The Sikh Religion: Its Gurus, Sacred Writings and Authors — Max Arthur Macauliffe (1909)
========================================================================================
Max Arthur Macauliffe's complete The Sikh Religion: Its Gurus, Sacred Writings and Authors — all six volumes (Oxford, 1909), the monumental English presentation of the lives of the ten Gurus and translations from the Adi Granth, public domain. The foundational Western scholarly source on Sikhism. Scans via Internet Archive.

TIGHT BINDING BOOK 


THE BOOK WAS 
DRENCHED 



UNIVERS; 

LIBRARY 



OU 172893 > 


7J 

■< 


N I VERBAL 







THE SIKH RELIGION 

MACAU LIFFE 


SIKH 1 



HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 

PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK 
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 








THE SIKH RELIGION 

ITS GURUS, SACRED WRITINGS 
AND AUTHORS 


MAX ARTHUR MACAULIFFE 

'gcr, 'MTrfa 'MOTIT; 

'SC*# Vm t, 'Sa# WIT. 

The egg of superstition hath burst; the 
mind is illumined: 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet 
and freed the captive. 

Guru Arjan 


IN SIX VOLUMES 
VOL. I 


OXFORD 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


1909 



OXFORD 

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BY HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 



PREFACE 


I BRING from the East what is practically an 
unknown religion. The Sikhs are distinguished 
throughout the world as a great military people,' 
but there is little known even to professional scholars 
regarding their religion. I have often been asked 
by educated persons in countries which I have 
visited, and even in India itself, what the Sikh 
religion was, and whether the Sikhs were Hindus, 
idolaters or Muhammadans. This ignorance is the 
result of the difficulty of the Indian dialects in 
which their sacred writings are contained. 

Judaism has its Old Testament ; Islam its Quran ; 
Hinduism its Veds, Purans, and Shastars ; Bud- 
hism its Tripitaka ; the Parsi religion its Zend- 
avesta ; and Confucianism its Analects, its Spring 
and Autumn, its Ancient Poems and its Book of 
Changes. The languages in which the holy writings 
of these reUgions are enshrined^ though aU difficult, 
are for the most part homogeneous, and after 
preliminary study with tutors can generally be 
mastered by the aid of grammars and dictionaries ; 
but not so the mediaeval Indian dialects in which 
the sacred writings of the Sikh Gurus and Saints 
were composed. Hymns are found in Persian, 
mediaeval Prakrit, Hindi, Marathi, old Panjabi, 
Multani, and several local dialects. In several 
hymns the Sanskrit and Arabic vocabularies are 
freely drawn upon. 



VI 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


There were no dictionaries of the Granth Sahib/ 
or sacred book of the Sikhs, when the author 
commenced his labours. Some have been since 
published, but each lexicographer has adopted 
a system of his own which makes it difl&cult to 
find the word required, and even when found the 
interpretation is not always satisfactory. For these 
reasons it is necessary for the translator of the 
Sikh sacred writings to reside for long years in 
India, and work with the assistance of the few 
gyanis, or professional interpreters of the Sikh 
canonical writings, who now survive. It would 
probably be an exaggeration to say that there are 
ten such men in the world. Of these few or none is 
capable of giving an English interpretation. They 
generally construe in tedious paraphrases in their 
own local dialects. But more than this, there is 
hardly any one Sikh who is capable of making a 
correct translation of his sacred writings. A man 
who is a good Sanskrit scholar will not know Persian 
and Arabic, and he who knows Persian and Arabic 
will not know words of Sanskrit derivation. A man 
who knows Hindi will not know Marathi ; a man 
who knows Marathi will not know Panjabi and 
Multani, and so on. Moreover, there are words in 
the Sikh sacred writings which are peculiar to them, 
and cannot be traced to any known language. 
As to these one must accept the traditional inter- 
pretations. The Granth Sahib thus becomes pro- 
bably the most difficult work, sacred or profane, 

* Sihib is an Arabic word meaning lord or master. It is applied 
by Indians to Europeans and natives of position, but it is particularly 
used by the Sikhs to denote a thing revered or holy, as ‘Darbar 
^ib’, the holy Sikh DarbSr or temple at Amritsar, the Granth 
Sihib, the sacred book of the Sikhs, Ac. 



PREFACE vii 

that exists, and hence the general ignorance of its 
contents. 

A portion of the Granth Sahib was translated 
some years since by a German missionary at the 
expense and under the auspices of the India Office, 
but his work was highly inaccurate and unidiomatic, 
and furthermore gave mortal offence to the Sikhs 
by the odium theologicum introduced into it. When- 
ever he saw an opportunity of defaming the Gurus, 
the sacred book, and the religion of the Sikhs, he 
eagerly availed himself of it. 

One of the main objects of the present work is to 
endeavour to make some reparation to the Sikhs for 
the insults which he offered to their Gurus and their 
religion. There are, however, many other advantages 
which I am hoping for, and which will probably be 
understood by the reader. 

All persons of discrimination acquainted with the 
Sikhs set a high value on them, but it appears that 
a knowledge throughout the world of the excellence 
of their religion would enhance even the present 
regard with which they are entertained, and that 
thus my work would be at least of political ad- 
vantage to them. In the second place, there is now 
a large number of Sikhs who understand the English 
language, but who have no time for the study of 
the compositions of the Gurus, and I thought it 
would be useful to them, if only from a linguistic 
point of view, to read a translation in the very 
simple English in which I have endeavoured to 
write it. In the third place, the old gyanis or pro- 
fessional interpreters of the Granth Sahib are dying 
out, and probably in another generation or two 
their sacred books will, owing to their enormous 



viii 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


difiSculty, be practically unintelligible even to other- 
wise educated Sikhs. In the fourth place, the 
vernacular itself is rapidly altering and diverging 
more and more from the general language of the 
Granth Sahib. Words which men still in the prime 
of life were accustomed to use in their boyhood 
have now become obsolete, and new vocables have 
taken their place. It appears, therefore, that it would 
on every account be well to fix the translation of the 
many exceedingly difficult passages scattered broad- 
cast through the Sikh sacred writings. In the fifth 
place there are local legends now rife which we have 
been able to gather, but which would otherwise pass 
into oblivion in a comparatively short period of time. 

Time was when it was not allowed to print the 
sacred book of the Sikhs. As ancient prejudice gave 
way, it was printed in parts which it was forbidden 
to unite in one volume lest it, as the embodiment, 
not only of the wisdom of the Gurus, but of the 
Gurus themselves, might be treated with disrespect. 
This prejudice has also vanished, and now the book 
is openly exposed for sale. There was also a prejudice 
on the part of Sikhs of the old school against trans- 
lating the sacred volume, but those who held it 
forgot the injunction of Guru Arjan to translate it 
into Indian and foreign languages so that it might 
spread over the whole world as oil spreads over water. 

ter 

^ Siiraj Park&sh, RSs III. 



PREFACE 


IX 


There can be no doubt that, were the Gurus and Bha- 
gats now alive, they would be pleased to see their com- 
positions translated into a language like the English 
spoken by many peoples throughout the continents 
and islands which extend far and wide over the earth. 

Until the year 1893 I was engaged in judicial 
duties in In^a. In that year representative Sikh 
societies, knowing that I appreciated their litera- 
ture, requested me to resign my appointment and 
undertake a translation of their sacred works. 
I acceded to their requests. My first intention 
was to make only a translation. This occupied 
my time for several years. It was prepared on 
what, I believe, is entirely a novel plan. Most 
translators, when they have completed their ren- 
derings, proceed to publish without subjecting their 
work to native criticism. On this account there 
are few, if any, translations of Oriental works made 
in Europe, even by the most eminent scholars, 
which are accepted by the learned natives of the 
East. I resolved that mine should be an exception, 
and accordingly submitted every line of my work 
to the most searching criticism of learned Sikhs. 
This was done either by rough printed proofs or 
typed copies. I also published invitations in Sikh 
newspapers to aU whom it might concern to visit 
me, inspect, and if necessary correct my translation. 
This entailed a voluminous correspondence which 
occupied a great amount of time, and inconveniently 
protracted my residence in India. 

On the conclusion of the examination of my 
translation, Bhai Sardul Singh, the Gyani ^ of the 

* The word gyani in Panjabi means a professional interpreter 
of the Granth S^ib. 



X 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Golden Temple, the late Bhai Sant Singh, a very 
learned Sikh of Kapurthala, and Bhai Prem Singh 
of Amritsar favoured me with the following : — 

We, through the agency of learned Sikhs acquainted with 
English, have carefully perused the translation of the hymns 
of the Granth Sahib by Mr. Macaulifie. The perusal cost 
us a month and a half of continuous labour. Wherever 
any of us found what seemed to be an error, we all met, 
discussed the passages,; and either corrected it or allowed 
Mr. Macauliffe’s translation to stand. Wherefore we now 
state that Mr. Macauliffe’s translation has been fully revised 
by us\and is thoroughly correct. The greatest care has 
been taken in making the translation conformable to the 
religious\^nets of the Sikhs. The translation is quite 
literal, anodqne according to all grammatical and rhetorical 
tules. \ 

We now recast the Rajas, Maharajas, Sardars, and 
the learned and accomplished of the Sikh faith to specially 
read or listen to this translation, if only for once. They 
will thus become acquainted with Mr. Macaulifie’s labours, 
and reap the advantage of the true instruction of their 
Gurus. They should also render all necessary aid to the 
translator, because he has resigned a high post under 
Government and spent untold wealth on this undertaking. 

I have received piles of somewhat similar docu- 
ments from learned and intelligent Sikhs, and seen 
numerous critical articles in Sikh, English, and 
foreign newspapers, which give expression to the 
strong desire felt for the production of a work such 
as that now offered. Among them I may be allowed 
to give the following from The Khalsa, a Sikh 
publication : — 

There can be no denying the fact that the publication 
of Mr. Macauliffe’s work will be the introduction of a new 
era in our history. Our Scriptures, though written in our 



PREFACE 


xi 


own language, have been so much neglected by our people, 
that it will be no exaggeration if we say that ninety per cent, 
of our co-religionists do not understand them. The Com- 
munity receiving English education are without any idea 
of the sublime truths contained in the Granth Sahib. From 
infancy upwards their minds are moulded in such a way, 
that it becomes almost impossible for them to talk and 
write in any other language than English ; and we shall 
not be exaggerating if we say that a great many of them 
find it difficult even to think in their own mother tongue. 
This being the case, an English translation of our Scriptures 
will at once appeal to the ever increasing community of 
educated men who will be the leaders of thought from the 
very nature of things. Already prepared by western culture 
to think and act independently, they will be constitutionally 
fitted to understand the catholicity of Sikh principles, and 
will feel a pleasure in spreading Sikh ideas far and wide. 
Apart from this, a great deal of the misunderstanding that 
now obtains about the work of our Gurus and Martjnrs 
will be removed, and the thinking public will see with their 
own eyes the drift of Sikh teachings. The trade of traitors 
among us who to please our wealthier and more influential 
neighbours, compromise our beliefs by ascribing to our 
great men thoughts that they never conceived and deeds 
that they never did, will languish, the promiscuousness in 
Sikh ideas will vanish, and Tat (pure) Khalsa will begin 
to start on a new career. 

Not less important will be the result of Sikh teachings 
on the minds of religious Europe and America. Already 
the Khalsa has achieved a world-wide renown in the matter 
of bravery. In the matter of religion, too, the name of 
the Khalsa will shine resplendently when the glorious deeds 
of our illustrious ancestors in the moral and religious world 
are made known far and wide. The translations of Hindu 
Scriptures by Professors Max Muller, Wilson, Monier 
Williams, and a host of other eminent writers on Oriental 
religions have drawn th§ attention of the whole civilized 
world to the Hindus and their literature. These transla- 



xii 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


tions have secured for the Hindus the sympathy of hundreds 
of savants and inquirers after religious truth. What will 
not the translations of our Scriptures achieve ? Unlike the 
Scriptures of other creeds, they do not contain love stories 
or accounts of wars waged for selfish considerations. They 
contain sublimest truths, the study of which cannot but 
elevate the reader spiritually, morally, and socially. There 
is not the least tinge of sectarianism in them. They teach 
the highest and purest principles that serve to bind man 
to man and inspire the believer with an ambition to serve 
his fellow men, to sacrifice all and die for their sake. 

The late Sir Baba Khem Singh, K.C.I.E., Member 
of the Legislative Council, who held a most pro- 
minent position among the Sikhs, wrote to me : — 

It is fortunate for the Sikh nation to have such a kind 
of friend as you, whose ideas are naturally inclined to their 
benefit, and they should ever bear you thankfulness and 
gratitude. I am glad to express my appreciation of your 
work, and the labour and trouble you have taken upon 
yourself to accomplish such a voluminous task. 

The late Baba Sumer Singh, the Mahant or Sikh 
Bishop of Patna, where Guru Gobind Singh was 
born, wrote to me as follows : — 

I fully appreciate your attempt to keep especial eye on 
the sense rather than on word-for-word rendering, and 
wherever the sense has been in danger of being absorbed 
in the language, suitable foot-notes have been interspersed 
throughout. 

The late Bhai Hazara Singh Gyani, who has pub- 
lished a Dictionary of the Granth Sahib, wrote to 
me as follows, after seeing specimens of this work : — 

I have read through the English translation of Japji 
prepared by Mr. Macauliffe. The translator seems to have 



PREFACE 


xiii 


taken great care in keeping the rendering in accordance 
with the Sampardai arths (traditional interpretations). 
I wish the undertaking a thorough success, and nothing 
will give me more pleasure than to see the work brought 
out of press. 

The following is a translation of an address 
presented to me by the Singh Sabha of Amntsar : — 

We are informed by very tinst worthy gyanis, that you 
have been stud3dng our sacred books for over twenty years, 
and that, resigning a good appointment, you have now 
laboured continually for some years at making an accurate 
translation of them ; that you have revised it seven times ; 
and have now made it as complete as can be done by human 
effort ; and in doing this you have not only spent your 
valuable time, but also a very large amount of money. 
Dr. Trumpp’s translation is not only generally incorrect, 
but injurious to our religion ; and there was a great want 
felt for an accurate version when Akal Purukh (the Im- 
mortal God) induced you to undertake it and fulfil our 
desires. It would have been well, had we executed the 
translation ourselves ; but Akal Purukh granted you the 
credit of the performance. As the holy Guru Teg Bahadur 
foretold that men would come from beyond the seas to 
assist the Sikhs, so you have been rendering us mental and 
bodily assistance ; and we now earnestly recommend the 
members of our faith, who can afford it, to render you all 
possible aid in publishing your work, and we trust our wishes 
will be fulfilled. We desire, now that you have become 
thoroughly acquainted with our customs, our sacred books, 
and the tenets of our religion, that you fulfil the promise 
made in your Circular letter to the Sikhs, in which 
you stated that you would write nothing prejudicial to 
their religion. In the lives of the Gurus which you are 
going to write, we desire you to consult the Gur Bilas, the 
Suraj Parkash, and such other works as have been com- 
piled from ancient writings not corrupted by the Handalis, 
the followers of Kabir, and the poets who infused foreign 



xiv THE SIKH RELIGION 

elements into our religion. The Khalsa and the whole Sikh 
race will be thankful to you for attending to this request. 
In conclusion we pray Akal Purukh to protect you in every 
way on your ocean journey, and fulfil your wishes and 
desires ; and that you may be ever a well-wisher and 
supporter of our sect and our faith. We earnestly hope 
that your translation of our sacred books will soon be in 
the library of every true Sikh.^ 

Notwithstanding these tributes to the accuracy 
of my work, to its utility and to my desire to do 
justice to the sacred writings of the Sikhs, some 
may possibly be found among them who will differ 
from' the versions I have given. I have met so- 
called gyanis who could perform tours de force with 
their sacred work, and give different interpretations 
of almost every line of it. My Sikh readers may 
rest assured that in this work all rational inter- 
pretations have been considered, and only those 
selected which seemed most suitable to the context 
add most in harmony with Sikh doctrines. When 
siicond and third interpretations seemed possible, 
they have been appended in the notes. 

When my translation was thus completed and 
approved of by the most learned Sikh priests and 
scholars, I found that an account of the Sikh 
Gurus, saints, and authors was absolutely necessary, 
and indeed of equal, if not greater importance than 
even a correct interpretation of their writings. 
The late illustrious scholar. Professor Max Muller, 
who had Indian literature so greatly at heart, 
expressed in his latest work, Auld Lang Syne, his 

* I did not intend, at first, to publish these extracts, and I regret 
having to do so now, but some Sikh friends have put pressure on me 
to adopt this course. 



PREFACE 


XV 


regret that the world knew so little of the Sikh 
reformers. He wrote : — 

It is a pity that we possess so little information about 
the original Sikh reformers. Their sacred book the Granth 
Sahib exists, nay it has even been translated into English 
by the late Dr. Trumpp. ' But it turns out now that 
Dr.Trumppwas by no means a trustworthy translator. The 
language of the Granth is generally called old Panjabi ; 
and it was supposed that a scholar who knew modej||| 
Panjabi, might easily learn to understand the 
it was four hundred years ago. But this is. hM tMf case. 
The language of the Granth Sahib is full of ^al dialectic 
varieties and forgotten idioms, so much so that it ha^ been 
said to be without any grammar at all. Mr. Macauliff^ 
who has spent many years among the Sikhs, and has with 
the help of their priests paid much attention to their Granth 
Sahib, has given us some most interesting and beautiful 
specimens of their poetry which form part of their sacred 
book. 

On perusing the current lives and accounts of 
the Gurus I found them overladen with puerile, 
heterodox, or repulsive details ; and it required 
further years of study and consultation with learned 
Sikhs to complete biographies of the founders of 
their religion, which were not inconsistent with their 
sacred writings The orthodox Sikhs who have read 
the hves of their Gurus in the voluminous Hindi 
work entitled Suraj Parkash, and in the current 
Panjabi works called Janamsakhis, will understand, 
and, perhaps, be grateful to me for the manner in 
which I have presented their religion according to 
the desires and teachings of their Gurus. 

To prevent misconception it ought, perhaps, to 
be here stated that this work is intended to be an 
exact presentation of the teaching of the Sikh 



XVI 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Gurus and orthodox writers as contained in their 
sacred books, and is by no means put forth as 
a portrayal of the debased superstitions and hetero- 
dox social customs of Sikhs who have been led 
astray from their faith by external influences. 

It must also be stated that the intention of the 
author has been, in fulfilment of his promise to 
the Sikhs, to write this work from an orthodox 
^kh point of view, without any criticism or expres- 
sion of opinion of his own. Accordingly, miracles 
which are accepted by many Sikhs will be found 
reverently described in this work. 

A very important question has arisen among the 
Sikhs as to how my translation of their sacred 
writings should be presented. The Granth Sahib, 
as already stated, is to them the embodiment of 
their Gurus, who are regarded as only one person, 
the light of the first Guru’s soul having been 
transmitted t6 each of his successors in turn. 

Oi 5* di'TfXa/i‘\jray Kal irap'qyyiiXav npScroi. 

The line of the Gurus closed with the tenth. 
Guru Gobind Singh. He ordered that the Granth 
should be to his Sikhs as the living Gurus. Accord- 
ingly the Granth Sahib is kept in silken coverlets, 
and when it is removed from place to place is 
taken on a small couch by Sikhs of good repute. 
Many of my old orthodox Sikh friends feared that 
if my translation were printed in the order of the 
original, it would not receive the same respect and 
attention in foreign countries as in India, and they 
accordingly desired that it should be published in 
some other form. This desire of the most holy 
and respected Sikhs is a great relief to me, for it 



preface xvii 

makes it competent to intersperse many of the 
sacred hymns in the lives of the Gurus, and 
thus present my work as much as possible in 
narrative form, which it is hoped will be more 
acceptable not only to European, but even to Sikh 
readers themselves. 

Competent Sikhs have also advised me that when 
the Guru’s instruction on various occasions is on 
the same subject and of the same tenor, it needs 
be given only once. For instance, in the Granth 
Sahib there are four h5nnns beginning with the 
words, ‘ In the first watch of night, my merchant 
friend.’ Two of these hymns are by Guru 
Nanak, the third by Guru Ram Das, and the fourth 
by Guru Arjan. The hymns begin in the same 
manner, are of the same purport, and are only very 
slightly varied in diction, so the publication of the 
whole four appears unnecessary. 

It is intelligible that repetitions should be found 
in the sacred books of several religions, for the 
teachings of their prophets were orally addressed 
to crowds who clustered round them, and repetitions 
served to impress on the listeners the instruction 
accorded ; but in a printed work, which the reader 
may peruse and reperuse at pleasure, repetition 
does not appear so necessary. Moreover, this work 
is intended for the European as well as for the 
Sikh student. It is apprehended that repetition 
would prove tedious, and deter several even con* 
scientious readers from its perusal. 

I find, however, that it is impossible for me to 
meet the wishes of all parties. Europeans will 
probably think my work too long, and Sikhs may 
possibly think it too short. As to the latter objec-* 

•am. t b 



xviii THE SIKH RELIGION 

tion, I may state that I have followed the advice 
of the most learned Sikh scholars. They have 
decided that there is no omission of anything 
necessary to faith or morals, but that the whole 
substance of the Sikh sacred writings is here pre- 
sented, and that if any Sikh shapes his conduct 
accordingly, he will be in no danger of failing to 
secure absorption in the Creator or a dwelling in 
the Creator’s heaven. 

A few of the advantages of the Sikh religion to 
the State may be here enumerated. One day, as 
Guru Teg Bahadur was in the top story of his 
prison, the Emperor Aurangzeb thought he saw 
him looking towards the south in the direction of 
the Imperial zenana. He was sent for the next 
day, and charged with this grave breach of Oriental 
etiquette and propriety. The Guru replied, ‘ Em- 
peror Aurangzeb, I was on the top story of my 
prison but I was not looking at thy private apart- 
ments or at thy queens. I was looking in the 
direction of the Europeans who are coming from 
beyond the seas to tear down thy pardas and 
destroy thine empire.’ Sikh writers state that 
these words became the battle-cry of the Sikhs in 
the assault on the mutineers in DihU (Delhi) in 1857, 
under General John Nicholson, and that thus the 
prophecy of the ninth Guru was gloriously fulfilled. 

When it was represented to Guru Gobind Singh 
that a Muhammadan army would eventually come 
to overpower his Sikhs, he replied, ‘ What God 
willeth shall take place. When the army of the 
Muhammadans cometh, my Sikhs shall strike steel on 
Steel. The Khalsa shall then awake, and know the 
play of battle. Amid the dash of arms the Khalsa 



PREFACE 


xix 


shall be partners in present and future bliss, tran- 
quillity, meditation, and divine knowledge. Then 
shall the English come, and, joined by the Khalsa, 
rule as well in the East as in the West. The holy 
Baba Nanak will bestow all wealth on them. The 
English shall possess great power and by force of 
arms take possession of many principalities. The 
combined armies of the English and the Sikhs shall 
be very powerful, as long as they rule with united 
councils. The empire of the British shall vastly 
increase, and they shall in every way obtain pros- 
perity. Wherever they take their armies they 
shall conquer and bestow thrones on their vassals. 
Then in every house shall be wealth, in every house 
religion, in every house learning, and in every 
house happiness.’ 

It is such prophecies as these, combined with 
the monotheism, the absence of superstition and 
restraint in the matter of food, which have made 
the Sikhs among the bravest, the most loyal and 
devoted subjects of the British Crown. As to their 
bravery and loyalty, the following, written by one of 
them, is by no means an exaggeration : ‘ As for the 
bravery and warlike spirit of the Sikhs, no Cossack, 
no Turk, no Russian, can measure swords with them. 
There is one trait very peculiar in them such as 
must make the enemies of the British fear them. 
The true blood of loyalty and devotion to their 
master surges in their veins. A true Sikh will let 
his body be cut to pieces when fighting for his 
master. The Sikh considers dying in battle a 
means of salvation. No superiority of the enemies 
in number, no shot, no shell, can make his heart 
quail, since his Amrit (baptism) binds him to 

b2 



XX 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


fight single-handed against millions. Some people 
may say that a soldier sells his head for the small 
wage paid him every month. But the Sikh does 
not do so : he devotes his head, body, and every- 
thing dear to him to preserving the influence of 
him whom he once makes his master. A Sikh 
who shows the least sign of reluctance to go, or 
goes with an expectation of remuneration, when 
called upon by his benefactor the King-Emperor to 
fight His Majesty’s enemies, no matter how strong 
they may be, will be condemned by the Gurus.’ 

If there is one superstition more strongly repro- 
bated than another in the Sikh sacred writings, it 
is pilgrimages to the places deemed sacred by the 
Hindus. Some of the Sikh States, in ignorance of 
the teachings of the Gurus, have maintained temples 
and spiritual arenas at Hardwar and Rikhikesh for 
the reception of pilgrims. At Hardwar there are 
held great religious fairs every twelve years at the 
time when the sun enters the lunar mansion of 
Aquarius (Kumbh), It is calculated that at least 
one hundred thousand Sikhs were present at the 
last great fair at Hardwar. All these pilgrims 
bathe in the Ganges; while bathing many recklessly 
yield to the necessities of nature ; others drink their 
excreta with the Ganges water as sacred nourish- 
ment, and die of cholera either at the fair or on 
their homeward journey. The corpses of Sikhs, as 
well as Hindus, were pulled out of railway carriages 
after the last twelfth-year fair and poisoned the 
country. The pest then extended east and west 
in all directions. Kabul, of course, on the western 
boundary of India, was soon affected, and the further 
progress of the disease towards Europe was thus 



PREFACE xxi 

described by the Paris correspondent of the Morning 
Post : — 

‘Professor Chantemesse, Director-General of the Public 
Health Department, made a somewhat disquieting state- 
ment at to-day’s meeting of the Academy of Medicine. 
He pointed out that the cholera epidemic, which originated 
in India and spread east and west, had established itself 
last autumn in four European centres, namely Transcaspia, 
Transcaucasia, Anatolia, and the banks of the Volga between 
Astrakhan, Saratoff, and Samara. As the winter cold had 
merely checked the disease, instead of stamping it out, 
there was every reason to fear it would continue its progress 
westward, by way of the Baltic ports, the Black Sea, the 
Danube, or Constantinople.’ According to another account, 
‘ seven thousand deaths from cholera occurred in the Punjab 
since the second week of April. The disease was originally 
disseminated by the returning pilgrims from Hardwar.* 

Of course there were also many Hindu pilgrims at 
the Hardwar fair, but let any one consider what a 
gain it would be to the world if the one hundred 
thousand ‘Sikhs ^ who attended it possessed such 
a very elementary knowledge of their religion as 
to know that their action was reprobated by all 
their holy Gurus. 

It is known to every Sikh that tobacco is forbidden 
by his religion, but it is not generally known that 
wine is equally forbidden. After I had quoted the 
Sikh tenets on this subject in public lectures at 
Simla, it was taken up by the enlightened Singh 
Sabha of Patiala; and a resolution in favour of 
total abstinence was signed by several of the best 
educated and most influential Sardars of the State. 

* At my request the PanjSb Government ascertained from the 
Government of the United Provinces the aj^roximate population of 
the Sikh pilgrims. 



xxu 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The freedom of women and their emancipation 
from the tyran ny of the parda)may be inferred 
’from the manner in which Bhai Budha received 
Mata^ Ganga the wife of Guru Arjan, from Guru 
Amar Das’s refusal to receive a rani who had 
visited him when she was closely veiled, and from 
Kabir’s address to his daughter-in-law. 

The high moral and enlightened teachings of the 
Gurus, their prohibition of the heinous crime of 
infanticide, and other injunctions for the public 
advantage will be found or understood from the 
composition of the Gurus and the Bhagats which 
we give in these volumes. 

The Hindu practice of the concremation of widows 
was forbidden by the Gurus ; though this was 
not generally known at the time of Lord William 
Bentinck, who had sufficient courage to issue an 
ordinance against it. 

The Gurus most powerfully and successfully at- 
tacked the caste system and the Hindu belief in 
impurity and defilement in many necessary and 
harmless acts of domestic life. 

It is admitted that a knowledge of the religions 
of the people of India is a desideratum for the 
British Officials who administer its affairs and 
indirectly for the people who are governed by them 
so that mutual sympathy may be produced. It 
seems, at any rate, politic to place before the Sikh 
soldiery their Guru’s prophecies in favour of the 
English and the texts of their sacred writings which 
foster their loyalty. 

An advantage of a literary or historical nature is 

^ The Sikhs give the title MSta or mother to the wives of the Gurus, 
in the same way as they give the title Baba or father to Guru NSnak., 



PREFACJ^ xxiii 

also anticipated from this work. Xt is hoped that i1 
will throw some light on the state of society in the 
Middle Ages and that it will also be useful for the 
student of comparative theology. Professor Geheimei 
Hofrath Merx, of the Heidelberg University, a verj 
distinguished German savant, has recently writter 
to me : ‘ The publication of your work is certainly 
very desirable. You save in this way materials foi 
the history of religions which, without your help, 
would probably disappear.’ 

To sum up some of the moral and political merits 
of the Sikh religion : It prohibits idolatry, hypo- 
crisy, caste exclusiveness, the concremation ol 
widows, the immurement of women, the use oi 
wine and other intoxicants, tobacco-smoking, infanti- 
cide, slander, pilgrimages to the sacred rivers anc 
tanks of the Hindus; and it inculcates loyalty, 
gratitude for all favours received, philanthropy, 
justice, impartiality, truth, honesty, and all the 
moral and domestic virtues known to the holiest 
citizens of any country. 

A movement to declare the Sikhs Hindus, it 
direct opposition to the teaching of the Gurus, is 
widespread and of long duration. I hatre only 
quite recently met in Lahore young men claiming 
to be descendants of the Gurus, who told me that 
they were Hindus, and that they could not read the 
characters in which the sacred books of the Sikhs 
were written. Whether the object of their tutors 
and advisers was or was not to make them disloyal, 
such youths are ignorant of the Sikh religion, and 
of its prophecies in favour of the English, and epn* 
tract exclusive social customs and prejudices to the 
extent of calling us Malechhas, or persons of impure 



xxiv 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


desires, and inspiring disgust for the customs and 
habits of Christians. 

And here let me remark that the recognition of 
Panjabi as an official or optional official language 
in the Panjab, instead of the alien Urdu, would 
be a most powerful means of preserving the Sikh 
religion. Panjabi is the mother tongue of all 
natives of the Panjab, be they Sikhs, Hindus, or 
Muhammadans. If it were recognized as an official 
or optional official .’anguage, Sikhs would not have 
to resort to books written in foreign languages for 
religious instruction and consolation, and the exalted 
ethical instruction of the Granth Sahib would be open 
to all classes of His Majesty’s subjects in the Panjab. 

After the English occupation of the Panjab the 
officers sent to administer it were transferred from 
what were then known as the North-Western 
Provinces. They took with them Urdu, or what was 
much the same — a bastard Persian with Urdu inflec- 
tions — the only Asiatic language they knew, and 
they found it more convenient to continue to use it 
than to learn a foreign language which had at the time 
no status and no literature. The vernacular writers 
and the officers who brought them were equally igno- 
rant of Panjabi, and so Urdu became the official lan- 
guage of that province. That the officials did not 
understand the natives, nor the natives the officials, 
made no difference. The court officials gradually 
picked up a smattering of Panjabi, and were able 
to interpret for the Europeans. This state of 
things was allowed to continue. If the Panjabis 
remonstrated against neglect of their language 
their remonstrances were unheeded. Now the Pah-, 
jab has become more enlightened, the remonstrances 



PREFACE 


have grown louder, and it remains to be seen 
whether any Lieutenant-Governor will take the 
trouble or have the courage to make Panjabi an 
alternative language for the Panjab, and thus 
confer a lasting favour not only on the Sikhs, but 
on all the natives of the Land of the Five Rivers, 
whose medium of communication it is from their 
'birth. At any rate, there appears nothing to hinder 
the native states of the Panjab from making Panjabi 
their official language. 

In our time one of the principal agencies for 
the preservation of the Sikh religion has been the 
practice of military officers commanding Sikh regi- 
ments to send Sikh recruits to receive baptism 
according to- the rites prescribed by Guru Gobind 
Singh, and endeavour to preserve them in their 
subsequent career from the contagion of idolatry. 
The military thus ignoring or despising the restraints 
imposed by the civil policy of what is called * religious 
neutrality', have practically become the main hiero- 
phants and guardians of the Sikh religion. 

I have been at great pains and expense to obtain 
details of the lives of the Bhagats, or Indian saints, 
who preceded the Gurus, and whose writings are 
incorporated in the Granth Sahib, but I have not 
been completely successful. I shall be very grate-' 
ful to any one who can add to my information 
regarding them. 

The h3nnns of the Bhagats will in some cases 
be found different from those preserved in the 
Hindi and Marathi collections of the saints* com^ 
positions in other parts of India. They were takai 
by Guru Arjan from the lips of wandering 
j^oinstrels or followers of the saints. 



xxvi THE SIKH RELIGION 

Parallel ideas and expressions to those of the 
Gurus and the Bhagats may be found in ancient 
and modem literature, sacred and profane, and 
could be largely quoted. Only a few such com- 
parisons, which occurred to the author at the time 
of writing, have been given in the notes to this 
work. They are intended to show the catholicity 
of the Gurus’ teachings, and they may also occa- 
sionally relieve the tedium of pemsal. 

The writers of the Janamsakhis had no maps to 
guide them, and accordingly in some cases assigned 
to the Gurus, notably Guru Nanak, impossiWe 
itineraries. Accordingly efforts have been made in 
this work to revise the Gurus’ travels and render 
them consistent with scientific Indian geography. 
Should learned Sikhs, after full consideration at 
a general council, prepare maps of the Gurus’ 
travels, they wiU be inserted in any future edition 
of this work. So also should learned Sikhs con- 
sider their own accounts of the Gurus, their own 
order of the Gurus’ hymns, or their own versions 
of words or phrases in the Gurus’ compositions 
superior to the gyanis’ and mine, we shall be pleased 
to receive their suggestions. 

H.H. Sir Hira Singh, Malvendar Bahadur, the 
Raja of Nabha, has at considerable expense caused 
the thirty-one Indian rags, or musical measures, 
to which the hymns of the Gums were composed, 
to be written out in European musical notation by 
a professional musician whom he employed for 
the purpose. The rags were merging into oblivion, 
and have been collected with much difficulty by 
Mahant Gaja Singh, the greatest minstrel of the 
Sikhs. They will be found at the end of the 



PREFACE 


xxvii: 

fifth volume of this work. Though they may sound 
bizarre to European ears, they will be appreciated 
by the Sikhs and by many European lovers of art 
who regret the loss of the music to which the Odes 
of Pindar and Sappho and the choral exercises of 
the Greek tragedians were sung. 

There are also added pictures of the Gurus as 
far as ascertainable, of famous Sikh temples, and 
of some scenes memorable in Sikh history. These 
pictures have been prepared by Bhai Lai Singh 
under the auspices of the Honourable Tikka Ripu- 
daman Singh, the young heir to the Nabha gadi. 

The expense attendant on the production of this 
work, which has been the labour of many years, 
and has been completed with the assistance for 
long periods of a large staff of Sikh scholars diid of 
English and vernacular copyists, has been very con- 
siderable, and I am indebted to His Highness the Raja 
of Nabha, His Highness Sir Rajindar Singh, the late 
much lamented Maharaja of Patiala, His Highness 
Raja Ranbir Singh, Raja of Jind, the Tikka Sahib of 
Nabha, and the late Sardar Ranjit Singh of Chich- 
rauli for defraying a portion of it. His Highness the 
Gaekwar of Baroda has promised his patronage after 
the publication of the work. 

Several persons have recommended this work to 
the patronage of the Indian Government and the 
Secretary of State for India. The distinguished 
scholar. Count Angelo de Gubematis, president of 
the Roman Congress of Orientalists, thus addressed 
the Secretary of State for India in a letter dated 
October 19, 1899 : — 

Dans l’int4r^t de la science, je prends la liberty de vous 
signaler fort particuli^rement k votre attention la pro-. 



xxviii THE SIKH RELIGION 

position de M. MacauMe, accueill6e avec tant d’int4r6t et 
si chaleureusement recommand^e par l’Assembl4e G6n4rale 
du XII“* Congrds des Orientalistes, dans sa stance du 
8 octobre, pour Edition et illustration critique des textes 
de la religion des Sikhs. Tout ce que I’India Office d6cidera 
en faveur de cette noble entreprise ne pourra 6tre que tr^s 
m^ritoire. Et k ce titre, j’ose vivement recommander la 
protection de I’India Office les int^ressantes recherches de 
M. Macauliile sur les textes canoniques des Sikhs du Panjab. 

G)unt de Gubematis’s letter covered the following 
proceedings of the Roman Congress : — 

A propos de la conference de M. Macauliffe, M. le 
Prof. L. von Schroeder, Professeur de Sanskrit k I’Universite 
de Vienne, estime qu’il serait trfes desirable de poss^der 
une traduction des livres sacr^s des Sikhs, telle que M. 
Macauliffe en a con5u le plan et prepare I’execution, tra- 
duction dans laquelle se trouverait incorporee et utilisee la 
tradition orale des Sikhs eux-memes qui menace de dis- 
paraltre rapidement. II recommande instamment I’entre- 
prise de M. Macauliffe k I’appui materiel tant du Gou*r 
vemement de I’lnde que des chefs Sikhs. Get appui a ete 
autrefois genereusement accorde k la tentative meritoire 
mais insuffisante de Dr. Trumpp ; il pent seul assurer le 
succ^s d’une ceuvre aussi considerable et aussi codteuse. 

M.6mileSenart, Membre de I’lnstitut de France, et Vice- 
President de la Societe Asiatique k Paris, k son tour, de- 
mande k appuyer la proposition faite par M. von Schroeder, 
et prie la reunion de recommander instamment k I’appui, 
soit du Gouvemement de I’lnde, soit des chefs Sikhs, I’en- 
treprise de M. Macauliffe. II insiste sur I’interet special 
que presente dans I’histoire religieuse de I’lnde le develop- 
pement de la religion des Sikhs, la seule qui y ait pris 
Failure militante et guerriere que ne semblaient pas faire 
pfevoir ses debuts. Le plus essentiel de la traduction pro- 
jetee sera dans cette circonstance, qu’elle preservera d’une 
pecte^mena^ante la tradition orale et Finterpretation 
orf^'doxe. Nulle part la tradition n’a plus d’importan^e- 



PREFACE 


que 4a^s une doctrine conune celle-ci, qui est voil4e d’un 
syncr^tisme compliqu^, et dont I’originalit^ sp^ulative n’a 
pu se d^gager que pen ^ pen. 

Lord Reay, the President of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, a nobleman who is never wanting to any 
benevolent or philanthropic enterprise, strongly 
recommended my work to the favourable con- 
sideration of the Lieutenant-Governor of the Panjab. 

Mr. L. W. Dane (now Sir Louis W. Dane, Lieu- 
tenant-Governor of the Panjab) has always adopted 
a S5mipathetic attitude towards my labours, and, 
as far as in him lay, assisted in bringing them to 
a successful conclusion. 

And Lord Kitchener of Khartoum, after presiding 
at my public lecture on ‘How the Sikhs became a 
Militant People ’, thus expressed himself : — 

It must be a matter of great satisfaction to Mr. Macauliffe 
that the Amritsar Singh Sabha have accepted his trans- 
lations as being thoroughly accurate. We may say with 
confidence that in putting the study of the Sikh sacred 
writings within our reach Mr. Macauliffe has earned the 
approbation of all who know the great value of the Sikh 
soldier ; the cordial recognition of the rulers of the co\mtry, 
and the gratitude of the chiefs, sardars, and people of the 
Sikh community — a feeling of gratitude which I feel sure 
will be much increased when Mr. Macaulifie has traqsla^ted 
the sacred writings into the ordinary Panjabi of thf day, 
a labour which, 1 understand, he is about to commence, and 
which I hope will result in their general dissemination 
through every Sikh household in the country. 

.4 

For literary assistance I must acknowledge my 
indebtedness to Sardar Kahn Singh of Nabha, one 
of the greatest sdiolars and most distinguished 
authors among the Sikhs, who by order of thel^ji^ 





THE SIKH RELIGION 


of Nabha accompanied me to Europe to assist in 
the publication of this work and in reading the 
proofs thereof ; to Diwan Lila Ram Watan Mai, 
a subordinate judge in Sind ; to the late Bhai 
Shankar Dayal of Faizabad ; to Bhai Hazara Singh 
and Bhai Sardul Singh of Amritsar, to the late 
Bhai Dit Singh of Lahore, to the late Bhai Bhagwan 
Singh of Patiala, and to many other Sikh scholars 
for the inteUigent assistance they have rendered me. 

In my translation from the Sikh sacred writings 
I freely use the subjunctive mood which is fast 
disappearing from the English language. The solemn 
form of the third person singular of the present 
tense I have employed for obvious reasons. My 
Sikh readers may easily learn that this form is 
not now used in conversation or ordinary prose. 
I have avoided the arbitrary nomenclature invented 
by European scholars, such as Brahmanism, a word 
which is not used in India ; self for soul or con- 
science, &c. 

The Sikh Gurus were simple men who generally 
chose colloquial language for the expression of 
their ideas, and avoided learned words and meta- 
physical subtleties. Hence in my translation I have 
endeavoured to use such simple language as I believe 
was intended by them and the reformers who pre- 
ceded them. My aim has been to interpret the 
sacred books of the Sikhs, subject to what I deem 
a necessary solemnity of form, in the current language 
of the day, and without any effort to produce new 
or startling expressions. In my efforts to use simple 
language, however, I cannot claim complete success, 
^he ideas of the Gurus and particularly their epithets 
the Creator cannot always be translated without 



PREFACE 


xxsk 

unwieldy periphrasis into any Anglo-Saxon words in 
ordinary use. Somewhat analogous words and ex- 
pressions may often be found, but they do not con- 
vey precisely the meanings intended by the Sikh 
sacred writers. 

Archaisms, though deemed necessary by poets, 
and though they often contribute to omateness of 
style, I have done my utmost to avoid. In this 
way I hope my book will be more useful to the 
Sikhs, and assist them in forming an acquaintance 
with the English tongue. 

Indian proper names I have spelled as they are 
written and pronounced in India at the present 
time, and not as they were written and pronounced 
in the Sanskrit age. In this I am but following 
the practice of all modem languages. Nobody 
would now call London Londinium, or Marseilles 
Massilia, or Naples Neapolis. Nor can I adopt the 
spelling of Oriental words which has been adopted 
in this country ostensibly for the use of continental 
scholars, which causes sh to be printed /, f, or 
], g; ch, &c. Such spelling is repulsive to many 
persons, and it can hardly be necessary for the 
Oriental scholars of any country. The different 
«’s, ^’s, r’s, and s’s of Indian languages I have 
found it hopeless to represent, nor would it be 
useful for my work, for they are often confounded 
in Sikh literature. The spelling of English words 
is that accepted by the Clarendon Press. 

In the languages and dialects with which we have 
been dealing there is no short e corresponding to 
the e in bed and no short o corresponding to the 
0 in not. Whenever, therefore, the vowels e and 
0 are found in Indian names in this work, they 



xxxii THE SIKH RELIGION 

are always long, E is always pronounced as it is 
in M or as the French 0 is always pronounced 
as in note^ The vowel i may be long or short. 
It is always long at the end of an Indian word, 
and is then pronounced like the EngHsh double 
e (ee). When it is long in the body of Indian words 
found in the notes it is marked with a makron, 
thus t. The vowel a may also be either short or 
long. When long in Indian words in the notes, it 
is crowned with a makron, thus a. The final a in 
Indian words may be generally considered short, 
like the a in sofa. In the text, in order not to 
distract the reader’s attention, diacritical marks are 
rarely employed. 

This being essentially a work on the Sikh religion 
we have commenced with Guru Nanak ; but if the 
reader desires to follow the historical development 
of the Sikh reformation, he had better begin with the 
sixth volume. This was probably the intention of 
Guru Arjan himself, for otherwise he could not have 
included in his compilation hymns quite opposed to 
the principles and tenets of his predecessors. 

The author feels that his work suffers from a 
special disadvantage, because the scholars of Europe 
and America are hardly in a position to riticize 
on its merits the translation of hymns composed 
in dialects which can only be learned in India from, 
the lips of the few exponents of the Sikh faith who 
now survive. Nor have European and American 
scholars had an opportunity of perusing the Indian 
works which form the basis of our lives of the Gurus 
and of the saints who preceded them, The difli- 
culty and extent of the author’s labours cannot 
therefore be understood. 



PREFACE 


xxxiii 


It is believed that a work of this nature cannot 
be accomplished again. In any age it could not 
be done out of India for want of expert assistance. 
In India, even under the most favourable con- 
ditions, and when a student had acquired a 
knowledge of some Indian languages and dialects, 
the translation of the sacred books of*' the Sikhs, 
and the compilation of the lives of their- Gurus 
and holy men, would be the work of years. No 
one while in the service of the Indian Government 
could find leisure to accomplish it; and few Euro- 
peans after their retirement from Indian service 
would care to spend long years and lonely lives 
in, India wrestling with mediaeval Indian dialects 
and submitting to the caprices of gyanis ; but 
even should such martyrs to the cause of science 
be found, they would not be able to obtain the 
requisite assistance, because the principal inter- 
preters of the sacred books of the Sikhs will have 
passed away with this generation, and, owing to 
want of patronage, there will be none to supply 
their place. This fact, too, would soon render a 
Sikh, even if thoroughly acquainted with the English 
tongue, and possessed of sufficient resource and in- 
dustry, «ncapable of producing an authoritative and 
exhaustive work in our language on his religion. 

The preacher of old said that ‘of making many 
books there is no end’. For the last century 
their publication has increased in geometrical 
ratio, and prodigious must be the number which 
find their way into the streets and shops which 
sell quicquid chartis amicitur inepUs. The author 
fondly hopes that this work, which contains an 
account of the last great religion of the world 

t SIKH. I C 



xxxiv THE SIKH RELIGION 

which remains to be exploited, may escape the 
general fate. At the same time a glance at the 
shelves of any large library must convince a writer 
of the vanity of most literary labour, if haply the 
love of fame is dearer to him than the love of his sub- 
ject. The blurred and hoary volumes, elaborately 
illuminated and bound, which no one now ever 
peruses, were often produced at the expense of years 
of toil — nay, of health and even life itself — and now 
remain sad monuments of the transitoriness of fame 
and the frequent futility of human effort. But there 
is even a worse fate than this, namely, the obloquy 
so often meted out to authors instead of the legiti- 
mate recompense of lives of strenuous toil devoted 
to literary or scientific investigation. Even under 
favourable circumstances the author of an elaborate 
work of this description, the production of which 
has occupied several years of his life, cannot always 
hope even for temporary reward in the approba- 
tion of those dear to him, those whom he would 
wish to please ; for either their measure of years 
has grown full, or separation and varied interests 
have dulled the feelings of mutual pleasure which 
would result from his success. 

Max Arthur Macauliffe. 

Royal Societies Club, 

London. 



CONTENTS OF VOL. I 


PAGB 

Preface v 

Introduction . . . . . . * xxxix 

Life of Guru Nanak . . ... . i 

Twelve Months 138 

Japji ^95 

Asa ki War 218 

Rahiras .250 

SoHiLA 258 

Guru Nanak’s Hymns 261 

Additional Sloks 379 




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


VOLUME I PAGE 

The Author and some of his Sikh Assistants Frontispiece 
Guru Nanak, the Founder of the Sikh Religion . i 

VOLUME II 

Guru Angad and a Pupil ..... i 

Guru Amar Das . 58 

Guru Ram Das receiving his DisaPLES . . .253 

VOLUME III 

Guru Arjan Reading the Granth Sahib . , i 

The Tank and Temple of Amritsar . . .13 

General View of Amritsar 20 

Guru Arjan’s Shrine ...... loi 

VOLUME IV 

Guru Har Gobind . i 

The Akal Bunga 4 

Baba Atal’s Shrine 132 

Guru Har Rai blessing Young Phul . . . 275 

Guru Har Krishan 315 

Guru Teg Bahadur 331 

VOLUME V 

Guru Gobind Singh i 

Fatahgarh 199 

An Akali 210 

Muktsar 214 

The Sikh Temple (Hazur Sahib) at Nander . . 246 

VOLUME VI 

Namdev’s Shrine at Ghuman 39 

Followers of Ramanuj and Ramamand . . . 105 




INTRODUCTION 


CHAPTER I 

The fifteenth century of the Christian era was a period 
of singular mental and political activity. Both in Europe 
and India men shook off the torpor of ages, and their minds 
awoke to the consciousness of intellectual responsibility. 
For this result, it is true, important preparations had 
been made in the fourteenth century, when the Christian 
reformers, Walter Lollard and John Huss, preached and 
suffered death for their opinions ; ^ when the poetical 
literature of England assumed a tangible form from the 
genius of Chaucer and Gower ; when the Musalmans in 
Europe penetrated into Thrace and Hungary ; and whra, 
after the overthrow and expulsion of Budhism from India 
by the astute and powerful Brahmans, there flourished the 
great exponents of Indian monotheism, the saint Kabir, 
and the enlightened Ramanand. 

But it was reserved for the fifteenth century to bear the 
full fruits of the mental awakening of the fourteenth. In 
England the ancient language of Greece began to be studied ; 
a furtherimpulse was given to thereformation of the Christian 
religion ; and villenage disappeared as a political institution. 
In France the Government was consoUdated by the union 
of the great fiefs to the crown ; and the daring monarch 
Charles VII made his successful expedition against the 
picturesque capital of Southern Italy. In Germany occurred 
the birth of Luther, and the revival and development of the 
invaluable art of printing in movable types.* In Italy 
there was a marvellous resuscitation of the fine arts, and 

^ Lollard and Huss were burned for heresy. Wickliffe would teve 
suffered the same fate, had not a paralytic attack antidpated the 
executioner. 

* Block printing waS known in China before the Chiidian era. 



xl THE SIKH RELIGION 

then were bom the renowned navigators Columbus and 
Amerigo Vespucci, the great masters Michael Angelo, 
Raphael, and Leonardo da Vinci, and the illustrious patron 
of letters Lorenzo di Medici. 

In Spain Ferdinand and Isabella, though they organized 
the inquisition in their intemperate religious zeal against 
the Saracens and Jews, were yet conspicuous for a worldly 
liberality which deserves the acknowledgement of posterity. 
In Portugal was bom Vasco da Gama, who under the enter- 
prising King Emanuel discovered the maritime route by 
the Cape of Storms to India. The Musalmans in Europe 
conquered Turkey and Greece, and seized on the ancient 
Italian city of Otranto. And in Asia, Taimur extended his 
victorious arms from Siberia on the north to the Arabian 
Sea on the south, and from the Ganges on the east to the 
Hellespont on the west. 

There is a wonderful analogy between the spiritual con- 
dition of Europe and India during the dark ages. In 
Europe most religious works were written in Latin, in India 
they were in Sanskrit. In both continents all learning 
was in the hands of the priesthood, and this admittedly led 
to serious abuses. A great cyclic wave of reformation then 
overspread both continents. During the very period that 
Luther and Calvin in Europe were warning men of the 
errors that had crept into Christianity, several Indian 
saints were denouncing priestcraft, h5q)ocrisy, and idolatry, 
and with very considerable success. Several of those great 
men who led the crusade against superstition, founded 
sects which still survive; but the most numerous and, 
powerful of all is the great Sikh sect foxmded by Gum, 
Nanak, which already forms a considerable section of the' 
population of the Panjab, and which is scattered in greater 
or less numbers not only throughout the whole of India but 
Kabul, Kandahar, China, and Southern Asia. 

A cognate cause is frequently assigned for the establishf 
ment of new religions, namely, that they appear at periods 
of great political or social depression, when it becomes 
necessary for men to have recourse to the superhuman fof* 



INTRODUCTION 


guidance and consolation. Then when the hour is darkest 
some prophet is born, perhaps in a lowly hamlet, to solace 
the heavy-laden and lift their thoughts to a brighter and 
happier world. A signal instance has been remarked by 
historians. Judaea was smarting from the tyranny and 
cruelty of Herod when he whom the most advanced races 
of the world call the Messiah was bom. 

The Gurus too appear to have been of the opinion that 
God sends a divine guide whenever required by the con- 
dition of the age and country. Guru Amar Das, the third 
Guru, wrote : — 

When the world is in distress, it heartily prayeth. 

The True One attentively listeneth and with His kind 
disposition granteth consolation. 

He giveth orders to the Cloud and the rain falleth in 
torrents. 

That is, the Gum comes by God’s order and gives abundant 
instruction to all who may be prepared to receive it. 

Indeed several events occurred during the Muhammadan 
conquests of India in the Middle Ages to force the Hindus 
to consider life in a serious aspect. Though many of the 
followers of Vishnu, Shiv, and the other gods of the Hindu 
dispensation adopted during that period the faith of the 
Arabian prophet, as the result of force or with a view to 
worldly advantages, yet others whose minds were powerfully 
directed to religious speculation sought safety from perse- 
cution and death in the loneliness of the desert or the 
retirement of the forest, and lived single-minded investigators 
of religious tmth as in the primitive golden age of their 
coxmtry. 

We shall here give, from the written accounts of Muham- 
madan historians, some examples of the treatment of Hindus 
by Muhammadan conquerors of India. 

Shahab-ul^Din, King of Ghazni, the virtual founder of the 
Muhammadan Empire in India (1170-1206), put Prithwi 
Raja, King of Ajmer and Dihli, to death in cold blood. 

^ The I is generally dient in such combinations. 



xlii THE SIKH RELIGION 

He massacred thousands of the inhabitants of Ajmer who 
had opposed him, reserving the remainder for slavery. 
After his victory over the King of Banaras the slaughter 
of the Hindus is described as immense. None were spared 
except women and children, and the carnage of the men 
was carried on until, as it has been said, the earth grew weary 
of the monotony.' 

In the Taj-t^Ma'asir by Hasan Nizam-i-Naishapuri it 
is stated that when Qutb-ul-Din Aibak (a,d. 1194-1210) 
conquered Merath he demolished all the Hindu temples of 
the city and erected mosques on their sites. In the city of 
Koil, now called Aligarh, he converted Hindu inhabitants 
to Islam by the sword and beheaded all who adhered to 
their religion. In the city of Kalinjar he destroyed one 
hundred and thirteen Hindu temples, built mosques on their 
sites, massacred over one himdred thousand Hindus, and 
made slaves of about fifty thousand more. It is said the 
place became black as pitch with the decomposing bodies 
of the Hindus. And in the Tabaqat 4 -Nasiri by Minhaj- 
ul-Siraj it is stated that when Muhammad Bakhtyar 
Khilji conquered Bihar he put to the sword about one 
hundred thousand Brahmans, and burnt a valuable library 
of ancient Sanskrit works. 

Abdulla Wassaf writes in his Tazjiyat-td-Amsar wa 
Tajriyat ul Azar that when Ala-ul-Din Khilji (1295-1316) 
captured the city of Kambayat at the head of the gulf of 
Cambay, he killed the adult male Hindu inhabitants for 
the glory of Islam, set flowing rivers of blood, sent the 
women of the country, with all their gold, silver, and jewels, 
to his own home, and made about twenty thousand maidens 
his private slaves. 

Ala-ul-Din once asked his qazi what was the Muhammadan 
law prescribed for Hindus. The qazi replied, * Hindus are 
like the earth ; if silver is demanded from them, they ought 
with the greatest humility to offer gold. And if a Muham- 
madan desire to spit into a Hindu's mouth, the Hindu should 

' The Kamilu-i Tawirikk by ibn Asir. See also Elphinstone’s 
History of India, 



INTRODUCTION 

Open it wide for the purpose. God created Hindus to be 
slaves of the Muhammadans. The Prophet hath ordained 
that, if the Hindus do not accept Islam, they should be 
imprisoned, tortured, and finally put to death, and their 
property confiscated.’ At this the monarch smiled and said 
he had not been waiting for an interpretation of the sacred 
law. He had already issued an order that Hindus should 
only possess com and coarse clothes sufficient to last them 
for six months. 

During the reign of the same monarch men formerly in 
easy circumstances were reduced to beggary, and their 
wives obliged to resort to menial labour for their main- 
tenance. In front of the palace were generally seen the 
corpses of forty or fifty Hindus. Hindus were punished 
with merciless severity for the most trifling offences. The 
monarch had his own brother and nephew flayed alive on 
the mere suspicion of disloyalty. He then had their flesh 
cooked and forced their children to eat it. What remained 
after the repast was thrown to the elephants to trample on. 

The historian, Ibn Batuta, who visited India in the time 
of the Emperor Muhammad Bin Tughlak, wrote of him : 
‘ Such was his inexorable and impetuous character that 
on one occasion when the inhabitants of Dihli revolted 
against his oppression and wrote him a letter of remon- 
strance, he ordered them to quit the place for Daulatabad, 
a city in the Dakhan (Deccan), at a distance of forty days’ 
journey. The order was so literally obeyed that when the 
Emperor’s servants searched the city after the removal, and 
found a blind man in one of the houses and a bedridden one in 
another, the bedridden man was projected from a catapult 
and the blind one draped by his feet to Daulatabad. 
But the latter’s limbs dropped off on the way, and at the 
end of the journey only one leg was left, which was duly 
thrown into the new city, “for the order had been that 
all should go to this place.” ’ We shall subsequently see 
how Muhammad bin Tughlak persecuted the Maratha saint 
Namdev, an accoimt of whose life and writings will be given 
in this work. 



xliv 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Amir Khusrau writes in his Tawarikh Alai or Khazain- 
ul-Futuh that when the Emperor Firoz Shah Tughlak 
( A.D. 1351-88) took the city of Bhilsa in Bhopal, he destroyed 
all its Hindu temples, took away their idols, placed them 
in front of his fort, and had them daily bathed with the 
blood of a thousand Hindus. Firoz Shah twice plundered 
the country of Malwa, and took away everything he could 
find except earthen pots. 

Farishta relates that a Brahman called Budhan, who 
dwelt in a place called Kayathan or Kataen near Lakhnau 
(Lucknow), was put to death by Sikeindar Khan Lodi for 
stating that eis Islam was true, so also was the Hindu 
religion. The saint Kabir lived under Sikandar Khan Lodi, 
and was tortured by him.‘ 

The Emperor Babar’s cruelty to the inhabitants of Sai5dd- 
pur we shall find described by Guru Nanak, who was an 
eye-witness. Both he and his attendant were taken 
prisoners and obliged to work as slaves. 

The Guru thus describes the Muhammadan rulers and 
the state of India in his time : — 

This age is a knife, kings are butchers ; justice hath taken 
wings and fled. 

In this completely dark night of falsehood the moon of 
truth is never seen to rise. 

I have become perplexed in my search ; 

In the darkness I find no way. 

Devoted to pride, I weep in sorrow ; 

How shall deliverance be obtained ? * 

There is a glamour of romance cast round the person of 
the Emperor Jahangir, partly owing to the poetry of Moore 
and partly owing to his possession of Nur Jahan, the most 
beautiful and gifted woman of the East ; but Jahangir’s 
memory is entitled to no historical commiseration. His 

' * Farishta elsewhere describes Sikandar Khan Lodi as just. God- 
fearing, and religious. He prayed five times a day, bestowed large 
sums of money on indigent and religious persons, and was, according 
to the historian, a model of a MusalmSn prince. 

* Majh ki War. 



INTRODUCTION 


3d« 

father Akbar was disposed to free thought in religion, and 
it was believed that in this he was encouraged by Abul 
Fazal, the famous Persian historian. Jahangir caused Abul 
Fazal to be cruelly assassinated. After his accession he 
compassed the death of Nur Jahan’s husband in order to 
possess her. He tells in his Memoirs how he disposed of 
robbers. ‘ I accomplished about this period the suppression 
of a tribe of robbers, who had long infested the roads about 
Agra ; and whom, getting into my power, I caused to be 
trampled to death by elephants.’ 

Sir Thomas Roe, the British Ambassador at his Court, 
gives the following further information regarding Jahangir’s 
method of dispensing justice : ‘ A band of one hundred 
robbers were brought in chains before the Great Mogul. 
Without any ceremony of trial, he ordered them to be 
carried away for execution, their chief being ordered to be 
tom in pieces by dogs. The prisoners were sent for execu- 
tion to several quarters of the city, and executed in the 
streets. Close by my house the chief was tom in pieces 
by twelve dogs ; and thirteen of his fellows, having their 
hands and feet tied together, had their necks cut by a 
sword, yet not quite through, and their naked and bloody 
bodies were left to cormpt in the streets.’ 

‘The trials are conducted quickly, and the sentences 
speedily executed ; culprits being hanged, beheaded, im- 
paled, tom by dogs, destroyed by elephants, bitten by 
sarpents, or other devices, according to the nature of the 
dimes ; the executions being generally in the market-place. 
The governors of provinces and cities administer justice in 
a similar maimer.’ 

The following gives Jahangir’s treatment of harmless 
lovers : ‘ Happening to catch a eunuch kissing one of his 
women whom he had relinquished, he sentenced the lady 
to be put into the earth, with only her head left above 
the ground, exposed to the burning rays of the sun, and 
the eunuch to be cut in pieces before her face.’ 

Sir Thomas Roe describes how Jahangir vented his dis- 
pleasure on some of his nobles : * Some nobles who were 



xivi THE SIKH RELIGION 

near his person he caused for some offence to be whipped 
in his presence, receiving 130 stripes with a most terrible 
instrument of torture, having, at the ends of four cords 
irons like spur-rowels, so that every stroke made four 
wounds. When they lay for dead, he commanded the 
standers-by to spurn them with their feet, and the door- 
keepers to break their staves upon them. Thus, cruelly 
mangled and bruised, they were carried away, one of them 
dying on the spot.’ 

Jahangir’s son Khusrau rose in rebellion against him, 
and it is not a matter for surprise that he found many 
adherents. ‘ After Khusrau’s arrest he was brought before 
his father, with a chain fastened from his left hand to his 
left foot, according to the laws of Changhez Khan. On 
the right hand of the Prince stood Hasan Beg, and on his 
left, Abdulrahim, Khusrau trembled and wept. He was 
ordered into confinement ; but the companions of his rebel- 
lion were put to death with cruel torments. Hasan Beg 
was sewed up in a raw hide of an ox, and Abdulrahim in 
that of an ass, and both were led about the town on asses, 
with their faces towards the tail. The ox’s hide became so 
dry and contracted, that before the evening Hasan Beg was 
suffocated ; but the ass’s hide being continually moisteneci 
with water by the friends of Abdulrahim, he survived the 
punishment. From the garden of Kamran to the city of 
Lahore two rows of stakes were fixed in the ground, upon 
which the other rebels were impaled alive ; and the unhappy 
Khusrau, mounted on an elephant, was conducted betwiMK 
the ranks of these miserable sufferers.’ 

Further on we shall see that Jahangir caused Guru Arjan, 
the fifth Sikh Guru, to be tortured to death, partly on 
account of his religion and partly because he had extended 
to Prince Khusrau a friendly reception and hospitality. 

Jahangir’s grandson the Emperor Aurangzeb was brought 
up a very strict Muhammadan. The following, according 
to the Mirat-i-Alam of the historian Bakhtawar Khan, shows 
how he treated Hindus and their temples for the honour 
and glory of God and the success of what he considered 



INTRODUCTION 


xlvii 


the only true religion : ‘ Hindu writers haVe been entirely 
excluded from holding public offices ; and all the wor- 
shipping places of the infidels, and the great temples of 
these infamous people have been thrown down and de- 
stroyed in a manner which excites astonishment at the 
successful completion of so arduous an undertaking.’ 

The following is from the Maasir-i-Alamgiri : ‘ It reached 
the ears of His Majesty, the Protector of the Faith, that 
in the provinces of Thatha, Multan, and Banaras, but 
especially in the latter, foolish Brahmans were in the habit 
of expounding frivolous books in their schools, and that 
students, learned Mussalmans as well as Hindus, went 
there even from long distances, led by a desire to become 
acquainted with the wicked sciences there taught. The 
Director of the Faith consequently issued orders to all the 
governors of provinces to destroy with willing hands the 
temples and schools of the infidels, and to put an entire 
stop to the teaching and practice of idolatrous forms of 
worship. It was subsequently reported to his religious 
Majesty, leader of the Unitarians, that in obedience to his 
orders, the Government officers had destroyed the temple of 
Vishwanath at Banaras. In the thirteenth year of Aurang- 
/eb’s reign this justice-loving monarch, the constant enemy 
of tyrants, commanded the destruction of the Hindu temple 
of Mathura, and soon that stronghold of falsehood and den 
of iniquity was levelled with the ground. On its site was 
laid at great expense the foundation of a vast mosque.’ 

^ere arose a sect called Satnamis founded by Jagjivan 
Das, a native of Awadh (Oude). They appear to have 
taken many of their doctrines from the Sikhs. Their moral 
code is thus described : ‘ It is something like that of all 
Hindu quietists, and enjoins indifference to the world, its 
pleasures or its pains, impHcit devotion to the spiritual 
guide, clemency and gentleness, rigid adherence to truth, 
the discharge of all ordinary, social, or religious obligations, 
and the hope of final absorption into the one spirit which 
pervades all things.’ ^ 

‘ H. H. Wilson's Religion of the Hindus. 



xlviii THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Muhammadan historian thus describes this pious 
sect and their treatment by the Emperor Aurangzeb : 
‘ A body of bloody miserable rebels, goldsmiths, carpenters, 
sweepers, tanners, and other ignoble beings, braggarts and 
fools of all descriptions became so puffed up with vain- 
glory as to cast themselves headlong into the pit of de- 
struction. Aurangzeb sent an army to exterminate and 
destroy these unbelievers. The heroes of Islam charged 
with impetuosity and crimsoned their sabres with the blood 
of these desperate men. The struggle was terrible. At 
length the Satnamis broke and fled, bjit were pursued with 
great slaughter. 

‘General Khan Jahan Bahadur arrived from Jodhpur 
bringing with him several cartloads of idols taken from 
the Hindu temples which had been razed to the ground. 
Most of these idols, when not made of gold, silver, brass, 
or copper, were adorned with precious stones. It was 
ordered that some of them should be cast away in out- 
offlces and the remainder placed beneath the steps of the 
grand mosque to be trampled under foot. There they lay 
a long time until not a vestige of them was left. 

‘ In 1090 A.H. (a.d. 1680) Prince Muhammad Azam and 
Khan Jahan Bahadur obtained permission to visit Udaipur. 
Two other officers at the same time proceeded thither to 
effect the destruction of the temples of the idolaters, which 
are described as the wonders of the age, erected by the 
infidels to the ruin of their souls. Twenty Rajputs had 
resolved to die for their faith. One of them slew many 
of his assailants before receiving his death blow. Another 
followed and another until all had fallen. Many of the 
faithful also had been dispatched when the last of these 
fanatics had gone to hell. 

‘ Soon after Aurangzeb himself visited the Rana’s 
lake and ordered all its temples to be levelled with the 
ground, Hasan Ali Khan then made his appearance 
with twenty camels taken from the Rana, and reported 
that the temple near the palace and one hundred and 
twenty-two more in the neighbouring districts had been 



INTRODUCTION xlix 

destroyed. He was rewarded by the emperor with the title 
of Bahadur. 

‘ When Aurangzeb went to Chitaur, still one of the most 
beautiful of all ancient cities, he caused sixty-three temples 
there to be demolished. The Rana had now been driven 
forth from his country and his home, the victorious Ghazis 
had struck many a blow, and the heroes of Islam had 
trampled under their chargers’ hoofs the land which this 
reptile of the forest and his predecessors had possessed for 
a thousand years.’ 

Aurangzeb’s iconodastic fury knew no bounds or modera- 
tion. ‘Abu Turab,'who had been commissioned by him 
to effect the destruction of the idol temples of Amber, the 
ancient capital of Jaipur, reported in person that three- 
score and six of these edifices had been levelled with the 
ground.’ ^ 

We shall further on see that it was Aurangzeb who put 
Guru Teg Bahadur, the ninth Guru of the Sikhs, to death 
in Dihli. According to the author of the Dabisian the 
emperor ordered the Guru’s body to be quartered and the 
parts thereof to be suspended at the four gates of the 
city.* Aurangzeb also persecuted Guru Gobind Singh, the 
tenth and last Guru of the Sikhs, and forced him to fly 
from the Panjab ; and it was a result of the same monarch’s 
tyranny that Guru Gobind Singh’s four sons lost their lives 
and that none of his descendants survived. 

Many earnest thinkers and reformers lived under the 
above and other Muhammadan emperors of India, but they 
were either executed and none dared record their teachings 
and their fate, or accounts of them belong to Hindu religious 
history, and lie beyond the scope of the present work. 

’ On the conduct of the Muhammadan Emperors we have largely 
availed ourselves of the translations and narratives in Sir Henry 
Elliot’s History of India. The original Persian histories are many of 
them difficult of access, and could not be consulted. 

* The Sikh chroniclers, as we shall subsequently see, give a different 
version of the mode of execution of Guru Teg Bahadur. 


81KH. 1 


d 



1 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chapter II 

'^The great Pandits and Brahmans of Hinduism communi- 
cated their instructions in Sanskrit, which they deemed the 
language of the gods. The Gurus thought it would be of more 
general advantage to present their messages in the dialects 
of their age. When Guru Amar Das was asked the reason 
for this, he replied : ‘ Well-water can only irrigate adjacent 
land, but rain-water the whole world. On this account the 
Guru hath composed his h5mms in the language of the 
people, and enshrined them in the Gurumukhi characters, 
so that men and women of all castes and classes may read 
and understand them.’ A Brahman urged : That religious 
instruction ought not to be communicated to every one, it 
being forbidden to instruct Sudars and women in the sacred 
lore.* The Guru thus oracularly replied : — 

O father, dispel such doubts. 

It is God who doeth whatever is done ; all who exist shall 
be absorbed in Him. 

The different forms, O God, which appear are ever Thine, 
and at the last they shall all be resolved in Thee. 

He who is absorbed in the Guru’s word, shall thoroughly 
know Him who made this world. 

Thine, O Lord, is the word ; there is none but Thee ; 
where is there room for doubt ? * 

Guru Nanak spoke of himself as neither continent nor 
learned, and was in every respect the essence of humility. 
His advent was heralded by no prophecies, and conse- 
quently he was not obliged to make or invent incidents in 

* It is laid down in the twelfth chapter of the Institutes of Gautam 
that if a Sudar even hear the Veds his ears must be stopped either 
with molten lead or wax ; if he read the Veds, his tongue must be cut 
out; and if he possess the Veds, his body must be cut in twain. 

In the eighteenth slok of the ninth chapter of the Institutes ofManu 
it is laid down that women may not take part in any Vedic rites. Their 
doing so, or having any concern with Vedic texts, would be con- 
trary to dharm. Women were therefore deemed as SQdars, and 
beyond the pale of religion. 

* Gauri gi- 



INTRODUCTION K 

his life conformable thereto. He preached against idolatry, 
caste distinction, and h3^crisy, and gave men a most 
comprehensive ethical code ; but in so doing he never uttered 
a word which savoured of personal ambition or an arrogation 
of the attributes of the Creator. He appears to have been 
on fairly good terms with Muhammadans, but his disregard 
of caste prejudices and his uncompromising language led 
him into occasional difficulties with the Hindus, though he 
was never embroiled in violent scenes. On the whole he 
was generally beloved during his life, and at his death 
Hindus and Muhammadans quarrelled as to which sect 
should perform his obsequies. 

The Granth Sahib contains the compositions of Guru 
Nanak, Guru Angad, Guru Amar Das, Guru Ram Das, 
Guru Arjan, Guru Teg Bahadur (the ninth Guru), a couplet 
of Guru Gobind Singh (the tenth Guru), panegyrics of bards 
who attended on the Gimis or admired their characters, 
and h3nnns of mediaeval Indian saints, a list of whom will 
subsequently be given. The cardinal principle of the Gurus( 
and Bhagats whose writings find place in the sacred books 
of the Sikhs was the unity of God. This is everjrwhere 
inculcated in the Sikh sacred writings with ample and 
perhaps not unnecessary iteration, considering the forces 
Sikhism had to contend with in an age of ignorance and 
superstition. 

The hymns of the Gurus and saints are not arranged in 
the holy volume according to their authors, but according 
to the thirty-one rags or musical measures to which they 
were composed. The first nine Gurus adopted the name 
Nanak as their notn de flume, and their compositions are 
distinguished by Mahallas or quariiers. The Granth Sahib 
is likened to a city and the hymns of each Guru to a 
ward or division of it. Thus the compositions of Guru 
Nanak are styled Mahalla one, that is, the first ward ; 
the compositions of Guru Angad the second ward, and so 
on. After the hymns of the Gurus are found the hymns 
of the Bhagats under their several musical measures. 

The Granth which passes under the name of Gmru 

d 2 



Hi THE SIKH RELIGION 

Gobind Singh, contains his Japji, the Akal Ustat or 
praise of the Creator, the Vachitar Natak or Wonderful 
Drama, in which the Guru gives an account of his parentage, 
his divine mission, and the battles in which he had been 
engaged. Then come three abridged translations of the 
Devi Mahatamya, an episode in the Markandeya Puran, 
in praise of Durga the goddess of war. Then follow the 
Cyan Parbodh, or awakening of knowledge; accounts of 
twenty-four incarnations of the Deity, selected because of 
their warlike character; the Hazare de Shabd; quatrains 
called sawaiyas, which are religious h5mins in praise of God 
and reprobation of idolatry and h5q)ocrisy ; the Shastar 
Nam Mala, a list of offensive and defensive weapons used 
in the Guru’s time, with special reference to the attributes 
of the Creator ; the Tria Charitar, or tales illustrating the 
qualities, but principally the deceit of women ; the Zafar- 
nama, containing the tenth Guru’s epistle to the Emperor 
Aurangzeb ; and several metrical tales in the Persian lan- 
guage. This Granth was compiled by Bhai Mani Singh after 
the tenth Guru’s death. 

There are two great divisions of Sikhs, Sahijdharis and 
Singhs. The latter are they who accept the baptism in- 
augurated by Guru Gobind Singh, which will be described 
in the fifth volume of this work. All other Sikhs are called 
Sahijdharis. The Singhs, after the time of Guru Gobind 
Singh, were all warriors, the Sahijdharis those who lived at 
ease, as the word denotes, and practised trade or agricul- 
ture.^ In the Singhs are included theNirmalas andNihangs. 
The Sahijdharis include the Udasis founded by Sri Chand, 
son of Guru Nanak ; the Sewapanthis founded by a water- 
carrier of Guru Gobind Singh ; the Ramraiyas, followers 
of Ram Rai, son of Guru Har Rai ; the Handdis, to be sub- 
sequently described, and other sects of minor importance. 

The Sikh religion differs as regards the authenticity of 

^ Some say that the Sahijdharis received their name from the 
promises of certain Sikhs in the time of Guru Gobind Singh, that 
they would not accept his baptism at the time, but that they would 
gradually do so. 



INTRODUCTION 


liii 

its dogmas from most other great theological systems. 
Many of the great teachers the world has known have 
not left a line of their own composition, and we only know 
what they taught through tradition or second-hand informa- 
tion. If Pythagoras wrote any of his tenets, his writings 
have not descended to us. We know the teaching of 
Sokrates only through the writings of Plato and Xenophon. 
Budha has left no written memorials of his teaching, 
Kung fu-tze, known to Europeans as Confucius, left no 
documents in which he detailed the principles of his 
moral and social system. The Founder of Christianity 
did not reduce his doctrines to writing, and for them we 
are obliged to trust to the Gospels according to Matthew, 
Mark, Luke, and John. The Arabian Prophet did not 
himself reduce to writing the chapters of the Quran. They 
were written or compiled by his adherents emd followers. 
But the compositions of the Sikh Gurus are preserved, and 
we know at first hand what they taught. They employed 
the vehicle of verse, which is generally unalterable by 
copyists, and we even become in time familiar with their 
different styles. No spurious compositions or extraneous 
dogmas can, therefore, be represented as theirs. 

It is not clear, however, that this contributes to the 
success of the Sikh religion. It appears that the very 
authenticity of the sacred books of a religion may militate 
against its general or permanent acceptance. The teach- 
ings of which there is no authentic record, are elastic 
and capable of alteration and modification to suit foreign 
countries and the aspirations and intellectual conditions 
of ages long subsequent to those in which they arose. 
No religion in its entirety is permanently adopted by a 
foreign country; and no religion when it spontaneously 
migrates can escape the assimilation of local ideas or super- 
stitions. The followers of all religions are prone to indulge 
in the luxury of eclecticism. By a universal law they adhere 
to the dogmas most suitable for themselves, and reject what 
they deem the least important or the least practicable 
enjoined by the founders of their faiths. 



liv THE SIKH RELIGION 

It is curious that the great^t religious reforms have been 
effected by the laity. The clergy, apart from their vested 
interests, are too wedded to ancient ^systems, and dare not 
impugn their utility or authority. P3dhagoras, who founded 
a religio-philosophical school and taught the transmigra- 
tion of souls, was the son of a gem-engraver and not 
a priest by early training or association. Ii^audi, the 
Hebrew poet, who gave consistency and splendour to 
Jewish sentiments, was not an ecclesiastic by professit»» 
Moses had a brother who was a high priest, but he was 
not himself designed for the priesthood. Sokrates was 
a profotmd thinker and moral guide, but still a member 
of the laity who had emerged from the schools of the 
sophists. Budha was a prince brought up without any 
sacerdotal instruction. He conceived ideas of reform by 
profound contemplation and introspection. Christ was by 
trade a carpenter, and was never intended to expound the 
law, or play the part of a Jewish Rabbi. Muhammad of 
Makka was born an idolater, herded sheep and goats in 
early life, and appears to have had no religious instruction 
whatever until he had met the Hanif Waraka, his wife’s 
cousin. The renowned Indian teacher Kabir was a weaver, 
who was so little of a professional priest that he denounced 
the Hindu and Muhammadan preachers of his age. And, 
as we shall see. Guru Nanak was not a priest either by[ 
birth or education, but a man who soared to the loftiestj 
heights of divine emotionalism, and exalted his mental? 
vision to an ethical ideal beyond the conception of Hindu; 
or Muhammadan. 

The illustrious author of the Vie de Jesus asks whether 
great originality will again arise or the world be content 
to follow the paths opened by the daring creators of ancient 
ages. Now there is here presented a religion totally un- 
affected by Semitic or Christian influences. Based on the 
concept of the unity of God, it rejected Hindu formularies 
and adopted an independent ethical system, ritual, and 
standards which were totally opposed to the theological 
beliefs of Guru Nanak’s age and country. As we shall see 



INTRODUCTION Iv 

hereafter, it would be difficult to point to a religion of 
greater originality or to a more comprehensive ethical 
system. 


Chapter III 

India contains a population who profess many religions. 
It would be a great mistake to put them all on the same 
footing. Some make for loyalty and others for what we may 
call independence. Some religions appear to require State 
support, while others have sufficient vitality to dispense with 
it. The Jewish religion has survived for many centuries 
without a temporal head and in the face of endless persecu- 
tions. Islam has spread in many lands, and does not 
solicit or require much support from temporal power. 
Muhammadans only claim the free exercise of their religion, 
and this is allowed them in India. Many members of 
other religions, believing that they are direct emanations 
from heaven, may not suppose that they require State 
countenance or support, but the student of compe^ative 
theology must be allowed to entertain a different opinion. 

Our little systems have their day ; 

They have their day and cease to be. 

To enumerate a few instances. When Constantine, the 
Roman Emperor of the West, after his conversion to 
Christianity, withdrew his support from the ancient religion 
of his country, it rapidly declined. Then vanished, in the 
words of Coleridge, 

The intelligible forms of ancient poets. 

The fair humanities of the old region. 

Its power, its beauty, and its majesty. 

Budhism flourished in India, its parent home, many 
centuries ago, but the successors of the renowned Asoka, 
who were not so spiritual or enlightened as he, allowed 
their religion to be completely banished from Indian soil, 
like an exile, to find in foreign lands the repose and accept- 



Ivi 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


ance it had vainly sought in its own country. The great 
Emperor Akbar, by an eclectic process, evolved what he 
considered a rational religion from Islam, Hindusim, and 
Zoroastrianism, but it perished when it received no support 
but rather opposition from his son Jahangir. The religion 
of the Cross was banished from its parent home of Judaea 
and supplanted by the religion of the Crescent. Christianity, 
however, or the civilization which passes under its name, 
gained in other countries much more than it lost in its own. 
Organization and the material forces by which it is main- 
tained have obviously contributed to that result. 

The Emperor Akbar’s historian, Abul Fazl, very clearly 
saw the advantage of State support to a religion. He says 
in his Ain-i-Akbari : ‘ Men of deep insight are of opinion 
that even spiritual progress among a people would be 
impossible, unless emanating from the king, in whom the 
light of God dwells.’ 

As Budhism without State support completely lost its 
hold in India, so it is apprehended that without State sup- 
port Sikhism will also be lost in the great chaos of Indian 
religious systems. 

^ The dialects and languages of the Gurus are now largely 
forgotten. There are no readable or trustworthy com- 
mentaries or translations of their compositions in any lan- 
guage, and the Sikhs find it difficult or impossible to xmder- 
stand them. Added to this is the custom of writing the 
sacred h5unns without any separation of words. As there 
is no separation of words in Sanskrit, the gyanis, or inter- 
preters of the Gurus’ h5anns, deem it would be a profanation 
to separate the words of their sacred writings. It cannot 
be said that the object of the gyanis has been to keep all 
divine knowledge to themselves, but at any rate the result 
is, that the Sikh laity have now thrust aside the gyanis 
and their learning, and are content to dispense with both. 

The sequel is a general relapse to Hinduism, which is princi- 
pally a system of domestic ritual. Hinduism has six philo- 
sophical s5rstems, two of which, the Sankhya and Mimansa, 
if pushed to their legitimate consequences, are practically 



INTRODUCTION lyii 

atheistical. The followers of the Hindu god Shiv may curse 
the followers of the Hindu god Vishnu, and the followers 
of Vishnu may retaliate on the followers of Shiv. To be 
deemed an orthodox Hindu it is only necessary to be 
bom in Hinduism and to conform to certain external 
observances, such as not eating or touching what its followers 
believe to be unclean, avoiding contact with persons who 
are deemed of lower caste, cooking food in a particular 
manner, and not allowing the shadow of strangers to fall 
on it. The old Levitical Law of Moses and its accessory 
regulations were sufficiently strict, but Hinduism surpasses 
all the religions that have ever been invented in a social 
exclusiveness which professes to be based on divine sanction. 

Truly wonderful are the strength and vitality of Hinduism. 
It is like the boa constrictor of the Indian forests. When 
a petty enemy appears to worry it, it winds round its 
opponent, crushes it in its folds, and finally causes it to 
disappear in its capacious interior. In this way, many 
centuries ago, Hinduism on its own ground disposed of 
Budhism, which was largely a Hindu reformation ; in this 
way, in a prehistoric period, it absorbed the religion of the 
Scythian invaders of Northern India ; in this way it has 
converted uneducated Islam in India into a semi-paganism ; 
and in this way it is disposing of the reformed and once 
hopeful religion of Baba Nanak. Hinduism has embraced 
(Sikhism in its folds ; the still comparatively young religion 
is making a vigorous struggle for life, but its ultimate destruc- 
[tion is, it is apprehended, inevitable without State support. 
Notwithstanding the Sikh Gums’ powerful denunciation of 
Brahmans, secular Sikhs now rarely do anything without their 
assistance. Brahmans help them to be born, help them to 
wed, help them to die, and help their souls after death to 
obtain a state of bliss. And Brahmans, with all the deftness 
of Roman Catholic missionaries in Protestant countries, 
have partially succeeded in persuading the Sikhs to restore 
to their niches the images of Devi, the Queen of Heaven, 
and of the saints and gods of the ancient faith. 



Iviii 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


CHAPTER IV 

A few brief paragraphs, unburdened with detail, on the 
origin and progress of religion until it received its mono- 
theistic consummation accepted by Guru Nanak appear to 
be necessary. 

Statius, the Latin poet, expressed his opinion that it was 
fear which first made gods in the world.* Miserable and 
resourceless primitive man felt the inclemency and fury 
of the elements, and prayed and sacrificed to avert their 
wrath or to gain their favour. But as there were malignant, 
so there were benignant natural agencies which received 
devout and earnest worship. The Sun, which gives light 
and heat, appears to have been worshipped by all primitive 
peoples. He was, however, distant and non-tangible ; but 
when fire was discovered, long ages after man had appeared 
on the surface of the earth, it appears to have received the 
greatest homage from the human race in all parts of the 
globe. By its means men warmed themselves, cooked their 
food, and smelted metals. It was to fire (Agni) the Indians 
of the Vedic period addressed some of their sublimest 
h)rmns ; and its discovery and importance led the ancient 
Greeks to suppose that it must have been stolen from 
heaven, which had so long been parsimonious of its gifts. 

As civilization progressed and the fruits of agriculture 
were added to the spontaneous gifts of nature, the bounty 
of the heavens was deemed necessary for man’s comfort 
and sustenance. It was then that the sky, under the various 
names of Dyaxis, Zeis, and Varuna, Ovpav6s, was invoked, 
both in India and Greece, to shed its choicest blessings on 
crops and men.* Other deities arose as prompted or required 
by human necessities. Prithwi, the earth, as the parent 
of sustenance, logically and necessarily received, as the 

* ‘ Primus in orbe decs fecit timor,’ TAei. iii. 66 1. 

* For long years after the discovery and study of Sanskrit there 
was no doubt whatever cast on the identity of Varuna with Ouranos. 
Doubts have now arisen in the minds of some persons on account, 
it is stated, of phonetic difficulties. 



INTRODUCTION lix 

spouse of the sky, divine honours both in India and Europe.^ 
Each deity addressed received all the homage and adoration 
that poetic fancy could lavish or imagine. His worshippers 
endeavoured to make him feel that he was the great god 
who ruled the world and controlled man and nature ; and 
they hoped that by judicious flattery and plenteous sacrifice 
he would listen to and grant their passionate supplica- 
tions. 

The gods as well as their votaries appear to have lived 
in friendly contiguity both in India and in Greece. Jupiter 
had his temple near that of Venus as they are found to-day 
in the disentombed city of Pompeii. Near Delphi Apollo had 
exclusive sway even to the extent of relegating Jupiter 
into a subordinate position. Each province selected in 
the wide domain of Olympus some deity which it worshipped 
to the exclusion of all others. In India, though the worship 
of Shiv, which is associated with knowledge, is different 
from that of Vishnu, which is associated with devotion, 
and though the worshippers of both gods frequently quar- 
relled and addressed each other in injurious language, yet 
they were united by the common bond of Hinduism, and 
sometimes celebrated their worship in harmony.* 

When man extended his horizon, the sufficiency and 
omnipotence of the gods ordinarily invoked began to be 
canvassed. In Greece the minor deities became completely 
subordinated to Zeus, the great ruler of Ol5nnpus. They 
could do everything but regulate human fate and action. 
That was reserved for the supreme deity alone : — 

’'Avovt* iirax^v Otoivi Koipta/eiv. 
i\€v0(pos yip oilrts ^ori Aids? 

In India a belief in an infinite, illimitable, and supreme 
power was gradually evolved by seers and philosophers 

* Tacitus wrote of the ancient Germans — ‘Herthum, id est terram 
matrem, colunt eamque intervenire rebus hominum, invehi populis 
arbitrantur,’ Germania, cap. xl. 

• An idol in a temple, Harihareshwar, on the outskirts of the 

MaisQr (Mysore) State contains the conjoint emblems of Vishnu and 
Shiv. * Aesch. Prom. Vine. 49. 



lx THE SIKH RELIGION 

ages before the emigration of the Aryans to Europe. Pra- 
japati, who was represented as the father of the gods, 
the lord of all living creatures, gradually received excep- 
tional human homage. There was also Aditi, who appears 
under various guises, being, in one passage of the Rig Veda, 
identified with all the deities, with men, with all that has 
been and shall be bom, and with air and heaven. In this 
character she corresponded to the Greek Zeus ; 

Zfiis aldrjp, Zeiis hi yrj, Zeis h' ovpavds, 

Zevs rot rh vdma x&ti r&vh* vn^prepov^ 

and to the Latin Jupiter : — 

lupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris.* 

But there appears again to have been even a more ex- 
alted concept of a divinity who was inexpressible and 
who could only be described by a periphrasis. He was 
bright and beautiful and great. He was One, though the 
poets called Him by many names. 

^ f^nrr 

Before there was anything, before there was either death 
or immortality, before there was any distinction between 
day and night, there was that One. It breathed breathless 
by itself. Other than it nothing has since been. Then 
was darkness, everything in the beginning was hidden 
in gloom, all was hke the ocean, without a light. Then that 
germ which was covered by the husk, the One, was produced.* 

Guru Nanak, as we shall see, gave expansion to this 
conception of the one God : — 

^ Aesch. Frc^. * Lucan, Pharsalia ix. 

* Rig Veda,X, 129. Tacitus indicates one God worshipped under 
different names by the Germans, and only perceived by the light 
of faith : ‘ Deorum nominibus appellant secretum illud quod sola reve- 
rentia vident.' It may be here noticed that Tacitus’ account of 
Germany and its people is much more trustworthy than that of 
Caesar, who was a less philosophical writer. Caesar states that the 
Germans worshipped the sun, fire, and the moon, and them only. 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixt 


In the beginning there was indescribable darkness ; 

Then was not earth or heaven, naught but God’s unequalled 
order. 

Then was not day, or night, or moon, or sun ; God was 
meditating on the void. 

Then were not continents, or hells, or seven seas, or 
rivers, or flowing streams. 

Nor was there paradise, or a tortoise, or nether regions ; 

Or the hell or heaven of the Muhammadans, or the De- 
stroyer Death ; 

Or the hell or heaven of the Hindus, or birth or death ; 
nor did any one come or go. 

Then was not Brahma, Vishnu, or Shiv ; 

No one existed but the One God. 

Then was not female, or male, or caste, or birth ; nor did 
any one feel pain or pleasure. 

There was no caste or religious garb, no Brahman or 
Khatri. 

No hom, no sacred feasts, no places of pilgrimage to bathe 
in, nor did any one perform worship. 

There was no love, no service, no Shiv, or Energy of 
his ; 

Then were not Veds or Muhammadan books, no Simritis, 
no Shastars ; 

The Imperceptible God was Himself the speaker and 
preacher ; Himself unseen He was everything. 

When He pleased He created the world ; 

Without supports He sustained the sky. 

He created Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv, and extended the 
love of Mammon. 

He issued His order and watched over all.' 

For many centuries thinking men in India have rejected 
gods and goddesses, and made no secret of their faith in the 
sole primad Creator, by whatsoever name called. 

An important question arose how the Supreme Being 
should be represented. He could not be seen, but He was 
believed to exist. The highest conception that primitive 
man could form of Him was that He was in man’s own 
image, subject to the human passions of wrath, jealousy, 
revenge, love of praise, and adoration. This conception 
is what has been termed anthropomorphism — that is, that 

' The Indian words in this hymn will subsequently be explained. 



Ixii 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


God is in man’s image, or, conversely, that God made man 
in his own image.^ 

When man’s conception of God extended, and it was 
admitted that He had created the heavens and the earth, 
and held control over His boundless creation, it became 
difficult for the philosopher to imagine Him in human form. 
Were He such, it would appear to be a limitation of His 
omnipotence and omnipresence, and, moreover, the belief 
that God is infinite and governs His infinite creation, but 
at the same time is not included in it, though possibly 
intelligible to faith, is not equally so to reason. To over- 
come this difficulty the belief arose that God is diffused 
through all matter, and that it is therefore a part of Him. 
This belief is known as pantheism. 

In India, pantheism may be said to be the creed of intel- 
lectual Hindus, but it cannot be held to be a generally 
satisfying or useful cult to the world. When a man believes 
that he is a part of God, and that God, who pervades 
space, pervades him also, moral obligation must obviously be 
relaxed. Nor can supplications be satisfactorily addressed 
to nature, with its elemental forces, even though God be held 
to reside therein. Pantheism is too cold and too abstract 
to satisfy the reasonable aspirations of the human soul. 
And the fact admitted by most philosophers, that men 
are endowed with free will, must make them pause before 
they accept the pantheistic philosophy in its entirety. 
Moreover, to gratify his emotional instinct, man must 
have access in spirit to a personal God to appeal to in order 
to grant him favours, to afford him solace in affliction, to 
love him as a son, and as a kind and merciful friend to 
take an interest in him when he needs assistance. According^ 
to the Sikh Gurus, God was a being to be approached and 

^ The ancient Greeks also believed that God made man in the 
divine image. Thus Plato — 'Os KwqBh avro Kod ^S>v hfmjtrt rm diStW 
tfcSv yiyovot iyaX/jua. 6 ytwrjaui wanjp, ^a<r% t« koX c^pav^eis In 
fioXXov ofuuw irpos to irapaZnyfiM. Ivrtvorjxrw ivtpydarturOai (‘ The creative 
Father seeing that this image of the immortal gods had both motion 
and life was pleased, and in his delight considered how he might 
fashion it still more like its prototype’), Ttmaeus. 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixiii 

loved as a fond and faithful wife loves her spouse, and 
human beings were to be regarded with equality as brothers, 
and not to be considered as divided into castes which were 
at variance with or despised one another. 

But though the Sikhs believe in a personal God, He is 
not in man’s image. Guru Nanak calls Him, Nirankar — 
that is, without form. Gur Das speaks of Him as formless, 
without equal, wonderful, and not perceptible by the 
senses. At the same time all the Gurus believed that He 
was diffused throughout creation. Guru Nanak wrote, 
‘ Think upon the One who is contained in everything.’ This 
same belief was again enunciated by Guru Ram Das, ‘Thou, O 
God, art in everything and in all places.’ And, according to 
Guru Gobind Singh, even God and His worshipper, though 
two, are one, as bubbles which arise in water are again 
blended with it. This belief, according to the Guru, admitted 
of no doubt or discussion.^ It is the error of men in supposing 
distinct existence, together with the human attributes of 
passion and spiritual bUndness, which produces sin and 
evil in the world and renders the soul hable to trans- 
migration. 

No religious teacher has succeeded in logically dissociating 
theism from pantheism. In some passages of the Guru’s 
writings pantheism is, as we have seen, distinctly implied, 
while in other texts matter is made distinct from the Creator, 
but an emanation from Him. Although anthropomorphic 
theism is a religion, while pantheism is a philosophy, and 
anthropomorphic theism is generally held orthodox and 
pantheism heterodox, yet, on account of the difficulty of 
describing the Omnipresent and Illimitable in suitable human 
language, both religion and philosophy are inextricably 

^ Compare 'AvOpwrov ye 'pvxTi, tlirtp ri koi oAAo rStv avOpunriViav, 
rov 6€iov pLerexet, Xenoph. Memor . ; ‘ Humanus autem animus decerptus 
ex divina mente cum alio nullo nisi cum ipso Deo, si hoc est fas 
dictu, comparari potest,’ Cicero, Tmc. Disp. 

Compare also the expressions attributed to Christ in the Gospel 
according to St. John, ‘ I and My Father are One,’ ' I am in the Father 
and the Father in Me,’ and again, ‘I am in My Father, and ye ini 
Me and I in you.’ 



Ixiv THE SIKH RELIGION 

blended by sacred as well as profane writers. Let us take 
a few examples : — 

Doth not the Lord fill heaven and earth ? — Jeremiah. 

God in whom we live, and move, and have our being. — St. 
Paul. 

Spiritus intus alit totamque infusa per artus 

Mens agitat molem, et magno se corpora miscet. — Virgil. 

Estne Dei sedes nisi terra, et pontus, et aer, 

Et caelum et virtus ? Superos quid quaerimus ultra ? 
lupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris! — 

Lucan. 


All in all and all in every part. — Cowley. 

Lives through all life, extends through all extent. 

Spreads undivided, operates unspent. — P ope. 

Deum rerum omnium causam immanentem, non vero 
transeuntem statuo. — Spinoza. 

Se Dio veder tu vuoi, 

Guardalo in ogni oggetto ; 

Cercalo nel tuo petto ; 

Lo troverai in te 1 — Metastasio. 

An indefinite number of such examples might be cited. 


CHAPTER V 

In the hymns of the Gurus, Nirvan, or absorption in God, 
is proposed as the supreme object of human attainment; 
but a paradise called Sach Khand is also promised to the 
blest. There they recognize one another and enjoy ever- 
lasting beatitude. Several learned Sikhs, however, maintain 
that Nirvan and Sach Khand are practically the same. 

Contrary to the practice of the ancient Indian ascetics, 
the Gurus held that man might obtain eternal happiness 
without forsaking his ordinary worldly duties. Reunion with 
the Absolute should be the supreme object of all Sikh 
devotion and aspirations. 



INTRODUCTION Ixv 

My soul, seek shelter in God’s holy name ; 

Pondering on this should’st thou ^ thought employ. 

No more thou’lt grieve, hemmed in by mortal frame. 

But gain in God Nirvana’s final joy. 

Nirvan, from nir out and va to blow, means in Sikh 
literature the cessation of individual consciousness caused 
by the blending of the light of the soul with the light of 
God. The Sikhs compare it to water blending with water : — 

As water blends with wafer, when 
Two streams their waves unite, 

The light of human life doth blend 
With God’s celestial light. 

No transmigrations then await 
The weary human soul ; , 

It hath attained its resting-place, 

Its peaceful crowning goal. 

Nirvan is to be obtained by meditation on God, with 
sufficient attention and iteration, and by a life spent in 
conformity with the Guru’s teachings. Individual con- 
sciousness then ceases, and there is no further pain or 
misery. 

A man may have performed good works on earth, but, 
if they be unattended with devout meditation and mental 
absorption in God, he cannot expect either Nirvan or Sach 
Khand, but must undergo purgation after death. After 
this the soul returns to a human body and begins anew 
its career, to end in either the supreme bliss of ultimate 
absorption or the supreme misery of countless trans- 
imgrations. 

If man have done evil and laid up demerits, his punish- 
ment after death must be severe. When the punishment 
corresponds to his misdeeds, his soul must enter some lower 
animal and pass through a greater or lesser number of the 
eight million four hundred thousand forms of existence in 
creation, until its turn comes to enter the offspring of human 
parents. The soul thus reborn in a human being has 
again to proceed in its long struggle to obtain the boundless 
reward of Nirvan. 


SIKH. I 


e 



Ixvi THE SIKH RELIGION 

Longa dies, perfecto temporis orbe, 
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit 
Aetherium sensum atque aurai simplicis ignem.^ 

Mind, whether known as reason or instinct of a greater 
or less degree, and whether an attribute of the brain, of 
the nervous system, or of the heart, is common to all animals. 
It is held in most religious systems to be distinct from the 
soul.® It induces the soul, under the impulse of goodness 
or passion, to perform good or evil acts. Both the mind and 
the soul are concomitants of life, which is a particular com- 
bination of certain elements existing in the body, and 
abides as long as the bodily mechanism is in order and 
harmonious operation. When the mechanism has fallen 
out of gear by illness, accident, or old age, life departs, 
and with it the soul, which in some religious systems is held 
to perish with the body, in others to be immortal and 
individual, and in others again to transmigrate from one 
living creature to another. We are in this work only con- 
cerned with the soul in its migratory aspect. 

In the Mosaic system God is represented as jealous and 
visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children even to 
future generations. The Indian philosopher feels that this 
belief is derogatory to God, and holds that the state of 
the soul after the death of the body depends on its acts 
(called Karma) while contained in the body. These acts 
attach to the soul, follow it, and determine its next abode. 

Hindus, and all who have sprung from them, have never 
entertained any doubt as to the possibility of the wanderings 
of the soul in the bodies of all created animals. And not 
only Hindus, but some Europeans of exquisite intellectual 
fibre have accepted or coquetted with this belief, -as if the 

* Virgil, Aeneid vi. 745. 

® In the Tusculan Disputations Cicero quotes a paragraph he had 
written in a work on Consolation, in which he appears to treat soul 
and mind as identical. After referring to the soul as that which 
possesses feeling, understanding, life, and vigour (‘ quicquid est illud, 
quod sentit, quod sapit, quod vivit, quod viget’), he states that the 
human mind is of the same kind and nature (‘ Hoc e genere atque 
eadem e natura est humana mens’), Tusc. Disp. i. 27. 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixvii 


minds of men of vivid imagination were of necessity recalling 
from the misty past — ^gathering from the fount of original 
knowledge — ideas evolved by primitive man long anterior, 
not only to European civilization, but to aU Semitic history. 
Many persons have thought on beholding for the first time, 
in this life at any rate, scenes in foreign lands, that they had 
been previously familiar with their beauties and derived no 
new gratification from them. The tenacity with which the 
Greek philosopher Pythagoras held this doctrine, which he 
called metempsychosis, is well known. Well known, too, 
is the success with which he and his followers for a long time 
imparted their views to the Dorian aristocracy on this and 
kindred subjects, such as, for instance, the non-destruction 
of life. And according to the Phaedo of Plato, Sokrates 
appears to have proved the doctrine of Pythagoras to his 
own satisfaction. 

To some of our English poets the belief has been one of 
curious interest and satisfaction. Thus Wordsworth : — 

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting ; 

The soul that rises with us, our life’s star 
Hath had elsewhere its. setting. 

And cometh from afar ; i 

Thus, too. Browning : — 

At times I almost dream 
I too have spent a life the sages’ way, 

And tread once more familiar paths. 

And also Rossetti : — 

I have been here before. 

But how or when I cannot tell. 

The soul when it separates from the body is likened in 
ancient Indian works to the moon on the day when it is 
invisible on account of its conjunction with the sun. The 
soul exists as the moon exists, though it is not perceptible; 
and as the moon shines again when it progresses in its 
motion, so does the soul when it moves into another body. 

The soul being in a state of mobility, and at the same 

e 2 



Ixviii THE SIKH RELIGION 

time immortal, seeks a body for the performance of its 
functions, and, as it were, enters into a matrimonial alliance 
with it for the completion and perfection of both. As 
the same thread will penetrate a gold bead, a pearl, or an 
earthen ball, so the soul, bearing its burden of acts, will 
enter any body with which it comes in contact. This the 
soul is enabled to do by its possession of a covering of 
finer or grosser texture, which it takes with it from the last 
body it has inhabited. The soul thus passes from body to 
body in a revolving wheel, until it is purged of its im- 
purities and deemed fit to blend with the Absolute, from 
which it originally emanated. 

Paramatama, the primal spirit, is the Supreme Being 
considered as the pervading soul of the universe. It is 
represented as light. Jivatama, the soul of each living 
being, is also light, an emanation from the Paramatama and 
not material. 

The lines of Milton maybe accepted as a ‘definition of the 
deity according to the Sikh conception : — 

. . . . Since God is light 
And never but in imapproached light 
Dwelt from eternity — 

Bright effluence of bright essence increate. 

And of Thomas Campbell nearly to the same effect : — 

This spirit will return to Him 
Who gave its heavenly spark. 

The Paramatama is likened to an illimitable ocean, the 
Jivatama to a glass of water immersed in it. The glass is 
the subtile body or covering of the soul. If the glass 
itself be broken or taken away, the water in it, which 
corresponds to the jivatama, blends with the water of the 
ocean. This is an exemplification of Nirvan. 

According to Sikh ontology all animals have two bodies, 
one a solid material body and the other a subtile intangible 
body.' The jivatama is separated from the former at the 

' St. Paul speaks of a spiritual body (i Cor. xv. 44), 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixix 

time of death, but not from the latter unless the state of 
Nirvan supervenes. While the jivatama is encased in a 
Subtile body, it is susceptible of punishment. 

' Sokrates, in discussing the possibility of a separate 
existence after death, dilates on the pleasure it would afford 
to meet such men as Homer, Hesiod, &c. ; but Plato has not 
recorded what Sokrates’ sensations would be on meeting 
his tormentors and persecutors in the same happy region. 
John Stuart Mill, too, thought^ that the most serious loss 
which would result to mankind from a disbeUef in an after 
existence would be the despair of reunion with those dear 
to us who have ended their earthly life before us. An 
aspiration for such a reunion is easy to understand, and 
the hope of its realization has soothed the death-bed of 
many a believer in the soul’s immortality. But all people 
are not equally dear to us, and it did not apparently 
occur to that eminent philosopher that, granted the hope 
of meeting those we love beyond the grave, there is also 
the possibility of meeting those who are not equally the 
objects of our affection — those who have perhaps embittered 
or even abridged our terrestrial existence, and who, it may be 
as the result of predestination or elective grace, are admitted 
to the sempiternal joys of paradise. To the believer in 
Nirvan there is no apprehension of such associations. Only 
those who are sufficiently purified can be absorbed in the 
Absolute, in the all-dazzling fount of God’s infinite perfection 
and love. Here individual consciousness ceases, the supreme 
goal of existence is attained, and neither sorrow, misery, nor 
remembrance of earthly evils can be apprehended. J<i 


CHAPTER VI 

About thirty miles south-west of the city of Lahore, 
the capital of the Panjab, and on the borders of the present 
civil districts of Gujranwala and Montgomery, stands the 
town of Talwandi, deep in a lonely forest. It is on the margin 

* Essay on the Utility of Religion. 



Ixx THE SIKH RELIGION 

of the Bar or raised forest tract which occupies the centre 
of the Panjab. The town is still girdled by a broad expanse 
of arborescent vegetation, which, when not whitened by 
the sand blown by the winds of the desert, wears through 
all seasons a cheerful appearance. The jal {Salvadora 
Persica) predominates, but there are also found the phulahi 
{Acacia modesia) and the jand {Prosopis spicigera). The 
wild deer is seen occasionally to appear startled at the 
traveller who disturbs the solitude of its domain, and the 
hare and the partridge cower cautiously among the thickets, 
deprecating molestation. 

In this retreat was born Guru Nanak, the founder of 
the Sikh religion. His birth took place on the third day 
of the light half of the month of Baisakh (April-May) in 
the year 1526 of the Vikramaditya era, corresponding to 
A. D. 1469. As to the month in which he was born there 
are strange diversities of statement, which we shall subse- 
quently notice. Guru Nanak’s father was Kalu of the 
Bedi ^ section of the Khatri caste. He was by profession 
a village accountant, but added the practice of agriculture 
to this avocation. Kalu’s father was Shiv Ram and his 
mother Banarasi. Kalu had one brother called Lalu, 
of whom little is known besides his name. Kalu was 
married to Tripta, daughter of Rama, a native of the 
Manjha ^ country. Tripta had a brother called Krishan, of 
whom history is as silent as of Lalu. Tripta bore to Kalu 
one daughter, Nanaki, and one son, Nanak. Nanaki married 
Jai Ram, a revenue official of high repute at Sultanpur, 
which is in the present native state of Kapurthala, and was 
then the capital of the Jalandhar Doab. 

When Taimur had spread anarchy and devastation over 
Northern India, a dynasty of Saiyids, or descendants of the 
Prophet Muhammad, aspired to rule in Dihli in the 
name of the Mughal conqueror. To Dihli there was hardly 
any territory attached, and Ala-ul-din, the last of the Saiyid 

‘ The meaning of this name will be explained when we come to the 
writings of the tenth Guru. 

* The Manjha is the country between the rivers RSvi and Bias. 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixxi 


rulers, in contemptuous disregard for the small and trouble- 
some dominion meted out to him by destiny, retired to the 
distant city of Badaun to end his days in religious and 
political tranquillity. He left Dihli and the fortunes of 
empire to Bahlol Khan Lodi, a man whose ancestors had 
been enriched by commerce, and whose grandfather had 
been Governor of Multan under the famous monarch Firoz 
Shah Tughlak. 

Bahlol Khan Lodi reigned from a. d. 1450 to a. d. 1488, 
and it was consequently near the middle of his reign that 
Guru Nanak, the founder of the Sikh religion, was born. 

After the accession of Bahlol Khan Lodi, Daulat Khan, 
a relative of his, obtained power in the Panjab, and governed 
under the paramount authority of his kinsman. He lived 
in state at Sultanpur till defeated and deprived of his 
possessions by the Emperor Babar. The Panjab appears 
to have been already parcelled out to Musalman chiefs 
who were retainers of the sovereigns of Dihli. One of these 
chiefs, called Rai Bhoi, a Musalman Rajput of the Bhatti 
tribe, had been Zamindar or proprietor of Talwandi. After 
his death his heritage descended to his son Rai Bular, who 
governed the town at the birth and during the youth of 
Nanak. 

Talwandi is said to have been originally built by a Hindu 
king called Raja Vairat. It was sacked and destroyed by 
fire and crowbar, like most Hindu towns and cities, during 
the Musalman invasions. Rai Bular restored it and built 
a fort on the summit of the tumulus, in which he lived the 
secure and happy ruler of a small village, some limited 
acres of cultivated land, and a boundless wilderness. 

Although the age was one of religious intolerance and 
persecution, Rai Bular appears to have been the very 
reverse of a bigot. His father and he were converted 
Hindus, doubtless added to the ranks of Islam by a hasty 
circumcision and an enforced utterance of some Arabic 
sentences which they did not perfectly comprehend. ' 


^ The descendants of Rai Bular still exist in that part of the country. 



Ixxii 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


In such a solitude Rai Bular could not have been under 
the less worthy influences of Islam ; and indifference, 
the parent of toleration, appears to have supervened on 
his Muhammadan religious training. But the human mind 
is so constituted, and the religious or emotional instinct 
so dominant in human nature, that most men at some 
period of their lives are irresistibly impelled to religious 
speculation. Something, too, must be allowed for Rai 
Bulat’s patriotic prejudices for a suffering though renounced 
faith. Talwandi shared not the tumults and excitements 
of the outer political world. It was a theatre meet for the 
training of a prophet or religious teacher who was to lead 
his countrymen to the sacred path of truth, and disenthral 
their minds from the superstitions of ages. Rai Bular in 
his little realm had ample time for reflection, and when 
he heard of Nanak’s piety and learning, felt a mysterious 
interest in the clever and precocious son of Kalu. 

The house in which Nanak was born lay a little distant 
from the fort. Probably Rai Bular and his family alone 
inhabited the ancient tumulus, while his tenants dwelt in 
the town of Talwandi on the plain. The town has now 
lost its old name, and is known as Nankana, in memory of 
the religious teacher to whom it had the honour of giving 
birth. When the Sikh religion had gained prominence, 
there was a temple erected on the spot where the Guru 
was born. It was afterwards rebuilt and enlarged by Raja 
Tej Singh, at the time when the Sikh arms had attained 
their greatest power and the Sikh commonwealth its widest 
expansion. Within the temple is installed the Granth 
Sahib, or sacred volume of the Sikh faith, intoned by a pro- 
fessional reader. The innermost shrine contains some cheap 
printed pictures of the Guru, and musicieins beguile the 
day chanting the religious metrical compositions of the 
Gurus. 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixxiii 


CHAPTER VII 

We shall now examine the principal current accounts of 
Guru Nanak and give brief notices of their authors. 

The oldest authentic account of the Guru was written 
by Bhai Gur Das, who flourished in the end of the sixteenth 
and the beginning of the seventeenth century, dying in 
A.D. 1629. He was first cousin of the mother of Guru 
Arjan, the fifth Guru of the Sikhs. He was Guru Arjan’s 
amanuensis, and wrote out from his dictation the Adi^ Granth, 
or sacred book of the Sikhs, which then contained the hymns 
of the first five Sikh Gurus and of the saints who preceded 
them. He next wrote what he called Wars or religious cantos. 
These are forty in number. The first War begins with the 
Sikh cosmology, and ends with a brief account of Guru 
Nanak and the succeeding Gurus to the date of Gur Das’s 
composition. Gur Das’s object was essentially religious. 
He delighted in singing the greatness of God, the littleness 
of man, and the excellence of the Guru. Besides the Wars, 
Gur Das wrote Kahits, which contains the Sikh tenets and 
a panegyric of the Gurus. 

The details which Gur Das has given of Guru Nanak 
will be utilized in the life of that Guru. It is a matter of 
regret that he did not write a complete life of the Guru, 
as its details could at that time have been easily obtained. 
The date of the composition of his work is not given, but 
it is admitted on all hands that it was during the time of 
Guru Arjan. Making due allowance for Gur Das’s pro- 
tracted employment in copying and collating the sacred 
volume for Guru Arjan — a task which was completed in 
A.D. 1604 — it may fairly be assumed that Gur Das wrote 
his own work not much more than sixty years after the 
demise of Guru Nanak, when some of his contemporaries 

^ The epithet Adi, which means primitive or first, was bestowed 
on the Granth Sahib of Guru Arjan to distinguish it from the Granth 
of Guru Gobind Singh, the tenth Guru, which was subsequently com- 
piled by Bhai Mani Singh. 



Ixxiv THE SIKH RELIGION 

were still alive, and one of them at least retained the vigour 
of his intellectual faculties. 

There was then living in the village of Ramdas ^ about 
twenty miles north of Amritsar, Bhai Budha, who had" 
embraced the Sikh religion under Guru Nanak at Kartarpur, 
and who used to attend him on some of his peregrinations. 
This man was in the prime of life when Gur Das copied 
the Granth Sahib for Guru Arjan, and the latter made him 
reader and custodian of the sacred volume at Amritsar. 
Bhai Budha subsequently lived until the Guruship of Guru 
Har Gobind, when he died at the ripe age of one hundred 
and seven years. In such estimation was he held that he 
was specially appointed to impress the saffron tilak, or 
patch of Gurudom, on the foreheads of the Gurus of his 
time ; and his descendants had the same honoured privilege 
as long as legitimate Gurus remained to be thus distinguished. 
He, however, has left no memoirs of the founder of his religion. 

Mani Singh was the youngest of five sons of Bika of 
Kaibowal, in the Malwa country, and belonged to the Dullat 
section of the Hindu Jats. The ruins of Kaibowal may 
now be seen near the village of Laugowal. When Guru 
Gobind Singh was going to Kurkhetar on a preaching 
excursion, Bika and his son Mani went to a place called 
Akoi to meet him and offer him their homage. Bika in 
due time returned home, leaving his son with the Guru. 
The Guru one day asked Mani to wipe the vessels from 
which the Sikhs had eaten, and, as an inducement, promised 
that as the vessels became bright so should his under- 
standing. Mani wiped the dishes with great humility and 
devotion, and received baptism from the Guru as his reward. 
He remained a celibate and devoted his life to the Guru’s 
service. 

This was Bhai Budha’s original name, and the village was called 
after him. The name Bhai Budha was given him by Guru Nanak. 

The word ‘ Bhai ’ means brother. Guru Nanak, who disregarded 
caste and preached the doctrine of the brotherhood of man, desired 
that all his followers should be deemed brothers, and thus he addressed 
them. The title ‘ Bhai ’ is now bestowed on Sikh priests and others 
who have made a special study of the Sikh sacred writings. 



INTRODUCTION Ixxv 

When the tenth Guru found it necessary to go to the 
south of India, he took Mani Singh, among others, with 
him. At Nander, or Abchalanagar, as it is now called by 
the Sikhs, the Guru expounded to his followers, among 
whom Mani Singh was an enthusiastic listener, the recon- 
dite language of the Granth Sahib or the book far 
excellence. 

After the Guru’s death Bhai Mani Singh remained as 
Granthi, or reader of the Granth in the Har Mandar in Am- 
ritsar.' The Sikhs commissioned him, while so employed, to 
write them a life of Guru Nanak. They represented that the 
Minas, or descendants of Prithi Chand, had interpolated much 
incorrect matter in the biography of the Guru, whereby 
doubts were produced in the minds of orthodox Sikhs ; 
and they commissioned Mani Singh to discriminate the 
true from the false, and compile a trustworthy life of the 
founder of their religion. He accordingly expanded the 
first of Bhai Gur Das’s Wars into a life of Guru Nanak. 
It is called the Gyan Ratanawali. Mani Singh wrote another 
work, the Bhagat Ratanawali, an expansion of Gur Das’s 
eleventh War, which contains a list of famous Sikhs up to 
the time of Guru Har Gobind. After the demise of Bhai 
Mani Singh the copyists interlarded several Hindu ideas in, 
his works. I 

The hymns of the Adi Granth are arranged under the 
musical measures to which they were intended to be sung. 
Mani Singh thought it would be better and more con- 
venient to compile the hymns of each Guru separately. 
He therefore altered the arrangement of the Granth Sahib, 
on which he was censured by the Sikhs. He apologized, 
and was subsequently pardoned by the members of his 
faith. 

/ In A.D. 1738 Mani Singh asked permission of Zakaria 
Khan, the Viceroy of Lahore, to allow the Diwali * fair to 

' Bhai Cyan Singh’s Panth Parkdsh. 

/ * The Diwili, originally a festival observed only by Hindus in 
honour of Lakshmi, their goddess of wealth, on the i gth day of Kartik 
(Oct.-Nov.). It w'as the date on which Bhai Budha the first Granthi 



Ixxvi 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


be held in Amritsar. The Viceroy gave permission on 
condition that Mani Singh undertook to pay a poll-tax for 
every Sikh who attended. Mani Singh accepted this con- 
dition, and sent circulars to the Sikhs to attend and hold 
a special Sikh gathering. The Viceroy sent troops to 
watch the movements of the Sikhs, but the Sikhs, mistaking 
their intention, dispersed. The result was that Mani 
Singh was unable to pay the stipulated tax. Upon this 
he was taken to Lahore for punishment. Zakaria Khan 
asked his Qazi what the punishment should be. The Qazi 
replied that Mani Singh must either accept Islam or suffer 
disj ointment of his body. Mani Singh heroically accepted 
the latter alternative. The Viceroy adjudged this barbarous 
punishment, nominally on account of his victim’s non- 
payment of the tax, but in reality on account of his influence 
as a learned and holy man in maintaining the Sikh religion. 
Mani Singh manifested no pain on the occasion of his 
execution. He continued to his last breath to recite the 
Japji of Guru Nanak and the Sukhmani of Guru Arjan. 

Bhai Santokh Singh, son of Deva Singh, was born in 
Amritsar in A. d. 1788. He received religious instruction 
in the Sikh faith from Bhai Sant Singh in his native city, 
and in the Hindu religion from a Pandit in Kaul in the 
Karnal district. He found a patron in Sardar Megh Singh 
of Buria, in the present district of Ambala in the Panjab, 
and under his auspices translated a work called Amar Kosh 
from the Sanskrit. In a. d. 1823 he wrote the Nanak^ 
Park ash. an exposition of the life and teachings of Guru! 
Nanak. I 

After this Bhai Santokh Singh entered the employ of 
Maharaja Karm Singh of Patiala. In a. d. 1825, Bhai 
Ude Singh of Kaithal obtained his services from the 
Maharaja. In Kaithal Bhai Santokh Singh, with the aid of 
the Brahmans whom Bhai Ude Singh had placed at his 
disposal, translated several works from the Sanskrit. He 
then set about writing the lives of the remaining Gurus, 

completed his perusal of the Granth Sahib, and it consequently became 
a Si^ holiday also. 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixxvii 


and this task he completed during the rainy season of 
A. D. 1843 under the name of ‘ Gur Partap Snra j popularly 
known as the ‘ S uraj Parka sh in six ponderous volumes. 
The lives of the Gurus, from the second to the ninth, inclu- 
sive, are divided into twelve ras or sections, corresponding to 
the signs of the Zodiac. The hfe of the tenth Guru is pre- 
sented in six ruts, or seasons, corresponding to the six Indian 
seasons, and into two ains, the ascending and descending 
nodes. The whole work is written in metre, and in difficult 
Hindi, with a large admixture o,f pure Sanskrit words. 
Santokh Singh’s other works are a paraphrase of the Japji 
of Guru Nanak and of the Sanskrit works Atam Pur an 
and Valmik’s Ramayan. 

Bhai Ram Kanwar, a lineal descendant of Bhai Budha, 
was specially favoured by receiving the pahul, or baptism 
by the dagger, from Guru Gobind Singh himself ; and on that 
occasion the name of Bhai Gurbakhsh Singh was bestowed 
on him.^ Bhai Gurbakhsh Singh survived by twenty-five 
years the tenth and last Guru, and dictated his history to 
Bhai Sahib Singh. To the writings of the latter, which are 
now no longer extant, Bhai Santokh Singh is said to have 
been indebted. It is, however, doubtful whether Bhai 
Santokh Singh had access to any trustworthy authority. 
From his early education and environment he was largely 
tinctured with Hinduism. He was unquestionably a poet, 
and his imagination was largely stimulated by copious 
draughts of bhang and other intoxicants in which he freely 
indulged. The consequence was that he invented several 
stories discreditable to the Gurus and their religion. Some 
of his inventions are due to his exaggerated ideas of prowess 
and force in a bad as well as in a good cause — a reflex of 
the spirit of the marauding age in which he lived. His 
statements accordingly cannot often be accepted as even an 
approach to history. 

The genealogy of Bhai Gurbakhsh Singh is as follows : Bhai Budha, 
who lived from the time of Guru Nanak to that of Guru Har Gobind, 
begot Bhana, who begot Sarwan, who begot Jalal^ who begot Jhanda, 
who begot Gurditta, who begot Bhai Ram Kanwar (Gurbakhsh Singh). 



Ixxviii THE SIKH RELIGION 

We shall now notice works called Jana msakhis, which 
profess to be biographies of Guru Nanak. These com- 
positions were obviously written at very different epochs 
after the demise of the Guru, and give very different and 
contradictory details of his life. In all of them miraculous 
acts and supernatural conversations are recorded. The 
question of these Janamsakhis is of such supreme impor- 
tance, as showing the extent to which pious fiction can 
proceed in fabricating details of the lives of religious 
teachers,^ that we must devote some space to a considera- 
tion of them. 

One of the most popular Janamsakhis is a large volume 
of 588 folio pages lithographed at Lahore. It is plentifully 
embellished with woodcuts, and its editor states that in 
its compilation he has expended vast pains, having collated 
books which he had brought from great distances at vast 
trouble and expense. He boasts that no one can produce 
such a book. If any one dare reprint it without his per- 
mission, he shall be sued and mulcted in damages in a court 
of justice. The work is apparently based on Bhai Santokh 
Singh’s Nanak Parkash. 

To gain credence for a biography it is of course necessary 
to have a narrator, and to be assured that the narrator is 
no fictitious person. In the present, and indeed in all the 
popular Janamsakhis, which no doubt have been compiled 
by altering some one original volume, a person called Bhai 
Bala is made the narrator. He is represented as having 
been three years younger than Guru Nanak, and as having 
accompanied him in the capacity of faithful and confidential 

^ Compare the manner in which Janamsakhis or gospels were 
multiplied in the early Christian Church. ‘ Vast numbers of spurious 
writings bearing the names of apostles and their followers, and claiming 
more or less direct apostolic authority, were in circulation in the early 
Church — Gospels according to Peter, to Thomas, to James, to Judas, 
according to the Apostles, or according to the Twelve, to Barnabas, 
to Matthias, to Nicodemus, &c. ; and ecclesiastical writers bear abundant 
testimony to the early and rapid growth of apocryphal literature.’ 
Supernatural Religion, vol. i, p. 292. It may be incidentally men- 
tioned that it was the Gospel according to Barnabas which Muhammad 
used in the composition of the Quran. 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixxix 


attendant in all his wanderings. Bala is said to have 
dictated the biography to Paira by order of Guru Angad, 
the Guru next in succession to Guru Nanak. What the 
value of this Janamsakhi is we shall briefly consider. 

It is generally written in the current Panjabi dialect, 
with a slight admixture of archaic words, and no more 
corresponds with the dialect of the age of Guru Nanak 
and Guru Angad, whose compositions have descended to 
us and can be examined, than the English of the present 
day corresponds with that of Chaucer or Piers Plowman. 
If Paira wrote from Bala’s dictation, where is the original 
volume, which of course was written in the language 
of the time ? When Bala proffered to dictate the biography. 
Guru Angad, who was well acquainted with Guru Nanak, 
knew so little of Bala that he is represented as having asked 
him whose disciple he was, and if he had ever seen Nanak. 
This does not appear as if Bala, supposing him to have 
ever existed, had been an eye-witness of Guru Nanak’s deeds, 
or a trustworthy authority for the particulars of his life. If 
he had been, his fitness for the duty of biographer would 
have been well known to Guru Angad, who was a constant 
companion of Guru Nanak in the end of his life. 

In Gur Das’s eleventh War is found a list of well-known 
Sikhs up to his time. He does not state what Sikhs were 
converted by or lived in the time of each Guru. Mani 
Singh, in the Bharat Raianwali, has given the same list with 
fuller particulars of the Sikhs. Among them Bhai Bala 
is not mentioned. This Janamsakhi professes to have 
been written in the Sambat year 1592,^ when Guru Nanak 
was still alive, and three years before Angad had obtained 
the Guruship. An earlier recension of the same biography 
professes to have been written in Sambat 1582, or thirteen 
years before the demise of Guru Nanak. 

There were three great schisms of the Sikh religion which 
led to the falsification of old, or the composition of new 
Janamsakhis. The schismatics were known as the Udasis, 

^ The Sambat or Vikramaditya era is fifty-seven years prior to annus 
domini. 



Ixxx THE SIKH RELIGION 

the Minas, and the Handalis. The first schism of the Sikhsj 
began immediately after the demise of Guru Nanak.^ Somen 
of his followers adopted Sri Chand, his elder son, as hia 
successor, and repudiated the nomination of Guru Angadj 
The followers of Sri Chand were termed Udasis, or th^ 
solitary ; and they now constitute a large body of devout 
and earnest men. Anand Ghan, one of their number, ha^ 
in recent times written the life of Guru Nanak. It contains 
an apotheosis of Sri Chand, and states that he was an incar- 
nation of God, and the only true successor of Guru Nanak. 

The second schismatical body of the Sikhs were the 
Minas. Ram Das, the fourth Guru, had three sons, Prithi 
Chand, Mahadev, and Arjan. Prithi Chand proved unfilial 
and disobedient, Mahadev became a religious enthusiast, 
while Arjan, the youngest, followed in the steps of his father. 
To Arjan, therefore, he bequeathed the Guruship. Prithi 
Chand he stigmatized as Mina or deceitful, a name given 
to a robber tribe in Rajputana. Prithi Chand, however, 
succeeded in obtaining a following, whom he warned against 
association with the Sikhs of Guru Arjan. Consequently 
enmity between both sects has existed up to the present time. 
Miharban, the son of Prithi Chand, wrote a Janamsakhi of 
Guru Nanak in which he glorified his own father. Here 
there was ample opportunity for the manipulation of details. 
It is in this J anamsakhi of the Minas we first find mention 
of Bhai Bala. 

The Handalis, the third schismatic sect of the Sikhs, 
were the followers of Handal, a Jat of the Manjha, who 
had been converted to the Sikh religion by Guru Amar Das, 

1 There are now several sects of the religion of Guru Nanak. It 
appears from the testimony of St. Paul that the early Christian Church 
was similarly divided. ‘ For it hath been declared unto me of you, 
my brethren, by them which are of the house of Chloe, that there 
are contentions among you. Now this I say that every one of you 
saith, I am of Paul ; and I of Apollos ; and I of Cephas ; and I of 
Christ. Is Christ divided ? was Paul crucified for you ? or were you 
baptized in the name of Paul?’ (i Cor. i. 11-13). Schisms appear 
to be the law of all religions. They began in lsl 3 .m after the death 
of the Prophet’s companions. Islam, it is said, now numbers seventy- 
three different sects. 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixxxi 


the third Sikh Guru. Bidhi Chand, a descendant of 
Handal, was a Sikh priest at Jandiala, in the Amritsar 
district. He took unto himself a Muhammadan woman, 
whom he attached to him rather by ties of love than of 
law, and upon this he was abandoned by his followers. 

He then devised a religion of his own, and compiled 
a Granth and a Janamsakhi to correspond. In both he 
sought to exalt to the rank of chief apostle his father Handal, 
and degrade Guru Nanak, the legitimate Sikh Guru. For 
this purpose creative fancy was largely employed. To 
serve the double object of debasing Guru Nanak and justify- 
ing himself to men, he stated that Nanak had also taken 
unto himself a Muhammadan woman bound to him by 
no bonds save those of lucre and ephemeral affection. 

According to this biographer, Guru Nanak, on his journey 
to Sach Khand, the true region, or the Land of the Leal, 
met the Hindu saint Dhru. One day while on earth Dhru 
sat on his father’s lap, and was removed by his step-mother. 
For this triyial slight he left his home and turned his thoughts 
to God. God accepted his worship, and in recognition 
thereof offered him the highest place in heaven. The 
pole, as not moving, is supposed to have the position of 
hdliour, and there Vishnu set him in the centre of the stars. 
Dhru began to converse with Guru Nanak, and told him that 
only one man, Kabir, had previously been able to visit 
that select and happy region. Here there was a covert 
depreciation of Guru Nanak. Kabir, a famous religious 
teacher, by caste a weaver, was his precursor, and the 
Handali’s object was to show that Guru Nanak was a follower 
of Kabir and not an original thinker. Guru Nanak is then 
represented to have said that a third man, Handal, was 
approaching, and would be present in the twinkling of an eye. 

Guru Nanak, proceeds the Handali writer, continued 
his journey to Sach Khand, and there found Kabir fanning 
God, who is represented as the four-armed Hindu deity 
Vishnu. A rude drawing in the Handali Janamsakhi 
represents God and Kabir in truly anthropomorphic fashion 
as a priest and his attendant disciple. 

f 


SIKH. 1 



Ixxxii 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Nanak informed God that he had not fully carried out the 
orders he had obtained prior to his departure to earth and his 
human manifestation. He had only promulgated God’s 
message in three directions. The western portion of the 
world remained still ignorant and un visited. He was there- 
fore remanded by God to fully accomplish his mission. 
On his return to earth he met in one of the lower world^ 
a Jogi with whom, as was his wont, he entered into familiar 
conversation. The Jogi, in reply to Nanak’s question, 
told him that he had been, in a previous state of existence 
in the Treta age, a servant of Raja Janak, King of Mithila, 
and father-in-law of the renowned deified hero Ram Chandar. 
Nanak is made to confess to him that he, too, had been a 
servant of Raja Janak, and that they had both served 
under the same roof in the same menial capacity. The 
Jogi then questioned Nanak as to his secular position in 
the Dwapar age. Nanak is represented as saying with 
the same unsuspecting frankness that he had been the son 
of a teli or oil-presser, a trade held to be offensive and 
degrading to Hindus. Thus was the depreciation of Guru 
Nanak complete. 

Such were the fictitious narratives introduced into the 
Janamsakhis, and, the reins of fancy having once been let 
loose, it was difiicult for the Handalis to know at what 
goal to pause. The result was a total transformation of the 
biographies of Guru Nanak which they had found in exis- 
tence. This occurred about the year a. d. 1640. Bidhi Chand 
died in the year a.d. 1654. His successor was Devi Das, 
whom his Musalman companion bore him. 

The Handali heresy was opportune for its followers. 
Zakaria Khan Bahadur, the Muhammadan Governor of 
the Pan jab, about a century afterwards, set a price on the 
head of every Sikh. At first he offered twenty-five, then 
ten, and finally five rupees. The heads of Sikhs were 
supplied in abundance by both Musalmans and Hindus,^ 

^ It was, as we shall subsequently see, a Bi^hman who betrayed the 
sons of Guru Gobind Singh, and placed them at the disposal of the 
Muhammadan Governor of Sarhind, who barbarously murdered them. 



INTRODUCTION 


ixxxm 

and the price offered was. consequently reduced by degrees. 
The Handalis protested to the officials of Zakaria that they 
were not Sikhs of Nanak, but a totally different sect who 
merited not persecution ; and in proof of this they pointed 
to their Granth, and their Janamsakhi, and to the Musalman 
companion of Bidhi Chand. Notwithstanding these subter- 
fuges, the Handalis were subsequently persecuted and 
deprived of their land by Maharaja Ranjit Singh, but they 
still exist as a small community, whose head quarters are 
at Jandiala, where the guardians of their temple enjoy a 
jagir or fief from the British Government. They are now 
known by the name of Niranjanie, or followers of the bright 
God (Niranjan). 

In the present age, accustomed as we are to the use and 
multiplication of printed books, it is not at once easy to 
realize how records of every description could have been 
forged, altered, and destroyed in an age when manuscripts 
only existed. It must be remembered that books then 
were few, and that combinations among their possessors, 
especially if supported by political power or religious 
fanaticism, could easily be effected. The Handalis appar- 
ently had sufficient influence to destroy nearly all the older 
accounts of the life of Guru Nanak. 

But, apart from this altogether, there is no doubt that 
there was a great destruction of Sikh manuscripts during the 
persecution of the Sikh faith by the Muhammadan authori- 
ties. Sikh works or treatises preserved in shrines became 
special objects of attack. Their existence was known and 
could not be denied by the Sikh priests, and S3rstematic 
raids were organized to take possession of them. It was 
only copies preserved by private individuals, living at a 
distance from the scenes of persecution, which had any 
chance of escape from the fury of the Moslems.^ 

^ This finds a parallel in the destruction of Christian writings by 
fanatical Romans prior to the time of the Emperor Constantine. The 
records of the Christian persecutions show that the Christian priests 
who surrendered their sacred writings subsequently received severe 
treatment at the hands of their co-religionists. Compare the manner 



Ixxxiv THE SIKH RELIGION 

All the Handali and modem Janamsakhis give Kartik 
as the month in which Baba Nanak was bom. In Mani 
Singh’s and all the old Janamsakhis the Guru’s natal month 
is given as Baisakh. The following is the manner in which 
Kartik began to be considered as the Guru’s natal month : 
There lived in the time of Maharaja Ranjit Singh, at 
Amritsar, Bhai Sant Singh Gyani, who was held in high 
estimation by that monarch. Some five miles from Amritsar 
is an ancient tank called the Ram Tirath or place of pilgrim- 
age of the Hindu god Ram. At that place a Hindu fair 
was and is still held at the time of the full moon in the month 
of Kartik. The spot is essentially Hindu, and it had the 
further demerit in the eyes of the Bhai of having been 
repaired by Lakhpat, the prime minister of Zakaria Khan 
Bahadur, the inhuman persecutor of the Sikhs. Bhai Sant 
Singh desired to establish an opposition fair in Amritsar 
on the same date, and thus prevent the Sikhs from making 
the Hindu pilgrimage to Ram Tirath. He gravely adopted 
the Handali date of Guru Nanak’s birth, and proclaimed that 
his new fair at Amritsar at the full moon in the month of Kartik 
was in honour of the nativity of the founder of his religion. 

There is no doubt that Guru Nanak was bom in Baisakh. 
All the older Janamsakhis give that as Guru Nanak’s natal 
month. As late as the Sambat year 1872 it was in Baisakh 
that the anniversary fair of Guru Nanak’s birth was always 
celebrated at Nankana. And finally the Nanak Parkash, 
which gives the full moon in Kartik, Sambat 1526, as the time 
of Gum Nanak’s birth and the tenth of the dark half of 
Assu, Sambat 1596, as the date of his death, states with 
strange inconsistency that he lived seventy years five months 
and seven days,^ a total which is irreconcilable with these 
dates, but it is very nearly reconcilable with the date of 
the Gum’s birth given in the old Janamsakhi. 

in which the Gospel according to the Hebrews, the Memoirs of the 
Apostles, and other valuable Christian records used by the early fathers 
of the Church, have been destroyed and lost for ever to the world. 

^ The usually accepted horoscopes and ages of the Gurus are given 
in a work called the Chfr Parnali. 



INTRODUCTION 


bcxxv 


How the month of Kartik was subsequently ratified by 
orthodox Sikhs as the month of Guru Nanak’s nativity is 
also -a curious instance of the manner in which religious 
anniversaries and observances can be prescribed and 
adopted. Bhai Harbhagat Singh, of Shahid Ganj in Lahore, 
was a Sikh of high consideration. He long debated in 
his own mind whether he would accept Baisakh or Kartik 
as the month of Guru Nanak’s nativity. At last he submitted 
the matter to the arbitrament of chance. He wrote the 
word Baisakh on one slip of paper and Kartik on the other, 
placed both papers in front of the Granth Sahib, and sent 
an unlettered boy, who had previously performed religious 
ablution in the sacred tank, to take up one of them. The 
boy selected the one on which Kartik had been written 

Other reasons, too, for the alterations of the date can 
easily be imagined. In the beginning of the month of 
Baisakh there have been large Hindu fairs held from time 
immemorial to celebrate the advent of spring. These 
fairs were visited by the early Sikhs as well as by their 
Hindu countrymen ; and it would on many accounts have 
been very inconvenient to make the birth of Guru Nanak 
s5mchronize with them. The comparatively small number 
of Sikh visitors at a special Sikh fair in the early days of 
the Sikh religion would have compared unfavourably with 
the large number of Hindu pilgrims at the Baisakhi fair, 
and furthermore, the selection of the month of October, 
when few Hindu fairs are held, and when the weather is 
more suitable for the distant journey to Nankana, would 
probably lead to a large gathering of Hindus at a Sikh 
shrine. 

One difference of opinion among the victims of priestcraft 
is apt to produce many. When the month of Kartik was 
adopted by the Handahs as Guru Nanak’s birth time, 
a discussion arose as to whether it was the lunar or the solar 

1 In the East sacred books are often employed in this way for 
purposes of divination. In the Middle Ages the Bible, and in earlier 
times the poems of Homer, Virgil, and odiers, were used for the same 
purpose. 



Ixxxvi THE SIKH RELIGION 

Kartik, there being a considerable difference between these 
forms of chronology. The partisans of the lunar Kartik, 
however, prevailed, the lunar month being the earlier 
form of calculation, and consequently the most acceptable 
to all persons whosereligion is based on any form of Hinduism. 
Generally the confusion of solar and lunar chronology is 
the cause of much perplexity and qualms of conscience to 
the pious.^ 

The last Jan^msakhi which we shall notice was written 
by a Sikh called Sewa Das.* Of this we have obtained 
several copies. One of them in our possession bears the 
date Sambat 1645 = a. d. 1588. It was therefore completed 
at least sixteen years before the compilation of the Granth 
Sahib by Guru Arjan, which is admitted to have taken 
place in a.d. 1604. Its language is that of Pothohar, the 
country between the Jihlam and the Indus, and its written 
character is unmistakably more ancient than that of any 
other Gurumukhi book now in existence. 

This Janamsakhi appears to have escaped the notice 
of both Gur Das and Mani Singh. Had Gur Das seen it, 
he would doubtless have given a fuller account of the life 
of Guru Nanak ; and, had it been known to Mani Singh, 
he would probably have referred to it or criticized its 
details. While persecutions of the Sikhs were raging south 
of Lahore, and the other detailed memoirs of Guru Nanak’a 
life, including those of Bhai Mani Singh, were destroyed, 
this Janamsakhi was preserved in Pothohar, where Moslem 
bigotry was not then aggressively exercised. 

In this biography there is no mention whatever of Bhai 

* The late Bhai Gurumukh Singh, who first gave the author these 
details, afterwards put himself at the head of a deputation to move 
the Government of the Panjab to declare the fictitious anniversary 
of Guru Nanak's birth a public holiday. That Government accord- 
ingly added a second Sikh holiday to the already long list of Christian, 
Hindu, and Muhammadan holidays sanctioned in its calendar. The 
other special Sikh holiday is the Hola Mahalla, the day on which 
the tenth Guru held a mimic battle for the instruction of his troops. 

* The late Sir Atar Singh, Chief of Bhadaur, gave the author this 
information. 



INTRODUCTION 


Ixxxvii 


Bala. There is, however, mention made of Mardana, who 
undoubtedly accompanied Baba Nanak as his minstrel 
in most, if not all, of his wanderings. This Janamsakhi 
again is deformed by mythological matter which Baba 
Nanak himself would have been the first to repudiate. 

Notwithstanding exaggerations, such as occur in all 
religions which deal with avatars or incarnations, the 
Janamsakhi now under consideration is beyond dispute 
the most trustworthy detailed record we possess of the 
life of Guru Nanak. It contains much less m3dhological 
matter than any other Gurumukhi life of the Guru, and is 
a much more rational, consistent, and satisfactory narrative. 
At the same time it is, of course, the product of legend and 
tradition, but these have, in at least one memorable instance, 
been thought more trustworthy than written records in 
such cases.i We shall make this ancient Janamsakhi the 
basis of our own details of the life of Guru Nanak supple- 
menting it when necessary by cullings from the later lives of 
the Guru. At the same time we must premise that several 
of the details of this and of all the current Janamsakhis 
appear to us to be simply settings for the verses and sa)dngs 
of Guru Nanak. His followers and admirers found dainty 
word-pictures in his compositions. They considered under 
what circumstances they could have been produced, and 
thus devised the framework • of a biography in which to 
exhibit them to the populace. 

The deeds that have been done, the prophecies that have 
been uttered, and the instruction that has been imparted 
by that great procession of holy men, the Sikh Gurus, will 
be found described in the following pages. In the Gurus 
the East shook off the torpor of ages, and rmburdened itself 

Papias, a father of the Christian Church, who flourished about 
A.D. 130, wrote that he considered what he obtained from the living 
and abiding voice of men would profit him more in obtaining accurate 
details of the life of Christ than what was recorded in the gospels. 

* That accomplished Sikh scholar and saintly man, the late BhSi 
Dit Singh, has also made the Janamsakhi that we use the basis of 
his Gurumukhi life of Guru Nanak. 



Ixxxviii THE SIKH RELIGION 

of the heavy weight of ultra-conservatism which had para- 
lysed the genius and intelligence of its people. Only those 
who know India by actual experience can adequately 
appreciate the difficulties the Gurus encountered in their 
efforts to reform and awaken the sleeping nation. 

Those who, secure in their own wisdom and infallibility, 
and dwelling apart from the Indian people spurn all know- 
ledge of their theological systems, and thus deem Sikhism 
a heathen religion, and the spiritual happiness and loyalty 
of its followers negligeable items, are men whose triumph 
shall be short-lived and whose glory shall not descend with 
the accompaniment of minstrel raptures to future genera- 
tions. I am not without hope that when enlightened rulers 
become acquainted with the merits of the Sikh religion they 
will not willingly let it perish in the great abyss in which 
so many creeds have been engulfed. 







GURU NANAK, THE FOUNDER OF THE SIKH RELIGION 


SIKH I P. I 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 

Chapter I 

To recapitulate what has been more fully stated 
in the Introduction, Guru Nanak, the founder of 
the Sikh religion, was born, according to all ancient 
Sikh records, in the early morning of the third day of 
the light half of the month of Baisakh (April-May) in 
the year a.d. 1469; but for convenience sake his 
anniversary is now observed by the Sikhs on the 
occasion of the full moon in the month of Kartik 
(October-November). His father., who was called 
Kalu, was accountant in the village of Talwandi in 
the present Lahore District of the Panjab, and his 
mother was Tripta, memorable in Sikh writings for 
her devotion to her son. 

The Sikh biographers recount in minute detail sdl 
the circumstances of the birth of Guru Nanalc. 
Daulatan, a midwife, assisted on the occasion.* 
When next morning interrogated by the astrologer 
Hafdial, who came to write the child’s horoscope, as 
to the nature of the voice uttered by him at birth,, 
she said it was as the laughing voice of a wise man 
joining a social gathering ; and she expressed herself 
at her wits’ end to comprehend the child’s nature. 
The astrologer desired to see him, but his mother 
refused owing to the chillness of the weather. He 
pressed the matter, and the child Was brought to 
him in his swaddling clothes. The astrologer on 
seeing the infant is said to have worshipped him' 
with clasped hands. He declared the child Should- 
wear the umbrella, the symbol of regal or prophe^^ 
dignity in-the*East. At the same time he regrett^r 
that he mould never live to see young Nanak’s 
eminence, worshipped as he should be alike by 
Hindus and Musalmans, and not merely by Hindus 

SIKH. X B 



2 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


as in the previous human manifestations of the 
Creator. The child’s name should resound both 
in earth and heaven. Inanimate nature should 
cry out ‘ Nanak, Nanak ! ’ He should have power 
over matter so as to traverse unscathed the depths 
of the ocean. He should worship and acknowledge 
but one God, and the creature he should treat as 
a creature. In other words he should be a mono- 
theist, not a worshipper of minor deities and idols. 

At the unripe age of five years Nanak is said to 
have begun to talk of divine subjects, and to have 
fully understood the meaning of his language. Great 
trust was reposed in him ; and both Hindus and 
Musalmans lavished on him their characteristic 
language of religious adulation. 

At Nankana ^ every place with which Nanak had 
any association is deemed sacred. On the spot 
where he used to play with children of his own age 
and subsequently spend nights in devotion, there 
was a small tank constructed by Rai Bular, the 
landlord of the village, in affectionate remembrance 
of the childhood of the Guru, at a time when his 
fame had extended far and wide. The tank was 
greatly enlarged by Kaura Mai, the Diwan or financial 
minister of Zakaria Khan, who was satrap of Lahore. 
Kaura Mai was an enthusiastic admirer of Guru Nanak, 
and lent his great material and political influence 
to the amelioration of the condition of the Sikhs. 
The spot is called Balkrira or the child’s playground. 

When Nanak was seven years of age, his father in the 
manner of Hindus asked the village astrologer to seleql 
an auspidous time for the commencement of the boy’i 
education. The schoolmaster thought the time haJ 
arrived. The school appears to have been a humble 
one, and the tuition fees not exorbitant. Kalu’s 
wife and not, as in modem times, the village money- 
lender was the custodian of the wealth of ttie house. 
Kalu took from her a coin corresponding to three 

' By which name Talwandi is nbw known. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


3 


farthings of English money, some betel-nut, and 
rice, and presented them to the schoolmaster with 
his son. In India wooden tablets painted black are 
employed in teaching children the letters of their 
language. The schoolmaster writes the letters with 
a kind of liquid chalk on the tablet ; and the children 
repeat their names aloud with much noise and energy. 
The schoolmaster wrote the alphabet for Nanak, 
and the latter copied it from memory after one day. 

It is said that on that occasion the young Guru 
made an acrostic on his alphabet. As in similar 
compositions in other languages, the letters were 
taken consecutively, and words whose initials they 
formed were employed to give metrical expression to 
the Guru’s divine aspirations, his tenets, and his 
admiration of the attributes of the Creator. 

The acrostic called the patti or tablet in the Rag ^ 
Asa is as follows : — 

S. The one Lord who created the world is the Lord of all. 

Fortunate is their advent into the world, whose 
hearts remain attached to God’s service. 

O foolish man, why hast thou forgotten Him ? 

When thou adjustest thine account, my friend, 
thou shalt be deemed educated. 

^ I. The Primal Being is the Giver ; He alone is true. 

No account shall be due by the pious man who 
understandeth by means of these letters. 

' Indian writers enumerate six principal R&gs or musical measures, 
namely, Sri Rag, Bhaira v, M^kaus, Hindol, D mak, Megh . To these 
are allotteT‘”wive8 ’’and ■^sons^T^iclTare moSmcationsof the principal 
airs, and are often sung differently in different provintils of India. 
The hymns of the Granth S§hib were composed to as many as thirty- 
one such musical measures, the names of which are as follows: — 
Sri RSg,' Majh, Gauri, Asa, GQjari, DevgandhSri, Bihagra, Wadhaiw, 
Sorath, Dhanisari, Jaitsari, Todi, BairSri, Tilang, SQhi, Biliwal, 
Gaund, Ramkali, Nat, Maligaura, MSru, Tukhari, Kedira, Bhairo; 
Basant, SSrang, MalSr, Kanra, Kalian, Prabhati, Jaijtwanti. Pew 
further information see Raja Sir Surindra Mohan Tagore’s learneit 
works on Indian music. The Rags in European musical notation 
will be found at the end of the fifth volume of this work.' 



4 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


U. Praise Him whose limit cannot be found. 

They who practise truth and perform service shall 
obtain their reward. 

N. He/ who knoweth divine knowledge is the learned 
pandit.^ 

He who knoweth the one God in all creatures 
would never say ‘ I exist by myself ’. 

K. When the hair groweth white, it shineth without 
soap. 

King Death’s hunters follow him who is bound 
by the chain of mammon 

KlI. The Creator, Lord of the world, giveth sustenance 
to His slaves. 

All the world is bound in His bonds ; no other 
authority prevaileth. 

G. He who hath renounced the singing of God’s word, 
is arrogant in his language. 

He who fashioned vessels made kilns in which He 
put them and burnt them. 

GH. The servant who performeth the Guru’s® work, who 
remaineth obedient to His commands. 

Who deemeth bad and good as the same, shall in 
this way be absorbed in Him. 

CH. He who made the four Veds,^ the four mines,® and 
the four ages,® 

Hath been in every age a Jogi, a worldly man, or 
a learned pandit. 

^ Pandit means a learned man, but the title is now appropriated 
by Br&hmans versed in Sanskrit literature. 

* Mays. In the sacred writings of the Sikhs this word has two 
meanings— one is mammon, as the word is here translated ; the other 
is illusion or God’s mystic power by which He created matter. 

* The word Guru means great. Here it stands for God. In a 
secondary sense it is applied to a g^'tat r^rligiffwi tearlifr 

® They are the Rig, SSm, Yajur, and Atharv, composed in the 
most ancient form of the Sanskrit language. In Sikh literature they 
are named the white, the red, the yellow, and the black Veds. 

® In the East four sources of life are enumerated. It is there said 
that animals are born from eggs, wombs, the earth, and perspiration. 

® The Sat, Treta, DwSpar, and Kal, corresponding to the golden^ 
silver, brass, and iron ages of Greece and Rome. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 5 

CHH. God’s ^adow is over everything ; doubt is His 
doing. 

0 God, having created doubt, Thou Thyself lead- 
est man astray. They whom Thou favourest 
meet the Guru. 

J. Thy slave, who wandered in the eighty-four lakhs ^ 
of existences, beggeth and prayeth for divine 
knowledge. 

There is One who taketh. One who giveth ; I have 
heard of none other. 

JH. Why die of grief, O mortal ? What God hath to 
give He continueth to give. 

He giveth, beholdeth and issueth His orders how 
living things are to obtain sustenance. 

N. When I look carefully I see no other than God. 

The one God pervadeth all places ; the one God 
dwelleth in the heart. 

T. 0 mortals, why practise deceit ? Ye shall have to 
depart in a ghari ® or two. 

Lose not the play of your lives, run and fall under 
God’s protection. 

TH. Comfort pervadeth the hearts of those whose minds 
are attached to God’s feet. 

They whose minds are so attached are saved, 0 
Lord, and obtain happiness by Thy favour. 

D. O mortal, why make display ? all that existeth is 
transitory. 

Serve Him who pervadeth all things, and thou 
shalt obtain happiness. 

DH. He Himself destroyeth and buildeth; He acteth 
as He pleaseth. 

He beholdeth the work of His hands, issueth His 
orders, and saveth those on whom He looketh 
with favour. 

N. He in whose heart God dwelleth singeth His praises. 

^ It is believed in the East that there are 8,400,000 spedes of 
animal life through which the soul may wander in transmigration. 
A lakh is one hundred thousand. 

^ A ghari is a period of twenty-four minutes. 



6 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Creator blendeth men with Himself, and they 
are not born again. 

T. The terrible ocean^ is deep, and none findeth its 
end. 

We have no boat or raft ; we are drowning ; save 
us, 0 Saviour King. 

TH. He who made all things is in every place. 

What do men call doubt ? What mammon ? 
That which pleaseth God is good. 

D. Impute not blame to any one, but rather to thine 
own karma.* 

I have suffered the consequences of my acts ; I 
may blame no one else. 

DH. He who made things after their kinds holdeth the 
power in His own hands. 

All receive what He giveth under His most bounti- 
ful order. 

N. The Master ever enjoyeth pleasure ; He cannot be 
seen or grasped. 

I am called a married woman, my sister, hut in 
reality I have never met my Husband.® 

P. The King, the Supreme God, made the play of the 
world to behold it. 

He seeth, understandeth, and knoweth everything ; 
He is within and without His creation. 

PH. The whole world is entangled with a noose and 
bound by Death’s chain. 

They who by the Guru’s favour have run to God 
for protection, are saved. 

^ In Sikh writings this world is likened to a terrible and stormy, 
ocean which can only be traversed with difficulty, and in which mati^ 
is ever liable to founder without spiritual guidance. The Guru supplies 
a boat for salvation. 

* Karma are acts which follow the soul in its transmigration and 
hinder its progress to Nirvan. 

® The Gurus speak of God as a husband and themselves as His 
.;ives; and spiritual happiness they liken to connubial bliss. This 
belief has to some extent a parallel in Greek' mythology. Psyche, the 
human soul, having forfeited the love of Eros, the divine soul, endured 
various sufferings to regain the affection of her lover. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 7 

B. God began to play by making the four ages His 
chaupar board.^ 

He made men and lower animals His dice, and 
began to throw them Himself. 

BH. They who search and feel fear by the favour of 
the Guru obtain the fruit thereof. 

The perverse, fools that they are, wander and heed 
not, and so transmigrate in the eighty-four 
lakhs of animals. 

M. God destroyeth worldly love ; is it only at death 
man is to remember Him ? 

Other thoughts possess man and he forgetteth the 
letter M.* 

Y. If man recognize the True One, he shall not be 
born again. 

The holy man uttereth, the holy man understand- 
eth, the holy man knoweth but the one God, 

R. God pervadeth all the creatures He hath made. 

Having created creatures He appointed them all 
to their duties ; they to whom He is kind take 
His name. 

L. He who appointed creatures to their duties, made 
worldly love sweet. 

He giveth eating and drinking equally to all, and 
ordereth them as He pleaseth. 

W. The Supreme Being who created the vesture of the 
world to behold it, 

Seeth, tasteth, and knoweth everything ; He is 
contained within and without the world. 

R. Why quarrel, O mortal ? meditate on God, under 
whose order is creation. 

Meditate on Him ; be absorbed in the True One ; 
and be a sacrifice unto Him. 

H. There is no other Giver than He who created crea- 
tures and gave them sustenance. 

Meditate on God’s name; be absorbed in God’s 

^ Chaupar is the Indian draughts. 

* The initial of MadhusQdan, one of the name^ applied to God. 

It may also be the initial of the Arabic word maut, death. 



8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


name, and thou shalt night and day derive 
profit therefrom. 

A. What God who made/Ae world hath to do He con- 
tinueth to do. 

He acteth and causeth others to act ; He knoweth 
everything ; thus saith the poet Nanak. 

Nanak appears to have continued to attend school 
for some time. One day he was observed to remain 
silent, and not apply himself to his books. The 
schoolmaster asked him why he was not reading. 
Nanak inquired, ‘ Art thou sufficiently learned to 
teach me ? ' The schoolmaster replied that he had 
read everything. He knew the Veds and Shastars,^ 
and he had learned to cast up accounts, post ledgers 
and daybooks, and strike balances. Upon this 
Nanak said, ‘ To your accomplishments I prefer the 
study of divine knowledge He then composed 
the following hymn : — 

Burn worldly love, grind its ashes and make it into ink ; ® 
turn superior intellect into paper. 

Make divine love thy pen, and thy heart the writer ; ask 
thy guru and write his instruction. 

Write God's name, write His praises, write that He hath 
neither end nor limit. 

0 master, learn to write this account. 

So that, whenever it is called for, a true mark may be 
found thereon. 

There® greatness is obtained, everlasting joys, and ever- 
lasting delights. 

They in w’hose hearts is the true Name, have the marks 
of it on their brows. 

^ Sanskrit works on the six philosophical systems of the Hindus. 
They are — ^the NySya founded by Gautama, the Vaisheshika by 
KanSda, the Sankhya by Kapila, the Yoga by Patanjali, the MimSnsa 
by Jaimini, the VedSnt by Vy5s. The six systems have been learnedly 
expounded by Max MQller in his Indian Philosophy. 

® At that time in India ink was made from burnt almond-rind 
and gum. 

® Corresponding to in Greek, the next world. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


9 


By God’s mercy men obtain it and not by idle words. 

One man cometh, another goeth ; we give them great 
names.^ 

Some men God created to beg, and some to preside over 
great courts. 

When they have departed, they shall know that without 
the Name * they are ot no account. 

I greatly fear Thine anger ; 0 God, my body pineth and 
wasteth away. 

They who have been called kings and lords are beheld as 
ashes. 

Nanak,® when man departeth all false affections are 
sundered.^ 

Upon this the schoolmaster became astonished, 
did Nanak homage as a perfect saint, and told him 
to do what he pleased. 

Nanak, having thus shown his scholastic profi- 
ciency, left school and took to private study and 
meditation. He remained for long periods in the 
same attitude, whether sleeping or waking, and 
associated continually with religious men. 

The scholastic ignorance of the founders of great 

^ Liierally — we call them commanders. This refers to the custom 
of parents giving their sons high-sounding names. 

' I ® In the Sikh writings the word Name is frequently used for God. 
A somewhat similar practice was known to the ancient Jews (Amos vi. 
lo). At a time too early to be traced the Jews abstained from pro- 
nouncing the name Jehovah for fear of its irreverent use, and uttered 
instead Adonai or Lord. In connexion with this we may say that the 
repetition of God’s name is one of the principal forms of Sikh wor- 
ship. Set forms of prayer are apt to be repeated mechanically or 
ostentatiously; and it was believed that by the constant heartfelt 
repetition of God’s name man should be eventually absorbed in Him, 
and thus obtain the supreme object of human birth after countless 
transmigrations. 

® In Oriental poetical works it is usual for the poet to insert his real 
or assumed name — takhallus — in the end of a composition or section 
of a composition. This practice is unknown to European poets except 
in the case of professed imitators of Oriental poetry. Were we there- 
fore to omit the word ‘ NSnak’ ^wherever it occurs, we should be consult- 
ing the taste of European readers, but the Sikhs do not desire such an 
omission. * Sri Rkg. 



10 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


religions has been made the subject of many a boast 
on the part of their followers. The object, of 
course, is that the acquirements and utterances of the 
religious teachers may be attributed solely to divine 
inspiration. We see no reason for ascribing a want 
of education to the founder of the Sikh religion ; 
and the manner in which his learning was acquired 
is not difficult to understand. Had he remained at 
the humble village school, there is no reason to 
suppose that he would have acquired any considerable 
knowledge, but in the dense forests around Talwandi 
were to be found ascetics and anchorets who sought 
the extreme retirement of the locality for the com- 
bined objects of undisturbed prayer and escape from 
the persecution of bigoted Moslem rulers. All the 
Janamsakhis are unanimous in stating that Nanak 
courted the retirement of the forest and the society 
of the religious men who frequented it. Several of 
them were profoundly versed in the Indian religious 
literature of the age. They had also travelled far 
and wide within the limits of Hindustan, and met 
its renowned religious teachers. Nanak thus became 
acquainted with the latest teachings of Indian 
philosophers and reformers. The satisfaction which 
he derived from spiritual thought and religious 
association he thus expressed : — 

Let Jogis practise Jog,^ let gluttons practise gluttony. 

Let penitents practise penance, and rub and bathe them- 
selves at places of pilgrimage ; 

But let me listen to Thy songs, O Beloved, if any will 
sit and sing them to me. 

The names of the men with whom Nanak associ- 
ated in the forest and who sang to him the songs of 
the Lord are all lost, and their excellences merged as 

^ Jog, connected with the Greek ^vy6v, originally meant the 
union of the soul with God, and may be compared with the etymo- 
logical meaning of the word ‘ religion ’. They who practised Jog were 
called JogU. The word Jog is now applied to certain practices of the 
Jogis which are detailed in the Aphorisms of Patanjali. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


II 


by a process of nirvan in the religious splendour of 
the founder of the Sikh religion. But more perhalis 
than learning from the lips of religious masters were 
his own undisturbed comriiunings with nature, with 
his own soul, and. with his Creator. The voice that 
had spoken to many a seer again became vocal in 
that wilderness, and raised Nanak's thoughts to the 
summit of religious exaltation. In summer’s heat 
and winter’s frost, in the glory of the firmament, in 
the changeful aspects of nature, as well as in the joys 
and sorrows of the inhabitants of his little natal vil- 
lage, he read in bright characters and repeated with 
joyous iteration the name of the Formless Creator. 
The Name henceforth became the object of his 
continual worship and meditation and indeed one of 
the distinctive features of his creed. 

As a man soweth so shall he reap ; as he earneth so shall 
he eat. 

No inquiry shall be made hereafter regarding the uUerers 
of the Name. With banners flying shall they go to heaven.^ 

Men are judged according to their acts. 

The breath drawn without the thought of God is wasted 
in vain. 

I would sell this body if only I found a purchaser. 

Nanak, the body which is not filled with the true Name 
is of no account.* 

There is also proof from the satisfactory internal 
evidence of his own compositions that Guru Nanak 
studied the Persian language. Kalu felt that the 
society of religious men was not likely to advance his 
son’s secular interests. Rai Bular promised that if 
Nanak learned Persian, in which all state documents 
and accounts were then written, he would appoint him 
village accountant in succession to his father. Persian 
was never the tongue of Hindus, and was despised by 
them as the language of foreigners and conquerors 

* San nisk&nai j&i. Also translated — if they bear Thy mark. 

* SOW. 



12 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


and of impure Musalman literature ; ^ but Hindus 
in the age of Nanak applied themselves to it as they 
do now — ^for the simple purpose of obtaining a liveli- 
hood. Nanak soon astonished his Persian as he had 
previously astonished his Hindu teacher. In reply 
to Rukn-ul-J)in*-S-in j unctions he assumed the r6le of 
teacher in turn and composed the following acrostic 
on the letters of the Persian alphabet : — 

ALIF. Remember God and banish neglect of Him from 
thy heart. 

Accursed the life of him in this world who breatheth 
without uttering the Name. 

BE. Renounce heresy and walk according to the Sharia t.^ 

Be humble before every one, and call no onTbad. 

TE. Repent with sincerity of heart lest thou afterwards 
grieve. 

Thy body shall perish : thy mouth shall be buried 
with it ; what canst thou do then ? 

SE. Praise God very much ; draw not thy breath with- 
out doing so, 

Or thou shalt be offered for sale from shop to shop, 
and not an adh ® shall be obtained for thee. 

JIM. Put together travelling expenses, and pack up where- 
withal to go with thee : 

Without the Lord thou shalt trudge about wearily. 

HE. Embrace humility, renounce the pride of thy heart ; 

Restrain thy wandering mind, 0 Rukn-ul-Din, and 
every moment remember thy Creator. 

KHE. They were traitors who forgot their Creator ; 

^ In the institutes of Parasar there is found an injunction not to 
speak the language of the inhabitants of Yavan — a word which 
originally meant Greece, but was afterwards applied to Arabia — even 
though it save life from issuing by the throat. Parasar possessed 
the Hindu abhorrence of strange countries and gave expression to it. 
His words are now Understood by the Hindus to refer to the language 
of the MusalmSns, though there were no Musalm&ns for centuries 
after his time. 

® Muhammadan law. 

® About an eighth of a farthing of English money. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 13 

Their minds w^e bent on the hoarding of wealth, 
and they bore loads of sin upon their heads. 

DAL. Be honest, O man, and sleep not during the eight 
watches of day and night. 

Awake for one watch and hold converse with God. 

ZAL. Remember God, 0 man, vacillate not an iota ; 

So shall hell hre not touch thee at all, and thy 
covetousness and worldly love be at an end. 

RE. The advantage of faith thou shalt know when thou 
arrivest before God — 

Restrain the five evil passions,^ O Rukn-ul-Din, and 
apply thy heart to God. 

ZE. Practise humility, the Lord is independent ; 

He doeth what he pleaseth ; what certainty is there 
regarding His acts ? 

SIN. Search thy heart ; the Lord is in thee. 

The body is a vessel which He wrought, and into 
which He infused His workmanship and skill. 

SHIN. Thou shalt obtain martyrdom if thou die for the 
love of the dear One. 

0 Rukn-ul-Din, this human body shall depart ; 
while in it pray to obtain God. 

SUAD. Let thy mind be contented when thou obtainest 
thine allotted food. ' 

God who gave thee the disease of himger is thy 
physician. 

ZUAD. God's splendour is lost for those who associate 
themselves with worldly affairs. 

Arise, look before thee, and regard not the play of 
the world. 

TOE. Embrace tariqat and enter upon marafat ; * 

This body of thine shall become a heap of dust in 
the grave. 

ZOE. They were tyrants who heeded not the Name : 

^ Lust, anger, covetousness, worldly love, and pride. 

^ There are four stages of SOfiism; Shariat, the law or external 

ceremonies; Tariqat, walking in God’s way; Marafat, Divine know- 
ledge ; Haqiqat, certainty or union with God. Many learned natives 

of India believe that the SOfi system is based on Vedint. 



14 


THE SIKH -RELIGION 


How can man obtain peace without his Master ? 

’AIN. Practise good works to the best of thy power : 

Without good works and virtues man shall die full 
of regret. 

CHAIN. O Rukn-ul-Din, they are rich who know them- 
selves— 

In this cage of the body God who hath neither mother 
nor father sporteth. 

FE. Have done with the world, and think it not thine own ; 

If thou deem it to belong to God, thou shalt not be 
confounded. 

QAF. They in whose hearts the love of God hath arisen 
shall have no rest till they find Him. 

The bodies of those who have met the Lord God 
have become refined gold. 

KAF. Remember thy creed ; in what else is there profit ? 

O Rukn-ul-Din, be not excessively addicted to 
sensuality. 

GAF. Man’s mind is wanton ; if thou restrain it. 

Thou shalt plant thy feet firmly on the way to 
haqiqat. 

LAM. May curses rain on those who abandon their prayers ! 

They lose whatever little or much they have 
earned. 

MIM. Wilfulness is prohibited ; walk as thy religious guide 
directeth thee. 

The wealth of those, saith Nanak, who have not 
given alms shall slip away. 

NUN. Look to truth alone, and know that the world is false. 

They who think the world is true shall die con- 
founded. 

WAW. They become saints who associate with the true. 

The more they remember God, the more they love 
Him. 

HE. Be in fear of that day when God will judge thee 

What, order will He pass in our case, O Rukn-ul- 
Din ? 

LAM. They on whom He casteth His look of mercy have 
b^me worthy. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 15 

What is desire for life if a man r^;ulate not his own 
conduct ? 

ALIF. God is in thee ; why thinkest thou not on Him, 
O ignorant man ? 

By service to the guru God is found, and deliverance 
obtained at last. 

YE. Love God whose empire is everlasting. 

He is unrivalled, 0 Nanak, and in need of no one.^ 

There are numerous Persian words and some 
Persian verses of the Guru found in the Granth Sahib, 
and it may be accepted as a fact that he became 
a fair Persian scholar. It is highly probable that his 
habit of free thought and toleration for other men’s 
opinions were assisted by his perusal of the Muham- 
madan writings with which the Persian language 
abounds. 

It does not appear that even the acquisition of 
Persian tended to give Nanak’s thoughts a more 
practical direction. His father thought him insane, 
and was sore distressed for his future. He, how- 
ever, sent him to herd buffaloes in the adjoining 
forest. Matters progressed smoothly for one day, 
but the next day Nanak fell asleep, and his C:attle 
trespassed on a neighbour’s field. The owner 
remonstrated, but Nanak said that God would 
bless the field. The owner was not to be diverted 
by this unpractical defence. He complained to Rai 
Bular, and the latter, hearing that Nanak was insane, 
was not content to send for him, but also for his 
father to adjust the quarrel. Nanak said that no 
injury had befallen the field: it was blessed by God. 
Rai Bular sent his own messengers to inspect the spot. 
On their arrival they found that not one blade had 
been trampled on or eaten. The field where this 
miracle is said to have occurred is pointed out to 
visitors. It is known as the Kiara Sahib, or the 
parterre far exceUmce. 

^ This coitaposition is not found in the Granth Sihib. Stune 
pikhs deny that it is the composition of Guru NSnak. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


i6 


Chapter II 

When Nanak had attained the age of nine years, 
his father determined to have him invested with the 
janeu, or sacrificial thread of the Hindus. Until 
a boy is so invested, he is deemed almost an out- 
cast. When the members and relations of the 
family, and all the neighbours, secular and religious, 
had assembled, and all preliminary rites had been 
duly performed, Hardial, the family priest, pro- 
ceeded to put the sacred thread on Nanak’s neck. 
The boy caught the thread with his hand, and 
asked the priest what he was doing, and what 
advantage it was to put a thread of that description 
on him. The priest then explained that the janeu 
was the basis of the Hindu religion, that without 
it a man would only be a Sudar,^ and that by 
putting it on greatness should be obtained in this 
world and happiness in the next. On hearing this 
the young Guru gave utterance to the following : — 

Make mercy thy cotton, contentment thy thread, con- 
tinence its knot, truth its twist. 

That would make a janeu for the soul ; if thou have it, 
O Brahman, then put it on me. 

It will not break, or become soiled, or be burned, 
or lost. 

Blest the man, O Nanak, who goeth with such a thread 
on his neck. 

Thou purchasest a janeu for four damris,* and seated in 
a square puttest it on ; 

^ There are four great wrra/w or castes of Hindus — Brahmans, the 
priestly class; Kshatris, tim militant class ; Vaisyas, the trading class; 
and Shlidars, the working class, the lowest of all. Of these castes 
there are now many subdivisions. 

* Four damris is one paisS of Indian, or a farthing of English 
money. 



LIFE OF GtmU NANAK if 

Thou whisper6st instruction that the Brahman is the 
guru of the Hindus — 

Man dieth, the janeu falleth, and the soul departeth 
without it> 

The priest explained that the custom of wearing 
a janeu had descended from the Vedic ritual, and 
that no Hindu could be deemed religious without 
wearing it. The Brahman then familiarly addressed 
the Guru, 'Thou art but a child of yesterday, and 
are we not as wise as thou ? Unless thou wear this 
thread thou shalt be deemed a person without 
religion.’ Guru Nanak replied : — 

Though men commit countless* thefts, countless adul- 
teries, utter countless falsehoods and countless words of 
abuse ; 

Though they commit countless robberies and villanies 
night and day against their fellow creatures ; 

Yet the cotton thread is spun, and the Brahman cometh 
to twist it. 

For the ceremony they kill a goat and cook and eat it, 
and everybody then saith ‘ Put on the janeu ’. 

When it becometh old, it is thrown away, and another is 
put on. 

Nanak, the string breaketh not if it be strong. 

The Brahman priest, on hearing this, became angry, 
and asked the Guru if everybody else was a fool, 
and he alone, who had abandoned the customs of 
his forefathers, was wise. He then called on the 
Guru to tell him what a proper janeu was. The 
Guru replied : — 

By adoring and praising the Name honour and a true 
thread are obtained. 

In this way a sacred thread shall be put on, which will 
not break, and which will be fit fy entrance into Go^s 
court. 

^ Asa ki W&r. This composition will subs^uently be given in 
ixtemo, and the meaning of the word wir explained. 

* IMh. Here used for an indefinite number. 

C 


SIKH. I 



i8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru then wound up his instruction on the 
subject as follows ; — 

There is no string for the sexual organs, there is no string 
for women ; 

There is no string for the impure acts which cause your 
beards to be daily spat upon ; 

There is no string for the feet, there is no string for the 
hands ; 

There is no string for the tongue, there is no string for 
the eyes. 

Without such strings the Brahman wandereth astray, 

Twisteth strings for the neck, and putteth them on others. 

He taketh hire for marrying ; 

He puUeth out a paper, and showeth the fate of the wedded 
pair. 

Hear and see, ye people, it is strange 

That, while mentally blind, man is named wise.^ 

We have seen in the Introduction to this work that 
Sultanpur was then the capital of the J alandharDoab. 
At that time and up to the period of British occupa- 
tion, land revenue was generally collected in kind.* 
Surveyors and appraisers called Amils were dis- 
patched from the capital to different districts. Amil 
Jai Ram was appointed to appraise the revenue 
demand of Talwandi. While one day surveying a 
corn-field, he observed Nanaki, sister of Nanak, draw- 
ing water from a well, and saw that she was fair to 
look upon. A marriaLge between them was arranged 
throu^ the kind offices of Rai Bular. The lady 
jyent and lived with her husband at Sultanpur. 

Nanak’s marriage must have taken place soon 
after his sister’s. It is related in the Janamsakhi 
which bears the name of Mani Singh, that Nanak 
was married at the age of fourteen. His marriage, 
as is usual in the ♦East, was arranged for him as 
a matter of religious duty by his parents. He was 

^ Asa ki War. 

* Under the Emperor Akbar it was often q;>tionaI for the hosbandman 
to pay either in money or in kind. Aln-i-Aktori, Boc^ III, Ain 13. 



LIFE OF GURU NAJlAK 


19 


betrothed to Sulakhani, daughter of Mula, a resident 
of Batala^ in the present district of Gurdaspur. It 
would appear that, owing to the distance between 
Nankana and Batala, which hindered frequent visits 
and negotiations, the marriage followed very soon 
after the betrothal. Nanak’s sister was present at the 
wedding, but her husband could not obtain per- 
mission to attend. He sent word that he was 
another person’s servant, an apology that was 
perfectly understood. 

Nanak appears to have been further trusted in 
the capacity of a herdsman. While one day herd- 
ing his buffaloes, he lay down to sleep under a tree 
during the midday heat. Rai Bular passing by in 
the evening found him in that attitude, and observed 
that the protecting shadow of the tree had remained 
stationary over him, and not veered round like the 
shadows of the other trees with the sun’s progress. 
On another occasion, as Nanak lay asleep in the 
pasture ground, it was observed that a large cobra 
watched over him, and protected the youthful saint 
with its hood. Rai Bular acknowledged the mira- 
culous powers of the boy, and congratulated Kalu 
on being the father of such a son. Kalu ought no 
longer to be displeased with him for his indifference 
to his worldly affairs. He was a very great man. 
A jal-tree,* gnarled and maimed by the centuries, is 
still pointed out as the scene of the former miracle. 
It possesses a thick trunk, is still gratefully umbra- 
geous, and its venerable branches depend to the 
earth in a fashion that suggests the pillared shade 
of the Indian fig-tree. 

Nanak still persisted in doing no useful work, and 
his mother reproached him with his idleness. She 
counselled him to rise, work for his livelihood, and 
cease weaving unpractical discourses. She told him 

1 Her place of birth ja fiat31a is reverenced by the Sikhs. Mate- 
jflja Sher Singh «i«cted a teniide in her honour. 

^ The Salvadora Olttidts. 



20 THE SIKH RELIGION 

that he was popularly credited with madness; but 
he paid no heed to her admonitions further than 
to compose the following hymn on the occasion : — 

He who dieth in obstinacy shall not be accepted. 

Even though man wear a religious garb and apply much 
ashes to his body, 

Yet, if he forget the Name, he shall afterwards repent. 

O man, obey God and thou shalt be happy. 

If thou forget the Name, thou shalt have to endure 
Death’s torture. 

They who apply distilled aloe-wood, sandal, and camphor 
to their bodies, 

Are immersed in worldly love, and far from the supreme 
dignity of salvation. 

They who forget the Name are the falsest of the false. 

They who are guarded by lances, for whom bands play, 
who sit on thrones, and are objects of salutation, 

Suffer from excessive avarice and lust. 

Being without God they pray not for His service or His name. 

God is found not by argument or by pride. 

If man apply his mind he shall find the comforting Name. 

They who love mammon are painfully ignorant. 

Without money goods cannot be had from a shop ; 

Without a boat man cannot cross the sea ; 

So, without serving the Guru, there is complete loss. 

Hail, hail to him who showeth the road ! 

Hail, hail to him who communicateth the Word ! 

Hail, hail to him who blendeth us with God ! 

Hail, hail to Him to whom the soul belongeth ! 

Under the Guru’s instruction separate the true from the 
false, and drink it as nectar. 

The greatness of the Name is bestowed according to Thy 
pleasure, 0 God. 

Without the Name how could I live, O mother ? 

Night and day ^ I repeat it and remain, 0 Lord, under Thy 
protection. 

Nanak, he who is imbued with the Name obtaineth honour.® 

^ Anudin, translated ‘night and day' by the gySnis, is literally-— 
every day. ® Gauri Ashtapadi. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 2t 

After this Nanak lay down, remained in one posi- 
tion for four days, and declined all physical exertion. 

Nanak appears to have become unfitted for all 
secular occupation. His idleness became notorious, 
and a serious source of anxiety to his parents. His 
mother sought to lead him with mild admonitions 
to secular duty, but fortunately failed. His 
father then addressed himself to the task. He 
represented that he required assistance in the culti- 
vation of his land, and Nanak was now of an age to 
turn his attention to agriculture. Nanak replied : — 

Make thy body the field, good works the seed, irrigate with 
God’s name ; 

Make thy heart the cultivator ; God will germinate in thy 
heart, and thou shalt thus obtain the dignity of nirvan.^ 

His father and Rai Bular represented that that 
was not the way to become a husbandman, whose 
business ought to be manual labour, and whose 
object was to gain a livelihood. Upon this Nanak 
composed the following : — 

Become a husbandman, make good works thy soil, and the 
word of God thy seed ever irrigate with the water of truth. 

Faith shall germinate, and thus even a fool shall know the 
distinction between heaven and hell. 

Think not that thou shalt find the Lord by mere words. 

In the pride of wealth and the splendour of beauty life 
hath been wasted. 

The sin of the body is a puddle, the mind is a toad therein, 
which valueth not at all the lotus. 

The bumble-bee is the teacher,®who preacheth incessantly ; 
but can the guru cause a man to understand who will not 
understand ? ^ 

^ Sri Rag. 

* Also translated — Clear thy ground, make the Word thy seed. 

* That is, the Guru. 

* The body is compared to a puddle ; the mind to a toad which 
loves the raddle, but sets no value on the beautiful lotus of spiritual 
wisdom. The spiritual guide, like the bee, unceasingly hums his meSMge. 



2t 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Preaching and listening are as the sough of the wind, when 
man’^ mind is tinctured % the illusions of the world. 

The Lord casteth a look of favour, and is well pleased with 
those who meditate on Him alone. 

Even though thou perform the thirty days’ fast, and make 
the five prayers thy daily companions, yet he who is called 
Satan will cut the thread of thy thoughts.^ 

Nanak saith, man must depart ; why amass property and 
wealth ? 2 

On the same occasion the Guru uttered the fol- 
lowing : — 

Make thy mind the ploughman, good acts the cultiva- 
tion, modesty the irrigating water, and thy body the field 
to till. 

The Name the seed, contentment the harrow, and the garb 
of humility thy fence : 

By the work of love the seed will germinate ; thou mayest 
behold happy the homes of persons who thus act. 

O father, mammon accompanieth not man when he de- 
parteth : 

Mammon hath allured this world, and few there are who 
understand it. 

# 

Then Nanak informed his father that he had sown 
his own field, and that its harvest was now ready. 
He had such confidence in his tillage, that, evett 
after deduction of the portion paid in kind to the 
government as revenue, the full produce would still 
remain. Sons, daughters, beggars, brethren, and 
relations would all be profited thereby. He had 
done farming work for God, who had treated him 
as a lord does his tenants, and the day that he 
effected union with his Creator, his soul within him 
would be glad. 

^ That is. make thy thoughts wander. For man in the old Panjibi 
life of the Guru the Granth Sahib has mat. The line may then be 
translated — Perform the thirty days' fast of the MusalrnSns, make their 
five daily prayers thy companions, ^d take care lest Satan destroy 
the effect of thy prayers. * Sri R$g. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


23 


On hearing this, his father told him to keep a 
shop, for a shop was as profitable as tillage. Nanak 
replied 

Make the knowledge that life is frail thy shop, the true 
Name thy stock-in-trade ; 

Make meditation and contemplation thy piles of vessels ; * 
put the true Name into them. 

Deal with the dealers of the true Name, and thou shalt 
gladly take home thy profits. 

Then again Kalu said, ‘ If thou desire not to be 
a shopkeeper, take horses and deal in them. Thy 
heart is sad ; but do something for thy livelihood, 
and visit foreign countries. We will say that thou 
hast gone to earn thy living, and that thou wilt 
soon return.’ Upon this Nanak uttered a third 
stanza : — 

Make thy hearing of the sacred books thy merchandise, 
truth the horses thou takest to sell ; 

Tie up virtues as thy travelling expenses, and think not 
in thy heart of to-morrow. 

When thou arrivest in the land of God, thou shalt obtain 
happiness in His abode. 

Kalu in despair replied, ‘ Thou art lost to us ; go 
and take government service. Jai Ram, Daulat 
Khan’s revenue officer, is thy brother-in-law ; 
go and take service with him ; perhaps thou wilt 
like that place ; we can dispense with thine earnings. 
If thou go elsewhere without any occupation, every- 
body will say that my son hath become a faqir, and 
people will heap reproaches on me.’ Upon this. 
Guru Nanak uttered a fourth stanza : — 

Make attention thy service, faith in the Name thine occupa- 
tion ; 

Make the restraint of evil thine effort, so shall men con- 
gratulate thee. 

^ In which the Indian pet^ shopkeeper keeps his goods. > 



24 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


God will then look on thee, 0 Nanak, with an eye of 
favour, and thy complexion shall brighten fourfold.^ 

Nanak then informed his father that God had 
granted him the object of his prayers. The gains 
of commerce, of government service, and of banking, 
had all been imparted to him. The astonished father 
said he had never seen or heard of a God who granted 
so many favours. Nanak replied that his God was 
the object of praise to those who had seen Him : — 

As men have heard, 0 Lord, so all call Thee great ; 

But hath any one ever seen how great Thou art ? * 

Thy worth cannot be estimated or described ; 

They who seek to describe it are absorbed in Thee. 

O my great Lord, deep and profound, brimful of excel- 
lences. 

None knoweth the extent of Thine outline. 

Though all meditative men were to meet and meditate 
upon Thee, 

Though all appraisers were to meet and appraise Thee — 

They who possess divine and spiritual wisdom, priests, 
and high priests ® — 

Yet could they not describe even a small portion of Thy 
greatness. 

All truth, all fervour, all goodness. 

The excellences of perfect men. 

Cannot be obtained in their perfection without Thee. 

If Thy grace be obtained none can be excluded ; 

Of what account is the helpless speaker ? 

Thy store-rooms are filled with Thy praises. 

Who can prevail against him to whom Thou givest ? 

Nanak, the True One arrangeth all.* 

His father was not satisfied, but further remon- 

* Sorath. 

® Also translated— How great He is whoever hath seen Him could 
tell. 

* Gurhai, translated high priests, is really die Persian plural of 
guru. Compare the words Shaikh mash&ikh, so frequently found in 
the Granth Sihib. Mash&ikh is, of course, the Arabic plural of shaikh. 

* Asa. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK ^ 

strated with Nanak. He enjoined him to abandon 
his whims and act like others, as no one could live 
without worldly occupation. Nanak was not con- 
vinced, so his father in despair left him and went 
to attend to his ordinary business. Nanak’s mother 
again attempted the worldly reformation of her son. 
She requested him to forget even for a few days his 
devotions and go abroad, so that the neighbours 
might be assured that Kalu’s son had recovered his 
reason. Nanak then uttered the following verses in 
the Rag Asa : — 

If I repeat the Name, I live ; if I forget it, I die ; ^ 

It is difficult to repeat the true Name. 

If a man hunger after the true Name, 

His pain shall depart when he satisfieth himself with it.® 
Then how could I forget it, O my mother ? 

True is the Lord, true is His name ; 

Men have grown weary of uttering 
Even an iota of His greatness ; His worth they have not 
discovered. 

If all men were to join and try to describe Him, 

That would not add to or detract from His greatness. 

God dieth not, neither is there any mourning for Him ; 
He continueth to give us our daily bread which never 
faileth. 

His praise is — that there neither is, 

Nor was, nor shall be any one like unto Him. 

As great as Thou art Thyself, O God, so great is Thy gift. 
Thou who madest the day madest also the night. 

They who forget their Spouse * are bad characters ; * 
Nanak, without His name they are naught.® 

^ Of course, spiritual life and death are meant. 

® Literally — the pain of that hungry man shall depart on eating the 
Name, that is, on receiving it as fo^. The verse is also translated — 
His pain shall depart ,* all his desires shall be merged in his hunger 
for the Name. 

® The allusion here is to men forgetting God. 

* A colloquial meaning of the word kamjat, which literally means 
inferior caste. 

® Sanat^ a plural form of son, a year, or an age. The word was 



26 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Then his mother arose and told the household of 
Nanak’s state. Upon this the whole family and 
relations grew sad, and said it was a great pity that 
Kalu’s son had become mad. 

His uncle Lalu among others exerted himself to 
console the young prophet. He represented to 
Nanak that all his relations had fixed on an occupa- 
tion for him, but he had refused to adopt it. On 
the contrary, he would do nothing whatever, not 
even enjoy himself. Nanak then gave utterance to 
the following hymn, which, however, is not found 
in the Granth Sahib : — 

All men are bound by entanglements ; how can these 
be called good qualities ? 

Nay, 0 Lalu, listen to the following qualities : — 
Forgiveness is my mother, contentment my father. 

Truth by which I have subdued my heart my uncle, 

Love of God my brother, affection mine own begotten 
son, 

Patience my daughter — I am pleased with such relations — 
Peace my companion, wisdom my disciple — 

This is my family in whom I ever rejoice. 

The one God who adorned us all is my Lord. 

Nanak, he who forsaketh Him and clingeth to another shall 
suffer misery. 

Guru Nanak then became silent, lay down, and 
ate and drank nothing. The whole family repre- 
sented to Kalu that something ought to be done for 
his son. A physician bught to be called, and medicine 
prescribed. ‘ Who knows but that behind a straw 
there is a lakh ? ’ that is, by a small expenditure 
Nanak may recover. Upon this, Kalu went and 
brought a physician. The physician came, and 
began to feel Nanak’s pulse. He withdrew his arm, 
and, drawing in his feet, stood up and said, ‘ O 

applied to coin which had long circulated, and which had conse- 
quently worn away and become worUtless. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 27 

physician, what art thou doing ? ’ The physician 
said that he was diagnosing his disease. Upon this 
Nanak laughed, and then uttered the following 
verses : — 

The physician is sent for to prescribe a remedy ; he taketh 
my hand and feeleth my pulse. 

The ignorant physician knoweth not that it is in my mind 
the pain is.‘ 

Physician, go home ; take not my curse with thee. 

I am imbued with my Lord; to whom givest thou 
medicine? 

When there is pain, the physician standeth ready with 
a store of medicine : 

The body is weeping, the soul crieth out, ‘ Physician, give 
none of thy medicine.’ 

Physician, go home, few know my malady. 

• The Creator who gave me this pain, will remove it. 

The physician asked Nanak what he himself 
thought his illness was. Nanak replied : — 

I first feel the pain of separation from God, then a pang 
of hunger for contempiaiion on Him. 

I also fear the pain which Death’s powerful m 5 ninidons 
may inflict. 

I feel pain that my body shall perish by disease. 

0 ignorant physician, give me no medicine. 

Such medicine as thou hast, my friend, removeth not 

The pain I feel or the continu^ suffering of my body. 

1 forgot God and devoted myself to pleasure ; 

Then this bodily illness befell me. 

The wicked heart is punished. 

Ignorant physician, give me no medicine. 

As sandal is useful when it exhaleth perfume. 

As man is useful as long as he hath breath in his body. 

So when the breath departeth, the body crumbleth away 
and hecometh useless : 

No one taketh medicine after that. 

^ Mal&r ki W£r. 



28 THE SIKH RELIGION 

When man shall possess the Name of the Bright and 
Radiant^ One, 

His body shall become like gold and his soul be made 
pure ; 

All his pain and disease shall be dispelled, 

And he shall be saved, Nanak, by the true Name * 

The following was on the same subject : — 

Pain is arsenic, the name of God is the antidote. 

O ignorant man, take such medicines 

As shall cure thee of thy sins. 

Make contentment thy mortar, the gift of thy hands thy 
pestle : 

By ever using these the body pineth not away, 

Nor at the final hour shall Death pommel thee. 

Make enjoyments thy firewood, covetousness thy clarified 
butter and oil. 

Burn them with the oil of lust and anger in the fire ® of 
divine knowledge. 

Burnt offerings, sacred feasts, and the reading of the 
Purans,^ 

If pleasing to God, are acceptable. 

Empire, wealth, and youth are all shadows ; 

So are carriages and imposing mansions. 

Hereafter neither man’s name nor his caste shall be 
considered. 

There is day, here all is night. 

Let us make penitence the paper,® Thy name, 0 Lord, the 
prescription. 

‘They for whom this priceless medicine is prescribed, 

' Also translated — When man possesseth even a portion of the 
name of the Bright One. 

* Malar. 

^ It was intended by his parents to make a horn sacrifice or burnt 
offering for Nanak’s recovery. The Sanskrit word kom is interpreted 
to mean casting into the fire, and correctly represents the oblation of 
clarified butter, sesames, butter, &c., which forms part of the ceremonial. 

* Sacred books of the Hindus, eighteen in number. They are the 
principal authorities for the idolatry and superstition of the Hindus. 

* To write a prescription on. 



LIFE OF OURU NANAK 

Are fortunate when they reach their final home. 

0 Nanak, blessed are the mothers who bore them.^ 

Then the physician drew back, stood still, and 
said that Nanak was not ill. His relations and 
friends ought to feel no anxiety for him, for he was 
a^great being. Upon this the physician worshipped 
him and took his leave. 

There is very little known regarding Nanak’s 
married life excepting that he begot two sons, Sri 
Chand and Lakhmi Das. It was related that he 
used to retire to the desert, and pass his time under 
trees in religious contemplation. 

All the modern Janamsakhis make Nanak's mar- 
riage long subsequent to this, and after his departure 
to Sultanpur. They say that it was Jai Ram who 
had him married, and that his wife was a native of 
Pakkho, a town not far from Sultanpur. We have 
followed Mani Singh and the old Janamsakhi. If 
Nanak had been left to his own discretion, and if 
his marriage had not been made for him by his 
parents, it is most probable that he would not have 
turned his attention to that part of a man's duties 
after entering the service of the government in 
Sultanpur. This will subsequently be understood 
when we come to consider his mode of life at that 
capital. 


Chapter III 

The Guru, on one occasion seeing his parents 
and relations standing around him to consider his 
condition, composed a hymn in the Rag Gauri 
Cheti * : — 

Since when have I a mother ? Since when a father ? 
Whence have we come ? 

^ Mal3r. 

‘ Gauri is a ragini or consort of Sri Rag, and has nine varieties 
one of which is the Cheti. 



30 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


From fire and bubldes of water are we sprung ; for what 
object were we created ? 

My Lord, who knoweth Thy merits ? 

My demerits cannot be numbered. 

How many shrubs and trees have we seen ! how many 
beasts created hy Thee ! 

How many species of creeping things, and how many 
birds hast Thou caused to fly ! 

Men break through the shops and great houses of cities 
and stealing therefrom go homewards. 

They look before them, they look behind them, but where 
can they hide themselves from Thee ? 

The banks of streams of pilgrimage, the nine regions ^ of 
the earth, shops, cities, and market-places have I seen. 

Becoming a shopkeeper I take a scale and try to weigh 
my actions in my heart. 

My sins are numerous as the waters of the seas and the 
ocean. 

Bestow compassion, extend a little mercy, save me who 
am like a sinking stone. 

My soul is burning like fire ; it is as though shears were 
cutting my heart. 

Nanak humbly representeth— he who obeyeth God’s order 
is happy day and night.* 

Kalu then desired that his son should embrace 
a mercantile hfe. He instructed him to go to 
Chuharkana in the present district of Gujranwala, 
and buy there salt, turmeric, and other articles to 
trade with. N anak set out with a servant, and on the 
way met some holy men, whose vows obliged them 
to remain naked in all seasons. Nanak was struck 
with this peculiarity, and inquired of their head- 
priest Santren if they had no clothes to wear, or if, 
having clothes, they found it uncomfortable to 

^ The ancient Indian Geographers divided the earth into nine 
regions or continents. 

* Gauri. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 31 

wear them. Before he could receive an answer, 
Nanak was reminded by his servant of his more 
practical mission, and counselled to proceed to 
Chuharkana in obedience to his father’s instructions. 
Nanak, however, was not to be thwarted in his 
object. He pressed the priest for an answer. The 
priest replied that his company required not clothes 
or food, except in so far as the latter was voluntarily 
bestowed on them. To avoid all luxury they dwelt 
in forests, and not in peopled towns and villages. 
Nanak thought he had found what he had sought 
for, and said to his servant that he had already 
obeyed his father’s instructions, which were to spend 
his money to the best advantage. He therefore 
gave the holy men the money with which his 
father had provided him. Upon this they asked 
him his name, and he said that he was Nanak 
Nirankari, or Nanak the worshipper of the Formless 
One, that is, God. Nanak was prevailed upon to 
take the money to the nearest village to buy food 
for the holy men, who had not tasted any for some 
days. 

When the faqirs took their departure, Nanak 
was censured by his servant for his reckless 
prodigality. He then realized the nature of his 
act, and did not go home, but sat under a tree 
outside the village of Talwandi. He was there 
found by his father, who cuffed him for his dis- 
obedience. The aged tree under which he sat is 
still preserved. A wall has been built around it 
for protection. Within the enclosure are found 
religious men in prayer and contemplation. The 
tree is known as the Thamb Sahib, or the holy 
trunk. 

Jai Ram, during his yearly visits to Talwandi at 
the close of the spring harvest, had ample oppor- 
tunities of cultivating Nanak’s acquaintance, and 
appreciating his good qualities. Rai Bular, too, was 
no apathetic advocate of Nanak. It was agreed 



32 THE SIKH RELIGION 

between him and Jai Ram that Nanak was a saint 
ill-treated by his father; and Jai Ram promised to 
cherish him and find him occupation in Sultanpur. 
Nanak’s departure to his brother-in-law was pre^ 
cipitated by another act of worldly indiscretion. Hs 
had entered into companionship with a faqir who 
visited the village. Nanak told him, as he did the* 
other faqirs, that his name was Nanak Nirankari ; 
and a friendly intimacy sprang up between them. 
The faqir was probably a swindler, and coveted 
a brass lota, or drinking vessel, and a gold wedding 
ring which Nanak wore, and asked that they might be 
presented to him, Nanak acceded to the request, to 
the further sorrow and indignation of his parents. 
After that it was not difficult to induce Kalu to 
allow his son to proceed to Sultanpur to join Jai 
Ram and Nanaki. 

The other members of Nanak’s family also unani- 
mously approved of his decision. Nanak’s wife 
alone, on seeing him make preparations for his 
journey, began to weep, and said, ‘ My life, even 
here thou hast not loved me ; when thou goest to 
a foreign country, how shalt thou return ? ’ He 
answered, ‘ Simple woman, what have I been doing 
here ? ’ Upon this she again entreated him, ‘ When 
thou satest down at home, I possessed in my estima- 
tion the sovereignty of the whole earth ; now this 
world is of no avail to me.’ Upon this he 
compassionate, and said,^ ‘ Be not anxious ; thy 
sovereignty shall ever abide.’ She replied, ‘ My life, 
I will not remain behind ; take me with thee.’ 
Then Nanak said, ‘ I am now going away. If I can 
earn my living, I will send for thee. Obey my order.’ 
She then remained silent. 

When Nanak asked Rai Bular’s permission to 
depart, the Rai gave him a banquet. The Rai then 
requested him to give him any order he pleased, 
that is, to state what favour he might grant him. 
Nanak replied : — 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


33 


I give thee one order if thou wilt comply with it. 

When thine own might availeth not, clasp thy hands 
jand worship God. 

Jai Ram introduced Nanak as an educated man 
to the Governor, Daulat Khan, who appointed 
him storekeeper and gave him a dress of honour 
as a preliminary of service. Nanak began to apply 
himself to his duties, and so discharged them that 
everybody was gratified and congratulated him. 
He was also highly praised to the Governor, 
who was much pleased with his new servant. Out 
of the provisions which Guru Nanak was allowed, 
he devoted only a small portion to his own main- 
tenance ; the rest he gave to the poor. He used 
continually to spend his nights singing hymns to 
his Creator. 

If Nanak, when weighing out provisions, went as 
far as the number thirteen — ter a — ^he used to pause 
and several times repeat the word — which also 
means ‘Thine,’ that is, ‘I am Thine, O Lord,’ — 
before he went on weighing. 

The minstrel Mardana subsequently came from 
Talwandi and became Nanak’s private servant. 
Mardana was of the tribe of Dums, who are minstrels 
by heredity. He used to accompany Nanak on 
the rabab, or rebeck.^ Other friends too followed. 
Nanak introduced them to the Khan and procured 
them employment. They all got a living by Nanak’s 
favour, and were happy. At dinner-time they came 
and sat down with him, and every night there was 
continual singing. A watch before day, Nanak used 
to go to the neighbouring Bein river and perform 
his ablutions. V^Tien day dawned, he went to dis- 
charge the duties of his office. 

One day after bathing Nanak disappeared in the 

^ Tlus instrament, which was of Arabian origin, has falleh into 
disuse in Northern India. It had from four to six strings of gc^t-gat 
with steel stringa for rescmapt^e, 

StKH. I X) 



34 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


forest, and was taken in a vision to God’s presence. 
He was offered a cup of nectar, which he fatefully 
accepted. God said to him, ‘ I am with thee. 
I have made thee happy, and also those who shall 
take thy name. Go and repeat Mine, and cause 
others to do likewise. Abide uncontaminated by 
the world. Practise the repetition of My name, 
charity, ablutions, worship, and meditation. I 
have given thee this cup of nectar, a pledge of 
My regard.’ The Guru stood up and made a 
prostration. He then sang the following verses to 
the accompaniment of the spontaneous music of 
heaven : — 

Were I to live for millions of years and drink the air for 
my nourishment ; 

Were I to dwell in a cave where I beheld not sun or moon, 
and could not even dream of sleeping,^ 

I should still not be able to express Thy worth ; how 
great shall I call Thy name ? 

0 true Formless One, Thou art in Thine own place— 

As I have often heard I tell my tale— If it please Thee, 
show Thy favour unto me. 

Were I to be felled and cut in pieces, were I to be ground 
in a mill ; 

Were I to be burned in a fire, and blended with its ashes, 

1 should still not be able to express Thy worth ; how 
great shall I call Thy name ? 

Were I to become a bird and fly to a hundred heavens ; 

Were I to vanish from human gaze and neither eat nor 
drink, 

I should still not be able to express Thy worth ; how 
great shall I call Thy name ? 

Nanak, had I hundreds of thousands of tons of paper and 
a desire to mite on it all after the deepest research ; 

Were ink never to fail me, and could I move my pen like 
the wind, 

# 

^ That is, were I to lead even the most ascetic life possible. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 35 

I should still not be able to express Thy worth ; how great 
shall I call Thy name ? ^ 

Hereupon a voice was heard, ‘ O Nanak, thou hast 
seen My sovereignty.* Then Nanak said, ‘ O Sire, 
what is anything that mortal can say, and what can 
be said or heard after what I have seen ? Even 
the lower animals sing Thy praises.* Upon this, the 
Guru uttered the preamble of the Japji : — 

There is but one God whose name is True, the Creator, 
devoid of fear and enmity, immortal, unborn, self-existent, 
great, and bountiful.* 

The True One was in the beginning ; The True One was 
in the primal age. 

The True One is, was, O Nanak, and the True One also 
shall be. 

When Nanak had finished, a voice was heard 
again : ‘ O Nanak, to him upon whom My look of 
kindness resteth, be thou merciful, as I too shall be 
merciful. My name is God, the primal Brahm, and 
thou art the divine Guru.* 

The Guru then uttered the following hymn : — 

Thou wise and omniscient, art an ocean ; how can I a fish 
obtain a knowledge of Thy limit ? 

Wherever I look, there art Thou ; if I am separated from 
Thee, I shall burst. 

I know neither Death the fisherman nor his net. 

When I am in sorrow, then I remember Thee. 

Thou art omnipresent though I thought Thee distant. 

What I do is patent unto Thee ; 

Thou beholdest mine acts, yet I deny them. 

I have not done Thy work or uttered Thy name ; 

Whatever Thou givest, that I eat. 

There is no other gate than Thine ; to whose gate shall I go ? 

Nanak maketh one supplication — 

Soul and body are all in Thy power. 

^ Sri Rag. 

* The ordinary translation of Gur parsSd, ‘ By the Gum's favour,' 
does not seem appropriate here. 


D 2 



36 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thou art near, Thou art distant, and Thou art midway. 

Thou seest and hearest ; by Thy power didst Thou create 
the world. 

Whatever order pleaseth Thee, saith Nanak, that is 
acceptable.^ 

After three days the Guru came forth from the 
forest. The people thought he had been drowned in 
the neighbouring river ; and how had he returned to 
life ? He then went home, and gave all that he had 
to the poor. A great crowd assembled, and Nawab 
Daulat Khan, the Governor, also came. He inquired 
what had happened to Nanak, but received no reply. 
Understanding, however, that the Guru’s acts 
were the result of his abandonment of this world, the 
Governor felt sad, said it was a great pity, and 
went home. 

It was the general belief at this time that Nanak 
was possessed with an evil spirit, and a Mulla or 
Muhammadan priest was summoned to exorcise it. 
The Mulla began to write an amulet to hang round 
Nanak’s neck. While the Mulla was writing Nanak 
uttered the following : — 

When the field is spoiled where is the harvest heap ? 

Cursed are the lives of those who write God’s name and 
seU it. 

The Mulla, paying no attention to Nanak’s serious 
objurgation, continued the ceremony of exorcism 
and finally addressed the supposed evil spirit, ‘ 
art'thou ? ’ The following reply issued from Nanal^« 
mouth : — 

Some say poor Nanak is a sprite, some say that he is a 
demon. 

Others again that he is a man. 

Those who were present then concluded that 
Nanak was not possessed, but had become insane. 

On hearing this Nanak ordered Marciina to play 
the rebeck and continued the stanza :t— 

1 Sri Rig. 



LIFE OF GURU NAN AK 37 

Simpleton Nanak hath become mad upon the Lord.^ 

And knoweth none other than God. 

When one is mad with the fear of God, 

And recognizeth none other than the one God, 

He is known as mad when he doeth this one thing — 
When he obeyeth the Master’s order — ^in what else is there 
wisdom ? 

When man loveth the Lord and deemeth himself worthless, 
And the rest of the world good, he is called niad.* 

After this, Guru Nanak donned a religious cos- 
tume and associated constantly with religious men. 
He remained silent for one day, and the next he 
uttered the pregnant announcement, ‘ There is no 
Hindu and no Musalman.’ The Sikhs interpret 
this to mean generally that both Hindus and Muham- 
madans had forgotten the precepts of their religions. 
On a complaint made by the Nawab’s Qazi, or 
expounder of Muhammadan law, the Guru was 
summoned before Daulat Khan to give an explana- 
tion of his words. He refused to go, saying, ‘ What 
have I to do with your Khan ? ’ The Guru was 
again called a madman. His mind was full of his 
mission, and whenever he spoke he merely said, 

‘ There is no Hindu and no Musalman.’ The Qazi 
was not slow to make another representation to 
the Governor on the impropriety of Nanak’s utter- 
ance. Upon this the Governor sent for him. A 
footman went and told the Guru that the Governor 
had requested him to come to him. Then Guru 
Nanak stood up and went to the Governor. The 
Governor addressed him, ‘Nanak, it is my misfor- 
tune that such an officer as thou should have become 
a faqir.’ The Governor then seated him beside him, 
^d directed his Qazi to ask, now that Nanak was 
in conversational mood, the meaning of his utterance. 
The Qazi became thoughtful, and smiled^ He then 
asked Nanak, ‘What hath happened to thee, that 

^ S. coUoqwalism. * Mink 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


38 

thou sayest there is no Hindu and ho Musalman ? ’ 
The Guru, not being engaged in 'controversy with 
Hindus at the time, gave no answer to the first part 
of the question. In explanation of his statement 
that there was no Musalman he uttered the follow- 
ing 

^ To be ^ a Musalman is difficult ; if one be really so, then 
one may be called a Musalman. 

Let one first love the religion of saints,* and put aside 
pride and pelf * as the file removeth rust. 

Let him accept the religion of his pilots, and dismiss 
anxiety regarding death or life ; ^ 

Let him heartily obey the will of God, worship the Creator, 
and efface himself— 

When he is kind to all men, then Nanak, shall he be indeed 
a Musalman.® 

The Qazi then put further questions to the Guru. 
The Guru called on Mardana to play the rebeck, and 
sang to it the following replies and instructions 
adapted for Muhammadans : — 

Make kindness thy mosque, sincerity thy prayer-carpet, 
what is just and lawful thy Quran, 

Modesty thy circumcision, civility thy fasting, so shalt 
thou be a Musalman ; 

Make right conduct thy Kaaba,® truth thy spiritual guide, 
good works thy creed and thy prayer. 

The will of God thy rosary, and God will preserve thine 
honour, 0 Nanak. 

^ In the original, ‘ to be called a Musalman.' The same idiom is 
found in Greek. 

* Also translated — (a) Let him first of all make his religion agree- 
able to men ; {b) let him first love his saints and his religion. 

* Also translated — (a) which bring trouble ; (b) to dispel pride and 
worldly love is to be filed or cleansed of impurities. 

* This verse is also translated — Being resigned to God, obedient 
(din), and lowly (mahitne), let man set aside all fear of birth and 
death — the transmigration which so exercises the oriental mind. 

® Majh ki War. 

* The great cube-like Muhammadan temple at Makka to which the 
faithful make pilgrimages. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


39 ^ 

Nanak, let others* goods ^ be to thee as swine to iho 
Musaltmn and kine to the Hindu 

Hindu and Musalman spiritual teachers will go bail for 
thee if thou eat not carrion.* 

Thou shalt not go to heaven by lip service ; it is by the 
practice of truth thou shalt be delivered. 

• Unlawful food will not become lawful by putting spices * 
therein. 

Nanak, from false words only falsehood can be ob- 
tained. 

There are five prayers, five times for prayer, and five 
names for them ®— 

The first should be truth, the second what is right, the 
third charity in God’s name. 

The fourth good intentions, the fifth the praise and glory of 
God. 

If thou make good works the creed thou repeatest, thou 
shalt be a Musalman. 

They who are false, O Nanak, shall only obtain what is 
altogether false. 

The Qazi became astonished at being thus lectured. 
Prayers had become to him a matter of idle lip- 
repetition of Arabic texts, while his mind was 
occupied with his worldly affairs. 

It was now the time for afternoon prayer. The 
whole company, including Nanak, went to the 
mosque. Up rose the Qazi and began the service. 
The Guru looked towards him and laughed in his 
face. When prayer was over, the Qazi complained 
to the Nawab of Nanak's conduct. The Guru said 
he had laughed because the Qazi’s prayer was not 

^ Literally — rights, or what is due to thy neighbour. 

* The Musalmans abstain from the flesh of swine, and the Hindus 
from the flesh of kine. 

* What is not thine own. 

* This means that, if wealth be improperly obtained, a portion of it 
'bestowed in alms will be no atonement 

* Prayers, or rather texts from the Quran, are repealed by strict 
MusalmSns at dawn, at midday, in the afternoon, in the evening, and 
before going to sleep at night 



40 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


accepted of God. The Qazi asked Nanak to state 
the reason for his conclusion. The Gum replied that 
immediately before prayer the Qazi had unloosed 
a new-born filly. While he ostensibly performed 
divine service, he remembered there was a well in 
the enclosure, and his mind was filled with appre- 
hension lest the filly should fall into it. His heart 
was therefore not in his devotions. The Gum in- 
formed the Nawab also that while he was pretending 
to pray, he was thinking of purchasing horses in 
Kabul. Both admitted the truth of the Guru’s 
statements, said he was favoured of God, and fell 
at his feet. The Guru then uttered the follow- 
ing 

He is a Musalman who effaceth himself, 

Who maketh truth and contentment his holy creed, 

Who neither toucheth what is standing, nor eateth what 
hath fallen— 

Such a Musalman shall go to Paradise. 

The whole company of Musalmans at the capital 
— the descendants of the Prophet, the tribe of 
shaikhs,^ the qazi, the muftis,® and the Nawab him- 
self, were all amazed at Nanak’s words. The Muham- 
madans then asked the Gum to tell them of the 
power and authority of his God, and how salvation 
could be obtained. Upon this the Gum addressed 
them as follows : — 

At God’s gate there dwell thousands of Muhammads^ 
thousands of Brahmas, of Vishnus, and of Shivs 

Thousands upon thousands of exalted Rams,* thousands 
of spiritual guides, thousands of religious garbs ; 

^ SAatihs are superiors of darweshes ot Muhammadan monks, but 
the title has now in India a much more extended signification, and is 
very often adopted by Hindu converts to IsUim. 

® Muhamm^an jurists. 

* Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv, form the Hindu trinity, and are 
respectively the gods of creation, preservation, and destruction. 

^ * Ram Chandar, king of Ayudbia, deified by the Hindus. He and 
his consort Sita will be found often mentioned. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 4 % 

Thousands upon thousands of cdibates, true men, and 
Sanyasis ; ^ 

Thousands upon thousands of Gorakhs,^ thousands upon 
thousands of superiors of Jogis ; 

Thousands upon thousands of men sitting in attitudes of 
contemplation, gurus, and their disciples who make suppli- 
cations ; 

Thousands upon thousands of goddesses and gods, thou- 
sands of demons ; 

Thousands upon thousands of Muhammadan priests, 
prophets, spiritual leaders, thousands upon thousands of 
qazis, mullas, and shaikhs — 

None of them obtaineth peace of mind without the instruc- 
tion of the true guru. 

How many hundreds of thousands of sidhs * and strivers,* 
yea, countless and endless ! 

All are impure without meditating on the word of the true 
guru. 

There is one Lord over all spiritual lords, the Creator 
whose name is true. 

Nanak, His worth cannot be ascertained ; He is endless 
and incalculable.® 

It is said that Daulat Khan, the Musalman ruler, 
on hearing this sublime hymn, fell at Guru Nanak’s 
feet. The people admitted that God was speaking 
through Nanak’s mouth, and that it was useless to 
catechize him further. The Nawab, in an outburst 

^ The Sanyasis are anchorets who have abandoned the world, and 
are popularly believed to have overcome nature. The word sastySs 
means renunciation. 

^ Gorakh was a famous Jogi who lived many centuries ago. 
His followers slit their ears, and make Shiv the special object of their 
worship. The name Gorakh, meaning Supporter of the earth, is often 
used for God in the sacred writings of the Sikhs. 

® Sidhs, in Sanskrit Siddhs, are persons who by the practice of Jog 
are popularly supposed to acquire extended life and miraculous powers. 

^ S&dhiA, persons aspiring to be Sidhs. 

® Banno’s Granth Sihib. An account of Banno vnll be foQhd in 
the life of Guru Arjan. 



42 THE SIKH RELIGION 

of affectionate admiration, offered him a sacrifice of 
his authority and estate. Nanak, however, 
in no need of temporal possessions, and went again 
into the society of religious men. They too offered 
him their homage, and averred that he was desirous 
of the truth and abode in its performance. Nanak 
replied : — 

My beloved, this body, first steeped in the base of 
worldliness, 1 hath taken the dye of avarice. 

My beloved, such robe * pleaseth not my Spouse ; How 
can woman thus dressed go to His couch ? 

I am a sacrifice, O Benign One, I am a sacrifice unto Thee. 

I am a sacrifice unto those who repeat Thy name. 

Unto those who repeat Thy name I am ever a sacrifice. 

Were this body, my beloved friends, to become a dyer’s 
vat, the Name to be put into it as madder. 

And the Lord the Dyer to dye therewith, such colour had 
never been seen. 

O my beloved, the Bridegroom is with those whose robes 
are thus dyed. 

Nanak’s prayer is that he may obtain the dust of such 
persons’ feet. 

God Himself it is who decketh, it is He who dyeth, it is He 
who looketh with the eye of favour. 

Nanak, if the bride be pleasing to the Bridegroom, he will 
enjoy her of his own accord.^ 

Upon this the faqirs kissed the Guru’s feet, the 
Governor also came, and all the people, both Hindu 
and Musalman, attended to salute and take final 
leave of him. Some complaints had been made of 
his extravagance as storekeeper; but, when the 
Governor made an investigation, he found the 

A metaphor from the dyer’s trade. Clothes before the process 
of dyeing are steeped in alum as a base or mordant the better to 
retain the dye. 

® Cholra, a coat which reaches to the knees ; choli, its diminutive, 
is a woman’s bodice. 

^ That is, man will be happy if he by good works make himself 
acceptable to God. The hymn is from Tilang. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


43 


storehouse full and all the Guru’s accounts correct. 
Nay, it was discovered that money was due to him 
from the State, The Guru, however, refused to 
receive it and requested the Nawab to dispose of it 
in relieving the wants of the poor 


Chapter IV 

After a short stay with the holy men with whom 
he had recently been consorting, the Guru, in 
company with Mardana, proceeded to Saiyidpur, the 
present city of Eminabad, in the Gujranwala district 
of the Panjab. Nanak and his companion took 
shelter in the house of Lalo, a carpenter. When 
dinner was ready, Lalo informed the Guru, and 
asked him to eat it within sacred lines.^ The Guru 
said, ‘ The whole earth is my sacred lines, and he 
who loveth truth is pure. Wherefore remove doubt 
from thy mind.’ On this Lalo served dinner, and the 
Guru ate it where he was seated. After two days 
the Guru desired to take his departure, but was 
prevailed on by Lalo to make a longer stay. The 
Guru consented, but soon found himself an object 
of obloquy because he, the son of a Khatri, abode 
in the house of a Sudar. After a fortnight, Mahk 
Bhago, steward of the Pathan who owned Saiyidpur, 
gave a great feast, to which Hindus of all four castes 
were invited. A Brahman went and told the Guru 
that, as all the four castes had been invited, he too 
should partake of Malik Bhago’ s bounty. The Guru 
replied, ‘ I belong not to any of the four castes ; 
why am I invited?’ The, Brahman replied, ‘It is 
on this account people call thee a heretic. Malik 
Bha^o will be displeased with thee for refusing his 
hospitality.’ On this the Brahman went away, and 

^ Enclosures, generally smeared with cow-dung to make them holy, 
within which Hindus pray and cook their food. 



44 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Malik Bhago fed his guests, but the Guru was not 
among them. 

When subsequently Malik Bhago heard of the 
Guru’s absence from the feast, he ordered him to 
be produced. Bhago inquired why he had not 
responded to his invitation. The Guru replied, that 
he was a faqir who did not desire dainty food, but 
if his eating from the hands of Malik Bhago afforded 
that functionary any gratification, he would not be 
found wanting. ‘ Malik Bhago was not appeased, but 
charged the Guru, who was the son of a Khatri, 
while refusing to attend his feast, with dining with 
the low-caste Lalo. Upon this the Guru asked 
Malik Bhago for his share, and at the same time 
requested Lalo to bring him bread from his house. 
When both viands arrived, the Guru took Lalo’s 
coarse bread in his right hand and Malik Bhago’s 
dainty bread in his left, and squeezed them both. 
It is said that from Lalo’s bread there issued milk, 
and from Malik Bhago’s, blood. The meaning was 
that Lalo’s bread had been obtained by honest 
labour and was pure, while Malik Bhago’s had been 
obtained by bribery and oppression and was there- 
fore impure. The Guru hesitated not to accept 
the former. 

After this the Guru and Mardana proceeded to 
a solitary forest, nowhere entering a ' village or 
tarrying on the bank of a river. On the way tbey 
were overtaken by hunger, and Mardana complained. 
The Guru directed him to go straight on and enter 
a village where the Upal Khatris dwelt. He had 
only to stand in silence at the doors of their houses, 
y^hen Hindus and Musalmans would come to do 
him homage, and not only supply him with food, 
but bring carpets and spread them before him to 
tread on. Mardana did as he had been directed, and 
succeeded in his errand. 

Mardana subsequently received an order to go to 
another village. He there also received great homage^ 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


45 


The villagers came and fell at his feet, and offered 
him large presents of money ‘ and clothes. These 
he tied up in bundles and took to the Guru. On 
seeing them the Guru laughed, and asked Mardana 
what he had brought. He answered that the vil- 
lagers had made him large presents of money and 
clothes, and he thought that he would bring them to 
his master. The Guru replied that they did not belong 
to either of them. Mardana inquired how he was to 
dispose of them. The Guru told him to throw them 
away, an order which he at once obeyed. The Guru 
explained to him the disastrous effects of offerings 
on laymen. ‘ Offerings are like poison and cannot 
be digested. They can only bring good by fervent 
adoration of God at all hours, ’^en man per- 
formeth scant worship and dependeth on offerings 
for his subsistence, the effect on him is as if he had 
taken poison.’ 

The Guru and Mardana are said to have visited 
a notorious robber called Shaikh Sajjan. With 
extreme impartiality he had built for his Hindu 
guests a temple, and for his Muhammadan guests 
a mosque ; and he otherwise ostensibly provided 
them with everything necessary for their comfort. 
His hospitality, however, was as false as that of the 
famous Greek robber, Procrustes. When night came 
on, Sajjan' dismissed his guests to sleep. He then 
threw them into a well in which they perished. 
Next morning he took up a pilgrim’s staff' and 
rosary, and spread out a carpet to pray in the true 
spirit of an ancient Pharisee. Shaikh Sajjan, seeing 
the Guru, interpreted the look of spiritual satisfaction 
on his countenance into a consciousness of worldly 
wealth, and expected much profit from such a wind- 
fall. He as usual invited his guests to go to sleep. 
The Guru asked permission to recite a hymn to God, 
and having obtained it, repeated the foUowing : — 

^ Literally — twenty>fives, because it used to be the Indian custom to 
count money in heaps of twenty-five each. 



46 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Bronze is bright and shining, but, by rubbing, its sable 
blackness appeareth. 

Which cannot be removed even by washing a hundred 
times. 

They are friends ^ who travel with me as I go along. 

And who are found standing ready whenever their 
accounts are called for. 

Houses, mansions, palaces painted on all sides. 

When hollow within, are as it were crumbled and use- 
less. 

Herons arrayed in white dwell at places of pilgrimage ; 

Yet they rend and devour living things, and therefore 
should not be called white.* 

My body is like the simmal tree ; ® men beholding me 
mistake me.^ 

Its fruit is useless : such qualities my body possesseth. 

I am a blind man carrying a burden while the moun- 
tainous ® way is long. 

I want eyes which I cannot get ; how can I ascend and 
traverse the journey ? 

Of what avail are services, virtues, and cleverness ? 

Nanak, remember the Name, so mayest thou be released 
from thy shackles.* 

Shaikh Sajjan, on hearing this warning and heart- 
searching hymn, came to his right understanding. 
He knew that all the faults were his own, which the 
Guru had attributed to himself. Upon this he made 

^ THie name Sajjan also means friend. There is here a pun on 
the word. 

* The heron, though white, has a black heart. 

* The Bomhax heptaphyllum. It bears no fruit in the true sense 
of the word. Its pods yield cotton, which is unfit for textile purposes. 
Its wood is very brittle, and almost useless for carpentry. 

* Like birds which peck at what they suppose to be the fruit of the 
simmal tree, but find none. The gyanis exercise their ingenuity on 
this line, and translate — The parrots tpiai jan) looking at it make a 
mistake. 

® Dugar, thence the tribe of Dogras in the Kangra and adjacent 
districts. Dogra literally means hillman. 

« Suhi. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 47 

him obeisance, kissed his feet, and prayed him to 
pardon his sins. Then the Guru said, ‘ Shaikh 
Sajjan, at the throne of God grace is obtained by 
two things, open confession and reparation for wrong.’ 
Shaikh Sajjan asked him to perform for him those 
things by which sins were forgiven and grace ob- 
tained. Then the Guru’s heart was touched, and he 
asked him to truly state how many murders he had 
committed. Shaikh Saj j an admitted a long catalogue 
of the most heinous crimes. The Guru asked him to 
produce all the property of his victims that he had 
retained in his possession. The Shaikh did so, where- 
upon the Guru told him to give it all to the poor. 
He obeyed the mandate, and became a follower of 
the Guru after receiving charanpahul.^ It is said 
that the first Sikh temple ® was constructed on the 
spot where this conversation had been held. 

The Guru, hearing of a religious fair at Kurkhetar ® 
near Thanesar, in the present district of Ambala, 
on the occasion of a solar eclipse desired to visit it 
with the object of preaching to the assembled pil- 
grims. Needing refreshment, he began to cook a 
deer which a disciple had presented to him. The 
Brahmans expressed their horror at his use of 
flesh, upon which he replied : — 

Man is first conceived in flesh, he dwelleth in flesh. 

When he quickeneth, he obtaineth a mouth of flesh ; 
his bone, skin, and body are made of flesh. 

^ Also called charanamrit. This was a form of initiation by drink- 
ing the water in which the Guru’s feet had been washed. The pre- 
amble of the Japji was read at the same time. The ceremony was 
inaugurated by Guru Nanak. 

I * Dharmsal, In modern times this word means a charitable 
rest-house where the Granth Sahib is kept and divine worship held, 
where travellers obtain free accommodation, and children receive 
religious instruction. A temple at a place visited by a Guru is now 
called Gurdwara. 

* The ancient Kurukshetra, the scene of the great battle between 
the Pandavs and Kauravs. In Hindu books it is called the Navel of 
the earth, and it is held that worldly beings were there created. 
Khuldsat-ul- Tawarlkh. 



48 THE SIKH RELIGION 

When he is taken out of the womb, he seizeth teats of 
flesh. 

His mouth is of flesh, his tongue is of flesh, his breath 
is in flesh. 

When he groweth up he marrieth, and bringeth flesh 
home with him. 

Flesh is produced from flesh ; all man’s relations are 
made from flesh. 

By meeting the true Guru and obeying God’s order, 
everybody shall go right. 

If ihou suppose that man shall be saved by himself, he 
shall not ; Nanak, it is idle to say so. 

The following is also on the same subject : — 

Fools wrangle about flesh, but know not divine know- 
ledge or meditation on God. 

They know not what is flesh, or what is vegetable, or in 
what sin consisteth. 

It was the custom of the gods to kill rhinoceroses, roast 
them and feast. 

They who forswear flesh and hold their noses when near 
it, devour men at night. 

They make pretences to the world, but they know not 
divine knowledge or meditation on God. 

Nanak, why talk to a fool ? He cannot reply or under- 
stand what is said to him. 

He who acteth blindly is blind ; he hath no mental 
eyes. 

Ye were produced from the blood of your parents, yet 
ye eat not fish or flesh. 

When man and woman meet at night and cohabit, 

A foetus is conceived from flesh ; we are vessels of flesh. 

O Brahman, thou knowest not divine knowledge or 
meditation on God, yet thou callest thyself clever. 

Thou considerest the flesh that cometh from abroad ^ bad, 
O my lord, and the flesh of thine own home good. 

All animals have sprung from flesh, and the soul taketh 
its abode in flesh. 


^ The flesh of animals. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


49 

They whose guru is blind, eat things that ought not to 
be eaten, and abstain from what ought to be eaten. 

In flesh we are conceived, from flesh we are born ; we 
are vessels of flesh. 

O Brahman, thou knowest not divine knowledge or 
meditation on God, yet thou callest thyself clever. 

Flesh is allowed in the Purans, flesh is allowed in the 
books of the Musalmans, flesh hath been used in the four 
ages. 

Flesh adorneth sacrifice and marriage functions ; flesh 
hath always been associated with them. 

Women, men, kings, and emperors spring from flesh. 

If they appear to you to be going to hell, then accept 
not their offerings. 

See how wrong it would be that givers should go to hell 
and receivers to heaven. 

Thou understandest not thyself, yet thou instructest 
others ; O Pandit, thou art very wise ! ^ 

O Pandit, thou knowest not from what flesh hath sprung. 

Corn, sugar-cane, and cotton are produced from water ; * 
from water the three worlds are deemed to have sprung. 

Water saith, ‘ I am good in many ways ’ ; many are the 
modifications of water. 

If thou abandon the relish of such things, thou shalt be 
superhuman, saith Nanak deliberately.® 

The Guru succeeded in making many converts at 
Kurkhetar. When departing, he thus addressed 
his Sikhs : ‘ Live in harmony, utter the Creator’s 
name, and if any one salute you therewith, return his 
salute with the addition true, and say “ Sat Kartar ”, 
the True Creator, in reply. There are four ways by 
which, with the repetition of God’s name, men may 
reach Him. The first is holy companionship, the 
second truth, the third contentment, and the fourth 
restraint of the senses. By whichsoever of these 

^ Said ironically. 

* Water assists the growth of vegetables, and on vegetables animals 
are fed. 

® Malir ki W&r. 


SIKH. I 


E 



50 THE SIKH RELIGION 

doors a man entereth, whether he be a hermit or 
a householder, he shall find God.’ 

The Guru next visited Hardwar in pursuance of 
his mission. A great crowd was assembled from the 
four cardinal points for the purpose of washing away 
their sins. The Guru saw that, while they were 
cleansing their bodies, their hearts remained filthj^ ; 
and none of them restrained the wanderings of his 
mind or performed his ablutions with love and 
devotion. While they were throwing water towards 
the east for the manes of their ancestors, the Guru 
went among them, and, putting his hands together 
so as to form a cup, began to throw water towards 
the west, and continued to do so until a large crowd 
had gathered round him. Men in their astonishment 
began to inquire what he was doing, and whether 
he was a Hindu or Muhammadan. If the latter, 
why had he come to a Hindu place of pilgrimage ? 
If he were a Hindu, why should he throw water 
towards the west instead of towards the rising sun ? 
And who had taught him to do so ? In reply, the 
Guru asked them why they threw water towards 
the east. To whom were they offering it, and who 
was to receive it ? They replied that they were 
offering libations to the manes of their ancestors. 
It would satisfy them, and be a source of happiness 
to themselves. 

The Guru then asked how far distant their ances- 
tors were. A learned man among them replied that 
their ancestors were thousands of miles distant. 
The Guru, upon this, again began to throw palmfuls 
of water towards the west. They reminded him 
that he had not answered their questions, or vouch- 
safed any information regarding himself. He replied 
that, before he had set out from his home in t^ 
west, he had sown a field and left no one to irrigl^ 
it. He was therefore throwing water in its direction, 
that it might remain green and not dry up. His 
field was on a mound where rain-water would not 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


5 ^ 

rest, and he was obliged to have recourse to this 
form of irrigation. On hearing this, the spectators 
thought he was crazed, and told him he was sprink- 
ling water in vain, for it would never reach his field. 
Where was his field and where was he, and how 
could the water ever reach it ? ‘ Thou art a great 
fool, thy field shall never become green by what thou 
art doing.’ The Guru replied, ‘ Ye have forgotten 
God. Without love and devotion your minds have 
gone astray. My field, which you say this water 
cannot reach, is near, but your ancestors are very 
far away, so how can the water ye offer them ever 
reach them or profit them ? Ye call me a fool, but 
ye are greater fools yourselves.’ 

The Guru after a little time again broke silence, 
and said, ‘ The Hindus are going to hell. Death 
will seize and mercilessly punish them.’ A Brahman 
replied, ‘ How can they who repeat God’s name go 
to hell ? Thou hast in the first place acted contrary 
to our custom, and now thou hast the audacity to 
tell us that we are going to hell.’ The Guru replied, 
‘ It is true that, if ye repeat the Name with love, 
ye shall not be damned. But when ye take rosaries 
in your hands, and sit down counting your bea'ds, 
ye never think of God, but allow your minds to 
wander thinking of worldly objects. Your rosaries 
are therefore only for show, and your counting your 
beads is only hypocrisy. One of you is thinking of 
his trade with Multan, another of his trade with 
Kabul, another of his trade with Dihli, and the 
gain that shall in each case accrue.’ The people, 
on hearing the Guru thus accurately divine their 
thoughts, began to think him a god, and prayed 
him to pardon them and grant them salvation by 
making them his disciples. 

The Guru, requiring fire to cook his food, went 
into a Brahman’s cooking-square for it. The 
Brahman charged him with having defiled his 
viands. The Guru replied that they had already 



52 THE SIKH RELIGION 

been defiled. Upon this the following was com- 
posed ; — 

EYiL.roindedness is a low woman, ^ cruelty a butcher’s 
wife, a slanderous heart a sweeper woman, wrath which 
ruineth the world a pariah woman. 

What availeth thee to have drawn the lines of thy cooking 
place when these four are seated with thee ? 

Make truth, self-restraint, and good acts thy lines, and 
the utterance of the Name thine ablutions. 

Nanak, in the next world he is best who walketh not 
in the way of sin.* 

While at Hardwar the Brahmans pressed the Guru 
to return to his allegiance to the Hindu religion. 
They pointed out the spiritual advantages of sacri- 
fices and burnt-offerings, and of the worship of 
cremation-grounds, gods, and goddesses. The Guru 
replied that the sacrifices and burnt-offerings of this 
age consisted in giving food to those who repeated 
God’s name and practised humility. And where 
the Guru’s hymns were read, there was scant worship 
of places of burial or cremation, or of gods, god- 
desses, and ignorant priests. As to the homage paid 
the latter, the Guru said that men were ruined thereby, 
as sweetmeats are spoiled by flies settling on them. 

Guru Nanak and Mardana departed thence, and 
proceeded to Panipat, a place famous in Indian 
history as the scene of three great decisive battles. 
At that time a successor of Shaikh Sharaf ® was the 

^ DQmni, the wife of a DQm. 

* Sri Rag ki War. 

* Shaikh Sharaf, whose patronymic was AbQ Ali Qalandar, received 
instruction at the age of forty years from Khwaja Qutub-ul-Din, who 
was also spiritual guide of Shaikh Farid and of the Emperor Shams- 
ul-Dln Altmish. Shaikh Sharaf says of himself, ' Learned men gave 
me a licence to teach and to pronounce judicial decisions, which 
offices 1 exercised for twenty years. Unexpectedly 1 received a calf 
from God, and throwing ail my learned books into the Jamna, 

out on travel. In Turkey I fell in with Shams-ul-din Tabr^^'-lind 
Mauliina Jalal-ul-Din ROmi, who preselfftedme with a robe tM^lturban 
and with many books, which in their ]^esence I threw into the river. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 53 

Muhammadan priest of the place. A disciple called 
Tatihari went to fetch a pot of water for his spiritual 
guide from the well near which the Guru and Mar- 
dana had sat down to rest. The Guru wore a Persian 
hat and a nondescript costume, which Tatihari took 
for that of a Persian darwesh. He addressed the 
Guru with the Muhammadan salutation, ‘ Salam 
Alaikum ’ (the peace of God be with you). Nanak 
replied, ‘ Salam Alekh ’ (salutation to the Invisible). 
Tatihari was astonished, and said that until then 
nobody had distorted his salutation. He went and 
told his religious superior, the Shaikh, that he had 
met a darwesh who had taken the liberty of punning 
on the Muhammadan salutation. The Shaikh at 
once resolved to go himself to see the man who had 
saluted the Invisible One, and inquire what he knew 
regarding Him. 

The Shaikh, on arriving, asked the Guru what 
religious denomination his head-dress denoted, and 
why he did not shave his head in orthodox fashion. 
The Guru replied : — 

When man hath shaved his mind he hath shaved his head 

Without shaving his mind he findeth not the way. 

Let him cut off his head and place it before his guru. 

If he resign his own wisdom, he shall be saved by the 
wisdom of his guru. 

To become the dust of the feet of all is to shave the head. 

Such a hermit appreciateth the words of the guru ; 

That is the way in which the head is shaved, 0 brother. 

Few are there who shave their heads according to the 
instruction of their guru. 

Nanak having abandoned all pleasures, affections, and 
egotism, 

Hath put on a hat of this fashion.^ 

Subsequently I came to P9n!pat and there lived as a recluse.’ His 
tomb is there. ^ That is, has laid aside egotism. 

* This and the following hymns bearing on the Tog philosophy 
express Guru N3nak’s ideas on the subject. These h}rmns are not 
found in the Granth S9hib. 



54 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Shaikh then asked the Guru to what religious 
sect he belonged. The Guru replied : — 

Under the instructions of my Guru' I remain His 
disciple. 

My stole and my hat consist in grasping the Word in 
my heart. 

I have turned the flowing river into a streak of sand.* 

I sit there at mine ease and am happy.® 

I have dispelled joy and sorrow. 

Having put on my stole I have killed all mine enemies ; 

I have settled in the silent city and abide therein • 

There I learned how to wear this stole. 

Having forsaken my family I live alone — 

Nanak having put on this stole is happy. 

The Shaikh next inquired to what sect the Guru’s 
loin-cloth belonged. The Guru replied : — 

By the word and instruction of the Guru my mind hath 
obtained peace ; 

I restrain my five senses and abide apart from the world ; 
I close mine eyes and my mind hath ceased to wander. 

I have locked up the ten gates ® of my body, 

And I sit in contemplation in its sixty-eight chambers.® 
With this loin-cloth I shall neither grow old nor die. 
Putting on a loin-cloth I dwell alone 
And drink from the waterfall ’ of the brain. 

I discard my low intelligence for the lofty wisdom of my 
Guru. 

In this way Nanak weareth a loin-cloth. 

' Nanak’s Guru was God. See Sorath xi, Mahalla I, and Gur 
EQs’s War, xiii, 25. 

* My brain is in a state of repose. 

* The wanderings of the mind hither and thither have ceased. 

* Dushl, literally, ill-wishers, then man’s evil passions. 

® The apertures or openings of the body frequently mentioned in 
Oriental medical and theological sciences. Nine of them can be 
easily enumerated, the tenth is the brain. . 

® In Jog philosophy the breath is supposed to wander in sixty^eight 
chambers of the body. ^ 

* Jogis believe that nectar falls or t^kles from the brain in a state 
of exaltation. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 55 

Then again the Shaikh desired to know what sect 
the Guru’s slippers denoted. The Guru replied : — 

By associating with those who go the right way I have 
obtained all knowledge. 

I have reduced my mind to the caste of fire and wind ; ^ 

I abide in the manner of the earth or a tree ; 

I can endure the cutting and digging of my heart ; * 

I desire to he as a river or sandal 

Which whether pleased or displeased conferreth advantage 
on all. 

Having churned the churn ® of this world I am exalted, 

And having abandoned evil I appear before my God. 

To those, who put on their slippers while meditating on 
Him, 

O Nanak, mortal sin shall not attach. 

Again the Shaikh said, ‘ Explain to me what a 
darwesh is.’ The Guru, ordering Mardana to play 
the rebeck, composed the following hymn : — 

He who while he liveth is dead, while he waketh is asleep,* 
who knowingly alloweth himself to be plundered,® 

And who having abandoned everything meeteth his 
Creator, is a darwesh. 

Few servants of Thine, 0 God, are darweshes at heart. 

Who feel not joy, sorrow, anger, wrath, pride, or avarice ; 

Who look on gold as dross, and consider what is right 
to be lawful ; 

Who obey the summons of God and heed none other ; 

Who seated in a contemplative attitude in the firma- 
ment * play spontaneous music — 

Saith Nanak, neither the Veds nor the Quran know the 
praises of such holy men. 

^ That is — I have no more caste than fire and wind. 

* Cutting, as applied to a tree, and digging to earth. That is— 
I can endure every form of torture. 

* Having extracted all pleasures from this world. 

* Who takes no heed of the world. 

® That is, who effaces himself. 

® That is, in the brain in a state of exaltation. 



56 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Shaikh finally said, ‘ Well done ! why make 
a further examination of him who beareth witness 
to God ? Even to behold him is sufficient.’ Then 
he shook hands with the Guru, kissed his feet and 
departed. 

Guru Nanak journeyed on and arrived in Dihli. 
An elephant belonging to the reigning sovereign 
Ibrahim Lodi had just died; and the keepers, 
regretting the loss of the animal whose service had 
afforded them maintenance, were bewailing its death. 
The Guru inquired whose the elephant was. They 
replied in Oriental fashion, that it was the Emperor’s, 
but that all things belonged to God. The Guru 
said that the elephant was alive, and bade them go 
and rub its forehead with their hands, and say at 
the same time, ‘ Wah Guru ’ — ^hail to the Guru ! ^ 
It is said that the elephant stood up to the astonish- 
ment of all. The Emperor, having received informa- 
tion of the miracle, sent for the animal, mounted it, 
and went to the Guru, and asked if it was he who 
had restored it to life. The Guru replied, ‘ God is 
the only Destroyer and Re-animater. Prayers are 
for faqirs, and mercy for Him.’ The monarch then 
asked, if the elephant were killed would the Guru 
again restore it. The Guru, not wishing to be 
treated as an itinerant showman, replied : — 

It is He (pointing on high) who destroyeth and destroying 
re-animateth ; 

Nanak, there is none but the one God. 

The animal then died, the inference of the chroni- 
clers being that it died at the will of the Guru, as 
it had been previously called to life by him. The 
Emperor ordered him to again revivify it. The Guru 
replied, ‘ Hail to your Majesty ! Iron when heated 
in the fire becometh red, and cannot be held for 
a moment in the hand. In the same way faqirs 

' Wahguru generally means God. We here merely give its apparent 
meaning. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


57 


become red in the heat of God’s love, and cannot be 
constrained.’ The Monarch, it is said, was pleased 
at this reply, and requested the Guru to accept a 
|)resent from him. The Guru replied : — 

Nanak is hungry for God, and careth for naught besides. 

I ask for God, I ask for nothing else. 

The king returned to his palace, and the Guru 
continued his wanderings. 

The Guru next proceeded to Bindraban, where he 
saw enacted the play called Krishanlila, in which 
the exploits of Krishan ^ are represented. Krishan 
appears making love to milkmaids, stealing their 
clothes while they were bathing, and killing his 
uncle Kans. The Guru expressed his dissatisfaction 
with the subject of the performance : — 

The disciples play, the gurus dance. 

Shake their feet, and roll their heads. 

Dust flieth and falleth on their hair ; 

The audience seeing it laugh and go home. 

For the sake of food the performers beat time. 

And dash themselves on the ground. 

The milkmaids sing, Krishans sing, 

Sitas and royal Rams sing. 

Fearless is the Formless One, whose name is true, 

And whose creation is the whole world. 

The worshippers on whom God bestoweth kindness 
worship Him ; 

Pleasant is the night for those who long for Him in their 
hearts. 

By the Guru’s instruction to his disciples this knowledge 
is obtained, 

^ Krishan son of Vasudev, by his wife Devaki, was born, according 
to Indian tradition, 3185 b.c. Cattle-grazing was the original calling 
of the family, and Krishan is celebrated for his adventures among 
the milkmaids of Mathura. In the Bhagavat Gita, an episode of 
the Sanskrit epic Mahdbhdrat, he declared himself to be God, the 
supreme Soul, the Creator of the world, and its Destroyer; and 
he has been accepted as such by Hindus, who deem him an in- 
carnation of Vishnu. 



58 THE SIKH RELIGION 

That the Kind One saveth those on whom He looketh 
with favour. 

Oil-presses, spinning-wheels, hand-mills, potters’ wheels, 
Plates,^ whirlwinds, many and endless. 

Tops, churning-staves, threshing-frames. 

Birds tumble and take no breath. 

Men put animals on stakes and swing them round. 

O Nanak, the tumblers are innumerable and endless. 

In the same way men bound in entanglements are swung 
round ; 

Every one danceth according to his own acts— 

They who dance and laugh shall weep on their departure, 
They cannot fly or obtain supernatural power. 

Leaping and dancing are mental recreations ; 

Nanak, they who have the fear of God in their hearts 
have also love.* 


Chapter V 

The Guru set out towards the east, having arrayed 
himself in a strange motley of Hindu and Muham- 
madan religious habiliments. He put on a mango- 
coloured jacket, over which he threw a white safa 
or sheet. On his head he carried the hat of a Musal- 
man Qalandar,® while he wore a necklace of bones, 
and imprinted a saffron mark on his forehead in the 
style of Hindus. This was an earnest of his desire 
to found a religion which should be acceptable both 
to Hindus and Muhammadans without conforming to 
either faith . As the Guru and his attendant proceeded, 
they met a Muhammadan notable called Shaikh Wajid. 
The Shaikh alighted under a tree, and his bearers 
began to shampoo and fan him. This afforded matter 
for contemplation to Mardana, and he asked the Guru 
whether there was not one God for the rich and 
another for the poor. The Guru replied that there 

^ Thai, plates poised on a stick and spun round. 

* Asa ki War. 

* A Muhammadan anchoret who abandons all worldly ties and 
possessions. He corresponds to the Indian SanySsi. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 59 

was only one God. Mardana then put his question 
in another form : ‘ Who created this man who rideth 
in a sedan of ease while the bearers have no shoes 
to their feet ? Their legs are naked while they 
shampoo and fan him.’ The Guru replied with the 
following verses : — 

They who performed austerities in their former lives, are 
now kings and receive tribute on earth. 

They who were then wearied, are now shampooed hy 
others. 

The Guru continued in prose : ‘ O Mardana, 
whoever is born hath come naked from his mother’s 
womb, and joy or misery is the result of actions in 
previous states of existence.’ Upon this, Mardana 
fell at the Guru’s feet. 

As Guru Nanak and Mardana journeyed on, they 
arrived at Gorakhmata, or temple of Gorakh, some 
twenty miles north of Pilibhit, in the United Provinces 
of India.^ There they observed a pipal-tree * of many 
a religious reminiscence. Years previously it had 
withered from age, but it is related that when the 
holy man sat beneath it, it suddenly became green. 
The biographer of the Guru states that Sidhs came 
on that occasion and addressed him : ‘ O youth, 
whose disciple art thou, and from whom hast thou 
obtained instruction ? ’ 

Guru Nanak, in reply, composed the following 
hymn : — 

What is the scale ? What the weights ? What weighman * 
shall I call for Thee ? 

Who is the guru from whom I should receive instruction, 
and by whom I should appraise Thy worth ? 

O my Beloved, I know not Thy limit. 

Thou fillest sea and land, the nether and upper regions ; 
it is Thou Thyself who art contained in ever5^hing. 

' The place is now known as NSnakmata, in memory of the Guru's 
visit. * The Ficus religiosa. 

* This line appears to mean that God cannot be weighed or 
estimated. 



6o THE SIKH RELIGION 

My heart is the scale, my understanding the weight, Thy 
service the weighman I employ. 

I weigh the Lord in my heart, and thus I fix my attention. 

Thou Thyself art the tongue of the balance, the weight, 
and the scales ; Thou Thyself art the weighman ; 

Thou Thyself beholdest. Thou Thyself understandest. 
Thou Thyself art the dealer with Thee} 

A blind man, a low-born person, and a stranger come but 
for a moment, and in a moment depart. 

In such companionship Nanak abideth ; how can he, fool 
that he is, obtain Thee ? * 

Then the Sidhs said, ‘ O youth, become a Jogi, 
and adopt the dress of our order, so shalt thou find 
the true way and obtain the merits of religion.’ The 
Guru replied with the following hymn : — 

Religion consisteth not in a patched coat, or in a Jogi’s 
staff, or in ashes smeared over the body ; 

Religion consisteth not in earrings worn, or a shaven 
head, or in the blowing of horns.® 

Abide pure amid the impurities of the world ; thus shalt 
thou find the way of religion. 

Religion consisteth not in mere words ; 

He who looketh on all men as equal is religious. 

Religion consisteth not in wandering to tombs ^ or places 
of cremation, or sitting in attitudes of contemplation ; ® 

Religion consisteth not in wandering in foreign countries, 
or in bathing at places of pilgrimages. 

Abide pure amid the impurities of the world ; thus shalt 
thou find the way of religion. 

On meeting a true guru doubt is dispelled and the wander- 
ings of the mind restrained. 

It raineth nectar, slow ecstatic music is heard, and man 
is happy within himself. 

- ^ In the Granth Sahib God is the wholesale merchant from whom 
all grace and good gifts proceed, and men are the dealers who receive 
from Him. * SQhi. * The Jogis blow deers' horns. 

* Marhi, a structure raised over the ashes of &e dead. 

® Tart lag&na is to sit cros§-legged in contemplative attitude as 
Buddha is represented. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 6t 

Abide pure amid the impurities of the world ; thus shalt 
thou find the way of religion. 

Nanak, in the midst of life be in death ; practise such 
religion. 

When thy horn soundeth without being blown, thou shalt 
obtain the fearless dignity — 

Abide pure amid the impurities of the world, thus shalt 
thou find the way of religion.^ 

On hearing this the Sidhs made Guru Nanak 
obeisance. The Guru, having infused sap into the 
pipal-tree by sitting under it, necessarily became a 
great being in their estimation. 

The Guru and his musical attendant proceeded to 
Banaras,^ the head quarters of the Hindu religion, 
and the birthplace of the renowned Kabir, then dead 
but not forgotten. The Guru and Mardana sat down 
in a public square of the city. At that time the chief 
Brahman of the holy city was Pandit Chatur Das. 
On goifig to bathe he saw the Guru and made the 
Hindu salutation, ‘ Ram Ram ! ’ On observing the 
Guru’s dress, he twitted him with possessing no 
salagram* though he called himself a faqir, with 
wearing no necklace of sacred basil and no rosary. 

‘ What saintship hast thou obtained ? ’ The Guru 
replied : — 

0 Brahman, thou worshippest and propitiatest the 
salagram, and deemest it a good act to wear a necklace of 
sweet basil.* 

Why irrigate barren land eind waste thy life ? 

Why apply plaster to a frail tottering wall ? 

Repeating God’s name, form a raft for thy salvation ; 
may the Merciful have mercy on thee ! 

^ Suhi. 

^ Banaras, in Sanskrit BarSnasi, is derived from Barna and Asi, 
two tributary streams of the Ganges. 

* A quartzose stone bearing the impression of a mmonites j tnd 
believed by the Hindus to represent Vishnu petrified ny^ a ciirse of 
Brinda for possessing her in the guise of her spouse. Sciagrams are 
found in the Gandaka and Son rivers. 

* Thereby denoting that be was dedicated to the god Vishnu. 



62 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chatur Das replied : ‘ O saint, the salagram and 
the necklace of sweet basil may indeed be useless as 
the irrigation of barren land, but tell me by what 
means the ground may be prepared and God found.’ 
The Guru replied : — 

Make God the well, string His name for the necklace of 
waterpots, and yoke thy mind as an ox thereto. 

Irrigate with nectar and fill the parterres therewith ; thus 
shalt thou belong to the Gardener. 

The Pandit inquired : ‘ The soil is irrigated, but 
how can it yield produce until it hath been dug up 
and prepared for the seed ? ’ The Guru explained 
how this was to be done : — 

Beat both thy lust and anger into a spade, with which dig 
up the earth, 0 brother : 

The more thou diggest, the happier shalt thou be : such 
work shall not be effaced in vain. 

The Paridit replied ; ‘ I am the crane, and thou 
art the primal swan of God. My understanding is 
overcome by my senses.’ The Guru replied : — 

If thou, O Merciful One, show mercy, a crane shall change 
into a swan. 

Nanak, slave of slaves, supplicateth, O Merciful One have 
mercy.i 

The Pandit then admitted that the Guru was 
a saint of God, and asked him to bless the city and 
sing its praises. The Guru inquired in what the 
specialty of the city consisted. The Pandit said it 
was learning, by which wealth was acquired. ‘ The 
world admireth the ground on which the possessor of 
wealth treadeth. By applying the mind to learning, 
thou shdt become a high priest.’ The Guru replied 
in a series of metaphors : — 

The city * is fraU, the king * is a boy and loveth the wicked ; 

He is said to have two mothers* and two fathers®; 
O Pandit, think upon this, 

1 Basant. a The body. » The heart. 

• Hope and desire. ® Love and hate. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 63 

O, sir Pandit, instruct me 

How I am to obtain the Lord of life. 

Within me is the fire,^ the garden * is in bloom, and I have 
an ocean ® within my body. 

The moon and sun * are both in my heart ; thou hast not 
obtained such knowledge ? 

He who subdueth mammon knoweth that God is every- 
where diffused ; 

He may be known by this mark that he storeth con- 
tentment as his wealth.® 

The king dwelleth with those who listen not to advice, and 
who are not grateful for what they receive. 

Nanak, slave of slaves, representeth, 0 God, in one moment 
Thou makest the small great and the great small.® 

Chatur Das requested further information. ‘ Sir, 
shall the name of God be to any extent obtained 
by what we teach the people and what we learn 
ourselves ? ’ The Guru inquired in return : ‘ O reli- 
gious teacher, what hast thou read ? What teachest 
thou the people, and what knowledge dost thou 
communicate to thy disciples ? ’ The Pandit replied : 
‘ By the will of God I teach the people the fourteen 
sciences — reading, swimming, medicine, alchemy, 
astrology, singing the six rags and their raginis, 
the science of sexual enjoyment, grammar, music, 
horsemanship, dancing, archery, theology, and states- 
manship.’ The Guru replied that better than all 
these was knowledge of God. Upon this he repeated 
the long composition called the Oamkar in the Rag 

^ The fire of evil passions. ® Of my youth. 

® Of desires. Man is here the measure of infinity. The ocean is 
supposed to contain fire which consumes it and hinders its increase. 
This fire is called harwanal, and is supposed to be near the Equator. 

® Meditation and divine knowledge. 

® Also translated— -He who hoardeth mercy instead of wealth 
recognizeth God. 

® Literally — in a moment thou canst make a tola a mSsha, and 
in a moment a m^ha a tola. A tola is i8o grains avoirdupois, the 
weight of a rupee. A masha is the twelfth part of a tola. The hymn 
is from Basant. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


64 

Ramkali, the first two pauris or stanzas of which 
are as follow : — 

It is the one God who created Brahma ; ^ 

It is the one God who created our understanding ; 

It is from the one God the mountains and the ages of the 
world emanated ; 

It is the one God who bestoweth knowledge. 

It is by the word of God man is saved. 

It is by the name of the one God the pious are saved. 

Hear an account of the letter O — ^ 

O is the best letter in the three worlds. 

Hear, O Pandit, why writest thou puzzles ? 

Write under the instruction of the Guru the name of God, 
the Cherisher of the world. 

He created the world with ease : in the three worlds 
there is one Lord of Light. 

Under the Guru’s instruction select gems and pearls, 
and thou shalt obtain God the real thing. 

If man understand, reflect, and comprehend what he 
readeth, he shall know at last that the True One is every- 
where.® 

The pious man knoweth and remembereth the truth — 
that without the True One the world is unreal. 

On hearing the whole fifty-four stanzas of the 
Oamkar, the Pandit fell at the Guru’s feet, and 
became a Sikh and possessor of God's name. 

During the Guru’s stay at Banaras Krishan Lai 
and Har Lai, two eminent young pandits, went to 
visit him, and he explained to them the tenets and 
principles of his religion. 

From Banaras the Guru proceeded to Gaya, the 
famous place of pilgrimage, where Buddha in days 
long past made his great renunciation and per- 
formed his memorable penance. There the Guru 
uttered the following in reply to Brahmans -who had 

^ This means that the true God is superior to all other gods. 

® The symbol of the eternal God. It is here used instead of the 
Name. ® Nirantar, pervades creation uninterruptedly. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 65 

uTjged him to perform the ceremonies usual among 
Hindus for the repose of the souls of ancestors. 

The Name alone, is my lamp, suffering the oil I put 
therein. 

The lamp’s light hath dried it up, and I have escaped 
meeting Death. 

O ye people, make me not an object of derision. 

The application of a particle of fire will destroy even 
hundreds of thousands of logs heaped together.^ 

God is my barley rolls * and leafy platters,® the Creator’s 
name the true obsequies.® 

In this world and the next, in the past and the future, 
that is my support. 

Thy praises are as the Ganges and Banaras to me ; my 
soul laveth therein. 

If day and night I love Thee, then shall my ablution be 
true. 

/ Some rolls are offered to the gods, some to the manes ® ; 
but it is the Brahman who kneadeth and eateth them. 

Nanak, the rolls which are the gift of God are never 
exhausted.* 

The Guru and Mardana in the course of their 
travels found themselves at a grain-dealer’s house. 
A son had just been bom to one of the partners, 
and several people had come to offer him congratula- 
tions. Some threw red powder’ in token of joy, 
and voices of blessing and congratulation filled the 
neighbourhood. Mardana sat down and gazed on the 

* ^ That is, God’s name will remove hundreds of thousands of sins. 

® Find ; this word also means the body which is supposed to be put 
together by the offering of these rolls. 

® Palial, literally, plates of leaves generally of the palds {Buiea 
frondosa) in which food is placed. 

* Ktriya, the ceremonies performed on the thirteenth day after death. 

® Chhatnehari, those who walked the earth, the manes of ancestors. 

* Asa. 

’ Red powder is thrown on passers-by in India on occasions of 
festivity. The practice is particularly resorted to on the occasion 
of the Holi, a Hindu saturnalia. 


SIKH. 1 


F 



66 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


spectacle. In the evening, when the grain-dealer’s 
entertainment was at an end, he stood up and went 
to his private apartments without taking any notice 
of Mairdana. The latter went to the Guru, who 
sat at some distance, informed him of the birth of 
the child, and gave him an account of the enter- 
tainment. The Guru smiled, and said it was not 
a son who had been bom in the grain-dealer’s house, 
but a creditor who had come to settle his account. 
He would remain for the night and depart in the 
morning. Then the Guru ordered Mardana to play the 
rebeck, and sang to its strains the following hymn : — 

I 

In the first watch of night, my merchant friend, the child 
by God’s order enter eth the womb. 

With body reversed it performeth penance within, O 
merchant friend, and prayeth to the Lord — 

It prayeth to the Lord in deep meditation and love. 

It cometh naked into the world, and again it departeth 
naked. 

Such destiny shall attend it as God’s pen hath recorded 
upon its forehead. 

Saith Nanak, in the first watch the child on receiving tl\e 
order entereth the womb. 

II 

In the second watch of night, O merchant friend, it for- 
getteth to meditate on God. 

It is dandled in the arms, 0 merchant friend, like Krishan 
in the house of Yasodha. 

; The child is dandled in the arms, and its mother saith, 
‘/This is my son.’ 

I Think on this, 0 thoughtless and stupid man,i nothing 
shall be thine at last. 

Thou knowest not Him who created thee ; meditate upon 
Him in thy heart. 

1 Man in the original might be translated mind, but the word 
includes the heart in the next line. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 67 

Saith Nanak, the child hath forgotten to meditate at the 
second watch. 

III 

At the third watch of night, O merchant friend, man’s 
thoughts are of woman and the pleasures of youth ; 

He thinketh not of God’s name, O merchant friend, which 
would release him from his bondage. 

Man thinketh not of God’s name, but groweth beside him- 
self with worldly love. 

Devoted to woman and intoxicated with his youth he 
wasteth his life in vain. 

He hath not traded in virtue or made good acts his friends. 

Saith Nanak, in the third watch man’s thoughts are of 
woman and the pleasures of youth. 

IV 

In the fourth watch of night, O merchant friend, the reaper 
cometh to the field ; 

The secret hath been given to none when Death shall seize 
and take away his victim. 

Think upon God ; the secret hath been given to none 
when Death shall seize and take man away. 

Hollow are the lamentations around. In one moment 
man’s goods become another’s. 

He shall obtain those things on which he hath set his 
heart 

Saith Nanak, O mortal, in the fourth watch the reaper 
hath reaped the field.* 

When morning came, the grain-dealer’s child died, 
and the grain-dealer and his relatives came forth 
weeping and wailing. Mardana asked the Guru 
what sudden change of fortune had come to those 
who ■ yesterday had been engaged in their rejoicings 

* It IS supposed that man shall receive in the next world the things 
which' formed the object of his last thoughts in this. He who has not 
fixed his thoughts op God at the last moment shall not find Him, 
but bcsin anew a course of transmigration. See Tritochan^ Gujari, 
voL vi. • Sri RSg Pahare. 

F 2 



68 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


and saturnalia. Then the Guru uttered the following 
on the vicissitudes of human life : — 

They, to whose faces were uttered gratulations and 
hundreds of thousands of blessings, 

Now smite their heads in grief; and their minds and bodies 
suffer agony. 

Of the dead some are buried, others are thrown into rivers.' 

The gratulations have passed away ; but even so do 
thou, 0 Nanak, praise the True One. 

As the Guru and Mardana pursued their way they 
saw a small enclosed field of gram.® The watchman 
of the field began to roast some for his dinner, while 
the Guru and Mardana gazed at him at a distance. 
As the watchman was preparing to eat, he saw them, 
and it occurred to him that they wanted something 
more dainty than gram, so he would go to his house 
and bring them better fare and comfortable bedding. 
As he stood up, the Guru, who did not wish to trouble 
him, asked whither he was going, and, on being 
informed, uttered the following verses : — 

Thy pallet is a coverlet and mattress for me ; thy love is 
my dainty dish. 

Nanak is already satiated with thy good qualities ; come 
back, 0 monarch. 

In due time the watchman obtained spiritual 
dignity in return for his kind intentions towards the 
Guru. 

There was at that time a shopkeeper whose mind 
had taken a religious bent, and who desired to 
meet a religious guide. He heard of Guru Nanak's 
arrival, and vowed that he would not eat or drink 
until he had had an interview with him. Having 

' The Musalm^ns bury their dead. The Hindus cremate them, 
or throw them into their sacred streams. 

* ChanS, Cicer anetinum, on which horses are fed in 

India. It is called gram by Europeans. When roasted green it is 
somei^ges eaten by the poorer; classes. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 6g 

once visited the Guru he continually went to him 
to receive religious instruction. A neighbouring 
shopkeeper heard of his friend's visits, and said 
that he too would go to see the holy man. They 
proceeded together, but on the way the second 
shopkeeper saw a woman of whom he became 
enamoured, and his visit to Nanak was indefinitely 
postponed. It was the custom of both to set out 
together, one to visit his mistress, and the other to 
visit the Guru. The second shopkeeper desired to 
put the fortunes of both to the test, and said, ‘ Thou 
practisest good works, while I practise bad works. 
Let us see what shall happen to each of us to-day. 
If I arrive first, I will sit down and wait for thee ; 
and if thou arrive first, then wait for me.’ This was 
agreed upon. The second shopkeeper went to the 
house of his mistress as usual, but did not find her. 
He then proceeded to the spot where his friend 
had agreed to meet him, but his friend, who on 
that day tarried long with the Guru, had not yet 
arrived. The second shopkeeper needing some occupa- 
tion in his solitude, drew out his knife and began to 
whittle the ground with it, when he found a shining 
gold coin. He continued his excavations with the 
weak delving implement he possessed, when, to his 
disappointment, he only discovered a jar of charcoal. 
He had, however, obtained some reward for his labour. 

Meanwhile the first shopkeeper arrived in doleful 
case. Having left the Guru, a thorn pierced his foot. 
He bound up the wound, and proceeded sore limping 
to the trysting-place. His friend told him of his better 
fortune. They both saw that he who went daily to 
commit sin prospered, while he who went to his 
religious teacher to pray and meditate on God, 
suffered ; and they a^eed to refer to Guru Nanak for 
an explanation of theu: unequal and unmerited fates. 

The Guru explained that the sinful shopkeeper 
had in a former birth given a gold coin as alms to a 
holy man. That coin was converted into many 



70 


tH£ SIKH RELIGION 


gold coins as a reward for the alms-giver, but, when 
he entered on his career of sin, the gold coins were 
turned into charcoal. The original gold coin was, 
however, restored. The shopkeeper who visited 
the Guru, had deserved to die by an impaling stake 
for the sins of deceit and usury, but, as he continued 
to progress in virtue, the impaling stake was reduced 
in size till it became merely a thorn. Having been 
pierced by it, he had fully expiated the sins of 
a former Wth. Thus may the decree of destiny be< 
altered by the practice of virtue. Both men werei 
thoroughly satisfied with this explanation of unequal 
retribution. The sinful as well as the virtuous man 
fell at Guru Nanak’s feet, and both became true 
worshippers of God. The Guru then uttered the 
following verses : — 

The heart is the paper, conduct the ink ; ^ good and bad 
are both recorded therewith. 

Man’s life is as his acts constrain him ; there is no limit to 
Thy praises, O God. 

O fool, why callest thou not to mind Thy Creator ? 

Thy virtues have dissolved away by thy forgetfulness of 
God. 

Night is a small net, day a large one ; there are as many 
meshes as there are gharis in the day. 

With relish thou ever peckest at the bait, and art ensnared ; 
O fool, by what skill shalt thou escape ? 

The body is the furnace, the mind the iron therein ; five 
fires * are ever applied to it. 

Sin is the charcoal added thereto, by which the mind is 
heated ; anxiety is the pincers. 

The mind hath turned into dross, but it shall again become 
gold when it meeteth such a Guru 

As will bestow the ambrosial name of the one God; then, 
Nanak, the mind shall become fixed.’ 

* Literally — Conduct— heart being the paper — is the ink. 

* The deadly sins. * M3ru. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 71 

The Guru then took the opportunity of discoursing 
on the immoral shopkeeper’s peculiar vice ; * Man 
is fickle when he beholdeth a courtesan ; he then 
hath a special desire for love’s play, and can in no 
way be restrained. On meeting her he loseth his 
human birth. Bereft of his religion he falleth into 
hell, where he undergoeth punishment and profusely 
lamenteth. Wherefore look not on her, but pass 
thy time among the holy.’ 

After this they all separated, and the Guru and 
Mardana continued their wanderings. On the way 
they were encountered by robbers. On seeing 
Guru Nanak, they said to themselves that he on 
whose face shone such happiness could not be 
without wealth. They accor<fingly went and stood 
around the Guru. As they beheld him morning 
dawned, so they were able to examine him more 
closely. He asked them who they were, and what 
they wanted. They candidly replied that they were 
thags,^ and had come to rob him. The Guru gave 
them spiritual instruction, and said that their sins 
should be wiped out when they had abandoned their 
evil career, turned to agriculture, and bestowed 
charity out of the spoils in their possession. They 
acted on his suggestions, began to repeat the Name, 
and reform their lives. The Guru on that occasion 
composed the following : — 

Covetousness is a dog, falsehood a sweeper, food obtained 
by deceit carrion ; 

! Slander of others is merely others’ filth in our mouths ; 
the fire of anger is a sweeper.* 

Pleasures and self-praise — these are mine acts, 0 Creator. 

My friends, doth any one obtain honour by mere words ? 

Call them the best, who are the best at the gate of the 
Lord ; they who do base acts sit and weep. 

^ Indian robbers who generally effect their purpose by the use of 
stupefying and poisonous drugs. 

* Also translated — Slander of others is our neighbour’s dirt, filthy 
language a sweeper, anger fire. 



72 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


There is pleasure in gold, pleasure in silver and in 
women, pleasure in the perfume of sandal ; 

There is pleasure in horses, pleasure in couches and in 
palaces, pleasure in sweets, and pleasure in meats. 

When such are the pleasures of the body, how shall God’s 
name obtain a dwelling therein ? 

It is proper to utter the words by which honour is 
obtained. 

Injury resulteth from uttering harsh words ; hearken, 

0 foolish and ignorant man. 

They who please God are good ; what more can 
be said ? 

They in whose heart God is contained possess wisdom, 
honour, and wealth. 

What need is there of praising them ? What further 
decoration can they obtain ? 

Nanak, they who are beyond God’s favouring glance love 
not charity or His name.^ 

By the following the Guru recommended agricul- 
tural labour: — 

The oxen are disciples,* the ploughman is their Shaikh ; ® 
The earth is a book, the furrow the writing. 

The sweat of the ploughman’s brow falleth to his heels. 
And every one eateth of his earning.^ 

1 They who eat the fruit of their earning and bestow a little 
from it, 

0 Nanak, recognize the true way. 

Then the Guru departed thence. 

^ Sri R&g. 

* Mushaiq. This is the Arabic mashshdq, a striven 

* Their spiritual guide. 

* Compare— 

‘ On its oxen and its husbandmen 
An empire’s strength is laid.' 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


73 


Chapter VI 

The Guru and Mardana went to Kamrup,^ a coun- 
try whose women were famous for their skill in 
incantation and magic. It was governed by a queen 
called Nurshah in the Sikh chronicles. She with 
several of her females went to the Guru and tried to 
obtain influence over him. 

Then the Guru uttered the following verses : — 

u-You buy saline earth,® and want musk into the bargain : 

Without good works, Nanak, how shaH you meet your 
Spouse ? 

The Guru continued as follows : — 

The virtuous wife enjoyeth her husband ; why doth the 
bad one bewail ? 

If she become virtuous, then shall she too go to enjoy her 
husband. 

My Spouse is an abode of sweetness ; why should He enjoy 
other women ? 

If a woman become virtuous and turn her heart into a 
thread. 

She shall string her Spouse’s heart thereon like a priceless 
gem. 

I show the way to others, but walk not in it myself ; ® I 
say I have already traversed it. 

If thou, O my Spouse, speak not to me, how shall I abide 
in Thy house ? 

Nanak, excepting One there is none besides. 

If Thy wife, 0 Spouse, remain attached to Thee, she shall 
enjoy Thee.* 

Nurshah observed that her people's spells were of 
no avail, however much they tried. The Guru, on 

^ In the time of the Guru it is believed that KSwaru, or KSmrQp, 
included at least the present districts of Go&lpara and KamrQp. 

* Kallar, impure nitrate of soda found in sandy soils in India. 

* Compare — 

‘Fungar vice cotis, acutum 

Reddere quae ferrum valet, exsors ipsa secandi.’ — Horace. 

* Wadhans. 



74 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


beholding their fruitless efforts, uttered the following 
hymn in the Suhi measure entitled Kuchajji, or the 
woman of bad character : — 

I am a worthless woman ; in me are faults ; how can I go 
to enjoy my Spouse ? 

My Spouse's wives are one better than the other ; 0 my life, 
who careth for me ? ^ 

My female friends who have* enjoyed their Spouse are in 
the shade of the mango * 

I do not possess their virtues ; to whom can I attribute 
blame ? * 

What attributes of Thine, O Lord, shall I blazon abroad ? 
What names of Thine shall I repeat ? 

I cannot even attain one of Thy many excellences : I am 
ever a sacrifice unto Thee. 

Gold, silver, pearls, and rubies which gladden the heart — 

These things the Bridegroom hath given me, and I have 
fixed my heart on them.* 

I had palaces of brick fashioned with marble. 

In these luxuries I forgot the Bridegroom and sat not 
near Him. 

The kulangs cry in the heavens,® and the cranes have come 
to roost.® 

The woman goeth to her father-in-law’s ; ’ how shall she 
show her face as she proceedeth ? 

As morning dawned she soundly slept, and forgot her 
journey. 

She separated from Thee, O Spouse, and therefore stored 
up grief for herself. 

* Literally — who knoweth my name ? 

® That is, they are fortunate. The mango is an evergreen, and its 
leaves always afford shelter. 

* It is my own fault that I possess not virtue. 

* And forgotten the Giver. 

® The Orientals believe that very old men hear noises in their heads. 
The kulang is a large stately Indian bird. 

^ Grey hair has come. 

^ In the Granth Sahib the present world is called one's father’s 
house, and the next world one’s father-in-law’s. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 75 

In Thee, 0 Lord, are merits ; in me all demerits : Nanak 
hath this one representation to make. 

Every night is for the virtuous woman ; may I though 
unchaste obtain a ni^ht also ! ^ 

Nurshah grew weary of her efforts. She felt that 
het ill success was the result of her sins. Her women 
then, beating drums, stood in front of the Guru, and 
began to dance and sing. He on that occasion com- 
posed the following hymn : — 

The impulses of my heart are my cymbals and madiras.® 

The world is my drum ; this is the music that playeth for 
me. 

Saints like Narad dance under the influence of this Kal 
age.® 

They who call themselves continent and virtuous also 
enter the dance. 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Name. 

The world is blind in the opinion of those who know the 
Lord. 

Contrary to custom, a disciple eateth from the hand of 
his guru. 

And goeth and dwelleth with him only for the sake of food.® 

If man were to live and eat hundreds of years, 

Dnly that day would be acceptable in which he recognized 
the Lord. 

Compassion is not exercised by merely beholding a suitor ; ® 

There is no one who receiveth or giveth not bribes. 

The king dispenseth justice when his palm is filled. 

If a man make a request for God’s sake nobody heedeth 
him. 

Nanak, men nowadays are men only in shape and name : 

• ^ She has grown grey in sin, and is not desirable to her Husband. 

® The nairas were struck with a stick, and somewhat corre- 
sponded to European triangles. 

* Even saints dance for pleasure, and not for the love of God in 
this age. 

* This is described as a custom of this degenerate age. The 
proper course would be for the disciple to feed his master. 

® A bribe must be paid to the judge. 



76 THE SIKH RELIGION 

In action they are dogs ; shall they be accepted at God’s 
gate ? 

If man by the favour of his guru deem himself a guest in 
this world, 

He shall acquire some honour in God’s court.* 

Again the Guru uttered the following verses : — 

^In words we are good, but in acts bad. 

We are impure-minded and h\a.ck-hearted, yet we wear the 
white robes of innocence.^ 

We envy those who stand and serve at His gate. 

They who love the Bridegroom and enjoy the pleasure of 
His embraces. 

Are lowly even in their strength, and remain humble. 

Nanak, our lives shall be profitable if we meet such women.* 

When the Guru had uttered these verses, Nurshah 
thought she would tempt him with wealth. Her 
attendants brought pearls, diamonds, gold, silver, 
coral, sumptuous dresses, all things precious the 
state treasury contained, and laid them at his feet. 
The Guru rejected all the proffered presents, and 
uttered the following hymn, which he sang to Mar- 
dana's rebeck : — 

O silly woman, why art thou proud ? 

Why enjoyest thou not the love of God* in thine own 
home ? 

The Spouse is near ; O foolish woman, why searchest thou 
abroad ? 

Put the surma ® needles of God's fear into thine eyes, and 
wear the decoration of love. 

Thou shalt be known as a devoted happy wife* if thou 
love the Bridegroom. 

* Asa. 

* Literally— we are white outside. * Sri Rag ki War. 

* The Indian husband is deemed as a god by his wife. 

* A species of collyrium. 

* SuhSgan, from the Sanskrit su, good, and bhdg, fortune, is applied 
to a wife whose husband is alive. JPej^, lot is happy, and her state 
deemed holy in comparison with thlit bf a widow. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 77 

What shall a silly woman do if she please not her Spouse ? 

However much she implore, she may not enter His 
chamber. 

Without God’s grace she obtaineth nothing, howsoever 
!she may strive. 

Intoxicated with avarice, covetousness, and pride, she is 
absorbed in mammon. 

It is not by these means the Bridegroom is obtained ; 
silly is the woman who thinketh so. 

Go and ask the happy wives ^ by what means they obtained 
their Spouse — 

‘ Whatever He doeth accept as good ; have done with 
cleverness and orders. 

‘ Apply thy mind to the worship of His feet by whose love 
what is most valued is obtained.® 

‘ Do whatever the Bridegroom biddeth thee ; give Him 
thy body and soul ; such perfumes apply.’ ® 

Thus speak the happy wives : * ‘ 0 sister, by these means 
the Spouse is obtained. 

‘ Efface thyself, so shalt thou obtain the Bridegroom ; 
what other art is there ? ’ 

Only that day is of account when the Bridegroom looketh 
with favour ; the wife hath then obtained the wealth of 
the world. 

She who pleaseth her Spouse is the happy wife ; Nanak, 
she is the queen of them all. 

She is saturated with pleasure, intoxicated with happi> 
ness,® and day and night absorbed in His love. 

She is beautiful and fair to view, accomplished, and it is 
she alone who is wise.® 

^ Who have God for their spouse. 

* That is, salvation. Also translated — from whom the wealth of 
love is obtained. 

* That is, let these be thy blandishments. 

® This is the reply of the favourite wives showing how they won 
God as their Spouse. 

® Sahtj. This word has many meanings in the Granth Sahib. It 
means natural disposition, easily, slowly, divine knowledge, divine 
tranquillity, God, &c. In some of its meanings it is deriv^ from 
sah, with, and ja, born. • Tilang. 



78 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Nurshah and her women, on hearing this hymn, 
twisted their head-dresses around their necks in 
token of submission, and fell at the Guru's feet. 
They asked how they could obtain salvation. The 
Guru told them to repeat God’s name, conscientiously 
perform their domestic duties, renounce magic, and 
they should thus secure future happiness. It is 
said that they became followers of Guru Nanak, and 
thus secured salvation. 

The Guru, on leaving Kamrup, entered a wilderness. 
There Kaljug^ came to tempt him. Mardana became 
sore afraid. The Guru remonstrated with him ; 
asked why he was afraid of Kaljug ; if he felt fear 
it ought to be the fear of God. 

The Guru then sang the following hymn : — 

Put the fear of God® into thy heart ; then the fear of 
Death shall depart in fear. 

What is that fear by fearing which the fear of Death may 
take fright ? 

O God, there is no other abode than in Thee ; 

Whatever happeneth is according to Thy pleasure. 

Fear if thou have any other fear than that of God : 

Fear is mental disturbance. 

The soul dieth not, neither is it drowned ; it is saved 
through fear of God. 

He who made something will make something. 

By His order man cometh ; by His order man goeth ; 

Before and behind us His order prevaileth. 

The swan of the heart aspireth to fly to heaven ; 

But on the way it is a target for great hunger which 
restraineth it. 

Let the swan make fear its eating, drinking, and support ; 

Without such food the stupid bird would die. 

Who hath a helper let anybody say. 

Everybody is Thine ; Thou art the helper of all. 

* ^ Kaljug here means Satan. 

* Dar ghar, the abode of feir, is explained by the gySnis to mean 
God. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


79 


Nanak, to name and meditate on Him to whom belong 

Men, lower animals, wealth, and property, is difficult.^ 

Mardana inquired who Kaljug was, by what signs 
he was known unto men, and what prerogative he 
exercised ? The Guru replied : — 

When true men speak the truth and suffer for it ; when 
penitents fail to perform penance in their homes ; 

When he who repeateth the name of God meeteth 
obloquy — these are the signs of the Kaljug.® 

Kaljug offered the Guru the wealth of the world 
if he would abandon his mission. He said, ‘ I possess 
everything. Say but the word, and I will build 
thee a palace of pearls, inlay it with gems, and 
plaster it with fragrant aloes and sandd. I will 
bring thee very beautiful women, and give thee the 
wealth of the world, the power of working miracles, 
and confer upon thee the sovereignty of the East 
and of the West. Take whatever pleaseth thee.’ 
The Guru informed him that he himself had renounced 
all sovereignty. What could he do with what Kaljug 
offered him, which moreover belonged to others ? 
Then the Guru uttered the following stanza : — 

Were a mansion of pearls erected and inlaid with gems 
for me ; 

Perfumed with musk, saffron, fragrant aloes and seindal 
to confer delight ; 

May it not be that on beholding these things I may forget 
Thee, 0 God, and not remember Thy name ! 

My soul burneth without Thee. 

* I have ascertained from my Guru that there is no other 
shelter than in God. 

Were the earth to be studded with diamonds and rubies, 
and my couch to be similarly adorned ; 

Were fascinating damsels whose faces were decked with 
jewels to slied lustre and enhance the pleasure of the scene ; 

^ Gauri. ® R&mkali. 



8o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


May it not be that on beholding them I may forget Thee 
and not remember Thy name 1 

Were I to become a Sidh and work miracles ; could 
I command the wealth of the universe to come to me ; 

Could I disappear and appear at pleasure, and were the 
world to honour me ; 

May it not be that on beholding these things I may forget 
Thee and not remember Thy name ! 

Were I to become a monarch on my throne and raise an 
army; 

Were dominion and regal revenue mine — O Nanak, they 
would be all worthless — 

May it not be that on beholding these things I may forget 
Thee and not remember Thy name ! ^ 

Then Kaljug went round him in adoration, fell at 
his feet, and took his departure. 

On the way Guru and Mardana sought shelter in 
a village, but were not allowed to remain there. 
The villagers began to play practical jokes on them. 
The Guru on that occasion uttered the following 
verses : — 

When I remain silent, they say I have no understanding 
in my heart ; 

When I speak, they say I chatter too much ; 

When I sit, they say I have spread my pallet to stay ; 

When I go away, they say I have thrown dust on my 
head ; ® 

When I bow down, they say I perform my devotions 
through fear. 

I can do nothing by which I may spend my time in peace. 

Both here and hereafter may the Creator preserve Nanak’s 
honour ! 

Then the Guru composed the following hymn in 
the Rag Malar — 

^ Sri Rag. 

* That is, I have become and dishonoured my family. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 8i 

Death is forgotten amid eating and drinking, laughter 
and sleep. 

By forgetting the Lord man hath ruined himself and ren- 
dered his life accursed ; he is not to tarry here. 

O man, ponder on the one Name, 

And thou shalt go to thy home with honour* 

What do they who worship Thee give Thee ? Nay, they 
cease not to beg of Thee. 

Thou conferrest gifts on all creatures ; Thou art the life 
within their lives. 

The pious who meditate on God receive nectar ; it is they 
who are pure. 

Day and night repeat the Name, O mortal, that thine 
impurities may be washed away. 

As is the season so the comfort of the body, and so the 
body itself.^ 

0 Nanak, that season is agreeable in which Code's name is 
repeated ; but what is any season without the Name ? 

The Guru and Mardana did not remain long in 
that village. Mardana asked the Guru what his 
decision was regarding its inhabitants. He replied, 
‘ O Mardana, may they remain here ! ’ 

The inhabitants of the next village at which they 
arrived showed them great attention. They remained 
there, however, for only one night, and departed 
next morning. The Guru when leaving said that 
the village should be abandoned. Then Mardana re- 
marked, ‘ Sir, the village in which we were not allowed 
to sit down, thou hast blessed ; and that which 
bestowed great attention and kindness on us thou 
hast cursed.’ The Guru replied, ‘ Mardana, if the 
people of the former village remove to another, they 
shall ruin it ; but if the people of the latter village 
remove to another, they shall save it.' 

The Guru returned from Kamrup by the great 
river Brahmaputra, and then made a coasting voyage 
to Puri on the Bay of Bengal, where Vishnu or 

^ That is, the condition of the body is as changeable as the seasons. 

•IKK. J G 



82 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Krishan, under the name of Jagannath, lord of the 
world, is specially worshipped. When the lamps 
were lit in the evening the Guru was invited by the 
high priest to stand up and join in the god’s worship, 
which was of a gorgeous and imposing character. In 
that rich tepiple offerings to the god were made on 
salvers studded with pearls. On the salvers were 
placed flowers and censers. A fan was employed to 
excite the flames of the incense, while the lamps 
around threw light over the temple. But the use 
of these articles showed artificial worship, while the 
expanse of the firmament, the sun and the moon, the 
procession of the stars, the natural incense of the 
sandal, the winds and forests, were the fitting acces- 
sories of Nanak’s purer worship of the God of creation. 
The Guru therefore, instead of accepting the high 
priest’s invitation to adore the idol, raised his eyes 
to heaven, and gave utterance to the following 
hymn : — 

The sun and moon, O Lord, are thy lamps ; the firmament, 
Thy salver ; the orbs of the stars, the pearls enchased in it. 

The perfume of the sandal ^ is Thine incense ; the wind is 
Thy fan ; * all the forests are Thy flowers, O Lord of light.® 

v/ ^ Malianlo, literally — the wind from the Malay tree. 

* In the original, chaurt, a flapper made from the tail of the yak or 
Thibetan cow, and used in India to brush away flies. 

• * The following is Dr. Trumpp’s translation of these two verses : — 

The dish is made of the sky, the sun and moon are made the lamps, 
the orbs of stars are, so to say, the pearls. 

The wind is incense-grinding, the wind swings the fly-brush, the 
whole blooming wood is the flames (of the lamps). 

While the present author was engaged in translating the sacred 
writings of the Sikhs at their request, one Bhai Gurumukh Singh 
projected a rival translation, which was to surpass all others. His 
modus operandi'was to alter Dr. Trumpp’s words here and there, and 
thus produce what he perhaps deemed would be an original version. 
He circulated the following as his translation of these lines : — 

The sky is for my plate (for arti) ; the sun and moon are for lamps ; 
(and) rows of stars are as it were for pearls. 

The air of sandal wood for perfumary smoke, the wind (for my) fan 
and all the rows of blooming forests (for flowers), O Lord of light. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


83 

What worship is this, 0 Thou Destroyer of birth ? ^ Un- 
beaten strains of ecstasy are the trumpets of Thy worship. 

Thou hast a thousand eyes and yet not one ^ eye ; Thou 
hast a thousand forms and yet not one form ; ^ 

Thou hast a thousand pure feet and yet not one foot ; 
Thou hast a thousand organs of smell and yet not one organ — 
I am fascinated by this play of Thine 

The light which is in everything is Thine, 0 Lord of light. 

From its brilliancy everything is brilliant ; 

By the Guru’s teaching the light becometh manifest. 

What pleaseth Thee is the real arati.^ 

O God, my mind is fascinated with Thy lotus feet as 
the humble-bee with the flower : night and day I thirst for 
them. 

Give the water of Thy grace to the sarang ® Nanak, so 
that he may dwell in Thy name.'^ 

^ ^ That is, of transmigration. 

* Thou hast many spiritual eyes, but no material eye. 

^ Thy manifestations are many, yet Thou hast no bodily form. 

^ Also translated — In this way Thou hast enchanted the world. 

^ In memory of the circumstance recorded in the text the Sikhs repeat 
several prayers in the evening. The prayers are collectively called Arati, 
and consist of this hymn and some others, which will be noted in 
their proper place. The word Arati originally meant waving lamps at 
night before an idol. 

® The Sarang, or pied Indian cuckoo, the Cuculus Melanoleukos is 
supposed to drink water 
only when the moon 
is in the mansion of 
Arcturus, so, when its 
time comes to drink, 
it is naturally thirsty. 

This bird is also known 
under the names cha- 
trik and papiha. Its 
love is celebrated in 
song and story. It is 
in full voice on the ap- 
proach of the Indian 
monsoon, when its 
plaintive strains are 
heard clearest at night. It is said that they make love’s unhealed 
fe^ounds bleed anew. ^ Dhanasari. 



G 2 



84 THE SIKH RELIGION 

While at Jagannath, Guru Nanak met a Brahman 
who kept his eyes and nose closed so as to receive 
no pleasure from these organs. He averred that 
in that state he with his mental eyes saw the secrets 
of the world. Nanak hid his lota and the Brahman 
could not find it, so Nanak by the following hymn 
in the Dhanasari measure twitted him on his want 
of omniscience : — 

This is not the age, there is no longer acquaintance with 
Jog ; this is not the way of truth. 

The holy places in the world have fallen ; the world is thus 
ruined. 

' In this Kal age God’s name is the best thing. 

Thou closest thine eyes and boldest thy nose to deceive 
the world. 

Thou boldest thy nose with thy thumb and first two 
fingers, and sayest that thou seest the three worlds. 

But thou seest not what is behind thee, this is a wonderful 
thing.* 


Chapter VII 

The Guru and Mardana after their travels in 
Eastern India returned to the Panjab, and proceeded 
on a visit to the shrine of Shaikh Farid, a Moslem 
saint, at a place then called Ajodhan, but now Pak 
Pattan, in the southern part of that province. A 
saint called Shaikh Brahm (Ibrahim) was then the 
incumbent of the shrine. He was the first to speak. 
On seeing the Guru, whom he knew to be a religious 
man, dressed in ordinary secular costume, he said : — 

Either seek for high position ® or for God. 

Put not thy feet on two boats lest thy property founder.® 

The Guru replied : — 

* Also translated — lo I this is thy devotional attitude. Padam asan 
is one of the Jogis’ attitudes. 

® Mujaddami, literally, the headship of a town. 

* The meaning is — ^lead either a secular or a religious life. Do no| 
combine both. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


85 

Put thy feet on two boats andthy property also on them 

One boat may sink, but the other shall cross over.* 

For me there is no water, no boat, no wreck, and no loss. 

Nanak, the True One is my property and wealth, and 
He is naturally everywhere contained. 

Shaikh Brahm replied : — 

O Farid, the world is enamoured of the witch* who is 
found to be false when her secret is known. 

Nanak, while thou lookest on, the field * is ruined. 

Upon this the Guru urged : — 

0 Farid, love for the witch hath prevailed from the very 
beginning. 

Nanak, the field shall not be ruined if the watchman be 
on the alert. 

Then Shaikh Brahm : — 

Farid, my body faileth, my heart is broken, and no 
strength whatever remaineth me. 

Arise, beloved, become my physician and give me 
medicine. 

Then the Guru exhorted him : — 

My friend, examine the truth, lip-worship is hollow. 

Nanak, the Beloved is not far from thee ; behold Him in 
thy heart. 

Then Shaikh Brahm uttered the following : — 

When thou ought est to have made thy raft, thou didst 
not do so ; 

When the full river® overfloweth, it is difficult to cross 
over. 

^ That is, enjoy the world and also remember God. 

* The body may perish, but the soul shall be saved. 

* Worldly love. 

* Man's body. 

® When the body has completed its measure of sin. Sarwar is, 
literally, a tank or lake, but Shaikh Brahm refers to the broad river 
Satluj, near which he lived. 



86 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Put not thy hand into the fire or it will burn.^ my dear. 

Some have obtained honour for themselves by uttering 
God’s name. 

As milk will not return to the udder, so the soul will 
not again enter the same body. 

Saith Farid, O my companions, when the Spouse calleth 
you. 

The soul shall depart in perplexity, and the body become 
a heap of dust.* 

The Guru replied by a hymn in the same measure : — 

Make a raft of devotion and penance, so mayest thou 
cross the stream.* 

There is no lake, no overflowing ; such a road is easy. 

O Lord, Thy name alone is the madder with which my 
robe is dyed. 

Such colour is everlasting, O my dear. 

If thou, my beloved, go not thus arrayed to meet the 
Bridegroom, how canst thou meet Him ? 

If thou possess virtues. He will meet thee. 

If He become united with thee. He will not part from 
thee ; that is, if union be really effected. 

It is the True One who putteth an end to transmigration. 

She who hath abandoned egotism hath sewed for herself 
a garment to please the Bridegroom. 

Under the Guru’s instruction she obtaineth her reward 
in the ambrosial converse of her Lord. 

Nanak saith, 0 female companions, the Lord is thoroughly 
dear. 

We are His slaves, true is our Spouse. 

Then Shaikh Brahm uttered the following : — 

They who have heart-felt love for God are the true ; 

But they who have one thing in their hearts and utter 
another are accounted false. 

* Also translated — Touch not safflower : its dye will depart. 

* SQhi. 

* Wahela, also translated — comfortably. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 87 

They who are imbued with the love of God and a longing 
to behold Him are also true. 

They who forget God’s name are a burden to the earth. 

God hath attached to His skirt those who were darwesh.es 
at His gate. 

Blest the mothers who bore them ; profitable was their 
advent into the world. 

0 Cherisher, Thou art illimitable, unapproachable, and 
endless. 

1 kiss the feet of those who recognize the True One. 

I seek Thy shelter, O God ; it is Thou who pardonest. 

Grant Thy worship as charity to Shaikh Farid.* 

On this the Guru uttered the hymn called Suchajji, 
the fortunate, in the Suhi measure : — 

When I have Thee I have everything ; Thou, O Lord, 
art my treasure. 

In Thee I dwell in peace, in Thee to dwell is my pride ; 

If it please Thee, Thou bestowest a throne and greatness ; 
if it please Thee, Thou makest man a forlorn mendicant ; 

If it please Thee, rivers flow over dry land, and the lotus 
bloometh in the heavens ; 

If it please Thee, man crosseth the terrible ocean ; if it 
please Thee, he is drowned therein ; 

If it please Thee, Thou art my merry Spouse — I am 
absorbed in Thy praises, O Lord * of excellences. 

If it please Thee, O Lord, Thou terrifiest me, and then 
I am undone with transmigration. 

O Lord, Thou art inaccessible and unequalled ; I am 
exhausted uttering Thy praises. 

What can I ask of Thee ? What can I say to Thee ? 
I hunger and thirst for a sight of Thee. 

Under the instruction of the Guru I have obtained the 
Lord ; Nanak’s prayer hath been granted. 

* Asa. 

* Tosh is a Persian word meaning Lord. The gyanis translate it 
vessel. 



88 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru and Shaikh Brahm remained together 
that night in the forest. A kind-hearted and charit- 
able vifiager who had seen them, took them a basin 
of milk before daylight. The Shaikh separated 
his own share from that of the Guru, and uttered 
these verses : — 

Devotion in the beginning of the night is the blossom, 
in the end of the night ^ the fruit. 

They who watch obtain gifts from the Lord.* 

The Guru responded : — 

Gifts are the Lord’s ; what can prevail against Him ? * 

Some who are awake receive them not ; others who are 
asleep He awaketh, and conferreth presents upon them.* 

The Guru then asked Shaikh Brahm to put his 
hand into the milk and feel what was in it. Farid 
found that it contained four gold coins. Upon 
this the villager, deeming that he was in the hands 
of magicians, went away without his basin. The 
Guru uttered the following hymn : — 

I 

O thou with the beautiful eyes, in the first watch of 
a dark night 

Watch thy property, 0 mortal ; thy turn shall come next. 

When thy turn cometh, who will awake thee ? Death 
shall taste thy sweets as thou sleepest. 

The night is dark ; what shall become of thee when the 
thief breaketh into and robbeth thy house ? 

O inaccessible, incomparable Protector, hear my suppli- 
cation. 

O Nanak, the fool hath never thought of God ; what 
can he see in a dark night ? 

^ That is, the end of life. 

* Farid’s Sloks. 

* No one can force Him to bestow His gifts. 

* Sri Rag ki War. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


89 


II 

It is the second watch ; awake, O heedless one. 

Watch thy property, 0 mortal ; thy field is being eaten up. 

Watch thy field, love God’s praises ; while thou art 
awake, the thief shall not touch thee. 

Then shalt thou not go the way of Death, nor suffer /rom 
him ; the fear and dread of him shall depart. 

The lamps of the sun and moon shall shine for thee, if 
thou under the Guru’s instruction ponder on the True One 
in thy heart, and utter His name with thy lips. 

Nanak, the fool heedeth not even now ; how shall he 
obtain happiness in the second watch ? 

III 

It is the third watch, thou art wrapt in slumber. 

By wealth, children, and wives men are afflicted with 
sorrow : 

Yet wealth, children, wives, and worldly possessions are 
dear to man ; he nibbleth at the bait, and is continually 
caught. 

If man under the Guru’s instruction meditate on the 
Name, he shall obtain rest, and Death shall not seize him.^ 

Transmigration and death never forsake us ; without the 
Name we are afflicted. 

Nanak, in the third watch men, under the influence of 
the three qualities,* feel worldly love. 

^ Death only seizes the soul which has to undergo further trans- 
migration. He does not harass the emancipated soul. 

* The three gunas or qualities of goodness, passion, and darkness — 
or reality, impulse, and ignorance — are frequently mentioned in Sikh 
as well as Hindu sacred literature. The Mosaic and Zoroastrian 
systems recognized two principles, good and evil, in the economy of 
nature. It was the Indian sage Kapila who discerned the three prin- 
ciples or qualities above stated. He beheld good, moderately good, 
and evil everywhere in ^reation. He believed that these qualities, but 
in different degrees, pervade all things, and are the distin^ishing 
characteristics of matter implanted in it by the Creator HimSw. 

The demigods possess goodness io excess, the demons darkness, 
and men passion. Manu thus defines the three qualities : ' It ought 
to be known that the three gunas or fetters of the soul are kjobdness, 
passion, and darkness. Restrained by one or more of these it is ever 



90 


THE SIKH RELIGION 

IV 

It is the fourth watcl^ ; the sun riseth. 

They who night and day are watchful have saved their 
homes. 

Night is pleasant for those who under the Guru’s instruc- 
tion watch and apply themselves to the Name. 

They who act according to the instruction of the Guru 
shall not be bom again ; the Lord will befriend them. 

In the fourth watch hands shake, feet and frames totter, 
eyes grow dim, and men’s bodies become like ashes. 

Nanak, without God’s name abiding in the mind man is 
unhappy during the four watches. 

V 

The knot of life is open ; arise, thine allotted time hath 
come. 

All pleasures and happiness are at an end ; Death will 
lead thee captive away. 

Without being seen or heard he will lead thee captive, 
when it so pleaseth God. 

His turn shall come to every one ; the ripe field shall ever 
be cut down. 

An account of every ghari and moment shall be taken, 
and the soul shall obtain punishment or reward. 

Nanak, God made everything, demigods and men are 
herein agreed.^ 

When the Guru and Shaikh Brahm left the forest 
the villager returned to fetch his basin. On lifting 
it up, it is said, he found that it had become gold, 
and was filled with gold coins. Then he began to 
repent of his suspicions, and confessed to himself 
that they were religious men. If he had come with 

attached to forms of existence. Whenever any one of the three 
qualities predominates, it causes the embodied spirit to abound in that 
quality.’ The aim of the soul apparently should be to divest itself of 
all three qualities. Compare Plato's distinction of the three parts of 
the mind corresponding to the three classes of his ideal state. 

1 Tukh&ri Chhant. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


91 

his heart disposed towards God, he would have gained 
holiness. ‘ I came with worldliness, and worldliness 
have I found.’ Upon this he took up his basin and 
'departed. 

Shaikh Brahm remarked that it was difficult for 
those who attached themselves to mammon to obtain 
salvation, and inquired what aid besides God’s name 
was ordinarily necessary for future happiness. The 
Guru replied with the following hymn : — 

The union of father and mother produceth a body, 

On which the Creator hath written its destiny. 

The gifts, the divine lights, and the greatness allotted it ; 

But on associating with mammon it loseth remembrance 
of God. 

O foolish man, why art thou proud ? 

Thou shalt have to depart when it pleaseth the Lord. 

Abandon pleasures, and peace and happiness shall be thine. 

Thou shalt have to leave thy home ; no one is permanent 
here. 

Eat a little and leave a little. 

If thou art again to return to this world.' 

Man decketh his body, dresseth it in silk. 

And issueth many orders ; 

He maketh a couch of ease and sleepeth thereon. 

Why weepeth he when he falleth into the hands of Death ? * 

Domestic entanglements are a whirlpool, O brother ; 

Sin is a stone which floateth not over. 

Put thy soul on the raft of God’s fear, and thou shaU he 
saved. 

Saith Nanak, such a raft God giveth but to few.* 

Then the people brought them bread, but Shaikh 
Brahm said that he had already dined. The people, 
annoyed that their offerings were thus spumed, said 

' That is, to practise great economy would be useless for him who 
is not to return to this world. 

/ * If man disregard the present opportunity of doing good works, 
why should he afterwards weep when Death seizes him for punishment ? 

* MSru. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


92 

to him: ‘You must be a liar from that country 
where Farid, who wore a wooden cake on his stomach, 
held religious sway. Whenever any one offered him 
food he used to say he had taken dinner.’ ‘ Upon 
this Shaikh Brahm said : ‘ What shall be my condi- 
tion, who am ever saying that I have dined, when 
I am only fasting ? ’ The Guru was pleased to 
observe the Shaikh’s tender conscience, and said to 
him : ‘ Shaikh Brahm, God is in thee.’ The Shaikh 
then asked the Guru to tell him of God, and by what 
virtues and merits He was to be found. The Guru 
replied as follows : — 

Come, my sisters and dear companions, embrace me. 

Having embraced me, tell me tales of the Omnipotent 
Spouse. 

In the true Lord are all merits, in us all demerits. 

O Creator, every one is in Thy power. 

Meditate on the one Word ; where Thou, 0 God, art, 
what more is required ? 

Go ask the happy wife by what merits she enjoyeth her 
Spouse — 

* Composure, contentment, and sweet discourse are mine 
ornaments. 

‘ I met my Beloved, who is an abode of pleasure, when 
I heard the Guru’s word.’ 

How great, 0 God, is Thy power ! how great Thy gifts ! 

How many men and lower animals utter Thy praises day 
and night ! 

How many are Thy forms and colours ! how many castes 
high and low I 

When the true Guru is found, truth is produced, and 
man becoming true is absorbed in the truth. 

When man is filled with fear through the Guru’s instruc- 
tions, then he obtaineth understanding, and honour re- 
sulteth. 

Nanak, the true King then blendeth man with Himself.* 

^ An account of Farid will be found in the sixth volume of this 
work. 

* Sri Rag. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


93 

The Guru, after his pleasant visit to Shaikh 
Brahm and his district, where he made several 
converts, proceeded to a country called Bisiar, 
probably the state of Bushahir in the Himalayas, 
where he was ill received. The inhabitants, deeming 
his presence pollution, purified every place he had 
stood on. One man alone, Jhanda, a carpenter, was 
found to treat him with hospitality. He took him 
to his house, washed his feet, and drank the water 
used for the purpose. While drinking, it was 
revealed to him that Nanak was a Guru. He joined 
him in his wanderings. 

The Guru and his companions directed their 
steps to the East. They went to an island in the 
ocean where they could obtain no food. There the 
Guru composed the Jugawali, a poem (no longer 
extant) on the four ages of the world. Jhanda 
committed it to writing and circulated it. With 
the new composition in his possession he returned 
to his own country, leaving the Guru and Mardana 
to continue their pilgrimage. 

Not long after they found themselves in a lonely 
desert. Mardana began to feel the pangs of hunger, 
and thus addressed his master : ‘ We are lost in this 
great wilderness, from which God alone can extricate 
us. Here I shall fall into the clutches of some wild 
animal which will kill and eat me.’ The Guru asked 
him to take care, and nothing should come near him. 
He further consoled him by stating that they were 
(not in a desert, as the place where God’s name was 
uttered was always inhabited. ‘ Many better men 
than we ’, said the Guru, ‘ have endured ^eater 
hardships.’ Upon this he composed the following : — 

The demigods in order to behold Thee, O God, made 
pilgrimages in sufferings and hunger. 

Jogis and Jatis^go their own ways, and don ochre-coloured 
garbs. 


^ JaHs, men vowed to perpetual continence. 



94 the SIKH RELIGION 

For Thy sake, O my Lord, the darweshes are imbued with 
love. 

Thy names are various, Thy forms are various, the 
number of Thy merits cannot be told. 

Men leaving houses and homes, palaces, elephants and 
horses go abroad. 

Priests, prophets, holy and sincere men leave the world 
to obtain salvation. 

They abandon good living, rest, happiness, and dainties ; 
they doff clothes, and wear skins. 

Imbued with Thy name they in anguish and pain become 
darweshes at Thy gate. 

They don skins, carry begging bowls, staves, and wear 
hair-tufts, sacrificial threads, and loin-cloths. 

Thou art the Lord, I am Thy player ; Nanak repre- 
senteth, what is caste ? ^ 

The Guru further remonstrated with his attendant ; 
* We cannot succeed without God’s word. Think 
of some hymn and play the rebeck.’ Mardana 
repUed that his throat was collapsing for want of 
food, and he had no strength to move, much less to 
play. The Guru then pointed to a tree and told him 
to eat his fill of its fruit, but take none with him. 
Mardana accordingly began to eat, and so much 
enjoyed the flavour of the fruit, that he thought he 
would eat what he could, and also take some with 
him, lest he might soon again find himself in a similar 
plight. 

As they continued their wanderings, Mardana 
again felt hungry, so he drew forth his stock of fruit. 
Directly he tasted it he fell down. The Guru inquired 
what had happened. Mardana confessed his dis- 
obedience of his master’s instructions in having 
brought with him and eaten some of the forbidden 
fruit. , The Guru remonstrated with him for his 
disregard of orders. The fruit was poisonous, but 
the Guru had blessed it for the occasion and made 

^ Asa. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 95 

it wholesome. The Guru put his foot on Mardana’s 
forehead as he lay stretched on the ground, and 
he at once revived. 


Chapter VIII 

Mardana had by this time had enough of travel, 
hardship, and hunger, and thus addressed his mas- 
ter : ‘ Blessings on thy devotion and thy deeds ! 
Thou art a holy man who hast abandoned the 
world, who neither eatest nor drinkest, and who 
never enterest a village. How can I remain with 
thee ? ’ The Guru asked him on what conditions he 
would change his mind and continue to accompany 
him. He replied, ‘ I will remain with thee if thou 
satisfy my hunger in the same way as thou satisfiest 
thine own; and if thou also promise not to take 
notice of anything I do.’ The Guru agreed to these 
conditions, and told him he should be happy in this 
world and the next. Mardana then fell at his feet. 

It would appear, however, that Mardana soon 
represented to the Guru the duty and propriety of 
returning home, and seeing his parents after twelve 
years’ wandering. The Guru adopted his suggestion, 
and they both directed their steps towards Talwandi. 
They halted in the forest some three miles from the 
village. Mardana asked permission to go home 
and inquire if his people were dead or alive. The 
Guru replied, * Since thou desire it, go and see thy 
people. Go also to my father Kalu’s house, but 
mention not my name. Return quickly.’ 

When Mardana reached his house he found severjd 
persons assembled there. They all affectionately 
greeted him, and said he had grown like Nanak. 
He was a great man now, and no longer the humble 
person he had been before. Mardana, having 
seen his people, proceeded to the house of Kalu, and 
sat down in his courtyard. The Guru’s mother, on 



96 THE SIKH RELIGION 

seeing him, arose, embraced him, and wept for joy. 
She asked for some account of her son Nanak. By 
that time a great crowd had assembled, and every one 
wanted to hear about him. Mardana evaded all 
inquiries, only telling people that he had been with 
Nanak. He then went away. The Guru’s mother 
at once suspected that he must have had some ob- 
ject in departing so quickly, and that her son could 
not be far off. She again arose, and taking some 
clothes and sweets for Nanak, followed Mardana 
and overtook him. She earnestly requested him to 
take her to her son. Mardana made no answer, 
but went on his way, she following. 

Nanak arose on seeing his mother, and respect- 
fully saluted her. She kissed his forehead and began 
to weep, saying, ‘ I am a sacrifice unto thee. I am 
a sacrifice unto the ground thou treadest on. Seeing 
thy face hath made me happy. Now I desire that 
thou shouldst abandon thy wanderings, abide with 
us, and turn thine attention to commerce for thy 
livelihood.’ The Guru, who was in turn dehghted 
to see his mother, called on Mardana to play the 
rebeck while he himself sang the following : — 

Drunkards abandon not stimulants, nor fishes water ; 

So God is pleasing beyond all others to those who are 
imbued with their Lord.^ 

1 am a sacrifice, I would be cut in pieces, 0 Lord, for 
Thy name. 

The Lord is a fruit-bearing tree whose name is ambrosia. 

They who have partaken of it are satisfied ; 1 am a 
sacrifice unto them. 

Why appearest Thou not unto me, 0 Lord, since Thou 
abidest with all ? 

^ These two lines are also translated — 

If drunkards obtain not stimulants, and fishes water, are pleated 
with nothing else, 

So all who are imbued with their Lord are content with none but 
Him. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 97 

How shall my thirst abate when there is a screen betweeft 
the Tank ^ and me ? 

Nanak is Thy dealer ; Thou O Lord, art his capital. 

Illusion leaveth my mind when I praise and pray to 
Thee.a 

His mother placed before Nanak the new clothes 
and sweets she had brought for him, and asked 
him to eat. He said he required no food. His 
mother inquired where he had eaten. He again 
called on Mardana to play an accompaniment to the 
following hymn : — 

o obey God's word is all sweet flavour ; to hear it is 
salt flavour ; 

To utter it with the mouth is acid flavour, and to sing 
it is spices. 

The love of the one God is thirty-six dishes ® for those on 
whom He looketh with favour. 

O mother, other viands afford ruinous happiness ; 

By eating them the body is pained, and sin entereth 
the mind. 

His mother asked him to take off the faqir's 
jacket he wore, and put on the new becoming clothes 
she had brought him. His reply was the following : — 

To be imbued with God is as red, truth and charity as 
white clothing ; 

To cut away the blackness of sin is blue, to meditate 
on God's feet is the real raiment ; 

Contentment is the waistband : Thy name, 0 Lord, is 
wealth and youth. 

Mother, other dress affordeth ruinous happiness ; 

By putting it on, the body is pained and sin entereth 
the mind. 

By this time his father Kalu had heard of Nanak’s 
arrival, and went on horseback to meet him. Nanak 

1 God. * Wadhans. 

® Indian gourmets enumerate thirty-six palatable dishes. 

SIKH. 1 H 



98 THE SIKH RELIGION 

bowed to him, and fell at his feet. Meantime Kalu 
continued to weep for joy. He asked his son to 
mount the horse on which he had come, and go home 
with him. Nanak replied that he had no need of 
a horse, and then sang the following : — 

To know Thy way, 0 God, is as horses with saddles made 
of gold. 

To pursue virtue is as quivers, arrows, bows, spears, and 
sword-belts. 

To be honourably distinguished is as bands and lances ; 
Thy favour, 0 God, is as caste for me. 

Father, other conveyance aflfordeth ruinous happiness ; 

By mounting it the body is pained, and sin entereth 
the mind. 

The father again pressed the son to return with 
him, if only for once. He said he had built a new 
house which he should like to show him after his 
long absence. Nanak ought also to visit his wife, 
and then, if he felt so disposed, he might continue 
his wanderings. Nanak replied : — 

The pleasure of the Name is as mansions and palaces ; 
Thy favouring glance, 0 Lord, is as family for me. 

To please Thee is mine empire ; to say more were alto- 
gether useless. 

Nanak, true is the King ; He decideth without taking 
others’ counsel. 

Father, other intercourse affordeth ruinous happiness ; 

By indulging in it the body is pained, and sin entereth 
the mind.^ 

r Kalu again said : ‘ My son, tell me at what thou 
art offended. If thou desire it, I will find thee another 
' wife.’ The Guru replied as follows : — 

He who made the world watcheth over it, and appointeth 
His creatures to their various duties. 

Thy gifts, 0 Lord, are as light to the mind, and as the 
moon and lamps to the body. 

1 Sri Rag* 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


99 

Thy gifts are as the moon and lamps to the body, by 
which the pain of darkness is dispelled. 

The bridal procession of attributes which accompany the 
Bridegroom who hath chosen His bride, appeareth beautiful. 

The marriage hath been performed with splendour to the 
accompaniment of the five musical instruments 

I am a sacrifice to my unchanging companions and friends. 

I have exchanged hearts with those to whom my body 
is attached. 

Why should I forget those friends with whom I have 
exchanged hearts ? 

Let those whose sight giveth pleasure be clasped to the 
heart. 

All merits and not one demerit is theirs for ever and ever. 

If one have a casket of virtues, let him extract odour 
from it. 

If our friends possess virtues, let us go and become 
partners with them. 

Let us form a partnership with virtue and abandon vice. 

Let us wear silk, go in state, and take possession of our 
arena.* 

Wherever we go, let us sit down, speak civilly, and skim 
and drink nectar. 

If one have a casket of virtues, let him extract odour 
therefrom. 

It is God Himself who acteth ; to whom should we 
complain ? No one else acteth. 

Go and complain to Him if He forget. 

If He forget, go and complain to Him ; but why should 
the Creator Himself forget ? 

He heareth, seeth, giveth His gifts without asking or 
praying for. 

The Giver, the Arranger of the world giveth His gifts, 
Nanak, and true is He. 

^ The voice, stringed instruments, wind instruments, leather instru- 
ments, as drums, and metallic instruments as cymbals, bells, &c. 
Pdnch said may also mean the five species of breath enumerated 
by Jogis. 

* That is, the company of saints. 

H 2 



100 THE SIKH RELIGION 

When He Himself acteth, to whom should we complain ? 
No one else acteth.^ 

Nanak continued to address Kalu : ‘ Father dear, 
it is God who arrangeth marriages. He maketh no 
mistake, and those whom He hath once joined He 
joineth for ever.’ By these words the Guru perhaps 
meant to establish monogamy.® The Guru’s mother 
then interposed, and asked her son to stand up and 
go with them, and cease his nonsense. He would 
obtain wealth by attending to his worldly duties. 
The Guru replied with the following hymn : — 

In the end of the night call upon the name of the Lord, 

And tents, umbrellas, pavilions, and carriages shall 
appear ready for your celestial journey. 

They are ever obtained by those who meditate on Thy 
name, 0 Lord. 

Father, I am without good works and false ; I have not 
meditated on Thy name. 

My mind is blind, led astray by superstition. 

The pleasures I have had have blossomed into pain by 
primal destiny, O mother. 

The pleasure was little ; the pain great ; in much pain 
have I passed my life. 

What separation is there from those who have separated 
from God ? and what meeting is there with those who have 
met Him ? 

Praise that Lord who made and beholdeth this play. 

By good destiny men meet God and enjoy pleasures even 
in this life. 

By evil destiny they who meet separate, O Nanak, but 
even so they meet again hy God's favour.^ 

^ Suhi Chhant. 

* Bhai Gur Das, so understood the Guru’s words when he wrote — 
Be chaste with one wife (War, vi, 8). In the Prem Sumarag, a work 
containing the supplementary teaching of Guru Gobind Singh, is 
found the injunction : ‘ Be satisfied with one wife. That befits a 
good man.’ 

• Maru. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


TOI 


Kalu, finding his arguments vain, appealed to his 
son on the score of his health and safety, and pointed 
out how regardless of them he had been. The 
following was the Guru’s reply : — 

I have no anxiety regarding death, and I have no desire 
for life. 

Thou, 0 God, art the Cherisher of all living things ; our 
breathings ^ are taken into account. 

Thou dwellest in the holy ; as it pleaseth Thee, so Thou 
decidest. 

O my soul, by uttering God’s name the heart is satisfied. 

Under the Guru’s instruction divine knowledge is obtained, 
and the burning of the heart extinguished.* 

The Guru again addressed his parents : ‘ Father 
dear, mother dear, I have returned home. I have 
been until now a hermit. Obey God’s order and let 
me again depart.’ His mother replied : ‘ My son, how 
shall I console myself, seeing that thou hast only now 
returned after an absence of twelve years ? ’ Then 
the Guru urged, ‘ Mother, agree to what I say ; con- 
solation shall come to thee.’ She then became silent, 
thinking it was useless to make further remonstrance. 


Chapter IX 

The Guru and Mardana again set out on their 
travels. It is said that they went to the west and 
crossed the rivers Ravi and Chanab, and, after a long 
circuitous route through a desert country, made 
their way again to Pak Pattan to pay another visit 
to Shaikh Brahm. They sat down to rest about four 
miles from the city. Shaikh Kamal, a pious and 
God-fearing disciple of Shaikh Brahm, who had gone 

^ Sas giras, expiration and inspiration. * Sri Rag. 



102 THE SIKH RELIGION 

into the forest for firewood, observed the Guru and 
his attendant. The latter was playing his rebeck 
and singing the following 

Thou art the tablet, 0 Lord, Thou art the pen, and Thou 
art also the writing. 

Speak of the one God ; O Nanak, why should there be 
a second ? ^ 

Shaikh Kamal went and, after obeisance, sat down 
near them, and asked to have the couplet repeated. 
This was done, and he learned it by heart. He then 
took up the firewood he had collected and went 
home. He told his master of his adventure, and 
repeated the couplet for him. Shaikh Brahm was 
highly pleased that the Guru had again visited his 
country, and he promptly proceeded to welcome 
him. ‘ After mutual salutations, the Guru thanked 
God for having again granted him a sight of Shaikh 
Brahm. After some friendly conversation, the Shaikh 
asked the Guru to explain the couplet. ‘ Nanak, 
thou sayest, “ There is only one God ; why should 
there be a second ? ” I say : — 

‘ There is one Lord and two ways ; 

Which shall I adopt, and which reject ? ’ 

The Guru replied : — 

There is but one Lord and one way ; 

Adopt one and reject the other. 

Why should we worship a second who is born and dieth ? 

Remember the one God, Nanak, who is contained in sea 
and land. 

The Muhammadan priest then said in turn : — 

Tear thy coat into tatters and wear a blanket instead ; 

Adopt a dress by which thou mayest obtain the Lord.® 

The Guru traversed this instruction : ‘ It is not 


^ Malar ki War. 


* Farid’s Sloks. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


103 


necessary for me to tear my coat or adopt a religious 
garb. Men who reside at home and work in their 
ordinary costume shall find the Lord if they fix their 
hearts on Him;’^ 

A young wife sitteth at home, her Beloved is abroad; she 
continually thinketh of Him and pineth away. 

She shall have no delay in meeting Him if she have good 
intentions.® 

Shaikh Brahm replied to the latter couplet : — 

When she was little, she enjoyed not her Spouse ; when 
she grew up she died. 

Lying in the grave she calleth out, ‘ I have not met Thee, 
O Lord.’ 3 

Guru Nanak then gave utterance to the following, 
to the effect that salvation depends upon virtue 
and not on a pleasing exterior or the possession of 
accomplishments : — 

A woman may be stupid, untidy, black, and impure- 
minded ; 

Yet, if she possess merits, she meeteth her Beloved ; 
otherwise, Nanak, the woman is to blame. 

The Shaikh then put the following questions : — 

What is that word, what that virtue, what that priceless 
spell ; 

What dress shall I wear by which I may captivate the 
Spouse ? * 

^ This reply of the Guru was subsequently versified by Guru Amar 
Das: — 

Why tear thy coat, Nanak, and why wear a blanket ? 

Seated at home thou shalt find the Lord if thine intentions be 
good. 

* Wadhans ki War. 

* Farid’s Sloks. 


3 Farid’s Sloks. 



104 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru replied : — 

Humility is the word, forbearance the virtue, and civility 
the priceless spell. 

Make these three^ thy dress, 0 sister, and the Spouse shall 
come into thy power.* 

The Spouse shall be hers who serveth Him. 

Forsaking all His other companions He will go to her. 

The Shaikh then said he wanted a knife — ‘ Give 
me such a knife as will make those who are killed 
with it acceptable to God. With the ordinary knife 
in use the lower animals are killed, and if a man’s 
throat be cut with it he becomes carrion.’ The Guru 
replied : ‘ Dear Shaikh, here it is : — 

Truth is the knife, truth is pure steel ; 

Its fashion is altogether incomparable. 

Put it on the hone of the Word, 

And fit it into the scabbard of merit. 

If any one be bled with that, O Shaikh, 

The blood of avarice will be seen to issue forth. 

If man be slaughtered with it, he shall go to meet God, 

0 Nanak, and be absorbed in the sight of Him.’® 

On hearing this the Shaikh raised his head in 
amazement and said, ‘ Well done. Thou hast seen 
God, and art dear to Him. God hath been very kind 
to me in that I have met thee. It would be rude 
to ask any further questions of those who are so 
beloved by Him.’ The Guru then volunteered the 
following : — 

There is friendship between beauty and love, alliance 
between hunger and dainty viands ; 

Companionship between greed and wealth, between a 
sleepy man and a bed and coverlet. 

^ Tewar, three pieces forming an Indian woman’s dress 
* Farid's Sloks. » Ramlcali ki War. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 105 

The anger which barketh is despised ; it is vain to worry 
with worldly occupations. 

To be silent, 0 Nanak, is good ; without the Name the 
mouth is defiled.^ 

The Shaikh asked the Guru to let him hear a 
strain in praise of the one God. ‘ My idea is said 
the Shaikh, * that adoration cannot be performed 
without two beings, that is, God and the Prophet ; 
Let me see whom thou makest man’s intercessor.’ 
The Guru called upon Mardana to play the rebeck 
and recite the first slok and pauri* of the Asa ki War. 

I am a sacrifice, Nanak, to my Guru a hundred times a 
day, 

Who without any delay made demigods out of men. 

Nanak, they who, very clever in their own estimation, 
think not of the Guru, 

Shall be left like spurious sesames in a reaped field — 

They shall be left in the field, saith Nanak, without an 
owner. 

The wretches may even bear fruit and flower, but these 
shall be as ashes within their bodies. 


God Himself created the world and Himself gave names 
to things. 

He made Maya by His power ; seated He beheld Hts 
work with delight. 

0 Creator, Thou art the Giver ; being pleased Thou 
bestowest and practisest kindness. 

Thou knowest all things ; Thou givest and takest life 
with a word.® 

Seated Thou beholdest Thy work with delight.* 

* Malar ki W§r. 

• ® A shlok in Sanskrit is a distich or couplet, but in modern Indian 
^etry it may extend to the length of an English sonnet. The word 
»a«rj is literally a ladder. In the Granth Sahib it means a stanza of 
five lines, and always follows a slok. 

® Also translated — Thou givest and takest life from the body. 

* Asa ki War. 



io6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Shaikh Brahm asked the Guru for further instruc- 
tion . The Guru then spoke on the sub j ect of humility, 
and said that as water, which resteth lowly on the 
earth, riseth under pressure into the air in sparkling 
fountains, so they who preserve a humble mind 
mount to God’s highest pinnacle. 

The Shaikh then rose to take his leave, and 
said, ‘ O Nanak, thou hast found God. There is no 
difference between Him and thee. Kindly grant 
that I too may be on good terms with Him.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ Shaikh Brahm, God will cause thy 
cargo also to arrive safe.’ By this the Guru meant 
that God would accept the Shaikh’s devotion. The 
Shaikh requested the Guru to give him a certain 
promise of this, and the Guru complied. They then 
shook hands and parted. 

The Guru next proceeded to Dipalpur. During 
his journey a Sanyasi asked him to define the word 
udas. The Guru replied : ‘ To make use of all things 
in this world and not deem them one’s own, but only 
God’s property, and ever to possess a desire to meet 
Him is udas.' 

The Guru then visited Kanganpur, Kasur, and 
Patti in the Lahore District. He thence proceeded to 
Windpur, not far from the present town of Cholha, 
in the sub-collectorate of Tarn Tar an in the Amritsar 
District. He met some Khatris who dwelt there ; 
but when they saw him dressed as a faqir and heard 
his minstrel Mardana sing, they were displeased at 
what they considered the masquerade he had adopted, 
and said to him, ‘ What dress is this which thou hast 
assumed ? Having become a faqir, thou hast dis- 
graced thy tribe, and led the world astray. Quit 
this place.’ The Guru represented that he would 
only remain for the night, and would depart next 
morning. He added that he was not leading people 
the wrong way, but guiding them to salvation. 
They replied that thejr would not allow him to 
remain for a moment in their village. He must 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


107 


depart at once, or they would forcibly expel him. 
The Guru, complying with this insulting order, said 
that the Guru’s place should ever be permanent. 

The Guru thence proceeded to a village on the 
site of the present Goindwal, where he desired to 
stay, but no one except a poor leper would receive 
him or allow him to remain there. The leper took 
him to his hut, and entertained him for the night. 
The leper thanked God that he had at last seen a 
human face, for even the lower animals had fled from 
him. When he began further to bemoan his fate, 
the Guru uttered the following : — 

My mind is ever and ever troubled. 

In many troubles my body pineth away and ever groweth 
worse. 

The body which forgetteth God’s word, 

Screameth like a real leper. 

To make many complaints is to talk folly 

Without our complaining everything is known to God, 

Who made our ears, our eyes, and our noses ; 

Who gave us tongues wherewith to speak ; 

Who preserved us in the fire of the womb ; 

And through whom the breath moveth and speaketh every- 
where. 

Worldly love, affection, and dainties 
Are all blackness and stains. 

If man depart with the brand of sin on his face. 

He will not be allowed to sit in God’s court. 

If he meet Thy favour, 0 God, he repeateth Thy name. 

By attaching himself to it he is saved ; he hath no other 
resource. 

Even if he be drowning in sin, God will still take care of 
him. 

Nanak, the True One is beneficent to all.* 

The Guru further warmed towards the leper and 
blessed him. The leper was cured of his malady, 
fell at the Guru’s feet, and began to utter the Name. 

* DhanSearL 



io8 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Guru then travelled through Sultanpur — ^his 
old head quarters when he was a Government 
official — Vairowal, and Jalalabad, until he arrived 
at a place called Kari Pathandi in the Amritsar 
District. In Kari Pathandi he made many Pathan 
converts. They used to serenade him with instru- 
mental music, interspersed with cries of ‘ Hail to 
King Nanak ! ’ The Guru there composed the fol- 
lowing : — 

He who made the world watcheth over it ; what shall we 
say, O brother ? 

He Himself who hath laid out its garden knoweth and 
acteth. 

Sing the praises of the Beloved ; sing His praises by 
which happiness is ever obtained. 

She who enjoyeth not her Spouse with love shall after- 
wards repent. 

She shall wring her hands, and beat her head as the night 
passeth away. 

She shall not be able to repent when the whole night is at 
an end ; 

But she may again enjoy her Husband when it cometh to 
her turn.^ 

The wife whom the Spouse hath chosen is better than I. 

I have not her merits ; whom shall I blame ? 

I will go and ask the female companions who have enjoyed 
their Spouse ; 

I will touch their feet, implore them, and induce them to 
show me the way. 

Nanak, she who obeyeth her Spouse’s order, applieth fear 
as her sandal. 

And performeth the incantation of merits, shall find her 
Beloved. 

She who meeteth Him with her heart shall continue to 
meet Him ; that is called a real meeting. 

However much one may i^ir« it, a meeting is not efli^^d 
by words. 


^ That is, in a future birth. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


109 


Metal blendeth with metal and love hasteneth to love. 

Know the Guru’s favour, and thou shalt find the Fearless 
One. 

A garden of betel may be in the house, but the donkey 
knoweth not its merits. 

When one is a judge of perfume, then may one appreciate 
flowers. 

He who drinketh nectar, ^ Nanak, putteth an end to his 
doubts and transmigration ; 

He easily blendeth with God, and obtaineth the undying 
dignity.* 

The Guru continued his wanderings and visited 
Batala in the Gurdaspur District. Thence he pro- 
ceeded a second time to Saiyidpur, where he again 
visited Lalo. Lalo complained to him of the oppres- 
sion of the Pathans. The Guru replied that their 
dominion should be brief, as Babar was on his way 
to the conquest of India. The Guru then addressed 
the following threnody to his host : — 

As the word of the Lord cometh to me, so I make known, 
O Lalo — 

Bringing a bridal procession of sin, Babar hath hasted 
from Kabul and demandeth wealth as his bride, 0 Lalo. 

Modesty and religion have vanished ; falsehood marcheth 
in the van, O Lalo. 

The occupation of the Qazis and the Brahmans is gone ; 
the devil readeth the marriage service,® O Lalo. 

Musalman women read the Quran, and in suffering call 
upon God, O Lalo. 

Hindu women whether of high or low caste, meet the same 
fate as they, O Lalo. 

They sing the paean of murder, 0 Nanak, and smear 
themselves with the saffron of blood. 

Nanak singeth the praises of the Lord in the city of corpses, 
and uttereth this commonplace — 

^ He who performs heartfelt devotion. * Tilang, Ashtapadi. 

* This refers to the licentiousness of Babar 's army. 



no 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


He who made men assigned them different positions ; He 
sitteth apart alone and regardeth them. 

True is the Lord, true His decision, true the justice He 
meteth out as an example. 

Bodies shall be cut like shreds of cloth ; Hindustan will 
remember what I say. 

They shall come in ’78, depart in ’97, and then shall 
rise another disciple of a hero.^ 

Nanak uttereth the word of the True One, and will pro- 
claim the truth at the True One’s appointed time.* 

Lalo asked the Guru what he meant by saying 
that God had assigned men different positions. The 
Guru replied as follows : — 

God can cause lions, hawks, ke^els, and falcons to eat 
grass ; 

And the animals which eat grass He can cause to eat meat 
— such a custom can He establish. 

He can cause hills to appear in rivers, and unfathomable 
rivers in sandy deserts. 

He can appoint a worm to sovereignty, and reduce an 
army to ashes. 

What wonder would it be if God caused to live without 
breath all the animals which live by breathing ? 

Nanak, as it pleaseth the True One, so He giveth us 
sustenance.® 

A Brahman came to the Guru, offered him a basket 
of fruit, and said, ‘ My frieni thou art uttering 
hymns of wrath.' The Guru replied, 'Remain not 
here ; there is a pool three miles distant ; go thither 
with thy family. All who remain here will be put 

^ That is, the Mughals shall come in Sambat 1578, and depart 
in Sambat 1597 (a. d. i 540 )* The Sambat year is fifty -seven years in ad- 
vance of annus Domini. The departing monarch viras Humayun. The 
disciple of a hero is understood to be Sher Shah Sflri, who dispossessed 
him. This line appears to be an answer to a question put to the 
Guru by Lalo. 

* Tilang. a Majh ki War. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


III 


to death.’ The Brahman acted on his advice. 
After some days Babar assaulted and destroyed the 
city. He also devastated the neighbouring villages. 
There was a general massacre of the people, and 
Pathan as well as Hindu habitations were plundered 
and razed to the ground.^ 

The lives of the Guru and Mardana were spared, 
probably because they were strangers, but they 
were imprisoned and placed under the superinten- 
dence of Mir Khan, an officer of Babar’s army. 
Mir Khan, on seeing them, ordered, ‘ Take away 
these slaves to work,’ The Guru was condemned to 
carry loads on his head, and Mardana to do the work 
of a groom. The Guru upon this uttered the fol- 
lowing : — 

I am a purchased slave, my name is Lucky. 

I have sold myself in the shop for God’s word ; where He 
placed me, there am I placed. 

What cleverness hath Thy slave ? 

He cannot obey the Lord’s order. 

My mother was a slave, my father a slave, I was born a 
slave. 

My mother danced, my father sang, I perform Thy service, 
O King.^ 

If Thou drink I will fetch Thee water, 0 Lord ; if Thou 
eat I will grind Thee corn. 

I will fan Thee, I will shampoo Thy limbs, and continue to 
repeat Thy name. 

Saith Nanak, ungrateful is Thy slave ; if Thou pardon 
him, it will be to Thy glory. 

In the beginning, in every age. Lord of mercy, Bestower, 
without Thee salvation is not obtained.® 

When the Guru had finished this hymn, Mardana 
saw some women weeping and shrieking as they 
passed along, and asked his master what had hapt 
pened to them. The Guru told Mardana to play th^ 

® That is, I am a hereditary servant of God. * Maru. 



II2 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


rebeck. Mardana replied that he could not do so, 
as he was holding a horse. The Guru bade him 
utter ‘ Wah Guru ’ and let go the horse. Mardana 
obeyed and played the Rag Asa, to which the Guru 
sang the following hymn : — 

They who wore beautiful tresses and the partings of whose 
hair were dyed with vermilion, 

Have their locks now shorn with the scissors, and dust is 
thrown upon their heads. 

They dwelt in their private chambers ; now they cannot 
find a seat in public — 

Hail, Father ! hail ! 

0 Primal Being, Thy limit is not known ; Thou makest 
and beholdest the different phases of existence — 

When they were married, they appeared beautiful near 
their spouses ; 

They came in their sedans adorned with ivory ; 

Water was waved round their heads,^ and glittering fans 
over them. 

They had hundreds of thousands waiting on them sitting, 
and hundreds of thousands waiting on them standing. 

Eating coco-nuts and dates they sported on their couches ; 

But now chains are on their necks, and broken are their 
strings of pearls. 

The wealth and beauty which afforded them pleasure have 
now become their bane. 

The order was given to the soldiers to take and dishonour 
them. 

If it please God, He giveth greatness ; and if it please Him, 
He giveth punishment. 

If they had thought of Him before, why should they have 
received punishment ? 

But they had lost all thought of God in joys, in spectacles, 
and in pleasures. 

When Babar’s rule was proclaimed no Pathan prince ate 
his food. 

^ The bridegroom’s mother or elder sister waves water around the 
head of a bride and then drinks it, so as to take all her ills on herself. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


113 

Some lost their five times of prayer, others their hours of 
worship. 

How shall Hindu women now bathe and apply frontal 
marks without their sacred squares ? 

They who never thought of Ram^ are not now allowed 
even to mention Khuda.* 

One may return to her home ; another may meet and in- 
quire after the safety of a relcUion ; 

But others are destined to sit and weep in pain. 

What pleaseth God, O Nanak, shall happen ; what is man ? ^ 

After this, Mir Khan, the governor of the jail, 
arrived. He saw that the Guru’s bundle was raised 
a cubit over his head without any apparent support, 
and that the horse entrusted to Mardana followed 
him while he played sacred music on his rebeck. The 
governor communicated this information to Babar. 
The Emperor replied that, if he had known the city 
contained such holy men, he would not have 
destroyed it. At the governor’s suggestion he went 
to the prison, which was two miles distant. There 
were Pathan and Hindu women huddled pro- 
miscuously together, grinding corn. The Guru had 
also been supplied with a hand-mill for the same 
purpose. It is said that the mill revolved of its own 
accord while he put in the corn. The Emperor 
addressed the Guru, but he was in a trance, thinking 
of the slaughter of his unoffending countrymen. On 
awaking he uttered the following hymn, which, 
however, is not found in the Granth Sahib : — 

^ The Hindu name of God. 

2 The Muhammadan name of God, which Hindus shrink from 
pronouncing. 

^ Compare — 

God of our fathers! what is man, 

That thou towards him with hand so various. 

Or might I say conlrarious, 

Temper'st thy providence through his short course. 

Not evenly, as thou rulest 

The angelic orders, and inferior creatures mute. 

Irrational and brute ? 


SIKH. 


I 


Milton, Samson Agonisies. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


114 

No one can kill him, 0 Kind One, whom Thou preservest. 

How can Thy praises be numbered ? Thou savest countless 
beings. 

Preserve me, O Beloved, preserve me ! I am Thy slave. 

My true Lord pervadeth sea and land, the nether and the 
upper regions. 

Thou didst preserve J aidev and N ama, Thy beloved saints — 

Thou didst save those on whom Thou didst bestow Thy 
name — 

Thou didst preserve Sain, Kabir, and Trilochan who loved 
Thy name. 

Thou didst preserve Ravdas, the tanner, who is numbered 
among Thy saints.^ 

Nanak, who is without honour or family, uttereth suppli- 
cation. 

Extricate him, O Lord, from the ocean of the world, and 
make him Thine own. 

It is said that the Emperor, on hearing this, fell at 
Nanak’ s feet, and declared that God appeared on 
his face. Upon this all the courtiers saluted Nanak. 
The Emperor asked him to accept a present from 
him. The Guru replied that he wanted nothing for 
himself, but he requested that the captives of 
Saiyidpur might be released. Upon this the Empercar 
ordered that they should be set free and their pror 
perty restored to them. The captives, however, 
refused to depart without the Guru. He was then 
allowed to go with them, and they went to their 
homes in the city. They found that all the people 
who had remained in Saiyidpur had been put to 
death. Mardana told his master that it had all hap- 
pened as God had willed it. Upon this the Guru, 
to the accompaniment of Mardana’s rebeck, sang 
the following lamentation : — 


‘ An account of the saints mentioned in this hymn, with their com- 
positions contained in the Granth S^ib, will be given in the final 
volume of this work. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 115 

Where are those sports, those stables, and those horses ? 
Where those bugles and clarions ? 

Where are those who buckled on their swords and were 
mighty in battle ? where those scarlet uniforms ? 

Where those mirrors and fair faces ? we see them no longer 
here. 

This world is Thine, O Lord of the earth. 

In one ghari Thou establishest and disestablishest ; Thou 
distributest wealth as Thou pleasest. 

Where are those houses, those mansions, and those palaces? 
where those beautiful seraglios ? 

Where are those easy couches and those women a sight of 
whom banished sleep ? 

Where is that betel, those betel-sellers, and those fair 
ones ? They have vanished. 

For wealth many are ruined ; this wealth hath disgraced 
many. 

It is not amassed without sin, and it departeth not with 
the dead. 

Him whom the Creator destroyeth He first depriveth of 
virtue. 

Millions of priests tried hy their miraculous power to 
restrain the emperor when they heard of his approach. 

He burned houses, mansions, and palaces ; he cut princes 
to pieces, and had them rolled in the dust. 

No Mughal hath become blind ; no priest hath wrought 
a miracle. 

There was a contest between the Mughals and Pathans *, 
the sword was wielded in the battle. 

One side aimed and discharged their guns, the other also 
handled their weapons : 

They whose letter ^ hath been tom in God’s court must 
die, my brethren. 

There were the wives of Hindus, of Turks, of Bhattis, and 
of Rajputs. 


^ In India when announcing the death of a relation it is usual for 
the writer to tear the top of the letter. The reference here is to that 
custom. 

I 2 



Ii6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The robes of some were torn from head to foot ; the 
dwellings of others were their places of cremation. 

How did they whose husbands came not home pass the 
night ? 

The Creator acteth and causeth others to act ; to whom 
shall man complain ? 

Misery and happiness are according to Thy pleasure ; to 
whom shall we go to cry ? 

The Commander is pleased issuing His orders ; Nanak, 
man obtaineth what is allotted him.^ 

A propos of the change of circumstances in India 
the Guru uttered the following : — 

God hath given fixed time for all events, and fully estab- 
lished the nine regions, the seven seas, the fourteen 
worlds,® the three qualities, and the four ages. 

He put four lamps ® one by one into the hands of the four 
ages. 

O kind God, such is Thy power. 

The dwellers at every hearth are Thy slaves, and religion 
is their ruler. 

The earth is Thy cooking-pot. Thou gavest once for all ; 
destiny is Thy storekeeper. 

Instigated by their hearts^ men lose patience and beg 
again and again to their ruin. 

Covetousness is a black dungeon, demerits the fetters on 
the feet. 

Wealth ever beateth the soul with its mallet, while sin 
sitteth as judge. 

Man shall be either good or bad, 0 Lord, as Thou lookest 
on him. 

^ Asa. 

® The Hindus and the Muhammadans agree in believing that there 
are fourteen worlds, seven above and seven, including the earth itself, 
below. According to the Hindus these worlds emerged from the 
mundane egg when divided into two equal parts. 

8 The Veds. 

* Narad the Muni is here understood by the gyanis to mean the 
human heart. Some further account of Narad will be given. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


117 

The Primal Being is now called Allah ; the turn of the 
Shaikhs hath come. 

There is a tax on the shrines of the gods ; such is the 
practice established. 

There are ablution-pots, calls to prayer, five daily prayers, 
prayer-carpets, and God appeareth dressed in blue.^ 

In every house all say ‘ Mian ’ ; ® your language hath been 
changed. 

Since Thou, who art Lord of the earth hast appointed 
Bahar a Mir,® what power have we ? 

In the four directions men make Thee obeisance, and 
Thy praises are uttered in every house. 

The profit which is obtained from pilgrimages, repeating 
the Simritis,* and bestowing alms all day long. 

Is, 0 Nanak, obtained in one ghari by remembering the 
Name which conferreth greatness.® 

The Hindus and the Musalmans who returned to 
Saiyidpur began to dispose of their dead, and there 
was weeping and mourning in every house. People 
said, ‘ Such and such was the deceased.’ Upon this 
the Guru fell into a trance, and uttered the following 
hymn : — 

As herdsmen stay for a short time in the pasture-ground,® so 
do men stay in this world. 

Men by the exercise of falsehood build houses for themselves. 

Awake, awake, ye sleepers ; lo ! the soul the dealer 
departeth. 

If ye are to remain here for ever, then build houses. 

The body shall fall and the soul depart, if any one desire 
to know the truth. 

* The Muhammadans frequently wear blue clothes, a custom which 
has descended from the ancient Egyptians. 

® Mian, a title of respect addressed to Muhammadans. In the hill 
districts of India it is given to the sons of RajpQt princes. 

® Mir, a lord or master. 

® Simritis, the traditional ceremonial and legal institutes of the 
Hindus. The principal Simritis are twenty-seven in number. 

® Basant Ashtapadi. 

® This refers to the nomadic life which prevailed around the Guru’s 
natal village. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


Ii8 

Why criest thou ‘ Alas ! alas 1 ’ ^ God is and shall be. 

Ye weep for others, hut who will weep for you ? 

Ye worry with worldly occupations, my brethren, and 
practise falsehood. 

. The dead hear not at all ; ye only cry to be heard of others. 

He who laid them to sleep, Nanak, will awake them. 

If man know his own home in God, then shall he not sleep. 

If any one know of any one at his departure taking any- 
thing with him, 

Then let him with open eyes amass wealth — know and 
consider this. 

Do thy dealing ; gain thine object ; be not sorry here- 
after. 

Thou shalt be known as a true dealer if thou take profit 
with thee. 

Sow the seed of truth in the soil of honesty ; in that way 
practise tillage. 

Forsake vice, practise virtue, so shalt thou obtain the 
Real Thing. 

If it be God’s favour, man shall meet the true Guru, 
understand his instruction. 

Repeat the Name, hear the Name, and deal in the Name. 

As is the profit so the loss ; that is the way of the world. 

What pleaseth Him, O Nanak, is my glory 

One day Mardana took it into his head to ask the 
Guru to explain the cause of the Saiyidpur massacre, 
and said, ‘ Sir, some Pathans have done wrong ; but 
why have so many been killed on their account ? ’ 
The Guru pointed out a tree, and told Mardana to 
go and sleep under it. When he awoke, the Guru 
would give him an answer. Mardana accordingly 
went and lay down to sleep under the tree. A drop 
of honey fell on his naked breast. As he slept, ants 
came to drink it, and the sleeper half unconsciously 
crushed them to death with his hand. The Guru 
asked him on awaking what he had done. He replied 

^ Ohi, chit There is a pun on the word ohi. It means, Alas! and 
He (God) is. * Asa Ashtapadi. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK iig 

that one insect had bitten him, and so he had killed 
them all. The Guru replied, ‘ It is in that very way 
the people of Saiyidpur were killed.’ Upon this 
Mardana fell at his feet, and the remnant of the 
inhabitants of Saiyidpur became his disciples. 

After this the Guru returned to the Emperor’s 
camp with the object of obtaining another interview 
with him. He visited the prison and sang hymns 
for the prisoners whose treatment he deplored. Under 
the influence of such feelings he composed the 
following : — 

Babar ruled over Khurasan and hath terrified Hindustan. 

The Creator taketh no blame to Himself ; it was Death 
disguised as a Mughal who made war on us. 

When there was such slaughter and lamentation, didst 
not Thou, 0 God, feel pain ? 

Creator, Thou belongest to all. 

If a t 5 nrant slay a tyrant, one is not angry ; 

But if a ravening lion fall on a herd, its master ^ should 
show his manliness. 

The dogs of Lodi * have spoiled the priceless inheritance ; 
when they are dead no one will regard them. 

0 God, Thou Thyself joinest and Thou Thyself separatest 
— ^lo ! this is Thy greatness. 

If any one give himself a great name and enjoy himself 
to his heart’s content. 

In God’s view he is as a worm which nibbleth corn ; 

But he who while alive is dead, may gain something, 
0 Nanak, by repeating the Name.® 

When Babar had heard this hymn, he ordered the 
Guru to be sent for. When the Guru appeared, the 
Emperor asked him to sing the hymn again, and 


> The master of Hindustan at the time was Sultan Ibrahim Lodi. 
He only met Babar’s force at Panipat, where he was defeated. 

® The Pathan dynasty of the Lodis who ruled in India prior to the 
advent of the Mughal Babar. 

* Asa. 



120 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


the Guru did so. Upon this, it is said, Babar’s brain 
opened for the reception of spiritual truths. He 
praised the Guru, and opening his bhang-pouch, 
offered him some. The Guru replied that he had 
already taken bhang whose intoxication would never 
subside. Babar asked what bhang that was. The 
Guru replied with the following hymn : — 

0 God, fear of Thee is my bhang, my heart its pouch ; 

1 am an intoxicated hermit. 

My hands are the cup ; it is for a sight of Thee, 0 God, 
I hunger. 

And ever beg at Thy door — 

For a sight of Thee I crave. 

I beg at Thy door ; grant me Thine alms. 

Saffron, flowers, musk, gold, and sandal are all applied 
to the body ; 

So the bright perfume of the saints rendereth all souls 
fragrant. 

No one calleth clarified butter or silk impure ; ’ 

Such is a saint in regard to caste. 

May Nanak obtain alms at the doors 

Of those who are imbued with Thy name and continue 
to love Thee 1 * 

The Emperor was so pleased with the Guru that 
he asked him to accompany him. The Guru 
would at first only promise to remain one day 
with him, but, on being pressed to remain three days, 
at last consented. The Guru was always distressed as 
he looked towards the prisoners. For the third time 
he sang the preceding hymn, and then fell into 
a trance and became unconscious. The Emperor 
stood over him, and asked the bystanders what had 
happened. They replied that the faqir, on beholding 
God’s wrath, was in suffering, and had fallen into a 
trance. Babar became alarmed for the Guru’s safety, 
and asked the people to pray to God for his re- 

^ That is, no one despises them. 


* Tilang. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


121 


covery. Upon this the Guru stood up, and there 
then shone such light as if a thousand suns had 
arisen. Babar saluted, and asked the Guru to be 
gracious unto him. The Guru replied, ‘ If thou, 
O Emperor, desire kindness, set all thy captives 
free.’ He agreed, on one condition — that the Guru 
should promise that his empire should continue from 
generation to generation. The Guru replied, ‘ Thine 
empire shall remain for a time.’ The Emperor on 
this ordered that all his prisoners should be clothed 
with robes of honour, a matter which gave great 
pleasure and satisfaction to the Guru. The Emperor 
asked the Guru for instruction suitable to his position. 
The Guru said, ‘ Deliver just judgements, reverence 
holy men, forswear wine and gambling. The monarch 
who indulgeth in these vices shall, if he survive, 
bewail his misdeeds. Be merciful to the vanquished, 
and worship God in spirit and in truth.’ 

- At the final parting, the Emperor pressed the Guru 
to embrace Islam, which recognized only one God, 
as the Guru himself had been preaching, so he would 
not have far to go on his spiritual journey and his 
progress to salvation. Moreover, on embracing Islam 
he would have the advantage of the mediation of 
God’s holy and last prophet Muhammad. The Guru 
replied : — 

^ There are hundreds of thousands of Muhammads, but 
only one God. 

The Unseen is true and without anxiety. 

Many Muhammads stand in His court. 

So numberless they cannot be reckoned. 

Prophets have been sent and come into the world. 

Whenever He pleaseth He hath them arrested and 
brought before Him. 

The slave Nanak hath ascertained 

That God alone is pure and all else impure. 

The Emperor, instead of being incensed at this 
outspoken language, invited the Guru to ask him 



122 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


a favour. The Guru replied to the accompaniment 
of Mardana’s rebeck : — 

It is the one God Who hath commissioned me. 

Every one partaketh of His Gifts. 

He who looketh for human support 

Loseth both this world and the next. 

There is but one Giver, the whole world are beggars. 

They who forsake Him and attach themselves to others 
lose all their honour. 

Kings and Emperors are all made by Him. 

There is none equal to Him. 

Saith Nanak, Hear, Emperor Babar, 

He who beggeth of thee is a fool. 

Chapter X 

The Guru then departed for Pasrur, and thence 
to Sialkot, the fortress of the Sial tribe, now a can- 
tonment in the northern part of the Pan jab. He 
rested under a wild caper tree, which still exists outside 
the city. Having taken refreshment, he sent Mardana 
to the market-place for a paisa, or a farthing’s worth 
of truth and a paisa worth of falsehood. Nobody 
understood what the messenger meant till Mardana 
reached Mula, who was a Karar, or petty shopkeeper. 
The latter said that death was true and life false. 
Mardana returned with this message to the Guru. 
Upon this a great friendship sprang up between the 
Guru and Mula, and Mula afterwards accompanied 
him to Kabul. On a subsequent occasion when Guru 
Nanak and Mardana visited Sialkot, Mardana went 
to Mula. His wife, thinking her husband would 
again leave her, concealed him, and told Mardana to 
say he was not at home. In his concealment, he was 
bitten by a snake and died. On this Guru Nanak 
composed the following : — 

Friendship with Karars is false, and false is its foundation. 

Mula saw not whence death would come to him.^ 

^ Additional Sloks of Guru Nanak. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 1^3 

When his work was accomplished in Sialkot, the 
Guru proceeded to the south of the Pan jab as far 
as Mithankot (in the present district of Dera Ghazi 
Khan), where Mian Mitha, a famous Muhammadan 
priest, resided. The Guru took up his quarters in 
a garden near the town. When Mian Mitha heard 
of the Guru’s arrival he said, ‘ Nanak is a good faqir ; 
but, if I meet him, I will squeeze the juice out of 
him as if he were a lemon. Mardana, when reporting 
his speech to the Guru, said, ‘ Mian Mitha is thine 
automaton, and will play as thou causest him to 
play.' Mian Mitha continued his boasting : ‘ I will 
go to see Nanak, and, if I meet him, I will take 
the cream off him as I would skim milk.’ Mian 
Mitha met the Guru and, after saluting him in the 
Muhammadan fashion, sat down. He challenged the 
Guru by the following slok : — 

The first name is that of God, the second that of the 
Prophet. 

0 Nanak, if thou repeat the Creed, ^ thou shalt find 
acceptance in God’s court. 

The Guru replied : — 

The first name is that of God ; how many prophets are 
at His gate ! 

0 Shaikh, form good intentions, and thou shalt find 
acceptance in God’s court. 

The Guru continued : ‘ Mian Mitha, at God’s gate 
there is no room for a prophet. He who dweUeth 
there is God alone.’ Mian Mitha then put the Guru 
two questions : / How can a lamp burn without oil ? 
and, How shall man obtain a seat in God’s court ? ’ 

The Guru replied as follows : — 

Act according to the Quran and thy sacred books. 

Put the wick of fear into thy body ; 

Bum in it the knowledge of truth ; 


^ That is, if thou become a Muhammadan. 



f*24 THE SIKH RELIGIO 

Thus shall thy lamp burn without oil. 

Make such a light, and thou shalt find the Lord. 
When God’s words leave an impression on man 
And service is performed, happiness is obtained. 
All worlds come and go : 

While abiding in this world perform worship ; 
Thus shalt thou obtain a seat in God’s court. 
And, saith Nanak, triumphantly swing thine arm.^ 


Mian Mitha then put to the Guru the question con- 
tained in the first line of the following hymn. He 
also inquired the condition of the souls of the wicked 
after death. The Guru replied as follows : — 

‘ My brother, salam alaikum ! for God’s sake tell the 
truth ; how shall man obtain distinction in God’s court ? ’ 

As man soweth so shall he reap ; he shall eat what he 
obtaineth from the Commander. 

Nanak, without the true Name man shall be bound and 
endure suffering. 

Praise be to the Creator ; when man goeth down to 
the wretched dark grave, God’s power shall be manifested. 

The angels, the heralds of the Almighty, shall come with 
His orders. 

They shall hold quivers, maces, battle-axes, two-edged 
swords, bows, 

Lances, and shields made of fire ; and put chains on 
men’s necks. 

By God’s order they shall bind and lead away the back- 
biter as well as the man without a priest. 

Nanak, the true Name, the source of consolation in this 
last age, shall procure man’s acceptance in God’s court. 

Ye fear lions, jackals, and snakes; but they shall make 
their dwellings in your graves. 

Oxen shall root up your graves, and even your enemies’ 
hatred of you shall cool. 


^ Sri Rag, 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 125 

Brethren, friends, and lovers read the fatiha,^ and say 
prayers for the defarted. 

Nanak, such things are false, and God alone is true. 

The sinners who have committed transgressions are bound 
and led away. 

Their luggage of sins is so heavy that they cannot lift it. 

The steep road ahead is dark, while the executioner 
walketh behind them. 

In front is a sea of fire ; how shall they cross it ? 

Ravens stand on men’s skulls, and peck at them fast 
as a shower of sparks. 

Nanak, where shall man escape when the punishment is 
by God’s order ? 

The eyes of the sinful shall be tom out ; they shall be- 
come blind, and terrible darkness prevail. 

Their ears shall be pressed as if they were the sockets of 
oil-presses,* and storms of filth shall assail their noses. 

Their tongues shall be cut out for breaking their promises 
and forgetting the True One. 

They shall cry aloud when their skulls are burning in 
the fire. 

No one can save the ignorant man who is covetous and 
hath no priest ; 

But they whose demerits are pardoned through their 
merits shall be, O Nanak, of the elect. 

As sesame is heated and pressed, or cotton carded by 
means of a thong, so shall sinners he punished. 

Like paper they shall be beaten with mallets, and put 
into presses ; 

They shall be heated like iron ; they shall bum and cry 
aloud ; 

The wretched beings’ heads shall be taken up with tongs 
and placed on anvils, 

^ The introductory prayer of the QuraiK Its secondary meaning 
is prayers offered up for a deceased person. 

* The Indian oil-press is a primitive machine. A beam is made 
to revolve in a socket in which the seeds to be pressed are placed. 
The meaning here is, that the ears shall be tortured as if the beams of 
oil-presses revolved in them as sockets. 



126 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


On which they shall be beaten with hammers in time 
according to the smith’s ^ lead. 

Nanak, without the true Name they shall have no rest 
either in this world or the next. 

Iron spikes shall be driven into their feet, and the sun 
shall burn their heads. 

They who are captivated with the strange woman’s flesh, 
shall lose their manhood and their honour ; 

They shall be bound to a heated pillar, and no one will 
go near them ; 

They shall be unloosed and again tied to it ; they shall 
repent and implore pity — 

Everybody, Nanak, is an enemy of the sinner — 

They shall be put into a furnace and bodkins of fire 
thrust into their eyes ; 

They shall be burnt by sand under which fire hath been 
kindled ; 

They shall be roasted in a caldron like rice, and shall 
then crackle and make a report. 

God Himself pardoneth, O Nanak ; whom else shall we 
address ? 

As the juice of sugar-cane is expressed by putting great 
weight on it. 

So man is weighed down by eating, drinking, dressing, 
and pleasures which degrade his mind. 

An account shall be demanded from the soul which hath 
dealt in such things. 

Feet and legs perform the duties the soul ordereth them. 

The tongue which tasted sinful savours shall stand up in 
court and cry out against the soul ; 

The ears shall also depose that it is the soul which is false 
and deceitful. 

The nose and eyes shall also plead not guilty, and it is 
the poor soul which shall suffer. 

The soul under arrest in Death’s court ^leadeth, ‘ It is 
the senses which have led the whole world astray : 

‘ The senses united have thrown man into misery as the 
smith puttfth iron on the anvil.* 

^ Dharmraj, the Pluto of Greek mythology. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 127 

Nanak, he who meeteth not the true Guru and obtaineth 
not divine knowledge, shall find no rest in this world or 
the next. 

The soul shall be filed seventy times like an arrow ; 

It shall be melted like gold in a mould ; O soul, thou 
shalt suffer for what thou hast done. 

The soul shall have to bear a prodigious saddle and be 
driven like a steed. 

Nanak, it shall be bound by Death, and have to suffer 
transmigration again and again. 

How many enemies shall it have on sea and land 1 the 
forests and glades shall cause it to suffer. 

Every house shall bear it enmity ; Nanak, the real thing 
is to meditate on the Eternal. 

Death with the three bloodshot and terrible eyes shall 
lie in wait for the soul. 

The whole world is Death’s provender ; merciless is the 
god of death. 

He seizeth men, Nanak, and hurrieth them away in 
obedience to the Commander. 

My body is before Thee; Thou art Master; Thou mayest 
preserve or destroy it. 

There shall be no mother, father, kinsman, wife, or 
brother. 

Son, or wealth to assist us ; how shall we have conso- 
lation ? 

There shall be no quiver, or bow, or shield, or sword 
to protect us, 

But a seething caldron day and night; consider this 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

Make honesty thy steed, truth thy saddle, continence 
thine equestrian armour ; 

The five virtues ^ thine arrows, and truth thy sword and 
shield. 

Nanak, pious men who have truth in their hearts, shall 
obtain honour in God’s court. 

^ Contentment, compassion, piety, patience, morality. The list 
of the five virtues is somewhat arbitrary. Truth is generally included 
in them, but here the Guru makes it a separate Virtue. 



128 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Brahma who came into the world repeating the Veds 
cannot describe God. 

What is poor Krishan who by God’s order descended upon 
earth ? 

Shiv and countless gods and goddesses standing at Thy 
gate praise Thee. 

He who turneth from God shall pine away and die ; the 
True One is ever the Pardoner.^ 

Mian Mitha then spoke : ‘ What is that one 

Name which thou praisest so much ? ’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ Hath any one ever known the worth of 
that Name ? ’ Mian Mitha asked him to be good 
enough to explain it to him. The Guru then took 
his arm, led him aside, and said to him, ‘ Shaikh, 
hearest thou the Name of the one God ? ’ While 
they were speaking, the name of the Prophet vanished 
amid the sounds of divine ecstasy, and when they 
looked again there appeared instead of it only a heap 
of ashes. Then came a voice from heaven which only 
repeated ‘ Allah ’, God’s Arabic name. Upon this 
Shaikh Mitha got up and kissed the Guru’s feet. 
The Guru then fell into a trance, and in that state 
gave utterance to the following : — 

Nasihat Nama* 

The present are favoured ; the absent are not. 

Faith is a friend, want of faith an infidel ; 

Pride is ruin, wrath is imlawful ; 

Concupiscence is Satan, conceit is infidelity ; 

The slanderer’s face is black. 

The man without faith is unclean ; he who is tender- 
hearted is pure. 

Knowledge is gentleness. The non-avaricious are holy ; 
the avaricious are impatient. 

The honest man hath a bright, the ungrateful man a 
yellow face. 

^ Banno’s Granth Sahib. It must be noted that this hymn is not 
generally accepted by the Sikhs. 

* Instruction. This too is not found in the Granth Sshib. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 129 

Truth is heaven, falsehood is hell. 

Mildness is victuals. 

Force is oppression, justice is pure. 

God^s f raises are ablutions, the call to prayer is noise. 

Theft is greed, adultery uncleanness. 

Patience is humility, impatience deceit. 

The right way is that of spiritual advisers ; the wrong 
way is for those who have none. 

Compassion is wealth, want of compassion useless. 

The sword is for warriors, justice for monarchs. 

He who knoweth and causeth others to know these 
things, 

Is, O Nanak, called a wise man. 

Upon this the Guru and Mian Mitha separated. 

Chapter XI 

The Guru proceeded to the river Ravi and thence 
to Lahore. The Lahore territory was then farmed 
from the Emperor by a millionaire Khatri, whose 
name was Duni Chand. He was performing the 
ceremony of shradh ^ for his father, when he heard of 
the devout Nanak’s arrival. He took the Guru to 
his house, and treated him with grgat affection. 
When everything was ready for the anniversary feast, 
Duni Chand began to feed the Brahmans. The Guru, 
on being summoned, asked what the matter was. 
Duni Chand repUed that it was his father’s shradh, 
and that he had fed one hundred Brahmans in his 
name. The Guru replied, ‘ It is now two days since 
thy father hath eaten anything, and yet thou sayest 
thou hast fed one hundred Brahmans for him.’ Duni 
Chand asked where his father was. The Guru replied 
that he had become incarnate in a wolf, which was 
now in a clump of trees six miles distant. The reason 

^ Shrddhs are oblations of cakes and libations of water made to the 
spirits of deceased ancestors : Vide Monier Williams’s Indian Wisdom, 
passim. 


SIKH. I 


K 



130 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


his father’s soul had entered a wolf was, that while 
he was in human birth he had coveted meat which 
a Sikh was cooking, and had died in that desire. 

The Guru, on seeing several flags over Duni Chand’s 
door, asked what they were. It was explained that 
each flag denoted a lakh of rupees which Duni 
Chand had acquired. On this the Guru gave him 
a needle, and told him to keep it until he asked for 
it in the next world. Duni Chand took the needle 
to his wife, and told her to put it by for the purpose 
indicated. She believed him crazed, and asked how 
a needle could go to the next world. She accordingly 
charged him to return it to the Guru. Duni Chand 
took the needle with his wife’s message to the Guru, 
who said, ‘If such a small and light thing as a needle 
cannot go to the next world, how can thy wealth reach 
there ? ’ Upon this Duni Chand fell at his feet, and 
prayed him to tell him by what means his wealth 
should reach the next world. The Guru replied, ‘ Give 
some of thy wealth in God’s name, feed the poor, and 
thy wealth shall accompany thee.’ Upon this Duni 
Chand distributed seven lakhs of treasure, for he 
understood that disobedience to the Guru’s order 
would militate against his salvation. He then 
became a disciple of the Guru, and began to repeat 
the Name. Guru Nanak uttered the following on 
the occasion : — 

False are kings, false their subjects, false the whole 
world ; 

False are mansions, false palaces, false those who dwell 
therein ; 

False is gold, false silver, false he who weareth them ; 

False the body, false raiment, false peerless beauty ; 

False husbands, false wives ; they pine away and l^ome 
dust.' 

Man who is false loveth what is false, and fmrgetteth the 
Creator. 

' Instead of chhSr, dust, the Grantb SSbib has khwir, despised. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


131 

With whom contract friendship ? The whole world passeth 
away. 

False is sweetness, false honey, in falsehood shiploads are 
drowned — 

Nanak humbly asserteth— Except Thee, 0 God, ever 5 rthing 
is thoroughly false.^ 

The Gum went in a north-east direction, and took 
up his post on the bank of the Ravi. His arrival 
there caused great excitement, and every one went 
to see him. He was universally held to be a man 
of God. All who visited him went away pleased. 
Every verse that he composed was at once pub- 
lished abroad. He used to compose verses like the 
following, which faqirs sang to the accompaniment 
of reeds : — 

Falsehood is at an end ; Nanak, truth at last prevaileth.* 

There was only the one Name mentioned in the 
Guru’s dwelling, and he became the object of great 
popular admiration. 

A millionaire official who dwelt in a neighbouring 
village began to depreciate the Guru. He said, ‘ Who 
is this person whose name is repeated by every one, 
as if he were a god, though he is only a mort^ like 
ourselves ? The Hindus are being perverted, and 
even the Musalmans are losing their faith. Come, let 
us imprison him.’ When the speaker mounted on 
horseback, the animal shied and threw him. Next 
day he again mounted, but, as he proceeded on his 
way, became blind and had to alight. Those who 
witnessed his calamity were afraid to make any 
remark save that Nanak was a great saint. They, 
however, suggested to the millionaire that he should 
do homage to the Guru. Upon this he began to 
praise the Guru ; and those who were with him 
bowed towards the Guru. The millionaire agaui 

^ Asa ki WSfr ‘ Rimkali ki War 1. . 


K 2 



132 THE SIKH RELIGION 

mounted his horse, intending this time to go and 
supplicate the Guru, but immediately fell down. 
His companions addressed him, ‘ Thou hast made 
a mistake in going on horseback. Go on foot, that 
thou mayest be pardoned.’ He took this advice. 
On arriving at a spot whence the Guru’s residence 
could be seen, he recovered his sight, and began to 
make salutations in the Guru’s direction. On 
arriving in his presence he fell at his feet. The Guru 
was pleased and made him his guest for three days. 
The millionaire, in honour of the Guru, founded 
a village, which he called Kartarpur, on the margin 
of the Ravi, and built a Sikh temple therein, both 
of which he dedicated to the Guru. 

One day a fanatical Brahman came to the Guru and 
begged for alms. The Guru, who was at his break- 
fast, invited the Brahman to join him. The Brahman 
replied that he would not eat food in that way. He 
would only eat what he had cooked himself. He 
would first dig up the earth to a depth of a cubit 
so that all impurity of the surface might be removed, 
and he would also make a cooking square into 
which none but himself might enter. He would 
then dig a span deeper, and make a fireplace on 
which he would put firewood which he had washed, 
so that no insects might be burned in it. The 
Guru had not attended to these formalities, and the 
Brahman spurned food otherwise cooked. The 
Guru told him he would give him uncooked viands 
which he might cook himself. He then went outside 
and began to dig up the earth, but wherever he 
dug he only turned up bones, which he deemed 
a still greater abomination than the Guru’s food. 
He continued digging all day, but with the same 
result. At last, overcome by hunger, he went and 
threw himself at Nanak’s feet, and asked for the 
cooked food he had previously rejected. The Guru 
was pleased to gratify him, and then composed the 
following 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


133 


Cooking places of gold, vessels of gold, 

Lines of silver far extended, 

Ganges water, firewood of the karanta ^ tree, 

Eating rice boiled in milk — 

O my soul, these things are of no account 
Until thou art saturated with the true Name. 

Hadst thou the eighteen Purans with thee, 

Couldst thou recite the four Veds, 

Didst thou bathe on holy days and give alms according to 
men’s castes, 

Didst thou fast and perform religious ceremonies day and 
night ; 

Wert thou a qazi, a mulla, or a shaikh, 

A Jogi, a jangam,* didst thou wear an ochre-coloured dress, 
Or didst thou perform the duties of a householder — 
Without knowing God, Death would bind and take all men 
away. 

The duties of all creatures are recorded on their heads ; 
They shall be judged according to their acts. 

Foolish and ignorant men issue orders — 

Nanak, the True One hath storehouses of praises.* 

The Guru initiated the practice of singing hymns 
in the end of the night. A boy seven years of age 
used to come to listen and stand behind him. 
When the singing was over, he used quietly to 
depart. One day the Guru ordered his servants to 
detain the boy in order to discover the object of 
his continual attendance. He was accordingly 
brought before the Guru, who asked him, ‘ O boy, 
why comest thou so early in the morning to listen 
to hymns ? This is the time of life for thee to 
eat, play, and sleep.’ The boy replied, ‘Sir, one 
day my mother bade me light the fire. When 
I put on the wood, I observed that the little sticks 
burned first and afterwards the big ones. From that 
time I have been afraid of early death. It is very 

^ The Carissa Carandas. 

* A class of faq!rs with matted hair and thin chains to their feet. 
They generally go about ringing bells. * Basant. 



t34 the SIKH RELIGION 

doubtful whether we shall live to be did, and so 
I attend thy religious gatherings.’ The Guru was 
much pleased on hearing this wisdom from the 
child’s lips, and said he spoke like an old man 
(budha). On that occasion the Guru composed the 
following : — 

In the briny unfathomable ocean the fish did not recognize 
the net.^ 

Why did the very clever and beautiful fish have so much 
confidence ? 

It was caught through its own doing ; death cannot be 
averted, 

0 my brethren ; know that in like manner death hangeth 
over your heads. 

Man is like the fish upon which the net falleth unawares. 

The whole world is bound by death ; without the Guru 
death cannot be destroyed. 

They who are imbued with the True One, and have 
abandoned worthless mammon, are saved. 

1 am a sacrifice unto those who are found true at the gate 
of the True One. 

Death is like the hawk among the birds, or the huntsman 
with the noose in his hands. 

They whom the Guru preserved have been saved ; all 
others have been entrapped by the bait. 

They who possess not God’s name shall be rejected ; no 
one will assist them. 

God is the truest of the true, and His place is the truest 
of the true. 

They who obey the True One meditate on Him in their 
hearts. 

Even the perverse who obtain divine knowledge under 
the Guru’s instruction are pure. 

Make supplication to the true Guru to unite thee with the 
Friend. 

When man meeteth the Friend he obtaineth happiness, and 
the myrmidons of death poison themselves. 

^ The worldly man does not remember death. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 135 

I abide in the Name,* and the Name abideth in my 
heart. 

Without the Guru <M is darkness ; without the Word 
nothing can be known. 

By the Guru’s instruction light shineth, and man con- 
tinueth to love the True One. 

Death entereth not where the soul’s light is blended with 
God’s. 

Thou, 0 God, art the Friend ; Thou art wise ; it is Thou 
who unitest men with Thee. 

Under the Guru’s instruction, O man, praise Him who 
hath no end or limit. 

Death entereth not where there is the incomparable Word 
of the Guru. 

By God’s order all sentient beings were produced ; by God’s 
order they perform their functions. 

By God’s order they are in the power of death ; by God’s 
order they are absorbed in the True One. 

Nanak, what pleaseth God shall happen ; there is nothing 
whatever in the power of His creatures.^ 

The boy to whom the above hymn was addressed 
was subsequently known as Bhai Budha on account 
of the complimentary expression of the Guru. 
He was held in such high estimation that he 
was commissioned to confer the tilaks or patches 
of Guruship on the first five successors of Guru 
Nanak. 

Kalu with all his people proceeded to where his 
son the Guru had fixed his habitation. Sikh societi^ 
then began to be formed. The Guru took off his 
extraordinary costume and dressed in a more con- 
ventional manner. With a cloth around his waist, 
a sheet over his shoulder, mid a turban on his head, 
he looked the impersonation of holiness. The 
string of his fame rose to heaven, it was said, like 
that of a kite. Every one addressed him, ‘ Hail, 
Nanak ! a great saint hath been bora in the world/ 

* Sri Rag, Ashtapadi. 



136 THE SIKH RELIGION 

At Kartarpur, a watch before day, the Japji and 
the Asa ki War were repeated. Then followed 
reading and expounding of the Guru’s h5anns, until 
a watch and a quarter after sunrise. This was 
succeeded by singing and the reading of the Arati 
(Gagan mai thal). After this, breakfast was served. 
In the third watch there was again singing, after 
which in the evening the Sodar was read. Then the 
Sikhs all dined together. The repast ended with 
further singing. After a watch of night had elapsed 
the Sohila was read, and every one then retired. 

The Guru when not engaged in prayer occupied 
himself during the day in Kartarpur in giving 
instruction to all who sought it. He thus delivered 
himself to Malo and Bhago on the subject of Hindu 
penances : ‘ To burn in fire, to abide long in water, 
to fast, to endure heat and cold, to hold up one’s 
arm permanently, to do penance with body reversed, 
to stand for a long time on one leg, to live on forest 
tubers and roots, to abide on the margins of rivers, 
to wander over the world as a pilgrim, to fast at 
full moon — all such penances are works of darkness.’ 

The Guru thus expressed himself on the subject 
of the devotional exercises of the Sikhs : ‘ To recall 
the wandering mind from the distraction of the 
senses, and then employ it in pious discourses 
and in devoutly singing and listening to songs of 
praise of the Almighty — know that these are merito- 
rious acts which may be easily performed. They 
involve but little labour and bring great reward. 
The Hindu penances on the contrary involve great 
trouble while only small recompense is obtained 
therefrom.’ 

The Guru replied to a man called Kalu who had 
asked him for a definition of a holy man : ‘ Recognize 
him as holy in whom are to be found friend- 
ship, s)7mpathy, pleasure at the welfare of others, 
and dislike of evil company. In the first place, the 
intentions of holy men are pure. Secondly, they are 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 137 

pleased on hearing the praises of others. Thirdly, 
holy men serve the virtuous. Fourthly, they honour 
those who can impart to them learning and good 
counsel. Fifthly, as there is a periodical craving for 
food or intoxicants, so they feel a craving for the 
Guru’s word and for divine knowledge. Sixthly, 
they love their wives, and renounce other women. 
Seventhly, they avoid subjects from which quarrels 
may arise. Eighthly, they serve those who are 
superior to themselves in intelligence or devotion. 
Ninthly, even if strong, they are not arrogant, and 
trample not on others. Tenthly, they abandon the 
society of the evil, and only associate with the holy.’ 

Two Sikhs, called Bhagta and Ohri, asked Guru 
Nanak how rest was to be obtained, and transmigra- 
tion avoided. The Guru replied as follows : ‘You 
shall find rest by avoiding manmukh karm (perverse 
acts).’ Being asked to define manmukh karm more 
particularly, the Guru replied : ‘ It is to be heartily 
envious of every one, to desire that worldly wealth 
and all happiness should forsake others and come to 
oneself, to suffer great pain as one beholdeth the 
houses and property of others, to believe all men 
one’s enemies, and do good to no one. Expel all this 
evil from your hearts. In the second place, the 
perverse man is proud and relentless to every one. 
When he seeth such and such a person inferior to 
himself, he never adviseth him ; nay, he laugheth 
at him, and treateth him with contempt, sa3fing, 
“His is not equal to my lofty intellect.” In the 
third place, the perverse man is addicted to slander ; 
but do you renounce it and never utter it. If any 
one praise another who is superior to him, he cannot 
endure it, nay he becometh wroth, saying, "O! I am 
well acquainted with him.” In this way he uttereth 
slander. How can he who is proud of his efforts and 
envious of others ever possess excellence ? In the 
fourth place, if the perverse man receive advice, he 
will not act on it through obstinacy; nay, he will 



138 THE SIKH RELIGION 

perversely do the very reverse. These vices— envy, 
pride, slander, and obstinacy — ^belong to the perverse. 
Relinquish them, acting as trees do when they drop 
their leaves in autumn.’ 

The Guru was asked why the words Sat Nam — 
the True Name — were always written as an intro- 
duction to his hymns. He replied, ‘ The Name is 
the God of all gods. Some propitiate Durga,^ some 
Shiv, some Ganesh,® and some other gods; but the 
Guru’s Sikhs worship the True Name and thus 
remove all obstacles to salvation. Accordingly, the 
prefatory words, the True Name, are v^itten in all 
compositions.’ 

It was here the Guru composed his poem on the 
Twelve Months of the year. The description is of 
course suited to the climate of the Panjab, his native 
country. We here give a translation in extenso * : — 

Hear Thou, 0 God — according to men’s acts in previous 
states of existence 

The weal or woe which Thougivest to each individual is just. 

0 God, the Creation is Thine ; what is my condition ? 
I cannot live for a moment without Thee. 

1 am miserable without my Beloved ; I have no friend ; 
yet from the Guru’s instruction I drink nectar. 

The Formless One continueth His creation;^ to obey God 
is the best of human acts. 

^ Durga is the energy or consort of Shiv. 

* Ganesh is an elephant-headed god of the Hindus, who in one of 
his attributes presides over literature, and is specially invoked in the 
prefaces to literary works. 

* The Indian seasons and months are — i , Spring, which includes the 
months Chet and BaisSkh ; 2, the hot weather, Jeth and Har ; 3, the 
rainy weather, Sawan and Bhadon ; 4, the temperate weather, Assu and 
Kartik; 5, the cold weather, Maghar and Poh; 6, Autumn, MSgh 
and PhSgan. These seasons are in Sanskrit and Hindi called respec- 
tively — Basant, Grikham, Pllwas, Sard, Him, and Sisar. The latter 
season, when the leaves fall, is contemporaneous with the European 
early spring. The Indian lunar year begins with Chet, which is movable, 
and the Indian solar year with Baisakh about the 12th of April. 

^ In Indian sacred writings several creations and destructions of the 
wm-ld are ttUiided to. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


139 

Nanak, the woman^is waiting for Thee ; hear Thou, O 
Omnipresent Spirit. 

The chatrik ^ crieth ‘ Prio ! ’ and the kokil ® also singeth 
its lays. 

The woman who is embraced by her Spouse enjoyeth 
every happiness. 

She whom God in His pleasure hath embraced is a happy 
woman. 

God established the nine mansions of ihe body ; the tenth 
which is superior to them all, is His home. 

Everything is Thine ; Thou art my Beloved ; I delight 
in Thee night and day. 

Nanak, the chatrik crieth ‘ Prio, prio I ’ and sweet is 
the kokil’s song. 

0 God, filled with delight, my Beloved, hear Thou me. 

Thou art contained in my soul and body ; I forget Thee 

not for an instant. 

Why should I forget Thee for an instant ? I am a sacrifice 
unto Thee ; I live by singing Thy praises. 

1 have no one ; whose am I ? I cannot abide without 
God. 

I have sought the shelter of His feet, and dwell there ; 
and my body hath become pure. 

Nanak, he on whom God looketh with favour obtaineth 
peace in his home, and his mind is consoled with the Guru’s 
teaching. 

It raineth a torrent of nectar, whose drops are de- 
lightful. 

When the friend, the kindly Guru meeteth one, and love 
is established with God. 

God entereth the temple of ihe body when it pleziseth 
Him, and the woman riseth up and repeateth His praises. 

' Its cry is *^prio’, a word which also means beloved. Hence it is 
said the bird calls to God and lives in His worship. 

* The black Indian cuckoo. Its name is derived from its cry, which 
increases in volume of sound as it progresses. It is larger than 
the chatrik. 



140 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


In every house the spouse enjoyeth his happy wife ; 
why hath my Spouse forgotten me ? 

Lowering clouds have overspread the heavens ; it raineth 
pleasantly and love comforteth my soul and body. 

Saith Nanak, Thou who rainest ambrosial speech, 
graciously come to mine abode. 

In Chet agreeable is the spring ; the bumble-bee is 
pleasing. 

In the Bar the forests are flowering ; may my Beloved 
return to me ! 

When her beloved retumeth not home, how can a wife 
obtain comfort ? Her body wasteth away with the pain 
of separation. 

The kokil singeth sweetly on the mango-tree ; why 
should I endure pain of body ? 

The bumble-bee is flitting on the flowering branches; 
how shall I survive ? I am dying, 0 mother. 

Nanak, in Chet comfort is easily obtained if woman 
obtain God in her home as her Spouse. 

The month of Baisakh is pleasant ; the trees are in 
blossom ; 

The woman is waiting for God at her gate, saying, ‘ Come, 
take compassion on me. 

‘ Come home, my Beloved, make me cross the difficult 
ocean ; without Thee I am worthless. 

* Who can appraise Thy worth, my Darling ? If it please 
Thee, I shall look at Thee and show Thee to others. 

‘ I know that Thou art not distant ; I acknowledge that 
Thou art in my heart, and I recognize Thy mansion.’ 

Nanak, in Baisakh God is found by him who meditateth 
on the Word and whose mind is thus happy. 

The month of Jeth is pleasant ; why should the Beloved 
be forgotten ? 

The land is burning like a furnace ; woman is making 
supplication — 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


141 

Woman is making supplication and praising His qualities : 
‘ I shall be pleasing to the Lord if I utter His praises. 

‘ The Bairagi ^ liveth in the true palace ; if He allow me 
to go to Him, I will go. 

‘ Without God I am without honour and strength ; how 
shall I obtain comfort in His palace ? ’ 

Nanak, in Jeth if a woman know God and embrace virtue, 
she shall by His favour become like unto Him. 


The month of Har is sultry the sun is burning in the 
sky ; 

The earth is suffering ; it is parched and heated like fire ; 

The heat is drying up moisture ; men die in anguish, 
yet the sun wearieth not of his toil. 

When his chariot turneth towards the souths woman 
looketh for the shade ; the grasshoppers chirp in the 
forest. 

She who hath departed with her sins shall suffer in the 
next world, while she who remembereth the True One shall 
obtain comfort. 

Nanak, with God, to whom I gave my heart, are death 
and life. 

In Sawan be happy, 0 my soul ; it is the season of clouds 
and rain. 

‘ I love my Spouse with my soul and body, but the Dear 
One hath gone abroad ; 

‘ My Spouse cometh not home ; I am dying with the pang 
of separation ; the flash of the lightning terrifieth me. 

‘ I am alone on my couch and greatly grieved ; 0 mother, 
my pain is as bad as death. 

‘Say how can sleep and appetite come to me without 
God ? Raiment affordeth my body no comfort.' 

^ God, in the sense that He loves not the sinner. The word BairSgi 
ordinarily means a man without love for the world. The Bairagis now 
form a special sect who worship Vishnu and wear sacrificial threads. 
They are distinguished from the SanySsis who worship Shiv and dis^ 
pense with sacrificial threads. 

^ We are obliged here to take a liberty with the word bkala, which 
means good. ^ After the summer solstice. 



14 Z THE SIKH RELIGION 

Nanak, she is the happy wife who is embraced by her 
beloved Spouse. 

In the month of Bhadon woman in the bloom of youth 
is led astray by doubt, but afterwards repenteth. 

The lakes and the meadows are filled with water ; it is 
the rainy season — ^the time for pleasure. 

It raineth during the dark night ; how can the young 
wife have comfort without her mate ? Frogs and peacocks 
are croaking. 

‘Prio, prio’ crieth the chatrik ; serpents go abroad biting ; 

Mosquitoes sting ; lakes are filled to the brim ; how shall 
man obtain comfort without God ? 

Nanak, I will ask my Guru and go where the Lord is. 

In Assu come, 0 Beloved ; the wife is pining and dying 
for Thee. 

Man can meet the Lord when He granteth him an inter- 
view ; but love of mammon ruineth him. 

When woman is spoiled by falsehood, her husband putteth 
her away ; then bloom the kukah and the kahi reeds.^ 

The heat is over, the cool season is approaching ; on 
seeing this my mind is uneasy 

On all sides the trees are green and verdant ; that which 
slowly ripeneth is sweet. 

Nanak, the true Guru hath become my mediator ; may 
I meet my Beloved in Assu ! 

In Kartik what pleaseth God is recorded in man’s destiny. 

The lamp which is lit by divine knowledge easily bumeth. 

Love is the oil of the lamp ; the woman and her Beloved 
have met ; ® she is overwhelmed with delight. 

She whom sin killeth shall not be acceptable at her death, 
while she whom virtue killeth shall really die. * 

God hath given His name and service to those who dwell 
in their own homes ; ever their prayer is — 

^ Kuksh is supposed to be the Saccharum munja, and kcAt the 
Saccharum sponiatuum. 

^ That is, so much time has passed away, that I fear I shall never 
meet my Beloved. 

’ Guided by the lamp's light. * Shall not suffer transmigratkm. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 143 

‘ Meet us, O God, and open the doors of our understand- 
ing ; otherwise one hour shall be as six months.’ ^ 

The month of Maghar is pleasant for those who are 
blended with God’s person by singing His praises. 

The virtuous woman through her virtues enjoyeth her 
spouse ; my Spouse is ever pleasing to me. 

While the whole world is movable. He is immovable, 
clever, wise, the Arranger. 

They who possess the merits of divine knowledge and 
meditation shall be blended with God. They are pleasing 
to God, and God is pleasing to them. 

The songs, music, and poems of bards have I heard ; but 
it is at the name of God sorrow fieeth away. 

Nanak, that wife is dear to her spouse who in his pre- 
sence doeth him hearty service. 

In Poh it freezeth ; the moisture of the forest and of the 
grass drieth up. 

Why comest Thou not ? Thou dwellest in my body, in 
my soul, and in my mouth.^ 

The Life of the world pervadeth my soul and body ; I 
enjoy pleasure through the instruction of the Guru. 

The light of God is contained in the hearts of animals 
born from eggs, wombs, perspiration, and earth. 

Lord of compassion, beneficent One, grant me a sight of 
Thee, and give me understanding that I may obtain salva- 
tion. 

Nanak, the Enjoyer enjoyeth her with pleasure who 
beareth Him love and affection. 

In Magh woman becometh pure when she knoweth the 
place of Pilgrimage * within her. 

I have easily met the Friend, and, by adopting His 
attributes, have become blended with Him. 

Hear me, 0 beloved and beautiful God, I made Thine 
attributes mine ornaments ; if it please Thee, I shall bathe 
in Th3rtank. 

^ That is, I ever think of Thee and repeat Thy name, but am 
unworthy to receive Thee. * God. 



144 the SIKH RELIGION 

The Ganges, the Jamna, the meeting of the three rivers 
at Tribeni Priyag,^ the seven oceans, 

Alms, charity, and worship are all contained in God’s 
name. I recognize Him as the One God in every age. 

Nanak, in the month of Magh, if I repeat God’s name 
with great delight, I bathe at the sixty-eight places of 
pilgrimage.* 

In Phagan the hearts of those to whom Go<f’s love is 
pleasing are happy. 

Night and day are pleasant to him who effaceth himself. 

When it pleased God, I effaced worldly love from my 
heart ; 0 Lord, mercifully come to my home. 

Though I deck myself in various garbs, yet without 
the Beloved I shall not obtain a place in heaven. 

I decorated myself with necklaces, strings of pearls, per- 
fumes,® silks, and satins, when my Beloved desired me. 

Nanak, my Guru hath blended me with God, and I have 
obtained Him as my Spouse. 


The twelve months, the seasons, the lunar days, and the 
week days. 

The gharis, the mahurats,* the moments, are all pleasant 
when the True One cometh and meeteth me of His own 
accord. 

* A famous place of Hindu pilgrimage, near Allahabad. The 
third river is the Saraswati, which is supposed to meet the Ganges 
and Jamna underground. The Saraswati, though no longer seen, 
was at one time an actual river. From a legend in the Mahabharat 
it would appear that it took its rise with other great rivers in the 
Himalayas, that it thence flowed through RajpQtana, where it occasion- 
ally disappeared in the sands of that country, and that it finally de- 
bouched north of DwSraka into the Arabian Sea. 

* Sixty-eight is the number of sacred places of pilgrimage in the 

estimation of the Hindus. ® Ras really means relishes. 

* The following is the Hindi time-table : — 

6o visias = i chasia 
6o chasias =r i pal 
6o pals = I ghari 
2 gharis = i muhOrat 
4 muhOrats = i pahar 
8 pahars = i day and night. 



LIFE OF GXTRO NANAE 145 

When the dear Lord is obtained, everything is arranged ; 
the Creator knoweth ever3rthing. 

I am dear to Him who decorated me ; I have met Him 
and am happy. 

The couch of my home is beautiful when my Beloved 
enjoyeth me ; the holy have good fortune written on their 
foreheads, 

Nanak, the Beloved enjoyeth me day and night ; having 
obtained God as my Spouse, I am a permanent bride. 

At that time there was a man in very straitened 
domestic circumstances who had a daughter to 
marry. He appealed to Guru Nanak to assist in 
procuring her a wedding outfit. The Guru told him 
to give him a list of the things he required, and he 
would send for them. The man did so. The Guru 
called a servant of his, named Bhagirath, and ordered 
him to go to Lahore and fetch what was required. 
He warned him at the same time not to spend a 
night in that city.^ Bhagirath, on arriving in Lahore 
went to a shopkeeper, and asked him to supply the 
articles at once. The shopkeeper bade him remain 
for a day and everything should be ready. Bhagirath 
said it was impossible. The shopkeeper told him 
that everything should be ready on that day, but 
the bride’s bracelets could not be made and coloured 
before nightfall. Bhagirath explained the order that 
had been given him. The shopkeeper inquired what 
sort of master he had who had issued such an order. 
Bhagirath replied that his master was the Guru. 
The shopkeeper inquired who the gurus of this 
generation were. Bhagirath could only reply that 
his master was a great Being. The shopkeeper 
rejoined, ‘ Wretch, where canst thou find a great 
being in this age ? ’ After further colloquy and 
further praise of the Guru by Bhagirath, the shop7 
keeper decided that he would go with him to his 

^ Which he characterized as a city of poison and wrath-^ZoA^^ 
shahr mhir qahtr* this the Guru meant the intemperance and 
licentiousness of that city. 

SIKH. I L 



J46 the SIKH RELIGION 

master. He had a set of coloured bracelets in his 
private house, which he would take and give the 
Guru. * If he be a great being,' continued the shop- 
keeper, ‘ he shall be my Guru as well as thine, and 
he shall have the bracelets for nothing ; but, if he be 
not a great being, I will exact the full price from him.’ 
When the shopkeeper saw the Guru and heard his 
gentle remonstrance with Bhagirath for his delay, he 
became convinced that he was a great being and 
searcher of hearts, and he accordingly fell at his 
feet and was made happy. He remained three years 
with the Guru, during which time he committed to 
memory many of his hymns. 

When the shopkeeper returned to Lahore, he sent 
for merchants and bankers and sold them every- 
thing he had in his shop. He then sailed to 
Ceylon to extend his commerce. There he took up 
his residence and began to trade. At the same time 
he led a religious life, and did not forget the Guru’s 
hymns. He used to sing them late into the night, 
and again rise before day for his devotions and 
ablutions. On the subject of bathing the Guru had 
taught him that whoever bathed a watch before day 
in cold water and repeated God’s name with love 
and devotion, shouldreceive nectar at God’s door, and 
be blended with Him who is unborn and self-existent. 

After bathing, the shopkeeper used to repeat the 
Japji and read the Guru’s h5nnns. He was wont to 
take breakfast at daybreak, and then go to discharge 
his worldly duties. Though the people of Ceylon were 
said to corrupt strangers who went among them, 
they had no influence over the shopkeeper, who con- 
tinued to adhere rigidly to the teachings of the 
Guru. The king of the country, whose name accord- 
ing to the Sikh annals was Raja Shivnabh, hearing that 
the shopkeeper would not conform to the religious 
customs of his country, summoned him to his presence. 
The shopkeeper presented the Raja with a coco- 
nut in token of his loyalty. In reply to the Raja’s 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK %4f 

questions, he said that he had already obtained what 
others sought to obtain by fasting, religious cere- 
monies, and austerities j so why should he perform 
them ? The Raja asked him what it was he had 
obtained. The shopkeeper replied that he had 
beheld a great being and thus secured salvation. 
The Raja inquired if he had really obtained spiritual 
comfort by seeing the great being. The shopkeeper 
replied, ‘ Sire, when one hath met God, what further 
comfort is necessary ? ' The king asked, ‘ In this 
Kal age who is there, a sight of whom can confer 
salvation ? ’ The shopkeeper replied, ‘ Such a per- 
son is Guru Nanak ; the mere repetition of his name 
can confer salvation.’ He then translated for him one 
of the Guru’s hymns. The Raja on hearing it was 
satisfied, and joy thrilled through his frame. He 
then requested the shopkeeper to take him to where 
Nanak lived, so that he too might behold him. The 
shopkeeper replied, ‘ Sire, meditate on him in thy 
heart, and thou shalt meet him here.’ 

The shopkeeper loaded his ship with the products 
of Ceylon, and returned to India. Raja Shivnabh 
remained at home, thinking of the Guru and 
yearning to behold him. 


Chapter XII 

Meanwhile the Guru made a journey to the south 
of India. He wore wooden sandals, took a stick in 
his hand, twisted a rope round his head as a turban, 
and on his forehead put a patch and a streak. On 
that occasion he was accompanied by Saido and 
Gheho of the Jat tribe. He proceeded to the Dra-? 
vidian country now named Madras. 

His companions, seeing his morning ablutions^ 
thought that he worshipped the river god, Khwaja 
Khizir,^ and derived his power from him. They 

^ Le mot ,de Khedher, signifiant en Arabe yerd v^doyant, 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


determined to worship the same god, and advance 
themselves if possible to a higher spiritual eminence 
than the Gum had attained. While travelling one 
night for the purpose of their worship they met a 
man carrying a fish in his hand. After mutual 
interrogations he said that he was the river god 
taking an offering to the Guru, and that it was from 
the Gum he had obtained his power, and not the 
Gum from him. He added : ‘ I am water, he is air, 
a superior element ; I am often contained in him.’ 
Saido and Gheho then went and prostrated them- 
selves before the Gum. He asked them why they 
had come to him at that hour. They used formerly 
only to come after sunrise. They then confessed to 
him the whole story of their attempted worship of 
Khwaja Khizir, and begged his forgiveness. The 
Guru composed the following on that occasion : — 

He who batheth in the immortal water of divine know- 
ledge taketh with him the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage. 

The Guru’s instruction is jewels and gems ; by serving 
him his disciples find them. 

There is no place of pilgrimage equal to the Guru ; 

The tank of consolation is contained in that Guru. 

The Guru is a river whence pure water is ever obtained, 
and by which the filth of evil inclinations is washed away. 

He who findeth the True Guru hath obtained perfect 
bathing, which maketh him a god out of a beast or a ghost. 

He who is imbued with the true Name obtaineth it ; that 
Guru is called sandal. 

. Fix thine attention on His feet by whose odour vegetables 
are perfumed. 

pretend que ce notn fut donn^ k ce prophkte k cause qu’il jouit d’une 
vie ilorissante et immortelle depuis qu’il eut bO de I’eau de la Fontaine. 
Plusieurs le confondent avec le prophkte £lie, que nous disons faire 
sa detneure <fens le Paradis terrestre et jouir de Timmortalit^. Parce 
I’arbre de vie ^toit dans ce Paradis, et qu'il y avoit aussi une 
Ftmtaine, les Musalmans donnentk qette Fontaine le nom de Fontaine 
de Vie, et croyent que c’est de la boisson de son eau, aussi bien que du 
fnut .de i'arbce de vie, .qu'£lie entredent son immortality. (D’Herbelot.) 



LIFE OF GmXJ NANAK 

Through the Guru man obtaineth real life, and through 
the Guru man departeth to God’s home. 

Nanak, through the Guru man is absorbed in the True One ; 
through the Guru man obtaineth the special dignity (rf 
deliverance} 

On the same occasion the Guru composed the 
following : — 

They who forget the Name go astray in worldly love and 
superstition ; 

They let go the stem and cling to the branches ; what 
shaU they obtain ? Ashes. 

How can man be saved without the Name ? If any one 
know, let him tell it. 

If man be holy he shall be saved ; the perverse shall lose 
their honour. 

Perf^t is the wisdom of those who serve the one God. 

Servants of God, take shelter in Him who was in the 
beginning, in every age, and who is the Bright One. 

My Lord is one ; there is none other, my brethren. 

By the favour of the True One happiness is obtained. 

Without the Guru no one hath obtained God, however 
much the matter be debated. 

He Himself showeth the way and fixeth true devotion 
in the heart. 

Even though thou advise the perverse man, he will still go 
to the wilderness ; 

But without God’s name he shall not be saved ; he shall 
die and go to hell. 

He who repeateth not God’s name shall wander in birth 
and death. 

God’s worth cannot be known without serving the true 
Guru. 

Whatever service God causeth men to do, that will be 
done. 

It is God Himself who acteth ; whom besides shall I men- 
tion ? God beholdeth His own greatness. 

He whom God inspireth serveth the Guru. 

^ Frabh&ti. 



THE SIKH RELIGION- 


150 

Nanak, they who give their lives shall be saved, and shall 
obtain honour in God’s court.^ 

The Guru arrived at a Saravagi or Jain temple, 
which was much frequented. Narbhi, the Jain 
priest, went with his disciple to visit him. The 
Jains attach an exaggerated value to life in every 
form. The Jain priest heard that the Guru had not 
the same tender scruples on the subject, and began 
to catechize him. ‘ Eatest thou old or new corn ? ’ 
(that is, dost thou eat corn with worms in it or not ?) 
‘ Drinkest thou cold water ; shakest thou the trees of 
the forest to eat their fruit ? Who is thy guru, and 
what power hath he to pardon thee since thou violatest 
all rules and destroyest life ? ’ The Guru in reply 
uttered the following pauri : — 

When the True Guru is merciful, faith is perfected. 

When the True Guru is merciful, man shall never grieve. 

When the True Guru is merciful, man shall know no 
sorrow. 

When the True Guru is merciful, man shall enjoy divine 
pleasure. 

When the True Guru is merciful, what fear hath man of 
Death ? 

When the True Guru is merciful he ever bestoweth happi- 
ness. 

When the True Guru is merciful, man obtaineth the nine 
treasures.* 

When the Guru is merciful, man is absorbed in the 
True One.* 

After this the Guru launched out into a satire 
on the Jains : — 

They have their hair plucked out, they drink dirty water, 
they beg and eat others’ leavings ; 

^ Asa Ashtapadi. 

* Nau ntdhi. This expression is used in the sacred writings of 
the Sikhs to denote unlimited wealth and prosperity. In the sacred 
books of the Hindus the expression has a more definite numerical 
signification. * Majh ki WSr. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK %$t 

They spread out their ordjj re, they inhale its smell, they 
are shy to look at water ; 

They have their heads plucked like sheep ; the pluckers* 
hands are smeared with ashes — 

They spoil the occupations of their parents ; their families 
weep and wail for them. 

They give not their deceased relations lamps or perform 
their last rites, or place an)wvhere barley rolls and leaves for 
them.^ 

The sixty-eight places of pilgrimage grant them no 
access ; the Brahmans wiU not eat their food. 

They are ever filthy day and night ; they have no sacri- 
ficial marks on their foreheads. 

They ever sit close as if they were at a wake, and they 
enter no assembly. 

They hold cups in their hands ; they have brooms * by 
their sides ; they walk in single file. 

They are not Jogis, or Jangams, or Qazis, or Mullas. 

God hath ruined them ; they go about despised ; their 
words are like curses. 

God killeth and restoreth animals to life ; none else may 
preserve them. 

The Jains make not gifts or perform ablutions; dust 
lighteth on their plucked heads. 

From water gems arose when Meru was made the churning 
staff.® 

The gods appointed the sixty-eight places of pil- 
grimages, and holy days were fixed accordingly by their 
orders. 

^ The Jains conform in many ways to Hindu customs. The Guru 
here censures them for not being altogether consistent. 

® To brush away insects and thus avoid treading on them. 

® According to the Hindus, Vishnu in his Kurmavatar assumed 
the shape of a tortoise which supported the mountain Mandara — ^in 
the Sikh writings called Meru — the Olympus of the Hindus, with 
which the gods churned the ocean. From the ocean were produced 
the fourteen gems or jewels here referred to. They are Lakhsmi, 
wife of Vishnu, the moon, a white horse with seven heads, a holy 
physician, a prodigious elephant, the tree of plenty, the all-)delding 
cow, &c. 



152 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Aftet ablution the Muhammadans pray ; after ablution 
the Hindus worship ; the wise ever bathe. 

The dead and the living are purified when water is poured 
on their heads. 

Nanak, they who pluck their heads are devils : these 
things * please them not. 

When it raineth there is happiness ; animals then perform 
their functions. 

When it raineth, there is corn, sugar-cane, and cotton, 
the clothing of all. 

When it raineth, kine ever graze, and women churn their 
milk. 

By the use of the clarified butter thus obtained burnt 
offerings and sacred feasts are celebrated, and worship is 
ever adorned 

All the Sikhs are rivers ; the Guru is the ocean, by bathing 
in which greatness is obtained. 

If the Pluckedheads bathe not, then a hundred handfuls 
of dust be on their skuUs.* 

The Jain priest asked the Guru why he travelled 
in the rainy season, when insects are abroad and 
there is danger of killing them under foot. The Guru 
replied as follows : — 

Nanak, if it rain in Sawan, four species of animals have 
pleasure — 

Serpents, deer, fish, and sensualists who have women in 
their homes. 

Nanak, if it rain in Sawan, there are four species of animals 
which feel discomfort — 

Cows’ calves, the poor, travellers, and servants. 

The Jain priest went and fell at his feet and be- 
came a convert to his faith. On that occasion the 
Guru completed his hymns in the Majh ki War, and 
Sjcddo and Gheho wrote them down from his dictation. 

It is said that the Guru then went to an island in 
the ocean, governed by an inhuman tyrant. The 
name of the island has not been preserved. Besides 

^ That is, water and bathing. ’ M3jh ki War. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 153 

Saido and Gheho a third J at called Siho accompanied 
him thither. On seeing them the t5n:ant resolved 
to put them to death for trespassing on his domain. 
He seized the Guru as the first victim of his rage. 
The Guru fell into a trance and sang the following : — 

He to whom the Lord is compassionate and merciful, will 
do the Master’s work. 

That worshipper whom God causeth to abide by His 
order, will worship Him. 

By obeying His order man is acceptable, and shall then 
reach his Master’s court. 

He shall act as pleaseth his Master, and obtain the fruit 
his heart desireth ; 

And he shall be clothed with a robe of honour in God's 
court.^ 

It is said that on hearing this hymn the tyrant 
desisted from his intention, and prostrated him- 
self before the Guru. Saido gave him water to 
drink in which the Guru had washed his feet, and 
thus made him a Sikh, and ensured him deliverance. 

The Guru on that occasion met a successor of Pir 
Makhdum Baha-ul-Din Qureshi, who had an extrava- 
gant idea of his own spiritual and temporal impor- 
tance. On being assured of the man’s hypocrisy, 
the Guru uttered the following : — 

The heart which relinquisheth God’s praises and magnifica- 
tion and attacheth itself to a skeleton,* 

Receiveth a hundred reproaches by day and a thousand 
by night.® 

The Pir then fell at his feet, invited the Guru to 
abide with him and desist from his wanderings, upon 
which the Guru uttered the following reflection and 
instruction : — 

^ Asa ki WSr. * That is, to the filth of the world. 

» SQhi ki war. 



154 the SIKH RELIGION 

Rest, sit at home, there is trouble in ever travelling. 

A place of rest is recognized when men dwell there per- 
manently. 

What manner of resting-place is the world ? 

Tie up the practice of sincerity as thy travelling expenses, 
and remain attached to the Name. 

Jogis sit in devotional postures, mullas dwell at places 
of rest ; 

Pandits read books ; sidhs sit in the palaces of the gods ; 

Demigods, sidhs, heavenly musicians, munis, saints, 
shaikhs, pirs, and commanders 

Have gone, stage by stage, and others too are departing. 

Emperors, kings, princes, nobles have marched away. 

Man must depart in a ghari or two ; O my heart, under- 
stand that thou too must go. 

This is told in hymns, yet few are they who understand it. 

Nanak humbly assert eth, God is contained in sea and land, 
in the upper and lower regions ; 

He is unseen, inscrutable, omnipotent, the kind Creator. 

The Merciful alone is permanent ; the whole world beside 
is transitory. 

Call Him permanent on whose head no destiny is recorded. 

The heavens and the earth shall pass away ; He the one 
God alone is permanent. 

By day the sun travelleth, by night the moon ; hundreds 
of thousands of stars pass away. 

The one God alone is our resting-place, Nanak saith verily.^ 

Upon this the Pir was convinced that the Guru 
was an exalted spiritual leader. 


Chapter XIII 

The Guru then turned his thoughts towards 
Ceylon, and succeeded in reaching that country, 
where he took his seat in Raja Shivnabh’s garden. 


^ Sri R3g, Ashtapadi. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 155 

At that time it was barren, but it is said to have 
become green on the Guru’s arrival. The gardener 
requested the king to go and see the faqir who had 
caused the withered garden to bloom anew. The 
king sent beautiful damsels to dance before the Guru 
and tempt him with their charms. The Guru, wrapped 
up in his own thoughts, neither spoke to them nor 
noticed them. The king came and inquired his 
name, caste, and whether he was a J ogi. The Guru 
replied as follows : — 

The Jogi who is associated with the Name and is pure, 
hath not a particle of uncleanness. 

He who keepeth with him the name of the Beloved, which 
is ever true, hath escaped birth and death. 

The king asked if he were a Brahman. The 
Guru replied : — 

He is a Brahman who hath divine knowledge for his 
ablutions, and God’s praises for the leaves * of his worship. 

There is but One Name, One God, One Light in the three 
worlds. 

The king asked if he were a shopkeeper. The 
Guru replied : — 

Make thy heart the scale, thy tongue the beam, and weigh 
the inestimable Name. 

There is but one shop, one Merchant above all ; the 
dealers are many. 

The king again inquired if he were a Hindu or 
a Muhammadan. The Guru continued his enigmati- 
cal replies : — 

The True Guru hath solved the ‘problem of the two ways. 

It is he who fixeth attention on the One God, and whose 
mind wavereth not, who can understand it. 

^ BrShmans use sweet basil and bel {Aegle Marmlos) leaves in 
their worship, the former in the worship of Vishnu and the latter in the 
worship of Shiv. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


156 

He who abideth in the Word and ever worshippeth day 
and night, hath ended his doubts. 

The king then asked if he -were Gorakhnath. The 
Guru showed no inclination to directly gratify 
his curiosity. 

Above us is the sky, Gorakh is above the sky ; His 
inaccessible form dwelleth there ; 

By the favour of the Guru, whether I am abroad or at 
home is the same to me ; Nanak hath become such an 
anchoret.^ 

When the Guru had ended, the king invited 
him to go to his palace and see his queen. He gave 
him an opportunity of expounding his doctrines 
to her. 

It was during Guru Nanak’s visit to Ceylon that he 
composed thePransan^li, which contained an account 
of the silent palace of God, the manner of meditating 
on Him, the private utterances of the Guru, and the 
nature of the soul and body. The following are its 
opening verses : — 

The supreme state is altogether a void,® all people say ; 

In the supreme state there is no rejoicing or mourning ; 

In the supreme state there are felt no hopes or desires ; 

In the supreme state are seen no castes or caste-marks ; 

In the supreme state are no sermons or singing of 
hymns ; 

In the supreme state abideth heavenly meditation ; 

In the supreme state are those who know themselves.® 

Nanak, my mind is satisfied with the supreme state. 

Saido and Gheho subsequently wrote out the 
Pransangali from memory. 

^ M2ru. 

® The Greek koOmv, the Latin caelum^ heaven. 

® The meaning of this expression is totally different from that of 
yvSJdi o-cavron To know oneself, in the Sikh sacred writings, means 
to know God who is within one. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


157 


On his return to India the Guru, having heard 
of the fair of Shivrat',, went to Achal Batala* to 
preach his doctrines. The whole country crowded 
to see and hear him, and showered offerings on 
him. The Jogis on witnessing his success became 
very jealous and determined to humble him. Bhan- 
garnath, their superior, asked him why he mixed 
acid with his milk, that is, why he a holy man led 
a family life. * When the milk becometh sour,’ said 
Bhangarnath, ‘ no butter is produced by churning. 
Why hast thou doffed thy hermit’s dress, and donned 
ordinary clothes ? ’ 

The Guru replied: ‘O Bhangarnath, thy mother 
was an unskilful woman. She knew not how to wash 
the churn, and so spoilt the butter in producing thee. 
Thou hast become an anchoret after abandoning thy 
family life, and yet thou goest to beg to the houses 
of family men. When thou doest nothing here, what 
canst thou obtain hereafter ? ’ 

Bhangarnath made no reply to the Guru’s ques- 
tion but broached another subject : ‘ O Nanak, 
thou hast exhibited miracles to the world ; why 
art thou slow to exhibit them to us also ? ’ The 
Guru replied : ‘ I have nothing worth showing you. 
Man hath absolutely no shelter except in the com- 
panionship of the hymns of the Guru. Were man 
to move the earth, that would not induce God to 
grant him undeserved favours. Hear the Word ; 
I speak verily, I have no miracle except the True 
Name : — 

^ A festival in honour of the god Shiv held on the 14th day of the 
dark half of Fhagan (February-March). It was usual for Jogis to 
congregate on the occasion of this festival. In the A!n-i-Akbari it is 
stated that the Emperor Akbar used then to hold meetings of all the 
Jogis of the Empire and eat and drink with them. Under the in- 
fluence of such carousals they used to promise him that he should 
live three or four times as long as ordinary mortals. 

J Achal, about three miles from Batala, contains the shrine of 
Simkartik, son of Shiv. For a. full account bf- Batala see the 
Khuldsai-ul’TawarUh, whose author was born there. 



I5& THE SIKH RELIGION 

Were I to put on a dress of fire, construct a house of 
snow and eat iron ; 

Were I to turn all my troubles into water, drink it, and 
drive the earth as a steed ; 

Were I able to put the firmament into one scale and 
weigh it with a tank ; ^ 

Were I to become so large that I could be nowhere con- 
tained ; and were I to lead every one by the nose ; ® 

Had I such power in myself that I could perform such 
things or cause others to perform them, it would be all in 
vain. 

As great as the Lord is, so great are His gifts ; He bestoweth 
according to His pleasure. 

Nanak, he on whom God looketh with favour obtaineth 
the glory of the True Name.’ ® 

In Batala the Guru vanquished in argument all 
priests who attended the fair, and obliged the 
followers of the six schools of philosophy to bow 
before him. The Jogis finally complimented him on 
his success and said : ‘ Hail, O Nanak, great are thy 
deeds ! Thou hast arisen a great being, and lit 
a light in this last age of the world.’ It was the 
time the Jogis took their daily wine, and the goblet 
was accordingly passed around. On its reaching the 
Guru he asked what it was. They said it was the 
Sidhs’ cup. He inquired what it contained. They 
said molasses and the flower of the dhava* plant, 
.of which Indian spirits are made. The Guru 
then uttered the following hymn : — 

Make divine knowledge thy molasses, meditation thy 
dhava flowers, good actions thy fermenting bark ® to put 
into them. 

Make the love of God thy furnace, devotion the sealing 
of the still ; in this way shall nectar be distilled. 

^ In Hindi apothecaries’ weight a tank is equal to four mashas, a 
masha is eight ratlis, and a raiti is the weight of eight grains of rice. 

* As a camel is led. ^ Msjh ki War. ■* The Sassia latifolia, 

* This is generally the bark of the kikar, or Acacia Arabica. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 159 

Father, by quaffing the divine juice the mind becometh 
intoxicated and easily absorbed in God’s love. 

I have arranged to fix my attention on God day and 
night, and heard the unbeaten sound. 

God is true, His cup is pure ; He giveth it to drink to 
him on whom He casteth a favouring glance. 

Why should he who dealeth in nectar feel love for paltry 
wine ? 

The Guru’s word is a nectar-speech ; by drinking it man 
becometh acceptable. 

When man performeth service at God’s gate^ to obtain 
a sight of Him, what careth he for salvation or paradise ? 

He who is dyed with God’s praises never loveth the world, 
and loseth not his life in the game. 

Saith Nanak, hear, Jogi Bharthari, I am intoxicated with 
the nectareous stream.® 

The Jogis inquired if he lived by begging. The 
Guru replied, ‘ Why should he who is absorbed in 
the Formless go to beg alms ? ’ They then asked 
if he were an Udasi or hermit. The Guru replied : — 

He who taketh the sword of knowledge and wrestleth 
with his heart ; 

Who knoweth the secrets of the ten organs of action and 
perception * and of the five evil passions ; 

Who can knot divine knowledge to his mind ; 

Who maketh pilgrimage on each of the three hundred and 
sixty days of the year ; 

Who washeth the filth of -pride from his heart — 

Nanak saith, he is a hermit. 

1 Sikhs and Moslems use the expression ‘ Gate of God ' for God’s 
throne or God’s court. The latent allusion is to a king who removes 
himself from his subjects’ gaze. It is at his gate those who appeal to 
him for justice wait, and it is at his gate when he goes forth his 
subjects can obtain a sight of him. 

® Asa. 

® The organs of action are the mouth, the hands, the feet, and the 
generative and excretory organs. The organs of perception are the 
five senses. 



l6o THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Jogis then asked the Guru if he were an 
Audhut. The Guru told them what an Audhut 
ought to be : — 

He is a servant of the Guru who restraineth his sexual 
organs, 

Whose heart is free from worldly desires, whose words are 
true, 

And who receiveth as his alms the glance with which the 
Merciful One beholdeth him. 

Know him to be meek whose heart is meek. 

And whose instruction is the profitable Word. 

Nanak saith, he is an Audhut 

Whose mind is not fickle, who goeth not to spectacles. 
Or to gamble or play chaupar, 

Who attacheth not his mind to things bad or good. 

Who weareth on his body whatever is given by the Guru, 
Who, when he goeth to another’s house, talketh not 
scandal. 

Who ohserveth the restraint put on him by the true Guru, 
And who receiveth the Guru’s instructions — O holy man, 
Nanak saith, such a man is an Audhut. 

The Jogis then desired to know if he were a Jogi, 
and the Guru replied : — 

To remain seated without support. 

To collect and restrain the five evil passions. 

To sleep little and take scant food. 

To keep guard over the saintly body. 

To be constant in devotion, penance, self-restraint, and 
remembrance of God — 

Nanak saith, these are the marks of a Jogi. 


When he speaketh, he uttereth divine wisdom ; 

He day and night waketh in the contemplation of God ; 
He attacheth a string to the vacant sphere,^ 

And by the Guru’s favour never dieth. 

All the gods do obeisance to him 

^ That is, he fixes his attention on God. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


i6i 


Who in this way performeth the Guru’s service, 

And who alloweth not his tongue to taste dainties — 
Nanak saith, these are the marks of a Jogi. 

He who effaceth wrath, avarice, and greed ; 

Who quencheth the fire of the five evil passions Within his 
heart ; 

Who day and night fiieth the kite 
By which divine knowledge is produced and evil inclina- 
tions depart ; 

Who cherisheth holiness, restraineth his evil passions 
And repeateth no spell but the Guru’s — 

The habits of that good man are the best — 

Nanak saith, these are the marks of a Jogi. 

He who maketh his body the vessel, remembrance of 
God his milk. 

Who putteth pure truth into it as his acid. 

Who by contrivance and effort easily curdleth the milk — 
Without contrivance it would be spoiled — 

Who useth divine knowledge as his churning staff and 
the Name as its string ; 

Who in this way repeateth only the Name, 

And who by rolling and rolling extracteth the butter— 
Nanak saith, these are the marks of a Jogi. 

The Jogis wondered if he were a Bairagi. The 
Guru defined the word for them : — 

He is a Bairagi who is sold to God, 

Who in the presence of God subdueth mammon. 

Who performeth the work of God and mammon,^ 

Who beareth an unbearable and intangible thing. 

Who hath abandoned wrath, avarice, and pride — 

Nanak saith, such a man is a Bairagi. 

He who abideth lonely in the house of enjo3nnent. 

And dwelleth in the house of worship — 

^ That is, who performs his worldly avocations and thinks of 
God at the same time. 


UKH. I 


M 



i 62 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Where the cat fleeth at the sound of a mouse * — 

Nanak saith, is a Bairagi. 

He is a Bairagi who embraceth contentment, 

Who reverseth his breath and is absorbed in God, 

Who subjecteth to himself the five senses — 

Such a Bairagi shall rise higher than Shiv. 

He who renounceth evil ways and fixeth his attention on 
the one God, 

Nanak saith, is a Bairagi. 

Upon this the followers of Gorakhnath pressed 
the Guru to adopt the style of a Jogi. The Guru 
asked them to describe a J ogi. They replied : — 

A Jogiweareth earrings, a patched coat, carrieth a wallet, 
a staff. 

And a deer’s horn which soundeth through the world. 

The Jogis were proceeding to give a further de- 
scription of their sect when the Guru interrupted 
and offered spiritual substitutes for all the externals 
of a Jogi 

Put the Guru’s word into thy heart for the rings in thine 
ears ; wear the patched coat of forbearance ; 

Whatever God doeth consider as good ; in this way shalt 
thou easily obtain the treasure of jog. 

O father, in this way the soul which hath been a pilgrim 
in every age, uniteth with the Supreme Essence. 

He who obtaineth the ambrosial name of the Pure One, 
and maketh reflection his Jogi’s cup. 

Divine knowledge his staff, and the Omnipresent the 
ashes he smear eth on his body, shall enjoy the great elixir 
of divine knowledge. 

Make God’s praise thy prayer, the Guru’s instruction 
thy sect of Atits,® 

The renunciation of desires and quarrels thy sitting in 
contemplation in God’s citadel • — 

® Where hypocrisy flees before humility. 

® By AUts here is meant of Jogis who consider themselves 

liberated from worldly restrai^. ® The brain. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 163 

From the sound of thy horn a melody shall thus be pro- 
duced which day and night shall fill thee with music. 

In everything is Thy light contained, 0 God, and many 
and various are its colours. 

Saith Nanak, hear, Jogi Bharthari, the Primal God is the 
sole object of my love.* 

During his residence in Batala the Guru composed 
the Sidh Gosht, a treatise from which the Jogis are 
said to have derived spiritual consolation. 


Chapter XIV 

The Guru continued his journey to the north. 
He wore leather on his feet and on his head, 
twisted a rope round his body, and on his forehead 
stamped a saffron tilak. He was accompanied 
by Hassu, a smith, and Sihan, a calico-printer. The 
party went as far as Srinagar in Kashmir, where 
they stayed some time and made many converts. 

Brahm Das was then the most eminent of the 
Kashmiri pandits. On hearing of the Guru’s arrival, 
he went to pay him a formal visit. The better to 
impress the Guru with his piety and learning, he 
wore an idol suspended from his neck, and took 
with him two loads of Sanskrit books. On seeing 
the Guru’s dress he said, * Is that the sort of faqir 
thou art ? Why wearest thou leather, which is 
unclean ? Why twistest thou a rope round thy 
body ? Why hast thou abandoned the observances 
of thy religion ? And why eatest thou flesh and 
fish ? ’ The Guru, not paying much attention to 
these impertinent questions, thus unburdened him- 
self of the thoughts which filled his mind : — 

There is but one road, one door ; the Guru is the ladder 
to reach one’s home. 

Beautiful is God ; Nanak, all happiness is in His name; 


* Asa. 
M 2 



164 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Pauri 

God Himself created and recognized His creation. 

He separated the earth from the sky and spread a canopy 
over it. 

He fixed the heavens without pillars by the utterance of 
a word. 

Having created the sun and moon, He infused His light 
into them. 

He made the wonderful play of night and day. 

Pilgrimage, religion, meditation, and bathing on holy 
days — 

None of these is equal to Thee, O God ; how can I describe 
Thee? 

Thou sittest on a true throne ; all else are subject to birth 
and death. 

After a pause the Guru again burst forth in God’s 
praises : — 

Thou, O God, who didst diffuse truth, art the truest of 
the true. 

Thou sittest in an attitude of contemplation concealed in 
the lotus of the heart. 

Brahma called himself great, but he found not Thy 
limit. 

Thou hast no father or mother ; who begot Thee ? 

Thou art devoid of all form, outline, or caste. 

Thou feelest not hunger or thirst ; Thou art satisfied and 
satiated. 

The great God is contained in Himself, and hath diffused 
His word. 

They who are satisfied with the True One are absorbed in 
Him.^ 

Brahm Das then recognizing the Guru’s piety and 
genius fell at his feet, and asked him what existed 
before creation ? The Guru in reply uttered the 
following hymn known as Solaha* in Rag Maru : — 

^ Mal3r ki War. > A hymn containing sixteen stanzas. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 165 

In the beginning ^ there was indescribable darkness ; 

Then was not earth or heaven, naught hut God’s unequalled 
order. 

Then was not day, or night, or moon, or sun ; God was 
meditating on the void. 

Then were not the mines of production, or voices, or wind, 
or water ; 

Neither creation nor destruction, nor coming nor going. 

Then were not continents, or hells, or seven seas, or rivers, 
or flowing streams , 

Nor was there paradise, or a tortoise,* or nether regions ; 

Or the hell or heaven of the Muhammadans, or the destroyer 
Death ; 

Or the hell or heaven of the Hindus, or birth, or death ; 
nor did any one come or go. 

Then was no Brahma, Vishnu, or Shiv : 

No one existed but the One God. 

Then was no female, or male, or caste, or birth ; nor did 
any one feel pain or pleasure. 

There was no J ati, Sati,* or dweller in the forest ; 

There was no Sidh, or Striver, or dweller at ease ; 

No Jogi, or Jangam, or religious garb ; nor did any one 
call himself a Nath ; * 

No devotion, penance, austerity, fasting, or worship ; 

Nor did any one speak or tell of duality.® 

God Himself having created was pleased, and valued what 
He had done. 

There was no purification, or self-restraint, or necklace of 
sweet basil ; 

There was no milkmaid, or Krishan, or cow, or herdsman ; 


^ Ariad is here understood to be iox arambh. A rbud in Sanskrit 
means a number of one hundred millions, so arbad narbad may also 
mean— for countless years. 

* Which some Hindus believe supports the earth. 

* Sati means a faithful wife, especially one who cremates herself 
with her deceased husband. 

® A superior of Jogis. 

® Dwait, duality, in the Sikh writings means the worship of other 
than God. 



i66 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


No incantations or spells, no hypocrisy, nor did any one 
play on the flute.' 

There were no acts attaching to the soul, or religion, or the 
gadfly of mammon. 

No one saw caste or birth with his eyes. 

There was not the net of pride, nor was death written on 
man’s brow, nor did man meditate on aught created.* 

There was no slander, no seed, no soul, no life. 

There was no Gorakh or Machhindar.* 

Nor was there divine knowledge, or meditation, or nobility; 
nor did any one have conceit of himself. 

There was no caste or religious garb, no Brahman or Khatri ; 

No demigod, no temple, no cow, no gayatri,* 

No horn, no sacred feasts, no places of pilgrimage to bathe 
in, nor did any one perform worship. 

There was no MuUa or any Qazi ; 

No Shaikh, no Disciple, no Haji ; ® 

No subject or king ; nor was pride in the world, nor did 
any one give himself a great name. 

There was no love, no service, no Shiv, or energy 
of his ; « 

No friend, no helper, no seed, no blood.’ 

God Himself was the merchant. Himself the dealer — such 
was the will of the True One — 

' One of Krishan’s youthful accomplishments. 

* Literally — nor did any one meditate on any one else. That is, 
no one then worshipped the gods or idols of the Hindus. 

* Machhindar is described in a verse attributed to GorakhnSth as 
his father. 

* The gayalri is the spell of the Hindus. It is now recited as 
follows: 0am, bhur, bhuvas, svar, tat savitur varenyam, bhargo 
devasya, dhimaht dhiyo yo natt prachodyat ‘ 0am, earth and air and sky, 
let us meditate on that excellent sun the bright god, which stimulateth 
our intellects.’ The late Professor Max Mttller gave the following 
translation — ‘ We meditate on the adorable light of the divine Savitri, 
that he may rouse our thoughts.' 

* This word is applied to Muhammadans who have made the 
pilgrimage to Makka. 

* Shiv’s energy or consort was variously named PSrbati, Durga, &c. 

’ ‘ No seed, no blood’ : this refers to the male and female func- 
tions of generation. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 167 

Then were no Veds or Muhammadan books,* no Simritis, 
no Shastars ; 

No reading of the Purans, no sunrise, no sunset. 

The Imperceptible God was Himself the speaker and 
preacher ; Himself unseen He saw everything. 

When He pleased He created the world ; 

Without supports He sustained the sky. 

He created Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv, and extended the 
love of mammon. 

He communicated the Guru’s words to some few persons. 

He issued His order and watched over all. 

He began with the continents, the universe, and the 
nether regions, and brought forth what had been hidden. 

His limit no one knoweth. 

From the True Guru I have learned, 

Nanak, that they who are imbued with the truth are 
wonderful, and delight in singing God’s praises. 

Upon this Brahm Das again fell at the Guru’s 
feet, cast away the idol from his neck, and, becoming 
a worshipper of God, performed service for the 
Guru. His evil desires, however, departed not. 
Whatever service he performed was brief and per- 
functory, for he thought to himself that he had 
performed similar service before; but whatever he 
did was of no avail on account of his pride. 

At one of their meetings the Guru told him to take 
a guru. He inquired, ‘ What guru shall I take ? ’ 
The Guru bade him go to a certain house in the 
wilderness where he should find four faqirs, and they 
would inform him. The pandit went to them, and 
they, after some delay, pointed out a temple in which 
they said he should find his guru. The pandit pro- 
ceeded thither, but instead of receiving a courteous 
reception, was shoe-beaten in a piteous manner by 
a woman in red who guarded the temple. Crying 
bitterly he returned to the four men who had dis- 

* They are described as the Psalms of David, the Old Testa- 
ment, the New Testament, and the QurSn. 



i68 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


patched him on the unpleasant errand. They 
inquired if he had found a guru, and in reply he 
told them his painful story. They explained to him 
that the woman was Maya, or worldly love ; and 
that she for whom he had so longed was his guru. 
The pandit returned to the Guru, and fell at his 
feet. He then cast away his two loads of books, 
began to repeat God’s name, and became so humble 
as to be. as it were, the dust of the earth. The 
pandit inquired who were happy in this world. The 
Guru rephed with the following sloks, which Hassu 
and Sihan committed to writing ; — 

Indar wept after his thousandfold punishment ; ^ 

Paras Ram wept on his return home ; * 

King Ajai* wept after eating what he had obtained as 
alms — 

Such is the punishment meted out in God's court — 

Ram wept when he was expelled from his kingdom, 

And separated from Sita and Lachhman.* 

Rawan, who took away Sita with beat of drum, 

Wept when he had lost Lanka 

The Pandavs ® though their master ’ had been with them, 
Became slaves and wept ; 

^ Indar was the god of the firmament. His punishment was for his 
effort to seduce Ahalya, the wife of the sage Gautama. 

* Paras Ram. Ram with the axe was the sixth avatar of Vishnu 
and preceded the Ram of Indian popular worship. He is said to 
have cleared the earth twenty-one times of the Kshatriyas. He then 
gave it to the sage Kashyapa and retired to the Mahendra mountains. 
The text alludes to his subsequent homeward return. 

® Aj was grandfather of Ram Chandar. One day when hunting 
he dipped a cloth in the blood of a deer which he had shot, and in 
order to test his wife's affection sent it to her wiUt a dying message 
that he had been killed in the hunting-field. She, believing the mes- 
senger, at once cremated herself with the cloth she had received. 
King Aj on returning home found out what had occurred, and was 
so overcome with grief and sorrow, that he abandoned his throne and 
retired from the world to do penance for his crime. 

® Lachhman was Ram’s brother. 

® Lanka. This was the ancient name of Ceylon, where Rawan ruled. 

• The opponents of the Kauravs in the great war which forms the 

subject of the Mahahhardt. ’ Krishan. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


169 


Janameja ^ wept when be went astray 

For one offence he was deemed a sinner — 

Shaikhs, Disciples and Pirs * weep 

For fear of suffering at the last moment ; 

Kings wept when their ears were torn,® 

And they went to beg alms from door to door ; 

The miser wept at his departure from the weeilth he had 
amassed ; 

The pandit wept when he had lost his learning ; 

The young girl who hath no husband weepeth — 

Nanak, the whole world is in misery. 

He who revereth the Name is victorious ; 

No other act is of any avail.^ 

The Guru, leaving Srinagar, penetrated the Hima- 
laya mountains, and scaled numerous lofty peaks 

^ Janameja, king of Hastinapura, who listened to the long Sanskrit 
epic Mahabharat in expiation of the sin of killing Brahmans. 

® Firs are Muhammadan saints. 

® The reference is to Gopi Chand and Bharthari. Bharthari was 
king of Ujjain. In his state there lived a Brahman who by his austeri- 
ties had obtained the fruit of immortality. Not deeming it useful to 
himself he presented it as a fitting offering to his monarch. He being 
in love with his queen presented it to her. She being in love with the 
head police officer of the state presented it to him. He being in love 
with a favourite courtesan presented it to her. She being in love with 
the king presented it to him. On being informed of the strange vicis- 
situdes of the fruit of immortality, and pondering on the instability of 
love and friendship, Bharthari aMicated and became a religious men- 
dicant. 

Gopi Chand was king of Bengal, whose capital, according to legend, 
was then Doulagarh. His mother MenSwati was RSja Bharthari’s 
sister. One day as Gopi Chand was bathing, his mother, seated in an 
upper chamber, admired his beauty, but at the same time felt that he 
was not so handsome as his father, her late husband. Death had 
taken him, it would also take Gopi Chand. Gopi Chand as he bathed 
felt moisture falling on him, and was told in reply to his inquiries 
that it was his mother’s tears. He tried to console her and said that 
death was the way of the world, and one must not endeavour to resist 
Nature’s primordial law. On reflection she decided that Gopi Chand 
should become a faqlr under the spiritual guidance of Jalandhamlith. 
Gopi Chand abdicated, proceeded to him, and after many troubles 
received, it is said, instruction how to overcome death. 

* RSmkali ki War. 



170 THE SIKH RELIGION 

uiitil he arrived at Mount Sumer. He there met 
many renowned Sidhs. When the Guru had made his 
obdsance and sat down, they inquired whence he 
had come and in what state he had left Hindustan. 
He replied : — 

The Kal age is a knife, kings are butchers ; justice hath 
taken wings and fled. 

In this ccanpletely dark night of falsehood the moon of 
truth is never seen to rise. 

I have become perplexed in my search : 

In the darkness I find no way. 

Devoted to pride, I weep in sorrow : 

Saith Nanak, how shall deliverance be obtained ? ^ 

On this the Sidhs requested the Guru to join them 
in praising God. Having done so he put his subse- 
quent conversation with them into the following 
form : — 

The Sidhs holding an assembly sat in religious attitude 
— ^hail to the assembly of the saints ! 

I offer my prayer to Him who is the true and Infinite One. 

I will cut off my head and lay it before Him ; I will 
place before Him my soul and body, 

Nanak, by meeting a holy man the True One is found, 
and honour is easily obtained. 

Is the True and Pure One obtained by wandering ? 

There is no salvation without the True Word 

The Sidhs asked : — 

‘ Who art thou ? What is thy name ? What is thy sect 
and what thine object ? 

‘ Speak the truth ; this is what we urge ; we are a 
sacrifice to saintly men. 

‘ Where is thy seat ; where dwellest thou, O youth ? 
Whence hast thou come, au4 whither goest thou ? 

‘Hear, O Nanak,* said the Sidhs, ‘What are thy 
tenets ? ’ 


^ Majh ki War. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 


171 

Nanak — ‘ I d\vell in God who hath His seat in every 
heart ; I act according to the will of the True Guru. 

‘ I came in the course of nature, and according to God’s 
order shall I depart. Nanak is ever subject to His will. 

‘ To be fixed in God is my prayerful attitude ; such know- 
ledge have I obtained from the Guru. 

‘ If one understand the Guru’s instruction and know him- 
self, then he being true shall be absorbed in the True One.’ 

A Sidh called Charpat asked : — 

‘ The world is an ocean, and is said to be difficult to cross ; 
how shall man traverse it ? ’ 

Saith Charpat, ‘ O Audhut Nanak, give a true reply.’ 

Nanak — ‘ Thou sayest so ; thou thyself understandest ; 
What answer can I give thee ? 

* I speak truly ; thou hast reached the distant shore ; 
how can I argue with thee ? 

‘ As a lotus in the water remaineth dry, as also a water- 
fowl in the stream, 

‘ So by meditating on the Word and repeating God’s 
name,’ ‘ shalt thou be unaffected by the world.’ 

Nanak is a slave to those who remain apart from the 
world, in whose hearts the one God abideth, who live 
without desires in the midst of desires. 

And who see and show to others the inaccessible and 
incomprehensible God.^ 

The Sidhs then said ‘ All hail ! ’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ All hail to the Primal Being ! ’ 

Several Sikhs suppose that Guru Nanak com- 
posed the Sidh Gosht on that occasion when he 
found leisure and retirement for composition, v 


Chapter XV 

After his sojourn with the Sidhs the Guru returned 
to the plains of the Panjab and travelled in a north- 
westerly direction until he reached Hasan Abdal, 

^ Sidh Gosht. 



172 THE SIKH RELIGION 

then a great centre of Muhammadan religious 
enthusiasm. 

There abode on a small hillock a bigoted and 
selfish priest known as Bawa Wali of Kandhar. 
The Guru and his minstrel needed water for their 
evening repast, and it could only be obtained from 
the Wali. Mardana told him that he and Guru 
Nanak had arrived, and he advised him to see the 
Guru, who was a great saint of God. Bawa Wali, 
who claimed exclusive holiness for himself, became 
offended on hearing the Guru’s praises, and refused 
the required water. He said if Mardana’s master 
were such a holy man, he ought to provide water for 
himself. When this reply was communicated to the 
Guru, he sent Mardana back to the Wali with the 
message that he himself was a very poor creature 
of God, and laid no claims to the character of a 
saint. The Wali paid no heed to this protestation, 
but persisted in his refusal to afford water to the 
Guru and his minstrel. The Guru was then com- 
pelled to bore a hole near where he had taken 
shelter, and a stream of water immediately issued 
forth. Upon this, the Wali’s well dried up, there 
being only a limited supply of water in the locality. 
The Wali’s rage naturally increased, and it is said 
that he hurled the hillock upon Guru Nanak’s un- 
offending head. The Guru, on seeing the descend- 
ing volume of earth, raised his right arm to protect 
himself. It is related that upon this the fall of the 
hillock was arrested. The impression of the palm 
of the Guru’s hand was left on the descending mass, 
which is now known as ‘Panja Sahib’ and held in 
reverence by the Sikhs. 

After a brief residence in Hasan Abdal the Guru 
proceeded to Gorakh-Hatari, a quarter of the city 
of Peshawar on the frontier of the Pan jab where 
there is an ancient temple of Gorakhnath. The 
Jogis having heard of his fame were anxious to 
discover how he had acquired such moral and 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 173 

spiritual influence, and, when the Guru was seated, 
put him the questions contained in the first four 
verses of the following hymn. The Guru’s replies 
follow:— 

What callest thou that gate at which thou sittest ? Who 
can see the gate within it ? 

Let some one come and describe to me that gate to attain 
which the Udasi wandereth. 

How shall we cross the ocean ? 

Row shall we be dead when alive ? 

Sorrow is the gate, wrath the porter, hope and anxiety 
its folding-doors. 

Mammon is a moat, domestic life its water ; man abideth 
by taking his seat on truth. 

How many names hast Thou, 0 God ! Their limit cannot 
be known ; there is none equal to Thee. 

Man ought not to call himself exalted, but dwell in his own 
thoughts ; what God deemeth proper, He doeth. 

As long as there is desire, so long is there anxiety ; how 
can one who feeleth it speak of the one God ? 

When man in the midst of desires remaineth free from 
desires, then, O Nanak, he meeteth the one God. 

In this way shall he cross the ocean. 

And thus be dead while alive.^ 

On uttering this hymn the Guru was pressed to 
adopt the style and religion of a Jogi. The principles 
of the Jogis’ sect were explained to him. The Guru 
replied : — 

The Word is my meditation, divine instruction the music 
of my horn for men to hear ; 

Honour is my begging-wallet, and uttering the Name my 
alms. 

Father, Gorakh awaketh. 

Gorakh is He who lifted the earth and fashioned it without 
delay ; 


^ Rimkali. 



174 the SIKH RELIGION 

Who enclosed water, breath, and life in the body, and 
made the great lights of the moon and sun ; 

Who gave us the earth as our abode, but whose many 
favours we have forgotten. 

Sidhs, Strivers, Jogis, Jangams, and Pirs are many. 

If I obtain the Name from them, I will sing their praises, 
and serve them heartily — 

Paper and salt melt not in clarified butter ; the lotus 
remaineth unaffected by water — 

What can Death say to them, O Nanak, who meet such 
saints ? * 

After his successful discussion with the Jogis the 
Guru decided to visit Makka, the pole star of Muham- 
madan devotion. He disguised himself in the blue 
dress of a Muhammadan pilgrim, took a faqir’s 
staff in his hand and a collection of his hymns 
under his arm. He also carried with him in the style 
of a Musalman devotee a cup for his ablutions and 
a carpet whereon to pray. And when an oppor- 
tunity offered, he shouted the Muhammadan call to 
prayer like any orthodox follower of the Arabian 
prophet. As usual in his peregrinations, he was 
accompanied by his faithful minstrel and rebeck- 
player Mardana. It is recorded that whenever he 
met children on his journey he joined in their sports. 
He accidentally found a Muhammadan faqir also bent 
on the Makkan pilgrimage, and passed a night with 
him in pleasant spiritual converse. The pilgrim 
offered him his bhang-pouch, and asked whether 
he was a Hindu or a Musalman. The Guru replied 
with the hymn he had previously addressed to the 
Emperor Babar when he inquired what intoxication 
that was whose effects should never depart. 

As they proceeded on the road to Makka, it is said, 
a cloud they saw over their heads accompanied them. 
The pilgrim became alarmed at the unusual occur- 


^ Ramkali. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 175 

rence, and said to the Guru, ‘ No Hindu hath ever yet 
gone to Makka. Travel not with me ; either go before 
Or after.’ The Guru told the pilgrim to precede 
him. When the pilgrim turned round to see where 
his companion was, it is said he could see neither him 
nor the cloud. The pilgrim then began to wring his 
hands, and said, ‘ It was God who was with me, but 
I could not endure the sight of Him. He worked 
illusion on me.’ 

When the Guru arrived, weary and footsore, in 
Makka, he went and sat in the great mosque where 
pilgrims were engaged in their devotions. His 
disregard of Moslem customs soon involved him 
in difficulties. When he lay down to sleep at 
night he turned his feet towards the Kaaba. An 
Arab priest kicked him and said, ‘ Who is this sleeping 
infidel ? Why hast thou, O sinner, turned thy feet 
towards God ? ’ The Guru replied, ‘ Turn my feet in 
a direction in which God is not.’ ^ Upon this the 
priest seized the Guru’s feet and dragged them in 
the opposite direction, whereupon, it is said, the 
temple turned round, and followed the revolution of 
his body. Some understand this in a spiritual sense, 
and say it means that Guru Nanak made all Makka 
turn to his teaching. Those who witnessed this 
miracle were astonished and saluted the Guru as 
a supernatural being. 

The Qazis and the Mullas crowded round the 
Guru, and interrogated him on the subject of his 
reUgion. They admitted that he had accomplished 
a great feat, but the source of his power was not 
apparent. They opened his book, and seeing that 
it was on religious subjects, inquired which was 

^ Curious it is to find the same eitpression in an Italian Operatic 
writer of the eighteenth century. 

E se, dov' ei dimora, 

Non intendesti ancora, 

Confondimi, se puoi; 

Dimmi dov’ ei non h 

(Metastasio.) 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


176 

superior, the Hindu or the Muhammadan religion. 
The Guru replied, ‘ Without good acts the professors 
of both religions shall suffer. Neither the Hindus 
nor the Muhammadans shall obtain entrance into 
God’s court. All their devotions shall vanish like the 
fleeting dye of safflower. Both sects are jealous of 
each other. The Hindus insist on saying Ram and 
the Moslems Rahim, Hbut they know not the one 
God. Satan hath led them both along his own 
flowery way.’ On that occasion the Guru uttered 
the following hymn in the Tilang measure : — 

Thy fasting and worship shall be acceptable 

When thou, O man, keepest watch over the ten apertures 
of thy body, hatest the world, 

Chastenest thy mind, restrainest thy sight, and fleest 
worldly desires and wranglings. 

Every day of the month offer thy love to the Lord ; 
thus shalt thou be recognized as pure and gentle. 

Keep the fast of meditation, and let the renunciation of 
pleasure be thy dance ; 

Keep watch over thy heart, so shalt thou be a really 
learned man ; 

Abandon delights, ease, evil speaking, mental anxiety, 
and vexation ; 

Treasure kindness in thy heart, and renounce the devices 
of infidelity ; 

Extinguish the fire of lust in thy heart, and thus become 
cool. 

Saith Nanak, thus practise fasting, and thy faith shall be 
perfect.^ 

When the Guru had finished, the Qazi said, ‘ Well 
done ! I have to-day for the first time seen a real 
saint of God.’ The Qazi then went and told the high 
priest that the darwesh Nanak had arrived. The 
high priest went to see him, shook hands with him. 


^ This hymn is not found in the Granth Sshib. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 177 

and sat down beside him. He thanked God that 
Nanak had come. 

The high priest asked Nanak if the Hindus who 
read the Veds, and the Musalmans who read the 
Quran, should or should not find God. The Guru 
courageously replied with the following outspoken 
h5ann of Kabir : — 

O brethren, the Veds and the Quran are false, and free 
not the mind from anxiety. 

If for a moment thou restrain thy mind, God will appear 
before thee. 

0 man, search thy heart daily, that thou mayest not again 
fall into despair. 

This world is a magic show which hath no reality. 

Men are pleased when they read falsehood, and quarrel 
over what they do not understand. 

The truth is, the Creator is contained in the creation ; 
He is not of a blue colour in the guise of Vishnu. 

Thou shouldst have bathed in the river which floweth 
in heaven.^ 

Take heed ; ever fix thine eyes on Him who is every- 
where present.* 

God is the purest of the pure ; shall I doubt whether 
there is another equal to Him ? * 

Kabir, he to whom the Merciful hath shown mercy, 
knoweth Him. 

The high priest then asked how God might be 
obtained by men. The Guru replied that it was by 
humility and prayer. He added the following hymn 
in the Persian language : — 

1 make one supplication before Thee ; lend Thine 
ear, O Creator. 

^ In the brain instead of the Ganges and other sacred streams of 
the Hindus. 

* Also translated — Embrace perpetual poverty, fix thy mental eyes 
on God, and thou shalt behold Him everywhere present. 

* Also translated — If there be- another like Him, then entertain 
doubt. 


SIKH. I 


N 



178 THE SIKH RELIGION 

0 God, Thou art great and merciful ; Thou art th6 fault- 
less Cherisher. 

The world is a perishable abode ; O my heart, know 
this as the truth. 

Azrail ^ seizeth me by the hair of my head ; yet thou 
knowest it not, 0 my heart. 

There shall be no wife, no son, no father, no brother, 
no one to take my hand. 

There shall be no one to hinder my falling at last when 
my fate * cometh. 

1 have passed my nights and days in vanity, and my 
thoughts have been evil. 

I have never done a good act — this is my condition ; 

I am unfortunate, I am also miserly and negligent ; I 
see not, and I fear not. 

Nanak saith, I am Thy slave, and the dust of the feet 
of Thy servants.® 

The high priest then asked the Guru to tell him 
the composition of matter, the nature of the God he 
adored, how He was to be found, and in what con- 
sisted the essence of his religion. The Guru replied 
again in the Persian language ; — 

Know that according to the Musalmans everything is 
produced from air, fire, water, and earth ; 

But the pure God created the world out of five 
elements.* 

However high man may leap, he shall fall on the earth 
again. 

Even though a bird fly, it cannot compete in endurance 
with the torrent and the wind which move by God’s will. 

How great shall I call God ? to whom shall I go to in- 
quire regarding Him ? 

* AzrSII is frequently mentioned in the Sikh sacred writings. In 
the Muhammadan dispensation he is the minister of Death who 
separates men’s souls from their bodies by violently tearing them 
asunder. TYie Qurdn, Siiras 32 and 79. 

■ * TdktAr is ul^rstood to be for ‘the Arabic taqdir, destiny. 

® Tilang. * AkSsh, or ether, being the fifth. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 179 

He is the greatest of the great, and great is His world ; 
men depart in their pride. 

I have consulted the four Veds, but these writings find 
not God’s limits. 

I have consulted the four books of the Muhammadans, 
but God's worth is not described in them. 

I have consulted the nine regions of the earth ; one 
improveth upon what the other saith. 

Having turned my heart into a boat, I have searched in 
every sea ; 

I have dwelt by rivers and streams, and bathed at the 
sixty-eight places of pilgrimage ; 

I have lived among the forests and glades of the three 
worlds and eaten bitter and sweet ; 

I have seen the seven nether regions and heavens upon 
heavens. 

And /, Nanak, say man shall be true to his faith if he 
fear God and do good works.^ 

In due time the Guru proceeded to Madina, where 
he vanquished the Muhammadan priests in argu- 
ment. Thence he journeyed to Baghdad, and took 
up his position outside the city. He shouted the 
call to prayer, on which the whole population 
became wrapt in silent astonishment.* The high 
priest of Baghdad, on meeting face to face the 
enthusiastic stranger, inquired who he was and to 
what sect he belonged. The Guru replied, ' I have 
appeared in this age to indicate the way unto men. 
I reject all sects, and only know one God, whom 
I recognize in the earth, the heavens, and in all 
directions.’ 

Upon this the Guru began to repeat the Japji. 
As the high priest listened to its doctrines he said, 
‘ This is a very impious faqir. He is working 

^ Banno’s Granth Silhib. 

^ It is certain that the Guru omitted the words Muhammad or rasul 
Allah of the creed, and substituted Arabic words of a similar sound to 
express his own ideas. Hence the astonishment of the people. 

N 2 



i8o THE SIKH RELIGION 

miracles here, and informing us, contrary to the 
authority of our holy Quran, that there are hundreds 
of thousands of nether and upper regions, and that 
at last men grow weary of searching for them/ 
The high priest then called upon the Guru to give 
a manifestation of his power. Upon this, it is said, 
the Guru laid his hand on the high priest’s son and 
showed him the upper and lower regions described 
in the Japji.' 

The Guru having accomplished his mission in the 
West resolved to return to his own country. When 
he arrived in Multan, the local high priest presented 
him with a cup of milk filled to the brim. By this 
he meant it to be understood that the city was full 
of holiness already, and that there was no room for 
another religious teacher. The Guru, in no wise 
disconcerted, took the milk and laid on it an Indian 
jasmin flower. The cup did not overflow. This 
typified that there was still room for the Guru in 
the midst of the Multanis, as there is still room for 
the ever flowing Ganges in the ocean. 

The Guru, after a brief sojourn in Multan, set out 
for Kartarpur. His reputation daily increased in 
the world, and men meditated on his name. He 
insisted that praying for anything except God’s 
name merely conferred on man a crown of sorrow. 
By this time the Guru had founded a pure religion 
and made his coin current in the world. 

In due time the Guru and his minstrel arrived at 
Kartarpur on the right bank of the river Ravi, 
opposite the present town of Dehra Baba Nanak. 
There he doffed his pilgrim’s dress, and donned 
worldly garments in order to show that he did not 
desire men to devote themselves exclusively to an 
ascetic life. At the same time he sat on his re- 
ligious stool, and began to preach to the people. 

During Guru Nanak’s stay at Kartarpur he con- 


1 Japji, Pauri xxiii. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK i8i 

tinued to compose hymns which diffused spiritual 
light and dispelled mental darkness. He ever con- 
versed on rehgious subjects, and divine measures 
were ever sung in his presence. The Sodar and the 
Sohila were chanted in the evening and the Japji 
repeated at the ambrosial hour of morning.^ 

At Kartarpur, Mardana, the Guru’s faithful 
minstrel, advanced in years and wearied with his 
long wanderings and physical privations, fell ill. 
He felt that he had no hope of longer life, and 
resigned himself to man’s inevitable fate. He 
had originally been a Muhammadan, but, being 
now a Sikh, the question arose as to how his 
body should be disposed of after death. The Guru 
said, ‘ A Brahman’s body is thrown into water, 
a Khatri’s is burnt in the fire, a Vaisya’s is thrown 
to the winds, and a Sudra’s is buried in the earth. 
Thy body shall be disposed of as thou pleasest.’ 
Mardana replied, ‘ Through thine instruction the 
pride of my body hath totally departed. With the 
four castes the disposal of the body is a matter of 
pride. I deem my soul merely as a spectator of my 
body, and am not concerned with the latter. Where- 
fore ^spose of it as thou pleasest.’ Then the Guru 
said, ‘ Shall I make thee a tomb and render thee 
famous in the world.’ Mardana rephed, ‘ When my 
soul hath been separated from its bodily tomb, why 
shut it up in a stone tomb ? ’ The Guru answered, 
‘ Since thou knowest God and art therefore a Brah- 
man, we shall dispose of thy body by throwing it 
into the river Ravi and letting it go with the stream. 
Sit down therefore on its margin in prayerful posture* 
fix thine attention on God, repeat His name at every 
inspiration and expiration, and thy soul shall be 
absorbed in the light of God.’ Mardana accordingly 
sat down by the river, and his soul separated from 
its earthly enclosure the following morning at a watch 


^ A translation of these divine services will be found in this volume. 



i 82 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


before day. The Guru then, by the aid of his Sikhs, 
consigned Mardana's body to the river Ravi,^ caused 
the Sohila to be read for his eternal repose, and con- 
cluded the obsequies by distributing karah parshad * 
(sacred food). The Guru counselled Mardana’s son 
Shahzada and his relations not to weep. There 
ought to be no lamentation for a man who was 
returning to his heavenly home, and therefore no 
mourning for Mardana.^ 

The Guru bade Shahzada remain with him in the 
same capacity as his father, and he would be held 
in equal honour. Accordingly Shahzada, the Guru’s 
faithful friend and minstrel, accompanied him to the 
time of his death. 

In the Granth Sahib are found three sloks of 
the Guru, dedicated to Mardana, against the use of 
wine. The following, which may conveniently be 
given here, will suffice as a specimen : — 

The barmaid is misery, wine is lust ; man is the drinker. 

The cup filled with worldly love is wrath, and it is served 
by pride. 

The company is false and covetous, and is ruined by 
excess of drink. 

Instead of such wine make good conduct thy yeast, truth 
thy molasses, God’s name thy wine ; 

Make merits thy cakes, good conduct thy clarified butter, 
and modesty thy meat to eat. 

Such things, 0 Nanak, are obtained by the Guru’s favour ; 
by partaking of them sins depart.* 


Chapter XVI 

There lived in a town called Khadur a Sikh 
named Jodhawho used to repeat God’s name while 

* It is stated in several Sikh works that Mardana’s body was 
crenaated. 

* The recipe for the preparation of karSA parshad, or SBlih sacred 
food, wiU be given in the life of Guru Gobind Singh, vol. v. 

* Gy&n Raianawali. * BihSgre ki War. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK i8t$ 

the rest of the inhabitants worshipped Durga. 
Their priest was a man called Lahina. One day 
when Jodha was repeating Guru Nanak’s Japji, 
Lahina heard him and inquired whose composition 
it was, Jodha duly informed him, and they became 
intimate. On being introduced to the Guru, Lahina 
told his name, upon which the Guru said, ‘Thy 
lahina is here, where else can it be found?’ In 
the Panjabi language the word lahina means to take 
or receive, and the Guru meant, ‘ What thou de- 
sirest to receive — salvation — is here, and nowhere 
else.’ After some spiritual instruction from the lips 
of the Guru, Lahina threw away the tinkling bells 
he wore on his hands and feet to dance before the 
goddess, and began to repeat God’s name. He 
made it a practice afterwards to perform menial 
service for the Guru.^ 

It is said that Lahina in a vision saw a female in 
a red dress shampooing the Guru. Lahina asked 
her who she was. She replied that she was Durga, 
and that she came once a week to do service for 
the Guru. On this Lahina became convinced of 
the divine mission of Guru Nanak. 

A Jogiwent to visit the Guru and congratulate 
him on the large number of converts he had made 
The Guru replied that he had few real Sikhs, as the 
Jogi himself would see. The Guru and the Jogi 
determined to proceed into the forest and there 
make trial of the Sikh converts who accompanied 
them in numbers. For this purpose the Guru 
assumed a terrible guise. He put on dirty, tattered 
clothes, took a knife in his hand, and proceeded with 
some hunting dogs into the forest, ostensibly in 
quest of game. On this several of his Sikhs fled. 
It was on that occasion the Guru composed the 
following : — 

^ A fuller account of Jodba’s influence on Lahina will be given in 
the Life of Guru Angad, Vol. II. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


184 

I have a dog ‘ and two bitches * with me ; 

Every morning they bark at the wind.® 

Falsehood is my hunting-knife and carrion its handle. 

0 Creator, I remain in the guise of a huntsman ; 

1 do not follow my Master’s counsel or do His work. 

I appear deformed and terrible. 

Thy Name alone saveth the world ; 

It is my support ; to obtain it is my desire. 

I utter calumny day and night ; 

I am base and worthless ; I covet my neighbour’s house. 

Lust and anger, which are pariahs, dwell in my heart. 

0 Creator, I remain in the guise of a huntsman ; 

In saint’s dress I meditate to entrap others. 

1 am a cheat in a country of cheats.* 

I deem myself very clever, and hear a great load of sin. 

O Creator, I remain in the guise of a huntsman. 

Ungrateful that I was, I did not appreciate what Thou 
didst for me. 

How can I, who am wicked and dishonest, show my face ? 

Humble Nanak expresseth his thoughts — 

O Creator, I remain in the guise of a huntsman.® 

As the party proceeded they found the road 
covered with copper coins. Some Sikhs took them 
up and departed. Further on were found silver 
coins. Several Sikhs took up the silver coins and 
returned home. As the Guru’s party proceeded 
further, they saw gold coins on the road. Several 
of the remaining Sikhs took up the gold coins and 
quickly vanished. Only the Jogi, two Sikhs, and 
the Guru’s attendant Lahina now remained. 

On proceeding further they found a funeral pyre. 
Near the corpse were four lighted lamps. A . sheet 
was stretched over it as it lay on the ground and 
emitted an offensive smell. The Guru said, ‘ Let 

* Avarice. ® Desire and covetousness. 

® The line means that desire and covetousness call in vain to the 
saint 

* Also translated — I am a cheat and cheat the country. 

* Sri Rag. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK i^5 

whoever wisheth to accompany me eat of this.’ 
The Sikhs quailed at the dreadful proposal, but 
Lahina remained staunch in his faith in the Guru. 
Without more ado he clasped his hands and asked 
the Guru if he should begin to eat the head or the 
feet of the corpse. The Guru told him to begin at 
the waist. Lahina lifted the winding-sheet in order 
to begin to eat, when lo ! it is said, a dish of sacred 
food appeared instead of the corpse ! Lahina offered 
the sacred food to the Guru first, and said he would 
partake of his leavings. The Guru replied, ‘ Thou 
hast obtained this sacred food because thou didst 
desire to share it with others. The Wealth given by 
God which man useth himself or burieth in the earth, 
is like carrion ; but the wealth which man shareth 
with others is as sacred food. Thou hast obtained 
my secret ; thou art in mine image. I will tell thee 
the real thing, the spell which is the essence of 
religion, and by which thou shalt have happiness 
here and hereafter. The following, which is the 
preamble of the Japji, is the spell meant by the 
Guru : — 

There is but one God whose name is True, the Creator, 
devoid of fear and enmity, immortal, unborn, self-existent, 
great, and bountiful. Repeat His name. 

The True One was in the beginning ; The True One was 
in the primal age ; 

The True One is, was, 0 Nanak ; the True One also shall be. 

The Guru instructed Lahina to utter the spell 
with a pure heart. It would fulfil all his desires, 
bestow happiness in this world and salvation in the 
next ; and by the continual practice of it the light 
of God should dawn in his heart. Upon this the 
, Jogi said, ‘ O Nanak, he shall be thy Guru who is 
produced from thy body — ;ang.’ Upon this the 
Guru embraced Lahina, addressed him as Angad, and 
promised that he should be his successor. The Jogi 
and the Guru then went to their respective homes. 



i86 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Sikhs who had deserted the Guru, afterwards 
bitterly regretted their conduct. They who had 
found the copper money said, that if they had gone 
further they would have found the silver money ; 
and they who had found the silver money said that 
if they had gone further, they would have found 
the gold money. Upon this the Guru composed the 
following ; — 

The words man speaketh shall be taken into account ; 
the food he eateth shall be taken into account ; 

Man’s movements shall be taken into account ; what 
he heareth and seeth shall be taken into account ; 

Every breath he draweth shall be taken into account ; 
why should I go and ask the learned ? 

O father, attachment to Maya is deceitful. 

He who being spiritually blind forgetteth God’s name, 
shall gain neither this world nor the next. 

Life and death are for everything that is born ; death 
devoureth everything here. 

Where the Judge sitteth and decideth, thither no one 
shall accompany thee. 

All who weep for thee tie up, as it were, a bundle of refuse.* 

Everybody saith that God is great ; nobody detracteth 
from Him ; 

But no one hath found His price ; He becometh not 
great by what man saith. 

O True Lord, Thou art one Lord; how many other worlds 
in which creatures dwell ! 

Nanak is with those who are low-born among the lowly ; 

Nay, who are lowest of the low ; how can he rival the 
great ? 

Where Thou, O Lord, watchest over the lowly. Thy look 
of favour shall be their reward.® 

The successor of Pir Baha-ul-Din, the Musalman 
prelate of Multan, went accompanied by several 
his followers to visit Guru Nanak. On meeting h^ 
he said, ‘ I have loaded the load ; do something 

* That is, they weep in vain. ® Sri Rag. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 187 

for me ' — that is, pray that I may have a successful 
journey to the next world. 

The Guru replied : — 

He who fUleth the sack shall load it on himself ; ^ the 
will of God is over all ; 

Nanak, they who have acted honestly shall depart with 
bright faces. 

The Guru, seeing the Pir prepared for death, said 
he would soon follow him himself. The Guru upon 
this composed the following hymn : — 

Wealth, youth, and flowers are guests® only for four days ;® 

They wither and fade like the leaves of the water lily. 

Enjoy God’s love, O dear one, in the freshness of youth. 

Few are thy days ; thou art wearied and the vesture of 
thy body hath grown old. 

My merry friends have gone to sleep in the grave. 

I too shall depart in sorrow, and weep with a feeble 
voice. 

O fair one,* why not attentively listen to this message ? 

Thou must go to thy father-in-law’s ; thou mayest not 
dwell for ever in thy father’s house. 

Nanak, know that she who sleepeth ® in her father's 
house, is robbed at an untimely season. 

She hath lost her bundle of merits and departed with 
a load of demerits.® 


Chapter XVII 

The Guru, knowing that his end was approach- 
ing, appointed Angad his successor. The Guru’s 
sons had not obeyed him. Their minds were insin- 
cere, and they had rebelled and deserted him. 
therefore he subsequently placed the umbrella 

* Man shall take with him the result of his acts. 

® hlathiare is connected with the Panjabi mthna, to run away. 

* Four days is a common Oriental expression for a short period. 

* The soul is here meant. 

Who awakes not in God’s service. ® Sri Rag. 



i88 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


of spiritual sovereignty over Angad’s head, and 
bowed to him in token of his succession to the 
Guruship. Then it became known to his people 
that Guru Nanak was about to die. Whole troops 
of Sikhs, Hindus, and Musalmans went to bid him 
farewell. Angad stood up before him in an attitude 
of supplication. When Guru Nanak had invited him 
to speak, he said, ‘ O king, be pleased to attach again 
to thy skirt those who have seceded from thee.’ By 
this Angad meant the Sikhs whose faith had been 
tried and foimd wanting. Guru Nanak replied, 
‘ I have forgiven them all for thy sake.’ Upon this 
Angad fell at his feet. 

Guru Nanak went and sat under a withered 
acacia tree, when lo ! it became green, and produced 
leaves and blossoms. Angad again fell at his feet 
in adoration. Guru Nanak’s family, relations, and 
disciples began to weep. On that occasion he com- 
posed the following : — 

Hail to the Creator, the True King, who allotted to the 
world its various duties ! 

When the measure ^ is full, the duration of life is at an 
end ; the soul is led away ; 

When the destined hour arriveth, the soul is led away 
and all one’s relations weep. 

The body and soul are separated, O my mother, when 
one’s days are at an end. 

Thou hast obtained what was allotted thee, and reaped 
the fruit of thy former acts. 

Hail to the Creator, the True King, who allotted to the 
world its various duties ! 

Remember the Lord, O my brethren ; all must depaH. 

The affairs of this world are transitory, only for four 
days ; we must assuredly proceed onwards : 

We must assuredly proceed onwards like a guest ; why 
should we be proud ? 


^ Pat. This is an Indian corn measure. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 189 

Repeat the name of Him by whose worship thou shalt 
obtain happiness in His court. 

In the next world thou canst in no wise enforce thine 
authority ; every one shall fare according to his acts. 

Remember the Lord, my brethren, every one must 
depart. 

That which pleaseth the Omnipotent shall come to pass ; 
this world is an illusion. 

The true Creator pervadeth sea and land, the nether 
regions, and the firmament. 

The true Creator is invisible, unequalled ; His limit 
cannot be found. 

Profitable is their advent into this world who have medi- 
tated with their whole hearts upon Him. 

The Adorner by His order demolisheth and again con- 
structeth. 

That which pleaseth the Omnipotent shall come to pass ; 
this world is an illusion. 

Saith Nanak, O Father, they shall be considered to have 
wept who weep through love. 

If men weep for the sake of worldly things, all their 
weeping, O Father, shall be in vain : 

All their weeping shall be in vain ; the world is not 
mindful of God, and weepeth for mammon. 

They know not good from evil, and thus lose their human 
lives. 

All who come into this world must depart ; false are you 
who practise pride. 

Saith Nanak, men shall be considered to have wept, O 
Father, if they weep through love.^ 

After this the assembled crowd began to sing 
songs of mourning, and the Guru fell into a trance. 
When he awoke therefrom, his sons, on seeing 
a stranger appointed to succeed their father, inquired 
what provision had been made for themselves. Guru 
Nanak replied, ‘ O my sons, God giveth to His 
creatures; you shall obtain food and clothing in 

^ Wadhans, Alihaniln. 



190 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


abundance, and if you repeat God’s name you shall 
be saved at last.’ 

The Musalmans who had received God’s name 
from the Guru, said they would bury him after his 
death. His Hindu followers on the contrary said 
they would cremate him. When the Guru was 
invited to decide the discussion he said, ‘ Let the 
Hindus place flowers on my right, and the Musal- 
mans on my left. They whose flowers are found 
fresh in the morning, may have the disposal of my 
body.’ 

Guru Nanak then ordered the crowd to sing the 
Sohila : — 

In the house in which God’s praise is sung and He is 
meditated on, 

Sing the Sohila and remember the Creator. 

Sing the Sohila of my fearless Lord ; I am a sacrifice to 
that song of joy by which everlasting comfort is obtained. 

Ever and ever living things are watched over ; the Giver 
regardeth their wants. 

When even Thy gifts cannot be appraised, who can 
appraise the Giver ? 

The year and the auspicious time for marriage^ are re- 
corded ; O relations, meet and pour oil on me the bride.® 

O my friends, pray for me that I may meet my Lord. 

This message is ever sent to every house ; such invita- 
tions are ever issued. 

Remember the Caller ; Nanak, the day is approaching.* 

The concluding slok of the Japji was then 
sung. The Guru drew a sheet over him, uttered 
‘ Wahguru ’, made obeisance to God, and blende^ 
his light with Guru Angad’s. The Guru remained 
the same. There was only a change of body pro- 
duced by a supreme miracle. 

^ Death is here considered a marriage as among the ancient Gree]|^. 

® Before marriage the bride's relations anoint her with oil. 

* Rag Gauri Dipaki. Guru N§nak caused this hymn to be repeated 
for him in token of rejoicing when he was dying. It is still read as a 
funeral service. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 191 

When the sheet was removed next morning, there 
was nothing found beneath it. The flowers on both 
sides were in bloom. The Hindus and the Musal- 
mans removed their respective flowers. All the 
Sikhs reverently saluted the spot on which the Guru 
had lain. He breathed his last on the tenth day of 
the light half of the month of Assu, Sambat 1595 
(a.d. 1538) at Kartarpur in the Panjab. 

The Sikhs erected a shrine and the Muhammadans 
a tomb in his honour on the margin of the Ravi. 
Both have since been washed away by the river, 
perhaps providentially, so as to avoid idolatrous 
worship of the Guru’s last resting-place. 

Bhai Gur Das, a brief account of whom we have 
given in the Introduction, draws a gloomy picture 
of the wickedness of the world at the rise of the Sikh 
religion: — Men’s ideas and aspirations were low. 
Mammon fascinated the world and led every one 
astray. Good acts no longer commended themselves 
to men. They burned with pride, and respected 
not one another. The high and the low forgot 
their mutual duties. Monarchs were unjust, and 
their nobles were butchers who held knives to men’s 
throats. 

Everybody thought he possessed knowledge, but 
none knew in what knowledge or ignorance consisted. 
Men did what pleased themselves. Alchemy and 
thaumaturgy were professed, incantations and spells 
practised, and men indulged in strife, wrath, and 
mutual jealousies. In the general disorder every one 
adopted a religion of his own. Out of one God they 
made many, and carved gods attractive and unat- 
tractive from wood and stone. Some worshipped 
the sun or moon, others propitiated the earth, sky, 
wind, water, or fire, and others again the god of 
death, while the devotion of many was addressed 
to cemeteries and cremation grounds. Thus did 
mankind go astray in vain religions and vain worship. 

Men despised one another and hence caste received 



192 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


religious sanction. The Brahmans set the Veds, 
the Purans, and the Shastars at variance. The 
professors of the six schools of Hindu philosophy 
quarrelled with one another, and while so employed 
indulged to their hearts’ content in h5q)ocrisy and 
superstition. 

Not only were the Hindus divided into four castes, 
but the Muhammadans were divided into four sects,^ 
and while the Hindus worshipped the Ganges and 
Banaras^, the Muhammadans addressed their devo- 
tions to Makka and the Kaaba. The devil fascinated 
the members of both rehgions ; they forgot their 
holy books ; they went astray on every road ; and 
truth was the one thing they failed to discover. 

There was no guru or religious guide, and without 
one the people were pushing one another to their 
destruction. Sin prevailed throughout creation. 
Pure religion was weeping day and night, and finally 
began to disappear from men’s gaze beneath the 
earth. She was weighed down by human trans- 
gressions. In lowly attitude she appealed to God 
for a guide. God observing men’s anguish and 
hearing their piteous cries, conferred supernatural 
attributes on Guru Nanak. He bestowed on him 
the supreme wealth of the Name and humility, and 
sent him into the world to relieve its sufferings. 
When Guru Nanak contemplated the world, he 
everywhere saw spiritual darkness, and heard the 
cry of pain. He endured the greatest privations 
and travelled to different countries in order to 
regenerate the human race. 

He pointed out to men the straight way — ^that 
there was but one God, the primal and omnipresent. 
He restored the three legs which religion had lost, 
and reduced to one the four castes of the Hindus. 
He placed the king and the beggar on a spiritual 
equsdity, and taught them to respect each other. 


^ Hanifi, Shafs^ |i^liki, and Hanbali. 



LIFE OF GURU NANAK 193 

He preached to all a religion of the heart as distin- 
guished from a religion of external forms and 
unavailing ritual. 

He found that the acts and austerities practised 
by professedly religious men of his age and country 
were without divine love or devotion, and conse- 
quently contained no merit before God. He satisfied 
himself that Brahma, the reputed author of the 
Veds, did not include love in them, nor was it men- 
tioned in the Simritis. He declared that God who 
has no form or outline was not found by wearing 
religious garbs, but by humility, and that if men 
rejected caste and worshipped God in spirit they 
should be accepted in His court. 

The Guru examined all religious sects, contem- 
plated the gods, goddesses, and spirits of earth and 
heaven, and found them all immersed and perishing 
in spiritual pride. He scrutinized Hindus, Moslems, 
priests, and prophets, and found not one godly 
person among them. They were all groping in the 
blind pit of superstition. 

Religious men who ought to be guiding their flocks, 
had retreated to the solitude of mountains. There 
was no one left to instruct and save the world. 
Though hermits rubbed ashes night and day on their 
bodies, they possessed no knowledge, and the world 
was rushing to its ruin for want of a divine guide. 
Rulers were everywhere oppressive. The fence 
began to eat the field instead of protecting it. 
Guardians proved faithless to their trusts and con- 
sumed the wealth of their wards. Some disciples 
played while their spiritual guides danced. Other 
disciples sat at home while, contrary to all custom, 
their spiritual guides waited on them. Judges took 
bribes and perpetrated injustice. Women only paid 
regard to their husbands for the wealth they pos- 
sessed, and sin was diffused throughout the world. 

When Guru Nanak appeared, the fog of spiritual 
ignorance dispersed, and light shone in the world, 

SIKH. O 



194 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


as when the sun rises the stars disappear and dark- 
ness fades away, or as when the lion roars in the forest 
the timid deer incontinently disappear. Wherever 
the Guru planted his foot, there was estabhshed 
a seat of worship. Every house of his followers 
became a temple in which the Lord’s praises were 
ever sung and the Lord’s name continually repeated. 
The Guru established a separate religion, and laid 
out an easy and simple way of obtaining salvation 
by the repetition of God’s name. The Guru extri- 
cated men from the terrible ocean of the world, and 
included them in the boon of salvation. He cut off 
the fear of transmigration, and healed the malady 
of superstition and the pain of separation from God. 
Until the Guru’s advent death’s mace ever impended 
over men’s heads, and the apostate and the evil 
spent their lives in vain. When men grasped the 
feet of the divine Guru, he gave them the true 
Word and effected their deliverance. He inculcated 
love and devotion, the repetition of God's name, 
and the lesson that as men sow so shall they reap. 

The four castes of the Hindus he reduced to one. 
Whether a Sikh had a caste or not, he was distin- 
guished in the society of the holy. The six schools 
of philosophy are like the six seasons of the year, 
but the sect of the Guru is the sun which shines 
over them all. Guru Nanak having abolished all 
sects shed great splendour on his own. Setting 
aside the Veds and the books of Islam, he taught 
his sect to repeat the name of the infinite God who 
surpasses all conception. By falling at one another’s 
feet and by practising humility are the Guru’s Sikhs 
recognized. They live as hermits among their fami- 
lies, they efface their individuality, they pronounce 
the ineffable name of God, and they transgress not 
the will of the Creator by uttering blessings or 
curses upon their fellow-creatures. Thus were men 
saved in every direction and Guru Nanak became 
the true support of the nine regions of the earth.^ 



DIVINE SERVICES BY GURU NANAK 
AND OTHER GURUS 


THE JAPJU 


There is but one God whose name is true, the Creator, ® 
devoid of fear and enmity, immortal, unborn, self-existent ; * 
by the favour of the Guru.* 


^yREPEAT His Name 


The True One wag in the beginning ; the True One was in 
the^^mal agd; , > v . J ^ /f. 

The True One is ® now also, 0 Nanak ; the True One 
also shall be.* 


* The Japji is considered by the Sikhs a key to their sacred volume 
and an epitome of its doctrines. It is silently repeated by the Sikhs 
early in the morning. Every Sikh must have it by heart, otherwise he 
is not deemed orthodox. It is the duty of all Sikhs, even if they 
cannot read, to have themselves taught this great morning divine 
service. The composition appears to have been the work of Guru 
Nanak in advanced age. 

* Karta purukh. It is perhaps not necessary to translate the word 
purukh. It means male or creative agency. The all-pervading spirit 
in union with a female element uttered a word from which sprang 
creation. 

* Saibhan is derived from the Sanskrit swayambhu, which we have 
found in this passage in a very ancient Sikh MS. 

* Gur Parsdd. We have translated these words in deference to the 
opinions of the majority of the Sikhs ; but with several learned gyanis 
we have no doubt that they were intended as epithets of God — the great 
and bountiful. Guru Ntlnak had no human guru ; as we have already 
seen, his guru was God. It was during the spiritual supremacy of his 
successors the favour of the Guru was invoked, and deemed indis- 
pensable for deliverance. Moreover, though par sad does sometimes 
in the Granth Sahib mean the Guru's favour, this appears to be more 
often expressed by gur parsddi, 

® Bhi. There are two bJm in this line which some say are idiomatic. 
We have very little doubt that the first bhi is an obsolete past tense of 
the defective verb bhu, and that the verse ought to be translated — 
* The True One is, was, and also shall be.' Compare — ‘ Guru Nanak, 
Shahu hai, bhi, hosi.* — Suhi Ashtapadi i. 

* Also translated — 

God was tru e in the beginning, He was true in the primal age ; 

He is true now also, Nanak, and He also will be true. 


O 2 



196 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


I 

By thinking I cannot obtain a conception of Him, even 
though I think hundreds of thousands of times. 

Even though I be silent and keep my attention firmly 
fixed on Him, I cannot preserve silence. 

The hunger of the hungry for God subsideth not though 
they obtain the load of the worlds. 

If man should have thousands and hundreds of thousands 
of devices, even one would not assist him in obtaining God. 

How shall man become true before God ? How shall the 
veil of falsehood be rent ? ^ 

By walking, O Nanak, according to the will ^ of the Com- 
mander as preordained. 

II 

By His order bodies are produced ; His order cannot be 
described. 

By His order souls ® are infused into them ; by His order 
greatness is obtained. 

By His order men are high or low ; by His order they 
obtain preordained pain or pleasure. 

By His order some obtain their reward ; * by His order 
others must ever wander in transmigration. 

All are subject to His order ; none is exempt from it. 

He who understandeth God’s order, 0 Nanak, is never 
guilty of egoism.® 

III 

Who can sing His power ? Who hath power to sing it ? ® 

Who can sing His gifts or know His signs ? ’ 

This translation appears to be unmeaning, for it is not doubted that 
God was true in all ages. With the translation in the text compare 
’Ey® flfii irav to ytyovo%, koX Sv, koX ia-ofievoy, ‘ I am all that was, and 
is, and will be.’ — Inscription on a Greek temple. 

^ Also translated — How shall the line of falsehood be broken? 

® Hq/dt, the Arabic razd, the divine pleasure. 

’ In these two lines some suppose aMr to refer to the non-sentient, 

to the sentient world. * That is, to be blended with God. 

® Literally — ^would not be guilty of saying iauu main, i.e. I exist by 
mrself independently of God. This is the sin of spiritual pride. 

• Also translated— Whoever has the power. 

^ Also translated — He who know^ fiis signs. 



197 


THE JAPJI 

Who can sing His attributes, His greatness, and His deeds 

>Vho can sing His knowledge whose study is arduous ? 

Who can sing Him, who fashioneth the body and again 
destroyeth it ? 

WTio can sing Him, who taketh away life and again 
restoreth it ? 

W^o can sing Him, who appeareth to be far, but is known 
to be near. 

WHio can sing Him, who is all-seeing and omnipresent ? * 

In describing Him there would never be an end. 

Millions of men give millions upon millions of descriptions 
of Him, but they fail to describe Him. 

The Giver giveth ; the receiver groweth weary of receiving. 

In every age man subsisteth by His bounty. 

The Commander by His order hath laid out the way of the 
world. 

Nanak, God the unconcerned is happy. 

IV 

True is the Lord, true is His name ; it is uttered with 
endless love.® 

People pray and beg, ‘ Give us, give us ’ ; the Giver giveth 
His gifts ; 

Then what can we offer Him whereby His court may be 
seen ? 

What words shall we utter with our lips, on hearing which 
He may love us ? 

At the ambrosial hour of morning meditate on the true 
Name and God's greatness. 

1 Char is understood to be a contracted form of achar. Some 
translate the word ‘ excellent,' and make it an epithet of wadiai. 

® This and the preceding lines of this pauri are also translated — 

Some sing His power according to their abilities ; 

Some sing His gifts according to their knowledge of His signs ; 

Some sing His attributes. His greatness, and His deeds; 

Some sing His knowledge whose study is arduous ; 

Some sing that He fashioneth the body and again destroyeth it ; 

Some that He taketh away the soul and again restoreth it ; 

Some that He appeareth far from mortal gaze ; 

Some that He ie all-seeing and omnipresent. 

® Also translated — His attributes are described in endless languages. 



198 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Kind One will give us a robe of honour, and by His 
favour we shall reach the gate of salvation.' 

Nanak, we shall thus know that God is altogether true.* 

V 

He is not established, nor is He created. 

The pure one existeth by Himself. 

They who worshipped Him have obtained honour. 

Nanak, sing His praises who is the Treasury of excellences. 

Sing and hear and put His love into your hearts. 

Thus shall your sorrows be removed, and you shall be 
absorbed in Him who is the abode of happiness.® 

Under the Guru’s instruction God's 'wox^isheard', under the 
Guru’s instruction its knowledge is acquired) under the Guru’s 
instruction man learns that God is everywhere contained.* 

The Guru is Shiv ; the Guru is Vishnu and Brahma ; the 
Guru is Parbati, Lakhshmi,® and Saraswati.® 

' This verse is also translated — By our former acts we acquire this 
human vesture, and by God’s favour reach the gate of salvation. 

The body is first formed, and then the soul from another body 
enters it. God decides in what body the soul is to have residence 
until the body perishes. The acts of previous births are adjusted 
when the soul attains a human body. It is the acts done in 
a human body which accompany the soul to future states of existence. 

* This verse is commonly translated — we shall then know that God 
is all in all Himself ; but this translation does not appear to harmonize 
with the preceding part of the pauri. 

* Also translated — and you shall take happiness to your homes. 

* This very difficult verse is also translated — 

(a) Under the Guru’s instruction God’s word is heard) under the 
Guru’s instruction the knowledge of it is acquired) it is contained in 
the Guru’s instruction. 

(f>) The voice of God is found as welt in other compositions as in 
the Veds; the voice of God is all-pervading. 

(<•) 'The pious know the Guru’s instruction, that God is every- 
where contained. 

(rf) The voice of the Guru is as the Veds for the holy ; they are 
absorbed in it 

* The Hindu goddess of wealth and riches, consort of Vishnu, and 
mother of K5m the god of love. 

* The goddess of eloquence and learning and patroness of arts and 
sciences. 

This verse is also translated — 



THE JAPJI 199 

If I knew Him, should I not describe Him ? He cannot be 
described by words. 

My Guru hath explained one thing to me — 

That there is hut one Bestower on all living beings ; may 
I not forget Him ! 


VI 

If I please Him, that is my place of pilgrimage to bathe in ; 
if I please Him not, what ablutions shall I make ? 

What can all the created beings I behold obtain without 
previous good acts ? 

Precious stones, jewels, and gems shall he treasured up in 
thy heart if thou hearken to even one word of the Guru. 

The Guru hath explained one thing to me — 

That there is hut one Bestower on all living beings ; may 
I not forget Him ! 

VII 

Were man to live through the four ages, yea ten times 
longer ; 

Were he to be known on the nine continents, and were 
everybody to follow in his train ; ^ 

Were he to obtain a great name and praise and renown in 
the world ; 

If God’s look of favour fell not on him, no one would 
notice him. 

He would be accounted a worm among worms, and even 
sinners would impute sin to him. 

{a) He is greater than Shiv ; greater than Vishnu and Brahma ; 
greater than Parbati, Lakhshmi, and Saraswati. 

{b) For the holy the Guru is Shiv; the Guru is Vishnu and 
Brahma ; the Guru is Parbati, Lakhshmi, and Saraswati. 

The tenth Guru says : — 

Khanda prithme saj ke Jin sab sansar upaiya — 

God first created the sword, the emblem of Death, and then the 
world. 

So here Shiv obtains precedence as the agent of destruction. 
The word uttered by God became the source of knowledge of 
Him through the Guru in the three forms of Shiv, Vishnu, and 
Brahma. 

' That is, to show him respect 



200 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Nanakj God may bestow virtue on those who are devoid 
of it, as well as on those who already possess it ; 

But no such person is seen as can bestow virtue upon Him. 

VIII 

By hearing the name of God men become Sidhs, Pirs, Surs.^ 
and Naths ; 

By hearing the Name man understandeth the real nature of 
the earth, its supporting bull,® and Heaven ; 

By hearing the Name man obtaineth a knowledge of the 
continents, the worlds, and the nether regions. 

By hearing the Name death doth not affect one.® 

Nanak, the saints are ever happy. 

By hearing the Name sorrow and sin are no more. 

IX 

By hearing the Name man becometh as Shiv, Brahma, 
and Indar. 

By hearing the Name even the low become highly lauded.^ 

By hearing the Name the way of Jog and the secrets of 
the body are obtained. 

By hearing the Name man understandeth the real nature of 
the Shastars, the Simritis, and the Veds. 

Nanak, the saints are ever happy. 

By hearing the Name sorrow and sin are no more. 

X 

By hearing the Name truth, contentment, and divine 
knowledge are obtained. 

Hearing the Name is equal to bathing at the sixty-eight 
places of pilgrimage. 

By hearing the Name and reading it man obtaineth 
honour.® 

^ Surs are spiritual heroes. 

® The bull which the Hindus believe supports the earth. This is 
not believed in by the Sikhs. See below, pauri xvi. 

® Man shall not die again, but obtain deliverance. 

* Also translated — By hearing the Name one is praised by high and 
low. 

® Also translated — On hearing the Name man obtaineth honour by 
the knowledge acquired. 



THE JAPJI 201 

By hearing the Name the mind is composed and fixed on 
God.^ 

Nanak, the saints are ever happy. 

By hearing the Name sorrow and sin are no more. 

XI 

By hearing the Name, the depth of the sea of virtue is 
sounded.* 

By hearing the Name men become Shaikhs, Firs, and 
Emperors. 

By hearing the Name a blind man findeth his way 

By hearing the Name the unfathomable becometh fathom- 
able. 

Nanak, the saints are ever happy. 

By hearing the Name sorrow and sin are no more. 

XII 

The condition of him who obeyeth God cannot be described. 

Whoever trieth to describe it, shall afterward repent. 

There is no paper, or pen, or writer 

To describe the condition of him who obeyeth God. 

So pure is His name — 

Whoever obeyeth God knoweth the pleasure of it in his 
own heart.® 

XIII 

By obeying Him wisdom and understanding enter the 
mind ; 

By obeying Him man knoweth all worlds ; 

By obeying Him man suffereth not punishment; 

By obeying Him man shall not depart with J am * — 

So pure is God’s name — 

Whoever obeyeth God knoweth the pleasure of it in his 
own heart. 

^ Or — by hearing the Name man easily meditateth upon God. 

* Also translated — man acquireth the best virtues. 

* Literally — he knows it in his own mind, that is, he obtains a 
pleasure which is incommunicable. 

* The god of death, previously called Dhannr3.j. This verse 
means that man shall not die again, but be absorbed in God. 



202 THE SIKH RELIGION 

XIV 

By obeying Him man’s path is not obstructed ; 

By obeying Him man departeth with honour and distinc- 
tion ; 

By obeying Him man proceedeth in ecstasy ^ on his way ; 

By obeying Him man formeth an alliance with virtue — 

So pure is God’s name — 

Whoever obeyeth God knoweth the pleasure of it in his 
own heart. 

XV 

By obeying Him man attaineth the gate of salvation ; 

By obeying Him man is saved with his family ; 

By obeying Him the Guru is saved, and saveth his 
disciples ; 

By obeying Him, 0 Nanak, man wandereth not in quest of 
alms * — 

So pure is God’s name — 

Whoever obeyeth God knoweth the pleasure of it in his 
own heart, 

XVI 

The elect * are acceptable, the elect are distinguished ; 

The elect obtain honour in God’s court ; 

The elect shed lustre * on the courts of kings. 

The attention of the elect is bestowed on the one Guru.® 

If any one say he can form an idea of God, he may say so, 

^ Magun. This word is understood to be for magan. Those who 
read magu na translate — 

{a) By obeying Him man proceedeth not by the path of destruction. 
{b) Man proceedeth by the broad, not the narrow way. 

* This is explained to mean — does not wander in transmigration. 

* Panch, literally five. The number conveys the idea of selection. 
There is a HindustSni proverb. Panchon men Parameshwar hai, 
Where five are assembled, God is in the midst of them. Others say 
that panch refers to the five classes of persons previously mentioned — 
those who walk according to God’s will, who know Him to be true, 
who praise Him, who hear His name, and who obey Him. 

* ’This is the interpretation of sohahi given by Bbai Chanda Singh 
in his commentary on the Granth Sahib. 

® The elect have one God as their Guru or spiritual guide, and 
meditate on Him. 



203 


THE JAPJI 

But the Creator’s works cannot be numbered. 

The bull that is spoken of is righteousness, the offspring of 
mercy, 

Which supported by patience maintaineth the order of 
nature.^ 

Whoever understandeth this is a true man. 

What a load there is upon the bull ! ® 

Beyond this earth there are more worlds, more and more. 

What power can support their weight ? 

The names of living things, their species, and colours 

Have all been written with a flowing pen. 

Doth any one know how to write an account of them ? 

If the account were written, how great it would be ! 

What power and beautiful form are Thine, O God ! 

Who hath power ® to know how great Thy gifts are ? 

By one word * Thou didst effect the expansion of the world. 

Whereby hundreds of thousands of rivers were produced. 

What power have I to describe Thee ? 

So powerless am /, that I cannot even once be a sacrifice 
unto Thee. 

Whatever pleaseth Thee is good. 

Thou, 0 Formless One, art ever secure. 

XVII 

Numberless thy worshippers,® and numberless Thy lovers ; 

Numberless Thine adorers, and numberless they who 
perform austerities for Thee ; 

^Numberless the reciters of sacred books and Veds ; 

^ Sui, the thread on which the world is strung. The Guru means 
by patience the adjusted balance of the world, everything being in 
equipoise. 

® Here Guru Nanak obviously rejects the Hindu story that the earth 
is supported by a bull. 

* We understand kiii as the Arabic ktewvoai. If kut be held to mean 
food, a meaning which the word so pronounced also bears in Arabic, 
the verse will be translated — Who knoweth the extent of Thy gifts of 
sustenance ? 

* The Hindus believe this is Eko aham, bahu sydm, I am one, let 
Me become many. 

* Literally — ^repetitions of God’s name. Here the word is used by 
metonymy for those who repeat God’s name. 



204 the SIKH RELIGION 

Numberless Thy Jogis whose hearts are indifferent /o the 
world ; 

Numberless the saints who ponder on Thine attributes and 
divine knowledge ; 

Numberless Thy true men ; numberless Thine almsgivers ; 

Numberless Thy heroes who face the steel of their 
enemies ; 

Numberless Thy silent worshippers who lovingly fix their 
thoughts upon Thee. 

What power have I to describe Thee ? 

So lowly am /, that I cannot even once be a sacrifice unto 
Thee. 

Whatever pleaseth Thee is good. 

O Formless One, Thou art ever secure. 

XVIII 

Numberless are the fools appallingly blind ; 

Numberless are the thieves and devourers of others’ 
property ; 

Numberless those who establish their sovereignty by 
force ; ^ 

Numberless the cut-throats and murderers ; 

Numberless the sinners who pride themselves on committing 
sin ; 

Numberless the liars who roam about lying ; 

Numberless the filthy * who enjoy filthy gain ; 

Numberless the slanderers who carry loads of calumny on 
their heads ; 

Nanak thus describeth the degraded. 

So lowly am I, I cannot even once be a sacrifice unto Thee. 

Whatever pleaseth Thee is good. 

O Formless One, Thou art ever secure. 

^ Also translated — Numberless are those who issue oppressive 
orders. ' 

* Malechh. Whose desires are filthy, and who are deemed the 
lowest of the low, complete outcasts. In the Guru’s time the word 
malechh was applied by Hindus as a term of opprobrium to Muham- 
madans. The Hindus still apply it to all who are not of their own 
persuasion. 



205 


THE JAPJI 

XIX 

Numberless Thy names, and numberless Thy places. 
Completely beyond reach are Thy numberless worlds. 
Numberless they who repeat Thy name with all the 
strength of their intellects.^ 

By letters * we repeat Thy name, by letters we praise Thee ; 
By letters we acquire divine knowledge, and sing Thy 
praises and Thine attributes ; 

By letters we write and utter the word ® of God ; 

By the letters recorded on man’s head his destiny is declared. 
He who inscribeth them on others, beareth them not on 
His own head. 

As He ordaineth, so shall man obtain. 

As great Thy creation, O God, so great is Thy fame 
There is no place without Thy name. 

What power have I to describe Thee ? 

So lowly am /, that I cannot even once be a sacrifice unto 
Thee 

Whatever pleaseth Thee is good. 

0 Formless One, Thou art ever secure. 

XX 

When the hands, feet, and other members of the body are 
covered with filth. 

It is removed by washing with water. 

When thy clothes are polluted. 

Apply soap, and the. impurity shall be washed away. 

So when the mind is defiled by sin, 

It is cleansed by the love * of the Name. 

Men do not become saints or sinners by merely calling 
themselves so. 

^ Also translated — 

(a) With their bodies reversed, that is, standing on their heads, a 
form of religious austerity practised in India. 

(3) They who try to describe Thee shall have to carry loads of 
sin on their heads. 

* Letters here appear to mean sacred literature. 

* Ban generally means custom. Here it is understood to be used 
for iSni, a word. 

* Water in which the dye of the Name has been dissolved. 



206 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The recording angels take with them a record of man's 
acts. 

It is he himself soweth, and he himself eateth. 

Nanak, man suffereth transmigration by God’s order. 

XXI 

Pilgrimage, austerities, mercy, and almsgiving on general 
and special occasions 

Whosoever performeth, may obtain some little honour ; 

But he who heareth and obeyeth and loveth God in his 
heart. 

Shall wash off his impurity in the place of pilgrimage within 
him. 

All virtues are Thine, O Lord ; none are mine. 

There is no devotion without virtue. 

From the Self-existent proceeded Maya (athi), whence issued 
a word which produced Brahma and the rest ^ — 

‘ Thou art true. Thou art beautiful, there is ever pleasure 
in Thy heart ! ’ 

What the time, what the epoch, what the lunar day, and 
what the week-day, 

What the season, and what the month when the world 
was created, 

The Pandits did not discover ; had they done so, they 
would have recorded it in the Purans. 

Nor did the Qazis * discover it ; had they done so, they 
would have recorded it in the Quran : 

Neither the Jogi nor any other mortal knows the lunar 
day, or the week-day, or the season, or the month. 

Only the Creator who fashioned the world knoweth when 
He did so. 

How shall I address Thee, O God ? how shall I praise 
Thee ? how shall I describe Thee ? and how shall I know 
Thee ? 

^ The verse is also translated — ‘ Blessing on Thee ! ’ is sat'd to have 
been the first salutation that Brahma addressed Thee. 

^ Guru Ninak means the scribes who reduced the Quran to writing. 



THE JAPJI 207 

Saith Nanak, everybody speaketh of Thee, one wiser than 
another. 

Great is the Lord, great is His name ; what He doeth 
cometh to pass. 

Nanak, he who is proud shall not be honoured on his 
arrival in the next world. 


XXII 

There are hundreds of thousands of nether and upper 
regions. 

Men have grown weary at last of searching for God's 
limits ; the Veds say one thing, that God has no limit} 

The thousands of Purans* and Muhammadan books 
tell that in reality there is but one principle.® 

If God can be described by writing, then describe Him ; 
but such description is impossible. 

O Nanak, call Him great ; only He Himself knoweth how 
great He is. 


XXIII 

Praisers praise God, but have not acquired a knowledge 
of Him, 

As rivers and streams fall into the sea, but know not its 
extent. 

Kings and emperors who possess oceans and mountains of 
property and wealth,® 

Are not equal to the worm which forgetteth not God in 
its heart. 

® The verse is also translated — The Veds have at last grown 
weary of searching for God’s limits, but they cannot give the slightest 
description of Him. 

® There being only eighteen Purans, the expression in the text 
means a thousand times eighteen or an indefinite number. The word 
sahans is also understood by the gySnis to refer to rikhis and learned 
men in indefinite numbers. 

® That is, that God is the root or principle of all things. 

® Also translated — As the sea is die king of streams, so is God the 
monarch of all. They who possess mountainous wealth, &c. 



ao8 THE SIKH RELIGION 

XXIV 

There is no limit to God’s praises ; ^ to those who repeat 
ihem there is no limit. 

There is no limit to His mercy, and to His gifts there is no 
limit. 

There is no limit to what God seeth, no limit to what He 
heareth. 

The limit of the secret of His heart cannot be known. 

The limit of His creation cannot be known ; neither His 
near nor His far side can be discovered.* 

To know His limits how many vex their hearts.® 

His limits cannot be ascertained ; 

Nobody knoweth His limits. 

The more we say, the more there remains to be said. 

Great is the Lord, and exalted is His seat. 

His exalted name is higher than the most exalted. 

Were any one else ever so exalted. 

Then he would know that exalted Being : 

How great He is He knoweth Himself. 

Nanak, God bestoweth gifts on whom He looketh with 
favour and mercy. 


XXV 

His many bounties * cannot be recorded. 

He is a great giver and hath not a particle of covetousness. 
How many, yea countless heroes beg of Him ! 

How many others whose number cannot be conceived ! 
How many pine away in sin ! ® 

How many persons receive yet deny God’s gifts ! 

How many fools there are who merely eat ! 

How many are ever dying in distress and hunger ! 

O Giver, these are also Thy gifts. 


* Also translated — There is no limit to the Praised One. 

* A metaphor taken from the banks of a river. 

* Billah, literally, cry in pain. 

* Karm, in Sanskrit, is work ; in Persian, kindness, favour, or 
bounty. The context seems to show that the latter is intended. 

® Compare Man vehSrin veria, the mind is encompassed with sin. 
Guru Amar Dss. 



20 $ 


THE JAPJI 

Rebirth ^ and deliverance depend on Thy will : 

Nobody can interfere with it. 

If any fool * try to interfere with it 

He shall himself know the punishment he shadl suffer. 

God himself knoweth to whom He may give, and He Him- 
self giveth : 

Very few acknowledge this. 

He to whom God hath given the boon of praising and 
lauding Him, 

O Nanak, is the King of kings.® 

XXVI 

Priceless are Thine attributes, O God, and priceless Thy 
dealings ; * 

Priceless Thy dealers, priceless Thy storehouses ; 

Priceless what cometh from Thee, and priceless what is 
taken away ; 

Priceless Thy rate and priceless the time for dealing ;® 

Priceless Thy justice and priceless Thy court ; 

Priceless Thy weights and priceless Thy measures ; • 

Priceless Thy gifts and priceless Thy marks ; 

Priceless Thy mercy and priceless Thine ordinances. 

How beyond all price Thou art cannot be stated. 

Ever speaking of Thee men' continue to fix their thoughts 
on Thee.’ 

^ Band, to be enclosed in a womb. 

* Khaik. This word is also found in the Sri Rig ki War, Slok 2 — 
thao nahtn khaika, there is no place for the fool. 

® Also translated — 

To those few, O Nanak, the King of kings 
Giveth the boon of praising and lauding Him. 

* In the true Name. 

* Also translated — Priceless is Thy love, and priceless they who 
are absorbed in it. 

* We read praman for parwan. If the latter be read, the translation 
will be — Priceless Thy weights and priceless Thine acceptance of 
mortals. A third translation is — Priceless Thy scale and priceless 
Thy weights. 

’ Also translated — Repealing that Thou art priceless, men continue 
to fix their attention on Thee. 


SIKH- I 


P 



aio 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


They who read the Veds and Purans speak of Thee ; . 

Learned men speak of Thee and deliver discourses on Thee ; 

Brahmas speak of Thee, and Indars speak of Thee ; 

The milkmaids and Krishan speak of Thee 

. Shivs speak of Thee, the Sidhs speak of Thee ; 

All the Budhas Thou hast created speak of Thee ; 

The demons speak of Thee, the gods speak of Thee ; 

Thy demigods, men, munis,^ and servants speak of Thee ; 

How many speak of Thee or attempt to speak of Thee ! 

How many depart while speaking of Thee ! 

If Thou wert to create as many more as Thou hast created, 

Even then few of them would be able to speak adequately 
of Thee. 

Thou mayest be as great as Thou pleasest. 

Nanak, only the True One Himself knoweth how great 
He is. 

If any one were to speak improperly of God, 

Write him down as the most ignorant of men. 

XXVII 

What is that gate, what is that mansion where Thou, 
0 sittest and watchest over all things ? 

How many various and countless instruments are played ! 
How many musicians, 

How many musical measures with their consorts, and 
how many singers sing Thee ! 

Wind, water, and fire sing Thee ; Dharmraj sings at Thy 
gate. 

The recording angels,* who know how to write, and on 
whose record Dharmraj judgeth sing Thee. 

Ishar,® Brahma, and Devi, ever beautiful as adorned by 
Thee, sing Thee. 

* Inspired saints who are popularly supposed to have attained divine 
nature. 

* Chitr and Gupt. Chitr means visible, Gupt invisible. According 
to the Sikhs, Chitr records man's overt acts, Gupt the designs of his 
heart. Both then report to Dharmmj. In Sanskrit literature Chitrgupt 
is one person, the recorder of Yama. 

® A title of Shiv. 



THE JAPJI 2II 

Indar seated on his throne with the gods at Thy gate 
sing Thee. 

Sidhs in meditation sing Thee ; holy men in contempla- 
tion sing Thee. 

The continent, the true, and the patient sing Thee ; un- 
yielding heroes sing Thee. 

The pandits and the supreme Rikhis,^ reading their Veds, 
sing Thee in every age. 

The lovely celestial maids who beguile the heart in the 
upper, middle, and nether regions sing Thee.® 

The jewels created by Thee with the sixty-eight places 
of Hindu pilgrimage sing Thee. 

Mighty warriors and divine heroes sing Thee ; the four 
sources of life sing Thee. 

The continents, the worlds, and the universe made and 
supported by Thy hands sing Thee. 

The saints who please Thee, and who are imbued with 
Thy love ® sing Thee. 

The many others who sing Thee I cannot remember ; how 
could Nanak recount them ? ® 

^ There are said to be seven supreme Rikhis. The Veds were 
written by Rikhis. 

® Also translated — The lovely aks/tal maids who beguile the heart 
sing Thee in the upper, and the fish in the lower regions. 

* Rasale is, literally, an abode of pleasure. 

* The following is offered as a free blank verse paraphrase of this 
pauri : — 

What is that gate, that mansion what, where Thou 
Dost sit and watch o’er all Thy wondrous works ? 

Many the harps and songs which tune Thy praise, 

Yea countless; Thy musicians who can tell? 

How many measures sung with high delight. 

And voices which exalt Thy peerless name 1 
To Thee sing water, wind, and breathing fire ; 

To Thee sings Dharamraj in regions drear; 

To Thee sing th’ angels who men’s deeds record 
For judgement final by that king of death. 

To Thee sing Shiva, Brahma, and the Queen 
Of Heav’n with radiant beauty ever crown’d. 

To Thee sing Indar and th’ attendant gods 
Around Thy throne and seraphs at Thy gate. 

To Thee sing Sidhs in meditation deep, 

Ard holy men who ponder but on Thee. 

P % 



212 THE SIKH RELIGION 

That God is ever true, He is the true Lord, and the true 
Name. 

He who made this world is and shall be ; He shall neither 
depart, nor be made to depart.^ 

He who created things of different colours, descriptions, 
and species, 

Beholdeth His handiwork which attesteth His greatness. 

He will do what pleaseth Himself ; no order may be 
issued to Him. 

He is King, the King of kings, O Nanak ; all remain subject 
to His will. 


XXVIII 2 

Make contentment and modesty thine earrings, self- 
respect thy wallet, meditation the ashes to smear on thy body ; 

Make thy body, which is only a morsel for death, thy 
beggar’s coat, and faith thy rule of life and thy staff.® 

Make association with men thine Ai Panth,* and the 
conquest of thy heart the conquest of the world. 

To Thee sing chaste and patient of mankind, 

Unyielding heroes of true faith approved. 

To Thee sing pandits and the chiefs of saints ; 

The ages four and Veds to them assigned. 

To Thee sing maidens who delight the sense, 

This world of ours, high heaven, and hell below. 

To Thee sing gems from Vishnu’s sea that rose. 

And eight and sixty spots of pilgrims’ haunt. 

To Thee sing heroes and the men of might ; 

The sources four from which all life doth spring. 

To Thee sing regions, orbs, and universe. 

Created, cherish’d, and upheld by Thee ! 

To Thee sing those whose deeds delight Thine eye. 

The hosts who wear the colours of Thy faith. 

All things beside which sing Thy glorious name. 

Could ne’er be told by Nanak’s lowly song. 

^ Also translated — Creation shall depart, but not He who made it. 

2 This and the following three pauris were composed by Guru 
Nanak after the Jogis had pressed him to adopt their dress and their 
religion. 

® This verse is also translated — Make the chastening of thy body 
not yet wedded to death thy patched coat, and faith thy beggar’s staff. 
* A sect of Jogis. 



213 


THE JAPJI 

Hail ! ‘ Hail to Him, 

The primal, the pure,® without beginning, the indestruc- 
tible, the same in every age ! 

XXIX 

Make divine knowledge thy food, compassion thy store- 
keeper, and the voice which is in every heart the pipe to call 
to repast. 

Make Him who hath strung the whole world on His string 
thy spiritual Lord ; let wealth and supernatural power be 
relishes for others. 

Union and separation is the law which regulateth the 
world.® By destiny we receive our portion. 

Hail ! Hail to Him, 

The primal, the pure, without beginning, the indestruc- 
tible, the same in every age ! 

XXX 

One Maya in union with God gave birth to three acceptable 
children.* 

One of them is the creator, the second the provider, the 
third performeth the function of destroyer.® 

As it pleaseth God, He directeth them by His orders. 

He beholdeth them, but is not seen by them. This is very 
marvellous. 


Hail! Hail to Him, 

The primal, the pure, without beginning, the inde- 
structible, the same in every age ! 

* Adesh, tlie ordinary salutation of Jogis. This word is derived from 
adi, primal and Jsh or Ishwar, God. Guru Nanak means that this 
salutation should only be offered to God. 

* Anil — literally, not of a blue colour, as Krishan is represented. 

® Also translated — favourable and unfavourable destinies shape 
men’s actions. * Chele, literally, disciples. 

® Lai may either mean absorption or reaper (Jove). Both meanings 
convey the idea of destruction. 



214 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


XXXI 

His seat and His storehouses ^ are in every world. 

What was to be put into them was put in at one time.* 

The Creator beholdeth His creation. 

Nanak, true is the work of the True One. 

Hail ! Hail to Him, 

The primal, the pure, without beginning, the indestructible, 
the same in every age ! 

XXXII 

Were one tongue to become a hundred thousand, and a 
hundred thousand to become twentyfold more, 

I Would utter the name of the one Lord of the world 
hundreds of thousands of times with all my tongues. 

In this way I should ascend the stairs of the Lord, and 
become one with Him. 

On hearing of the exaltation of the religious the vile 
become jealous.® 

Nanak, the former have found the Kind One, while false is 
the boasting of the false. 

XXXIII 

I have no strength to speak and no strength to be silent 

I have no strength to ask and no strength to give ; 

I have no strength to live, and no strength to die ; 

I have no strength to acquire empire or wealth which 
produce a commotion in the heart. 

I have no strength to meditate on Thee or ponder on 
divine knowledge ; 

I have no strength to find the way to escape from the 
world. 

He in whose arm there is strength, may see what he 
can do. 

Nanak, no one is of superior or inferior strength before God. 

^ To supply human necessities. 

* That is, before man is born, his portion is' fully allotted him. 

® Literally — on hearing matters connected with heaven worms grow 
jealous. 

* This hyperbole means that man has no strength to do anything 
without G(^’s assistance. 



THE JAPJI 


^15 


XXXIV 

God created nights, seasons, lunar days, and week days. 

Wind, water, fire, and the nether regions. 

In the midst of these He established the earth as a temple. 

In it He placed living beings of different habits and kinds. 

Their names are various and endless. 

And they are judged according to their acts. 

True is God, and true is His court. 

There the elect are accepted and honoured. 

The Merciful One marketh them according to their acts. 

The bad and the good shall there be distinguished. 

Nanak, on arrival there, this shall be seen. 

XXXV 

Such is the practice in the realm of righteousness. 

I now describe the condition of the realm of knowledge. 

How many winds, waters, and fires ! how many Krishans 
and Shivs ! 

How many Brahmas ^ who fashioned worlds ! how many 
forms, colours, and garbs ! 

How many lands of grace like this ! * how many mountains ! 
how many Dhrus and instructors ® such as his. 

How many Indars, how many moons and suns, how many 
regions and countries ! 

How many Sidhs, Budhs, how many Naths ! how many 
goddesses and representations of them ! 

How many demigods and demons ! how many saints, 
how many jewels and seas ! 

How many sources of life ! how many languages ! and how 
many lines of kings ! 

How many possessors of divine knowledge ! how many 
worshippers ! Nanak, there is no end of them. 

^ The Hindus believe it was through the agency of Brahma God 
created the world. 

* Where men reap the results of their acts. 

^ N^rad, who instructed Dhru to obtain his exalted dignity. NSrad 
is said to have been a son of Brahma. His father advised lum to 
marry, but he rejected his advice saying it was only proper to love 
Krishan. Father and son then began to curse each other with immoral 
and disastrous results for both. One of Nirad’s epithets is Strife-maker. 



2i6 the SIKH RELIGION 

XXXVI 

In the realm of knowledge the light of divine knowledge 
is resplendent. 

There are heard songs from which millions of joys and 
pleasures proceed. 

Beauty is the attribute of the realm of happiness.^ 

There things are fashioned in an incomparable manner. 

What is done there cannot be described. 

Whoever endeavoureth to describe it shall afterwards 
repent. 

There are fashioned knowledge, wisdom, intellect, and 
understanding ; 

And there too is fashioned the skill of demigods and men 
of supernatural power. 


XXXVII 

Force is the attribute of the realm of action.® 
Incomparable are they who dwell therein. 

There are very powerful warriors and heroes 
They are filled with the might of Ram. — 

There are many Sitas ® in the midst of greatness, 

Their beauty cannot be described — 

They die not, neither are they led astray * 

In whose hearts God dwelleth. 

There dwell congregations of saints ; 

They rejoice ; the True One is in their hearts. 

God dwelleth in the true realm.® 

He looketh on its denizens with an eye of favour, and 
rendereth them happy. 

There are continents, worlds, and universes. 
Whoevertrieth to describe them shall never arrive at an end. 

^ Sharm khand, Sharm is here not the Persian sharm, shame, nor 
the Sanskrit shram, toil. It is the Sanskrit shaman, happiness. The 
verse is also translated — Beautiful are the words of those who have 
attained the realm of the happy. 

* That is, the world. 

® Sita's name is apparently introduced here as she was the wife of 
Ram mentioned in the preceding line. 

* Na thage jah, literally — are not deceived. 

* Sach Khand. 



217 


THE JAPJI 

There are worlds upon worlds and forms upon forms. 

They fulfil their functions according to God’s orders : 

God beholding and contemplating them is pleased. 

Nanak, to describe them would be impossible.^ 

XXXVIII 

Make continence thy furnace, resignation thy goldsmith, 

Understanding thine anvil, divine knowledge thy tools, 

The fear of God thy bellows, austerities thy fire. 

Divine love thy crucible, and melt God’s name therein. 

In such a true mint the Word shall be coined. 

This is the practice of those on whom God looketh with 
an eye of favour. 

Nanak, the Kind One by a glance maketh them happy. 

Slok 

The air is the guru, water our father, and the great earth 
our mother ; 

Day and night are our two nurses, male and female, who 
set the whole world a-playing.* 

Merits and demerits shall be read out in the presence of 
the Judge. 

I According to men’s acts, some shall be near, and others 
distant from God. 

They who have pondered on the Name and departed after 
the completion of their toil,® 

Shall have their countenances made bright, 0 Nanak ; 
how many shall be emancipated in company with them ! * g 

^ Literally — would be as hard as iron. 

® Here the denizens of the world are likened to children. Their 
father is said to be water, the human sperm ; the earth like a mother 
affords them nutriment; day supplies them with occupation; the 
night lulls them to rest ; and the breath of the Guru imparts divine 
instruction. 

In the East it is usual for the rich to have two ntirses for a child — a 
female nurse by night, and a male nurse to accompany and play 
with it by day. 

® The worship of God and the necessity of labour for one’s liveli- 
hood are eminently Sikh principles. 

* This slok is generally believed to be the composition of Guru 
Angad. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


3i8 


ASA KI WARi 

There is but one God whose name is true, the Creator, 
devoid of fear and enmity, immortal, unborn, self-existent, 
great and beneficent. 

Guru Har Gobind 

This War includes sloks. The sloks also were written by 
the first Guru, and should be sung to the air of ‘ Tunda 
As Raja 

Slok I 
Guru Nanak 

I am a sacrifice to my Guru a hundred times a day. 

Who without any delay made demigods out of men. 

Guru Angad 

Were a hundred moons to rise, and a thousand suns to 
mount the sky ; 

Even with such light there would be appalling darkness 
without the Guru. 


Guru Nanak 

Nanak, they who very clever in their own estimation 
think not of the Guru, 

Shall be left like spurious sesames in a reaped field. 

' The word War originally meant a dirge for the brave slain in 
battle, then it meant any song of praise, and in this collection it means 
God’s praises generally. Wars were composed in stanzas called 
pauns, literally ladders, which were sung or chanted by professhinal 
mlnstrel8._ 

The Asa ki War is repeated by religious Sikhs after the Japji 
as a morning divine service. 

* As, son of Chitrbir, was a holy prince against whom a false 
charge had been preferred by his lascivious stepmother, which led to 
his hands and feet being cut off as punishment. One of the many 
Oriental versions of the story of Potiphar’s wife. 



ASA KI WAR 219 

They shall be left in the field, saith Nanak, without an 
owner : 

The wretches may even bear fruit and flower, but they shall 
be as ashes within their bodies. 

Pauri n 

God Himself created the world and Himself gave names 
to things. 

He made Maya ^ by His power ; seated He beheld His 
work with delight. 

0 Creator, Thou art the Giver ; being pleased Thou 
bestowest and practises! kindness. 

Thou knowest all things ; Thou gives! and takes! life 
with a word.® 

Seated Thou didst behold Thy work with delight. 

Slok II 
' Guru Nanak 

True are Thy regions and true Thy universes ; 

True Thy worlds and true Thy creation ; 

True Thine acts and all Thy thoughts ; 

True Thine order and true Thy court ; 

True Thy command and true Thy behest ; 

True Thy favour and true Thy signs. 

Hundreds of thousands and millions declare Thee true ; 

True is all Thy power, true all Thy strength ; 

True Thy praises, true Thy eulogies ; 

True Thy might, 0 true King. 

Nanak, true are they who meditate on the True One. 

They who are born and die are the falsest of the false.* 

* The pauris in this collection are all by Guru Nanak, so in the 
original his name is omitted at their head. 

® In Sanskrit literature, MSya is styled anadi, without a beginning, 
hence uncreated, but this is not the doctrine of the Gurus. To believe 
that God did not create Maya would be to believe in a limitation of 
His power. 

® Also translated — Thou givest and takest life from the body. 

* Koch is here used as the correlative of sack, true. 



220 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru Nanak^ 

Great is His glory whose name is great ; 

Great is His glory whose justice is true ; 

Great is His glory whose seat is immovable ; 

Great is His glory who understandeth our utterances ; 
Great is His greatness who knoweth all our feelings ; 
Great is His glory who giveth without consulting others ; 
Great is His glory who is all in all Himself. 

Nanak, His acts cannot be described. 

All that He did and hath to do dependeth on His own 
will. 


Guru Angad 

This world is the True One’s chamber ; the True One’s 
dwelling is therein. 

Some by His order He absorbeth in Himself ; others by 
His order He destroyeth.® 

Some at His pleasure He withdraweth from mammon ; 
others He causeth to abide therein. 

It cannot be even told whom He will regenerate. 

Nanak, he to whom God revealeth Himself, is known as 
holy. 


Pauri II 

Nanak, God having created animals recorded their names, 
and appointed Dharmraj to judge their acts. 

At His own court the real truth is adjudged; He separateth 
and removeth those who are attached to mammon. 

There the false find no place: they go to hell with blackened 
faces. 

They who are imbued with Thy name win ; the de- 
ceivers lose. 

God recorded names and appointed Dharmraj to record 
acts. 

^ In the original, Mahala I. It is so written to mark the distinction, 
between the preceding verses, which are sloks, and the following 
verses, which are in a different measure. 

^ By separating from Himself. 



ASA KI WAR 221 

Slok III 
Guru Nanak 

Wonderful Thy word, wonderful Thy knowledge ; 
Wonderful Thy creatures, wonderful their species ; 
Wonderful their forms, wonderful their colours ; 
Wonderful the animals which wander naked ; 

Wonderful Thy wind ; wonderful Thy water ; 

Wonderful Thy fire which sporteth wondrously ; 
Wonderful the earth, wonderful the sources of production ; 
Wonderful the pleasures to which mortals are attached ; 
Wonderful is meeting, wonderful parting from Thee ; 
Wonderful is hunger, wonderful repletion ; 

Wonderful Thy praises, wonderful Thy eulogies ; 
Wonderful the desert, wonderful the road ; 

Wonderful Thy nearness, wonderful Thy remoteness ; 
Wonderful to behold Thee present. 

Beholding these wonderful things I remain wondering. 
Nanak, they who understand them are supremely 
fortunate. 


Guru Nanak 

By Thy power we see, by Thy power we hear, by Thy 
power we' fear, or enjoy the highest happiness ; 

By Thy power were made the nether regions and the 
heavens ; by Thy power all creation ; 

By Thy power were produced the Veds, the Purans, the 
Muhammadan books, and by Thy power all compositions ; 

By Thy power we eat, drink, and clothe ourselves ; by 
Thy power springeth all affection ; 

By Thy power are the species, genera, and colours of 
creatures ; by Thy power are the animals of the world.^ 

By Thy power are virtues ; by Thy power are vices : by 
Thy power, honour and dishonour ; * 

^ Also translated — By Thy power was created animate and inani- 
mate nature. 

* Man abhmSn. The latter word is for aptnan, as so often in the 
Granth Sahib. Compare man abhiman madhe so sewak nahin. He 
who hath regard for honour or dishonour is not a holy man. 



222 THE SIKH RELIGION 

By Thy power are wind, water, and fire ; by Thy power 
is the earth. 

Everything existeth by Thy power ; Thou art the omni- 
potent Creator ; Thy name is the holiest of the holy. 

Saith Nanak, Thou beholdest and pervadest M things 
subject to Thy command : Thou art altogether unrivalled. 

Pauri III 

Man having enjoyed himself becometh ashes, and the 
soul passeth away. 

However great and wealthy a man may be, the ministers 
of Death throw a chain on his neck and take him away. 

There an account of his acts is read ; the Judge on his seat 
taketh the account and passeth sentence. 

Such a man shall find no place of shelter ; when he is 
beaten, who will hear his cries ? 

Man, blind that thou art, thou hast wasted thy life. 

Slok IV 
Guru Nanak 

In fear ^ the winds and breezes ever blow ; 

In fear flow hundreds of thousands of rivers ; 

In fear fire performeth its forced labour ; 

In fear the earth is pressed by its burden ; 

In fear Indar moveth headlong : in fear sitteth Dharmraj 
at God's gate ; 

In fear is the sun, in fear the moon ; they travel millions 
of miles without end ; 

In fear are the Sidhs, the Budhas, the demigods, and the 
Naths ; in fear are the stars * and the firmament ; 

In fear are wrestlers, very mighty men and divine heroes ; 

In fear cargoes of men come and go. 

God hath destined fear for every one ; ® Nanak. the Form- 
less One, the True, is alone without fear. 

1 The fear of God is, of course, meant. 

* Addni, from the Sanskrit udugan. The phrase is also translated- 
In fear is the firmament extended. 

* Literally — God hath written the destiny of fear on the heads of all. 



ASA KI WAR 


2^3 


Gum Namk 

Nanak, the Formless One is without fear ; all the Rams 
were dust. 

How many stories there are of Krishan ! how many Veds 
and religious compositions ! ^ 

How many beggars dance, and fall, and again beat time ! 

Actors enter the market-place and draw forth their 
appliances ; * 

Kings and queens sing and utter nonsense ; ® 

They wear earrings worth hundreds of thousands, and 
necklaces worth hundreds of thousands.^ 

The body on which they are worn, O Nanak, shall become 
ashes. 

Divine knowledge is not sought in mere words ; to speak 
concerning it were as hard as iron ; 

By God’s grace man obtaineth it ; skill and orders are 
useless therefor. 

Pauri IV 

If the Kind One look with kindness, then is the true 
Guru obtained. 

The soul hath wandered through many births, and now 
the true Guru hath communicated the Word. 

There is no benefactor so great as the true Guru ; hear 
this, all ye people. 

By meeting the true Guru who hath removed pride from 
his heart, and who preacheth the Truest of the true. 

The True One is obtained. 

Slok V 

Let all the gharis be your milkmaids, and the pahars 
your Krishans and Gopals ® : 

Let wind, water, and fire be your jewels ; and the moon 
and sun your avateirs ; 

^ Also translated — How many expound the Veds ! 

** Also translated — draw a crowd around them. This hymn pur- 
ports to give a brief description of the miracle-plays of Ram and 
Krishan. * Literally — speak of the upper and lower regions. 

* IMh iakian. Takd is really a double pice, or about a h^fpenny 
of English money, but in the plural it means money in general. 

* Gi^dls are herdsmen among whom Krishan used'to sport. 



224 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The whole earth your stage properties and vessels, which 
are all entanglements. 

Nanak, they who are devoid of divine knowledge are 
robbed ; the minister of death hath devoured them. 

Guru Nanak 

The disciples play, the gurus dance, 

Shake their feet, and roll their heads. 

Dust flieth and falleth on their hair ; ^ 

The audience beholding laugh and go home. 

For the sake of food the performers beat time, 

And dash themselves on the ground. 

The milkmaids sing, Krishans sing, 

Sitas and royal Rams sing. 

Fearless is the Formless One, whose name is true. 

And whose creation is the whole world. 

The worshippers on whom God bestoweth kindness worship 
Him ; 

Pleasant * is the night for those who long for Him in their 
hearts. 

By the Guru’s instruction to his disciples this knowledge 
is obtained, 

That the Kind One saveth those on whom He looketh with 
favour. 

Oil-presses, spinning-wheels, hand-mills, potters’ wheels, 
Plates, whirlwinds, many and endless, 

Tops, churning-staves, threshing-frames turn round ; 
Birds tumble and take no breath. 

Men put animals on stakes and whirl them. 

0 Nanak, the tumblers are innumerable and endless. 

In the same way those bound in entanglements are swung 
round ; 

Every one danceth according to his own acts — 

They who dance and laugh shall weep on their departure ; 

1 Jhatd is a woman's head of hair. The actors, who in India are 
generally all men, wear female wigs. 

* Bhini. Literally— dewy ; when the atmosphere is calm and the 
heat not excessive. 



ASA KI WAR 


225 


They cannot fly or obtain supernatural power. 

Leaping and dancing are human recreations ; 

Nanak, they who have the fear of God in their hearts 
have also love. 

Pauri V 

Thy name is the Formless : by repeating it man goeth not 
to hell. 

The soul and body are all Thine : what Thou givest man 
eateth : to say aught else were waste of words. 

0 man, if thou desire thine advantage, do good acts and be 
lowly. 

Even though thou stave off old age, it shall come to thee 
in the disguise of death. 

None may remain when his measure is full. 

Slok VI 

The Musalmans praise the Shariat, read it, and reflect 
on it ; 

But God’s servants are they who employ themselves in 
His service in order to behold Him. 

The Hindus praise the Praised One whose appearance 
and form are incomparable ; 

They bathe in holy streams, perform idol-worship and 
adoration, use ^ copious incense of sandal. 

The Jogis meditate on God the Creator, whom they call 
the Unseen, 

Whose form is minute, whose name is the Bright One, 
and who is the image of their bodies.* 

In the minds of the generous contentment is produced 
in their desire to give. 

Others give, but ask a thousandfold more, and still want 
the world to honour them. 

Why mention thieves, adulterers, perjurers, evil and sinful 
men ? 

^ Some suppose kdr to be a noun meaning the lines Hindus draw 
on the ground to enclose cooking-places, within which others are not 
admitted. 

* The Jogis, when in intensely deep meditation,- close their eyes. 
On opening them and looking upward they suppose that they behold 
God in their own image in the firmament. 

SIKH. X Q 



226 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Many depart from here after eating what they had 
amassed in previous births ; ^ shall they have any business 
whatever in the next world ? * 

The animals which live in the water, dry land, the four- 
teen worlds, and all creation — 

What they say Thou alone knowest ; for them too Thou 
carest. 

Saith Nanak, the saints hunger to praise Thee ; the true 
Name is their support. 

In everlasting joy they abide day and night : may I 
obtain the dust of the feet of such virtuous men ! 

Guru Nanak and Shaikh Brahm discussed the 
question of the disposal of the dead. The Shaik 
maintained that a man who was burned would either 
go to hell or not rise at the day of judgement. 

Guru Nanak 

The ashes of the Musalman fall into the potter’s clod ; 

Vessels and bricks are fashioned from them ; they cry out 
as they burn. 

The poor ashes burn and weep, and sparks fly from them. 

Nanak, the Creator who made the world, knoweth whether 
it is better to be burned or buried. 

Pauri VI 

Without the true Guru none hath found God : without 
the true Guru none hath found God. 

God hath put Himself into the true Guru ; He hath made 
manifest and proclaimed this. 

Salvation is ever obtained by meeting the true Guru who 
hath banished worldly love from within him. 

Best are the meditations of him who hath fixed his mind 
on the True One : 

He hath found the Giver of life to the world. 

^ And have done nothing meritorious in this birth. 

* This verse is also translated — Many depart from here after 
spending what they possessed ; had they any other business in this 
world ? 



ASA KI WAR 

Slok VII 


227 


In pride man cometh, in pride he departeth ; 

In pride is man born, in pride he dieth ; 

In pride he giveth, in pride he taketh ; 

In pride he earneth, in pride he spendeth ; 

In pride man becometh true or false ; 

In pride man meditateth evil or good ; 

In pride he goeth to hell or heaven ; 

In pride he rejoiceth, in pride he moumeth ; 

In pride he becometh filthy, in pride he is cleansed ; 

In pride man loseth his caste and race ; 

In pride are the ignorant, in pride the clever ; 

In pride one knoweth not the value of deliverance or 
salvation ; 

In pride is mammon and in pride its effect on the heart ; 
In pride are animals created. 

When pride is removed, God’s gate is seen. 

Withoutdivine knowledge manworrieth himself bytalking. 
Nanak, the Commander hath thus ordained it ; 

As man regardeth God, so God regardeth him.^ 

Guru Angad 

It is the nature of pride that it produceth pride. 

This pride is a trammel which subjecteth man to repeated 
transmigration. 

What is the origin of pride, and by what device shall it 
depart ? 

For pride it is ordained that man wander according to 
his previous acts. 

Pride is a chronic disease, but there is also a medicine 
for it in the heart. 

If God bestow His grace, man shall avail himself of the 
Guru’s instruction ; 

Saith Nanak, hear, O ye men, in this way trouble shall 
depart. 

^ Also translated — 

(a) Treat men according to their acts. 

\b) Treat others as thou wouldst be treated thyself. 

Q 2 



228 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Pauri VII 

They who have meditated on God as the truest of the true, 
have done real worship and are contented ; 

They have refrained from evil,*^ done good deeds, and 
practised honesty ; 

They have lived on a little corn and water, and burst the 
entanglements of the world. 

Thou art the great Bestower ; ever Thou givest gifts which 
increase a quarterfold. 

They who have magnified the great God have found Him. 

Slok VIII 

Men, trees, the banks of sacred streams, clouds, fields. 

Islands, peoples, countries, continents, the universe. 

The sources of production from eggs, wombs, the earth, 
and perspiration. 

Lakes, mountains, animals — O Nanak, God knoweth their 
condition. 

Nanak, God having created animals taketh care of them 
all. 

The Creator who created the world hath to take thought 
for it also. 

It is the same Creator who made the world who taketh 
thought for it. 

To Him be obeisance ; blessings be on Him ! His court 
is imperishable. 

Nanak, without the true Name what is a sacrificial mark ? 
what a sacrificial thread ? 

Guru Nanak 

Man may perform hundreds of thousands of good acts 
and deeds, hundreds of thousands of approved charities. 

Hundreds of thousands of penances at sacred places, 
sahaj jog ® in the wilderness, 

1 Literally — Have not put their feet into evil. 

* There are two forms of Jog or exercise for the union of the soul with 
God. Sahaj Jog or raj jog is the repetition of God’s name with fixed 
attention and association with the holy, as contradistinguished from the 
hath jog of Patanjali, the severest and most painful form of a Jogi’s 
austerities. 



ASA KI WAR 


229 

Hundreds of thousands of braveries, and part with his life 
in the conflict of battle ; 

He may study hundreds of thousands of Veds and works 
of divine knowledge and meditation, and read the Purans — 

Nanak, these devices would be of no avail ; true is the 
mark of grace. 

The Creator who made the world hath decreed trans- 
migration. 

Pauri VIII 

Thou alone art the true Lord who hath diffused the real 
truth. 

He to whom Thou givest obtaineth truth, and he then 
practiseth it. 

Man obtaineth truth on meeting the true Guru in whose 
heart the truth dwelleth. 

The fool knoweth not truth, and hath wasted his life 
by obstinacy ; 

Why hath he come into the world ? 

Slok IX 

Guru Nanak 

A man may load carts with books ; he may load men 
with books to take with him ; 

Books may be put on boats ; pits may be filled with them. 

A man may read books for months ; he may read them for 
years ; 

He may read them for life ; he may read them while he 
hath breath — 

Nanak, only one word, God's name, would be of account ; 
all else would be the senseless discussion of pride. 

Guru Nanak 

The more one readeth and writeth, the more is one tor- 
mented ; 

The more one wandereth on pilgrimages, the more one 
babbleth ; 

The more religious garbs man weareth, the more dis- 
comfort he causeth his body. 



230 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Bear, O my soul, the result of thine own acts. 

He who eateth not corn ^ hath lost the relish of life. 

Men suffer much pain through their attachment to 
mammon. 

They who wear not clothes suffer terribly day and 
night. 

Man ruineth himself by perpetual silence ; how can he who 
sleepeth in ignorance be awakened without a guru. 

Even though man go barefooted, he must still suffer for 
his own acts.* 

If a man eat filth, and put ashes on his head. 

The blind fool loseth respect ; without the Name he 
obtaineth no abiding place. 

The ignorant man who dwelleth in the wilderness and at 
burial and cremation-grounds, knoweth not God and shall 
afterwards regret. 

He who meeteth the true Guru and fixeth God'’s name in 
his heart, obtaineth comfort. 

Nanak, he on whom God looketh with favour obtaineth 
Him. 

He becometh free from hopes and fears, and destroyeth 
his pride by means of the Word. 

Pauri IX 

The saints, 0 Lord, please Thy heart, adorn Thy gate, 
and hymn Thy praises. 

Nanak, they who are outside Thy favour, find no entrance 
and wander in many births. 

Some know not their origin, and have an excessive 
opinion of themselves. 

I ain a singer of low caste ; others call themselves of high 
caste. 

I only beg of those who meditate on Thee.® 

^ Several faqirs do not eat corn, some go naked, some practise 
perpetual silence, some go barefooted, some eat filth, &c. 

* The gySnis generally translate— If a man go barefooted, he is 
merely suffering for his folly. 

* Also translated — I beg /or a sight of those who meditate 
on Thee. 



231 


ASA KI WAR 

Slok X 
Guru Nanak 

False are kings, false their subjects, false the whole world ; 

False are mansions, false palaces, false those who dwell 
therein ; 

False is gold ; false silver ; false he who weareth them ; 

False the body ; false raiment ; false peerless beauty ; 

False husbands ; false wives ; they waste away and 
become dust. 

Man who is false loveth what is false, and forgetteth 
the Creator. 

With whom contract friendship ? The whole world 
passeth away. 

False is sweetness ; false honey ; in falsehood shiploads 
are drowned. 

Nanak humbly assert eth — except Thee, 0 God, everything 
is thoroughly false. 

Guru Nanak 

Man is known as true when truth is in his heart ; 

When the filth of falsehood departeth, man washeth his 
body clean. 

Man is known as true when he beareth love to the 
True One ; 

When the mind is enraptured on hearing the Name, 
man attaineth the door of salvation. 

Man shall be known as true when he knoweth the true 
way ; 

Having prepared the field of the body, put into it the seed 
of the Creator. 

Man shall be known as true when he receiveth true 
instruction ; 

Let man show mercy to living things and perform some 
works of charity. 

Man shall be known as true, when he dwelleth in the 
pilgrimage of his heart ; 



232 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Let man after inquiry from the true Gjiiru rest and abide 
in his own heart ; 

Truth is the medicine for all ; it removeth and washeth 
away sin. 

Nanak maketh supplication to those who are in possession 
of truth. 

Pauri X 

Be mine the gift of the dust of the saints' feet : if I obtain 
it, I shall apply it to my forehead. 

Forsake false covetousness; concentrate thy mind and 
meditate on the Unseen One. 

Thou shalt obtain a reward in proportion to what thou hast 
done. 

If it have been so allotted from the beginning, man shall 
obtain the dust of the saints’ feet. 

Ruin not thyself with scant service. 

Slok XI 
Guru Nanak 

There is a dearth of truth ; falsehood prevaileth ; the 
blackness of this age maketh men demons. 

They who have sown the seed of the Name have departed 
with honour ; how can half-seed germinate ? 

If the seed be whole, it will germinate in the proper 
season. 

Nanak, unbleached cloth cannot be dyed without a base. 

If the body be put into the vat of fear, modesty be made 
its base. 

And it be dyed with devotion, O Nanak, there will not 
be a trace of falsehood in it. 

Guru Nanak 

Greed and sin are ruler and village accountant ; falsehood 
is master of the mint. 

Lust, his minister, summoneth and examineth men, and 
sitteth in judgement on them. 

The subjects are blind and without divine knowledge, and 
satisfy the judge's greed with bribes. 



ASA KI WAR 


233 

Priests dance, play musical instruments, disguise, and 
decorate themselves ; 

They shout aloud, sing of battles, and heroes’ praises. 

Fools call themselves pandits and with tricks and cavilling 
love to amass wealth. 

Pretended religious men spoil their religious acts, and yet 
want the door of salvation ; 

They call themselves continent, and leave their houses 
and homes, yet they know not the way. 

Every one is perfect to himself : no one admitteth himself 
wanting. 

If the weight of honour be put into the scale, then, Nanak, 
man shall appear property weighed. 

Guru Nanak 

Man’s evil becometh known, 0 Nanak ; the True One 
seeth all. 

Every one maketh endeavours, but it is only what the 
Creator doeth that taketh place. 

Caste hath no power in the next world : there is a new 
order of beings. 

They whose accounts are honoured are the good. 

Pauri XI 

They whom Thou didst so destine from the beginning 
meditate on Thee, O Lord. 

There is nothing in the power of creatures ; O God, it is 
Thou who hast created the different worlds. 

Some Thou blendest with Th5^elf ; others Thou leadest 
astray from Thee. 

Thou art known by the favour of the Guru, through whom 
Thou revealest Thyself. 

They who know Thee are easily absorbed in the True One. 

Slok XII 
Guru Nanak 

Pain is medicine, worldly pleasure a disease ; where 
there is such pleasure, there is no desire for God. 

Thou art the Doer, I do nothing ; if I try to do an3rihing, 
it cometh to nothing. 



234 the SIKH RELIGION 

I am a sacrifice unto Thee ; Thou abides! in Thine omni- 
potence : 

Thine end cannot be seen. 

Thy light pervadeth creatures ; .creatures are contained 
in Thy light ; Thou fiUest inanimate and animate 
creation.^ 

Thou art the true Lord ; beautiful is Thy praise ; he who 
uttereth it is saved. 

Nanak uttereth the words of the Creator ; what is to be 
done God continueth to do. 

Guru Angad 

The Jogis deem it their duty to acquire divine knowledge, 
the Brahmans to read the Veds, 

The Khatris to exercise bravery, the Sudars to work for 
others ; 

But the highest duty of all is to repeat the name of the one 
God.2 

He who knoweth the secret of this 

Is a bright God himself, and Nanak is his slave. 

Guru Angad 

There is one God, the God of all gods, the Supreme God 
of souls. 

He who knoweth the secrets of the soul and of God, 

Is a bright God himself, and Nanak is his slave. 

Guru Nanak 

Water remaineth if confined in a vessel ; hut it cannot 
remain without a vessel. 

The mind controlled by divine knowledge is restrained ; 
hut without a guru there can be no divine knowledge. 

1 Also translated — Thy power {kata) is inconceivable (a, not, and 
ialna, to know). 

* Also translated — 

The Jogis speak of divine knowledge, the Brahmans of the Veds ; 

The Khatris of bravery, the SSdars of working for others. 

All that they speak is concerning the one God. 



235 


ASA KI WAR 

Pauri XII 

When the literate man is sinful he deserveth punishment ; 
but punish not the illiterate saint. 

As man acteth so shall he be described. 

Play not such a game as shall bring thee defeat on arriving 
at God’s court. 

The literate and the illiterate shall be judged hereafter ; 

The headstrong shall be punished in the next world. 

Slok XIII 
Guru Nanak 

Nanak, this body of ours^ hath one carriage and one 
driver. 

They are both changed in every age : the holy man 
knoweth this. 

In the Sat age contentment was the carriage, piety the 
driver in front ; 

In the Treta age continence was the carriage, strength 
the driver in front ; 

In the Dwapar age penance was the carriage, truth the 
driver in front ; 

In the Kal age passion* is the carriage, falsehood the 
driver in front. 

Guru Nanak 

The Sam Ved saith that the Lord is white-robed,® that 
men desired truth, abode in truth, and that all were 
absorbed in truth. 

The Rig saith that God’s name is everywhere contained, 
that it is as the sun in heaven ; 

That by repeating it sins depart, 

^ Meru is the large bead in* which the two ends of a rosary are 
joined, without which it is believed that prayers repeated on the rosary 
are of no avail. Mer shartr here means man’s body, which is 
superior to that of other animals. 

* Agan. Literally — fire. This word is often used for wrath, but Guru 
Nanak has more often inveighed against avarice or covetousness than 
against wrath, and perhaps it is the former that is taken as a special 
attribute of this degenerate age. 

* Seiamhar. The Hans or Swan avatSr. 



236 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


And that then, Nanak, man obtaineth salvation. 

The Yajur stateth that Kan Krishan, who was a Yadav, 
seduced Chandrawal ; 

That he brought the tree of life for a milkmaid, and amused 
himself in Bindraban. 

The Atharv belongeth to the Kal age, when God’s name 
was called Allah. 

Men then wore blue clothes, and the Turks and Pathans 
exercised sway. 

The four Veds are true according to the Hindus', but if they 
are read and studied there are found therein four different 
doctrines ; 

When man hath love and devotion and is himself lowly, 
it is then, O Nanak, he obtaineth salvation. 

Pauri XIII 

I am a sacrifice to the true Guru by meeting whom the 
Lord is remembered, 

Who gave me the salve of divine instruction ; with these 
eyes I then beheld God in the world. 

The deeders who leave the Lord and attach themselves 
to mammon are wrecked. 

The true Guru is a boat ; few there are who consider this. 

And those who do he mercifully saveth, 

Slok XIV 
Guru Nanak 

The simmal-tree of the desert is very tall and very thick. 

Why should the birds which go to it with hopes depart 
disappointed ? 

Because its fruit is insipid, its flowers unwholesome, and 
its leaves useless. 

The tree which yieldeth sweet fruit is lowly, O Nanak, 
but its qualities and virtues are exquisite. 

Every one boweth to himself ; no one boweth to another. 

If anything be put into a scale and weighed, the side 
which descendeth is the heavier.^ 

^ The man who is lowly is the most worthy. 



ASA KI WAR 237 

The wicked man like a deer-stalker boweth twice more 
than any one else ; 

But what availeth bowing the head, if the heart be impure? 

The following hymn was composed by Guru 
Nanak at Banaras on the occasion of a discussion 
with the local pandits who pressed him to dress in 
the style of the Hindus : — 

Guru Nanak 

You read books, perform your twilight devotions, argue, 
worship stones, and sit like cranes ; 

You utter falsehoods as excellent jewels ; you meditate 
on the Gayatri ^ three times a day ; 

You wear necklaces, put sacrificial marks on your fore- 
heads, carry two dhotis, and put towels on your heads. 

If you knew God’s designs, you would know that yours is 
verily a vain religion. 

Saith Nanak, verily reflect that without the' true Guru 
you shall not find the way. 

Some suppose that the following was addressed to 
Sultan Ibrahim Khan Lodi who it is believed at one 
time sought to persecute the Guru : — 

Pauri XIV 

Raiment and pleasing beauty man must leave on earth 
and depart. 

Man shall obtain the fruit of the bad or good deeds he hath 
done : 

He may have exercised sovereignty to his heart’s content, 
yet must he proceed by the narrow road. 

He shall be sent naked to hell, which will then appear 
very formidable to him ; 

And he shall regret the sins he committed. 

The following slok, addressed by Guru Nanak to 
pandit Hardial, his family priest, when he came to 
invest him with a janeu, the sacrificial thread of the 
upper classes of Hindus, has already been given : — 

^ Traipal is understood to be for tripada, the gayatri or spell of the 
Hindus. 



238 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Slok XV 

Make mercy thy cotton, contentment thy thread, con- 
tinence its knot, truth its twist. 

That would make a janeu for the soul ; if thou have it, 
O Brahman, then put it on me. 

It will not break, or become soiled, or be burned, or lost. 

Blest the man, O Nanak, who goeth with such a thread 
on his neck. 

Thou purchasest a janeu for four damris, and seated in 
a square puttest it on ; 

Thou whisperest instruction that the Brahman is the 
guru of the Hindus — 

Man dieth, the janeu falleth, and the soul departeth with- 
out it. 

Guru Nanak 

Though men commit countless thefts, countless adulteries, 
utter countless falsehoods and countless words of abuse ; 

Though they commit countless robberies and villanies night 
and day against their fellow creatures ; 

Yet the cotton thread is spun, and the Brahman cometh 
to twist it. 

For the ceremony they kill a goat and cook and eat it, 
and everybody then saith ‘ Put on the janeu ’. 

When it becometh old, it is thrown away and another 
is put on. 

Nanak, the string breaketh not if it be strong. 

Guru Nanak 

By adoring and praising the Name honour and a true 
thread are obtained. 

In this way a sacred thread shall be put on, which will not 
break, and which will be fit for entrance into God's court. 

Guru Nanak 

There is no string for the sexual organs, there is no string 
for women ; 

There is no string for the impure acts which cause your 
beards to be daily spat upon. 

Thereis no string for the feet,there is no string for the hands. 



ASA KI WAR 239 

There is no string for the tongue, there is no string for 
the eyes. 

Without such strings the Brahman wandereth astray, 

Twisteth strings for the neck, and putteth them on others. 

He taketh hire for marrying ; 

He pulleth out a paper, and showeth the fate of the wedded 
pair?- 

Hear and see, ye people, it is strange 

That, while mentally blind, man is named wise. 

Pauri XV 

He to whom the Lord is compassionate and merciful will 
do the Master’s work. 

That worshipper whom God causeth to abide by His order, 
will worship Him. 

By obeying His order man is acceptable, and shall then 
reach his Master’s court. 

He shall act as pleaseth his Master, and obtain the fruit 
his heart desireth ; 

And he shall be clothed with a robe of honour in God's 
court. 

A man at Lahore presented a cow to a Brahman. 
The Brahman took her with him, but had not 
wherewithal to pay toll at the Sultanpur ferry. He 
was stopped by the Khatri toll-keeper. The latter 
collected the cow’s dung, and at once set about 
plastering his cooking-place therewith. Mardana 
went towards him, but was ordered off, lest he 
should defile the toll-keeper’s cooking-place. Upon 
this Guru Nanak uttered the following: — 

Slok XVI 

Thou takest toll for a cow and a Brahman, the cow- 
dung win not save thee. 

Thou wearest a dhoti ® and a frontal mark, and earnest 
a rosary, yet thou eatest the bread of malechhas. 

^ That is, he draws a horoscope. 

^ Dhoii is a cloth tied round the loins, the Latin subltgaculum. 



240 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Thou performest the Hindu worship at home, thou readest 
the Quran in public, and associatest with Muhammadans,^ 
O my brother. 

Lay aside hypocrisy, repeat God’s name, and thou shalt 
be saved. 


Guru Nanak 

They who have strings on their necks eat men, recite 
the Muhammadan prayers. 

And use knives to cut men’s throats^ 

Although the Brahmans sound shells in their houses. 

And enjoy their viands as they do themselves ; ® 

Yet false is their capital and false their dealings. 

By uttering falsehood they maintain themselves. 

Far from them is the abode of bashfulness and honesty : 
Nanak, falsehood everywhere prevaileth. 

On their foreheads are sacrificial marks ; on their waists 
reddish * dhotis ; 

And in their hands knives ; they are the world’s butchers. 
Putting on blue clothes, they are acceptable in the 
Muhammadans’ court. 

And, while taking bread from the malechhas, worship 
the Purans. 

They eat he-goats killed with unspeakable words,® 

And allow no one to enter their cooking squares. 

Having smeared a space they draw lines around it. 

And sit within, false that they are. 

Saying, ‘ Touch not ! 0 touch not ! 

‘ Or this food of ours will be defiled.’ 

But their bodies are defiled ; what they do is defiled ; 

* Also translated — Thou actest like Muhammadans. 

® Also translated — They who read prayers devour men, and they 
who wear strings on their necks ply knives. 

® According to the holy books of the Hindus, Brahmans should 
not eat in the houses of men who recite Muhammadan prayers. 

* Kdkhdi, reddish, or partially soiled from frequent washing. The 
word is also applied to the tucking in of a dhoti in a particular way. 

® The Muhammadan expression Bismilldh (in the name of God), 
used when slaughtering animals as well as on other occasions. It is, 
of course, unacceptable to Hindus. 



ASA KI WAR 


241 

Their hearts are false while they perform ablutions after 
their meals. 

Saith Nanak, meditate on the True One ; 

If thou art pure, thou shalt obtain Him. 

Pauri XVI 

All are within Thy ken, O Lord ; Thou seest all, and Thou 
movest them beneath Thy glance. 

God himself bestoweth greatness ; He Himself causeth 
men to do good works. 

He is the greatest of the great ; great is His world ; He 
appointeth all men to their respective duties. 

If He cast a backward glance. He maketh monarchs as 
grass ; ^ 

They may beg from door to door and receive no alms. 

Guru Nanak composed the following slok on being 
invited by a dishonest shopkeeper to attend a shradh, 
or religious service, for his deceased father : — 

Slok XVII 

If a robber break a house and sacrifice the fruits of that 
robbery to his ancestors. 

The sacrifice shall be known in the next world, and make 
out the ancestors to be thieves. 

The hand of the Brahman go-between shall be cut off ; 
thus will God do justice. 

Nanak, it is only the fruit of what man giveth from his 
earnings and toil that shall be obtained in the next world. 

Guru Nanak 

As a woman hath her recurring courses, so falsehood dwell- 
eth in the mouth of the false one, and he is ever despised. 

He should not be called pure who sitteth and washeth his 
body ; 

Rather is he pure, Nanak, in whose heart God dwelleth. 

1 Gkdh. Generally translated ‘ grass-cutters ’ by the gyanis : a third 
interpretation too is current. In former times men of position 
appeared before conquerors with grass in their mouths, implying 
that they were the conquerors’ cows whose lives should be saved. 
Accordingly, the phrase is also translated — and He would cause 
^inji^ to put grass in their mouths. 

sikH. I R 



242 


THE SIKH RELIGION 
Pauri XVII 

Caparisoned horses fleet as the wind and women adorned 
with every aid to beauty ^ — 

Men fix their hearts on them, dwell in mansions, pavilions 
and palaces, and make display ; 

They enjoy pleasures to their hearts’ content ; but they 
know not God and therefore fail. 

They live by their authority, and, beholding their women’s 
chambers, forget death ; 

But old age shall come and youth fail them. 

A rich man gave a feast to which Guru Nanak 
and several Brahmans were invited. During the 
feast a child was born in the house, whereupon the 
Brahmans refused food and departed, deeming the 
house impure. Guru Nanak remonstrated with 
the following : — 

Slok XVIII 

If the idea of impurity be admitted, there is impurity 
m everything. 

There are worms in cow-dung* and in wood ; 

There is no grain of corn without life. 

In the first place, there is life in water by which everything 
is made green. 

How shall we avoid impurity ? It falleth on our 
kitchens. 

Saith Nanak, impurity is not thus washed away : it is 
washed away by divine knowledge.® 

Guru Nanak 

Impurity of the heart is greed, impurity of the tongue is 
falsehood ; 

Impurity of the eyes is gazing on another’s wealth, his wife, 
and her beauty ; 

Impurity of the ears is listening to slander. 

^ Har rangi. Literally — with every colour. 

In India cow-dung, besides being used for religious purposes, is 
ordinarily used as fuel by poor people. 

® In the current Janamsikhis it is stated that this slok was composed 
on tte proposed purification of the Guru’s house after the birth of his 
son, Sri Chand. 



ASA KI WAR 243 

Nanak, even the friended saint who -practiseth such things, 
shall go bound to hell. 

All impurity consisteth in superstition and attachment 
to worldly things. 

Birth and death are ordained ; as it pleaseth God, we come 
and go. 

The eating and drinking which God sent as sustenance 
are pure. 

Nanak, the pious persons who know God have no 
impurity. 

Pauri XVIII 

Magnify and praise the True Guru in whom there is all 
greatness. 

If the Guru cause us to meet God, we shall behold His 
greatness. 

If it please the Guru, he will cause Godins praises to dwell 
in the heart. 

He putteth his hand on our foreheads ; and when he 
giveth the order, removeth evil from within us. 

When God is pleased the nine treasures are obtained. 

Slok XIX 

The Brahman having first purified himself sitteth in a 
purified square. 

The purified food is placed before him ; no one may 
touch it. 

Being thus purified, he beginneth to eat and read Sanskrit 
verses. 

If it is thrown into a filthy place ; whose fault is that ? 

The corn was holy, the water was holy, the fire and salt 
were holy ; when the fifth ingredient, ghi} was added. 

Then the food became holy. 

When the food entereth a sinful body, it becometh impure 
as if spat upon. 

The mouth which uttereth not the Name, and eateth even 
delicacies without the Name, 

Consider, O Nanak, as if spat upon. 

^ Clarified butter, always deemed pure by Hindus and kindred sects. 

R 2 



244 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The following was Guru Nanak’s remonstrance to 
a man who reviled the female sex : — 

Guru Nanak 

In a vessel^ man is conceived, from a vessel he is born, 
with a vessel he is betrothed and married. 

With a vessel he contracteth friendship ; with a vessel 
he goeth through the world. 

When one vessel dieth, another is sought for ; to a vessel 
he is bound. 

Why call her bad from whom are bom kings ? 

From a vessel a vessel is born ; none may exist without 
a vessel. 

Nanak, only the one True God is independent of a vessel. 

The mouth which ever praiseth Him^ is fortunate and 
beautiful. 

Nanak, that face shall be bright in the court of the True 
One. 

Pauri XIX 

Every one calleth Thee his own, O Lord ; those who do 
not so call Thee Thou puttest away. 

Every one must bear the result of his own acts, and adjust 
his own account. 

Since ye are not to remain in this world, why practise 
ye pride ? 

Call no one bad ; know this by reading these words. 

Dispute not with a fool. 

Slok XX 

Nanak, the mind and body of him who talketh evil are 
evil : 

He is most evil, and most evil is his reputation. 

The evil person is rejected in God’s court ; his face is 
spat upon. 

The evil person is a fool, and receiveth shoe-beatings as 
punishment. 

^ Woman is meant. The Greeks sometimes used the word o-kcvos 
in the same sense. 

* Some suppose that woman is the missing word here, as the pre- 
ceding part of the slok is a defence of women, not a eulogy of God. 



ASA KI WAR 245 

Guru Nanak 

If a man, foul within and fair without, puff himself up 
in the world. 

His filth will not depart even though he bathe at the sixty- 
eight places of pilgrimage. 

They who wear silk within and rags without, are good 
in this world. 

They have conceived love for God and contemplate 
beholding Him. 

In God’s love they weep, in God’s love they laugh, or are 
even silent. 

They care not for an5d;hing except the true Master. 

They beg for food at God's door, and only eat when He 
giveth it to them. 

For them there is but one court as there is but one pen 
we and you shall meet for justice. 

The accounts of the wicked shall be examined in God's court, 
and they shall be pressed, O Nanak, like oil in a mill.^ 

Pauri XX 

Thou Thyself didst create the world, and Thou Thyself 
didst infuse power into it. 

Thou beholdest Thine own work, the losing and winning 
dice ® upon earth. 

Whatever hath come shall depart ; his turn shall come to 
every one. 

Why forget that Lord who owneth life and soul 

With thine own hands arrange thine own affairs. 

^ That is, there is no mediator between God and man. It is God 
Himself who decides man's fate. 

^ This with half the last line is also translated — They who confound 
meum and tuum shall have their accounts examined in God’s court, 
and shall be pressed, O N3nak, like oil in a mill. 

* That is, the sinners and the virtuous. The game of chausar or 
chaupar is played with sixteen pieces, called ram, and three di^ 
called pSsa, The siris while teing moved round the board, like 
creatures in transmigration, are called kachi, unripe ; when they reach 
their goal, they are called pakki^ or ripe. 



246 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Slok XXI 
Guru Angad 

What love is that which attacheth itself to worldly 
things ? 

Nanak, call him a lover who is ever absorbed in God. 

He who deemeth what is good good, and what is bad bad, 

Shall not be called a true lover if he proceed in this 
manner.^ 

Guru Angad 

He who offereth salutation and at the same time criticizeth 
God^’s works, hath made a mistake from the beginning. 

Both his salutation and criticism are in vain ; Nanak, 
such a person shall not obtain a place in God's court. 

Pauri XXI 

Ever remember that Lord by worshipping whom thou 
shalt find happiness. 

Why hast thou done such evil deeds as thou shalt suffer 
for ? 

Do absolutely nothing evil, look well before thee ; 

So throw the dice that thou mayest not lose with the 
Lord, 

Nay, that thou mayest gain some profit. 

Slok XXII 
Guru Angad 

When a servant while performing service is proud and 
quarrelsome besides, 

And talketh too much, he pleaseth not his master. 

If he efface himself and perform service, he shall obtain 
some honour. 

Nanak, he who longeth for God shall meet Him, and 
his longing shall be acceptable. 

^ He shall not be called a lover, if he rail at God in adversity. 
This idea often occurs in Oriental g^ry. 



ASA KI WAR 


247 


Guru Angad 

What a man hath in his heart cometh forth ; lip-worship 
is of no avail. 

Man soweth poison and expecteth ambrosia ; behold 
that for justice ! 

Guru Angad 

Contracting friendship with a fool would never be pro- 
fitable. 

He acteth according to his understanding : let any one 
see and inquire into this. 

One thing can be put into a vessel if another be first 
removed.^ 

Commands will not succeed with God ; supplications 
must be addressed to Him. 

By practising falsehood falsehood is obtained : Nanak, 
there is pleasure in praising God. 

Guru Angad 

Friendship for a fool and love for a great man 

Are like lines drawn on water, which leave neither trace 
nor mark. 

Guru Angad 

If a man be a fool and do anything, he cannot do it well ; 

Even though he do one or two things well, he will spoil the 
rest. 

Pauri XXII 

Jf the servant who is employed in service act according 
to his master’s wishes. 

His honour is all the more, and he receiveth double wages. 

If he vie with his master, he will excite his jealousy, 

Lose his large salary, and receive shoe-beating on the 
mouth. 

Thank Him by whose gifts thou liveth 

Nanak, commands will not succeed with Him ; the 
Master must be implored. 

^ The love of God will enter man’s heart if he first expel worldljr love. 



248 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Slok XXIII 
Guru Angad 

What sort of gift is that which we obtain by our own 
asking ? 

Nanak, wonderful is the gift we obtain when the Lord 
is pleased. 

Guru Angad 

What sort of service is that in which the fear of the 
master departeth not ? ^ 

Nanak, he is called a servant who is absorbed in the love 
of his master. 

Pauri XXIII 

Nanak, God’s end is not seen, nor hath He a thither or 
a hither side. 

He Himself createth, and He Himself again deslroyeth. 

Some have chains on their necks, and some ride on many 
horses. 

It is God who causeth to act and who acteth Himself ; 
to whom else shall we complain ? 

Nanak, it is for Him who made the world to take 
care of it. 

Slok XXIV 
Guru Nanak 

It is God Himself who made vessels * and He Himself who 
filleth them. 

In some is contained milk ; ® others are put over 
the fire. 

Some sleep on mattresses, and others stand and watch over 
them. 

Nanak, God regenerateth those on whom He looketh with 
favour. 

^ That is, when perfect understanding does not exist between master 
and servant, and the service is performed without love. 

* Here the word hhande means human beings generally. 

* That is, God’s love, milk being deemed pure. 



ASA KI WAR 249 

Guru Angad 

God Himself arrangeth, He Hiujself putteth what He 
hath made into its proper place ; 

Having in this world created animals, He Himself be- 
holdeth their birth and death. 

Whom shall we address, O Nanak, since God doeth every- 
thing Himself ? 

Pauri XXIV 

The greatness of the great God cannot be expr^sed ; 

He is the Creator, the Omnipotent, the Bounteous ; He 
provideth His creatures with sustenance. 

Man must do the work which God destined for him from 
the beginning. 

Nanak, except in the one God alone there is no abiding 
place. 

He doeth what He pleaseth. 



THE RAHIRAS^ 

S0DAR2 

Guru Nanak, Rag Asa 

What is that gate, what is that mansion where Thou, 
O God, sittest and watchest over all things ? 

How many various and countless instruments of Thine 
are played ! How many Thy musicians, 

How many Thy musical measures with their consorts, and 
how many singers sing Thee ! 

Wind, water, fire sing Thee ; Dharmraj singeth at Thy 
gate; 

The recording angels, who know how to write, and on 
whose record Dharmraj judgeth, sing Thee ; 

Ishar, Brahma, and Devi, ever beautiful as adorned by 
Thee, sing Thee ; 

Indar seated on his throne and the gods at Thy gate sing 
Thee ; 

Sidhs in meditation sing Thee ; holy men in contempla- 
tion sing Thee ; 

The continent, the true, and the patient sing Thee ; un- 
yielding heroes sing Thee. 

The Pandits and the supreme Rikhis, reading their Veds, 
sing Thee in every age. 

The lovely celestial maids who beguile the heart in the 
upper, middle, and nether regions sing Thee. 

^ The RahirSs is a collection of hymns by Guru NSnak, Guru 
Amar DSs, Guru Ram Das, and Guru Arjan. It is recited by the 
Sikhs as divine service at sunset. 

‘ The following hymn is so called because in the original it thus 
begins. 



THE RAHIRAS 251 

The jewels created by Thee with the sixty-eight places of 
Hindu pilgrimage sing Thee. 

Mighty warriors and heroes sing Thee ; the four sources 
of life sing Thee. 

The continents, the worlds, and the universe made and 
supported by Thy hands sing Thee. 

0 God, the saints who please Thee and who are imbued 
with Thy love sing Thee. 

The many others who sing Thee I cannot remember ; how 
could Nanak recount them ? 

That God is ever true. He is the true Lord, and the true 
Name. 

He who made this world is, was, and shall be ; he shall 
neither be born nor die. 

He who created things of different colours, descriptions, 
and species, 

Beholdeth His handiwork which attesteth His greatness. 

He will do what pleaseth Himself ; no order may be issued 
to Him to the contrary. 

He is King, the King of kings, O Nanak; all xtvasixn subject 
to His will. 


Guru Nanak, Rag Asa 

As men have heard so all call Thee great ; 

But hath any one ever seen how great Thou art ? 

Thy worth cannot be estimated or described ; 

They who seek to describe it are absorbed in Thee 

0 my great Lord, deep and profound, brimful of excel- 
lences. 

None knoweth the extent of Thine outline. 

Though all meditative men were to meet and meditate 
upon Thee, 

Though all appraisers were to meet and appraise Thee — 

They who possess divine and spiritual wisdom, priests 
and high priests — 

Yet they could not describe even a small portion of Thy 
greatness. 

All truth, all fervour, all goodness, 



252 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The excellences of perfect men, 

Cannot be obtained in their perfection without Thee. 

If Thy grace be obtained none can be excluded ; 

Of what account is the helpless speaker ? 

Thy storerooms are filled with Thy praises. 

Who can prevail against him to whom Thou givest ? 
Nanak, the True One arrangeth all. 

Guru Nanak, Rag Asa 

If I repeat the Name, I live ; if I forget it, I die ; 

It is difficult to repeat the true Name. 

If man hunger after the true Name, 

His pain shall depart when he satisfieth himself with it. 
Then how could I forget it, O my mother ? 

True is the Lord, true is His name. 

Men have grown weary of uttering 
Even an iota of His greatness ; His worth they have not 
discovered. 

If all men joined and tried to describe Him, 

That would not add to or detract from His greatness. 

God dieth not, neither is there any mourning for Him ; 
He continueth to give us our daily bread which never 
faileth. 

His praise is — that there neither is. 

Nor was, nor shall be any one like unto Him. 

As great as Thou art Thyself, O God, so great are Thy 
gifts. 

Thou who madest the day madest also the night 
They who forget their Spouse are evil persons : 
l^anak, without His name they are naught. 

Guru Ram Das, Rag Gujari 

O servants of God and the true Guru, the true Being, 
offer this supplication unto Him. 

We insects and worms seek thy protection, 0 true Guru ; 
mercifully enlighten us with the Name ; 

My friend and divine Guru, enlighten me with God’s name. 



THE RAHIRAS 


253 

Under the Guru’s instruction, the Name is the helper of 
my soul ; singing God’s praises is my occupation. 

Exceedingly, fortunate are the men of God who have 
faith in Him and thirst for Him : 

On obtaining the name of God, they are satisfied ; when 
men meet the company of the saints, God’s attributes are 
known. 

They who obtain not the relish of God’s name are unfor- 
tunate, and shall go to the god of death. 

Curses on the lives, curses on the hopes of living, of those 
who enter not the true Guru’s protection and society ! ^ 

The saints who have obtained the society of the true 
Guru are those on whose foreheads it was so written from 
the beginning. 

Blest is that true society, Nanak, by meeting which the 
relish of God is obtained, and the Name manifested. 


Guru Arjan, Rag Gujari® 

O my soul, why proposest thou exertion® when God 
Himself is engaged in effort for thee ? 

He even putteth their food before the insects which He 
created in rocks and stones. 

^ Also translated — They who enter not the true Guru’s protection 
and society have lived and shall live accursed. 

® It is said that on one occasion there was scarcity in Guru Arjan’s 
langar khdna, or supply dep6t for holy men and mendicants. When 
the Guru’s servants were making excessive efforts to collect provisions, 
he composed the folio wing/br Ihe special occasion. It should not be 
understood from this hymn that the Guru discountenanced labour or 
exertion. The Guru himself was most active in his ministrations, in 
his poetical work, and in his compilation in one great volume of the 
compositions of his predecessors and of the most famous mediaeval 
Indian saints. He wrote — 

O man, by striving and earning enjoy happiness ; 

Nanak, by meditating on God, meet Him and thine anxieties shall 
vanish. 

So also Guru Nanak — 

They who eat the fruit of their labour and bestow some portion, 

O Nanak, recognize the right way. 

® Also translated — O man, why feelest thou anxiety ? 



254 the SIKH RELIGION 

O my God, they who meet the society of the saints are 
saved. 

Through the favour of the Guru they obtain the highest 
rank ; though they be as dry wood, they are made green. 

No one can rely on mother, father, friends, children, or 
wives. 

God provideth every one with his daily food ; why, O man, 
art thou afraid ? 

The kulang flieth away hundreds of miles, leaving her 
young behind her. 

Who f eedeth them ? Who giveth them morsels to peck at ? 
Have you not considered this ? 

God holdeth in the palm of His hand all treasures and the 
eighteen supernatural powers. 

Nanak is ever a sacrifice unto Thee ; O God, Thou hast 
no end or bounds. 


SO PURUKHi 
Guru Ram Das, Rag Asa 

That Being is pure, God is the pure Being, God is alto- 
gether inaccessible and illimitable. 

All meditate on Thee ; all meditate on Thee ; O God, Thou 
art the true Creator. 

All creatures are Thine ; Thou providest for them all. 

O saints, meditate on God who causeth all misery to be 
forgotten. 

God Himself is the Lord, God Himself is the worshipper ;* 
Nanak, what a helpless creature is man ! 

Thou, O God, the one Supreme Being, art fully contained 
in every heart and pervadest everything. 

Some men are givers, some beggars ; all are Thy 
wondrous sport. 

Thou Thyself art the Giver ; Thou art the Enjoyer ; I 
know none beside Thee. 

^ The following hynm is so known as these are its first words. 

* On the principle that God is everywhere and in every creature. 



THE RAHIRAS 255 

Thou art the totally infinite Supreme Being ; what attri- 
butes of Thine shall I recount ? 

The slave Nanak is a sacrifice unto those who serve Thee, 
unto those who serve Thee. 

They who meditate on Thee, who meditate on Thee, 
0 God, abide in happiness in this age. 

They who meditate on God are emancipated, are emanci- 
pated, my friend ; for them Death’s noose is broken. 

All fear hath departed from those who have meditated on 
the fearless, the fearless God. 

They who have worshipped, who have worshipped my 
God, are absorbed in Him. 

Blest, blest are they who have meditated on God ; the 
slave Nanak will become a sacrifice unto them. 

0 Infinite One, Thine infinite storehouses are filled with 
Thy worship, Thy worship. 

0 Infinite One, many are Thy saints, many are Thy saints 
who praise Thee. 

They offer various, various worship to Thee, O God ; they 
practise austerities and repeat Thy name, O endless One. 

Various, various saints of Thine read many Simritis and 
Shastars, perform their daily duties and the six acts prescribed 
for Brahmans ; ^ 

But only they are saints, good saints, saith Nanak, who 
please God, the Omnipotent. 

Thou art the primal Being, the illimitable Creator ; there 
is none so great as Thou. 

Thou art the same in every age ; Thou art ever and ever 
the same ; Thou art the eternal Creator. 

What pleaseth Thee prevaileth ; what Thou doest cometh 
to pass. 

Thou Thyself didst fashion the whole creation, yet, being 
created, it shall disappear.* 

Nanak singeth the praises of the Creator who knoweth all 
things. 

^ Reading the Veds, expounding them, making sacrifice, assisting 
others in doing the same, receiving alms and giving them to other 
Brahmans. * Only God Himself is permanent. 



256 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru Ram Das, Rag Asa 

Thou art the true Creator, my Lord. 

What pleaseth Thee shall come to peiss ; what Thou givest 
I shall receive. 

Everything is Thine : all meditate on Thee. 

They to whom Thou showest kindness, obtain the jewel 
of Thy name. 

The pious ^ have gained, and the perverse have lost it. 

Thou Thyself hast separated these and blended those with 
Thee. 

Thou art an ocean : all are contained in Thee. 

There is none beside Thee. 

All living creatures are Thy play. 

When Thou didst desire separation, they who had met 
Thee were separated from Thee ; when Thou didst desire 
union, Thou didst blend them with Thyself.* 

That saint whom Thou causest to know Thee shall know 
Thee. 

And ever dwell on Thy praises. 

They who have served God have found happiness. 

And have become easily absorbed in His name. 

Thou Thyself art the Creator ; everything that is made is 
Thine ; 

There is none beside Thee ; 

Thou beholdest and knowest Thy handiwork. 

The slave Nanak saith, under the Guru’s instruction 
Thou becomest manifest. 


Guru Nanak, Rag Asa 

Man hath obtained a dwelling in that tank * whose water 
God hath made as hot as fire. 

Man’s feet cannot move in the mire of worldly love ; we 
have seen him drowning therein. 

^ Gurumukh, literally — they who follow the Guru’s instruction. 

* Also translated — Those separated from the saints Thou didst 
separate from Thee; those united with them Thou didst blend with 
Thyself. * That is, the world. 



THE RAHIRAS 257 

0 foolish man, thou hast not thought of the one God in 
thy heart ; 

Through forgetfulness of Him thy virtues have melted 
away. 

1 am not continent, or true, or learned ; I was born a 
stupid fool. 

Nanak representeth, he hath sought the shelter of those 
who forget Thee not, 0 God. 

Guru Arjan, Rag Asa 

Since thou hast now obtained a human body O man, 

It is time for thee to meet God ; 

All else that thou doest is of no avail ; 

Join the company of the saints and only repeat God’s 
name ; 

Apply thyself to preparation for crossing the terrible 
ocean. 

Thy life is vainly passing in worldly love ; 

Thou hast not repeated God’s name, performed penance, 
austerities, or other religious works ; 

Thou hast not served holy men or known God. 

Nanak saith, base have been mine acts ; 

Preserve mine honour who have taken shelter in Thee. 


^IKH. I 


S 



THE SOHILA^ 

Guru Nanak, Rag Gauri Dipaki 

In the house in which God’s praise is sung and He is 
meditated on, 

Sing the Sohila and remember the Creator. 

Sing the Sohila of my Fearless Lord ; I am a sacrifice to 
that song of joy by which everlasting comfort is obtained. 

Ever and ever living things are watched over ; the Giver 
regardeth their wants. 

When even Thy gifts cannot be appraised, who can ap- 
praise the Giver ? 

The year and the auspicious time for marriage are re- 
corded ; relations meet and pour oil on me the bride. 

O my friends, pray for me that I may meet my Lord. 

This message is ever sent to every house : such invitations 
are ever issued. 

Remember the Caller; Nanak, the day is approaching. 

Guru Nanak, Rag Asa 

There are six schools of philosophy, six teachers, and six 
doctrines. 

The Guru of gurus is but one, though He hath various 
forms. 

O father, preserve the system 

In which the Creator is praised ; ® that will redound to 
thy glory. 

As there is one sun and many seasons. 

In which there are wisas, chasas, gharis, pahars, lunar 
and week days, and months ; 

^ The collection of hymns called Sohila is repeated at bedtime by 
pious Sikhs. It consists of three hymns of Guru Nanak, one of Guru 
Ram Das, and one of Guru Arjan. The word Sohila is derived from 
sowan wela meaning in the PanjSbi language the time for sleep. 

^ The meaning is that Guru Nanak rejects the Hindu systems. 



THE SOHILA 259 


So, O Nanak, there is but one God, although His forms 
are many. 


Guru Nanak, Rag Dhanasari 

^ The sun and moon, 0 Lord, are Thy lamps ; the firmament 
Thy salver ; the orbs of the stars the pearls enchased in it. 

The perfume of the sandal is Thine incense, the wind is 
Thy fan, all the forests are Thy flowers, O Lord of light. 

What worship is this, O Thou Destroyer of birth ? Unbeaten 
strains of ecstasy are the trumpets of Thy worship. 

Thou hast a thousand eyes and yet not one eye ; Thou 
hast a thousand forms and yet not one form ; 

Thou hast a thousand stainless feet and yet not one 
foot ; Thou hast a thousand organs of smell and yet not one 
organ. I am fascinated by this play of Thine. 

The light which is in everything is Thine, O Lord of light. 

From its brilliancy everything is brilliant ; 

By the Guru’s teaching the light becometh manifest. 

What pleaseth Thee is the real worship. 

O God, my mind is fascinated with Thy lotus feet as the 
bumble-bee with the flower : night and day I thirst for them. 

Give the water of Thy favour to the sarang Nanak, so 
that he may dwell in Thy name. 

Guru Ram Das, Rag Gauri Purbi 

The city ^ is greatly filled with lust and wrath ; but these 
are destroyed on meeting the saints. 

By predestination the Guru is found, and the soul is ab- 
sorbed in the region of God’s love. 

Salute the saint with clasped hands — this is a greatly 
meritorious act. 

Prostrate thyself before him — this is a greatly religious act. 

The infidel knoweth not the taste of God’s essence ; he 
beareth the thorn of pride in his heart. 

The more he moveth, the more it pricketh him, and the 
more pain he feeleth : his head shall feel death’s mace. 


* The body. 
S 2 



26 o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The saints of God are absorbed in God’s name, and have 
destroyed the pain and fear of transmigration. 

They have found God the imperishable Being, and great 
honour is theirs in the earth’s continents and the universe. 

0 God, we poor, and wretched, are Thine ; preserve us, 
preserve us. Thou greatest of the great ! 

The Name is Nanak’s support and prop ; I have obtained 
happiness through being absorbed only in God’s name. 

Guru Arjan, Rag Gauri Purbi 

1 pray you hear me, my friends, it is time to serve the 
saints. 

Earn here the profit of God’s name, and in the next world 
ye shall abide in happiness. 

Human life groweth shorter every day and night ; 

0 man, meet the Guru and arrange thine affairs. 

This world is involved in wickedness and superstition ; 
they who know God are saved. ' 

He whom God awakeneth and causeth to drink the 
essence of His word, knoweth the story of the Ineffable.^ 

. Purchase that * for which thou hast come into the world, 
and God by the Guru’s favour will dwell in thy heart. 

Thou shalt find a home with comfort and peace in God’s 
own palace, and not return again to this world. 

O God, Searcher of hearts. Arranger,® fulfil the desires of 
my heart. 

The slave Nanak craveth the happiness of being made the 
dust of the saints’ feet. 

' This and the concluding portion of the preceding line are also 
translated — 

He whom the saint who knoweth God awakeneth, shall be saved, 

And shall quaff the essence of God's name : it is, he who knoweth 
the story of the Ineffable. 

® God’s name. 

^ The gyanis often translate Bidhata — He who gives man the fruit 
of his acts. The third Guru uses the expression in the same sense. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 

Sri Rag 

The following was addressed to a man addicted 
to intoxicants : — 

The Giver gave man a pill of the intoxicant illusion. 

In his intoxication he forgot death and enjoyed pleasure 
for four days. 

The abstainers^ obtained truth to keep them in God’s 
court. 

Nanak, know the True One alone as true. 

By serving Him mart obtaineth happiness and proceedeth 
with honour to His court. 

The true wine is that which containeth the true Name ; 
it is prepared without molasses. 

I am a sacrifice unto those who hear and explain this. 

Man is known as properly intoxicated when he obtaineth 
a place in God’s court. 

Bathe in the water of virtues ; apply the perfume of 
truth to thy body ; 

Then shall thy face become bright, and the One Giver 
bestow hundreds of thousands of gifts on thee. 

Inform God, with whom resteth happiness, of thine 
unhappiness. 

Why forget Him who owneth thy soul and life ? 

All clothing and food are impure without Him. 

All else is false; what pleaseth Thee, O God, is accept- 
able. 

A Sikh called Prema asked the Guru where God 
resided, in what state He dwelt, and how He 

^ Sofian. These must not be confounded with the SSfis of Persia 
whose predilections are in the opposite direction. By abstainers are 
here meant the truthful. 



262 THE SIKH RELIGION 

could be found. The following was the Guru’s 
reply : — 

The virtues of the virtuous woman are blazoned abroad ; 
she who is not virtuous regretteth it. 

O woman, if thou desire thy Spouse, practise truth. He 
cannot be obtained by falsehood. 

No boat or raft will take thee to the distant Beloved. 

My Lord is perfect ; His throne is secure. 

He whom the perfect Guru maketh holy, shall obtain 
the True and unrivalled One. 

God’s palace is beautiful ; it is adorned with bright gems, 
rubies. 

Pearls, and diamonds ; it is surrounded by a golden- 
fortress, and is an abode of pleasure. 

How shall I scale the fortress without a ladder ? By 
meditating on God through the Guru ^ I shall behold Him. 

The Guru giving me God’s name is my ladder, my boat, 
and my raft ; 

The Guru is the lake, the sea, and the boat ; the Guru is 
the sacred stream. 

If it please God, I shall go to bathe in the true tank ^ 
and become pure. 

He is called the most perfect ; He reposeth on a perfect 
throne. 

His seat is perfectly beautiful ; He fulfilleth the hopes 
of the hopeless. 

Nanak, if man obtain the Perfect One how can his virtues 
decrease ? 

A man can only find favour with God by 
devotion : — 

Accursed is her life who is separated from her Spouse ; 
she is ruined by mammon. 

Like a wall impregnated with kallar she crumbleth down 
day and night. 

She obtaineth no rest without the Word ; without her 
Beloved her grief departeth not. 

O woman, what are thine adornments without thy Spouse? 

^ The Guru is meant. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 363 

Thou shalt not obtain entrance into God’s court ; being 
false thou shalt be despised. 

The Lord is wise and forgetteth not : He is true and 
a great husbandman. 

He first prepareth the ground,^ then soweth the seed of 
the true Name. 

From the name of the one God the nine treasures are 
produced, and man obtaineth the marks ® of His favour. 

What shall be the condition of him who accepteth not 
the Guru’s doctrine ? 

The blind® man hath forgotten the Name; the perverse 
is stone-blind. 

His transmigration shall cease not ; he shall be ruined 
by death and birth. 

Woman may buy sandal, kungu,^ and red lead for the 
partings of her hair. 

Distilled aloe wood, sandal, betel, and camphor in great 
quantities ; 

Yet, if she please not her Spouse, all her preparations 
are vain : 

All her enjoyments are vain, and all her adornments are 
useless. 

Until she is permeated by the Word, how shall she obtain 
honour at God’s court ? 

Nanak, blest is the woman who loveth her Spouse. 

The Guru’s idea of creation ; — 

From the True One proceedeth air, from air water 

And from water the three worlds ; light was infused into 
every heart. 

The Pure One becometh not impure : he who is imbued 
with the Word obtaineth honour. 

Guru Nanak composed the following after a con- 

^ That is, man’s heart. 

® A reference to the thappas, or marks, put on crops before being 
divided among the partners of the land. 

® That is, spiritually blind. 

^ A red composition, principally of saffron, used by women to 
ornament their foreheads. 



264 THE SIKH RELIGION 

versation with Samangir, a Sanyasi, at Talwandi. 
The Guru maintained the excellence of his own 
system and the advantage of repeating God’s name 
obtained from the Guru : — 

If I turn myself into a woman, the Enjoyer will enjoy me. 

•Love not that which appear eth transient. 

The Spouse enjoy eth on His couch the pious virtuous wife. 

Having under the Guru’s instruction obtained God’s name 
as the water, quench the four fires.^ 

The lotus of the heart shall then bloom, and thou shalt 
be completely satiated with nectar. 

Nanak, make the true Guru thy friend, and thou shalt 
obtain happiness ^ in God’s court. 

The following is a homily addressed to a trader 
called Ramu whom the Guru met at Kartarpur ; — 

Trade, O trader, and take care of thy merchandise. 

Buy such goods as shall depart with thee. 

In the next world is a wise Merchant who will be careful 
in selecting the real article. 

O my brother, utter God’s name with attention. 

Take with thee God’s praise as thy merchandise, so that, 
when the Merchant seeth it. He shall be satisfied. 

How shall they whose wares are not genuine, be happy ? 

By trading in counterfeit goods the soul and body become 
counterfeit. 

Like a deer snared in a noose, such a trader shall suffer 
great misery and ever lament. 

The counterfeit shall not be received in the great God’s 
treasury, and they shall not behold Him. 

The counterfeit have neither caste nor honour ; the 
counterfeit are none of them acceptable. 

The counterfeit who do counterfeit work, shall lose their 
honour in transmigration. 

^ The four fires are — hima, cruelty ; moh, worldly love ; krodh, 
anger ; and lobh, avarice. 

^ Sack, literally truth, but in the compositions of the Gurus the word 
often means happiness. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


265 

Nanak, instruct thy heart by the Guru’s word and advice. 

They who are imbued with the love of God’s name have 
no load of sin and no superstition. 

They in whose hearts God dwelleth are without fear, and 
great shall be their gain by repeating His name. 

The omnipresence of God : — 

He Himself is the Relisher ; He Himself is the relish ; 
He Himself is the Enjoyer ; 

He Himself is the robe ; He Himself the couch and the 
Spouse — 

My Lord, who is dyed with love, pervadeth everything — 

He Himself is the fisherman and the fish ; He Himself 
is the water and the net. 

He Himself is the lead of the net ; He Himself is the bait 
within it. 

O my friends, my Darling is in every way playful. 

He ever enjoyeth the virtuous wife ; see what a state is 
mine ! ^ 

Nanak representeth, Thou art the lake, and Thou art the 
swan ; 

Thou art the lotus and the water lily. Thou art pleased 
on beholding them.'^ 

The following was a remonstrance to a Mulla 
and a Qazi who had entered on a discussion with 
the Guru : — 

He is the Lord who hath caused the garden of the world 
to flourish ® and grow green, 

And who restraineth sea and land ; hail to the Creator ! 

Thou must die, O Mulla, thou must die. 

By all means fear the Creator. 

^ Who, not being virtuous, am divorced from God. 

® The lotus opens its leaves by day and the water-lily by night. 
God is the sun and moon which behold them by day and night 
alternately. 

* Maula, a name of God in Arabic. The Hindi verb maulna 
means to bloom or blossom. There is in the original a pun on the 
word. 



266 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thou art a Mulla or a Qazi only when thou really knowest 
God’s name. 

Even if thou be very learned thou must depart ; none 
may remain when his measure of life is full. 

He is a Qazi who hath renounced pride, and made the 
name of God alone his support. 

He is, was, and shall be : He was not born, neither shall 
He die ; True is the Creator.^ 

Thou prayest five times a day, and readest thy Quran 
and holy books. 

Nanak saith, when the grave calleth, man shall cease to 
drink and eat. 


Ashtapadi 

The following was composed in a devotional 
paroxysm. Some suppose that it was uttered at 
Makka in reply to Qazis who had asked the Guru 
to tell them of the God he adored : — 

Persuade thy heart to sing God’s name with every breath 
thou drawest.* 

How great is He to whom one playeth and singeth, and 
where doth He dwell ? 

All Thy eulogists continue to praise Thee with affection. 

Father, God is inaccessible and endless. 

Pure is the Name ; pure is the place of the true Cherisher. 

How great Thy sovereignty is cannot be known ; no one 
knoweth how to describe it. 

If a hundred poets were to be found, they could not 
describe a particle of it, though they sang their utmost.® 

Nobody hath found Thy worth ; every one as he hath 
heard describeth Thy glory. 

Priests, prophets, saints, faithful men, martyrs. 

Shaikhs, Strivers, Qazis, Mullas, Darweshes who have 
arrived at Gods gate, 

^ True here apparently means abiding, eternal. 

® Also translated — ^As far as it can fix its attention. 

® L^^lly — even though they cried over it. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 267 

Obtain further blessings if they continue to recite God’s 
praises. 

He consulteth no one when He createth ; He consulteth 
no one when He destroyeth ; He consulteth no one when 
He giveth or taketh. 

I He knoweth His own might ; He acteth and causeth 
others to act. 

He beholdeth all men with favour* and bestoweth on 
those who please Him. 

Neither His place nor His name is known, nor how great 
His name is among other names. 

How great is that place where my Sovereign dwelleth ! 

None can reach it ; of whom shall I inquire the way ? 

High or low caste influenceth not God when He maketh 
any one great. 

Greatness is in the hands of the Great One ; He giveth 
to whom He pleaseth. 

He regenerateth man by His order without any delay. 

Everybody crieth ‘ Give me much, much ’, in the hope 
of getting it. 

How great shall the Giver be called who giveth countless 
gifts ! 

Nanak saith, 0 God, Thy storehouses are full in every 
age, and never is there a deficiency. 

It is said that a Qazi and a pandit asked the 
Guru how man could find God and be blended 
with Him. The following was the reply : — 

All are wives of the Spouse and adorn themselves for 
Him. 

In trumpery red dresses have they come for His in- 
spection.i 

Love is not obtained by hypocrisy ; counterfeit gilding 
degradeth. 

In this way God the Spouse shall enjoy the wife. 

The good wife is pleasing to Thee, O Lord ; of Thy favour 
Thou decoratest her. 


^ Literallv — to be counted bv Him. 



268 THE SIKH RELIGION 

She is decorated with the Guru’s word ; her body and soul 
are with her Beloved. 

With hands clasped she standeth waiting on Him, and 
offereth Him true supplication. 

She is imbued with the love of her Darling ; she dwelleth 
in fear of the True One ; and, when dyed with His love, 
her colour is the true one. 

She is called the handmaiden of the Beloved, and an- 
swereth to the name of Lali.^ 

Her true affection is not sundered ; the True One blendeth 
her with Himself. 

Her soul is imbued and saturated with the Word ; I am 
ever a sacrifice unto her. 

She who is absorbed in the True Guru, shall not sit down 
a widow. 

Her Beloved is an abode of pleasure ever young and 
true ; He neither dieth nor is botn. 

He ever enjoyeth His virtuous wife, and casteth true 
glances on her as she obeyeth Him. 

She maketh truth the parting of her hair, and love her 
dress and ornaments. 

She maketh the indwelling * of God her sandal, and the 
tenth gate her chamber. 

She lighteth the lamp of the Word, and weareth God’s 
name as her necklet. 

She weareth on her forehead the jewel of love, and she 
is beautifxd among women. 

Her beauty and wisdom are charming, and true is her 
infinite love. 

She knoweth no man but her Beloved ; it is only for 
the True Guru she feeleth love and affection. 

But thou who art reckless on a dark night,® how shalt 
thou pass it without the Beloved ? 

Thy bosom shall bum, thy body shall burn, and thy mind 
shall bum, O woman. 

® The jewel or precious one. 

* cat ivasata ; also translated — ^mental restraint. 

* In sj^tual ignorance. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 269 

When woman enjoyethnot her Husband, her youth passeth 
in vain. 

Her Husband is on the couch ; his wife sleepeth and 
knoweth not His presence. 

While I sleep, the Beloved awaketh ; whom shall I go to 
consult ? ^ 

Nanak, the true Guru, having taught me love, hath 
caused me to meet God, and 1 abide in His fear. 

The mind is impure until it receives instruction 
from a true religious teacher: — 

When the mind is impure the body is impure, and the 
tongue impure. 

The mouth is impure by uttering impurity ; how shall 
it be made pure ? 

The heart cannot be cleansed without the Word ; from the 
True One truth is obtained. 

O girl, what happiness is there without virtue ? 

Brahmans read books aloud, but understand not their 
meaning. 

They give instruction to others as a business matter. 

They wander about the world preaching falsehood ; while 
they who abide by the Word are the best. 

How many pandits and astrologers study the Veds ! 

They glorify battles and enmities, * but from quarrels 
resuUeth transmigration. 

However much they tell and preach what they have heard, 
man shall not be freed from his sins without the Guru. 

All call themselves virtuous, but I possess no virtue. 

Beautiful is the woman who hath God for her Spouse ; 
that God pleaseth me. 

Nanak, she who is united with God by the Word shall 
not be separated from Him. 

The following was addressed to Hindu devotees 
whom the Guru met in his wanderings in the Hima- 
layas : — 

^ That is, there Is no remedy for my negligence now. 

* The epic poems Ramlyan and Mah&bbSrat. 



270 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Though man perfom lip-devotion, penance, and austeri- 
ties, dwell at places of pilgrimage. 

Bestow alms and perform acts of devotion, what are 
these without the True One ? 

As he soweth so shall he reap ; human life is lost without 
virtue. 

O silly one, happiness is obtained by being a slave to 
virtue. 

She who under the Guru’s instruction abandoneth evil, 
shall be absorbed in the Perfect One. 

The following is a brief lecture against hypocrisy, 
with a few precepts to obtain future happiness : — 

God carefully draweth the touchstone over men in order 
to assay them. 

The counterfeit shall not be accepted ; the genuine shall 
be put into His treasury. * 

Dispel hopes and fears, so shall thy filth be washed away. 

Everybody asketh for happiness ; nobody asketh for 
misery. 

Great misery attendeth on happiness, but the perverse 
understand it not. 

They who consider happiness and misery the same, and 
know the secret of the Word shall be happy. 

Man may escape from the dangers of this world by 
accepting the Guru and hearkening to his instruc- 
tions: — 

The fearful ocean of the world is dangerous and formid- 
able ; it hath no shore or limit. 

No boat, no raft, no pole, and no boatman ; 

But the true Guru hath a vessel for the terrible ocean, 
and ferrieth over him on whom he looketh with favour. 

Love for God is inculcated by familiar Indian 
examples : — 

0 man, enh^llin such love for God as the lotus hath for 
the water. ^ 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 271 

Such love doth it bear it, that it bloometh even when 
dashed down by the waves. 

The creatures which God created in water die without it, 
and therefore love it. 

O man, how shalt thou be delivered without love ? 

God pervadeth the hearts of the pious, and bestoweth on 
them a store of devotion. 

O man, entertain such love for God as the fish for the 
water. 

The more it hath, the happier it becometh, and the 
greater its peace of mind and body. 

Without water it could not live for a moment ; God 
tiione knoweth the sufferings of its heart. 

O man, entertain such love for God as the chatrik for 
rain : 

Though the tanks be full and the earth drenched, it will 
not drink from either. • 

If so fated, it shall obtain the rain-drops, otherwise it is 
fated to die. 

O man, entertain such love for God as water for milk. 

The water alone is consumed in boiling and alloweth not 
the milk to be consumed. 

God uniteth the separated, and conferreth true greatness. 

O man, entertain such love for God as the chakwi*^ for 
the sun. 

She sleepeth not for a moment, for she knoweth that 
her mate is absent from her. 

The perverse see not ; to the pious God is ever present. 

The perverse make calculations, but it is only what the 
Creator doeth that cometh to pass. 

His worth cannot be ascertained, even though all men 
desire it ; 

But it can be ascertained under the Guru’s instruction ; 
by meeting the True One happiness is obtained. 

^ The ruddy sheldrake, called by Anglo-Indians the BrSiunani duck. 
Should the male and female birds be separated at nig^t, for instance 
at different sides of a river, they are believed to call to each other until 
they behold the morning sun when they renew their conjugal acquaint- 
ance. 



2 ^^ 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


If the True Guru be met, true love shall not sunder, 

And the wealth of divine knowledge of the three worlds 
shall be obtained. 

If any one acquire virtue, he will not forget the Pure 
Name. 

The birds which peck on sea and land have played and 
gone away. 

Man must depart in a ghari or two ; his enjoyment is 
only for to-day or to-morrow. 

He whom Thou blendest with Thyself shall be blended 
with Thee, and shall take his place in the true arena. 

Without the Guru love is not produced, and the filth of 
pride depart eth not. 

He who recognizeth God in himself, and knoweth the 
secret of the Word, shall be satisfied : 

But when man recognizeth himself through the Guru’s 
instruction, what more remaineth for him to do ? 

Why speak of meeting God ? Man hath met Him 
already^ but it is only on receiving the Word he is 
satisfied. 

The perverse obtain not understanding ; separated from 
God they suffer punishment. 

For Nanak there is but the gate of the one God ; there 
is no other refuge. 

It is said the following was addressed by the 
Guru, during his pilgrimage to the east, to a Raja 
called Harbans : — 

Man is led astray by the reading of words ; ritualists 
are very proud. 

What availeth it to bathe at a place of pilgrimage, if the 
filth of pride be in the heart ? 

Who but the Guru can explain that the King and Emperor 
dwelleth in the heart ? 

All men err ; it is only the great Creator who erreth not. 

He who admonisheth his heart under the Guru’s instruc- 
tion shall love the Lord. 

* Because the soul has emanated from God. 



HYMNS OF GURU 273 

Nanak, he whom the incomparable Word hath caused to 
meet God, shall not forget the True One. 

God cannot be deceived and His merits cannot be 
described : — 

By taking the protection of the Guru man shall be saved ; 
counterfeit is the capital of the perverse. 

The eight metals of the King are coined agreeably to 
His orders.i^ 

The Assayer Himself assayeth the coins, and putteth the 
genuine into His treasury. 

Thy merits, O Lord, cannot be ascertained ; I have seen 
and tested everything. 

Thy merits cannot be expressed by words ; if man remain 
true, he shall obtain honour. 

Under the Guru’s instruction Thou, O Lord, art praised ; 
otherwise Thy worth cannot be described. 

The Guru prefers the repetition of God’s name 
to all other forms of devotion : — 

My heart is penetrated by God’s name ; what else shall 
I reflect upon ? 

Happiness cometh to him who meditateth on the Word ; 
perfect happiness to him who is imbued with God. 

Preserve me as it pleaseth Thee, O God ; Thy name 
is my supjwrt. 

O man, just is the will of the Master. 

Love Him who made and adorned thy body and mind. 

Were my body to be cut into pieces and burnt in the 
fire ; 

Were I to turn my body and soul into firewood, and bum 
them night and day ; 

Were I to perform hundreds of thousands and millions 
of religious ceremonies, all would not be equal to God’s 
name. 

t Man is composed, according to Indian ideas, of hair, blood, 
nerves, skin, bone, seed, flesh, and fat. These correspond to dte 
eight simple or compound metals difierently stated by Indian iustoriana. 
Bh&i Gar DSs understands the eight metals to be the four castes of 
Hindus and the four great sects or Muhammadans. 

•IIIH. I T 



274 the SIKH RELIGION 

Were a saw to be applied to my head and my body to be 
cut in twain ; ^ 

Were my body to be frozen in the Himalayas, even then 
my mind would not be free from disease — 

It would all not be equal to God’s name — I have seen and 
examined everything — 

Were I to make offerings of millions of gold, many ex- 
cellent horses and excellent elephants ; 

Were I to make large presents of lands and cows, even 
then pride would remain in my heart. 

The Guru hath given me the true gift that my mind is 
penetrated by God’s name. 

How many opinions, and how many interpretations of 
the Veds through obstinacy ! 

How many entanglements there are for the soul I the 
gate of deliverance is only obtained through the Guru’s 
instruction. 

Everything is inferior to truth ; the practice of truth is 
superior to all else. 

Call every one exalted ; let no one appear to thee low. 

The one God fashioned the vessels, and it is His light 
that fiUeth the three worlds. 

By His favour man obtaineth the truth ; what He 
granteth in the beginning none can efface. 

The holy meet the holy ; by love for the Guru man 
obtaineth consolation. 

He who is absorbed in the True Guru pondereth on the 
Word of the Ineffable. 

He who drinketh the nectar of the Name shall be satisfied, 
and go to God’s court with a dress of honour. 

The strain of ecstasy® resoundeth night and day in the 
hearts of those who bear great love to the Word. 

® Saws were kept at Banaras and PriySg for the immolation of Hindu 
devotees. The operator applied the saw first to the head and cut 
through the body to the middle thus dividing it into halves. Devotees 
believed that all their sins should thus be forgiven, and they should 
immediately enter a state of bliss. 

® Kingurt is a musical instrument, ori^nally composed of twO 
gourds or calabashes connected by a frame bn which there were four 
strings. It is now^nerally made bf one calabash, a frame and one 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 275 

Few there are who obtain understanding by admonishing 
their hearts through their guru. 

Nanak, they who forget not the Name, and who act 
according to the Word shall be delivered. 

The following principally inculcates the inutility 
of worldly possessions and the superiority of 
devotion : — 

We see mansions painted and whitewashed with orna- 
mented doors. 

They were constructed to give pleasure to the heart, 
and through love and regard for worldly things, hut they 
shall fall to ruin. 

So the body which is empty within and possesseth no 
love, shall fall and become a heap of dust. 

O my brethren, your bodies and wealth shall not accompany 
you. 

God’s name is the pure wealth ; God giveth it through 
the Guru. 

If the Giver give the true wealth of God’s name. 

The great Creator shall become man’s friend, and no 
inquiry shall be made of him in the next world. 

If God deliver man, he shall be delivered ; God alone is 
the Pardoner. 

The perverse man deemeth that daughters, sons^ and 
relations are his. 

He is pleased on beholding woman, but, as she bringeth 
joy, so she bringeth sorrow. 

Holy men are imbued with the Word, and day and night 
enjoy divine happiness. 

The mind of the wavering infidel wandereth in quest of 
transitory wealth. 

Men ruin themselves by their search abroad while the 
Real Thing is in their homes. 

The pious obtain It, the perverse miss It through pride. 

O vicious infidel, know thine own origin. 

string. The Jogis apply the word to the music heard in the brain 
by the practice of Jog. 

T 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


276 

Thy body made from blood and semen shall be brought 
to the fire at last. 

The body is in the power of the breath according to the 
true mark on the forehead. 

Men pray for a long life ; no one desireth to die. 

He is said to lead a happy life in whose heart God dwelleth 
through the Guru’s instruction. 

Of what account are they who are without the Name, 
and who therefore obtain not a sight of the great God ? 

As a man goeth astray at night in his sleep, 

So doth he in whose heart there is pride and worldly love, 
and who is in the power of mammon. 

To him who reflecteth under the Guru’s instruction the 
world appeareth a dream. 

As thirst is quenched when one findeth water ; as the 
child is sustained by its mother’s milk ; 

As the lotus cannot exist without water, and the fish 
would die without it. 

So, Nanak, may I obtain divine happiness through the 
Guru’s instruction and live singing God’s praises ! 

Without the spiritual condition which is obtained 
by a repetition of the Name there is no salvation : — 

I have become alarmed on seeing a terrible mountain in 
my Father’s house.^ 

Steep is the mountain and difficult to ascend ; there is 
no ladder which will reach it ; 

But under the Guru’s instruction I have found the secret ; * 
the Guru hath caused me to meet God and I am saved. 

O my brethren, the ocean of the world is difficult and 
formidable. 

If I have a satisfactory interview with the perfect true 
Guru, he will deliver me hy granting me God’s name. 

If I say I am perishable, it will not avail me ; but if I 
really know that I am perishable, it will. 

Everything that came into this world shall depart ; the 
Creator alone is immortal. 

^ Seeing the difficulties of thus world. 

* Tfiat there is no mountain. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 277 

Be sure to praise the True One and love His abode. 

Beautiful houses and palaces and thousands of strong- 
holds, 

Elephants, horses with their housings, and hundreds of 
thousands, yea, countless armed men 

Will not depart with any one : Their masters pine away 
and die without gaining any advantage from them. 

Thou mayest amass gold and silver, but wealth is an 
entangling net. 

Man’s authority may be proclaimed throughout the whole 
world, but without the Name death standeth over his 
head. 

When the body falleth, the soul fleeth away ; what shall 
be the condition of the evil doers ? 

The husband is delighted on beholding his sons and his 
wife on her couch ; 

He applieth distilled aloe wood and sandal ; he weareth 
fine clothes and decorateth himself ; 

Yet shall he leave his family and depart ; dust shall 
return to dust. 

■ He may be styled a chief, an emperor, a king, a governor, 
or a lord ; 

He may be called the headman of a town or a governor ; 
he may bum with pride ; 

Yet by perversely forgetting the Name he shall be as a 
reed burnt in the fire. 

Having come into the world, he shall depart however proud 
he be. 

The whole world is a chamber of lampblack ; the body 
and soul which enter it shall be tarnished.^ 

They who are preserved by the Guru are pure ; the fire 
of their desires is extinguished by the Word. 

Nanak, man obtaineth deliverance by the trae name of the 
King of kings. 

May I not forget God’s name ! may I purchase it as a 
jewel ! 

The perverse man perisheth in the terrible ocean of the 


^ Literally — ^sbali become ashes. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


270 

world ; the holy man crosseth it, unfathomable though 
it he. . 

Ghar IIP 

Definitions : — 

How is Sat Sangat, the Society of the holy, known ? 

The name of the one God is mentioned there. 

How are Duhagins — women separated from their husbands 
— ^known ? 

They are those who forgetful of their Spouse wander 
unhonoured. 

They who are pleased with God’s will, 

Remove superstition from their minds. 

Nanak, the true Guru, is known by his association with 
every one. 

Sri Rag ki War 

Some virtues which contribute to perfection : — 

Faith and resignation are the characteristics of the holy ; 
patience is the viaticum of angels. 

The perfect shall obtain a sight of God ; the fool shall 
find no place with Him. 

Caste is vain and contributes not to goodness or 
holiness : — 

Castes are folly, names are folly : 

All creatures have one shelter, that of God. 

If a man call himself good. 

The truth shall be known, O Nanak, when his account is 
accepted. 

Man, no matter what his caste or social position 
may be, is exalted by devotion : — 

What difference is there between a swan and a crane, if 
God look kindly on the latter ? 

Nanak, if it please Him, He can change a raven into a 
swan. 


This is understood to mark time — three beats to a bar. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 279 

Majh ki War 

God as the Guru : — 

The Guru is the Giver, the Guru is the house of snow,^ 
the Guru is the lamp of the three worlds. 

Nanak, the Guru possesseth the immortal wealth ; by 
putting faith in Him happiness is obtained. 

The ten stages of man : — 

In man’s first stage he loveth the milk of his mother’s 
breast ; 

In his second he recognizeth his father and mother ; 

In his third his brother, his brother’s wife, and his own 
sister ; 

In the fourth a love of play ariseth in him ; 

In the fifth he runneth after food and drink ; 

In the sixth he inquireth not a woman's caste in his lust ; 

In the seventh he colWcteth things for a house to live in ; 

In the eighth his body is wasted by wrath ; 

In the ninth he groweth grey and his breathing is diffi- 
cult ; 

In the tenth he is burnt and becometh ashes. 

His companions accompany him to his pyre with loud 
lamentations. 

The soul flieth away, showing the road of departure to 
others. 

He came, he died, and departed — leaving only a name. 

After his death his relations offer food on leaves, and 
call the crows .2 

Nanak, the perverse love mental darkness. 

Without a guru the world is lost. 

Other divisions of human life : — 

At ten a child, at twenty a rake, at thirty man calleth 
himself handsome ; 

1 That is, he cools the fire of desires. Some suppose that hixoai 
ghar is for the Sanskrit himkar, the moon. 

^ Portions {bait) of such offerings are set aside for cows, portions 
for dogs, and portions for crows. 



m THE SIKH RELIGION 

At forty he is in his prime, at fifty his feet halt, at sixty 
old age cometh on ; 

At seventy he loseth his intellect, at eighty he cannot 
perform his duties ; 

At ninety he reclineth on his couch, and feeleth no strength 
whatever in himself. 

I, Nanak, have sought and searched, and seen that the 
world is a mansion of smoke. 

The following is said to have been addressed to 
a holy man called Thakur Das at Priyag : — 

Were I to dwell in the cavern of a golden mountain or 
in a pit of water ; 

Were I to stand on my head on earth or in the heavens ; 

Were I to cover all my body with clothes,^ and did I 
nothing but bathe ; 

Were I to shout aloud the white, the red, the yellow, 
and the black Veds ; * 

Were I to remain dirty and filthy,® all this would be foolish 
and sinful. 

Nanak, since I have pondered on the Word, I am not, 
I was not, and I shall not be.* 

Guru Nanak declares the folly of external puri- 
fications : — 

Man washeth his clothes and his body, and mortifieth 
himself. 

Knowing not of the filth attaching to his heart, he rubbeth 
and cleanseth himself externally. 

Being blind he is led astray, and falleth into Death’s noose. 

He deemeth the property of others as his own, and suffereth 
for his pride. 

Nanak, when pride is dispelled under the Guru’s instruc- 
tions, man meditateth on God’s name, 

Repeateth the Name, adoreth the Name, and through 
the Name is absorbed in happiness. 

* This is done by a sect called the KSprias, who cover even their 
faces. -I 

* As^he Brahmans do. , ^ The reference is to the Jains. 

* Tfeat is, I am totally absorbed in God. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 2$t 

Some important subjects are briefly treated as 
follows : — 

God hath caused the union of body and soul ; 

He who created them can separate them. 

A fool while enjoying pleasure hath all pain : 

Disease proceedeth from sinful pleasure. 

From worldly rejoicing proceedeth mourning, separation 
from God, birth, and death. 

The fool while boasting becometh invcdved in disputes : 

The decision resteth with the True Guru ; He putteth an 
end to disputes. 

That which the Creator doeth cometh to pass ; what 
man hath set in motion must stop. 

The following was addressed by the Guru to 
a Qazi at Sultanpur : — 

Thou utterest falsehopd, eatest carrion,^ 

Yet thou goest to admonish others. 

Cheated thyself thou now cheatest thy companions. 

Nanak saith, that is the sort of guide thou appearest ! 

As a Qazi beheaded a goat, some drops of blood 
fell on his garments, which he at once wiped 
off. He said that he could not join in prayer until 
the pollution had been removed. The following was 
uttered by the Guru on the occasion : — 

If clothes become defiled by blood falling on them. 

How can the hearts of those who drink human blood* 
be pure ? 

Nanak, utter God’s name with a pure heart regardless of 
thy dress. 

All else is but worldly ostentation ; thou, 0 Qazi, 
practisest falsehood. 

The Qazi asked Guru Nanak who he was. The 
latter replied as follows : — 

Since I am nobody, what shall I say : since I am nothing, 
what can I be ? 

^ Food obtained by peculation and bribery. 

* That is, who practise extortion or tyranny. 



282 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


As God made me, I act ; as He told me, I speak ; I am 
thoroughly defiled with sin, and desire to wash it away. 

Though I know nothing myself, yet I teach others ; such 
a guide am I. 

Nanak, he who being blind showeth the road to others 
and misleadeth all his companions, 

Shall be shoe-beaten in the next world, and it will be seen 
what sort of guide he was. 

Everything shall vanish except God : — 

Of kings, subjects, and rulers none shall remain : 

Shops, cities, bazars shall be destroyed by God’s order. 

Solid and beautiful mansions a fool deemeth his own ; 

Storehouses filled with wealth in a moment become 
empty. 

Steeds, chariots, camels, elephants and their housings, 

Gardens, properties, houses, and homes. 

Tents, comfortable beds, and ornamental pavilions — where 
shall they be recognized ? 

The following was delivered to Sikhs who asked 
the Guru what pleasure God’s praises afforded him : — 

Were rivers to become kine, and springs to become milk 
and clarified butter ; 

Were the whole earth to become sugar so that the heart 
might ever rejoice ; 

Were the mountains to become gold and silver, and be 
studded with diamonds and rubies ; 

I would even then magnify Thee, and the desire to do so 
would not cease as I spoke. 

Were the eighteen loads of vegetables of the earth ^ to become 
fruit, and grass to become rice ; 

Could I arrest the moon and sun in their courses, and were 
my seat to become immovable, 

' This is the sum total of the earth’s flora according to ancient 
Sanskrit writers. The idea was that if a leaf were taken off every 
tree and4>]ant, there would be formed eighteen loads, each of which 
an ordinary strong man could lift. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK ^83 

I would even then magnify Thee, and the desire to do so 
would not cease as I spoke. 

Could I inflict pain by means of the two sinful beings 
Rahu and Ketu ; ^ 

Could I obtain authority over bloodthirsty kings and my 
glory thus shine forth, 

I would even then magnify Thee, and the desire to do so 
would not cease as I spoke. 

Were fire and frost to become my raiment, and the wind 
my food ; 

Were all the fascinating women of heaven to become my 
wives — all perishable ® — 

I would even then magnify Thee, and the desire to do so 
would not cease as I spoke. 

Caste becomes deadly if exclusive reliance be 
placed on it for salvation : — 

What power hath caste ? It is the reality that is tested. 

Poison may be held in the hand, but man dieth if he eat it. 

The sovereignty of the True One is known in every age. 

He who obeyeth God’s order shall become a noble in His 
court. 

The following allegory of mounted cavalry refers 
to the different stages of asceticism : — 

The Master sent obedience to His orders as a steed into 
the world ; 

Reflection on the instruction which the Guru imparteth 
is its kettle-drum^. 

Some have mounted their steeds, others have them ready 
caparisoned ; 

' Owing to the exigencies of prosody, only Rahu is mentioned in 
the original text. Rahu and Ketu are two demons, who, according 
to Indian astrologers, inflict pain on mortals as they do on the sun 
and moon on occasions of eclipse. 

* Some understood jdu to be the Sanskrit jdya, wife. The gySnis 
translate — All the fascinating women of heaven may go, as far as 1 tun 
concerned. 



284 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Some have loaded their baggage for the march, and others 
have set out. 

In the following allegory the mill is the world, 
the corn is the soul, the husk the body, refuge in 
God the axle : — 

When the field is ripe, it is cut ; only the chaff and the 
hedge remain. 

The com is threshed with the husk, and the chaff is 
winnowed away. 

Men then put together the two mill-stones and sit down 
to grind corn. 

That which attacheth to the axle escapeth. Nanak hath 
seen a wonderful thing.^ 

Good men, like sugar-cane, are subject to torture: — 

See how sugar-cane is cut down .and made into sheaves 
after the stalks are cleaned. 

The labourers put it into a press and squeeze it. 

Having expressed the juice, they put it into a pan, and it 
groaneth as it burneth. 

The residue is collected and put into the fire beneath the 
pan. 

Nanak, sweet things are thus ill-treated ; come and see, 
O people. 

It is useless to endeavour to instruct a fool : — 

What can deep water do to a fish ? What can the sky do 
to a bird ? 

What can cold do to a stone ? What can married life 
do to a eunuch ? 

Even though thou apply sandal to a dog, he will still 
preserve his canine nature : 

Even though thou instruct a deaf man, and read for him 
the Simritis ; 

Even though thou place a light before a blind man, and 
bum fifty lamps for him, all would be of no avail. 

^ That the corn attached to the axle is not ground, that is, the soul 
which is attached to God is not tortured by Death. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 285 

Even though thou put gold before a herd of cattle, they 
would still pick out the grass to eat. 

If a flux be put into iron it will melt, but not become 
cotton.^ 

Nanak, the peculiarity of a fool is that what is said to 
him is ever lost. 

When his Sikhs inquired how an alliance could 
be formed with God the Guru composed the fol- 
lowing : — 

When bronze, gold, and iron break. 

The blacksmith weldeth them by means of fire. 

When a husband falleth out with his spouse, 

A reconciliation is effected in this world through children. 

When the king asketh and his subjects give, a bond is 
established between them. 

When a hungry man eateth, he establisheth an alliance 
with the world. 

Drought formeth an alliance with rivers when they are 
flooded with rain. 

There is an affinity between love and sweet words. 

If any one speak the truth, he formeth a bond with know- 
ledge. 

By goodness and truth the dead establish a bond with the 
living. 

* Such are the affinities that are established in the world. 

The only way to establish friendship with a fool is to 
smite him on the mouth.* 

By praising God man establisheth an alliance with God’s 
court. 

Nanak saith this deliberately. 

The following seven sloks form part of the Guru’s 
instruction to Shaikh Brahm, or Farid the second, of 
Pak Pattan: — 

The priests, the shaikhs, and the potentates of ike world 
are all beneath the earth. 

* Its nature will not be altered. 

* Munh mSr, Also translated — ^to remain silent. 



286 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Emperors pass away, but God ever flourisheth. 

There is only Thou, there is only Thou, O God I 

Neither demigods, nor demons, nor men, 

Nor Sidhs, nor Strivers, nor this earth shall abide. 

There is One ; is there any other ? 

There is only Thou, there is only Thou, O God ! 

Neither the just nor the generous. 

Nor the seven regions beneath the earth shall remain. 
There is One : is there any other ? 

There is only Thou, there is only Thou, O God ! 

Not the regions of the sun and the moon. 

Nor the seven continents, nor the seven seas, 

Nor com, nor wind shall abide. 

There is only Thou, there is only Thou, O God ! 

Our maintenance is in nobody’s power but God's : 

To all of us but one hope abideth — 

There is one : is there any other ? 

There is only Thou, there is only Thou, O God ! 

Birds have no money in their possession : 

They only depend on trees and water. 

God is their Giver. 

There is only Thou, there is only Thou, 0 God ! 

Nanak, no one can erase 
What is written on the forehead. 

God it is who giveth man power and again taketh it away. 
There is only Thou, there is only Thou, 0 God ! 

Guru Nanak thus discoursed to Prem Chand of 
Sarhind on the best way of occupying time : — 

They who in the early morning praise God and meditate 
on Him with single heart. 

Are perfect kings, and die fighting when occasion ariseth.^ 
In the second watch there are many ways in which the 
attention of the mind is distracted. 

^ This is understood to mean Uiat they hght to the death with their 
deadly sins. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 2S7 

Many persons fall into the fathomless water, and cannot 
emerge however much they struggle. 

In the third watch when hunger and thirst are both 
barking, food is put into the mouth. 

What is eaten becometh filth, yet man again desireth 
food. 

In the fourth watch drowsiness cometh, man closeth his 
eyes and goeth into dreamland.^ 

Again rising in the morning he engageth in turmoil, and 
yet maketh- preparations to live a hundred years. 

If man feel love for God every moment during the eight 
watches of the day, 

O Nanak, God will dwell in his heart and true shall be 
his ablution. 

Man’s continual thought should be devotion to 
his Maker : — 

When Thou art near, what more do I desire ? I speak 
verily. 

He who is deceived by false worldly occupations reacheth 
not God’s palace : 

His heart is hard and he loseth his service. 

The house which containeth not the True One, sho\ild be 
destroyed and rebuilt. 

When its owner is weighed, how shall he be found of 
full weight ? 

If he lose his pride, no one will say he is of short weight. 

The genuine shall be assayed, and selected at the gate of the 
All-seeing. 

The true goods are only in one shop ; they are obtained 
from the perfect Guru. 

The advantages conferred on men by the True 
One 

Without the True One all are false and practise falsehood. 

Without the True One the false shall be bound and led 
away ; 


^ Pawar properly means uance, or suspended animation. 



28 $ THE SIKH RELIGION 

Without the True One the body is dust and shall be rolled 
in the dust ; 

Without the True One dress and food are all hunger ; » 

Without the True One the false shall not attain God’s 
court. 

The false attached to avarice miss God’s palace. 

The whole world is deceived, and cometh and goeth in 
deception. 

In the heart is the fire of greed which is quenched by the 
Guru’s instruction. 

The advantages of the Guru, who is likened to 
a life-giving tree : — 

Nanak, the Guru is the tree of contentment, whose 
blossom is religion and whose fruit is divine knowledge. 

It aboundeth in succulence and is ever green ; it ripeneth 
by good works and meditation. . 

Honour is obtained by partaking of its relish ; it is the 
greatest of gifts. 

There is a tree of gold ; its leaves are corals ; its blossoms, 
jewels and rubies. 

It beareth gems for fruit, and the heart of him who eateth 
it rejoiceth. 

Nanak, it is obtained by him on whose forehead such 
destiny hath been recorded. 

The sixty-eight places of pilgrimage are at the Guru’s 
feet, and ever specially worship them. 

Cruelty, worthy love, avarice, and wrath are four streams 
of fire : 

They who fall into them are burnt, O Nanak, but de- 
liverance is obtained by cleaving to good works. 

The evil of forgetting God : — 

In the heart and mouth of the perverse who never re- 
member Thee, 

Abide the bitterness of the gourd, the coloc5mth, and the 
nim, and the poison of the akk^ and dhatura. 


^ CaU)tr<^is procera. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 289 

Nanak, to whom shall I tell it ? Whoso forget Thee 
wander bereft of Thy favour, O God. 

The unequal conditions of men : — 

The bird, man, by his ideas and his acts sometimes flieth 
high and sometimes low,^ 

He sometimes percheth on a sandal-tree, sometimes on 
the branch of the akk-shrub, and sometimes again he loveth 
high flight. 

Nanak saith, it is the custom of the Lord to lead all 
beings by His order. 

Women’s duty : — 

If women adorn themselves with love and affection for 
their Spouse, 

They shall not be restrained from their devotion to Him 
day or night. 

They shall abide in rfis chambers, and the Word shall 
regenerate them ; 

They shall humbly supplicate the True One ; 

And they shall appear beautiful near their Spouse, walking 
according to His order. 

They shall make hearty supplication to the Beloved. 

Accursed the homes, wretched the lives of those who 
possess not the Word. 

They whose hopes are fulfilled by the Word quaff nectar. 

The Guru was requested to state the extent of 
his love of devotion : — 

The desert is not satisfied with rain, and the hunger of 
fire is not appeased ; 

Kings are not satisfied with dominion ; who hath ever 
filled the ocean ? 

How much hath Nanak inquired after the True Name 
and not been satisfied ! 

Bhai Rama of Sultanpur inquired how God was 
known. The Guru replied : — 

He to whom God giveth understanding understandeth ; 

^ Literally — is sometimes exalted and sometimes debased. 

U 


SIKH, t 



290 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He to whom He giveth knowledge knoweth everything. 
Man merely worrieth himself when he preacheth for the 
sake of mammon. 

The Commander, who created all things, 

Himself possesseth all knowledge. 

He Himself, Nanak, spoke the Word — 

Doubt shall depart from him to whom He gave it. 

The Guru’s reward for singing God’s praises : — 

Me, a minstrel out of work, God applieth to His work ; 
He ordered me in the beginning to sing His praises night 
and day. 

The Master summoned the minstrel to His true court, 
And put on him a robe of true praise and eulogy : 

He then obtained the ambrosial food of the true Name. 
They who have eaten under the Guru’s instruction are 
satisfied, and have obtained comfort. 

The minstrel uttereth praise and singeth the Word. 
Nanak, he who uttereth true praise obtaineth the Perfect One. 

Rag Gauri 

The advantages resulting from the fear of God : — 
The fear of God is very great and very heavy. 

Man’s wisdom is of little account, and so is his chatter 
Walk with the load of fear on thy head ; 

Meditate on the Guru who is kind and merciful. 

No one shall be saved without the fear of God : 

His fear hath adorned man’s love. 

The fire of the fear of transmigration is burned away by 
the fear of God. 

By fear the Word is fashioned and decorated. 

\^^at is fashioned without fear is altogether worthless : 
Useless is the mould and useless the stroke thereon. 

In the minds of many there is a desire to fashion the Word 
mthout fear ; 

But even though they perform a thousand artifices they 
shall not succeed. 

Nanak, the speech of the perversf^ls nonsense ; 

What they write is worthless a|j|^iity. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


291 


The* following was addressed by the Guru to one 
who had remonstrated with him for having left his 
relations to lead a wandering life : — 

Make wisdom thy mother, contentment thy father, 

Truth thy brother — this is best. 

People talk, but talking is of no avail. 

The measure of Thy might, O God, cannot be obtained. 
Modesty and attention are my two parents-in-law ; 

Good works I have accepted as my spouse ; 

Union with saints hath been my auspicious time for 
marriage,' and separation from the world my wedding. 

Saith Nanak, from such a union hath sprung truth eis my 
offspring. 

The composition of man’s body and the inutility 
of pilgrimages ; the body dies, but not the soul : — 

The body is a mixture of wind, water, and fire ; 

Within it is the changeful play of the intellect. 

The body hath nine gates and a tenth door ; 

O wise man, understand and reflect on this. 

God speaketh, preacheth, and listeneth ; 

He who reflecteth on himself is a wise man. 

The body is earth, the wind speaketh therein. 

Consider, O wise man, what it is that dieth — 

It is the quarrelsome and proud understanding. 

The conscious soul dieth not. 

The precious jewel, for which men go on pilgrimages, 
Dwelleth within the heart. 

Pandits read and argue. 

But know not that which is within themselves. 

When my spiritual ignorance dieth, I die not myself. 

He who is everywhere contained dieth not. 

Saith Nanak, when the Guru showed me God, 

No one seemed to me to die or to be born. 

One Sant Das propounded six questions to Guru 
Nanak : — 

Is it known whence man hath come, 

Whence he hath sprung, in what he shall be absorbed, 

u 2 



29 ^ 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


How he is bound, how he obtaineth emancipation, 

And how he shall be easily absorbed in the Imperishable ? 

The Guru replied : — 

The Name is nectar in the heart as well as in the mouth : 

Through it man is freed from worldly desires. 

Man cometh in the course of nature and goeth in the 
course of nature. 

Man is bom according to the desires of his heart, and he 
is absorbed in the same way. 

The pious man is emancipated and falleth into no en- 
tanglements : 

He is delivered by meditation on the Word and by God’s 
name. 

Many birds roost by night on a tree — 

Some happy, others unhappy — they whose minds have 
worldly love perish. 

When night hath passed away, they gaze upon the sky : ^ 

They fly in every direction according to the destiny 
recorded for them. 

They who are associated with the Name deem the world 
Uke a meeting-place of cowherds : 

The poisonous vessels of lust and wrath have burst for 
them. 

To those without the capital of the Name houses and shops 
are empty ; 

But by meeting the Guru the adamant doors of their 
understanding are opened. 

A holy man is met by primal destiny. 

God’s perfect people are rendered happy by truth : 

They barter their souls and bodies for divine knowledge 
and God’s love. 

Nanak toucheth their feet. 

The following is a conversation between soul and 
body : — 

The Soul : ‘ O body, thou thinkest thyself immortal, and that 
thou shalt be always happy — know that this world is a play. 

^ When life ceases, thehr..8o(rii take flighti 



HYMNS OF GURlt NANAK 293 

Thou practisest avarice, covetousness, and excessive 
falsehood, and bearest many burdens. 

I have seen thee, O body, trodden as ashes on the ground.’ 

The Body : ‘ Hearken, hearken to mine instruction. 

If thou have done good works, they shall abide with thee ; 
O my soul, thou shalt not again find such opportunity.’ 

The Soul : ‘ I address thee, O my body, hearken to my 
instruction. 

Thou slanderest ^ and bearest false witness against others.’ 

The Body : ‘ Thou covet est another’s vine,* O soul ; thou 
committest theft and evil deeds.’ 

The Soul : ‘ When the soul departeth, thou shalt remain 
behind like an abandoned woman. 

Thou, O body, shalt remain but as a dream — ^what good 
deeds hast thou done ? ’ 

The Body : ‘ Whatever I took by stealth was pleasing to 
thee. 

Thou hast no honour in this world, and thou shalt be 
rejected in the next ; thou hast lost thy human dwelling 
in vain.’ 

I am very unhappy, O father, saith Nanak, no one careth 
for me, 

Arabian and Turkish steeds, gold, silver, and loads of 
raiment 

No one taketh with him ; they leave him in this world, 
O fool. 

Sugar, fruit, all have I tasted ; it is only Thine ambrosial 
Name which is sweet. 

Man diggeth deep foundations and constructeth edifices 
on them, but they shall become at last heaps of dust. 

He hoardeth, and hoardeth, and giveth to no one ; the 
fool thinketh that all is his own. 

Rawan nominally possessed a golden Lanka and a golden 
palace, but they were no one’s property. 

Hear, O foolish and ignorant soul : 

What pleaseth God shall be done. 

My Lord is a great Merchant, we are His retail-dealers. 

^ Ninda chinda is an alliteration. 

* This is understood to be meant for neighbour’s wife. 



294 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Our souls and bodies are all His capital ; He it is who 
killeth and re-animateth. 

The Guru reflects on the power of the deadly sins 
which lead men to destruction : — 

The others ^ are five, I am but one ; how shall I protect 
tny house ? 

They ever assail and plunder me ; to whom shall I 
complain ? 

Utter God’s holy name, 0 my soul ; 

Before thee is Death’s army fierce and numerous. 

God erected a palace,® put doors to it, and the woman ® 
sitteth within. 

Deeming the world sweet, she ever sporteth, but these 
five men rob her. 

When Death destroyeth the palace, her chamber is sacked, 
and she being alone is captured. » 

She is beaten by Death’s mace, and his chains are riveted 
on her neck ; the five men have taken flight. 

The housewife wanteth gold and silver ; friends want 
banquets. 

Nanak, they who commit sin for these things shall go 
bound to Death’s city. 

Kinganath Jogi pressed Guru Nanak to become 
his disciple; the Guru replied that he had already 
learned the science of Jog. He composed the 
following hymn on the occasion : — 

Make restraint of thine inmost heart thine earrings, thy 
body the patched coat ; 

Reduce thy five senses to subjection, O Jogi, and make 
a pure heart thy staff. 

In this way shalt thou obtain the way of jog. 

Make the fact that there is but one Word and none other 
thy devotion to tubers and roots. 

If God could be obtained by merely shaving the head, 
we should make a god of the Ganges.* 

* The deadly sins which rob the body. ® The body. 

® The soul. * Where pilgrims shave their heads. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 295 

It is the one Lord who saveth the three worlds ; thou 
thinkest hot of Him, 0 fool. 

If thou apply thy mind to words through hypocrisy, thy 
doubts shall never leave thee. 

If thou turn thy thoughts to the feet of the one God, why 
pursue avarice and greed ? 

If thou repeat the Name of the Bright One, thy soul 
shall be absorbed in Him. 

0 Jogi, why utterest thou so much deceit ? 

Thy body is mad,^ thy mind is silly, thou passest thy 
life talking of thy property. 

Nanak representeth, it is after the naked body is burnt 
the soul regretteth lost opportunities. 

Man’s precious life should not be wasted, but 
should be devoted to God’s service and not to the 
acquisition of wealth : — 

Man loseth his nights *in sleeping and his days in eating ; 

His human life, valuable as a diamond, he parteth with 
for a kauri. 

Thou knowest not God’s name ; O fool, thou shalt here- 
after regret. 

Thou buriest endless wealth in the earth, yet thy desire 
for it depart eth not.® 

They who departed desiring endless wealth lost the 
Endless One. 

If all were to obtain according to their desires, they 
would be happy. 

Whatever all may desire, a man’s fate is decided by his acts. 

Nanak, He who fashioned creation taketh care of it. 

It is not known on whom God’s order will confer greatness. 

The fervour of the Guru’s devotion : — 

Were I to become a fawn, live in the forest, and gather 
and eat tubers and roots, 

1 should ever and ever be a sacrifice to my Lord, who is 
obtained through the favour of the Guru. 

I am a retail-dealer of Thine, O God ; 

® Because smeared with ashes. 

* Also translated— Thou desirest not the Endless One. 



296 the SIKH RELIGIOlsr 

Thy Name is my stock-in-trade and my merchandise. 

Were I to become a koil and live in a mango-tree, I should 
still tranquilly meditate on the Word. 

Through my loye my Lord, whose form appeareth un- 
equalled, would naturally meet me. 

Were I to become a fish and dwell in the water, I should 
still remember Him who watcheth over all animals. 

My Spouse dwelleth on this side and on that ; I shall 
stretch forth mine arm to touch Him. 

Were I to become a serpent and dwell in the ground, 
I should still abide in the Word and my fears would depart. 

Nanak, they are ever the happy married wives whom 
God hath absorbed in His light. 

Gauri Ashtapadi 

Without a religious guide man would run riot in 
evil and haste to perdition : — • 

The heart is an elephant, the body a forest. 

The Guru the goad ; when the mark of the true Word 
is made on the elephant, 

He shall obtain honour in the King’s court. 

God cannot be known by cleverness. 

Without chastening the mind how can God be appraised ? 

In the house is nectar which the thieves are taking away : ^ 

No one tried to restrain them. 

If any one guard the nectar, God Himself will confer 
greatness on him. 

Worldly wealth, comforts, and pleasures would 
never satisfy the Guru without devotion to God. 

I may apply distilled aloe wood and sandal to my body, 

I may wear silks and satins. 

But without God’s name how shall I obtain happiness ? 

What shall I wear ? in what dress shall I show myself ? 

]How shall I obtain happiness without the Lord of the 
world ? 

I may have rings in mine ears and a necklace of pearls on 
my neck, 

^ The name of God is in the heart. The evil passions plunder it. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 297 

A red coverlet, flowers, and red powder ; ^ 

But where should I search for happiness except with the 
Lord of the world ? 

A beautiful woman with expressive eyes 
May make the sixteen decorations and render herself very 
lovely. 

Yet without worshipping the Lord of the world she would 
ever be despised. 

One may have in his house or palace a comfortable couch ; 
A flower-girl may scatter flowers on it day and night. 

Yet without God’s name its owner would be unhappy. 
Excellent horses, elephants, lances, musical instruments. 
Armies, mace-bearers, and attendants are worthless 
And vain shows without the Lord of the world. 

I may be called a Sidh, and I may summon wealth and 
supernatural power to me ; 

I may make for my ‘head a crown, a regal hat, and an 
umbrella. 

Yet how should I obtain real happiness without the Lord 
of the world ? 

I may be styled a lord, an emperor, or a king, 

I may say ‘ Now then ’ * to inferiors ; all this would be 
false display. 

Without the Guru’s instruction my business could not 
be adjusted. 

Egotism and selfishness are forgotten under the Guru’s 
instruction. 

Through the Guru’s instruction it is known that God is 
in the heart. 

Nanak supplicateth, I seek Thy shelter, O God. 

The Guru describes the condition of the holy 
and the means of salvation : — 

He who serveth the one God knoweth not others : 

He layeth aside the bitter things deceit and evil. 

By love and truth shalt thou meet the Truest of the True. 

^ For frontal marks and the parting of the hair. 

^ Abe tale in PanjSbi is a much more contemptuous expression than 
‘ now then 



298 THE SIKH RELIGION 

If there be any such saint of God, 

His filth shall be washed away, and he shall meet God 
by singing His praises. 

Reversed are the lotuses of all men’s hearts : 

The fire of evil inclinations bumeth away the world. 
While those who meditate on the word of the Guru are 
saved. 

The bumble-bee, the moth, the elephant, the fish. 

And the deer^ suffer the consequences of their acts and 
die. 

Absorbed in worldly desires man knoweth not the Real 
Thing; 

He thinketh of lust and love for woman. 

Which with wrath ruin all sinners. 

He who forgetteth the Name, loseth his honour and his 
senses. 

The perverse being who allowath his mind to covet 
another’s house. 

Hath a halter round his neck, and is entangled in diffi- 
culties ; 

While the pious shall be delivered by singing God’s 
praises. 

As a widow, who giveth her body to a stranger. 

And through lust or money falleth into another’s power, 
Is never satisfied without a lover ; 

So man readeth books and reciteth the Simritis ; 

He also readeth, heareth, and expoundeth the Veds and 
the Purans ; 

But without being dyed with God^s essence his mind is 
very unstable. 

As the chatrik loveth and thirsteth for the rain-drops, 
As the fish is delighted with the water. 

So Nanak is satisfied quaffing God’s essence. 

There was a hill king called Amar Singh who 

^ The animals mentioned suffer for the gratification of their senses. 
The bee scents the lotus and is entangled; the moth looks on the 
lamp and is burnt; the elephant, to gratify his lust, rushes into 
a trap ; the fish is hungry and takes the bait ; and the deer is lured 
to his death by the hunter’s bell. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


399 


was dethroned by his brother. On being expelled 
he went to Guru Nanak for advice. The following 
was given him : — 

They who wear religious garbs are full of pride and know 
not God. 

Few are they whose minds are reconciled to devotion 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

The True One is not obtained by the practice of egotism. 

When pride departeth, the supreme dignity is obtained. 

Kings under the influence of pride make many expedi- 
tions : 

They are ruined by pride and remain subject to trans- 
migration. 

He who meditateth on the Guru’s word shall lose his 
pride ; 

He shall dismiss his ^wandering thoughts, and destroy 
his deadly sins. 

He in whose heart is the truth shall easily arrive at God’s 
court, 

And, knowing God, shall obtain the supreme state. 

The Guru dispelleth the doubts of those whose works 
are true ; 

And they shall obtain a fixed seat in the court of the 
Fearless. 

What do they retain who die talking of their possessions ? 

He who meeteth a perfect Guru putteth an end to his 
contentions. — 

What there is, is nothing in reality — 

The pious who are saturated with divine knowledge sing 
God’s praises. 

The fetters of pride cause man to wander in trans- 
migration. 

Nanak, it is the saint of God who obtaineth happiness. 

Death impends over all, but cannot harm the 
holy : — 

Even Brahma was subject to death ^ from the beginning. 

^ Literally — Brahma entered the house of death. 



300 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He found not the end of Vishnu’s lotus in the nether 
regions ; ^ 

He accepted not God’s order, and was led astray in error. 

Whatever is created Death destroy eth. 

God hath preserved us by our meditating on the word of 
the Guru. 

Maya deludeth all the gods and goddesses. 

Death looseth not his hold on him who serveth not the 
Guru. 

God is imperishable, invisible, and inscrutable. 

Emperors, rulers, and kings shall not abide. 

Having forgotten the Name they shall undergo death’s 
torture. 

The Name is my support ; I shall abide as Thou keepest 
me, 0 Lord. 

Chiefs and kings have no abiding-place. 

Bankers die after accumulating Wealth and money. 

O God, grant me Thine ambrosial name as my wealth. 

Subjects, lords, headmen, sovereigns — 

None is found permanent in this world. 

Irresistible death striketh false mortals on the head. 

One alone, the Truest of the true, is immovable. 

All those whom He created He will again destroy.® 

Man obtaineth honour when he knoweth God under the 
Guru’s instruction. 

Qazis, shaikhs, and faqirs in rehgious garbs 

Call themselves great, but through pride their bodies are 
in pain. 

Death will not release them without receiving the true 
Guru’s consolation. 

^ According to many Hindus Vishnu was the creator of the 
world. From Vishnu’s navel there grew a lotus from which the god 
Brahma was produced. Brahma on attaining intelligence began to 
consider the source of his birth. It could not be from such an 
insignificant thing as a lotus. He rejected the idea and kicked the 
lotus at the same time, whereupon he descended into it and remained 
long wandering in its stem until he repented of his error. He then 
rose to the top where he sat enthroned as before. 

* Literally — draw' within Himself. Creation is God’s extension ; 
destruction, His contraction. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 301 

The net of Death is over man’s tongue and eyes ; 

It is over his ears when he listeneth to unchaste language. 

He is robbed day and night without the Word. 

Death cannot espy him in whose heart 

God’s true name dwelleth, and who singeth God’s praises — 

Nanak, the pious shall be absorbed in the Word. 

A prayer to God for protection : — 

As a herdsman guardeth and keepeth watch over his 
cattle, 

So God day and night cherisheth and guardeth man and 
keepeth him in happiness. 

O Thou compassionate to the poor, I seek Thy protection ; 
look on me with favour. 

Preserve me in this world and the next. 

Wherever I look there art Thou contained ; guard me, 
O Guardian. » 

Thou art the Giver, Thou art the Enjoyer, Thou art the 
support of the soul. 

Man must supplement his prayers by good acts : — 

Without meditating on divine knowledge man ascendeth 
or descendeth according to his acts. 

Without praising the Lord of the world the darkness of 
ignorance shall not be dispelled. 

We see that the world is perishing through covetousness 
and pride. 

By serving the Guru, God and the true gate of salvation 
are attained. 

What hath man brought into the world ? What shall he 
take away when he is entangled in Death’s noose ? 

Like a well-bucket firmly attached to a rope, he is now 
in heaven, now in hell. 

A spiritual guide is necessary for salvation : — 

His account is settled who through the Guru’s favour 
knoweth God. 

God, called the Pure One, who is in every heart, is my 
Lord. 



302 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Man shall not be emancipated without the Guru’s in- 
struction ; see and ponder upon this. 

Even though man performed hundreds of thousands of 
ceremonies, all would still be darkness without the Guru. 

What shall we say to those who are blind and devoid of 
wisdom ? 

Without the Guru the way cannot be seen ; how shall 
we reach the goal ? 

Man calleth the counterfeit genuine ; but he knoweth 
not what the genuine is. 

A blind man he calleth an assayer ; wonderful is this age. 

Man saith, the sleeper is awake, and he who is awake 
sleepeth ; 

He saith, they who are alive are dead, and he weepeth 
not for those who are really dead ; 

He saith, that he who is coming hath gone, and that he 
who hath gone is coming ; «= 

He calleth another’s property his own, and with his own 
he is not satisfied ; 

He calleth what is sweet bitter, and what is bitter 
sweet ; 

He slandereth those who love God — such is what I have 
seen in this age. 

Man serveth a handmaiden,^ but the Master he seeth not. 

He churneth tank water, and no butter is produced. 

He who can explain this is the Guru for me. 

Nanak, he who knoweth himself is unequalled and un- 
rivalled. 


Gauri Chhant 

The longing of the pious for God is compared to 
the longing of the young bride for her spouse : — 

Painful is the night for the young bride; without her 
Beloved she sleepeth not. 

She pineth away through grief at His absence : 

The woman pineth away through grief at His absence, 
saying ‘ How shall I look upon Him ? ’ 

^ Mammon. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 303 

Ornaments, dainty food, sensuous enjoyments are all 
vain and of no account for her. 

Intoxicated with the wine of youth and melting with 
pride milk cometh not to her breast. 

Nanak, she meeteth her Spouse when He causeth her to 
meet Him ; without Him no sleep cometh to her. 

The bride is unhonoured without her beloved Lord. 

How shall she be happy without embracing Him ? 

Without a spouse there is no domestic happiness ; ask 
thy friends and companions. 

Without the Name there is no love or affection ; but, 
with the True One, woman abideth in happiness. 

They in whose hearts there is truth and contentment, 
meet the Friend ; under the Guru’s instruction the Bride- 
groom is recognized. 

Nanak, the woman who abandoneth not the Name shall 
be easily absorbed in God through it. 

Come, friends and companions, let us enjoy our Beloved. 

I will ask my Guru and write His words of love. 

The Guru hath communicated to me the true Word ; the 
perverse shall regret they have not received it. 

When I recognized the True One, my roaming mind 
became fixed. 

The wisdom of the True One is ever new, so is the 
love of His Word. 

Nanak, true peace of mind is obtained from His look of 
favour ; meet Him, my friends and companions. 

My desires have been fulfilled ; the Friend hath come 
home to me. 

A song of rejoicing was sung at the union of Husband 
and wife. 

His praises and a song of joy were sung ; the bride is 
happy in His love and her heart is in raptures. 

Her friends are also happy, her enemies unhappy ; true 
profit is obtained by repeating the name of the True One. 

With clasped hands the woman prayeth that she may 
night and day be steeped in God’s love. 

Nanak, the Beloved and His spouse unite in dalliance ; 
my desires have been fulfilled. 



304 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Rag Asa 

The Creator bestows good gifts : — 

If a beggar at God’s gate cry aloud, God heareth him in 
His palace. 

God may give him consolation or repulse him ; He alone 
bestoweth greatness. 

God knoweth man’s virtues and inquireth not his caste ; 
in the next world there is no caste. 

God acteth Himself and causeth to act. 

Thou, 0 Creator, payest heed to man’s complaints. 

Since it is Thou alone who actest. 

Why should we be dependent on any hut Thee ? 
What is the world to us ? 

Thou Thyself didst create ; Thou Thyself dost bestow ; 

Thou forbiddest evil inclinations. 

If Thou by the Guru’s favour dw/;ll in the heart. 

Suffering and the darkness of ignorance shadl depart 
therefrom. 

Thou givest truth to those whom Thou lovest ; 

Thou givest truth to none besides. 

If Thou give truth to any one, saith Nanak, there shall 
be no inquiry made of him hereafter. 

The following was addressed to a votary of 
Krishan, who was worshipping his god with music 
ahd dancing : — 

Make understanding thy fife, the love of God thy drum ; 

By these joy and earnest desire are ever produced in 
the heart. 

This is devotion ; this is austerity — 

In this wise dance beating time with thy feet. 

Deem knowing how to praise God as beating time : 

Other dances are sensuous pleasures. 

Play truth and contentment as thy pair of cymbals ; 

Make the perpetual vision of God the bells for thy feet ; 

Make love for none but God thy measures and songs — 

In this wise dance beating time with thy feet. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 

Ever make the fear of God in thy heart and soul. 
Whether sitting or standing, thy g5n:ations. 

Make the knowledge that thy body is ashes thy recum- 
bent p>osture^ — 

In this wise dance beating time with thy feet. 

* Thine audience shall be the disciples who love instruction. 
Who hear the true Name from the Guru’s lips, 

And repeat it again and again — 

Nanak, in this wise dance beating time with thy feet. 

The following was intended to show God's supe- 
riority to His creatures Ram and Krishan, who 
are now adored as gods by the Hindus : — 

God having created the atmosphere supported the whole 
earth and set bounds to water and fire. 

The fatuous Rawan * had his ten heads cut off ; what 
greatness was obtained by slaying him ? 

What praise of Thine, O God, shall be uttered ? 

Thou pervadest everything ; Thou lovest all Thy 
creatures. 

Having created living beings. Thou boldest their ways 
in Thy hand. What greatness was obtained by putting 
a nose-ring on the black serpent of the Jamna ? * 

Whose husband art Thou ? Who is Thy wife ? Thou 
pervadest all things. 

Brahma, the granter of favours, with his progeny went 
to ascertain God’s greatness. 

But could not find His limits ; what greatness was 
obtained by sla5nng Kans ? * 

When the sea of milk was churned and its gems brought 
^ A part of an Oriental dance. 

^ RSwan, king of Ceylon, abducted Sita, Ram’s wife, and was 
killed by him. 

^ This was one of the feats of Krishan, who, in some ways, 
resembles the Hercules of Greece. 

^ Kans, king of Mathura, is called Krishan’s maternal uncle. It 
was foretold that the offering of Krishan's mother, Devakij should kill 
Kans, so he employed all his efforts to destroy her children. Krishan, 
however, was not destroyed, but succeeded in fulfilliof the terms of 
the prophecy. 


KKII. I 


X 



3o6 the SIKH RELIGION 

forth, the demigods and demons each claimed the merit 
thereof. 

What greatness was obtained by the distribution of the 
gems to each ? Saith Nanak, if men try to conceal Thy 
greatness, 0 God^ how can it be concealed ? 

The Guru in his anxiety to meet God compares 
himself to a bride who rejoices in her approaching 
marriage : — 

When the Bridegroom kindly came to my house, 

My female companions met me and arranged for the 
marriage. 

My heart was glad as I gazed upon the play ; the Bride- 
groom came to wed me. 

Sing, sing, O ladies, the bridal song with wisdom and 
reflection. 

The Life of the world hath rnme to my house as my 
Bridegroom. 

My marriage having been brought about through my 
Guru, when I met him I recognized my Spouse 

Whose Word filleth the three worlds ; when my pride 
departed my heart was glad. 

God arrangeth His own affairs ; they are not arranged 
by others : 

They consist in bestowing truth, contentment, mercy, 
and faith — a few pious persons know this. 

Saith Nanak, God alone is the Spouse of all. 

She on whom He looketh with favour is the happy wife. 

In the opinion of the Guru human life is worthless 
without holiness : — 

A cow without milk, a bird without wings, and tillage 
without water are of no avail. 

What is an emperor to whom no obeisance is made ? 
Dark is the chamber in which Thy name, 0 God, is not. 

Why shouldest Thou forget me when I am in great 
affliction ? 

When afliiction befalleth me, forget me not. 

Man’s eyes grow blind, his tongue loseth its taste, his 
ears hear not ; 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 307 

He can only move by being supported — ^these are the 
fruits of non-service. 

Make the Word the garden tree, plant it in good soil,^ 
and irrigate with love. 

The one Name is the fruit of all such trees ; how shall 
men obtain it without good works ? 

All creatures are Thine, O Lord ; none obtaineth his 
reward without devotion to Thee. 

Woe and weal are distributed according to Thy will ; 
without Thy name real life remaineth not. 

How may man live except by dying by the Guru’s 
teaching ? If one live otherwise, he shall not know the 
way. 

Saith Nanak, Thou, O Lord, restorest life; Thou pre- 
serves! man as Thou pleasest. 

The following was, addressed by way of admoni- 
tion to a Brahman : — 

Making my body the loin-cloth, my heart the Brahman, 

Divine knowledge my sacrificial thread, meditation my 
grass 2 and leaves, 

I shall beg for God’s name and praises instead of the 
alms of the Brahmans ; 

And by the favour of the Guru be absorbed in God. 

O Brahman, so meditate on God 

That His name may become thy purification. His name 
thy learning, and His name thy wisdom and good acts. 

The sacrificial thread is only on thy body as long as thou 
hast life. 

Make the remembrance of the Name thy loin-cloth and 
frontal mark, 

And it shall abide with thee in this world and the next. 

Search for nothing but the true Name ; 

Make God’s love thy worship, the burning of the love of 
wealth thine incense. 

Look only on the one God, search for none other. 

^ The heart. 

* The kusha (Poa cynosuroidts), used by the Brahmans in worship. 

X 2 



3o8 the SIKH RELIGION 

He who repeateth God’s name with his mouth and pon- 
dereth on it, 

Beholdeth Him at the tenth door of the firmament.' 

His doubt and fear who liveth upon the love of God flee 
away. 

If the sentry be on the alert, thieves will not break in. 

Deem the knowledge of the one God thy frontal mark, 

And the consciousness .that God is within thee thy dis- 
crimination.® 

God cannot be overcome by other ceremonial acts. 

He who merely readeth religious books hath not found 
His worth. 

His secret is not known from the eighteen Purans or the 
four Veds. 

Nanak, the true Guru hath shown me God. 

The following was addressed to a pandit who 
inquired how salvation could be obtained : — 

The body like a frail earthen vessel is miserable ; in 
birth and death it suffereth further pain. 

How shall the dangerous ocean of this world be crossed ? 
It cannot without the divine Guru. 

There is none but Thee, O my Beloved ; there is none but 
Thee, 0 God. 

In all colours and forms art Thou ; Thou pardonest 
him on whom Thou lookest with favour. 

My mother-in-law * is perverse ; she will neither let 
me dwell at home, nor meet my Beloved. 

Since I have worshipped the feet of my companions and 
friends,^ my Beloved through the kindness of the Guru 
hath looked on me with favour. 

. Reflecting on myself and chastening my heart I see that 
there is no friend like Thee. 

As Thou keepest me so I live ; I endure woe and weal 
as Thou bestowest them, 

' In the brain in a state of ecstasy. 

* In the matter of eating, drinking, wearing, living, and worshipping. 

® Mammon. * The ^nts. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 309 

I have dispelled hopes and desires, and I no more long 
for mammon; /. 

The holy man ^ho hath found shelter in the society of 
the saints, obtaineth the fourth state.^ 

He in whose heart the invisible and inscrutable God 
dwelleth, possesseth all divine knowledge, meditation, 
devotion, and penance. 

Nanak, he whose heart is dyed with God’s name shall 
readily obtain devotion under the Guru’s instruction. 

The following is supposed to have been composed 
by the Guru on the death of his father : — 

Abandon love of family and love of everything. 

Abandon worldly love ; it is all sinful. 

Abandon worldly love and superstition, O my friends. 

Repeat the true Name with your tongues and your hearts. 

His children weep not and his mother afflicteth not 
herself for him * 

Who possesseth the nine treasures of the true Name. 

The world is ruined by such love as the worldly feel ; 

Only some rare pious man may be saved. 

Through such love as that one is born again 

He who feeleth such love goeth to the city of Death. 

Practise acceptance of the Guru’s instruction as thy 
devotion and penance. 

He who breaketh not with worldly love shall not be 
accepted. 

If God look on man with favour such love shall depart, 

O Nanak, and he shall be absorbed in God. 

When Guru Nanak went to Gorakhmata — the 
present Nanakmata — he found religious men of 

^ Ancient Indian writers enumerate four states of life— 
waking ; mapan, dreaming ; sukhupati, deep sleep — iweiSdy ns 
KafisvSwv oyap pijSiy 6p^ (Plato, Apology ) ; and turiya, mental 
absorption in God, in which state man is said to have obtained salva- 
tion during life. He then forgets the troubles of the world and is 
immersed in happiness. 

‘ ^ The gySnis also translate — His heart crieth not or longeth for 
mammon. 



310 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


several sects assembled there. The following was 
composed after a discussion with them : — 

He who meditateth on knowledge conferreth favour on 
others ; 

When he correcteth his evil passions he dwelleth at 
a place of pilgrimage ; 

The tinkling bells of ecstasy resound for him when he 
tumeth his heart to God. 

What can Death do to me in the next world ? 

When man hath abandoned desires he is a Sanyasi, 

If a Jogi be continent, he enjoyeth his body.^ 

He who in his heart meditateth mercy, is a Digambar : ® 
He tortureth himself, but not others. 

Thou, O Lord, art one, but many are Thy manifestations. 
Nanak knoweth not Thy wonderful play. 

As a wife fears that she is forgotten by her 
spouse, so the holy man fears that he is neglected by 
God : — 

I am not possessed of one virtue to cleanse my polluted 
body. 

My Lord awaketh ; I sleep the livelong night. 

How shall I thus become dear to my Spouse ? 

My Lord awaketh ; I sleep the livelong night. 

Even though I approach His couch smitten with desire, 
I ktww not if I shall then please Him or please Him not. 
How know I what shall occur, 0 mother ? 

Without beholding God I cannot abide. 

I have not tasted love ; my thirst is not quenched ; 

My youth hath fled, and I mourn for what is lost. 

Even now I awake smitten with desire : 

1 have become sad, and remain without hope. 

If woman adorn herself with the rejection of pride. 

Her Spouse will enjoy her on the couch. 

Then, Nanak, shall she please her Spouse’s heart ; 

She will abandon pride and be absorbed in Him. 

^ The ecstasy he feels from the practice of Jog is sufficient for him. 

2 Who wanders naked. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 31X 

It is necessary to fear as well as love God so as 
to keep His commandments : — 

In this world woman is very silly. 

I know not the worth of my Spouse ; 

He is one, there is none other. 

If He cast a glance of favour on me, I shall meet Him. 

In the next world woman shall know the truth. 

And easily recognize her Beloved. 

If she obtain such wisdom by the Guru’s favour. 

She shall please her Spouse’s heart. 

Saith Nanak, if she adorn herself with fear and love, 

Her Spouse will ever enjoy her on the couch. 

When man has parted with all worldly love, he 
has prepared himself for deliverance : — 

No one hath a son, no one hath a mother.^ 

Through deceitful worldly love man wandereth in doubt. 

0 my Lord, I am Thy creation ; 

1 utter Thy name when Thou givest it me. 

Man may wail aloud for his many transgressions, 

But he shall only be pardoned if it be God’s will. 

By the Guru’s favour evil inclinations depart — 

Wherever I gaze there is only one God — 

Saith Nanak, if man attain such wisdom. 

The True One will absorb that true one in Himself. 

.The following was addressed to a worldly-minded 
Raja : — 

Thou mayest have lakhs of armies, lakhs of musical 
instruments and lances ; lakhs of men may rise to do thee 
homage ; 

Thy dominion may extend over lakhs of miles ; lakhs of 
men may rise to do thee honour — 

All that would be fruitless, wert thou not credited in 
God’s account. 

Without God’s name the world is only trouble. 

If the fool be never so much admonished, he remaineth 
the blindest of the blind. 


^ Everything is illusion. 



312 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Thou mayest earn lakhs of rupees ; thou mayest amass 
and spend lakhs ; lakhs may come and lakhs may go ; 

But, if thy soul obtain not credit in God’s account, where 
else shall it obtain it ? 

Lakhs of Shastars may be explained to thee ; lakhs of 
pandits may read the Purans for thee— 

All would be unacceptable didst thou not obtain credit 
in God’s account. 

From the true Name — the kind Creator’s name — ^honour 
is obtained. 

If it dwell day and night in the heart, O Nanak, man 
shall be deUvered by God’s favouring glance. 

The temptations to which man is exposed by his 
senses : — 

The five evil passions dwell concealed within the heart; 

Wherefore it remaineth not fixed, but wandereth like a 
pilgrim. 

My mind remaineth not fixed on the Merciful One : 

Avaricious, deceitful, sinful, and hypocritical, it is exces- 
sively attached to worldly love. 

When I meet my Beloved I will adorn myself, 

And put on necldaces of flowers. 

I have five companions and one husband.^ 

It is ordained from the beginning that the soul depart. 

The five senses shall weep in unison, 

Saith Nanak, when the soul is arrested to give its account. 

Asa Ashtapadi 

Gum Nanak expatiates on the advantage of the 
Gum’s instruction and the repetition of God’s name : — 

Man may perform all devotion, all penance, and resort to 
every expedient ; 

Yet he is as if he wandered in a wilderness, and could 
not find the way. 

Without knowing God, no one is acceptable. 

^ This is the relation of the soul to the five senses or organs of 
perception. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


313 


Without the Name man is despised.* 

The Lord is permanent ; the world cometh and goeth. 
Mortals shall be emancipated by being the holy man’s 
slaves. 

The world is bound by worldly love and many desires ; 
Yet some reject it under the Guru’s instruction. 

The lotuses of the hearts of those who have the Name 
within them bloom, 

And they fear not Death, 

The world which loveth women is overcome by them. 
Men attached to sons and wives forget God’s name. 
They waste in vain their human lives and lose their game. 
To serve the true Guru is the best thing. 

They who utter words of pride in public, 

Never apply the unction of salvation to their hearts 
They who burn worldly love under the Guru’s instruction, 
And ever meditate or? the pure Name in their hearts. 
Hold and restrain their wandering minds. 

By God’s favour the Guru associateth such persons with 
the congregation of the Sikhs. 

Without a guru man forgetteth God and suffereth trans- 
migration. 

Him whom God regardeth favourably He blendeth with 
Himself. 

If I speak of the beautiful One, I cannot describe Him. 
If I discourse of the Ineffable, I cannot find His worth. 
All pain and pleasure depend on Thy will, O God. 

All pain shall be erased by the True Name, 

And men shall hear instruments played without hands and 
anklets without feet. 

If man understand the Word, he shall behold the True 
One. 

When the True One is in the heart, all happiness is there 
also. 

The Preserver preserveth men by His favouring glance. 
He who effaceth himself knoweth the three worlds. 

He who understandeth the Word, shall be absorbed in 
the True One. 

* Literally — has ashes thrown on his head. 



314 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Nanak, the Creator will congratulate him 

Who without respite meditateth on the Word. 

How deliverance may be obtained : — 

He who burneth his hopes and desires by the Word, 

Who uttereth and causeth others to utter God’s name, 

Shall by means of the Guru find the way to God’s own 
abode. 

His body shall become gold by God’s incomparable light. 

And he shall behold God’s form in the whole three worlds. 

I possess God’s true name as wealth which shall never fail. 

God pervadeth the five elements, the three worlds, the 
nine regions, and the four quarters of the universe. 

The Almighty supporteth the earth and the heavens. 

The wandering mind He bringeth back. 

Whoever is a fool seeth not with his eyes ; 

His language giveth not pleasure^ and he understandeth 
not what is told him. 

Intoxicated with evil passions, he quarrelleth with the 
world ; 

While on the other hand a man becometh good by association 
with the good, 

Pursueth virtue and purifieth himself from vice. 

Without serving the Guru peace is not obtained. 

The Name is diamonds, jewels, and rubies ; 

It is the pearl of the heart, God’s own wealth. 

Nanak, God assayeth man, and maketh him happy with 
a glance. 

The following was addressed to a hypocritical 

Jogi 

Men sing songs while meditating evil ; 

They intone measures and style themselves knowing. 

Without the Name the heart is filthy and meditateth evil. 

Whither goest thou ? O man, remain at home. 

The pious are satiated \wth God’s name, and by searching 
easily find Him. 

The bodily sins of lust, wrath, and worldly love are in 
the mind ; 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


315 


So are painful greed, avarice, and pride. 

How can the mind be satisfied without God’s name ? 
They who lave their hearts know the True One. 

The holy man knoweth the condition of his heart. 

The mind obtains composure by devotion : — 

The apostate’s mind is a furious elephant 

Which wandereth distracted in the forest of worldly love. 

Impelled by Death it rusheth here and there, 

While the pious search and find God in their hearts. 
Without the Guru’s word the mind is not at rest. 
Remember God’s very pure name and relinquish bitter 
pride. 

Say how shall this stupid mind be happy : 

Without understanding, it shall suffer the torture of 
Death. 

God will cause man to meet the true Guru, and will 
pardon him. 

The True One will thrust aside the tortures of Death. 

Wealth is perishable ; devotion to God an abiding 
gain 

When the body perisheth, whose shall be its wealth ? 
Without the Guru how shall God’s name be obtained } 
God’s name is wealth which accompanieth and assisteth us. 
Day and night he is pure who fixeth his attention on God. 
What have we but God’s name ? 

Treating pleasure and pain as the same I forsake not 
the Name : God will pardon and blend me with Himself. 
The fool loveth gold and woman ; 

Attached to mammon he forgetteth the Name, 

Him whom Thou, 0 God, pardonest Thou causest to 
repeat Thy name. 

Death’s myrmidons cannot overtake him who singeth 
Thy praises. 

0 Hari, who art God, the great Giver, 

Mercifully preserve us as Thou pleasest. 

Under the Guru’s instruction God is pleasing to my mind ; 
Disease is removed and pain averted. 



5i6 the SIKH RELIGION 

There is no other medicine, charm, or spell. 

By remembering God, sin is destroyed. 

As I behold creation I am amazed and astonished 

God is contained in the hearts of demigods and men. 

God who filleth every place, I hold in my heart. 

There is none equal to Thee, O Lord. 

He who loveth worship hath God’s name in his mouth. 

In the company of such saints and worshippers 

Man breaketh his shackles and meditateth on God. 

Pious men are emancipated by a knowledge of God 
through the Guru. 

Death’s m5n:midons cannot inflict pain on him 

Who awaketh in the love of God’s name. 

God to whom His saints are dear, abideth with them. 

Nanak, salvation is obtained by bearing love to God. 

The following on the disregard of worldly things 
was addressed to a selfish Brahman : — 

He who serveth the Guru knoweth the Lord ; 

His pain is erased who recognizeth the True Word. 

Repeat God’s name, my friends and companions. 

On serving the true Guru ye shall behold God with 
your eyes. 

Entanglements are mother, father, and the whole world ; 

Entanglements are sons, daughters, and women ; 

Entanglements are religious ceremonies performed 
through ostentation ; 

Entanglements are sons, wives, and worldly love in the 
mind ; 

An entanglement is the tillage done by the tiller — 

He suffereth for his selfishness when the King demandeth 
revenue — 

An entanglement is traffic without meditating on God. 

Man is never satisfied ; worldly love is ever5rwhere 
diffused.^ 

An entanglement is the perishable wealth which merchants 
amass. 

' Also translated — Man is not satisfied with the extension of his 
wealth. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK m 

Without devotion to God man findeth no place. 

Entanglements are Veds, religious discussions, and pride. 

By the entanglements of worldly love and sin man 
perisheth — 

Nanak taketh shelter in God’s name — 

„He whom the true Guru preserveth is freed from his 
entanglements. 

The following was addressed to a mixed assembly 
of professedly religious men : — 

I have searched in every direction, but found no friend. 

If it please Thee, O Lord, Thou art mine and I am Thine. 

I have no other gate than Thine ; whom shall I salute ? 

I possess Thee alone, O Lord ; Thy true name is in my 
mouth. 

The Sidhs strive for supernatural power ; Pirs also desire 
wealth and supernatural^power. 

May I not forget the one Name under the true Guru’s 
instruction ! 

Why do the Jogis, the Bhogis,^ and the Kaprias wander 
in foreign lands ? 

They heed not the Guru’s instruction or the Real Thing 
that is within them. 

Pandits, preceptors, and astrologers ever read the Purans, 
. But know not the Thing within them — God who is con- 
cealed within the heart. 

Some anchorets perform austerities in forests, others ever 
dwell at places of pilgrimages. 

Those benighted people know not themselves ; why have 
they become ascetics ? 

Some who are called Jatis try to restrain their seed : 

Without the word of the Guru they shall not be saved, but 
shall wander in transmigration. 

Different persons are family men, worshippers, penitents ; 
but it is only they who are attached to the Guru’s instruc- 
tions. 

Who hold fast the Name, charity, and ablutions, and who 
awake in God’s service. 

^ A sect of Indian Sybarites. 



3i8 the SIKH RELIGION 

Through the Guru the gate of Thy house, O Lord, is 
known ; when men go there they recognize it. 

Saith Nanak, may I not forget Thy name, and may my 
heart be reconciled with the True One ! 

Precepts for salvation ; — 

By restraining his mental desires man shall assuredly 
cross the terrible ocean. 

Thou, O Lord, wast in the beginning and in the primal age; 
Thou art the Merciful ; I have entered Thine asylum. 

Thou art the Giver ; we are Thy beggars ; O God, grant 
us a sight of Thee. 

0 man, meditate on the Name under the Guru’s instruc- 
tion, and thou shalt be happy in the temple of thy heart. 

Renounce falsehood and avarice ; and then shalt thou 
recognize the True One. 

Be absorbed in the Guru’s instruction, and thou shalt 
know what is best for thee. 

This mind is a grasping tyrant enamoured of greed : 

Under the Guru’s instruction greed is removed, and man 
arriveth at an understanding with God. 

If man sow a barren field, how shall he obtain profit ? 

The obstinate man is not pleased with the truth ; he is 
buried in falsehood. 

Renounce avarice, ye blind ; it bringeth great unhappi- 
ness. 

If the true Lord dwell in the heart, the poison of pride 
shall be removed. 

Forsake the evil way of mammon, my brethren, or ye 
shall be plundered. 

Day and night praise the Name under the protection of 
the true Guru. 

The mind of the perverse is a stone or a rock ; accursed 
and vain is his hfe. 

However much a stone be put into the water, it is dry 
at the core. 

God’s name is wealth, the true Guru hath given it. 

Nanak, he who forgetteth not God’s name drinketh 
distilled nectar. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 319 

The advantage of domestic devotion : — 

Why should I go searching in the wood ? My heart is 
a verdant forest. 

The true Word hath come quickly to my heart and 
abideth there. 

Wherever I look there is God ; no one else is seen. 

Whosoever doeth the Guru’s work shall find God’s court. 

The True One blendeth with Himself him who is pleasing 
to His mind ; 

He blendeth with Himself him who ever walketh accord- 
ing to His will. 

If the true Lord dwell in the heart, it becometh fixed. 

God then granteth greatness in which naught is wanting. 

How shall one reach God’s court by occasional service ? 

He who embarketh in a boat of stone shall be drowned 
with his cargo 

An inculcation of devotion regardless of worldly 
opinion : — 

He whose mind is imbued with God’s name discourseth 
of the True One, 

What care I for men if I please Thee ? 

As long as there are life and soul, meditate on the True 
One. 

The profit of singing God’s praises is that man obtaineth 
happiness. 

True is Thy work ; grant it me. Thou Merciful One. 

I live by praising Thee ; Thou art my prop and my 
support. 

I am the servant and the porter at Thy gate ; Thou 
knowest my pain. 

I am astounded at Thy service which hath removed my 
pain. 

Holy men through Thy name shall reach Thy court and 
Thy presence.* 

^ Also translated — in the ocean. 

* Also translated — They who know the Name under the Guru’s 
instruction shall reach God’s court. 



320 THE SIKH RELIGION 

That time is auspicious when man recognizeth the true 
Word. 

Practise truth, contentment, and love ; and then the 
worship of God’s name shall be thy viaticum. 

Banish sin from thy mind, and the True One will bestow 
truth : 

The True One bestoweth true love on the true. 

What pleaseth Thee, O God, is the real justice. 

True are the gifts which the true and merciful One 
granteth. 

Serve Him day and night whose Name is priceless. 

Thou, O God, art the most high ; I who am Thy servant 
am low. 

Saith Nanak, O True One, look on me with favour that 
I who am separated from Thee may meet Thee. 

Asa Chhant 

It is said that Bhai Budha and Mula, a Sikh, went 
to the Guru and asked him what afforded the 
highest gratification. His reply was the following : — 

O woman in the prime of youth, my Beloved is playful. 

When a wife entertaineth great love for her Spouse, He 
mercifully taketh delight in her and enjoyeth her. 

The wife shall meet her Spouse if the Lord God Himself 
show her favour. 

Her bed is pleasant in the company of her Beloved ; her 
seven tanks ^ are filled with nectar. 

Show me compassion and kindness, O Compassionate One, 
that I may obtain the true Word and sing Thy praises. 

Nanak, the young woman, having seen God her Spouse, 
is delighted and her heart is enraptured. 

0 young woman, beautiful without art, pray only for the 
love of the one God, 

God is pleasing to my soul and body, and I am charmed 
with His companionship. 

She who is dyed with God’s love and prayeth to Him, 
shall abide in happiness through His name. 


* The five organs of perception, withjntellect andMinderstandinK. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 321 

When thou embracest virtue thou shalt know God ; virtue 
shall abide with thee and vice be put to flight. 

Without Thee I cannot abide for a moment ; I derive no 
satisfaction from merely conversing of Thee. 

Nanak, she whose tongue and heart are moistened with 
God’s essence, calleth for her Beloved. 

0 my friends and companions, my beloved is a merchant. 

1 have purchased from him God’s name whose sweetness 
and value are infinite. 

If woman’s house be pleasing to the inestimable, true, 
and beloved God, she shall be happy. 

Other women enjoy dalliance with God ; I cry aloud 
standing at His door. 

Thou, Cause of causes. Omnipotent, Harbinger of pros- 
perity, arrangest man’s affairs. 

Nanak, she on whom God looketh with favour is a happy 
wife ; she treasureth up the Word in her heart. 

In my house is a true song of rejoicing ; God my lover 
hath visited me. 

Imbued' with love He enjoyed me ; I have exchanged 
hearts with Him. 

I gave God my heart and took Him as my Spouse ; He 
enjoyeth me as He pleaseth. 

She who offereth her soul and body to the Beloved is 
supremely happy through the Word, and obtaineth the 
ambrosial fruit in her own home. 

It is not obtained by intellect, or study, or by great 
cleverness ; what the heart desireth is obtained by love. 

Nanak, God is my Beloved ; I belong to none besides.^ 

As the deer is snared, the bumble-bee caught by 
the lotus, and the fish falleth into the net, so man’s 
soul becomes the prey of Death. 

Hear, O black deer,* why art thou enamoured of the 
garden ? * 

The fruit of sin is sweet, but only for four days ; it then 
groweth bitter. 

^ Aim. translated — I conceal not the fact. 

* Man. * The world. 


•IKH. I 


Y 



322 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The fruit for which thou greatly cravest, shall become 
very bitter without the Name. 

That fruit is as a wave of the ocean, or as a flash of 
lightning.^ 

There is no protector but God ; yet He hath been for- 
gotten by thee. 

Verily, saith Nanak, think of it, thou shalt die, O black 
deer. 

0 bumble-bee,® thou wanderest among the flowers, and 
very great shall be thy suffering, when the lotus close(h 
on thee. 

1 have inquired of my Guru regarding the true knowledge 
of God. 

I have inquired of the true Guru regarding the knowledge 
of God ; O bumble-bee, thou art enamoured of the flowers. 

When the sun riseth,® the body falleth, and the soul shall 
be boiled in hot oil. 

O demon, without the Word thou shalt be bound and 
punished on the road of death. 

Verily, saith Nanak, think of it, thou shalt die, O black bee. 

My soul from a strange land,* why fallegt thou into 
entanglements ? 

When the true Lord dwelleth in thee, why shouldst thou 
be entangled in Death’s net } 

When the fisherman casteth his net, the fish leaveth the 
water with tears in its eyes. 

The love of mammon is dear to the world ; all doubts 
on the subject shall at last be set aside.® 

Serve God heartily, and dispel thy mental anxieties. 

Verily, saith Nanak, think of it, 0 my soul from a strange 
land. 

Rivers which separate in their course can only mef^ 
again by chance. 

In every age what is sweet is full of poison ; some rare 
holy man knoweth this. 

^ That is, such fruit is very transitory. 

® The soul in another aspect. ® When death comes. 

* Which has migrated from another body. , 

® Also translated— -But at last it shall be delivered Iffom its error. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 323 

Some rare person who thinketh of the true Guru knoweth 
divine knowledge and recognizeth God. 

Without God’s name the fools and the heedless wander in 
superstition and are ruined. 

They whose hearts contain not God’s true name and 
service, at last groan and weep. 

Verily, saith Nanak, they who have been long separated 
meet by the True Word. 

Rag Gujari 

Guru Nanak orders man to repeat God’s name 
and engage not in idol worship : — 

If the heart be made the scraper,^ the Name the sandal, 

And good acts be mixed with it as kungu, that shall be 
the real worship of God in the heart. 

Worship God by meditating on His name, for without 
the Name there is no worship. 

If any one were to wash his heart as the surface of the 
idol is washed. 

His impurity should be removed, his soul should become 
pure, and he should depart to deliverance. 

Even beasts have their merits ; for the oil-cake they eat 
they give milk, but the Brahmans make no return for the 
offerings made them. 

Without the Name accursed is man’s life and the acts he 
performeth. 

God is near, think Him not distant ; He ever careth for 
and remembereth us. 

Eat what He givetfi, said Nanak verily. 

The Guru’s God is superior to the demigocte of 
the Hindus : — 

Brahma sprang from the lotus of Vishnu’s navel, and 
having attuned his throat began to recite the Veds ; 

Yet he could not see God’s limits, and remained in the 
darkness of transmigration. 

. Why should I forget the Beloved who is the support of 
my soul, 

^ Ursa. *A stone on which sandal for worship is scraped. 

Y 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


324 

Whom the perfect worehip, whom munis serve, on whom 
gurus meditate, 

Whose lamps are the sun and moon, and whose one light 
pervadeth the three worlds ? 

The pious have Ught day and night, but for the perverse 
there is only sable darkness. 

The Sidh sitteth in meditative posture and ever argueth, 
but can he see God even with both his eyes ? 

They in whose hearts there is light are awakened by the 
sound of the Word ; the true Guru decideth their arguments. 

0 Lord of demigods and men, infinite, unborn. Thy true 
palace is unrivalled. 

Saith Nanak, 0 Life of the world, grant me peace and save 
me by Thy favouring glance. 

Gujari Ashtapadi 

The Guru’s heart is ever filled with devotion : — 

1 ask Thee, O God, for nothing at any time ^ but the love 
of Thy pure name ; grant it to me, 0 Bright One. 

The chatrik Nanak prayeth for the nectareous water of 
Thy name ; mercifully grant him to sing Thy praises. 

There is no happiness without true devotion : — 

O Sire, how many people wear religious garbs to beg and 
fill their bellies ! 

O mortal, there is no happiness without God’s service ; 
without the Guru pride depart eth not. 

O Sire, what shall I ask ? Nothing appeareth per- 
manent ; in this world are the ebb and flow of life. 

Saith Nanak, grant me the Name as my wealth, that I 
may wear it as a necklace on my heart. 

The Guru only claims to be a religious instructor 
from the ranks of the people : — 

O Sire, I am not high, or low, or middling ; I am of God’s 
people, and I seek His protection. 

^ Ab tab. Also translated — I only look for Thy Pure name, not the 
worthless things of this world. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 325 

It is only they who are dyed with the Name who are 
free from worldly love and forget mourning, separation, 
and disease. 

My brethren, by the favour of the Guru God’s service is 
obtained. 

He in whose heart is the Word of the true Guru, ob- 
taineth the Pure God, heedeth not Death and oweth him 
nothing. 

The following instruction was addressed to Pandit 
Ram Chand at Banaras : — 

The saints worship God with love ; they thirst for the 
truth, and hear it with excessive love. 

They who cry aloud in trouble obtain rest by prayer and 
heartily loving God. 

O man, repeat God’s name and seek His protection. 

Repeat God’s name ^ind do good works ; thus shalt thou 
cross over the ocean of the world. 

O mortal man, to repeat God’s name under the Guru’s 
instruction is a happy thought. 

By mentally repeating God’s name one’s mind obtaineth 
a treasure of real divine knowledge and peace. 

In this world man’s fickle mind pursueth wealth and 
becometh intoxicated with worldly love ; 

But, on being imbued with the Guru’s word and teach- 
ing, God’s name and service become firmly implanted in 
the heart. 

Doubts which ruin the world by the disease of trans- 
migration, cease not by wandering to places of pilgrimage. 

The place of God is the abode of unmixed happiness ; he 
who is truly wise repeateth God’s name as his penance. 

Every one is saturated with worldly love, and therefore 
endureth the great pain of birth and death. 

Man shall be saved by hastening to the asylum of the 
true Guru and repeating God’s name in his heart. 

Man’s mind becometh stable, and he practiseth divine 
meditation under the Guru’s instruction. 

Pure is the heart which containeth truth and the excellent 
jewel of divine knowledge. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


326 

O man, by fear, love, and service, and by fixing thine 
attention on God’s feet shalt thou cross the terrible ocean. 

O God, put into my heart Thy name which is the purest 
of the pure ; my body is in Thy sanctuary. 

Extricate me, 0 God, from the waves of avarice and 
covetousness, and pilt Thy name as capital into my heart .0 

Chasten my mind, Thou spotless One, saith Nanak, I seek 
Thy protection. 

Bihagre ki War 

Reflections on the Hindu idol-worshippers : — 

The Hindus have forgotten God, and are going the wrong 
way. 

They worship according to the instruction of Narad.^ 

They are blind and dumb, the blindest of the blind. 

The ignorant fools take stones and worship them. 

0 Hindus, how shall the stone wljich itself sinketh carry 
you across ? 

Rag Wadhans 

The Guru enjoyed a vision of God in his dreams, 
and on awaking felt the pain of separation from 
Him : — 

The peacocks are crying with joy ; 0 sisters, the rainy 
season hath come. 

The, fervent woman, O God, is enamoured of Thy glances 
which bind her like a rope. 

1 am a sacrifice to a sight of Thee, O God ; to Thy name 
I am a sacrifice. 

Since Thou art my Master I am proud ; without Thee 
what pride should I have ? 

O woman, break thy couch with its frame and thine arm 
with their bracelets,® 

Since, notwithstanding thy decorations, the Lord is 
enamoured of others. 

Thou needest not a bracelet-dealer, or silver, or glass 
bracelets : 

^ Narad’s Panchar Hr d inculcates idolatry. 

* Literally — break thy bracelets on thy couch and along with them 
its frame and thine arms. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 327 

Bum the arm which embraceth not the Bridegroom. 

All my companions went to enjoy the Bridegroom ; whose 
door shall I, wretched that I am, approach ? 

0 Lord, I think myself well behaved and very clever, yet 
I have no charm to please Thee. 

, I plaited my tresses with cosmetic and filled the parting 
of my hair with vermilion ; 

Yet when I went before Thee I was not accepted ; I shall 
die of excessive grief. 

1 am weeping ; the whole world weepeth ; yea, even the 
birds of the forests weep for me. 

One thing weepeth not for me, the separation which parted 
me from my Beloved. 

He came to me in my dreams and again vanished, upon 
which I wept my fill. 

I cannot go to Thee, 0 Beloved, or send any one to Thee. 

Return, O happy sl^p, perhaps I may again behold my 
Lord. 

What shall I give him, saith Nanak, who telleth me 
of Thee, O God ? 

I will cut off my head and give it to him to sit on ; without 
my head I will perform his service. 

Why do I not die and give up my life since my Lord hath 
chosen another ? 

Wadhans Chhant 

The following was addressed to the Hindus, who 
set the highest religious value on ablutions : — 

Why wash the body defiled by falsehood ? 

The practice of truth is the acceptable ablution. 

When there is truth in the heart, then man becometh true 
and obtaineth the True One. 

Understanding is not obtained without favourable destiny; 
man ruineth himself by vain babbling. 

Wherever thou sittest speak civilly, and fix thine 
attention on God’s word. 

Why wash the body defiled by falsehood ? 

When Thou, 0 Lord, didst cause me to speak, I spoke. 

Thine ambrosial name is pleasing to my soul. 



328 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thy name is sweet to my soul ; a load of sorrow hath 
fallen from off me. 

When Thou gavest the order, happiness came and took 
its seat in my heart. 

I pray to Thee, who didst create the world, for Thy favour. 

When Thou didst cause me to speak, I spoke. 

The Master granteth man his term of human life according 
to his past acts. 

Fall not into a quarrel by calling any one evil. 

Enter not into a quarrel with the Lord ,* thou shalt only 
ruin thyself. 

Why be jealous and vex him with whom thou associatest ? 

Bear what God giveth thee ; it is forbidden to remon- 
strate ; speak not nonsense regarding it. 

The Master granteth man his term of life according to 
past acts. 

God created all things and looketii on them with favour. 

Nobody desireth what is bitter ; every one desireth what 
is sweet. 

Everybody may ask for what is sweet, but God will do 
as He pleaseth. 

Alms-offerings and various good works are not equal to 
the Name. 

Nanak, they who are the objects of God’s favour from the 
beginning, have obtained His name. 

God created all things and looketh on them with favour. 

Wadhans Alahanian 

Some one inquired why God, who is ever present, 
is never visible. The Guru replied : — 

The Lord who created the world and again drew it within 
Himself, is known by His omnipotence. 

Search not for the True One afar off ; He is in every 
heart, and is known by the Guru’s instruction. 

By the Guru’s instruction know the True One who made 
creation ; think Him not distant. 

Meditate on the Name and thou shalt obtain happiness ; 
without the Name man is not victorious in the arena of 
the world. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 329 

He who established the world knoweth its ways ; what 
shall any one say ? 

He who established the world spread the net of mammon ; 
accept that Lord with thy heart. 

Wadhans ki War 

Guru Nanak as usual pays no attention to cere- 
monial : — 

Perish the ritual by which I forgot my Beloved ! 

Nanak, that is the true love which preserveth me in 
honour with the Lord. 

Rag Sorath 

The Guru’s reflections on death and future 
punishment : — 

Death must come to all and all must part company ; 

Go and ask the wise i^men shall meet hereafter or not. 

They who have forgotten my God shall suffer great pain. 

Certainly praise that true Being, 

From whose glance of favour happiness ever resulteth. 

Praise Him, for He is Great. He is, was, and ever shall be. 

Thou alone, O God, art the Benefactor of all ; no gifts are 
obtained from man. 

What pleaseth Thee taketh place ; what avail womanly 
tears ? 

How many kings have departed having exercised sove- 
reignty over millions of fortresses on earth ? 

They whom the world could not contain have had rings 
put on their noses 

If man thought of future torments why should he devote 
himself to enjoyment ? ® 

Nanak, man shall have to wear on his neck as many 
chains as he hath sins. 

If he possess virtues, which are as brothers and friends/ 
his chains shall be cut off. 

They who have no Guru shall not be accepted hereafter ; 
they shall be beaten and expelled. 

^ Have been made slaves. 

* Literally — Why should he eat sweet things? 



330 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The following is in opposition to all except deistic 
forms of religion : — 

There appeareth no partner of Thine ; then whom shall 
I praise hut Thee ? 

Nanak, the slave of slaves representeth, God is known by 
the Guru’s teaching. 

The Guru’s conception of God : — 

The Unseen, Infinite, Inaccessible, Inapprehensible God 
is not subject to death or destiny 

He is of no caste, unborn, self-existent, without fear or 
doubt. 

I am a sacrifice to the Truest of the true. 

He hath no form, or colour, or outline ; He becometh. 
manifest by the true Word. 

He hath no mother, father, son, or kinsman ; He feeleth 
not lust, and hath no wife 

Or family ; He is pure, endless, and infinite ; all light 
is Thine, O Lord. 

God is concealed in every heart ; His light is in every 
heart. 

He whose understanding’s adamantine doors are opened by 
the Guru’s instruction, fixeth his gaze on the Fearless One. 

God having created animals made them subject to death, 
and retained all contrivances in his own power. 

He who serveth the True Guru obtaineth the real boon, 
and is delivered by repeating the Word. 

Truth is contained in pure vessels ; few there are whose 
acts are pure. 

By seeking Thy protection, saith Nanak, the soul blendeth 
with the Supreme Soul. 

The condition of a man who has no Guru to com- 
municate God’s name : — 

As a fish without water, so is the infidel — dying of thirst. 

If thy breath be drawn in vain, O man, thou shalt die 
without God. 

. A ’ 

^ Also translated— God is not bound by the influence of His acts. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


331 


O man, repeat God’s name and praises ; 

But how shalt thou obtain this pleasure without the 
Guru ? It is the Guru who uniteth man with God. 

Meeting the society of holy men is as a pilgrimage for 
the holy. 

* The advantages of bathing at the sixty-eight places 
of pilgrimage are obtained by beholding the Guru: — 

As a Jogi without continence, devotion, truth, or content- 
ment, 

So is the body without the Name ; Death will punish 
it since it containeth sin in its heart. 

God is not found by loving the infidel ; He is found by 
loving the true Guru. 

Saith Nanak, he who is absorbed in God’s praises obtaineth 
the Guru who is the dispenser of weal and woe. 

Man should cultivate true piety in his own home : — 

The nectareous water of life,^ for which thou earnest into 
the world, is with the Guru. 

Abandon garbs, disguises, and cleverness; this water® 
is not obtained by devotion to mammon. 

O man, remain at home ; go nowhere, my friend. 

By searching abroad thou shalt suffer much affliction ; 
the water of life is in thy heart at home. 

Forsake vice and pursue virtue ; thy vice thou shalt 
regret. 

Thou knowest not good from evil ; thou shalt again and 
again wallow in the mire. 

Inside thee is the great filth of covetousness and false- 
hood ; why washest thou thine outside ? 

Ever repeat the Pure Name under the Guru’s instruction, 
then shall thy heart be pure. 

Abandon covetousness and slander, forswear falsehood 
and thou shalt obtain the true fruit through the Guru’s 
instruction. 

O God, preserve me as Thoii pleasest ; Nanak praiseth 
Thy Word. 

1 That is, God’s name. 


® Literally — this fruit. 



332 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


God is the invisible Benefactor and is pleased 
when men obey His behests : — 

All creatures are subject to destiny from the beginning ; 
there is none not subject to it. 

God alone is not subject to destiny ; He beholdeth the 
work of His own omnipotence ; He causeth His order 'to 
be executed. 

O man, repeat God’s name and thou shalt be happy ; 

Day and night worship the feet of the Guru the Giver and 
the Enjoyer. 

Behold Him without thee as He is within thee ; there is 
none other. 

Under the Guru’s instruction regard all men as equal, 
since God’s light is contained in the heart of each. 

Restrain in its place thy wandering mind ; thou shalt 
know ‘how to do this on meeting the Guru. 

On beholding the Invisible thou Shalt be astounded ; thou 
shalt forget thy misery and obtain happiness. 

Quaff nectar and thou shalt obtain supreme happiness 
and abide in thine own home. 

Sing His praises who destroyeth the fear of birth and 
death, and thou shalt not be born again. 

God ^ the First Principle, the Pure One, is in all things ; 
of this there is no doubt. 

Nanak hath obtained God the Infinite Supreme Being 
as his Guru. 

SORATH ASHTAPADI 

The Guru deprecates idolatry and then gives his 
notion of an ideal Bairagi, or renouncer of the world: — 

May I not fall under the power of mammon, worship 
any but God, or visit tombs and places of cremation ! 

May I not enter the strange house impelled by greed ! ^ 
may the Name extinguish my greed ! 

The Guru showed me God in my own home ; my heart 
became easily enamoured of Him, my brethren. 

^ Soham, I am He. Compare ‘ I am that I am '. ^ ^ 

* May I not go to worship in a heathen templ^J^. the sake of 
mammon. wl-’- ' 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 333 

Thou art wise, Thou art far-seeing ; it is only Thou, O 
Lord, who givest wisdom. 

My heart hath no love for the world ; it is tinctured with 
its hate ; the Word hath penetrated my heart, O my 
mother. [ 

Jle who loveth the true Lord and continually repeateth 
His hymns, beholdeth His light in his own heart. 

Countless persons call themselves Bairagis, but only he 
who is pleasing to God is a Bairagi. 

Such a Bairagi treasureth the Word in his heart ; he is 
ever absorbed in the fear of God and serveth the Guru. 

He thinketh on the one God, his mind wavereth not, and 
he restraineth its wanderings. 

He is intoxicated with God’s love, ever absorbed in 
divine pleasure, and he singeth the praises of the True One. 

If the mind, which is like the wind, dwell even for a little 
on the name of Him who liveth at ease, happiness shall 
result, my brethren. 

My tongue, eyes, and ears are tinctured by the True One ; 
Thou, O Lord, hast extinguished the fire that con- 
sumed me. 

He is a Bairagi who abandoneth desires and assumeth an 
attitude of contemplation in his own home. 

He who is filled with the alms of the Name is contented 
and quaffeth nectar at his ease. 

As long as there is a particle of worldly love, there is no 
contempt of the world. 

All the world is Thine, 0 Lord ; Thou alone art the Giver ; 
there is none other, my brethren. 

Perverse creatures ever abide in misery ; God conferreth 
greatness on the holy. 

Infinite, endless, inaccessible, inapprehensible. Thy worth 
cannot be obtained by speaking. 

Sun Samadh,^ Mahaparamarath,® and Lord of the three 
worlds are names of Thine. 

All animals born in the world have their destinies recorded 
on their foreheads, and must bear what is destined for them. 

^ He who is in deep and silent meditation. 

^ The great supreme Being. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


334 

It is God who causeth man to perform good acts and 
maketh them steadfast in His service. 

When man feareth God, the filth of his soul and body 
departeth, and God Himself giveth him divine knowledge: 

Only he who hath tasted it, knoweth its flavour, as a 
dumb man enjoy eth sweets.^ 

How describe the Indescribable, my brethren ? Ever 
walk according to His will. 

If God cause man to meet the generous Guru, understand- 
ing is produced; he who hath no Guru hath no under- 
standing. 

Walk as God causeth you to walk, my brethren ; what 
other device can man adopt ? 

Some are led astray in error, others love God’s service ; 
Thy play, 0 Lord, is incomprehensible. 

Men obtain the result of what Thou hast applied them to ; 
Thou leadest them by Thine order^ 

We can serve Thee if we have anything of our own ; our 
souls and bodies are Thine. 

God is merciful to him who hath met the true Guru ; the 
ambrosial Name is his support. 

He to whom the attributes of God, who dwelleth in heaven, 
become manifest, shall obtain divine knowledge and medita- 
tion from them. 

God’s name is pleasing to him ; he uttereth it himself 
and causeth others to utter it ; and he only speaketh of the 
Real Thing. 

The Deep and Profound is obtained by the instruction 
of the Guru and priest ; without such instruction the 
world would go mad. 

Nanak, he whose heart is pleased with the True One is 
a perfect Bairagi, and naturally fortunate. ^ 

The following was the Guru’s instruction to a 
Brahman : — 

Hopes and desires are entanglements, my brother ; thy 
religious ceremonies are, also entanglements. 

^ The dumb man eating sweets enjoys a pleasure .whith is incom- 
municable. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 335 

Man, my brother, is bom in the world as the result of 
bad and good acts ; ^ he perisheth when he forgetteth the 
Name. 

Maya bewitcheth the world, my brother ; all thy religious 
ceremonies are worthless. 

•Hear me, thou Pandit with the religious ceremonies — 

Meditation on the Supreme Being is the only religious 
ceremony, my brother, from which happiness is derived. 

Thou standest chattering of the Shastars and Veds, my 
brother, and makest it a worldly affair. 

The filth of sin which is within thee shall not be washed 
away by hypocrisy. 

Like the hypocrite, the spider is ruined when her web is 
blown by the wind and she falleth headlong. 

By evil inclinations many are ruined ; by love of mammon 
they are lost. 

Without the true Gufli the Name is not obtained, and 
without the Name doubt departeth not. 

My brother, serve the true Guru and thou shalt be happy, 
and released from transmigration. 

True peace is obtained from the Guru. When the mind 
is pure, man shall be absorbed in the True One. 

He who serveth the Guru knoweth the way ; without the 
Gum it cannot be found. 

What religious acts can he perform who hath greed in 
his heart ? He uttereth falsehood and eateth poison. 

O Pandit, if thou chum coagulated milk, butter shall be 
produced ; 

If thou chum water, thou shalt obtain but water ; this is 
the way of the world. 

The unseen God dwelleth in every heart, yet without the 
Gum man is mined by wandering. 

Maya hath bound this world on all sides with her 
cable : 

Without a gum its knot cannot be untied ; man groweth 
weary in striving. 

^ If a man’s acts were totally bad, he could not obtain human 
birth. Human birth is only obtained when good and bad acts are in 
equipoise. 



336 THE SIKH RELIGION 

This world is led astray by supersti,tion ; words are of no 
avail. 

By meeting the Guru, my brother, the fear of God entereth 
the heart. To die in the fear of God is man’s true destiny. 

In God’s court the Name is superior to ablutions, alms, 
and similar religious acts. 

- He who, by the Guru’s goad, hath driven the Name into 
his heart to abide there, shall become free from hypocrisy, 

Man is a banker’s shop, the unrivalled Name is his capital. 

The merchant who meditateth on the Guru’s instruction 
secureth the capital. 

Nanak, blest are the merchants who on meeting the Guru 
engage in such traffic. 

Deprecation of idolatry : — 

My brethren, you worship goddesses and gods ; what can 
you ask them ? and what can they* give you ? 

Even if a stone be washed with water, it will again sink 
in it. 

Rag Dhanasari 

The Guru reposes his hopes in God and confirms 
his devotion to Him : — 

My soul is in fear ; to whom shall I complain ? 

I have served Him who causeth us to forget our sorrows 
He is ever and ever the Giver. 

My Lord is ever young ; He is ever and ever the Giver. 

Night and day serve the Lord, and in the end He will 
deliver thee. 

Hark, hark, my friend,^ thus shalt thou cross over. 

0 Merciful One, by Thy name shall I cross over ; I am 
ever a sacrifice unto Thee. 

In the whole world there is only one True Being ; there is 
no second. 

He on whom God looketh with favour will serve Him. 

How shall I, O Beloveji, abide without Thee ? 

Grant me the favour to remain attached to Thy name. 


^ Literallj- — woman. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 337 

There is none other, 0 my Beloved, to whom I may go 
to address myself. 

I serve niy Lord, I beg from no other : 

Nanak is His slave and ever a sacrifice unto Him. 

0 Lord, I am ever a sacrifice to Thy name, for which I 
could bear to be cut to pieces. 

Life is but brief, and man ought to make the best 
use of it : — 

We men live but for a moment ; we know not if we shall 
live the space of two gharis. 

Nanak representeth, serve Him to whom belong our souls 
and lives. 

O fool, consider how many days thy life shall last. 

0 Lord, my breath, body, and soul are all Thine ; Thou 
art very dear to me. 

The poet Nanak thus speaketh ; O True Cherisher, 

If Thou give nothing to any one, what pledge can he 
give Thee ? ^ 

Nanak representeth, he who is destined from the beginning 
to obtain something shall obtain it. 

The deceitful person who, instead of thinking of God’s 
name, practiseth deceit. 

Shall be led captive to the gate of Death, and shall then 
as he is led along regret lost opportunities. 

As long as we are in this world, Nanak, hear somewhat 
and speak somewhat of God. 

1 have searched and found no resting-place ; wherefore 
in the midst of life be in death. 

The Guru moralized as follows on seeing a thief 
arrested : — 

If a thief praise the magistrate, the mind of the latter is 
not pleased thereby ; 

If he revile the magistrate, it cannot displease him in the 
least. 

Nobody will be surety for a thief. 

^ Man can obtain nothing from God except as the result of His 
favour. If man receive noming from God, no surety is needed, 

Z, 


MKN. I 



338 THE SIKH RELIGION 

How can what a thief doeth be good ? 

Hear, O fool, dog, and liar. 

The True One knoweth thee, O thief, without thy speaking. 
A thief may be well dressed, a thief may be ingenious. 
Yet he is only worth a double paisa, the price of a bad 
rupee. 

If thou put a bad coin with others, 

It will be found counterfeit on being assayed. 

As man acteth, so shall be his reward ; 

He himself soweth and he himself eateth the fruit. 

Even though man praise himself. 

Yet will he act according to his understanding. 

If he tell hundreds of lies to conceal the truth, 

He shall still be false even though the whole world call him 
good. 

If it please Thee, even a fool is acceptable, 

Nanak, God is clever to know mun’s secret. 

A Brahman, a Qazi, and a Jogi entered into dis- 
cussion with the Guru, and he gave them the 
following instruction : — 

The body is the paper, the mind the order written thereon. 
Silly man readeth not the lines of destiny on his forehead. 
In God’s court three destinies ^ are engraved. 

Lo ! what is counterfeit is there of no avail. 

Nanak, if there be sterling silver within us. 

Everybody will say that it is real. 

The Qazi telleth lies and eateth filth. 

The Brahman taketh life and then batheth. 

The ignorant J ogi knoweth not the way of union with God — 
The whole three ruin the world.* 

He is a Jogi who knoweth the way to God, 

And who by the Guru’s favour only recognizeth the 
One. 

He is a Qazi who turneth away men from the world, 

And who by the Guru’s favour while alive is dead. 

^ Superior, medium, and inferior destinies. 

* Literally — ^the three form the boundary of the wilderness, that is, 
preach the whole of what ruins mortals. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


339 


He is a Brahman who reflecteth upon God ; 

He shall be saved himself, and shall save all his relations. 

Wise is lie who cleanseth his heart : 

A Musalman is he who cleanseth his impurity. 

He who readeth and acteth on what he readeth, is accept- 
able. 

He shall bear on his forehead the stamp of God’s court. 

Dhanasari Ashtapadi 

God is pleased with love and service, not with 
idolatry or pilgrimages : — 

God maketh Himself manifest and beholdeth men. 

He is not pleased by obstinate penance nor by many 
religious garbs. 

He who fashioned the vessel of the body and poured into it 
His ambrosial gifts, 

Will only be satisfied with man’s love and service. 

They who, though ever reading, forget God’s name shall 
suffer punishment, 

And notwithstanding their great cleverness undergo trans- 
migration. 

He who repeateth the Name and thus eateth the food of 
fear, • 

Shall become a pious worshipper and be absorbed in God. 

He who worshippeth stones, visiteth places of pilgrimage, 
dwelleth in forests, 

And renounceth the world, wandereth and wavereth. 

How can his filthy mind become pure ? 

He who meeteth the True One shall obtain honour. 

Dhanasari Chhant 

They who utter falsehood are unhappy : — 

If a woman please her Spouse, she shall be honoured in 
His house : 

If she utter falsehood it is of no avail ; 

If she utter falsehood it is of no avail ; her Spouse will not 
look at her. 

Without merits, forgotten by her Spouse, and false, painful 
are her nights. 

z a 



340 


THE SIKH RELIGION 

Rag Suhi 

Man ought to practise devotion at home : — 

Man dwelleth not at home, but wandereth abroad. 

Why doth he forsake ambrosia and eat poison ? 

Embrace such knowledge, O my soul. 

As may make thee a servant of the True One. 

Although every one speaketh of divine knowledge and 
meditation, 

Yet the whole world wandereth bound by its own entangle- 
ments. 

He who performeth service is a servant of Him 
Who pervadeth the water, the dry land, the nether regions, 
and the firmament. 

I am not good ; there is nobody bad. 

The representation of Nanak is — he who thinketh so is saved. 

Suhi AshtapXdi 

The Guru depreciates himself, and utters a prayer 
to the Almighty : — 

In me are all demerits ; I have not one merit : 

How shall I meet my Spouse ? 

No beauty or lustrous eyes are mine, 

No family, no manners, or sweet speech. 

The woman who cometh adorned with divine knowledge. 
Shall be a happy wife if she please her Spouse. 

0 God, mercifully attach her to Thy feet 
Who hath neither beauty nor good features, 

Who remembereth not God at the last moment. 

Who hath no wisdom, understanding, or cleverness. 

The woman, who though very wise pleaseth not her Spouse, 
Who attached to mammon is lost in superstition. 

Shall, if she dismiss her pride, be absorbed in her Beloved, 
And obtain Him who is her nine treasures. 

1 suffered through being separated from God in many 
births. 

O Beloved Sovereign, take my hand. 

Saith Nanak, the Lord is, was, and shall be. 

The Beloved will enjoy her who is pleasing to Him. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 341 

Miscellaneous instruction of the Guru : — 

False and fleeting is the dye of the safflower, lasting for 
only four days. 

Without the Name man wandereth in error ; the evil 
passions ^ rob him, false that he is. 

* He who is tinctured with the True One shall not be born 
again. 

How canst thou who art dyed with the love of God, be 
otherwise dyed ? 

Serve the Guru who giveth God’s dye, and apply thy heart 
to the True One. 

Even though man wander in every direction, he shall not 
obtain spiritual wealth without good fortune. 

If robbed by vice thou wander in the forest like a huntsman, 
thou shalt not find shelter. 

They whom the Guru protecteth are saved ; their hearts 
are dyed with his instruction. 

They who wear white clothes, but whose hearts are filthy 
and hard. 

Never utter the Name, but like thieves become absorbed 
in mammon. 

They who know not their own humble origin are beasts and 
cattle. 

Man though ever and ever engaged in pleasures, ever and 
ever desireth more enjoyment. 

He thinketh not of the Creator, so misery attacheth to him 
again and again. 

How shall he in whose heart the Dispenser oi weal and woe 
dwelleth, want for anj^hing ? 

They whose accounts are not adjusted shall be summoned ; 
the executioner shall smite them on their heads. 

When the account is called for it must be given ; it will be 
examined and considered. 

Man shall be saved by his love for the True One ; the 
Pardoner will pardon him. 

If he make any one else than God his friend, he shall die 
and be blended with the dust. 


^ Literally — thags. 



342 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Man beholding various phases of life is led astray, and 
going astray suffereth transmigration ; 

But he shall be emancipated by a favouring ^ance from 
God, and God will blend him with Himself. 

0 listless man who possessest not divine knowledge, search 
not for it without the Guru. 

Man is ruined by allowing himself to be drawn in different 
directions ; the effects of both evil and good acts remain with 
him. 

The god of death spieth every one who is without the 
Word, and who feeleth not the fear of God. 

He who made and sustained the world giveth support to all. 

Why forget Him who is ever and ever the Benefactor ? 

May Nanak not forget the Name which is the support of 
the supportless ! 

SuHi Chhant 

The following is now sung by Sikhs at marriages 
and other festivities : — 

Friends ^ have come to my house : 

The True One hath caused me to meet them. 

When it pleased God He caused me to meet them without 
mine own effort ; by meeting the elect happiness is found. 

1 have obtained what I set my heart on. 

When I meet the saints my soul is happy ; night and day 
my hearth and home look bright. 

The unbeaten sound of the five musical instruments 
playeth since saints have come to my house. 

Come, beloved friends, 

Sing a song of rejoicing, O women. 

Sing a true song of rejoicing ; then shall you be pleasing 
to God and rejoice through the four ages.® 

The Spouse hath come to my house, the place is adorned 
by Him. His instruction hath adjusted mine affairs. 

I applied the great salve of divine knowledge to mine eyes, 
and saw God’s form which filleth the three worlds. 

^ Saints are meant. 

® Also translated — Then shall you be pleasing to God to whom 
songs of rejoicing are sung through the four ages. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 343 

Meet me, O companions, sing with zest a song of rejoicing, 
since my Spouse hath come home to me. 

My soul ^ind body are bedewed with nectar, 

And in my heart is the jewel of love : 

In my heart is the precious jewel, and I ponder on the 
Primal Essence. 

To animals Thou art the opulent Giver ^ ; Thou givest to 
every individual. 

Thou art wise ; Thou possessest divine knowledge ; Thou 
art the searcher of hearts ; Thou Thyself didst create the 
world. 

Listen, my friends, the charming Bridegroom hath fasci- 
nated me, and my soul and body are bedewed with nectar. 

0 Supreme Spirit of the world. 

True is Thy play : 

True is Thy play, O Incomprehensible and Infinite One ; 
who can cause us to un(J^erstand but Thee ? 

Without Thee how many can call themselves Sidhs, 
Strivers, or wise ? 

The Guru hath stayed the soul which was maddened with 
the misery of death. 

Nanak, he who removeth his demerits by the Word, 
obtaineth God through his aggregate of merits. 

The Guru is waiting for God as a fond wife for 
her husband : — 

Come, my Friend, that I may behold Thee. 

Standing at my door I am watching for Thee ; in my 
heart is excessive longing ; 

In my heart is excessive longing ; hear me, my Lord, I 
have reliance on Thee. 

On beholding Thee I have become free from desire ; the 
pain of birth and death is at an end. 

In all things is Thy light ; from it art Thou known, but 
Thou art found by love. 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Friend ; the True One is 
found when my mind cometh home. 

^ Also translated — animals beg of Thee. 



344 


THE SIKH RELIGION 

SuHi Ki War 

God will assay man’s qualities : — 

Nanak when a man bringeth and putteth money in his 
house he examineth it ; 

So in the Lord’s court the counterfeit and the genuine shall 
be tested. 

Bathing at places of pilgrimage only renders men 
more impure : — 

Men of evil minds and thievish bodies go to bathe at 
places of pilgrimage. 

One part of their filth departeth by bathing, but they con- 
tract double more.^ 

A gourd may be externally washed, but it containeth 
undiluted poison within. 

Holy men are good without bathing ; a thief is always 
a thief whether he bathe or not. 

Men should traffic in God’s name from their 
earliest years : — 

There are two lamps for fourteen shops,* 

And as many shopkeepers as souls : 

When the shops are opened, the traffic beginneth. 

Every one who cometh into the world is transient. 

Religion is the broker who putteth a mark on the goods. 

Nanak, they who profit by the Name are acceptable. 

For those who obtain the greatness of the true Name 

Gratulations resound on their arrival at their own homes. 

In evil association there is no hope of amendment: — 

It is the habit of thieves, adulterers, prostitutes, and 
pimps 

To contract friendship with the, irreligious and dine with 
them. 

They take no thought for God’s praises ; the devil ever 
dwelleth in their hearts. 

^ Their bodily filth departs, but their mental filth and hypocrisy 
increase. 

* There are the sun and the moon for the fourteen worlds. 



HYMNS OF GtiRU NANAK 345 

If sandal be rubbed on a donkey, he will still roll in the 
dust. 

Nanak, *by spinning falsehood the web of falsehood is 
woven. 

False is the cloth therefrom and its measurement ; false 
^he raiment and the pride thereof. 

The repetition of God’s name is superior to the call of the 
Muazzin ^ or the horn of the Jogi, 

Whether the Muazzin repeateth the call to prayer or the 
Jogi bloweth horns, and the bards join the chorus, 

Some are givers, others are beggars ; to me Thy name 
alone is acceptable. 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who have heard and 
accepted it. 

The following sloks in the Suhi ki War contain 
miscellanec^ instnjction and reflections of the 
Guru : — 

I am a sacrifice to those whose words consist of God’s 
praises. 

Every night is for the married woman ; let me who am 
separated from Thee, O God, obtain even one night. 

They who have not obtained the sweets of love or the 
delights of the Bridegroom, 

Are like the guest of an empty house who goeth as he 
cometh. 

A curse on the lives of those who eat to distend their bellies 

Nanak, without the true Name all love is turned into hate. 

Yow say, 0 Pandits — * As darkness is dispelled when a 
lamp is lighted, 

‘ So by reading the Veds sinful inclinations are destroyed.’ 

I say, ‘ When the sun riseth, the moon is not seen. 

‘ Where divine knowledge appeareth mental ignorance is 
dispelled. 

‘ You, O Pandits, read the Veds and study them, 

* But the reading of the Veds is a secular occupation. 

< Without imderstanding this every one shall be disgraced, 

^ Who calls to prayer from the top of a mosque. 



346 THE SIKH RELIGION 

‘ Nanak, the man who listeneth to the Guru’s instruction 
shall be saved. 

‘ They who delight not in the Word and wh6 love not 
God’s name, 

‘ Speak offensively with their tongues, and sheill ever be 
disgraced. 

‘ Nanak, they act according to their destiny which none 
can erase.’ 


Rag Bilawal 

It would not redound to God’s glory to call Him 
by the names of the Hindu incarnations. 

Thou art an emperor ; if I call Thee lord, how will that 
be to Thy greatness ? 

If Thou inspire me, I will praise Thee, t) Lord ; I am 
foolish myself and can say nothing. ^ 

Give me understanding to sing Thy praises. 

That I may abide in truth according to Thy will. 

All that there is cometh from Thee ; Thou lovest all, 

I know not Thy limit, O my Lord; what skill have I, a 
blind man ? 

What shall I say ? while talking I see that I cannot describe 
the Indescribable. 

I speak as it pleaseth Thee; and this is only in the smallest 
degree for Thy greatness. 

Among so many dogs I, a strange dog, bark for my belly’s 
sake. 

Even though Nanak perform no service, he will still bear 
his Master’s name 

The Guru’s faith in God. 

My body I have clothed with a Qalandar’s dress, I have 
turned my heart into a temple, and I bathe in that place of 
pilgrimage. 

The one Word dwelleth in my heart, and I shall not be born 
again. 

My soul is pierced by the Compassionate One ; O my 
mother, 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


347 


Who knoweth another’s pain ? 

I think of no one but God. 

0 inaccessible, imperceptible, unseen, and boundless God, 
take thought for me. 

Thou fUlest sea and land, the upper and lower regions ; 
Jhy light is in every heart. 

My faculty of learning and my understanding are all 
Thine ; I have built my heart as a temple to Thee. 

1 know none but Thee, O my Lord ; I ever sing Thy 
praises. 

Men and lower animals all seek Thy protection ; all 
anxiety for them resteth with Thee. 

What pleaseth Thee is good ; this is Nanak’s sole repre- 
sentation. 


Lunar Days 

The Guru counsels disregard of mammon ; — 

What name shall I repeat except that of the Lord of the 
world ? 

Under the Guru’s instruction God’s court is seen in one’s 
own home. 

They who are attached to mammon shall regret it ; 

They shall go in fetters to Death’s gate and suffer trans 
migration. 

What have they brought, and what shall they take 
away ? 

They shall receive blows from the god of death on the 
head. 

No one can be emancipated without the Guru’s instruction. 

No one can be saved by the practice of hypocrisy. 

Heartfelt devotion is superior to all offerings and 
ablutions : — 

On the tenth day of the lunar month repeat the Name 
as your offerings and ablutions. 

Night and day lave yourselves in the attributes and 
knowledge of the True One. 



348 THE SIKH RELIGION 

When doubts and fears have fled, impurity shall not cling 
to the true heart. 

A frail cord will soon snap : 

Know that the world is as the cord. 

Fix thy mind firmly on the True One and thou shalt be 
happy. 

Ramkali 

In his devotional enthusiasm the Guru indulges 
in self-depreciation : — 

Some read the Veds,^ some the Purans : 

Some repeat names ^ on their rosaries and meditate on 
them. 

I know not and never knew an 3 rthing ; I recognize only 
Thy name. 

I know not, 0 God, what my lot shall be. 

I am ignorant and devoid of divine knowledge ; O Lord, 
I seek Thy protection, mercifully preserve my self-respect 
and honour. 

The mind sometimes riseth and sometimes falleth to the 
nether regions.* 

The greedy mind remaineth not still ; it searcheth for 
mammon in all directions. 

Man entered the world doomed to die ; yet he amasseth 
wealth for long life. 

While others depart, O Lord, we see the burning fire 
approaching us also. 

No one hath a friend, no one hath a brother, no one 
hath a father or mother. 

Nanak representeth, if Thou give Thy name, it will assist 
me at the last hour. 

After the death gif a Hindu a lamp is kept burning 
for several days to light the soul of the departed to 
the next world. It is then floated on water. Guru 
Nanak indites the following homily on the custom ; — 

^ Literally — Sanskrit. 

* Some invoke gods and goddesses. 

* Sometimes man is elated and sometimes depressed. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


349 


Adore God^ in the following way — 

Make thy body into a raft * by which thou mayest cross 
over. * 

Put on it the fire of thy heart, 

And the lamp shall bum untiringly day and night. 

Float such a lamp on the water 
As shall procure thee all knowledge. 

The knowledge of God is a good material ; 

God will accept a lamp made out of it. 

Make good deeds thy wheel, and mould thy lamp on it ; 

It will accompany thee in this world and the next. 

When God looketh on him with an eye of favour, 

Some rare pious man knoweth how to make this lamp. 

This lamp shall be permanent in his heart, 

And shall not be extinguished when he dieth. 

Float such a lamp on the water 

As shall not be shakwi or put out by the wind, 

And by whose light God’s throne may be seen. 

Khatris, Brahmans, Sudars, and Vaisyas 
Find not such a lamp by thousands of researches and 
calculations ; 

But if any of them light such a lamp as I have described. 
He shall, 0 Nanak, obtain deliverance. 

The following was addressed to a Jogi : — 

The Jogi runneth about begging for clothes and food ; 
He bumeth with the pangs of hunger, and he shall also 
have misery hereafter. 

He who hath not received the Guru’s instmction, loseth 
his honour by his own stupidity. 

Some rare man obtaineth God’s service by the Gum’s 
teaching. 

The Jogi who knoweth the way d^velleth in a peaceful 
home. 

He who is satisfied with the alms of love and the Word 
beholdeth all men with an equal eye. 

Literally — fix thine attention on God. 

‘ The little raft on which the lamp is placed. 



350 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The five oxen ^ draw the carriage of the body : 

The whole goeth well by the^contrivance of God, 

When the axle breaketh, the carriage tumeth over ; 

Its timber is scattered and it is burnt in the fire. 

Meditate, O Jogi, on the Guru’s instruction. 

Consider weal and woe, union and separation of friends 
as the same. 

Let the Name and meditation on the Guru’s instruction 
be thy dainties.® 

The wall of thy body shall remain permanent ® by repeat- 
ing God’s name. 

By the practice of sahaj jog thou shalt be freed from 
entanglements, 

And shalt repress lust and wrath under the Guru’s ad- 
monition. 

Make the protection of God and the Guru earrings for 
thy heart. 

Nanak, it is by devotion to God man shall be saved. 
Ashtapadi 

God is in man’s heart and ought not to be sought 
for elsewhere : — 

0 Nanak, may I obtain the greatness of the Name ! there 
is no religious work superior to it. 

If man go elsewhere to ask for what he hath at home, he 
shall be received with reproaches. 

It is said that Guru Nanak on his excursion to 
the Himalayas met a Jogi called Chetnath, who 
reproached him with not being a J ogi, a Sanyasi, or 
a saint, but only a pretended guru. The following 
was Guru Nanak’s reply : — 

0 Jogi, thou buildest a hut and preachest to the world : 

If, abandoning th 5 ?*devotional attitudes, thou beg from door 
to door, how shalt thou obtain the True One ? 

^ The five organs of action. 

® Sweets are given to Jogis at the time of their reception into a 
monastery. 

® There is a belief that the Jogis live for hundreds of years as the 
result of their austerities. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 351 

Thou lovest mammon and woman, 

And art neither an anchoret nor a worldly man. 

O Jogij' keep thy seat, ^ and the pain of thy worldly love 
shall depart. 

Thou art not ashamed to beg from door to door ; 

Thou singest songs, but knowest not thyself. 

How shall the great fire which burneth thee be ex- 
tinguished ? 

If the love of God attach to thy heart under the Guru’s 
instruction, 

Thou shalt easily enjoy the alms of contemplation. 

Thou hypocritically applies! ashes to thy body, 

And shalt be punished for thy worldliness by Death’s 
mace. 

The impure vessel® of thy heart cannot hold the alms 
of love. 

Thou art bound by bonds and shalt suffer transmigration. 

Thou dost not restrain thy seed, and yet thou callest 
thyself continent. 

While sapng ‘ Mother ’, thou beggest and fallest in love 
with woman. 

Thou art without compassion and God’s light shineth 
not in thee. 

Thou art immersed in every species of entanglement. 

With a patched coat and a bag thou assumes! many 
guises. 

Like a conjurer thouperformest many tricks to deceive men. ’ 

The fire of anxiety burneth thy heart — 

How shalt thou be saved without good works ? 

Thou makes! rings of crystal for thine ears. 

Without the highest divine knowledge there is no emanci- 
pation. 

Thou art beguiled by the pleasur^jS of the tongue and 
sensual organs. 

Thou hast becon^ a beast, and the mark of it shall not 
be erased. 

^ That is, go not a-begging, 

® Khapar. A wooden vessel shaped like a skull. It is carried by 
Jogis for the alms they receive. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


352 

There are three classes of people and three dasses of Jog.' 

He who meditateth on the Word shall need no mourning. 

He who meditateth on the way of jog is a Jogf : 

By the true Word he shall become bright. 

The Guru in an address to a pandit reject^ 
astrology : — 

Thou calculatest auspicious moments, but reflectest not 

That God is beyond auspicious moments. 

He who meeteth the Guru knoweth them. 

When there is the Guru’s instruction man recognizeth 
God’s will. 

Speak not falsehood ; O Pandit, tell the truth. 

If pride depart by means of the Word, God’s abode shall 
be attained. 

The astrologer after calculating draweth out a horoscope ; 

He readeth it to himself and ofhers, but knoweth not 
the reality. 

Deem the Guru’s word the highest of all ; 

Utter no other discourse ; it were all in vain. 

Thou bathest, and washest, and worshippest stones, 

But without being imbued with God thou art the filthiest 
of the filthy. 

Abandon pride, and thou shalt m§et God the real wealth. 

Repeat God’s name, and thou shalt succeed in obtaining 
emancipation. 

Thou readest not thine epic poems nor reflectest on the 
Veds : 

Drowned thyself, how canst thou save thine ancestors ? 

Few understand that God is in every*heart. 

When man meeteth the tni».Guru, he obtaineth under 
standing. 

By making calculations such as thine doubt and sorrow 
enter the mind ; 

But, when the Guru’s protect!8l3^is sough| happiness 
resulteth. 

Having sinned we come to him for j^rptection. 

' People and jog are subdivided according to the three qualities. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 353 

According to man’s acts in a former state the Guru 
causeth him to meet God. 

God cannot be obtained unless man enter the Guru’s 
protection ; 

Otherwise he is led astray in superstition and suffereth 
transmigration. 

He who hath not God in his heart and whose conduk is 
not according to the Word, 

Shall be bound at Death’s gate and punished for his sins. 

Men call themselves Teachers, Pandits, and Missars ; ^ 

But they who are tinctured with mammon shall not reach 
God’s mansion. 

He who by the Guru’s favour hath the support of the 
Name, 

Is unequalled amongst millions. 

One man appeareth evil and another good ; but they are 
both contained in' the Trvie One : 

The learned man understandeth this by the aid of the 
true Guru. 

A few holy men who know the one God, 

Have ended their transmigration, and become absorbed 
in Him. 

They in whose hearts is the one God, 

Possess all excellences and meditate on the truth. 

They who act as pleaseth the Guru 

Are true, O Nanak, and shall be absorbed in the True One. 


The following was addressed* to a rich sinner who 
visited the Guru 


% 


as 


0» silly man, as thou earnest so shalt thou depart 
thou wert bom so shalt thouiiie ; 

As thy enjoyment so shall be thy suffering ; through 
forgetfulness of the Name thou shalt Ull into the terrible 
ocean. 

Thou artiproud on l^iiolding thy beauty and wealth. 
Thou hast extended \hy love to gold and woman ; why 
thou forgotten Name and gone astray ? 

^ A title applied to BrShmans by Hindus. 


SIKH. W 


A a 



354 the SIKH RELIGION 

Not having practised continence, truth, self-restraint, or 
virtue, thou shalt suffer in the skeleton of a ghost. 

Alms-gifts, ablutions, and austerities are of ' no avail ; 
without association with the saints, thou hast been bom 
in vain. 

Through the covetousness that attacheth to thee thou 
hast forgotten the Name ; thy life hath been wasted in 
transmigration. 

Death will hasten to seize thee by the hair and punish 
thee ; and, when he eateth thee, thou shalt have no con- 
sciousness for repentance. 

Day and night thou revilest others and art jealous of 
them ; the Name is not in thy heart, and thou hast not 
universal benevolence. 

Without the Guru’s instruction thou shalt not obtain 
salvation or honour ; without God’s name thou shalt go 
to hell. I 

Thou practisest disguise for a brief period like a conjurer, 
while thou art steeped in worldly love and sin. 

Seeing the extension of thy wealth here and there, thou 
hast become intoxicated with worldly love. 

Thou committest sin on a large scale, and without 
remembering the Word hast fallen into error. 

Thou hast suffered great pain from the disease of pride ; 
but it shall depart when thou receivest the Guru’s in- 
struction. 

The infidel seeing happiness and wealth coming to him 
becometh proud in his heart. 

He who owneth this body and wealth will take them back ; 
he who feeleth anxiety regarding them shall have sorrow. 

At the last moment nothing shall depart with thee ; 
whatever is seen is the result of God’s kindness. 

God is the primal and infinite Being ; by treasuring His 
name in the heart man shall be saved. 

Thou weepest for the dead ; wlv) heareth thy weeping ? 
He whom thou weepest for might have fallen to the dragon in 
the sea of terror. 

’'‘|:The infidel beholding his family, wealth, houses, and 
mansions falleth into needless entanglements. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 355 

Man cometh when God sendeth him, and he goeth away 
when God calleth him. 

God cdhtinueth to do what is proper ; the Pardoner 
pardoneth. 

O brethren, search for the society of those who have 
tasted God’s elixir. 

When man taketh the Guru’s protection, then wealth, 
supernatural power, wisdom, divine knowledge, and the 
boon of emancipation are obtained. 

The pious consider woe and weal as the same, and are 
free from joy or sorrow. 

Nanak, he who chasteneth himself under the Guru’s 
instruction obtaineth God, and God absorbeth him in 
Himself. V 

^ Dakhani Oamkar '■ 

Men who are generally impure cannot obtain 
emancipation until# their hearts are thoroughly 
purified : — 

As borax melteth gold. 

So lust and wrath melt the body. 

The gold is drawn over the touchstone, and must, until 
thoroughly pure, endure the fire. 

When it assumeth a high colour * the Assayer is satisfied. 

The world is a beast, and pride is its butcher.® 

As thou actest with thine own hand, so shall be thy 
recompense. 

He who made the world knoweth its worth. 

What else is to be said ? Talking availeth not. 

Ramkali ki War I 

The following is a satire on the professedly 
religious men of the time : — 

They who call themselves virtuous, commit sin and 
pretend that they are doing good. 

^ This is a composition of Guru Nanak, made in the south of India 
in praise of God. 

® The body must be purified as gold is by melting. God the 
Assayer is satisfied with it when it assumes a bright colour. 

® Pride is killing the world. 


A a 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


356 

Guras go to private houses to impart instruction. 

A woman loveth man for the money he earneth for her ; 
Otherwise he may come or go as he pleaseth. 

Nobody obeyeth the Shastars or the Veds ; 

Everybody worshippeth himself. 

The Qazi sitteth to administer justice ; 

He turneth over his beads and invoketh God, 

But he taketh bribes and doeth injustice. 

If any one call him to account, he will read and 
cite texts. 

The Muhammadan creed filleth the ears and hearts of the 
Hindus. 

They carry tales to the judge and plunder the populace : 
They make squares for cooking so as to appear pure. 

See what the Hindus are like. 

Jogis with long hair and ashes on their bodies keep wives. 
Children scream before and behind them. 

They miss the right road and obtain not union with God. 
Why do they put ashes on their heads ? 

Nanak, this is the state of this degenerate age, 

That men only speak of themselves and think themselves 
the best. 

The following is also a satire on Brahmans, 
Muhammadan priests, and J ogis : — 

A Brahman goeth to the house of a Hindu, 

Readeth texts, and putteth the sacrificial thread on a hoy's 
neck. 

If the boy commit sin after putting on the thread. 

He shall not be accepted for all his ablutions and washings. 
The Musalman may praise himself. 

But without a guru or a priest he shall not be accepted. 
Even when the road is pointed out, few travel by it. 
Without good works heaven is not obtained. 

Men seek the way in a Jogi’s monastery ; 

And on that account put rings in their ears and heSme 
his disciples. 

With earrings on they wander about the world. 

While the Creator they pretend to search for is everywhere. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 357 

All souls are travellers : 

When the death-warrant cometh for them there must be 
no delay. 

He who knoweth God in this world, shall recognize Him 
in the next. 

• All others, whether Hindus or Musalmans, are chatterers. 

All men’s accounts shall be taken in God’s court ; 

And no one shall be saved without good works. 

He who repeateth the name of the Truest of the true, 

Shall not, O Nanak, be examined hereafter. 

Only the good shall be saved when the final 
reckoning is called for : — 

Nanak saith, O man, hear true instruction — 

God seated in judgement will produce His book and call 
on thee for thine account. 

The stiff-necked who owe an3rthing shall be summoned ; 

And the angel Azraif placed over them. 

They shall see no way of escape ; they shall be entangled 
in the narrow streets. 

Falsehood is at an end, O Nanak, and truth shall at last 
prevail. 

The following was addressed to a proud Muham- 
madan governor : — 

At thy waist is a handsome sword, thou art mounted on 
a handsome steed : 

Be not proud, saith Nanak, lest thou fall on thy head. 

Only good men can remain in the society of the 
saints : — 

Z' Between the lake and the swan there is affinity from the 
beginning ; so it pleased the Lord. 

In the lake there are diamonds and pearls which form 
the swan’s food. 

Cranes and ravens, however cunning they may be, cannot 
rei^ain in lake Mansarowar?- 

They cannot subsist there ; their food is different. 

^ It is said that Lake Mansarowar in the HimSiayas contains pearls, 
which are food for swans, but not for cranes and ravens. 



358 THE SIKH RELIGION 

By the practice of truth, truth is obtained ; 0 false ones, 
false is your pride. 

Nanak, they for whom it was so ordered from the 
beginning meet the True Guru. 

My Lord is effulgent, if any one reflect on it. 

Nanak, serve Him who giveth ever and ever ; 

Nanak serve Him by whose service sorrow departeth, 

Sins are erased, merits take their place, and peace abideth 
in the heart. 

Rag Maru Ashtapadi 

A h5^ocritical Sanyasi called Brahmpuri was 
mentioned to the Guru as a very worthy man. The 
Guru, knowing his real condition, composed the 
following : — 

The perverse having through avarice abandoned their 
own homes, ruin themselves by casting covetous eyes on 
the houses of others. 

They have ruined their state as householders ; they have 
not met the True Guru, and through their stupidity are 
involved in a whirlpool. 

Of wandering in foreign countries and reading texts they 
grow weary, and their covetousness increaseth. 

Of weak intellect, they know not the Word ; they fill 
their bellies like cattle. 

O Sir, the way of the Sanyasi should be this : — 

He should under the Guru’s instruction only think of 
the one God, love His name, and be satisfied with it. 

But the hypocrite mixeth ochre, dyeth his dress with it, 
and weareth the gtirb of a beggar ; 

He teareth his clothes to make a patched coat, and 
putteth money into his wallet ; 

Blind that he is and bereft of shame, he beggeth from 
house to house and preacheth to the world ; 

Led astray by superstition he knoweth not the Word and 
loseth the game. 

The fire which is within him is not extinguished without 
the Guru, yet he heateth himsdf with external fires ^ also. 

^ The penance of five fires is frequently spoken of and resorted to 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 359 

There is no worship without serving the Gam ; how can 
man of himself recognize God ? 

He wh5 slandereth others shall abide in hell, and be 
separated from the Supreme Spirit. 

He who wandereth to the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage 
js ruined thereby ; how can he wash away the filth of 
his sins ? 

He sifteth dust, applieth it to his body, and looketh for 
the way of mammon. 

He knoweth not the one God who is with him whether he 
be at home or abroad ; if any one tell him the truth, he 
groweth angry. 

While reading texts his mouth uttereth falsehoods ; that 
is all the wisdom a man without a guru possesseth. 

How can man obtain happiness without repeating the 
Name ? How shall he be honoured without the Name ? 

Some shave their he^ds, some twist long hair round them 
or wear a top-knot ; others through pride remain silent ; 

But without the love of divine knowledge their minds 
waver and hasten in every direction. 

Maddened by worldly love they reject nectar and drink 
deadly poison. 

They obey not God’s order ; their evil deeds shall not 
be effaced, and they shall enter the bodies of beasts. 

The Kapari with a bowl in his hand and excessive greed 
in his heart 

' Abandoneth his own wife, and filled with lust coveteth his» 
neighbour’s. 

While preaching he knoweth not God’s word, and 
attacheth himself to a prostitute. * 

With poison in his heart he pretendeth that he hath no 
doubts, but Death will disgrace him. 

He who serveth the True Guru and removeth pride from 
his heart, is a true Sanyasi ; 

He desireth not clothes or food, but taketh what is 
frailly ofieredftiim ; 

by Hindu devotees during the sultriest time of an Indian summer. 
They light fires around them in the four directions ; the sun over 
them is the fihh. 



36 o the SIKH RELIGION 

He chattereth not ; he amasseth the wealth of patience ; 
and his passions he subdueth with God’s name. 

Blessings on that man, who whether householder, Sanyasi, 
or Jogi, fixeth his attention on God’s feet. 

He who in the midst of desires is without desires, and 
who loveth the one God is a Sanyasi. 

He who drinketh God’s essence and preserveth a religioul 
attitude in his own home shall obtain peace. 

The mind of the pious man who knoweth God wavereth 
not, but restraineth its wanderings. 

He who under the Guru’s instruction searcheth the house 
of the body, shall obtain the boon of the Name. 

Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv are most exalted when they 
are imbued with the contemplation of the Name. 

Thy light, O Lord, is in the sources of production, in com- 
positions, in the firmament, in the lower regions, and in all 
creatures. 

By repeating hymns containing God’s true name and 
clasping it to the heart, all happiness and final deliverance 
shall be obtained. 

No one can be saved without the Name ; Nanak, that is 
the true way to swim across. 

The following was delivered in a fit ot extreme 
religious fervour to Mihan and Sihan : — 

Woman, however many friends she may make, wan- 
dereth like an itinerant minstrel in transmigration. 

She who is separated from God obtaineth no access to 
Him ; how shall she be patient ? 

My soul is imbu^ with the love of the Beloved. 

I am a sacrifice ; I would cut myself in pieces for The^ 
look at me even for an instant with a gl^ce of favour. 

Separated as I am from my Beloved in my father’s 
house, how shall I meet him in my father-in-law’s ? 

I wear demerits round my neck ; I am ruined «vitho«t 
the Beloved ; I am pining to death. 

If in my father’s house I remember the Beloved, I shall 
find a dwelling in His. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 361 

The wife who hath found her Beloved, the Lord of excel- 
lences, sleepeth in peace. 

She maketh a silken coverlet and mattress for her couch, 
and arrayeth herself in a costly robe. 

The wife whom her husband abandoneth passeth the 
night in grief. 

* Whatever dainties she tasteth and whatever dresses she 
weareth, 

Her youth passeth in vain without her Beloved ; she 
pineth away through separation from Him. 

Hear the song of the True One under the Guru’s 
instruction. 

True is the throne of the True One ; she on whom He 
looketh with favour loveth Him. 

The possessor of divine knowledge applieth the salve of 
truth to her eyes, and then beholdeth Him who seeth all 
things. 

He who under the Guru’s instruction dispelleth his pride 
and arrogance, shall understand and know God, 

They who please Thee, O God, are like Thee ; how many 
unhappy wives there are like me : 

Nanak, their Spouse parteth not from those who are 
imbued with the love of the True One. 

God is the only true friend and relation : — 

Nor sisters, nor brothers, nor mothers-in-law remain with 
one ; 

But, O companions, the true relationship with the Beloved, 
when found through the Guru, shall never be sundered. 

I am a sacrifice to my Guru, I am fver a sacrifice unto 
him. 

’I have grown weary of wandering so far without a guru ; 
now the Guru hath united me with my Beloved. 

P^ernal and maternal aunts, grandmothers, and wives 
of husbands’ younger and elder brothers 
ftCome^and go ; they tarry not but depart like rela5rs of 
passengers. 

Maternal uncles and their wives, brothers, fathers, and 
motors abide not. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


3^2 

Assembled in great crowds at the river they depart with 
their baggage like travellers. 

0 my companions, my Husband is dyed witH the true 
colour. 

The true Husband never forsaketh ; He enjoyeth one 
with delight. 

All seasons are good for those who love the True One. 

The woman who knoweth her husband enjoyeth happi- 
ness day^ and night. 

The ferryman calleth out at the ferry, ‘ Come on, make 
haste ; you delay.’ 

1 have seen at the other side those whom the Guru put 
into the boat. 

Some have loaded their baggage, some have set out with 
it, and others are weighed down by their loads. 

They who have made true traffic are with the true God. 

I am not good, nor do I find anyipne bad. 

Nanak, he who effaceth his pride is as the True One. 

Maru Solhe 

God has no incarnations : — 

God’s secret is not found in the Veds or the books of 
the Musalmans ; 

He hath not father or mother or son or brother. 

There is no friend like God, who is to be obtained 
through the Guru by those who lead a holy life : — 

I have no friend like God 

Who gave me soul and body, and infused into me under- 
standing. 

He cherisheth and watcheth over all creatures ; He is 
wise and knoweth the secrets of hearts. 

The Guru is like a lake ; we are his beloved swans ! 

In the water are many jewels and rubies. 

God’s praises are pearls, gems, and diamonds ; singing 
them maketh soul and body happy. 

^ in the original, pronounced exac^iike its English equivalent. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 363 

God is inaccessible, unfathomable, altogether distinct 
from His creation. 

The great Sustainer of the earth hath no end. 

God saveth man through the true Guru’s instruction ; 
He blendeth with Himself those who are absorbed in His 
Wve. 

How can there be emancipation without the true Guru ? 

He loveth the primal God who was before all time, 

'*Who mercifully granteth emancipation in His court, and 
pardoneth the sins which man committeth. 

The true Guru is the giver and procurer of emancipation. 

He prescribeth nectareous essence and cureth all 
diseases. 

He whose avarice is extinguished and whose mind is cool, 
shall owe no tax to Death the tax-gatherer. 

The body greatly loveth the soul ; 

The latter is a male Jogi, the former a beautiful woman. 

He enjoyeth her in dalliance day and night, but goeth 
away without taking leave. 

God having created the world arrangeth it ; 

He speaketh in the wind, water, and fire. 

The mind of him who associateth with evil passions 
wavereth ; he suffereth the consequences of his acts. 

They who forget the Name shall have to endure pain 
and misery. 

How can they tarry when they receive the order to 
depart ? 

They shall plunge into the pit of hell and suffer like 
fishes out of water. 

The apostate shall undergo the pain of transmigration in 
eighty-four lakhs of species. 

Man shall suffer according to his acts. 

There is no salvation without the true Guru ; man shall 
be seized and bound according to his acts. 

Very narrow is the way like the edge of a sword. 

Man’s account shall be taken, and he shall be pressed 
like sesame. 

There no mother, father, wife, or son will befriend thee ; 
without love for God there is no emancipation. 



364 THE SIKH RELIGION 

However numerous one’s friends and companions may be 
in the world, 

There are no real friends but the Guru and God. 

Salvation dependeth upon serving the Guru, and night 
and day singing God’s praises. 

Abandon falsehood, pursue truth. 

And thou shalt obtain the fruit thy heart desireth. 

Few are they who traffic in true merchandise ; they 
who do so obtain profit. 

Depart with the merchandise of God’s name. 

And thou shalt easily obtain a sight of God’s court. 

A perfect man under the Guru’s instruction searcheth for 
God, and thus beholdeth Him who looketh on all alike. 

God is infinite, but under the Guru’s instruction is found 
by a few 

Who teach their hearts the Guru’s word. 

Accept the true Guru’s word as t®ae ; thus shalt thou be 
absorbed in God. 

Narad and Saraswati are Thy servants, O Lord. 

The greatest of the great in the three worlds are Thy 
servants. 

In all things is Thy might ; Thou bestowest on all ; 
everything is Thy creation. 

Some worship at Thy gate, and thus dispel their sufferings. 

They who are emancipated by the true Guru, receive a 
robe of honour in Thy court. 

The true Guru breaketh the entanglements of pride, and 
hindereth the mind from wandering. 

Meet the true Guru, look for the way 

To reach God, and thus have no account against thee. 

Efface pride and serve the Guru, 0 Nanak, and thou shalt 
be dyed with God’s love. 

Miscellaneous instruction of the Guru : — 

The Creator is the true Lord 

Who carefully supporteth the globe of the earth. 

The Creator beholdeth the work of His hands ; true and 
independent, 

He created the different species of animals* 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 365 

Two travellers ^ have struck out two roads. 

There is no emancipation without the perfect Guru ; it 
is profitable to repeat the true Name. 

The perverse man readeth, but knoweth not the way : 

Led astray by error he knoweth not the Name. 

The false evidence the evil man giveth for a bribe becometh 
like a halter round his neck. 

Brahmans read the Simritis, the Shastars, and the Purans : 

They engage in disputations, but know not the Real 
Thing : 

Without the true Guru they find not the Real Thing. 

They who are purified by the True One walk in the true 
way. 

Everybody praiseth God and speaketh of Him as he hath 
heard. 

God is wise and assayeth the true. 

They on whom God^looketh with favour are holy and 
praise His word. 

How many speak of God according to what they have 
heard ! 

They speak of Him according to what they have heard, 
but know not His limit. 

He to whom the Unseen hath manifested Himself knoweth 
the story of the Ineffable. 

When one is bom gratulations resound ; 

The ignorant sing songs of rejoicing ; 

But he who is born shall assuredly die, and undergo the 
destiny allotted him. 

It is my God who effecteth union and separation of the 
soul and body. 

He who created the world assigned His creatures woe 
or weal ; 

But the holy who wear the armour of mildness are un- 
affected by them. 

Good are they who deal in the truth ; 

By the Gum’s wisdom they obtain the true merchandise. 

He who possesseth the wealth of the true merchandise, 
is enraptured with the trae Word. 

* The founders of the Hindu and Muhammadan religions. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


366 

Loss accrueth from false dealings. 

The pious carry on their dealings according to God’s will. 

Their capital remaineth intact, their stock-in-trade safe, 
and they escape from Death’s noose. 

Every one speaketh of God according to his own 
pleasure. ^ 

The perverse who are attached to mammon, know not how 
to speak of God. 

The understanding and utterance of the blind man are 
blind ; he shall suffer the pain of transmigration. 

In pain he is bom, in pain he dieth. 

His pain cannot be removed except by seeking the Gum’s 
protection. 

In pain he is created, in pain he perisheth. What hath 
he brought with him ? what shall he take away ? 

True are the acts of those who are subject to 
the Gum ; - r 

They shall not suffer transmigration or feel the edge of 
Death’s sword. 

He who abandoneth the branches of the tree of the world} 
and only knoweth God the essential root of all things, 
enjoyeth tme delight in his heart. 

Death shall not punish godly people, 

Nor shall they experience the pain of the difficult 
road. 

They worship God’s name in their hearts and mention 
no other. 

They who repeat not God’s praises shall be punished at 
last ; 

While they who please Thee, O God, shall abide according 
to Thy will : 

They shall go with a robe of honour to Thy court and 
be happy by the True King’s order. 

Many describe Thine attributes, O Lord ; what availeth 
my speaking ? 

The greatest of the great find not Thy limit. 

Nanak, may I obtain the trath ! preserve mine honour, 
0 Lord ; Thou art the Monarch of monarchs ! 

^ Worldly entanglem^lts. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 367 

The following is said to be instruction given to 
Taru and Bharu during the Baisakhi fair at Kar- 
tarpur 

Put away from you lust, wrath, and slander ; 

Abandon avarice, and covetousness, and you shall be 
\ree from care. 

He who breaketh the chain of superstition shall be free, 
and feel divine pleasure in his heart. 

The happy and incomparable perfect Guru showeth man 

Day and night the light within him, and he beholdeth it 

Like a bright flash of lightning at night. 

Meet the true Guru, and God Himself 

Who placed the lamps of the moon and sun in the firma- 
ment of heaven will save you. 

Continue to love God, and you shall behold the Unseen 
One pervading all threg worlds. 

He who obtaineth the ambrosial essence loseth his avarice 
and his fear. 

He who effaceth himself obtaineth the fearless position. 

He who acteth accoijding to the pure Word shall attain 
a lofty degree, the loftiest of the lofty. 

The Name of the Unseen and Inapprehensible is un- 
equalled ; 

The juice of the beloved Name is exceeding sweet. 

God’s praises be given to Nanak, and in every age repeat 
ye His name whose end is not known. 

The heart which hath obtained the diamond of the Name 

Shall obtain patience by repeating and reverencing it. 

Put the Destroyer of fear into thy stubborn heart, and 
thou shalt not be bom again. 

Man is saved by love of devotion and the Gum’s word. 

I crave the boon of the praise of God’s name. 

If God be pleased. He will cause us to meet the trae Gum 
and save the whole world. 

Death’s myrmidons and Death himself worship the feet 
of those 

Who repeat God’s name under the Gum’s teaching and 
directions. 



368 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Man’s state and condition become exalted by exalted com- 
pany, and he crosseth over the terrible ocean of the world. 

This world which is a terrible ocean, is crossed over by 
the Guru’s instruction 

•And by dispelling the heart’s doubts. 

Let man take the five arrows,^ put them on the bow o| 
his brain and kill Death. 

How shall the apostate obtain knowledge of the Word ? 

Without a knowledge of the Word man undergoeth 
transmigration. 

Nanak, salvation dependeth upon the instruction of the 
Guru whom God by perfect good fortune hath caused us 
to meet. 

The Fearless One, the true Guru is our protector. 

The great God is obtained by devotion. 

For him who obtaineth the Bright One under the Guru’s 
instruction, the unbeaten strain of j(?y resoundeth. 

The Fearless One is He on whose forehead no destiny is 
recorded. 

Heis invisible, but we behold Him through Hisomnipotence. 

He transcendeth the world •, He is unborn and self- 
existent, O Nanak, and is obtained by the Guru’s in- 
struction. 

Only the True Guru knoweth the state of man’s heart. 

He is fearless who recognizeth the Guru’s instructions, 

Beholdeth God within him, knoweth that He fervadeth 
'creation, and alloweth not his mind to wander elsewhere. 

He in whose heart God dwelleth is fearless. 

And day and night delighted with the bright Name. 

Nanak, God’s praises are obtained from the society of 
the saints, and man is thus easily blended with Him. 

He who knoweth that God is with him whether at home 
or abroad, 

Who remaineth attached to the world and bringeth home 
his wandering mind. 

Shall obtain, O Nanak, the ambrosial essence of the 
True One who dwelleth in the three worlds, and who was 
before all things. 


^ The five virtues. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 369 

Maru ki War I 

Man shall certainly be responsible for his acts : — 

Creation was by God’s order ; in His court the truth is 
accepted. 

^ The Lord will call for man’s account ; O man, stray not 
on beholding the world. 

Nanak, God will keep an account of the love and affection 
of him 

Who watcheth over his heart, and is a pure-minded 
darwesh. 

The condition of really holy men : — 

For those who dwell apart and live on the bread of, alms 
God is ever 5 rwhere : 

The diamonds of their hearts are pierced with God’s 
diamond, O Nanak, and their necks are gorgeous with 
jewels. 

True devotion and repetition of the Name secure 
salvation : — 

Recognize God’s pri^pal love,^ and worship the great God. 

Shall Death then, O Nanak, strike thee on the head ? 
Nay ; the Name shall cause thee to meet God. 

Many sects appeal to the Veds, but it is heartfelt 
devotion which secures salvation : — 

The drum of the Veds loudly resoundeth for many a 
faction. 

Remember God’s name, Nanak ; there is none but Him. 

Where man is proud there art Thou not ; where Thou 
art, there no pride is. 

0 men of divine knowledge, understand this riddle — ^the 
story of the Ineffable One is in the heart. 

But without the Guru the Real Thing cannot be found : 
it is concealed though it dwelleth in every heart. 

^ Explained to be the love of God which disposes Him to protect 
the child in the womb. 

B b 


81KK. I 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


370 

God is known by meeting the true Guru and implanting 
his instruction in the heart. 

When pride departeth, doubt, fear, and the pain of trans- 
migration depart. 

By the wisdom of the Guru the Unseen is seen, Man’s 
intellect becometh exalted, and he is saved. 

Nanak, repeat the spell of God in whom the three worlds 
are contained. 

Bhairo 

To engage in ritualistic practices is of* no avail : — 

To give a feast, make a burnt offering, offer alms, perform 
penance and worship, and endure bodily pain for ever are 
all of no avail. 

Without God’s name salvation is not obtained ; the holy 
man obtaineth it by the Name. 

Without God’s name it is useless^to be born in the world. 

To eat poison, to speak for the sake of poison (mammon) 
without the Name is to die an unprofitable death and wander 
in transmigration. 

To read books, discuss grammar, and pray three times 
a day are all of no avail. 

Without the Guru’s instruction, O mortal, where is 
salvation ? without God’s name man is entangled and dieth. 

Even though man take up the beggar’s staff and pot, and 
adopt the hair-tuft, the sacrificial thread, and the dhoti of 
the Hindus, go to places of pilgrimage, and wander far and 
wide. 

Yet shall he not find comfort without God’s name ; he 
who repeateth it shall be saved. 

Even though man weave his hair into a crown, apply 
ashes to his body, doff his clothes, and wander naked, 

Yet shall he be not satisfied without God’s name ; it is 
under the stress of prenatal acts man assumeth a devoti<mal 
garb. 

Thou, 0 God, art in all creatures that are in the water, 
the dry land, the nether regions, and the firmament. 

By the favour of the Guru preserve Thy servant ; Nanak 
stirring God’s elixir hath drunk it. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 


Rag Basant 

The ^pUowing was written with buoyant feeling 
after the departure of a cold winter in the north of 
India : — 

All hail to the great month^ in which spring ever beginneth. 

" Ever and ever remember the Sustainer of the earth, and 
thy heart shall rejoice. 

0 silly man, forget thy pride, 

Subdue thy pride and meditate on God in thy heart ; 
adopt the most excellent virtues. 

Good acts are the tree, God’s name its branches, religion 
its flowers, divine knowledge its fruit, 

Attainment of God its leaves, and the dispelling of mental 
pride its dense shade. 

They who behold God’s power with their eyes, hear it 
with their ears, and jepeat the true Name with their 
tongues, 

Obtain the full wealth of honour and tranquilly meditate 
on God. 

The great season hath come, be careful and do good 
works. 

Nanak, the pious who continue absorbed in God shall be 
perennial and never wither. 

Sarang ki War 

The following is a refutation of the general Indian . 
ideas on the subject of impurity : — 

There is no impurity in songs,* there is no impurity in 
knowledge ; * 

There is no impurity in the moon’s or sun’s different 
phases ; 

^ Basant, the Indian spring, is general!/ considered to begin 
between the 12th and 14th of March. 

* As supposed by the MusaltnSns. 

* The Brahmans assert that the Veds should not be communicated 
to women and SQdars. During the period of Brahmanical ascendency 
in India the SQdars were forbidden under pain of death to read the 
Veds — they might only repeat God's name. Among the SQdars are 
included all women. 


B b 2 



372 THE SIKH RELIGION 

There is no impurity in com, there is no impurity in 
ablution ; ^ 

There is no impurity in rain which falleth eve^where ; 

There is no impurity in earth, there is no impurity in 
water ; 

There is no impurity contained in air. 

There are no virtues, Nanak, in the man who is without 
a guru. 

It is he who turneth away from God whose mouth is 
impure. 

The Guru mentions things which confer purity on 
men of different classes : — 

Nanak, the following handfuls * of water are pure if any 
one know how to fill them — 

Divine knowledge for the Pandit, continence for the Jogi, 

Contentment for the Brahman, akns out of what he hath 
himself earned for the family man,® 

Justice for the king, meditation on the True One for the 
learned. 

Although water when drunk will quench thirst, the heart 
cannot be washed with it. 

Water is the generator of the world, and shall finally 
destroy ever5dhing. 

The futility of idolatry : — 

Thou in thy house keepest an idol with its attendant gods :* 

Thou washest it and worshippest it ; 

Thou offerest it kungu, sand^, and flowers ; 

Thou fullest at its feet and propitiatest it to the utmost ; 

Yet it is by continually begging of men thou clothest and 
supportest thyself. 

^ As supposed by the Jains, who avoid water. 

® Ckuli, as much water as can be taken in one band. Water is 
taken in handfuls by Hindus and drunk as grace before and some- 
times after meals accompanied by sacred texts, mndus also use 
water in the same way when taking solemn oaths, lj‘4, 

® As contradistinguished from the almsgiving ^\^eves out of 
their plunder. * Such as Lakhshmi, Ganffinnesh, Ac. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 373 

For such foolish acts shalt thou receive the punishment 
of the foolish. 

The i(fol giveth thee not when hungry, nor preserveth 
thee from death. 

It is like a foolish quarrel among the blind. 

“ God has no partner, wherefore supplication should 
be made to Him direct : — 

If Thou have any partner, 0 God, I will speak of Thee 
in his presence. 

But Thou hast no partner, therefore will I praise Thee to 
Thy face. Thy name giveth sight to the blind. 

One of the Guru’s reflections on this degenerate 
age 

In the Kal age men have faces like dogs, and eat carrion. 

They bark as they utter falsehood, and have no regard 
for honesty. * 

They who have no honour while alive, shall have an evil 
reputation after death. 

What is destined taketh place, Nanak ; what the Creator 
doeth cometh to pass. 

They who deceive men by selling them charms 
and amulets shall not find salvation : — 

Accursed the lives of those who write God’s name to sell it. 

They whose crop is spoiled require no place for a harvest- 
heap. 

They who are devoid of truth and modesty will receive 
no assistance hereafter. 

The ways of wisdom : — 

Call not by the name of wisdom the wisdom which is 
spent in wrangling. 

By wisdom the Lord is worshipped ; by wisdom honour 
is obtained. 

It is by wisdom what is read is imderstood, it is by 
wisdom alms are properly bestowed. 

Nanak saith, these are the ways of wisdom, all else are 
ways of wickedness. 



374 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The virtues and practices which are most potent 
to secure deliverance : — 

They who make truth their fasting, contentment their 
place of pilgrimage, divine knowledge and meditation their 
ablutions, 

Mercy their idol, and forgiveness their rosary, are fore* 
most in God's favour. 

Nanak, few there are who make the right way their loin- 
cloths, meditation on God their cooking squares. 

Good deeds their frontal marks, and God’s love their food. 

Better to live by honest labour than by beg- 
ging 

Men without divine knowledge sing hymns. 

The hungry Mulla maketh a home of his mosque.' 

One man who earneth nothing slitteth his ears ; ^ 

Another becometh a beggar and l«seth his caste. 

Touch not at all the feet of those 

Who call themselves gurus and pirs, and go begging. 

They who eat the fruit of their labour and bestow some- 
thing, 

O Nanak, recognize the right way. 

Rag Malar 

Some moral commandments : — 

Cease to covet another’s wife and another’s goods ; shun 
the deadly sins of pride, 

Evil inclinations, slander, and lust and wrath the execu- 
tioners, 

I The inaccessible and illimitable God dwelleth in man’s 
heart. 

He shall obtain nectar in his own heart, whose conduct 
is according to the Guru’s precious instruction ; 

And who considereth woe and weal and the blame and 
praise of the world as the same, 

' He spends all his time in his mosque, so as to t%ceive the more 
alms. * Th^' jogi. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 375 

Wisdom, knowledge, and understanding are obtained from 
God’s name ; the love of God is obtained by association 
with the Saints. 

Day and night profit is obtained from God’s name given 
by the beneficent Guru. 

He on whom the Creator looketh with favour obtaineth 
instruction from the Guru’s words. 

The body is the palace, the temple, and the house of 
God ; into it He putteth His eternal light. 

Nanak, the pious are invited to God’s palace ; He will 
blend them with Himself. 

Malar Ashtapadi 

The Guru by familiar Indian examples expresses 
his love for God : — 

The chakwi will no4 sleep at night in the absence of 
her mate. 

When the sun riseth she gazeth on her beloved, and 
boweth, and toucheth his feet. 

0 my Beloved, dear to me is Thy love, which shall be 
my companion. 

1 cannot live for a moment in this world without Him ; 
so much do I thirst for Him. 

The lotus on the lake on beholding the sunbeams of 
heaven naturally rejoiceth : 

O my Beloved, such is the longing I feel in my heart 
that my light may be blended with Thine.. 

The chatrik without water crieth ‘ Prio, prio!’ and scream- 
eth aloud. 

There is terrible thunder, it raineth on every side, but 
without its special raindrops the chatrik’s thirst departeth 
not. 

The fish which is born and liveth in water, obtaineth weal 
and woe according to its previous acts. 

It cannot live for an instant without water ; its death or 
life dependeth on it. 

Woman is separated from her Beloved who liveth abroad ; 
she sendeth Him a message through the true Guru. 



376 THE SIKH RELIGION 

All cry out ‘ Prio, prio ! but they can only obtain their 
Beloved if it please the Guru. 

The Beloved is with us ; He ever associateth*with the 
true ; He blendeth with Himself those on whom He looketh 
with favour. 

God is the life within all lives ; He pervadeth every heart. 

Through the Guru’s favour He is manifest at home, and 
men become easily absorbed in Him. 

Arrange thine own affairs, 0 man ; the Lord of the earth 
is the Giver of happiness. 

When by the Guru’s favour man findeth God in his heart, 
then, O Nanak, his burning is extinguished. 

Malar ki War 

Prayers ought not to be offered for worldly advan- 
tages : — 

They who offer prayers shall die, •and so shall they who 
are prayed for. 

Nanak, it is not known where they shall be placed by 
God’s order. 

The punishments that await the impenitent 
wicked : — 

Some have chains on their necks and are being led off to 
prison ; 

But by recognizing Him who is the truest- of the true, 
•they shall be freed from their bonds. 

He who obtaineth favourable destiny knoweth the True 
One. 

Man’s fate is decided by God’s order ; when man goeth 
before Him he shall know this. 

Recognize the Word Which will cause thee to cross the 
terrible ocean. 

Thieves, adulterers, and gamblers shall be pressed like 
sesame ; 

Slanderers and backbiters shall be carried away by the 
flood. 

The pious who are absorbed in the True One shall be 
known in God’s court. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK ^ 

Worldly advantages distract men's minds from 
devotion : — 

Empire, wealth, beauty, nobility, and youth are five 
robbers ; 

These robbers have robbed the world without respect for 
•any one. 

They who fall at the Guru’s feet, however, rob them. ^ 

The Guru’s humility, the transitory character of 
human life, and the efficacy of the Name : — 

The world is very transient like a flash of lightning ; 

Yet, foolish heart of mine, thou thinkest not of the grave. 

I am low and wretched; Thou, 0 God, art an ocean of 
generosity. 

Grant me only one thing — ^Thy name ; the poisonous 
things of the world please me not. 

By the skill of God'even a fragile vessel holdeth water.* 

Thou art omnipotent ; I have come into the world by 
Thy power. 

Nanak, the dog of Thy court, is growing madder every 
day for Thy love. 

The world is fire, God’s name is what cooleth it. 

The bliss of divine composition : — 

Blest the paper, blest the pen, blest the ink-bottle, blest 
the ink, 

^ • 

Blest the writer, Nanak, who writeth the True Name, 

He who batheth in the immortal water of divine know- 
ledge taketh with him the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage. 

Rag Prabhati 

A satire on Hindu sects and ritualists 

Jogis go to ruin in twelve sects, Sanyasis in ten. 

The Jogis, the Kaprias, and the plucked-headed Saravagis 
without the Word have halters round their necks. 

* That is, deprive them of the power of robbing. . 

* A frail mortal may be possessed of divine Imowledge. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


378 

They who are tinctured by the Word are perfect Bairagis, 

.Who beg to obtain alms in the wallet- of their hearts that 
their love may be fixed on God alone. * 

The Brahmans read the epic poems before devotional acts, 
and cause others to perform them ; 

But without knowing God they know nothing ; the^ 
perverse are separated from God and miserable. 

They who obtain the Guru’s instruction are pure, and 
shall be honoured at the true court. 

Night and day they love the jewel of the Name, and are 
blended with the True One in every age. 

All religious acts, purifications, austerities, devotion, 
penance, and pilgrimages abide in the Word. 

Nanak, if the true Guru be found, he will unite man with 
God, when sorrow and sin and death shall be no more. 

Prabhati Ashtapadi 

The feats of the Jogis and the tenets of the six 
religious systems of the Hindus are ineffectual to 
secure salvation : — 

The niwali feat,^ the suspension of breath in the dorsal 
chamber ; * the turning the brain into a still, making 
expiration and inspiration like the Jogis, and suspending the 
breath ate of no avail. 

Without the true Guru man knoweth nothing ; he is led 
astray in error, sinketh, and dieth. 

.The fool is defiled, and the more he washeth, the more 
is he defiled ; the filth of his heart shall never depart. 

All religious acts are vain except the repetition of the 
Name ; they are like conjuror’s tricks which deceive the 
spectators. 

The six religious duties are contained in the name of the 
Bright One. 

^ This consists in passing a tape through the body to cleanse the 
stomach and intestines — a feat of the Jogis. 

2 The Jogis assert that they can draw breath from the lower 
vertebral column to the brain, and suspend it when they please in its 
passage. We shall further on find that the passage is called the 
serpent’s way. When the breath finally reaches the brain, it is said 
to distil nectar which produces a state of exaltation. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 379 

Thou art, O God, an ocean of merits ; in me are demerits. 

The pursuit of worldly things is a foolish and sinful act. 

The Wockhead thinketh too highly of himself, and can- 
not understand his duty. 

The perverse desire fascinating wealth, and their speech 
is evil. 

According to the Hindus foul is the ablution of the Chandal, 
and vain are his religious ceremonies and decorations. 

False is the wisdom of the perverse ; their acts produce 
strife. 

In the impure man is pride ; he obtaineth not the flavour 
of the Lord. 

Insipid the pleasure of doing other than the repetition of 
God’s name. 

Additional Sloks 

When Guru Narvik visited Ceylon he gave the 
following advice to its queen, who was proud of 
her beauty and her state : — 

Hear, young woman with the gazelle eyes, hear my 
serious and weighty words. 

First examine thy goods and make thy traffic. 

Dismiss ^ the evil and welcome the good. 

Consider, 0 young woman, what proclamation to give by 
which thou mayest find friends. 

Give thy soul and body to thy friends, and thou shalt 
thus enjoy the utmost hilarity. 

Love not that which is transitory ; 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who understand this. 

In spiritual matters consult the holy : — 

If thou art to cross the water, consult those who have 
the skill to cross ; 

They are very wise and will keep clear of the whirlpool. 

The dangers of the world : — 

There are continual showers, squalls, and torrents ; 
hundreds of thousands of waves succeed one another. 

^ Dohi dichai. Literally — make a proclamation to depart. 



38o the SIKH RELIGION 

Address the True Guru, and there shall be no fear that 
thy bark will founder. 

Another of the Guru’s reflections on the sinful- 
ness of his age : — 

Nanak, to what hath the world come ? 

No companion or friend remaineth. 

Love hath ceased among brethren and kinsmen ; 

Faith is lost on account of mammon. 

The following was composed by Guru Nanak on 
seeing women mourning : — 

They are sa5dng ‘ Hai hai ! ’ and ‘ Oh Oh ! ’ ; 

They beat their cheeks and pluck out the hairs of their 
heads ; 

They utter God’s name ^ without meaning it : if they were 
absorbed in it, 

Then would Nanak be a sacrifice unto them. 

The Guru went to visit a man of reputed sanctity, 
but on finding him a hypocrite composed the 
following : — 

The raven washeth and rubbeth itself in a small pool in 
the desert ; 

Its mind and body are full of demerits and its beak of filth. 

The swan of the lake, not knowing that the raven was an 
evil bird, associated with him. 

* Such is affection for the infidel ; O man of divine know- 
ledge, understand the allusion. 

Congratulate the congregation of the saints, and act like 
a holy man. 

Pure is the ablution, O Nanak, when the Guru is deemed 
the river of pilgrimage. 

The really holy are few : — 

The saints are few, not many ; deceit and wrangling 
Prevail in the world.® 

^ Oh hai. He is. 

® Also translated — They who act as become faqirs are few in the 
world. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 381 

The following has reference to the concremation 
of widows : — 

Nanak, the widow followeth her husband and dieth ; she 
hath no power to live. 

But she who dieth struck by the news of her husband’s 
•death -is acceptable. 

When the Allwise hath struck her with the arrow of love, 
it cannot be extracted. 

She whom God hath struck with it is struck, and being 
struck is acceptable. 

The body is frail and cannot be saved without 
God’s grace : — 

Who can wash a vessel which is fragile in its construction ? 

The body is a compound of five elements ; it hath a false 
gilding. 

If it please God, th# vessel shall be acceptable ; 

The supreme light shall shine and God’s praises resound 
in it. 

Pride without merit : — 

Nanak, those men are the real donkeys who are proud 
without merit. 

A definition of a Brahman : — 

He is a Brahman who knoweth God, 

Who performeth works of devotion, penance, and self- 
restraint ; 

And who observeth the religion of mildness and patience. 

Such a Brahman shall burst his bonds, obtain salvation. 

And be worthy of worship. 

A definition of a Khatri : — 

He is a Khatri who is brave in good deeds 

And who employeth his body in charity.^ 

The Khatri who inspecteth his ground before sowing his 
gifts, 

^ That is, who sacrifices himself for others. 



382 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Shall be acceptable in Goi^s court. 

The Khatri who practiseth greed, covetousness, and 
falsehood. 

Shall suffer for his misdeeds. 

The Guru required complete self-sacrifice from his 
disciples : — 

If thou desire to play at love with me. 

Come my way with thy head in the palm of thy hand. 

Put thy feet on this road ; 

Give thy head and regard not human opinion. 

The Guru, faith, truth, and the capital of God’s 
name are necessary for salvation : — 

Without the Guru there is no divine knowledge, without 
faith no meditation ; 

Without truth there is no credit, end without capital no 
balance. 

If Ram had been God he would not have lost 
his queen Sita, and he would himself have healed 
his half-brother Lachhman instead of calling on 
Hanuman to do so : — 

« 

Ram Chandar mourned in his soul for Sita and Lachhman : 

He remembered Hanuman,^ and he came to meet him. 

The misguided demon Rawan did not know it was not 
Ram bid God who did this. 

Nanak, God is independent : Ram could not erase his 
destiny. 

A purse-proud per^n addressed improper language 
to the Guru. When the Guru’s disciples took this 
amiss, the Guru uttered the following : — 

Impute not blame to the Rai ; ® his intellect is forsaking 
him in his old age. 

^ See the story of Hanuman going for a plant to heal Lachhman, in 
Dowson’s Dictionary of Hindu Mythology, 

^ This means a nobleman. 



HYMNS OF GURU NANAK 383 

The blind man talketh much and falleth into the pit. 
Whatever the Perfect One hath done is perfect ; there is no 
deficiency or excess in it. 

Nanak, the pious who know this, shall be absorbed in 
the Perfect One. 


END OF VOL. I 



OXFORD 

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDfpN PRESS 
BY HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY

=>5£ratxi Fir 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 

CENTRAL 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 

ACCESSION NO. 13 AM 

CALL No. 2 .94 • S 5* 3 / -Mac 

U.6.A. V9 


1 ; 

'r 



1 

i 


Si mTTrrTTtrTTTirmnillXU^Tj 

47, Great Russell Street : »Q 
British Museum, 
UP 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


ITS GURUS, SACRED WRITINGS 
AND AUTHORS 


MAX ARTHUR. MACAULIFFE 


'sp* "WIT ; 

arct- 'K3K r gra* ^ w»r. 

The egg of superstition hath burst; the 
mind is illumined : 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet 
and freed the captive. 

Guru Arjan 


IN- SIX VOLUMES 
VOL. II 


r. 5 *V , 

>* srf. ■ 

* * ^ jr? y 

T'Uew I'..-' :U; '• 




’ ® K A 




OXFORD 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
1909 




HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 

PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK 
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 



CONTENTS OF VOL. II 


PAGE 

Life of Guru Angad, The Second Guru . . x 

Sloks of Guru Angad 46 

Life of Guru Amar Das, the Third Guru . . 58 

Anand 1 17 

Sadd 151 . 

Hymns of Guru Amar Das 154 

Life of Guru Ram Das, the Fourth Guru . 253 

Hymns of Guru Ram Das 286 

Lawan (Epithalamium) 334 






GURU ANGAD AND A PUPIL 


SIKH II P. I 





LIFE OF GURU ANGAD, THE 
SECOND GURU 


Chapter I 

In Matte di Sarai, a village about six miles from 
Muktsar in the Firozpur district of the Panjab, 
once lived a trader called Pheru. He subsequently 
removed to the village of Harike, where he found 
a better opening for commerce. His wife’s maiden 
name was Ramo, but after her marriage she was 
called Daya Kaur. She is described as a lady of 
. gentle disposition, charitable, and religious. Four 
• hours before day on the nth of Baisakh in the 
Sambat year 1561 (a.d. 1504) a son was born to 
them. He received the name Lahina. In due time 
he wedded a lady called Khivi, a native of Matte di 
Sarai. His father grew weary of Harike, and with 
his own family and Lahina’ s returned to Matte di 
Sarai and lived there. Lahina’s wife there gave 
birth to a daughter called Amro and to two sons 
who were named Dasu and Datu. 

When Matte di Sarai was sacked by the Mughals 
and Baloches, Pheru and Lahina’s families went to 
live in Khadur, now a famous Sikh town in the Tarn 
Taran sub-collectorate of the Amritsar district. 
While dwelling there Lahina organized a yearly 
pilgrimage of devout Hindus to Jawalamukhi, 1 a 
place sacred to Durga in the lower Himalayas, where 
fire issues from the mountains. 

There lived in Khadur a Sikh called Jodha whose 

1 A place in the Himalayas where flame issues from the mountain. 
It is held sacred by Hindus, who make it an object of pilgrimage. 
It appears from one of Seneca’s letters that the ancient Romans 
worshipped similar places, such as springs of hot water, sources of 
rivers, &c. 

Sikh, n B 



2 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


practice it was to rise every morning three hours 
before day and repeat the Japji and the Asa ki War. 
One pleasant night when gentle zephyrs cooled the 
heated air, Lahina heard a voice which awakened 
his emotions as it sang the following : — 

Ever remember that Lord by worshipping whom thou 
shalt find happiness. | ■ 

Why hast thou done such evil deeds as thou shalt suffer 
for ? 

Do absolutely nothing evil ; look well before thee. 

So throw the dice that thou mayest not lose with the 
Lord, 

Nay, that thou mayest gain some profit . 1 

As Lahina attentively listened, his mind obtained 
peace. After daybreak he asked Jodha who had 
composed that stimulating hymn. Jodha duly 
informed him that it was his Guru, Baba 2 Nanak, 
then dwelling in Kartarpur on the bank of the Ravi. 
Devotion was kindled in Lahina’s heart by all that 
he had heard from Jodha ; and he longed to behold 
the Guru, it is said, as the chakor 3 desires to see 
the moon. 

Lahina was conducting his family and his com- 
pany of pilgrims to Jawalamukhi, but he induced 
them to break their journey at Kartarpur, telling 
them that they could perform two religious acts on 
the one pilgrimage. They could visit Guru Nanak, 
whom many persons believed to be beloved of God, 
and whose holy company was desirable and ought to 
be sought by all men. They might afterwards behold 
the flame goddess of Jawalamukhi. Lahina’s advice 
was adopted and he was enabled to offer his obeisance 
to the Guru. The Guru, on observing his kind heart 
and amiable disposition, inquired who he was and 

1 Asa ki War, 

2 Baba means father. The word was and is frequently applied to 
Guru Nanak, 

3 The Greek partridge. 


LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


3 


whither he was going. Lahina told him his name 
and errand, on hearing which, the Guru spoke to 
him of the True Creator. His discourse made such 
an impression on Lahina that he threw away the 
bells with which he had provided himself to dance 
before the goddess at J awalamukhi. He congratulated 
himself on his good fortune in meeting the Guru, 
and said he no longer felt an inclination to worship 
in a heathen temple. 

His companions, who had grown weary of waiting 
for him, at last pressed him to continue his journey 
to J awalamukhi. They said that, though he was the 
leader of their party, yet he forsook them on the road 
and in a strange country. They further represented 
that it was written in the holy books of their faith, 
that he who threw any obstacle in the way of those 
who were doing penance, giving alms, fasting, going 
on pilgrimage, or getting married; who through 
laziness or fear of growing weary failed to worship 
Durga, the giver of wealth and holiness ; or who 
having made a vow relinquished all efforts to accom- 
plish it, was a great sinner, and his wealth and sons 
should all perish. Lahina coolly replied that he was 
prepared to suffer every calamity that might occur 
to him, but he would not forsake his true Guru. He 
had obtained such peace of mind while listening to 
his discourses, that he said he had already derived 
all the advantage he could have hoped for from the 
worship of the goddess. He then decided to discon- 
tinue his pilgrimage and abide with the Guru. 

The Guru, on seeing his daily increasing devotion, 
said to him one day, ‘ I must give thee some- 
thing ; but first go home and settle thine affairs, 
and when thou returnest I will initiate thee as 
a Sikh.’ Upon this Lahina returned to Khadur, 
and told his wife what had happened and the 
spiritual change which had been wrought in him 
by meeting Guru Nanak, whom he described as the 
bestower of happiness both in this world and the 

B 2 


4 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


next. He said he had determined to place himself 
for the future at the Guru’s feet. After a stay of some 
days at his home, during which he procured a new 
suit of clothes for himself and a bag of salt for the 
Guru’s free kitchen, he set out, accompanied by his 
nephew, for Kartarpur. On arriving at the Guru’s 
house he was respectfully received by Sulakhani, the 
Guru’s wife, who told him that the Guru was in his 
fields, and would be home by evening. If, however, 
Lahina desired to see him at once, he might go to 
meet him. Accordingly Lahina, making over the 
bag of salt to Mata Sulakhani, went straightway 
to the Guru. 

The Guru had collected three bundles of grass 
for his cows and buffaloes, and he desired to have 
the bundles taken home ; but, as the grass was wet 
and full of mud, his ordinary Sikhs slunk away from 
the task. He then asked his sons Sri Chand and 
Lakhmi Das to carry the bundles. They too evaded 
the duty, saying that there was a labourer coming 
who would take them. Lahina, who had just arrived, 
made his obeisance and said, ' Consider me as 
a labourer, and give me this work to do.’ The 
Guru repeated his wish to have the bundles taken 
to his house. Lahina asked for assistance to lift 
the bundles on his head, and he would then carry 
them. The Guru said he might take as many as 
his strength permitted. Lahina, gathering strength 
from his enthusiasm, took up the three bundles, and 
walked with them in company with Guru Nanak to 
his house. On the way the dripping of the moist 
mud from the grass soiled his new clothes. 

When they arrived, the Guru’s wife, seeing Lahina’s 
state, asked the Guru if it were a proper thing for 
him to impose such menial labour on a guest and 
soil his new clothes. The Guru, she said, was depriv- 
ing the Sikhs of their faith through his great want 
of consideration. The Guru replied that God had 
put the bundles on the head of the man who was 


LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


5 


fit to carry them. His wife, not understanding the 
Guru’s hidden meaning, rejoined, ‘ See, his clothes 
from his head to his feet are fouled with the mud 
which has been dripping from the grass.’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ This is not mud ; it is the saffron of God’s 
court, which marketh the elect. Even one of these 
bundles was difficult to lift. He hath acquired 
divine strength, and lifted all three.’ On looking 
again the Guru’s wife observed that the mud on 
Lahina’s clothes had really changed to saffron. 
The three bundles are held by the Sikhs to symbolize 
spiritual affairs, temporal affairs, and the Guruship. 

It was Guru Nanak’s practice to rise three hours 
before day and go to bathe in the Ravi. After his 
bath, he used to recite the Japji, meditate on God, 
and sing His praises till day dawned. He was always 
attended by Lahina, who took charge of his clothes, 
and performed for him any other offices he required. 
Three other Sikhs — Bhai Bhagirath, Bhai Budha, 
and Bhai Sudhara — on seeing Lahina’s constancy 
and devotion to the Guru, thought that they too 
would perform meritorious service for him, so they 
proceeded in the early morning to the bank of the 
river to wait on him. It was the winter season, 
black clouds gathered, cold winds blew in gusts, and 
hail began to fall. The three men became quite 
benumbed, and were with difficulty able to make 
their way home shaking and shivering. It was only 
by warming themselves at the fire that they I'ecovered 
the use of their limbs. Lahina endured the cold as 
if it had been the mildest weather. When the Guru 
at sunrise came out of the water, he congratulated 
Lahina on his endurance, and said he had attained 
salvation, which was the main object of human 
birth. 

Once Lahina thought to himself, * The Guru 
endureth great cold in performing his penance. It 
is not right that his servant should live in comfort.’ 
Accordingly before day next morning he too entered 


6 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


the water, and only came out at sunrise, by which time 
his body was nearly frozen. He fell down at the Guru’s 
feet, and the Guru’s touch had the effect of restoring 
the natural heat of his body. All the Sikhs were 
astonished on seeing the Guru’s kindness to the 
man who had voluntarily become his servant, and 
endured well nigh unendurable hardships for him. 

Chapter II 

The Guru now began to enter on a systematic 
trial of the devotion of his Sikhs. One winter’s 
night, as heavy rain was falling, a part of the wall of 
his house fell. The Guru said it must be repaired at 
once. His sons said it was now midnight and very 
cold, but they would send for masons and labourers 
in the morning, who would do the necessary repairs. 
The Guru replied that there was no need of masons 
and labourers. The Guru’s work must be performed 
by his Sikhs. Everybody was silent except Lahina, 
who at once stood up and began to repair the wall. 
The Guru’s sons and other Sikhs went off to sleep. 
When Lahina had to some extent restored the wall, 
the Guru said, ' That is crooked, throw it down, 
and build it up again.’ Lahina did so, but the Guru 
again professed not to be satisfied. The foundation 
must be moved back, which meant that the wall 
must be thrown down again, and built up for the 
third time. Lahina obeyed his master’s order, but 
the master again expressed his dissatisfaction, and 
asked to have the wall again destroyed and again 
rebuilt. Upon this the Guru’s sons told Lahina that 
he was a fool to obey unreasonable orders. Lahina, 
putting himself into a respectful posture, replied that 
a servant should make his hands useful by doing 
his master’s work. The Guru then said to his family : 
‘ You know not this man’s worth. He used every 
year to visit the shrine of Durga. Now, having met 
the Guru, he hath remained to serve the true God.' 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


7 


The Guru and his disciple grew daily more pleased 
with each other. In proportion as the Guru instructed 
him, divine knowledge entered his heart. The Guru’s 
sons grew jealous of the devoted servant and 
disciple, and took no pains to conceal their dis- 
like. Probably in order to still the enmity which 
daily increased, the Guru suggested that Lahina 
should return for a time to Khadur. The Guru said : 

‘ Thy father, mother, and relations are much dis- 
tressed at thine absence from them. Wherefore 
return to Khadur, tarry there for some time, and 
cause God’s name to be repeated. I myself lived 
there once in the house of Satbharai. My bed is 
still there. Thou shalt behold me in Khadur as if 
thou wert near me.’ 

Lahina, who was the essence of obedience, at once 
proceeded to Khadur. On his arrival it became 
known that he had spent three years with Guru 
Nanak, and had made great progress in virtue and 
spirituality. Accordingly, everybody went to pay him 
homage. Among others Takht Mai, the head man of 
the city, went to touch his feet. Lahina said to 
him, ‘ This must not be, since thou art in every way 
of higher rank than myself ; ’ but Takht Mai knew 
of the power Lahina possessed to render him spiri- 
tually perfect, and would not abate a jot in his 
devotion to him. He pressed Lahina to give him 
religious instruction by which he might be saved. 
Lahina accordingly repeated to him the following 
hymn of Guru Nanak : — 

God will regenerate those in whose hearts there is love ; 

He will make them happy with gifts, and cause them to 
forget their sorrows. 

There is no doubt that He will assuredly save them. 

The Guru cometh to meet those for whom such destiny 
hath been recorded, 

And will give them for their instruction God’s ambrosial 
Name. 



8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


They will walk as it pleaseth the true Guru, and never 
wander a-begging . 1 

Why should he, for whom God’s court is at hand, bow to 
any one else ? 

The porter at God’s gate will ask him no questions 
whatever. 

Man shall be saved by the words of those on whom God 
looketh with favour. 

There is no one to advise Him who sendeth and recalleth man . 

God knoweth how to do all things ; He destroyeth, 
constructeth, and createth. 

Nanak, the Name is the reward of him to whom the 
Gracious One showeth favour . 2 

On hearing this the doors of Takht Mai’s under- 
standing opened, and divine knowledge shone on 
him. All the Sikhs, believing Lahina to be even as 
Guru Nanak, went to do him homage. Bread was 
daily made and distributed to visitors, and the 
devotion of the people daily increased. 

The Guru, knowing Lahina’s devotion, went to 
visit him in Khadur. Lahina and his wife fell at 
the Guru’s feet, and placed everything they had at his 
disposal. The Guru taught Lahina contempt for the 
world, discrimination, and divine knowledge. Having 
thus made him spiritually wise with excellent instruc- 
tion, the Guru returned to Kartarpur, leaving Lahina 
in Khadur. While reciting the prayers taught him 
by the Guru, the time passed speedily for Lahina. 
Hopes, desires, and worldly love all vanished, while 
his spiritual love and devotion were all centred on 
God. As gold is tried by the touchstone, so did 
Guru Nanak try Lahina, and find him pure and 
altogether fit for the exalted office of Guru. 

Henceforth Lahina never went into the town. 
He remained absorbed in spiritual thought and 
love of the Word. The only time he left his house 


1 That is, they will not suffer transmigration. 


2 Suhi. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


9 


was when he went to the border of a tank outside 
Khadur, where he used to lie down in incessant and 
unwavering meditation on God. 

Guru Nanak, knowing Lahina’s devotion, was not 
very long in paying him another visit, and thus 
addressed him : * Thou hast performed excessive 

devotions. I cannot endure that thou shouldst 
suffer any longer. Between thee and me there is 
now no difference. None of my Sikhs hath such 
faith and confidence in me as thou, and therefore 
I love thee most of all. Thou art verily Angad 
a part of my body. I congratulate thee.’ Say- 
ing this the Guru embraced him, and took him to 
Kartarpur. 

While at Kartarpur Guru Nanak found time to 
attend to agriculture. He sowed several fields of 
corn which gave him an unfailing supply for his 
kitchen, from which he fed all comers, Musalmans 
as well as Hindus. Once, when there was an unusual 
crowd of visitors, continuous rain fell for three days, 
and it became impossible to light a fire or cook, so that 
there was nothing to eat for his guests. The Guru 
went out into the fields, taking with him his sons 
Sri Chand and Lakhmi Das. He explained to them 
his difficulty, and how improper it would be that 
his guests should want for anything as long as they 
sought shelter with him. His sons replied, ‘ How 
can we satisfy such a crowd in this heavy rain ? 
Whence can we obtain sufficient bread ? ’ The 
Guru said, ‘ Climb this kikar tree, shake it, and it 
shall rain fruit and sweets to satisfy our visitors.’ 
Sri Chand replied, ‘ Nothing can fall from kikar but 
thorns or bitter fruit.’ The Guru then addressed his 
other son : ‘ Climb this tree and shake it.’ Lakhmi 
Das replied, ‘ Hath such a thing ever been done 
before ? Have sweets and pastry ever fallen from 
trees ? ’ The Guru then told Angad to do what 
his sons had refused. Angad with great alacrity 
climbed the tree, shook it, when down fell heaps of 


10 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


every conceivable form of Indian sweetmeats. When 
the Guru’s guests had partaken thereof and satisfied 
their hunger, they began to sing praises of the. Guru 
and his faithful disciple. Angad promptly explained 
that such power was not in himself. It was divine 
knowledge not sweetmeats which dropped from the 
tree. It was all the miraculous effect of the Guru’s 
words. The Guru on hearing this said, ‘ My words 
are profitable, but only they who obey them shall 
obtain the fruit thereof.’ It was then for the first 
time the Guru’s sons and many of his Sikhs realized 
the value of obedience. 

The Guru had by now well tested Lahina’s 
devotion, but at the same time deemed it proper to 
make further trial, principally with the object of 
humbling the pride of his sons, and convincing them 
and his disciples that Lahina alone was worthy to 
succeed him. On one occasion near midnight, when 
the sacred songs had ceased, and all except the 
Guru had retired, he called his sons, told them that 
his clothes were soiled, and asked them to take them 
at once and wash them. They replied that all the 
wells had stopped , 1 that it was dark, and that, even 
if by any means they succeeded in washing the 
clothes, they could not dry them at that hour. 
When it was day they would procure a washerman 
who would perform the required service. The Guru 
said it would be well if they went themselves at once 
and washed them. They replied, that, if he could 
not wait* till morning, he had better put on other 
clothes. Upon this the Guru addressed himself to 
Angad. Angad at once took up the clothes, where- 
upon day dawned, and he found the wells on the 
outskirts of the city in motion. He rapidly washed 
and dried his master’s clothes. On returning with 
them in an incredibly short space of time, everybody 

1 Water in the Panjab is most generally raised by Persian wheels 
which are worked by bullocks or buffaloes. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


ii 


was astonished, and the Guru again expressed him- 
self delighted with his service. 

One day, as the Guru was washing his hair, the 
cup lie used slipped from his hand and fell into 
a deep sink. The Guru told his sons to bring it to 
him quickly. They replied that the sink was very 
deep and full of dirty water, but that they would 
get somebody to dive for it. Upon this the Guru 
told Angad to restore him his cup. As soon as Angad 
put in his hand, it is said, the cup rose to the sur- 
face of the water, and he had no difficulty in taking 
it out and presenting it to his master. The Guru 
then said to his wife, ‘ Sri Chand and Lakhmi Das 
are thy sons ; Lahina, who obeys me, is my son.’ 
The Guru’s wife duly admonished her sons, giving 
them hope at the same time that, if they obeyed 
their father’s orders, one of them might be found 
fit to succeed him. The mother’s words were 
addressed to deaf ears for the sons in no wise 
showed filial affection or obedience. The last trial of 
Guru Angad was on the subject of eating the corpse 
mentioned in the Life of Guru Nanak. 

One day, as the Sikhs were assembled, the Guru 
seated Angad on his throne, put five pice and a 
coco-nut in front of him, and said to Bhai Budha, 
‘ This is my successor ; put a tilak on his forehead 
in token of his appointment to the Guruship.’ Bhai 
Budha did so. The Guru then ordered his people 
to obey and serve Angad, who was in his image. 
Whoever did so should obtain the reward thereof. 
Guru Nanak’ s sons were highly displeased at being 
superseded. He told them that Angad alone had 
proved himself most worthy of the Guruship. It 
was a position which depended on self-sacrifice, 
Angad had exhibited that virtue in the highest 
degree, and consequently had the best claim to 
the position to which he had been elevated. Guru 
Nanak directed Angad after his appointment to 
the Guruship to return to Khadur. He obeyed, 



12 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


though he wished to remain in attendance on his 
master even to his latest breath. Bhai Gur Das 
thus describes the succession of Guru Angad : — 

Angad got the same tilak, the same umbrella over his head, 
and was seated on the same true throne as Guru Nanak. 

The seal in Guru Nanak’s hand entered Guru Angad’s, 
and proclaimed his sovereignty. 

He left Kartarpur, and went and lit the Guru’s lamp in 
Khadur. 

What was sown in the beginning hath germinated in this 
world ; to offer another opinion were false cleverness. 

Lahina obtained the gift from Nanak, and it must descend 
to the house of Amar Das . 1 

A short time after the appointment of. Guru 
Angad, Guru Nanak departed this life in the manner 
already related. 


Chapter III 

A Jat girl called Nihali was one day making 
cakes of cow-dung for fuel in the vicinity of Khadur. 
She saw Guru Angad approaching and felt delighted 
at the opportunity afforded her of doing him homage. 
Guru Angad, who still keenly felt his separation 
from Guru Nanak, was singing his praises as he 
proceeded. Yearning for solitude, he said that the 
eyes which beheld Guru Nanak desired to see 
nothing more, and he then remained silent for some 
time. When he spoke again, he asked her to let 
him have a room where he might sit alone and 
meditate on God, without any distraction or inter- 
ruption. The room might be locked on him outside. 
He required nothing to eat or drink except a pot 
of milk daily. The girl granted his request. She 
gave him a pot of milk daily, and in doing so 
continued to gladden her eyes by beholding him. 
Guru Angad remained in profound meditation with 
the name of God as additional support. It is said 

1 War I, 46, 




i. 

LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 13 

that six months passed in this manner, every moment 
of which seemed an age to his Sikhs. 

One day Bhai Lalo, Bhai Saido, Bhai Ajitta and 
other Sikhs asked Bhai Budha, to whom the 
Guru Nanak had been so kind, to tell them where 
they could find his successor. They had searched 
Khadur and other places, but could obtain no trace 
of him. Bhai Budha said he would give them an 
answer on the morrow. Overnight he read the 
Sodar and the Sohila, and then fixed his thoughts 
on the Guru. He then with his mind’s eye saw 
Guru Angad sitting concealed in the house of Nihali. 
Bhai Budha rose three hours before day and read the 
Japji, the Asa ki War, and other hymns of Guru 
Nanak. At daybreak the devout Sikhs came again 
and surrounded him, as they knew the Guru had 
communicated to him supernatural knowledge. He 
told them what he had seen in a vision. They then, 
taking him as leader, proceeded to Nihali’s house 
near Khadur. The owner of the house in reply to 
their inquiries gave them no information. Bhai 
Budha then said that, as there could be no darkness 
after the sun had arisen, so a Guru could not be 
hidden. Nihali went to Guru Angad, and told him 
of the visit of his four Sikhs. He at once ordered 
that they should be shown into his apartment. The 
Guru embraced Bhai Budha and uttered the follow- 
ing sloks: — 

Die before the dear one thou lovest ; 

To live after .him in the world is a curse to life. 

After a pause the Guru resumed : — 

Cut off the head which boweth not to the Lord. 

Nanak , 1 take and burn the wretched body 2 which fecleth 
not the pain of separation . 3 

1 Guru Nanak’s successors assumed the name Nanak as their nom 
de plume. 

2 Pt'njar. Literally* — a skeleton ; here used contemptuously for the 

body. 3 Sri Rag ki War. 


*4 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The other Sikhs saw that Guru Angad had the 
same radiance on his countenance, the same manners, 
and the same appearance as Guru Nanak, and 
congratulated Bhai Budha on his success in dis- 
covering him. 

The Guru asked Bhai Budha how he had obtained 
his name Budha, and how it was that Guru Nanak 
had been always pleased with him. Bhai Budha 
then told him that he was the boy who had watched 
the little sticks burning first, and the large sticks 
afterwards, and had attended Gxiru Nanak’s prayer- 
meetings. Bhai Budha related another incident of 
his life. Once the Emperor’s troops marching 
through his village cut down all his father’s young 
crops to feed their horses. He begged his father to 
protect his fields. His father replied that he was 
powerless against the Emperor’s troops. Bhai 
Budha then concluded that, if his father could not 
withstand the Emperor’s troops, how could he 
withstand Death, a still more powerful antagonist ? 
On this Bhai Budha went and put himself under 
Guru Nanak's protection. Guru Nanak on hearing 
his history said, ‘ My brother, thou talkest like an old 
man (budha). Thou shalt henceforth be called Bhai 
Budha, and thy transmigration shall be at an end.’ 
f Bhai Budha then told how next day he took a 
pot of clarified butter to Guru Nanak. The Guru 
asked if he had brought the offering with his mother’s 
consent or secretly. Bhai Budha replied he had 
brought it with his mother’s consent. ‘ Guru Nanak 
then’, continued Bhai Budha, 'gave me divine 
instruction, upon which my mind became pure, and 
I obtained the spiritual knowledge which enabled 
me to find thee.’ Saying this he fell at Guru Angad’s 
feet. The Guru invited him to ask a favour. Bhai 
Budha replied, ‘ Take thy seat as Guru and receive 
the Sikhs publicly. Instruct us in our faith, and 
save us all.’ Upon this Guru Angad repeated the 
following : — 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


15 

He whom Guru Nanak’s instruction enlightened is im- 
mersed in the praises of the True One. 

What instruction can I give him who had divine Nanak 
for his guru ? 1 

After this Guru Angad came forth from his 
seclusion. When this was announced, crowds went 
to see him and make him offerings. All that he 
received was sent to his kitchen for the support 
of pilgrims and wayfarers. There were continual 
preaching, singing, and repetition of the Name as 
in Guru Nanak’s time. 

It was Guru Angad’s daily practice to rise three 
hours before day, bathe in cold water, and engage 
in meditation and introspection. Meanwhile the 
musicians sang the Asa ki War. At its completion 
the Guru arose from his attitude of contemplation. 
Sick persons, particularly lepers, came from great 
distances to be healed by him ; and on being healed 
returned to their respective homes singing the Guru’s 
praises. After his healing ministrations the Guru 
preached and expounded Guru Nanak’s hymns. 
About nine o’clock in the forenoon visitors of all 
conditions sat in a line, and received sacred food in- 
discriminately. When the elders had finished and 
grace had been said, the children were fed and 
instruction imparted to them by the Guru himself. 
Very often he took the opportunity of pointing a 
moral from the children’s behaviour. He used to 
delight in watching their sports, and would tell his 
Sikhs that the children’s time for mourning had not 
yet come, that elders ought to be pure and simple in 
heart as they, and then should they be dear to their 
Creator. The Guru used sometimes to witness 
wrestling matches in the early afternoon. On such 
occasions he would often take the opportunity of in- 
structing the spectators how to overcome anger and 
other deadly sins. After this he used to hold court, 

1 Majh ki War. 



i6 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


when Balwand and Satta, two famous minstrels of 
the time, entertained the company with vocal and 
instrumental music. The Sodar was then repeated 
and food distributed as in the morning. After that 
followed further singing of sacred hymns, and then 
the Guru and his disciples retired to rest. 

Jogis of different sub-sects visited the Guru, and 
endeavoured to win him over to their own practices 
and beliefs. They represented that the great Rikhis, 
Munis, and Penitents of former ages had none of them 
obtained happiness or mental purity without Jog with 
its eight accessories of forbearance, observance, pos- 
ture, introspection, suspension of breath, contempla- 
tion, absorption, and trance . 1 ‘ By the practice of J og,’ 
they said, ' life is prolonged and wealth and super- 
natural power obtained. Guru Nanak practised it, 
and was able to make disciples out of the four castes. 
Wherefore do thou also practise Jog. If thou now 
learn of us, thou shalt by the favour of Gorakh 
obtain twofold power.’ The Guru, divining their 
object, replied : ' By the favour of Guru Nanak 
I am not conscious of any deficiency in myself for 
the work in which I am engaged. In this Kaljug it 
is difficult to practise the Jog you mean, but by the 
Jog of real devotion it is easy to render the mind 
pure. Holy men say that Sahaj Jog consisteth in 
repeating the Name with fixed attention, and 
associating with the holy. By your J og, wealth and 
supernatural power may be obtained, but, when 
man becometh attached to these things, he cannot 
obtain salvation. If man’s life be prolonged, he is 
ruined by avarice and pride. While pluming your- 
selves on your bodily austerities, you have not seen 
God who is in every heart. Guru Nanak hath shown 
us how to abide pure amid impurity, that is, how 
to find God while leading a secular life .’ 2 The Guru 

1 See the Foga Suira of Patanjali, by Manilal Nabhubhai Dvivedi, 
Bombay. 

2 So also Guru Amar Das ; see below, paragraph on salvation, p. 252. 


LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


*7 


then quoted for the Jogis Guru Nanak’ s hymn 
describing in what religion consists. 

It is said that the superior of the Jogis on hearing 
it was pleased, and invited the Guru to ask him 
a favour. The Guru replied that Baba Nanak had 
given him everything, and he wanted nothing more. 
The superior again urged, ‘ Ask for something. 
Let not my words be uttered in vain.’ Upon this 
the Guru asked for humility. The superior replied, 
‘ I have it not, nor is it with the demigods in heaven.’ 
The Jogi then fixing his thoughts on God prayed for 
humility for himself, whereupon a voice came from 
heaven that humility had been granted with unspar- 
ing hand to Guru Nanak and his successor Guru 
Angad. Upon this the Jogis took their leave. 

After them came another Jogi of high spiritual 
rank called Harinath. He felt happy on seeing the 
Guru, and requested him to tell him man’s highest 
duty. The Guru replied with the twelfth slok of 
Asa ki War. On hearing it Harinath’s doubts were 
dispelled. The Guru’s fame increased ; there was 
ever a large crowd around him, and those for whom 
he interceded received the objects of their desires. 

One evening in the hot weather there arose a 
storm which brought clouds of dust and hindered 
the preparation of dinner. Jiva, the Guru’s cook, 
said he could only serve it if the Guru quelled the 
storm. The Guru chid him in the following lan- 
guage : ‘ 0 Jiva, remain ever satisfied with the will 
of God and the true Guru. This is the main article 
of our faith ; and the Sikh who observeth it shall 
be beloved by the Guru. As a woman who is 
virtuous, well-behaved, and clever, is ever happy in 
her obedience to her spouse, so, 0 Jiva, do thou 
accept the Guru’s instruction and be ever happy 
in thine obedience to God. By so doing thou shalt 
obtain all the advantages of devotion, penance, 
fasting, and alms-deeds, and abide in bliss. 

A blacksmith called Gujjar went to the Guru 



i8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


and asked for divine instruction that he might 
obtain salvation. The Guru bade him recite the 
Japji with attention every morning, and work gra- 
tuitously for the poor. 

A barber named Dhinga remained with the Guru 
and performed ordinary menial offices for his Sikhs. 
One day he asked the Guru for spiritual consolation. 
The Guru replied, ‘The Guru is as it were a grave, and 
the Sikhs are as it were corpses. These are laid in 
the grave when life is extinct, and they cease to 
move. So when the Sikhs divest themselves of pride, 
they are fit to rest in the Guru’s bosom. His Sikhs 
should therefore be humble and serve others. The 
saint Sain 1 was of the same trade and caste as thou, 
yet he obtained salvation by serving his fellow-crea- 
tures. Thou shouldst therefore not despair of thy 
deliverance from transmigration during thy present 
birth.’ 

Paro of the Julka tribe asked the Guru the mean- 
ing of par am hans — superior swan — as applied to 
holy men. The Guru replied : ‘ In the first place, 
the holy accept good precepts from the Guru as 
the swan, according to the popular belief, feedeth 
on pearls in Lake Mansarowar ; secondly, the holy 
renounce evil and do good as the swan by the 
peculiar structure of its bill separateth water from 
milk.’ 

A soldier named Malu Shah, orderly of a Mughal 
officer, sought for spiritual advice which would be 
profitable to him here and hereafter. The Guru 
counselled him, if ever the necessity of battle arose, 
to fight for his master, and not consider whether 
his side was in a numerical minority or not. 

Kidaru asked the Guru how he should escape from 
the fire of the deadly sins which was consuming the 
world. The Guru replied, * As when a forest is 
burning the deer flee and cool themselves in the 


1 An account of this saint will subsequently be given. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


19 


nearest lake, so should man flee the deadly sins 
and take refuge in the cooling water of the Guru’s 
instruction.’ 


Chapter IV 

The Emperor Babar was succeeded by his son 
Humayun. He invaded Gujrat in the Dakhan, 
and then determined on making an expedition 
against Sher Shah, who had recently taken posses- 
sion of Bengal. Humayun was successful at first. 
He recovered Gaur, then the capital of Bengal, but 
was at last defeated and obliged to seek safety in 
flight. Mounted on horseback he plunged into the 
Ganges ; his horse sank, and he himself only escaped 
drowning by the prompt assistance rendered him 
by a water-carrier. On crossing the river, he made 
his way to Agra, and there effected a reconciliation 
with his brother Hindal, who had previously been 
his enemy. They with their brother Kamran col- 
lected a great force, and this time there were hopes 
of success for the imperial cause, but Humayun was 
again defeated near Kanauj, and was obliged to flee 
from Hindustan. He made his way to Lahore, and 
there inquired for some wonder-working priest 
who could restore him his throne and kingdom. 
He was informed of the greatness of the late Guru 
Nanak and of the succession of Guru Angad to 
his spiritual sovereignty, and advised to seek his 
assistance. Upon this Humayun, taking offerings 
with him, proceeded to Khadur. The Guru at the 
time was in a deep trance, minstrels were playing and 
singing the Guru’s hymns, and the Emperor was 
kept standing. He became violently angry, and 
put his hand on the hilt of his sword with the inten- 
tion of striking the Guru. The sword, however, 
would not come out of the scabbard, a circumstance 
which gave the fugitive Emperor time to repent of 
his haste. The Guru, nothing daunted, addressed 



20 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


him : ‘ When thou oughtest to have used thy sword 
against Sher Shah, thou didst not do so. Now when 
thou comest among priests, instead of saluting them 
respectfully, thou desirest to draw thy sword on 
them. In a cowardly manner hast thou fled from 
the battle, and now posing as a hero thou wishest 
to attack a body of men engaged in their devotions.’ 
Humayun repented and craved the Guru’s spiritual 
assistance. The Gum replied : ‘ Hadst thou not put 
thy hand on the hilt of thy sword, thou shouldst at 
once have obtained thy kingdom. Thou shalt now pro- 
ceed for a time to thine own country Persia, and when 
thou returnest thou shalt recover thy possessions.’ 
The Emperor took his leave, crossed the Indus with 
great trouble and difficulty, and made his way to 
his native country. Having obtained a reinforce- 
ment of cavalry from the king of Persia, he returned 
to India, and after a pitched battle recovered his 
empire and captured Dihli. After his success he felt 
grateful to the Guru and desired to do him a favour. 
By this time Guru Angad was no more, and Guru 
Amar Das reigned in his place. Guru Amar Das sent 
a message to the Emperor to live honestly, not to 
desecrate holy places, and not again to come to molest 
the Guru. 

There was a Sikh called Mana who worked in 
Guru Angad’ s kitchen. Through good feeding he 
waxed fat and proud, so that at last he would not 
obey any of the Sikhs or even perform his or din ary 
duties. He spent the principal part of his time 
quarrelling with his fellow Sikhs. He used to say, 

‘ I am nobody’s servant. I am the Guru’s Sikh, 
and I will only do what he ordereth me.’ One day 
he showed a disposition to work. The Guru told 
him to serve the saints. He said, ‘ I am not their 
servant, but I will do for thee what thou orderest 
me.’ The Guru, tired of seeing him suing for 
service, told him to go to the forest, gather some 
firewood, and cremate himself. Mana accordingly 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


21 


went to the forest, collected wood, and made a pyre. 
On setting fire to it and seeing it blaze np he became 
afraid, and did not relish the idea of death. Mean- 
while a thief arrived and asked why this great fire ? 
Mana related his whole story. The thief on hearing 
of the Guru’s greatness began to repent, and con- 
cluded that he had at last an opportunity of wiping 
out the sins of his past life. He accordingly said to 
Mana, ‘ Take this casket of gems from me, and let 
me in exchange for it obey the Guru’s order.’ Mana 
being a greedy man and loving life, a bargain was 
struck on these terms. The thief obtained faith, cre- 
mated himself, it is said, and went to his repose at Guru 
Nanak’s feet. Mana went to the bazar to sell the 
gems, and was there arrested on suspicion of having 
stolen them. The result of his trial was that he 
was hanged, and the stolen gems restored to their 
owner. ‘ So true is it,’ as the Guru subsequently 
said, ‘ that the perverse lose both worlds, and, if 
folly depart not from the heart, man obtaineth not 
salvation even by living near the Guru.’ 

Balwand and Satta continued to please the Guru’s 
visitors with their songs and music; but on seeing 
his glory increase, their pride and greed increased 
in the same ratio. They boasted that it was on 
account of their music the Guru had become re- 
nowned. One day an elderly Sikh asked them to 
sing him a hymn. They made a rude reply, saying, 

‘ Shall we sing hymns for peasants ? ’ The Guru on 
hearing this was not pleased, and, when the minstrels 
came to sing at the evening seance, turned his back 
on them. They went round so as to catch his eye, 
but he again avoided their salutation. They asked 
what offence they had committed. He informed 
them and said that, as they would not sing to a Sikh 
of his, they must not sing to him. They fell at his 
feet and begged his pardon, which he good-naturedly 
granted. Their pride, however, was not totally 
h um bled. They determined to sing for the future 



22 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


only on condition that they received higher wages. 
After a short time they told the Guru that one of 
their daughters was to be married, and they asked 
for five hundred rupees to meet expenses. The Guru 
desired them to wait for two months, and he would 
settle their accounts at the yearly Baisakhi fair. 
Balwand said they could not wait so long ; they 
wanted money at once, and pressed him to borrow 
it for them. The Guru replied that it was not 
a good thing to borrow, and he asked them to have 
patience and see what God would do. They then 
began to address him in an insolent tone : * It is 
we who by singing thy praises have made thee 
famous. Did we not sing the Guru’s hymns, the 
Sikhs would never make thee offerings. Therefore 
refuse not our request. If thou choose not to give 
the money we require, we will go to our homes and 
sing our hymns there.’ 

The quarrel was not adjusted, and next morning 
they did not present themselves. The Guru sent for 
them, but they failed to answer his summons. He 
again sent a special messenger to tell them not to 
delay, but come to him at once. The more, how- 
ever, the Guru humbled himself, the prouder they 
became. They replied, ‘ The Guru knoweth not our 
worth. His court shall have no splendour without 
us. Even Guru Nanak’s court would not have been 
known without the music of Mardana.’ The Guru 
could endure the ingratitude of the minstrels who 
owed everything to him, but he could not endure the 
disrespect shown to Guru Nanak’s court, so he 
cursed them and said, ‘ Their children shall wander 
forlorn, and none shall cherish them.’ The Guru 
then assigned the duty of singing the hymns to 
his Sikhs. For a good cause enthusiasts are some- 
times found. Bhai Ramu, Bhai Dipa, Bhai Ugarsain, 
and Bhai Nagauri came from Dalla with two- 
stringed violins and cymbals, and took the places 
of the faithless Balwand and Satta. It soon began 


LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


23 


to rain showers of melody and devotion, and the 
audiences were delighted. Balwand and Satta on 
reaching their homes continued to sing the Guru’s 
hymns with the object of withdrawing the Sikhs 
from the Guru, but in this they completely failed. 
No one would go to them or listen to their minstrelsy. 
They found themselves without corn or money to 
buy it, and then they began to repent of their 
impudence and imprudence. They said to some 
Sikhs, whom they expected to perform the office of 
mediators between them and the Guru, that they 
would return to their duties, if they even received 
food and clothes as remuneration. The Sikhs men- 
tioned this to the Guru, but he sternly forbade 
them to make any representation again on behalf 
of men who showed disrespect to the house of Guru 
Nanak. He said he would have the beard and 
moustaches of any one who again spoke in their 
favour cut off and his face blackened, and he would 
then have him mounted on a donkey and led in 
disgrace through the city. 

Two months after this Balwand and Satta went 
to Lahore to visit one Bhai Ladha, whom they knew 
to possess great influence with the Guru. They told 
him all the circumstances connected with their 
quarrel with the Guru, and begged him to intercede 
for them. Bhai Ladha said to himself, ‘ Here is 
a chance of doing good. The body and wealth 
abide not for ever. The only gain is for him who 
doeth a good action.’ He sent Balwand and Satta 
on before him, and having shaved his head, blackened 
his face, and mounted a donkey with his face turned 
to the tail, went round the city of Khadur, and 
finally arrived in the Guru’s presence. The Guru 
asked him what guise he had assumed. He said 
he was merely obeying the Guru’s order, and prayed 
him to be good enough to pardon and reinstate the 
rebeck-players. ‘ The Sikhs err,’ said Bhai Ladha, 
‘ but the Guru can pardon and mend what is broken.’ 



24 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru granted Bhai Ladha’s request and, com- 
mending his self-devotion, took the opportunity of 
expatiating on the merits of philanthropy : ' The 
best devotion is the remembrance of the True 
Name ; the best act is philanthropy : without both 
of these accursed is man's human birth. He merely 
vegetateth and heedeth not what is best for him. 
He is a beast without a tail or horn, and vain is his 
advent into the world. At the last moment the 
myrmidons of Death shall firmly seize him, and he 
shall depart grieving with empty hands. Almsgifts, 
penance, and sacrifices are not equal to philanthropy. 
Of the various sins that man commits none is worse 
than selfishness.’ 

When the rebeck-players came, they fell at the 
Guru’s feet, but they were too much abashed to lift 
their eyes to his. He put rebecks into their hands, 
and ordered them to sing with the same mouths 
and to the same instruments the praises of Guru 
Nanak whom they had reviled. They then com- 
posed and sang in Guru Nanak and Guru Angad’s 
praises five pauris in the Ramkali ki War, which, 
when completed by three pauris more, Guru Arjan 
subsequently included in the Granth Sahib . 1 The 
composition is known among the Sikhs as the Coro- 

1 In this narrative we have followed Bhai Dhiyan Singh Gyani, grand- 
uncle of Bhai Sardul Singh Gyani. Bhai Santokh Singh states that 
the above composition was written in the time of Guru Arjan. This 
receives some support from Gur Das also. He makes ‘ Bhai Ladha 
parupkari/ who interceded with Guru Angad for Balwand and Satta, 
live in the time of Guru Arjan. It does not, however, follow that 
Bhai Ladha did not live in the time of Guru Angad also. The 
statement that the circumstance occurred in the time of Guru Arjan is 
totally negatived by the internal evidence of the composition itself, if it 
be carefully examined. It was written by the minstrel Balwand to 
make his peace with Guru Angad. Satta afterwards, as we shall see, 
added three pauris to it in the time of Guru Arjan when the apotheosis 
of the Guru had become complete. The pauris were added with the 
intention of making a complete panegyric on the Gurus up to the time 
of Guru Arjan, and obtaining for the ode the honour of insertion in 
the Granth Sahib. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


25 


nation Ode (Tikke di War)* The pauris or stanzas 
which relate to Guru Nanak and Guru Angad are 
as follow : — 

I 

How can the words of him who uttereth the Name of the 
Omnipotent Creator be weighed ? 1 

Grant us true merits that the gift of supreme salvation 
may be ours, and that our sisters and brothers may 
share it . 2 

Nanak established his empire by laying a strong founda- 
tion of the fortress of truth . 3 

He placed the crown over Lahina’s head, and Lahma re- 
peating God's praises quaffed nectar. 

The true Guru put into Guru Angad’s heart the power- 
ful sword of the Almighty. 

The Guru and his disciple Lahina have made the straight 
road — hail to Nanak ! 

The King during his lifetime gave the apostolic mark to 
Guru Angad. 

II 

Guru Nanak proclaimed the accession of Lahina as the 
reward of service. 

He had the same light, the same ways ; the king merely 
changed his own body . 4 

The divine umbrella waved over him ; he obtained posses- 
sion of the throne in the place of Guru Nanak. 

Lahina did what Guru Nanak ordered him, and in doing so 
licked the insipid stone 6 of Jogism. 

The kitchen of the Guru’s word was opened ; in his 
earnings there was no deficiency. 

1 Also translated' — He whose name is the Omnipotent Creator doeth 
everything; how can His words be weighed? 

2 Also translated — Grant us virtues, truth, &c., as our sisters and 
brothers. 

3 Also translated — Nanak established the true empire and made firm 
the foundation of his fortress. 

4 That is, assumed another form. 

6 So called because man must suffer worldly discomfort while 
striving to obtain union with God. 


26 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He liberally spent the Master’s gift, himself ate, and gave 
alms. 

The Lord is praised ; His light flasheth from the upper 
to the lower regions. 

On beholding thee, 0 true King, the filth of different 
births hath been cut away. 

Since the Guru ordered us to speak the truth, why should 
we recede from his order ? 

His sons would not obey his words ; they turned a deaf 
ear to their priest. 1 

With evil hearts they became rebels ; they took sackloads 
of sins on their heads, 

Lahina obeyed what the Guru had ordered him, and earned 
the reward of his acts. 2 

Let us see who hath lost and who hath gained. 

Ill 

Lahina obeyed the orders of Guru Nanak whether necessary 
or unnecessary. 3 

The Guru is impartial like the god Dharmraj, and inter- 
cedeth for those who appeal to him. 

The True One doeth at once what the true Guru tell eth him. 

The sovereignty of Guru Angad was proclaimed and the 
true Creator ratified the act. 

A scion of Guru Nanak exchanged bodies with him and 
took possession of his throne. 

The people waited at the Guru’s door, and the rust of 
their sins was filed off. 

The darweshes at his gate became happy by uttering the 
Master’s true name and hymns. 

Saith Balwand, Guru Angad' s consort Khivi was a good 
person who afforded very effectual shade to his disciples. 

1 A reference to Gur Das, War I, 38, and XXVI, 33, will show that 
this line is correctly translated. 

2 This is on the supposition that khaiiai is read as the last word of 
the verse. Those who read thatiai translate — What Guru Nanak said 
he did, and what he attempted he successfully accomplished. 

3 Ko sal jiwahe salt. Also translated— (a) which is better, thistle or 
rice? (The Guru’s sons are thistles, and Lahina rice.) (< b ) As man 
doeth good or evil so shall he be accepted. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


27 

She distributed the Guru’s wealth in his kitchen — rice- 
boiled in milk and glii tasting like ambrosia. 

The faces of the Guru’s Sikhs were bright ; those of the 
perverse grew pale. 

The disciples who toil are accepted in company with their 
master. 

Mother Khivi’s spouse is he who supporteth the earth, 

IV 

Guru Nanak, in bowing to Guru Angad , reversed the order 
of things, 1 and everybody said 6 What is this he hath done ? 5 

King Nanak, the lord of the earth, uttered sublime 
sentiments. 

Taking a mountain as his churning staff and the snake 
as its rope he churned God’s word. 

He extracted the fourteen gems and illumined the world. 

He displayed such power when he tested so great a 
man as Angad. 

He put his umbrella over the head of Lahina who then 
was exalted to the skies. 

Guru Nanak' s light blended with Guru Angad* s 9 and 
Guru Nanak became absorbed in him. 

He tested his Sikhs and his sons, and the whole sect saw 
what he had done. 

It was when Lahina was purified that Guru Nanak 
consecrated him. 


V 

After Guru Nanak , Pheru’s son the true Guru, went and 
inhabited Khadur. 

Devotion, penance, and austerities abide with thee, 
0 Lahina ; great pride with other people. 

Greed spoiletli men as slime doth water. 2 
Natural light streameth into the Guru’s court. 

They who can find no shelter elsewhere find it in thee, 
0 Lahina . 

1 HorioGangwahatau Literally— made the Ganges flow backwards. 

2 Balwand here censures himself. 



28 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Thou art completely filled with the Name, which is wealth 
and the nine treasures. 

He who slandereth thee shall be ruined. 

The people of this world only see with their eyes, but 
thou seest afar with thy mind. 

Pheru’s son the true Guru went and inhabited Khadur 
after Guru Nanak. 


Chapter V 

There resided in Khadur the purse-proud Chaudhri 1 
of the Khahiras, who placed himself in opposition to 
Guru Angad. He used to laugh at the Sikhs when 
he saw them doing service for the Guru. The 
Chaudhri had a son who was betrothed in childhood 
at vast expense. When he grew up he used to 
drink wine and frequent the society of women of 
ill fame, and he became an enemy of those who 
endeavoured to dissuade him from evil courses. 
Once he fell ill with fever, -and epilepsy subsequently 
supervened. He became insensible and foamed at 
the mouth. His parents and relations tried every 
remedy and every form of incantation, burnt in- 
cense to exorcise the evil spirits who they thought 
possessed the patient, but all their efforts were in 
vain. At last friends suggested to the young man’s 
parents to place him under the Guru’s treatment. 
Persons suffering from various ailments came long 
distances to the Guru, and all returned to their 
homes restored to health, so why should not 
the Guru heal the Chaudhri’ s son ? Moreover, the 
Chaudhri’s family lived near, and a trial at any rate 
might be made of the Guru’s healing power. The 
young man’s parents and friends yielded to the 
representations made them, and took him to the 
Guru. The Guru’s prescription was not elaborate. 
He ordered the patient to abstain from wine, serve 

1 The headman of a village. There were originally four (chan) men 
in whom confidence was placed ( dhar ) ; hence the name. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


29 


holy men, repeat God’s name, and he should be 
effectually cured. When he recovered by this mode 
of treatment he was informed that if he disregarded 
the Guru’s injunctions his malady would return. 

There lived in Khadur a pretended religious man 
known as the Tapa, or Penitent, to whom recourse 
had been made at an early stage of the young man’s 
illness. He boasted that it was his own prayers 
which had effected the cure. When the Guru heard 
this, he said he did not desire to speak evilly of 
any one, and he repeated from the Asa ki War, 
‘ Treat others as thou wouldst be treated thyself.’ 
A year passed, however, without any evil to the 
young man. When the month of Sawan came round 
with its gathering clouds, its flashing lightning, and 
its cooling rain, he said, ‘ When shall this pleasant 
time come again ? Following the Guru’s instruc- 
tions I have passed a whole year in misery and 
suffering. Now bring wine and let me drink.’ 
Several persons tried to dissuade him, but in vain. 
He drank wine without measure, saying, ‘What 
knoweth Angad of the pleasure I feel ? ’ That 
moment his epilepsy returned, he fell to the ground 
from the top story of his house, and was immediately 
killed. Every one said that his death was the 
result of his opposition to the Guru and disregard 
of his warnings. The Guru, much distressed at the 
young man’s untimely fate, repeated Guru Nanak’s 
Alahanian or Lamentation. 

When the Guru subsequently visited Harike, the 
scene of his childhood, his Sikhs went to do him 
homage, and brought him a couch to rest on after 
the fatigue of his journey. The owner of the village, 
who had known the Guru when a boy, refused to 
accept him as a prophet, to show him honour, or to 
make him an offering, but sat down familiarly 
beside him at the head of the couch. As soon as he 
did so his head became giddy, and he fell from his 
seat. The Sikhs told him that that was the result 



30 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


of his having put himself on an equality with the 
Guru. He replied, ' I am of higher caste than the 
Guru, and owner of a village. How is he superior 
to me ? ' Then the Sikhs repeated for his edification 
the eleventh slok of Asa ki War. On hearing it 
the man’s pride and malevolence departed, and he 
became a devout Sikh. 

King Ram Chandar, accepted by the Hindus as 
a god, had a younger half-brother named Bharat. 
It is said that from him the Khatris of the Bhalla 
tribe have descended. Tej Bhan of that line went 
and dwelt in the village of Basarka not far from 
Amritsar. His wife Bakht Kaur bore him four sons, 
the eldest of whom was Amar Das. He was born 
before day on the 14th of the light half of Baisakh 
in the Sambat year 1536 (a.d. 1479). He lived 
partly by agriculture and partly by trade. At the 
age of twenty-three years and ten months he was 
married to Mansa Devi. There were two sons, 
Mohri and Mohan, and 'two daughters, Dani and 
Bhani, born of the marriage. Amar Das was a zealous 
believer in the Vaishnav faith, and used to fast 
every eleventh day. He ever reflected that his 
humatN life was passing in vain, and he longed for 
the guidance of a religious teacher to make it pro- 
fitable. ' How can the lotus bloom without the sight 
of the sun,’ he asked, ‘ and how can man obtain 
salvation without a guru ? ’ He made a vow to 
bathe yearly in the Ganges, and zealously discharge 
all the duties of a pious Hindu. On returning for 
the twentieth time from that sacred river, wearied 
with travel and the noonday heat, he lay down to 
sleep outside the village of Mihra. 

As Amar Das continued his journey, he met a 
monk with whom he became so intimate and friendly 
that they cooked for each other. The monk on seeing 
Amar Das’s merits asked him what guru had taught 
him such piety and wisdom. Amar Das replied that 
he had no guru. On hearing this the monk said. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


3i 


‘ Alas ! I have committed a great sin. I have eaten 
from the hands of a man who hath no guru. My 
ablutions in the Ganges are now of no avail. It 
was only when Narad and Shukdev 1 appointed gurus 
that they themselves became worthy of worship. 
I can now only be purified by returning to bathe 
again in the Ganges.’ Thus lamenting the monk 
departed. Amar Das then began seriously to con- 
sider how he could find a guru. Until he had found 
one, he had no heart to eat or perform his secular 
duties. He prayed, * 0 God, mercifully grant that 
I may meet such a guru as will possess the alchemic 
power of turning dross into gold.’ One morning 
before day, while engaged in such reflections on the 
upper parapet of his house, he heard the dulcet 
chanting of the Guru’s hymns. The voice came 
from his brother’s house where lived Bibi Amro, 
Guru Angad’s daughter, recently married to his 
(Amar Das’s) brother’s son. It was Bibi Amro’s 
practice to rise a watch before day, bathe, and 
recite the Japji and other hymns of Guru Nanak, 
and then make butter for the family. When over- 
heard by Amar Das, she was singing the third 
hymn in the Maru measure, already given in the 
Life of Guru Nanak. 

On hearing it, Amar Das became deeply absorbed 
in devotion. From the concluding lines in particular 
he derived the sublime consolation that he should 
be changed from dross into gold. He could not 
avoid asking the lady to sing the hymn again, 
and inquired where she had learnt it. She readily 
consented, and added that she had learned the 
composition from her father. Amar Das committed 
the hymn to memory, and prevailed on her to take 

1 A brief account of Narad has already been given. Shukdev was 
a rikhi the son of Vyas, the author of the Mahabharat and arranger of 
the Veds. As usual in his epoch, he desired to place himself under 
a guru. He succeeded in finding Raja Janak, the father-in-law of 
Ram Chandar, who made him his disciple. 


32 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


him to see the Guru. The devotion of a former 
existence was kindled in his heart, and until he had 
the advantage of beholding Guru Angad, he deemed 
every moment an age. 

After some days, during which suitable arrange- 
ments were made for their travel, Bibi Amro accom- 
panied by Amar Das set out on a visit to her father 
in Khadur. When Amar Das arrived, the Guru, 
on account of his close affinity, desired to embrace 
him, but Amar Das courteously remonstrated. He 
said, ‘ Thou art as God, I am only a worm/ and 
then fell at the Guru’s feet. Amar Das, on doing 
homage to the Guru, felt as delighted as a poor 
man would who had obtained the wealth of the 
world. 

One day the Guru had a meat dinner prepared. 
Amar Das said, ‘ If the Guru is a searcher of hearts, 
he must know that I am a Vaishnav and do not 
touch flesh.’ The Guru, knowing this, ordered that 
dal 1 should be served him. Amar Das then reflected, 

‘ The Guru knoweth that meat is forbidden me, so 
he hath ordered that dal be served me instead.’ 
Amar Das then rapidly arrived at the conclusion 
that any disciple, whose practice differed from that 
of the Guru, must inevitably fail. He therefore told 
the cook that if the Guru were kind enough to give 
him meat, he would partake of it. The Guru, on 
hearing this, knew that superstition was departing 
from Amar Das’s heart, and he handed him his own 
dish. When Amar Das had partaken of it, he for 
the first time felt peace of mind, and, as he became 
further absorbed in his attentions and devotion to 
the Guru, celestial light dawned on his heart. Thus 
did he break with the strictest tenet of Vaishnavism 
and become a follower of the Guru. 

One day the Guru, in order to further remove 

1 Dal is the pulse of certain Indian leguminous plants such as chana, 
masur, vioih , urad, mung, &c. It is not the name of any particular 
vegetable. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


33 


Amar Das’s prejudices, thus began to instruct him : 
‘ The meats it is proper to abstain from are these — 
Others’ wealth, others’ wives, slander, envy, covetous- 
ness, and pride. If any one abstaining from meat 
is proud on the subject and says, “I never touch 
meat,” let him consider that the infant sucks nipples 
of flesh, that the married man takes home with 
him a vessel of flesh.’ Guru Angad then repeated 
and expounded Guru Nanak’s sloks on the subject. 
He also related to Amar Das the story of Duni Chand 
and his father, given in the Life of Guru Nanak. 

‘ If you think of it,’ continued the Guru, ‘ there 
is life in everything, even in fruits and flowers, to say 
nothing of flesh ; but whatever thou eatest, eat 
remembering God, and it shall be profitable to thee. 
Whatever cometh to thee without hurting a fellow- 
creature is nectar, and whatever thou receivest by 
giving pain is poison. To shatter another’s hopes, 
to calumniate others, and to misappropriate their 
property is worse than to eat meat.’ The last 
vestige of Amar Das’s superstition had by this time 
departed. He remained night and day in attendance 
on the Guru, and is said to have performed for him 
the menial offices of many servants. One day, as 
the Guru and Amar Das were walking together, 
Amar Das thoughtlessly put his left arm forward 
in advance of the Guru’s body. Amar Das was 
himself the first to notice and regret the occur- 
rence. He said, ‘ This arm which hath caused 
disrespect to the Guru should be cut off. What 
sort of servant am I if I revere not my master ? ’ 
The Guru replied, ‘ It is of no consequence ; swing 
thine arm by all means. It is by austerities the 
senses should be controlled. Move thy feet and 
hands in the saints’ service and thy devotion shall 
be profitable. He who performeth such service 
shall be happy. Let man renounce pride, fear and 
love God, accept His will, and obey His commands. 
These are the marks of a true Sikh.’ 

D 


SIKH, II 



34 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


One day a man called Gobind came to make a 
complaint to Guru Angad. He had been involved 
in a lawsuit with his relations, and vowed that if 
ever he were victorious, he would found a city in 
honour of the Guru. Fortune having favoured him, 
he began to found the city on an open plot of land 
on the bank of the Bias, of which he had obtained 
a lease from the Emperor. Having received from 
astrologers an auspicious time for the inception of 
the work, he laid out the boundaries, employed 
masons, and began to build ; but what was done 
by day was in some mysterious manner undone by 
night. It was supposed that this was the work 
of demons, but probably the enmity of Gobind’s 
relations has not been taken sufficiently into con- 
sideration. Gobind prayed the Guru to have the 
village completed and called after himself. The 
Guru then read him a homily on the futility of fame. 

‘ Why trouble about miserable human affairs ? 
There ought to be naught dearer to man than the 
True Name.’ Gobind then prayed him to grant his 
desires, even if he had no ambition to have the city 
founded in his honour. 

Upon this Guru Angad sent Amar Das his walking- 
stick and commissioned him to remove whatever 
obstructed the construction of the city. Amar Das 
prayed to God for His assistance, and everything 
succeeded according to the Guru’s wishes. Gobind 
founded without further molestation a beautiful 
city, which Amar Das called Gobindwal in honour 
of him. The city is now known as Goindwal. Gobind 
did not forget to build a palace in it for his benefactor 
Amar Das. When everything was completed, Gobind 
went again to Khadur to offer his thanks to the 
Guru for sending with him such a potent envoy as 
Amar Das, and also to beg the Guru to go and live 
in the newly-founded city. The Guru did not wish 
to leave his old town and residence, so he ordered 
Amar Das to go and live in Goindwal by night, and 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


35 

come to him by day. On account of the presence 
of Amar Das and the religious atmosphere which 
pervaded the place, Goindwal became a species of 
earthly paradise. Amar Das in process of time took 
with him all his relations from Basarka and per- 
manently settled in Goindwal. 

Amar Das was now old, but a halo of devotion 
shone round him. His daily duties were as follows : 
He rose at Goindwal a watch before day, and pro- 
ceeded to the river Bias to take water to Khadur 
for the Guru to bathe with. Meanwhile he repeated 
the Japji and generally finished it half-way between 
Goindwal and Khadur. After hearing the Asa ki 
War in Khadur he fetched water for the Guru’s 
kitchen, scrubbed the cooking utensils, and brought 
firewood from the forest. Every evening he listened 
to the Sodar and the daily vespers and then sham- 
pooed the Guru. After putting him to rest he 
returned to Goindwal, walking backwards in his 
supreme reverence for his spiritual master. The 
half-way spot where he used every morning to 
finish the Japji is called the Damdama or breathing- 
place. A temple was erected on the spot, and is 
now an object of pious pilgrimage to Sikhs. 


Chapter VI 

Mention has already been made of the Tapa who 
lived at Khadur. He was worshipped as a guru by 
the Khahira Jats. He was constant in his external 
devotions, and knew how to practise spells and in- 
cantations, but he cherished a most unholy jealousy 
of the Guru, and did all in his power to hinder the 
Guru’s followers from making him the object of 
a reverence which, the Tapa contended, should 
never be shown to a family man. He maintained 
that it was he himself, who was both continent and 
a penitent, whom all men should worship. 


36 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


It happened that one year there was a great 
drought in the land. The months of Har, Sawan, 
and even half of Bhadon — from the middle of June 
to the end of August — had passed, and the usual 
rains of the season had not appeared. Food stuffs 
became scarce and dear, and the people were greatly 
distressed. Cattle too suffered severely, and died 
in large numbers, for all the tanks were dry and 
no water came from heaven. The people went in 
a body to the Tapa and represented their condition. 
He said it was a small calamity in comparison with 
another which had befallen their town. ‘ I am 
a monk,’ he said, ‘ yet no one worshippeth me, but 
all worship the family man. Go now and tell the 
Guru to procure you rain.’ The cultivators replied : 
‘ The Guru telleth no one to worship him. He 
careth naught for king or emperor, he thinketh not 
of eating or drinking. Every offering made him is 
sent into his kitchen, whence the poor, the indigent, 
the traveller, and the stranger are fed. We have no 
power to compel the Guru.’ 

The Tapa replied, ‘ If you expel him from the city 
I will send you rain in less than twenty-four hours. 
If, on the other hand, you allow him to remain, let 
him cause rain to fall.’ On hearing this the ignorant 
Jats lost their heads, went to the Guru, and requested 
him to send rain. The Guru said, ‘ Rest satisfied 
with God's will. God hath no partner in His designs, 
and no one can influence Him.’ The Jats then 
delivered to the Guru the Tapa’s message. The 
Guru replied that if they thought they could thus 
gain their object, he would willingly leave their town. 
Bhai Budha was very angry with the J ats, but the 
Guru restrained him and said, * Our religion teacheth 
pardon for offences.’ Saying this the Guru turned 
his back on the town, proceeded some distance, and 
sat under a tree. The cultivators who lived in that 
neighbourhood were warned not to receive him. 
In this way he had to leave seven villages in sue- 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


37 

cession, until at last he found refuge in a forest 
near Razad Khan’s hillock, south of Khadur, where 
he was visited by neighbours who bore no allegiance 
to the haughty and hypocritical Tapa. 

When Amar Das arrived in Khadur next morning, 
he found the Guru’s house empty. On inquiring 
of the villagers, he learned all the circumstances 
connected with his master’s exile. Amar Das told 
them they were fools, asked them if they had taken 
leave of their senses, and if a lamp could ever be 
substituted for the sun ; that is, how could they 
have kept the Tapa and expelled the Guru ? Upon 
this occasion Amar Das composed the two following 
sloks : — 

By meeting the true Guru worldly hunger departeth, but 
it departeth not by merely putting on a sectarial garb. 

Through the pain of hunger the Tapa wandereth from 
house to house ; in the next world he shall obtain twofold 
punishment. 

His appetite is not satisfied, and he never eateth in comfort 
what he obtaineth. 

He ever beggeth with persistency and annoyeth the giver. 

Leading the life of a householder, by which somebody 
may gain, is better than putting on such a sectarial dress. 

They who are imbued with the Word acquire under- 
standing ; others are led astray by doubt. 

They act as they were destined ; it is of no use to address 
them. 

Nanak, they who please God are fortunate ; they are 
honoured and acceptable. 


The fire of avarice is not extinguished by wearing a 
sectarial dress ; anxiety still continueth in the mind. 

As striking a serpent’s lair killeth not the serpent, so 
a man without the Guru performeth useless acts. 

Serve the generous true Guru, and let the Word abide 
in your hearts ; 



38 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


So shall your bodies be refreshed, your minds become 
happy, and the fire of avarice be extinguished. 

You shall feel the height of bliss when you have banished 
pride from within you. 

The holy man, the real hermit, is he who continueth to 
fix his attention on the True One. 

He who is contented and satisfied with God’s name, shall 
feel not a particle of anxiety. 

Nanak, without the Name man will not be delivered ; 
he shall perish in his pride . 1 

The people all flocked around the Tapa, and said, 
‘ On account of thee have we fallen out with the 
Guru. When he was here, we always had enough 
even of dainties to eat from his kitchen. We have 
now expelled him, and yet no rain falleth.’ The 
Tapa replied, ‘ Have patience ; rain shall fall 
immediately.’ He then made every form of incan- 
tation, but without success. Amar Das explained 
to the people that, excepting God, nobody had 
power to send rain, and they had been most unwise 
in accepting the statements of a hypocrite against 
a man who had never harmed any human being. If 
the Tapa could cause rain to fall, why should he 
beg from house to house ? On this the people were 
satisfied of the Tapa’s hypocrisy, and greatly 
repented of their treatment of the Guru. They 
then inflicted suitable punishment on the Tapa, so 
that other evil men might not be tempted to follow 
his example. . After that they went in a body to 
solicit the Guru’s forgiveness for their acts. 

When Guru Angad heard of the Tapa’s punish- 
ment, he felt much grieved and thus addressed 
Amar Das : ‘ Thou hast not obtained the fruits of 
companionship with me, which are peace, forbear- 
ance, and forgiveness. Thou canst not endure 
things difficult to be endured. What thou didst, 
thou didst to please the rabble.’ On hearing this, 

1 Wadhans ki War. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


39 


Amar Das threw himself at the Guru’s feet and 
humbly besought his pardon. He promised that he 
would for the future rigidly abide by such instruc- 
tions as the Guru was pleased to communicate. 
The Guru replied : ‘ Thou shouldst have endurance 
like the earth, steadfastness in woe and weal like 
a mountain ; thou shouldst bear pardon in thy 
heart, and do good to every one irrespective of his 
acts. Thou shouldst deem gold and dross as the 
same, and practise humility, for the humble shall 
ever be exalted. Behold how valuable even minute 
diamonds are. The pearl is small, but consider its 
price. Reflect on the tiny fruit of the bohr-tree , 1 
and to what a prodigious size it groweth, filling 
a forest far and wide.’ 

The Guru on his return to Khadur passed by 
a village called Bhairo, where lived a friend of his 
called Khiwan. Hearing of the Guru’s coming, he 
went forth to meet him, and invited him to visit 
his house and bless it. The Guru accepted his 
hospitality, and made him supremely happy. Amar 
Das promised that the true Guru would grant 
Khiwan a son, and that that son should be a saint. 
On hearing this everybody was astonished that 
Am ar Das during the Guru’s lifetime should have 
adopted the role of prophet and bestower of 
offspring. Amar Das on reflection felt that he had 
again transgressed the Guru’s injunctions, and 
expressed his contrition therefor. The Guru con- 
soled him : ‘ My light is in thee. For the future, 
whatever thou sayest, say with deliberation.’ 

There was great rejoicing in Khadur on the Guru’s 
return. It was everywhere believed that the Tapa’s 
punishment was a supernatural event to attest the 
Guru’s divine mission. Henceforth no rival of Guru 
Angad set foot in Khadur. 

The Guru, on now observing Amar Das’s devotion, 

1 The bohr-tree is the Ficus Indica, generally known as the Indian 
fig-tree. 



40 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


great merits, and innate nobility of character, said 
to his Sikhs : ‘ Amar Das will save innumerable 
persons. Blest be the eyes which behold the saint 
of the True Guru, blest the hands which serve him, 
blest the feet which tread the way to the society 
of the holy, blest the ears which hear God’s 
praises, and blest the tongue which refraineth from 
calumny, slander, and falsehood. Ever speak the 
truth, and sing the hymns of the Guru.’ 

The Guru’s sons Dasu and Datu remained with 
him, but he was better pleased with Amar Das’s 
service. It was the Guru’s custom to distribute 
robes of honour half-yearly to his Sikhs. When 
Amar Das received his, he used to wear it as a 
turban or cushion on his head, and never remove 
it ; and when he received another he used to tie it 
on the top of the last presented him. In this way 
he carried twelve turbans on his head by the time 
he was appointed Guru. On seeing him carry such 
a weight people said he was in his dotage, but in 
reality his faith and devotion daily increased. He 
felt no desire for wealth or supernatural power. 
His thoughts were ever absorbed in God, the Guru’s 
service, and the distribution of alms to the indigent. 

Once a rich Sikh presented a costly dress to the 
Guru. A drop of blood fell on it from a sore on 
the Guru’s foot, and the Guru told Amar Das to 
take it to be washed. When the washerman examined 
it he said he feared the stain could not be removed. 
The cloth was of very fine material, and he asked 
not to be blamed if it were injured in the washing. 
Amar Das, on hearing this, sucked the blood from 
the dress, an extreme act of humility and devotion. 
The stain disappeared, and he took the dress 
thoroughly clean to his master, saying, ‘ As the stain 
hath vanished from this dress, so by thy favour 
hath impurity from my mind.’ 

Guru Angad’s sore foot occasionally gave him great 
pain. One night, as matter was issuing from it, he 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


41 


complained to Amar Das that he could not sleep for 
the pain. Amar Das promptly applied his mouth to 
the sore and sucked it. The Guru obtained imme- 
diate relief and thus secured a good night’s rest. 
He then told Amar Das to ask a favour. Amar Das 
replied, ‘ Why suffer from this sore ? The favour 
I ask is that thou heal it by thy supernatural power.’ 
The Guru replied by the twelfth slok of Asa ki 
War, and added : — ' In pain God is remembered and 
the mind remaineth humbled. At aright man 
awaketh in God’s service and is estranged from the 
world.’ 


Chapter VII 

One day Guru Angad said that his life was drawing 
to a close, and he must depart. In reply to his Sikhs, 
who desired that he should remain longer among 
them to bestow instruction and divine happiness, 
he said, ‘ The saints of the true Guru are of the 
nature of clouds. They assume a body for the 
benefit of the world, and confer benefits on men. 
The body, which is merely a store-house of corn, 
shall perish. As a rich man casteth aside his old 
clothes and putteth on new ones, so do the saints 
of the true Guru put away their crumbling bodies, 
and take new vesture for their souls. A man 
in his own house may remain naked or clothed, 
may wear old or new raiment — that is the con- 
dition of the saints — they are bound by no rules.’ 
The Guru’s disciples listened to this discourse 
with rapt attention and their anxieties were 
removed. 

While the Guru was considering that his sons 
were not, but that Amar Das was, fit to succeed 
him, an accident occurred which finally confirmed 
him in his determination. On the 14th of the month 
of Chet, when there was no moon, it rained all night. 



42 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Cold winds blew, lightning flashed, and every 
human being was glad to find shelter in his house 
and go to sleep. Three hours before day the Guru 
called out that he wanted water. He called again 
but no one answered him. The third time he shook 
one of his sons to awaken him, and told him to go 
and fetch water. When the son showed no inclina- 
tion to obey his father, Amar Das at once said, 
£ Great king, thy slave will fetch thee water.’ The 
Guru objected and said that Amar Das was now 
too old for such service. Amar Das replied that he 
had grown young on hearing the Guru’s order. He 
at once put a pitcher on his head and started for the 
river. Intoxicated with the wine of devotion he 
thought not of his body. On arriving at the Bias, 
he filled his vessel, began to repeat the Japji, and 
made the best of his way to his master. He paid 
no regard to the elements, but went straight towards 
the Guru’s house, feeling his way in the thick dark- 
ness as he went along. 

On the outskirts of Khadur there was a colony 
of weavers. The holes in the ground, into which 
the weavers put their feet when sitting at their 
looms, were filled with water. Into one of these 
holes Amar Das fell, striking his foot against a peg 
of karir 1 wood. Notwithstanding his fall he still 
succeeded in saving the water on his head. On 
hearing the noise and uproar, some of the weavers 
awoke. They cried out, ‘ Thief ! thief ! ’ and called 
on their people to be on the alert. On going out of 
doors they heard some one repeating the Japji, 
and one of the weavers’ wives said, ‘ Fear not, it 
is not a thief. It is that poor homeless Amru whose 
beard hath grown gray, and who hath taken leave 
of his senses. Having abandoned his sons and 
daughters, his house and home, his commerce and 
his dealings, he is now without occupation, and 
wandereth from door to door. Other people go to 

1 Capparis aphylla , the wild caper tree. 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 43 

sleep at night, but he will not rest even then. Single- 
handed he doeth the work of twenty men. He is 
ever bringing water from the river and firewood from 
the forest ; and what a guru to serve ! ’ 

Amar Das could endure hearing disrespectful 
language of himself, but not of his Guru. He told 
the weaver’s wife that she had gone mad, and 
hence her slander of the Guru. Saying this, he 
took his vessel of water to the Guru. It is said 
that the weaver’s wife did in fact go mad as the 
result of Amar Das’s censure. They sent for physi- 
cians, who, however, knew no medicines to restore 
her. It soon became known that she had offended 
the Guru by her language, so on the failure of the 
physicians the weavers decided to take her to him 
with the object of imploring his pardon. 

The weavers informed the Guru of what had 
occurred, and implored him to pardon the mad 
woman’s error. The Guru said, ‘ Amar Das hath 
done great service and his toil is acceptable. His 
words prove true ; wealth, supernatural power, and 
all earthly advantages wait on him. The peg 
against which he struck his foot shall grow green, 
and the weaver’s wife shall recover. He who 
serveth Amar Das shall obtain the fruit his heart 
desireth. Ye describe him as homeless and lowly, 
but he shall be the home of the homeless, the honour 
of the unhonoured, the strength of the strengthless, 
the support of the unsupported, the shelter of the 
unsheltered, the protector of the unprotected, the 
restorer of what is lost, the emancipator of the 
captive.’ 

After that the Guru sent for five copper coins 
and a coco-nut, bathed Amar Das, clothed him in 
a new dress, and installed him in the Guru’s seat. 
He placed the five copper coins and the coco-nut 
before him while Bhai Budha affixed to his forehead 
the tilak of Guruship. Thus was Guru Amar Das 
regularly and solemnly appointed Guru Angad’s 



44 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


successor. All the Sikhs, with loud acclamations, fell 
at his feet. Guru Angad sent for his two sons, 
Dasu and Datu, told them that the office of Guru 
was the reward of humility, devotion, and service; 
and Guru Amar Das had obtained the high position 
as the reward of his ceaseless toil, manifold virtues 
and piety. He then ordered his sons to bow before 
the new Guru, which they were very reluctant to 
do, as they had always deemed him their servant. 
Guru Angad then summoned Punnu and Lalu, the 
head men of the town, and all his Sikhs, told 
them he was going to depart this life, and that he 
had appointed Guru Amar Das as his worthy suc- 
cessor on the throne of Guru Nanak. ‘ Whoever 
serveth him shall obtain happiness in this world 
and salvation in the next, and he who envieth him 
shall have sorrow as his portion.’ 

On the third day of the light half of the month 
of Chet in the Sambat year 1609 (a.d. 1552), Guru 
Angad gave a great feast to his Sikhs, and reminded 
them of the tenets and principles of the Sikh religion. 
On the following day he rose before dawn, bathed, 
and put on new raiment to prepare for his final 
departure. He then repeated the Japji, summoned 
all his family, consoled them, and enjoined them to 
accept God’s will. He ordered Guru Amar Das to 
live in Goindwal, and there save men by his teaching. 
Guru Angad then fixed his thoughts on Guru Nanak 
and, with ' Wahguru ’ on his lips, passed from this 
transitory world on the fourth day of the light half 
of Chet, 1609, having enjoyed the Guruship for 
twelve years six months and nine days. 

Guru Angad’ s sons and Sikhs grew sad, but Bhai 
Budha bade them lament not, but repeat God’s 
name. They then began to sing the Guru's hymns 
to the accompaniment of rebecks, drums, bells, and 
trumpets. They erected a splendid bier on which 
they placed the body of the deceased Guru and 
recited the Sohila of Guru Nanak and the lamenta- 



LIFE OF GURU ANGAD 


45 


tions in the Maru and Wadhans measures- After 
this they placed the Guru’s remains on a pyre of 
sandal-wood and cremated him according to his 
express wish near the tree which sprang out of the 
karir peg against which Amar Das had struck his 
foot. 

Guru Amar Das enjoined his flock to console 
themselves and said to them, 1 Guru Angad is 
imperishable and immortal. It is a law of the body 
to be born and die, but the soul is different. It is 
ever the same essence. Holy men have deemed 
human life temporary, like the roosting of birds for 
a night on a tree, or like the brief occupation of 
a ferry-boat by passengers. Wherefore renounce all 
worldly love. A child may tremble and suppose his 
shadow to be a ghost, but the wise entertain no 
such alarm. And so the man who possesseth divine 
knowledge hath no apprehension of further trans- 
migration.’ 

On hearing the Guru’s words many Sikhs obtained 
divine knowledge, and crossing over the troublous 
ocean of the world, obtained beatitude in God. 

The principal points in Guru Angad’s character 
were to serve and love the Guru and worship God. 
It was by this means he succeeded in obtaining the 
spiritual leadership of the Sikhs in opposition to the 
wife, sons and relations of Guru Nanak. For the 
same reasons Guru Angad in spite of the opposition 
of his own relatives conferred the Guruship on Amar 
Das, who was proved to be the most worthy of the 
high dignity. 



SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 


Majh ki War 

God rewards the upright and holy who toil in 
obscurity : — 

The gift, the perverse suppose, is preferable to the Giver ; 

What shall I say of their intelligence, understanding, and 
cleverness ? 1 

He who toileth.in obscurity is known in all directions ; 

He who acteth honestly is called honest, and he who 
committeth sin is known as a sinner. 

O Creator, Thou Thyself performest the whole play ; why 
mention any one else ? 

O Source of Light, as long as Thy light is in the body Thou 
speakest in it. If any one have done aught without Thee, 
show Mm to me that I may recognize him. 

Nanak, God, who alone is skilful and wise, is made manifest 
by the Guru’s instruction. 

Spiritual exaltation : — 

To see without eyes, to hear without ears, 

To walk without feet, to work without hands. 

To speak without a tongue — that is to be dead while alive. 

Nanak, he who accepteth the will of God shall be united 
with Him. 

Addiction to pleasures is incompatible with true 
devotion : — 

We see, and hear, and know that God cannot be found in 
worldly pleasures ; 

How can man without feet, arms, and eyes 2 run to em- 
brace Him ? 

1 This is, of course, said ironically. 

2 As long as a man is steeped in worldly pleasures he has no feet, 
arms, or eyes for God’s service. 



SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 


47 

Make feet out of fear, hands out of love, and eyes out of 
understanding. 

Nanak saith, in this way, 0 wise women, shall you meet 
the Bridegroom. 

Who are perfect bankers : — 

They are perfect bankers who have found the Perfect One ; 

They are ever 1 unconcerned and abide in the love of the 
One God. 

Few can obtain a sight of the Unfathomable Being. 

Nanak, if the perfect Guru, whose acts are perfect and 
whose words are perfect, 

Make any one perfect, he will not decrease in weight. 

1 Man’s proper employment and the bliss attending 
morning devotion : — 

Let man during the eight watches subdue eight things — 
the five deadly sins and the three qualities — and his body the 
ninth. 

The nine treasures are in the One God’s name for which 
they who are profoundly religious search. 

Nanak, the favourites of destiny have praised Him 
through their gurus and priests. 

In the morning during the fourth watch they who 
remember God feel delight ; 

They love the streams wherein they bathe , and the True 
Name is in their hearts and on their lips ; 

There nectar is distributed, and the fortunate obtain 
favour. 2 

The body obtaineth the character of gold and assumeth 
a beautiful colour ; 

If the Assayer approve of it, He -will not again put it in 
the fire. 

During the remaining seven watches of the day it is good 
to speak truth and sit with learned men ; 

There bad and good acts are considered, and the capital 
of falsehood decreaseth ; 

1 A tin. Literally — during the eight watches of the day. 

2 Also translated — favours are distributed according to man’s acts* 



48 THE SIKH RELIGION 

There the counterfeit are rejected and the genuine con- 
gratulated. 

Nanak, it is idle to tell the Master of one’s misery or 
happiness. 

The virtuous hunger for God : — 

The mouths of the virtuous who love the One God weary 
not of speaking. 

Nor their ears of hearing, nor their eyes of beholding Him. 

Hunger forsaketh not those who hunger for God ; it 
departeth not by mere words . 1 

Nanak, the hungry man shall be satisfied when, by 
uttering God’s praises, he becometh absorbed in Him. 

Man ought not to undertake what is beyond his 
ability : — 

If he who only knoweth the charm for a scorpion’s sting 
touch a serpent, 

He applieth a brand to his body with his own hand ; 

It is the Master’s decree from the beginning that he be 
very severely buffeted. 

The perverse who contend with the pious shall perish ; 
this is God’s justice. 

God is the Lord of both ; He sifteth them carefully. 

Nanak, know that everything is according to God’s will. 

Know thyself and strive not to perform impos- 
sibilities : — 

Nanak, deem him who can assay himself a true assayer. 

He who understandeth both disease and medicine is a 
knowing physician. 

Let man transact no idle business on the road 2 but con- 
sider himself a guest ; 

1 The preceding three verses are also translated — 

The mouth is never satisfied with uttering worldly things, or the ears 
with hearing them, 

Or the eyes with beholding them ; each of the senses delighteth to 
gratify itself. 

The hunger of the hungry departeth not by mere talk. 

2 That is, let men have no entanglements in this world. 



SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 


49 

Let him know his own real character, confess it, and 
divest himself of his shortcomings ; 

Let him not walk in covetousness, but abide in truth ; 
he shall then become the best, and be acceptable. 

If an arrow be shot at the sky, how can it reach it ? 

The sky is inaccessible above us ; know that the arrow 
will recoil on the archer. 

Mail ought to meditate on his Creator : — 

Until man knoweth God his human birth is unprofitable. 

A few pass over the world’s ocean by the Guru’s favour. 

God is the Cause of causes, omnipotent : saith Nanak, 
meditate upon Him. 

The creation is in the power of the Creator who holdeth 
the contrivance by which it is sustained. 

Nothing can affect him whom God favours : — 

What effect can frost have on fire, the night on the sun ? 

What effect can darkness have on the moon ? What 
effect hath caste on air or water ? 

What can affect the earth in which everything hath its 
birth ? 

Nanak, man is accounted honourable if God preserve his 
honour. 


Soeath ki War 

Man reaps the fruit of his acts : — 

The nose-string is in the hand of the Master ; man is 
driven by his acts. 

It is true, Nanak — where God giveth there man eateth. 

Suhi ki War 

Man ought to think of his future : — 

Why do those who know they must depart make display ? 

They think not of their departure, but continue to arrange 
their worldly affairs. 

Man amasseth wealth for a night ; in the morning he must 
depart. 


SIKH, II 


E 



50 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Nanak, wealth shall not go with him, and then will he 
regret. 

There is no merit in divine service performed 
under pressure : — 

In the fine the prisoner payeth there is no merit, and no 
favour conferred on others ; 

Nanak, the act which is voluntarily performed is the best. 

God is won by love, not by force : — 

Obstinacy, however much one strive, winneth not God to 
man's side ; 

Nanak, he who truly loveth God and pondereth on the 
Word, winneth Him to his side. 

The contrast between those who fear and those 
who fear not God : — 

They who fear God, have no other fear, while they who 
fear Him not, shall have much 1 fear ; 

Nanak, they shall both be confronted at God’s court. 

Nature’s great law, Pares cum paribus facillime congre- 
gantur : — • 

Things which walk associate with those which walk, things 
which fly with those which fly. 

The living associate with the living, the dead with the 
dead ; 

Praise Him, Nanak, who hath established this law. 

The happiness which pervades young religious 
hearts in the vernal season : — 

Nanak, they in whose house their spouse abideth, enjoy 
■perpetual spring, 

While they whose spouse is in a distant land burn night 
and day. 

First meditate on God on the arrival of spring, 

Nanak, and praise Him who is the support of all. 

1 Much in the original. 


SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 


5i 


In what a real meeting consists : — 

It is not by merely meeting that a meeting is effected, 
that is, if there is to be a real meeting. 

They who meet with their hearts are properly said to have 
met. 

When man has only one Friend, why should he 
forget Him ? — 

Different people have different friends ; I, unhonoured, 
have only Thee, 0 God. 

Why do I not die of weeping when I bear Thee not in 
mind ? 

Think of God under all circumstances : — 

In weal repeat God’s name ; in woe also remember Him ; 

Nanak saith, in this way, 0 wise women, shall you meet 
the Bridegroom. 

Ramkali ki War 

The supreme reward of spiritual obedience : — 

Devotion, penance, everything is obtained by obeying 
God ; all other occupations are vain ; 

Nanak, obey him who hath himself obeyed God he is 
known by the favour of the Guru. 

The perverse cannot understand divine instruc- 
tion : — 

Nanak, if a blind man go to assay jewels, 

He will not know their value, but will return having made 
an exhibition of himself. 

If a jeweller go and open a purse of jewels, 

He thereby bringeth the jewels and a purchaser together. 2 

They who possess merits, Nanak, may deal in such jewels ; 

But they who know not their value go about like blind 
men in the world. 

1 Or — obey Him who is worthy to be obeyed. 

2 He brings a purchaser for the jewels, that is, he causes the 
purchaser to purchase God’s name. 

E 2 



52 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The following was addressed to the Tapa : — 

He who followeth the road when shown by a blind man 
is blind himself ; 

Why should he, Nanak, who hath good eyes stray into the 
wilderness ? 

It is not they who have no eyes in their faces who are blind; 

They are blind, Nanak, who stray from the Lord. 

The sinner may find favour by repentance : — 

The Lord can make him whom He hath blinded see clearly ; 

God treateth man as He knoweth him, no matter what one 
may say . 1 

Where the real thing, God, is not seen, know that pride 
prevaileth : 

Nanak, how shall a purchaser purchase anything if he 
recognize it not ? 

It is the perverse who are really blind : — 

Why call him blind who is blind by the will of God ? 

Nanak, it is he who will not understand God’s will who 
should be called blind. 

God provides for all : — 

Nanak, be not anxious for thy maintenance, anxiety is 
for Him 

Who created animals in the water and also giveth them 
sustenance. 

There no shop is open and no one trafficketh ; 

There is no commerce and no traffic whatever. 

Animals are the food of animals, such food God giveth 
them ; 

Hetaketh care even of the animals He created in the ocean. 

Nanak, feel not anxious — anxiety is for God. 

Sarang ki War 

Only the Guru can cause divine knowledge to 
enter the heart : — 

1 Literally Even though one speak a hundred times. 



SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 


53 

The Guru hath the key of the lock, the heart is the store- 
room, the body is its roof ; 

Nanak, without the Guru the doors of the heart cannot 
be opened, since nobody else hath the key. 

Men, though naturally equal, are appointed to 
different duties in life : — 

Thou Thyself, 0 God , didst create, saith Nanak, Thou 
Thyself didst put creatures in their different places ; 

Whom shall I call inferior since all have the same Master ? 

There is one Master of all ; He appointeth men to their 
various duties, and watcheth over them — 

Some to small, some to great duties ; none departeth 
empty. 

Men come naked, they depart naked, yet during their lives 
they make a display ; 

Nanak, it is not known what duty God will order for them 
in the next world. 

Souls proceed from God and bring their destinies : — 

Traders come from the Merchant ; He sendeth their 
destinies with them ; 

Orders are recorded therein to take care of the real 
thing. 1 

Of those who have made purchases and packed up their 
merchandise, 

Some have gone away with a profit 2 while others have 
lost their capital. 

No one wanteth small profits ; who shall be congratulated? 

Nanak, God looketh with favour on those who have kept 
their stock-in-trade intact. 

The nectar of the Name : — 

They who possess the greatness of Thy name, 0 God, are 
happy at heart. 

Nanak, there is only one nectar ; 3 there is none other ; 


1 Was/. Also translated — to take care of what they have received, 

2 Divine knowledge. 3 God’s name. 



54 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Nanak, that nectar is in the heart, but it is only obtained 
by the favour of the Guru ; 

They who were so destined from the beginning quaff it 
with delight. 

Magnify and praise the Creator only : — 

Why praise the creation ? Rather praise the Creator ; 

Nanak, there is no bestower but the One God. 

Praise the Creator who made the world ; 

Praise that Bestower who supporteth every one. 

Nanak, God, whose storehouses are full, is alone ever- 
lasting — 

Magnify and praise the Lord who hath no end or limits. 

The most exalted are subject to God’s order : — 

How shall I speak to Him who of Himself knoweth what 
is to be known ? 

That Lord is the greatest whose orders cannot be set 
aside — 

Orders by which kings, princes, and commanders must 
abide — 

What pleaseth Him, Nanak, is good. 

They who must abide by His order have no power of 
their own ; 

When He ordereth, men must take the road. 

Men must act according to God’s recorded order ; 

Nanak, men come when they are sent by God, and depart 
when they are called by Him. 

Divine knowledge is the key which unlocks God’s 
treasure house : — 

They to whom the praises of God have been vouchsafed 
are the real treasures ; 

They to whom the key is given obtain the treasure. 

The treasurers from whom good acts proceed are accept- 
able ; 

God looketh with favour, Nanak, on those who bear the 
standard of His name. 


SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 


55 

The inferiority of the Veds to the Guru’s teach- 
ing — 

The readers of the Veds have brought tales and legends 
of the gods, and defined sins and virtues. 

For what men give they receive, and for what they receive 
they give , 1 and they are accordingly bom again either in 
hell or heaven. 

The world wandereth in doubt as to what are high and 
low castes and species ; 

But the ambrosial word of the Guru speaketh of the Real 
Thing, and bringeth divine knowledge and meditation ; 

The pious utter it, the pious know it ; they who possess 
divine knowledge meditate on it, and act according to it. 

God created the world by His fiat, and restraineth it there- 
by ; He beholdeth everything subject to it. 

Nanak, if man’s pride depart ere he die, he shall be deemed 
of account. 

Man’s future is determined by his acts : — 

As a man’s acts so is he : this is a necessary conse- 
quence ; 

He who hath the marks of piety cannot lose them ; he 
must retain such appearance. 

He who acteth according to the will of God receiveth his 
reward ; Nanak, he is worthy of homage . 2 

Malar ki War 

The rainy season, during which the natives of 
India usually take rest, is accounted a time of 
pleasure : — 

Sawan 3 hath come, my companions, think of the Bride- 
groom ; 

Nanak, the bad wife who loveth another shall pine away 
and die. 

1 Men reap the reward of their acts. 

2 Such as Hindus offer their idols. 

3 The Hindi month July-August, when the rains generally begin 
in India. 


56 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Sawan hath come, my companions, the clouds are about 
to rain ; 

Nanak, the good wife who loveth her husband sleepeth in 
peace. 

The topsy-turvyism of Guru Angad’s epoch : — 

The beggar is styled a king, the blockhead a pandit, 

The blind a connoisseur — that is how people speak. 

The wicked man is styled a Chaudhri, and the liar is 
deemed perfect. 

Nanak, that is the way of this iron age ; how to distinguish 
men is known under the Guru’s instruction. 

Despise earthly glory : — 

Nanak, burn in the fire the praises of the world ; 

These accursed things have caused the Name to be for- 
gotten ; not one of them shall go with thee. 

No other composition of Guru Angad is found in 
the Granth Sahib. There are several verses in the 
sacred volume in his praise, composed by bards called 
Kalsahar, Kal, and Tal. 

Prior to Guru Angad’s time the compositions of the 
saints and reformers were for the most part written 
in Sanskrit letters. He, deeming that the com- 
positions of Guru Nanak were worthy of a special 
written character of their own, adopted and modified 
a Panjabi alphabet, called Gurumukhi, to give ex- 
pression to what fell from the Guru’s bps. This was 
furthermore a gain on the score of simplicity, for it 
contains but thirty-five letters, while the Sanskrit 
alphabet has fifty-two. 

The Gurumukhi character was well calculated to 
make its readers part with Hindu compositions 
written in Sanskrit. The Gurumukhi 5 is the San- 
skrit M, the Gurumukhi M is the Sanskrit Bh, the 
Gurumukhi W is the Sanskrit D, the Gurumukhi Dh, 
is the Sanskrit P, and the Gurumukhi B is nearly 
the Sanskrit Gh. When, therefore, one has become 



SLOKS OF GURU ANGAD 


57 


accustomed to the use of the Gurumukhi letters, 
a special and separate effort is required to read 
Sanskrit, however much one may have been pre- 
viously acquainted with it. The result has been 
that in most cases Gurumukhi scholars have parted 
company with Sanskrit and the multitudinous Brah- 
manical works in that recondite language. 

Guru Angad, elated with the adoption of a new 
character for the hymns of his predecessor, dedicated 
to God on the occasion the following hymn which we 
have found in an ancient manuscript 1 at Khadur : — 

Sarang 

0 Thou who art perfect, light of the soul, the Supreme 
God, my beloved, my soul and body. 

Bewitcher, Thou hast bewitched my heart ; I have 
obtained understanding by pondering on Thy Word. 

1 am the handmaiden of my Lord. 

On clasping the feet of God, the life of the world, I have 
destroyed and parted with pride. 

I was perverse and low, but my evil understanding which 
hath caused me pain of mind and body hath left me. 

Since I began to love the joyous God, my mind hath 
been consoled by repeating His name. 

Having forgotten pride, I have abandoned the world, 
and true wisdom hath entered my heart. 

Since I have become reconciled with Him who is without 
enmity or stain, I have lost all regard for men’s opinion. 

0 my Beloved, Support of my soul, there has been none 
like Thee in the past, and there shall be none like Thee in 
the future. 

Nanak, she who is dyed with Thy name is a happy wife ; 
Thy name is my refuge. 

1 The MS. was then in possession of a Sikh lady named Sukh Dei. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS, THE 
THIRD GURU 




Chapter I 

The early history of Guru Amar Das has already 
been given. When he was appointed Guru he 
retired into a solitary room in the upper story of 
his house, and there meditated on God and Guru 
Angad’s instructions. His Sikhs went to see him, 
and he, on the representation of Bhai Ballu, a faith- 
ful Sikh who had attached himself to him, came 
forth from his solitude and presented himself to them 
as their Guru. 

Since the time of Guru Nanak the Gurus were 
obliged to turn their attention to secular affairs, and 
to provide for the maintenance of themselves and 
their followers. Guru Amar Das’s kitchen was 
abundantly supplied by the offerings of the faithful. 
All who came to visit him were fed to repletion. 
None departed disappointed. What he daily re- 
ceived was daily spent, and nothing was saved for 
the morrow. The Guru kept only one suit of clothes 
for himself. When he received a new suit he gave 
the old one to some deserving Sikh. On witnessing 
the profusion of Guru Amar Das the minstrel Satta 
composed the following, which is the sixth pauri of 
the Coronation Ode : — 

Guru Amar Das obtained the same mark, the same throne, 
and the same court. 

The grandson was as acceptable as the father and 
grandfather . 1 

1 Guru Amar Das was as acceptable as Guru Angad and Guru 
Nanak. The terms of relationship are figurative. 



Tftff Mfflg gTTlft TOmft 



SIKH II P. 58 





LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


59 

Guru Amar Das by the force of love threw into the churn 
the rope of the snake, 

And churned the ocean of the Word with the churning 
staff of Meru ; 

He brought forth fourteen gems and illumined the world. 

He made divine knowledgehis steed and chastity his saddle; 

On his bow of truth he strung the arrow of God’s praise. 

In this age there was pitch darkness ; he arose like a sun. 

With him the field of truth germinated and the fruit of 
truth was produced. 

Ever in thy kitchen, 0 Amar Das, are clarified butter and 
flour to eat. 

Thou knowest the four quarters of the world ; the Word is 
dear to thy soul. 

Thou hast removed the transmigration of those on 
whom thou lookest with favour. 

The wise being Guru Nanak descended in the form of 
Amar Das. 

Firm as the mountain of Meru thou art swayed not by 
gusts of wind. 

Searcher of hearts, thou knowest the secrets of men. 

How can I praise thee, 0 true king, when thou art wise 
and omniscient ? 

Let Satta have whatever gifts please the true Guru. 

The sect was astonished on seeing Nanak’s umbrella over 
Amar Das’s head. 

Guru Amar Das obtained the same mark, the same throne, 
and the same court. 

The grandson was as acceptable as the father and grand- 
father. 

Hindu admirers and inquirers came from every 
part of India. It was necessary for all the Guru’s 
visitors to eat from his kitchen before they were 
allowed to behold him. The object of this ordinance 
was no doubt that his Hindu visitors should habituate 
themselves to liberal views on the subject of caste, 
and should relax their rigid customs of cooking and 
separation at meals. When his visitors had ob- 



6o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


tained audience, they interrogated him on religious 
matters, and he resolved their doubts. In such 
benevolent and engrossing duties and in the peace 
and tranquillity he enjoyed, the Guru took no ac- 
count of the flight of time. 

It is related that, though the greatest delicacies 
were served from his kitchen, the Guru himself lived 
on coarse food, and observed the most ascetic habits. 
He used sometimes to consult the Veds, the Shastars, 
and the Purans, but they offered him no spiritual 
consolation. He thus expressed his conclusions : — 

The Simritis and the Shastars define good and evil, but 
they know nothing of the Real Thing ; 

They know nothing of the Real Thing ; without the Guru 
they know nothing of the Real Thing. 

The world is asleep in mammon and superstition ; in 
sleep it passeth the night. 

By the Guru’s favour they who put God into their hearts 
and utter His ambrosial word, are awake. 

Saith Nanak, they who pass their nights awake, and who 
day and night fix their attention on God, shall obtain the 
Real Thing . 1 

At this stage of their history, when the Sikhs met 
they treated one another affectionately, and saluted 
one another with God’s name. All who came to 
receive the Guru’s instruction sat in a line and ate 
together. Even they who had not previously 
accepted the divine message, were allowed free 
access to the Guru, and partook of his hospitality. 

The inhabitants of Goindwal daily increased and 
the city extended itself owing to the number of those 
who sought the Guru’s spiritual advice and instruc- 
tion. There then arose a difficulty in procuring 
timber for the construction of houses, and a deputa- 
tion waited on the Guru to represent the matter. 
The Guru ordered his nephew Sawan Mai to proceed 
to Haripur in the Kangra district to cut down pine 

1 Anand. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 61 

trees and cedars, and float them in rafts down the 
river Bias. 

Sawan Mai accordingly proceeded to Haripur and 
was received with great honour and rejoicing by 
the citizens. An umbrella was raised over his head, 
chauris were waved around him, and flowers showered 
on him in handfuls. Men washed his feet and drank 
the water therefrom. Those who came suffering from 
physical and mental ills he instructed in the True 
Name. All such were comforted and made whole, 
and joined in singing the Guru’s praises. The Raja 
requested to be allowed to perform a service for the 
miracle-worker. Sawan Mai merely requested a grant 
of the timber for which the Guru had sent him. 
The king at once sent his men to cut down pine 
trees and cedars, and dispatch them by rafts on 
the river Bias to Goindwal. The king’s order was 
promptly obeyed. When the timber reached the 
Guru, he distributed it among people of all castes, 
who then constructed comfortable dwellings for them- 
selves. Goindwal subsequently became an imposing 
city on the margin of the Bias. 

When the time arrived for Sawan Mai’s departure 
from Haripur he as a preliminary requested the 
Raja’s permission to leave his country. The Raja 
said he would accompany him to behold the Guru, 
and thus render his human life profitable. He 
provided elephants, horses, carriages, and palkis for 
his attendants, and set out in great state and splen- 
dour for Goindwal. Sawan Mai went in advance to 
the Guru to announce the Raja’s arrival. The Guru 
said, * Let His Highness come by all means when 
he hath eaten from my kitchen.’ The Guru’s 
condition was accepted. He received the Raja in 
private audience on the top story of his house, next 
in order the Raja’s prime minister, and lastly the 
Raja’s queens. They were all gratified with a sight 
of the Guru. One of the queens lately married would 
not remove her veil. The Guru quietly said to her, 



62 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


' Crazed lady, if thou art not pleased with the Guru’s 
face, why hast thou come hither ? ’ 1 On this she at 
once became insane, and casting aside her clothes 
ran naked into the forest. Efforts were made to stop 
her, but she succeeded in escaping and baffling pursuit. 

The Raja having remained for some days with the 
Guru took formal leave of departure. The Guru 
told him that Sawan Mai, whom he recommended to 
the Raja’s protection, would accompany him as his 
chaplain. The Raja was pleased to hear that Sawan 
Mai would return with him, and lavished on him 
his respectful attentions. Sawan Mai afterwards 
occasionally went from the hills to visit the Guru, 
and listen to his teaching, so that he might not 
inadvertently deviate from the tenets and principles 
of the faith. 

A simpleton, who only clothed himself with a 
blanket, attached himself to the Guru as factotum. 
He was in the habit of saying ‘ Sach, sach ! ’ (true, 
true) to everything that was said to him, and was 
consequently nicknamed Sachansach. One day as 
he had gathered firewood in the forest and was about 
to return with his load, the insane queen appeared 
before him. She was quite naked, her hair was 
dishevelled, and she altogether presented a weird 
and alarming appearance. She caught Sachansach, 
pinched him, bit him, wrestled with him, and re- 
duced him to a sad plight. With great difficulty 
he escaped, and made his way home streaming with, 
blood. The Sikhs on seeing his plight inquired what 
had occurred. His only reply was that he had had 
enough of the Guru's service, and that he would 
leave it and return to his home. When pressed for 
his reason, he at last related his interview with a witch 
in the forest. The Guru said, ‘ Take my slipper, and 
if the witch come again, touch her with it, and she 
shall be cured of her malady.’ 

1 The Oriental custom of veiling the face is frequently reprobated 
in Sikh literature. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 63 

Sachansach obeyed the Guru’s order, and next 
day, on the queen’s aggressive approach, touched 
her with the Guru’s slipper, when she immediately 
recovered her sanity. She then for the first time 
discovered that she was naked, and sought to flee 
abashed from Sachansach’s gaze. He promptly tore 
up his blanket and gave her half of it. She wrapped 
it round her, and thus clothed went and fell at the 
Guru’s feet. He readily pardoned her offence. 
The shrine of Bhai Sachansach is near the town 
of Shekhupur. 


Chapter II 

After Guru Angad’s death, his son Datu sat on 
the Guru’s seat in Khadur, and issued the following 
proclamation : ‘ Amru (Guru Amar Das) is old. He 
is my servant. I am prince of the Guru’s line. His 
throne is mine.’ The Sikhs, however, decided that 
only he whom the true Guru Angad had appointed, 
should be deemed the real Guru. They therefore left 
Datu at Khadur and went in a body to Goindwal, 
where Guru Amar Das resided. His Sikhs gathered 
round him, and there was ever a crowd of devoted 
followers at his door. Datu was kept duly informed 
by emissaries of the reverence in which Guru Amar 
Das was held by his followers. 

One day some Sikhs, who had not heard of Guru 
Amar Das’s change of residence, arrived in Khadur. 
As they were departing to behold him in Goindwal, 
a sympathizer of Datu said to him, ‘ Canst thou, 
whose servant Amar Das enjoyeth sovereignty, en- 
dure it and live ? Thou who oughtest to be master, 
canst now only look on, and be thy servant’s servant. 
An innumerable crowd of worshippers bearing offer- 
ings and presents go to visit thy rival. Go and see 
for thyself.’ Datu could no longer endure such taunts, 
and early next morning proceeded to Goindwal to 



64 THE SIKH RELIGION 

see with his own eyes the position of affairs. On 
beholding the Guru surrounded with such splendour 
he said, ‘ Only yesterday thou wert a water-carrier 
in our house, and to-day thou sittest as a Guru.’ 
Saying this he kicked the Guru off his throne. The 
Guru meekly replied, ‘ O great king, pardon me. 
Thou must have hurt thy foot.’ Upon this the Guru 
arose and retired to the upper story of his house. 
His Sikhs, angry at the violence offered their master, 
also abandoned the place. The Guru, when alone, 
deliberated on his best course of action, and by 
evening decided he could only have peace by be- 
taking himself to a distance from his tyrant. He 
accordingly left Goindwal for Basarka, his native 
village. 

Early next morning a Jat cultivator of Basarka, 
going to his land some distance from the town, 
met the Guru on the way. He fell at his feet and 
said, ‘ I have heard that thou hast obtained the 
Guru’s throne ; how is it thou hast come here alone ? 
May I be of service to thee ? ’ The Guru asked 
for a residence, and the Jat immediately prepared 
him one. The Guru on entering it requested his host 
to brick up the doorway and on it record the follow- 
ing : ‘ Whoever openeth this door is no Sikh of 
mine, nor am I his Guru.’ The Guru on being thus 
immured consoled himself by reflecting on the couplet 
of Kabir 

Kabir, heart-burning ariseth from claims, he who hath no 
claim is without anxiety. 

He who hath no claim deemeth Indar poor in comparison 
with himself. 

Datu was now free to sit on the Guru’s throne in 
Goindwal, and became very proud of his new position. 
The Sikhs, however, would not approach him, and all 
the pilgrims to Goindwal went away on hearing of 
his insult to the Guru. On seeing the contempt with 
which he was regarded, he loaded his newly-acquired 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


65 

wealth on a camel and returned to Khadur. On 
the way he encountered robbers, who seized the 
camel with its load. One of the robbers struck Datu 
on the foot with which he had kicked the Guru. It 
swelled up as big as a drum, and caused him great 
agony. 

The Sikhs were very much distressed at losing 
their Guru. Some searched the forests, others the 
banks of the Bias, but could procure no trace of 
him. It was then decided to consult Bhai Budha, 
the foremost of the Sikhs. He had formerly pointed 
out Guru Angad’s place of concealment, and they 
hoped he would have similar success in discovering 
Guru Amar Das. They accordingly prayed him to be 
again their guide. Their prayer placed Bhai Budha 
in a dilemma. If he pointed out where the Guru 
was, the Guru might be angry ; and if, on the other 
hand, he did not do so, the distress of the Sikhs 
would be intolerable. Bhai Budha, after full con- 
sideration, decided to do what was proper, and 
endeavour to find the Guru. To this end he deter- 
mined that the Guru’s mare should be put in front 
of the search party, and that they should all follow 
her. Accordingly, bowing towards the Guru’s vacant 
throne, and uttering a prayer for the success of their 
quest, they let the mare loose and anxiously followed 
her at a short distance. 

She unerringly made her way to the Guru’s house 
in Basarka, and stood before his door. The Sikhs 
congratulated Bhai Budha on the success of the 
plan he had contrived. A difficulty now arose as 
to how they were to obtain access to the Guru. 
Before their eyes was distinctly written, ‘ Whoever 
openeth this door is no Sikh of mine, nor am I his 
Guru.’ There was no prohibition, however, to find 
another entrance, so they resolved to make an 
opening in the wall. They did so, and all entered 
by it. The Guru, on hearing the tumult, arose from 
his deep meditation. He asked his unexpected and 

F 


SIKH* II 



66 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


unceremonious visitors why they had opened his 
door in disregard of his orders. On their explanation 
the Guru accepted the position. Bhai Budha then 
frankly addressed him : ‘ Guru Angad hath attached 
us, O Guru, to thy skirt ; yet thou hast deserted us 
and concealed thyself. How are we to receive 
spiritual consolation ? ’ The Guru smiled and re- 
mained silent. 

The opening, supported by brickwork, is still 
shown at Basarka, where a yearly fair, at the full 
moon in the month of Bhadon, is held in com- 
memoration of the event. The Guru could not 
disregard the love and devotion of his Sikhs, and 
mounting his mare returned with them to Goindwal. 
The resumption of his spiritual duties was celebrated 
with illuminations, rejoicings, and feastings. Mean- 
while Datu was detained at Khadur by the pain in 
his foot, and through very shame, if for no other 
reason, would not consent to visit the Guru. 

As the fame of the Guru's piety and saintly char- 
acter increased, he became more and more the object 
of popular veneration. Bhai Paro, who lived in the 
village of Dalla in the Jalandhar Doab, that is, be- 
tween the rivers Satluj and Bias, received religious 
instruction and emancipation from him. Paro used 
to ride to visit the Guru every other day. Once a 
Nawab's son observed and followed him. He saw 
Paro take a plunge with his horse into the deep water 
of the Bias, and arrive safely on the opposite shore. 
The Nawab's son congratulated him, and inquired in 
whose service he underwent such trial and danger. 
Paro informed him of his visits and devotion 
to the Guru. On hearing this and other particulars 
regarding the successors of Guru Nanak, the Nawab’s 
son became a Sikh and renounced his ancestral 
position. 

Bhai Lalo, a banker’s son of the village of 
Dalla, joined Bhai Paro in one of his visits to the 
Guru. Bhai Lalo had been religious from his earliest 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 67 

years. When he came of age his father died, leaving 
him considerable wealth. This he increased by his 
industry, while at the same time he relieved every 
case of distress brought before him, and became 
famous for his charities. Lai means a ruby. The 
Guru on hearing his name said, ‘ Lalo Ear rang 
rangia gaya,’ an expression which may be either 
translated — Lalo is imbued with God’s love, or — 
the ruby glows with every colour. Lalo on receiving 
instruction and initiation became a ruby or gem of 
the Guru. He used to visit him on the first day of 
every month. When returning home he always took 
with him one or two Sikhs. These he would bring 
back on the occasion of his next monthly visit, and 
then take one or two others to accompany him. By 
means of these relays of earnest Sikhs he preserved 
his orthodoxy and his connexion with the Guru. 

During one of Bhai Lalo’s visits the Guru com- 
plimented him on his great public benefactions. 
Then, patting him on the forehead, the Guru said 
that he had invested him with spiritual power and 
sanctity. On thus receiving the approbation of the 
Guru, Bhai Lalo returned home for the last time, 
and there continued to exercise the humility and 
generosity for which he had been previously so 
distinguished.- 

A Khatri named Mahesha of Sultanpur also sought 
the Guru’s protection and permission to sit at his 
feet. The Guru initiated him into the Sikh religion 
and taught him its tenets. A short time afterwards 
Mahesha lost all his wealth, but not his faith in the 
Guru. On the Guru’s intercession God restored him 
all his property, and granted him the priceless boon 
of salvation. 

The Guru preached lessons of forgiveness and 
endurance, but his enemies only returned evil for 
the favours he had intended them. Their slander, 
however, was to him like a rain shower which, 
though it might cause a mud wall to crumble down, 



68 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


would only cleanse a mountain’s side. When 
Goindwal rose to importance some Muhammadan 
dignitaries settled there. Blinded by authority and 
wealth, they deemed every one inferior to themselves. 
They could not tolerate the fame of the Guru, and 
caused him every form of annoyance, but, so far 
from desiring to take revenge, he used to pray to 
heaven to soften their hearts and guide them aright. 
When Sikhs went to fetch water for the Guru’s 
kitchen, Muhammadan boys were instigated to break 
their earthen vessels with pellets and clods. When- 
ever the Sikhs remonstrated, the Muhammadans 
assaulted them. When the Sikhs, driven to ex- 
tremities, complained to the Guru, he told them, 
instead of fragile earthen vessels, to use goatskins 
which could not be so easily broken. This advice 
the Sikhs adopted, but the Muhammadans pierced 
the goatskins with arrows, and continued to harass 
the Sikh water-carriers as before. The Guru then 
counselled his people to use brass utensils. These 
the Muhammadans knocked off the bearers’ heads 
with bricks and stones, and drove the Sikhs almost 
to distraction. But, however much the Muham- 
madans annoyed the Sikhs and the Guru, he never 
uttered a harsh word, but, on the contrary, prayed 
that God would remove the hate and religious rancour 
of their hearts. His Sikhs asked how long they 
should bear the tyranny of the Muhammadans. The 
Guru replied, ' As long as you live. It is not proper 
for saints to take revenge. Nay, there is no greater 
penance than patience, no greater happiness than 
contentment, no greater evil than greed, no greater 
virtue than mercy, and no more potent weapon than 
forgiveness. Whatever man soweth he shall reap. 
If he sow trouble, trouble shall be his harvest. If 
a man sow poison, he cannot expect ambrosia.’ On 
hearing this homily the Sikhs regained their peace 
of mind. 

A company of armed Sanyasis arrived in Goind- 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 69 

wal. As the Muhammadan hoys were discharging 
pellets at the Sikhs, one of the pellets knocked out 
the eye of the Sanyasis’ high priest. The Sanyasis 
became enraged, seized the offending boy, and beat 
him to death. Upon this an affray arose between 
them and the Muhammadans, in which arrows, 
swords, lances, daggers, and axes were employed. 
The Sanyasis invoked Dattatre, 1 and the Muham- 
madans Ali 2 to support them in the combat. 
Many brave men on both sides were slain, and 
among them several enemies of the Guru. The 
Sikhs regarded the destruction of the Muhammadans 
as a divine chastisement for the annoyance to which 
they had subjected them. 

Soon afterwards, as a detachment of soldiers 
guarding imperial treasure was on its way from 
Lahore to Dihli, a storm arose as the convoy 
approached Goindwal, and the heavens Assumed 
a sable hue. Though the soldiers exercised great 
vigilance, yet one mule laden with money strayed 
to the Muhammadan quarters of the town. The 
soldiers searched everywhere, and the town-crier 
made proclamation, but no trace could be found of 
the mule. Some of the Muhammadans who had 
concealed the animal, hypocritically joined in the 
search, and expressed their regret at the occurrence. 
At last the mule betrayed its captors. Left alone 
in the house of a Musalman, the animal neighed 
plantively on missing the company of his fellows. 
When the police officer heard the sound, he pro- 
ceeded to the dwelling whence it had issued. The 
Muhammadans endeavoured to prevent his entry 
on the plea that he was violating their domestic 
privacy, but the police officer was not to be thwarted, 
and succeeded in rescuing the mule with his 
treasure. He then reported all the offences of the 
Muhammadans to the Emperor — their persistent 

1 The founder of the Sanyasi sect, who was afterwards deified. 

2 Son-in-law of Muhammad and leader of his four friends. 



7 o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


annoyance of the Guru and his Sikhs, their attack 
and slaughter of the Sanyasis, and finally their 
endeavour to rob the Emperor of his treasure. 
The Emperor ordered that they should be imprisoned, 
their houses razed to the ground, and all their 
property confiscated. ‘Such’, said the Guru, ‘shall 
ever be the condition of those who bear enmity to 
men who desire to live at peace.’ 

Chapter III 

On one occasion when the Guru visited an out- 
lying village and preached, the headman said his 
words ought to be recorded, and he sent for pen and 
ink for the purpose. The following was the Guru’s 
expostulation : — 

Why send for pen and ink ? Write my words in thy heart. 

If thou ever abide in the love of God, thine affection shall 
never be sundered from Him. 

Pens and ink-bottles shall perish — what they write shall 
go with them — 

Nanak, but the love of the True One which He bestoweth 
from the beginning shall not perish. 

The things which are seen shall not depart with one ; see 
if there be any contrivance by which they may go with you. 

The true Guru implanteth the True One in your hearts ; 
continue to love Him. 

Nanak, the Giver of the Word is true, and He is obtained 
by good acts. 

The Guru continued his instructions : — ‘ The Guru 
will assist him who hath endurance ; God is patient 
and patiently rewardeth. If any one ill-treat you, 
bear it. If you bear it three times, God Himself 
will fight for you the fourth time, and extirpate 
your enemies.’ 

He then quoted the twenty-first pauri of the 
Asa ki War. 

The Guru, having obtained respite from his 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


7i 


Muhammadan persecutors, continued to commu- 
nicate spiritual and ethical instruction to his Sikhs : 
‘ Do good to all, but be not proud thereof. Deem 
another’s wife as a snake or a murderous elephant, 
and associate not with her. Avoid evil company ; 
be not conceited, glorify not yourselves, and for- 
swear slander and falsehood. Eat and work accord- 
ing to your ability. Practise not hypocrisy or 
ostentation. Meditate on the Guru’s instruction. 
Give a tithe of your substance to God. Associate 
with the virtuous and wait upon the stranger. In- 
voke Wahguru before meals, and He will bless your 
repasts.’ 

His Sikhs put a question to the Guru : ‘ Who 
are the greatest saints and worshippers of God ? ’ 
The Guru replied, ' They who have repeated the 
Name and renounced pride are the best. The saint 
who so acteth, and leaveth this filthy and loathsome 
body, shall obtain in its stead a celestial body of 
light. True saints are passionless, and afford shelter 
to men. He who restraineth his desires hath ob- 
tained salvation while alive. The saints are ever 
independent. What they do is ever beautiful and 
of good report. The true Guru and the saints are 
sent into the world to benefit it, though in reality 
they live apart and are not of it.’ 

Kingurinath, at the head of a company of Jogis, 
visited Guru Amar Das. They proclaimed that they 
were Jogis and holy men, and in proof of their state- 
ment pointed to the garbs and earrings they wore. 
The Guru denied that that was the way to become 
holy. He would tell them, and thereupon he uttered 
the following : — 

Ramkali Ashtapadi 

Put the rings of modesty in thine ears, O Jogi, and make 
compassion thy patched coat. 

Apply the fear of transmigration to thy body as ashes, 
0 Jogi, thus shalt thou conquer the three worlds. 

0 Jogi, play such a kinguri 



72 THE SIKH RELIGION 

As shall produce the unbeaten strain and abiding love of 
God. 

Make patience thy wallet, truth thy platter, put the 
ambrosial Name thereon as food. 

Make meditation thy staff, O Jogi, and remembrance of 
God the horn thou blowest. 

Make the fixing of thy mind on God thy sitting posture, 1 
0 Jogi, so shall thine injuries depart. 

Go beg in the city of the body, 2 0 Jogi, and thou shalt 
obtain the Name. 

It is not by means of this kinguri, O Jogi, that thou shalt 
meditate upon or obtain the True One ; 

It is not by means of this kinguri, 0 Jogi, that thou shalt 
find peace, or that pride shall depart from thy heart. 

Make the fear and love of God the two gourds of thy 
kinguri, 0 Jogi, and thy body its frame. 

Be holy and the strings will play ; thus shall thine avarice 
depart. 

He who understandeth God’s order and applieth his heart 
to the one God is properly called a Jogi : 

His doubts are dispelled, he becometh pure, and thus 
obtaineth the way of union with God. 

All that is visible shall be destroyed ; wherefore fix thy 
mind on God. 

If thou bearlovetothetrueGuru,thoushaltunderstand this. 

Union with God consisteth not, 0 Jogi, in leaving one’s 
family and wandering abroad. 

By the Guru’s favour thou shalt obtain God’s name in the 
mansion of thy body. 

This body is an earthen puppet, O Jogi, and in it is a dire 
disease — the craving for mammon. 

This disease will not be cured, O Jogi, by thy many efforts 
or by wearing sectarial dresses. 

God’s name, 0 Jogi, in whatever heart He implanteth it, 
is the medicine. 

Wherever there is a holy man he obtaineth divine know- 
ledge, and findeth the way of union with Him. 

1 Eighty-four postures of the Jogis are enumerated. 

2 That is, practise contemplation. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


73 

The path of union with God is difficult, 0 Jogi ; he on 
whom God looketh with favour obtaineth it. 

Whether he be at home or abroad, he seeth but the one 
God, and removeth doubt from his heart. 

0 Jogi, play that kinguri which playeth without being 
struck. 1 

Saith Nanak, in this way shalt thou obtain deliverance, 
0 Jogi, and be absorbed in the True One. 

One day, as the Guru was taking a ride, he saw 
a wall broken by rain, which threatened to fall, and 
he accordingly rode quickly past it. On reaching 
home his Sikhs quoted to him one of his own hymns, 
in which he wrote : — 

Death shall not approach him who meditateth on God’s 
name. 

They also quoted to him a verse of Guru 
Nanak : — 

1 feel no anxiety regarding death, and I have no desire to 
live. 

They then interrogated him : ‘ Great king, death 
is subservient to thee. Thou hast enjoyed a long 
life. Thou hast no pride or selfishness. Why hast 
thou hastened past the dangerous wall ? ’ The Guru 
replied : ‘ I only want to teach my Sikhs that since 
human life, for which even the demigods vainly 
long, is so difficult to obtain, it is our duty to preserve 
it. If a tree be preserved, it will many times bear 
leaves, blossoms, and fruit. So if the body be 
preserved, we can practise charity and perform 
religious works of every description ; but when the 
body perisheth, we can no longer perform our duty 
to God. Holy men derive endless advantages from 
their bodies. By them they serve the saints, repeat 
God’s name, obtain divine knowledge and become 
emancipated. The body by which we confer benefits 
on others, and by which happiness in this life and 

1 Attune thy heart to divine knowledge. 



74 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


salvation in the next are obtained, ought to be 
cherished by all . 1 

One day the Sikhs said to the Guru, ‘ Formerly, 
when we undertook any enterprise we used to con- 
sult the Brahman astrologers. Now that we have 
come under thy protection, whom shall we consult ? ’ 
The Guru replied, ‘ The most favourable time for 
the Guru’s Sikhs is when they pray to God. If at 
the beginning of all undertakings they with a lowly 
mind invoke His assistance, all their efforts shall be 
successful.’ 

On one occasion, on seeing a large crowd of people 
who had come to him for the attainment of their 
desires, the Guru mourned over the ills of life, and 
decided to seek for a time the retirement of the 
forest. To escape notice he started on his journey 
at midnight. His movements, however, became 
known to his sons Mohri and Mohan and a few other 
devoted Sikhs, and they prepared to accompany 
him. When the party had been three days in the 
forest, a Muhammadan goatherd called Bahlol saw 
the Guru, and recognizing him as a holy man, fell 
at his feet and made him an offering of a bowl of 
milk. The Guru seeing his devotion, said, * I am 
happy.’ The goatherd, too, became happy in the 
consciousness of having ministered to the wants of 
a deserving man. The Guru invited him to ask a 
favour. The goatherd replied that there was nothing 
stable in the world, wherefore the only favour he 
asked was that he might be enabled to remember 
God’s name. The Guru granted him this favour. 

1 On this subject Guru Arjan subsequently wrote the following 
verses : — 

Dust flieth on the body of him who repeateth not God’s name 
and frequenteth not the society of the saints. 

Nanak, curses on the insipid body which knoweth not Him who 
created it. 

Nanalc, cherish that body which remembereth God, in whose 
heart God’s lotus feet dwell, and whose tongue repeateth His name, 

Bihagre ki War. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


75 


Chapter IV 

Once the Guru visited Kasur. It was a time 
of excessive heat, and he felt very weary. The 
governor of the city was a Khatri of the Puri tribe. 
The Guru sent a messenger to request his permis- 
sion to pitch his tent in his garden. The governor 
replied, ' I know the Guru ; he is a Khatri of the 
Bhalla tribe. Only yesterday he lived in Basarka 
and to-day he is Guru. He hath attached to him 
men of all castes, high and low. They sit in a line 
and eat with him and with one another. If he 
choose to be a Guru of outcastes, he can please him- 
self, but I will not allow him to approach my dwell- 
ing.’ The Guru on hearing this said, ‘ My disciples 
shall one day have sovereign power. A Sikh ruler 
shall reign here in Kasur, and the descendants of 
this Khatri who is now governor shall become his 
servants.’ The Guru, departing thence, found his 
way to the hut of a poor Pathan. On seeing the 
Guru the man arose and said that he was poor, 
otherwise he would give him suitable entertainment. 
The Guru replied in the words of Guru Nanak : — 

God can appoint a worm to sovereignty and reduce an 
army to ashes. 

The Guru continued, ‘ Do God’s service, and thou 
shalt become the lord of Kasur, but directly thou 
practise tyranny, thou shalt die.’ A short time 
afterwards the Khatri officials in Kasur caused such 
political disturbance that the Emperor ordered them 
to be disarmed and expelled, and Pathans appointed 
in their place. The latter and their descendants 
continued to govern that part of the Panjab until 
it was conquered by Ranjit Singh and the Sikhs. 

On one occasion, as the Guru lay asleep in the 
small hours of the night, he was awakened by a 
woman’s screams. He sent two of his Sikhs to 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


76 

inquire the cause of her grief. They returned with 
the information that a young man had just died 
of tertian ague, and his mother was bewailing his 
loss. On hearing this the compassionate Guru 
prayed to the Deathless Being to console her. He 
told his Sikhs to repeat the first pauri of the Japji, 
and, while doing so, to put water into the mouth of 
the deceased. The Sikhs, instead of performing 
the ceremony themselves, brought the body to the 
Guru. He put water into the corpse’s mouth, and 
touched the head with his foot, when lo ! the youth 
was re-animated. 

Once while a rich man was giving a religious feast 
a child was born in his house. The Brahmans in 
consequence declared the place impure, and refused 
food. The giver of the feast went to the third Guru 
to complain. The latter thereupon ordered his 
Sikhs to partake of the viands prepared, and they 
did so. The Brahmans subsequently went to the 
Guru to represent that his disciples had eaten impure 
bread. The following was the Guru’s remonstrance: — 

The love of mammon is mental impurity, 

By which men are led astray in doubt and suffer trans- 
migration. 

The impurity of the perverse never departeth 

Until they become saturated with the Word and with 
God’s name. 

Whatever taketh the form of worldly love is all impurity : 

On this account man dieth and is bom again and again. 

There is impurity in fire, in wind, and in water ; 

There is impurity in whatever is eaten ; 

There is impurity in religious ceremonies and in worship. 

Only the heart which is dyed with the Name is pure. 

By serving the True Guru impurity departeth : 

Then man dieth not, nor is he bom, nor doth Death 
destroy him. 

Let any one carefully examine the Shastars and Simritis, 
and. he shall find 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


77 


That without the Name there is no deliverance. 

In the four ages the Name is considered the best word, 

And by means of it in this Kalage the pious are saved. 

The True One neither dieth nor suffereth transmigration. 

Nanak, the holy shall be absorbed in God. 1 

A rich Muhammadan horse-dealer named Alayar, 
a native of Dihli, who had returned from Arabia 
through Kabul with five hundred horses, arrived at 
the Bias. He had intended to proceed to his native 
city, where he hoped to find a good market, but 
was unable to continue his journey as the river was 
flooded, and the boatmen did not think their boats 
sufficiently strong to withstand the current. The 
following morning he saw Bhai Paro, on his way to 
the Guru as usual, plunge his horse into the foaming 
river and reach the opposite shore in safety. The 
horse-dealer met him on his return, and compli- 
mented him on the feat he had performed. Bhai 
Paro said there was nothing wonderful in his crossing 
a swollen river. The true Guru, to whom he daily 
went to do homage, caused thousands of souls to 
swim across the still more dangerous ocean of the 
world. Alayar was anxious to behold so great 
a being, so he arranged with Paro on the next 
occasion to sit behind him on his horse, and thus 
cross the river and visit the Guru with him. 

Alayar was delighted on seeing the Guru, hearing 
his words, and witnessing the devotion of his Sikhs. 
Filled with enthusiasm and humility he mentally 
desired the Guru’s leavings. The Guru divined his 
wish and offered him the dish from which he had 
eaten. The Guru’s attention was then attracted 
to his name, and he said, ‘ It is difficult to become 
a friend (yar) of God (Allah), but I will make God 
thy Master, and thee His servant.’ Thus was Alayar 
made a priest and freed from all doubts, evil passions, 
and inclinations. He henceforth drew no distinction 
between Hindus and Muhammadans, and continued 

1 Gauri. 



78 THE SIKH RELIGION 

as he had begun, a model of humility and divine 
fervour. The Guru in due time sent him to a place 
called Devantal, where saints resided. His trade in 
horses was undertaken and continued by his son. 
Alayar’s family ultimately settled down in Dalla, 
where lived Bhai Paro and Bhai Lalo and other 
devoted servants of the Guru. Musalmans of every 
rank accepted and reverenced Alayar under the 
name of Ala Shah as a pious priest. A concourse of 
Sikhs, among whom were Bhai Dipa, Bhai Khana, 
Bhai Malu, and Bhai Kidara, gathered round these 
holy men in Dalla, and took up their abode with 
them. 


Chapter V 

There was a goldsmith in Goindwal married to 
an elderly woman. All medicines and incantations 
were employed to procure them offspring, but in 
vain. The everlasting cry of the childless couple 
was, ‘ How shall we be happy in this world ? And 
who will take care of our wealth ? ’ Their youth 
had passed, and the advent of old age naturally 
made them despair the more. They decided to dig 
a well where travellers might allay their thirst, and 
build a temple where the devout might pray. They 
hoped that in this way their wishes might be crowned, 
and their memory abide in the world. When the 
Guru heard of the pious work they had undertaken, 
he went and personally assisted in it. On being 
informed of his presence the goldsmith and his wife 
hastened with offerings to do him homage. He 
asked them what they desired. The goldsmith's 
wife on this drew a veil over her face. The Guru 
said, ‘ Be not abashed. Ask what thou desirest 
without shame.’ She replied, ‘ Thou hast come to 
visit us ; now give us an heir to our house.’ The 
Guru inquired if they expected him to keep children 
for his friends. The goldsmith, with humility and 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


79 


faith, replied that there were children in the words 
of the Guru. The Guru was pleased at this reply, 
and told them that, if they had faith, they should 
have two children. They were accordingly blessed 
with that number of offspring. People on seeing 
the children with the old lady said they must be her 
grandchildren. The twelfth generation of the gold- 
smith and his wife still reside in Goindwal, and are 
called Maipotre (mother’s grandsons) in memory of 
this event. 

Inquirers came from different countries in detached 
bodies to behold the Guru. On seeing their number 
and frequency, Bhai Paro and his friends represented 
that there should be one place of general meeting for 
the Sikhs, and special fairs should be established 
where Sikhs could assemble and become acquainted 
and fraternize with one another. Upon this the Guru 
proclaimed that gatherings of Sikhs should be held 
on the first days of the months Baisakh and Magh, 
and on the ancient festival of the Diwali . 1 

A shopkeeper called Girdhari, who lived in the 
south of India, was very fortunate as far as wealth, 
property, and relations were concerned, but he was 
distressed at having no children. He took a second 
wife, but still there was no offspring. On hearing 
what the Guru had done for the goldsmith, he went 
to Goindwal to do him homage. He remained there 
for some days and importuned the Guru, but could 
only obtain the following reply : — 

None can erase what was written on the forehead in the 
beginning : 

What was written happeneth ; he who hath spiritual 
insight understandeth this . 2 

1 By this the Guru meant that his Sikhs should not follow the 
example of the Hindus who go on idolatrous pilgrimages in Baisakh, 
Magh, and at the Diwali, or feast of lights, in autumn, but that they 
should attend on him three times a year for religious instruction and 
God’s worship. 

2 Supplementary sloks of the Granth Sahib. 



8o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru when further pressed said to Girdhari, 
‘ Repeat the Name, do good works, and obey the 
will of God. A hankering for sons is the cause of 
worldly entanglements.’ On hearing this the shop- 
keeper’s eyes filled with tears, and heaving cold 
sighs he withdrew from the Guru’s presence. Bhai 
Paro meeting him asked why he was leaving without 
having obtained his object. Girdhari then narrated 
his conversation with the Guru. Paro said that if 
he had faith he should have five children. The 
shopkeeper went home, and in five years found him- 
self the father of five sons. 

Girdhari took his five sons and placed them all at the 
Guru’s feet. The Guru inquired how he had obtained 
such a large offspring. Girdhari replied, ‘ I have 
got them through the mediation of Bhai Paro, the 
servant of thy house.’ The Guru said, ‘ Well done, 
•Bhai Paro, who art able to reverse the order of 
nature! Such power is not in me.’ Bhai Paro 
humbly represented : ' Great king, on seeing this 
man going disappointed from thy house I merely 
gave him from thy store-room which is ever in- 
exhaustible. Why should we be niggardly ? ’ The 
Guru replied, ‘True, but this is the Kalage when 
many persons come with desires and motives. Guru 
Nanak hath said : — 

“Whatever God doeth accept as good; have done with 
cleverness and orders.” ’ 

The Guru ironically continued : ‘ If thou have 
compassion to spare, then ever satisfy the desires 
of those who go away disappointed from me. Thou 
art a saint of the highest order, and mine image. 
I grant thee the Guruship of the world! Spread 
saintship therein.’ Bhai Paro, touching the Guru’s 
feet, meekly replied , 1 Pardon thy servant, and let me 
abide at thy feet. Even if I must suffer further 
transmigration, let me not be driven from thy 
presence. Guruship becometh thee ; I am content 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


81 


to be a disciple. Grant me the gift of serving thee.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘ If thou desire to serve me, 
repair to thy house ; God hath pardoned thee and 
granted thee deliverance.’ Bhai Paro went home, 
distributed his wealth among his heirs, and set apart 
a favourite mare and some money for the Guru, 
with strict injunctions for the proper disposition of 
his property. Having made sacred food, and pre- 
pared for his death, he lay down. Then uttering 
' Wahguru and parting with his body, he went 
to his repose at Guru Nanak’s feet. 

When Guru Amar Das heard of Bhai Paro’s death, 
he sent his own son Mohri to Dalla to console Bhai 
Paro’s family. Mohri passed a whole night in Dalla, 
recounting Bhai Paro’s praises, and next day returned 
to Goindwal. r 

Bhai Lalo continued to perform every service in 
the Guru’s house. His mind, body, and wealth were 
all employed in conferring benefits on others. He 
fed and attended to the poor and needy, fanned the 
Guru, and distributed food to his Sikhs. He was so 
distressed at Paro’s death, and dissatisfied with the 
things of this world that he resolved to bestow all 
his property in alms, and consign his body to Death. 
He thought of the words of Kabir : — 

While the world fearetli death, my mind is pleased there- 
with, 

Since it is only by death supreme bliss is obtained . 1 

When Bhai Lalo, after the usual prayers, assumed 
his final posture, his eyes filled with tears. His 
friends said to him. ' Thou hast no worldly love ; 
thou hast practised charity and the duties of thy 
religion ; thou art free from all earthly desires ; 
then why art thou weeping ? ’ He replied, ' I have 
inherited countless wealth from my father. That 
shall be profitable if it be spent in the service of the 

1 Kabir’s sloks. 

G 


SIKH. II 



82 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Guru and his Sikhs. I have also mine own earnings 
which I wish to dispose of for their benefit. Further- 
more, I have recently built a house at great expense, 
which I reserved for myself, but it is useless to me 
now. If that also be applied to the use of the Sikhs, 
I shall have nothing to regret.’ His relations and 
Sikh friends disposed of his property accordingly. 
He then, in the words of the Sikh chronicler, parted 
with his body as though it were the slough of 
a snake. 

One day a Sikh merchant went to the Guru, and said 
that he had given alms and feasts to Brahmans, 
and made pilgrimages according to prescribed rules, 
but obtained no spiritual profit or consolation there- 
from. He therefore requested the Guru, who was 
the pilot of the world’s terrible ocean, to save him. 
The Guru on that occasion composed the following : — 

Serve God ; perform no other service. 

By serving Him thou shalt obtain the fruit thy heart 
desireth ; by any other service thy life shall pass away in 
vain. 

God is my love, God is my rule of life, God is the subject 
of my conversation. 

By the Guru’s favour my heart is saturated with God’s 
love ; thus is my service rewarded. 

God is my Simritis, God is my Shastars, God is my kinsman, 
God is my brother. 

I am hungry for God; with His name my heart is satisfied. 
God is my relative, and at the last moment will be my helper. 

Except God all other capital is false, and goeth not with 
us when we depart. 

God is the wealth which shall depart with me ; whitherso- 
ever I go, thither will it go. 

He who is attached to falsehood is false, and false are the 
works he performeth. 

Saith Nanak, everything happeneth according to God’s 
will ; naught is gained by babbling. 1 

1 Gujari. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


83 

The Guru continued : ‘ Repeat the one God’s 
name, be humble, abandon pride, and self-conceit. 
As fire burneth a dry crop, so do pride and self- 
conceit destroy the effect of alms and religious 
exercises. 

His Sikhs once asked the Guru, ‘ If, as the saints 
say, the world is like a dream, then how do their 
bodies perform their functions ? ’ The Guru replied, 
' Their bodies perform all their functions, but their 
minds are not affected by the world. The saints 
abide in the form of ordinary mortals, as the sword 
touched by the philosopher’s stone retaineth its 
shape, but is at the same time changed into gold. 
By humility and contempt of the world the saints 
obtain deliverance at their death.’ The Guru then 
related the following parable : ‘ Some one told 

a saint that his only son had been slain. The saint 
on hearing the news remained unmoved. On this 
people began to admire his fortitude, and say, 
“ Thy son was a fine, obedient young man. Thou 
art to be congratulated that thou canst endure his 
death without a murmur.” The saint replied, “ The 
world is like a dream or a shadow ; sons, wives, 
and wealth are all perishable. In a dream a poor 
man may become a king or a king a poor man, but 
when they awake they find their dreams have no 
reality. For whom shall man rejoice or mourn ? ” 
Upon this some one came and told the father that 
his dead son had been re-animated. On hearing this, 
too, the saint manifested no joy.’ The Guru, 
pointing out the moral of his story, said, * Saints 
are unaffected by joy or sorrow as the lotus is by 
water.’ 

Many persons continued to visit the Guru for 
religious instruction. Lalu, Durga, and Jawanda 
received from him the following advice, c Ever do 
good to others. This is to be accomplished in three 
ways : By giving good advice, ’by setting a good 
example to Sikhs, and by ever desiring men’s welfare.’ 

g 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


84 

A Sikh named Jagga asked the Guru’s permission 
to become a hermit. He said he had met a Jogi 
and asked him for instruction. The Jogi would only 
give it on his relinquishing a domestic and adopting 
an ascetic life. The Guru replied that deliverance 
could not be obtained either by the relinquishment 
of house and home or by the practice of Jog. As 
a lotus, while growing in the mud, turns its petals 
towards the sun, so should man while engaged in 
worldly affairs turn his thoughts to God by me ans 
of the instruction of the Guru. 

To Gopi, Mohan, Rama, and Amru, the Guru spoke 
as follows : ' Practise forbearance and forgiveness, and 
harbour not enmity to any one in your hearts. 
Should any one address you a harsh or disrespectful 
word, be not angry, but speak civilly in return.’ 

To Gangu and Sahara the Guru delivered the fol- 
lowing instruction : ' When you have prepared food, 
first feed the Sikhs, and then eat the remainder 
yourselves. He who eateth after his brother Sikhs 
shall become very holy. Ever remember Wahguru. 
Worship not cremation grounds, tanks , 1 or Hindu or 
Muhammadan shrines.’ 

When the Guru paid a visit to the Sikh families 
in Dalla, Prithi Mai and Tulsa of the Bhalla caste 
went to see him. They unceremoniously seated 
themselves beside him, and said with much famili- 
arity, ' Thou and we are of the same caste.’ The 
Guru replied in the words of Guru Nanak : — 

Caste hath no power in the next world ; there is a new 
order of beings. 

It is the good whose accounts are honoured. 

' This body ’, continued the Guru, ‘ is composed 
of five elements. It is subject to hunger, thirst, joy, 

1 Hindu women dig holes near tanks for the benefit of their 
ancestors. Others drawing forth mud from tanks worship unseen 
spirits under the name - of Bibaris, who are supposed to control 
children’s diseases. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 85 

sorrow, birth, and death. It perisheth, and no 
caste goeth with the soul to the next world. They 
who are honoured and exalted in God’s court are 
those whose minds are humble, who have renounced 
falsehood, fraud, slander, deceit, hypocrisy, and 
ingratitude, and who have repeated the Name and 
benefited others. If the high caste on which people 
plume themselves in this life be not recognized in 
the next, of what advantage is it ? The Guru 
recognizeth no caste.’ 

Bhais Malhan, Ramu, Gobind, and Dipa asked 
the Guru to give them instruction whereby they 
might be saved. He replied, ‘ Abandon obstinacy 
and pride, serve the saints, prepare sacred food 
according to the rules of our religion, feed the 
hungry, clothe the naked, rise before day, repeat 
the Japji, bestow a little of your time and wealth 
on God’s service, associate with the saints, meditate 
on the Word, perform the duties of your religion, 
hurt no one’s feelings, sing the Guru’s hymns, be 
lowly and abandon pride, recognize only the Creator 
as the one God, and all your desires shall be fulfilled. 
If a man be weighed down with worldliness, he shall 
sink like an overladen boat in the world’s ocean; 
but, if worldliness lie not heavily on him, his bark 
shall float, and he shall obtain deliverance.’ 

Bula, a learned pandit, laid before the Guru 
a scheme he had devised for a compilation of the 
Guru’s hymns, and mooted the question of remu- 
neration for his labour. The Guru replied : ' Make 
a careful collection of the Guru’s hymns, and give 
it to the Sikhs in God’s name. If any one offer thee 
money, accept it for thy maintenance, but beg not, 
and great shall be thy gain.’ 

A Sultanpur bard named Bhikha embraced retire- 
ment from the world so as to search for the Creator. 
Wherever he heard of any saints he went to wait 
on them. For a long time he remained in a state 
of pupilage under a Brahman, without obtaining 



86 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


any peace of mind. One day he felt very sad and 
prayed to God to guide him. Upon this he received 
an inspiration to go to Goindwal and see the Guru 
of whom everybody was speaking. Full of devotion 
he arrived and had the happiness of beholding the 
object of his visit. He stood absorbed in thought 
for a short time, and then gave utterance to the 
following in the Guru’s praise : — 

By the Guru’s divine knowledge and meditation man’s 
soul is blended with God. He who with single mind fixeth 
his attention on God, shall know Him who is the truest of the 
true. His mind shall not fly or wander who restrained! his 
lust and wrath. He who dwelleth in God’s land and obeyeth 
His order shall obtain wisdom. He who hath done good 
works in this age shall know God. If a Guru be found he 
willingly and cheerfully granteth a sight of Him. 

I have continued searching for a saint and seen many 
holy men — Sanyasis, ascetics, and sweet-voiced pandits— 
I have roamed for a year, but none of them hath satisfied 
me. I heard what they had to say, but I was not pleased 
with their conduct. What shall I say of the merits of those 
who renouncing God’s name attach themselves to mammon ? 
God hath caused me to meet the Guru ; as Thou, O God, 
keepest me, so I abide . 1 

Hearing Bhikha’s words the Guru put his hand 
on his forehead in token of accepting him as a dis- 
ciple, gave him the true Name, and made him 
happy. Having found the true Guru, Bhikha re- 
turned to his native town and abode there. Keeping 
the Guru’s image in his heart, he applied himself 
to meditation and contemplation. As the result of 
his devotion his name is recorded in the honoured 
roll of holy Sikhs, and his verses have been dis- 
tinguished by inclusion in their sacred book. 

1 Bards' Sawaiyas. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


87 


Chapter VI 

One morning, before day, while the Asa ki War 
was being chanted, the Guru fell into a trance. 
He thought he saw Guru Nanak appear and order 
him to make a place of pilgrimage where God alone 
should be worshipped, and thus confer a favour on 
the world. It was the object of the Gurus to pre- 
serve their Sikhs from contamination at Hardwar, 
Banaras, and other places of Hindu pilgrimage. 
Guru Amar Das resolved to obey the order he felt 
he had thus so solemnly received. He purchased 
some land, and on the day of the full moon in the 
month of Kartik laid with all due religious ceremony 
the foundation of the Bawali, or well with descending 
steps, which is now such an object of reverent 
pilgrimage to Hindus as well as Sikhs in the city of 
Goindwal. His Sikhs all joined in the work. Some 
dug up the earth, some put it into baskets, some 
removed it, some made offerings of corn for the sup- 
port of the workmen, some drew water for them, 
and some cooked their meals. There was great 
activity throughout the city during the construction 
of the Bawali. 

There lived in that portion of the city of Lahore 
called Chuni Mandi a Khatri of the Sodhi tribe 
named Thakar Das. He was married to a lady 
called Jaswanti, a word which means the praise- 
worthy. A son called Hari Das (Servant of God) was 
born to them. Hari Das afterwards married Anup 
Devi. After her marriage she was generally known 
as Day a Kaur. The associations and acts of both 
husband and wife were ever good and praiseworthy. 
Contrary to the polytheistic spirit of their time, 
they worshipped only one God, served saints, and 
made the repetition of God’s name the main object 
of their devotion. They worked diligently for their 



88 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


livelihood, and were contented with their lot. They 
rose early to perform their adoration and meditation, 
and their prayer ever was that a son might be born 
to them who should be the light of their family, 
and whose glory should shine like the sun. 

The result of their prayer and devotion was that 
after twelve years of married life, in the early morn- 
ing of Thursday, the second day of the dark half 
of the month Kartik, in the Sambat year 1591 
(a.d. 1534), a son was bom to them, who appeared 
like a sun of the solar line from which they claimed 
their descent. He was called Ram Das, but was 
generally known as Jetha, a name which means 
first-born. He is described as of fair complexion, 
handsome figure, pleasing and smiling face, and not 
disposed to weep or cry in the manner of ordinary 
children. 

As he grew up he frequented the society of holy 
men, and gave them whatever he received from his 
parents. The latter desired that he should turn 
to some occupation for his livelihood, but that was 
not his own intention. There lived near his parents 
a poor man who made his living by selling boiled 
pulse. At his suggestion Jetha’s mother boiled 
some, put it into a basket, and gave it to him to sell, 
so that he might begin to do something profitable. 
An ordinary person would have taken the pulse to 
the bazars and streets for sale, but Jetha went off 
with his basket to the river Ravi and there sat 
down. He soon saw a company of holy men coming 
towards him from the opposite side, and waited 
until they had bathed and emerged from the river. 
They were very hungry, and on seeing him with his 
basket, asked him to supply their necessities. They 
represented that what was given in the name of the 
Lord would fructify a thousandfold, and that God 
would bless his earnings. Jetha gave them the 
whole contents of his basket and went home. The 
holy men were very pleased, and prayed that God 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 89 

would reward the boy for his compassionate and 
timely gift. 

He soon fell in with a company of Sikhs singing 
hymns to the accompaniment of cymbals and drums, 
and proceeding on their way with great rejoicing. 
When . he asked whither they were going, one of 
them replied, ‘ Come with us, we are going to Goind- 
wal where Guru Amar Das, the third Guru, holds 
his court. Every blessing in this world and the 
next is obtained by his favour.’ On hearing this 
Jetha’s heart was filled with devotion, and he at 
once joined the Sikhs in their pilgrimage. Jetha, 
on arriving in Goindwal, prostrated himself before 
the Guru, who was much impressed with his devo- 
tion and handsome exterior. In reply to the Guru’s 
inquiries J etha told his name and station, and how, 
abandoning all worldly desires, he had sought his 
spiritual protection. The Guru replied, ‘ If thou 
hast come abandoning all worldly desires, thou 
shalt obtain a true sovereignty. Perform work and 
service. It is thus God’s court is obtained.’ Jetha 
was delighted at his reception, and at once applied 
himself to the Guru’s service. He cooked in the 
kitchen, shampooed his master, drew water, brought 
firewood from the forest, and, when not so employed, 
assisted in the excavation of the Bawali. He never 
thought of his own ease and never felt weary. He 
was of such meek temper that, even if any one spoke 
harshly to him, he would never retaliate. He 
became known as what he really was, namely, Ram 
Das, which being interpreted means God’s slave. 

One of the Guru’s daughters, Bibi Sulakhani, known 
as Dani, had married Rama of the Bedi family to 
which Guru Nanak belonged. The other daughter, 
Bibi Bhani, was from her earliest years fond of 
prayer and seclusion. When her young girl com- 
panions would invite her on a pleasant day in 
summer to go with them to indulge in the pastime 
of the swing, she would inform her father, who in- 



go 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


variably gave her permission. At the same time 
he would remind her of the following composition 
of his own: — 

The world is dead through pride, the proud have no means 
of living. 

He who walketh as it pleaseth the Guru, shall obtain the 
dignity of eternal life. 

They who fix their attention on God’s feet shall live for 
ever. 

Nanak, when He who looketh on all with favour, dwelleth 
in the heart, the pious man is easily absorbed in Him. 

She used to say to her playmates, ‘ We are 
thoughtless beings like the skipping and playing 
lambs while the butcher Death standeth over us.’ 
She would then recite Guru Nanak’ s lines : — 

This message is ever sent to every house, such invitations 
are ever issued. 

Remember the Caller ; Nanak, the day is approaching. 

By this she meant that Death stood ready for his 
victims, and it was a mistake to think too much of 
earthly pleasures. Her mother, who used to ac- 
company her, would then say, ‘By Guru Nanak’ s 
favour remain free from anxiety. What fear hast 
thou of Death? The Guru hath granted his Sikhs 
happiness in this life and salvation in the next, and 
hath commanded them to eat and enjoy themselves.’ 

A faithful Sikh once asked the Guru’s permission 
to offer Bibi Bhani money to purchase dresses and 
ornaments, so that she might decorate herself like 
other girls, and not appear at a disadvantage in 
their company. On hearing of the offer she repeated 
Guru Nanak’s words : — 

False is gold, false is silver, false those who wear them ; 

and reminded the Sikh that the best use to which 
money could be applied, would be to fill the Guru’s 
kitchen with corn and supply the necessities of 
pilgrims. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


9 1 


The Guru’s wife, MansaDevi, one day seeing Bibi 
Bhani playing, remarked to her husband that, as 
Bhani had arrived at the age of puberty, they ought 
to search for a husband for her. The Guru ordered 
the necessary search to be made. When the Guru’s 
agent was ready to depart, Bibi Bhani’s mother saw 
a boy outside her door hawking some articles. On 
attentively observing him, she said to the agent, 
‘ Search for a youth like him to be Bibi Bhani’s 
husband.’ Hearing this, the Guru ordered the 
agent to pause. On examining the youth’s linea- 
ments the Guru exclaimed, ‘ He is his own parallel, 
for God had made none other like unto him.’ 
On this the Guru called the youth and interro- 
gated him on matters in which fathers-in-law are 
interested. On being satisfied with the boy’s 
replies and his desire to marry Bhani, the Guru sent 
him with marriage presents to his father, Hari 
Das, in Lahore, and had the betrothal ceremony 
performed. 

After the completion of the nuptial negotiations 
Guru Amar Das wrote to Hari Das that the twenty- 
second of Phagan, Sambat 1610, would be a suitable 
time for the marriage. All the Sodhis congregated 
together, and there were great rejoicings. Women 
sang the Guru’s hymns, and bards exhibited their 
poetical skill. The bridegroom’s procession was 
formed, he was put on horseback, and he and his 
friends proceeded in state to Goindwal. Mohri, the 
Guru’s eldest son, went forth to receive him. As the 
bridegroom was about to enter the Guru’s house, the 
Guru said to him, ' My son Jetha, it is the custom 
of our family that before the bridegroom entereth 
the bride’s house he should make a request. Make 
one accordingly.’ Jetha accordingly repeated the 
first hymn of the Gujari measure contained in the 
Rahiras. 

Guru Amar Das, highly pleased at the request 
conveyed in the earnest language of the hymn, 



92 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


granted Jetha a present of the Name, promised that 
at his court it should be unceasingly heard, and that 
it should flow like a current of waters. 

When the marriage was duly celebrated, the 
marriage procession returned to Lahore. Jetha’ s 
parents wished the young couple to live with them 
according to the usual custom of the East, but 
Jetha considered the Guru as his god, and himself 
as his worshipper. He did not think of him at all 
in the light of a father-in-law, a relation who is 
ordinarily treated with scant respect by Indian 
bridegrooms. He deemed parting from him even 
worse than expulsion from heaven, and accordingly 
returned with his wife to Goindwal after a short 
sojourn in Lahore. In his heart he believed that the 
foundation of love sprang from the Guru’s lotus 
feet, and he used to pray : — 

May I abide from beginning to end in the joy of Thy 
lotus feet ! 

After his return to Goindwal he was the same 
Jetha and performed the same service for the Guru 
as before, without a particle of false pride in his 
heart. The more Jetha served the Guru, the more 
his love for him and for all mankind increased. His 
disposition became divine, as when iron is turned 
into gold by the contact of the philosopher’s stone. 
Specially did he labour at the Bawali which the Guru 
was constructing. He made no objection to carrying 
baskets of earth on his head, and paid no heed to 
the banter or reproaches of his companions. The 
Guru took special notice of his conduct, and showed 
him special favour. 

Bibi Bhani not only considered Amar Das her 
father, but also her Guru, the very image of Guru 
Nanak. In the same way she served Jetha not only 
as husband but as saint. In the month of Assu, 
Sambat 1614, a son, Prithi Chand, was born of the 
marriage. Three years after, in the month of Har, 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


93 


a second son, Mahadev, made his appearance. On 
Tuesday, the seventh day of the dark half of Bai- 
sakh, Sambat 1620, Jetha and Bhani were blessed 
with a third son called Arjan, at whose birth there 
were unusual rejoicings. 


Chapter VII 

There was a Bairagi named Mai Das, a most 
devout worshipper of the god Krishan. Strictly 
adhering to all Vaishnav ceremonials, he would only 
eat what he had cooked with his own hands. His 
chief desire was to behold the yellow-robed, peacock- 
crowned god in bodily form. In the hope of obtain- 
ing assistance for the purpose from the Guru, of 
whose fame he had heard, he went to Goindwal. On 
arriving there, however, he was informed he could 
not see the Guru until he had eaten food from his 
kitchen. He decided that as a strict Vaishnav he 
could never partake of such food, and he accordingly 
took his departure. On his way home he said to 
himself, ‘ I have been lucky in deciding to see the 
Guru, but unlucky in departing without seeing him. 
I will by way of consolation go to Dwaraka to see 
Krishan.’ He accordingly made the long journey 
to Dwaraka, and took up his abode in an adjacent 
forest. On the night of his arrival he was holding 
the fast of the eleventh of the lunar month, during 
which he was allowed to eat fruit, but it was not 
obtainable for it was then the winter season. Cold 
winds were blowing, rain was falling in torrents, light- 
ning was flashing, and the night was appallingly dark. 
He called upon all his gods, ‘ 0 Wasdev, O Krishan, 
0 Girdhari, I have no shelter but in you.’ At last 
in his dire extremity he accidentally found a hollow 
tree in which he took shelter for the night. 

On the morrow at daybreak he searched the whole 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


94 

forest, but could find nothing to eat. Closing his 
eyes and meditating on God he prayed for relief. 
A supreme J ogi, seeing his devotion, brought a plate 
full of dal and rice, and laying it before him de- 
parted. Mai Das on opening his eyes was astonished 
to see prepared food in such a place. He reflected, 
* This food having been cooked in water is impure. 
If I eat it, I shall become an outcaste, and if I do 
not, I shall die. Well, if die I must, let me die by 
all means, but I will not abandon my principles.’ 

The supreme Jogi knowing his unshaken faith 
placed before him unobserved a plate of sweets, 
which, as having been cooked in clarified butter, 
even a devout Hindu could receive from the hands 
of another without defilement. Mai Das then began 
to consider : ‘ Into this solitude no man may bring 
sweets, nor have I seen anybody coming or going. 
Impure food was first brought me, and when I 
refused it, I received pure food. It was certainly 
God who came to me, but through my misfortune 
I did not see him.’ Mai Das searched in every 
direction, and again began to call on his god, ‘ 0 
Krishan, O Girdhari, O Murari, pardon my sins. 
O compassionate one, O Gobind, grant me a sight 
of thee.’ Full of devotion he wandered weeping and 
shouting through the forest. It is said that he then 
heard a voice : c Thou hast not taken food from 
Amar Das’s kitchen, and hast not beheld him ; there- 
fore shalt thou not obtain perfection. If thou desire 
to do so, then first behold Amar Das.’ 

On hearing this Mai Das returned to Goindwal. 
Invoking his favourite god, he partook of food from 
the Guru’s kitchen, and was then allowed the privi- 
lege of sitting in the Guru’s court and beholding 
him who had been so long the special object of his 
thoughts and aspirations. The Guru addressed him, 

‘ Come, Mai Das, thou art a special saint of God.’ 
Mai Das with complimentary expressions suppli- 
cated to be made the Guru’s servant, so that he 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


95 


might ever behold him. The Guru replied, ‘ Abide 
with me for eight days, keep the company of my 
saints, and I will then point out to thee thy spiritual 
guide.’ 

Meanwhile the Sikhs continued with great energy 
and devotion to excavate the Bawali. After digging 
very deep they found large stones which hindered 
their progress. The Sikhs prayed the Guru to remove 
the obstacle. He counselled patience, and said that 
all should be well in due time. 

When water obstinately refused to enter the 
Bawali, the Guru inquired if there were any of his 
Sikhs sufficiently courageous to drive a peg into its 
base with the object of removing the obstruction. 
At the same time the Guru warned his hearers that 
the operation involved great peril. The man who 
performed it must be able to stem the current which 
would issue from the aperture formed by the peg; 
otherwise he would be drowned. All the Sikhs re- 
mained silent, and no one ventured to undertake 
such a perilous task. At last Manak Chand of 
Vairowal, a young man with a sprouting beard, who 
was married to a niece of the Guru, declared himself 
at the Guru’s service. 

This man's history is connected with the miracu- 
lous power of the first Guru. When Guru Nanak 
visited Thatha, Hari Chand who was childless took 
him an offering of milk in the hope of obtaining the 
object of his desires. The Guru being pleased, said, 
' A gem (manak) shall be strung on thy necklace.’ 
Within a year a son was born to him who was called 
Manak Chand, in remembrance of the word used by 
the Guru and the fulfilment of the prophecy. 

Manak Chand, invoking God’s name, extracted 
the peg, whereupon there immediately issued a rush- 
ing stream which overflowed the Bawali. Manak, 
though on his guard, was upturned, and though 
striking out vigorously sank to the bottom. Next 
morning his old widowed mother and his young wife 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


96 

came and sat on the margin of the Bawali weeping 
piteously. The aged mother was crying out, ‘ Ah ! 
Manak my son, who will protect me now ? Thou 
oughtest to have taken me with thee.’ The Guru 
inquired who was weeping. The Sikhs brought the 
old lady to him, and she bowed at his feet. The 
Guru said, ‘ Manak is not drowned, he will save many 
a one yet. Have patience, and he will come to thee.’ 
The Guru went and stood by the Bawali. He called 
out, ‘ Manak, behold thy mother is weeping for thee, 
come and meet her.’ Manak’s body at once rose to 
the surface. The Guru meditated on God, and 
touched the young man’s body with his foot, upon 
which he walked forth from the water in the full 
possession of life and vigour. The Guru then ad- 
dressed him : ‘ Thou art my living — j iwar — son. Thy 
sons shall be called sons of Jiwar. Now become Mai 
Das’s spiritual guide, go home, and wealth and 
supernatural power shall come at thy bidding.’ Thus, 
by the favour of the Guru, Jiwar and his descendants 
have been reverenced by succeeding generations. 

By this time Mai Das’s stay of eight days was at 
an end. The Guru told him that Manak Chand 
should become his spiritual guide. The Guru having 
ordered him to go and preach to all people thus con- 
tinued : ‘ Thou too shalt make converts and become 
a famous saint; save men by giving them God’s 
name, read the Guru’s hymns, and all blessings shall 
attend thee.’ Mai Das, having received spiritual 
and temporal favours from Manak Chand, returned 
to his village. He afterwards paid the Guru a yearly 
visit, obtained mental peace, found salvation for 
himself, and became empowered to grant it to others. 

The Bawali when finished yielded sweet drinking 
water, and the Sikhs greatly rejoiced at the comple- 
tion of their labours. It was provided with eighty- 
four steps. The Guru decreed that whoever should 
attentively and reverently repeat the Japji on every 
step, should escape from wandering in the wombs 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


97 


of the eighty-four lakhs of living creatures. Sadha- 
ran, a Sikh carpenter, devoutly made woodwork 
for seven steps of the Bawali and clamped it with 
iron. 

It was now the time for the Emperor Akbar to 
make his periodical visit to Lahore. Having crossed 
the Bias he made a detour to Goindwal, and accom- 
panied by a large escort of Mughal and Pathan 
soldiers made a state visit to the Guru, of whose 
sanctity he had heard such favourable accounts, and 
presented him with costly offerings of every descrip- 
tion. The Emperor, out of respect for the Guru, 
walked on the bare ground as he approached his 
residence. He learned, however, that he could not 
have an interview with the Guru until he had par- 
taken of his food. The Emperor inquired of what 
the food consisted, and was informed that it was 
coarse unseasoned rice. He asked for some and par- 
took of it as 'if it were ambrosia. Having seen the 
large number of people fed from the Guru's kitchen 
he requested him to accept his service and his offer- 
ings. He added, ‘ I will make thee a grant of what- 
ever land thou desirest, and I am ready to perform 
any other office that may be pleasing to thee.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ I have obtained lands and rent-free 
tenures from my Creator. He who cherisheth all 
existences giveth also unto me. My Sikhs devoutly 
give me wherewithal to supply my kitchen. What- 
ever cometh daily is spent daily, and for the morrow 
my trust is in God.’ The Emperor pressed on him 
the acceptance of several villages, but the Guru was 
firm in his refusal. The Emperor then said, ‘ I see 
thou desirest nothing. From thy treasury and thy 
kitchen countless beings receive bounties, and I 
entertain similar hopes. The villages which thou 
refusest I will grant to thy daughter Bibi Bhani.’ 
The Emperor upon this signed a grant of the villages 
in her name. The Guru gave the Emperor a dress 
of honour, and dismissed him, highly pleased with 

H 


SIKH. II 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


98 

his pilgrimage. The headmen of the villages granted 
by the Emperor went with offerings to the Guru, 
but he sent them and their offerings to Jetha, the 
husband of the proprietress. The management of 
the villages was entrusted to Bhai Budha, who went 
and lived in a forest in the midst of them . 1 

Every one was pleased on hearing of the healing 
virtues and fame of the Bawali, except a second Tapa 
who had settled in Goindwal. His heart was bitter 
as the colocynth, but his words as sweet as the 
mango. The Guru gave a great feast on the tenth 
day of the month following the completion of the 
Bawali. The Tapa, though invited, refused to attend. 
He said to the Guru's messenger, ' I. want nothing 
from the Guru, nor will I give him anything. I will 
go to dine with the provincial governor instead. 
He too hath invited me, and from him I shall 
receive presents of gold coins.’ The Tapa on going 
to the governor began to calumniate the Guru. 
‘Behold, O Diwan, Amar Das, though a Khatri, 
eateth the fruit of offerings as if he were a Brahman. 
He putteth men of the four castes all in a line, 
maketh them eat together, and thus destroyeth their 
religion. I have therefore refused to dine with him, 
and have come to thee as a candidate for thy favour.’ 

The Tapa was disappointed. He received only 
a bad dinner and one rupee from the governor. 
On returning home he heard that the Guru was not 
only giving an elaborate banquet to his guests, but 
bestowing five rupees, and in some cases sixteen 
on every religious man who attended. On hearing 
this the Tapa was filled with regret and said, if 
he had known it, he would have dined with him 
instead of with the governor. He could thus have 
kept m the good graces of the Guru, and received 
a good dinner and at least five rupees from him. 
~ ie , Wl ^ urt f ,s house, and said publicly that 
he had no quarrel with him, and did not desire any. 

1 Suraj Par hash, Ras II, Chapter 10. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


99 


The Guru’s door happened at the time to be closed 
as the feast was in progress. The Tapa called from 
outside, but received no answer. He then went 
home and brought his son, whom he caused to leap 
over the wall of the Guru’s courtyard and enter his 
dining-room. The Tapa’s son succeeded in getting 
from the Guru a share of the banquet and five rupees. 
Notwithstanding this the Tapa boasted that he did 
not desire a present or a share of the feast served 
out promiscuously from the Guru’s kitchen. He 
had only sent his son on the Guru’s repeated pressing 
invitations. The Tapa, however, got the worst of 
the transaction, for his son injured his leg in crossing 
the wall, and the Tapa’s own insolent speeches 
regarding the Guru were reported to the headmen 
of the city. After consultation among themselves 
they thought they would visit him, and see how he 
passed his time. They entered his apartment with- 
out having given previous intimation, and caught 
him in adultery with the landlord’s wife. They 
arrested him and took him to the landlord, to whose 
turn it now came to defend his honour. Such 
offences were then visited with exemplary severity. 
The Tapa was put to death with torture. On this 
incident Jetha composed the following : — 

He is not a Tapa whose heart is greedy and who ever 
wandereth begging for mammon. 

When he was first called, he would not accept the 
proffered money ; afterwards repenting he brought his son 
and seated him in the midst of the assembly. 

The village elders all began to laugh, saying that the wave 
of greed had overcome the Tapa. 

He will not approach the place where he seeth little wealth; 
where he seeth much there he forfeiteth his faith. 

My brother, he is not a penitent ; he is a crane ; the saints 
seated in council have decided this. 

While employed in praising the rest the Tapa slandereth 
the true Guru ; for this sin God hath cursed him. 



100 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Behold the result the Tapa obtained for slandering the 
true Guru — all his labours have been in vain. 

When he sitteth outside among the village elders he is 
called a penitent ; when he sitteth at home he is committing 
sin ; God hath disclosed his secret sin to the elders. 

Dharmraj said to his myrmidons, ‘ Take and place the 
Tapa where the greatest murderers are. 

‘ Let no one look at this Tapa again ; he is accursed of the 
true Guru.’ 

Nanak telleth what took place in God’s court. He under- 
standeth whom God hath regenerated . 1 

The third Guru supplemented this hymn with his 
own injunctions : ‘ He is a Tapa or penitent who 
practiseth penance, who renounceth slander, false- 
hood, envy, and jealousy, who is the same in woe 
as in weal. When a deceitful and ill-conducted 
man pretendeth to be a Tapa, his counterfeit gilding 
is soon discovered. Wherefore it is better to re- 
nounce evil deeds, falsehood, and deception.’ 

The Guru again added the following : — 

, He whose heart is false acteth falsely ; 

He goeth about for money, yet he calleth himself a peni- 
tent ; 

Led astray by superstition he frequenteth all places of 
pilgrimage. 

How shall a penitent obtain the supreme reward ? 

By the favour of the Guru a few are sincere : 

Nanak, such penitents shall obtain salvation at home. 

The true penitent : — 

He is a penitent who performeth the penance 

Of remembering the Word on meeting the true Guru. 

The service of the true Guru is the acceptable penance : 

Nanak, such a penitent shall obtain honour in God’s court. 


1 Gauri ki War I. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


ior 


Chapter VIII 

A banker taking large offerings went to visit the 
Guru. The offerings included a necklace of pearls 
and precious stones. He wanted to put it on the 
Guru, but the Guru said he was too old for such 
ornaments. The banker might put it on him who 
was the Guru’s image, and who was dearer to him 
than life, and then the banker’s wishes would be 
gratified. The banker replied that the Guru might 
put it on whomsoever he pleased. The Sikhs began 
to conjecture whom the Guru could have meant. 
Some said Mohri, others Mohan — sons of the Guru — 
and others again thought of other faithful and 
obedient Sikhs. The Guru, disappointing them all, 
put the necklace with all its beauty and splendour 
on the neck of his favourite Jetha. 

On an occasional afternoon the Guru used to go 
with his retinue to the bank of the river Bias. On 
the way a filthy naked Muhammadan faqir, who 
was almost always under the influence of intoxicants, 
took up his position. He said in a voice loud enough 
for the Guru to hear as he passed by : ‘ He con- 
sumeth the wealth of the whole world. The older 
he groweth the more miserly he become th. He only 
maketh gifts to those from whom he desireth some- 
thing in return. He taketh no notice of faqirs, and 
hath never remembered me who am a beggar like 
others. I take opium and bhang, and he never 
offereth me any, though he ought sometimes to 
think of the poor. I care for no one, be he king or 
emperor ; I speak the truth to his face. When 
a man giveth me anything I pray for his welfare.’ 

The faqir often used such offensive language in 
reference to the Guru. The Guru, who was patience 
incarnate, used to remain silent and pass on. One 
day Jetha accompanied the Guru, and on hearing 
the graceless faqir spluttering and discharging, as 


102 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


it were, the sediment of his bhang, said to him, 
‘ Why participate in sin by slandering the true 
Guru ? ’ The faqir replied, ‘ Why should I not ? He 
hath never given me alms. Give me the necklace 
thou wearest.’ On this Jetha took off his gorgeous 
necklace, and put it on the faqir. Upon this he began 
to sing aloud the Guru's praises : * Thou art more 
generous than Raja Harishchandra, than Raja Karan, 
and than Raja Vikramadit.’ 1 As the party returned 
from the river in the evening, and while the Guru 
was still distant, the faqir began to shower further 
praises and blessings on him. ' Thou savest the 
world ; may thy sons and grandsons flourish ! ’ The 
Guru on hearing this remarked that somebody must 
have been generous to the faqir, otherwise he could 
not so soon have altered his tone and language. On 
inquiry the Guru learned what had occurred. J etha 
confessed, ‘ 0 Guru, I have given the faqir my 
necklace. Thou hast given me God’s name as a 
necklace ; I keep it by me. This perishable neck- 
lace I have offered in thy name.’ On hearing this 
the Guru blessed J etha : ‘ Thy line shall be endless 
and thine income and expenditure inexhaustible.’ 

The hostility of the Hindus now began to assert 
itself even more offensively than before. The Sikhs 
who visited the Guru at Goindwal used to speak 
as follows when they returned to their homes : ‘ The 
Guru hath proclaimed a new religion and abolished 
differences of castes and tribes. With him the four 
great castes eat from one vessel, and with great 
devotion perform uniform worship. He giveth to 
drink to his Sikhs the water in which he hath washed 
his feet, and teacheth them to reverently repeat 
Wahguru instead of the gayatri.’ 

When the Khatris and Brahmans, who were ex- 
tremely ignorant, irreligious, and proud of their 
castes, heard these reports, they could not endure 

1 Kings renowned in Eastern lore for their generosity. Raja Vikra- 
madit also gave his name to the Sambat era. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


103 


the Guru’s praises, and said, ‘ What an amount of 
deceit he hath been practising ! ’ They all met one 
day and arrived at the following conclusion : ‘ These 
are bad innovations the Guru hath introduced. No 
one will now reverence a Brahman, and the religion 
of the Khatris is quite abolished. The Guru hath 
reduced the four castes to one, and the result is that 
every one hath renounced and fallen away from 
his faith. All men eat together. The worship of gods 
and ancestors hath ceased, and all the popular cus- 
toms have been violated. Our only resource now 
is to appeal to the Emperor, so that he may abolish 
such new-fangled practices.’ 

The Hindus were joined in their opposition to the 
Guru by a Marwaha Khatri, whose interest it was, 
on the score of his commercial and banking trans- 
actions, to maintain the ancient superstitions. The 
Guru had at that time few powerful allies. His old 
friend and disciple Gobind was dead, and Gobind’s 
son, having become depraved by bad company, 
joined in hostility to him. 

Even the very men from whom the Guru had 
purchased the land for the Bawali turned against 
him — no doubt instigated by the Brahmans — and 
complained that the Guru had not paid them its 
stipulated price. Moreover, he had not only ille- 
gally taken possession of it, but forcibly ejected 
them even from their homes. The Marwaha em- 
ployed a servant who blackened his face and put 
on dirty ragged clothes to take a complaint on the 
subject to the Emperor. As the Marwaha and his 
servant proceeded on their way, they endeavoured 
but without success to defame the Guru. Several 
people who had heard of the Guru’s virtues and 
extraordinary powers, would not allow them shelter 
in their villages. 

When they reached the royal court, the complaint 
against the Guru was read out to the Emperor. 
A Pathan friend of the Guru at court explained that 



104 THE SIKH RELIGION « 

the complaint against him was false, and recalled t 

circumstances to the Emperor’s recollection which » 

induced him to believe so too. The Emperor then j 
gave his decision. ‘ I have never before heard that 
the Guru practised oppression on any one or coveted 
any one’s property. It was with great difficulty 
I induced him to accept villages to supply provisions 
for his kitchen, and I believe that the complainants 
and their representatives are lying. Send these men 
out of my sight.’ 

On the return of the Marwaha and his servant 
without having accomplished their obj ect, J etha com- 
posed the following : — 

The perverse man put on his perverse servant a blue-black 
patched coat filled with filth and veimin . 1 

No one in the world would allow him to sit near him ; he 
fell into ordure and still more dirt attached to him. 

The perverse man sent his servant to slander and backbite 
others, but the result was that the faces of both were 
blackened. 

It was quickly heard through the whole world, my brethren, 
that the perverse man with his servant had been shoe- 
beaten ; with addled brains they arose and returned home. 

The perverse man for the future was not allowed to mix in 
society or even with his marriage relations ; then his wife and 
his niece went and brought him home . 2 

He hath lost this world and the next ; hungry and thirsty 
he ever crieth out. 

Thanks to the Lord, the Creator, who Himself seated in the 
judgement seat caused real justice to be done. 

Him who slandereth the perfect true Guru, the True One 
punisheth and destroyeth. 

God who created the whole world hath uttered these words . 3 

The Brahmans then made a special complaint of 
their own against the Guru. It was to the following 
effect. ‘Thy Majesty is the protector of our cus- 

1 According to the custom of petitioners in that age. 

2 That is, hindered him from visiting his relations. 

3 That is, has inspired me to utter these words. Gauri ki War 1. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


105 


toms and the redresser of our wrongs. Every man’s 
religion is dear to him. Guru Amar Das of Goindwal 
hath abandoned the religious and social customs of 
the Hindus, and abolished the distinction of the four 
castes. Such heterodoxy hath never before been 
heard of in the four ages. There is now no twilight 
prayer, no gayatri, no offering of water to ancestors, 
no pilgrimages, no obsequies, and no worship of idols 
or of the divine salagram. The Guru hath aban- 
doned all these, and established the repetition of 
Wahguru instead of Ram ; and no one now acteth 
according to the Veds or the Simritis. The Guru 
reverenceth not J ogis, J atis, or Brahmans. He 
worshippeth no gods or goddesses, and he ordereth 
his Sikhs to refrain from doing so for ever more. He 
seateth all his followers in a line, and causeth them 
to eat together from his kitchen, irrespective of 
caste — whether they are Jats, strolling minstrels, 
Muhammadans, Brahmans, Khatris, shopkeepers, 
sweepers, barbers, washermen, fishermen, or car- 
penters. We pray thee restrain him now, else it will 
be difficult hereafter. And may thy religion and 
empire increase and extend over the world ! ’ 

After hearing this complaint the Emperor decided 
that he would summon the Guru, and confront him 
with his accusers. He accordingly dispatched a high 
official to Goindwal to request the Guru’s attendance. 
} The Emperor’s summons was not the brutal order 

I of a modem court, ‘ Herein fail not,’ but, ‘ Kindly 

i grant me a sight of thee.’ The official informed the 

I Guru of the Brahmans’ and Khatris’ charges against 

him. The Guru replied, ‘ I am too old to go any- 
' where. My son Mohan is absorbed in divine medita- 

tion, and my other son Mohri says he has never seen 
a court-house. There is Jetha; he may wait on 
the Emperor.’ Upon this the Guru instructed Jetha 
<r- to go and represent him. With an embrace he 

addressed him as follows : ‘ Thou art in mine image ; 
Guru Nanak will be with thee, and none shall pre- 


io6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

vail against thee. The Khatris and Brahmans who 
have complained are ignorant and false. Answer 
truly all the questions put to thee. Be not abashed 
and fear nobody. If any difficult questions be put 
and thou art at a loss for an answer, then think of 
the Guru, and thou shalt be able to give a suitable 
reply. Vindicate before the court the true teaching 
of Guru Nanak. Falsehood cannot contend with 
truth. As Guru Nanak hath said : — 

Falsehood is at an end, Nanak, truth at last shall prevail . 1 

On receiving these instructions Jetha fell at the 
Guru’s feet, and said, ‘ O my lord, I know nothing 
by myself. A sight of thee is my only morning and 
evening prayer ; my thoughts will be ever on the 
Guru, and what thou orderest that will I do.’ The 
Guru then patted him affectionately on the shoulder, 
and, giving him five trustworthy Sikhs as an escort, 
dispatched him on his journey. 


Chapter IX 

The Emperor received J etha with great distinction, 
and inquired after the Guru’s health. The Brahmans 
and the Khatris, not deeming their representative 
capable of urging their complaints with sufficient 
force, decided, on further consideration, to appear 
personally before the Emperor. On their arrival 
they repeated verbally the charges they had made in 
writing against the Guru. It was reserved for them 
to give another complexion to their accusation. 
They said that the conduct of the Guru in diverting 
people from the old faith was likely to lead to politi- 
cal disturbance or insurrection. The Emperor then 
called for Jetha to reply to the charges. 

Jetha said, ‘O Emperor, in the Sat, the Treta, 
the Dwapar, and the Kal ages God was worshipped 
under the names of Wasdev, Hari, Gobind, and Ram 
1 Ramkali ki War I. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


107 


respectively. The Guru hath made out of the 
initials of these four names the word Wahguru, 
which is praise of God and the Guru. The Rikhis, 
who composed the Shastars, have written that when- 
ever the saints meet together and repeat God’s 
name and praises, there are the Ganges, the Jamna, 
the Saraswati, the Godavari, and all the rivers of 
Hindu pilgrimage. It is true that by bathing at 
these the body is cleansed, but it is by associating 
with saints and repeating God’s name that the mind 
becometh pure. Better than the worship of idols 
is it to recognize God’s light in everybody, and vex 
no one’s soul ; for what place of pilgrimage is equal 
to mercy ? To bear no one enmity is tantamount 
to fasting. To renounce hypocrisy and repeat the 
Name are the main elements of our religion. The 
true Guru giveth honour to all while he himself 
remaineth humble. The Brahmans claim to be 
equal to God. The Guru maketh no such boast, 
for he well knoweth that he is God’s slave. Selfish 
and ambitious men roam and wander in pursuit of 
wealth ; but the Guru hath no worldly desires, and, 
knowing that God is in all creatures and everywhere 
diffused, is firm in his faith, harboureth no doubts, 
and renounceth superstition.’ Jetha then repeated 
the following composition of his own : — 

God’s name is God’s treasure ; clasp it to thy heart under 
the Guru’s instruction. 

Be the slave of God’s slave ; subdue pride and evil 
passions. 

They who have won the prize of human birth shall by the 
Guru’s favour never know defeat. 

Blest, blest and very fortunate are they, Nanak, who 
under the Guru’s instruction deem God the essence of all 
things. 

God, God, God is the treasury of excellences. 

Meditate on God, God under the Guru’s instruction, then 
shalt thou obtain honour in God’s court. 



io8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Repeat, God, God, God, and thy face shall become bright 
and distinguished. 

Nanak, he who hath obtained God’s name shall meet Him. 

Jetha then said, ‘ If, however, my accusers desire 
to test my knowledge I will expound to them the 
gayatri, although I place no faith in its efficacy.’ 
On this Jetha was called upon to fulfil his promise. 
On hearing Jetha’ s exposition of the famous Hindu 
text, the Brahmans and Khatris who came to 
complain were astonished at his learning and inti- 
mate acquaintance with their religion. They were 
put to shame in the presence of the Emperor, while 
the Sikhs who accompanied Jetha were as pleased 
as the lotus when it beholds the sun. 

The Emperor then gave his decision : ‘ I see no 
hostility to Hinduism in this man, nor do I find any 
fault with his compositions. To repeat or not to re- 
peat the gayatri is at his own discretion. It certainly 
doth not concern me to cause the gayatri to be re- 
peated or twilight devotions performed. Jetha’s 
words show how the mind may be purified and 
hypocrisy renounced. There is no difference be- 
tween God and His darwesh. No man can vie with 
either. You complainants are enemies of truth, and 
are only causing needless annoyance. Reply to 
Jetha if you can ; if not, ask his forgiveness.’ The 
Brahmans could give no reply and departed from 
court thoroughly crestfallen. 

Upon this the Emperor took Jetha aside, and 
told him to request Guru Amar Das, who before his 
conversion to Sikhism used to make a yearly pilgrim- 
age to the Ganges, to make one pilgrimage more 
in order to divert the wrath of the Hindus. The 
Emperor added that he would issue an order that 
no tax should be levied on the Guru’s party. 1 

Gobind’s son took his discomfiture in the Mar- 
waha’s land-suit so much to heart that he pined away 
1 Sur a j Par hash, Ras I, Chapter 44. The jaziya or tax on 
‘infidels' was subsequently abolished by Akbar in a.d. 1579. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


109 

and soon died. His mother believed that her son’s 
fate was the result of his hostility to the Guru, so, in 
order to save the family from extinction, she brought 
her surviving son, then a child, to the Guru, and 
prayed him to protect him. The Guru compas- 
sionately said, ' This son shall remain attached to 
the Guru, and from him many sons shall be born ’ — 
a prophecy which was subsequently fulfilled. 

The Guru, in compliance with the Emperor’s 
suggestion, and also in order to have an opportunity 
of preaching his religion, set out for Hardwar. By 
the time he had crossed the river Bias and arrived 
in the Doab, he found himself accompanied by a 
great concourse of people. It had become publicly 
known that he and his retinue were exempted from 
the ordinary pilgrim- tax, so people flocked to him 
in numbers. They would have a sight of the Guru, 
they would perform their pilgrimage with singing 
and music, they would live on the Guru’s kitchen, 
they would be exempted from the pilgrim-tax, they 
would be protected from robbers, and they would 
have the advantage of bathing with all due cere- 
monial and observances at the renowned place of 
pilgrimage. For all these reasons several thousands 
followed in the Guru’s train. The Guru sometimes 
walked with a stick, but more generally rode, on 
account of his extreme age. Having crossed the 
Satluj he went to Pahoa, a place of pilgrimage not 
far from Thanesar or Kurkhetar, where in days 
long past, on the margin of the Saraswati, Rikhis 
and Munis performed painful penance and austerities. 
The Pandits and Brahmans of the place were well 
pleased to see the Guru, and they went and sat in his 
court. He then proceeded to Thanesar or the place 
far excellence of Shiv the destroyer. The Guru was 
asked why he had abandoned Sanskrit, the language of 
the gods, and composed hymns in the vulgar tongue. 
He replied, 'Well-water can only irrigate adjacent 
land, but rain-water the whole world. On this 



no 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


account the Guru hath composed his hymns in the 
vulgar dialect, and enshrined them in the Gurumukhi 
characters, so that men and women of all castes and 
classes may read them.’ A Brahman replied, ‘ Clouds 
rain on the earth, hut is there not water enough in 
the earth already ? ’ The Guru replied as follows : — 

You say, clouds rain upon the earth, but is there not 
water enough in the earth already ? 

I reply — There is, it is true, water in the earth, but water 
only appeareth when the clouds rain. 1 

The Pandit said that religious instruction ought 
not to he communicated to every one, it being for- 
bidden to instruct Sudars and women in the sacred 
lore. The Guru replied : — 

0, father, dispel such doubts. 

It is God who doeth whatever is done ; all who exist shall 
be absorbed in Him. 

What is the effect of the union of female and male without 
the interposition of God ? 

The different forms, 0 God, which appear are ever Thine, 
and at the last they shall all be resolved in Thee. 

I have been led astray through so many births ; now that 
I have found Thee I am as if I had never strayed. 

He who is absorbed in the Guru’s word, shall thoroughly 
know Him who made this world. 

Thine is the Word, there is none but Thee ; where is room 
for doubt ? 

Nanak, he whose essence is united with the essence of God 
shall not be born again. 2 

The Guru proceeded to the river Jamna, whose 
dark ripples delighted his eyes. There arose a slight 
unexpected difficulty. Every pilgrim endeavoured 
to escape taxation by saying he was a Sikh and 
follower of the Guru. The tax-gatherers waited on 

1 In this allegory the water in the earth means recondite Sanskrit 
literature; the water from the clouds, the Gum’s instruction, which 
is continually poured down for the benefit of the world. 

2 Gauri. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


hi 


the Guru, and requested him to separate or name 
his own immediate followers, and they should pass 
free, but all others must pay. The Guru replied, 
‘ If you want taxes, I will give you whatever money 
you require ; but if, in obedience to the Emperor’s 
order of exemption, you do not tax my Sikhs, they 
shall all be known by their uttering “ Sat Nam ! Sri 
Wahguru ! ” None may be expelled from the Guru’s 
company ; whoever cometh as a friend is ever 
respected.’ When the Guru was crossing the Jamna, 
thousands of people who were not Sikhs accompanied 
him, crying out ‘ Sat Nam ! Sri Wahguru ! ’ and 
passed over untaxed. 

After preaching at the J amna the Guru proceeded 
in the direction of Hardwar. He rested under a tree 
on the way at a place called Kankhal, three miles to 
the south of the great Hindu source of cholera and 
devotion. As he approached Hardwar the crowd 
which gathered round him assumed still vaster pro- 
portions. When the tax-gatherers tried to impose 
a tax on any of them, they were met with the angry 
reply, ‘ Have I not said Wahguru ? Am I not the 
Guru’s Sikh ? ’ Thus there was not even a farthing 
put into their boxes, and they went to their homes 
■without the usual receipts. 

The Guru availed himself of the opportunity to 
read a brief homily to his followers : 1 As the tax- 
gatherers have not been able to prevail against you, 
so Death, another tax-gatherer, shall have no power 
against those who repeat “ Sat Nam ! Sri Wah- 
guru ! ” This is an example to hand of the way to 
escape from Death.’ 


Chapter X 

The Guru having returned to Hardwar after so 
many years’ absence was received with great dis- 
tinction and demonstrations of friendship by Jogis, 
Bairagis, Sanyasis, Brahmacharis, Pandits, &c. They 


112 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


disclosed to him their spiritual doubts and difficul- 
ties, which he successfully solved. When the Guru 
was subsequently visited by the Chaudhri and the 
heads of the lay population of Hardwar, they asked 
him why he caused the four castes of Hindus to do 
him homage when he himself did homage to no one. 
He replied that the Brahmans were already very 
proud, and, if he paid them homage, their pride 
would only increase the more. And as regards the 
homage paid to him by the four castes, neither he 
nor his predecessors required it from any one. It 
was only when the earth, overladen with the burden 
of sin, raised its protest to heaven, that Guru Nanak 
appeared to point out the easy path of salvation, 
and not to obtain the praise or homage of human 
beings. 

When the Guru and his party had all returned to 
Goindwal, Jetha, in response to numerous inquiries 
and requests, gave the following metrical account 
of the recent pilgrimage : — 


I 

A sight of the true Guru was our bathing during the 
Abhijit , 1 

The filth of evil inclinations was cleansed, and the darkness 
of ignorance dispelled. 

The ignorance of those who saw the Guru was dispelled, 
and light beamed on their hearts. 

The pains of transmigration vanished in a moment, and 
men obtained God the imperishable Lord. 

God the Creator Himself made this auspicious time, when 
the true Guru went to the fair at Kurkhetar. 

A sight of the true Guru was our bathing during the 
Abhijit. 

1 The lunar month, though generally considered twenty-eight days, 
is really only twenty-seven days, odd hours, minutes, and seconds. 
Abhijit was intercalated between the 21st and 22nd asterisms to 
adjust the difference. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


113 


II 

Sikhs travelled with the true Guru on his journey. 

Every day, every hour, and every moment service was 
held ; 

God’s service was held, and all people came to behold the 
Guru. 

God blended with Himself those who obtained a sight of 
him. 

The true Guru made the toil of pilgrimage in order to save 
all people ; 

And Sikhs travelled with the true Guru on his journey, 

III 

It was an auspicious time when the true Guru first arrived 
in Kurkhetar. 

When it was known, the beings of the three worlds came 
to behold him. 

All the demigods, munis, and saints of the three worlds 
came to behold him. 

The sins of those who touched the perfect true Guru were 
all erased. 

Jogis, Digambars, Sanyasis, and men of the six schools 
entered into conversation with him . 1 

It was an auspicious time when the Guru arrived in 
Kurkhetar. 


IV 

The Guru then proceeded to the Jamna where he caused 
people to repeat God’s name. 

The tax-gatherers met the Guru with offerings and allowed 
his followers to cross over. 

All those in the Guru’s train who meditated on God, were 
exempted from toll — 

Death the tax-gatherer approacheth not those who walk 
in the true way according to the Guru’s instruction — 

Eveiybody took the Guru’s name, and by taking it all the 
pilgrims were excused toll. 

1 Also translated — Conversed with him and made him offerings. 

SIKH, II I 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


114 

The Guru then proceeded to the Jamna where he caused 
people to repeat God’s name, 


V 

After that he went to the Ganges and there was a mar- 
vellous scene. 

All were entranced on seeing the saintly Guru, and there 
too no one took half a dam 1 from him. 

No one paid half a dam or put any money into the toll-box ; 
the toll-collectors’ mouths were sealed. 

They said , i Brethren, what shall we do ? of whom shall 
we ask ? Every one is escaping under cover of the Guru . 3 

The toll-collectors by their skill and cleverness saw it was 
best to close their boxes and go away. 

After that the Guru went to the Ganges, and there was 
a marvellous scene. 


VI 

The leading men of the city went in a body, and took 
shelter in the true Guru. 

They asked the true Guru concerning God, and he proved 
His existence from the Simritis, 

The Simritis and Shastars all established God’s existence ; 
Shukdev, Prahlad 2 , and Sri Ram uttering God's name medi- 
tated on Him. 

In the city of the body is the fort of the soul which the 
five deadly sins would rob, but the Guru hath destroyed 
their abode. 

The Purans everywhere contain praises of offerings, but it 
is from Guru Nanak’s words God’s service is obtained. 

The leading men of the city went in a body and took 
shelter in the true Guru . 3 

There was a merchant called Gango, a Khatri of 
the Basi tribe, who had become bankrupt by losses 

1 An ancient Indian coin or money-measure of very small value, 
twenty-five dams being equal to a paisa of Indian or a farthing of 
English money, 

2 An account of this saint will afterwards be given, 

3 Tukhari Chhant, 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 115 

in trade. His former friends, connexions, and 
relations deserted him and laughed at him. Sad 
at heart, he went to Goindwal to see the Guru, of 
whose fame he had heard. Putting complete faith 
in him, he ate from his kitchen and then went to 
make his obeisance. He was only able to offer as 
much molasses as would weigh a penny. He told 
the Guru that, while very unfortunate in his worldly 
affairs, he was very happy at having seen him, and 
he solicited his protection. The Guru took the 
molasses in his hand, and inquired what distressed 
his heart. Gango told him and added, ‘ As a last 
resource I have come to thee.’ The Guru replied, 
‘ Go to Dihli and open a bank there, serve, and 
treat respectfully the saints who visit thee, and thou 
shalt obtain wealth from the Creator.' Gango 
adopted the Guru’s suggestion. He opened a head 
office in Dihli, and afterwards a branch in Lahore, 
and did banking business in partnership with his 
son. Public confidence in him was restored, he 
grew wealthy, and was subsequently enabled to draw 
cheques for large amounts on his correspondents. 

On one occasion a poor man went to the Guru 
and complained that, though his daughter was 
marriageable, he had not wherewithal to defray 
her marriage expenses. The Guru put him no 
questions, but gave him a cheque on Gango for 
fifty rupees. Gango said to himself, ' If I honour 
this, the Guru will trouble me again.’ He accord- 
ingly took no notice of the man or of the cheque. 
The man returned to the Guru, and told him the 
result of his mission. The Guru gave him the 
amount of the cheque out of his own pocket, and 
thus enabled him to procure his daughter’s marriage. 
As regards Gango’s conduct the Guru remarked, 
‘ Worldly love and pride destroy love and con- 
fidence. Under their influence man turneth away 
from his Guru, and consequently suffereth great 
hardship.’ 

1 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


ix6 

It happened that soon afterwards the tide 
of trade turned and Gango again became bankrupt. 
Thoroughly repentant, he re-addressed himself to 
the Guru, and performed menial service in his 
kitchen. Regard for the world and the customs 
of his family he totally disregarded. Whatever 
toil he performed he treated as penance for dis- 
honouring the Guru’s cheque, and while perform- 
ing his self-imposed duties, he was ever absorbed 
in devotion. After some time the Guru sent for 
him. He went, fell at his feet, and saying that 
all mortals were liable to err begged forgiveness. 
The Guru granted it, gave him a white dress, 
and communicating to him the true Name which 
was the spell of initiation said, ‘ Thou too shalt 
convert many to the faith, thine utterances shall 
prove true, and wealth and supernatural power 
shall come at thy bidding.’ Gango’ s shrine is now 
at a village called Dau, near Kharar in the Ambala 
district. 

The choicest viands continued to be served up 
from the Guru’s kitchen. The traveller, the 
stranger, the beggar, as well as the follower of the 
Guru, could gratify his palate with the six physical 
tastes — sweet, salt, sour, bitter, pungent, and astrin- 
gent — of Indian cookery, while the Guru himself 
continued to live as before on coarse food served 
without condiments. His kitchen remained open 
till three hours after nightfall. Whatever remained 
after the guests had been fed, was compassionately 
thrown to the beasts and birds, and if, after they 
were satisfied, anything were left, it was given to 
the fish in the river, so that they too might be filled. 

One day a Sidh Jogi went to see the Guru and 
humbly addressed him : * Since thou, 0 Guru, hast 
been enthroned, I have desired to behold thee. 

I am fortunate to-day in having attained my object. 

I have performed every form of penance, but, 
finding it all unavailing, have now come to thee. 

I wish to obtain mental rest and an assurance that 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 117 

when I abandon this body I shall be born in thy 
family, and so be happy worshipping God and singing 
His praises.’ The Guru replied, ‘ Perfection and 
happiness are not obtained by calling one’s self 
a Sidh and obtaining many followers. It is by 
devotion to God that real happiness is obtained. And, 
as thou desirest to be born in my family, thou 
shalt be Mohri’s son and my grandson.’ The Jogi, 
in order to pursue his devotions without inter- 
ruption, retired to the margin of the Bias, and there 
parted with his body. 

It will be remembered that the Guru had two 
sons, Mohan and Mohri. Mohri’s eldest son was 
Arth Mai, and his second son the Sidh J ogi. When 
the Guru heard of the Jogi’s rebirth, he sent Bhai 
Ballu to bring him the infant. Although it was 
not advisable to remove him so soon after birth, 
no one might disobey the Guru. On seeing his 
grandson, the Guru composed the Anand or Song 
of Joy on the spot, in thirty-eight pauris, and 
taking the infant in his lap gave him the name of 
Anand. Bhai Ballu then went on the housetop, 
and, calling the people with beat of drum to listen 
to him, recited the whole composition. It is now 
repeated on occasions of marriages and rejoicings, 
also before large feasts, and at the preparation of 
sacred food. 


THE ANAND 
I 

Joy, my mother, that I have found the True Guru I 1 
I have easily found the True Guru, and the music of gratu- 
lation is in my heart. 

The excellent Rags and the race of the female singers of 
heaven have come to sing hymns. 

They who have fixed God in their hearts sing His praises. 
Saith Nanak, I feel joy that I have obtained the True Guru. 

1 The True Guru here means God. 



n8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


II 

O my soul, ever abide with God ; 

Abide with God, 0 my soul ; He will make thee forget all 
sorrow ; 

He will accept thee, and arrange all thine affairs. 

The Lord is omnipotent in all things ; why forget 
Him ? 

Saith Nanak, 0 my soul, ever abide with God. 

III 

0 my true Lord, what is there not in Thy house ? 

In Thy house is everything ; he to whom Thou givest shall 
receive ; 

He will ever praise Thine attributes and plant Thy name 
in his heart. 

Many strains of rejoicing resound for him in whose heart 
Thy name abideth. 

Saith Nanak, O true Lord, what is there not in Thy house ? 

IV 

The true Name is my support ; 

The true Name which satisfieth all my hunger, is my 
support. 

God’s name having entered my heart hath granted me 
peace and happiness, and fulfilled all my desires. 

1 have ever sacrificed myself to the Guru who possesseth 
such excellences. 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 saints, love God’s hymns : 

The true Name is my support. 

V 

The five forms of music resound in that happy house 1 ; 

In that happy house into which God hath infused His 
might, the strains resound. 

Thou, 0 God, hast put the five evil passions under sub- 
jection, and vanquished Death the torturer. 


1 That is, in the heart where God dwells. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


119 

They who were so predestined 1 are attached to Thy name, 
0 God. 

Saith Nanak, they obtain happiness, and in their hearts 
the unbeaten strain resoundeth. 

VI 

Without true love man 2 is unhonoured ; 

Man is unhonoured without love. What can the wretched 
creature do ? 

There is none omnipotent but Thee ; have mercy on me, 
0 God. 

Man hath no other refuge than the Word, by attachment to 
which he is adorned. 

Saith Nanak, what can the wretched creature do without 
love ? 


VII 

Every one talketh of happiness, but true happiness can 
only be known from the Guru ; 

If the beloved Guru be merciful, happiness shall ever be 
known from him. 

The Guru being merciful cut away my sins, and put into 
mine eyes the salve 3 of divine knowledge ; 

The True One hath adorned with the Word those whose 
hearts have parted with worldly love. 

Saith Nanak, that is the real happiness which is known 
from the Guru. 


VIII 

0 Father, he to whom Thou givest happiness obtaineth it ; 
He obtaineth it to whom Thou givest it ; what else can 

poor mortal do ? 

Some led astray by error wander in every direction, 
others are adorned by attachment to Thy name ; 

1 Translated by Mahant Sumer Singh — They to whom Thou didst 
show favour from the beginning. 

2 Literally — the body, 

3 Anjaiij or surma , a preparation for darkening the eyelids, is made 
sometimes of lamp-black, sometimes of antimony. 



Ii20 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


. Through the Guru’s favour pure are the hearts of those to 
whom the will of God is agreeable. 

Saith Nanak, the man on whom Thou, O Beloved, con- 
ferreth happiness obtaineth it. 

IX 

Come, 0 beloved saints, let us speak of the Ineffable One ; 

Let us speak of the Ineffable One ; through whom shall 
we find words to do so. 1 

Entrust body, soul, and wealth to the Guru, and obey his 
order, so shall you succeed. 

Obey the Guru’s order, and sing true songs 2 of praise — 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 saints, in this way speak of the 
Ineffable. 


X 

0 fickle man, no one hath obtained God by cleverness ; 
By cleverness no one hath obtained Him ; hearken, 0 my 

soul. 

This Maya who hath led man astray in such superstition is 
fascinating ; 

He who hath spread this illusion hath created Maya the 
fascinating. 

1 have made myself a sacrifice to Him who hath rendered 
worldly love dear to mortals. 

Saith Nanak, 0 fickle man, no one hath obtained God by 
cleverness. 


XI 

0 dear man, do thou ever remember the True One. 

This family which thou seest shall not depart with thee ; 
It shall not depart with thee ; why fix thy thoughts 
thereon ? 

Never do what thou shalt have to repent of at last. 
Hearken to the instruction of the true Guru ; it is that 
which shall go with thee. 

Saith Nanak, O dear man, ever remember the True One. 

1 Also translated — Through whom shall we be able to find Him. 

2 The hymns of the Guru. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


121 


XII 

0 Inaccessible and Inapprehensible One, Thine end cannot 
be found. 

No one hath found Thine end ; it is only Thou Thyself who 
knowest Thyself. 

Men and lower animals are all Thy sport ; by what words 
can any one describe it ? 

It is Thou, who didst create the world, who speakest and 
beholdest all. 

Saith Nanak, Thou art ever inaccessible ; Thine end 
cannot be found. 

XIII 

Demigods, saints, and munis search for nectar, 1 but only 
from the Guru can it be obtained ; 

He to whom the Guru showeth favour findeth such nectar, 
and putteth the True One in his heart. 

Thou didst create all men and lower animals ; seeing Thee 
to be the One God, I have come to touch Thy feet. 2 

They with whom the True Guru is well pleased, have no 
longer avarice, covetousness, or pride. 3 

Saith Nanak, he with whom God is pleased, hath obtained 
nectar from the Guru. 

XIV 

The way of the saints is peculiar ; 

The way of the saints is peculiar ; they travel by a difficult 
road ; 

They renounce avarice, covetousness, pride, and worldly 
desires, and speak not much ; 

They go by the road which is sharper than a sword and 
finer than a hair. 

By the favour of the Guru the desires of those who renounce 
pride are centred in God — 

Saith Nanak, the way of the saints is peculiar in every age. 

1 God's name. 

2 That is, to adore Thee. 

3 This line is also translated — Avarice, covetousness, and pride 
have left me, and the True Guru is endeared to me. 



122 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


XV 

As thou causest us, O Lord, to walk, so we walk ; what 
more can we know of Thine attributes ? 

They whom Thou hast put on the right way walk as Thou 
causest them ; 

They whom Thou of Thy mercy appliest to Thy name 
ever meditate on Thee, O God ; 

They to whom Thou impartest Thine instruction through 
the Guru shall obtain happiness. 

Saith Nanak, O true Lord, Thou causest us to walk as Thou 
pleasest. 

XVI 

The Word is a delightful song of rejoicing ; 

The true Guru hath communicated to me the Word which 
is ever a delightful song of rejoicing ; 

It dwelleth in the hearts of those who were so destined 
from the beginning. 

Some go about talking much, but no one hath obtained 
the real Word by babbling. 

Saith Nanak, the true Guru hath communicated to me 
the Word which is a song of rejoicing. 

XVII 

They who have meditated on God have become pure ; 

They who have meditated on God through the Guru’s 
instruction have become pure ; 

They are pure with their parents and families, and with all 
their associates. 

They who repeat God’s name are holy, they who hear it are 
holy, and they who treasure it in their hearts are holy ; 

Saith Nanak, they are holy who under the Guru’s instruc- 
tion have meditated on God. 

XVIII 

Divine knowledge is not obtained by superstitious cere- 
monies ; without divine knowledge doubt will not depart ; 

Doubt will not depart by any effort however much men 
continue to perform such ceremonies. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS . 123 

Through doubt the heart is filthy ; by what means shall it 
be cleansed ? 

By attaching thyself to the Word thy heart shall be 
cleansed ; continue to fix thy thoughts upon God. 

Saith Nanak, it is by the favour of the Guru divine know- 
ledge is obtained, and doubt dispelled. 

XIX 

Foul within and fair without ; 1 

They who are fair without and foul within, have lost their 
human lives at play. 

They have contracted the great disease of avarice and 
forgotten death. 

The Name, which is the best thing in the Veds, they hear 
not ; they wander like demons. 

Saith Nanak, they who have renounced truth, and attached 
themselves to falsehood, have lost their human lives at play. 

XX 

Fair within and fair without ; 

They who are fair without and fair within, do good acts 
through the true Guru. 

Even the very name of falsehood reacheth them not, and 
truth is the object of their desires. 

The merchants who have earned the jewel of human birth 
are prosperous, 

Saith Nanak, the hearts of those who abide with the Guru 
are ever pure. 

XXI 

If any disciple turn towards the Guru ; 

If any disciple turn towards him, his heart shall be with 
the Guru ; 

He shall meditate on the Guru’s feet, and remember God 
in his heart ; 

He shall renounce pride, ever abide under the Guru’s 
guidance, and know none but him. 

1 This is an English idiom which we have ventured to use here. 
The literal translation is — The heart unclean, the external clean. 



124 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Saith Nanak, hear, 0 saints, such a disciple shall turn 
towards the Guru. 


XXII 

Whoever turneth away from the true Guru, shall not 
obtain salvation without him ; 

Nor shall he obtain salvation elsewhere — go inquire of 
persons of discrimination — 

He shall wander in many births, and not obtain deliver- 
ance without the true Guru ; 

But he shall at last obtain deliverance by attaching himself 
to the feet of the true Guru who will communicate to him 
the Word. 

Saith Nanak, thoroughly reflect on this — there can be no 
deliverance without the true Guru. 

XXIII 

Come, ye disciples, beloved of the true Guru, sing a true 
song. 

Sing a song of the Guru, the song of songs ; 

It will enter the hearts of those on whom God looketh with 
favour. 

Abide in the love of God, repeat His name, and ye shall 
ever quaff nectar : 

Saith Nanak, ever sing this true song. 

XXIV 

Without the true Guru every song is false ; 1 

Every song is false without the true Guru ; 

They who utter it are false, they who hear it are false, and 
false is its author. 

They may continually repeat God’s name with their 
tongues, but they heed not what they say. 

They whose hearts are seized by Maya pray mechanically ; 2 

Saith Nanak, without the true Guru all songs are false. 

1 No faith can be placed on any song other than that of the Guru. 

2 Ravaani here means a continuous flow of prayer on the lips, but 
not felt by the heart. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


125 


XXV 

The Guru’s word is a jewel enchased with diamonds ; 

The man whose heart is attached to the jewel of the Word 
shall be absorbed in God. 

When the heart is attached to the Word man loveth the 
True One. 

God is the diamond ; the jewel is He ; to whomsoever He 
giveth it He explaineth its worth. 

Saith Nanak, the Word is a jewel enchased with diamonds. 

XXVI 

God having by His divine power created the world 
subjected it to His order ; 

He subjected it to His order ; He Himself beholdeth ; He 
causeth some rare holy person to understand this ; 

Such a person giveth the Word a place in his heart, bursteth 
his bonds, and obtaineth deliverance. 

He whom God desireth to make holy shall become so, and 
fix his attention on the one God. 

Saith Nanak, God is the Creator ; He Himself explaineth 
His orders. 


XXVII 

The Simritis and the Shastars define good and evil, but 
they know nothing of the Real Thing ; 

They know nothing of the Real Thing ; without the Guru 
they can know nothing of the Real Thing. 

The world is asleep in mammon and superstition ; in sleep 
it passeth its time ; 1 

By the Guru’s favour they who put God in their hearts 
and utter His ambrosial word are awake : 

Saith Nanak, they who pass their time awake, and who 
day and night fix their attention on God, shall obtain the 
Real Thing. 

1 Literally — night, a word which is often applied in the Granth 
Sahib to human life. 



126 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


XXVIII 

Why forget Him who cherished us in our mother’s wombs ? 

Why forget that great Benefactor who gave us sustenance 
in the midst of fire ? 

Nothing can affect him whom God causeth to love Him ; 

The holy man whom God causeth to love Him ever remem- 
ber eth Him. 

Saith Nanak, why forget that great Benefactor ? 

XXIX 

As is the fire of the womb within, so is the fire of mammon 
without ; 

The fire of mammon and of the womb are the same ; the 
Creator hath set a play going. 

When it pleaseth Him the child is born, and the family is 
well pleased ; 

The love the child bore God in the womb departeth, greed 
attacheth to it, and mammon ruleth over it. 

Maya is that influence by which God is forgotten, worldly 
love produced, and man becometh attached to secular things, 

Saith Nanak, they who love God through the Guru’s 
favour, find Him even in the midst of mammon , 1 

XXX 

God is priceless ; His price cannot be ascertained ; 

His price cannot be ascertained by any one though people 
use every effort . 2 

If thou meet such a true Guru as will dispel thy pride, 
entrust thy head to him ; 

So shalt thou meet God who owneth thy soul, and He will 
come to dwell in thy heart. 

Saith Nanak, God is priceless ; fortunate are they who 
have found Him. 

XXXI 

God is my capital, my mind is the merchant ; 

God is my capital, my mind is the merchant ; through the 
true Guru I know my capital. 

1 Even by remaining a family man, and not adopting the life of an 
anchoret, 2 Literally — even though people continue to scream. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


127 

Ever repeat God’s name, my soul, and thou shalt gain 
profit daily. 

They who are pleasing to God have obtained this wealth — 

Saith Nanak, God is my capital, my mind is the merchant, 

XXXII 

0 my tongue, thou art attached to other savours ; thy 
thirst depart eth not. 

Thy thirst will not depart by any means until thou obtain 
God’s elixir. 

If thou obtain and drink God’s elixir, thirst will not again 
affect thee. 

This elixir of God is obtained by him who, on account of 
his previous good acts, hath met the true Guru : 

Saith Nanak, when God hath made His abode in the 
heart man forgetteth all other elixirs. 

XXXIII 

0 body of mine, God infused light into thee, and then thou 
earnest into the world ; 

When God put light into thee thou earnest into the world. 

God is the mother, God is the father, who having created 
man showed him the world. 

To him who understandeth by the Guru’s favour, this 
world is a show, or appeareth to be a show. 

Saith Nanak, when He who formed thy body out of the 
elements of nature put light into it, then earnest thou into 
the world. 

XXXIV 

My soul was delighted when I heard of God’s coming ; 

O my friends, sing a song of welcome to Him ; my house is 
turned into a palace to receive Him. 

Ever sing a song of welcome to Him, my friends, and you 
shall feel nor sorrow nor suffering. 

Fortunate the days when I am attached to the Guru’s 
feet, and repeat the Name of my Beloved. 

Under the Guru’s instruction I knew the unbeaten strain, 
and enjoyed the divine relish of God’s name. 



128 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


. Saith Nanak, God Himself who is able to do and to cause 
everything to be done met me. 

XXXV 

O body of mine, what hast thou done by coming into this 
world ? 

• What hast thou done, 0 thou body, since thou earnest 
into this world ? 

To the God who fashioned thee thou hast not given a place 
in thy heart. 

Through the Guru’s favour God dwelleth in the heart, if 
such was predestined. 

Saith Nanak, the man 1 who attacheth his heart to the 
true Guru, is acceptable. 


XXXVI 

0 eyes of mine, God infused light into you, look at none 
but God ; 

Look at none but God ; look on Him intently. 

All this world which you behold is God’s image ; God’s 
image appeareth in it. 

When by the Guru’s favour I received understanding, 
I saw that God was one, and that there was none besides. 

Saith Nanak, these eyes were blind, but on meeting the 
true Guru they obtained divine light. 

XXXVII 

0 ears of mine, you were sent to hear the truth ; 

You were sent and attached to this body to hear the truth ; 
hear the true Word, 

By hearing which the soul and body are revived, and the 
tongue absorbed in God’s relish. 

The True One is invisible and wonderful ; His state cannot 
be described. 

Saith Nanak, hear the ambrosial Name and you shall be 
pure ; you were sent to hear the truth. 

1 In this hymn sharlr, body, means man generally. 




ii 

r- 

S' 

f 


Sr 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 129 

XXXVIII 

God having put the soul into the cave of the body, blew 
breath into it as a musical instrument ; 

He blew breath into it as a musical instrument ; nine doors 
of the body He disclosed, and the tenth He concealed ; 

To some through the Guru He gave faith and disclosed the 
tenth door : 

There are the various forms of God, there the nine treasures 
of His name, but His end is never found. 

Saith Nanak, the beloved God having put the soul into 
the cave of the body, blew breath into it as a musical instru- 
ment. 


t XXXIX 

I Sing this true song of rejoicing in the true temple ; 1 

j Sing this song of rejoicing in the true temple where the 

j saints ever meditate on the True One. 

They who please Thee and to whom Thou givest under- 
standing through the Guru’s instruction, meditate on Thee, 
0 True One. 

The True One is the Lord of all ; he on whom He bestoweth 
favours shall receive Him. 

Saith Nanak, sing this true song of rejoicing in the true 
temple. 

XL 

Listen to my joy, my very fortunate friends, all my 
desires have been fulfilled : 

I have obtained God the Supreme Brahm, and all my 
sorrows have departed ; 

My sorrows, mine afflictions, and my sufferings have 
departed by listening to the true Word. 

The saints and holy men are happy on hearing it from the 
perfect Guru : 

Pure are they who hear it, stainless those who utter it, the 
true Guru will fill their hearts ! 

Nanak representeth, for those who attached themselves to 
the Guru’s feet the unblown trumpets play. 

1 In the congregation of saints. 

K 


SIKH. II 


130 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


All who heard the Anand were filled with love 
and devotion. The Guru ordered that from that 
day forward it should ever be recited on festive 
occasions. The Sikhs believe that when the Anand 
is read at the beginning of any undertaking, it is 
successful ; and if it be read in the morning, the day 
is passed in happiness. Guru Ram Das and Guru 
Arjan added each a pauri to the composition, thus 
increasing the number of pauris to forty altogether . 1 

A third son, who died at his birth, was born to 
Mohri. Mohri’s wife then went to the Guru and 
said, ‘ My son is dead, I pray thee have compassion 
on me.’ The Guru, uttering ‘Sat Nam! Sri Wahguru! ’ 
touched the child with his foot, and said, ‘ Arjani, 
mayest thou have arja — long life.’ Upon this the 
child revived. 


Chapter XI 

One day the Guru called to his elder son, saying, 
‘ Come here, crazy Mohan.’ From that moment 
Mohan, in fulfilment of his father’s words, renounced 
the world, shut himself up in a house, and fixed his 
attention on God. He used sometimes to eat 
ravenously with both hands, and sometimes he 
would speak to no one. His mother, on seeing his 
idiotic condition, addressed the Guru, ‘ My lord, 
by thy look of mercy even the dead revive. Be 
good enough to restore Mohan to reason. Had 
I known that he should have become like this, 
I would not have got him married. His wife, thy 
daughter-in-law, is now sitting in soiled garments 
mourning and heaving cold sighs.’ The Guru replied, 
* People know not Mohan’s greatness. Tell his wife 
to decorate herself and fall at her husband’s feet, 
and she shall have a son.’ His wife accordingly 
arrayed herself and went to do homage to her hus- 
band as he sat alone in his chamber. Her hopes 

1 Suraj Par hash, Ras I, Chapter 59. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


13 1 

were fulfilled, and in due time she was delivered 
of a son. On hearing of the child’s birth the Guru 
said he should become an ascetic saint, who would 
be called Sant Ram. In a short time the boy’s 
mother died, and he was brought up under the 
Guru’s supervision. He became very clever, com- 
mitted to memory the Guru’s hymns, and used to 
recite them with great fervour. He compiled the 
hymns of Guru Amar Das in a volume which is said 
to be still extant. 

A Khatri after much longing obtained a son whom 
he called Prema. The child’s mother died in giving 
him birth. Then his father died. His paternal aunt 
and his sisters, who were nursing him, also died. So 
did all his paternal and maternal relations, and he 
was left alone in the world. His property was 
devoured by designing persons ; and, to crown his 
troubles, he became a prey to such virulent leprosy 
that his fingers and toes dropped off, his body melted 
away, blood trickled from it, and flies, by settling 
on it and stinging him, completed his misery. Some 
compassionate person tied a small earthen pot to 
his neck, that the charitable might put morsels into 
it for his maintenance. When he changed his place, 
he did so by crawling ; but nobody would allow him 
to approach. He heard of the cures effected by the 
Guru — how he healed the leper, restored sight to 
the blind, made the deaf hear, and the dumb speak — 
so his mind was filled with the desire of beholding 
such a wonder-worker. Trundling along the ground, 
he with great delay and difficulty reached Goindwal. 
On beholding the joy that pervaded the Guru’s city 
and the special happiness of his Sikhs, and on eating 
food from the Guru’s kitchen, he became so happy 
that he composed a song in allusion to his bodily 
ailment, and sang and repeated it with devotion 

I have now found my lost waist-cloth (body) ! 

I have now found my lost waist-cloth ! 

K 2 



132 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


A crowd collected round, and as they listened to 
his stammering voice cried, ‘ Encore ! encore ! ' 
Some put corn, others water into the vessel suspended 
from his neck. His pains decreased in proportion as 
he rolled in the dust of the temple. He implored the 
Sikhs to tell him how he could see the Guru. They 
replied that, whenever the Guru of his own accord 
sent for lepers, he might join them. He then began 
to reflect that his coming was in vain, and if he could 
find no refuge in the Guru’s sanctuary, whither should 
he go ? He therefore thought that he had better 
remain where he was and die. He then began to 
weep and laugh alternately. He blamed the sins of 
his former existence for having been refused a sight 
of the Guru, which was free as air to all others. 

Some compassionate Sikhs represented the leper’s 
condition and devotion to the Guru. The Guru said, 
‘ He speaketh truly. He hath found his former body. 
Bathe him to-morrow in the water from my bath, 
then wrap him up from head to foot and bring him 
to me.’ The Sikhs acted accordingly. The Guru 
showed himself to him, and with his own hands 
removed the cloth in which they had swathed him, 
when lo ! he stood forth in manly beauty and 
symmetry. He received from the Guru a new name, 
Murari, one of the epithets of Krishan. 

One day in public audience the Guru asked, ‘ Is 
there any lover of the Guru who will give his daughter 
in marriage to Murari ? ’ A man called Sinha 
stood up and offered to do so. He accordingly took 
Murari home, and on arriving there sent his wife, 
who was of stern temper, to her apartment, that 
she might not see what he was engaged in. Sinha 
set up a bridal pavilion, and causing the young 
couple to perform the usual circumambulations 
and ceremonies, duly solemnized their marriage. 

When Sinha’s wife heard of the marriage she ran 
weeping and wailing to the Guru. ‘A very im- 
proper thing hath occurred ! I know nothing of this 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


133 


man’s antecedents, or of his caste, or parentage, 
and yet my husband hath given him my daughter ! ’ 
The Guru replied, * I am his father and mother, my 
caste is his caste. Thy daughter’s name is Matho 
and my son’s Murari. People will afterwards link 
their names together with reverence. Very fortunate 
are they who have entered Guru Nanak’s asylum.’ 
After this the angry mother was appeased, and con- 
fei'red a dowry on her daughter. The Guru then 
addressed Murari : * Go home now and abide in 
happiness. Give men initiation by the true Name 
and save them. Thou too shalt make converts to 
the faith, and wealth and supernatural power shall 
wait on thee.’ 

There was a Brahman called Kheda who was such 
a devout worshipper of the goddess Durga that he 
was ever singing her praises. He used to go twice 
a year to see her arrayed in flame at Jawalamukhi. 
Once on passing through Goindwal he tarried there 
in his curiosity to behold the Guru. The Sikhs duly 
apprised the Guru of the stranger’s visit ; but he as 
usual said that he could only grant Kheda an inter- 
view when he had taken food from his kitchen. 
Kheda reflected that he was a Brahman, and as such 
could only eat food which he had cooked himself 
within a purified square. He could not forfeit his 
salvation by eating from a kitchen which supplied 
the four castes indiscriminately. He therefore re- 
turned to his party and resolved to continue his 
journey. It was agreed that they should all proceed 
on the morrow. At night the goddess of his worship, 
assuming a terrible shape, appeared to him in a vision. 
He called out, ‘ 0 Durga, protect me ! What offence 
have I committed ? ’ She replied, ‘ Guru Nanak was 
born to save the world. Guru Amar Das in his image 
is now on his throne. Turning away from him thou 
art leaving Goindwal. On this account I have ap- 
peared unto thee. Now go, and see the Guru.’ 
Kheda went back, ate from the Guru’s kitchen, and 


134 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


was then permitted to bow at his feet. In reply to 
the Guru’s inquiries he told him his whole history. 
The Guru was pleased with his visit and gave him 
every consolation. He gave him the spell of initia- 
, tion as a Sikh, granted him salvation, and bestowed 
on him the power of conferring it on others. Kheda 
afterwards materially contributed to the spread of 
the Sikh gospel. 

A pandit called Beni, who expounded the Veds 
and the Shastars, and who had committed Sanskrit 
syntax, etymology, and prosody to memory, was 
travelling round India in great spiritual pride. 
Wherever he heard of any famous pandit, he went, 
discussed, vanquished him, and then took possession 
of all his library. Having defeated in argument the 
pandits of all the great cities of India, he turned his 
steps towards Goindwal. The pandits there naturally 
refused to enter into a discussion with a man who 
had gained so many victories, and referred him to 
the Guru. The Guru gave him a seat, and inquired 
why he favoured him with a visit. He replied, ‘ Thy 
Sikhs read not the twilight prayers or the gayatri. 
They perform not pilgrimages, penances, or the 
religious duties of the Hindus ; how shall they be 
saved ? ’ The Guru replied, * Those things sufficed 
for the first three ages of the world, but in this 
fourth age they are useless. At present it is the 
Name alone that can confer salvation. Devotion is 
the means of salvation, and it is best performed 
under the Guru’s guidance. Without devotion all 
ritual is vain. Take a lamp in thy hand and walk 
not in darkness. Seed can only germinate at the 
proper season. Renounce false pride, and perform 
such devotion as may absorb thy mind in God’s love. 
Now as thou art a pandit give an answer to my 
questions : — 

Is man a householder or an anchoret ? 

Is man without caste and ever immortal ? 




LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


135 



VL 

*»r 

I' 

;j; I- 




Is man fickle or without love for the world ? 

Whence hath pride attached to man ? 

O Pandit, reflect on man. 

Why read so much and bear further burden ? 

The Creator attached mammon and worldly love to man, 
And according to this law created the world. 

By the Guru’s favour understand this, 0 brother, 

And ever abide under God’s protection. 

He is a pandit who divesteth himself of the load of the 
three qualities, 

And daily uttereth the one Name. 

Such a pandit receiveth the instruction of the true Guru, 
And offereth his life unto him. 

The pandit who ever abideth apart and unmoved, 

Shall be acceptable in God’s court. 

To all he preacheth that there is only the one God. 

All that he beholdeth he recognizeth as the one God. 

Him whom he favoureth he blendeth with God, 

And rendereth ever happy in this world and the next, 
Saith Nanak, what can one do and how ? 

He to whom God is merciful shall be saved ; 

He shall each day sing God’s praises, 

And not be again deafened with the Shastars and the Veds.’ 1 

The Pandit, on hearing this, thought to himself, 

‘ I have been carried away by the stream of intel- 
lectual pride. Now that I have the raft of the Guru’s 
instruction, I will embark on it, cross the world’s 
dangerous ocean, and obtain salvation.’ The star of 
the pandit’s good fortune had arisen ; he sought the 
Guru’s protection and obtained the fruit thereof. 
With clasped hands he again addressed the Guru : 

‘ Great king, I have become a pandit by reading, 
but until now I have not understood what real know- 
ledge meant. I have been so blinded by pilgrimages, 
penance, and reading the Shastars, and so absorbed 
in idol-worship and pride, that I have possessed no 

1 Literally — The Shastars and the Veds shall not again be shouted 
at him. Rag Malar. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


136 

real devotion. Now that I have entered thine 
asyl um instruct me and save me.’ The pandit dis- 
encumbered himself of all his volumes, and humbly 
sat at the Guru’s feet for spiritual instruction. The 
doors of his understanding opened, and he became 
filled with devotion. Thus having, by the Guru’s 
favour, obtained salvation while alive, he thanked 
him and took his departure. 

Chapter XII 

There lived a devout Sikh named Prema in the 
village of Talwandi , 1 about seven kos from Goindwal. 
He was lame, but yet able to walk with the aid of a 
crutch. He used every day to take a pitcher of milk 
to the Guru, who drank some himself, and distributed 
the remainder among his guests. One day in the 
height of the rainy season, as the roads were full of 
mire, he set out with his usual offering. The village 
chaudhri frequently observed him going and coming. 
On this particular day the chaudhri remained at 
home, and, having nothing better to do, watched the 
Sikh, and furtively took away his crutch, saying to 
him, ‘ Go riot to-day ; there is too much mire on 
the ground. If you persist in going, you will fall 
down and die.’ Another man said to him, ' Your 
Guru is such a wonder-worker, why does he not cure 
your leg ? If he cannot do so, how shall he save 
you hereafter ? ’ Prema prayed to be allowed to 
pay his usual visit to the Guru. In reply to the 
impertinent inquiries he said he had not become 
a Sikh to have his leg made whole, and he had never 
asked the Guru for a new one. His tormentors con- 
tinued to tease him for some time, and at last re- 
turned him his support, whereupon he hastened with 
all his might to the Guru. Prema told the whole 
story how he had been delayed by the mischievous 
pranks of the chaudhri. Upon this the Guru said 

1 This is not the Talwandi where Guru Nanak was born. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


137 


that his leg must be mended. The Guru continued : 
‘ On the bank of the river there dwelleth a Muham- 
madan faqir called Husaini Shah. Go and tell him 
that the Guru hath sent thee to be thoroughly cured.’ 

Husaini Shah lived alone and allowed no one to 
approach him, but by the Guru’s favour he made 
Prema an exception, and allowed him to sit down 
beside him. When Prema had finished his narrative, 
the faqir took up a stick to castigate him, as he had 
done other visitors for intruding on his privacy. 
Prema watching his movements ran away, forgetting 
in his haste to take his crutch with him. To his 
delight and surprise his leg became whole. Prema 
then returned to the faqir, fell to the ground before 
him, and thanked him profusely for the cure he had 
wrought in such an unceremonious and extraordinary 
manner. Husaini modestly disclaimed all credit, and 
said, ‘ Thy leg was cured the moment the Guru told 
thee to come to me ; but he hath given me the evil 
reputation of exercising supernatural power. Go 
now, fall at his feet, and offer him my homage 
also. There are many servants of God like me, but 
I am confident there is none like the Guru who is 
perfect and omnipotent.’ Thus did even pious 
Muhammadans bear testimony to the Guru’s spiritual 
greatness. 

The Guru was an ocean of mercy which contained 
many gems of virtue and divine knowledge ; and 
whoever dived therein with faith obtained his great 
reward. One day Bhai Budha and other Sikhs, find- 
ing a favourable opportunity, requested the Guru to 
be good enough to recount to them the rules of his 
religion. He said, ‘While yet a watch of night 
remaineth, let my Sikhs arise, bathe, and sit apart 
for meditation. Let them ponder on the Guru’s 
hymns and repeat God’s name until the morning. 
Let them out of their honest earnings assist holy 
men and never take another’s wife or property. Let 
them never utter harsh words, falsehood, or slander. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


138 

Let them mourn when others mourn, and rejoice 
when they rejoice. Let them not eat until they 
are hungry, or sleep until they are sleepy, for he who 
eateth unnecessarily contracteth disease, and he who 
sleepeth unnecessarily shorteneth his life. Let them 
forget not the true Name for a moment. Let them 
accept God’s will, and, deeming what God doeth to 
be for the best, impute no blame to Him. Let them 
maintain their mental serenity, subdue pride, lust, 
wrath, and avarice, and be contented with rightful 
gain. Let them not desire to have their good acts 
known, otherwise their full advantage would not 
be obtained, and vainglory would be added to their 
other sins. Let them never listen to slander of God 
or the Guru, but shun the company of slanderers. 
Let them avoid deceit, envy, and avarice, and rely 
on God’s worship for salvation. Let them ever make 
preparation for their future happiness, and never be 
entangled with worldly pleasures. Let Sikhs ever 
associate with the holy, love the Guru’s hymns, and 
be pleased when they read or listen to them. Let 
them act according to the Guru’s words ; then shall 
they know that they are saved.’ 

Whenever Arjan, Jetha’s youngest child, was 
brought to the Guru he used to embrace and fondle 
him. One day as the Guru was taking his meal, 
Arjan crawled to his chamber and put his hand into 
his plate. The Sikhs took the child away, but he 
returned and acted as before. He was again re- 
moved, and on his return for the third time the Guru 
gave him his leavings. The Guru then said, ‘ Come, 
heir to the plate, wilt thou have it ? ’ The Sikhs 
understood that the Guru, by these words, foretold 
Arjan’s succession to the exalted position of Guruship. 

One day Bhai Budha, on seeing the Guru eat, said 
to him, ' Is it right for the Sikhs to eat dainty food 
while thou art satisfied with a coarse meal ? Issue 
an order that only such food as thou eatest shall be 
served from thy kitchen.’ The Guru replied, ‘ 0 Bhai 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


139 


Budha, thou supposest there is a difference between 
the Sikhs and me. I enjoy the flavour of what the 
Sikhs eat.’ Then all became certain that what entered 
the Sikhs’ mouths contributed to the Guru’s sus- 
tenance. Upon that occasion Jetha composed the 
following : — 

As a mother is delighted when her child taketh food, 

As a fish is delighted when it batheth in the water, 

So the true Guru is delighted when his disciple findeth 
food. 

O beloved God, cause me to meet such servants of Thine 
As will remove sorrow from me by the interview. 

As a cow is delighted at the meeting of her calf, 

As a wife is delighted when her beloved returneth home, 
So is a holy man delighted when he singeth God’s praises. 
As the chatrik is delighted when it raineth in torrents, 

As a king is delighted to see his wealth increase, 

So is a godly man delighted when he repeateth the Name of 
the Formless. 

As man is delighted at acquiring worldly wealth, 

As the Guru’s disciple is delighted when he meeteth and 
embraceth his Guru, 

So is Nanak delighted on licking the feet of holy men . 1 

Two men named Phiria and Katara from the 
neighbourhood of Dihli having heard of the Guru’s 
fame, visited him at Goindwal, and performed for him 
assiduous service. The Guru, being very pleased, one 
day said to them, ‘ You have obtained full knowledge 
of my religion, and you may now return to your own 
country to preach there the true Name and lead souls 
to salvation.’ They represented, ‘ 0 true king, the 
inhabitants of our country are followers of Jogis who 
split their ears. The Jogis deceive them by incanta- 
tions and spells, and consequently the people know 
nothing of devotion, the Guru’s hymns, or divine 
knowledge. They worship cemeteries and cremation 
grounds, are averse from true religion, and none but 

1 Gauri. 


140 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


the true Guru himself can save them. The Guru 
replied, * Go utter Wahguru, teach every one you 
meet the virtues of the True name, and put people 
on the Guru’s way.’ Phiria and Katara again repre- 
sented: ‘Such is the power of the Jogis, that simple 
men like us may not withstand them. Without the 
special power of the Guru how can the True name 
be proclaimed among such persons ? ’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ The Creator will be with you ; your words 
shall penetrate their hearts ; and their impious efforts 
shall not prevail against you. From the sleep of 
ignorance men shall awake to divine knowledge. 
Grant them the gift of the Name, cause them to 
utter Wahguru and walk in the path shown by the 
Guru.’ 

Having received these commands and the Guru’s 
blessing, and meditated on the Immortal Being in 
their hearts, Phiria and Katara returned to their 
own country. On arriving there they proceeded to 
a Jogis’ monastery. The Jogis, on seeing their faces 
beaming with the light shed on them by the Guru, fled 
like deer on seeing a tiger. Phiria and Katara then 
converted the monastery into a temple. People 
assembled in crowds, and asked whence these very 
mighty men had come, who had dared violate the sanc- 
tuary of Gorakhnath, and before whom the priests of 
the J ogis had fled. A crowd of people came to create 
a disturbance, but, on hearing Phiria and Katara 
sing the Guru’s hymns, their hard hearts so melted 
that they sought the Sikhs’ protection, and with all 
due ceremonies embraced the Sikh religion, and 
began to worship the one God. All their desires, 
spiritual and temporal, were then fulfilled. Several 
persons were gradually converted, J ogis’ monasteries 
were destroyed, and in their places imposing Sikh 
temples reared to the glory of God and true religion. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


141 


Chapter XIII 

Probably anticipating the trouble that his sons 
Mohan and Mohri would cause Jetha, the Guru said 
to him , ‘ Search for some place other than Goindwal 
for the residence of our Sikhs. Go thither, build 
a great city, and cause it to be inhabited. Thou 
possessest the lands assigned thee by the Emperor. 
First build a house therein for thyself, and then 
excavate a tank to the east of it as a place of Sikh 
pilgrimage .’ 1 

Jetha searched, and found an open uninhabited 
tract of country some twenty-five miles from Goind- 
wal, and there he established himself. He built 
a house for his residence and employed a crowd of 
labourers to excavate the earth for the construction 
of a tank. After some time, when a portion of the 
work was accomplished and several people had built 
huts for themselves on the new site, Jetha, suffering 
from the pain of separation from the Guru, returned 
to Goindwal to report the extent of the work he had 
performed. ‘ I have built a village consisting of 
several houses, and excavated a considerable portion 
of a tank on the spot where thou didst order.’ 
Jetha remained for some time at Goindwal, became 
treasurer of the Guru’s income and superintended 
his expenditure. 

Guru Amar Das in due time again addressed Jetha : 

' Go and attend to the house thou madest in the 
Guru’s Chakk. Cease to construct the rectangular 
tank thou didst lay out, and on which thou didst 
perform some work, and give it the name Santokhsar 
— a tank which will afford spiritual consolation to 
all who bathe therein. On the low land to the east of 
it excavate another tank and call it Amritsar — tank 
of nectar. It shall be consolidated with brickwork 
when there is an opportunity. Go and exert thine 
efforts to that end.’ 

1 Suraj Par hash, Ras II, Chapter 1 1 . 



142 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Jetha went, and after the distribution of sweets 
as encouragement to the labourers, applied them to 
the work. It proceeded rapidly for several months 
until it was time for Guru Amar Das to appoint 
a successor, upon which he recalled Jetha. The 
latter, by the time of his departure, had excavated 
a somewhat deep pit near the ber tree now called 
Dukhbhanjani, or destroyer of sorrow, but he was 
obliged to leave the tank incomplete . 1 

Guru Amar Das’s elder daughter Dani was married 
to a man called Rama, who became a zealous Sikh. 
Rama, besides performing the usual Sikh worship, 
used to work in the Guru’s kitchen and minister to 
the wants of pilgrims at the Bawali. One day the 
Sikhs addressed the Guru: ‘Jetha and Rama are 
equally related to thee, and both perform service 
with great self-sacrifice. Rama is the elder, yet 
thou bearest greater love to Jetha. What is the 
cause thereof ? ’ The Guru replied, ‘ He who hath 
the greater faith, devotion, humility, and obedience, 
is the more deserving. The holy have God in their 
power, and they who perform the ordinary duties 
of their religion obtain the fruit thereof. I am going 
to make a trial of both Jetha and Rama in your 
presence. He who better comporteth himself shall 
be deemed the more worthy.’ 

The Guru went to the Bawali, and, sending for both 
Jetha and Rama, ordered each of them to make 
him a platform beside it, one that he might sit on in 
the morning, and the other in the evening. He who 
did the better work should receive the greater 
honour. Jetha and Rama began their labours. 
When the platforms were completed, the Guru went 
to inspect them. Rama, after the customary 
obeisance, showed the Guru his work, and thought 
he had done well. The Guru said, ' Thy platform 
is not straight, throw it down and build another.’ 
Rama represented that he had made the platform 
1 Suraj Par hash, Ras II, Chapter 13. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


143 


straight and very beautiful with his own hands after 
great exertion. The Guru replied, ‘ No doubt thou 
hast laboured hard, but the platform is not to my 
satisfaction.’ The Guru insisted on its demolition 
and the erection of another in its place. Rama 
consented and built the platform a second time. It 
still failed to please the Guru. Rama after long 
argument, threw it down again, but refused to build 
it up a third time. He said, ‘ The Guru hath grown 
old and his reason faileth him.’ The Guru remarked, 
‘ This man hath not true devotion ; how shall he 
be worthy of the Guruship ? ’ ■ » . 

The Guru, on going to Jetha’s platform, said, 

‘ Jetha, I do not like this platform. Throw it down 
and build another.’ J etha at once began to demolish 
his work and build it anew. When it was finished, 
the Guru said that he was not satisfied with that 
either, and asked him to do the work over again. 
Jetha consented and worked day and night till he 
had completed the platform for the third time. The 
Guru affected to find fault with it until it had been 
demolished and rebuilt seven times. J etha clasped 
the Guru’s feet and humbly addressed him : * I am 
a fool ; pray have regard for thy duty to me as thy 
son. I am erring and of mean understanding, while 
thou possessest all knowledge.’ 

On hearing this the Guru smiled, embraced him, 
and said, ‘ Obeying my order, seven times hast thou 
built the platform, so seven generations of thine 
shall sit on the Guru’s throne.’ Then turning 
to the Sikhs the Guru said, ‘ I have now tested 
the devotion of both my sons-in-law. You have 
seen the result ; that is why Jetha is dearer 
to me. He is a perfect being who hath become 
incarnate, and the world following him shall be 
saved ’. The Sikhs were astonished on witnessing 
Jetha's marvellous devotion and obedience, and 
began to recognize him as the image of the Guru. 

Bibi Bhani after her marriage continued to attend 


144 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


on her father. She used to fan him, draw water, 
and also work in the kitchen. One night, as the 
Guru was absorbed in deep meditation, she noticed 
that a part of one leg of his couch was broken off. 
Fearing that his meditation should be disturbed, 
she put her hand under the broken leg so as to 
keep the couch level. When the Guru arose and 
saw what she had done he asked why she had en- 
dured such torture. She said that seeing the leg 
broken, and fearing that there would be delay in 
getting another, she put her hand under it, so that 
her father might not suffer inconvenience. She 
thought that if her wretched body served the Guru, 
she would be very fortunate. The Guru was 
pleased and said, ' Whoever doeth good works shall 
reap the reward thereof.’ He invited her to ask 
a favour. Her request was that the Guruship 
should remain in her family. He blessed her say- 
ing, ‘ Thine offspring shall be worshipped by the 
world. From the offspring of thy womb shall be 
born a universal saviour ; but thou hast dammed the 
clear flowing stream of the Guruship, and conse- 
quently great trouble and annoyance shall result.’ 

'Jetha possessing the spirit of obedience con- 
tinued to serve the Guru day and night, and never 
wearied. He used to shampoo him, draw water, 
cook, serve meals from the kitchen and then wash 
the dishes. The Guru blessed him: ‘The whole 
world shall do thee homage, and rich and poor shall 
reap the benefits of thy service.’ 

Once as Jetha’s relations were returning from 
a pilgrimage to the Ganges they halted at Goindwal. 
The Guru accorded them an affectionate reception ; 
but they, through excessive pride of being the male 
relations of his son-in-law, refused to fall at his feet, 
and simply asked him where Hari Das’s son, namely 
Jetha, was. The Guru gave them refreshments and 
pent for Jetha. On learning Jetha’s occupation 
they were filled with anger and said to him, ‘Thou 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


145 


hast shamed thy family by performing menial 
service in thy father-in-law’s house. Couldst thou 
not obtain suitable maintenance with thy parents 
without having to draw water, scrub dirty vessels, 
and shampoo the Guru ? Thou a Khatri’s son 
actest like this. Nobly hast thou enhanced the 
honour of thy family ! When we go to the houses 
of our fathers-in-law, we get excellent couches to 
rest on, sweets and palaos to eat, and we laugh and 
play with their daughters. All the families of our 
fathers-in-law exert themselves to show us respect. 
Even a passer-by would be ashamed to see thy con- 
dition. Was it for this thou wert destined ? ’ 

Jetha, much displeased at this language, so offen- 
sive to the Guru in particular, replied : ‘ In your 
estimation the Guru is my father-in-law, but in mine 
he is God in person. He hath procured for me 
happiness in both worlds. Through his favour 
I have obtained peace of mind, consolation, faith, 
and divine knowledge. I am in word and deed the 
Guru’s slave.’ On hearing this Jetha’s relations 
went to the Guru, and said to him, ‘ Thou callest 
thyself the Guru of the world, and claimest to know 
everything. To every one is dear the honour of 
his family, but thou hast totally disregarded it. 
In our family Jetha is the only one who hath for- 
saken his parents, lived with his father-in-law, and 
carried filth on his head for him. If thou desire 
that he should work for thee, give him some other 
occupation, so that he may not be a laughing-stock 
before men.’ The Guru looking at Jetha replied : 

‘ I have not made him carry filth on his head, but 
I have put filth on the heads of his slanderers, and 
I have caused the umbrella of true sovereignty to 
wave over him. If he had not been born in your 
family, you would all have been damned. It is he 
who hath saved the whole of your tribe. He is the 
incarnation of devotion, religion, and salvation. He 
is of noble mind, the very essence of humility, 

L 


SIKH. II 


146 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and hath ever acted as becometh the Guru’s 
disciple.’ 

The Guru being now old began to think of his 
death and the propriety of leaving the Guruship to 
the most deserving of his disciples. Jetha per- 
formed such unremitting service day and night that 
he allowed himself no repose of mind or body. One 
day as the Guru sat down after bathing, Bibi 
Bhani came and bowed to him. The Guru asked 
her what she would do if her husband were to die. 
She understood the Guru to mean that her husband 
was near his dissolution. She replied that she 
must accept her fate. She would either die with 
her husband, or do as her father ordered her. The 
Guru replied : ‘ There is no necessity for thee to 
die, I will bestow a favour on thee, which will be 
far more advantageous; I will grant thy husband 
the Guruship, and extended life.’ 

Guru Amar Das, having in every way tested Jetha 
and found him perfect, ordered Bhai Ballu to send 
for a coco-nut and five paise. The Guru then 
caused Jetha to bathe and clothe himself in new 
raiment. He summoned his own two sons, Mohan 
and Mohri, and his principal Sikhs, including Bhai 
Budha, and, when they had all taken their seats, 
thus addressed them : ‘ Guru Nanak in the begin- 
ning established this custom, that the Guruship 
should be bestowed on the most deserving. Where- 
fore, having found Ram Das— hitherto called Jetha— 
fully worthy, I now bestow on him the Guruship ’ 

The Guru descended from his throne and, taking 
Guru Ram Das’s arm, seated him on it. Bhai Budha, 
according to ancient custom, attached the tilak or 
patch of sovereignty to Guru Ram Das’s forehead. 
Then placing the coco-nut and the five paise before 
him the Guru said, ( It is only a golden vessel that 
can hold a tigress’s milk’— that is, the responsibility 
of the Guruship can only be vested in a pure man. 
The Guru then declared Ram Das duly appointed 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


147 

as his successor. Upon this Guru Amar Das uttered 
the following : — 

Why keep property entrusted to another ? A man is 
happy when he hath returned it . 1 

The Guru’s instruction resteth with the Guru ; it shineth 
from no other source. 

When a blind man findeth a gem, he taketh it from house 
to house to sell ; 

But people cannot assay it, and he cannot get an eighth 
of a paisa for it. 

When he cannot assay it himself, he ought to have it 
assayed by an assayer . 2 

If he turn his attention to the Guru, he shall obtain the 
real thing , 3 and the nine treasures. 

Though all men possess wealth at home, they are dying of 
hunger, since without the true Guru they know not where 
to find it. 

When the refreshing Word dwelleth in the soul and body, 
there is no sorrow or pain of separation. 

He is a fool who poseth as a man of importance, and who 
is proud of what belongeth not to him. 

Nanak, without understanding no one hath obtained God, 
but is born and dieth again and again. 

All the Sikhs made offerings according to their 
means, and saluted Guru Ram Das on his appoint- 
ment. There were great rejoicings. An umbrella 
| was raised, chauris waved over him, shells blown, 
and bugles, flutes, and clarions played. The date 
\ of Guru Ram Das’s appointment was the 13th day 
j of the light half of Bhadon, Sambat 1631 (a.d. 1574). 
The following verses refer to the occasion : — 

The true Guru who desireth happiness for, and is merciful 
to souls, hath given the greatness of the Name to Guru Ram 
Das. 

r. 1 This line refers to the throne, received from the second by the 
f third Guru, which it was the duty of the latter to transmit to another, 

t 2 That is, the Guru. 

3 Divine knowledge. 

J L 2 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


148 

Guru Ram Das hath now obtained greatness so as to 
save the Sodhis and the whole world. 

Mohan would not do homage to Guru Ram Das. 
He said, * Our father hath superseded us and granted 
the Guruship to his son-in-law. We consider him 
our servant ; why should we bow to him ? ’ Saying 
this, Mohan went into his upper room and there 
mourned his fate. 

Guru Amar Das asked his son Mohri how he would 
regard Guru Ram Das. He replied, ‘ My lord, from 
the time thou gavest him, the name Ram Das, I 
have deemed him the same as Guru Nanak, Guru 
Angad, and thyself.’ Guru Amar Das on hearing 
this was much pleased and thus congratulated his 
son : ‘ Thou knowest no difference between the 
Gurus. I recognize in thee a dutiful and obedient 
son.’ Mohri replied, ‘ Father mine, render me 
assistance when my account is called for in Dharm- 
raj’s court.’ The Guru said, ' While still alive 
I have settled thine account. Thou hast no need 
to go to Dharmraj.’ On hearing this Guru Ram 
Das said, '0 true Guru, grant me the dignity of 
being thy disciple and give the Guruship to Mohri.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘ The ancient gift which was to 
be given I have given thee ; and what was to be 
given him, I have given him. He is my poor son ; 
take thou care of him.’ 

Guru Amar Das in a devotional paroxysm then 
gave utterance to the following : — 

My mind is happy that I have obtained my beloved Lord ; 
my beloved friends and saints too are pleased. 

They who were united with the Creator from the beginning 
shall never be separated from Him, since it was He Himself 
who united them. 

I have found the Guru ; he hath dispelled all my sorrows, 
and the Word permeateth my heart. 

Let me praise God the Giver of all happiness and clasp 
Him to my heart. 



LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 149 

How can the jealousy of the perverse affect those who are 
regenerated by the true Word ? 

j My Beloved shall preserve their honour since they have 

fallen for shelter at the Guru’s door. 

Nanak, it is the followers of the Guru who are happy ; 
their countenances shall be bright in God’s court . 1 

Bhai Gur Das composed the following on the 
; accession of Guru Ram Das to the Guruship : — 

What he previously received must be restored, and 
i descend to the line that owneth it. 

The Sodhi king Ram Das sat on the throne, and was called 
the true Guru. 

> He dug a perfect tank, and awakened the light of divine 

knowledge in Amritsar. 

The play of the Lord is contrary to that of the world ; the 
ocean floweth backwards, and is contained in the Ganges . 2 

Guru Ram Das received his reward for what he gave ; he 
who giveth nothing receiveth nothing. 

It will descend to Guru Ram Das’s son Arjan who shall be 
j styled the world’s Guru. 

| The Sodhis will not allow it to depart ; no others can en- 

; dure the unendurable thing. 

What belongeth to the house shall remain in the house . 8 

jj Chapter XIV 

| 

/ When all the ceremonies of Guru Ram Das’s 

| coronation were complete, Guru Amar Das ordered 

j Bhai Budha and other Sikhs to do homage to the 

j newly installed Guru. Then followed a great feast, 

at which every variety of dishes and dainties were 
served. Sending for the headmen of Goindwal, the 
members of his family and all his Sikhs, Guru 
Amar Das said : ‘ God’s summons hath come, and 

1 Sarang ki War. 

2 Guru Amar Das is the ocean and Guru Ram Das the Ganges. 

Guru Amar Das has communicated his greatness and virtues to Guru 
Ram Das. 3 War I, 47. 


I 


150 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


I am about to depart. God’s will I accept with 
pleasure. The Creator by calling me hath conferred 
honour on me ; and as true friends, relations, and 
well-wishers are pleased and never sorry at seeing 
an honour paid a friend, let there be no mourn- 
ing for me. When I have gone, sing God’s 
praises, read God’s word, hear God’s word, and obey 
God’s will.’ Mohri then asked him how his obse- 
quies were to be celebrated. The Guru replied, 
' Perform no obsequies for me, place not a lamp in 
my hands during my last moments. Call me not 
a ghost as the Hindus do up to the thirteenth day 
after death. Remember to obey my instructions.' 

Mohri put a final question to his father : ‘ Thou 
hast ordered us to lead family lives. This cannot 
be done without the aid of wealth. What occupa- 
tion shall we pursue to maintain ourselves ? ’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ Live honestly, practise piety, and 
turn not away from God. Act according to my 
advice, and you shall be happy.’ 

The Guru repeated the J apji, drew a sheet over him 
and amid the surrounding Sikhs’ unbroken cries of 
Wahguru ! Sat Guru ! Sat Nam ! blended the light 
of his soul with the light of God. After the Guru’s 
body had been washed and clothed in costly raiments, 
it was placed on a beautiful bier, and borne with the 
singing of the Sikh choristers, to the accompaniment 
of rebeck and tabla, and amid a rain of flowers, to the 
margin of the river Bias, where it was cremated with 
all solemnity. The ashes were afterwards thrown 
into the river. When the singing was over, the 
mourners recited the Sohila and distributed sacred 
food. They then returned home singing the Guru’s 
praises as they went. Guru Ram Das addressed 
words of consolation to the Sikhs and the family of 
the departed. 

Guru Ram Das’s glory daily extended like the 
rays of the rising sun, and the Sikh religion grew 
like a gigantic tree. It was Guru Nanak who had 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


151 

sowed the seed from which it sprang. In Guru 
Angad’s time its trunk towered on high, and its 
roots penetrated the earth, while during Guru Amar 
Das’s spiritual reign it put forth its widely spreading 
branches in every direction. 

As the Emperor Akbar administered his empire 
by the agency of governors of provinces, so Guru 
Amar Das similarly partitioned the Sikh spiritual 
empire into twenty-two districts. 1 

Guru Amar Das, after a spiritual reign of twenty- 
two years, departed this life at ten o’clock on the 
forenoon of the day of the full moon in the month 
of Bhadon, Sambat 1631 (a.d. 1574). There is a yearly 
fair held on that date at Goindwal to commemorate 
the act of the Guru’s blending with his Maker. 

Mohri had, as we have seen, a son called Anand. 
Anand’s son was Sundar Das, who afterwards at the 
request of Guru Arjan wrote the following account 
of the death of Guru Amar Das. The composition 
is called the ‘ Sadd ’ or the ‘ Calling ’, and is now 
sung by Sikhs on all occasions of mourning. 

THE SADD 
I 

God is the Benefactor of the Universe ; He loveth the 
saints and filleth the three worlds. 

They in whose hearts the Guru’s instruction is contained 
know none besides God ; 

Under the Guru’s instruction they know none besides ; 
they meditate on the one Name. 

By the favour of Nanak and Guru Angad, Amar Das 
obtained the supreme position. 

When the message came for him to depart, he was absorbed 
in God’s name. 

In this world he obtained the eternal, immovable, and 
unequalled God by service. 

1 Manjis. Literally — -couches on which the Gurus used to sit and 
communicate instruction to their audiences. 


152 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru gladly accepted the will of God to go to Him. 1 

The true Guru offered a prayer to God, ‘ Protect mine 
honour ; this is my supplication. 

‘ Preserve the honour of Thy servant, 0 bright God, grant 
me Thy name, 

‘ That it may assist me at my final departure, and van- 
quish death and death’s myrmidons.’ 

God heard the true Guru’s prayer and granted his request ; 

He mercifully blended the true Guru with Himself and 
said, ‘ Bravo ! bravo ! well done ! ’ 

III 

‘ My disciples, sons, and brethren, hear me ; I have 
received God’s order to go to Him.’ 

The Guru was pleased with the will of the Lord ; my God 
congratulated him. 

He to whom God’s order is pleasing is a saint of the true 
Guru ; 

There are joy and unbeaten strains for him, and God 
Himself embraceth him. 

‘ Carefully examine your hearts, my sons, my brethren, 
and my family. 

‘ The order written in the beginning cannot be erased ; 
the Guru is going to God.’ 


The true Guru was pleased to sit up and call his family— | 

Let no one weep when I am gone ; that would never 
please me. 

When a friend obtaineth a robe of honour, friends who j 

desire his honour are pleased. I 

Consider and behold, my sons and brethren, God clotheth j 

me with a robe of honour .’ 

The true Guru himself while alive appointed a successor to 
his authority ; ! 

Some attribute this line to Guru Amar Das, and translate — What > 

pleaseth God pleaseth me, the Guru is going to God. 


LIFE OF GURU AMAR DAS 


153 

He caused all his disciples, relations, sons, and brethren to 
fall at Ram Das’s feet. 

V 

Linally, the true Guru spoke, 'After my death, sing God’s 1 
praises. 

* Call God instead of a pandit and, for the Garar Puran, 
read God’s word ; 2 

‘ Read God’s word, hear God’s name ; the Guru desireth 
God’s love instead of a lofty bier, 3 

‘ Barley rolls, bread on leaves, Hindu obsequies, lamps, 
and throwing his bones 4 into the Ganges.’ 

The true Guru spoke as it pleased God, and he was blended 
with the Omniscient Being. 

The true Guru gave Ram Das Sodhi the apostolic mark, 
the token of the true Word. 


VI 

As the true Guru spoke, so his disciples obeyed his wishes. 

His son Mohri became obedient to him, and fell at Ram 
Das’s feet. 

Then all fell at the feet of the true Guru into whom Guru 
A mar Das had infused his spirit. 

Any person who through jealousy 5 did not bow before him 
was brought by the supernatural power of the true Guru, 
and made bow before him. 

It pleased God and the Guru to bestow greatness on Ram 
Das according to God’s will recorded in the beginning. 

Saith Sundar, hear me, 0 saint, 6 the whole world fell at 
Ram Das’s feet. 

1 The use of the word Nirban here for God shows the Guru intended 
that the Sikh and not the Hindu ritual should be read at his decease. 

2 That is, the compositions of the Gurus. 

3 Behan , from the Sanskrit viman , a celestial chariot. Among the 
Hindus, when an elderly person dies, he is raised on a lofty bier on 
which flowers, money, almonds, &c., are thrown, and in front of which 
musicians sing and play. 

4 PhuL The bones of the departed after the process of cremation. 

5 The allusion here is to Guru Amar Das’s eldest son, Mohan, who 
at first refused to do homage to the new Guru. 

6 Guru Arjan is meant. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


Whether men wear religious garbs or revel in 
their worldly possessions, they still need the Guru’s 
guidance. 

Sri Rag 

Men put on many garbs and wander abroad, but in their 
hearts and minds practise deception. 

They shall not find God’s palace, and dying their abode 
shall be in filth. 

0 man, be a hermit in thine own home. 

He who hath been enlightened by the Guru’s instruction 
practiseth truth, self-restraint, and good works. 

He conquereth his heart by the Guru’s instruction, and 
obtaineth salvation and deliverance in his own home. 

Meet the society of the saints, 0 man, and meditate on 
God’s name. 

Even though thou enjoy hundreds of thousands of women, 
and rule the nine regions of the world, 

Thou shalt not obtain happiness without the true Guru, 
but shalt be born again and again. 

Wealth and supernatural power follow those, even though 
they in no wise covet them, 

Who wear on their necks God’s necklaces 1 and attach 
themselves to the Guru’s feet. 

What pleaseth God and nothing else shall take place. 

The slave Nanak liveth by repeating Thy name, 0 God ; 
grant it to him of Thy grace. 

The condition of the pious as distinguished from 
the perverse : — 

Men act as they see others act : the perverse acquire not 
understanding. 


1 God’s name. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 155 

The service of the pious whose hearts are pure is acceptable 
to God. 

They sing God’s praises, ever read them, and by singing 
them become absorbed in Him. 

Nanak, the words of those who fix their attention on the 
Name are ever true. 

The saints trade in God's name : — 

God is the wealth and capital of His saints ; they trade in 
consultation with the Gum. 

They praise His name for ever and ever ; His name is their 
merchandise and their support. 

In their hearts the perfect Guru hath established God’s 
name as an inexhaustible storehouse. 

O my brethren, admonish your hearts. 

O man, why art thou indolent ? Ponder on the Name 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

To serve God is to love Him, if pious men reflect on it. 

God is not served by hypocrisy : the words of the double- 
dealer are despised. 

He in whose heart are discrimination and reflection 
uniteth not with him. 

He is called the servant of God who claspeth Him to his 
heart. 

The holy man who placeth before Him and entrusteth to 
Him his soul and body, and rooteth out pride from within 
him, 

Is blest and acceptable, and shall never suffer defeat . 1 

God is obtained by His own favour ; without it He is not 
obtained. 

Eighty-four lakhs of species thirst for God, but only he 
whom He blendeth with Himself shall meet Him. 

Nanak, the pious man who is ever absorbed in God’s name 
shall find Him. 

The condition of the perverse is like that of an 
unhappy wife : — 

The acts of the perverse are like the external decorations 
of a wife separated from her husband : 

1 By evil passions or the god of death. 


156 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Her husband cometh not to her couch, and she is ever in 
disgrace. 

Far from reaching her husband’s chamber, she may not 
see even the door of his house. 

The necessity of a spiritual guide : — 

Though man mortified himself and performed penance 
with body reversed, yet pride would not forsake him. 

Were he even to investigate the relation between the 
supreme and the individual soul, he would never obtain the 
Name. 

The name of God abideth in the heart of him who, under the 
Guru’s instruction, while alive is dead. 

The means of obtaining deliverance : — 

Whom shall I worship ? What name shall I utter ? Go 
ask the true Guru. 

Let me obey the order of the true Guru and remove pride 
from within me. 

That is real worship and service by which the Name 
dwelleth in the heart. 

It is only from the Name happiness is obtained ; man is 
adorned by the true Word. 

O my soul, be wakeful night and day, and think upon God. 

Watch thy field or the kulang Death will descend upon it. 

His heart’s desires are fulfilled who is saturated with the 
Word. 

He who feareth, loveth, and serveth God day and night 
shall behold Him ever present. 

Doubts fly far away from him whose heart is ever dyed 
with the true Word. 

He obtaineth the pure Lord who is true and an ocean of 
excellences. 

They who are awake are saved, they who sleep are lost . 1 

They know not the true Word; their lives pass away like 
a dream. 

As from an'empty house a guest goeth as he came, 

1 Literally — are robbed. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 157 

So the life of the perverse man passeth away in vain ; 
what face shall he show to God ? 

Thou art Thyself, 0 God, all in all ; man in a state of 
pride cannot utter Thy praises. 

Recognize the Guru’s instruction, so shall the disease of 
pride vanish from thy heart. 

I touch the feet of those who serve their own true 
Guru. 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who are found to be true 
in God’s court. 

Instruction addressed to the sensual and the 
false : — 

Hear, hear, thou who art seized by lust, why goest thou 
swaggering along ? 

Thou knowest not thine own Beloved ; how shalt thou 
show thy face to Him ? 

I touch the feet of my friends who know their own Spouse. 

By associating with the guild of the saints, may I become 
like them ! 

O woman, the false have been ruined by their falsehood. 

God the Spouse is true and beautiful, and is found by the 
Guru’s instruction. 

The perverse know not their Spouse ; how shall they pass 
their nights ? 

They who are filled with pride bum with desire, and suffer 
pain from their worldly love. 

They who are dyed with the Word, and from whom all 
pride departeth are happy wives. 

They ever enjoy their Spouse and pass their days in the 
highest delight. 

Their Spouse hath abandoned those who are devoid of 
divine knowledge, and they shall not obtain the Dear One. 

The spiritually blind are in darkness ; without beholding 
the Bridegroom their hunger shall not depart. 

Come and meet me, my friends, and cause me to meet my 
Beloved. 

She who by perfect destiny hath met the true Guru, hath 
found her Beloved and is absorbed in the True One. 



■;t 

! ; 

158 THE SIKH RELIGION f 

i 

The women on whom God looketh with favour are happy \ 
wives : f 

They recognize their Spouse, and offer Him their bodies | 
and their souls. | 

By dispelling their pride, they find their Spouse in their f 
own homes. i 

Nanak, they who practise devotion day and night are happy ; 

wives worthy of praise. ( 

i' 

1; 

Sri Rag Ashtapadi I 

The holy are compared to non-migratory, the 1 

unholy to migratory birds : — f 

f 

Beautiful is the bird 1 on the tree 2 , which pecketh at truth 
by the Guru’s favour. \ 

It drinketh the essence of God’s name, abideth in happi- f 

ness, and flieth not hither and thither. | 

It obtaineth a dwelling in its own nest, and is absorbed in 
God’s name. 

0 man, do the Guru’s service. 

If thou walk in the way of the Guru, thou shalt be day f 

and night absorbed in God’s name. j 

Can the birds 3 on the tree be prized which fly in every I 

direction ? j 

The more they fly, the worse they suffer ; they ever burn 
and scream. 

Without the Guru they cannot behold God’s court or 
obtain the ambrosial fruit. 

For the pious who are naturally true, God is an evergreen 
tree. 

They reject the three branches 4 and attach themselves to 
the Word which is the trunk . 

The name of God alone is ambrosial fruit ; He Himself 
giveth it to be eaten. 

The perverse even while erect are withered ; they have 
no fruit or shadow. 


1 The soul of the pious man. 

3 The souls of the perverse. 


2 The body. 

4 The three qualities, 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 159 

Sit not near them ; they have neither house nor village. 

They are ever cut down and burnt as dry wood ; they have 
neither the Word nor God’s name. 

Men act according to God’s order and wander according to 
their previous acts. 

By His order they obtairfa sight of Him, and whither He 
sendeth them thither they go. 

Of His own will God dwelleth in their heai'ts ; and they 
become blended with the True One. 

The ignorant wretches who recognize not God’s order* 
wander about in error. 

Their acts are the result of obstinacy, and they are con- 
tinually disgraced. 

They have no peace within them, and they love not the 
True One. 

Beautiful are the faces of the pious who bear love and 
affection to the Guru. 

Theirs is the real worship ; they are dyed with the truth, 
and found true at the court of the True One. 

Fortunate is their advent into the world ; they save all 
their families. 

The acts of all are under the eye of God ; none are beyond 
His supervision. 

As the true God beholdeth man, so he becometh. 

Nanak, the greatness of the Name is obtained by good acts. 

Even the holy without the Guru fall under the 
influence of mammon : — 

Sidhs wander abroad misled by Maya, and contemplate 
not God with love. 

Maya entereth the three worlds, and they are greatly 
entangled by her. 

Without the Guru deliverance cannot be obtained, nor 
shall doubt and worldly love depart. 

Whom do men call Maya ? What doth Maya do ? 

She it is who hath enchained man in misery 1 and caused 
him to do works of pride. 

1 Dukh sukh . Pain and pleasure. In the Sikh sacred writings the 
words combined generally mean unhappiness. 



160 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Men even of the lowest caste obtain glory in God’s 
court : — 

Nama, a calico printer, and Kabir, a weaver, obtained 
salvation from the perfect guru. 

Knowing God they embraced His word, and lost their 
consciousness of caste. 

Demigods and men sing their compositions ; none may 
erase them, my brethren. 

Prahlad, the son of a Daitya , 1 read not of religious cere- 
monies or austerities, yet he knew not worldly love ; 

On meeting a true guru he became holy, and uttered 
God’s name night and day. 

He read only of the one God ; he required only the one 
Name, and knew none other. 

All long for rest and ultimate repose in God : — 

Everybody longeth for rest, but it cannot be obtained with- 
out the Guru. 

Pandits and astrologers grow weary of reading ; they who 
wear sectarial dresses wander in error. 

If God be merciful, rest is obtained by meeting the Guru. 

My brethren, rest is not obtained without the Guru. 

It is from the Word rest proceedeth and the true God is 
obtained. 

What is sung at rest is acceptable ; without rest recital is 
vain. 

It is in rest devotion springeth up ; in rest love of God and 
contempt of the world are produced. 

1 The Daityas were a race of demons and giants who warred 
against the gods. Prahlad’s father was, according to the Sikhs, 
Harnakhas the golden-eyed, who for a long time did penance and 
prayed to Shiv with the object of obtaining immortal life. He 
had a son called Prahlad who elected the rival deity Vishnu as 
the object of his adoration, Harnakhas, wearied with his son’s dis- 
obedience, had him tied to a pillar with the object of striking off his 
head. He said to his son, ‘ Where is now your God ? ’ Upon this, 
it is said, Vishnu, in one of his incarnations, half man and half lion, 
issued from the pillar, and with his nails tore Harnakhas to pieces. 
Multan is believed to have been the scene of this miracle. At any 
rate, a temple was built there in commemoration of the event. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 161 

It is from rest happiness and peace are obtained ; without 
rest life is vain. 

It is in rest God is ever and ever praised ; in rest man 
applieth himself to contemplation. 

It is in rest God’s praises are uttered, and man attentively 
serveth Him. 

It is by the Word God dwelleth in the heart, and the 
tongue tasteth His nectar. 

In rest death is destroyed, and man entereth the sanctuary 
of the True One. 

In rest God’s name dwelleth in the heart, and man prac- 
tiseth truth. 

They are very fortunate who have found God and entered 
into a state of rest. 

Rest is not found in mammon which produceth worldlv 
love. 

The perverse perform ceremonial works, but they destroy 
themselves and others by their pride. 

Their birth and death cease not ; they come and go again 
and again. 

Rest is not found in Maya with the three qualities ; she 
leadeth men astray in error. 

What avail reading, studying, and talking if men wander 
from the First Cause ? 

In the fourth state there is rest ; it is obtained by the holy. 

The name of Him who is without qualities is a treasure ; in 
rest a knowledge of it is obtained. 

The virtuous praising God say, ‘ True is the fame of the 
True One.’ 

God will grant rest even to those who have gone astray, if 
they have found the Word. 

Without rest all are blind in the darkness of worldly love. 

In rest a knowledge of the true eternal Word is obtained. 

The perfect Guru, the Creator, hath pardoned and blended 
me with Himself. 

In rest the Unseen, the Fearless, the Luminous, the Form- 
less One is recognized. 

There is one Benefactor of all, the Luminous One who 
blendeth man with His light. 

M 


SIKH. II 


162 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Under the instruction of the perfect Guru praise God who 
hath no end or limit. 

The Name is the wealth of those who possess divine know- 
ledge ; in rest they trade in it. 

Night and day they receive God’s name as their profit from 
a full and exhaustless storehouse. 

Nanak, there shall never be a deficiency since the Giver 
hath given it. 

Sri Rag ki War 

The Guru’s preference for the Sri Rag, the holy 
measure : — 

The Sri Rag is a measure among measures, if any one 
loving the True One sing in it - 1 

The understanding of him in whose heart the true God 
dwelleth is ever firm and unequalled. 

He who pondereth on the Guru’s instruction obtaineth the 
priceless jewel. 

His tongue is true, his heart is true, and true his body. 

0 Nanak, ever true are the dealings of those who serve 
the true Guru. 

The love of mammon deprives men of their 
senses : — 

Until one love the Lord all other love 2 is unstable. 

Maya hath infatuated man, so that he cannot see or hear. 

Without beholding God love is not produced ; what shall 
a blind man do ? 

Nanak, the True One who hath deprived man of sight can 
restore it. 

The true Guru can only be obtained by love : — 

The company of the Guru is not easily found either far or 
near ; 

Nanak, thou shaft meet the true Guru if thy heart dwell 
with him, 

1 Also translated— If any one by means of it love the True One. 

i Literally — separation ; absence which makes the heart grow 
fonder. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 163 

The following is said to have been written when 
the Guru’s brother-in-law suggested to him that in 
consequence of his large expenditure on guests, 
charity, &c., he ought to keep accounts : — 

May the pen with the ink-bottle be burnt, may the paper 
also be burnt ! 

May the writer who writeth love of the world be burnt ! 

Nanak, man acteth according to what was destined in the 
beginning ; nothing else can be done. 

To read about other things than God is false ; false it is to 
speak of worldly things or to love them. 

Nanak, nothing is permanent but the Name ; man is 
ruined by perpetual plodding. 

The evil of worldly love : — 

The whole world is dead repeating ‘ Mine, mine ’, yet 
worldly wealth departeth with no one. 

Man suffereth for worldly love ; Death is on the watch for 
every one. 

Nanak, the pious who remember God’s name shall be 
saved. 

The Guru deprecates obstinacy : — 

They who obey not God shall copiously weep ; 

Through the deceit of their hearts they shall find no sleep. 

If woman walk as it pleaseth her Spouse, 

She shall be honoured at home and invited to His 
chamber — 

Nanak, such wisdom is obtained by good acts — 

And she by the favour of the Guru shall be absorbed in 
the true One. 

The Guru preaches to those who are attached to 
worldly love : — 

O perverse man who possesseth not the Name, err not on 
beholding the safflower dye of this world. 

Paltry is its price, and it shall last but for a few days. 

The stupid, the blind, and the ignorant die in agony 
* through attachment to mammon. 

M 2 


164 THE SIKH RELIGION 

They fall like worms into ordure, and continually perish 
therein. 

Nanak, they who are imbued with the Name are happy 
through the kind disposition of the Guru. 

The dye of devotion fadeth not ; he who applieth it shall 
remain absorbed in God. 

The condition of the perverse : — 

The pandits induced by worldly gain read, and read, and 
recite the Veds. 

The fool who in his love of mammon forgetteth God’s 
name, shall be punished therefor. 

He never thinketh of Him who gave him life and body, and 
supplieth him with his daily bread. 

The noose of death shall not be cut from his neck ; he shall 
come and go again and again. 

The perverse man is blind and seeth nothing ; he acteth 
as was predestined for him. 

The true Guru is found by complete good fortune ; the 
Name of the giver of happiness shall then abide in the 
disciple’s heart. 

Nanak, they who forget not the Name by which honour is 
obtained at the gate of the True One, 

Shall enjoy happiness, array themselves in happiness, and 
pass their lives in happiness. 

The condition of the holy : — 

By serving the true Guru happiness and the true Name 
of the Lord of excellences are obtained. 

By the Guru’s instruction man knoweth himself, and 
God’s name is manifested to him. 

He who is true acteth truly, and obtaineth greatness near 
the Great One : 

He praiseth and supplicateth God to whom belong body 
and soul. 

They who praise the true Word, dwell in supreme happiness. 
Though man may have practised devotion, penance, and 
self-restraint, yet without the Name in his heart accursed is 
his life. ... ' 



I HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 165 

The Name is obtained by the Guru’s instruction ; the 
f perverse perish through worldly love. 

t Preserve me, 0 God, according to Thy will ; Nanak is Thy 

| slave. 

i 

J The cupidity of the Brahman : — 

The Brahman when reading shouteth aloud through love 
] of mammon. 

\ The foolish and ignorant man recognizeth not God who is 

l within him. 

| He preacheth to the world through worldly love, but he 

i understandeth not divine knowledge. 

- He spendeth his life in vain, and dieth and is born again 

and again. 

\ He who serveth the true Guru obtaineth the Name ; know 

I and reflect upon this : 

I His clamour and complaints shall come to an end, and 

peace and happiness ever abide in his heart. 

By reflecting on the Guru’s instruction, man effaceth him- 
self and his mind becometh pure. 

Nanak, they who are imbued with the Word and bear 
love and affection to God shall obtain deliverance. 

Spiritual pride cannot be removed without 
effort : — 

Nanak, he is brave and a hero who chaseth the enemy of 
pride from within him. 

The pious man who praiseth the Name reformeth his 
life : 

He is ever saved and saveth all his families. 
i He who loveth the Name is honoured at the gate of the 

I True One. 

I The perverse die in pride ; they die an evil death. 

Everything befalleth according to God’s will ; what can 
| poor mortals do ? 

Man forgetteth the Master under the influence of pride and 
j ; worldly love. 

j Nanak, without the Name all is suffering ; happiness is 

f forgotten. 


i66 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The truly pious have no fear of death : — 

He in whose heart the true Guru hath established God’s 
name is freed from superstition. 

He singeth God’s name and praises, light appear eth, and 
the way is shown unto him. 

He destroyeth his pride, fixeth his attention on the one 
God, and implanteth the Name in his heart. 

By the Guru’s instruction Death cannot look at him, for he 
is absorbed in the true Name. 

The Creator Himself pervadeth everything : He applieth 
to His name those who please Him. 

If the slave Nanak repeat God’s name, he shall live ; with- 
out the Name he shall immediately die. 

The value of true devotion : — 

Through the kind disposition of the Guru adore God 
who is in thy heart. 

If man’s spirit have faith in the universal Spirit, it shall 
be happy at home : 

Through the kind disposition of the Guru it shall become 
steady and waver not. | 

Without the Guru peace is not obtained, and the impurity f 
of covetousness departeth not from the heart. | 

If for one moment God’s name dwell in the heart, it is as 
bathing at the sixty-eight places of Hindu pilgrimage. 

Impurity attachetli not to the true ; it attacheth to those 
who love worldly things. 

It will never depart by ablution even though one bathe at 
the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage. 

Whatever the perverse proud man doeth, he shall only 
receive pain in return. \ 

Nanak, when man is absorbed in the true Guru, his im- i 

■ purity shall be washed away. \ 

The perverse prefer to tread the way of mammon \ 

If the perverse be admonished, will they ever heed the 
admonition ? 

If the perverse meet the good, these will not associate with j 

them ; they are doomed to transmigration. ( 

I. 

t 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 167 

There are two ways — one the love of God, the other of 
mammon ; 1 the way man treadeth dependeth on God’s will. 

The believer chasteneth his heart and applieth to it the 
touchstone of the Word . 2 

It is with his heart he quarrelleth, with his heart he strug- 
gleth, he is engaged with his heart. 

Whoever loveth the true Word shall receive what his heart 
desireth. 

He shall ever eat the ambrosia of the Name, and act 
according to the Guru’s instruction. 

They who quarrel with others, instead of quarrelling with 
their own hearts, waste their lives. 

The perverse are ruined by obstinacy and by the practice 
of falsehood and deception. 

He who by the Guru’s instruction subdueth his heart, 
shall fix his affection on God. 

Nanak, the believer practiseth truth ; the perverse suffer 
transmigration. 

Service to the Guru inculcated : — 

They who serve the true Guru shall be considered of 
account. 

Having effaced pride from their hearts they shall continue 
to love the True One. 

The lives of those who serve not the true Guru pass in 
vain. 

Nanak, God acteth as He pleaseth ; none may interfere 
with Him . 3 

The fate of the spiritually blind : — 

The spiritually blind who are encompassed by sin, who 
commit sin, 

And who worship mammon, shall be punished in God’s 
court. 

Worship the divine spirit ; but without the true Guru He 
cannot be known. 

1 Literally — running about the world. 

2 To ascertain if his heart has become pure or not. 

3 Literally — talking is of no avail. 



i68 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Devotion, penance, and austerities please the true Guru, 
and are obtained by good acts. 

Nanak, service should be performed with attention ; he 
who pleaseth God shall be acceptable. 

Vain are the lives of the perverse : — 

They who worship not the true Guru or ponder on his 
words, 

Never obtain divine knowledge in their hearts, and are as 
dead in the world. 

They wander in the eighty-four lakhs of existences, and 
are ruined by transmigration. 

He whom God causeth to perform the true Guru’s service 
shall perform it. 

In the true Guru is the treasure of the Name which is 
obtained by good acts. 

They who are imbued with the word of the true Guru, 
ever truly love God. 

Nanak, he whom God blendeth with Himself, shall never 
be separated from Him ; he shall naturally be absorbed in 
Him. 

The Guru’s definition of a saint : — 

He is a saint who recognizeth God, 

Who by the Guru’s favour knoweth himself, 

Who restraineth his wandering mind and keepeth the one 
God in his heart, 

Who in life is dead, and who repeateth God’s name— 

Such a saint is the best, 

And, 0 Nanak, shall be absorbed in the True One. 

The sinner who pretendeth to be a saint : — 

He who hath deception in his heart and calleth himself a 
saint, 

Shall never by reason of his hypocrisy obtain the supreme 

God. 

He who practiseth calumny soileth his heart. 

He may wash away his bodily filth, but his heart’s impurity 
shall not depart. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 169 

He who quarrelleth with the guild of the saints, 

Who is smitten with worldly love, and who remembereth 
not the Name, 

Shall, even though he perform many religious ceremonies, 
be unhappy night and day. 

What is destined from the beginning cannot be effaced. 

Nanak, deliverance is not obtained without serving the 
true Guru. 

Hypocrisy is as vain as the external decorations 
of an evil woman : — 

The woman whose conduct is bad, and whose heart is 
counterfeit, may decorate herself, but she shall still be ugly. 

She acteth not as pleaseth her Spouse, nay, the foolish 
woman giveth Him orders. 

She who acteth as her Guru desireth shall escape all misery. 

The writing which the Creator wrote in the beginning 
cannot be effaced. 

Let woman devote her soul and body to her Spouse and 
love His word. 

Without repeating His name no one hath obtained God ; 
reflect on this in thy heart. 

Nanak, that woman whom the Creator enjoyeth, shall 
become beautiful and well-conducted. 

The worldly grope in mental darkness, and are 
miserable without the Guru : — 

Worldly love is darkness whose limits cannot be seen. 

The perverse, the spiritually ignorant, and those who 
forget God’s name perish in great misery. 

After rising in the morning they perform many hollow 
ceremonies for the love of mammon ; 

But, if they serve their true Guru, they shall cross the 
terrible ocean. 

Nanak, the believers by clasping the true Name to their 
hearts shall become absorbed in the True One. 

He who turns to idolatry falls to the level of an 
abandoned woman : — 

The perverse woman is filthy, ill-conducted, and evil ; 


170 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


She leaveth her husband and her home through her love 
for another man : 

Her passion is never extinguished ; she burneth and crieth 
aloud. 

Nanak, without the Name she appeareth misshapen and 
unlovely, and her husband abandoneth her. 

The happiness of the holy : — 

She who is tinctured by the Word, and who beareth love 
and affection to the true Guru is a happy wife. 

She whose love and affection are true, shall ever enjoy her 
Spouse. 

Very lovely, beautiful, and honoured shall that woman be. 

Nanak, she is called the happy wife whom the Blender 
hath blended with Himself. 

Who shall obtain renown : — 

He who acteth according to the wishes of the Guru shall 
acquire great renown. 

The name of God, which is the greatest, shall dwell in his 
heart, and no one can remove it. 

He to whom God showeth His kindness obtaineth the 
Name through his good acts. 

Ngpak, the creation is in the power of the Creator ; a few 
pious men understand this. 

Nanak, Mammon who is God’s servant waiteth upon those 

Who worship His name and fix their attention on Him 
night and day. 

The perfect One, the Regenerator, by His order hath 
made them perfect. 

They who by the Guru’s favour understand divine 
knowledge, have attained the gate of deliverance. 

The obstinate recognize not God’s order ; Death the 
executioner shall punish them. 

The pious who worship God shall cross the terrible ocean 
of the world. 

He whom the Guru himself pardoneth, shall wipe out all 
his demerits with merits. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 171 

The Guru's fervid prayer : — 

May I meet my Beloved and hold Him to my heart ! 

May I ever and ever praise my God through the love and 
affection of the Guru ! 

Nanak, she is a happy wife whom God looketh on with 
favour and uniteth with Himself. 

The effect of the effacement of spiritual pride : — 

If God look on man with favour, he shall obtain Him by 
service to the Guru. 

By pondering on God’s name man becometh a demigod. 

He who effaceth his pride meeteth God, and is saved by 
the Guru’s instruction. 

Nanak, they on whom God conferreth His favour become 
easily united with Him. 

God's greatness and munificence : — 

Our lives and bodies are all His ; He supportetli all. 

Nanak, under the Guru’s instruction serve Him who is ever 
and ever the Giver. 

I am a sacrifice to those who ponder on the Formless One. 

Their faces are ever bright ; the whole world boweth 
before them. 

The spiritual exaltation conferred by the Guru : — 

I am completely altered since I met the true Guru ; I have 
obtained the nine treasures to spend and eat. 

The eighteen perfections follow in my train, my mind 
abideth in its own house and home . 1 

Unbeaten sounds ever play for me, and I direct my atten- 
tion to absorption in God. 

Nanak, devotion to God abideth in the hearts of those on 
whose foreheads such fate was written in the beginning. 

The advantages of obeying the word of God : — 

Majh Ashtapadi 

He who dieth by the Guru’s word is really dead . 2 

Grief shall not annoy nor Death crush him 

1 My mind ceases to wander. 

2 That is, he shall not undergo transmigration. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


172 

Who lieareth the true Word, obeyeth it, and treasureth 
it in his heart ; his light shall be blended with God’s. 

I am a sacrifice, my life is a sacrifice unto those who 
derive glory from God’s name, 

Who serve the true Guru, who apply their hearts to the 
True One, and who under the Guru’s instruction have 
become absorbed in Him. 

The body is frail ; it is a frail garment for the soul to 
wear. 

If woman attach herself to the world, she shall not attain 
God’s court. 

Night and day she shall burn and wander ; day and night 
without her Beloved shall she suffer great agony. 

Neither men’s bodies nor castes shall go to the next world. 

Where the account is taken, there shall man be delivered 
by the practice of truth. 

They who serve the true Guru and are absorbed in the 
Name, shall be blest here and hereafter. 

She who maketh fear and love her decorations, 

Shall by the Guru’s favour obtain God in her own home. 

She shall always enjoy God, and be day and night tinctured 
with the fixed dye of His love. 

The Beloved ever dwelleth with all, 

Though only a few can behold Him by the favour of the 
Guru. 

My Lord is the most high ; through His mercy He blendeth 
man with Himself. 

This world is asleep in worldly love. 

Men forget the Name and are ruined at last. 

He who put them to sleep will awaken them, and by the 
Guru’s instruction they shall obtain understanding. 

He who drinketh the nectar of God’s name shall have his 
doubts dispelled, 

And by the Guru’s favour attain the state of salvation. 

He who is dyed with service shall ever be free from attach- 
ment to the world, and, effacing himself, shall be blended 
with God. 

Thou didst create men, 0 God, and appoint them to their 
several duties ; 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


173 

And Thou gives t their food to the eighty-four lakhs of 
animal species. 

Nanak, he who is dyed with love for the True One medi- 
tateth on the Name, and God causeth him to act according 
to His will. 

All good thoughts arise in the heart : — 

Diamonds and rubies are produced in the heart, 

But it is by the Gum’s instruction man assayeth them and 
hath them assayed. 

They who possess the truth utter the truth, and apply the 
touchstone of truth to their hearts. 

I am a sacrifice, my life is a sacrifice unto those who 
implant the Word of the Guru in their hearts. 

Though in impurity, they obtain the Pure One ; and 
their light is blended with God’s light. 

The perverse may perform hypocritical service, 
but for their salvation they must attend to the 
instruction of the Guru : — 

The perverse and fools practise cleverness, 

But for all their bathing and washing they shall not be 
acceptable. 

As they came into the world , so shall they depart 
grieving for their transgressions. 

The perverse are blind and see nothing. 

They have come into the world with death written for 
them, but they think not of it. 

Though the perverse perform religious ceremonies, they 
obtain hot the Name, and without it they lose their human 
lives. 

The essence of the Word is to act honestly. 

Through the perfect Guru the gate of deliverance is 
obtained. 

Night and day the Guru reciteth God’s praises and Word ; 
himself dyed with the truth, he dyeth others therewith. 

The advantages of association with the holy : — 

By serving the true Guru man obtaineth great glory, . 


I 74 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


And God the Inconceivable dwelleth in the heart. 

God is a tree of goodly fruit ; the thirst of him who 
drinketh its nectar departeth. 

I am a sacrifice, and my life is a sacrifice unto Him who 
causeth me to meet the society of the saints. 

God himself causeth us to meet the society of the saints, 
in which under the Guru’s instruction God’s praises are sung. 

Serve the true Guru whose word is pleasant, 

And who hath caused God’s name to dwell in the heart. 

God is pure : he who removeth the filth of pride shall 
obtain honour in the court of the True One. 

Without the Guru the Name cannot be obtained, 

Though Sidhs and strivers continually cry for it. 

Without serving the Guru happiness is not obtained, and 
it is by the greatest good fortune he is found. 

The mind is a mirror ; a few holy men behold themselves 
therein. 

Rust attacheth not to it if the filth of pride be wiped away. 

The unbeaten strain resoundeth from the pure Word ; by 
the Guru’s instruction man is absorbed in the True One. 

Without the true Guru, God cannot in any way be seen. 

If the Guru be gracious he showeth Him unto man. 

God himself is everywhere diffused, and man by divine 
knowledge easily blendeth with Him. 

He who is pious loveth the one God, 

And by the Guru’s instruction dispelleth his suspicion 
that there is another. 

He who tradeth and trafficketh in the Name in his heart 
obtaineth the true treasure. 

To praise God is the highest duty of the pious : 

In this way they attain the gate of deliverance. 

He who is dyed with God’s love singeth His praises night 
and day, and is invited to His palace. 

The true Guru, the giver, is found when God causeth us to 
find him. 

Perfect is the fortune of him who causeth the Word to 
dwell in his heart. 

Nanak, the glory of God’s name is obtained by singing the 
praises of the True One. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 175 

The world compared to a garden under God’s 
superintendence : — 

This world is a garden ; my Lord is its Gardener : 

He guardeth it ever, and there is no part of it exempt 
from His care. 

The odour which He infused into it prevaileth ; what is 
planted is known by its odour . 1 

The perverse are ailing in this world. 

They forget the Giver of health who is inaccessible and 
illimitable. 

Stricken with disease they ever wander lamenting, but 
without the Guru they obtain not relief. 

The following is a satire on actors who repre- 
sent Krishan and his milkmaids : — 

God is bright, and bright are his saints. 

Through them my heart, speech, and desires are pure. 

The saints’ hearts are bright ; their faces are ever beauti- 
ful, and they ponder on the very bright Name. 

I am a sacrifice, my life is a sacrifice unto those who sing 
God’s praises, 

Who speak of Him day and night, and acclaim Him and 
His word. 

They the filth of whose pride departeth through fear of 
the Guru become bright, 

And sing of God with natural ease. 

They ever abide in bliss, they worship day and night, and 
hear and sing God’s praises. 

Fix thine unsteady mind on God’s service ; 

Obey the Guru’s instruction, and attune thy heart to it ; 

Make the dispelling of worldly love thy true and perfect 
tune, and set thy heart a-dancing to the Word. 

Death shall lie in wait for those who through worldly love 

Shout aloud and dash their bodies on the ground. 

Wordly love causeth the heart to dance ; the deceit of 
man’s heart causeth him misery. 

1 The souls are the flowers of the garden, and they are known by 
their odour. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


176 

If God by the Guru’s instruction cause men to serve Him, 

Their bodies and minds shall naturally be dyed with His 
love. 

From the Word supernatural music is produced, and the 
service of the holy player gaineth acceptance. 

The perverse beat time and play many musical instruments. 

But no one listeneth or payeth attention to them. 

Under the influence of Maya they make a stage and dance, 
but, on account of their worldly love, they find only suffering. 

He in whose heart there is love, hath already obtained 
salvation ; 

He controlleth his senses and findeth the way of truth 
and self-restraint ; 

Under the Guru’s instruction he ever pondereth on God — 
the service that pleaseth him. 

It is from the Guru’s instruction God’s service is obtained 
in the four ages : 

From no other source may it be obtained. 

Nanak, it is by service to the Guru and obeisance at his 
feet God’s name is obtained. 

The condition of the pious and the perverse com- 
pared : — 

The saints whom the Guru’s instruction and the Name 
adorn, 

Are illustrious in God’s true court. 

They day and night ever abide in bliss, and praising God’s 
excellences become absorbed in Him. 

I am a sacrifice, and my life is a sacrifice unto those who 
hear the Name and treasure it up in their hearts. 

God the true, the most high, removeth their pride and 
blendeth them with Himself. 

God is true, and true is His name. 

By the Guru’s favour He blendeth a few with Himself. 

They who under the Guru’s instruction meet God, are not 
again separated from Him ; they easily blend with the True 
One. 

Without Thee, 0 God, nothing can be done ; 

Thou beholdest and knowest the work of Thy hands. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 177 

Thou actest and causcst to act, 0 Creator ; and under 
the Guru’s instruction Thou blendest man with Thyself. 

The virtuous woman who maketh the fear 

And love of God her decorations, obtaineth Him. 

She who serveth the true Guru is ever a happy wife, and 
is absorbed in his true instruction. 

They who forget the Word have no house or home : 

They wander distraught like ravens in a ruined building ; 

They lose both this world and the next and pass their 
lives in extreme misery. 

Writing, writing paper, and ink have failed them — 

No one hath obtained happiness from worldly love — 

They write falsehood, they practise falsehood, and are 
ruined by their deliberate falsehood. 

The pious on the contrary reflect and write what is totally 
true ; 

They are true men and gain the gate of deliverance. 

True are their paper, pens, and ink ; writing the truth 
they become absorbed in the True One. 

My God dwelleth in men’s hearts and beholdeth their acts. 

He who through the Guru’s favour meeteth the Lord is of 
account. 

Nanak, they who obtain the Name from a perfect Guru 
obtain greatness. 

God dwells in man’s heart : — 

In the cavern of the heart there is an exhaustless store- 
house : 

In it dwelleth God, the unseen, the illimitable. 

He is concealed, but becometh manifest to him who 
effaceth himself under the Guru’s instruction. 

I am a sacrifice, my life is a sacrifice unto those in whose 
heart the ambrosial Name dwelleth. 

Of the ambrosial Name the taste is exceeding sweet ; in- 
structed by the Guru they drink its nectar. 

He who effaceth his pride openeth the adamant doors of 
his understanding, 

And admitteth the priceless Name by the Guru’s favour. 

Without the Guru’s instruction no one obtaineth the Name; 

N 


SIKH. II 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


178 

but, if the Guru be gracious, hg implanteth it in man’s 
heart. 

The Guru applieth to the eyes the true salve of divine 
knowledge, 

Which illuminateth the heart and dispelleth the darkness 
of ignorance. 

The soul is then happy, light is blended with light, and 
man obtaineth honour in God’s court. 

He who goeth beyond his body to search for God, 

Shall not find Him, but shall suffer the great misery of a 
forced labourer. 

The perverse man is blind and seeth not, but, when he 
returneth home after his search, he shall find the Real Thing 
by the Guru’s instruction. 

He from whom the filth of pride departeth seeth God in 
his soul and body, 

And by the favour of the Guru obtaineth the True One. 

He who sitteth down in a good place 1 and ever singeth 
God’s praises, shall become absorbed in the true Word. 

. He who restraineth his wandering mind and closeth the 
nine gates, 

Shall obtain a dwelling in the tenth, God’s own home. 

There the unbeaten strain resoundeth day and night, and 
is heard under the Guru’s instruction. 

Without the Word there is mental darkness, 

Man obtaineth not the Real Thing, nor doth his transmigra- 
tion cease. 

The true Guru holdeth the keys ; none save him can open 
the door ; the true Guru is found by good fortune. 

Thou art, 0 God, in every place at once concealed and 
manifest. 

Man knoweth this when he obtaineth the Guru’s favour. 

Nanak, ever praise the Name, and by the Guru’s instruc- 
tion it shall dwell in thy heart. 

Merits and demerits contribute to the attainment 
of a human body : — 

Within the body are two brothers, demerits and merits ; 

1 In the company of the saints. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 179 

Men were created out of both. 

He who under the Guru’s instruction effaceth them and 
entereth the asylum of the one God, shall be absorbed in 
Him. 

The pious and the perverse contrasted : — 

Their birth is the most exalted and their dwelling-place 
the best, 

Who serve the true Guru and remain hermits in their own 
homes. 

They abide in God’s love, they are ever dyed with His 
colour, and they satiate their souls with His nectar. 

I am a sacrifice, and my life is a sacrifice unto those who 
read of and know God, and who set Him up in their hearts. 

The pious who read and praise God’s name, shall obtain 
glory at the court of the True One. 

The Unseen and Inscrutable One is everywhere contained, 

Yet He cannot be found by any worldly contrivance. 

If God be gracious the true Guru is found, and he causeth 
man to meet the Kind One. 

He who readeth only secular compositions knowetli not 
God : 

He burneth for Maya of the three qualities ; 

But her bonds are broken by the Guru’s instruction ; 
the Guru’s instruction effecteth salvation. 

Man’s mind is volatile and cannot be restrained : 

Under the influence of worldly love it wandereth in every 
direction. 

It is a worm bred in poison, attached to poison, and by 
poison shall it perish. 

They who practise egotism and assert themselves, 1 

Are not acceptable even though they perform many 
devotional works. 

There is none besides Thee, 0 God ; Thou pardonest those 
who are adorned with the Guru’s instruction. 

They who know not God, and night and day 

Wander in quest of mammon, are born and again perish. 

1 Who cause themselves to be known, who put themselves forward by 
boasting. 

N 2 


i8o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The life of the perverse man passeth away in vain ; it is 
when he finally departeth he repenteth. 

As when a woman decorateth herself for her spouse who 
is abroad, 

Thus vain are the acts of the blindly perverse. 

They have no honour in this world, no admission to God’s 
court in the next, and they lose their lives in vain. 

The few who recognize the Word of the perfect Guru 

Know the name of God. 

They ever perform service, and day and night easily obtain 
rest. 

The one God pervadeth everything : 

A few pious men understand this. 

Nanak, they who are dyed with the Name are illustrious, 
and God of His mercy blendeth them with Himself. 

The following is directed against worldly-minded 
Brahmans : — 

The perverse read and are called pandits ; 

They suffer great pain from their worldly love ; 

They are intoxicated by their evil passions and know 
nothing ; they enter wombs again and again. 

I am a sacrifice, and my life is a sacrifice unto those who 
dispel their pride, and are blended with God. 

By serving the Guru, God dwelleth in their hearts, and 
they easily quaff divine nectar. 

Men read the Veds, but obtain not God’s nectar. 

Infatuated by mammon the pandits engage in disputa- 
tions. 

Devoid of knowledge they are ever in darkness ; the pious 
know God and sing His praises. 

They who are adorned by the Word speak of the Ineffable, 

And by the Guru’s instruction the truth is pleasing to 
their hearts. 

They repeat day and night the name of the Truest of the 
true, and dye their hearts with the truth. 

The True One is ever known through the Guru’s instruc- 
tion ; by meeting the True One happiness is obtained. 

The filth of falsehood and slander attacheth not 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 181 


To those who by the Guru’s favour continually watch. 

The pure Name dwelleth within their hearts, and their light 
is blended with the light of God. 

They who read only secular compositions 1 know not God, 
the Real Thing. 

They are led astray from the First Cause and recognize 
not the Guru’s word. 

They feel worldly love and understand nothing, but by 
the Guru’s instruction they shall obtain God. 

They who shout out the Veds for the sake of lucre 

Are perverse, and through worldly love know not God. 

It is secular compositions they read ; they know not the 
one God, and suffer misery through their ignorance. 

God blendeth with Himself those whom He lovetli, 

And by means of the Guru’s instruction removeth their 
doubts and troubles. 

Nanak, the Name possesseth true greatness ; by accepting 
it happiness is obtained. 

Polytheism is a cause of evil in the world : — 

Maya is the origin of the goddesses and gods 

Who composed the Simritis and the Shastars. 

She diffused lust and wrath in the world, wherefore man 
suffei*eth the pain of transmigration. 

Why hath he who serveth not the true Guru come into the 
world ? 

Accursed is his life ; he hath lost his human birth in vain. 

The perverse remember not the Name ; without it they 
shall suffer great misery. 

Majh ki War 

The effect of rendering praise and thanksgiving 
to God : — 

In the kal age God’s praise hath appeared as a light for 
the world ; 

Through it a few believers are saved. 

God bestoweth it on whom He looketh with favour : 

Nanak, such a man becometh holy and receiveth the jewel. 

1 Literally — who read of things possessing the three qualities. 


182 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The fear of God is the only fear that assists : — 

In fear man is born, in fear also he dieth, fear ever dwelleth 
in his heart. 

Nanak, profitable is his advent who dieth in the fear of 
the Lord. 

If he who liveth without the fear of God, and enjoyeth 
countless pleasures, 

Also die without that fear, O Nanak, his face shall be 
blackened. 

Gauri 

A Sikh asked Guru Amar Das what advantage he 
had obtained from association with Guru Angad. The 
following was the reply : — 

God is met by meeting the Guru ; 

God then blendeth man with Himself. 

My God knoweth all contrivances ; 

By His order He blendeth with Himself those who recog- 
nize His word. 

Through love of the true Guru doubt and fear vanish. 

He who feeleth fear shall be absorbed in the love of the 
True One. 

On meeting the Guru, God will naturally dwell in the heart. 

My God is great • His worth cannot be appraised. 

Let Him who hath no end or limit, be praised under the 
Guru’s instruction. 

May my God, the Pardoner, pardon me ! 

On meeting the Guru all wisdom and understanding are 
obtained. 

The heart becometh pure, and the True One dwelleth 
therein. 

When the True One dwelleth in the heart, everything 
which man doeth is true. 

Meditation on the Word is the best occupation. 

It is through the Guru true service is performed, 

And through his instruction a few know the Name. 

May the giver and benefactor 1 live for ever, 

Nanak, and may love attach to God’s name ! 

1 The Guiu. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 183 

The following was composed on the same subject : — 

Through the Guru a few obtain divine knowledge : 

He who knoweth God through the Guru shall be acceptable. 
Through the Guru there resulteth divine knowledge and 
meditation on the True One ; 

Through the Guru the gate of deliverance is attained. 

It is only by perfect good fortune the Guru cometh in 
one’s way. 

The true become easily absorbed in the True One. 

On meeting the Guru the fire of avarice is quenched. 
Through the Guru peace dwelleth in the heart. 

Through the Guru man becometh pure, spotless, and 
immaculate. 

Through the Guru the Word which uniteth man with God 
is obtained. 

Without the Guru every one wandereth in doubt. 

Without the Name great misery is suffered. 

He who is pious meditateth on the Name. 

On beholding the True One, true honour is obtained. 
Whom shall we call the giver ? The One God. 

If He be gracious, the Word by which we meet Him is 
obtained. 

May Nanak meet the beloved Guru, sing the True One’s 
praises, 

And becoming true be absorbed in the True One ! 

God ought never to be forgotten : — 

Why forget Him to whom belong life and soul ? 

Why forget Him who is contained in everything, 

And by serving whom honour is obtained at His court and 
man becometh acceptable ? 

I am a sacrifice to the name of God ; 

When I forget Thee may I die that moment ! 

Thou forgettest those who forget Thee — 

It is they who love mammon who forget Thee — 

The perverse without divine knowledge re-enter wombs. 
Those with whom the one God is heartily pleased, He 
applieth to the service of the true Guru, 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


184 

The one God dwelleth in the hearts of those with whom He 
is heartily pleased ; 

And under the Guru’s instruction they become absorbed 
in His name. 

They who have stored merits meditate on divine know- 
ledge ; 

They who have stored merits efface their pride. 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice unto those who are dyed with the 
Name. 

The perverse sleep, the pious are awake in con- 
templation of God : — 

The perverse have gone to sleep through their love of 
worldly things ; 

The pious are awake contemplating divine knowledge and 
God’s attributes. 

They who love the Name are awake. 

Nobody awakened by divine knowledge sleepeth. 

A few possess it by means of the perfect Guru. 

The impious and the indiscriminating never possess it. 

They may claim that they do, but they are burning with 
worldly love. 

The blind unbeliever is never acceptable. 

In this age salvation is obtained through God’s name, 

Which a few obtain by pondering on the Guru’s instruction. 

Such are saved themselves and save all their families. 

In this kal age there is no work of devotion equal to the 
repetition of the Name. 

The kal took birth in the house of a Sudar. 1 

Nanak, without the Name salvation cannot be obtained. 

The advantages of service to the Guru which has 
been the custom from time immemorial : — 

The service of the Guru hath prevailed in the four ages : 

A few men practise it. 

God’s name is exhaustless wealth in which there is no 
deficiency. 

It ever conferreth happiness in this world and honour in 
God’s court. 

1 Whose duty it is to serve others and repeat God’s name. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 185 

0 my soul, doubt not this : 

Through the worship of the Guru thou shalt quaff nectar. 

They who serve the true Guru are great men in the world : 

They are saved themselves and they save all their families. 

They clasp God’s name to their hearts. 

Dyed with the Name they cross over the terrible ocean. 

They who with lowly minds ever serve the true Guru, 

Expel their pride, and the lotuses of their hearts bloom. 

They dwell in their own homes where the unbeaten strain 
resoundeth. 

While hermits in their own homes they are dyed with the 
Name. 

The words of those who serve the true Guru are true. 

In every age the saints have repeated their words, 

And continually uttered God’s name. 

Nanak, they who are dyed with the Name obtain beatitude 
and eternal rest. 

Bliss is the portion of the virtuous : — 

God ordained that woman should remain in her father’s 
house for four days. 1 

She is an honoured woman who singeth God’s praises under 
the Guru’s instruction. 

She who in her father’s house amasseth merits shall obtain 
a dwelling with her father-in-law. 

The pious whose hearts love God shall be easily absorbed 
in Him. 

The Beloved abideth in this world and the next ; say 
how shall He be found ? 

It is God the pure and invisible who blendeth man with 
Himself. 

If God Himself grant wisdom, man shall meditate on His 
name. 

They who are very fortunate meet the true Guru ; he 
putteth nectar into their mouths. 

Their pride and worldly love depart ; and they are easily 
absorbed in bliss. 


1 That is, that brief life should be man’s portion. 



i86 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


God Himself is all-pervading ; it is He Himself who 
attacheth man to His name. 

The perverse through pride find Him not ; they are fools 
and devoid of divine knowledge. 

They serve not the true Guru, and shall repent again and 
again. 

They shall obtain a dwelling in the womb, and there suffer 
agony. 

It is the will of my Creator that the perverse shall suffer 
transmigration. 

My Lord God wrote man’s full destiny on his forehead at 
his birth. 

When man meeteth the brave Guru who hath conquered sin , 
he meditateth on God’s name. 

God is my father and mother, God is my kinsman and 
brother. 

O God, pardon and blend the worm Nanak with Thee. 
Gauri Chhant 

The following was composed in reply to Dana, 
who inquired how man should cross over the tem- 
pestuous ocean of the world : — 

The world is a tempestuous ocean ; how shall man traverse 
it ? 

Make God’s name the boat, and put the Word into it as 
the helmsman. 

When thou puttest the Word into it as the helmsman, God 
Himself will ferry thee over, and thus shalt thou traverse the 
ocean, difficult though it be. 

By the Guru’s instruction man obtaineth service, and is 
thus dead while alive. 

In a moment the name of God effaceth his sins, and his 
body becometh pure. 

By God’s name, Nanak, deliverance is obtained, and dross 
becometh gold. 

Women and men are immersed in lust, and know not to 
repeat God’s name. 

Mothers, fathers, children, and brothers are very dear, but 
they all drown even without water. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 187 

They drown even without water who know not the way of 
salvation, and who through pride wander about the world. 

All who come into the world shall depart ; they who 
meditate on the Guru shall be saved. 

The pious who utter God’s name shall be saved themselves 
and shall save their families. 

Nanak, the pious man, within whose heart the Name 
dwelleth, shall meet the Beloved. 

There is nothing stable but God’s name : this world is a 
play. 

Fix true devotion firmly in thy heart and deal in the name 
of God. 

Deal in God’s name who is inaccessible and illimitable, 
and through the Guru’s instruction thou shalt acquire its 
wealth. 

Thy service, meditation, and devotion shall be true if thou 
erase pride from thy heart. 

We who are without understanding, foolish, stupid, and 
blind, have been put on the right way by the true Guru. 

Nanak, the pious are adorned by the Word, and night and 
day sing God’s praises. 

God acteth Himself and causeth to act ; He adorneth 
men by His word. 

He Himself is the True Guru ; He is the Word ; in every 
age His saints are dear to Him : 

In every age His saints are dear to Him ; He Himself 
adorneth them ; He Himself appointeth them to His service. 

He Himself is far-seeing, He Himself causeth men to serve 
Him. 

He Himself is the Bestower of merits and the remover of 
demerits ; He causeth His name to dwell in men’s hearts. 

Nanak is ever a sacrifice unto that True One who Himself 
acteth and causeth to act. 

Gauri ki War I 

While praising the Gauri Rag the Guru extols the 
love of the True One and denounces falsehood and 
deception : — 

The Gauri Rag is auspicious, if in it one remember God. 



1 88 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Walk as it pleaseth the true Guru ; make that thy 
decoration. 

The Word of the Spouse is true ; repeat it ever and ever. 

She who devoteth her life to the True One, is deeply dyed 
as with boiling madder. 

She who loveth the True One shall be thoroughly tinctured 
with a deep dye. 

Falsehood and deception are as things wrapped up in 
false gilding which remain not undetected. 

False is the boasting of those who love falsehood. 

Nanak, God is true and loolceth with favour on man. 

The Guru sheds celestial light on the darkness of 
the perverse : — 

Pride, folly, mortal and venial sins have led the world 
astray. 

The perverse who are in total darkness, shall see God if 
they meet the true Guru. 

Nanak, God hath blended with Himself him whom he 
caused to love His word. 

The difference between the worldly and the pious: — 

He who possesseth worldly love is very blind and deaf : 

He heareth not the Word, but maketh a great uproar and 
tumult. 

The pious are known by loving God’s word ; 

They hear and believe in God’s name and become absorbed 
in it. 

What pleaseth God He doeth and causeth others to do. 

Nanak, man the instrument playeth as God causeth him to 
play. 

Except in God’s mercy there is no hope for the 
proud unbeliever : — 

The proud unbeliever shall never know the Guru’s court ; 
he shall be a little hither or a little thither. 

Though ever invited he never goeth to the Guru’s court ; 
how should he be accepted in God’s court ? 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 189 

Few know the Guru’s court ; they who reach it ever stand 
with clasped hands. 

Nanak, if my God show mercy, He will restore man to Him. 

The condition of those who deny their Guru : — 

They who deny their Guru shall have no house or home : 

They shall lose both worlds, and find no place in God’s 
court. 

The opportunity of touching the true Guru’s feet cannot 
be again obtained. 

If man be not numbered among the Guru’s disciples he 
shall pass his life in deepest sorrow. 

The true Guru is a being without enmity who attacheth 
man to himself. 

Nanak, God will release at His court those to whom He 
hath disclosed Himself. 


The perverse are spiritually blind, foolish, and proud. 

In their hearts is wrath ; they lose their senses in play . 1 

They commit the sins of falsehood and unrighteousness. 

What can they hear and what can they tell others ? 

They are blind and deaf ; they lose their way and stray 
into the desert. 

The blind unbeliever suffereth transmigration. 

He obtaineth no place without meeting the true Guru. 

Nanak, man obtaineth what is written for him from the 
beginning. 

Even he who meets the Guru can confer salvation 
on others : — 

He who through the Guru’s instruction obtaineth divine 
knowledge, discrimination, and intelligence, 

Shall sing God’s praises and string a garland in his heart. 

He shall be the purest of the pure and possess the highest 
intelligence. 

He who meeteth such a person shall be saved by him. 

He whose heart containeth the perfume of God’s name, 

1 They stake their precious human lives and lose them. 



190 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Shall utter great and exalted words to make happy those 
who hear them ; 

And he himself shall obtain honour at God’s court. 
Nanak, on meeting the true Guru, the Name is obtained 
as wealth and property. 


Asa 

The Guru’s is the best of all religious systems : — 
Very fortunate are they who obtain God’s system . 1 
True disregard of the world is obtained by the Guru’s 
instruction. 

Six Hindu religious systems pass current, 

But the Guru’s system is profound and unequalled. 

By the Guru’s system the way of salvation is obtained, 
And the True One Himself abideth in the heart. 

By the Guru’s system the world is saved, 

If men bestow love and affection on it. 

The few who bestow love and affection on it, 

Shall ever be happy. 

By the Guru’s system the gate of deliverance is attained. 
By serving the true Guru one’s family is saved. 

For him who is without the Guru there is nowhere 
salvation ; 

Deluded by sin he suffereth punishment. 

By the Guru’s word the body acquireth happiness and rest ; 
He who receiveth his instruction shall suffer no pain, 

Nor shall the god of death approach him. 

Nanak, the holy man shall be absorbed in the True One. 

The love of mammon leads to perdition : — • 

The perverse when dying die evil deaths ; 

They destroy themselves by their love of mammon ; 

They are undone by continually speaking of their posses- 
sions : 

Lulled to sleep as they are by superstition, they know not 
themselves. 

He who dieth by the Word is really dead. 

1 The Sikh religion. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


191 

They, to whom the Guru hath shown that praise and blame 
are the same, obtain profit in this world by uttering God’s 
name. 

They who possess not the Name shall melt in wombs. 

Vain are the lives of those who are greedy for mammon. 
All those who are without the Name shall burn in pain. 
The perfect true Guru hath given me understanding. 

The man of wavering mind shall receive great punishment : 
Having lost his human birth he shall find no place of rest, 
But return to the filthy dwelling of the womb : 

It is there the perverse man shall take up his abode. 

I am ever a sacrifice to my own true Guru. 

His instruction hath blended the light of my soul with the 
light of God. 

I have obtained the pure Word while dwelling in mine own 
home. 

Nanak, having effaced pride, is ever a hermit. 

The condition of the perverse and the virtuous 
contrasted : — 

The perverse only practise falsehood ; 

They never reach the Master’s palace. 

Attached to the world they wander in doubt, 

And entangled in selfishness suffer transmigration. 

Lo the decorations of an evil wife ! — 

She attacheth her heart to her sons and their wives, to 
wealth, mammon, falsehood, worldly love, hypocrisy, and 
vice. 

She who is pleasing to her Lord shall ever be a happy wife : 
She maketh the Guru’s instruction her decorations ; 

Her couch is pleasant and day and night she enjoyeth her 
Lord ; 

Meeting her Beloved she is ever happy. 

She is a truly good wife who loveth the True One ; 

She ever claspeth her Beloved to her breast. 

She beholdeth him near, yea, ever present. 

My Lord is everywhere contained. 

Caste and beauty shall not go with thee to the next world : 
There shalt thou fare according to thine acts. 


IQ2 THE SIKH RELIGION 

By the Word man becometh the most exalted of the 
exalted, 

0 Nanak, and absorbed in the True One. 

It was represented to the Guru that salvation might 
be obtained by joining in the Ras Mandal, or circular 
dance of Krishan. The following was the Guru’s 
reply 

Man may dance and play many musical instruments, 

But he is blind and deaf ; what availeth speaking to him ? 

In his heart are the lire of avarice and the wind of super- 
stition ! 

Where the lamp burneth not and nothing can be seen, 

The pious man’s heart is lighted up by devotion. 

He knoweth himself and meeteth the Lord. 

For the pious the love of God is the dance, 

The destruction of pride the time, 

And the service of the pious the true way ; 

But the service and dancing of the hypocrite bring sorrow. 

Asa Ashtapadi 

The following refers to the religious books of the 
Hindus and the helplessness of their avatars : — 

The ocean of the Shastars, the Veds, and the Simritis is 
Thine, O Lord ; the Ganges is contained in Thy feet. . 

There are three branches, 1 Thou art the trunk : my mind 
telleth me Thou art wonderful in everything. 

The slave Nanak worshippeth Thy feet, and repeateth 
Thine ambrosial Word. 

The thirty-three karors 2 of divinities are Thy slaves ; 
Thou givest wealth and supernatural power ; Thou art the 
support of the soul. 

Thy form is not seen : what shall I say, however much I 
reflect ? 

Thine are the three qualities, Thine the four sources of 
production in every age. 

1 The three qualities. 

2 A karor is one hundred lakhs, or ten millions. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


193 

If Thou be gracious, man will speak of Thee the Ineffable 
and obtain the supreme dignity. 

Thou art the Creator ; all creation is Thine ; what can 
mortal man do ? 

The four Yeds Thou gayest to Brahma that he might read 
and reflect on them, 

But the wretch understood not Thine order, and so 
he wandereth from hell to heaven. 1 

The kings created by Thee in different ages are sung of as 
Thine avatars. 2 

Even they did not find Thy limits ; what shall I say, 
however much I reflect ? 

Thou art true, all Thou doest is true ; if Thou grant me 
the truth, I will proclaim it. 

He whom Thou causest to understand Thy truth, shall 
be easily absorbed in the Name. 

Worship God in thine own home and go not to 
the wilderness to find Him : — 

In thine own home, 0 man, is everything ; abroad is 
nothing. 

By the Guru’s favour everything is obtained, and the 
doors of the understanding opened. 

God is obtained from the true Guru, my brethren. 

The treasure of the Name is within the heart ; the perfect 
true Guru hath shown it me. 

He who dealeth in the name of God findeth it, and ob- 
taineth the gem of reflection. 

He openeth his heart, and beholdeth with his mind’s eye 
the storehouse of salvation — 

Within the body are many chambers ; the soul dwelleth 
therein — 

He shall obtain the fruit his heart desireth, and not again 
transmigrate. 

The assayers who have obtained wisdom from the Guru, 
have found the real gem after testing. 

1 Brahma suffers transmigration like other creatures. 

2 Obviously a reference to Ram and Krishan. 

O 


SIKH. II 



194 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The boon of the Name is inestimable ; a few obtain it 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

What can be found by searching abroad ? the Real Thing 
is in one’s own home, my brethren. 

The whole world wandereth astray in error ; the perverse 
lose their honour. 

The false one who leaveth his own home and goeth 
elsewhere to worship, 

Shall be seized like a thief, and being without the Name 
shall suffer punishment. 

They who know God in their own homes are happy, my 
brethren ; 

They recognize God in their hearts bythe powerof theGuru. 

God bestoweth gifts and conferreth understanding ; whom 
shall I address except Him ? 

Nanak, meditate on the Name, so shalt thou obtain glory 
in the court of the True One. 

The perverse shall not reach God’s court, while the 
virtuous shall be supremely happy : — 

Bad wives shall not reach their husband’s chamber or 
know his delights. 

Their words are harsh, they are not humble, they long for 
another love. 

How shall man’s heart be restrained ? 

By the Guru’s favour it shall be restrained and return 
home after instruction in divine knowledge. 

The Beloved Himself hath adorned good wives, and they 
bear Him love and affection. 

Walking as it pleaseth the true Guru, they are naturally 
decorated with the Name. 

They ever enjoy their Spouse, and then are their couches 
truly adorned. 

They become fascinated with their Spouse’s love, and on 
meeting Him are happy. 

Divine knowledge is the incomparable decoration 
of the virtuous woman : — 

Through the love and affection of her Spouse she is beautiful 
and the queen of them all. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 195 

The True, Unseen, and Endless One hath infused love 
into her heart ; 

She serveth her true Guru with true love and affection. 

The good wife hath decorated herself with a necklace of 
virtues. 

She anointeth her person with the sandal of love, and 
within her is the jewel of reflection. 

They who are dyed with devotion are the best ; caste 
and lineage are obtained from the Word. 

Without the Name every one is of low caste and becometh 
a filthy worm. 

Every one goeth about saying c I, I but without the 
Word egoism shall not depart. 

Nanak, they who are dyed with the Name lose their pride, 
and are absorbed in the True One. 

One ought to persevere and be constant in devo- 
tion : — 

They who are dyed with the True One are pure, and ever 
true is their reputation. 

In this world they are famous in every house, and in the 
next they shall be distinguished through all ages. 

0 dear playful heart, adopt a lasting colour. 

When thou art dyed with the excellent Word, its colour 
shall not fade or depart. 

We are low, filthy, very proud, and sin through love of 
mammon. 

Coming in contact with the Guru the elixir, I have become 
gold, and am blended with the pure light of the Eternal. 

Without the Guru none may be dyed with God's love ; on 
meeting the Guru the true dye is applied. 

They who are dyed with the fear and love of the Guru, are 
blended with God whose praises are true. 

Without fear the love of God is not produced, nor doth 
the heart become pure. 

Without fear man’s works are false, and he findeth no 
place of rest. 

God by associating him with the saints will dye whoso He 
desireth to dye. 

O 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


196 

From the perfect Guru is obtained the society of the 
saints, and man easily loveth the True One. 

Without such society all men are like beasts. 

They know not Him who made them ; without the Name 
they are all thieves. 

Some buy merits and sell demerits through the kind office 
of the Guru. 

By serving the Guru the Name is obtained and God 
dwelleth in the heart. 

• The Giver of all is the one God, He assigneth every one 
his occupation. 

Nanak, God regenerateth 1 man by attaching him to the 
Name, and by means of the Word blendeth him with 
Himself. 


Gujari 

Man ought to love God alone and not stray into 
idolatrous paths : — 

Curse on the life in which God’s love is not obtained, 

And on that occupation in which God is forgotten and 
man becometh attached to another . 2 

So serve the true Guru, O my soul, that the love of God 
may be produced and all other love forgotten. 

If the heart remain attached to God, there shall be no 
fear of old age, and man shall attain the dignity of life 
eternal . 

Behold, from the love of God springeth peace according 
to the service performed. 

When I dismissed pride from within me, my heart became 
pure, and my light was blended with God’s. 

Without good fortune such a true Guru cannot be obtained, 
howsoever all may desire it. 

When the screen of falsehood is removed, there shall ever 
be happiness. 

Nanak, what service shall the servant perform for such 
a true Guru ? Let him lay down his life for the Guru. 

1 Sawarian also means to adorn. 

2 That is, to idols. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 197 

If man attend to the wishes of the Guru, the true Guru 
himself will show him kindness. 

God’s name must be uttered with attention and 
love : — 

Everybody uttereth God’s name, but God is not obtained 
by such utterance. 

If by the favour of the Guru God dwell in the heart, 
man shall obtain the advantage thereof. 

He whose heart feeleth the love of God, 

Shall never forget Him, but shall ever repeat His name 
with heart and soul. 

They in whose hearts there is deception and who pretend 
to be holy, 

Shall never lose a particle of their thirst, and shall be sorry 
at their final departure. 

Even though man strive at various places of pilgrimages, 
the heart’s pride never thus departeth. 

The king of death shall punish him who forsaketh not his 
pride. 

If God be gracious, man shall meet Him ; a few under 
the Guru’s instruction know this. 

Nanak, he who removeth pride from within him, shall 
meet God. 

Even he who meets the true Guru can communicate 
holiness to others : — 

When man meeteth the true Guru, he becometh a philo- 
sopher’s stone ; and when he becometh a philosopher’s 
stone, he causeth men to worship him. 

He who worshippeth him shall obtain the fruit thereof, 
and giving instruction shall teach men the truth. 

Until man become a philosopher’s stone, he is not worthy 
to be worshipped ; before satisfying his own mind he 
instruct eth others. 

Though devoid of divine knowledge and blind, he calleth 
himself a guru : whom can he put in the right way ? 

Nanak, without the Kind One nothing can be obtained ; 
but he on whom God casteth a look of favour findeth Him. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


198 

By the favour of the Guru God conferreth greatness and 
disseminateth His word. 

A Brahman told the third Guru that he had better 
live at Banaras, for divine knowledge and salvation 
were obtained only there. The following was the 
Guru’s reply : — 

Divine knowledge is neither gained nor lost at Banaras. 

Divine knowledge is obtained by meeting the Guru, then 
man knoweth God. 

Hear God’s praises, O man, and cause the Word to abide 
in thy heart. 

When the divine knowledge thus obtained remaineth 
permanent, then shall doubt depart. 

If thou give God’s feet a place in thy heart, thy sins shall 
be blotted out. 

If thou restrain thy mind 1 thou shalt dwell in the true 
place of pilgrimage. 

The minds of the perverse are stupid ; they obtain no 
understanding : 

They know not God’s name, and, when they at last 
depart, regret their ignorance. 

In this heart are Banaras, all the places of pilgrimage, and 
the Simritis ; the true Guru hath explained this. 

The sixty-eight places of pilgrimage are with him whose 
heart is filled with God. 

Nanak, on meeting the true Guru God’s will is known, 
and the one God dwelleth in the heart. 

They who please Thee, O True One, are all true, and shall 
be absorbed in Thee. 

Gujari Ashtapadi 

The Guru again repudiates the idea that deliver- 
ance may be obtained by assisting in the dance of 
Krishan and the milkmaids : — 

I dance, but it is my heart I cause to dance : 

1 Panch bhu atmtin. The three qualities are in each of the five 
elements. The five parts of saiogun make the antahkaran or mind 
here denoted ; the five parts of rajogun make the five organs of per- 
ception ; and the five parts of taviogun make the five organs of action. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


199 


A 
A 

f 

I 

j 

I By the favour of the Guru I have effaced myself. 

He who keepeth his mind firmly fixed on God, shall 
| obtain deliverance and the object of his desires. 

1 Dance, O man, before thy Guru ; 

| He who danceth as it pleaseth the Guru shall obtain 

I happiness, and at the last moment the fear of Death shall 

| forsake him. 

He whom God causeth to dance and whom He applieth 
to His love is a saint. 

He himself singeth, he himself instructeth, and putteth 
ignorant man on the right way. 

He who banisheth worldly love shall dance day and night 
in God’s house and never sleep. 

’ Every one who danceth, leapeth, and singeth of other 

gods, is lulled to sleep in the house of mammon ; such are 
the perverse who have no devotion. 

I Demigods and men who abandon the world dance in 

v religious works ; Munis and men dance in the contem- 

plation of divine knowledge. 

The Sidhs, Strivers, and holy men who have acquired 
J wisdom to meditate on God, dance in God’s love. 

| The regions, worlds, beings endowed with the three 

j qualities, and they who love Thee, O God, dance. 

Men and the lower animals all dance, the four sources of 
j life dance. 

They who please Thee dance, as do the pious who love the 
Word. 

They whom Thou causest to obey Thine order, are saints 
and real possessors of divine knowledge. 

To love the True One is the real service ; men cannot be 
, saints without serving Him. 

A few who ponder on the Word while alive are dead, and 
obtain the True One. 

Several dance for the sake of mammon ; only a few 
j meditate on the Real Thing. 

He to whom Thou art gracious shall obtain Thee by the 
t favour of the Guru. 

jj If I forget the True One even for a moment, that 

i moment passeth in vain. 


200 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Remember Him at every breath and He will pardon thee 
of His own grace. 

It is they who please Thee, 0 God, and who meditate on 
the Word, who really dance. 

Saith Nanak, they to whom Thou art merciful shall easily 
obtain bliss. 

Gujari ki War I 

The condition of the perverse : — 

The hearts of the perverse are tortured by doubts ; they 
kill themselves with worldly affairs. 

They are lulled to sleep by love of the world and never 
awake : they remain attached to mammon. 

They remember not the Name ; they think not of the 
Word ; such is the conduct of the perverse. 

They obtain not God’s name ; they waste their lives in 
vain ; Nanak, Death shall punish and dishonour them. 

Before creation God was alone : — 

When God Himself made the world, there was none 
else. 

He took counsel and advice with Himself ; what He did 
came to pass. 

Then there was not heaven, or hell, or three worlds. 

Then was only the Formless One Himself ; creation was 
not yet. 

God acteth as He pleaseth ; there is none but Him. 

God alone and not incarnations ought to be 
adored : — 

My Lord is eternal ; He is seen by him who abideth by 
His word. 

He is ever imperishable, and suffereth not transmigration. 

Ever and ever serve Him who is contained in everything. 

Why serve another who is born and dieth ? 

The lives of those who know not their Lord but fix their 
thoughts on others, are unprofitable. 

Nanak, it cannot be known how much punishment the 
Creator will inflict on them. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


201 


Man ought to bow to the will of God : — 

Ponder on the name of the True One ; the True One 
pervadeth all things. 

Nanak, by understanding God’s order man becometh 
acceptable, and obtaineth his just reward. 

Man goeth about babbling, but he knoweth not God’s 
order at all ; he is blind and lowest of the low . 1 

The homage offered to God must be suitable to 
His greatness : — 

That is real devotion and penance which pleaseth the 
True Guru. 

By pleasing the True Guru greatness is obtained. 

Nanak, by abandoning pride man devoteth himself to 
the Guru. 

Not all may receive the Guru’s instruction : — 

Nanak, only a few whom God Himself hath honoured, 

Receive the Guru’s instruction. 

Pride prevents entrance into bliss : — 

Nanak, the gate of salvation is very narrow ; only the 
lowly can pass through. 

How can he whose mind is inflated with pride enter 
therein ? 

When one meeteth the true Guru, pride departeth and 
everything is illumined. 

The soul is emancipated for ever, and becometh easily 
absorbed in God. 

Happiness consists not in mammon but in 
devotion : — 

Curses on such lives as theirs who heed not the true Guru, 

And in whose hearts God’s name dwelleth not ; what 
have they obtained by their advent into the world ? 

Mammon is counterfeit capital ; its gilding falleth off in 
a moment. 


1 Literally — most unripe. 


202 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


When it slippeth from man’s hands, his face is blackened, 
and he withereth away. 

Happiness dwelleth in the hearts of those who love the 
true Guru, 

Who ponder on God’s name with love and remain ab- 
sorbed in it. 

Nanak, the true Guru hath entrusted to them the wealth 
which is contained in the heart, 

And they obtain a high colour like the tint 1 applied 
to gold. 

Mammon is a snake, the holy are snake-charmers : — 

Mammon is a serpent which twineth herself round the 
world ; 

She devoureth him at last who waiteth upon her. 

A few holy men are snake-charmers who trample on her 
with their feet. 

Nanak, they are saved who continue to fix their attention 
on the True One. 

Man is called to bliss by obeying God’s order : — 

There is one Lord of all ; He remaineth ever present. 

Nanak, man obeyeth not God’s order ; so, though God 
dwelleth in his heart, man goeth far from Him. 

Those on whom God looks with favour He causes 
to obey His order : — 

The wife who obeyeth His orders and loveth Him ob- 
taineth happiness. 

The evil wife burneth the whole night ; her spouse showeth 
her not affection. 

Nanak, the good wife, whose spouse is God, abideth in 
happiness. 

The soul while leaving the body bears its own 
responsibility : — 

What love subsisteth between the body and the soul since 
the latter forsaketh the former when fallen ? 

1 Wanni, colouring applied to gold, no matter how pure, to 
enhance its lustre. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


203 

Why, 0 man , pamperest thou with words of falsehood 
this body which departeth not with thee ? 

The body is dust and blind ; go ask the soul. 

The soul — ‘ I am infatuated with mammon, so I suffer 
transmigration again and again ; 

‘ I did not recognize my Lord’s order by which I should 
have been absorbed in the True One.’ 

The abiding wealth : — 

The Name alone is abiding wealth ; all other wealth is 
unstable. 

That wealth thieves cannot spy out, or pickpockets take 
away. 

That divine wealth is contained in the soul and shall 
depart with it. 

It is obtained from the perfect Guru, but the perverse 
shall not obtain it. 

Blest is the trader, 0 Nanak, who entering the world hath 
earned the wealth of the Name. 

The evil of pride and worldly love : — 

Curses on the lives of those who forsake divine happiness, 
and obtain misery by the sin of pride. 

The perverse devoid of divine knowledge are filled with 
worldly love ; they have no understanding. 

They shall not find happiness in this world or the next ; 
after their final departure they shall regret. 

A few by the Guru’s favour meditate on the Name, and 
from them pride departeth. 

Nanak, he for whom it is so predestined falleth at the 
Guru’s feet. 

The condition of the perverse : — 

The lotus of the heart of the perverse man is reversed ; 
he possesseth neither devotion nor God’s name. 

He acteth under the influence of mammon, and vain are 
his efforts. 

His heart softeneth not to any one, and the language he 
uttereth is harsh. 



204 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


When he meeteth the religious he associateth not with 
them ; his heart relisheth falsehood. 

Nanak, the Creator hath so contrived that the perverse 
are wrecked by uttering falsehood, and the pious saved 
by repeating the Name. 

The mental peace of the holy : — 

Every one honoureth him who serveth his own true Guru. 

The greatest of all efforts is to obtain God’s name : 

A refreshing calm then dwelleth within, and the heart is 
ever happy repeating it. 

Nanak, they who magnify God’s name eat ambrosia, and 
are clothed therewith. 

How God may be found : — 

0 man, hearken to the Guru’s instruction, and thou shalt 
obtain God the treasury of excellences. 

God, the giver of comfort, will abide in thy heart, and thy 
pride and arrogance shall depart. 

Nanak, if thou fix thine attention night and day on the 
Kind One, thou shalt obtain Him. 

The following was addressed to a proud Brahman : — 

He who knoweth God and fixeth his attention on Him 
night and day is a Brahman. 1 

The disease of pride shall leave him who consulteth the 
true Guru and practiseth truth and self-restraint. 

His light who singeth God’s praises and amasseth merits, 
shall be blended with the light of God. 

In this age there are few who know God, who erase their 
pride and become absorbed in Him. 

Nanak, happiness is ever obtained by meeting him who 
night and day pondereth on God. 

The fate of the hypocrite : — 

There is deception in the heart of the perverse and irre- 
ligious man ; his tongue uttereth falsehood. 

1 A man is not a Brahman merely by paternity. 


■j HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 205 

Though God graciously beholdeth and listeneth, yet is 
j He not pleased by deception. 

j He who, lost in worldly love, preacheth to men with the 

,\ object of sinful gain, 

Shall ever suffer misery in attainment, shall be born and 
f die, and come and go again and again. 

His superstition shall by no means be dispelled ; he shall 
, rot in filth. 

■ My Lord causeth him on whom He bestoweth favour to 

i hear the Guru’s instruction. 

He meditateth on God’s name, he singetli God’s name, 
and at last God’s name releaseth him. 

The happiness of the pious : — 

The pious meditate on God, a tranquillizing sound is 
produced within them, and they ponder on the true Name, 
j The pious are night and day tinctured with God’s love, 

| and the name of God is pleasing to their souls. 

The pious see God, the pious speak of God, the pious 
, love God. 

| Nanak, divine knowledge is obtained from the Guru’s 

teaching, and the thick gloom of ignorance is dispelled. 

The holy man, whose works are perfect from the beginning, 
meditateth on God’s name. 

The heedless shall ever suffer transmigration : — 
Why hath he come into the world who serveth not the 
f true Guru, 

l Who loveth not God’s word, and calmly meditateth not 

; on His name ? 

He shall be born again and again, and be ever polluted 
with filth. 

Through false avarice he shall not enjoy either this world 
or the next. 

Nanak, the pious whom the Creator hath united with 
Himself shall be saved. 

The condition and power of the saints : — 

In this age the saints have earned the treasure of the 
Name, and obtained God’s highest dignity. 


206 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


By service to the true Guru they have put the name of 
God into their hearts, and night and day ponder thereon. 

Through the Guru’s instruction they are hermits even in 
their own homes, and they destroy their pride and worldly 
love. 

They are saved themselves and they save the whole world ; 
happy the mothers who bore them. 

He on whose forehead God wrote such destiny in the 
beginning, hath obtained such a true Guru. 

Nanak is a sacrifice to his Guru who put him on the right 
road when he strayed in doubt. 

A satire on worldly-minded sectaries : — 

Man beholding mammon hath gone astray, as the moth 
beholding the lamp is consumed. 

Erring pandits look towards mammon to see what one 
may offer them. 

They read for hire and are ever immersed, in sin ; God 
hath deprived them of His name. 

Jogis, Jangams, Sanyasis have gone astray ; they have 
allowed their arrogance and pride to greatly increase. 

They accept not alms of clothes and food offered 
them , 1 but want more ; through obstinacy they ruin their 
lives. 

In the midst of so many, only he who hath pondered on 
the Name under the Guru’s instruction hath obtained 
perfection. 

Nanak, to whom shall one complain since all act as God 
causeth them to act ? 

The evil of worldly love ; its antidote : — 

Pride and selfishness are deceitful and have ruined the 
perverse. 

They who apply their hearts to the love of the world feel 
its effects and remain entangled in it. 

When the light of the Guru’s words shineth, worldly love 
departeth from the heart. 

1 Unsolicited alms which they may accept. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


207 

Then the body and soul become bright, and the Name 
abideth in the heart. 

Nanak, God’s name which is obtained by the Guru’s 
instruction is the antidote to worldly love. 

On transmigration : — 

Through how many ages hath this soul wandered ! it 
abideth not permanently but cometh and goeth. 

When God pleaseth, He causeth it to wander ; He pro- 
duceth this play of illusion. 

If God be gracious, the Guru shall be found, the soul 
shall be fixed, and become absorbed in its Creator. 

Nanak, when man’s mind believeth through the mind 
of the Guru , he neither dieth nor is born again. 

The following sloks describe the pleasure obtained 
by praising God under the name of Wah Wah ! — 

The True One causeth Himself to be applauded through 
the Guru’s instruction. 

Wah ! Wah ! 1 is His praise and eulogy ; some pious 
men know this. 

Wah ! Wah ! are true words by which man meeteth the 
True One. 

Nanak, by uttering Wah ! Wah ! God is obtained ; 

His praise is obtained by good acts. 

The tongue is adorned by uttering the words Wah ! Wah ! 

By these perfect words God is found. 

Greatly blest are they from whose mouths Wah ! Wah ! 
proceedeth. 

They who utter Wah ! Wah ! shall be illustrious, and the 
people shall come and worship them. 

Wah ! Wah ! is obtained by good acts, Nanak ; he who 
uttereth it shall obtain honour at the gate of the True One. 

By uttering Wah ! Wah ! the night passeth pleasantly ; 

By uttering Wah ! Wah ! there is ever happiness, my 
mother ; 

1 Wah! Literally — bravo! The word is also a part of God's 
name Wahguru. 



208 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


f 

! 

By uttering Wah ! Wall ! man loveth God. • 

By good acts man uttereth Wah ! Wah ! and causeth 
others to utter it. j 

By uttering Wah ! Wah ! man obtaineth honour. ,| 

Nanak, Wah ! Wah ! is His praise whose ordinance is true. J 

Wah ! Wah ! are true words which the pious have ob- j 

tained by search : f 

They utter the words Wah ! Wah ! and clasp them to 
their hearts. | 

By uttering Wah ! Wah ! the pious have easily found 
God in their search. i 

Greatly fortunate, Nanak, are they who remember God 
in their hearts. ) 

Address Wah ! Wah ! to Him who is true, deep, and 
profound ; J 

Address Wah ! Wah ! to Him who is the giver of virtue, f 

of intellect, and of patience ; ! 

Address Wah ! Wah ! to Him who is contained in every j 

thing ; I 

Address Wah ! Wah ! to Him who giveth sustenance j 

to all. 

Nanak, by the words Wah ! Wah ! praise the one God 

whom the true Guru hath pointed out. J 

i 

Whenever the holy repeat Wah ! Wah ! the wicked ) 

poison themselves. I 

The words Wah ! Wah ! are not pleasing to them ; they § 

pass their lives in extreme misery. 'j 

The pious repeat Wah ! Wah ! with fixed attention and i 

quaff nectar. i 

Nanak, they who repeat Wah ! Wah ! are holy, and have 
obtained knowledge of the three worlds. 

They to whom God Himself giveth understanding ever 
repeat Wah ! Wah ! ■ 

By repeating Wah ! Wah ! the heart becometh pure and 
pride departeth therefrom. 

The Guru’s disciple who .ever repeateth Wah ! Wah ! 
obtaineth his heart’s desires. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


209 

They who repeat Wah ! Wah ! are illustrious ; O God, 
unite me with them. 

May I remember Wah ! Wah ! in my heart and also 
utter Wah ! Wah ! with my lips ! 

Nanak, I bestow my body and soul on those who utter 
Wah! Wah! 

Wah ! Wah ! is that true Lord whose name is nectar. 

They who worship Him have obtained the reward thereof 
— I am a sacrifice unto them. 

Wah ! Wah ! is the Treasury of excellences ; the man 
to whom He giveth enjoyeth His bounty. 

Wah ! Wah ! filleth sea and land, and is found through 
the Guru’s instruction. 

O all ye disciples of the Guru, ever repeat Wah ! Wah ! ; 
Wah ! Wah ! is pleasing to the perfect Guru. 

Nanak, the myrmidons of Death approach not him who 
heartily repeateth Wah ! Wah ! 

Wah ! Wah ! are the words of the Formless One ; there 
is none so great as He. 

Wah ! Wah ! to Him who is inaccessible and unfathom- 
able ; Wah ! Wah ! to Him who is true. 

Wah ! Wah ! to Him who is independent ; whatever He 
doeth cometh to pass. 

Wah ! Wah ! to the nectareous Name which a few pious 
men obtain. 

Wah ! Wah ! is obtained from good acts by him to whom 
God showeth mercy. 

Nanak, Wah ! Wah ! is obtained by the holy man who 
night and day uttereth God’s name. 

They who trust in God are not disappointed : — 

Without serving the true Guru peace is not obtained, 
and worldly love departeth not. 

However much we desire it, the True Guru is only found 
by good acts. 

They in whose hearts there is the sin of avarice are 
f ruined by worldly love ; 

I 


SIKH. II 


P 


210 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Their transmigration ceaseth not ; they suffer misery t 

from their pride. ■ 

Of those who fix their hearts on the true Guru none is I 
disappointed. j 

Death summoneth not them for punishment, neither do i 

they suffer misery. j 

Nanak, the pious who are filled with the true Word shall } 
be saved. f 

The heart requires a driver : — { 

The mind is an elephant, the Guru the elephant-driver, I 
divine knowledge the goad ; whithersoever the Guru 
driveth, thither goeth the mind. 

Nanak, the elephant without a goad goeth astray again \ 

and again into the desert. ; 

In the following slok devotion is compared to I 

rain from heaven, which the careful man prepares J 

to receive. In the fervour of his heart he desires p 
it not in drops but in a shower all at once : — 

The husbandman looking at the sky 1 raiseth the bound- 
aries of his fields to catch the rain. 

In the same way holy guests enter his house in whose j; 

heart there is devotion, and are there welcomed. ^ 

Ye clouds, if ye rain at all, rain in abundance ; why rain § 

when the season is past ? 2 I 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice unto those who have received the f 
Guru’s instruction in their hearts. **, 

Only the friendship of the upright and holy ought f 
to be valued : — 

That is sweet which is pleasing ; he is a friend who is 
upright. 

Nanak, he whom God enlighteneth is a holy man. 

1 Literally — beholding the lofty house, that is, the clouds in the sky. 

2 That is, ye holy men, impart your instruction now that we may 
profit by it. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 211 

However much man obtains, he hankers for 
more : — 

The world dieth in hopes, but its hopes are not fulfilled : 1 

Nanak, he who devoteth his heart to the True One hath 
his hopes fulfilled. 

When divine knowledge is obtained there are no 
more hopes and desires : — 

Hopes and desires shall die ; He who gave them will 
take them away. 

Nanak, there is nothing permanent but the name of God. 

Bihagre ki War 

The success of those who turn their hearts to 
God : — 

Nanak, the man of divine knowledge hath conquered the 
world which itself hath conquered everybody. 

Through the Name man’s business is successful ; what 
occurreth taketh place by God’s will. 

The pious man’s mind is fixed, and nobody can move it. 

God granteth his saints’ prayers, and their deeds become 
brilliant. 

The perverse are led astray from the First Cause ; in 
their hearts are avarice, covetousness, and pride. 

Their nights and days pass in wranglings ; they reflect 
not on God’s word. 

God hath taken from them the good understanding they 
possessed ; all their words are sinful. 

However much is given them, they are not satisfied ; in 
their hearts are avarice and the great darkness of spiritual 
ignorance. 

Nanak, it is wise to break with the perverse to whom 
worldly love is dear. 

The fool in his folly : — 

The fool knoweth not himself ; he annoyeth others by 
his language. 

1 Literally — hope neither dieth nor departetb. 

P 2 


212 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


His original disposition hath not left him ; blind that 
he is, and separated from God, he shall suffer punishment. 

Fear of the true Guru hath not induced him to alter his 
disposition or chasten his heart so as to be united with God. 

His doubts cease not night or day ; without the Word 
he is in misery. 

Lust, anger, and avarice are potent within his heart ; 
he ever passeth his life in worldly affairs, and never remem - 
bereth God . 

His feet, his hands, his eyes, and his ears fail him ; his 
days are ended ; his death is near. 

The true Name, by which the nine treasures are obtained, 
hath never been dear to him. 

He who in life is dead, and who from death again returneth 
to life, obtaineth deliverance. 

What shall mortal obtain without God’s grace if it be not 
his from the beginning ? 

0 fool, remember the Guru’s word by which thou shalt 
find the way of salvation. 

Nanak, thou shalt find the true Guru when thou effacest 
thyself. 

Man's tongue should be properly employed : — 

May that tongue be burnt which hath not received the 
relish of God’s name ! 

Nanak, the tongue of him in whose heart God dwelleth, 
enjoyeth the taste of the Word. 

May his tongue be burnt who hath forgotten God’s name ! 

Nanak, the tongues of the pious repeat God’s name and 
love it. 

Who is a real darwesh : — 

Few darweshes understand their duties. 

Curses on the life, curses on the garb of him who wan- 
dereth begging from house to house ! 

Nanak will wash his feet and be a sacrifice unto him 

Who abandoneth hopes and anxieties, and receiveth the 
Name as his alms from the Guru’s lips. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


213 

The body compared to a fruit-bearing tree on 
which the soul alights : — 

Nanak, there is one tree ; 1 it beareth two fruits ; 2 a 
bird 3 alight eth thereon. 

It is not seen coming or going ; it hath no wings. 

Though enjoying pleasures of every sort, it only obtaineth 
deliverance through the Word. 

The deeds of him who is dyed with the juice of the fruit 
of God’s name, are, 0 Nanak, true and resplendent. 

Formal ceremonies and worldly love discour- 
aged : — 

The religious ceremonies of hypocrites are all entangle- 
ments ; bad and good are bound up with them. 

Man’s exertions for children and wife, made through 
selfishness and worldly love, are entanglements. 

Wherever I look, there I see the rope of worldly attach- 
ment. 

Nanak, without the true Name it is all groping in the 
dark. 

There lived at Goindwal a Musalman priest who 
conceived a great hatred of the third Guru for his 
spiritual success. The following was addressed to 
him : — 

0 Shaikh, abandon the violence of thy heart, fear God, 
and dismiss thy madness. 

Through fear of the Guru how many have been saved ! 
through fear the Fearless One is obtained. 

Let the Word penetrate thy hard heart, so shall peace 
come to dwell therein. 

Whatever deed is done in peace is acceptable to the Lord. 

Nanak, no one hath obtained Him by lust and wrath ; 
go ask those who possess divine knowledge. 

The true Guru is a boat for man’s salvation : — 

The true Guru who is dyed with the Name is a boat 
for salvation in this age. 

1 The body. 2 Pain and pleasure. 


3 The soul. 


214 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The pious man in whose heart the True One dwelleth 
shall be saved. 

He remembereth the Name, he treasureth the Name, 
and obtaineth honour from the Name. 

Nanak hath found the true Guru and obtained the Name 
through his favour. 

The result of serving the Guru : — 

They who serve and wait upon the one true Guru and 
love God’s name, 

0 Nanak, reform their own lives and save their families. 

The following was composed by the Guru on hear- 
ing Hindus chanting their vespers : — 

The vesper which recalleth God to my heart is acceptable : 

It produceth attachment to God and destroyeth worldly 
love. 

If man by the Guru’s favour make the contemplation 
of God his vespers, worldly love shall cease and his mind 
become stable. 

Nanak, in the vespers which the obstinate repeat their 
souls find no repose ; they shall be ruined by transmigration. 

The life of the hermit is of no avail : — 

1 wandered through the whole world calling out for my 
Beloved, yet my thirst departed not ; 

But on meeting the true Guru, O Nanak, my thirst 
departed, and I found my Beloved in my own home on 
my return. 

The Guru’s prescription for salvation : — 

The true Guru gave me this prescription — 

Remember God’s name through the Guru. 

God is ever present. Having removed the film of doubt 
from thine eyes allow the light to enter. 

The name of God is nectar ; apply it as eye-salve. 

Treasure up in thy heart the order of the Guru ; make 
the love of the True One thine abstinence ; 

So shall God, O Nanak, preserve thee in happiness in 
this world, and thou shalt afterwards disport with Him. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 215 

The Guru's order to abstain altogether from 
wine : — 

One man bringeth the full goblet , another cometh and 
filleth the cup . 

The intellect of him who drinketh depart eth, and in- 
toxication entereth his brain. 

He distinguisheth not between mine and thine, and is 
buffeted by his master. 

If possible, drink not at all the false wine, 

By which man forgetteth God and receiveth punishment 
at His court. 

Nanak, he who by God’s look of favour meeteth the true 
Guru, obtaineth the true wine from him. 

Thus shall man ever abide in the joy of the Lord, and 
obtain a position in His court. 

He who practises humility fears not death ; — 

Who knoweth how we shall die, or what death is ? 

If we forget not the Lord, death shall be easy. 

The world feareth death ; every one desireth to live. 

He who by the Guru’s favour while alive is dead, under- 
standeth God’s order. 

Nanak, he who dieth such a death shall live for ever. 

The surpassing wealth of the Name : — 

O my soul, the Name is wealth from which happiness 
ever and ever springeth. 

Loss never accrueth therefrom, but ever gain. 

It lesseneth not by eating or spending ; God bestoweth 
it ever and ever. 

He who possesseth it hath no anxiety whatever, and never 
sustaineth loss. 

Nanak, it is obtained through the Guru’s instruction by 
him on whom he looketh with favour. 

Man ought to be ever wakeful in God's service : — 

Men have died and continue to die through pride. 

Man while he hath breath in his body remembereth not 



216 THE SIKH RELIGION 

God ; what shall he do when he hath gone to the next 
world ? 

He who hath divine knowledge is on the alert ; he who 
is without it acteth blindly. 

Nanak, according to man’s acts in this life shall be his 
reward in the next. 

Man is happy when he can rest his hopes of salvation on 
his Guru. 

In the beginning it was God’s will that He could not be 
remembered without a true Guru. 

When man meeteth the true Guru, God is contained in 
his heart, and he remaineth ever attached to Him. 

He remembereth God at every breath, and no breath 
passeth in vain. 

His fear of transmigration departeth and he obtaineth 
the dignity of eternal life. 

Nanak, this dignity is obtained by him to whom God 
showeth mercy. 

The Jogi who hearkens to the Guru : — 

The Jogi who hath obtained the Name by the Guru’s 
instruction hath found the way. 

All excellences dwell in such a Jogi’s little city ; 1 the 
garb maketh not the Jogi. 

Nanak, there are few Jogis in whose hearts God’s light 
shineth. 


Wadhans Alahanian 

Man should ever be prepared for death and for 
the account which he must render of his acts : — 

This body is worn out ; old age hath overtaken it. 

They whom the Guru preserveth are saved ; the others 
die and are born again ; 

The others die, are born again, and transmigrate ; after 
their final departure they shall regret ; without the Name 
there is no happiness. 


1 His body, the microcosm. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 217 

Man shall obtain hereafter the fruits of his own acts in 
this life ; the perverse shall lose their honour. 

In the abode of Death are terrible darkness and great 
storms ; there is found no sister or brother. 

This body is worn out ; old age hath overtaken it. 

If the true Guru take me to himself my body shall become 
gold. 


Wadhans ki War 

A Jogi went one day to visit the third Guru, and 
coveting a rosary he had, succeeded in stealing it. 
When charged with the theft he denied his guilt. 
The attendants of the Guru searched and found the 
rosary on him, upon which the Guru said : — 

I thought he was a great swan , 1 so I held converse with 
him : 

Had I known that he was only a wretched crane, I should 
never have touched him. 

The fate of the idolater : — 

Curses on the lives, curses on the habitations of those who 
worship strange gods ! 

They abandon ambrosia and turn to poison ; they earn 
poison ; poison is their stock-in-trade, 

Poison their food, poison their dress, morsels of poison 
they eat. 

Here they are totally miserable, and when they die 
their abode shall be in hell. 

The mouths of the perverse who know not the Word are 
impure ; they die of lust and wrath. 

They have abandoned the fear of the true Gum ; their 
business never succeedeth on account of their obstinacy. 

In the city of Death they shall be bound and beaten ; 
no one will hear their supplications. 

Nanak, they act according to their primal destiny, while 
the pious abide in the Name. 

1 A great swan in the religious language of the Sikhs means a 
great saint. 



218 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Death is in the power of the holy man : — 

Under the Guru’s instruction worship Him who hath 
created Death, and no sorrow shall come to thee. 

Nanak, Death worshippeth the pious man in whose heart 
the True One dwelleth. 

The saints are superior to monarchs : — 

My Beloved is pleased with the saints and hath attached 
them to Himself. 

He hath granted them an empire and made true crowns 
for their heads. 

They are ever happy and pure, and perform the work 
of the true Guru. 

They are not kings who, dying in the fight, have again 
to enter the womb . 1 

Nanak, without the Name even kings are like noseless 
persons who roam about and receive no honour. 

The perverse have not only mental but physical 
deformity : — 

The perverse man who hath not obtained the Name, is 
a coward ugly and noseless. 

Day and night he is engaged in worldly affairs, and 
enjoyeth no happiness even in his dreams. 

Nanak, if man become pious, he shall be saved ; other- 
wise he shall be bound and suffer pain. 

The necessity of faith and love of God : — 

Even though man make efforts in hundreds of trans- 
migrations, happiness will never come to him 

Who hath no faith in the true Guru and loveth not his 
word. 

Nanak, love the True One, and thou shalt obtain peace 
through the Guru. 

God is the only male ; human beings are females 
who ought to love Him : — 

In this world there is one Male ; all the rest are females, 

1 They who, struggling with the world, have not obtained salvation, 
are born again and cannot be called spiritual rulers. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 219 

He enjoyeth them all and yet remaineth separate from 
them : He is invisible and cannot be seen. 

The true Guru showeth Him, and man seeth Him through 
his word. 

She who serveth the Male and destroyeth pride by the 
Word, becometh a male herself. 

The Male hath no partner, no molester, and no enemy. 

Immovable for ever is His empire ; it nor cometh nor 
goeth. 

Night and day worshippers worship and sing the true 
God’s praises. 

Nanak, on seeing the greatness of the true God, is happy. 

The perverse man is foolish and contemptible : — 

The -perverse man enjoyeth not the relish of the Word, 
and loveth not God’s name. 

His tongue uttereth harsh language ; and he- is ever 
despised. 

0 Nanak, he acteth according to destiny which none can 
erase. 


Sorath ki War 

The fate of those who think not of God : — 

According to what God Himself wrote in the beginning 
must man act. 

Worldly love hath cast its deception over him, and lie 
hath forgotten the Lord of excellences. 

Deem not that the world is alive ; it is dead through the 
love of mammon. 

They who have not meditated on the Name through the 
Guru’s instruction, are not allowed to sit near God. 

They are miserable in the highest degree, and their 
children and wives shall not go with them. 

Their faces are blackened among men, and their hearts 
heave heavy sighs. 

No one trustetli the perverse ; trust in them is at an end. 

Nanak, the pious in whose heart the Name dwelleth are 
very happy. 



i 

220 THE SIKH RELIGION * 

% 

God is in the heart, but the perverse know it 
not : — * 

The heart is full of nectar, but the perverse enjoy not its ■ 

savour. t\ 

As the deer knoweth not its own musk, and wandereth, 
led astray by ignorance, 

So the perverse despise nectar, amass poison, and forget 
the Creator. J 

A few pious men obtain insight and behold God within 
them. 

The extent of the Guru's self-mortification : — 

Though my flesh is so mortified that if my body were 
pressed in an oil-press, it would not give a drop of blood, 

Yet would I still further sacrifice and quarter myself for 
my love for the True One. 

In this way I should not fail to meet Him either night or 
day, 0 Nanak. 

When the love of God is real, it is not transient : — 

My Friend is merry; by His merriment He attracteth 
my soul. 

When clothes are dyed with madder and a base, 

Their colour, Nanak, will not depart, and no other 
colour may be given them. 

Man's mind is difficult to restrain : — 

The mind of the perverse man is incorrigible and attacheth 
itself to mammon. 

He obtaineth no happiness even in his dreams ; he 
passeth his life in extreme misery. 

The pandits grow weary of reading from door to door ; 
the Sidhs, of sitting in attitudes of contemplation. 

Man’s mind is not under restraint ; men grow weary 
performing religious ceremonies, 

Changing their sectarial garbs, and bathing at the sixty- 
eight places of pilgrimage, 1 

While they exercise no control over their minds, but are 
led astray by pride and superstition. I 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


221 


By the favour of the Guru God’s love is obtained ; and 
by great good fortune God cometh and dwelleth in the 
heart. 

When there is fear of God the mind is restrained, and 
pride is destroyed by His word. 

The fate of those who turn away from their 
Guru : — 

They who turn their faces from the true Guru, shall find 
no house or home. 

They shall wander from door to door like divorced women 
of bad character and evil reputation. 

Nanak, they who are pardoned through the Guru’s 
instruction shall be blended with God. 

The food of life eternal : — 

Three things — truths patience , and reflection are put into 
a dish ; and, when kneaded with the water of God’s name, 
become perfect ambrosial food. 

By partaking of them man is satisfied, and attaineth the 
gate of salvation. 

This food is rare, O saints, but it can be obtained by the 
Guru’s instruction. 

Why should the spell 1 of God's name be counteracted ? 
rather clasp it to your heart. 

The precious character of the Guru's instruction : — 

There is one Creator, one Guru, and one Word to medi- 
tate on. 

True is the shop , 1 2 true its dealings ; 3 its garners are 
filled with jewels . 4 

They are obtained by the Guru’s favour, if the Bestower 
bestow them. 

1 Mundawani is a spell employed at marriages by the females of 
the bride's party to induce the bridegroom's friends to believe that 
they cannot partake of the bridal feast until a counterspell is employed. 
The word mundawani literally means a thing sealed, as viands pre- 
paratory to eating, in order to preserve their purity. Here the word 
is used for God's name, the fourth ingredient of the ambrosial food. 

2 The Guru. 3 In God's name. 4 Virtues. 



222 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The following was addressed to the Muhammadan 
priest of Goindwal who followed devious ways : — 

0 Shaikh, restrain thy mind which now wandereth 
towards the four cardinal points, the sport of the four 
winds. 

Abandon thy crooked ways, accept the instruction of . 
the Guru ; 

Prostrate thyself before the true Guru ; he knoweth 
everything that is to be known. 

Banish thy hopes and desires ; become as a guest in the 
world . 

If thou walk as the true Guru desireth, thou shalt obtain 
honour in God’s court. 

Nanak, accursed the garb, accursed the food of those who 
remember not God. 

The inspired teacher is for the whole world : — 

Great men utter instruction for a special occasion, but 
the whole world becometh a partner in it. 

Nanak, how can he in whose heart there is no faith, 
expound divine knowledge ? 

The self-sacrifice of the disciple must be com- 
plete : — 

As the elephant offereth his head to the goad, as the 
anvil offereth itself to the hammer , 

So should the disciple put his soul and body before his 
Guru , and stand and wait on him. 

In this way the pious man, while humbling himself, 
assumeth the sovereignty of the whole universe. 1 

Nanak, the pious understand this if God look on them 
with favour. 

Different ways of disposing of the dead : — 

Some are cremated, some buried, and others eaten by 
dogs; 

Some are thrown into the river and others again into pits : 

Nanak, it is not known where they shall ultimately go. 

1 Spiritual sovereignty is of course meant. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


223 


The fate of slanderers : — 

The slanderers hate the saints, but love the wicked to 
fascination. 

They have no rest in this world or the next ; they die 
and are bom again and again. 

Their thirst is never slaked ; they are ruined by worldly 
love. 

Their faces are blackened in the court of the true One. 

Nanak, without the Name they neither abide in this 
world nor cross over to the next. 

When reading and study are advantageous : — 

Reading and study are worldly acts if the sin of avarice 
be in the heart. 

All who read through pride grow weary, and are ruined 
by worldly love. 

He is learned, he is a wise pandit who pondereth on the 
Guru’s word : 

He searcheth in his heart, findeth the Real Thing there, 
and reacheth the gate of deliverance : 

He tranquilly meditateth on God, and findeth Him who 
is the treasury of excellences. 

Nanak, blessed is that trader who by the Guru’s instruc- 
tion obtaineth the Name as his support. 

The Guru can remove the sins of previous births: — 

The impurity of many births hath attached to man’s 
mind, and it hath become quite black. 

An oilman’s towel will not become white by washing, 
even though it be washed hundreds of times. 

His nature altereth who by the Guru’s favour while alive 
is dead. 

Nanak, no impurity attacheth to him, and he shall not 
again enter a womb. 

The indifference of the world to spiritual matters: — 

0 man, oppressed by a nightmare thy life hath passed 
away in sleep. 



224 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Thou hast not awakened on hearing the word of the true 
Guru, nor hath enthusiasm arisen in thy heart. 

May that body which hath no virtues and performeth not 
the Guru’s service be burnt ! 

I have seen the world burning with pride and worldly love. 

Nanak, they who meditate in their hearts on the true 
Word and seek the Guru’s protection shall be saved. 

External decorations lead astray : — 

Without the Word woman become th not pure even though 
she don many ornaments ; 

She careth not for her husband, but loveth another. 

Nanak, such a woman is impure, ill-conducted, and evil 
among her sex. 

God is the Pardoner and Cherisher : — 

God appointeth men to do His service ; He it is who 
rewardeth them. 

He is the Father and Mother of all, and taketh care of 
them. 

Nanak, they who ponder on the Name obtain a residence 
in God’s own palace and are honoured in every age. 

Suhi Ashtapadi 

A Sikh called Jacha inquired of the Guru the best 
means of obtaining God : — 

Praise not the world which shall perish ; 

Praise not men who shall die and become dust. 

Hail ! my Lord, hail ! 

The pious ever praise Him who is true and independent. 

The perverse are burning with love for the world : 

They embrace not the present opportunity ; they shall 
be bound and beaten in the city of Death. 

The lives of the pious are profitable ; they cling to the 
true Word. 

God hath appeared unto them, and they abide in peace 
and happiness. 

The thirst and hunger of those who forget the Guru’s 
instruction and are attached to worldly love, 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 225 

Depart not ; night and day they wander in suffering : 

They cherish friendship for the evil and hatred for the 
holy. 

They shall perish with their families, and cause their 
whole tribe to perish. 

It is not good to slander any one ; yet that is what the 
perverse and blockheads do. 

The faces of the slanderers become blackened, and they 
fall into horrible hell. 

0 man, as thou worshippest, so shalt thou be, and so shall 
be the acts thou performest. 

It is thou thyself who didst sow ; it is thou thyself who 
shalt eat ; nothing is obtained by prating. 

When great men speak it is with some object: 

They are filled to the brim with nectar, and have not 
a particle of avarice. 

The virtuous amass virtues and instruct others. 

They who meet them are fortunate ; night and day they 
repeat God’s name. 

He who created the earth will give us sustenance. 

One alone is the Giver ; He Himself is the true Lord, 

That True One is with thee, 0 man ; thou shalt behold 
Him by the Guru’s instruction. 

Ever remember God and He will pardon thee and blend 
thee with Himself. 

Man is impure ; the True One is pure ; how shall we meet 
Him ? 

When man dispelleth his pride under the Guru’s instruction, 
God will unite him with Himself, and that shall be a lasting 
union. 

Accursed is his life in this world who forgetteth the true 
Lord! 

God will look with favour and not forget him who medi- 
tateth on the Guru’s instruction. 

When the true Guru blendeth me with God, a lasting 
union shall be effected, and I shall clasp the True One to 
my heart. 

Once I have found Him, through the love and affection of 
the Guru, we shall not be separated. 

Q 


SUCH. U 



226 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Let me praise my Beloved by meditation on the word 
of the Guru. 

When I meet my Beloved, I shall obtain happiness and 
become an illustrious woman. 

Suhi Chhant 

Sins are erased by devotion ; God’s fellowship 
with the pious : — 

All his sins are erased, O God, who reverently singeth 
Thy praises day and night. 

All men are Thine ; Thou art theirs ; I am Thine ; Thou 
art mine. 

Suhi ki War 

The repentant sinner : — 

The evil wife in a red dress goeth to enjoy a strange man. 

Infatuated with another she leaveth the husband of her 
home. 

She eateth bread because it is sweet ; its flavour greatly 
increaseth her disease. 

She leaveth God her lawful spouse, and afterwards 
suffereth the pain of separation from Him ; 

But under the Guru’s instruction she will return, renew 
her love for God, and decorate herself to attract Him. 

She will then enjoy God her true Spouse in peace, and 
clasp His name to her heart. 

She will be submissive and ever a good wife, and God will 
unite her with Himself. 

Nanak, she who hath obtained the true God as her Hus- 
band, shall ever be a happy wife. 

How repentance is effected : — 

O thou with the red robe , 1 thou shalt become a good wife 
if thou repeat the true Name with thy heart. 

By conciliating the true Guru thy beauty shall be greatly 
enhanced, and thou shalt have no other abode than his. 


1 Married women wear red. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 227 

Put on such decorations as shall never be tarnished, that 
thy husband may love thee night and day. 

Nanak, what are the signs of a good wife ? Her heart is 
pure, her face bright, and she is absorbed in her spouse. 

It is not the dress that ensures happiness : — 

0 people, I have been in red, wearing a red robe, 

But, since it is not the robe that obtaineth the Bride- 
groom, I have ceased to robe myself. 

Nanak, they who have heard the Guru’s instruction, have 
found the Bridegroom. 

In this way the Bridegroom is found ; what pleaseth God 
taketh place. 

The dye of the worldly is temporary, of the saints 
permanent : — 

Thou with the red robe, the whole world steeped in folly 
and worldly love is red ; 

But the dye is false and totally vanisheth in a moment 
like the shadow of a tree. 

The colour of the pious is the reddest of the red as if 
dyed with madder. 

vShe in whose heart dwelleth God’s ambrosial name, 
turneth away from mammon and entereth the house of 
God. 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to my Guru by meeting whom 
I sing God’s praises. 

Man ought not to set his heart on fleeting plea- 
sures : — 

The red colour is useless ; the Bridegroom is not obtained 
by it ; 

It taketh not long to fade. She who loveth mammon 
sitteth as a widow. 

The woman who coveteth a red robe is silly and fickle. 

Make the true Word thy red robe, and the fear and love 
of God thine ornaments. 

Nanak, they who act according to the wishes of the true 
Guru shall ever be happy wives. 

0 2 



228 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The idolater is compared to an unchaste woman : — 

The woman with the red robe who leaveth God and 
loveth another husband is a bad character. 

She hath neither modesty nor virtue ; she ever uttereth 
falsehood, and is ruined by her perversity. 

She for whom it is so written from the beginning, shall 
obtain God as her Spouse. 

'She shall doff all her red robes and don the garment of 
humility. 

She shall obtain great honour in this world and the next ; 
the whole world shall worship her. 

No one is equal to her whom the Creator enjoyeth. 

Nanak, she who hath the everlasting Male as her Husband 
is holy, and shall ever be a happy wife. 

How a woman ought to love her husband : — 

It is not they who burn themselves with their husbands’ 
corpses who are Satis ; 

Nanak, rather are they Satis who die by the shock of 
separation from their husbands. 

They also are known as Satis who abide in modesty and 
contentment ; 

Who wait upon their Lord and rising in the morning ever 
remember Him. 

The concremation of widows is inadmissible : — 

Women are burnt in the fire with their husbands : 

If they appreciate their husbands they undergo sufficient 
pain by their death . 

Nanak, if they appreciate not their husbands, why 
should they be burnt ? 

Whether the husband be alive or dead such women will 
flee far away from him . 1 

1 Whether a widow loves her deceased husband or not, her cremation 
is useless. If she loves him, his death is a torture to her, while, if she 
loves him not, his life or death is of equal unconcern to her. Therefore 
cremating her by force, or for the sake of custom or fashion, is utterly 
useless. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


220 


Men ought to acquire divine knowledge before 
adopting a religious dress : — 

0 woman, only decorate thyself when thou hast conciliated 
thy Husband, 

Lest He come not to thy couch and thy decorations be 
in vain. 

When thy Husband’s heart is conciliated, decoration will 
become thee. 

It will be acceptable if thy Husband love thee. 

Make fear thy decoration, God’s love thy betel, and 
reverence thy food. 

Nanak, she who delivereth her body and soul to her 
Husband shall enjoy Him. 

God cannot be won by a religious garb : — 

A woman taketh collyrium, flowers, betel and attar of 
roses, and decorateth herself, 

But if her husband come not to her couch, it is all in vain. 

The Guru describes an ideal marriage : — 

They are not husband and wife who sit together : 

Rather are they husband and wife who have one soul 
and two bodies. 


Bilaw al 1 ki War 

God’s praises may be said or sung : — 

Enjoy yourselves when God’s name is in your mouths. 2 

Measures, music, and hymns are pleasant if one meditate 
on God ; 

But if man serve God even without measures and music, 
he shall obtain honour at His court. 

Nanak, meditate upon God by the Guru’s instruction, so 
shall all the pride of thy heart depart. 

1 This word in Panjabi means enjoyment, in Sanskrit a musical 
measure. There is in the first line of the hymn a play on the word. 
The Bilawal is sung on festive, the Maru on mournful occasions. 

2 Or — the time to sing in the Bilawal measure is when God’s name 
is in your mouths. 


230 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru’s prayer for the human race : — 

0 God, of Thy mercy save the world which is in flames. 

Save it in any way that it may be saved. 

The fate of the infidel : — 

The five thieves 1 rob those who forget the Name 

And utter falsehood ; they make a breach of pride in 
their hearts. 

The infidels who know not the savour of God’s name are 
ruined by their folly. 

They who have lost the ambrosial Name through doubt 
and conceived an affection for sin, 

Love the wicked and quarrel with the saints. 

Nanak, the infidels shall be bound by Death and suffer 
torments in hell ; 

They shall obtain the reward of their acts ; where God 
placeth them there shall they remain. 

The fate of the holy : — 

They who serve the true Guru have become strong from 
being weak. 

God ever dwelleth within them and Death cannot look 
at them. 

Lakshmi is their servant in whose hearts is the sweet- 
ness of God’s name. 

The servant of the servants of God obtaineth the supreme 
boon. 

Nanak is ever a sacrifice to him in whose soul and body 
God dwelleth. 


Ramkali 

The characteristics of the four ages : — 

In the Sat age every one spoke the truth ; 

In every house God’s service was performed, and men were 
holy. 

In the Sat age religion had four legs : 2 

1 The five senses. 

2 Pure religion is compared to ah unblemished cow. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 231 

Then a few understood divine knowledge by the Guru’s 
instruction. 

In the four ages the Name is magnified. 

They who cling to the Name obtain salvation ; without 
the Guru none may obtain the Name. 

In the Treta age one leg 1 of religion was removed ; 
Hypocrisy prevailed and men deemed God distant . 2 
He who obtained knowledge under the Guru’s instruction 
knew God, 

And acquired happiness by implanting the Name in his 
heart. 

In the Dwapar age worldly love and duality arose : 

Led astray in error men thought the Creator and creation 
distinct. 

In the Dwapar age religion was only left two legs . 3 
Wherever there was a holy man he fixed the Name firmly 
in his heart. 

In the Kal age only one leg remained to religion . 4 
She went on one leg and worldly love increased : 

Worldly love produced excessive darkness. 

If man meet the true Guru, the Name shall be his salvation. 
In every age there is only the one true Being : 

In everything is the True One, there is none besides. 

By praising the True One true happiness is obtained ; 
But only a few pious men utter such praises. 

Through all the ages the Name is the best thing ; 5 
Only a few holy men know this. 

He who pondereth on God’s name is a saint : 

Nanak, in every age the Name is magnified. 

Ramkali ki War I 

The cultivation of the Name : — 

The true Guru is the field of happiness ; he whom God 
causeth to love it, 

1 That is, truth. 

2 And not in their hearts as believed in the Sat age. 

3 The second leg that fell off is supposed to be sacrifice. 

4 Worship is supposed to be the third leg that dropped off; God’s 
name, the fourth, remained. 

5 Superior to all religious ceremonies. 


232 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Soweth the Name ; the Name springeth up, and he is 
absorbed in it. 

Pride which is the seed of doubt fleeth away from him. 

He no longer soweth the seed of doubt ; it no longer spring- 
eth up ; he liveth on what God giveth him. 

When water blendeth with water, it cannot again be 
separated. 

Nanak, that is the way of the holy ; O people, come and 
see : 

But what can wretched people see who themselves know 
nothing ? 

He in whose heart God dwelleth and to whom He showeth 
Himself, beholdeth Him. 

Sorrow is the portion of the perverse : — 

The perverse man is a field of sorrow ; he soweth sorrow 
and eateth sorrow. 

In sorrow is he born, in sorrow he dieth, and in pride he 
passeth his life. 

The mentally blind man acteth blindly, and thinketh not 
of his transmigration. 

He knoweth not the Giver, but clingeth to what is given : 

He acteth as was at first destined for him ; 0 Nanak, 
he cannot act otherwise. 

The following is a reply to a hymn of Kabir : — 

Nanak, God will look with favour on him who hath 
turned himself into henna : 

God Himself will grind it, God Himself will rub it, and 
God Himself will apply it to His feet. 

This is a loving cup of the Lord. He prepareth it for 
him with whom He is pleased. 

The following is a reflection on anchorets : — 

Led astray by doubt, I have wandered the world over, 
and searched until I have grown weary. 

God gave me no peace ; what can cope with Him ? 

Meditate on God under the Guru’s instruction, and clasp 
Him to thy heart. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 


^33 

Nanak, if God be merciful, man seated in his own home 
can find Him. 

The false and the true Abhyagat , 1 or mendicant, 
who claims to have reached the final goal of 
sanctity : — 

He in whose heart there is superstition ought not to be 
called an Abhyagat. 

Alms given to him, 0 Nanak, shall be as vain as himself. 

Few are they, 0 Nanak, to whose lot it hath fallen to 
give food to him 

Who hungereth for the supreme reward of the Fearless 
and Pure. 

They should not be described as Abhyagats who eat in 
other’s houses, 

And who to fill their bellies adopt many sectarial garbs. 

They are Abhyagats, O Nanak, who study their hearts, 

Who search and find the Lord, and dwell in their own 
homes. 

Man must do good acts and obey God's laws : — 

Numberless persons are absorbed in God , the Mine of 
jewels ; but the false suffer transmigration : 

They act as they please and suffer great punishment. 

Everything is in the Mine of jewels, but it is only ob- 
tainable by good acts. 

Nanak, man obtaineth the nine treasures if he act accord- 
ing to God’s will. 

Better to taste God's ambrosia than the poison 
of the perverse : — 

He who serveth not the Guru cheerfully shall lose his 
life by pride. 

The lotus of his heart shall never bloom whose tongue 
tasteth not God’s essence. 

The perverse die by eating poison ; they perish by 
worldly love. 

1 This word in Sanskrit means a visitor. The name was subse- 
quently given to pious mendicants. 


2 34 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


He on whom the true God looketh with favour becometh 
the slave of His slaves : 

He serveth the true Guru night and day and never leaveth 
his side : 

As the lotus remaineth dry in the water, so he liveth a 
hermit in his own home. 

Nanak, the Lord of excellences acteth and causeth all to 
act as He pleaseth. 

Dutiful children ought to accept the counsel of 
sages : — 

Elders’ 1 advice maketh children good : 

They who are pleasing to God heed such counsel and act 
accordingly. 

Go and consult the Simritis, the Shastars, the writings of 
Vyas, 2 Shukdev, Narad, and those who uttered excellent 
words. 

They whom God attacheth to the truth remain attached 
to it and ever remember it. 

Nanak, their coming into the world is profitable who save 
all their families. 

The blind leading the blind : — 

When the guru is blind, the deeds of his disciples also 
are blind ; 

They act as it pleaseth themselves and continually utter 
the grossest falsehood ; 

They practise lying and deception and ever slander 
others. 

The slanderers are ruined themselves and ruin all their 
families ; 

But they are, 0 Nanak, in the position in which God 
placed them ; what can the poor creatures do ? 

1 Literally — grandfathers; in the East the fathers are often very 
young, and advice-giving then becomes the grandfather’s duty or 
privilege. Here the Guru means Guru Nanak’s instruction. 

2 Vyas, the compiler of the Veds, see note i, p. 31. 





HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 235 


Nothing is gained by association with a fool : — 

The fool listeneth to the words of the fool. 

What are the marks of a fool ? What his acts ? 

The fool is he who is stupid and dying of pride. 

In its practice he is ever miserable, and in misery he 
abideth. 

If his dearest friend fall into a well, what device shall he 
adopt to extricate him ? 

A pious man would think about it, but the fool would 
remain aloof. 

By repeating God’s name the pious man is saved, and 
they who were perishing shall be saved through him. 

Nanak, God acteth as He pleaseth, and man must endure 
what cometh from Him. 

Maru ki War I 

The condition of those who have not the fear of 
God in their hearts : — 

They who have not met the Guru and who have not a 
particle of fear, 

Suffer great pain in transmigration, and their anxiety 
never ceaseth. 

They are beaten like soiled garments or like a gong which 
striketh gharis and double gharis. 

Nanak, without the true Name they are never free from 
entanglements. 

The Guru inculcates truth, the whole truth, and 
nothing but the truth : — 

I have searched the three worlds, my friends, and dis- 
covered that pride is bad for men. 

Grieve not, 0 my heart, speak the truth, Nanak, the 
whole truth. 

The Guru culls divine knowledge from God's 
tree : — 

The tree spontaneously produceth flowers and fruits ; 


236 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the bumble-bee divesting himself of fear dwelleth among 
them. 

Nanak, there is but one tree (God), one flower (divine 
knowledge), and one bumble-bee (the Guru). 

The Guru teaches true piety to a J ogi : — 

If I become a Jogi, wander in the world, and beg from 
door to door, 

When my account is called for in God’s court, how many 
persons shall I have to satisfy ? 1 

Let me make the Name my alms, patience my hut, com- 
panionship with the True One my cry ; I shall not then he 
asked for an account. 

God is not obtained by sectarial garbs ; all who adopt 
them shall be seized by the god of death. 

Nanak, their words are false — do thou remember the true 
Name. 

Even the perverse may be saved by obeying 
God’s order : — 

A raven becometh not white, nor doth iron float. 

He who accepteth the boon of the Beloved, is blest and 
regenerateth others. 

The countenance of him who recognizeth God’s orders shall 
become bright, and he shall cross over like iron on timber. 

To abandon avarice and abide in fear are, 0 Nanak, most 
meritorious acts. 

The heart is not chastened by wandering in 
forests : — 

The ignorant man who goeth into the desert to chasten 
his heart cannot succeed. 

Nanak, if the heart be chastened, it must be by reflection 
on the Guru’s instruction. 

Even though every one desire to chasten his heart, he 
cannot succeed ; 

1 I shall have to compensate numerous persons for the alms I have 
received. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 237 

But man, 0 Nanak, shall chasten his heart, if he meet 
the true Guru. 

Were a man to forget God he would deserve 
expulsion from his fraternity : — 

Were I to become a pandit or an astrologer and recite the 
four Veds ; 

Were I to be worshipped for my wisdom and teaching in 
the nine regions of the world, 

May it not be that I should forget the true Name and 
that none should touch my cooking-square. 1 

Cooking-squares are all false ; Nanak, God alone is true. 

It is when man ceases to think of merits and 
demerits and fixes his attention on God alone that 
he is saved : — 

Merits and demerits are the same ; since God created both. 

Nanak, happiness is obtained by obeying God’s order 
and pondering on the Guru’s instruction. 

The Guru refuses to use force to his slanderer : — 

They who have no divine knowledge or a particle of fear 
in their hearts, 

Have been destroyed by God ; Nanak, why slay the 
slain ? 

The Guru rejects the Brahman's horoscope and 
censures his pride and pretended learning : — 

To study one’s mental horoscope 2 is the real happiness. 

That Brahman is good who knoweth how to meditate on 
God ; 

Who reflecting on the Guru’s instruction extolleth God 
and readeth His praises . 

His birth is profitable, and he saveth his family. 

In the next world there shall be no inquiry regarding 
caste ; to act according to the Word is the real thing. 

1 The Guru means that if he forgot God’s name, he should deserve 
the penalty that nobody would eat or associate with him. 

2 To know the state of one’s own heart. 


238 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Vain is all other study, vain all other acting, since man 
thus becometh attached to sin. 

The perverse man hath no internal happiness ; his life is 
ruined. 

Nanak, they who are tinctured by the Name are saved 
by the Guru’s boundless love. 

Bhairo 

A pandit asked the Guru to listen to a discourse 
of his. The Guru refused. Upon this the pandit 
said he himself was a Brahman while the Guru was 
only a Khatri, and it was the duty of Khatris to 
listen to Brahmans. The Guru replied as follows : — 

Let none be proud of his caste. 

He who knoweth God is a Brahman. 

0 stupid fool, be not proud of thy caste ; 

From such pride many sins result. 

Everybody saith there are four castes, 

But they all proceeded from God’s seed. 

The world is all made out of one clay, 

But the Potter fashioned it into vessels of many sorts. 

The body is formed from the union of five elements ; 

Let any one consider if he hath less or more in his com- 
position. 

Saith Nanak, the soul is fettered by its acts. 

Without meeting the true Guru salvation is not obtained. 

Basant 

The sectarial dresses, the scriptures, and the 
pilgrimages of the Hindus are of no avail : — 

Even if man take off his clothes, become naked 

And wear matted hair, how can he obtain union with 
God? 

His mind is not pure, nor tarrieth it at the tenth gate. 

The foolish person wandereth and retumeth again and 
again in transmigration. 

0 foolish man, meditate on the one God, 

And thou shalt at once cross the world's ocean. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 239 

They who expound the Simritis and the Shastars, 

And who as divines and learned men read the Purans, 
Practise in their hearts hypocrisy and deception. 

God cometh not near them ; 

How shall they obtain the Pure One, 

Who while practising great self-restraint 
And performing ceremonial works and special adoration* 
Have greed within them, and harbour the deadly sins in 
their hearts ? 

What can he make who is made himself, 

And whose movements are in God’s power ? 

If God look on him with favour, his doubts shall cease ; 
And if he understand God’s order, he shall obtain the 
True One. 

He in whose heart is the filth of sin 
May wander on pilgrimages through the countries of the 
world ; 

Yet, O Nanak, it is only when he associateth with the 
true Guru 

That the obstacles in the terrible ocean shall break for 
his passage. 

The holy enjoy perpetual spring : — 

When spring cometh, the forests bloom ; 

But men and lower animals only bloom by thinking on 
God : 

In this way the mind is refreshed. 

By repeating God’s name day and night under the Guru’s 
instruction pride is removed and washed away. 

When the true Guru reciteth his verses and hymns. 

The world bloometh again by his love. 

Fruits and flowers are produced when God Himself 
produceth them. 

When man findeth the true Guru, he attacheth himself to 
God, the root of all things. 

God is the spring ; the whole world is His garden ; 
Nanak, by perfect good fortune special service is per- 
formed. 


240 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Sarang ki War 

The Hindus fast on the eleventh day of the light 
and dark halves of the lunar month. Besides these 
certain other days of the lunations are occasionally 
dedicated to certain Hindu divinities. Thus the 
ninth is sacred to Devi, the tenth to Digpal, or the 
elephants who support the eight points of the com- 
pass, the eleventh to Vishnu, and the twelfth to 
Bawan, his dwarf incarnation. The Guru in the 
following gives substitutes for these fasts. The 
slok was addressed to Brahmans who censured 
the Guru for his neglect of fasting : — 

If man on the ninth day make a vow to speak the truth, 

His lust, wrath, and covetousness will depart. 

The tenth day is auspicious if one restrain the organs of 
action and perception : the eleventh day is auspicious if 
one then know that God is one. 

If on the twelfth day man preserve himself from the five 
deadly sins, then, 0 Nanak, shall he be happy. 

If fasts be thus observed, O Pandit, why give more in- 
struction ? 

Brahmans and sectaries obtain no advantage 
from reading and pilgrimages : — 

Pandits and men vowed to silence grow weary of reading ; 
men who wear sectarial dresses grow weary of wandering 
from country to country. 

Through love of the world they never obtain God’s name, 
and very great misery attacheth to them. 

They are stupid and blind, and make it their business to 
serve mammon. 

With deception in their hearts the fools read books to 
fill their bellies. 

They who have expelled pride from their hearts, serve 
the true Guru and obtain happiness. 

Nanak, there is only one Name to read and meditate on ; 
a few reflecting men know this. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 241 

Man must accept the inevitable. As he came 
naked into the world, so must he depart : — 

Naked man cometh, naked he departeth — such is the 
will of God ; what can be done ? 

He who gave life will take it away. With whom shall 
man be angry on that account ? 

He who is pious obeyeth God’s will and tranquilly quaffeth 
divine nectar. 

Nanak, ever praise the Giver of happiness, and repeat 
His name with thy tongue. 

No hope from false gods : — 

When men have forgotten God’s name, what other name 
will they utter ? 

They are as worms in ordure ; their worldly affairs like 
thieves have robbed them. 

May Nanak not forget God’s name ! False is all other 
desire. 

The fate of those who forget the Name : — 

They who forget the Name, even though they perform 
many other religious acts, 

Are bound and beaten in the city of Death, 0 Nanak, 
like robbers caught house-breaking. 

Man should be firm in his devotion : — 

As long as the mind is inconstant, man indulgeth in great 
pride and arrogance. 

He relisheth not the Word and loveth not the Name. 

His service is not acceptable ; he fretteth and fretteth 
until he becometh an object of contempt. 

Nanak, call him a servant who would cut off his head, 
place it before his master , 

Obey the order of the true Guru, and take his instruction 
to heart. 

Only what pleases God can be deemed devotion, 
penance, and service : — 

If man renounce his pride, God will pardon him and 
blend him with Himself. 


SIKH. II 


R 



242 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Man once blended with God will never be separated ; 
light will be blended with light. 

Nanak, that man knoweth God whom he causeth to know 
Him through the Guru’s favour. 

God is ever young, and His name is ever holy : — 

The True One never groweth old, and His name is never 
defiled. 

He who walketh in the way of the Guru shall not be born 
again. 

Nanak, he who forgetteth the Name shall both come 
and go. 

He who obeys and loves the Almighty needs not 
fear death : — 

The order of the Unconcerned is over all ; no artifice can 
succeed and no argument prevail against Him. 

The holy man who effaceth himself, accepteth God’s will, 
seeketh His protection, 

And renounceth his pride, shall not feel Death’s mace. 

Nanak, he is a worshipper who fixeth his love on the 
True One. 

The Creator and the creature contrasted : — 

All gifts, splendour, and beauty are Thine, 0 God ; 

Many artifices and pride are mine. 

They who harbour covetousness, worldly love, and pride 
shall never be free from transmigration, however many 
ceremonial acts they perform. 

Nanak, the Creator Himself causeth to act ; what 
pleaseth Him is good. 


Malar ki War 

The mental happiness obtained by heeding pious 
instruction : — 

On meeting the Guru the mind is happy as after rain the 
earth is decorated : 

Everything appeareth green, the lakes and pools are 
filled to the brim. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 243 

The colour of the True One attacheth to the heart as 
redness to madder. 

The lotus of the heart bloometh by obeying the True 
One ; man is rendered happy by the Guru’s word. 

The perverse turn to worldly love ; carefully consider this. 

The god of death is seen standing over their heads as if 
they were ensnared deer. 

Avarice, covetousness, and slander are evil ; lust and 
wrath terrible. 

God appeareth not to our eyes until we reflect on His 
word. 

They who please Thee, 0 God, acquire patience, and no 
longer have domestic entanglements. 

By serving the Guru man saveth his capital ; 1 the Guru 
is a ladder and a boat of salvation . 

Nanak, they who love God obtain Him ; Thou art true, 
0 God , and true is he who obeyeth Thee. 

When the Guru instructs, the heart assumes a 
different colour. It is supposed that an Indian 
woman's passions increase when there are clouds. 
Here she is considering what her relations with her 
spouse will be — whether he will withdraw or grant 
her his love. In the latter case she will be held 
to be imbued with a different colour. 

Lowering clouds come and give the earth different colours. 

I know not how long the love with which I have inspired 
my spouse will endure. 

The women shall be happy in whose hearts there are fear 
and love. 

Nanak, they who feel not fear and love are not happy. 

When lowering clouds come and the pure rain falleth, 

O Nanak, the women who have broken with their spouse 
are unhappy. 

When lowering clouds come and rain falleth continuously, 

0 Nanak, the woman who acteth as her husband desireth, 
ever enjoyeth his embraces. 


1 His human birth; his soul does not descend to a lower animal. 



244 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


It is God alone who sends rain : — 

Why stand ye up to look ? unhappy people, this cloud 
can do nothing. 

It is He who sent the cloud ye should treasure in your 
hearts. 

He giveth Himself a residence in the hearts of those on 
whom He looketh with favour. 

Nanak, all on whom God looketh not with favour shall 
lament. 

As the chatrik is in need of rain, so is man in need 
of divine instruction : — 

0 chatrik, every one longeth for Him on whom thou 
callest. 

When God is merciful it will rain, and the forests and 
glades become green. 

God is found by the Guru’s favour ; few are they who 
know this. 

Resting or standing continually meditate on Him, and 
thou shalt be happy for ever and ever. 

Nanak, nectar ever raineth ; God bestoweth it on the 
pious. 

God sends a divine teacher when required : — 

When the world is in distress, it heartily prayeth. 

The True One attentively listeneth and with His kind 
disposition 1 granteth consolation ! 

He giveth orders to the cloud-god and the rain falleth in 
torrents. 2 

Then corn and wealth are produced in great abundance 
and of untold value. 

Nanak, praise His name who giveth to all creatures their 
sustenance, 

By eating whereof happiness is produced, and misery 
felt no more. 


1 Also translated— Of his own accord. 

2 The Guru gives copious instruction. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 245 

God knows man’s necessities better than he knows 
them himself : — 

O chatrik, cry not and allow not thy heart to long for 
water ; obey the order of the Lord. 

Nanak, by obeying His order thy thirst shall depart, and 
thou shalt have fourfold love for Him. 

There is no lack of divine instruction, but men 
receive it not : — 

O chatrik, thy dwelling is in the water ; thou wanderest 
in the water ; 

Thou knowest not the water’s value and so thou fallest 
a-screaming. 

It raineth everywhere on sea and land ; there is no place 
without rain. 

So much rain falleth that they who are dying of thirst 
and receive it not are unfortunate. 

Nanak, the pious in whose hearts God dwelleth find the 
water. 

It is they who are favoured by God who receive 
divine instruction : — 

This water raineth on every one ; God by His kind 
disposition causeth it to fall. 

The trees which by the Guru’s instruction are absorbed 
in God become green . 1 

Nanak, the animals on which God looketh with favour 
become happy and their misery departeth. 

The bliss of those who receive divine instruction: — 

On a wet night there is lightning and it raineth in torrents ; 

If it be the will of God, where it raineth much corn and 
wealth shall be produced, 

By using which the heart will be satisfied and men will 
perform their duties. 

This wealth is the sport of the Creator ; it sometimes 
cometh and sometimes goeth ; 

1 Human beings thrive under divine instruction. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


246 

But the Name is the wealth of those who possess divine 
knowledge ; they are ever absorbed in it. 

Nanak, they on whom God looketh with favour, shall 
obtain this wealth. 

As the chatrik will not drink ordinary water, so 
men will not receive instruction : — 

This world is a chatrik ; let none make a mistake herein. 

This chatrik is an animal without understanding, other- 
wise it would know 

That God’s name is nectar, by drinking which thirst 
departeth. 

Nanak, the pious who drink it shall not again be thirsty. 

When God is merciful men receive saving in- 
struction : — 

The Malar is refreshing ; by meditation on God in it 
comfort is obtained. 

If God show His mercy it raineth over the whole world. 

By rain animals obtain the means of subsistence, and the 
earth is decorated. 

Nanak, this world is all water ; from water everything 
hath sprung. 

The few who know God by the Guru’s favour are ever 
emancipated. 

God, without being asked, gives man what is good 
for him : — 

0 chatrik, thou knowest not the palace of the Lord ; 
when thou seest it pray there. 

Thou pratest much to please thyself ; thy words are not 
acceptable. 

The Lord is very beneficent ; what thou desirest thou 
shalt obtain from Him. 

Then the world’s thirst to say nothing of thine, poor 
chatrik, shall depart . 1 

1 As the chatrik wants special rain-drops, so the world seeks its 
own advantages. If the world accepted God’s name, all unworthy 
desires should depart. 


HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 247 

The chatrik, on obtaining the special drops it 
desires, is compared to the man disposed to receive 
instruction : — 

The 'chatrik on a rainy night naturally loving the True 
One crieth — 

‘ This water is my life ; without water I cannot live. 5 

So by the Guru’s instruction the water of life is found 
when man dispelleth his pride. 

Nanak, the true Guru hath caused me to meet Him 
without whom I cannot live for a moment. 

God is not to be importuned for secular favours : — 

O chatrik, the chaste woman obtaineth access to her 
spouse's chamber ; the unchaste one is banished. 

Within thee, God dwelleth and is ever present with the 
holy. 

Thou shalt not have to shout and scream when God 
looketh on thee with favour. 

Nanak, they who love the Name and act according to the 
Guru’s instruction, shall be easily blended with God. 

In the following the chatrik represents the pious 
man praying for the gift of life 

The chatrik prayeth, 4 0 God, mercifully grant me the 
gift of life ! 

c Without water my thirst will not be quenched ; I shall 
expire. 

4 Thou 0 God , art the Giver of happiness, illimitable ; Thou 
art the Giver and treasury of favours. 5 

Nanak, God pardoneth the pious and at the last hour 
becometh their Friend. 

The worldly man, like the chatrik, accepts not 
what God grants him, but seeks his own advan- 
tages : — 

O chatrik, thou knowest not what thirst there is within 
thee, and by what draught it shall be quenched. 

Through worldly love thou wanderest, and the immortal 
water thou obtain est not. 


t SIKH. II 



248 THE SIKH RELIGION 

If God cast His glance of favour, the true Guru will be 
easily found. 

Nanak, the immortal water will be obtained from him, 
and man will be easily absorbed in God. 

When man rises early for prayer his supplication 
is granted : — 

The chatrik calleth at the ambrosial hour of morning , 1 
and his prayer is heard in God’s court. 

God mercifully issueth an order to the cloud to kindly 
rain . 2 

The joy felt by the holy in the rainy season : — 

Woman shall be happy in Sawan by reflecting on the 
Gum’s instruction. 

Nanak, by her unequalled love for the Guru she shall ever 
be a happy wife ; 

But she who is devoid of virtue, and who is attached to 
a second love shall burn in Sawan. 

Nanak, she careth not for her spouse, and therefore 
despiseth all decoration. 

Supplementary Sloks 

In the opinion of the Guru forgetfulness of God's 
name is the greatest sin. 

Saith Nanak, by forgetting the one Name sin is com- 
mitted equal in the estimation of the Hindus to the killing of 
Brahmans, kine, and virgins, eating the food of the sinful, 

And the million transgressions which render men accursed 
and ever and ever victims of pride. 

Let all other wisdom depart, as long as the knowledge of 
the one God remaineth. 

The devotion of the saints is compared to that of 
the fond wife who cooks elaborate dishes for her 
spouse : — 

As a devoted wife in her husband’s house, intensely 
desiring to perform service for him, 

1 When a watch or about three hours of night still remain. 

2 So if a man rise early for prayer, God will hearken unto him. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 249 

Prepareth him viands of many savours, making some 
tart and others sweet ; 

Even with the same devotion the saints praise and apply 
their hearts to God’s name : 

They offer the Guru their souls, bodies, and wealth ; they 
would even sell their heads and place them before him. 

Many saints pray for the fear and service of God ; God 
fulfilleth their desires, and blendeth them with Himself. 

The spiritual exaltation of the holy : — 

In the heart of the pious man is composure ; his soul 
ascendeth to the tenth heaven, 

Where there is nor sleep nor hunger, and where God’s 
ambrosial name which conferreth bliss abide th. 

Nanak, sorrow is not felt where the light of God shineth. 

The fate of the perverse : — 

The perverse man is of unstable mind ; in his heart he 
hath many artifices. 

What he hath done and what he doeth is all in vain ; 
he is in no way acceptable. 

The fruit of his religious acts and alms shall all go to the 
king of death. 

Without the true Guru the king of death will not release 
him ; he shall be ruined by his worldly love. 

His youth glideth imperceptibly away, and on attaining 
old age he dieth without repentance. 

Children and wives are objects of affection, but at the 
last moment none of them will assist or accompany him. 

The condition of those who practise worldly love ; — 

Worldly love is an ocean of sorrow, difficult to cross, nay, 
uncrossable. 

The perverse pass their lives in avarice and pine away 
talking of their possessions. 

They can neither retreat nor advance ; they remain 
entangled in mid ocean. 

God may pardon man's transgressions. The fol- 



250 THE SIKH RELIGION 

lowing is repeated by many Sikhs on rising in the 
morning : — 

We commit many sins of which there is no end. 

O God, be mercifully pleased to pardon them. 

We are great sinners and transgressors. 

0 God, Thou pardonest and blendest unto Thee ; other- 
wise it will not come to our turn to be pardoned. 

The Guru graciously cut off our sins and transgressions 
by blending us with God. 

Hail to those, 0 Nanak, who have meditated on God’s 
name ! 

Rely not on the covetous : — 

As far as possible rely not on a covetous man ; 

At the last moment he will lead thee where nobody can 
lend thee a hand. 

The condition of the perverse : — 

The perverse are like children and dotards whose hearts 
take no thought of God. 

The perverse and the pious contrasted : — 

How shall he who doeth evil be acceptable ? 

He shall burn in his own anger. 

The perverse man is a fool andworrieth himself with quar- 
relling. 

He who is pious knoweth everything. 

Nanak, the pious man struggleth with his own heart. 

His singers represented to the Guru that the 
Dhanasari was a very popular measure, and that 
whenever they played or sang it they usually re- 
ceived large rewards from others. On this the Guru 
composed the following : — 

The Dhanasari measure is worthy of praise, brethren, if 
it perform the work of the True Guru. 1 

Brethren, heartily entrust to Him thy body and soul along 
with thy life ; turn away from the world and obey His order. 

1 If it be employed to sing God’s praises. 



HYMNS OF GURU AMAR DAS 251 


Where He seateth you there sit, brethren ; and whither 
He sendeth you thither go. 

There is no wealth, brethren, so great as the true Name. 

May I ever sing the praises of the True One, brethren, and 
ever abide with the True One ! 

Make God’s attributes and praises your raiment, brethren, 
and enjoy the relish of the honour He granteth you. 

Why merely praise Him, brethren ? You ought to offer 
sacrifices yourselves for a sight of Him. 

A man proud of his long beard went to visit 
Guru Angad, but would not bow to him. Guru 
Amar Das thus addressed the offender : — 

That is a real beard which toucheth the Guru’s feet. 

They who day and night serve their Guru ever abide in 
happiness ; 

Nanak, they are seen with beaming faces at the court of 
the True One. 

The advantage of possessing everything true : — 

When men speak the truth and act the truth, true are 
their mouths and true their beards. 

The true Word dwelleth in their hearts, and they shall be 
blended with the True Guru. 

From the capital springeth true wealth, and the highest 
rank is obtained. 

They who hear the truth, obey the truth, and practise 
truth, 

Shall obtain a seat in the True court, and be absorbed in 
the True One. 

Nanak, without the true Guru the True One shall not be 
obtained ; the perverse shall go astray. 

The advantage of meeting the Guru : — 

The chatrik crieth, ‘Prio, prio ’ (Beloved! Beloved!) 
through love of the cloud. 

If it meet the Guru, it shall receive cool water to remove 
all its pain. 

Its thirst shall depart, composure ensue ; and it shall 
cease its cries and screams. 


252 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Nanak, the pious who hold the Name to their hearts, 
obtain peace. 

The joy of him who is devoted to God : — 

Nanak, he who is absorbed in the service of the true 
Guru, enjoyeth 'perpetual spring. 

God is pleased with him, his mind and body bloom, and 
the whole world is clad in verdure for him. 

The orison of the holy : — 

At early dawn whose name should we take ? 

We should take the name of God who is omnipotent to 
destroy and to create. 

The inanimate world also praises the Creator : — 

0 Persian wheel, thou also speakest well, saying ‘ Tu, 
Tu ’ (Thou, Thou ) ; 1 

But the Lord is ever present ; why call to Him with a 
loud voice ? 

Man ought to be a sacrifice to Him who created the world 
and made creatures of different species. 

The forests and glades of the world meditate on Thee, 
O God, and thus ever pass their nights and days. 

Salvation is not obtained by wearing a sectarial 
dress : — 

Union with God is not obtained by an ochre-coloured 
robe, nor by a dirty garment : 

Nanak, it is obtained sitting in one’s own home under 
the Guru’s instruction. 

A perusal of the Veds will render man no assist- 
ance : — 

Wert thou to wander in all directions and read the Veds 
through the four ages, it would be all in vain. 

Nanak, if thou meet the true Guru, God will dwell in thy 
heart, and thou shalt attain the gate of deliverance. 

1 The Guru deduces the original of these words from the sound of 
the Persian wheel in motion. 



^bPsTHT ft) 



GURU RAM DAS RECEIVING HIS DISCIPLES 


*A 


SIKH XI P. 253 





LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS, THE 
FOURTH GURU 

Chapter I 

Guru Ram Das’s parentage and birth, his early 
life, his meeting with Guru Amar Das, his marriage 
with Guru Amar Das’s daughter Bibi Bhani, and 
many other incidents in his life, have already been 
related in the Life of Guru Amar Das. 

The manner in which the Emperor Akbar bestowed 
several villages on Bibi Bhani, Guru Amar Das’s 
daughter, after they had been refused by her father, 
has also been narrated. She assigned them during 
her father’s lifetime to her husband. 

How the construction of the tank in Amritsar was 
entrusted to Jetha, and how he was appointed Guru 
Amar Das’s successor under the name of Guru Ram 
Das, have also been related. It needs hardly be said 
that Guru Ram Das adopted the principles and tenets 
of Guru Amar Das. 

The minstrel Satta dedicated to Guru Ram Das on 
his installation the seventh pauri of the composi- 
tion, which is known in the Granth Sahib as the 
joint production of Balwand and Satta, previously 
called the Coronation Ode. 

Hail ! hail Guru Ram Das ! God who created thee hath 
decorated thee. 

Complete are the miracles which the Creator Himself 
performed. 

The Sikhs and their congregation bowed to thee since 
God was with thee. 

Thou art immovable, unfathomable, unequalled ; thou 
hast no end or bounds. 

Thou didst save those who worshipped thee with love ; 



254 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Thou didst expel with ignominy 1 their former avarice, 
greed, lust, wrath, and worldly love with their train. 

Hail to thy place ! true are those who abide in thy pre- 
sence. 

Thou art Nanak, thou art Lahina, thou art Amar Das ; 
so I deem thee. 

When I saw the Guru my spirits were sustained. 

One day the Sikhs represented to the Guru : ‘ The 
Purans describe the advantages of pilgrimages, and 
thou sayest that the repetition of the Name is the 
most efficacious form of worship. Be pleased to 
satisfy our minds on this subject.’ The Guru 
replied : * They who go on pilgrimages commit every 
species of enormity. Whatever good acts they per- 
form are merely for ostentation. They give alms 
to those who flatter them to their faces or speak 
well of them to others. How shall persons like that 
be saved ? ’ The Guru then quoted the following 
hymn of Guru Nanak : — 

Shall I go to bathe at a place of pilgrimage ? God’s 
name is my place of pilgrimage. 

My places of pilgrimage are the Word, contemplation, and 
the divine knowledge within me. 

The divine knowledge given by the Guru is the true place 
of pilgrimage where the ten auspicious times for bathing 
and the Dasahra 2 are always present. 

I ever beg for God’s true name ; grant it me, 0 God, 
Sustainer of the earth. 

1 Literally — having beaten them. 

2 The Dasahra festival is held on the tenth day of the light half of 
the month of Jeth, May-June, in commemoration of the birth 
of the Ganges. The word is derived from dash, ten, and hara, 
to take away ; that is, the removal of ten great sins. The ten parabs 
or auspicious times for bathing are the eighth and the fourteenth 
of the lunar month, the day when no moon appears, the day when 
the moon is full, the first day of the solar month, the day of the new 
moon when it falls on a Sunday and the moon is in the mansion of 
Shrawan or Aquila, the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, eclipses of 
the sun and moon. Sardar Kahn Singh’s Gurumat Prabhakar. 


LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 255 

The world is ill, the Name is its medicine ; without the 
True One the filth of sin attacheth to it. 

The Guru’s word is pure and ever diffuseth light ; ever 
bathe in such a true place of pilgrimage. 

Filth attacheth not to the true ; what filth have they to 
wash off ? 

Twine for thyself a garland of virtues, and then what 
shalt thou have to grieve for ? 

He who chasteneth himself by meditation shall be 
saved ; he shall save others and never again return to a 
womb. 

The supreme mediator is himself the philosopher’s stone ; 
the true are pleasing to the True One. 

They feel happiness and true joy night and day ; their 
sorrow and their sins depart. 

The true Guru hath shown God to him who hath obtained 
the true Name ; no impurity attacheth to him in whose 
heart is the True One. 

Association with the congregation of the saints is the 
perfect ablution. 

Sweet is the voice of the singer who singeth of God. 

Praising the True One and obeying the true Guru are in 
my opinion equal to alms-deeds, and works of mercy. 

He who loveth the society of the Beloved shall easily 
bathe in the society of those who are the truest of the true x 
as his Tribeni. 

Worship the one true God who ever giveth and whose 
gifts ever increase. 

Salvation is obtained by associating with saints ; God 
associateth with the company of the saints him on whom 
He looketh with favour . 1 2 

Every one giveth accounts of God ; how great shall I say 
He is? 

I by myself am a blockhead, low, and ignorant, but I 
understand Him from the Guru’s description. 

1 Sat Saite may also be translated — assuredly. 

2 Also translated — The society of the Friend is obtained from 
association with the saints ; him on whom God casteth a favouring 
glance, He blendeth with Himself. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


256 

True is the teaching of the Guru whose words are nectar ; 
my heart is satisfied therewith. 

Man marcheth off to a place of pilgrimage and returneth 
laden with sin, while, if he had remained under the Guru’s 
instruction, he would have found the True One. 

There should be no end to speaking of God ; He is the 
storekeeper of devotion and everywhere diffused. 

Nanak maketh a true representation — it is he who 
cleanseth his heart who is pure. 1 

To this the Guru added the following hymn of his 
own : — 

The pandits read the Shastars and the Simritis, 

The Jogis cry ‘ Gorakh, Gorakh ’, 

But I who am ignorant repeat God’s name. 

I know not, O Lord, what my condition shall be. 

Worship God, 0 my soul, so shalt thou sail over the 
terrible ocean. 

The Sanyasis apply ashes to decorate their bodies, 

The Brahmacharis altogether avoid women ; 

But my hopes O God, ignorant though I am, are in Thee. 

The Khatri performeth deeds and obtaineth the rank of 
a hero ; 

The Sudars and the Vaisyas work for others. 

God’s name hath saved me who am ignorant. 

The whole creation is Thine, Thou pervadest every place. 

Nanak, God giveth greatness to the holy. 

I being blind have set up God as my prop. 2 

The Guru continued : ‘ Even if one go on a 

pilgrimage, the Name ought to be praised. Indeed, 
it is by praising the Name all advantages, whether 
temporal or spiritual, are obtained ; and it was for 
the magnification of the Name places of pilgrimages 
were established on spots frequented by great 
Rikhis and Munis who had spent their days in that 
form of devotion. On the other hand, making 
pilgrimages involveth great sufferings and ruffleth 
1 Dhanasari Chhant. 2 Gauri. 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 


257 

the temper, whereas the pilgrimage of the Name 
requireth no exertion and causeth no exasperation. 
What is even the Tribeni — a place so holy in the 
estimation of the Hindus ? The Tribeni of the Sikhs 
is to repeat God’s name, sing His praises, and know 
Him present in every heart. Without intelligence 
and discrimination men go astray at pilgrimages. 
What pilgrimages did Kabir and Rav Das make ? 
Yet they obtained salvation and are reverenced by 
the world. They each abode in a hut at the pil- 
grimage of the Name. The restraint of their desires 
they made the four walls of their lowly dwellings. 
Love and devotion were their roofs, and divine 
knowledge and meditation the beams on which 
they rested. They kept the love of God in their 
hearts to preserve them from the rain of bad com- 
pany, the cold of superstition, and the heat of 
avarice. By dwelling in such huts men need not 
wander on pilgrimages, and may easily obtain 
deliverance from transmigration.’ 

Sri Chand, the elder son of Baba Nanak, wore 
long hair, wandered a naked hermit, and established 
the sect of the Udasis. He would not go to meet 
either Guru Angad or Guru Amar Das, but, now 
that a long time had elapsed since his father’s death, 
and he had partially forgotten his imaginary griev- 
ances, he thought he would visit Guru Ram Das. 
When he arrived in the suburbs of Goindwal, the 
Guru went and took him, as the son of Guru Nanak, 
an offering of sweets and five hundred rupees in 
money. Sri Chand on beholding Guru Ram Das, 
thought him the very image of Guru Nanak. In 
the course of conversation Sri Chand remarked to 
him that he had grown a long beard. The Guru 
replied, 'Yes, I have grown a long beard that I may 
wipe thy feet therewith ’ ; whereupon the Guru 
proceeded to suit the action to the word. Sri Chand 
felt abashed, drew back his feet from the Guru, and 
said, ' 0 great king, thou art senior, thou art in my 

s 


SIKH. XI 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


258 

father’s place. It is magic like this which hath 
made thee a Guru. I possess no such power, and 
therefore was I superseded. I cannot express thy 
greatness. The Sikhs who come to behold thee shall 
be saved.’ 

One day the Guru, while meditating on Guru 
Amar Das, remembered that he had received from 
him a parting injunction to preach the true Name 
everywhere, and make a supreme place of pilgrimage 
at Amritsar. He asked his brothers-in-law, Mohan 
and Mohri, to accompany him thither for the pur- 
pose, but they refused. He went himself and spent 
several months there excavating the tank ordered 
by Guru Amar Das. In process of time a deputa- 
tion of Sikhs came to him from Lahore inviting him 
to extend his journey to their ancient city. They 
said, ‘ Since thy parents died, thou hast not visited 
thy birth-place. Return home, meet thy relations, 
preach to the Sikhs, and bless thy city. Wherever 
thou treadest, thou savest numberless sinners.’ 

The Guru accordingly proceeded to Lahore. As 
he approached that city, his relations and Sikhs 
came forth to meet him. He remained there for 
some time, turned his parents’ house into a temple, 
and built a well near it for the devotional ablutions 
of his followers. During his sojourn in his natal 
city he made many converts. It is said that his 
person and his words possessed such attractive 
power, that all who came under his influence felt 
constrained to embrace his religion. In due time 
he returned to Goindwal. 

Chapter II 

A company of J ogis with their superior went to 
make trial of the Guru. They said : ‘ Great king, 
thy Sikhs practise not Jog with its eight limbs or 
accessories, and without doing so the mind, is never 
at peace. Until the mind is at peace, God is not 


LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 


259 


obtained ; until God is obtained salvation is im- 
possible ; and until salvation is obtained the soul 
shall wander through the eighty-four lakhs of exist- 
ences. O Guru, how can thy Sikhs obtain salva- 
tion ? What advantage do they gain by serving 
thee ? ’ 

The Guru replied : ‘ As the teats on a goat’s neck 
yield no milk, so Jog without piety yieldeth no 
advantage. My Sikhs are family men, and may 
obtain salvation in that condition of life. It would 
be impossible for them to practise Jog. The best 
means of practising Jog is the repetition of the 
Name. The Name is implanted in the hearts of 
my Sikhs, and they repeat it day and night. All 
persons in whose hearts there are love and devotion, 
shall undoubtedly obtain deliverance from trans- 
migration. Wealth or supernatural power may 
strive to lead them astray, but will not succeed. 
Profit or loss, joy or sorrow, praise or blame never 
cause them to waver. At every breath they repeat 
the Name of Sri Wahguru, the immortal God. They 
never incline to mammon or worldly advantages, 
since they know that all such things are perishable 
and delusive like a mirage. He who hath not divine 
knowledge, is like a man in a lonely forest in the 
heat of the year, who searcheth for water but findeth 
only a sandy waste. The sun above him burneth- 
his head, the sand beneath him his feet, and he 
findeth no respite from his sufferings. He who on 
the contrary hath divine knowledge, knoweth that 
it is not water, but a sea of sand that is before him, 
that everything is false and that God alone is true. 
Without love and devotion to God all other means 
of obtaining salvation are unprofitable. 0 J ogis, it 
is very difficult even for yourselves to practise Jog 
in this age, and you can never obtain perfection by 
it. Even if you obtain supernatural power, it is 
very difficult to fix your attention on God, for the 
mind wandereth in every direction, and is not at 

s 2 


26 o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


rest even for a moment. But, supposing it were 
possible to practise Jog, thoughts of wealth and 
supernatural power would ultimately lead men 
astray. Their desire is to obtain money, beautiful 
women, fame, greatness, and honour. In such 
aspirations man forgetteth God. They who know 
Him are never led astray. However potent their 
temptations may be, they conquer them, and there- 
fore enjoy the sweets of divine knowledge and medi- 
tation. A man may wear a J ogi’s garb, but without 
devotion in his heart God never entereth it. It 
must be one of our main objects to extricate our- 
selves from the mire of the world.’ The Guru com- 
pleted his instructions to the J ogis by repeating to 
them the following hymn : — 

0 Jogi, when thou touchest the strings only with thy 
hands, thy lute is played in vain. 

Under the Guru’s instruction utter God’s praises, O Jogi, 
and dye thy soul with the dye of God’s love. 

O Jogi, teach thine intellect divine instruction. 

The one God existeth in every age, I bow before Him. 

Thou singest in many measures and arguest in many ways, 
but thy heart is only playing a game. 

Thou desirest to work thy well and water the ground after 
the oxen have gone to pasture. 

Perform the duty of sowing God’s name in the soil of thy 
body ; God will then germinate and there shall be a verdant 
field. 

Yoke a constant mind for a bullock and by means of it 
irrigate thy love of God with the Guru’s instruction. 

Jogis, Jangams and all creation, 0 Lord, are Thine ; they 
walk by the wisdom Thou givest. 

O Lord of slave Nanak, searcher of hearts, turn my soul 
unto Thee. 1 

On account of the general impression produced 
by the Guru's teaching, people of every class and 
religion flocked to see and hear him, and there was 

1 Asa. 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 261 

a great accession of converts. Several persons, as 
usual in such cases, became envious of his fame and 
success, and foremost among them was a third Tapa 
or penitent. 1 He said : ‘ This is really the terrible 
Kal age. I a penitent bear cold and heat, yet 
people heed me not, while they reverence this 
married man as a guru.’ Thus the Tapa spluttered, 
and foamed, and impotently raged. One day he 
repaired to the Guru’s court and thus addressed 
him : ‘ 0 Guru, thy Sikhs are very proud ; they 
accept not the Veds or Shastars ; they make no 
pilgrimages ; nor do they fast, perform the usual 
religious duties of Hindus, or practise austerities of 
any sort. They only reverence thee and recognize 
thy compositions. Their adoration is confined to 
the utterance of Wahguru. These misguided people 
are losing the advantages of their human birth. 
Pray tell me, sir, however can they go to heaven ? ' 
The Guru replied : ‘ 0 Tapa, my Sikhs desire not 
heaven. Heaven they deem not fit reward for their 
merits. They never engage in worship which is 
merely intended for the admiration of the public. 
Their minds are absorbed in God’s love. That is 
their heaven and their salvation. Thou knowest not 
the glory of the saints. Thou hast forsaken the real 
thing, attached thyself to false ceremonies, and for- 
feited thy salvation. Thy mind is filled with pride. 
Through pride and boasting men completely lose 
their way in this world. Without faith no devotion, 
penance, or worship availeth. They who possess no 
faith are drowned in lust, wrath, worldly love, 
covetousness, pride, and whatever else there is of 
evil. It is not so with my Sikhs. Their confidence 
and trust are reposed in the one immortal God. 
At every breath they repeat His name, and thus 
easily merit salvation. They need not penances or 
pilgrimages. They are in themselves pure and holy 

1 Accounts of the Tapa who opposed Guru Angad and of the Tapa 
who opposed Guru Amar Das have already been given. 



262 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


places.’ The Guru composed the following on the 
occasion : — 

The Ganges, the Jamna, the Godavari, and the Saraswati 
make efforts to obtain the dust of the saints’ feet. 

They say ‘ The filth of sin which falleth into us from 
those who are full of it, is washed away by the dust of the 
saints’ feet.’ 

Bathe in the Name as in the sixty-eight places of pil- 
grimage. 

When the dust of the saints’ feet riseth and falleth into 
the eyes, it removeth all the filth of evil inclinations. 

Bhagirath 1 by penance brought down the Ganges, and 
Shiv established Kedarnath 2 and Banaras ; 

Krishan herded cows in Bindraban ; but it was by pro- 
ducing saints of God that all these places became famous. 

All the places of pilgrimage which the gods established 
long for the dust of the saints’ feet, and say — 

‘When we meet a saint of God and a holy man of the 
Guru, we will apply the dust of his feet to our foreheads.’ 

0 my Lord, all Thy creation longeth for the dust of the 
saints’ feet. 

Nanak, God granteth the dust of the saints’ feet to him 
on whose forehead it hath been written, and saveth him. 3 

It is said the Tapa was convinced on hearing this 
hymn, and embraced the Sikh religion. 

The Guru occupied most of his time in composing 
hymns breathing great devotional fervour and in 
receiving and addressing his Sikhs. Piles of wealth 
were offered him, but his thoughts turned not in 
that direction. 

Among the Sikhs at Goindwal was a simple man 
called Handal, a native of Jandiala in the present 

1 Sagara was king of Ajudhia. Bhagirath, a descendant of his, 
performed austerities which induced Shiv to allow the Ganges to 
descend to the earth for the purpose of bathing the ashes of Sagara's 
sons who had been consumed by the wrath of the sage Kapila. 

2 Kedarnath, a place of pilgrimage in the Himalayas sacred to 
the god Shiv, who is there represented as a shapeless mass of rock. 

3 Malar. 


LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 263 

district of Amritsar, who was ever on the alert to 
perform submissive service for the Guru. Handal 
continually repeated God’s name, conversed with 
no one, and remained absorbed in devotion. He 
was unaffected by joy or sorrow, and every one 
loved him on account of his child-like nature ; but 
he himself bore neither love nor hate to any one, 
and was known as a saint. One day the Guru 
went to visit his kitchen. There he saw willing 
Sikhs at work. Handal, who was kneading flour at 
the time, was delighted to see him, and prepared 
to prostrate himself before him. As the wet flour 
was adhering to his hands, he put them behind his 
back, so that they might not be seen, and then 
threw himself at the Guru’s feet. The Guru was 
gratified on seeing his true and humble devotion — 
‘ O Handal, thy love is pleasing to my soul ; thou 
hast prostrated thyself in a new manner. Thy 
service is complete. What thou desirest, that will 
I give thee.’ The Guru blessed him, gave him a 
robe of honour, granted him deliverance, and thus 
addressed him : * Return to thy native town, repeat 
the Name, initiate Sikhs, and keep them on the 
Guru’s way. Have confidence in none but the 
Creator and the true Guru.’ Handal went home, 
and lived in Jandiala, where a shrine has been 
erected in his honour. His followers do not per- 
form the Hindu obsequies, nor take the bones of 
the dead to the Ganges. The vessels and clothes 
offered by the Hindus to the dead, to wear on their 
journey, are by the Handalis applied to their own 
wants instead of being distributed to the inferior 
priests who minister at Hindu funeral rites. Strange 
to say, it was the descendants of this pious man who 
introduced falsehood into the lives of the Gurus, 
and destroyed the first authentic accounts of their 
lives. 



264 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chapter III 

About that time Gur Das, author of ‘Wars' 
and ‘Habits’, went to visit the Guru . 1 He pro- 
strated himself before him and said, ‘ My lord, thou 
art the honour of the unhonoured, the life of the 
holy, the protector of the poor. I have come to 
seek thy protection. Make me a disciple of thine.’ 
The Guru was ever pleased to accede to such a 
request, and, having heard of Gur Das’s good 
report as a Sikh, directed him to go to Agra and 
preach the Sikh religion there. Bhai Gur Das be- 
came a famous and successful preacher. He sent 
several of the Agra Sikhs to the Guru, who taught 
them the advantages of human birth and the neces- 
sity of working out ultimate salvation therein. The 
Guru at that time composed the following for the 
instruction of his Sikhs in the practice of their 
religion : — 

Let him who calleth himself a Sikh of the true Guru, rise 
early and meditate on God ; 

Let him exert himself in the early morning, bathe in the 
tank of nectar, 

Repeat God’s name under the Guru’s instruction, and all 
his sins and trangressions shall be erased. 

Let him at sunrise sing the Guru’s hymns, and whether 
sitting or standing meditate on God’s name. 

The disciple who at every breath meditateth on God, will 
please the Guru’s heart. 

The Guru communicateth instruction to that disciple of 
his to whom my Lord is merciful. 

The slave Nanak prayeth for the dust of the feet of that 
Guru’s disciple who himself repeateth God’s name and 
causeth others to do so . 2 

The Guru again reminded his disciples of the order 
of Guru Amar Das to make a nectareous tank — the 

1 Suraj Parkash, Ras II, Chapter 14. 

2 Gauri ki War- 1 . 


LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 265 

sacred Sikh tank in Amritsar — as a second place of 
Sikh pilgrimage, and exhorted them to assist in 
completing the work he had begun. The Guru and 
his party proceeded to a thick forest filled with 
luxuriant Indian trees. He rested beneath the shade 
of the shisham tree near which he had previously 
laid out the tank and done some excavation. 

The Kardar, or magistrate and revenue collector, 
of Patti, a town in the Lahore district, had five 
daughters, but was not favoured with a son. All 
the daughters are described as beautiful, virtuous, 
and obedient. Four of them were married, and 
happened at the time to be visiting their parents, 
but the youngest had not yet been even betrothed. 
One day the whole five went to bathe and enjoy 
the fresh air in their father’s country garden. As 
they were returning home, they met a company of 
saints engaged in divine worship. One of the saints 
burst forth into God’s praises. The four married 
ladies went home, while the unmarried one remained 
to hear the holy man as he sang the eighth slok of 
the Asa ki War. 

The saint thus concluded his discourse : ‘ God is 
the Cherisher and Lord of all. He is the Cause of 
causes. He setteth everything in motion, and hold- 
eth everything in His own power. It is the one 
God who destroyeth and preserveth, who produceth 
and cherisheth.’ When the young lady heard this 
and similar instruction, divine love sprang up within 
her. She then and there divested herself of her 
jewels and superfluous costly raiment, and distributed 
them among the saints. Having thus gratified her 
spiritual promptings she went home, and there con- 
tinued to be absorbed in God’s love. She lost no 
time in communicating to her sisters the instruction 
and spiritual satisfaction she had received. 

When her mother heard that her youngest daughter 
had suddenly undertaken the role of preacher, she 
became very angry, and informed her husband. The 


266 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


father, in order to make trial of his daughters, sum- 
moned them all to his presence, and asked who gave 
them to eat and drink, and who cherished and pro- 
tected them. The four married daughters bowing 
to their father said, that it was their parents who 
had provided them with food and cherished and 
protected them. The jewels and ornaments and 
everything they possessed had been the gifts of their 
parents. The father, seeing that his youngest 
daughter was silent, inquired the cause. She then 
found utterance : ‘ The one God alone is the Cherisher 
of creation. Parents are only a pretext.’ Her father 
was very angry on hearing this reply, and again 
addressed her : ‘ Who hath given thee clothes and 
jewels?’ She replied: ‘Father dear, all are God’s 
gifts. It is the Creator who bestoweth everything. 
He giveth to thee and to me, and protecteth us all.’ 
The father replied, ‘ I shall see if God will protect 
thee.’ 

After some time a leprous cripple came to the 
town. His flesh, where not melting away, was eaten 
by worms, and his whole body emitted a foul odour. 
To such a man did the angry father marry his pious 
daughter without her consent and without a dowry. 
He stripped her even of the jewels and dresses she 
had retained after her offerings to the saints. It 
was impossible for her to be pleased with her hus- 
band, yet she bore her evil fate with fortitude, and 
said : ‘ 0 God, although I can have no happiness in 
this world with my husband, yet Thou art my true 
Lord and Creator. Thou cherisheth the eighty-four 
lakhs of existences, and wilt also cherish me.’ Saying 
this she set herself to wait on her leprous spouse, as 
if he were her god. She begged from door to door, 
thus maintained him and herself, and wore out her 
days of sorrow. 

One day her husband addressed her: ‘My be- 
loved, my beautiful, other people shun me in disgust, 
and will not even touch me, but thou waitest on 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 267 

me with extreme self-devotion. I have now one 
more request to make thee. By granting it God 
will vouchsafe thee thy reward.’ She replied, ' My 
body and soul are thine, and as thou orderest so 
shall I do.’ Then her husband said : ' I was born 
a cripple, and I afterwards contracted leprosy. I am 
weak, poor, and miserable. Far from being able to 
serve others, I cannot maintain myself. Attached 
to me thou hast undergone great hardship and 
misery. I have now suffered for my evil acts in 
former states of existence, but I have done nothing 
good even in this life. Now do me this last favour 
by taking me to a place of pilgrimage, that I may 
endeavour to earn salvation hereafter.’ 

She procured a basket, put her husband into it, 
and tenderly bore him on her head to Hardwar, 
Tribeni, and other places of Hindu pilgrimage in the 
hope of curing him of his malady. Wandering and 
wandering, she by the divine guidance of piety and 
virtue arrived footsore and weary at the very spot 
which the third Guru had indicated and the fourth 
Guru had marked out as the site of his tank of 
nectar, and there laid down her burden. She and 
her husband were soon seized with an imperious 
desire for food, and bethought them how it was to 
be obtained. After much discussion, during which 
the wife expressed her reluctance to leave her hus- 
band, it was decided that he should remain under 
a ber tree in the cool and grateful proximity of the 
water, while she departed to the nearest village to 
beg their daily meal. The leper, left alone, saw two 
crows fighting. One had a piece of bread in its 
mouth, which the other tried to snatch. While they 
were struggling, the bread fell into the pool. Both 
birds swooped down upon it. On emerging from 
the tank’s tiny wavelets they became swans of 
singular whiteness, and flew to Mansarowar, a lake 
in Tibbat (Thibet) supposed by the Indians to be the 
natal place of those beautiful birds. The leper saw 



268 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


that the water possessed marvellous healing and 
cleansing properties, and at once determined to test 
its efficacy on himself. He left his basket and 
crawled into the water. The leprosy at once dis- 
appeared from the whole of his body except one 
finger by which he had held on to a branch of the 
ber tree on the margin. Not only had the leprosy 
disappeared, but he who had hitherto been a cripple 
was restored to health and the splendour of manly 
beauty, and he calmly awaited the return of his 
darling and faithful spouse from her mendicant 
excursion. 

On arriving, her consternation knew no bounds. 
In the perfect proportions of the man who stood 
before her, she could not discover her husband, the 
recent crippled and maimed leper, and she shrank 
from his embrace with all the indignation of out- 
raged virtue. In vain did he essay to explain to 
her the cause of his metamorphosis. She inter- 
rupted his narrative with tears and imprecations. 
Her belief was, that the stranger before her had 
killed her husband, and now presented himself as 
an unholy lover in her helplessness and bereave- 
ment. The quarrel waxed hot between husband 
and wife. She refused to accept his statements, and 
he felt mortified at the incredulity of his hitherto 
peerless spouse. Remonstrance and argument had 
no effect on her, and feminine obstinacy temporarily 
triumphed. With ceaseless objurgations and moni- 
tions of divine vengeance she hastened from the 
presence of the man she believed guilty of such 
great enormity, to mourn her darling leper in some 
remote and forlorn solitude. 

Some villagers who had accidentally seen the 
occurrence, bore witness to the fact that it was really 
the same man she had brought in her basket. The 
lady still remained sceptical. On this they told her 
that Guru Ram Das, a famous saint of God, was 
sitting under a tree not far distant, and if she went 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 269 

to him he would resolve her doubts. Accordingly 
she and her husband appeared before him. The 
wife after compliments said : ‘ I am a virtuous 
woman. I left my leprous husband here and he 
hath disappeared. This man whom I know not, 
claimeth to be he, but I believe he is some deceitful 
person who hath a design on my virtue. I deem 
not that this pool possesseth such extraordinary 
efficacy as he allegeth.’ The Guru smiled and said : 
‘ Thou sayest this pool hath no such efficacy. It is 
in fact supreme among all places of pilgrimages. If 
thou even yet believe not, see this man is affected 
with leprosy in one finger. Let him dip it into the 
water, and thou shalt see the result. And whoever 
bathe th in this tank shall obtain balm for his wounded 
spirit ! 5 The late leprous cripple put his finger into 
the water and it was immediately healed. Thus 
was his wife doubly convinced that it was in reality 
her husband who had accosted her, and that the 
pool possessed miraculous virtues. The ber tree still 
on the spot is that under which she left her crippled 
husband. The place is called the Dukhbhanjani, or 
destroyer of sorrow. 

After the conjugal reconciliation through the kind 
offices of the Guru, the faithful couple embraced his 
religion, and the quondam leper and cripple assisted 
him in enlarging the tank, building to it flights of 
descending steps, and rearing on its margin imposing 
edifices for divine praise and prayer, worthy of the 
miraculous discovery of the water and its still more 
miraculous virtue. 

His Sikhs were rejoiced on seeing the Guru’s 
participation in this miracle, and the magistrate of 
Patti was astonished on hearing of it. He recognized 
the Guru as a real saint of God, made him offerings, 
and prostrated himself before him. The magistrate 
was delighted on again beholding his daughter and 
seeing her husband restored to ordinary human 
shape and vigour. Having no son he adopted his 



270 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


completely healed son-in-law. The Guru on that 
occasion composed the following : — 

God is very dear to the hearts of those who have met the 
society of the saints and whose souls are fascinated by the 
Word. 

Repeat God’s name, meditate on God ; it is He who 
conferreth gifts on all. 

0 my brethren, God fascinateth my soul. 

1 sing God’s praises ; His servant is honoured by meeting 
the Guru and the society of saints. 

The service of God under the Guru’s instruction' is an 
ocean of happiness ; through it wealth, prosperity, and 
supernatural power fall at man’s feet. 

They whose support is God’s name utter it and are adorned 
thereby. 

They who feel angry on hearing the Name are devoid of 
good fortune and possess a bad and worthless understanding. 

Thou mayest throw ambrosia to crows and ravens, but 
they will only satiate themselves with filth and ordure. 

The true Guru, the true speaker is a lake of nectar 1 by 
bathing wherein crows become swans. 

Nanak, blessed, and great, and very fortunate are they 
whose hearts’ filth is washed away by God’s name under 
the Guru’s instruction . 2 


The magistrate, on hearing this, became ashamed 
of his previous perversity. He made over all his 
property to his son-in-law, went- to serve the Guru, 
and put himself under his instruction and spiritual 
protection . 3 

The Guru, telling his Sikhs that Santokhsar, the 
first tank he had undertaken, should be finished by 
his successor, set about completing his Amritsar, or 


1 Amritsar. 2 Gujari. 

3 In the Suraj Par kash, Ras II, Chapter 37 et seq., all this is 
represented to have occurred in the time of Guru Arjan. It is not 
likely that Guru Ram Das would have neglected to carry out the 
work which he himself had begun under the order of his beloved 
father-in-law, the third Guru. Even the author of the Suraj Parkash 
himself throws a doubt on his own narrative. Ras II, 39. 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 271 

tank of nectar, as a place of pilgrimage for his 
followers. He induced all his Sikhs to join in the 
work, under Bhai Budha’s superintendence, and en- 
gaged labourers to assist them. He said that the 
tank of nectar should be God’s home, and whoever 
bathed in it should obtain all spiritual and temporal 
advantages. During the progress of the work the 
hut in which the Guru first sheltered himself was 
enlarged for his residence. It is now known as the 
Guru’s Mahal, or palace. 

Chapter IV 

Although the Guru’s Sikhs, followers, and admirers 
of every class came to assist in the excavation of 
the tank, yet money was necessary to pay further 
labourers and maintain the Guru’s kitchen. Ac- 
cordingly Bhai Budha and the foremost Sikhs one 
day waited on the Guru and represented that further 
funds were necessary for the completion of the work. 

The Guru, after reflection, decided to send his 
agents to different countries to spread the Sikh 
religion and also collect the offerings of the faithful. 
Such agents were called masands. In the time of 
the Afghan kings, nobles were styled Masnad-i-ali. 
Hence the word masnad was employed as an ordinary 
appellation of courtiers. From its frequent use it 
was changed in the mouths of Sikhs into masand. 
The Guru was called Sacha Padshah, or the true 
king, so his agents were styled masands. 1 For some 
time after their appointment they sent large sums 
to the Guru, but they afterwards became a generally 
dishonest body of men, not contributing to the 
Guru’s treasury, and grasping power as opportunity 
offered. 

An aged couple went to the Guru and prayed 
him to grant them the favour of a son. He replied 
that a son was not recorded in their destiny. They 

1 Dabisian-i-Mazahib. 


272 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


said they knew that, but they had come to him to 
reverse the decree of fate. The Guru then informed 
them that four sons were to be born to himself, but 
he would give them one of them and content him- 
self with three. After this Bhagtu 1 was born to 
the aged couple. 

Some Jogis who had previously visited the Guru 
thought they would return to him to ascertain 
whether the extension of his fame had filled his 
heart with pride. They were delighted at finding 
him possess the same humility, the same suavity, 
and the same toleration of indignities as before. They 
then begged him to give them instruction. Full of 
self-abasement the Guru uttered the following : — 

The heart coveteth gold and women, and sweet to it is 
worldly love. 

Man turneth his mind to palaces, mansions, horses, and 
other pleasures. 

O my Lord God, how shall I be saved who think not on 
Thee? 

0 my God, such base acts have been mine. 

Thou, O God, who possessest excellences and art com- 
passionate, mercifully pardon all my sins. 

No beauty is mine, no high birth, and no manners. 

What dare I without merits say in Thy presence since 
I have not uttered Thy name ? 

We sinners shall be saved with the Guru. This is the 
true Guru’s favour. 

God gave all men souls, bodies, mouths, noses, and water 
to use ; 

He gave them corn to eat, clothes to wear, and pleasures 
to enjoy. 

He who gave them is not remembered by man ; the brute 
thinketh that he hath made them all himself ; 

Whereas it is Thou, O Searcher of hearts, who hast made 
all things and pervadest them. 

1 This man Bhagtu is ancestor of the Kaithal family and also of 
the Rais of Arnauli in the Ambala district. 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 


273 

What can we poor creatures do ? This is all Thy play, 
0 Lord. 

Humble Nanak purchased in the market is a slave of the 
slaves of God. 1 

On the text that no one can be relied on except 
God the Guru uttered the following : — 

Some rely 2 on their friends, their sons, and their brothers ; 

Some rely on their marriage relations, and their sons-in- 
aw ; 

Some for a special object rely on their king and their 
headman, 

But I rely on God who is everywhere contained. 

My reliance is on God ; God is my prop. 

I have no party or faction except God ; I sing His mani- 
fold and unnumbered praises. 

What man relieth on is perishable ; 

He who relieth on what is false shall repent of it. 

The man who doeth base things shall not be lasting. 

My reliance is on God than whom none is more powerful. 

All other reliance is an illusion of Maya. 

The pagans burn for mammon. 

They suffer transmigration and lose their game. 

I rely on God who adjusteth everything in this world 
and the next. 

Lust, wrath, avarice, worldly love, and pride have in- 
creased ; 

And, on account of the quarrels resulting from these deadly 
sins, there are many factions in this age. 

God causeth him to whom He is merciful to meet the 
society of the saints. 

My partisan is God who hath destroyed all other partisans. 

They who feel false worldly love, sit down and form 
factions. 

They guess the faults of others and increase their own 
conceit. 

As they sow so shall they eat. 

1 Gauri. 

2 Dhara is literally a party or faction, 

T 


SIKH. II 



274 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Nanak’s reliance is on the faith of God which conquereth 
the whole world . 1 

The Gum then turning to his Sikhs counselled 
them to consult God in all undertakings, and He 
would render them assistance. 

Whatever work you desire to do tell it to God, 

And He will accomplish it ; the true Guru beareth true 
witness to this. 

By the company and munificence of the saints you shall 
taste nectar. 

Destroyer of fear, Kind One, preserve the honour of Thy 
slave. 

Nanak, sing God’s praises, and thou shalt find Him 
though unseen to the world. 2 


Put aside lust, wrath, falsehood, and slander ; renounce 
mammon, and cease to be proud. 

Renounce lust for woman, renounce worldly love, then 
shalt thou obtain the Bright One in this dark world. 

Renounce ideas of honour or dishonour and love of sons 
and wives ; renounce greed and desire, and fix thine at- 
tention on God. 

Nanak, he in whose heart the True One dwelleth, shall 
by means of the true Word be absorbed in God’s name . 3 

One Tiratha went to the Guru to be instructed 
how he could free himself from his sins and obtain 
mental peace. The Guru replied : ‘ Ever speak the 
truth, than which there is nothing more meritorious. 
The true Guru will ever assist him who speaketh 
the truth. God is truth, and he who speaketh truth 
shall be absorbed in Him.’ 

Three Sikhs, Bishan Das, Manak Chand, and Puru 
went to visit the Guru, and begged him to give 
them instruction for their own salvation and that 
of their families. The Guru bade them serve Sikhs 
and induce their relations to do likewise. Bishan 

1 Asa. 2 Sri Rag ki War. 3 Majh ki War. 


LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 


275 


Das, Manak Chand, and Puru were further directed 
to consider their families as God’s gift, and repeat 
with them the Creator’s name. 

The Guru instructed Maiya, Japa, Kanaiya, and 
Tulsa to love the Guru’s hymns beyond their own 
affairs. ‘ Whenever you read the Guru’s hymns, 
keep your attention on their meaning, and never 
allow your minds to wander. As a sick horse is 
curbed to receive medicine, so must the mind be 
restrained for the purpose of receiving the Guru’s 
hymns and their advantages. Withdraw your minds 
from evil, and reflect on what the Guru said and 
what is due to yourselves.’ 

Seven Sikhs, named Dharam Das, Dugar Das, Dipa, 
Jetha, Sansari, Bula, and Tirath, asked the Guru to 
tell them how they could be saved. He replied as 
follows : ‘ In the first place, abandon mental pride, 
adopt humility, slander not, eschew vice, serve out 
of your own resources the Sikhs who visit you. 
Cheerfully give them food and clothing. Grant 
their requests and refuse them not. When a Sikh 
hath an important work in hand, join him and pray 
for him ; and if you see that it cannot be accomplished 
without money, collect subscriptions for him from 
every quarter, and at the same time contribute 
yourselves. Bring a Sikh work to completion, and 
you shall obtain the essence of happiness. AAdien- 
ever there is a congregation of the holy, cause the 
word of God to be adequately preached and sung. 
Go devoutly thither in the evening and the morning, 
and imbue your minds with love. To the best of 
your ability rear to God a beautiful temple, and 
appoint thereto a priest who is competent to ex- 
pound His word. Let the wayfarer ever be fed, 
whether by one Sikh or by many together. Re- 
member the Name, and you shall obtain indescribable 
spiritual advantage therefrom. Serve the holy, than 
which there is no greater work of charity. By 
attending to these instructions you shall obtain 



276 THE SIKH RELIGION 

happiness in this world and dwell near your Guru 
in the next.’ 

While the tank was being excavated, dwellings 
arose in the vicinity for the accommodation of the 
Guru’s Sikhs, visitors, and workmen ; and in time 
a beautiful city was constructed, which was at first 
called Ramdaspur, 1 or the city of Ram Das, and 
finally Amritsar, as it is now known. 

Sahari Mai, the Guru’s first cousin, came from 
Lahore specially to invite him to grace his son’s 
marriage with his presence. The Guru represented 
all the difficulties there would be were he to leave 
Amritsar. Sikhs were daily coming to see him and 
receive instruction, and it would be improper for him 
to neglect his duty as Guru. In the second place, 
wherever he went he was accompanied by a large 
crowd of followers ; and it would not be right to 
im pose the burden of feasting them all on the parents 
of the bride. In lieu of himself the Guru consented 
to send one of his sons. He addressed Prithi 
Chand, generally known as Prithia, but he made 
excuses. He said that he had never before been 
separated from his father, and he did not wish to 
leave him now. He represented how important it 
was that he should remain at home to take charge 
of the offerings, and to ensure that they were not 
misappropriated. It was also necessary for him to 
attend the Guru’s kitchen, and take care that 
strangers received due attention. The Guru replied 
that his own business was never interrupted, and 
some other Sikh would willingly undertake Prithia’s 
duties. Prithia finally urged that he dreaded the 
turmoil of weddings, and should feel unhappy if he 
went. Prithia had two motives of his own for 
refusing. He was in charge of the offerings, and 
was able to furtively set aside much wealth for him- 

1 This name, well known in former times, of the present city of 
Amritsar furnishes an additional proof that Guru Ram Das continued 
the work he had begun under his predecessor. 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 277 

self. If he went to Lahore this illicit gain would 
fall to some one else. The time, too, was approaching 
for the selection of a Guru in succession to his father, 
and he apprehended supersession during his absence.’ 

The Guru then addressed his second son, Mahadev, 
who was a religious enthusiast and heeded not sub- 
lunary affairs. He replied that he had no relations 
or connexions in the world, and, that being the case, 
why should he entangle himself in any such enter- 
prise ? The Guru then addressed himself to his 
youngest son, Arjan, who when not in attendance on 
his father was constantly engaged in devotion, who 
was possessed of all saintly qualities, and regarded no 
wealth or worldly advantages. The Guru asked him 
to go with his relation to Lahore, and after the 
wedding remain at the temple there to give religious 
instruction to the Sikhs. Arjan replied that he only 
desired his father’s pleasure. It was but a wedding 
and an occasion of rejoicing ; but even were it 
a mission which involved danger of life, he would 
go all the same and gladly obey his father’s orders. 
The Guru was well pleased, and again directed him 
to tarry some time in Lahore, and not return until 
he had received a written invitation. While there, 
whatever offerings Arjan should receive were to be 
consigned to his kitchen to feed the poor and the 
stranger, so that none should be sent away hungry. 

Before his departure his mother went to call him 
in the early morning, and asked him to repeat God’s 
name. This was preparatory to giving him the 
maternal advice and uttering for him the prayer 
which he subsequently versified in the following 
hymn : — 

Ever repeat the name of that God who hath no end or 
limit ; 

By remembering Him all sin is removed and ancestors 
are saved. 

0 my son, this is thy mother’s blessing. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


278 

May God never forget thee for a moment, and do thou 
ever repeat the name of the Lord of the world ! 

May the true Guru be merciful to thee and mayest thou 
love the saints ! 

May God’s preservation of thine honour be thy raiment, 
and singing His praises thy daily food ! 

Ever quaff the nectar of God’s name ; mayest thou live 
long and may the remembrance of God afford thee endless 
delight ! 

May joy and pleasure be thine ; may thy desires be fulfilled 
and mayest thou never feel anxiety ! 

Let thy heart become the bumble-bee, and God’s feet the 
lotus for thee . 1 

Nanak, attach thyself to them with the delight the 
chatrik findeth in raindrops . 2 

Chapter V 

One day, in conversation with his Sikhs in Lahore, 
Arjan expressed the regret he felt at his long separa- 
tion from his father. They accordingly suggested 
that he should write to him for his recall. Arjan was 
pleased with the suggestion and said, ‘ Although the 
Guru appeareth to have forgotten us, we have never 
forgotten him.' Upon this he addressed the fol- 
lowing to his father : — 

My soul longeth for a sight of the Guru ; 

It crieth like the chatrik for raindrops. 

My thirst is not quenched, and I have no rest without a 
sight of the dear saint. 

I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to a sight of the Guru, 
the dear saint. • 

He sent this quatrain by a Sikh to the Guru. 
When the Sikh reached Amritsar the Guru was 

1 May thy heart, like the bumble-bee, be attached to the lotus of 
God’s feet ! 

2 Gujari. 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 


279 


taking his afternoon repose. Prithia recognized the 
messenger as the servant who had accompanied 
Arjan to Lahore. He called him, and asked if he 
had brought a letter. He replied that he had, and 
unsuspectingly delivered it. Prithia on reading it 
became filled with jealousy. He knew he could not 
have written the verses himself, and he feared that, if 
the Guru saw them, he might appoint Arjan as his 
successor. He therefore concealed the letter and 
sent a verbal reply in his father’s name, telling 
Arjan to remain in Lahore and not return until he 
was sent for. Arjan on receiving this message knew 
it had been sent by Prithia and not by his father 
the Guru, and on questioning the messenger, dis- 
covered what had occurred. He then wrote a 
second quatrain and dispatched it with strict orders 
to deliver it only to the Guru. It was as follows : — 

Thy face is beautiful, the sound of thy words giveth 
composure. 

It is long since I have seen my lord. 

Blest is the land where thou dwellest, O my saint, friend, 
and lord. 

I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to the holy Guru, my 
friend and lord. 

Prithia was lying in wait for the messenger and 
forcibly took possession of Arjan’s second letter. On 
reading it he became more incensed than before. 
In his father’s name he sent a second message, 
* Remain at Lahore for some time yet and come not 
without orders. I will myself shortly go to fetch 
thee.’ Prithia instructed the servant to take the 
message quickly, or the Guru would be angry with 
him. What Prithia really feared was that if the 
servant delayed in Amritsar, the Guru might come 
to know the deceit that was being practised. The 
servant on reaching Lahore told Arjan how Prithia 
had taken possession of the letter. On this Arjan 



280 THE SIKH RELIGION 

wrote and despatched a third quatrain to his 
father : — 

When I was separated from thee for a ghari, it seemed 
an age. 

When shall I now meet thee, O my beloved lord ? 

I cannot pass the night, and sleep cometh not without 
beholding the Guru’s court. 

I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to that court of the true 
Guru. 

On this letter Arjan took the precaution of writing 
No. 3, so that his father might know that two other 
letters had previously been dispatched. Arjan on 
this occasion gave urgent instruction to the mes- 
senger that the letter should only be handed to the 
Guru himself. 

Prithia, as before, was waiting to intercept the 
third letter. The messenger was also on his guard, 
and, on seeing Prithia, hid himself. Prithia could 
not be for ever on the watch. When he went to 
his private house for reflection, the messenger took 
the opportunity to approach the Guru and give him 
his son Arjan’s letter. The Guru on seeing it noticed 
that it bore the number 3, but only this one letter 
had reached him. The messenger told him what 
had previously occurred, whereat the Guru was 
much incensed. Prithia, who did not wish to remain 
long absent, arrived by the time the messenger had 
finished his narrative. The Guru asked Prithia 
what had become of the first two letters. He 
replied that he did not remember where they had 
been put. He would search and bring them. The 
Guru thrice asked him if he did not know where 
the letters were, and thrice he swore by the Guru’s 
holy feet that he had no knowledge of them. Upon 
this the Guru, reading his secret thoughts, told him 
that the letters were concealed in his coat pocket 
at home. The Guru sent a servant to Prithia’s house 
with a request to his Wife to send Prithia’s coat which 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 281 

was hanging on a peg on the wall. The servant 
brought the coat, and in its pocket were found the 
two missing letters ! 

Bhai Budha then by order of the Guru proclaimed 
Prithia’s villainy to the whole assembly. Prithia 
was thoroughly ashamed, and found no retreat in 
subterfuge and no pardon in apology. The Guru 
said : ‘ Prithia’s deception hath been laid bare before 
the Sikhs. A trial hath been made as to whether 
he is noble or base, obedient or disobedient to the 
Guru.’ The Guru then at once dispatched Bhai 
Budha to Lahore with a carriage to bring Arjan 
home with all possible speed. After Arjan’s arrival 
and obeisance to his father, the Guru remarked to 
him that he had previously sent three quatrains, 
and suggested him to write a fourth that the hymn 
might be complete. On this he extemporized the 
following : — 

It is my good fortune to have met the holy Guru, 

And I have found the Immortal God in my own home. 

May I serve thee and never again be separated from thee 
for an instant ! Nanak is thy slave. 

I am a sacrifice, and my soul is a sacrifice unto thee : 
Nanak is thy slave . 1 

On hearing this the Guru was highly pleased and 
embraced his son. He then addressed him the 
following brief but pregnant words : ‘ Guru Amar 
Das declared that the Guruship was the reward of 
merit. As only he who is lowly and humble-minded 
may lay claim to it, I grant it to thee.’ Saying 
this the Guru sent for five paise and a coco-nut, 
placed them before Arjan, and descending from his 
throne seated him on it in presence of the whole 
assembly. Bhai Budha affixed the tilak or mark of 
spiritual sovereignty to Arjan’s forehead, and he 
was publicly proclaimed Guru amid universal mani- 
festations of delight. Guru Ram Das said, ‘ Guru 

1 Majh. 



282 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Arjan hath become the world’s Guru, and, as one 
lamp is lighted from another, so the Guru’s spirit 
hath passed into him, and will dispel the darkness 
of the world.’ 

When Guru Arjan went to embrace his mother, 
he said : ‘ All my anxieties have been removed. 
Having earned the true name of God, I have come 
home.’ He then composed the following : — 

The wealth of God’s name hath become my devotion, the 
wealth of God’s name my penance, the wealth of God’s 
name my food. 

May I not forget for a moment Him whom I have obtained 
in the company of the saints ! 

0 mother, thy son hath come home to thee with profit. 

1 possess God’s wealth walking, God’s wealth sitting, God’s 
wealth waking and sleeping. 

God’s wealth is mine ablutions, God’s wealth my divine 
knowledge ; I fix mine attention on God. 

God’s wealth is my raft, God’s wealth my boat ; it is 
God’s wealth which shall take me across. 

God’s wealth hath caused me to forget my worldly anxiety; 
God’s wealth hath removed my doubts of salvation. 

From God’s wealth I have obtained the nine treasures ; 
I have come into the possession of God as wealth. 

I may eat and spend this wealth without exhausting it ; 
it will abide with me in this world arid the next. 

God loaded a treasure, and gave it to Guru Nanak ; my 
mind is imbued with God’s love. 1 

Prithia, whose anger knew no bounds, addressed 
offensive language to his father, and then informed 
Bhai Budha that his father had acted improperly. 
The Guruship was his own right, yet it had been 
given to his youngest brother. He vowed that he 
would remove Guru Arjan, seat himself on the Guru’s 
throne, and the Emperor himself would admit the 
justice of his claim. The Guru addressed Prithia 
the following by way of remonstrance : — 

1 Gujari. 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 283 

Why, 0 my son, quarrel with thy father ? 

It is a sin to quarrel with him who begot thee and reared 
thee. 

The wealth of which thou art proud belongeth to no one. 

In a moment shalt thou abandon the pleasures of sin, and 
then shalt thou repent. 

Repeat His name who is thy dear Lord, thy Master, and 
thy God. 

The slave Nanak giveth thee instruction ; if thou hearken 
unto it, thy regrets shall depart. 1 

Notwithstanding this remonstrance Prithia con- 
tinued to use offensive language to the author of 
his existence. ' Fine mercy thou hast shown me ! 
Thou hast conferred the Guruship on thy youngest 
son and told me falsehoods. Thou hast told me to 
repeat God’s name. Practise what thou preachest, 
and let Arjan, who hath been honoured by thee, 
also heed thine instructions.’ Guru Ram Das then 
uttered the following : — 

They render God hearty worship on whose forehead such 
destiny was recorded in the beginning. 

How can one be jealous of those whom my God the 
Creator assisteth ? 

Meditate on God, 0 my soul, meditate on God ; He is the 
Remover of the troubles of every birth. 

God in the beginning bestowed on his saints the am- 
brosial storehouse of saintship. 

The fool who trieth to rival them, shall have his face 
blackened both in this world and the next. 

They are saints, they are worshippers to whom God’s 
name is dear. 

God is obtained by their service ; ashes shall be thrown 
on the slanderer’s head. 

He in whose house this occurreth knoweth what is proper ; 
ask Guru Nanak the world’s Guru, and reflect on it. 

In the case of the four Gurus none hath ever obtained the 


1 Sarang. 



284 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guruship by revilings ; it is by God’s service the Guruship 
is obtained . 1 

When Prithia still continued to insult his father, 
the latter ordered him out of his sight, and said, 
'Thou art a Mina 2 ; my Sikhs will not obey thee, 
and will never associate with thee.’ Bibi Bhani 
then painfully called to mind the words of Guru 
Amar Das, namely, ‘ Thou hast dammed the clear 
flowing stream of the Guruship and consequently 
great trouble and annoyance shall result.’ 

While this unpleasant scene was being enacted, 
night came on, and Guru Arjan, his mother, Bhai 
Budha, and all the Sikhs went to pay their respects 
to Guru Ram Das. Guru Ram Das announced that 
he could not always abide with them, that his end 
was approaching, and that he would go to die in 
Goindwal. At his departure so many Sikhs gathered 
round him that it was difficult for them to obtain 
a sight of him. He addressed them some parting 
words of instruction of priceless value, and taking 
Arjan with him set out for Goindwal. 

On arriving at Goindwal, Guru Ram Das bathed 
in the Bawali, and had interviews with his two 
brothers-in-law, Mohan and Mohri. The next day 
he prepared a great feast, at which every one ate 
his fill. The following morning before day the Guru 
again bathed, and, having repeated the preamble of 
the Japji and the Asa ki War, began to meditate 
on Guru Amar Das. When day dawned and his 
devotions were at an end, he entrusted his Sikhs to 
Guru Arjan, directed him to complete the tanks at 
Amritsar, and repeated for him the main tenets 
of Sikhism by which he charged him ever to 
abide. 

Bibi Bhani, knowing that these injunctions were 
the signals of her husband’s death, begged him to 

1 Suhi. 

2 This word originally meant a tribe of Hindu robbers of Rajputana. 
In the Panjab the name is now applied to a villain with a smiling face. 



LIFE OF GURU RAM DAS 285 

take her with him on his final journey. He bade 
her abide in the world for some days, and then she 
should meet him. Guru Ram Das’s soul was borne 
to the celestial regions on the third day of the light 
half of the month of Bhadon, Sambat 1638 (a. d. 
1581). The bard Mathura composed the following 
on his death : — 

Guru Ram Das who was pleasing to God, went to God’s 
city; 

God gave him a throne and seated him on it. 

The demigods on receiving thee, 0 Ram Das, were pleased, 
and sang victory to thee. 

During thy life the sins of the demons 1 trembled within 
them and they fled. 2 

The sins of those who received Guru Ram Das’s instruction 
were cut away. 

He gave the umbrella and sovereignty of the earth to 
Guru Arjan. 3 

1 That is, sinful persons. 

2 That is, the evil trembled for their enormities and concealed 
themselves. 

3 Sawaiyas. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 

Sri Rag 

Praises of the Guru : — 

When the Name is obtained the mind is satisfied ; without 
the Name accursed is life. 

Let some holy friend who meeteth me point out to me 
God the Lord of excellence. 

I would be quartered for him who showed me the Name. 

O my Beloved, I live by meditating on the Name. 

Without the Name I could not live ; 0 my true Guru, 
implant it in me. 

The Name is a priceless jewel ; the perfect true Guru 
possesseth it. 

By applying myself to the service of the true Guru, he 
bringeth forth and displayeth the jewel of the Name. 

Blest are the very fortunate who come to the Guru and 
meet him. 

They who have not met the true Guru are unfortunate 
and subject to death. 

They shall again wander in birth, and be placed in terrible 
filth. 

Approach not those in whose hearts is the pariah wrath. 

The true Guru is a tank of nectar ; very fortunate are 
they who come to bathe therein. 

Their impurities of every birth depart, and the pure Name 
is implanted in them. 

The slave Nanak, by fixing his attention on the true 
Guru, hath obtained the highest dignity. 

The excellence of the Name is obtained through 
the Guru: — 

Let me sing God’s praises, let me proclaim God’s praises, 
let me utter God’s praises, 0 mother. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 287 

The holy man who repeateth His praises is my friend ; 
with him I will sing God’s praises. 

When I pierced the diamond of my heart with the diamond 
of divine knowledge , the deep colour of the Name appeared . 

0 my God, let me sing Thy praises that my soul may be 
gratified. 

My heart thirsteth for God’s name ; may the Guru be 
pleased to grant it me ! 

Dye your hearts with the love of God , 0 ye very fortunate, 
and the Guru will be pleased to confer on you favours. 

1 am a sacrifice to that true Guru who lovingly fixeth the 
Name in my heart. 

Without the true Guru, God’s name is not found even 
though one perform hundreds of thousands and millions 
of ceremonies. 

Without good fortune God is not found, even though He 
dwell in our homes and be for ever near, 

Because a screen widely separateth Him from those in 
whose hearts there is the pain of ignorance and superstition. 

Without meeting the true Guru man becometh not gold ; 
the perverse sink like iron while the boat is hard by. 

God’s name is the boat the true Guru provideth ; how 
shall we go on board ? 

He who walketh according to the will of the true Guru 
shall sit in the boat. 

Hail, hail to the greatly fortunate persons, O Nanak, 
whom the true Guru blendeth with God ! 

Man even though silly may be blended with God 
by piety. This hymn was composed by Guru Ram 
Das when after his marriage he was invited to make 
some request : — 


Sri Rag Chhant 

The girl is silly, how shall she behold God in this world ? 
When God is merciful the holy learn the affairs of the 
next world : 

The holy learn the affairs of the next world and ever 
meditate on God. 



288 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Woman shall then roam happy among her companions, 
and triumphantly swing her arm in God’s court. 

What balance of Dharmraj’s account shall remain after 
repeating God’s name ? 

The girl even though silly shall behold God in this 
world through the Guru’s instruction. 

The marriage is ended, my father ; I have found God 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

The Guru hath dispelled the darkness of ignorance, and 
lit the lamp of divine knowledge : 

The Guru hath lit the lamp of divine knowledge, 
darkness is dispelled, and I have discovered the precious 
jewel of God’s name. 

The malady of pride hath departed, sorrow hath fled, 
and I have cured my pride under the Guru’s instruc- 
tion. 

I have obtained as my spouse the Deathless One, the 
Imperishable, who shall never die or be born. 

The marriage is ended, 0 my father ; I have obtained 
God under the Guru’s instruction. 

God is very true, my father ; when God’s saints meet, 
the marriage procession is beautiful. 

She who repeateth God’s name shall be happy in this 
world and be really beautiful in the next : 

In the next she shall be very beautiful who in this world 
hath remembered the Name. 

Profitable are the whole lives of those who under the 
Guru’s instruction have conquered their minds by throwing 
the dice of God’s name. 

By meeting God’s saints my work hath prospered ; for 
my spouse I have obtained the Joyful Being. 

God is very true, my father ; when God’s saints meet, 
the marriage procession is beautiful. 

My father, give me God as a gift and dowry. 

Give me God as my raiment ; give me God as my glory 
that my work may succeed. 

By devotion to God the marriage is easy ; the Giver gave 
me the gift of the true Guru’s name. 

Thy glory, O God, shall fill the earth’s continents and the 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 289 

universe ; this dowry of the Name cannot be confounded 
with others. 

Any other dowry the perverse may display is false pride 
and worthless gilding. 

My father, give me God as a gift and dowry. 

My father, woman on meeting her beloved God extendeth 
the vine. 1 

God, who is in every age, ever setteth a-going the Guru’s 
race ; 

In every age increaseth the true Guru’s race who under 
his instruction meditate on the Name. 

God shall never be destroyed ; what He giveth ever 
increaseth. 

Nanak, the saints and God are one ; by repeating God’s 
name woman is adorned. 

My father, woman on meeting her beloved God extendeth 
the vine 1 


Sri Rag ki War 

True men eat the bread of labour ; the false and 
the deceitful live by begging : — 

Thou didst create all things, 0 Lord ; Thou givest 
sustenance to Thy creatures. 

Some live by deceit and fraud, and drop from their mouths 
falsehood and deception. 

Thou hast subjected creatures thereto ; Thou doest what 
pleaseth Thyself. 

To others Thou hast explained the truth and given un- 
failing stores thereof. 

The food of those who remember God is profitable, they 
who remember Him not, stretch out their hands to beg . 

There is none to beg from except God, the uni- 
versal Benefactor : — 

Every one belongeth to Thee ; Thou art every one’s ; 
Thou art the capital stock of all. 2 

All beg of Thee and ever supplicate Thee. 

1 That is, produces a holy offspring. 

2 Vide Vol. i. p. 60, n. r. 

U 


SIKH. II 



290 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


He to whom Thou givest hath obtained everything ; Thou 
art distant from some and to others Thou art near. 

Except Thee there is none to beg from ; let some one 
investigate this in his mind. 

All praise Thee ; Thy door is open to the holy. 

The Guru in a vision presented himself at God’s 
door : — 

I a minstrel of the Lord God went to His door. 

God from within heard my cries, and called the minstrel 
into His presence. 

Having called the minstrel, He asked him for what object 
he had come. 

‘ Thou ever bestowest gifts, merciful Lord, grant me to 
meditate on Thy name.’ 

Nanak, God the Giver caused me to repeat His name and 
clothed me with a robe of honour. 

Majh 

The advantage of the society of the saints : — 

I meditate on God’s excellences and name, 

And in company with the saints I cause His name to 
dwell in my heart. 

The Lord God is inaccessible and inapprehensible ; but 
His delights are obtained on meeting the true Guru. 

Blessings on those men of God who know Him. 

I shall go and ask them to tell me of God. 

On meeting the men of God, I will shampoo their feet, 
rub and wash them, and drink the divine essence. 

The true Guru the giver made fast in me God’s name. 

Very fortunate am I who have obtained a sight of the 
Guru. 

In uttering the true ambrosial Name which is received 
from the perfect Guru, I drink nectareous essence. 

O God, cause me to meet the society of the saints, the 
true beings. 

On meeting them I shall meditate on God’s name. 

Nanak, may I under the Guru’s instruction hear of God, 
speak of Him, and regale myself with His name ! 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


291 

The Guru shows the one God who pervades all 
things but is distinct from them : — 

Come, my sisters, meet me, my dear ones : 

I am a sacrifice to her who shall show me my Beloved. 

On meeting the society of the saints I have found God 
the Friend, and am a sacrifice to the true Guru. 

Whithersoever I look, there is the Lord. 

Thou pervadest every heart, Thou Searcher of hearts. 

The perfect Guru hath shown me God who is with me ; 
I am ever a sacrifice to the true Guru. 

There is but one breath, one matter, and one light in all 
things. 

One light pervadeth all things but is distinct in each ; 
there is no light equal thereto. 

By the favour of the Guru the one God hath been seen ; 
in everything I am a sacrifice to the true Guru. 

Nanak speaketh words of nectar 

Which are dear and pleasing to the hearts of his disciples. 

The perfect true Guru giveth instruction ; he is benefi- 
cent to others. 


Majh ki War 

Some of the attributes of the Guru : — 

He in whose heart there is truth hath the true Name, 
and uttereth the truth with his mouth ; 

He walketh in God’s way himself, and causeth others to 
do so. 

If there be a river on our way, it will wash away filth ; 
by bathing in a pond 1 more filth attacheth to one. 

The true Guru who meditateth on God night and day is 
the perfect river. 

He is saved himself with his family, and by giving God’s 
name he saveth the whole world. 

The slave Nanak is a sacrifice to him who repeat eth God’s 
name and causeth others to do so. 

1 By having recourse to a hypocritical guru. 



292 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Gauri 

Ram Das is happy beyond expression in the 
society of Guru Amar Das : — 

The beggar is happy when a householder giveth him alms ; 

The hungry man is happy when he taketh food ; 

The disciple is happy and contented when he meeteth his 
Guru. 

Grant me, 0 Lord, a sight of Thee in whom is my hope. 

Mercifully fulfil my desires. 

The chakwi is happy when she seeth the sun : 

She then meeteth her beloved and all her sorrow de- 
parteth. 

The disciple is happy when he beholdeth his Guru ; 

The calf is happy when it sucketh milk ; 

Its heart is glad when it seeth its dam ; 

The disciple is happy when he beholdeth his Guru. 

All other affections are worldly and false, 

And shall perish like false and temporary gilding. 

The slave Nanak is happy and contented with the true 
Guru. 

Happy is the family in which a religious son has 
been bom : — 

As the mother nourisheth her foetus in the hope of its 
being a son — 

‘ When he is big he will earn and allow me money which 
will give me enjoyment — ’ 

So the man of God loveth God, and God will render him 
assistance. 

0 my God, I am foolish, preserve me, 0 my Lord. 

Thy servant’s praise is Thy glory. 

They to whose hearts God’s praises are pleasing, rejoice 
in their palaces and homes. 

When they sing God’s praises, they taste all sweets. 

The man of God is the saviour of his family ; he shall 
deliver twenty-one generations, 1 yea, the whole world. 

1 This includes seven generations of the father’s family, seven of 
the mother’s, and seven of the father-in-law’s. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


293 

Whatever hath been done hath been done by God and is 
His glory, 

0 God, all creatures are Thine ; Thou pervadest them all, 
and causest them to worship Thee. 

0 God, Thou causest them to acquire the treasure of 
devotion and Thou Thyself apportionest it. 

1 am Thy slave purchased in a shop ; what skill hath this 
creature ? 

Wert Thou, 0 God, to seat me on a throne, I should still 
be Thy slave ; cause me even as a lowly grass-cutter to 
utter Thy name. 

Nanak is God’s slave, and magnifieth Him. 

The earnings of the holy : — 

The husbandman laboureth and hopeth in his heart, 

While yoking his plough and making his efforts, that his 
sons and daughters shall eat the fruits of his labour ; 

So the man of God uttereth God’s name that God may 
at last deliver him. 

0 my God, accomplish my salvation, foolish though 
I am ! 

Apply me, O God, to the work of serving the true Guru. 

As the merchant who taketh horses for traffic, 

Earneth money and entertaineth hopes that his wealth 
shall increase ; 

So the man of God uttereth the name of God, and is 
happy in uttering it. 

The shopkeeper collecteth wares and sitting in his shop 
dealeth in them : 

His wealth is false, its display is false, he is wrapped up 
in falsehood. 

The man of God collecteth divine wealth and taketh God 
with him as his viaticum. 

Love of wealth and family is a snare when man turneth 
away from God. 

He who is the slave of God’s slaves shall be saved under 
the Guru’s instruction. 

Nanak, they who ponder on the Name under the Guru’s 
instruction shall be enlightened. 



294 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The fervour of the Guru’s devotion : — 

The desire for God is ever in my mind and heart ; 0 God, 
how shall I behold Thee ? 

He who loveth God knoweth the pleasure thereof ; God is 
very dear to my mind and heart. 

I am a sacrifice to my Guru who hath caused me to meet 
my Creator from whom I had been separated. 

O God, I a sinner have taken refuge at Thy gate. 

My understanding hath no merit ; mercifully cause me 
to meet Thee some time. 

0 God, my demerits are very great, and could never be 
numbered. 

It is Thou who possessest merits ; it is Thou who art 
compassionate ; it is Thou who pardonest when Thou 
pleasest. 

1 am a sinner, but Thou hast saved me by association 
with the Guru, who, by teaching me God’s name, hath 
delivered me. 

0 my true Guru, how can I recount thy merits ? When 
thou speakest, I become astonished. 

Can any one else preserve a sinner like me as the true 
Guru hath preserved and saved me ? 

Thou, O Guru, art my father, thou art my mother, thou 
art my relation and companion. 

0 God, my True Guru, Thou knowest of Thyself my 
condition. 

1 was wandering astray ; no one cared for me when the 
great God placed me a worm near the true Guru. 

Hail ! hail to the slave Nanak’s Guru, by meeting whom 
all my sorrow and trouble are at an end. 

The Guru ever cherishes his disciples : — 

As a woman having given birth to a son nourisheth him 
and keepeth her eye on him — 

In and out of doors she feedeth him and continually 
fondleth him — 

So the true Guru watcheth over his disciple who beareth 
love and affection to God. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


295 


0 my God, we are silly children of Thine. 

Hail ! hail to the Guru, the true Guru, the teacher who 
hath rendered us wise by divine instruction ! 

As the white-robed bird 1 circling and flying in the heavens 

Keepeth her thoughts on her young left behind, and ever 
remembereth them in her heart, 

So the true Guru claspeth to his heart that disciple who 
loveth God. 

God preserveth the tongue made of flesh and blood 
within the scissors of the thirty or thirty- two teeth. 

Let any one consider if the tongue or the teeth have any 
power of themselves ; know that everything is in the power 
of God. 

When men calumniate the saints, God preserveth His 
servants’ honour. 

My brethren, let no one suppose that any one hath any 
power ; every one acteth as God causeth him to act. 

Old age, death, fever, headache, snakebite are all in the 
power of God. None of these may occur without God’s 
will. 

Nanak, ever so meditate on God’s name in thy heart, 
that at the last moment it may deliver thee. 

The advantage of meeting the true Guru : — 

He is called the true Gum whose presence maketh the 
heart glad ; 

Then mental doubt vanisheth, and the supreme dignity 
is obtained. 

How shall I meet my beloved true Guru ? 

1 every moment make obeisance that I may meet him. 

God mercifully caused me to meet my perfect true 

Guru. 

On applying the ashes of the true Guru his slave’s desires 
are fulfilled. 

Meet such a guru as shall implant God’s service in the 
heart and teach it to thee. 

Thus shall there never be any deficiency ; God’s profit 
shall ever be obtained. 


1 The kulang. 



296 THE SIKH RELIGION 

He in whose heart there is divine pleasure hath no love 
for mammon. 

Nanak, if such a guru be found, man shall be saved, sing- 
ing God’s praises. 

The debt men owe to the Guru : — 

This mind of many whims resteth not for a moment ; it 
roameth and wandereth in every direction. 

They who are very fortunate, have found the perfect Guru 
who giveth God’s spell by which their minds become fixed. 

O God, we are slaves of the true Guru : 

The brand hath been branded on our foreheads ; we owe 
a great debt to the Guru : 

He conferred on us many kindnesses and favours, and 
rescued us from the dangerous ocean of fear. 

They who have not the love of God in their hearts plot 
deceitful schemes. 

As paper is spoiled by water, so the perverse are ruined 
by pride. 

We know nothing of the past or future ; as God placeth 
us so shall we stand. 

O Guru, be merciful to us sinners ; saith the slave Nanak, 
we are thy dogs. 

The Guru’s happiness on meeting God : — 

O my Gobind, 1 Thou art in my heart, Thou art in my 
heart : because Thou art in my heart, I am dyed with Thy 
love. 

0 my Gobind, the sportive Hari is with me, yet cannot 
be seen ; but the perfect Guru hath shown me the Unseen. 

O my Gobind, all poverty and misery depart from him 
to whom the name of God hath been made manifest. 

The highly fortunate have obtained God, the highest 
dignity, 0 Gobind, and are absorbed in His name. 

0 my Gobind, my beloved, hath any one seen the Lord 
God with his eyes ? 

1 Gobind and Hari are both names of God. They are retained in 
the translation of this hymn to avoid confusion. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


2 97 

My mind and body are very sad, O my Gobind, without 
God I a woman waste away. 

On meeting the saints, 0 my Gobind, I have found my 
God, Friend, and Companion. 

God, the life of the world, hath come to me, 0 my Gobind ; 
I pass the night in happiness. 

Ye saints, cause me to meet my God, the Friend ; my 
soul and body hunger for Him. 

I cannot live without seeing my Beloved ; separation 
from Him weigheth upon my heart. 

God is my Friend and Beloved ; the Guru introduced me 
to Him and my heart revived. 

The desires of my soul and body have been fulfilled, 
0 my Gobind ; on meeting God my heart expanded. 

I am a sacrifice, O my Gobind, my Beloved ; I am a 
hundred times a sacrifice unto Thee. 

In my soul and body is the love of the Beloved, O my 
Gobind, 0 God preserve my capital. 1 

0 my Gobind, let me meet the true Guru, the mediator 
who will show me the way, and cause me to meet God ! 

Through Thy mercy, 0 my Gobind, I have obtained God’s 
name ; the slave Nanak hath entered Thine asylum. 

The Guru's longing for God : — 

1 suffer from separation from God’s name and from God. 

May I meet my Lord, my Friend, and obtain happiness ! 

On beholding the Lord God I survive, O my mother, 

His name is my companion and brother. 

Ye dear saints, sing the praises of my Lord God. 

Ye greatly fortunate ones, repeat the Name under the 
Guru’s instruction. 

God and God’s name are my life and soul. 

By repeating the Name man hath not again to cross the 
terrible water. 

How shall I behold the Lord God, my soul and body’s 
desire ? 

Present me to God, ye dear saints, my heart loveth Him. 

By the Guru’s word the beloved King is obtained. 

1 That is, make my human life profitable. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


298 

Ye greatly fortunate ones, utter His name. 

In my soul and body I have a great longing for God. 

Ye saints, cause me to meet Gobind who is my Lord God. 

By the true Guru’s instruction the Name is ever manifest 
to me ; 

So the desires of the slave Nanak’s heart have been 
fulfilled. 

Man ought to keep watch over his refractory 
mind : — 

Gauri Karhale 

0 refractory 1 soul 2 who comest from afar, how shalt thou 
meet God ? 

When I found the Guru by perfect good fortune, the 
Beloved came and embraced me. 

0 refractory soul, meditate upon the True Guru ; 

0 refractory and wretched soul, meditate on God’s name, 

And when thy account is called for, God Himself will 
release thee. 

0 refractory soul, once very pure, the filth of pride hath 
now attached to thee. 

The Beloved Spouse was present in thy house ; when 
thou didst separate from Him, thou wert punished. 

0 refractory soul, my dear, search for God within thee. 

He is not found by contrivance ; the Guru showeth Him 
in thy heart. 

0 refractory soul, my dear, day and night fix thine 
attention on God. 

When thou findest God through the Guru thou shalt go 
home and obtain the painted palace. 

0 refractory soul, my friend, abandon hypocrisy and 
greed : 

The hypocritical and the greedy shall be smitten ; Death 
will punish them with his mace. 

1 Karhale, a camel. In a secondary sense it means a camel 
which does not obey its bridle, thence stubborn. The gyanis also 
translate the word — make effort. 

2 In the original man, a word which is used sometimes for mind and 
sometimes for man, but here appears to mean the soul which has 
migrated from a distant body. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 299 

0 refractory soul, who art dear to me as my life, rid 
thyself of the filth of hypocrisy and superstition. 

The perfect Guru is a tank of divine nectar ; when the 
company of saints is obtained filth departeth. 

0 refractory soul, my dear, listen only to the instruction 
of one guide the Guru — 

Worldly love may be widely diffused, yet at last nothing 
shall go with one — 

0 refractory soul, my friend, take God’s name for thy 
travelling expenses, and thou shalt obtain honour. 

Thou shalt have a dress of honour in God’s court, and 
God Himself will embrace thee — 

0 refractory -soul, he who obeyeth the Guru shall under 
the Guru’s instruction accomplish his work. 

Make obeisance before the Guru, 0 slave Nanak, and he 
will blend thee with God. 

0 refractory soul, gifted with the power of reflection, 
meditate and carefully look. 

They who dwell in forests are tired of wandering in them ; 
while they may under the Guru’s instruction behold the 
Beloved in their own hearts. 

0 refractory soul, remember God ; 

0 refractory and wretched soul, the perverse are caught 
in a great net, 

While the pious are delivered by remembering God’s name. 

0 refractory soul, my beloved, search for the True Guru 
in the society of the saints. 

Attached to the society of the saints meditate on God and 
He will go with thee. 

0 refractory soul, greatly fortunate are they on whom 
the one God looketh with favour. 

If God deliver thee, thou shalt be delivered ; worship the 
true Guru’s feet. 

0 refractory soul, my beloved, think of the Light within 
thy body. 

When the merciful God conferreth a gift on thee, the Guru 
will show thee the Name which is the nine treasures. 

0 refractory soul, thou fickle-minded, lay aside thy 
perverse cleverness. 


300 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Remember God’s name, and at the last moment He will 
grant thee deliverance. 

O refractory soul, very fortunate shalt thou be if thou 
treasure the gem of divine knowledge. 

The divine knowledge of the Guru is a sword held in the 
hand to destroy the god of death. 

Within thee is the treasure, 0 refractory soul, yet thou 
wanderest abroad in doubt searching for it. 

When thou meetest the perfect Guru, thou shalt find God 
the Friend who is with thee. 

O refractory soul, ever remember the love of God and 
thou shalt be imbued with it. 

By serving the Guru and remembering his instruction the 
dye of God shall never fade. 

We are birds, O refractory soul, and God the immortal 
Being is a tree. 

Nanak, very fortunate are the pious who remembering 
the Name find the Tree. 

Gauri ki War I 

A message of love : — 

Hear, my Friend, this message of love ; mine eyes are 
fixed on Thee. 

When the Guru is pleased he blendeth me with the Friend, 
and then the slave Nanak sleepeth in peace. 

Men should not be jealous of the Guru, who is 
specially favoured of God : — 

Know that he is great whom the Lord maketh great. 

God pardoneth him who is pleasing to Him. 

If any one try to rival Him he is an insensate fool. 

He whom the true Guru causeth to meet Him, singeth 
His praises and dilateth on them. 

Nanak, true is the True One ; he who knoweth Him is 
absorbed in the truth. 

The Guru is the soil in which religion is planted : — 

The true Guru is the field of religion ; as man planteth in 
it, so he gathereth fruit. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


301 

The Guru’s Sikhs plant ambrosia and obtain God as their 
ambrosial fruit. 

Their faces are bright in this world and the next, and 
they shall obtain a true robe of honour in God’s court. 

Some whose hearts are base ever act basely ; as they 
plant, so the fruit they eat. 

When the true Gum the banker looketh at them and 
assayeth them, their gilding is all laid bare. 

As they meditate, so they obtain, and so God maketh 
them known. 1 

Nanak, the Lord God Himself pervadeth both the good 
and the bad ; 2 he ever beholdeth the acts of all. 

Man’s regeneration must depend on himself : — 

Man hath one mind ; the one God pervadeth it ; as the 
mind turneth, 3 such is its acceptance. 

Man may say what he pleaseth ; it is what he hath at 
home he eateth. 4 

Without the true Guru there is no understanding, and 
pride departeth not from the heart. 

The spiritually proud are miserable and hungry ; they put 
out their hands and beg from door to door. 

Falsehood and robbery remain not concealed ; gilding 
and adulteration are laid bare. 

The true Guru meeteth, and God cometh to, him who was 
so fated in the beginning. 

As iron touched by the philosopher’s stone assumeth a 
bright colour, so doth man when he meeteth the company 
of the saints. 

0 slave Nanak’s Lord, Thou guidest men as Thou pleasest. 

Reference to the fate of those who calumniated 
Guru Amar Das : — 

Him who slandereth the perfect true Guru the Creator 
will punish. 

1 They reap the fruit of their evil intentions and obtain an evil 
reputation. 

2 Literally — both ends, men of both moral extremes. 

3 As man’s mind is disposed towards God. 

4 Better to depend on God who is with one than go abroad in 
search of Him. 



302 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The slanderer shall not have such an opportunity again ; 
as he soweth so shall he eat. 

He shall be taken away to terrible hell with blackened 
face and a halter on his neck like a thief ; 

But, if he return to the Guru’s protection and meditate 
on God’s name, he shall be saved. 

He who obeyeth not the Guru’s order is perverse and 
robbed by mental ignorance and poisonous mammon : 

In his heart is falsehood and he deemeth every one false ; 
God hath fastened unworthy disputes on his neck. 

He talketh a great deal, but what he saith pleaseth no- 
body ; 

He wandereth from house to house like an abandoned 
woman ; whosoever meeteth him beareth the mark thereof. 

The holy man keepeth aloof from him ; he leaveth him 
to go and sit with the Guru. 

He who denieth the Guru is base ; 0 elect, he hath lost 
all his capital and profit. 

At first, O Nanak, men recited the Shastars and the Veds, 
but the words of the perfect Guru have superseded them. 

The magnification of the perfect Guru is pleasing to his 
disciples ; the perverse shall never more have this oppor- 
tunity. 

The world, which is God’s field, yields ambrosial 
produce to the Guru’s disciples : — 

The whole world is God’s field ; God Himself causeth the 
tillage to be performed. 

The holy man hath made God’s grace germinate ; the 
perverse have lost their capital. 

Every one cultivateth for his own advantage ; if it please 
God, He causeth the field to germinate. 

The Guru’s disciples sow ambrosia, and obtain God’s 
name as the ambrosial fruit. 

Death the mouse ever gnaweth the produce ; 1 but God the 
Creator killeth and expelleth it. 

With God’s love the tillage succeedeth, and the harvest- 
heap is produced by His favour. 

1 That is, human life. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


303 

God hath removed all the trouble and anxiety of those 
who have meditated on Him. 

The slave Nanak hath worshipped the Name ; he is saved 
himself, and saveth the whole world. 

The Guru encourages his Sikhs to hear his in- 
struction : — 

True Sikhs sit with the true Guru ; and the false toil 
and find no place even by search. 

Are their faces bright to whom the words of the true 
Guru are not agreeable ? Nay, they wander contemned of 
God. 

God causeth their acts to prosper who have the wealth 
of His name within them. 

They cease to be subject to others ; God sitteth near to 
assist them. 

When God is on our side, every one is on our side ; and 
every one who seeth us praiseth us. 

Kings and emperors, all the work of God, come and 
salute God’s servant. 

Great is the greatness of the perfect Guru ; he who 
greatly serveth God obtaineth unequalled happiness. 

God hath given the perfect Guru a permanent gift, and 
what He hath given ever increaseth. 

No slanderer can endure his greatness ; God Himself 
destroyeth the slanderer. 

The slave Nanak utter eth the praises of the Creator who 
ever preserveth His saints. 

Guru Ram Das addressed the following to the pre- 
tended Tapa, or penitent, who perpetually slandered 
Guru Amar Das : — 

Thou didst not at first show respect to Guru Amar Das ; 
thy excuses now are of no avail. 

How can the wretched perverse man who wandereth half 
way obtain happiness by mere words ? 

He who loveth not the true Guru cometh with a lie and 
departeth with a lie. 


3°4 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


A pretended guru leads man astray : — 

When the master is naked and hungry, whence shall his 
servant eat to repletion ? 

If the master have anything in his house, the servant 
can get it ; how can he get what there is not ? 

If a Sikh serve a false guru and Death afterwards call on 
him for an account, such service shall be hurtful. 

Nanak, perform service for the great God, a sight of whom 
is profitable, and no account shall afterwards be taken from 
thee. 

The following was addressed to Guru Amar Das’s 
enemies : — 

Nanak, the saints consider and the four Veds tell 

That what the saints utter with their mouths cometh to 
pass. 

In the extension of the world this appeareth manifest : 
all people hear of it. 

The fools obtain not happiness ; they are at enmity with 
the saints. 

The saints desire virtues for them, but they burn with 
pride. 

What can the wretches do, since their fate was evil from 
the beginning ? 

They whom the supreme Being smiteth have none to 
succour them. 

It is real justice that they who bear enmity to those who 
are without it should perish. 

They whom the saints curse shall wander again and again : 

When a tree is cut up by the roots, its branches wither. 

A magnification of the Guru : — 

The whole world come and fall at the feet of those to 
whom God giveth greatness. 

We may fear if we do anything by ourselves ; but it is 
the Creator who putteth forth His might in all things. 

Lo ! my brethren, this is the arena of the true Beloved 
who by His power hath made every one subject to Him. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 305 

The Lord God preserveth His saints and blackeneth the 
faces of slanderers and enemies. 

The greatness of the true Guru ever increaseth ; the 
saints themselves ever sing God’s praises. 

Night and day repeat the Name, ye disciples of the Guru, 
and through the true Guru implant the Creator in your 
hearts. 

0 Guru’s Sikhs, know that the true Guru’s hymn is 
most true ; the Creator Himself hath caused him to 
utter it. 

The beloved God maketh bright the faces of the Guru’s 
Sikhs, and the whole world wisheth victory to him. 

Nanak is God’s slave ; God preserveth the honour of His 
servants. 

The fate of those who deny the Guru : — 

They who leave the Guru, who is present with them , shall 
find no entrance into God’s court. 

Let any one go and meet those slanderers, and he will 
see their faces pale and spat upon. 

They who are accursed of the Guru are accursed of the 
whole world, and shall ever be vagrants. 

They who deny their Guru shall wander about groaning. 

Their hunger shall never depart ; they shall ever shriek 
from its pangs. 

No one heareth what they say ; they are ever dying of 
fear. 

They cannot bear the true Guru’s greatness ; they cannot 
find room in this world or the next. 

Whoever goeth to meet those cursed by the true Guru 
shall lose the remnant of his honour. 

They who were cursed by the Guru became leprous ; 
whoever meeteth them shall catch the leprosy. 

0 God, allow me not to see those who turn their hearts 
to mammon. 

There is no escape from what the Creator Himself wrote in 
the beginning. 

Slave Nanak, worship the Name ; nothing can equal it. 

Great is its greatness, and it ever increaseth. - 

X 


SIKH. II 


306 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Guru Ram Das continues to magnify Guru Amar 
Das : — 

Great is Amar Das’s greatness who was appointed in the 
presence of Guru Angad. 

The world boweth to him ; all fall at his feet ; his praise 
filleth the worlds. 

The continents and the universe bow to him ; he on 
whose forehead the perfect Guru put his hand became 
perfect. 

The Guru’s greatness ever increaseth ; none can equal it. 

Slave Nanak, the Creator Himself appointed Guru Amar 
Das, and will preserve his honour. 

Evil shall be the fate of the Guru’s slanderer : — 

He who slandereth the perfect true Guru shall find his 
position difficult in the world. 

Death shall seize and throw him into terrible hell which 
is a pit of sorrow. 

No one will hear his cries and lamentations ; he shall 
weep in pain. 

He hath cast away all his chances in this world and the 
next ; his capital and profit, all hath he lost. 

He shall become as an oilman’s ox which his master 
yoketh when he riseth in the morning. 

God ever seeth and heareth everything ; nothing is con- 
cealed from Him. 

As man sowed in a former life > so shall he reap in this. 

He to whom God showeth mercy shall wash the feet of 
the true Guru ; 

He shall be saved through the true Guru like iron attached 
to timber. 

Slave Nanak, meditate on and repeat God’s name and 
thou shalt be happy. 

Animate and inanimate nature congratulate the 
Guru and his family : — 

That land where my true Guru sitteth groweth green. 

The creatures who saw my true Guru have become happy. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


307 

Hail, hail to his father ! hail, hail to his family ! hail, 
hail to the good mother who gave him birth ! 

Hail, hail to the Guru who worshippeth the Name ! he 
is saved himself and he saveth those who saw him. 

0 God, mercifully cause me to meet the true Guru ; the 
slave Nanak will wash his feet. 

The man who is separated from God is compared 
to one who suffers from a malignant ulcer : — 

They who have a malignant 1 ulcer within them know 
what torture is. 

They know what separation from God is ; I am ever 
a sacrifice unto them. 

0 God, unite me with the friend, and I will place my 
head as a sacrifice beneath his feet. 

1 am a slave to the slaves of those disciples of the Guru 
who perform his work. 

Moist with God’s dye are the robes 2 of those who are 
imbued with God’s deep dye. 

Nanak, mercifully cause me to meet the Guru, and I will 
sell my head to him as the price of God's name . 

The holy and unselfish man deserves congratula- 
tions : — 

0 beloved, the holy man who meeteth the society of the 
saints in which God is praised, 

And who preacheth instruction for the good of others, is 
worthy of gratulation among mortals. 

The Guru excommunicates the hypocritical apos- 
tates : — 

The apostates go and bow to the Guru, but their hearts 
are base and filled with falsehood. 

When the Guru saith to them 6 Rise and work , my 
brethren,’ they go and squeeze themselves in somewhere 
like cranes. 

The true Guru abideth among his disciples ; he picketh 
out and expelleth the monkeys. 

1 Also translated — chronic. 

2 Metaphorically for understandings. 

X 2 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


308 

They sitting here and there conceal their faces, and being 
counterfeit may not associate with the holy. 

There is no food for them there ; they go and eat filth 
like sheep. 

If you desire to feed the apostate, he will spew and vomit 
poison on you. 

0 God, give me not the company of the apostate ; he is 
accursed of the Creator. 

He who made this play beholdeth it ; the slave Nanak 
remembereth His name. 

God protects the true Guru : — 

The true Guru who claspeth God to his heart is inscrutable. 

None can touch the true Guru on whose side God is. 

Devotion to God is the true Guru’s sword and armour by 
which the torturer death is destroyed. 

God Himself is the protector of the true Guru, and will 
save all who follow him. 

Him who. meaneth evil to the true Guru the Creator 
Himself will destroy. 

This is the word of the true God’s court ; the slave Nanak 
uttereth this prophecy. 

Whether asleep or awake man should remember 
God : — 

What is sleeping ? what waking ? the holy are the 
acceptable. 

They who never forget God are perfect and distinguished. 

They obtain the true Guru from the Merciful One, and fix 
their thoughts on him night and day. 

May I continue to meet such persons and obtain honour 
at God’s gate ! 

Nanak, bright are the faces of those who ever as they 
awake remember God, 

And who repeat His praises whether sleeping or waking. 

The Guru has found God and His mediator : — 

Searching for God in my soul and body I have found the 
God whom I desired ; 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


309 

And I have found the Guru the mediator who hath 
blended me with Him. 

There is no alliance between God and mammon : — 

They who love mammon have no faith in the holy man. 

They come and go and wander in transmigration , and 
have no happiness even in their dreams. 

They act falsely ; they speak falsely ; attached to false- 
hood they become false. 

Worldly love is all trouble ; through trouble man perish- 
eth ; through trouble he weepeth. 

There is no union between worldliness and love of God, 
however all may desire it. 

They whose treasure-houses contain meritorious acts are 
happy under the Guru’s instruction. 

Asa 

The Guru's instruction is communicated from one 
man to another : — 

The pious propagate God’s vine ; 

It beareth God’s fruit which epicures enjoy. 

Utter the name of God which containeth endless delights ; 

Utter God’s name and praises under the Gum’s instruc- 
tion, so shalt thou destroy the serpents which are Death’s 
myrmidons. 

God implanted His worship in the Guru ; 

If the Guru be pleased, he conferreth it on his disciple, 
my brethren. 

Religious ceremonies produce pride ; on account of them 
the way is not known ; 

They are idle as the dust the elephant throweth on his 
head after bathing. 

He whose fortune is very great and very exalted, 

Shall, 0 Nanak, by uttering the true Name become true 
and pure. 

The fourth Guru was fond of hearing the hymns 
of his predecessors sung. On one occasion when he 


3io 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


ordered a seance, the musicians were not ready. 
Then the following hymn was composed : — 

How long will they take to search for anklets and cym- 
bals ? when will some one play the rebeck ? 

While a messenger is going and they are coming a short 
time must elapse ; in the meantime let me repeat God’s 
name. 

Such devotion hath been produced in my heart 

That without God I cannot live for an instant ; as a fish 
dieth out of water. 

How long will it take to find five or seven singers ? 
When will some one raise the voice of song ? 

In tuning the instruments and selecting the music some 
little time must elapse ; meanwhile let my soul sing God’s 
praises. 

When will some one dance and stretch forth his feet ? 
when will some one wave his hands ? 

In stretching out one’s hands and feet some little delay 
must take place ; meanwhile let my heart remember God. 

When will some one satisfy the people ? Yet by satis- 
fying people no honour is obtained in heaven. 

Nanak, ever meditate on God in thy heart, then shall 
every one congratulate thee. 

The Guru ardently desires to behold God : — 

0 my mother, show me my beloved God : 

1 cannot remain for a moment without Him ; on beholding 
Him I am as pleased as a camel with creepers. 

My soul through divine love hath renounced the world 
with the object of beholding God the Friend. 

As the bumble-bee cannot abide without the lotus, so 
can I not abide without God. 

Preserve me in Thy sanctuary, 0 beloved Lord of the 
world ; fulfil my desires, 0 Lord God. 

Nanak’s soul is glad when God showeth Himself even for 
a moment. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


3ii 


Asa Chhant 

The supreme importance of the Guru's instruc- 
tion : — 

Through love of the Guru’s instruction I have obtained 
real life during life. 

The Guru gave me God’s name, and implanted it in my 
heart : 

He implanted it in my heart, and all doubt and trouble 
have departed. 

Under the Guru’s instruction I have meditated on the 
Unseen and Inapprehensible ; I have obtained the pure and 
supreme dignity. 

On singing the true Guru’s hymns the voice of the un- 
beaten strain ever resoundeth. 

Nanak, God the Giver bestowed on me a gift — my light 
hath blended with His. 

The perverse die in their perversity, saying their property 
was their own. 

They attach their hearts to skin-covered filth 1 which 
cometh for a moment and in a moment departeth : 

They attach their hearts to skin-covered filth which is 
fleeting as the dye of the safflower. 

They go now to the east, and now to the west, as a potter’s 
wheel revolveth. 

In sorrow they eat, in sorrow they amass and enjoy ; 
they extend their increase of sorrow. 

Nanak, if man enter the Guru’s asylum, he shall easily 
cross the dangerous ocean. 

My God is good, inaccessible, and unfathomable. 

I asked my merchant, the true Guru, for God as my 
stock-in-trade : 

I asked for God as my stock-in-trade and bought His 
name ; since then I sing God’s praises and they are pleasing 
to me. 

I have banished sleep and hunger and become absorbed 
in divine tranquillity. 

1 The body is meant. 



312 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Dealers of one description 1 come and take away God’s 
name as their profit : 

Nanak, it is they who offer their souls and bodies to the 
Guru who acquire it. 

The great ocean of God is full of jewels upon jewels ; 

They obtain them to whom the Guru’s words are pleasing : 

They to whom the Guru’s words are pleasing obtain the 
priceless unrivalled jewels. 

They who have obtained Thy unrivalled name, 0 God, 
have their storehouses filled with Thy service. 

I have churned the ocean of the body ; I have seen a rare 
thing come to view. 

The Guru is God and God is the Guru ; Nanak, there is 
no difference between them, my brethren. 

The following hymn is in effect a glorification of 
the Sikh religion which sprang up in the Kal or 
fourth and last age of the world. The Kal age is 
therefore here made out to be the best of all the 
four ages: — 

In the Sat age all men were contented ; religion had four 
legs, and men meditated on God. 

They sang of God with heart and soul, acquired the 
greatest happiness, and every heart possessed a knowledge 
of God’s excellences. 

A knowledge of God’s excellences was men’s wealth ; 
He was their salvation, and the pious became illustrious. 

At home or abroad there was but the one God and no 
other. 

Men fixed their attention on Him ; His name was their 
helper ; in His court they acquired honour. 

Then came the Treta age — though worldliness began to 
press on men’s hearts, yet they practised continence and 
austerities. 

One leg of religion dropped off ; three legs remained ; in 
men’s minds and hearts wrath was inflamed. 

A great poisonous fermentation in men’s hearts and souls 
was wrath ; kings made war and suffered in the conflict. 

1 Who deal in the Name, holy men. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 313 

Men’s hearts were attacked by the diseases of egotism and 
pride ; their conceit and arrogance increased. 

If my God be merciful, the poison shall depart by the 
Guru’s instruction and God’s name. 

The Dwapar age came — men wandered in doubt ; God 
created the milkmaids and Krishan. 

Penitents practised not penances, men initiated sacrifices 
and offerings, and performed many religious ceremonies : 

They performed religious ceremonies ; the second leg of 
religion dropped off, and two legs remained. 

Many heroes engaged in great wars ; through pride they 
ruined themselves and others. 

He who is compassionate to the poor caused man to meet 
the sainted Guru, and on meeting him impurity departed. 

When God made the Kal age, religion had lost three legs 
and only the fourth remained. 

They who acted according to the Guru’s instruction 
obtained God’s name as their medicine, and in singing His 
praises obtained divine rest. 

The season for the praises of God arrived ; His name was 
magnified, and the field of God’s name germinated. 

If in the Kal age any other seed than the Name be sown, 
men lose all their profit and capital. 

Nanak, when the true Guru hath been found, he showeth 
the Name in man’s heart. 

God’s attributes : — 

My great God is inaccessible, inapprehensible, eternal, 
pure, formless. 

His condition cannot be described ; immeasurable is His 
glory ; my God is invisible and illimitable : 

God is invisible, illimitable and boundless ; only He 
knoweth Himself. 

What can this poor creature utter, 0 God, which would 
be a description of Thee ? 

He on whom Thou castest Thy glance of favour, medi- 
tateth on Thee under the Guru’s instruction. 

Thou, great God, art inaccessible, inapprehensible, eternal, 
pure, formless. 



314 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Thou art the primal Male, the boundless Creator ; Thy 
limit cannot be ascertained. 

Thou art uninterruptedly within every heart, and in 
everything art Thou contained. 

Within the heart is the Supreme Brahm, the Supreme 
God, whose end cannot be found. 

He hath no form or outline ; He is unseen and inappre- 
hensible ; but under the Guru’s instruction the Invisible 
becometh visible. 

He who beholdeth God shall ever be happy day and night, 
and shall be easily absorbed in His name. 

Thou art the primal Male, the boundless Creator ; Thy 
limit cannot be ascertained. 

Thou art the true Supreme Being, ever indestructible ; 
0 God, Thou art the treasury of excellences, 

O God, Thou alone art the Lord, there is none besides ; 
Thou art the omniscient Being. 

Thou art omniscient and most exalted ; there is none so 
great as Thou. 

Thine is the Word ; Thou pervadest everything ; what 
Thou doest cometh to pass. 

The one God is contained in everything ; the pious behold 
Thee, 0 God, on repeating Thy name. 

Thou art the true Supreme God, ever indestructible ; 0 
God, Thou art the treasury of excellences. 

Thou art the Creator of all ; Thy glory is everywhere ; 
Thou settest everything in motion as Thou pleasest : 

Thou settest everything in motion as Thou pleasest ; 
everything is subject to Thy word : 

Everything is subject to Thy word; when it pleaseth 
Thee, man obtaineth greatness therefrom. 

If man obtain wisdom from the Guru’s instruction and 
efface himself, he shall be absorbed in the Word. 

Thy word cannot be grasped ; it can be obtained from 
the Guru’s instruction : Nanak, he who obtaineth it , shall be 
absorbed in the Name. 

Thou art the Creator of all, Thy glory is every- 
where ; Thou settest everything in motion as Thou 
pleasest. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 315 

The Guru’s soul is thoroughly saturated with 
God’s love : — 

Mine eyes are wet with God’s nectar ; my soul is dyed 
with His love. 

God applied His touchstone to the heart, and found it 
brightest gold. 

Through the Guru my soul and body are dyed with a deep 
colour. 

The slave Nanak hath perfumed himself with the musk 
of God's love , and his whole life is supremely blest. 

The word of God’s love which is a pointed arrow hath 
smitten his heart. 

He who feeleth the pain of love knoweth its torment. 

He who in life is dead is said to have obtained deliver- 
ance while alive. 

Nanak prayeth , 0 God, may the true Guru cause me to 
meet Thee that I may cross over the dangerous world ! 

I ignorant and stupid have sought Thine asylum ; may 
I obtain the love of God ! 

I have obtained God from the perfect Guru ; I pray for 
the service of God alone. 

My soul and body are pleased with Thy word ; I repeat 
it with endless pleasure. 

On meeting the saints, Nanak hath obtained God in their 
association. 

0 Thou compassionate to the poor, hear my supplication ; 
0 God, Lord, King. 

1 pray for the protection of God’s name and God putteth 
it into my mouth. 

0 God, it is Thy function to love Thy saints and preserve 
their honour. 

The slave Nanak hath sought Thy protection ; Thy name 
hath saved him. 

The Guru has found God, who is a diamond in 
the golden fortress of the body : — 

On searching and searching for God, the Friend, I have 
found Him under the Guru’s instruction. 

It is known that God is in the golden fortress of the body. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


316 

God is a diamond and a jewel with which my soul and 
body are pierced. 

Having been very fortunate at my birth I have obtained 
God ; Nanak is kneaded with His essence. 

I a young woman continually arise and inquire the road 
to my Spouse. 

The true Guru reminding me of God’s name putteth me 
on His road. 

The Name, the antidote to the poison of pride, is the 
support of my soul and body. 

The slave Nanak prayeth, 0 God, grant me to meet the 
true Guru who hath already met Thee. 

Through the Guru, O Beloved, come to me who have 
been so long separated from Thee. 

My soul and body are very sad ; mine eyes are moist with 
God’s love. 

O Guru, show me God the Beloved ; on meeting Him my 
soul shall be happy. 

Nanak, God hath appointed me, a fool, to perform His duty. 

The Guru’s body is moistened with God’s nectar, and he 
sprinkleth it on his disciples. 

They whose hearts are pleased with the Guru’s words 
drink their fill of nectar. 

The Guru being pleased, I have obtained God and I shall 
no longer be buffeted. 1 

Nanak, the man of God and God have become one. 

God ever preserves His saints : — 

God produced saints in every age, and continueth to 
preserve their honour. 

God destroyed the wicked Harnakhas and saved Prahlad. 

God turned His back on the proud and the slanderers, but 
showed His face to Namdev. 

Nanak hath so served his God that He will deliver him at 
last. 

It is said that the following hymn was composed 
by Guru Ram Das before he had become Guru. 

1 Either by transmigration or the god of death. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


317 

Guru Amar Das was highly pleased with this and 
other compositions of his saintly son-in-law : — 

Come home, 0 my beloved soul, which hath wandered 
afar. 

0 Guru, cause me to meet God, my Beloved, that He 
may dwell in my heart. 

Thou shalt be happy, 0 my dear, if God show thee mercy. 

Nanak, when the Guru is pleased, my dear, he will blend 
man with God. 

1 did not heartily taste God’s love, my dear ; 1 

So the thirst of my heart hath never been slaked ; my 
dear, it formeth ever new desires. 

Youth is ever passing away, my dear, the god of death 
stealeth away the breath. 

Nanak, she is a fortunate wife, my dear, who claspeth 
God to her heart. 

Mine eyes are refreshed by the Beloved, my dear, as the 
chatrik with his raindrops. 

On drinking the raindrops of God, my dear, my heart is 
comforted. 

Separation from God kept me awake, my dear, and I 
could by no means sleep. 

But now Nanak by loving the Guru hath obtained God, 
the Friend, my dear, and is at rest . 

In the month of Chet, my dear, beginneth the pleasant 
season of spring ; 

But without my Beloved, my dear, the dust was flying 
about my court. 2 

There was hope in my heart and I was waiting, my dear * 
both mine eyes were fixed on Him. 

But now Nanak on seeing the Guru is happy, my dear, 
as a mother on seeing her child. 

My dear, the true Guru hath repeated to me tales and 
legends of God. 

I am a sacrifice to the Guru, my dear, who hath caused 
me to meet God. 

1 I did not love Him, so I did not taste His love. 

2 Instead of spring it was autumn for me. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


318 

God hath fulfilled all my desires, my dear ; I have obtained 
the fruit my heart desired. 

When God is pleased, my dear, the slave Nanak is ab- 
sorbed in the Name. 

Without the love of my beloved God, I rejoice not. 

How shall I find the Guru through whom I may behold 
my Beloved ? 

If the bounteous God cause me to meet the great Guru, 
I shall meet Him. 

Nanak, he on whose forehead it was so written in the 
beginning shall find the Guru, my dear. 

Gujari 

On Guru Amar Das : — 

The saints of God are the best ; their speech is the best ; 
what they utter is for others’ advantage. 

God mercifully saveth those who hear their words with 
faith and devotion. 

O God, grant me to meet the dear saints of God. 

The true Guru, the perfect Guru, dear to me as my life, 
will save us sinners. 

Very fortunate, very fortunate are the pious whose sup- 
port is God’s name. 

Under the Guru’s instruction they obtain God’s nectar, 
God’s essence, and a storehouse of devotion. 

They who have not obtained a sight of the true Guru, 
the true man, are unfortunate, and shall be punished by 
Death. 

They shall be born again as dogs, swine, and donkeys, and 
God will punish them as wilful murderers. 

O compassionate to the poor, have mercy on Thy servant 
and save him. 

The slave Nanak hath sought Thine asylum ; if it please 
Thee, 0 God, Thou wilt save him. 

The Guru prays never to forget God’s name 

Mercifully so dispose my heart, O God, that I may night 
and day continually meditate on Thy name. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


319 

God is all comfort, all excellence, all wealth ; by utter- 
ing His name all misery and hunger depart. 

• 0 my soul, God’s name is my companion and my brother. 

Under the Guru’s instruction let me sing the praises of 
God’s name ; it will be at the last hour my helper, and 
deliver me in God’s court. 

0 God, the Searcher of hearts, Thou Thyself art the 
Giver ; Thou didst mercifully infuse the longing for Thee 
into my soul. 

The longing of my heart and soul is for God ; He hath 
fulfilled my longing since I have entered the asylum of the 
true Guru. 

Through meritorious acts I have obtained human birth, 
but without the Name it would be accursed and useless. 

He who is without the Name shall eat sorrow as his 
relish ; his countenance shall grow pale, and men shall spit 
on his face. 

God will give glory in His court to those who have entered 
His asylum. 

Nanak, God welcometh and applaudeth His servant, 
embraceth him and blendeth him with Himself. 

The advantage of the Name and of the Guru's 
instruction : — 

He who through the true Guru hath found the Lord God 
hath made Him dear to me by his instruction. 

My soul and body have become refreshed and happy 1 
since through good fortune I have meditated on God’s 
name. 

My brother, may some one come to meet me who will 
implant God’s name in my heart ! 

He is my Beloved, my life, my soul, and my body ; all 
would I give him who would tell me of my Lord God. 

1 have obtained patience, faith, and God from the Guru’s 
instruction ; may he ever apply my mind to God and His 
name ! 

Nectar droppeth into the mouth of him who uttereth the 
true Guru’s nectareous words and hymns. 

1 Literally — become cooled and green. 



320 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Pure is the Name ; no soil attacheth to it ; under the 
Guru’s instruction repeat it with devotion. 

The man who hath not found the wealth of the Name is 
unfortunate and dieth again and again. 

Meditate on God, the root of joy, the life of the world, 
who giveth to all men, and thou shalt be happy. 

Thou art the Giver ; all creatures are Thine, saith the 
slave Nanak ; thou pardonest the pious and blendest them 
with Thyself. 

Guru Ram Das expresses his humility and his 
faith in family life : — 

Mother, father, son are all made by God ; God estab- 
lished all their relationships. 

All my strength is as nothing before God , 0 my friend. 

The body, soul, and person are all in God’s power. 

God Himself inspired His saints with faith. 

Even in their families they abide as hermits. 

When hearty love is established with God, 

Then what man doeth is pleasing to Him. 

Whatever work God hath appointed us to do, 

That we do with His permission. 

Nanak, they whose devotion is pleasing to my Lord, 

Fix their attention on God’s name. 


Devgandhari 

The first two lines of the following embody an 
inquiry made by Sangatia, a Sikh. The remainder 
of the hymn is the Guru’s reply : — 

Tell me in what street I shall find my Beautiful One : 

0 saints of God, show me the way, and I will follow you. 

The word of the Beloved comforteth the heart ; good is 
this custom which hath been established. 

She who whether bent with age 1 or of small stature is 
pleasing to the Lord, is beautiful and becometh united with 
Him. 


1 Laiari may also mean a hunchback. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


321 

There is but one Beloved ; all are His handmaidens ; she 
who pleaseth Him is good. 

What shall the poor wretch Nanak do ? Let him walk 
in the way which pleaseth the Lord. 

The Guru has completely devoted himself to 
God:— 

I have now come weary to God : 

Since I have come to Thy protection, save me, O God, 
or destroy me. 

I despise 1 men’s artifices and praises. 

Whether one speak well or ill of me, I have humbled my 
body. 

God mercifully preserveth him who cometh to His pro- 
tection. 

The slave Nanak prayeth, 0 God, preserve mine honour 
who have sought Thy shelter ! 

Bihagra Chhant 

The Guru encourages men to lead a religious 
life : — 

They who think not on God’s name, O my life, are per- 
verse, foolish, and silly. 

They who think on worldly love, O my life, shall regret 
it at their final departure. 

The perverse, 0 my life, who are led away by sin shall 
not enter God’s court. 

Nanak, O my life, they who meet the Guru, who repeat 
God’s name, and who are absorbed in it shall be saved. 

All ye people, go and meet the Guru, O my life, who 
will fix God’s name in your hearts. 

Make no delay in repeating God’s name, 0 my life; nobody 
knoweth whether he shall draw another breath or not. w 

That time, that juncture,, that ghari, that moment 
are profitable, 0 my life, when my God cometh into the 
mind. 

Nanak, by remembering the Name, 0 my life, Death’s 
myrmidons approach not. 

1 Literally — I have burnt in the fire. 

Y 


SIKH, II 



322 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


God always beholdeth and heareth everything, O my 
life ; it is he who committeth sin who feareth. 

All fear departeth from him, O my life, whose heart is 
pure within him. 

He who hath faith in God’s name is fearless, 0 my life, 
though all the hostile and the shameless slander him. 

They who have worshipped the perfect Guru Nanak, 0 
my life, make all men bow at their feet. 

Ever worship such a God, 0 my life, as is the great Lord 
of all. 

They who have worshipped the one God with single mind, 
O my life, care for no one. 

By serving the Guru God’s palace is attained, 0 my life ; 
all slanderers talk foolishness and give causeless annoyance. 

0 my life, the Lord God hath written good fortune on that 
man’s forehead in the beginning who meditateth on Him. 1 

Bihagre ki War 

It is God who performs all the agricultural and 
culinary operations by which man subsists. The 
following hymn is sung after Sikh entertainments : — 

God Himself is the soil, Himself the tiller ; it is He who 
causeth the corn to spring up and be ground ; 

It is He who cooketh it ; it is He who putteth the food 
into dishes and serveth it ; it is He who sitteth down to 
eat it. 

He is the finger-water ; He giveth the toothpick ; He 
holdeth the water to wash the mouth. 

It is He who ever seateth the saints at His banquet ; it 
is He who dischargeth them. 

God causeth him to whom He is merciful to obey His 
order. 

Wadhans Ghorxan 

The following, in which the body is compared to 
a steed to be kept under subjection, is sung at 
marriages : — 

The body is a steed which God created. 

1 That is, the privilege of meditating on God is obtained by destiny. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


323 


Hail to human birth obtained by meritorious acts ! 

Human birth is obtained by greatly meritorious acts ; 
the body is fine gold 

Which by the Guru’s instruction is dyed a rich colour, 
O God, a new colour. 

This body by which God’s name is repeated is beautiful 
as adorned by His name. 

It is obtained by great good fortune ; the Name is its 
companion : O slave Nanak, it is God who created it. 

Having well reflected put a saddle thereon. 1 

Mount it. Sir, and thou shalt cross the dangerous ocean. 

The dangerous ocean in which there are many waves 
shall be crossed through the Guru’s instruction. 

Very fortunate people, making God the boat, embark 
thereon and cross over ; the pilot Guru ferrieth men over 
by the Word. 

Him who night and day singeth God’s love and God’s 
praises, God the Lover imbueth with His love. 

The slave Nanak hath obtained the rank of nirvan, God’s 
highest and best rank. 

The Guru hath put divine knowledge as a bit into the 
mouth, 

And applied God’s love as a whip to the body : 

The pious man who hath conquered his own mind, applieth 
God’s love as a whip to his body. 

He obtaineth the Word, fashioneth his unfashioned mind, 
and drinketh God’s nectar. 

He who heareth the Word which the Guru uttereth, 
dyeth his steed with God’s colour, 2 

Traverseth the great and difficult way, 0 Nanak, and 
crosseth over. 

God created the body a fleet mare. 

The body by which God’s name is repeated is blest, is 
blest. 

The body by which God’s name is repeated, the result of 
prenatal acts, is to be congratulated and praised. 

Man having under the Guru’s instruction mounted his 

1 Keep it under subjection. 

2 Applies God’s love to his heart. 

Y 2 



324 THE SIKH RELIGION 

body as a mare, crosseth the difficult way and meeteth the 
JPrimal Joy. 

The perfect God hath arranged the marriage feast ; a 
company of saints hath come as the marriage procession. 

O slave Nanak, I have obtained God as my Spouse ; the 
holy men meeting rejoice and utter gratulations. 

Soeath ki War 

The relation of God to’ His servants : — 

God loveth His slaves ; God is a friend of His slaves. 

God is in the power of His slaves as a musical instrument 
in the power of the musician. 

God’s slaves meditate on God and bear affection to the 
Beloved. 

Mercifully hear me, 0 God ; may rain fall throughout 
the whole world ! 

The praise of God’s slaves contrihuteth to God’s great- 
ness. 

God is pleased with His own greatness when His slaves 
are congratulated. 

It is they who meditate on God’s name ; God and God’s 
saints are the same. 

The slave Nanak is God’s servant ; O God, preserve his 
honour. 

He who has no faith in the Guru is stupid and 
deceitful : — 

He in whose heart is spiritual ignorance and who hath 
no faith in the Guru hath but a poor understanding. 

He in whose heart there is deceit deemeth every one 
deceitful ; through this deception he is ruined. 

What is pleasing to the Guru entereth not his mind ; he 
wandereth about for his own object. 

If God be merciful, Nanak shall be absorbed in His words. 

The fate of him who is accursed of the Guru : — 

He who is accursed of the true Guru shall leave his home 
and wander for ever : 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 325 

He shall be followed by hootings and his face shall be 
blackened in the next world : 

Incoherent words shall ever issue from his lips, and he 
shall die spluttering them forth. 

What if anybody do anything ? he shall only obtain the 
result of his prenatal acts. 

Wherever he goeth he shall be proved a liar ; falsehood 
pleaseth no one. 

Brethren and saints, behold God’s graciousness ; as man 
doeth so shall he receive. 

This will be God’s decision in His true court ; the slave 
Nanak foretelleth this. 


Dhanasari 

How man’s impurities are removed : — 

The rust of the sins of many births attaches to man ; 
but when he joins the guild of holy men it is filed away : 

So when gold is heated in the fire, its impurity is removed. 

Obedience to the Guru inculcated : — 

We are totally blind, saturated with the greatest sins ; 
how shall we walk in the Guru’s way ? 

May the true Guru, the bestower of happiness, mercifully 
take us under his protection ! 

Sikhs of the Guru and friends, walk in God’s way. 

Faithfully obey 1 what the Guru preacheth ; Divine 
teaching is unique. 

Hear, servants of God and brethren, serve the Guru very 
promptly. 

Tie up service to the Guru as thy travelling expenses to 
God ; think not of to-day or to-morrow. 

Saints of God, repeat His name ; saints of God, let us 
walk with God. 

He who repeateth God’s name becometh as God, and 
meeteth God who sporteth. 

To repeat God’s name is the longing of my heart : 0 
God, Dweller in the forest, have mercy. 

1 Also translated — Accept as good. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


326 

Thy slave Nanak prayeth — O God, cause me to meet the 
company of holy men and be the dust of their feet. 

Let God be ever in man’s thoughts : — 

Read of God, write of God, repeat God’s name, sing God’s 
name, and He will cause thee to cross the terrible ocean. 

Meditate on God in thy heart with thought and word, 
and so repeat His name that thou mayest be happy. 

Mentally repeat the name of God, the Lord of the world ; 

And, 0 my friends, meet the company of the saints. 

Sing of God, the Dweller in the forest, and you shall be 
happy day and night. 

When God cast a look of favour on me, then I made 
mental effort ; by repeating God’s name I have been saved. 

O my Lord, preserve Thy servant Nanak’s honour ; he 
hath entered Thine asylum. 

Jaitsari 

God is a diamond which the Guru has made his 
own for the benefit of others : — 

A diamond or a ruby, however priceless or heavy, is, 
without a purchaser, as a blade of grass. 

When the holy Guru the purchaser saw the jewel, he 
bought it for hundreds of thousands. 

God was concealed as a diamond in my heart. 

When God, compassionate to the poor, caused me to 
meet the saintly Guru, I assayed the Diamond. 

In the house of the perverse is the darkness of igno- 
rance ; in their houses the Diamond is not seen. 

The pagans die wandering in the wilderness ; they have 
tasted of the poison of the serpent mammon. 

O God, cause me to meet Thy saint, the good man ; 
O God, keep me under the saint’s protection ! 

O Lord God, accept me ; I have hastened to Thy side. 

What praise of Thine can my tongue recount ? Thou art 
great and inaccessible, the greatest Being. 

The slave Nanak prayeth — 0 God, show mercy to me ; 
O God, preserve me who am sinking like a stone. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


3^7 


Men are as silly children without the Guru : — 

I am a child, foolish, stupid, and silly, and know nothing 
of Thy state or condition. 

0 God, he merciful, grant me the best understanding, 
and make me who am stupid wise. 

My mind is lazy and drowsy. 

0 God, bring the holy Guru to meet me ; let me meet 
him, and the doors of my understanding shall open. 

Love the Guru every moment, O my heart, that God’s 
name may become my love and life. 

Without the Name I should die, 0 my Lord, as a drunkard 
craveth for intoxicants. 1 

The hearts of those who have good fortune from the 
beginning love God. 

1 worship at all times the feet of those who have made 
God dear to me. 

0 God, my Lord, have mercy on me, cause me, who hath 
long been separated from Thee, to meet Thy saint. 

Hail ! hail to the true Guru who hath implanted God’s 
name in me ! The slave Nanak is a sacrifice unto him. 

The repetition of God's name and praises secures 
salvation : — 

0 God, the mothers of those who keep not God’s name 
in their hearts ought to have been barren. 

They who wander without the Name pine away and die 
in agony. 

0 man, repeat the name of God who is within thee. 

God the merciful hath shown me mercy ; when the Guru 

gave me divine instruction my mind understood it. 

The praise of God in the Kal age holdeth the highest 
place ; God is obtained through the true Guru. 

1 am a sacrifice to my true Guru who hath disclosed to 
me God’s hidden name. 

A sight of the holy man is obtained by great good fortune ; 
he removeth all sin. 

I have found the true Guru who is a very clever mer- 
1 That is, in a paroxysm of desire. 


328 THE SIKH RELIGION 

chant ; he hath made me a partner in God’s many attri- 
butes. 

They to whom the Life of the world hath shown mercy, 
have clasped Him to their hearts. 

Dharmraj in his court hath tom up my papers 1 ; the 
slave Nanak hath settled his account. 

Bairari 

The position and occupation of the child in the 
womb : — 

When the child reversed was praying in the pit of fire, 
God preserved him in the womb. 

Tilang 

God is supreme and has no partner : — 

All come by the Master’s order ; His order extendeth 
over all. 

True is the Lord, and true is all His play. 

Praise the True One ; God the Master is over all. 

He hath no partner ; of whom shall I take account ? 

God hath built His temple out of air, water, earth, and 
ether. 

He Himself abideth in the centre ; say what can be 
accounted false ? 

Instruction for the faithless : — 

The proud man of evil mind ever doeth fruitless work. 

When he practiseth deceit and falsehood, he thinketh he 
hath conquered the world. 

Such is his way in this life ; he never remembereth 
God’s name. 

In a moment everything that is false shall perish ; O my 
mind, meditate on God. 

The time cometh not to thy memory when the torturer 
Death shall seize thee. 

Nanak, God will redeem him in whose heart He merci- 
fully dwelleth. 

1 As was done by Indian bankers after accounts were adjusted. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


329 

Guru Ram Das’s devotion to Guru Amar Das and 
his disciples : — 

My friend the Guru hath told me tales and parables 
of God. 

I am a sacrifice to my Guru ; to the Guru I am a sacrifice. 

Come to me, Sikhs of the Guru ; come to me, beloved of 
my Guru. 

God’s praises are pleasing to Him ; I have obtained them 
from the Guru. 

To those who obey the will of the Guru I am ever a 
sacrifice ; 

I am a sacrifice to those who have beheld the beloved 
true Guru ; 

I am ever a sacrifice to those who have served the Guru. 

0 God, Thy name is Hari, because Thou effacest suffering. 1 

Thou art obtained by service to the Guru ; through his 

instruction is salvation. 

They who meditate on God’s name are accepted : 

Nanak, I am a sacrifice to them, and ever and ever offer 
myself for them. 

That, O God, is Thy praise which is pleasing unto Thee. 

The holy men who serve the Beloved obtain Him as their 
reward. 

God is with the souls of those who hold Him dear. 

They repeat and remember the name of the beloved God, 
and live for ever. 

1 am a sacrifice to the holy ones who have served the 
Beloved. 

They are saved themselves with their families, and have 
freed the whole world. 

The Guru who hath served the Beloved God is blest, is 
blest. 

The Guru who hath shown God’s way hath performed 
merit, the greatest merit. 

The Guru’s disciples who serve him are meritorious beings : 

The slave Nanak is a sacrifice unto them, and ever and 
ever offereth himself for them. 

1 Hri , to take away, is the root of Hari. 


330 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


They are holy friends and companions ; they are pleasing 
to God Himself. 

God in His court clotheth them with robes of honour 
and embraceth them. 

Grant me, 0 Lord, a sight of the holy men who meditate 
on Thy name : 

I will bathe their feet, stir and drink the dirt thereof. 

They who, while eating betel leaf and betel nut and 
dyeing their lips therewith, 

Never think of God, shall be seized and taken away by 
Death ; 

But Death shall never approach those who remember 
God’s name, 

And clasp it to their hearts — the Guru’s Sikhs are dear 
to the Guru. 

God’s name is a treasure : some rare pious person knoweth 
this. 

Nanak, they who meet the true Guru shall enjoy the 
highest pleasure. 

The true Guru is the giver ; being pleased he bestoweth 
favours. 

I am ever a sacrifice to the Guru who gave me the Name. 

The Guru who giveth God’s love is congratulated and 
praised. 

As I behold the Guru I am glad ; the Guru is true, the 
Guru is the giver. 

The Guru’s tongue uttereth nectar, and is adorned with 
God’s name. 

All the hunger of the Sikhs who hear and obey the Guru 
departeth. 

Men speak of God’s way ; say how shall we walk therein ? 

Har Har is Thy name, O God ; take Har 1 with thee, 
0 man, as thy travelling expenses. 

The pious who have adored God are wealthy and very 
wise. 

I am ever a sacrifice to the true Guru ; I am absorbed 
in the Guru’s word. 

Thou art Master, Thou art Lord, Thou art my sovereign. 

1 That is, God’s name. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 331 

If it please Thee, we perform Thy service ; Thou art an 
ocean of merits. 

Thou art, 0 God, of one phase, and Thou art of many 
phases. 

Saith Nanak, whatever pleaseth Thee is good. 

SUHI 

Instructions for the deceitful : — 

If man while publicly invoking God ever practise deceit, 
his heart shall never become pure. 

He may day and night perform many ceremonies, but 
he shall not have happiness even in his dreams. 

Without the Guru possessed of divine knowledge there 
can be no devotion. 

Unbleached clothes can never be dyed, however much all 
may desire it. 

The malady of the perverse departeth not, even though 
j they perform lip-worship, penance, austerities, and fasting. 

\ Their internal malady is great pride ; they are ruined by 

j worldly love. 

He who while in a religious garb practiseth cunning, who 
alloweth his mind to wander in every direction, 

Who is filled with pride and regardeth not the Word, 
shall wander in transmigration again and again. 

Nanak, he on whom God looketh with favour under- 
standeth, meditateth on the Name, 

| By the Guru’s favour knoweth the one God, and shall 

I be absorbed in Him. 

Men of the lowest castes obtain salvation by 
devotion : — 

He who even of low caste repeateth God’s name shall 
obtain the highest dignity. 

| Ask Bidur 1 the son of a handmaiden, in whose house 

jjj Krishan stayed. 

I 1 Krishan, once stayed at the house of Bidur (Vidur), a man of low 

i caste, and was hospitably entertained by him. Krishan at his depar- 

j ture was pleased to bless his host 



332 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Hear the ineffable word of God, my brethren, by which 
all anxiety, pain, and hunger are removed. 

Men praise Rav Das the tanner who every moment sang 
the one God’s praises. 

Though of fallen caste he became the best : the four 
castes came and fell at his feet. 

The Khatris and Brahmans called Namdev who loved 
God a calico-printer ; 

But God turned His back on them and showed His face 
to Namdev. 

The sixty-eight places of pilgrimage yield the palm of 
victory 1 to the worshippers and saints of God. 

May the slave Nanak through God’s mercy night and 
day touch their feet ! 

The worship of God, the only permanent good, is 
inculcated : — 

Where God is remembered, there He becometh a friend 
and helper. 

God dwelleth in the heart by the favour of the Guru ; 
He is not otherwise obtained. 

Amass God’s wealth, my brethren, 

So that God may assist you in this world and the next. 

God’s wealth is earned in the company of the holy ; 
God’s wealth is not obtained elsewhere or by other effort. 

The holy who deal in God’s jewels purchase the jewel of 
God’s wealth : dealers in glass acquire not God’s wealth by 
idle words . 2 

God’s wealth is as jewels, ornaments, and gems : 

God’s saints fix their attention on it at the suitable am- 
brosial hour. 

When God’s wealth is sown at the suitable ambrosial 
hour, God’s saints eat it, spend it, and it never faileth. 

Both in this world and the next the saints who deal in 
God’s wealth are congratulated. 

There is no fear for God’s wealth ; it ever remaineth 

1 Literally — put patches on their foreheads. 

2 The holy meditate on God; the perverse continue their vain 
babbling. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


333 


immovable and permanent ; it cannot be destroyed by fire 
or by water ; it is not the prey of thieves or of Death’s 
myrmidons. 

Pickpockets cannot approach God’s wealth, nor can the 
tax-gatherer Death impose a tax on it. 

The apostates through sin have amassed sinful wealth, 
but not a particle of it shall go with them. 

In this world the apostate is miserable when wealth 
slippeth from his hands : the apostate shall not find entrance 
into God’s court hereafter. 

The dealer in this wealth of God, 0 saints, is God Him- 
self ; he to whom He giveth it, loadeth it and taketh it 
away. 

This wealth of God shall never suffer deficiency; the 
Guru hath given this knowledge to the slave Nanak. 

Suhi Ashtapadi 

The Gum's passionate desire to obey and serve 
God : — 

I will sell myself to him who bringeth my dearly Beloved 
to me. 

I desire to behold God. 

By God’s mercy the true Guru will cause me to meet 
Him and meditate on His name. 

If Thou give me happiness, O God, I will worship Thee ; 
even in misery I will meditate on Thee. 

If Thou give me hunger even then I shall be satiated 
with it ; and in its torture I shall feel happy. 

I would cut up my body and soul and dedicate them all 
to Thee, or I would burn myself in fire ; 

I would fan Thee and draw Thee water ; what Thou 
givest me I should eat. 

Poor Nanak hath fallen at Thy door, 0 God ; Thine 
acceptance of him will be to Thy glory. 

I would take out mine eyes and put them beneath Thy 
feet : having wandered over the whole earth I have gained 
this wisdom. 

If Thou seat me near Thee, I will still reverence Thee ; 



334 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


even if Thou strike me and thrust me away, I will still 
meditate on Thee. 

If men praise me, then the praise is Thine ; if they slander 
me, even then I will not leave Thee. 

If Thou art on my side, men may say what they please ; 
if Thou forget me, I die. 

I am a sacrifice to the perfect Guru : falling at their feet 
I propitiate the saints. 

Poor Nanak is mad for a sight of Thee. 

Suhi Chhant 

The following, which Guru Ram Das composed on 
the occasion of his marriage, is now an epithalamium 
of the Sikhs. 

I 

God by this first round 1 hath ordained secular fife . 2 

Accept the Word instead, of Brahma and religion instead 
of the Yeds, 

And God will free you from your sins. 

Hold fast to religion, meditate on God’s name, and let 
it be fixed in your memory. 

Worship the true Guru, the perfect Guru, and all your 
sins shall depart. 

Very fortunate is man when God is near to his heart ; 
then he feeleth composure and happiness. 

The slave Nanak hath given out the first round and made 
a beginning of the marriage. 


II 

In the second round God hath caused me to meet the 
true Guru. 

1 Lawan is that part of the marriage ceremony which consists in 
tying together the upper garments of the bride and bridegroom, and 
causing them to go four times round the Granth Sahib, while this 
hymn is repeated by the Sikh priest. 

2 The first two lines of each stanza end in the original with the 
word Balram Jiu, which may mean, O Dear One, or, I am a sacrifice 
unto Thee. The Sikh reader may supply the word for himself. 


HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 335 

The fear in my heart hath departed, and the filth of my 
mind hath been washed away. 

I have obtained a pure state by singing God’s praises 
and beholding Him before me. 

The Lord God the soul- of the world is everywhere diffused 
and filleth every place. 

Within and without us is the one God ; on meeting 
the saints, hymns of rejoicing are sung. 

The slave Nanak hath finished the second round and 
heard the strain of ecstasy. 


Ill 

God hath appointed the third round, and pleasure and 
contempt of the world are produced in the mind. 

The saints have caused me to meet God, and I have found 
Him by great good fortune. 

I have found the pure God by singing His praises and 
uttering His hymns. 

I have by great good fortune found the company of the 
saints wherein tales of the Ineffable are told. 

The absorbing thought of God hath arisen in my heart, 
and I have repeated His name by the destiny recorded on 
my forehead. 

The slave Nanak hath given out the third round, and 
God’s love hath been produced in his heart. 

Iv 

At the fourth round divine knowledge is produced in the 
heart, and I have obtained God. 

Under the Guru’s instructions I have obtained a good 
disposition, and God is dear to my soul and body : 

God is dear and pleasing to me ; I meditate on Him 
night and day. 

By singing the praises of God’s name I have obtained 
the fruit my heart desired. 

God hath finished the work, and woman’s heart delighteth 
in His name. 

The slave Nanak hath given out the fourth round, and 
obtained God the Imperishable. 



336 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Guru composed the following also on his 
marriage : — 

The Lord God hath accomplished the work ; 

He came to wed a holy bride : 

He came to wed a holy bride who thus found God ; that 
bride is dear to her Spouse. 

On meeting the saints songs of rejoicing are sung ; God 
Himself hath decorated the bride. 

Demigods, men, and heavenly minstrels have come in 
a body, and formed a marriage procession never seen before. 

Nanak, I have found the true God who never dieth or 
is bom. 


Bilawal Ashtapadi 

Association with the holy and acceptance of their 
teachings are superior to the life of a J ogi : — 

By intercourse with the true Guru the rings I wear are 
in my heart, and the instruction of the Guru I have applied 
as ashes to my body. 

I renounced family life and wandered in the forest, but 
my heart was not at rest even for a moment. 

After wandering I returned home, and fell at the feet of 
God’s saints. 

Even the Sanyasi who abandoneth his children con- 
ceiveth many desires in his heart : 

He conceiveth desire upon desire, and knoweth not that 
under the Guru’s instruction man is freed from desires and 
is happy. 

When the wish for separation ariseth, man becometh 
a Digambar, yet his mind wandereth in every direction. 

He roameth about, but his thirst is not quenched ; it is 
only when he meeteth the saints that he attaineth the abode 
of mercy. 

The Sidhs study many postures and earnestly desire 
wealth and the tricks of supernatural power. 

They are not satisfied or contented, nor doth peace enter 
their minds : it is by meeting the saints man is satisfied, 
and by God’s name he obtaineth perfection. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 337 

As God made all men on an equality, so they 
obtain salvation : — 

God made the sources of production, human beings, and 
animals of all colours and forms ; 

He who taketh the saints’ protection shall be saved. 
Khatris, Brahmans, Sudars, Vaisyas, the whole race of 
Chandals, 

Namdev, Jaidev, Kabir, Trilochan, the low caste Rav 
Das, the currier, 

And those who met the company of holy men, such as 
the blessed Dhanna Jat and Sain, obtained God. 

God, to whom His saints are dear, protecteth their honour 
and accepteth them. 

Nanak, he who entereth the asylum of God, the life of 
the world, is mercifully preserved by Him. 

Gaund 

Place all thy hopes in God : — 

0 man, if thou rest thy hopes on God thou shalt obtain 
the fruits, however various, that thy heart desireth. 

God knoweth everything that passeth in the mind ; He 
alloweth not man to lose a particle of his labour. 

0 my soul, put thy hope in that Lord God who is con- 
tained in everything : 

0 my soul, put thy hope in God, the Lord of the world. 

The hopes which are put in any other than God are 
fruitless and all in vain. 

The Guru is completely penetrated by God’s 
love : — 

My soul, like a thirsty man without water, greatly yearneth 
for a sight of God. 

The arrow of God’s love hath pierced my heart. 

God knoweth my suffering, the pain within my heart. 

He who telleth me anything of my beloved God, is my 
brother, is my friend. 

Join, join, my companions, sing the praises of my Lord, 
and adopt the counsel of the patient true Guru. 

SIKH. II 2 

f 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


338 

Fulfil, O Lord, every desire of the slave Nanak ; on 
beholding Thee my mind is at rest. 

Ramkali 

They who unselfishly meet the saint shall obtain 
their reward : — 

If I have very great good fortune I shall have no delay 
in meeting the saint. 

God’s saints are my excellent tank of nectar : by great 
good fortune shall man bathe therein. 

0 God, apply me to the service of the saint : 

1 will draw watef, fan him, grind his corn, shampoo his 
feet, and put the dust thereof on my face. 

The saint of God, who causeth man to meet the true 
Guru, is very great and exalted. 

There is none so great as the true Guru ; on meeting 
him meditate upon God. 

They who entered the true Guru’s protection obtained 
God, and He preserved their honour. 

Some people come for their own objects, and sit in front 
of the Guru like cranes in the act of meditation. 

When the crane goeth into the society of the base crow, 
he putteth his beak into a poisonous carcass. 

Saith Nanak, 0 God, cause me to meet holy company, 
that meeting it I may be made a saint of Thine. 

Nat Ashtapadi 

The advantage of holy company : — 

0 God, bathe me in the nectareous tank. 

The true Guru’s knowledge is the best thing wherein to 
bathe ; by obtaining it the filth of sin departeth. 

The advantages of holy company are very great — the 
courtesan was saved by teaching her parrot to repeat God’s 
name ; 1 

The touching of Krishan’s feet took the hunchback 2 to 
heaven. 

1 The courtesan (Ganika) by the advice of a holy man taught her 
parrot to repeat God’s name. 

2 A hunchbacked handmaiden had ground sandal for Krishan’s 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


339 


Ajamal bore love to his son, and called out, 1 Narayan ! ’ 1 

His faith pleased my God’s heart and He smote and 
expelled the myrmidons of Death. 

Man preacheth and dictateth to others, hut practiseth 
not what he preacheth ; 

But, on meeting the company of the saints, obtaineth 
staunchness of faith, and God’s name saveth him. 

As long as the mind and body are healthy, man remem- 
bereth not God. 

When the house is on fire, is that the time for the water- 
man to dig a well from which to draw water ? 

O man, associate not with the apostate who hath for- 
gotten God’s name. 

The word of the apostate stingeth like a scorpion ; leave 
the apostate far away. 

When love is bestowed, it increaseth greatly ; attach- 
ment to the holy regenerateth. 

They who accept the Guru’s words as absolutely true, 
are very dear to my Lord. 

According to our dealings in previous births, God’s name 
becometh dear. 

By the favour of the Guru the ambrosial juice of the 
Name is obtained ; man singeth and pondereth on it. 

0 God, my Jewel, my Darling, all forms and colours are 
Thine. 

Everything shall be according to the colour Thou givest ; 
saith Nanak, what is wretched man ? 

God’s word and the Guru are interchangeable 
terms : — 

The Word is the Guru and the Guru is the Word ; in 
the Word is the essence of ambrosia. 

The worshipper who obeyeth what the Guru’s word 
teacheth shall be saved by the Guru in person. 

uncle, but on accidentally meeting Krishan applied it to his feet. 
He raised her from her stooping posture, upon which it is said her 
hump disappeared, and her body became perfect. 

1 Narayan, one of God’s names, is frequently given to children. 
Ajamal, a worldly man, called on the point of death to his son so named, 
and obtained salvation because he had once mentioned God’s name. 

Z 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


340 

Ablutions and decorations are of no avail without 
listening to the Guru : — 

Man continually washeth his body, and rubbeth it and 
adometh it ; 

But the beautiful decorations of him whose heart accepteth 
not the words of my true Guru are all in vain. 

Maru ki War I 

The Guru is potent to save under all circum- 
stances : — 

I will embark on the boat and proceed, however agitated 
be the sea. 

The true boat cannot be stopped if the Guru give en- 
couragement. 

I will disembark at that landing-place where the Guru 
is seen on the alert. 

Nanak, if I obtain God’s look of favour I shall be honoured 
in His court. 


Basant 

The presence of God in every heart : — 

As the light of the sun’s rays is diffused, 

So is God the warp and woof contained in every heart. 

Man’s life is ever decreasing, and he ought to 
remember God the Saviour : — 

Night and day are both calling — 

Remember God in your hearts : He is the Saviour at last 
and for ever. 

O my soul, ever remember God. 

When man completely removeth the disease of sloth, he 
obtaineth God and under the Guru’s instruction singeth 
His praises. 

The obstinate die again and again of pride. 

They who are destroyed by the demon Death shall go to 
his city. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


34i 


Basant Ashtapadi 

The Guru preaches the necessity of controlling 
the mind : — 

A child 1 dwelleth in the city of the body ; it will not 
rest even for a moment. 

We weary of our various efforts and struggles to restrain 
it , but yet it wandereth incessantly. 

My Lord, bring the child to a fixed home. 

By meeting the true Guru the Perfect One is obtained ; 
by repeating His name He is manifested. 

All men’s bodies in which God’s name dwelleth not, are 
earth in graves. 

When the Guru causeth man to taste the water of God’s 
name, he enjoyeth it and again reviveth. 

I have thoroughly examined and searched my body ; the 
holy man showed me a sight — 

All the apostates were dying of searching abroad, while 
I under the Guru’s instruction found God at home. 

God hath been compassionate to the poorest of the poor 
as when Kristian went to Bidur’s house. 

Sudama 2 went to Krishan with love, upon which Krishan 
removed his poverty, and rendered him happy. 

Great is the honour of God’s name ; my Lord Himself 
hath bestowed it on me. 

If all the apostates were to practise slandering it, that 
would in no wise lessen it. 

God’s name is His servant’s praise by which he obtaineth 
honour in every direction. 

The slanderer and the infidel cannot endure it ; they 
have set fire to their houses. 

God’s servant meeting another obtaineth honour, as 
virtue springeth from virtue. 

The men who are the slaves of slaves of my God are 
dear and beloved by me. 

1 That is, the mind. 

2 Sudama had been a class fellow of Krishan, and in great poverty 
approached him when his fame had spread far and wide. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


342 

The Creator is as the ocean ; He is without limit ; it is 
He who blendeth man with Himself. 

Nanak, the holy man is naturally blended with God as 
water with water. 


Sarang ki War 

The following was addressed to a hypocritical 
faqir : — 

Thou smearest thy body with ashes, but in thy heart is 
ignorance. 

Thou hast a patched coat, a wallet, and many sectarial 
garbs, but thou art evil-minded and proud. 

Thou hast never uttered the Word of God ; thy heart 
is filled with the love of fleeting things. 

In thy heart are avarice and superstition ; thou wanderest 
a pagan. 

Saith Nanak, thou hast not remembered the Name and 
hast lost thy game. 

Hypocrisy cannot for ever be concealed : — 

They who are clean outside, but in whose hearts is the 
filth of deception, 

Practise falsehood and deception, and their falsehood 
becometh apparent. 

What is within cometh forth and cannot be concealed. 

He to whom falsehood and avarice attach, shall again 
enter the womb. 

Nanak, what man soweth he eateth : he obtaineth what 
the Creator destined for him. 

The fate of the slanderer : — 

They in whose hearts is the enemy slander cut their own 
noses and cause others to cut theirs. 

They become very ugly and pained, and their faces 
ever appear black. 

When they rise in the morning, they take and steal 
others’ property with God’s name in their mouths. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


343 

0 God, associate me not with such ; preserve me from 
them, O God. 

Nanak, such perverse persons act according to their 
destiny and are unhappy. 

Man may be holy in his own home : — 

Even in one’s own house and one’s own family man may 
be absorbed in God. 

Nanak, they who are imbued with the Name are the true 
hermits. 

Men cannot be compelled to holiness : — 

Service is not performed by calculation ; what is so done 
is not acceptable. 

He who hath not a relish for the Word, shall never love 
the True One. 

The obstinate person to whom the Guru is not dear, 
shall come and go in transmigration. 

When he maketh one step forward he retreateth ten. 

Man ought not to rail at Providence : — 

Saith Nanak, why, O man, be angry with Him who 
taketh thought for us, 

Without whom we cannot live for a moment, and by 
forgetting whom we cannot succeed in any degree ? 

In the rainy reason men obtain respite from out- 
door occupation, so that is the time for either love 
or devotion : — 

When rainy Sawan cometh, meditate on God’s name 
under the Guru’s instruction. 

All trouble, hunger and pain shall be at an end when 
the rain falleth in torrents. 

The whole earth becometh green, corn groweth, and there 
appear harvest heaps. 

God Hi m self mercifully calleth man when he expecteth 
it not and assigneth him a place. 



344 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Kanra Ashtapadi 

The advantages of listening to the Guru’s instruc- 
tion : — 

0 man, act according to the instruction of the Guru. 

As the iron goad suhdueth the furious elephant, so let 
the goad of the Guru’s instruction restrain thy heart. 

The wandering mind wandereth in every direction ; if 
the Guru restrain it, it will fix its attention on God. 

If the true Guru put the Word into the mind, the nectar 
of the Name shall trickle into the mouth. 

Man is filled with the poison of the serpents 1 ; the Guru’s 
instruction is the jay which swalloweth them. 

The serpent mammon will not then approach such a 
person ; he will reject the poison and fix his attention on 
God. 

The dog covetousness is very powerful in the citadel of 
the body, but the Guru will in a moment smite and expel it. 

He will plant truth, patience, and faith instead ; then 
shall man sing God’s praises. 

Mortal would sink into the mire of worldly love, did the 
Guru not save him from sinking. 

When man repeating ‘ Save ! save ! ’ cometh into the 
Guru’s sanctuary 2 , the Guru reacheth his hand and extri- 
cateth him. 

The world is all like the play of a dream ; God causeth 
the whole game to be played. 

Under the Guru’s instruction take the Name as your 
profit, and you shall be honoured in God’s court. 

Pride acteth and causeth to act ; pride bringeth and 
putteth the charcoal of sin on man’s head. 

The torturer Death shall come, and cause man to eat 
what he hath sown. 

1 The deadly sins. 

2 It cannot be said that the Hindus had an actual sanctuary corre- 
sponding to the aa-vXov of the Greeks, but whoever approached a 
great man saying, trahi, trahi — protect me — might not be refused 
protection, 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 345 

0 saints, lay up God’s name ; take it as your travelling 
expenses and you shall obtain honour : 

Eat it, spend it, and bestow it freely, and God will so 
give you that there shall be no deficiency. 

The wealth of God’s name is in the heart ; they who 
enter the Guru’s protection shall obtain it. 

0 slave Nanak, the Lord of mercy hath shown mercy, 
removed my misery and poverty, and blended me with 
Himself. 

The Guru does for man what the philosopher’s 
stone does for iron : — 

0 man, bethink thee of the Guru’s protection. 

As iron becometh gold by touching the philosopher’s 
stone, so do the virtues of the Guru, who is the philosopher’s 
stone, enter his disciples. 

The great being, the true Guru, is a philosopher’s stone ; 
he who is touched by it shall obtain his reward. 

As by the guru’s instruction Prahlad was saved, so the 
Guru protecteth the honour of the servant. 

The true Guru’s word is good ; by means of it man 
obtaineth nectar. 

Kanre ki War 

God’s praises : — 

Thou O God, art the Sidh and the Striver ; Thou art the 
Jogi of Jogis. 

Thou art the Taster of tasters ; Thou art the Enjoyer 
of enjoyers. 

Thou pervadest all things ; what Thou doest taketh place. 

Hail to the true congregation ! hail to the true Guru 
by meeting whom man repeateth God’s name ! 

All ye people, proclaim Har, Har, Hare, Har, Har, Hare ; 
by thus uttering God’s name all sins depart. 

The Guru's instruction dispels poverty and sor- 
row : — 

Poverty and sorrow shall depart from those who walk 
as pleaseth the true Guru. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


346 

Nobody hath found God by walking his own way ; 0 
man, see and be assured of this. 

The ceremonies of the Hindus are marred by 
spiritual pride : — 

Very fortunate are they who meditate on God ; to them 
are entrusted God’s storehouses. 

The acts done without God’s name are ever spoiled by 
pride. 

Even when the elephant is rubbed and bathed, he will 
again throw dust on his head. 

God’s attributes cannot be described. The Guru 
makes supplication : — 

I have but one tongue while God’s merits are unapproach- 
able and unfathomable. 

How can we silly persons repeat Thy name, 0 God ? 
Thou art great, unapproachable, and unfathomable. 

O God, grant us excellent understanding that we may 
fall at the true Guru’s feet ! 

O God, lead us to meet the company of the saints that 
we sinners may be saved with them ! 

O God, pardon the slave Nanak and be pleased to blend 
him with Thee ! 

O God, mercifully hear our supplication, and save us 
who are sinners and worms ! 

Though devotion be abundant, yet few obtain it : — 

Devotion is a bubbling lake ; filled to the brim it floweth 
over. 

The fortunate ones, O slave Nanak, who obey the true 
Guru obtain it. 

The Guru gives divine knowledge to those who 
are prepared to receive it : — 

He to whom the Guru giveth the salve of divine knowledge 
hath his eyes tinctured with God’s love. 

Life without devotion is valueless : — 

My mind and body are only of value when I behold God 
with mine eyes. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 


347 

Nanak, may I find that God and live ever hearing His 
■ praises \ 

They who seek to injure God’s slaves injure them- 
selves : — 

God’s slaves repeat God’s name ; the ignorant aim arrows 
to destroy them. 

Nanak, God’s slaves are saved by God’s love : the arrows 
recoil on those who discharged them. 

Men ought to fix their attention on God alone : — 

They whose eyes are attracted by God’s love behold Him 
by means of the Name : 

If they look at any one else, O Nanak, they ought to be 
gouged out. 

God exerts Himself to give divine knowledge to 
the pious : — 

God the Beneficent Giver putteth forth His hands and 
poureth rain on the world. 

For those who remember God’s name the corn germina- 
teth and the field arriveth at maturity. 

God is with man but can only be seen by means 
of the Guru : — 

I am searching for my Friend, but my Friend is with me. 

O slave Nanak, the Invisible is not seen, but the holy 
man showeth Him. 


Kalian 

The Guru addresses God as a child his father : — 

0 God have mercy on me, and I will sing Thy praises ! 

1 have ever hope in Thee that Thou wilt yet embrace me. 
I am a child stupid and silly ; my Father will advise me. 
A son every moment erreth and committeth faults, but 

the Father of the world will still be pleased with him. 

We obtain only what Thou, 0 Lord God, givest. 

There is no other refuge for me to seek. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


348 

God is pleased with the saints who are pleased with Him. 

The Lord of light will blend their light with His, and both 
lights shall unite. 

When God is merciful, He will fix man’s attention on Him. 

The slave Nanak hath sought the asylum of God’s gate, 
and God will protect His honour. 

Kalian Ashtapadi 

An injunction to speedily seek the society of the 
saints : — 

0 God, make me the slave of Thy slaves ; 

As long as there is breath in my body, nourish me with 
the dust of the saints’ feet. 

Shiv, Narad, Sheshnag \ and the Munis long for the dust 
of the saints’ feet. 

Every house where the saints put their feet becometh 
holy. 

Renounce shame of the saints' service ; renounce all pride ; 
when you meet a saint abide with him. 

He will cause you to disregard Dharmraj, and extricate 
you though drowning in a sea of poison. 

They who are parched by superstition are thoroughly 
parched, but they shall bloom again by association with the 
saints : 

Wherefore make not a moment’s waiting or delay : go 
and take the protection of the saints’ feet. 

The singing of God’s name is a precious thing which God 
deposited with His saints. 

It is offered him who obeyeth the Guru’s word as the 
truest of the true. 

Hear, hear, ye brother saints ; the Guru raiseth his arm 
and calleth unto men. 

Let him who desireth supreme mental happiness, enter 
the true Guru’s protection. 

1 The serpent which, in the Hindu dispensation, supports the earth. 
It is said to possess a thousand heads which formed the couch of 
Vishnu whilst sleeping between the different creations and destructions 
of the world. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 349 

Let him who is greatly fortunate and very virtuous, fix 
the Name in his heart under the Guru’s instruction. 

All worldly love is troublesome, but, by drinking the 
elixir of God’s name, man shall cross the world in comfort. 

They who possess excessive worldly wealth pine away in 
the midst of it. 

The way of ignorance is very gloomy and difficult, specially 
when man is weighted with the load of pride. 

Nanak, by ever repeating God’s name salvation is obtained. 

By meeting the true Guru the Name is fixed in the heart, 
and by it man is blended with God. 

God is not found even by search without the true 
Guru : — 


Supplementary Sloks 

I love my Dear One ; how shall I meet my beloved 
Friend ? 

I search for that Friend who is adorned with truth. 

The true Guru is my friend ; if I meet him I will sacrifice 
my life unto him. 

The dear one will show me God the Friend, the Creator. 

Nanak, I was searching for my Beloved, but the true 
Guru hath shown Him unto me. 

The holy man is the true lover who finds the 
truly Beloved : — 

The holy man is the true lover by whom the truly Beloved 
is found. 

Nanak, man is then happy night and day and naturally 
absorbed in God. 

The love and affection vouchsafed by God through 
the Guru are not forfeited : — 

True love and affection are obtained from the perfect 
Guru ; 

They shall never be forfeited ; Nanak singeth God’s 
praises. 



350 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The holy man may be cheerful or serious : — 

The holy man may laugh, the holy man may weep ; 

Whatever he doeth is in God’s service. 

Only those who possess discrimination and reflec- 
tion serve the Guru : — 

The service of the Guru and of Pirs 1 is very difficult, yet 
in it is the essence of happiness. 

God inspireth him on whom He casteth His glance with 
love and affection. 

The world will cross the terrible ocean if it attach itself 
to the true Guru’s service. 

He in whose heart there is discrimination and reflection, 
shall obtain the fruit his heart desireth. 

Nanak, when man meeteth the true Guru, he findeth God 
the remover of all sorrow. 

It is only the holy man who can regenerate and 
save by giving God’s name : — 

Even though the perverse man perform service, he at- 
tacheth his heart to mammon. 

Sons, wives, and families increase his worldly love : 

None of them will save him when his account is at last 
called for in God’s court. 

Without God’s name all is misery ; worldly love causeth 
misery. 

Nanak, when the holy man appear eth all worldly love 
departeth. 

The condition of the perverse : — 

The perverse feel love of the world, not love of the Name : 

They act falsehood, they amass falsehood, and they eat 
falsehood. 

They die amassing the wealth of poisonous mammon and 
at last all become dust. 

1 This verse was obviously intended for Sikhs and Muhammadans. 
By Pirs here are meant living saints, and not their cemeteries, as the 
word frequently means in India. 



HYMNS OF GURU RAM DAS 351 

They perform religious ceremonies, purifications, and 
self-restraint, but within them is the sin of greed. 

Nanak, what the perverse do is not acceptable ; they are 
despised in God’s court. 

It is good to sing God’s praises, but they may 
also be uttered by ordinary speech : — 

That is the best of all musical .measures by which God 
abideth in the heart. 

Musical measures to which the Word is sung are all true ; 
their worth cannot be described ; 

But God is independent of musical measures and airs ; His 
order cannot be understood merely from them. 

Nanak, he who understandeth God’s order becometh free 
from desires, and obtaineth understanding from the true 
Guru. 

Everything cometh from Him according to His will. 


END OF VOL. II 



OXFORD 

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BY HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY 


?c> 


n 

« 


»Wi»as'i»«‘ ap  aeiig 

§ WR  ^|T|T  STR<r5T  aRT^ift 
^ Lai  Bahadur  Shastri  Academy 
IC  of  Administration 

g MUSSOORIE 

X? 

^ r . 

;[|jj  arerrrR 

^ Accession  No. 

S ^rsrrr  ^ . - 

^ class  No X.4.T.^.O. 

I*  5?cr^?mT  ^ 

? Book  No 

xs  r»o 


$ 

« 

% 

% 

£C 


QL  294.6 
MAC  V.3 


102380 

LBSNAA 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


ITS  GURUS,  SACRED  WRITINGS 
AND  AUTHORS 

BY 

MAX  ARTHUR  MACAULIFFE 

\raRr  %,  ^ 'aM* 

The  egg  of  superstition  hath  burst;  the 
mind  is  illumined: 

The  Guru  hath  cut  the  fetters  off  the  feet 
and  freed  the  captive. 

Guru  Arjan 

IN  SIX  VOLUMES 
VOL.  Ill 


OXFORD 

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 


HENRY  FROWDE,  M.A. 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 
LONDON,  EDINBURGH,  NEW  YORK 
TORONTO  AND  MELBOURNE 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  Ill 

PAGE 


Life  of  Guru  Arjan,  the  Fifth  Guru  . . i 

Hymns  of  Guru  Arjan 102 

Twelve  Months 124 

Bawan  Akhari 168 

SUKHMANI , . . .197 

Jaitsari  ki  War 370 

Sahaskriti  Sloks 430 

Gatha 434 

Punhas 438 

Extra  Sloks 443 


HI  p. , 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN,  THE  FIFTH 

GURU 

CHAPtER  I 

Bibi  Bhani,  wife  of  Guru  Ram  Das,  gave  birth 
to  Arjan  at  Goindwal  on  Tuesday  the  7th  day  of 
the  dark  half  of  Baisakh,  Sambat  1620  (a.d.  1563). 

We  have  already  related  one  legend  of  GUru 
Amar  Das’s  fondness  for  his  grandson  Arjan,  and 
of  his  offer  to  him  of  the  Guruship.  Another  legend 
is  also  current.  The  child  Arjan  one  day  found  his 
way  to  the  bed  of  Guru  Amar  Das  while  taking  his 
repose.  It  was  generally  considered  a serious  thing 
to  disturb  the  Guru  in  his  siesta.  Bibi  Bhani  on 
missing  the  child  ran  to  fetch  him.  He  had,  however, 
already  awakened  the  Guru,  who  said,  ‘ Let  him 
come  to  me  ; yih  mera  dohita  pant  ka  bohita  howega  ’ 
— this  grandson  of  mine  shall  be  a boat  to  take  man- 
kind across  the  ocean  of  the  world. 

Arjan  was  in  due  time  married  to  Ganga,  daughter 
of  Krishan  Chand,  a resident  of  the  village  of  Meo 
in  the  Philor  sub-collectorate  of  the  present  district 
of  Jalandhar. 

The  details  of  Arjan’s  hfe  up  to  the  date  of  his 
father  Guru  Ram  Das’s  death  are  given  in  the  life 
of  the  latter.  It  will  be  remembered  that  he  died  in 
Goindwal.  After  his  decease,  Mohti,  maternal  uncle 
of  Arjan,  bestowed  on  him  a turban  as  his  father’s 
heir,  according  to  ancient  custom,  Prithia  urged  that 
it  was  he  himself  who,  as  eldest  son  of  the  late  Guru 
Ram  Das,  should  receve  the  turban.  Upon  ttiis 
Guru  Arjan  conferred  it  on  him  and  returned  to 
Amritsar.  A short  time  afterwards  Prithia  met 
Sulahi  Khan,  a revenue  officer  of  the  province  of 
Lahore,  and  interested  him  in  a complaint  which 

B 


BJKH.  Ill 


2 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


he  was  preparing  to  make  to  the  Emperor  on  the 
subject  of  his  supersession  by  his  youngest  brother. 

Prithia  next  complained  to  the  chaudhris  of 
Amritsar,  that  he  and  his  brother  had  been  left 
without  maintenance.  The  chaudhris  made  a 
representation  to  Guru  Arjan  on  the  subject.  He 
accordingly  granted  certain  taxes  and  house 
rents  to  Prithia,  the  customs  duties  of  Pasian  ka 
Chauk  (a  ward  of  Amritsar)  to  Mahadev,  his  second 
brother,  and  merely  reserved  for  himself  the  volun- 
tary offerings  of  the  faithful.^ 

As  we  have  seen,  it  was  under  Guru  Amar  Das 
that  Jetha,  his  sPn-in-law,  afterwards  Guru  Ram  Das, 
began  the  excavation  of  the  tanks  of  Santokhsar  and 
Amritsar  and  the  foundation  of  the  city.  After  the 
death  of  Guru  Ram  Das,  Guru  Arjan  applied  himself 
to  the  task  of  completing  the  tanks  and  extending  the 
city  of  Ramdaspur.  It  was  his  practice  to  go  every 
day  and  sit  under  a shisham®  tree,  which  had 
sheltered  Guru  Ram  Das,  and  superintend  the  work. 

When  the  tank  of  Santokhsar  was  approaching 
completion,  it  is  said  the  workmen  came  on  a hut 
in  which  a naked  Jogi  was  seated  in  profound  con- 
templation. The  Guru  clothed  him,  and  restored 
him  to  consciousness.  He  was  rubbed  and  the 
breath  which  was  concentrated  in  his  brain  was 
diffused  through  his  body.  He  then  opened  his  eyes, 
and  seeing  the  Guru  and  his  Sikhs  standing  round 
him,  inquired,  ‘Who  are  you  and  who  reigneth 
now  ? ' Bhai  Budha  answered  these  and  many 
other  queries.  The  Guru  interrogated  him  as  to 
how  he  had  been  so  long  concealed  alive  beneath 
the  earth.  The  Jogi  replied,  ‘I  pleased  my  guru, 
and  he  granted  me  the  privilege  of  l5dng  in  deep 
cmtemplation  here.  He  promised  that  I should 
sleep  till  the  coming  of  Guru  Arjan,  who  would 
awaken  me  and  grant  me  deliverance.’  He  then  put 

^ Suraj  Parkdsh^  RSs  II,  Chapter  29. 

• Dalhergia  Sissoo, 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  3 

several  questions  to  the  Guru,  who  replied  by 
the  following  hymn  : — 

A player  playeth  his  part 

And  representeth  many  characters  ; 

But  when  he  taketh  off  his  disguises  the  play  is  brought  to 
an  end, 

And  he  assumeth  his  original  appearance. 

What  characters  appeared  and  disappeared ! 

Whither  did  they  vanish  and  whence  did  they  come  ? 

Many  waves  are  formed  in  the  water, 

And  ornaments  of  many  fashions  are  made  of  gold 

I have  seen  seeds  of  various  kinds  sown  : 

When  the  produce  ripeneth,  the  seed  reappeareth  in  its 
original  shape. 

In  a thousand  water-pots  there  is  one  sky  reflected. 

When  the  water-pots  burst  the  sky  remaineth  as  before. 

Man  goeth  astray  through  the  sins  of  covetousness  and 
worldly  love ; 

But,  when  he  is  freed  from  his  error,  he  assumeth  the  like- 
ness of  God, 

Who  is  imperishable  and  perisheth  not. 

Who  neither  cometh  nor  goeth. 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  washed  away  the  filth  of  my  pride. 

And  Nanak  hath  obtained  the  supreme  state.^ 

It  is  said  that  the  Jogi  on  hearing  this  found  his 
doubts  resolved  and  obtained  divine  knowledge. 
He  then  cast  aside  his  body,  in  the  words  of  the 
Sikh  chronicler,  as  a snake  sloughs  his  skin,  and  by 
the  favour  of  the  Guru  obtained  salvation.  The  tank 
from  the  site  of  which  the  Jogi  had  emerged  was 
completed  on  the  first  of  Phagan,  Sambat  1645 
(A.  D.  1588). 

The  Guru  hastened  the  construction  of  the  Amrit- 
sar, or  sacred  tank,  and  projected  the  Har  Mandar  or 
temple  of  God.  He  appointed  his  most  trustworthy 
Sikhs — Bhais  Budha,  Salo,  Bhagtu,  Paira,  Bahk), 
Kaliana,  and  others — ^to  superintend  the  work  and 

^ Suhi. 

B2 


4 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


procure  lime,  bricks,  and  all  other  necessary  materials. 
The  removal  of  the  earth  had  all  been  effected 
under  Guru  Ram  Das  in  Sambat  1634.  The  task 
of  making  the  masonry  side-walls  and  floor  fell  to 
Guru  Arjan, 

One  day  the  Guru  seated  in  court,  said  that 
in  order  to  complete  the  work  more  money 
was  required,  and  he  suggested  to  his  Sikhs  to 
endeavour  to  obtain  it  from  the  hill  chiefs.  Bhai 
Kaliana  said  he  would  gladly  act  in  furtherance 
of  the  Guru’s  wishes.  He  proceeded  to  the  Hindu 
state  of  Mandi  in  the  hills,  and  appreciating  the 
beauty  of  the  country  after  his  residence  in  the 
plains  decided  to  sojourn  there.  On  the  occasion  of 
the  Janam  Ashtami — eighth  day  of  the  dark  half  of 
the  month  of  Bhadon — the  anniversary  of  Krishan’s 
birth,  the  Raja  decreed  that  all  the  inhabitants  of 
his  state  should  observe  a rigid  fast  during  the  day, 
and  not  sleep  the  following  night,  but  keep  vigil 
and  occupy  their  time  uttering  ‘ Krishan,  Krishan  ’. 
In  the  morning  they  should  repair  to  the  temple  to 
behold  the  salagram ; and  there  they  might  break 
their  fast  by  drinking  water  in  which  the  salagram 
had  been  bathed. 

Kaliana  was  the  only  one  who  heeded  not  these 
stringent  orders.  He  did  not  fast,  or  go  to  the  temple, 
or  drink  the  water  in  which  the  idol  had  been  bathed. 
In  reply  to  several  questions  as  to  the  cause  of 
his  disobedience  he  replied : ‘ My  God  is  a living 
Being  who  speaketh  and  conferreth  great  happiness 
on  His  worshippers.  Vain  is  the  worship  of  a lifeless 
stone  which  neither  eateth,  nor  speaketh,  nor  con- 
ferreth favours.  It  is  true  that  you  occasionally 
fast,  but  at  the  same  time  you  refrain  not  from 
grbvous  sins.  The  Sikhs  of  my  Guru  eat  little  and 
thils  are  ever  fasting.  They  ever  restrain  lust  and 
wrath,  and  apply  their  hearts  to  God’s  worship.’ 
He  then  repeated  the  following  hynm  of  Guru 
Arjan : — 


5 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

Did  God  put  aside  all  the  other  days  of  the  month 

That  He  should  have  been  bom  on  the  eighth  ? 

Man  led  astray  by  error  uttereth  nonsense. 

God  is  not  subject  to  birth  and  death. 

Man  taketh  cakes  ^ and  giveth  them  secretly  to  an  idol  to 
eat. 

O,  brute  of  an  infidel,  God  is  not ‘bom,  nor  doth  He  die. , 

All  thy  sin  resulteth  from  fondling  the  idol. 

May  the  mouth  which  sayeth  God  entered  a womb  be 
burnt ! 

Nanak’s  God  is  everywhere  ; 

He  is  not  bom,  nor  doth  He  die  ; He  cometh  not  and  goeth 
not.® 

On  hearing  this  everybody  laughed  and  began 
to  criticize  Kaliana’s  words.  They  were  repeated 
throughout  the  city,  and  the  Raja  was  informed  that 
there  had  come  to  the  state  a stranger  who  spoke 
slightingly  of  the  salagram  and  called  it  a stone,  and 
who  did  not  fast  on  the  holy  anniversary  of  Krishan’s 
birth.  The  Raja  became  very  wroth,  and  at  once 
sent  an  orderly  to  summon  Kaliana.  When  he 
arrived,  the  Raja  in  imperious  and  angry  tones  asked 
him  to  tell  his  place  of  residence,  his  religion,  and 
the  name  of  his  guru. 

Kaliana  replied : ‘ On  the  throne  of  the  holy  Guru 
Nanak,  who  was  very  famous  in  the  world,  now  sit- 
teth  the  holy  and  perfect  Guru  Arjan.  We  who  are 
his  disciples  obtain  the  object  of  our  desires  from 
him.  He  giveth  us  instruction,  which  conferreth  hap- 
piness here  and  hereafter.  We  ever  read  his  hymns, 
wherefore  we  reverence  not  stones  which  neither  see, 
nor  hear,  nor  speak.  How  can  a stone  be  pleased, 
and  what  can  we  gain  by  worshipping  it  ? God  who 
is  the  life  within  our  lives,  by  whose  support  we  exist, 
and  who  is  ever  bounteous  to  us  all — that  God  you 
suppose  to  be  a stone.  God  who  pervadeth  sea  and 

^ Made  out  of  clarified  butter,  sugar,  and  flour  kneaded  without 
water.  2 Bhairo, 


6 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


land,  who  conferreth  happinoss  here  and  hereafter, 
who  is  contained  in  animate  and  inanimate  nature, 
who  is  in  the  past,  present  and  future,  who  is 
supreme  in  the  three  worlds  and  to  whom  none  is 
equal — ^that  God  you  imagine  to  be  an  inanimate 
object.  How  can  He  be  pleased  with  you  when  you 
treat  him  with  such  utter  indignity  ? ’ ^ 

The  Raja  finding  Kaliana  thus  intractable  ordered 
that  he  should  be  imprisoned.  Next  day  he  was 
again  produced,  and  ordered  to  bow  before  the  idol. 
Kaliana  refused,  and  said  his  idol  was  Guru  Arjan. 
The  Raja  then  ordered  him  to  lose  one  of  his  legs  as 
punishment,  and  be  expelled  the  country.  After  the 
delivery  of  this  order  the  Raja  fainted,  and  the 
execution  was  accordingly  stayed.  Every  known 
remedy  was  employed  to  revive  him,  but  in  vain. 
The  wise  men  at  the  royal  court  frankly  said  that 
this  was  all  the  result  of  the  annoyance  inflicted  upon 
the  holy  stranger.  Instead  of  being  punished,  he  ought 
to  have  been  received  with  hospitality  and  respect. 

Better  counsels  having  thus  prevailed,  Kaliana 
was  called  to  the  Raja’s  bedside.  He  said  he  could 
cure  him  if  he  promised  to  believe  in  the  Guru  and 
become  one  of  his  Sikhs ; otherwise  he  had  no  healing 
power.  His  ministers  promised  on  behalf  of  the 
Raja  that  he  would  act  as  Kaliana  desired.  Upon 
this  Kaliana  stood  up,  clasped  his  hands,  and  prayed 
to  God  to  save  the  monarch’s  life.  While  Kaliana 
was  thus  praying,  the  Raja  recovered  consciousness. 
On  seeing  Kaliana  as  his  physician  standing  before 

^ This  teaching  may  be  contrasted  with  the  present  idolatrous 
practices  of  many  ignorant  Sikhs.  Sardar  Kahn  Singh,  in  his  Gurma! 
Sudhdkar,  states  that  some  Sikhs  go  to  temples  of  Shiv  and  imitate 
there  the  bleating  of  goats.  They  go  to  temples  of  Vishnu  and 
there  chew  leaves  of  sweet  basil,  sacred  in  the  estimation  of  the 
Hindus,  and  drink  water  in  which  the  idol  has  been  bathed.  They 
go  to  temples  of  Durga  and  there  offer  goats  in  sacrifice,  and  put  on 
red  and  yellow  necklaces  consecrated  to  the  goddess.  They  also  go 
to  Muhammadan  temples  and  cemeteries  and  there  offer  lamps, 
sweets,  &c.,  after  the  manner  of  ignorant  Muhammadans. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  7 

him,  he  ordered  that  he  should  be  received  into  his 
palace,  and  treated  with  all  possible  courtesy  and 
distinction. 

The  Raja  after  complete  recovery  begged  Kaliana 
to  take  him  to  the  Guru.  The  Raja  went  with  his 
queens,  his  concubines,  and  his  army,  and  pitched 
his  camp  outside  Amritsar.  ‘ Kaliana  preceded  to 
inform  the  Guru  of  the  monarch's  arrival,  and  of 
the  circumstances  which  had  led  to  it.  The  Raja 
next  day,  accompanied  only  by  his  macebearers,  went 
on  foot  to  see  the  Guru.  On  arriving  in  his  presence 
he  put  his  head  on  the  Guru's  feet,  and  begged  him 
to  save  him  now  that  he  had  come  under  his  pro- 
tection. The  Guru  imparted  to  him  religious  instruc- 
tion upon  which  he  realized  his  past  errors.  The 
Guru  asked  him  to  stay  with  him  for  three  days,  and 
he  would  reap  the  advantage  thereof.  The  Raja 
consented  to  delay  his  departure  and  also  to  take  his 
meals  from  the  Guru’s  kitchen.  In  due  time  he  took 
leave  of  the  Guru  and  returned  with  all  his  suite  to 
his  own  kingdom. 

There  is  a story  told  of  one  Manj,  a votary  of 
Sakhi  Sarwar,  a Muhammadan  pir,  whose  shrine  is 
on  the  border  of  Balochistan.  The  Guru’s  fame  had 
reached  Manj ; he  had  heard  the  Guru’s  hymns 
recited,  and  passionately  desired  to  behold  him. 
When  this  favour  had  been  vouchsafed  him,  he 
made  the  following  requests;  ‘O  Guru,  heal  my 
three  fevers,  make  me  a Sikh,  and,  deeming  me 
thy  servant,  save  me  and  remove  the  great  pain 
of  transmigration.’  The  Guru  replied  : ‘ Thou  hast 
made  Sakhi  Sarwar  thy  priest.  His  way  is  easy : 
Sikhism  on  the  contrary  is  difficult.  In  it  thou  canst 
not  put  thyself  forward  or  assert  thyself.  Thou 
canst  not  embrace  it  without  being  ready  to  sacrifice 
without  a groan  thy  life  on  its  behalf.  If  thou 
become  my  Sikh,  thou  shalt  be  an  object  of  public 
obloquy.  Thy  relations  will  ridicule  thee,  and  not 
allow  thee  to  associate  with  them.  They  will  also 


8 


THE,  SIKH  RELIGION 


dispossess  thee  of  all  thy  property.  If  thou  art 
prepared  to  endhre  such  hardships  and  sufferings, 
then  mayest  thou  become  a disciple  of  mine.  Other- 
wise OMitinue  to  worship  the  shrine  of  thy  saint  and 
talk  not  of  Sikhism.  Keep  thy  wealth,  and  the  good 
opinion  of  thy  family.  \^y  heap  on  tbyself  trouble 
by  embracing  my  religion  ? ’ 

Manj  replied : ‘ 0 Guru,  the  very  moment  I saw 
thee  and  heard  thy  words  I turned  away  from  Sakhi 
Sarwar,  and  I was  overwhelmed  with  shame  when 
I reflected  that  in  imitation  of  others  I bowed  my 
head  at  the  shrine  of  a pretended  saint  possessing 
no  real  greatness.  Thus  do  men  forfeit  their  religion 
and  lose  the  advantage  of  human  birth.' 

Manj  thus  spoke  in  his  humility  and  tears  clouded 
his  eyes.  The  Guru  replied : ‘ Accept  Sikhism. 
Worship  the  true  God,  and  it  shall  be  a source  of 
happiness  to  thee.’  The  Guru  then  told  his  visitor 
that  he  must  go  home,  demolish  the  niche  appro- 
priated to  Sakhi  Sarwar’s  worship  in  his  dwelling, 
return  to  the  Guru,  and  place  himself  under  his 
protection.  Manj  did  all  this,  returned  to  the  Guru, 
lived  by  manual  labour,  and  contributed  a fourth 
part  of  his  earnings  to  the  Sikh  cause. 

A Sikh  named  Bahilo  came  from  Malwa  to  visit 
the  Guru.  He  professed  to  know  how  to  make  bricks 
in  the  most  durable  manner.  The  Guru  accordingly 
entrusted  to  him  the  whole  of  the  brick-making 
necessary  for  the  completion  of  the  tanks  and  the 
temple.  Indeed  there  were  many  Sikhs  at  the  time 
who  served  the  Guru  with  the  utmost  fidelity. 
Among  others  the  names  of  Ajab,  Ajaib,  and  Umar 
Shah  are  mentioned.  They  were  masands  who 
collected  offerings  for  the  Guru,  and  faithfully  de- 
livered them.  On  one  occasion  he  asked  them  in 
what  light  they  regarded  the  offerings  which  passed 
thrcmgh  their  hands.  They  replied  that  they  re- 
garded them>  as  poison  not  only  for  their  bodies  but 
for  their  souls. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


9 


Chapter  II 

Unexpected  help  reached  the  Guru  from  various 
quarters.  One  Ganga  Ram,  a Brahman  merchant, 
came  from  Bhatinda  with  corn  to  sell.  He  visited 
the  Guru  and  remained  with  him  for  some  time. 
During  his  stay  the  Guru’s  kitchen  one  day  became 
empty,  so  Ganga  Ram  gave  up  all  his  corn  and  fed 
for  a space  of  five  days  ^ the  labourers  on  the  tank. 
As  the  Baisakhi  fair  was  approaching,  the  Guru 
persuaded  him  to  stay  and  enjoy  it.  Large  offerings 
were  made  to  the  Guru  on  the  occasion,  all  of  which 
he  ordered  to  be  given  to  Ganga  Ram.  This  was 
done  to  test  his  devotion  and  sincerity.  Ganga  Ram, 
however,  refused  to  accept  them.  The  Guru,  who 
was  naturally  pleased  at  meeting  such  a disinterested 
friend,  commended  and  blessed  him. 

When  the  tank  was  excavated,  it  was  represented 
to  the  Guru  that  Har  Mandar,  or  the  temple  of  God 
to  be  built  in  the  midst  of  it,  should  be  raised  higher 
than  all  other  buildings  in  the  neighbourhood,  so  that 
it  might  receive  proper  respect.  The  Guru  replied : 
‘ No  ; what  is  humble  shall  be  exalted.  The  more 
a tree  is  laden  with  fruit,  the  more  its  branches 
descend  to  the  earth.  By  whatever  way  you  approach 
the  temple  you  must  descend  eight  or  ten  steps, 
wherefore  let  the  Har  Mandar  be  made  the  lowest 
edifice  of  all.’  The  Guru  himself  was  humble,  but 
through  his  spiritual  greatness  he  obtained  the 
dignity  of  being  visited  by  people  of  rank  from  all 
parts  of  India  and  receiving  their  rich  offerings. 

Hindu  temples  are  closed  on  three  sides  and 
opened  only  towards  the  east  or  rising  sun.  The 
great  Sikh  temple  at  Amritsar  was  to  be  open  on  all 
sides.  This  meant  that  the  Sikh  worship  was  open 
to  all,  and  was  not  concerned  with  sun-worship. 
The  Granth  Sahib  is  placed  in  the  middle  of  the 
temple,  so  that  no  man  may  seat  himself  in  its  place. 


10 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


It  was  on  the  ist  of  Magh,  Sambat  1645  (a.d.  1589), 
the  Guru  laid  the  first  brick  of  the  masonry  founda- 
tion of  the  Har  Mandar,  or  the  Darbar  Sahib,  now 
known  to  Europeans  as  the  Golden  Temple.  A 
mason  afterwards  accidentally  displaced  the  brick, 
whereupon  the  Guru  prophesied  that  the  foundation 
should  again  have  to  be  laid.  His  words  were  sub- 
sequently fulfilled.  Ahmad  Shah  Abdali,  in  Sambat 
1819,  destroyed  the  temple  and  desecrated  the  tank. 
Two  years  afterwards  the  great  army  of  the  Khalsa 
recovered  possession  of  the  temple,  relaid  its  masonry 
foundation,  and  reconstructed  it. 

The  Guru  had  given  orders  that  only  kiln-dried 
bricks  should  be  employed.  Some  masands  who  had 
charge  of  the  bricks,  resolved  to  cheat  the  Guru  and 
scamp  the  work.  They  smeared  sun-dried  bricks 
with  plaster  and  leiid  them.  The  Guru  heard  of 
their  dishonesty  and  ordered  them  to  desist.  They 
disobeyed  his  orders  three  times.  He  then  dismissed 
them,  and  said  that,  when  he  became  tenth  Guru, 
he  would  visit  them  with  condign  punishment. 

When  the  Sikhs  in  large  numbers  contributed 
their  assistance,  and  the  tank  and  temple  were 
approaching  completion,  the  Guru  felt  that  God 
Himself  had  assisted  in  the  work,  and  in  joy  and 
gratitude  composed  the  following  : — 

God  Himself  came,  and  stood  up  to  do  the  work  of  the 
saints. 

Into  the  beautiful  land  and  the  beautiful  tank  He  poured 
nectareous  water. 

He  poured  nectareous  water,  completed  the  work,  and  all 
our  desires  are  fulhlled. 

There  are  rejoicings  in  the  world,  and  all  anxiety  is  at  an 
end. 

The  Veds  and  the  Purans  sing  the  praises  of  Him  who  is 
fixed  and  imperishable. 

God  hath  been  mindful  of  His  usual  function  ; Nanak 
hath  meditated  on  His  name. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJ AN  ii 

The  Creator  gave  me  the  nine  treasures,  wealth,  and  super- 
natural power  ; I have  not  been  in  want  of  anything. 

I have  obtained  happiness  eating,  spendings  and  living 
comfortably  ; God’s  gifts  ever  increase  : 

His  gifts  increase,  are  never  exhausted,  and  I have  found 
the  Searcher  of  hearts. 

Millions  of  obstacles  have  been  removed  and  trouble  hath 
not  approached  me. 

Peace,  composure,  and  happiness  in  abundance  are  mine, 
and  all  niy  craving  is  satisfied. 

Nanak  singeth  the  praises  of  the  Lord  ; wonderful  is  His 
praise. 

He  did  it  whose  work  it  was  ; what  is  wretched  man  ? 

The  saints  are  adorned  by  singing  God’s  praises,  and  ever 
wishing  Him  victory. 

Pleasure  is  produced  by  singing  God’s  praises  and  forming 
an  alliance  with  His  saints. 

How  shall  his  ^ praises  be  recounted  who  exerted  himself  in 
the  construction  of  the  tank  ? 

Bathing  in  this  tank  is  equal  to  bathing  in  the  sixty-eight 
places  of  pilgrimage,  to  the  bestowal  of  alms,  and  the  per- 
formance of  great  purifications. 

The  purification  of'  sinners  is  the  function  of  the  Lord  ; 
His  word  is  Nanak’s  support. 

Treasury  of  excellences,  my  God,  Creator,  what  praises  of 
Thine  may  I utter  ? 

The  prayer  of  the  saint  is — ‘ O Lord,  grant  us  the  great 
elixir  of  Thy  name. 

Give  us  the  Name  ; grant  us  this  boon,  forget  us  not  for  a 
moment.’ 

O tongue,  repeat  God’s  praises  ; let  us  ever  sing  them  night 
and  day. 

The  mind  and  body  of  him  who  loveth  the  Name  shall  be 
filled  with  ambrosial  essence. 

Nanak  representeth,  my  desires  have  been  fulfilled.  I live 
by  a sight  of  Thee.^ 

^ The  reference  is  to  Guru  Ram  Das. 

2 SQhi  Chhant. 


12  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  foUo'Wing  afeo  was  composed  on  Uie  same 
occasion 

The  Creator  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  work. 

And  not  a haib  of  any  mm'e  head  was  touched.^ 

The  Guru  will  render  ablution  herein  very  profitable. 

And  by  rqMating  God’s  name  sins  shall  depart. 

O saints,  Ram  Das’s  * tank  is  excellmt : 

He  who  batheth  in  it  shall  save  his  family ; his  own  soul 
too  shall  be  saved. 

He  who  here  below  singeth  a song  of  rejoicing  over  this 
work. 

Shall  obtain  the  fruit  his  heart  desireth.’ 

He  who  while  meditating  on  his  God  . 

Cometh  to  bathe  here  shall  be  made  safe  and  whole. 

He  who  batheth  in  the  saints’  tank 
Shall  obtain  final  salvation. 

Meditating  on  God’s  name, 

He  shall  not  die  or  suffer  transmigration. 

He  to  whom  God  is  merciful 
Knoweth  divine  knowledge. 

His  cares  and  anxieties  shall  depart 

Who  seeketh  the  protection  of  Baba  Nanak  and  God.* 

* That  is,  the  Muhammadan  authorities  at  the  time  did  not  interfere 
with  the  work. 

* Ram  Das  may  also  here  mean  God’s  servant. 

* Also  translated — Men  will  sing  a song  of  rejoicing  over  this  work, 
and  obtain  their  heart’s  desires. 

* Also  translated— Guru  Nanak  hath  solight  God’s  protection ; and 
all  men’s  cares  and  anxieties  shall  depart.  Sorath. 

The  following  is  an  alternative  translation  of  this  hymn : — 

The  Creator  is  within  me, 

And  not  a hair  of  my  head  can  be  touched, 

The  Guru  maketh  my  ablution  successful. 

Repeat  God’s  name  and  thy  sins  shall  be  washed  away. 

God’s  saints  and  servants  form  an  excellent  tank.* 

He  who  batheth  in  it  shall  save  his  Own  soul  and  the  souls  of  all 
his  family. 

The  whole  world  shall  congratulate  him, 

And  he  shall  obtain  the  reward  his  heart  desireth. 

* From  which  others  may  draw  the  nectar  of  the  Name. 


THE  TANK  AND  TEMPLE  OF  AAIRITSAR 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  13 

The  Guru  thus  described  the  advantages  of  the 
tank : — 

By  bathing  in  the  tank  of  Ram  Das  ^ 

AU  the  sins  that  man  conunitteth  shall  be  done  away, 
And  he  shall  become  pure  by  bis  ablutions.  ^ 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  given  us'this  boon. 

Whai  we  meditate  on  the  Guru’s  instruction, 

God  bestoweth  all  comfort  and  happiness, 

And  causeth  the  whole  cargo  to  cross  over  safely. 

In  the  association  of  the  saints  imcleanness  departeth, 
And  the  supreme  Being  abideth  with  us. 

Nanak  by  meditating  on  the  Name 
Hath  found  God  the  primal  Being.* 


Chapter  III 

When  the  tank  and  temple  were  completed  there 
were  great  rejoicings.  The  enormous  exertions  and 
personal  sacrifices  made  by  Bhais  Budha,  Bhagtu, 
and  Bahilo  are  specially  mentioned.  One  day  as 
they  were  all  bathing,  Guru  Arjan  shed  tears  on 
seeing  the  state  of  their  bodies  as  the  result  of  their 
labours.  The  Guru  said  with  mournful  voice,  that, 
as  the  tank  had  been  constructed  by  such  devout 
and  sincere  Sikhs,  all  sins  should  be  removed  and 
all  desires  fulfilled  by  bathing  in  it  and  duly 
worshipping  God. 

He  who  batheth  herein,  having  meditated  on  his  God, 

Shall  be  completely  restored  to  health. 

He  who  batheth  in  the  tank  of  the  saints 
Shall  obtain  salvation. 

He  who  meditateth  on  God’s  name 
Shall  not  die  or  suffer  transmigration. 

He  to  whom  God  is  merciful 

Is  thoroughly  acquainted  with  divine  knowledge. 

Gum  NSnak  hath  entered  God^s  sanctuary ; 

He  hath  removed  all  my  cares  and  anxieties. 

^ This  line  is  al$e»  translated — By  bathing  in  the  tank  of  the  saints 
of  God. 

* Sorath. 


14 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  following  was  composed  by  the  Guru  on  the 
same  occasion 

God  Himself  hath  given  the  support  of  His  lotus  feet. 

He  who  entereth  God’s  asylum  shall  ever  be  renowned. 

God  is  the  Preserver,  unequalled  ; holy  is  His  service. 

The  divine  Guru  hath  made  Ramdaspur  God’s  empire. 

Ever  and  ever  meditate  on  God,  and  no  obstacle  shall 
thwart  you. 

Nanak,  by  praising  the  Name  the  fear  of  enemies  fleeth 
away.^ 

The  Guru  wrote  the  following  on  the  completion  of 
the  Har  Mandar. 

By  repeating  God’s  name  I have  made  God’s  temple  : ye 
saints  and  worshippers,  sing  God’s  praises. 

Remember,  remember  the  Lord  your  God,  and  ye  shall 
be  released  from  all  your  sins. 

By  singing  God’s  praises  the  supreme  position  is  obtained  ; 
His  word  is  the  best. 

The  savour  of  divine  knowledge  is  very  sweet  when  the 
tale  of  the  Ineffable  is  told. 

Good  the  juncture,  true  the  time  and  moment  when 
I had  the  immovable  foundation  laid. 

O slave  Nanak,  when  God  was  merciful  everything  was 
completed. 

The  instruments  of  joy  continually  play ; the  supreme 
Being  hath  taken  His  abode  in  my  heart. 

The  performance  of  the  work  of  the  True  One  under  the 
Guru’s  instruction  is  best  of  all ; by  it  false  doubts  and  fears 
are  dispelled. 

The  Guru  hath  spoken  the  divine  Word  ; on  continually 
hearing  it  the  mind  and  body  are  refreshed. 

He  whom  God  hath  made  His  own,  hath  obtained  all 
happiness ; 

♦ In  his  house  are  the  nine  treasures,  his  garners  are  filled 
with  God’s  name  which  he  loveth. 

Nanak,  the  servant  who  is  fully  fortunate  shall  never 
forget  God. 


^ Bilawal. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  15 

When  God,  the  Lord  of  the  umbrella,^  affordeth  shelter,  all 
trouble  departeth ; 

The  abode  of  sorrow  and  sin  hath  fallen  and  the  work  hath 
succeeded. 

When  the  Lord  God  ordered  it,  misfortune  was  averted, 
and  true  religion  and  charity  flourished. 

Ever  meditate  on  this  God  whether  sleeping,  sitting,  or 
standing. 

The  Treasure  of  excellences,  the  Sea  of  happiness,  the 
Lord  is  in  sea  and  land,  in  the  nether  and  upper  regions. 

O slave  Nanak,  there  is  no  shelter  except  in  God. 

My  house  hath  been  constructed ; my  garden  and  tank 
have  been  constructed  ; may  God  enter  therein  ! 

My  heart  hath  become  glad ; my  friends  and  associates 
rejoice,  and  sing  songs  of  praise  and  gladness  to  the  Lord. 

They  have  sung  the  true  God’s  praises,  meditated  on  Him, 
and  obtained  all  their  desires. 

They  who  are  attached  to  the  Guru’s  feet  are  ever  awake  ; 
in  their  hearts  resound  God’s  praises. 

When  the  Lord  who  dwelleth  in  happiness  casteth  a look 
of  favour,  this  world  and  the  next  are  arranged. 

Nanak  representeth — ever  repeat  His  name  who  supporteth 
soul  and  body.® 

The  Emperor  Akbar’s  new  prime  minister,  Raja 
Birbar,  a learned  and  accomplished  man,  was  on 
religious  grounds  hostile  to  the  Guru  and  jealous 
of  his  daily  increasing  influence  and  popularity. 
The  minister  was  a great  favourite  of  the  Emperor, 
who  desired  to  have  him  always  by  his  side.  He  is 
said  to  have  been  capable  by  the  force  of  his 
intellect  of  telling  the  Emperor  his  secrets  at  any 
time.  His  energy  blazed  for  a while,  but  it  was  only 
the  expiring  flicker  of  the  lamp.  On  account  of  his 
hostility  to  the  Guru  evil  days  came  upon  him.  On 
the  failure  of  Zain  Khan  Kokah  in  his  expedition 


^ God  who  makes  kings  and  emperors. 
® Suhi  Chhant. 


i6  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

against  the  Yusufzais,  Birbar  was  ordered  to  pro- 
ceed to  him  with  reinforcements.  Before  his  depar- 
ture he  received  a written  permission  from,  the 
Emperor  to  levy  a tax  of  a rupee  on  the  house 
of  every  Khatri  on  the  way.  He  crossed  the  Bias 
and  sent  his  agents  to  collect  the  tax  in  Amritsar. 
The  Khatris  there  refused  payment  and  complained 
to  the  Guru.  He  represented  to  the  Prime  Minister’s 
agents : ‘ The  tax  is  on  Khatris.  We  are  Sikhs  and 
look  for  exemption.  Up  to  the  present  the  govern- 
ment hath  never  imposed  forced  labour  or  taxes  on 
the  Guru’s  house.  My  kitchen  is  kept  open  by  the 
offerings  of  Sikhs  and  saints.  No  one  is  refused 
access  to  it.  Take  as  much  corn  and  food  as  you 
require,  but  I have  no  money  to  give  you.  I live, 
on  ccMifidence  in  God.’ 

The  agents  repeated  this  speech  to  the  Prime 
Minister,  who  became  furious  on  hearing  it.  He 
said : ‘ I am  a commander  of  many  men ; how 
dareth  the  Guru  disobey  me  ? Moreover  I bear 
the  Emperor’s  order.  Even  if  it  be  the  Guru’s 
house,  it  is  for  Sikhs  and  not  for  me  to  rever- 
ence it.’  Upon  this  Birbar  sent  some  soldiers 
to  the  Guru  with  the  following  message : ‘ Thou 
art  a Khatri,  a subject,  and  in  every  way  sub- 
ordinate to  the  state.  If  thou  come  to  meet  me,  it 
will  be  well;  otherwise  I will  sack  the  whole  of 
thy  city.’  The  soldiers  went,  but  were  dumb- 
founded in  the  presence  of  the  Guru.  Divining  their 
object  he  thus  addressed  them : ‘ My  friends,  I care 
not  for  any  one,  nor  do  I fear  any  one.  Let  Raja 
Birbar  come  and  do  what  he  pleaseth.  The  Creator 
will  protect  me.’  The  soldiers,  fearing  the  Guru’s 
words  and  also  their  master’s  wrath,  went  and 
falsely  told  him  that  the  Guru  would  come  on  the 
morrow.  Raja  Birbar  said : ‘ What  mattereth  it  if 
he  be  a saiiit  or  an  object  of  reverence,  or  even 
very  old,  if  he  have  not  fear  of  me  ? Well,  if  he 
come  not  to-morrow,  I will  sack  Amritsar.’  That 


LIFE  OF  GURU;  ARJAN  17 

night  the  Raja  never  slept  through  perturbation  of 
mind. 

Meanwhile  another  order  arrived  from  the  Emperor 
telling  the  Raja  to  make  haste  and  proceed  with  his 
troops  by  forced  marches  to  unite  with  Zain  Khan 
against  the  Yusufzais.  The  Raja  was  much  disap^ 
pointed  on  receiving  this  peremptory  command,  as 
it  left  him  ho  time  to  wreak  his  vengeance  on  the 
Gur-u.  He  ordered  his  staff  to  remirid  him  of  the 
Guru  on  his  return,  and  said  that  if  he  did  not 
then  get  a rupee  from  each  house  in  Amritsar, 
he  would  raze  the  city  to  its  foundations.  As  the 
sacrificial  fire  flames  up  when  clarified  butter  is 
thrown  on  it,  so  did  the  Raja’s  spirit  burn  at  the 
recollection  of  the  Guru’s  language.  When  the 
Sikhs  communicated  to  the  Guru  the  Raja’s  wrathful 
words  he  merely  said,  ‘ If  the  Raja  return  he  will 
give  us  trouble.’  Zain  Khan  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  and  Raja  Birbar  held  divided  councils.  They 
were  attacked  and  defeated  by  the  Yusufzais.  Zain 
Khan  escaped  with  difficulty,  but  Birbar  was  slain.^ 

Prithi  Chand  in  alliance  with  Sulahi  Khan  found 
ample  opportunities  of  annoying  the  Guru.  Wazir 
Khan,  the  Emperor’s  assistant  Prime  Minister,  inter- 
posed on  the  Guru’s  behalf  and  prevailed  on  Sulahi 
Khan  to  bring  the  contending  brothers  to  a com- 
promise. The  reason  why  Wazir  Khan  espoused  the 
Guru’s  cause  is  said  to  have  been  the  following  : 
Once  as  he  w^-s  lying  ill  in  his  house  in  Lahore, 
suffering  from  dropsy,  a Sikh  passed  by  singing  the 
Guru’s  Sukhmani.*  As  Wazir,  Khan  Ijstened  his 
pain  decreased-  When  the  Sikh  had  gone  beyond 
hearing,  the  p?dn  appeared  again.  When  he  returned 
by  the  same  route  singing  the  same  strain,  Wazir 
Khan’s  pain  was  again  allayed.  He  called  the  Sikh 
and  requested  him  to  continue  to  sing  the  Sukh- 

*•  This  episode,  in  defiance  of  chronology,  is  often  included  by  the 
Sikh  chroniclers  in  the  Life  of  Guru  Amar  Das. 

® A composition  of  Guru  Arjan  which  will  subsequently  be  given. 

C 


SIKH.  Ill 


Tim  SIKH  'RELIGION 


i8 

mam  >iot'  him.  He  then,  ^stributed  Siicred  food 
in  the  Guru’s  name,  and  was  soon  restored  to 
perfect  healths  When  he  found  an'  opportunity  he 
visitfed  the  Guru,  told  him  the  whole  circumstance, 
and  became  !a  devout  follower  of  his.  Wazir  Khan 
until  his  death  retained  Sikhs  in  his  service  to  sing 
the  Gurui’s  hymns  for  him  every  morning  before  day- 
break, atime  which  the  Sifchs  call  the  ambrosial  hour. 
Whai  Wadr  Khan  solicited  the  Guru  to  give  him  in- 
struction the  Guru  addressed  him  the  following  : — 

0 servant  of  God  the  Inscrutable, 

dea^e  to  think  of  worldly  occupations. 

Become  the  dust  of  the  feet  of  poor  travellers  ; thus  shall 
the  darwe^  be  accepted  at  God’s  door. 

Make  truth  thy  prayer,  faith  thy  prayer-carpet ; ' 

Chasten  desires  and  subdue  thy  feelings. 

Make  thy  body  the  mosque,  thy  Conscience  the  Mulla,  and 
the  very  pure  God  thy  creed. 

Make  thy  shariat  die  practice  of  real  saCred  law. 

Make  thy  tatiqat  the  search  for  God  ind  abandonment 
of  the  wdtl<ji ; 

M^e  thy  riiarifat,  O devotee,  ihe  chaSfeniug  of  thy  mind  ; 
and  thy  haqikat  the  meetiftg  6f  God,  by  which  thou  shalt 
not  die  again. 

Make  the  restraint  of  thine  orgahs  of  action  and  perception 
from  evil  ways. 

Thy  hearty  practice  of  the  precepts  of  the  Quran  and  sacred 
books. 

Make  subjugation  of  the  five  thieves  thy  sidaq,*  charity 
thy  sabari,*®  and  thou  shalt  be  accepted. 

Make  kindnesS’thy  Makka,  humility  thy  fasting. 

Implicit®  obedience  to  the  word  of  thy  prifest  thy  heaven, 

Thj^  service  of  God  thy  huris,  thy  nUr,*  and  thy  perfume  ; 
and  God 'thy  lofty  hujra.® 

t 

^ Sincerily.  ^ i ^ Patience. 

® Andaza,  According  to  measure,  neither  more  nor  less  than  what 
the  guru  tells  thee. 

^ Nur,  Literally — light,  then  the  sight  of  God. 

^ A small  apartment  or  structure  for  private  woiship* 


19 


Um  OFiQURIiJ  ARJAiN 

He  who  pi^ctiseth  truth  is  a Qazi ; 

He  who  chasteneth  his  heart  is  a Haji ; 

He  who  banisheth  Satan  is*  a Mulla,  and  he  Who  prai^eth 
God  is  a darwesh. 

At  every  time  and  on  every  occasion 
Remember  God,  the  Creator,  in  thy  hearty 
Make  the  subjection  of  thy  ten  organs  the  rosary  by  which 
God  is  remembered  in  thy  heart ; 

Good  conduct  and  great  restraint  over  thyself  y thy  circum- 
cision. 

Know  in  thy  heart  that  everything  is  for  the  moment. 
Sports,  banquets,  and  sodalities  are  all  entanglements. 
Kings,  rulers,  and  nobles  are  perishable  ; God’s  gate  alone 
is  the  stable  place. 

Let  first  God’s  praises,  second  patience, 

Third  mildness,  fourth  almsgiving. 

Fifth  the  five  evil  passions  restrained  in  one  place  be  thy 
five  most  precious  times  of  prayer. 

Make  the  knowledge  that  God  is  everywhere  thy  daily 
worship  ; 

The  abandonment  of  evil  deeds  the  water-pot  in  thy  hand  ; 
The  knowledge  that  there  is  but  one  God  thy  call  to  prayer ; 
such  a Muazzin  shall  have  an  excellent  reward. 

What  is  honestly  obtained  eat  thou  as  thy  food  ; 

Wash  away  thy  filth  in  the  river  of  thy  heart. 

He  who  recognizeth  his  Pir  is  the  man  for  heaven  ; Azrail 
will  not  keep  him  in  hell. 

Make  good  works  thy  body,  faith  thy  spouse. 

And  obedience  to  God  thy  pleasures  and  spectacles. 

Purify  what  is  impure,  make  God’s  presence  thy  Hadis  ^ ; 
let  a complete^  body  be  the  turban  on  thy  head. 

Let  a Musalman  be  soft-hearted. 

And  wash  away  the  filth  of  his  heart. 

Let  not  the  pleasures  of  the  world  approach  him  ; and  let 
him  be  pure  as  flowers,  silk,  clarified  butter,  or  deerrskin. 

He  is  the  object  of  the  kindness  of  the  Kind  One>  > 

Who  is  a man,ithe  manliest  of  men : 

^ The  tiadkional  sayirtgs  of  the  Prophet,  which 'have  the  force  of 
law  among  Moslems.  ^ That  is,  uncircumcised. 

C 2 


20 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  is  a Shaikh,  a chief  of  Shaikhs,  aiwl  a Haji ; the  man 
on  whom  God’s  look  of  favour  falleth  is  His  slave. 

Power  belongeth  to  the  Omnipotent,  kindness  to  the 
Kind  One ; 

The  attributes  and  love  of  the  Merciful  are  unfathomable. 

Understand  God’s  order  whidi  is  true,  O Nanak,  and  thou 
sbalt  be  released  from  thy  i«ison.^ 

Chapter  IV 

When  the  buildings  around  the  Guru’s  tank  had 
increased,  the  Guru  ordered  his  Sikhs  and  worship- 
pers to  take  up  their  abode  in  them.  Thus  did  the 
city  of  Amritsar  gradually  extend.  A Sikh  called 
Bhai  Salo,  who  appears  to  have  possessed  much 
local  influence,  materially  assisted  the  Guru  in  the 
accomplishment  of  his  design.  After  a little  time, 
however,  the  Sikhs  finding  there  was  no  worldly 
advantage  to  them  in  living  in  Amritsar  presented 
a humble  address  to  the  Guru  ; ‘ True  king,  there  is 
here  ho  trade  or  commerce  of  any  sort,  by  which  we 
may  gain  our  livelihood  and  support  our  families. 
There  are  very  few  inhabitants,  and  consequently 
as  yet  no  buying  or  selling.’  The  Guru  in  reply 
told  them  not  to  despair,  that  Amritsar  should 
yet  become  a great  city  and  possess  a large 
population.  He  counselled  them  to  depend  on 
prayer  and  divine  worship  for  their  prosperity. 
They  were  to  rise  early,  bathe  and  go  to  the  temple 
to  hear  expositions  of  the  Guru’s  hymns.  After  that 
they  were  to  attend  to  their  worldly  affairs  till 
evening,  when  their  worship  should  begin  anew  by 
the  repetition  of  the  Rahiras  and  Sohila. 

Notwithstanding  the  compromise  that  had  been 
effected,  the  Guru’s  quarrelsome  brother  Prithia 
continued  to  give  him  eve^  form  of  annoyance. 
Consequently  the  Guru  decided  to  leave  Amritsar 
and  make  a tour  in  the  Man j ha,  or  country  between 

' Maru  Solha. 


GENERAL  VIEW  OF  AMRITSAR 


21 


LIFE  OF  mjRU  > ARJAN 

the  Ravi  and  Bias.  He  first  visited  Khadur  and 
Goindwal,  and  then  proceeded  to  the  village  of 
Sarhali,  where  he  sought  to  obtain  land  whereon  to 
build  himself  a dwelling. 

A Sikh  of  the  village  of  Bhaini  invited  the  Guru 
to  visit  him,  and  the  Guru  knowing  his  devotion 
consented.  When  he  arrived  in  the  village  the  day 
was  far  advanced.  The  Sikh’s  wife  saw  that  the 
Guru  was  hungry,  but  at  the  same  time  it  would  take 
too  long  to  cook  vegetables  for  his  dinner.  She 
therefore  prepared  a dish  of  broken  bread  inixed 
with  butter  and  sugar,  and  laid  it  before  him.  Hav- 
ing satisfied  himself  he  inquired  the  name  of  the 
village.  She  said,  ‘ Bhaini.’  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ The 
name  of  this  village  shall  be  Cholha,  that  is,  tit-bit, 
or  dainty  dish,’  Upon  this  he  composed  the  fol- 
lowing : — 

I am  a sacrifice  to  my  Guru  who  implemted  God’s  name  in 
my  heart ; 

Who  pointed  out  to  me  the  straight  road  when  I was  in 
a great  wilderness  and  darkness. 

God  is  my  life ; 

He  feeleth  anxiety  for  me  regarding  everything  in  this 
world  and  the  next. 

By  remembering  Him  I obtain  all  treasure,  respect,  great- 
ness, and  perfect  honour. 

By  repeating  His  name,  the  dust  of  whose  feet  all  saints 
desire,  millions  of  sins  are  erased. 

Let  him  who  desireth  all  desirable  things  worship  the  one 
supreme  Treasure. 

The  Lord  is  the  supreme  Being,  limitless  ; by  remembering 
Him  man  crosseth  over  the  world.  , i 

By  abiding  in  the  association  of  the  saints  man  obtaineth 
comfort',  peace,  and  great  happiness,  and  his  honour  is 
preserved,  • 

To  amass  God’s  wealth  and  make  God’s  name  my  food-— 
Nanak  hath  made  these  things  his  cholha  (dainties).^ 

^ DhanSsari. 


22  THE-  SIHH  IREEIGION 

On  ttoe  snihe  occasion  thfe  Guru  composed  the 
following • 

God’s  name  is  priceless  ; 

It  is  naturally  comfortab^. 

(jod  abidetb  with  me  and  h^peth  n?e  j .He  forsaketh  me 
not : He’ is  unfathomal>le  and  unrivalled.  , , 

'^e,is  my  b^oved  brother,  my  father,  my  mother,  and  the 
shelter  of  the  saints. 

The  Invisible  is  seen  when  He  is  obtained  from  the  Guru, 
yvho,  O Nanak,  is  Gpd’s  cholha  (dainty).^ 

The  name  Bhaini  was  duly  changed  into  Cholha 
in  the  government  records  of  the  period. 

A Jat  inhabitant  of  the  village  of  Cholha  repre- 
sented to  Guru  Arjan  that  the  inhabitants  of  the 
village  of  Buh  would  not  allow  his  cattle  to  graze 
on  their  lands,  though  he  had  an  ancient  right  of 
pasturage.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Buh  juh  howega,' 
that  is,  ^ Buh  shall  become  sterile,’  a prediction  which 
was  subsequently  fulfilled. 

Guru  Arjan  on  this  tour  visited  a village  called 
Khanpur,  between  Goindwal  and  the  present  Tarn 
Taran.  He  was  accompanied  by  five  Sikhs,  including 
Bidhi  Chand  and  Gur  Das,  men  famous  in  different 
ways,  of  whom  we  shall  hereafter  have  much  to 
say.  He  remained  the  whole  day  engaged*  in  his 
devotions.  In  the  evening  it  rained  heavily  and 
wintry  winds  were  blowing.  Bidhi  Chand  said  to 
the  Guru : ‘ That  lofty  house  which  thou  seest  in  the 
village  is  very  near.  Let  us  go  and  rest  there  for  the 
night.’  The  Guru  objected,  and  said  it  would  be 
better  to  remain  where  they  were  than  associate 
with  the  evil  people  who  dwelt  there.  Bidhi  Chand, 
however,  prevailed  on  him  to  let  him  go  into  the 
village  and  enideavour  to  secure  shelter,  as  the  night 
was  piercingly  cold.  Bidhi  Chand  begged  the  people 
to-  let  his  party  have  even  one  room  in  which  they 
could  all  sleep  t<^ether.  The  villagers  only  laughed 

^ Asa.  Dainty  here  means  darling,  as  in  old  English. 


LIPE  OF!  GURU!  - ARJiAN  ^^3 

at  him,  and  called  the  Guru  and  his  Sikhs  hypocrites. 
Bidhi  Chand  went  and  duly  informed  the  Guru  of 
the  character  of  his  reception.  The  Guru  replied : 
‘ Pay  no  heed,  I told  thee  they  weare  foul--tDngued 
people.  Whoever  hath,  devotion  in  his  h^n^t^yill 
come  to  us  ot  his  own  accord,  and  give  us  accoxninojda- 
tion  for  the  ni^ht.’  * 

As  Guru  Arjan  had  antic^ated,  Hema,  a devhut 
Sikh  of  the  village,  arrived  and  said,  ‘ O true  Guru, 
I have  a tattered  hut  made  out  of  grass  and  twigs 
which  is  at  thy  service.  It  will  be  hallowed  by 
receiving  thee.’  Hema,  who  had  been  made  a Sikh 
by  Guru  Ram  Das,  lived  grinding  corn  for  the 
villagers.  His  leisure  time  he  employ^  in  repeating 
the  Guru’s  hymns.  Though  he  was  extremely  poor, 
and  possessed  only  a coarse  blanket  to  Wear,  his  hut 
was  ever  open  to  the  stranger.  The  Guru  seeing  his 
love  and  devotion  gladly  accepted  his  hospitality. 
He  then  cooked  and  supplied  his  distinguished 
guest  with  the  best  food  in  his  possession.  Before 
retiring  he  took  off  his  sole  blanket,  and  put  it  under 
the  Guru  as  bedding,  so  that  he  might  enjoy  sweet 
repose.  The  Guru,  seeing  his  devotion,  composed 
the  following : — 

Very  beautiful  is  that  hut  in  which  God’s  praises  are 
sung. 

While  the  mansion  in  which  God  is  forgotten  is  of  no  avail. 

There  is  a pleasure  even  in  poverty  when  in  the  company  of 
the  saints  God  is  remembered. 

May  that  grandeur  which  is  bound  up  with  manimon 
perish  I 

Even  when  turning  a handndll  or  wearing  a coarse  blanket, 
the  heart  may  be  happy  and  contented.  > - 

That  empire  is  0|f  no  avail  which  qonferreth  npl;  satisfaction. 

I They  ^ho  wander  eyen  naked  in  the  love  pf  the  pne  God 
obtain  honpur, 

While  vain  are  silks  and  satins,  attachment  to  which 
maketh  man  covetous. 


24  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Ev^3rtluag  is  in  Thy  powa;,  O God ; Thou  actest  and 
bausest  to  act. 

May  Nanak  obtain  the  gift  of  remembering  Thee  at  every 
breath  he  draweth  I ^ ‘ ' 

On  the  same  occasion  the  Gutu  coihposed  the 
following 

The  place  where  the  name  of  the  beloved  God  is  repeated, 
Is  like  a mansion  of  gold  ; 

The  city  in  which  the  name  of  God  is  not  repeated  is  like 
a wilderness.  , 

He  who  eating  dry  bread  remembereth  God, 

Shall  behold  Him  whether  at  home  or  abroad. 

Know  that  he  who  through  pampering  his  belly  com- 
mitteth  bad  deeds  is  planting  for  himself  a garden  of  poison. 
The  spiritually  ignorant  man  who  loveth  not  the  saints. 
And  committeth  sins  in  company  with  the  infidel, 

, Loseth  his  human  body  so  difficult  of  attainment,  and 
ujM’ooteth  himself. 

' I have  entered  Thine  asylum,  0 compassionate  to  the  poor. 
O ocean  of  comfort,  my  great  God,  ’ 

Nanak  singeth  Thy  praises,  mercifully  preserve  his  honour.^ 

The  Guru  remained  for  some  time  in  Khanpur. 
During  his  stay  Hema  obtained  his  desire,  and 
went  to  his  heavenly  abode.  After  the  Guru’s 
departure,  the  Emperor’s  viceroy,  who  had  some 
reason  to  be  dissatisfied  with  the  inhabitants  of 
Khanpur,  sent  an  army  against  it,  razed  it  to  the 
ground,  and  massacred  its  chief  inhabitants.  The 
survivors  had  reason  to  reflect  on  the  words  of 
Kabir 

Kabir,  the  bouse  in  which.  God  and  His  saints  are  not 
served, 

Is  like  a cremation-ground  and  ghosts  dwell  therein. 

' The  Guru  thence  proceeded  to  the  village  of  Khara, 
where  he  was  pleased  with  the  prospect  around  him 


^ Suhi, 


2 Majh. 


® Slok  192. 


LIFE  OF  GUR¥  ARJ  AN  25 

— the  flowering  woods  and  glades,  the  limpid  wlater, 
and  the  fresh  and  exhilarating  atmosphere.  On 
entering  the  village  he  received  a friendly -reception 
from  the  headmen. " They  afterwards  assisted  him 
in  obtaining  land  from  the  yiliajgers  on  \iv^hich  he  laid 
the  foundation  of  what  is  now  the  famous  SikW  city 
of  Tarn  Taran,  and  proceeded  to  construct  a tink 
for  the  devotional  ablutions  of  his  Sikhs.  The  year 
in  which  these  events  occurred  is  stated  to  be 
A.  D.  1590.  The  name  Tarn  Taran  means  a raft  to 
take  men  across  the  world’s  ocean.  The  Guru,  at 
great  expense,  built  lime-kilns  and  caused  bricks  to 
be  baked.  When  these  were  seen  by  Nur-ul-Din, 
the  local  Muhammadan  governor,  they  were,  accord- 
ing to  the  tyrannical  custom  of  the  age.  Seized  by 
him  for  the  construction  of  a seraglio  designed  by 
the  Emperor  for  the  public  use.  The  Sikhs  on  seeing 
this  suggested  to  the  Guru  to  write  to  the  Emperor 
to  allow  the  tank  to  be  finished  and  to  inspire  fear 
in  Nur-ul-Din.  The  Guru,  who  was  the  essence 
of  humility,  refused  to  take  notice  of  the  outrage. 
He  said  that  God  had  not  yet  ordered  the  tank  to 
be  made,  wherefore  they  were  to  stop  its  construc- 
tion altogether.  ‘ Mercy  ’,  continued  the  Guru,  ‘ is 
the  basis  of  religious  worship ; wherefore  we  should 
have  mercy  on  every  one.  All  the  acts  of  him  who 
hath  not  mercy  in  his  heart  are  vain.’ 

In  the  Sambat  year  1832  (a.  d.  1775)  Sardar 
Khushal  Singh  of  Faizullapur  and  Sardar  Jassa 
Singh  of  Ramgarh  destroyed  Nur-ul-Din* s edifice, 
and  employed  the  bricks,  of  which  Nur-ul-Din  had 
robbed  the  Guru,  in  the  construction  of  the  tank.^ 

The  tank  at  Tam  Taran  is  larger  than  that  at  the  Golden 
Temple  at  Arriritsar.  At  ope  corner  is  s.  ,tall  mjnaret  built  by  Ranjlt 
Singh.  He  fcteftded  to  bhild  three  othire,  but  died  before  he  coUld 
accompli^  his- project.  ■ Tke  money . collected  for  the  construction 
mysteriously  disappeared  front  its, custodians. 

The  approach  to  the  temple  lias  lately  been  opened  by  the  de- 
molition of  some  houses,  to  whose  proprietors  large  sums  of  money 
have  been  paid  by  willing  subscribets  as  'compensatidn. 


26  THE  SIKH ; RELIGION 

The  Guru  then  went  into  the  Jalandhar  district, 
where  he  purchased  land  to  build  another  city, 
Kartarpur/  or  thei  city  of  the  Creator,  which  has 
since  risen  to  considerable  spiritual  and  temporal 
eminence*  It  liesi  in  what  is  called  the  Jalandhar 
Doab  between  the  Bias  and  Satluj  riMets., : 

The;  Gwv  with  his;  own  hands  out ! the  &!st 
sod  for  the  construction  of  the  city  and  its  necesr 
sarily  accompanying  well  to  supply  water  to  the 
inhabitants.  The  well  he  i called  Gangsar,  or  the 
Ganges  tank,  for.  the  following  reason : A man 
called . Baisakhi,  who  used  every  year  to  visit  the 
Ganges,  once  called  upon  the  Guru  on  his  way. 
The  Guru  asked  him  not  to  go,  but  bathe  in  his  well, 
worship  God,  repeat  the  true  Name,  and  he  should 
thus  obtain  all  the  advantages  of  bathing  in  the 
Ganges.  Baisakhi  respectfully  represented  that  he 
had  made  a vow  to  go  to  the  Ganges^  and  must 
accordingly  proceed  thither.  The  Guru,  on  seeing 
his  determination,  allowed  him  to  continue  his 
journey.  When  Baisakhi  on  the  point  of  returning 
sought  to  fill  a vessel  with  Ganges  water,  it  slipped 
from  his  hand  and  was  taken  away  by  the  current. 
He  did  all  in  his  power  to  recover  it,  but  in  vain. 
When  he  returned  to  the  Guru,  and  related  the 
untoward  incident,  it  is  said  that  the  Guru  to  his 
astonishment  produced  in  his  presence  from  the  new 
well  the  yery  vessel  that  had  fallen  from  his  hands 
at  the  Ganges.  Baisakhi  was  then  convinced  tha,t 
his  pilgrimage  to  Hardwar  had  been  in,  vain.  On 
this  account  the  well  at  Kartarpur  was  called  the 
Gai^sar. 

The  Guru  went  to  the  country  of  Nakka  at  the 
invdtation  of  Bhm  Bhuria,  Chaudhri  Chuhar  Mai,  and 
other  pious  Sikhs.  He  visited  Khemkaran,  Chunian, 
and  other  villj^es,  where  he  preached  with  great 
success.  He  then  went  to  J ambar,  where  he  remained 
for  some  time,  during  which  he  converted  Kidara, 
Kheda,  Samdu,  Mukanda,  Tulsa,  Lalu,  and  others! 


LIFE  OF  GURU  AHJ AN  ^7 

The  Guru  then  proceeded  to  L^ihore  at  the  request 
of  the  Sikhs  who  resided  there.  He  rested  in  the 
Dabbi  Bazar  on  the  site  df  the  preserit  ■ ' Guru’s 
BawaU  ^ and  planned  its  construction.  People  of 
all  classes  hearing  cif  his  fame  flocked  to  See  him, 
receive  his  instruction,  and  make  provision  for  their 
future  salvation.  Thither  came  the  Jo^  Sambhunath 
and  the  Hindu  saints  Kahna  and  Chhajju ; the 
Moslem  saints  Shah  Husain,  Shah  Sulaiman,  Shah 
Inayat  Qadari,  Shaikh  Wall  Shah,  and  others,  all 
humbling  themselves  before  the  Guru  and  beseeching 
soul-saving:  religious  instrucUpn.  The,  Guru  .flying 
his  thoughts  on  God  uttered  the  following  hymn 

O wise  men,  think  of  the  Lprd  in  your  hearts. 

The  true  King,  the  Releaser  from  bohdage,  dwellefh  in  the 
heart  by  the  mind’s  affection.  , ■! 

Nothing  is  equal  in  Value  to  the  sight  of  God. 

Thou  art  the  pure  Cherisher  ; Thou  Thyself  art  the  Lord 
great  and  incomparable. 

• Give  me  Thy  hand,  O Brave  One,  Thou  art  the  only  one 
to  assts/ me. 

O Creator,  by  Thy  power  didst  Thou  Create  the  World  ; 
Thou  art  Nanak’s  prop.^ 

This  hymn,  when  heard  by  the  Viceroy  of  Lahore, 
produced  a great  impression  on  his  mind.  It  is  said 
that  he  reformed  his  life,  and  devoted  himself  to 
God’s  service.  He  invited  the  Guru  to  ask  him 
a favour.  The  Guru  did  so,  and  the  result  was  the 
excavation  of  the  Hawaii  at  the  Viceroy’s  expeilSe. 

The  Guru  then  went  to  the  shrine  of  Guru  N^ak 
at  Dehra  Baba  Nanak  in  the  Gurdaspur  .district. 
Thence  he  proceeded  to  Barath  in  the  same  district 
to  visit  Sri  Chand,  Guru  Nanak’s  spp.  After  piutual 
salutations  they  held  a conversatipn.  Sri  Chand 
asked  why  the  Guru  wandered  hither  .and  thither 
and,  did  not  reside  in  Amritsar.  The  Guru  replied 

^ Tilang. 


28  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

that  Prithia  was  distressed  at  his  residence  there, 
and  so  he  travelled  to  propagate  his  religion.  After 
some  further  conversation,  in  the  course  of  which 
Sri  Chand  censured  the  conduct  of  Prithia,  and  said 
it  would  be  the  cause  of  his  damnation,  the  Guru 
took  his  departure  for  Amritsar,  and  thus  consulted 
the  wishes  of  his  Sikhs  and  of  Sri  Chand. 


Chapter  V 

After  the  Guru’s  return  to  Amritsar,  Prithia  con- 
tinued to  annoy  him  as  before.  Prithia’ s jealousy 
was  to  a great  extent  fanned  by  his  wife’s  reproaches. 
She  said  to  her  husband:  ‘My  lord,  hadst  thou 
pleased  thy  father  by  serving  him,  thou  shouldst 
now  be  Guru,  and  I should  be  the  Guru’s  revered 
wife.  The  eldest  son  hath  been  superseded.  The 
youngest  hath  obtained  the  position  of  Guru  and  is 
worshipped  by  the  world.  The  Emperor  and  kings 
bow  before  him.  Wealth  ever  cometh  to  him  while 
the  fates  are  against  us.’  Prithia  replied : ‘ Thou 
hast  the  greatest  wealth  of  all  in  thy  son  Mihrban. 
When  he  shall  have  grown  up,  he  shall  obtain  the 
Guruship.  Arjan  hath  no  son  himself,  and  his 
prosperity  is  but  short-lived.’ 

The  Guru’s  wife,  who  overheard  this  conversation, 
repeated  it  to  her  husband.  He  bade  her  pay  no 
heed  to  it  but  continue  to  repeat  the  true  Name.  He 
then  addressed  her  the  following  hymn  : — 

O my  soul,  grasp  the  shelter  of  the  Supreme  and  Omnipo- 
tent God. 

Repeat  the  name  of  God  who  supporteth  the  regions  of 
the  earth  and  the  universe. 

0 saint  of  God,  abandon  thine  intellectual  pride,  under- 
stand the  will  of  God,  and  thou  shalt  be  happy. 

Accept  the  act  of  God  as  good  : in  weal  and  woe  meditate 
on  Him. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  29 

The  Creator  saveth  in  a moment  millions  of  fallen  ones, 
and  in  this  there  is  no  delay. 

The  Lord  is  the  destroyer  of  the  pain  and  sorrow  of  the 
poor;  He  rewardeth  whom  He  pleaseth  ; 

He  is  mother  and  father,  cherisher  of  life  and  soul,  and 
a sea  of  comfort  for  all.  ' 

There  is  no  deficiency  in  the  Creator’s  gifts  ; He  is  omni- 
present, and  a mine  of  jewels. 

The  beggar  beggeth  Thy  name,  O Lord  ; Thou  abidest  in 
every  heart. 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  entered  the  sanctuary  of  Him  from 
whom  nobody  departeth  empty 

The  Guru  continued  his  instruction  : — 

Fools  love  the  world  though  it  is  as  a mirage,  an  enchanted 
city,  or  the  shadow  of  a tree. 

In  the  same  way,  Nanak,  wise  men  regard  family  and 
wealth  as  perishable,  and  remember  God’s  name.* 

O my  good  wife,  even  if  Karmo’s  jealousy  and 
pride  please  thee  not,  be  not  jealous  and  proud  like 
her.  If  one  throw  a handful  of  dust  at  the  moon, 
it  will  not  reach  it,  but  recoil  on  the  thrower.  If 
my  eldest  brother’s  wife  hath  addressed  thee  bad 
language,  bear  it.  Shaikh  Farid  hath  said  : — 

Farid,  do  good  for  evil,  clothe  not  thy  heart  with  anger  ; 

Thus  shall  thy  body  not  suffer  pain,  and  thou  shalt  obtain 
everything.* 

The  Guru’s  wife  said : ‘ Although  thine  instruction 
is  the  best,  yet  my  married  life  would  be  most  happy 
if  thou  grant  me  a son.  Great  king,  they  who  seek 
thy  protection  obtain  happiness  in  this  life  and 
salvation  in  the  next.  If  thou  grant  not  thy  servant 
a son,  it  will  not  be  well.’ 

With  the  object  of  giving  his  Sikhs  a lesson  in 
humility  he  decided  on  referring  her  to  Bhai  Budha 
to  pray  for  the  desired  boon,  and  gave  her  the 
following  directions : ' My  beloved,  if  thou  really 

^ Gauri.  ^ Sahaskriti  verses.  * Sloks. 


30 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


desire  a,  son,  then  go  to  Bhai  Budha,  an  ancient  Sikh 
of  Baba  Nanak’s  time,  and  wait  on  him.  He  dwell- 
eth  in  a forest.  He  is  a humble  man.  He  carrieth 
firewood  and  grass,  and  sendeth  to  my  kitchen  the 
corn  which  is  the  Guru’s  right  after  the  cultivators 
have  taken  their  share.  He  is  ever  engaged  in 
worship,  and  only  eateth  when  he  receiveth  food 
from  the  Guru’s  kitchen.  If  he  be  pleased,  he  will 
bless  thee  and  thou  shalt  have  a son.  God  arrangeth 
the  affairs  of  His  saints.’ 

Next  day  the  Guru’s  wife  set  out  in  great  state 
to  see  Bhai  Budha.  She  took  with  her  as  her  atten- 
dants the  wives  of  the  headmen  of  Amritsar.  They 
rode  in  carriages,  palkis,  and  sedans,  and  formed  an 
imposing  procession.  She  was  also  attended  by 
servants  male  and  female  who  carried  plates  of 
sweets  as  offerings  to  the  saint.  They  reached  his 
place  in  the  forest  in  the  afternoon  when  he  was 
hungry  and  thirsty,  and  in  momentary  expectation 
of  his  meal  from  the  Guru’s  kitchen.  When  he  saw 
the  dust  of  the  cortege  flying,  and  the  carriages, 
palkis,  .sedans,  bearers  and  horsemen  approaching 
at  high  speed,  he  said,  ‘ Is  there  a stampede  from 
Amritsar  that  the  inhabitants  have  left  the  city  and 
sought  shelter  here?’  The  Guru’s  wife,  on  being 
informed  of  Bhai  Budha’s  surprise,  was  much  dis- 
tressed, and  remarked  that  her  journey  had  brought 
her  a curse  instead  of  a blessing.  Having  made  her 
obeisance  and  placed  before  him  the  delicious  food 
she  had  brought,  she  addressed  him  : ' Thou  hast 
seen  and  heard  and  served  Guru  Nanak.  Thou  art 
respected  by  us  and  worthy  art  thou  of  reverence. 
The  Guru  hath  sent  me  to  thee  that  by  thy  blessing 
I may  obtain  the  boon  of  a son.’ 

Bhai  Budha  replied,  ‘ Revered  lady,  I am  but 
the  grass-ciitter  and  servant  of  thy  house.  If  I pos- 
sessed the  power  thou  supposest,  why  should  I cut 
grass  and  sweep  the  Guru’s  stables  ? It  is  the  Guru 
himself  who  fulfilleth  every  one’s  desires.  It  is  the 


31 


LITE  OF  GURU  ARJ AN 

Guru  himself  who  is  the  ocean  of  supernatural  power. 
Should  he  desire  to  dismiss  me,  I must  be  contentl 
As  for  these  savoury  dishes  thou  placest  before  me, 
I am  not  worthy  of  them.  They  are  only  fitted  for 
the  Guru  himself.  If  thou  think  I should  take  them, 
expect  not  service  from  mer  Were  I to  eat  them, 
how  could  I afterwards  think  of  cutting  grass  ? If 
thou  desire  menial  service  from  me,  then  I am  thy 
slave,  but  take  away  these  viands.’  The  lady’s 
further  solicitations  were  useless.  She  had  to  return 
disappointed  and  crestfallen  to  the  Guru. 

The  Guru  on  hearing  the  result  of  his  wife’s  mission 
quoted  to  her  the  following  h)min  of  Guru  Amar 
Das  : — 

O man,  be  not  proud  of  thy  knowledge ; become  pious 
and  humble. 

Within  thee  are  ignorance  and  pride  of  intellect : by  the 
true  Word  wash  away  this  filth. 

Be  humble  before  the  true  Guru,  and  allow  not  thyself 
to  be  at  all  noticed — 

The  world  is  burning  by  its  own  pride  ; allow  not  thyself 
to  be  noticed— 

Act  according  to  the  will  of  the  true  Guru,  and  abide  by 
his  wishes. 

Thus  saith  Nanak,  forsake  pride  and  continue  to  be  of 
humble  mind  ; thus  shalt  thou  obtain  happiness.^ 

The  Guru  continued:  ‘The  saints  and  the  true 
Guru  are  not  pleased  with  display.  If  thou  desire 
anything  from  them,  never  appear  in  the  character 
of  a superior.  Come,  I will  teach  thee  how  to  suc- 
ceed. With  devotion  in  thy  heart  grind  corn,  knead 
the  flour,  and  bake  the  bread  with  thine  own  hands. 
Dress  it  with  onions.  Then  take  it  with  some  thick 
buttermilk  on  thy  head  to  Bhai  Budha.  Dress  thy- 
self as  a cultivator’s  wife,  and  go  on  foot  and  alone, 
so  shalt  thou  obtain  the  saint’s  blessing.' 

The  Guru’s  wife,  in  accordance  with  his  instruc- 

^ Asa  Chhant. 


32 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


tions,  proceeded  next  day  without  attendants  to 
Bhai  Budha.  She  found  him  hungry  as  before  and 
waiting  for  his  meal.  On  seeing  her  he  thought  to 
himself : ‘ If  a mother  take  not  care  of  her  son,  who 
will  do  so  ? She  hath  brought  me  my  meal,  and 
I need  it  much.  I was  wrong  in  sending  her  away 
yesterday,  but  she  hath  pardoned  mine  error.  Hail, 
lady ! give  me  what  thou  hast  brought.' 

Bhai  Budha  while  eating  said,  ‘ The  Guru  is  the 
owner  of  the  storehouse,  but  I have  received  ’ an 
order  to  open  it.  As  thou  hast  given  me  food  to  my 
heart’s  content,  so  shalt  thou  have  a son  to  thy 
heart’s  content.  He  shall  be  very  handsome  and 
brave,  possess  spiritual  and  temporal  power,  become 
a mighty  hunter,  ride  on  royal  steeds,  wear  two 
swords,  be  puissant  in  battle,  and  trample  on  the 
Mughals.’  With  every  morsel  he  ate  Bhai  Budha 
uttered  a blessing  on  the  lady’s  progeny  and  said : 
‘ As  I now  crush  these  onions  thou  hast  brought  me, 
so  shall  thy  son  crush  the  heads  of  his  enemies,  and 
be  at  once  a great  warrior  and  exalted  Guru.  His 
shall  not  be  the  humble  seat  of  a village  Guru,  but 
a gorgeous  imperial  throne.  As  I am  now  filled  with 
thy  viands,  so  shall  thy  heart  be  filled  with  joy  on 
beholding  him.’  A son  who  received  at  his  birth 
the  name  of  Har  Gobind  was  duly  conceived ; and 
in  memory  of  the  event  an  anniversary  fair  is  held  in 
the  forest  where  Bhai  Budha  resided. 

The  Guru,  on  hearing  from  his  wife  on  her  return 
home  of  the  graciousness  of  her  reception  by  Bhai 
Budha  said,  ‘ If  the  saints  desire  it,  they  can  make 
a poor  man  a king,  fill  the  empty,  and  poise  a moun- 
tain on  a blade  of  grass.’ 

It  may  be  convenient  here  to  give  a panegyric  of 
Bhai  Budha,  which  a Sikh  biographer  put  into  the 
mouth  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

Budha  Sahib  is  the  impersonation  of  austerity,  a mine 
of  divine  knowledge  and  virtue. 


33 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

Simple  and  pious  he  hath  asserted  himself ; he  is  un- 
equalled like  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  philosopher’s  stone. 

He  hath  adopted  no  religious  garb  nor  in  any  wise  practised 
hypocrisy  ; he  hath  subdued  all  his  desires  and  organs. 

Hear,  O Ganga,^  ineffable  is  the  word  of  the  saints  in 
whose  complete  power  God  is. 

The  Guru  on  being  satisfied  of  his  wife's  concep- 
tion composed  the  following  : — 

That  the  words  of  holy  men  are  immutable  is  apparent  to 
all. 

Whoever  associateth  with  a saint  shall  meet  the  Lord  God. 

This  faith  and  comfort  are  obtained  by  uttering  God’s 
name. 

Everybody  hath  been  making  his  own  remarks ; ^ the 
Guru  hath  brought  a child  to  my  house. 

There  is  no  doubt  God  is  the  preserver  of  him  who  seeketh 
His  shelter. 

Plant  God’s  name  in  the  soil  of  acts'^  since  this  opportunity 
is  difficult  to  find. 

God  Himself  is  the  Searcher  of  hearts  ; He  doeth  every- 
thing and  causeth  everything  to  be  done. 

It  is  God’s  function  to  purify  many  sinners. 

Be  not  led  astray,  0 man,  by  the  deceit  of  mammon. 

Nanak,  God  will  preserve  his  honour  whom  He  hath  robed 
in  His  court.^ 

When  Karmo,  Prithia's  wife,  heard  of  the  Guru's 
wife's  pregnancy,  she  upbraided  her  husband  with 
having  falsely  prophesied  that  no  child  should  be 
born  to  Guru  Arjan. 

When  Bhai  Budha  spoke  of  a stampede  from 
Amritsar  he  little  thought  that  there  would  be 
a stampede  of  another  character,  which  would  give 
his  words  literal  fulfilment.  Prithia  instigated  his 
friend  Sulahi  Khan,  now  grown  insolent  with  power, 

^ Guru  Arjan’s  wife. 

^ I'hat  Guru  Arjan  should  never  have  offspring. 

® That  is,  in  this  birth.  ^ Bilawal. 

D 


SIKH  Ul 


34  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

to  proceed,  under  pretence  of  levying  tribute,  with 
a strong  force  to  plunder  Amritsar  and  inspire  fear 
in  the  Guru.  The  Guru,  anticipating  the  raid  and 
otherwise  apprehending  unprovoked  annoyance  from 
Sulahi,  resolved  to  leave  Amritsar  and  seek  shelter 
in  Wadali,  a village  six  or  seven  miles  distant.  A 
faithful  Sikh,  apprehending  danger  to  the  Guru, 
persuaded  him  to  retire  to  a tract  of  barren  land, 
called  Raur  in  the  local  dialect,  which  belonged  to 
him.  It  is  said  that  after  the  Guru’s  arrival  the 
land  became  green.  It  may  be  here  mentioned  that 
the  Guru’s  retreat  is  still  called  the  Guru’s  Raur, 
and  possesses  an  imposing  and  well  appointed  temple. 

The  Guru  was  not  suffered  to  abide  long  in  peace 
in  his  retreat.  Wadali,  originally  founded  by  the 
Chambal  and  Man  tribes,  had  become  a prosperous 
village,  and  oh  this  account  the  inhabitants  of  the 
neighbouring  villages  grew  jealous  and  made  war 
on  them.  The  Wadali  people,  unaccustomed  to  a 
marauding  life,  were  defeated,  and  in  their  difficul- 
ties, hearing  that  Guru  Arjan  was  encamped  in  the 
vicinity,  sought  his  protection  and  mediation  with 
their  enemies.  The  Guru  accepted  the  role  thus 
offered  him,  and  proceeded  with  the  Wadali  men 
to  their  village,  where  he  lived  for  a considerable 
time. 

Prithia,  not  wishing  to  undergo  the  expense  of 
entertaining  Sulahi  Khan,  went  forth  to  meet  him. 
Sulahi  after  salutation  said,  ‘ Prithi  Chand,  thou  the 
eldest  hast  not  obtained  the  Guruship.  Where  is  thy 
youngest  brother  who  hath  obtained  it  ? ’ Prithia 
replied,  ‘ My  lord,  my  brother  Arjan,  hearing  of 
thine  approach,  hath  left  Amritsar  and  gone  I know 
not  whither.’  Prithia  offered  Sulahi  a present, 
which  he  refused,  saying  that  it  was  more  proper 
for  him  to  give  than  to  take  a present  from  a guru. 
Sulahi  requested  Prithia  to  let  him  know  when 
Arjan  returned,  and  he  would  take  measures  to 
restrain  his  irregularities. 


35 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

The  Guru,  finding  in  Wadali  a scarcity  of  water, 
ordered  a lairge  well  to  be  dug  and  worked  by  six 
Persian  wheels  {chheharat),  whence  it  was  afterwards 
called  Chhiharta.  On  the  fifth  day  of  the  light  half 
of  Magh,  the  Indian  vernal  festival,  there  is  a yearly 
fair  held  at  the  place. 

Chapter  VI 

Sikhs  from  distant  countries  visited  Amritsar 
during  the  Guru’s  absence,  but  their  hearts  withered 
and  pined  like  a lotus  without  the  sun.  Prithia  made 
many  efforts  to  convince  them  that  he  was  the  real 
Guru,  but  the  crane  is  not  made  a swan  by  pretence 
or  by  a coat  of  paint.  He  who  has  no  spiritual  peace, 
consolation,  truth,  love  and  devotion  cannot  com- 
municate these  gifts  and  virtues  to  others. 

Har  Gobind  was  born  at  Wadali  on  the  21st  of  the 
month  of  Har,  Sambat  1652  (a.  d.  1595).  On  his 
birth  the  Guru  composed  the  following  : — 

The  True  Guru  sent  me  a son  ; 

A long-lived  son  hath  been  born  by  destiny. 

When  he  took  up  his  dwelling  in  the  womb. 

His  mother’s  heart  was  exceeding  glad. 

•,A  son,  a saint  of  God  hath  been  born. 

The  destiny  recorded  in  the  beginning  hath  become  mani- 
fest to  all. 

By  God’s  order  the  boy  hath  been  born  in  the  tenth  month. 

There  is  no  more  anxiety  ; great  joy  hath  taken  its  place. 

Our  female  friends  sing  the  Anand,  the  composition  of  the 
Guru,^ 

Which  is  pleasing  to  the  true  Lord. 

The  vine  of  my  race  hath  extended  and  shall  last  for  many 
generations. 

God  hath  erected  the  machinery  of  the  faith. 

The  True  Guru  hath  granted  me  what  my  heart  desired. 

The  third  Guru,  as  we  have  already  seen,  composed  the  Anand 
on  the  birth  of  his  grandson  called  Anand. 


36  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Having  fixed  my  attention  on  the  one  God,  I have  become 
free  from  anxiety. 

As  a child  who  is  very  proud  of  its  father,  obeyeth  his  words, 

So  I speak  as  it  pleaseth  God  to  have  me  speak. 

It  is  not  a secret  or  a concealed  matter 

That  Guru  Nanak,  being  pleased,  bestowed  this  gift  on  me.^ 

The  Guru  composed  the  following  also  on  the 
same  occasion  : — 

God  hath  remembered  His  function  and  conferred  all 
happiness  on  me. 

The  saint  ^ hath  been  merciful,  and  all  my  family  is 
delighted. 

The  True  Guru  himself  hath  accomplished  the  matter. 

Long  be  the  life  of  Har  Gobind  ! God  hath  consulted  our 
comfort,  happiness,  and  peace  of  mind. 

The  woods,  the  dales,  the  three  worlds  are  blooming  and 
all  creatures  rejoice. 

Nanak  hath  obtained  the  object  of  his  heart’s  desires  ; 
God  hath  fulfilled  them.® 

On  hearing  of  the  birth  of  a son  to  the  Guru, 
Karmo,  Prithia’s  wife,  became  very  sorrowful.  She 
said  to  her  husband : ‘ Hast  thou  heard  of  the  rejoic- 
ings at  Wadali } Arjan’s  glory  is  now  like  that  of 
the  sun,  and  thou  art  hidden  like  the  stars  before 
his  brightness.  All  thy  talk  and  boasting  have  been 
in  vain.’  Prithia’s  heart  also  burnt,  and  he  impu- 
dently replied : ‘ My  words  are  ever  true.  What  if 
a son  hath  been  born  to  Arjan  ? Shall  I cherish 
grief  in  my  heart  ? I will  not  allow  the  child 
to  live.’  Karmo  took  no  sustenance  the  following 
night,  and  was  quite  unable  to  sleep.  The  birth  of 
a young  heir  reminded  the  Sikhs  of  the  time  when 
the  whole  of  Ajudhia  rejoiced  at  the  accession  of 
Ram  to  the  sovereignty,  and  Kekai,  one  of  his 
father’s  wives,  alone  mourned  the  event. 

Next  morning  Karmo  sent  for  an  old  nurse  of  the 

^ .\sa.  * That  is,  Bhai  Budha.  ® Bilawal. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  37 

family,  and  after  some  preliminary  conversation  asked 
her  to  go  to  Wadali,  pretend  to  be  a friend  of  the 
Guru’s  family,  and  find  an  opportunity  of  poisoning 
his  newly-born  son.  Should  the  nurse  succeed  in 
this,  she  should  have  as  much  money  as  she  pleased. 
At  present  she  could  have  one  hundred  rupees,  and, 
when  Karmo’s  son  Mihrban  obtained  the  Guruship, 
she  should  be  rewarded  with  a further  pecuniary 
grant,  an  excellent  house,  and  maintenance  for  life. 
The  nurse  replied : ‘ I have  been  employed  in  your 
family  for  many  generations,  and  now  when  it  is 
my  turn  to  obtain  the  post  of  nurse,  the  Guru’s 
wife  hath  employed  another.  My  heart  was  already 
distressed  before  I heard  thy  tale.  In  a few  days 
thou  shalt  see  I will  accomplish  thy  work.’  Karmo 
gave  her  the  promised  money  and  a splendid  shawl 
as  a retaining  fee. 

The  deceitful  nurse  went  home,  applied  poison  to 
the  nipples  of  her  breast,  mixed  some  more  in  a 
medicine  called  gurhti  given  to  infants  in  the  East, 
and  proceeded  to  Wadali.  It  was  at  a time  when, 
owing  to  some  temporary  indisposition,  the  child 
refused  the  breast,  and  the  family  was  in  great 
anxiety  in  consequence.  Sage  women  recommended 
each  her  own  medicine.  When  Karmo’s  nurse 
arrived,  Ganga  the  Guru’s  wife  was  much  pleased  to 
see  her,  and  the  nurse  too  rejoiced  in  the  hope  of 
being  able  to  carry  out  her  hostile  design.  She 
hypocritically  said,  ‘0  Queen  Ganga,  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  congratulations  to  thee ! May  thy  child 
and  thy  husband  live  for  ever ! Thou  hast  not  re- 
membered me,  but  I have  remembered  thee.  I have 
come  to  wish  thee  happiness.’ 

Ganga  told  her  the  child  was  not  well  and  ceased 
to  suckle.  The  nurse  replied,  ‘ Bring  him  hither ; 

I will  give  him  infants’  medicine.  I understand 
infants’  complaints,  and  I treat  numbers  of  them  who 
are  brought  to  me  from  distant  countries.  After 
one  dose  of  my  infants’  mixture  they  require  no 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


38 

more.  Prithia’s  wife  always  had  her  infant  treated 
by  me,  and  he  was  never  ill  afterwards.’  The  upshot 
of  it  was,  that  Ganga,  deceived  by  her  specious 
words,  entrusted  the  child  to  her.  The  nurse  took 
Har  Gobind  in  her  lap,  and  offered  him  the  poisoned 
medicine,  but  he  refused  it.  She  caressed  and 
fondled  him  and  succeeded  in  putting  the  drug 
into  his  mouth,  but  he  would  not  swallow  it.  She 
then  drew  out  her  breast,  and  offered  it  to  him. 
The  moment  she  did  so  she  fainted  and  fell  back- 
wards. Some  put  water  into  her  mouth,  others 
sprinkled  rosewater  on  her  with  the  object  of 
restoring  her.  Having  become  conscious,  she  looked 
about  her  and  said,  ‘ The  bribe  of  one  hundred  rupees 
which  Prithia  and  his  wife  gave  me  hath  undone  me. 
Why  did  I poison  my  breasts  and  undertake  to  kill 
the  child  ? ’ 

The  story  of  Prithia’s  instigation  of  the  child’s 
murder  spread  from  house  to  house  and  caused  him 
deserved  obloquy.  The  Guru  composed  the  follow- 
ing hymn  on  the  occasion  : — 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  stretched  forth  His  hand  and 
preserved  him. 

The  glory  of  His  servant  hath  become  manifest. 

Ever  repeat  the  Guru’s  name  ; ever  meditate  on  the  Guru, 

And  lay  before  him  thy  heart’s  desires. 

I have  sought  the  protection  of  the  true  divine  Guru, 

And  His  servant’s  service  hath  been  successful. 

He  hath  preserved  my  soul,  body,  youth,  and  life. 

Saith  Nanak,  I am  a sacrifice  to  the  Guru.^ 

During  Har  Gobind’s  illness  suggestions  were 
made  to  the  Guru  that  recourse  be  had  to  a local 
witch  who  possessed  a high  reputation  for  skill  in 
sorcery,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  from  her  a charm 
for  the  recovery  of  the  child.  This  was  to  be  done 
by  repeating  some  cabalistic  words  over  water  and 
then  giving  it  to  the  child  to  drink.  The  Guru 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  39 

ridiculed  such  suggestions  and  such  remedies,  and 
composed  the  following  on  the  occasion  : — 

The  name  of  the  Pure  One  is  holy  water  ; 

By  repeating  it  with  the  tongue  sins  fly  away. 

God  dwelleth  in  everything  ; 

God  shineth  in  every  heart. 

By  repeating  God’s  name  man  descendeth  not  to  hell ; 

By  serving  God  all  boons  are  obtained. 

God  is  the  support  of  the  soul ; 

God  is  the  ship  of  the  world. 

By  repeating  His  name  Death  fleeth  away. 

God  breaketh  the  witch’s  teeth. 

God  is  ever  the  pardoner, 

He  giveth  comfort  and  happiness, 

God  manifesteth  His  glory  ; 

He  is  the  father  and  mother  of  saints  : 

God  is  with  the  holy  ; 

They  continually  sing  of  Him. 

The  Invisible  Thing  ^ is  obtained  by  meeting  the  Guru. 

His  servant  Nanak  hath  taken  God’s  shelter.^ 

Owing  to  the  perpetual  importunity  and  taunting 
speeches  of  his  wife  Karmo,  Prithia’s  mind  became 
daily  sadder,  and  he  again  plotted  nefarious  designs. 
He  sent  for  a snake-charmer,  gave  him  some 
money,  and  promising  him  a further  large  reward 
on  his  success,  induced  him  to  undertake  to  kill  the 
child  by  exposing  him  to  a cobra.  As  the  mother 
was  sitting  at  her  door  rejoicing  in  the  sight  of  her 
son,  and  pleased  with  his  youthful  gambols,  the 
snake-charmer  escaping  her  notice  let  a black  snake 
loose  in  the  court-yard.  Har  Gobind  took  the  hissing 
creature  in  his  hand  as  it  rushed  towards  him,  and 
killed  it  immediately.  Guru  Arjan  arrived  on  the 
spot  soon  after,  and  composed  the  following  : — 

Here  and  hereafter  our  protector 

Is  God,  the  true  Guru,  compassionate  to  the  poor. 

God’s  name.  ® Gaund. 


40 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  Himself  piotecteth  His  servants ; 

His  voice  speaketh  in  every  heart. 

I am  a sacrifice  to  the  Guru’s  feet. 

By  day  and  night,  at  every  breath  we  draw,  He  who  filleth 
every  place  should  be  remembered. 

Thou,  O God,  art  my  protector  ; 

True  is  the  support  of  the  True  One. 

Greatness  is  obtained  by  devotion  to  Thee. 

Nanak,  O God,  hath  sought  Thy  shelter. 

When  Har  Gobind  was  about  two  years  of  age 
a deputation  of  the  inhabitants  of  Amritsar  went  to 
the  Guru  at  Wadali.  They  said  to  him,  ‘ Wherever 
thou  abidest  there  is  happiness.  Conscious  of  the 
advantage  of  beholding  thee,  we  have  abandoned 
our  villages,  our  homes,  and  our  relations  to  dwell 
in  Amritsar,  but  thou  continuest  to  dwell  apart. 
Other  Sikhs  too  come  from  distant  countries  to 
behold  thee.  When  they  arrive  in  Amritsar  and 
find  thee  not,  they  return  to  their  homes.  Come  now 
with  us.  Ramdaspur  shall  long  prosper  by  thy 
presence.’ 

The  Guru  acceded  to  their  request,  and  set  out 
for  his  capital  Amritsar.  On  arriving  there  he  sent 
his  wife,  child,  and  servants  to  his  private  dwelling, 
and  then  walked  to  the  Golden  Temple.  He  bathed  in 
the  tank  and  distributed  sacred  food  with  the  usual 
prayers.  Then  was  sung  the  following  hymn : — 

I have  meditated  on  my  Guru, 

And  reached  my  home  in  comfort. 

This  is  due  to  the  greatness  of  the  Name 

Whose  worth  cannot  be  expre.ssed. 

Ye  saints,  worship  God,  God,  God  : 

By  worshipping  Him  ye  shall  obtain  everything,  and  all 
your  affairs  shall  be  adjusted. 

Very  fortunate  is  He  who  findeth 

Love  and  devotion  to  God. 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  meditated  on  the  Name, 

And  thus  received  the  reward  of  all  happiness. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  41 

On  that  occasion,  also,  the  Guru  composed  the 
following : — 

I have  meditated  on  God  in  my  heart, 

And  so  have  returned  home  safe  and  sound. 

Everybody  is  consoled 

That  the  perfect  Guru  hath  saved  us. 

0 saints,  my  God  is  ever  merciful. 

God  taketh  no  account  from  His  worshippers,  but  pre- 
serveth  them  as  His  children. 

1 have  clasped  God’s  name  to  my  heart, 

And  He  hath  arranged  all  mine  affairs. 

The  perfect  Guru  being  pleased  gave  it  me. 

Nanak  shall  have  no  further  anxiety.^ 

The  Guru,  taking  his  son,  waited  with  some 
sacred  food  on  Prithia,  as  his  eldest  brother.  Prithia 
hated  the  sight  of  the  Guru  and  his  son,  but,  pre- 
tending to  be  pleased,  ironically  said,  ‘ May  you 
both  live  long ! ’ The  Guru  then  went  with  his  son 
to  visit  Mahadev,  his  second  elder  brother,  and 
receive  his  blessing. 

There  were  great  rejoicings  and  illuminations 
when  the  Guru,  after  such  long  absence,  returned 
to  Amritsar  accompanied  by  the  young  heir  to 
the  Guruship.  Prithia  and  his  wife  Karmo  alone 
burned  with  jealousy.  Karmo  addressed  her 
husband  : ‘ My  lord,  thou  hast  made  many  efforts 
to  secure  for  thyself  the  Guru’s  throne  and  kill  Har 
Gobind,  but  thou  hast  not  succeeded.  Now  our  rivals 
who  are  near  us  indulge  in  ostentatious  rejoicings. 
My  breast  is  burning,  I suffer  intense  agony  and 
cannot  endure  their  happiness.  Thou  didst  formerly 
say — and  thus  consoled  me — that  the  Guruship 
belonged  to  our  house,  and  that  after  Arjan’s  death 
our  son  Mihrban  should  inherit  it.  Now  even  that 
hope  is  shattered,  since  a young  prince  hath  been 
born  in  Arjan’s  house.  Wherefore  contrive  some 
other  plan  by  which  the  desires  of  our  hearts  may 

^ Sorath. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


42 

be  fulfilled.’  Prithia  replied,  ‘ Hear  me,  my  beau- 
tiful, have  no  anxiety ; thy  son  shall  sit  on  the  Guru’s 
throne.  Har  Gobind,  Arjan’s  son,  shall  be  the 
victim  of  small-pox.  If  he  survive,  then  shall  we 
contrive  some  other  plan  for  his  destruction.  He 
must  not  live.’ 

When  this  conversation  was  reported  to  the 
Guru,  he  repeated  the  following  composition  of 
Guru  Ram  Das 

The  perverse  are  all  day  occupied  with  avarice,  though 
they  pretend  otherwise  ; 

At  night  oppressed  by  drowsiness  and  their  nine  apertures 
relaxed,  they  worship  not  God. 

Women  exercise  power  over  the  perverse,  and  ever  make 
fair  promises  ; 

But  they  who  act  as  women  tell  them,  are  impure,  thought- 
less, and  foolish. 

The  impure  who  feel  lust  ask  the  way  from  women  and 
travel  thereby  ; 

But  he  who  walketh  as  the  true  Guru  telleth  him,  is  a 
true  man,  the  best  of  the  best. 

God  produced  all  women  and  men  ; He  playeth  every  play. 

Saith  Nanak,  all  is  the  work  Thou,  O God,  hast  made — 
the  best  of  the  best.^ 

Har  Gobind  exhibited  some  feverish  symptoms. 
On  the  third  day  afterwards  his  body  became 
inflamed  and  showed  red  pustules  which  eventually 
assumed  a confluent  form.  The  child’s  eyes  closed 
as  if  in  perpetual  sleep.  Small-pox  of  a very  virulent 
type  had  declared  itself.  The  child’s  mother  prayed, 
‘ O great  God,  I have  one  son  obtained  after  long 
waiting.  May  he  be  able  to  bathe  and  rise  in 
health  ! ’ The  Guru  administered  to  his  wife  such 
consolation  as  suggested  itself  to  him.  The  people 
of  the  city  advised  him  to  make  an  offering  to  the 
goddess  of  small-pox,  and  propitiate  her  by  worship- 
ping a young  virgin.  They  said,  ‘ The  goddess  is 
^ Gauri  ki  War  I. 


43 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

pleased  when  an  immaculate  virgin  is  worshipped 
by  offering  her  food  and  money,  and  paying  her 
other  abject  service.’  According  to  the  ‘ Skand 
Puran  ’ of  the  Hindus,  the  goddess  of  small-pox 
should  be  thus  addressed : ' I bow  to  Sitala  Devi 
who  rideth  on  a donkey,  who  is  naked,  who  weareth 
a broom  as  her  diadem,  and  whose  forehead  is 
adorned  with  a sieve.’  Hindus  are  in  the  habit  of 
repeating  this  as  an  incantation  in  the  hope  of 
obtaining  recovery  from  the  malady.  The  Guru 
rejecting  the  advice  of  his  Hindu  friends  addressed 
them  the  following  : — 

God  is  my  sole  prop  ; I have  relinquished  other  hopes. 

God,  the  perfect  Lord  of  excellences,  is  powerful  over  all. 

The  Name  is  the  support  of  God’s  slave  who  entereth  His 
protection. 

Reliance  on  God  is  in  the  saints’  hearts. 

He  Himself  preserveth  ; He  Himself  bestoweth ; He  Him- 
self cherisheth. 

The  compassionate  to  the  poor,  the  ocean  of  favour 
remembereth  us  at  every  breath  we  draw. 

What  the  Creator  continueth  to  do  is  for  our  advantage. 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  taught  that  happiness  is  obtained,  by 
the  will  of  God. 

They  who  dismiss  care,  anxiety,  and  calculations,  recognize 
God’s  order. 

Nanak,  they  who  are  imbued  with  God’s  love  perish  not, 
nor  are  they  abandoned  by  Him.^ 

The  child  gradually  began  to  show  signs  of 
recovery,  upon  which  the  Guru  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing : — 

I have  ever  and  ever  repeated  God’s  name. 

And  God  Himself  hath  preserved  my  child. 

The  smedl-pox  is  stayed  ; 

Our  troubles  are  removed  by  God’s  name. 

My  God  is  ever  merciful. 

He  who  is  merciful  to  all  creatures  hath  heard  the  prayer  of 
His  worshipper. 


^ Bilawal. 


44 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


God  is  omnipotent  to  act  and  cause  to  act. 

By  remembering  Him  all  sorrows  depart. 

He  hath  heard  the  supplication  of  His  servant ; 

Nanak,  every  one  may  now  sleep  in  comfort.^ 

On  the  ninth  day  of  the  disease  the  child  opened 
his  eyes,  whereupon  the  Guru  composed  the  fol- 
lowing : — 

The  divine  Guru  hath  opened  his  eyes, 

My  anxieties  have  fled,  my  prayers  have  been  successful. 
God  hath  preserved  my  son  from  the  small-pox  ; 

The  Lord,  the  Supreme  Being  hath  shown  mercy. 

Nanak,  he  who  repeateth  the  Name  shall  live, 

And  quaff  God’s  nectar  in  the  company  of  His  saints. 

The  Guru  composed  the  following  also  on  the  same 
occasion  : — 

The  fever  hath  departed,  God  hath  granted  relief. 

My  son  is  now  well  by  the  grace  of  God. 

It  is  by  God’s  favour  men  become  happy, 

And  they  who  through  various  births  were  separated  from 
God  become  united  with  Him. 

By  ever  remembering  His  name 
The  abode  of  all  diseases  is  destroyed. 

With  composure  and  devotion  utter  God’s  hymns, 

And  remember  Him,  0 mortal,  through  the  eight  watches 
of  the  day. 

Sorrow  and  pain  and  Death  approach  him  not,% 

Saith  Nanak,  who  singeth  God’s  praises.^ 

God  hath  protected  the  honour  of  His  servant.® 

The  Guru  gave  the  medicine  of  God’s  name,  and  all  the 
fever  hath  departed. 

God  of  His  mercy  hath  preserved  Har  Gobind. 

The  calamity  was  removed  ; he  obtained  all  happiness  by 
ever  reflecting  on  God’s  attributes. 

^ Sorath.  2 Qauri. 

® In  the  Granth  Sahib  protecting  honour  frequently  means  pro- 
tecting life. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  45 

My  Creator  consented  to  the  magnification  of  the  perfect 
Guru. 

Guru  Nanak  laid  a fixed  foundation  which  ever  groweth 
more  secure.^ 

O God,  Thou  hast  been  merciful. 

There  is  comfort  and  joy,  O God  ; my  boy  hath  recovered. 

Clasping  both  hands  I made  supplication  and  meditated 
on  the  Supreme  Being  in  my  heart. 

God  giving  His  hand  hath  preserved  him  and  removed  all 
his  sufferings. 

The  husband  and  wife  joined  in  rejoicing  and  singing 
victory  to  God. 

Saith  Nanak,  I am  a sacrifice  to  the  man  who  saveth  all.^ 

The  following  also  was  composed  by  the  Guru  on 
the  same  occasion  : — 

The  primal  Brahm,  the  Supreme  Being,  pardoned,  and 
all  my  son's  maladies  are  healed. 

They  who  enter  the  asylum  of  the  perfect  Guru  are  saved, 
and  all  their  affairs  adjusted. 

God’s  servant  remembereth  the  Name  which  is  his 
.support. 

The  True  Guru  being  compassionate  hath  cured  his  fever. 

Be  ever  happy,  my  beloved  friends ; the  Guru  hath 
preserved  Har  Gobind. 

Nanak,  great  is  the  greatness  of  the  Creator  ; true  is  His  ' 
word  and  true  His  speech.^ 

The  authors  of  the  ' Gur  Bilas the  ' Suraj 
Parkash’,  the  'Guru  Samhita'  and  other  works, 
without  paying  due  regard  to  the  Guru’s  hymns, 
falsely  asserted,  each  according  to  his  own  Hindu 
proclivities,  that  the  Guru’s  wife  went  to  worship 
in  the  temple  of  Durga,  performed  the  Hindu 
ceremony  of  horn,  and  adored  virgins,  all  for  her 
son’s  recovery.  There  is  no  indication  of  this 

^ Gujari. 

2 Devgandhari.  Guru  Nanak  is  the  man  referred  to  in  the  last  line 
of  the  hymn.  ^ Sorath. 


46  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

superstitious  worship  in  the  Guru’s  hymns.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  only  the  Anand  of  Guru  Amar  Das 
and  the  other  hymns  quoted  herein  which  were 
repeated  or  sung  on  the  occasion. 


Chapter  VII 

When  Har  Gobind  had  completely  recovered, 
there  were  illuminations  and  great  rejoicings. 
Prithia’s  wife,  however,  kept  raw  the  sore  of  her 
husband’s  inflamed  mind  : ‘ My  lord  and  master,  thy 
words  have  proved  false.  Thine  enemies  increase 
daily  like  the  waxing,  while  thou  decreasest  like  the 
waning  moon.  I cannot  endure  Arjan’s  greatness, 
therefore  I will  either  drown  or  poison  myself.’ 

Prithia  sent  for  Har  Gobind’ s male  nurse  and 
said  to  him  : ‘ Thou  art  a high  Brahman  and  on 
that  account  I ever  take  thought  for  thee.  What 
are  thy  wages  ? Thou  wearest  no  necklace  and 
no  bracelets.  Arjan  squandereth  on  others  and 
boasteth  of  his  generosity.  Thou  gottest  nothing  even 
when  the  child  was  born.  My  friend,  if  thou  do 
business  for  me,  I will  fill  thy  house  with  wealth, 
and  thou  shalt  not  want  for  jewellery.  But  since 
thou  art  intimate  with  Arjan’s  family,  I will  only 
tell  thee  what  I wish  thee  to  do  on  thy  taking  an 
oath  on  thy  janeu  to  keep  my  secret.’  When  the 
servant  complied,  Prithia  said,  ‘ Take  five  hundred 
rupees  from  me  and  kill  that  boy.  I wiU  show  thee 
how  to  do  it.  Thou  wilt  not  find  it  difficult,  for  he 
is  all  day  with  thee.  Put  poison  either  in  curds  or 
bread-pudding,  and  extract  the  thorn  from  mine 
eye?.  I will  give  thee  half  of  the  money  now,  and 
the  other  half  when  thou  hast  done  the  deed.  Fear 
not  in  the  slightest.’ 

The  Brahman  was  thus  persuaded  to  promise 
to  poison  the  child.  He  took  very  powerful  poison 
and  ground  it  into  powder.  Next  day  when  the 


47 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

boy’s  mother  sent  him  milk  by  another  servant, 
the  Brahman  found  an  opportunity  of  slipping  the 
poison  into  it.  The  child  turned  his  head  away 
from  the  poisoned  food,  thrust  it  aside,  and  asked 
for  something  else  to  drink.  The  Brahman  began  to 
fondle  and  pat  him  on  the  head,  and  said,  ‘ Thou 
oughtest  certainly  to  drink  this.’  The  child  then 
began  to  cry.  The  Guru  heard  him,  sent  for  the 
Brahman  and  inquired  the  cause  of  the  weeping  he 
had  heard.  The  Brahman  replied  that  he  had 
offered  the  child  sweet  milk,  but  he  would  not  take 
it,  and  when  pressed  to  do  so  began  to  cry. 

The  Guru,  taking  the  child  in  his  arms,  began  to 
encourage  him  to  drink  what  was  offered  him.  The 
child,  however,  still  turned  away  his  head  and 
would  not  touch  it.  The  Guru  then  began  to  suspect 
another  plot.  He  took  some  of  the  potion  and  gaveu^ 
it  to  a dog,  which  fell  ill  immediately,  and  very  soon 
after  died.  The  Brahman,  seeing  the  state  of  the  dog, 
was  himself  seized  with  colic,  and  began  to  suffer 
great  agony.  He  confessed  his  intention  of  poison- 
ing the  child  at  Prithia’s  instigation,  and  then 
expired.  Upon  this  the  Guru  composed  the  fol- 
lowing : — 

The  poison  produced  no  impression  whatever  on  him  ; 

The  evil  Brahman  died  of  the  colic. 

The  Supreme  Being  Himself  preserved  His  servant ; 

The  sinner  died  by  the  Guru’s  power. 

The  servant  hath  meditated  on  His  Master  : 

God  Himself  hath  destroyed  the  plotter  against  the 
innocent. 

God  like  a mother  and  father  protected  His  servant. 

The  face  of  the  slanderer  is  blackened  here  and  hereafter. 

God  heard  the  prayer  of  His  servant  Nanak, 

And  the  vile  sinner  was  destroyed  without  hope.* 

Guru  Arjan  found  an  opportunity  of  reproaching 

Literally — not  the  size  of  a sesame. 

* Bhairo. 


48  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Prithia  with  his  murderous  designs.  Prithia  became 
furious  at  their  discovery,  and  determined  to  set  out 
with  his  family  for  Dihli  to  make  a complaint  to  the 
Emperor  Akbar  against  the  Guru,  and  thus  antici- 
pate any  charges  the  Guru  might  subsequently  make 
against  him.  Mahadev  endeavoured  to  restrain  him, 
and  quoted  many  passages  from  ancient  writings 
to  prove  that  brothers  ought  to  live  in  harmony ; 
but  Prithia  could  not  be  restrained  by  any  remon- 
strance. Prior  to  his  departure  for  Dihli,  he  decided 
on  going  to  the  village  of  Hehar  and  paying  a visit 
to  his  friend  Sulahi.  Sulahi  conferred  on  him  the 
proprietorship  of  the  village,  and  there  he  tarried  for 
some  time  and  built  a tank  for  public  use.  The 
Guru  sent  Bhai  Gur  Das  to  Prithia  with  the  object 
of  endeavouring  to  conciliate  him.  Bhai  Gur  Das 
failed  in  the  negotiations,  and  only  received  abusive 
language  to  communicate  to  the  Guru.  Gur  Das 
composed  the  following  on  that  occasion  : — 

The  crane,  though  dwelling  at  a place  of  pilgrimage,  is  not 
content. 

It  raineth  near  the  chatrik,  yet  he  drinketli  not.  » 

Even  though  the  bamboo  attach  itself  to  sandal,  it  is  not 
perfumed. 

The  owl,  unlucky  bird,  seeth  not  the  sun. 

The  musk  is  in  the  deer’s  navel,  yet  he  fleeth  elsewhere  in 
quest  of  it. 

The  true  Guru  Arjan  is  the  true  king  ; the  mina  Prithia' s 
face  hath  been  blackened.^ 

The  meaning  of  this  hymn  appears  to  be  that  no 
one  knows  when  he  is  well  off.  Prithia  did  not 
appreciate  the  advantage  of  dwelling  near  the 
Guru. 

A letter  was  in  due  time  received  from  the  Em- 
peror summoning  Sulahi  to  Dihli.  He  took  Prithia 
with  him  to  present  a complaint  against  the  Guru. 
The  Emperor  decided  in  the  first  place  that  he 

1 War  XXXVI. 


49 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

would  not  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  religious  men, 
and  secondly  that  the  memorial  was  false.  Prithia, 
crushed  by  his  disappointment,  became  seriously  ill. 
The  Guru,  on  hearing  the  total  result  of  his  enemy’s 
proceedings,  composed  the  following  : — 

God  Himself  showed  the  memorial  to  be  false, 

And  affliction  befell  the  sinner. 

Death  shall  not  approach  him 

Whose  helper  my  God  is. 

The  blind  fool  told  lies  in  the  true  court. 

And  smote  his  head  with  his  hands. 

They  who  commit  sin  contract  disease. 

God  Himself  sat  as  the  judge. 

Prithia  is  involved  in  the  consequences  of  his  own  acts  ; 

All  his  wealth  shall  pass  away  with  his  life. 

Nanak,  my  Creator  guardeth  the  honour  of  those 

Who  seek  the  protection  of  His  court 

When  Har  Gobind  was  of  a suitable  age  to  receive 
instruction,  the  Guru  went  to  his  own  brother 
Mahadev,  and  requested  him  to  take  the  boy  under 
his  protection  and  educate  him.  Mahadev  recom- 
mended that  the  delicate  and  responsible  duty 
should  be  entrusted  to  Bhai  Budha,  who  was  ex- 
perienced, who  had  seen  Guru  Nanak,  and  by  whose 
intercession  the  child  had  been  born.  The  Guru 
accepted  Mahadev’s  advice  and  sent  for  Bhai  Budha. 
He  modestly  pleaded  that  he  was  himself  quite 
uneducated.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Thou  hast  all 
eloquence  in  thy  heart.’  As  a preliminary  to  Har 
Gobind’s  education,  prayers  were  read  in  the  temple. 
The  Guru  publicly  announced  his  intention  of 
entrusting  his  son’s  education  to  Bhai  Budha,  and 
quoted  a line  from  one  of  Guru  Nanak’s  hymns  : — 

He  who  hath  meditated  on  knowledge  conferreth  favour 
on  others  .2 

Bhai  Budha  began  his  tuition.  He  first  wrote  the 

^ Gauri.  ^ Asa. 


50 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


thirty-five  letters  of  the  Gurumukhi  alphabet  on 
a wooden  tablet  and  told  Har  Gobind  their  names. 
The  pupil  immediately  repeated  them  from  memory 
as  if  he  had  previously  known  them.  In  a few  days 
he  knew  how  to  join  vowels  with  consonants  and 
mastered  spelling.  He  then  began  to  read  the  Guru’s 
hymns,  upon  which  his  faculty  of  perception  and 
comprehension  was  developed.  In  a short  time  he 
received  the  gift  of  tongues.  He  was  then  taught 
the  use  of  offensive  and  defensive  weapons,  riding, 
swimming,  chemistry,  astronomy,  medicine,  agri- 
culture, administration,  and  other  sciences.  On  the 
completion  of  his  education  the  Guru  took  him  to 
the  temple,  offered  thanksgiving  to  God  and  acknow- 
ledgement to  Bhai  Budha  for  his  successful  and 
comprehensive  instruction. 

A Sikh  called  Paira  lived  with  Guru  Arjan,  and 
used  to  wait  on  him  day  and  night.  The  teaching 
of  the  Guru  made  a great  impression  on  his  mind. 
At  that  time  a proud  ritualistic  pandit  arrived  to 
hold  a religious  controversy  with  the  Guru.  On  the 
morning  after  his  arrival  he  put  a tilak  on  his 
forehead  and  went  and  sat  in  devotional  attitude 
on  the  margin  of  the  Guru’s  tank.  He  was  provided 
with  a salagram,  a bell,  and  a shell,  which  he 
ostentatiously  displayed. 

It  was  the  Guru’s  custom  to  bathe  every  morning 
in  his  tank.  After  that  he  used  to  go  into  the 
temple  and  make  four  circumambulations.  Then 
going  forth  he  used  to  make  four  more.  When  mak- 
ing the  first  round  he  passed  by  the  pandit,  but  did 
not  make  obeisance  to  him  or  his  salagram.  The 
pandit  became  angry,  and  said  the  Guru  and  his 
Sikhs  had  sadly  fallen  away  from  orthodox  worship. 

‘ Although  he  calleth  himself  a guru  ’,  said  the 
pandit,  ‘ and  hath  followers  and  worshippers,  yet 
he  is  only  a Khatri  and  a family  man,  while  I am 
a rigidly  continent  Brahman.  He  thereiore  ought 
to  have  worshipped  me.  Ram  and  Krishan,  who 


51 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

were  incarnations  of  God,  used  to  reverence  and 
worship  Brahmans/  The  Guru  knew  what  was 
passing  in  the  Brahman's  mind,  and  stopped  to 
speak  to  him  at  the  second  circumambulation. 

' Excellent  twice-born,  what  fancies  hast  thou  con- 
ceived that  thou  art  angry  ? Pray  explain  the 
cause  thereof.'  The  Brahman  briefly  stated  the 
cause.  The  Guru  upon  this  gave  utterance  to  the 
following  hymn  : — 

Thou  readest  the  Veds  with  their  commentaries, 

But  the  all-pervading  God  abideth  not  in  thy  heart 

Thou  givest  instruction  to  make  men  firm  in  their  faith, 

But  thou  practisest  not  thyself  what  thou  preachest. 

O Pandit,  study  the  Veds 

And  banish  the  greed  of  thy  heart. 

Thou  placest  a salagram  before  thee. 

But  thy  thoughts  are  dispersed  in  every  direction. 

Thou  puttest  a tilak  on  the  salagram  and  fallest  at  its  feet. 

Thou  blindly  followest  tlie  world. 

Thou  performest  the  six  duties,  thou  spreadest  thy  mat 
and  wearest  a loin-cloth  ; 

But  it  is  only  in  wealthy  houses  thou  ever  readest  thy 
books, 

Tellest  thy  beads  and  beggest  for  alms — 

0 my  friend,  no  one  hath  thus  been  saved. 

He  is  a pandit  who  acteth  according  to  the  Guru’s  instruc- 
tion : 

Maya  with  her  three  qualities  departeth  from  him. 

Nanak,  seek  the  protection  of  that  God 

With  whose  name  the  four  Veds  are  filled.® 

The  Brahman  replied,  ' O Guru,  even  if  thou  think 
me  not  a fit  person  to  bow  to,  thou  oughtest  at  least 
to  have  bowed  to  the  salagram.  The  Guru  then 
extemporized  the  following  hymn  intended  to  confute 
and  humble  the  Hindu  priest : — 

1 have  obtained  God  as  my  salagram  : 

^ Also  translated— God  is  not  in  thy  heart,  nor  are  thy  ways  perfect. 

® Ramkali. 


52 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Saith  Nanak,  the  Guru  hath  made  me  this  gift : 

It  is  such  a salagram  I serve. 

God  is  my  worship,  my  adoration,  my  obeisance  ; 

He  batheth  all  day  long. 

He,  the  Supreme  Gyani,  is  ever  banqueting, 

And  leaveth  no  one  unprovided  for  : 

1 touch  His  feet  again  and  again. 

His  bell  is  heard  in  the  four  corners  of  the  world, 

His  seat  is  ever  in  heaven. 

His  fan  wavcth  over  all. 

His  incense  is  ever  diffused, 

Every  heart  is  His  casket,^ 

The  company  of  the  saints  is  His  perfect  court 
Singing  God’s  praises,  which  ever  bestoweth  pleasure,  is 
my  adoration. 

His  greatness  is  beautiful  and  ever  endless. 

He  who  hath  come  under  the  protection  of  the  saints’  feet 
And  is  fortunate,  shall  obtain  such  a salagram? 

The  following  was  also  quoted  by  the  Guru  on 
the  same  occasion  : — 

O blind  one,  thou  seest  not  with  thine  eyes  ; 

Thou  must  leave  all  these  vain  things  and  depart. 

Saith  Nanak,  O God,  mercifully  grant  me 
The  favour  of  the  company  of  the  saints. 

Man  obtaineth  something  when  he  becometh  the  dust  of  the 
saints'  feet. 

He  to  whom  God  giveth  understanding  repeateth  His 
name. 

The  Brahman  desired  to  continue  the  controversy, 
but  the  Guru  avoided  it  as  much  as  possible.  At 

^ Sampui^  a stnall  box  in  which  Brahmans  keep  the  salagram, 
flowers,  rice,  and  other  things  offered  to  idols. 

2 Small  brass  idols  are  placed  around  the  salagram,  and  these  are 
said  to  form  a court. 

^ Asa.  In  the  translation  of  this  hymn  it  has  been  found  necessary 
to  alter  the  order  of  the  verses. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  53 

last  he  consented  to  hear  the  Brahman  speak  on 
the  Veds  and  Upanishads.^  The  Brahman  wound  up 
with  a discourse  on  the  nature  of  Brahm.  When  he 
had  finished,  Bhai  Salo  presented  himself,  and  was 
welcomed  by  the  Guru  as  his  own  special  Ananya 
Bhagat,  or  monotheistic  saint.  The  Brahman  con- 
tended that  such  an  appellation  might  only  be 
applied  to  himself.  The  Guru  denied  this  on  the 
ground  that  the  Brahman  worshipped  many  gods. 
On  this  the  Brahman  produced  all  the  books  he  had 
brought  with  him,  but  they  failed  to  satisfy  the 
Guru.  The  Brahman  then  proposed  to  send  his  son 
to  Banaras  for  the  remainder  of  his  library.  An 
auspicious  time  for  the  son’s  departure  was  fixed 
by  the  astrologers,  but  after  he  had  set  out  on  his 
journey,  he  met  an  ass  which  brayed.  Deeming  this 
an  unliicky  omen  he  returned.  The  circumstance 
afforded  much  banter  and  amusement  to  the  Sikhs, 
who  became  the  more  convinced  of  the  truth  of 
their  own  religion. 

The  Guru  summoned  Paira,  and  told  him  that 
when  Guru  Nanak  visited  Ceylon  he  composed  the 
Pransangali,  and  left  it  there  until  a successor  of  his 
should  demand  it.  The  Guru  gave  Paira  directions 
to  go  and  bring  the  volume.  While  the  question  of 
funds  for  the  distant  journey  was  under  considera- 
tion, a Sikh  came  forward  and  offered  the  Guru  five 
paise — all  he  had  in  the  world.  The  Guru  gave  this 
sum  to  Paira  for  his  travelling  expenses,  and 
dispatched  him  without  consulting  an  astrologer. 
The  Brahman  remarked  on  this  omission,  whereupon 
the  Guru  read  him  a lecture  on  the  evils  of  super- 
stition. Bhai  Gur  Das,  who  happened  to  be  with  the 
Guru,  wrote  the  following  stanza  on  the  occasion  ; — 

0 Brahman,*  thou  art  a worshipper  of  Vishnu  and  of  the 

^ Theological  and  philosophical  supplements  to  the  Veds. 

* The  ironical  epithet  ananya,  which  means  not  worshipping  other 
gods,  has  not  been  translated. 


54  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

salagram ; thou  listenest  to  the  Gita/  yet  thou  callest  thyself 
a monotheist. 

After  inquiring  of  astrologers  and  calculating  auspicious 
times,  thou  goest  on  religious  pilgrimages  and  on  visits  to 
holy  places. 

When  thou  goest  forth,  if  thou  meet  a donkey  or  a dog, 
superstition  is  aroused  by  the  omen  and  thou  returnest  home. 

Thou  hast  not  the  gift  of  continence,  and  art  not  content 
with  the  support  of  one  God  ; indecision  being  in  thy  heart, 
thou  shalt  not  obtain  the  supreme  rank. 

Such  is  the  power  of  association  with  the  company  of  the 
Guru’s  Sikhs  that  continence  is  produced,  man  relieih  on  one 
support,  and  his  indecision  is  removed. 

He  will  not  consult  the  astrologers  or  the  Veds,  or  ask  the 
lunar  or  week  day  ; nor  will  he  clasp  to  his  heart  any  super- 
stition regarding  the  planets  and  the  lunar  mansions. 

He  will  take  no  note  of  omens  or  conjunctions  of  planets  or 
serve  other  gods  ; and  he  will  fix  his  attention,  love,  and 
affection  on  the  word  of  the  Formless  One. 

The  Sikhs  and  the  saints  are  as  children  ; the  holy  Guru 
is  their  cherisher  ; they  who  meditate  on  God  shall  obtain 
salvation  while  alive.^ 

On  hearing  this  the  Brahman’s  pride  was  tho- 
roughly humbled,  and  he  was  obliged  to  admit  that 
the  Sikhs  were  better  than  his  own  co-religionists. 
His  burning  heart  obtained  comfort  from  the  Guru’s 
instruction.  He  threw  away  his  salagram,  began  to 
utter  the  true  Name,  was  initiated  into  the  Sikh 
religion,  and  thus  obtained  salvation.  Several  other 
learned  pandits  followed  his  example,  and  accepted 
the  pure  faith  of  Guru  Nanak. 

Paira  reached  Ceylon  with  great  difficulty,  as  was 
natural  considering  the  restricted  travelling  expenses 
allowed  him.  The  King  of  Ceylon  received  him 
with  respect,  treated  him  hospitably,  and  gave  him 
the  required  volume,  with  a letter  and  many  presents 

^ The  episode  in  the  Mahdbharal  in  which  Krishan  declares  him- 
self to  be  God.  2 Gur  Das’s  Kabit. 


55 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

for  the  Guru,  and  allowed  him  to  depart  on  his 
return  journey  to  Amritsar.  The  Pransangali  was 
subsequently  stolen  by  a pretended  sadhu,  or  holy 
man.^ 


Chapter  VII 

Guru  Arjan  now  felt  the  necessity  of  laying  down 
rules  for  the  guidance  of  his  followers  in  the  per- 
formance of  their  daily  religious  duties  and  expia- 
tory rites.  This  course  would  reduce  his  religion  to 
consistency,  and  hinder  divergent  tenets  and  rituals. 
That  consummation,  however,  could  only  be  attained 
when  the  exact  words  of  the  Gurus  were  permanently 
recorded  in  one  grand  volume.  The  Guru  was 
strengthened  in  this  determination  by  information 
he  continually  received  that  Prithia  was  composing 
religious  hymns  of  his  own  which  he  described  as  the 
compositions  of  Guru  Nanak  and  his  successors,  and 
the  ignorant  populace  had  not  sufficient  intelligence 
to  discriminate.  Guru  Amar  Das,  in  the  twenty- 
third  and  twenty-fourth  pauris  of  the  Anand,  had 
decided  that  only  the  real  hymns  of  the  Guru  should 
be  repeated  and  reverenced  by  Sikhs.  Accordingly, 
such  compositions  should  be  collected  and  arranged 
for  the  guidance  of  the  faithful.  Nothing  but  evil 
could  result  from  the  hymns  which  Prithia  endea- 
voured to  impose  upon  the  public. 

In  addition  to  the  hymns  of  the  Gurus,  Guru 
Arjan  praised  the  compositions  of  Gur  Das,  especially 
his  ‘ Waran  ’.  Being  thus  commended,  Gur  Das 
volunteered  to  go  to  Goindwal,  to  Mohan,  elder  son 
of  the  third  Guru,  for  the  volumes  containing  the 
Guru’s  compositions.  Gur  Das,  however,  failed  to 
attract  Mohan’s  attention.  He  had  locked  himself 
in  his  house,  and  was  said  to  be  intent  on  his  devo- 
tions. Gur  Das  remained  knocking  at  his  door  for 

’ A printed  Pransangali  on  the  science  of  Jog  can  now  be  pur- 
chased, but  the  Sikhs  do  not  accept  it  as  genuine. 


56  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

a whole  night,  but  failed  to  receive  an  answer.  He 
then  returned  to  Amritsar,  and  told  the  Guru  the 
story  of  his  failure. 

Bhai  Budha  then  volunteered  to  go.  On  arriving 
in  Goindwal  he  endeavoured  to  gain  Mohan’s  atten- 
tion, but  also  failed.  He  then  broke  open  his  door, 
and  found  Mohan  in  a state  which  simulated  uncon- 
sciousness. Mohri,  Mohan’s  younger  brother,  came 
on  hearing  the  tumult,  and  advised  Bhai  Budha  not 
to  awaken  the  sleeper.  Upon  this  Bhai  Budha 
desisted  and  returned  to  Amritsar.  The  Guru,  on 
hearing  of  his  ill-success,  decided  that  he  would  go 
himself.  On  arriving  at  Mohan’s  house  he  called  out 
to  him,  but  received  no  answer.  The  Guru  then 
addressed  him  the  following  stanza,  which  might  be 
considered  partly  as  addressed  to  God  and  partly  to 
Mohan — Mohan  meaning  the  enchanter,  being  one  of 
the  names  of  the  Divinity  : — 

O Mohan,  lofty  is  thy  mansion,  and  matchless  thy  palace  ; 

O Mohan,  saints  adorn  the  doors  of  thy  temple. 

In  thy  temple  they  ever  sing  the  praises  of  the  infinite 
and  merciful  God. 

Where  the  company  of  the  saints  assemble,  there  they 
meditate  on  thee. 

Show  compassion  and  kindness,  O compassionate  lord  ; be 
merciful  to  the  poor. 

Nanak  representeth,  I am  thirsting  for  a sight  of  thee, 
grant  it  to  me,  and  all  happiness  shall  be  mine. 

On  hearing  this,  Mohan  opened  the  door,  to  find 
that  the  Guru  himself  had  come  to  visit  him.  Not 
being  totally  appeased  by  the  verses  he  had  heard, 
he  reproached  the  Guru  with  having  taken  the 
Guruship  out  of  his  family,  and  come  to  steal  the 
religious  and  literary  memorials  of  his  predecessors. 
The  Guru  took  no  notice  of  his  blustering,  but  pro- 
ceeded to  address  him  another  stanza : — 

0 Mohan,  incomparable  are  thy  words,  and  superior  thy 
deportment. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  57 

O Mohan,  thou  believest  in  one  God,  all  others  thou 
treatest  as  refuse. 

Thou  believest  in  the  one  invisible  God  who  holdeth  the 
whole  fabric  of  the  world. 

Under  the  Guru’s  instruction  thou  hast  subjected  to  thy- 
self God  the  primal  Being. 

Thou  Thyself  mo  vest,  O God ; Thou  Thyself  standest  still ; 
Thou  Thyself  supportest  the  whole  fabric. 

Nanak  representeth,  preserve  mine  honour ; all  Thy  ser- 
vants seek  Thy  sanctuary. 

Mohan,  somewhat  softened  on  hearing  this, 
descended  from  the  upper  chamber  in  which  he  had 
been  seated,  in  order  to  receive  his  distinguished 
visitor.  The  Guru  followed  up  his  poetical  address 
with  a third  stanza  : — 

0 Mohan,  the  company  of  saints  meditate  on  thee  and 
consider  how  they  shall  behold  thee. 

O Mohan,  at  the  last  hour  Death  shall  not  approach  him 
who  repeateth  Tliy  name. 

The  god  of  death  shall  not  touch  him  who  with  single 
heart  meditateth  on  Thee. 

All  who  worship  Thee  in  thought,  word,  and  deed,  shall 
obtain  the  fruit  thereof. 

The  impure,  the  foolish,  and  the  stupid  on  beholding  Thee 
obtain  divine  knowledge. 

Nanak  representeth,  0 omnipresent  God,  abiding  be  Thy 
sovereignty. 

When  Mohan  examined  the  Guru's  face,  he  saw  in 
it  such  preternatural  splendour,  that  he  recognized 
the  light  of  all  the  Gurus.  He  then  surrendered  the 
books,  deeming  the  divine  Guru  before  him  their 
proper  custodian.  Upon  this  the  Guru  uttered 
a fourth  stanza,  and  thus  completed  the  hymn 

O Mohan,  mayest  thou  be  successful  with  thy  family  ! 

0 Mohan,  thy  children,  friends,  brethren,  and  family,  all 
hast  thou  saved. 


58 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Thou  hast  also  saved  those  who  having  beheld  thee  have 
dispelled  their  pride. 

Death  never  approacheth  those  who  magnify  Thee. 

Endless  are  Thine  excellences  ; they  cannot  be  described, 
O True  Guru,  and  Supreme  God. 

Nanak  representeth,  Thou  hast  preserved  a prop  by 
clinging  to  which  the  world  shall  be  saved 

The  Guru  composed  the  following  also  on  that 
occasion  ; — 

I am  wealthy  and  fortunate  in  the  true  Name  ; 

I sing  God’s  praises  with  composure  and  love. 

When  I opened  and  saw  my  father  and  grandfather’s  ^ 
treasury  of  sacred  books 

My  soul  was  enriched  ; 

My  storehouses  were  filled  with  gems  and  rubies 

Inestimable,  inexhaustible,  and  unweighable. 

0 my  brethren,  let  us  eat  and  spend  this  wealth  together. 

It  shall  not  diminish,  but  continue  to  increase. 

Saith  Nanak,  he  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny  hath  been 
written, 

Will  join  us  in  availing  ourselves  of  this  treasure 

After  this  the  Guru  and  Mohan  held  a long  con- 
versation on  the  subject  of  the  Gurus  from  the 
time  of  Guru  Nanak.  Mohan  was  so  pleased  with 
the  interview,  that  he  pressed  his  visitor  to  remain 
with  him.  The  Guru  excused  himself  on  account 
of  the  project  he  had  formed  to  compile  the  hymns 
of  his  predecessors.  He  then  departed,  promising 
to  visit  Mohan  again  whenever  he  was  honoured  with 
an  invitation. 

On  the  Guru’s  return  journey  to  Amritsar  he 
stayed  at  Khadur.  Datu,  Guru  Angad’s  son  who 
had  kicked  Guru  Amar  Das  off  his  throne,  went  to 

^ Gauii  Chhant. 

^ Ram  Das,  the  fourth  Guru,  was  Guru  Arjan’s  father.  His 
maternal  grandfather  was  Guru  Amar  Das,  The  Guru  doubtless 
means  all  his  predecessors. 

® Gauri. 


59 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

meet  him,  and  for  the  sake  of  self-abasement  and 
as  an  act  of  contrition  put  himself  the  following 
questions  in  presence  of  the  Guru  : ‘ How  can  there 
be  worship  without  merits  ? How  can  there  be 
honour  without  learning?  How  can  there  be  victory 
without  bravery  ? How  cari  there  be  meditation 
without  mental  composure  ? How  can  the  heart 
have  peace  without  contentment  ? How  can  empire 
be  obtained  without  the  performance  of  meritorious 
acts  ? How  can  there  be  divine  knowledge  without 
the  true  Guru  ? How  can  there  be  honour  without 
virtue  ? Since  the  ocean  of  life  is  unfathomable, 
how  can  one  cross  it  without  a vessel  ? How  can 
there  be  worship  without  loving  God’s  lotus  feet  ? 
How  can  there  be  deliverance  without  God  ? How 
can  there  be  singing  without  a tune  ? How  can  one 
acquire  fame  without  verse,  praise  without  the 
bestowal  of  gifts  ? The  ocean  of  the  world  is  wide  : 
how  can  one  cross  it  without  the  Sikh  religion  ? 
How  can  there  be  day  without  the  sun  ? I had  no 
virtues  or  good  qualities,  so  how  could  I have  been 
Guru  ? Such  have  been  my  reflections.’ 

Datu  then  narrated  to  the  Guru  all  his  misconduct 
and  the  result  thereof.  He  said  he  still  felt  pain  in 
his  foot  which  the  robbers  had  injured.  He  had 
gone  to  visit  Guru  Amar  Das  on  his  deathbed,  and 
begged  pardon  for  his  violence.  Guru  Amar  Das  told 
him  that  the  fifth  Guru  would  heal  him.  Guru  Arjan, 
in  consideration  of  Datu’s  descent,  put  his  hand  on 
the  injured  limb  and  made  it  whole.  He  then,  after 
a conversation  with  Datu  on  the  subject  of  the 
preceding  Gurus,  and  after  an  interview  with  his 
brother  Dasu,  set  out  for  Amritsar. 

On  the  Guru’s  arrival  in  Amritsar,  he  made  plans 
for  the  compilation  of  the  Granth  Sahib.  He  fixed 
for  the  purpose  on  a secluded  spot,  where  jand^,  wild 
caper,  Indian  fig,  and  pipal  trees  yielded  agreeable 
shade,  while  green  herbage  gratified  the  eye  and 

^ The  Prosopts  Spicig€7'a, 


6o 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


afforded  a pleasant  carpet  for  the  feet.  Tents  were 
erected  for  the  accommodation  of  the  Guru  and  his 
bards  and  minstrels.  The  Guru  decided  to  have 
a tank  constructed  there  also,  and  set  about  its 
excavation. 

On  the  completion  of  the  tank,  and  at  the  time  of 
giving  it  the  name  Ramsar,  the  Guru  composed  the 
following,  which  may  be  understood  literally  or 
spiritually  : — 

Ever  bathe  in  God’s  tank  ; ^ 

Stir  it  up  and  drink  the  great  nectareous  juice. 

God’s  name  is  holy  water  ; 

He  who  batheth  in  it  shall  have  all  his  desires  fulfilled. 

Where  God  is  spoken  of  in  the  company  of  the  saints, 

The  sins  of  millions  of  births  are  erased. 

The  saints  rejoice  on  remembering  God’s  name, 

And  their  souls  and  bodies  feel  supreme  delight. 

The  slave  Nanak  is  a sacrifice  to  him 

Who  hath  obtained  the  treasure  of  the  dust  of  God’s  feet.^ 

The  Guru,  on  taking  up  his  abode  near  the  tank, 
was  accompanied  by  a crowd  of  Sikhs.  He  now 
occupied  himself  with  collecting  further  materials 
for  his  compilation,  and  with  composing  hymns  of 
his  own.  He  therefore  instructed  Bhai  Budha  to 
take  his  place  in  the  Har  Mandar,  and  do  duty  for 
him  by  giving  religious  instruction  to  all  who  pre- 
sented themselves.  He  sent  for  Gur  Das  and  ap- 
pointed him  to  write  the  hymns  of  the  Gurus  from  his 
dictation.  He  ordered  that  they  should  afterwards 
be  translated  by  learned  men  into  Indian  and  foreign 
languages,  so  that  they  might  extend  over  the  whole 
world  as  oil  spreads  over  water.® 

The  followers  of  the  principal  Indian  saints, 
Hindu  and  Muhammadan,  since  the  days  of  Jaidev, 

^ Ramsar  is  also  used  in  a spiritual  sense  to  mean  the  association 
of  the  saints. 

® Gauri. 

® Siiraj  Parkiish,  Ras  III,  Chapter  41. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  6i 

were  invited  by  the  Guru  to  attend  and  suggest 
suitable  hymns  for  insertion  in  the  sacred  volume. 
They  repeated  hymns  of  their  respective  sects  ; and 
such  as  conformed  to  the  spirit  of  reform  then  in 
vogue,  or  were  not  wholly,  inconsistent  with  the 
Guru’s  teaching,  were  adopted  and  incorporated  in 
the  Granth.  It  may  be  here  conceded  that  those 
hymns  received  some  alterations  in  the  process  of 
transmission  from  the  saints  to  their  followers  who 
were  contemporaries  of  Guru  Arjan  ; and  this  will 
explain  why  so  many  Panjabi  words  are  found  in 
the  Bhagats’  writings,  and  why  they  differ  from 
their  compositions  preserved  in  other  parts  of  India. 
According  to  the  Hindu  religion  it  was  deemed  a sin 
to  listen  to  the  teaching  of  Musalmans,  to  say 
nothing  of  that  of  Sudars.  It  was  one  of  the  Guru’s 
objects  to  show  the  world  that  there  was  no  such 
superstition  in  the  Sikh  religion,  and  that  every 
good  man,  no  matter  of  what  caste  or  creed,  was 
worthy  of  honour  and  reverence. 

The  hymns  are  arranged  according  to  Rags,  or 
musical  measures.  The  hymns  of  the  first  Guru, 
Mahalla  I,  come  first,  then  those  of  the  second  Guru, 
Mahalla  II,  and  so  on.  After  the  Guru’s  hymns 
the  hymns  of  Bhagats,  or  Indian  saints  who  had 
previously  conceived  reformatory  ideas,  were  in- 
serted, though  without  any  fixed  order  of  precedence. 

Satta,  the  minstrel  who  had  visited  Guru  Ram  Das, 
now  came  and  completed  the  long  hymn  begun  by 
Balwand  by  adding  the  following  pauri  in  praise 
of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

The  four  Gurus  illumined  the  four  ages  of  the  world  ; thou, 
Arjan,  art  the  fifth  in  their  place. 

It  is  thou  thyself  who  didst  create  the  world  ; thou  art  its 
standing  pillar. 

Thou  art  the  tablet,  thou  art  the  pen,  thou  art  the  writer. 

The  human  race  cometh  and  goeth  ; thou  art  ever  new  and 
whole. 


62 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Guru  Arjan  sitteth  on  Baba  Nanak's  throne ; the  true 
Guru’s  canopy  shineth  over  him. 

Thou  hast  illuminated  every  direction  from  the  east  to  the 
west. 

They  who  worship  not  the  true  Guru  are  subject  to  trans- 
migration. 

Thy  miracles  increase  twofold  and  fourfold ; this  is  a 
true  offering  to  the  true  Guru.^ 

The  four  Gurus  illumined  the  four  ages  of  the  world  ; thou 
art  the  fifth  in  their  place. 

Kahna,  Chhajju,  Shah  Husain,  and  Pilo — four 
religious  men  of  Lahore — also  came  and  requested 
the  Guru  to  find  a place  in  his  Granth  for  their 
compositions.  He  invited  them  to  give  him  speci- 
mens of  their  poetical  abilities.  Kahna  was  the  first 
to  deliver  his  composition — 

I am  He,  I am  He 

Whom  the  Veds  and  Purans  sing,  but  whom  none  hath 
found  by  search. 

This,  a deification  of  Kahna  himself,  was  promptly 
rejected  by  the  Guru  as  rank  blasphemy. 

Chhajju’s  composition  was  the  following  : — 

Look  thou  not  on  woman,  even  though  she  be  cut  out  of 
paper ; 

Like  a plundering  band  of  Baloches  she  will  take  thee 
away  and  kill  thee. 

This  was  rejected  as  being  too  derogatory  to  the 
female  sex.  According  to  Guru  Nanak,  domestic  life 
was  the  best  of  all,  and  he  had  no  wish  to  depreciate 
women. 

Shah  Husain’s  turn  came  next.  The  following 
was  his  composition  : — 

Be  silent,  0 my  friend,  be  silent  ; 

There  is  no  necessity,  O my  friend,  for  speaking  ; 

My  friend,  there  is  no  necessity  for  speaMng. 

* Also  translated — Thou  art  the  true  successor  of  the  true  Guru 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  63 

Within  and  without  us  is  the  one  Lord ; to  whom  else  shall 
we  address  ourselves  ? 

The  one  Beloved  pervadeth  every  heart ; there  is  nowhere 
a second. 

Saith  the  humble  faqir  Husain,  I am  a sacrifice  unto  the 
true  Guru. 

This  was  rejected  by  Guru  Arjan  on  the  ground 
that  he  did  not  consider  it  the  duty  of  holy  men  to 
conceal  the  message  which  God  had  commissioned 
them  to  give  to  the  world. 

Pilo,  the  last  to  claim  the  honour  of  immortality 
in  the  Granth  Sahib,  submitted  the  following  ; — 

They  who  have  died  at  their  birth  are  superior  to  us  ; 

They  do  not  thrust  their  feet  into  the  mire,  and  are  not 
befouled  therewith. 

This  was  also  rejected  on  the  ground  that  better 
is  the  man  who  struggles  with  the  world  to  make 
his  life  profitable  than  he  who  quits  the  scene  at 
the  outset. 

Krishan  Lai  and  Har  Lai,  two  elderly  learned 
pandits  of  Banaras,  came  to  behold  the  Guru.  They 
told  him  that  Guru  Nanak  had  given  them  much 
instruction  on  his  visit  to  their  holy  city.  That 
instruction  was  now  incorporated  in  the  Asa  ki  War, 
and  had  become  the  common  property  of  men  ; but 
they  came  to  Guru  Arjan  to  receive  from  him  special 
instruction  to  suit  their  own  particular  case.  He 
composed  what  are  called  the  Sahaskriti  sloks, 
written  in  a species  of  Prakrit,  for  their  edification. 
To  these  compositions  he  subsequently  added  the 
Gatha,  now  found  near  the  end  of  the  Granth  Sahib. 

The  Guru,  probably  to  make  trial  of  his  learned 
and  able  scribe  Bhai  Gur  Das,  whose  compositions 
he  admired,  offered  to  insert  them  in  the  Granth ; 
but  Bhai  Gur  Das  said  that  they  were  not  worthy 
of  such  honour.  The  Guru  complimented  him  on  his 
modesty  and  ability,  and  said  that  whoever  read 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


64 

the  Bhai’s  writings  should  acquire  spiritual  profit 
and  instruction  and  faith  in  the  teachings  of  the 
holy  Gurus. 

Several  bards  who  had  accepted  the  Sikh  religion 
appeared  before  the  Guru,  and  offered  him  pane- 
gyrics of  himself  and  his  predecessors.  The  Guru 
graciously  gave  such  compositions  a place  in  the 
sacred  volume. 

When  all  the  hymns  for  insertion  had  been  deter- 
mined on,  the  Guru  sat  within  his  tent  and  dictated 
them  to  Bhai  Gur  Das.  After  much  time  and  labour 
the  volume  was  completed  on  the  first  day  of  the 
light  half  of  Bhadon,  Sambat  1661  (a.d.  1604). 
The  Guru  then  wrote  the  Mundawani  as  a con- 
clusion, and  affixed  his  seal  thereto.  The  Munda- 
wani is  as  follows  : — 

Three  things  have  been  put  into  the  vessel^ — truth, 
patience,  and  meditation. 

The  ambrosial  name  of  God  the  support  of  all  hath  also 
been  put  therein. 

He  who  eateth  and  enjoyeth  it  shall  be  saved. 

This  provision  should  never  be  abandoned  ; ever  clasp  it 
to  your  hearts. 

By  embracing  God’s  feet  wc  cross  the  ocean  of  darkness  ; 
Nanak,  everything  is  an  extension  of  God. 

After  this  the  Guru  in  his  self-abasement  inserted 
the  following  slok  ; — 

I did  not  appreciate  what  Thou  didst  for  me,  and  yet 
Thou  madest  me  worthy. 

I am  full  of  demerits  ; I possess  no  merit,  and  yet  Thou 
Thyself  hast  compassion  on  me. 

Thou  showest  compassion  and  kindness  unto  me ; I have 
found  the  true  Guru,  the  friend. 

Nanak,  if  I obtain  the  Name,  I shall  live,  and  my  body 
and  soul  shall  be  refreshed. 

A Muhammadan  poet  called  Alim  in  a.h.  991 

* The  Granth  Sahib  is  meant. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  65 

(a.d.  1583)  wrote  a work  in  353  stanzas  generally 
from  four  to  six  lines  each,  called  ‘Madhava  Nal 
Sangit  which  purports  to  be  an  account  of  the 
loves  of  Madhava  Nal  and  a lady  called  Kam 
Kandala.^  The  Rag  Mala,  which  forms  the  con- 
clusion of  the  Granth  Sahib  and  contains  a list  of 
the  rags  and  raginis  and  their  subdivisions,  is  a por- 
tion of  Alim’s  work  extending  from  the  sixty- third 
to  the  seventy-second  stanza.  It  is  not  understood 
how  it  was  included  in  the  sacred  volume.  The 
rags  mentioned  in  it  do  not  correspond  with  the 
rags  of  the  Granth  Sahib. 

The  Guru  invited  all  his  Sikhs  to  see  the  precious 
compilation,  the  fruit  of  so  much  anxious  labour, 
and  distributed  sacred  food  amongst  them  as  a 
thanksgiving  for  the  completion  of  his  toil.  The 
volume  was  by  the  advice  of  Bhai  Budha  and  Bhai 
Gur  Das  deposited  in  the  Har  Mandar. 

At  the  conclusion  of  his  task  the  Guru  told  his 
Sikhs  that  the  Granth  Sahib  was  the  embodiment 
of  the  Gurus,  and  should  therefore  be  held  in  extreme 
reverence.  He  then  considered  to  whom  he  could 
entrust  the  sacred  volume.  If  he  entrusted  it  to  the 
Bedis,  Tehans,  Bhallas,  or  Sodhis — the  tribes  from 
whom  the  Gurus  had  sprung — they  might  become 
proud,  and  consider  themselves  far  superior  to  their 
surroundings ; or  they  might  perchance,  owing  to 
their  mutual  jealousies  and  quarrels,  treat  it  with 
disrespect.  He  therefore  decided  on  giving  charge  of 
it  to  Bhai  Budha,  who  had  seen  Guru  Nanak,  whose 
devotion  had  been  often  tried,  and  who  would  per- 
form the  duty  with  reverence  and  love.* 

Supplementary  to  the  instructions  contained  in 
the  Granth  Sahib  the  Guru  prescribed  the  rites  to 
be  observed  on  the  decease  of  a Sikh,  and  also  on 
occasions  of  rejoicing. 

^ An  account  of  the  same  lovers  is  also  found  in  the  ninety-fuM 
Chalitar  or  tale  in  the  tenth  Guru’s  Granth. 

2 Gur  Bilas,  V. 

SIKH.  Ill  F 


66 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


When  Bhai  Budha  first  opened  the  sacred  volume 
in  the  temple,  his  eyes  fell  on  the  hymn  quoted  above, 
beginning,  ‘ The  Creator  stood  in  the  midst  of  the 
work,’  which  he  regarded  as  auspicious  and  having  a 
direct  reference  to  the  compilation. 

Bhai  Banno,  who  lived  at  Mangat  in  the  Gujrat 
district  of  the  Pan  jab,  took  a keen  interest  in  the 
work,  and  went  with  a large  following  to  see  it. 
His  curiosity  was  aroused,  and  he  considered  how 
he  could  obtain  possession  of  the  precious  volume. 
He  asked  the  Guru  for  the  loan  of  it  to  show  to  his 
flock.  The  Guru,  for  obvious  reasons,  was  most 
unwilling  to  part  with  it,  but  was  finally  prevailed 
on  to  do  so.  According  to  his  order  Bhai  Banno 
might  read  it  for  Sikhs  on  the  way,  but  he  was  not 
to  detain  it  in  his  village  for  more  than  one  night. 
Bhai  Banno,  instead  of  expediting  his  journey, 
proceeded  by  slow  and  short  marches,  and  thus 
contrived  to  obtain  a full  copy  of  the  Granth  Sahib 
before  he  returned  it.  Into  his  own  copy  he  intro- 
duced some  hymns  which  had  been  omitted  by  the 
Guru.  The  Guru,  on  hearing  of  this,  told  him  the 
volume  might  remain  as  he  had  compiled  it.  There 
is  another  story,  namely,  that  the  Granth  Sahib  was 
entrusted  to  Bhai  Banno  to  have  it  bound  in  Lahore, 
and  that  in  taking  it  there  he  had  an  unauthorized 
copy  prepared. 


Chapter  VIII 

A deputation  of  Sikhs  came  to  the  Guru  from 
Kashmir  and  represented  to  him  that  the  pandits 
of  that  country  had  advised  them  to  discontinue  the 
reading  of  the  Guru’s  hymns  and  turn  their  attention 
to  Sanskrit  sacred  compositions  and  Hindu  worship, 
otherwise  they  would  have  no  communication  with 
them.  They  therefore  prayed  the  Guru  to  send 
a competent  Sikh  to  Kashmir  to  silence  the  pandits 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  67 

and  extend  the  Guru’s  faith  in  that  direction.  ,The 
Guru  accordingly  sent  Madho  on  that  important 
errand.  He  commissioned  him  to  instruct  the 
Kashmiris  to  rise  before  day,  perform  their  ablutions, 
repeat  and  sing  the  Gurus’ . hymns,  associate  with 
holy  men,  observe  the  GurUs’  anniversaries,  dis- 
tribute sacred  food,  give  a tithe  of  their  earnings  to 
the  Sikh  cause,  share  their  food  with  others,  speak 
civilly,  live  humbly,  and  adopt  the  other  rules  and 
observances  of  the  Sikhs. 

Numerous  stories  are  told  by  the  author  of  the 
Suraj  Parkash  to  illustrate  the  miraculous  power 
and  teachings  of  the  Guru.  A Sikh  called  Tiloka,  an 
officer  in  the  Kabul  army,  had  thoughtlessly  killed 
a female  deer.  On  opening  the  animal  two  embryos 
were  discovered.  Tiloka  was  much  distressed  at  his 
inhumanity  in  killing  the  animal,  and  vowed  never 
to  go  hunting  again.  In  furtherance  of  his  humani- 
tarian vow  he  resolved  to  wear  a wooden  sword  for 
the  future.  When  the  king  heard  of  this,  and  held 
a parade  for  the  purpose  of  examining  the  officers’ 
arms,  Tiloka’s  sword  was,  as  the  result  of  his  invoca- 
tion of  the  Guru,  changed  into  polished  steel,  and  he 
thus  escaped  punishment  for  what  would  otherwise 
have  been  a grave  military -offence. 

One  Kataru,  the  king’s  weighman,  also  came  from 
Kabul.  When  he  solicited  instruction  from  the  Guru, 
he  was  told  to  use  just  weights  and  discharge  his 
duties  honestly.  When  he  returned  to  his  office  in 
Kabul,  a bania,  or  petty  shopkeeper,  with  evil  and 
malicious  intent,  placed  in  his  shop  a false  weight, 
which  he  unknowingly  used.  The  bania  went  to  the 
king  to  lay  information  against  Kataru.  The  king 
proposed  to  inspect  the  weighing  apparatus,  and 
Kataru,  hearing  this,  prayed  to  the  Guru  to  protect 
him.  The  Guru,  who  was  in  Amritsar,  knew  by  his 
occult  power  of  his  distress.  At  that  moment  a poor 
Sikh  came  to  the  Guru  with  a small  offering  of  five 
paise.  The  Guru  took  the  coins,  passed  them  from 


68  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

one*hand  to  the  other  simultaneously  with  the 
king’s  inspection,  so  when  the  king  tried  both  scales 
the  weights  appeared  correct.  The  Guru  explained 
the  meaning  of  his  act  to  an  inquiring  Sikh.  The 
king  of  Kabul  was  satisfied  with  his  inspection,  and 
Kataru  on  paying  a second  visit  to  Amritsar  attested 
the  Guru’s  explanation  in  every  respect. 

One  Chuhar,  a chaudhri,  went  to  the  Guru  for 
religious  instruction.  The  Guru  told  him  ever  to 
speak  the  truth.  The  village  dignitary  said  it  was 
impossible  for  a man  in  his  position  to  avoid  speaking 
falsehood.  The  Guru  directed  him  to  depart,  and 
keep  an  account  of  his  lies  and  of  his  good  acts, 
and  bring  it  to  him  at  the  end  of  every  month.  The 
first  month  the  good  acts  were  nil,  and  the  lies 
many.  The  Guru  obliged  him  to  read  out  the  account 
in  open  darbar,  and  thus  publicly  confess  his  sins, 
whereat  he  was  much  ashamed.  The  second  month 
the  account  showed  better.  There  was  steady  pro- 
gress in  virtue  until  the  eighth  month,  when  no 
lies  appeared,  and  there  was  a clean  sheet.  The 
Guru  then  absolved  him  and  granted  him  release 
from  transmigration. 

Lalu,  Balu,  and  Haridas  asked  the  Guru  to  tell 
them  how  they  could  be  saved.  He  replied,  ‘ Banish 
pride,  worldly  love,  and  envy.  Bear  not  ill-will  to 
others,  so  shall  others  bear  not  ill-will  to  you.  Cheer- 
fully meet  and  salute  with  both  hands  the  Guru's 
Sikhs.  Walk  humbly  and  speak  civilly  to  all.  When 
you  eat,  share  your  food  with  others,  and  live  by 
honest  labour.  By  observing  these  instructions  you 
shall  obtain  all  happiness.’ 

The  following  was  the  Guru’s  instruction  to 
a soldier  who  went  to  him  for  spiritual  advice  : 

‘ He  who  exerciseth  bravery  shall  be  fearless  in  the 
battlefield.  He  who  resolveth  to  conquer  or  die  in 
arms,  and  wbo,  when  dying,  claspeth  the  True  Name 
to  his  heart,  shall  efface  the  sins  of  many  births  and 

obtain  deliverance.  'Witbont  temembmn^  God 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  69 

none  shall  obtain  a place  in  the  heroes’  heaven. 
He  who  fearlessly  challengeth  the  foe  and  falleth 
amid  the  clash  of  arms,  shall  feel  the  ecstasy  the 
Jogis  long  for,  and  arrive  at  a permanent  abode  of 
bliss.  Many  pleasures  shall  await  him  as  he  abideth 
in  the  realms  of  the  brave.  The  greatest  merit  of 
a soldier  is  not  to  show  his  back  to  the  enemy. 
A hero  obtaineth  for  himself  bliss  both  here  and 
hereafter  by  the  might  of  his  arms.  If  he  conquer 
he  obtaineth  the  sovereignty  of  the  earth,  while  if 
he  die  celestial  happiness  is  his  portion.  Fight  for 
him  whose  salt  thou  hast  eaten.  Give  tliy  life  for 
thy  sovereign,  and  great  shall  be  thy  fame  in  both 
worlds.’  ^ 

Bhai  Lalu  and  Bhai  Nihalu  were  very  successful 
preachers  and  expounders  of  God’s  word.  The  Guru, 
on  being  asked  how  this  result  was  achieved,  replied 
as  follows  ; ‘ When  the  preacher  practiseth  what  he 
preacheth,  his  words  make  an  impression  on  all. 
People  treasure  them  in  their  hearts  and  thus  obtain 
salvation.  The  tree  must  put  forth  roots  before  it 
can  afford  shade  to  the  wayfarer.  He  who  readeth 
and  preacheth  and  yet  doeth  not  good  acts  himself, 
shall  produce  no  impression  on  others.  They  may 
listen  to  his  words,  but  will  never  act  on  them.’ 

Guru  Arjan  gave  the  following  instructions  to 
Nanu  and  Kalu  : ' He  who  liveth  honestly,  who 
with  good  intentions  readeth  or  listeneth  to  the 
Guru’s  words,  who  pondereth  on  their  meaning, 
who  divesteth  himself  of  evil  inclinations,  and  who 
devoutly  repeateth  the  True  Name,  shall  be  freed 
from  transmigration  and  obtain  an  abode  in  Sach- 
khand ; but  he  who  readeth  for  the  sake  of 
gain  doeth  evil  and  shall  not  be  honoured.  When 
the  snake  obtaineth  the  light  of  the  jewel  in  his 
head,  he  availeth  himself  of  it  to  pick  up  and  eat 
insects  by  night.  Such  is  the  man  who  for  gain 
readeth  sacred  texts.  He  committeth  sinful  acts, 

^ Suraj  Par  hash  t Ras  111,  Chapter  60. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


70 

adultery  with  other  men's  wives,  and  respecteth  not 
the  most  excellent  True  Name.  He  shall  receive  no 
assistance  from  the  Guru,  but  proceed  to  hell  and 
suffer  the  punishment  there  provided  for  the  wicked.’ 

Setha,  Gobinda  and  Bhaga,  residents  of  Chaniot 
in  the  Jhang  district  of  the  Pan  jab,  went  with 
troubled  minds  to  the  Guru  to  inquire  whether  the 
corn  they  had  distributed  in  alms  for  the  repose  of 
the  souls  of  their  ancestors  ever  reached  them.  The 
Guru  replied  in  the  negative,  quoting  in  support 
of  his  decision  the  seventeenth  slok  of  the  Asa  ki 
War.  The  Guru  added  that  they  could  not  know 
whether  their  ancestors  were  in  heaven  or  hell,  so 
it  was  of  no  avail  to  make  them  offerings. 

Paira  and  Jetha  one  day  visited  the  Guru,  and  said 
it  was  their  custom  to  throw  some  of  their  cooked 
food  into  the  fire  before  eating.  The  Guru  denied 
the  necessity  of  throwing  food  into  the  fire.  Men 
need  only  repeat  God’s  name,  ‘ Wahguru ! Wahguru !’ 

In  the  time  of  Guru  Arjan  crowds  were  con- 
verted to  Sikhism  in  the  Panjab,  Hindustan,  and  all 
the  neighbouring  countries.  It  is  said  that  the  hill 
rajas  of  Kulu,  Suket,  Haripur  and  Chamba  visited 
the  Guru,  and  became  his  followers,  as  the  Raja  of 
Mandi  had  previously  done. 

At  that  time  Chandu  Shah  was  the  Emperor’s 
Diwan  or  Financial  Minister.  He  was  a native  of 
the  Pan  jab,  but  his  official  duties  necessitated  his 
residence  in  Dihli.  He  possessed  wealth,  learning, 
and  various  accomplishments,  youth,  high  caste, 
and  above  all,  power  in  the  land.  He  had  a young 
daughter  seven  years  of  age  called  Sada  Kaur,  to 
whom  God  had  given  extreme  beauty  without  the 
good  fortune  which  so  often  accompanies  inferior 
natural  gifts.  One  day  her  mother,  as  she  saw  her 
playing,  said  to  Chandu  : ‘ Our  daughter  is  growing 
to  maturity.  We  ought  to  search  for  a husband  for 
her.  The  Turks  now  hold  sway.  They  practise 
oppression  and  deu'k  deeds,  among  which  is  the 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  71 

forcible  abduction  of  Hindu  virgins.  It  hath  there- 
fore become  a practice  of  the  Hindus  to  marry  their 
daughters  when  very  young,  so  it  is  our  duty  to 
provide  for  Sada  Kaur,  and  form  an  alliance  with 
some  respectable  family.’ 

Chandu  was  of  the  same  opinion,  and  sending  for 
his  family  priest  and  his  barber  ^ ordered  them  to 
go  and  search  for  a suitable  husband  for  his  daughter. 
The  detailed  instructions  usual  in  such  cases  were 
duly  given.  The  priest  and  the  barber  searched  in 
every  city  as  far  as  Peshawar,  but  could  find  no 
suitable  mate  for  Sada  Kaur.  They  then  returned 
and  duly  informed  their  employer  of  their  ill-success. 
The  matter  remained  in  abeyance  for  a time. 

One  of  the  main  objects  of  an  Oriental  woman’s 
anxiety  is  to  procure  the  marriage  of  her  children. 
She  thinks  and  dreams  of  her  supposed  duty  in 
this  respect  almost  from  the  time  of  their  birth. 
Chandu’ s wife  again  addressed  him : ‘ We  must  no 
longer  keep  our  daughter  in  our  house.  Thou  art 
all  day  occupied  with  affairs  of  state.  I can  go 
nowhere,  I sit  at  home  and  think  of  our  daughter’s 
future.  The  more  I see  her,  the  more  I sink  into 
the  pit  of  anxiety.’  Chandu  explained  that  he 
had  already  done  his  best  but  failed.  ‘ Where  there 
was  a boy  of  suitable  age,  his  family  was  not  good 
enough  ; and  where  the  family  was  good  enough  the 
boy  was  not  of  a suitable  age.’  He  admitted  that  his 
daughter  was  a thorn  in  his  side.  She  was  too  old 
to  be  put  to  death.*  At  the  same  time  he  could 
find  no  family  equal  to  his  own.  His  wife  replied, 

‘ Take  God’s  name  and  kill  not  our  daughter.  No 

^ It  is  customary  in  India  to  send  the  family  priest  and  family 
barber  on  such  errands. 

® In  former  times  Indians  of  high  family  frequently  killed  their 
daughters  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  giving  them  in  marriage  to  men  of 
inferior  birth.  The  Sikh  Gurus  resolutely  set  themselves  against  the 
practice.  At  the  time  of  administration  of  the  Pahul  or  Sikh  baptism, 
one  of  the  obligations  imposed  on  neophytes  is  not  to  kill  their 
daughters,  and  to  avoid  all  association  with  those  who  do. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


72 

such  dark  deed  could  be  concealed.  We  must  be 
humble,  for  it  is  usual  for  the  father  of  the  bride 
to  bow  before  the  father  of  the  bridegroom. 

Upon  this  Chandu  again  sent  his  family  priest 
and  his  barber  with  instructions  as  before.  They 
travelled  as  far  as  Lahore,  but  could  not  find  a 
suitable  bridegroom.  There  they  heard  the  good 
report  of  Guru  Arjan’s  son  in  Amritsar,  and  thither 
they  proceeded.  On  arriving  they  were  astonished 
at  the  regal  state  and  retinue  of  the  Guru  of  whom 
the  bard  Mathura  had  sung : — 

In  this  world  there  is  no  such  great  saint  as  lie  ; he  assumed 
birth  to  lighten  the  darkness  of  the  age. 

Millions  of  troubles  have  departed  from  those,  O Mathura, 
who  through  him  have  quaffed  the  nectar  of  the  Name. 

Miss  not  the  road  to  him,  O man  ; think  not  of  any  other. 

God  the  Omnipresent  Brahm  hath  in  person  taken  His 
dwelling  in  Guru  Arjan’s  heart. 

Until  good  fortune  appeared  on  man’s  forehead,  he 
roamed  and  wandered  long  in  transmigration. 

He  was  drowning  in  the  terrible  ocean  of  this  Kal  age  ; but 
now  no  regret  remaineth  him.^ 

The  main  thing  is  this,  Mathura,  that  Guru  Arjan  assumed 
birth  to  save  the  world. 

They  who  repeat  his  hymns  shall  not  again  suffer  the  pain 
of  birth.* 

The  matchmakers’  admiration  of  Har  Gobind  and 
of  the  respect  in  which  he  and  his  father  were  held, 
exceeded  all  bounds.  They  thought  of  proposing  the 
marriage  to  Guru  Arjan  themselves,  but  on  second 
thoughts  decided  on  first  consulting  Chandu. 

The  priest  and  the  barber  reported  to  Chandu  that 
they  had  seen  the  Guru’s  son  in  the  new  city  of 
Amritsar,  and  thought  that  he  would  be  a suitable 
parti  for  Sada  Kaur.  They  dilated  to  Chandu  on 

* Literally,  regret  tiiat  liis  life  was  not  profitable. 

* Sawaiyas  of  the  bard  Mathura  in  praise  of  Guru  Arjan. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  73 

the  excellences  of  Har  Gobind,  ^hose  lineage  they 
gave,  on  the  enormous  respect  in  which  his  father 
was  held,  and  on  the  splendour  they  had  witnessed 
in  the  Guru’s  city.  Chandu  was  not  pleased  at 
hearing  the  Guru’s  praises,  and  said,  ‘ Do  you  think 
him  equal  to  me  ? What  if  he  hath  many  followers  ? 
He  liveth  on  offerings,  which  is  an  ignominious  form 
of  livelihood.  If  the  offerings  come,  the  cup  is  held 
straight ; if  they  do  not  it  is  reversed.  He  sitteth 
and  watcheth,  and  even  if  wealth  cometh,  his 
kitchen  can  with  difficulty  be  supplied.  He  hath 
no  store  of  money.  Such  wealth  is  like  a mountain 
stream.  Whatever  he  appeareth  to  possess,  he  is 
in  reality  only  a beggar,  while  I am  the  Emperor’s 
Minister  by  whom  millions  of  money  are  collected 
and  millions  of  law-suits  decided.  What  power 
hath  he  ? while  on  the  contrary  none  can  reverse  my 
order.  Moreover  the  Guru’s  caste  is  inferior  to 
mine.  O Brahman,  I have  tested  thy  wisdom  and 
knowledge  in  this  matter.  Thou  desirest  to  put  the 
ornamental  tile  of  a top  story  into  a gutter.  Where 
am  I,  imperial  Financial  Minister  ? and  where  is  the 
Guru,  though  he  may  be  an  object  of  veneration  to 
his  followers  ? I think  he  must  have  stuffed  you  both 
with  sweets  ^ that  you  come  to  me  and  propose  an 
alliance  with  his  family.’ 

Chandu’s  wife  who  had  been  listening  said,  ‘ My  lord, 
we  have  been  searching  for  a husband  for  our  daughter 
for  the  last  two  years,  and  no  family  hath  yet  pleased 
thee.  Of  the  boys  thou  hast  seen  none  hath  remained 
un betrothed  or  unwedded.  At  last  we  must  wed  our 
daughter  somewhere.  She  cannot  always  remain 
with  us.  Wherever  she  is  married,  it  must  be  into  a 
family  beneath  ours.  Thou  art  the  greatest  minister 
in  this  empire.  As  everybody  boweth  before  thee, 
so  doth  everybody  bow  before  the  Guru.  Therefore 
let  the  matter  be  now  concluded.  If  our  daughter 
enter  the  Guru’s  house  she  shall  be  called  the  revered 

1 This  is  a euphemism  for  a bribe. 


74 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


wife  of  the  Guru ; and  obtain  the  happiness  which 
God  destined  her.’ 

Chandu  still  urged  his  objections : ‘ The  Guru 
acteth  not  in  conformity  with  the  customs  of  the 
Khatris.  He  shaveth  not,  he  eateth  from  the 
hands  of  men  other  than  Brahmans  and  Khatris, 
and  he  hath  adopted  a new  form  of  religion.’  After 
the  husband  and  wife  had  wrangled  the  whole  night 
over  the  matter,  it  was  at  last  decided  that  Sada 
Kaur  should  be  given  in  marriage  to  Har  Gobind, 
and  the  marriage  presents  duly  dispatched  to 
Amritsar. 

It  came  to  the  ears  of  the  Sikhs  of  Dihli  that 
Chandu  had  used  injurious  expressions  regarding 
the  Guru.  They  also  knew  that  he  did  not  really 
desire  the  alliance,  but  only  consented  in  order  to 
save  himself  from  his  wife’s  importunity.  The  Sikhs 
met  to  consult  over  the  matter,  and  it  was  decided 
to  inform  the  Guru  of  Chandu’s  utterances.  Ac- 
cordingly the  following  letter  was  dispatched,  ‘ O 
true  Guru,  great  king,  Chandu  is  very  proud.  He 
hath  likened  his  house  to  a top  story  and  the  Guru’s 
to  a gutter.  He  hath  called  himself  the  head  and 
thee  the  feet.  He  styleth  himself  a great  minister 
and  thee  a mendicant.  When  he  uttereth  such 
insolent  language  beforehand,  what  will  he  not  do 
in  the  future  ? His  words  are  not  only  slander  of 
thee,  but  of  Guru  Nanak  on  whose  throne  thou  sittest. 
Even  if  he  be  a rich  man  or  a diwan,  what  carest 
thou  for  him  ? In  the  Guru’s  house  rich  and  poor 
are  alike.  The  Sikhs  cannot  endure  his  insulting 
expressions.  As  Guru  Amar  Das  hath  said : — 

Nanak,  it  is  wise  to  break  with  the  perverse  to  whom 
Worldly  love  is  dear.^ 

If  thou  consent  to  an  alliance  with  such  a haughty 
man,  thou  shalt  lay  up  for  thyself  enduring  misery. 
Thou  wantest  for  nothing.  Thou  art  king  of  kings. 

^ Bihagre  ki  War. 


75 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

Our  urgent  request  is  that  thou  pay  no  regard  to 
the  Financial  Minister,  and  that  thou  reject  his 
alliance.’ 

The  messenger  entrusted  with  this  letter  was 
ordered  to  speed  night  and  day  so  that  he  might 
arrive  before  Chandu’s  priest  and  barber  had  con- 
cluded the  contract  of  l^trothal.  He  succeeded  in 
doing  so.  The  Guru,  who  was  a searcher  of  hearts 
and  knew  the  future,  was  aware  that  this  letter  sowed 
the  seed  of  strife  and  had  been  dispatched  to  him 
with  inconsiderate  zeal ; but  at  the  same  time  he  felt 
obliged  to  accept  the  advice  of  the  Sikhs  of  Dihli. 
He  accordingly  rejected  the  marriage  presents, 
telling  the  priest  and  the  barber  that  an  ornamental 
tile  shoxild  not  be  put  into  a gutter.  The  match- 
makers, astonished  to  hear  these  words  repeated, 
defended  their  master  and  remonstrated  to  the  best 
of  their  ability,  but  in  vain.  The  Guru  repeated  to 
them  what  tlae  Dihli  Sikhs  had  written  and  said, 
' I am  contented  with  my  humble  lot,  and  desire  not 
an  alliance  with  the  great.  If  a man’s  foot  slip  on 
the  brink  of  a lofty  tower,  he  falleth  to  the  ground 
a shapeless  mass  ; but  if  a man  slip  on  a mat  he 
sustaineth  no  injury.  Guru  Nanak  hath  said  regard- 
ing himself : — 

Nanak  is  with  those  who  are  low-born  among  the  lowly  ; 

Nay,  who  are  lowest  of  the  low  ; how  can  he  rival  the 
great  ? ’ ^ 

The  Guru  also  quoted  from  one  of  his  own 
hymns : — 

He  who  riseth  high  falleth  into  the  pit — 

Death  reacheth  not  those  who  remain  on  the  ground.** 

While  the  priest  and  the  barber  were  further 
remonstrating,  a Sikh  rose  in  the  assembly  and 
addressed  the  Guru  : ' Great  king,  put  not  acid  into 
milk.  Spurn  an  alliance  with  that  dog  of  a Karar.® 

^ Sri  Rag.  ® Asa. 

® Karar,  aliovc  called  a hania,  means  a petty  Hindu  shopkeeper. 


76  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Let  him  knock  his  head  against  his  top  story.  That 
consumer  of  wealth  of  the  impure  who  revileth  thee 
hath  gone  mad.  Why  demean  thyself  ? Thou  art 
king  of  kings.  What  need  hast  thou  of  such  an 
alliance  ? ’ 

The  Guru  chid  the  Sikh  for  this  language  and 
quoted  from  the  twentieth  slok  of  the  Asa  ki  War : — 

Nanak,  the  mind  and  body  of  him  who  talketh  evil  are  evil : 

He  is  most  evil,  and  most  evil  is  his  reputation. 

The  evil  person  is  rejected  in  God’s  court ; his  face  is 
spat  upon. 

The  evil  person  is  a fool,  and  receiveth  slioe-beatings  as 
punishment. 

‘ Wherefore,’  said  the  Guru,  ‘ it  is  not  proper  for 
Sikhs  to  use  bad  language.  I am  not  proud ; the 
proud  please  not  God.  I am  His  slave.  Our  honour, 
strength,  trust,  and  support  are  in  the  Creator. 
Ever  fear  Him.’ 

Then  in  full  assembly  uprose  a native  of  Dalla,  one 
Narain  Das,  a grandson  of  Bhai  Paro,  who  had  been 
a Sikh  of  Guru  Amar  Das.  Putting  his  sheet  round 
his  neck  in  the  manner  of  a lowly  suppliant,  he  said : 

‘ True  Monarch,  I am  the  slave  of  thy  feet.  I have  a 
daughter  whom  my  wife  and  I have  vowed  to  offer 
thy  son.  If  thou  make  her  too  the  slave  of  thy 
feet,  I shall  be  very  fortunate.  I am  a poor  un- 
honoured Sikh.  Thou  art  the  honour  of  the  un- 
honoured. Make  thy  servant  happy,  and  send  me 
not  disappointed  away.’  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ If 
thou  have  love  in  thy  heart,  then  is  thy  pro- 
posal agreeable  to  me.  The  seventh  day  of  the  light 
half  of  the  month  of  Maghar,  fixed  on  by  Chandu 
as  an  auspicious  date  for  offering  the  marriage 
presents,  hath  not  been  in  vain.’  Upon  this  Narain 
Das  went  off  at  once  and  purchased  marriage  presents 
in  the  city.  They  were  put  into  Har  Gobind’s  lap, 
and  a saffron  tilak  as  a symbol  of  the  completion  of 
the  betrothal  was  affixed  to  his  forehead. 


77 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

Upon  this  another  Sikh  called  Hari  Chand  stood 
up,  and  said,  ‘ O true  king,  I have  also  decided  to 
give  my  daughter  to  thy  son.  If  my  petition  please 
thee,  I will  give  my  daughter  as  a servant  to  Har 
Gobind,  and  thy  reputation  as  cherisher  of  the  poor 
shall  shine  the  brighter.’  Guru  Arjan,  also,  though 
at  first  unwilling  to  accept  a second  wife  for  his  son, 
felt  he  could  not  reject  the  offer  of  a faithful  Sikh, 
and  so  agreed  to  the  marriage  of  the  young  people. 
Moreover  Hari  Chand  had  refused  all  other  alliances 
for  his  daughter,  and  vowed  to  bestow  her  only  on 
the  young  Guru.^  Hari  Chand  went  immediately 
and  brought  the  marriage  presents.  These  were 
placed  in  Har  Gobind’s  lap  and  a patch  attached 
to  his  forehead  as  before.  All  this  took  place  in  the 
presence  of  Chandu’s  priest  and  barber,  who  returned 
sad  and  disappointed  to  their  master. 

The  seventh  day  of  the  light  half  of  the  month  of 
Magh,  Sambat  i66i,  was  fixed  for  Narain  Das’s 
daughter’s  marriage — practically  a betrothal — to  Har 
Gobind ; Narain  Das  went  to  his  village  and  made 
all  preparations  for  the  wedding.  Songs  expressing 
a hope  that  the  bridegroom  may  outlive  the  bride, 
were  sung  by  the  women  of  his  household.  The 
following  hymn,  setting  forth  the  humility  of  the 
bride  and  her  devotion  to  the  bridegroom,  was  also 
sung  on  the  occasion  : — 

0 God,  Thou  hast  no  love  for  me  ; Thou  hast  so  many 
handmaidens  like  me. 

^ Up  to  the  time  of  Guru  Arjan  the  Gurus  were  so  trusted  and  held 
in  such  high  estimation  that  religious  people  frequently  thought  it  their 
duty  to  vow  to  them  their  lives,  their  children,  and  their  property. 
Several  Sikhs  used  on  the  birth  of  daughters  to  register  oaths  that  they 
would  only  bestow  them  on  the  Guru  or  his  relations.  Girls  so 
dedicated  were  always  styled  mothers  by  the  Sikhs,  and  none  might 
marry  them  except  those  to  whom  they  were  vowed.  The  Guru 
therefore  felt  bound  to  meet  the  wishes  and  vows  of  the  Sikhs  so 
solemnly  made.  This  to  a large  extent  will  explain  the  polygamy  of 
some  of  the  Gurus. 


78  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Thou  art  an  ocean  and  mine  of  jewels  ; I know  not  Thy 
worth. 

I know  not  Thy  worth  ; Thou  art  very  wise  ; be  gracious 
unto  me,  0 Lord. 

Mercifully  grant  me  wisdom  to  meditate  on  Thee  during 
the  eight  watches  of  the  day. 

0 my  soul,  be  not  proud,  become  the  dust  0/  men’s  feet, 
and  thou  shalt  obtain  deliverance. 

Nanak’s  God  is  over  all ; He  hath  many  handmaidens 
like  me. 

Thou  art  the  jewel  of  a very  deep  and  profound  sea  ; Thou 
art  my  husband,  I am  Thy  bride. 

In  proportion  as  Thou  art  very  great — yea,  more  exalted 
than  the  great — I am  small. 

1 am  nothing  ; Thou  art  the  only  One  ; Thou  art  wise  of 
Thyself. 

0 God,  if  Thou  cast  on  me  even  for  a moment  Thine 
ambrosial  glance,  I shall  survive  and  enjoy  all  delights  and 
sweetness. 

I,  the  slave  of  Thy  slaves,  am  under  the  protection  of  Thy 
feet ; my  soul  bloometh  and  my  body  groweth  young. 

Nanak’s  Lord  is  contained  in  all  things  : He  doeth  what 
He  pleaseth. 

Thou  art  my  pride  ; Thou  art  my  strength. 

My  understanding,  intellect,  and  skill  are  Thy  gifts  ; what 
Thou  causest  me  to  know  I know. 

It  is  he  on  whom  the  Creator  casteth  a look  of  favour  who 
knoweth  and  understandeth. 

The  perverse  woman  hath  gone  astray  on  many  paths,  and 
hath  been  ensnared  by  worldly  occupations. 

She  who  is  virtuous  is  pleasing  to  God  ; she  enjoyeth  all 
pleasure. 

0 Lord,  Thou  art  Nanak’s  support;  Thou  art  Nanak’s  pride. 

1 am  a sacrifice,  I devote  myself  to  Thee ; Thou  art  my 
belter  firm  as  a mountain. 

I am  hundreds  of  thousands  of  times  a sacrifice  to  him 
who  hath  removed  the  curtain  of  error  from  before  me. 

My  darkness  is  dispelled  ; I have  renounced  sin,  and  my 
soul  is  reconciled  with  the  Lord. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  79 

I have  plccLsed  the  Lord  ; I care  for  no  one  ; my  hfe  hath 
been  profitable  and  I am  accepted. 

I have  become  a priceless  jewel  of  great  weight ; the  gate 
of  happiness  in  this  world  and  the  next  hath  opened  for  me. 

Saith  Nanak,  I have  become  fearless  ; God  hath  become 
my  shelter.^ 


Chapter  IX 

When  the  priest  and  the  barber  returned  to  Dihli 
they  told  Chandu  everything  they  had  heard  and 
seen  in  Amritsar — the  Guru’s  refusal  and  the  reason 
thereof,  the  abuse  of  Chandu  uttered  by  the  Sikh 
in  Darbar,  the  betrothal  of  Har  Gobind  and  the 
actual  appointment  of  a time  for  his  marriage. 
Chandu  was  naturally  very  much  incensed,  but  he 
wrote  the  Guru  a letter,  in  which  as  a matter  of 
policy  he  concealed  his  resentment.  He  began 
by  magnifying  the  Guru  and  demeaning  himself, 
and  then  continued : ‘ It  is  certainly  true  that 
I said  thou  art  of  inferior  caste  to  me.  This  expres- 
sion thoughtlessly  escaped  my  mouth,  and  some 
one  hath  written  and  exaggerated  it,  and  made 
thee  displeased  with  me.  Thou  art  now  the  most 
worshipful  Guru  in  the  world,  and  it  is  right  for 
thee  to  consider  everything.  It  is  not  proper  for  thee 
to  fall  out  with  me  for  what  lunatics  and  base  people 
tell  thee.  If  I interest  myself  for  thee  with  the 
Emperor,  he  too  will  be  at  thy  service.  I can  give 
a large  dowry  to  my  daughter.  Retain  for  thy  son 
the  other  girls  with  whom  thou  hast  formed  alliances, 
and  accept  mine  also.  Great  people  contract  many 
marriages.  If  thou  tell  me  I used  overbearing 
language,  I may  or  may  not  have  done  so  ; but  it  was 
in  my  own  private  house  and  not  meant  for  others 
to  hear.  Your  people  in  public  darbar  have  called 
me  a dog.  Well,  let  bygones  be  bygones,  and  I will 
^ Guru  Arjan,  Suhi  Chhant. 


8o  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

have  many  favours  conferred  on  thee  by  the  Emperor. 
Thou  art  already  on  bad  terms  with  thy  brother 
Prithi  Chand.  Thou  oughtest  to  make  me  an  ally. 
If  thou  fall  out  with  me  too,  thou  shalt  nowhere  find 
an  abiding-place.  There  are  now  sparks  flying  about. 
If  they  increase  there  will  be  a blazing  fire  which 
it  will  be  difficult  to  extinguish.  Thou  shalt  not 
again  have  this  opportunity.  And  if  thou  hast 
called  me  a dog  I may  become  mad,  and  do  thee 
harm  contrary  to  my  saner  judgement.’ 

Chandu  dispatched  this  letter  by  the  hands  of  the 
Brahman.  The  Guru'  having  read  it  said : ‘ It  is 
pride  that  ruineth  men.  Pride  of  wealth  is  the  basis 
of  all  ills.  Man  must  suffer  for  his  acts.  Now  know 
that  Chandu  must  not  form  an  alliance  with  us. 
They  whom  the  Creator  joineth  are  united ; but 
they  whom  man  joineth  are  not.  It  is  the  Guru’s 
rule  to  comply  with  the  wishes  of  his  Sikhs.  Their 
words  are  immutable.  What  they  once  reject,  it  is 
not  proper  again  to  accept.  Even  were  I to  consent 
to  Chandu’s  alliance,  no  good  could  result.  He 
tempteth  me  with  gain,  but  who  would  forfeit  his 
soul  therefor  ? As  for  his  threats,  I have  no  fear 
of  them.  God  alone  is  the  guardian  of  all.’  The 
priest  returned  with  this  message  without  being  able 
to  prevail  on  the  Guru  to  alter  his  determination. 

The  Guru  then  made  all  preparations,  and  invited 
guests  to  his  son’s  wedding  with  Narain  Das’s 
daughter.  He  even  invited  his  own  brother  Prithi 
Chand,  but  the  invitation  was  refused.  The  marriage 
was  duly  celebrated  with  all  suitable  ceremony  and 
rejoicing. 

The  women  of  Narain  Das’s  household  sang  the 
following  composition  of  the  bridegroom’s  father  on 
the  occasion  of  the  marriage  ; — 

It  is  a time  of  rejoicing,  I sing  my  Lord  ; 

I have  heard  of  the  imperishable  Bridegroom,  and  joy  hath 
arisen  in  my  heart. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  8i 

My  mind  longeth  to  know  when  I shall  be  fortunate  enough 
to  meet  the  perfect  Lord. 

Grant  me,  O my  friend  Guru,  understanding  to  know  when 
I shall  meet  God  and  be  absorbed  in  Him. 

Day  and  night  I stand  and  wait  to  find  by  what  way  I may 
obtain  the  Lord. 

Nanak  prayeth,  have  mercy  and  attach  me  to  the  hem  of 
Thy  garment.^ 

Prithia  addressed  himself  to  the  qazis  and  pan- 
dits who  bore  enmity  to  the  Guru  on  account  of  his 
compilation  of  the  Granth,  and  induced  them  to 
complain  to  the  Emperor  Akbar  that  Guru  Arjan 
had  compiled  a book  in  which  the  Muhammadan 
priests,  prophets,  and  leaders,  and  the  Hindu  incar- 
nations and  gods,  were  spoken  of  with  contempt. 
Akbar  was  at  that  time  touring  in  the  Panjab  and 
the  complaint  of  the  qazis  and  the  pandits  was 
placed  before  him  by  Chandu  on  his  arrival  in 
Gurdaspur.  Chandu  supported  the  complaint  by 
saying  that  he  knew  the  charges  were  based  on 
facts.  Upon  this  the  Emperor  ordered  that  Guru 
Arjan  and  his  Granth  should  be  produced  before  him. 
The  Guru  did  not  go  himself,  but  sent  Bhai  Budha 
and  Bhai  Gur  Das  to  read  to  him  from  it.  The  first 
hymn  which  caught  the  Emperor’s  eye  was  the 
following  of  Guru  Arjan’s  own  composition  in  the 
Persian  language  : — 

From  earth  and  light  God  made  the  world  ; 

The  sky,  earth,  trees  and  water  are  God’s  creation. 

O man,  whatever  the  eye  can  behold  is  perishable. 

The  world  is  an  eater  of  carrion,  neglectful  of  God  and 
greedy  of  mammon. 

Like  an  ogre  or  a beast  it  killeth  and  eateth  forbidden 
food.* 

Restrain  thy  heart,  or  the  Omnipotent  will  take  and  punish 
thee  in  hell. 

^ Bilawal  Chhant. 

* Also  Vianslated — The  world  fmen')  is  like  a demon  or  a beast ; 
it  killeth  what  is  unlawful  and  eateth  carrion. 


82 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


When  Azrail  shall  seize  thee,  of  what  avail 

Shall  patrons,  brothers,  courts,  possessions,  and  mansions 
be? 

The  pure  God  knoweth  thy  condition. 

Slave  Nanak,  utter  thy  prayer  to  the  holy  man  to  guide 
thee} 

The  Emperor  on  hearing  this  said  it  was  a very 
proper  hymn.  The  qazis  and  pandits  represented 
that  the  hymn  was  specially  selected  for  the 
Emperor’s  hearing,  and  begged  him  to  procure  some 
one  else  to  read  the  Granth  to  him,  none  among 
them  being  acquainted  with  the  Gurumukhi  charac- 
ters in  which  the  sacred  volume  is  written.  The 
Emperor  turned  over  its  pages  himself,  and  pointing 
to  a particular  spot  asked  Gur  Das  to  read  from  there. 
On  this  the  hymn  already  given,  beginning  ‘ O 
servant  of  God  the  Inscrutable  ’,  was  read  to  His 
Majesty. 

The  Emperor  on  hearing  this  was  much  pleased. 
Chandu,  however,  was  not  to  be  thwarted.  He 
said  that  Gur  Das  had  repeated  this  from  memory. 
The  Emperor  must  have  the  Granth  read  to  him 
by  some  one  else  who  knew  Gurumukhi.  Chandu 
found  a man  called  Sahib  Diyal,  who  possessed  the 
necessary  knowledge.  Chandu  turned  over  the 
leaves  of  the  Granth  and  told  him  to  read  the  hymn 
he  pointed  out.  The  hymn  was  the  following  : — 

Thou  fastenest  a stone  to  thy  neck, 

And  seest  not  God  who  dwelleth  in  the  heart. 

O infidel,  thou  wanderest  astray  in  error  : 

Thou  churnest  water  and  shalt  die  in  agony. 

The  stone  which  thou  callest  God 

Shall  take  thee  with  it  and  drown  thee. 

O sinner,  untrue  to  thy  salt. 

It  is  not  a boat  of  stone  which  will  ferry  thee  over. 

On  meeting  the  Guru,  Nanak  recognizeth  the  Lord. 


^ Tilang. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  83 

The  Arranger  is  contained  in  the  water,  the  dry  land,  the 
nether  regions,  and  the  firmament.^ 

When  the  Emperor  heard  this,  he  was  still  more 
pleased  with  the  teaching  of  the  Granth,  and  dis- 
pleased with  the  Guru’s  slanderers  and  enemies. 
He  then  gave  his  decision  : ‘ Excepting  love  and 
devotion  to  God  I so  far  find  neither  praise  nor 
blame  of  any  one  in  this  Granth.  It  is  a volume 
worthy  of  reverence.’  He  then  made  an  offering 
to  it  of  fifty-one  gold  muhars  and  gave  Bhai  Budha 
and  Bhai  Gur  Das  dresses  of  honour  for  themselves 
and  a third  for  Guru  Arjan.  He  told  them  to  give 
his  respectful  salutations  to  the  Guru,  and  promised 
to  go  to  visit  him  when  he  was  returning  from 
Lahore  whither  he  was  then  proceeding. 

When  Chandu  and  his  party  heard  the  Emperor’s 
decision  and  his  message  to  the  Guru,  their  faces 
became  pale  and  they  hung  down  their  heads  through 
shame.  All  good  people  cursed  Chandu,  and  his  evil 
reputation  spread  from  house  to  house.  The  Emperor, 
true  to  his  word,  visited  the  Guru  on  his  return 
journey  to  Dihli,  and  was  charmed  with  his  saintly 
bearing.  He  was  also  so  pleased  with  the  imposing 
and  beautiful  temple  which  the  Guru  had  con- 
structed, and  the  delightful  melodies  to  which  the 
hymns  of  the  Gurus  had  been  set,  that  words  failed 
him  to  express  his  gratification.  He  called  himself 
the  Guru’s  slave  and  asked  for  instruction  to  render 
him  happy  and  secure  peace  for  his  soul.  The  Guru 
then  repeated  for  him  the  following  hymn  : — 

One  man  invoketh  Ram,  another  Khuda  ; 

One  man  worshippeth  Gosain,  another  Allah  ; 

Some  speak  of  the  Cause  of  causes,  others  of  the  Benevolent. 

Some  talk  of  the  Extender  of  mercy,  others  of  the  Merciful. 

Some  bathe  at  the  Hindu  sacred  places,  others  visit  Makka. 

Some  perform  the  Hindu  worship,  others  bow  their  heads 
in  the  Muhammadan  fashion. 

^ Suhi. 

* A gold  muhar  is  now  about  the  value  of  an  old  English  guinea. 

G2 


84  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Some  read  the  Veds,  others  the  Musalman  books. 

Some  wear  white,  others  blue. 

Some  call  themselves  Hindus,  others  Musalmans. 

Some  aspire  to  the  heaven  of  the  Hindus,  others  to  the 
heaven  of  the  Muhammadans  ; 

But  he  who  recognizeth  God’s  will,  saith  Nanak, 

Knoweth  the  secret  of  the  Lord  God.^ 

The  Emperor  partook  of  the  Guru’s  hospitality, 
and  prayed  to  be  allowed  to  make  a contribution  to 
his  large  expenditure,  so  that  thereby  he  might 
secure  spiritual  and  temporal  welfare  and  happiness. 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ The  welfare  and  happiness  of 
monarchs  depend  on  cherishing  their  subjects  and 
doing  justice.  The  monarch  whose  subjects  are  happy 
shall  himself  be  happy  in  this  life,  and  in  the  next 
obtain  praise,  glory,  and  honour.’ 

The  .Emperor  remitted  the  revenues  of  the  Panjab 
for  that  year  in  compliment  to  the  Guru,  who  repre- 
sented that  there  was  a severe  famine  in  the  land 
and  the  cultivators  required  His  Majesty’s  considera- 
tion. The  Guru’s  fame  and  influence  largely  increased 
owing  to  the  respect  the  Emperor  had  shown  him. 
This,  in  the  words  of  the  chronicler,  was  the  cause  of 
such  agony  to  Prithia  as  would  last  till  it  had  taken 
his  life  with  it. 

Badaoni  states  that  on  another  occasion,  namely, 
the  thirteenth  of  the  month  of  Azur  (Jamadi  ul  sani), 
Akbar,  with  a gorgeous  military  retinue,  crossed  the 
Bias  and  went  to  Goindwal  to  visit  Guru  Arjan, 
whose  teaching  and  character  he  appreciated. 
Badaoni  also  writes  that  people  reverenced  the  suc- 
cessive Gurus  as  spiritual  leaders,  and  solicited  their 
benedictions. 

Unfortunately  for  the  Guru  the  tolerant  Emperor 
Akbar  died  soon  after,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son 
Jahangir.  Jahangir’s  son  Khusro,  nominated  to  the 

^ Ramkali.  The  words  in  the  first  part  of  the  lines  of  this  hymn  are 
Hindi,  and  refer  to  the  Hindus  and  their  worship.  The  words  in  the 
second  part  are  Arabic,  and  refer  to  Muhammadans  and  their  worship. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  85 

throne  by  Akbar  in  supersession  of  Jahangir,  claimed 
the  Pan  jab  and  Afghanistan,  which  his  father  was 
unwilling  to  concede  him.  Jahangir  accordingly 
desired  to  obtain  possession  of  Khusro’s  person,  but 
Khusro  escaped  from  Agra  pursued  by  the  Imperial 
army,  and  directed  his  steps  towards  Afghanistan. 
On  the  way  he  visited  the  Guru  at  Tarn-Taran  and 
begged  him  to  grant  him  pecuniary  assistance. 
The  Guru  said  he  had  money  for  the  poor,  but  not 
for  princes.  Khusro  replied  with  great  humility 
that  he  himself  was  now  very  poor,  needy,  and 
unfriended,  and  had  not  even  travelling  expenses. 

Guru  Arjan,  seeing  the  Prince’s  evil  plight  and 
humility,  took  compassion  on  him.  He,  moreover, 
felt  friendly  to  the  Prince,  who  had  visited  him  a few 
times  previously  with  the  Emperor  Akbar  ; and  he 
also  felt  a debt  of  gratitude  to  the  Prince’s  grand- 
father, the  late  monarch,  so  he  gave  him  five  thousand 
rupees  to  defray  his  expenses  to  Kabul.  Khusro, 
however,  was  seized  by  the  imperial  troops  as  he  was 
crossing  the  Jihlam,  and  taken  in  chains  to  his  father. 

Prithia  managed  to  retain  Sulahi  Khan’s  assistance 
and  co-operation  to  ruin  the  Guru.  Sulahi,  on  the 
pretext  of  having  to  collect  revenue  in  the  Pan  jab, 
obtained  leave  from  the  Emperor  to  proceed  thither. 
On  his  way  he  visited  Prithia  in  his  village  of  Kotha. 
Under  the  pretence  of  hunting  they  spent  their  time 
concocting  plans  for  the  Guru’s  destruction. 

The  Guru,  on  hearing  of  the  further  conspiracies 
of  his  enemies,  composed  the  following  : — 

Death  laugheth  over  man’s  head,  but,  brute  that  he  is, 
he  knoweth  it  not. 

Involved  in  quarrels,  pleasures,  and  pride,  he  thinketh 
not  of  death. 

Serve  thy  true  Guru  ; why  wander,  O luckless  one  ? 

On  beholding  the  brilliant  safflower,  why  make  the  mistake 
of  attaching  thyself  to  it  ? 

Constantly  sinning  thou  hast  accumulated  wealth  to  use 
it  thyself  ; 


86  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

But  thou  shalt  depart  naked,  and  thy  dust  shall  be  blended 
with  dust. 

They  for  whom  thou  didst  take  trouble  are  at  variance 
and  enmity  with  thee. 

At  the  last  hour  they  will  flee  from  thee  ; why  burnest 
thou  with  wrath  ? 

He  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny  hath  been  written, 
becometh  the  dust  of  the  holy  man’s  feet. 

Saith  Nanak,  by  seeking  the  protection  of  the  true  Guru 
man  is  released  from  his  bonds.^ 

One  day  Prithia  took  Sulahi  to  admire  some  brick- 
kilns he  had  made.  On  arriving,  Sulahi' s horse 
started  at  the  accidental  flight  of  a bird  from  under 
his  feet,  and  ran  with  his  rider  straight  into  a kiln 
in  full  blast.  In  a few  minutes  horse  and  rider 
became  a mass  of  cinders.  On  hearing  of  this  event 
the  Guru  composed  the  following  : — 

If  any  one  flout  the  poor  by  stroking  his  beard  at  them. 

The  supreme  God  will  burn  him  in  the  fire. 

The  Creator  who  protecteth  His  servant 

Hath  administered  perfect  justice. 

Before  and  through  the  ages  His  glory  was  manifest — 

The  calumniator  died  in  great  agony. 

None  saveth  him  who  is  accursed  of  God  : 

In  this  world  and  the  next  evil  shall  be  his  reputation. 

(iod  embraceth  and  protecteth  His  servant  : 

Nanak,  meditate  on  God’s  name,  and  seek  His  slielter. 

The  Guru  composed  the  following  also  on  the 
same  subject : — 

God  preserved  me  from  Sulahi. 

Sulahi  by  no  means  succeeded  ; Sulahi  died  unclean. 

God  drew  forth  His  axe  and  smote  off  his  head,  and  in  a 
moment  he  became  ashes. 

He  was  consumed  ever  meditating  evil ; He  who  created 
him  thrust  him  into  the  fire. 

^ Bilawal. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  87 

Son,  friend,  wife,  nothing  remaineth  for  him  now ; his 
brethren  and  relations  have  aJJ  abandoned  him. 

Saith  Nanak,  I am  a sacrifice  to  that  God  who  fulfilled 
the  words  of  His  servant.^ 

The  following  was  uttered  by  the  Guru  on  the 
same  occasion  : — 

The  slanderer  by  the  Guru’s  favour  hath  been  turned  away. 

God  the  supreme  Being  was  merciful : He  killed  him  with 
unerring  arrow. 

Death  and  Death’s  noose  cannot  affect  me  since  I have 
established  the  sect  of  the  True  One. 

The  jewel  of  God’s  name  I have  earned  as  wealth,  whicli 
will  never  decrease  by  eating  and  spending. 

In  one  moment  the  slanderer  became  ashes  and  obtained 
his  deserts. 

Nanak  foretold  what  was  hidden ; the  whole  world  saw 
the  truth  of  his  prophecy.** 

Prithi  Chand  was  naturally  most  displeased  at 
the  death  of  his  faithful  ally  in  evil.  In  the  meantime 
Chandu  was  considering  how  he  could  procure  the 
marriage  of  his  daughter  with  Har  Gobind  or  avenge 
himself  on  the  Guru.  He  accordingly  wrote  to 
Prithia  to  request  him  to  use  all  his  influence  to 
bring  about  the  marriage,  and  in  the  event  of  his 
failure  threatened  to  confiscate  the  fief  he  had 
recently  obtained  from  the  Emperor.  Prithia,  how- 
ever, required  no  threats ; he  was  only  too  willing 
to  assist  Chandu  in  his  nefarious  designs.  He  wrote 
in  reply  that  Arjan,  who  had  deprived  him  of  his 
rights,  was  already  his  enemy ; and  he  would  be  only 
too  happy  to  assist  in  meting  him  adequate  punish- 
ment. He  begged  Chandu  to  use  his  influence  with 
the  Emperor  to  bring  the  Guru  to  justice.  On 
receiving  this  letter  Chandu  summoned  Prithia  to 
Dihli.  There  they  both  concocted  a plan  to  induce 
the  Emperor  by  some  means  to  visit  the  Panjab, 
where  they  would  have  an  opportunity  of  entering 

^ Bilawal.  ^ Todi. 


88 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


into  some  conspiracy  against  the  Guru.  Chandu 
informed  the  Emperor  of  the  abundance  of  game 
in  the  Lahore  district,  and  also  explained  that 
Lahore  would  be  a convenient  place  to  rest  on  the 
Emperor’s  way  to  Kashmir,  where  he  ought  to  spend 
the  summer  on  account  of  the  beauty  of  its  scenery 
and  the  salubrity  of  its  climate.  Upon  this  Prithia 
returned  home. 

Chandu’s  scheme  proved  successful.  In  a short 
time  the  Emperor  proceeded  to  the  Panjab.  On 
reaching  the  Bias  he  encamped  on  its  banks  and 
went  a-hunting.  Chandu,  in  conversation  with  him, 
represented  that  there  were  several  thieves  in  the 
country  who,  during  the  night,  had  stolen  some  of 
the  Emperor’s  property.  The  Emperor  inquired 
how  thieves  could  exist  in  his  empire.  Chandu 
replied  that  the  Emperor  had  a rival  in  the  Panjab, 
namely  Guru  Arjan,  who  entertained  thieves  and 
exercised  independent  authority.  Upon  this  the 
Emperor  issued  an  order  to  the  Guru  through  Sulabi 
Khan,  nephew  of  the  late  Sulahi  Khan,  to  abstain 
from  such  practices.  The  Guru’s  business,  he  said, 
was  to  restrain  others  from  evil,  and  it  behoved  him 
not  to  do  evil  himself.  Chandu  wrote  on  his  own 
account  to  Sulabi  Khan  to  endeavour  to  induce  the 
Guru  to  consent  to  the  marriage  alliance,  and  also 
to  grant  a more  liberal  distribution  of  property  and 
offerings  to  Prithia  than  had  been  formerly  agreed 
on.  Sulabi  Khan  went  to  Amritsar  to  endeavour  to 
carry  out  these  measures. 

^^en  the  Sikhs  heard  of  Sulabi  Khan’s  intention 
they  proposed  that  they  should  be  allowed  to  kill  him, 
but  they  were  dissuaded  by  the  Guru.  He  was  already 
sufficiently  armed  and  protected  against  his  enemies. 
On  that  occasion  he  composed  the  following : — 

Humility  is  my  mace, 

And  being  the  dust  of  the  dust  of  all  men’s  feet  my  two- 
edged  sword  : 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  89 

These  no  evil  doer  can  withstand. 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  arranged  this  matter.^ 

On  Sulabi’s  journey  to  Amritsar  his  party  fell  in 
with  a Saiyid  who  was  accompanied  by  several 
Pathans.  The  Saiyid  represented  to  him  that  these 
Pathans  had  been  in  his  uncle  Sulahi  Khan’s  service, 
and.  that  a year’s  salary  was  due  to  them.  Sulabi  put 
them  off  with  excuses,  whereupon  an  affray  arose. 
Sulabi’s  escort,  reverencing  the  Saiyid  as  a descendant 
of  the  Prophet,  did  not  strenuously  defend  their 
master,  and  he  was  killed.  When  Chandu  heard 
of  Sulabi  Khan’s  death  he  represented  to  the  Emperor 
that  it  had  been  done  through  the  machinations  of 
the  Guru.  He  added  that  the  Guru  had  perpetrated 
many  other  misdeeds.  For  instance,  he  had  deprived 
his  elder  brother  Prithia  of  the  Guruship,  and  had 
endeavoured  to  deprive  the  Hindus  and  Muham- 
madans of  their  religions.  Prithia  had  made  com- 
plaints in  person  to  the  late  Emperor,  who  promised 
to  summon  the  Guru  when  he  visited  the  Panjab. 
When  His  Majesty  on  one  occasion  did  visit  the 
Panjab,  he  had  not  time  to  make  the  necessary 
inquiry  into  the  charges  against  Guru  Arjan,  but 
now  was  the  time  to  do  so.  The  Guru  only  became 
bolder  with  delay  and  impunity.  Upon  this  the 
Emperor  ordered  Chandu  to  send  for  Prithia,  and 
he  accordingly  did  so.  Prithia  was  overjoyed  on 
receiving  the  invitation.  On  the  way  he  for  some 
business  of  his  own  visited  Tarn  Taran,  where  the 
Sikhs  invited  him  to  bathe.  He  said  that  the  Guru’s 
tank  there  was  only  a common  pool,  and  he  would 
only  bathe  in  his  own  tank  at  Hehar.  Thither  he 
accordingly  proceeded,  and  after  bathing  in  it  and 
eating  a surfeit  at  dinner,  he  got  cramp  in  the 
stomach,  and  died  the  same  night. 

Mihrban,  son  of  Prithia,  took  advantage  of  the 
Guru’s  gift  to  Khusro  to  rouse  the  ire  of  the  Emperor 

^ Sorath. 


90 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


against  the  Guru.  He  informed  Chandu  of  it,  and 
Chandu  informed  the  Emperor,  adding  that  the 
Guru  had  blessed  Khusro  and  promised  him  that 
he  should  become  Emperor.  Chandu  also  represented 
to  the  Emperor  that,  if  he  did  not  have  Khusro 
quickly  arrested,  the  pretender  would  receive  great 
military  assistance  from  the  followers  of  the  Guru. 
The  people  of  the  Panjab,  he  said,  were  all  highway 
robbers.  The  pandits  and  the  qazis  also  thought 
it  a favourable  opportunity  to  institute  new  pro- 
ceedings against  the  Guru  on  the  old  charge  of 
having  compiled  a book  which  blasphemed  the 
worship  and  rules  of  the  Hindus  and  the  prayers 
and  fastings  of  the  Muhammadans.  By  such  accusa- 
tions Chandu  induced  the  Emperor  to  summon  Guru 
Arjan.  Chandu’s  heart  was  now  gratified,  for  he 
knew  he  had  at  last  secured  his  revenge. 


Chapter  X 

The  Guru  now  felt  that  his  enemies  were  vic- 
torious and  that  his  end  was  near,  but  he  was  confi- 
dent at  the  same  time  that  the  vials  of  God’s  wrath 
would  burst  on  their  heads.  Before  his  departure 
for  Lahore  he  appointed  his  son  Har  Gobind  his 
successor  with  all  ancient  ceremony  and  formality, 
and  gave  him  injunctions  suitable  for  the  occasion. 
The  Guru  then  addressed  his  wife  Ganga : ‘ This 
body  abideth  not  for  ever.  Wherefore  a wise  person 
should  not  love  it.  Whatever  is  born  perisheth,  and 
whatever  is  high  falleth  sooner  or  later.  This 
is  nature’s  law.  To  love  the  body  is  a grievous 
error.  All  bodies  daily  grow  old  and  preserve  not 
their  original  strength.  From  a child  one  groweth 
to  be  a man,  and  then  cometh  old  age,  which  seizeth 
on  the  body  and  causeth  it  to  waste  away  until 
it  falleth  into  its  final  sleep.  Live  thou  when  I am 
gone,  mourn  not  for  me,  and  make  no  effort  of 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  91 

thine  own  to  separate  thy  soul  from  thy  body.’  The 
latter  was  an  injunction  not  to  cremate  herself  on 
his  death. 

The  Guru  took  with  him  Bhai  Bidhi  Chand, 
Bhai  Langaha,  Bhai  Paira,  Bhai  Jetha,  and  Bhai 
Pirana.  The  Emperor  J ahangir  was  at  first  disposed 
to  treat  the  Guru  with  respect,  but  Chandu  reminded 
him  of  the  Guru’s  pecuniary  assistance  to  Khusro. 
The  Emperor  then  addressed  him : ‘ Thou  art  a 
saint,  great  teacher,  and  holy  man ; thou  lookest 
on  all,  rich  and  poor,  alike.  It  was  therefore  not 
proper  for  thee  to  give  money  to  my  enemy  Khusro.’ 
The  Guru  replied : ‘ I regard  all  people,  whether 
Hindu  or  Musalman,  rich  or  poor,  friend  or  foe, 
without  love  or  hate ; and  it  is  on  this  account  that 
I gave  thy  son  some  money  for  his  journey,  and 
not  because  he  was  in  opposition  to  thee.  If  I 
had  not  assisted  him  in  his  forlorn  condition,  and 
so  shown  some  regard  for  the  kindness  of  thy  father 
the  Emperor  Akbar  to  myself,  all  men  would  despise 
me  for  my  heartlessness  and  ingratitude,  or  they 
would  say  that  I was  afraid  of  thee.  This  would 
have  been  unworthy  of  a follower  of  Guru  Nanak, 
the  world’s  Guru.’ 

The  conclusion  of  this  speech  was  not  calculated 
to  soothe  the  Emperor’s  feelings.  He  ordered  the 
Guru  to  pay  a fine  of  two  lakhs  of  rupees,  and  also 
to  erase  the  hymns  in  his  Granth  which  were  opposed 
to  the  Hindu  and  Musalman  religions.  The  Guru 
replied : ‘ Whatever  money  I have  is  for  the  poor,  the 
friendless,  and  the  stranger.  If  thou  ask  for  money 
thou  mayest  take  what  I have ; but  if  thou  ask  for  it 
by  way  of  fine  I shall  not  give  thee  even  a kauri,  for  a 
fine  is  imposed  on  wicked  worldly  persons  and  not  on 
priests  and  anchorets.  And  as  to  what  thou  hast  said 
regarding  the  erasure  of  hymns  in  the  Granth  Sahib, 
I cannot  erase  or  alter  an  iota.  I am  a worshipper 
of  the  Immortal  God,  the  Supreme  Soul  of  the  world. 
There  is  no  monarch  save  Him ; and  what  He  re- 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


92 

vealed  to  the  Gurus,  from  Guru  Nanak  to  Guru  Ram 
Das,  and  afterwards  to  myself,  is  written  in  the  holy 
Granth  Sahib.  The  hymns  which  find  a place  in  it 
are  not  disrespectful  to  any  Hindu  incarnation  or 
any  Muhammadan  prophet.  It  is  certainly  stated 
that  prophets,  priests,  and  incarnations  are  the  handi- 
work of  the  Immortal  God,  whose  limit  none  can 
find.  My  main  object  is  the  spread  of  truth  and 
the  destruction  of  falsehood ; and  if,  in  pursuance 
of  this  object,  this  perishable  body  must  depart,  I 
shall  account  it  great  good  fortune.’ 

The  Emperor  made  no  reply,  but  rose  and  left  the 
hall  of  audience.  After  this  a magistrate  informed 
the  Guru  that  he  must  pay  the  fine  or  be  imprisoned 
in  default.  When  the  Sikhs  of  Lahore  heard  this 
decision,  they  proposed  to  unite  and  raise  a sub- 
scription to  discharge  the  Guru’s  obligation.  The 
Guru  would  not  agree,  and  sent  them  word,  that  who- 
ever contributed  to  pay  the  fine  imposed  on  him 
should  be  deemed  a pervert,  and  would  for  the 
sake  of  momentary  gratification  imperil  his  future 
salvation.  Men  devoted  to  religion,  the  Guru  said, 
never  paid  fines.  Fines  were  for  thieves,  adulterers, 
slanderers,  and  robbers.  As  the  Guru  would  not 
allow  the  fine  to  be  paid,  he  was  placed  under  the 
surveillance  of  Chandu.  The  qazis  and  Brahmans 
offered  the  Guru  the  alternative  of  being  put  to 
death  or  of  expunging  the  alleged  objectionable 
passages  in  the  Granth  Sahib  and  inserting  the 
praises  of  Muhammad  and  of  the  Hindu  deities. 

The  Guru  replied,  ‘ The  Granth  Sahib  hath  been 
compiled  to  confer  on  men  happiness  and  not  misery 
in  this  world  and  in  the  next.  It  is  impossible  to 
write  it  anew,  and  make  the  omissions  and  altera- 
tions you  require.’  On  hearing  this  the  Guru’s 
enemies  concluded  that  he  would  yield  to  no  ordinary 
threats,  so  they  put  fetters  on  him,  and  began  to 
torture  him  in  various  ways.  They  poured  burning 
sand  on  him,  seated  him  in  red-hot  caldrons,  and 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  93 

bathed  him  in  boiling  water.  The  Guru  bore  all 
this  torture  with  equanimity  and  never  uttered 
a sigh  or  groan.  He  was  given  another  opportunity 
to  recant  and  comply  with  the  demands  of  his 
enemies.  He  replied,  ‘ 0 fools,  I shall  never  fear 
this  treatment  of  yours.  It  is  all  according  to  God’s 
will;  wherefore  this  torture  only  affordeth  me 
pleasure.’  On  this  occasion  the  Guru  repeated  the 
following : — 

The  egg  of  superstition  hath  burst ; the  mind  is  illumined  : 

The  Guru  hath  cut  the  fetters  off  the  feet  and  freed  the 
captive. 

My  transmigration  is  at  an  end. 

The  heated  caldron  hath  become  cold ; the  Guru  hath 
given  the  cooling  Name. 

Since  the  holy  man  hath  been  with  me,  Death's  myrmidons, 
who  lay  in  wait  for  me,  have  left  me. 

I have  been  released  from  him  who  restrained  me  ; what 
shall  the  judge  do  to  me  now  ? 

The  load  of  my  karma  is  removed  ; I am  freed  therefrom. 

From  the  sea  I have  reached  the  shore ; the  Guru  hath 
done  me  this  favour. 

True  is  my  place,  true  my  seat,  and  truth  I have  made 
my  special  object. 

Truth  is  tlie  capital ; truth  the  stock-in-trade  which  Nanak 
hath  put  into  his  house.^ 

When  Chandu  threatened  to  put  the  Guru  to 
further  torture  he  addressed  him  as  follows  ; — 

The  earth,  the  firmament,  and  the  stars  are  under  the 
influence  of  fear  ; over  their  heads  is  unchanging  law. 

Wind,  water,  and  fire  are  under  the  influence  of  fear ; so, 
too,  is  helpless  Indar. 

There  is  only  the  one  God  without  fear,  as  I have  heard. 

He  who  meeting  the  Guru  singeth  God’s  praises,  is  happy 
and  ever  at  peace. 


^ Maru. 


94 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Corporeal  beings  and  gods  are  under  the  influence  of  fear  ; 
Sidhs  and  their  disciples  have  died  through  fear. 

The  eighty-four  lakhs  of  beings  which  die  and  are  born, 
which  again  and  again  are  yoked  to  wombs,  are  under  the 
influence  of  fear. 

All  beings  which  Thou,  0 God,  hast  created  subject  to  the 
qualities  of  passion,  goodness,  and  darkness  are  under  the 
influence  of  fear. 

The  helpless  Lakshmi  ^ who  produceth  illusion  is  under  the 
influence  of  fear,  and  greatly  so  is  Dharmraj . 

All  things  are  filled  with  fear — it  is  only  the  Creator  who 
is  devoid  of  it. 

Saith  Nanak,  God  is  the  Companion  of  saints ; saints 
adorn  His  court,®  and  are  therefore  without  fear. 

Several  J ogis  and  religious  men  who  had  met  the 
Guru  and  appreciated  his  sincerity  and  exalted 
doctrines,  went  to  condole  with  him  in  his  afflictions. 
Mian  Mir,  the  Moslem  saint  of  Lahore,  also  went 
and  contributed  his  sympathetic  tears.  He  found 
the  Guru’s  body  all  blistered  and  suppurated,  and 
requested  his  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Emperor  for 
his  release  and  the  punishment  of  his  torturers.  The 
Guru  requested  him  to  cast  his  eyes  towards  heaven. 
On  doing  so,  it  is  said,  Mian  Mir  saw  angels  begging 
the  Guru’s  permission  to  destroy  the  wicked,  the 
proud,  and  the  perverse.  Mian  Mir  on  beholding 
this  supernatural  vision  asked  the  Guru  why,  when 
he  possessed  superhuman  power,  he  consented  to 
endure  suffering  at  the  hands  of  such  vile  sinners. 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ I bear  all  this  torture  to  set  an 
example  to  the  teachers  of  the  True  Name,  that  they 
may  not  lose  patience  or  rail  at  God  in  affliction. 
The  true  test  of  faith  is  the  hour  of  misery.  Without 
examples  to  guide  them  ordinary  persons’  minds 
quail  in  the  midst  of  suffering.  In  the  second  place, 
if  he  who  possesseth  power,  within  him  defend  not 

^ Lakshmi,  is  here  called  Kaula  (Kamala)  or  the  dweller  on  the  lotus. 

® Maru. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  95 

his  religion  by  the  open  profession  thereof,  the  man 
who  possesseth  no  such  power  will  when  put  to  the 
torture  abjure  his  faith.  The  sin  will  light  on  the 
head  of  him  who  hath  the  power  but  showeth  it  not ; 
and  God  will  deem  him  an  enemy  of  religion.  In 
the  third  place,  the  body  is  naturally  subject  to  woe 
and  weal,  but  not  the  spirit.  The  body  is  perishable, 
the  soul  imperishable.  To  set  aside  by  the  exercise 
of  supernatural  power  the  law  of  nature  which 
applieth  to  all  things  perishable,  and  thereby  to 
engender  pride  in  the  heart,  would  be  supreme  folly.’ 
Mian  Mir  on  hearing  this  departed  commending  the 
Guru’s  fortitude  and  singing  his  praises. 

Upon  this  the  Guru’s  enemies  again  applied  them- 
selves to  his  torture.  They  kept  him  for  three  hours 
seated  in  a caldron  heated  by  a blazing  fire.  The 
Guru’s  life  was  well-nigh  extinct,  but  he  would  not 
even  submit  to  Chandu’s  conditions,  namely,  to  allow 
his  son  Har  Gobind  to  marry  Chandu’s  daughter. 

The  Guru  repeated  the  following  also  during  the 
period  of  his  torture  : — 

Sri  R/tg  Ashtapadi 

When  very  great  troubles  befall,  and  nobody  receiveth 
one ; 

When  enemies  pursue,  and  relations  flee  away  ; 

When  all  from  whom  man  looked  for  assistance  have  fled, 
and  all  succour  is  at  an  end. 

If  he  then  remember  God,  no  hot  wind  shall  strike  him. 

God  is  the  strength  of  the  strengthless. 

He  neither  cometh  nor  goeth  ; He  is  permanent  ever  ; by 
the  Guru’s  instruction  know  Him  as  the  True  One. 

If  man  be  weak  from  the  pangs  of  nakedness  and  hunger. 

If  he  have  not  a paisa  in  his  purse,  and  there  be  none  to 
console  him. 

If  no  one  gratify  his  aims  and  desires,  and  he  be  never 
successful. 

Yet*  if  he  remember  God,  he  shall  obtain  a permanent 
kingdom. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


96 

If  any  one  have  excessive  anxiety  and  bodily  suffering, 

If  bound  up  in  household  and  family,  he  feel  alternate  joy 
and  sorrow. 

If  he  wander  in  every  direction,  and  cannot  rest  even  for 
a moment. 

Yet  if  he  think  upon  God,  his  body  and  soul  shall  be 
happy. 

Man  may  be  in  the  power  of  lust,  wrath,  and  covetousness  ; 
he  may  become  a miser  through  love  of  greed  ; 

He  may  have  committed  the  four  great  sins  ^ and  all  venial 
sins  ; he  may  be  a demon  to  destroy  ; 

He  may  never  have  listened  to  sacred  books,  hymns,  and 
poetry  ; 

Yet  shall  he  be  saved  if  he  think  upon  God  and  repeat  His 
name  even  for  a moment. 

Even  though  man  repeat  by  heart  the  Shastars,  the 
Simritis,  and  the  four  Veds  ; 

Though  he  be  a penitent,  a leader  of  penitents,  or  a Jogi 
and  have  made  all  pilgrimages  ; 

Though  he  perform  the  six  duties  twice  over,  though  he 
bathe  and  perform  worship. 

Yet  if  he  love  not  the  supreme  God,  he  shall  assuredly  go 
to  hell. 

Man  may  have  empire,  dominion,  and  principality  ; enjoy- 
ments may  be  scattered  around  him  ; 

He  may  have  delightful  and  beautiful  gardens,  and  his 
orders  may  be  such  as  cannot  be  disobeyed  ; 

He  may  have  merriment  and  spectacles  of  many  descrip- 
tions, and  he  may  continue  devoted  to  pleasure  ; 

Yet  if  he  think  not  of  the  supreme  God,  he  shall  be  born 
again  as  a serpent. 

Man  may  be  very  wealthy  ; he  may  be  attentive  to  cere- 
monial duties  ; his  reputation  and  conduct  may  be  ostensibly 
spotless ; 

He  may  love  his  mother,  father,  children,  brothers  and 
friends  ; 

Armies  in  full  panoply  and  all  men  may  show  him  honour  ; 

^ Guru  Amar  Das  gives  in  his  additional  sloks  the  four  sins  which 
the  Hindus  believe  to  be  the  most  heinous. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN  97 

Yet  if  he  think  not  of  the  supreme  God,  he  shall  be  taken 
and  consigned  to  the  abode  below. 

Man’s  body  may  have  no  disease  or  blemish  ; he  may  have 
no  heart-burning  or  grief  ; 

He  may  not  think  of  death,  but  day  and  night  enjoy  him- 
self ; 

He  may  have  made  everything  his  own  and  fear  no  one  ; 

Yet  if  he  think  not  of  the  supreme  God,  he  shall  fall  into  the 
power  of  Death’s  myrmidons. 

He  to  whom  the  supreme  God  is  merciful  obtaineth  the 
society  of  the  saints. 

The  more  that  association  increaseth,  the  greater  his  love 
for  God. 

He  is  the  I.ord  of  both  worlds  ; there  is  no  resting  place 
but  in  Him. 

If  the  true  Guru  be  pleased,  Nanak  shall  obtain  the  true 
Name. 

A daughter-in-law  of  Chandu,  daughter  of  a pious 
Sikh,  who  had  heard  of  the  Guru’s  torture,  con- 
sidered what  she  could  do  to  save  him  whom  her 
father  had  ever  reverenced,  and  from  whom  he  had 
ever  obtained  the  object  of  his  desires.  She  said 
to  herself,  ‘ The  Guru  hath  eaten  nothing,  and  not 
even  drunk  water  or  slept  for  several  days.  Accursed 
is  my  life  in  this  house  that  I hear  of  the  Guru’s 
torture,  and  still  see  the  light  of  day  ! ’ She  prepared 
some  sharbat  and  took  it  in  the  dead  of  night  secretly 
to  the  Guru’s  prison.  When  stopped  by  the  sentry 
on  guard,  she  drew  forth  a piece  of  jewellery  and  gave 
it  to  him.  He  allowed  her  to  pass  with  strict  injunc- 
tions to  return  quickly.  She  told  the  Guru  who  she 
was : ‘ Recognize  in  me  the  daughter  of  a Sikh  of 
thine.  I am  wife  of  the  sinner’s  (Chandu’s)  son, 
but  I ought  never  to  have  been  married  to  him. 
I must  have  committed  some  great  sin  in  a previous 
existence,  and  this  is  the  result  of  it.  Hence  I desire 
to  live  no  longer.  Take  this  sharbat  and  also  eat 
something.  Look  on  me  as  thy  slave,  and  have 
pity  on  me.’ 

SIKH,  in  H 


98 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Hail  to  thee  who  hast  so  much 
devotion  ! Thou  hast  now  but  few  days  to  live  and 
thou  mayest  accompany  me.  Keep  thy  secret  to 
thyself.  I cannot  take  food  or  drink  from  Chandu’s 
house.’  On  hearing  this,  the  lady  begged  him  to 
take  her  as  his  companion  to  the  unknown  world. 

Chandu  was  all  night  meditating  further  torture 
for  the  Guru.  He  said  to  himself,  ‘ The  Guru  mani- 
festeth  no  pain  under  ordinary  torture,  therefore  I 
will  cause  him  further  suffering.’  Notwithstanding 
all  the  tortures  employed,  the  Guru  would  not  abate 
a jot  of  his  determination. 

For  five  days  the  Guru  suffered  torture  and  then 
asked  permission  to  bathe  in  the  Ravi  and  take  his 
five  Sikh  companions  with  him.  Chandu  might 
afterwards  order  what  he  thought  fit.  Chandu  was 
very  pleased  at  the  Guru’s  proposal  and  said,  ‘ When 
the  Guru’s  body  is  cool  after  bathing,  he  will  certainly 
consent  to  his  son’s  alliance  with  my  daughter.’  He 
accordingly  granted  the  Guru’s  request  and  said, 
‘ Thy  life  shall  be  saved,  if  thou  hearken  to  my 
words.’ 

Chandu  sent  with  his  prisoner  an  escort  of  soldiers 
armed  with  swords  and  matchlocks.  He  ordered  them 
to  keep  a close  watch  on  the  Guru.  They  were  not  to 
speak  to  any  one  on  the  way  lest  they  should  reveal 
the  Guru’s  sufferings.  They  also  received  orders  not 
to  allow  the  Guru  to  make  any  detour,  but  proceed 
straight  on,  and  not  halt  before  he  had  arrived  at 
the  bank  of  the  river.  While  the  Guru  was  bathing 
and  subsequently  drying  himself,  the  soldiers  were 
not  to  address  him  or  interrupt  him  in  any  way. 
They  were  then  to  return  with  him  and  keep  him 
and  his  Sikhs  in  front  of  them  so  that  he  might  not 
escape. 

The  Guru  enveloped  himself  in  a long  sheet  and 
set  forth.  The  whole  of  his  body  was  blistered,  and 
the  soles  of  his  feet  sore  and  festered.  Looking 
where  he  might  tread  with  the  least  pain  he  pro- 


99 


LIFE  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

ceeded  very  slowly.  Seeing  his  servant  Pirana  near 
him  he  leaned  on  his  shoulder,  and  emerged  from 
the  city  by  a wicket  opening  towards  the  river. 
Several  people  bowed  as  he  passed.  The  bystanders 
were  astonished  on  seeing  him  weak  from  hunger 
and  suffering,  and  said,  ‘ In  what  a state  the  Guru 
is  travelling  ! ’ His  mind  however  appeared  collected 
and  fixed  on  divine  meditation  as  in  his  earlier  and 
happier  days.  His  devotion  like  a mountain  which 
cannot  be  moved  was  in  no  way  affected  by  his 
bodily  pain. 

On  arriving  with  very  slow  and  painful  steps  at 
the  Ravi  he  took  up  some  of  its  cold  water — recently 
melted  from  Himalayan  ice — and  bathed  his  feet  and 
hands  therewith.  He  then  went  into  the  water  and 
bathed  his  whole  body.  Meanwhile  he  recited  with 
great  devotion  the  Japji,  which  confers  salvation 
on  Sikhs.  His  men,  who  were  like  a halo  round  him, 
followed  his  example.  The  Guru  bowed  at  the  end 
of  his  devotions  and  thus  addressed  his  Sikhs ; 
‘ I have  succeeded  in  effecting  the  object  of  my  life. 
Go  to  my  son  the  holy  Har  Gobind,  and  give  him 
from  me  ample  consolation.  Bid  him  not  mourn 
or  indulge  in  unmanly  lamentations  but  sing  God's 
praises.  Let  him  also  restrain  from  grief  the  other 
members  of  my  family.  Let  him  sit  fully  armed 
on  his  throne,  and  maintain  an  army  to  the  best  of 
his  ability.  Let  him  afiix  the  patch  of  Guruship  to 
his  forehead  according  to  ancient  custom,  and  ever 
treat  his  Sikhs  with  the  utmost  courtesy.  Let  him 
hold  Bhai  Budha  in  honour,  and  in  all  respects, 
except  the  wearing  of  arms  hereby  enjoined,  adopt 
the  practices  of  the  preceding  Gurus.  Cremate  not 
my  body,  but  let  it  flow  on  the  bosom  of  this  river. 

Having  thus  spoken  the  Guru  observed  a minstrel 
approach  with  a two-stringed  instrument,  and  invited 
him  to  take  a seat  on  a pleasant  spot  near  the  riVer, 
sing  the  Guru’s  hymns,  and  accompany  himself  on 
his  instrument.  The  minstrel  accordingly  began 


100 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


to  sing  with  great  feeling  and  expression,  whereupon 
the  heavenly  hosts  thronged  to  listen,  to  witness  the 
Guru’s  departure,  and  to  congratulate  him  on  his 
victory  over  torture  and  tyranny.  Some  recounted 
the  Guru's  deeds,  while  others  listened  with  admira- 
tion. They  vowed  that  the  earth  itself  had  not 
such  patience  as  the  Guru.  There  was  nothing 
animate  or  inanimate  to  be  compared  with  him. 
‘ He  hath  shown  extreme  patience  and  endurance, 
though,  had  he  chosen  to  exercise  his  miraculous 
power,  he  might  have  averted  his  sufferings.  He 
hath  never  meditated  retaliation  on  his  enemy ; his 
praise  suits  none  but  himself  for  having  endured 
extreme  suffering  and  heeded  it  not.  He  now  cometh 
to  us  to  abide  in  glory  and  bliss  after  his  earthly 
misery.’ 

The  Guru’s  death,  occurred  on  the  fourth  day  of 
the  light  half  of  the  month  Jeth,  Sambat  1663 
(June,  A.  D.  1606). 

When  Chandu’s  daughter-in-law  heard  of  the 
Guru’s  death  she  too  abandoned  her  body,  as  if  it 
were  a worthless  blade  of  grass.  Her  corpse  remained 
concealed  in  her  chamber  and  none  knew  that  her 
spirit  had  accompanied  the  Guru’s  in  its  heavenly 
flight. 

Thus  did  Guru  Arjan  for  his  sanctity,  his  conver- 
sion of  the  Hindus  and  Muhammadans,  his  compila- 
tion of  the  Granth  Sahib  and  his  assistance  to  the 
grandson  of  his  former  benefactor,  fall  a victim 
to  the  bigotry  and  inhumanity  of  a Muhammadan 
emperor.^ 

^ The  statement  of  the  author  of  the  Dabistan-i-Mazahib  on 
the  subject  of  Guru  Arjan  is  as  follows : — ‘ Guru  Arjan  blessed  the 
Emperor’s  son  Khusro  who  had  risen  in  rebellion  against  his  father, 
and  when  Khusro  was  arrested  the  Emperor  ordered  Guru  Arjan  also 
to  be  punished  and  a large  fine  imposed  on  him.’  This  the  Guru 
was  unable  to  pay,  and  he  was  subsequently  imprisoned  in  what  the 
historian  calls  the  sandy  country  of  Lahore,  where  he  died  from  the 
effects  of  the  heat  and  the  tortures  inflicted  on  him  by  those  who 
sought  to  realize  the  fine  imposed. 


GURU  ARJA^ 


LIFE  OF  GURU  AI^AN  loi 

The  temple  dedicated  to  the  Guru  in  Lahore  bears 
the  following  inscription  of  his  own  composition  : — 

Perform  ablution,  remember  your  God,  and  your  minds 
and  bodies  shall  be  free  from  disease.  * 

Millions  of  obstacles  shall  be  removed  by  God’s  protec- 
tion, and  good  fortune  shall  dawn  on  you. 

I have  uttered  the  compositions  and  the  hymns  of  God. 

O my  brethren,  ever  sing,  listen,  and  read  them,  and  the 
perfect  Guru  will  preserve  you. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

Sri  Rag 

Life  is  uncertain  and  man  ought  to  repent  be- 
times : — 

Though  only  a guest  for  a ghari  or  two,  man  arrangeth  his 
affairs. 

He  is  absorbed  in  mammon  and  lust  ; and,  fool  that  he 
is,  knoweth  not  that  he  is  but  a guest, 

* He  only  repenteth  after  his  departure,  and  so  falleth  into 
the  power  of  Death  the  executioner. 

0 blind  man,  thou  art  sitting  on  a falling  bank. 

If  thou  art  so  fated  from  the  beginning,  then  act  according 
to  the  Guru’s  instruction. 

The  Owner  ^ may  gather  the  crop  whether  it  be  green,  half- 
ripe,  or  ripe  and  fit  to  be  cut. 

The  reapers  ^ make  preparations,  bring  sickles,  and  arrive 
on  the  ground. 

They  cut  the  crop  as  it  is  measured  out  to  them  when  the 
Landlord  giveth  orders. 

The  first  watch  of  night  is  gone  in  business  ; during  the 
second  man  sleepeth  his  fill ; 

The  third  is  passed  in  idle  discourse  ; and  at  the  fourth 
the  morning  dawneth. 

He  who  gave  soul  and  body  never  entereth  into  man’s 
mind. 

1 sacrifice  and  devote  my  life  to  the  society  of  the  saints, 

Through  whom  understanding  entered  my  heart,  and  I 

met  God  the  Omniscient. 

Know  that  Kanakhath  ever  seen  God  who  is  the  Searcher 
oi  hearts  with  him. 

1 God. 


2 Death’s  mj^rmidons. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  103 
The  attributes  of  God : — 

I love  that  true  One  who  dieth  not  or  sulfereth  transmi- 
gration ; 

Who,  being  contained  in  everything,  will  not  be  separated 
from  me  though  I separate  from  Him  ; 

Who  removeth  the  pain  and  sorrow  of  the  poor,  and  truly 
loveth  His  servant. 

Wonderful  is  the  form  of  the  Pure  One  ; the  Guru  hath 
caused  me  to  meet  Him,  O my  mother. 

0 my  brethren,  be  friends  with  such  a God. 

Accursed  is  the  love  of  worldly  things ; no  one  attached 
to  them  appeareth  happy. 

God  is  wise,  generous,  mild,  beautiful,  and  infinite  ; 

He  is  the  companion,  the  helper,  exceeding  great,  exalted, 
and  altogether  without  limit  ; 

He  is  not  known  as  young  or  old  ; everlasting  is  His 
court. 

Wliat  we  ask  Him  we  obtain  ; He  is  the  support  of  the 
weak. 

On  beholding  Him  sins  vanush,  and  the  soul  and  body  are 
at  peace. 

If  man  with  single  mind  meditate  on  Him,  mental  doubts 
shall  be  dispelled. 

He  is  the  treasury  of  excellences  ; ever  new  and  complete 
are  His  gifts. 

Ever  and  ever  adore  Him;  forget  Him  not  by  day  or 
night : 

He  is  the  companion  of  those  who  arc  so  destined  from  the 
beginning. 

Devote  your  body,  your  soul,  and  your  wealth  all  unto 
Him;  sacrifice  your  whole  life  unto  Him. 

He  beholdeth.  He  heareth,  He  is  ever  present,  He  pervadeth 
every  heart. 

He  cherisheth  even  the  ungrateful ; 0 Nanak,  God  is  ever 
the  Pardoner. 

God's  beneficence : — 

Ever  and  ever  remember  God  and  clasp  Him  to  tby  heart, 
who  gave  thee  soul,  body,  and  wealth,  and  adorned  thee  ; 


104  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Who  constructed  all  the  materials  of  thy  body  and  infused 
into  it  immortal  light. 

O my  soul,  there  is  none  but  God. 

Ever  remain  under  God’s  protection  and  thou  shalt  feel 
no  sorrow. 

Jewels,  wealth,  gems,  gold,  and  silver  are  all  dust. 

The  affinities  of  mother,  father,  sons,  and  kinsmen  are  all 
false. 

The  perverse  man,  unclean  beast  that  he  is,  knoweth  not 
Him  who  made  him  : 

He  deemeth  that  God  who  is  within  and  around  him  is 
distant ; 

Avarice  clingeth  to  him,  and  his  heart  is  attached  to  pride 
and  falsehood. 

Boatfuls  of  persons  without  devotion  or  God’s  name  come 
and  go. 

0 God,  the  Creator,  mercifully  preserve  man  and  Thine 
other  creatures. 

There  is  no  protector  but  Thee  ; very  unfeeling  is  the  god 
of  death. 

Saith  Nanak,  O God,  have  mercy  on  me  that  I may  not 
forget  Thy  name. 

Nothing  can  be  concealed  from  the  omnipotent 
God : — 

In  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet  are  found  the  merits  of 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  pilgrimages,  fastings,  and  morti- 
fications. 

From  whom  canst  thou  hide  thine  evil  deeds,  since  God 
ever  present  beholdeth  thee  ? 

My  God  pervadeth  and  filleth  every  place. 

True  is  His  empire,  true  His  authority,  and  truest  of  the 
true  ^ His  seat. 

The  True  One  exerteth  true  power  in  the  creation  of  the 
world. 

Nanak,  repeat  the  true  Name  to  which  I am  for  ever  and 
ever  a sacrifice. 

^ In  this  hymn  as  in  many  passages  of  the  Granth  Sahib  the  word 
true  means  eternal. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  105 

The  Guru  counsels  the  rejection  of  worldly 
pleasures : — 

Deeming  the  pleasures  of  the  world  sweet,  man  partaketh 
of  them,  but  they  prove  to  have  a bitter  taste. 

He  causeth  his  brethren  and  friends  to  love  him  heartily  ; 
he  is  vainly  devoted  to  sinful  pleasures. 

These  shall  pass  away  in  a trice,  and  he  shall  be  astonished 
without  the  Name. 

O my  soul,  apply  thyself  to  the  service  of  the  true  Guru. 

Whatever  is  seen  is  perishable,  abandon  thy  perversity. 

As  a mad  dog  runneth  in  every  direction. 

So  the  avaricious  man  distinguisheth  not,  but  eateth  both 
what  is  allowed  and  what  is  forbidden. 

He  who  feeleth  lust,  wrath,  and  pride  shall  enter  the  womb 
again  and  again. 

Mammon  hath  spread  out  her  net  and  placed  a bait  within 
it  : 

The  greedy  bird  is  snared  and  cannot  escape,  my  mother. 

Man  knoweth  not  Him  who  made  him  ; wherefore  he  shall 
suffer  transmigration  again  and  again. 

This  world  hath  in  many  ways  and  forms  bewitched  man. 

He  who  is  preserved  by  the  omnipotent  and  eternal  Being 
shall  be  saved. 

The  people  of  God  are  saved  by  their  love  for  Him  ; to 
them  Nanak  is  ever  a sacrifice. 

Man  during  his  brief  measure  of  life  ought  to 
practise  devotion  : — 

When  the  herdsman  goeth  only  for  a few  days  to  the  pasture 
ground,  why  should  he  prefer  a claim  to  it  ? 

When  thy  time  is  completed,  thou  must  depart  ; yet  thou 
art  arranging  thy  household  affairs.^ 

O man,  sing  God’s  praises  and  serve  the  true  Guru  with 
love. 

Why  art  thou  proud  of  a trifle  ? 

Like  the  guest  of  a night  thou  shalt  depart  in  the  morning. 

^ Also  translated — Arrange  thy  household  affairs ; that  is,  make 
preparation  for  thy  journey. 


io6  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Why  art  thou  attached  to  thy  family  ? everything  is 
short-lived  as  the  flowers  of  the  garden. 

Why  ever  speak  of  thy  property  ? Long  for  the  God  who 
gave  it  thee. 

Thou  must  assuredly  depart  and  leave  thy  lakhs  and 
karors. 

Having  wandered  among  the  eighty-four  lakhs  of  exist- 
ences, thou  hast  at  last  obtained  human  life  so  difficult  to 
obtain. 

Nanak,  remember  thou  the  Name  ; the  day  of  thy  departure 
is  near. 

While  life  remains  learn  wise  conduct : — 

0 body,  as  long  as  the  soul  thy  companion  is  with  thee,  so 
long  thou  livest  happily. 

When  thy  companion  departeth,  thou  shalt  be  blended 
with  the  dust. 

If  thou  have  felt  love  of  God  and  a desire  to  behold  Him, 
blest  shall  be  thine  abode. 

As  long  as  the  soul  dwelleth  with  thee,  every  one  will  say 
‘ Sir,  Sir,’  to  thee  ; 

But  when  it  departeth  no  one  will  care  for  thee. 

Serve  thy  Bridegroom  in  thy  father’s  house,  and  thou  shalt 
abide  in  happiness  in  thy  father-in-law’s. 

Having  met  the  Guru,  learn  wise  conduct ; and  sorrow 
shall  never  befall  thee. 

All  must  go  to  their  father-in-law’s  ; God  taketli  every 
one  away. 

Nanak,  blest  is  that  happy  wife  who  loveth  the  Bride- 
groom. 

Some  moral  injunctions  : — 

Store  up  God’s  wealth,  worship  the  true  Guru,  and  renounce 
all  sin. 

Remember  that  God  who  made  and  adorned  thee,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved. 

O man,  repeat  the  name  of  the  one  eternal  God, 

Who  gave  thee  soul,  mind,  and  body,  and  who  is  the 
support  of  the  heart. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  107 

The  world  is  intoxicated  with  the  prevailing  lust,  wrath, 
and  pride. 

Enter  the  asylum  of  the  saints,  fall  at  their  feet,  and  thy 
misery  and  mental  blindness  shall  be  removed. 

The  practice  of  truth,  patience,  and  mercy  is  the  best  work 
man  can  accomplish. 

He  to  whom  God  the  Formless  One  granteth  grace,  re- 
nounceth  pride  and  becometh  the  dust  of  all  men’s  feet. 

Whatever  is  seen,  the  extension  of  creation,  is  all  Thou, 
0 God. 

Saith  Nanak,  the  Guru  hath  cut  away  doubt ; and  I con- 
sider all  things  God. 

The  Guru  addresses  God  as  a child  his  father  : — 

Relying  on  Thee,  O Beloved,  I have  been  tnade  happy. 

Even  if  I have  gone  astray,  I am  Thy  child,  0 God  ; 
Thou  art  my  father  and  mother. 

It  is  easy  to  talk. 

But  to  act  as  Thou  pleasest  is  difficult. 

In  Thee  I repose  mine  honour  and  my  strength  ; I know 
Thee  as  mine. 

Thou  art  within  and  without  everything  ; Thou  needest 
nothing,  O Father. 

0 Father,  I know  not  Thy  ways. 

God  freeth  me  from  entanglements,  O saints,  and  cherisheth 
love  for  me. 

The  Lord  hath  been  merciful,  and  my  transmigration  is 
at  an  end. 

On  meeting  the  Guru,  Nanak  hath  recognized  the  Supreme 
God. 

Ashtapadi 

Better  seek  God's  protection  than  join  any  of  the 
current  Indian  religious  sects  : — 

1 know  not  what  things  please  the  Lord  ; 

O my  soul,  seek  His  way. 

The  meditator  practiseth  meditation. 

He  who  is  possessed  of  knowledge  may  employ  his  know- 
ledge. 

Yet  few  know  God. 


io8  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Bhagauti  ^ acteth  according  to  the  rules  of  his  sect ; 

The  Jogi  claimeth  that  he  alone  is  emancipated  ; 

The  Penitent  is  absorbed  in  his  penance  ; 

The  Silent  observe  silence  ; 

The  Sanyasi,  the  Brahmachari, 

And  the  Hermit  are  devoted  to  their  lonely  lives  ; 

The  Bhagats  worship  in  nine  ways  ; ^ 

The  Pandits  shout  the  Veds  ; 

The  householders  who  practise  household  duties, 

The  Eksabdis,®  Bahurupias,"*  the  Audhuts, 

The  Kaprias,  the  Kautas,  the  Jagutas®  all  plume  themselves 
on  their  religious  merits. 

Some  bathe  at  places  of  pilgrimage. 

The  Nirahars  fast  ; the  Aparasas  touch  nothing  they  deem 
impure  ; 

Some  hide  and  do  not  allow  themselves  to  be  seen. 

Some  in  their  own  estimation  know  everything  : 

Nobody  admitteth  any  deficiency  in  himself. 

All  say  that  they  have  found  God  ; 

But  it  is  only  the  saint  whom  God  uniteth  with  Himself. 

All  the  above-mentioned  efforts 

I abandon,  and  seek  God’s  protection  ; 

Nanak,  I fall  at  the  Guru’s  feet. 

The  Guru  confesses  the  benefits  he  has  received 
from  God : — 

1 fall  at  God's  feet  to  conciliate  Him  ; 

^ The  Bhagauti  in  the  Sikh  writings  is  a worshipper  of  God. 
In  the  Guru’s  time  the  Bhagautis  appear  to  have  formed  a separate 
sect. 

2 Bhagats  enumerate  nine  forms  of  devotion.  They  are  shrawan, 
or  hearing  God’s  praises ; kJratan^  singing  God's  praises ; stmiran. 
remembering  God ; bandan,  prostration  before  God  ; ddsaiwa^  menial 
service  of  God  ; sakkyaiwa^  believing  God  to  be  one’s  companion  ; 
archan^  invocation  of  God ; diam  naiwedan^  sacrificing  one’s  life  for 
God ; pddsewatiy  worship  of  God’s  feet. 

^ The  Eksabdis,  on  going  to  a house  for  alms,  repeat  the  one  word 
‘ Algikh  ’ or  Alekh,  the  Invisible.  If  they  receive  nothing,  they  walk 
quietly  away. 

^ The  BahurupTas  and  Kautas  are  men  who  perform  in  religious 
dramas.  ® Men  who  watch  at  night. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  109 

The  true  Guru  hath  blended  me  with  God  ; there  is  none 
so  great  as  He. 

The  Lord  of  the  earth  is  my  Beloved  ; 

He  is  dearer  to  me  than  mother,  father, 

Sisters,  brothers,  and  all  friends  ; there  is  none  like  Thee, 
O God. 

By  Thine  order  Sawan  ^ hath  come, 

And  1 have  yoked  the  plough  of  truth. 

I begin  to  sow  the  Name  in  the  hope  that  God  in  His  bene- 
ficence will  cause  it  to  yield  heaps  of  corn. 

Having  met  the  Guru,  I recognize  the  one  God  ; 

I know  nothing  of  any  one  else. 

God  appointed  me  to  the  one  duty;^  as  it  pleaseth  Him, 
so  I perform  it. 

Do  you,  my  brethren,  eat  and  enjoy  yourselves ; 

The  Guru  hath  invested  me  with  a robe  of  honour  in  God’s 
court. 

I have  become  master  in  my  own  village  ; ^ I have  taken 
its  five  claimants  ^ captive. 

I have  entered  Thine  asylum,  O God, 

The  five  claimants  have  now  become  my  tenants. 

None  of  them  can  interfere  with  me  Nanak,  the  village 
is  now  thickly  populated.® 

I am  a sacrifice  and  devote  myself  to  Thee, 

0 my  Sovereign  ; on  Thee  alone  I meditate. 

Thou  hast  re-peopled  a ruined  village : I am  a sacrifice 
unto  Thee. 

1 continually  meditate  on  God,  the  Beloved, 

And  thus  obtain  the  fruit  my  heart  desireth. 

God  hath  arranged  all  mine  affairs  and  appeased  the 
hunger  of  my  soul. 

1 have  abandoned  all  mine  avocations, 

^ The  month  when  the  rains  begin  in  India.  Here  it  means 
human  life. 

2 To  lead  men  to  holiness. 

^ That  is,  my  own  body. 

^ The  five  evil  passions  or  deadly  sins  who  claim  a partnership  in 
ihe  village  of  i)\e  body. 

® Literally — Can  put  his  ear  forward  to  hear  complaints  against  vie, 

® The  body  is  now  full  of  merits  instead  of  demerits. 


no 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


And  I serve  the  true  God. 

God  firmly  tied  the  Name,  the  receptacle  of  the  nine 
treasures  in  my  robe. 

I have  found  the  comfort  of  comforts. 

The  Guru  hath  implanted  his  instruction  in  my  heart. 
The  true  Guru  placing  his  hand  on  my  forehead  hath  shown 
me  God. 

I have  built  a true  temple  : 

I search  for  and  bring  into  it  the  disciples  of  the  Guru. 

I bathe  their  feet,  fan  them,  and  ever  prostrate  myself 
before  them. 

Having  heard  of  the  Guru  I went  to  him  : 

He  implanted  in  my  heart  the  virtues  of  the  Name,  of 
charity,  and  of  ablutions. 

The  whole  world,  Nanak,  having  embarked  on  the  true 
boat  ^ hath  been  saved. 

The  whole  creation  waiteth  on  Thee,0  Lord,  day  and  night. 
Lend  Thine  ear  and  hear  my  supplication. 

I have  seen  and  examined  every  one  ; it  is  Thou  alone 
who  graciously  deliverest  us. 

The  order  of  the  Merciful  hath  now  been  issued 
That  no  one  should  annoy  another  ; 

That  all  should  dwell  in  peace,  and  that  this  should  be 
a benign  reign 

Nectar  falleth  in  torrents. 

I speak  as  the  Master  inspireth  me. 

I am  very  proud  of  Thee,  O Lord  ; do  Thou  accept  me. 
Thy  saints  ever  hunger  for  Thee  ; 

0 God,  fulfil  my  desires. 

Giver  of  comfort,  grant  me  a sight  of  Thee  and  embrace  me : 

1 have  found  none  so  great  as  Thou. 

Thou  art  in  the  earth,  the  heavens,  and  the  nether  regions  ; 
Thou  art  contained  in  every  place,  saith  Nanak ; Thou  art 
the  true  support  of  the  saints. 

I am  the  wrestler  of  the  Lord  : 

Having  met  the  Guru  I put  on  a tall  turban.* 

^ Having  clung  to  the  Sikh  religion. 

^ The  reign  of  the  Sikh  religion. 

* Victorious  wrestlers  in  former  times  were  decorated  with  lofty 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  iii 

All  are  assembled  for  the  wrestling  ; God  Himself  is  seated 
to  behold  it. 

The  music  of  the  drums  and  clarions  striketh  up  ; 

The  wrestlers  enter  the  arena  and  walk  round. 

I have  vanquished  the  five  youths — the  deadly  sins  ; — the 
Guru  patted  me  on  the  back. 

All  came  together  to  see  the  wrestling, 

And  they  shall  take  their  various  ways  homewards. 

The  holy  have  obtained  profit ; the  perverse  have  lost  even 
their  capital. 

Thou  art  devoid  of  colour  and  marks  ; 

O God,  Thou  appearest  ever  present. 

0 Lord  of  excellences,  Thy  saints  hear  Thy  praises,  meditate 
on  Thee,  and  love  Thee. 

1 am  God’s  servant  in  every  age. 

The  Guru  cut  the  rope  of  ignorance  which  hound  me. 

I will  not  again  engage  in  wrestling  ; Nanak  hath  searched 
and  found  this  opportunity  of  deliverance. 

Chhant. 

The  happiness  of  the  saints  : — 

When  the  Lord  is  merciful,  men  bathe  in  tlie  dust  of  th(‘. 
saints’  feet. 

Nanak  hath  obtained  all  things  in  God  who  is  wealth  and 
property. 

Beautiful,  0 Lord,  is  Thy  house  ; the  saints  live  in  the 
liope  of  rest  in  it. 

Their  souls  and  bodies  dissolve  in  love  on  remembering 
God’s  name,  and  they  drink  its  nectar  ; 

They  drink  its  nectar,  live  immortal  lives,  and  while 
drinking  deem  the  water  of  sin  insipid. 

When  my  God  the  Lord  of  the  earth  became  merciful,  I 
deemed  the  saints’  society  a treasure. 

O beloved  saints,  all  happiness  and  abundant  joy  are  theirs 
who  have  sewed  God’s  jewel  in  their  hearts. 

They  forget  not  for  a moment  the  support  of  life  ; 0 
Nanak,  they  live  by  repeating  God’s  name. 

turbans.  The  Nihangs,  a small  sect  of  Sikhs,  quote  this  line  in  justi- 
lication  of  their  tall  head-dress. 


II2 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Majh. 

Gratitude  to  God  who  treats  all  men  as  equal. 

That  season  is  pleasant  when  I remember  Thee,  O God ; 

That  work  is  pleasant  which  is  done  for  Thee. 

0 Thou  who  bestoweth  on  all,  that  heart  is  happy  in 
which  Thou  dwellest. 

Thou  art  our  universal  Father. 

In  Thine  inexhaustible  storehouse  are  all  treasures. 

He  on  whom  Thou  bestoweth  is  satisfied  and  satiated, 
and  he  is  Thy  worshipper. 

Every  one  reposeth  his  hopes  in  Thee. 

Thou  abidest  in  every  heart. 

All  are  partners  in  Thee  ; Thou  disownest  none. 

. Favour  with  God  is  likened  to  a woman’s  happy 
married  life : — 

In  the  house  where  the  Beloved  celebrated  His  marriage 

Female  friends  sang  songs  of  rejoicing, 

Where  the  Spouse  hath  adorned  the  bride,  there  reign  joy 
and  pleasure. 

The  woman  who  is  dear  to  her  husband,  is  beautiful,  clever, 
skilful. 

Well  conducted,  and  distinguished  : 

She  is  accomplished,  and  very  fortunate  ; 

She  possesseth  sons  and  is  a virtuous  wife  ; 

She  hath  all  decorations,  and  it  is  she  who  is  wise. 

She  who  is  adorned  with  the  love  of  her  Spouse,  is  of  good 
family  and  a queen. 

The  greatness  of  her  whom  her  Spouse 

Hath  embraced  cannot  be  described. 

The  married  life  of  her  who  hath  the  support  of  the  love 
of  the  Unapproachable  and  Inapprehensible  Spouse  shall  be 
eternal. 

The  Hindu  Shastars  and  religious  ceremonies  are 
of  no  avail : — 

1 have  searched  and  searched  in  the  desire  to  behold  Thee, 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  113 

I have  traversed  every  variety  of  forest. 

Is  there  any  one  who  will  bring  me  my  God — who  is  devoid 
of  qualities,  and  yet  possesseth  all  qualities — and  introduce 
me  to  Him  ? 

Man  may  recite  aloud  the  wisdom  of  the  six  Shastars  ; 

He  may  worship,  apply  frontal  marks,  and  bathe  at  places 
of  pilgrimage  ; 

He  may  perform  the  nivali  feat,  and  sit  in  the  eighty-four 
postures  of  the  Jogis,  but  he  shall  obtain  no  comfort  there- 
from. 

Man  may  perform  devotion  and  penance  for  many 
years  ; 

He  may  travel  and  roam  over  the  earth  ; 

Yet  peace  shall  not  enter  his  heart  for  a moment,  and  his 
soul  shall  wander  again  and  again. 

God  being  merciful  hath  caused  me  to  meet  the  saint. 

My  soul  and  body  are  refreshed,  and  I have  obtained 
consolation. 

The  immortal  God  resideth  in  my  heart,  and  Nanak  singeth 
to  God  a song  of  rejoicing. 

Praise  and  prayer  to  the  Almighty ; — 

Darling  God,  merciful,  joyous. 

Deep,  profound,  endless,  Sustainer  of  the  earth, 

Lofty,  unfathomable,  eternal  Lord,  I live  by  remembering 
Thee. 

Destroyer  of  sorrow,  priceless  treasure. 

Without  fear  or  enmity,  unfathomable,  unequalled, 

Deathless,  unborn,  self-existent ; the  mind  become th  re- 
freshed by  remembering  Thee. 

O God,  Thou  joyous  One,  be  ever  with  me. 

Thou  art  the  Cherisher  of  high  and  low. 

Thy  name  is  the  elixir  which  satisfieth  my  heart  ; under 
the  Guru’s  instructions  let  me  drink  the  nectar. 

In  pain  or  pleasure  I meditate  on  Thy  name,  O dear 
One  : 

This  wisdom  have  1 obtained  from  the  Guru. 

Thou  art  Nanak's  support,  0 God ; by  Thy  love  I shall  be 

saved. 

siKfi.  m I 


II4  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Guru  expresses  his  love  for  God  by  familiar 
similes : — 

Thou  art,  0 God,  an  ocean  of  water  ; I am  Thy  fish  : 

I a chatrik  thirst  for  the  drops  of  Thy  name. 

In  Thee  is  my  hope,  for  Thee  I thirst,  my  heart  is  absorbed 
in  Thee. 

As  a child  is  satisfied  by  drinking  milk, 

As  a poor  man  is  happy  on  finding  wealth. 

As  a thirsty  man  is  refreshed  by  drinking  water,  so  is  my 
soul  happy  with  God. 

As  a lamp  shineth  in  the  darkness. 

As  a woman's  hopes  are  fulfilled  on  beholding  her  spouse. 

As  one  becometh  happy  on  meeting  one’s  beloved,  so  is 
my  soul  gladdened  with  God’s  love. 

The  saints  have  put  me  on  God’s  road, 

‘ And  being  merciful  have  made  me  intimate  with  Him. 

God  is  mine  ; I am  His  slave ; Nanak,  the  Guru  hath 
given  me  the  true  Word. 

God’s  name  is  the  sweetest  and  most  potent  of  all 
relishes : — 

The  ambrosial  Name  is  ever  pure. 

God  is  the  bestower  of  comfort  and  the  Destroyer  of  sorrow. 

I have  tasted  and  tried  all  other  relishes,  but  to  my  mind 
God  is  the  sweetest  dainty  of  all. 

They  who  drink  the  nectar  of  His  name  are  satisfied, 

And  become  immortal  on  possessing  it. 

The  treasure  of  the  Name  is  obtained  by  him  in  whose 
heart  the  Guru’s  word  abideth. 

He  who  obtaineth  the  essence  of  God’s  name  is  satisfied 
and  cloyed. 

He  who  hath  obtained  God’s  sweets  wavereth  not. 

God’s  name  is  obtained  by  him  on  whose  forehead  favour- 
able destiny  was  recorded. 

God  hath  come  into  the  possession  of  one  man,  the  Guru, 
from  whom  many  receive  favours. 

On  meeting  him  many  obtain  salvation. 

The  pious  obtain  the  treasure  oi  the  'Name.,  but  tew,  0 
Nanak,  are  they  who  have  seen  them. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  115 
God's  praises : — 

God  is  my  ocean,  God  is  perfection,  God  is  my  wealth  ; 

O deep  and  profound  One,  Thou  art  the  boon  of  my  life. 
He  who  toucheth  the  Guru’s  feet  enjoyeth  countless 
pleasures  and  delights. 

They  who  have  seen  God  are  pure. 

And  save  all  their  brethren  and  friends. 

My  Lord  is  inaccessible,  and  inapprehensible  ; I meditate 
on  Him,  the  True  One,  by  the  kindness  of  the  Guru. 

A few  by  great  good  fortune  have  obtained  a sight  of  Him, 
Whom  men  make  every  effort  to  find. 

His  palace,  exalted,  infinite,  and  invisible,  the  Guru  hath 
shown  me. 

Deep  and  profound  is  Thine  ambrosial  name,  O God  ; 

He  in  whose  heart  it  dwelleth  obtaiheth  deliverance. 
Nanak,  they  whose  bonds  arc  all  cut  off  by  the  Guru  arc 
absorbed  in  God. 

The  Guru  delights  in  his  devotion : — 

By  God’s  favour  I meditate  on  His  name, 

And  by  His  mercy  I sing  a song  of  joy . 

All  your  lives  whether  standing,  sitting,  sleeping,  or  waking, 
meditate  on  God, 

The  holy  man  hath  given  me  the  Name  as  medicine  ; 

He  hath  cut  off  my  sins,  and  I have  become  pure  : 

All  my  pains  have  departed,  all  my  pangs  have  been 
assuaged,  and  I have  become  happy. 

He  whom  my  Beloved  assisteth 

Shall  be  delivered  from  the  ocean  of  the  world. 

Why  should  he  who  recognizeth  the  Guru  as  true  be  afraid? 

Since  I have  obtained  the  society  of  the  saints 

And  met  the  Guru,  the  demon  of  pride  hath  departed. 

At  every  breath  Nanak  singeth  God’s  praises  ; the  true 
Guru  hath  cast  a veil  over  his  sins. 

The  condition  of  God's  worshipper  : — 

God  pervadeth  His  worshippet  as  warp  and  wool 
God,  the  Bestower  of  comfort,  cherisheth  His  worshipper. 

I 2 


ii6 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


1 draw  water,  I fan,  I grind  corn  for  him,  and  am  ever 
ready  to  do  the  work  of  the  Lord. 

God  hath  cut  off  my  chains  and  applied  me  to  His  worship. 

The  order  of  the  Lord  is  pleasing  to  the  worshipper’s 
heart. 

He  acteth  as  is  pleasing  to  the  Lord  ; he  becometh  versed 
in  spiritual  and  wordly  knowledge. 

Thou  art  wise,  O God  ; Thou  knowest  all  things. 

God’s  worshippers  enjoy  His  love. 

What  belongeth  to  God  belongeth  to  His  worshipper  ; the 
worshipper  is  distinguished  in  the  company  of  his  Lord. 

He  whom  God  hath  clothed  with  His  robe  of  honour, 

Shall  not  eigain  be  called  on  for  his  account. 

Nanak  is  a sacrifice  to  that  worshipper  ; he  is  a gem  of  the 
Deep  and  Unfathomable. 

The  devotion  of  the  householder  is  superior  to  that 
of  the  anchoret : — 

Everything  is  found  at  home,  nothing  abroad  : 

He  who  searcheth  abroad  is  lost  in  doubt. 

He  who  by  the  Guru’s  favour  hath  found  God  in  his  heart, 
is  happy  in  mind  and  body. 

A stream  of  nectar  raineth  on  him  in  torrents. 

The  man  who  drinketh  it  after  hearing  and  reflecting  on 
the  Word, 

Rejoiceth  and  is  glad  day  and  night,  and  ever  sporteth 
with  God. 

Separated  from  God  through  many  births,  I have  now 
found  Him, 

And  though  dried  up  have  revived  by  the  Guru’s  favour. 

Having  met  pious  men  I have  obtained  excellent  wisdom, 
and  meditated  on  the  Name. 

As  waves  blend  with  water, 

SiCi  blexvded  with 

Saith  Nanak,  the  doors  of  error  have  been  opened  for  its 
escape,  and  there  shall  be  no  more  wandering.^ 

The  Guru's  devotion  to  the  holy : — 

I am  a sacrifice  to  him  who  hath  heard  Thy  praises  ; 

1 Jauldn  has  two  meanings— chains  or  wandering. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  117 

I am  a sacrifice  to  him  who  uttereth  Thy  name  ; 

I am  ever  a sacrifice  to  him  who  worshippeth  Thee  with 
heart  and  soul. 

I will  wash  his  feet  and  behold 

That  merciful  person  who  walketh  in  Thy  path. 

I will  bestow  my  heart  on  that  friend  of  mine  who  meeting 
the  Guru  hath  found  God. 

Greatly  fortunate  are  they  who  know  Thee ; 

Among  crowds  they  live  apart  unaffected  by  them  ; 

In  the  company  of  the  saints  they  subdue  all  passions  and 
cross  the  terrible  ocean. 

Having  renounced  pride,  insolence,  and  the  darkness  of 
worldly  love. 

My  soul  hath  entered  their  asylum. 

Ye  saints,  grant  Nanak  the  gift  of  the  name  of  that  in- 
acccessible  and  unfathomable  God. 

God  pervades  creation  : — 

Thou  art  the  tree  ; Thy  branch  ^ hath  blossomed  ; 

From  being  small  Thou  hast  become  great. 

Thou  art  an  ocean.  Thou  art  its  foam  and  its  bubbles  ; 
there  is  nothing  seen  besides  Thee. 

Thou  art  the  string,  Thou  art  the  beads  of  the  rosary, 

Thou  art  its  knots,  Thou  art  its  chief  bead. 

God  is  in  the  beginning,  the  middle,  and  the  end,  and 
none  besides  is  seen. 

0 Bestower  of  comfort,  Thou  possessest  no  attributes,  and 
yet  Thou  possessest  all.^ 

Thou  dwellest  at  ease  ; Thou  art  the  Enjoyer  ; Thou  art 
saturated  with  love. 

Thou  knowest  Thine  own  affairs  ; it  is  Thou  who  remem- 
berest  Thyself.^ 

Thou  art  God,  and  again  Thou  art  Thine  own  worshipper  \ 

Thou  art  concealed,  0 God,  and  again  manifest. 

^ The  world  which  has  been  expanded  from  God. 

Nirgun  sargun,  God  is  said  to  -possess  no  qualities  when  He  has 
drawn  the  world  within  Him.  He  is  said  to  possess  all  qualities  when 
He  projects  matter  from  Him  to  form  creation. 

^ Man  remembers  and  worships  God  through  Him  as  He  is  seated 
in  each  person’s  heart. 


ii8  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  slave  Nanak  ever  singeth  Thy  praises  : look  on  him 
with  a little  kindness. 

Man  is  happy  on  meeting  the  Guru  and  hearing  his 
universal  instruction : — 

0 God,  Thy  Word  is  nectar : 

On  hearing  it  my  final  emancipation  is  obtained. 

On  beholding  the  true  Guru  the  burning  of  my  mind  hath 
been  quenched,  and  it  hath  become  cool ; 

Happiness  is  obtained  and  sorrow  fleeth  far  away. 

When  tlie  saints  repeat  God’s  name. 

Water,  dry  land,  and  lakes  are  completely  filled  with  it  ; 
there  is  no  place  without  it. 

The  Creator  showing  mercy 

Cherisheth  all  men  and  lower  animals. 

. By  the  kind,  merciful,  and  compassionate  One  all  living 
things  are  satisfied  and  satiated. 

(lod  made  the  forests,  the  glades,  and  the  three  worlds  : 

He  created  them  all  in  a moment. 

Under  the  Guru’s  instruction,  Nanak,  adore  Him  who 
fulfilleth  the  desires  of  the  mind. 

God’s  relationship  to  man  : — 

Thou  art  my  father,  Thou  art  my  mother. 

Thou  art  my  kinsman.  Thou  art  my  brother  ; 

Thou  art  everywhere  my  protector ; then  why  should  I 
feel  fear  and  anxiety  ? 

By  Thy  favour  I recognize  Thee  ; 

Thou  art  my  shelter.  Thou  art  mine  honour. 

Besides  Thee  there  is  none  other  ; the  whole  world  is  the 
arena  of  Thy  play. 

Men  and  lower  animals  all  hast  Thou  created  ; 

Thou  didst  appoint  them  to  whatever  duties  pleased  Thee. 

Everything  Thou  hast  created  is  Thine  ; there  is  nothing 
ours. 

1 have  obtained  great  comfort  by  meditating  on  Thy  name. 

And  my  heart  is  refreshed  by  singing  Thy  praises. 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  congratulated  me  ; Nanak  hath 
overcome  his  difficulties. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  119 

Divine  instruction  refreshes  the  mind : — 

By  God’s  order  the  rain  beginneth  to  fall. 

Let  us,  my  friends,  having  met  the  saints,  repeat  His  name. 

I have  obtained  coolness,  peace,  composure,  and  comfort, 
since  God  Himself  infused  coolness  into  my  heart. 

By  God's  grace  the  Guru's  instruction  has  been 
promulgated : — 

The  Lord  God  hath  become  merciful ; 

Rain  hath  fallen  everywhere. 

The  Creator,  compassionate  and  ever  merciful  to  the  poor, 
hath  bestowed  comfort  on  us. 

And  cherished  His  human  beings  and  lower  animals 

As  a mother  taketh  care  of  her  child. 

Thou,  O Lord,  art  the  Destroyer  of  grief,  an  Ocean  of  com- 
fort, and  Thou  givest  sustenance  to  all. 

The  Kind  One  filleth  sea  and  land  : 

I ever  devote  myself  and  am  a sacrifice  to  Him  ; 

I ever  meditate  on  Him  night  and  day,  who  in  one  moment 
saveth  all  beings. 

Since  God  Himself  preserveth  them. 

All  their  sorrows  and  afflictions  depart. 

When  the  Name  is  repeated, 

And  God  looketh  on  us  with  favour,  O Nanak,  the  soul 
and  body  are  refreshed. 

The  universal  happiness  produced  by  the  diffusion 
of  the  Guru's  instruction  : — 

Rain  hath  fallen  ; God  made  it  fall  : 

He  hath  caused  all  men  and  animals  to  dwell  in  comfort : 

Their  sufferings  have  departed,  and  they  have  obtained 
true  happiness  by  remembering  God’s  name. 

He  whose  they  are  cherisheth  them  ; 

The  supreme  God  hath  become  their  Protector. 

My  God  hath  heard  my  supplication,  and  my  labour  hath 
been  successful. 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  I have  beheld  Him 

Who  is  the  Benefactor  of  all  living  things. 

The  things  that  dwell  in  sea  and  land,  beneath  the  earth. 


120 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


and  in  the  firmament,  are  all  satisfied,  and  I shall  now  wash 
the  feet  of  holy  men. 

I am  ever  and  ever  a sacrifice  to  Him 

Who  fulfilleth  the  heart’s  desires. 

0 Nanak,  the  Destroyer  of  pain  hath  bestowed  this  boon 
on  me,  and  I am  dyed  with  the  love  of  Him  who  is  the  abode 
of  pleasure. 

Praise  and  thanksgiving: — 

My  soul  and  body  are  Thine  ; my  wealth  also  is  Thine  ; 

Thou  art  my  Lord  and  Master  ; 

My  soul  and  body  are  all  Thy  capital ; my  power  is  from 
Thee,  O God. 

Ever  and  ever  Thou  alone  art  the  Giver  of  happiness. 

1 bow  and  bow  and  touch  Thy  feet. 

If  it  please  Thee,  and  Thou  give  me  work,  0 Merciful  One, 
I will  perform  it. 

0 God,  it  is  from  Thee  alone  I receive  ; Thou  art  mine 
ornament. 

Whatever  Thou  givest  I treat  as  happiness. 

Wherever  Thou  placest  me,  there  shall  be  heaven  for  me  : 
Thou  art  the  Cherisher  of  all. 

Nanak  having  remembered  Thee  hath  obtained  happiness. 

He  hath  sung  Thy  praises  all  day  long  ; 

All  his  heart’s  desires  have  been  fulfilled,  and  he  shall 
never  more  be  unhappy. 

God  sent  the  Guru  to  comfort  the  world  : — 

The  supreme  God  hath  sent  the  cloud, ^ 

And  hath  caused  it  to  rain  on  sea  and  land  in  all  directions. 

Comfort  hath  ensued,  all  thirst  is  quenched,  and  there  is 
joy  everywhere. 

An  exhortation  to  holiness  : — 

My  soul  and  body  are  dyed  with  the  beloved  God. 

vSacrifice  to  Him  all  that  thou  hast  : 

Sing  God’s  praises  the  live-long  day,  and  forget  Him  not 
even  for  a moment. 


^ 'the  true  Guru. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  121 

He  who  meditateth  on  God’s  name  in  the  company  of  holy 
men, 

Is  my  beloved  saint  and  friend. 

In  the  company  of  holy  men  thou  shalt  cross  over  the 
world’s  ocean  and  cut  Death’s  noose. 

By  God’s  service  the  four  boons  ^ are  obtained. 

Repeat  His  name  who  is  the  Tree  of  Life  unseen  and  in- 
scrutable. 

The  Guru  hath  cut  off  my  sins  of  lust  and  anger,  and  my 
hopes  have  been  fulfilled. 

The  mortal  who  hath  perfect  good  fortune 

Shall  meet  God  in  the  company  of  holy  men. 

Nanak,  he  within  whose  heart  the  Name  abideth  shall  be 
acceptable,  whether  a householder  or  an  anchoret. 

Prayers  ought  only  to  be  offered  for  worthy 
objects  : — 

If  any  one  pray  for  worldly  objects. 

He  shall  not  take  long  to  perish. 

He  who  ever  worshippeth  the  Supreme  Being,  shall  on 
meeting  the  Guru  abide  everlasting. 

He  in  whose  heart  there  is  love  and  devotion, 

Ever  waketh  day  and  night  singing  God’s  praises. 

God  will  take  his  arm  and  blend  with  Himself  him  whom 
He  hath  destined  to  receive  from  Him. 

God’s  lotus  feet  dwell  in  the  hearts  of  the  saints. 

Without  God’s  assistance  all  men  are  robbed. 

Ever  desire  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet  : the  name  of  th(' 
True  One  is  their  ornament. 

Whether  standing  or  sitting  sing  God’s  name  : 

By  remembering  it  a permanent  boon  is  obtained. 

O God  be  merciful  to  Nanak  ; what  Thou  doest  must  be 
endured. 

Majh  Ashtapadi 

The  Guru  replies  to  several  questions  of  his  Sikhs : — 

Who  is  saved  ? Who  hath  found  the  right  way  ? 

Who  hath  divine  knowledge  ? Who  is  the  preacher  ? 

^ Dharm  (faith),  arth  (wealth),  kdm  (the  fulfilment  of  desires), 
mokhsh  (salvation). 


122  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Who  is  householder  ? Who  is  anchoret  ? Who  hath  found 
God’s  price  ? 

How  is  man  bound  ? How  is  he  set  free  ? 

How  shall  he  escape  from  transmigration  ? 

Who  doeth  good  works  ? Who  doeth  unselfish  works  ? 
Who  speaketh  of  God  and  causeth  others  to  speak  of  Him  ? 

Who  is  happy  ? Who  afflicted  ? 

Who  tumeth  towards  the  Guru  ? Who  turneth  away 
from  him  ? 

How  is  God  met  ? How  doth  man  separate  from  Him  ? 
Who  shall  explain  this  to  me  ? 

What  is  that  word  by  which  the  mind’s  wandering  ceaseth  ? 

What  is  that  instruction  by  which  man  may  bear  weal 
and  woe  alike  ? 

What  is  that  way  by  which  man  may  meditate  on  the 
Supreme  God  ? What  is  that  way  by  which  man  may  sing 
His  praises  ? 

The  following  are  the  replies  seriatim  to  the  above 
questions : — 

The  believer  is  saved  : the  believer  hath  found  the  right 
way  ; 

The  believer  possesseth  divine  knowledge ; the  believer 
is  the  preacher. 

Blest  is  the  believer,  whether  householder  or  anchoret  ; 
tlie  believer  hath  found  God’s  price. 

By  pride  man  is  bound  ; by  the  Guru’s  instruction  he 
is  freed. 

The  believer  escapeth  from  transmigration. 

The  believer  performeth  good  works  ; the  believer  per- 
formeth  unselfish  works ; whatever  the  believer  doeth  is 
acceptable. 

The  believer  is  happy  ; the  unbeliever  is  afflicted. 

The  believer  listeneth  to  the  Guru  ; the  unbeliever  turneth 
away  from  him. 

The  believer  meeteth  God  ; the  unbeliever  is  separated 
from  Him — the  Guru  hath  explained  this. 

The  Guru’s  instruction  is  the  Word  by  which  the  mind’s 
wanderings  cease  ; 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  123 

By  the  Guru’s  instruction  woe  and  weal  are  borne  alike. 

The  Guru’s  teaching  is  the  way  by  which  the  supreme 
God  is  meditated  on,  and  man  singeth  His  praises. 

Thou  Thyself  hast  made  the  whole  creation. 

Thou  art  the  Cause  of  causes,  and  hast  established  every- 
thing. 

Saith  Nanak,  from  being  one  Thou  hast  become  endless, 
and  in  the  One  the  Endless  is  absorbed. 

God’s  praises : — 

God  is  indestructible,  then  what  anxiety  can  there  be  ? ^ 

God  is  Omnipotent,  so  His  slave  is  perfectly  happy. 

0 Giver  of  life,  soul,  honour,  and  happiness,  we  obtain 
happiness  from  what  Thou  doest  for  us. 

1 am  a sacrifice  and  my  life  is  a sacrifice  to  that  holy 
man  to  whose  soul  and  body  Thou  art  pleasing. 

Thou  art  my  mountain  ; ^ Thou  art  my  shelter  ; none 
can  rival  Thee. 

He  to  whom  Thy  works  are  agreeable 

Hath  seen  Thee,  O Supreme  God,  in  every  heart. 

Thou  art  the  one  sole  God  contained  in  every  place. 

Thou  gratifiest  all  the  heart’s  desires  : 

Thy  storehouses  are  filled  with  devotion  and  love. 

He  whom  Thou  mercifully  protectest  shall  be  absorbed  in 
Thee  by  perfect  good  works. 

God  hath  brought  man  to  the  surface  out  of  the  blind 
well. 

He  mercifully  regardeth  His  servant  with  a favouring  eye. 

The  servant  singeth  the  perfect  and  immortal  God’s  praises 
in  repeating  and  hearing  which  there  is  no  end. 

In  this  world  and  the  next  Thou  art  the  Protector,  0 
Lord  ; 

Thou  cherishest  the  child  in  its  mother’s  womb. 

The  fire  of  Maya  cannot  affect  those  who  are  dyed  with 
God’s  love  and  sing  His  praises. 

What  excellences  of  Thine  can  I remember  and  relate  ? 

In  my  soul  and  body  I behold  Thee. 

^ That  is,  God  will  ever  watch  over  man. 

2  To  which  to  retreat  for  protection. 


124  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Thou  art  my  Friend,  my  Saint,  and  my  Lord  ; I know 
none  but  Thee. 

He  whose  helper  Thou  art,  O God, 

Feeleth  no  hot  wind. 

Thou  art  the  Lord  ; Thou  givest  comfort  to  those  who 
seek  Thy  protection  ; by  repeating  Thy  name  in  the  com- 
pany of  the  saints.  Thou  becomest  manifest. 

Thou  art  exalted,  unfathomable,  infinite,  and  inestimable. 

Thou  art  the  true  Lord  ; I am  Thy  servant  and  slave  ; 

Thou  art  the  King,  true  is  Thy  sovereignty.  Nanak  is 
a sacrifice  unto  Thee. 

The  Twelve  Months  of  Guru  Arjan 
Majh 

O God,  mercifully  unite  with  Thee  those  who  by  their 
past  acts  are  separated  from  Thee  ! 

Weary  of  wandering  in  the  four  corners  of  the  world  and 
in  every  direction,  we  have  come  to  Thy  protection. 

A cow  without  milk  is  of  no  avail : 

Without  water  the  tree  withereth  and  beareth  no  fruit. 

If  we  meet  not  the  Lord  God,  the  Friend,  how  shall  we 
find  rest  ? 

The  city  or  village  or  house  where  God  is  not  seen  is  as 
a furnace. 

All  decorations,  betel,  and  tasteful  viands  are  unstable 
together  with  the  body. 

Without  the  Lord  God  all  friends  are  as  the  god  of  death. 

Nanak’s  supplication  is,  ‘ Mercifully  grant  me  Thy  name  ; 

‘ O Lord  God,  whose  abode  is  immovable,  unite  me  with 
Thee.’ 

In  Chet  worship  God  and  you  shall  greatly  rejoice. 

You  shall  obtain  Him  by  meeting  saints  and  repeating 
His  name. 

It  is  only  those  who  have  found  their  God,  whose  advent 
into  the  world  is  of  account : 

Vain  is  his  birth  who  liveth  even  for  a moment  without 
Him. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  125 

God  is  equally  contained  in  sea  and  land,  the  nether 
regions,  the  firmament,  and  the  forests. 

With  how  much  pain  shall  man  reckon  if  God  enter  not 
his  heart  ? 

They  who  repeat  God’s  name  are  very  fortunate, 

Nanak,  my  mind  desireth,  my  mind  thirsteth  for  a sight 
of  God. 

I shall  touch  his  feet  who  causeth  me  to  meet  God  in 
the  month  of  Chet. 

In  Baisakh  how  can  they  find  consolation  who  are 
separated  from  God,  in  whose  hearts  there  is  no  love, 

Who  forget  Him  the  Friend,  and  attach  themselves  to 
deceitful  mammon  ? 

vSon,  wife,  wealth  remain  not ; God  alone  perisheth  not. 

The  whole  world  is  strangled  in  its  love  of  false  occupa- 
tions. 

All  but  the  name  of  the  one  God  shall  be  lost  on  man’s 
last  journey. 

He  who  forgetteth  God  is  ruined  ; there  is  none  but 
Him. 

Pure  is  the  fame  of  those  who  are  attached  to  the  feet 
of  the  Beloved. 

Nanak’s  prayer,  0 God,  is — ‘ Unite  me  with  Thee  that 
I may  obtain  Thee.’ 

Baisakh  is  then  delightful  when  the  saints  cause  man  to 
meet  God. 

In  Jeth  man  should  unite  with  God  before  whom  all  bow. 

He  who  clingeth  to  the  skirt  of  God,  the  Friend,  shall 
never  be  bound  by  any  one. 

God’s  name  is  like  gems  and  pearls  which  none  may  steal. 

In  God  are  all  the  loves  which  delight  the  mind. 

What  God  desireth  He  doeth,  and  creatures  act  according 
to  His  will. 

They  whom  God  hath  made  His  own  are  blest. 

Could  men  on  their  own  account  ^ meet  God,  why  should 
they  weep  in  separation  ? 

^ Without  the  interposition  of  the  Guru. 


126  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Nanak,  God  is  obtained  by  association  with  the  saints ; 
and  they  who  obtain  Him  are  happy. 

In  Jeth  the  playful  God  is  obtained  by  the  fortunate 
for  whom  it  hath  been  so  recorded. 

Asarh  ^ is  a burning  month  for  him  to  whom  the  Lord 
God  is  not  near. 

He  who  forsaketh  God  the  life  of  the  world  and  resteth 
his  hopes  on  man, 

Shall  be  ruined  by  his  love  of  mammon,  and  shall  wear 
Death’s  halter  around  his  neck. 

As  man  sowed,  in  a previous  life,  so  was  the  destiny 
recorded  on  his  forehead,  and  so  hath  he  reaped. 

When  the  night  of  human  life  hath  passed,  man  regretteth 
and  departeth  without  hope. 

They  who  meet  the  saints  shall  be  released  in  God’s 
court. 

0 God,  show  Thy  mercy  unto  me  that  I may  thirst  for 
a sight  of  Thee. 

Nanak  representeth — 0 God,  there  is  none  but  Thee. 

Asarh  is  pleasant  for  him  in  whose  heart  dwell  God’s  feet. 

In  Sawan  happy  is  the  woman  who  loveth  God’s  lotus 
feet. 

Her  mind  and  body  are  imbued  with  true  love,  and  her 
one  support  is  the  Name. 

The  love  of  worldly  pleasures  is  false  ; everything  we  see 
shall  become  ashes. 

Pleasant  are  the  drops  of  God’s  nectar  ; he  shall  drink 
them  who  meeteth  saints. 

The  woods  and  glades  rejoice  with  God  the  omnipotent 
and  unequalled. 

My  mind  longeth  to  meet  God  ; His  favour  shall  cause 
me  to  meet  Him. 

1 am  ever  a sacrifice  to  my  companions  who  have  met 
God. 

Nanak,  God  mercifully  regenerateth  men  with  the  Word. 

^ Called  Hdr  in  Guru  Nanak's  Twelve  Months, 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  127 

Sawan  is  pleasant  for  those  who  clasp  God’s  name  to 
their  hearts. 

In  Bhadon  she  who  loveth  mammon  is  lost  in  doubt. 

Though  she  have  hundreds  of  thousands  of  decorations, 
they  are  of  none  avail. 

They  whom  man  loved  leave  him  in  a moment. 

He  wringeth  his  hands,  his  body  trembleth,  and  changeth 
from  black  to  white. 

On  the  very  day  his  body  perisheth  men  call  out  ‘ ghost  ! ’ 

The  myrmidons  of  Death  seize  and  take  away  the  soul, 
and  tell  no  one  their  secret.^ 

As  man  soweth,  so  shall  he  reap  the  field  of  his  works. 

Nanak,  (iod  giveth  His  feet  as  a boat  to  him  who  hath 
sought  His  protection. 

They  who  love  the  Guru,  their  saviour,  shall  not  go  to 
hell  in  Bhadon. 

In  Assu  ariseth  the  pang  of  love — how  man  can  meet 
God. 

The  mind  and  body  greatly  thirst  for  a sight  of  .some 
one  to  come  and  cause  us  to  meet  God. 

I fall  at  the  feet  of  the  saints  who  support  me  in  my  love. 

How  can  any  one  obtain  happiness  but  in  God  ? there 
•is  no  place  beside. 

They  who  have  tasted  the  juice  of  love  are  satiated  and 
cloyed. 

Humbling  thyself  make  this  supplication,  ‘ O God,  attach 
me  to  Thy  skirt  ! ’ 

They  whom  God  the  Spouse  united  with  Himself  shall 
never  be  separated  from  Him. 

Nanak,  there  is  no  other  shelter  than  God. 

In  Assu  they  dwell  happy  to  whom  God  showeth  mercy. 

In  Kartik  they  who  do  bad  acts  cannot  impute  the  blame 
to  others. 

They  who  forget  God  suffer  from  every  disease. 

^ They  give  no  previous  intimation  of  their  visit. 


128 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


They  who  have  turned  their  faces  from  God,  are  separated 
from  Him  at  every  birth. 

All  the  sweets  of  mammon  become  bitter  for  them  in 
a moment. 

No  one  will  mediate  for  them ; to  whom  shall  they 
make  their  daily  complaints  ? 

Nothing  resulteth  from  man’s  own  efforts  ; he  obtaineth 
what  was  recorded  in  his  original  destiny. 

My  Lord  is  found  by  good  fortune  ; then  shall  all  pains 
of  separation  depart. 

O God,  save  Nanak,  and  release  him  from  this  prison. 

If  in  Kartik  man  obtain  the  society  of  the  saints  all  his 
anxieties  shall  depart. 


The  month  of  Maghar  is  beautiful  for  those  who  sit  with 
their  beloved  God. 

How  can  their  glory  be  told  whom  God  blendeth  with 
Himself  ? 

The  bodies  and  minds  of  those  who  have  the  saints  for 
their  companions  rejoice  in  the  Lord. 

They  who  are  deprived  of  the  society  of  the  saints  dwell 
alone  ; 

Their  pain  never  dcpartcth  ; they  are  bound  in  the  thrall 
of  Death. 

They  who  have  enjoyed  their  Lord  are  seen  ever  standing 
in  His  service. 

Their  necklaces  are  set  with  God  for  gems,  jewels,  and 
rubies. 

Nanak  desireth  the  dust  of  the  feet  of  those  who  fall  for 
shelter  at  God’s  door. 

They  who  worship  God  in  Maghar  shall  never  be  born 
again. 


In  Poh  cold  shall  never  be  felt  by  those  whom  the  Lord 
God  hath  embraced. 

God’s  lotus  feet  have  entered  my  heart,  and  1 desire  to 
behold  Him. 

Take  shelter  in  God  and  His  service  shall  be  thy  gain. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  129 

On  meeting  the  holy  sing  God’s  praises  and  sin  shall  not 
affect  thee. 

Thou  shalt  be  blended  with  what  thou  hast  sprung  from ; 
wherefore  be  absorbed  in  true  love. 

He  whom  the  Supreme  Being  hath  taken  by  the  hand 
shall  never  be  separated  from  Him. 

I am  a hundred  thousand  times  a sacrifice  to  God  the 
Friend,  the  unapproachable  and  unfathomable. 

Nanak  hath  fallen  at  God’s  door  : it  is  to  His  honour 
to  protect  him. 

Poh  is  agreeable  and  bringeth  all  happiness  to  him  whom 
God  pardoneth. 

In  Magh  bathe  in  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet  ; 

Meditate  on  God’s  name,  and  bestow  it  upon  all  ; 

So  shall  the  filth  of  the  sins  of  births  be  washed  away, 
and  pride  vanish  from  thy  heart. 

Lust  and  anger  shall  not  seduce,  and  the  dog  covetous- 
ness shall  be  destroyed. 

The  world  praiseth  those  who  walk  in  the  true  way. 

Mercy  to  human  beings  is  more  acceptable  than  bathing 
at  the  sixty-eight  places  of  pilgrimage,  and  than  all  alms 
offered  there  : 

He  on  whom  God  mercifully  bestoweth  it  is  a wise  man. 

Nanak  is  a sacrifice  to  those  who  have  met  their  Lord. 

In  Magh  they  to  whom  the  perfect  Guru  is  kind  are 
called  the  pure. 


In  Phagun  they  enjoy  happiness  to  whom  God  hath 
manifested  Himself. 

The  saints  who  render  man  assistance  with  God  have 
mercifully  blended  me  with  Him. 

Since  then  my  couch  is  beautiful ; I possess  all  happiness, 
and  there  is  no  room  for  sorrow. 

My  desires  have  been  fulfilled  ; I am  very  fortunate  in 
having  obtained  God  as  my  Spouse. 

My  companions,  come  to  me,  sing  a song  of  rejoicing,  and 
chant  the  hymns  of  the  Lord. 

Nobody  appeareth  like  God ; no  one  is  equal  to  Him. 

K 


SIKH,  HI 


130 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  hath  prepared  for  me  this  world  and  the  next,  and 
given  me  a stable  position. 

He  hath  rescued  me  from  the  ocean  of  the  world,  and 
I shall  not  again  have  to  run  through  births. 

My  tongue  is  but  one,  while  manifold  are  His  attributes  ; 
Nanak  is  saved  by  falling  at  His  feet  : 

In  Phagun  ever  praise  Him  who  hath  not  a particle  of 
avarice. 

The  affairs  of  those  who  meditated  on  the  Name  have 
been  adjusted. 

They  who  adore  God  the  perfect  Guru  shall  be  found 
genuine  in  His  court. 

God’s  feet  are  the  basis  of  all  comforts ; through  them 
man  crosseth  over  the  terrible  and  dangerous  ocean. 

. They  who  have  obtained  love  and  devotion  burn  not  in 
sin. 

Their  falsehood  hath  vanished,  their  worldliness  hath 
disappeared,  and  they  are  filled  to  the  brim  with  the  truth. 

They  serve  God  the  supreme  Being,  and  put  Him  alone 
in  their  hearts. 

All  months,  days,  and  minutes  are  good  for  him  on  whom 
God  looketh  with  favour. 

Nanak  craveth  the  boon  of  a sight  of  Thee,  0 God  ; be 
Thou  merciful  unto  him. 


Gauri 

An  inquirer  asked  the  Guru  in  the  first  two  lines 
of  the  following  how  final  rest  and  God  were  obtained. 
The  Guru  duly  replied  : — 

How  is  comfort  found,  O my  brother  ? 

How  shall  God  the  helper  be  obtained  ? 

There  is  no  comfort  in  the  house  whose  master  saith  ‘ All 
this  wealth  is  mine  ’ ; 

Nor  in  dwelling  in  a lofty  and  beautifully  built  mansion. 

In  such  deceptive  avarice  man  loseth  his  human  life. 

He  is  pleased  on  beholding  his  elephants  and  his  horses, 

The  assemblage  of  his  army,  his  mace-bearers,  and  his 
servants ; 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  131 

But  on  their  account^  there  is  a halter  of  pride  round  his 
neck. 

Were  man  to  rule  over  the  whole  world, 

Enjoy  pleasures  and  embrace  many  women, 

It  would  be  as  if  a beggar  became  a king  in  a dream. 
One  comfort  the  true  Guru  hath  pointed  out  to  me — 

‘ Whatever  God  doeth  is  pleasing  to  His  saints.’ 

Slave  Nanak,  he  who  destroyeth  his  pride  shall  be  absorbed 
in  God. 

In  this  way  comfort  is  found,  O my  brother  ; 

Thus  God  the  Helper  is  obtained. 

Since  God  is  everywhere  contained,  man  may  lead 
a holy  life  as  a householder  : — 

Why  wander  ? Who  would  wander 
When  God  is  contained  in  the  water,  dry  land,  the  earth, 
and  in  the  firmament  ? 

The  holy  are  saved  ; the  perverse  lose  their  honour* 

None  can  equal  him 

Whom  the  merciful  God  protecteth. 

Since  the  one  infinite  Being  pervadeth  all  things, 

Be  thou  free  from  care  and  sleep  happy : 

God  knoweth  everything  which  happeneth. 

The  perverse  are  dying  of  thirst  for  mammon  ; 

They  wander  through  many  births  on  account  of  their 
destiny  writ  from  the  beginning. 

As  man  soweth,  so  shall  he  eat. 

On  beholding  God,  the  heart  delighteth  ; 

The  light  of  God  is  everywhere  manifested. 

God  hath  fulfilled  all  Nanak’s  desires. 

Man  after  long  transmigration  having  obtained 
human  birth,  ought  to  endeavour  to  utilize  it  and 
work  out  his  deliverance  : — 

In  how  many  births  wert  thou  a worm  or  a moth  ! 

In  how  many  births  an  elephant,  a fish,  or  a deer  ! 

In  how  many  births  a bird  or  a serpent  ! 

In  how  many  births  wert  thou  yoked  as  a horse  or  an 


132 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Meet  the  Lord  of  the  world — this  is  the  time  to  meet  Him. 

After  a long  period  this  human  body  hath  been  formed 
for  thee. 

In  how  many  births  wert  thou  created  in  rocks  and  moun- 
tains ! 

In  how  many  births  wert  thou  aborted  from  the  womb ! 

In  how  many  births  wert  thou  born  as  a vegetable  ! 

Thou  didst  wander  through  the  eighty-four  lakhs  of 
existences. 

Human  birth  having  now  been  obtained  by  thee,  associate 
with  the  saints, 

Perform  service,  repeat  God’s  name  under  the  guidance 
of  the  Guru, 

And  renounce  pride,  falsehood,  and  insolence. 

If  thou  be  dead  when  alive,  thou  shalt  be  acceptable  in 
God’s  court  • 

0 God,  whatever  hath  been  or  shall  be  is  Thy  work. 

There  is  none  other  fit  to  perform  it. 

Man  shall  meet  Thee,  O Lord,  if  Thou  cause  him  to  do  so. 

Saith  Nanak,  sing  God’s  praises. 

Man  in  his  present  state  of  probation  ought  to 
practise  holiness : — 

Sow  the  Name  in  this  productive  soil,^ 

And  thy  desires  shall  be  accomplished  ; 

Thou  shalt  obtain  the  fruit  of  thy  labour  and  the  fear 
of  Death  shall  be  dispelled. 

Ever  sing  God’s  attributes  and  praises  ; 

Clasp  His  name  to  thy  heart, 

And  thou  shalt  quickly  attain  thine  object. 

Fix  thine  attention  upon  God, 

And  thou  shalt  obtain  honour  at  His  court. 

Abandon  all  thy  tricks  and  devices  of  speech, 

And  cling  to  the  feet  of  holy  men. 

He  in  whose  power  all  men  are, 

Shall  never  be  separated  from  us,  but  shall  be  with  us 
alway. 

^ That  is,  in  the  human  body.  In  his  Sanskrit  Dictionary  Apte 
translates  karm  bhumi,  this  world,  a place  of  probation. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  133 

Abandon  shifts  ; grasp  His  protection, 

And  in  a moment  thou  shalt  obtain  deliverance. 

Know  that  He  is  ever  near  thee. 

Receive  God’s  commands  as  true  and  obey  them. 

Under  the  Guru’s  instruction  efface  thyself 
And  repeat  God’s  name,  O Nanak. 

Man  ought  to  show  gratitude  to  God  for  His  many 
favours : — 

During  the  eight  watches  of  the  day  meditate  on  that 
God 

Who  made  thee  a jewel  out  of  earth, 

Who  carefully  preserved  thee  in  the  womb, 

And  who  bestowed  on  thee  renown  and  greatness. 

O All-pervading,  may  I obtain  the  dust  of  Thy  saints’ 
feet ! 

O men,  meet  the  Guru  and  meditate  on  my  Lord. 

My  mind  forgetteth  not  that  God, 

Who  turneth  a foolish  man  into  a preacher. 

Who  turneth  a senseless  into  a sensible  man. 

And  by  whose  favour  the  nine  treasures  are  obtained. 
May  I day  and  night  at  every  breath  remember  Him 
Who  giveth  a home  to  the  homeless. 

Who  giveth  honour  to  the  unhonoured. 

Who  fulfilleth  all  desires. 

And  by  whose  favour  the  chains  of  mammon  are  cut  otf ! 
By  the  favour  of  the  Guru  poison  hath  become  nectar. 
Saith  Nanak,  nothing  is  accomplished  by  man — 

Praise  ye  the  Preserver. 

The  advantages  of  devotion  : — 

Hear  the  Word  of  God  and  thy  uncleanness  shall  depart ; 
Thou  shalt  become  very  pure  and  obtain  enduring  ^ hap- 
piness. 

By  good  fortune  the  society  of  holy  men  is  obtained, 
And  love  to  the  Supreme  Being  produced. 

God  saveth  His  servants  who  repeat  His  name. 

And  conducteth  them  across  the  great  sea  of  fire. 

^ Sail,  a rock  or  a mountain. 


134  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

By  singing  God’s  praises  the  heart  is  refreshed, 

And  the  sins  of  many  births  blotted  out. 

I behold  in  my  heart  God’s  whole  treasure  ; 

Why  should  I now  go  searching  for  it  abroad  ? 

When  the  Master  is  kind, 

His  servant’s  labour  is  already  accomplished. 

Remember,  remember,  remember  the  attributes  of  Him, 
Who  having  cut  off  thy  shackles  hath  made  thee  His 
servant. 

There  is  but  one  God  in  the  heart  and  in  every  place  : 
He  filleth  the  whole  world. 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  dispelled  all  my  doubts. 

By  remembering  God,  Nanak  hath  obtained  comfort. 

The  human  race  tends  to  degenerate  : — 

They  who  arc  dead  have  passed  away  ; 

They  who  survive  stand  with  their  loins  girded  : 

Looking  to  the  occupations  in  which  the  former  were 
engaged. 

The  latter  have  contracted  twice  their  load  of  mammon. 
They  are  entangled  in  things  which  are  perishable. 

And  think  not  of  the  last  hour. 

The  foolish  person  is  bound  by  desire. 

And  involved  in  lust,  anger,  and  worldly  love  : 

Dharmraj  standeth  over  him  : 

He  eateth  poison  deeming  it  to  be  sweet,  and  saith 
‘ I shall  take  mine  enemy  captive  and  punish  him  ; 

Who  shall  dare  set  foot  on  my  soil  ? 

I am  a pandit,  I am  clever  and  wise.’ 

Attached  to  the  world  man  knoweth  not  the  Creator  : 
Only  God  knoweth  His  own  state  and  condition. 

What  can  one  say  ? How  can  any  one  describe  Him  ? 
Man  is  engaged  in  whatever  duties  God  appointed  for 
him. 

Every  one  prayeth  to  secure  his  own  advantage. 
Everything  is  Thine  ; Thou  art  the  Creator. 

Thou  hast  no  end  or  limits. 

Bestow  this  boon  upon  Thy  slave  Nanah, 

That  he  may  never  forget  Thy  name. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  135 

They  who  without  service  to  God  are  attached  to 
mammon  shall  regret  when  it  is  too  late  : — 

Man  is  not  satisfied  with^vast  wealth. 

It  is  not  sufficient  for  him  to  see  many  phases  of  life ; 
he  desireth  to  see  more  ; 

He  is  entangled  with  children  and  wife,  deeming  them  his 
own  ; 

But  his  wealth  shall  perish,  and  his  children  and  wife 
become  heaps  of  ashes  ; 

Then  shall  you  behold  him  lamenting  without  God’s  name. 

Accursed  the  bodies,  accursed  the  wealth  of  the  lovers  of 
mammon. 

All  wealth  is  God's;  it  is  but  given  to  man  for 
brief  use : — 

As  when  one  putteth  a bag  of  money  on  the  head  of 
a forced  labourer  ; 

The  money  reacheth  the  master’s  house,  but  the  labourer 
suffer eth  pain. 

As  when  a beggar  in  a dream  sitteth  on  a king’s  throne, 

On  opening  his  eyes  he  findeth  it  a baseless  phantom. 

As  when  a watchman  is  placed  over  another’s  field, 

. The  field  belongeth  to  its  owner,  and  the  watchman  leaveth 
when  his  business  is  done. 

Even  though  the  watchman  strive  vigorously, 

He  shall  not  become  owner  of  the  field. 

He  to  whom  the  empire  of  the  world  belongeth  hath  sent 
it  as  a dream. 

He  who  made  Maya  hath  infused  avarice  into  mankind, 

God  Himself  destroyeth,  He  Himself  restoreth. 

Nanak,  offer  thy  supplication  unto  Him. 

Men  in  previous  births  held  high  positions,  but 
are  not  now  happy  until  saints  tell  them  of  God  : — 

I have  seen  many  forms  and  species  of  mammon  ; 

With  my  pen  I have  written  ingenious  things  on  paper  ; 

I have  known  what  it  is  to  be  a chief,  a king,  a lord  ; 

But  with  all  that  my  mind  was  not  satisSed. 


136  THE  SI'KH  RELIGION 

O,  ye  saints,  show  me  that  comfort, 

By  which  my  thirst  may  be  quenched  and  my  mind 
satisfied. 

I had  fleet  horses  and  elephants  to  ride  on, 

Distilled  aloe  wood,  sandal,  couches,  and  beautiful  women. 
Actors  sang  for  me  at  performances  in  the  arena. 

Yet  with  all  that  my  heart  was  not  satisfied. 

Mine  were  thrones,  courts,  jewels,  and  carpets. 

All  fruits,  beautiful  gardens. 

And  the  occupation  of  the  chase,  the  sport  of  kings. 

Yet  my  heart  was  not  happy  ; all  was  illusion  and  decep- 
tion. 

The  saints  of  their  kindness  told  me  of  the  True  One, 
And  in  Him  I found  all  comfort  and  joy. 

Sing  God’s  praises  in  the  company  of  the  saints ; 

• Saith  Nanak,  they  are  met  by  great  good  fortune. 

He  who  hath  God  as  his  wealth  is  happy. 

By  God’s  mercy  the  company  of  the  saints  is  obtained. 

Men  are  entangled  in  mammon  as  birds  in  a net : — 

Man  thinketh  that  his  body  is  his  own  ; 

Again  and  again  he  clingeth  to  it. 

Children,  wives,  and  household  are  entanglements 
Which  prevent  man  from  becoming  the  servant  of  God. 
What  is  that  way  by  which  God’s  praises  may  be  sung  ? 
What  is  that  skill  by  which  man  may  escape  from  mam- 
mon ? 

What  is  for  man’s  good  he  deemeth  evil. 

If  one  tell  him  the  truth,  he  regardeth  it  as  poison.^ 

He  knoweth  not  what  is  for  his  profit  or  his  loss. 

That  is  how  the  infidel  is  entangled  in  the  world. 

The  fool  drinketh  what  is  deadly  poison  for  him. 

And  deemeth  bitter  the  ambrosial  Name. 

He  never  approacheth  the  company  of  the  saints  ; 

He  wandereth  through  the  eighty-four  lakhs  of  existences. 
Birds  after  enjoying  pleasures  of  various  descriptions, 

1 There  is  a Panjabi  proverb — Sack  minhiinjhulh  gw,  ptr  paisa, 
ram  gur.  Truth  is  pepper,  falsehood  sugar,  money  is  the  spiritual 
guide,  and  woman  the  master. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  137 

Are  all  caught  in  the  same  net.^ 

Saith  Nanak,  the  perfect  Guru  hath  cut  the  net 
For  whomsoever  he  is  merciful.^ 

God’s  mercy  and  man’s  supplication : — 

By  Thy  mercy,  O God,  the  way  is  found  ; 

By  Thy  mercy  the  Name  is  meditated  on  ; 

By  Thy  mercy  man  is  released  from  his  fetters  ; 

By  Thy  mercy  pride  is  dispelled. 

If  Thou  appoint  me  to  Thy  service  I will  perform  it. 

I can  do  nothing  of  myself,  O God. 

If  it  please  Thee,  I sing  Thy  word  ; 

If  it  please  Thee,  I call  Thee  the  True  One  ; 

If  it  please  Thee,  the  true  Guru  is  kind. 

All  happiness,  O God,  is  obtained  from  Thy  mercy. 

Pure  is  the  act  which  pleaseth  Thee  ; 

True  is  the  faith  which  pleaseth  Thee. 

The  treasury  of  all  excellences  is  with  Thee. 

Thou  art  the  Lord,  Thy  servant  maketh  Thee  this  sup- 
plication— 

‘ May  my  soul  and  body  become  pure  through  the  love 
of  God  ! 

May  I obtain  all  happiness  in  the  Society  of  the  saints  ! 
May  my  soul  be  dyed  with  Thy  name  ! ’ 

This  Nanak  deemeth  supreme  happiness. 

Of  all  relishes  none  so  sweet  as  God’s  name  : — 

0 my  tongue,  thy  thirst  departeth  not  for  an  instant, 
However  many  sweets  thou  tasteth. 

If  thou  now  taste  the  sweetness  of  God, 

Thou  shalt  be  astonished  on  tasting  it. 

My  beloved  tongue,  drink  the  nectar  of  God's  name : 
Steeped  in  this  relish  thou  shalt  be  satiated. 

O my  tongue,  sing  thou  God’s  praises  ; 

Every  moment  meditate  on  God. 

The  association  of  the  saints  is  obtained  by  good  fortune  ; 

^ Men  are  captured  by  mammon. 

^ To  admit  of  his  emancipation. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


138 

Go  to  none  but  them,^and  hear  no  words  but  theirs.^ 
During  the  eight  watches,  O my  tongue,  adore 
The  supreme  God,  the  unfathomable  Lord, 

And  thou  shalt  be  ever  happy  in  this  world  and  the  next. 
By  singing  His  praises,  0 my  tongue,  thou  shalt  be  beyond 
all  price. 

Plants  and  trees  may  burst  into  flower  and  fruit  and 
sweet  may  be  their  flavour^ 

But  God’s  name  once  tasted  thou  shalt  never  forsake. 

No  other  relish  ^ can  equal  it. 

Saith  Nanak,  the  Guru  hath  become  my  succourer. 

God  who  resides  in  the  heart  is  the  great  merchant 
with  whom  the  saints  deal : — 

The  heart  is  a building,  the  body  is  a fence  constructed 
round  it  ; 

Within  it  are  countless  things  ; 

Within  it,  we  hear,  dwelleth  the  Merchant. 

Who  are  the  dealers  who  enjoy  credit  with  Him  ? 

Few  there  are  who  deal  in  the  precious  Name, 

Who  eat  its  nectar  as  food, 

And  devote  their  soul  and  body  to  God’s  service. 

What  is  the  way  by  which  God  will  be  pleased  ? 

Who  is  the  man  who  will  introduce  me  to  that  traffic  ? 

I will  touch  his  feet  and  renounce  all  ideas  of  mine  and 
thine. 

How  shall  I reach  the  Merchant’s  palace  ? 

How  shall  I be  invited  to  enter  it  ? 

Thou  art  the  great  Merchant  who  hast  millions  of  dealers. 
Who  is  that  benefactor  who  will  associate  me  with  them  ? 
Searching  and  searching  I have  found  my  home. 

The  true  one  hath  shown  me  the  priceless  jewel. 

Saith  Nanak,  by  faith  in  the  Guru 

He  will  mercifully  blend  us  with  the  Merchant. 

^ These  two  lines  arc  also  translated — 

Only  go  to  that  association  of  the  saints  in  which  nothing  is 
heard  but  God’s  name ; 

It  is  obtained  by  good  fortune. 

^ Ras  kas — Kas  is  probably  alliterative.  Some  suppose  it  to  be  a con- 
traction of  kasela^  astringent,  one  of  the  six  relishes  of  Indian  cookery. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  139 

The  saints’  occupation,  attributes,  and  praises : — 

Night  and  day  the  pious  abide  in  the  love  of  the  one  God, 

They  believe  God  ever  with  them  ; 

They  make  the  repetition  of  God’s  name  their  occupation  ; 

They  are  satisfied  and  comforted  by  His  sight. 

On  entering  the  asylum  of  the  perfect  Guru 

They  become  enamoured  of  God,  and  their  minds  and 
bodies  grow  happy. 

God’s  lotus  feet  are  the  support  of  their  souls. 

They  behold  Him  alone  and  carry  out  His  orders  ; 

They  deal  in  only  one  thing,  they  occupy  themselves  with 
only  one  thing  ; 

They  think  of  nothing  but  the  Formless  One  ; 

They  arc  free  from  both  joy  and  sorrow  ; 

They  are  ever  separated  from  the  world,  and  devoted  to 
religion  ; 

They  are  seen  among  the  crowd,  but  are  not  of  it ; 

They  fix  their  attention  on  the  supreme  God. 

How  can  I describe  the  glory  of  the  saints  ? 

Their  wisdom  is  unfathomable,  and  cannot  be  sounded. 

O supreme  God,  have  mercy  on  me. 

And  bestow  on  Nanak  the  dust  of  Thy  saints’  feet. 

The  general  prevalence  of  mammon  : — 

Maya  is  contained  in  the  rejoicing  and  mourning  diffused 
throughout  the  world  ; 

She  is  contained  in  heaven,  hell,  and  the  incarnations  ; 

She  is  contained  in  the  rich,  the  poor,  and  those  who  are 
conspicuous  for  their  splendour  ; 

She  is  contained  in  covetousness  which  is  the  root  of 
trouble  ; 

She  is  contained  in  the  world  in  various  forms. 

O God,  the  saints  live  by  Thy  protection,  and  are  not 
subject  to  Maya. 

Maya  is  contained  in  him  who  is  intoxicated  with  intel- 
lectual pride  ; 

She  is  contained  in  him  who  is  attached  to  children  and 
wife ; 

She  is  contained  in  elephants,  horses,  and  other  animals  ; 


140  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

She  is  contained  in  him  who  is  intoxicated  with  the  wine 
of  beauty  and  youth  ; 

She  is  contained  in  kings,  in  the  poor,  and  in  those  addicted 
to  pleasures ; 

She  is  contained  in  the  songs  and  musical  instruments 
heard  at  assemblies  ; 

She  is  contained  in  couches,  in  palaces,  and  their  orna- 
ments ; 

She  is  contained  in  the  evil  passions  which  render  man 
blind  ; 

She  is  contained  in  him  who  performeth  religious  cere- 
monies prompted  by  pride  ; 

She  is  contained  in  the  family  man  ; she  is  contained  in 
the  anchoret ; 

She  is  contained  in  human  occupations  and  conduct ; she 
is’  contained  in  caste  ; 

She  is  contained  in  everything  except  in  those  who  arc 
imbued  with  God’s  love. 

God  hath  cut  off  the  entanglements  of  the  saints ; 

How  can  she  be  contained  in  them  ? 

Saith  Nanak,  Maya  approacheth  not  those 

Who  have  obtained  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 

While  the  senses  are  asleep,  the  deadly  sins  rob 
the  body ; — 

The  eyes  sleep  ^ while  coveting  others’  property  ; 

The  ears  sleep  on  hearing  tales  of  slander  ; 

The  tongue  sleepeth  in  the  desire  for  the  relish  of  sweet 
things  ; 

The  mind  sleepeth  admiring  mammon. 

In  this  world  few  are  watchful ; 

They  who  are  receive  their  boon  whole. 

All  the  senses  are  intoxicated  with  their  own  pleasures, 

And  take  no  thought  of  the  body  they  inhabit ; 

Wherefore  the  five  plunderers  and  highway  robbers 

Tall  upon  its  unguarded  citadel  to  plunder  it. 

\a\ber  nor  mother  can  protect  man  from  them  ; 

Neither  friend  nor  brother  can  protect  man  from  them  ; 

^ Sleep  towards  God,  regard  Him  not. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  141 

They  are  not  restrained  by  bribes  or  diplomacy  ; 

They  are  only  controlled  by  the  society  of  the  saints. 
Have  mercy  on  me,  O God ; 

Grant  me  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet  for  all  my  treasure. 
He  who  meeting  the  true  Guru  is  awake  in  the  love  of 
God, 

O Nanak,  hath  the  capital  stock  of  his  human  life  intact 
He  to  whom  God  is  merciful  is  awake  ; _ 

His  capital  stock,  wealth,  and  property  remain  whole. 

God’s  praises  and  glory  and  the  advantages  of 
remembering  Him : — 

There  is  none  besides  Him 

In  whose  power  are  lords  and  emperors  ; 

In  whose  power  is  the  whole  world  ; 

Who  hath  created  everything. 

Address  thy  supplication  to  the  true  Guru, 

That  he  may  arrange  all  thine  affairs. 

His  court  is  the  most  exalted  of  all ; 

His  name  is  the  prop  of  all  the  saints. 

The  Lord  whose  glory  shineth  in  every  heart, 

Is  contained  in  everything,  and  filleth  creation. 

By  remembering  Him  the  abode  of  sorrow  is  demolished  ; 
By  remembering  Him  Death  molesteth  us  not ; 

By  remembering  Him  what  is  withered  becometh  green  ; 
By  remembering  Him  the  sinking  stone  floateth  ; 

Victory  be  ever  to  the  society  of  the  saints  ! 

God’s  name  is  the  support  of  the  lives  of  His  servants. 
Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O God,  my  supplication — 

By  the  favour  of  the  saints,  grant  me  to  dwell  in  Thy 
name. 

The  advantages  of  repeating  and  writing  God’s 
name : — 

Ever  repeat  God’s  praises  with  thy  tongue, 

And  thou  shalt  obtain  happiness,  0 my  brother  and  friend. 
Write  with  pen,  paper,  and  ink 
The  ambrosial  word  of  God’s  name. 

Thy  hand  shall  then  become  pure, 


142  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

And  the  entanglements  of  Maya  shall  be  destroyed. 

By  thus  acting  all  thy  sins  shall  depart. 

By  remembering  God  Death  shall  not  punish  thee  ; 

The  myrmidons  of  Dharmraj  shall  not  look  at  thee  ; 
And  even  though  engaged  with  the  world  it  shall  not 
fascinate  thee. 

Thou  shalt  be  saved  thyself,  and  shalt  save  the  world 
By  repeating  the  name  of  the  one  God. 

When  God’s  name  hath  entered  thy  heart, 

Make  use  of  it  thyself  and  advise  others  to  do  so. 

He  on  whose  forehead  the  wealth  of  the  Name 
Hath  been  written,  shall  repeat  it. 

Sing  God’s  praises  throughout  the  day  : 

Saith  Nanak,  I am  a sacrifice  unto  Him. 

. Men  act  perversely  : — 

What  belongeth  to  another  we  deem  our  own  ; 

Our  hearts  are  attached  to  what  ought  to  be  abandoned. 
Say  how  shall  the  Lord  of  the  earth  be  found. 

We  love  what  is  forbidden  ; 

What  is  false  we  deem  true. 

The  heart  is  in  no  wise  attached  to  what  is  true. 

We  go  crookedly  by  the  left  way  ; 

Leaving  the  straight  way  we  wend  backwards. 

God  is  the  Lord  of  the  two  worlds — 

Nanak,  he  who  meeteth  Him  shall  be  saved. 

The  Guru  in  his  humility  feels  himself  unequal  to 
worthily  adoring  God  : — 

What  form  of  Thine  shall  I adore  ? 

By  whcit  science  of  Jog  shall  I discipline  my  body  ? 
\\diat  art  is  that  by  which  I can  sing  Thy  praises  ? 

What  speech  is  that,  O supreme  God,  by  which  I may 
please  Thee  ? 

What  worship  of  Thine  shall  I perform  ? 

What  way  is  that  by  which  I may  cross  the  terrible  ocean  ? 
What  is  that  penance  by  which  I may  become  penitent  ? 
What  is  that  Name  by  which  the  filth  of  pride  may  be 
washed  away  ? 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  143 

vSkill,  worship,  divine  knowledge,  meditation,  and  the  fruit 
of  all  his  toil 

Are  obtained  by  him,  O Nanak,  whom  the  compassionate 
true  Guru  kindly  meeteth. 

It  is  such  a man  who  possesseth  excellence  ; it  is  he  who 
knoweth  God  ; 

And  the  Giver  of  comfort  granteth  his  prayers. 

The  Guru  exhorts  his  soul  to  practise  devotion  : — 

0 my  soul,  desire  Him 
In  whom  there  is  no  deficiency  : 

O my  soul,  make  that  beloved  God  thy  friend. 

And  ever  remember  Him  who  is  the  support  of  life. 

O my  soul,  serve  Him 

Who  is  the  primal  Being  and  infinite  God. 

O my  soul,  place  thy  hope  in  Him 
Who  is  the  trusted  of  every  age. 

Nanak,  on  meeting  the  Guru,  singeth  the  praises  of  God, 
Whose  love  ever  conferreth  happiness. 

Who  are  the  really  great : — 

They  who  appear  to  be  very  great  in  this  world 
Suffer  from  the  malady  of  anxiety. 

Who  is  great  by  reason  of  the  greatness  of  his  wealth  ? 
He  is  great  who  devoteth  his  love  to  God. 

Landowners  ever  strive  for  land  ; 

Their  covetousness  is  never  extinguished  ; but  they  must 
leave  their  lands  and  depart. 

Saith  Nanak,  the  real  thing  I consider  is. 

That  without  repeating  God’s  name  there  is  no  deliver- 
ance. 

A man  without  piety  is  less  useful  than  a beast : — 

Man  eateth  many  species  of  food  like  a beast ; 

He  is  bound  like  a thief  by  the  rope  of  worldly  love  ; 

His  mortal  body  without  the  company  of  the  saints 
Is  tortured  in  the  womb  by  transmigration. 

, He  weareth  beautiful  clothes  of  various  sorts 
Like  a scarecrow  in  the  fields  to  frighten  c^nimals  away. 


144 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  bodies  of  all  creatures  are  of  use, 

But  man’s  is  useless  unless  he  utter  the  Name. 

Saith  Nanak,  he  to  whom  God  is  merciful 
Uttereth  God’s  name  in  the  company  of  the  saints. 

The  Guru’s  mission  is  accomplished  : — 

The  word  of  the  Guru  hath  dispelled  all  trouble  and 
affliction  ; 

Transmigration  is  at  an  end,  and  all  happiness  attained. 
By  meditating  on  the  Fearless  God,  fear  is  extinct. 

I have  sung  the  praises  of  God  in  the  company  of  His 
saints. 

I have  put  his  lotus  feet  within  my  heart. 

The  Guru  hath  taken  me  across  the  sea  of  fire  ; 

The  perfect  Guru  extricated  me  when  I was  drownipg : 
The  Guru  united  me  with  God,  though  separated  from 
Him  in  various  births. 

Saith  Nanak,  I am  a sacrifice  to  that  Guru 
By  meeting  whom  my  salvation  hath  been  accomplished. 

The  following  is  repeated  by  Sikhs  over  a sick 
person : — 

Things  which  were  withered  God  in  a moment  maketh 
green. 

His  ambrosial  glance  irrigateth  and  reviveth  them. 

The  perfect  God  removeth  all  affliction. 

When  He  bestoweth  His  service  on  His  servant. 

Anxiety  is  removed  and  the  heart’s  desires  fulfilled. 

When  the  true  Guru,  who  is  an  embodiment  of  good 
qualities,  showeth  mercy. 

Sorrow  fleeth  away,  and  happiness  taketh  its  place — 

In  this  there  is  no  delay — when  God  giveth  the  order. 

. Our  desires  are  fulfilled  when  the  true  Guru  is  found  ; 
Nanak,  they  who'- find  Him  bear  good  fruit. 

They  who  seek  God  aright  have  no  fear : — 

The  whole  world  is  sunk  in  fear  ; 

But  he  .who  hath  the  Name  for  his  support  hath  no  fedr. 
He,  0 Lord,  who  taketh  Thy  protection  feareth  not : 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


145 


What  pleaseth  Thee  must  be  done. 

They  who  mourn  and  rejoice  suffer  transmigration, 

While  they  who  are  pleasing  to  the  Lord  obtain  comfort. 
Maya  pervadeth  this  fiery  ocean  of  the  world : 

They  who  have  found  the  true  Guru  have  recovered. 

O God,  the  Preserver,  preserve  me  ! 

Saith  Nanak,  what  a poor  creature  am  I ! 

Worthless  is  the  body  without  the  Name  : — 

Mouths  without  the  Name  are  empty 
Like  husks  devoid  of  grain. 

O mortal,  ever  repeat  God’s  name  : 

Without  it  woe  to  the  body,  which  shall  then  become 
Death’s  ^ prey  ; 

Without  it  the  countenance  loseth  its  lustre.^ 

Without  her  spouse  where  is  the  wife  ? ® 

When  through  devotion  to  the  pleasures  of  the  world 
man  forgetteth  the  Name, 

His  desires  are  never  fulfilled. 

Saith  Nanak,  O God,  mercifully  grant  me  the  favour 
Of  repeating  Thy  name  day  and  night. 

Man’s  sins  cannot  be  concealed  from  God  : — 

Man  doeth  evil  but  pretendeth  to  do  good  : 

For  this  he  shall  be  bound  like  a thief  in  God’s  court. 

He  who  uttereth  the  Name  is  a saint  of  God — 

Who  is  equally  contained  in  sea,  land,  the  nether  regions, 
and  the  firmament — 

He  who  uttereth  words  of  nectar  while  in  his  heart  is 
poison, 

Shall  be  bound  and  punished  in  Death’s  city. 

The  sins  which  man  committeth  behind  many  screens 
Shall  in  a moment  be  laid  bare  to  th^  world. 

Nanak,  God  will  be  merciful  to  him 

^ Birdni.  Literally — another’s. 

2 Bhdg,  Literally — fortune,  then  the  lustre  of  the  face  produced 
by  good  fortune — a Panjabi  idiom. 

® Suhdg,  Literally — the  married  state.  The  meaning  i»,  there  can 
be  no  happiness  without  God. 


SIKH.  Ill 


L 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


146 

In  whose  heart  is  the  truth,  and  who  is  dyed  with  the 
love  of  the  Name. 

Man  ought  to  show  his  gratitude  to  God  by  remem- 
bering Him  : — 

Why  should  we  show  neglect  to  Him,  O mother, 

Who  hath  bestowed  on  us  raiment  and  food  ? 

He  who  forgetteth  the  Lord  and  attacheth  himself  to 
others, 

Exchangeth  a gem  for  a kauri. 

Man  may  forsake  God,  fascinated  by  other  deities  ; 

But  who  hath  honour  by  saluting  a slave  instead  of  his 
master  ? 

Man  taketh  food  and  drink  tasting  like  nectar  ; 

But  the  dog  knoweth  not  Him  who  gave  them. 

Saith  Nanak,  we  are  ungrateful ; 

Pardon  us,  O God,  Thou  Searcher  of  hearts. 

The  advantage  of  meditation  on  God : — 

Meditation  in  my  heart  on  God’s  feet 
Is  for  me  equal  to  bathing  and  ablutions  at  all  places  of 
pilgrimage. 

Remember  God  every  day,  O my  brethren, 

And  the  impurity  of  millions  of  births  shall  be  washed 
away. 

Piety  is  for  man's  advantage  : — 

Men  have  made  God  their  friend  for  their  own  advantage  ; 
He  fulfilleth  all  their  desires  and  granteth  them  the 
dignity  of  salvation. 

Let  all  so  make  God  their  friend 
That  none  may  depart  in  vain. 

God  removeth  the  sorrows,  pains,  and  maladies  of  those 
Who  for  their  own  objects  hold  Him  in  their  hearts. 

All  their  desires  are  fulfilled. 

Who  practise  repetition  of  God’s  name  with  their  tongues. 
Nanak  is  many  times  a sacrifice  unto  them — 

Profitable  is  a sight  of  my  God. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  147 

The  advantage  of  listening  to  divine  instruction : — 

Hear  the  story  of  God  in  the  company  of  the  saints, 

And  millions  of  obstacles  to  deliverance  shall  be  removed 
in  a moment. 

By  drinking  the  nectareous  juice  of  God’s  excellences  and 
praises 

And  adoring  His  feet,  hunger  and  thirst  shall  depart. 

He  in  whose  heart  God  dwelleth, 

Possesseth  the  complete  treasure  of  happiness,  comfort, 
and  peace. 

Medicines,  charms,  and  spells  are  all  in  vain  : 

Clasp  the  Creator  to  thy  heart. 

Abandon  all  doubts,  repeat  the  name  of  the  Supreme 
Being  ; 

And  such  religion,  saith  Nanak,  shall  be  unshaken. 

God  is  omnipotent  to  save  : — 

The  deadly  sins  like  robbers  were  with  me  all  day  long. 
But  God  mercifully  dispersed  them. 

Let  every  one  repeat  with  love  the  name  of  God 
Who  is  full  of  all  resources.^ 

God  in  a moment  causeth  man  to  cross  over 
The  very  seething  ocean  of  the  world. 

Man’s  many  shackles  can  only  be  burst 
By  remembering  the  Name  ; thus  he  obtaineth  the  reward 
of  salvation. 

Man  can  accomplish  nothing  by  tricks  or  devices  of  speech. 
Saith  Nanak,  show  mercy  to  me,  O God,  that  I may  sing 
Thy  praises. 

Meditation  on  God  and  obedience  to  His  word 
are  potent  for  salvation  : — 

The  mortal,  whether  learned  or  unlearned, 

Who  meditateth  on  God,  attaineth  the  supreme  state. 

In  the  company  of  the  saints  remember  God. 

Without  the  Name  false  is  wealth  and  property. 

He  who  obeyeth  the  voice  of  God 
Is  handsome,  clever,  and  wise. 

^ That  is,  from  whom  all  power  proceeds. 

L 2 


148 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Profitable  is  his  advent  into  the  world 
Who  recognizeth  his  Lord  in  every  heart 
Saith  Nanak,  he  who  is  very  fortunate 
Applieth  his  mind  to  God’s  feet. 

Incongruities : — 

Infidels  consort  not  with  God’s  servants  ; 

The  former  are  sinful ; the  latter  love  God. 

The  association  would  be  as  unmeet  as  if  one  who  cannot 
ride  were  put  astride  a thoroughbred  ^ mare ; 

As  if  an  impotent  man  were  to  caress  a woman ; 

As  if  a spancel  were  put  on  an  ox  to  milk  him  ; 

As  if  a man  were  to  mount  a cow  and  chase  a lion ; 

As  if  one  were  to  worship  a sheep  instead  of  the  cow 
Kamdhen,  which  granteth  all  desires ; 

As  if  one  were  to  pursue  trade  without  capital. 

Nanak,  repeat  God’s  name  in  thy  heart ; 

Remember  a friend  like  the  Lord  God. 

The  saints*  love  of  God  illustrated  by  familiar 
examples : — 

As  a wife  is  delighted  on  beholding  her  spouse, 

As  God’s  servant  liveth  by  remembering  His  name. 

As  a mother  reviveth  on  beholding  her  son, 

So  God’s  servant  loveth  God  who  is  the  warp  and  woof. 
As  an  avaricious  man  rejoiceth  on  acquiring  wealth. 

So  God’s  servant’s  heart  is  attached  to  His  lotus  feet. 
They  who  bear  such  love  to  God 

Enjoy  the  greatest  good  fortune  : He  blendeth  them 
with  Himself. 

May  I not  forget  Thee  even  for  a moment.  Thou  beneficent 
One  ! 

Nanak’s  God  is  the  support  of  the  soul. 

The  following  was  addressed  to  a hypocritical 
Brahman ; — 

Thou  openest  thy  waistcloth,  and  spreadest  some  of  it 
beneath  thee ; 


^ Singdri.  Literally — decorated. 


149 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

Thou  loadest  thy  belly  like  a donkey  ; 

But  without  good  works,  deliverance  is  not  obtained — 

The  boon  of  deliverance  is  granted  to  meditation  on  the 
Name. 

Thou  performest  worship  and  ablutions,  and  appliest 
sacrificial  marks  to  thy  forehead  ; 

Thou  pullest  out  a knife  to  threaten  suicide  if  alms  be  not 
given  thee  ; 

Thou  recitest  the  Veds  with  tuneful  voice. 

Slirinkest  thou  not  from  killing  creatures;^  O mortal  ? 

Saith  Nanak,  he  to  whom  God  showeth  mercy 

Is  pure  in  heart  and  meditateth  upon  Him. 

The  condition  of  those  who  are  imbued  with  God's 
love  : — 

They  who  are  imbued  with  God’s  love  burn  not  in  the 
flames  ; ^ 

They  who  are  imbued  with  God’s  love  are  not  deceived 
by  Maya  ; 

They  who  are  imbued  with  God’s  love  are  not  drowned 
in  the  water  ; 

They  who  are  imbued  with  God’s  love  bear  good  fruit  : 

By  God’s  name  all  their  fear  is  dispelled  ; 

They  meet  the  society  of  the  saints,  and  sing  God’s  praises. 

He  who  is  imbued  with  God’s  love  is  freed  from  all 
anxieties  ; 

He  who  rcceiveth  the  Guru’s  spell  becometh  attciched  to 
God  ; 

He  who  is  imbued  with  God’s  love  hath  no  fear  of  Death  ; 

He  who  is  imbued  with  God’s  love  hath  his  desires  ful- 
filled ; 

He  who  is  imbued  with  God’s  love  suffereth  not  misery  ; 

He  who  is  imbued  with  God’s  love  is  watchful  night  and 
day ; , 

He  who  is  imbued  with  God’s  love  abideth  in  the  abode 
of  happiness ; 

^ Leading  men  astray  arid  ruining  them. 

^ They  do  not  suffer  from  avarice  or  covetousness. 


150 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  who  is  imbued  with  God’s  love  is  preserved  from 
doubts  and  fears  ; 

He  who  is  imbued  with  God’s  love  obtaineth  the  highest 
wisdom  ; 

He  who  is  imbued  with  God’s  love  is  pure. 

Saith  Nanak,  1 am  a sacrifice  to  those 

Who  forget  not  my  God. 

God  helps  and  cherishes  His  servants : — 

He  Himself  is  His  servant’s  helper. 

Like  a father  and  mother  He  ever  cherisheth  him. 

Every  one  is  saved  by  entering  God’s  sanctuary. 

It  is  He  who  acteth  and  causeth  to  act ; He  is  omni- 
present and  true. 

. The  Creator  now  dwelleth  in  my  heart. 

Fear  is  extinct  and  my  soul  hath  obtained  all  happiness. 

God  mercifully  preserveth  His  servants, 

And  their  sins  of  many  births  fall  off. 

The  glory  of  God  cannot  be  described  : 

The  slave  Nanak  is  ever  in  His  sanctuary. 

Helpless  man  utters  his  wail  to  the  Almighty : — 

0 strong-armed  puissant  God,  ocean  of  happiness,  I am 
falling  into  the  pit  ; take  Thou  my  hand. 

Mine  ears  hear  not ; mine  eyes  see  not ; afflicted  and 
crippled  I cry  at  Thy  gate. 

Patron  of  the  poor  and  patronless,  full  of  mercy,  friend, 
father,  mother. 

Thou  who  causest  Thy  saints  to  cross  over  the  ocean  of 
fear — Nanak  holdeth  Thy  lotus  feet  within  his  heart. 

Without  the  Guru  man  has  not  wherewithal  to 

recommend  him  to  God 

Nwtne  1 meet  the  Lord  oi  the  0 

mother  ? 

I possess  no  beauty,  no  understanding,  no  strength ; I 

am  a stranger  come  from  afar. 

^ The  speaker  is  supposed  to  be  a woman. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  151 

I have  not  wealth  or  the  glory  of  youth  ; friendless  that 
I am,  unite  me,  O God,  with  Thee. 

Searching  and  searching  I have  renounced  the  world  ; 
I wander  thirsting  for  a sight  of  Thee. 

Compassionate  to  the  poor,  O merciful  God,  Nanak 
prayeth — quench  my  thirst  with  the  society  of  the  saints. 

Instruction  and  supplication  : — 

Depart,  bird  of  the  soul,  and  make  remembrance  of  God 
thy  pinions  ; 

Meet  the  saint,  embrace  his  society,  put  God’s  perfect 
jewel  into  thy  heart. 

Superstition  is  a pit,  the  thirst  for  pleasure  its  mire  ; 
very  entangling  is  the  noose  of  worldly  love. 

He  who  cutteth  it  is  God,  the  world’s  Guru  ; dwell  at 
His  lotus  feet. 

O God,  beloved  Master,  Lord  of  the  poor,  mercifully  hear 
my  supplication. 

O Nanak’s  Lord,  take  my  hand  ; the  soul  and  body  are 
all  Thy  capital. 

Though  God  is  in  every  heart,  some  men  are  good 
and  others  evil ; the  reason  is  known  only  to  God  : — 

O immortal  King, 

We  dwell  fearlessly  with  Thee  ; whence  cometh  this  fear  ? 

In  one  person  Thou  appearest  proud,  in  another 
lowly ; 

In  one  person  Thou  art  haughty,  in  another  humble  ; 

In  one  person  Thou  art  a pandit  and  preacher,  in  another 
Thou  art  stupid  ; 

In  one  person  Thou  graspest  at  everything,  in  another 
Thou  acceptest  nothing. 

What  can  man  the  poor  wooden  puppet  do  ? He  who 
setteth  the  puppet  in  motion  knoweth  its  condition ; 

It  playeth  the  part  lor  which  the  Player  dressed  it. 

He  hath  made  various  chambers  of  many  descriptions 
within  it,  and  He  Himself  guardeth  it. 

The  soul  must  remain  in  whatever  body  it  is  placed ; 
what  can  the  wretched  thing  do  ? 


152  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

He  who  made  something,  namely,  all  the  contrivance  of 
the  body,  knoweth  its  construction. 

Nanak,  the  infinite  God  knoweth  the  value  of  His  own 
work. 

Amid  the  pleasures  of  sin  man  thinks  not  of  death : — 

Abandon,  abandon,  the  pleasures  of  sin  : 

0 fool  and  madman,  thou  art  entangled  with  them,  and 
shall  be  punished  like  cattle  which  fall  upon  crops. 

What  thou  considerest  thine  advantage  shall  not  go  with 
thee  an  inch.^ 

Naked  didst  thou  come,  naked  shalt  thou  go  ; thou  shalt 
become  a morsel  for  Death,  and  return  to  a body  again  and 
again. 

Beholding  the  short-lived  sports  of  the  world,  thou  art 
absorbed  in  them,  and  laughest  while  they  last. 

The  string  of  life  weareth  away  day  and  night  ; thou 
hast  not  done  aught  for  thy  soul. 

Amid  vain  works  old  age  hath  come  upon  thee  ; thy  speech 
faileth  and  thy  body  wasteth  away. 

Since  that  fascinating  woman  bewitched  thee,  thy  love  for 
her  hath  in  no  wise  diminished. 

When  the  Guru  showed  me  that  such  was  the  world, 
I abandoned  pride  and  entered  Thy  sanctuary,  O God, 

The  saints  showed  me  the  way  to  God  ; the  slave  Nanak 
hath  adopted  God’s  service  and  praises. 

Thanksgiving : — 

Whom  have  I but  Thee, 

My  Beloved  ? Thou  art  the  support  of  the  soul. 

Only  Thou  knowest  the  state  of  my  heart  ; Thou  art 
my  friend  and  companion. 

1 have  obtained  all  happiness  from  Thee  ; Thou  art  in- 
tangible and  unequalled. 

I cannot  describe  Thy  play,  O ocean  of  merits,  Bestower 
of  happiness. 

The  unapproachable,  invisible,  and  imperishable  God  is 

kuoNvil  by  means  ot  the  peiieet  Gmn. 

^ ZasM,  two  vivde,  ot  tk  V'Neoly-footvVt  pwl 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  153 

Since  I have  destroyed  pride,  God  hath  banished  my 
doubts  and  fears,  and  made  me  completely  happy. 

By  showing  me  the  company  of  the  saints  Thou  hast 
put  an  end  to  my  anxiety  regarding  transmigration. 

I wash  their  feet  ; I serve  the  Guru  and  offer  myself 
a sacrifice  a hundred  thousand  times  to  him 

By  whose  favour  the  slave  Nanak  hath  crossed  the  terrible 
water  and  met  the  Beloved. 

The  bliss  of  the  holy  : — 

I am  a sacrifice  to  them 

Whose  sole  support  is  the  Name. 

How  shall  their  greatness  be  estimated  wlio  are  imbued 
with  the  love  of  the  supreme  Being  ? 

Happiness,  peace,  and  joy  are  with  them  ; there  are  no 
others  generous  as  they. 

They  who  thirst  for  a sight  of  God,  have  come  to  save 
the  world. 

They  who  have  sought  their  protection  have  been  saved, 
and  all  their  desires  fulfilled  in  the  company  of  the  saints. 

If  I fall  at  their  feet  I shall  survive ; I am  happy  in  the 
company  of  the  saints. 

0 God,  be  merciful  to  me  that  my  heart  may  become 
the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 

Empire,  youth,  and  life — whatever  is  seen  in  this  world 
decreaseth. 

Nanak  hath  earned  the  treasure  of  the  Name  which  is 
ever  new  and  pure. 

A Jogi  came  to  the  Guru  and  asked  him  if  he  had 
learned  the  science  of  Jog.  The  following  was  the 
Guru's  reply : — 

The  way  of  Jog  I have  heard  from  my  Guru  ; 

The  true  Guru  hath  communicated  to  me  the  Word. 

Every  moment  I bow  before  Him  who  is  contained  in 
the  nine  regions  of  the  earth  and  in  this  body. 

1 have  made  the  Guru’s  instruction  mine  earrings,  and 
have  set  up  the  one  God  %n  my  heart. 


154  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  five  pupils  collectively  I have  placed  under  the  con- 
trol of  One.^ 

When  the  organs  of  perception  and  action  were  obedient, 
then  I became  a pure  Jogi. 

I burnt  superstition  and  applied  its  ashes  to  my  body  ; 
the  sight  of  the  one  God  I made  my  sect. 

I have  resignedly  and  gladly  accepted  that  as  the  portion 
which  God  destined  for  me. 

Where  there  was  no  fear,  there  I assumed  my  devotional 
attitude,  and  the  ecstatic  sound  was  my  Jogi’s  horn. 

I have  made  meditation  on  God  my  staff,  and  love  of  the 
Name  my  rule  of  life. 

The  fetters  of  mammon  shall  be  struck  off  that  fortunate 
person  who  meeteth  such  a Jogi. 

Nanak  serveth  and  worshippeth  such  a person  and  licketh 
his  feet. 

A prayer  to  the  Lord  of  life : — 

O Lord  of  my  life,  show  me  compassion  and  mercy ; 
I helpless  have  entered  Thy  sanctuary. 

Give  me  Thy  hand,  and  extricate  me  from  the  blind 
well ; ® I have  no  device  or  spell  to  assist  myself. 

Causer  of  causes,  everything  art  Thou  ; Thou  art  omni- 
potent ; there  is  none  beside  Thee. 

Only  Thou  Thyself  knowest  Thine  own  state  and  con- 
dition ; they  who  are  so  destined  ® become  Thy  worshippers. 

Thou,  O God,  lovest  Thy  worshippers  : Thou  art  con- 
tained in  them  as  the  warp  and  woof. 

They  long  for  Thy  very  beloved  name  and  a sight  of 
Thee,  as  the  chakor  longeth  for  the  moon. 

There  is  no  difference  between  God  and  His  saints  ; but 
out  of  hundreds  of  thousands  and  millions  there  is  only 
one  real  servant  of  God. 

^ I have  controlled  my  evil  passions  and  subjugated  them  to  the 
One  Central  Authority. 

* Or— guard  me  in  this  blind  well,  that  is,  this  world. 

® Throughout  all  the  Sikh  writings  this  destiny  of  the  Sikhs  depends 
on  the  result  of  acts  in  previous  states  of  existence. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  155 

He  in  whose  heart  God  is  manifested  repeateth  His 
praises  night  and  day. 

O God,  Thou  art  omnipotent,  infinite,  the  Most  High, 
the  Giver  of  comfort  and  the  Prop  of  life. 

O God,  mercifully  grant  Nanak  the  companionship  of  the 
saints. 

Relations  and  worldly  wealth  avail  not  without 
devotion  to  God : — 

There  is  no  happiness  without  devotion  to  God ; 

Win  for  thyself  the  priceless  jewel,  of  human  life  by 
repeating  His  name  even  for  one  moment  in  the  company 
of  saints. 

Several  people  have  left 

Sons,  wealth,  wives,  and  pleasures  after  enjoying  them. 

Fools  have  departed  naked  leaving  behind  them 

Excellent  horses  and  elephants,  and  even  the  pomp  of 
empire. 

The  bodies  which  were  perfumed  with  distilled  aloe  wood 
and  sandal. 

Have  been  blended  with  the  dust. 

Infatuated  by  worldly  love  they  deemed  God  distant. 

But,  saith  Nanak,  He  is  ever  present. 

Contempt  for  the  body : — 

0 body,  great  thy  pride  from  such  an  origin. 

Transitory  art  thou,  however  much  thou  grasp  at  worldly 
things. 

Thou  lovest  those  things  which  learned  saints  have  for- 
bidden thee. 

As  a gambler  who  while  losing  remaineth  attached  to 
play,  so  thy  senses  conquer  and  hold  thee  in  bondage. 

Thou  art  not  imbued  with  love  for  the  lotus  feet  of  Him 
who  destroyeth  and  createth  all  things. 

The  Treasure  of  mercy  gave  me,  Nanak,  the  company  of 
the  saints  by  which  I am  saved. 

Man,  groping  in  the  darkness  of  worldly  love,  desires 
the  light  of  divine  knowledge  to  dawn  for  him : — 

Is  there  any  one  who  will  dispel  man’s  pride. 


156  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

And  turn  his  heart  away  from  sweet  mammon  ? 

Man  hath  become  spiritually  ignorant ; he  desireth  what 
existeth  not. 

His  night  is  dark  and  gloomy ; how  can  morning  dawn 
for  him  ? 

I have  grown  weary  wandering  and  searching  in  every 
way; 

But  at  last  God  hath  been  merciful,  and  I have  obtained 
the  treasure  of  the  company  of  the  saints. 

Man  should  think  of  his  soul,  not  of  his  short-lived 
body : — 

O my  soul,  seek  God’s  protection,  and  thou  shalt  be 
happy. 

The  days  in  which  the  Giver  of  life  and  happiness  is 
forgotten,  pass  away  in  vain. 

Thou  hast  come  as  the  guest  of  one  night,  yet  thou  ex- 
tendest  the  hope  of  living  for  many  ages. 

Houses,  palaces,  wealth,  everything  that  is  seen  is  like  the 
shadow  of  a tree. 

This  body  of  mine,  my  entire  wealth,  gardens,  and  property 
shall  all  pass  away. 

Thou  hast  forgotten  God,  the  Giver ; in  one  moment 
these  things  shall  become  another’s. 

Thou  bathest  and  puttest  on  clean  clothes,  and  per- 
fumest  thyself  with  distilled  aloe  wood  and  sandal. 

Thou  thinkest  not  of  the  Fearless,  the  Formless  One ; 
thou  art  as  an  elephant  which  throweth  dust  on  itself  after 
being  bathed. 

When  God  is  merciful.  He  will  cause  thee  to  meet  the 
true  Guru  ; all  happiness  abideth  in  God’s  name. 

Nanak,  by  singing  God’s  praises  the  Guru  shall  unlock 
thy  fetters,  and  thou  shalt  be  freed. 

»The  following  was  written  by  the  Guru  on  hearing 
that  a raja  was  preparing  an  expedition  to  seize 
another  raja’s  territory  : — 

The  thirst  of  only  a few  is  slaked. 

Man  amasseth  thousands  and  millions,  but  restraineth 
not  his  mind ; 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  157 

He  is  burning  for  more  and  more. 

Though  possessing  beautiful  women  of  many  races,  he 
committeth  adultery  in  other  men’s  houses. 

He  distinguisheth  not  between  bad  and  good. 

Under  the  many  bonds  of  mamirion  he  wandereth  and 
singeth  not  the  praises  of  the  Treasury  of  excellences  ; 

His  mind  is  absorbed  in  worldly  affairs. 

He  to  whom  God  is  merciful  is  dead  while  alive,  and  in  the 
company  of  the  saints  crosseth  over  the  ocean  of  the  world : 

Nanak,  that  man  shall  be  acceptable  in  God’s  court. 

To  man  God  should  be  the  dearest  of  all : — 

God  is  the  darling  object  of  all  men. 

Some  love  contemplation,  some , pleasure,  some  divine 
knowledge,  some  meditation. 

And  some  a hermit’s  life. 

Some  love  lip-worship,  some  austerities,  some  adoration, 
burnt  offerings,  and  daily  ceremonies  ; 

And  some  a wandering  existence. 

Some  love  the  shore,  some  the  sea,  some  the  study  of  the 
Veds, 

But  to  Nanak  only  God’s  service  is  dear. 

God  to  the  Guru  is  everything  that  is  precious : — 

The  celebration  of  Thy  praises  is  my  treasure. 

Thou  art  my  delight.  Thou  art  my  glory.  Thou  art  my 
beauty.  Thou  art  my  love  ; 

Thou,  O God,  art  my  Hope  and  my  Shelter ; 

Thou  art  my  pride,  Thou  art  my  wealth.  Thou  art  mine 
honour,  Thou  art  my  life. 

The  Guru  hath  united  me  with  Thee  from  whom  I had 
parted. 

Thou  art  my  home,  Thou  art  my  forest.  Thou  art  my 
village.  Thou  art  my  desert ; 

Saith  Nanak,  Thou  art  to  me  the  nearest  and  dearest  of  all. 

The  Guru  gives  the  opinion  of  holy  men  as  to  the 
means  of  salvation:— 

They  who  dwell  under  the  sovereign  Lord’s  protection 
Shall  be  saved : 


158  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

All  others  fall  to  the  ground  from  the  lofty  heights  of 
mammon. 

Great  men  after  the  study  of  the  Shastars,  the  Simritis, 
and  the  Veds,  have  thus  expressed  themselves — 

‘ There  is  no  salvation,  nor  hath  any  one  found  comfort 
without  the  repetition  of  God’s  name.’ 

Man  may  have  amassed  the  wealth  of  the  three  worlds, 
yet  his  avarice  will  not  otherwise  be  slaked. 

Without  repeating  God’s  name  can  stableness  be  ob- 
tained ? No  \ man  shall  transmigrate  again  and  again. 

Man  engageth  in  various  fascinating  recreations,  yet  his 
desires  are  never  satisfied. 

They  ever  burn  and  are  never  quenched  ; without  the 
Name  all  things  are  vain. 

Repeat  God’s  name,  O my  friend ; this  is  the  essence  of 
perfect  happiness. 

Tn  the  company  of  the  saints  and  by  becoming  the  dust 
of  their  feet,  Nanak  hath  freed  himself  from  trans- 
migration. 

The  Guru  gives  a compendium  of  his  teaching : — 

Without  God  all  works  are  vain. 

By  works  of  hypocritical  devotion,  penance,  and  austerities 
man  is  plundered  on  this  side.^ 

He  who  abideth  in  fasting,  insincere  ceremonies,  and 
austerities  shall  not  obtain  an  eighth  of  a paisa. 

In  the  next  world  the  coin  is  different,  my  brother  ; this 
coin  will  be  of  no  use  there. 

He  who  batheth  at  a place  of  pilgrimage  and  wandereth 
over  the  earth,  shall  find  no  abiding  place  hereafter. 

Such  things  shall  avail  him  not ; he  merely  pleaseth 
people  thereby. 

Man  shall  not  hereafter  find  a place  in  God’s  court  by 
reciting  the  four  Veds. 

He  who  knoweth  not  the  Pure  and  Imperishable  One,^ 

uttereth  sheer  nonsense. 

^ In  this  world. 

^ Sudhdkhar,  Also  translated — the  pure  word,  God's  name. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  159 

Nanak  hath  expressed  this  opinion  ; he  who  acteth  on  it 
shall  be  saved. 

Serve  the  Guru,  meditate  on  God’s  name,  and  dismiss 
pride  from  thy  heart. 

The  Guru  addresses  God  with  great  fervour : — 

Come,  my  beloved  God, 

Night  and  day,  at  every  breath  let  me  meditate  on  Thee. 

0 saints,  give  God  this  message,  ‘ I fall  at  Thy  feet ; 
Without  Thee  how  shall  I be  saved  ? 

With  Thee  I rejoice ; 

Thou  art  in  the  forest,  in  the  glades,  in  the  three  worlds  ; 
Thou  conferrest  supreme  happiness  and  joy. 

My  couch  is  pleasant,  my  soul  expandeth  towards  Thee. 
On  beholding  Thee  happiness  shall  be  mine. 

1 will  wash  Thy  feet,  and  continually  perform  Thy  service. 
I will  worship  Thee,  make  Thee  offerings,  and  do  Thee 

homage  : 

Thy  slave  of  slaves  will  repeat  Thy  name.’ 

Repeat,  0 saints,  this  my  supplication  to  God ; 

So  shall  my  desires  be  fulfilled  and  my  soul  and  body 
revive. 

On  beholding  God  all  my  griefs  shall  be  dispelled. 

By  continually  repeating  God’s  name  Nanak  shall  be 
saved. 

And  obtain  unfading  happiness. 

Sing  God’s  praises  received  from  a saint  and  pray 
for  God  as  your  alms : — 

O my  soul,  sing  God’s  delicious  praises ; sing  God’s 
delicious  praises. 

Attached  to  the  True  One,  the  homeless  obtain  a home. 
AJJ  other  relishes  are  insipid  and  render  body  and  soul 
insipid. 

Accursed  is  his  life  who  doeth  aught  contrary  to  God’s 
will. 

Grasp  the  saint’s  skirt  and  thou  shalt  cross  over  the 
ocean. 


i6o  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Adore  the  supreme  God,  and  all  thy  family  shall  be 
saved. 

He  who  putteth  God’s  name  into  my  heart  is  my  saint, 
my  kinsman,  my  friend ; 

He  bestoweth  on  me  the  favour  of  blotting  out  all  my 
demerits. 

My  property,  my  treasure,  and  my  home  may  go  to  ruin  ; 
my  wealth  is  in  God’s  feet. 

Nanak  begging  at  Thy  gate,  O God,  craveth  for  Thee  as 
his  alms. 


Gauri  Ashtapadi 

It  is  said  that  one  Raj  Chand  went  to  the  Guru 
and  asked  him  how  happiness  could  be  obtained  and 
unhappiness  avoided.  The  following  was  the  Guru’s 
reply 

When  man  harboureth  pride  in  his  heart, 

He  wandereth  about  mad  and  estranged  from  God. 

When  man  becometh  the  dust  of  all  men’s  feet, 

He  on  that  account  beholdeth  God  in  every  heart. 

The  fruit  of  humility  is  naturally  pleasant : 

This  gift  my  true  Guru  gave,  me. 

When  man  deemeth  others  bad, 

All  weave  plots  against  him. 

When  he  hath  ceased  to  speak  of  things  as  his  own, 

No  one  beareth  him  enmity. 

When  man  holdeth  things  as  his  own, 

He  suffereth  serious  trouble. 

When  man  recognizeth  the  Creator, 

His  sufferings  are  at  an  end. 

When  man  entangleth  himself  with  worldly  love,v 
He  suffereth  transmigration  and  falleth  under  Deatli’s 
continual  ken. 

' When  man’s  doubts  are  removed, 

There  is  no  difference  between  him  and  the  Supreme. 
From  the  moment  that  man  recognizeth  a difference, 

He  sufteieth  pain,  pnnisiiment,  and  auction. 

momeiiV  man  hnoweth  the  one  God, 

He  hath  obtained  all  knowledge. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  AkjAN  i6i 

When  man  runneth  after  mammon, 

He  findeth  it  not,  nor  doth  his  thirst  depart. 

When  man  fleeth  from  mimihon, 

She  proceedeth  to  pursue  him. 

When  the  true  Guru  is  found  by  his  own  mercy. 

The  lamp  is  lit  in  the  temple  of  one’s  heart. 

When  man  considereth  his  gain  and  loss, 

He  realizeth  the  value  of  this  temple. 

The  one  God  doth  everything  and  causeth  everything  to 
be  done. 

He  Himself  is  wisdom,  reflection,  and  discrimination. 

He  is  not  distant,  He  is  near  and  with  all. 

Nanak,  praise  the  true  God  with  love. 

All  must  perish  save  God  who  has  no  end  or  limit: — 

In  the  first  place,  man  issueth  from  his  dwelling  in  the 
womb ; 

He  afterwards  attacheth  himself  to  his  children,  wife,  and 
family. 

Thy  dishes  of  many  sorts  and  thy  varied  dresses, 

O wretched  man,  shall  assuredly  pass  away. 

What  place  is  that  which  shall  ever  be  permanent  ? 
What  word  is  that  by  which  evil  inclinations  shall  be 
removed  ? 

Even  the  realm  of  Indar  must  assuredly  perish  ; 

Even  the  realm  of  Brahma  remaineth  not  permanent ; 
And  even  the  realm  of  Shiv  shall  dissolve. 

Maya  with  the  three  qualities  and  the  demons  shall 
perish. 

Mountains,  trees,  the  earth,  the  firmament,  and  the  stars 
The  sun,  the  moon,  wind,  fire,  and  water, 

The  laws  and  alternations  of  day  and  night. 

The  Shastars,  the  Simritis,  and  the  Veds, 

Places  of  pilgrimage,  demigods,  temples,  and  books. 
Rosaries,  frontal  marks,  purely  cooked  victuals, 

Loin  cloths,  prostrations,  raiment,  food, 

Shall  pass  aw^y  with  all  men. 

Race,  caste,  Musalmans,  Hindas, 

Beasts,  birds,  animals  of  different  species, 

SIKH.  Ill 


i62  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

All  the  visible  creation, 

And  all  forms  of  existence  shajl  perish. 

By  praising  and  serving  God  real  divine  knowledge  is 
obtained, 

Which  ever  conferreth  happiness  and  the  permanent  and 
tiue  abode. 

Where  the  congelation  of  the  saints  are  absorbed  in 
God’s  praises, 

And  dwell  for  ever  in  the  fearless  city, 

There  is  no  fear,  no  doubt,  no  mourning,  no  anxiety. 

No  transmigration,  no  death,  no  birth. 

There  is  for  ever  joy  and  the  theatre  of  spontaneous 
music. 

The  saints  dwell  there ; singing  God’s  praises  is  their 
sustenance. 

The  supreme  Being  hath  no  end  or  limit. 

Who  can  describe  Him  ? 

Saith  Nanak,  he  to  whom  God  is  merciful 

Shall  reach  the  imperishable  place  in  the  company  of  the 
saints. 

He  who  divests  himself  of  love  of  mammon  shall 
attain  all  perfection  : — 

He  who  divesteth  himself  of  the  love  of  mammon,  is 
a hero ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  is  perfect ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  obtain  greatness  ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  be  free  from  suffering. 

If  there  is  any  one  who  so  divesteth  himself. 

And  banisheth  his  love  of  mammon,  he  accomplisheth 
raj  jog.i 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  have  no  fear ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  be  absorbed  in  the 
Name ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  have  his  thirst  ex- 
tinguished ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  be  acceptable  m God’s 
court : ,11 

^ That  is,  he  accomphslies  a great  feat. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  163 

He  who  so,  divesteth  himself,  shall  become  wealthy  ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  be  honoured  ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  become  continent ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  obtain  deliverance — 
The  advent  of  him  who  so  divesteth  Himself,  is  profitable — 
He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  be  stable  and  opulent ; 
He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  be  very  fortunate  ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  be  watchful  night  and 
day  ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  obtain  salvation  while 
alive  ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  lead  a pure  life  ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  be  thoroughly  versed 
in  divine  knowledge  ; 

He  who  so  divesteth  himself,  shall  meditate  on  God — 
Without  so  divesting  himself  man  shall  not  be  acceptable. 
Even  though  he  perform  millions  of  superstitious  cere- 
monies and  forms  of  worship — 

Without  so  divesting  himself  he  shall  be  born  again  ; 
Without  so  divesting  himself  he  shall  not  escape  from 
Death  ; 

Without  so  divesting  himself  he  shall  not  obtain  divine 
knowledge  ; 

Without  so  divesting  himself  his  impurity  shall  not  be 
washed  away  ; 

Without  so  divesting  himself  everything  is  defilement ; 
Without  so  divesting  himself  everything  is  an  entangle- 
ment. 

He  to  whom  the  Ocean  of  mercy  is  merciful, 

Shall  be  freed  and  shall  obtain  all  perfection. 

He  whose  love  of  mammon  is  removed  by  the  Guru, 
Shall,  saith  Nanak,  meditate  on  God. 

He  who  embraces  a holy  life  shall  obtain  every- 
thing that  is  prized  : — 

He  who  attacheth  himself  to  God  findeth  a friend  in 
everybody ; 

He  who  attacheth  himself  to  God  hath  a stable  mind  ; 
He  who  attacheth  himself  to  God  feeleth  no  anxiety  ; 

M 2 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


164 

He  who  attacheth  himself  to  God  shall  be  saved. 

O my  soul,  unite  thyself  with  God  ; 

Naught  else  shall  avail  thee. 

Great  worldly  people  who  think  not  of  God, 

Are  useless  and  ignorant. 

Although  God’s  slave  be  accounted  of  lowly  birth. 

Yet  in  his  company  men  shall  be  at  once  saved. 

Hearing  God’s  name  is  equal  to  millions  of  ablutions  ; 
Meditating  on  Him  is  equal  to  millions  of  adorations  ; 
Hearing  His  praises  is  equal  to  millions  of  alms-deeds  ; 
Knowing  His  ways  from  the  Guru  bringeth  millions  of 
rewards. 

Think  again  and  again  upon  God  in  thy  heart, 

And  thy  love  for  mammon  shall  depart. 

The  immortal  God  is  with  thee  ; 

.0  man,  be  absorbed  in  thy  love  for  Him. 

Specially  perform  the  service  of  Him 
By  serving  whom  all  thine  avarice  shall  depart ; 

By  serving  whom  the  myrmidons  of  Death  will  not  look 
at  thee ; 

By  serving  whom  thou  shalt  obtain  great  honour  ; 

By  serving  whom  thou  shalt  be  immortal ; 

Whose  servant  shall  not  be  punished  ; 

Whose  servant  shall  not  be  even  bound  ^ ; 

And  in  whose  office  thine  account  shall  not  be  called  for. 
O man,  perform  the  service  of  Him 
Who  is  in  need  of  nothing. 

Who  is  one  though  of  various  forms. 

And  at  whose  sight  thou  art  ever  happy. 

Without  remembering  God  man  is  on  a level  with 
everything  that  is  low  and  base : — 

■ He  who  remembereth  not  God,leadeth  the  life  of  a snake:* 
* So  liveth  the  infidel  who  forgetteth  the  Name. 

He  who  liveth  remembering  God  even  for  a moment, 
Shall  live  for  millions  of  days,  yea,  for  ever. 

Cursed  be  the  acts  done  without  remembering  God  1 

* Ban  is  understood  to  be  for  the  Panjabi  bank,  binding. 

* He  is  always  bent  on  injuring  others.  ' 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  165 

The  infidel  like  a crow’s  beak  dwelleth  in  filth  : 

Without  remembering  the  Name  his  desires  are  those  of 
a dog. 

The  infidel  is  nameless  like  a prostitute’s  son  ; 

Without  remembering  the  Name  he  is  like  a ram’s  horn. 
The  infidel  uttereth  falsehood  and  his  face  is  blackened  ; 
Without  remembering  God’s  name  he  is  like  a donkey 
Which  wandereth  about  in  foul  places.^ 

Without  remembering  the  Name  he  is  as  a mad  dog. 

The  covetous  infidel  falleth  into  entanglements  ; 

Without  remembering  the  Name  he  committeth  suicide. 
The  infidel  is  low  ; he  hath  neither  family  nor  caste. 

The  Guru  causeth  him  to  whom  he  is  merciful  to  meet 
the  society  of  saints, 

And,  O Nanak,  to  cross  over  the  ocean  of  the  world. 

The  evil  fate  of  him  who  forgets  the  Name  : — 
Come  to  me,  O my  God,  bestow  on  me  Thy  name  ; 
Totally  accursed  be  the  love  which  is  without  the  Name  ! 
He  who  dresseth  himself  or  eateth  without  invoking  the 
Name, 

Is  like  a dog  fallen  on  garbage. 

Business  performed  without  the  Name 
Is  futile  as  the  decorations  of  a corpse. 

He  who  enjoyeth  pleasures  in  forgetfulness  of  the  Name, 
Hath  no  happiness  even  in  his  dreams ; nay,  his  body 
becometh  diseased. 

If  man  abandon  the  Name  for  any  other  occupation. 

The  whole  of  his  false  gilding  shall  fall  off. 

He  who  loveth  not  heartily  the  Name, 

Shall  go  to  hell  even  though  he  perform  millions  of  cere- 
monies. 

He  who  remembereth  not  God’s  name  in  his  heart. 

Shall  be  bound  like  a thief  in  the  realm  of  Death. 

There  might  be  hundreds  of  thousands  of  displays  and 
great  profusion, 

Yet  without  the  Name  they  wouJdaJJ  be  vain  ostentation. 

^ The  donkey,  like  the  Indian  cow,  sheep,  and  other  animals,  is 
a foul  feeder.  He  is  used  to  remove  filth  in  Indian  towns. 


i66 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


That  man  repeateth  God’s  name 

To  whom,  O Nanak,  He  mercifully  granteth  it. 

What  God  the  Friend  does  for  man  : — 

My  soul  longeth  for  that  Friend, 

Who  forsaketh  me  not  at  the  beginning,  middle,  or  end 
of  my  undertakings. 

God’s  love  ever  accompanieth  us  ; 

He  is  the  Compassionate  and  omnipresent  Cherisher. 

He  perisheth  not,  neither  doth  He  abandon  His  servant. 
Wherever  I gaze,  there  is  He  contained. 

He  is  beautiful,  skilful,  clever,  the  Giver  of  life  ; 

He  is  brother,  son.  father,  and  mother  ; 

He  is  the  support  of  my  life  and  soul ; He  is  my  capital. 
Dwelling  in  my  heart  He  hath  made  me  love  Him. 

He  hath  cut  off  mammon’s  chains. 

And,  beholding  me  with  a favourable  eye,  made  me  His 
own. 

By  ever  remembering  God  all  diseases  are  healed. 

And  by  meditating  on  His  feet  all  happiness  enjoyed. 

The  all-pervading  Being  is  ever  fresh  and  youthful ; 

He  is  the  companion  and  protector  of  man  whether  at 
home  or  abroad. 

Saith  Nanak,  the  saint  who  knoweth  God’s  dignity 
Hath  obtained  from  Him  the  Name  for  all  his  wealth. 

The  man  who  knows  not  God  passes  his  life  in 
pleasures,  worldly  love,  and  pride,  and  cannot  obtain 
salvation : — 

Through  pleasures,  social  gatherings,  and  the  gratification 
of  evil  passions,  man,  blind  that  he  is,  knoweth  not  God. 

His  whole  life  passeth  away  saying,  ‘ I hoard,  I earn  ; 

I am  a hero,  I am  distinguished  ; no  one  is  equal  to  me  ; 

1 am  young,  religious,  of  good  family  ’ •,  thus  pride  enter- 
eth  his  heart. 

And  he  forgetteth  it  not  until  death,  so  entangled  is  he 
ifa  his  boastful  ^ intellect. 

^ Badh ; some  read  ia/,  and  translate — A man  is  entangled  by  his 
intellect  from  youth,  and  forgetteth  not  pride  till  his  death. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  167 

He  resigneth  his  wealth  to  his  brothers,  friends,  kinsmen, 
and  companions  who  survive  him. 

The  desire  to  which  the  mind  is  attached  becometh 
supreme  at  the  last  hour. 

If  man  perform  purifications  through  pride,  he  becometh 
bound  by  such  entanglements. 

O merciful  God,  show  mercy  that  Nanak  may  become 
the  slave  of  Thy  slaves. 

Gauri  Chhant 

Man  should  consider  howto  obtain  God's  favours: — 

Hear,  my  companions,  let  us  join  and  make  efforts  to 
please  God  the  Bridegroom  ; 

Through  the  saint’s  spell  let  us  abandon  pride  and  through 
the  philtre  of  devotion  fascinate  our  Spouse. 

0 my  companions,  once  He  cometh  into  our  power,  He 
will  not  again  forsake  us  ; this  is  a good  custom  of  the  Lord. 

Nanak,  God  will  make  us  pure  and  dispel  the  fear  of  old 
age,  death  and  hell. 

Hear,  my  companions,  this  is  a good  course  ; let  us 
adopt  it. 

Having  withdrawn  from  worldly  cares  let  us  sing  God’s 
praises  with  composure  and  devotion. 

Our  troubles  and  difficulties  shall  depart,  our  doubts  be 
dispelled,  and  we  shall  obtain  the  reward  our  hearts  desire. 

Nanak,  let  us  meditate  on  the  name  of  the  supreme  and 
omnipresent  God. 

O my  companions,  I have  ever  desired  to  devote  myself 
to  God ; may  He  grant  my  desires ! 

Having  renounced  the  world  I thirst  for  a sight  of  His 
feet ; I look  for  them  everywhere. 

To  find  the  omnipresent  Being  I will  trace  His  tracks  in 
the  company  of  the  saints. 

Nanak,  the  holy  men  who  have  found  the  Giver  of  com- 
fort are  very  fortunate. 

0 my  companions,  f now  dwell  with  my  beloved  Spouse ; 
and  my  soul  and  body  have  become  attached  to  Him. 

Hear  me,  O my  companions,  I sleep  well  since  I have 
found  my  Beloved. 


i68  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

I have  lost  xny  doubts,:  I have  obtained  peace  and  rest ; 
the  Lord  hath  appeared  unto  me,  and  the  lotus  of  my  heart 
hath  blossomed. 

I have  found  my  Husband,  the  Lord,  the  Searcher  of 
hearts ; 0 Nanak,  my  married  state  shall  never  cease. 


The  Bawan  Akhari^ 

OR  ACROSTIC 

The  divine  Guru  is  my  mother,  the  divine  Guru  is  my 
father  *,  the  divine  Guru  is  my  lord  and  Supreme  God ; 

The  divine  Guru  is  my  companion  and  dispeller  of  spiritual 
ignorance,  the  divine  Guru  is  my  relation  and  my  brother  ; ® 

The  divine  Guru  is  the  giver  and  the  teacher  of  God’s 
name,  the  divine  Guru  hath  the  spell  that  cannot  be  counter- 
acted ; * 

The  divine  Guru  is  peace,  truth,  the  image  of  wisdom ; 
the  divine  Guru  is  a philosopher’s  stone  by  touching  which 
man  is  saved  ; 

The  divine  Guru  is  a place  of  pilgrimage,  his  divine 
knowledge  a lake  of  nectar,  by  bathing  in  which  the  Illimit- 
able is  obtained  ; 

The  divine  Guru  is  the  Creator,  the  remover  of  all  sin, 
the  divine  Guru  is  the  purifier  of  the  impure  ; 

^ The  words  hdwan  akhari  mean  the  fifty-two  letters  of  the  San- 
skrit language.  A similar  number  of  words  of  religious  meaning  or 
significance  is  introduced  and  expounded.  The  intention  was  that 
their  initials  should  be  in  the  order  of  the  Sanskrit  letters,  but,  for 
spme  hitherto  unexplained  reason,  the  projected  arrangement  was  not 
adhered  to.  The  Sloks  of  the  Bawan  Akhari  are  of  general  religious 
import ; it  is  in  the  Pauris  the  words  chosen  for  exposition  are  found. 
The  Bawan  Akhari  consists  altogether  of  fifty-five  Sloks  and  Pauris. 

2 In  India  the  mother  is  placed  first.  In  English,  following  the 
i^reek  idiom,  precedence  is  given  to  the  father. 

^ Sahodaray  from  sahy  the  same,  and  udaVy  the  womb.  Compare  the 
Greek  adelphos  and  its  ordinary  derivation  from  a,  and  delphusy 
the  womb. 

^ Mani  nirodhara.  The  gyanis  translate— the  spell  most  potent 
to  save.  It  is,  however,  the  Sanskrit  niruddhdr  mantar  as  translated  in 
the  text. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  169 

The  divine  Guru  is  from  the  beginning,  from  the  beginning 
of  time,  and  in  every  age ; the  divine  Guru  is  the  spell  of 
God’s  name  by  the  utterance  of  which  man  is  saved. 

O God,  mercifully  bring  me — ^foolish  and  sinner  that 
I am — into  the  company  of  the -Guru,  so  that  by  clinging 
to  him  I may  be  saved. 

Nanak  boweth  to  the  divine  Guru,  the  true  Guru,  the 
Supreme  Brahm,  the  Supreme  God. 

Slok  I 

God  Himself  created  and  caused  men  to  act ; He  Him- 
self is  capable  of  acting. 

Nanak,  there  is  one  pervading  God ; there  neither  was 
nor  shall  be  another. 

Pauri  I 

O A M.  I bow  to  the  one  God,  and  to  the  saint  the  true 
Guru. 

The  Formless  One  is  the  beginning,  the  middle,  and  the 
end. 

He  Himself  is  rest,  He  Himself  hath  His  seat  in  bliss ; 

He  Himself  heareth  His  praises  ; 

He  Himself  created  Himself  ; 

He  is  His  own  father.  His  own  mother  ; 

He  Himself  is  small,  He  Himself  is  large — 

Nanak,  His  play  cannot  be  understood. 

O God,  compassionate  to  the  poor,  be  merciful. 

That  my  heart  may  become  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 

Slok  II 

The  one  God  is  without  form  and  yet  with  form ; He  is 
without  qualities  and  yet  possesseth  all  qualities. 

Define  the  one  God  as  one,  Nanak,  and  the  one  God  as 
manifold. 

Pauri  II 

0 AM.  The  one  God,  the  great  Guru,  created  all  things  ; ^ 

He  hath  strung  them  all  on  one  string.® 

^ Akdr,  Literally — forms,  bodies. 

® So  that  they  may  be  in  His  power. 


lyo 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  three  qualities  are  separately  diffused. 

Instead  of  possessing  no  attributes  God  now  appeareth 
possessing  all  attributes. 

He  made  creation  of  all  forms  ; 

From  the  increase  of  mental  desires  resulteth  transmi- 
gration ; 

He  Himself  is  free  from  both  birth  and  death. 

Nanak,  He  hath  no  end  or  limit. 

Slok  III 

They  are  rich  and  fortunate  who  possess  the  hoard  of  the 
truth  and  the  stock-in-trade  of  God's  name. 

Nanak,  the  true  and  pure  Name  is  obtained  from  the 
saints. 

Pauri  III 

S.  True,  true,  true  is  He  ; 

There  is  nothing  separate  from  the  True  Being. 

It  is  he  whom  He  putteth  into  his  asylum  who  obtaineth 
His  protection, 

Remembereth  Him,  singeth  His  praises,  and  causeth 
others  to  hear  them  : 

Doubt  and  error  in  no  way  enter  him ; 

His  glory  appeareth  manifest. 

Nanak  is  ever  a sacrifice  unto  the  holy  man 

Who  attaineth  to  this  distinction. 

Slok  IV 

Why  art  thou  crying  out  for  wealth  ? All  worldly  love  is 
false. 

All  they  who  are  without  the  Name,  Nanak,  are  as  dust. 

Pauri  IV 

D H.  The  dust  of  Thy  servant’s  feet  is  pure,  0 God ; 

* Blest  are  they  whose  souls  desire  it ; 

They  want  not  wealth,  they  desire  not  even  paradise  ; 

They  are  fascinated  with  the  love  of  the  very  Dear  One, 
and  the  dust  of  the  saint’s  feet. 

Why  should  worldly  affairs  affect  those 

Who  forsake  not  the  one  God  or  go  elsewhere  to  worship  ? 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  171 

He  in  whose  heart  God  hath  put  the  Name, 

O Nanak,  is  a perfect  saint  of  God. 

Slok  V 

It  is  not  by  adopting  various  religious  garbs  or  by  know- 
ledge or  meditation,  or  by  obstinacy  that  God  is  obtained 
by  any  one  : 

Saith  Nanak,  he  to  whom  God  is  merciful  is  a saint  and 
possessor  of  divine  knowledge. 

Pauri  V 

N G.  Divine  knowledge  consisteth  not  in  words  uttered 
by  the  mouth, 

Nor  in  extracting  different  species  of  arguments  from  the 
Shastars. 

He  possesseth  divine  knowledge  in  w'hose  heart  God  is 
firmly  fixed  ; 

It  is  not  by  discussion  he  becometh  capable. 

He  who  is  strict  in  his  obedience  to  God’s  order  possesseth 
divine  knowledge ; 

Heat  and  cold  are  all  the  same  to  him. 

The  possessor  of  divine  knowledge,  to  whom  God  ex- 
tendeth  mercy, 

Meditateth  on  God,  O Nanak,  under  the  Guru’s  instruc- 
tion. 


Slok  VI 

Men  come  into  the  world,  but  without  knowing  God  they 
are  as  beasts  and  cattle. 

Nanak,  the  holy  man,  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny 
hath  been  written,  knoweth  God. 

Pauri  VI 

The  foetus  reversed  in  the  pit  of  the  womb  performeth 
penance. 

And  continueth  to  remember  God  at  every  breath. 

Man  then  cometh  into  this  world  to  meet  the  one  God, 

But  fascinating  Maya  fascinateth  him  at  his  birth. 

He  becometh  entangled  with  what  he  must  abandon, 


172  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

And  in  his  soul  forgetteth  the  Giver. 

He  to  whom  Thou  showest  favour,  O Lord  of  the  earth, 
Will  not  forget  Thee,  saith  Nanak,  either  here  or  there.^ 

Slok  VII 

<» 

Man  is  born  by  God’s  order,  he  dieth  by  God’s  order,  no 
one  is  exempt  from  His  order  ; 

Transmigration  is  at  an  end  for  him,  Nanak,  in  whose 
heart  God  abideth. 


Pauri  VII 

This  soul  hath  dwelt  in  many  wombs  ; 

Immersed  in  sweet  illusion  it  was  entangled  in  them ; 
This  illusion  hath  reduced  the  world  * to  subjection. 

And  infused  a love  for  itself  into  every  heart : 

O my  friend,  tell  us  of  some  device 

By  which  we  may  escape  this  dangerous  illusion. 

Maya  approacheth  not  him, 

0 Nanak,  whom  God  mercifully  associateth  with  the 
saints. 


Slok  VIII 

God  Himself  hath  appointed  good  and  bad  acts  for  man 
to  perform ; ® 

But  man  the  brute,  indulgeth  in  pride  ; Nanak,  what  can 
he  do  without  God  ? 


Pauri  VIII 

It  is  God  alone  who  causeth  man  to  act ; 

It  is  He  Himself  who  diffuseth  demerits  and  merits. 

Man  perfofmeth  the  duties  of  the  station  in  which  God 
hath  placed  him  in  this  world. 

And  receiveth  what  God  conferreth  upon  him. 

No  one  knoweth  God’s  limit ; 

It  is  only  what  He  doeth  that  occurreth. 

^ Either  in  the  womb  or  after  birth.  Others  translate—Either  in 
this  world  or  the  next. 

* Trigun.  Literally — the  three  qualities  which  prevail  in  the  world. 

® Also  translated — Man  doeth  good  and  evil  according  to  destiny, 
as  God  Himself  hath  ordained. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  173 

It  is  from  Him  alone  the  whole xreation  hath  proceeded. 

Nanak,  He  Himself  is  the  arranger. 

Slok  IX 

Man  continueth  to  love  women,  pleasures,  and  the  tunattlt 
of  the  passions,  things  fleeting  as  the  dye  of  the  safflower.^ 

Nanak,  take  God’s  protection  and  thy  selfishness  shall 
depart. 

Pauri  IX 

O my  soul,  the  more  thou  lovest  anything  except  God, 
the  greater  thine  entanglements. 

The  apostates  do  the  very  things  which  in  every  way 
hinder  their  emancipation. 

They  who  while  practising  pride  continue  to  perform 
ceremonial  works,  bear  a crushing  load  : 

When  there  is  no  love  for  the  Name  such  works  are  sinful. 

They  who  are  in  love  with  delicious  Maya  are  bound  by 
Death’s  rope ; 

Deluded  by  error  they  know  not  that  God  is  ever  with 
them ; 

They  shall  not  be  acquitted  when  their  accounts^  are 
examined  : a mud  wall  can  never  be  clean. 

He  to  whom  God  giveth  knowledge,  O Nanak,  becometh 
holy  and  his  understanding  pure. 

Slok  X 

They  who  associate  with  the  saints  and  who  are  dyed 
with  the  deep  dye  of  the  one  God’s  love, 

O Nanak,  shall  have  their  fetters  cut  off. 

Pauri  X 

R.  Dye  this  heart  of  thine  with  God’s  love  ; 

Repeat  God’s  name  with  thy  tongue. 

So  shall  no  one  address  thee  rudely  in  God’s  court : 

Every  one  shall  honour  thee,  saying,  ‘ Come,  sit  down.’ 

In  that  palace  thou  shalt  obtain  thy  dwelling 

^ Also  translated — Which  are  fleeting  as  the  dye  of  the  safflower  and 
bitter  as  poison. 

^ Also  translated — It  is  not  by  counting  prayers  said  or  actions  done. 


174 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Where  there  is  no  transmigration  or  destruction. 

God’s  wealth  is  in  the  house  of  him, 

Nanak,  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny  was  recorded  in 
the  beginning. 

Slok  XI 

The  sins  of  covetousness,  falsehood,  and  worldly  love  are 
committed  by  the  foolish  and  the  blind  ; 

Slaves  of  Maya,  0 Nanak,  they  love  an  offensive  smell.' 

Pauri  XI 

L.  They  are  entangled  and  steeped  in  the  juice  of  evil 
passions  ; 

They  are  intoxicated  with  the  wine  of  mental  pride  and 
worldly  love  ; 

And  from  this  worldly  love  resulteth  transmigration. 

As  God  ordereth  so  man  acteth. 

There  is  no  one  imperfect  and  no  one  perfect ; 

There  is  no  one  wise  and  no  one  foolish. 

Where  God  appointed  men  there  they  perform  theirduties. 
Nanak,  the  Lord  is  always  unaffected  by  mundane  affairs} 

Slok  XII 

My  darling  God,  the  Lord  of  the  earth,  is  deep,  profound, 
and  unfathomable  ; 

Nanak,  there  is  none  like  unto  Him,  He  is  unconcerned. 

Pauri  XII 
L.  There  is  none  equal  to  Him  ; 

He  Himself  is  the  only  one,  there  shall  be  none  other ; 

He  is  now  and  ever  hath  been  ; 

No  one  hath  found  His  limit ; 

He  is  contained  as  fully  in  an  ant  as  in  an  elephant ; 

He  is  famous,  known  everywhere  : 

He  to  whom  He  hath  given  His  love 
Repeateth  His  name,  O Nanak,  under  the  Guru’s  instruc- 
tion. 

^ Th^il  \s,  eN\\  deeds. 

^ ^\sited  \\\  xVve  >NOY\d  according  to  their  good  and 

bad  acts  in  previous  birth,  and  not  by  God’s  special  interference. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


175 


Slok  XIII 

He  who  hath  tasted  the  savour  of  God  naturally  enjoy eth 
His  love. 

Nanak,  blessed  is  the  advent  of  such  into  the  world  ; 
he  is  acceptable  to  God, 


Pauri  XIII 

Deem  fortunate  the  birth  of  him 

Whose  tongue  repeateth  God’s  praises  ; 

He  goeth  and  sitteth  with  the  saints, 

And  night  and  day  meditateth  on  the  Name  with  love. 

He  to  whom  God  showeth  compassion  and  mercy, 

Is  at  his  birth  endued  with  the  Name  ; 

He  has  been  born  once,  but  shall  not  again  enter  the 
womb  ; 

Nanak,  he  shall  be  absorbed  in  the  sight  of  God. 

Slok  XIV 

Nanak,  be  absorbed  in  the  Name  by  the  repetition  of 
which  the  heart  becometh  happy,  worldly  love  is  erased. 

And  there  is  an  end  to  pain,  sorrow,  and  longing  for 
earthly  pleasures. 

Pauri  XIV 

Y.  Rid  thyself  of  evil  inclinations  and  duality  ; 

Relinquishing  them  sleep  in  peace  and  composure. 

Y.  Go  and  take  the  protection  of  the  saints, 

By  whose  assistance  thou  shalt  cross  this  terrible  ocean. 

Y.  He  who  taketh  the  one  Name  and  stringeth  it  in  his 
heart. 

Shall  not  be  born  again. 

Y.  By  the  support  of  the  Guru  thou  shalt  not  lose  thy 
human  birth. 

Nanak,  he  in  whose  heart  the  one  God  dwelleth  hath 
obtained  happiness. 

Slok  XV 

He  who  is  our  friend  in  this  world  and  the  next,  dwelleth 

within  car  souls  and  bodies. 


176  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  perfect  Guru  teacheth  us,  O Nanak,  to  utter  God’s 
Name  continually. 


Pauri  XV 

Night  and  day  remember  Him  who  will  in  the  end  be 
thy  helper. 

These  worldly  pleasures  only  last  for  a few  days  ; every 
one  must  leave  them  and  depart. 

Who  hath  a mother,  father,  son,  daughter, 

Home,  or  wife  ? Thou  canst  take  none  of  them  with  thee. 

Amass  such  things  as  are  not  perishable. 

So  shalt  thou  depart  to  thine  own  home  with  honour. 

They  who  in  this  Kal  age  sing  God’s  praises  in  the  company 
of  the  saints, 

O Nanak,  shall  not  come  again  into  the  world. 

Slok  XVI 

Though  one  be  very  beautiful,  of  high  birth,  wise,  a divine 
in  words,  and  wealthy, 

Yet  shall  he  be  deemed  as  dead,  0 Nanak,  if  he  have  no 
love  for  God. 


Pauri  XVI 

N G.  Even  though  man  be  versed  in  the  six  Shastar 
systems. 

And  perform  the  exercises  of  purak,  kumbhak  and  rechak ; ^ 

Even  though  he  practise  divine  knowledge,  meditation, 
pilgrimages,  and  ablutions. 

Only  eat  food  cooked  by  himself,  live  apart  from  human 
contact  and  dwell  in  the  forest ; 

Yet  if  he  feel  no  love  for  God’s  name  in  his  heart. 

Every  act  of  his  shall  only  be  brief. 

Superior  to  him  deem  thou  the  pariah, 

O Nanak,  in  whose  heart  God  dweheth. 

^ These  are  exercises  in  the  Jog  religious  system.  Purak,  in- 
spiration, is  closing  the  right  nostril  and  drawing  up  air  through  the 
kumbhak,  suspension,  stopping  the  mouth  and  closing  both 
nostrils ; and  rechak,  expiration,  through  the  right  nostril. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


177 


Slok  XVII 

Man  wandereth  about  in  the  four  quarters  and  the  ten  ^ 
directions  of  the  world  bearing  the  mark  of  deeds  done. 

Weal  and  woe,  deliverance  and  transmigration,  Nanak, 
are  according  to  man’s  written  record. 

Pauri  XVII 

K.  God  is  the  Creator  and  cause  of  everything  ; 

No  one  can  efface  that  written  record  ; 

What  God  once  doeth  cannot  be  altered  ; ^ 

The  Creator  erreth  not. 

To  one  He  Himself  pointeth  out  the  right  way ; 

Another  He  causeth  to  wander  sorrowfully  in  the  wilder- 
ness ; 

He  playeth  His  own  play. 

Whatever  He  giveth,  Nanak,  man  receiveth. 

Slok  XVIII 

Various  and  countless  people,  0 Nanak,  repeat  God’s 
name. 

Men  eat,  spend,  and  enjoy  ® themselves,  but  God’s  store- 
houses fail  not  them. 


Pauri  XVIII 

K H.  With  that  all-powerful  One  there  is  no  stint ; 

He  continueth  to  give  what  He  deemeth  right  to  give, 
wheresoever  man  may  go. 

The  wealth  of  the  Name  is  the  treasure  from  which  the 
saints  spend  ; it  is  their  capital. 

With  patience,  humility,  joy,  and  composure  they  con- 
tinue to  repeat  God’s  praises. 

They  to  whom  God  is  merciful  sport  and  enjoy  themselses. 

They  who  have  God’s  name  for  their  wealth  in  their  homes 
are  ever  wealthy  and  of  good  report 

^ The  four  cardinal  points,  the  four  intermediate  points,  heaven 
above,  and  earth  below. 

^ Literally — nothing  occurs  twice. 

® Men  enjoy  themselves  and  in  doing  so  squander. 

mi  N 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


178 

• They  on  whom  God  looketh  with  favour  suffer  not 
trouble,  or  pain,  or  torture  ; ^ 

Nanak,  they  who  are  pleasing  to  God  are  successful. 

Slok  XIX 

Calculate  and  consider  in  thy  mind  that  men  must 
assuredly  depart. 

The  desire  for  transitory  things  is  effaced  by  the  Guru’s 
instruction  ; only  in  the  Name  is  there  health. 

Pauri  XIX 

G.  Sing  God’s  praises  at  every  breath  and  ever  repeat 
His  name. 

Why  repose  confidence  in  thy  body  ? Delay  not,  my 
friend ; 

. There  is  no  reliance  on  childhood,  youth,  or  old  age  ; 

The  time  is  not  known  when  the  noose  of  Death  will  fall 
upon  thee. 

Behold  the  wise,  the  meditative,  and  the  clever ; even 
they  remain  not  here. 

The  fool  clingeth  to  the  things  which  the  rest  of  the 
world  leaveth  behind. 

He  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny  hath  been  written, 
continueth  to  remember  God  by  the  Guru’s  favour. 

Nanak,  fortunate  is  her  advent  who  is  the  spouse  of  the 
Beloved. 


Slok  XX 

I have  searched  all  the  Shastars  and  Veds  ; they  tell  of 
nothing  save  this, 

Thai  the  one  God  was  in  the  beginning,  in  the  beginning 
of  time,  is  now,  Nanak,  and  ever  shall  be. 


^ Pauri  XX 

G H.  Put  this  into  thy  heart  that  there  is  none  but 
God  ; 

There  was  none,  and  there  shall  be  none  : He  is  every* 
where  contained. 

^ The  torture  inflicted  by  the  god  of  death. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  179 

Thou  shalt  be  absorbed^  in  Him,  O man,  when  thou 
enterest  His  asylum. 

In  the  Kal  age  the  Name  is  the  real  atonement  for  sins. 

After  toiling  and  moiling  in  superstitious  exercises  many 
regret  it ; 

Without  devotion  to  God  how  can  stability  be  obtained  ? 

He  to  whom  the  divine  Guru  gave  the  great  nectareous 
essence, 

Hath  stirred  it  up,  O Nanak,  and  drunk  it. 

Slok  XXI 

God  has  counted  and  fixed  for  man  all  his  days  and 
breathings  ; these  cannot  be  increased  or  diminished  the 
length  of  a sesame  seed  ; 

Nanak,  they  who  desire  to  live  on  in  error  and  worldly 
love  are  fools. 

Pauri  XXI 

N G.  Death  shall  seize  him  who  hath  fallen  away  from 
God. 

He  seeth  not  God  who  dwelleth  in  his  heart,  and  he  shall 
suffer  many  transmigrations. 

Divine  knowledge  and  meditation  shall  come  to  him 

To  whom  God  mercifully  grant eth  them. 

No  one  shall  be  emancipated  by  making  calculations  ; 

The  frail  pitcher  shall  burst  at  last. 

Only  they  who  utter  God’s  name  their  lives  long  really 
live  ; 

They  become  distinguished,  Nanak,  and  not  obscure. 

Slok  XXII 

In  thy  heart  meditate  on  God’s  lotus  feet,  and  its  inverted 
lotus  jshall  bloom. 

God  Himself  will  appear,  O Nanak,  under  the  saints^ 
instruction. 

Pauri  XXII 

C H.  Blest,  blest  that  day  and  auspicious  that  conjuncture 

When  I cling  to  the  Guru’s  lotus  feet. 

1 Also  translated— thou  shalt  be  saved. 

N 2 


i8o  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

After  wandering  in  the  four  corners  and  the  ten  directions 
of  the  globe, 

I through  the  favour  of  God  obtained  a sight  of  him. 

Through  excellent  meditation  all  duality  is  removed  ; 

My  mind  hath  become  pure  by  association  with  the 
saints. 

Nanak,  he  to  whose  eyes  the  salve  of  divine  knowledge 
hath  been  applied, 

Shall  forget  his  anxieties  and  behold  the  one  God. 

Slok  XXIII 

The  breast  becometh  cool  and  the  heart  happy  by  singing 
the  chant  of  God’s  praises  ; 

Show  such  mercy,  O God,  that  Nanak  may  become  Thy 
slave  of  slaves. 


Pauri  XXIII 

C H H.  We  are  Thy  slave-boys. 

Yea,  we  are  the  water-carriers  of  the  slave  of  Thy  slaves. 
C H H.  We  are  the  dust  of  Thy  saints’  feet  : 

Show  us  Thy  mercy,  O God. 

We  have  abandoned  all  devices  and  stratagems. 

And  propped  up  our  souls  with  the  prop  of  the  saints. 
The  puppet  of  ashes  whom  the  saints  assist 
Shall,  Nanak,  obtain  the  supreme  state. 

Slok  XXIV 

Man  is  greatly  elated  by  his  strength  and  power,  and 
thereby  diseaseth  his  frail  body  ; 

Through  his  pride  he  is  entangled,  Nanak,  but  the  Name 
will  felease  him. 


Pauri  XXIV 

J.  When  a man  thinketh  something  of  himself, 

* He  is  caught  like  a parrot  in  a trap ; 

When  he  thinketh  he  is  a saint  and  possessed  of  divine 
knowledge, 

God  will  show  him  no  respect  whatever  in  the  next 
world  ; 

When  he  thinketh  he  is  a preacher. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  i8i 

He  merely  roameth  over  the  earth  like  a trader. 

He  who  removeth  his  pride  by  association  with  the  saints 
O Nanak,  meeteth  God. 

Slok  XXV  • 

Rise  at  dawn,  utter  the  Name,  yea,  night  and  day  worship 
God  I 

Thus  shalt  thou  feel  no  anxiety,  Nanak,  and  all  thy 
troubles  shall  vanish. 


Pauri  XXV 

J H.  By  occupying  thyself  with  God’s  name 
All  thy  griefs  shall  be  effaced. 

The  perverse  man  whose  heart  fecleth  worldly  love 
Shall  die  in  excessive  grief. 

O my  soul,  when  thou  hcarest  the  ambrosial  word  in 
the  company  of  saints, 

Thine  impurities  and  sins  shall  depart.^ 

Nanak,  from  him  to  whom  God  is  merciful. 

Lust,  wrath,  and  other  evil  passions  shall  depart. 

Slok  XXVI 

Though  you  make  efforts  of  various  kinds,  you  shall  not 
have  eternal  life,  my  friends. 

You  shall  have  eternal  life,  saith  Nanak,  if  you  repeat 
God’s  name  with  love. 


Pauri  XXVI 

N Y.  Know  for  a certainty  that  these  bodies  of  yours 
which  you  love  shall  perish. 

Even  though  you  make  calculations,  you  cannot  count 
how  many  have  departed. 

Whatever  you  behold  shall  perish  ; to  what  shall  you 
attach  yourselves  ? 

Know  this  in  your  hearts  as  certain  that  love  of  the 
world  is  false. 

He  who  knoweth  this  is  a saint  and  removed  from  error. 

Him  with  whom  God  is  pleased,  He  extricateth  from  the 
blind  well. 

^ Literally — shall  drop  or  fall  off  as  leaves  from  trees. 


i82 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  whose  arm  is  omnipotent  is  able  to  create  the  world — 

Nanak,  praise  Him  who  uniteth  the  soul  with  Himself. 

Slok  XXVII 

By  serving  the  saints  the  bonds  of  transmigration  are 
broken,  and  man  obtaineth  rest : ' 

Nanak,  may  I never  forget  the  sovereign  God,  the  treasury 
of  excellences ! 

Pauri  XXVII 

Serve  the  one  God  to  whom  no  one  appealeth  in  vain  ; 

If  He  dwell  in  thy  soul,  body,  mouth,  and  heart,  thou 
shalt  obtain  whatever  thou  desirest. 

He  to  whom  the  holy  man  is  kind,  shall  obtain  the  service 
hy  which  God’s  court  shall  be  won. 

If  God  be  compassionate  thou  shalt  abide  in  the  company 
of.  the  saints — 

I have  searched  in  many  lands,  but  found  no  happiness 
without  the  Name. 

The  ministers  of  Death  shall  recede  from  him  who  joineth 
the  society  of  the  saints  ; 

Again  and  again  I sacrifice  myself  to  the  saints. 

Through  whom,  O Nanak,  the  sins  of  old  are  blotted  out. 

Slok  XXVIII 

They  with  whom  God  is  pleased  are  not  stopped  at  His 
gate ; 

Supremely  blest  are  they,  Nanak,  whom  God  hath  made 
His  own. 

Pauri  XXVIII 

T H.  He  who  having  abandoned  all  else  attacheth  him- 
self to  the  one  God, 

Afflicteth  no  one’s  heart. 

They  who  are  buffeted  by  worldly  love  are  dead, 

^ And  find  nowhere  comfort. 

They  who  abide  in  the  company  of  the  saints  are  re- 
freshed ; 

The  ambrosial  Name  is  sweet  to  their  souls. 

The  soul  of  the  man  who  pleaseth  his  Lord, 

O Nanak,  becometh  refreshed. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


183 


Slok  XXIX 

Prostrations  and  obeisance  many  times  to  Thee,  0 God, 
who  possessest  all  contrivances  and  art  omnipotent ! 

Reach  me  Thy  hand,  0 God,  saiVA  Nanak,  and  save  me 
from  wavering.^ 

Pauri  XXIX 

D.  O my  soul,  this  is  not  thy  dwelling  ; know  that  Place  ^ 
where  thy  dwelling  is  ; 

Learn  from  the  Guru’s  instruction  the  way  to  that 
dwelling. 

Man  undergoeth  toil  to  erect  a dwelling  here 

Which  will  not  go  an  inch  with  him. 

He  on  whom  the  omnipotent  God  looketh  with  favour, 

Knoweth  the  way  to  that  dwelling. 

That  dwelling  is  permanent  and  true,  and  is  obtained  in 
the  company  of  the  saints  ; 

Nanak,  they  who  find  it  waver  not. 

Slok  XXX 

When  Dharmraj  beginneth  to  smite,  none  can  restrain 
him  : 

Nanak,  they  who  repeat  God’s  name  in  association  with 
the  saints  shall  be  saved. 

Pauri  XXX 

D H.  Why  goest  thou  about  searching  ? search  in  thine 
own  heart. 

God  dwelleth  with  thee  ; why  wanderest  thou  from  forest 
to  forest  ? 

Throw  down  thy  heap  of  terrible  pride  in  the  company 
of  the  saints  ; 

So  shalt  thou  find  rest,  abide  in  peace,  and  be  blest  with 
the  sight  of  God  : 

He  in  whom  that  heap  is,  shall  be  bom  and  die,  and 
suffer  the  pain  of  the  womb  ; 

^ This  slok  is  recited  by  Sikh  minstrels  when  they  begin  to  sing, 
and  also  by  readers  of  the  Granth  Sahib  on  opening  it. 

® That  is,  God. 


i84  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

He  who  is  steeped  in  worldly  love  and  entangled  with 
egotism  shall  come  and  go. 

I have  now  gradually  fallen  under  the  protection  of  the 
saints  ; 

God  hath  cut  the  meshes  of  sorrow,  Nanak,  and  united 
me  with  Himself. 

Slok  XXXI 

Where  the  saints  ever  repeat  God’s  name  and  praises — 

Dharmraj  saith,  ‘ Approach  not  there,  O my  ministers  : 
if  you  dOy  neither  you  nor  I shall  escape.’ 

Pauri  XXXI 

N.  He  who  conquereth  his  own  heart  is  victorious  in  the 
battle  ; 

He  who  dieth  fighting  with  his  pride  and  worldly  love  is 
blest  ; ^ 

He  who  effaceth  his  pride  ^ shall  under  the  perfect  Guru’s 
instruction  be  dead  while  alive  ; ® 

He  shall  conquer  his  heart,  meet  God,  and  obtain  a robe 
of  honour  for  his  bravery  ; 

He  shall  consider  nothing  his  own  ; the  one  God  shall  be 
his  prop  and  support  ; 

He  shall  continue  night  and  day  to  remember  the  supreme 
and  infinite  God,; 

He  shall  so  act  as  to  make  his  heart  the  dust  of  all  men’s 
feet  ; 

He  shall  understand  God’s  order,  be  ever  happy,  Nanak, 
and  obtain  what  was  destined  for  him. 

Slok  XXXII 

I will  devote  my  body,  soul,  and  wealth  to  him  who 
causeth  me  to  meet  God  ; 

Nanak,  my  doubts  and  fears  shall  then  be  dispelled,  and 
Death  shall  no  longer  look  for  me. 

^ BhddUy  blest,  happy,  from  the  Sanskrit  bhaddra.  It  may,  however, 
be  a corruption  of  the  word  bahdduf\  brave,  a hero.  If  so  sobha  du 
hoi  be  read,  the  translation  will  be — He  shall  be  honoured  in  both 
worlds. 

^ Mani^  to  consider  things  as  one’s  own. 

^ This  is  explained  lo  mean  that  he  will  be  very  humble. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


185 


Pauri  XXXII 

T.  Love  Him  who  is  the  treasury  of  excellences,  the 
sovereign  God  ; 

Thou  shalt  then  obtain  the  fruit  thy  heart  desireth,  and 
thy  yearning  shall  depart. 

He  in  whose  heart  the  Name  dwelleth,  shall  have  no  fear 
on  the  road  to  death  ; 

His  understanding  shall  become  enlightened  ; he  shall 
obtain  salvation  and  a place  in  God’s  court. 

Nor  wealth,  nor  mansion,  nor  youth,  nor  empire  shall 
depart  with  thee. 

In  the  company  of  the  saints  continue  to  remember  God's 
name  ; it  is  this  that  shall  avail  thee. 

There  shall  be  no  more  burning  when  God  Himself  re- 
moveth  thy  fever  ; 

Nanak,  God  Himself  protecteth  us  ; He  is  our  mother 
and  father. 

Slok  XXXIII 

The  perverse  have  grown  weary  of  their  various  toils,  yet 
they  are  not  satisfied  and  their  thirst  is  not  allayed  ; 

They  shall  die  in  the  midst  of  their  hoarding,  Nanak, 
and  their  wealth  shall  not  depart  with  them. 

Pavri  XXXIII 

T H.  None  is  permanent ; why  stretchest  thou  thy  feet 
forward  ? ^ 

In  thine  efforts  after  wealth  alone  thou  committest  great 
fraud  and  deceit ; 

Thou  toilest  to  fill  thy  purse,  O fool,  and  then  fallest 
down  weary  : 

At  the  last  moment  that  shall  not  avail  thy  soul. 

Thou  shalt  obtain  permanence  ^ by  worshipping  God  and 
accepting  the  saints’  instruction. 

^ A metaphor  from  the  quarrels  of  Indian  landowners.  On  a 
disputed  plot  one  claimant  puts  his  foot  forward,  his  opponent  does 
the  same.  In  the  text  the  expression  means  to  bring  everything 
within  one’s  grasp. 

^ Thou  shalt  no  more  wander  in  transmigration. 


i86 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Ever  love  the  one  God — that  is  the  true  love. 

He  is  the  cause  of  causes ; all  contrivances  are  in  His 
hand  alone. 

We  remain  at  the  posts  to  which  Thou,  0 God,  hast 
appointed  us ; saith  Nanak,  the  creature  is  helpless. 

Slok  XXXIV 

His  slaves  have  seen  the  one  God  who  giveth  everything  ; 
They  continue  to  remember  Him  at  every  breath  ; Nanak, 
a sight  of  Him  is  their  support. 

Pauri  XXXIV 

D.  The  Giver  is  one  ; He  giveth  to  all ; 

In  His  giving  there  is  no  stint ; innumerable  are  His  full 
storehouses. 

• The  Giver  liveth  for  ever. 

O my  foolish  mind,  why  forgettest  thou  Him  ? 

No  man  is  at  fault,  my  friend  ; 

It  is  God  who  forged  the  fetters  of  Maya’s  illusion. 

The  holy  men  whose  pain  He  Himself  removeth 
Shall,  O Nanak,  be  satisfied.^ 

Slok  XXXV 

O my  soul,  grasp  the  prop  of  the  one  God,  lay  aside  thy 
hopes  in  others ; 

Ponder  on  the  Name,  and  thine  affairs  shall  succeed. 
Pauri  XXXV 

DH.  If  thou  abide  with  the  saints  the  wanderings  of 
thy  heart  shall  then  cease  ; 

If  God  Himself  bestow  mercy  from  the  beginning,  the 
mind  shall  become  enlightened. 

They  have  the  true  capital  and  are  the  true  traders. 
Whose  stock-in-trade  is  the  Name  and  who  deal  in  God. 
Patience,  glory,  and  honour  are  ior  him 
Who  attentively  heareth  God’s  name. 

The  holy  man  in  whose  heart  God  is  contained 
Shall,  O Nanak,  obtain  greatness. 

^ This  pauri  is  repeated  as  a grace  before  meals. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  187 

Slok  XXXVI 

Nanak,  the  perfect  Guru  hath  taught  that  for  him  who, 
in  the  company  of  the  saints, 

Repeateth  the  Name  with  his  tohgue  and  with  love  in 
his  heart,  there  is  no  hell. 

PaUri  XXXVI 

N.  They  in  whose  souls  and  bodies  the  Name  abideth 
Shall  not  fall  into  hell. 

They  who  under  the  Guru’s  instruction  repeat  the  Name, 
which  is  a treasure, 

Shall  not  perish  by  the  poison  of  mammon. 

No  refusal  await eth  him 

To  whom  the  Guru  hath  given  the  spell  of  the  Name. 
God’s  name  which  is  full  of  nectar  is  the  treasury  of 
wealth  : 

Nanak,  unbeaten  musical  instruments  sound  for  him  who 
repeateth  it, 

Slok  XXXVII 

When  I abandoned  deceit,  worldly  love,  and  sin,  the 
great  Supreme  Being  preserved  mine  honour  : 

Nanak,  adore  Him  who  hath  no  end  or  limit. ^ 

Pauri  XXXVII 

P.  The  sovereign  God  is  beyond  estimate ; His  limit 
cannot  be  ascertained  ; 

He  is  the  purifier  of  sinners,  and  inaccessible. 

Millions  of  sinners  who  meet  the  saints 
And  repeat  the  ambrosial  Name  become  pure. 

He  whom  Thou  Thyself  preservest,  O Lord  of  the  earth, 
Loseth  all  deception,  fraud,  and  worldly  love. 

God  is  emperor ; He  alone  is  entitled  to  the  umbrella 
over  His  head  : 

Nanak,  there  is  no  other  sovereign. 

Slok  XXXVm 

By  restraining  the  mind  DeatKs  nooses  are  cut,  trans- 
migration is  at  an  end,  and  victory  obtained. 

^ Sikhs  repeat  this  couplet  when  tying  on  their  turbans. 


i88 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Nanak,  permanence  is  obtained  from  the  Guru  and  trans- 
migration effaced  for  ever  and  ever. 

Pauri  XXXVIII 

P H.  0 soul,  thou  hast  returned  after  long  wanderings  ; 
In  this  Kal  age  thou  hast  obtained  a human  body  so 
difficult  to  obtain ; 

Thou  shalt  not  again  have  the  present  opportunity. 
Repeat  God’s  name,  then  Death's  noose  shall  be  cut  away, 
And  there  shall  be  no  transmigration  for  thee. 

Utter  the  name  of  the  one  God  ; that  is  the  real  utterance. 
Have  mercy,  O God  the  Creator, 

And  unite  poor  Nanak  with  Thyself. 

Slok  XXXIX 

Hear  Thou  my  supplication.  Supreme  Being,  compassionate 
to  the  poor  and  Lord  of  the  earth — 

Nanak,  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet  is  to  me  comfort, 
wealth,  great  enjoyment,  and  pleasure. 

Pauri  XXXIX 

B.  It  is  he  who  knoweth  God  who  is  a Brahman  ; 

He  is  a Vaishnav  who  is  pious,  and  accepteth  the  pure 
religion. 

He  is  a hero  who  effaceth  his  wickedness  : 

Nothing  evil  may  approach  him. 

Man  is  bound  by  the  fetters  of  his  own  pride. 

And  yet,  blind  that  he  is,  he  imputeth  blame  to  others. 
Discussion  and  subterfuges  are  all  of  no  avail. 

0 God,  he  whom  Thou  causes!  to  know  Thee,  saith  Nanak, 
knoweth  Thee. 


Slok  XL 

Heartily  worship  God  who  is  the  destroyer  of  fear  and 
the  remover  of  sin  and  sorrow  ; 

He  in  whose  heart  He  dwelleth  through  the  companion- 
ship of  the  saints  shall  never  again,  O Nanak,  wander  in 
transmigration. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


189 


Pauri  XL 

B H.  Dispel  thine  errors  ; 

This  world  is  all  a dream. 

In  error  are  demigods,  goddesses,  and  gods  ; 

In  error  are  Sidhs,  Strivers,  and  so  is  Brahma  ,* 

In  mazes  of  error  man  is  ruined. 

This  world  is  difficult  to  cross  and  very  dangerous. 

The  pious  who  have  effaced  error,  fear,  and  worldly  love, 
Shall,  Nanak,  obtain  supreme  happiness. 

Slok  XLI 

Through  wealth  the  mind  wavereth  in  many  ways  and 
becometh  entangled  ; 

He  whom  Thou,  O God,  preservest  from  asking  for  it, 
saith  Nanak,  loveth  the  Name. 

Pauri  XLI 

M.  He  who  asketh  is  silly  ; 

The  Bestower  who  is  wise  continueth  to  bestow  ; 

What  God  giveth  He  giveth  once  for  all. 

O foolish  man,  why  callest  thou  aloud  ? 

When  thou  prayest,  thou  prayest  for  worldly  things. 
From  which  happiness  resulteth  to  no  one. 

If  thou  pray  for  anything,  then  pray  for  the  one  God, 
By  whom,  saith  Nanak,  thou  shalt  be  saved. 

Slok  XLII 

Their  wisdom  is  perfect  and  they  are  distinguished  in 
whose  hearts  is  the  perfect  Guru’s  instruction  ; 

Nanak,  they  who  know  their  God  are  fortunate. 

Pauri  XLII 
M.  He  who  knoweth  God*s  secret 
Is  satisfied  on  meeting  the  company  of  the  saints  ; 

He  deemeth  woe  and  weal  as  the  same  ; 

He  is  exempted  from  entering  hell  or  heaven  : 

The  man  who  knoweth  God’s  secret  dwelleth  in  the  world, 
and  yet  is  apart  from  it ; 


igo  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

He  is,  as  it  were,  the  eminent  being  who  filleth  every 
heart.^ 

He  who  is  not  entangled  by  mammon, 

Nanak,  hath  found  happiness  in  God’s  love. 

Slok  XLIII 

O my  friends,  allies,  and  adherents,  hear  me — there  is  no 
emancipation  without  God  ; 

Nanak,  he  who  falleth  at  the  Guru’s  feet  hath  all  his 
fetters  cut  away. 

Pauki  XLIII 

Y.  Though  man  make  efforts  of  many  kinds. 

How  far  can  he  succeed  without  the  one  Name  ? 

The  efforts  by  which  emancipation  is  obtained. 

Are  made  in  the  company  of  the  saints. 

The  salvation  which  every  one  holdeth  to. 

Cannot  be  obtained  without  the  repetition  of  God’s  name  : 

God  is  capable  of  giving  salvation. 

O Master,  preserve  us  men  without  merits. 

Nanak,  that  man’s  intellect  becometh  enlightened. 

Whom  God  Himself  instructeth  in  thought,  word,  and 
deed. 

Slok  XLIV 

Think  of  thyself ; be  angry  with  no  one  ; 

Abide  humble  in  the  world,  Nanak,  and  through  God’s 
favour  thou  shalt  be  saved. 

Pauri  XLIV 

R.  Become  the  dust  of  every  one’s  feet ; 

Abandon  pride,  and  the  sins  to  thy  debit  shall  be  blotted 
out. 

Thou  shalt  be  victorious  in  the  struggle,  O brother,  and 
acceptable  in  God's  court. 

If  under  the  Guru’s  instruction  thou  fix  thine  attention 
on  God’s  name. 

Thy  sins  shall  gradually  be  blotted  out 

Also  translated —He  enjoyeth  the  happiness  of  God  who  filleth 
every  heart. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  191 

By  the  perfect  Guru’s  peerless  word. 

Nanak,  they  on  whom  God  and  the  Guru  have  conferred 
favours, 

Are  dyed  with  the  love  of  God's  name  and  intoxicated 
with  its  savour. 

Slok  XLV 

The  diseases  of  covetousness,  falsehood,  and  the  other 
deadly  sins  infest  this  body  ; 

But  the  pious  who  drink  the  medicine  of  God’s  nectar, 
O Nanak,  shall  be  healed. 

Pauri  XLV 

L.  He,  0 God,  to  whom  Thou  administerest  medicine. 

Is  at  once  cured  of  his  sorrows  and  pains. 

That  medicine  is  the  Name  ; whosoever  heartily  loveth  it 
Shall  not  even  dream  of  disease. 

The  medicine  of  God’s  name  is  in  every  heart,  my  brethren. 
Except  the  perfect  Guru  no  one  knoweth  how  to  prepare  it. 
He  whose  way  of  life  the  perfect  Guru  hath  appointed, 

0 Nanak,  shall  never  again  sicken. 

Slok  XLVI 

God  is  everywhere,  there  is  no  place  without  Him  ; 

He  is  with  thee,  Nanak,  whether  thou  art  at  home  or 
abroad  ; what  concealest  thou  from  Him  ? 

Pauri  XLVI 

W.  Bear  not  enmity  to  any  one — 

God  is  contained  in  every  heart ; 

He  is  contained  in  sea  and  land ; 

By  the  favour  of  the  Guru  some  rare  person  singeth  His 
praises. 

Enmity  and  jealousy  shall  depart  from  the  heart  of  him 
Who  under  the  Guru’s  instruction  heareth  God’s  praises. 
Nanak,  he  who  under  the  Guru’s  instruction  repeateth 
God’s  name. 

Shall  be  released  from  all  caste  and  caste  marks. 


192 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Slok  XLVII 

The  stupid  and  ignorant  infidel  passeth  his  life  in  egoism  ; 
In  agony  he  dieth  as  one  thirsty,  0 Nanak,  and  thus 
obtaineth  his  deserts. 


Pauri  XLVII 

R.  He  who  by  association  with  the  saints  worshippeth  the 
Name, 

Which  is  the  essence  of  religious  acts,  shall  not  engage 
in  strife. 

He  in  whose  heart  the  Beautiful  One  dwelleth, 

Shall  have  his  strife  erased  and  ended. 

It  is  the  ignorant  perverse  man,  in  whose  heart 

The  sin  of  pride  dwelleth,  who  harboureth  strife. 

Nanak,  when  the  holy  man  instructeth, 

•All  strife  ceaseth  in  a moment. 

Slok  XLVIII 

0 my  soul,  grasp  the  protection  of  the  holy  man ; lay 
aside  thy  phrases  and  devices  : 

The  Guru’s  instruction,  Nanak,  dwelleth  in  the  heart  of 
him  on  whose  forehead  good  fortune  was  written. 

Pauri  XLVIII 

S H.  Weary  of  repeating  the  Shastars,  the  Simritis,  and 
the  Veds, 

We  have  now,  0 God,  entered  Thine  asylum. 

In  my  researches  I have  come  to  this  conclusion. 

That  without  worshipping  God  there  is  no  deliverance. 

We  constantly  make  mistakes  ; 

Thou  art  omnipotent,  infinite,^  and  illimitable. 

O Compassionate  One,  protect  us  who  have  fallen  under 
Thy  protection ! 

Saith  Nanak,  O God,  we  are  Thy  children. 

Slok  XLIX 

When  pride  is  erased,  happiness  resulteth,  the  mind  and 
body  are  healed. 


^ Literally — innumerable. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  193 

Naiiak,  and  lie  who  is  worthy  of  praise  becoineth  mani- 
fest. 


Pauri  XLIX 

K H.  Thoroughly  praise  God 

Who  in  an  instant  can  fill  to  the  brim  what  is  empty. 
When  a mortal  is  thoroughly  humble, 

He  night  and  day  repeateth  the  name  of  the  eternal  God. 
The  Lord  giveth  happiness  to  those  who  please  Him. 

The  infinite  supreme  Being  is  so  potent, 

That  He  can  in  a moment  pardon  numberless  sins  : 
Nanak,  the  Lord  is  merciful. 

Slok  L 

Verily  I say  unto  thee,  hear  me,  O my  soul,  fall  under 
the  sovereign  God’s  protection  ; 

Cast  aside  all  thy  phrases  and  devices,  Nanak,  and  God 
will  unite  thee  with  Himself. 

Pauri  L 

S.  O silly  man,  lay  aside  devices  : 

The  Lord  is  not  pleased  with  tricks  and  orders.^ 

Even  though  thou  practise  a thousand  forms  of  cleverness. 
Not  one  shall  avail  thee.^ 

Day  and  night  repeat  His  name, 

O my  soul,  which  will  go  with  thee. 

He  whom  God  Himself  applieth  to  the  saint’s  service, 
Nanak,  shall  never  feel  unhappy. 

Slok  LI 

Happiness  resulteth  from  uttering  God’s  name  and  keeping 
it  in  mind. 

Nanak,  God  provideth  all  things,  and  is  everywhere  equally 
contained. 

^ Ordering  God  in  a familiar  manner  to  grant  worldly  favours,  such 
as  to  send  rain,  heal  sickness,  provide  sons  for.  parents,  &c. — a practice 
of  Brahmans. 

2 Literally — not  one  of  them  shall  go  with  thee. 

O 


SIKH.  Ill 


194 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Pauri  LI 

Lo  ! God  filleth  the  hearts  of  all — 

Men  are  continually  born,  but  the  Guru’s  wisdom  de- 
stroyeth  their  pain.^ 

He  is  happy  who  hath  escaped  from  pride  ; where  there 
is  no  pride  there  is  God. 

By  the  power  of  the  company  of  the  saints  the  pain  of 
birth  and  death  is  removed. 

God  becometh  merciful  to  those  who,  by  association  with 
the  saints. 

Lovingly  fix  the  name  of  the  compassionate  One  in  their 
hearts. 

Nanak,  everything  hath  proceeded  from  God  ; 

Without  Him  no  one  hath  accomplished  anything. 

Slok  LII 

Looking  to  his  account  man  shall  never  be  released® 
since  he  erreth  every  moment. 

Saith  Nanak,  O Thou  Pardoner,  pardon  us  and  save  us. 

Pauri  LII 

Man  is  disloyal  and  a sinner ; he  is  a stranger  to  God 
and  of  little  wisdom  ; 

He  knoweth  not  the  Essence  of  all  things,  who  gave  him 
soul,  body,  and  happiness. 

For  the  sake  of  worldly  gain  he  goeth  searching  in  every 
direction  ; 

God,  the  Giver,  the  Bestower,  he  treasureth  not  in  his 
heart  for  an  instant. 

Greed,  falsehood,  sin,  worldly  love,  these  things  he  har- 
boureth  in  his  heart. 

He  passeth  his  life  with  great  adulterers,  thieves,  and 
sjanderers. 

If  piecing  to  Thee,  0 God,  pardon  the  counterfeit  along 
with  the  genuine. 

® This  and  the  preceding  line  are  also  translated — 

God  filleth  the  hearts  of  all,  and  will  ever  and  ever  do  so; 

He  is  the  destroyer  of  sorrow  and  greatly  wise. 

* Man’s  account  with  God  is  always  on  the  debit  side. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  195 

Saith  Nanak,  O supreme  God,  if  it  please  Thee,  stones 
shall  float  on  water. 


Slok  LIU 

Eating,  drinking,  playing,  and  laughing  have  we  wandered 
in  many  births  ; 

O God,  rescue  us  from  the  terrible  ocean,  prayeth 
Nanak  ; we  rely  on  Thee. 

Pauri  LIU 

Having  both  enjoyed  and  suffered  the  pain  of  many 
births,  we  have  returned  as  human  beings. 

Troubles  are  removed  by  meeting  the  holy  man,  and  being 
absorbed  in  the  true  Guru’s  instruction. 

Man  adopting  contentment  amasseth  truth,  and  liveth 
upon  the  ambrosia  of  the  Name. 

Genuine  is  the  mercy  of  God ; I have  found  my  haven 
in  joy  and  happiness. 

My  cargo  hath  safely  arrived;  I have  had  great  profit, 
and  I return  home  with  honour. 

Genuine  is  the  consolation  the  Guru  gave  me ; I have 
met  God  on  my  return. 

God  Himself  acted  and  acteth  ; He  was  in  the  beginning 
and  shall  be  in  the  end. 

Nanak,  praise  Him  who  is  contained  in  every  heart. 

Slok  LIV 

O Ocean  of  mercy,  compassionate  God,  we  have  entered 
Thine  asylum. 

Nanak  is  happy  in  giving  the  one  word  ^ God  a place  in 
his  heart.* 

Pauri  LIV 

God  holdeth  the  three  worlds  by  letters  ; 

Through  letters  the  Veds  are  studied  ; 

^ Akhar.  Literally — a letter.  There  is  however  a pun  on  the 
word.  It  also  means  indestructible,  from  the  Sanskrit  a negative,  and 
kshar,  destruction. 

* This  slok  and  pauri  LV  are  sung  by  the  Sikhs  on  the  conclusion 
of  the  intonement  of  a passage  from  the  Granth  SShib. 

O 2 


196  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Through  letters  the  Shastars,  the  Simritis,  and  the 
Purans ; 

Through  letters  hymns,  discourses,  and  sermons  ; 

Through  letters  is  the  way  of  escape  from  fear  and  error  ; 

Through  letters  religious  and  worldly  acts  are  performed 
and  pure  faith  obtained. 

The  whole  visible  world  is  contained  in  letters ; 

But,  Nanak,  the  Supreme  Being  is  beyond  letters. 

Slok  LV 

0 inaccessible  One,  Thy  hand  holdeth  the  pen  which 
writeth  man’s  destiny  on  his  forehead. 

Thou  of  incomparable  form  art  contained  in  all  things  ; 

Man’s  tongue  cannot  describe  Thy  praises  ; 

Nanak  on  beholding  Thee  is  fascinated,  and  devoted 
unto  Thee. 

Pauri  LV 

O eternal,  supreme  God,  indestructible.  Destroyer  of  sin, 

0 All-pervading,  contained  in  everything.  Destroyer  of 
grief.  Lord  of  excellences. 

Formless  one,  0 man’s  companion,  O Thou  without  the 
three  human  attributes.  Prop  of  all. 

Supporter  of  the  earth,  O Ocean  of  excellences  who  hast 
ever  discrimination, 

0 God,  most  remote  Thou  art,  wast,  and  shalt  be. 

0 Thou,  constant  Companion  of  the  saints.  Support  of 
the  supportless, 

1 am  Thy  slave,  I am  without  merits,  no  merit  is  mine. 

Saith  Nanak,  grant  me  the  gift  of  Thy  name  that  I may 

string  it  and  keep  it  in  my  heart. 

Slok 

The  divine  Guru  is  my  mother,  the  divine  Guru  is  my 
lather,  the  divine  Guru  is  my  Lord  and  supreme  God  ; 

The  divine  Guru  is  my  companion  and  dispeller  of  spiritual 
ignorance,  the  divine  Guru  is  my  relation  and  my  brother  ; 

The  divine  Guru  is  the  giver  and  the  teacher  of  God’s 
name,  the  divine  Guru  hath  the  spell  that  cannot  be  counter- 
acted ; 


HYMNS  OF^  GURU  ARJAN  197 

The  divine  Guru  is  peace,  truth,  and  the  image  of  wisdom ; 
the  divine  Guru  is  a philosopher’s  stone  by  whpse  touch  man 
is  saved ; 

The  divine  Guru  is  a place  of  pilgrimage,  his  divine  know- 
ledge a lake  of  nectar,  by  bathing  in  which  the  Illimitable 
is  obtained ; 

The  divine  Guru  is  the  creator,  the  remover  of  all  sin, 
the  divine  Guru  is  the  purifier  of  the  impure  ; 

The  divine  Guru  is  from  the  beginning,  from  the  beginning 
of  time  and  in  every  age  ; the  divine  Guru  is  the  spell  of 
God’s  name,  by  whose  utterance  man  is  saved. 

O God,  mercifully  bring  me — foolish  and  sinner  that  I 
am — into  the  company  of  the  Guru,  so  that  by  clinging  to 
him  I may  be  saved. 

Nanak  boweth  to  the  divine  Guru,  the  true  Guru,  the 
supreme  Brahm,  the  supreme  God. 


SUKHMANI  ^ 

Slok  I 

I bow  to  the  primal  Guru  ; 

I bow  to  the  Guru  of  the  primal  age  ; 

I bow  to  the  true  Guru  ; 

I bow  to  the  holy  divine  Guru.* 

Ashtapadi  I 

I 

Remember,  remember  God  ; by  remembering  Him  you 
shall  obtain  happiness, 

And  erase  from  your  hearts  trouble  and  affliction. 

^ This  composition  is  divided  into  twenty-four  ashtapadis,  si  word 
which  means  eight  pads.  A pad  contains  ten  lines,  and  thus  some- 
what resembles  the  English  sonnet.  Each  ashtapadi  therefore  contains 
eighty  lines.  The  word  means  peace  of  mind.  This  com- 

position is  repeated  in  the  morning  by  very  earnest  Sikhs  after  the 
Japji. 

* These  first  four  lines  are  supposed  to  refer  to  the  four  Gurus 
respectively  who  preceded  Guru  Arjan. 


198  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Remember  the  praises  of  the  one  all-supporting  God. 
Numberless  persons  utter  God’s  various  names.^ 
Investigating  the  Veds,  the  Purans,  and  the  Simritis, 
Men  have  made  out  the  one  word  which  is  God’s  name. 
His  praises  cannot  be  recounted, 

Who  treasureth  God's  name  in  his  heart  even  for  a moment. 
Saith  Nanak,  save  me,  0 Lord,  with  those  who  are  desirous 
of  one  glance  of  Thee. 

In  this  Sukhmani  is  the  name  of  God  which  like  ambrosia 
hestoweth  happiness. 

And  giveth  peace  to  the  hearts  of  the  saints.® 


By  remembering  God  man  doth  not  again  enter  the 
womb  ; 

By  remembering  God  the  tortures  of  Death  disappear ; 

By  remembering  God  death  is  removed  ; 

By  remembering  God  enemies  retreat ; 

By  remembering  God  no  obstacles  are  met ; 

By  remembering  God  we  are  watchful  night  and  day  ; 

By  remembering  God  fear  is  not  felt ; 

By  remembering  God  sorrow  troubleth  not : 

Men  remember  God  in  the  company  of  the  saints — 

Nanak,  by  the  love  of  God  all  wealth  is  obtained. 

3 

By  remembering  God  we  obtain  wealth,  supernatural 
power,  and  the  nine  treasures  ; 

By  remembering  God  we  obtain  divine  knowledge,  medi- 
tation, and  the  essence  of  wisdom  ; 

Remembrance  of  God  is  the  real  devotion,  penance,  and 
worship ; 

By  remembering  God  the  conception  of  duality  is  dis- 
pelled ; 

By  remembering  God  we  obtain  the  advantages  of  bathing 
at  places  of  pilgrimage  ; 

^ Also  translated — Remember  that  One  Sustainer  of  the  world 
whose  various  names  countless  persons  utter. 

* Also  translated — This  Sukhmani  dwelleth  in  the  hearts  of  the 
saints. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  199 

By  remembering  God  we  are  honoured  at  His  court ; 

By  remembering  Grod  we  become  reconciled  to  His  will ; 
By  remembering  God  men’s  lives  are  very  profitable  : 
They  whom  He  hath  caused  to  do  so  remember  Him — 
Nanak,  touch  the  feet  of  such  persons. 

4 

To  remember  God  is  the  most  exalted  of  all  duties. 

By  remembering  God  many  are  saved  ; 

By  remembering  God  thirst  is  quenched  ; ' 

By  remembering  God  man  knoweth  all  things  ; 

By  remembering  God  there  is  no  fear  of  death  ; 

By  remembering  God  our  desires  are  fulfilled  ; 

By  remembering  God  mental  impurity  is  removed, 

And  the  ambrosial  Name  filleth  the  heart. 

God  abideth  on  the  tongue  of  the  saint 
Whose  most  humble  slave  Nanak  is. 

5 

They  who  remember  God  are  wealthy ; 

They  who  remember  God  are  honoured  ; 

They  who  remember  God  are  acceptable  ; 

They  who  remember  God  are  distinguished  ; 

They  who  remember  God  feel  not  want ; 

They  who  remember  God  rule  the  world  ; 

They  who  remember  God  dwell  in  happiness  ; 

They  who  remember  God  live  for  ever  ; 

They  to  whom  God  showeth  mercy  ever  remember 
Him— 

Nanak  prayeth  for  the  dust  of  such  men’s  feet. 

6 

They  who  remember  God  are  philanthropic  ; 

I am  ever  devoted  to  those  who  remember  God. 

The  faces  of  those  who  remember  God  look  bright ; 

They  who  remember  God  pass  their  lives  in  bliss  ; 

They  who  remember  God  chasten  their  hearts ; 

The  ways  6i  remember  God  are  holy  ; 

They  who  remember  God  feel  extreme  joy ; 

^ That  is,  avarice  is  removed. 


200 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


They  who  remember  God  dwell  near  Him, 

And  by  the  favour  of  the  saints  are  watchful  night  and 
day— 

Nanak,  meditation  on  God  is  obtained  by  complete  good 
fortune. 


7 

By  remembering  God  everything  is  accomplished  ; 

By  remembering  God  man  never  grieveth  ; 

By  remembering  God  man  uttereth  His  praises  ; 

By  remembering  God  man  is  easily  absorbed  in  Him  ; 

By  remembering  God  man  findeth  an  immovable  seat ; 

By  remembering  God  the  lotus  of  man’s  heart  bloometh  ; 

By  remembering  God  man  heareth  the  unbeaten  melody  ; 

The  happiness  which  is  obtained  by  remembering  God 
hath  no  end  or  limit  : 

They  to  whom  God  is  merciful  remember  Him  ; 

Nanak  seeketh  the  protection  of  such  men. 

8 

By  remembering  God  His  saints  have  become  distin- 
guished ; 

By  remembering  God  the  Veds  were  composed  ; 

By  remembering  God  men  have  obtained  supernatural 
power,  continence  and  generosity  ; 

By  remembering  God  even  the  lowly  are  known  in  every 
direction  ; 

By  remembering  God  the  whole  earth  is  supported  ; ^ 

Remember,  remember  God  the  Cause  of  causes. — 

. For  the  remembrance  of  God  He  created  the  whole 
world  : 

Where  God  is  remembered  there  is  God  Himself : 

Nanak,  the  pious  whom  God  hatli  mercifully  instructed, 
»Have  obtained  the  boon  of  remembering  Him. 

O Thou  Destroyer  of  the  pain  an^  grjjef  of  the  distressed, 
Lord  of  every  heart,  Thyself  without  a lord, 

^ And  not  by  the  serpent  Sheshnag  as  the  Hindus  suppose. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  201 

I have  come  under  Thy  protection  ; O God,  be  with 
Nanak ! 


Ashtapadi  II 

1 

Where  man  hath  neither  mother,  nor  father,  nor  son,  nor 
friend,  nor  brother. 

There,  0 my  soul,  God’s  name  shall  be  with  thee  and 
assist  thee. 

Where  the  very  terrible  ministers  of  Death  crush  thee. 
There  the  name  of  God  alone  shall  go  with  thee. 

Where  there  are  very  great  obstacles. 

The  name  of  God  will  remove  them  in  a moment. 

Thou  shalt  not  be  saved  even  by  many  expiations  ; 

It  is  the  name  of  God  which  remove th  millions  of  sins. 

O my  soul,  utter  the  name  of  God  under  the  Guru’s 
instruction  ; 

Thus  shalt  thou,  saith  Nanak,  have  manifold  joys. 

2 

The  king  of  the  whole  world  is  miserable  ; 

Only  he  is  happy  who  uttereth  God’s  name. 

Even  though  there  be  millions  of  entanglements. 

By  uttering  the  name  of  God,  we  shall  be  freed  from 
them  all. 

The  various  pleasures  of  the  world  allay  not  our  thirst, 
But  by  pondering  on  God’s  name  it  is  quenched. 

On  the  road  on  which  man  goeth  alone,^ 

The  name  of  God  is  with  him  to  cheer  him. 

Ever  ponder  on  such  a Name  in  thy  heart. 

And  under  the  Guru’s  instruction,  Nanak,  thou  shalt 
obtain  the  supreme  state. 


3 

^5^7  though  thou  have  millions  0/ arms,  thou  shalt  not 

be  saved  ; 


^ That  is,  after  deatl). 


202 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


But,  if  thou  utter  the  Name,  thou  shalt  be  saved. 

When  many  obstacles  harass  thee. 

The  name  of  God  will  at  once  save  thee. 

Man  dieth  and  is  bom  in  many  births. 

But  he  shall  obtain  rest  by  uttering  the  Name. 

The  soul  is  defiled  by  filthy  pride — filth  which  is  never 
washed  away ; ^ 

But  the  name  of  God  cleanseth  all  impurity  : 

Repeat  such  a Name,  O my  soul,  with  love  : 

Nanak,  it  is  obtained  in  the  company  of  the  saints. 

4 

On  the  way  where  the  miles  cannot  be  counted. 

The  name  of  God  shall  there  be  thy  provision  ; 

On  the  way  where  there  is  pitch  darkness. 

The  name  of  God  shall  accompany  and  light  thee  ; 

On  the  way  where  nobody  knoweth  thee. 

The  name  of  God  shall  be  there  to  recognize  thee  ; 
Where  there  is  very  terrible  heat  and  great  sunshine, 
There  the  name  of  God  shall  be  a shadow  over  thee. 

O man,  where  thirst  tormenteth  thee, 

There,  saith  Nanak,  the  name  of  God  shall  rain  nectar  on 
thee.® 


5 ■ 

Uttering  the  Name  is  the  business  of  the  pious  ; 
It  giveth  peace  to  the  hearts  of  the  saints. 
God’s  name  is  the  shelter  of  His  servants  ; 

By  God’s  name  millions  have  been  saved. 

The  saints  day  and  night  praise  God  ; 

The  pious  use  God’s  name  as  their  medicine. 
The  name  of  God  is  the  treasure  of  the  holy  ; 
The  Supreme  Being  gave  this  gift  to  man. 


^ Even  at  places  of  pilgrimage. 

* Hindus  light  lamps  to  guide  the  departed.  They  offer  water  to 
allay  their  thirst  and  umbrellas  to  protect  them  from  the  heat.  Such 
offerings,  which  are  made  through  Brahmans,  are  rejected  by  the  Sikhs 
as  vain  superstitions. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  203 

Nanak,  the  pursuit  of  divine  knowledge  is  the  rule  of  the 
holy, 

Whose  souls  and  bodies  are  dyed  with  the  love  of  the 
one  God. 


6 

The  name  of  God  is  the  way  of  salvation  for  His 
servant ; 

The  food  of  God’s  name  satisfieth  His  servant  ; 

The  name  of  God  is  His  servant’s  beauty  and  delight ; 

By  uttering  God’s  name  harm  never  befalleth  one  ; 

God’s  name  is  His  servant’s  glory  ; 

From  God’s  name  man  obtaineth  lustre  ; 

God’s  name  is  enjoyment  and  salvation  to  His  servant ; 

By  uttering  God’s  name  man  is  never  separated  from 
Him. 

Nanak,  every  demigod  ^ worshippeth  him 

Who  is  dyed  with  the  worship  of  God’s  name. 

7 

God’s  name  is  wealth  and  treasure  to  His  servants ; 

God  Himself  gave  His  name  as  a boon  to  man  ; 

God’s  name  is  to  His  servant  a powerful  stronghold  ; 

God’s  servant  knoweth  naught  but  God’s  glory. 

The  man  of  God  who  is  the  warp  and  the  woof,^  is  dyed 
with  God’s  love  ; 

In  deep  meditation  man  is  intoxicated  with  the  essence 
of  the  Name ; 

During  the  eight  watches  of  the  day  the  man  of  God 
repeateth  His  name. 

The  saints  of  God  are  distinguished  and  not  obscure  ; 

The  worship  of  God  conferreth  salvation  upon  many — 

Nanak,  how  many  shall  be  saved  with  holy  men  ? 

^ Har  har  deva.  Also  translated — (a)  Vishnu,  Shiv,  and  the  other 
gods,  (b)  Nanak  worshippeth  him  as  a god  instead  of  Vishnu  and 
Shiv. 

^ Ot  pot.  Also  translated — thoroughly.  The  man  of  God  is 
thoroughly  dyed  with  God’s  love. 


204 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


8 

This  name  of  God  is  as  the  tree  which  groweth  in 
heaven ; ^ 

The  singing  of  God’s  praises  is  as  the  gifts  of  Kamdhen  ; 

Speaking  of  God  is  the  best  of  all  utterances  ; 

By  hearing  the  Name  pain  and  sorrow  are  removed  : 

The  praise  of  the  Name  dwelleth  in  the  hearts  of  the 
pious  ; 

By  their  influence  all  sins  depart. 

It  is  by  great  good  fortune  association  with  the  pious  is 
obtained ; 

It  is  by  serving  them  man  meditateth  on  God’s  name  : 

There  is  nothing  equal  to  God’s  name — 

Nanak,  a few  men  obtain  it  by  the  Guru’s  instruction. 

Slok  III 

I have  seen  many  Shastars,  many  Simritis,  and  searched 
them  all — 

They  are,  Nanak,  not  equal  to  God’s  priceless  name. 

Ashtapadi  III 

I 

Muttering  spells,  doing  penance,  pretended  knowledge,  all 
meditation. 

The  exposition  of  the  six  Shastars  and  of  the  Simritis, 

The  practice  of  Jog,  the  performance  of  vain  religious 
ceremonies, 

The  abandonment  of  everything,  wandering  in  the  forest, 

Superstitious  efforts  of  various  descriptions. 

Almsgiving,  the  sacrifice,  of  horn,  the  bestowal  of  many 
je)yels,* 

* This  is  called  kalaptaru,  and  according  to  the  Hindus  communi- 
cates all  wealth  to  man.  That  and  the  cow  KSmdhenu  were  produced 
among  the  fourteen  gems  from  the  churning  of  the  ocean. 

• Jewels  may  be  understood  literally ; but  the  word  is  sometimes 
applied  to  clarified  butter,  sesame,  sandal,  cardamums,  honey,  &c., 
thrown  on  fire  as  a hom  sacrifice. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  205 

Cutting  pieces  off  one’s  body  and  making  them  a burnt 
offering, 

The  performance  of  fasting  and  vows  of  many  kinds — 
All  are  not  equal  to  the  contemplation  of  God’s  name, 
Nanak,  even  if  it  be  only  once  repeated  as  directed  by 
the  Guru. 

2 

Were  one  to  wander  through  the  nine  continents  of  the 
earth,  live  for  a long  time. 

And  become  a great  anchoret  and  penitent ; 

Were  one  to  burn  oneself  in  the  fire. 

Make  gifts  of  gold,  excellent  horses,  and  lands. 

Perform  the  niwali  feat,  adopt  many  Jogi  attitudes. 
Adopt  the  Jain  mortifications,  make  great  spiritual  efforts, 
And  cut  one’s  body  into  pieces — 

Even  then  the  filth  of  pride  would  not  depart. 

There  is  nothing  equal  to  God’s  name  : 

Nanak,  by  the  utterance  of  the  Name  under  the  Guru 
man  obtaineth  salvation. 


3 

Even  though  the  soul  leave  the  body  at  a place  of  pil- 
grimage ; yet  if  it  retain  worldly  desires. 

Pride  and  arrogance  will  not  depart  from  it. 

Even  though  one  practice  purification  day  and  night. 
The  filth  of  the  heart  will  not  leave  the  body. 

Even  though  man  subject  his  body  to  much  mortification, 
Evil  passions  will  never  abandon  his  heart. 

Even  though  we  wash  this  temporary  body  with  much 
water. 

How  can  a wall  of  mud  become  clean  ? 

O my  soul,  exalted  is  the  name  of  God. 

Nanak,  the  worst  sinners  have  been  saved  by  the  Name. 

4 

By  too  much  cleverness  man  shall  feel  the  fear  of 
Death ; 

Even  by  various  efforts  his  thirst  shall  not  be  satisfied  ; 


2o6 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Even  by  adopting  various  religious  garbs  the  fire  of  his 
worldly  love  is  not  quenched  ; 

Even  by  millions  of  other  religious  efforts  man  is  not 
acceptable  in  God’s  court. 

He  over  whom  worldly  love  hath  spread  its  net, 

Shall  not  escape  in  heaven  or  hell. 

Death  heedeth  naught  but  the  praises  of  God  ; 

He  punisheth  all  other  works  of  man. 

By  repeating  God’s  name  grief  is  dispelled  : 

Nanak  uttereth  the  Name  without  effort. 

5 

Let  him  who  prayeth  for  the  four  boons, 

Apply  himself  to  the  service  of  holy  men. 

Let  him  who  desireth  to  remove  his  troubles, 

■Continually  sing  the  name  of  God  in  his  heart. 

Let  him  who  desireth  honour  for  himself, 

Renounce  pride  by  association  with  holy  men. 

Let  him  who  feareth  transmigration, 

Come  under  the  protection  of  holy  men. 

Nanak  is  a sacrifice,  a sacrifice 

Unto  those  who  thirst  for  the  sight  of  God. 

6 

Among  all  men  foremost  is  he 

Who  by  association  with  the  pious  effaceth  pride. 

He  who  deemeth  himself  lowly, 

Shall  be  deemed  the  most  exalted  of  all. 

They  whose  minds  are  the  dust  of  all  men’s  feet. 

Shall  see  God’s  name  in  their  inmost  hearts. 

They  who  expel  evil  from  their  hearts. 

Shall  regard  the  whole  world  as  their  friends. 

^The  holy  man  who  looketh  upon  weal  and  woe  as  the 
same. 

Shall  not,  Nanak,  be  affected  by  evil  or  good. 

7 

To  him  who  hath  no  wealth,  O God,  Thy  name  is  wealth  ; 
To  him  who  hath  no  home,  Thy  name  is  a home  ; 


207 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

To  him  who  hath  no  honour,  Thy  name  is  an  honour : 
Thou  givest  gifts  to  all  persons. 

Thou,  O Lord,  actest  and  causest  to  act. 

It  is  only  Thou,  who  hast  the  secrets  of  all  hearts. 

Who  knowest  Thine  own  condition  and  limit. 

Thou  art,  0 God,  Thine  own  beloved  ; 

It  is  Thou  alone  who  canst  praise  Thyself. 

Saith  Nanak,  no  one  else  knoweth  Thy  praises. 

8 

Of  all  devotion,  the  best  devotion  is 

To  utter  the  name  of  God  and  do  pious  works  ; ^ 

Of  all  rites,  the  best  rite  is 

To  remove  the  filth  of  evil  inclinations  by  association 
with  saints  ; 

Of  all  efforts,  the  best  effort  is 
Ever  heartily  to  repeat  God’s  name ; 

Of  all  .speech,  the  divine  speech  is 

To  uttei;  with  the  tongue  God’s  praises  heard  from  the 
Gum\ 

Of  all  places,  that  is  the  best  place 

Nanak,  where  God’s  name  dwelleth  in  the  heart. 

Slok  IV 

O unworthy  and  foolish  man,  ever  remember  God. 

Fix  thy  heart  upon  Him,  Nanak,  who  made  thee  ; this 
will  avail  thee  in  the  end. 

Ashtapadi  IV 

I 

Mortal,  think  upon  the  goodness  of  God, 

What  thine  origin  is,  and  what  thou  appearest  now — 
That  God  who  made  thee,  fashioned  thee,  and  adorned 
thee. 

Who  preserved  thee  in  the  fire  of  the  womb, 

Who  in  thine  infancy  gave  thee  milk  to  drink, 

^ Also  translated — To  utter  the  name  of  God,  which  is  a pious 
work. 


2o8 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


In  thy  youth  food,  comfort,  and  intelligence, 

In  thine  old  age  relations  to  watch  over  thee. 

And  who  put  food  into  thy  mouth  as  thou  wast  seated.* 
Unworthy  man,  however,  value  not  these  favours. 

If  Thou,  0 God,  pardon  him,  then,  0 Nanak,  he  shall  be 
acceptable. 

2 

Thou  feelest  an  affection  for  others,  and  abandonest  Him 
By  whose  favour  thou  dwellest  in  comfort  on  the  earth. 
And  rej  nicest  with  children,  brothers,  friends,  and 
wives ; 

By  whose  favour  thou  drinkest  cool  water. 

And  the  pleasant  winds  and  the  priceless  fire  are  at  thy 
service  ; 

By  whose  favour  thou  enjoyest  all  pleasures. 

And  livest  with  all  the  necessaries  of  life  ; 

Who  gave  thee  hands,  feet,  ears,  eyes,  and  a tongue — 
Such  sins  of  ingratitude  attach  to  blind  and  foolish  man  ; 
Nanak  prayeth,  save  us,  O Lord,  from  such  sins. 

3 

The  ignorant  * man  loveth  not  Him 

Who  protecteth  him  in  the  beginning  and  the  end  ; 

The  fool  fixeth  not  his  heart  on  Him 
By  service  to  whom  the  wealth  of  the  world  is  obtained  ; 
The  Lord  who  is  ever  and  ever  present 
Is  thought  by  the  blind  to  be  far  away  ; 

The  stupid  and  foolish  forget  Him 

By  service  to  whom  honour  is  obtained  at  His  court. 

Man  erreth  ever  and  ever  : 

Nanak,  the  Infinite  One  is  the  only  Preserver. 

4 

Man  abandoneth  a jewel  and  loveth  a kauri ; 

He  renounceth  truth  and  occupieth  himself  with  false- 
hood ; 

* That  is,  without  any  effort  of  thy  own. 

? Gawar.  Gamwar,  dweller  in  a village,  is  literally  the  Latin  word 
paganus. 


209 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

What  he  shall  have  to  part  with  he  deemeth  enduring  ; 

The  thought  of  death  which  is  to  happen  he  putteth  away 
from  him  ; 

He^  troubleth  himself  about  what  he  must  part  with  ; 

He  spurneth  the  Succourer  who  abideth  with  him  ; 

He  washeth  away  and  removeth  the  coating  of  sandal,^ 

And  like  a donkey  conceiveth  a love  for  ashes  to  roll  in. 

Man  hath  fallen  into  a terrible  blind  well  : 

Saith  Nanak,  O Merciful  God,  extricate  him  : 

5 

He  is  only  man  in  appearance  ; his  acts  are  those  of 
a brute  ; 

He  beguileth  ^ people  day  and  night  ; 

He  weareth  a religious  dress,  but  within  him  is  the  iillh 
of  worldly  love  ; 

However  much  he  try,  he  cannot  conceal  his  sins  ; 

Before  the  world  he  practiseth  contemplation,  meditation, 
and  ablution. 

While  in  his  heart  he  hath  the  greed  of  a dog  ; 

In  his  heart  is  the  fire  of  avarice  while  he  applieth  ashes 
to  his  body  ; ^ 

There  is  a stone  tied  to  his  neck  : how  shall  he  cross  over 
the  bottomless  ocean  ? 

He  in  whose  heart  God  Himself  dwelleth, 

Shall,  O Nanak,  be  easily  absorbed  in  Him. 

6 

How  shall  a blind  man  find  the  road  even  though  he  hear 
where  it  is  ? 

Take  his  hand  and  he  shall  reach  the  goal. 

How  can  a deaf  man  understand  riddles  ? 

Talk  to  him  of  the  night,  and  he  will  think  you  are  talking 
of  the  dawn 

^ What  is  precious.  ^ ’ 

2 Lok  pachdr^  the  Sanskrit  lokopaeMr^  is  also  ’ translated  — he 
foiloweth  others'  example. 

^ To  imitate  religious  persons. 

P 


SIKH,  lit 


210 


THE  SIKIH  RELIGiaN 


How  can  a dumb  man  sing  a stave 

When,  though  he  try,  it  would  break  his  voice,^ 

How  can  a cripple  roam  on  a mountain  ? 

He  could  never  reach  there.  i 

O merciful  Creator,  Nanak  humbly  supplicateth  Thee,: 
That  by  Thy  favour  he  may  be  saved. 

7 

Man  thinketh  not  upon  the  Succourer  Vhc  abideth  with 
him ; 

He  loveth  what  is  hostile  to  him  ; 

He  dwelleth  within  a house  of  sand. 

And  indulgeth  in  joy,  and  sports,  and  the  pleasures  of 
the  world  : 

He  is  certain  in  his  heart  that  they  shall  last  for  ever. 

• Attached  to  the  sins  of  revenge,  epmity,  lust,  wrath, 
worldly  love. 

Falsehood,  excessive  avarice,  and  deceit. 

The  thought  of  death  never  entereth  his  foolish  heart. 

In  this  way  he  hath  passed  several  lives  ; 

Nanak  prayeth,  0 God,  save  him  by  Thy  favoiir. 

8 

Thou  art  the  Lord : I make  this  supplication,  unto 
Thee. 

Soul  and  body  are  all  Thy  property  ; 

Thou  art  mother  and  father,  we  are  Thy  children. 

By  Thy  favour  we  obtain  many  comforts  : 

Nobody  knoweth  Thy  limit. 

0 God,  Thou  art  the  most  exalted  of  the  exalted. 

All  things  are  strvmg  on  Thy  string,* 

And  must  obey  the  orders  Thou  issuest. 

It  is  only  Thou  Thyself  who  knowest  Thine  own  con- 
dition and  limit : 

Nanak,  Thy  slave,  is  ever  a sacrifice  unto  Thee.® 

1 That  is,  his  voice  would  be  out  of  tune. 

* The  whole  creation  is  upheld  by  Thy  law. 

® This  eighth  pad  is  repeated  by  the  Sikhs  whenever  the  Granth 
Sahib  is  opened. 


HYMNS  OF  GVm  ARJAN 


211 


Slok  V 

They  who  leave  God  the  Giver  and  attach  themselves  to 
others  pleasures, 

Shall  never  be  acceptable  ; O Nanak,  without  the  ‘Nhme 
their  honour  shall  depart.  ' 

Ashtapadi  V 

1 

If  man  obtain  ten  things  and  lay  them  by, 

Shall  he  basely  forfeit  his  faith  for  the  sake  of  one 
thing  ? ^ 

If  God  give  not  even  one  thing  and  take  away  the  ten 
things, 

Say  what  can  foolish  man  do  ? 

Ever  bow  down  to  that  Lord 
With  whom  force  is  of  no  avail. 

All  happiness  abideth  in  him 
To  whose  heart  God  is  dear. 

The  man  whom  God  hath  caused  to  obey  His  order. 
Hath,  Nanak,  obtained  all  things. 

2 

The  Banker  giveth  countless  capital  to  man  : ’ 

He  eateth,  and  drinketh,  and  useth  it  with  pleasure  and 

}oy ; 

But  if  God  the  Banker  take  back  some  of  what  He  hath 
entrusted  to  man. 

The  fool  becometh  angry. 

He  by  his  own  act  forfeiteth  confidence. 

And  God  will  not  again  trust  him. 

If  thou  place  the  things  ^ before  their  Owner, 

And  obey  God^s  order  with  all  thy  might,® 

, ^ When  God  has  conferred  many  blessings,  shall  man  be  Ungrateful 
and  rail  at  Him  because  he  is  bereft  of  one  blessing  ? 

2 The  blessings  previously  referred  to. 

® Literally--on  thy  forehead.  Persian  and  Indian  Mussulmans 
say — with  the  head  and  eyes. 

P 2 


212 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  will  make  thee  fourfold  happy. 

Nanak,  the  Lord  is  ever  compassionate. 

3 

Man  is  enamoured  of  the  various  forms  of  mammon, 

But  it  is  temporary ; know  this  for  a certainty. 

Man  falleth  in  love  with  the  shadow  of  a tree  : 

When  that  vanisheth  he  mourneth  in  his  heart. 
Everything  we  see  is  transitory  ; 

Yet  man,  thoroughly  blind  that  he  is,  is  attached  to  it. 
He  who  giveth  his  love  to  a passing  visitor. 

Shall  gain  nothing  thereby. 

O my  soul,  the  love  of  God’s  name  is  comfortable. 
Nanak,  God  attacheth  to  Himself  those  to  whom  He 
showeth  mercy. 


4 

Perishable  are  body,  wealth,  and  family ; 

Perishable  are  pride,  egoism,  and  worldly  love  ; 

Perishable  are  dominion,  youth,  wealth,  and  property ; 

Perishable  are  lust  and  direful  wrath  ; 

Perishable  are  carriages,  elephants,  horses,  and  raiment ; 

Perishable  the  love  of  worldly  things,  a sight  of  which 
causeth  man  to  rejoice  ; ^ 

Perishable  are  deceit,  worldly  love,  and  pride  ; 

Perishable  is  self-conceit ; 

Imperishable  the  worship  performed  under  the  protection 
of  holy  men — 

Nanak  liveth  by  meditating  on  God’s  feet — 

5 

Perishable  the  ears  which  listen  to  slander  of  others  ; 

Perishable  the  hands  which  steal  the  property  of  others  ; 

Perishable  the  eyes  which  behold  the  beauty  and  other 
charms  of  another’s  wife  ; 

Perishable  the  tongue  which  tasteth  dainty  food  and  other 
savours ; 

^ Also  Uanslated — Perishable  the  pleasure  obtained  by  beholding 
near  the  various  forms  of  mammon. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJ AN  213 

Perishable  the  feet  which  run  after  evil ; 

Perishable  the  heart  which  coveteth  another’s  goods ; 

Perishable  the  body  which  benefit eth  not  others  ; 

Perishable  the  nose  which  delighteth  in  the  smell  of 
evil ; 

Without  understanding  God  everything  is  perishable. 

Fruitful  is  the  body,  Nanak,  which  taketh  the  name  of 
God. 

6 

Vain  is  the  life  of  the  infidel.^ 

How  can  man  be  pure  without  truth  ? 

Vain  are  the  spiritually  blind  without  God’s  name  ; 

Foul  breath  2 issueth  from  their  mouths  : 

Without  remembering  the  Name  their  days  and  nights 
pass  away  in  vain. 

As  the  crop  perLsheth  without  rain, 

As  the  money  of  the  miser  is  worthless, 

So  everything  is  vain  without  repeating  God’s  name. 

They  are  to  be  highly  congratulated  in  whose  hearts  the 
name  of  God  abideth  : 

Nanak  is  a sacrifice,  a sacrifice  unto  them. 

^ Sakai,  This  word  means  an  adorer  of  the  Shaktis,  or  female 
energies  of  the  gods,  but  the  term  is  more  particularly  applied  to  the 
adorers  of  Parbati,  the  female  energy  of  Shiv.  As  the  worshippers  of 
Shiv  set  up  the  phallus  as  the  outward  and  visible  representation  of 
their  god,  so  the  worshippers  of  his  consort  apply  themselves  to  the 
worship  of  the  female  principle,  by  which  they  mean  the  divine  power 
personified  in  woman.  Some  suppose  that  Shakti  created  the  world 
without  God’s  intervention. 

The  Sakats  are  of  two  classes,  those  who  follow  the  right-hand  and 
those  who  follow  the  left-hand  way.  The  worship  of  the  former  is 
open  and  undisguised,  and  of  the  latter  secret  and  concealed.  The 
ceremonies  must  be  attended  with  one  or  all  of  five  objects  beginning 
with  an  M — mans,  flesh;  matsya,  fish;  madya,  wine;  maithuna, 
sensuality ; and  mudra,  naturalistic  gesticulations.  It  can,  therefore,  be 
understood  that  the  worship  occasionally  diverges  from  its  strictly 
religious  character. 

The  scriptures  of  the  Sakats  are  called  Tantras.  They  principally 
consist  of  dialogues  between  Shiv  and  his  consort.  Their  composition 
is  attributed  to  Shiv  himself.  There  is  no  doubt  that  they  possess 
some  antiquity,  for  they  are  mentioned  in  the  Purans. 

2 That  is,  foul  language. 


H4  / /IlHB  SIHH.  RELIGION'  i 

7, \ , ; 

He  who  professeth  one  thing  and  dpetli  another,  , 

, In,  whose  heart  tj^ere  is  ho  love,,  but  who  .attacheth  nien 
to  him  by  his  words, 

Shall  be  tried  by  the  Lord,  who  is  wise,  who  knov^eth 
everything,  . 

And  is  not  pleased  simply  by  outward  appearances. 

He  who  practiseth  not  what  he  preacheth. 

Shall  come  and  go,  shall  be  born  and  die. 

The  world  shall  be  saved  by  his  teaching 

In  whose  heart  the  Formless  One  dwelleth. 

Only  they  who  are  pleasing  to  Thee,  0 God,  can  know 
Thee  : 

Nanak  falleth  at  the  feet  of  such  men. 

8 

Supplicate  thp  Supreme  Being, who  knoweth  all  things, 

God,  accepteth  the  prayers  of  His  creatures  : 

He  Himself  and  by  Himself  decideth  : 

To  one  man  He  showeth  Himself  afar,  and  to  another 
near. 

He  Himself  is  free  from  all  stratagems  and  wiles  ; 

He  thoroughly  knoweth  the  ways  of  man’s  heart ; 

The  man  who  is  pleasing  to  Him  He  attacheth  to  His  skirt — 

He  is  contained  in  every  place — 

He  to  whom  He  showeth  favour  is  His  servant. 

Nanak,  every  moment  repeat  God’s  name. 

Slok  VI 

Nanak  hath  taken  Thy  protection,  O Divine  Guru ; merci- 
fully grant 

“ That  his  lust,  wrath,  avarice,  worldly  love,  and  pride  may 
depart!  , 

Ashtapadi  VI 

' X . 

Bear  that  God  .in  thy  mind 

By  whose  favour  thou  eatest  of  the  thirty-six  dishes. 


HYMNiS  ^ OFI  Glim  -ARJlAN  215 

Thou  shalt  obtain  salvation  by  remembering  Him 
By  whose  favour  thou  appliest  perfume  to  thy  body. 
Meditate  oil  Him  continually  in  thy  heart 
By  whose  favour  thou  dwellest  comfortably  at  home. 
Repeat  His  name  with  thy  tongue  for  the  eight  watches 
By  whose  favour  thou  dwellest  in  comfort  with  thy 
family. 

Nanak  ever  meditateth  on  Him 

By  whose  favour  thou  enjoyest  mental  and  bodily  plea- 
sure ; He  is  worthy  of  meditation.^ 

2 

Why  shouldest  thou  be  enamoured  of  others  and  forsake 
Him 

By  whose  favour  thou  wearest  silks  and  satins  ? 

O man,  sing  His  praises  for  the  eight  watches 
By  whose  favour  thpu  sleepest  in  comfort  on  thy  bed. 
Repeat  His  praises  with  thy  mouth  and  with  thy  tongue 
By  whose  favour  every  one  honoureth  thee. 

O man,  ever  think  upon  the  Supreme  Being  alone 
By  whose  favour  thy  faith  is  preserved. 

By  uttering  the  name  of  God  thou  shalt  obtain  honpur 
at  His  court, 

O Nanak,  and  go  home  with  honour. 

3 

Fix  thine  attention  on  that  lovable  God 
By  whose  favour  thy  beautiful  body  remaineth  healthy. 
O man,  thou  shalt  obtain  happiness  by  uttering  God’s 
praises. 

By  whose  favour  thy  honour  is  preserved. 

O man,  take  shelter  in  that  Lord  God 
By  whose  favour  all  thy  defects  are  concealed. 

O man,  at  every  breath  remember  the  Most  High 
By  whose  favour  none  can  equal  thee. 

Nanak,  perform  His  service 

By  whose  favour  thou  obtainest  a human  body  so  difficult 
to  obtain. 

1 The  Sikhs  repeal  this  pad  also  as  grace  after  meals. 


rm  SIKH'  REiiGim 


216 


4 

0 man,  why  art  thou  slow  in  remembering  Him 
By  whose  favour  thou  wearest  jewels  ? 

0 naan,  never  forget  thy  God 

By  whose  favour  thou  ridest  on  horses  and  elephants. 
String  and  keep  God  in  thy  heart 

By  whose  favour  thou  hast  gardens,  and  property,  and 
wealth. 

Standing  or  sitting,  O man,  ever  meditate  upon  Him 
Who  made  the  framework  of  thy  body. 

Meditate  upon  Him  who  is  the  Invisible  One, 

And  he  will  preserve  thee,  Nanak,  in  this  world  and  the 
next. 

5 

Meditate  upon  Him  during  the  eight  watches  of  the  day 
By  whose  favour  thou  bestowest  much  in  charity. 
Remember  that  God  at  every  breath 
By  whose  favour  thou  performest  thy  religious  and 
worldly  duties. 

Remember  that  God  ever  incomparable 
By  whose  favour  thy  form  is  beautiful. 

Meditate  on  that  God  day  and  night 
By  whose  favour  thou  hast  obtained  the  superior  state 
By  the  Guru’s  favour,  Nanak,  repeat  His  praises 
By  wliose  favour  thine  honour  is  preserved. 

6 

Why  attach  thyself  to  any  other  and  forsake  Him 
By  whose  favour  thine  ears  hear  melody. 

By  whose  favour  thou  beholdest  wonders. 

By  whose  favour  thou  utterest  ambrosial  words. 

By  whose  favour  thou  abidest  in  ease  and  comfort. 

By  whose  favour  thy  hands  move  to  discharge  * their 
duties, 

By  whose  favour  thou  art  completely  successful, 

1 Human  birth. 

* Kar.  If  pad,  the  foot,  were  read  instead  of  this  word,  the  verse 
« ould  appear  more  simple. 


217 


HYMNS  OFi  GURU  ARJAN 

By  whose  favour  thou  obtainest  supreme  bliss, 

By  whose  favour  thou  shalt  be  filled  with  happiness  and 
comfort  ? 

Awaken  thy  heart,  Nanak,  by  the  Guru’s  favour. 

7 

Never  at  all  forget  that  God  in  thy  heart 

By  whose  favour  thou  art  distinguished  in  the  world. 

O foolish  man,  repeat  His  name 
By  whose  favour  thou  obtainest  glory. 

Know  in  thy  heart  that  He  is  ever  present 
By  whose  favour  thine  affairs  are  completed. 

O my  soul,  attach  thyself  to  Him 
By  whose  favour  thou  obtainest  the  truth. 

Nanak,  utter  the  name  of  Him 
By  whose  favour  all  are  saved. 

8 

He  uttereth  God’s  name  whom  He  causeth  to  utter  it ; 
He  singeth  God’s  praises  whom  He  causeth  to  sing 
them. 

Through  God’s  mercy  man  becometh  enlightened  ; 
Through  God’s  compassion  the  lotus  of  the  heart 
bloometh. 

If  God  be  pleased,  He  abideth  in  man’s  heart. 

By  God’s  compassion  man’s  intellect  is  superior  to  that 
of  others. 

All  wealth  is  obtained,  O God,  by  Thy  kindness  ; 

No  one  obtaineth  anything  by  himself. 

We  apply  ourselves  to  the  duties  to  which  Thou  hast 
appointed  us,  O Master  : 

Nanak,  we  have  no  power  in  ourselves. 

Slok  VII 

The  supreme  Being  is  inaccessible  and  unfathomable ; 

He  who  repeateth  His  name  shdl  be  saved. 

Hear,  O my  friends,  Nanak’s  representation 
And  the  wonderful  story  of  the  saints  : — 


2I8 


THE-  SIKHi  RELIGION / ! ^ 


Ashtapadi  VII 

1 

By  associatijOn  with  saints  the  face  becometh  bright, , 

By  association  with  saints  all  filth  is  removed, 

By  association  with  saints  pride  is  effaced. 

By  association  with  saints  divine  knowledge  is  re- 
vealed, 

By  association  with  saints  God  is  known  to  be  near, 

By  association  with  saints  everything  is  decided. 

By  association  with  saints  the  jewel  of  the  Name  is 
obtained. 

By  association  with  saints  we  should  strive  for  the  one 
God— 

What  mortal  can  express  saints’  praises  ? 

Nanak,  the  glory  of  saints  is  merged  in  that  of  God.^ 

2 

By  association  with  saints  the  Unseen  is  obtained, 

By  association  with  saints  man  ever  flourisheth. 

By  association  with  saints  the  five  evil  passions  are 
restrained. 

By  association  with  saints  man  partaketh  of  the  am- 
brosial essence  of  the  Name, 

By  association  with  saints  man  becometh  the  dust  of 
all  men’s  feet, 

In  the  association  of  saints  is  fascinating  converse. 

By  association  with  saints,  the  mind  wandereth  not 
in  any  direction. 

By  association  with  saints  it  becometh  stable. 

By  association  with  saints  the  mind  is  free  from 
illusion — 

^Nanak,  by  association  with  saints,  God  is  well  pleased. 

3 

By  association  with  saints  all  enemies  become  friends,  j 
By  association  with  saints  man  becometh  very  pure, 

^ When  saints’  praises  cannot  be  e.xpressed,  much  less  can  God's. 


HYMNS-  m .GliJiBU-ARiJAN  219 

By  association  with  saints  man  feeleth  not  enmity  for 
any  one,  , , 

By  association  with  saints  man’s  feet  walk  not  awry — 

A man  cannot  be  evil  who  associateth  with  saints — 

By  association  with  saints  man  knoweth  the  Supreme 

Joy, 

By  association  with  saints  there  is  no  fever  of  pride, 

By  association  with  saints  man  abandoneth  all  self- 
conceit. 

Only  God  knoweth  His  saints’  greatness — 

Nanak,  there  is  an  understanding  between  God  and  His 
saints — 

4 

By  association  with  saints  the  mind  never  wandereth,  . 

By  association  with  saints  happiness  is  ever  obtained, 

By  association  with  saints  man  obtaineth  what  is  un- 
seen, 

By  association  with  saints  man  beareth  intolerable  things, 
By  association  with  saints  man  dwelleth  in  an  exalted 
position, 

By  association  with  saints  man  shall  reach  God'^s  palace, 
By  association  with  saints  man’s  faith  is  completely 
established, 

In  the  association  of  saints  the  Supreme  Being  alone 
is  mentioned, 

By  association  with  saints  man  obtaineth  the  treasure  of 
the  Name — 

Nanak  is  a sacrifice  to  the  saints — 

5 

By  association  with  saints  all  one’s  family  is  saved, 

By  association  with  saints  acquaintances,  friends,  and 
family  are  saved. 

By  association  with  saints  that  wealth  is  obtained 
From  which  every  one  gaineth  advantage — 

Dharmraj  performeth  service  for  those  who  associate 
with  saints—  ' 

By  association  with  saints  the  king  of  the  demigods 
singeth  man’s  praises. 


2^0 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


By  association  with  saints  sins  flee  away, 

By  association  with  saints  man  singeth  the  praises  of  the 
ambrosial  NatM, 

By  association  with  saints  man  reacheth  every  place, 
Nanak,  by  association  with  saints  man’s  birth  is  profit- 
able. 

6 

By  association  with  saints  man  hath  no  travail — 

On  beholding  and  meeting  them  man  becometh  happy — 
By  association  with  saints  blemishes  are  removed, 

By  association  with  saints  hell  is  avoided, 

By  association  with  saints  man  shall  be  happy  in  this 
world  and  the  next, 

By  association  with  saints  they  who  are  separated  from 
God  shall  meet  Him, 

By  association  with  saints  man  departeth  not  empty. 

But  obtaineth  the  fruit  he  desireth. 

The  Supreme  Being  dwelleth  in  the  hearts  of  saints  ; 
Nanak,  man  hearing  God’s  delicious  name  from  saints 
shall  be  saved. 

7 

In  the  association  of  saints  hear  God’s  name. 

In  the  association  of  saints  sing  God’s  praises. 

In  the  association  of  saints  God  is  not  forgotten. 

In  the  association  of  saints  man  shall  assuredly  be 
saved — 

To  the  association  of  saints  God  is  dear — 

By  association  with  saints  He  is  seen  in  every  heart. 

By  association  with  saints  man  becometh  obedient. 

By  association  with  saints  I have  been  saved. 

By  association  with  saints  all  maladies  are  healed. 
Nanak,  association  with  saints  is  obtained  by  good 
fortune. 

8 

Even  tbe  Veds  know  not  the  greatness  oi  saints  ; 

They  described  them  as  far  as  they  had  heard  of  them. 
The  greatness  of  saints  is  beyond  the  three  qualities. 
The  greatness  of  saints  pervadeth  every  place  ; 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJ AN  221 

There  is  no  end  to  the  glory  of  saints  ; 

The  glory  of  saints  is  ever  endless, 

The  glory  of  saints  is  the  highest  of  the  high, 

The  glory  of  saints  is  the  greatest  of  the  great, 

The  glory  of  saints  appertaineth  to  them  alone  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  my  brethren,  there  is  no  difference  between 
God  and  His  saints. 

Slok  VIII 

He  whose  heart  is  true  and  whose  words  are  true 
Looketh  at  nobody  but  the  one  God. 

Nanak,  these  are  the  marks  of  a man  who  knoweth 
God 

Ashtapadi  VIII 

1 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  ever  uncontaminated. 

As  the  lotus  is  untouched  by  the  water  ; 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  ever  stainless,^ 

As  all  things  purified  by  the  sun  ; 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  looketh  on  all  men  as  equal. 
As  the  wind  bloweth  on  the  rich  and  poor  alike  ; 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  uniformly  patient. 

Like  the  earth  which  one  man  diggeth  up  and  another 
smeareth  with  sandal. 

This  is  the  attribute  of  the  man  who  knoweth  God  ; 
Nanak,  his  nature  is  like  that  of  fire.^ 

2 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  the  purest  of  the  pure. 

As  filth  cannot  permanently  attach  to  water  ; 

The  mind  of  the  man  who  knoweth  God  is  enlightened, 
Like  the  firmament  above  the  earth ; 

To  the  man  who  knoweth  God  a friend  and  foe  are  the 
same  ; 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  hath  no  pride  ; 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  the  most  exalted  of  the 

exalted  ; 

^ That  is,  no  matter  what  he  eats  or  with  whom  he  associates. 

^ Which  purifies  everything. 


222 


tHE  SIKH  RELIGION  ' 


Yet  his  mind  is  the  most  humble  of  all — 

Nanak,  only  those  are  Brahmgyanis  * 

Whom  God  Himself  maketh  so — 

3 

The  man  who  kijoweth  God  is  the  dust  of  all  men’s  feet, 
The  man  who  knoweth  God  feeleth  spiritual  pleasure, 
The  man  who  knoweth  God  showeth  kindness  to  all. 
From  the  man  who  knoweth  God  copieth  nothing  evil, 
The  man  who  knoweth  God  ever  looketh  on  all  with  , an 
equal  eye — 

Nectar  raineth  from  the  glance  of  him  who  knoweth 
God — 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  free  from  entanglements  ; 
The  way  of  the  man  who  knoweth  God  is  pure  ; 

Divine  knowledge  is  the  food  of  the  man  who  knoweth 
God  ; 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  meditateth  on  Him, 

4 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  hath  his  hopes  on  One 
alone, 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  shall  never  perish. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  steeped  in  humility. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  delighteth  to  show  kindness 
to  others. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  not  involved  in  worldly 
affairs. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  restraineth  his  wandering 
mind ; 

Very  good  are  the  acts  of  the  man  who  knoweth  God  ; ® 
Ever3d;hing  prospereth  with  him  who  knoweth  God  ; 

Jn  the  company  of  the  man  who  knoweth  God  all  shall 
be  saved — 

Nanak,  the  whole  world  praiseth  the  man  Svhu  knoweth 
God. 

^ Who  know  God. 

* Also  translated — To  the  man  who  knoweth  God,  whatever  is,  is 
best. 


HYMNS  OF  GURH  ARJAN 


223 


.5 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  loveth  Him  alone  j 
God  abideth  with  the  man  who  knoweth  Him  ; 

The  Name  is  the  support  of  the  man  who  knoweth 
God, 

The  Name  is  a halo  ^ for  the  man  who  knoweth  God  ; 
The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  ever  watchful, 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  renounceth  pride, 

The  heart  of  him  who  knoweth  God  feeleth  supreme 
delight. 

The  home  of  him  who  knoweth  God  is  ever  happy, 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  dwelleth  in  peace  and  rest, 
The  man  who  knoweth  God,  O Nanak,  shall  never  perish — 

6 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  called  a Brahmgyani, 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  loveth  but  Him  alone. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  free  from  care  ; 

Pure  is  the  doctrine  of  him  who  knoweth  God  ; 

He  is  a Brahmgyani  whom  God  maketh  so  ; 

Great  is  the  glory  of  the  man  who  knoweth  God. 

A sight  of  the  man  who  knoweth  God  is  only  obtained 
by  good  fortune  ; 

Be  a sacrifice  to  the  man  who  knoweth  God  ; 

Shiv  searcheth  for  the  man  who  knoweth  God — 

Nanak,  the  Brahmgyani  is  himself  God. 

7 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  priceless. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  knoweth  everything — 

Who  knoweth  the  secret  of  him  who  knoweth  God  ? 
Obeisance  ever  to  him  who  knoweth  God  ! 

Even  half  a letter  of  his  praises  who  knoweth  God  cannot 
be  written — 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  the  lord  of  all — 

Who  can  tell  the  worth  of  the  man  who  knoweth  God  } 

^ Parwar.  This  word  also  means  family  and  retinue. 


224 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Only  the  man  who  knoweth  God  knoweth  his  own  state ; 
The  man  who  knoweth  God  hath  no  end  or  limit. 

Nanak  ever  boweth  to  the  man  who  knoweth  God. 

8 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  the  creator  of  the  whole 
world, 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  liveth  for  ever  and  dieth  not, 
The  man  who  knoweth  God  bestoweth  on  creatiires 
spiritual  and  temporal  benefits. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  the  perfect  being,  the 
arranger. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  the  patron  of  the  patron- 
less. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  holdeth  his  arm  over  all, 
The  man  who  knoweth  God  owneth  the  whole  world. 

The  man  who  knoweth  God  is  himself  the  Formless  One — 
The  glory  of  the  man  who  knoweth  God  is  peculiar  to 
himself — 

Nanak,  the  man  who  knoweth  God  is  the  lord  of  all. 
Slok  IX 

Nanak,  he  is  an  Aparas  ^ and  saveth  all, 

Who  preserveth  the  Name  in  his  inmost  heart, 

Who  seeth  God  in  all  things. 

And  who  every  moment  boweth  to  the-  Lord. 

Ashtapadi  IX 

I 

Nanak,  among  millions  there  is  scarcely  an  Aparas 
Whose  tongue  toucheth  not  falsehood, 

Whose  heart  loveth  to  behold  the  Bright  One, 

Whose  eyes  gaze  not  on  the  beauty  of  others’  wives. 
Who  serveth  holy  men  and  loveth  saints, 

Whose  ears  hear  not  slander  of  any  one, 

Who  deemeth  himself  the  worst  of  all  men. 


^ Aparas^  a sect  who  plume  themselves  on  not  touching  metals. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  225 

Who  by  the  favour  of  the  Guru  renounceth  all  wickedness, 
Who  banisheth  all  evil  desires  from  his  heart, 

Curbeth  his  passions,  and  refraineth  from  the  five  deadly 
sins. 

2 

He  is  a.  Vaishnav  with  whom  God  is  pleased. 

Who  is  free  from  the  influence  of  mammon, 

Who  in  performing  good  acts  looketh  not  for  reward  * — 
Of  such  a Vaishnav  pure  is  the  religion — 

Nanak,  that  Vaishnav  shall  obtain  final  salvation, 

Who  desireth  not  a reward  for  anything. 

Who  is  only  attached  to  God’s  service  and  singing  His 
praises, 

Who  remembereth  God  in  his  mind  and  body. 

Who  is  merciful  to  all  creatures. 

Who  himself  holdeth  fast  God’s  name  and  causeth  others 
to  repeat  it. 

3 

He  is  a Bhagauti  who  loveth  God’s  service, 

Who  forsaketh  the  company  of  all  wicked  men. 

Who  removeth  all  superstition  from  his  mind. 

Who  deemeth  and  worshippeth  all  nature  as  the  Supreme 
Being, 

Who  by  association  with  the  saints  washeth  away  the 
filth  of  sin — 

Of  such  a Bhagauti  supreme  is  the  wisdom — 

He  who  continually  serveth  God, 

And  dedicateth  his  soul  and  body  to  His  love, 

Who  placeth  God’s  feet  in  his  heart — 

Nanak,  such  a Bhagauti  shall  obtain  God. 

4 

He  is  a Pandit  who  awakeneth  his  own  mind. 

Who  searcheth  for  God’s  name  in  his  heart. 

Who  drinketh  the  excellent  juice  of  God’s  name — 

^ Acts  are  of  two  kinds,  those  performed  for  a material  object,  as  if 
one  makes  offerings  for  wealth  or  the  restoration  of  health,  and 
secondly  those  performed  without  any  hope  or  desire  of  reward. 

SIKH.  Ill  Q 


226 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  world  liveth  by  that  Pandit’s  instruction — 

The  Pandit  who  implanteth  God’s  word  in  his  heart 
Shall  not  be  born  again. 

Nanak  ever  maketh  obeisance  to  that  Pandit 
Who  understandeth  the  real  meaning  of  the  Veds,  the 
Purans,  and  the  Simritis, 

Who  recognizeth  the  great  in  the  minute/ 

And  who  instructeth  the  four  castes. 

5 

The  Name,  the  ground  spell,  giveth  knowledge  to  all ; 

He  who  among  the  four  castes 
Repeateth  it,  shall  obtain  salvation. 

Some  rare  man  obtaineth  it  by  association  with  the  saints. 
By  the  favour  of  God,  the  keeping  of  the  Name  in  the 
heart 

Shall  save  brutes,  sprites,  blockheads  and  hard-hearted 
persons 

The  Name  is  the  medicine  for  all  diseases  ; 

Singing  God’s  praises  is  beatitude  and  joy. 

God’s  name  is  found  not  in  any  other  way  or  by  any 
other  religion, 

Nanak,  he  for  whom  such  destiny  was  written  from  the 
first,  shall  obtain  God’s  name. 

6 

He  in  whose  heart  is  God’s  dwelling. 

May  truly  be  called  God’s  slave. 

The  soul  of  the  world  appeareth  to  his  gaze. 

And  he  hath  obtained  the  state  of  God’s  slave  of  slaves. 
The  servant  of  God  who  believeth  that  He  is  ever 
near, 

Shall  be  acceptable  at  His  court. 

His  servant  to  whom  He  showeth  kindness. 

Shall  obtain  all  knowledge. 

The  man  who  among  all  men  is  a recluse  at  heart, 

Thus  becometh,  0 Nanak,  a slave  of  God. 

1 Who  recognizes  the  great  God  in  His  minute' forms. 

* Literally — stones.  ^ 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


227 


7 

He  whose  heart  loveth  God’s  order 

Is  said  to  have  obtained  salvation  during  life. 

To  him  joy  and  sorrow  are  the  same  ; 

He  is  ever  happy  and  is  never  separated  from  God^ 

To  him  as  is  gold  so  is  dross, 

As  is  nectar  so  is  bitter  poison, 

As  is  honour  so  is  dishonour, 

As  is  the  poor  man  so  is  the  king. 

He  who  deemeth  what  cometh  from  God  as  best. 

Shall,  O Nanak,  be  said  to  have  obtained  salvation  during 
life. 


8 

All  places  belong  to  the  Supreme  Being  ; 

Creatures  have  different  names  according  to  where  God 
placed  them. 

God  is  able  to  act  and  cause  others  to  act ; 

What  pleaseth  Him  shall  ultimately  be. 

God  extended  Himself  in  endless  waves  ; 

The  play  of  the  Supreme  Being  cannot  be  understood. 
Man’s  enlightenment  is  according  to  the ' understanding 
God  giveth  him. 

The  Supreme  Being,  the  Creator,  is  imperishable  ; 

He  is  ever,  ever,  ever  compassionate  : 

By  remembering  and  remembering  Him,  Nanak  hath 
become  happy. 

Slok  X , 

Many  people  praise  Him  who  hath  neither  end  nor  limit  : 
Nanak,  God  created  His  creatures  of  many  kinds  and 
various  species. 

Ashtapadi  X 

I 

Many  millions  are  His  worshippers, 

Many  millions  are  engaged  in  religious  and  worldly  duties, 
Many  millions  dwell  at  places  of  pilgrimage. 

Many  millions  wander  as  anchorets  in  the  forest, 

0 2 


228 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Many  millions  listen  to  the  Veds, 

Many  millions  perform  excessive  penances. 

Many  millions  meditate  on  God  in  their  hearts, 

Many  millions  of  poets  compose  verses  in  His  praise, 
Many  millions  meditate  on  His  ever  new  names — 

Even  then,  Nanak,  they  find  not  the  Creator’s  limit. 

2 

Many  millions  are  proud, 

Many  millions  are  in  blind  ignorance. 

Many  millions  are  hard-hearted  misers. 

Many  millions  are  unsociable  ^ and  morose  at  heart. 
Many  millions  steal  others’  property. 

Many  millions  bring  false  charges  against  others, 

Many  millions  make  efforts  to  acquire  wealth. 

Many  millions  wander  in  foreign  lands  ; 

Where  Thou  didst  place  men,  O God,  there  are  they  : 
Nanak,  only  the  Creator  knoweth  His  own  creatures. 

3 

Many  millions  are  Sidhs,  Jatis,  and  Jogis ; 

Many  millions  are  Kings  and  enjoy  pleasures  ; 

Many  millions  of  birds  and  serpents  have  been  created  ; 
Many  millions  of  stones  and  trees  have  been  produced  ; 
Many  millions  of  winds,  waters,  and  fires  ; 

Many  millions  of  countries  and  regions  of  the  earth 
Many  millions  of  moons,  suns,  and  stars  ; * 

Many  millions  of  demigods,  demons,  and  crowned 
Indars. 

God  holdeth  all  things  by  His  string. 

And,  O Nanak,  saveth  those  whom  He  pleaseth. 

4 

Many  millions  of  beings  were  created  with  the  three 
qualities  of  impulse,  darkness,  and  goodness, 

t Abhig.  This  is  believed  to  be  from  a,  negative,  and  the  PanjSbi 
hhijna. 

• Nakshatar  in  Sanskrit  properly  means  lunar  mansions,  but  in 
the  Granth  Sahib  it  generally  means  stars. 


22g 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

Many  millions  of  Veds,  Purans,  Simritis,  and  Shastars, 
Many  millions  of  jewelled  oceans, 

Miany  millions  of  animals  of  various  descriptions  ; 

Many  millions  were  made  long-lived, 

Many  millions  of  hills  and  golden  mountains. 

Many  millions  of  Yakshas,^  Kinars,*  and  Pishachas,® 
Many  millions  of  sprites,  ghosts,  pigs,  and  tigers — 

God  is  near  all,  yet  far  from  all ; 

Nanak,  God  filleth  everything,  and  yet  is  separate. 

5 

Many  millions  inhabit  the  nether  regions. 

Many  millions  dwell  in  hell  and  heaven. 

Many  millions  are  born,  live,  and  die. 

Many  millions  wander  through  many  wombs. 

Many  millions  live  without  exertion,* 

Many  millions  are  wearied  with  labour. 

Many  millions  are  created  wealthy. 

Many  millions  are  anxious  for  riches. 

Wherever  God  pleaseth  He  placeth  them  ; 

Nanak,  everything  is  in  God’s  power. 

6 

There  are  many  millions  of  Bairagis 
Who  love  God’s  name  ; 

Many  millions  search  for  God, 

And  find  Him  in  their  hearts  ; 

Many  millions  thirst  for  a sight  of  God, 

And  find  Him,  the  Imperishable  One  ; 

Many  millions  pray  for  the  society  of  the  saints — 

They  are  those  who  love  the  Supreme  Being. 

Nanak,  they  are  ever  blest 
With  whom  God  is  well  pleased. 

* Supernatural  beings  attendant  on  the  god  of  wealth.  They  were 
known  as  ‘ good  people  ’. 

* Celestial  musicians  who  sprang  with  the  Yakshas  from  the  toe  of 
Brahma.  They  are  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  paradise  of  the  god  of 
wealth  on  Mount  Kailas  in  the  Himalayas. 

® The  most  malignant  order  of  evil  spirits. 

* Literally — eat  as  they  are  seated. 


®30  ^THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

7 

Many  millions  of  sources  of  life  and  regions  were  .created. 
Many  millions  of  skies,  mundane  eggs,^ 

Many  millions  of  incarnations. 

In  divers  shapes  the  world  was  spread  out ; ® 

Many  times  was  extension  extended. 

Ever  and  ever  there  is  but  One  God — 

Many  millions  of  creatures  were  made  of  many  descrip- 
tions ; 

From  God  they  emanated  and  in  God  shall  they  be 
absorbed. 

No  one  knoweth  His  limit ; 

Nanak,  God  Himself  is  all  in  all. 

8 

There  are  many  millions  of  His  slaves 
Whose  minds  are  enlightened  ; 

Many  millions  who  know  the  Real  Thing, 

And  ever  look  with  their  eyes  on  the  One  alone  ; 

Many  millions  drink  the  essence  of  the  Name, 

Become  immortal,  and  live  for  ever  and  ever  ; 

Many  millions  sing  the  excellences  of  the  Name, 

And  are  absorbed  in  divine  bliss,  happiness,  and  tran- 
quillity. 

God  watcheth  over  every  breath  of  His  servant, 

For,  O Nanak,  God’s  servants  are  dear  to  Him. 

Slok  XI 

The  Cause  of  causes  is  the  One  God,  there  is  none  other. 
Nanak  is  a sacrifice  to  Him  who  is  contained  in  sea  and 
land,  in  the  nether  regions  and  the  firmament. 

Ashtapadi  XI 

I 

The  Cause  of  causes  is  capable  of  acting  ; 

What  pleaseth  Him  shall  come  to  pass. 

^ Brahmand.  This  word  means  the  universe. 

* At  every  creation  the  world  assumed  different  shapes. 


231 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

He  who  hath  no  end  or  limits 
Establisheth  and  disestablisheth  in  a moment. 

By  His  order  He  supporteth  and  holdeth  the  firma- 
ment ; ^ 

By  His  order  there  is  creation,  and  by  His  order  absorp- 
tion in  Himself ; 

The  occupations  of  high  and  low  are  according  to  His 
order ; 

By  His  order  there  are  the  varied  phases  of  nature ; 
Having  created,  He  beholdeth  His  own  greatness — 
Nanak,  God  is  contained  in  all  things. 

2 

If  it  please  God,  man  obtaineth  salvation  ; 

If  it  please  God,  He  maketh  a stone  cross  the  ocean  of 
the  world ; 

If  it  please  God,  He  can  restore  the  lifeless  body  ; 

If  it  please  God,  then  man  recounteth  His  praises  ; 

If  it  please  God,  then  He  saveth  sinhers. 

He  Himself  createth.  He  Himself  designeth. 

He  Himself  is  the  Lord  of  both  worlds. 

The  Searcher  of  hearts  sporteth  and  is  pleased  ; 

He  causeth  man  to  do  as  He  wisheth. 

Nanak,  there  is  nothing  seen  but  Him. 

3 

Say  what  can  be  accomplished  by  man  ; 

What  pleaseth  God  He  causeth  to  be  done  ; 

If  man  had  the  power  he  would  acquire  all  things.^ 

God  doeth  what  pleaseth  Himself, 

Through  not  knowing  God  man  is  attached  to  sin  ; 

If  he  knew  God,  he  would  save  himself  from  it. 

The  mind  led  astray  by  superstition  wandereth  in  every 
direction, 

^ That  which  is  not  supported,  the  firmament  The  line  is 
also  translated-r-By  His  order  He  supporteth  the  world.  Himself 
unsupported. 

* He  must  therefore  depend  upon  God  and  seek  His  assistance. 


232 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


And  in  a moment  retumeth* 

God  bestoweth  His  service  on  him  to  whom  He  is  merci- 
ful ; ‘ 

Nanak,  such  a man  shall  be  absorbed  in  the  Name. 

4 

God  the  cherisher  of  the  poor 

Can  in  a moment  make  a humble  worm  a king ; 

Him  who  is  totally  obscure 

God  can  at  once  render  everywhere  famous. 

The  Lord  of  the  world  will  not  take  the  accounts  of 
those 

On  whom  He  bestoweth  His  favours. 

Soul  and  body  are  all  His  property  ; 

Every  heart  is  full  of  God’s  light ; 

He  made  His  own  handiwork — 

Nanak  liveth  by  beholding  His  greatness. 

5 

Man’s  power  is  not  at  his  own  disposal ; 

The  Cause  of  causes  is  the  Lord  of  all. 

Helpless  creatures  must  obey  orders  ; 

What  pleaseth  God  shall  ultimately  be. 

Man  is  sometimes  exalted,  and  sometimes  debased  ; 
Sometimes  he  mourneth,  and  sometimes  he  laugheth  witli 
delight  and  joy ; 

Sometimes  he  engageth  in  blame  and  praise, 

Sometimes  he  is  up  in  heaven,  sometimes  down  in  hell ; 
Sometimes  he  is  acquainted  with  divine  knowledge, 
Nanak,  God  Himself  causeth  us  to  meet  Him. 

6 

Sometimes  man  danceth  in  a variety  of  ways. 

Sometimes  he  sleepeth  day  and  night. 

Sometimes  he  is  terrible  in  his  mighty  wrath. 

Sometimes  he  is  the  dust  of  all  men’s  feet, 

Sometimes  he  is  enthroned  as  a great  king. 

Sometimes  he  weareth  the  attire  of  a lowly  beggar, 
Sometimes  he  faUeth  into  evil  repute. 


HYMNS  OF.  GURU  ARJAN  233 

Sometimes  he  is  called  very  good  ; 

As  God  keepeth  him  so  he  remaineth — 

By  the  favour  of  the  Guru,  Nanak  speaketh  the  truth. 

7 

Sometimes  as  a Pandit  man  expoundeth  texts, 

Sometimes  vowed  to  silence  he  practiseth  contemplation, 
Sometimes  he  batheth  at  places  of  pilgrimage. 

Sometimes  as  a Sidh  or  Striver  he  preacheth  divine  know- 
ledge. 

Sometimes  his  soul  wandereth  in  many  wombs — 

Is  in  an  elephant,  a worm,  or  a moth. 

As  a player  he  playeth  several  parts  ; 

As  God  pleaseth  so  He  maketh  man  dance. 

What  pleaseth  God  shall  come  to  pass  ; 

Nanak,  there  is  none  other  than  He. 

8 

Sometimes  man  obtaineth  the  saints’  society, 

From  which  He  returneth  not  again, 

And  which  shall  not  perish  : 

The  light  of  divine  knowledge  shall  then  shine  in  his  heart. 
His  soul  and  body  dyed  with  the  name  of  the  one  God 
Shall  ever  abide  with  the  Supreme  Being. 

As  water  blendeth  with  water. 

So  light  is  blended  with  light. 

Transmigration  is  ended  and  rest  obtained — 

Nanak  is  ever  a sacrifice  to  the  Lord. 

Slok  XII 

They  who  have  effaced  themselves  and  become  humble 
are  happy. 

While  the  very  haughty,  O Nanak,  are  consumed  by  their 
pride. 

Ashtapadi  XII 

I 

He  in  whose'  heart  is  the  pride  of  dominion. 

Shall  fall  into  hell  ^d  become  a dog ; 


234 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  who  boasteth  of  his  youth, 

Shall  become  a creature  of  filth  ; ’ 

He  who  calleth  himself  good 

Shall  die  and  be  bom  again,  and  wander  in  many  a 
womb ; ■ 

He  who  is  proud  of  his  wealth  and  property. 

Is  stupid  and  blind  and  ignorant ; 

He  in  whose  heart  God  mercifully  planteth  meekness. 
Shall  obtain,  O Nanak,  salvation  in  this  world  ^ and 
happiness  in  the  next. 

2 

Not  so  much  as  a straw  shall  go  with  him, 

Who,  becoming  wealthy,  plumeth  himself  thereon. 

He  who  relieth  on  his  large  army  and  men, 

Shall  be  destroyed  in  ajnoment ; 

He  who  deemeth  himself  stronger  than  all. 

Shall  in  a trice  become  dust ; 

Dharmraj  shall  disgrace  him 

Who  in  his  pride  thinketh  naught  of  any  one. 

He  whose  pride  is  effaced  by  favour  of  the  Guru, 

Shall  be  acceptable,  Nanak,  in  God’s  court. 

3 

If  man  do  millions  of  good  acts  btU  possess  pride, 

He  incurreth  only  trouble ; all  his  acts  are  vain. 

He  who  is  proud  of  his  various  mortifications, 

Shall  be  bom  again  and  again  in  hell  and  heaven. 

How  shall  he  who,  though  making  many  efforts, 
Softeneth  not  his  heart,  go  to  God’s  court  ? 

Goodness  shall  not  even  approach  him 
Who  calleth  himself  good. 

Saith  Nanak,  pure  shall  be  the  glory  of  him 
Whose  heart  is  the  dust  of  all  men’s  feet. 

4 

Man  hath  no  happiness 

So  long  as  he  thinketh  he  can  do  something  ; 

As  long  as  man  thinketh  he  can  do  something, 

^ Shall  obtain  salvation  even  in  life. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  235 

So  long  shall  he  wander  in  wombs  ; 

As  long  as  man  deemeth  any  one  an  enemy  or  a friend, 
So  long  shall  his  mind  not  be  stable  ; 

As  long  as  man  is  intoxicated  with  the  love  of  mammon, 
( So  long  shall  Dharmraj  punish  him. 

It  is  by  God’s  grace  man’s  bonds  are  burst. 

And  by  the  Guru’s  favour  pride,  O Nanak,  is  removed. 

5 

Even  though  man  earn  thousands,  he  will  run  after  a 
lakh ; 

He  will  never  be  satisfied  in  his  pursuit  of  wealth. 
Though  he  devote  himself  to  the  enjoyment  of  many  evil 
passions. 

He  will  never  be  satisfied  ; he  will  kill  himself  pursuing 
more.  *“ 

No  one  can  be  satisfied  without  contentment ; 

Otherwise  all  efforts  are  vain  like  the  illusion  of  a dream. 
All  happiness  is  obtained  by  loving  the  Name  ; 

But  only  a few  obtain  it  by  great  good  fortune — 

God  Himself  is  all  in  all,  the  Cause  ®f  causes  ; 

Ever  and  ever,  Nanak,  repeat  His  name. 

6 

The  Creator  is  the  Cause  of  causes ; 

What  resource  hath  man  ? 

He  becometh  as  God  regardeth  him — 

There  is  only  God  ; 

Whatever  was  created  was  according  to  His  pleasure. 

He  is  far  from  all,  and  yet  with  all ; 

He  understandeth,  beholdeth,  and  exerciseth  judgement ; 
He  Himself  is  one  and  He  Himself  is  many  ; 

He  neither  dieth  nor  perisheth  ; He  neither  cometh  nor 
goeth ; 

Nanak,  He  is  ever  diffused  throughout  creation  ; 

7 

He  Himself  instructeth,  and  He  Himself  understandeth  ; 
He  Himself  is  blended  with  Bver5dhing  ; 


/ THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


336 

He  made  His  own  expansion  ; ^ 

Evoything  is  His,  He  is  the  Creator — 

Say  can  anything  be  effected  without  Him  ? 

The  one  God  is  in  every  place  ; 

He  Himself  acteth  His  own  parts  ; 

He  exhibiteth  plays  of  endless  kinds  ; 

He  is  in  the  soul,  and  the  soul  is  in  Him ; 

Nanak,  His  worth  cannot  be  described. 

8 

True,  true,  true  is  the  Lord  God  ; 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  some  rare  person  describeth  Him. 
True,  true,  true  is  He  who  created  all. 

Among  millions  some  rare  one  knoweth  Thee,  0 God ; 
Excellent,  excellent,  excellent  is  Thy  form. 

Very  beautiful,  unbounded,  and  incomparable. 

Pure,  pure,  pure  is  Thy  Word  ; 

Every  one  heareth  it  with  his  ears,  and  repeateth  it. 
Holy,  holy,  holy,  holy 

Is  Thy  name  ; Nanak  uttereth  it  with  heartfelt  love. 
Slok  XIII 

He  who  entereth  the  asylum  of  the  saints  shall  be  saved  ; 
He  who  slandereth  the  saints,  Nanak,  shall  be  born  again 
and  again. 

Ashtapadi  XIII 

I 

By  calumniating  the  saints  man’s  life  is  shortened. 

By  calumniating  the  saints  man  escapeth  not  from  Death, 
By  calumniating  the  saints  all  happiness  vanisheth. 

By  calumniating  the  saints  man  falleth  into  hell, 

By  calumniating  the  saints  the  understanding  is  clouded, 
^ By  calumniating  the  saints  man  is  without  glory — 

None  can  save  him  who  is  accursed  of  the  saints — 

By  calumniating  the  saints  man  falleth  from  his  position. 
Nanak,  even  a slanderer  shall  be  saved  in  the  company 
of  the  saints. 

If  the  merciful  saints  but  show  him  mercy. 

^ By  expanding  Himself  God  made  the  world. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


237 


2 

By  calumniating  the  saints  man’s  face  becometh  crooked, 
By  calumniating  the  saints  man  croaketh  like  a raven, 

I By  calumniating  the  saints  man  is  bom  as  a serpent, 

By  calumniating  the  saints  man  is  born  as  a creeping 
worm. 

By  calumniating  the  saints  man  burneth  with  thirst. 

By  calumniating  the  saints  man  deceiveth  every  one. 

By  calumniating  the  saints  all  man’s  influence  departeth. 
By  calumniating  the  saints  man  becometh  the  lowest  of 
the  low ; 

There  is  no  abiding  place  for  him  who  calumniateth  the 
saints  ; 

But  if  it  please  the  saints,  O Nanak,  he  too  may  obtain 
salvation. 

■3 

The  slanderer  of  the  saints  is  a great  malefactor,^ 

The  slanderer  of  the  saints  hath  not  a moment’s  rest. 
The  slanderer  of  the  saints  is  a great  murderer, 

The  slanderer  of  the  saints  is  accursed  of  God, 

The  slanderer  of  the  saints  loseth  his  dominion. 

The  slanderer  of  the  saints  becometh  afflicted  and  poor. 
The  slanderer  of  the  saints  contracteth  every  disease. 

The  slanderer  of  the  saints  is  ever  separated  from  God, 
The  slanderer  of  the  saints  committeth  sin  upon  sin ; 

But,  O Nanak,  if  it  please  the  saints,  he  too  may  obtain 
salvation. 


4 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  is  ever  impure. 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  is  no  man’s  friend. 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  shall  be  pimi^ed, 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  shall  be  abandoned  by  all. 
He  who  slandereth  the  saints  is  very  proud, 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  is  ever  a sinner, 

1 A Mat,  from  the  Sanskrit  atatayin.  Literally— Who  threatens 
another  with  a drawn  bow  j then  any  person  who  commits  a heinous 
crime. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


238 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  dieth  and  is  bom  again, 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  swerveth  from  happiness, 
He  who  slandereth  the  saints  hath  no  abiding  place  ; ' 
But  if  it  please  the  saints,  O Nanak,  they  will  join  him 
with  themselves — 


5 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  breaketh  down  half  way,^ 
He  who  slandereth  the  saints  succeedeth  in  nothing, 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  shall  wander  in  deserts. 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  shall  fall  into  the  wilderness. 
He  who  slandereth  the  saints  is  hollow  within — 

As  the  corpse  of  a dead  man  hath  no  breath — 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  hath  no  root  whatever ; 

He  shall  himself  eat  of  the  fruit  he  hath  planted  ; 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  hath  no  protector  ; 

But  if  it  please  the  saints,  O Nanak,  they  will  save  him 
too — 


6 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  shall  cry  aloud. 

As  a fish  without  water  wriggleth  in  agony  ; 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  shall  never  be  full. 

As  a fire  is  not  satisfied  with  firewood  ; 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  is  left  alone 
Like  a miserable  barren  sesame  stalk  in  a field  ; 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  is  void  of  honesty ; 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  ever  uttereth  falsehood — 
Such  is  the  fate  of  the  slanderer  from  the  beginning  ; 
Nanak,  whatever  pleaseth  God  shall  take  place — 

7 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  shall  become  deformed, 

He  vfho  sbmd^eth  the  saints  shall  receive  nunrshment 
in  God’s  comrt,  . 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  ever  gaspeth, 

^ That  is,  he  dies  in  his  youth.  Compare— 

Uiid  eh’  man  nur  den  halben  Weg  ern^ichf. 

Muss  wohl  ein  aimer  TeufeLsterhen,^ , fi, 

, Goethe’s 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  239 

He  who  slandereth  the  saints  is  neither  dead  nor  living, 
He  who  slandereth  the  saints  never  hath  his  hopes  fulfilled, 
He  who  slandereth  the  saints  departeth  disappointedj;, 
No  one  obtaineth  permanence  ^ by  slandering.the  saints — 
Man  is  as  it  pleaseth  God  to  make  him ; , 

No  one  can  set  aside  his  destiny — 

Nanak,  the  True  One  knoweth  everything  ; 

8 

Every  heart  is  His,  He  is  the  Creator ; 

Ever  and  ever  bow  to  Him  ; 

Praise  God  day  and  night ; 

Meditate  on  Him  at  every  breath  you  draw  and  at  every 
morsel  you  eat. 

Everything  prevaileth  that  God  hatli  done. 

Man  shall  become  as  God  maketh  him. 

God  playeth  His  own  play  ; 

Who  else  can  criticize  Him  ? 

He  giveth  His  name  to  those  to  whom  He  is  merciful; 
And,  Nanak,  very  fortunate  are  they. 

Slok  XIV 

Quit  devices,  my  good  friends,  and  remember  God,  God 
the  King ; 

Treasure  in  thy  heart  thy  hopes  in  the  one  God,  O Nanak, 
so  sliall  suffering,  error,  and  fear  depart. 

Ashtapadi  XIV 
1 

Know  that  all  reliance  on  man  is  vain  ; 

It  is  God  alone  who  bestoweth. 

By  whose  gifts  we  remain  satisfied. 

And  not  again.  Jeel  thirst. 

The  one  God  alone  destroyeth  and  protecteth  •,  , • 

T|iere  i^hothing  in  man’s  power. 

Happiness  cometh  from  understanding  th;?  will  of  God  ; 
String  His  name  and  wear  it  on  thy  neck ; 

Remember,  remember,  remember  that  Gpd,  . 

Nanak,  an^  no  ohst^de  shall  com^  hi  fhy  wayc . 

transBjigiatiob..  ! . , // 


240 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


2 

O man,  praise  the  Formless  One  in  thy  heart ; 

O man,  practise  works  of  righteousness  ; 

Quaff  the  nectar  of  the  Name,  and  thy  tongue  shall 
become  pure. 

And  thou  shalt  render  thy  soul  for  ever  happy. 

Behold  God’s  splendour  with  thine  eyes. 

In  the  company  of  the  saints  love  for  all  other  company 
shall  vanish. 

Walk  with  thy  feet  in  God’s  way  : 

Thy  sins  shall  be  erased  if  thou  even  for  a moment  repeat 
God’s  name. 

Do  God’s  work,  hear  His  story  with  thine  ears. 

And  thy  countenance,  O Nanak,  shall  be  bright  in  His 
court. 

3 

Very  fortunate  are  they  in  the  world 
Who  ever  and  ever  sing  God’s  praises. 

He  who  meditateth  on  God’s  name 
Shall  be  accounted  rich  in  the  world. 

Know  that  he  shall  ever  and  ever  be  happy 
Who  uttereth  the  Supreme  God’s  name  with  mind  and 
tongue. 

He  who  recognizeth  the  one  only  God 

Shall  obtain  knowledge  of  this  world  and  the  next. 

He  whose  mind  is  won  over  to  the  Name, 

Nanak,  sljall  know  God  the  Pure  One. 

4 

Kndw  that  his  thirst  shall  be  quenched 

• Who  by  the  Guru’s  favour  knoweth  himself. 

* The  holy  man  Who  repeatcth  God’s  praises  in  the  company 
of  the  saints. 

Shall  be  exempt  ftom  all  disease. 

He  who  night  and  day  singeth  the  one  God’s  praises 
Shall  be  saved  even  in  the  bosom  of  his  family. 

Death’s  noose  shall  be  cut  for  him 
Who  putteth  his  hopes  in  God  alone. 


241 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

He  whose  soul  hungereth  for  the  Supreme  God, 

Shall,  O Nanak,  have  no  suffering. 

5 

He  who  thinketh  upon  the  Lord  God, 

Is  a happy  saint  and  wavereth  not. 

The  servant  to  whom  God  showeth  His  mercy — 

Say  of  whom  shall  he  be  afraid  : 

As  God  is,  so  doth  He  appear  unto  him — 

Contained  in  His  own  creation. 

He  who  is  successful  in  his  long  search  for  God, 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  knoweth  the  whole  reality. 

When  I look  I see  God  is  the  root  of  all  things  ; 

Nanak,  He  is  at  once  minute  and  great  ; 

6 

He  is  not  born,  neither  doth  He  die  ; 

He  playeth  His  own  parts. 

Things  visible  and  invisible,  which  come  and  go, 

The  whole  creation  is  supported  by  the  Commander, 

And  He  Himself  is  contained  in  everything. 

Employing  many  devices  He  maketh  and  unmaketh. 

He  is  imperishable  and  infrangible  ; 

He  supporteth  the  universe  ; 

He  is  unseen,  inscrutable,  and  glorious. 

Nanak,  they  whom  He  Himself  causeth  to  repeat  His 
name  repeat  it. 


7 

They  who  know  God  are  glorious  ; 

The  whole  world  shall  be  saved  by  their  spell. 

God’s  servants  shall  save  all : 

God’s  servants  shall  cause  sorrow  to  be  forgotten. 

They  who  repeat  the  Name  under  the  Guru’s  instruction 
shall  be  happy  ; 

The  Merciful  One  shall  blend  them  with  Himself ; 

The  fortunate  man  to  whom  God  showeth  mercy, 

Shall  apply  Himself  to  their  service. 

R 


SIKH.  Ill 


242 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  who  uttereth  the  Name  shall  obtain  rest ; 

Nanak,  consider  him  as  the  best : 

8 

Whatever  he  doeth  is  for  the  love  of  God  ; 

He  shall  ever  and  ever  abide  with  Him — 

Whatever  naturally  happeneth,  happeneth — 

And  recognize  Him  as  the  Creator. 

What  God  doeth  is  pleasing  to  the  saints  ; 

As  He  is,  so  He  appeareth  unto  them. 

They  shall  be  absorbed  in  Him  from  whom  they  have 
sprung, 

And  be  alone  deemed  worthy  of  the  treasure  of  happiness. 
He  Himself  giveth  honour  to  His  own  ; 

Nanak,  know  that  God  and  His  servant  are  one. 

Slok  XV 

God  is  full  of  all  power  and  knoweth  the  affairs  ^ of  His 
creatures  ; 

I am  a sacrifice  to  Him,  O Nanak,  by  remembering  whom 
salvation  is  obtained. 


Ashtapadi  XV 

1 

God  is  the  mender  of  what  is  broken  ; 

He  Himself  cherisheth  all  creatures. 

Nobody  applieth  in  vain  to  Him 
Whose  heart  feeleth  anxiety  for  all. 

O man,  ever  repeat  God’s  name  ; 

He  Himself  is  the  imperishable  Lord. 

From  what  man  doeth  himself  nothing  result eth. 

O mortal,  even  though  thou  desire  it  hundreds  of  times. 
Without  God  nothing  shall  avail  thee. 

* Salvation,  Nanak,  is  obtained  by  repeating  the  name  of 
the  one  God. 

2 

If  man  be  handsome,  he  should  not  be  charmed  thereby, 
Since  it  is  God’s  light  that  shineth  in  everybody. 

^ Birtha.  Also  translated — trouble,  from  the  Sanskrit  byatha. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  243 

If  man  be  wealthy,  why  should  he  be  proud  thereof, 
Since  all  the  wealth  that  God  hath  given  belongeth  to 
Him? 

Even  though  one  be  a mighty  hero, 

What  efforts  can  he  make  without  obtaining  power  from 
God? 

If  any  one  plume  himself  on  being  very  liberal, 

God  the  real  Giver  will  think  him  a fool. 

He  whose  malady  of  pride  is  cured  by  the  Guru’s  favour, 
Shall,  O Nanak,  never  suffer  from  it  again. 

3 

As  a pillar  supporteth  a house. 

So  the  word  of  the  Guru  supporteth  the  heart ; 

As  a stone  floateth  when  put  into  a boat. 

So  are  mortals  saved  by  clinging  to  the  Guru’s  feet ; 

As  a lamp  giveth  light  in  the  darkness, 

So  man  shineth  on  beholding  the  Guru  ; 

As  man  can  find  his  way  in  a great  wilderness  if  he  have 
a guide. 

So  light  shall  shine  for  him  when  he  joineth  the  congrega- 
tion of  the  saints. 

I desire  the  dust  of  such  saints’  feet ; 

0 God,  fulfil  Nanak’s  desires. 

4 

O foolish  man,  why  dost  thou  bewail  ? 

Thou  shalt  obtain  what  was  written  for  thee  in  the  be- 
ginning. 

God  is  the  Dispenser  of  woe  and  weal ; 

Abandon  others  and  think  of  Him  : 

Whatever  He  doeth  gladly  agree  to — 

Why  wanderest  thou  astray,  O thoughtless  one  ? 

O greedy  moth,  attached  to  pleasures. 

What  came  into  the  world  with  thee  ? 

Repeat  God’s  name  in  thy  heart, 

Nanak,  and  thou  shalt  go  to  thy  home  with  honour. 

R 2 


244 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


5 

In  the  dwelling  of  the  saints  God’s  name  is  found — 

The  merchandise  thou  earnest  into  the  world  to  obtain. 
Renounce  pride,  weigh  God's  name  in  thy  heart, 

And  purchase  it  with  thy  life. 

Load  thy  merchandise,  set  out  with  the  saints. 

And,  having  freed  thyself  from  the  entanglements  of  the 
deadly  sins. 

Every  one  will  congratulate  thee  ; 

Thy  countenance  shall  be  bright,  and  thou  shalt  obtain 
honour  in  God’s  court. 

Few  are  the  merchants  who  deal  in  this  merchandise, 

And  to  them  Nanak  is  ever  a sacrifice. 

6 

. Bathe  the  saints’  feet  and  afterwards  drink  the  bathing 
water ; 

Dedicate  thy  soul  to  the  saints  ; 

Bathe  thyself  in  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 

And  become  a sacrifice  unto  them. 

The  service  of  the  saints  is  obtained  by  good  fortune  ; 
Sing  God’s  praises  in  their  company  : 

The  saints  preserve  man  from  various  dangers. 

He  who  singeth  God’s  praises  shall  taste  the  savour  of 
nectar. 

He  who  cometh  to  the  door  of  the  saints  and  seeketh 
their  protection. 

Shall,  0 Nanak,  obtain  all  happiness. 

7 

God  reanimateth  the  dead  ; 

He  giveth  support  to  the  hungry  ; 

All  wealth  is  in  His  glance ; 

But  man  only  obtaineth  what  was  originally  destined  him. 
Everything  is  God’s  ; He  is  Omnipotent. 

There  neither  was  nor  shall  be  any  but  Him  ; 

O man,  ever  and  ever  repeat  His  name  day  and  night ; 
This  is  the  most  exalted  and  sacred  duty. 

He  to  whom  God  hath  mercifully  granted  His  name, 
Shall,  O Nanak,  become  pure. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


245 


8 

He  whose  heart  hath  faith  in  the  Guru 
Shall  remember  the  Lord  God  ; 

They  in  whose  hearts  is  the  one  God, 

Are  called  saints  in  the  three  worlds. 

True  are  the  acts  and  true  the  ways  of  those 
In  whose  hearts  is  the  truth,  and  who  utter  the  truth 
with  their  mouths. 

True  is  God’s  glance,  true  His  world. 

True  His  practice,  and  true  His  creation. 

He  who  recognizeth  the  Supreme  Being  as  true. 

Shall,  O Nanak,  be  absorbed  in  the  True  One.^ 

Slok  XVI 

God  hath  no  form,  outline,  or  colour ; He  is  exempt 
from  the  three  qualities  ; 

He  causeth  him,  O Nanak,  with  whom  He  is  well  pleased 
to  know  Him. 


Ashtapadi  XVI 

I 

Keep  thou  the  imperishable  God  in  thy  heart, 

And  renounce  human  love. 

There  is  nothing  superior  to  God  ; 

He  is  one  without  interruption  in  all  things  ; 

He  is  far-seeing  ; He  is  knowing. 

O deep,  profound,  and  all-wise. 

Supreme  Brahm,  Supreme  God,  Gobind, 

Treasure  of  mercy,  compassionate  Pardoner, 

Nanak’s  heartfelt  desire  is 
To  fall  at  the  feet  of  Thy  saints. 

* These  six  lines  are  also  translated — 

Of  him  who  recognizeth  God  as  true 
True  are  the  acts,  true  the  ways. 

There  is  truth  to  his  heart  •,  with  his  tongue  he  uttereth  truth ; 
True  are  his  eyes,  true  his  body, 

True  his  conduct,  and  true  his  property : 

Nanak,  such  a man  shall  be  absorbed  in  the  True  One. 


246 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


2 

God  is  the  fulfiller  of  desires  and  capable  of  giving 
protection  ; 

What  He  hath  inscribed  in  man's  destiny  shall  take  place. 
He  can  destroy  and  create  in  the  twinUing  of  an  eye  ; 
None  but  Himself  knoweth  His  counsel ; 

He  is  ever  happy  and  joyous  ; 

All  things  are,  I have  heard,  in  His  palace  ; 

He  is  King  of  kings  and  Supreme  Jogi  among  Jogis  ; 

In  penance  He  is  king  of  the  penitents  ; in  the  domestic 
state  He  is  an  enjoyer  : 

By  constant  meditation  on  Him  the  saints  obtain  happi- 
ness— 

Nanak,  no  one  hath  found  the  limit  of  such  a Being  ; 

3 

To  His  play  there  is  no  limit ; 

All  the  demigods  have  grown  weary  searching  for  it. 
What  doth  a son  know  of  His  father’s  birth  ? 

Grod  hath  strung  all  things  on  His  own  string. 

His  servant  to  whom  He  giveth  wisdom,  divine  know- 
ledge, and  meditation, 

Meditateth  on  Him. 

They  whom  He  leadeth  astray  among  the  three  qualities. 
Die  to  be  born  again,  and  again  suffer  transmigration. 
The  high  and  the  low  places  of  the  earth  are  His— 

O Nanak,  man  knoweth  as  God  causeth  him  to  know 
Him. 

4 

God  hath  various  forms  and  various  colours  ; 

He  assumeth  various  guises,  and  yet  remaineth  the  same. 
God  the  indestructible  who  hath  one  form, 

* Hath  extended  Himself  in  various  ways  ; 

He  acteth  various  parts  in  a moment. 

The  Perfect  One  filleth  every  place  ; 

He  hath  made  creation  in  various  forms  ; 

He  Himself  knoweth  His  own  worth  ; 

^ That  ia,  no  one  knows  God’s  origin. 


247 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

All  hearts  are  His,  all  places  are  His. 

Nanak  liveth  by  ever  uttering  God’s  name. 

5 

By  the  Name  are  sustained  all  creatures  ; 

By  the  Name  are  supported  the  regions  of  the  earth  and 
the  universe  ; 

By  the  Name  are  supported  the  Simritis,  the  Veds,  and 
the  Purans  ; 

By  the  support  of  the  Name  we  hear  God^s  praises,  and 
obtain  divine  knowledge  and  meditation  ; 

By  the  Name  are  supported  the  firmament  and  the  nether 
regions  ; 

By  the  Name  is  the  whole  world  upheld  ; 

By  the  Name  are  maintained  all  cities  and  houses  ; 

By  hearing  the  Name  with  attention  man  is  saved. 

He  whom  God  mercifully  attacheth  to  His  name, 

Shall,  O Nanak,  obtain  final  deliverance. 

6 

God’s  form  is  true,  true  is  His  place  ; 

He  is  the  True  Spirit,  He  alone  is  Supreme  ; 

His  acts  are  true,  His  word  is  true  ; 

The  true  Spirit  is  contained  in  everything  ; 

His  deeds  are  true.  His  creation  is  true  ; 

The  Root  of  the  world  is  true,  and  true  what  springeth 
from  it ; 

Pure  are  His  acts,  the  purest  of  the  pure. 

Everything  turneth  out  well  for  him  to  whom  God  giveth 
knowledge. 

The  true  name  of  God  bestoweth  happiness  ; 

True  faith,  Nanak,  is  obtained  from  the  Guru. 

7 

'true  are  the  words  and  instruction  of  the  saints ; 

True  are  they  into  whose  hearts  they  enter. 

He  who  knoweth  how  to  search  for  the  truth, 

Shall  obtain  salvation  by  uttering  the  Name. 

God  Himself  is  true,  and  true  is  everything  He  hath  made  ; 
He  Himself  knoweth  His  own  measure  and  condition. 


248  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  creation  belongeth  to  its  Maker  ; 

He  taketh  counsel  with  none  but  Himself. 

The  measure  of  the  Creator  is  not  known  to  the  creature  ; 
Nanak,  what  pleaseth  God  prevaileth, 

8 

Man  wondereth  at  the  wonders  upon  wonders  of  creation. 
But  it  is  only  he  who  knoweth  God  who  obtaineth  bliss. 
The  men  of  God  who  are  enamoured  with  His  love, 
Receive  under  the  Guru’s  instruction  the  great  boons  ; 
They  are  generous  and  dispellers  of  sorrow  ; 

In  their  company  the  world  shall  be  saved. 

He  who  serveth  the  saints  is  very  fortunate  ; 

In  the  society  of  the  saints  man  fixeth  his  attention  on 
the  one  God. 

They  who  sing  the  excellences  and  praises  of  God, 

Shall,  Nanak,  by  the  favour  of  the  Guru  obtain  their 
reward. 

Slok  XVII 

The  True  One  was  in  the  beginning  ; the  True  One  was 
in  the  primal  age. 

The  True  One  is  now  also,  0 Nanak  ; the  True  One  also 
shall  be. 

Ashtapadi  XVII 

1 

His  feet  are  true,  and  true  is  he  who  toucheth  them  ; 

His  worship  is  true,  and  true  is  His  worshipper  ; 

A sight  of  Him  is  true,  and  true  is  he  who  obtaineth  it ; 
True  is  His  name,  and  true  is  he  who  meditateth  on  it ; 
He  Himself  is  true,  and  so  is  everything  He  sustaineth  ; 
He  Himself  is  excellence  and  the  Bestower  of  excellence  ; 
The  Word  is  true,  and  true  is  God  who  uttereth  it ; 

The  ears  are  true  which  hear  the  praises  of  the  True  One  ; 
To  him  who  linderstandeth,  everything  is  true — 

Nanak,  God  is  altogether  true. 

2 

He  who  knoweth  in  his  heart  Him  whose  form  is  true. 
Shall  recognize  the  Root  of  all  things,  the  Cause  of  causes. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  249 

Divine  knowledge  shall  be  revealed  to  him 
Into  whose  heart  faith  in  God  hath  entered ; 

He  shall  abide  free  from  fear, 

And  be  absorbed  in  Him  from  whom  he  sprang. 

If  one  take  a thing  and  blend  it  with  another  of  the  same 
kind, 

It  cannot  be  said  to  be  separate  from  it. 

A man  of  understanding  can  understand  that. 

When  God  is  found,  O Nanak,  man  becometh  one  with 
Him. 

3 

The  servant  of  the  Lord  obeyeth  His  order. 

The  servant  of  the  Lord  ever  adoreth  Him, 

The  servant  of  the  Lord  possesseth  faith  in  his  heart ; 
Pure  is  the  conduct  of  the  Lord’s  servant  : 

His  servant  knbweth  that  God  is  with  him. 

God’s  servant  is  dyed  with  His  name, 

God  cherisheth  His  servant. 

The  Formless  One  preserveth  the  honour  of  His  servant — 
He  is  a servant  to  whom  the  Lord  showeth  mercy  ; 
Nanak,  such  a servant  remembereth  God  at  every  breath. 

4 

God  will  draw  a veil  over  the  faults  of  His  servant. 

And  will  assuredly  preserve  his  honour ; , 

He  will  bestow  greatness  on  His  slave. 

Cause  him  to  repeat  His  name. 

And  preserve  his  honour. 

No  one  knoweth  God’s  condition  or  measure — 

No  one  is  equal  to  God’s  servant ; 

God’s  servant  is  the  most  exalted  of  the  exalted. 

The  servant  whom  God  applieth  to  His  service. 

Shall  be  renowned,  O Nanak,  in  every  direction. 

5 

If  God  infuse  power  into  a little  ant. 

It  can  reduce  to  ashes  armies  of  hundreds  of  thousands 
and  millions  of  men. 

God  preserveth  and  holdeth  out  a hand  to  him 
Whom  He  desireth  not  to  deprive  of  life. 


250 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Though  man  make  efforts  of  many  kinds, 

His  exertions  are  in  vain. 

No  one  can  kill  or  preserve  but  God  ; 

He  is  the  Preserver  of  all  creatures. 

Why  art  thou  anxious,  O mortal  ? 

Nanak,  repeat  the  name  of  God  the  unseen,  the  wonderful ; 

6 

Ever,  ever,  ever  repeat  God’s  name  ; 

Satisfy  thy  soul  and  body  by  quaffing  its  nectar. 

The  holy  man  who  obtaineth  the  jewel  of  the  Name, 
Will  look  on  no  one  but  God  ; 

He  will  deem  the  Name  his  wealth,  the  Name  his  beauty 
and  delight. 

The  Name  his  happiness,  God’s  name  his  companion. 

He  who  is  satisfied  with  the  savour  of  God’s  name. 

Shall  be  absorbed  soul  and  body  in  it. 

To  utter  the  Name  standing,  sitting,  or  sleeping, 

Saith  Nanak,  is  ever  the  duty  of  the  man  of  God. 

7 

God  gave  the  gift  to  His  worshipper 
To  utter  His  praises  day  and  night. 

They  who  serve  with  heartfelt  love. 

Shall  be  absorbed  in  the  Lord. 

They  shall  know  the  past  and  the  present. 

And  recognize  the  order  of  their  God. 

Who  can  describe  His  greatness  ? 

I know  not  how  to  describe  even  one  of  His  excellences. 
They  who  abide  the  whole  day  in  the  presence  of  God, 
Saith  Nanak,  are  the  perfect  men. 

8 

0 man,  take  shelter  with  them  ; 

Give  them  thy  soul  and  body. 

He  who  recognizeth  his  God 
Is  bountiful  in  all  things  ; 

In  His  shelter  thou  shalt  find  all  happiness  ; 

By  a sight  of  Him  thou  shalt  blot  out  all  sin. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  251 

Renounce  all  other  cleverness, 

And  attach  thyself  to  His  service. 

Nanak,  ever  worship  His  feet, 

And  thou  shalt  suffer  no  more  transmigration, 

Slok  XVIII 

He  who  knoweth  the  True  Being  is  called  the  true  Guru  ^ ; 
His  disciple  is  saved  by  association  with  him,  0 Nanak, 
and  by  singing  God’s  praises. 

Ashtapadi  XVIII 

1 

The  true  Guru  cherisheth  his  disciple, 

The  true  Guru  is  ever  compassionate  to  his  servant. 

The  Guru  will  remove  the  filth  of  his  disciple’s  wicked- 
ness— 

Under  the  Guru’s  instruction  the  disciple  will  repeat  God’s 
name — 

The  true  Guru  will  cut  the  fetters  of  his  disciple, 

If  the  disciple  recoil  from  evil  deeds. 

The  disciple  to  whom  the  true  Guru  giveth  the  wealth 
of  the  Name, 

Is  very  fortunate. 

The  true  Guru  adjusteth  this  world  and  the  next  for  his 
disciple. 

Nanak,  the  true  Guru  loveth  his  disciple  as  his  life. 

2 

The  servant  who  dwelleth  in  his  Guru’s  house, 

Should  heartily  accept  his  order, 

Not  overrate  himself, 

Ever  meditate  on  God’s  name  in  his  heart, 

And  sell  his  soul  to  the  true  Guru — 

The  affairs  of  such  a man  shall  prosper. 

He  who  serveth  the  true  Guru  without  any  desire 
Of  reward,  shall  obtain  the  Lord. 

The  servant  to  whom  God  showeth  favour, 

Nanak,  will  accept  the  Guru’s  instruction  ; 

^ The  reference  here  is  to  Guru  Nanak.  He  was  called  the  true 
Guru  as  being  the  mediator  of  the  True  Being. 


252 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


3 

The  servant  who  fully  ^ conciliateth  the  Guru, 

Shall  know  the  state  of  the  Supreme  Being. 

He  in  whose  heart  is  God’s  name  is  the  true  Guru  ; 

I am  many  times  a sacrifice  to  such  a Guru  ; 

He  bestoweth  all  treasure  on  men, 

And  is  day  and  night  imbued  with  love  for  the  Supreme 
Being. 

The  holy  man  is  in  God  and  God  in  the  holy  man,  - 
God  Himself  is  one  ; of  this  there  is  no  doubt. 

The  Guru  is  not  obtained  by  a thousand  devices  ; 

Nanak,  such  a Guru  is  only  found  by  good  fortune. 

4 

.A  sight  of  the  Guru  is  profitable  ; he  who  beholdeth  him 
is  purified ; 

By  touching  his  feet  man’s  conduct  and  practice  become 
spotless ; 

He  who  on  meeting  him  uttereth  God’s  praises, 

Shall  arrive  at  the  court  of  the  Supreme  Being. 

On  hearing  his  words  the  ears  are  satisfied  ; 

The  mind  gaineth  contentment  and  the  spirit  consolation. 
He  on  whom  the  perfect  Guru,  whose  spell  is  immortal, 
Looketh  with  his  ambrosial  glance  becometh  a saint. 

His  excellences  are  endless;  his  worth  cannot  be  appraised. 
Nanak,  whoso  pleaseth  him  he  blendeth  with  himself. 

5 

Man  has  but  one  tongue,  God’s  praises  are  manifold ; 

He  is  the  True  Being  of  perfect  discrimination  ; 

Mortal  cannot  by  any  words  succeed  in  describing  Him. 
He  is  inaccessible,  incomprehensible  and  unperturbed. 

He  liveth  not  by  food.  He  is  without  enmity,  the  Giver 
of  comfort ; ^ 

No  one  hath  found  His  worth. 

^ Bis  biswe.  Literally — Twenty  There  are  twenty 

in  a btgha,  a land  measure  equal  to  about  half  an  acre.  When  all  the 
bt'swas  are  included,  the  bigia  is  complete. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  253 

Many  saints  continually  make  obeisance  to  Him, 

And  meditate  in  their  hearts  on  His  lotus  feet. 

Nanak  is  ever  a sacrifice  to  his  true  Guru, 

By  whose  favour  the  name  of  such  a God  is  repeated. 

6 

This  divine  essence  only  few  obtain, 

But  they  who  drink  it  become  immortal. 

That  being  shall  never  perish 

In  whose  heart  the  Lord  of  excellences  appeareth. 

He  who  taketh  God’s  name  during  the  eight  watches, 
Who  giveth  true  instruction  to  his  servant, 

Who  is  not  veneered  by  worldly  love, 

Who  keepeth  but  the  one  God  in  his  heart — 

For  him  a lamp  shall  shine  in  the  darkness. 

And,  O Nanak,  his  doubts,  wiorldly  love,  and  sorrows 
flee  away. 

7 

By  the  perfect  instruction  of  the  saints, 

Man  becometh  cool  in  the  midst  of  heat ; 

Sorrow  is  put  to  flight,  happiness  resulteth. 

The  fear  of  birth  and  death  is  removed, 

Fear  ceaseth,  man  abideth  fearless. 

And  all  troubles  vanish  from  his  mind. 

God  showeth  mercy  to  his  own 

Who  in  the  company  of  the  saints  repeat  His  name. 

By  listening,  O Nanak,  to  God’s  praises  with  attention 
Mental  stableness  is  obtained,  and  superstition  and  trans- 
migration cease. 

8 

He  whose  power  fascinateth  the  whole  world. 

Is  without  the  three  qualities,  and  yet  possesseth  all 
qualities. 

God  Himself  performeth  His  own  playi» 

Only  He  Himself  knoweth  His  worth. 

There  is  no  other  than  God  ; 

He,  the  one  Spirit,  pervadeth  all  things  without  inter- 
ruption ; 


254  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

He,  the  warp  and  the  woof,  is  contained  in  all  forms  and 
colours ; 

He  becometh  manifest  by  association  with  the  saints  ; 

He  who  made  creation  infused  His  power  into  it — 
Nanak  is  many  times  a sacrifice  unto  Him. 

Slok  XIX 

Except  God’s  worship  nothing  shall  go  with  thee,  0 man  ; 
worldly  things  are  ashes  : 

Nanak,  the  essence  of  wealth  is  the  repetition  of  God’s 
name. 


Ashtapadi  XIX 

1 

■In  the  company  of  the  saints  reflect  on  God  ; 

Remember  the  one  God  and  rest  upon  His  name  ; 

Forget  all  other  efforts,  my  friend  ; 

Put  God’s  lotixs  feet  into  thy  heart ; 

He  is  the  Omnipotent,  the  Cause  of  causes  ; 

Firmly  grasp  His  name  ; it  is  the  best  thing  ; 

Lay  up  this  wealth  and  thou  shalt  be  fortunate. 

Pure  is  the  instruction  of  the  saints  ; 

Keep  the  hope  of  the  one  God  in  thy  heart, 

Nanak,  and  all  thy  maladies  shall  be  healed. 

2 

By  serving  God  thou  shalt  obtain  the  wealth 
After  which  thou  now  hastest  in  every  direction. 

The  happiness  which  thou  ever  desirest,  my  friend. 

Shall  be  found  by  loving  the  society  of  the  saints. 

The  glory  for  which  thou  performest  good  acts. 

Shall  be  obtained  by  hastening  to  God  for  protection. 

It  is  not  by  many  remedies  maladies  are  healed  ; 

It  is  by  administering  the  medicine  of  God’s  name. 

Of  all  treasures  God’s  name  is  the  treasure  ; 

Repeat  it,  Nanak,  and  thou  shalt  be  acceptable  in  God’s 
court. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


255 


3 

Thy  mind  which  now  wandereth  in  every  direction,  shall 
rest 

By  enlightening  it  with  God’s  name. 

No  obstacle  can  impede  him 
In  Ayhose  heart  God  abideth. 

This  Kal  age  is  hot ; God’s  name  is  cool ; 

Remember  it,  remember  it,  and  thou  shalt  ever  be  happy. 
By  service  and  love  the  mind  becometh  enlightened, 
Fears  depart,  all  hopes  shall  be  fulfilled, 

Man  shall  abide  in  the  imperishable  home, 

Saith  Nanak,  and  Death’s  noose  be  cut  for  his  escape. 

4 

It  is  the  true  man  who  meditateth  on  God ; 

It  is  the  falsest  of  the  false  who  suffer  transmigration  ; 
But  transmigration  shall  be  effaced  by  serving  God. 
Abandon  pride  and  seek  the  protection  of  the  divine 
Guru, 

So  shall  thy  precious  human  life  be  saved. 

Remember  God  who  is  the  support  of  the  soul — 

Man  shall  not  be  saved  by  many  devices. 

Or  by  studying  the  Simritis,  the  Shastars,  and  the  Veds. 
Nanak,  heartily  serve  God, 

And  thou  shalt  obtain  thy  heart’s  desire. 

5 

Thy  wealth  shall  not  depart  with  thee  ; 

Why  art  thou  wrapped  up  in  it,  O foolish  man  } 

Son,  friend,  family,  and  wife — 

Say  what  ownership  hast  thou  in  them. 

Dominion,  worldly  pleasure,  and  extensive  wealth— 

Say  who  can  escape  from  these. 

Horses,  elephants,  carriages,  and  equipages, 

Are  delusive  shows  and  false  displays ; 

Ignorant  man  knoweth  not  Him  who  gave  them  ; 

Nanak,  he  forgetteth  the  Name  and  afterwards  regretteth. 


256 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


6 

Take  the  advice  of  the  Guru,  0 silly  man  ; 

Without  devotion  many  clever  men  have  been  lost. 
Worship  God  with  thy  heart,  O my  friend, 

And  thy  mind  shall  become  pure  ; 

Put  His  lotus  feet  into  thy  heart, 

And  the  sins  of  many  births  shall  depart ; 

Repeat  His  name  thyself  and  cause  others  to  do  so  ; 

By  hearing  it,  and  uttering  it,  and  abiding  by  it  thou 
shalt  obtain  salvation. 

The  real  thing  is  God’s  true  name — 

Nanak,  sing  His  excellences  with  devotion  and  love. 

7 

By  singing  God’s  praises  filth  shall  be  washed  away. 

And  the  poison  of  pride,  which  overspreadeth  thee,  shall 
depart. 

By  remembering  God’s  name  at  every  breath  thou  drawest, 
Thou  shalt  become  free  from  care  and  abide  in  happi- 
ness— 

O man,  lay  aside  all  thy  cleverness  ; 

The  true  wealth  thou  shalt  acquire  in  the  company  of 
the  saints. 

Obtain  God’s  name  as  thy  capital,  deal  with  it, 

And  thou  shalt  be  happy  in  this  world  and  victorious  in 
the  next — 

Saith  Nanak,  he  on  whose  forehead  such  fate  hath  been 
written, 

Seeth  the  one  God  without  interruption  in  all  things. 

8 

Repeat  the  name  of  the  one  God,  magnify  the  one  God, 
RemembeT  tbe  one  God,  make  Him  thy  heart’s  desire, 
Sing  the  excellences  of  the  one  God  who  is  endless  ; 
With  soul  and  body  repeat  the  name  of  the  one  God — 
God  Himself  is  the  only,  only,  only  one ; 

The  perfect  God  filleth  every  place  ; 

There  have  been  many  expansions  of  the  one  God.^ 

^ That  is,  there  have  beep  many  creation?. 


257 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 

Worship  the  one  God,  and  all  thy  sins  shall  depart. 
Nanak,  by  the  favour  of  the  Guru  the  one  God  is  known 
by  him 

Whose  soul  and  body  are  thoroughly  imbued  with  His 
love, 

Slok  XX 

Aftet  many  wanderings,  O God,  I have  come  to  Thine 
asylum  ; 

Nanak’s  prayer,  O God,  is — ‘ Let  me  apply  myself  to  Thy 
service.’ 

Ashtapadi  XX 

1 

I,  a beggar,  beg  a gift  of  Thee,  O God  : 

Mercifully  grant  me  Thy  name. 

I crave  for  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet ; 

Fulfil  my  desire,  O Supreme  Being. 

Let  me  ever  sing  Thine  excellences, 

And  meditate  on  Thee,  at  every  breath ; 

Let  me  ever  love  Thy  lotus  feet, 

And  continually  perform  Thy  service. 

Thou  art  mine  only  shelter,  mine  only  support 
Nanak  craveth  Thine  excellent  name. 

2 

In  God’s  favouring  glance  there  is  great  happiness. 

But  few  obtain  God’s  savour  ; ^ 

They  who  have  tasted  it  are  satisfied, 

They  have  become  perfect  beings  and  waver  not, 

They  are  filled  with  the  sweetness  and  delight  of  love. 
And  in  the  company  of  the  saints  feel  desire  to  meet  God. 
They  enter  His  asylum  forsaking  all  others. 

Their  hearts  are  enlightened,  and  they  fix  their  attention 
on  Him  day  and  night. 

Very  fortunate  are  they  who  repeat  God’s  name ; 

Nanak,  they  who  are  dyed  with  it  are  happy. 


&IKH.  Ill 


^ The  sweetness  of  God’s  love. 
S 


258 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


3 

The  desires  of  God’s  servant  are  fulfilled  ; 

He  obtaineth  pure  instruction  from  the  true  Guru. 

God  is  merciful  to  His  servant, 

And  rendereth  him  ever  happy. 

God  cutteth  his  fetters,  he  is  emancipated. 

And  the  ignorance  from  which  the  pain  of  birth  and 
death  resulteth  is  no  more  ; 

His  wishes  are  fulfilled,  his  desires  are  all  fulfilled  ; 

He  is  blended  with  God  and  is  ever  present  with  Him. 
God  to  whom  he  belonged  hath  blended  him  with  Him- 
self— 

Nanak  is  absorbed  in  God’s  service  and  His  name. 

4 

Why  forget  Him  who  destroyeth  not  the  effects  of  labour  ? 
Why  forget  Him  who  regardeth  what  is  done  for  Him  ? 
Why  forget  Him  who  gave  us  everything  ? 

Why  forget  Him  who  is  the  life  of  living  beings  ? 

Why  forget  Him  who  preserveth  us  in  the  fire  of  the 
womb  ? 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  some  rare  one  seeth  Him — 

Why  forget  Him  who  extricateth  man  from  sin, 

And  joineth  with  Him  those  who  had  broken  with  Him 
during  many  births  ? 

l‘he  perfect  Guru  hath  taught  me  the  real  thing  ; 

So  Nanak  hath  meditated  on  his  God. 

5 

O holy  saints,  do  this — 

Abandon  all  else  and  repeat  God’s  name  ; 

Remember  it,  remember  it,  remember  it,  and  you  shall 
be  happy ; 

Repeat  it  yourselves  and  cause  others  to  repeat  it. 

By  service  and  love  you  shall  cross  over  the  world  ; 
Without  service  the  body  shall  be  as  dust.^ 

From  the  treasure  of  the  Name  all  beatitude  and  happi- 
ness are  obtained, 

^ That  is,  man  shall  be  despised  and  dishonoured. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  259 

And  even  they  who  are  drowning  obtain  rest — 

O Nanak,  repeat  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  excellences, 
And  all  thy  sorrow  shall  depart. 

6 

The  wish  of  my  soul  and  body  is 

That  the  pleasures  of  love,  affection,  and  desire  for  God 
may  spring  up  in  me  ; 

That  I may  have  the  happiness  of  beholding  Him  with 
mine  eyes  ; 

And  that  my  soul  may  be  gladdened  by  washing  the 
saints’  feet. 

Few  there  arc  who  can  obtain  association  with  the  saints, 
And  whose  souls  and  bodies  are  filled  with  love  for  Thee. 
Mercifully  grant  me  one  thing,  O God, 

To  repeat  Thy  name  by  the  Guru’s  favour. 

Nanak,  God’s  praises  cannot  be  expressed  ; 

He  is  contained  in  all  things  ; 

7 

He  is  the  Pardoner,  compassionate  to  the  poor, 

Kind  to  the  saints,  and  ever  merciful. 

Gobind  Gopal,  the  Patron  of  the  patronless, 

Cherisheth  all  creatures  ; 

He  is  the  primal  Being,  the  Creator  of  the  world, 

, The  support  of  the  souls  of  holy  men. 

He  shall  become  pure  who  repeateth  His  name. 

And  devoteth  to  Him  service,  affection,  and  heartfelt 
love. 

Devoid  of  virtue,  low,  and  ignorant 

Nanak  seeketh  thy  protection,  0 Supreme  Power. 

8 

He  who  singeth  God’s  praises  even  for  a moment. 

Shall  obtain  everything — heaven,  salvation,  deliverance. 
He  to  whose  heart  the  story  of  God’s  name  is  pleasing, 
Shall  enjoy  the  various  pleasures  and  greatness  of  a 
monarch. 

They  whose  tongues  continually  repeat  God’s  name. 

Shall  enjoy  plenteous  food,  raiment,  singing,  and  dancing. 

S 2 


26o  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Good  are  his  deeds,  glorious  and  wealthy  is  he 
In  whose  heart  the  perfect  Guru’s  spell  abideth. 

O God,  grant  Nanak  a dwelling  with  Thy  saints, 

Where  all  happiness  shall  be  manifested  unto  him. 

Slok  XXI 

The  Formless  One  who  possesseth  all  qualities,  and  yet 
is  devoi4  of  them  is  in  profound  contemplation  ; 

Nanak,  what  He  hath  made  He  again  absorbeth  in  Him- 
self. 

Ashtapadi  XXI  ^ 

1 

Before  this  world  in  any  wise  appeared. 

By  whom  were  bad  and  good  acts  committed  ? 

•When  God  was  in  profound  meditation. 

With  whom  were  enmity  and  strife  ? 

When  no  colour  or  trace  of  man  was  seen. 

Say  who  then  felt  joy  or  sorrow. 

When  there  was  only  the  Supreme  Being  Himself, 

Where  was  worldly  love  ? Who  had  superstition  ? 

He  Himself  performed  His  own  play  ; 

Nanak,  there  was  no  other  Creator. 

2 

When  God  was  the  sole  master. 

Say  who  was  accounted  bond  or  free. 

When  there  was  only  the  one  God,  inaccessible,  limitless, 
Say  who  was  born  in  hell  or  heaven.® 

When  God  who  is  without  attributes  was  in  profound 
repose, 

Say  where  were  Shiv  and  his  consort. 

When  God  Himself  held  His  own  light. 

Who  was  fearless,  who  feared  any  one  ? 

• He  Himself  performed  His  own  play  ; 

Nanak,  God  is  inaccessible  and  illimitable. 

® In  the  Shastars  several  things,  such  as  Maya,  Karma,  &c.,  are  said 
to  be  uncreated.  The  Guru  by:  this  Ashtapadi  means  that  God  alone 
is  uncreated. 

• That  is,  hell  and  heaven  did  not  then  exist. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


261 


3 

When  the  Imperishable  One  was  seated  on  His  comfort- 
able throne, 

Say  where  were  then  transmigration  and  destruction. 
When  there  was  only  the  perfect  God  the  Creator, 

Say  who  had  any  fear  of  Death. 

When  there  was  only  the  one  invisible  and  incompre- 
hensible God, 

Whom  did  Chitr  and  Gupt  call  on  for  his  account  ? 
When  there  was  only  the  pure,  incomprehensible,  and 
unfathomable  Lord, 

Who  was  then  emancipated  ? Who  was  bound  with  fetters  ? 
God  is  wonderful  in  Himself  ; 

Nanak,  it  was  He  Himself  created  His  own  form. 

4 

When  there  was  only  the  pure  Being,  the  Lord  of  men, 
And  there  was  no  filth  of  sin,  say  what  was  the  need  of 
ablution. 

When  there  was  only  the  bright,  formless,  and  undis- 
turbed One, 

Who  was  held  in  honour  and  who  in  dishonour  ? 

When  there  was  only  the  Lord  of  the  world. 

Say  who  was  the  victim  of  deceit  and  fraud. 

When  God’s  light  was  contained  in  Himself, 

Who  felt  hunger  ? who  satiety  ? 

The  Creator  is  the  Cause  of  causes  ; 

Nanak,  the  Creator  is  beyond  calculation. 

5 

When  God’s  glory  was  contained  in  Himself, 

Who  was  then  mother,  father,  friend,  son,  or  brother 
When  He  Himself  was  versed  in  all  accomplishments. 
Where  did  any  one  see  the  Veds  and  Muhammadan  books  ? 
When  God  kept  His  designs  to  Himself, 

Who  thought  of  favourable  or  unfavourable  omens  ? 
When  He  Himself  was  far  and  He  Himself  was  near. 
Who  was  Master  and  who  was  slave  ? 

Man  is  astonished  at  the  wonders  of  creation  : 

Nanak,  only  God  Himself  knoweth  HiS  own  condition. 


262 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


6 

When  the  undeceivable,  the  impenetrable,  and  the  in- 
scrutable One  was  contained  in  Himself, 

Who  felt  the  influence  of  mammon  ? 

When  there  was  no  one  to  offer  obeisance  to  God  but 
Himself, 

The  three  qualities  had  not  yet  entered  the  world. 

When  there  was  only  the  one  God, 

Who  was  free  from  care,  who  felt  care  ? 

When  God  was  content  with  Himself, 

Who  preached  and  who  listened  ? 

God  is  totally  infinite,  the  most  exalted  of  the  exalted  : 
O Nanak,  He  Himself  is  His  own  parallel. 

7 

When  God  made  this  illusion  of  the  world. 

He  diffused  the  three  qualities  in  it. 

Demerits  and  merits  began  to  be  spoken  of  ; 

Some  suffered  hell  and  others  enjoyed  heaven. 

God  made  the  snares  and  entanglements  of  mammon, 
Pride,  worldly  love,  doubt,  excessive  fear, 

Woe  and  weal,  honour  and  dishonour, 

And  delivered  different  kinds  of  doctrines. 

God  Himself  performeth  and  beholdeth  His  own  play  ; 
When  He  collecteth  the  stage  properties,*  O Nanak,  He 
alone  remaineth. 

8 

Where  there  are  saints  of  the  Invisible,  there  is  He  Him- 
self. 

When  God  extended  Himself,  the  saints  became  glorious  ; 
He  Himself  is  the  arbiter  of  both  states  ; * 

^ God’s  glory  is  peculiar  to  Himself  ; 

He  Himself  performeth  plays,  amusements,  and  frolics  ; 
He  enjoyeth  pleasures  and  yet  remaineth  separate  from 
them ; 

* When  He  draweth  creation  within  Himself. 

* Creation  and  destruction. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  263 

He  attacheth  whomsoever  He  pleaseth  to  His  name, 

And  causeth  whomsoever  He  pleaseth  to  play  the  play 
of  the  world. 

He  is  incalculable,  unfathomable^  uncountable,  and  un- 
rivalled— • 

His  slave  Nanak  speakkh  as  He  causeth  him  to  speak. 

Slok  XXII 

0 Lord  of  men  and  lower  animals.  Thou  art  contained 
in  everything ; 

Nanak,  the  one  God  is  everywhere  extended ; where  is 
there  another  seen  ? 


Ashtapadi  XXII 

1 

Thou  Thyself  art  the  speaker.  Thou  Thyself  the  hearer  ; 
Thou  art  one,  and  Thou  art  many. 

When  it  pleased  God,  He  created  the  world  ; 

And  when  it  pleased  Him,  He  absorbed  it  in  Himself. 
Without  Thee,  O God,  nothing  is  done ; 

Thou  boldest  the  whole  world  on  Thy  string. 

He  whom  God  Himself  instructeth, 

Obtaineth  the  true  Name, 

Looketh  on  all  with  an  equal  eye,  knoweth  the  truth, 
And  is,  O Nanak,  victorious  over  the  universe. 

2 

Men  and  the  lower  animals  are  in  the  power  of  Him 
Who  is  compassionate  to  the  poor  and  the  Patron  of  the 
patronless. 

No  one  can  destroy  whom  God  preserveth  ; 

He  whom  God  forgetteth  is  already  dead. 

Why  should  any  one  leave  God  and  go  to  another  ? 

The  one  bright  Monarch  is  over  all. 

Know  that  He  in  whose  power  are  the  ways  of  all  creatures. 
Is  with  thee  whether  at  home  or  abroad. 

The  Ocean  of  excellences  is  endless  and  illimitable  ; 

The  slave  Nanak  is  ever  a sacrifice  unto  Him. 


264 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


3 

Tlie  perfect  compassionate  God  filleth  every  place  : 

He  is  merciful  to  all, 

And  knoweth  His  own  affairs. 

The  Searcher  of  hearts  is  contained  in  everything, 

And  cherisheth  creatures  in  divers  ways. 

Whatever  creatures  He  made  meditate  on  Him. 

He  blendeth  with  Himself  whosoever  pleaseth  Him, 
Performeth  His  service,  and  singeth  His  praises. 

He  who  hath  hearty  faith  in  Him, 

O Nanak,  recognizeth  the  one  God,  the  Creator. 

4 

The  hopes  of  him  who  is  attached  to  tlie  name  of  the 
one  God, 

• Shall  not  be  in  vain. 

Service  is  the  duty  of  the  servant : 

He  who  obeyeth  God’s  order  shall  obtain  the  supreme 
state, 

Than  which  nothing  more  exalted  can  be  conceived. 

He  in  whose  heart  the  Formless  One  dwelleth. 

And  who  night  and  day  worshippeth  the  Guru’s  feet. 
Shall  burst  his  fetters  and  be  free  from  enmity  : 

He  shall  be  at  ease  in  this  world,  happy  in  the  next, 

And,  O Nanak,  God  will  blend  him  with  Himself. 

5 

Be  joyous  in  the  company  of  the  saints ; 

ys'aSs.e.s  ni  Ciod  vjho  is  the  Primal  ]oy  ; 

Meditate  on  God’s  name  the  real  thing  ; 

Save  thy  human  life  so  difficult  of  attainment ; 

And  sing  the  ambrosial  words  of  God’s  praise.s — 

That  is  the  way  to  save  thy  soul. 

He  who  beholdeth  God  ever  near  him. 

Shall  be  delivered  from  his  ignorance,  and  his  spiritual 
darkness  dispelled. 

Hearken  to  instruction,  and  treasure  it  in  thy  heart. 

So  shalt  thou,  Nanak,  obtain  the  reward  thy  heart 
desireth. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  265 

6 

Arrange  both  this  world  and  the  next  for  thyself 
By  clasping  God’s  name  to  thy  heart. 

Perfect  is  the  teaching  of  the  petfect  Guru  ; 

He  in  whose  heart  it  dwelleth  assayeth  the  truth. 

With  thy  soul  and  body  attentively  repeat  God’s  name, 
And  sorrow,  pain,  and  fear  shall  depart  from  thy  heart. 
O dealer,  deal  in  the  true  merchandise  of  the  Name, 

And  thy  cargo  shall  go  to  heaven  with  thee. 

Put  the  prop  of  the  one  God  into  thy  heart, 

Nanak,  and  thou  shalt  not  again  suffer  transmigration. 

7 

Where  can  any  one  go  far  from  God  ? 

Thou  shalt  be  saved  by  meditating  on  the  Preserver. 

All  his  fear  shall  depart  who  uttereth  the  name  of  the 
Fearless  One, 

And  he  shall  be  saved  by  God’s  mercy. 

He  whom  God  preserveth  shall  not  feel  misery  ; 

By  repeating  God’s  name  his  mind  shall  be  happy. 

His  anxieties  shall  depart,  his  pride  be  erased. 

And  there  shall  be  none  equal  to  him — 

Nanak,  all  his  affairs  shall  succeed 
Over  whom  the  brave  ^ Guru  watcheth. 

8 

The  world  shall  be  saved  by  beholding  the  Guru, 

Whose  understanding  is  periect,  whose  giauce  is  nectar, 
And  whose  lotus  feet  are  incomparable. 

Profitable  is  a sight  of  him,  beautiful  his  form, 

Blessed  his  service,  and  acceptable  his  servant. 

He  in  whose  heart  the  Seafcher  of  hearts, 

The  Supreme  Being,  dwelleth  is  happy, 

And  Death  shall  not  approach  him. 

Nanak,  he  who  in  the  company  of  the  saints  meditateth 
on  God 

Becometh  immortal,  and  obtaineth  the  immortal  rank. 

^ So  called  because  he  has  vanquished  the  deadly  sins. 


266 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Slok  XXIII 

The  Guru  hath  given  the  eye-salve  of  divine  knowledge 
by  which  the  darkness  of  ignorance  is  dispelled  ; 

The  mind  of  him,  O Nanak,  who  by  God’s  favour  meeteth 
the  saints  is  enlightened. 

Ashtapadi  XXIII 

1 

In  the  company  of  the  saints  I have  seen  God  within  me  ; 
God’s  name  to  me  is  sweet — 

All  things  of  various  colours  and  divers  forms 
Are  in  the  heart  of  the  one  God.^ 

God’s  name  is  the  nine  treasures  and  ambrosia 
For  him  in  whose  body  it  findeth  a resting-place. 

Where  there  is  deep  meditation,  the  unbeaten  sound  is 
heard  ; 

The  wonder  and  marvel  of  it  cannot  be  described. 

He  to  whom  God  showeth  Himself,  beholdeth  Him, 

And,  0 Nanak,  obtaineth  understanding. 

2 

The  Endless  One  is  with  thee  whether  at  home  or  abroad  ; 
He  is  contained  in  every  heart. 

In  earth,  heaven,  and  nether  regions  ; 

In  all  worlds  He  is  the  Perfect  Cherishei  ; 

In  forest,  glade,  and  mountain  He  is  the  .Supreme  Being  ; 
As  He  ordereth  so  are  His  creatures'  acts. 

In  wind,  water,  fire. 

And  in  every  direction  is  He  contained  ; 

There  is  no  place  where  He  is  not. 

Nanak,  by  the  Guru’s  favour  obtain  happiness  ; 

3 

Consult  the  Veds,  Purans,  and  Simritis,  and  thou  shalt 
know 

That  the  one  God  is  in  the  moon,  the  sun,  and  the  stars. 
Everybody  speaketh  with  the  voice  of  God, 


^ That  is,  God  watches  over  them  all. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  267 

Who  is  unwavering  and  never  wavercth. 

He  playeth  His  play  with  all  His  appliances  ; 

He  cannot  be  obtained  by  purchase,  His  attributes  are 
priceless  ; 

His  light  is  in  all  things. 

He  holdeth  the  warp  and  woof  of  the  world. 

Nanak,  this  is  the  creed  of  those  who 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  are  freed  from  superstition. 

4 

In  the  sight  of  the  saints  everything  is  God  ; 

In  their  hearts  is  all  faith. 

It  is  only  good  words  the  saints  hear  ; 

They  love  God  who  is  contained  in  all  things. 

The  rule  of  the  saint  who  knoweth  God  is  to  speak  the 
truth  to  everybody  ; 

Whatever  happeneth  he  taketh  for  the  best, 

For  he  recognizeth  God  as  the  Cause  of  causes. 

God  dwelleth  within  as  also  without  man  ; 

Nanak,  on  beholding  Him  all  men  are  fascinated. 

5 

He  Himself  is  true  ; true  is  everything  that  He  hath 
made  : 

Everything  was  created  by  God. 

If  it  please  Him  He  expandeth  Himself, 

If  it  please  Him  His  form  alone  remaineth. 

His  manifold  power  cannot  be  seen  ; 

He  blendeth  with  Himself  whomsoever  He  pleaseth. 
What  can  be  described  as  near  Him  and  what  distant, 
Since  He  Himself  filleth  all  space  ? 

Nanak,  God  causeth  that  man  to  understand  Him 
Whom  he  teacheth  that  He  Himself  is  within  him. 

6 

God  Himself  abideth  in  all  the  elements  ; 

He  beholdeth  all  things  with  His  own  eyes  ; 

The  whole  creation  is  His  body  ; 

He  Himself  heareth  His  own  praises  ; 

He  hath  made  transmigration  as  a play, 


268 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


And  rendered  Maya  subservient  to  Him. 

Included  in  everything,  He  yet  remaineth  distinct. 
Whatever  order  is  to  be  given,  He  giveth  Himself  ; 

By  His  order  man  cometh,  by  His  order  man  goeth  ; 
Nanak,  when  it  pleaseth  Him,  He  blendeth  man  with 
Himself. 

7 

Whatever  cometh  from  Him  is  not  evil ; 

Say  hath  any  one  except  Him  done  anything. 

He  Himself  is  good  ; His  acts  are  very  good ; 

He  Himself  knoweth  His  own  mind  ; 

He  Himself  is  true,  and  true  is  everything  that  He  sup- 
porteth ; 

The  warp  and  woof  of  the  world  He  hath  blended  with 
Himself ; 

His  condition  and  measure  cannot  be  described  ; 

If  any  one  else  were  like  Him,  he  would  know  how  to 
describe  Him. 

Nanak,  by  the  favour  of  the  Guru 

It  is  known  that  all  God’s  acts  must  be  accepted. 

8 

He  who  knoweth  Him  must  always  be  happy. 

And  God  will  blend  him  with  Himself. 

He  in  whose  heart  God  dwelleth  is  wealthy, 

Of  high  family,  honoured,  and  obtaineth  salvation  during 
life. 

Hail,  hail,  hail ! a man  ^ hath  come 

By  whose  favour  the  whole  world  shall  be  saved. 

The  object  of  his  coming  was 

That  through  him  the  Name  might  be  remembered. 

He  was  saved  himself  and  he  saved  the  world  : 

To  him,  Nhnak,  I ever  make  obeisance. 

Slok  XXIV 

He  who  worshippeth  the  perfect  God  whose  name  is 
perfect. 

And  who  singeth  the  praises  of  the  perfect  One,  0 Nanak, 
obtaineth  the  perfect  One. 

^ Guru  NSnak  is  meant. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  269 

Ashtapadi  XXIV 

1 

Hear  the  instruction  of  the  perfect  Guru — 

Regard  the  Supreme  Being  as  ever  near  thee  ; 

Repeat  His  name  at  every  breath, 

And  the  anxiety  of  the  heart  shall  depart. 

Abandon  the  fleeting  wave  of  desire, 

And  heartily  pray  for  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 
Renounce  pride,  make  supplication. 

And  thus  shalt  thou  in  the  company  of  the  saints  cross 
the  ocean  of  fire. 

Fill  thy  storehouses  with  divine  wealth, 

Nanak,  and  bow  before  the  perfect  Guru. 

2 

By  repeating  God’s  name  in  the  company  of  the  saints. 
Thou  shalt  obtain  rest,  comfort,  peace,  and  happiness. 
Drink  the  nectareous  essence  of  God’s  praise. 

And  thou  shalt  avoid  hell  and  save  thy  soul. 

Think  in  thy  heart  of  the  one  God 

Who  hath  one  form  but  many  manifestations. 

Gopal,  Damodar,  compassionate  to  the  poor. 

Destroyer  of  pain,  completely  merciful — 

Remember,  remember  for  ever  His  name  ; 

Nanak,  it  is  the  support  of  the  soul. 

3 

The  saints’  words  are  the  holiest  hymns  ; 

Priceless  rubies  are  those  gems  ; 

He  who  heareth  them  and  liveth  according  to  them  shall 
be  saved  ; 

He  shall  be  saved  himself  and  save  others  ; 

Profitable  his  life  and  the  lives  of  his  associates, 

Whose  heart  is  touched  by  divine  love. 

He  for  whom  the  unbeaten  music  of  rejoicing  playeth. 
Shall  on  hearing  it  be  happy,  and  sing  God’s  Raises. 
God  shineth  in  the  coimtenance  of  the  holy  man ; ^ 
Nanak,  in  his  company  men  are  saved. 

^ Mahant.  This  word  is  the  same  as  mahatama,  which  primarily 
meant  having  a great  soul,  and  was  afterwards  applied  to  men  of 
sanctity. 


270 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


4 

Hearing  that  God  is  able  to  give  shelter,  I have  come  to 
seek  it. 

God  hath  mercifully  blended  me  with  Himself. 

No  hatred  remaineth  me ; I have  become  the  dust  of 
all  men’s  feet ; 

And  I have  in  the  saints’  company  obtained  God’s  nec- 
tareous  name. 

The  divine  Guru  was  pleased  with  me, 

And  the  service  of  his  servant  hath  been  rewarded. 

By  hearing  God’s  name  and  repeating  it  with  my  tongue 
I have  become  freed  from  entanglements  and  sin. 

God  hath  Himself  kindly  shown  me  compassion, 

And,  0 Nanak,  my  cargo  hath  arrived  at  its  haven.^ 

5 

Praise  God,  my  dear  saints, 

With  attentive  and  composed  minds. 

In  the  Sukhmani  are  composure  and  God’s  praises  and 
name. 

He  who  hoardeth  it  in  his  heart  shall  become  wealthy. 
And  all  his  desires  shall  be  fulfilled  ; 

He  shall  become  a distinguished  person,  renowned  through- 
out the  world  ; 

He  shall  obtain  the  highest  place  of  all. 

And  shall  not  again  undergo  transmigration. 

Nanak,  he  who  obtaineth  the  Sukhmani, 

Shall  depart  after  earning  the  wealth  of  God’s  name, 

6 

These  advantages  shall  be  obtained  by  him  who  reciteth 
the  Sukhmani, 

And  heartily  heareth  Guru  Nanak’s  words  in  praise  of 
the  Name : — 

Rest,  peace,  wealth,  the  nine  treasures. 

Understanding,  divine  knowledge,  all  spiritual  power. 
Wisdom,  devotion,  union  with  and  meditation  on  God, 
The  best  divine  knowledge,  the  most  excellent  ablutions, 
^ That  is,  I have  been  successful  in  my  devotion. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  271 

The  four  desirable  objects,  mental  enlightenment, 
Contempt  of  all  things,  though  in  the  midst  of  them, 
Beauty,  cleverness,  knowledge  of  the  truth. 

And  the  power  of  looking  on  all  men  as  equal. 

• ' 7 

If  any  one  heartily  utter  this  precious  hymn, 

He  shall  obtain  salvation  in  every  age. 

It  containeth  the  sound  of  God’s  name. 

Which  the  Simritis,  Shastars,  and  Veds  repeat. 

God’s  name  is  the  sum-total  of  all  faith  ; 

It  dwellcth  in  the  hearts  of  His  saints. 

Millions  of  sins  are  erased  in  the  company  of  the  saints, 
And  by  their  favour  man  escapeth  Death. 

They  on  whose  foreheads  God  recorded  such  destiny. 
Have,  O Nanak,  entered  the  asylum  of  the  saints. 

8 

He  in  whose  heart  this  Sukhmani  dwelleth  or  who  listeneth 
to  it  with  love, 

Shall  remember  the  Lord  God  ; 

The  pain  of  birth  and  death  shall  be  removed  from  him  ; 
His  human  life  so  hard  to  obtain  shall  that  moment  be 
saved  ; 

His  renown  shall  be  spotless  and  his  speech  nectar  ; 

The  one  Name  shall  be  contained  in  his  heart ; 

Sorrow,  disease,  fear,  and  doubt  shall  not  exist  for 
him  ; 

His  acts  shall  be  pure,  he  shall  be  called  a holy  man. 
And  his  fame  shall  be  the  most  exalted  of  all. 

Nanak,  such  are  the  merits  of  the  composition  called 
Sukhmani. 


Lunar  Days 

The  advantage  of  devotion  : — 

My  sorrow  hath  fled  and  my  doubt  departed  since  I have 
taken  God’s  shelter. 

Nanak  hath  obtained  the  fruit  his  heart  desired  by  singing 
God’s  praises. 


272  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

He  who  singeth,  he  who  heareth,  he  who  meditateth  on 
God ; 

He  who  preacheth  and  he  who  fixeth  the  Name  in  his 
heart,  shall  be  saved  ; 

His  sins  shall  be  cut  away,  he  shall  become  pure,  and 
purged  of  the  filth  of  various  births  ; 

His  countenance  shall  be  bright  in  this  world  and  the 
next,  and  worldly  love  shall  not  affect  him  ; 

He  who  praiseth  God  is  wise,  a Vaishnav,  a possessor  of 
divine  knowledge. 

Wealthy,  a hero,  and  of  reputable  family. 

The  Khatris,  Brahmans,  Sudars,  Vaisyas,  and  Chandals 
shall  be  saved  by  remembering  God. 

Nanak  is  the  dust  of  the  feet  of  him  who  knoweth  his 
God. 

Gauri  ki  War  I 

The  fate  of  those  who  forget  God  : — 

Where  shall  they  who  have  totally  forgotten  God  find 
an  arm  to  grasp  ? ^ 

Nanak,  God  potent  to  act  and  cause  to  act  hath  ruined 
them. 

The  fate  of  murderers,  adulterers,  and  robbers  : — 

Men  take  halters  at  night  and  go  to  strangle  others,  but 
God  knoweth  such  persons. 

Concealed  in  places  they  leer  at  other  men’s  wives. 

They  break  into  houses  even  difficult  of  access,  and  enjoy 
wine  for  its  sweetness  : 

But  they  shall  afterwards  regret  their  respective  mis- 
deeds. 

The  angel  Azrail  will  press  them  like  millfuls  of  sesame. 

, The  fate  of  idolaters  and  ingrates  : — 

It  is  the  servants  of  the  True  King  who  are  acceptable  ; 

Nanak,  the  fools  who  serve  other  gods  pine  away  and 
die. 

The  destiny  God  wrote  in  the  beginning  cannot  be 
effaced. 


^ That  is,  to  assist  them. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  273 

The  wealth  of  God’s  name  is  Nanak’s  capital ; ever 
meditate  on  it. 

In  terrible  hell  there  is  much  suffering ; it  is  the  abode 
of  the  ungrateful. 

God  smiteth  them,  Nanak,  and  they  die  a miserable 
death. 

Gauri  ki  War  II 

Man  is  happy  at  all  seasons  when  remembering 
God : — 

Nanak,  that  is  a delightful  day  when  God  cometh  into 
the  mind. 

Accursed  is  the  season,  however  pleasant,  when  the 
Supreme  Being  is  forgotten. 

God  is  man’s  best  friend  : — 

Nanak,  contract  friendship  with  Him  who  hath  everything 
in  His  power. 

They  are  accounted  false  friends  who  go  not  a step  with 
one. 

Miscellaneous  aphorisms  of  the  Guru : — 

I have  seen  every  place  ; there  is  none  beside  God. 

Nanak,  they  who  have  met  the  true  Guru,  have  attained 
their  object. 

The  condition  of  this  perishable  world  is  as  a flash  of 
lightning. 

Whoever  repeateth  the  Lord’s  name,  Nanak,  is  beautiful. 

Men  have  searched  the  Simritis  and  the  Shastars,  but  no 
one  hath  found  God’s  worth. 

He  who  meeteth  the  society  of  the  saints  enjoyeth  divine 
pleasure. 

True  is  the  name  of  the  Creator  ; He  is  a mine  of  jewels. 

The  mortal,  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny  hath  been 
written,  remembereth  God. 

O God,  grant  Nanak,  Thy  guest,  the  true  Name  as  his 
travelling  supplies. 

Man  appeareth  to  be  happy,  but  his  heart  is  anxious, 
and  his  avarice  never  departeth. 

T 


SIKH.  MI 


274  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Nanak,  without  the  true  Name,  no  one’s  sorrow  departeth. 

They  who  have  not  loaded  truth  to  carry  with  them, 
shall  be  plundered. 

Nanak,  they  who  meeting  the  Guru  recognize  the  one 
God  shall  be  congratulated. 

They  who  part  friendship  with  God  are  worthless: — 

They  who  are  separated  from  their  Lord,  O Nanak,  are 
entangled  in  the  knot  of  doubt. 

And  useless  as  the  beautiful  fruit  borne  by  the  akk 
plant. 

They  who  forget  God  suffer  the  pain  of  transmi- 
gration ; — 

They  who  forget  God  die,  but  cannot  die  altogether ; 

They  who  turn  away  from  God,  are  in  agony  like  a thief 
on  the  stake. 

Blest  are  they  who  ever  remember  God : — 

Nanak,  blest  are  they,  perfect  are  they,  and  saints  are 
they, 

Who  remember  the  spell  of  God’s  name  at  every  breath 
they  draw. 

The  following  reproach  was  addressed  to  a Musal- 
man  priest : — 

Thou  wanderest  about  all  day  under  the  pressure  of 
hunger : 

How  shalt  thou  escape  falling  into  hell,  if  thou  remember 
not  thy  Prophet  ? 

The  following  is  repeated  as  a grace  before  and  after 
meals  : — 

The  beggar  beggeth  for  alms,  ‘ Give  me,  O dear  One  ; 

Giver,  Benefactor,  I have  ever  remembered  Thee.’ 

God’s  unequalled  storehouses  are  never  exhausted. 

Nanak,  unequalled  is  the  Word  which  hath  arranged 
everything. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  275 

Remember  the  Word  and  you  shall  be  happy  here 
and  hereafter : — 

0 beloved,  learn  the  Word ; it  shall  protect  york  from 
transmigration  : 

Your  faces,  saith  Nanak,  shall  become  bright,  and  you 
shall  ever  be  happy  remembering  the  one  God. 

Man  should  not  pray  for  worldly  advantages : — 

That  is  the.  best  begging  which  beggeth  for  the  one  God  ; 

Except  the  Lord’s  name,  Nanak,  all  words  are  sinful. 

The  condition  of  him  who  loves  and  is  beloved 
by  God : — 

He  in  whose  heart  the  love  of  God  dwelleth  is  like  the 
golden  earth  studded  with  gems  of  grass. 

Nanak,  all  his  affairs  become  easy  with  whom  the  true 
Guru  is  pleased. 

The  covetous  go  wherever  they  expect  gain  : — 

The  kite  wandereth  in  every  direction — over  water,  moun- 
tain, and  forest. 

But  only  resteth  where  it  seeth  carrion. 

The  Guru’s  devotion  to  God : — 

1 have  made  Him  a friend  who  is  versed  in  all  arts  ; 

I sacrifice  to  Him  my  soul : He  is  the  wealth  of  my  body 
and  soul. 

O Beloved,  if  Thou  take  my  hand,  I will  never  forsake 
Thee. 

They  who  forsake  God  are  evil  and  fall  into  hell’s  tor- 
ments. 

Love  the  Omnipresent : — 

O silly  woman,  dispel  thy  doubts,  and  love  thou  the  only 
dear  One. 

Whithersoever  thou  goest,  there  is  He  present. 

A hypocrite  can  never  be  equal  to  a saint : — 

Persons  only  fitted  to  play  at  bat  and  ball  like  children, 
mount  horses  and  handle  guns. 

T2 


276  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Animals  which  fly  like  bam  fowl  wish  to  be  on  a par 
with  swans. 

Salvation  is  obtained  by  repeating,  hearing,  or  even 
writing  God's  name  : — 

He  who  repeateth  God’s  name  with  his  tongue,  and 
lieareth  it  with  his  ears,  is  saved,  my  friend. 

The  hand  which  writeth  God’s  praises  with  love  is  pure. 

Such  have  obtained  all  the  merit  of  bathing  at  the 
sixty-eight  places  of  pilgrimage  : 

They  have  crossed  over  the  ocean  of  the  world  and  sub- 
jugated the  fortress  of  evil  passions. 

Nanak,  such  attach  men  to  the  infinite  God’s  skirt  and 
service,  and  save  them. 

God  will  save  His  servant : — 

He  who  hath  God  hath  no  further  desires  ; 

Nanak,  all  who  touch  His  feet  are  saved. 

Asa 

Mammon  affects  not  saints  but  only  the  worldly  : — 

Maya  devoureth  him  who  loveth  her ; 

She  greatly  terrifieth  him  who  seateth  her  down  in  peace. 

Brethren,  friends,  and  families  are  at  variance  on  beholding 
her  ; 

But  now  by  the  Guru’s  favour  she  is  under  my  controL 

Sidhs,  Strivers,  demigods,  and  men 

Are  bewitched  on  beholding  her  ; except  the  pious  all 
are  deceived  by  her  deceit.  • 

Some  who  wander  as  ascetics  are  in  love  with  her  ; 

Others  as  family  men  amass  wealth,  but  they  cannot 
make  her  their  own. 

Others  who  call  themselves  continent  are  greatly  troubled 
by  her. 

God  hath  preserved  me  from  her  by  attaching  me  to  the 
Guru’s  feet. 

She  leadeth  astray  the  penitents  who  practise  penance. 

Pandits  have  been  seduced  by  her  into  every  form  of 
greed. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  277 

Maya  hath  bewitched  earth  and  heaven.^ 

My  true  Guru  hath  given  me  his  hand  and  saved  me. 

Maya  acteth  as  a servant  to  the  holy  man. 

With  clasped  hands  she  waiteth  on  him  and  respectfully 
saith, 

‘ What  thou  orderest  I shall  do  ; 

But,  O saint,  I cannot  approach  thee.’ 

The  condition  of  those  who  have  renounced  worldly 
love  : — 

My  Beloved  hath  separated  me  from  my  mother-in-law : ^ 

My  husband’s  younger  brother’s  wife,®  and  my  husband’s 
elder  brother’s  wife  ^ have  died  of  grief  and  sorrow. 

I no  longer  heed  my  husband’s  eldest  brother,® 

Since  my  clever  and  wise  Spouse  hath  protected  me. 

Hear,  O ye  people,  I have  obtained  the  essence  of  love. 

The  true  Guru  hath  given  me  God’s  name,  and  I have 
killed  and  destroyed  mine  enemies  the  evil  passions. 

In  the  first  place,  I have  renounced  the  love  of  pride  ; 

Secondly,  I have  renounced  the  customs  of  men  ; 

Thirdly,  I have  renounced  the  world,  and  deem  an  enemy 
and  a friend  the  same. 

Fourthly,  having  met  the  Guru  I recognize  the  excellences 
of  the  final  state. 

I have  assumed  an  attitude  of  contemplation  in  the  cave 
of  rest. 

God  appeared  as  light  and  played  for  me  unbeaten 
music  ; 

I have  obtained  great  joy  by  meditating  on  the  Guru’s 
word. 

Attached  to  my  Beloved,  I have  become  a blest  and  happy 
wife. 

The  slave  Nanak  herein  uttereth  divine  wisdom  ; 

He  who  heareth  and  acteth  accordingly  shall  be  saved, 

Shall  be  absorbed  in  God, 

And  not  again  suffer  transmigration. 

^ All  beings  in  whom  there  are  the  three  qualities. 

^ Maya.  ® Hope.  ^ Desire. 

® The  god  of  death. 


278  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Holiness  is  described  under  the  allegory  of  a perfect 
woman : — 

A house  is  adorned  by  the  presence  of 

A woman  who  is  virtuous  and  devotion  incarnate, 

Whose  beauty  is  incomparable,  and  conduct  without 
reproach. 

Some  rare  holy  man  may  find  her  : 

On  meeting'  the  Guru  I have  found  such  a well-behaved 
woman  : 

She  sheddeth  lustre  on  feasts  and  marriages. 

As  long  as  she  lived  with  her  father,^ 

Her  husband  wandered  about  very  lonely. 

When  I served  and  conciliated  the  true  man. 

He  brought  her  to  my  house,  and  I obtained  all  happi- 
jiess. 

She  possesseth  the  thirty-two  good  qualities ; ^ true  and 
holy  are  her  offspring  ; 

She  is  obedient,  accomplished,  and  beautiful , 

She  fulfilleth  the  wishes  of  her  husband  and  her  lord  ; 

She  comforteth  in  every  way  her  husband’s  younger  and 
elder  brothers’  wives ; 

She  is  the  best  of  the  household  ; 

She  giveth  counsel  to  her  husband’s  younger  and  elder 
brothers. 

Blest  is  the  home  in  which  she  hath  appeared  • 

0 Nanak,  its  inmates  pass  their  time  in  perfect  happiness. 

The  interference  of  Maya,  or  worldly  love,  in 
human  affairs,  and  how  she  is  to  be  overcome  : — 

If  I form  any  plan,  Maya  alloweth  it  not  to  mature  ; 

She  standeth  near  virtue  and  continence  to  repulse  them ; 

She  weareth  many  guises  and  assumeth  many  forms  ; 

She  alloweth  me  not  to  dwell  at  home,  but  maketh  me 
wander  in  different  places. 

* Spiritual  ignorance. 

* Different  moralists  and  connoisseurs  give  different  names  to  these 
qualities.  'I'hey  arc  intended  to  include  all  moral  and  physical  ex- 
cellences. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  279 

She  is  the  mistress  of  my  house,  and  alloweth  me  not  to 
dwell  therein. 

It  I try  to  do  so,  she  quarrelleth  with  me. 

She  was  sent  by  God  in  the  beginning  as  a ruler. 

She  hath  subdued  the  nine  regions  and  all  worlds. 

At  the  banks  of  sacred  waters  she  relinquisheth  not  her 
hold  on  Jogis  and  Sanyasis, 

While  they  grow  weary  of  reading  the  Simritis  and 
studying  the  Veds. 

Where  I sit,  there  she  sitteth  with  me  ; 

She  forcibly  entereth  every  abode. 

Even  by  entering  a low  asylum  ^ I cannot  save  myself 
from  her. 

Say,  my  friend,  to  whom  shall  I have  recourse  ? 

Having  heard  of  the  true  Guru’s  teaching  I have  come 
to  him. 

The  Guru  hath  fixed  God’s  name  in  my  heart  as  a spell. 

I now  may  dwell  in  my  own  home  singing  the  praises 
of  the  Eternal  One. 

Nanak  hath  met  God,  and  is  free  from  anxiety. 

My  house  is  now  mine  own,  and  its  former  mistress  and 
ruler 

Is  under  my  control ; the  Guru  hath  made  me  a courtier 
of  God. 

The  Guru  versifies  an  address  made  to  him  by 
a Sikh : — 

Having  glanced  at  foreign  countries  I have  come  here  for 
traffic. 

1 have  heard,  O Guru,  thou  hast  an  incomparable  and 
profitable  thing,^ 

To  purchase  which  I have  tied  virtues  in  my  dress®  and 
brought  them  as  my  capital. 

Having  beheld  the  jewel,  my  heart  hankereth  after  it. 

O merchant,^  a dealer  hath  come  to  thy  door. 

^ Even  if  I worship  gods  and  idols. 

2 The  Name. 

® Natives  of  India  do  not  generally  use  pockets,  but  carry  money 
and  valuables  knotted  in  their  garments. 

4 The  Guru. 


28o 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Exhibit  your  goods,  so  that  we  may  effect  a bargain. 
God  hath  sent  me  to  the  merchant. 

Priceless  thy  jewel  and  priceless  thy  capital. 

I have  found  a well-disposed  friend  to  act  as  broker.* 
Now  that  I have  made  my  purchase  my  mind  is  easy. 

I have  no  fear  of  thieves,  of  wind,  or  of  water. 

Quietly  have  1 purchased,  and  quietly  do  I take  away 
my  purchase. 

When  the  true  Name  is  gained,  there  is  no  regret. 

I shall  take  my  purchase  home  safe  and  sound. 

I have  made  a profit  and  am  happy. 

Thanks  to  the  perfect  merchant,  the  bestower. 

Such  a bargain  some  rare  pious  man  hath  made. 

Nanak  taketh  home  profitable  goods. 

The  following  was  addressed  to  a hypocritical 
Brahman ; — 

0 Brahman,  people  make  thee  offerings  and'worship  thee 
Thou  takest  from  them  and  yetdeniest  that  they  give  thee. 
Thou  shalt  regret  thy  conduct  at  the  Court 
Where  thou  shalt  have  to  appear. 

Such  Brahmans  as  contrive  evil 

For  the  innocent  shall  be  lost,  O my  brethren. 

With  covetousness  in  their  hearts  they  wander  about  like 
mad  dogs ; 

They  slander  others,  and  bear  the  load  of  their  sins  on 
their  own  heads. 

O Brahman,  thou  art  plundered  by  mammon,  yet  thou 
reflectest  not 

That  in  many  ways  thou  art  led  astray  through  error. 
Thou  wearest  many  religious  dresses  before  men. 

But  thy  heart  is  besieged  by  evil  passions. 

Thou  preachest  to  others,  but  art  ignorant  thyself. 

Such  a Brahman  shall  nowhere  be  acceptable. 

O foolish  Brahman,  remember  God 

Who  beholdeth  thee,  heareth  thee,  and  abideth  with  thee. 

Saith  Nanak,  if  such  be  thy  fate. 

Renounce  pride  and  cling  to  the  Guru’s  feet. 

' ^ laedlator  mnU 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  281 

The  fate  of  the  slanderer : — 

The  slanderer  roareth  and  screameth, 

He  forgetteth  the  primal  God  the  Supreme  Being,  and 
obtaineth  the  reward  of  his  acts. 

Any  friend  he  may  have  he  shall  take  with  him  to  helL 
Vainly  the  slanderer  taketh  on  himself  a load  as  that  of 
a boa-constrictor,^  and  burneth  himself  in  the  fire. 

Nanak  telleth  what  taketh  place  at  God’s  gate. 

God’s  saints  are  ever  happy  ; they  are  in  ecstasies  singing 
His  praises. 

Pride  mars  man's  good  qualities  : — 

In  the  first  place,  thy  caste  is  good  ; 

Secondly,  thy  lineage  is  honoured  ; 

Thirdly,  thine  abode  is  beautiful ; 

But  the  pride  of  thy  heart  marreth  thy  beauty. 

0 handsome,  shapely,  wise,  and  clever  man. 

Excessive  pride  and  worldly  love  have  ensnared  thee. 
Very  clean  is  thy  kitchen. 

Thou  bathest,  adorest,  and  appliest  crimson  frontal  marks. 
Thou  pratest  of  divine  knowledge  while  thou  art  dissolved 
in  pride. 

The  dog  covetousness  ruineth  thee  in  every  way ; 

Thou  dressest  and  enjoyest  thyself ; 

Thou  performest  religious  ceremonies  to  be  honoured 
of  men. 

While  thou  sprinklest  over  thy  body  perfumed  distilled 
aloe  wood  and  sandal, 

The  pariah  wrath  is  thine  evil  companion. 

All  other  creatures  are  thy  water-carriers. 

In  this  world  thou  issuest  thine  own  coin.^ 

Thou  hast  gold,  and  silver,  and  copper ; 

But  thy  lust  hath  destroyed  thy  virtue. 

The  soul  which  God  mercifully  regardeth 
Shall  be  delivered  from  its  prison. 

^ Ajgar  bhdi\  If  ajar  hhdr  were  read,  the  translation  would  be — an 
intolerable  load. 

^ In  proof  of  sovereignty. 


282 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


That  body  which  meeteth  the  company  of  the  saints 
shall  taste  the  relish  of  God’s  name, 

And,  saith  Nanak,  produce  good  fruit. 

Then  shalt  thou  be  like  a happy  married  woman  endowed 
with  all  comeliness  and  happiness ; 

Then  shalt  thou  be  all-beautiful  and  wise. 

The  Guru  preaches  a brief  sermon  on  humility 

The  framework  of  the  body  hath  been  skilfully  con- 
structed, 

Yet  know  for  certain  that  it  shall  become  dust. 

Remember  thine  origin,  O thoughtless  fool ; 

Why  art  thou  proud  of  such  a thing  ? 

Thou  art  a guest  on  three  sers  of  corn  a day  ; ^ 

All  thine  other  property  thou  hast  only  as  a trust. 

Thou  art  ordure,  bones,  and  blood  wrapped  up  in  skin  : 

Is  it  of  this  thou  art  proud  ? 

If  thou  know  One  Tiling  thou  shalt  be  pure  ; 

Without  knowing  it,  thou  shalt  be  ever  impure. 

Saith  Nanak,  I am  a sacrifice  to  the  Guru, 

Through  whom  God  the  omniscient  Being  is  obtained. 

The  Guru’s  impatience  to  meet  God  : — 

Separated  from  my  Spouse  one  ghari  appeareth  to  me  as 
a day,  yea,  as  many  days. 

My  mind  is  distressed  until  I meet  my  Beloved. 

Separated  from  my  Spouse  one  moment  appeareth  to  me 
a day  ; yea,  it  never  passeth. 

Excessive  is  the  desire  of  my  heart  to  behold  Him  ; is 
there  any  such  saint  as  will  cause  me  to  meet  my  Beloved  ? 

The  four  watches  of  the  day  appear  to  me  as  the  four 
ages  of  the  world. 

When  night  cometh  I think  it  will  never  end. 

The  conspiracy  of  the  deadly  sins  hath  kept  me  from 
my  Beloved. 

Wandering  and  wandering  I weep  and  wring  my  hands. 

^ Two  and  a half  sers  in  Guru  Avjan’s  time  is  equal  to  one  ser 
or  two  pounds  avoirdupois  now. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  283 

At  last  (iod  hath  shown  Himself  to  His  servant,  Nanak, 
Who  having  seen  Him  hath  obtained  supreme  happiness. 

Instead  of  worshipping  God  at  home  man  performs 
vain  devotion  abroad : — 

Man  forsaking  the  love  of  God,  becometh  intoxicated  with 
the  love  of  worthless  objects. 

He  hath  what  he  wanteih  at  home,  yet  he  goeth  abroad 
to  seek  it : ^ 

He  listeneth  not  to  the  true  ambrosial  Word. 

Attached  to  false  scriptures,  he  wrangleth  with  the  holy,  ^ 
Taking  the  wages  of  the  Lord  he  serveth  some  one  else. 
With  such  qualities  is  mortal  clothed. 

He  hideth  himself  from  Him  who  is  ever  with  him. 

He  prayeth  again  and  again  for  what  is  useless  to  him. 
Saith  Nanak,  O God,  compassionate  to  the  poor. 

As  it  pleaseth  Thee  so  cherish  me. 

The  intoxication  of  devotion  : — 

He  who  drinketh  the  essence  of  God  is  ever  imbued 
with  it  ; 

The  effect  of  all  other  essences  is  but  for  a moment. 

He  who  is  intoxicated  with  God’s  essence  is  ever  happy  ; 
Anxiety  is  produced  by  all  other  essences. 

He  who  drinketh  God’s  essence  is  inebriated  and  intoxi- 
cated ; 

All  other  essences  are  worthless. 

The  value  of  God’s  essence  cannot  be  described  : 

It  is  found  in  the  saints’  shop  ; 

But  nobody  can  purchase  it  even  with  millions  of 
rupees. 

The  Guru  giveth  it  to  him  who  hath  obtained  his  favour. 
Nanak  having  obtained  its  relish  from  the  Guru, 

And  tasted  it,  hath  become  astounded. 

Nanak  having  become  accustomed  to  its  taste 
Cannot  by  any  means  relinquish  it  in  this  world  or  the 
next. 

^ Man  possesses  God  in  his  heart,  yet  he  becomes  an  anchoret  and 
goes  to  the  forest  in  quest  of  Him. 


284  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Guru  prays  for  God’s  protection  : — 

Beside  Thee,  O Lord,  I have  none  other ; Thou  art  in 
my  heart ; 

Thou  art  my  friend  and  my  companion  ; why  should  my 
soul  be  afraid  ? 

Thou  art  my  shelter  ; Thou  art  my  hope. 

Sitting  or  standing,  sleeping  or  waking  may  I not  forget 
Thee  0 God,  at  every  breath  I draw ! 

Protect  me,  protect  me,  O God,  in  Thine  asylum  ! terrible 
is  the  ocean  of  fire. 

Giver  of  happiness  to  Nanak  ; true  Guru,  we  are  Thy 
children. 

God  preserves  His  saints  from  worldly  love,  which 
is  a malignant  fever  : — 

God  hath  saved  His  servant. 

My  mind  is  reconciled  to  the  Beloved  ; my  fever  hath 
poisoned  itself  and  died. 

I feel  not  cold  or  heat  when  I sing  the  praises  of  God’s 
name. 

My  vomiting  totally  ceased  when  I took  the  protection 
of  God’s  lotus  feet. 

By  the  favour  of  the  saints,  God  hath  been  kind  to  me 
and  given  me  assistance. 

Nanak  ever  singeth  the  Treasury  of  excellences,  and  thus 
dispelleth  doubt  and  sorrow. 

The  Guru’s  instruction  is  medicine  for  the  mind 
diseased : — 

I have  taken  God’s  name  as  my  medicine  ; 

I have  been  cured,  my  pain  ^ hath  departed. 

My  fever  hath  left  me  through  the  perfect  Guru’s  instruc- 
tion. 

I have  become  glad,  my  sorrows  have  all  fled. 

Nanak,  all  animals  obtain  happiness 

By  meditating  on  the  supreme  God  in  their  hearts. 

^ That  is,  spiritual  ignorance. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  285 

The  Guru  fears  not  the  death  of  his  body  : — 

The  time  of  death,  which  man  desireth  not,  shall  arrive. 

Without  God’s  order  how  shall  the  fire  of  fear  be  put  out, 
however  much  we  try  ? 

The  body  is  dissolved  by  water,  fire,  and  earth, ^ 

But  the  soul  is  neither  young  nor  old,^  O my  brethren. 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  entered  the  sanctuary  of  the 
saints. 

And  by  the  Guru’s  favour  the  fear  of  death  is  far  from 
him. 

The  advantage  of  saintly  association  and  devo- 
tion : — 

By  association  with  the  saints,  in  whom  God’s  light  for 
ever  shineth, 

Man  obtaineth  a dwelling  at  God’s  feet. 

O my  soul,  ever  repeat  God’s  name. 

So  shalt  thou  obtain  comfort,  peace,  and  happiness  ; and 
all  thy  sins  shall  depart. 

Saith  Nanak,  ye  whose  acts  are  perfect 

Shall  on  meeting  the  true  Guru  obtain  the  perfect  supreme 
Being. 

O my  True  Guru,  Holder  of  the  play  of  the  world,  preserve 
Thy  child. 

Give  me  sense  ever  to  sing  Thy  praises,  my  God,  in- 
accessible and  endless. 

When  a mortal  is  in  his  mother’s  womb  he  abideth  under 
the  support  of  the  Name  ; 

He  is  happy,  he  remembereth  God  at  every  breath,  and 
the  fire  of  the  womb  affecteth  him  not  ; 

So,  O man,  cease  to  covet  others’  goods  and  others’ 
wives,  and  to  slander  others. 

Relying  on  the  true  Guru,  worship  in  thy  heart  God’s 
lotus  feet. 

The  houses,  mansions,  and  palaces  which  thou  beholdest — 
of  these  none  shall  depart  with  thee. 

^ The  different  ways  of  disposing  of  the  dead. 

2 That  is,  the  soul  is  unaffected  by  time  or  death. 


286  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

As  long  as  thou  livest  in  this  Kal  age,  Nanak,  remember 
God’s  name. 

Everything  is  false  save  devotion  to  God : — 

Empire,  property,  youth,  mansions,  fame,  comeliness,  and 
youthful  beauty. 

Great  wealth,  elephants,  horses,  and  rubies  purchased 
with  hundreds  of  thousands. 

Shall  be  of  no  avail  in  God’s  court  hereafter  ; the  proud 
must  depart  without  them. 

Why  apply  thy  mind  to  any  but  the  one  God  } 

Standing,  sitting,  sleeping,  or  waking,  ever  and  ever 
meditate  on  Him. 

They  who  were  victorious  in  the  great  decorated  and 
beautiful  arenas,  and  in  the  contests  of  the  battle-field. 

Who  loudly  boasted  that  they  had  the  power  of  killing, 
capturing,  or  releasing. 

Left  everything  and  departed  .on  the  very  day  the  order 
of  the  Supreme  Being  arrived. 

Man  performeth  ceremonial  works  of  many  descriptions, 
but  the  Creator  he  knoweth  not. 

He  preacheth,  but  he  practiseth  not ; he  knoweth  not 
God’s  word. 

Naked  he  came,  naked  shall  he  depart ; his  acts  are 
impure  as  when  the  elephant  throweth  dust  on  its  head. 

Ye  good  saints  and  friends,  hear  me  all — false  is  this 
world. 

Fools  have  died  in  agony  speaking  of  their  belongings. 

On  meeting  the  Guru,  Nanak  hath  meditated  on  the 
Name  ; the  true  Name  hath  saved  him. 

Few  are  wakeful  in  God’s  service : — 

The  whole  world  is  fast  asleep  in  error  and  silly  occupa- 
tions ; 

Only  some  rare  servant  of  God  is  awake. 

Man  is  absorbed  in  greatly  fascinating  mammon  who  is 
dearer  to  him  than  life  ; 

Few  are  they  who  forsake  her. 

Some  rare  holy  man  is  attached 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  287 

To  God’s  incomparable  lotus  feet,  and  the  instruction  of 
His  saints. 

Nanak,  they  who  are  very  fortunate,  and  to  whom  God 
showeth  favour, 

Are  wakeful  in  the  company  of  the  saints,  and  become 
imbued  with  divine  knowledge. 

The  fate  of  the  slanderer : — 

The  slanderer  who  washeth  away  the  filth  of  the  sins 
committed  by  the  slandered  in  various  births,  shall  obtain 
his  deserts. 

He  shall  have  no  happiness  here,  no  entrance  into  God’s 
court  hereafter,  and  he  shall  be  tormented  in  the  realm  of 
Death. 

The  slanderer  hath  lost  his  life  in  vain. 

He  cannot  succeed  in  anything,  and  hereafter  shall  not 
find  a place. 

Such  is  the  fate  of  the  wretched  slanderer  : what  can 
the  poor  creature  do  ? 

He  shall  be  ruined  where  he  shall  have  no  protector  : to 
whom  shall  he  appeal  ? 

There  is  no  salvation  anywhere  for  the  slanderer  ; such 
is  the  will  of  God. 

The  more  the  saints  are  slandered,  the  happier  are  they. 

Thou,  O God,  art  the  prop.  Thou  art  the  helper  of  the 
saints.  < 

Saith  Nanak,  God  protect eth  His  saints,  and  the  slanderer 
He  consigneth  to  the  stream. 

The  following  was  addressed  to  a hypocritical 
Sanyasi : — 

He  who  washeth  his  body  while  he  hath  filth  in  his  heart 
shall  lose  his  happiness  in  both  worlds. 

Here  he  suffereth  from  lust,  wrath,  and  worldly  love  ; 
hereafter  he  shall  sob  and  weep. 

The  way  to  worship  God  is  different. 

The  serpent  is  not  killed  by  striking  its  lair  on  the  out- 
side, neither  doth  the  deaf  man  hear  the  Name. 


288 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  hypocrite  while  abandoning  his  worldly  occupations 
knoweth  not  of  devotion  ; 

He  applieth  himself  to  criticism  of  the  Veds  and  the 
Shastars,  but  knoweth  not  the  real  means  of  union  with  God. 

As  a bad  coin  ^ is  discovered  when  examined  by  a money- 
changer, 

So  the  Searcher  of  hearts  knoweth  everything  ; how 
shalt  thou  hide  thyself  from  Him  ? 

The  false  are  at  once  ruined  by  their  falsehood,  deception, 
fraud,  and  hollowness. 

Nanak  uttereth  this  most  verily  ; see  and  remember  this 
in  your  hearts. 

The  wonders  wrought  by  the  Guru's  teaching : — 

By  the  Guru's  instruction,  a low  Chandal  woman  becometh 
a Brahmani  and  a Sudar  woman  attaineth  the  highest  rank  ; 

The  craying  desire^  for  terrestrial  and  celestial  enjoy- 
ments is  extinguished  and  destroyed. 

The  cat  ^ of  the  household  ^ is  now  differently  trained  ; 
on  Seeing  mice  ® it  feareth  them. 

The  Guru  hath  subjected  the  lion  ® to  the  goat  ^ ; the 
dogs  ® eat  grass  ; ^ 

A hut  hath  been  raised  without  pillars  in  which  the 
homeless  find  a home. 

Without  a setter  jewels  are  set^^  and  a marvellous  precious 
stone  ^ placed  among  them. 

^ Dabua,  This  coin  was  worth  a little  more  than  an  Indian  paisa 
or  an  English  farthing. 

^ Lahbar,  literally— a flame.  Sakhni — empty  and  ungratified. 
The  line  is  also  translated — (a)  Even  if  the  wealth  of  the  world  be 
obtained,  man's  desires  will  not  be  satisfied,  but  when  the  Bridegroom 
(Bar)  is  obtained  (laH),  all  craving  (khdi)  is  extinguished,  (b)  The 
soul  wandereth  unsatisfied  in  the  nether  and  upper  regions,  but  when 
it  obtaineth  the  Bridegroom  its  hunger  is  relieved,  (c)  He  who 
is  devoid  of  terrestrial  and  celestial  blessings,  shall,  on  receiving 
the  fruit  of  the  Gurus  instruction,  have  his  hunger  for  such  things 
satisfied. 

^ Understanding.  ^ The  heart.  ® Worldly  things. 

® Pride.  ^ Humility.  ® The  organs  of  sense. 

® Obtain  their  rightful  portion.  Heaven. 

Man's  mind  is  set  with  virtues. 

Divine  love.  Thewa  is  the  large  stone  of  a ring. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  289 

It  is  not  by  clamour  the  plaintiff  succeedeth  ; by  silence 
he  obtaineth  justice. 

Man  dead  to  God  while  enjoying  wealth,  and  seated 
upon  costly  carpets,  now  knoweth  that  what  appeareth  to 
the  eye  quickly  vanisheth. 

He  who  saith  he  knoweth,  knoweth  nothing  ; but  he  who 
really  knoweth  is  well  known. 

Saith  Nanak,  the  Guru  hath  given  me  nectar  to  drink, 
and  on  tasting  it  I am  happy. 

The  Guru’s  dependence  on  God : — 

Where  Thou,  O Lord,  art,  what  fear  is  there  ? whom  shall 
I praise  but  Thee  ? 

Where  I have  only  Thee  I have  everything ; there  is 
none  but  Thee. 

O Father,  I have  seen  that  the  world  is  poison. 

Preserve  me,  O Lord  of  the  earth  ; Thy  name  is  my 
support. 

Thou  knowest  the  whole  state  of  my  mind  ; to  whom 
shall  I go  to  tell  it  ? 

Without  the  Name  the  whole  world  hath  gone  mad  ; 
when  it  obtaineth  the  Name  it  becometh  sane. 

What  shall  I say  ? to  whom  shall  I tell  my  condition  ? 
what  I want  to  say  must  be  told  to  the  Lord. 

What  Thou  hast  done  prevaileth  ; ever  and  ever  my 
hope  is  in  Thee. 

If  Thou  grant  greatness,  it  is  to  Thine  own  greatness  : 
let  me  everywhere  meditate  on  Thee. 

0 God,  Thou  art  ever  the  Giver  of  happiness  to  Nanak  ; 
Thy  name  alone  is  my  strength. 

The  Guru  acknowledges  his  obligations  to  God : — 

When  I forget  Thee,  every  one  vexeth  me ; when  I 
remember  Thee,  men  do  me  service. 

1 know  none  but  Thee,  Thou  true,  invisible,  and  in- 
scrutable One. 

When  I think  of  Thee,  Thou  art  always  merciful ; what 
is  the  wretched  crowd  then  to  me  ? 

U 


SIKH.  Ill 


290  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Say  whom  shall  I call  bad  or  good  ? All  men  are  Thy 
creatures. 

Thou  art  my  prop  ; Thou  art  my  support ; Thou  givest 
me  Thy  hand  and  protectest  me. 

He  to  whom  Thou  showest  mercy  can  suffer  no  ill. 

Only  that  is  happiness  and  that  greatness  which  is  pleasing 
to  God. 

Thou  art  wise,  Thou  art  ever  kind,  0 Lord  ; if  I obtain 
Thy  name,  I am  happy. 

In  Thy  presence  this  is  my  humble  representation ; my 
soul  and  body  are  totally  Thine. 

Saith  Nanak,  whatever  distinction  I possess  is  Thine  ; no 
one  knoweth  my  name.^ 

The  following  represents  a conversation  between 
a Sikh  and  a devout  lady  who  had  asked  him  the 
questions  contained  in  the  first  part  of  the  hymn. 
The  conversation  was  versified  by  the  Guru. 

Thou  hast  escaped  worldly  love,  impurity,  and  sloth  ; by 
whose  favour  was  it  done  ? 

Worldly  love  once  greatly  fascinating  thou  feelest  no  longer  ; 
whither  hath  gone  thy  sloth  ? 

By  what  arduous  mortification  hast  thou  escaped  from 
lust,  wrath,  and  pride. 

Which  have  ruined  godly  men,  demigods,  demons,  beings 
possessed  of  the  three  qualities,  and  the  whole  world  ? 

A forest  fire  consumeth  much  grass  ; * some  rare  green 
shrub  like  thee  hath  escaped. 

I cannot  describe  such  an  omnipotent  being  ; his  praises 
cannot  be  expressed. 

In  this  chamber  of  lamp-black  thou  hast  not  been  be- 
smirched ; ® nay,  thou  hast  assumed  a spotless  colour. 

^ The  Sikh’s  reply : — 

The  great  spell  of  the  Guru  hath  taken  its  dwelling  in 
my  heart,  and  I have  heard  the  wonderful  Name. 

^ That  is,  it  is  not  I,  it  is  Thou  who  art  distinguished. 

* That  is,  avarice  has  consumed  many  mortals. 

* Thou  hast  not  become  wicked  in  this  evil  world. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU.  ARJAN  291 

God  hath  mercifully  looked  on  me  with  favour,  and 
attached  me  to  His  feet. 

Through  love  and  service  Nanak  hath  obtained  happiness 
in  the  association  of  the  saints. 

The  following  represents  another  conversation 
between  the  same  lady  and  the  Sikh  : — 

Thy  red  jacket  ^ become th  thee  ; 

Thou  art  pleasing  to  the  Lord,  and  thou  w innest  His 
heart. 

Who  hath  given  this  bloom  to  thy  face  ? 

What  dye  hath  given  thee  thy  bright  complexion  ? 

Thou  art  beautiful,  thou  art  a happy  wedded  wife. 

In  thy  house  is  thy  Beloved,  in  thy  house  is  good 
fortune. 

Thou  art  chaste,  thou  art  distinguished. 

Thou  art  pleasing  to  thy  Beloved,  thou  possesses!  superior 
knowledge. 

The  Sikh's  reply : — 

I please  my  Beloved,  wherefore  I have  this  bright  com- 
plexion. 

Saith  Nanak,  God  hath  looked  on  me  with  a favouring 
glance. 

Hear,  my  friend,  this  is  the  reward  of  my  toil, 

That  God  Himself  decketh  and  adorneth  me. 

Man  is  happy  on  meeting  God,  as  a woman  on 
meeting  her  husband : — 

When  Thou  wert  distant,  I greatly  suffered  ; 

Now  that  I have  contrived  to  meet  Thee, 

My  female  companions  cease  to  taunt  me. 

My  suspicions  have  fled  ; by  the  Guru  I am  united  with 
my  Beloved. 

My  Beloved  hath  approached  and  placed  me  on  the  couch  : 

I no  longer  heed  what  people  say. 

In  my  temple  ^ is  the  light  of  the  Word. 

My  Spouse  is  joyful  and  happy. 

1 Devotion.  2 Heart, 

U 2 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


292 

Through  the  destiny  recorded  on  my  forehead  my  Beloved 
hath  come  home  to  me, 

And  Nanak  hath  found  lasting  wedded  bliss. 

The  Guru,  while  associating  with  the  world,  ever 
thinks  on  God : — 

My  soul  is  attached  to  the  true  Name  ; 

My  love  for  men  is  but  artificial  guise  ; 

My  ties  are  only  external : I smile  on  every  one, 

But  I am  separate  from  them  as  a lotus  from  the  water. 
I converse  with  everybody. 

But  I keep  my  heart  with  God. 

I appear  very  formidable. 

But  in  reality  my  heart  is  the  dust  of  every  one’s  feet, 
The  slave  Nanak  hath  found  the  perfect  Guru  ; 

He  hath  shown  me  the  one  God  both  in  my  heart  and  in 
nature. 

However  great  man’s  pleasures,  he  is,  as  it  were, 
dead  without  devotion  ; — 

Man  may  enjoy  pleasures  in  the  vigour  of  youth. 

But  without  the  Name  he  is  blended  with  the  dust. 

He  may  wear  costly  earrings  and  fine  clothes ; 

He  may  have  a comfortable  couch,  and  be  proud  thereof  ; 
He  may  have  elephants  to  ride  and  a golden  umbrella 
over  his  head  ; 

But  without  the  worship  of  God  he  is,  as  it  were,  beneath 
the  earth. 

Man  may  enjoy  many  beautiful  women. 

But  without  the  essence  of  God  all  relishes  are  insipid. 
Deceived  by  mammon  man  is  led  into  sin  and  evil. 

But  he  is  saved,  O Nanak,  by  entering  the  sanctuaiy  of 
the  merciful  God. 

The  saints  are  likened  to  a garden,  the  Guru  to 
a gardener : — 

There  is  a garden  ^ in  which  many  trees  are  planted  ; 
They  bear  the  ambrosial  Name  as  fruit. 

1 The  company  of  the  saints. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  293 

So  contrive,  O man  of  God, 

That  thou  mayest  obtain  the  rank  of  nirvan. 

Around  the  garden,  my  brethren,  are  poisonous  pools ; 
within  it  is  nectar  ; • , 

There  is  one  gardener  to  irrigate  ; 

He  tendeth  the  leaves  and  branches  ; 

He  bringeth  many  vegetables  and  planteth  them  therein  ; 

They  all  without  exception  bear  fruit. 

He  who  hath  received  the  ambrosial  fruit  of  the  Name 
from  the  Guru, 

Crosseth  over  the  world’s  ocean  according  to  the  slave 
Nanak. 

The  Guru  prefers  the  spot  where  the  saints  con- 
gregate to  any  place  of  pilgrimage  : — 

If  I go  on  a pilgrimage  I see  men  boasting ; 

If  I inquire  of  Brahmans,  I find  them  immersed  in  mam- 
mon. 

O my  friend,  show  me  that  place 

Where  God’s  praises  are  ever  sung. 

By  meditating  on  evil  and  good  according  to  the  Shastars 
and  Veds, 

Man  again  and  again  descendeth  to  hell  and  ascendeth 
to  heaven. 

In  the  family  man’s  life  there  is  anxiety,  and  in  the 
hermit’s  pride. 

The  soul  is  entangled  in  religious  ceremonies. 

He  who  by  God’s  favour  hath  his  mind  under  control. 

Shall  be  saved,  O Nanak,  by  the  Guru’s  instruction. 

Sing  God’s  praises  in  the  company  of  the  saints  : 

The  place  where  they  dwell  is  obtained  from  the  Guru. 

Let  God  be  ever  present  to  man  in  all  his  avoca- 
tions : — 

Whether  standing,  sitting,  or  sleeping,  meditate  on  God. 

Taking  thy  walks  sing  God’s  praises. 

With  thine  ears  hear  the  ambrosial  Word. 

By  listening  to  it  thy  heart  shall  be  glad,  and  all  thine 
infirmities  and  troubles  depart. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


294 

While  working,  travelling,  or  .wandering  by  the  river’s 
shore  repeat  God’s  name. . 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  drink  God’s  nectar; 

He  who  day  and  night  singeth  God’s  praises 
Shall  not  fall  in  Death’s  way.  . 

By  touching  the  feet  of  him  who  fqrgetteth  not  God’s 
name 

During  the  eight  watches  of ‘the  day,  0 Nanak,  emancipa- 
tion is  obtained. 

God’s  kingdom  is  for  the  lowly : — 

The  lowly  man  whom  nobody  knoweth 

Shall  be  honoured  by  everywhere  repeating  God’s  name. 

I crave  for  a sight  of  Thee  ; grant  it,  O my  Beloved  : 

Who  hath  not  been  saved  by  serving  Thee  ? 

.The  whole  world  washeth  the  dirt  of  his  feet 
Whom  nobody  would  approach. 

The  man  who  is  useless  to  everybody 
Is  invoked  as  a saint  by  the  Guru’s  favour. 

In  the  company  of  the  saints,  the  mind  that  sleepeth 
awaketh ; 

Then,  O Nanak,  the  Lord  is  dear. 

The  omnipresence  of  God  expressed  by  different 
metaphors : — 

God  is  Himself  the  tree,  and  its  extended  branches. 

He  watcheth  His  own  field.^ 

Wherever  I look  there  is  the  one  God  ; 

He  is  in  every  heart. 

He  Himself  is  the  sun  and  the  expansion  of  its  rays. 

He  is  at  once  concealed  and  manifest. 

He  is  described  as  possessing  aU  qualities  and  no  qualities. 
Both  descriptions  together  apply  to  the  one  God. 

. Saith  Nanak,  the  Guru  hath  dispelled  my  doubts  and  fears, 
And  I behold  the  Blissful  One  everywhere. 

The  Guru’s  self-depreciation  : — 

I know  no  tricks  and  devices  of  speech. 

But  day  and  night  I repeat  Thy  name. 

^ The  world. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  295 

I possess  no  merits — ^not  even  one. 

0 God,  Thou  doest,  and  causest  all  things  to  be  done. 

1 a fool,  blockhead,  ignorant,  and  thoughtless, 

Long  for  Thy  name  in  iny  heart. 

I have  performed  no  works  of  devotion,  penance,  or 
mortification  ; 

1 have  only  adored  Thy  name  in  my  heart. 

I know  nothing  ; I have  little  wisdom. 

Nanak  representeth,  Thou  art,  O God,  my  shelter. 

The  relation  of  the  creature  to  the  Creator : — • 

Thou  art  my  lake,  I am  Thy  fish  ; ^ 

Thou  art  my  Lord,  I am  the  beggar  at  Thy  gate. 

Thou  art  my  Creator,  I am  Thy  worshipper. 

I have  found  Thy  sanctuary,  O God  of  profound  ex- 
cellence. 

Thou  art  my  life.  Thou  art  my  support. 

On  beholding  Thee  I bloom  like  the  lotus. 

Thou  art  my  salvation,  and  mine  honour ; Thou  art  the 
Acceptor  of  the  holy. 

Thou  art  Almighty,  Thou  art  my  strength. 

Nanak’s  supplication  to  God  is — 

May  I night  and  day  repeat  Thy  name,  O Lord  of  ex- 
cellences ! 

The  Guru  one  day  visiting  his  sacred  tank  saw 
mourning  in  one  house  and  rejoicing  in  another. 
Upon  this  he  composed  the  following : — 

Mourners  practise  falsehood ; 

They  laugh  while  mourning  for  others. 

One  man  dieth  and  there  is  weeping  for  him  ; in  the  house 
of  another  there  is  singing. 

One  man  weepeth,  another  laugheth. 

From  youth  to  old  age 

Man  attaineth  not  his  object ; then  he  regretteth  lost 
opportunities. 

The  world  is  subject  to  the  three  qualities, 

^ That  is,  as  a fish  cannot  live  without  water,  so  I cannot  live 
without  Thee. 


296  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

And  therefore  man  passeth  through  hell  and  heaven. 

Saith  Nanak,  that  man’s  'birth  is  fruitful,  and  he  is  ac- 
ceptable 

Whom  God  hath  applied  to  the  repetition  of  His  name. 

A man  had  a dream  which  he  related  to  Guru 
Arjan.  He  thought  he  had  fallen  into  a well  and 
tried  to  ascend  by  the  well-rope.  Two  mice,  one 
black  and  the  other  white,  were  gnawing  it  away. 
In  the  well  was  a venomous  serpent  which  he  feared 
would  sting  him.  In  this  dilemma  a drop  of  honey 
fell  into  his  mouth  front  a tree  which  grew  over  the 
well,  and  he  awoke.  The  following  was  composed 
by  the  Guru  on  the  subject  of  the  dream  : — 

Night  and  day  mice  gnaw  the  rope.^ 

He  who  falleth  into  the  well  eateth  sweets.^ 

The  night  ® passeth  away  in  thinking  and  reflecting. 

Man  while  considering  the  various  pleasures  of  the  world 
never  thinketh  of  God. 

Deeming  the  tree’s  shadow  immovable  he  buildeth  his 
house  beneath  it ; 

But  Death’s  noose  is  round  his  neck,  and  Maya  aimeth  her 
arrow  at  him. 

The  sandy  shore  which  is  exposed  to  the  waves 

The  fool  considereth  to  be  peimanent. 

He  who  repeateth  the  Sovereign  God’s  name  in  the  society 
of  the  saints, 

Shall,  Nanak,  live  for  ever  singing  God’s  praises. 

The  following  was  addressed  to  a dead  body : — 

With  the  soul  thou  didst  play. 

With  the  soul  thou  didst  meet  every  one. 

Everybody  desired  thee  with  the  soul ; 

^Without  it  no  one  wisheth  to  see  thee. 

Where  is  that  soul  now  ? 

Without  it  thou  art  in  a sad  plight ; 

^ Night  and  day  life  grows  shorter. 

* Man  enjoys  himself  when  he  comes  into  the  world. 

* Human  life. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  297 

With  it  thou  wert  master  in  thine  own  home. 

With  it  thou  wert  distinguished, 

With  it  thou  wert  fondled  ; 

Without  it  thou  wert  left  in  the  dust. 

With  it  thou  hadst  honour  and  greatness, 

With  it  thou  hadst  relations  with  the  world. 

With  it  thy  framework  was  tricked  out  in  various  ways  ; 
Without  it  thou  hast  become  clay. 

The  soul  neither  dieth  nor  is  born  ; 

It  acteth  subject  to  God’s  orders. 

O Nanak,  it  is  God  who  having  fashioned  the  body  uniteth 
and  separateth  the  soul  from  it — 

He  Himself  knoweth  His  own  power. 

The  attributes  possessed  in  common  by  God  and 
the  saints : — 

God  doth  not  die,  nor  do  we  fear  death  ; 

He  doth  not  perish,  nor  do  we  grieve. 

He  is  not  poor,  nor  are  we  hungry  ; 

He  feeleth  not  pain,  nor  do  we. 

There  is  no  destroyer  but  God  ; 

He  liveth  and  giveth  us  life. 

He  hath  no  entanglements,  nor  have  we  ; 

He  hath  no  worldly  occupations,  nor  have  we  ; 

He  hath  no  impurity,  nor  have  we — 

When  He  is  glad,  we  are  ever  happy — 

He  hath  no  anxiety,  nor  have  we  ; 

He  is  not  defiled  by  the  world,  nor  are  we  ; 

He  feeleth  no  hunger,  and  we  no  thirst. 

If  He  is  pure,  we  are  so  also. 

We  are  nothing.  He  is  the  only  Being  : 

He  alone  is  the  beginning  and  end. 

O Nanak,  the  Guru  hath  dispelled  and  shattered  our  doubts. 
We  and  God,  having  become  united,  have  assumed  the 
same  colour. 

The  advantages  of  loving  the  Lord : — 

By  love  for  the  Lord  happiness  is  ever  obtained. 

By  love  for  the  Lord  we  feel  no  misery. 


298 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


By  love  for  the  Lord  the  filth  of  pride  is  washed  away, 
By  love  for  the  Lord  man  is  ever  pure. 

Hear,  my  friend,  bear  love  and  affection  to  God, 

Who  is  our  life  and  soul  and  the  support  of  every  heart. 
By  love  for  God  all  treasure  is  obtained. 

By  love  for  God  the  pure  Name  entereth  the  heart. 

By  love  for  God  man  is  ever  honoured. 

By  love  for  God  anxiety  is  erased. 

By  love  for  God  man  crosseth  the  terrible  ocean. 

By  love  for  God  man  feareth  not  Death, 

By  love  for  God  all  are  saved. 

By  love  for  God  He  goeth  with  us. 

No  erring  man  may  by  himself  meet  God. 

He  to  whom  God  is  merciful  joineth  the  society  of  the 
saints. 

Saith  Nanak,  I am  a sacrifice  unto  Thee,  O God  ; 

Thou  art  the  shelter  and  strength  of  the  saints. 

The  proud  and  rich  oppressor  is  brought  to  his 
level  by  death  : — 

Man  becoming  a king,  exerciseth  dominion  ; 

Committing  oppression  he  acquireth  wealth  ; 

Amassing  and  amassing  he  filleth  his  coffers  ; 

But  God  taketh  his  wealth  from  him  and  bestoweth  it  on 
another. 

The  body  is  an  unbaked  earthen  vessel  with  water  therein. 
Yet  man  becometh  very  proud  of  it. 

He  becometh  fearless  and  reckless. 

And  never  thinketh  of  the  Creator  who  is  with  him. 

He  raiseth  and  collecteth  armies. 

But  when  the  breath  leaveth  him  he  becometh  ashes. 

He  possesseth  lofty  mansions,  seraglios  and  queens, 

, Elephants  and  teams  of  horses  to  delight  his  heart, 

A large  family  of  sons  and  daughters  ; 

But  through  love  of  them  the  fool  dieth  in  great  affliction. 
He  who  created  him,  destroyeth  him. 

Pleasures  and  enjoyments  are  like  a dream. 

He  is  emancipated,  he  possesseth  empire  and  wealth, 

O Nanak,  to  whom  the  Lord  is  merciful. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  299 

The  condition  of  the  regenerate  : — 

The  order  of  the  Beloved  is  sweet  to  me ; 

My  Spouse  hath  divorced  my  co-wife  who  obeyed  not  His 
order. 

My  Beloved  hath  decorated  me  His  happy  married  wife, 

And  slaked  the  burning  of  my  heart. 

It  is  well  that  I did  the  bidding  of  the  Beloved  ; 

I have  known  what  happiness  and  tranquillity  are  with 
Him. 

I am  the  handmaiden,  the  servant  of  the  Beloved 

Who  is  indestructible,  inaccessible,  and  infinite. 

I will  take  a fan  and  wave  it  over  my  Beloved. 

The  five  deadly  sins  which  tormented  me  have  fled. 

I am  not  of  high  family,  nor  am  I beautiful ; 

I know  not  how  I have  pleased  my  Spouse. 

Though  I am  helpless,  poor,  and  unhonoured, 

My  Spouse  hath  taken  my  hand  and  made  me  His  queen. 

When  first  I saw  my  Beloved  Friend, 

I obtained  happiness  and  tranquillity,  and  blest  was  my 
married  life. 

Saith  Nanak,  my  desires  have  been  fulfilled. 

The  true  Guru  hath  united  me  with  God,  the  Lord  of 
excellences. 

The  following  is  a description  of  Maya,  or  worldly 
love : — 

On  her  forehead  is  a frown,^  her  look  is  sour. 

Bitter  is  her  speech,  rude  her  tongue  ; 

She  is  ever  hungry,  she  thinketh  God  is  distant  and  seeth 
her  not. 

Such  a female  hath  the  one  God  created. 

She  hath  devoured  the  whole  world  except  those  whom 
the  Guru  hath  protected,  my  brethren. 

Casting  a net  of  deception  she  watcheth  till  the  whole 
world  fall  therein. 

She  hath  bewitched  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Shiv. 

Only  the  pious  who  love  the  Name  have  not  been  dis- 
honoured by  her. 

^ Literally — the  mark  of  the  three  qualities. 


300  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Men  grow  weary  performing  fasting,  vows,  and  expia- 
tions ; 

They  wander  to  the  banks  of  sacred  streams  over  the 
whole  earth ; 

But  only  those  who  have  sought  the  true  Guru’s  shelter 
are  saved. 

The  whole  world  is  bound  by  the  love  of  Maya. 

The  obstinate  and  the  foolish  are  consumed  by  pride. 

Guru  Nanak  hath  taken  mine  arm  and  protected  me. 

God’s  praises  ; His  name  man’s  only  support : — 

I am  a purchased  slave ; Thou,  O Lord,  art  my  true 
Master ; 

My  soul  and  body,  yea,  everything  is  Thine. 

O Lord,  Thou  art  the  honour  of  the  unhonoured  ; I put 
my  trust  in  Thee. 

Know  that  he  who  hath  other  support  than  the  True  One 
is  feeble. 

Thine  empire  is  boundless  ; no  one  knoweth  its  limit. 

He  who  meeteth  the  true  Guru,  walketh  according  to  Thy 
will. 

Device  and  cunning  are  of  no  avail. 

Receive,  O man,  the  happiness  which  the  Lord  being 
pleased  conferreth  on  thee. 

Even  though  thou  perform  millions  of  ceremonies,  they 
will  not  avail  thee. 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  made  the  Name  his  support  and 
forsaken  all  other  calling. 

The  following  was  addressed  by  the  Guru  to  his 
mother : — 

If  the  invisible  and  infinite  Lord  dwell  a little  in  my  heart, 

0 my  mother,  my  troubles,  pains,  and  infirmities  shall 
all  vanish. 

1 am  a sacrifice  to  my  Master. 

My  soul  and  body  are  very  happy  repeating  His  name. 

I have  heard  a little  regarding  that  true  Lord. 

I have  obtained  happiness  upon  happiness,  0 my  mother, 
which  cannot  be  estimated. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  301 

On  beholding  Him  with  mine  eyes  I was  pleased,  and 
began  to  long  for  Him. 

O mother,  I am  without  excellences,  yet  God  Himself  hath 
attached  me  to  His  skirt. 

God  is  totally  beyond  the  Veds  and  the  books  of  the  world  ; 

Nanak’s  King  hath  openly  manifested  Himself. 

Magnification  of  the  Lord  who  ought  to  be  served 
and  remembered  by  His  frail  creatures : — 

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  saints  worship  Thee,  uttering 
‘ Beloved,  Beloved  ! ’ 

In  what  way  shall  I who  am  without  virtues  and  sinful 
meet  Thee,  O my  life  ? 

Thou  art  my  prop,  O Lord,  Sustainer  of  the  earth,  and 
merciful  God  ; 

Thou  art  the  Lord  of  all ; the  whole  creation  is  Thine. 

Thou  art  ever  the  Helper  of  the  saints,  and  they  behold 
Thee  ever  present. 

They  who  are  without  the  Name  die  lamenting. 

Transmigration  is  at  an  end  for  those  who  embrace  the 
Lord^s  service. 

What  shall  be  the  condition  of  those  who  forget  the  Name  ? 

The  whole  world  is  like  trespassing  cattle.^ 

Saith  Nanak,  O God,  do  Thou  Thyself  cut  off  my 
shackles  and  blend  me  with  Thee. 

Instruction  to  the  human  race : — 

O man,  forgetting  all  other  things,  think  only  of  the  one 
God  ; 

Put  aside  false  pride  and  offer  Him  thy  soul  and  body ; 

Praise  thou  the  Creator  during  the  eight  watches  of  the 
day. 

, I live  by  Thy  gifts,  O God,  show  mercy  unto  me. 

0 man,  do  that  work  by  which  thy  countenance  may  be 
bright  .2 

^ Men  follow  their  own  inclinations  and  suffer  accordingly.  Tres- 
passing cattle  were  chained  and  impounded. 

* By  ^hich  thou  mayest  be  happy. 


302  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

0 God,  he  on  whom  Thou  bestowest  truth  becometh 
attached  to  it. 

O man,  construct  such  a house  as  shall  never  fall. 

If  thou  put  the  one  God  in  thy  heart,  thoushalt  never  die. 

God  is  dear  to  those  who  are  pleasing  to  Him  ; 

And  by  the  Guru’s  favour,  0 Nanak,  they  praise  Him  the 
Ineffable. 

The  bliss  of  those  who  devote  their  thoughts  to 
God 

What  men  are  they  who  forget  not  the  Name  ? 

They  are  as  God  ; know  that  there  is  no  difference  be- 
tween Him  and  them. 

The  souls  and  bodies  of  those  who  meet  Thee,  O Lord,  are 
happy. 

They  obtain  happiness  ; all  their  sorrows  are  dispelled  by 
the  favour  of  the  saints, 

By  whom  are  saved  all  countries  and  worlds. 

They  are  perfect  saints  in  whose  hearts  Thou,  0 God, 
dwellest. 

He  whom  Thou  acknowledgest  is  acknowledged. 

He  is  illustrious,  accepted,  and  famous  everywhere. 

O true  King,  fulfil  Nanak’s  desire 

To  adore  and  remember  Thee  day  and  night  at  every 
breath. 

Man  ought  ever  to  attend  to  his  devotions : — 

O thou,  the  prey  of  sloth,  why  sleepest  thou  forgetting 
the  Name  ? 

How  many  float  away  to  perdition  on  this  river  of  life  ! 

O man,  embark  on  the  boat  of  God’s  feet  and  cross  over. 

During  the  eight  watches  of  the  day  sing  God^s  praises  in 
the  company  of  the  saints. 

Thou  enjoyest  various  pleasures,  but  they  are  empty 
without  the  Name. 

Without  God’s  service  thou  shalt  weep  thyself  to  death. 

Thou  dressest,  eatest,  and  perfumest  thyself  and  rubbest 
on  batna,^ 

1 An  Oriental  soap  used  to  make  the  skin  aoft  and  delicate. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  303 

But,  without  remembering  God’s  name,  thy  body  shall 
assuredly  depart  and  become  dust. 

This  world  is  very  difficult  to  cross  : only  a few  know  this. 

They  who  seek  God’s  protection,  O.Nanak,  shall  be  saved; 
this  is  God’s  law. 

The  Guru  calls  upon  his  saints  to  join  him  in 
worship  and  arrive  at  a state  of  exaltation : — 

Come,  my  friends,  let  us  meet  and  enjoy  every  relish  ; 

Having  met  let  us  repeat  God’s  ambrosial  name  so  that 
our  sins  may  be  blotted  out. 

Meditate  on  the  Real  Thing,  O ye  saints,  that  no 
troubles  may  befall  you. 

The  pious  are  on  the  alert,  and  have  destroyed  all  the 
thieves.^ 

Take  wisdom  and  humility  as  your  viaticum,  and  destroy 
the  sin  of  pride. 

True  is  the  shop,^  perfect  the  traffic  ; deal  in  the  ware  of 
the  Name. 

They  who  offer  up  their  souls,  bodies,  and  wealth  are  held 
in  honour. 

They  who  are  pleasing  to  their  Lord  enjoy  themselves. 

Fools  of  weak  understanding  who  drink  wine  become 
whore-masters. 

They  who  are  saturated  with  God’s  elixir,  Nanak,  are  the 
true  drinkers. 

The  Guru,  as  handmaiden  of  the  Lord,  offers  Him 
homage  : — 

The  God  whose  handmaiden  I am,  is  the  most  exalted  of 
all  : 

Everything  whether  small  or  great  is  His. 

My  soul,  my  life,  and  my  wealth  are  admittedly  the  Lord’s. 

I am  accounted  the  handmaiden  of  Him  through  whose 
Name  I have  become  pure. 

O Thou,  who  art  independent  and  full  of  joy,  Thy  name 
is  a jewel  and  a diamond. 

^ The  deadly  sins  who  came  to  rob  them. 

? The  company  of  the  saints. 


304  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

She  whose  Lord  Thou  art,  roameth  satisfied  and  ever 
happy. 

Ye  friends  and  companions  of  my  association,  implant  in 
me  right  understanding, 

That  I may  serve  the  saints  with  love,  and  thus  obtain 
God’s  treasure.. 

All  are  handmaidens  of  God  ; all  call  Him  Master, 

But  it  is  only  she  whom  God  adometh,  O Nanak,  who 
abideth  in  happiness. 

The  duties  of  the  holy  handmaiden  : — 

Become  the  handmaiden  of  the  saints  and  learn  thy 
duties  : 

The  highest  of  all  virtues  is  not  to  deem  thy  Spouse 
afar. 

• Dye  thy  soul  with  the  beautiful  madder  of  God’s  name. 

Abandon  devices  and  cunning,  and  know  that  God  is 
with  thee. 

Make  obedience  to  thy  Spouse’s  words  thine  ornaments  ; 

Chew  forgetfulness  of  the  world  as  thy  betel ; 

Make  the  Guru’s  instruction  thy  lamp,  and  spread  the 
couch  of  virtue. 

Stand  with  clasped  hands  all  day  long,  and  thou  shalt 
meet  the  sovereign  God. 

She  who  is  pleasing  to  the  Creator  possesseth  all  discretion 
and  ornaments  ; 

She  is  endowed  with  peerless  beauty,  O Nanak,  and  is 
a happy  wife. 

The  advantages  conferred  by  the  Guru : — 

As  long  as  I have  mental  doubts  I stray  in  devious  paths  : 

When  the  Guru  dispelled  my  doubts  I obtained  rest. 

The  evil  passions  which  tormented  me  have  left  me  through 
the  Guru  : 

I have  escaped  from  them,  and  they  have  escaped  from  me. 

Man  is  entangled  from  the  moment  he  thinketh  that 
worldly  things  are  private  property. 

I have  escaped  from  entanglements  since  the  Guru  dis- 
pelled my  spiritual  ignorance. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  305 

Man  suffereth  as  long  as  he  knoweth  not  the  will  of 
God. 

He  is  happy  when,  meeting  the  Guru,  he  recognizeth  God’s 
will. 

I have  no  enemy  to  torment  me,  nor  doth  any  one  appear 
to  me  to  be  evil.^ 

. The  servant  who  serveth  the  Guru,  O Nanak,  is  a slave 
of  the  Lord. 

Devotion  is  pleasing  to  the  Lord  and  procures  the 
fulfilment  of  desires  : — 

Sing  God’s  praises  and  thou  shalt  obtain  great  happiness, 
comfort,  and  delight. 

If  the  true  Guru  give  His  name,  evil  influences^  shall 
be  removed. 

I am  ever  and  ever  a sacrifice  to  my  Guru  ; 

I devote  myself  to  the  Guru  by  meeting  whom  I have 
obtained  my  real  object. 

He  who  remembereth  not  God  believeth  in  good  and  bad 
omens. 

Death  approacheth  not  him  who  is  pleasing  to  the  Lord. 

The  Name  is  superior  to  all  gifts,  charity,  devotion,  and 
penance. 

All  his  desires  shall  be  fulfilled  who  repeateth  God’s  name. 

His  fear  is  no  more,  his  errors  and  worldly  love  have  fled, 
and  he  seeth  none  but  God. 

Nanak,  if  the  supreme  Being  preserve,  no  sorrow  shall 
befall  us. 

The  Guru  sings  God's  praises  on  every  occasion  : — 

I sing  God’s  praises  at  home,  I sing  them  abroad,  I sing 
them  awaking  in  the  morning. 

I,  who  deal  in  God’s  name,  have  obtained  it  as  my  viaticum 
irom  the  Guru, 

And  completely  forgotten  all  things  beside. 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  given  me  the  gift  of  the  Name  ; it 
is  my  only  support. 

^ That  is,  I am  nobody's  enemy. 

^ Gnh  {grah),  the  seven  planets  of  the  ancients  and  the  demons 
Rahu  and  Ketu.  Grth  also  means  entanglements. 

X 


SIKH.  Ill 


3o6  the  SIKH  RELIGIO^r 

Tn  woe  1 sing  God's  praises,  in  weal  I sing  them  ; on  my 
way  I remember  them. 

The  Guru  hath  firmly  fixed  the  Name  in  my  heart  and 
slaked  my  thirst. 

I sing  God's  praises  by  day,  I sing  them  by  night,  I sing 
them  with  my  tongue  at  every  breath. 

The  faith  that  God  is  with  us  whether  alive  or  dead 
resulteth  from  association  with  the  saints. 

Bestow  this  gift,  O God,  upon  Thy  slave  Nanak,  that  he 
may  clasp  to  his  heart  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 

That  he  may  hear  of  God  with  his  ears,  behold  Him  with 
his  eyes,  and  put  the  Guru’s  feet  on  his  forehead. 

Man  must  die  at  last,  and  his  only  hope  is  in 
God 

The  body  which  thou  deemest  permanent  is  only  a two 
days’  guest. 

Children,  wife,  home,  all  thy  property — the  love  of  all 
these  things  is  transitory. 

0 man,  why  laughest  thou  ? 

If  thou  look  attentively,  these  things  are  like  an  en- 
chanted city  ; ^ profit  is  only  obtained  by  worshipping  God. 

Clothes  worn  on  the  body  fall  to  tatters  after  two  or  four 
days  ; 

However  much  thou  runnest  upon  a wall,  thou  shalt  at 
last  arrive  at  its  end  ; * 

Salt  at  once  melteth  if  put  into  a pitcher  of  water  ; 

So  when  the  order  of  the  Supreme  Being  arriveth,  the  soul 
must  depart  in  a trice. 

O man,  thy  walking,  thy  sitting,  and  thy  breathing  are 
all  counted. 

^ Harishchandar  son  of  Trisanku  was,  according  to  the  Purans, 
raised"  to  heaven  for  his  unbounded  liberality.  He  was  accompanied 
thither  by  his  friends  and  followers,  but  being  induced  to  boast  of  his 
merits,  he  was  hurled  back  to  earth.  On  the  way  he  repented  of  his 
fault,  and  remained  suspended  feet  uppermost  in  mid-air.  His  city 
there  is  said  to  be  occasionally  visible.  In  the  Granth  Sahib  the 
word  harchandauri  simply  means  a mirage. 

* Some  day  death  shall  arrive. 


HYMNS  OP  GURU  ARJAN  307 

Ever  sing  God’s  praises,  Nanak,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved 
under  the  shelter  of  the  true  Guru’s  feet. 

The  blessings  obtained  when  God  mercifully  grants 
the  true  Guru : — 

When  God  is  merciful, 

What  is  reversed  becometh  straight,  and  slanderers  and 
enemies  become  friends. 

The  jewel  of  divine  knowledge  shineth  in  the  darkness, 
and  the  impure  understanding  becometh  purified. 

When  I met  the  true  Guru  I obtained  happiness,  pros- 
perity, and  the  fruit  of  God’s  name. 

No  one  knew  me,  despicable  ^ that  I was,  but  now  I have 
become  famous  throughout  the  world. 

formerly  no  one  would  allow  me  to  associate  with  him, 
hut  now  all  men  worship  my  feet. 

I used  formerly  to  go  about  begging  for  paise,  hut  now  all 
the  thirst  of  my  heart  is  quenched. 

I who  could  not  endure  reproach  from  any  one,  have  now 
become  patient  through  the  society  of  the  saints. 

What  praises  of  Him  who  is  totally  beyond  reach  can  be 
uttered  by  a single  tongue  ? 

Thy  servant  Nanak  is  in  Thy  sanctuary  ; make  him  Thy 
slave  of  slaves. 

Man  is  slow  to  virtue,  but  swift  to  vice 

O fool,  thou  art  very  slow  to  thy  profit,  but  to  thy  loss 
thou  hastenest. 

O sinner,  thou  makest  not  good  bargains,  but  art  attracted 
by  worthless  things. ^ 

O true  Guru,  my  hope  is  in  thee. 

P Supreme  God,  Thy  name  is  Purifier  of  sinners  ; I have 
come  to  Thy  shelter. 

O man,  thou  listenest  to  foul  language  and  art  entangkd 
in  it,  but  in  repeating  the  Name  thou  art  indolent. 

Thou  , greatly  delightest  in  slander,  and  art  wrong-headed. 

^ Kripan,  Literally — a miser. 

^ R^naia.  Things  of  sand  or  dust. 

X 2 


3o8  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Thou  covetest  thy  neighbour’s  wealth,  son,  and  wife,  and 
like  a mad  dog  eatest  what  ought  not  to  be  eaten. 

Thou  hast  no  love  for  the  true  faith  ; on  hearing  the  truth 
thou  becomest  angry. 

0 compassionate  to  the  poor,  merciful  Lord  God,  Thy 
name  is  the  support  of  the  saints. 

0 God,  Nanak  hath  gladly  entered  Thine  asylum ; be 
mindful  of  Thine  own  honour.^ 

An  exhortation  to  man  to  abandon  worldly  love : — 

Thou  clingest  to  perishable  things  ; worldly  love  hath 
bound  thee. 

Thou  thinkest  not  whither  thou  shalt  have  to  go  : through 
pride  thou  hast  become  blind. 

O man,  why  not  abandon  the  world  and  worship  God  ? 

■ Thou  dwellest  in  a frail  chamber  ; the  diseases  of  all  the 
passions  affect  thee. 

While  talking  of  thy  wealth  days  and  nights  pass  away  ; 
every  moment  life  groweth  shorter. 

As  men  are  led  away  by  sweet  savours,  so  art  thou  by 
false  and  filthy  occupations. 

Thy  senses  are  attached  to  the  pleasures  of  lust,  wrath, 
avarice,  and  worldly  love  ; 

Therefore  the  Supreme  Being  hath  caused  thee  to  wander 
again  and  again  in  births. 

When  He  who  removeth  the  sorrows  of  the  poor  becometh 
merciful,  all  happiness  is  obtained  on  meeting  the  Guru. 

Saith  Nanak,  if  thou  day  and  night  meditate  on  God  He 
will  heal  all  thy  maladies  ; 

So,  my  brethren,  repeat  God’s  name. 

And  He  who  removeth  the  sorrows  of  the  poor,  shall 
become  merciful,  and  the  pains  of  birth  and  death  vanish. 

For  the  unworthy  pleasures  of  a moment  man 

forfeits  This  future  "happiness  •. — 

For  the  fleeting  pleasure  of  Just,  thou  shalt  suffer  misery 
for  endless  time. 

For  the  enjoyment  of  a ghari  or  two,  thou  shalt  repent 
aghin  and  again.  ^ 

^ By  protecting  me  who  am  Thine  own. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  309 

O blind  one,  remember  the  Lord  God  ; 

Thy  time  hath  approached. 

Thou  art  misled  on  beholding  even  for  a moment  the 
beauty  of  the  akk,  the  nim,  and  the  colocynth.^ 

As  is  companionship  with  a serpent  so  is  an  intrigue  with 
thy  neighbour’s  wife. 

For  worthless  objects  ^ thou  committest  sin,  but  the  real 
thing  is  neglected  by  thee. 

Thou  lovest  what  thou  shalt  have  to  abandon  and  thou 
quarrellest  with  thy  friends. 

This  is  the  case  with  the  whole  world,  but  only  he  who 
hath  the  perfect  Guru  shall  be  saved. 

Saith  Nanak,  when  man  is  purified,  he  shall  cross  over  the 
terrible  ocean  of  the  world. 

Man  cannot  conceal  his  sins  from  God : — 

What  men  do  in  secret  God  seeth,  though  fools  and  block- 
heads deny  it. 

They  reap  the  reward  of  their  own  acts  and  regret  them 
afterwards. 

My  God  knoweth  all  man’s  devices  beforehand. 

Deceived  by  error,  0 man,  thou  triest  to  hide  thine  acts 
from  Him,  but  afterwards  thou  shalt  have  to  confess  thy 
heart’s  secrets. 

Man  applieth  himself  to  what  God  hath  applied  him  : 
what  can  any  mortal  do  1 

Pardon  me,  O Lord,  supreme  God  ; Nanak  is  ever  a 
sacrifice  unto  Thee. 

The  mortal  sins,  though  potent,  can  be  subdued 
by  the  saints  : — 

The  five  deadly  sins  subdue  the  four  castes  and  the  four 
stages  of  life,  and  trample  on  the  six  religious  systems. 

They  have  bewitched  and  deceived  the  beautiful,  the 

accomplished,  the  lovely,  and  the  wise. 

Is  there  any  puissant  hero  or  champion  to  seize  and 
destroy  them  ? 

^ That  is,  the  evil  passions  are  fair  without  but  foul  within. 

* Bairi  kdran.  Also  translated— Thou  committest  sin  for  thy 
relations  who  are  thine  enemies. 


310 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  who  can  pass  his  life  killing  and  destroying  them,  is 
perfect  in  this  age. 

They  form  a great  tribe  who  cannot  be  controlled  and  who 
will  not  flee  ; they  are  a mighty  and  obstinate  army  ; 

But,  saith  Nanak,  he  who  is  under  the  protection  of  the 
society  of  the  saints  crusheth  them. 

Sweet  is  the  society  of  the  saints : — 

My  beloved,  the  society  of  the  saints  is  a stream  of  nectar  ; 

The  Guru  diverteth  it  not  from  my  heart  even  for  a 
moment. 

On  beholding  and  touching  it  great  pleasure  and  delight 
are  obtained  : 

It  is  dyed  with  the  Creator’s  dye. 

Death  never  approacheth  him  who  meeting  the  Guru 
uttereth  the  Name  even  for  a moment : 

God,  O Nanak,  embraceth  and  claspeth  him  to  His  heart. 

The  occupation  of  the  saints : — 

Good  is  the  society  of  the  saints  ; 

Every  watch,  every  hour,  every  moment  they  sing  God’s 
praises  and  speak  of  Him  ; 

Walking,  sitting,  or  sleeping  they  sing  His  praises  ; their 
souls  and  bodies  are  absorbed  in  His  feet. 

I am  small.  Thou,  O God,  arc  great ; Nanak  knoweth 
Thy  sanctuary. 

Meditate  on  God  who  has  done  and  will  do  so  much 
for  man : — 

The  soul,  mind,  body,  life — all  pleasures  and  enjoyments 
are  given  by  God  ; 

He  is  the  Relation  of  the  poor  and  the  Bestower  of  life  ; 

* He  is  potent  to  save  those  who  seek  His  protection. 

O my  soul,  meditate  on  God’s  name. 

In  this  world  and  the  next  the  one  God  who  accompanieth 
thee  is  the  Helper  ; fix  thy  love  on  Him  alone. 

Men  ponder  on  the  Veds  and  Shastars  to  secure  deliverance; 

But  superior  to  all  religious  ceremonies  and  observances 
is  the  utterance  of  the  Name. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  311 

Lust,  wrath,  and  pride  depart  on  meeting  the  true  divine 
Guru. 

They  in  whose  hearts  he  fixeth  God’s  name  and  worship 
best  perform  His  service. 

O Compassionate  One,  I seek  the  protection  of  Thy  feet ; 
Thou  art  the  honour  of  the  unhonoured. 

Thou,  O God,  art  the  Support  of  my  soul  and  life  ; Thou 
art  Nanak’s  strength. 

The  advantage  of  the  saints'  society  and  God's 
love : — 

Without  the  society  of  the  saints  man  ever  wavering 
suffereth  great  misery  : • 

By  love  of  the  one  Supreme  God  the  profit  of  God’s  essence 
is  earned. 

Men  grasp  the  unreal : — 

0 madmen,  ye  have  fallen  asleep. 

Ye  are  intoxicated  with  worldly  love,  families,  and 
sensual  enjoyments,  and  embrace  fleeting  pleasures. 

Desires  which  are  false,  joy  and  delight  which  are  a dream 
the  perverse  deem  real. 

They  discover  not  at  all  the  secrets  of  the  wealth  of  the 
ambrosial  Name  which  is  with  them. 

Nanak,  they  whom  God  mercifully  keepeth  in  the  com- 
pany of  the  saints,  obtain  His  protection. 

The  Guru  grasps  the  real : — 

The  love  of  that  Dear  One  for  me  ! 

Not  gold,  or  gems,  or  pearls,^  or  rubies  ; no,  no,  no  ! 

Not  empire,  not  fortune,  not  authority,  not  enjoyments — 
none  of  these  do  I desire. 

In  worshipping  the  feet  of  the  saints  and  taking  their 
protection  I find  supreme  happiness. 

All  Nanak’s  heart-burning  was  dispelled 

When  he  obtained  the  love  of  the  Beloved. 

^ Gajmoti.  Pearls  fabled  to  come  from  the  head  of  the  white 
elephant. 


312  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Guru  makes  God  manifest : — 

0 God,  the  Guru  hath  shown  Thee  to  mine  eyes. 

In  this  world  and  the  next,  in  every  heart  art  Thou, 
O Bewitcher. 

Cause  of  causes.  Supporter  of  the  earth.  Thou  alone  art 
beautiful. 

Nanak  devoteth  himself  to  meeting  and  beholding  the 
saints  ; he  sleepeth  in  complete  happiness. 

The  Guru  prays  God  to  crown  his  devotion : — 

Bringing  service  to  a successful  issue, 

O God,  I have  gladly  come  to  Thee. 

He  wko  putteth  God’s  feet  into  his  heart  and  obtaineth 
the  boon  of  the  Name  is  successful. 

This  is  his  happiness  here  and  hereafter  ; preserve  him 
by  association  with  saints. 

Nanak,  meditate  on  the  Name,  sing  God’s  praises,  and  thou 
shalt  be  easily  absorbed  in  Him. 

The  longing  of  the  holy  for  God : — 

0 God,  Thy  feet  are  beautiful ; 

God’s  saints  find  them  in  their  hearts. 

They  who  dispel  their  pride  and  practise  worship,  sing 
God’s  praises  with  the  greatest  zest : 

They  long  for  the  one  God ; they  thirst  to  behold  Him  ; 
none  else  pleaseth  them. 

0 God,  have  mercy  upon  me  ; what  is  the  helpless  crea- 
ture ? Nanak  is  a sacrifice  unto  Thee. 

The  condition  of  the  holy  is  contrasted  with  that 
of  the  listless  and  the  proud  : — 

He  who  forgetteth  God  is  already  dead ; 

He  who  meditateth  on  the  Name  shall  obtain  all  the  ad- 
vantages thereof,  and  be  happy  ; 

He  who  practiseth  pride,  though  he  be  called  a king,  shall 
be  caught  like  a parrot,  insnared  in  a trap. 

Saith  Nanak,  he  who  meeteth  the  Guru  shall  become 
immovable.^ 

^ Shall  not  be  subject  to  transmigration. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  313 

The  Guru  describes  the  condition  of  the  worldly : — 

He  who  sleepeth  in  the  intoxication  of  sin  and  worldly 
love  hath  no  understanding. 

It  is  only  when  Death  lifteth  him  up  by  the  hair  that  he 
shall  come  to  his  senses. 

They  who  are  attached  to  the  poison  of  avarice  and  the 
other  deadly  sins  acquire  wealth  by  oppressing  others. 

They  are  intoxicated  with  pride  in  what  is  destroyed  in 
a moment,  and,  demons  that  they  are,  know  not  God. 

The  Veds,  the  Shastars,  and  holy  men  cry  out,  but  the 
deaf  hear  not. 

They  utterly  lose  their  game,  and  the  fools  regret  what  is 
lost. 

All  the  tax  they  pay  shall  be  by  way  of  punishment,  and 
it  shall  not  be  credited  in  God’s  court. 

0 men,  the  work  by  which  God  would  cast  a veil  over 
your  sins  you  have  not  performed. 

Since  the  Guru  hath  shown  me  that  the  world  is  such  as 
it  is,  I have  sung  the  praises  of  God  alone. 

Having  renounced  all  pride  in  his  strength  and  skill, 
Nanak  hath  entered  Thine  asylum. 

What  the  holy  gain  by  devotion : — 

By  dealing  in  the  name  of  God 

The  saints  and  holy  men  are  propitiated,  the  Beloved  is 
obtained.  His  praises  are  sung,  and  the  music  of  the  five 
instruments  is  played. 

When  I obtained  God’s  favour  I obtained  a sight  of  Him, 
and  am  now  imbued  with  His  love. 

By  serving  the  saints  I conceived  love  and  affection  for 
my  darling  Master. 

. When  the  Guru  fixed  divine  knowledge  in  my  heart,  I 
rejoiced  that  I should  not  be  born  again. 

1 have  obtained  tranquillity  and  the  treasure  of  God 
within  me. 

And  renounced  all  the  wiles  of  the  lust  of  my  heart. 

For  a long  time  my  soul  hath  been  very  thirsty  : 

0 God,  grant  me  a sight  of  Thee,  show  Thyself  unto  me. 

Embrace  poor  Nanak  who  hath  entered  Thine  asylum. 


314  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Guru  in  his  humility  and  sense  of  depen- 
dence on  God  prays  to  Him : — 

Would  that  some  one  would  destroy  the  strong  fortress 
of  sin, 

Save  me  from  desires,  avarice,  deception,  worldly  love, 
and  error ; 

And  that  the  diseases  of  lust,  wrath,  avarice,  and  pride 
would  leave  me ! 

May  I in  the  company  of  the  saints  love  God’s  name,  sing 
His  praises. 

Meditate  on  Him  day  and  night. 

And  capture  and  ra^e  the  rampart  of  error  ! 

Nanak,  the  Name  is  my  treasure. 

• The  Guru  instructs  a disciple : — 

Abandon  lust,  wrath,  and  covetousness, 

And  remember  God’s  name  in  thy  heart. 

The  worship  of  God  is  a profitable  work. 

Forsake  the  sins  of  pride,  worldly  love,  and  falsehood, 
and  ever  utter  God’s  name. 

0 man,  attach  thyself  to  the  feet  of  the  saints. 

Awake  and  remember  the  feet  of  the  Lord  God 

Who  is  compassionate  to  the  poor,  the  Purifier  of  sinners, 
and  the  Supreme  Being. 

Serve  God,  O Nanak,  and  thy  lot  shall  be  perfect. 

The  play  of  the  world : — 

God  hath  exhibited  this  play  consisting  of  rejoicing  and 
mourning,  joy,  and  sorrow. 

One  moment  man  feareth,  again  he  feareth  not,  and  other 
times  he  pursueth  his  fancies  ; 

One  moment  he  enjoyeth  pleasures,  and  again  he  aban- 
doneth  them ; 

One  moment  he  practiseth  Jog,  penance,  and  worship  of 
many  kinds,  and  again  he  wandereth  in  error  ; 

And  sometimes,  O Nanak,  God  of  His  mercy  applieth  man 
to  His  love  by  association  with  saints. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  AR JAN 

The  Guru  continues  his  instruction  : — 

Take  the  protection  of  the  one  God, 

Utter  the  h3unns  of  the  Guru, 

Obey  the  order  of  the  True  One, 

Receive  the  treasure  of  the  Name  in  thy  heart, 

And  thou,  O man,  shalt  enter  into  happiness. 

He  who  in  life  is  dead 
Shall  cross  the  terrible  ocean. 

Call  him  the  fearless 

Who  is  the  dust  of  aU  men’s  feet. 

O,  man,  the  instruction  of  the  saints 
Removeth  all  anxieties. 

Sorrow  can  never  approach  him 
Whose  happiness  is  in  the  Name. 

All  men  obey  him 

Who  listeneth  to  God’s  praises. 

Nanak,  profitable  is  his  advent  into  the  world. 

And  he  is  pleasing  to  the  Lord,  O my  soul. 

The  Guru  prays  to  the  Lord  of  the  unowned : 

God  is  for  him 

Who  hath  nobody  besides. 

He  who  knoweth  the  state  of  his  heart 
Knoweth  everything. 

Save  me  who  have  fallen — 

This,  O my  soul,  is  Nanak’s  prayer. 

The  Guru’s  message  to  his  soul : — 

O my  soul,  who  hast  come  from  afar, 

Hear  my  message. 

Everybody  hath  abandoned  the  things 
To  which  thou  art  attached. 

They  were  as  a dream  for  those 
Who  repeated  God’s  name. 

They  who  leave  God  and  attach  themselves  to  others 
Hasten  to  transmigration. 

It  is  only  they  who  repeat  God’s  name 
Who  shall  continue  to  live. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


316 

He  to  whom  God  is  merciful, 

O Nanak,  becometh  His  worshipper. 

Asa  Ashtapadi 

Man  must  make  his  choice  between  God  and 
mammon : — 

When  I please  the  five  virtues,  I displease  the  five  sins. 

When  I put  the  former  into  my  heart,  I dispossess  the 
latter. 

In  this  way  the  city  of  my  body  is  peopled,  O my  brethren. 

Trouble  departed  from  me  when  I grasped  the  divine 
knowledge  of  the  Guru. 

The  Guru  hath  made  a fence  ^ round  the  true  religion  : 

Meditation  on  the  divine  knowledge  of  the  Guru  is  a 
Strong  thorny  gate. 

0 my  brethren  and  friends,  sow  the  field  of  the  Name, 

And  make  the  perpetual  service  of  the  Guru  your  traffic. 

Make  all  your  shops  out  of  peace  and  rest  and  happiness. 

The  wholesale  dealer,^  the  retail  dealers,®  form  a company 
in  the  one  God’s  name. 

Where  the  true  Guru  hath  set  God’s  seal 

Neither  infidel-tax,  nor  fine,  nor  poll-tax  is  levied. 

Load  and  dispatch  your  cargo  of  the  Name, 

So  shall  you,  under  the  Guru’s  instruction,  return  home 
with  a profit. 

The  wholesale  dealer  is  the  true  Guru  ; the  retail  dealers 
are  his  disciples ; 

The  stock-in-trade  is  the  Name  ; the  remembrance  of  the 
True  One  is  the  account  kept. 

O Nanak,  everlasting  is  God’s  city  ; 

He  who  serveth  the  perfect  Guru  shall  abide  in  it. 

Asa  Birhara 

Worship  God  alone  and  you  shall  be  happy : — 

Remember  the  supreme  God,  O my  dear  friend,  and 
sacrifice  thyself  for  a sight  of  Him. 

® To  keep  out  evil  passions.  * The  Guru. 


The  disciples. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  317 

0 my  dear  friend,  why  abandon  Him,  whose  memory 
causeth  sorrow  to  be  forgotten  ? 

1 would  sell  this  body  to  the  saint,  O my  dear  friend,  if 
he  caused  me  to  meet  the  Beloved.  • 

The  pleasures  and  attractions  of  sin  are  insipid ; I have 
abandoned  them,  0 mother. 

Lust,  wrath,  and  covetousness  forsook  me,  O my  dear 
friend,  when  I fell  at  the  true  Guru’s  feet. 

They  who  are  imbued  with  God  go  not  elsewhere,^  my  dear 
friend ; 

They  who  have  tasted  God’s  essence,  O my  dear  friend, 
are  satisfied  and  contented. 

They  who  seize  the  skirt  of  the  saint,  O Nanak,  shall 
cross  over  the  terrible  ocean. 

Asa  Chhant 

Jubilation  on  spiritual  victory: — 

Joyl  great  joy  ! I have  seen  God. 

I have  tasted,  I have  tasted  His  sweet  essence. 

His  sweet  essence  hath  rained  on  my  heart : through  the 
kindness  of  the  true  Guru  I have  obtained  composure. 

Since  the  five  enemies  fled,  my  home  hath  become 
habitable,  and  I sing  a song  of  rejoicing. 

The  holy  saint  being  my  intercessor,  I am  comforted 
and  satisfied  with  the  ambrosial  Word. 

Saith  Nanak,  when  I saw  God  with  mine  eyes  my  heart 
was  gratified  with  Him. 

Highly  adorned  are  my  beautiful  gates  : 

My  continual  guests  are  the  beloved  saints. 

When  I did  homage  to  them  and  served  thpm,.  they  ad- 
justed mine  affairs. 

God  Himself  is  the  Groomsman,  He  Himself  is  the  Brides- 
man, He  Himself  is  the  priest,  He  Himself  is  the  God  of 
marriage.* 

He  Himself  adjusteth  His  own  affairs ; He  Hims^f  sus- 
taineth  the  world. 

^ Worship  not  false  gods. 

* The  Brahmans  when  celebrating  marriages  worship  different 
gods  and  planets.  ' 


3i8  the  SIKH  RELIGION  ^ 

Saith  Nanak,  when  the  Bridegroom  sittcth  at  home  with 
me  adorned  are  my  beautiful  gates  ; 

The  nine  treasures  in  abundance  then  enter  my  house. 

And  I obtain  everything,  everything  by  meditating  on  the 
Name. 

By  meditation  on  the  Name  vrith  composure  and  devotion 
God  is  ever  my  Helper. 

My  cares  are  at  an  end,  my  transmigration  hath  ceased, 
and  my  mind  no  longer  feeleth  anxiety. 

When  I call  out  God’s  name,  spontaneous  music  playeth, 
and  there  is  a scene  of  wondrous  splendour. 

Saith  Nanak,  when  the  Beloved  is  with  me,  I obtain  the 
nine  treasures. 

All  my  brethren  and  friends  became  overjoyed 

When  I on  meeting  the  Guru  conquered  in  the  very 
toilsome  struggle  of  the  arena  ; 

When  on  meeting  the  Guru  I repeated  God’s  name,  I con- 
quered and  the  walls  of  the  fortress  of  error  were  demolished. 

I obtained  the  wealth  of  many  treasures,  and  God  stood 
by  to  assist  me. 

He  whom  God  hath  made  His  own  possesseth  divine 
knowledge,  and  is  conspicuous  among  men. 

Saith  Nanak,  the  brethren  and  friends  of  him  on  whose 
side  standeth  God  rejoice. 

How  man  should  love  God : — 

When  water  and  milk  are  placed  over  a fire,  the  water 
alloweth  not  the  milk  to  bum ; O men,  in  that  way  love 
God.i 

As  the  bumble-bee  becoraeth  entangled  and  intoxicated 
by  the  odour  of  the  lotus,  and  leaveth  it  not  even  for  a 
moment,  ’ 

So  relax  not  a whit  thy  love  for  God  ; dedicate  to  Him 
all  thine  ornaments  and  enjoyments. 

Man  in  the  company  of  the  saints  hath  no  fear  of  what  is 
called  the  way  of  death  where  wailings  are  heard. 

^ The  Guru’s  meaning  is  that  man  the  water  should  sacrifice  him- 
self for  God  and  God,  the  milk  would  blend  him  with  Himself. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  319 

Sing  and  meditate  on  God’s  praises,  and  all  thy  sins  and 
sorrows  shall  depart. 

Saith  Nanak,  chant  the  song  of  God,  O man,  love  Him  and 
bear  Him  such  affection  in  thy  heart. 

As  a fish  beareth  water  ; it  hath  not  a moment’s  happiness 
out  of  it ; such  love  bear  God,  O man. 

The  chatrik  thirsty  for  raindrops  chirrupeth  every 
moment  ‘ Rain,  beautiful  cloud  ! ’ 

So  love  God,  give  Him  thy  soul  and  fix  all  thine  attention 
on  Him. 

Be  not  proud,  seek  God’s  protection,  sacrifice  thyself 
for  a sight  of  Him. 

The  woman  who  hath  true  love  for  the  Guru  and  with 
whom  he  is  well  pleased,  shall  meet  her  parted  Spouse. . 

Saith  Nanak,  chant  the  song  of  the  eternal  God  ; love 
Him, 

O my  soul,  and  bear  Him  such  affection 

As  the  love  of  the  sheldrake  for  the  sun  ; she  feeleth  much 
anxiety  as  to  when  she  shall  behold  the  day. 

As  the  kokil  in  love  with  the  mango  sweetly  singeth, 
so  love  God,  O man  : 

Love  God,  be  not  proud,  all  are  but  guests  of  a single  night. 

Now  why  art  thou,  who  earnest  and  shalt  depart  naked, 
attached  to  and  enamoured  of  the  world  ? 

By  entering  the  asylum  of  the  feet  of  the  pious,  the 
worldly  love  thou  feelest  now  shall  depart,  and  stability 
be  thine, 

Saith  Nanak,  sing  the  chant  of  the  Merciful  Being,  O man, 
and  love  God  as  the  sheldrake  watcheth  for  the  day. 

As  the  deer  at  night  hearing  the  sound  of  the  bell  giveth 
its  life  ; so,  0 man,  bear  love  to  God. 

As  a wife  in  love  with  her  husband  waiteth  on  her  beloved ; 
so  give  thy  heart  to  thy  Darling  : i 

So  give  thy  heart  to  thy  Darling,  enjoy  Him,  and  thou 
shalt  obtain  all  happiness  and  bliss. 

My  friend,  my  Beloved,  we  have  met  after  a very:  long 
time,  and  I have  clothed  myself  in  red.^ 

^ Put  on  red  clothes,  and  dyed  roy  lips,  hands,  feet,  Ac.  Red  is 
worn  by  married  women,  but  never  by  widows. 


320 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


When  the  Guru  became  the  mediator,  I saw  God  with 
mine  eyes  ; none  appeareth  to  me  like  my  Beloved. 

Saith  Nanak,  chant  the  song  of  the  compassionate  and 
fascinating  One ; 0 man,  grasp  God’s  feet  and  such  love 
bear  thou  Him. 

The  great  God  to  whom  all  creation  is  subject 
cannot  be  obtained  by  idle  pilgrimages  and  ablu- 
tions : — 

Of  roaming  and  searching  from  forest  to  forest  and  of 
many  ablutions  ^ I have  become  very  weary. 

Nanak,  when  I met  the  holy  man,  I found  God  in  my 
heart. 

Whom  countless  munis  and  penitents  seek  for. 

Whom  millions  of  Brahmas  worship,  and  whose  name  is 
uttered  by  men  of  divine  knowledge  ; 

To  meet  whom,  the  Bright  One,  men  perform  devotion, 
penance,  mortification,  religious  ceremonies,  worship,  many 
purifications  and  adorations. 

Wander  over  the  earth,  and  bathe  at  places  of  pilgrimage. 

O God,  men,  forests,  glades,  beasts,  and  birds  all  worship 
Thee. 

The  merciful  beloved  God  is  found,  0 Nanak,  and  salva- 
tion obtained  by  meeting  the  society  of  the  saints. 

Millions  of  incarnations  of  Vishnu  and  of  Shiv  with  the 
matted  hair 

Desire  Thee,  O merciful  One ; for  Thee  their  souls  and 
bodies  feel  endless  longing. 

The  Lord  is  infinite  and  unapproachable.  He  is  the  all- 
pervading  God  and  Master. 

Demigods,  Sidhs,  the  crowd  of  celestial  singers  meditate 
on  Thee  ; the  Yakshas  and  Kinars  utter  Thy  praises. 

Millions  of  Indars  and  various  gods  repeat  Thy  name, 
O Lord,  and  hail  Thee. 

Thou  art  the  Patron  of  the  patronless,  saith  Nanak ; 
Thou  art  the  compassionate  ; associate  me  with  the  saints 
that  I may  be  saved. 

^ AvgiA.  The  gyanis  translate  this  word  search,  but  it  is  a not 
uncommon  Sanskrit  word  bearing  the  meaning  given. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  321 

Millions  of  Devis  and  Lakshmis  serve  Thee  in  divers  ways. 

Invisible  and  visible  beings,  wind,  water,  day  and  night 
adore  Thee. 

The  stars,  the  moon,  and  the  sun  meditate  on  Thee  ; 
the  earth  and  the  heavens  sing  Thy  praises. 

All  the  sources  of  production  and  all  articulate  creatures 
ever  meditate  on  Thee. 

The  Simritis,  the  Purans,  the  four  Veds,  and  the  six 
Shastars  repeat  Thy  name. 

Nanak,  through  the  society  of  the  saints  meet  the  Purifier 
of  sinners,  to  whom  the  saints  are  dear. 

As  much  as  God  communicated  to  me,  so  much  doth  my 
tongue  utter. 

They  who  serve  Thee  unknown  to  me  are  without 
number. 

Thou  art  the  all-pervading,  indefinable,  unfathomable 
Lord  ; Thou  art  within  and  without  all  things. 

We  are  beggars  all,  Thou  alone  art  the  Giver  ; Thou  art 
not  far  away  ; nay,  Thou  art  present  and  manifest. 

Thou  art  in  the  power  of  Thy  saints  ; how  can  their 
praises  be  recounted  who  meet  Thee  ? 

May  Nanak  obtain  the  boon  and  honour  to  be  allowed 
to  place  his  head  on  the  saints’  feet  ! 

God  confers  bliss  on  those  who  love  Him : — 

Abiding  is  the  marriage  state  of  the  saint ; her  Spouse 
neither  dieth  nor  departeth. 

She  who  hath  God  for  her  Husband  shall  ever  enjoy  Him. 

The  Lord  is  indestructible  and  invisible ; He  is  ever 
young  and  stainless. 

He  is  not  distant ; He  is  ever  present  ; He  filleth  every 
direction  for  ever  and  for  ever. 

He  is  the  Lord  of  the  soul  from  whom  proceed  salvation 
and  wisdom  ; I love  the  love  of  that  Beloved. 

Nanak  expoundeth  what  he  knoweth  from  the  Guru’s 
instruction  ; abiding  is  the  married  state  of  the  saint ; her 
Spouse  neither  dieth  nor  departeth. 

She  who  hath  God  for  her  Spouse  enjoyeth  great  bliss. 

Happy  is  such  a woman,  she  is  completely  honoured  : 


322  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

She  enjoyeth  honour,  greatness,  and  happiness,  she  singeth 
God’s  praises,  and  is  ever  with  her  great  Lord. 

She  hath  all  perfections,  the  nine  treasures  ; her  home  is 
never  empty,  it  containeth  everything. 

The  married  state  of  her  whose  speech  is  honeyed  and 
who  obeyeth  her  Beloved,  shall  ever  be  permanent. 

Nanak  expoundeth  what  he  knoweth  through  the  Guru’s 
instruction — she  who  hath  God  for  her  Spouse  enjoyeth 
excessive  bliss. 

Come,  my  companions,  to  the  holy  man,  and  let  us  apply 
ourselves  to  his  service. 

Let  us  lay  aside  our  pride,  grind  his  corn,  and  wash  his 
feet. 

Let  us  efface  and  not  parade  ourselves,  and  our  troubles 
shall  depart. 

Let  us  take  the  Guru’s  protection,  obey  him,  and  be 
happy  with  whatsoever  he  doeth. 

Let  us  do  him  the  lowest  service,  dispel  care,  be  wakeful 
and  stand  before  him  with  clasped  hands  day  and  night. 

Nanak  expoundeth  what  he  knoweth  from  the  Guru’s 
instruction  ; come,  my  companions,  to  the  holy  man,  and 
let  us  apply  ourselves  to  his  service. 

He  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny  hath  been  written 
applieth  himself  to  the  saints’  service. 

The  desires  of  him  who  hath  obtained  the  company  of 
the  saints  shall  be  fulfilled. 

In  the  company  of  the  saints  are  love  of  God  and  remem- 
brance of  His  name. 

The  sins  of  superstition,  worldly  love,  and  duality  all  are 
abandoned  by  him. 

In  whose  heart  dwell  peace,  composure,  and  devotion  ; 
he  singeth  God’s  praises  with  joy  and  delight 
Nanak  expoundeth  what  he  knoweth  through  the  Guru’s 
instruction — be  on  wbose  iorehead  such  destiny  hath  been 
written,  applieth  himself  to  the  saints’  service. 

The  Guru  gives  way  to  self-depreciation : — 

I am  a sinner,  devoid  of  understanding  and  virtue,  friend- 
less and  low,  ; 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  323 

Foolish,  hard-hearted,  of  mean  birth,  steeped  in  the  mire 
of  worldly  love. 

Enveloped  in  the  filth  of  error,  and  in  acts  of  pride  and 
arrogance — the  thought  of  death  entereth  not  my  heart. 

Through  spiritual  ignorance  I am  entangled  with  domes- 
tic enjoyments  and  worldly  love. 

Youth  fadeth  away,  age  increaseth.  Death  which  hovereth 
over  me  bideth  his  time. 

Nanak  r^presenteth,  my  hope  is  in  Thee,  0 God  ; preserve 
me,  lowly  though  I be,  in  the  asylum  of  Thy  saints. 

I have  wandered  in  many  births  and  have  suffered  great 
pain  in  wombs. 

Deeming  enjoyments  and  gold  delicious,  I have  become 
entangled  with  them. 

Through  transmigration  I have  been  born  innumerable 
times,  and  have  wandered  through  many  lands. 

Now  I have  taken  God’s  protection,  and  obtained  all 
comfort  from  His  name. 

O Protector,  beloved  Lord,  by  me  nothing  was  or  shall 
be  effected. 

Nanak  hath  obtained  happiness,  comfort,  and  joy 
through  Thy  mercy,  and  hath  crossed  over  the  ocean  of 
the  world. 

God  hath  saved  nominal  saints  : what  fear  have  the  real 
saints  ? 

In  any  case  carefully  listen  to  God’s  praises. 

By  carefully  listening  to  His  word  man  obtaineth  divine 
knowledge  and  the  wealth  of  His  name. 

He  becometh  imbued  with  God’s  love  and  singeth  His 
praises. 

Were  the  earth  to  become  paper,  the  forests  pens,  and 
the  wind  a writer. 

The  end  of  the  Endless  One  could  not  be  described; 

Nanak  hath  grasped  the  protection  of  His  feet. 

The  inward  satisfaction  obtained  by  devotion : — 

Day  and  night  become  pleasant  by  remembering  God’s 
name. 

By  love  to  His  lotus  feet  wickedness  and  sin  depart ; 

Y 2 


324 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Pain,  hunger,  and  poverty  flee  away,  and  man’s  path 
appeareth  clear. 

When  we  meet  the  society  of  the  saints  and  love  the 
Name,  the  heart’s  longings  are  satisfied. 

By  beholding  God,  man’s  desires  are  fulfilled  and  his 
whole  family  saved. 

Day  and  night,  night  and  day,  O Nanak,  it  is  joy  to 
remember  God’s  name. 

The  Guru  prays  for  grace  to  remember  God : — 

To  utter  God’s  name  in  the  company  of  the  spotless 
saints  is  a holy  thought. 

0 God,  saith  Nanak,  bestow  mercy  on  me,  that  I may 
not  forget  Thy  name  for  a moment ! 

The  virtues  of  the  man  of  pure  life  are  conspicuous 
and  God  renders  him  happy.  This  chant  is  sung  by 
Sikhs  at  marriages : — 

The  stars  glitter  on  a clear  night 

Holy  men  the  beloved  of  my  Lord  are  awake  ; 

The  beloved  of  my  Lord  are  ever  awake,  and  remember 
His  name  night  and  day. 

They  meditate  in  their  hearts  on  His  lotus  feet,  and 
forget  Him  not  for  a moment. 

They  renounce  the  mental  sins  of  pride  and  worldly  love, 
and  efface  the  pain  of  wrong-doing. 

Nanak  representeth,  the  servants  of  God,  the  dear  saints 
are  ever  awake. 

My  couch  hath  splendid  trappings. 

In  my  heart  joy  hath  sprung  up  since  I heard  that  my 
Lord  was  approaching. 

,On  meeting  my  Lord  I have  entered  on  happiness  and 
am  filled  with  the  essence  of  joy  and  delight. 

He  embrace  me  ; my  sorrows  fled  ; my  soul,  mind,  and 
body  all  bloomed  afresh. 

1 have  obtained  my  heart’s  desires  by  meditating  on 
God  ; the  time  of  iny  union  with  Him  I account  aiispicidus. 

Nauak  re^emtetb,  when  he  met  the  Bearer  oi  pros- 

perity, the  essence  oi  ail  pleasure  was  prepared  for  him. 

* Night,  is  here  explained  by  human  life,  and  the  stats  by  virtues. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  325 

My  companions  meeting  me  asked  me  to  describe  my 
Spouse. 

I was  so  filled  with  the  sweets  of  love  that  I could  not 
speak. 

The  attributes  of  the  Creator  are  deep,  mysterious,  and 
boundless  ; the  Veds  have  not  found  His  limit. 

She  who  meditateth  on  the  Lord  with  devotion  and  love, 
who  ever  singeth  His  praises. 

And  is  pleasing  to  her  God,  is  full  of  all  virtues  and  divine 
knowledge. 

Nanak  representeth,  she  who  is  dyed  with  the  colour  of 
God’s  love  shall  be  easily  absorbed  in  Him. 

When  I began  to  sing  songs  of  joy  to  God, 

My  friends  became  glad,  my  troubles  and  mine  enemies 
fled  away, 

My  happiness  and  comfort  increased,  I rejoiced  in  God’s 
name,  and  He  Himself  bestowed  mercy  on  me. 

I clung  to  His  feet,  and  being  ever  wakeful  I met  Him. 

Happy  days  came,  I obtained  peace  with  all  treasures 
and  was  blended  with  God. 

Nanak  representeth,  the  saints  of  God  are  ever  steadfast 
in  seeking  His  protection. 

Why  should  man  fall  away  from  God  for  the  sake 
of  short-lived  pleasure  ? — 

Rise  and  go,  O traveller,^  why  delayest  thou  ? 

Thine  appointed  time  is  complete  ; why  covetest  thou 
what  is  false  ? 

Thou  covetest  what  is  false,  and  by  the  deceit  of  Maya 
thou  committest  innumerable  sins. 

O wretched  man.  Death  hath  sought  thee  ; thou  shalt 
be  overcome  by  him,  and  thy  body  shall  be  a heap  of  ashes. 

Thou  shalt  depart  leaving  thy  property  and  youth  ; no 
more  shalt  thou  have  clothing  and  food. 

Saith  Nanak,  thine  acts  shall  accompany  thee,  their  effects 
cannot  be  effaced. 

Instead  of  pleasure  there  ever  resulteth  pain  from  the 

commission  of  sin. 


1 The  soul. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


326 

Lo  ! as  the  deer  is  snared  on  a moonlight  night, ^ 

So  the  sins  thou  hast  committed  shall  not  forsake  thee  ; 
they  shall  lead  thee  away  with  a halter  round  thy  neck. 

Thou  art  deceived  by  a mirage ; thou  embracest  an  un- 
substantial lover ; 

Thou  art  intoxicated  with  avarice,  greed,  and  conceit ; 
thou  art  brimful  of  pride. 

Nanak,  man  like  the  deer  is  destroyed  by  his  ignorance, 
and  his  transmigration  ceaseth  not. 

The  fly  is  caught  in  the  sweets — how  can  it  take  flight  ? 

The  elephant  falleth  into  a pit — how  can  it  escape  ? 

It  will  be  difficult  for  her  to  escape  who  remembereth  not 
her  Spouse  even  for  a moment. 

Her  sufferings  and  punishment  cannot  be  reckoned  ; she 
shall  obtain  the  fruit  of  her  own  acts 
■ What  she  hath  done  in  secret  shall  become  manifest ; 
she  shall  be  ruined  in  this  world  and  the  next. 

Nanak,  without  the  true  Guru  the  proud  self-willed  man 
is  ruined. 

God’s  servants  live  by  clinging  to  His  feet. 

The  Lord  embraceth  those  who  seek  His  protection. 

He  giveth  them  strength,  understanding,  divine  knowledge 
and  meditation;  He  Himself  causeth  them  to  utter  His  name. 

God  Himself  is  the  society  of  His  saints  : it  is  He  who 
saveth  the  world. 

The  Preserver  ever  preserveth  those  whose  acts  are  pure  ; 

Nanak,  they  shall  never  go  to  hell ; God’s  saints  are 
under  His  protection. 

Man  cannot  hide  his  sins  from  God : — 

What  man  doeth  either  by  day  or  night  shall  be  recorded 
on  his  forehead. 

He  from  whom  man  seeketh  to  conceal  his  acts  is  with 
him  and  seeth  them  : 

The  Creator  is  with  him  and  seeth  them ; why  com- 
mitteth  he  sin  ? 

Do  good  acts,  repeat  the  Name,  and  thou  shall  never  go 

^ When  hunters  are  out  and  snares  are  laid. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  327 

During  the  eight  watches  of  the  day  repeat  God’s  name, 
and  it  shall  accompany  thee. 

Ever  worship  in  the  company  of  the  saints,  O Nanak, 
and  the  sins  thou  hast  committed  shall  be  blotted  out. 

By  violence  and  fraud  thou  fillest  thy  belly,  O ignorant 
fool, 

Although  God  the  Giver  continueth  to  give  thee  everything. 

The  compassionate  Lord  is  ever  the  Bestower  ; why  for- 
get Him  ? 

Join  the  society  of  the  saints  and  boldly  worship  God, 
so  shall  thy  whole  family  be  saved. 

The  Name  is  the  support  of  the  sidhs,  the  strivers,  the 
gods,  the  munis,  and  the  saints. 

Nanak  representeth,  ever  worship  God  the  sole  Creator. 

Cheat  no  one  ; God  assayeth  everything. 

They  who  practise  falsehood  and  deception  shall  be  born 
again  in  this  world, 

While  those  who  have  meditated  on  the  one  God  have 
crossed  over  its  ocean  ; 

Having  abandoned  lust,  wrath,  and  blame  of  the  blameless, 
they  have  entered  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord. 

God  pervadeth  sea  and  land,  the  nether  regions,  and  the 
firmament  : He  is  exalted,  inaccessible,  and  infinite. 

Nanak  representeth,  God  is  the  prop  of  His  servants  : His 
lotus  feet  are  their  support. 

Lo  ! the  world  is  a phantom  city ; nothing  is  durable. 

The  enjoyments  of  the  world  shall  not  accompany  thee. 

God  is  ever  with  thee  ; remember  Him  day  and  night. 

Beside  the  one  God  there  is  none  : burn  the  love  of 
worldly  things. 

Deem  that  God  in  thy  heart  as  thy  friend,  thy  youth, 
thy  wealth,  thine  all. 

Nanak  representeth,  he  who  obtaineth  God  by  great 
good  fortune  entereth  on  happiness  and  rest. 

The  effect  of  worldly  Jove  on  man  and  other 
animals : — 

The  illusion  of  mammon  is  terrible,^  the  illusion  of  mam^ 

^ Also  translated — A wall  between  God  and  man. 


328  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

mon  is  terrible  ; alas  ! great  is  its  intoxication,  it  perverteth 
men’s  natures,  and  their  lives,  alas  ! pass  in  vain. 

In  the  deep  and  awful  forest,  in  the  deep  and  awful  forest, 
alas ! the  thieves  of  the  soul  rob  the  house  ^ in  broad  day- 
light, and  night  and  day  eat  the  plunder? 

By  night  and  day  they  eat  the  plunder  ; life  passeth 
away  without  God  ; come  to  me,  O God,  Thou  Lord  of 
mercy. 

Without  the  companionship  of  the  Beloved  many  births 
and  deaths  have  taken  place,  and  there  is  no  salvation. 

1 am  without  family,  beauty,  distinction,  or  divine  know- 
ledge ; who  is  my  cherisher  but  Thee,  O God  ? 

With  clasped  hands  Nanak  hath  entered  Thy  sanctuary  ; 
O beloved  Lord,  grant  him  salvation. 

Alas  ! as  a fish  out  of  water,  a fish  out  of  water  dieth  by 
separation  from  it,  so  how  can  I live  without  the  Beloved  ? 

The  deer  faceth  the  arrow,  it  faceth  the  arrow,  alas  ! it 
sacrificeth  its  life  while  absorbed  in  the  pleasure  of  listening 
to  the  hunters  hell. 

Love  to  the  Beloved  hath  sprung  up  within  me  : I have 
abandoned  the  world  to  meet  Him  : curses  on  the  body 
which  remaineth  for  one  moment  without  Him  ! 

Mine  eyelids  close  not  ; I am  absorbed  in  the  love  of  the 
Dear  One  ; my  mind  anxiously  looketh  for  Him  night  and 
day. 

They  who  are  imbued  with  God’s  love  and  intoxicated 
with  the  Name,  lose  all  fear,  doubt,  and  worldly  love. 

Bestow  mercy  and  compassion,  O Thou  compassionate, 
all-pervading  God,  that  Nanak  may  be  absorbed  in  Thy 
love. 

The  bumble-bee  is  humming,  the  bumble-bee  is  humming  ; 
alas  ! intoxicated  with  the  savour  and  odour  of  the  honey 
of  the  flowers,^  it  entangleth  itself  in  its  love  for  the 
lotus. 

The  heart  of  the  chatrik  thirsteth,  the  heart  of  the  chatrik 

^ In  this  world  the  deadly  sins  take  possession  of  the  heart. 

2 The  gySnis  translate — The  sun  eats  men  night  and  day,  that  is, 
lime  consumes  man’s  life. 

® Man  enjoys  earthly  pleasures. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  329 

thirsteth  ; its  heart  longeth  for  the  beautiful  cloud-drops  ; 
when  it  drinketh  all  its  fever  departeth, 

0 Destroyer  of  fear,  O Destroyer  of  sorrow,  come  to  me  : 
my  soul  and  body  feel  for  Thee  excessive  love. 

Beautiful,  clever,  wise  Lord,  with  what  tongue  shall  I 
utter  Thy  praise  ? 

Take  me  by  the  hand,  give  me  Thy  name  : he  on  whom 
Thou  lookest  with  favour  hath  his  sins  erased. 

Saith  Nanak,  he  who  beholdeth  God  the  Purifier  of  sinners 
feeleth  no  pain. 

1 think  of  the  Lord,  I think  of  the  Lord  ; me  friendless 
preserve  in  Thine  asylum  : I delight  to  meet  Thee  who 
giveth  delight  to  my  soul. 

I meditate  on  Thy  beautiful  form,  I meditate  on  Thy 
beautiful  form  ; my  soul  longeth  for  a knowledge  of  Thee, 
O God,  who  preserveth  the  honour  of  Thy  suppliants. 

God  who  bestoweth  full  honour  and  destroyeth  sorrow 
hath  fulfilled  all  my  desires. 

Happy  was  that  day  when  God  embraced  me  : on  meeting 
my  Spouse  my  couch  was  adorned. 

God  casting  a glance  of  favour  on  me,  all  my  sins  have 
been  erased. 

Nanak  representeth,  my  desires  have  been  fulfilled.  I 
have  found  the  Bearer  of  prosperity,  the  Treasury  of  excel- 
lences. 


Gujari 

The  necessity  of  the  Guru : — 

Men  perform  devotional  exercises  ^ and  the  six  religious 
acts  of  the  Hindus ; worldly  people  are  steeped  in  such  things  ; 

But  without  the  Guru  the  filth  of  pride  leaveth  not  their 
hearts,  and  they  lose  their  game. 

O my  God,  mercifully  preserve  me. 

Out  of  millions  some  rare  man  is  a servant  of  God  ; all 
others  are  worldly. 

^ Kiriachar,  This  includes  worship,  applying  frontal  marks,  bathing, 
feeding  idols,  &c. 


330 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  Shastars,  the  Veds,  the  Simritis,  all  have  I searched  ; 
they  all  utter  one  cry  : — 

‘ Without  a guru  none  obtaineth  salvation  ’ ; observe  and 
consider  this  in  thy  mind. 

Were  one  to  bathe  at  the  sixty-eight  places  of  pilgrimage 
and  wander  over  the  whole  earth, 

Were  one  to  perform  various  purifications  day  and  night, 
all  would  be  darkness  without  the  true  Guru. 

Running  hither  and  thither,  I traversed  the  whole  world, 
but  now  I have  arrived  at  God’s  door. 

God  hath  removed  my  sinful  desires  and  enlightened 
my  understanding : Nanak  is  saved  under  the  Guru’s 
guidance. 

Man  through  his  perversity  is  ever  doing  what 
■he  ought  not  to  do  : — 

Man  proposeth  to  go  to  the  west,  but  he  is  led  away  to 
the  east. 

God  in  an  instant  establisheth  and  disestablisheth ; He 
holdeth  in  His  hands  the  result  of  man’s  designs. 

Human  devices  are  of  no  avail : 

What  my  Lord  deemeth  fit  shall  continue  to  be. 

Men  who  go  forth  with  the  object  of  acquiring  territory 
and  amassing  money,  die  on  the  way. 

Their  armies,  officers,  and  servants — all  shall  they  leave 
and  depart  to  the  city  of  Death. 

Through  obstinacy  man  asserteth  himself  and  deemeth 
there  is  none  other  like  himself. 

The  food  which  blameless  persons  have  reprobated  and 
laid  aside  he  eateth  again  and  again.^ 

He  to  whom  God  is  kindly  disposed  and  merciful  shall 
have  his  shackles  cut  off. 

Saith  Nanak,  he  who  hath  met  the  perfect  Guru  is  accept- 
able, whether  he  be  a family  man  or  an  anchoret. 

The  advantages  of  devotion  and  charity : — 

They  who  repeat  the  priceless  Name  shall  have  their 
shackles  cut  off ; 

^ That  is,  he  indulges  in  forbidden  pleasures. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  331 

They  shall  be  freed  from  the  sins  of  lust,  wrath,  worldly 
love,  and  the  disease  of  pride. 

They  who  joining  the  company  of  the  saints  sing  God’s 
praises, 

Shall  have  their  hearts  purified  by  the  favour  of  the  Guru 
and  obtain  the  highest  of  all  happiness. 

I have  adopted  this  as  my  worship — to  deem  good  what- 
ever God  doeth  : 

To  consider  friends  and  enemies  as  the  same  is  an  index 
of  the  way  to  God. 

He  filleth  every  place,  wherefore  I go  nowhere.^ 

He  is  in  every  heart,  uninterruptedly  in  all  things  ; He 
is  immersed  in  love  and  dyed  with  love. 

When  God  is  merciful  and  compassionate,  man  arriveth 
at  the  abode  of  the  Fearless. 

In  one  moment  his  troubles  and  anxieties  are  at  an  end, 
O Nanak,  and  he  becometh  absorbed  in  God. 

Man  ought  to  trust  to  God  alone  : — 

Every  one  to  whom  I address  myself  is  full  of  his  own 
troubles ; 

But  he  who  heartily  adoreth  the  Supreme  God  shall  cross 
over  the  terrible  ocean. 

None  but  the  great  God  can  remove  this  distress  and  sorrow. 

Whoever  forsaketh  God  and  becometh  a worshipper  of 
others,  shall  find  his  honour,  dignity,  and  reputation  decrease. 

They  who  are  acquaintances  and  relations  for  the  sake  of 
mammon  are  of  no  avail. 

God’s  slave,  even  though  he  be  of  lowly  birth,  is  exalted  ; 
in  his  company  man  obtaineth  whatever  his  heart  desireth. 

Even  though  man  have  thousands  and  millions  of  viands 
obtained  by  sin,  yet  shall  his  hunger  not  be  satisfied  thereby. 

By  remembering  the  Name  there  appear  endless  lights 
by  which  the  Unseen  is  manifested. 

Wandering  and  wandering  I have  arrived  at  Thy  door, 
O Destroyer  of  fear,  sovereign  God. 

Nanak  desireth  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet ; in  it  he  findeth 
his  happiness. 


^ I practise  my  devotions  at  home. 


332 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


All  worldly  possessions  are  temporary  ; the  Name 
alone  is  permanent : — 

Man  first  dwelleth  in  his  mother’s  womb ; leaving  it  he 
cometh  into  the  world. 

He  then  desireth  splendid  houses,  beautiful  gardens,  and 
mansions  ; but  none  of  these  shall  go  with  him. 

Vain  is  every  desire  of  the  covetous. 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  given  me  God’s  name;  it  is  a thing 
that  becometh  my  soul. 

Man  is  attached  to  and  rejoiceth  in  the  company  of  dear 
friends,  relations,  sons,  brethren,  and  wife  ; 

But  when  the  last  moment  hath  arrived.  Death  seizeth 
him  while  they  look  on. 

By  unworthy  means  man  amasseth  wealth,  gold,  silver, 
and  copper ; 

But  he  really  only  gaineth  his  hire  as  a labourer ; 
everything  else  passeth  to  others. 

Horses,  elephants,  chariots  man  acquireth  by  violence  and 
calleth  his  own ; 

But  when  there  is  a long  journey  before  him,  they  will 
not  travel  a step  with  him. 

The  Name  is  my  wealth,  the  Name  maketh  me  happy  as 
a king,  the  Name  is  my  family  and  helper. 

God  gave  Nanak  the  wealth  of  the  Name  which  shall 
never  perish  or  transmigrate. 

Men  of  the  lowest  castes  have  by  devotion  obtained 
celestial  bliss  and  glory : — 

Those  who  have  lapsed  God  hath  purified  and  made  his 
own  ; every  one  boweth  before  them. 

No  one  now  asketh  their  caste  or  their  tribe ; men  beg 
the  dust  of  their  feet. 

" Such,  O God,  is  the  effect  of  Thy  name  1 

Thou  art  the  Lord  of  all  creation ; Thou  specially 
assistest  Thy  servant. 

In  the  company  of  the  saints,  Nanak  hath  obtained 
wisdom  ; singing  God’s  praises  is  his  support. 

In  this  way  God’s  servants  Namdev,  Trilochan,  Kabir, 
and  the  tanner  Rav  Das  obtained  salvation. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  333 
God  is  unknowable : — 

0 God,  none  there  is  who  understandeth  Thee  ; how  may 
we  know  Thee  ? 

Shiv,  Brahma,  and  all  the  munis  have  not  been  able  to 
realize  Thy  state. 

The  story  of  God  is  recondite  and  deep. 

God  cherishes  His  servants,  and  they  sing  His 
praises : — 

God’s  servant  hath  no  worldly  wisdom,  resource,  or 
cleverness ; 

As  occasion  offereth,  he  meditateth  on  God. 

It  is  God’s  function  to  love  His  saints  ; 

He  cherisheth  and  fondleth  them  as  His  own  children. 

God’s  saints  sing  His  praises  as  their  devotion,  penance, 
mortification,  and  religious  ceremonies. 

Nanak  hath  entered  the  asylum  of  the  Lord ; he  hath 
obtained  there  the  fearless  boon  of  happiness. 

The  Guru  enjoins  worship  and  saintliness : — 

My  beloved  friends,  worship  God  day  and  night ; make 
not  the  slightest  delay. 

Serve  the  saints  with  love  ; put  aside  pride  and  obstinacy. 

The  entrancing  merry  God  is  my  soul  and  honour  ; 

He  dwelleth  in  my  heart ; my  mind  is  fascinated  as  I 
behold  His  sports. 

By  remembering  Him  my  mind  is  happy,  and  its  rust  is 
rubbed  off. 

The  importance  of  meeting  God  ^ cannot  be  described  ; 
Nanak,  it  is  beyond  everything. 

Only  the  really  holy  man  is  free  from  worldly 
love : — 

Men  call  themselves  Munis,  Jogis,  and  learned  in  the 
Shastars,  but  Maya  hath  them  all  urider  her  control. 

The  mind  is  lost  in  astonishment  at  her  subjection  of  the 

^ This  is  also  translated  in  a secular  sense — the  importance  of 
union  cannot  be  described. 


334  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

tKree  gods^  and  the  three  hundred  and  thirty  millions  of 
demigods. 

She  is  potent  and  continueth  to  pervade  the  whole  world. 

Her  secret  is  obtained  by  the  Guru’s  favour ; no  one 
besides  knoweth  it. 

Ever  conquering  she  hath  subdued  all  places,  and 
enmeshed  all  the  world ; 

Saith  Nanak,  she  misleadeth  not  the  holy  man,  but 
becoming  his  handmaiden  claspeth  his  feet. 

The  Guru  humbles  himself  before  God : — 

Small  is  the  power  of  mother,  father,  brother,  son,  and 
kinsman. 

Though  various  forms  of  mammon  are  seen,  yet  none  shall 
go  an  inch  with  one. 

• O God,  I have  none  but  Thee. 

I am  helpless,  devoid  of  merits ; possessing  none  I have 
come  to  Thee. 

I am  a sacrifice  again  and  again  to  Thy  feet ; in  this 
world  and  the  next  Thine  is  the  power  to  save. 

In  the  company  of  the  saints  Nanak  hath  obtained  a sight 
of  Thee  ; to  none  else  oweth  he  obligation. 

God’s  omnipotence : — 

In  a moment  Thou  establishest  and  disestablishest ; Thy 
worth  cannot  be  appraised. 

Thou  turnest  a king  into  a beggar  in  a moment,  and  into 
the  lowly  Thou  infusest  splendour. 

0 ye  people,  ever  meditate  on  your  God. 

Why  are  ye  anxious  and  solicitous  regarding  the  things 
which  perish  in  a moment  ? 

O God,  Thou  art  my  prop,  my  perfect  True  Guru  ; I have 
fallen  imder  Thy  protection. 

I,  Nanak,  am  heedless,  silly,  childish ; reach  me  Thy 
hand  and  save  me. 

A supplication  to  God : — 

It  is  Thou  who  conferrest  gifts  on  all ; do  Thou  abide  in 
my  heart. 


^ Bcahma,  Vishnu,  and  Shiv. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  335 

He  in  whose  heart  Thy  lotus  feet  are  contained,  hath  not 
the  darkness  of  doubt. 

O my  Lord,  where  I remember  Thee,  there  art  Thou 
present, 

0 Thou  who  cherishest  all,  have  mercy  on  me  that  I may 
ever  praise  Thee  ; 

That  I may  remember  Thy  name  at  every  breath  and 
long  for  Thee  only. 

Nanak’s  prop  is  the  Creator ; he  hath  renounced  the 
hopes  he  had  in  others. 

No  evil  can  befall  him  whom  God  protects  : — 

Nanak  seeketh  Thy  protection,  O Creator  ; Thou,  O God, 
art  the  support  of  the  soul. 

What  can  the  world  do  to  him  whom  Thou  aidest  and 
protectest  ? 

The  Guru  humbles  himself  and  prays  to  God  for 
mercy : — 

1 have  never  fixed  my  attention  on  God. 

I have  passed  my  life  in  worldly  occupations  and  not 
sung  the  name  of  the  Treasury  of  excellences. 

I have  by  deception  exerted  myself  in  various  ways  to 
amass  money  kauri  by  kauri. 

How  much  sorrow  was  debited  to  me  when  I forgot  God 
and  was  eaten  up  by  the  arch  fascinator  mammon  ! 

Be  gracious,  O Lord,  and  take  not  mine  acts  into  account. 

O God,  Thou  art  compassionate  and  benign,  an  ocean  of 
clemency  ; Nanak  hath  come  under  Thy  protection. 

The  advantages  of  meditating  on  God  : — 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  I have  meditated  on  God,  and  all 
my  doubts  have  vanished. 

Anxiety,  ignorance,  and  fear  have  left  me,  and  my  sins 
are  at  an  end. 

God’s  name  is  dear  to  my  soul. 

Having  met  the  saints,  I have  under  their  instruction 

meditated  on  God  in  the  most  sinless  way. 


336  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Devotion  and  the  performance  of  various  ceremonies  are 
profitable  when  the  Name  is  remembered. 

When  Thou  didst  graciously  protect  me,  my  desires  were 
fulfilled. 

May  I never  at  any  time  forget  God  the  omnipotent ! 

How  can  I describe  Thy  various  attributes  ? They  are 
innumerable  and  ever  ineffable. 

Thou  art  the  Remover  of  the  sorrows  of  the  poor,  the 
Saviour  compassionate  and  merciful. 

The  immovable  dignity  is  obtained  by  remembering  the 
Name  ; Nanak  hath  firmly  grasped  Thy  protection. 

Ashtapadi 

God’s  praises,  and  supplications  unto  Him  : — 

O Lord,  King  of  men,  Friend  of  the  poor,  Purifier  of 
sinners. 

Dispeller  of  fear  and  terror.  Abode  of  mercy.  Treasury  of 
excellences,  profitable  is  Thy  service. 

0 God  Gopal,  great  Gobind, 

1 have  taken  the  protection  of  Thy  feet,  Thou  merciful 
God,  cause  me  to  cross  the  terrible  ocean  of  the  world. 

Dispeller  of  lust  and  wrath.  Burner  of  pride  and  worldly 
love,  Murari,  Honey  of  the  soul, 

Sustainer  of  the  earth,  set  aside  my  transmigration  and 
preserve  mine  honour.  Thou  Primal  Joy. 

Many  burn  in  their  desire  for  mammon  ; but  by  the  Guru’s 
spell  divine  knowledge  is  obtained  in  the  heart,  and  they  are 
heated . 

Prick  the  bubble  of  my  pride,  O Thou  full  of  mercy,  and 
dispel  my  anxieties,  O Thou  Eternal  Being. 

0 man,  remember  the  Omnipotent  every  moment,  and 
calmly  apply  thyself  to  the  contemplation  of  God. 

O compassionate  to  the  poor,  ever  happy,  who  fillest  all 
space,  I beg  the  dust  of  Thy  saints’  feet. 

From  the  evils  of  worldly  and  sensual  love,  and  from 
Vnt  s\ns  oWrope  an^  iiesVte  J>yescrve  us. 

Preserve  the  faith  and  remove  doubt  from  our  hearts  ; 
save  us,  0 Formless  One  ! 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  337 

Even  they  who  are  without  raiment  become  well  attired 
from  the  treasury  of  God’s  storehouses. 

The  stupid,  the  senseless,  and  the  fools  become  virtuous 
and  patient  by  God’s  favouring  glance. 

Thou  shalt  obtain  salvation  while  alive  by  repeating  the 
name  of  the  Lord  of  the  world,  remembering  Him,  and  having 
faith  in  Him  in  thy  heart. 

The  belief  that  God  is  compassionate  and  merciful  to  His 
creatures  and  pervadeth  everything  is  the  rule  of  the  saints. 

God  showeth  Himself  to  those  who  hear  His  praises  and 
utter  His  name. 

Saith  Nanak,  O God,  Saviour  of  sinners,  receive  me  in 
Thine  embrace.^ 


Gujaki  ki  War  II 

When  God  is  pleased,  man  obtains  every  boon  : — 

When  Thou  art  pleased,  O Kind  and  Incomprehensible 
One,  Thou  dwellest  in  my  heart. 

When  Thou  art  pleased,  O Kind  One,  I obtain  the  nine 
treasures  in  my  own  home. 

When  Thou  art  pleased,  O Kind  One,  I act  according  to 
the  Guru’s  instruction. 

When  Thou  art  pleased,  O Kind  One,  Nanak  shall  be 
absorbed  in  the  True  One. 

Kings  without  piety  are  not  held  in  honour : — 

How  many  sit  on  thrones  and  have  many  musical  instru- 
ments played  for  them  ! 

But  without  the  true  Name,  Nanak,  nobody’s  honour  hath 
been  preserved. 

The  demigods  and  priests  do  homage  to  God : — 

Men  standing  with  the  Veds  and  the  books  of  the  Musal- 
mans  meditate  on  Thee,  0 God. 

They  who  are  prostrate  at  Thy  door  cannot  be  counted. 

Brahma  and  Indar  on  their  thrones  meditate  on  Thee. 

Shiv,  Vishnu,  and  the  avatars  proclaim  Thy  praises. 

^ The  Hindi  names  in  this  hymn  obviously  only  mean  God,  not 
any  of  His  alleged  incarnations. 


338  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Moslem  priests,  Prophets,  Shaikhs,  and  saints  utter  Thy 
name. 

God  the  warp  and  woof  is  woven  into  every  heart. 

By  falsehood  man  passeth  away,  by  honesty  he  abideth. 

Man  applieth  himself  to  those  duties  to  which  God 
appointed  him. 

They  who  are  slow  to  devotion  must  eventually 
suffer : — 

Man  is  slow  to  goodness,  but  a tiger  to  evil. 

Nanak,  to-day  or  to-morrow  the  feet  of  the  heedless  shall 
fall  into  a trap. 

God  loves  man  despite  his  sins : — 

However  evil  our  ways,  Thy  love  for  us,  0 God,  is  not 
’ hidden. 

Saith  Nanak,  Thou  O Lord,  the  true  Friend,  hast  over- 
looked our  sins  of  thought.^ 

Man  is  saved  by  humbling  himself  before  God : — 

Countless  sinners  become  pure  by  fixing  their  attention 
on  God’s  feet. 

He,  O Nanak,  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny  hath  been 
written,  obtaineth  God’s  name  for  the  sixty-eight  places  of 
pilgrimage. 

The  following  is  uttered  by  Sikhs  when  they  put 
on  new  clothes : — 

Thou,  O God,  hast  given  me  the  raiment  of  love  to  pre- 
serve mine  honour. 

0 my  Lord,  Thou  art  wise  and  far-seeing  ; Nanak  knoweth 
not  Thy  worth. 

By  remembering  Thee,  I obtain  everything,  I find  nothing 
difficult. 

Nanak,  he  whose  honour  the  true  Lord  protecteth  can 
be  dishonoured  by  no  one. 

^ Also  translated — 

\Vhatever  difficulties  there  may  be,  love  is  not  hidden. 

Thou,  O Lord,  preservest  the  honour  of  those  in  whose  hearts 
ThOu,  the  true  Friend,  art. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  339 

God  is  the  raft  to  ferry  man  over  the  dangerous 
ocean  of  the  world  : — 

The  river  is  deep ; I cannot  ford  it ; yet  I must  because 
I love  Thee. 

My  heart  is  sewed  to  Thy  feet,  O God,  saith  Nanak  ; Thou 
art  the  raft  and  the  boat. 

The  saints  are  the  Guru's  friends : — 

They,  a sight  of  whom  banisheth  evil  inclinations,  are 
my  friends. 

Nanak,  I have  searched  the  world  all  over  ; there  are  few 
such  persons.  * 

Long  for  the  Omnipotent : — 

Nanak,  long  for  that  God  who  is  the  support  of  all ; 

By  whose  power  the  earth  resteth  upon  water,  and  timber 
containeth  fire.^ 

The  Guru  prays  to  God  who  is  potent  to  bestow  : — 

All  Thou  hast  made  is  dependent  on  Thee  alone. 

What  Thou  madest  in  the  beginning  prevaileth  in  the 
world. 

I am  astounded  on  beholding  Thy  astounding  might. 

Thy  slave  hath  come  under  Thy  protection  ; act  and 
I shall  be  saved. 

All  wealth  is  in  Thy  hands  to  give  it  to  whom  Thou 
pleasest. 

He  to  whom  Thou  art  merciful  repeateth  Thy  name. 

Men  read  religious  books  without  spiritual  ad- 
vantage : — 

The  broth  is  stirred  with  spoons,  but  they  know  not 
its  flavour. 

Nanak,  those  men  are  the  best  who  are  imbued  with  the 
relish  of  God’s  love. 

The  Guru  is  convinced  of  the  unity  of  God : — 

When  my  Beloved  was  kind  to  me,  I searching  found 

One  Creator  ; Nanak,  no  other  can  be  seen. 

^ It  is  believed  that  fire  is  naturally  inherent  in  limber. 

Z 2 


340  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Sin  may  be  avoided  by  remembering  the  Guru’s 
instruction : — 

Take  aim  with  the  arrow  of  truth  and  bring  down  sin. 

Remember  the  Guru’s  instruction,  Nanak,  and  no  sorrow 
shall  befall  thee. 

He  who  forgets  God  can  never  prosper : — 

Millions  of  obstacles  are  in  his  way  who  forgetteth  the 
Name : 

He  croaketh  day  and  night,  Nanak,  like  a raven  in  an 
empty  building. 

The  life  of  an  anchoret  is  not  necessary  to  salva- 
tion : — 

Nanak,  I have  met  the  true  Guru,  and  my  union  with 
. God  is  accomplished. 

Even  while  men  laugh,  and  play,  and  dress,  and  eat, 
salvation  can  be  obtained. 

The  favours  conferred  by  the  Guru : — 

Hail ! hail  to  that  true  Guru  who  hath  demolished  the 
fortress  of  doubt ! 

Congratulations  to  that  true  Guru  who  hath  united  me 
with  God ! 

The  Guru  hath  given  me  as  a medicine  the  inexhaustible 
treasure  of  the  Name. 

It  hath  cured  the  great  and  terrible  disease  of  spiritual 
ignorance. 

In  obtaining  the  wealth  of  the  Name.  I have  found  a great 
treasure ; 

And  by  recognizing  myself  I have  won  this  priceless 
human  life. 

The'praises  of  the  Guru  the  omnipotent  being  cannot  be 
expressed. 

The  Guru  is  the  supreme  Brahma,  illimitable,  invisible, 
and  inscrutable. 

Effort  encouraged  by  the  Guru : — 

0 man,  by  striving  and  earning  enjoy  happiness. 

Nanak,  by  meditating  on  God,  meet  Him  and  thine 
anxieties  shall  vanish. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  341 

God  destroys  slanderers  and  protects  the  holy : — 

God  at  once  destroyed  the  slanderers  and  suffered  them 
not  to  live  for  a moment. 

He  caught  them  and  yoked  them  to  birth,  for  He  could 
not  endure  the  torments  of  His  slaves. 

He  dragged  down  the  slanderers  by  the  hair  of  their  heads, 
and  sent  them  on  the  road  to  Death. 

He  threw  them  into  hell,  where  they  groaned  in  agony  ; 

But  God,  true  that  He  was,  O Nanak,  embraced  and  pro- 
tected His  saints. 


Devgandhari 

The  intoxication  of  devotion  : — 

Thy  servant,  O God,  is  intoxicated  with  Thine  elixir. 

He  who  obtaineth  the  store  of  the  essence  of  love,  for- 
saketh  it  not  to  go  elsewhere. 

While  seated  he  repeateth  God’s  name,  while  sleeping  he 
repeateth  God’s  name,  he  taketh  God’s  essence  for  his  food. 

Bathing  in  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet  is  equal  to  ablution 
at  the  sixty-eight  places  of  pilgrimage. 

Profitable  is  the  life  of  God’s  servant  who  hath  made  God 
a father  of  good  children. 

Nanak,  he  who  recognizeth  the  all-pervading  God, 
taketh  all  with  him  and  saveth  them. 

The  following  is  sung  at  banquets  and  also  when 
the  Granth  Sahib  is  brought  to  the  temple  in  the 
early  morning : — 

O God,  this  is  the  desire  of  my  heart  : 

That  Thou,  the  Treasure  of  mercy,  the  Compassionate, 
shouldst  make  me  the  slave  of  Thy  saints  ; 

That  I should  touch  their  feet  in  the  morning  and  behold 
them  night  and  day  ; 

That  I.  should  devote  my  body  and  soul  to  their  service 
and  sing  God’s  praises  with  my  tongue  ; 

That  I should  ever  abide  with  the  saints  and  remember 
Thee  at  every  breath  I draw. 

The  Name  is  my  sole  support- and  wealth  ; from  it  Nanak 
obtaineth  delight. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


342 

The  Guru’s  delicious  sensation  on  meeting  God : — 

O Beloved,  Thy  words  are  nectar. 

0 my  Beloved,  very  beautiful,  Bewitcher  of  the  soul. 
Thou  art  in  everything  and  yet  distinct. 

1 long  not  for  empire,  I long  not  for  salvation  ; ^ my  soul 
loveth  Thy  lotus  feet. 

There  may  have  been  Brahma,  Shiv,  Sidhs,  Munis,  and 
Indar,  but  I desire  only  a sight  of  Thee. 

O Lord,  I have  come  helpless  to  Thy  door,  and,  weary 
that  I am,  have  entered  the  asylum  of  Thy  saints. 

Saith  Nanak,  I have  met  God  who  beguileth  the  heart ; 
my  soul  is  refreshed  and  happy. 

The  unity  of  God : — 

Know  that  there  is  only  one  God  : 

Know  Him  to  be  one  through  the  Guru’s  instruction. 

Why  wander?  wander  not,  my  brethren  ; God  is  surely 
contained  in  every  place. 

As  the  fire  which  is  in  timber  cannot  be  made  available 
without  skill. 

So  God’s  door  is  not  obtained  without  the  Guru. 

Abandon  pride  in  the  company  of  the  saints  ; 

Thus,  saith  Nanak,  shall  the  Primal  Treasure  be  obtained. 

The  Guru  deprecates  evil  communications : — 

Turn  away,  0 my  soul,  turn  away. 

Turn  away  from  the  apostate. 

False  is  the  love  of  the  false  ; abandon  it,  O my  soul,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved  ; thou  shalt  not  be  saved  in  the  company 
of  the  apostate. 

As  any  one  who  entered  a house  filled  with  soot  would 
become  black. 

So  whoever  associated  with  the  apostate  would  become 
defiled  ; but  he  who  meeteth  the  Guru  shall  escape  from 
Maya,  and  flee  from  evil  association. 

O merciful  One,  Ocean  of  mercy  I crave  this  boon  of  Thee, 
not  to  bring  me  face  to  face  with  the  apostate. 

Make  Nanak  Thy  slave  of  slaves,  and  his  head  shall  roll 
under  the  saints’  feet. 

^ The  Guru  loves  God  and  expects  no  reward. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


343 


Bihagra  Chhant 

The  following  was  composed  in  reply  to  a question 
how  God  could  be  worshipped 

I have  seen  one  miracle  of  God,  O my  beloved  ; what  He 
doeth  is  perfect  justice. 

God  appointed  the  world  as  a beautiful  arena,  my  beloved, 
where  all  men  come  and  go. 

He  who  created  the  earth  made  men’s  coming  and  going. 

God  inviteth  some  who  meet  the  true  Guru  to  His  palace  ; 
others  wander  astray  in  error. 

Thou  alone,  O God,  knowest  Thine  own  limit ; Thou 
art  contained  in  everything. 

Verily  speaketh  Nanak — hear,  O saints,  God  dispenseth 
perfect  justice. 

Come  and  meet  me,  O companions,  my  beloved  ; let  us 
worship  God’s  name. 

Worship  the  perfect  true  Guru,  my  beloved  ; let  us  smooth 
the  way  to  death. 

Having  under  the  Guru’s  instruction  smoothed  the 
arduous  road,  we  shall  obtain  honour  in  God’s  court. 

They  whom  God  so  predestined  fix  their  attention  on 
Him  day  and  night. 

Pride,  egotism,  and  worldly  love  depart  when  we  associate 
with  the  holy  man. 

Saiththe  slave  Nanak,  salvation  is  obtained  by  worshipping 
God’s  name. 

0 saints,  my  beloved,  let  us  unite  and  with  clasped  hands 
worship  the  Imperishable  Being. 

1 have  examined  many  forms  of  worship,  my  beloved  ; 
but  they  are  all  vain ; let  us  devote  our  souls  and  bodies 
all  to  Him. 

When  soul,  body,  and  wealth  belong  to  the  Lord,  what 
offering  shall  we  make  Him  ? 

The  compassionate  God  embraceth  him  to  whom  He 
showeth  mercy. 

He  bn  whose  forehead  such  destiny  was  written  loveth 
the  Guru. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


344 

The  slave  Nanak  saith— let  us  by  association  with  the 
saints  worship  God’s  name. 

I have  returned,  0 my  beloved,  from  searching  in  every 
direction  ; and  have  found  God  in  my  own  home. 

God  hath  made  this  body  as  a temple,  O my  beloved,  and 
He  is  contained  therein. 

The  Lord  God  is  contained  in  everything  ; He  becometh 
manifest  by  the  Guru’s  instruction. 

Darkness  is  dispelled,  and  troubles  removed  when  the 
Guru  hath  caused  the  essence  of  God’s  nectar  to  trickle  into 
the  mouth. 

Wherever  I look,  there  and  in  every  place  is  the  Lord,  the 
Supreme  Being. 

Saith  the  slave  Nanak,  on  meeting  the  true  Guru,  I have 
found  God  on  returning  home. 

The  exquisitely  pleasurable  feeling  of  union  with 
God 

O pleasant  night,  grow  long  as  I love  the  Dear  One  ; 

0 unpleasant  sleep,  grow  short  that  I may  ever  touch 
His  feet. 

1 long  for  the  dust  of  His  feet,  and  I ever  beg  for  His 
name  for  the  love  of  which  I have  abandoned  the  world. 

Forsaking  my  very  evil  inclinations,  I have  become 
imbued  with  the  love  of  the  Dear  One  and  intoxicated 
without  wine. 

I have  met  the  Dear  One  on  the  right  way ; He 
hath  taken  my  arm,  and  I have  become  absorbed  in 
His  love. 

Nanak  imploreth  Thee,  0 Lord,  to  extend  him  the  favour 
to  continue  attached  to  Thy  feet. 

O my  friends  and  companions,  let  us  remain  attached  to 
God’s  feet. 

Our  hearts  feel  great  love  for  the  Dear  One  ; let  us  pray 
for  His  service. 

Let  us  go  and  meet  the  saints  of  God,  meditate  on  Him, 
and  we  shall  obtain  His  service. 

Let  us  forsake  the  sins  of  pride  and  worldly  love,  and 
dedicate  to  Him  our  bodies,  wealth,  and  souls. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  345 

God  is  the  great  Being,  all-pervading,  of  perfect  excel- 
lence ; on  meeting  Him  all  error  and  fear  depart. 

Nanak  representeth,  hear  my  counsel ; my  companions, 
let  us  ever  and  ever  repeat  God’s  name. 

God’s  spouse  is  a happy  wife,  and  enjoyeth  every  pleasure  ; 

She  shall  not  become  a widow  ; her  Spouse  is  long-lived. 

She  is  never  unhappy,  she  meditateth  on  God ; blest  and 
fortunate  is  she. 

She  sleepeth  in  peace  and  rest ; her  sins  are  blotted  out, 
and  she  awaketh  in  the  delight  and  love  of  the  Name. 

She  remaineth  absorbed  in  God’s  love  ; His  name  is  her 
jewels  ; the  words  of  the  Dear  One  are  to  her  sweet  and 
pleasing. 

Nanak  representeth,  I have  obtained  my  heart’s  desire  ; 
I have  met  God  who  is  a long-lived  Spouse. 

He  in  whose  soul  and  body  God  the  Primal  Joy  is  con- 
tained, 

Hath  at  home  songs  of  rejoicing  and  millions  of  pleasures. 

God,  my  Spouse,  is  infinite,  compassionate,  the  Possessor 
of  wealth,  the  Saviour  of  sinners. 

God,  the  Extender  of  mercy,  is  He  who  causeth  man  to 
cross  the  terrible  ocean, 

God  embraceth  him  who  seeketh  His  protection  ; this  is 
the  function  of  the  Lord. 

Nanak  representeth,  I have  found  God  as  my  Spouse,  and 
He  ever  indulgeth  in  dalliance  with  me. 

Dark  is  the  night  and  difficult  the  road.  There  is 
none  to  light  man's  way  and  guide  him  but  God  : — 

Thou  who  art  imbued  with  love  for  many  worldly  things 
shall  find  thy  way  difficult. 

O sinner,  there  is  none  to  help  thee  ; 

No  helper  is  thine  ; thou  shalt  ever  regret  it. 

Thou  utterest  not  God’s  praises  : shall  these  days  ever 
return  ? ^ 

As  leaves  separated  from  the  tree  shall  not  grow  again 
thereon,  so  shall  thy  relations  and  friends  part  from  thee,  and 
thou  shalt  proceed  alone  on  thy  way  to  Death. 

^ Shalt  thou  ever  again  have  such  an  opportunity  ? 


346  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Nanak  representeth,  without  the  name  of  God  man  ever 
wandereth  in  distress. 

O man,  thou  practisest  deception  in  secret,  but  God  who 
knoweth  everything  knoweth  thee. 

When  Dharmraj  taketh  thine  account,  thou  shalt  be 
pressed  like  a bundle^  of  sesame. 

0 mortal,  thou  shalt  suffer  the  penalty  of  thine  acts,  and 
wander  in  many  wombs. 

Imbued  with  the  love  of  the  arch  fascinator,  thou  shalt 
lose  the  jewel  of  thy  human  life. 

Thou  wert  clever  at  everything  else  except  repeating  the 
one  God’s  name. 

Nanak  representeth — they  for  whom  it  was  so  destined 
are  attracted  to  superstition  and  worldly  love. 

The  ungrateful  arc  separated  from  God  and  have  no 
mediator. 

The  all-cruel  myrmidons  of  Death  shall  seize  them  ; 

Shall  seize  and  lead  them  off,  and  they  shall  obtain  their 
deserts  on  account  of  their  love  for  the  arch  fascinator. 

They  never  repeated  God’s  praises  under  the  Guru’s 
instruction,  so  their  breasts  shall  be  applied  to  the  hot 
pillar. 

Man  is  ruined  by  lust,  wrath,  and  pride  ; he  loseth  his 
senses  and  then  regretteth. 

Nanak  representeth — without  repeating  God’s  name  man 
faileth  to  meet  Him. 

There  is  none  but  Thee,  O God,  the  Preserver. 

It  is  Thy  function  to  save  sinners. 

1 seek  Thy  protection,  O Saviour  of  sinners,  Master, 
Ocean  of  mercy,  compassionate  : 

O Creator,  Cherisher  of  every  heart,  rescue  me  from  the 
blind  well. 

Thou  art  my  Protector,  cut  away  my  heavy  fetters,  and 
give  me  the  Name  as  my  sole  support. 

Nanak  imploreth — O God,  compassionate  to  the  poor, 
reach  me  Thy  hand  and  save  me. 

The  day  when  God  blended  me  with  Himself  was  fortunate: 


^ As  much  sesame  as  is  put  at  one  time  into  a press. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  347 

All  happiness  then  appeared,  and  misery  remained  far 
apart. 

Comfort,  ease,  joy,  and  delight  ever  accrue  from  singing 
God’s  praises. 

In  association  with  the  saints  worship  God  with  love,  and 
thou  shalt  not  again  rush  through  births. 

God  graciously  embraceth  man  according  to  the  result 
of  former  acts.^ 

Nanak  representeth — when  God  is  met,  man  never  again 
wandereth  in  transmigration. 

Prayer  and  praise  of  God : — 

Hear  my  supplication,  O my  Lord  God, 

Though  I am  full  of  millions  of  sins,  nevertheless  I am 
Thy  slave. 

0 Thou  Dispeller  of  grief,  merciful,  fascinating.  Destroyer 
of  trouble  and  anxiety, 

1 seek  Thy  protection,  protect  mine  honour  ; Thou  art  in 
all  things,  0 spotless  One, 

Thou  hearest  and  beholdest  us  ; Thou  art  with  us  all, 
0 God  ; Thou  art  the  nearest  of  all  to  us. 

O Lord,  hear  Nanak’s  prayer,  save  the  slave  of  Thy 
household. 

Thou  art  ever  omnipotent ; we  are  poor  and  beggars. 

O God,  save  us  who  are  involved  in  the  love  of 
mammon. 

Bound  by  covetousness  and  worldly  love,  we  have  com- 
mitted various  sins. 

The  Creator  is  distinct  and  free  from  entanglements  ; man 
obtaineth  the  fruit  of  his  acts. 

Show  us  kindness.  Thou  purifier  of  sinners  ; we  are  weary 
of  wandering  through  many  a womb. 

Nanak  representeth — I am  the  slave  of  God  fipho  is  the 
Support  of  the  soul  and  life. 

Thou  art  great  and  omnipotent ; my  understanding  is 
feeble. 

Thou  cherishest  even  the  ungrateful ; Thou  lookest 
equally  on  all, 

^ Literally — According  as  the  sprout  cometh  from  the  seed. 


348  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Unfathomable  is  Thy  knowledge,  O infinite  Creator ; 
I am  lowly  and  know  nothing. 

Having  rejected  the  gem  of  Thy  name,  I have  amassed 
kauris  ; I am  a degraded  and  silly  being. 

By  the  commission  of  sin  I have  amassed  what  is  very 
unstable  and  forsaketh  man. 

Nanak  hath  sought  Thy  protection,  0 omnipotent  Lord  ; 
preserve  his  honour. 

When  I sang  God’s  praises  in  the  association  of  the  saints, 

He  united  me,  who  had  been  separated  from  Him,  with 
Himself. 

By  ever  thoroughly  singing  God’s  praises.  He  who  is 
happiness  itself  becometh  manifest. 

My  couch,  when  God  accepteth  me  as  His  own,  is 
adorned  by  Him. 

Having  dismissed  anxiety  I am  no  longer  anxious,  and 
suffer  no  further  pain. 

Nanak  liveth  beholding  God  and  singing  the  praises  of 
the  Ocean  of  excellences. 


Wadhans 

God  holds  His  court  in  every  heart,  but  the  screen 
that  conceals  it  can  only  be  rent  by  piety  : — 

Very  exalted  is  His  court  ; 

It  hath  no  end  or  limits. 

Hundreds  of  thousands  and  millions  hasten. 

But  they  can  never  reach  His  court. 

What  is  that  auspicious  hour  when  God  is  met  ? 

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  saints  worship  Him. 

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  great  penitents  do  penance 
unto  Him. 

Hundr«(fc  of  thousands  of  Jogis  practise  Jog. 

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  great  enjoyers  enjoy  enjoy- 
ments ; ^ 

But  God  is  not  thus  found  ; He  dwelleth  in  every  heart : 
only  a few  know  it. 

^ There  are  some  sects  of  Hindus,  notably  the  Bam  Mdragis,  who 
believe  that  heaven  is  gained  by  terrestrial  enjoyments. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  349 

Is  there  any  friend  who  can  rend  the  screen  between  Him 
and  us  ? 

If  that  friend  be  kind  to  me,  I will  make  efforts  to  meet 
God^ 

And  sacrifice  my  body  and  soul  unto  Him. 

After  many  wanderings  I have  come  to  the  saints, 

And  all  my  sorrows  and  doubts  arje  dispelled. 

God  hath  invited  me  to  His  court  to  quaff  nectar. 

Saith  Nanak,  my  Lord  is  the  most  high. 

The  love  of  the  saint  for  the  Beloved  : — ■ 

My  heart  desireth  to  meet  the  T rue  Guru  ; how  shall 
I find  Him,  my  dear  ? 

Even  though  hundreds  of  amusements  be  afforded  a child, 
it  cannot  live  without  milk. 

The  hunger  of  my  heart  departeth  not,  0 my  boon  com- 
panion, even  though  hundreds  of  dishes  be  served  before  me. 

My  soul  and  body  feel  love  for  the  Beloved  ; how  shall 
my  heart  be  satisfied  without  beholding  Him  ? 

Hear,  0 my  friend  and  beloved  brother,  introduce  me  to 
the  Friend  and  Giver  of  happiness. 

He  who  ever  repeateth  to  me  God’s  words  knoweth  all 
the  secrets  of  my  heart. 

I cannot  abide  for  a moment  without  God,  and  I cry 
for  Him  as  the  chatrik  for  water. 

What  excellences  of  Thine,  O God,  shall  I recount  ? 
Thou  preservest  men  without  merits  like  me. 

My  boon  companion,  I am  waiting  for  my  Spouse  ; when 
shall  I behold  the  Beloved  with  mine  eyes  ? 

All  my  pleasures  and  amusements  are  forgotten  ; without 
my  Beloved  they  are  of  no  account. 

This  vesture  becometh  me  not ; I know  not  how  to  adorn 
myself. 

I make  obeisance  to  those  companions  of  mine  who  enjoy 
their  darling  Beloved. 

I have  made  all  decorations,  0 my  boon  companion,  but 
without  the  Beloved  they  are  of  no  avail. 

When  my  Spouse  speaketh  not  to  me,  O my  companion, 
my  youth  passeth  all  in  vain. 


350  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Blessed,  blessed  are  the  happy  wives,  O my  boon  com- 
panion, who  are  united  with  their  Spouse. 

I am  a sacrifice  to  such  happy  wives,  O my  boon  com- 
panion, and  I ever  wash  their  feet. 

As  long  as  duality  and  superstition  were  in  my  heart, 
I thought  God  distant ; 

But  when  I met  the  perfect  true  Guru,  O my  companion, 
all  my  hopes  and  desires  were  fulfilled. 

I obtained  the  highest  happiness,  O my  boon  companion, 
and  discovered  that  my  Beloved  was  everywhere. 

Nanak  hath  obtained  divine  pleasure,  0 my  boon  com- 
panion, by  touching  the  true  Guru’s  feet. 

Wadhans  Chhant 

The  following  is  sung  at  marriages  after  the  usual 
circumambulations  are  completed : — 

0 my  God,  my  hopes  and  desires  have  been  fulfilled. 

1 am  without  merits  ; all  merits  are  Thine  ; 

All  merits  are  Thine,  0 my  Lord  ; with  what  mouth  shall 
I praise  Thee  ? 

Thou  hast  not  considered  my  merits  or  demerits  ; Thou 
hast  at  once  pardoned  me. 

I have  obtained  the  nine  treasures ; congratulations 
resound  and  unblown  trumpets  play. 

Saith  Nanak,  I have  found  a good  Spouse  and  home, 
and  all  my  anxieties  are  at  an  end. 

SORATH 

Prayer  and  worship  are  not  to  be  addressed  to 
idols  and  demigods,  but  only  to  the  Creator : — 

To  whom  else  shall  I pray  ? whom  else  shall  I worship, 
since  it  is  God  who  created  all  ? 

The  different  persons  who  appear  the  greatest  of  the 
great  shall  all  be  blended  with  the  dust. 

The  Fearless,  the  Formless,  the  Destroyer  of  fear  will 
grant  all  happiness  and  the  nine  treasures. 

O beloved  God,  I am  satiated  with  Thy  gifts. 

Why  should  I flatter  wretched  man  ? what  need  I from 
him  ? 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  351 

He  who  meditateth  on  God  possesseth  everything ; God 
hath  appeased  his  hunger. 

The  Giver  of  happiness  conferreth  such  wealth  as  shall 
never  be  exhausted. 

The  true  Guru  hath  introduced  me  to  God  ; I am  now 
happy  and  absorbed  in  bliss. 

O my  soul,  repeat  the  Name,  worship  the  Name,  utter  the 
Name  night  and  day. 

Hear  the  instruction  of  the  saints  and  all  thy  fear  of  death 
shall  depart. 

They  to  whom  my  God  is  merciful  are  attached  to  the 
Guru’s  words. 

Who  can  appraise  Thy  worth,  O God  ? Thou  art  com- 
passionate to  all  creatures. 

Whatever  Thou  doest  prevaileth  ; what  can  we  poor  chil- 
dren do,  O God  ? 

Preserve  Thy  slave  Nanak,  as  a father  cherisheth  his  son. 

Man's  life  hangs  by  a frail  thread  ; his  only  hope 
is  in  God  : — 

Sons,  kinsmen,  the  wife  of  thy  household  are  attached  to 
thee  for  thy  wealth. 

None  of  them  will  assist  thee  at  the  last  moment  ; their 
love  is  all  false. 

O man,  why  pamper est  thou  thy  body  ? 

It  shall  vanish  like  a cloud  of  smoke  ; worship  the  one 
beloved  God. 

The  body  is  disposed  of  in  three  ways — it  is  thrown  into 
the  river,  to  the  dogs,  or  burnt  to  ashes. 

Man  deeming  himself  immortal  sitteth  at  home  and  for- 
getteth  the  Cause  of  causes. 

God  fashioned  beads  ^ of  many  sorts  and  strung  them 
together  on  a frail  string.^ 

That  string  shall  break,  O wretched  man,  and  then  shalt 
thou  regret. 

Meditate  day  and  night  on  Him  who  created  thee  and 
adorned  thee. 


^ Human  beings. 


2 Life. 


352  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

God  hath  extended  His  mercy  to  Nanak  who  hath  taken 
the  true  Guru’s  protection. 

Happiness  depends  on  man’s  mental  condition  : — 

To  the  happy  every  one  seemeth  happy  ; the  sick  man 
will  have  it  that  every  one  is  sick. 

The  Lord  God  acteth  and  causeth  to  act ; in  His  power 
is  the  union  of  the  soul  with  Him. 

O my  soul,  he  who  dispelleth  his  doubts, 

And  knoweth  that  God  is  in  all  things,  will  have  it  that 
no  one  erreth.^ 

He  whose  soul  is  happy  in  the  company  of  the  saints 
deemeth  that  every  one  is  happy. 

He  whose  heart  is  filled  with  the  disease  of  pride  shall 
groan  in  the  pain  of  birth  and  death. 

Everything  appeareth  manifest  to  him  to  whose  eyes  the 
salve  of  divine  knowledge  is  applied. 

He  in  whom  there  is  the  darkness  of  spiritual  ignorance 
seeth  nothing  ; again  and  again  shall  he  wander  in  trans- 
migration. 

0 my  Lord,  hear  my  supplication  ; Nanak  prayeth  for 
this  happiness — 

That  his  heart  may  be  attached  to  the  place  where  the 
saints  sing  Thy  praises. 

Men’s  bodies  and  souls  belong  to  the  saints,  and 
it  is  they  who  procure  men’s  salvation  : — 

Our  bodies  belong  to  the  saints,  our  wealth  to  the  saints, 
our  souls  are  entrusted  to  the  saints  : 

By  the  favour  of  the  saints  we  meditate  on  God’s  name, 
and  all  comfort  then  resulteth. 

There  are  no  givers  but  the  saints. 

They  who  enter  the  sanctuary  of  the  saints  shall  be  saved. 

Millions  of  sins  are  erased  by  serving  the  saints  and 
singing  God’s  praises  with  zest. 

By  association  with  the  saints,  which  is  obtained  by  good 
fortune,  man  obtaineth  happiness  here,  and  his  countenance 
shall  be  bright  hereafter. 

^ That  is,  he  finds  no  fault  in  others. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  353 

I have  but  one  tongue ; the  saints  are  full  of  various 
excellences  ; how  far  can  I recount  their  praises  ? 

The  Inaccessible,  the  Inapprehensible,  the  ever  Imperish- 
able, is  obtained  by  seeking  the  protection  of  the  saints. 

I without  virttie,  low,  friendless,  and  sinful  have  come  to 
their  shelter. 

0 God,  rescue  Nanak  who  is  perishing  in  the  blind  well 
of  domestic  love. 

Prescriptions  for  salvation  : — 

After  bathing  remember  God,  and  thy  body  and  soul 
shall  be  healed. 

By  taking  God’s  protection  good  fortune  dawneth,  and 
millions  of  obstacles  are  removed* 

God’s  words  and  hymns  are  the  best  language. 

Sing,  hear,  and  read  them  continually,  my  brother,  and 
the  perfect  Guru  will  preserve  thee. 

The  greatness  of  the  true  Lord  is  immeasurable  ; the 
saints  are  dear  to  the  Compassionate  One. 

He  hath  continued  to  preserve  the  honour  of  the  saints, 
and  cherish  them  according  to  His  ancient  practice. 

God’s  ambrosial  name  ever  eat  as  food,  0 man  ; put  it 
into  thy  mouth  at  all  times. 

Continually  sing  God’s  praises,  and  the  pains  of  old  age 
and  death  shall  all  flee  away. 

My  Lord  hath  heard  my  supplication  : all  mine  affairs 
have  been  adjusted, 

And  Guru  Nanak’s  greatness  hath  shone  through  the 
whole  world. 

The  Guru  feels  that  he  cannot  worship  God  with 
sufficient  fervour : — 

God  is  the  Lord  of  millions  of  worlds  ; He  is  the  Bene- 
factor of  all  creatures.  . . t 

H^.cherisheth  and  careth  forms  but  we,  fools  that  we 
are,  know  none  of  His  merits# 

. I know  not  how  to  adore  God. 

1 only  repeat  ‘ Har,  Har,  Guru,  Guru  1 ’ 

Wherefore,  O Gpd,  my  name  is  God’s  servant. 

A a 


6IKH.  tii 


354 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  CompassicMiate  to  the  poor,  the  Merciful,  the  Ocean 
of  happiness  filleth  all  hearts. 

He  ^holdeth,  heareth,  and  is  ever  with  us  ; but:  I,  fool 
that  I am,  thought  Him  distant. 

God  is  endless ; even  if  I estimate  and  describe  Him, 
how  know  I how  great  He  is  ? 

I supplicate  my  true  Guru  to  instruct  me  a fool. 

That  I am  a fool  is  a small  thing  ; millions  of  sinners 
are  saved. 

They  who  have  heard  and  seen  Guru  Nanak  shall  not 
again  fall  into  wombs. 

Jog  is  worthless  for  those  who  have  obtained  the 
Guru’s  instruction : — 

The  things  which  afforded  me  great  anxiety  have  all 
vanished. 

I fixed  my  breath  at  the  top  of  my  nose,  composed  myself 
to  rest,  and  the  upturned  lotus  of  my  heart  bloomed. 

Behold  a wonderful  thing  occurred  ! 

The  Guru  put  into  my  heart  the  wisdom  of  that  God 
whom  we  hear  spoken  of  as  unfathomable. 

The  deadly  sins  which  had  greatly  tortured  me  became 
afraid. 

And  implored  me  to  save  them  from  God  since  they 
had  entered  my  protection. 

When  the  storehouse  of  God  is  open,  he  who  is  so  fated 
receiveth  therefrom. 

One  gem  my  Guru  gave  me,  and  my  soul  and  body  have 
become  happy. 

The  Guru  hath  given  me  one  drop  of  nectar,  so  I have 
become  permanent  and  immortal. 

God  entrusted  the  storehouses  of  worship  to  Guru  Nanak, 
and  never  took  an  account  from  him. 

God  and  man  contrasted : — 

We  are  impure;  Thou,  O Creator,  art  pure ; we  are  without 
virtues  ; Thou  bestowest  them. 

We  are  fools  ; Thou  art  clever  and  wise  ; Thou  knowest 
all  contrivances. 

0 God,  such  are  we,  and  such  art  Thou. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  353 

We  are  sinners,  Thou  art  the  Destroyer  of  sins  ; great  are 
Thy  dominions,  O God. 

Thou  didst  create  all  things,  and  having  created  dost 
cherish  them  : Thou  hast  given  soul,*  and  body,  and  life. 

We  are  without  merits  ; no  merits  are  ours  ; grant  us 
Thy  favours,  O Kind  One. 

Thou  doest  well  towards  us,  but  we  are  ungrateful ; Thou 
art  ever  and  ever  compassionate. 

0 Thou,  the  Giver  of  happiness,  the  Disposer,  preserve  us 
Thy  children. 

Thou  art  a treasure,  the  immovable  Monarch  ; men  and 
the  lower  animals  beg  of  Thee.. 

Saith  Nanak,  this  is  our  condition  ; preserve  us  through 
Thy  saints. 

The  Guru  has  absolutely  devoted  himself  to  the 
saints : — 

1 am,  beloved  friends,  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet ; I have 
fallen  under  their  protection. 

The  saints  are  my  powerful  stay ; the  saints  are  mine 
ornaments. 

I have  ingratiated  myself  with  the  saints, 

And  obtained  what  was  allotted  me. 

Ye  saints,  my  soul  is  yours. 

With  the  saints  have  I dealt,  with  the  saints  have  I 
traded. 

From  the  saints  have  I gained  a profit — the  storehouses 
of  God’s  service  are  full. 

The  saints  entrusted  to  me  their  stock-in-trade,  and  then 
my  mind’s  anxiety  vanished. 

What  can  Dharmraj  do,  now  that  all  his  account-books 
are  tom  up  ? 

Through  the  favour  of  the  saints  I have  obtained  great 
joy  and  happiness. 

Saith  Nanak,  my  soul  is  reconciled  with  God,  and  become 
imbued  with  His  wondrous  love. 

Human  pride  and  forgetfulness  of  God : — 

Man  is  immersed  in  the  darkness  of  worldly  love,  and 
knoweth  not  the  Giver. 


A a 2 


356  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Forgetting  Him  who , fashioned  his  sotil  and  body  man 
only  admitteth  his  own  strength.  i 

, O foolish  man,  the  Lord  God  keepeth  an  eye  on  thine  acts. 

He  knoweth  what  thou  doest ; nothing  remaineth  con- 
cealed from  Him.  , / 

Thou  art  intoxicated  with  the  pleasures  of  the  palate, 
with  covetousness  and  pride — the  sources  of  many  sins. 

Weighted  with  the  fetters  of  pride  thou  hast  wandered 
in  suffering  through  many  births. 

Closing  folding-doors  and  hanging  up  many  screens  man 
entangleth  himself  with  another’s  wife. 

When  Chitr  and  Gupt  call  for  thine  account,  who  shall 
screen  thee  ? 

O Compassionate  to  the  poor,  All-pervading,  Destroyer  of 
.sorrow,  there  is  no  shelter  but  in  Thee. 

Extricate  us  from  the  ocean  of  the  world,  O God  ; Nanak 
hath  entered  Thy  sanctuary.  , 

The  omnipresence  of  God  — 

As  fire  is  contained  in  all  timber,  and  butter  in  all  milk. 

So  the  light  of  God  is  contained  in  everything  high  and 
low ; He  is  in  the  hearts  of  all  living  things. 

O saints.  He  is  contained  in  every  heart.  ■ He  filleth  all 
space  ; He  pervadeth  sea  and  land. 

The  true  Guru  hath  dispelled  all  my  doubts  ^ Nanak 
singeth  the  praises  of  the  Ocean  of  excellences,  i . 

The  .Omiiipresent  is  contained  in  all  things  though  ever 
distinct  from  them. 

The  Gufu  has  obtained  everything  precious  from 
God: — 

When  the  great  God  was  merciful,  I obtained  all  the 
desires  of  my  heart.  , . 

By  touching  God’s  feet  and  singing  His  praises  !l  have 
become  immortal. 

It  was  a good  and  completely  auspicious  occasion! 

By  repeating  the  Name  I have  obtained  peace,  composure,' 
and  happiness  ; and  unblown  trumpets  play  for  me^ " ' • 
i On  meeting  the  Lord,  my  Beloved,  my  house  and  home 
became  comfortable.  ‘ . 


HYMNS  ^ OF  GURU  ARJ AN  357 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  obtained  the  treasure  of  God’s 
name,  and  all  his  desires  are  fulfilled. 

The  greatness  of  the  Guru 

When  the  Guru’s  feet  dwelt  in  my  heart,  God  granted  me 
excellent  qualities. 

When  the  omnipresent  supreme  God  became  merciful,  I saw 
the  treasure  of  His  name  within  me. 

O my  friends,  the  Guru  is  my  preserver. 

He  ever  bestoweth  greatness  and  glory  twofold  and  four- 
fold. 

The  men  and  lower  animals  who  have  beheld  him  are 
all  saved. 

Wonderful  is  the  greatness  of  the  perfect  Guru  ; Nanak 
is  ever  a sacrifice  unto  him. 

Some  Sikhs  repeat  the  following  before  the 
Sohila,  at  bed-time : — 

The  word  of  the  Guru  is  my  protection  ; 

It  guardeth  me  on  every  side. 

My  soul  is  attached  to  God’s  name. 

And  so  for  shame  Death  hath  fled  away. 

0 Lord,  Thou  bestowest  happiness  on  me  ; 

Thou  the  omnipresent  God  hast  cut  away  my  fetters 
and  cleansed  my  heart. 

Nanak,  God  perisheth  not — 

His  worship  is  not  in  vain. 

By  repeating  Thy  name,  O God,  Thy  saints  rejoice, 

And  all  their  desires  are  fulfilled. 

The- Guru’s  devotion  to  God  and  its  results : — 

1 am  a sacrifice  to  my  Guru 

Who  hath  preserved  mine  honour  intact. 

I ever  meditate  on  my  God, 

And  thus  obtain  the  reward  my  soul  desireth. 

0 ye  saints,  there  is  none  beside  God. 

He  is  the  Cause  of  causes  ; 

He  hath  given  us  His  blessing, 

And  made  all  other  creatures  subject  to  us.- 


358  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Nanak,  when  I meditated  on  the  Name 

All  my  sorrows  departed. 

Man  should  not  be  ashamed,  but  should  be  eager 
to  worship  God : — 

As  a hungry  man  is  not  ashamed  when  eating, 

So  God’s  slave  is  not  ashamed  to  sing  His  praises. 

Why  be  slothful  in  thine  own  business  ? 

By  remembering  God  thy  face  shall  be  bright  in  His  court, 
and  thou  shalt  obtain  happiness  for  ever  and  ever. 

As  a lustful  man  is  greedy  to  gratify  his  lust. 

So  is  God’s  slave  to  sing  His  praises. 

As  a mother  is  wrapped  up  in  her  child. 

So  the  holy  man  repeateth  God’s  name. 

He  who  obtaineth  the  Name  from  the  perfect  Guru 

Shall,  O Nanak,  meditate  upon  it. 

The  Guru’s  prayer  and  its  result : — 

‘ Hear  my  prayer,  O my  Lord ; men  and  animals  are 
protected  by  Thee. 

O Thou  Cause  of  causes,  protect  the  honour  of  those 
who  repeat  Thy  name. 

0 beloved  Lord,  extend  Thy  sovereignty  over  us. 

Whether  bad  or  good  we  are  Thine.’ 

When  the  omnipotent  Lord  heard  this  appeal.  He  cut  off 
my  fetters  and  regenerated  me. 

He  dressed  me  in  a robe  of  honour,  blended  His  wor- 
shipper with  Himself,  and  Nanak  became  conspicuous  as 
a mountain.^ 

God’s  kindness  to  His  saints  : — 

God  hath  subjected  men  and  the  lower  animals  to  His 
! saints  ; all  are  servants  at  their  courts. 

God  accepteth  His  saints  and  causeth  them  to  cross  the 
terrible  ocean  : 

He  hath  arranged  all  their  affairs. 

The  Compassionate  to  the  poor,  the  Merciful,  the  Ocean 
of  mercy,  the  Omnipresent  is  my  master. 

^ Guru  N§nak  became  conspicuous  in  the  world. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  359 

God’s  servant  on  whom  He  bestoweth  the  robe  of  devo- 
tion is  ever5rwhere 

Welcomed  and  respected,  and  not  allowed  to  want  for 
aught ; Nanak  knoweth  God’s  power. 

SORATH  ASHTAPADI 

Man  corrupted  by  association  with  the  world  is 
saved  by  the  Guru : — 

The  mother’s  womb  is  an  ocean  of  grief,  O my  Beloved  ; 
there  God  causeth  His  name  to  be  repeated. 

When  man  emergeth  therefrom,  0 my  Beloved,  his  evil 
passions  develop  and  his  worldly  love  increaseth. 

Him  to  whom  Thou  didst  show  favour,  O my  Beloved, 
Thou  hast  caused  to  meet  the  true  Guru. 

Such  a man  worshippeth  Thee,  O my  Beloved,  at  every 
breath,  and  is  attached  to  Thy  name. 

Thou  art  the  support  of  my  soul  and  body,  O my  Beloved  ; 
Thou  art  the  support  of  my  soul  and  body. 

There  is  no  Creator  but  Thee,^  O my  Beloved,  Thou  art 
the  only  Searcher  of  hearts. 

Man  cometh  into  the  world,  O my  Beloved,  after  wandering 
in  countless  births  and  suffering  pain  in  various  wombs. 

He  forgot  the  true  Lord,  O my  Beloved,  and  so  suffered 
heavy  punishment. 

They  who  have  met  the  perfect  true  Guru,  O my  Beloved, 
are  attached  to  the  true  Name. 

We  are  saved,  O my  Beloved,  by  following  those  who 
take  the  protection  of  the  True  One. 

He  who  eateth  because  the  food  is  sweet,  O my  Beloved, 
maketh  his  body  ill. 

Bitter  is  the  consequence,  my  Beloved  ; sorrow  is  the 
result. 

Thou,  0 Beloved,  having  caused  man  to  eat  sweet  food 
hast  led  him  astray  ; so  his  separation  from  Thee  shall  con- 
tinue. 

0 my  Beloved,  Thou  hast  introduced  to  the  Guru  and 
saved  those  who  were  so  destined  from  the  beginning. 

Man  is  full  of  longing  for  mammon,  O my  Beloved  ; God 
never  entereth  his  heart. 


36o  the  SIKH  religion 

The  bodies  of  those  who  forget  Thee,  O supreme  God, 
become  ashes. 

They  utter  many  a groan,  O my  Bdoved,  but  their 
torture  ceaseth  not. 

They  whom  Thou  didst  introduce  to  the  Guru  and  re- 
generate, retain  their  capital  intact. 

As  far  as  possible,  O my  Beloved,  as^ciate  not  with  the 
infidel. 

On  meeting  him,  0 my  Beloved,  man  forgetteth  God  and 
becometh  dishonoured. 

The  perverse  obtain  no  entrance  into  God’s  court,  0 my 
Beloved,  but  are  punished  by  Death, 

It  is  said  that  a man  went  to  the  Guru  and  told 
him  that  he  had  long  performed  various  religious 
ceremonies,  but  his  heart  was  still  troubled.  He 
asked  the  Guru  for  the  remedy,  and  also  the  way 
to  God.  The  Guru  replied  as  follows ; — 

Although  man  read  and  study  the  Veds,  perform  the 
niwali  and  bhujangam  ^ feats, 

He  shall  not  escape  from  the  company  of  the  five  deadly 
sins  ; nay,  he  shall  be  the  more  entangled  in  pride. 

0 my  beloved,  it  is  not  by  such  means  God  is  found  ; 
I know  it,  for  I have  done  many  such  things. 

1 have  dropped  down  weary  at  the  Lord’s  door : may 
He  grant  me  wisdom  and  discrimination ! 

Man  may  be  vowed  to  silence  ; he  may  live  on  leaves  ; * 
he  may  roam  about  naked  in  the  forest ; 

He  may  visit  all  the  places  of  pilgrimage  on  earth  ; but 
even  then  he  could  never  escape  from  worldly  love. 

With  a desire  in  his  heart  for  emancipation  he  may  take 
his  seat  at  a place  of  pilgrimage,  and  apply  his  head  to  the 
saw ; 

* But  even  though  he  made  hundreds  of  thousands  of  such 
efforts,  his  mental  impurity  would  not  depart. 

^ Bhujangam,  literally — a snake,  but  applied  by  Jogis  to  the 
vertebral  column,  through  which  they  say  they  draw  up  the  breath 
from  the  anus  to  the  brain. 

* Karpati.  Also  translated — He  may  use  his  hands  as  a platter. 
Some  faqirs  deny  themselves  plates  or  dishes  of  any  sort. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  361 

He  may  bestow  gifts  of  many  sorts — gold,  women,  horses, 
and  elephants  ; 

He  may  offer  com,  clothes,  and  lands  in  abundance  ; but 
even  then  he  could  not  reach  God’s  door. 

He  may  continue  attached  to  worship,  adoration,  obei- 
sance, prostrations,  and  the  six  acts ; 

But  he  could  not  in  that  way  find  God  ; he  would  merely 
fall  into  the  meshes  of  pride. 

' Men  have  grown  weary  performing  Jog  and  the  eighty- 
four  postures  of  the  Sidhs  : 

Man  may  attain  a long  life,  but  without  association  with 
God  he  shall  be  born  again  and  again  ; 

He  may  enjoy  the  sport  of  kings  and  the  delights  of 
empire,  and  issue  orders  not  to  be  disobeyed  ; 

He  may  possess  beautiful  couches,  and  use  sandal  and 
distilled  aloe- wood,  but  such  things  form  the  gate  of  terrible 
hell. 

Singing  God’s  praises  in  association  with  His  saints  is  the 
highest  act  of  all. 

Saith  Nanak,  this  privilege  is  obtained  by  him  whose 
acts  recorded  in  previous  births  entitle  him  to  receive  it. 

Thy  worshipper,  O Lord,  is  intoxicated  with  Thy  love. 

Since  the  Destroyer  of  the  sorrows  of  the.  poor  became 
merciful  unto  him,  his  soul  hath  been  absorbed  in  God’s 
praises. 


Dhanasari 

How  the  senses  lead  astray : — 

The  fish  long  in  love  with  the  water  loseth  its  life  on 
leaving  it ; 

The  bumble-bee  dieth  on  account  of  its  love  for  the 
lotus  ; it  cannot  find  its  way  out.^ 

Now  my  soul  hath  contracted  love  for  the  one  God. 
Under  the  true  Guru’s  instruction  I recognize  Him  who 
. neither  dieth  nor  is  born,  and  who  is  ever  with  us* 

Through  the  force  of  lust  the  elephant  is  ensnared ; the 
poor  animal  falleth  into  another’s  power* 

^ At  night  when  the  petals  of  the  lotus  close. 


362  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  deer  giveth  up  its  life  for  the  hunter’s  bell ; through 
love  of  it  he  is  slain. 

Mortal  beholding  his  family  is  led  astray  by  covetousness 
and  wrapped  up  in  mammon. 

Very  much  attached  to  worldly  things,  he  deemeth  them 
his  own,  but  at  last  departeth  without  them. 

■ Know  that  he  who  loveth  any  but  God,  shall  ever  be 
miserable. 

Saith  Nanak,  the  Guru  hath  explained  to  me  that  by 
God’s  love  man  ever  rejoiceth. 

Man  blindly  commits  sinful  acts  and  only  abstains 
when  his  eyes  are  opened  by  the  Guru  : — 

It  is  man’s  practice  to  do  what  he  shall  be  ashamed  of — 

He  slandereth  the  saints,  reverenceth  the  infidel,  and 
adopteth  other  such  perverse  practices. 

Led  astray  by  worldly  love,  he  loveth  what  he  ought  to 
eschew. 

Like  a mirage  or  the  green  leaves  of  the  forest  even  so 
is  man’s  state. 

Even  if  a streak  be  made  on  a donkey’s  body  with  sandal, 
he  will  still  prefer  ashes  ; 

So  man  instead  of  loving  God’s  nectar  devoteth  himself 
to  sinful  enjoyments  which  deceive. 

The  best  saints  to  purify  men  in  this  world  are  to  be 
found  by  good  fortune. 

The  jewel  of  life  is  lost  in  exchange  for  a worthless  glass 
bead. 

When  the  Guru  applieth  to  man’s  eyes  the  salve  of  divine 
knowledge,  the  sins  and  troubles  of  many  births  flee  away. 

By  love  to  the  one  God  in  the  company  of  the  saints 
Nanak  hath  escaped  from  these  evils. 

The  worship  of  the  Hindus,  of  the  Jogis,  and  of 
the  Jains  is  unavailing: — 

Worship,  fasting,  frontal  marks,  ablution,  the  bestowal 
of  copious  alms  and  presents  at  festivals. 

Austerities,  and  flattering  addresses  to  God,  never  prevail 
upon  Him. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  363 

Man  only  obtaineth  rest  by  repeating  God’s  name. 

All  search  for  God  in  various  ways ; but  the  search  is 
difficult,  and  He  is  not  found. 

Lip-worship,  penance,  wandering  oVer  the  earth,  the  per- 
formance of  austerities  with  body  reversed. 

Following  the  path  of  the  Jogis  and  the  Jains — it  is  not 
by  such  things  the  Lord  is  satisfied. 

It  is  by  repeating  His  ambrosial  and  priceless  name 
and  praises  He  is  obtained  by  the  man  to  whom  He  showeth 
mercy. 

By  association  with  the  saints  the  love  of  God  is  obtained  : 
Nanak  is  made  happy  by  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 

Man  is  helpless  without  God : — 

I am  miserable ; save  me,  O Lord, 

I can  do  nothing  of  myself,  O my  Lord ; mercifully 
grant  me  Thy  name. 

Family  and  the  world  are  a sea  of  fire  ; 

Doubt,  worldly  love,  and  spiritual  ignorance  are  storms 
therein. 

While  on  the  crest  of  the  wave  man  is  happy ; while  in 
the  trough  he  is  unhappy.  . 

His  thirst  and  hunger  are  never  allayed. 

From  yielding  to  mental  desires  resulteth  the  disease  of 
the  deadly  sins. 

The  five  deadly  sins  man’s  companions  are  very  intract- 
able. 

The  lives,  souls,  and  wealth  of  the  world  are  Thine,  O 
God. 

Nanak,  know  that  God  is  ever  near. 

The  foolish  man  is  attracted  by  temporary  not 
permanent  advantages ; — 

Value  as  a straw  the  things  which  forsake  thee  ; ^ 

They  are  useless  entanglements. 

Man  loveth  the  things  which  depart  not  with  him ; 

His  enemies  he  deemeth  his  friends — 

^ Also  translated — Thou  docst  foolish  things  which  thou  shalt  have 
to  abandon. 


3^4 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


In  such  error  is  the  world  led  astray—  ; . * 

The  fool  loseth  the  boon  of  human  :life  ; : ‘ 

He  is  not  pleased  even  to  see  the  true  religion.  it 

Deeming  falsehood  and  deception  sweet  he  is  attached  to 
them. 

• He  Idveth  gifts  but  forgetteth  the  Giver. 

The  wretched  creature  thinketh  not  of  death. 

He  weepeth  for  thi-  loss  of  the  property  of  others. 

He  forfeiteth  the  benefit  of  all  his  religious  acts. 
Understanding  not  the  will  of  God,  he  suffereth  trans- 
. migration. 

He  committeth  sins  and  then  regretteth. 

What  pleaseth  Thee,  O God,  is  acceptable, 

I am  a sacrifice  to  Thy  will, 

Nanak  is  Thy  poor  slave  ; .1 

Preserve  me,  O my  Lord  ! 

The  sensible  man  hoards  up  God’s  name  and 
, praises : — 

God’s  name  is  the  support  of  poor  me. 

. To  earn  God  is  my  daily  occupation  ; 

The  name  of  the  one  God  is  what  I hoard  up. 

That  it  may  be  useful  to  me  in  this  world  and  the 
next. 

Dyed  with  the  peerless  dye  of  God’s  name. 

The  saints  sing  the  excellences  of  the  Formless  One, 
Excessive  humility  is  the  glory  of  the  saints ; 

They  recognize  their  greatness  in  God’s  praises, 

And  find  their  happiness  in  God’s  service. 

In  it  they  obtain  comfort  and  their  anxieties  depart. 
Where  the  saints  meet  together. 

They  celebrate  God’s  praises  with  music  and  song. 

Joy  hath  its  abode  in  the  saints’  company. 

Which  is  obtained  by  him  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny 
was  written.  r 

Wjth  clasped  hands  I suppUcate  them 
To  allow  me  to  wa^  their  feet  and  sing  th«r  praises. 

..  P compassionate,  merciful,  and  omnipresent  God,  : 
Nanak  liveth  on  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  365 

The  rich,  the  landlords,  and  the  rulers  should 
consider  themselves  inferior  to  the  saints  :t— 

As  the  rich  are  proud  beholding  their  wealth,  and  land-' 
\6vdii  thdr  lands  \ •' 

As  the  monarch  deemeth  that  all  sovereignty  is  his,  so 
God’s  saints  are  proud  of  their  Lord’s  support. 

If  any  one  remember  his  Protector 

And  act  as  He  endoweth  him,  he  shall  not  be  the  worse 
therefor.  ' 

Nanak,  by  the  favour  of  the  saints  they  shall  sing  God’s 
praises  and  thfeir  hearts  became  pure, 

Who  forsaking  idols  take  refuge  in  the  one  God,  saying, 
* We  have  entered  Thy  sanctuary.’ 

God’s  kindness  to  His  saint: — 

God  who  extended  His  might  in  the  four  quarters  of  the 
earth  put;  His  hand  on  my  head, 

; Looked  on  me  with  an  eye  of  favour,  and  dispelled,  my 
sorrows.  ; ! 

He  hath  preserved  me  His  slave. 

Embracing  me,  the  Compassionate  One,  the  Pardoner, 
wiped  out  all  . my  demerits. 

Whatever  I ask  of  my  God  He  granteth  me. 

Whatever  God’s  slave  Nanak  uttereth  shall  prove  true 
both  in  this  world  and  the  next. 

God  is  ever  man’s  friend  and  helper - 

God  remembering  His  function  alloweth  not  man  to  see 
the  hour  of  trouble  ; 

He  giVeth  His  hand,  preserveth  His  own,  and  cherisheth 
them  at  every  breath  they  draw.  ' ' 

My  soul  continueth  devoted  to  God.-' 

At  the  beginning  and  the  end  God  is  ever’ our  helper; 
hail  to  our  Friend  I • 1 

' On  beholding  the  marvellous  greatness  of  the  Lord  my 
soul  is  delighted. 

Nanak  is  happy  remembering  God ; the  omnipotent  LOrd 
hath  preserved  mme  honour. 


366  THE  SIEH  RELIGION 

The  vigilance  of  the  holy ; — 

Deem  him  unfortunate  who  forgetteth  the  Lord  of  life, 
the  Giver. 

He  whose  soul  is  attached  to  God’s  feet  shall  obtain 
a tank  of  nectar. 

Thy  slave  awaketh  in  the  love  of  God’s  name  ; 

All  sloth  hath  now  departed  from  his  body,  and  his  soul 
is  attached  to  the  Beloved. 

Wherever  I look,  there  is  God  a thread  on  which  every 
heart  is  strung. 

Drinking  the  water  of  the  Name,  the  slave  Nanak  hath 
parted  with  love  for  all  beside. 

Ashtapadi 

The  society  of  saints  is  superior  to  all  places  of 
pilgrimage : — 

The  more  I bathed  at  sacred  places  the  more  impurity  of 
pride  I contracted  ; the  Lord  of  my  heart  accepted  not  at 
all  my  exertions. 

When  shall  I obtain  the  society  of  the  saints  in  which 
there  is  ever  divine  pleasure  ? My  spirit  will  lave  therein, 
and  I shall  obtain  the  eye-salve  of  divine  knowledge. 

He  who  practiseth  obstinacy,  and  looketh  for  wealth,  like 
a crane  watching  a fish,  shall  be  of  no  account. 

Is  there  any  such  bestower  of  happiness  as  will  recite  to 
me  legends  of  God  ? when  I meet  such  a person  I shall  be 
saved. 


Jaitsari 

Man  amasses  wealth  in  vain  and  has  no  real  friend 
but  God : — 

Doth  any  one  know  who  is  a friend  in  this  world  ? 

He  to  whom  God  is  merciful  can  tell ; his  ways  are  pure. 

Parents,  wife»  sons,  relations,  lovers,  friends,  and  brethren, 

Meet  according  to  the  acts  of  previous  births,i  but  at  the 
last  hour  none  of  them  will  aid  one. 

In  collecting  pearl  necklaces,  gold,  rubies,  dianaonds,  and 
wealth  which  gladdeneth  the  heart 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  367 

Man’s  life  is  passed : ever  grumbling  he  is  never  con- 
tented. 

Were  he  to  possess  elephants,  carriages,  steeds,  swift'  as 
the  wind,  land,  and  armies — 

Of  these  none  would  go  with  him ; he  must  depart 
naked. 

God’s  beloved  saints  are  beloved  by  Him  ; in  their  com- 
pany sing  God’s  praises. 

Nanak,  when  man  hath  the  society  of  such  saints,  he 
is  happy  in  this  world,  and  his  face  shall  be  bright  in  the 
next. 

The  following  was  written  after  the  Guru’s  con- 
versation with  a Bairagi : — 

0 happy  wives,  my  companions,  give  me,  give  me  intelli- 
gence of  my  Beloved, 

1 am  astonished  at  the  different  accounts  I hear  of  Him  ; 
I relate  them  to  you. 

Some  say  that  God  is  altogether  distinct  from  the  world ; 
others  that  He  is  altogether  included  in  it. 

His  colour  is  not  seen  ; His  outline  is  not  distinguished; 
O happy  wives,  tell  me  truly — 

‘ He  is  included  in  everything ; He  dwelleth  in  every 
heart,  yet  He  is  not  blended  with  anything  ; He  is  separate.’ 

Nanak  saith.  Listen,  0 ye  people,  put  the  saints’  word 
into  your  hearts. 

A song  of  rejoicing : — 

Desirable  is  my  Friend  ; 

Gladly  sing  songs  of  rejoicing  in  every  house  for  He 
dwelleth  in  every  heart. 

Worship  Him  in  weal ; worship  Him  in  woe  ; forget  Him 
not  at  any  time. 

By  repeating  the  Name  there  is  the  splendour  of  millions 
of  suns,  and  the  darkness  of  superstition  vanisheth. 

Thou,  O God,  art  in  all  places ; whatever  appeareth  is 
Thine. 

Nanak,  he  who  obtaineth  the  society  of  the  saints  shall 
not  again  be  subject  to  transmigration; 


368 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Jaitsari  Chhant 

The  Guru’s  passionate  thirst  for  God : — 

I thirst  day  and  night  for  a sight  of  Thee,  O God  ; I ever 
think  of  Thee  night  and  day. 

Nanak,  the  Guru  opening  the  doors  of  my  understanding 
hath  caused  me  to  meet  God,  the  Friend. 

Hear  me,  my  friends,  and  good  people,  I make  one  repre- 
sentation— 

I wander,  O my  beloved,  searching  for  the  fascinating 
Darling. 

Show  Him  to  me,  O my  beloved,  grant  me  a sight  of 
Him  even  for  a little,  and  I will  lay  down  my  life  for  you. 

Mine  eyes  are  dyed  with  the  colour  of  the  Beloved,  and 
rest  not  even  for  a moment. 

My  soul  is  attached  to  God  as  a fish  to  the  water,  as 
the  thirsty  chatrik  to  the  raindrops. 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  found  the  True  Guru,  and  all  his 
thirst  is  quenched. 

O my  friend,  I am  not  equal  to  any  of  the  companions 
of  the  Beloved. 

0 my  friend,  one  of  them  is  better  than  the  other  ; who 
thinketh  of  me  ? 

Of  His  many  companions  one  is  better  than  the  other, 
O my  beloved ; the  Lord  ever  playeth  with  them. 

On  seeing  them  my  heart  also  longeth  to  obtain  the  Lord 
of  excellences. 

1 would  lay  down  my  life  for  any  one  who  pleased  my 
Darling. 

Nanak  saith,  hear  my  prayer,  O ye  happy  wives,  show 
Him  to  me,  that  I may  see  what  my  Beloved  is  like. 

Of  my  friend,  I love  my  Beloved,  but  He  careth  not 
for  me. 

mO  my  friend,  thou  hast  enjoyed  the  Darling  ; point  Him 
out  to  me  who  inquirfeth  for  Him. 

TVvey  on  whose  forthead  such  destiny  was  written,! obtain 

the  Darling  by  effacing  their  pride. 

■ God  took  my  arm  and  drew  me  towards- Him; regardless 

of  my  merits  or  demerits.  ' 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  369 

Everything  becometh  her  on  whom  Thou  hast  put  a 
garland  of  virtues  and  clothed  in  red.^ 

Nanak,  blessed  is  that  happy  wife  with  whom  her  Husband 
abideth. 

0 my  friend,  I have  obtained  Him  who  hath  ever  been 
the  object  of  my  vows. 

The  Spouse  I desired  hath  come  and  congratulations  have 
been  sung. 

1 am  in  great  joy  and  happiness  ; the  Beloved  is  kind 
and  ever  affordeth  me  new  delight. 

I have  been  very  fortunate  ; the  Guru  hath  caused  me 
to  meet  God  through  the  true  society  of  the  saints. 

My  hopes  and  desires  are  all  fulfilled  ; my  body  is  united 
with  that  of  the  Beloved. 

Nanak  representeth — through  meeting  the  Guru  I have 
obtained  the  object  of  my  vows. 

Man  compared  with  a traveller  who  amasses  no 
wealth : — 

The  world’s  inhabitants  are  travellers  filled  with  pride ; 

Impelled  by  the  love  of  mammon  they  commit  various 
sins  ; 

They  are  drowned  in  covetousness,  worldly  love,  and 
pride,  and  think  not  of  death ; 

They  pass  their  lives  talking  of  their  sons,  friends,  worldly 
affairs,  and  wives. 

When  the  days  they  were  destined  to  remain  in  the  world 
have  expired,  they  shall  suffer  on  beholding  the  myrmidons 
of  Death. 

Nanak,  the  deeds  that  have  been  done  cannot  be  wiped 
out ; why  hath  man  not  earned  the  wealth  of  God’s  name  ? 

Man  maketh  many  efforts  in  worldly  affairs^  but  God’s 
name  he  singeth  not ; 

Wherefore  he  wandereth  about  in  numberless  births,  dieth, 
and  is  born  again 

In  bedsis,  jvds,  f/m,  wMsr  nmkr  cmot 

told. 

* The  dress  of  the  married  woman,  not  of  her  who  is  deprived  of 
ner  spouse. 

S’IKH.  hi  g 


370 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Man  reapeth  what  he  soweth,  and  obtaineth  the  result 
of  his  own  acts. 

The  jewel  of  his  life  he  loseth  in  play,  and  pleaseth  not 
his  God. 

Nanak  representeth — man  wandereth  in  error,  and  ob- 
taineth not  rest  even  for  a moment. 

When  youth  hath  fled,  old  age  sitteth  down  in  possession. 

The  hands  tremble,  the  head  shaketh,  and  the  eyes  see 
not : 

The  eyes  see  not  without  worshipping  God  ; man  leaveth 
his  wealth  and  departeth. 

Man’s  relations  with  whom  he  hath  worn  out  his  mind 
and  body,  obey  him  not ; nay,  they  throw  dirt  on  his  head. 

The  love  of  the  infinite  and  omnipresent  God  abideth  not 
for  a moment  in  the  heart. 

Nanak  representeth — there  is  no  delay  in  the  destruction 
of  the  false  who  are  as  forts  of  paper. 

Nanak  hath  fallen  under  the  protection  of  God’s  lotus 
feet : 

God  Himself  caused  me  to  cross  the  rough  and  terrible 
ocean. 

Meeting  the  company  of  the  saints  I have  worshipped 
God,  and  He  hath  embraced  and  preserved  me. 

He  hath  granted  my  prayer  and  bestowed  on  me  His 
name ; He  hath  not  regarded  my  demerits. 

I have  obtained  God  the  Treasury  of  excellences,  the 
Infinite  whom  my  heart  desired. 

Nanak  representeth — I have  partaken  of  the  feast  of  God’s 
name  by  which  I am  satiated. 

Jaitsari  ki  War 

It  is  said  that  the  whole  of  the  Jaitsari  ki  War 
was  composed  by  the  Guru  as  instruction  to  a Sikh 
called  Tiloka.  Parts  of  it  are  read  daily,  and  the 
whole  completed  in  ten  days  after  the  decease  of 
a Sikh : — 

Slok  I 

. In  the  beginning  God  pervaded  ci^eation,  in  the  present 
He  j^ervadeth  it,  and  in  the  future  He  will  pervade  it.  ■ 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  371 

Nanak,  the  saints  remember  the  All-pervading  who  is  the 
Destroyer  of  sin  and  Lord  of  the  world. 

Behold,  hear,  and  cause  others  to  hear,  and  fix  the  True 
One  in  thy  heart. 

Nanak,  be  absorbed  in  the  love  of  God  who  is  fully  con- 
tained in  all  things. 

God's  omnipotence  and  omnipresence  : — 

Pauri  I 

Sing  of  God,  the  only  Pure  One  ; He  is  contained  in  every- 
thing. 

He  is  potent  to  do  and  cause  to  be  done  : what  He  doeth 
taketh  place. 

In  a moment  He  establisheth  and  disestablisheth  ; there 
is  none  but  Him. 

He  pervadeth  the  continents,  the  universe,  the  nether 
regions,  the  islands,  and  all  worlds. 

He  whom  God  causeth  to  understand  understandeth  ; 
he  alone  is  the  pure  man. 

Why  forget  God  who  brought  man  forth  from  the 
womb  ? — 


Slok  II 

God  having  put  thee  into  thy  mother’s  womb,  made  the 
framework  of  thy  body. 

Thou  didst  remember  Him  at  every  breath,  Nanak,  and 
so  the  great  heat  did  not  consume  thee. 

With  body  reversed  thou  didst  dwell  in  a filthy  place. 

Nanak,  why  forget  that  Lord  by  whose  name  thou  didst 
escape  therefrom  ? 

Pauri  II 

O man,  thou  wert  conceived  from  blood  and  seed,  and 
placed  in  the  fire  of  the  womb. 

Thy  head  downwards,  thou  wert  dirty,  restless  in  the 
darkness  of  a terrible  hell. 

By  remembering  God  thou  wert  not  burned  ; clasp  Him 

to  thy  heart  and  soul. 


372  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Forget  not  for  a moment  Him  who  preserved  thee  in 
a painful  place. 

By  forgetting  God  thou  shalt  never  be  happy,  but  shalt 
lose  thy  human  life. 

Ever  remember  God  and  His  benefits : — 

Slok  III 

God  bestoweth  the  gift  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  heart’s 
desires  and  of  all  hopes. 

Nanak,  remember  God  who  destroyeth  suffering  and 
misery  ; He  abideth  not  far  away. 

Love  Him  through  whom  thou  enjoyest  all  pleasures. 

Nanak,  forget  not  that  Lord  even  for  a moment  who 
. made  this  beautiful  body. 

Thank  God  for  what  He  hath  given  thee ; — 

Pauri  III 

God  who  is  able  to  give,  gave  thee  soul,  life,  body,  wealth, 
and  pleasures  to  enjoy. 

He  gave  thee  houses,  mansions,  chariots,  horses,  and  made 
thee  fortunate  ; 

He  gave  thee  sons,  wife,  friends,  servants. 

Meditate  on  that  God  ; thy  soul  and  body  shall  be  re- 
freshed, and  the  pain  of  separation  from  Him  healed. 

Repeat  God’s  praises  in  the  company  of  the  saints,  and 
all  thy  maladies  shall  depart. 

Man’s  first  duty  is  to  God : — 

Slok  IV 

They  who  strive  for  the  sake  of  family  and  make  various 
efforts  for  wealth. 

Who  are  without  the  service  and  love  of  God,  O Nanak, 
are  as  ghosts. 

That  love  shall  fade  which  is  devoted  to  any  other  than 

God. 

vja.'y  oi  \oVmg  ttve  Lotd. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  373 

The  body  perishes  unhonoured,  wherefore  man 
should  remember  God,  with  whom  rests  salvation ; — 

Pauri  IV 

By  forgetting  God  the  body  becometh  ashes,  and  every 
one  calleth  it  a ghost. 

Even  they  whom  one  loved  allow  him  not  to  remain 
a moment  in  their  house. 

Of  what  use  is  wealth  improperly  amassed  ? 

As  man  soweth,  so  shall  he  reap  ; his  body  is  the  field 
of  acts. 

The  ungrateful  who  forget  God  shall  wander  in  trans- 
migration. 

Superstitious  ceremonies  are  of  no  avail;  God’s 
light  in  the  heart  burns  all  sin  : — 

Slok  V 

Millions  of  alms,  ablutions,  and  various  penances  for 
purification  are  of  no  avail. 

Nanak,  to  repeat  God’s  name  with  the  tongue  removeth 
all  sin. 

However  much  firewood  one  may  collect,  if  a spark  be 
applied  to  it,  it  will  be  consumed  in  a moment ; 

So  when  the  true  Lord  dwelleth  in  the  heart,  Nanak,  all 
sins  disappear. 

The  effect  of  remembering  and  praising  God : — 

Pauri  V 

Millions — yea,  all  sins  depart  by  remembering  God’s 
name. 

Man  obtaineth  the  reward  his  heart  desireth  by  singing 
God’s  praises. 

The  fear  of  transmigration  is  removed,  and  a lasting  and 
true  abode  obtained. 

If  it  be  so  decreed  in  the  beginning,  man  becometh 
absorbed  in  God’s  feet. 

0 God,  mercifully  preserve  me ; Nanak  is  a sacrifice  unto 
Thee, 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


374 

The  Guru  likens  to  worms  those  who  only  think 
of  pleasures : — 

Slok  VI 

They  who  turn  their  thoughts  to  peerless  houses,  to 
pleasures,  and  to  delights  of  the  palate, 

And  who  never  think  on  God — such  people,  Nanak,  are 
worms  in  filth. 

Forsake  all  worldly  things  : why  fix  thy  love  on  them  ? 

Nanak,  the  body  which  forgetteth  the  Lord  shall  become 
ashes. 

Pauri  VI 

Man  may  enjoy  a beauteous  couch,  varied  pleasures,  and 
all  delights  ; 

He  may  possess  a palace,  gold,  and  silver ; he  may  use 
perfumes  and  wear  pearls  and  diamonds  ; 

He  may  enjoy  the  pleasures  his  heart  desireth  and  have 
no  anxiety  whatever ; 

But  if  he  remember  not  God,  he  shall  he  like  a worm  in 
ordure. 

Without  God’s  name  there  is  no  peace,  how  shall  the 
heart  be  consoled  ? 

The  bliss  of  spiritual  happiness  obtained  by  toil : — 

Slok  VII 

Anchorets  search  in  the  ten  directions  for  the  love  of 
God’s  lotus  feet : 

They  renounce  deceptive  mammon,  Nanak,  in  the  delight- 
ful company  of  the  saints. 

May  I repeat  God’s  name  in  my  heart  and  with  my  lips, 
and  wander  preaching  in  all  countries  ! 

Nanak,  all  worldly  things  are  false ; I live  by  hearing 
God’s  true  fame. 

The  poor  and  holy  man,  if  pious,  is  king  of  the 

world 

Pauri  VII  . , 

He  who  liveth  in  a ruined  hut  with  all  his  clothes  torn, 
Who  hath  neither  caste,  nor  lineage,  nor  respect,,  l^-ho 

wandereth  in  the  wilderness. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  375 

Who  hath  no  friend  or  lover,  who  is  without  wealth  or 
beauty,  and  who  hath  no  relation  or  kinsman. 

Is  king  of  the  whole  world  if  his  heart  be  filled  with 
God’s  name. 

God  is  well  pleased  with  him,  and  men  are  saved  by  the 
dust  of  his  feet. 

Worldly  pleasures  are  vain  without  devotion : — 

Slok  VIII 

A man  may  have  many  sports,  empire,  pleasures,  beauty, 
the  umbrella  of  empire,  fans  waving  over  him,  and  a throne 
to  sit  on — 

They  who  are  absorbed  in  such  things  are  fools,  ignorant, 
and  blind  ; Nanak,  the  desire  for  mammon  is  a dream. 

In  dreams  man  enjoyeth  all  pleasures,  and  worldly  things 
appear  sweet  to  him. 

Nanak,  without  the  Name  beautiful  Maya  is  deceptive. 

The  fool  is  misled  by  his  folly : — 

Pauri  VIII 

The  fool  attacheth  his  heart  to  a dream  : 

When  he  awaketh  he  forgetteth  empires,  pleasures,  and 
delights,  and  suffereth  disappointment. 

His  life  passeth  away  in  pursuing  worldly  things, 

But  his  desires  have  not  been  fulfilled  because  he  hath 
been  fascinated  by  Maya. 

What  can  the  poor  creature  do  when  God  Himself  leadeth 
him  astray  ? 

The  condition  of  the  persons  and  habitations  of 
those  who  forget  God : — 

Slok  IX 

They  who  forget  God,  Nanak,  are  as  wanderers  in  the 
wilderness. 

Even  though  they  dwell  in  heaven  or  conquer  the  nine 

regions  of  the  earth. 

Where  there  are  millions  of  plays  and  spectacles,  without 
remembrance  of  the  Name, 

Nanak,  that  place  is  desolate,  and  equal  to  millions  of  heUs. 


376  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Pauri  IX 

Man  deemeth  a place  a city,  though  it  be  only  a veiy 
terrible  wilderness. 

On  seeing  false  wealth,  man  believeth  it  to  be  real. 

Men  go  mad  through  lust,  wrath,  and  pride. 

When  the  club  of  death  falleth  on  their  heads,  they  shall 
regret. 

He  who  wandereth  without  the  company  of  the  perfect 
divine  Guru  is  a demon. 

Everything  deceives  except  devotion  to  God : — 

Slok  X 

Deceptive  is  empire,  deceptive  is  beauty,  deceptive  are 
wealth  and  pride  of  birth. 

Man  amasseth  poisonous  wealth  with  deceit  and  guile, 
Nanak,  but  nothing  can  go  with  him  save  God’s  name. 

Men  mistake  on  beholding  the  colocynth  which  appeareth 
beautiful — 

It  is  not  worth  an  eighth  of  a paisa  ; Nanak,  thus  wealth 
appeareth  beautiful,  but  will  not  depart  with  one. 

Contempt  of  wealth  and  condemnation  of  idolatry: — 

Pauri  X 

Why  amass  what  will  not  go  with  thee  as  thou  pro- 
ceedest  ? 

Say  why  thou  endeavourest  to  acquire  what  thou  must 
leave  behind  ? 

How  can  thy  mind  be  contented  and  not  distressed  when 
thou  forgettest  God  ? 

He  who  forsaketh  God  and  attacheth  himself  to  idols 
shall  abide  in  hell. 

0 God,  be  merciful  and  compassionate,  and  dispel  Nanak’s 
dread  of  transmigration. 

The  holy  man  finds  no  pleasure  in  worldly  enjoy- 
ments : — 

Slok  XI 

Not  sweet  to  me  are  the  pleasures  of  empire,  not  sweet  are 
sensuous  enjoyments,  not  sweet  are  the  pleasures  of  wealth. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  377 

Sweet  is  association  with  God’s  saints,  O slave  Nanak ; 
sweet  is  the  sight  of  God. 

It  is  thus  love  is  produced,  and  the  mind  absorbed  therein. 

The  real  thing  is  then  found  and  the  Lord  is  then  sweet. 

Pauri  XI 

Without  God  nothing  is  sweet  to  His  saints  : 

All  other  pleasures  are  insipid  : I have  seen  this  after 
careful  search. 

The  doubt  and  pain  of  ignorance  were  removed  when  the 
Guru  became  my  mediator. 

When  the  love  of  God’s  lotus  feet  pierced  my  heart,  it 
became  as  if  dyed  with  madder. 

God  then  dwelt  in  my  life,  my  soul,  my  mind,  and  my 
body  ; and  everything  that  was  false  vanished. 

The  lower  animals  are  led  by  their  senses,  the  saints 
only  by  devotion  : — 


Slok  XII 

The  fish  cannot  live  without  water,  nor  the  chatrik  with- 
out the  cloud  ; 

The  deer  is  smitten  with  the  arrow  of  the  bell ; the  bee 
is  entangled  by  the  odour  of  the  flower. 

The  saints  are  pleased  by  God’s  lotus  feet,  Nanak,  and 
by  nothing  else. 

The  Guru's  love  for  God : — 

O God,  may  I behold  Thy  face  without  blinking  and  not 
turn  my  mind  elsewhere  ! 

Nanak  will  abide  with  that  Lord  God  who  is  the  Friend 
of  the  saints. 


Pauri  XII 

How  can  a fish  maintain  life  without  water  ? 

How  can  the  chatrik  be  satisfied  without  raindrops  ? 

As  the  deer  fascinated  by  the  bell  runneth  towards  the 
huntsman ; 


378  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

As  the  greedy  bumble-bee  on  finding  an  odorous  flower 
hath  itself  shut  up  in  it ; 

So  holy  men  love  tiod  and  are  satisfied  on  beholding 
Him, 

Slok  XIII 

The  saints  meditate  on  God’s  lotus  feet  and  adore  them 
at  every  breath. 

They  forget  not  the  name  of  the  Imperishable  One  ; 
0 Nanak,  the  supreme  God  fulfilleth  their  hopes. 

God  is  stitched  into  their  hearts  and  is  never  a moment 
out  of  them. 

Nanak,  the  true  Lord  fulfilleth  their  desires  and  ever 
watcheth  over  them. 

. A supplication : — 

Pauri  XIII 

0 Lord,  fulfil  my  hopes  who  have  hopes  in  Thee. 

'He  who  meeteth  God  shall  never  grieve. 

My  heart  desireth  Thee  ; grant  me  a sight  of  Thee  that 
my  anxiety  may  depart. 

May  my  body  be  purified  with  the  dust  of  Thy  feet ! 

May  the  supreme  God  through  the  divine  Guru  be  ever 
present ! 

The  devotion  of  the  saints ; — 

Slok  XIV 

Nanak  is  ever  a sacrifice  to  those  who  meditate  on  the 
Supreme  Being, 

Who  repeat  His  name  with  their  tongues  and  hear  His 
ambrosial  word  with  their  ears. 

Everything  is  false  save  the  Lord  alone  : 

Nanak,  blest  are  they  who  love  the  True  One. 

Holy  are  they  who  in  any  manner  are  concerned 
with  God : — 

Pauri  XIV 

1 am  ever  a sacrifice  to  those  who  hear  God’s  story. 

, . Periectly  distinguished  are  they  who  bow  their  foreheads 
to  God. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  379 

The  hands  of  those  who  write  the  praises  of  the  Endless 
One  are  adorned  thereby. 

Their  feet  are  pure  and  clean  who  walk  in  God’s  way ; 

They  are  saved  with  the  saints'  and  all  their  sorrow 
fleeth  away. 

Happy  the  time  when  the  saints  meet  God : — ' 

Slok  XV 

To  make  effort  and  repeat  God’s  name  are  completely 
obtained  by  God’s  will. 

Happy  that  moment,  O Nanak,  when  I obtain  a sight  of 
God ! 

The  value  of  that  moment  cannot  be  estimated  ; its 
happiness  is  beyond  measure. 

Nanak,  that  time  is  acceptable  when  my  Beloved  meeteth 
me. 

Pauri  XV 

Tell  me  what  time  that  is  when  I shall  obtain  God  : , 

That  time  is  very  auspicious  when  I shall  meet  the  Lord. 

By  meditating  on  God  for  the  eight  watches  of  the  day, 
the  desires  of  the  heart  are  realised. 

By  great  good  fortune  the  company  of  the  saints  is  ob- 
tained ; I bow  and  touch  their  feet. 

My  heart  thirsteth  for  a sight  of  the  saints ; Nanak  is 
a sacrifice  unto  them. 

The  reward  of  devotion : — 

Slok  XVI 

God  is  the  Purifier  of  sinners,  the  Remover  of  every 
sorrow. 

Nanak,  they  who  repeat  His  name  enter  His  secure 
asylum. 

They  altogether  abandon  pride  and  cling  to  God’s  feet. 

Nanak,  on  beholding  God  their  troubles  and  anxieties 
depart. 

A fervent  prayer : — 

Pauri  XVI 

Blend  me  with  Thee,  0 Compassionate  One ; I have  fallen 
at  Thy  door. 


38o  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Preserve  me,  O Compassionate  to  the  poor;  wandering 
I have  become  very  weary. 

It  is  Thy  function,  O God,  to  love  the  saints  and  save 
sinners. 

Beside  Thee  there  is  none  : grant  my  supplication. 

Take  me  by  the  hand,  O Compassionate  One,  and  save 
me  from  the  ocean  of  the  world. 

The  cure  for  the  heart’s  fever  : — 

Slok  XVII 

I have  the  support  of  the  praises  of  the  merciful  God 
who  saveth  the  saints. 

Nanak,  man  groweth  pure  by  associating  with  the  saints 
and  taking  shelter  in  God. 

, The  heart’s  fever  is  not  at  all  removed  by  sandal,  the 
moon,  or  the  cold  season  ; 

It  is  cooled,  Nanak,  by  repeating  God’s  name. 

"Salvation  is  secured  by  devotion : — 

Pauri  XVII 

All  men  are  saved  by  the  shelter  of  God’s  lotus  feet. 

The  heart  groweth  fearless  on  hearing  God’s  glory . 

There  shall  be  nothing  wanting  when  the  wealth  of  the 
Name  is  stored  up. 

The  society  of  the  saints  is  obtained  by  greatly  meritorious 
acts. 

Meditate  on  God  during  the  eight  watches  of  the  day,  and 
ever  hear  His  praises. 

All  mercies  are  obtained  by  repeating  God’s  name 
and  praises ; — 

Slok  XVIII 

. Nanak,  to  repeat  the  praises  of  the  name  of  the  merciful 
supreme  Being 

Is  to  obtain  mercy,  to  remove  sorrows,  and  to  shake  off 
mammon. 

The  burning  fever  of  my  heart  hath  been  quenched  ; 
God  Hipiself  hath  preserved  me. 

Nanak,  repeat  the  name  of  that  God  who  created  the 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  381 

The  results  of  meditation  and  holy  association : — 
Pauri  XVIII 

When  God  is  merciful  we  feel  not  .worldly  love. 

Millions  of  sins  are  removed  by  meditating  on  the  one 
God. 

When  the  body  is  bathed  in  the  dust  of  the  holy  man’s 
feet,  it  becometh  pure ; 

The  mind  and  body  are  relieved ; man  obtaineth  the 
perfect  God, 

And  he  is  saved  with  his  family  and  all  his  tribe. 

Praises  of  the  true  Guru : — 

Slok  XIX 

The  Guru  is  Gobind,  the  Guru  is  Gopal,  the  perfect  Guru 
is  Narayan  ; 

The  Guru  is  merciful,  the  Guru  is  omnipotent ; Guru 
Nanak  is  the  saviour  of  sinners  ; 

The  Guru  is  the  boat  to  cross  over  the  dangerous  and  un- 
fathomable ocean  of  the  world. 

Nanak,  everything  is  effected  by  touching  the  feet  of  the 
true  Guru. 

The  Guru’s  power  : — 

Pauri  XIX 

Hail ! hail  to  the  divine  Guru  in  whose  company  God’s 
name  is  repeated  ! 

When  the  Guru  is  merciful,  all  demerits  vanish. 

The  supreme  being,  the  divine  Guru,  exalteth  the  lowly  ; 

He  cutteth  off  the  galling  chains  of  mammon,  and  maketh 
man  his  servant. 

Through  him  the  tongue  singeth  the  praises  of  the  Eternal 
God. 

God  alone  to  be  worshipped : — 

Slok  XX 

The  one  God  is  seen,  the  one  God  is  heard,  the  one  God  is 
spoken  of. 

Nanak  beggeth  the  gift  of  His  name  : 0 compassionate 

Being,  merciiuHy  grant  it  to  him. 


382 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


■ " I ^vorship  the  one  God,  I remember  the  one  God,  I make 
supplication  to  the  one  God. 

Nanak  hath  amassed  the  wealth  of  the  Name,  the  real 
capital. 

God  alone  is  merciful,  omnipresent,  and  omni- 
potent : — 

Pauri  XX 

God  is  merciful,  illimitable  ; He  alone  filleth  the  world. 

He  is  everything  Himself  ; whom  can  I mention  like 
Him  ? 

O God,  Thou  grantest  gifts,  and  again  receivest  them. 

Transmigration  dependeth  altogether  on  Thine  order ; 
immovable  is  Thine  abode. 

• Nanak  beggeth  a boon  ; mercifully  grant  him  Thy  name. 

Vain  are  decorations  and  wealth  without  devo- 
tion ; — 

Tom 

. Without  knowing  God  man’s  birth  were  vain  : 

He  decketh  and  adorneth  himself  in  various  ways,  but  it  is 
as  though  he  were  dressing  a corpse. 

The  miser  running  in  every  direction  amasseth  wealth 
with  toil; 

Yet  he  practiseth  not  charity  or  serveth  the  saints,  and 
his  wealth  availeth  him  not. 

A woman  putteth  on  her  jewels,  decketh  her  couch,  and 
maketh  great  preparations  : 

If  she  obtain  not  the  company  of  her  spouse,  the  sight  of 
her  decorations  will  but  pain  her. 

A man  may  work  all  day  pounding  husks  with  a pestle ; ^ 

Yet  he  only  suffereth  pain  like  a forced  labourer ; his 
wealth  shall  not  be  spent  on  himself. 

God  implanteth  His  name  in  the  heart  of  him  to  whom 
He  is  kind. 

Nanak,  such  a man  yearnetb  for  the  society  of  the  saints 
and  obtaineth  God’s  love. 

^ This  corresponds  to  the  English  expressions — threshing  beaten 
straw,  winnowing  chaif,  &c.,  &c. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  383 

A prayer  to  God : — 

Ocean  of  mercy,  dwell  for  ever  in  my  heart ; 

So  enlighten  my  understanding  that  I may  love  Thee,  O 
God. 

May  I obtain  the  dust  of  Thy  saints’  feet  to  apply  to  my 
forehead ! 

From  being  a great  sinner  may  I be  purified  and  sing  Thy 
praises  and  Thine  attributes  ! 

May  Thine  order  be  sweet  to  me,  and  what  Thou  doest 
please  me  ! 

May  what  Thou  givest  satiate  me,  so  that  I may  run  after 
no  one  else  ! 

O Lord  God,  may  I ever  know  Thee  near  me,  and  may  I 
remain  the  dust  of  all  men’s  feet  ! 

May  I meet  the  company  of  saints  so  that  I may  obtain 
my  God  ! 

We  are  ever  and  ever  Thy  children  ; Thou,  O God,  art 
our  Master. 

Saith  Nanak,  we  are  children  ; Thou  art  our  father  and 
mother  : put  Thy  name  as  milk  into  our  mouths. 

The  Guru  prays  for  God^s  name  as  the  sole  means 
of  salvation  : — 

O Lord,  I crave  Thy  name  as  a gift  ; 

Naught  else  shall  depart  with  me  ; may  I also  obtain  the 
favour  of  singing  Thy  praises  ! 

Empire,  wealth,  varied  pleasures  and  enjoyments  are  all 
as  the  shadow  of  a tree. 

Man  hasteth  in  every  direction,  but  all  his  efforts  are 
vain. 

All  his  affairs  who  desireth  other  than  God  appear  to  be 
unstable. 

Nanak  prayeth  for  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet  that  his 
mind  may  obtain  rest. 

God's  name  is  all  things  to  the  Guru : — 

God’s  name  is  the  support  of  my  soul ; 

By  its  use  my  life,  soul,  and  mind  are  comforted. 

The  Name  is  my  caste,  the  Name  is  my  lineage^  the  Name 
is  my  family ; 


384  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Name  is  ever  my  companion  ; God’s  name  delivereth 
me. 

The  pleasure  of  worldly  things  is  much  spoken  of,  but 
none  of  them  shall  depart  with  thee. 

The  Name  is  my  beloved  and  my  friend  ; God’s  name  is 
Nanak’s  storehouse. 

By  devotion  mind  and  body  are  purified : — 

Sing  God’s  excellent  praises  and  thy  maladies  shall  be 
healed. 

Thy  countenance  shall  become  bright,  thy  heart  pure,  and 
thy  life  profitable  in  this  and  the  next  world. 

Wash  the  Guru’s  feet,  serve  him,  and  make  him  thy  heart 
as  an  offering. 

Abandon  egotism,  contention,  and  pride  : accept  what 
cometh  from  God. 

He  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny  hath  been  written, 
attacheth  himself  to  the  Guru’s  service. 

Saith  Nanak,  except  the  one  God  there  is  none  able  to 
accomplish  aught. 

The  Guru  prays  God  to  forgo  his  account ; — 

0 True  Guru,  I have  sought  Thy  protection. 

May  I obtain  Thy  name  to  give  comfort  and  glory  and 
remove  my  anxiety. 

1 behold  no  other  place  of  shelter  ; I have  arrived  weary 
at  Thy  gate. 

Heed  not  my  account ; without  it  may  I be  saved  ! deliver 
me  though  devoid  of  virtue. 

Thou  ever  forgi  vest,  Thou  art  ever  kind,Thousupportcstall. 

The  slave  Nanak  followeth  the  saints  : save  him  in  this 
. human  birth. 

The  Guru’s  beatitude  when  singing  of  God : — 

When  my  tongue  singeth  of  God,  who  is  an  ocean  of 
merits. 

Peace,  composure,  and  delight  spring  up  in  my  heart, 
and  all  sorrows  take  flight. 

O man,  whatever  thou  askest  thou  shcdt  obtain  by 
worshipping  God’s  feet,  the  abode  of  pleasure. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  385 

They  shall  free  thee  from  both  birth  and  death,  and  carry 
thee  across  the  terrible  ocean  of  the  world. 

Searching  and  searching  I have  ascertained  that  the  real 
thing  is  to  depend  on  God  as  His  slave. 

If,  O Nanak,  thou  desire  everlasting  happiness,  ever 
remember  God. 

The  miser  especially  needs  God's  favour : — 

O miser,  thy  body  and  soul  are  full  of  sin. 

In  the  company  of  the  saints  worship  the  Lord  ; it  is 
He  alone  who  draweth  a veil  over  thy  sins. 

When  there  are  many  holes  in  the  boat,^  they  cannot  be 
stopped  by  the  fingers. 

Address  Him  who  made  the  boat,  and  they  shall  be  stopped, 
and  the  frail  boat  become  sound. 

If  any  one  try  to  lift  a mountain  with  words,  he  cannot 
succeed  ; where  it  was  there  it  remaineth. 

Nanak  hath  no  strength  or  power ; 0 God,  preserve  him; 
he  hath  sought  Thy  protection. 

They  who  are  slaves  of  mammon  shall  with 
difficulty  be  saved  : — 

Alas  ! alas  ! the  wealth  in  which  thou  ;^rt  wrapped  up, 
O fool,  is  little  or  naught. 

What  thou  deemest  thine  own  is  not  thine. 

Thou  hast  not  thought  of  thy  God  for  a moment. 

What  belongeth  to  another  thou  deemest  thine  own. 

Thou  hast  not  given  a place  in  thy  heart  to  the  Name 
which  is  with  thee. 

Thou  hast  attached  thy  heart  to  things  which  thou  must 
abandon. 

Thou  hast  amassed  worldly  things  but  remainest  hungry 
and  thirsty. 

Thou  hast  not  obtained  the  viaticum  of  the  ambrosial 
Name. 

Thou  hast  fallen  into  the  pits  of  lust,  wrath,  and  worldly 
love. 

Nanak,  through  the  favour  of  the  Guru  some  rare  man  is 
saved. 


SIKH,  Ilf 


^ Thou  hast  committed  many  sins. 
C C 


386  THE  SIKH  RELIGION^ 

Serving  the  one  God  is  the  Guru's  sole  occupa- 
tion : — 

I have  but  one  God  ; 

I recognize  none  other. 

I have  found,  my  Guru  through  great  good  fortune. 

He  hath  impressed  on  me  God’s  name, 

Which  is  to  me  devotion,  penance,  fasting,  and  religious 
observances. 

By  meditating  on  God  I have  obtained  all  comfort  and 
peace. 

To  praise  God  is  my  devotion,  my  occupation,  and  my 
caste. 

I feel  great  joy  on  hearing  His  praises. 

Saith  Nanak,  he  who  hath  found  God 

Hath  all  things  in  his  home. 

The  Guru  has  found  God  by  diligent  and  pious 
search : — 

Man  desireth  the  love  of  God  the  Beautiful, 

But  God’s  love  is  not  obtained  by  mere  words. 

Searching  for  a sight  of  Him  I look  in  every  lane. 

My  doubts  have  been  dispelled  on  meeting  the  Guru. 

I have  obtained  this  wisdom  from  the  holy  man  according 
to  the  destiny  recorded  on  my  forehead. 

In  this  way  Nanak  hath  seen  God  with  his  eyes. 

Reject  mammon  and  be  simple  at  heart : — 

O mother,  mammon  is  deceitful, 

She  is,  if  God  be  not  worshipped,  as  burning  grass,  the 
shadow  of  a cloud,  or  the  water  of  a hill-stream. 

Renounce  thy  devices  and  great  cleverness  ; clasp  thy 
hands  and  follow  the  way  of  the  saint. 

Remember  the  Lord  the  Searcher  of  hearts  ; this  is  the 
best  fruit  of  human  birth. 

Holy  men  preach  divine  knowledge,  but  luckless  fools 
understand  it  not. 

The  slave  Nanak  is  absorbed  in  love  and  devotion  ; by 
remembering  God  the  filth  of  his  sins  hath  been  burnt. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  387 

God's  saving  name  is  obtained  from  the  Guru : — 

0 mother,  the  feet  of  the  Guru  are  dear  to  me  ; 

God  giveth  them  by  favourable  .destiny  : millions  of 
advantages  are  obtained  by  beholding  the  Guru. 

By  singing  the  praises  of  the  Immortahand  Indestructible, 
unmannerly  lust,  wrath,  and  pride  vanish. 

They  who  are  dyed  with  the  true  love  become  permanent ; 
birth  and  death  shall  not  again  torment  them. 

1 deem  all  joys  and  pleasures  false  except  worshipping  God 
through  the  compassionate  Guru. 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  obtained  the  jewel  of  the  Name, 
without  it  everybody  is  robbed  of  his  human  birth. 

Bairari 

The  advantage  of  congregational  devotion  : — 

The  saints  meeting  together  sing  God’s  praises. 

And  thus  remove  the  pain  of  millions  of  births. 

What  the  h^art  desireth  is  in  this  wise  obtained. 

They  have  mercifully  granted  me  God’s  name 

In  which  abide  all  happiness  and  greatness. 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  Nanak  hath  obtained  this  know- 
ledge. 

Tilang^ 

The  kindness  of  God  : — 

Kind,  kind  is  the  Lord  ; 

My  Lord  is  kind  : 

To  all  creatures  He  giveth  gifts. 

Why  waver,  0 mortal  ? the  Creator  will  protect  thee. 

He  who  gave  thee  birth  will  support  thee.. 

He  who  created  the  earth  will  take  care  of  thee. 

He  is  the  Master  and  the  true  Cherisher  of  all  hearts. 

His  power  apd  worth  cannot  be  known  He  is.  great  and 
unconcerned. 

Servant  of  God,  do  Him  service  as  long  as.  there  is  breath 
in  thy  body. 

^ The  Tilang  measure  is  much  sung  by  Balochea..  Hymns  in  this 
measure  ordinal  ily  contain  several  Persian  words. 

C C 2 


388 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Thou,  O God,  art  all-powerful,  ineffable,  inapprehensible ; 
the  soul  and  body  are  Thy  property. 

Nanak’s  prayer  ever  is  that  by  Thy  mercy  he  may  obtain 
happiness. 

The  Guru . praises  God  under  whatever  name 
known : — 

O Creator,  on  beholding  Thy  might  I long  to  meet  Thee. 

Thou  alone  art  my  spiritual  and  temporal  Lord  ; Thou  art 
unsullied  by  the  whole  creation. 

In  a moment  Thou  makest  and  unmakest : wonderful 
are  Thy  manifestations. 

Who  knoweth  Thine  acts  ? ^ Thou  art  a light  in  the 
darkness. 

0 Allah,  Thou  Thyself  art  the  Lord  of  the  world,  the 
merciful  Khuda.* 

Why  should  they  who  adore  Thee  day  and  night  go  to 
hell? 

Azrail  is  a friend  of  the  slave  whose  support  Thou  art. 

All  the  sins  of  Thy  servant  who  obtaineth  a sight  of 
Thee,  are  pardoned. 

All  worldly  things  are  for  the  present ; true  happiness  is 
to  be  found  in  Thy  name. 

On  meeting  the  Guru,  Nanak  hath  ascertained  this  ; 
wherefore  he  ever  singeth  the  praises  of  the  one  God. 

SuHl 

God  has  installed  the  Guru  as  a beloved  housewife 
in  His  palace : — 

God  hath  given  me  possession  of  the  household  ; I have 
become  the  housewife. 

My  Spouse  hath  made  the  ten  organs  of  action  and  reflec- 
my  slaves. 

1 have  put  together  all  the  things  of  the  house. 

And  with  thirsty  desire  I long  for  my  Beloved. 

What  merits  of  my  beloved  Spouse  shall  I mention  ? 

He  is  the  wise,  handsome,  and  compassionate  God. 

Also  translated — play. 

* Allah  and  Khuda  used  in  this  verse  are  Muhammadan  names 
of  God. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  389 

I have  put  on  chastity  as  my  ornaments  and  applied  the 
fear  of  God  as  a pigment  to  mine  eyes.  ^ 

I chew  the  ambrosial  Name  as  my  betel ; 

My  bracelets,  my  dress,  mine  ornaments  admirably  become 
me. 

A woman  obtaineth  all  happiness  if  her  Beloved  go  to  her 
house. 

I have  fascinated  my  Spouse  by  the  charm  of  my  virtues  : 

I have  made  Him  subject  to  me  and  the  Guru  hath  dis- 
pelled my  doubts. 

My  palace  is  the  most  exalted  of  all. 

My  Beloved  hath  forsaken  all  other  women  and  become 
my  lover. 

The  bright  light  of  the  sun  ^ hath  appeared. 

I have  spread  my  couch  with  infinite  faith  in  Him, 

My  Darling  who  affordeth  ever  new  delight  hath  come  to 
my  couch  to  enjoy  me. 

Nanak,  when  I met  my  Beloved  I obtained  happiness. 

Man  is  unable  to  render  due  thanksgiving  to  God 
for  all  His  favours  : — 

What  praises  of  Thine  shall  I recount,  O Thou  who 
bestowest  on  me  though  devoid  of  virtue  ? 

What  skill  hath  a purchased  slave  ? this  soul  and  body 
are  totally  Thine. 

I am  a sacrifice  to  a sight  of  Thee,  Thou  merry,  beloved, 
and  fascinating  Darling, 

O God,  Thou  bestowest  on  me  a poor  beggar  ; Thou  art 
ever  and  ever  beneficent. 

What  can  be  accomplished  by  myself  is  nothing,  O my 
inaccessible  and  infinite  Lord. 

What  service  shall  I perform  } what  shall  I say  to  please 
Thee? 

How  shall  I obtain  a sight  of  Thee  ? 

Thy  measure  cannot  be  ascertained  ; Thy  limit  cannot  be 
found  ; my  soul  thirst eth  for  Thy  feet. 

Becoming  bold  I pray  to  obtain  this  gift  that  the  dust 
of  the  saints’  feet  be  applied  to  my  face. 

^ Divine  knowledge. 


390  THE  SIKH  religion: 

The  Guru  extended  mercy  to  his  slave  Nanak,  so  God 
reached  him  His  hand  and  saved  him. 

Man  is  swift  to  evil  and  slow  to  good 

Man  riseth  early  for  evil  deeds  ; 

But  he  sleepeth  when  it  is  time  to  repeat  God’s  name. 
The  fool  knoweth  not  his  opportunity ; 

He  becometh  involved  in  worldly  love  and  pleasures  ; 

In  the  midst  of  his  covetousness  he  is  elated,  pleased. 
And  looketh  not  even  at  holy  men. 

The  ignorant  clown  never  understandeth. 

He  is  again  and  again  involved  in  entanglements. 

He  is  pleased  on  hearing  immoral  songs, 

While  his  mind  is  slow  to  hear  God’s  praises. 

O blind  one,  thou  seest  not  with  thine  eyes  : 

Thou  must  leave  all  these  false  occupations  and  depart. 
Saith  Nanak,  0 God,  mercifully  grant  me 
The  favour  of  the  company  of  Thy  saints. 

Man  obtaineth  something  when  he  becometh  the  dust  of 
the  saints'  feet — 

He  to  whom  God  giveth  Understanding  repeateth  His 
name. 

The  Guru’s  instruction  : — 

Man  seeth  with  his  eyes,  but  yet  is  blind ; he  heareth, 
but  yet  is  deaf  ; 

What  is  near  him  he  deemeth  distant ; the  sinner  ever 
committeth  sin. 

O mortal,  do  such  acts  as  shall  secure  thy  deliverance, 
And  repeat  God’s  name  the  ambrosial  word. 

Thou  art  ever  filled  with  the  love  of  horses  and  palaces. 
But  none  of  them  shall  depart  With  thee. 

Thou  scrubbest  thy  vessel  of  clay  ; 

Yet  it  is  very  foul,  and  shall  be  punished  by  Death’s 
mace. 

Man  is  bound  by  lust,  wrath,  covetousness,  and  worldly 
love. 

And  is  thereby  swallowed  up  in  a great  pit. 

Hear  Nanak’s  prayer— 

O my  God,  save  me,  a sinking  stone  ! 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  3QI 

The  Guru's  self-sacrifice  and  abject  servility  to 
God's  saint : — 

God’s  saint  is  my  life  and  wealth  ; * I am  his  water-carrier  ; 

He  is  dearer  to  me  than  all  brethren,  friends,  and  sons, 
yea,  than  even  life  itself. 

Let  me  make  a fan  of  my  hair,  and  wave  it  as  a chauri  over 
the  saint  ; 

Let  me  bow  my  head  beneath  his  feet,  and  apply  their 
dust  to  my  face  ; 

Like  a poor  man  let  me  offer  him  my  supplication  with 
sweet  words  ; 

Abandoning  pride  let  me  fall  at  his  feet,  and  obtain  the 
treasure  of  virtues. 

Let  me  obtain  a sight  of  him  again  and  again. 

Let  me  treasure  up  his  ambrosial  word  in  my  heart,  and 
make  him  continual  obeisance. 

I desire  the  society  of  holy  men  ; I hope  for  it,  I pray  for  it. 

0 Lord,  have  mercy  upon  Nanak  that  he  may  touch  Thy 
slaves’  feet. 

God's  praises : — 

1 supplicate  the  true  Guru  to  grant  me  the  Name  as  my 
support. 

When  the  True  King  is  pleased,  the  world  is  cured  of  its 
fever. 

Thou,  0 Lord,  art  the  prop  of  the  saints  ; Thou  art  the 
shelter  of  the  saints  ; Thou  art  the  true  Creator. 

True  are  Thy  chattels,  true  Thine  extension.^ 

Thy  form  is  unapproachable  ; unequalled  is  a sight  of 
Thee. 

I am  a sacrifice  to  Thy  servants  to  whom  Thy  name 
is  dear. 

All  hopes  are  fulfilled  when  the  Unapproachable  and  the 
Unequalled  is  obtained. 

Guru  Nanak  hath  met  the  primal  God,  and  is  a sacrifice 
unto  His  feet. 


^ The  world  which  has  been  projected  from  the  Creator. 


392  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Salvation  is  only  found  in  the  Guru’s  instruction 
which  is  open  to  all : — 

Salvation  is  not  obtained  by  reading  all  the  Veds,  the 
books  of  the  Musalmans,  the  Simritis,  and  the  Shastars. 

He  who  under  the  Guru’s  instruction  repeateth  the  one 
Word  shall  obtain  unsullied  glory. 

The  four  castes  of  Khatris,  Brahmans,  Sudars,  and 
Vaisyas  are  partners  in  God’s  word. 

Nanak,  by  repeating  under  the  Guru’s  instruction  the 
name  of  God  who  dwelleth  in  every  heart,  man  shall  be 
saved  in  this  age. 


Ashtapadi 

The  magnification  of  God’s  name  : — 

The  Simritis,  the  Veds,  and  the  Purans  proclaim 

That  without  the  Name  all  ritual  is  false  and  valueless. 

The  Name,  which  is  unequalled  wealth,  abideth  in  the 
hearts  of  the  saints. 

Transmigration,  worldly  love,  and  sorrow  are  removed 
in  the  company  of  the  saints. 

They  who  indulge  in  worldly  love,  strife,  and  pride  shall 
assuredly  weep. 

They  who  are  without  the  Name  shall  find  no  happiness. 

By  boasting  of  his  property,  bonds  are  forged  for  man. 

They  who  devote  themselves  to  works  of  mammon  shall 
be  born  in  hell  and  heaven. 

By  reflecting  and  reflecting  and  reflecting  I have  come  to 
this  conclusion. 

That  without  the  Name  there  is  no  happiness  and  man 
assuredly  faileth. 

Many  come  and  go,  die  and  are  born  again. 

Without  knowing  God  all  is  vain  and  men  wander  in 
wombs. 

They  to  whom  God  is  merciful,  obtain  the  society  of  the 

saints, 

And  repeat  God’s  name  which  is  ambrosia. 

Millions,  yea,  countless  and  endless  persons  search  for 
God ; 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  393 

But  God  is  near  him  whom  He  causeth  to  know  Him. 

Forget  me  not,  O Bountiful  One';  grant  me  Thy  name. 

It  is  Nanak’s  pleasure  to  repeat  Thy  praises  day  and  night. 

Chhant 

God  ever  speaks  mildly : — 

God  who  is  my  Friend  and  my  Lord,  speaketh  mildly ; 

I am  weary  of  trying  Him,  but  He  never  speaketh  harshly. 

The  perfect  God  who  thinketh  not  of  our  demerits, 
knoweth  not  how  to  speak  harshly. 

To  purify  sinners  is  God’s  function  ; He  destroyeth  not 
a particle  of  man’s  work.^ 

He  dwelleth  in  every  heart ; He  pervadeth  everything  ; 
He  is  the  nearest  of  the  near. 

The  slave  Nanak  is  ever  under  the  protection  of  God,  his 
immortal  Friend. 

The  advantage  of  singing  God's  praises : — 

Bilawal 

Exalted,  peerless,  endless  Lord,  who  knoweth  Thy  merits  ? 

By  singing  them  man  is  saved  ; by  hearing  them  man  is 
saved,  and  multitudes  of  sins  are  effaced. 

0 Lord,  Thou  savest  beasts,  sprites,  and  idiots  ; even 
stones  Thou  causest  to  cross  the  terrible  water. 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  entered  Thine  asylum,  and  is  ever 
and  ever  a sacrifice  unto  Thee. 

The  first  verse  of  the  following  is  often  inscribed 
on  new  houses  : — 

The  True  Guru  hath  made  my  house  and  family  permanent. 

He  who  slandereth  them  is  already  destroyed  by  the 
Creator. 

The  slave  Nanak  taketh  the  protection  of  Him  whose 
word  is  eternal  and  incomparable. 

Advantages  of  meeting  the  Guru  and  his  saints:— 

The  cripple  can  cross  over  a mountain,  the  blockhead 
ecome  an  accomplished  preacher, 

^ hilt  is,  man  loses  not  a particle  of  the  advantage  of  devoiion. 


394  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

And  the  blind  see  the  three  worlds  on  meeting  the  pure 
Guru. 

O my  friends,  hear  the  advantage  of  the  company  of  the 
saints — 

With  them  impurity  is  washed  away,  millions  of  sins  set 
aside,  and  the  heart  purified. 

Such  is  service  to  God  that  by  it  an  ant  can  overcome  an 
elephant. 

God  hath  given  the  fearless  gift  to  him  whom  He  hath 
made  His  own. 

For  him  a lion  becometh  a cat,  and  a mountain  a blade, of 
grass  : 

They  who  toiled  for  half  a dam  have  become  very  rich. 

What  praise  of  Thine  can  I utter,  0 Thou  of  endless 
excellences  ? 

Mercifully  grant  Nanak  Thy  name,  0 God,  otherwise 
he  cannot  behold  Thee.^ 

The  Guru's  self-abasement  before  God's  saints : — 

Let  me  perform  service  for  Thy  slave,  0 Lord  : and  wipe 
his  feet  with  my  hair. 

Let  me  give  him  my  head  as  an  offering,  and  listen  to  the 
praises  of  the  Abode  of  pleasure. 

My  soul  reviveth  on  meeting  Thee  ; wherefore  meet  me, 
0 Merciful  One. 

Night  and  day  my  mind  is  happy  thinking  on  the  Merciful 
One. 

0 God,  attach  me  to  the  skirts  of  Thy  saints  who  save  the 
world, 

0 God,  grant  me  the  gift  of  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 

1 have  no  tricks  of  speech  or  cleverness,  nor  can  I labour 
in  Thy  service. 

Preserve  me  from  doubt,  fear,  and  worldly  love,  and  cut 
away  Death’s  noose. 

I implore  Thee,  0 Lord  of  mercy,  0 Father,  to  cherish  me  ! 

0 Abode  of  happiness,  let  Nanak  sing  Thy  praises  in  the 
company  of  the  saints. 

^ which  means  empty,  also  means  way,  and  the  phrase  may 
be  translated — Show  me  the  way  to  behold  Thee. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  395 

Abase  thyself  before  the  saint  of  God : — 

Draw  water,  fan,  and  grind  for  God’s  slave,  and  then 
shalt  thou  be  happy. 

Burn  for  him  in  the  fire  empire,  possessions,  and  dominion. 

Touch  the  feet  even  of  the  saints’  servant. 

Forsake  the  possessors  of  wealth  and  the  lords  of  um- 
brellas. 

The  saints’  dry  bread  is  equal  to  all  treasure. 

The  thirty-six  dishes  in  the  house  of  the  infidel  are  as 
poison. 

A man  is  not  naked  when  he  clotheth  himself  in  the  rags 
of  the  saints  ; 

He  loseth  his  honour  when  he  putteth  on  the  silken  robe- 
of  the  infidel. 

When  one  contracteth  friendship  with  an  infidel,  it  is 
dissolved  half  way. 

Whoever  serveth  God’s  saint  shall  be  saved  in  this  life 
and  the  next. 

Everything  was  produced  by  Thee,  0 Lord  ; Thou  didst 
contrive  this  contrivance  of  the  world. 

Nanak,  on  beholding  the  saints,  singeth  God’s  praises. 

The  Guru's  search  for  God : — 

Searching  and  searching  I search  round  the  forests 

For  th^t  God  who  is  undeceivable,  invulnerable,  and  in- 
scrutable. 

When  shall  I behold  my  God  the  delight  of  my  soul  ? 

Better  than  waking  is  the  dream  in  which  I abide  with 
God. 

As  I listen  to  the  Shastars  on  the  four  castes  and  the  four 
stages  of  life,  I am  not  satisfied  but  thirst  to  behold  God. 

He  hath  no  colour  nor  outline,  nor  is  He  made  of  five 
elements  ; He  is  imperishable. 

The  saints  or  some  rare  man  of  great  sanctity  may  describe 
His  appearance. 

They  whom  He  mercifully  meeteth  are  to  be  congratulated. 

His  doubts  vanish  who  seeth  God  within  him  and  without 
him. 

Nanak,  he  whose  acts  are  perfect  meeteth  God. 


396  THE  SIKH  RELIGION  ^ 

There  is  salvation  for  the  repentant  sinner 

Body,  wealth,  and  youth  pass  away.^ 

Thou  hast  not  repeated  God’s  name,  and  day  hath  dawned 
on  thee  while  committing  sin  at  night. 

Through  continually  eating  various  forms  of  food  thy 
teeth  are  worn  and  drop  out. 

Thou  wert  robbed  while  talking  of  thy  possessions,  and 
thou  didst  feel  no  compunction  on  committing  sin. 

Great  enormities  are  a terrible  sea  of  trouble  in  which 
man  perisheth  ; 

But  the  Lord  God,  O Nanak,  taketh  the  arm  of  him  who 
seeketh  His  protection  and  extricateth  him. 

The  Guru's  love  for  God : — 

I am  in  love  with  the  Beloved. 

The  Lord  hath  drawn  me  with  such  a strong  thread  that 
if  I try  to  break  it,  it  will  not  break  ; and  if  I try  to  let 
it  go,  it  will  not  go. 

0 Lord,  mercifully  abide  day  and  night  in  my  heart. 

1 am  a sacrifice  to  God,  an  account  of  whom  I have  heard, 
but  cannot  express. 

The  slave  Nanak,  Thy  slave  of  slaves,  prayeth — O God, 
show  me  Thy  mercy  ! 

Submission  to  God's  saint  is  equal  to  all  pilgrim- 
ages : — 

The  feet  of  the  Supreme  Being’s  slave  whose  praise  is 
pure,  are  equal  to  millions  of  pilgrimages  to  the  Ganges. 

Nanak,  he  who  batheth  in  the  feet  of  the  holy  man  shall 
have  the  sins  of  many  births  washed  away. 

Bilawal  Ashtapadi 

The  Guru  describes  his  love  for  God : — 

O God,  there  is  none  but  Thee. 

The  love  of  my  heart  for  Thee  is  like  that  of  the  chakor 
for  the  moon. 

Or  the  love  of  the  fish  for  the  water. 

' Also  translated— The  play  of  body,  wealth,  and  youth  is  over. 


HYMNS  OF  GtJRtj  ARJAN  397 

As  the  bumble-bee  forsaketh  not  the  lotus, 

As  the  chawki  desireth  the  sun. 

So  Nanak  thirsteth  for  God’s  feet. 

As  the  husband  is  the  life  of  his  young  bride, 

As  the  covetous  man  is  pleaded  with  a gift  of  wealth, 

As  the  affinity  of  milk  for  water, 

As  the  very  hungry  man  desireth  food. 

As  a mother  loveth  her  son. 

So,  O Nanak,  ever  remember  God. 

As  the  moth  falleth  into  the  lamp, 

As  the  thief  fearlessly  stealeth. 

As  the  elephant  is  entrapped  through  his  lust. 

As  the  sinner  is  caught  in  his  misdeeds. 

As  the  gambler’s  vice  forsaketh  him  not. 

So  Nanak  applieth  his  soul  to  God. 

As  the  deer  loveth  the  hunter’s  bell. 

As  the  chatrik  longeth  for  the  rain-drops. 

So  I live  by  association  with  the  saints. 

I love  to  worship  God, 

And  my  tongue  repeateth  His  name. 

O God,  grant  Nanak  a sight  of  Thee. 

He  who  singeth,  heareth,  or  writeth  God’s  praises 
Shall  receive  all  the  reward  thereof  from  God. 

He  shall  himself  cross  over  the  ocean  of  the  world. 

And  save  all  his  family, 

God’s  feet  shall  be  a boat  for  him 

Who  in  the  association  of  the  saints  singeth  God’s  praises. 
O Lord  God,  protect  mine  honour. 

O God,  Nanak  hath  taken  the  protection  of  Thy  door.^ 

Gaund 

Man,  even  when  captivated  by  the  world,  shall  be 
saved  hy  seeking  God’s  protection : — 

O man,  thou  art  caught  like  a fish  or  a monkey  ; thou  art 
captivated  with  the  d}^  of  the  safflower. 

The  movements  of  thy  feet  and  thy  breathings  are  counted; 
thou  shalt  only  be  saved  if  thou  sing  God’s  praise?. 

O man,  understand  this  and  cease  thy  perversity. 

^ Duar  in  the  original. 


398  THE  SIKH!  RELIGION 

Canst  thou  not  find  a place  to  dwell  in  at  home  ? why 
goest  thou  to  others’  houses  ? ^ 

Impelled  like  an  elephant  by  the  pleasure  of  lust,  thou 
remainest  attached  to  thy  family.  , 

As  birds  meet  together  and  again  separate,  so  thou  too 
shalt  be  separated  from  thy  people,  but  thou  shall  obtain  a firm 
abiding-place  if  in  association  with  the  saints  thou  meditate 
on  God. 

As  the  fish  perisheth  through  love  of  its  palate,  so  foolish 
man  is  ruined  by  his  covetousness. 

Thou  art  in  the  power  of  thy  five  enemies,  but  thou  shalt 
escape  from  them  by  seeking  God’s  protection. 

0 Destroyer  of  grief,  be  merciful  to  the  poor ; man  and 
the  lower  animals  all  are  Thine. 

May  I obtain  the  favour  to  continually  behold  and  meet 
Thee  ! Nanak  is  the  slave  of  Thy  slaves. 

The  supreme  efficacy  of  God’s  protection  : — 

Him  whom  the  Protector  protecteth 

The  Formless  One  will  assist. 

Fire  shall  not  touch  him  in  his  mother’s  womb  ; 

Lust,  wrath,  covetousness,  and  worldly  love  shall  not 
affect  him. 

When  man  repeateth  the  name  of  the  Formless  Oiie  in  the 
company  of  the  saints. 

Dust  shall  be  thrown  in  the  face  of  whoever  slandereth 
him. 

The  spell  of  God’s  name  ^ is  armour  for  His  slave  : 

Enemies  and  ill-wishers  can  make  no  impression  on  him. 

He  who  indulgeth  in  pride  shall  pass  away. 

While  God  protecteth  His  poor  slave. 

God  will  embrace  and  defend  him 

Who  falleth  under  His  protection. 

He  who  is  very  proud 

Shall  in  a moment  be  blended  with  the  dust. 

1 am  ever  and  ever  a sacrifice  to  Him 

1 Do  good  thyself,  and  then  go  and  preach  to  others. 

* Ram  kawach.  Literally — God’s  coat  of  mail;  but  the  term  is 
also  applied  to  a particular  spell. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  399 

Who  is,  was,  and  shall  be  the  true  One. 

God  hath  mercy  and  protecteth  His  slaves  : 

He  is  the  support  of  Nanak’s  soul, 

God  described  by  negatives  : — 

Wonderful  and  greatly  unequalled  is  a description 
Of  the  Soul  of  the  world,  the  Supreme  Being  : 

He  is  not  old,  nor  is  He  young  ; 

He  hath  no  sorrow,  nor  is  He  caught  in  Death’s  halter ; 
He  neither  perisheth,  nor  departeth  ; 

In  the  beginning  and  in  every  age  He  pervadeth  the  world  ; 
He  feeleth  nor  heat  nor  cold  ; 

He  hath  no  friend,  no  enemy  ; 

He  feeleth  nor  joy  nor  mourning. 

Everything  belongeth  to  Him  and  He  is  potent  to  act. 
He  hath  no  father,  and  no  mother  ; 

He  is  without  limit,  and  from  the  beginning ; 

He  is  not  the  subject  cither  of  virtue  or  of  vice. 

In  every  heart  He  is  ever  awake  ; 

He  created  one  energy  Maya  with  the  three  qualities. 
Great  Maya  is  His  shadow. 

He  is  undeceivable,  invulnerable,  inscrutable,  and  com- 
passionate. 

Compassionate  to  the  poor  He  is  ever  merciful ; 

His  condition  and  measure  cannot  be  known  : 

Nanak,  I am  a sacrifice  unto  Him. 

Ramkali 

A prayer  to  God  and  miscellaneous  instruction  : — 
Have  mercy  upon  me,  O Bountiful  to  the  poor,  and  think 
not  at  all  of  my  merits  or  demerits. 

Why  should  we  wash  clay  ? O Lord,  to  be  unclean  is  the 
condition  of  man.^ 

O my  soul,  serve  the  True  Guru,  and  thou  shalt  be  happy. 
Thou  shalt  obtain  whatever  thou  mayest  desire,  and  not 
again  feel  sorrow. 

God  fashioned  us  frail  vessels,  put  His  light  within  us, 
and  cherisheth  us. 

^ That  is,  man  is  ever  sinful. 


400 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


We  act  as  the  Creator  predestined  for  us  from  the  beginning. 

Man  claimeth  his  soul  and  body  to  be  entirely  his  own  ; 
hence  his  transmigration. 

He  thinketh  not  on  Him  who  gave  them  ; he  is  blindly 
wrapped  up  in  worldly  love. 

He  who  knoweth  the  God  who  made  him  shall  reach  His 
unequalled  palace. 

May  Nanak  Thy  slave  serve  Thee  and  sing  Thy  praises, 
O God  ! 

By  due  meditation  on  God  man  is  preserved  from 
the  deadly  sins  : — 

My  God  hath  assisted  me,  and  I have  disposed  of  all 
mine  enemies. 

I have  bound  the  enemies  who  plundered  this  world. 

My  God  is  the  True  Guru. 

To  utter  His  name  and  put  confidence  in  Him  is  equal 
to  enjoyment  of  the  delights  of  many  empires. 

The  Protector  watcheth  over  him  who  thinketh  of  none 
but  Him. 

He  whose  support  is  Thy  name  alone,  O Lord,  despiseth 
the  world. 

He  who  hath  met  the  Giver  of  comfort,  becometh  perfect ; 
he  is  not  deficient  in  anything. 

On  meeting  God,  the  best  thing,  man  obtaineth  the  supreme 
position,  and  forsaketh  it  not  to  go  elsewhere. 

I cannot  describe  a Being  like  Thee  who  art  true,  invisible, 
and  infinite. 

Nanak,  our  Lord  is  unequalled,  unfathomable,  and  un- 
wavering. 

Praises  of  God : — 

Thou  art  wise.  Thou  art  immovable.  Thou  art  my  caste. 
Thou  art  my  lineage. 

Thou  art  unwavering.  Thou  waverest  never  ; then  how 
can  I feel  anxiety  ? 

Thou  alone  art  the  one  God  ; 

Thou  alone  art  the  one  King. 

Through  Thy  mercy  I have  obtained  happiness. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  401 

Thou  art  a lake  ; we  are  Thy  swans  ; in  Thee  are  gems 
and  rubies. 

Thou  art  the  Giver  ; Thou  hesitatest  not  at  all ; we  eat 
from  Thy  hands  and  are  ever  happy. 

We  are  children,  Thou  art  our  Father,  Thou  puttest  milk 
into  our  mouths. 

We  all  play  and  Thou  ever  fondlest  us  : Thou  art  ever 
brimful  of  excellences. 

Thou  art  perfect  and  fillest  every  place  : O Perfect  One, 
we  too  are  satiated  with  Thy  company. 

After  many  efforts  I have  become  blended  with  Thee  ; 
Nanak,  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  said. 

A votary  of  Krishan  invited  Guru  Arjan  to  see 
the  circular  dance  in  honour  of  his  god.  The  Guru 
replied  that  the  whole  world  was  dancing  and  playing, 
and  there  was  no  necessity  to  go  to  such  an  enter- 
tainment. A man  ought  to  dance  as  follows  : — 

Make  thy  hands  the  cymbals,  thine  eyes  the  kettledrums, 
thy  forehead  the  rebeck, 

Thine  ears  the  sweet  pipe,  and  thy  tongue  the  prelude. 

Bring  dancing  with  the  heart  as  the  motions  of  thy  hands 
and  thy  tinkling  anklets. 

And  dance  to  God. 

Let  the  Compassionate  One  be  the  spectator  and  behold 
thy  dressing  and  decorations. 

Let  thine  arena  be  the  whole  earth,  the  firmament  above 
its  canopy. 

And  the  breath  the  sole  manager. 

From  the  water  and  the  other  elements  God  created  a 
puppet  to  which  acts  are  attached. 

In  the  four  corners  of  the  earth  God  lit  up  and  placed  both 
the  moon  and  sun  as  lamps. ^ 

There  are  ten  dancing  girls  * and  five  accompanists  ^ 
together  in  one  chamber.^ 

^ An  attendant  holding  a lamp  in  each  hand  goes  round  and  lights 
the  theatre. 

^ The  organs  of  action  and  perception, 

® The  five  senses,  * Thebp^> 

D d 


Mku.  m 


402  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

They  separately  gesticulate  and  all  speak  different 
tongues. 

In  every  house  there  is  dancing  day  and  night,  and  in 
every  heart  the  trumpets  ^ sound. 

God  causeth  one  man  to  dance  in  secular  occupations, 
another  He  diverteth  therefrom,  and  a third  He  debaseth 
by  transmigration. 

Saith  Nanak,  he  who  meeteth  the  perfect  Guru  shall  not 
dance  again. 

Instruction  to  a Jogi; — 

0 Jogi,  the  four  Veds  call  to  thee,  but  thou  obeyest  them 
not ; 

The  six  Shastars  also  tell  of  one  thing. 

The  eighteen  Purans  combined  speak  of  the  one  God  ; 

Yet,  even  so,  thou  hast  not  found  their  secret. 

The  kinguri  of  God  playeth  an  unequalled  strain, 

O intoxicated  Jogi. 

In  the  first  age  the  village  of  truth  was  inhabited  ; ^ 

In  the  Treta  age  there  was  some  falling  off  ; ® 

In  the  Dwarpar  half  the  truth  remained  ; 

In  the  Kal  one-fourth  remained,  and  then  God  was 
shown  by  the  Guru. 

On  one  string  * the  gems  of  souls  were  strung  ; 

They  were  all  kept  separate  by  knots  : ® 

The  rosary  thus  formed  revolved  in  many  ways.® 

When  God  draweth  the  string,  they  all  come  together.’ 

From  the  four  elements  the'  body  ® was  constructed. 

In  it  there  were  difficult  passages  and  many  windows.® 

When  the  Jogi  cometh  searching  and  searching  to  God’s 
door, 

^ Thoughts,  fancies,  &c.,  &c. 

* That  is,  truth  dwelt  wherever  there  were  human  habitations. 

® Duttra — two  or  three.  Men  were  at  sixes  and  sevens. 

® God’s  power.  ® That  is,  by  different  bodies. 

* Men  were  subjected  to  different  forms  of  transmigration. 

’ Are  absorbed  in  God  from  whom  they  sprang. 

® Mat.  Literally — a Jogi’s  dwelling. 

® This  refers  to  the  practice  of  the  Jogis  fixing  their  breath  in 
different  parts  of  the  body  and  practising  introspection. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  403 

Then,  O Nanak,  he  shall  find  God’s  private  apartment. 
Thus  shall  his  kinguri  play  an  unequalled  strain  : 

On  hearing  it  the  Jogi’s  mind  will  be  pleased. 

The  Guru  recommends  God's  love  instead  of  the 
practice  of  Jog : — 

There  * are  the  full  sounds  of  the  five  musical  instruments. 
Without  being  struck  they  play  wondrously  and  mar- 
vellously. 

The  saints,  God’s  people,  sport  there. 

The  Supreme  Being  pervadeth  all  things,  but  is  not  com- 
bined with  them. 

In  His  palace  are  happiness,  composure,  and  joy. 

The  company  of  the  saints  sit  and  sing  God’s  praises ; 
theirs  is  not  the  malady  of  transmigration. 

There  only  God’s  name  is  remembered. 

Few  are  they  who  there  find  rest. 

Love  is  their  food  and  singing  their  support. 

There  are  countless  everlasting  seats. 

There  no  one  falleth,  or  wavereth,  or  runneth  astray. 

It  is  only  by  the  favour  of  the  Guru  a few  find  that 
paradise. 

There  is  neither  doubt,  nor  fear,  nor  worldly  love,  nor 
mammon. 

There  in  deep  repose  is  the  merciful  God 
Who  hath  not  end  or  limit. 

He  is  at  once  concealed  and  manifest. 

Nanak,  the  wonderful  condition  of  him  cannot  be  described 
In  whose  heart  is  God’s  love. 

The  following  was  addressed  to  a tyrannical 
official : — 

Thou  amassest  wealth  by  causing  misery  ; 

But  it  shall  nbt  avail  thee  ; it  shall  only  benefit  others. , 
Thou  practisest  pride  and  actest  like  a blind  man  ; 

Thou  shalt  be  bound  by  Death’s  halter  in  the  next  world. 
Dismiss  thy  jealousy  of  others,  O fool. 

Thou  hast  but  one  night  to  stay  here  : 

^ In  the  company  of  the  saints. 

D ,d  2 


404 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Though  intoxicated  with  wealth  thou  must  depart ; 

Yet  thou  continuest  to  love  vanities. 

In  the  period  of  childhood  one  is  heedless  ; 

In  the  heyday  of  youth  man  is  attached  to  unsavoury 
pleasures ; 

In  the  third  stage  of  life  he  amasseth  wealth  ; 

When  old  age  cometh  on  he  leaveth  everything  and  de- 
parteth  with  regret. 

After  long  time  man  obtaineth  a human  body  so  difficult 
to  obtain ; 

But  it  is  as  dust  without  the  Name. 

He  who  knoweth  not  Him  who  created  him, 

Is  worse  than  a beast,  a sprite,  or  an  idiot. 

Hear  me,  0 Creator,  Gobind,  Gopal, 

Compassionate  to  the  poor,  ever  merciful. 

If  Thou  free  men,  they  shall  be  freed  from  their  bonds. 
Nanak,  the  world  is  heedless ; O God,  pardon  and  unite 
us  with  Thee. 

Where  the  saints  dwell  and  pray,  there  is  heaven : — 

Where  the  saints  put  their  feet,  there  arc  the  sixty-eight 
places  of  pilgrimage  ; 

Where  the  Name  is  uttered,  there  is  heaven. 

Advice  to  a Brahman  : — 

Sing  the  praises  of  God’s  name,  O Pandit. 

Religious  ceremonies  are  of  no  avail ; pride  is  of  no  avail ; 
go  home  contented  in  thy  mind. 

The  Hindu  gods,  goddesses,  and  sacred  books 
know  not  God’s  greatness  : — 

The  Veds  know  not  His  greatness  ; 

Brahma  knoweth  not  His  secrets  ; 

The  incarnations  know  not  His  limit : 

The  Supreme  Being  is  without  limit. 

Only  God  knoweth  His  own  state ; 

TsJien  merely  speak  of  Him  from  hearsay. 

Shiv  knoweth  not  His  secret ; 

The  demigods  have  grown  weary  searching  for  Him  ; 


- HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  405 

The  goddesses  know  not  His  secret ; 

The  unseen  Supreme  Being  is  over  all. 

God  playeth  according  to  His  pleasure.: 

It  is  He  who  separateth,  it  is  He  who  uniteth. 

Some  wander,  others  He  applieth  to  His  worship. 

He  causeth  man  to  know  His  works. 

Hear  the  true  instruction  of  the  saints — 

It  is  only  they  who  have  seen  with  their  eyes  who  can  tell 
God's  greatness. 

He  is  not  the  object  either  of  virtue  or  of  vice. 

Nanak’s  God  is  all  in  all. 

The  Guru  warns  man  to  seek  God’s  protection 
betimes : — 

0 man,  neither  thy  body  nor  thy  soul  is  thine  own  : 

It  is  by  thy  worldly  love  thou  fullest  into  such  error. 
Thou  friskest  about  like  a lamb  or  a kid  : 

When  thou  expectest  not,  Death  will  cast  his  noose 
and  hurl  his  quoit  at  thee. 

0 my  soul,  seek  the  protection  of  God’s  lotus  feet. 

Repeat  the  name  of  God  the  Helper  who  is  with  thee,  and 
under  the  Guru’s  instruction  thou  shalt  obtain  the  true 
wealth. 

The  imperfect  things  of  this  world  will  never  be  perfect. 
Man  is  ever  miserable  on  account  of  lust,  wrath,  and 
pride. 

He  committeth  sin  to  gratify  his  heart. 

0 thoughtless  man,  nothing  will  go  an  inch  with  thee. 
Thou  practisest  deceit,  and  knowest  many  tricks  ; 

Thou  laboriously  siftest  dirt  for  kauris  ; 

Thou  never  thinkest  on  Him  who  gave  thee  everything  ; 
Thou  art  greedy  for  perishable  things,  and  thy  pain  will 
not  leave  thee. 

When  the  supreme  God  was  compassionate. 

My  heart  became  the  dust  of  the  saints’  feet. 

God  with  His  lotus  hand  hath  attached  me  to  His 
skirt.  ' 

Nanak  hath  become  absorbed  in  the  Truest  of  the 
frue. 


4o6 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION  * 


Ashtapadi 

God’s  praises  and  the  Guru’s  instructions  to  men : — 

O man,  remember  the  Preserver, 

Who  fashioned  thee  out  of  this  water, 

And  made  thy  earthly  body — 

The  Luminous  One  wlio  gave  thee  speech,  understanding, 
and  reason. 

And  who  protected  thee  in  thy  mother’s  womb. 

O man,  forsake  all  else  and  meditate  on  Him 
Who  gave  thee  father  and  mother, 

Who  gave  thee  brother  and  sons, 

Who  gave  thee  a wife  and  friends. 

Remember  that  God 
Who  gave  thee  priceless  air. 

Who  gave  thee  priceless  water, 

And  who  gave  thee  fire  to  burn — 

O man,  remain  under  that  God’s  protection. 

Place  thy  heart  at  the  feet  of  that  God 
Who  gave  thee  thirty-six  species  of  food. 

Who  made  within  thee  a place  to  contain  them. 

And  who  gave  'thee  land  and  chattels  to  use. 

O man,  adore  the  feet  of  that  God 
Who  made  thee  eyes  to  see,  ears  to  hear. 

Hands  to  work,  feet  to  walk, 

A nose,  a tongue,  and  a head  to  crown'  all ; 

Who  made  thee  pure  from  being  impure. 

And  who  gave  thee  the  highest  among  all  births. 

Wilt  thou  now  be  accepted  by  Him,  or  wilt  thou  not  ? 

O man,  thine  affairs  shall  be  arranged  by  meditating  on 
Him. 

In  this  world  and  the  next  there  is  but  the  one  God  ; 
Wherever  thou  lookest,  there  is  He. 

The  heart  is  slow  to  serve  Him  ; 

But  by  forgetting  Him  man  cannot  abide  for  a moment. 
We  are  sinners  and  without  merits  ; 

We  do  no  service  or  good  deeds. 

' Literally — ^the  large  bead  in  a rosary. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  407 

The  boat  of  the  Guru  is  only  found  by  good  fortune. 

Nanak,  a stone  floateth  over  by  associating  with  the  saint. 

The  object  of  the  following  composition  is  to  in- 
struct man  to  remember  God  at  all  seasons : — 

Guru  Arjan’s  Seasons 
Ramkali 
Slok  I 

O man,  salute  God  the  Supreme  Being,  and  desire  the 
dust  of  His  saints’  feet. 

Nanak,  dispel  pride,  repeat  the  name  of  God  who  is 
omnipresent. 

He  is  the  remover  of  sin,  the  dispeller  of  fear,  an  ocean 
of  happiness. 

Nanak,  ever  meditate  on  Him,  the  Compassionate  to  the 
poor,  the  Destroyer  of  sorrow. 

Chhant 

O fortunate  beings,  sing  God’s  praises,  and  God  will  be 
merciful  unto  you. 

Delightful  the  season,  the  month,  the  hour,  and  the  time 
when  you  repeat  God’s  name. 

Blessed  are  they  who  imbued  with  love  for  God  with  single 
mind  meditate  on  His  attributes. 

Profitable  are  the  lives  of  those  who  have  found  Him. 

Good  acts,  alms,  and  religious  ceremonies  are  not  equal 
to  God’s  name  which  removeth  all  sin. 

Nanak  representeth,  I live  by  remembering  Him  who  is 
free  from  transmigration.  * 

Slok  II 

Strive  to  attain  the  Inaccessible  and  Inapprehensible,  and 
bow  to  His  lotus  feet. 

Saith  Nanak,  mention  of  Thee  by  those  whose  support  is 
the  Name,  will  be  pleasing  to  Thee. 

0 my  friends,  seek  the  protection  of  the  saints  and 
remember  the  eternal  God. 

Nanak,  by  repeating  God’s  name  you  shall  become  green 
from  being  withered. 


4o8 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Chhant 

Excellent  is  the  season  of  spring  ; Chet  and  Baisakh  are 
pleasant  months. 

Having  obtained  God  as  my  Spouse,  my  soul,  body,  and 
life  bloom  afresh. 

0 my  companions,  when  the  lotus  feet  of  the  immovable 
Spouse  enter  my  house,  I rejoice  and  am  happy  and  glad. 

He  is  beautiful,  clever,  and  wise,  a Recognizer  of  merit 
and  inestimable. 

1 have  obtained  Him  by  great  good  fortune,  dispelled  my 
sorrow,  and  fulfilled  my  desires. 

Nanak  representeth,  by  seeking  Thy  protection  my  fear 
of  Death  is  dispelled. 


Slok  III 

Nanak  had  been  bound  in  the  soft  ^fetters  of  the  record 
of  his  previous  acts. 

Without  the  company  of  saints  he  killed  himself  wandering 
and  doing  various  religious  acts,  but  now  he  is  released. 

God  blendeth  with  Himself  those  who  please  Him  ; it  is 
He  who  also  separate th  man  from  Him. 

Nanak,  I have  fallen  under  the  protection  of  God  whose 
glory  is  great. 

Chhant 

Jeth  and  Har  form  the  hot  season  when  the  heat  is  in- 
tensely severe. 

God  looketh  not  on  the  woman  who  is  separated  from  His 
love. 

She  is  ruined  by  great  pride  ; she  beholdeth  Him  not, 
and  dieth  in  agony. 

Attached  to  mammon  she  is  displeased  with  God,  and 
gaspeth  like  a fish  out  of  water. 

Death  shall  punish  her  for  her  sins,  and  she  shall  dread  the 
transmigration  which  awaiteth  her. 

Nanak  prayeth — preserve  me  in  Thine  asylum,  O Thou  who 
fulfillest  desires. 

^ Man  immersed  in  worldly  pleasures  does  not  feel  his  fetters. 


HYMNS 'OF  GURU  ARJAN  409 

Slok  IV 

My  love  is  attached  to  my  Beloved  ; I cannot  abide  for  an 
instant  without  Him. 

Nanak,  He  of  His  kind  disposition  filleth  my  soul  and 
body. 

He  who  was  my  friend  at  many  births  hath  taken  me  by 
the  hand. 

God  with  hearty  love  hath  made  Nanak  the  slave  of  His 
feet. 

ClIHANT 

The  rainy  season  in  Sawan  and  Bhadon  bestoweth  comfort 
and  joy. 

The  lowering  clouds  rain,  and  sea  and  land  are  filled  with 
honey 

God  pervadeth  every  place,  and  His  name,  which  is  the 
nine  treasures,  filleth  my  heart. 

By  remembering  the  Lord,  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  whole 
families  are  saved. 

They  who  are  awake  in  the  love  of  the  Beloved  shall  never 
be  shamed  ; the  Merciful  One  will  ever  pardon  them. 

Nanak  represent eth,  I have  obtained  God  as  my  Spouse 
who  ever  pleaseth  my  soul. 

Slok  V 

Thirsty  with  desire  I wander  thinking  when  I shall  behold 
God. 

0 Nanak,  is  there  any  friendly  holy  man  who  will  bring 
me  to  meet  Him  ? 

Without  meeting  Him  I have  no  rest ; I cannot  abide  for 
a moment. 

Nanak,  by  entering  the  sanctuary  of  God’s  saints  my 
desires  shall  be  fulfilled. 

Chiiant 

In  Assu  and  Kartik,  the  cool  season,  I thirst  for  God  and 
make  preparation  to  meet  Him. 

Searching  for  a sight  of  Him  I wander  thinking  when  I 
shall  meet  the  Lord  of  excellences. 

^ That  is,  water. 


410  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

I have  no  happiness  without  my  Beloved  Spouse ; my 
necklaces  and  bracelets  are  all  hateful  to  me. 

However  beautiful,  clever,  accomplished,  and  wise  I may 
be,  my  body  is  as  if  it  had  not  breath  in  it. 

My  soul  thirsteth  to  meet  God,  I look  here  and  there  and 
in  every  direction  for  Him. 

Nanak  prayeth,  O God  Lord  of  excellences,  mercifully 
unite  me  with  Thee. 

Slok  VI 

Nanak,  since  I have  met  the  all-pervading  God,  my  doubt 
as  to  whether  I am  separated  from  God  or  not  hath  been 
removed. 

My  heart-burning  hath  b^en  slaked,  comfort  hath  ensued, 
and  I have  peace  of  soul  and  body. 

God  sent  holy  men  with  this  message — ‘ I am  not  far  from 
thee.’ 

Nanak,  by  repeating  the  Name  of  the  all-pervading  God, 
my  doubts  and  fears  have  been  dispelled. 

Chhant 

In  Maghar  and  Poh,  the  snowy  season,  God  appeareth  to 
me  and  I am  refreshed. 

I have  obtained  a sight  of  God,  my  heart-burning  hath 
been  slaked,  and  deceitful  mammon  put  to  flight. 

All  my  desires  have  been  fulfilled  ; I have  met  God  face  to 
face,  and  as  a worshipper  have  worshipped  His  feet. 

Singing  the  praises  of  the  Unseen  and  Inscrutable  is  my 
necklace,  my  hair-strings,  my  decorations,  and  all  my  delight. 

Death  cannot  look  at  those  who  desire  the  love  and  service 
of  God. 

Nanak  representeth,  God  hath  blended  me  with  Himself, 
and  my  love  shall  not  now  be  sundered  from  Him. 

Slok  VII 

When  a happy  wife  hath  obtained  the  wealth  of  God’s 
name,  her  mind  never  wavereth. 

Nanak,  by  association  with  the  saints  God  the  Friend 
appeareth  in  the  heart. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  41 1 

Woman  enjoyeth  millions  of  songs,  joys,  and  pleasures  with 
the  dear  Beloved. 

By  repeating  God’s  name,  O Nanak,  man  obtaineth  the 
fruit  his  heart  desireth. 


Chhant 

Magh  and  Phagun,  the  autumnal  season,  are  pleasing  to 
the  heart  and  full  of  excellence. 

O my  friends  and  companions,  sing  a song  of  rejoicing, 
God  my  Husband  hath  come  home. 

My  Jewel  hath  come  home,  my  heart  meditateth  on  Him, 
and  my  couch  is  beautiful  and  bright. 

The  woods  and  glades  become  green  ; ^ on  beholding  the 
scene  I am  entranced. 

By  repeating  the  pure  spell  in  my  heart  I have  met  the 
Lord,  and  my  desires  have  been  fulfilled. 

Nanak  representeth,  I have  met  my  Spouse,  God  the 
Bearer  of  prosperity  ; and  shall  now  be  ever  engaged  in 
dalliance. 

Slok  VIII 

The  saints  are  succourers  of  the  soul  and  pilots  across 
the  terrible  ocean  ; 

Nanak,  know  them  for  the  most  exalted  of  all,  for  they 
love  God’s  name. 

They  who  know  God  have  crossed  over  ; they  are  brave, 
they  are  heroes. 

Nanak  is  a sacrifice  to  those  who  by  repeating  God’s 
name  have  reached  the  shore. 

Chhant 

The  saints’  feet  preside  over  all ; by  means  of  them  all 
troubles  are  erased  ; 

They  dispel  the  pain  of  transmigration  and  cause  devotion 
to  God  to  enter  the  heart ; 

They  are  imbued  with  God’s  love  and  intoxicated  with 
divine  knowledge  ; I forget  them  not  for  a moment. 

He  who  renounceth  pride  and  falleth  under  the  protection 
^ Autumn  has  become  spring  for  the  Guru. 


412  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

of  their  feet,  shall  obtain  all  favours  from  the  Lord  of  the 
world. 

I salute  God,  Gobind,  the  Ocean  of  excellence,  Srirang^  the 
Primal  Lord. 

Nanak  supplicateth — do  Thou,  O God,  who  art  the  same 
in  every  age  have  mercy  on  me. 

Ramkali  ki  War  II 

A Sikh  called  Mahila  asked  the  Guru  if  saints 
could  free  men  from  the  fear  of  transmigration  and 
unite  them  with  God.  The  following  was  the  Guru's 
reply : — 

As  I have  heard  of  the  true  Guru,  so  have  I found  him. 

He  is  the  mediator  at  God’s  court  and  uniteth  with  God 
those  who  have  been  separated  from  Him. 

He  maketh  fast  the  spell  of  God’s  name  in  the  disciples* 
heart,  and  healeth  the  malady  of  pride. 

Nanak,  God  caused  those  so  destined  from  the  beginning 
to  meet  the  true  Guru. 

By  propitiating  God  everything  is  obtained : — 

If  the  one  God  be  my  friend,  all  will  be  my  friends  ; if  the 
one  God  be  my  enemy  every  one  will  quarrel  with  me. 

The  true  Guru  hath  shown  me  that  without  the  Name 
all  is  vanity. 

The  infidel  and  the  evil  who  are  attached  to  the  pleasures 
of  the  world  shall  suffer  transmigration. 

Nanak,  by  the  favour  of  the  true  Guru  I have  recognized 
the  Lord  God. 

The  perverse : — 

Friendship  with  the  perverse  is  an  alliance  with  mammon  : 

While  we  look  on,  it  fleeth  away,  and  findeth  nothing  to 
arrest  it. 

While  the  perverse  have  raiment  and  food  they  cling  to 
us  ; 

The  day  they  get  nothing  they  utter  abuse. 

The  perverse  and  those  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance  know 
not  the  state  of  the  soul. 

^ This  name  in  the  Granth  Sshib  obviously  means  God. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  413 

A false  joining  will  not  last ; it  is  like  a broken  stone 
cemented  with  mud. 

The  blind  know  not  themselves  ; they  suffer  in  the  midst 
of  false  occupations. 

Involved  in  false  worldly  love  they  pass  their  days  in 
pride. 

God  bestoweth  His  full  favour  on  those  to  whom  He 
extendeth  His  mercy  from  the  first. 

Nanak,  they  who  seek  the  shelter  of  the  true  Guru  are 
saved. 

The  Guru  prays  for  a holy  life  : — 

Be  merciful,  0 my  God,  that  I may  pass  my  life  with  the 
saints  ! 

They  who  forget  Thee  are  born  and  die ; their  sorrows 
are  never  at  an  end. 

O man,  where  the  way  is  difficult,  nay,  everywhere 
remember  the  True  Guru  in  thy  heart. 

By  repeating  God’s  name  no  one  shall  obstruct  thy  path. 

It  is  only  the  saints  who  can  influence  God 

Thou,  O Lord,  comest  not  into  man’s  power  even  by 
abundant  supplication  ; 

Thou  comest  not  into  man’s  power  even  by  reading  the 
Veds  ; 

Thou  comest  not  into  man’s  power  by  bathing  at  places 
of  pilgrimage  ; 

Thou  comest  not  into  man’s  power  by  running  over  the 
earth  : 

Thou  comest  not  into  man’s  power  by  any  artifice  ; 

Thou  comest  not  into  man’s  power  by  giving  copious  alms. 

Every  one  is  in  Thy  power,  O Inaccessible  and  Inappre- 
hensible. 

Thou  art  in  the  power  of  the  saints ; Thou  art  their 
strength. 

When  the  feet,  head,  mouth  and  soul  are  beau- 
tiful : — 

The  feet  are  beautiful  which  move  towards  Thee,  0 Lord ; 
the  head  is  beautiful  which  boweth  to  Thy  feet ; 


414 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  mouth  is  beautiful  when  it  singeth  Thy  praises  ; and 
the  soul  when  it  entereth  Thy  protection. 

God’s  praises: — 

Thou,  0 God,  art  great ; greatly  unrivalled  is  Thy 
dignity ; 

Various  are  Thy  manifestations ; Thine  acts  cannot  be 
known. 

Thy  life  is  within  animals  ; Thou  knowest  everything  ; 

Everything  is  in  Thy  power  ; Thy  palace  is  beautiful ; 

It  is  filled  with  joy  and  gratulation. 

Without  pride  thou  bearest  honour,  greatness,  and  splen- 
dour. 

Thou  art  filled  with  all  potencies  ; Thou  appearest  every- 
where. 

Nanak,  Thy  slave  of  slaves  maketh  supplication  before 
Thee. 

The  Guru’s  devotion  to  God : — 

I am  a sacrifice  unto  Thee,  O great  God. 

Of  me  who  am  without  merits  Thou  art  the  perfect  bene- 
factor ; Thou  art  the  compassionate  Lord  of  the  poor. 

Standing  or  sitting,  sleeping  or  waking,  O man,  deem 
God  thy  soul,  thy  life,  thy  wealth,  and  thy  property. 

The  thirst  for  a sight  of  Thee,  O God,  is  great  in  my  heart ; 
Nanak  prayeth — make  me  happy  by  a sight  of  Thee. 

Maru 

Instances  of  the  success  of  devotion : — 

The  boy  Dhru  at  the  age  of  five  years  was  helpless,  but 
by  remembering  God  he  became  fixed  and  immortal. 

Ajamal  through  love  for  his  son  called  upon  Narayan, 
whereupon  the  good  angels  smote  the  myrmidons  of  Death. 

What  numberless  persons  my  Lord  saved  ! 

I am  poor,  of  little  intellect,  without  virtue  ; I fall  at  Thy 
door  for  protection. 

The  pariah^  Balmik  was  saved,  so  was  the  wretched 
huntsman  * ; 

^ SupchSr.  Literally — one  who  cooks  and  eats  dogs. 

* Who  accidentally  shot  Krishan. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  415 

The  elephant  which  remembered  God  even  for  a moment 
was  saved.^ 

God  preserved  His  servant  Prahlad,  and  Narsinh  tore 
Harnakhas  with  his  nails. 

Bidur,  son  of  a handmaiden,  became  pure  and  his  whole 
family  illustrious. 

What  sins  of  mine  can  I confess  ? I have  been  absorbed 
in  the  false  love  of  the  world. 

Nanak  hath  come  to  God’s  sanctuary  and  shelter  ; 0 
Lord,  stretch  out  Thine  arm,  and  take  me  to  Thee. 

By  devotion  man  obtains  salvation  during  life : — 

When  my  fate  was  favourable  and  God  was  merciful, 
I sang  His  praises. 

My  toil  hath  ended,  I have  obtained  rest,  and  all  my 
wandering  is  at  an  end. 

Now  I have  obtained  the  dignity  of  real  life. 

I have  remembered  God  in  my  heart  under  the  protection 
of  the  saints. 

I have  banished  lust,  wrath,  avarice,  and  worldly  love ; 
these  enemies  all  have  I banished. 

Ever  the  Almighty  is  present  to  view ; nowhere  is  He 
distant. 

I have  obtained  happiness  and  rest ; all  my  desires  have 
been  fulfilled  by  the  assistance  of  the  saints. 

God  in  a moment  hath  purified  the  sinner  ; God’s  praise 
cannot  be  expressed. 

I have  become  fearless,  all  fear  hath  departed ; I 
have  taken  the  shelter  of  God’s  feet. 

Nanak  singeth  God’s  praises  and  fixeth  his  attention  on 
Him  night  and  day. 

True  religion  is  not  found  among  Hindu  sectaries 

The  Pandit  shouteth  aloud  the  Veds,  but  his  heart  is  slow 
to  good  works. 

^ It  is  stated  in  the  Bhagal  Mai  that  a shark  caught  an  elephant’s 
leg  and  was  dragging  him  into  deep  water.  The  elephant  thought  of 
God,  at  the  same  time  lifted  a lotus  flower  with  his  trunk  as  an  offering, 
and  was  saved. 


4i6  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  silent  devotee  sitteth  apart,  but  the  knots  of  desire 
are  in  his  heart. 

The  anchoret  abandoneth  his  home,  but  he  is  not  saved 
by  flight. 

To  whom  shall  I tell  the  state  of  my  heart  ? 

Where  shall  I find  him  who  is  saved  himself  and  who  will 
bring  me  to  meet  God  ? 

The  penitent  chasteneth  his  body,  but  his  thoughts 
wander  in  every  direction. 

The  Brahmachari  practiseth  continence,  but  there  is  pride 
in  his  heart. 

The  Sanyasi  wandereth  in  pilgrimages  and  while  there 
quarrelleth  with  strangers.^ 

The  Ramdasis  ^ in  their  efforts  to  get  bread  put  on  tinkling 
anklets,  and  dance  before  idols. 

Men  fast,  perform  their  daily  religious  duties,  and  the 
six  acts  for  the  purpose  of  ostentation. 

With  their  mouths  they  chant  sacred  songs  and  hymns, 
but  they  sing  not  heartily  God’s  praises. 

God’s  saints  are  pure  and  free  from  joy,  sorrow,  covetous- 
ness, and  worldly  love. 

If  God  be  merciful,  my  soul  shall  obtain  the  dust  of  the 
saints’  feet. 

Saith  Nanak,  when  I meet  the  true  Guru  my  anxiety 
shall  depart. 

My  Lord  God  is  the  Searcher  of  hearts. 

The  Beloved  knoweth  all  the  secrets  of  my  heart,  so 
I have  forgotten  all  my  idle  prayers. 

Maru  Anjuli 

A homily  addressed  to  a Muhammadan  : — 

At  night  all  animals  congregate  under  a tree.® 

Some  speak  hotly  and  others  gently  to  one  another. 

When  the  sun  riseth  they  depart,  as  when  their  lives  have 
come  to  an  end. 

They  who  commit  sin  shall  assuredly  be  ruined. 

^ By  holding  religious  discussions  with  them,  or  telling  them  they 
^re  not  .so  good  as  he. 

^ Dancers  at  Hindu  temples.  ® The  world. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  417 

Azrail  will  seize  and  torture  them. 

When  the  Book-keeper^  calleth  for  their  accounts,  the 
Creator  will  consign  them  to  hell. 

No  brother  or  sister  will  accompany  them. 

They  shall  depart,  leaving  their  property,  their  youth, 
and  their  wealth. 

They  know  not  the  benevolent  Creator,  so  they  shall  be 
pressed  like  bundles  of  sesame. 

Thou  mayest  rob  others  of  their  property  ; 

But  God  who  is  with  thee,  O man,  seeth  and  heareth  thee. 

Through  worldly  greed  thou  fallest  into  a pit,  and  knowest 
not  the  future. 

Forthis  reason  thou  shalt  be  born  and  die,  and  be  born  again, 

And  suffer  much  punishment  in  a distant  country.^ 

Mortal,  blind  that  he  is,  knoweth  not  who  made  him; 
wherefore  he  shall  suffer  misery. 

Man  straying  from  his  Maker  is  ruined. 

The  play  of  the  world  is  evil ; man  is  sometimes  sad  and 
sometimes  glad. 

He  practiseth  not  truth  or  patience  ; he  goeth  not  to 
the  saints,  but  wandereth  as  it  pleaseth  him. 

God  Himself  performeth  the  whole  play ; 

One  man  He  extricateth  and  another  He  sinketh  in  the 
wave. 

As  God  causeth  man  to  dance  so  he  danceth. 

Every  one  passeth  his  life  according  to  his  past  acts 
recorded  on  his  forehead. 

If  the  Master  be  merciful,  man  shall  meditate  on  Him. 

If  man  associate  with  the  saints,  he  shall  not  fall  into  hell. 

O Lord,  grant  the  gift  of  Thine  ambrosial  name  to  Nanak, 
and  he  shall  ever  sing  the  song  of  Thy  praises. 

Maru  ki  War  II 

The  Guru's  devotion  to  God  and  his  longing  to 
behold  Him : — 

If  Thou  but  say  the  Word,  O my  Friend,  I will  cut  off 
my  head  and  give  it  Thee. 

^ The  god  of  death. 

^ Thy  way  hereafter  shall  be  tedious  and  arduous. 


4i8  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Mine  eyes  long  to  behold  Thee. 

My  Love  is  with  Thee ; I see  that  all  other  l6ve  is  false. 

I shudder  at  clothes  and  food  until  I behold  the  Beloved. 

0 my  Spouse,  I arise  at  dawn  to  behold  Thee. 

^ Coll3nium,  garlands,  betel,  and  dainties  are  all  as  ashes 
without  a sight  of  Thee,  O God. 

Love  and  longing  for  God : — 

If  Thou,  O God,  be  my  friend,  separate  not  Thyself  from 
me  for  a moment. 

Thou  hast  fascinated  my  soul ; when,  O my  life,  shall 
I behold  Thee  ? 

The  house  into  which  the  Bridegroom  comes  is 
happy  and  imparts  happiness  to  others : — 

If  Thou  enter  my  courtyard,  the  whole  land  shall  become 
beautiful. 

When  I am  without  my  Spouse,  the  One  God,  nobody 
careth  for  me. 

Everything  shall  be  beautiful  if  the  Bridegroom  come 
and  make  my  courtyard  His  own  ; * 

Then  the  wayfarer  who  cometh  to  my  house  shall  never 
depart  empty.* 

Against  adultery : — 

What  shall  I say  to  thee,  0 blockhead  ? look  not  on 
another’s  vines  ® ; art  thou  their  master  ? 

Nanak,  the  whole  world  is  blooming  like  a garden  of 
flowers.® 

In  this  world  take  care  how  thou  travellest : — 

Walk  along  the  footpath ; there  is  thick  slush  on  the 
ground. 

Take  care  lest  thy  feet  slip  and  thou  be  splashed. 

^ Literally — ^take  possession  of  my  courtyard  and  sit  in  it. 

* The  holy  men  who  visit  me  shall  always  take  away  God’s  name. 

* Others'  wives. 

* The  garden  of  beauty  is  large,  and  there  are  many  women  to 
select  from  without  poaching  on  neighbours’  property.  The  Guru 
also  possibly  meant  that  men  and  women  ought  to  select  their  own 
mates. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  419 

Men  rely  on  unrealities  and  are  disappointed : — 

Thinking  what  is  false  and  transitory  to  be  real,  thou 
runnest  before  others  to  seize  it ; 

But  Nanak,  it  shall  melt  away  like  butter  in  the  fire  and 
fade  like  the  water-lily. 

The  Guru  stimulates  his  soul  to  piety : — 

O foolish  soul,  thou  art  lazy  in  God’s  service  ; 

A long  time  shall  elapse  before  this  opportunity  shall 
return. 

Man  acts  heedlessly,  but  the  Guru  can  guide  him : — 

Thy  thatch  is  of  thick  grass,  yet,  O careless  man,  thou 
lightest  fire  in  it. 

They  who  are  so  fated,  shall  obtain  shelter  in  the  teacher.' 

Man’s  worldly  efforts  will  not  secure  salvation. 
The  following  couplet  has  in  view  the  practice  of 
offering  huge  cakes  at  the  shrine  of  Sakhi  Sarwar. 
The  priests  read  the  darud,^  receive  the  offered  cakes, 
break  off  small  pieces  for  the  pilgrims,  and  keep  the 
solid  remainder  for  themselves.  The  feast  then 
begins.  Where  there  is  no  priest  the  darud  is  not 
read : — 

Nanak,  men  grind  com,  cook,  prepare,  and  set  the  bread 
before  them ; 

But  without  the  true  Guru  they  must  sit  and  watch 
without  eating  until  the  darud  is  read.® 

The  following  is  repeated  by  Sikhs  as  a grace  before 
meals : — 

Nanak,  they  who  propitiate  the  Guru 

Cook  loaves,  put  them  on  the  dish,  and  eat  to  satiety. 

Shrink  not  from  efforts  for  salvation  : — 

Turn  thine  attention  to  the  next  world ; turn  not  thy 
face  backward. 

' That  is,  the  Guru. 

® The  first  chapter  of  the  QurSn,  here  means  the  Muhammadan 
benediction. 

* They  shall  wait  for  ever.  Men  make  worldly  efforts  but  they  are 
ineffectual  without  the  Guru. 


E e 2 


420  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Nanak,  make  thyself  now  acceptable,  and  thou  shalt  not 
be  born  ag^ain. 

God  is  the  Friend  who  pleases  all : — 

My  merry  Friend  is  every  one’s  friend  ; 

AU  think  Him  their  own  ; He  maketh  no  heart  sad. 

They  to  whom  the  Guru  once  looked  up,  before 
his  installation,  now  look  up  to  him : — 

They  whom  I followed  are  now  following  me  ; 

They  on  whom  I rested  my  hopes  now  rest  their  hopes  on 
me. 

The  Guru  desires  to  sacrifice  himself  as  a wife  for 
her  beloved  Spouse : — 

May  I become  a couch  for  my  Beloved,  and  my  eyes  its 
coverlet.^ 

If  He  look  on  me  but  once  I shall  obtain  happiness  beyond 
all  price. 

May  I become  a throne  also  for  my  Beloved  King. 

If  He  put  His  foot  on  me,  I shall  bloom  like  the  lotus. 

The  Guru  is  the  only  regenerator : — 

God  who  is  unseen  and  not  subject  to  destiny,  is  not 
obtained  by  devices  of  wisdom. 

God  is  not  found  in  the  six  Hindu  systems,  nor  in  roaming 
and  wandering,  nor  in  wearing  religious  garbs. 

They  who  fast  until  they  see  the  moon  ^ are  of  no  account. 

Though  they  read  the  whole  of  the  Veds,  they  understand 
not  God  the  real  thing. 

They  draw  marks  on  their  foreheads,  make  ablutions,  but 
within  them  is  blackness. 

He  who  weareth  a religious  garb  findeth  not  God  without 
true  instruction. 

^ That  is,  let  me  give  God  a place  in  my  eyes. 

* Some  fast  on  the  day  when  no  moon  is  visible.  On  the  first 
day  of  the  moon  they  eat  a mouthful,  on  the  second  day  two  mouth- 
fuls, and  so  on  to  the  day  of  the  full  moon.  The  mouthfuls  then 
decrease  in  the  ratio  of  their  previous  increase. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  421 

He  who  is  led  astray  can  only  find  the  road  if  favourable 
destiny  had  been  written  on  his  forehead  at  first. 

It  is  only  he  who  beholdeth  the  Guru  with  his  eyes  whose 
hfe  is  regenerated. 

Rise  betimes  and  remember  God : — 

Rising  at  dawn  repeat  God’s  name,  and  meditate  on  the 
Guru’s  feet. 

The  filth  of  birth  and  death  shall  depart  by  singing  the 
true  One’s  praises. 

Without  the  Name  the  body  is  altogether  blind  and  empty. 

Nanak,  his  human  birth  is  profitable  in  whose  heart  the 
true  Master  dwelleth. 

Select  good  , companions : — 

Nanak,  break  with  the  false  and  seek  for  the  saints  who 
are  true  friends. 

The  former  will  leave  thee  while  alive ; the  latter  will 
not  forsake  thee  even  when  dead. 

Tukhari  Chhant 

Devotion  to  God  and  the  Guru : — 

I am  a sacrifice  to  the  darling  Guru  ; I have  given  my 
soul  unto  him.^ 

Hearing  his  words  my  soul  is  happy. 

My  soul  attached  to  God’s  love  is  happy  as  the  fish  in 
water. 

Thy  worth,  O God,  cannot  be  described ; Thy  palace  is 
unrivalled. 

0 Lord,  Bestower  of  all  merits,  hear  the  supplication  of 
one  poor  man. 

Grant  a sight  of  Thee  to  Nanak  ; he  is  a sacrifice  unto 
Thee  ; he  hath  sacrificed  his  life  unto  Thee. 

Bhairo 

The  following  prayer  is  uttered  by  pious  Sikhs  on 
awaking  in  the  morning ; — 

1 am  happy  when  rising  ; I am  happy  when  sitting. 

I feel  no  fear  when  I know 

^ Also  translated — 0 Darling  God,  I am  a sacrifice  to  Thee  whom 
the  Guru  hath  implanted  in  my  heart. 


422 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


That  the  one  Lord,  who  is  the  Searcher 
Of  all  hearts,  is  my  Protector. 

I sleep  without  anxiety  and  awake  without  anxiety. 

0 God,  Thou  art  everywhere  contained. 

Nanak,  since  the  Guru  fixed  his  spell  in  my  heart, 

1 abide  happy  at  home,  and  find  peace  abroad. 

The  following  was  written  on  a theme  of  Kabir: — 

I practise  not  fasting,  nor  observe  the  Ramzan ; ^ 

I serve  Him  who  will  preserve  me  at  the  last  hour. 

The  one  Lord  of  the  earth  is  my  God, 

Who  judgeth  both  Hindus  and  Musalmans.* 

I go  not  on  a pilgrimage  to  Makka,  nor  worship  at  Hindu 
places  of  pilgrimages. 

I serve  the  one  God  and  none  other. 

I neither  worship  as  the  Hindus,  nor  pray  as  the  Musalntans. 
I take  the  Formless  God  into  my  heart,  and  there  make 
obeisance  unto  Him. 

I am  neither  a Hindu  nor  a Musalman.® 

The  soul  and  body  belong  to  God  whether  He  be  called 
Allah  or  Ram. 

Kabir  hath  delivered  this  lecture. 

When  I meet  a true  guru  or  pir,  I recognize  my  own 
Master. 

Piety  and  worldly  pride  contrasted : — 

Excellent,  excellent,  excellent,  excellent,  excellent  is  Thy 
name  1 

False,  false,  false,  false  is  worldly  pride  ! 

True  are  Thy  servants  who  have  obtained  a sight  of  Thee 
the  incomparable  One. 

Without  Thy  name  the  whole  world  is  ashes. 

Wondrous  is  Thy  might ; I praise  Thy  feet. 

We  are  enriched  by  uttering  Thy  praises,  O true  King. 

^ The  lunar  month  of  the  Muhammadan  fast. 

* Also  translated — I have  renounced  both  the  Hindus  and  the 
Muhammadans. 

* This  line  is  very  important  in  reference  to  recent  controversies 
as  to  whether  the  Sikhs  are  Hindus. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  423 

Thou  art,  O God,  the  support  and  shelter  of  those  who 
have  no  support. 

Cherisher  of  the  poor,  I meditate  on  Thee  day  and  night. 

The  Lord  Himself  is  kind  to  Nanak. 

May  my  heart  not  forget  Him  who  is  my  life  and  soul ! 

Miscellaneous  instruction : — 

God  the  Creator  of  all  things  is  fascinating,  formless,  the 
Giver  of  happiness. 

Who  is  so  intoxicated  with  the  juice  of  sin  that  he  can 
leave  such  a God  and  worship  elsewhere  ? 

0 my  soul,  worship  God. 

1 have  seen  all  other  devices  ; by  attending  to  them  man’s 
work  is  marred. 

The  perverse,  blind,  and  spiritually  ignorant  leave  God 
and  worship  a goddess  who  is  His  handmaiden. 

Being  without  the  Guru  and  like  unto  beasts,  they  slander 
those  who  worship  God. 

The  soul,  body,  and  wealth  are  dl  God’s ; the  apostates 
say  that  they  are  their  own. 

They  are  proud,  their  understanding  is  evil  and  filthy; 
without  the  Guru  they  must  again  wander  in  the  terrible 
ocean  of  the  world. 

God  is  not  found  by  penances,  burnt  offerings,  or  by 
visiting  the  banks  of  rivers. 

By  effacing  himself  and  seeking  the  Guru’s  protection, 
Nanak  crosseth  over  the  world. 

All  animals  are  led  astray  by  their  senses : — 

The  disease  of  pride  hath  impoverished  man  ; 

The  disease  of  lust  subdueth  the  elephant ; 

Through  disease  of  the  eye  the  moth  is  burned  to  ashes ; 

Through  disease  of  the  ear  the  deer  is  ruined  : 

Every  one  we  see  hath  his  own  special  disease. 

It  is  only  my  true  Guru  united  with  God  who  is  free 
therefrom. 

Through  disease  of  the  palate  the  fish  is  caught ; 

Through  disease  of  the  nose  the  bumble-bee  dieth  ; 

The  whole  world  is  the  prey  of  disease — 


424 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Entangled  in  the  disease  of  worldly  love  and  sin. 

Through  disease  man  dieth  and  through  disease  is  he  born. 
Through  disease  the  soul  wandereth  in  wombs  again  and 
again. 

Man  cannot  free  himself  from  the  toils  of  disease  even 
for  a moment : 

Without  the  true  Guru  disease  never  forsaketh  him. 
When  God  is  merciful  to  any  one, 

He  taketh  his  arm  and  freeth  him  from  disease. 

The  fetters  of  him  who  hath  obtained  the  association  of 
the  saints  burst ; 

Saith  Nanak,  the  Guru  hath  cured  his  disease. 

Man  is  slow  to  good  and  swift  to  evil : — 

Man  is  not  slow  to  devise  evil, 

Or  ashamed  to  have  intercourse  with  a prostitute. 

All  day  man  laboureth  ; 

But,  when  it  is  time  to  remember  God,  he  feeleth  as  if 
adamant  had  fallen  on  his  head. 

Attached  to  mammon  the  world  is  led  astray, 

Thy  Creator  never  entereth  thy  mind,  0 man.- 
Toiling  and  moiling  in  vain  sufferest  thou  hardship  ; 

Yet  thy  worldly  business  is  never  completed. 

Thy  heart  is  absorbed  in  lust,  wrath,  and  covetousness. 
And  thou  shalt  die  gasping  like  a fish  out  of  water. 

He  who  is  preserved  by  God  Himself 
Ever  repeateth  His  name. 

Nanak,  he  who  hath  found  the  true  Guru, 

Singeth  God’s  praises  in  the  company  of  the  saints. 

How  happiness  is  obtained : — 

There  is  no  happiness  in  the  acquisition  of  great  wealth. 
There  is  no  happiness  in  beholding  the  performances  of 
acrobats. 

There  is  no  happiness  in  conquering  many  countries — 
All  happiness  is  obtained  by  singing  God’s  praises. 

Soine  of  God’s  attributes : — 

God  the  Cherisher  is  merciful ; who  can  count  His  merits  ? 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  425 

He  hath  many  forms  and  manifestations  ; He  is  the  Lord 
of  all. 

With  Him  are  varied  knowledge,  varied  meditation, 
varied  devotion  and  penance. 

Various  are  His  merits.  His  voices,  and  His  sports; 
various  holy  men  keep  Him  in  their  hearts. 

Near  Him  various  voices  and  various  instruments  con- 
tinually sound  ; He  hath  various  relishes  ; various  sins  and 
maladies  are  removed  by  hearing  His  praises. 

Nanak,  serve  the  unequalled  God  through  whom  all  the 
advantages  of  sacred  rivers,  of  the  six  schools,  of  fasting, 
worship,  and  of  wandering  in  pilgrimages  are  obtained. 

Basant 

The  attributes  of  the  holy : — 

It  is  he  who  associateth  with  the  saints  who  is  the  real 
penitent ; 

It  is  he  who  loveth  the  Guru  who  constantly  meditateth 
on  God  ; 

It  is  he  who  hath  obtained  the  fear  of  God  who  is  without 
fear ; 

It  is  he  whose  doubts  depart  who  is  happy  ; 

It  is  he  whose  heart  is  fixed  who  is  a hermit ; 

It  is  he  who  hath  found  the  true  place  who  is  permanent. 

The  season  of  spring,  which  is  an  emblem  of  our 
transitory  life,  is  also  the  time  for  a new  access  of 
devotion : — 

Our  hearts  bloom  on  beholding  the  flowers  of  spring,  but 
these  quickly  fade. 

Remembering  this  let  us  completely  abandon  pride. 

And  become  absorbed  in  God’s  lotus  feet. 

Ye  fortimate,  come  to  God. 

Think  upon  God,  O my  soul. 

On  the  margin  of  the  stream  there  are  very  many  sweet- 
smelling trees. 

Yet  some  one  shrub  is  withered  there  ; ^ 

^ There  is  one  man  in  the  society  of  the  saints  not  perfect  in  his 
faith.  These  two  verses  are  also  translated — Soft  trees  yield  abundant 


426  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

But  since  the  season  of  spring  hath  come, 

It  now  blossometh  luxuriantly. 

The  Kal  age  hath  now  arrived  ; 

Freely  plant  the  one  Name. 

It  is  not  at  all  the  season  for  other  planting  : 

Never  wander  astray  in  error. 

He  on  whose  forehead  such  destiny  hath  been  written, 

Shall  obtain  God  on  meeting  the  Guru. 

O my  soul,  this  is  the  season  of  the  Name. 

Nanak  uttereth  God’s  praises — Hari ! Hari  I Hari  1 Hari ! 

Injunctions  to  the  Guru’s  Sikhs ; — 

Join  and  unite  together,  my  brethren,  lay  aside  differences, 
love  one  another. 

. Associate  yourselves  with  God’s  name,  0 holy  men  ; 
spread  your  mat  and  sit  on  it. 

In  this  way,  my  friends,  throw  your  dice.^ 

O holy  men,  repeat  God’s  name  day  and  night,  and  at 
the  last  hour  you  shall  not  suffer. 

Make  the  practice  of  religion  your  board,  and  truth  your 
pieces. 

Conquer  lust,  wrath,  covetousness,  and  worldly  love ; 
such  a game  is  pleasing  to  God. 

Rise  at  dawn,  perform  your  ablutions,  then  and  at  bed- 
time worship  God. 

My  true  Guru  shall  cause  you  to  win  the  critical  throw, 
and  you  shall  go  home  with  happiness  and  comfort. 

God  Himself  playeth ; God  Himself  looketh  on ; He  Himself 
made  what  is  made. 

Nanak,  the  man  who  playeth  under  the  Guru’s  instruction 
shall  win  the  game  and  go  home  happy. 

God’s  praises : — 

Only  Thou,  0 Lord,  knowest  Thy  power ; none  beside 
knoweth  it. 

He  to  whom  my  beloved  Guru  showeth  mercy,  recognizeth 
Thee. 

odour.  Others  remain  like  dry  firewood.  That  is,  the  tender-hearted 
receive  full  benefit  from  the  Guru’s  instruction,  while  the  hard-hearted 
reject  it.  ^ The  reference  is  to  the  Indian  game  of  chaupar. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  427 

I am  a sacrifice  to  Thy  worshippers. 

Thy  place,  O God,  is  ever  beautiful ; Thy  play  is 
unequalled. 

Thy  service  can  be  performed  by  Thyself  and  none  other. 

It  is  only  he  who  pleaseth  Thee,  and  whom  Thou  lovest 
who  is  Thy  worshipper. 

Thou  art  the  great  Giver ; Thou  art  the  great  Sage : 
there  is  none  equal  to  Thee. 

Thou  art  omnipotent ; 0 my  Lord,  how  know  I how  to 
worship  Thee  ? 

Thy  palace  is  invisible,  0 my  Dear  One ; it  is  difficult 
to  obey  Thy  will. 

Saith  Nanak,  I have  fallen  at  Thy  door  ; protect  me  who 
am  stupid  and  ignorant. 


Sarang 

The  servant’s  dependence  on  his  Master : — 

Every  one  remembereth  his  master. 

Whoever  is  a servant  goeth  to  his  master 

To  tell  him  his  sorrow,  to  tell  him  his  joy,  to  tell  him  his 
state  : 

It  is  from  him  he  getteth  honour,  from  him  strength, 
from  him  advantage. 

Some  rely  upon  empire,  youth,  wealth,  and  possessions  ; 
others  upon  fathers  and  mothers. 

Instead  of  all  these  Nanak  hath  had  the  Guru  ; and  all 
his  hopes  have  been  fulfilled. 

The  Guru  has  found  happiness  in  God’s  asylum : — 

0 God,  I have  come  to  Thine  asylum. 

The  anxiety  of  my  mind  hath  departed  since  I obtained 
a sight  of  Thee. 

Though  I spoke  not,  Thou  hast  known  my  state,  and 
caused  me  to  utter  Thy  name. 

By  uttering  Thy  praises  my  misery  hath  fled ; I am 
filled  with  happiness  and  peace,  and  altogether  delighted. 

Taking  mine  arm.  Thou  hast  brought  me  forth  from 
the  blind  well  and  abode  of  mammon. 


428  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Saith  Nanak,  the  Guru  hath  cut  off  my  entanglements, 
and,  though  I was  separated  from  God,  hath  brought  me 
to  Him. 

Thanksgiving  to  God : — 

O God,  how  friendless  and  helpless  am  I ! 

From  what  humble  beginning  didst  Thou  make  me  man 
by  Thy  power  ! 

Giver  of  life  and  soul  to  all  creatures,  Thou  art  unequalled ; 
Thy  merits  cannot  be  described. 

Thou  art  the  Beloved  of  all,  the  Cherisher  of  all,  the 
Support  of  all  hearts. 

No  one  knoweth  Thy  state  or  condition  ; from  Thyself 
alone  hast  Thou  made  the  extension  of  the  world, 

Nanak  prayeth — seat  me  on  the  boat  of  the  holy  man, 
•and  I shall  cross  over  the  dangerous  ocean. 

Kanra 

Exhortation  to  devotion : — 

Come  my  friends  and  saints. 

Sing  God’s  praises  with  joy  and  pleasure,  and  your  sins 
shall  be  erased  and  put  aside. 

Lay  the  feet  of  the  saints  on  your  foreheads,  and  there 
shall  be  light  in  your  dark  abodes. 

By  the  favour  of  the  saints  the  lotus  of  the  heart  bloometh  ; 
repeat  God’s  name  and  behold  Him  near  you. 

Nanak  is  a sacrifice  to  the  time  when,  by  God’s  mercy,  he 
found  the  saint. 

Prabhati  Ashtapadi 

A satire  on  certain  forms  of  Hindu  worship : — 

The  mind  containeth  great  wrath  and  pride. 

Men  worship  and  make  great  display  ; 

They  perform  ablutions,  and  make  the  marks  of  quoits^  on 
their  bodies  ; 

Yet  the  filth  of  their  hearts  never  departeth. 

No  one  hath  found  God  in  that  way. 

Men  impress  Vishnu’s  marks  on  their  bodies,  yet  their  minds 
are  fascinated  by  mammon. 

^ The  quoit  is  one  of  the  emblems  of  Vishnu,  v?ith  which  his 

worshippers  are  frequently  branded. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  429 

They  commit  sin  and  are  in  the  power  of  the  five  evil 
passions. 

They  bathe  at  places  of  pilgrimage,  and  say  that  all  their 
sins  have  vanished, 

Yet  they  again  fearlessly  commit  them. 

The  ministers  of  Death  will  bind  and  take  them  away  to 
his  city. 

They  put  on  tinkling  anklets  and  play  cymbals, 

While  in  their  hearts  there  is  deception,  and  they  wander 
like  demons. 

A serpent  is  not  killed  by  beating  his  lair. 

God  who  made  men  knoweth  all  things. 

They  perform  fire-penance,  and  wear  ochre-coloured 
garments  ; 

Smitten  by  some  calamity  ^ they  run  away  from  home, 
Leave  their  country  and  wander  abroad. 

Taking  the  five  deadly  sins  with  them. 

They  have  their  ears  torn  and  steal  morsels  to  live  on  ; 
They  beg  from  house  to  house  and  fail  to  be  satisfied  ; 
They  leave  their  own  wives,  and  ogle  the  wives  of  others ; 
They  find  no  home  and  are  very  miserable  ; 

They  make  vows  of  silence,  and  speak  not ; 

In  their  hearts  are  worldly  desires  and  they  wander  in 
births  ; 

Abstaining  from  corn  their  bodies  undergo  pain. 

They  understand  not  God’s  order,  but  are  filled  with  pride. 
Without  a true  guru  no  one  hath  obtained  the  supreme 
state — 

Inquire  of  all  the  Veds  and  the  Simritis. 

The  perverse  perform  useless  works. 

Which,  like  a house  of  sand,  have  no  stability. 

They  to  whom  the  merciful  God  is  pleasing. 

Knot  the  Guru’s  word  in  their  garments. 

Among  millions  only  a few  saints  are  seen  : 

Nanak,  man  is  saved  in  their  company. 

He  who  is  lucky  obtaineth  a sight  of  them  ; 

He  is  saved  himself  and  saveth  all  his  family. 

^ Disindmtion  to  labour  is  a frequent  cause  of  embracing  the  life 

of  a fygjr. 


430 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Sahaskriti^  Sloks  of  Guru  Arjan 

ADDRESSED  TO 

Krishan  Lal  AND  Har  Lal,  two  Brahmans  who  went 
FROM  BANARAS  to  VISIT  THE  GURU. 

God  preserves  the  holy  man. 

A huntsman  on  seeing  a deer  may  discharge  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  arrows  and  miss  him  ; 

So  he  whom  God  preserveth,  0 Nanak,  shall  not  have 
a hair  of  his  head  touched. 

The  life  of  a king,  however  great,  hangs  by  a hair : — 

A king  may  make  many  efforts  ; strong  and  brave  men 
may  serve  him  on  every  side  ; 

He  may  dwell  in  a steep  and  lofty  place,  and  never  think 
of  death ; 

But  when  the  order  of  God  cometh,  0 Nanak,  an  ant 
can  take  away  his  life. 

Dismiss  all  anxiety  for  thy  relations  and  love  God 
alone : — 

Be  not  anxious  for  thy  mother,  father,  brother,  or  for 
men ; 

Be  not  anxious  for  wife,  son,  friend  ; being  occupied  with 
them  is  to  be  subject  to  mammon. 

One  merciful  all-pervading  God  is  the  Cherisher  of  all 
beings. 

The  holy  man  is  the  real  hero : — 

All  the  saints  are  an  invincible  army  of  heroes  who  have 
donned  the  armour  of  humility  ; 

The  repetitions  of  God’s  praises  are  their  weapons,  the 
Guru’s  words  their  shelter  and  the  bucklers  in  their  hands  ; 

They  are  mounted  on  horses,  chariots,  and  elephants, 
and  know  God’s  way  ; 

They  walk  fearlessly  among  the  armies  of  their  enemies, 
charge  them  with  God’s  praises ; 

^ Sahaskriti  in  the  Granth  Sahib  means  a mixture  of  Sanskrit, 
Praknt,  and  Hindi. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  431 

They  conquer  the  world,  O Nanak,  and  take  captive  the 
five  thieves. 

Man  is  debased  without  the  Guru’s  instruction : — 

The  life  of  mortal  without  the  Guru’s  instruction  is 
accursed  and  defiled. 

The  blockhead  is  not  equal  to  a dog,  a donkey,  a raven, 
or  a snake. 

Death  cannot  affect  the  holy : — 

Nanak,  Death’s  myrmidons  shall  not  look  at  him  who 
worshippeth  God’s  lotus  feet, 

Keepeth  God’s  name  in  his  heart,  and  singeth  His  praises 
in  the  company  of  the  saints. 

All  earthly  things  may  be  gained,  but  not  devotion 
without  God’s  grace: — 

Not  difficult  to  obtain  are  wealth  and  beauty ; not 
difficult  to  obtain  is  the  sovereignty  of  demigods  ; 

Not  difficult  to  obtain  are  pleasing  viands  ; not  difficult 
to  obtain  is  elegant  raiment ; 

Not  difiicult  to  obtain  are  sons,  friends,  brothers,  and 
relations  ; not  difficult  to  obtain  are  woman’s  favours  ; 

Not  difficult  to  obtain  is  accomplishment  in  learning; 
not  difficult  to  obtain  are  cleverness  and  dexterity ; 

But  God’s  name  alone  is  difficult  to  obtain  ; Nanak,  it  is 
obtained  by  His  favour  in  the  company  of  saints. 

The  six  attributes  of  the  saint : — 

He  is  called  a holy  man  and  perfect  saint  who  is  filled 
with  the  following  six  pairs  of  qualities — 

Who  possesseth  the  spell  of  God’s  name,  and  meditateth 
on  Him  who  fiUeth  every  place  ; 

Who  deemeth  woe  and  weal  as  the  same,  and  whose  life 
is  pure  and  without  enmity  ; 

Who  is  compassionate  to  all  creatures,  and  who  hath 
expelled  the  live  deadly  sins ; 

fUio  su6sfstef6  on  God^s  praises,  and  who  abideih  m ihe 
world  untouched  by  it  as  the  lotus  in  the  water ; 


432  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Who  instructeth  friend  and  enemy  alike,  who  loveth  God’s 
service ; 

Who  heareth  not  slander  of  others,  and  abandoning  pride 
becometh  the  dust  of  all  men’s  feet. 

The  deadly  sins : — 

0 love,  thou  art  an  invincible  hero  in  the  fight ; thou 
crushest  even  the  very  powerful. 

Thou  fascinatest  the  company  of  the  musicians  of  heaven, 
demigods,  men,  beasts,  and  birds.^ 

1 bow  to  God  the  Creator  ; Nanak  seeketh  the  protection 
of  the  Lord  of  the  world. 

0 lust,  thou  givest  an  abode  in  hell ; thou  causest  man 
to  wander  in  many  a womb  ; 

Thou  stealest  the  heart,  thou  pervadest  the  three  worlds, 
thou  destroyest  devotion,  penance,  and  virtue  ; 

Thou  conferrest  scant  happiness,  O bodiless  * one,  thou 
art  fickle,  thou  fillest  high  and  low  ; 

But  fear  of  thee,  saith  Nanak,  is  dispelled  by  associating 
with  the  saints  and  taking  shelter  in  God. 

O wrath,  thou  root  of  strife,  there  is  never  mercy  in  thee. 

Thou  takest  sinful  mortals  in  thy  power,  and  causest 
them  to  dance  like  monkeys. 

By  association  with  thee  man  is  debased  : the  myrmidons 
of  Death  inflict  various  punishments  on  him. 

Nanak  prayeth,  O Destroyer  of  the  sorrows  of  the  poor, 
merciful  God,  preserve  all  creatures  from  wrath. 

O thievish  covetousness,  thou  playest  many  a prank 
with  the  great. 

^ Compare — 

*Ep«)s  dvixare  fmxav — 

Kot  <r  ovT  dfiavaratv  oiSeU 

oifi’  d/Mpumy  iir’  dy0p(O7r<oy. 

Sophocles,  Aft/,  781, 

* As  having  been  burnt  to  ashes  by  Shiv,  whom,  when  engaged  in 
penance,  he  had  troubled  with  lascivious  thoughts.  ■ The  words  avf/ 
chanchal  of  the  original  may  also  mean  unstable  as  mercury. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  AR JAN  433 

Through  thee  the  wandering  mind  greatly  wavereth  in 
every  way  and  manner. 

Thou  hast  no  respect  for  friend,  or  lover,  or  relation,  or 
parent. 

What  ought  not  to  be  done  thou  doest ; what  ought  not 
to  be  eaten  thou  eatest ; what  ought  not  be  to  made,  thou 
makest — such  is  thy  reputation. 

Take  me,  take  me  into  Thy  protection,  O God  ! this  is 
Nanak’s  prayer,  O King  of  men. 

O sinful  pride,  source  of  transmigration, 

Thou  abandonest  friends  and  boldest  fast  imto  enemies  ; 
thou  spreadest  many  an  illusion. 

Through  thee  the  soul  groweth  weary  of  transmigration, 
and  suffereth  much  pain. 

Through  thee  man  roameth  astray  in  the  terrible  wilder- 
ness, and  contracteth  very  dire  and  incurable  maladies. 

The  only  physician  is  the  supreme  Brahm,  the  supreme 
Being,  whom  Nanak  worshippeth. 

The  following  prayer  is  repeated  by  many  Sikhs 
while  performing  their  morning  ablutions : — 

O Lord  of  the  soul,  Gobind,  Ocean  of  mercy.  Guru  of 
the  world ; 

O Destroyer  of  the  world’s  grievances,  full  of  compassion, 
dispel  every  sorrow. 

O Thou,  capable  of  affording  shelter,  merciful  Lord  of 
the  poor,  have  mercy  on  us. 

Nanak,  when  God  whether  called  Ram,  Damodar,  or 
Madhwa  is  remembered,  this  perishable  body  obtaineth 
comfort. 

God’s  power : — 

The  power  with  which  God  supported  the  firmament,  and 
enclosed  fire  in  timber  ; 

The  power  with  which  He  supported  the  moon,  the  sun, 
and  the  lunar  mansions,  and  infused  light  and  breath  into 
the  body ; 

The  power  with  which  He  cherished  the  embryo  in  the 
mother’s  womb  and  protected  it  from  the  fire  of  its  dwelling — 

•IKH.  Ill  F f ' 


434 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


With  the  same  power,  O Nanak,  God  restrained  His  seas 
and  allowed  not  the  world  to  be  wasted  by  their  waves. 

By  devotion  apparent  impossibilities  may  be  ac- 
complished. This  couplet  is  recited  by  gyanis  as  an 
introduction  to  the  reading  of  the  Granth  Sahib : — 
By  remembering  God  in  the  company  of  the  saints, 

O Nanak,  and  seeking  His  protection, 

Mosquitoes  can  pierce  rocks,  ants  cross  mire. 

Cripples  traverse  the  ocean,  and  blind  men  see  even  in 
the  darkness. 

God  is  not  in  the  guise  of  the  Hindu  deity  Vishnu: — 
God  hath  no  shell,  no  quoit,  no  mace,  nor  is  He  of  sable 
colour  ; wonderful  is  His  form  ; He  is  unborn. 

The  Veds  describe  Him  as  indescribable. 

He  is  the  Most  High,  the  Illimitable,  the  Indestructible  ; 
He  dwelleth  in  the  hearts  of  the  saints ; Nanak,  they 
who  know  Him  are  very  fortunate. 

When  God  is  merciful,  miraculous  events  occur: — 
Nanak  representeth,  when  God  is  merciful 
A mountain  becometh  a blade  of  grass,  and  what  is  dry 
becometh  green ; 

They  who  are  drowning  swim,  they  who  are  empty  are 
filled. 

And  millions  of  suns  shine  in  the  darkness. 

Gatha  ^ 

1 

Camphor,  flowers,  and  perfumes  become  impure  by 
touching  man’s  body. 

Nanak,  the  ignorant  are  proud  of  the  fat,  blood,  foul 
odours,  and  bones  of  which  their  bodies  are  composed. 

2 

Were  man  to  traverse  with  his  eye  the  sky,  the  con- 
tinents, the  worlds, 

^ G&tha  meant  originally  a Sanskrit  verse.  In  later  times  Prakrit 
or  any  language  not  Sanskrit  has  been  so  called ; Guru  Arjan’s  Gatha 
may  perhaps  be  described  as  aphorisms. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  435 

And  its  regions  even  to  the  smallest  particle  thereof, 
O Nanak,  nothing  could  be  obtained  without  the  saint. 

3 - 

Know  that  death  is  real,  and  everything  else  that  ap- 
peareth  is  unreal. 

God’s  praise,  saith  Nanak,  which  is  obtained  by  association 
with  the  saints  shall  alone  accompany  us. 

4 

The  mind  wandereth  to  mammon,  lovers,  friends,  and 
relations. 

Nanak,  the  abode  of  happiness  which  consisteth  in  wor- 
shipping God  is  obtained  by  association  with  the  saints. 

5 

The  nim-tree  by  association  with  sandal  becometh  as 
sandal, 

Nanak,  while  the  bamboo,  even  though  it  dwelleth  near, 
is  not  perfumed  through  its  pride. 

6 

By  repeating  and  reflecting  on  the  discourse  in  which 
God’s  name  is  interwoven,  pride  is  effaced. 

Nanak,  by  letting  fly  the  arrow  of  God’s  name  the  five 
enemies  are  destroyed. 

The  word  of  the  saint  is  the  path  of  peace  ; it  is  obtained 
by  greatly  meritorious  deeds. 

Nanak,  there  is  no  transmigration  for  him  who  uttereth 
God’s  praises. 

8 

When  leaves  wither  and  fall,  they  return  not  again  to 
the  tree. 

Nanak,  without  the  Name  there  is  suffering  ; man’s  days 
and  nights  pass  in  transmigration. 

9 

The  very  fortunate  who  love  the  association  of  saints 
obtain  God. 

Nanak,  he  who  repeateth  God’s  name  and  praises  returneth 
not  to  the  ocean  of  the  world. 

F f 2 


430 


' THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


10 

Discourses  on  God  are  profound  and  endless,  and  few  are 
there  who  understand  them. 

They  who  understand  them,  Nanak,  abandon  worldly 
desires,  and  repeat  God’s  name  in  the  company  of  saints. 

The  saint’s  word  is  the  prime  speU ; through  it  millions 
of  sins  are  blotted  out : 

Nanak,  by  meditating  on  God’s  lotus  feet  whole  families 
are  saved. 


12 

Beautiful  is  that  temple  in  which  God’s  praises  are  sung. 
Nanak,  the  utterance  of  God’s  name,  which  only  the 
fortunate  obtain,  affordeth  deliverance. 

13 

The  true  friends,  the  saints,  find  God  the  Friend  who 
never  vexeth  man’s  heart. 

Nanak  hath  made  Him  whose  abode  and  greatness  are 
immeasurable,  the  companion  of  his  soul. 

14 

Dishonour  is  effaced  by  a good  son 

Who  remembereth  in  his  heart  the  Guru’s  spell. 

And  loveth,  O Nanak,  God  the  permanent. 

Who  taketh  man  across  the  world’s  ocean, 

15 

1 Tp  forget  God  is  death  ; 

To  meditate  on  His  name  is  life. 

^ Napak,  God  is  found  by  association  with  the  saints, 
Which  is  obtained  by  primal  destiny. 

16 

■ As  the  spell  of  the  ^ake-charmer  draweth  the  fangs  of 
the  serpent, 

‘ So,  Nanak,  the  saint  who  is  found  by  good  fortune  re- 
moveth  misery. 


HYM!<IS’(I)F  GURU  M'JAN  437 

17 

God  pervadeth  every  place  and  giveth  shdter  to  all 
souls ; 

Nanak,  His  love  toucheth  the  heart  when'  the  Guru 
extendeth  his  fa'vour  and  showeth  himself. 

18 

When  God’s  lotus  feet  cleave  the  heart, 

All  comfort  is  obtained. 

Nanak,  from  the  most  ancient  times  the  happy  saints 
sing  God’s  praises. 

19 

They  who  utter  instnictive  words  and  walk  with  the 
saints  shall  be  saved  : 

In  the  ocean  of  the  world,  Nanak,  they  shall  not  again 
obtain  birth. 

20 

Men  may  study  the  Veds,  the  Purans,  and  the  Shastars, 

But  it  is  the  name  of  the  one  God  that  should  be  clasped 
to  the  heart. 

He  who  claspeth  it  to  his  heart  saveth  whole  families. 

Nanak,  very  fortunate  are  the  few  who  can  thus  save. 

21 

Nanak,  the  remembrance  of  God’s  name  which  saveth 
whole  families. 

Is  obtained  by  associating  with  saints,  whom  only  the 
very  fortunate  behold. 

22 

The  saints  remove  all  sin  and  implant  all  faith  in  the 
heart ; 

Nanak,  they  on  whose  foreheads  it  is  so  written  obtain 
association  ■with  them. 

23 

God  was,  is,  and  shall  be ; it  is  He  who  destroyeth  and 
createth  all  things. 

Nanak,  know  for  certain  that  holy  men  are  the  cause  of 
God’s  love. 


438  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

24 

Man  loveth  not  the  Word  vdiich  conferreth  happiness; 
he  is  attached  to  fleeting  things  like  the  safflower  dye ; 

Nanak,  he  obtaineth  not  spiritual  happiness  even  in  a 
dream : disease,  sorrow,  and  separation  from  God  are  his 
portion. 

PUNHAS 

The  following  quatrains  are  said  to  have  been 
addressed  by  the  Guru  to  Harihan,  his  wife’s  sister, 
who  asked  him  to  compose  some  devotional  verses. 
In  most  of  them  her  name  is  inserted.  Others 
suppose  that  Harihan  is  a measure  and  means  the 
same  as  Punha : — 

I 

The  pen  in  the  hand  of  the  Inscrutable  One  writeth  on 
the  forehead. 

He  whose  form  is  incomparable  is  concerned  with  all. 

Thy  praises,  O God,  cannot  be  expressed. 

Nanak,  on  beholding  Thee  is  fascinated  and  a sacrifice 
for  a sight  of  Thee. 


2 

Seated  in  the  company  of  the  saints,  I utter  God’s  praises  ; 

I dedicate  to  Him  all  my  decorations,  and  give  Him  all 
my  soul. 

Thirsting  that  He  will  come,  I have  made  my  Spouse’s 
couch. 

Harihan,  when  destiny  is  recorded  on  the  forehead,  we 
meet  the  Friend. 

3 

0 my  companions,  a woman  may  prepare  everything — 
lamp-black  for  the  eyes,  necklaces,  betel ; 

She  may  take  the  sixteen  decorations  and  apply  anjan 
to  her  eyes ; 

Yet  it  is  only  when  the  spouse  visiteth  her  she  obtaineth 
everything. 

0 Harihan,  without  the  Spouse  all  decorations  are  vain. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


439 


4 

She  in  whose  house  He  abideth  is  very  fortunate  ; 

All  decorations  become  her,  and  she  is  a happy  wife, 

I sleep  now  free  of  care  since  ihy  heart’s  desires  have 
been  fulfilled. 

Harihan,  when  God  came  to  my  house,  I obtained  every- 
thing. 

5 

My  only  hope  was  that  my  hopes  might  be  fulfilled  ; 

When  I met  the  merciful  true  Guru,  I obtained  the 
Perfect  God. 

In  my  body  were  many  demerits,  so  that  I was  over- 
spread with  them. 

Harihan,  when  the  true  Guru  is  merciful,  the  mind 
obtaineth  rest. 

6 

Saith  Nanak,  I have  meditated  on  God  who  is  endless, 
endless. 

Difficult  to  cross  is  this  world,  but  the  true  Guru  hath 
caused  me  to  cross  it. 

Transmigration  is  at  an  end  when  the  true  Guru  is  found. 

Harihan,  the  nectar  of  God’s  name  is  obtained  from  the 
true  Guru. 

7 

I am  lucky  ; ^ happiness  abideth  in  my  home  ; 

0 my  companions,  God  who  is  a jewel  is  in  my  breast ; 
on  beholding  Him  my  sorrow  departeth. 

1 dwell  with  God  who  is  the  essence  of  all  happiness. 

And  in  whose  hand,  0 Harihan,  ever  abide  wealth,  per- 
fection, and  the  nine  treasures. 

8 

He  who  goeth  to  enjoy  another’s  wJfe  shall  be  put  to 

shame. 

How  long  shall  the  sins  of  those  who  continually  steal 
others’  property  be  concealed  ? 

1 Literally— There  is  the  image  of  a lotus  in  my  hand,  an  aus- 
picious  mark  according  to  Hindu  palmists. 


440  rate  S^K!H  RELIGIdlbT 

By  repeating  God’s  praises  man  becometh  pure  and  saveth 
all  his  family. 

Harihan,  by  also  hearing  the  supreme  God’s  praiteSiand 
meditating  bn  Him,  man  becometh  pure. 

: .9  ' 

The  heavens  shine  above,  the  earth  below  appearetb 
beautiful ; 

In  every  direction  shineth  God’s  light ; I long  to  behold 
His  face. 

I wander  searching  in  every  country  to  find  the  Dear  One. 

Harihan,  if  good  fortune  be  recorded  on  the  forehead, 
a sight  of  Him  shall  be  obtained. 

10 

I have  seen  every  place,  but  found  none  like  unto  thee  ; ^ 

The  Creator  constructeth  thee,  O temple,  therefore  art 
thou  beautiful. 

Ramdaspur  is  thickly  populated,  unparalleled,  and  beyond 
praise. 

Harihan,  Nanak’s  impurities  depart  by  bathing  in  the 
tank  of  Ram  Das. 

11 

The  chatrik  in  his  heart  desireth  the  friendly  rain. 

And  longeth  for  that  to  which  his  soul  is  attached. 

He  wandereth  lonely  from  forest  to  forest  in  quest  of 
a drop  of  water. 

Harihan,  thus  God’s  servant  prayeth  for  the  Name ; 
Nanak  is  a sacrifice  unto  him. 

12 

The  Friend’s  heart  is  beyond  praise  : His  secrets  cannot 
be  known. 

It  is  only  he  who  possesseth  unequalled  virtues  who  can 
recognize  the  Real.  Thing. 

When  man’s  mind  is  absorbed  in  God  there  is  excessive 

love. 

Harihan,  he  who  chasteneth  the  thief,  his  fickle  mind, 
shall  obtain  the  wealth  of  the  True  One. 

^ The  Golden  Temple  at  Aihritsan  ' 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN 


441 


13 

In  a vision  the  Most  High  appeared  to  me,  but  I could 
not  seize  His  skirt. 

A beautiful  Being  He  shone ; on  beholding  Him  my 
heart  was  beguiled. 

I am  searching  for  His  tracks : say  how  shall  I find  them  ? 

O my  friend  Harihan,  show  me  by  what  efforts  I may 
obtain  the  Beloved. 


14 

The  eyes  which  see  not  the  holy  man  are  in  evil  case ; 

The  ears  which  hear  not  his  instruction  ought  to  be 
stopped ; 

The  tongue  which  uttereth  not  the  Name  ought  to  be 
cut  in  pieces — 

Harihan,  when  man  forgetteth  God,  he  daily  declineth. 

15 

T'he  bumble-bee  is  very  proud,  but  he  is  caught  in  the 
petals  of  the  lotus  ; 

His  body  is  entangled  therein  and  he  loseth  his  senses ; 
but  the  sun  alloweth  his  escape  in  the  morning. 

Is  there  any  such  sun^  as  will  open  the  hard  knot  of 
ignorance  for  me  ? 

Nanak,  the  one  Lord  God  who  uniteth  what  is  broken 
hath  alone  power  to  do  so. 

16 

I run  in  every  direction  on  account  of  my  love  for  God. 

How  shall  we  destroy  the  five  troublesome  enemies  the 
deadly  sins  ? 

Shoot  them  with  the  sharp  arrow  of  meditation  on  God’s 
name. 

And,  Harihan,  thou  shalt  obtain  the  perfect  Guru  who 
is  the  destroyer  of  great  slins. 

17 

^he  true  Guru  hath  conferred  gifts  which  are  never 

exhauste^-ii.  , . ...  t 

1 The  Sanskrit  mitr  means  the  stm  as  well  as  a,  friend. 


442  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

God  being  pleased  bestoweth  the  wealth  of  the  ambrosial 
Name, 

By  eating  and  enjoying  which  all  pious  persons  shall  be 
saved. 

Nanak,  ever  worship  Him  and  thou  shalt  never  die. 

18 

Wherever  the  saints  go,  the  place  is  beautiful. 

All  happiness  is  obtained  by  meditating  on  God’s  name. 

When  God’s  creatures  rejoice,  the  slanderer  dieth  in 
agony. 

Nanak,  the  saints’  hearts  are  pleased  reciting  the  Name. 

19 

God  is  the  Purifier  of  sinners  ; why  not  worship  Him  ? 

False  and  contemptible  is  love  of  the  world ; how  long 
shall  we  suffer  it  ? 

By  beholding  a castle  in  the  air  how  canst  thou  be  happy  ? 

Harihan,  1 am  a sacrifice  to  those  who  know  how  to 
reach  God’s  court. 

20 

The  fool,  whose  body  is  filth  and  very  malodorous, 

Hath  done  very  many  bad  things. 

He  wandereth  in  the  darkness  of  pride  and  thinketh  not 
of  death. 

Harihan,  on  beholding  a castle  in  the  air  why  suppose  it 
to  be  real  ? 

21 

Who  can  preserve  his  life  when  it  cometh  to  an  end  ? 

The  physician  may  prescribe  endless  remedies,  hut  they 
are  of  no  avail ; 

Therefore,  O ignorant  man,  remember  the  one  God  who 
wiU  assist  thee. 

Harihan,  without  the  Name  the  body  is  dirt,  and  every- 
thing is  vain. 

22 

Drink  the  medicine  of  the  unequalled  and  priceless  Name  : 
The  saints  eat  the  ambrosia  of  God’s  name  in  company, 

and  give  it  to  all  to  partake  thereof. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  ARJAN  443 

They  who  are  so  destined  obtain  it. 

Harihan,  I am  a sacrifice  to  those  who  enjoy  God’s  love. 

23 

When  the  assembly  of  the  physicians  ^ is  formed, 

God  is  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  medicines  are  effectual. 
Men’s  acts  bad  and  good  are  disclosed,* 

And  Harihan,  their  troubles,  diseases,  and  sins  vanish. 

Extra  Sloks 
Who  are  real  lovers  : — 

They  are  the  real  lovers  who  know  God  and  turn  not 
away  from  Him ; 

They  who  perform  no  service  for  Him  are  false,  and  slink 
away. 

Devotion  is  sufficient  without  decorations : — 
Without  the  Lord  I will  bum  silks  and  satins  in  the 
flames ; 

With  Thee,  0 Lord,  saith  Nanak,  I look  beautiful  even 
when  rolhng  in  the  dust. 

The  contempt  of  the  world  is  love  of  God ; — 

By  the  Guru’s  instruction  the  Name  is  worshipped  and 
love  for  God  and  contempt  of  the  world  produced. 

When  man  subdueth  the  five  enemies  the  Maru  Rag* 
is  profitable. 

The  following  was  addressed  to  a covetous  Brah- 
man : — 

If  I have  the  one_^God,  I have  gained  lakhs  ; how  many 
doors  for  thee  to  beg  at  ? 

O Brahman,  thy  life  hath  passed  in  vain  since  thou  hast 
forgotten  Him  who  made  thee. 

The  punishment  of  sinners : — 

Sinners  shall  lament  for  the  sins  they  commit : 

^ The  congregation  of  saints. 

* That  is,  their  diseases  are  diagnosed. 

® The  Maru  rag  is  sung  in  war. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


444 

Nanak,  as  a churning-staff  chumeth  milk,  so  shall  Dharm- 
raj  chum  them. 

The  pious  render  their  lives  profitable  and  are 
honoured  after  death  : — 

The  pious  who  meditate  on  the  Name  gain  the  advantage 
of  human  lives — 

Nanak,  Dharmraj  will  tell  them  that  they  have  made 
his  court  holy. 

Evil  advisers : — 

Men  sink  into  evil  sloughs  through  the  sweet  words  of 
evil  advisers ; 

Nanak,  they  whose  good  fortune  is  recorded  on  their 
foreheads  escape  their  influence. 

Baba  Nanak  divinely  inspired : — 

God  gave  Baba  Nanak  the  Word  as  an  inexhaustible 
wealth  to  use  and  spend  ; 

As  long  as  God  is  merciful,  so  long  shall  that  capital  never 
diminish. 

The  Guru  in  his  search  for  God  would  sell  his  body 
for  wings  : — 

If  I could  find  wings  to  purchase,  I would  take  them  for 
an  equal  weight  oj  my  flesh ; 

I would  attach  them  to  my  body,  and  search  for  and 
find  the  Friend. 

To  sit  with  God  the  King  of  kings  is  the  Guru's 
highest  honour : — 

n My  Friend  is  the  true  monarch,  the  King  of  kings  ; 

To  sit  near  Him,  in  whom  all  must  have  faith,  is  an 
honour. 


END  OF  VOL.  Ill 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

ITS  GURUS,  SACRED  WRITINGS 
AND  AUTHORS 

BY 

MAX  ARTHUR  MACAULIFFE 

\igKr  5r?  ^ ‘^fK^r. 

The  egg  of  superstition  hath  burst;  the 
mind  is  illumined : 

The  Guru  hath  cut  the  fetters  off  the  feet 
and  freed  the  captive. 

Guru  Arjan 

IN  SIX  VOLUMES 
VOL.  IV 

OXFORD 

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 


1909 


HENRY  FROWDE,  M.A. 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 
LONDON,  EDINBURGH,  NEW  YORK 
TORONTO  AND  MELBOURNE 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV 

PAGE 

Life  of  Guru  Har  Gobind,  the  Sixth  Guru  . i 

Gur  Das’s  Analysis  of  Sikhism  ....  241 

Life  of  Guru  Har  Rat,  the  Seventh  Guru  . 275 

Life  of  Guru  Har  Krishan,  the  Eighth  Guru  . 315 

Life  of  Guru  Teg  Bahadur,  the  Ninth  Guru  . 331 

Hymns  of  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  ....  393 

Sloks  of  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  ....  414 


GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


8tKH  IV  P.  I 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND/ 
THE  SIXTH  GURU 

Chapter  I 

Ille  ego  qui  quondam  gracili  modulatus  avena 
Carmen 

nunc  horfentia  Martis 

Arma  virosque  ^ cano. 

Lol  I the  man  whose  muse  whilom  did  mask, 

As  time  her  taught,  in  lowly  shepherd*s  weeds, 

Am  now  enforced — a far  unfitter  task — 

For  trumpets  stern  to  change  mine  oaten,  reeds; 

Spenser. 

The  early  life  of  Guru  Har  Gobind  has  already 
been  given  in  the  life  of  his  father  Guru  Arjan.  On 

1 Besides  the  life  of  the  sixth  Guru  by  Bbai  Santokh  Singh,  then- 
tioned  in  the  Introduction,  there  is  another  work  called  Gur  Bilas 
on  the  same  subject.  The  name  of  the  author  is  not  given.  In  the 
preface  to  it  it  is  stated  that  Bhai  Mani  Singh  went  to  Nankana.  ThQ 
ragis  were  singing  Gur  Das's  compositions.  When  they  came  to  the 
following— 'There  were  five  cups,  five  priests,  the  great  priest  the 
sixth  Guru  sat  on  his  throne — one  Bhagat  Singh,  a devout  Sikh  of 
the  locality,  called  upon  Mani  Singh  to  give  an  account  of  Guru  Har 
Gobind,  the  sixth  Guru.  Mani  Singh  replied,  ‘ I will  relate  to  thee 
what  Guru  Gobind  Singh  told  Bhai  Daya  Singh,  and  what  the  latter 
communicated  to  me.'  One  Dharm  Singh  was  present,  and  heard 
Mani  Singh's  narrative.  He  gave  its  details  to  the  author  of  the  Gur 
Bilds,  whom  he  had  previously  baptized.  The  author  of  the  work 
states  that  he  completed  it  in  Sambat  1775  (a.d.  1718).  SardSr 
Kahn  Singh  of  Nabha,  however,  gives  it  as  his  opinion  that  the  work 
was  compiled  by  Bhai  Gurumukh  Singh  and  Bhai  Darbara  Singh, 
a priest  and  a chorister  respectively  of  the  Sikh  temple  at  Amritsar, 
and  that  they  began  their  literary  labour  in  the  reign  of  MaharSja 
Ranjit  Singh  and  finished  it  in  the  reign  of  Maharlja  Sher  Singh. 

We  are  also  indebted  for  several  details  of  the  life  of  Guru  Har 
Gobind  to  a manjiscript  life  of  that  Guru  in  the  Panjabi  language,  and 
also  to  the  Hindi  work,  Itihds  Guru  Khdlsa,  of  Sadhu  Gobind  Singh 
of  BanSras. 

2 Virgil  had  only  one  hero ; we  have  several. 

B 


SIKH.  IV 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


2 

ascertaining  his  father’s  death,  he  caused  the  Granth 
Sahib  to  be  read,  and  employed  Bhai  Budha  for 
the  purpose.  The  musicians  of  the  temple  sang  the 
Gurus’  hymns  to  the  accompaniment  of  their  instru- 
ments. The  singing  and  the  reading  of  the  Granth 
Sahib  lasted  for  ten  days. 

When  the  final  rites  were  ended,  Bhai  Budha 
clothed  Guru  Har  Gobind  in  new  raiment,  and  placed 
before  him  a seli — a woollen  cord  worn  as  a necklace 
or  twisted  round  the  head  by  the  former  Gurus — and 
a turban,  as  appurtenances  of  Jiis  calhng.  Guru  Har 
Gobind  ordered  that  the  seli  should  be  placed  in  the 
treasury,  apparently  because  it  was  not  suited  to 
the  altered  political  condition  of  the  Sikhs.  He 
• then  addressed  Bhai  Budha,  ‘ My  endeavours  shall 
be  to  fulfil  thy  prophecy.  My  seli  shall  be  a sword- 
belt,  and  I shall  wear  my  turban  with  a royal 
aigrette.’  He  then  sent  for  his  arms,  and  arrayed 
himself  in  martial  style  so  that,  as  the  Sikh  chronicler 
states,  his  splendour  shone  like  the  sun. 

Guru  Har  Gobind  then,  according  to  the  custom 
usual  on  such  occasions,  summoned  all  his  Sikhs, 
and  invited  the  principal  inhabitants  of  Amritsar 
to  a banquet.  He  caused  a large  quantity  of  sacred 
food  to  be  made  and  brought  into  the  temple  for 
the  entertainment  of  his  guests.  While  Bhai  Budha 
read  the  Granth  Sahib  in  the  middle  of  a well-ordered 
assembly,  Gur  Das  stood  and  waved  a gorgeous 
chauri  over  the  sacred  volume.  When  the  reading 
was  ended,  all  the  assembly  reverently  bowed  their 
heads.  The  singers  again  began  to  sing  the  Gurus’ 
hymns.  The  Sadd  was  intoned  and  a solemn  prayer 
offered.  The  Guru  reaffirmed  instructions  for  the 
guidance  of  future  generations  of  Sikhs  in  the  per- 
formance of  obsequies : — 

‘ When  a Sikh  dieth,  let  not  the  obsequies  of  Hindus 
be  performed  for  him.  Let  sacred  food  be  prepared 
and  distributed,  let  the  Granth  Sahib  be  infoned  and 
a solemn  prayer  offered,  as  I caused  to  be  done  on 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  3 

hearing  of  my  father’s  death.  That  is  the  way  to 
prepare  for  the  deceased  a passage  to  Sach  Khand.’ 

Only  one  body  of  men  among  his  followers  were 
dissatisfied  at  his  accession.  The  masands,  who 
used  to  collect  offerings  and  tithes  from  the  Sikhs, 
had  become  very  corrupt  and  dishonest,  and  they 
now  trembled  for  their  misdeeds.  They  represented 
to  the  Guru’s  mother,  ‘ It  is  the  reign  of  the 
Mughals.  We  have  nobody  of  mature  age  to  guide 
and  protect  us.  The  Guru  is  yet  a boy.  Chandu 
is  still  an  enemy.  The  Guru  girdeth  on  his  arms, 
but  for  faqirs  to  lord  it  over  men  is  a course  that 
involveth  peril.  The  preceding  five  Gurus  never 
handled  arms.  If  Jahangir  hear  of  our  Guru’s 
doings  he  will  be  angry  ; and  where  shall  we  hide 
ourselves  ? ’ The  Guru’s  mother  replied,  ‘ Have  no 
anxiety.  Guru  Nanak’s  hand  is  on  my  son’s  head. 
The  Guru  ever  liveth.  Bhai  Budha’s  words,  that 
Har  Gobind  shall  be  a temporal  as  well  as  spiritual 
ruler  and  shall  wield  two  swords,  are  about  to  be 
fulfilled.’  Notwithstanding,  however,  the  courageous 
face  she  showed  the  masands,  she  remonstrated  with 
the  young  Guru.  ‘ My  son,  we  have  no  treasure, 
no  state  revenue,  no  landed  property,  no  army. 
If  thou  walk  in  the  way  of  thy  father  and  grand- 
father, thou  shalt  be  happy.’  The  Guru  replied 
in  the  words  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

The  Lord  who  is  the  Searcher  of  all  hearts 

Is  my  guardian.^ 

‘ Have  no  anxiety  whatever  for  me,  everything  shall 
be  according  to  the  will  of  God.’ 

The  Guru  then  issued  an  encyclical  letter  to  the 
masands  to  the  effect  that  he  would  be  pleased  with 
those  who  brought  offerings  of  arms  and  horses 
instead  of  money.  On  Monday,  the  fifth  day  of  the 
light  half  of  Har,  Sambat  1663,  he  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  Takht  Akal  Bunga.  When  it  was  built 

^ Bhairo. 

B 2 


4 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


of  solid  masonry,  he  took  his  seat  on  it.  It  is  the 
corridor  of  the  golden  temple  whereon  the  Akalis 
now  sit  and  the  arms  of  the  Gurus  are  preserved. 

Bhai  Budha,  too,  on  seeing  the  young  Guru  in 
military  harness  mildly  remonstrated  with  him. 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ It  is  through  thine  intercession 
I obtained  birth  ; and  it  is  in  fulfilment  of  thy 
blessing  I wear  two  swords  as  emblems  of  spiritual 
and  temporal  authority.  In  the  Guru’s  house 
religion  and  worldly  enjoyment  shall  be  combined — 
the  caldron  to  supply  the  poor  and  needy  and  the 
scimitar  to  smite  oppressors.’ 

Several  warriors  and  wrestlers  hearing  of  the 
Guru’s  fame  came  to  him  for  service.  He  enrolled 
as  his  body-guard  fifty- two  heroes  who  burned  for 
the  fray.  This  formed  the  nucleus  of  his  future 
army.  Five  hundred  youths  then  came  to  him  for 
enlistment  from  the  Manjha  (the  country  between 
the  Ravi  and  the  Bi^is),  the  Doab  (the  country 
between  the  Bias  and  the  Satluj),  and  the  Malwa^ 
countries.  . These  men  told  the  Guru  that  they  had 
no  offerings  to  make  him  but  their  lives ; for  pay 
they  only  required  instruction  in  his  religion  ; and 
they  professed  themselves  ready  to  die  in  his  service. 
The  Guru  gave  them  each  a horse  and  weapons 
of  war,  and  gladly  enlisted  them  in  his  army.  He 
made  Bidhi  Chand,  Pirana,  Jetha,  Paira,  and 
Langaha,  each  a captain  of  a troop  of  one  hundred 
horse. 

After  this  several  men  out  of  employ  and  without 
a taste  for  manual  labour  flocked  to  the  Guru’s 
standard.  People  began  to  wpnder  how  he  could 
continue  to  maintain  such  an  army.  The  Guru 
quoted  from  Guru  Arjan  : — 

God  putteth  their  food  even  before  the  insects  which  He 
created  in  rocks  and  stones ; . 

^ Malwa  comprises  that  portion  of  the  Paojab  fontiedby  the  Patiala, 
Nitbha,  Jind,  and  Farldkot  feudatory  states,  and  th^  British  districts 
of  Firozpur  and  Ludhiana. 


THE  ARAL  BUNGA 


SIKH  IV  P.  4 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  5 

He  provideth  every  one  with  his  daily  food  ; why,  O man, 
art  thou  afraid  ? ^ 

The  Guru  by  quoting  such,  passages  and  by  his 
own  hopefulness  and  force  of  character  removed 
men's  fears.  In  a short  time,  besides  such  as 
required  regular  pay,  hordes  gathered  round  him, 
who  were  satisfied  with  two  meals  a day  and  a new 
uniform  every  half-year. 

Guru  Har  Gobind  appears  to  have  been  the  first 
Guru  who  systematically  turned  his  attention  to 
the  chase.  He  rose  before  day,  bathed,  dressed 
himself  in  full  armour,  and  then  went  to  the  Har 
Mandar — God’s  temple — to  worship.  There  he 
heard  the  Japji  and  the  Asa  ki  War  recited.  He 
then  preached  to  his  Sikhs.  After  his  sermon  the 
Anand  of  Guru  Amar  Das  and  a concluding  prayer 
were  read.  Upon  this  all  repaired  to  breakfast 
which  was  distributed  indiscriminately  to  the  Guru’s 
troops  and  followers  as  they  sat  in  rows  for  the  pur- 
pose. The  Guru  was  in  the  habit  of  afterwards 
taking  rest  for  about  an  hour  and  then  preparing  for 
the  chase.  Accompanied  by  an  army  of  forest 
beaters,  hounds,  tame  leopards,  and  hawks  of  every 
variety,  he  used  to  sally  forth  and  traverse  long 
distances. 

Once  a sadhu,  or  Hindu  holy  man,  on  seeing 
the  Guru’s  proceedings  expressed  contempt  for  him 
as  a destroyer  of  life.  The  Guru  quoted  in  justi- 
fication Guru  Nanak’s  verses  on  the  subject  of 
flesh.  Upon  this  the  holy  man  repented  of  his 
censure. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  the  Guru  used  to  sit  on  his 
throne,  and  give  audience  to  his  visitors  and  followers. 
Minstrels  sang  the  Guru’s  hymns  and  at  twihght  the 
‘ Sodar  ’ was  read.  Then  all  stood  up  and  with 
clasped  hands,  offered  a prayer  to  the  Almighty. 
At  the  conclusion  of  the  service  musical  instruments 
of  many  sorts  were  played.  The  congregation  then 

^ Gujaii. 


6 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


bowed  to  the  Guru,  and  all  adjourned  for  their 
evening  repast.  A sacred  concert  was  afterwards 
held  in  which  hymns  were  sung  in  the  Kalian  and 
Kanra  measures.  Next  followed  the  minstrel  Ab- 
dulla’s martial  songs  to  inspire  the  Sikhs  with  love 
of  heroic  deeds  and  dispel  feelings  unworthy  of 
warriors. 

The  Sohila  was  then  read,  after  which  the  Guru 
retired  to  his  private  apartment.  Before  going  to 
sleep  he  used  to  place  his  head  on  his  mother’s  feet 
in  respectful  salutation  and  receive  her  blessing 
and  embrace. 

The  Guru  was  fond  of  reciting  Guru  Nanak's  com- 
positions to  his  Sikhs,  particularly  the  following: — 

Thou  art  the  Creator,  the  Arranger, 

Who  having  Thyself  created  the  world  recognized  it  as 
good. 

Thou  art  Thyself  the  True  Guru,  Thyself  the  Worshipper, 
Thyself  the  Creator  of  the  universe. 

Thou  art  near,  not  distant. 

They  who  know  this  under  the  Guru’s  instruction  are 
perfect. 

There  is  profit  in  associating  with  them  day  and  night ; 
this  is  the  advantage  of  association  with  the  Guru. 

In  every  age,  O God,  Thy  saints  are  good. 

Their  tongues  are  flavoured  by  singing  Thy  praises. 

They  utter  Thy  praises,  disregard  misery  and  poverty, 
and  have  no  apprehension  from  others. 

They  remain  awake  and  are  never  seen  asleep. 

By  serving  up  truth  they  save  their  associates  and 
families. 

They  have  not  the  filth  of  sin  ; they  are  spotless  ; they 
abide  in  devotion  and  love. 

Ye  men  of  God,  understand  the  true  Guru’s  word. 

This  youth  is  but  for  a moment ; ^ the  body  groweth  old. 

O mortal,  thou  shalt  die  to-day  or  to-morrow ; repeat 
God’s  name  and  meditate  on  it  in  thy  heart. ' 

* Sas.  Literally — for  a breath. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


7 


O mortal,  eschew  falsehood  and  flattery.^ 

Death  flayeth  and  killeth  the  false  one  : ® 

The  apostate  suliereth  for  his  falsehood  and  pride ; he 
is  tormented  in  both  worlds. 

Renounce  slander  and  envy  of  others. 

Man  is  ruined  by  perpetual  reading,  and  to  him  peace 
cometh  not. 

In  the  company  of  the  saints  praise  the  Name,  and  the 
Supreme  God  will  be  your  Helper. 

Renounce  the  sins  of  lust  and  wrath  ; 

Renounce  works  of  pride  and  covetousness. 

Enter  the  true  Guru’s  protection,  and  you  shall  be  saved  ; 
thus  shall  you  cross  the  terrible  ocean,  my  brethren. 

In  front  is  a noisome  river  and  a poisonous  whirlpool  of  fire. 

There  will  be  no  one  to  assist,  the  soul  must  go  alone. 

The  fiery  flood  formeth  hissing  waves  ; through  perverse- 
ness man  falleth  and  is  burned  therein.® 


Chapter  II 

According  to  the  Sikh  chronicler  the  Guru  rained 
instruction  like  clouds  in  Sawan,  and  the  Sikhs 
flourished  under  it  like  thirsty  rice-fields.  All  the 
Sikhs  revived  like  vegetables  in  season,  but  Chandu’s 
heart  shrivelled  up  like  the  poisonous  akk  and  the 
camel-thorn  in  the  monsoons.  Chandu’s  daughter 
was  still  unwedded.  It  is  written  in  the  ‘ Chanakya 
Niti’:*— 

Sleep  cometh  not  at  nights  to  three  persons — 

Kahara.  From  this  word  comes  the  well-known  kabari,  a man 
who  sells  to  Anglo-Indians  furniture  purchased  at  auctions. 

* Uchhahara.  Believed  to  be  the  Panjabi  ucherna.  Others  suppose 
it  to  be  uchhalna,  to  leap,  and  translate  the  line — Death  will  make 
a bound  and  destroy  the  false  one.  ® M5ru  Solha. 

Chanakya  was  a Brahman  friend  of  the  monarch  Chandragupta. 
He  wrote  a work  on  polity  and  ethics,  and  has  been  called  the  Indian 
Machiavelli.  His  NiH  was  translated  under  the  order  of  Guru  Gobind 
Singh  into  elegant  Hindi  verse  by  Sainapati. 


8 THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

A debtor,  the  father  of  a maid,  and  a man  in  fear  of  an 
enemy. 

Chandu  had  to  expiate  the  crime  of  having  been 
instrumental  in  killing  Guru  Arjan ; his  daughter  re- 
mained unwedded,  and  he  feared  the  growing  military 
power  of  Guru  Har  Gobind.  Chandu’s  aspirations, 
however,  like  those  of  a poor  man  remained  unful- 
filled. One  day  he  was  vaunting  in  his  wife’s  pre- 
sence, that  if  she  said  but  the  word,  he  would  send 
Guru  Har  Gobind  to  his  father.  She  replied,  ‘ My 
lord,  a tree  beareth  fruit  at  the  proper  season  ; I fear 
that  the  thorns  which  we  formerly  planted  shall  now 
prick  us.  I hear  that  the  young  Guru  hath  vowed 
to  avenge  his  father.  May  God  preserve  us  ! There 
is  no  reliance  on  Emperors.  In  a moment  they 
become  as  if  they  had  never  known  one.  When 
we  extended  our  enmity  to  Guru  Arjan,  what  return 
did  we  obtain  for  it  ? Our  daughter  is  still  un- 
wedded, and  thou  art  in  fear.  Wherefore  let  us 
make  peace  with  the  Guru.’ 

Upon  this  Chandu  wrote  to  the  Guru,  ‘ My 
daughter  is  virtuous.  Make  her  thy  slave.  Thou 
art  Guru,  I am  the  Emperor’s  minister.  A man’s 
dignity  increaseth  by  an  alliance  with  the  exalted. 
If  thou  listen  to  my  words,  it  shall  be  greatly  to 
thine  advantage.  At  present  thou  understandest  not, 
but  thou  shalt  hereafter.  On  a former  occasion  thy 
father’s  Sikhs  called  me  a dog.  It  did  them  no 
harm  ; it  was  thy  father  who  suffered  for  it.  I have 
now  forgotten  my  former  enmity ; but  if  thou  listen 
not  to  my  words,  I will  serve  thee  as  I did  thy 
father.’  The  perusal  of  this  letter  brought  all  his 
father’s  sufferings  and  dishonour  to  the  Guru’s 
mind,  and  galled  him  to  the  heart.  He  wrote  in 
reply,  ‘ What  the  Sikhs  said  is  true.  Even  still 
thou  utterest  harsh  words.  Thou  shalt  assuredly 
suffer  for  all  thy  misdeeds.  The  torture  thou  didst 
inflict  on  such  a philanthropic  and  peaceful  Guru 
as  my  father,  must  bring  its  vengeance  in  time. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


9 


Thou  shalt  die  trodden  in  the  dust  and  dishonoured 
by  shoe-beatings  inflicted  by  pariahs.  Guru  Ram 
Das  hath  said  : — 

He  who  taketh  reckoning  from  the  Guru,  shall  lose 
everything  in  this  world  and  the  next. 

He  shall  gnash  his  teeth,  foam  at  the  mouth,  and  perish 
talking  wildly. 

He  shall  ever  strive  for  more  wealth,  and  even  his  former 
wealth  shall  flee  away. 

What  shall  he  earn,  what  shall  he  eat  in  whose  heart  is 
the  pain  of  anxiety  ? 

He  who  beareth  enmity  to  him  who  is  without  it,  taketh 
all  the  sins  of  the  world  on  his  own  head. 

His  mouth  blistereth  uttering  the  slander  of  his  heart ; 
and  he  shall  find  no  shelter  in  this  world  or  the  next. 

If  he  obtain  gold  it  shall  turn  into  ashes ; but,  if  he 
again  enter  the  Guru’s  protection,  his  previous  sins  shall 
be  remitted. 

The  slave  Nanak  meditateth  night  and  day  on  the  Name  ; 
by  remembering  God  his  enormities  and  offences  have  been 
erased.^ 

‘ I act  according  to  my  father’s  orders,  and  rely  on 
his  words  which  ever  prove  true.  He  hath  said : — 

Creatures  and  their  designs  are  in  God’s  power ; what 
He  ordereth  that  must  they  do. 

When  God  is  pleased,  there  is  no  need  to  fear. 

Sorrow  shall  never  affect  one  by  remembering  Thee,  O 
God. 

The  ministers  of  Death  shall  never  approach  the  Guru’s 
beloved  Sikhs. 

The  Cause  of  causes  is  all-powerful ; there  is  none  but 
Him. 

Nanak  hath  entered  God’s  asylum ; my  mind  is  sup- 
ported by  the  True  One’s  strength.* 

‘ And  as  to  what  thou  hast  written  that  a marriage 
alliance  with  thy  faniily  shall  be  greatly  to  my 

Gauri  ki  War  I,  * Bilawal. 


10  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

dignity  and  advantage,  my  reply  is  in  the  words  of 
Guru  Arjan — 

He  who  withdrawing  his  heart  from  religion  turneth  it 
to  worldly  affairs, 

Shall  be  known  as  a sinner  in  both  worlds. 

He  who  is  pleasing  to  God  is  acceptable. 

God  Himself  knoweth  His  own  power. 

He  whom  He  causeth  to  perform  the  good  acts  of  true 
religion, 

Shall  not  lose  the  viaticum  of  his  faith,  nor  .shall  this 
world  fail  him. 

One  God  shineth  in  all  things  without  interruption. 

Men  remain  at  the  different  posts  to  which  God  appointed 
. them. 

O my  inaccessible,  inapprehensible,  and  true  Lord, 

Nanak  speaketh  as  Thou  causest  him  to  speak.’  ^ 

Chandu’s  servant  taking  this  reply  to  his  master 
further  inflamed  his  mind  by  expatiating  on  the 
Guru's  state  and  wealth.  ‘ His  glory,’  said  the  ser- 
vant, ‘ is  twice,  nay  four  times  greater  than  that  of 
any  previous  Guru.  His  predecessors  used  to  sit 
on  couches ; he  sitteth  upon  a throne.  He  weareth 
arms,  calleth  himself  the  true  king,  taketh  presents 
like  an  emperor,  maintaineth  an  army  of  a thousand 
brave  youths,  and  careth  for  nobody.’ 

Chandu  found  an  opportunity  of  communicating 
this  and  the  contents  of  the  Guru’s  letter  to  the 
Emperor  Jahangir.  He  added  on  his  own  account, 
‘ Thy  majesty  summoned  the  present  Guru’s  father, 
Arjan,  to  Lahore  and  entrusted  him  to  me.  The  pre- 
sent Guru  hath  on  account  of  his  father’s  death 
vowed  to  take  vengeance  on  thee.  There  is  fear 
of  an  insurrection  from  his  proceedings.  If  thou 
order  me,  I will  watch  his  proceedings.  Otherwise 
thou  mayest  summon  him  here,  and  admonish  him. 
He  hath  grown  too  proud.  Thrones  are  for 
emperors,  not  for  beggars.’ 

^ Suhi. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


II 


The  Emperor  sent  Wazir  Khan  and  Kind  Beg 
to  summon  the  Guru.  Wazir  Khan,  who  was 
really  a Sikh,  on  noticing  the  Emperor’s  manner  and 
countenance  divined  his  object,  and  began  to  plead 
for  Guru  Har  Gobind.  He  said,  ‘ I everywhere 
hear  his  praises — that  he  is  a worshipper  of  the 
one  God ; that,  though  young  in  years,  he  is  old 
in  wisdom,  ability,  and  knowledge  of  men  ; and 
that  he  hath  worthily  undertaken  the  duties  of  his 
high  and  onerous  station.’  The  Emperor  concealed 
his  disapproval  of  this  speech,  and  merely  ordered 
Wazir  Khan  and  Kind  Beg  to  go  to  Amritsar  and 
invite  Guru  Har  Gobind  to  visit  him  in  Dihli. 

Before  his  departure  for  Amritsar  Wazir  Khan 
made  another  representation  to  the  Emperor — ' I 
pray  thy  Majesty  not  to  hold  communication  with 
any  detractor  of  the  Guru,  and  not  to  listen  to  any 
slander  or  calumny  of  him.  The  Guru  hath  no  desire 
for  empire.  His  wealth  increaseth  of  itself  by  the 
power  of  his  repetition  of  God’s  name.  When  he 
arriveth  here,  thou  shalt  be  well  pleased  with 
him.’ 

When  the  Guru  heard  the  Emperor’s  order  from 
the  lips  of  Wazir  Khan,  he  said,  ‘ The  Emperor 
formerly  summoned  my  father  to  Lahore,  and  fine 
service  he  performed  for  him  ! Six  years  have  now 
elapsed  since  my  father’s  death,  and  what  hath  the 
Emperor  done  to  make  reparation  to  my  family  ? ’ 
How  can  the  subjects  of  such  a monarch  be  happy  ? 
Kind  Beg  replied,  ‘ O Guru,  the  Emperor  was  power- 
less in  the  matter.  It  was  really  Guru  Arjan  himself 
who  did  this,  for  by  his  supernatural  power  he  might 
have  averted  his  fate.  Thou  art  also  to  blame  for 
not  having  caused  Chandu  to  be  punished.  He  hath 
now  again  reported  to  the  Emperor  that  thou  hast 
erected  a throne  for  thyself,  raised  an  army,  and  art 
preparing  to  contend  with  the  imperial  forces.’  The 
Guru  replied,  ‘ It  was  not  for  my  father  to  display 
miracles  before  the  Emperor ; it  is  the  evil  man 


12 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


himself  who  reapeth  the  reward  of  his  evil  deeds. 
I shall  give  a reply  on  the  morrow  to  His  Majesty’s 
message.’ 

At  the  afternoon  meeting  of  the  Sikhs  the  question 
was  discussed  whether  the  Guru  should  go  to  meet 
the  Emperor  or  not.  Bhai  Budha  and  Bhai  Salo 
counselled  the  Guru  to  go.  Other  Sikhs,  on  the 
contrary,  advised  him  to  make  some  pretext  and 
not  put  himself  in  the  Emperor’s  power.  The 
Guru  in  this  difficulty  went  to  consult  his  mother 
Ganga.  When  she  heard  of  the  Emperor’s  sum- 
mons she  remained  silent.  She  sent  for  Bhai  Salo, 
Bhai  Jetha,  and  others  to  ask  their  advice,  where- 
upon the  following  decision  was  arrived  at — ‘The 
Emperor  hath  already  caused  us  to  apprehend  harm 
from  him.  Guru  Arjan  went  to  him  and  never  re- 
turned. We  can  now  only  regret  that  circumstance. 
Instead  of  the  Guru  let  some  trustworthy  Sikhs 
wait  on  the  Emperor.  Should  he  desire  to  come 
here,  we  are  all  ready  to  resist  him.  The  Sikhs  are 
ready  to  sacrifice  their  lives  to  avenge  Guru  Arjan. 
We  rejoice  in  our  woodland  life.  The  Emperor’s 
army  will  find  it  difficult  to  traverse  the  distance 
between  us.  Emperors  are  like  cobras.  One  can 
only  abide  near  them  in  trepidation  and  uncertainty. 
If  the  Emperor  be  angry  at  this  determination,  then 
war  is  the  only  resource.’  To  this  Mata  Ganga 
added,  ‘ The  joy  of  my  life  was  at  an  end  when  my 
husband  separated  from  me.  If  my  son  now  leave 
me,  I cannot  survive.’ 

The  envoys  invited  Guru  Har  Gobind  to  make 
complaint  to  the  Emperor  against  Chandu,  and  have 
his  whole  conduct  thoroughly  investigated.  After 
consideration  the  Guru  decided  to  appear  before 
the  Emperor.  The  envoys  were  very  pleased. 
Wazir  Khan  reminded  the  Guru  of  the  fact  that  his 
Gwcu  Ar^an  had  cured  him  of  dropsy  and 
restored  him  to  life.  He  professed  to  be  the  Guru's 
disciple,  and  to  desire  the  destruction  of  his  enemy. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  EAR  GOBIND 


13 

The  Guru  replied  with  the  following  slok  of  Guru 
Ram  Das  : — 

God’s  saints  worship  God  and -magnify  Him. 

The  saints  ever  sing  God’s  praises  ; God’s  name  bestoweth 
happiness. 

God  ever  bestoweth  on  His  saints  the  greatness  of  the 
Name  which  ever  increaseth. 

God  hath  seated  His  saints  firmly  in  their  homes  ^ and 
protecteth  His  own  honour. 

God  will  call  for  their  accounts  from  the  slanderers  and 
severely  punish  them. 

The  slanderer  shall  obtain  the  fruit  of  what  he  meditateth 
in  his  heart. 

What  he  doeth  in  secret,  even  underground,  shall  assuredly 
be  laid  bare. 

The  slave  Nanak  on  seeing  God’s  greatness  is  happy.® 

The  Guru  continued,  ‘ It  is  God  alone  who  will 
call  the  slanderers  to  account.  Ill  shall  they  then 
fare.  Meditate  not  or  do  evil  to  any  one.’  The  Guru 
quoted  from  his  father’s  hymn  : — 

Harbour  not  evil  to  another  in  thy  heart. 

And  thou  shalt  not  have  trouble,  my  friend.® 

The  Guru  then  made  preparations  for  his  journey. 
He  assigned  the  secular  duties  of  the  Ear  Mandar* 
to  Bhai  Budha,  and  its  spiritual  duties  to  Bhai 
Gur  Das.  The  Guru’s  mother,  seeing  his  resolve 
fixed,  addressed  him  many  words  of  affection,  prayed 
for  his  safety,  and  repeated  to  him  [the  following 
verses  of  her  husband  Guru  Arjan  : — 

Continually  meditate  on  God’s  name  in  thy  heart. 

And  thy  associates  and  companions  shall  be  saved. 

The  Guru  is  ever  with  me  : 

I ever  repeat  His  name  and  remember  Him. 

^ That  is,  they  are  no  longer  subject  to  transmigration. 

® Gauri  ki  War  1.  ® Asa. 

^ This,  also  called  the  Darbar  Sahib,  is  known  to  Europeans  as  the 
Golden  Temple  in  Amritsar. 


14 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


What  He  hath  done  is  sweet  to  me. 

Nanak  craveth  the  boon  of  His  name.^ 

The  Guru  set  out  for  Dihli  on  Monday  the  second 
day  of  Magh  1669  (a.  d.  1612).  At  the  first  halt 
on  his  journey,  when  parting  with  the  Sikhs  who  had 
accompanied  him  thus  far,  he  gave  them  the  following 
injunctions  : — ‘ The  Har  Mandar  is  specially  devoted 
to  God’s  service,  wherefore  it  should  ever  be  respected. 
It  should  never  be  defiled  with  any  impurity  of  the 
human  body.  No  gambling,  wine-drinking,  light 
behaviour  with  women,  or  slander,  should  be  allowed 
therein.  No  one  should  steal,  utter  a falsehood, 
smoke  tobacco,  or  contrive  litigation  in  its  precincts. 
Sikhs,  holy  men,  guests,  strangers,  the  poor  and  the 
friendless  should  ever  receive  hospitality  from  Sikhs. 
My  people  should  ever  be  humble,  repeat  God’s 
name,  promote  their  faith,  meditate  on  the  Guru’s 
words,  and  keep  all  his  commandments.’  The 
Guru  then  continued  his  journey  to  Dihli  with  an 
escort  of  three  hundred  men. 

When  the  Guru  reached  the  Jamna  river,  he 
pitched  his  camp  in  a flower  garden  near  Majnun’s 
hillock,  and  dismissed  the  envoys  Wazir  Khan  and 
Kind  Beg  to  inform  the  Emperor  of  his  arrival. 
Wazir  Khan  highly  praised  the  Guru  in  the  hope 
of  obtaining  a friendly  reception  for  him  at  court. 
Crowds  of  Sikhs  came  forth  from  Dihli  to  see  him. 
The  Guru’s  arrival  recalled  Guru  Arjan’s  death  to 
their  recollection  and  they  began  to  mourn.  The 
Guru  consoled  them  by  repeating  to  them  his  father’s 
words  : — 

Fortunate  are  those  saints  of  Thine,  0 God,  in  whose  houses 
the  wealth  of  Thy  name  dwelleth. 

Their  advent  into  the  world  is  acceptable,  and  profitable 
are  their  acts. 

0 my  God,  I am  a sacrifice  to  Thy  saints. 

1 would  make  a chauri  of  my  hair,  wave  it  over  them, 
and  put  the  dust  of  their  feet  on  my  forehead. 

^ Asa. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  15 

Philanthropic  men  have  come  who  are  beyond  birth  and 
death  ; 

They  give  their  lives,  apply  rnen  to  devotion,  and  cause 
them  to  meet  God. 

True  their  order ; true  their  empire ; with  truth  are 
they  imbued. 

True  is  their  happiness,  and  true  their  praise  ; they  know 
God  to  whom  they  belong. 

I would  fan,  draw  water,  and  grind  for  God’s  servant. 

Nanak’s  supplication  to  God  is,  that  he  may  obtain  a sight 
of  His  servant.^ 

The  Guru  satisfied  all  the  doubts  of  his  Sikhs. 
His  instruction  dispelled  the  fog  of  their  ignorance, 
all  light  shone  on  them,  and  divine  knowledge  filled 
their  hearts. 

The  Emperor  received  the  Guru  with  great 
apparent  respect.  Seeing  him  very  young  and 
already  installed  as  Guru,  he  put  him  the  following 
question  to  test  his  knowledge  of  divinity : — 
‘ What  is  the  essential  difference  between  the  Hindus 
who  worship  Ram  Narayan,  Parbrahm,  and  Para- 
meshar,  and  the  Musalmans  who  pray  to  Allah, 
the  bounteous  Lord  ? ’ The  Guru  replied  with  the 
following  hymn  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

The  Bounteous  One  is  the  Cause  of  causes  ; 

The  Merciful  One  cherisheth  all. 

Allah  is  invisible  and  unequalled  ; 

He  alone  is  God  great  and  infinite. 

I bow  to  the  one  God,  the  Lord  of  the  earth  : 

The  Creator  pervadeth  every  place. 

As  Madho  He  is  Lord  and  Life  of  the  world. 

The  Destroyer  of  fear  ; worship  Him  in  thy  heart. 

Whether  known  as  Rikhikesh,  Gopal,  Gobind, 

Or  Mukand,®  Thou  alone,  0 God,  art  the  kind  Master. 

Thou  art  at  once  Pir,  Prophet,  and  Shaikh ; 

Master  of  hearts.  Thou  dispensest  justice. 

^ Suhi. 

* The  Hindi  proper  names  in  this  hymn  arc  all  names  of  God. 


i6  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Thou  art  holier  than  the  Quran  and  the  other  Muham- 
madan books. 

’ “’Whether  as  Narayan,  Narhar,  or  the  Compassionate, 
Thou  pervadest  every  heart  and  art  the  heart’s  support. 
As  Wasdev  Thou  dwellest  in  every  place. 

Thy  sport  is  not  understood. 

Thou  art  the  Bestower  of  kindness  and  mercy. 

Grant  us  devotion  and  worship  of  Thee,  O Creator. 

Saith  Nanak,  when  the  Guru  hath  removed  superstition, 
Allah  and  Parbrahm  are  the  same.^ 

, The  Emperor  then  asked  the  Guru  to  explain  the 
order  of  the  world.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ He  who 
created  it  preserveth  it  and  will  destroy  it.  Endless 
. animals  visible  and  invisible,  which  sprang  from  the 
Creator,  shall  be  again  absorbed  in  Him.  Through 
pride  they  all  suffer.  But  when  man  meeteth  the 
true  Guru,  and  frequenteth  the  saints’  society,  his 
pride  and  arrogance  are  swept  away,  and  he  obtaineth 
salvation.’ 

Upon  this  the  Emperor  inquired  how  man  could 
keep  his  mind  pure  from  the  contact  of  the  world. 
The  Guru  replied  with  the  following  hymn  of  Guru 
Amar  Das  : — 

When  the  heart  is  filthy,  everything  in  man  is  filthy  ; 
the  heart  is  not  cleansed  by  cleansing  the  body. 

The  world  is  led  astray  by  superstition,  my  brethren  ; 
only  a few  know  it. 

O my  soul,  repeat  the  one  Name  : 

The  true  Guru  hath  given  me  this  treasure. 

Even  when  men  learn  the  postures  of  the  Sidhs  and 
practise  restraint  of  their  senses, 

Neither  their  mental  filth  nor  the  filth  of  their  pride 
departeth. 

t There  is  no  means  of  purifying  the  heart  except  by  taking 
shelter  in  the  true  Guru. 

By  meeting  the  true  Guru,  my  brethren,  the  heart  is 
changed  beyond  expression. 

^ Ramkali. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  17 

Saith  Nanak,  if  any  one  die  on  meeting  the  true  Guru 
and  be  again  reanimated  by  his  teaching, 

The  filth  of  his  selfishness  shall  depart  and  his  heart 
become  pure> 

The  Emperor  then  asked,  ' O Guru,  tell  me  who 
are  holier,  the  Hindus  or  the  Muhammadans.  The 
four  elements  are  equally  diffused  in  all  animals 
from  the  worm  to  the  elephant,  how  then  is  it  that 
their  lights  and  understandings  are  different  ?’ 

The  Guru  replied  with  the  following  hymn  of 
Kabir  : — 

In  the  beginning  God  by  His  Omnipotence  created  light 
and  from  it  all  the  races  of  men. 

From  the  one  light  the  whole  world  was  created  ; then 
who  is  good  and  who  is  bad  ? 

O my  brethren,  lose  not  yourselves  in  doubt. 

Creation  is  in  the  Creator,  and  the  Creator  in  the  creation  ; 
He  filleth  every  place. 

Matter  is  one,  but  the  Fashioner  fashioned  it  in  various 
ways. 

There  is  no  fault  with  the  vessels  of  clay  and  no  fault 
with  the  Potter.2 

The  one  true  God  is  in  all ; everything  turneth  out  as 
He  hath  ordained. 

He  who  obeyeth  the  will  of  God  and  recognizeth  Him  as 
one,  is  His  servant. 

God  is  invisible  ; He  cannot  be  seen  ; the  Guru  hath 
given  me  sweet  molasses  ^ to  eat. 

Saith  Kabir,  my  doubts  are  abandoned  since  I have  seen 
the  Spotless  One  everywhere.^ 

The  Emperor  was  much  interested  in  these 
hymns  and  with  the  Guru's  general  exposition  of 
his  doctrines,  and  before  dismissing  him  desired 
to  hear  his  ideas  on  the  duties  and  attributes  of 

^ Wadhans. 

2 God  cannot  be  blamed  for  creating  vessels  of  clay,  that  is,  human 
beings,  and  human  beings  cannot  be  blamed  for  being  created  by 
Him.  ® Good  instruction.  ^ Prabhati, 

C 


SIKH.  IV 


i8  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

a monarch.  The  Guru  then  said  ; ‘ A good  monarch 
is  ever  philanthropic.  He  can  never  endure  to 
see  a man  in  misery  without  making  great  efforts 
with  mind,  body,  and  wealth  to  remove  all  his 
sufferings.  If  he  see  a man  hungry  or  in  need  of 
a house  to  dwell  in,  he  supplieth  his  necessities. 
He  provideth  poor  persons  with  work — to  repair 
a fallen  well  or  bridge,  to  level  an  uneven  road, 
or  to  plant  trees  on  the  roadside.’  Upon  this  the 
Guru  took  his  leave. 

Chapter  III 

The  Emperor  having  heard  that  the  Guru  loved 
the  chase  requested  him  to  accompany  him  one 
day  on  a hunting  excursion.  When  in  the  forest, 
a tiger  issued  forth  and  rushed  at  the  Emperor. 
Elephants  and  horses  took  fright,  and  the  beaters 
who  accompanied  the  party  loudly  shouted  in 
distress.  Bullets  and  arrows  were  discharged,  but 
went  right  and  left  of  the  tiger.  The  Emperor 
almost  paralysed  with  fear  called  upon  the  Guru 
to  save  him.  The  Guru  alighted  from  his  horse, 
and  taking  his  sword  and  shield  ran  between  the 
Emperor  and  the  tiger.  As  the  tiger  was  going 
to  spring,  the  Guru  dealt  him  a blow  with  his  sword, 
and  he  fell  lifeless  to  the  earth.  The  Emperor 
thanked  his  destiny  that  he  was  saved  from  the 
jaws  of  death  by  the  Guru’s  hand. 

When  it  was  time  for  the  Emperor  to  visit  Agra, 
he  invited  the  Guru  to  accompany  him.  The  Guru, 
after  repeated  invitations,  at  last  consented.  As 
they  were  hunting  on  the  way,  the  Emperor  took 
the  opportunity  of  telling  him  what  people  were 
saying  against  him — ‘ O Guru,  my  ministers  and 
staff  tell  me  that,  although  tttbu  oughtest  in  reality 
to  have  no  connexion  with  worldly  affairs,  yet  thou 
callest  thyself  the  true  king  of  the  world,  and  thy 
Sikhs  call  me  who  am  descended  from  emperors, 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


19 


who  am  the  lord  of  many  lands,  and  the  cherisher  of 
my  subjects,  a false  king.  Is  all  this  true  ? ’ The 
Guru  replied,  ‘ I have  never  told  any  one  to  call  me 
true  king,  but  where  there  exists  love  between  people, 
there  is  no  need  of  formality,  and  a man  is  treated 
as  he  treateth  others.  I love  my  Sikhs  in  propor- 
tion to  the  love  they  bear  me.  In  Guru  Nanak’s 
view  God  is  the  only  Emperor.  He  hath  said  in  the 
Japji 

He  is  Emperor,  King  of  kings ; Nanak,  all  must  remain 
subject  to  His  will.’ 

The  Emperor  listened  but  was  not  convinced,  and 
he  and  the  Guru  went  off  to  their  respective  tents. 

In  the  afternoon  a young  grass-cutter,  hearing 
that  the  Guru  had  come,  desired  to  see  him.  In  reply 
to  his  inquiries  some  one,  mistaking  the  Emperor 
for  the  Guru,  said,  ‘ There  he  is  sitting  under  a tree.’ 
The  grass-cutter  went  to  make  his  prostration.  He 
had  only  half  an  ana  ^ as  an  offering.  He  drew  it  forth , 
laid  it  before  the  Emperor,  and  thus  addressed  him, 
‘ 0 true  king,  all  earthly  kings  are  false.  Thy  realm 
is  permanent  in  every  age.  Protect  me  at  my  last 
hour,  and  extricate  me  from  hell.  I am  a poor  Sikh 
of  thine  ; thy  sovereignty  is  real  and  potent  to 
protect.’  The  Emperor  said  to  his  courtiers,  ‘ I cannot 
protect  myself ; how  can  I save  this  man  in  the  way 
he  desireth  ? ’ The  Emperor  quite  understood  that 
the  Guru  had  had  no  opportunity  of  prompting  the 
petitioner  to  call  him  true  king.  He  then  addressed 
the  grass-cutter,  ‘ I am  a false  king.  There  (pointing 
to  the  Guru)  is  the  true  king.’  The  grass-cutter  took 
up  his  half  ana,  and  ran  with  it  to  the  Guru  who 
received  him  affectionately,  and  gave  him  the  follow- 
ing instruction : — ‘My  brother,  meditate  on  God,  live 
honestly,  covet  not  thy  neighbour’s  wife  or  property, 
compassionate  the  suffering,  obey  the  Guru’s  com- 

^ An  ana  is  worth  a penny  of  English  money.  There  are  sixteen 
anas  in  a rupee,  which  is  now  worth  one  shilling  and  four  pence. 


20 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


mandments,  and  thou  shall  be  happy  in  this  world, 
and  the  next.’ 

When  in  due  time  the  Emperor  and  the  Guru 
arrived  in  Agra,  the  Guru  was  received  with  great 
rejoicings  by  the  people.  Chandu  thought  to  him- 
self, ‘ The  Guru  will  take  revenge  on  me  when 
he  findeth  an  opportunity.  I shall  only  be  safe  if  by 
some  means  I succeed  in  having  him  imprisoned,  and 
I must  apply  all  my  ingenuity  and  efforts  to  that 
end.’ 

The  Emperor  had  a very  severe  illness  in  Agra, 
and  considered  what  would  be  an  auspicious  time 
for  him  to  sit  on  his  throne  after  his  recovery.  It 
is  said  that,  though  a Muhammadan,  he  consulted 
an  astrologer  on  the  subject — a fact  not  improbable, 
seeing  that  his  mother  had  been  a Hindu  princess 
and  he  was  married  to  a lady  of  the  same  rehgion. 
Chandu  went  secretly  to  the  astrologer,  and  told  him 
how  the  Guru’s  father  had  spurned  his  alliance,  in 
consequence  of  which  his  daughter  now  sat  neglected 
and  despised  at  his  door.  On  seeing  her  unwedded, 
he  said  he  had  no  appetite  by  day  and  no  sleep  by 
night.  Chandu  accordingly  gave  a large  bribe  to 
the  astrologer  to  contrive  some  plot  by  which  Guru 
Har  Gobind  might  be  rendered  powerless  to  do  him 
injury. 

When  the  astrologer  next  day  appeared  before  the 
Emperor,  he  said,  ‘ A calamity  hath  been  hanging  over 
thee  for  five  and  a half  years,  and  thou  art  in  danger  for 
two  and  a half  years  more.  Saturn  is  a very  powerful 
god  and  still  pursueth  thee.  He  will  show  thee  the 
might  of  his  arm  once  again.  Thou  hast  already 
bestowed  thy  weight  in  gold  as  alms,  and  offered 
endless  sacrihces,  but  one  thing  yet  remaineth  to 
be  done.  It  behoves  thy  majesty  to  send  some 
holy  man  into  the  fort  at  Gualiar  to  do  penance  there, 
and  pray  for  thy  good  health  so  that  thou  mayest 
escape  from  the  evil  influences  of  the  planets.  If  this 
be  not  done,  thy  life  shall  be  in  serious  danger.’ 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


21 


The  Emperor  began  to  fear,  and  asked  the  advice 
of  his  ministers.  They  being  instructed  by  Chandu 
supported  the  advice  of  the  astrologer,  and  suggested 
that  Guru  Har  Gobind,  who  was  now  in  the  Em- 
peror’s camp  and  in  his  power,  should  be  sent  into 
the  fort  in  accordance  with  the  astrologer’s  warning 
and  advice.  Their  advice  well  suited  the  Emperor’s 
inclination. 

When  the  Emperor  mentioned  his  decision  to  the 
Guru,  the  latter  accepted  it  without  hesitation. 
Having  formed  his  determination,  the  Guru  ordered 
that  his  troops  and  his  camp  should  remain  where 
they  were.  He  next  morning  took  his  five  Sikhs 
with  him,  and  went  to  obey  the  order  of  the  Emperor. 
At  his  departure  his  troops  represented  to  him  that 
he  was  leaving  the  wicked  Chandu  to  revel  in  his 
villanies.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘The  time  hath  not 
yet  come.  God  will  accomplish  everything  when  He 
pleaseth.  Best  is  the  fruit  that  slowly  ripeneth.’  ‘ 

^ Cunningham  un  his  History  of  the  Sikhs  states  that  Har  Gobind 
became  involved  in  difficulties  \\ilh  the  Emperor  about  retaining  for 
himself  that  money  which  he  should  have  disbursed  to  his  troops.’ 
Cunningham'i  authority  for  this  statement  was  Captain  Troyer,  the 
translator  of  the  Dahisidn : ‘ Har  Gobind  became  involved  in  many 
difficulties ; one  of  them  was  that  he  appropriated  to  himself  the  pay 
due  to  the  soldiers  in  advance ; he  carried  also  the  sword  against  his 
father ; he  kept  besides  many  rervants,  and  was  addicted  to  hunting. 
Jahangir,  on  account  of  the  money  due  to  the  army,  and  of  the  mulct 
imposed  upon  Arjan  Mai,  sent  Har  Gobind  to  the  fort  of  Gualiar,  &c.’ 
As  this  is  such  a serious  and  wholly  unwarranted  calumny  of  the  Guru, 
we  feel  constrained  to  quote  the  original  Persian — 

Here  there  is  not  one  word  about  money  due  to  the  army,  about 
Har  Gobind^s  criminal  misappropriation,  or  about  his  having  carried 
his  sword  against  his  father.  The  translation  of  the  passage  is  this : 

‘ He  had  many  difficulties  to  contend  with.  One  of  them  was,  that  he 
adopted  the  style  of  a soldier,  wore  a sword  contrary  to  the  custom  of 


22 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


There  was  joy  in  the  fort  when  it  was  known  that 
the  Guru  was  coming.  It  contained  many  rajas 
who  had  been  deprived  of  their  kingdoms  and 
thrones  by  Jahangir,  and  who  now  emaciated,  filthy, 
foully  clad,  and  subservient  to  low  warders,  dragged 
out  a miserable  existence.  They  believed  that  they 
should  be  released  by  the  Guru’s  intercession  and 
then  return  to  their  states  and  their  families.  Hari 
Das  the  governor  of  the  fort,  too,  was  happy.  He  had 
long  desired  to  see  the  Guru,  but  pressure  of  official 
duties  had  prevented  him  from  absenting  himself 
for  the  purpose.  He  now  went  forth  to  meet  him, 
prostrated  himself  before  him,  and  applied  the  dust 
of  his  feet  to  his  head  and  body.  The  Guru’s  first 
act  was  to  cause  clean  clothes  and  better  food  to  be 
supplied  to  the  imprisoned  rajas,  and  to  endeavour 
to  make  their  prison  a paradise  in  comparison  with 
the  hell  it  had  previously  been.^ 

Chandu  wrote  to  Hari  Das — ‘ Thou  and  I are  ser- 


his  father,  maintained  a retinue,  and  began  to  follow  the  chase.  The 
Emperor  in  order  to  extort  from  him  the  balance  of  the  fine  which  had 
been  imposed  on  Arjan  Mai,  sent  him  to  Gualiar,  &c.’  ^ 

We  might  suppose  that  Troyer  had  translated  from  a different  text, 
and  that  the  Dabislan  has  since  his  time  been  altered  at  somebody's 
instigation,  if  some  of  the  blunders  of  Troyer's  translation  were  not  so 
very  palpable.  For  instance,  assigning  to  the  expression  harkhildf-i~ 
pidar  sham^her  basi  the  meaning  that  Har  Gobind  bore  arms  against 
his  father,  is  not  only  opposed  to  the  verbal  and  grammatical  interpre- 
tation of  the  passage,  but  it  is  also  opposed  to  the  whole  tenor  of  the 
accounts  of  both  Arjan  and  Har  Gobind  given  in  the  Dabistdn  itself. 
If  the  Persian  writer  had  intended  to  convey  the  idea  which  Captain 
T royer  does,  he  would  have  written  ha  mukdbila-i-pidar  shamsher  basi ; 
but  this,  though  grammatical,  would  not  have  been  true,  for  Har  Gobind 
was  devotedly  attached  to  his  father,  and  even  vowed  deathless  ven- 
geance on  his  father’s  enemies.  It  is  indeed  hard  that  the  fame  of  Har 
Gobind  should  have  been  tarnished  by  the  blunders  of  a translator. 
Dr.  Trumpp  in  his  Adi  Granih  has,  with  his  usual  theological  bias, 
repeated  the  strange  calumny. 

1 The  room  in  which  the  Guru  was  incarcerated  was  in  a top 
story  to  the  left  as  one  enters  the  Gualiar  fort  by  the  AlamgTr  gate. 
It  is  on  the  eastern  verge  of  the  plateau,  overlooks  the  ancient  town  Of 
Gualiar,  and  commands  a wide  and  not  unpleasant  prospect. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


23 


vants  of  the  Emperor.  I will  assist  thee  in  many 
ways,  and  grant  thee  a yearly  income  of  five  thousand 
rupees  if  thou  find  some  means  of  disposing  of  the 
Guru  who  is  now  in  thy  power.  It  is  because  I 
depend  on  thee  that  I induced  the  Emperor  to  send 
him  into  the  fort.  Now  that  thou  knowest  my  wishes, 
thou  mayest  act  as  it  pleaseth  thee,  but,  if  thou  do 
me  the  favour  I desire,  I shall  never  forget  it.  I 
depend  altogether  upon  thee.’  Hari  Das  on  receiving 
this  letter  placed  it  before  the  Guru  for  his  informa- 
tion. 

The  Guru  took  hardly  any  food, — his  rations 
he  distributed  among  the  needy  prisoners.  The 
Sikhs  who  accompanied  him  represented  ‘Thou 
eatest  nothing  while  we  fill  our  bellies  twice  a day. 
We  curse  ourselves  that  thou  remainest  hungry 
while  we  eat  to  repletion.  Kindly  tell  us  why 
thou  actest  so.’  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ If  thou  bring 
me  food  obtained  by  labour  I will  eat  it.’  His 
Sikhs  went  next  morning  to  a brazier’s  shop  and 
there  hammered  copper  all  day  long.  With  their 
earnings  they  purchased  food  for  the  Guru,  which 
he  ate  as  if  it  were  ambrosia.  The  rajas  prayed  that 
the  Guru  might  ever  remain  with  them,  and  that  the 
Emperor  might  order  the  governor  to  treat  him  well, 
and  never  impose  any  hardship  on  him. 

Chandu  again  wrote  to  the  governor,  ‘ My  friend 
Hari  Das,  I send  thee  a poisoned  robe  for  the  Guru. 
He  who  putteth  it  on  shall  die  immediately.  Tell 
him  the  Emperor  sent  it.  If  he  weareth  it  not,  then 
destroy  him  in  any  way  practicable.  Tell  me  what 
thou  succeedest  in  doing,  so  that  I may  show  my 
gratitude.  There  will  not  again  be  such  an  op- 
portunity.’ Hari  Das,  as  before,  placed  this  letter 
and  the  poisoned  robe  at  the  Guru’s  disposal.  The 
Guru  upon  this  repeated  the  following  hymn  of 
Guru  Arjan  : — 

The  slanderer  shall  crumble  down 


24  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Like  a wall  of  kallar : hear,  ye  brethren,  thus  shall  he 
be  known. 

The  slanderer  is  glad  when  he  seeth  a fault ; on  seeing 
anything  good  he  is  filled  with  grief. 

He  meditateth  evil  all  day  long,  but  it  befalleth  not ; 
the  evil-minded  man  dieth  meditating  evil. 

The  slanderer  forgetteth  God,  and,  when  death  approach- 
eth,  quarrelleth  with  God’s  saint. 

The  Lord  Himself  preserveth  Nanak  ; what  can  wretched 
man  do  ? ^ 

The  Guru’s  mother,  finding  that  he  did  not  return 
in  due  time,  felt  very  anxious  and  sent  Bhai  Budha 
to  bring  him  home.  Bhai  Budha  on  entering  the 
Guru’s  chamber  thus  addressed  him,  ‘ What  a fine 
return  is  thy  confinement  in  this  fort  for  having 
killed  the  tiger  and  saved  the  Emperor’s  life ! The 
eyes  of  thy  mother  and  of  thy  Sikhs  are  all  turned 
towards  thee.  Night  and  day  they  await  thy  coming ; 
thou  mayest  escape  if  thou  desire.  Thy  Sikhs  who 
traverse  great  distances  and  endure  great  hardships 
in  order  to  behold  thee,  are  grievously  disappointed.’ 
The  Guru  sent  his  mother  and  his  Sikhs  a letter 
of  consolation,  and  expressed  a hope  that  he  should 
soon  return  to  them.  He  said  he  was  happy  in  the 
fort  where  he  could  repeat  God’s  name  apart 
from  the  distraction  of  worldly  people,  who  ever 
importuned  him  to  gratify  their  petty  desires.  He 
added  that  his  fellow  prisoners  were  happy  with  him, 
and  he  with  them.  He  directed  Bhai  Budha  on  his 
return  journey  to  call  at  Dihli,  see  to  the  protection 
of  his  camp,  and  have  his  horses  grazed  where  there 
was  good  pasturage. 

Bhai  Jetha  went  on  a mission  to  Dihli  to  secure 
the  Guru’s  release.  He  succeeded  in  soothing  the 
Emperor,  who  had  been  troubled  with  fearful  visions. 
The  Guru  remarked  that  Jetha  appeared  conceited 
after  this  performance.  In  order  to  humble  him  he 

^ Bilawal. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  25 

bade  him  take  a vessel  to  the  Jamna  and  fetch  him 
water.  When  Jetha  returned  with  the  water,  the 
Guru  ordered  him  to  take  it.  back  again,  and  throw 
it  where  he  had  taken  it  from.  Jetha  obeyed  the 
order.  The  Guru  then  asked,  ‘ When  thou  didst 
fill  the  vessel  did  the  river  appear  less ; and  when  thou 
didst  put  back  the  water  did  the  river  appear 
more  ? ’ Jetha  replied,  ‘ No,  what  is  a vessel  in 
comparison  with  a river  ? ’ The  Guru  then  said, 
‘ The  Guru  is  like  the  ocean,  and  thou  like  the  vessel 
didst  display  in  the  Emperor’s  case  thy  miraculous 
power.  Such  cleverness  pleaseth  me  not.’  Bhai 
Jetha  changed  the  subject,  ‘ O true  king,  all  thy 
Sikhs  are  unhappy,  and  thy  mother  is  sore  distressed 
on  account  of  thine  absence.  Though  thou  art  angry 
with  me,  I have  been  only  fulfilling  a former  com- 
mandment of  thine  to  do  good  to  others  whenever 
possible,  an  expression  which  I now  venture  to  recall 
to  thy  memory,  and  beg  that  thou  mayest  return  to 
Amritsar  to  cheer  thy  mother  and  bless  thy  people.’ 
The  Guru  replied  by  the  following  hymn  of  Guru 
Arjan  : — 

Accept  as  good  whatever  is  ; 

Abandon  thy  pride ; 

Day  and  night  ever  sing  God’s  praises  : 

Make  this  thy  whole  aim. 

Rejoice,  O saint,  and  repeat  God’s  name. 

Reject  artifice  and  too  much  cleverness ; repeat  the 
Guru’s  holy  spell. 

Centre  thy  hopes  in  the  one  God  alone  ; 

Repeat  God’s  pure  name  ; 

Bow  to  the  Guru’s  feet. 

And  the  Giver,  the  Bountiful, 

Will  take  thee  across  the  terrible  ocean. 

He  in  whose  heart  there  is  all  treasure 

Hath  no  end  or  limits. 

He  will  preserve  thee  at  last. 

Nanak  hath  obtained  this  treasure 


26  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Of  God’s  pure  name. 

He  who  repeateth  it  shall  obtain  salvation. 

Nanak,  it  shall  be  obtained  by  God’s  favour.^ 

When  the.  Emperor  had  heard  Wazir  Khan’s 
pleading  on  behalf  of  the  Guru,  whose  sanctity  was 
an  object  of  general  observation,  he  ordered  that  he 
should  be  presented  to  him.  On  hearing  this  the 
imprisoned  rajas  were  much  distressed.  They  appre- 
hended that  they  were  now  going  to  lose  him  whose 
presence  had  cheered  their  sufferings,  and  that  they 
should  have  no  one  to  cherish  them  and  render 
them  spiritual  consolation.  The  Guru  solaced  them, 
and'  promised  that  he  would  not  leave  them  until 
they  were  released. 

When  Wazir  Khan  returned  to  Dihli,  he  reported 
the  result  of  his  mission  to  the  Guru,  and  the  Guru’s 
desire  that  the  rajas  should  be  released.  The 
Emperor  replied,  ‘ The  kings  imprisoned  in  Gualiar 
are  hostages  for  millions  of  money.  Moreover,  if 
I release  them,  there  is  danger  of  their  inciting  rebel- 
lion in  my  empire.’  On  this  some  of  the  Emperor’s 
ministers,  who  were  either  friends  or  relations  of  the 
imprisoned  rajas,  represented  that  it  was  unnecessary 
to  detain  them  any  longer.  Their  spirits  were  now 
so  cowed  that  there  was  no  danger  of  their  again 
disturbing  His  Majesty’s  peace.  The  Emperor,  after 
full  reflection  on  this  and  Wazir  Khan’s  arguments  for 
the  Guru’s  recall,  replied,  ‘I  will  so  far  meet  the 
Guru’s  wishes  as  not  to  further  detain  the  rajas, 
and  I will  entrust  them  to  him  on  condition  that  he 
be  surety  for  their  loyal  behaviour.’ 

When  Wazir  Khan  returned  with  this  order  to 
Gualiar,  the  Guru  stood  up,  and  taking  Wazir  Khan 
and  Hari  Das  the  governor  with  him,  went  and  caused 
the  fetters  of  the  kings  to  be  struck  off.  They  addressed 
him,  ‘ 0 true  Guru,  as  thou  hast  cut  these  material 
fetters,  so  cut,  we  pray  thee,  our  spiritual  fetters 

^ RSmkali. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  27 

also.’  They  seized  the  hem  of  his  garment  and  held 
it  until  he  had  promised  them  salvation.  On  his 
doing  so  they  all  repeated  with  one  voice  the  verse 
of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

The  Guru  hath  cut  the  fetters  off  the  feet  and  freed  the 
captive.^ 

From  this  circumstance  the  Guru  is  still  remem- 
bered in  Gualiar  as  Bandi  Chhor  Baba,  the  holy  man 
who  freed  the  prisoners.^ 

Hari  Das,  the  governor  of  the  Gualiar  fort  and 
prison,  expressed  his  regret  on  parting  from  the  Guru. 
The  Guru  replied  in  the  words  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

Meditate  in  thy  heart  on  the  Guru’s  image  ; 

Obey  the  Guru’s  word  and  instruction.® 

‘ That  we  have  met  in  the  flesh  is  a temporary 
matter,  the  result  of  destiny ; but  that  we  have  met 
in  the  spirit  is  a matter  to  be  treasured  for  ever. 
As  Gur  Das  hath  said,  “ I am  a sacrifice  to  those  Sikhs 
of  the  Guru  who  meet  in  the  spirit.”  And  again 
Guru  Nanak  : — 

They  who  meet  with  their  hearts  really  meet ; that  is 
a real  meeting.* 

‘ While  thou  remainest  in  the  Gualiar  fort  propagate 
the  true  faith,  and,  when  thou  thinkest  of  me,  thou 
shalt  behold  me.’ 

Hari  Das’s  eyes  were  filled  with  tears,  but  he  was 
comforted  on  hearing  the  Guru’s  words  of  counsel 
and  encouragement. 

The  Guru  with  his  five  Sikhs  set  out  with  Wazir 
Khan  for  Dihli.  The  Guru  took  shelter  in  his  old 

^ Maru. 

® In  the  fort  a cenotaph  called  Bandishar,  probably  a contraction  of 
Bandi  Chhor,  is  pointed  out  to  visitors,  at  which  both  the  Sikhs  and  the 
Muhammadans  worship — the  Muhammadans  every  Thursday  evening, 
and  the  Sikhs  occasionally.  At  this  spot  the  Guru  used  to  pray.  It 
is  near  a tank  in  and  around  which  masonry  work  was  constructed 
in  ancient  times. 

® Gaund.  Tilang,  Ashtapadi. 


28 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


quarters  on  Majnun’s  hillock.  The  Emperor  in- 
vited him  to  his  presence  and  thus  addressed  him — 
‘ I am  very  thankful  to  thee  ; thou  hast  rendered  me 
great  assistance.  Thy  prayers  have  removed  the 
effects  of  the  conjunction  of  planets  unfavourable 
to  me,  and  effectually  cured  my  maladies.’  The 
Guru  replied,  ‘ There  was  no  conjunction  of  planets 
unfavourable  to  thee.  That  was  only  in  the  imagina- 
tion of  thy  advisers.  Guru  Nanak’s  house  is  like 
a mirror.  As  a man  presenteth  himself  to  it  so  is 
he  treated.  What  is  there  that  cannot  be  found 
in  the  Guru’s  house  ? In  it  are  the  four  great  boons 
to  mortals,  but  they  can  only  be  obtained  by  faith. 
He  who  hath  devotion  shall  obtain  the  fruit  thereof, 
as  happened  in  the  case  of  thine  ancestors.’ 

The  Emperor  was  struck  with  the  beauty  of  a 
rosary  the  Guru  carried.  It  was  made  from  a yellow 
composition  called  kapur.  The  Emperor  asked  him 
for  one  of  its  beads.  He  would  add  it  to  his 
own  rosary  and  preserve  it  in  memory  of  the  Guru. 
The  Guru  replied,  that  his  father  had  a better 
rosary  which  he  used  to  wear  as  a necklace,  but 
it  was  now  in  Chandu’s  possession.  The  Em- 
peror sent  for  Chandu  and  asked  for  the  necklace. 
Chandu  proceeded  to  his  house  to  search  for  it. 
During  his  absence  the  Guru  took  occasion  to  bring 
the  whole  of  Chandu’s  conduct  to  the  Emperor’s 
notice.  Chandu,  after  a pretended  search,  repre- 
sented that  the  rosary  had  been  lost.  The  Emperor 
suspected  that  he  had  really  misappropriated  it 
and  would  not  produce  it,  and,  as  there  were 
many  other  grounds  for  his  displeasure  with 
Chandu,  he  became  quite  satisfied  of  his  perfidy  and 
wickedness. 

The  Emperor  communicated  to  Guru  Har  Gobind 
the  numerous  complaints  Chandu  had  made  against 
him.  The  Emperor  also  pretended  that  Chandu  had 
exceeded  the  orders  he  had  received  on  the  subject 
of  Guru  Arjan’s  treatment.  ‘ He  told  me,’  continued 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  29 

the  Emperor,  ‘ that  thou  saidst  thou  wouldst  wreak 
vengeance  on  me.  Therefore  I sent  Wazir  Khan  for 
thee,  and  now,  on  seeing  thee  and  learning  Chandu’s 
real  character,  my  doubts  and  apprehensions  regard- 
ing thee  are  all  removed.  Chandu  is  thine  enemy, 
and  thou  mayest  have  revenge  on  him.’  The  Guru 
replied  that  his  father  Guru  Arjan  did  not  wish  to 
avenge  himself  on  Chandu,  for  his  principles  were  as 
stated  in  the  following  hymn  of  Guru  Ram  Das  : — 

The  true  Guru  is  generous  .and  compassionate  ; he  feeleth 
compassion  ever. 

The  true  Guru’s  heart  is  free  from  enmity,  and  in  every- 
thing he  beholdeth  the  one  God. 

None  who  bear  enmity  to  those  who  are  without  it  shall 
abide. 

The  true  Guru  wisheth  well  to  all ; how  could  any  evil 
befall  him  ? 

As  men  feel  towards  the  true  Guru,  so  shall  they  be 
rewarded. 

Nanak,  the  Creator  from  whom  nothing  is  concealed, 
knoweth  everything.^ 

The  Guru  continued,  ‘ O Emperor,  if  thou  do  jus- 
tice, thou  shalt  be  honoured  in  God’s  court,  and  if 
thou  do  injustice  thou  shalt  have  to  account  for  it. 
Thou  hast  put  a bell  in  front  of  thy  gate,  and,  when 
anybody  ringeth  it,  thou  comest  forth  thyself  and 
hearest  his  complaint.  But  even  so,  thou  shalt  only 
be  acquitted  of  all  blame  in  respect  of  my  father,  if 
thou  do  justice  now.  He  bore  enmity  to  no  one,  but 
was  every  one’s  friend  and  endeavoured  to  contribute 
to  every  one’s  happiness.  God,  who  is  the  Bestower 
of  the  fruit  of  past  acts,  will  fulfil  His  commandment 
to  destroy  the  enemy.  But,  O Emperor,  take  my 
father’s  necklace  from  Chandu.  It  is  the  duty  of 
a king  to  cherish  his  subjects,  and  that  can  only  be 
done  by  punishing  thieves  and  harmful  men.’  Upon 

^ Gauri  ki  War  I. 


30 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


this  the  Emperor  made  over  Chandu,  as  was  the 
custom  at  that  time,  to  the  Guru  for  punishment. 

• On  a signal  from  the  Guru,  Bhai  Bidhi  Chand  and 
Bhai  Jetha  seized  Chandu,  led  him  outside  the  fort, 
took  off  his  turban,  tied  his  hands  behind  his  back, 
and  showered  blows  of  slippers  on  his  devoted  head. 
While  being  thus  castigated  he  was  led  through  the 
streets  of  the  city,  a warning  to  all  men.  He  was 
pelted  with  stones,  mud,  and  filth,  and  several  people 
spat  on  his  face.  He  had  said  that  he  would  attack 
the  Guru  like  a mad  dog,  and  his  threat  recoiled  on 
himself.  He  would  have  died  under  the  injuries 
he  then  received,  only  the  Guru  felt  compassion  and 
rescued  him  from  the  wrath  of  the  people.  The 
Guru  caused  his  arms  to  be  unbound,  and  put  him 
into  a house  with  a sentry  over  him,  intending  to 
take  him  ahve  to  the  scene  of  Guru  Arjan's  death  in 
Lahore.  The  Emperor  sent  for  Chandu’s  wife  and 
son,  and  made  them  also  over  to  the  Guru,  telling 
him  to  punish  them  as  he  pleased.  The  Guru,  in  reply, 
uttered  the  following  verses  of  Guru  Amar  Das : — 

Curses  be  on  the  head  of  the  false  one  ; greatness  to  the 
true  saint ! 

True  is  the  Lord,  true  is  His  justice,  ashes  be  on  the 
head  of  the  slanderer  ! ^ 

The  most  severe  punishment  that  was  inflicted  on 
Chandu’s  wife  and  son  was  to  cause  them  to  behold 
Chandu’s  sufferings.  The  Sikhs  bound  him,  and 
made  him  over  to  pariahs  as  if  he  were  a dog.  Dirt 
and  filth  continued  to  be  poured  on  him,  and  he  was 
reduced  to  a condition  in  which  no  one  could  re- 
cognize him.  When  his  wife  and  son  had  seen  his 
treatment,  they  were  allowed  to  depart.  Everybody 
congratulated  the  Guru  on  the  mercy  he  had  shown 
them. 


^ Biliiwal  ki  War. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


31 


Chapter  IV 

The  Guru  desired  to  return  to  Amritsar,  and  duly 
informed  the  Emperor.  The  Emperor  replied,  ‘ I am 
not  feeling  well.  My  physicians  tell  me  I must  have 
change  of  air,  and  I shall  thus  regain  my  strength. 
I therefore  intend  to  spend  this  summer  in  Kashmir. 
If  thou  desire  to  defer  thy  homeward  journey  until 
Thursday,  the  lucky  thirteenth  day  of  the  half-lunar 
month,  we  will  travel  to  Kashmir  together,  and  I 
shall  enjoy  thy  pleasant  companionship.’ 

The  Emperor  and  the  Guru  set  out  on  the  appointed 
day.  Bhai  Jetha,  knowing  the  Guru’s  compassionate 
disposition,  concealed  from  his  sight  Chandu,  led 
along  amid  the  scavengers  and  dogs.  The  Guru’s  tent, 
which  was  always  pitched  with  the  Emperor’s,  was 
magnificently  appointed,  and  the  Guru’s  youth  and 
beauty  excited  universal  admiration.  One  day  the 
Empress  Nur  Jahan,  beholding  him,  asked  one  of  her 
handmaidens  who  that  handsome  young  man  was  who 
ever  accompanied  the  Emperor.  The  servant,  who 
was  well  acquainted  with  the  Guru’s  circumstances, 
detailed  them  to  Her  Majesty.  The  Empress  longed 
to  meet  him,  and  on  the  following  night  made  further 
inquiries  regarding  him  of  her  husband.  ‘ Hath 
that  priest  who  accompanieth  thee  a wife  ? ’ The 
Emperor,  in  ignorance  of  the  Guru’s  status,  replied  in 
the  negative.  The  Empress  said  it  was  very  strange 
that  at  his  age,  and  possessing  health  and  wealth,  he 
should  have  sufficient  continence  to  lead  a single  life. 

Next  morning,  as  the  Guru’s  tent  was  on  the  bank 
of  the  Bias,  and  he  was  alone,  the  Empress,  accom- 
panied by  her  co-queens,  nearly  as  fair  as  she,  went 
with  the  Emperor’s  permission  to  visit  the  great 
Sikh  priest.  The  Empress  was  struck  with  awe  on 
beholding  the  Guru.  He  thus  addressed  her  and 
her  companions  : ‘ O fair  queens,  great  hath  been 
your  good  fortune  that  you  have  obtained  in  your 


32 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


human  birth  high  family  and  high  position  without 
any  anxiety  for  your  maintenance,  and  that,  being 
so  beautiful,  you  are  an  emperor’s  consorts.  Where- 
fore, worship  God  who  gave  you  these  manifold 
favours.  Be  virtuous  ever.  A woman’s  happiness 
and  salvation  largely  depend  on  her  devotion  to  her 
husband.  Fear  God,  preserve  yourselves  from  sin 
and  wickedness.  Keep  your  hearts  under  restraint. 
However  close  may  be  the  relationship  of  sons, 
wives,  and  husbands,  at  the  last  moment  there  shall 
be  none  to  render  assistance.  It  is  only  virtuous 
acts  which  uplift  the  soul  to  communion  with  God. 
The  lower  animals  feel  love  and  similar  pleasures, 
but  it  is  only  human  beings  who  are  privileged  to 
worship  their  Creator.’  The  queens  pondered  on 
this  discourse,  returned  to  the  Emperor,  and  ex- 
tolled the  Guru’s  passionless  and  sinless  nature. 

When  the  Guru  and  the  Emperor  had,  crossed  the 
river  Bias,  the  Guru  induced  him  to  accompany  him 
to  Goindwal.  There  the  Guru  bathed  in  the  Bawali, 
visited  the  upper  room  in  which  Guru  Amar  Das 
had  lived,  and  held  an  affectionate  interview  with 
his  sons.  The  Guru  then  said  to  the  Emperor,  ‘ I am 
now  going  to  Amritsar,  and  thy  Majesty  may  con- 
tinue thy  journey  to  Lahore.’  The  Emperor  replied, 

‘ May  I too  not  behold  thy  sacred  temple  ? ’ The 
Guru,  seeing  the  Emperor’s  friendly  curiosity,  con- 
sented to  conduct  him  to  Amritsar.  On  the  way 
they  passed  a night  at  -Tarn  Taran,  whose  history 
the  Guru  related  to  the  Emperor. 

The  Emperor  encamped  at  the  village  of  Gumtala, 
Amritsar,  where  now  the  district  court  is  held, 
while  the  Guru  with  his  followers  went  into  the  city. 
Bhai  Jetha  preceded  the  party  to  inform  the  Guru’s 
Sikhs  of  his  approach.  All  the 
mhabitants  came  forth  to  meet  him.  When  the 
Guru  arrived  at  the  Takht  Akal  Bunga,  Bhai  Budha 
ottered  a thanksgiving  for  his  return.  The  Guru, 
having  performed  all  due  worship  and  observances, 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


33 


prayed  and  circumambulated  the  temple.  He  then 
went  to  his  private  apartments,  where  his  mother 
most  affectionately  greeted  him  after  his  long  absence. 
The  Emperor  sent  sacred  food  and  offered  to  defray 
all  the  expenses  of  the  completion  of  the  temple. 
The  Guru,  however,  wishing  to  retain  for  the  Sikhs 
exclusive  proprietary  rights  in  it,  replied,  ‘ The  place 
where  the  money  of  one  person  is  spent  becometh 
that  person’s  property.  This  temple  erected  to  God 
belongeth  to  God.  All  are  equal  sharers  in  it.  It 
will  be  gradually  completed.  The  Sikhs  will  do  the 
work.  Like  Guru  Nanak’s  religion,  all  are  partners 
in  it,  and  none  are  excluded.’ 

The  Empress  Nur  Jahan,  and  her  co-queens,  went 
again  to  visit  the  Guru.  They  also  went  to  see  the 
temple,  and  ended  by  visiting  the  Guru’s  mother. 
She  gave  them  religious  instruction,  and  recited 
to  them  the  hymn  which  Guru  Nanak  addressed 
to  Nur  Shah,  the  queen  of  Kamrup.  The  Guru’s 
mother  also  recited  to  her  visitors  the  following 
verses  of  Guru  Nanak : — 

She  who  is  pleasing  to  her  beloved  adorneth  his  home, 

While  she  who  speaketh  falsely  is  of  no  account ; 

She  who  speaketh  falsely  is  of  no  account ; her  spouse 
will  not  even  behold  her. 

Her  spouse  forgetteth  the  wicked  wife ; false  that  she 
is,  she  passeth  the  night  in  separation.^ 

The  Emperor  said  to  the  Guru,  ‘ Thou  art  a very 
young  man.  Many  very  beautiful  women  come  to 
see  thee.  It  is  hard  to  subdue  youthful  passions. 
How  dost  thou  succeed  in  doing  so  ? ’ The  Guru 
replied  by  a parable  : ' There  was  once  a very  religious 
and  chaste  man  who  had  conquered  his  passions. 
A lewd  and  adulterous  king  used  to  wait  on  him. 
The  saint  once  asked  him  what  desire  he  sought  to 
gratify  by  his  attention  to  him.  The  king  replied, 
“ I am  a lustful  man.  I ever  desire  sexual  pleasures 

^ Dhan3sari  Chhant. 

D 


SIKH.  IV 


34 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


and  the  gratification  of  all  my  desires.”  The  saint 
replied,  “ Because  of  this  enjoyment  thou  hast  only 
eight  days  more  of  life  which  thou  mayest  enjoy  as 
thou  pleasest.  On  the  ninth  day  thou  shalt  die.” 
The  king  inquired  what  he  could  do  to  avert  his  fate. 
The  saint  replied,  ” Meditate  on  God’s  name.”  The 
king  then  abandoned  worldly  affairs,  and  so  ap- 
plied himself  to  devotion  that  all  impure  desires 
left  his  mind.  On  the  ninth  day  he  went  to  the 
saint  and  told  him  how  he  had  spent  his  time  since 
their  last  interview.  The  saint  said  that  his  life  was 
saved  by  the  power  of  his  devotion,  and  inquired  how 
he  had  abandoned  sensuality.  The  king  replied  that 
it  was  through  fear  of  impending  death.  Then  the 
saint  said,  ” That  is  an  answer  to  the  question  thou 
didst  propound.  That  is  the  way  to  avert  thy  fate. 
Thou  thoughtest  that  thou  shouldst  die  in  eight 
days,  so  no  evil  desires  entered  thy  mind,  while,  as 
for  myself,  I am  not  certain  that  death  will  not  come 
and  seize  me  at  any  moment.  On  this  account  my 
mind  is  unswayed  by  passion.”  O Emperor  J ahangir, 
there  is  no  reliance  to  be  placed  on  death  ; it  cometh 
like  a thief  when  we  expect  it  not.  If  a man  had 
information,  he  would  not  allow  his  house  to  be 
plundered.  Guru  Nanak  hath  said  : — 

My  brethren,  know  that  death  impendeth  over  your 
heads  : 

Man  is  like  a fish  upon  which  the  net  falleth  unawares.’  ^ 

After  hearing  this  the  Emperor  remained  a few  days 
with  the  Guru,  and  then  proceeded  to  Lahore. 

The  Emperor  left  Wazir  Khan  and  Kind  Beg  at 
Amritsar  with  instructions  to  endeavour  to  induce 
the  Guru  to  go  to  visit  him  at  Lahore.  When  they 
succeeded  in  doing  so,  the  Guru  went  to  his  mother 
to  communicate  his  intention,  and  make  his  obeisance 
to  her  before  his  departure.  Having  made  new 
arrangements  for  the  performance  of  the  duties  of 
^ Sri  Rag,  Ashtapadi. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


35 


the  temple  and  the  kitchen,  he  mounted  his  horse, 
and  set  out  with  a small  escort.  He  remained  for 
a night  at  a village  half-way,  and  next  day  pitched 
his  tent  in  Muzang,  a suburb  of  Lahore.  The  fol- 
lowing morning  he  visited  the  birthplace  of  Guru 
Ram  Das,  the  Bawali  whose  construction  Guru  Arjan 
had  planned,  and  the  place  where  he  gave  up  his 
spirit.  He  caused  a small  temple  to  be  erected 
there,  and  appointed  Bhai  Langaha  to  take  charge 
of  it.  A large  fair  is  held  at  the  place  yearly  on 
the  anniversary  of  Guru  Arjan’s  death — the  fourth 
day  of  the  light  half  of  Jeth  (May -June). 

When  people  remarked  that  Chandu,  who  had 
been  brought  from  Amritsar  with  the  Guru’s  party, 
justly  suffered  for  his  misdeeds,  the  Guru  said  that 
every  man’s  acts  clung  to  him.  Chandu  was  reduced 
to  a most  deplorable  condition.  His  eyes  became 
blind  from  weeping,  his  body  dried  up,  and  only 
a skeleton  remained  of  what  was  once  the  sleek  and 
handsome  minister  of  the  Emperor.  He  was  daily 
led  through  the  city  streets,  when  the  children  used 
to  throw  handfuls  of  dust  on  his  head,  and  the  women 
to  utter  every  imprecation  on  him.  Bhai  Bidhi 
Chand  and  Bhai  Jetha  delivered  Chandu  over  to 
scavengers,  who  led  him  round  the  streets  to  beg. 
He  who  used  to  take  bribes  of  thousands  of  rupees 
was  now  glad  to  get  kauris  and  the  leavings  of  others 
for  his  support.  For  a sacrificial  mark  on  his  fore- 
head he  had  now  the  marks  of  shoe-beatings,  and  foe 
necklaces  of  pearls  and  diamonds  he  had  old  slippers 
suspended  from  his  neck.  After  fifteen  days  of  this 
treatment  in  Lahore  death  came  to  his  relief.  A 
grain-parcher,  on  seeing  him,  became  so  enraged 
that  he  struck  him  on  the  head  with  an  iron  ladle 
full  of  burning  sand.  On  this  Chandu  fell  with 
painful  cries  and  swooned.  The  grain-parcher  dealt 
him  a similar  blow  as  he  lay  unconscious  on  the 
ground.  His  skull  was  fractured,  and  his  soul 
became  the  spoil  of  death’s  myrmidons.  The 


36  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

scavengers  threw  his  body  into  the  river  Ravi. 
When  the  Emperor  heard  of  Chandu’s  death,  he  said 
that  he  richly  deserved  his  fate.  The  Guru,  however, 
prayed  that  as  Chandu  had  suffered  torment  for 
his  sins  in  this  life,  God  would  pardon  him  hereafter. 

When  Prithia’s  son  Mihrban  heard  of  Chandu’s 
death  he  was  greatly  distressed.  He  said,  ‘ Sulahi 
died  when  he  set  himself  against  the  Guru.  When 
my  father,  too,  became  the  Guru’s  enemy  he  perished 
in  his  thoughtless  career.  And  now  Chandu  is  dead. 
It  is  not  known  what  magic  the  Guru  possesseth 
that  no  one  may  withstand  him.’  Mihrban  exchanged 
turbans  with  Karm  Chand,  Chandu’s  son,  in  token 
of  life-long  friendship,  and  took  counsel  with  him 
how  to  effect  the  Guru’s  ruin.  They  proceeded  to 
Prince  Khuram,  afterwards  the  Emperor  Shah 
Jahan,  and  poisoned  his  mind  against  the  Guru. 

When  the  Guru  heard  of  Mihrban’s  arrival  in 
Lahore,  he  sent  Bhai  Paira  and  Bhai  Pirana  to  try 
to  dissuade  him  from  his  hostile  designs.  They 
exhorted  him,  ‘ Abandon  strife  and  come  to  terms 
with  the  Guru.  Nothing  is  gained  by  dissension. 
What  did  thy  father  gain  by  his  enmity  with  Guru 
Arjan  ? who  said : — 

The  advantage  of  union  cannot  be  described,  Nanak,  it 
is  beyond  expression.^ 

Thy  jealousy  shall  cause  misery  even  to  thyself.’ 

• Mihrban  replied,  ‘ My  father  at  his  death  enjoined 
me  never  to  make  friendship  with  the  Guru.  I cannot 
disregard  my  father’s  injunctions.’  When  the  envoys 
represented  t\ve  Gnrn’ s supernatural  power,  Mihrban 
replied,  ‘ I am  aware  of  that.  Even  with  such  power 
Guru  Arjan  abandoned  Amritsar  through  fear  of 
Sulahi,  and  was  subsequently  unable  to  avert  his 
oum  death.  The  masands  are  now  Har  Gobind's 
friends  solely  because  he  hath  bribed  them.  My 

^ Literally— beyond  the  beyond.  GQjari. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  37 

father,  it  is  true,  failed,  but  he  was  a poor  unsophis- 
ticated man,  unable  to  cope  with  my  clever  uncle 
Arjan.  Why  did  not  Har  Gobind  work  miracles 
against  Chandu  when  he  caused  him  to  be  sent  to  the 
fortress  of  Gualiar  ? ’ Bhai  Paira  replied,  ‘ Thou 
art  still  a child  and  knowest  nothing.  Great  men 
have  great  endurance.  They  can  endure  the  bad 
language  of  enemies  as  if  it  were  a rain  shower, 
and  can  withstand  them  like  mountains.’  On 
hearing  this,  Mihrban’s  anger  blazed  forth,  and, 
seeing  it,  Bhai  Paira  and  Bhai  Pirana  returned  to 
the  Guru. 

The  Guru,  on  hearing  of  the  failure  of  their  nego- 
tiations, said,  ‘ I will  go  myself  to  Mihrban.  He  is 
my  first  cousin,  and  I will  endeavour  to  conciliate 
him.  Although  he  is  at  enmity  with  me,  yet  he 
cannot  treat  me  with  discourtesy.’  Mihrban  gave 
him  a respectful  reception,  and  seated  him  by  his 
side.  The  Guru  opened  the  conversation,  ‘ Thy 
father  and  mine  are  in  heaven.  We  are  both  brothers 
now,  so  we  ought  not  to  bear  each  other  enmity 
from  which  happiness  can  never  result.’  The  Guru 
then  quoted  the  following  slok  of  their  common 
relation.  Guru  Ram  Das  : — 

He  in  whose  heart  there  is  jealousy  shall  never  prosper. 

No  one  shall  heed  what  he  saith  ; he  is  a fool  ever  crying 
in  the  wilderness. 

He  in  whose  heart  there  is  calumny  is  known  as 
a calumniator ; everything  he  hath  done  or  doeth  is 
in  vain. 

He  ever  causelessly  slandereth  others ; he  cannot  show 
his  face  to  any  one ; it  hath  become  black. 

In  the  Kal  age  the  body  is  the  field  of  works ; as  man 
soweth  so  shall  he  reap. 

Justice  is  not  administered  on  false  evidence ; when 
a man  eateth  poison  he  dieth. 

My  brethren,  behold  the  justice  of  the  true  Creator — as 
any  one  acteth,  so  shall  be  his  reward. 


38  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  obtained  all  enlightenment  and 
preached  the  words  of  God’s  court.^ 

The  Guru  continued,  ' The  Lord  of  the  world,  the 
Supreme  Being  will  not  be  pleased  to  bestow  happi- 
ness or  prosperity  on  those  who  harbour  evil  in  their 
hearts,  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  Creator  will  make 
him  happy  who  is  pleased  with  the  happiness  of 
others.’  The  Guru  then  quoted  the  following  from 
Kabir  : — 

Indulge  not  in  envy  and  bickering,  O my  soul. 

Do  good  deeds  and  gain  their  reward.^ 

The  Guru  concluded  his  remonstrance,  ‘ Friend- 
ship is  ambrosia,  dissension  poison.  Wherefore 
banish  dissension,  and  thou  shalt  be  happy.  Kings 
and  emperors  bow  before  the  Guru’s  throne.  It  is 
not  proper  for  scions  of  his  house  to  flatter  or  pay 
court  to  worldly  people  like  Chandu’s  son  ; nor  does 
it  beseem  them  to  squander  the  wealth  of  the  Sikhs 
in  illicit  gratuities.’ 

Mihrban,  far  from  being  convinced  by  all  this 
good  advice,  only  became  more  enraged.  He  vented 
his  wrath  on  the  Guru,  and  said,  ‘ The  enmity 
that  hath  subsisted  between  us  I will  never  forget. 
Leave  me.’  The  Guru  addressed  him  for  the  last 
time,  ‘ I desire  that  thou  mayest  live  in  peace, 
but  who  can  set  aside  God’s  will  ? ’ Saying  this 
the  Guru  retired  to  his  tent.  He  remained  several 
months  at  Lahore,  preaching  to  his  disciples  and 
leading  them  to  the  paths  of  religion  and  rectitude. 

A masand  named  Sujan  resided  in  Kabul.  He 
had  there  amassed  for  the  Guru  great  wealth  from 
tithes  and  offerings,  and  considered  how  this 
wealth  could  reach  the  Guru,  or  be  best  ap- 
plied to  his  advantage.  He  had  heard  that  the 
Guru  had  a great  love  for  horses.  He  there- 
fore searched  Kabul  and  Bukhara  for  a steed 

^ Gauri  ki  WSr  I.  2 ^sa. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  39 

worthy  of  his  spiritual  master.  At  last  he  found 
a horse  of  rare  strain,  beauty,  and  speed,  which  he 
purchased  for  a lakh  of  rupees  as  an  offering  likely 
to  assist  him  in  obtaining  ultimate  salvation  and 
making  the  true  king  happy.  Sujan  covered  the 
horse  with  dirty  clothes,  and  took  him  with  fifteen 
or  twenty  others  which  were  going  for  sale  to  the 
Panjab.  The  object  of  these  precautions  was  that 
the  animal  might  not  be  specially  remarked  and 
coveted  on  the  way  by  some  Muhammadan  official. 
In  those  days,  whenever  the  Turks  ^ saw  a good 
horse,  a good  sword,  or  anything  else  desirable,  they 
appropriated  it  for  themselves  with  scant  ceremony 
towards  the  owner.  As  the  cavalcade  was  crossing 
the  Indus  at  Atak,  the  eye  of  an  official  happened 
to  fall  on  the  Guru’s  horse,  and  he  inquired  whence 
it  had  come  and  whither  it  was  going,  remarking  at 
the  same  time  that  it  would  make  a suitable  present 
for  the  Emperor.  Sujan  said  that  the  other  horses 
were  for  sale,  but  he  was  taking  this  particular  one 
as  an  offering  to  the  true  king. 

The  official  endeavoured  to  persuade  Sujan  to  let 
him  have  the  animal,  but  in  vain.  He  thereupon 
wrote  to  the  Emperor  Jahangir  that  a Sikh  was 
taking  a horse  of  untold  value  to  Guru  Har  Gobind, 
and  advised  him  to  take  possession  of  the  animal 
by  every  possible  means,  for  he  was  worthy  of  a 
monarch.  The  Emperor,  whose  friendship  for  the 
Guru  had  never  been  real,  replied  by  sending  some 
troops  to  the  official  with  an  order  that  he  must 
not  allow  the  horse  to  cross  the  river.  If  the  owner 
were  very  greedy,  the  price  of  the  animal  should  be 
paid  him,  but  if  he  refused  to  take  it,  force  should  be 
employed.  Sujan  refused  to  surrender  the  horse  on 
any  consideration.  He  maintained  that  the  Guru 
had  paid  for  him,  and  he  was  consequently  his 
property.  The  Emperor's  men  told  Sujan  he  might 

^ The  Mughal  Emperors  and  their  followers  are  always  called 
Turks  in  Sikh  compositions. 


40 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


give  all  the  other  horses  to  the  Guru,  but  this 
particular  one  must  be  the  Emperor’s  perquisite. 
Sujan  continued  his  journey  to  the  Guru  and  told 
him  how  he  had  been  robbed  of  the  horse  procured 
with  such  difficulty  and  solicitude.  The  Guru 
recommended  patience,  and  predicted  that  nobody 
but  himself  should  ever  ride  the  animal. 

When  the  Emperor  desired  to  mount,  the  animal 
shook  its  head,  which  was  regarded  as  a bad  omen. 
The  Emperor  then  desisted,  and  ordered  that  he 
should  be  fed  on  rare  mashes,  but  the  next  day  the 
horse  would  neither  eat  nor  drink.  The  Emperor’s 
most  accomplished  veterinary  surgeons  declared 
that  an  evil  eye  had  caused  the  malady.  Wazir 
Khan,  the  Guru’s  friend,  reminded  the  Emperor  that 
the  horse  belonged  to  the  Guru,  and  that  property 
taken  from  others  could  not  bring  luck  to  its  posses- 
sor. All  known  medicines  were  tried,  but  in  vain. 
When  the  horse  was  on  the  point  of  death,  Rustam 
Khan,  the  head  Qazi,  said,  ‘ If  the  holy  Quran 
were  read  for  him  he  might  recover.’  Upon  this  the 
Emperor  presented  him  to  the  Qazi  with  permission 
to  exercise  on  him  his  spiritual  power. 

As  the  Qazi  was  leading  him  home,  the  animal 
neighed  when  passing  the  Guru’s  tent  This  was 
interpreted  as  an  appeal  to  the  Guru  to  rescue  him 
from  the  Qazi’s  hands.  The  Guru  sent  for  the  Qazi 
with  the  object  of  negotiating  the  purchase  of  the 
horse.  It  was  agreed  between  them  that  the  Guru 
should  have  the  horse  for  ten  thousand  rupees.  The 
Qazi  signed  an  agreement  to  that  effect,  and  it  was 
further  stipulated  that  the  price  should  be  paid  at 
the  time  of  the  Diwali  fair  in  Amritsar.  The  Guru 
took  the  animal  to  the  stable,  and  by  simply  patting 
him  on  the  neck  restored  him  to  his  usual  strength. 

A Muhammadan  saint,  Mian  Mir,  originally  named 
Muhammad  Mir,  born  in  Sistan  in  a.d.  1550,  found 
his  way  like  many  other  distinguished  Muhammadans 
to  the  Panjab,  and  settled  in  a barren  plain  about 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  41 

five  miles  from  Lahore.  He  gained  a high  reputa- 
tion for  sanctity  and  devotion.  Jahangir  in  his 
autobiography  wrote  of  him : ‘ Truly  he  is  the 
beloved  of  God.  In  sanctity  and  purity  of  soul,  he 
hath  no  equal  in  this  age.  This  humble  servant 
[namely  the  Emperor]  used  to  go  to  the  darwesh, 
who  explained  to  him  many  minute  points  of 
theology.  It  was  my  desire  to  make  him  an  offering 
of  money ; but  as  he  was  above  worldly  things, 
I dared  not  make  the  offer,  and  contented  myself 
with  the  presentation  of  the  skin  of  an  antelope  to 
serve  as  a mat  for  reading  his  prayers  on.’ 

The  Guru  resolved  to  visit  Mian  Mir,  and  duly 
notified  his  intention.  The  saint  went  forth  to 
meet  him,  entertained  him  in  his  house,  and  treated 
him  in  every  way  with  the  greatest  respect.  The 
Guru  inquired  to  what  degree  of  divine  knowledge 
he  had  attained,  if  he  had  succeeded  in  keeping  his 
mind  under  restraint  and  repressing  his  desires,  and 
if  he  had  yet  felt  the  blissful  inward  satisfaction  of 
having  met  God.  Mian  Mir  courteously  replied  : 
‘ He  to  whom  thou  showest  favour  hath  found 
everything.  Having  abandoned  all  false  worldly 
things  I have  found  the  true  God,  who  is  beyond 
conception  and  expression.  Whoever  hath  seen 
Him  hath  abandoned  pride  and  obtained  peace. 
My  mind  is  at  rest  and  no  longer  tormented  by 
desires.  The  pleasure  of  meeting  God  is  incom- 
municable. In  the  words  of  Bhikan 

Though  one  try  to  utter  God’s  praises,  they  cannot  be 
fully  uttered ; 

They  are  like  sweets  to  a dumb  person.^ 

‘The  man  who  possesseth  divine  knowledge  is 
happy  at  every  time  and  in  every  place.  The  man 
who  possesseth  it  not,  is  ever  unhappy.  ’ After  further 
conversation  on  the  same  and  kindred  subjects 
the  Guru  returned  to  his  camp.  The  nobles  who 

^ Sorath. 


42  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

had  heard  the  colloquy  reported  it  to  the  Em- 
peror, and  expressed  to  him  their  surprise  that  an 
elderly  saint  like  Mian  Mir  should  treat  a married 
Sikh  Guru  with  such  respect.  The  Emperor  asked 
Mian  Mir  for  an  explanation.  Mian  Mir  replied  : 
‘ The  Guru  is  a sincere  believer  in  God.  His  heart 
is  pure  and  his  words  leave  an  impression  on  the 
mind.  From  those  who  hear  him  all  doubts  depart. 
On  this  account  I have  received  him,  and  thought 
him  worthy  of  respect  and  reverence.’ 


Chapter  V 

The  Qazi,  on  seeing  that  the  horse  which  was  worth 
a lakh  of  rupees  had  recovered,  and  that  the  Guru 
daily  rode  him,  felt  that  he  had  got  the  worst  of  the 
bargain,  and  began  to  clamour  for  his  money  without 
waiting  for  the  Diwali  fair.  The  Guru  then  reminded 
him  of  what  had  occurred  : ‘ A Sikh  paid  a lakh  of 
rupees  for  the  horse,  the  Emperor  seized  and  appro- 
priated him.  The  animal  was  dying  when  you  sold 
him  to  me.  I will,  however,  pay  you  the  ten  thousand 
rupees  at  the  appointed  time.’ 

On  another  occasion,  as  the  Guru  was  taking  his 
siesta,  the  Qazi  came  to  dun  him.  Bhai  Budha,  who 
was  sitting  at  the  Guru’s  door,  said  that  that  was 
not  the  time  to  approach  the  Guru,  and  suggested 
that  the  Qazi  might  return  another  day  at  an  hour 
when  it  would  be  convenient  for  the  Guru  to  receive 
him.  The  Qazi  pressed  Bhai  Budha  to  awaken  the 
Guru.  He  was  not,  he  said,  a courtier  or  royal 
favourite  who  might  not  be  disturbed.  Bhai  Budha 
replied,  ‘ What  are  wretched  courtiers  in  comparison 
with  our  Guru  ? He  is  king  of  kings.  Depart,  come 
again.  What  time  is  this  to  come  begging  for 
money.’  The  Qazi  replied,  ‘ If  I tell  the  Emperor, 
he  will  punish  the  Guru,  and  I shall  then  obtain  the 
price  of  the  horse.’  This  threat  Bhai  Budha  promptly 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  43 

resented  : ‘ Fool,  put  a guard  on  thy  tongue.  Thou 
knowest  not  God’s  will.’ 

The  Guru,  hearing  an  uproar,  awoke  and  came 
forward,  when  the  Qazi  thus  angrily  addressed  him  : 
‘ Thou  pretendest  ignorance.  Thou  neither  payest 
me  the  promised  money  nor  returnest  me  my  horse, 
and  yet  thou  sleepest  without  anxiety.  Thou  shalt 
see  into  what  a pleasant  sleep  I will  put  thee.  If 
thou  study  thine  own  interests,  pay  me  for  the 
horse,  otherwise  I will  complain  to  the  Emperor.’ 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Thou  mayest  tell  the  Emperor 
and  act  as  it  pleaseth  thee.’  After  this  the  Qazi 
departed. 

One  morning  the  Guru  called  Bhai  Budha,  told 
him  his  business  in  Lahore  was  accomplished,  and 
they  must  return  home.  Bhai  Budha,  having  made 
all  preparations,  set  out  in  advance.  The  Guru, 
with  his  army,  then  marched  and  overtook  him. 

There  was  in  the  house  of  the  Qazi  a daughter, 
named  by  the  Sikhs  Kaulan,’  who  was  a disciple  of 
Mian  Mir.  She,  in  addition  to  being  very  beautiful, 
was  both  amiable  and  virtuous.  From  her  earliest 
years  she  had  occupied  her  mind  with  praising  God’s 
name  and  remembering  Him  in  the  company  of 
saints.  Even  when  she  attained  puberty  she  de- 
clined her  parents’  suggestions  to  marry.  When  at 
home,  she  used  to  dwell  in  a lonely  chamber.  When- 
ever she  went  abroad,  it  was  to  behold  her  spiritual 
guide  Mian  Mir ; otherwise  she  never  even  put  her 
foot  outside  her  house.  In  Mian  Mir’s  congregation, 
as  she  frequently  heard,  not  only  from  Mian  Mir 
himself  but  from  other  very  holy  men,  various  praises 
of  Guru  Har  Gobind,  so  she  also  praised  him  in  the 
midst  of  her  own  family.  The  Qazi,  her  father,  was 
in  the  highest  degree  incensed  with  her ; in  the  first 
place,  for  refusing  marriage,  and  secondly,  for  ‘fre- 
quenting the  society  of  faqirs.  When,  moreover,  he 

^ This  was  the  lady's  name  after  her  conversion  to  the  Sikh  religion, 
Her  original  Muhammadan  name  is  not  known. 


44 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


heard  from  her  lips  praises  of  Guru  Har  Gobind,  he 
became  exceedingly  wroth,  and  thus  addressed  her  : 
‘ 0 infidel,  thou  praisest  an  infidel  and  obeyest  not  the 
law  of  Muhammad,  according  to  which  it  is  forbidden 
under  penalty  of  death  to  praise  an  unbelieving 
person.’  Kaulan  replied,  ‘Father  dear,  the  law  of 
Muhammad  doth  not  apply  to  holy  men  or  to  me. 
It  applies  rather  to  those  fools  who  neither  know  nor 
obey  anything  besides.  Saints  are  God’s  servants. 
At  the  same  time,  He  obeyeth  them,  and  they  may  do 
what  they  please.  They  have  no  concern  with  the 
law  of  Muhammad.’  On  hearing  this  and  similar 
replies  from  his  daughter,  the  Qazi’s  heart  burned 
with  bigotry  and  indignation.  On  that  very  day 
he,  in  consultation  with  his  brother  Qazis,  issued  an 
order  for  the  execution  of  his  daughter  for  her  sin 
of  transgressing  the  Muhammadan  law.  Kaulan’s 
mother,  on  hearing  this  decision,  informed  not  only 
her  daughter  of  it,  but  also  Mian  Mir.  On  this 
Mian  Mir  said  to  Kaulan : ‘ There  appeareth  no  means 
of  saving  thee  here.  Thou  shalt  be  innocently  put 
to  death,  as  Mansur  was  by  these  tyrants.^  It  is 
better,  therefore,  that  thou  at  once  go  to  Amritsar 
and  seek  there  the  protection  of  Guru  Har  Gobind. 
In  this  age  there  is  none  but  him  to  save  thy  life.’ 
Kaulan  deemed  her  Fir’s  advice  the  best.  She  at 
once  packed  up  her  effects,  and  taking  with  her 
a fellow  disciple,  set  out  for  Amritsar.® 

Meantime  the  Qazi  was  not  idle.  He  complained 
to  the  Emperor  that  the  Guru  had  promised  to  pay 
him  the  price  of  the  horse,  but  now  put  him  off  with 
' excuses.  ‘ He  procrastinateth,  and  will  not  fulfil  his 
promise.  If  thy  Majesty  send  an  officer  to  remon- 

^ Husain  ibn  MansQr  SQii  was  put  to  death  at  Baghdad,  a.d.  923, 
after  suffering  grievous  torture  and  mutilation.  In  a state  of  mystic 
ecstasy  he  had  cried  out,  ‘lam  the  Truth  (God).’  Being  rebuked 
for  this  and  told  to  say  instead,  ‘ He  is  the  Truth,’  he  replied,  ‘ Yes, 
He  is  all,  but  you  say  He  is  lost.  Husain  is  lost ; the  drop  hath 
disapprared,  but  the  ocean  remaineth  as  it  was.’ 

* Itihas  Guru  Khalsa, 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  45 

strate  with  him,  I shall  consider  I have  the  money 
in  my  pocket.  Otherwise,  he  will  always  put  me  off 
as  he  doeth  now.’  The  Emperor  replied,  ‘ When 
day  breaketh,  take  one  of  my  men  to  the  Guru. 
I will  send  him  word  to  pay  thee  all  thy  money,  and 
I think  he  will  not  fail  to  do  so.’ 

The  Qazi,  on  visiting  the  site  of  the  Guru’s  camp 
at  Lahore,  found  that  he  had  departed,  so  he  pre- 
pared to  follow  him.  He  knew  that  the  Guru  must 
have  gone  to  Amritsar,  but  he  was  not  certain  if  he 
would  remain  there  or  seek  concealment  in  the 
neighbouring  wilderness,  where  he  would  have  no 
fear  of  the  Emperor,  as  no  army  could  enter  it  to 
capture  him.  The  Qazi  decided  that  his  case  would 
be  hopeless  if  he  did  not  set  out  at  once.  He  would 
return  to  Lahore  and  seek  the  Emperor’s  assistance, 
if  the  Guru  failed  to  keep  his  promise  or  used  violence 
towards  him. 

On  his  way  the  Qazi  met  the  Guru  hunting  to 
the  west  of  Amritsar.  The  Qazi  respectfully  saluted 
him.  The  Guru  complimented  him  on  the  celerity 
with  which  he  had  pursued  him.  The  Qazi  replied 
civilly,  but  at  the  same  time  made  it  very  clear  that 
he  desired  to  obtain  his  money  without  further 
delay.  The  Guru  invited  him  to  remain  for  the 
night,  and  in  the  morning  he  would  give  him  a 
cheque  on  a Lahore  banker. 

Not  long  after  the  Qazi’s  arrival  in  Amritsar  he 
heard  that  his  daughter  was  there.  He  besought  her 
to  return  to  her  religion  and  her  home,  but  she, 
exceedingly  afraid  of  being  put  to  death,  did  not  at 
all  desire  to  accompany  him.  He  then  went  to 
where  his  pony  was  tethered,  mounted  him,  and 
made  the  best  of  his  way  to  Lahore.  The  Guru  did 
his  utmost  to  detain  him  for  another  day,  until  it 
was  convenient  for  him  to  pay  the  price  of  the 
horse. 

The  Qazi,  on  reaching  home,  found  his  wife  in  tears, 
and  began  in  earnest  to  think  of  his  own  errors. 


46  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

He  said  to  himself,  ‘ My  daughter  would  have 
remained  at  home  had  I treated  her  less  cruelly.’ 
His  wife  levelled  at  him  her  bitterest  taunts,  and 
increased  his  repentance  and  mortification.  He 
decided  to  go  next  day  to  the  Emperor,  and  make 
his  complaint.  When  he  arrived  in  court  he  took 
off  his  turban,  dashed  it  on  the  ground,  and  made 
other  signs  of  distress,  but  as  he  spoke  in  tears  the 
Emperor  could  not  quite  follow  his  story.  Moreover, 
the  Emperor  was  in  a bad  humour  at  the  time, 
having  been  irritated  by  some  petitioner  immediately 
before.  He  angrily  replied  to  the  Qazi’s  complaint : 
‘ What  disturbance  is  this  that  thou  art  causing  ? 
I understand  thee  not.  Thou  speakest  like  a lunatic. 
Appear  not  bare-headed  in  my  presence.  Thou 
wast  a sensible  man  once,  but  now  thou  seemest  to 
have  lost  thy  reason.’ 

Wazir  Khan  then  interposed  and  made  an  inge- 
nious defence  of  the  Guru.  ‘ Sire,  what  shall  I say 
about  anybody  ? It  is  a bad  world,  and  the  Qazi 
now  appeareth  to  be  as  bad  as  the  rest.  He  made 
his  daughter  miserable  and  used  to  beat  her  daily. 
Being  thus  helpless,  she  left  her  home  and  went  to 
Amritsar.  Through  fear  of  her  father,  she  has 
remained  there  and  desireth  not  to  return.  The 
Guru,  who  is  ever  merciful,  receiveth  all  visitors 
and  provideth  for  them,  the  Qazi’s  daughter  among 
others.  Mian  Mir  and  other  saints  go  to  meet  him, 
and  treat  him  with  respect.  It  is  against  such  a 
man  this  fool  maketh  complaint.  His  case,  more- 
over, is  a very  paltry  one.  Thou  hast  heard  too 
* much  already.  It  is  not  proper  to  quarrel  with  the 
Guru.  Some  calamity  may  happen  by  interference.’ 

The  Emperor  then,  addressing  the  Qazi,  passed 
his  final  order  : ‘ Art  thou  not  ashamed  of  thyself  ? 
It  became  thee  not  to  have  acted  as  thou  hast  done. 
It  is  not  proper  for  thee  to  quarrel  with  priests. 
Thou  oughtest  rather  to  do  them  reverence.  In 
open  court  thou  hast  rent  the  veil  of  thy  modesty. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


47 


and  rendered  thyself  despised  of  all  men.  Thy 
daughter  was  obliged  to  leave  her  home  Be  silent ; 
say  no  more  ; thou  hast  received  only  thy  deserts.’ 

The  Qazi,  complaining  that  the  Emperor  would 
not  allow  him  to  fully  state  his  case,  took  up  his 
turban  and  left  the  court.  He  then  reflected  : ‘ On 
every  side  I am  in  trouble.  The  very  haughty  Guru 
will  keep  this  ten  thousand  rupees.  He  thinketh 
I am  utterly  resourceless;  How  shall  I teach  him 
a lesson  ? He  will  not  pay  me  my  money,  and  he 
hath  all  but  killed  me.  Moreover,  my  daughter  hath 
forsaken  me  and  embraced  another  faith  ; I cannot 
remedy  what  is  done,  so  I must  either  take  revenge 
or  kill  myself.  I trusted  to  the  Emperor  Jahangir, 
but  far  from  assisting  me,  he  hath  brought  counter 
charges  against  me.  What  hath  God  done  with  me  ? 
I am  in  a dire  dilemma,  and  sped  by  troubles  on 
every  side.  The  whole  family  is  mourning  for  my 
daughter,  and  yet  she  is  so  estranged  from  us,  that 
we  can  never  on  any  account  see  her  more.’ 

Kaulan  began  her  altered  life  under  the  protection 
of  the  Guru,  the  friend  of  her  spiritual  adviser 
Mian  Mir.  She  found  consolation  in  repeating  the 
following  hymn  of  the  Guru’s  father,  which  she  had 
learned  by  hearing  it  often  recited  by  the  Sikhs  : — 

0 mother,  I awake  by  association  with  the  saints ; 

On  seeing  the  love  of  the  Beloved,  I repeat  His  name 
which  is  a treasure. 

Thirsting  for  a sight  of  Him,  I long  and  look  for  Him  ; 

1 have  forgotten  my  desire  for  other  things. 

I have  found  the  Guru,  the  giver  of  composure  and 
peace ; 

On  beholding  him,  my  mind  is  wrapped  up  in  God. 

On  seeing  God  pleasure  hath  arisen  in  my  heart ; Nanak, 
dear  to  me  is  His  ambrosial  word.^ 

The  Sikh  chronicler  states  that  Kaulan  in  a 

* Kedara. 


48  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

previous  birth  desired  to  obtain  the  true  Guru’s 
instruction  and  be  happy. 

The  Guru  had  a separate  building  prepared  for 
her  residence,  and  bade  her  occupy  her  time  as  she 
pleased.  On  beholding  her  continual  dependence 
on  God,  he  was  specially  pleased  with  her,  and  took 
care  of  her  in  every  way.  Some  time  passed  in  this 
manner,  until  one  day  Kaulan,  putting  together  all 
her  jewels,  placed  them  before  the  Guru.  With 
clasped  hands  she  thus  addressed  him,  ‘ Friend  of 
the  poor,  be  good  enough  to  apply  the  price  of  these 
jewels  to  some  religious  object,  by  which  my  name 
may  be  remembered  for  some  time  in  the  world.’  The 
Guru  accordingly,  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  light  half  of 
the  month  of  Magh,  Sambat  1678  (a.d.  1621),  caused 
a tank  to  be  excavated  in  her  name  with  the  money. 
The  tank  is  still  famous  as  Kaulsar  ^ ( Kaulan’ s tank) 
in  the  city  of  Amritsar.  The  Guru  also  constructed 
another  tank  called  Bibeksar,  which  was  meant  to 
commemorate  his  spiritual  instruction  delivered  on 
the  spot  to  his  followers.  There  are  now  altogether 
five  sacred  tanks  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Sikh  temple 
in  Amritsar  : Santokhsar,  Amritsar,  Ramsar,  Kaul- 
sar, and  Bibeksar. 

The  Sikhs  in  Amritsar  were  all  the  time  apprehen- 
sive that  the  Emperor  would  send  an  army  to  arrest 
the  Guru  on  the  Qazi’s  complaint.  They  were  pre- 
pared, if  necessary,  for  defence.  The  Emperor,  how- 
ever, thought  no  more  of  the  Qazi  or  his  grievances, 
and  refused  to  embroil  himself  with  the  Guru.  The 
masands  formed  the  next  party  of  whom  the  Guru 
had  to  take  account.  They  went  and  complained  to 
his  mother  against  him : ‘ The  Guru’s  proceedings 
please  no  one.  The  Qazi  hath  gone  to  complain  to 
the  Emperor.  When  the  Emperor  sendeth  an  army 
and  maketh  war  on  us,  what  shall  we  do  ? We 
have  no  kingdom  and  no  large  force  to  defend  our- 

^ Itihas  Guru  Khaha.  Some  Sikhs  suppose  this  name  was  given 
the  tank  because  the  lotus  {^aul ) flourishes  in  it. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


49 


selves.  How  can  we  cope  with  the  Emperor  ? The 
Guru  must  abscond  and  leave  his  city.  This  place 
belonged  to  his  father  and  grandfather.  When  it 
passeth  out  of  his  possession,  where  shall  we  abide  ? ’ 

Mother  Ganga  replied,  ‘ I cannot  help  it.  The 
first  five  Gurus  preached  doctrines , of  peace  ; my 
son  -the  sixth  Guru  weareth  arms.  It  must  sooner 
or  later  come  to  war  with  the  Emperor.  I have 
continued  to  admonish  him,  and  tell  him  that  such 
conduct  becometh  him  not.  He  is,  however,  very 
resourceful,  and,  if  it  come  to  a conflict,  he  will  know 
how  to  defend  himself.  You  and  I can  do  nothing. 
If  you  think  the  Guru  will  listen  to  you,  then  advise 
him.  Go  and  do  everything  to  avert  war,  and  convey 
to  the  Guru  my  feelings  on  the  subject.’  As  the 
masands  were  on  the  point  of  personally  remonstrat- 
ing with  the  Guru,  a messenger  arrived  from  Lahore 
with  a letter  from  Wazir  Khan  informing  him  of  the 
Emperor’s  decision  on  the  Qazi’s  complaints.  The 
Sikhs  were  delighted  at  the  result.  The  difficulty 
with  the  Emperor  Jahangir,  they  hoped,  was  at  an 
end.  The  vaticinations  of  the  masands  were  falsified, 
and  the  Guru  and  his  party  made  up  their  minds 
to  dwell  for  ever  in  Amritsar.^ 

Not  long  afterwards  the  Guru  and  his  mother 
went  to  the  shrine  of  Guru  Nanak  to  see  Sri  Chand, 
Guru  Nanak’s  son,  who  lived  there.  The  Guru 
made  an  offering  of  a horse  and  one  thousand  rupees. 
The  Guru’s  mother  said  to  Sri  Chand,  ‘ Thou  art 
now  old,  thou  hast  supernatural  power,  bless  my 
son  that  he  may  have  offspring.’  Sri  Chand  replied, 
with  a line  of  Guru  Arjan : — 

The  vine  of  the  race  hath  grown  and  shall  last  for  many 
generations.* 

The  Si^  chroniclers  state  that  this  occurred  in  the  time  of 
Shah  Jahan,  but  this  cannot  be  correct.  Jahangir  died  in  a.d.  1627,  and 
Kaufan  had  taken  up  her  residence  in  Amritsar  at  least  seven  years 
before  that,  for  she  was  there  when  Baba  Atal  R§i  was  born. 

* Asa. 


SIKH.  IV 


E 


50 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


It  will  be  remembered  that  after  Guru  Arjan  had 
refused  to  marry  Har  Gobind  to  Chandu’s  daughter, 
the  young  Guru  was  offered  two  wives.  One  of 
them,  Damodari,  he  had  already  married.  When  it 
was  known  that  she  had  become  pregnant,  there 
were  great  rejoicings  in  both  families.  To  the 
second  lady,  Nanaki,  the  daughter  of  Hari  Chand, 
the  Guru  was  not  yet  married,  partly  on  account  of 
her  youth  and  partly  on  account  of  his  absence  in 
Dihli,  Agra,  Lahore,  and  other  places.  Hari  Chand 
now  wrote  that  the  approaching  Baisakhi  would  be 
a suitable  time  for  the  marriage.  It  was  accordingly 
then  celebrated  with  all  due  formalities  and  rejoicings. 

There  was  a Sikh  called  or  styled  Almast,  which 
means  the  enthusiast.  In  his  wanderings  he  arrived 
at  that  part  of  the  district  of  Pilibhit  where  there 
had  been  built  a temple  to  commemorate  Guru 
Nanak’s  visit.  Guru  Nanak,  it  is  said,  had  left  the 
mark  of  his  five  fingers  on  every  leaf  of  a pipal  tree 
there,  and  made  sweet  the  bitter  fruit  of  a soap-nut 
tree  some  forty  miles  to  the  east  of  it.  Some  Jogis, 
who  had  now  taken  possession,  wanted  to  root  up 
the  Guru’s  pipal,  name  the  temple  after  Gorakh- 
nath,  and  abolish  the  name  of  Guru  Nanak.  Almast 
could  not  endure  this.  Considering  the  temple  his 
own,  he  resided  in  it,  and  performed  all  the  menial 
and  religious  duties  connected  with  it.  The  Jogis 
sought  to  expel  him,  and  thus  stated  their  case, 

‘ Gorakhnath  performed  penance  here,  hence  the 
name  Gorakh-mata.  Thy  Guru  only  stayed  here  as 
a traveller  for  four  days.  How  can  the  temple  be 
his  ? ’ Almast  pointed  to  the  marks  of  Guru  Nanak’s 
hand  on  every  leaf  of  the  pipal  tree,  and  instanced 
the  sweetness  of  the  soap-nut.  It  would  therefore 
not  be  proper  for  him  to  resign  the  place  to  the 
Jogis.  He  bluntly  told  them  that  Guru  Har  Gobind, 
who  was  now  on  Guru  Nanak’s  throne,  would  soon 
come  and  humble  their  pride.  The  Jogis  were  so 
angry  at  this,  that  they  set  fire  to  the  pipal  and  left 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


51 


not  a trace  of  it.  Almast  told  them  that  when  the 
Guru  came,  he  would  restore  the  tree,  and  whoever 
committed  a sin  against  Gurji  Nanak  should  perish 
root  and  branch. 

Night  and  day  Almast  read  the  compositions  of 
the  Gurus.  He  used  to  pray,  ‘ 0 searcher  of  hearts, 
true  Guru,  render  us  assistance.’  Enduring  hunger 
and  thirst  and  the  inclemency  of  all  seasons,  Almast 
waited  until  Guru  Har  Gobind  should  come  to  repair 
and  take  possession  of  Guru  Nanak’s  temple. 

The  parents  of  Damodari,  the  Guru’s  wife,  lived  in 
the  village  of  Dalla.  Her  eldest  sister  Ramo  was 
married  to  Sain  Das,  who  lived  in  Daroli  in  the  present 
district  of  Firozpur.  Sain  Das  had  not  been  origin- 
ally a Sikh,  but,  owing  to  the  good  example  and 
advice  of  his  father-in-law  Narain  Das,  and  the  ex- 
hortations of  his  wife  Ramo,  who  was  a grand- 
daughter of  Bhai  Paro,  Guru  Amar  Das’s  faithful 
attendant,  he  became  a convert  to  the  teachings  of 
Guru  Arjan.  Sain  Das  was  ever  praying  that  Guru 
Har  Gobind  would  visit  his  village.  He  built  a man- 
sion to  receive  him,  and  vowed  that  no  one  should  live 
in  it  until  the  Guru  had  hallowed  it  by  his  presence. 
Sain  Das  laid  a beautiful  bed  with  soft  bed^ng,  and 
over  the  pillow  he  put  a canopy.  He  used  every 
morning  to  lay  flowers  in  the  room  and  perfume  it, 
and  pray  that  the  Guru  would  soon  come  to  bless  the 
place.  His  wife  used  often  to  press  him  to  send  for 
the  Guru.  On  such  occasions  he  would  say,  ‘ The 
Guru  is  omniscient  and  will  come  of  his  own  accord. 
There  is  something  wanting  in  our  devotion,  or  we 
have  committed  some  sin  that  his  visit  hath  been  so 
long  delayed.  We  dare  not  write  him  a letter  or 
send  for  him.’  On  account  of  the  troubles  in  , which 
Almast  was  involved,  and  the  devotion  of  Sain  Das, 
the  Guru  decided  on  visiting  Daroli  and  Pilibhit, 
and  taking  with  him  a troop  of  his  armed  retainers. 
His  mother  and  his  wives  were  to  accompany  him 
as  far  as  Daroli,  and  stay  with  Ramo  until  he 


52  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

joined  them  after  bringing  the  Jogis  of  Pilibhit  to 
reason. 

Bhai  Budha,  and  indeed  all  the  Sikhs,  on  hearing 
of  the  Guru’s  resolve,  were  very  much  disheartened 
at  the  thought  of  being  left  in  Amritsar  without 
their  leader.  The  Guru  consoled  them  by  saying 
that  if  they  daily  offered  their  adorations  at  the  Har 
Mandar  or  Golden  Temple,  all  their  affairs  should 
succeed.  When  the  Guru  found  that  his  mother 
and  his  wives  had  arrived  safely  in  Daroli,  he  com- 
pleted his  preparations  for  the  journey  to  Pilibhit. 

The  Guru  took  his  horses  to  Kartarpur,  where  he 
left  them  to  be  fed  during  his  absence.  There  some 
Pathans  of  the  village  of  Wadamir,  ready  equipped 
with  swords  and  shields,  offered  themselves  for 
service.  With  them  was  a tall  and  powerful  youth 
of  sixteen  summers,  who  had  large  eyes,  strong  arms, 
thick  neck,  and  sprouting  beard.  The  Guru  was 
impressed  with  his  appearance,  and  inquired  whose 
son  he  was.  Ismail  Khan,  the  head  of  the  band  of 
Pathans,  replied,  ‘ This  youth  was  born  in  the  village 
of  Ghilzai  Alim.  His  parents  are  dead.  He  is  my 
nephew  and  liveth  with  me  in  Wadamir.  I have 
brought  him  up.  He  is  versed  in  both  military  and 
general  knowledge,  and ’his  name  is  Painda  Khan.’ 
The  Guru  inquired  if  he  would  accept  service  or  not, 
to  which  Ismail  Khan  made  reply,  ‘ Sir,  we  keep  not 
shops  or  till  land ; military  service  is  what  we 
aspire  to.  If  thou  desire  to  employ  him  in  that 
capacity,  thou  mayest  do  so.’  The  Guru  gave  him 
ten  rupees  as  enlistment  money,  supplied  him  with 
dinner  from  his  kitchen,  and  promised  that  on 
returning  from  his  excursion  he  would  retain  him  on 
his  own  personal  staff.  The  Guru  remained  for  some 
days  in  Kartarpur,  and  again  had  an  interview  with 
Painda  Khan.  He  gave  him  a house  and  a female 
buffalo,  and  agreed  to  pay  him  five  rupees  a day 
as  an  officer  of  his  army. 

When  the  Guru  arrived  in  Nanakmata,  which  is 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


53 


several  miles  north  of  the  city  of  Pilibhit,  the  Jogis, 
seeing  his  retinue,  thought  that  some  raja  had 
arrived.  On  hearing  who  it  was,  they  hid  themselves 
in  huts  made  of  leaves.  Almast  came  forth  from  his 
retirement  on  hearing  the  neighing  of  the  Guru’s 
steed,  uttered  thanksgiving  that  his  spiritual  master 
had  arrived,  and  seemed  like  a dead  man  restored 
to  life. 

Near  the  spot  where  the  pipal  had  been,  the  Guru 
constructed  a platform,  and  sitting  on  it  repeated 
the  Sodar.  This  being  ended  he  sprinkled  saffron 
on  which  he  had  breathed  God’s  name,  when  lo,  it  is 
said,  the  pipal  emerged  from  the  ground  as  a serpent 
from  its  lair  ! In  proportion  as  the  Guru  sprinkled 
the  saffron  the  pipal  grew,  and  after  one  night 
appeared  in  full  size  in  all  its  luxuriance. 


Chapter  VI 

Next  day,  observing  the  Guru’s  glory  and  splen- 
dour, the  Jogis  ran  to  their  priest  with  the  same 
haste  as  cowards  flee  from  the  field  of  battle,  and 
related  to  him  all  that  had  occurred  since  Guru 
Nanak  had  visited  the  place.  The  priest  called  to 
their  recollection  how  Guru  Nanak  had  vanquished 
the  Sidhs  who  opposed  him,  and  advised  them  to 
subdue  their  pride,  conceit,  and  arrogance,  bow 
before  the  Guru,  and  seek  his  protection.  The  Jogis 
became  very  angry  at  not  receiving  a promise  of 
assistance  or  even  encouragement.  One  of  them 
said,  ‘ Shall  we  who  are  Sidhs  and  Jogis,  and  live 
for  endless  years,  bow  before  a child  of  yesterday, 
who,  moreover,  is  not  a celibate  like  ourselves  ? ’ 
Another  Jogi  said,  ‘ Guru  Nanak  is  no  more,  let  us 
take  possession  of  our  temple.’  The  Jogis  consulted 
with  one  another,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
until  the  Guru  was  in  some  way  dishonoured,  he 
would  never  leave  them  alone.  They  then  in  a body 


54 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


went  to  the  Guru  in  all  the  bravery  of  the  habila- 
ments  of  their  order — ochre-coloured  robes,  rings  in 
their  ears,  selis  on  their  necks,  wallets  on  their 
shoulders,  and  crutches  in  their  hands — and  repre- 
sented to  him,  ‘ Thou  art  a married  man ; we  are 
well-known  holy  ascetics.  From  of  old  this  place, 
bearing  the  name  of  Gorakhnath,  hath  notoriously 
been  ours.  Wherefore  leave  it,  and  go  and  abide 
wherever  it  pleaseth  thee ! ’ The  Guru  replied, 

‘ Whom  do  you  call  a holy  ascetic  ? I apply  the 
name  only  to  him  who  hath  renounced  pride  and 
who  hath  the  love  of  God  in  his  heart.  It  is  he,  and 
not  a man  who  weareth  an  ascetic’s  garb,  who 
shall  obtain  salvation.’ 

The  Jogis,  in  order  to  terrify  the  Guru,  then  began 
to  make  a show  of  their  pretended  powers,  and 
cries  of  ‘ Strike  the  Guru  ! strike  the  Guru  ! ’ arose 
from  the  whole  band.  The  Sikhs  began  to  grow 
apprehensive.  The  Guru  pacified  them,  and  said  no 
harm  should  come  to  them.  The  Jogis  exerted  all 
their  powers,  but  could  produce  no  effect  on  the 
Guru.  Weary  and  abashed,  they  returned  to  their 
priest,  who  told  them  that,  on  account  of  their 
pride,  they  had  forfeited  such  reputation  as  they 
already  possessed.  Since  that  date  the  place  has 
borne  undisturbed  the  name  Nanakmata,  and  re- 
mained in  the  possession  of  Udasi  Sikhs. 

The  Guru  remained  some  time  in  that  neighbour- 
hood. He  occupied  himself  with  the  chase,  with 
preaching  to  his  Sikhs,  and  with  the  organization 
of  a methodical  Sikh  service  for  them  under  the 
guidance  of  Almast. 

The  Guru  on  his  return  journey  proceeded  to 
Daroli,  where  his  mother  and  wives  were  anxiously 
awaiting  him.  They  went  forth  to  meet  him,  and 
great  joy  reigned  in  the  village  on  his  arrival. 

Sain  Das  said  to  the  Guru,  ‘ Almast  is  a very 
fortunate  man,  for  whose  sake  thou  didst  undertake 
such  a long  journey,  and  whose  devotion  hath 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


55 


rendered  thee  so  subservient  to  him.  When  did  he 
become  a Sikh  ? ’ The  Guru  replied,  ‘ He  was 
originally  a goat-herd  on  the  banks  of  the  Ravi, 
and  was  known  as  “The  simpleton”.  He  had  long 
cherished  a desire  to  see  Guru  Nanak,  and,  on 
accidentally  doing  so,  love  and  devotion  sprang  up 
in  his  heart.  He  milked  one  of  his  goats,  and  offered 
the  milk  to  the  Guru.  The  only  recompense  he 
asked  was  to  be  allowed  to  gaze  on  the  holy  man. 
The  Guru  requested  him  to  ask  for  some  further 
favour.  He  replied  as  before,  that  his  only  desire 
was  to  behold  the  Guru.  Then  Guru  Nanak  said, 
“Twice  three  are  six.  Thou  hast  thrice  desired 
to  behold  the  Guru,  and  now  thou  shalt  live  to  behold 
the  sixth  Guru  in  succession  to  me.”  ’ Sain  Das 
on  hearing  this  narrative  congratulated  Bhai  Almast, 
and  applied  to  his  case  the  following  hymn  of  Guru 
Arjan  : — 

0 God,  by  Thy  favour  I have  dispelled  my  doubts ; 

1 have  reflected  in  my  mind  that  by  Thy  favour  every- 
thing is  mine. 

By  service  to  Thee  millions  of  sins  are  erased  ; by  a sight 
of  Thee  sorrow  departeth. 

By  repeating  Thy  name  I have  obtained  great  happiness, 
and  banished  all  my  anxieties  and  maladies. 

In  the  company  of  the  holy  man  I have  forgotten  lust, 
wrath,  avarice,  falsehood,  and  slander. 

I have  cut  off  the  shackles  of  mammon ; Nanak,  God, 
the  Ocean  of  mercy,  hath  Himself  saved  me.^ 

It  was  now  time  for  Ramo,  Sain  Das’s  wife,  to 
hold  a spiritual  colloquy  with  the  Guru — * Friend 
of  the  poor,  true  Guru,  my  prayer  is  that  I may 
worship  my  husband  with  my  body,  and  discharge 
all  the  duties  of  conjugal  chastity,  that  the  love  of 
God  may  abide  in  my  heart,  and  that  I may  ever 
remember  His  name,  so  that  at  the  last  He  may 
assist  me,  and  that  I may  have  no  fear  of  death, 

^ Devgandhari. 


56  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

or  hell,  or  further  transmigration.’  The  Guru  re- 
plied, ‘God  at  all  times  assisteth  those  whose  hearts 
are  pure.  With  a pure  mind  meditate  on  His  name, 
and  accept  His  will.  Then  shalt  thou  be  happy  and 
all  fear  forsake  thee.’ 

The  time  of  Damodari’s  lying-in  was  approaching, 
and  her  mother-in-law  Ganga  continued  to  pray  for 
her  safe  delivery  of  a son.  Damodari  ever  meditated 
on  God  and  repeated  Guru  Nanak’s  hymns  and 
those  of  her  husband’s  father  the  late  Guru.  On  a 
Wednesday  night  when  the  moon  was  full,  in  the 
month  of  Kartik,  Sambat  1670  (a.  d.  1613),  she 
gave  birth  to  a son.  who  was  afterwards  named 
Gurditta,  and  who  bore  a remarkable  likeness  to 
Guru  Nanak.  When  morning  dawned,  the  Guru 
went  to  see  his  child,  and  then  distributed  alms  to  all 
applicants.  Instead  of  worldly  songs  of  rejoicings 
the  compositions  of  the  Gurus  were  sung  on  the 
auspicious  occasion.  The  hymn  composed  by  Guru 
Arjan  on  the  birth  of  Har  Gobind  received  special 
prominence. 

During  the  Guru’s  long  absence  from  Amritsar, 
prayers  were  offered  there  for  his  speedy  return, 
and  a letter  was  sent  reminding  him  of  his  duty  to 
return  quickly  to  his  Sikhs  and  the  temple  of  his 
forefathers.  He  told  his  mother  of  the  communica- 
tion he  had  received,  and  she  highly  commended 
his  resolution  to  attend  to  it.  The  Sikhs  who  ac- 
companied him  also  pressed  him  not  to  delay.  On 
his  arrival  in  Amritsar  the  following,  among  other 
hymns  of  the  fifth  Guru,  was  sung  with  rapture : — 
O Guru,  may  I behold  Thee  and  live, 

Then  shall  my  fortune  be  completed,  0 God  ! ^ 

Hear  this  supplication,  O my  God  ; 

Grant  me  Thy  name  and  make  me  Thy  servant. 

O God,  the  Giver,  protect  me  in  Thine  asylum. 

^ Also  translated — 

O God,  may  Thy  full  favour  be  extended  to  me. 

That  through  the  Guru  1 may  behold  Thee  and  live ! 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  57 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  some  rare  person  knoweth  Thee. 

O God,  my  Friend,  hear  my  supplication. 

That  Thy  lotus  feet  may  dwell  in  my  heart. 

Nanak  uttereth  this  one  prayer — 

That  he  may  not  forget  Thee,  Thou  Lord  of  perfect 
excellences ! ^ 

The  Guru  having  taken  up  his  residence  at  home 
used  to  preach  to  his  congregation  and  occasionally 
go  on  shooting  excursions.  When  not  occupied 
with  preaching  or  prayer,  he  generally  sat  in  the 
open  air  and  received  his  Sikhs.  The  places  where 
he  used  to  sit  are  now  called  Pipali,  Lohgarh,  and 
Chaurasti  Atari.  During  the  Guru’s  absence  Bhai 
Budha  organized  a nightly  sacred  concert  to  be  sung 
round  the  tank  of  Amritsar.  The  Guru,  on  hearing 
of  it,  said,  ‘ This  choir  shall  for  ever  abide,  and  I shall 
be  always  with  it.’ 

Painda  Khan  arrived  in  Amritsar  with  the  army 
and  the  horses  the  Guru  had  left  in  Kartarpur. 
Painda  Khan’s  ordinary  gymnastic  practice  was  to 
tie  two  large  earthen  vessels  filled  with  sand  to  his 
brawny  arms,  and  thus  encumbered  swing  clubs 
weighing  one  hundred  and  sixty  pounds  each  round 
his  head.  The  Guru  was  pleased  with  him,  and  used 
to  make  him  presents  of  valuable  clothes,  horses 
of  Iraq,  clarified  butter,  sugar,  and  all  such  food 
as  was  calculated  to  promote  strength. 

Two  men,  called  Niwala  and  Nihalu,  went  to  the 
Guru,  and  asked  how  they  could  be  saved.  The 
following  was  the  Guru’s  reply : ‘ As  there  is  fire  in 
all  timber,  but  without  attrition  it  lighteth  not  or  dis- 
pelleth  cold ; and  as  butter  is  contained  in  milk 
but  cannot  be  extracted  without  churning ; so  there 
is  divine  knowledge  which  5deldeth  the  essence  of 
happiness  in  the  hymns  of  the  true  Guru.  In 
perusing  them  there  is  great  merit,  but  divine 
knowledge  is  not  to  be  obtained  unless  man  meditate 

’ Suhi. 


58  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

on  them,  implant  them  in  his  heart,  and  act  according 
to  them  in  all  his  atfairs.  It  is  then  he  shall  obtain 
bliss  and  a knowledge  of  God,  and  dispel  for  ever  the 
pain  of  transmigration.' 

The  Guru  thus  addressed  Krishan  and  Pammu 
who  also  had  sought  his  advice : ‘ Even  if  an 
ignorant  man  read  the  Guru's  hymns,  all  his  sins 
shall  be  remitted.  When  man  putteth  forward  the 
feet  of  desire,  he  shall  easily  obtain  divine  knowledge 
by  practice,  and  be  strengthened  in  the  service  of  the 
saints.  But  the  sinners  who  read  to  receive  honour 
from  men,  are  worthy  of  expulsion  from  all  societies. 
Though  they  cause  themselves  to  be  addressed  by 
every  one  as  gyanis,  yet  they  have  no  faith  or  divine 
knowledge.  Such  people  are  proud,  and  associate 
not  with  the  holy.  They  give  themselves  all  praise 
in  the  hope  of  receiving  money,  but  they  never  obtain 
divine  knowledge.  How  can  they  who  possess  such 
pride  enter  God’s  court  ? ’ 

There  was  an  ancient  Jogi  in  Garhshankar  in  the 
Jalandhar  district,  who  gave  out  that  Shiv  had 
promised  that  whoever  beheld  him  should  secure 
emancipation.  Many  persons  went  to  see  the  Jogi 
on  that  account  Tilak  alone  of  his  village  refused. 
The  Jogi  became  curious  to  know  the  cause,  and 
decided  that  he  would  go  to  see  him.  Tilak  at  the 
interview  put  a screen  between  himself  and  the  Jogi, 
so  that  the  latter  might  not  afterwards  say  that  Tilak 
had  seen  him  and  thus  obtained  emancipation.  Tilak 
told  him  that  all  his  own  devotion  was  centred  in 
the  Guru,  and  he  would  resort  to  no  one  else  for  his 
salvation.  The  Jogi  on  hearing  accounts  of  the 
Guru’s  teachings  conceived  a desire  to  visit  him, 
and  begged  Tilak  to  introduce  him.  Tilak  consented, 
and  both  proceeded  to  Amritsar  for  the  purpose. 

The  Jogi  opened  the  conversation  by  saying  to 
the  Guru,  ‘ If  Guru  Nanak  had  divine  power,  why 
hast  thou,  who  sayest  thou  art  the  sixth  Guru, 
not  preseryed  his  original  body  ? ’ By  this  the  Jogi 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  59 

desired  to  know  why  Guru  Nanak  had  not  survived, 
and  why  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  appoint  suc- 
cessors. The  Guru  rephed,  ‘ The  soul  putteth  on 
a body  like  clothes  which  when  old  fall  into  tatters. 
Kings  and  rich  men  take  off  their  old  clothes  and  put 
on  new  ones.  Poor  people  patch  and  stitch  their 
torn  clothes,  so  that  they  may  last  a little  longer ; 
but,  when  a man  hath  new  clothes,  why  should  he 
patch  and  wear  the  old  ones  ? ’ ^ The  Guru  in 
support  of  this  argument  quoted  the  following  verses 
of  his  father  : — 

He  who  remembereth  not  God,  leadeth  the  life  of  a snake  ; ^ 

So  liveth  the  infidel  who  forgetteth  the  Name. 

He  who  liveth  remembering  God  even  for  one  moment. 

Shall  last  for  hundreds  of  thousands  and  millions  of  days, 
yea,  for  ever.* 

The  Jogi  on  hearing  this  began  to  feel  humble.  He 
became  profuse  in  his  thanks  both  to  the  Guru  and 
Tilak  who  had  led  him  to  Amritsar.  He  then  begged 
the  Guru  to  make  him  like  Tilak,  a believer  in  one 
God,  and  grant  him  the  gift  of  faith.  The  Guru 
replied,  ‘ God  is  in  the  power  of  love,  but  love  is  not 
that  which  can  be  bought.  It  is  the  gift  of  God, 
and  is  bestowed  on  him  to  whom  He  showeth  mercy. 
If  thou  have  faith,  thou  shalt  obtain  what  thou 
prayest  for  from  Guru  Nanak’s  house.  The  store 
of  love  and  devotion,  a little  of  which  had  been 
granted  to  the  avatars,  jogis,  rikhis,  and  munis, 
was  entrusted  in  full  by  the  Creator  to  Guru  Nanak. 
He  hath  generously  distributed  it  with  open  hands 
and  from  him  no  account  shall  be  taken.  As  hath 
been  said : — 

He  to  whom  God  gave  a drop  of  nectar  became  im- 
movable and  immortal ; 

^ The  Guru  compares  the  Gurus  to  rich  men  who  change  their 
clothes,  the  Jogis  to  poor  men  who  patch  them. 

* He  may  live  long  like  the  snake,  but  he  possesses  no  knowledge 
of  God.  ® Gauri  Ashtapadi. 


6o 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  entrusted  a store  of  devotion  to  Guru  Nanak,  and 
then  took  no  account  from  him.^ 

The  Guru  on  hearing  of  the  pride  of  a certain 
reputed  holy  man,  said,  ‘ God  is  not  pleased  with 
pride  or  insolence.  See  how  humble  Guru  Nanak 
was,  and  what  lessons  of  humility  and  devotion  he 
gave  to  his  Sikhs.  Shaikh  Farid  did  painful  penance 
for  twelve  years  in  the  forest  living  on  tubers  and 
roots,  but  on  his  return  home  his  mother  found  he 
had  not  completely  renounced  pride.  He  was 
accordingly  remanded  to  the  forest  where  he  renewed 
his  penance  for  twelve  years  more,  this  time  with 
body  reversed  in  a well.  Not  satisfied  with  that,  he 
went  with  a wooden  cake  tied  over  his  stomach  for 
a third  term  of  twelve  years  in  search  of  saints.  In 
his  wanderings  he  met  a holy  man  whom  he  served. 
It  was  only  then  that  he  became  emancipated  from 
evil  passions.’ 

One  Sewa  Das,  a Brahman,  who  resided  at  Srinagar 
in  Kashmir,  and  who  had  been  converted  by  the 
Guru,  became  such  an  anchoret  that  he  retained  no 
love  for  his  relations.  When  reproached  for  this 
by  his  mother  Bhagbhari,  he  defended  himself  by 
repeating  the  following  hymn  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

Relations  abandon  one  when  alive  ; 

Can  any  one  when  dead  be  benefited  by  them  ? 

He  for  whom  it  is  so  predestined  remembereth  God  in 
his  soul  and  body. 

Mammon  is  of  no  avail — 

His  thirst  shall  never  depart 

Who  hath  partaken  of  the  poison  of  deception. 

Without  God’s  name  how  shall  one  cross  over 

The  dangerous  ocean  of  the  world  full  of  appalling  woe  ? 

By  meeting  the  company  of  saints,  and  worshipping 
God’s  name, 

O Nanak,  man’s  father’s  and  mother’s  families  shall  be 
saved.* 

^ Guru  Arjan,  Sorath.  * Gauri. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


6i 


Bhagbhari  made  a beautiful  robe  to  give  to  the 
Guru  when  he  visited  her  village.  She  did  not 
know  when  that  time  would,  arrive,  but  she  kept  the 
robe  for  him,  saying  that  as  he  was  a searcher  of 
hearts,  and  would  consequently  be  attracted  by  her 
devotion,  he  would  certainly  visit  her  before  she 
died.  The  Guru  accordingly  determined  to  proceed 
to  Kashmir  to  meet  her. 

On  proceeding  as  far  as  Chapamala  near  Sialkot, 
the  Guru  inquired  of  a Brahman,  whom  he  casually 
met,  where  he  could  find  water  to  drink  and  bathe  in. 
The  Brahman  carelessly  replied,  that  the  soil  was 
stony  and  water  was  very  scant.  Upon  this  the 
Guru  drove  a spear  into  the  ground,  and  it  is  said, 
a spring  of  pure  water  issued  forth.  The  Guru’s 
Sikhs  constructed  a tank  at  the  spring.  The  Brah- 
man was  quite  put  to  shame  by  the  power  of  the 
Guru,  confessed  that  he  had  been  drowning  in  the 
pride  of  caste,  and  asked  pardon  for  not  having 
recognized  the  Guru’s  greatness.  The  Guru  replied, 

‘ The  sins  of  him  who  repenteth  shall  be  par- 
doned.’ The  tank  was  called  Gurusar,  or  the  Guru’s 
tank. 

The  Guru  continued  his  journey  into  the  moun- 
tains of  Kashmir,  where  he  received  offerings  of 
delicious  apples,  and  admired  the  beautiful  scenery 
and  the  temperate  climate  of  the  country.  There 
he  met  Kattu  Shah,  a converted  Muhammadan  and 
faithful  Sikh  who  had  visited  him  at  Amritsar.  The 
Guru  passed  a night  in  his  house.  Thence  he  pro- 
ceeded to  Srinagar,  where  he  found  Sewa  Das  waiting 
for  him  and  meditating  on  God.  On  hearing  the 
neighing  of  the  Guru’s  horses,  Sewa  Das  came  forth 
and  found  the  Guru  already  at  his  door.  The  Guru 
was  received  with  great  demonstrations  of  respect 
and  affection.  Sewa  Das’s  mother  said  she  wor- 
shipped the  very  ground  on  which  the  Guru  trod, 
and  repeated  for  him  the  following  hymn  of  Guru 
Arjan: — 


62 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


May  I remember  the  Guru  at  every  breath  ! 

The  Guru  is  my  soul,  the  true  Guru  is  my  capital — 

May  I live  continually  beholding  the  Guru  ! 

May  I drink  the  water  in  which  I have  washed  his  feet ! 

May  I ever  bathe  in  the  dust  of  the  Guru’s  feet ! 

May  I thus  wash  away  the  filth  of  pride  attached  to 
preceding  births ! 

May  I fan  that  Guru 

Who  hath  put  forth  his  hand  and  saved  me  from  the 
great  fire ! 

May  I draw  water  for  the  house  of  that  Guru 

From  whom  I learned  the  way  of  finding  the  Unknowable  ! 

May  I continually  grind  com  for  the  house  of  that  Gura 

By  whose  favour  mine  enemies  have  all  become  friends  ! 

The  Guru  who  gave  me  life 

Hath  purchased  me  and  made  me  his  slave. 

May  I ever  and  ever  make  obeisance  to  that  Guru 

Who  caused  me  to  love  him  ! 

Saith  Nanak,  my  Guru  is  all  powerful ; 

He  hath  removed  my  troubles  and  anxieties,  my  fears, 
doubts,  and  sufferings.^ 

The  Guru  requested  Sewa  Das’s  mother  to  bring 
the  dress  she  had  made  for  him.  He  put  it  on,  and 
she  blessed  her  fate  that  she  had  been  so  honoured. 
She  began  to  praise  the  Guru  for  his  condescension 
and  repeated  to  him  the  following  hymn  of  Rav 
Das  : — 

Who  but  Thee,  my  Jewel,  could  do  such  a thing  ? 

Cherisher  of  the  poor,  Lord  of  the  earth.  Thou  hast  put 
over  my  head  the  umbrella  of  spiritual  sovereignty^ 

Saying  this  she  drank  some  of  the  water  in  which 
the  Guru  had  washed  his  feet.  Her  son  also  partook 
of  the  same  beverage,  and  the  remainder  she  sprinkled 
over  her  house.  She  cooked  with  her  own  hands 
for  the  Guru  as  long  as  he  remained  her  guest. 

The  Guru  was  visited  by  crowds  of  Kashmiris, 

^ Gauri  Ashtapadi.  * Maru. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  63 

men  and  women,  both  from  Srinagar  and  the  sur- 
rounding villages,  and  many  embraced  Sikhism. 
The  Guru  satisfied  their  .spiritual  necessities  by 
preaching  to  them  the  cardinal  virtues,  and  their  tem- 
poral necessities  by  feeding  them  from  his  ever  open 
kitchen.  A very  remarkable  circumstance  is  said 
to  have  occurred  during  the  Guru’s  stay  in  Srinagar. 
A company  of  Sikhs  was  coming  from  a ^stant  village 
with  offerings  of  honey  for  the  Guru.  On  the  way 
they  stayed  with  Kattu  Shah,  who  pressed  them  to 
let  him  have  some  of  the  offering.  They  refused, 
saying  that  they  could  not  offer  to  the  Guru  Kattu 
Shah’s  leavings.  When  the  Sikhs  reached  the  Guru, 
the  honey  was  found  rotten  and  full  of  worms.  The 
Guru  said,  ‘ This  is  the  result  of  not  having  given 
to  my  Sikh  in  whom  is  the  spirit  of  the  Guru.’  He 
ordered  them  to  return  and  satisfy  Kattu  Shah. 
Upon  this,  it  is  said,  the  honey  became  fresh  and 
sweet  as  before.  The  Sikhs  remarked  on  the  dis- 
interestedness of  the  Guru,  who  preferred  one  of  his 
Sikhs  to  himself.  On  this  occasion  the  following 
hymns  of  the  fourth  Guru  were  sung  : — 

No  one  knoweth  the  secret  of  the  true  Guru’s  mind  or 
what  shall  please  him. 

The  true  Guru  pervadeth  the  hearts  of  his  Sikhs ; he  is 
pleased  with  him  who  loveth  them. 

As  the  true  Guru  telleth  them,  so  they  act  and  pray ; 
the  work  of  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  findeth  acceptance. 

No  Sikh  shall  approach  him  who  desireth  to  have  any- 
thing done  by  Sikhs  without  the  true  Guru’s  order. 

A Sikh  will  work  for  him  who  heartily  worketh  for  the 
true  Guru. 

A Sikh  would  never  approach  him  who  cometh  and  goeth 
to  men  for  deception. 

Nanak  proclaimeth  God’s  decree,  that  the  creature  who 
doeth  an5^hing  without  propitiating  the  true  Guru  shall 
suffer  great  misery.^ 


^ Gauri  ki  War  I. 


64  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

When  God’s  saints  are  praised,  it  is  God’s  glory. 

God  is  only  pleased  with  His  own  praises  when  His  saint 
is  congratulated.^ 

The  Guru  is  a Sikh,  and  the  Sikh  is  a Guru ; they  are 
both  one,  but  it  is  the  Guru  who  giveth  instruction. 

He  putteth  the  s|)ell  of  God’s  name  in  the  heart,  O Nanak, 
and  then  God  is  easily  obtained. 

While  the  Guru  was  in  Srinagar,  Bhagbhari  fixing 
her  thoughts  on  him  blended  her  spirit  with  her 
Creator.  He  built  a temple  before  his  depar- 
ture, and  charged  Sewa  Das  to  remain  and  preach 
the 'true  faith.  The  Guru  returned  to  the  Pan  jab 
by  Baramula  on  the  river  Jihlam.  The  next  day 
he  visited  the  spot  where  the  renowned  Rikhi 
Kashyap  had  dwelt,  and  where  Vishnu  was  said  to 
have  assumed  the  incarnation  of  a dwarf.  Thence  the 
Guru  proceeded  to  Gujrat  in  the  Panjab.  The  people 
of  that  city  were  so  satisfied  with  their  own  priest 
Shah  Daula  that  they  only  laughed  at  the  Guru’s 
dress,  appearance,  and  retinue. 

Shah  Daula  went  to  visit  the  Guru  and  expressed 
his  deep  regret  for  the  offensive  remarks  made  by 
his  fellow-citizens.  He  insisted  on  the  Guru  staying 
a night  with  him.  The  Guru  was  pleased  with  his 
affection  emd  devotion  and  said,  ‘ Gujrat  is  a city 
of  mockers.  Shah  Daula  is  God’s  faqir.’  Shah 
Daula’s  spiritual  position  was  strengthened  and 
enhanced  by  the  Guru’s  visit,  instruction  and 
patronage.'* 

The  Guru  thence  proceeded  to  Wazirabad  and 
thence  to  Hafizabad,  both  in  the  present  district  of 
Gujranwala.  In  Hafizabad  he  was  hospitably  received 

* Sorath  ki  War. 

* Shah  Daula  was  believed  to  have  attained  such  illumination  of 
mind  that  he  could  discover  hidden  treasure.  His  successors  at  Gujrat 
now  produce  a class  of  men  with  small  heads  who  are  let  out  to  beg. 
For  an  account  of  Shah  Daula  see  the  Khuldsat-uUTawarikh, 

* Pandit  Tara  Singh’s  Gur  Tiraih  Sangrah, 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  65 

by  a Sikh  called  Karm  Chand.  The  Guru  read  the 
J’apji  to  him  and  explained  its  meaning,  objects,  and 
advantages.  Karm  Chand  learning  from  the  Guru 
the  esoteric  meaning  of  the  hymns  of  the  Granth 
Sahib  obtairied  salvation  during  life.  The  Guru 
thence  proceeded  to  a village  called  Muttu  Bhai, 
sixteen  miles  south  of  Hafizabad,  to  whose  inhabi- 
tants he  communicated  the  principles  of  his  religion. 
There  he  remained  for  some  time. 

In  the  town  of  Mandiali,  about  five  miles  from 
Lahore,  there  dwelt  a Sikh  called  Dwara,  His  wife 
Bhagan  was  a woman  of  great  natural  endowments. 
They  had  an  only  (laughter,  modest  and  pious,  known 
among  the  Sikhs  as  Marwahi ; but  also  called  Maha- 
devi.  In  proportion  as  she  had  been  dear  to  her 
parents  in  her  infancy,  so  distressed  did  she  render 
them  now  by  her  enforced  celibacy.  Dwara  had  a 
Sikh  friend  who  advised  him  to  wed  his  daughter  to 
the  Guru,  of  whom  he  uttered  high  praises  as  an 
inducement  to  the  alliance.  Dwara  accordingly  dis- 
patched marriage  presents  which  reached  the  Guru 
in  Muttu  Bhai.  The  Guru  graciously  accepted  them 
and  dispatched  his  own  return  presents  by  Dwara’s 
agents.  The  marriage  was  afterwards  duly  solemnized 
in  Mandiali  with  great  pomp  and  ceremony. 


Chapter  VII 

Bhai  Langaha  arrived  from  Lahore  with  informa- 
tion for  the  Guru — ‘ My  lord,  thy  father  and  grand- 
father constructed  a temple  and  other  sacred  build- 
ings in  Lahore.  Religious  services  are  duly  per- 
formed there,  and  travelling  strangers  are  received 
and  treated  with  hospitality.  The^  Qazi  of  Lahore  is 
now  jealous  of  thy  fame.  When  he  findeth  oppor- 
tunity he  maketh  representations  to  the  Emperor 
that  our  sacred  buildings  should  be  dismantled  and 
mosques  built  on  their  site.  Thy  friend  Wazir  Khan, 


66 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


hdwever,  is  still  alive  • lind  impedeth  the.  Qazi’s 
designs.’  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Tlte-  dharmsal  .ifc 
God’s  place.  The  fool  'vdio  \Visheth  its  end  shall  be 
quickly  uprooted.  The  Guru’s  dharmsal  shall  be 
ever  permanent,  God  hath  rendered  its . foundation 
immovable.  Relying  on  Him  continue  to  dispense 
the  Guru’s  hospitahty.’  Bhai  Langaha  then  re- 
turned to  Lahore,  and  the  Guru  at  the  same  time 
prepared  to  leave  Mandiali. 

Thence  the  Guru  proceeded  to  Talwandi,  by  this 
time  called  Nankana,  the  birthplace  of  Guru  Nanak, 
and  visited  the  scenes  of  his  miracles  there.  The 
Nimani  fair,  called  by  the  Hindus  the  Nirjala  Ikadashi, 
held  on  the  nth  day  of  the  light  half  of  the  month 
of  Jeth,  was  at  its  height  at  the  time.  The  Sikhs  still 
observe  this  fair  in  commemoration  of  the  Guru’s 
visit.  Thence  the  Guru  proceeded  to  Madar,  where 
Guru  Arjan  was  said  to  have  left  his  shoes  after 
having  touched  the  Sikh  Kidara  with  them  for 
tubercles  on  the  neck. 

The  Guru  next  went  to  Manga  in  the  Lahore 
district  to  see  the  tree  under  which  Guru  Nanak 
had  sat.  Thence  he  proceeded  to  Amritsar  where 
as  usual  great  rejoicings  were  held  on  his  return. 

His  wife  Damodari  presented  the  Guru  with 
another  child,  this  time  a daughter.  Among  the 
Sikhs  a name  is  given  to  a new-born  child  by  a process 
of  divination.  The  Granth  Sahib  is  opened  and  the 
initial  letter  of  the  first  word  of  the  last  hymn  on  the 
right  page  becomes  the  initial  of  the  child’s  name. 
The  Guru’s  daughter  was  thus  named  Viro. 

Bainda  Khan,  who  had  been  recruited  at  Kar- 
tairpur,  was  continually  pampered  to  increase  his 
strength.  He  could  raise  the  trunk  of  a tree  weighing 
ten  mans  ^ and  lift  two  young  buffaloes.  He  could 
w'ithOut  the  aid  of  rope  or  bridle  arrest  a horse 
running  at  full  speed.  No  wrestler  would  engage 
tvith'him.'  ^ ....  1 

Abcnit  Sttof  pountfs  avoirdupois.  ’ 


LIFE  OF  GOKU  HAR  GOBIND  67 

■ In  Har,  Sambat  1674,  Marwahi  gave  birth  to  a son 
Whokn  the  Guru  called  Sutaj  Mai.  Nanaki,  the  Guru’s 
second  wife,  represented  to  the  Guru  that  she  had  no 
offspring.  The  Guru  asked  her  to  have  patience 
and  promised  that  a son  of  hers  should  one  day  sit 
on  the  Guru’s  throne.  On  Monday  the  i6th  day  of 
Maghar,  Sambat  1675  (a.d.  1618),  she  gave  birth  tO 
her  first  son  who  was  called  Ani  Rai. 

One  Rama  of  Batala  on  seeing  the  child  Gurditta 
the  Guru’s  eldest  born  in  his  father’s  lap,  was  pleased 
and  thought  what  an  excellent  husband  the  boy 
Would  make  for  his  daughter.  He  was,  however, 
disheartened  by  the  thought  that  he  himself  was 
only  a poor  man,  and  the  Guru  before  whom  em- 
perors and  kings  bowed  was  great  and  famous. 
What  alliance  could  there  be  between  an  elephant 
and  an  ant,  an  eagle  and  a sparrow  ? Having, 
however,  thought  of  the  Guru’s  other  humble 
alliances  after  the  rejection  of  a minister’s  daughter, 
Rama  decided  on  offering  his  daughter  as  a future 
wife  for  the  Guru’s  son  Gurditta.  The  Guru  con- 
sulted his  mother,  who  gave  it  as  her  advice  that  the 
daughter  of  such  an  excellent  Sikh  ought  not  to  be 
rejected.  The  Guru  then  consented  to  the  union. 
The,  ardas  (supplication)  was  read,  and  Rama’s  mar- 
riage presents  duly  placed  before  Gurditta. 

^e  of  the  main  occupations  of  elderly  Oriental 
ladies  is  to  contrive  matrimonial  alliances  for  their 
young  relations.  In  process  of  time,  as  Viro  the 
Guru’s  daughter  by  Damodari  was  growing  up,  the 
Guru’s  mother  suggested  to  him  that  he  ought  to 
search  for  a spouse  for  her.  The  Guru  replied  that 
God  would  settle  all  such  things.  At  the  same  time 
he  did  not  forget  his  mother’s  suggestion.  At  his 
lev6e  one  .morning  he  saw  a man  in  dirty  clothes 
standing  with  his  son  at  a distance.  The  Guru 
noticed  1 something  noble  concealed  under  the  man’s 
otherwise  unpromising  exterior,  and  beckoned  him 
to  approach.  The  Guru  inejuired  his  residence  and 


68 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


status.  He  replied  that  his  name  was  Dharma 
and  his  son  was  called  Sadhu.  They  were  residents 
of  the  village  of  Malha,  and  had  little  in  the  way  of 
worldly  wealth.  Dharma  politely  added  that  his 
son  was  the  gift  of  the  Guru  and  consequently  the 
Guru’s  servant.  They  had  both  come  to  pay  him 
their  respects  and  solicit  his  blessing.  The  Guru 
seated  Sadhu  near  him  and  without  further  con- 
sideration sent  to  his  private  apartments  for  marriage 
presents.  He  put  them  in  God’s  name  into  the 
boy’s  lap.  Dharma  was  surprised  and  confused 
at  this  unexpected  accession  of  honour,  and  said  to 
the  Guru,  ‘ Honour  of  the  unhonoured,  where  is 
a drop  of  water  and  where  is  the  ocean  ? Where  is 
the  ant  and  where  is  the  elephant  ? I am  a poor 
creature  and  thou  art  the  king  of  kings.’  The 
Guru  replied,  ‘ In  the  Guru’s  house  this  hath  ever 
been  the  rule,  that  he  whom  nobody  knoweth  be- 
cometh  conspicuous.  Have  no  anxiety,  remain 
humble  as  before,  and  everything  shall  prosper.’ 
The  Guru’s  mother  had  not  been  consulted  as  to 
the  status  of  the  proposed  bridegroom,  and  when 
told  what  the  Guru  had  done,  did  not  fail  to  give 
emphatic  expression  to  her  adverse  opinion.  ‘ What 
hast  thou  seen  in  him  ? I hear  he  is  a very  poor 
man.’  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Mother  dear,  God  will 
act  for  the  best.  The  bridegroom  is  good  and  of 
good  family.  Father  and  son  are  Sikhs,  and  as 
for  wealth  there  is  no  deficiency  in  the  Guru’s  store- 
house.’ 

On  Wednesday  at  the  full  moon  in  the  mcmth  of 
Kartik,  Sambat  1677,  Nanaki  gave  birth  to  another 
son.  The  midwife  praised  his  qualities,  and  the 
Guru’s  mother  was  delighted.  When  all  the  cere- 
monifes  attendant  on  childbirth  were  completed,  the 
child  was  called  Atal  Rai.  The  Guru  on  seeing 
him  uttered  this  prophecy : ‘ He  shall  be  absorbed 
in  fixed  (atal)  contemplation,  be  a benefactor . to 
mankind,  restore  life  to  the  dead,  crown  his  life 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  69 

mth.i  glory,  and  after  death  attain  the  highest 
position  in  God’s  court.’ 

A Sikh  named  Mihra  resided  at  Bakala,  a town 
near  the  river  Bias.  He  built  a mansion  for  the 
accommodation  of  the  Guru,  and  went  to  Amritsar 
with  the  object  of  inviting  him.  The  Guru  gave 
him  no  definite  promise,  but  said  he  would  come  at 
some  time.  Mihra  then  went  to  wait  on  the  Guru’s 
mother,  expecting  a more  satisfactory  answer  from  her, 
and  hoping  she  would  prevail  on  the  Guru  to  accept 
his  invitation.  It  was  the  time  of  the  wedding  of 
her  grandson  Gurditta  to  Natti,  also  called  Nihalo, 
daughter  of  Rama,  and  she  was  in  a favourable 
mood  to  listen  to  a request.  She  at  once  consented 
to  go  to  Bakala,  told  Mihra  to  proceed  thither, 
and  she  would  soon  follow  with  her  son  the  Guru. 
The  Guru,  on  consideration,  thought  it  proper  to 
yield  to  his  mother  and  accept  the  invitation.  He 
was  in  due  course  received  by  Mihra  and  the  other 
inhabitants  of  the  village  with  great  respect  and 
rejoicing. 

After  three  days  Ganga  the  Guru’s  mother  in- 
formed him  that  as  she  had  now  seen  her  daughters- 
in-law,  and  her  grandchildren,  it  was  time  for  her 
to  depart.  She  said  that  she  had  no  further  desires 
on  earth  to  gratify,  and  would  go  to  dwell  at  her  hus- 
band’s feet.  She  gave  orders  that  as  Guru  Arjan’s 
body  was  thrown  into  the  Ravi  near  Lahore,  so 
should  hers  be  thrown  into  the  Bias.  Then  collect- 
ing her  thoughts,  repeating  the  Japji,  the  Sukhmani, 
and  the  Anand,  and  concentrating  her  attention 
on  Guru  Nanak,  she  went  to  her  final  repose  on 
the  ist  day  of  Jeth,  Sambat  1678  (a.d.  1621).  Four 
Sikhs  took  her  body  into  the  Bias  until  the  water 
reached  their  necks,  and  there  allowed  it  to  be  borne 
on  the  stream. 

When  the  Guru  after  his  mother’s  death  was 
preparing  to  return  to  Amritsar,  Mihra  pressed  him 
to  remain  in  Bakala  and  there  celebrate  the  cere- 


70  ' THE  SIKH  RETIGICN  ^ 

monies  of  the  tenth  day  after  his  mother’s  death, 
that  is,  put  on  a turban  and  affix  a patch  to  his  fore« 
head  according  to  ancient  customs.  The  GUru 
replied,  ‘The  patch  of  Gunidom  shall  be  applied 
here  to  the  forehead  of  the  ninth  Guru.  Thou  shalt 
survive  till  then,  and  thy  desire  to  behold  his  instal- 
lation shall  be  gratified.’ 

The  Guru  went  to  Amritsar  without  waitings  for 
the  ceremonies  of  the  tenth  day.  When  his  wives 
and  other  relations  heard  of  his  mother’s  death, 
they  were  naturally  much  grieved  for  the  loss  of  such 
a capable  and  affectionate  lady.  They  said,  ‘ We 
had  no  anxiety  as  long  as  she  presided  over  uS. 
Who  will  now  give  us  counsel  and  consolation  ? ’ 
The  Guru  by  way  of  solacing  his  people  recited  the 
Alahanian  or  Lamentations  of  Guru  Nanak.  i 

Bhai  Budha  who  had  gone  to  Amritsar  to  condole 
with  the  Guru  on  his  mother’s  death,  took  an  op- 
portunity of  making  a personal  representation  to 
him,  ‘ Thy  mother  hath  gone  to  heaven.  I see  thee 
girding  on  thine  arms  and  preparing  for  battle. 
My  body  hath  grown  old.  I am  no  longer  strong  for 
combat,  and  must  return  to  my  forest  home  as  before.’ 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ I am  but  fulfilling  thy  prophecy 
that  I should  wear  two  swords,  and  twist  the  necks 
of  the  Mughals.  Thou  mayest  go  to  live  where  and 
how  thou  pleasest.’ 

The  Guru  practised  all  martial  exercises  and  fcoh 
lected  arms  of  every  description.  He  hunted, 
witnessed  exhibitions  of  strength  by  Painda  Khan^ 
and  occasionally  visited  Kaulan  to  afford  her 
spiritual  consolation. 

Aikother  son,  who  was  named  Teg  Bahadur,  was 
born  to  Naiiaki  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  dark  half  Of 
Baisakh,  Sambat  1679  (a.d.  1622).  It  was  prophOsied 
at  his  birth,  that  he  should  restrain  his  mind,  subdue 
his  passions,  and  beget  a powerful  arms-bearing  and 
warrior  son,  who  would  promote  religion,  convert 

jackaiVs  \n\,o  and  sparrows  iatO  haW^S.  > ' ‘ 


LIFE  OF  GU®U  HAR  GOBIND  71 

. There  was  a Sikh  called  Gurumdkh  who  was 
married  to  a devoted  wife.  They  were  ha{)py  in 
every,  respect  except  that  they  had  no  children. 
They  requested  the  Sikhs  to  pray  for  them,  that  their 
desires  might  be  fulfilled.  They  were  advised  to  serve 
Sikhs  in  every  way,  and  th^  did  so.  The  result  was 
that  they  had  a son  in  due  course.  When  he  was 
ten  years  of  age,  his  parents  died  within  a short 
interval  of  each  other.  The  son  was  brought  up 
without  a trade  or  profession  of  any  sort,  and  had  to 
sell  his  household  property  to  maintain  himself.  No- 
body would  pay  what  was  due  to  him ; and  if  he 
owed  anything,  he  had  to  pay  twice  or  thrice  more 
than  was  just,  or,  in  default,  pledge  his  house  and 
movables.  At  last  it  came  to  pass  that  he  found 
himself  without  house,  or  home,  or  property  of  any 
description  except  one  solitary  kauri.  He  took  this 
humble  coin  to  the  market-place,  but  no  one  would 
give  him  food  for  it.  His  stomach  was  collapsing 
with  hunger,  and  he  began  to  weep  and  wail,  ‘ I was 
my  parents’  darling,  but  they  gave  me  no  education. 
How  shall  I earn  my  living  ? ’ While  thus  complain- 
ing a company  of  Sikhs  singing  hymns  was  passing 
by.  One  of  them  asked  him  why  he  was  thus  stand- 
ing all  forlorn.  Having  told  his  story,  he  was  urged 
to  join  the  party  and  proceed  to  Amritsar  to  seek 
the  Guru’s  protection.  He  would  obtain  mainten- 
ance from  the  Guru's  kitchen,  for  did  not  Guru 
Arjan  say 

My  brethi'en,  eat  food  to  satiety. 

And  meditate  on  the  ambrosial  Name  in  your  hearts.* 

Apart  from  maintenance  the  youth  would  obtain 
spiritual  advantage  by  visiting  the  Guru.  He  ac- 
cordingly joined  the  Sikhs,  and  did  menial  service 
for  them  on  the  road.  When  not  so  occupied  he  was 
committing  the  Guru’s  hymns  to  memory.  So  ab- 
sorbed was  he  in  his  devotions,  that  he  forgot  on 

* Biiiwal. 


72 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


one  occasion  to  proceed  with  his  party.  He  was 
found  wandering  by  a Pathan  trooper  and  inipressed 
to  carry  his  Idggage.  It  was  then  the  era  of  Musab 
man  domination,  and  no  one  had  the  course  to  set 
him  free.  He  was  lamenting  his  fate;.in  havii^  parted 
from  the  Sikhs,  and  being  thus  delayed  in  seeing  the 
Guru,  when  he  accidentally  met  a masand.  Having 
saluted  him  he  placed  his  kauri  before  him,  and 
begged  him  to  offer  it  to  the  Guru  and  supplicate 
him  to  grant  an  interview  to  a Sikh  in  distress.  The 
masand  took  the  kauri,  blessed  the  son  of  Gurumukh, 
and  proceeded  on  his  way. 

The  youth  and  the  Pathan  went  on  until  they  were 
wearied  from  the  heat  and  the  journey.  The  Pathan 
espied  a clump  of  trees  and  an  adjacent  well  where 
he  stopped  to  take  rest  and  quench  his  thirst.  As 
he  stood  on  the  edge  of  the  well  the  masonry  gave 
way,  and  he  was  launched  into  the  water  with  tons 
of  masonry  on  his  head.  This  was  understood  to  be 
a punishment  from  heaven  for  his  tyranny  in  im- 
pressing a devout  Sikh,  and  causing  him  to  undergo 
excessive  hardship.  Gurumukh’s  son  began  to  con- 
sider what  he  was  to  do  with  the  Pathan’ s luggage. 
He  did  not  know  his  name  or  address.  He  therefore 
decided  that  the  things  were  a windfall  for  himself. 
He  opened  the  bundle  and  found  some  clothes,  jewels, 
and  one  thousand  gold  muhars.  He  tied  them  all  up 
again,  and,  taking  them  with  him  on  the  Pathan’s 
horse,  set  out  for  Amritsar.  When  darkness  was 
coming  on  he  sought  a night’s  lodging,  and  was  qqn- 
ducted  to  the  house  of  a Hindu.  The  Hindu  hap- 
pened to  have  gone  abroad,  leaving  his  wife  at 
home.  The  visitor  handed  her  a rupee  and  requested 
her  to  bake  him  two  cakes.  She  took  the  money, 
ol^rved  his  bundle,  and  at  once  made  up  her 
mind  if  possible  to  relieve  him  of  whatever  he  was 
carrying.  She  laid  him  on  a bed  in  the  deudhi,  or 
outer  reception-room,  had  his  horse  tied  up,  and 
began  to  prepare  his  dinner.  She  made  him  a savoury 


LIFE  OF  emu  H'AR  GOBIND 


73 


dish,  in  which  she  mixed  a potent  narcotic  and  placed 
it  before  him.  He  took  a morsel  of  the  food,  and  re- 
peating ' Wahguru  put  it  into  his  mouth.  As  the 
bard  said  in  one  of  his  verses  in  praise  of  Guru 
Amar  Das: — - 

The  poison  was  changed  into  nectar  when  he  uttered 
the  True  Guru’s  name. 

The  hostess  called  out  to  her  guest  every  half-hour, 
and  was  astonished  at  hearing  him  speak  in  the 
ordinary  manner.  Before  composing  himself  to  sleep 
he  repeated  the  Sohila  with  great  devotion. 

Foiled  in  this  attempt,  the  hostess  thought  of 
another  plan  whereby  she  might  rob  her  guest.  She 
persuaded  him,  on  the  pretext  of  safety,  to  go  and 
sleep  near  his  horse  and  leave  his  saddle-bags  and 
bundle  with  her.  She  represented  that  if  anything 
were  stolen  from  him  she  would  get  a bad  name ; 
hence  her  thoughtfulness  for  him  and  herself.  When 
she  found  the  Sikh’s  property  in  her  possession,  she 
hastened  to  a burglar  who  was  a lover  of  hers,  and 
requested  him  to  come  and  kill  the  man  who  was 
sleeping  in  her  reception-room.  She  said,  ‘ He  is  my 
enemy,  and  it  is  proper  to  kill  him;  I will  never  forget 
the  favour,  and  I will  besides  substantially  reward 
thee.’  Having  received  a promise  from  the  burglar, 
she  returned  home  and  went  to  sleep.  By  accident 
her  husband  returned  home  that  very  night.  On 
entering  the  deudhi,  and  seeing  a stranger,  he  in- 
quired who  he  was  and  his  business.  Gurumukh’s  son 
informed  him.  The  owner  of  the  house,  who  was  a 
kind  and  considerate  man,  took  him  within,  the  better 
to  show  his  hospitality,  and  went  himself  to  sleep  in 
the  deudhi.  At  the  endbf  the  night  the  burglar  came 
and  killed  the  master  of  the  house,  believing  him  to 
be  the  strange  guest,  and  then  absconded.  In  the 
morning  it  was  ascertained  that  it  was  the  newly 
arrived  husband  who  had  been  killed,  and  not  the 
wayfaring  Sikh.  The  victim’s  wife  began  to  weep 


74 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


and  mourn,  her  husband!  wiS' gone,  and  she  found 
herself  in  the  painful  position  of  ah'  Indmn  widow. 

Meantime  the  guest  awoke^  and  heartily  thanking 
the  Guru  for  his  escape  took  up  his  saddle^ha^s  and 
bundle,  mounted  his  horse,  and  lost  no  time  in  de- 
parting. On  his  escape  he  devoutly  repeated  the 
following  hymn  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

No  hot  wind  toucheth  him  who  is  under  the  protection 
of  the  Supreme  God. 

Round  about  me  is  God’s  circle,  so  no  trouble  can  afflict 
me,  my  brethren. 

I have  met  the  perfect  true  Guru  who  hath  reconciled 
with  God. 

He  gave  me  God’s  name  as  my  medicine ; I have  fixed 
mine  attention  on  the  one  God. 

That  Preserver  hath  preserved  me,  and  cured  all  my 
maladies. 

Saith  Nanak,  mercy  hath  been  extended  to  me,  and  God 
hath  become  my  helper.^ 

In  the  Guru’s  court  it  was  usual  for  the  masands  to 
bring  the  offerings  of  the  Sikhs  and  hand  them  to  an 
officer  called  Ardasia  or  chamberlain.  He  used  to 
call  out  the  giver’s  name  and  the  nature  of  the  offering 
and  present  it  to  the  Guru.  When  it  came  to  the 
presentation  of  Gurumukh’s  son’s  kauri,  the  Guru 
said,  ‘ He  hath  sent  this  kauri  with  faith,  and  hath 
received  much  more  than  a thousandfold  from  God. 
He  is  now  on  his  way  hither.’  While  the  Guru  was 
speaking,  and  the  masand  who  had  brought  the  kaiiri 
was  wondering  how  the  Pathan  could  have  parted 
with  his  impressed  carrier,  the  Sikh  arrived  and  ad- 
dressed the  Guru,  ‘ O true  king,  this  horse,  these  arms, 
clothing,  and  gold  coins  are  all  thine.  It  is  thou  who 
hast  freed  me  from  the  tyranny  of  the  Pathan,  .the 
poison  of  the  evil  woman,  and  the  sword  of  the  robber; 
and  now  thou  hast  granted  me  a sight  of  thee,  and 
thfe  of  bathing  in  thine  ambrosial  tank.’ 

^ Bilawai.  * < 


LIFE  OF  GVmj  HAR  GOBIND 


75 


The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Thou  hast  with  faith  offered  a 
kauri  in  return  for  which  Guru  Nanak  hath  granted 
thee  a treasure.  The  hofsfe,  atms,  and  money 
are  all  thine.'  The  Guru  told  the  youth  to  trade 
with  the  property,  do  an  honest  business,  give  a 
tithe . of  his  profits  to  the  Sikh  cause,  and  continue 
his  religious  duties  as  before.  On  the  evil  woman 
who  9aused  her  husband's  death,  a poet  composed 
the  following 

accursed  is  the  wealth  hoarded  by  a miser  without 
generosity, 

As  accursed  is  a learned  man’s  pride  which  benefiteth 
not  the  world, 

As  accursed  is  beauty  without  wisdom,  and  accursed  the 
wisdom  which  praiseth  not  God, 

As  accursed  is  the  tongue  without  God’s  name,  as  accursed 
is  the  hand  which  serveth  not  His  saints, 

As  accursed  are  the  ears  which  hear  not  God’s  name,  as 
accursed  is  the  king  whose  minister  is  evil. 

As  accursed  is  life  without  association  with  saints,  so  is 
woihan’s  life  accursed  without  a husband. 

And  on  the  Sikh  who  offered  a kauri  Bhai  Gur 
Das  composed  the  following  : — 

When  man  goeth  one  step  towards  the  protection  of  the 
Guru’s  feet,  the  Guru  advanceth  a million  steps  to  meet 
him* 

The  true  Guru  ever  remembereth  him  with  love,  who 
even  once  remembereth  a particle  of  the  Guru’s  teaching. 

The  Guru  shall  bestow  all  wealth  on  him  who  offereth 
even  one  k^uri  with  faith,  devotion,  an4  love. 

The  true  Guru  is  an  ocean  of  compassion  ; unfathom- 
able is  the  knowledge  of  his  greatness  ; I bow,  I bow,  I bow 
to  the  Guru  whose  glory  is  indescribable.^ 


^ Gur  Das's  Kahii, 


76 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Chapter  VIII 


Sudden  intelligence  arrived  that  the  Emperor 
Jahangir  had  died  in  Kashmir,  whereupon  his  son 
Shah  Jahan  immediately  assumed  regal  power. 
The  Guru  knowing  the  future  addressed  Strife, 
as  an  evil  agency.  ‘ Go  where  thy  companions 
falsehood,  worldly  love,  and  pride,  have  their  dwel- 
lings, and  be  happy  with  them.  Thou  shalt  have 
enough  blood  there  to  fill  the  skull  thou  carriest.’ 

When  Damodari's  daughter  was  to  be  married  to 
the  son  of  Dharma,  she  wished  to  invite  all  her 
relations  on  the  occasion,  but  the  Guru  would  not 
agree,  because  he  had  a presentiment  of  hostilities 
on  the  part  of  the  new  Emperor.  He  knew  that 
Mihrban  (Prithia’s  son)  and  Karm  Chand  (son  of 
Chandu)  had  poisoned  Shah  Jahan’ s mind  against 
him.  The  Sikhs  were  all  distressed  at  this,  and  said 
to  him,‘  If  thou  invite  not  thy  relations  at  such  a time, 
how  shall  they  be  known  as  thy  relations  ? ’ The 
Sikhs  not  knowing  the  Guru’s  real  motive  considered 
that  he  was  too  much  occupied  with  Muhammadans 
and  military  exercises.  It  is  true  that  he  excessively 
pampered  Painda  Khan  in  every  way,  and  used  fre- 
quently to  present  him  with  offerings  made  by  the 
Sikhs.  This  caused  great  heart-burning  to  others. 
It  was  decided  that  a deputation  consisting  of  Bhais 
Tilak,  Tirath,  Niwala,  Krishan,  Tulsi,  Takhtu,  and 
others  should  wait  on  Bhai  Gur  Das,  now  an  old 
man,  possessing  much  influence  with  the  Guru,  and 
endeavour  to  persuade  him  to  remonstrate  with 
the  Guru  on  his  general  conduct.  On  this  occasion 
Bhai  Gur  Das  composed  the  following  ; — 


People  say  the  former  Gurus  used  to  sit  in  the  temple 
t\\e  present  Guru  remaineth  not  in  any  one  place. 

used  to  visit  the  former  Gurus ; 
rne  present  Guru  was  sent  into  the  fortress  by  the  Emperor. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  77 

In  former  times  the  Guru’s  darbar  could  not  contain  the 
sect ; the  present  Guru  leadeth  a roving  life  and  feareth 
nobody. 

The  former  Gurus  sitting  on  their  thrones  used  to  console 
the  Sikhs  ; the  present  Guru  keepeth  dogs  and  hunteth. 

The  former  Gurus  used  to  compose  hymns,  listen  to  them, 
and  sing  them ; the  present  Guru  composeth  not  hymns, 
or  listeneth  to  them,  or  singeth  them. 

He  keepeth  not  his  Sikh  followers  with  him,  but  taketh 
enemies  of  his  faith  and  wicked  persons  as  his  guides  and 
familiars. 

I say,  the  truth  within  him  cannot  possibly  be  concealed  ; 
the  true  Sikhs  like  the  bumble-bees  are  enamoured  of  his 
lotus  feet. 

He  supporteth  a burden  intolerable  to  others  and  asserteth 
not  himself.^ 

Bhai  Gur  Das  told  the  Sikhs  that,  though  the  Guru 
was  blameless,  yet  in  order  to  silence  his  detractors 
it  was  advisable  to  send  for  Bhai  Budha  to  apprise 
the  Guru  of  the  scandal  that  had  arisen.  The  Sikhs 
accordingly  went  to  Bhai  Budha  in  the  forest  and 
represented  to  him  the  state  of  affairs.  They  found 
him  already  prepared  to  set  out  for  Amritsar.  The 
Guru  treated  him  with  marked  respect  and  seated 
him  near  him.  He  said  ‘ Bhai  Budha,  thy  body 
is  old,  but  thy  love  is  ever  young.  Why  hast  thou 
undertaken  such  a journey  in  this  hot  month  of 
Jeth  ? Tell  me  thine  object.’  Bhai  Budha  replied, 
‘Thou  art  like  the  Ganges,  like  the  sun,  and  like 
the  fire.  The  Ganges  swalloweth  corpses  and  bones 
of  the  countless  dead,  and  yet  remaineth  pure  ; the 
sun  draweth  towards  it  noxious  vapours,  and  yet 
remaineth  pure ; fire  burneth  and  consumeth  the 
dead,  and  yet  remaineth  pure.  Thou  art  like  all 
three.  The  Sikhs  seeing  thy  love  ior  sport  and  mili- 
tary exercises  fear  for  thee.  Wherefore  abandon 
them.’  The  Guru  laughed  and  replied,  ‘ I have  done 
: 1 War  XXVI. 


78  - 'THE  SIKH  ^RELIGION' 

nothing  improper  ; I am  only  obeying  thine  orders 
with  my  life^  and  improving  the  condition  of  my 
Sikhs.’  Upon  this  Bhai  Budha  returned  td  his 
forest  dwelling. 

The  Guru  once  in  a vision  beheld  his  father  Guru 
Arjan  surrounded  by  his  saints.  He  thought  that 
Guru  Arjan  thus  addressed  him — ‘ As  Guru  Nanak 
on  receiving  God’s  order  resigned  the  supply  office 
in  Sultanpur,  travelled  in  foreign  countries,  and 
preached  the  true  Name,  so  the  saints  who  are 
annoyed  by  the  unjust  acts  of  the  Turks,  pray  thee 
to  gird  on  thine  arms,  and  make  use  of  them  to 
good  effect  against  thine  enemies,  that  the  Sikhs 
may  abide  in  peace.’  Guru  Har  Gobind  replied, 

‘ The  words  of  the  saints  are  immutable.  What 
they  propose  God  accomplisheth.  I shall  be  engaged 
in  many  battles  in  which  enemies  and  oppressors 
shall  perish.’  The  Guru  on  awaking  took  his  bow 
and  quiver,  girded  on  his  two  swords,  his  daggers 
and  other  arms,  and  distributed  horses,  uniforms, 
armour,  shields,  and  guns  among  his  soldiers. 

A company  of  Sikhs  came  from  the  West  to  behold 
the  Guru,  and  present  him  with  offerings.  As  they 
were  hungry  and  weary,  the  Guru  desired  to  give 
th6m  their  dinner.  The  Guru’s  servants  represented 
that  dinner  had  already  been  served,  the  fires  were 
extinguished,  the-  cooks  had  all  dispersed,  and  even 
if  they  could  be  found,  it  would  be  very  late  to 
retire  for  rest  after  a second  dinner  had  been  pre- 
pared. The  Guru  then  bethought  him  of  a room  full 
of  sweets  collected  for  the  marriage  of  his  daughter, 
and  ordered  that  they  should  be  given  to  his 
visitors*.  The  key  of  the  room  was  With  DamodaH, 
th^  Guru’s  wife,  but  she  refused  to  give  it  up  of 
bestow  the  sweets  on  any  one  till  the  bridegroom’s 
party  had  partaken  of  them.  The  Guru  sent  to 
her  several  times,  but  she  obstinately  adhered  to 
her  determination.  The  Guru  then  gave  vent  tO 
his  sentiments — ‘ My  Sikhs  are  dearer  to  me  than 


LIFE  OF  GUMJ  WAR  GOBIND  79 

life.  Were  they  the  first  to  taste  the  sweets,  all 
obstacles  to  the  marriage  should  be  removed,  but  now 
the  Muhammadans  shall  come  and  possess  themse’ves 
of  them;  My  Sikhfe  are  like  a garden.  If’  its  trees 
remain  green  they  yield  flowers,  leaves,  and  wpod  for 
all  purposes.  Wherefore  we  shcaild  ever  take  care  to 
foster  Sikhs,  and  promote  their  comfort.  From  the 
days  of  Guru  Nanafc  down  to  my  father  the  fifth 
Guru,  it  hath  ever  been  the  practice  to  entertain  five 
Sikhs,  whenever  anything  of  importance  was  to  be 
done,  and  all  efforts  should  thus  prove  successful. 
When  wandering  Sikhs  come  to  my  house  and  go 
away  disappointed,  it  is  but  a just  requital  that  the 
sweets  should  fall  to  the  Muhammadans,  and  the 
marriage  be  interrupted.’  The  bystanders  began  to 
tremble,  but  none  of  them  durst  beg  the  Guru  to  recall 
his  curse.  Fortunately,  however,  at  that  time  a Sikh 
came  with  five  mans  of  sweets  as  a contribution  to 
the  marriage  feast.  The  Guru  distributed  the  offer- 
ing among  the  Sikhs  who  had  come  from  the  West, 
and  thus  succeeded  in  discharging  the  duties  of  hos- 
pitality. 

The  Emperor  Shah  Jahan  went  hunting  from 
Lahore  in  the  direction  of  Amritsar.  The  Guru  at 
the  same  time  was  similarly  occupied.  Both  hunting 
parties  unconsciously  approached  each  other,  but 
without  meeting.  The  Emperor  had  a white  hawk 
which  had  been  sent  him  as  a rare  present  from  the 
King  of  Iran.  As  the  Emperor  was  on  the  point  of 
returning  to  Lahore,  a Brahmani  duck  rose^  and  he 
with  his  own  hand  let  fly  the  hawk  in  putsuit.  The 
hawk  which  had  been  over  pampered  refused  to  strike, 
buti  began  to  play  with  the  bird.  The  Emperor  felt 
tired  and  did  riot  wait  to  capture  it,  but  hasted  on 
his  way  to  Lahore.  He  sent  his  huntsmen  with 
some  troops  to  search,  and  concluded  that  they  would 
bring  him  back  his  treasure.  They  went  wherever 
they  saw  the  duck  rising  before  the  hawk.  The  bird 
and  the^hawk  eventually  fled  in  the  direction  of  the 


8o 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Guru’s  party.  The  Sikhs  at  once  let  fly  a hawk  of 
their  own  which  seized  the  duck.  The  Emperoi^’s 
hawk  then  joined  in  the  seizure,  and  the  Sikhs  cAtight 
them  both.  They  were  pleased  to  behold  such  a 
beautiful  hawk,  and  congratulated  themselves  on  the 
acquisition.  They  decided  that  they  would  keep  it 
fcH*  themselves  since  it  had  sought  their  protection. 

When  the  royal  huntsman  and  his  troopers  arrived 
and  saw  the  hawk,  they  told  the  Sikhs  that  it  was 
theirs,  and  asked  that  it  should  be  given  them.  The 
Sikhs  refused  to  admit  the  ownership  of  men  who 
were  strangers  to  them,  and  said  that,  as  they  had 
caught  the  bird  with  difficulty  in  the  forest,  and  it 
had  no  owner,  they  claimed  it  as  their  prize.  The 
huntsman  replied,  ‘ Shah  Jahan  whose  glory  is  great, 
is  king  of  the  whole  world.  The  kings  of  all  lands 
bOw  before  him,  and  fear  him.  He  hath  left  nowhere 
a rebel,  and  hath  subjected  all  men  to  his  authority. 
Know  you  him  not  ? We  are  his  servants.  The 
hawk  alighted  here  before  our  arrival.  You  have 
caught  him,  and  made  him  your  own.  Give  him 
up  quickly,  displease  us  not,  or  the  Emperor  will  be 
angry.’  The  Sikhs  rejoined,  ‘We  will  not  give  up 
the  hawk  through  fear  of  the  Emperor.  Go  and 
make  a complaint  to  him  whose  power  you  so  vaunt.’ 

The  head  huntsman  renewed  the  remonstrance. 

‘ Fear  you  not  the  Emperor  ? Since  you  are  within 
his  cable-tow,  why  desire  to  behold  a real  exhibition  ? 
You  speak  like  intoxicated  persons,  and  know  not 
what  you  say.  Even  kings  who  have  thousands  of 
fighting  m*en  stand  with  clasped  hands  before  the 
Emperor,  and  fear  him  in  their  hearts.  If  you  give 
not  up  the  hawk,  how  shall  you  escape  ? Whither 
will  you  flee?  When  the  Emperor’s  army  cometh 
and  falleth  on  you  with  violence,  who  wUl  fight  on 
your  side?  Then  you  and  the  hawk  will  be  captured 
and  taken  away.  Ponder  on  my  words/  ' * 

^The  Sikhs  angrily  retorted,  ‘Coward,  why  quarrhl 
thus  ? Go  oft  with  thine  arms  in  safety;  Why  pro' 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  8i 

yoke  chastisement  for  thine  insolence  ? , We  shall 
see  if  the  hawk  belongeth  to  the  Emperor  or  to  us. 
Go  before  him  and  complain,  and  do  what  he  will 
tell  thee.  Stand  not  quarrelling  here.  If  thou  desire 
to  retain  thy  self-respect,  abandon  the  hawk  and  go. 
Otherwise  thou  shalt  leave  thine  arms  behind  thee,  and 
suffer  the  disgrace  thereof.’  As  the  altercation  waxed 
hotter  and  more  angry  language  was  exchanged, 
the  Sikh  warriors  called  to  arms,  and  inflicted  severe 
chastisement  on  the  Muhammadans.  They  who  sur- 
vived hastened  their  steps  to  Lahore  to  report  to  the 
Emperor  the  seizure  of  the  hawk  and  the  violence  of 
the  Sikhs.  Other  enemies  of  the  Guru  thought  it 
a good  opportunity  to  revive  the  charges  against  him, 
and  to  remind  the  Emperor  of  his  alleged  misdeeds. 
‘ The  Guru,’  they  said,  ‘ hath  now  crowned  the 
measure  of  his  iniquity  by  misappropriating  the 
Emperor’s  favourite  hawk,  and  his  Sikhs  have  slain 
several  of  the  bodyguard.’  The  Emperor  was  taunted 
with  apathy  and  advised  to  arrest  the  Guru  at  once, 
lest  he  should  seize  some  fort,  rise  in  rebellion  and 
defy  constituted  authority. 

The  Emperor  sent  for  Mukhlis  Khan,  one  of  his 
trusty  general  officers,  seated  him  near  him,  gave  him 
a dress  of  honour  of  great  value  and  a swift  and 
powerful  charger  with  golden  trappings,  and  ordered 
him  to  organize  a military  expedition  to  punish  the 
Sikhs.  Mukhlis  Khan  already  commanded  an  army 
of  seven  thousand  men,  and  he  was  empowered  to 
take  with  him  any  further  forces  he  might  require. 
He  was  to  bring  the  leader  of  the  Sikhs  and  the  hawk 
by  any  means  he  thought  expedient  to  the  Emperor  ; 
and  he  should  then  be  promoted  to  even  a higher 
position  than  he  had  previously  occupied.  Mukhlis 
Khan  told  the  Emperor  that  it  was  a very  easy  matter. 
At  the  very  moment  of  his  arrival  in  Amritsar  he 
would  arrest  the  Guru,  and  bring  him  before  his 
Majesty  without  having  to  resort  to  force  of  arms.; 

The  Sikhs:  of  . Lahore  hearing  of  the  contemplated 

G 


SIKH.  iV 


82 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


military  expedition  against  the  Guru  sent  a swift  mes- 
senger to  apprise  him  of  it.  The  messenger  reached 
Amritsar  in  the  evening.  There  was  a place  caUed 
Lohgarh,  or  the  iron  (strong]  fortress,  outside  the  city. 
It  was  really  a platform  raised  to  resemble  a species 
of  tower,  where  the  Guru  used  often  to  hold  his  court 
in  the  afternoon.  He  had  a high  wall  built  round  it, 
prepared  it  in  other  ways  for  defence,  and  posted 
within  the  enclosure  a small  detachment  of  twenty- 
five  men  in  anticipation  of  attack.  He  took  out  all 
his  weapons,  cleaned  and  sharpened  his  swords,  and 
distributed  them  among  his  troops.  Meantime,  there 
were  great  rejoicings  in  the  Guru’s  palace  on  account 
of  his  daughter’s  approaching  marriage,  and  women 
sang  the  marriage  songs  composed  by  the  Gurus. 

His  S.khs  told  the  Guru  that  a big  gun  was  neces- 
sary for  the  defence  of  Lohgarh.  The  Guru  replied, 

‘ There  is  a hollow  tree  lying  there  which  will  serve 
as  a cannon.’  It  is  said  that  from  the  hollow  tree 
thus  converted  into  a weapon  of  artillery  the  Sikhs 
subsequently  discharged  stones  in  such  a manner 
as  to  dismay  their  adversaries  and  seriously  thin 
their  ranks. 

The  Sikhs  and  their  officers  made  preparations, 
and  were  soon  ready  for  the  fray.  The  Guru  addressed 
his  commander-in-chief  Bhanu : ‘It  is  not  good 
to  have  the  fighting  near  our  homes,  let  the  battle 
be  fought  outside  our  city.  In  the  first  place,  the 
enemy  may  enter  our  houses  and  plunder  our  pro- 
perty, and  secondly,  we  may  kill  our  own  brave  men 
in  the  darkness.  It  is  better,  too,  that  our  families 
be  removed  for  safety  outside  the  city.  They  must 
only  take  with  them  the  first  articles  on  which  they 
can  lay  their  hands.’ 

Bhai  Niwala,  who  appears  to  have  been  an  elderly 
man,  went  into  the  Guru’s  private  apartments  and 
brought  forth  his  wives  and  children.  For  the 
approaching  marriage  everything  that  was  necessary 
had  been  stored  up,  but  there  was  no  time  now  to 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  83 

make  a nice  selection,  and  many  valuables  must  be 
left  behind.  The  twenty-five  brave  Sikhs  on  duty 
in  Lohgarh  restrained  the  imperial  host,  but  were 
unable  to  cause  much  destruction  among  them  owing 
to  the  darkness  of  the  night.  The  defenders  of  the 
fort  said,  that  in  the  morning  they  would  show 
their  strength  to  the  Turks,  that  they  would  figlit 
their  way  to  Lahore,  capture  and  bring  back  the 
Emperor,  and  thus  prove  to  the  world  that  they 
really  were  the  Guru’s  soldiers.  Meanwhile  the 
Guru’s  wives  and  children  were  all  removed  to  a house 
near  Ramsar.  The  Guru  went  to  the  temple  and 
there  fervently  prayed  for  victory.  He  repeated  on 
the  occasion  these  lines  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

Wicked  men  and  enemies  are  all  destroyed  by  Thee,  O' 
Lord,  and  Thy  glory  is  manifested. 

Thou  didst  immediately  destroy  those  who  annoyed  Thy 
saints.^ 

Several  other  verses  of  the  Guru’s  father  recurred 
to  his  memory  at  the  time : — 

God  the  Destroyer  of  fear  removeth  pride.® 

They  who  harbour  it  shall  drop  and  fall  on  the  ground 
like  leaves? 

It  was  discovered  at  Ramsar  that  the  Guru’s 
daughter  Viro,  whose  marriage  had  been  thus  rudely 
interrupted,  was  missing.  At  this  her  mother  began 
to  weep  and  wail.  Singha  and  Babak  were  sent  to 
search  for  her.  It  appears  that  when  the  Guru’s 
family  were  leaving  their  abode,  the  girl  was  acci- 
dentally left  in  the  upper  story  of  the  house.  The 
Guru  gave  Singha  and  Babak  his  rosary  to  satisfy 
her  that  they  had  been  really  commissioned  to 
search  for  her,  and  that  no  treachery  was  contem- 
plated. 

The  Sikh  detachment  in  Lohgarh,  though  coura- 

^ Dhanasari  * MSru  Solha.  ® Gauri  ki  WSr  I. 


84  THE  SIKH  RELIGION  i 

geous  to  the  last  degree,  were  too  few  to  cope  with 
the  Muhammadan  host,  and  after  destro5dng  hun^ 
dreds  of  the  enemy  fell  msurtyrs  to  the  Guru’s  cause. 
The  Muhammadans  proceeded  to  the  Guru’s  palace 
in  search  of  him,  and  on  finding  it  empty  became 
furious.  They  took  possession  of  the  house  in  which 
the  sweets  had  been  stored  for  the  marriage  feast, 
and  gorged  themselves  to  repletion.  Viro  remained 
silent  in  the  upper  story,  and  would  not  through  fear 
open  the  door  even  when  invited  to  do  so  by  Singha 
and  Babak.  When,  however,  her  father’s  rosary 
was  shown  her  by  the  light  of  a lamp,  she  became 
satisfied  that  no  deceit  was  intended.  She  then 
descended,  and  Singha  put  her  on  horseback  in  front 
of  him.  The  horse,  which  used  to  be  kept  at  Ramsar, 
knew  his  way  through  the  city,  and  so  Singha  gave 
him  free  rein  that  he  might  make  his  way  in  the  dark. 
Mukhlis  Khan,  who  was  standing  on  the  brink  of  the 
holy  tank,  on  hearing  a horse  pass,  challenged  the 
rider.  Babak,  who  was  walking  by  the  horse,  replied 
in  Mukhlis  Khan’s  Turkish  dialect,  ‘ We  belong  to 
you.  We  have  grown  weary  of  searching  for  you, 
but  did  not  know  where  to  find  you.  If  you  have 
seen  the  Guru  anywhere  pray  tell  us,  and  if  not,  then 
be  on  the  alert.’  They  were  on  the  point  of  passing 
on  when  their  movements  were  heard  by  one  of  the 
Muhammadan  soldiers,  who  shouted  aloud,  ‘ The 
Guru’s  family  is  escaping,  seize  them.’  Upon  this 
a Pathan  soldier  put  his  lance  in  rest  for  attack. 
Babak,  noticing  his  action,  discharged  his  musket, 
and  the  soldier  fell  like  a plantain  tree  before  a gale 
of  wind.  The  Guru,  hearing  the  report,  sent  Bidhi 
Chand  and  Painda  Khan  to  assist  Viro’s  rescuers ; 
and  they  all  made  their  way  in  safety  to  him  and 
received  countless  congratulations. 

Three  hours  of  night  now  remained.  The  Guhi, 
feeling  that  his  family  would  not  be  safe  in  AniritSar 
after  daybreak,  decided  on  at  once  sending  thein  to 
Goindwal.  It  happened,  too,  that  the  coming  day 


LIFE  OF  GIMU  HAR  GOBIND  85 

was  the  one  fixed  for  Viro’s  marriage.  He  ordered 
that  his  family  and  all  the  non-combatants  of  the 
city  should  halt  at  Jhabal,  a town  about  seven  miles 
to  the  south-west  of  Amritsar.  They  would  spend 
the  day  there,  and  he  would  join  them  in  the  evening, 
when  they  would  celebrate  the  marriage  without 
interruption,  and  thence  proceed  to  Goindwal.  This 
was  all  arranged,  and  the  Guru  dispatched  a guard 
of  soldiers  for  the  protection  of  his  people.  He  took 
the  precaution  of  sending  two  soldiers  to  stop  the 
bridegroom’s  procession,  lest  it  might  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy. 

The  enemy,  wearied  by  the  forced  march  of  the 
previous  day  and  their  sleepless  bivouac,  and  sur- 
feited by  the  Guru’s  sweets,  were  sleeping  on  beds 
they  had  seized  from  the  citizens.  When  they  lay 
down  they  thought  that  the  Guru  had  either  been 
killed  in  the  fight  or  had  absconded.  They  were 
awakened  by  an  unmistakable  sound  of  muskets. 
Then  began  the  conflict,  the  clashing  of  swords,  and 
the  hissing  of  bullets.  Brave  men  fell  and  died, 
blood  flowed  in  profusion,  corpses  were  piled  on  one 
another,  the  wounded  uttered  piercing  cries  ; heads, 
bodies,  arms,  and  legs  were  separated,  and  horses 
without  riders  careered  round  the  city. 

Mukhlis  Khan,  on  seeing  his  soldiers  giving  way, 
thus  addressed  them,  ‘ Are  you  not  ashamed  to  run 
away  before  a few  Sikhs  ? Charge,  and  either  cap- 
ture or  kill  the  Guru.’  The  Turks,  supposing  that 
Bhai  Bhanu,  the  Guru’s  commander-in-chief,  was 
•the  Guru  himself,  advanced  against  him.  They  were 
further  incited  to  the  combat  by  the  shouts  of  Shams 
Khan,  an  officer  of  the  imperial  guard,  and  rushed 
on  with  drawn  swords.  Bhai  Bhanu,  too,  cheered  on 
his  men,  ‘ Advance,  O Sikhs ; fight,  and  fear  not. 
The  Guru  our  preserver  is  with  us.  If  your  heads 
fly  off,  let  them  fly,  but  never  allow  yourselves  to  be 
called  cowards.  Charge  in  a body,  strike  and  rout 
the  enemy.’  On  hearing  these  woirds  df  their  chief, 


86 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


the  Sikhs  set  their  teeth  and  charged,  crying,  ‘ Smite  ! 
smite  ! ’ and  challenging  the  enemy.  Such  was  their 
onslaught  that  Shams  Khan  and  his  troops  fled 
precipitately.  Mukhlis  Khan  sent  Anwar  Khan  to 
Shams  Khan’s  assistance.  Anwar  Khan  addressed 
him,  ‘ 0 Shams  Khan,  thou  hast  disgraced  the  names 
of  Mughal  and  Pathan.  Think  of  thine  ancestry, 
stand  and  fight  the  enemy,  and  lose  not  heart.  Even 
if  thou  save  thyself  for  a moment  by  flight,  that 
shall  not  long  avail  thee,  for  Mukhlis  Khan  will 
afterwards  put  thee  to  death,  and  thou  shalt  then 
burn  in  hell-fire.’ 

Hearing  Anwar  Khan’s  reproaches.  Shams  Khan 
returned  and  roared  defiance  at  his  opponents.  This 
produced  some  confusion  in  the  Sikh  ranks.  On 
observing  this,  Bhai  Bhanu  rushed  with  great 
velocity  to  the  protection  of  his  troops,  and  caused 
them  to  fire  a volley  which  killed  Shams  Khan’s 
horse.  Bhai  Bhanu  then  dismounted,  and  he  and 
Shams  Khan  engaged  in  single  combat.  Bhai  Bhanu 
said  to  him,  ‘ I will  not  suffer  thee  to  escape  now.’ 
Shams  Khan  replied,  ‘ Defend  thyself,  I am  going  to 
strike.’  Bhai  Bhanu  received  the  sword  on  his  shield, 
and  then  putting  forward  all  his  force,  beheaded  his 
adversary  with  one  blow.  The  Muhammadans,  see- 
ing their  commander  slain,  rushed  in  a body  on 
Bhai  Bhanu,  and  assailed  him  on  all  sides.  He, 
however,  lost  not  heart,  but  cut  down  the  enemy  as 
if  they  were  radishes.  Observing  him  springing  and 
roaring  like  a tiger,  all  feared  to  approach  him.  At 
last  he  received  two  bullets  which  passed  through- 
and  through  his  body.  With  Wahguru  on  his  lips 
the  brave  commander  of  the  Guru’s  army  went  to 
his  repose  at  Guru  Nanak’s  feet. 

When  Mukhlis  Khan  heard  of  Shams  Khan’s 
death  he  dispatched  a thousand  horse  under  the 
command  of  Saiyid  Muhammad  Ali  to  the  pa^t  of 
the  field  in  which  he  had  been  slain.  Muhammad 
Ali’s  troops  fought  with  great  determination,  and 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  87 

inflicted  appalling  loss  on  the  Sikhs.  Heads  and 
legs  flew  off  until  heaps  were  formed  on  the  plains. 
Kites  uttered  shrieks  of  joy,  and  the  demonesses 
attendant  on  the  goddess  of  war  belched  oh  receiving 
such  a surfeit  of  flesh  and  gore.  The  marksmen 
Bhai  Tota,  Nihalu,  Tiloka,  Ananta,  and  Nivala, 
killed  many  Musalmans.  Singha,  too,  did  good  ser- 
vice in  encouraging  the  Guru’s  men,  ‘ Fight  now ; 
remember,  my  friends,  this  opportunity  will  not 
come  again.’  A Muhammadan  trooper  in  the  Guru’s 
army  represented  to  him  that  his  men  were  too  few 
to  cope  with  the  thousands  of  brave  troops  against 
him.  The  Guru  replied  that  he  was  not  responsible 
for  the  war ; they  who  sought  it  should  perish 
therein.  His  helper  was  God.  In  the  words  of  the 
Sukhmani : — 

If  God  infuse  power  into  a little  ant. 

It  can  reduce  to  ashes  armies  of  hundreds  of  thousands 
and  millions  of  men. 

He  is  the  Preserver  of  all  creatures. 

• 

Singha  continued  valorous  to  the  last.  He 
advanced  with  five  hundred  warriors,  fought  like 
a tiger,  and  put  the  Muhammadan  hosts  to  flight, 
as  if  they  were  so  many  jackals.  Muhammad  Ali, 
seeing  his  army  fleeing,  pressed  to  the  van  and 
endeavoured  to  rally  them.  He  fired  at  Singha  and 
wounded  both  him  and  his  horse.  His  adversary, 
seeing  that  Singha  was  not  yet  dead,  fired  again  but 
missed  him.  Singha  recovered  consciousness,  drew 
forth  an  arrow  as  he  lay  on  the  ground,  and  taking 
steady  aim  drove  it  through  Muhammad  Ali’s  chest. 
The  imperial  army,  on  seeing  him  fall,  fought  with 
desperation  to  avenge  him.  Bhai  Tota  and  Bhai 
Tiloka,  who  were  so  eager  for  the  combat  that  they 
pushed  others  aside  to  reach  the  front,  both  fell 
mortally  wounded.  In  the  that  ensued  the 

Sikhs  and  the  Turkish  army  became  blended  like 
two  torrents.  The  soldiers  of  both  armies  wrestled 


88  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

with  one  another.  The  Muhammadans  rushed  on 
shouting  ‘ Ya  Ali ! Ya  Ali ! ’ The  brave  Singha  in 
the  conflict  died  a hero's  death. 

When  the  news  of  Singha’s  death  reached  the  Guru 
he  dispatched  the  powerful  Painda  Khan  against 
the  Muhammadans,  Painda  Khan  advanced  with 
his  troops  like  a hawk  moving  amongst  quails. 
The  Guru  himself,  too,  went  into  the  thick  of  the 
fight,  and  adjusting  his  arrows  to  his  bow  discharged 
them  hissing  like  snakes,  and  killed  countless 
Muhammadans,  These  fell  to  the  earth  as  if  they 
were  drunkards  intoxicated  with  wine  or  bhang. 
When  Mukhlis  Khan  heard  that  the  Guru  had 
personally  taken  the  field,  and  was  destroying  his 
army,  he  ordered  all  his  troops  to  charge,  and  not 
allow  the  Sikh  priest  to  escape,  as  they  had  done 
on  the  previous  night,  ‘ God  ’,  the  Muhammadan 
chief  said,  ‘ hath  now  given  the  Guru  into  our  hands  ; 
we  will  send  him  to  the  Emperor  and  receive  rewards 
and  honours  for  his  capture,’ 

Upon  this  the  Imperial  army  in  a body  plied  their 
arrows,  swords,  and  muskets,  and  rushed  like  clouds 
in  the  month  of  Sawan  to  the  capture  or  destruction 
of  the  Guru,  but  the  Guru’s  arrows  dispersed  them 
like  a westerly  wind.  When  struck  by  him  they  lay 
on  the  ground  like  men  in  the  deep  sleep  of  indigestion 
induced  by  a surfeit  of  sweets.  Those  still  able  to 
fight  advanced  gnashing  their  teeth  with  rage,  but 
on  meeting  the  Guru  wrung  their  hands  in  sorrow. 
The  Guru  in  order  to  draw  them  on  used  sometimes 
to  retire  a little.  The  Turks  would  then  advance  and 
receive  their  death  at  his  hands.  Bhai  Jaita  and 
Takhtu  thinking  that  the  Guru’s  retreat  was  due 
to  weariness,  prayed  him  to  take  a brief  respite, 
and  they  would  in  the  meantime  hold  the  enemy 
in  check.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ No ; I have  retreated 
that  they  may  advance  and  be  all  destroyed  in  a 
body,’ 


LIFE  OF  GUiRU  HAR  GOBIND  89 


Chapter  IX  / 

Bidhi  Chand  and  Painda  Khan  had  been  dom- 
mitting  great  havoc  among  the  Muhaihmadan 
army.  They  and  Bhai  Jati  Mai — son  of  the  hero 
Singha — Bhais  Nanda,  Piraga,  Bhima,  and  Bhikhan 
mounted  on  their  chargers,  ran  to  the  Guru’s  assist- 
ance, and  destroyed  detachment  upon  detachment 
of  the  enemy.  Bhai  Nanda  drew  his  sword,  and 
cut  off  the  heads  of  several  Muhammadans.  The 
conflict  was  so  obstinate  that  the  martial  weapons 
on  both  sides  were  broken,  and  the  combatants 
had  then  to  fight  with  their  fists.  While  they  were 
thus  contending,  Muhammadans  in  their  dismay  and 
confusion  fired  both  on  the  Guru’s  troops  and  on 
their  own.  • The  Guru’s  brave  soldiers,  Amira,  Jaita, 
Tota,  Krishan  Das,  Gulala,  Gopala,  Nihala,  Diala, 
Takhtu,  Mahita,  Paira,  Tiloka,  Jati  Mai;  Piraga, 
Jetha,  Bidhi,  Chand,  Babak,  and  Painda  Khan 
cheerfully  resolved  to  spurn  life  and  devote  them- 
selves soul  and  body  to  the  Guru’s  assistance^ 

The  Sikhs  surrounded  Ali  Beg,  Bahadur  Khan, 
Saiyid  Didar  Ali,  Mihr  Ali,  Ismail  Khan,  and  others, 
who  had  acquired  throughout  India  great  fame  in 
many  a field.  The  brave  youths  Bidhi  Chand  and 
Painda  Khan,  lifting  their  lances,  soon  made  their 
enemies’  horses  riderless.  The  Guru  himself  so 
fought  that  no  one  whom  he  struck  asked  again  for 
water.  The  Musalmans  advanced  against  him  with 
drawn  swords.  The  four  Sikhs  Tota,  Tiloka,  Ananta, 
and  N ihala  hastened  to  his  support.  These  four  faith- 
ful and  devoted  Sikhs,  having  killed  Bahadur  Khan 
and  the  whole  of  his  detachment,  received  the  edge  of 
the  sword  on  their  own  necks,  and  went  to  heaven 
as  a reward  for  their  devotion.  Seeing  them  fall 
Bhai  Mohan,  Bhai  Bidhi  Chand,  Gopal  Das,  Jaita, 
Pdr^a,  Paira,  Damodar,  Bhag  Mai,  Painda  Khan, 
Jati  Mai,  Chandar  Bhan,  Chhajju,  Gajju,  Hira, 


90  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Moharu,  Sujan,  and  other  magnanimous  Sikhs  who 
had  devoted  their  lives  and,  property  to  the  Guru, 
challenged,  defied,  and  closed  with  the  enemy. 

Mukhlis  Khan  then  addressed  his  chosen  warriors 
Karim  Beg,  Rahim  Beg,  Ali  Beg,  Jang  Beg,  Salamat 
Khan,  and  others ; ‘ My  brethren,  why  have  you  lost 
courage  ? You  enjoy  revenue-free  lands  given  you 
by  the  Emperor,  and  are  called  Sardars.  Show  your 
gratitude,  earn  fame  and  receive  further  rewards  of 
bravery.  The  Guru  hath  no  army,  no  soldiers,  his 
Sikhs  are  common  people.  Charge,  capture  them, 
take  them  to  the  Emperor,  and  you  shall  receive  re- 
wards.’ Saiyid  Ali  replied,  ‘ O my  lord,  thou  speakest 
justly,  but  the  Guru’s  arrows  are  like  black  snakes. 
If  one  of  them  strike  a man,  he  requireth  nothing 
more.  Painda  Khan  is  a powerful  and  brave  warrior. 
Thou  sayest  that  the  Guru’s  army  is  worthless ; open 
thine  eyes  and  see.  We  brought  seven  thousand 
men  against  him,  how  many  of  them  now  remain  ? 
The  Guru  is  a lamp  around  which  his  enemies  fly 
like  moths  and  are  reduced  to  ashes.’ 

Mukhlis  Khan  finding  himself  defeated  sent  an 
envoy  to  propose  terms  of  peace.  The  envoy 
addressed  the  Guru  as  follows  : — ‘ O true  Guru, 
fighting  becometh  thee  not.  Consider  if  thou  hast 
any  kingdom  to  enable  thee  to  fight.  The  Emperor 
hath  hundreds  of  thousands  of  men,  many  fortresses, 
and  endless  resources.  If  thou  come  to  terms,  thou 
shalt  abide  in  thy  city.  Thou  art  already  in  pos- 
session of  revenue-free  villages,  and  hast  up  to  the 
present  lost  nothing.  All  rajas,  nawabs,  and  rulers, 
are  subject  to  the  Emperor.  He  is  the  lord  of  Balkh, 
Bukhara,  Kabul,  Baluchistan,  Hindustan  and  other 
countries.  What  power  hast  thou  to  contend  with 
him  ? If  thou  suffer  a reverse,  on  whom  wilt  thoU 
rdy  for  assistance  ? Whither  wilt  thou  flee  for 
safety  ? If  thou  hearken  to  my  words,  then  will  we 
make  peace.  Be  ^tisfied  with  the  Guruship.  What 
wilt  thou  gain  by  a prolongation  of  hostilities  ? ’ 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  91 

The  Guru  replied,  ‘ The  Emperor  is  without  the 
fear  of  God  in  his  heart.  Why  should  we  go  to  make 
peace'  with  him  ? Our  reliance  is  on  Wahguru,  the 
King  of  kings,  whose  creature  this  Emperor  is. 
If  his  descendants  persist  in  quarrelling  with  the 
Guru,  they  shall  forfeit  their  empire.  Let  the 
Emperor  protect  his  throne.  The  army  of  which 
he  is  so  proud  shall  perish  like  the  seven  thousand 
you  have  brought  against  me.  If  you  retire  now, 
you  may  survive,  but  if  you  persist  in  fighting,  not 
one  of  you  shall  escape.’ 

Mukhlis  Khan  on  receiving  this  message  considered 
how  he  could  show  his  face  to  the  Emperor  if  his 
troops  retired  without  victory.  On  the  other  hand, 
were  they  to  renew  the  combat,  they  would  have 
no  chance  of  escape ; but  at  all  events  it  was  better 
to  die  fighting  with  the  foe  than  to  live  by  igno- 
minious flight.  He  therefore,  after  a short  respite, 
ordered  the  renewal  of  hostilities.  When  the  Guru’s 
men  heard  the  Musalmans’  call  to  arms,  they  repre- 
sented to  their  spiritual  and  temporal  master,  ‘ O true 
king,  only  one  hundred  of  us  armed  men  are  ready  for 
the  combat.  All  the  rest  are  sleeping  after  the  toil 
of  battle.  Mukhlis  Khan's  troops  who  fled  from  the 
field  have  now  rallied  and  sounded  the  call  to  arms.’ 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ We  shall  send  them  straight  to 
death.  Allow  them  not  to  escape.’  Bidhi  Chand 
applauded  the  Guru’s  determination. 

Upon  this  the  Guru’s  men  called  to  arms,  and 
lighting  the  fuses  of  their  matchlocks  advanced  to 
repel  the  enemy.  Every  Musalman  who  advanced 
was  slain.  The  Guru,  who  fought  with  conspicuous 
bravery  and  success,  was  a host  in  himself.  He 
discharged  in  quick  succession  barbed  and  crescent- 
shaped arrows,  which  hissed  as  they  left  his  bow- 
string, and  killed  men  and  horses  of  the  opposing 
ranks.  His  handful  of  men  blessed  and  praased  his 
valour.  Saiyid  Sultan  Beg,  seeing  his  own  army 
fast  perishing,  decided  to  make  a united  and 


92 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


determined  rush  on  the  Guru,  as  the  only  means  of 
obtaining  victory.  The  advice  was  accepted  and  the 
Musalmans  Charged.  Bidhi  Chand,  Painda  Khan; 
and  Jati  Mial  hastened  to  oppose  the  onset  of  thi 
enemy;  and  dealt  them  wholesale  destruction  * Sultari 
Beg  aimed  a lance  at  Bidhi  Chand,  v^ose  horse 
providentially  turned  aside  and  thus  saved  his 
master.  ‘ Upon  this  Sultan  Beg  retreated  to  escape 
a return  stroke.  Bidhi  Chand  called  out  to  him, 
‘ Stand,  why  fleest  thou  ? ’ Sultan  Beg  received  his 
adversary’s  sword  on  his  shield,  and  escaped  for 
the  moment.  Bidhi  Chand’s  sword  could  not  reach 
him  as  he  fled,  but  a swift  arrow  overtook  him.  It 
pierced  Sultan  Beg’s  body,  and  he  fell  lifeless  from 
his  horse. 

Painda  Khan  was  equally  successful  in  the  combat. 
He  made  Didar  Ali, . the  last  survivor  of  Mukhlis 
Khan’s  personal  staff,  bite  the  earth.  Mukhlis 
Khan,  now  left  alone,  thought  nothing  remained  for 
him  but  to  engage  the  Guru  himself.  He  said, 
‘ Let  thee  and  me  now  decide  the  quarrel  by  single 
combat,  and  none  else  approach.’  In  order  to  please 
him  the  Guru  warned  his  own  men  to  stand  aside. 
He  then  discharged  an  arrow  which  killed  Mukhlis 
Khan’s  horse.  Mukhlis  Khan  then  said,  ‘ Thou  art 
on  horseback  and  I am  now  on  foot.  Moreover, 
I want  to  fight  with  sword  and  shield,  but  thou  art 
discharging  arrows.  It  is  not  a fair  fight.’  Upon 
this  the  Guru  dismounted  and  said,  ‘ Show  thy 
utmost  skill  and  strike  the  first  blow.’  The  Khan 
aimed  a blow,  which  the  Guru  avoided  by  a swift 
side  movement.  The  next  blow  fell  on  the  Guru’s 
shield.  The  Guru  then  said,  ‘ Thou  hast  made  two 
strokes  which  I have  parried.  Now  it  is  my  turn.’ 
The  Guru  then  lifting  his  powerful  arm  dealt  MukhUs 
Khan  a blow  which  cleft  his  head  in  twaifi. 

Painda' Khan,  Bidhi  Chand,  and  Jati  Mai  killed 
the  Musalmans  who  held  their  ground,  but  the  great 
majority  of  them  'fi«i  without  venturing  to  look 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


93 


behind.  After  nine  hours  of  fighting  the  Guru’s 
victory  was  complete.  All  his  surviving  Sikhs 
exchanged  congratulations,  and  the  drums  of  vic- 
tory joyously  sounded. 

The  Guru  went  to  inspect  the  field  of  battle,  and 
then  visited  Lohgarh.  On  seeing  his  faithful  friends 
Mohan  and  Gopala  groaning  in  death’s  agonies, 
he  wiped  their  mouths  and  said,  ‘ O Mohan  and 
Gopala,  whatever  you  ask  me  I will  grant  you. 
You  have  given  your  lives  for  my  sake.  There  is 
nothing  I would  not  give  you.’  They  replied, 
‘ We  feared  that  at  our  last  moment  we  should  not 
behold  thee;  but  thou,  being  a searcher  of  hearts 
and  omniscient,  hast  come  to  gratify  us.  ' We  have 
now  no  further  desire.’  The  Guru  again  pressed 
them  to  ask  for  a favour.  They  replied,  ‘ Grant  us 
that  in  whatever  shape  thou  mayest  be,  we  may 
ever  abide  with  thee.  Grant  us  also  that  all  who 
die  fighting  on  thy  behalf  may  receive  salvation.’ 
Then  the  Guru  : ‘ I congratulate  you  on  your 

disinterestedness.  Both  prayers  shall  be  granted. 
You  are  happy  in  your  death.’  Then  fixing  their 
thoughts  on  God  they  separated  their  eternal  souls 
from  their  temporary  bodies. 

The  Guru  had  all  the  remaining  corpses  collected, 
washed,  clothed  with  shrouds,  and  placed  on  funeral 
piles.  He  then  with  his  own  hands  set  fire  to  the  wood. 
The  battle  extended  to  a distance  of  over  four  miles 
to  the  south  of  Amritsar,  and  there  a dharmsal 
called  the  Sangrana  or  Battle  was  erected  to  com- 
memorate the  Guru’s  victory.  The  battle  was 
fought  in  Sambat  1685  (a.d.  1628).  A fair  is 
held  on  the  spot  every  year  at  the  time  of  the  full 
moon  in  the  month  of  Baisakh. 

When  the  Guru  had  completed  the  last  rites  of  his 
brave  soldiers,  he  made  preparations  to  go  to  his 
family  in  Jhabal.  On  arriving  at  Jhabal  he  had  time 
to  again  turn  his  attention  to  his  daughter’s  marriage. 
He  sent  masands  in  advance  to  meet  the  bridegroom’s 


94 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


procession.  Dharma,  the  bridegroom's  father,  con- 
trary to  custom,  humbled  himself  before  the  Guru, 
and  prepared  amd  dressed  his  son  Sadhu  for  the 
ceremony.  A Muhammadan  soldier  who  happened 
to  be  in  Jhabal  at  the  time  heard  rejoicings,  saw 
fireworks,  and  inquired  the  cause.  He  learned  that 
it  was  on  account  of  the  marriage  of  the  Guru’s 
daughter,  and  that  the  Guru  had  just  arrived  after 
destroying  the  imperial  army.  It  at  once  occurred 
to  the  soldier,  that  if  he  killed  the  Guru,  he  should 
receive  a large  reward  from  the  Emperor.  The  soldier 
thought  that  as  the  Guru  was  then  without  suspicion 
of  harm  and  unguarded,  his  death  might  be  easily 
effected.  Even  if  the  project  did  not  succeed,  he 
thought  he  would  at  any  rate  frighten  him,  and 
the  marriage  festivities  might  be  interrupted.  He 
took  up  his  matchlock,  lit  a fuse,  and  aimed  at  the 
Guru.  The  musket  burst,  and  killed  the  soldier 
instead  of  his  intended  victim.  His  death  was 
attributed  to  God’s  special  intervention,  and  the 
marriage  was  duly  celebrated.  Sadhu  the  bride- 
groom was  inspired  to  compose  the  following  hymn 
on  the  occasion  : — 

I was  reading  the  lesson  ^ of  sin  ; 

I was  sitting  at  the  shop  of  falsehood  and  deception. 
When  the  true  Guru  cut  off  my  evil  thoughts, 

And  took  and  drew  me  out  of  hell. 

I am  a sacrifice,  my  life  is  a sacrifice  to  the  Guru. 

I was  sullen,  and  blind,  and  saw  not ; 

I was  drowning  in  mammon. 

I praise  the  true  Guru 
Who  showed  me  light. 

The  slave  Sadhu  hath  seen  the  Guru, 

Washed  his  feet  and  drunk  the  nectareous  water  there- 
from. 

The  perfect  Guru  hath  given  me  to  drink  the  nectar  of 
the  Name. 


^ Literally — tablet. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  95 

Before  parting  with  his  daughter  the  Guru  gave  her 
the  following  advice,  ‘ How  can  I describe  the  wcMrth 
and  dignity  of  a husband  ? • Service  to  him  is  the 
most  important  duty  a wife  can  discharge.  Greatly 
honour  his  elders,  and  heartily  serve  thy  mother-in- 
law.’  Viro  then  went  to  take  leave  of  her  mother,  who 
addressed  her,  ‘ If  thou  desire  to  be  happy,  thou 
must  ever  serve  thy  husband.  Ever  consider  the 
honour  of  thy  family.  Associate  not  with  the  evil. 
Rise  early  to  perform  thine  ablutions,  and  read 
the  Guru’s  hymns.  Let  no  complaint  against  thee 
reach  me.  In  this  way  shalt  thou  enjoy  all  happi- 
ness. Hearken  my  beloved  daughter.  In  a sliort 
time  1 will  send  for  thee.  Guru  Nanak  hath  been 
our  protector,  otherwise  thy  marriage  would  not 
have  been  celebrated.’  Her  mother  then  embraced 
her  and  showed  great  concern  at  her  departure.  The 
Guru  returned  to  his  private  apartments  and  said, 
‘ Daughters  are  other  persons’  property.  Why  feel 
their  loss  ? ’ He  again  embraced  his  daughter  and 
consoled  her.  Upon  this  Baba  Gurditta  came  with 
great  love  in  his  heart,  and  he,  too,  embraced  his 
sister. 

The  Guru  having  no  further  business  in.  Jhabal 
went  with  his  family  to  visit  Tarn  Taran.  On  the 
way  the  Guru’s  wives  discussed  the  war  and  its 
causes  — ‘ Were  our  mother-in-law  Ganga  now  alive, 
she  would  read  the  Guru  a lesson.  However, 
perhaps  it  is  all  for  the  best,  for  such  a large  army 
of  the  enemy  hath  been  destroyed,  and  God  hath 
preserved  most  of  the  Sikhs.’  The  Guru  after  ad- 
miring the  tank  and  blessing  the  memory  of  Guru 
Arjan  proceeded  to  Goindwal. 

The  Emperor  was  dismayed  on  hearing  of  the 
defeat  of  his  troops  by  what  he  called  an  army  of 
faqirs.  It  must  have  been,  he  thought,  the  result 
of  charms,  spells,  and  incantations.  The  Muham- 
madan survivors  of  the  war  then  related  its  details 
in  their  own  way.  ‘Although  the  Sikhs  were  of 


96  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

all  castes  and  trades,  they  proved  brave  in  battle, 
atld  the  imperial  army  was  not  to  blame  for  its 
defeat.’  When  the  Emperor  heard  of  Mukhlis  Khan’s 
death,  he  flared  up  like  a fire  on  which  clarified 
butter  has  been  thrown  for  sacrifice.  He  called  a 
council  of  his  chiefs,  at  which  it  was  decided  that  the 
Guru  should  be  captured  or  killed  in  the  attempt, 
lest  he  should  seize  the  reins  of  empire. 

Wazir  Khan,  ever  mindful  of  the  Guru’s  welfare, 
thus  defended  him,  ‘ Sire,  the  Guru  is  not  a rebel,  and 
hath  no  design  on  thine  empire.  He  hath  ever  been 
the  support  of  the  state.  Had  he  minded  to  raise 
a rebellion,  he  would  have  followed  up  his  victory, 
seized  some  fortress,  and  taken  possession  of  a portion 
of  thy  Majesty’s  dominion,  or  plundered  one  of  thy 
treasuries.  But  he  centreth  not  his  thoughts  in 
worldly  wealth.  Is  it  not  a miracle  that  with  not 
fully  seven  hundred  men  he  destroyed  an  army  of 
seven  thousand  ? ’ These  and  many  other  argu- 
ments urged  by  Wazir  Khan  were  supported  by 
other  friends  of  the  Guru  at  court.  Their  arguments 
convinced  the  Emperor,  and  he  decided  that  it  was 
not  good  to  engage  in  further  warfare  with  priests 
and  faqirs,  and  that  it  would  be  well  to  forget  the 
past. 

The  Guru  having  met  his  own  relations  and  those 
of  his  predecessors  at  Goindwal,  and  visited  all  its 
sacred  spots,  took  his  departure  for  Kartarpur, 
accompanied  by  his  trusty  warriors  Bidhi  Chand, 
Jati  Mai,  Painda  Khan,  and  others.  He  heard  that 
Kaulan  was  ill,  and  went  to  render  her  necessary 
service.  She  could  only  address  him  in  very  feeble 
accents.  He  represented  that  she  was  fortunate  in 
having  left  the  society  of  bigots,  in  having  been 
instructed  in  the  Sikh  faith,  and  in  thus  having  been 
placed  on  the  road  to  deliverance.  He  counselled 
her  to  reflect  on  God  who  was  within  her,  and  whom 
dtedh  could  not  approach.  He  told  her  that  she  had 
only  , twenty-four  hours  to  live,  and  during  that  time 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  97 

she  must  meditate  on  her  Creator.  He  also  pro- 
mised to  come  to  her  at  her  departure. 

Next  day  a Sikh  came  to  tell  the  Guru  of  a tiger 
in  the  neighbourhood  which  had  killed  the  villagers' 
cattle.  The  Guru  ordered  his  horse  and  girded  on 
his  arms.  Taking  Bidhi  Chand,  Painda  Khan,  and 
others,  he  proceeded  to  the  tiger’s  lair.  It  was  in 
a dense  forest  where  other  game  too  were  in  abun- 
dance. The  Guru  dismounted  with  the  intention  of 
meeting  the  tiger  on  foot  with  sword  and  shield.  As 
the  animal  sprang  up,  his  men  called  out  to  the 
Guru  to  use  his  gun,  and  not  allow  the  beast  to 
approach  too  close.  The  Guru,  protecting  his  head 
with  his  shield  awaited  the  tiger’s  assault,  and  dealt 
him  a blow  with  his  sword  on  the  flank  that  cut  him 
in  twain.  The  Sikhs  were  astonished  at  the  Guru’s 
courage  and  strength,  and  sang  congratulations. 

On  returning  home  the  Guru  proceeded  to  Kaulan’s 
apartments  and  addressed  her  consolatory  words. 
‘Be  ready,  prepare  thyself,  thine  hour  hath  come. 
Dismiss  all  consideration  for  thy  body  and  fix  thine 
attention  on  God,  who  is  unborn  and  imperishable. 
The  world  is  unreal  and  only  shineth  with  His  light. 
The  soul  is  pure,  real,  conscious,  and  happy.  As  long 
as  man  is  proud  of  his  body  he  is  subject  to  birth 
and  death,  but  when  he  hath  obtained  divine 
knowledge  and  passed  beyond  the  bounds  of  love 
and  hate,  then  he  obtaineth  deliverance.’  When 
Kaulan,  after  meditating  on  the  Guru’s  instruction, 
again  opened  her  eyes,  she  addressed  her  last  words 
to  the  Guru,  ‘ I thank  thee  ! I thank  thee  ! O patron 
of  the  homeless,  that  I found  shelter  in  thee.  Thou 
didst  in  a moment  confer  on  me  the  position  which 
Jc^is  for  years  vainly  strive  to  attain.  Thou  didst 
dispei  the  ignorance  which  hung  over  my  millions 
of  births  like  an  inveterate  disease.’  She  then  fixed 
her  attention  on  God,  repeated  ‘Wahguru’,  and 
heaving  her  last  breath  departed  to  the  heaven  of 
her  aspirations.  The  Guru  ordered  her  maids  and 

H 


SIKH.  IV 


98  - THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

manservant  to  prepare  her  for  the  last  rites.  Her 
maids  bathed  her  and  clothed  her  in  a shroud  and 
costly  shawl.  While  the  minstrel  sang  the  Guru’s 
hymns,  her  body  was  removed  to  the  garden  attached 
to  her  dwelling  and  there  cremated.  The  Sohila  was 
read  and  prayers  offered  for  the  repose  of  her  soul. 

Chapter  X 

While  the  Guru  remained  in  Kartarpur,  tnany  men 
came  to  enlist  under  his  banner.  They  said  that  no 
one  else  had  power  to  contend  with  the  Emperor  or 
to  kill  such  brave  Muhammadans  as  had  fallen  in 
battle  in  Amritsar.  The  Guru  was  the  bright  gem 
of  the  world.  So  afraid  was  the  Emperor  of  him, 
that  he  did  not  venture  to  send  another  army  to 
avenge  the  recent  defeat.  The  Guru  set  himself  to 
replace  the  men  who  had  fallen,  and  also  to  increase 
his  army.  He  continued  to  instruct  his  soldiers  in 
the  science  of  warfare,  and  train  them  to  archery 
and  the  use  of  fire-arms. 

Painda  Khan  soon  became  a source  of  concern  to 
the  Guru.  He  began  to  boast,  ‘ It  is  absurd  for  the 
Guru  to  enlist  so  many  men.  If  I am  allowed, 
I will  show  the  Muhammadans  what  I can  do. 
Having  eaten  the  Guru’s  salt  and  been  his  servant, 
it  is  I who  conquered  the  countless  hosts  opposed 
to  him  at  Amritsar.*  With  my  arrow  I skewered 
them  like  trussed  fowl.  Had  I not  been  there,  no 
one  would  have  had  the  courage  to  oppose  them. 
The  Guru’s  Sikhs  would  have  all  fled.’  When  the 
Guru  heard  this  he  said  Painda  Khan  was  not  a trust- 
worthy servant,  and  that  his  boasting  would  end 
badly.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  Guru  provided 
him  with  a wife  of  good  family  in  the  village  of 
Chhotamir,  gave  hint  a house  to  live  in,  and  supplied 
tutu  wUh  funds  to  commence  housekeeping.' ' i After 
Painda  Khan  used  to  sleep’ at 'night 
in  his  own  house  and  wait  on  the  Guru  by  <toy>  hut 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


99 


after  a little  time  the  Guru,  desiring  to  have  some 
respite  from  Painda  Khan’s  boasting,  ordered  him 
to  remain  at  home,  and  only  visit  him  occasionally. 

Meantime  offerings  of  money,  horses,  arms,  and 
ammunition  continued  to  be  made  to  the  Guru,  and 
the  spirit  of  his  troops  rose  as  they  devoted  them- 
selves to  exercises.  They  used  to  boast  that  if  the 
Guru  but  gave  them  the  order,  they  would  in  a day 
capture  Dihli  and  Lahore.  They  vowed  that  if 
ever  again  there  was  fighting  they  would  make 
short  work  of  the  enemy. 

While  the  Guru  was  in  that  neighbourhood  he 
killed  many  beasts  of  prey  and  protected  useful 
animals.  There  was  such  public  tranquillity  that 
travellers  could  pass  through  the  forests  without  ap- 
prehension. Thieves,  burglars,  and  highway  robbers 
concealed  themselves  as  effectually  as  owls  and  bats 
do  at  sunrise.  It  appeared  as  if  the  Sat,  or  golden 
age  of  the  world,  had  returned  to  the  Doab.  Songs 
of  joy  and  happiness  resounded  in  every  village. 

One  day  the  Guru  took  Painda  Khan  and  other 
Sikhs  into  the  forest  with  him.  There  enjoying 
the  beautiful  prospect,  inhaling  the  odour  of  sweet 
smelling  flowers,  and  listening  to  the  singing  of 
birds,  the  Guru  in  an  exaltation  of  spirit  recited  the 
following  hymn  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

Tell  me  where  there  is  any  one  in  whom  God  is  not. 

The  Creator  who  is  full  of  mercy  conferreth  all  happiness  : 
ever  meditate  on  that  God. 

Sing  the  praises  of  that  God  on  whose  thread  creatures 
are  strung. 

Remember  that  God  who  gave  thee  everything  ; to  whom 
else  shouldst  thou  go  ? 

Profitable  is  the  service  of  my  God ; from  it  thou  shalt 
obtain  the  fruit  thy  heart  desireth. 

Saith  Nanak,  take  the  gain  and  profit  of  service,  and 
thou  shalt  go  home  happy.* 

* Sarang. 

H2 


100 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


An  ex-officer  of  the  Emperor’s  army  came  to  seek 
the  Guru’s  assistance.  The  officer  had  been  charged 
with  cowardice  and  dismissed  with  a reprimand. 
At  the  moment  of  his  visit  the  Guru  was  absorbed 
in  divine  contemplation.  The  officer  was  kept  wait- 
ing and  manifested  his  displeasure.  The  Guru 
observing  his  insolent  manner  said,  ‘ It  is  more 
glorious  to  contend  with  warriors  than  with  faqirs. 
By  annoying  men  engaged  in  God’s  service  thou 
shalt  lose  thy  happiness  in  this  world  and  the 
next.’  Hearing  this  the  officer  fell  at  the  Guru’s  feet, 
and  begged  pardon  for  his  impatience  and  rudeness. 
The  Guru  pardoned  him  and  instructed  him  to  serve 
saints,  worship  God,  practise  forbearance,  and  repeat 
the  true  Name,  and  he  should  soon  be  reinstated 
in  his  original  position.  On  this  occasion  the  Guru 
repeated  the  following  hymn  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

Sit  quietly  in  your  homes,  O dear  saints  of  God  ; 

The  True  Guru  hath  arranged  your  affairs. 

The  Creator  hath  smitten  the  wicked  and  the  evil, 

And  preserved  the  honour  of  His  saints. 

He  hath  subjected  to  me  all  kings  and  emperors. 

Since  I have  quaffed  the  great  nectareous  juice  of  the  Name. 

Fearlessly  worship  God 

Whom  the  company  of  saints  have  granted  you. 

Nanak  hath  sought  the  asylum  of  the  Searcher  of  hearts, 

And  taken  the  Lord  God’s  shelter.^ 

The  officer  acted  on  the  Guru’s  advice,  and  in  a 
few  days  the  Emperor  was  moved  to  send  for  hint 
and  restore  him  to  the  rank  from  which  he  had  been 
removed  in  disgrace. 

The  rains  had  set  in,  and  the  very  hot  season  was 
now  over.  The  clouds  wandering  in  the  heavens 
showered  moisture  which  comforted  the  bddy,  as 
the  words  of  philanthropic  men  who  watri^r"  bvet 
the  earth  comfort  the  sohl.  Vivid  lightniifg  ftlsiyed 
among  the  parti-coloured  clouds,  gentle  zephyi^ 

^ Gauri. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  loi 

diffused  coolness,  the  earth  saturated  with  water 
was  covered  with  a carpet  of  verdure.  Streams 
flowed  in  every  direction,  and  tanks  were  filled  to 
the  brim.  The  greenness  and  the  cleanliness  of  the 
trees  afforded  pleasure  to  the  eye.  The  cuckoos 
called,  frogs  croaked,  peacocks  danced.  The  rain- 
bow— Indar’s  bow  without  a string — reflected  its 
beauty  in  the  heavens,  streams  overflowed  their 
banks,  and  the  play  of  their  waves  and  ripples  excited 
gladness  and  exhilaration.  The  Guru  praised  the 
scene,  and  said  that  the  months  of  Sawan  and 
Bhadon  gave  renewed  life  unto  mortals. 

It  now  became  a question  where  the  Guru  was 
going  to  pass  the  rainy  season,  and  on  this  subject 
he  showed  himself  willing  to  accept  the  advice  and 
suggestions  of  his  Sikhs.  One  man  said  that  there 
was  a very  beautiful  place  called  Bagha  on  the 
elevated  right  bank  of  the  river  Bias.  The  river 
flowed  pleasantly  at  its  base,  and  contributed  to 
the  coolness  of  the  climate.  There  was  no  mire  in 
which  the  feet  of  men  and  beasts  of  burden  would  sink, 
and  there  was  excellent  shooting  for  an  enthusiastic 
sportsman  like  the  Guru.  A second  Sikh  chimed 
in  that  the  Guru  ought  certainly  to  see  the  place. 
A third  recommended  a thinly  populated  village 
called  Ruhela,  whither  the  Guru  might  proceed  in 
order  to  confer  salvation  on  its  inhabitants.  Ruhela 
was  also  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Bias.  The  Guru 
yielded  to  the  last  advice,  and  decided  to  go  and 
spend  the  rainy  season  in  or  near  Ruhela. 

The  Guru  thought  it  safe  to  dismiss  his  son 
Gurditta,  and  thus  addressed  him:  ‘We  are  at 
enmity  with  the  Muhammadans.  It  is  certain  that 
they  will  attack  us  once  more.  Thou  art  still  a child 
and  not  fit  for  arms  or  the  fatigue  of  war.  Moreover, 
thou  hast  for  some  time  been  separated  from  thy 
relations  wjio  are  awaiting  thee.  Wherefore  go  to 
Goindwal,  and  remain  with  thy  mother  and  thy 
friends.’.  The  Guru,  when  setting  out  for  the  Bias, 


102 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


prepared  himself  and  his  troops  for  the  contingency 
of  war.  When  Painda  Khan  heard  this  he  expressed 
a desire  to  accompany  him.  The  Guru  remembering 
his  boasting,  and  also  feeling  that  God  would  give 
him  victory  without  Painda  Khan’s  assistance,  put 
him  off  with  this  reply,  ‘ Thou  hast  been  recently 
married,  and  it  is  well  for  thee  to  abide  at  home,  and 
cherish  thy  young  wife.  I am  not  going  far— only 
to  the  bank  of  the  Bias.  When  I need  thee,  I will 
send  for  thee.’  Painda  Khan  urged,  ‘ The  Emperor 
is  at  enmity  with  thee.  Should  an  army  suddenly 
come  and  thou  be  attacked  before  I can  arrive,  men 
will  curse  me  for  not  rendering  thee  timely  assist- 
ance.’ The  Guru  replied,  ‘ I am  leaving  thee  behind 
of  my  own  free  will.  During  my  absence  share  thy 
food  with  others,  touch  not  another’s  wife  or  pro- 
perty, turn  not  thy  back  on  the  enemy,  ever  remember 
God,  and  cheerfully  accept  His  will.’  Painda  Khan 
then  went  home. 

The  Guru  set  out  from  Kartarpur  for  the  Bias.  On 
arriving  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  which  is  low, 
he  found  boats  ready  to  take  him  and  his  troops 
across  to  the  right  bank,  which  is  lofty.  The  river 
separates  the  country  which  is  called  the  Manjha 
on  the  north-west  from  the  Doab  on  the  south-east. 
On  crossing  he  pitched  his  camp  on  the  tumulus  of 
an  ancient  village.  He  observed  that  the  dwellings 
were  only  in  one  direction,  and  the  rest  of  the  land 
quite  unoccupied.  Accordingly  he  decided  that  this 
would  be  a very  suitable  site  whereon  to  found  a 
city.  He  was  received  in  a friendly  manner  by  the 
people,  who  congratulated  themselves  that  without 
any  exertion  on  their  part  the  Guru  had  come  to 
visit  them.  The  landlord  and  chaudhri  was  Bhagwan 
Das,  a Khatri  of  the  Gherar  tribe.  In  Sikh  histories 
he  is  generally  called  by  his  tribal  name. 

is  mimitely  described.  He  had 

a fat  paunch,  a short  neck  as  if  his  body  was  Sh^allow- 
it,  a large  mouth,  thick  lips,  and  small  eyes. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  103 

Although  his  hair  and  beard  had  grown  grey  and 
he  walked  with  the  support  of  a stick,  yet  he  was 
strong  of  body.  The  fastenings  of  his  coat  were 
generally  undone,  and  he  wore  his  turban  and  loin- 
cloth loose.  He  was  clever  at  litigation,  as  became 
a Panjabi  bania.  Pride  took  up  its  abode  in  his  heart, 
and  he  considered  no  one  equal  to  himself.  He 
fancied  he  was  of  the  Guru’s  caste,  and  harboured 
a rivalry  with  him  which  was  fatal  to  friendship. 
Gherar  was  not  long  in  hearing  of  the  Guru’s  arrival. 
He  was  also  informed  that  the  Guru  was  a very  power- 
ful man,  and  had  no  fear  of  the  Emperor,  whose 
army  he  had  recently  destroyed.  Gherar  began  to 
consider  what  the  Guru’s  object  could  be.  He  went 
to  him  with  pride  in  his  heart,  and  did  not  salute 
him,  but  abruptly  asked  why  he  had  left  his  home 
in  the  rainy  season.  The  Guru  replied,  that  on 
seeing  this  lofty  place  with  the  great  river  flowing 
beneath,  he  thought  he  would  tarry  there  some  days 
for  the  sake  of  sport. 

Gherar  feeling  angry  ironically  replied,  ‘ Fine 
sport  thou  meanest ! How  thou  hast  prejudiced 
thine  affairs ! Thou  hast  made  the  Emperor  thy 
deadly  enemy,  then  how  canst  thou  hope  for  peace  ? 
Having  ruined  thy  home  thou  hast  fled  hither 
from  Amritsar.  When  a wise  man  erreth,  he  ought 
to  take  warning  and  amend  his  ways.  The  Gurus 
who  preceded  thee  never  used  violence.  The  Em- 
peror and  his  subjects  used  all  to  visit  them  and 
bow  before  them.  Thou  hast  struck  out  a new 
path.’ 

The  Guru  replied,  ‘ I have  only  injured  myself. 
Why  take  it  to  heart  ? Why  should  the  troubles 
I have  had  fall  on  the  heads  of  such  people  as  thou  ? 
The  affairs  of  the  Guru’s  house  shall  ultimately  be 
adjusted  and  the  Turks  deprived  of  empire  ? ’ 
Hearing  this  Gherar  arose  and  hastened  home. 

The  Guru  made  such  an  impression  on  the  people 

hy  his  teachings  that  they  invited  him  to  stay  with 


104  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

them,  and  they  would  give  him  and  his  followers 
all  the  unoccupied  land  in  the  neighbourhood. 
Gherar,  who  was  a bigoted  Hindu,  and,  as  we  have 
seen,  prejudiced  against  the  Guru  even  long  before 
his  arrival,  used  all  his  efforts  to  induce  his  people 
to  withdraw  their  offer  to  the  Guru  and  expel  him 
from  the  land.^ 

Gherar,  who  was  unpopular  for  his  oppr^sion 
of  the  poor,  was  unable  to  persuade  his  people  to 
act  hostilely  to  the  Guru,  and  was  obliged  for  the 
time  to  curb  his  wrath.  One  day,  however,  as  the 
Guru  was  denouncing  Hindu  superstitions  Gherar 
rose  from  the  assembly  and  communicated  to  the 
Brahmans  of  the  village  the  Guru’s  words,  to  which 
he  made  additions  and  comments  of  his  own.  He  said 
that  the  Guru  was  reviling  the  Veds  and  Shastars, 
and  that  he  ought  to  be  banished  from  among  them. 
He  then  began  to  utter  vile  abuse  of  the  Guru,  at 
which  the  Sikhs  naturally  took  offence.  There 
immediately  arose  a conflict  between  the  Sikhs 
and  the  Hindus,  in  which  Gherar  was  killed  and 
thrown  into  the  river.  His  people  remembered  his 
many  acts  of  tyranny  and  regretted  not  his  death. 
They  were  glad  of  the  Guru’s  instruction  and  pwro- 
tection,  and  became  daily  more  anxious  that  he 
should  continue  to  abide  among  them. 

The  Guru,  having  thus  secured  the  goodwill  of 
the  people,  communicated  to  Bidhi  Chand  his  inten- 
tion of  founding  a city  on  the  spot.  Bidhi  Chand 
replied  in  courtier  phrase,  that  all  places  belonged 
to  the  world’s  Guru,  and  that  the  lands  and  people 
with  whom  he  was  pleased  were  very  fortunate. 
The  Guru  ordered  that  the  city  should  be  laid  out 

^ sadhu  Gobind  Singh  states  in  ins  Itihas  Guru  KMlta  HaaX  there  had 
been  previously  wi  the.  land  a town  belonging  to  Chandu,.  which  wHh 
the  rest  of  his  property  was  confiscated  by  the  Emperor’s : order, . It 
remained  uninhabited  for  some  time,  and  was  afterwards; conferred  tjy 
Sanad  on  the  Guru.  Gherar  sought  to  dispossess  him  'and  ajiprd^ 
priate  the  land.  This  led  to  a conflict,  in  which  Gherar  and' his 
retainers  were  killed.  • ^ 


LIFE  OF  GURU;  HAR  GOBIND  105 

on  tlie  morrow;  that  an  enclosing  wall  should  first 
of  all  be  built,  and  the  whole  work  completed  without 
delay.  , . ' 

Before  the  Sikhs  took  breakfast  the  next  morning 
they  repeated  the  followiiig  prayer : ‘Holy  Guru 
Nanak,  holy  Guru  Angad,  holy  Guru  Amar  Das, 
who  grantest  desires,  holy  Guru  Ram  Das,  who  art 
the  source  of  happiness,  holy  Guru  Arjan,  who  fuh 
finest  hopes,  the  holy  Guru  Har  Gobind  by  your 
favour  and  by  divine  impulse  desireth  to  found  a 
city  here.  Be  ever  with  him  and  assist  him. 
Bestowers  of  happiness,  by  your  favour  all  things 
prove  successful.  Ever  vindicate  the  cause  of  your 
servants.’  Upon  this  all  boWed  their  heads  and  ate 
the  sacred  food  prepared  for  the  occasion.  After 
breakfast  they  beat  the  war  drum  and  shouted  in 
a body,  ‘ Hail  to  the  Guru  ! ’ 

The  Guru  cut  the  first  sod  himself  and  summoned 
masons  and  labourers  from  neighbouring  villages. 
He  was  now  surrounded  with  a larger  and  more 
devoted  body,  of  followers  than  ever.  He  found 
leisure  to  devote  to  the  superintendence  and  com- 
pletion of  the  city  he  had  projected.  It  was  sub- 
sequently called  Sri  Har  Gobindpur  in  honour  of 
the  Guru. 

Ratan  Chand,  son  of  Gherar,  vowed  that  he  would 
avenge  his  father’s  death  or  meet  him  by  drowning 
himsdf.  ‘ I will  trample  the  Guru’s  dead  body 
under  my  feet  or  secure  him  in  fetters  in  a jail,  or 
I will  throw  him  into  the  river  as  his  Sikhs  ^d  my 
father.  I am  on  the  best  of  terms  with  Abdulla 
Khan,  the  subadar,  of  Jalandhar,  to  whom  I shall 
go  aqd  complain.  There  too  resideth  Karm  Chand, 
sou  of  Chandu,  who  oweth  tbe  Guru  a debt  of  revenge. 
We  shall  all  i three  take  counsel  how  we  can  arrest 
the  Guru:’^  career.’  Ratan  Chand  hastened  to  Karm 
Chand,  and  urged  him  to  join  him  against  the  com- 
mon oppressor;  The  present  Guru  had  never  met 
Shahfjahan.  Nay  n^re,  there  was  special  enmity 


io6  THE  SIKH  RELIGION i ' 

between  them,  for  the  Guru  had  destroyed  his  army. 
If  therefore  the  sons  of  the  murdered  piar^ts  were 
to  combine,  it  was  thought  they  would  succeed  in 
compassing  the  Guru’s  ruin. 

Karm  Chand,  Chandu’s  son,  when  consulted 
replied,  ‘How  shall  we  capture  or  kill  the  Guru? 
He  is  a great  warrior*  and  hath  moreover  an  army 
widi  him.  The  Emperor  knowing  this  hath  stifled 
his  wrath.  It  would  not  be  possible  for  us  to  kill 
the  Guru  openly.  We  must  seize  him  by  some  skil- 
ful ambush.  I will  not  wear  a turban  on  my  head 
till  I have  killed  or  at  least  captured  him.  Then 
shall  I enjoy  life,  whereas  I am  now  passing  my 
time  as  a dead  man.  If  the  gods  assist  us,  we  shall 
succeed.  I will  join  in  any  expenditure  that  may 
be  necessary.  If  it  come  to  representations  to  the 
Emperor,  I have  great  interest  with  him.  Thou 
and  I have  both  the  same  cause,  namely,  to  avenge 
our  murdered  fathers.  I at  first,  as  fire,  desired  to 
destroy  the  Guru,  but  I could  not  do  so  alone. 
Now  thou,  like  wind,  hast  met  me.  Fire  and  wind 
combined  will  produce  a conflagration  in  which  the 
Guru  shall  certainly  perish.  Thou  hast  come  to  me, 
as  I anticipated  when  I heard  of  thy  father’s  death. 
Exert  thyself  and  the  desires  of  our  hearts  shall  be 
fulfilled.’ 

They  both  next  morning  proceeded  to  the  subadar 
of  Jalandhar.  Ratan  Chand,  taking  off  his  turban 
and  throwing  it  on  the  floor  before  the  subadar, 
poured  forth  his  grievances  and  his  wrath.  He 
pointed  out  that  if  swift  action  were  taken,  the 
Guru  might  be  at  once  secured.  If  they  delayed 
till  he  had  constructed  his  projected  fort,,  his  capture 
would  be  impossible.  Ratan  Chand  further  fepre- 
seated  how  pleased  the  Emperor  would  be  were  the 
Guru  put  into  his  hands,  and  what  high  promotion 
the  subadar  would  receive.  The  subadar  aiid  his 
advisers  were  convinced  by  Ratan  Ghand’s;  argu- 
ments, and  an  immediate  expedition  was  ptanndd 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


107 


and  organized  against  the  Guru.  The  belief  was 
that  the  principal  part  of  the  Guru’s  army  had  been 
slain  at  Amritsar,  and  that  he  was  now  compara- 
tively defenceless.  It  was  also  supposed  that  the  few 
men  the  Guru  had  now  with  him  were  a worthless 
rabble,  since  they  had  been  enlisted  from  the  dregs 
of  the  i>eople.  It  was  said  that  they  consisted  only 
of  strolling  singers,  barbers,  washermen,  cobblers,  and 
such  like,  who  would  disperse  the  moment  they  found 
themselves  confronted  with  regular  troops.  As  to 
their  numbers  they  resembled  a small  amount  of 
salt  in  a large  amount  of  flour,  and  were  unnoticeable 
and  negligeable. 

When  the  Guru  heard  of  Ratan  Chand’s  indict- 
ment and  the  preparations  for  an  expedition  to  Sri 
Har  Gobindpur,  he  simply  said,  ‘ What  pleaseth 
God  is  the  best.’  The  subadar’s  army  is  said  to 
have  amounted  to  ten  thousand  men,  and  to  have 
descended  on  the  Guru  like  a swollen  tropical  river 
making  its  way  to  the  sea.  Abdulla  Khan  disposed 
his  forces  into  divisions.  Bairam  Khan  received 
command  of  one  thousand  men  ; Muhammad  Khan 
a tried  warrior  in  many  a field,  a similar  number ; 
Balwand  Khan  too  received  a divisional  command. 
A division  was  entrusted  to  Ali  Bakhsh,  a renowned 
marksman.  Imam  Bakhsh  was  made  commander 
of  the  fifth  division.  These  five  generals  with  their 
troops  advanced  and  took  the  field.  To  each  of  his 
two  sons,  Nabi  Bakhsh  and  Karim  Bakhsh,  who 
rode  on  chargers  with  gold  embroidered  saddles,  the 
subadar  gave  the  command  of  two  thousand  men. 
He  retained  one  thousand  horse  as  his  own  body- 
guard. 

When  the  Guru  marshalled  his  army  Bhai  Jattu, 
an  excellent  marksman,  appeared  in  the  van  with 

matchlock  in  hand.  The  Gm ^ave  him  command 

of  two  thousand  horse.  A troop  of  one  hundred 

was  given  Bhai  Kalyana.  The  Guru,  seeing  Bhai 

Nano  well  equipped  and  mounted,  gave  him  also 


Io8  : THE  SIKH  RELIGION  ( ' ; 

a troop  of  ono  hundred  horse.  To  Bhai  Piraga, 
already  tried  in  warfare,  five  hundred  men  were 
entrusted  with  orders  to  resist  the  first  onslaught  of 
the  Muhammadans.  A troop  of  four  hundred  horse 
was  placed  under  the  command  of  Bhai  Mathura. 
Bhai  Jagannath;  popularly  knownas  Jagana,a  power- 
ful and  trained  soldier,  sdso  received  command  of 
a similar  force.  Troops  of  horse  mustering  one 
hundred  each  were  placed  at  the  disposal  of  Bhai 
Shaktu  and  Bhai  Paras  Ram,  both  accomplished 
archers.  Jati  Mai,  Bhai  Molak  and  other  officers 
were  told  off  to  support  Bhai  Bidhi  Chand.  Thus 
the  Guru  divided  his  army  into  eight  troops  or 
companies. 

It  was  as  if  the  Guru  were  founding  another  city, 
and  desired  to  give  a feast  on  its  inauguration.  The 
Muhammadan  army  came  as  if  they  were  Brahmans 
who  desired  to  eat  to  repletion.  The  feast  provided 
for  them  was  shields  for  plates,  swords  for  pumpkins, 
bullets  for  sweets,  daggers  for  jalebis,  arrows  for  gul-i- 
bihisht,^  and  other  weapons  for  other  dainties.  Before 
coming  to  blows  Abdulla  Khan  sent  an  envoy  to 
endeavour  to  come  to  terms  with  the  Guru,  and 
induce  him  to  abandon  the  city  he  was  building. 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ You  rely  on  the  Emperor  alone ; 
I rely  on  the  Immortal  God.  The  great  Guru  hath 
granted  me  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual  authority, 
and  made  me  a lord  of  war  as  well  as  of  hospitality ; 
but  war  I desire  not,  and  shall  not  assume  tibe 
aggressive.  Unless  you  attack  me  I shall  bear  you 
no  enmity.  I covet  no  one’s  property.  If  you 
quarrel  with  me  I shall  send  you  where  I sent 
Mukhlis  Khan.  Should  you  fight  with  me,  it  can 
only  lead  to  your,  own  destruction.  If  you  go  home 
r will  not  pursue  you.  But,  you  have  only  two 
means  of  safety,  either  make  peace  with  me  or 
Should  you  fight,  victory  shall  never  be  yours/' 
-This  answer  was  not  conciliatory,  aiui  both  sides 
^ and  are  Indian  swe^tmeatt. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  -HAR  GOBIND  109 

made  preparations  for  the  conflict.  The  Guru  from 
the  top  of  his  rampart  observed  the  enemy  approach, 
and  addressed  his  army.  ‘ Brother  Sikhs,  this  con- 
test is  not  for  empire,  for  wealth,  or  for  land.  It  is 
in  reality  a war  for  our  religion.  Wherefore  turn 
not  your  backs  on  the  foe,  but  confront  them  and 
destroy  them.  Let  each  commander  keep  watch 
over  his  men.  Kill  not  those  who  flee  or  surrender. 
Lose  not  your  courage,  but  fight  to  the  death.' 
Every  species  of  weapon  then  known  to  Asiatic  war- 
fare was  brought  into  play.  It  is  said  that  the 
Guru’s  braves  danced  like  peacocks,  and  the  cowards 
among  the  enemy  hid  themselves  like  snakes  on  the 
approach  of  winter.  As  the  battle  advanced  such 
was  the  melee  that  it  was  difficult  to  distinguish 
friend  from  foe. 


Chapter  XI 

As  Muhammad  Khan  led  the  van,  he  was  chal- 
lenged by  Bhai  Jattu  whose  horse  he  at  once  killed 
with  an  arrow.  Then  simultaneously  Jattu  dis- 
charged his  musket  at  Muhammad  Khan,  and 
Muhammad  Khan  another  arrow  at  Jattu.  Bullet 
and  arrow  both  took  effect,  and  the  two  heroes  fell 
mortally  wounded.  When  Muhammad  Khan  fell, 
his  division  fled.  To  take  his  place  Abdulla  Khan 
ordered  Bairam  Khan  to  advance  with  his  men  and 
not  retreat,  so  that  it  might  never  be  said  they  had 
run  away  as  cowards  from  the  Sikhs.  Bairam  Khan 
with  his  thousand  men  crying  ‘ Strike  ! strike  I ' 
advanced  and  was  received  by  Bhai  Mathura,  who 
had  been  ordered  by  the  Guru  to  resist  his  attacks 
Mathura  seeing  the  superior  force  directed  against 
him  said  to  soldiers,  ‘ My  brethren,  avery  one 
mtBt  die.  Generations  have  died,  and  are  dying. 
Others  .die  in  vain,  but  if  you  die,  your  death  .’shall 
be  profitable,  since  you  give  up  y^r  . lives  as  an 
offering  to  the  Guru,  and  shall  join  the  court  of 


no  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

heavrai;  but  if,  on  the  other  hand,  you  vanquish 
your  enesinies,  then  empire  shall  be  yours,  and  you 
shall  enjoy  uninterrupted  happiness  and  repose.  In 
either  alternative  great  shall  be  your  gain.’ 

The  Sikhs  fought  with  desperation  and  drove  the 
enemy  before  them.  Mathura  disabled  Bairam 
Khan’s  horse  with  a bullet.  Bairam  Khan’s  troop 
was  then  surrounded  by  the  Sikhs  and  fought 
heroically.  Seeing  this.  Mathura  in  a rage  dis- 
mounted and  rushed  on  Bairam  Khan.  Both  heroes, 
brought  by  their  impetuosity  to  close  quarters,  could 
not  use  their  missiles,  and  engaged  each  other  in 
a wrestling  contest.  Mathura  got  the  better  of  the 
struggle,  and  throwing  his  adversary,  snatched  his 
sword  from  his  scabbard  and  cut  off  his  head. 
Bairam  Khan’s  army  witnessing  this,  became  en- 
raged, surrounded  Bhai  Mathura,  and  cut  him  to 
pieces. 

The  Chief  on  seeing  Bairam  Khan  slain  ordered 
Balwand  Khan  to  advance.  Ali  Bakhsh  proceeded 
to  support  him.  The  Guru  sent  Kalyana  to  oppose 
them.  Balwand  Khan  fought  with  great  bravery 
and  with  his  lance  dispatched  several  Sikhs.  Kal- 
yana seeing  this  took  steady  aim  with  his  matchlock, 
and  shot  him  through  the  heart.  Seeing  him  lying 
on  the  field  Ali  • Bakhsh  called  on  his  troops  to 
avenge  him.  They  surrounded  Kalyana,  but  he 
kept  them  at  bay  with  flights  of  arrows.  When 
his  quiver  was  empty  he  resorted  to  his  sword.  He 
was,  however,  no  match  for  the  numbers  opposed  to 
him,  and  gloriously  fell  with  many  wounds.  His 
courage  never  failed  him  to  the  last,  and  he  died 
repeating  ‘ Wahguru  ! ’ 

Ali  Bakhsh  again  directed  his  troops  against  the 
Guru.  Seeingthis  Bhai  Nano  opposed  the  onslaught. 
The  Gum,  patting  him  on  the  back,  placed  two 
hundred  ihore  men  at  his  disposal.  Thus  Bhai  Nano 
had  three  hundred  in  all  at  his  commaind.  They 
fought  with  great  determination  and  inflicted  great 


LIFE  OF  GURU'  iE£AR  GOBIND  iii 

loss  on  the  enemy.  Ali  Bakhsh  took  up  his  match- 
lock and  fired  at  Nano  but  missed  him.  Nano  then 
discharged  an  arrow  at  Ali  Bakhsh,  which  went 
through  his  body.  Seeing  him  fall  the  Muham- 
madan army  began  to  flee.  It  was,  however,  rallied 
by  Sardar  Imam  Bakhsh,  who  now  came  up  with 
his  division.  Meanwhile  Nano  continued  to  slay 
the  Muhammadans.  Imam  Bakhsh  hastened  to  stop 
his  career.  Nano  on  seeing  him  fixed  his  thoughts 
on  the  Guru,  and  drawing  his  two-edged  sword 
struck  off  his  left  hand.  Imam  Bakhsh  without 
faltering  used  his  remaining  arm  on  Nano  and 
killed  him,  upon  which  Nano’s  troops  retreated. 

The  Guru  extolled  Nano's  bravery,  and  asked  if 
there  was  any  Sikh  who  could  now  sustain  the  fight. 
Bhai  Piraga  came  forward  and  said,  ‘ My  Lord,  by 
thy  favour  I will  destroy  the  army  of  the  enemy.’ 
Bhai  Jagana,  Krishan,  and  other  faithful  officers 
with  their  troops  went  to  Piraga’ s support.  WTien 
Bhai  Jagana  and  other  distinguished  Sikhs  were 
slain,  Bidhi  Chand  came  forward  and  asked  the 
Guru’s  permission  to  join  the  combat  and  support 
Bhai  Piraga.  This  being  granted,  Bidhi  Chand  and 
the  Sikhs  fought  with  their  usual  valour,  the  result 
of  which  was  that  the  Muhammadan  army  became 
demoralized,  turned,  and  fled.  Abdulla  Khan,  the 
Muhammadan  chief,  came  on  the  scene  with  a stick 
in  his  hand  to  strike  and  restrain  the  fugitives.  He 
then  appealed  to  Karm  Chand  and  Ratan  Chand  to 
enter  the  combat,  show  their  bravery,  and  not  allow 
it  to  be  said  that  ten  thousand  imperial  troops  were 
killed  in  vain.  The  Chief  also  ordered  his  eldest  son 
Nabi  Bakhsh  to  advance  with  the  troops  under  his 
command. 

When  the  Guru  heard  of  this  he  was  very  pleased 
and  thought  the  time  had  arrived  ior  himself  itO 
eater  the  battle.  It  is  said  that  when  he  twanged 
his  bow  his  enemies  trembled,  and  that  when  the 
neighing  of  his  horse  was  heard  as  he  entered  the 


II2  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

battle-field,  there  was  widespread  eonsternation  in 
the  Muhammadan  ranks. 

When  the  Guru  showed  himself  fully  accoutred  to 
his  troops,  he  called  on  them  to  slay  Abdulla  Khan 
and  thus  put  ah  end  to  the  combat.  Karm  Chand, 
Chandu’s  s<hi,  said  that  he  would  now  avenge  his 
father’s  death  by  killing^  Bidhi  Ghahd  and  capturing 
the  Guru.  Bidhi  Chand  replied,  ' Take  care  ! I will 
send  thee  to  thy  father.’  Karm  Chand  discharged 
showers  of  arrows.  One  of  them  struck  Bidhi  Chand 
and  lodged  in  his  body.  Bidhi  Chand  drew  it  out 
and  hurled  it  back  on  Karm  Chand.  It  missed  him, 
but  struck  his  horse,  causing  the  animal  to  reel  and 
fall.  Bidhi  Chand  then  bound  Karm  Chand,  dragged 
him  before  the  Guru,  and  addressed  him,  ‘ Thou  &dst 
owe  one  debt  to  the  Guru,  in  that  thy  father  killed 
his,  and  now  thou  owest  him  another  for  having 
made  war  on  him.’  Bidhi  Chand  offered  to  put 
him  to  death  if  the  Guru  allowed  him.  The  Guru 
seeing  him  in  that  miserable  plight  took  compassion 
on  him,  and  ordered  his  release,  sa5dng  it  was  not 
proper  to  kill  a defenceless  prisoner. 

When  Karm  Chand,  thus  released,  found  his  way 
to  the  Chief  he  gave  him  the  following  version  of 
the  incident.  ‘ I went  to  the  Guru  to  reconnoitre 
his  army.  He  arrested  and  tortured  me,  but  I 
escaped  by  stratagem  and  force  of  arms,  and  have 
lMX)ught  thee  this  information.  The  Guru  hath  a 
very  small  army  ; make  a rush  and  we  shall  capture 
him  with  all  his  property.’  The  Chief  accordingly 
ordered  his  troops  to  charge,  upon  which  there  arose 
a sanguinary  engagement  on  both  sides.  Nabi 
Bakhsh  led:  one  wing  of  the  Muhammadan  > army, 
and  his  father  the  other.  Karim  Bakhsh,  the  Chief's 
second  son^  on  seeing  h^  father  personally  engaged, 
hastened  to  hisS  assistance^  Their  4rmy,  ho^evea’,' 
was  destroyed  like  dry  grass  by  a fbrest  fire, 
eipally  owing  to  the  exettions  and  braveiyof  fehai 
ShaktU.-  ■ ^ . 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  113 

Nabi  Bajkhsh  discharged  an  arrow  at  Paras  Ram, 
one  of  the  Sikh  leaders,  and  severely  wounded  him. 
The  Sikhs  with  Shaktu  at  their  head  gathered  round 
and  rescued  him.  After  recovering  consciousness  he 
rushed  with  his  sword  on  Nabi  Bakhsh,  and  cut  off 
his  head  with  one  blow.  The  Muhammadans  on 
this  attacked  Paras  Ram  and  Shaktu,  and  killed 
them  both.  The  Chief  wept  aloud  at  the  loss  of 
his  son,  and  expressed  a pious  wish  that  he  himself 
had  been  slain  instead.  Karim  Bakhsh,  the  Chief’s 
second  son,  went  to  console  his  father,  saying  he 
would  avenge  his  brother,  and  either  kill  the  Guru 
or  be  killed  himself — a resolution  which  the  chief 
applauded.  As  the  youth  advanced  he  descried  the 
Guru.  He  asked  those  who  had  no  fear  in  their 
hearts  or  those  who  had  no  loved  ones,  to  accom- 
pany him  to  seize  and  kill  the  Guru.  They  who 
chose  might  retire  from  the  conflict.  The  Chief 
hearing  his  words  and  fearing  he  was  too  sanguine 
of  success,  warned  him  not  to  advance,  but  hold  his 
ground  where  he  was,  for  the  Guru  was  not  merely 
the  bravest  of  the  Sikhs,  but  a veritable  messenger  of 
death.  The  rash  youth  heeded  not  his  father’s  counsel. 

The  Guru  on  seeing  Karim  Bakhsh  at  a distance 
called  out  to  Bhai  Bidhi  Chand,  ‘ Lo  ! the  Chief’s 
young  son  hath  come  to  avenge  his  brother.  The 
slanderers  have  incensed  his  mind.  Now  exert  thy 
strength  and  engage  him.  He  hath  come  to  assault 
thee,  but  do  thou  assault  him.’  Bidhi  Chand 
shouting  defiance  advanced.  The  Chief  sent  Ratan 
Chand  and  Karm  Chand  to  his  son’s  assistance. 
Then  arose  a desperate  effort  to  capture  the  Guru. 
They  cried  out  that  the  Guru  had  no  army,  that  he 
should  become  their  easy  prey,  and  that  they  should 
receive  suitable  rewards  from  the  Emperor.  Such 
was  the  fury  of  the  imperial  troops  that  some  of 
the  Sikhs  were  on  the  point  of  giving  way  when 
they  were  kept  in  position  by  Bidhi  Chand.  Karim 
Bakhsh  couching  his  lance  directed  it  at  Bidhi  Chand, 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


114 

but  it  only  lighted  on  his  saddle-bow.  Bidhi  Chand 
and  Karim  Bakhsh  now  rushed  at  each  other  with 
drawn  swords.  Karim  Bakhsh  dealt  ■ a blow  at 
Bidhi  Chand  from  which  he  was  again  providentially 
saved.  It  then  for  a time  became  a play  of  fence, 
when  sword  clashed  against  sword,  until  with  one 
swashiiig  blow  Karim  Bakhsh  shattered  Bidhi 
Chand’s  weapon  in  twain.  Bidhi  Chand  turned  his 
horse  and  ran  for  another  sword.  On  his  return 
with  a better  tempered  blade  he  dealt  Karim  Bakhsh 
a blow  which  terminated  the  combat. 

The  sons  of  Chandu  and  Gherar,  on  seeing  this, 
fled  from  the  field,  but  were  afraid  to  show  their 
faces  to  the  Chief,  and  so  remained  at  a distance. 
Several  followed  their  example,  and  were  pursued 
by  Bidhi  Chand  and  other  Sikhs  at  the  head  of  their 
troops.  The  runaways  told  the  Chief  of  his  second 
son’s  death,  and  the  intelligence  made  him  for  a 
time  unconscious.  On  being  partially  restored  he 
began  to  mourn,  ‘ Alas ! fool  that  I was  not  to 
consider  that  I was  powerless  against  him  about 
whom  the  Emperor  was  silent  even  after  the  loss 
of  his  army.  Both  my  sons  are  dead,  yet  I behold 
the  light  of  day.  A curse  on  me  and  my  life ! I 
have  been  untrue  to  my  Emperor  and  also  to  my 
relations,  who  warned  me  not  to  contend  with  the 
Guru.  He  hath  killed  five  of  my  bravest  officers 
and  my  two  darling  boys.  My  progeny  is  at  an 
end,  and  there  will  be  none  to  preserve  my  name 
in  the  world.’ 

The  Chief  endeavoured  to  rally  Ratan  Chand 
and  K^rm  Chand : — ‘ About  two  hours  of  day  still 
remain.  Advance  and  fight,  and  perhaps  the  Guru 
may  come  into  our  possession.  Your  boasts  have 
all  been  in  vain.  Like  jackals  you  are  only  fit  to 
bark.  There  is  even  yet  time  to  restore  the  fortune 
of  war.  Let  me  behold  your  manliness.  Either 
conquer  or  die.’  The  Chief  then  gave  the  order  for 

a general  advance. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


115 

The  Guru,  seeing  the  onslaught  of  the  Muham- 
madans specially  directed  against  himself,,  addressed 
his  troops,  ‘ My  brethren,  the  Turks  are  advancing  ; 
I will  now.  myself  fight  and  destroy  those  enemies 
who  have  without  cause  brought  an  army  of  thou- 
sands against  God’s  servant.’  Both  armies  then 
again  hotly  engaged.  The  Turks  came  as  it  were 
to  offer  themselves  as  sacrifice  to  the  Guru.  Abdulla 
Khan,  maddened  by  the  death  of  his  sons,  discharged 
flights  of  arrows,  and  heeded  not  whether  he  aimed 
at  friend  or  foe.  This  was  the  most  desperate  por- 
tion of  the  conflict.  None  retreated,  none  sued  for 
quarter. 

Under  the  favouring  glance  of  the  Guru  the  Sikhs 
who  had  formerly  been  weak  as  hares  now  became 
strong  as  lions.  No  matter  what  their  birth  or 
previous  calling,  they  all  proved  themselves  gallant 
heroes  in  the  field.  Abdulla  Khan  resolved  to  con- 
quer or  die.  He  could  not  show  himself  again  to  the 
Emperor  if  his  ten  thousand  troops  were  vanquished 
in  vain.  There  would  be  no  place  in  which  to  hide 
himself,  and  the  earth  would  not  open  to  receive 
him.  It  therefore  would  be  better  for  him  to  receive 
death  at  the  hands  of  the  Guru.  The  Guru  seeing 
Karm  Chand  and  Ratan  Chand  in  front  addressed 
them,  ‘What  think  you  on?  Now  avenge  your 
fathers.  Retreat  not  like  cowards.  Be  brave  and 
stand  before  me  ; otherwise  go  where  your  fathers 
have  gone.’ 

The  Guru  let  fly  an  arrow  which  disabled  Ratan 
Chand’s  horse.  Then  Karm  Chand  advanced,  drew 
hiS;  bow-string  to  his  ear,  and  shot  the  Guru’sjiorse, 
the-  famous  charger  sent  from  Kabul  which  the  Guru 
had  obtained  with  such  difficulty.  The  Guru  drew 
forth  the  arrow  and  pierced  Karm  Chand’s  horse 
with  it.  Ratan  Chand  and  Karm  Chand  had  now 
to  fight  on  the  ground.  Joined  by  their  Chief  they 
discharged  flights  of  arrows  at  the  Guru,  who  saved 
himseJf  by  his  dexterity,  The  arrows,  JeB  like 


ii6  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

showers  of  flowers  around  him,  and  it  seemed  as  if 
the  three  men  had  been  worshipping  him  and  begging 
of  him  the  gift  of  salvation.  The  Guru  was  left 
alone  to  contend  against  all  three,  as  Bidhi  Chand 
and  his  other  heroes  were  engaged  fighting  in  a 
distant  part  of  the  field.  His  enemies  were  very 
pleased  to  see  the  Guru  alone  and  unhorsed,  at  the 
approach  of  evening  too.  He,  however,  felt  that 
victory  was  ever  on  the  side  of  religion,  ‘ God 
succoureth  His  servants,’  he  thought,  ‘ and  the 
proud  and  the  wicked  shall  be  vanquished.’ 

The  Guru  on  being  closely  assailed  by  Karm  Chand 
struck  him  with  his  shield  and  made  him  stagger 
and  fall.  Ratan  Chand  seeing  this  ran  to  his  aid. 
The  Guru  drew  forth  his  pistol  and  shot  him.  Then 
fearing  that  his  enemy  might  still  escape,  he  dis- 
charged an  arrow,  which  completed  his  discom- 
fiture. Abdulla  Khan  now  lost  all  command  over 
himself,  and  struck  out  with  his  sword  right  and 
left,  before  and  behind,  above  and  below.  The 
Guru  at  first  received  all  his  blows  on  his  strong 
shield.  Then  gathering  his  strength  he  drew  his 
falchion  on  the  Chief,  and  severed  his  head  from  his 
body.  By  this  time  Karm  Chand  had  recovered 
consciousness  and  rushed  at  the  Guru  saying, 

‘ Whither  goest  thou  after  killing  all  my  friends  ? 
Deem  not  that  by  killing  Ratan  Chand  the  victory 
is  thine.’ 

There  ensued  for  a time  a sword-play  between 
the  Guru  and  Karm  Chand,  until  the  sword  of  the 
latter  was  broken.  The  Guru  as  a holy  man  desiring 
to  take  no  mean  advantage  of  his  adversary,  put 
his  own  sword  into  his  scabbard,  and  engaged  with 
him  in  a wrestling  combat.  They  were  locked  in 
one  another’s  arms,  as  if,  after  all  the  fighting,  they 
had  become  fast  friends.  At  last  the  Guru,  seizing 
Karm  Chand  by  both  arms,  swung  him  round  as 
Krishan  did  his  uncle  Kans,  and  killed  him  by 
^ka^mg\ns  head  on  the  ground.  It  had  now  become 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  117 

dark.  The  Chief  and  all  his  sardars  were  slain,  his 
army  had  fled,  the  battle  was  ended,  and  victory 
remained  with  the  Guru.  Bidhi  Chand  lit  a torch 
and  passed  through  files  of  dead  bodies  in  his  search 
for  his  master,  who  was  only  found  with  delay  and 
difficulty. 

The  Guru  went  to  his  tent  and  Bidhi  Chand 
sought  out  the  wounded  and  attended  to  them. 
The  next  day  was  occupied  with  the  disposal  of  the 
slain.  The  Chief,  his  two  sons,  and  his  five  generals 
were  all  put  into  one  grave.  The  bodies  of  the 
fallen  Sikhs  were  brought  to  the  Guru  and  their 
names  announced.  The  Guru  blessed  them  one  by 
one,  and  caused  them  to  be  thrown  into  the  river 
Bias.  The  bodies  of  the  fallen  Muhammadans 
shared  the  same  fate.  A platform  was  erected  near 
the  place  where  they  were  buried.  In  after  days 
the  Guru  used  occasionally  to  go  and  sit  on  it,  and 
point  out  to  Bidhi  Chand  and  his  other  officers  the 
advantages  of  a just  cause,  by  means  of  which  they 
had  destroyed  their  proud  enemies,  and  saved  their 
own  brave  and  loyal  co-religionists. 

The  Guru  then  delivered  a funeral  oration,  in  the 
course  of  which  he  said,  ‘ Death  is  very  potent  and 
capable  of  altering  human  affairs  in  a moment.  It 
maketh  those  who  are  laughing  weep,  and  those  who 
are  weeping  laugh.’  He  then  recited  the  following 
hymn  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

This  perishable  world  was  made  like  a house  of  sand  ; 

It  is  quickly  destroyed  like  paper  moistened  with  water, 

O man,^  behold  and  consider  the  True  One  in  thy  heart. 

Sidhs,  Strivers,  householders,  and  Jogis  have  departed 
abandoning  their  houses  and  homes. 

The  world  is  like  a nightly  dream. 

What  we  see  shall  all  perish ; why  attach  thyself  to  it, 
O fool  ? 

^ Maffsh  is  here  used  for  man.  The  word  generally,  means 

desire,  but  it  is  used  by  the  tenth  Guru  in  the  sense  of  conscience. 


ii8  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Where  are  thy  brothers  and  friends  ? Open  thine  «y^s 
and  look. 

One  goeth,  another  shall  go — each  in  his  turn. 

They  who  serve  the  perfect  true  Guru  shall  have  a fixed 
place  at  God’s  door. 

The  man  Nanak  is  God’s  slave,  preserve  his  honour, 
O God  .J 

And  also  the  following : — 

0 man,  why  art  thou  puffed  up  with  pride  ? 

Within  thee  are  bad  odour,  impurity,  and  uncleanness ; 
what  is  visible  is  ashes. 

0 mortal,  remember  Him  who  made  all  things,  and  who 
supporteth  life  and  soul. 

The  ignorant  fool  who  forsaketh  Him  and  attacheth  himr 
self  to  other  gods,  shall  be  born  again  after  death. 

1 am  blind,  dumb,  crippled,  devoid  of  understanding; 
0 God,  the  Preserver,  preserve  me. 

God  is  omnipotent  to  act  and  cause  others  to  act ; Nanak, 
what  a wretched  creature  is  man  ! * 

‘ His  evil  fate  urged  Abdulla  Khan  so  that  with- 
out cause  or  provocation  he  marched  against  us  with 
ten  thousand  men.  Besides  his  two  sons  he 
hath  lost  his  state,  authority,  and  prosperity,  and 
become  himself  the  prey  of  death.  It  hath  so  dis- 
posed of  him  that  no  trace  of  him  remaineth.  There 
is  no  reliance  to  be  placed  on  life.  We  know  not 
when  the  last  hour  shall  come  The  only  gain  is 
worship,  and  repetition  of  God’s  name.’  Hymns 
were  then  recited  and  prayers  offered  for  the  repose 
of  the  souls  of  all  who  had  fallen  in  the  battle. 

Chapter  XII 

To  the  masands  was  entrusted  the  construction 
of  the  city  of  Sri  Har  Gobindpur.  The  surrounding 
walls  were  to  have  five  gates ; streets  and  market- 
places were  to  be  laid  out  \ and  houses  constructed 

' BWawal.  * DevgandhSri. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


119 

for  those  who  thronged  to  offer  homage  to  the  Guru. 
Gherar’s  son  having  been  killed,  all  his:  relations 
fled,  and  the  Guru  remained  in  peaceable  possession. 
Heiprojected  the  construction  of  a Sikh  temple,  but 
it  occurred  to  him  that  his  Muhammadan  troops 
and  labourers  would  also  require  a temple  for  their 
worship.  He  therefore  constructed  with  thoughtful 
impartiality  both  a temple  and  a mosque.  He  pur- 
chased horses  for  his  men  to  replace  those  which  had 
been  killed  in  action.  His  soldiers  now  considered 
where  they  should  find  a horse  worthy  of  being 
ridden  by  the  Guru  himself.  Inquiries  were  made 
even  in  distant  countries,  but  no  horse  could  be 
found  to  take  the  place  of  the  Guru’s  famous  steed, 
killed:  by  an  arrow  from  Karm  Chand’s  bow. 

WTiile  the  minds  of  the  Sikhs  were  thus  exercised 
a rich  contractor  called  Subhaga  came  from  the  west 
of  the  Pan  jab  with  an  offering  of  five  horses.  The 
Guru  selected  the  best  among  them  for  his  own 
use.  He  gave  the  second  to  his  son  Gurditta,  the 
third  to  Bhai  Bidhi  Chand,  the  fourth  he  sent  to 
Painda  Khan,  and  the  fifth  he  kept  in  his  stable  to  be 
subsequently  disposed  of  as  might  be  deemed  ex- 
pedient or  necessary. 

One  day  as  the  Guru  sat  in  the  midst  of  his 
Sikhs  he  said,  ‘ According  to  the  rules  of  our  re- 
ligion the  repetition  of  the  Gurus’  hymns  with 
due  understanding  and  with  a pure  heart  is  God’s 
real  worship.’  The  Sikhs  represented  that  they 
all  read  the  Gurus’  hymns  daily.  The  Guru  re- 
plied, ‘ He  who  can  repeat  the  Japji  and  under- 
stand the  divine  knowledge  contained  therein,  shall 
have  his  desires  fulfilled,  and  obtain  deliverance 
hereafter.’  A Sikh  named  Gopal  undertook  the  task. 
The  Guru  having  caused  his  feet  to  be  bathed, 
s^ted  him  on  a lofty  throne  in  front  of  him.  Gopal 
then  jbegan  to  repeat  the  Japji.  When  he  had 
nearly  finished,  the  Guru  began  to  consider  what 
present  he  should  make  him.  The  wealth  of  the 


120 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION  i i 


world  would  be  insignificant  for  a man  of  perfect 
piety.  The  Guru  seriously  intended  to  offer  hini 
the  Guruship,  and  sent  for  five  paise  and  a 

coco-nut  to  perform  the  ceremony  of  his  appoint* 
ment.  When  Gopal  came  to  the  line,  ‘ God 
dwelleth  in  Sach  Khand,’  in  the  thirty-seventh 
pauri  of  the  great  Sikh  morning  religious  ser- 

vice, the  Guru  moved  his  feet  to  stand  up  and* do 
obeisance  to  the  reader  as  Guru.  At  that  irioment 
Gopal’s  thoughts  turned  away  from  God,  and  he  said 
to  himself,  ‘ Will  the  Guru  reward  me  with  his  spare 
horse  or  not  ? ’ The  Guru  read  his  thoughts,  dis- 
closed them  to  him,  and  informed  him  that  but 

for  his  mental  wanderings  he  should  receive  the 
Guruship.  The  Guru  gave  him  the  fifth  horse  as 
his  reward,  but  he  lost  the  Guruship,  which  would  be 
superior  to  the  wealth  of  the  world.  So  difficult 
is  it  to  pray  with  attention. 

The  party  of  Sikhs  who  had  come  with  Subhaga 
received  the  Guru’s  permission  to  visit  the  shrines 
and  places  sacred  to  the  Gurus.  They  proceeded 
to  Goindwal,  and  bathed  in.  its  Hawaii.  Thence 
they  visited  Khadur  and  Tarn  Taran.  From  there 
they  proceeded  to  the  Guru’s  forest  to  see  Bhai 
Budha.  They  found  Gur  Das  with  him.  Subhaga 
and  his  party  told  them  who  they  were,  and  related 
all  the  incidents  connected  with  the  Guru’s  occupa- 
tion of  land  on  the  margin  of  the  Bias  and  the 
subsequent  battle  with  the  Muhammadans.  As 
Subhaga  and  his  party  were  departing  for  Amritsar, 
Bhai  Budha  and  Bhai  Gur  Das  accompanied  them. 
Subhaga  and  his  friends  after  visiting  Amritsiar  and 
beholding  God’s  temple  returned  to  their  own 
country.  Bhai  Budha,  Bhai  Gur  Das,  and  three 
other  Sikhs  named  Jiwa,  Ajitta,  and  Jodha,  whb 
joined  them  in  Amritsar,  all  proceeded  to  s^e  the 
Guru  at  Sri  Har  Gobindpur.  When  Bhai  Budha 
had  inspected  the  Guru’s  city  he  said  that  as  he  was 
now  old,  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  retire  from  the 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HiAR  GOBIND  121 

active  service  of  religion  and  return  io  his  village 
Raindas;  He  recjuested  the  Guru’s  perihission  to 
do:  so,  and  at  the  same  time  prayed  him  to  appdrot 
a Accessor  who  would  manage  the  villages  granted 
to  Bibi  Bhani  by  the  Emperor  Akbar,  His  heart 
was  sad  at  parting  from  the  Guru,  and  he  begged 
him  to  show  himself  to  him  whenever  he  invoked 
him.  Bhai  Gur  Das  remained  with  the  Guru  in 
Sri  Har  Gobindpur. 

A man  called  Khwaja  had  accompanied  the  Guru 
as  groom  from  Kashmir,  and  was  very  attentive 
and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties.  The 
Guru  once  seeing  him,  while  running  by  his  horse’s 
sidei  perspiring  profusely,  invited  him  to  ask  a favour. 
Khwaja  only  requested  that  he  might  ever  have  the 
privilege  to  behold  him.  The  Guru  gave  him  the 
true  Name,  and  made  him  happy.  His  under- 
standing then  became  enlightened,  the  veil  of  false- 
hood dropped  from  his  eyes,  and  he  saw  God,  first 
in  the  world  and  then  in  himself,  but  informed  no 
One  of  his  spiritual  happiness. 

One  Jani  a Saiyid — or  reputed  descendant  of  the 
prophet  Muhammad — chanced  to  turn  his  attention 
to  religion  and  became  a faqir.  He  resided  among 
faqirs  in  the  hope  of  meeting  some  religious  men 
who  would  give  him  spiritual  consolation.  In  his 
wanderings  he  met  some  very  eloquent  men,  but 
none  of  heroic  devotion.  Having  heard  of  Khwaja’s 
spiritual  attainments  he  went  to  him  for  information, 
* 0 Khwaja,  how  heist  thou  escaped  from  the  snares 
of  the  evil  one  ? When  I try  to  fix  my  mind  on  God, 
I am  beset  with  lust,  wrath,  avarice,  worldly  love,  and 
pride.  Howshall  I free  myself  from  these  deadly  sins  ? ’ 
Khwaja  replied,  ‘The  true  Guru  hath  banished  my 
evil  thoughts,  and  made  me  happy.  Go  thou  and 
stand  at  his  door.  The  Guru  hath  said  : — 

If  thou  efface  THysfelf  and  serve  the  Guru,  thou  shaft 
obtain  some  honour. 


122  1 THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

■ f As  the  gold  i of  the  > mine  when  twelve  times 
annealed  be<^meth  fine  gold,  so  the  mind  beceoaeth 
pure ; by  chastening  aaf^d  suffering.  • When  the , GuiHi 
knoweth  thy  heart’s  devotion,  he  will  at  once  make 
thee  happy.  If  a poor  man  stand  at  a rich  man’s 
door  and  remain  there,  he  may,  even  though  he 
receive  buffets  at  first,  obtain  advantage  at  last.’ 
Jani  on  hearing  this  went  and  stood  at  the 'Gum’s 
door.  The  Guru  sent  for  him,  asked  why  he  stood 
there,  and  what  he  wanted.^  Jani  replied.  ‘ Know- 
ing the  things  of  this  world  to  be  perishable,  I 
have  abandoned  them.  Grant  me  a sight  of  the 
Ruler  of  the  world  and  save  me  from  the  fire  of 
hell.’  The  Guru  rejoined,  ‘ Tell  me  what  else  thou 
requirest.  God  is  very  remote.'  Jani  refused  to 
accept  this  answer,  quoting  Guru  Arjan  : — 

He  who  is  infatuated  with  worldly  love,  deemeth  God 
distant : 

But,  saith  Nanak,  He  is  ever  present.’ 

‘ If  thou,  O Guru  ’,  continued  Jani,  ‘ show  me  God, 
then  He  will  not  be  distant.’ 

The  Guru  upon  this  directed  his  Sikhs  to  build 
a wall  between  Jani  and  himself.  The  object  of  this 
apparently  was  to  test  the  sincerity  of  Jani’s  devotion. 
Jani,  however,  held  his  ground  and  kept  his  attention 
fixed  on. the  Guru.  He  yielded  not  to  hunger,  thirst, 
or  sleep,  but  remained  at  the  Guru’s  door.  When- 
ever he  saw  a Sikh  passing,  he  implored  him  to  take 
his  message  to  the  Guru.  The  Guru  wearied  by  his 
importunities  at  last  said, If  he  be  in  a great  hurry 
to  see  me.  let  him  leap  into  the  rivep.’  Jani  hearing 
this  actu^ly  went  to  leap  into  the  river.  The  Guru 
sent  a Sikh  to.  dissuade  him.  He  then  offered  him 
wealth  and  supernatural  power,  but  these  boons  were 
refused.  Jam  would  only  accept  divine  knowledge. 
The  Guru  then  put  his  hand  on  his  forehead,  and  made 

^ Gauri.  . / 


LIFE  OF  GORU  HAR  GOBIND  123 

attracted  to  the  Guru  by  the  religious  proficiency 
attained  by  Khwaja  and  Jani,  and' remained  ih  his 
service  after  they  had  departed.  i 

A deputation  from  Ksehmir  waited  on  the  Guru, 
and  requested  him  to  send  there  as  preacher  Bhai 
Garhia,  ivho  is  described  as  a very  liberal,  humfble, 
and  disinterested  man.  Bhai  Garhia  on  his  way 
encamped  at  some  distance  from  the  city  of  Gujrat, 
where  he  met  Shah  Daula.  Bhai  Garhia  was  well 
received  in  Kashmir.  He  used  to  sing  the  Gurus’ 
hymns  and  relate  events  in  the  lives  of  the  Gurus. 
After  some  time  Guru  Har  Gobind  recalled  him. 
Whatever  offerings  he  received  while  in  Kashmir 
he  spent  in  the  Guru’s  name,  and  at  his  departure 
gave  a feast  in  honour  of  his  spiritual  master.  The 
Guru  was  pleased  with  the  manner  in  which  he  had 
spent  the  offerings  he  had  received  in  Kashmir.  In 
due  time  Bhai  Garhia  returned  to  his  native  village. 

One  day,  as  the  Guru  was  sitting  in  open  court, 
a proud  Brahman  called  Nitya  Nand,  a native  of 
Batala,  entered  leaning  on  his  staff.  His  dbject 
was  to  discuss  religious  matters  with  the  Guru. 
The  Guru  respectfully  received  him.  Nitya  Nand 
produced  the  Purans  and  began  to  read  them. 
When  he  had  finished,  a Hindu  invited  him  to  read 
the  Garur  Puran,  a Sanskrit  composition  recited 
for  dying  Hindus.  According  to  it  the  soul  reaches 
its  abode  in  the  next  world  a year  after  the  dissolu- 
tion of  the  body.  A Sikh  called  Sundar  said, 
‘ By  the  Guru’s  favour  I can  traverse  that  road  in 
twelve  hours.’  Bh4i  Lala  said,  ‘ I can  do  it  in  six 
hours  ’ Bhai  Manj  said,  ‘ I can  do  it  in  three  hours.’ 
Bhai  Nihala  said,  ‘ What  need  have  we  to  go  there 
at  all  ? ’ The  Brahman  then  said  to  the  Guru, 
‘ Listen  to  what  thy  Sikhs  are  saying.’  The  Guru 
replied,  ‘ What  my  Sikhs  say  is  correct.  The  one 
year’s  journey  stated  in  thy  text  is  only  for  sinners ; 
but  for  those  who  act  without  any  worldly  object, 
who  possess  divine  knowledge,  and  who  are  saints 


124 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


of  God,  there  is  no  necessity  to  traverse  the  journey 
at  all.  The  companions  of  a king  have  no  need 
to  go  to  a subordinate  of  his,  nor  are  good  men  sent 
to  prison.  In  the  same  way  good  men  suffer  not 
on  the  way  to  their  last  abode,  and  have  no  concern 
with  thy  Dharmraj . Wherefore  as  Guru  Ram  Das 
hath  said  : — 

They'  who  have  meditated  on  God  the  best  Being,  the 
Root  of  joy,  are  ever  in  extreme  happiness. 

They  have  ceased  to  regard  Dharmraj  ; all  their  concern 
for  death  is  at  an  end.^ 

‘ Guru  Arjan  hath  also  said  : — 

The  road  on  which  the  evil  passions  plundered 

The  traveller  is  far  from  the  saints. 

It  was  the  perfect  Guru  who  pointed  out  to  me  the  right 
road. 

Thy  name,  0 Lord,  is  the  way  of  salvation ; the  road 
of  Death  is  distant. 

The  port  where  that  greedy  tax-gatherer  watcheth 

Is  far  from  the  saint. 

While  very  many  are  tortured  by  Death, 

The  saints  abide  with  the  Supreme  God. 

The  recording  angels  write  all  men’s  accounts  : 

They  will  take  no  notice  of  the  saints. 

Saith  Nanak,  for  him  who  hath  found  the  perfect  true 
Guru 

Unblown  trumpets  play.* 

‘ As  a man  on  horseback  can  traverse  a road  in 
cme  hour  which  taketh  a man  on  foot  three  hours, 
and  he  who  hath  a better  conveyance  can  traverse 
it  still  more  quickly,  so  the  good  suffer  not  like  the 
bad,  and  their  road  is  different.  The  coming  and 
going  of  the  soul  is  the  result  of  spiritual  ignorance. 
As  Guru  Arjan  hath  said  : — 

My  trknsmigration  is  at  an  end  ; 

My  heated  caldron  hath  become  cold ; the  Guru  hath 
given  me  the  cxioling  Name.® 

Bilawal.  * Asa.  ® Maru. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  125 

‘ And  again  : — 

The  saints  who  have  taken  God’s  name  as  their  support 
suffer  not  transmigration. 

It  is  all  God’s  play,  saith  Nanak ; God  is  altogether  in- 
comprehensible.* ^ 

On  hearing  this  the  Brahman  obtained  peace, 
and  became  satisfied  that  the  Guru’s  words  were  the 
essence  and  conclusion  of  all  wisdom.  He  confessed, 
‘ In  the  first  place,  I had  pride  of  caste ; secondly, 
I had  pride  of  learning  which  attacked  me  like  fever; 
but  I thank  the  Guru,  whose  words  are  cooling,  and 
who  hath  cooled  with  them  my  burning  mind.’  The 
Brahman  being  thus  humbled  remained  with  the 
Guru,  became  a Sikh,  and  began  to  preach  the  Sikh 
religion. 

Bhai  Budha  remained  in  his  village  of  Ramdas 
intent  on  his  devotions.  The  True  Name  ever  came 
spontaneously  to  hfs  tongue.  One  night  he  saw 
Guru  Arjan  in  a vision,  and  begged  him  to  place  him 
at  his  feet.  Guru  Arjan  replied,  ‘ Guru  Nanak  hath 
made  death  subservient  to  thee.  Thou  hast  seen 
six  spiritual  kings,  and  mayest  when  it  pleaseth  thee 
go  to  Sach  Khand,  and  there  obtain  imperishable 
dignity.’  After  this  Bhai  Budha  awoke,  and  telling 
his  son  Bhana  of  the  vision,  said  his  end  had  come, 
for  Wahguru  had  called  him. 

Bhai  Budha  then  sent  for  a banker  friend  of  his 
and  said  to  him,  ‘ Go  to  the  Guru  and  remind  him 
of  a promise  he  once  made  to  come  to  me  whenever 
necessary.’  The  Guru  taking  Bhai  Gur  Das  and 
other  Sikhs  went  to  Bhai  Budha,  and  took  a last 
farewell  of  him.  Bhai  Budha  had  strength  enough  left 
to  wash  the  Guru’s  feet.  He  then  drank  some  of  the 
water  therefrom  and  sprinkled  the  remainder  over 
his  house.  It  is  said  that,  as  the  ocean  is  pleased  on 
seeing  the  full  moon,  so  was  Bhai  Budha  pleased  on 
beholding  the  Guru.  The  Guru  said  to  him,  ‘ Bhai 

^ Gauri. 


126 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Budha  thou  hast  lived  long.  Thou  hast  been  ever 
\v;it^  the  Gurus.  Give  me  some  instruction.’  Bhai 
Budha  replied,  ‘ Great  king,  thou  art  a sun ; I am 
a fire-fly  before  thee.  Thou  hast  come  to  save  me, 
and  to  hear  my  dying  words.  Guru  Nanak  had  no 
worldly  concerns  or  designs.  He  travelled  over 
many  lands,  and  established  in  them  the  worship  of 
the  true  Name.  Guru  Angad  by  the  force  of  his 
piety  and  devotion  pleased  him,  and  obtained  the 
Guruship.  He  gave  it  to  Guru  Amar  Das,  he  to 
Guru  Ram  Das,  and  he  to  Guru  Arjan  who  with 
open  hands  showered  upon  men  happiness  in  this 
life’ and  salvation  in  the  next.  Guru  Arjan  possessed 
a treasury  of  the  Name,  which  was  never  exhausted* 
His  fame  hath  spread  over  the  world.  Thou  his  son 
art  spiritual  and  temporal  lord  and  protector  of  the 
holy.  Though  divine,  thou  also  performest  a human 
part.  I have  been  a servant  of  the  Guru’s  house  for 
six  generations.  Succour  me  in  the  next  world,  and 
allow  me  not  to  suffer  when  I enter  death’s  door, 
which  I fondly  hope  is  the  portal  of  salvation.  My  son 
Bhana  here  is  thy  servant : take  his  arm  and  keep 
him'  at  thy  feet.’ 

The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Thou  sawest  Guru  Nanak,  and 
hast  ever  abided  by  his  instruction.  Guru  Arjan 
hath  said : — 

They  with  whom  God  is  pleased  love  the  saints’  society. 

They  who  touched  Guru  Nanak  saved  all  thdr  families. 

They  to  whom  God  hath  been  merciful  have  obtained 
all  happiness. 

They  who  touched  Guru  Nanak  have  not  been  bom  again. 

They  whose  fetters  the  Merciful  hath  cut  off,  are  attached 
to  His  Worship.  ' ' 

They  who  have  touched  Guru  Nanak  are  ever  emanci- 
pated in  this  World  and  the  next.^ 

* Thpu,  0 Bhai  Budha,  shalt  assuredly  obtain 
immortal  bUss.  Of  this  thy  humiUty  is  an  .assprance.’ 

^ Ouru  Arjan’s  Sawaiyas. 


LIFE  OF  OURU  HAR  GOBIND  127 

The  Guru  then  put  his  hand  on  Bhai  Budha’s 
head  and  blessed  him.  Next  morning  'Bhai  Budha 
arose  before  day  and  repeated  the  Japji.  Then 
fixing  the  image  of  the  true  Guru  in  his  heart  and 
uttering  ‘ Wahguru ! Wahguru ! ’ he  departed  for 
Sach  Khand.  The  Guru  and  his  Sikhs  sang  con- 
gratulations on  the  manner  of  Bhai  Budha’s  death 
after  his  long,  holy,  and  eventful  life,  and  lauded 
him  for  the  assistance  he  had  ^ven  in  the  propaga- 
tion and  consolidation  of  the  Sikh  faith.  The  Guru 
himself  ignited  his  funeral  pile. 

At  the  request  of  Bhai  Bhana  the  Guru,  leaving 
his  troops  in  Ramdas,  proceeded  with  a few  favourite 
Sikhs  to  Kartarpur  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Ravi. 
They  all  did  homage  at  the  place  where  Guru  Angad 
had  received  Guruship.  The  Guru  after  a three  days’ 
sojourn  re-crossed  the  river,  and  proceeded  to  Dehra 
Baba  Nanak.  Bhai  Bhana  inquired  where  the  shrine 
of  Guru  Nanak  was.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘It  was  not 
Guru  Nanak’s  desire  to  set  up  shrines  whether  great 
or  small.  On  this  account  the  river  absorbed  his 
remains.’ 

Dharm  Chand,  Guru  Nanak’s  grandson,  with  all 
his  male  relations  came  forth  from  Dehra  Baba 
Nanak  to  receive  the  Guru  and  escort  him  to'  thfeir 
temple.  The  Guru  made  an  offering  to  the  temple 
of  one  thousand  rupees,  and  to  Dharm  Chand’s 
sons  Mihr  Chand  and  Manak  Chand  he  presented 
clothes  and  golden  bracelets.  Dharm  Chand,  con- 
ceited at  the  Guru’s  offering  to  his  sons,  began  to 
think  himself  a person  of  great  importance.  Bhai 
Bhana  on  observing  this  remonstrated  with  hirti 
and  asked 'him  to  listen  to  the  following  stanza  of 
Bhai  Gur  Das 

Sri  Chand  hath  been  continent  from  childhood  and  built 
the  Giuru’s  shrine. 

Lakhmi  Das  his  son  and  Dharm  Chand  his  grandson  had 
a high  opinion  of  themselves. 


128  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Gttm  Angad  seated  his  servant  on  his  throng  yet  Ifetu 
kicked  him  off  it.  ' > 

Mohan  becaine  a fanatic,  and  Mohri  caused  the  top  story, 
where  Guru  A mar  Das  had  resided,  to  be  revered. 

Prithia  became  deceitful  and  urged  false  complaints  and 
accusations  against  the  Guru. 

Mahadev  became  proud — the  Gurus'  sons  made  men  per- 
verse and  led  them  astray. 

The  odour  of  the  sandal  perfumeth  not  the  bamboo.^ 

Dharm  Chand  became  humble  on  hearing  this. 
The  Guru  at  his  lev^e  next  morning  expressed  a 
desire  to  visit  Sri  Chand,  son  of  Guru  Nanak.  He 
went  to  a solitary  place  where  Sri  Chand  was  en- 
gaged in  austerities.  The  Guru  saluted  and  offered 
him  presents.  Sri  Chand  complimented  him  on  his 
bravery  in  war : ‘ Thou  hast  killed  Moslems  and 
given  peace  to  the  poor.’  The  Guru  politely  replied, 
‘ It  was  all  the  result  of  thy  favour.’  The  Guru 
then  set  out  with  Bhai  Bhana  to  Ramdas,  his  father 
Bhai  Budha’s  village.  Bhai  Bhana  entertained  the 
Guru  there  for  a month,  which  they  passed  in  spiritual 
converse. 

The  Guru’s  followers  now  reminded  him  that 
the  Piwali  fair  would  take  place  in  a few  days  in 
Amritsar,  and  pressed  him  to  return  thither  after 
his  long  absence.  He  took  Bhai  Bhana  with  him. 
On  arriving  there  he  sent  for  his  family  from  Goind- 
wal  and  for  Painda  Khan  frqm  Kartarpur.  Painda 
Khan  on  arriving  expressed  regret  that  the  Guru  had 
not  sent  for  him  to  take  part  in  the  battle  of  the 
Bijas. 

A daughter  who  was  born  to  Painda  Khan  after 
the  arrival  of  his  family  in  Amritsar,  was  deemed 
a very  unwelcome  visitor.  The  Guru  on  hearing 
Painda  Khan’s  complaint  on  the  subject,  laughed 
and  said  that  as  God  had  sent  her,  so  would  He 

* That  is,  proud  mtn  generaliy  obtain  no  advantage  by  associating 
with  the  holy.  Wat  XXVI. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  H?AR  GOBIND 


129 


cherish  her.  Bhai  Jetha  asked  the  Gafu  why  he 
laughed.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ This  child  is  strife 
incarnate.  On  her  account  there  shall  be  a great 
battle,  in  which  many  Moslems  shall  perish.  This  is 
God’s  will.’ 


Chapter  XIII 

Natti,Gurditta’s  wife, in  due  time  became  pregnant, 
whereat,  his  mother  Damodari  greatly  rejoiced.  The 
Guru  ordered  Gurditta  to  go  with  his  wife,  spend  the 
Baisakhi  fair  at  Kartarpur,  and  take  his  place  as 
expounder  of  the  faith.  While  there  a son  was  born 
to  him.  When  the  Guru  in  Amritsar  heard  of  the 
glad  event,  he  said  that  Gurditta’s  son  should  prove 
a second  Prithia.  The  Guru  at  the  same  time 
called  Gurditta  and  his  family.  On  their  arrival 
in  Amritsar  the  Guru  put  a shirt  on  the  child  and 
named  him  Dhir  Mai. 

The  Guru  went  one  day  a-hunting  and  heard  a 
woman  singing  the  following  rustic  verses  : — 

Thou  with  the  black  beard  and  white  turban, 

My  name  is  Sulakhani,  and  I live  in  Chabba. 

I present  a petition  to  the  true  Guru. 

May  I,  who  am  now  without  fruit,  bear  fruit ! 

Chabba  is  a village  about  four  miles  from  Amritsar 
on  the  road  to  Tarn  Taran  and  is  near  the  Sangrana 
or  monument  raised  to  those  who  fell  in  the  Guru’s 
battle  with  the  imperial  forces.  The  lady  was  the 
wife  of  a Jat  agriculturist.  She  had  come  to  implore 
the  Guru  to  intercede  for  her  that  she  might  have 
a son-  The  Guru  prayed  for  her  and  she  was  sub- 
sequently blessed  with  a family  of  seven  children. 
A, bard  has  celebrated  this  occurrence  as  follows  : — 

As  the  Guru  was  touring,  a woman  came  to  him  to  ask  for 
a son. 

He  said,  ‘A  son  hath  not -been  written  on  thy  forehead 
on  heiaring  this  she  was  disappointed. 

K 


SIKH.  IV 


130 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION^ 


Then  the  Guru  wrote  on  her  fctrehead  the  figure  one. 

At  the  time  of  writing  his  hand  shook  and  one  beeame 
seven. 

There  were  seven  sons  bom  ; the  universe  knoweth  it. 

By  the  Guru’s  favour  a stake  is  changed  into  a thorn. 

As  the  Guru  on  another  occasion  went  hunting 
some  thirty  miles  from  Amritsar,  he  came  on  Sri 
Chand’s  retreat.  Sri  Chand  asked  him  to  allow  him 
to  adopt  one  of  his  sons.  The  Guru  with  great 
reluctance  gave  his  eldest  son  Gurditta,  who  appears 
to  have  accompanied  him  to  the  chase.  Sri  Chand, 
in  token  of  adoption  and  succession  to  him,  put  on 
Gurditta’s  head  a Persian  hat,  and  on  his  neck  a 
string  of  lotus  seeds. 

Baba  Atal,  the  Guru’s  son  by  Nanaki,  while  playing 
with  the  children  of  the  city  used  to  instruct  them 
by  his  conversation.  Whatever  he  said  even  jest- 
ingly had  a profound  meaning.  He  was  so  beloved 
by  all,  that  no  one  refused  his  requests.  The  Guru 
used  to  take  him  in  his  lap,  fondle  him,  and  say, 
‘ Display  not  thy  power,  or,  if  thou  do,  use  it  with 
discretion.  Squander  it  not  in  vain.’  Baba  Atal 
would  reply,  ‘ Great  king,  thy  treasury  never 
faileth.’ 

There  lived  in  Amritsar  a Sikh  named  Gurumukh 
who  had  an  only  son  called  Mohan,  eight  years  of 
age.  He  and  Baba  Atal  used  to  play  at  bat  and  ball 
together.  Once  they  played  until  nightfall.  The 
victory  remained  with  Baba  Atal,  and  it  was  agreed 
between  the  two  boys  that  Mohan  should  pay  his 
forfeit  in  the  morning.  Both  boys  went  home.  At 
night  Mbhan  arose  for  purposes  of  nature,  and  walking 
in  the  dark  was  bitten  by  a cobra.  On  hearing  his 
screams  his  father  and  mother  arose  and  found  him 
fainting.  A physician  was  called,  but  the  poison  had 
done  its  work,  and  the  boy  succumbed. 

Next  morning  Baba.  Atal  proceeded  to  Mohan’s 
house.  He  heard  weeping  on  the  way,  and  on  being 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  131 

told  that  Mohan  was  dead,  said,  ‘ No,  he  is  not  dead. 
He  is  alive.  Conne,  I will  fetch  him.’  Saying  this 
he  went  to  the  apartment  Where  Mohan’s  body  was 
lying.  Touching  it  with  his  bat  he  said,  ‘ Mohan, 
arise.  Utter  Wahguru ! Open  thine  eyes.  Thou 
oughtest  not  to  sleep  so  late,  arise  and  pay  me  what 
I have  won.’  Upon  this,  it  is  said,  Mohan,  though 
dead  for  four  hours  and  a half,  arose  as  if  from 
sleep.  A crowd  of  bystanders  congratulated  the 
Guru’s  son,  and  said  he  had  done  a deed  beyond 
the  power  of  other  mortal. 

The  Guru  while  sitting  in  his  court  heard  the 
rejoicings.  People  were  saying,  ‘ As  is  the  father,  so 
is  the  son,  a treasury  of  miraculous  power.’  But 
the  Guru  was  not  at  all  pleased.  He  said,  ‘ It  hath 
ever  been  Baba  Atal’s  custom  to  dissipate  his  power. 
Now  whenever  a son  may  die,  the  parents  will  bring 
him  to  our  door.  Whose  son  shall  we  reanimate,  and 
whose  shall  we  allow  to  die  ? God  showeth  no  favour 
to  man,  who  must  enjoy  or  suffer  the  result  of  his 
acts,  and  the  religion  of  saints  and  holy  men  pre- 
scribe th  obedience  to  God’s  will.’ 

While  the  Guru  was  thus  speaking.  Baba  Atal 
returned  from  Mohan’s  house.  The  Guru  angrily 
addressed  him : ‘ Thou  must  be  working  miracles, 
while  I teach  men  to  obey  God’s  will.’  Baba  Atal 
replied,  ‘ Great  king,  mayest  thou  live  for  ages  ! I 
depart  to  Sach  Khand.’  Saying  this  he  left  the 
assembly.  It  did  not  occur  to  any  one  to  seek  him 
or  beg  the  Guru  to  pardon  him.  It  was  thought 
that  the  boy  had  simply  gone  to  his  mother’s  apart- 
ments. He  had,  however,  actually  gone  to  bathe 
in  the  Guru’s  tank  of  nectar.  After  his  ablutions 
he  four  times  circumambulated  the  Golden  Temple, 
and  then  went  and  sat  on  the  margin  of  the  Kaulsar. 
Bending  his  head  forward  he  supported  his  chin  with 
his  bat,  and  repeated  the  Japji  with  his  eyes  directed 
towards  the  Temple.  As  he  finished  his  morning 
devotions,  his  light  blended  with  the  light  of  Goa 

K2 


132 


t 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


on  ^the  tenth  day  of  the  dark^half  of  Asdn, ‘Safnbat 
x6%,  when  he  was  in  his  Mnth  year.  ' 

The  Guru  seeing  his  wives,  children,  and  Sikhs 
lamenting  their  beloved  Baba  Atal  said,  * This  wttfld 
is  perishaWte.  Everything  is  the  sport  of  death.  It 
maketh  the  weepers  laugh  and  the  laughers  weep, 
and  produceth  the  other  vicissitudes  of  life.  Be  con^ 
soled.  Baba  Atal  hath  obtained  immortal  d^ity  and 
his  fame  shall  for  ever  abide.'  When  the  Guru  sent 
fOT  a load  of  sandal  wood  to  cremate  him  in  the 
forest,  the  Sikhs  suggested  that  the  body  should  be 
taken  near  some  inhabited  place  and  not  cremated 
in  that  unfrequented  spot.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ The 
city  shall  increase  in  population,  and  this  shadl  be 
the  centre  of  it.  In  the  Guru’s  city  this  place  shall 
be  'as  the  Anpuma  ^ in  Banaras,  where  all  comers 
are  gratuitously  filled  with  com.’  Baba  Atal  at  the 
time  of  cremation  received  the  name  of  Kotwal,  or 
pofice  officer  of  the  city,  by  which  was  meant  that 
he  Would  ever  guard  its  inhabitants.  The  Guru 
said,  ' In  commemoration  of  him  who  by  God’s  will 
hath  resigned  his  body  in’  his  ninth  year,  a nine- 
storied  shrine  shall  be  erected  which  shall  be  seen 
from  afar.’  The  virtues  and  miracles  of  Baba  Atal 
have  been  abundantly  celebrated  by  the  Sikhs  in 
song  and  story. 

A great  crowd  of  relations  and  friends  came  from 
Goindwal,  Khadur,  Daroli,  Kartarpur,  and  other 
places  to  offer  their  condolences  to  the  Gurti  on  the 
^teath  of  his  son.  He  repeated  for  them  the  following 
B^mn  of  Guru  Aijan  : — 

* A^^rna,  ^ uame  of  PSrbati,  js  sup^sed  to  be  the  Anna  Ferenna 
of  tiie’Romhhti,  whom  Varro  placed  in  the  same  rank  as  FaOas  ahd 
Cereh,  and  whd  ^as  deified  by  the  Roman  people  in  consequence  of 
haring  evpplied  them  wid>  k)od  when  they  letifed  to  Mount  Auent^. 
Besi^  ti^e  alntost  iden%  cd*  umes  there  is  a singulp  9oincideQce  in 
the  times  of  their  worship,  the  festival  of  AnpQma  uung  plaqe  in  the 
«ttljr  part  of  the  increhso  of’ the  moon  in  the  bonth  ofCh^  ^^rch- 


BABA  ATAL  S SHRINE 


SIKH  IV  P.  133 


LIFE  OF  GURiU  HAR  GOBIND 


133 


As  a hwl)iaji4man  living  sovm  hijt  field 
. CMtetb  downithe  crop  whether  ripe  <x  unripe/ « 

So,  O mortal,  know  that  what  is  bom  shall  die : 

God’s  ^wt^alpne  is  permanent.  , 

Nig^it  assuredly  foUpw  day, 

^d  when  the  night  is  passed,  morn  shall  dawn. 

The  ill-fated  sleep  in  the  love  of  mammon, 

^t  by  the  Gum’s  favour  a few  are  wakeful. 

Seith  Napak,  ever  sing  God’s  praises. 

So  shall  thy  face  he  bright  and  thy  heart  be  pure.*  . 

Sain  Das,  husband  of  the  Guru’s  sister-in-law, 
said  to  the  Guru,  ‘ Ordinary  people  suffer  greatly 
on  the  loss  of  a son.  What  is  the  suffering  of  holy 
men  in  such  cases  ? ’ The  Guru  requested  him  to 
draw  lines  on  the  ground.  He  then  requested  him 
to  erase  them.  He  did  so.  The  Guru  then  said, 
‘ Thou  hast  had  no  pleasure  in  making  these  lined 
and  no  pain  in  erasing  them.’  Sain  Das  replied} 
‘ None  whatever.’  Then  said  the  Guru,  ‘ That  is  all 
a holy  man  suffereth  on  the  loss  of  a son.’ 

A Sikh  called  Prem  Chand,  resident  of  Kartarpur, 
proposed  his  daughter  as  a wife  for  Suraj  Mai,  the 
Guru’s  third  son. 

One  day  a conversation  arose  in  the  presence  of 
the  Guru  as  to  the  difficulties  of  Sikhism.  Bhai 
Gur  Das  admitted  the  fact,  but  said  that  at  the  same 
time  men  should  have  faith  in  their  religion.  He 
then  recited  the  twentieth  pauri  of  his  thirty-fifth 
War 

If  a mother  become  unchaste,  how  can  her  son  disgrace 
her  ? , 

’ If  a,  cow  swallow  a g^,  one  would  not  tear  open  her 
telly  and  kill  her.  * . 

^^Even  if  a husband  visit  several  his  wife  shopld 

I^jsseiwe  her  ch^i^y.  ’f- 

' Evep*|ta/rulw  make  current  a leather  coin,  the  subjects 
are  and  outfit  fa  accept  it. 

cut  in  the  East  * Asa. 


134  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

If  Brahmans  drink  wine,  shall  people  bum  them  ? ^ 

Even  if  the  Guru  become  a play*actor,  his  Sikhs  should 
not  lose  their  faith. 

The  Gueu  was  not  pleased  with  the  last  Verse, 
and  thought  he  would  do  something  to  teach  Gur  Das 
humility.  At  the  time  he  wanted  two  chargers, 
and  was  informed  that  Kabul  alone  produced  horses 
worthy  to  bear  him.  He  decided  to  send  Bhai 
Gur  Das  thither,  and  gave  him  money  to  make  the 
purchases.  The  horses  were  to  be  bought  subject 
to  the  Guru’s  approval.  Gur  Das  found  two  chargers 
priced  at  fifty  thousand  rupees  each,  and  sent  them 
to  , the  Guru.  The  Guru  approved  and  wrote  to 
him  to  pay  their  price  and  return  forthwith  to 
Amritsar. 

When  the  owner  went  to  Gur  Das  for  settlement, 
Gur  Das  seated  him  outside  his  tent  and  went  within 
to  count  the  money.  On  opening  the  saddle-bags 
he  found  that  they  contained  not  money  but  brick- 
bats. When  he  did  not  come  forth  from  his  tent 
within  a reasonable  time,  the  horse  merchant  went 
in  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  his  delay.  He  found 
that  Gur  Das  had  escaped  by  an  opening  in  the  back 
of  his  tent,  and  left  the  saddle-bags,  which  to  the 
merchant  now  appeared  filled  with  money.  The 
Sikhs  who  had  come  with  Gur  Das  paid  the  merchant, 
returned  with  the  balance  to  Amritsar,  and  in- 
formed the  Guru  of  Gur  Das’s  sudden  disappearance. 

Gur  Das  was  afraid  to  return  to  the  Guru,  and 
sought  refuge  in  Banaras,  which  he  reached  by  a 
circuitous  route  after  great  hardship  and  suffering, 
^me  Sikhs  residing  there  received  him  with  great 
respect  on  account  of  his  former  connexion  with  the 
Guru  and  his  literary  gifts.  The  Raja  of  the  city 
heard  from  the  ^khs  of  the  arrival  of  a very  dis- 
tinguished member  of  their  body,  and  went  to  do 
him  honour. 

' It  is  written  in  the  Shastars  that  if  a BrShman  drinks  wine,  the 
only  atonement  is  to  kill  himself  by  drinking  it  boiling  hot. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  . HAR  GOBIND  135 

The  Raja  used  often  to  send  for  Gur  Das  and 
listen  to  his  expositions  of.  the  hymns  of  the  Gurus. 
Once  several  pandits  and  Sanyasis  said,  ‘ Banaras 
is  the  city  of  Shiv,  and  he  dealeth  salvation  there  to 
his  worshippers.  Wherefore  abandon  the  teachings 
of  the  Guru  and  adore  Shiv.  What  hast  thou  to 
gain  from  the  Guru  ? ’ Gur  Das  replied,  ‘ As  a vir- 
tuous woman  leaveth  not  her  husband  to  go  to 
another  man,  so  will  I not  abandon  the  Guru  to 
worship  a Hindu  god.  A calf  which  leaveth  its 
mother  and  goeth  to  a strange  cow,  only  receiveth 
kicks.  If  a swan  abandon  Mansarowar,  it  will  not 
elsewhere  receive  pearls  as  food.  If  a man  leave 
an  emperor  and  go  to  serve  his  subjects,  he  will 
feel  his  altered  position.  So  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  can- 
not leave  God  or  preserve  their  honour  by  wor- 
shipping the  gods  and  goddesses  of  His  creation.’^ 

The  pandits  represented,  ‘ The  great  God  in 
Sanskrit  literature  bore  the  names  Shiv,  Gobind, 
Ram,  &c.  Why  did  Guru  Nanak  introduce  the 
custom  of  uttering  Wahguru  and  what  is  the  meaning 
of  the  words  ? ’ Gur  Das  replied  that  Wahguru  was 
the  greatest  of  all  names.  ‘ Wah  means  congratula- 
tion, and  guru  means  great.  Both  words  combined, 
therefore,  mean  congratulation  to  the  Great  God. 
They  also  mean  that  God  is  marvellous,  that  is, 
beyond  human  comprehension.’^ 

The  pandits  discussed  with  him  the  relative  merits 
of  Sanskrit  and  the  vulgar  tongue.  They  said  that 
Sanskrit,  which  was  a written  language,  was  the 
language  of  the  gods,  and  Hindi,  which  was  a spoken 
language,  the  language  of  men.  Gur  Das  replied, 
‘ The  Guru  used  the  spoken  language  in  order  to 
communicate  his  ideas  to  men.  Sanskrit  was  merely 
the  language  of  priests.  The  current  spoken  lan- 
guage had  preceded  it  and  will  succeed  it.  Sanskrit 

^ Gur  Das's  Kabit. 

2 Another  interpretation  of  Wahguru  has  been  given  already  in 
the  Life  of  Guru  Amar  Das. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


136 

only  holdeth  an  intermediate  position.  It  Was  the 
current  language^  Krishan  used*  in  his  exhortations 
to  Arjan.  Whenever  any  one  readeth  on  preachetb 
a Sanskrit  discourse;:  he  must  explain  it  in- the 
language’ d{  the  people.  Speech  can  only  be  uttered 
by  a being  with  a body.  God  hath  no  body,  there- 
fore He  speaketh  no  language,  nor  was  Sanskrit 
composed  by  Him.  It  is  now  found  only  in  books; 
and  is  therefore  a dead  language.  It  is  a tree  which 
beareth  no  fruit,  while  the  current  language  on  the 
contrary  is  a tree  with  fruit-bearing  branches.  The 
Guru  seeing  that  human  life  was  limited,  compiled 
the  Granth  Sahib  in  easy  language.  Sanskrit  is  so 
difficult  that  a whole  life  must  be  spent  in  acquiring 
it,  wherefore  we  use  the  spoken  language  which 
children  and  women  can  read  and  understand.^  It 
is  on  this  account  the  Guru  hath  made  the  spoken 
language  the  vehicle  for  divine  instruction.  All 
persons  of  whatever  caste  may  read  it,  not  like 
your  Sanskrit,  a knowledge  of  which  you  deny  to 
women  and  men  of  low  caste.’  It  is  said  that  on 
this  the  pandits  and  Sanyasis  of  Banaras  admitted 
the  force  of  his  argument  and  acknowledged  them- 
selves vanquished.  After  a sojourn  of  two  months 
in  Banaras  Gur  Das  felt  an  inclination  to  return  to 
the  Guru  and  brave  his  ire. 

Gur  Das  wrote  to  the  Guru,  ‘ As  a tethered  calf 
crieth  for  its  dam  ; as  a labourer  who  desireth  to  go 
home,  but  is  forced  to  work  for  another,  passeth  his 
time  in  anxiety ; as  a wife  detained  by  her  parents 
and  separated  from  her  spouse  pineth  for  him,  so.  a 
Sikh  desireth  happiness  at  the  Guru’s  feet,  but  is 
kept  in  misery  in  a foreign  land  in  obedience  to  his 
order.’®  j , 

The  Guru  sent  Bhai  Jetha  and  some  Sikhs  to 
fetch  Gur  Das,  but  not  in  the  manner  in  whidi  he 
had  anticipated.  The  Guru  sent  by  Jetha  a letter 

® Gur  Dis’s  Kabit. 


* This  is  not  now  the  case. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  137 

to  the  governor  of  Banaras  to  say  that  Gur  Das  had 
deserted  him  without  his  permission,  and  requested 
that  he  might  be  sent  under  arrest  for  punishment. 
The  governor  was  astonished  on  receiving  the  Guru’s 
letter,  and  said  that  he  knew  no  thief  called  Gur 
DaS)i  or  Guru’s  servant,  but  the  Guru’s  messengers 
might  arrest  himself  and  take  him  to  serve  the 
Guru.  ■ On  this  Gur  Das,  who  had  just  finished 
reading  the  Japji,  related  to  the  governor  and  his 
staff  the  whole  story  of  his  journey  to  Kabul,  and 
his  flight  from  there,  whereat  there  was  further 
Curiosity  and  astonishment. 

Gur  Das’s  hands  were  then  tied  behind  his  back, 
but,  at  the  same  time,  he  was  dismissed  with  great 
respect  by  the  governor  and  his  people,  who  fully 
believed  in  his  innocence.  When  the  arresting  party 
had  proceeded  about  four  miles  on  their  homeward 
journey,  Bhai  Jetha  unbound  Gur  Das,  so  that  he 
might  travel  more  comfortably.  Bhai  Gur  Das  had 
not  requested  this  favour.  When  they  arrived  near 
Amritsar  Bhai  Jetha  again  bound  his  prisoner  as 
before  for  presentation  to  the  Guru.  The  Guru 
ironically  told  Gur  Das  that  he  was  an  excellent 
Sikh,  and  made  several  other  cutting  observations 
on  his  conduct.  Bhai  Gur  Das  replied  : — 

If  a mother  poison  her  son,  who  is  affectionate  enough 
to  save  him  ? 

If  a sentry  break  into  a house,  who  is  to  guard  it  ? 

If  a guide  take  a traveller  into  a wilderness,  to  whom 
shall  he  complain  ? 

If  a fence  devour  the  field,  there  will  be  no  one  to  look 
after  it. 

If  the  Guru  become  a play-actor  and  cause  his  Sikhs  to 
doubt,,  what  can  the  poor  Sikhs  do  ? ^ 

The  Guru  pardoned,  him  and  suggested  that  he 
might  complete  the  compositions  in  which  he  had 
been  engaged  prior  to  his  arrest. 

iW^rXXXV. 


138 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Chapter  XIV 

The  marriage  of  the  Guru’s  son  Suraj  MaJ  was 
duly  celebrated  with  Khem  Kaur,  daughter  of  Prem 
Chand.  One  Lai  Chand  and  his  wife  Bishan  Kaur 
thought  that  they  would  like  to  betroth  their 
daughter  Gujari  to  Teg  Bahadur,  the  Guru’s  youngest 
son,  on  the  occasion.  When  Lai  Chand’ s agent 
iurrived  with  marriage  presents,  he  did  not  know 
the  name  of  the  intended  bridegroom,  so  Ani  Rai, 
Teg  Bahadur’s  eldest  brother,  was  asked  if  he  would 
be  married.  He  whose  mind  had  been  absorbed  in 
spiritual  thoughts,  inquired  what  marriage  meant. 
The  agent  explained  the  meaning  and  intention 
of  the  ceremony.  Ani  Rai  replied,  ‘ Married  hfe  is 
the  foundation  of  misery.  Sensual  pleasures  are 
like  the  husk  of  rice,  spiritual  pleasures  like  am- 
brosia.’ Ani  Rai  could  not  be  induced  to  alter  his 
opinions  or  his  condition.  Teg  Bahadur,  who  had 
really  been  intended  by  Lai  Chand  for  his  son-in- 
law,  was  then  consulted  as  to  whether  he  would 
marry,  and  he  replied  that  he  would  implicitly  obey 
his  father.  He  was  accordingly  in  pubUc  darbar 
formally  betrothed  to  Gujari,  Lai  Chand’s  daughter. 

Wali  Khan,  the  surviving  son  of  the  Subadar  of 
Jalandhar,  was  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  avenge 
his  father.  That  opportunity  had  now  arrived.  The 
Emperor  Shah  Jahan  was  on  his  way  from  Dihli 
to  Lahore.  Wali  Khan  presented  him  a horse  with 
a gold  embroidered  saddle  and  other  costly  gifts. 
The  Emperor  remarked  to  him  that  his  father  and 
elder  brother  had  not  come  to  wait  on  him.  Wali 
Khan  replied  that  they  had  been  killed  by  the 
priest  of  the  Sikhs  who  had  forcibly  taken  land  in 
the  village  of  Ruhela,  thrown  its  owner  Bhagwan 
Das  Gherar  into  the  river  Bias,  and  caused  an  in- 
surrection in  the  country.  Wali  Khan  then  entered 
into  all  the  details  of  the  destruction  of  the  army 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  139 

sent  against  the  Guru.  The  Emperor  was  astonished, 
and  inquired  if  there  was  any  one  who  would  lead 
another  expedition  against  him. 

Wazir  Khan,  the  Guru’s  friend,  was  ready  with 
his  ingenious  pleading — ‘ May  it  please  thy  Majesty, 
whosoever  thou  orderest  is  ready  to  proceed  against 
the  Guru,  but  it  would  not  be  improper  to  reflect 
before  action.  Had  the  Subadar  of  Jalandhar 
received  thine  orders  when  he  marched  against  the 
Guru  ? No ; he  made  war  on  his  own  responsibility. 
Ask  Wali  Khan  where  the  Guru  is  now.  Is  he 
entrenched  as  a rebel  in  Ruhela  ? Is  he  appropri- 
ating its  land  revenue  ? No  ; he  is  now  living 
peaceably  in  Amritsar.  He  belongeth  not  to  any 
Hindu  or  Muhammadan  faction.  The  Gherar  used  to 
persecute  his  own  people  and  oppress  the  poor.  The 
Guru  out  of  his  own  resources  built  them  houses. 
He  even  built  a mosque  for  Muhammadans  on  the 
land  which  he  found  unoccupied  on  the  margin  of 
the  Bias.  The  Gherar  was  an  ally  of  the  Hindus, 
and  he  suffered  for  it.  He  came  to  fight  and  insult 
the  Guru.  The  Sikhs  could  not  tolerate  his  language. 
While  quarrelling  with  them,  he  fell  into  the  river, 
and  was  taken  away  by  the  current.  His  son  Ratan 
Chand  in  collusion  with  Karm  Chand,  Chandu’s  son, 
went  to  the  Subadar  to  request  him  to  aid  them, 
and,  as  I hear  from  the  best  authority,  tempted 
him  with  a very  large  bribe.  It  is  on  that  account 
the  Subadar  made  war  on  the  Guru  without  thy 
Majesty’s  authority.  The  Guru  is  a wonderful  man. 
He  hath  no  appliances  of  war  and  no  troops.  Thou 
art  asked  to  believe  that  some  petty  shopkeepers 
killed  ten  thousand  men  of  thine  imperial  army. 
If  thou  order  me,  I will  go  alone  and  destroy  the 
fort  the  Guru  is  said  to  have  constructed,  and  also 
the  mosque  occupied  by  a priest  and  a few  feeble 
beggars.  This  Subadar’s  son  ought  to  be  punished. 
A long  time  hath  elapsed  since  his  father  made  war, 
and  he  hath  only  informed  thee  of  it  to-day.’ 


140  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Emperor  was  astonished. and  inquired  why 
the  Guru  had  constructed  a mosque.  Wazir  Kh^!s 
answer  was  prompt — ‘ Sire,  gurus  and  pirs  are  all 
men’s  property^  They  feel  neither  love  nor  hate. 
The  Guru  sitteth  on  Guru  Nanak’s  throne.  His  is 
the  abode  of  miracles.  He  looketh  on  Hindus  and 
Muhammadans  with  an  equal  eye.’  The  Emperor 
replied,  ‘ Wazir  Khan,  I am  pleased  with  thy  faith- 
ful; representation  of  the  case.’  The  Emperor  then 
confiscated  Wali  Khan’s  jagir^  and  refused  to  grant 
him  his  father’s  post.  After  this  the  Guru  was  left 
in  peace  for  some  time.  Every  one  hesitated  to 
make  further  complaints  against  him. 

Baba  Gurditta,  the  Guru’s  son,  founded  the  city 
of  Kiratpur  under  the  following  circumstances : — On 
the  peak  of  the  black  ridge  of  the  Kahlur  mountain 
there  once  lived  Budhan  Shah,  a Muhammadan 
priest  famed  as  a miracle-worker.  He  kept  two 
goats  which,  it  is  said,  a tame  tiger  used  daily  to 
take  to  graze.  Guru  Nanak  and  Mardana  once 
visited  the  place.  Budhan  Shah  asked  the  Guru 
who  he  was,  and  for  what  purpose  he  had  come. 
Mardana  took  it  upon  himself  to  reply,  ‘ This  is  the 
divine  Guru  Nanak,  who  hath  been  born  to  instruct 
the  world,  because  all  people  are  engaged  in  filling 
their  bellies  and  gratifying  their  evil  passions  to  the 
forgetfulness  of  God.  I am  Mardana,  by  profession 
a minstrel.  I sing  and  proclaim  God’s  praises.’ 
Budhan  Shah  was  pleased  to  receive  such  visitors, 
and  passed  some  time  in  conversing  with  the.  Guru 
on  religious  subjects.  He  then  told  him  that  he 
might  depart,  as  the  tiger  was  returning  home  with 
the  goats  and  might  possibly  alarm  him.  The  Guru 
replied,  that  all  noxious  animals  were  in  the  Creator’s 
power,  and  he  had  no  apprehension  from  them. 

The  tiger  with  his  charge  returned  in  the  evening, 
and,  it  is  said,  first  bowed  at  Gum  Nanak’s  feet 
and  then  at  his  own  master’s.  Budhan  Shah, 
* A revenue-free  tenure. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  141 

observing  the  tiger’s  first  obeisance  to  Guru  Nanak, 
concluded  that  he  must  be.  a man  possessing  super- 
natural power,  and  treated  him  accordingly.  He 
consulted  him  as  to  how  pride  could  be  erased  from 
the  heart,  and  the  senses  become  disgusted  with 
pleasure.  Guru  Nanak  replied,  ‘ When  a man 
obtaineth  fresh  milk  he  will  not  taste  sour  milk. 
Without  spiritual  pleasure  man  resorteth  to  the 
gratification  of  his  senses.  When  he  forsaketh 
temporal  pleasure  he  obtaineth  divine  pleasure. 
When  all  false  pleasures  are  forsaken,  the  true 
pleasure  is  obtained  ; and  when  permanent  pleasure 
is  obtained,  transitory  pleasures  please  no  more. 
When  man’s  attention  is  fixed  on  God,  there  en- 
sueth  a state  of  profound  exaltation,  man’s  thoughts 
cease  to  wander,  the  senses  stray  not,  and  celestial 
light  dawneth  on  the  mind.’ 

Budhan  Shah  asked  Guru  Nanak  how  celestial  light 
was  manifested.  The  Guru  explained  the  process 
to  him,  upon  which  he  fell  into  a trance.  When  he 
arose  from  it,  he  milked  his  goats  and  laid  a pail 
of  milk  before  the  Guru.  The  Guru  drank  half  of 
it  himself  and  returned  the  other  half  to  Budhan 
Shah,  telling  him  to  keep  it  in  memory  of  him. 
Budhan  Shah  pressed  him  to  remain  with  him, 
otherwise  how  long  was  he  to  preserve  the  milk  ? 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Wait  until  my  Sikh  (Gurditta) 
cometh,  thy  life  shall  last  till  then.  He  will  found 
a city  and  abide  here.’  Saying  this  the  Guru 
departed. 

Guru  Nanak  was  ever  present  to  Budhan  Shah’s 
thoughts.  He  looked  at  the  milk  every  morning 
and  found  it  preserved  its  freshness.  After  some  time 
he  learned  that  Guru  Nanak  had  forsaken  his  body. 
He  then  heard  of  the  succession  of  the  Gurus — 
Angad,  Amar  Das,  Ram  Das,  Arjan,  and  Har  Gobind 
—and  seeing  that  the  milk  remained  as  before,  would 
often  say,  ‘ O Guru,  send  thy  Sikh  to  drink  the  milk 
and  fulfil  thy  promise.’ 


142  ^ the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Har  Gobind  privately  narrated  all  the  circum' 
stances  to  his  eldest  son  Gurditta,  and  sent  him  to 
Budhan  Shah,  whose  devotion  he  commended. 
Gurditta  took;  his  wife  and  son  Dhirmal  with  him. 
Budhan  Shah  met  him  on  the  bank  of  the  Satluj, 
and  asked  him  who  he  was,  whence  he  had  come, 
and  if  he  knew  Guru  Har  Gobind.  Gurditta  replied, 
‘ 0 priest,  thou  hast  the  milk  that  was  entrusted 
to  thee.  Bring  it  to  me.  The  Guru  is  my  father, 
and  hath  sent  me  to  taste  it.’  Budhan  Shah  gave 
him  the  milk.  He  tasted  it  and,  it  is  said,  found 
it  sweet  as  if  it  had  been  just  set.  Budhan  Shah  then 
addressed  Gurditta,  ‘ This  hilly  land  is  all  thine ; 
fulfil  my  desires,  and  abide  with  me.’  Gurditta 
then  laid  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  Kiratpur  at 
the  base  of  the  mountain.  It  was  named  Kiratpur 
as  God’s  praises — Kirat — were  ever  to  be  sung  there. 

At  the  suggestion  of  Bhai  Bhana  the  Guru  visited 
his  own  native  village  Wadali,  about  four  miles 
from  Amritsar  on  the  road  to  Lahore.  He  there 
pointed  out  the  house  in  which  he  had  been  born. 
Thence  he  proceeded  to  the  well  with  six  Persian 
wheels  constructed  by  Guru  Arjan.  There  a villager 
represented  to  him  that  a wild  boar  was  devastating 
the.  country  and  killing  even  cultivators.  A hunting 
party  was  organized,  the  forest  was  beaten,  and  the 
boar  rushed  forth.  The  Guru  told  Painda  Khan  to 
attack  the  animal.  He  rushed  forward  but  failed  to 
strike.  The  boar  then  charged,  threw  horse  and  rider, 
and  exulted  in  his  feat.  Burrowing  the  ground  with 
his  shining  tusks,  the  animal  again  advanced  to  attack 
Painda  Khan  as  he  lay  helpless.  The  Quru  at  once 
went  to  Painda  Khan’s  assistance,  and  drawing  his 
sword  confronted  the  boar.  The  boar  made  a charge 
which  the  Guru  avoided  by  leaping  aside.  Then 
raising  his  sword  and  exenting  all  his  strength,  he 
struck  the  brute  with  such  force  across  the  back, 
that  he  cut  him  in  twain.  ■ 

After  this  the  Guru  returned  to  Amritsar.  Next 


LIFE  OF  GURU  EAR  GOBIND  143 

morning  Bhai  Bhana 'prayed  the  Guru  to  relate  to 
him  the  history  of  Amritsar,  and  he  graciously  did 
so.  On  another  occasion  Bhai  Bhana  asked  the 
Guru  to  show  him  the  forest  land  which  the  Emperor 
Akbar  had  granted  to  Bibi  Bhani  and  within  which 
Bhai  Budha  had  dwelt.  The  Guru  taking  Gur  Das 
and  Bhai  Bhana  with  him  pointed  out  the  locality. 
There  they  found  that  a solid  brick  building  had 
been  erected  on  Bhai  Budha’ s seat.  It  is  situated 
some  five  miles  south  of  Amritsar  near  the  Bari 
Doab  canal.  An  annual  fair  is  held  there  on  the 
2ist  of  the  month  of  Assu. 

In  the  month  of  Bhadon,  during  the  rainy  season, 
the  Guru  at  Bhai  Bhana’s  suggestion  proceeded  with 
his  Sikhs  to  Tarn  Tar  an.  They  all  bathed  there  at 
the  time  when  there  was  no  moon  visible.  It  was 
the  anniversary,  according  to  lunar  reckoning,  of  the 
excavation  of  the  tank  by  Guru  Arjan. 

At  the  request  of  his  Sikhs  the  Guru  then  pro- 
ceeded to  Cholha  to  see  the  temple  which  had  been 
erected  to  commemorate  Guru  Arjan’s  visit.  During 
their  visit  Bhai  Gur  Das  at  the  Guru’s  request 
related  the  history  of  Cholha. 

Having  left  Cholha  the  Guru  and  his  Sikhs  went 
to  visit  the  ruins  of  Vindpur,  a village  in  which  Guru 
Nanak  had  been  inhospitably  received  by  his  tribes- 
men. The  Guru  there  related  its  history. 

The  Guru  and  his  party  thence  proceeded  to  the 
ruins  of  Khanpur  which  Guru  Arjan  had  once 
visited.  Bidhi  Chand  narrated  its  history  to  Bhai 
Bhana.  Thence  they  all  proceeded  to  Goindwal. 
On  their  arrival  there,  they  met  Sundar  Das,  the 
great-grandson  of  Guru  Amar  Das  and  author  of 
the  ‘Sadd’. 

One  morning  after  the  Guru  had  performed  his 
devotions  he  went  to  Gur  Das,  whose  end  was  now 
approaching.  Gur  Das  begged  pardon  for  any  sins  he 
might  have  committed.  He  then  warmly  embraced 
the  Guru  and  Sundar  Das;  As  a preparation  for  bis 


144 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


death  he  recited  the  Asa  ki  War  ailid  ■ siid,  There 
is  no  time  now  fOr 'delay.  I am'd5nng,  Irepeat 
Wahgum ! Wah^ru  ! Erect 'no  shrine  for  me,  but 
throw  my  remains  from  the  pyre  into  the 'Bias.' 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ I thank  thee,  Bhai  Gur  Das,‘  for 
having  assisted  in  laying  out  the  road  of  the  Sikh 
faith.  Among  the  Gurus’  Sikhs  thy  name  shall  be 
immortal.’  Bhai  Gur  Das  having  heard  this  medi- 
tated On  God,  drew  a sheet  over  himself,  and  closed 
his  eyes  in  eternal  sleep  on  Friday  the  fifth  day  of 
the  light  half  of  Bhadon,  Sambat  1686  (a.  d.  162^). 
After  performing  Gur  Das’s  last  rites  the  Guru 
returned  to  Amritsar  by  way  of  Khadur. 

Bhai  Bhana  took  leave  of  the  Guru  in  Amritsar 
and  returned  to  his  village  of  Ramdas.  Bibi  Viro 
and  her  husband  Sadhu  also  prepared  for  their 
departure.  The  Guru  blessed  her,  and  said  that 
she  should  have  five  brave  sons.  She  and  her 
husband  then  proceeded  to  their  residence  in  Malha. 

A married  couple  called  Jalhan  and  Ramki  of  the 
village  of  Dobhirana,  situated  some  ten  miles  from 
Amritsar,  were  anxious  that  the  Guru  should  pay 
them  a visit.  He  accordingly  went  shooting  in  their 
neighbourhood.  Jalhan  and  his  wife  congratulated 
themselves  on  their  good  fortune  that  they  should 
at  last  behold  the  Guru.  He  remained  with  them 
for  a night.  During  his  visit  he  revealed  his  hazard- 
ous position,  ‘ O saint  Jalhan,  why  do  the  Moslems 
cause  me  such  annoyance?  They  are  pursuing  me 
and  will  not  desist.  Wherever  I go,  they  attack 
me.’  ' Jalhan  replied,  ‘ O great  king,  thou  canst 
work  miracles.  In  my  opinion  thou  art  doing  deeds 
to  please  thyself.  ''W4iat  power  have  the  • wretched 
Turks  to  contend  with  thee  ? Thou  art  merely  per- 
forming human  play,  and  not  thy  supematurd  rdle. 
Maya  hath  come  to  thee  and  thou  attachest  her  to 
thy  feet.  They  who  long  for  her  bear  thee  enmity, 
and  are  ready  to  die  of  be  slain  themselves?  in  a 
Oohtest  with  thee.  If  thou  rid  thyself  of  her;  thou 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  145 

shalt  have  peace.’  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Since  Maya 
hath  become  attached  to  me,  I cannot  detach  myself 
from  her,  for  I must  now  alter  the  constitution  of 
Sikhism  and  defend  my  followers  with  force  of  arms.’ 
Jalhan  had  no  further  advice  to  offer,  but  on  the 
contrary  was  willing  to  receive  it.  The  Guru  ex- 
horted him  to  honestly  i)erform  his  worldly  affairs 
in  the  station  in  which  God  had  placed  him,  and 
never  to  forget  his  devotions. 

Gurditta  and  his  wife  Natti  continued  to  reside 
in  Kiratpur.  There  was  a son  born  to  them  on 
Sunday  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  light  half  of 
Magh,  Sambat  1687  (a.  d.  1630).  Gurditta  sent  a 
messenger  to  inform  the  Guru  and  invite  him  to 
Kiratpur  on  the  joyful  occasion;  but  the  Guru  had 
more  pressing  matters  to  attend  to  at  the  time.  He 
opened  the  Granth  Sahib,  gave  Gurditta’ s child  the 
name  of  Har  Rai,  and  returned  a message  to  the 
effect  that  he  would  soon  proceed  to  Kiratpur. 

After  a few  months  the  Guru  received  a letter 
from  Sain  Das  inviting  him  to  attend  the  Baisakhi 
fair  at  Daroli.  The  Guru  reflected  on  his  own 
position.  ‘ The  Emperor  beareth  me  malice  in  his 
heart.  The  honour  of  my  temple  shall  be  preserved 
if  I go  to  Malwa  and  make  its  forest  my  fort.  If 
the  Emperor  send  an  army  thither  to  pursue  me,  it 
will  die  of  thirst  without  my  taking  the  trouble  to 
destroy  it.’  Thus  reflecting,  the  Guru  consulted  his 
wife  Damodari.  She  replied,  ‘ My  lord,  I am  a slave 
obedient  to  thy  will.  If  thou  depart,  I will  go  with 
thee.  If  thou  leave  me  behind,  here  will  I remain.’ 
Before  leaving  Amritsar  the  Guru  went  to  the  temple 
and  prayed  to  God  to  preserve  him  and  ever  grant 
him  victory.  The  Sikhs  inquired  who  would  take  care 
of  the  temple  in  their  absence.  The  Guru  replied, 
‘ The  Sikhs  will  take  care  of  it.  We  shall  not 
return  again.’  He  complained  to  the  people  of 
Amritsar  that  they  would  be  likely  to  suffer  greatly 
were  he  to  remain  with  them.  He  would  now  re- 

L 


SIKH.  IV 


146  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

move  the  theatre  of  war  to  the  forest,  but  would 
ever  abide  with  them  in  the  spirit. 

To  his  father-in-law  Hari  Chand,  who  said  that 
the  city  would  be  ruined  in  his  absence,  the  Guru 
represented,  ‘ The  city  shall  increase  in  population 
day  by  day.  He  who  meditateth  evil  to  it  shall  die 
in  misery  himself.  Here  at  the  Guru’s  feet  shall  be 
the  spring  of  happiness  in  both  worlds ; here  shall 
the  feast  of  the  Name  be  ever  served  to  my  followers  ; 
and  here  shall  my  Sikhs  be  ever  happy.  The 
foundation  of  the  city  hath  been  firmly  laid,  and 
never  shall  give  way.’  He  then  proceeded  on  his 
journey,  taking  with  him  a mounted  army  of  one 
thousand  brave  and  devoted  men.  A band  with 
banners  flying  preceded  the  party,  and  then  came 
the  Granth  Sahib  borne  on  the  heads  of  two  carriers. 
Sikhs  were  employed  to  wave  fans  over  the  sacred 
volume  to  add  to  its  dignity,  and  hinder  any  thought- 
less insect  from  alighting  on  it. 

The  Guru  on  arriving  at  Daroli  by  way  of  Tarn 
Taran  was  received  with  great  affection  by  Sain 
Das.  The  Guril  said  to  him,  ‘ The  cable  of  thy  love 
hath  so  bound  me  that  I have  no  hope  of  ever 
escaping  from  it.’  Sain  Das  replied,  ‘ In  all  ages 
this  hath  been  God’s  way.  His  name  is  Bhagat 
Watsal — the  saints  are  dear  to  Him — He  knoweth 
the  love  of  His  slaves.  Whether  one  be  a pandit, 
a jogi,  or  a king,  one  cannot  please  God  without 
love.  If  a man  have  love,  even  though  he  be  poor 
and  ignorant,  yet  is  he  dear  to  the  Lord.’ 

An  event  occurred  at  the  time  of  the  Guru’s 
first  visit,  to  Daroli,  which  must  be  here  narrated. 
In  the  ‘ village  of  Wadaghar  in  the  present  district 
of  Firozpur  was  a Sikh  called  Akal,  a carpentM*  by 
trade.  He  had  been  converted  to  Sikhism  by  Guru 
Ram  Das  and  used  often  to  visit  Guru  Arjan  and 
Guru  Har  Gobind.  He  had  an  accomplished 
daughter  for  whom  he  desired  to  procure  a husband. 
He  found  a suitable  match  for  her  ^ in  the  person  of 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


147 


Sadhu,  son  of  Sada,  a resident  of  the  village  of 
Tuklani.  Akal’s  family  priest  had  made  all  in- 
quiries and  performed  all  the  necessary  ceremonies, 
but  had  failed  to  inquire  if  the  intended  bridegroom 
were  a Sikh  or  not.  The  priest  replied  to  Akal’s 
inquiries  that  the  boy  was  a Hindu  held  in  high 
honour  by  his  brethren ; and  he  deemed  that  sufficient 
without  further  investigation.  Akal  was  not  satis- 
fied, but  said  that  God  would  put  everything  right. 
He  heard  some  time  afterwards  that  the  bride- 
groom’s parents  were  followers  of  Sakhi  Sarwar,^  yet 
he  accepted  the  alliance  fearing  that  he  could  not 
find  another  mate  so  suitable  for  his  daughter. 
At  the  same  time  he  felt  severe  twinges  of  con- 
science on  the  subject.  Accordingly,  at  the  time  of 
his  daughter’s  departure  after  the  wedding  he  gave 
her  this  admonition — ‘ My  beloved  daughter,  in  all 
worldly  matters  obey  and  wait  upon  thy  mother- 
in-law  and  thy  husband,  but  never  bow  thy  head 
to  any  but  the  Guru.’  The  girl  herself  was  much 
distressed  at  having  to  marry  a youth  of  another 
religion,  but  she  was  obliged  to  accept  her  position. 

The  marriage  procession  started  from  Wadaghar 
to  Tuklani  in  the  early  morning.  The  intervening 
route  not  being  safe,  the  procession  passed  by  Daroli, 
where  the  bride  heard  the  Sikhs  singing  sacred  hymns. 
Being  informed  that  the  Guru  was  encamped  in  the 
village,  and  fearing  that  she  might  not  again  have, 
an  opportunity  of  seeing  him,  she  ordered  her 
bearers  to  let  her  alight  and  go  to  do  him  homage. 
The  Guru  on  seeing’  her  asked  who  she  was.  A Sikh 
who  knew  her  whole  history  answered  for  her.  The 
girl  then  addressed  the  Guru,  ‘ Thou  art  a searcher 
of  hearts,  and  knowest  that  I am  a daughter  of 
a Sikh,  while  my  parents-in-law  are  followers  of 
Sakhi  Sarwar.  Evil  is  my  fate  that  I am  in  the 
power  of  others.  If  thou  convert  my  husband  to 

^ A famous  Baloch  pir,  whose  shrine,  not  far  from  the  Sulaiman 
Mountains,  is  yearly  visited  by  pilgrims  of  vari6us  Indian  religions. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


148 

the  Sikh  religion,  I shall  be  perfectly  happy.’  The 
Guru  replied,  ‘ My  daughter,  have  no  anxiety,  God 
will  act  for  the  best.  As  thy  father  and  mother 
were  Sikhs,  so  shall  thy  husband  and  children  also 
be  Sikhs,  and  thy  wishes  be  fulfilled.’  On  hearing 
this  the  girl  was  consoled  and  felt  satisfied  that  her 
evil  destiny  was  now  altered. 

Meantime  Sada  missed  his  daughter-in-law.  On 
discovering  that  she  had  gone  to  visit  the  Guru,  he 
became  very  angry  and  sent  the  bridegroom  for  her, 
saying,  ‘ What  have  we  to  do  with  the  Guru  ? We 
are  worshippers  of  Sakhi  Sarwar.  If  we  bow  to  the 
Guru,  our  priest  will  be  very  angry  with  us.  Go 
quickly  and  bring  back  thy  wife.’  Sadhu  thus 
found  his  way  to  the  Guru’s  presence.  The  Guru 
was  then  holding  court,  and  hymns  were  being 
sung.  He  shone  among  his  Sikhs  like  the  moon 
among  the  stars.  Sadhu  became  at  once  filled  with 
devotion  and  said,  ‘ Alas  ! we  have  wasted  our  lives 
in  vain.  Being  of  the  Hindu  faith  we  reverence  and 
worship  a Muhammadan.  We  make  an  offering  of 
a cake  to  Sakhi  Sarwar  and  then  eat  his  leavings.’ 
Upon  this  the  Guru  said,  ‘ Bhai  Sadhu,  repeat  the 
Name  and  amend  thy  life.  Cease  to  worship  Sakhi 
Sarwar.’  Sadhu,  after  some  further  parley,  begged 
the  Guru  to  make  him  a Sikh,  and  pardon  his  past 
sins.  The  Guru,  seeing  him  fit  for  the  favour, 
initiated  him  with  the  usual  ceremonies,  and  said 
that  he  should  have  a son  who  also  would  be  true 
to  the  Sikh  faith. 

When  the  marriage  procession  reached  home,  the 
bridegroom’s  relations  took  him  to  the  family  shrine 
of  Sakhi  Sarwar  and  asked  him  to  worship.  He  at 
once  remembered  the  words  of  Guru  Nanak; — 

I will  not  fall  into  idolatry;  I will  worship  none  but 
God  ; I will  not  go  to  graves  or  places  of  cremation,  ^ 

Saying  this  he  kicked  down  the  miniature  likeness 
^ Sorath,  Ashtapadi. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  149 

of  a grave  which  had  been  erected  for  Sakhi  Sarwar’s 
worship,  and  said,  ‘ I will  repeat  the  true  Name  of 
Wahguru  and  amend  my  life.’  Sada  thought  his 
son  had  lost  his  reason,  and  began  to  remonstrate 
with  him,  ‘ My  son,  it  is  through  Sakhi  Sarwar’s 
favour  we  have  obtained  wealth  and  thou  hast  found 
a bride,  and  yet  thou  spurnest  his  household  shrine.’ 
Sadhu  far  from  being  satisfied  with  what  he  had 
done  continued  his  work  of  destruction.  He  seized 
a mattock  and  removed  the  last  vestige  of  Sakhi 
Sarwar’s  worship.  The  father  renewed  the  masonry 
work  but,  as  fast  as  he  did  so,  the  son  demolished 
it.  Faith  in  Sakhi  Sarwar  began  to  be  shaken. 
People  said  that  he  had  become  powerless  to  defend 
himself,  much  less  to  defend  others.  By  the  Guru’s 
favour  Sadhu’s  wealth  and  happiness  continued  to 
increase.  A child,  a treasury  of  beauty,  was  born 
to  him  in  Sambat  1672,  and  his  devotion  acquired 
new  fervour.  The  Guru  named  the  child  Rup  Chand 
on  account  of  his  beauty,  and  said  he  should  become 
a great  saint. 

When  the  boy  had  attained  the  age  of  fifteen  years, 
he  and  his  father  Sadhu  went  one  day  during  the 
hot  Weather  to  the  forest  to  cut  wood.  They  took 
with  them  a leather  bottle  filled  with  water  to  quench 
their  thirst.  They  hung  the  bottle  on  a tree,  and 
afterwards,  on  going  to  drink  from  it,  found  the 
water  had  become  cool.  They  remembered  the  Guru 
and  thought  to  themselves  that  this  would  be 
pleasant  water  for  him  to  drink.  Although  the 
heat  was  terrific,  as  if  it  rained  sparks  of  fire,  they 
refrained  from  drinking  and  began  to  meditate  on 
the  Guru,  ‘ O true  Guru,  first  drink  this  pure  cool 
water,  and  then  we  will  satisfy  our  thirst.  Thou 
fulfillest  the  desires  of  thy  servants.  Ever  present 
thou  hearest  their  supplications.  Drink  this  water. 
We  may  die,  but  we  will  never  drink  till  thou  hast 
tasted  it.’ 

The  village  of  Tuklani,  where  Sadhu  and  Rup 


150 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Chand  lived,  was  some  thirty  miles  distant,  yet,  it  is 
said,  the  Guru  heard  their  prayer  as  he  lay  in  an 
apartment  perfumed  with  sandal  and  fragrant  grass 
and  cooled  by  water  sprinkled  over  a sandy  floor. 
The  Guru  at  once  stood  up  and,  leaving  all  his 
comforts,  prepared  to  start  in  the  appalling  heat 
for  Tuklani  to  see  his  Sikhs  Sadhu  and  Rup  Chand. 
He  found  them  fainting  from  the  heat,  and  called 
on  them  to  arise.  They  arose  as  happy  as  the 
chatrik  when  he  hears  thunder  presaging  rain,  or 
as  the  lotus  when  it  beholds  the  sun.  The  Guru 
told  them  that  he  was  thirsty  and  asked  for  cold 
water.  On  drinking  from  the  leather  bottle  he 
said  it  was  excellent,  like  nectar,  and  that  he  had 
never  before  drunk  such  delicious  beverage. 

The  Guru  told  them  that  the  Sikh  religion  should 
ever,  remain  in  their  family,  but,  as  the  people  of 
Tuklani  were  annoyed  at  their  having  embraced  it, 
and  as  the  village  would  be  destroyed  on  account  of 
the  several  enormities  of  its  inhabitants,  Sadhu  and 
Rup  Chand  ought  to  leave  the  place  and  found 
a village  for  themselves.  The  Guru  was  particularly 
pleased  to  see  Rup  Chand,  and  made  him  a present 
of  clothes  and  arms.  Rup  Chand  placed  them 
reverently  on  his  head,  and  said  he  would  honour 
them.  Through  respect  he  refused  to  wear  the 
sword  which  had  been  worn  by  the  Guru.  Upon 
this  the  Guru  seated  him  on  the  couch,  and  said  he 
should  have  a congregation  of  his  own,  in  which  he 
should  use  his  tongue  instead  of  a sword,  spread  Guru 
Nanak’s  doctrines,  and  make  the  Sikhs  firm  in  their 
faith.  ‘ Keep  thy  kitchen  ’,  said  the  Guru,  ‘ ever 
open  for  the  traveller  and  the  stranger.  What  thou 
sayest  shall  be  fulfilled,  wealth  and  preternatural 
power  shall  hang  upon  thy  tongue  People  will 
reverence  thee,  and  great  shall  be  thy  glory.’  ^ 

^ The  lord  of  BagrlSn . in  ihe  Ludhiana  district  is  a lipeal  de- 
scendant of  BhSi  RQp  Chand.  He  maintains  a public  kitdhen  lip  to 
the  present  time,  as  ordered  by  the  GurUi  I 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  15 1 

The  Guru  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  light  half  of 
the  month  of  Baisakh,  Sambat  1688,  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  a village  on  an  open  plain  six  miles  distant 
from  Tuklani  and  called  it  Bhai  Rupa  in  honour  of 
his  Sikh  prot4g6.  Bhai  Rupa  is  now  a considerable 
town  in  the  Nabha  State.  The  Guru  also  ordered 
a house  to  be  constructed  for  himself  and  promised 
on  its  completion  to  reside  in  it  for  some  time.  The 
Guru  after  a very  brief  visit  to  Bhai  Rup  Chand  and 
his  father,  returned  to  Daroli,  where  he  was  joined 
by  Gurditta  and  his  wife  and  sons,  Dhirmal  and 
Har  Rai. 

Damodari’s  last  hour  had  now  arrived.  She  asked 
the  Guru’s  pardon  for  her  sins  or  for  any  idle  words 
she  might  have  spoken  during  her  married  life.  She 
said  she  had  no  fear  of  death  and  only  felt  one  sorrow, 
that  of  leaving  her  husband.  The  Guru  replied, 
‘ Have  no  anxiety.  Bodies  meet  subject  to  destiny, 
but  it  is  the  meeting  of  souls  that  is  important.’  He 
further  consoled  her,  gave  her  parting  spiritual 
instruction,  and  said  her  salvation  was  assured.  She 
then  sent  for  all  the  members  of  her  family,  and  took 
leave  of  each  in  turn.  She  departed  this  life  on 
Wednesday,  the  twelfth  day  of  the  light  half  of  Sawan, 
Sambat  1688  (a.d.  1631).  The  Guru  ordered  that 
instead  of  mourning  for  her  death  his  Sikhs  should 
read  the  Japji  and  Sohila  for  her  eternal  repose. 

Ramo  was  so  sad  at  the  loss  of  her  sister,  that  she 
too  pined  away  and  died.  Her  husband.  Sain  Das, 
perished  from  the  shock  of  his  wife's  untimely  death. 
Damodari’s  parents,  that  is  the  Guru’s  parents-in-law, 
did  not  long  survive  Sain  Das  and  Ramo. 

When  the  funeral  ceremonies  of  his  relations 
were  completed,  the  Guru  again  began  to  consider 
his  position.  He  trusted  that  Wazir  Khan  would 
prevent  the  di^atch  of  too  powerful  an  army  against 
him.  He  therefore  decided  on  sending  all  his  family 
and  the  Granth  Sahib  ta  Kartarpur,  while  he  himself 
remained  in  Daroli.  On  seeing  Sain  Das’s  un- 


152 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


tenanted  and  desolate  mansion,  once  the  abode  of 
life  and  joy,  the  Guru  repeated  the  following  hymn 
of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

Accursed  the  love  of  mother  and  father ; accursed  the 
love  of  brothers  and  relations  1 

Accursed  the  love  of  wife  and  the  pleasure  of  sons ; accursed 
the  love  of  home  ! 

The  love  of  the  guild  of  saints  is  true  ; Nanak.  happiness 
abideth  with  them. 

Perishable  is  the  body,  its  strength  faileth  ; 

In  old  age  the  l>ve  of  wealth  increaseth. 

Though  only  a pilgrim  in  the  world,  man  iniulgeth  in 
endless  hopes 

While  terrible . Dharmraj  counteth  his  breathings. 

Man  faileth  into  the  pit  of  mammon  ; God’s  mercy  is  the 
real  support  of  his  body  obtained  with  so  much  difficulty. 

They  whose  desires  are  evil,  attach  themselves  to  a mirage, 
an  enchanted  city,  or  the  shadow  of  a tree. 

Thus  perishable  is  the  love  of  family : Nanak.  remember 
God’s  name.^ 

One  day  the  Guru  addressed  his  Sikhs  : ‘ Brethren 
dearer  to  me  than  life,  you  are  one  thousand  brave 
men.  Shall  we  remain  here  or  proceed  to  spread  our 
religion  .?  ’ A Sikh  replied,  ‘ 0 my  lord,  show  thyself 
where  the  devout  and  grateful  think  of  thee  and 
await  thee.’  The  Guru  beat  the  drum  of  departure, 
whereat  the  people  of  Daroli  were  very  much  grieved, 
and  feared  that  they  should  have  no  one  to  protect 
them  in  his  absence.  The  Guru  recommended  them 
to  Itww  time,  m remembering  God,  in  showing 

hospitality  to  travellers  and  visitors,  and  in  repeating 
the  true  Name.  Thus  should  all  their  desires  be  ful- 
filled, and  their  troubles  and  sorrows  depart.  Saying 
this  the  Guru  and  his  party  proceeded  to  his  friends 
Sadhu  and  Rup  Chand’s  village.  They  had  con- 
structed a splendid  house  for  his  reception.  The 
Guru  blessed  them  and  exhorted  them,  as  earnest 
^.Sahaskriti  sloks. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  153 

and  devout  exponents  of  his  religion,  to  practise 
charity  and  humility,  in  .which  case  their  homes 
should  last  for  ever,  and  they  should  be  reverenced 
as  holy  men.  The  Guru  abode  with  them  during  the 
months  of  Bhadon  and  Assu, 

Near  Bhai  Rupa  was  a village  called  Kangar  in 
the  present  state  of  Nabha,  owned  by  Rai  Jodh.  He 
was  third  in  descent  from  Mahar  Mitha,  who  had 
been  a contemporary  of  the  Emperor  Akbar.  Mahar 
Mitha  had  a young  daughter  sixteen  years  of  age, 
whose  beauty  attracted  the  Emperor’s  notice.  He 
vowed  that  if  he  did  not  obtain  her  with  her  parents’ 
consent,  he  would  take  her  by  force.  Mahar  Mitha, 
finding  himself  powerless  to  oppose  a powerful 
monarch,  sent  him  a message,  that  if  he  came  veiled 
as  an  ordinary  bridegroom,  he  might  return  with  the 
coveted  bride.  Akbar  consented,  went  to  Mahar 
Mitha,  and  duly  married  his  daughter.  Mahar 
Mitha  had  a son  called  Chain  Beg,  who  begot  Amar 
Shah,  who  begot  Rai  Jodh.  He  had  for  a wife  a 
Sikh  lady.  At  her  request  he  went  with  very  costly 
presents  and  a retinue  of  five  hundred  men  to  pay 
his  respects  to  the  Guru.  His  wife  subsequently 
visited  the  Guru  alone,  and  prayed  him  to  make  her 
husband  a Sikh.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Thy  progeny 
shall  increase  and  all  become  Sikhs.  Thy  great- 
grandson  shall  receive  and  serve  the  tenth  Guru 
who  will  grant  him  salvation.’ 

Chapter  XV 

Toif  irepl  Totis  Xoyovs  ivjTovSaKoviv  ifyovpai  Trpo(rtjK(iu  perk 
T^fv  iroWtjv  Tmi>  <TirovSaioT(pa>v  avdyvoxTiv  dviivai  re  rriv 
Sidvoiav  Kal  irpos  rhv  ^iretra  Kdparov  aKpaiortpav  irapa- 
(TKivd^ilv} 

It  is  said  that  Bidhi  Chand,  before  he  entered  the 
service  of  the  fifth  Guru,  had  been  a famous  highway- 

^ Methinks  it  befits  persons  of  literary  pursuits  to  relax  their  minds 
after  protracted  serious  reading,  and  thus  render  them  fresher  for 
subsequent  appHcatibn. — Lucian’s  Veracious  History. 


154 


THE  SIKH,  RELIGION 


man  and  robber,  and  several  of  his  exploits  in  that 
capacity  are  recorded.  Once  he  stole  some  very  valu- 
able buffaloes  from  Sultanpur.  The  owners  awoke  and 
hotly  pursued  him  as  far  as  the  village  of  Cholha,  where 
he  was  received  by  a man  called  Adali.  Adali  put 
the  stolen  buffaloes  into  a slimy  pool  so  that  when 
they  emerged  from  it  they  were  not  recognized  by 
the  owners.  Bidhi  Chand,  glad  of  his  escape,  begged 
Adali  to  make  him  a disciple.  Adali  said  he  had  no 
spiritual  power  himself,  and  recommended  him  to 
go  to  Guru  Arjan,  who  would  grant  him  peace  of 
mind.  He  also  advised  him  to  restore  the  stolen 
buffaloes  to  their  owners  and  implore  God’s  pardon. 
Accordingly  Adali  took  Bidhi  Chand  to  the  Guru 
and  informed  him  that  he  desired  to  become  a 
Sikh.  Guru  Arjan  made  him  a Sikh  and  instructed 
him  to  renounce  thieving,  serve  the  saints,  and  medi- 
tate on  God.  Bidhi  Chand  represented,  ‘ I have  con- 
tracted this  habit  of  thieving.  The  world  is  in  the 
power  of  habit,  which  it  is  difficult  to  overcome.’ 
Guru  Arjan  replied,  ‘ Do  good  to  others,  forswear 
falsehood,  read  and  ponder  on  the  Gurus’  hymns  and 
associate  with  saints,  so  shall  all  thy  evil  inclinations 
depart.’  Upon  this  Bidhi  Chand  abandoned  his 
village  and  attached  himself  to  Guru  Arjan.  Adali  his 
guide  and  friend  then  went  home,  pleased  at  having 
placed  Bidhi  Chand  in  the  way  of  redemption. 

One  day  Bidhi  Chand  said  to  Guru  Arjan,  ‘ I began 
from  my  childhood  to  commit  theft.  How  shall  I 
be  saved  hereafter  ? ’ Guru  Arjan  told  him  to  repeat 
the  following  hymn  ; — 

The  formless  One,  the  Destroyer  of  sorrow,  bringeth  back 
what  hath  gone  and  freeth  the  captive. 

I know  not  good  works,  I know  not  religion  ; I am  greedy 
and  avaricious. 

I am  called  a worshipper  of  God ; preserve  Thine  own 
honour, 

O God  ; Thou  art  the  honour  of  the  unhonoured. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  155 

Thou  makest  something  out  of  those  who  are  nothing  ; 
I am  a sacrifice  unto  Thy  power. 

As  when  a boy  following  his  natural  inclinations  com- 
mitteth  hundreds  of  thousands  of  faults, 

His  father  adviseth  him,  chideth  him  in  several  ways, 
but  at  last  embraceth  him  ; 

So  pardon  my  past  offences,  O God,  and  put  me  in  Thy 
way  for  the  future. 

God  the  Searcher  of  hearts  knoweth  everything ; then  to 
whom  shall  man  go  to  redress  grievances  ? 

God  is  not  pleased  with  the  utterance  of  words ; if  it 
please  Him,  He  preserveth  our  honour. 

Other  shelters  all  have  I tried  : Thy  shelter  alone  re- 
maineth  me. 

Be  merciful  and  compassionate,  my  Lord  God,  and  hear 
Thou  my  supplication. 

Cause  me  to  meet  the  perfect  true  Guru  and  put  an  end 
to  my  mental  anxieties. 

God  hath  put  His  name  as  medicine  into  my  mouth,  and 
the  slave  Nanak  abideth  in  happiness.^ 

Guru  Arjan  continued — ‘ Thy  past  sins  shall  be 
pardoned  if  thou  seek  God’s  protection,  and  cease 
to  commit  sin  for  the  future.  Serve  saints  and 
worshippers  who  repeat  the  Name,  sweep  their  floors, 
draw  them  water,  scrub  their  vessels,  fan  them,  and 
shampoo  them,  and  thou  shalt  gain  all  possible  ad- 
vantages. Theft  is  a baneful  habit.  It  is  the  cause 
of  entanglements  in  this  world.  Thy  service  to  the 
saints  will  only  be  profitable  if  thou  renounce  all 
desire  to  appropriate  others’  property.’ 

Two  masands,  Bakht  Mai  and  Tara  Chand,  had 
been  deputed  to  Kabul  to  collect  funds  for  the  Guru. 
They  returned  with  a company  of  Sikhs  who  also 
brought  offerings  for  their  spiritual  master.  They 
were  besides  bringing  two  horses  of  surpassing  beauty 
and  fleetness  for  the  Guru,  but  the  animals  were 
forcibly  seized  by  the  Emperor’s  officials  and  duly 

^ Soratb. 


156  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

presented  to  him.  Guru  Har  Gobind,  who  was  then 
in  Bhai  Rupa,  received  the  Sikhs  with  great  ceremony. 
Having  laid  their  offerings  before  him  they  proceeded 
to  inform  him  of  the  seizure  of  the  excellent  steeds 
they  had  intended  for  him.  He  bade  them  be  of 
good  cheer  and  not  take  the  matter  too  much  to  heart. 

Some  of  the  Sikhs  invited  the  masands  to  give  an 
account  of  their  travels,  what  countries  they  had 
traversed,  whether  they  saw  Amritsar  on  the  way,  and 
by  what  route  they  had  returned  ? They  replied  that 
in  their  anxiety  to  see  the  Guru  they  had  first  gone 
to  Lahore  where  they  thought  he  was,  and  had  re- 
mained there  some  days  to  see  the  Muhammadan 
festival  of  the  Baqar  Id,  during  which  an  ox  is  slain 
in  commemoration  of  the  intended  sacrifice  of  IsmaiH 
by  Abraham.  They  intended  on  their  return  journey 
to  visit  Amritsar  and  bathe  in  its  sacred  tank.  The 
Sikhs  hearing  them  rtiention  Lahore  asked  them 
to  give  their  impressions  of  it,  and  tell  about  the 
Emperor  Shahjahan,  who  was  there  at  the  time.  They 
said  that  Shah  J ahan  publicly  attended  the  mosque 
on  the  occasion,  and  the  people  of  many  villages  came 
and  assisted  in  the  service.  The  Emperor  appeared 
in  great  state  on  a beautiful  tall  elephant  adorned 
with  gold  and  silver  trappings  and  bearing  a glittering 
canopied  hauda,  whose  ball-fringe  was  set  with  precious 
stones.  The  masands  said  that  they  could  not  count 
the  imperial  army,  which  on  that  occasion  descended 
on  the  parade  ground  like  clouds. 

‘ Then  came,  led  with  embroidered  silken  ropes,  the 
horses  taken  forcibly  from  us.  Their  bearing-reins 
were  fastened  to  saddles  studded  with  gems,  which 
glittered  in  a manner  to  captivate  the  beholder.  The 
horses  were  in  superb  condition  and  pranced  as  they 
were  led  along.  The  Emperor  loved  them  so  much 
that  he,  would  not  allow  them  to  go  out  of  his  sight. 
They  appeared  beautiful,  as  if  made  by  Cupid’s  own 
hands.  If  the  god  of  the  firmament  saw  them,  even 
^ The  Muhammadans  have  substituted  Ismail  for  Isaac. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  157 

he  would  be  enamoured  of  their  beauty.  We  heard 
people  say  that  the  horses  would  cross  a river  with- 
out wetting  their  riders.  One  of  them  was  called 
Dil  Bagh  and  the  other  Gul  Bagh.  They  were  so 
swift  that  it  was  difficult  to  tell  whether  they  put 
their  legs  on  the  ground  or  flew  in  the  air.  During 
our  whole  lives  we  have  never  seen  such  horses ; and, 
as  they  had  been  brought  for  the  Guru,  he  ought 
certainly  to  possess  them,  so  that  he  might  in  case 
of  necessity  have  excellent  chargers  to  bear  him  in 
a conflict  with  the  enemy.  What  doth  the  Emperor 
want  such  horses  for  ? He  cannot  ride  or  fight  like 
the  Guru.  The  Guru  is  a man  of  great  stature, 
and  when  mounted  on  such  horses  would  appear 
doubly  beautiful  as  he  presented  himself  to  his 
Sikhs,  and  would  gladden  their  hearts  as  they  beheld 
him.’ 

The  party  from  Kabul  returned  home,  except 
Bakht  Mai  and  Tara  Chand,  who  remained  with  the 
Guru  at  Bhai  Rupa.  Their  conversation  was  ever  of 
Dil  Bagh  and  Gul  Bagh.  Bidhi  Chand,  notwith- 
standing his  resolutions  of  amendment,  began  to 
consider  how  he  could  restore  the  belauded  steeds. 
A horse  destined  for  the  Guru  had  once  been  taken 
away  by  the  Emperor’s  father  and  was  duly  re- 
covered. This  afforded  Bidhi  Chand  what  he 
deemed  a suitable  pretext  for  his  intended  action. 
The  Emperor  was  now  at  war  with  the  Guru,  had 
inflicted  great  losses  on  the  Sikhs,  and  caused  the 
death  of  many  of  his  bravest  warriors,  and  it  would 
be  a disgrace  to  allow  him  to  retain  possession  of 
the  horses  brought  all  the  way  from  Kabul  for  the 
Guru.  It  was  impossible  to  secure  them  by  purchase, 
and  being  very  dear  to  the  Emperor  they  were  well 
guarded.  Even  were  war  to  be  declared  against 
him,  possession  of  the  horses  could  not  be  obtained, 
as  they  were  kept  in  an  impregnable  fortress. 

Some  of  the  soldiers  lately  enlisted  by  the  Guru 
said,  ‘ We  find  on  full  consideration  that  no  one 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


158 

but  Bidhi  Chand  can  accomplish  the  enterprise  of 
recovering  the  horses.  He  is  so  clever  that  he  can 
do  what  ^ the  world  thinketh  impossible.  As  there 
are  no  horses  like  Dil  Bagh  and  Gul  Bagh,  so  there 
is  no  one  like  Bidhi  Chand  to ’secure  possession  of 
them.  If  Bidhi  Chand  by  his  great  cleverness  suc- 
ceed in  bringing  the  horses,  it  will  be  a miracle 
famous  throughout  the  world.  Ram  Chandar,  on 
losing  his  queen  Sita,  selected  the  very  wise  and 
clever  Hanuman,  and  dispatched  him  to  Ceylon  in 
search  of  his  queen.  Hanuman  examined  the  whole 
island,  discovered  Sita,  killed  the  great  demons  of 
Rawan’s  army,  set  fire  to  his  city,  and  crossed  the 
ocean  on  his  victorious  homeward  march.  There  is 
now  a similar  exploit  to  be  performed.  Hanuman’ s 
fame  still  liveth  in  the  world.  Bidhi  Chand  will 
accomplish  it,  and  his  fame  shall  be  resplendent.’ 
Bidhi  Chand  on  hearing  himself  thus  praised  and 
encouraged  said,  ‘ What  are  Gul  Bagh  and  Dil  Bagh  ? 
I would  even  bring  the  Guru  the  horses  of  the  sun’s 
chariot.’ 

Bidhi  Chand  then  with  clasped  hands  uttered  a 
prayer.  ‘ O Guru  Arjan,  I am  now  bent  on  acting  in 
opjwsition  to  thine  injunctions ; pardon  me  for  ven- 
turing to  restore  to  thy  Sikhs  horses  wantonly  taken 
from  them  by  unrighteous  Moslems.  Assist  me 
in  the  perilous  path  I am  about  to  tread.’  He  re- 
ceived the  congratulations  of  his  companions,  and 
as  soon  as  preparations  for  his  journey  were  com- 
pleted departed  for  Lahore.  On  reaching  the  city 
gate  he  again  considered  how  he  was  to  perform  the 
task.  ‘ I cannot  break  the  fort  wall  which  is  very 
strong.  The  horses  are  well  guarded  and  no  stranger 
may  approach  them.  There  are  several  sentries  at 
the  gates.  If  I can  only  enter  the  stable-keeper’s 
service,  then  I may  have  access  to  the  horses ; but  he 
will  not  take  me  without  an  introduction  ; wherefore 
I must  try  some  means  of  obtaining  access  to  him  in 
some  other  way,  so  that  I may  succeed  in  my  object.’ 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  159 

The  manner  in  which,  without  the  Guru’s  knowledge, 
Bidhi  Chand  recovered  the  horses  brought  for  him 
from  Kabul,  cannot  afford  edification  to  the  .strictly 
pious.  We  here,  however,  give  a narrative  current 
among  the  Sikhs  partly  to  relieve  the  strain  on  the 
reader  who  has  so  far  followed  this  serious  narrative, 
and  partly  to  show  with  what  ingenuity,  address, 
and  daring  Indians  of  former  ages  could  succeed  in 
transferring  property. 

Bidhi  Chand  went  to  the  house  of  a carpenter 
named  J iwan  who  had  previously  known  him.  J iwan 
welcomed  him  as  bringing  a blessing  on  his  house. 
Bidhi  Chand  in  reply  to  Jiwan’s  inquiries  frankly  told 
him  the  nature  of  his  errand,  and  asked  his  advice, 
and  all  information  regarding  the  Emperor,  his  horses, 
and  their  keepers.  Jiwan  was  astonished  and  said, 

‘ Thou  hast  come  on  a difficult  errand.  The  Emperor 
resideth  in  the  Saman  Burj — octagonal  tower — and 
the  horses  are  kept  near  him.  They  are  guarded  by 
hundreds  of  men  who  serve  their  master  with  great 
fidelity.  There  are  many  sentries  ever  under  arms  at 
the  gates.  The  Darogha  or  stable-keeper’s  name  is 
Sondha  Khan.  He  hath  many  subordinates.  To 
say  nothing  of  taking  away  the  horses,  the  stable  is 
inaccessible.  How  canst  thou  ever  reach  it  ? But 
if  fortune  favour  thee,  thou  shalt  accomplish  a feat 
which  is  otherwise  impossible.  God  can  render  what 
is  difficult  easy,  can  make  the  weak  strong  and  the 
strong  weak.  Who  but  thee  can  reach  the  stables' 
and  obtain  possession  of  the  horses  ? ’ 

Bidhi  Chand  requested  his  host  to  make  him  a 
khurpa,  or  iron  instrument  for  grubbing  up  grass, 
and  pray  that  success  might  attend  his  efforts.  Bidhi 
Chand  then  went  to  rest  and  slept  soundly,  while  his 
friend  Jiwan  sat  up  all  night  making  the  khurpa. 
Next  morning  Bidhi  Chand  took  it  with  a net  to 
hold  grass,  and  proceeded  to  the  bank  of  the  river 
Ravi.  There  he  began  to  cut  beautiful  soft  grass  to 
take  to  the  coveted  horses.  He  already  deemed 


t6o  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

them  the  Guru’s,  so  he  laboured  with  a will.  He 
collected  the  grass  with  great  care  and  put  it  in  his 
net.  He  then  took  it  to  the  market-place.  Horse 
owners  on  seeing  its  emerald  brightness  hastened  to 
negotiate  for  it.  Bidhi  Chand  said  that  he  would 
not  sell  it  for  less  than  a rupee,  but  no  one  would 
give  him  so  much  for  a bundle  of  grass.  He  then 
moved  on  till  he  arrived  opposite  the  gate  of  the 
fort.  It  was  in  the  evening,  and  the  time  for  the 
stable-keeper  to  go  forth  and  breathe  the  fresh  air 
on  the  margin  of  the  Ravi. 

Bidhi  Chand,  on  learning  that  Sondha  Khan,  the 
well-dressed  man  he  saw  before  him,  was  the  stable- 
keeper,  congratulated  himself  for  having  been  so 
fortunate  as  to  meet  on  the  very  day  after  his  arrival 
the  man  whose  acquaintance  he  had  so  desired  to 
make.  When  the  grass  was  brought  to  the  stable- 
keeper’s  notice,  he  said  that  he  had  never  seen  such 
grass  in  all  his  life.  It  was  fit  for  Dil  Bagh  and  Gul 
Bagh,  and  he  ordered  his  men  to  adjust  the  price 
and  buy  it  for  the  horses.  On  observing  Bidhi 
Chand  he  said  that  he  apf>eared  to  be  an  honest  man. 
Bidhi  was  ready  with  his  reply,  ‘ Thou  art  an  appre- 
ciator  of  merit.  Thou  art  very  wise,  and  art  there- 
fore employed  in  the  Emperor’s  service.  I greatly 
desire  that  Dil  Bagh  and  Gul  Bagh  should  thrive,  and 
to  this  end  I have  made  great  efforts.  Now  that 
this  beautiful  grass  hath  reached  its  proper  place 
my  wishes  are  fulfilled.  As  long  as  the  horses  of  the 
true  King ' — a title  of  the  Guru  not  understood  by 
the  stable-keeper — ‘ eat  my  grass,  I will  gladly  sell 
it  for  whatever  thou  art  pleased  to  give.’ 

His  sweet  words  and  civility  induced  Sondha  Khan 
to  take  him  with  the  grass  on  his  head  to  where  the 
horses  were  tethered  with  silken  ropes.  When  Bidhi 
Chand  laid  down  his  bundle  in  front  of  them,  they 
ate  ravenously  as  if  they  had  been  fasting  for  a whole 
day.  Before  leaving  the  court  he  carefully  surveyed 
the  premises,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  i6i 

would  be  very  difficult  to  remove  the  horses.  He 
went  into  the  market-place,  and  changing  the  rupee 
he  had  received,  distributed  the  money  aS  alms,  say- 
ihg  that  he  would  never  eat  anything  purchased 
with  Muhammadans’  money,  lest  after  taking  away 
the  prize  he  should  be  deemed  ungrateful’ 

After  thus  feeding  the  horses  for  six  or  seven  days, 
they  used  to  neigh  welcome  to  him  whenever  he 
approached.  He  would  then  pat  them  on  their  backs 
to  make  them  pleased  with  him.  The  stable-keeper 
one  day  inquired  his  name  and  whether  he  would 
consent  to  be  a permanent  servant.  Bidhi  Chand 
replied,  ‘ The  wise  call  me  Kasera.^  I bring  thee 
grass  daily ; wherefore  make  me  thy  servant  and 
thou  shalt  see  me  serve  thee  daily  more  and  more, 
but  I will  not  work  for  hire.  As  these  are  the  true 
King’s  horses,  I will  serve  them  for  love.  If  ever  I 
obtain  my  wishes,  my  service  to  the  horses  shall 
not  go  unrewarded.’  Bidhi  Chand  was  accordingly 
appointed  grass-cutter  to  the  Emperor’s  favourite 
steeds  at  a wage  of  one  rupee  per  day.  The  stable- 
keeper  on  appointing  him  warned  him  to  do  good 
work  and  nothing  should  be  deducted  from  his 
stipulated  pay,  a practice  so  usual  in  former  times. 
Bidhi  Chand  replied,  ‘ What  shall  I say  ? Thou 
shalt  see  the  service  I will  perform.  Good  men  say 
little,  and  what  they  do  say  they  fdlfil  in  the  end:’ 
When  Bidhi  Chand  was  not  cutting  or  fetching  grass, 
he  was  always  occupied  in  washing  and  brushing  the 
horses  and  attending  to  their  comfort. 

Bidhi  Chand  requested  the  stable-keeper  to  give 
orders  to  the  porters  at  all  the  fort  gates  to  allow  him 
free  ingress  and  egress  at  all  times;  The  stable- 
keeper  took  him  round  and  gave  all  the  necessary 
orders.  Bidhi  Chand  continued  his  incessant  labour 
and  even  did  the  work  of  the  permanent  stable-ser- 
vants, whereat  they  were  much  pleased.  After  some 
days  Sondha  Khan  ordered  that  the  bridling  and  the 

^ KHhi  Chand  meant  H ghast^Ara  or  grass-cutter. 

M 


•SIKH.  IV 


i62  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

unbridling  of  the  horses  should  be  entrusted  to  Kasera. 
They  had  become  attached  to  him  on  account  of  his 
great  attention  to  them  day  and  night.  Sondha  Khan 
then  told  Bidhi  Chand  his  principal  duty  would  be 
to  groom  the  horses.  He  needed  only  go  occasionally 
for  grass.  Bidhi  Chand  replied  that  he  was  not  above 
any  service  whether  it  were  to  go  for  grass  or  remain 
and  groom  the  horses.  He  spoke  civilly  to  every  one 
and  won  all  hearts  without  paying  any  money. 

Whenever  for  the  future  Bidhi  Chand  went  for 
grass  he  brought  a large  stone  concealed  in  it.  At 
midnight  he  used  to  fling  the  stone  into  the  river 
which  then  flowed  under  the  fort.  When  the  stone 
fell  into  the  water  it  made  a great  noise,  and  awakened 
everybody  in  the  neighbourhood.  Bidhi  Chand’ s 
object  was,  that  people  might  suppose  it  was  a fish 
or  the  falling  of  a wall  or  of  a stone  off  the  parapet ; 
and  that  the  occupants  of  the  fort  would  gradually 
become  habituated  to  the  noise,  and  take  no  notice 
of  it  when  he  leaped  one  of  the  horses  over  the  battle- 
ment into  the  river.  If  he  once  succeeded  in  getting 
the  horse  outside  the  fort  walls,  he  knew  he  should 
succeed  in  taking  him  to  Bhai  Rupa,  the  Guru’s  resi- 
dence at  the  time. 

The  Emperor  once  went  to  see  the  horses  and  was 
very  pleased  to  observe  their  excellent  condition.  He 
admired  Bidhi  Chand,  said  he  appeared  a smart  ser- 
vant, and  ordered  the  stable-keeper  to  treat  him  well, 
that  he  might  remain  in  his  service.  He  then  made 
him  a suitable  money  present.  Bidhi  Chand,  who 
lived  on  Jiwan’s  earnings,  entrusted  the  money  to 
the  stable-keeper,  told  him  to  retain  it,  and  also  his 
monthly  salary  until  such  time  as  he  required  funds 
for  his  expenses.  The  stable-keeper  was  deceived  by 
this  apparent  generosity.  He  thought  that  Bidhi 
Chand,  who  was  really  greedy  to  obtain  the  horses, 
had  no  greed  in  his  heart,  and  he  continued  to  repose 
the  utmost  confidence  in  him.  He  deemed  him  the 
best  of  all  his  servants  and  made  the  others  sub- 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  163 

ordinate  to  him.  Though  Bidhi  Chand  thus  became 
their  superior  officer,  he  used  to  treat  them  affec- 
tionately, so  that  they  might  be  on  his  side  in  the 
hour  of  need. 

Bidhi  Chand  congratulated  himself  on  his  progress 
thus  far.  The  next  object  of  his  ambition  was  to 
obtain  a saddle  for  one  of  the  horses  to  assist  him  in 
his  escape.  He  accordingly  set  to  work  to  secure  the 
friendship  of  the  man  who  kept  the  keys  of  the 
Emperor’s  storehouse  where  his  costly  saddles  were 
kept.  In  this  also  he  succeeded  by  flattering  and 
soft  speeches.  All  the  time  he  managed  to  conceal 
his  extraordinary  cleverness,  and  to  pass  for  an  igno- 
rant villager  of  mean  understanding.  As  his  fellow- 
servants  listened  to  his  simple  talk,  they  began  to 
love  him  and  he  gratified  them  in  every  way  in  his 
power.  One  day  he  said  in  their  presence,  ‘ These 
are  very  fine  horses.  Does  his  Majesty  keep  them 
to  look  at,  so  that  his  heart  may  rejoice  ; or  do  they 
always  remain  standing  like  this  in  the  stable  ? Have 
they  any  saddles,  and  if  so  what  are  their  saddles 
like  ? Will  you  show  them  to  me  ? ’ Somebody  said 
to  him  in  reply,  ‘Thou  simpleton,  their  saddles  are 
very  costly,  set  with  pearls  and  well-cut  diamonds, 
and  inlaid  with  glittering  gems  which  shine  like  the 
stars  in  heaven.  The  saddles  are  each  worth  a 
lakh  and  a quarter  of  rupees.  The  like  of  thee  can 
never  have  seen  such  saddles.  Who  would  show  them 
to  ignorant  villagers  ? And  who  could  possess  them 
but  emperors  with  unbounded  wealth  ? ’ 

Bidhi  Chand  humbly  represented,  ‘ Pray  consider 
me  as  one  of  yourselves.  I am  a servant  of  the 
horses  of  the  true  King.  I live  among  you  day  and 
night.  If  my  desire  to  see  the  saddles  be  not 
gratified,  then  everything  I do  is  in  vain.  I have 
never  seen  a saddle  of  such  value.  Where  did  you 
have  saddles  made  worth  a lakh  and  a quarter  of 
rupees  each  ? I am  astonished  at  hearing  such  a 
thing.  I have  therefore  a great  desire  to  see  them, 

M 2 


i64  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

and  I beg  you  to  gratify  me.’  Another  servant 
replied,  ‘ The  saddles  are  kept  under  lock  and  key 
and  continually  guarded.  He  in  whose  custody  the 
keys  are  will  show  them  to  thee.  Speak  to  him,  he 
is  here  now.’  The  custodian  of  the  keys  said  he 
would  be  very  pleased  to  show  the  saddles,  if  he 
received  the  stable-keeper’s  permission,  but  other- 
wise he  would  be  afraid  to  do  so.  The  stable-keeper 
happened  to  arrive  at  the  time,  and  asked  the  ser- 
vants what  plot  they  were  concocting.  They  replied, 
‘ Thou  hast  employed  Kasera,  a very  simple-minded 
fellow,  who  says  things  to  set  us  all  a-laughing.  He 
desireth  to  know  how  a lakh  and  a quarter  of  rupees 
could  be  spent  on  a saddle.’  Bidhi  Chand  himself 
then  told  the  darogha  he  could  not  rest  until  he  had 
seen  saddles  of  such  astonishing  value. 

The  darogha  told  him  that  on  the  great  Id  festival 
both  horses  would  be  saddled  and  led  out,  and  then 
he  would  see  such  a sight  as  he  had  never  seen 
before.  Bidhi  Chand,  to  whom  time  was  valuable 
and  delay  a thing  to  be  avoided,  then  philosophically 
addressed  the  darogha,  ‘ What  dependence  is  there 
on  life  ? It  may  cease  within  an  hour.  Who  knoweth 
whether  even  the  breath  we  now  expire  shall  return 
again  ? The  moment  I heard  every  one  praise  the 
saddles  I conceived  a desire  to  behold  their  wonderful 
workmanship.  A thing  worth  a lakh  and  a quarter 
of  rupees  is  a wonder  to  me,  and  I shall  not  be  happy 
till  I see  it.  I am  always  with  thee  here,  and  am  I 
not  to  have  my  natural  desires  gratified  in  such 
a matter  ? Wherefore,  my  master,  I pray  thee 
grant  an  order  that  their  custodian  show  me  the 
saddles.’  The  darogha,  overcome  by  these  entreaties, 
ordered  that  Bidhi  Chand  should  see  the  saddles. 
Bidhi  Chand  on  seeing  them  pretended  that  he 
thought  the  diamonds  were  white  stones,  and  the 
pearls  grains  of  millet  such  as  he  had  often  chewed 
in  his  native  village,  and  asked  where  the  precious 
stones  were  of  which  he  had  heard  so  much.  What 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  165 

he  saw  appeared  to  him  of  no  value.  At  this  every 
one  laughed,  and  asked  what  he  could  know  about 
precious  stones.  He  had  never  heard  of  such  things, 
and  had  never  seen  them  before,  Bidhi  Ghand, 
putting  his  hand  on  the  diamonds,  remarked  that 
they  were  very  hard,  and  would  prick  the  Emperor’s 
body  when  he  touched  them.  They  could  not 
possibly  be  comfortable  things  to  sit  on.  The 
darogha  explained  to  him,  that  what  he  saw  were  not 
things  one  could  take  into  his  hand  and  eat.  They 
were  for  display  on  great  occasions,  and  only  found 
in  the  possession  of  emperors  and  great  monarchs. 
Bidhi  Chand  replied,  ‘ If  a man  like  me  got  a thousand 
rupees  it  would  last  him  for  life.  He  could  get  a 
wife  for  himself  and  another  for  his  son,  when  he  had 
one,  out  of  the  money.  It  is  only  kings  who  squander 
money  in  vain.’ 

This  conversation  at  an  end,  the  darogha  ordered 
Bidhi  Chand  to  lift  up  the  saddles  and  take  them 
back  into  the  store-room.  Bidhi  Chand  kept  his  eyes 
well  open,  and  took  note  of  its  interior.  He  also 
observed  where  the  custodian  laid  the  key  after 
locking  the  door.  Next  day  the  darogha  seeing  him 
most  attentive  to  the  horses,  ordered  that  he  alone 
was  to  give  them  mashes  and  other  food,  and  take 
care  of  them  day  and  night.  Meanwhile,  Bidhi 
Chand  carefully  studied  how  he  could  take  one  or 
both  away.  He  was  ever  searching  for  a low  and 
suitable  part  of  the  fort’s  ramparts  over  which  he 
might  leap  them  into  the  river.  He  said  to  himself, 
‘ I must  hit  on  some  plan  by  which  the  servants  may 
go  to  sleep  and  not  hear  or  see  me  saddling  the  horses. 
If  the  grooms  remain  awake,  they  will  most  probably 
catch  me  in  the  act,’ 

AU  the  grooms  employed  on  the  horses  were  fond 
of  music  and  dancing  women.  One  day,  as  they 
were  all  laughing  and  talking  together,  one  of  them 
turned  to  Bidhi  Chand  and  said,  ‘ Look  here,  brother 
Kasera,  thou  art  a new  servant  and  receivest  the 


i66 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


highest  pay  of  us  all.  Thou  hast  also  got  a large 
present  from  the  Emperor,  and  not  yet  given  thy 
fellow-servants  a dinner.  This  is  not  well  of  thee.’ 
This  proposal  was  the  very  thing  that  Bidhi  Chand 
had  desired.  He  replied,  ‘ I am  at  the  service  of 
you  all.  Why  should  I not  please  you  ? I did  not 
think  of  it ; you  have  reminded  me.  You  have  said 
well,  and  I have  grasped  your  meaning.  I am 
thinking,  however,  that  it  would  not  be  proper  for  you 
who  are  of  a different  religion  to  receive  food  from 
my  hands.  I will  do  another  thing  as  you  ask  me. 
You  know  well  that  I am  no  miser.  I will  spend  all 
I have  on  you.  I will  tell  you  what  I wish  to  do 
myself.  I will  give  you  wine — a hogshead  among 
you — and  you  may  enjoy  yourselves  and  get  drunk 
to  your  hearts’  content.  With  my  own  hands  I 
will  fill  your  cups,  and  you  shall  be  delighted  when 
I have  satisfied  you.  Be  happy  in  the  enjoyment  of 
God’s  gifts.  There  is  no  reliance  on  life.  The 
pleasure  of  the  day  is  the  only  gain.’ 

The  grooms  on  hearing  this  were  all  delighted  and 
shouted  ‘ Bravo  ! Bravo  Kasera  ! ’ The  prospect  of 
getting  drunk  filled  them  with  visions  of  bliss.  They 
vowed  that  they  would  take  no  dinner  that  day, 
that  they  might  the  more  eagerly  partake  of  Bidhi 
Chand’s  hospitality.  They  had  dinner  every  day  at 
home,  but  they  had  riever  yet  joined  in  such  a sym- 
posium as  Kasera  had  proposed.  Bidhi  Chand 
at  once  saw  his  opportunity,  and  thus  communed 
with  himself,  ‘ This  is  the  eighth  day  of  the  dark  half 
of  the  month,  a convenient  time  for  my  purpose.  It 
will  be  very  dark  in  the  beginning  of  the  night. 
I will  then  jump  one  of  the  horses  over  the  rampart, 
and  after  that  when  it  is  light  make  my  way  to  Bhai 
Rupa.  I will  now  so  entertain  my  friends  that  they 
will  curse  me  in  the  morning.’ 

Bidhi  Chand  then  addressed  his  brother  grooms — 
" Let  no  one  take  dinner  to-day.  I adjure  all  of  you 
to  assemble  here  this  evening.  I will  go  and  fetch 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  167 

the  wine.  When  you  have  drunk  it,  you  may  eat  as 
much  as  you  please.  After,  that  you  may  go  home 
to  your  wives.  If  you  do  not  wish  to  go  home,  then 
remain  here.  Have  no  anxiety  whatever  to-day. 
Enjoy  for  the  moment  the  pleasures  of  love  and  wine. 
I will  arrange  everything  for  you.’ 

Bidhi  Chandwent  to  his  friend  Jiwan,  took  twenty 
rupees  from  him  to  buy  strong  wine,^  and  going 
to  a publican  asked  for  his  most  potent  liquor. 
The  publican  told  him  he  would  charge  him  fifty 
per  cent,  above  ordinary  market  price  for  a special 
distillation  which  he  kept  in  his  private  house, 
and  which  he  would  not  sell  to  ordinary  customers. 
The  publican  described  its  virtues,  ‘ If  a man  drink 
even  a little  of  it,  he  will  so  lose  his  senses  that  he 
cannot  find  even  his  own  door.  What  higher  praise 
can  I bestow  on  it  ? ’ Bidhi  Chand  told  him  that 
he  would  give  him  not  fifty  but  one  hundred  percent, 
above  market  price,  if  he  supplied  him  with  wine 
possessing  four  times  the  ordinary  strength. 

When  Bidhi  Chand  met  his  guests  he  told  them  all 
the  trouble  he  had  taken  to  procure  them  excellent 
wine,  again  pressed  them  to  enjoy  themselves,  and 
assured  them,  with  a covert  meaning,  that  whenever 
he  left  them  they  should  all  remember  him.  Having 
addressed  them  loving  words  of  that  description  he 
handed  round  the  wine,  but  at  first  in  small  quan- 
tities. He  then  engaged  them  in  pleasant  conversa- 
tion, and  they  were  delighted  when  he  agreed  with 
everything  they  said.  As  intoxication  gradually 
came  on,  some  were  laughing  and  others  thought 
they  were  in  the  seventh  heaven.  Hitherto  he  had 
taken  care  not  to  give  them  too  much  lest  they  should 
suspect  his  designs ; but,  when  a watch  of  night 
had  elapsed,  he  began  to  give  them  wine  without 
measure,  and  they  drank  with  open  mouths.  The 
sentries  also  joined  in  the  carousals  and  said  while 
Bidhi  Chand  was  filling  their  cups,  ‘ Listen,  brother 

^ Spirits  were  then  much  cheaper  in  India  than  they  aCre  now. 


i68  . THE  SIKH  RELIGION  : 

Kasera,  the  sentry  duty  is  thine  to-night.  Thou  hast 
been  so  liberal  of  thy  wine,  that  we  cannot  possibly 
remain  awake,  so- keep  guard  thyself.’  Bidhi  Chand 
replied,  ' Have  no  fear  ; I shall  remain  awake  the 
whole  night.  Such  is  the  dread  of  the  Emperor 
that  no  one  may  approach.  The  whole  country  is 
under  one  powerful  monarch.  Who  can  come  to 
spy  out  the  land,  much  less  to  steal  ? ’ . 

Saying  this;  Bidhi  Chand  let  the  wine  flow.  He 
filled  to  the  brim  a special  goblet  for  the  custodian 
of  the  keys,  who  took  it  and  laughingly  said,  ‘ O 
Kasera,  seeing  thy  friendship  I will  drink  this  cup 
from  thy  hands.  The  protection  of  my  storehouse 
I now  entrust  to  thee.  Thou  hast  not  taken  wine, 
so  thou  wilt  remain  awake  and  be  fully  on  the  alert.’ 
Bidhi  Chand  assured  him  that  he  would  remain  awake 
and  that  no  stranger,  however  daring,  should  approach 
the  premises.  The  key-holder  might  therefore  sleep 
soundly  and  comfortably.  All  the  company  were 
reassured  on  hearing  Bidhi  Chand’ s cheerful  words, 
and  began  to  drink  on,  big  and  little,  old  and  young. 
They  soon  became  unconscious  and  fell  down  uttering 
incoherent  nonsense.  When  they  could  no  longer 
speak,,  they  took  off  their  clothes  and  rolled  naked 
on  the  floor.  Bidhi  Chand  took  each  man’s  arm  and 
inquired  how  he  was,  and  on  receiving  no  answer 
knew  that  his  friends  were  disposed  of  for  the  night, 
and  he  himself  was  free  for  action.  It  is  true  he 
heard  the  distant  sentries  calling,  but  they  could 
not  interfere  with  his  operations. 

Xhe  author  of  the  ‘ Gur  Bilas  ’,  or  Life  of  Guru 
Har  Gobind,  here  makes  the  following  reflection  on 
the  use  of  wine.  ‘ Wine  is  evil  on  this  account  that 
he  who . drinketh  it  loses  his  senses.  A king  who 
drinketh  becometh  like  a beast,  and  easily  falleth 
a prey  to  his  enepry.  Good  men,  hear  me  on  this 
subject.  Monarctis  who  have  conquered  powerful 
enemies  have  been  blinded  by  the  intojdcation  of 
wine,  Their  kingdoms  have  passed  out  of  their 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  169 

possession,  and  they  have  become  poor  in  an  instant. 
Men  holy,  clever,  and  great  have  degraded  themselves 
to  the  level  of  brutes  by  the  use  of  wine.  It  would 
hold  men  captive  even  without  fetters.’ 

Bidhi  Chand  finding  all  his  guests  lying  on  the 
floor  in  Bacchanalian  slumber  tied  his  waistband  and 
adjusted  his  turban  for  action.  He  then  went  to  the 
niche  in  the  wall  where  he  knew  the  key  of  the 
harness-room  was  kept  and  immediately  found  it. 
Having  taken  out  a saddle  he  went  to  Dil  Bagh  and 
undid  his  silken  headstall.  Caressing  the  animal 
he  put  on  his  bridle  and  drew  the  reins  over  his  neck. 
He  then  laid  on  the  saddle-cloth  and  the  saddle,  and 
fastened  tight  the  soft  silken  girths.  He  attached 
on  either  side  the  golden  stirrups,  and  further 
secured  the  saddle  by  carefully  passing  the  crupper 
under  Dil  Bagh’s  tail.  This  done  he  untied  the 
horse’s  heel  ropes.  He  then  mounted,  taking  in 
his  hand  a whip  with  a golden  handle  which  he  found 
attached  to  the  saddle.  He  cantered  the  animal 
backwards  and  forwards  until  he  found  that  he  had 
got  into  his  full  stride.  Then  applying  the  whip 
he  faced  him  at  the  fort-wall  over  which  he  was  to 
leap.  The  horse,  which  had  never  previously  been 
struck  even  by  the  stalk  of  a flower,  on  receiving  a cut 
with  the  whip  roused  himself  at  the  unusual  summons, 
gathered  his  strength,  set  his  limbs,  and  on  Bidhi 
Chand  lifting  the  reins  cleared  without  hesitation 
the  high  battlement  with  a bound,  and  plunged  with 
his  rider  into-the  river.  Bidhi  Chand,  well  skilled  in 
horsemanship,  steadied  the  animal  in  the  water  and 
guided  him  safely  to  shore. 

The  residents  of  the  fort  who  were  awake  had 
become  accustomed  to  the  report  of  bodies  falling 
into  the  water,  and  thought  the  splash  they  had 
heard  was  due  to  the  falling  of  one  of  the  battlements 
as  the  result  of  erosion  of  the  river.  Bidhi  Chand 
drawing  in  his  reins  on  the  bank  patted  the  horse, 
and  encouraged  him  after  the  fright  he  had  sustained. 


lyo 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


While  Bidhi  Chand  had  been  originally  meditating 
this  enterprise,  he  used  to  note  every  wall  and  rivulet 
and  tree  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  now  carefully 
examining  them  took  the  road  and  directed  his  course 
to  Bhai  Riipa.  The  horse  bounded  along  like  the 
wind  while  Bidhi  Chand  gaily  sang — 

May  the  Guru  and  God  be  always  with  me  ! 

Remember,  remember  Him  who  ever  protecteth.^ 

The  moon  rose  two  hours  after  his  departure,  and 
then  he  was  able  to  steer  his  way  by  its  position  in 
the  sky.  He  avoided  all  towns  and  villages.  On 
reaching  Harike  at  the  junction  of  the  rivers  Bias  and 
Satluj,  he  introduced  Dil  Bagh  again  into  deep 
water  by  plunging  him  into  the  foaming  Ghara.^ 
The  horse  was  found  to  correspond  exactly  with  the 
description  the  Kabuli  Sikhs  had  given.  Dil  Bagh 
appeared  as  if  he  had  sprung  from  a sea  of  beauty 
by  the  combined  agencies  of  exquisiteness  and 
strength. 


Chapter  XVI 

The  morning  after  Bidhi  Chand  had  departed  from 
Lahore  the  darogha  Sondha  Khan,  finding  one  of 
the  Emperor’s  favourite  horses  missing  and  all  the 
sentries  and  grooms  asleep,  was  not  in  an  enviable 
frame  of  mind.  The  grooms  and  guards,  when 
roused  up,  maintained  that  they  had  been  watchful 
during  the  night,  and  said  the  horse  must  have  sunk 
into  the  earth  or  soared  to  the  celestial  regions.  The 
"E-mpeTor  SViaE  3 aVan  "bemoaned  his  irreparable  loss — 
Who  hath  taken  my  most  favourite  steed  and 
thus  hastened  his  own  destruction  ? Can  there  be 
any  one  in  the  whole  earth  who  hath  not  the  fear 
of  me  in  his  heart  ? When  the  kings  of  other  lands 
cannot  keep  a particle  belonging  to  me  in  their  pos- 

^ Asa. 

* The  Satluj  is  so  called  after  its  junction  with  the  Bi3s. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  171 

session,  who  hath  two  heads  that  he  can  afford  to 
sacrifice  one  of  them  for  stealing  my  horse  ? If  my 
enemy  were  to  hide  himself  in  the  retirement  of  the 
mountains  or  in  desert  fastnesses,  my  army  would 
not  desist  till  it  had  found  him.  Whoever  hath 
taken  my  steed  is  now  my  greatest  enemy.  I will 
assuredly  put  him  to  death  whoever  and  wherever 
he  may  be.’  The  Emperor  sent  trackers  with  an 
escort  in  every  direction  to  endeavour  to  trace  the 
missing  animal,  but  no  clue  could  be  obtained. 

The  Sikhs  who  had  brought  the  horses  from  Kabul, 
on  receiving  charge  of  Dil  Bagh  in  BhaiRupa,  observed 
that  he  did  not  eat  his  corn  with  a will,  that  tears 
were  flowing  from  his  eyes,  and  that  his  heart  was 
sad.  It  was  not  known  how  he  had  become  so  weak. 
He  was  well  groomed  and  treated  with  the  utmost 
care.  Rai  Jodh  thought  that  the  horse  had  become 
weak  as  it  was  the  first  time  he  had  been  ridden  any 
distance.  He  had  previously  been  unaccustomed  to 
travel  and  exertion.  The  Sikhs,  however,  came  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  water  which  flowed  from 
the  horse’s  eyes  was  simply  the  pain  of  his  heart  pro- 
jected on  his  body,  and  must  be  caused  by  separation 
from  his  hitherto  inseparable  stable  companion. 
Bidhi  Chand  was  easily  able  to  confirm  this  opinion. 
‘ This  Dil  Bagh  of  ours  and  Gul  Bagh  were  tethered 
together.  They  used  to  eat  corn,  grass,  and  mashes 
of  different  sorts  side  by  side,  so  that  affection  sprang 
up  between  them.  Manifestly  it  is  bn  account  of 
his  separation  from  his  brother  that  tears  are 
flowing  from  his  eyes.’  This  speech  convinced 
everybody. 

Bidhi  Chand  therefore  decided  on  bringing  Dil 
Bagh’s  brother  to  him  from  the  Lahore  fort,  so  that 
the  horse  might  no  longer  suffer  from  the  pangs  of 
separation.  He  said  to  himself,  ‘ Although  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  brave  men  with  arms  in  their  hands 
were  on  the  alert,  I could  so  deceive  them,  that 
I would  take  the  horse  away  before  their  very  eyes.’ 


172  i THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

After  Bidhi  Chand  had  set  out  for  Lahore,  Rai  Jodh 
pressed  the  Guru  to  leave  Bhai  Rupa  and  go  to  his 
village  of  Kangar  about  four  miles  distant.  Sadhu 
and  Rup  Chand,  owners  of  the  village  of  Bhai  Rupa, 
desired  to  accompany  the  Guru,  but  he  advised  them 
to  remain  in  their  own  village,  and  they  should  always 
have  his  company  in  the  spirit.  His  bodily  company 
would  not  he  said  be  safe  for  them,  for  he  was  bent  on 
perilous  enterprises.  He  should  have  to  encounter 
the  Muhammadans  in  the  blood-stained  field  of 
danger,  when  steel  would  resound  on  steel  and  brave 
men  die  amid  the  clash  of  arms.  Meantime  his 
beloved  friends  Sadhu  and  Rup  Chand  would  lead 
the  liyes  of  saints,  and  practise  the  virtues  of  charity 
and,  benevolence  in  their  native  village.  Sadhu  and 
Rup  Chand  accepted  the  Guru’s  decision,  and  made 
him  their  parting  obeisance.  Rup  Chand’s  wife  also 
came  and  embraced  the  Guru’s  feet.  On  the  Guru’s 
arrival  at  Kangar  he  was  similarly  greeted  by 
another  lady,  Rai  Jodh’s  wife,  who  made  him  large 
offerings.  Such  were  the  Guru’s  gracious  manners 
that  he  completely  won  Rai  Jodh’s  heart,  and  Rai 
Jodh  daily  showed  him  some  new  mark  of  affection. 

When  Bidhi  Chand  arrived  at  the  gate  of  I.ahore 
he  heard  the  town-crier  publishing  the  theft  of  Dil 
Bagh,  and  offering  to  give  the  finder  any  reward  he 
pleased.  Bidhi  Chand  inquired  what  all  this  meant, 
and  was  duly  informed  by  the  Sikhs  who  were 
entertaining  him  of  what  had  occurred.  After 
considering  his  position,  and  the  danger  to  himself 
in  ’;,  the  event  of  failure,  he  carefully  formed  his 
plans.  He  went  to  a cloth-merchant  and  asked 
him  to  make  him  a fine  Hindustani  costume.  He 
ordered  three  coats  of  different  lengths,  a paejama 
or  trousers  with  a beautiful  waistband,  a turban 
several  yards  long  with  embroidered  ends,  and 
a pair  of  ornament^  shoes  low  at  the  heels  but  with 
long  toes  pointed  upwards.  The  cloth-merchant 
had  everything  ready  by  four  o'clock  in  the  after- 


LIFE  Ot?  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  173 

noon,  and  his  wife  then  served  up  dinner.  Bidhi 
Chand  expressed  his  satisfaction — ‘ When  one  Sikh 
serveth  another,  the  Guru  valueth  that  more  than 
service  to  himself,  as  he  hath  said,  “ Knowing  him 
to  be  my  Sikh  he  hath  honoured  him.”  On  hearing 
of  such  love  the  Guru  will  be  pleased.’ 

Bidhi  Chand  then  asked  his  friend  to  get  amagician’s 
chain  made  for  him  by  a clever  smith  before  next 
morning,  and  not  mention  the  circumstance  to  any 
one.  On  the  morrow  he  put  on  his  new  dress  and 
with  coco-nut  oil  greased  his  long  hair  until  it  shone. 
He  parted  his  beard  in  the  centre,  so  that  his  chin 
could  be  seen.  He  also  twisted  up  his  moustaches. 
He  then  put  on  his  three  coats,  one  reaching  below 
the  knees,  the  second  a shorter  one  over  it,  and  the 
third  a jacket  over  all.  He  tied  on  his  turban  in 
the  shape  of  a shield,  and  buttoned  his  trousers 
at  the  ankles.  He  fastened  • its  waistband  so  as 
to  show  the  embroidered  ends,  and  finally  put 
on  his  long  pointed  shoes  so  that  he  looked  a 
real  Hindustani.  He  had  just  dressed  when  the 
magician’s  chain  he  had  ordered  arrived.  Holding 
it  in  his  hand  in  front  of  him,  he  walked  slowly  into 
the  streets  and  market-places  and  appeared  an 
innocent  and  respectable  man.  At  the  same  time 
people  were  astonished  on  seeing  his  strange  costume, 
and  thronged  around  him.  Several  questions  were 
asked,  ‘ To  what  country  does  he  belong  ? ’ ‘ What 
is  his  name  ? ’ ‘ Where  doth  he  reside  ? ’ Bidhi 
replied,  ‘ My  country  is  far  away.  1 am  a profes- 
sional man  and  know  something  of  occult  science.’ 
So  sa5dng  he  strutted  proudly  along,  followed  by  a 
crowd  to  the  gate  of  the  fort. 

Bidhi  Chand  sat  down  on  a raised  platform  and  in 
reply  to  further  inquiries  said,  ‘ I am  an  experienced 
tracker  and  astrologer,  and  can  trace  anything  that 
hath  been  lost.’  The  crowd  asked  other  questions 
which  he  answered  oracularly,  while  at  the  same  time 
he  amused  his  audience.  He  procured  a mirror  into 


174 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION  . 


which  he  frequently  looked,  and  then  adjusted  his 
beard  and  moustaches  ; and  he  would  now  and  again 
handle  and  shake  his  chain  ostentatiously  before  the 
multitude.  It  happened  that  a servant  of  the  stable- 
keeper,  who  was  passing  that  way,  stopped  to  see 
what  was  going  on  and  inquired  who  the  stranger 
was..  Bidhi  Chand  replied,  ‘ My  name  is  Ganak.^ 
My  ordinary  residence  is  in  a forest^  in  a distant 
country.  I have  come  in  quest  of  an  opportunity 
to  show  my  skill.’ 

The  stable-keeper’s  servant  then  began  to  tell  him 
of  the  loss  of  the  Emperor’s  horse,  and  said  that,  if 
he  thought  he  could  give  any  clue  to  the  recovery  of 
the  animal,  he  would  introduce  him  to  the  Emperor 
who  would  generously  reward  him.  Bidhi  Chand 
then  boasted  of  his  skill.  By  merely  smelling  the 
ground,  he  said,  he  could  tell  the  secrets  of  the  upper 
and  nether  regions,  - to  say  nothing  of  this  con- 
temptible planet.  He  could  tell  the  Emperor  in  what 
direction  the  horse  had  been  taken  and  where  he  was 
at  that  moment.  He  could  not  recover  the  horse,  he 
admitted,  for  that  was  beyond  his  power,  but  the 
Emperor  himself  with  his  army  could  accomplish  an 
enterprise  of  that  nature.  The  Emperor  heard  of  the 
self-constituted  tracker  and  sent  the  stable-keeper  to 
summon  him,  The  stable-keeper  went,  and  failing  to 
recognize  Bidhi  Chand  in  his  altered  costume,  took 
him  inside  the  fort.  He  was  duly  presented  to  the 
Emperor,  and  stood  up  in  court  with  the  utmost  confi- 
dence. In  reply  to  the  Emperor’s  questions  he  said, 
‘ I dwell  in  a forest.  Men  call  me  “Tracker  Ganak.’’ 
My  skill  I obtained  from  an  ancient  and  venerable  seer. 
I can  interpret  omens,  discover  tracks,  and  read  the 
stars  and  planets.  I am  a wanderer  because  certain 
persons  bear  me  great  enmity.  They  are  many 
while  I am  but  one.  I have  come  hither  to  obtain 
justice,  and  I will  give  thee  information  regarding 

* This  word  means  a diviner  by  numbers. 

* The  Malwa  country  is  sometimes  still  called  the  Jangal  or  forest. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  175 

the  horse  thou  hast  lost.’  The  Emperor  then  con- 
ferred on  him  a costly  robe,  gave  him  a large  sum 
to  defray  the  expenses  attendant  on  his  residence 
at  the  capital,  and  promised  him  lakhs  of  rupees  if 
he  pointed  out  where  the  stolen  horse  was  concealed. 

Upon  this  Bidhi  Chand,  holding  his  magician’s 
chain,  put  his  hand  on  the  ground  and  raised  it  three 
times  to  his  forehead.  He  then  ostentatiously  bowed 
to  his  supposed  patron  saint  and  preceptor.  He 
began  to  count  by  the  aid  of  his  thumb  the  joints  of 
his  fingers,  so  that  all  might  think  he  was  interpreting 
omens.  He  then  said  to  the  Emperor,  ‘ I know  where 
the  horse  is,  but  I want  to  have  one  look  at  the  place 
whence  he  was  stolen,  and  then  I will  give  thee  all 
information.  I will  tell  thee  the  thief’s  name  and 
how  he  effected  the  theft.  It  is  then  for  thyself  to 
consider  whether  thou  canst  recover  the  animal 
peaceably  or  go  to  war  for  him.’  The  Emperor 
promised  Bidhi  Chand  a high  office  at  court ; he 
should  have  all  his  enemies  in  his  power,  and  he  should 
receive  four  lakhs  of  rupees  on  giving  information 
which  would  lead  to  the  recovery  of  the  horse. 

Bidhi  Chand  requested  the  Emperor  to  reduce 
his  promise  to  writing,  and  said,  ‘ Let  all  the  people 
in  court  pray  with  clasped  hands  that  the  two  horses 
meet  again.  The  prayers  of  many  produce  an  effect, 
because  the  Lord  is  in  the  midst  of  a multitude. 
I shall  obtain  the  desire  of  my  heart  if  you  will  all 
heartily  pray  to  God  for  my  success.’  On  this  the 
courtiers  clasped  their  hands  and  prayed  that  the 
stolen  horse  might  again  meet  its  mate.  After  this 
the  Emperor  reduced  his  promise  to  writing.  Bidhi 
Chand  then  said,  ‘ Let  us  now  go  to  the  place  whence 
the  horse  was  stolen.  I will  cast  my  chain  and 
consider  numbers,  stars,  and  omens.  I swear  by 
my  preceptor  that  I will  tell  thee  truly  where  the 
horse  is  and  the  name  of  the  thief.  We  diviners  tell 
not  lies,  especially  in  the  Emperor’s  court.’  Upon 
this  the  Emperor,  stable-keeper,  Bidhi  Chand,  and 


176  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

a few  others  went  to  the  stables.  Some  tried  to 
dissuade  the  Emperor  from  trusting  the  stranger, 
but  the  advice  was  disregarded. 

When  the  Emperor,  in  reply  to  Bidhi  Chand,  said 
that  the  horse  which  had  been  stolen  had  his  saddle 
on,  Bidhi  said  that,  if  it  had  been  otherwise,  he  could 
by  the  calculations  he  had  already  made  discover 
the  tracks.  If,  however,  the  remaining  horse  were 
saddled  and  bridled,  he  would  consider  what  could 
be  done  without  the  delay  which  would  be  necessary 
to  recast  his  numbers.  His  suggestion  was  adopted. 
Upon  this  he  said  he  would  ply  his  skill  energetically 
and  not  go  to  sleep  that  night.  He  hoped,  by 
observing  the  motions  of  the  stars,  to  discover  before 
morning  the  tracks  desired.  He  would  then  be  ready 
to  receive  the  stipulated  reward.  The  Emperor 
pressed  him  not  to  wait  till  morning  but  impart  his 
secret  at  once,  in  which  case  he  should  receive  a- 
further  reward  of  a lakh  and  a quarter  of  rupees. 
Bidhi  Chand  said  that  he  could  only  succeed  in 
divining  the  tracks  in  solitude  and  tranquillity  at 
the  particular  hour  when  the  horse  had  been  stolen, 
so  he  requested  the  Emperor  to  cause  all  the  inhabi- 
tants to  close  their  doors  and  go  to  sleep  at  that  time. 
He  also  made  it  a condition  that  all  the  gates  of  the 
fort  should  be  shut,  so  that  there  might  be  no  noise 
made  by  the  ingress  or  egress  of  its  occupants.  The 
Emperor  was  deceived  into  issuing  orders  according 
to  Bidhi  Chand’s  wishes.  When  the  fort  gates  were 
closed  on  one  side,  Bidhi  Chand  contrived  to  cause 
them  to  be  opened  on  the  other  side,  in  order  to 
effectually  secure  himself  from  pursuit. 

When  everybody  else  had  retired  to  rest,  Bidhi 
Chand  undid  the  ropes  that  bound  the  horse.  He  put 
his  head  on  the  ground  and  prayed  for  his  success. 
It  is  said  that  the  Emperor  heard  a noise  as  if 
a horse  had  got  loose,  but  Bidhi  Chand  allayed  his 
apprehensions,  and  said  that  he  had  discovered  where 
the  horse  was,  and  would  surely  fulfil  his  promise 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  177 

to  tell  the  name  of  the  thief.  Bidhi  Chand  appears 
to  have  also  found  means  of  locking  from  the  outside 
the  door  of  the  passage  which  led  from  the  Emperor’s 
apartments.  He  then  said  aloud,  ‘ Hear  everything, 
consider  not  the  thief  a person  to  be  forgotten.  Thy 
father,  by  the  power  of  his  army,  formerly  took  pos- 
session of  an  excellent  horse  intended  for  the  holy 
and  worshipful  Guru  Har  Gobind,  whose  fame  is  like 
that  of  the  sun,  and  thou  hast  now  in  imitation  of 
thy  unjust  father  seized  these  noble  steeds  specially 
intended  by  pious  Sikhs  for  their  beloved  Guru. 
I have  made  reprisal  and  taken  the  first  horse  by  my 
ingenuity.  My  name  is  Bidhi  Chand ; I am  the 
Guru’s  servant.  It  was  I who  took  home  Dil 
Bagh,  the  horse  thou  art  in  search  of.  On  account 
of  separation  from  his  mate  he  wept  copiously  on 
his  arrival,  and  we  could  only  induce  him  to  eat  and 
drink  with  difficulty.  Wherefore,  in  the  guise  of 
a tracker  and  with  a love  for  dumb  animals,  I have 
come  to  take  his  companion  to  join  him.  I am 
the  thief,  the  true  King  is  my  master.  Thou  hast 
now  given  me  Gul  Bagh  ready  saddled.  I have 
thoroughly  gauged  the  wisdom  of  thy  court.  I will 
tell  where  the  horse  is,  and  in  so  doing  remove  all 
blame  from  myself.  The  Guru  hath  pitched  his  tent 
in  the  new  village  of  Bhai  Rupa.  Know  that  Dil 
Bagh  is  standing  there.  Gul  Bagh  shall  now  go  to 
join  him.’ 

The  Emperor  on  hearing  this  called  to  the  darogha 
to  stop  the  thief,  but  the  darogha  was  also  a prisoner 
and  helpless.  The  Emperor  again  called  out  for 
help,  but  no  help  was  forthcoming.  The  guards  were 
all  locked  in.  Bidhi  Chand  again  addressed  the 
Emperor,  ‘ Why  art  thou  angry  ? I have  taken  the 
horse,  as  was  fit  and  proper.  Remember  the  promise 
thou  hast  made  me.  I have  not  received  my  former 
wages  as  groom  and  grass-cutter^  nor  the  present 
of  a thousand  rupees  which  thou  madest  me.  Thou 
hast  promised  me  four  lakhs  of  rupees  for  tracking. 

N 


SIKH.  IV 


178  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

That,  thou  hast  not  paid  me.  Again,  thou  didst 
promise  a lakh  and  a quarter  of  rupees  for  immediate 
information.  I have  not  yet  received  a kauri  from 
thee.  I have,  therefore,  virtually  purchased  the 
horses  which  with  their  saddles  may  be  set  against  my 
account.  Send  me  the  balance  and  free  thyself  from 
the  debt ; otherwise  there  shall  remain  an  account 
between  us  which  can  only  be  adjusted  in  God’s 
court.  If  thou  desire  to  stop  me  and  determine  not 
to  pay  me,  then  I shall  go  with  the  conviction  that 
thou  art  a deceitful  monarch.  I have  the  keys  of 
the  fort  here  with  me,  and  will  throw  them  into  the 
deep  river.  Make  haste.  Thou  wilt  have  to  find 
them  before  thou  catchest  me.’  Saying  this,  Bidhi 
Chand  again  prayed  for  the  success  of  his  enterprise, 
and  finally  addressed  the  Emperor — ‘Whatever  efforts 
are  to  be  made,  make  now,  so  that  thou  mayest  not 
be  sorry  after  my  departure.  Say  not  that  thou 
hast  not  had  full  information.’  Upon  this  he  took 
the  bunch  of  keys  and  calling  out,  ‘Going,  going, 
gone,’  threw  them  into  the  deep  water,  and  left  the 
Emperor  to  search  for  them  and  his  precious  steeds.' 

He  then  applied  his  whip  to  the  horse.  The 
animal  pulled  himself  together,  leaped  over  the 
battlement,  and  dropped  into  the  deep  water  of  the 
Ravi.  Bidhi  Chand  then  rode  off  with  him  as  he 
had  done  his  companion  Dil  Bagh,  gaily  singing  as 
he  went  along.  Both  horses  were  entrusted  to  the 
Sikhs  who  had  brought  them  from  Kabul. 

The  Sikh  chronicler,  who  is  partial  to  detail,  states 
that  when  the  two  horses  met  they  neighed  each  other 
welcome,  rubbed  noses  and  offered  mutual  salutations 
like  two  brothers  who  had  met  after  long  separation. 
The  Kabuli  Sikhs  made  them  a present  to  the  Guru. 
He  changed  Dil : Bagh’ s name  into  Jan  Bhai,  which 
means  that  the  horse  was  as:  dear  as  life,  and  Gul 
Bagh’s  name  intq  Suhela,  which  means  dear  com- 
panion. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


179 


Chapter  XVII 

There  were  warnings  that  the  Emperor’s  army 
would  soon  arrive  to  recover  the  horses,  and  it  was 
necessary  to  prepare  for  defence  and  seek  shelter  in 
some  advantageous  position.  Rai  Jodh  recom- 
mended the  Guru  to  betake  himself  to  a deep  forest 
in  which  there  was  a tank,  as  otherwise  there  was  no 
water  for  miles  around.  Two  villages,  Lahira  and 
Marhaj,  were  subsequently  built  not  far  from  this 
tank.  The  Guru  with  three  thousand,  and  Rai  Jodh 
with  one  thousand  men  marched  to  a tank  in  the 
lands  of  Nathana.  The  army  was  so  disposed  round 
the  tank  that  when  the  enemy  arrived  they  could  not 
obtain  access  to  its  water,  and  must  thus  inevitably 
perish  from  thirst. 

The  Emperor  was  thinking  of  proceeding  himself 
to  punish  the  Guru,  but  was  dissuaded  by  Wazir 
Khan,  who  knew  that  his  own  happiness  and  pros- 
perity depended  on  the  Emperor’s,  and  that  the 
Guru  would  be  victorious.  Wazir  Khan  recom- 
mended that  no  artillery  should  be  sent,  but  that 
the  combat  should  be  decided  by  swords,  bows  and 
arrows,  and  matchlocks.  To  this  the  Emperor 
agreed.  Then,  taking  a naked  sword  in  his  hand 
and  calling  his  chief  secretary,  he  said,  ‘ Is  there  any 
brave  man  who  will  undertake  an  expedition  against 
the  Guru  ? ’ It  was  the  custom  of  the  time  for  a 
monarch  on  such  occasions  to  lay  down  a sword  and 
a packet  of  betel.  Whoever  put  the  betel  into  his 
mouth  and  took  up  the  sword,  bound  himself  to 
undertake  the  enterprise  and  defend  the  monarch’s 
cause.  Up  rose  Lala  Beg,  a high  officer  of  the  im- 
perial army,  and  going  through  the  usual  ceremony 
said  he  would  lead  an  expedition  against  the  Guru, 
and  produce  him  with  the  stolen  horses  before  the 
Emi>eror  in  a few  days.  Lala  Beg’s  brother  Qamar 
Beg  with  his  two  sons,  Qasim  Beg  and  Shams  Beg, 


i8o  THE  SIKH  RELIGION  ' 

and  his  nephew  Kabuli  Beg  also  volunteered.  The 
Emperor  made  them  anticipatory  gifts — bracelets, 
necklaces,  aigrettes  for  their  turbans,  and  robes  of 
honour — and  put  them  in  command  of  an  army  of 
thirty-five  thousand  horse  and  foot.  He  gave  them 
orders  not  to  delay,  but  make  all  possible  speed 
and  produce  the  Guru  in  chains  before  him. 

The  imperial  army  marched  to  Bhai  Rupa  and 
not  finding  the  Guru  there  proceeded  to  his  new 
quarters.  A spy  named  Hasan  Khan  was  dis- 
patched by  Lala  Beg  to  make  a reconnaissance. 
The  nature  of  his  errand  was  discovered  by  an 
expression  which  accidentally  escaped  him,  namely, 
‘ Our  army  is  much  larger.’  Upon  this  he  was 
seized  by  the  Sikhs,  cuffed  and  kicked,  whereupon 
he  asked  for  mercy  in  the  name  of  the  Guru.  The 
Guru  ordered  that  he  should  be  released  and  not 
put  to  death.  He  was  asked  to  tell  the  strength 
of  the  imperial  army,  and  he  in  gratitude  gave  true 
details.  He  was  then  given  a dress  of  honour  and 
dismissed. 

A curious  device  for  discovering  the  movements 
of  a hostile  army  is  here  mentioned  by  the  author 
of  the  Suraj  Parkash.  Rai  Jodh’s  wife  put  some 
pearls  on  a tray  so  that,  when  the  imperial  army 
moved,  the  tramp  of  the  soldiers’  feet  might  cause 
the  pearls  to  vibrate  and  the  necessary  information 
would  thus  be  obtained. 

When  the  spy  Hasan  Khan  returned  to  his  chief, 
he,  in  giving  details  of  what  he  had  seen,  incidentally 
praised  the  Guru’s  troops.  Though  few  in  number, 
they  were,  he  said,  brave  as  tigers  and  longing  for 
the  fray.  The  imperial  army  were  as  so  many 
jackals  before  them.  This  enraged  Lala  Beg,  and 
he  dismissed  his  spy  on  the  pretext  of  disaffection. 
Upon  this  Hasan  Khan  returned  to  the  Guru, 
and  begged  his  patronage  and  protection.  The 
Guru  welcomed  him  in  opposition  to  the  advice  of 
Rai  Jodh,  who  represented  that  it  was  impolitic  to 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  i8i 

entertain  an  enemy’s  spy.  The  Guru,  in  reply,  said 
that  it  would  not  be  proper  for  him  to  refuse  pro- 
tection to  any  one  who  sought  it.  Moreover,  this 
Hasan  Khan  in  God’s  mysterious  way  should  be- 
come a very  distinguished  person.  Orders  were  then 
issued  to  Bidhi  Chand  and  Jetha  to  hold  their  troops 
in  readiness  for  defence.  The  orders  had  not  been 
given  too  soon.  That  very  night  Rai  Jodh’s  wife 
knew  by  the  movement  of  her  pearls  that  the 
Emperor’s  army  was  approaching,  and  wrote  to  that 
effect  to  her  husband  who  was  with  the  Guru’s  army, 
so  that  the  Guru  might  be  duly  apprised. 

The  imperial  army  was  composed  of  several 
nationalities.  Some  had  large  heads,  others  long 
noses,  and  others  again  red  cheeks.  There  were 
sable  Ethiopians,  Ruhelas,  Yusufzais,  Daudzais, 
Gilzais,  Baloches,  and  Pathans.  Preceded  by  torches 
they  advanced  to  the  sound  of  drums  of  many 
descriptions.  Lala  Beg  said  to  his  troops  that  the 
Guru  had  nothing  of  an  army ; with  whom  were 
they  to  fight  ? They  had  only  to  go  and  seize  the 
priest  of  the  Sikhs.  Qamar  Beg  addressing  the  Chief 
said,  ‘ 0 my  brother,  if  thou  send  me,  I will  bring 
thee  even  the  angel  of  Death,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
Guru  ? ’ Upon  this  the  Chief  placed  seven  thousand 
men  at  his  disposal.  On  seeing  him  approach, 
Hasan  Khan,  the  late  imperial  spy,  informed  the 
Guru  of  his  name,  position,  and  capabilities. 

Rai  Jodh  with  a thousand  men  went  to  oppose 
Qamar  Beg.  He  ordered  his  troops  to  use  their 
matchlocks  at  a distance,  and  not  allow  the  enemy 
to  come  to  close  quarters.  Showers  of  bullets  soon 
thinned  the  ranks  of  the  imperial  army  marching  in 
close  formation,  and  totally  destroyed  the  torch- 
bearers  who  had  been  leading  the  way.  Then 
ensued  darkness,  upon  which  the  imperial  army  fell 
into  dire  confusion.  They  used  their  swords  and 
guns,  and,  goaded  by  their  misadventure  and  the 
havoc  caused  by  the  Guru’s  troops,  heeded  not 


i82 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


whether  they  slaughtered  friend  or  foe.  Very  soon 
under  all  the  circumstances — the  darkness,  the  dust 
raised  by  men  and  horses,  the  day’s  fatigue,  the 
cold,  and  the  severe  losses  in  the  ranks — they 
deemed  it  best  to  retreat.  They  thought  their  own 
troops  who  were  in  the  rear  were  enemies,  and 
received  them  with  showers  of  bullets.  Thus  the 
imperial  army  was  broken  up  and  whole  detach- 
ments fell  by  mutual  slaughter.  Qamar  Beg  left 
alone  advanced  in  search  of  his  army,  and  dis- 
charged showers  of  arrows  as  he  proceeded.  Rai 
Jodh  finding  an  opportunity  pierced  Qamar  Beg 
with  his  lance.  He  fell  and  soon  after  died  in  agony. 
Rai  Jodh  reported  his  victory  to  the  Guru  who 
warmly  commended  him. 

The  Guru’s  army  was  provided  with  sufficient 
firewood  from  the  forest.  The  imperial  army  had 
no  such  comfort.  Consequently  at  the  end  of  the 
night  the  Emperor’s  troops  became  frozen  with  the 
cold.  When  day  dawned,  there  were  heaps  of 
soldiers  of  the  imperial  army  found  dead  on  the 
field.  As  the  Guru  surveyed  them  from  an  emi- 
nence, he  was  reminded  of  Hasan  Khan’s  words  that 
his  Sikhs  were  as  brave  as  tigers,  and  that  each  of 
them  should  kill  many  flying  jackals  of  the  enemy. 

The  Chief  on  seeing  Qamar  Beg  and  thousands  of 
his  men  slain  was  in  sore  anxiety.  He  thought  of 
advancing  himself  into  the  thick  of  the  fight,  but 
Shams  Beg,  Qamar  Beg’s  son,  asked  to  be  allowed 
to  go  instead.  The  Chief  yielded  and  gave  him  com- 
mand of  a division  of  his  army.  As  Shams  Beg 
advanced  he  saw  his  father’s  dead  body,  and  well  nigh 
succumbed  at  the  sight.  He,  however,  succeeded  in 
putting  himself  at  the  head  of  his  troops.  Hasan 
Khan,  the  quondam  spy,  pointed  him  out  to  the 
Guru  : ‘ Behold  that  powerful  youth  in  blue  uniform 
on  a steed  painted  blue,  at  the  head  of  the  imperial 
forces.  It  is  necessary  to  send  some  very  brave 
men  to  oppose  him.’  The  Guru  sent  Bidhi  Chand 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  183 

with  fifteen  hundred  men.  He,  on  seeing  his  antag- 
onist, thus  addressed  him ; ‘ O boy,  why  comest 
thou  to  die  ? Seest  thou*  not  thy  father  already 
entered  into  Death’s  abode  ? Why  seekest  thou 
to  follow  him  ? Thou  art  yet  too  young  for  the 
battle-field.  Go  home  to  thy  mother’s  protection.’ 
Shams  Beg  on  hearing  this  angrily  retorted,  ‘ If  I 
die,  I will  take  with  me  my  father’s  foe.’  Arrows 
and  swords  were  then  plied.  Bidhi  Chand’s  powerful 
arm  sent  many  Turks  to  untimely  death.  Though 
some  of  them  fought  well,  they  were  defeated  by 
the  superior  skill  and  bravery  of  Bidhi  Chand  and 
his  troops.  The  two  commanders,  Bidhi  Chand 
and  Shams  Beg,  then  approached  each  other  and 
engaged  in  single  combat.  Bidhi  Chand  struck  his 
adversary  with  his  mailed  fist,  and  sent  him  reeling 
to  the  earth.  He  then  put  his  leg  on  his,  and,  taking 
hold  of  the  other  with  his  powerful  arms,  tore  his 
body  in  twain. 

Lala  Beg  was  enraged  on  seeing  his  nephew 
Shams  Beg  and  his  army  slain.  When  he  made 
a signal  for  some  one  to  advance,  his  second  nephew, 
Qasim  Beg,  offered  himself,  ‘ If  thou  wilt  allow  me, 
I will  go  and  avenge  my  father  and  brother.’  The 
chief,  on  seeing  the  young  hero  come  forward,  gave 
him  command  of  his  reserve.  Hasan  Khan  pointed 
him  out  to  the  Guru  as  he  approached,  ‘ O true  King, 
Qasim  Beg  now  advance th  against  thee.  He  is  a 
very  powerful  man  and  held  in  great  esteem  by  the 
Emperor  of  Dihli.  A brave  warrior  should  be  sent 
against  him  also.  The  Guru  accordingly  dispatched 
Bhai  Jetha  with  five  hundred  men.  Qasim  Beg, 
seeing  Bhai  Jetha,  thus  addressed  him  : ‘ O grey- 
beard, why  comest  thou  with  such  a puny  force  to 
seek  thy  destruction  ? Go  and  enjoy  a few  days 
more  of  this  world,  and  send  to  the  battle-field  him 
who  hath  killed  my  father  and  brother.’  Bhai 
Jetha  replied,  ‘ I have  enjoyed  my  life,  but  thou 
art  young.  I see  thy  beaird  is  just  sprouting.  There 


i84  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

is  yet  time  for  thee  to  escape  by  flight  and  enjoy 
the  wife  of  thy  youth.  Mistake  not  on  seeing  my 
small  army.  I,  single-handed,  will  not  suffer  thee  to 
abide  alone,  but  will  dispatch  thee  speedily  to  thy 
father  and  brother.  If  thou  consent  not  to  fly,  let 
our  armies  engage,  and  then,  if  the  issue  be  doubtful, 
we  shall  both  decide  the  fortune  of  war  by  single 
combat.’ 

Except  cannon  every  weapon  of  warfare  known 
at  the  time  was  brought  into  requisition.  Bullets 
fell  like  hail ; swords,  knives,  and  daggers  glittered 
like  lightning,  quivers  were  emptied,  bow-strings 
snapped,  arrows  broke,  and  warriors  wrestled  in 
deadly  combat.  Some  of  the  raw  undisciplined 
forces  began  to  plunder  one  another,  and  there  was 
general  riot  and  disorder.  Jackals,  wolves,  kites, 
and  vultures  feasted  on  the  bodies  of  the  slain. 
There  were  heard  on  all  sides  cries  of  ‘ Kill  him ! 
kill  him  ! ’ ‘ Let  him  not  escape  ! ’ When  Bhai 

Jetha  saw  Qasim  Beg’s  army  falling  in  numbers,  he 
confronted  him  as  he  had  promised,  and  let  fly 
showers  of  arrows  which  killed  Qasim  Beg’s  horse. 
Jetha  then  seized  the  rider  by  the  legs,  whirled  him 
round  his  head,  and  dashed  him  to  the  ground  as 
an  Indian  washerman  beats  soiled  linen  on  a plank. 
Qasim  Beg  immediately  expired,  while  Jetha  stood 
on  the  battle-field  like  a pillar  driven  into  the  earth. 
The  Chief,  Lala  Beg,  hearing  of  the  destruction  of 
Qasim  Beg  and  his  army,  was  only  able  to  invoke 
Allah,  whom  he  had  so  trusted,  for  a successful  issue 
of  his  engagement  with  the  infidels. 

, The  Chief  himself  then  advanced  with  all  his 
remaining  men.  Hasan  Khan,  who  was  at  tlie 
Guru’s  side  and  now  thoroughly  devoted  to  his 
cause,  advised  the  dispatch  of  a force  to  support 
Jetha.  The  Guru  replied  that  Jetha  was  like  a 
tiger,  and  would  dispose  of  his  enemies.  The  Turks 
surrounded  and  endeavoured  to  kill  him  with  arrows, 
but  these  flew  right  and  left  of  him  and  ever  missed 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  185 

their  mark.  Jetha  on  his  own  part  discharged 
arrows  which  never  sped  in  vain.  Lala  Beg,  seeing 
the  destruction  caused  by  Jetha,  now  went  to  oppose 
him.  Lala  Beg  first  used  his  lance,  but  Jetha 
parried  it.  Lala  Beg  then  drew  his  sword,  but 
Jetha  received  the  first  blow  on  his  own.  The  next 
time  Lala  Beg  was  more  successful,  for  he  cut  down 
his  brave  adversary,  who  died  uttering  Wahguru. 
Thus  emboldened  by  success,  Lala  Beg  advanced 
with  three  thousand  men  in  armour  against  the 
Guru.  Jati  Mai,  the  son  of  Singha,  asked  the  Guru’s 
permission  to  show  Lala  Beg  the  strength  of  his 
arm,  and  cut  down  the  Turks.  The  Guru  consented 
to  his  stemming  the  onset  of  the  enemy. 

Jati  Mai  rained  showers  of  arrows  on  the  Turks, 
and  sent  them  to  death’s  abode  with  the  speed  of 
hill  torrents  hastening  to  the  sea.  Lala  Beg  himself 
hurried  to  oppose  him,  and  discharged  an  arrow 
which  struck  Jati  Mai  on  the  breast,  and  made  him 
fall  fainting  to  the  earth.  The  Guru,  seeing  Jati 
Mai  fall,  entered  the  battle-field  on  his  bounding 
steed.  In  mild  accents  he  invited  Lala  Beg  to 
approach  and  measure  his  strength  with  his.  Lala 
Beg  would  not  come  near,  but  dispatched  arrows 
from  a distance,  all  of  which  missed  their  mark. 
The  Guru,  taking  steady  aim,  shot  Lala  Beg’s 
horse,  which  fell  with  its  rider.  The  Guru,  on  seeing 
the  Chief  on  the  ground,  dismounted  so  as  not  to 
take  an  unfair  advantage  of  his  adversary.  The 
Chief  assumed  the  offensive  and  aimed  several  blows 
of  his  sword  at  the  Guru,  who  parried  them  all. 
The  Guru  then  putting  forward  his  strength,  struck 
the  Chief  a blow  which  completely  severed  his  head 
from  his  body.  It  was  as  if  the  Chief  had  in  his 
devotion  offered  his  head  as  a sacrifice  to  the  Guru, 
and  the  Guru  in  return  had  granted  him  escape 
from  the  ills  of  Ufe  and  ultimate  salvation. 

Kabuli  Beg,  the  Chiefs  sister’s  son,  was  the  only 
one  of  the  commanders  who  now  remained.  On 


i86  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

seeing  him  advance  and  make  a final  effort  to 
restore  the  fortune  of  the  day,  the  faithful  Hasan 
Khan  called  the  attention  of  the  Guru  to  his  in- 
trepidity and  the  impetuosity  of  his  attack.  Kabuli 
Beg  meaiit  to  gather  such  a harvest  as  reapers  do 
when  they  enter  a ripe  field.  Bidhi  Chand,  Rai 
Jodh,  and  Jati  Mai,  who  by  this  time  had  somewhat 
recovered  from  his  wound,  bravely  confronted  him. 
The  battle  was  then  fought  with  extreme  fury  on 
both  sides.  The  three  Sikh  warriors  committed  such 
havoc  among  Kabuli  Beg’s  troops  that  few  remained. 
Kabuli  Beg,  maddened  with  rage  on  seeing  the 
destruction  they  caused,  rapidly  discharged  arrows 
which  wounded  all  three.  Seeing  this  the  Guru 
himself  hastened  to  their  support.  Kabuli  Beg  dis- 
charged arrows  at  the  Guru  which  whizzed  as  they 
passed  him.  One  arrow  struck  his  horse,  Gul  Bagh, 
on  the  head  and  killed  him.  The  Guru  in  retalia- 
tion killed  Kabuli  Beg’s  horse.  Kabuli  Beg  now 
approaching  the  Guru  made  a stroke  at  him  with 
his  sword,  which  the  Guru  received  on  his  shield. 
Kabuli  Beg  again  and  again  slashed  at  the  Guru, 
but  every  blow  was  parried.  The  Guru  then,  to 
change  the  monotony  of  defence,  said  to  him,  ‘ It 
is  now  my  turn,  be  on  thy  guard.’  The  Guru  then 
dealt  him  such  a blow  as  severed  his  head  from 
his  body.  This  ended  the  battle.  The  surviving 
Turks  fled  for  their  lives.  Twelve  hundred  soldiers 
of  the  Guru  were  slain,  and  wounded. 


Chapter  XVIII 

Bidhi  Chand,  Rai  Jodh,  and  Jati  Mai  went  to 
congratulate  the  Guru  on  his  victory.  The  battle, 
which  had  begun  at  midnight,  lasted  for  eighteen 
hours  on  the  i6th  of  Maghar,  Sambat  1688  (A.  D. 
1631).  The  Guru  allowed  Hasan  Khan  to  return  to 
Lahore  with  the  survivors  of  the  imperial  army. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  187 

The  plunder  obtained  from  the  bodies  of  the  deceased 
Turks  was  divided  among. the  poor.  A descendant 
of  Marhaj  appropriated  to  himself  a costly  sword 
belonging  to  a fallen  Pathan.  When  the  Guru 
heard  of  it,  he  called  upon  the  Sikh  to  relinquish 
it,  for  it  was  not  proper  to  retain  booty.  The  Sikh 
denied  all  knowle%e  of  it.  The  Guru  said  that  the 
sword  should  ply  in  the  family  of  him  who  had 
stolen  it.  It  turned  out  that  the  members  of  his 
family  died  within  a year  by  mutual  slaughter.  The 
Guru  established  the  scene  of  the  battle  as  a place 
of  pilgrimage.  It  is  now  called  Gurusar,  or  the 
Guru’s  tank.  It  lies  near  the  village  of  Nathana, 
about  three  miles  from  the  Rampura  Phul  railway 
station.  The  Raja  of  Nabha  has  at  considerable  ex- 
pense built  an  imposing  temple  on  the  spot  where 
the  Guru  encamped.  The  bard,  Abdulla,  composed 
a dirge  on  the  battle,  which  is  no  longer  extant. 

It  was  noticed  that  the  horse  Dil  Bagh  was  very 
distressed  at  the  absence  of  his  mate.  The  Guru 
addressed  him  words  of  consolation  : ‘ Such  births 
as  thine  have  been  obtained  and  lost  by  sin.  By 
sin  hast  thou  obtained  the  body  of  a beast.  Thy 
brother  hath  gone  to  heaven,  have  no  more  anxiety.’ 
It  is  said  that  upon  this  the  horse  recovered  his 
usual  spirits.  Hasan  Khan  carried  to  the  Emperor 
the  news  of  the  death  of  his  generals  and  of  the 
defeat  of  his  army.  The  Emperor  was  in  a fury. 
Wazir  Khan  was  as  usual  ready  with  special  pleading 
for  the  Guru ; ‘ The  Guru’s  predecessors,  from  Guru 
Nanak  down,  had  either  done  the  Emperor’s  line 
favours,  or  had  been  on  good  terms  with  them, 
and  what  was  now  to  be  gained  by  falling  out 
with  the  Guru?  This  was  the  third  time  that  the 
Emperor’s  forces  had  been  defeated  by  his  army. 
What  then  was  the  advantage  of  carrying  on  the 
contest  and  aggravating  the  enmity  ? I pray  thy 
Majesty,  let  this  be  the  end  of  it,  and  let  bygones 
be  bygones.  Let  another  officer  be  appointed 


i88  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

instead  of  Lala  Beg  the  deceased  chief.’  Upon  this 
the  Emperor,  by  the  Guru’s  occult  inducement,  gave 
Hasan  Khan  a dress  of  honour,  and  appointed  him 
to  a high  office. 

After  the  Guru’s  return  to  Kangar  from  the  war, 
he  went  shooting  in  the  adjoining  forest.  A hissing 
python  crawled  near  his  party.  The  Sikhs  wanted 
to  destroy  it  as  vermin,  but  the  Guru  interposed  and 
ordered  them  to  allow  the  animal  to  approach  him. 
The  Guru  touched  it  with  his  toe,  whereupon  it 
burst  and  died,  and  worms  issued  from  its  body. 
The  Guru  explained  that  it  had  been  in  a previous 
birth  a very  proud  Mahant  who  used  to  embezzle 
his  disciples’  property.  He  had  not  repeated  God’s 
name  or  repented,  so  he  became  a python,  and  his 
victims  in  order  to  torture  him,  became  the  worms 
which  now  appeared.  The  Guru,  quoting  the  follow- 
ing lines  of  the  first  Guru,  granted  him  salvation  : — 

They  who  give  disciples  hats  * are  fools,  and  they  who 
receive  them  very  shameless. 

A rat  cannot  go  into  its  hole  if  there  be  a winnowing- 
fan  tied  to  its  belly.* 

By  this  the  Guru  meant  that  hypocritical  priests 
who  make  disciples  are  fools  and  make  fools  of  their 
disciples,  and  that  man  cannot  obtain  salvation  so 
long  as  he  is  entangled  with  mammon.  The  Guru 
also  quoted  the  following  pauri  from  Gur  Das  : — 

Though  one  wear  man’s  five  garments  ; ® 

Though  his  moustaches  and  whiskers  appear  beautiful  and 
his  dress  be  very  effective  ; 

Though  he  wear  a hundred  arms  and  associate  with  the 
elect ; 

^ It  was  and  still  is  the  custom  in  India  for  a religious  teacher 
to  take  o£f  his  hat  and  put  it  on  the  head  of  his  disciple  as  part  of 
the  ceremony  of  initiation. 

» Malar  ki  War. 

* The  five  garments  of  Gur  Das’s  time  were  paejama  (drawers),  kurta 
(shirt),  angarkha  (long  coat),  kamarband  (waistband),  dastar  (turban). 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  189 

Though  he  be  skilled  in  courtly  graces,  and  known  in 
many  lands, 

Yet  without  virile  power  he  cannot  be  deemed  a man. 
What  can  a woman  do  with  him  ? 

So  if  a man  without  virtues  be  called  a guru,  who  shall 
do  him  obeisance  ? ^ 

When  the  Guru  was  leaving  Kangar,  Rai  Jodh 
expressed  a wish  to  remain  for  ever  in  his  service. 
The  Guru  did  not  encourage  him  in  this,  but  told 
him  to  abide  in  his  village.  He  then  promised 
that  when  he  became  Guru  Gobind  Singh,  he  would 
pay  an  affectionate  visit  to  Rai  Jodh’s  family.  He 
crossed  the  Satluj  and  proceeded  to  Kartarpur, 
whither  he  had  sent  his  family  and  the  Granth  Sahib 
from  Daroli. 

Preparations  were  now  made  for  the  marriage  of 
the  Guru’s  son  Teg  Bahadur  to  Gujari,  daughter  of 
Lai  Chand  and  Bishan  Kaur.  The  ninth  of  Phagun, 
Sambat  1689,  was  fixed  on  as  a suitable  time  for 
the  purpose,  and  the  marriage  was  then  celebrated 
with  great  munificence  and  rejoicings. 

There  was  at  that  time  one  copy  of  the  Granth 
with  the  Guru,  and  another  at  Mangat  made  by 
Bhai  Banno.  Bidhi  Chand  asked  and  obtained  the 
Guru’s  permission  to  make  a third  copy. 

One  day  as  the  Guru  was  hunting  he  had  every- 
thing white  on  and  about  his  person.  He  was 
clothed  in  white  muslin,  he  was  protected  from  the 
sun’s  rays  and  the  dust  by  a white  umbrella,  he 
carried  his  white  hawk  on  his  hand,  rode  on  a 
white  horse,  and  his  groom  waved  a white  chauri 
by  his  side.  To  him  thus  arrayed  a father  and  son, 
Sikhs  of  Amritsar,  presented  themselves.  The  father 
represented  that  the  son  had  with  severe  study 
learned  the  art  of  painting,  and  they  were  both 
ready  to  perform  any  service  the  Guru  might  desire. 
Bidhi  Chand  suggested  that  the  youth  should  paint 


1 War  XXXVI. 


igo 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


a picture  of  the  Guru.  The  young  man  fixed  his 
attention  on  the  work,  and  drew  a satisfactory  like- 
ness of  the  Guru.  The  Guru  presented  the  picture 
to  Bidhi  Chand.  It  is  unfortunately  no  longer  in 
existence. 

On  -the  approach  of  the  Baisakhi  festival  several 
Sikhs,  including  Rai  Jodh,  went  to  visit  the  Guru. 
A Sikh  named  Chitar  Sain  made  him  a present  of 
a horse,  a hawk,  a dress,  and  some  military  weapons. 
The  Guru  gave  all  the  offerings  to  Painda  Khan 
except  the  hawk,  which  he  reserved  for  his  own  son 
Gurditta.  The  dress  and  arms  Painda  Khan  put 
on  to  adorn  his  person.  He  then  appeared  a magni- 
ficent warrior,  and  began  to  consider  himself  a very 
superior  being.  The  Guru  ordered  him  to  appear 
before  him  always  in  that  style.  He  mounted  the 
horse  which  he  had  received,  rode  swiftly  to  his 
village,  and  showed  himself  to  his  admiring  relations. 
Asman  Khan,  his  son-in-law,  asked  him  for  all  the 
presents  given  him  by  the  Guru,  but  he  very  properly 
refused. 

Asman  Khan  then  tried  to  steal  them  by  suborning 
Painda  Khan’s  wife.  He  said  that  if  he  did  not 
get  them,  he  would  either  became  a faqir  or  drown 
himself.  She  told  this  to  Painda  Khan,  and  re- 
presented how  sad  it  would  be  if  their  daughter, 
Asman  Khan’s  wife,  became  a widow.  Painda  Khan, 
however,  did  not  wish  to  displease  the  Guru  by 
transferring  the  presents  he  had  made  him  to 
another.  Were  the  Guru  to  dismiss  him,  how  could 
he  maintain  himself  ? Painda  Khan’s,  wife  dis- 
regarding his  strong  remonstrance,  stood  up,  and 
gave  the  sword,  shield,  and  clothes  which  he  had 
just  taken  off  to  her  son-in-law,  saying  to  her  hus- 
band as  she  did  so,  ‘Thou  needest  nothing;  the 
Guru  will  give  thee  other  presents.  May  I not 
claimi  sp  much  from  thee  ? ’ She  then  laughed  away 
her  husband’s  displeasure.  Asman  Khan  at  once 
put  on  his  father-in-law's  dress,  buckled  on  his 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND 


191 

sword  and  shield,  mounted  his  horse,  and  went  forth 
to  amuse  himself  with  the  chase.  Painda  Khan 
seeing  this  stared  in  blank  astonishment  at  his  wife 
who  had  robbed  him  in  his  own  house.  He  threw 
himself  on  his  bed,  heaved  cold  sighs,  and  considered 
what  the  Guru  would  say  to  him  for  parting  with 
his  presents.  He  felt  for  the  time  mentally  disor- 
ganized and  unable  to  pay  his  respects  to  the 
Guru. 

It  happened  that  Gurditta,  taking  the  hawk  which 
had  been  presented  to  the  Guru,  went  hawking  on 
that  very  day.  In  opposition  to  the  advice  of  his 
attendants,  he  let  fly  the  bird  at  a time  when  it  was 
not  hungry.  The  hawk  consequently  did  not  return, 
but  flew  off  to  the  village  of  Wadamir,  where  Asman 
Khan  happened  to  be  resting  from  the  fatigue  of  the 
chase.  Asman  Khan  captured  it,  thinking  to  him- 
self that  if  he  took  it  to  the  Emperor  instead  of  the 
one  the  Sikhs  had  formerly  appropriated,  he  should 
be  rewarded  with  a grant  of  land. 

Asman  Khan,  on  retitrning  home,  told  his  mother- 
in-law  all  the  events  of  the  day.  She  said,  ‘ Conceal 
the  hawk.  If  the  Guru  hear  that  thou  art  in  posses- 
sion of  it,  he  will  not  fail  to  punish  thee.  Painda 
Khan  said,  ‘ If  thou  give  me  the  hawk  I will  take 
it  to  the  Guru,  and  obtain  his  pardon  for  letting 
thee  have  his  presents.’  Asman  Khan  laughingly 
said,  ‘ Thou  art  ever  prating  of  losing  thine  appoint- 
ment. I want  this  hawk  to  enable  me  to  obtain 
a tract  of  country  from  the  Emperor.  Why  shouldst 
thou  be  dependent  on  infidels  for  thy  subsistence  ? 
Pray  to  God  to  support  thee.’  Father-in-law  and 
son-in-law  spent  the  whole  night  wrangling  over  the 
hawk,  but  without  arriving  at  any  satisfactory 
settlement. 

When  the  Guru  heard  that  his  son  Gurditta’ s 
hawk  had  been  taken  possession  of  by  Asman  Khan, 
he  said,  ‘ The  will  of  God  is  very  powerful.  Worldly 
love  destroyeth  the  understanding.  Five  days  have 


192 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


now  elapsed,  and  Painda  Khan  through  shame  hath 
not  come  near  me.’  Painda  Khan  did  not  venture 
to  go  near  the  Guru  during  the  Baisakhi  fair,  which 
is  generally  a time  of  universal  enjoyment.  The 
Guru  again  remarking  his  absence  sent  for  him.  He 
appeared  looking  dejected  and  wearing  dirty  clothes. 
The  Guru  inquired  the  cause  of  his  altered  appear- 
ance. Where  were  the  clothes  and  the  horse  he  had 
received  ? Was  he  in  possession  of  Gurditta’s  hawk  ? 
If  he  told  the  truth  he  should  be  pardoned  and 
receive  presents  to  make  amends  for  those  he  had 
lost. 

Painda  Khan,  fearing  his  wife’s  and  son-in-law’s 
ire,  falsely  replied,  ‘ The  horse  and  clothes  thou 
gavest  me  are  in  my  possession.  As  soon  as  thine 
order  reached  me,  T hastened  to  come  to  thee  with- 
out even  thinking  of  my  appearance.  Were  I in 
possession  of  the  hawk,  I would  surrender  it  to  thee. 
I would  never  detain  thy  property.  Do  me  justice 
and  listen  not  to  slanderers.’  The  Guru  said, 
‘ Falsehood  pleaseth  me  not.  I have  heard  that 
thy  son-in-law  hath  seized  the  hawk.  There  is  even 
yet  time  for  thee  to  make  a full  confession.’  Painda 
Khan  swore  by  the  Guru  that  he  had  not  seen  the 
hawk.  Upon  this  the  Guru  whispered  to  Bidhi 
Chand  to  go  and  bring  the  hawk  with  all  the  offer- 
ings that  had  been  presented  to  Painda  Khan. 
Bidhi  Chand  found  Asman  Khan  asleep,  and  quietly 
took  all  the  property  he  had  misappropriated. 
The  Guru  again  pressed  Painda  Khan  to  tell  the 
truth,  but  he  swore  for  the  third  time  that  he  knew 
nothing  of  the  hawk,  and  that  he  was  in  full  posses- 
sion of  the  Guru’s  presents.  Upon  this  the  Guru 
called  on  Bidhi  Chand  to  produce  the  hawk,  the 
sword,  and  the  dress  he  had  taken  from  Asman 
Khan’s  house.  The  Guru  then  in  presence  of  his 
Sikhs  charged  Painda  Khan  with  having  sworn 
falsely  three  times  in  succession.  When  Painda 
Khan  could  make  no  reply,  the  Guru  ordered  him 


LIFE  OF  QURUi  MAR  GOBIND  193 

to  be  expelled  from  the  darbar.  Thei  f^esence  of 
Painda  ;Khan  had  never  been  agreeable  to  the'  Sikhs, 
and  they  obeyed  the  Guru’s  order  with  alacrity. 
They  seized  Painda  Khan  and  submitted  him  to 
very  rough  treatment.  He  could  not  bring  himself 
to  ask  the  Guru’s  pardon,  On.  the  contrary  he  thus 
addressed  him  : ■ I will  go  and  complain  to  the 
Emperor.  Thou  shalt  suffer  as  ;thy  father  did,  and 
then  I shall  have  my  revenge.’  The  Guru  simply 
replied,  ‘Go  by  all  means  and  complain  to  thy 
heart’s  content.  Thou  shalt  reap  the  reward  of 
thine  acts.’  The  Guru  then  caused  him  to  be  .for- 
cibly expelled  from  the  precincts  of  Kartarpur. 

When  Painda  Khan  reached  home  he  found  his 
son-in-law  Asman  Khan  weeping  for  the  loss  of  the 
hawk.  On  seeing  Painda  Khan  crestfallen  and 
hearing  him  curse  his  fate,  Asman  Khan  inquired 
the  cause.  Painda  Khan  then  gave  him  all  the 
details  of  his  treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  Guru 
and  his  Sikhs,  and  vowed  that  he  would  have  his 
revenge.  He  then  went  from  his  village  of  Chhota- 
mir  to  the  Muhammadan  village  of  Bassi.  A resolu- 
tion was  there  passed  at  his  instigation,  that:  the 
priest  of  the  Sikhs  was  a great  tyrant,  that  his 
power  daily  increased  to  the  public  detriment,  that 
he  received  countless  offerings  and  possessed  bound- 
less wealth,  and  that  the  Emperor  should  be  invited 
to  send  an  army  to  reduce  him  to  subjection  and 
take  possession  of  all  his  property.  Some  people 
laughed,  and  said  Painda  Khan  was  an  ungrateful 
scoundrel,  who  returned  evil  for  good,  and  must  one 
day  inevitably  receive  his  deserts. 

Painda  Khan  was  able,  imder  the  promise,  of 
plunder,  to  induce  five  hundred  horsemen  to  join 
him.  Some  far-seeing  men  among  them,  however, 
suggested  that  the  advice  of  his  cousin  Qutub  Khan, 
who  was  now  govecnor.of  Jalandhar,  should  be  taken 
before  war  was  declared  t against  the  Guru.  Hiey 
accordingly  proceeded  to  Jalandhar < where  Painda 

o 


SIKH.  i\ 


194 


THE  SIRH  RELIGION*  ' 


Khan  laid  his  tase  beiore  his  cousin,  and  said,  ‘ A 
generous  man  is  tested  in  famine  time.  Join  me 
mid  assist  me.’  Qutub  Khan  was  surprised,  and 
asked  why  such  a crowd  had  favoured  him  with 
a visit.  Painda  Khan  told  him  of  the  ill-treatment 
he  had  received,  and  begged  him  to  induce  the 
Emperor  to  send  an  m:my  to  punish  the  Guru.  His 
cousin  replied,  ‘ Thou  sinner,  masters  are  ever 
chastising  their  servants.  What  if  the  Guru  hath 
taken  his  own  prc^erty  ? Thou  hast  eaten  his  salt 
and  been  brought  up  by  him.  Whatever  desirable 
things  the  Guru  obtaineth  he  ever  bestoweth  on 
thee.  Disgrace  not  the  Pathans  by  fighting  with 
such  a man.  If  thou  do,  the  world  will  call  thee 
ungrateful.  If  thou  desire  thine  own  advantage, 
make  peace  with  the  Guru.’ 

Painda  Khan  angrily  replied,  ‘ Perhaps  thou  hast 
eaten  the  Guru’s  sacred  food,  and  it  speaketh 
within  thee.’  Qutub  Khan  rejoined,  ‘ Thou  oughtest 
to  be  ashamed  of  thy  words.  I have  never  eaten 
the  Guru’s  food,  sacred  or  profane ; but  thou,  having 
eaten  it  over  and  over  again,  hast  been  nourished 
on  it.  Everybody  knoweth  that  thou  desirest  to 
fight  with  him  whose  menial  thou  hast  been  the 
greater  part  of  thy  life.’  Painda  Khan  then  thought 
it  proper  to  adopt  a more  concilatory  tone,  ‘ Deeming 
thee  to  be  a Musalman  and  brother  I have  come 
to  thee.’  Qutub  Khan  jeeringly retorted,  ‘Fine  Musal- 
man thou  art  to  desire  to  do  evil  to  him  whose  salt 
thou  hast  eaten  ! ’ Painda  Khan  ingeniously  gave  a 
new  turn  to  the  discussion,  ‘ I am  waging  a religious 
war.  The  Guru  hath  stolen  thy  master’s  horses  from 
the  Lahore  fort  and  ridden  them.  I desire  to  avenge 
that  wrong.’  After  much  debate  of  this  description 
Qutub  Khan  said,  ‘ I have  only  been  making  trial 
of  thee.  True  it  certainly  is  that  the  Guru  is  an 
enemy  of  the  Emperor.  Proceed  and  I will  follow 
and  (assist  thee.’  Painda  Khan  ahd  his  cousin  then 
sfvore  fidelity  to  each  other,  and  Painda  Khan  and 


LIFE  OF  GURU.  HAR  GOBIND  195 

his  son-in-law  proceeded  to  Lahore  to  lay  their 
complaints  in  person  before  the  Emperor.  Qutub 
Khan  promised  to  follow  them. 

Chapter  XIX 

When  Painda  Khan  and  his  son-in-law  reached 
Lahore,  no  one  would  allow  them  to  approach  the 
Emperor.  They  had  spent  all  the  money  they  had 
brought  with  them  in  maintaining  themselves  and 
their  five  hundred  horses,  and  in  bribing  a courtier 
called  Salamat  Khan  to  procure  them  an  audience  ; 
but  the  ever-faithful  Wazir  Khan  would  not  allow 
any  one  to  poison  the  Emperor’s  mind  against  the 
Guru.  Painda  Khan  was  consequently  reduced  to 
great  straits.  He  could  not  return  home,  nor  could 
he  gain  access  to  the  Emperor.  He  was  in  the 
condition  of  a snake  which  takes  a lizard  into  its 
mouth,  and  can  neither  swallow  nor  reject  it. 

Qutub  Khan  soon  arrived  in  Lahore,  and  listened 
to  the  story  of  his  cousin  Painda  Khan’s  disappoint- 
ment. He  advised  him  to  procure  a long  bamboo, 
tie  a hen  to  the  end  of  it,  and  lift  her  to  the  royal 
casement,  when  her  clucking  might  perhaps  awake 
the  Emperor.  Should  this  fail,  he  was  to  light 
torches  at  midnight  and  cause  his  five  hundred  men 
to  raise  a loud  shout  opposite  the  Emperor’s  apart- 
ments, upon  which  an  audience  might  be  vouch- 
safed him  on  the  morrow.  This  expedient  proved 
successful.  Next  morning  the  Emperor  sent  for  the 
men  who  had  disturbed  his  rest  over  night,  but  it 
was  not  with  the  object  of  giving  them  a satis- 
factory audience.  He  peremptorily  demanded  an 
explanation  of  their  conduct. 

Before  Painda  Khan  or  Qutub  Khan  could  address 
the  Emperor  on  the  subject  of  their  grievances, 
Wazir  Khan  was  ready  with  his  usual  pleading  on 
bqhqlf  of  the  Guru.  ‘Thy  majesty,  this  is  not 
an  age  for  an  honest  man.  The  evils  prophesied 

02 


j96  ' THE  SIKsH  sRELIGION.  . . 

for  the  thirteenth  century  ^ of  our  era  have  already 
b^un.  He  whom  thou  treatest  well  doeth  thee 
harm  in  return.  This  Painda  Khan  was  a poor 
unprotected  child.  His  parents  were  dead.  The 
Guru  found  him  as  a waif,  took  pity  on  him,  and 
brought  him  up  as  if  he  were  his  own  son.  He 
bestowed  on  him  every  valuable  present  he  received 
for  himself.  He  procured  a wife  for  him  and  made 
provision  for  his  family.  It  is  through  the  Guru’s 
munificence  his  daughter’s  marriage  hath  been  cele-^ 
brated.  Now  when  he  ought  to  be  satisfied  with 
his  position,  he  hath  stolen  the  Guru’s  hawk,  de- 
nied the  offence  on  oath,  and  come  to  complain 
against  the  very  man  who  cherished  him  and  made 
him  distinguished  among  his  fellows.  He  hath  thus 
committed  the  most  heinous  sin  of  ingratitude,  the 
extreme  of  all  wickedness.’ 

Wazir  Khan  in  thus  pleading  was  actuated  as 
much  by  his  devotion  to  the  Emperor  as  by  gratitude 
to  the  Guru.  He  knew  the  Guru’s  power,  and  did 
not  wish  to  embroil  the  Emperor  in  further  warfare 
with  him.  It  happened  soon  after,  that  there 
was  urgent  need  of  Wazir  Khan’s  services  in 
a distant  part  of  the  empire,  and  thither  he  was 
accordingly  dispatched.  Painda  Khan  now  found 
his  opportunity  of  approaching  the  Emperor  in 
person,  and  thus  unburdened  himself : ‘ Sire,  the 
Guru  hath  done  me  grievous  wrong.  I have  been 
his  servant.  I asked  him  for  my  last  six  months’ 
salary,  but,  instead  of  giving  it  to  me,  he  hath  con- 
fiscated my  clothes  and  arms,  and  expelled  me  with 
ignominy  from  his  court.  Three  times  hath  he  con- 
<\uered  in  war  by  my  assistance.  I have  killed 
a large  portion  of  thine  army.  Thy  chiefs  now 

t r lyiOJlfim  prophecy  which  like  others  has  nof  besh 

The  fo^^tc^nih  century  of  the  Muhammadan  era  has  alf^ady 
^ tnitet  be  stated^  however,  that  orthodox  Muhamj^ad&hs 
that  the  prophtaes  were  not  for  the  thirteenth*  ccntiity 

forihe  d^y  ^judgement,  >i  ' , , h 


LIFE  OF  GURU  FTAR  GOBIND  I97 

know  my  strength.’  The  Emperor  inquired  what 
wars  he  referred  to,  and  where  they  had  been  fought. 
Qutub  KhAn  replied,  ‘ First  the  Guru  had  an  engage- 
ment in  Amritsar  with  Mukhlis  Khan,  who  had  an 
army  of  seven  thousand  men,  secondly  at  Har 
Gobindpur  with  Abdulla  Khan,  the  governor  of  the 
Jalandhar  province,  and  thirdly  at  the  Nathana 
tank  with  Lala  Beg.  They  with  their  armies  were 
all  vanquished  by  thy  petitioner  Painda  Khan’s 
assistance.’ 

Painda  Khan  continued,  ‘ I am  so  strong  that  I can 
throw  an  elephant.  I can  pulverize  a rupee  under  my 
thumb.  I bore  with  the  kicking  and  cuffing  I suf- 
fered from  the  Guru  because  I had  patience  and  con- 
fidence in  thy  justice.  He  is  thy  deadly  enemy  and 
hath  killed  thousands  of  thine  army.  His  robbers 
have  stolen  thy  horses  from  thy  fort  at  Lahore.  He 
seized  thy  white  hawk  and  refused  to  surrender  it. 
I am  in  his  secrets,  and  if  thou  entrust  an  army  to 
me,  thou  shalt  assuredly  succeed  in  reducing  him 
to  submission.  I promise  to  bring  him  and  the 
horses  he  stole  to  thee,  or  kill  him  and  have  my 
revenge.’  Then  spoke  the  corrupt  Salamat  Khan  in 
support  of  the  charges ; ‘ Painda  Khan’s  assistance 
is  providential.  The  Guru  hath  quarrelled  with  him 
without  reason,  and  he  hath  come  to  thee  for  justice. 
Look  at  him.  He  hath  the  frame  of  a giant.  If 
thou  but  order  he  will  catch  the  Guru  by  the  neck 
and  produce  him  before  thee,  and  what  the  Guru 
hath  in  his  treasury  shall  become  thy  spoil.’ 

By  such  representations  was  the  mind  of  the 
Emperor  influenced.  He  inquired  the  strength  of 
the  Guru’s  army  and  the  amount  of  his  wealth. 
Painda  Khan  replied,  ‘ He  hath  no  army.  The  halt, 
the  cripple,  the  blind,  the  deaf  and  dumb,  the 
diseased,  the  old,  the  poor,  the  lazy,  and  the  good' 
for-nothings  gathei*  round  him.  Barbers,  washer- 
men, pedlaffs,  strolling  minstrels,  and  similar  unWar- 
like  peoj^le  compose  what  he  calleth  his  army.  As 


198  THE  SIKH  RELIGION  ' 

for  wealthy,  he  possesseth  millions  upon  millions.’ 
Salamat  Khan  chimed  in.  ‘ Such  an  opportunity  as 
this  which  God  hath  given  us  ought  not  to  be  lost,’ 
The  Emperor  was  worked  Up  to  a passion  and  taking 
a Sword  in  his  hand  said,  ‘ Is  there  any  one  of  my 
officers  brave  enough  to  go  and  assist  Painda  Khan, 
and  subdue  the  Guru  who  hath  caused  all  this 
trouble.’  Kale  Khan,  governor  of  Peshawar,  desir* 
ous  of  avenging  the  fate  of  his  brother,  Mukhlis  Khan, 
rose  and  said,  ‘ May  it  please  thy  Majesty,  I will 
capture  the  Guru  and  bring  him  before  thee.’ 

The  Emperor  gave  Kale  Khan  command  of  fifty 
thousand  men,  bestowed  on  him,  as  insignia  of  his 
appointment,  a necklace  of  enormous  pearls  and 
a robe  of  gold  lace,  and  ordered  him  to  proceed 
forthwith  against  the  Guru.  Anwar  Khan,  a con* 
fidential  officer  of  the  Emperor,  friend  of  the  late 
Abdulla  Khan,  and  anxious  to  be  his  avenger,  joined 
Kale  Khan  with  two  thousand  men.  The  Emperor 
decorated  him  too  with  a robe  of  honour  worth  five 
thousand  rupees.  Qutub  Khan,  Painda  Khan,  and 
Asman  Khan  also  received  dresses  of  honour,  and 
were  commissioned  to  fight  under  Kale  Khan.  The 
Emperor  on  dismissing  them  said,  that,  when  they 
returned  victorious,  they  should  receive  further 
marks  of  his  favour.  But  the  Emperor  did  not 
reflect  that  his  army  was  as  the  ocean,  and  the 
Guru  as  the  barwanal,  the  fire  that  consumed  it. 
The  imperial  troops  were  in  reality  like  a herd  of 
deer  proceeding  to  engage  with  a tiger. 

Kale  Khan  crossing  the  Bias  proceeded  to  Jalan- 
dhar. Qutub  Khan  entertained  all  the  generals  and 
provided  for  the  encampment  of  the  troops.  During 
the  following  night  they  planned  their  campaign^ 
While  they  were  so  engaged  a voice  of  warning 
proceeded  as  from  a neighlwuring  tree,  ■ One  of  thee 
hath  been  untrue  to  his  salt.  With  him  thousands 
shall  perish.  These  troops  which  have  come  in 
proud  array,  are  like  motlK  hovering  around  a lamp. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  199 

The  Chaughatta^  (Chaghtai)  monarch  too  is  ill- 
advised,  arid  is  sowing  thorns  for  his  children.’ 

When  the  generals  heard'  this  mysterious  boding, 
they  came  forth  from  their  tentsj  looked  hither  and 
thither  and  examined  the  trees  in  the  vicinity,  but 
could  not  see  the  speaker.  They  then  said  among 
themselves,  ‘ The  Guru  is  a great  miracle-worker. 
This  must  be  a voice  from  heaven.’  Painda  Khan 
thought  it  necessary  to  encourage  his  brother 
generals,  ‘ Fear  not ; had  the  Guru  the  power  of 
working  miracles,  could  he  not  have  made  himself 
emperor  of  the  whole  world  ? He  hath  been  power- 
ful and  victorious  only  through  my  assistance.  Now 
victory  shall  no  longer  be  his.  You  shall  see  my 
strength.  If  you  allow  me  a free  hand  to  plunder 
I shall  capture  the  Guru  this  very  day.’  Kale  Khan 
thought  it  necessary  to  repress  the  speaker,  ‘ Pride 
and  braggadocio  avail  not.  It  seemeth  to  me  it 
would  be  well  to  send  an  envoy  to  ascertain  what 
the  Guru  meaneth — whether  he  will  fight  or  come 
to  terms  with  us.’  Anwar  Khan  suggested  that 
they  should  make  an  offering  to  the  Guru,  and  thus 
deceive  him  into  believing  that  they  were  his  friends. 
They  would  thus  obtain  an  easy  victory  and  succeed 
in  capturing  him.  Qutub  Khan  was  for  more 
violent  measures,  ‘ Deceive  him,  deceive  him ! and 
overpower  him  in  any  way  you  can ! ’ 

A faithful  Sikh  hearing  of  the  arrival  of  an  enor- 
mous imperial  army  in  Jalandhar  hastened  to 
inform  the  Guru.  Next  arrived  a masand  who  said 
that  the  imperial  army  was  approaching  thick  as 
flies,  and  suggested  to  the  Guru  that  he  should  take 
measures  to  protect  himself  and  his  followers,  as, 
when  it  rain^  iron,  the  showers  would  not  fall  like 
ordinary  raindrops.  The  Guru  replied  by  a hymn 
of  Guru:  Amar  Das  : — 

God  Himself  protecteth  His  saints ; what  can  a sinner  do 
against  them  ? 

‘ Babar,  the  Emperor's  ancestor,  beIonged4o  this  family. 


aoo  i : THE  &IRH  RELIGION  i 

i:  Proud,  fools  practise;  prides  apd  die  by  bating  poison. 

The  fewidays  they  had  to  live  are  at  an  end  ; they  shall 
be  cut  down  like  a ripe  : cro^.;  , ii 

They  shaU  be  spoken  of  according,  to  their  acts. 

The  slave  Nanak’s  Master  is  great ; He  i&  the  Lord  of  all.^ 

Painda  Khan’s  voice  was  soon  heard  inciting  the 
teodps  to  make  a sudden  charge  and  surround  the 
Guru.  Qutub  Khan  again  counselled  patience  and 
the  dispatch  of  an  envoy  to  endeavour  to  make 
peace.  This  was  at  last  agreed  on,  and  Anwar  Khan 
was  the  envoy  selected.  Anwar  Khan  thought  to 
pitch  his  tent  near  the  Guru,  and  thus  find  a con- 
venient opportunity  of  treacherously  slaying  him. 
The  Guru,  however,  took  care  that  Anwar  Khan 
should  not  continue  long  in  too  close  proximity  to 
him.  And  though  Anwar  Khan  was  provided  with 
many  presents  for  the  Guru,  yet  the  Guru  refused 
to  accept  them. 

A goldsmith  came  to  the  Guru  with  unusually 
rich  offmngs.  He  presented  golden  dice  set  with 
gems  and  an  embroidered  chaupar-board  with  varie- 
gated pieces  formed  of  sapphires,  rubies,  and  topazes. 
Although  the  Guru  did  not  approve  of  such  articles 
as  tended  to  divert  men’s*  minds  from  God,  and 
were  sources  of  falsehood,  sin,  and  trouble,  yet  he 
accepted  them,  so  that  he  might  preserve  the  gold- 
smith in  his  faith  and  devotion.  The  imperial  envoy 
on  seeing  the  presents  said  to  the  Guru,  ' Thou 
acceptest  the  offerings  of  all  other  Sikhs,  but  not 
mine.  What  is  the  cause  ? ’ The  Guru  replied, 
‘ The  Guru’s  house  is  like  a sea  of  milk.  The  offerings 
of  thfe  Sildis  are  like  streams  which  flow  into  it  of 
their  own  accmrd,  and  blend  with  iti  But  thy  heart 
is  not  sincere,  and  therefore,  if  put  into  the  Guru’s 
sea  of  milk,  would  turn  it  acid  and  cause  it  to  fer- 
ment,’ Anwar  Khan  rejoined,  ‘ Wazir  Khan  fre- 
quently sent  me  with  gifts  to  thee,  and  thou  didst 

^ Gaun  ki  W31t  1. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  BAR  GOBIND  201 

kiways  accept  them;’  The  Guru  said  that  they  were 
•gifts  of  love  which  easily  amalgamated  with  the 
Guru’s  TUilk.  ■ . m 

Whfen  Anwar  Khan  failed  to  persuade  the  ■ Guru 
to  take  his  presents,  he  challenged  to  play  him  at 
chaupaT.  The  Guru  replied  that  such  play  was  not 
suitable  for  a priest.  Anwar  Khan  pressed  his  pro- 
posal, and  laid  the  chaUpar-board  before  him.  He 
had  formed  an  idea  that,  if  he  conquered  the  Guru 
at  the  game,  it  would  be  a presage  of  victory  for 
his  army,  and  if  the  Guru  defeated  him,  his  army 
would  also  be  defeated.  The  Guru  at  last  con- 
sented to  play  with  the  envoy.  Anwar  Khan  lost 
the  first  time,  the  second,  and  the  third  also,  and 
then  losing  his  temper  with  his  game  said  to  the 
Guru,  ‘Thou  art  a cheat,  thou  hast  won  by  trickery! 
Why  have  I always  had  threes  ? ’ The  Guru  replied, 
‘ Cheating,  deceit,  and  falsehood  are  the  principal 
stock  of  thy  house,  while  I am  a faqir.’  Anwar 
Khan  retorted,  ‘ A fine  faqir  thou  art,  hunting  and 
enjoying  thyself  and  practising  warfare  for  thine 
own  amusement.  Thou  art  a great  deceiver,  and 
so  ha.ve  been  all  the  Gurus  from  Baba  Nanak  down.’ 

The  Guru  could  endure  the  insults  to  himself,  but 
not  the  defamation  of  his  predecessors.  ‘ If  there 
is  any  Sikh  of  the  Guru  present,  let  him  remove 
this  fellow  from  my  presence.’  Bidhi  Chand  duly 
obeyed  the  Guru’s  order.  Some  Sikhs  then  on  their 
own  account  administered  Anwar  Khan  shoe-beatings 
until  he  fainted.  The  Guru  interceded  for  him  and 
allowed  him  to  depart  without  renewed  punishment. 

Anwar  Khan  on  his  return  to  his  Chief  reported 
the  ill-treatment  he  had  received,  and  advised  an 
immediate  attack  on  the  Guru  who  had  not  erne- 
tenth  of  the  strength  of  the  imperial  army.  Kale 
Khan  was  very  pleased  with  this  suggestion.  Painda 
Khan  too  was  for  immediate  action.  Qutub  Khan, 
however,  was  not  so  sanguine.  The  Guru  had 
already  had  great  experience  of  wair ; and  it  was 


202 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Hot  likely  that  he  would  be  now  off  his  guard.  It 
wias,  howeve®,  determined  by  a large  majority  of 
the  generals  to  attack  his  position  that  very  nighti 
The  Guru  knowing- their  designs  ordered  Bidhi  Ghand 
to  be  on  the  alert.  The  Guru-  had  by  this  time 
eighteen  hundred  regular  fighting  men  who  were 
supplied  by  his  friends  in  Kartarpur.  The  whole 
force  was  so  marshalled  and  disposed  as  to  prevent 
surprise  and  capture. 

Meantime  dissension  was  brewing  in  the  Guru’s 
camp.  Dhir  Mai,  his  grandson,  accepting  the  evil 
forebodings  of  the  masands,  said  that  the  Guru  would 
certainly  be  defeated.  The  imperial  army  had  arrived 
like  a flight  of  locusts.  The  Guru’s  army  was  in- 
significant. It  did  not  bear  the  same  ratio  to  the 
imperial  army  as  condiment  to  the  viands  of  a feast. 
‘ The  Guru,’  continued  Dhir  Mai,  ‘ is  in  one  of  his 
fits  of  obstinacy,  and  knoweth  not  the  enemy’s 
prowess  and  strategy.  I shall,  therefore,  probably 
attain  my  object  and  succeed  him  in  his  holy  office,’ 
Dhir  Mai’s  mind  having  been  thus  perverted,  he  sat 
down  and  wrote  the  following  letter : — ‘ Brother 
Painda  Khan,  my  grandfather  hath  expelled  and 
disgraced  thee  without  cause,  but  I know  thee  to 
be  my  friend,  and  I will  do  the  best  for  thine  interests. 
If  thou  come  to-night  and  make  a sudden  attack, 
the  fort  and  its  treasure  will  fall  into  your  hands, 
for  here  there  is  no  preparation  made.  I will  render 
thee  every  assistance.’ 

Needless  to  say  that  Painda  Khan  was  highly 
pleased  on  receiving  this  letter.  He  showed  it  to 
the  other  generals,  who  were  also  pleased,  par- 
ticularly when  they  learned  the  dissension  in  the 
Guru’s  family.  An  immediate  charge  was  ordered. 
The  soldiers,  heated  with  wine,  began  to  boast  and 
use  ribald  language.  Dust  arose  and  obscured  the 
moon  and  stars.  The  earth  shook  beneath  the 
tramp  of  > the  armyi  Sweets  and  offerings  were 
vowed  to  Muhammadan  ssunts  for  success.  The 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  203 

Chief  ordered  that  the  whole  army  should  assemble 
near  Chhotamir,  and  thence  they  would  assault 
Kartarpur  and  capture  the  Guru;  It  happened  that, 
before  the  imperial  army  could  enter  Chhotamir,  an 
earthquake  occurred  which  swallowed  the  village 
with  the  greater  portion  of  its  inhabitants.  Those 
who  did  not  perish  were  plundered  by  the  imperial 
troops.  Painda  Khan  did  his  utmost  to  protect  his 
fellow-citizens,  but  in  vain. 

The  Guru  arose  earlier  than  usual,  and  after  bath- 
ing began  his  devotions.  He  repeated  the  Japji,  and 
prepared  sacred  food.  He  then  read  the  Anand,  the 
third  Guru’s  song  of  rejoicing,  and  uttered  a prayer 
suitable  to  the  occasion.  Sacred  food  was  then 
distributed,  and  after  partaking  of  it  his  soldiers 
received  a substantial  meal,  upon  which  arms  were 
served  out  to  them.  Jati  Mai  announced  that  the 
imperial  army  was  approaching  like  a dust  storm  in  an 
Indian  summer.  When  the  Gum  heard  this  and  other 
similar  expressions  of  warning  or  dismay,  he  calmly 
said,  ‘ Have  no  anxiety,  stand  fast,  be  united,  put 
on  your  armour.  The  Creator  will  act  for  the  best.’ 

On  receiving  the  Guru’s  orders,  Jati  Mai,  Ami 
Chand,  Mihr  Chand,  and  Bhai  Lakhu,  taking  five 
hundred  men,  advanced  and  showered  bullets  and 
arrows  at.  the  enemy.  Baba  Gurditta  asked  his 
father’s  permission  to  enter  the  battle,  but  was 
ordered  to  keep  guard  in  the  village  until  daylight. 
The  discharges  of  matchlocks  were  like  fireworks 
at  a wedding.  The  armies  soon  came  to  close  com- 
bat when,  it  is  said,  twelve  thousand  of  Kale  Khan’s 
army  slept  their  final  sleep.  Twenty  thousand 
imperial  troops  then  advanced.  Kale  Khan  told 
them  that  the  Guru’s  army  was  insignificant,  and, 
if  they  finished  the  fighting,  they  might  plunder  as 
much  as  they  pleased.  This  permission  greatly 
stimulated  their  bravery.  Then  ensued  the  usual 
carnage.  Bows  twanged,  arrows  hissed  like  siiakes, 
bullets  fell  like  hail.  Here  and  there  men  engaged 


204  ' • ' the  SIKH  IKELIGION’ 

i*’ close  combat  with  swords,  knives,  and  daggers. 
Horses  fell  or  fled  without  their  riders^  EleJ>hants 
Wandered  in  rjuest  of  their  drivers  and  stable  c(m^ 
panions.  The  wounded  became  so  attached  to  the 
battle-field  that  they  could  not  rise.  The  dead  fell 
in  rows  like  corn  laid  by  reapers. 

; Qutub  Khan,  seeing  the  destruction  of  his  troops, 
addressed  Kale  Khan,  ‘ We  have  made  a great  mis-^ 
take  in  engaging  at  night.  Want  of  sleep  hath 
disabled  our  brave  soldiers.  The  darkness  and  the 
dust,  tooj  have  led  to  our  troops  turning  against  one 
another.  Our  Pathans  are  retreating  before  the 
Sikhs.'  Our  losses  are  very  serious,  while  the  Guru’s 
are  practically  none.’  Painda  Khan  said,  ‘ Make 
one  charge  and  the  battle  shall  be  at  an  end.  Know 
ye  any  men  among  the  Sikhs  able  to  resist  your 
onset  ? ’ Kale  Khan,  the  Chief,  was  not  of  this  opinion, 
and  replied,  ‘ Are  the  Sikhs  sweet  food  which  we 
can  gulp  down  ? Our  army  hath  all  been  ^lain  or 
rOuted.  The  Sikhs  have  made  our  teeth  so  bitter^ 
that  we  cannot  eat  any  more.  No  Pathan  will  now 
advance.  Lead  thyself.’  Then  Painda  Khan  and 
his  son-in-law,  Asman  Khan,  taking  lighted  torches 
advanced  at  the  head  of  their  troops,  but  they  were 
only  seeking  their  own  destruction.  Kartarpur  was 
like  a lamp  round  which  they  were  fluttering  as 
moths. 

Bidhi  Chand,  Jati  Mai,  Lakhu,  and  Rai  Jodh 
ranged  themselves  and  their  troops  on  the  four  sides 
of  Kartarpur.  Qutub  Khan,  Painda  Khan,  Asman 
Khan,  and  Kale  Khan,  at  the  head  of  their  respective 
detachments,  advanced  against  them.  The  Pathans 
were,  however,  powerless  against  the  brave  Sikhs 
fighting  for  their  religion  and  their  Guru.  Bidhi 
Chand  was  seen  as  usual  fighting  bravely  and 
practising  with  signal  success  the  skill  in  archery 
which  he  had  acquired  during  an  eventful  life  of 

: The  Sikhs  have  inflicted  such  injury  on  Us  that  Ure,  cannot  bear 
W look  al  them  agalrii 


LIFE  OF  GURU:  BAR  GOBIND  205 

foray  and  warfare.  There  was  seen  ihe  Guru  in 
glittering  armour,  mounted  on  Dil  Bagh;  once  the 
Emperor’s  pride.  Fortunate,  says  the  chronider, 
were  the  Pathan  chiefs  that  they  obtained  the  price- 
less advantage  of  beholding  the  Guru  on  his  beautiful 
charger  with  his  resplendent  armour  and  trappings. 

Bidhi  Chand  discharged  an  arrow  at  Anwar  Khan 
which  struck  him  between  the  eyebrows,  as  if  it 
were  applying  a Hindu  sacrificial  mark  to  his  fore- 
head. He  fell  to  the  earth  as  if  he  were  doing 
obeisance  to  the  Guru,  or  begging  his  forgiveness 
and  suing  for  salvation.  The  Guru's  order  went 
forth  that  nobody  who  was  fleeing  should  be  put 
to  death.  The  Sikhs  were  only  to  fight  after  chal- 
lenging the  enemy  face  to  face.  The  Guru’s  arrows 
passed  through  the  Muhammadan  chiefs,  Pathans, 
Mughals,  and  Saiyids,  as  if  these  men  were  only 
pancakes.  Jati  Mai  and  Qutub  Khan  encountered 
each  other  in  the  darkness  and  dust-cloud,  but  under 
the  circumstances  the  contest  between  them  re- 
mained undecided. 


Chapter  XX 

Morning  dawned  on  the  combatants  to  find  the 
Guru  dispatching  his  enemies  as  the  sun’s  rays  put 
darkness  to  flight.  The  Pathans  died  like  sparrows 
struck  by  hail  or  lightning.  Their  hopes  of  victory 
were  abandoned,  and  their  spirits  could  not  revive. 
They  began  to  say  to  one  another,  ‘ Fine  friendship 
hath  Painda  Khan  shown  for  Islam  and  fine  booty 
have  we  got ! While,  trying  to  empty  the  Guru’s 
treasury  we  have  emptied  the  Emperor’s.  We  have 
awakened  a sleeping  tiger  and  sacrificed  our  lives 
and  property.  Thousands  of  brave  Muhammadans 
have  perished  as  the  result  of  our  espousing  the 
cause  of  an  ungrateful  villain.  Now  we  can  neither 
flee  away  noi  conquer.  But  it  is  better  to  turn 


2o6  / THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

our  iace  to  the  enemy  and  die  than  disgrace  our- 
sdves  by  flightl’  ' 

The  ^nerals  also  conterred  among  one  another. 
They  had;  been  fighting,  they  said,  fw  six  hours, 
and  far  from  having  succeeded,  half  their  army  had 
perished.  It  was  inexplicable  how  the  Guru  had 
become  such  a soldier.  Let  Painda  Khan,  who 
boasted  that  it  was  through  him  the  Guru  had 
obtained  his  former  victories,  and  that  he  would  at 
once  capture  him,  now  show  his  prowess  and  put 
his  word  to  the  proof.  Painda  Khan  replied,  ‘ I am 
going  to  advance  ; come  and  support  me.  In  one 
bound  I will  catch  the  Guru  as  a tiger  fasteneth  on 
an  elephant.’  Asman  Khan  followed  up  his  father- 
in-law’s  boasting ; ‘ I,  single-handed,  will  capture  and 
bring  the  Guru  with  his  sons  and  all  his  Sikhs.’ 
Saying  this,  Painda  Khan  and  Asman  Khan  entered 
the  battle-field.  The  Muhammadan  army  then 
rallied  and  discharged  arrows  like  rain  in  the  Indian 
month  of  Sawan. 

Nanaki  watched  the  battle  from  the  top  story  of 
her  house.  She  was  delighted  as  she  saw  her  son, 
Teg  Bahadur,  wielding  his  sword  and  dealing  out 
destruction  to  the  enemy.  Baba  Gurditta,  the 
Guru’s  eldest  son,  also  fought  valiantly,  and  made 
the  Muhammadans  feel  the  strength  of  his  power- 
ful and  well-practised  arm.  Asman  Khan,  seeing 
his  troops  dying  by  Gurditta’s  hands,  discharged 
arrows  at  him  from  afar,  but  it  is  said  the  Baba 
cut  them  with  his  sword  as  they  flew  in  the  air. 
Qutub  Khan,  putting  a cannon  in  position,  fired  at 
the  Sikhs-  but  nothing  could  restrain  the  havoc 
they  were  dealing  among  the  Muhammadans.  The 
Guru  displayed  prodigies  of  strength,  bravery,  and 
martial  skill,  and  the  enemy  were  not  able  to  cope 
with  him  even  single-handed. 

The  Muhammadans  again  began  to  bewail  their 
evil  destiny;  ‘Alas!  alas!  why  have  we  come 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  207 

we  left  our  homes,  our  wives,  and-  our  children. 
What  will  the  Emperor  say.?  Fine  dresses  of  honour 
we  shall  obtain  ! We  are  undone  ourselves  and  have 
undone  our  army.’  Qutub  Khan  advanced  gnashing 
his  teeth  with  rage  as  he  observed  the  Guru  shining 
like  a sun  on  his  favourite  charger.  Bhai  Lakhu, 
seeing  Qutub  Khan’s  onset,  discharged  an  arrow  at 
him  which  caused  him  to  fall  swooning  to  the  ground. 
Seeing  this  a body  of  Pathans  moved  against  Lakhu. 
For  the  space  of  three-quarters  of  an  hour  he  kept 
the  opposing  forces  at  bay.  The  Musalmans  sur- 
rounded Bhai  Lakhu  and  killed  his  horse.  Shouting 
victory  to  the  true  Guru,  he  still  defended  himself 
with  his  sword.  The  Muhammadans  said  to  one 
another,  ‘ Thousands  of  us  have  been  vanquished. 
This  one  man  fighteth  with  his  sword  alone,  and 
will  not  allow  lances,  arrows,  or  daggers  to  touch 
his  body.  He  hath  yet  no  need  of  the  maids  of 
paradise  who  bestow  happiness  on  departed  heroes.’ 
While  men  were  thus  speculating,  Qutub  Khan,  who 
by  this  time  had  recovered  consciousness,  struck 
Bhai  Lakhu  on  the  forehead  with  an  arrow,  which 
caused  him  to  reel  and  fall  to  the  ground.  Qutub 
Khan,  then  drawing  his  sword,  struck  the  fallen  hero  as 
he  lay  wounded,  and  severed  his  head  from  his  body. 

Bhai  Lakhu’s  death  was  a boon  for  the  Muham- 
madans, and  cheered  their  flagging  spirits.  Kale 
Khan  again  addressed  Painda  Khan,  who  seemed 
to  have  been  playing  the  laggard ; ‘ Painda  Khan, 
half  the  day  is  now  over  and  our  army  is  perishing. 
Thou  art  the  cause  of  this  disaster ; go  forward  and 
withstand  the  Guru.  We  will  support  thee.’  Ac- 
cordingly Kale  Khan,  Qutub  Khan,  and  Asman 
Khan,  putting  Painda  Khan  in  front,  advanced 
against  the  Guru.  The  Guru,  on  seeing  his  deadly 
enemy  Painda  Khan,  curbed  his  wrath  and  bided 
his  opportunity.  Bidhi  Chand  engaged  with  Kale 
Khan,  aiwi  Baba  Gufditta  with  Asman  Khan.  Painda 
Khan  with  his  drawn  sword  confronted  - the  Guru, 


2o8  i THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

and;  thus  addressed  his  former  friend  and  master, 
‘.Stand,  I will  ►now  revenge  the  ignominy  thou  hast 
caused  me,  and,  thusMQQ^  my  burning,  breast.  If 
thou  desire  to  come  to  terms,  do  so  at  once,  and 
I will  take  thee  to  the  Emperor  and  induce  him  to 
pardon  thy  many  offences,’ 

The,  Guru  replied,  ‘ Painda  Khan,  why  use  haughty 
language  ? Now  that  the  sword  is  in  thy  hand  and 
that  thou  art  ready  to  do  or  die,  what  time  is  it  to 
talk  of  peace  ? The  man  who  runneth  away  and 
turnetb  his  back  to  the  foe,  hath  no  longer  regard 
for  his  religion.  As  to  what  thou  talkest  of  revenge, 
I am  here,  alone  prepared  to  afford  it  thee.  Thou 
raayest  even  strike  the  first  blow,  otherwise  thou 
mayest  regret  it  afterwards.’  Painda  Khan,  on 
hearing  this,  became  enraged  and  brandished  his 
sword.  Inclining  his  body,  he  aimed  a blow  at  the 
calf  of  the  Guru’s  leg.  The  Gmu  turned  his  horse 
aside  to  avoid  it,  but  the  sword  struck  his  stirrup. 
He  smiled  and  said,  ‘ O Painda  Khan,  strike  me 
where  thou  pleasest,  seize  me,  bind  me,  that  thou 
mayest  have  no  cause  for  repentance.  Fear  not 
that  I shall  flee  thee.’  Painda  Khan  made  another 
stroke  at  the  Guru,  which  he  received  on  his  shield. 
The  Guru  was  merely  showing  his  science,  for  hitherto 
he  had  not  intended  to  kill  his  adversary.  Painda 
Khan  then  tried  to  seize  the  Guru’s  bridle,  and  take 
him  and  the  famed  Dil  Bagh  to  the  Emperor’s 
general.  As  Painda  Khan  was  making  his  attempt, 
the  Guru  kicked  him  so  forcibly  as  to  cause  him  to 
stagger,  He,  however,  recovered  himself  and  £^ain 
assumed  the  offensive.  He  had  sufiflcient  insolence 
to  provoke  the  war,  but  he  could  not  look  straight 
in  the  face  of  the  Guru  whose  presents  he.  had 
received,  whose  leavings  he  had  eaten,  and  whose 
cast-^ff  clothes  he  had  worn.  It  was  the  Guru’s 
wish  that  Painda  Khan  should  even  now  adn^t  that 
hehad  erred,^i£md  he  would  then  restore^  him  to  his 
former  position.  . . . i 


LIFE  OF  GURU  H'AR  GOBIND  209 

Instead  of  that  the  ill-starred  man  made  another 
blow  of  his  falchion  at  the  Guru.  His  weapon  parted 
from  the  handle  and  fell  on  the  ground.  The  Guru, 
deeming  it  a point  of  honour  not  to  take  advantage 
of  the  misfortune  of  his  enemy,  alighted  and  said, 
‘ Ingratitude  and  slander,  both  of  which  thou  hast 
been  guilty  of,  are  very  serious  crimes,  but  to  kill 
the  person  I have  cherished  is  hot  a course  I desire 
to  adopt.’  Painda  Khan  mockingly  replied,  ‘ Come, 
I will  take  thee  to  the  Emperor.’  The  Guru,  under 
all  the  provocation,  drew  his  two-edged  scimitar  and 
struck  Painda  Khan  so  forcibly  that  he  fell  prone 
on  the  ground.  The  Guru  said,  ‘ Thou  art  a Musal- 
man.  Now  is  the  time  to  repeat  thy  creed.’  Painda 
Khan,  repenting,  replied,  ‘ O Guru,  thy  sword  is  my 
creed  and  my  source  of  salvation.’ 

The  Guru,  on  seeing  Painda  Khan’s  dead  body, 
was  filled  with  pity  and  regret.  He  took  his  shield, 
and  put  it  over  his  victim’s  face  so  as  to  shade  it 
from  the  sun,  and  bursting  into  tears,  said,  ‘ Painda 
Khan,  I cherished  thee,  I reared  thee,  and  I made 
thee  a hero.  Though  men  spoke  ill  of  thee,  I forgot 
thy  failings,  and  evil  to  thee  never  entered  my  mind ; 
but  evil  destiny  so  misled  thee  that  thou  broughtest 
an  army  against  me.  It  is  thine  own  acts  of  in- 
gratitude and  insolence  that  have  led  to  thy  death 
at  my  hands.  It  is  impossible  to  digest  offerings 
without  serving  the  saints  and  worshipping  God, 
otherwise  they  ruin  the  understanding,  become 
deadly  poison  to  the  body,  and  lead  to  man’s  ulti- 
mate damnation.  Though  thou  hast  been  ungrate- 
ful and  untrue  to  thy  salt,  I pray  the  Almighty  to 
grant  thee  a dwelling  in  heaven. 

Good  men  are  honoured  for  their  greatness ; God  also 
adjusteth  the  affairs  of  the  evil : 

He  saveth  sinners  and  those  who  fall  away  from  Him.’^ 

Asman  Khan  advanced,  discharging  arrows,  and 
was  confronted  by  Baba  Gurditta,  who  showered 

^ Giir  Das,  X. 

P 


bIKIl.  IV 


210  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

arrows  on  him  in  return.  One  of  them  struck 
Asman  Khan  oil  the  eyebrow  and  penetrated  his 
brain.  Baba  Gurditta,  seeing  him  dead,  stood  at 
his  head  and  wept  copiously.  The  Guru  came 
up  and  inquired  the  cause  of  his  grief.  Baba 
Gurditta  replied,  ‘ He  was  my  friend.  We  used  to 
play  together.  He  now  tried  to  kill  me  with  his 
arrows,  from  which  I escaped,  but  one  of  mine  hath 
lodged  in  his  head.  He  reeled  and  fell,  and  never 
rose  again.  I have  used  great  efforts  to  lift  him 
Up,  but  in  vain.’  Saying  this  Baba  Gurditta  con- 
tinued to  weep.  The  Guru  inquired  if  dead  men 
ever  rose,  and  if  he  had  ever  known  weeping  of  any 
avail.  Baba  Gurditta  replied,  ‘ This  is  the  resiilt 
of  wearing  arms.  The  mind  becometh  cruel.  Take 
these  weapons  from  me.  I will  now  go  home.’ 
Baba  Gurditta  then  retired  from  the  battle-field 
to  weep  over  the  friend  of  his  youth,  and  embrace 
a more  peaceful  and  holy  life. 

The  imperial  army,  hearing  of  the  death  of  Painda 
Khan  and  Asman  Khan,  became  totally  demoralized. 
As  they  fled  from  the  field  they  said,  ‘ The  Guru 
is  the  death  of  the  Pathans.  Let  us  return  to 
Lahore.’  Others,  more  jealous  of  their  reputation, 
inquired  how  they  could  dare  go  home  and  endure 
the  reproach  of  cowardice.  They  were  now  not  fit 
to  show  their  faces  to  any  one,  much  less  to  the 
Emperor.  They  had  accordingly  better  sound  the 
drum  for  another  charge,  and  either  conquer  or  die. 
This  advice  prevailed,  and  another  attempt  was 
made  to  retrieve  the  day’s  misfortune.  Bidhi  Chand, 
seeing  the  enerny  advancing,  warned  the  Guru  to 
prepare  to  receive  them.  There  was,  however,  no 
necessity  for  warning.  The  Guru  continued  to  dis- 
charge an  incessant  shower  of  arrows  which  caused 
unwonted  havoc.  There  was  such  a collection  of 
corpses  on  the  battle-field  that  it  was  difficult  to 
move  without  treading  on  them.  The  earth  was 
stained  with  gore  as  if  it  had  put  on  a red  garment. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  21 1 

As  Qutub  Khan  advanced,  the  Guru  observed 
him  and  shot  his  horse.  .Qutub  Khan  thus  dis- 
mounted, continued  to  discharge  arrows,  which  the 
Guru  cut  with  his  sword  in  their  flight.  Qutub 
Khan  approaching  nearer  fought  desperately,  and 
for  a whole  hour  engaged  the  Guru  in  single  combat. 
At  last  the  Guru,  who  had  better  staying  power, 
cut  off  his  head  with  a single  stroke.  Kale  Khan 
the  chief,  on  seeing  Qutub  Khan’s  corpse,  massed 
his  troops  and  said,  ‘ This  is  a war  for  our  religion. 
Behold  the  Sikhs — how  insignificant  in  number,  yet 
how  desperately  they  have  fought ! In  a few  hours 
they  have  repelled  all  our  charges.  Y ou  have  come  like 
clouds,  yet  have  achieved  nothing.  This  is  the  last 
encounter.  Take  courage.’  Upon  this  the  Muham- 
madan troops  made  a furious  onslaught,  but  could 
make  no  sensible  impression  on  the  Sikhs.  The 
imperial  troops  died  in  numbers,  and  now  only 
about  two  thousand  remained.  Kale  Khan  became 
demented,  and  raised  despairing  cries.  ‘ O God, 
who  hath  destroyed  mine  army  ? whither  hath  it 
gone  ? ’ 

The  Commander-in-chief  now  confronted  the  Guru 
and  said,  ‘ Har  Gobind,  thou  art  very  clever  in  the 
science  of  arms.  Thou  hast  killed  thousands  of  my 
soldiers.  Until  I send  thee  where  thou  hast  sent 
them,  my  debt  will  not  be  discharged.’  The  Guru 
smiled  and  said,  ‘ Kale  Khan,  the  soldiers  who  have 
gone  before  are  now  awaiting  thee.  Thou  abidest 
in  sorrow  here,  therefore  I am  going  to  dispatch 
thee  quickly  to  thy  friends.’ 

Kale  Khan,  maddened  by  rage,  discharged  an  arrow 
which  whizzed  past  the  Guru.  A second  arrow 
grazed  the  Guru’s  forehead,  and  drops  of  blood 
bespattered  his  face,  as  if  they  were  tilaks  of 
victory.  The  Guru  again  addressed  him,  ‘ I have 
seen  thy  science.  Now  observe  mine.’  The  Guru 
discharged  an  arrow  which  killed  Kale  Khan’s 
horse.  Kale  Khan  thus  dismounted  confronted  the 

P2 


212 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Guru.  The  Guru  thought  it  a point  of  honour  also 
to  dismount  and  offer  his  adversary  a choice  of 
arms.  Kale  Khan  desired  to  fight  with  sword  and 
shield.  The  Guru  prepared  to  meet  him  with  his 
own  weapons.  Sparks  of  fire  issued  from  the  clash 
of  sword  on  sword.  The  Guru  parried  all  his  strokes. 
When  not  receiving  them  on  his  sword  he  dexterously 
stopped  them  with  his  shield. 

The  chiefs  of  both  armies  fought  thus  for  an  hour, 
cut  and  guard.  At  last  the  Guru  said  to  his  adver- 
sary, ‘ As  thy  name  is  Kale  Khan,  so  Kal — death — 
knocketh  at  the  gate  of  thy  life.’  Kale  Khan  on 
this  became  iurther  enraged  and  dealt  his  blows 
recklessly  and  unskilfully.  When  the  combat  was 
becoming  monotonous  and  the  Guru  had  warded  off 
the  last  stroke,  he  said  to  his  adversary,  ‘ Not  thus; 
this  is  the  way  to  fence.’  The  Guru,  then  putting 
forth  all  his  strength,  dealt  Kale  Khan  a blow  with 
his  two-edged  scimitar  which  severed  his  head  from 
his  body.  On  this  the  Musalmans  and  their  leaders 
retreated  like  clouds  before  an  Indian  westerly  wind. 
Bidhi  Chand  and  Jati  Mai  shouted  victory.  On 
hearing  this,  Qasim  Khan  ran  towards  the  Guru  in 
the  hope  that  he  would  fall  on  him  imawares  and 
have  the  drum  of  victory  beaten  for  himself.  The 
Guru  warded  off  his  blows  for  some  time,  and  at  last 
easily  dispatched  him  to  his  departed  friends. 

A Sikh  subsequently  asked  the  author  of  the 
Dahistan-i-Mazahab,  what  the  Guru  meant  by  say- 
ing, ‘ Not  thus ; this  is  the  way  to  fence.’  Muhsan 
Fani  replied  that  the  Guru  had  not  killed  his  enemy 
through  hostility,  but  was  merely  giving  him  a lesson 
in  sword-play.^ 

It  is  said  that  several  thousand  Muhammadans  but 
only  seven  hundred  of  the  Guru’s  brave  and  skilful 
Sikhs  perished  in  this  sanguinary  battle.  It  ended 
an  hour  before  nightfall  on  the  24th  day  of  Har, 
Sambat  1691  (a.d.  1634). 

^ DalmtilnH’Mazahab, 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GrOBIND  213 

In  the  early  morning  the  Guru  determined  to  see 
his  friend  Bu^an  Shah,  whose  end  was  approaching, 
and  who,  the  Guru  well  knew,  was  waiting  for  him 
near  Kiratpur.  The  Guru  started  on  his  horse,  and 
directed  Bidhi  Chand  to  follow  with  his  family,  and 
he  would  wait  for  them  on  the  road.  Bidhi  Chand, 
taking  charge  of  the  Guru’s  followers  and  some  of  his 
property,  prepared  for  his  journey. 

Dhir  Mai  and  his  -mother  Natti  were  the  only 
members  of  the  Guru’s  family  who  did  not  accompany 
him  on  his  journey  to  Kiratpur.  In  the  first  place, 
Dhir  Mai  had  turned  traitor,  and  was  ashamed  to 
show  his  face  to  the  Guru  and  his  Sikhs.  In  the 
second  place,  he  thought  that,  if  he  remained  behind, 
he  could  take  possession  of  all  the  Guru’s  property, 
including  the  Granth  Sahib.  It  will  be  remembered 
that  Bidhi  Chand  had  begun  to  make  a copy  of  the 
sacred  book.  He  told  Dhir  Mai  that  he  had  copied  it 
as  far  as  the  Bilawal  Rag,  or  more  than  one  half  of 
the  whole,  and,  if  he  might  take  the  Granth  Saljib 
with  him,  he  would  soon  finish  copying  the  remainder. 
Dhir  Mai  replied,  ‘ Go  to  Kiratpur  ; I will  search  the 
Guru’s  house  for  the  Granth  Sahib,  and  if  I find  it, 
will  send  it  to  thee.’  When  Bidhi  Chand  overtook 
the  Guru,  he  told  him  of  Dhir  Mai’s  continued  con- 
tumacy. The  Guru  laughingly  said,  ‘ Kartarpur 
was  founded  by  his  ancestors.  That  is  why  he  will 
not  leave  it.  He  desires  to  improve  it,  and  hence  his 
remaining  there.  It  was  improper  for  him  to  break 
with  his  father  and  grandfather  and  to  ally  himself 
with  the  Muhammadans,  but  he  is  an  incarnation  of 
Prithia  and  means  to  establish  a sect  of  his  own.  Let 
the  Granth  Sahib  remain  with  him.  When  the 
Sikhs  feel  devotion,  they  will  deprive  him  of  it.’ 

The  Guru  reached  Phagwara  on  his  journey.  As 
the  town  was  on  the  road  to  Lahore,  whence  reinforce- 
ments could  easily  be  sent  against  him,  he  continued 
his  march  to  Kiratpur.  On  arriving  at  the  Satluj  he 
pointed  to  a hill  at  the  north,  which  he  said  the  tenth 


214 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Guru  would  make  his  playground.  Here  the  famous 
steed  Dil  Bagh,  surnmned  Jan  Bhai,  died  from  the 
effect  of  wounds  in  the  recent  battle. 

The  Guru  thence  proceeded  on  his  journey  to 
Budhan  Shah’s  hut.  Budhan  Shah  on  awaking  from 
a deep  trance  addressed  him — ‘ O true  Guru,  thou 
hast  assumed  birth  to  save  the  world.  Although 
Gurus  Nanak,  Angad,  Amar  Das,  Ram  Das,  Arjan, 
and  thou  have  all  had  different  bodies,  they  have 
been  pervaded  by  the  same  light.  My  wishes  have 
been  fulfilled,  and,  now  that  I behold  thee,  I have  no 
further  object  in  life.  As  thou  hast  come  to  me 
regardless  of  the  care  of  thy  body  overspent  in  the 
fatigue  of  war,  so  assist  me  in  the  next  world  also. 
Guru  Nanak  promised  me  that  I should  behold  him 
before  my  death,  so  his  light  in  thee  hath  brightened 
my  departure.’ 

The  Guru  left  his  son  Baba  Gurditta  and  Bidhi 
Chand  with  Budhan  Shah,  and,  promising  to  return, 
departed  to  Kiratpur,  which  he  made  his  permanent 
residence.  There  he  bathed,  performed  his  de- 
votions, and  medicated  his  wound.  Bidhi  Chand 
inquired  Budhan  Shah’s  age  and  circumstances. 
He  replied,  ‘ In  this  Kal  age  few  live  for  a hundred 
years,  but  by  the  Guru’s  favour  I have  enjoyed  a 
much  longer  span  of  life.  Guru  Nanak  left  milk  with 
me  and  promised  that  a Sikh  of  his  should  return 
and  drink  it.  Gurditta  formerly  came  to  me  and 
received  the  trust.  I pray  him  to  deem  me  his 
servant  and  not  forget  me,  and  before  he  dieth  to 
order  his  shrine  to  be  made  near  mine.’  Baba 
Gurditta  replied,  ‘ Why  art  thou  sad  ? Remain 
with  us  for  some  time  longer.  Men  worship  thee, 
and  thou  art  caressed  and  happy.’  Budhan  Shah 
answered,  ‘ However  long  I may  remain,  I must 
depart  at  last ; and  this  is  the  time  to  go  while  thou 
^t  by  my  side.’ 

The  Guru  returned  from  Kiratpur  to  Budhan  Shah 
in  time  to  bid  him  a Isist  adieu.  Budhan  Shah 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  215 

grasped  his  feet  and  prayed  for  his  intercession.  His 
last  words  were,  ‘ My  mind  is  sinful,  evil  passions 
have  overmastered  it.  I have  called  myself  Thy 
servant,  O God,  wherefore  preserve  the  honour  of 
Thy  name.'  Saying  this,  Budhan  Shah,  fixing  his 
thoughts  on  God,  parted  with  his  body. 


Chapter  XXI 

After  the  Guru’s  departure  from  Kartarpur,  Dhir 
Mai  possessed  himself  of  a large  amount  of  the 
Guru’s  property.  He  then  feared  that  the  Emperor 
might  send  another  army  to  wrest  it  from  him  and 
capture  him  in  mistake  for  the  Guru.  He  accordingly 
wrote  to  the  Emperor,  ‘ Sire,  I desire  thy  victory  and 
thy  support,  but  thy  troops  were  fated  to  die,  so 
how  could  they  be  saved  ? The  Guru  hath  destroyed 
the  whole  army,  but  I am  thy  friend,  and  I pray  thee 
to  deem  me  so.’ 

The  Emperor  was  distracted  at  the  loss  of  his  army. 
He  said,  ‘ Several  thousands  of  my  troops  slain ! 
Assuredly  the  Guru  hath  brought  about  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  world ! ’ Wazir  Khan,  who  by  this  time 
had  returned  to  the  Emperor,  took  the  Guru’s  part 
as  he  had  so  often  done  before.  ‘ Sire,  thou  hast  now 
ascertained  for  the  fourth  time  that  whosoever 
proceedeth  with  evil  intention  against  the  Guru, 
never  returneth.  Thine  armies  have  been  destroyed 
by  the  Guru’s  supernatural  power,  and  not  by  his 
material  strength  and  strategy.  Painda  Khan  was 
in  the  Guru’s  secrets,  but  he  died  in  return  for  his 
ingratitude  and  treachery.  His  family  is  ruined, 
and  his  town  hath  been  swallowed  up.  I have  often 
ventured  to  give  thy  Majesty  advice,  but  thou  hast 
deliberately  sent  thine  armies  to  destruction.’ 

Then  came  Dhir  Mai’s  messenger  with  his  letter. 
Wazir  Khan  read  it  to  himself  and  was  astonished  at 
its  contents.  Whether  the  Emperor  could  read  it 


2i6  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

or  not  he  accepted  the  following  version  of  Dhir  Mai’s 
missive  from  the  lips  of  Wazir  Khan : ‘ O Sire,  come 
to  terms  and  be  not  at  enmity  with  the  Guru.  Both 
thy  steeds  have  been  slain  in  battle,  and  there  is  now 
no  hope  of  their  recovery.  The  Guru  is  ever  thine 
ally  and  well-wisher.  Thou  shalt  have  peace  of 
mind  by  forgetting  the  past.’  It  is  to  be  feared 
that  some  Indian  Rajas  even  in  the  present  day  have 
their  communications  read  to  them  in  this  fashion, 
and  are  thus  rendered  incapable  of  administering 
their  states. 

The  Emperor  was  pleased  at  Wazir  Khan’s  version 
of  Dhir  Mai’s  letter  and  said,  ‘ Wazir  Khan,  thou 
gavest  me  good  advice,  but  to  my  sorrow  I did  not 
accept  it.  Now  write  in  reply  that  there  shall  be 
no  enmity  between  the  Guru  and  myself  for  the 
future.’  The  ingenious  Wazir  Khan  while  adhering 
to  the  spirit  of  this  order  wrote  a conciliatory  letter 
to  Dhir  Mai. 

A messenger  is  said  to  have  come  about  this  time 
from  an  un traceable  island  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal  to  the 
Guru  inviting  him  to  go  thither  and  bless  the  country. 
The  Guru,  however,  could  not  leave  his  Sikhs  to 
proceed  to  such  a distant  country,  but  deputed 
Bidhi  Chand,  who  long  before  this  had  repented  of 
his  many  misdeeds,  to  go  and  preach  the  principles 
of  the  Sikh  religion,  Bidhi  Chand  lost  no  time  in 
executing  the  Guru’s  order.  On  his  way  by  the 
margin  of  the  sea  he  arrived  at  a city  called  Devnagar. 
In  an  adjoining  forest  Uved  a faqir  named  Sundar 
Shah,  who  by  the  practice  of  painful  austerities  had 
obtained  miraculous  power  and  was  extensively 
worshipped.  Bidhi  Chand  rested  under  a withered 
tree  outside  the  city,  and  in  devotional  ecstasy  sang 
the  following  hymn  of  the  third  Guru  ; — 

The  spring  hath  appeared  ; the  forests  are  in  bloom  ; 

Men  and  lower  animals  fixing  their  attention  on  God  are 
flourishing. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  217 

It  is  in  this  way  the  heart  becometh  glad. 

Repeat  God’s  name  day  and  night ; under  the  Guru’s 
instruction  pride  is  washed  away. 

By  preaching  the  verses  and  words  of  the  true  Guru 

This  world  becometh  happy,  and  the  true  Guru  is  pleased. 

Fruit  and  flowers  appear  when  God  Himself  causeth  them. 

When  man  findeth  the  true  Guru,  he  clingeth  to  the  Root 
of  joy. 

God  is  the  spring  ; all  the  world  is  His  garden. 

Nanak,  by  perfect  good  fortune  special  service  is  obtained.^ 

It  is  said  that  on  this  the  withered  tree  became 
green,  and  in  consequence  every  one  recognized 
Bidhi  Chand’s  miraculous  power  and  did  him  homage. 
Sundar  Shah  on  hearing  of  the  miracle  went  riding 
on  his  tiger  to  see  the  stranger.  He  expected  that 
Bidhi  Chand  would  incontinently  take  to  flight  on 
seeing  the  tiger.  The  crowd  of  worshippers  round 
Bidhi  Chand  departed  precipitately,  but  he  fearlessly 
held  his  ground.  Sundar  Shah  incited  the  animal 
to  attack  Bidhi  Chand,  but  a glance  from  the  latter 
changed,  it  is  said,  the  animal  into  a pillar  of  stone. 
Sundar  Shah  and  Bidhi  Chand  then  held  a religious 
discussion  in  which  the  former  was  vanquished. 

Sundar  Shah  pressed  Bidhi  Chand  to  remain  with 
him,  but  he  pleaded  the  Guru’s  order  to  visit  the 
island  for  which  he  was  bound.  He  promised,  how- 
ever, with  the  Guru’s  permission,  to  return  and  spend 
his  last  days  with  Sundar  Shah.  Bidhi  Chand  went 
to  his  destination,  preached  the  Sikh  religion  to  the 
people,  and  made  many  converts.  Having  fulfilled 
the  Guru’s  instructions  and  accomplished  his  mission 
he  returned  to  Kiratpur. 

The  anonymous  author  of  the  Dabistan-i- 
Mazahab,  who  wrote  under  the  nom  d&  flume  of 
Muhsan  Fani,  states  that  he  corresponded  with 
Guru  Har  Gobind,  who  always  signed  hinaself  Nanak. 
That  author’s  testimony,  therefore,  regarding  the 

^ Basant. 


2i8  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Guru  we  consider  of  the  hipest  importance,  and  we 
shall  give  it  as  far  as  it  extends 

Whilst  the  Guru  and  his  party  of  Sikhs  were  at 
Kiratpur  a Sikh  called  Bhairo  cut  off  the  nose  of  the 
goddess  at  Naina  Devi,  some  ten  miles  distant.  This 
was  reported  to  the  neighbouring  Raja,  who  com- 
plained to  the  Guru  of  the  outrage.  Bhairo  was 
summoned,  and  said  he  would  admit  the  charge 
if  the  goddess  herself  attested  it.  One  of  the  Raja’s 
courtiers  said  in  reply,  ‘ O blockhead,  how  can  the 
goddess  speak  ? ’ Bhairo  smiled  and  said,  ‘ We  now 
know  who  the  blockhead  is.  If  the  goddess  cannot 
repel  her  assailant  and  give  evidence  against  him, 
how  can  you  hope  for  any  advantage  from  her  ? ’ 
On  this  the  Raja  remained  silent. 

One  Jhanda,  a very  rich  man,  used  to  be  very 
attentive  to  his  devotions.  When  his  foot  was 
accidentally  injured.  Guru  Har  Gobind  advised  him 
not  to  wear  shoes.  Jhanda  accordingly  took  off  his 
shoes,  and  remained  barefooted  for  three  months. 
The  Guru  on  hearing  this  said  that  he  did  not  mean 
him  to  remain  always  barefooted,  but  only  as  long 
as  his  foot  was  sore.  He  then  resumed  his  shoes. 
One  day  the  Guru  told  his  Sikhs  to  fetch  firewood 
from  the  forest.  Next  day  Jhanda  was  not  to  be 
found.  The  Sikhs  searched  for  him,  and  about  noon 
on  the  following  day  saw  him  with  a bundle  of  fire- 
wood on  his  back.  The  Guru  remonstrated  with 
him  for  having  undertaken  such  a menial  office. 
He  replied  that  the  Guru  had  given  an  order  to 
his  Sikhs  to  fetch  firewood,  and,  as  he  considered 
himself  a Sikh,  he  decided  to  obey  his  order.  Both 
these  stories  are  given  as  instances  of  the  Guru’s 
influence  even  over  rich  men. 

The  Guru  commissioned  a man  called  Basava  to 
proceed  from  Balkh  to  Iraq  to  purchase  horses.  As 
he  had  advanced  one  stage  from  Balkh,  some  one 
told  him  that  his  son  had  fallen  suddenly  ill,  and 
advised  him  to  return  home.  He  replied,  ‘ If  my 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  219 

son  die,  then  let  him  die.  There  is  sufficient  fire- 
wood in  the  house  to  burn  him.  I will  not  flinch 
from  my  duty  to  the  Guru.’  After  his  return  home 
he  heard  that  his  son  had  died,  but  he  felt  no  re- 
morse for  having  obeyed  the  Guru  and  proceeded 
on  the  journey  he  had  undertaken. 

Muhsan  Fani  relates  that  as  he  was  travelling 
with  this  man  Basava  from  Kabul  the  fastening  of 
his  postin  or  sheep-skin  jacket  broke.  Basava  took 
off  his  janeu  and  gave  it  to  him  to  tie  his  postin 
with,  saying  that  janeus  were  best  employed  for 
such  purposes. 

The  Sikhs  asked  the  Guru  whom  they  should 
recognize  as  Guru  when  he  was  far  away.  He 
replied,  ‘ Deem  the  Sikh  who  cometh  to  you  with 
the  Guru’s  name  on  his  lips  as  your  Guru.’  The 
historian  states  that  any  one  with  the  Guru’s  name 
on  his  lips  might  then  enter  the  house  of  a Sikh 
and  receive  welcome  and  hospitality. 

It  became  a custom  of  the  Sikhs  if  any  one  of 
them  desired  a gift  from  heaven  to  mention  his 
request  before  his  brother  Sikhs  or  before  the  Guru’s 
masands,  and  then  all  combined  and  prayed  for 
the  desired  blessing.  The  Guru  himself  adopted 
the  same  custom. 

The  Guru  believed  in  one  God.  His  disciples 
reprobate  idol  worship.  They  neither  pray  nor 
practise  austerities  in  the  Hindu  fashion.  They 
hold  not  sacred  the  temples  of  Hindus,  or  believe 
in  their  incarnations.  They  pay  no  regard  to  San- 
skrit compositions  which  the  Hindus  believe  to  be 
in  the  language  of  the  gods.  They  believe  that 
all  the  Gurus  are  the  same  as  Nanak.  The  Sikhs 
are  not  restricted  in  the  matter  of  eating  or  drinking. 
One  Partap  Mai,  a learned  man,  said  to  a Hindu 
youth  who  felt  caste  restrictions  irksome,  and  con- 
sequently desired  to  embrace^ Islam,  ‘Why  become  a 
Muhammadan  ? If  thou  desire  to  have  no  restrictions 
on  what  thou  eatest  and  drinkest,  then  become  a Sikh.  ’ 


220  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Sikhs  increased  under  all  the  Gurus  to  such 
an  extent  that  even  in  the  time  of  Guru  Arjan  one 
or  more  representatives  of  the  Sikh  religion  could 
be  found  in  every  Indian  city.  To  such  an  extent 
was  caste  disregarded  that  Hindus  of  the  Brahman 
caste  became  disciples  of  Sikh  Khatris,  for  none  of 
the  Gurus  was  a Brahman  ; and  Khatris  did  homage 
to  the  Jat  masands,  who  were  a low  section  of 
Vaisyas.  Guru  Har  Gobind  gained  a large  number 
of  followers  in  Kiratpur.  He  kept  seven  hundred 
horses  in  his  stables,  and  always  entertained  three 
hundred  horsemen  and  sixty  artillery  men. 

One  day  Baba  Gurditta  joined  a hunting  party.  It 
happened  that  one  of  his  Sikhs  shot  a cow  by  mistake 
for  a deer.  The  shepherds  came  and  arrested  the 
offending  Sikh.  Baba  Gurditta  went  to  his  assist- 
ance and  offered  to  give  compensation.  The  shep- 
herds, however,  would  have  from  the  Guru’s  son 
nothing  less  than  the  restoration  of  the  cow  to  life. 
Gurditta  found  himself  in  a dilemma.  If  he  restored 
the  cow  to  life,  the  Guru  would  be  angry,  as  he  had 
been  before  with  Baba  Atal,  and  if  he  refused  to 
satisfy  the  shepherds,  they  would  detain  his  Sikh 
^ a hostage.  He  was  at  last  persuaded  to  reani- 
mate the  cow.  He  accordingly  put  his  cane  on  her 
head  and  said,  ‘Arise,  and  eat  thy  grass!’  It  is 
said  that  upon  this  the  cow  arose,  and  ran  and 
joined  the  herd. 

The  cause  of  Gurditta’s  late  return  was  inquired 
into,  and  he  was  obliged  to  give  a narrative  of  the 
day’s  events.  The  miracle  wrought . by  him  was 
reported  to  the  Guru,  who  became  angry,  and  said, 
‘ It  is  not  pleasing  to  me  that  any  one  should  set 
himself  up  as  God’s  equal,  and  restore  life  to  the 
dead.*  People  die  every  day.  Everybody  will  be 
bringing  his  dead  to  my  door,  and  whom  shall  I 

^ It  appears  from  this  that  the  itixth  Guru  entertained  no  such  special 
veneration  for  the  cow  as  the  Hindus  have.  He  waS  only  angry  at 
the  miracle  Wrought  which  altered  the  course  of  nature. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  221 

select  for  reanimation  ? Guru  Nanak  ordered  that 
we  should  accept  the  will  of  God — “ What  pleaseth 
Thee,  O Lord,  is  good.”  If  thou  persist  in  doing 
acts  contrary  to  God’s  will  thy  further  residence 
on  earth  is  unprofitable.’  Baba  Gurditta  replied, 
‘ Mayest  thou  live  for  ever ! I depart.’  He  then 
circumambulated  the  Guru  in  token  of  offering  him- 
self as  a sacrifice  to  him,  and  took  his  departure 
for  Budhan  Shah’s  shrine.  On  arriving  there  he 
drove  his  cane  into  the  ground,  lay  down,  and,  in 
the  words  of  the  Sikh  chronicler,  crossed  the  stream 
of  the  troubles  of  life  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-four 
years,  in  the  Sambat  year  1695  (a.  d.  163  8). 

When  Baba  Gurditta  did  not  return  within  a 
reasonable  time,  the  Guru  caused  search  to  be 
instituted  for  him.  His  body  was  ultimately  dis- 
covered. The  Guru  himself  went  to  behold  it,  and 
was  followed  by  other  members  of  the  family  of  the 
deceased,  who  mourned  his  untimely  fate. 

After  this  the  Guru  sent  to  Kartarpur  for  Dhir  Mai, 
Baba  Gurditta’s  elder  son,  and  the  Granth  Sahib  of 
which  he  had  been  left  in  custody.  The  Guru  in- 
tended that  the  holy  voluble  should  be  read  for  the 
repose  of  Gurditta’s  soul,  and  also  that  Dhir  Mai 
should  be  present  to  receive  a turban  after  his 
father’s  death  in  token  of  succession  to  his  property 
and  position.  Dhir  Mai  possessed  extraordinary 
acuteness  for  one  so  young.  He  said  to  himself, 
‘ If  I leave  the  land  and  money  which  have  come 
into  my  possession  and  go  for  a turban  to  the  Guru, 
every  one  will  think  me  a fool.  I have  the  Granth 
Sahib  and  I will  keep  it.’  He  then  addressed  the 
messenger,  ‘ My  father  is  not  in  Kiratpur.  To 
whom  shall  I go  ? It  is  through  fear  of  the  Guru 
my  father  died.  I do  not  desire  to  die  yet.  I will 
myself  have  the  Granth  Sahib  read  here  for  my 
deceased  father.  I do  not  deem  it  advisable  to 
leave  my  property  in  charge  of  servants.  My 
younger  brother  Har  Rai  is  with  the  Guru.  The 


222  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

turban  may  be  bound  <m  him.  What  business  have 
I in  Kiratpur  ? ’ 

The  messenger  represented  to  him,  ‘ Thou  art 
still  young,  and  oughtest  to  be  subject  to  thy  grand- 
father the  Guru.  It  is  thy  duty  to  obey  him.  Come 
by  aJl  means  with  the  Granth  Sahib  to  the  Guru. 
Leave  thy  property  in  charge  of  thy  servants,  who 
are  trustworthy.  Thou  mayest  afterwards  return 
and  take  charge  of  it.  Be  not  too  much  in  love 
with  earthly  things.  Obey  the  order  of  the  Guru.’ 
Dhir  Mai  then  volunteered  the  following  statement, 
‘ I have  written  to  the  Emperor  and  entered  into 
an  alliance  with  him.  I have  informed  him  that 
I now  hold  no  parley  with  the  Guru.  If  I go  to 
the  Guru,  I shall  prove  false  to  the  Emperor.  And 
if  the  Emperor  become  angry  and  sack  the  city,  to 
whom  shall  I go  for  redress  ? I will  not  give  up  the 
Granth  Sahib.’  Dhir  Mai’s  object  was  to  secure  the 
Guruship  for  himself.  He  hoped  that,  as  long  as  he 
kept  the  sacred  volume  in  his  possession,  the  Sikhs 
would  look  on  him  as  their  religious  leader.  The 
messenger,  however,  failing  to  persuade  Dhir  Mai, 
succeeded  in  taking  Natti,  Dhir  Mai’s  widowed 
mother,  to  the  Guru.  When  the  Guru  heard  that 
Dhir  Mai  declined  his  invitation,  he  merely  said, 
‘ Mammon  is  very  powerful.  It  hath  led  the  world 
astray.  Dhir  Mai  is  a very  unfortunate  child.’ 

The  Guru  now  sent  for  Bhai  Bhana,  son  of  Bhai 
Budha.  Bhai  Bhana  on  the  way  from  his  village 
of  Ramdas  called  at  Batala,  and  thence  took  with 
him  Gurditta’s  parents-in-law  to  the  Guru.  There 
was  a great  gathering  of  Sikhs  at  Kiratpur  on  the 
occasion.  Bidhi  Chand  read  the  Granth  Sahib  as 
far  as  he  had  copied  it  for  Gurditta’s  repose.  Bhai 
Rup  Chand  also  presented  himself  on  the  occasion. 
His  father  had  died  not  long  previously.  All  friends 
and  relations  appeared  and  mourned  Gurditta’s  un- 
timely fate.  They  praised  his  virtues,  his  beauty, 
his  affability,  and  his  bravery.  The  Guru  offered 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  223 

them  all  words  of  consolation,  and  b^ged  them  to 
dry  their  tears.  He  explained  that  Dhir  Mai  had 
acted  with  great  treachery,  and  would  neither  come 
himself  nor  send  the  Granth  Sahib.  He  would 
therefore  bind  the  turban  on  the  head  of  Har  Rai, 
Dhir  Mai’s  youngest  brother.  Though  very  young  in 
years,  he  was  deemed  worthy  of  succession  to  his 
grandfather. 

Suraj  Mai,  the  Guru’s  son  by  the  Marwahi,  was 
intelligent  and  performed  his  secular  duties  to  his 
father’s  satisfaction.  Ani  Rai,  the  Guru’s  son  by 
Nanaki,  was  a religious  enthusiast.  Teg  Bahadur, 
the  Guru’s  son,  also  born  of  Nanaki,  was  worldly 
contempt  incarnate.  Satisfied  that  the  world  was 
transitory,  he  mixed  not  in  it,  but  delighted  in 
solitude.  One  day  the  Guru’s  wife  Nanaki  addressed 
him,  ‘ O my  lord,  thou  ever  showest  great  kindness 
to  Har  Rai,  who  is  only  thy  grandson,  but  thou 
never  regardest  thine  own  son  Teg  Bahadur,  who 
is  simple  and  unsophisticated.  Fulfil  my  wishes  to 
put  him  on  thy  throne.’  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Teg 
Bahadur  is  a Guru  of  gurus.  There  is  none  who 
can  endure  the  unendurable  so  well  as  he.  He  hath 
obtained  divine  knowledge  and  renounced  worldly 
love.  If  thou  have  patience  the  Guruship  shall 
revert  to  him.  From  him  shall  be  born  a warrior 
who  shall  smite  the  Turks,  free  the  earth  from  the 
burden  of  the  evil,  render  Guru  Nanak’s  name 
illustrious,  and  spread  his  own  glory  and  fame  to 
the  uttermost  bounds  of  the  world.’ 

The  Marwahi  dreamt  that  the  late  Damodari 
appeared  to  her  and  said,  ‘ My  sister,  leave  the 
world  now.  It  is  good  to  leave  the  fair  when  it 
is  at  its  height.  If  thou  live,  thou  shalt  be  greatly 
pained  at  the  Guru’s  death.  If  thou  come  with  me, 
we  shall  both  abide  together  in  Sach  Khand  where 
there  is  perpetual  happiness,  where  sorrow,  sickness 
and  death  enter  not,  and  where  night  and  day  the 
saints  are  ever  hymning  the  Creator’s  praise.’ 


224 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  Marwahi  on  awaking  related  her  dream  to 
the  Gum.  He  gave  his  interpretation  to  the  effect 
that  her  end  was  near,  and  repeated  for  her  the 
following  hymn  of  Guru  Nanak  : — 

No  one  liveth  as  long  as  he  desireth,  or  obtaineth  his 
object. 

He  who  possesseth  divine  knowledge  liveth  for  ever ; it 
is  he  who  remembereth  God  who  is  ever  honoured. 

By  ever  husbanding  life  it  passeth  away  in  vain. 

Nanak,  to  whom  shall  we  complain  ? Death  taketh  us 
away  even  without  our  permission.^ 

‘ If  thou  desire  to  go,’  continued  the  Guru,  ‘ I will 
quickly  follow  thee.’  She  called  her  son  Suraj  Mai, 
told  him  she  was  going  to  leave  the  world,  and 
begged  him  to  be  patient  and  mourn  not  for  her. 
She  impressed  on  him  the  propriety  of  ever  obeying 
his  father.  She  then  called  the  other  members  of 
the  family  and  took  leave  of  them.  Putting  herself 
in  a devotional  attitude  she  recited  the  Japji,  and 
repeating  the  true  Name,  the  holy  Wahguru,  re- 
signed her  spirit  to  her  Creator. 

On  the  tenth  day  after  Marwahi’s  death  Bidhi 
Chand  finished  reading  for  the  repose  of  her  soul 
the  portions  of  the  Granth  Sahib  he  had  copied. 
Her  son  Suraj  Mai  duly  received  a turban  and  a 
shawl  on  the  occasion.  The  Guru  now  became  daily 
sadder  and  resigned  every  comfort.  He  removed 
a comfortable  mattress  on  which  he  had  slept  and 
only  put  one  sheet  under  him.  Pillows  he  entirely 
rejected. 

The  Guru  kept  Har  Rai  continually  beside  him, 
and  taught  him  worldly  and  spiritual  knowledge. 
One  day  a Sikh  called  Daya  Ram,  from  Anupshahr 
on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges,  appeared  before  the 
Guru.  He  had  come  with  people  of  his  country  and 
some  members  of  his  family  to  do  homage  to  the 
Guru.  His  daughters  had  previously  heard  of  Har 
^ Supplementary  sloks. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  EAR  GOBIND  225 

Rai  and  conceived  a desire  to  wed  him  collectively. 
On  seeing  Ear  Rai  the  Guru’s  grandson,  Daya  Ram 
betrothed  his  daughters  to  him.  The  nuptial  cere- 
monies took  place  on  “the  tenth  day  of  Ear,  Sambat 
1697  (a.  D.  1640). 


Chapter  XXII 

Bidhi  Chand  after  a stormy,  eventful,  and  perilous 
life  felt  that  his  end  was  approaching.  Ee  remem- 
bered his  promise  to  Sundar  Shah  to  return  to  him 
that  they  might  go  to  paradise  together,  and  asked 
the  Guru’s  permission  to  proceed  on  his  long  terres- 
trial and  celestial  journeys.  The  Guru  addressed  him 
the  following  parting  words  : ‘ All  worldly  persons 
dread  death ; but  the  holy  fear  it  not,  and  are 
happy  since  they  exchange  bodies,  which  are  mines 
of  sorrow  and  disease,  for  bodies  which  are  like 
celestial  light,  and  they  roam  for  ever  in  the 
blissful  fields  of  Sach  Khand.  Take  Sundar  Shah 
with  thee  to  the  Guru’s  heaven,  and  I will  come 
to  you  soon.’  Bidhi  Chand  put  his  son  Lai  Chand’s. 
hand  into  the  Guru’s  and  said,  ‘ I pray  thee  to 
cherish  my  son  as  thy  servant.’  Ee  then  addressed 
his  son,  ‘ If  thou  desire  to  obtain  the  wishes  of  thy 
heart  and  to  live  happy,  be  faithful  to  the  Guru 
and  ever  serve  and  obey  him.’  Saying  this,  the  old 
man’s  eyes  filled  with  tears.  The  Guru  tenderly 
embraced  him,  and  offered  him  further  words  of 
consolation — ‘ This  body  is  temporary  and  abideth 
not.  Eow  long  can  one  keep  life,  which  is  like  a 
mud  vessel  which  breaketh  sooner  or  later  and 
alloweth  its  contents  to  flow  away  ? Look  to  thy 
soul,  which  is  an  emanation  from  God,  and  not  to 
thy  material  body.’  Bidhi  Chand  on  hearing  this 
bowed  to  the  Guru’s  feet  and,  bidding  farewell  to 
the  assembled  Sikhs,  went  to  join  Sundar  Shah  and 
prepare  for  the  road  to  paradise. 

Bidhi  Chand  after  his  toilsome  and  tedious  journey 

SIKH.  IV  Q 


226  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

to  the  south  of  India  found  his  friend  Sundar  Shah 
contemplating  God  in  a fit  of  abstraction.  He  said 
to  him,  ‘ My  friend,  arise,  find  a home  with  comfort 
and  peace  in  God’s  palace,  and  return  not  again  to 
this  world.’ ^ Sundar  Shah  opening  his  eyes  said, 
‘ Brother,  by  thy  favour  my  mind  is  at  peace  and 
all  fear  of  death  is  dispelled.  I have  waited  for 
thee,  and  now  the  wish  of  my  heart  is  gratified.’ 
The  people  of  the  village  came  to  see  the*  devout 
Sikh  from  the  Panjab,  and  received  divine  instruction 
from  him  for  the  space  of  three  days. 

The  fourth  day,  before  Bidhi  Chand  arose  for  his 
devotions,  he  saw  in  a vision  Bhais  Budha,  Paira, 
Pirana,  Gur  Das,  Langaha,  Jetha,  and  a whole 
assembly  of  departed  Sikh  saints.  He  heard  them 
say,  ‘ O Bidhi  Chand,  congratulations ! By  re- 
pentance and  service  to  the  Guru  thou  hast 
made  thy  life  profitable.  Come  now  with  us  to 
abide  in  Sach  Khand.’  Bidhi  Chand  on  hearing 
this  trembled  with  joy.  When  he  related  his 
vision  to  Sundar  Shah  they  both  agreed  to  aban- 
don their  bodies  and  proceed  to  join  the  bliss- 
ful Sikhs  in  their  heavenly  abode.  The  date  of 
Bidhi  Chand’s  death  is  given  as  the  eighth  day  of 
the  light  half  of  Bhadon,  Sambat  1697.  The  Guru 
caused  his  partially  copied  Granth  to  be  read  for 
Bidhi  Chand's  eternal  repose,  and  bound  a turban 
on  his  son  Lai  Chand’s  head. 

The  Guru  continued  to  be  very  thoughtful.  His 
discourses  were  ever  on  the  transitory  nature  of 
human  life  and  the  propriety  of  accepting  the  divine 
will.  One  day  in  spring,  as  he  was  seated  alone  in 
his  garden,  he  saw  the  flower-beds  blooming  and 
the  creepers  adorning  and  clinging  to  the  trees  like 
loving  and  chaste  wives  to  their  husbands.  He 
began  to  reflect  on  the  many  benefits  which  trees 
conferred  on  man.  Their  leaves,  blossoms,  fruit, 
branches,  bark,  shade,  timber  are  all  for  human 

^ Guru  Aijan,  Gauri  PQrbi. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  227 

advantage.  Whoever  cometh  to  them  with  hope 
never  goeth  away  disappointed.  Even  they  who 
heartlessly  throw  stones  at  them  receive  their  fruit. 
They  supply  food,  covering,  carriages,  ships,  utensils, 
furniture,  perfume,  and  countless  other  favours. 

While  the  Guru  was  thus  reflecting,  Har  Rai 
approached  on  horseback.  On  seeing  the  Guru  at 
a distance  he  alighted  and  hastened  to  make  his 
obeisanoe.  He  was  dressed  in  the  style  of  a noble- 
man of  the  time  in  a loose-flowing  robe  composed 
of  one  hundred  and  one  pieces.  The  wind  expanded 
it,  and  it  broke  several  flowers  as  the  wearer  pro- 
ceeded to  the  Guru.  Har  Rai  on  seeing  the  damage 
his  dress  had  caused  sat  down  and  wept,  saying, 
‘ Alas  ! I have  spoiled  these  flowers.’  A Sikh  who 
had  observed  the  occurrence  informed  the  Guru. 
The  Guru  went  and  inquired  why  Har  Rai  was  thus 
seated  in  sorrow.  Har  Rai  duly  informed  him.  The 
Guru  then  said,  ‘ Wear  thy  robe  by  all  means,  but 
lift  up  thy  skirts  when  walking.  It  behove th  God’s 
servant  to  be  tender  to  all  things.’  Har  Rai  ever 
after  remembered  the  Guru’s  instruction  as  to  how 
he  was  to  carry  his  robe. 

When  the  Guru  was  pressed  by  some  Sikhs  to 
appoint  his  second  son  Suraj  Mai  as  his  successor, 
he  replied,  ‘ The  Guruship  is  a heavy  burden.  Only 
the  worthy  can  support  it.  The  aspirant  to  it  may 
know  how  to  prophesy,  but  should  keep  his  secrets 
to  himself.  Though  he  see  offences  he  should 
forgive  them.  He  should  assist  his  Sikhs  in  their 
time  of  tribulation  and  give  servants ’the  reward  of 
their  services.  Deeming  the  things  of  this  world 
perishable,  he  should  not  covet  them.  Only  he 
who  possesseth  these  virtues  is  worthy  to  be  a Guru. 
The  Guru’s  masands  and  servants  are  worthy  of 
respect  and  receive  offerings,  but  my  son  Suraj 
Mai  is  more  worthy  than  they.  He  shall  obtain 
other  things — wealth,  property,  children — but  the 
Guruship  is  the  heritage  of  Har  Rai.’ 

Q 2 


228  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

One  day  the  Guru  received  a letter  to  the  effect 
that  Manohar  Das,  the  great-grandson  of  Guru  Amar 
Das,  was  dead.  Upon  this  the  Guru  remained  for 
some  time  absorbed  in  thought.  He  then  said, 
‘ Congratulations  to  the  saints ! His  name  was 
Manohar — heart-stealing — and  of  a truth  he  stole 
God’s  heart.’  A Kashmiri  Sikh  on  hearing  this 
inquired  what  virtues  Manohar  possessed  that  he 
received  this  extravagant  eulogy.  The  Guru  replied 
with  great  affection,  ‘ Manohar  Das  used  to  take 
Guru  Arjan  in  his  lap  and  play  with  him.  It  was 
by  service  to  the  Guru  he  obtained  his  greatness. 
He  was  free  from  covetousness,  worldly  love,  and 
wrath,  and  never  desired  the  world’s  praises.  His 
dependence  was  on  the  Name.  That  is  why  I con- 
gratulated him.  I had  myself  intended  to  wait  on 
him,  but  I was  engaged  in  warfare,  and  now  that 
he  hath  departed  my  opportunity  of  serving  him 
hath  gone.’ 

The  Guru  dispatched  a letter  to  Anand  Rai, 
Manohar  Das’s  son,  who  was  living  in  Goindwal, 
and  invited  him  to  visit  him.  Anand  Rai,  over- 
joyed at  the  honour  done  him,  speedily  set  out. 
The  Guru  went  to  meet  him,  and  on  account  of  the 
affection  he  bore  him  joined  in  carrying  his  palki.^ 
Anand  Rai,  who  did  not  desire  such  condescension 
from  the  Guru,  alighted  and  said,  ‘ Thou  art  on  the 
Guru’s  throne  and  a mine  of  virtue.  Thou  treatest 
me  as  of  higher  dignity  than  thyself,  but  I am  not 
equal  to  the  dust  of  thy  feet.  \VTiat  if  the  bamboo 
groweth  very  tall  ? It  is  not  equal  in  value  to  the 
smallest  sandal  tree.’  The  Guru  took  his  arm,  con- 
ducted him  to  his  private  apartments,  and  ministered 
to  his  every  comfort.  Anand  Rai  persisted  in  saying 
that  he  was  the  Guru’s  servant.  This  the  Guru 
would  not  admit,  and  apologized  to  him  for  not 
having  waited  on  him  before  for  want  of  opportunity. 

‘ Without  service  to  the  saints,’  the  Guru  continued, 

^ Generally  known  as  a palanquin. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  229 

' life  is  vain  and  profitless.  It  is  by  such  service 
the  advantage  of  human  birth  is  obtained.’  Anand 
Rai  replied,  ‘ Thou  hast  lifted  niy  palki  as  an  ex- 
ample of  humility  to  ethers.  Kindly  grant  that  my 
mind  may  continue  lowly,  that  I may  be  a true 
Sikh,  and  that  worldly  love  may  not  enter  my 
heart.'  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ They  who  serve  without 
hope  of  reward  obtain  distinctionj  but  they  who 
serve  wjth  ulterior  motives  merely  accumulate  sin.’ 

While  the  Guru  and  Anand  Rai  were  thus  con- 
versing, Man  Singh  and  other  servants  of  the  latter 
arrived.  The  Guru  respectfully  seated  them  near 
him.  He  offered  a tray  full  of  rupees  to  Anand 
Rai,  but  he  would  not  accept  them.  Anand  Rai 
would  not  touch  money  of  any  description  for  the 
following  reason.  While  Guru  Amar  Das  was  medi- 
tating on  God,  his  son  Mohri  used  to  receive  the 
offerings  of  the  Sikhs.  One  day,  while  handling 
money,  his  hands  became  black,  and  he  showed  them 
to  his  father  who  said,  ‘ My  son,  silver  is  white  and 
beautiful,  but  when  thou  takest  it  into  thy  hands 
it  turneth  them  black.  In  the  same  way  the  minds 
of  those  who  covet  it  become  black ; and  they 
fight  and  quarrel  with  one  another  until  death 
releaseth  them  from  their  struggles.’  The  Guru 
said  to  Anand  Rai,  ‘ If  thou  wilt  not  accept  my 
offering,  then  distribute  the  money  among  the 
needy.’  Upon  this  Anand  Rai  accepted  it,  saying 
that  as  it  was  a present  from  the  Guru  he  would 
make  it  an  exception.  The  Guru  sent  an  escort  of 
honour  with  him. 

A rebeck-player  called  Babak  is  frequently 
mentioned  in  the  life  of  the  sixth  Guru.  He  was 
a very  devout  and  able  servant  of  the  Guru 
and  assisted  in  attracting  listeners  to  the  temple. 
After  service  one  morning  he  told  the  Guru  that  he 
had  been  very  happy  with  him.  He  had  risen 
rapidly  from  the  jrosition  of  humble  player  to  that 
of  honoured  courtier  of  the  Guru.  He  'prayed  the 


230 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Guru  to  give  his  son  the  same  position  and  dignity 
he  had  held  himself.  The  Guru  consoled  him  on 
his  departure — ‘ His  turn  shall  come  to  every  one. 
No  one  may  abide  here.  The  day  of  departure  is 
certain  for  all.  Repeat  the  true  Name  which 
assisteth  in  both  worlds.  I will  as  long  as  I live 
protect  thy  sons  and  grandsons.  By  the  power  of 
the  Word  thy  father  obtained  happiness.  Thou  too 
shalt  be  happy.  Nothing  shall  be  wanting  to  those 
who  possess  the  Gurus’  hymns.  He  who  readeth 
them  and  renounceth  worldly  love  shall  have  the 
four  great  boons  as  his  attendants.’  Babak  took  his 
leave,  repaired  to  his  house,  and  there  with  Wah- 
guru  on  his  lips  died  a painless  death. 

One  day  the  Guru,  observing  Jati  Mai’s  devoted 
service,  thus  addressed  him,  ‘ Thy  father  Singha  was 
with  me  in  my  first  battle.  Thou  hast  been  with 
me  in  three  battles,  and  bravely  hast  thou  sus- 
tained thy  part  in  destro5dng  enemies.  Thou  lovest 
me,  and  art  even  a greater  warrior  than  thy  father. 
Thy  son  Daya  Ram  shall  be  with  my  grandson. 
Guru  Gobind  Singh,  and  assist  in  destroying  the 
Turks.  I am  delighted  with  thy  conspicuous  gal- 
lantry, and  invite  thee  to  ask  any  gift  in  my  power 
to  bestow.’  Jati  Mai  replied  that  the  only  boon  he 
desired  was  that  at  the  last  moment  he  might  not 
suffer  the  pain  of  death,  but  remember  God  and  be 
released  from  further  transmigration.  The  Guru 
replied,  ‘ The  time  for  thy  departure  is  nigh.  Birth 
and  death  are  the  law  of  the  body ; hunger  and 
thirst  of  life  ; weal  and  woe  of  the  senses  ; joy  and 
mourning  of  the  mind.  The  soul  is  pure  as  ether. 
When  it  through  ignorance  taketh  on  itself  the 
duties  of  body,  life,  senses,  and  mind,  it  becometh 
subject  to  desires  and  doubts,  and  falleth  into 
worldly  entanglements ; but  when  it  hath  freed 
itself  from  these  it  obtaineth  salvation  and  becometh 
absorbed  in  divine  happiness.  The  soul  associating 
with  worldly  wisdom  falleth  into  ignorance  and  for- 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  231 

getteth  God.  The  mind  yielding  to  the  senses  mis- 
leadeth  wisdom  and  falleth  into  sin.  It  is  to  the 
body  the  senses  are  attached.  When  the  soul 
through  divine  knowledge  separateth  from  the  body, 
then  it  becometh  pure,  obtaineth  salvation,  is  ab- 
sorbed in  celestial  happiness,  and  beholdeth  God. 
Be  not  afraid  of  death,  and  be  not  desirous  of  life. 
Know  the  Creator  who  cherisheth  all  His  creatures ; 
then  shalt  thou  be  free  from  all  mortal  ills  and 
obtain  peace.’  On  hearing  this  Jati  Mai’s  mind  was 
happy.  He  put  his  son’s  hand  into  the  Guru’s, 
upon  which  the  Guru  assured  him  of  the  youth’s 
future  welfare.  Jati  Mai  went  home,  repeated  Sat 
Nam  Wahguru,  and  gave  up  his  spirit.  The  Guru 
on  hearing  of  his  death,  said  ; — 

The  love  of  the  worshipper  shall  go  with  him  to  the  end. 

While  alive  he  worshipped  his  Master,  and  at  his  departure 
kept  Him  in  his  heart.^ 

The  Guru  deeply  felt  the  loss  of  so  many  friends 
and  relations,  and  thought  it  was  time  for  himself, 
too,  to  depart  and  follow  them.  Preparing  for  death 
he  abandoned  all  mundane  affairs,  and  distributed  his 
private  property  among  those  who  had  a claim  to 
it.  He  then  ordered  the  masands  to  collect  all  his 
Sikhs  and  bring  them  to  him  on  the  first  day  of 
the  moon  in  the  month  of  Chet.  His  Sikhs  accord- 
ingly thronged  from  every  quarter  to  see  their  Guru 
and  do  him  homage  on  the  day  appointed. 

The  Guru  sent  again  for  his  grandson  Dhir  Mai, 
who  was  still  living  in  Kartarpur.  Dhir  Mai  being 
in  possession  of  the  Granth  Sahib  replied,  ‘ I am 
already  a guru.  If  the  Guru  supersede  me  and 
appoint  my  younger  brother,  what  shall  it  avail  me 
to  go  to  Kiratpur  ? ’ The  messenger  then  went  to 
Dhir  Mai’s  mother  and  represented  to  her  that  people 
had  come  in  thousands  from  all  parts  to  the  Guru, 
and  it  would  not  be  right  for  her  and  her  son 

^ Maru. 


232 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


to  remain  absent  at  such  a critical  time.  Dhir 
Mai’s  mother  tried  to  persuade  him  to  go  to  the 
Guru.  She  said,  ‘ Fail  not  to  take  thy  place  in  the 
family  circle.  Thou  art  his  eldest  grandson.  He 
appeareth,  it  is  true,  to  love  thy  younger  brother 
more.  But  go  to  the  Guru  in  any  case.  Thou  shalt 
have  an  honourable  reception.  If  thou  even  now 
please  him,  he  may  appoint  thee  his  successor.’ 

Dhir  Mai  persisted,  ‘ I possess  the  Granth,  which 
is  the  outward  and  tangible  sign  of  Guruship.  The 
Guru  may  appoint  whomsoever  he  pleaseth.  I will 
deprive  his  nominee  of  the  dignity,  as  I am  on  good 
terms  with  the  Emperor.  I hold  this  city  of  Kar- 
tarpur.  Why  should  I go  to  the  Guru  ? ’ His 
mother  replied,  ‘ The  Guru  will  neither  take  the 
Granth  nor  the  city  from  thee.  He  hath  two  grand- 
sons of  whom  thou  art  the  elder.  Thou  shalt  obtain 
greatness  by  pleasing  him.  When  the  Sikhs  see 
thee  seated  near  him,  they  will  recognize  thee  as 
his  elder  grandson.  If  thou  go  not  to  him,  who 
will  acknowledge  thee  ? He  is  now  about  to  appoint 
a successor.  If  he  choose  to  bestow  the  Guruship  on 
one  of  thine  uncles,  we  cannot  help  it.  But  whether 
he  giveth  it  to  thee  or  not,  have  thyself  respected 
by  showing  that  thou  art  on  friendly  terms  with 
him.’ 

These  arguments  were  successful.  Dhir  Mai 
mounted  his  horse  and  proceeded  to  Kiratpur. 
The  Guru  received  him  affectionately.  After  the 
usual  commonplaces  of  meeting  and  salutation 
Dhir  Mai  said,  ‘ I have  written  to  the  Emperor  and 
adjusted  the  difference  between  thee  and  him. 
Therefore  it  is  that  thou  dwellest  in  happiness  and 
security.’  When  the  Guru  heard  this  he  thought 
to  himself,  ‘ This  youth  is  deceitful  and  proud,  and 
consequently  not  fit  for  the  Guruship.’  Dhir  Mai 
remained  with  the  Guru  and  had  ample  opportunity 
of  seeing  that  Har  Rai  was  his  favourite.  It  hap- 
pened that  the  Guru  kept  his  private  apartments 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  233 

for  three  days.  Dhir  Mai  thought  that  that  would 
be  a good  opportunity  to  put  himself  forward  as 
the  Guru’s  successor,  so  in  consultation  with  his 
masands  he  erected  a?  throne,  raised  a canopy  over 
it,  and  took  his  seat  as  Guru.  When  the  Guru 
heard  of  this  usurpation,  he  said,  ‘ I sent  for  him 
to  receive  my  parting  instruction,  but  he  hath  come 
to  practise  deceit  and  guile.  The  succession  to  the 
Guruship  dependeth  on  the  Guru's  pleasure,  and  can 
only  be  obtained  by  service,  humility,  and  devotion. 
It  is  not  to  be  obtained  by  pride  and  trickery.’ 
Dhir  Mai  on  hearing  this  became  very  angry,  and 
gave  expression  to  his  feelings,  ‘ Am  I not  the 
Guru’s  grandson  ? I am  heir  to  the  Guruship.  The 
Guru  may  give  it  to  whomsoever  he  please th.  I 
have  the  power  to  take  it  from  him  afterwards. 
It  is  my  mother  who  hath  brought  this  disgrace 
on  me  by  persuading  me  to  come  here.’  Saying 
this  Dhir  Mai  mounted  his  horse  and  rode  back  to 
Kartarpur. 


Chapter  XXIII 

When  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  in  response  to  his  summons 
arrived  from  all  quarters  in  Kiratpur,  the  Holi 
festival  was  being  celebrated  according  to  Sikh 
ritual.  On  that  occasion  the  following  hymn  of 
Guru  Arjan  was  sung  : — 

Let  us  worship  the  Guru^  and  make  obeisance  to  Him. 

To-day  is  our  day  of  rejoicing ; 

To-day  we  are  very  happy  ; 

Our  anxieties  have  departed  since  we  have  met  God. 

To-day  spring  is  in  our  hearts,® 

And,  O God,  we  sing  Thine  endless  praises. 

To-day  our  Phagan  is  celebrated.® 

1 God. 

® Literally — ^houses,  but  the  word  is  often  used  for  the  heart. 

® The  Holl  is  celebrated  in  the  month  of  Phagan. 


234 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


..  We  begin  to  play  on  meeting  God’s  companions  ; 

Our  service  to  them  shall  be  our  Holi. 

The  very  red  colour  of  God  attacheth  to  us  ; ^ 

Our  souls  and  bodies  bloom  beyond  comparison, 

And  wither  not  in  shade  or  sunshine  ; 

They  flourish  in  all  seasons. 

It  is  ever  spring  when  we  meet  the  divine  Guru  : 

Then  the  tree  of  life  is  produced  for  us, 

And  beareth  many  gems  of  flower  and  fruit. 

We  are  cloyed  and  satiated  singing  God’s  praises — 

The  slave  Nanak  meditateth  on  God.^ 

The  following  hymn  was  sung  to  remind  the 
Sikhs  that  their  time  must  not  be  spent  in 
frivolity  : — 

Man  is  led  astray  by  recreation  and  varied  amusements 
and  by  the  pleasures  of  the  eyesight. 

Such  delights  are  unreal,  for  even  kings  and  emperors  arc 
involved  in  anxiety.® 

My  brethren,  happiness  is  obtained  by  association  with 
saints. 

Sorrow  and  anxiety  depart  from  him  for  whom  God  hath 
so  destined. 

I have  wandered  through  all  countries,  and  observed  that 

Lords  of  wealth  and  great  lords  of  the  soil  perished 
speaking  of  their  property ; 

They  fearlessly  enforced  their  orders,  and  treated  men 
with  haughtiness ; 

They  subjected  every  one  to  them,  but  being  without 
the  Name  they  were  blended  with  the  dust. 

Great  monarchs,  at  whose  gates  stood  the  thirty-three 
karors  of  gods,  Sidhs,  and  Strivers  as  servants. 

Whose  dominion  was  over  mountain  and  sea,  all  passed 
away,  Nanak,  like  a dream 

1 The  word  rang  means  either  colour  or  love.  ® Basant. 

® These  two  lines  are  also  translated — 

Those  who  enjoy  much  recreation,  varied  amusements,  and  plea- 
sures which  lead  the  senses  astray ; 

Who  enjoy  regal  and  imperial  state,  are  involved  in  anxiety. 

* Guru  Arjan,  Sri  R5g. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  235 

The  Guru  added  the  following  more  particular 
instructions  regarding  the  observance  of  the  Holi 
festival : ‘ He  who  drinketh  wine  and  throweth  mud 
and  dust  and  blackeneth  his  face,  shall  have  dust 
thrown  on  his  head,  and  his  face  shall  be  blackened 
in  the  next  world  ; while  he  who  uttereth  lascivious 
expressions  shall  suffer  pain  in  the  lowest  hell.  It 
is  those  who  take  delight  in  the  true  Name  who 
enjoy  the  real  Holi ; and  it  is  for  this  purpose  the 
soul  obtaineth  human  birth  in  this  world.  Guru 
Arjan  hath  said  : — 

Man  hath  come  to  hear  and  read  God’s  word. 

Vain  is  the  human  birth  of  those  mortals  who,  forgetting 
the  Name,  conceive  worldly  desires. 

Understand  this,  O thoughtless  man,  that  the  saints  have 
told  the  story  of  the  Ineffable  One. 

Receive  the  gain  of  worshipping  God  in  thy  heart,  and 
thy  transmigration  shall  be  at  an  end. 

Effort,  power,  and  cleverness  are  Thine  ; if  Thou  grant 
them  to  me,  I will  repeat  Thy  name. 

They  are  servants,  and  it  is  they,  O Nanak,  who  are 
attached  to  service,  who  are  pleasing  to  God.’  ^ 

A day  was  appointed  for  a great  assemblage  at 
which  the  Guru’s  successor  was  to  be  consecrated. 
When  all  were  assembled  Guru  Har  Gobind  rose, 
clasped  his  hands  in  an  attitude  of  supplication,  and 
uttered  a prayer  to  the  Supreme  Being  for  the 
success  of  the  day’s  proceedings.  Then,  taking  Har 
Rai  by  the  hand,  he  seated  him  on  the  throne  of 
Guru  Nanak.  Bhai  Bhana,  son  of  Bhai  Budha, 
affixed  the  tilak  to  Har  Rai’s  forehead  and  decorated 
him  with  a necklace  of  flowers.  The  Guru  putting 
five  paise — farthings — and  a coco-nut  on  a tray 
offered  them  to  Har  Rai.  He  then  circumambulated 
him  four  times,  bowed  to  him,  and  gave  him  the 
following  instructions : — ‘ A watch  and  a quarter 
before  day,  shake  off  sleep,  rise,  bathe,  and  recite 

^ Sarang. 


236  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

the  Japji,  which  is  the  Guru’s  spell.  Be  gentle  in 
thy  demeanour.  Obtrude  not  thyself,  repeat  the 
Name,  and  cause  others  to  do  so.  Sit  in  the  com- 
pany of  thy  holy  Sikhs  twice  a day.’  After  this 
and  similar  instruction  to  his  successor,  the  Guru 
addressed  the  Sikhs,  ‘ In  Har  Rai  now  recognize  me. 
The  spiritual  power  of  Guru  Nanak  hath  entered 
him.’  Upon  this  the  assembled  Sikhs  shouted  con- 
gratulations and  the  minstrels  began  to  sing.  The 
heralds  then  announced  that  this  was  the  seventh 
Guru  duly  appointed  and  consecrated.  Bards  and 
minstrels  chanted  the  young  Guru’s  genealogy  and 
eulogies.  All  were  unanimous  in  saying  that  Har 
Rai,  who  by  service  had  pleased  his  grandfather 
Guru  Har  Gobind,  well  merited  the  exalted  position 
he  had  attained. 

Guru  Har  Gobind’s  wife  Nanaki  thus  addressed 
her  spouse  : ‘ Thou  didst  promise  that  my  son 

should  be  a Guru  of  the  world,  and  that  thy  grand- 
son should  be  a greater  warrior  than  thou.  My 
lord,  when  shall  this  prophecy  be  fulfilled  ? ’ The 
Guru  replied,  ‘ I have  told  thee  that  thy  son  shall 
be  a Guru,  and  he  certainly  shall.  Everything 
cometh  by  patience.’  Go  now  to  the  village  of  Ba- 
kala,  where  my  mother  Ganga’s  cenotaph  is,  and 
there  abide.  The  Guru  asked  Suraj  Mai  what  boon 
he  desired  for  himself.  He  at  once  replied,  ‘ To 
be  a real  Sikh.’  The  Guru  said,  ‘ Well  done  ! my 
son,  well  done  ! mayest  thou  live  long  ! Thou  shalt 
greatly  flourish.  Thine  offspring  shall  be  rich  and 
reverenced.  Abide  with  Har  Rai,  and  thou  shalt 
obtain  all  spiritual  and  temporal  blessings.’ 

The  Guru  then  retired  for  introspection  and  divine 
meditation  into  a house  called  Patalpuri,  which  he 
had  constructed  on  the  margin  of  the  Sathij,  and, 
as  the  other  Gurus  had  done,  exhorted  his  people 
not  to  mourn  for  him.  ‘ This  visible  and  tangible 
body  is  false,  God  alone  is  true.’  ' 

Bibi  Viro  his  daughter  came  to  him  with  tears 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  237 

in  her  eyes  and  said,  ‘ My  mother  departed  and  left 
me.  Thou  hast  since  then  been  a mother  as  well 
as  a father  to  me.  What  shall  I do  without  thee  ? ’ 
The  Guru  gave  her  every  consolation,  and  thus  con- 
cluded his  address  to  her,  ‘ Sorrow  not  for  me. 
Everything  that  is  born  must  perish.  Thou  shalt 
have  sons  who  shall  fight  on  the  side  of  thy  nephew 
the  tenth  Guru,  and  display  great  valour.'  Guru 
Har  Gobind  then  addressed  words  of  parting  or  of 
advice  and  instruction  to  his  friends  and  relations 
around  him. 

Guru  Har  Rai  put  the  departing  Guru  a question 
which  needed  an  urgent  reply — ‘ O great  king,  thine 
enmity  with  the  Turks  hath  ceased.  The  Emperor 
is  possessed  of  treasure,  arms,  and  fortresses.  If 
he  proceed  against  me,  how  am  I to  act  ? ' Guru 
Har  Gobind  replied,  ‘ Have  no  anxiety.  He  who 
proceedeth  against  thee  with  enmity  in  his  heart 
shall  never  prevail  against  thee.  God  will  be  with 
thee  and  assist  thee.  Keep  two  thousand  two 
hundred  mounted  soldiers  ever  with  thee.’ 

To  his  Sikhs  generally  he  said,  ‘ The  seventh  king 
Guru  Har  Rai  is  now  on  Guru  Nanak’s  throne. 
I have  attached  you  to  the  hem  of  his  garment. 
If  you  serve  him  you  shall  obtain  the  fruit  your 
hearts  desire.  He  holdeth  the  storehouses  both  of 
salvation  and  of  worldly  enjoyment.’  When  the 
Sikhs  pressed  him  for  further  instruction  he  repeated 
the  following  hymn  of  Guru  Arjan  : — 

What  is  the  moonlight  on  your  floor  ? Better  is  God’s 
light  within  you. 

Among  forms  of  worship,  the  best  is  the  worship  of  God’s 
name. 

Among  things  to  be  relinquished,  the  best  is  the  relin- 
quishment of  lust,  wrath,  and  avarice. 

Among  things  to  be  prayed  for,  best  is  it  to  pray  to  the 
Guru  for  God’s  praises. 

Among  vigils,  the  best  is  to  awake  to  sing  God’s  praises. 


238  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Among  things  to  be  attached  to,  the  best  is  attachment 
to  the  Guru’s  feet. 

These  things  shall  be  obtained  by  him  on  whose  forehead 
such  destiny  hath  been  written. 

Saith  Nanak,  he  who  hath  entered  God’s  asylum  findeth 
everything  good.^ 

The  Guru,  having  recited  this  hymn,  thus  addressed 
his  Sikhs  and  his  family : ‘ When  I am  gone,  be 
glad  and  rejoice.  I am  now  departing  to  my  final 
home.  Let  there  be  no  mourning  in  my  house,  but 
let  every  one  rely  on  God.  He  who  obeyeth  my 
words  shall  be  dear  to  me,  and  shall  obtain  salvation 
with  me.  Ever  love  the  Guru’s  hymns,  and  regale 
your  hearts  by  reading  and  listening  to  them. 
Remember  the  true  Name  with  devotion,  and  be 
daily  niore  and  more  intoxicated  with  its  sweetness.’ 

The  Guru  then  caused  attar  of  roses,  saffron,  and 
sandal  to  be  sprinkled  in  all  his  apartments,  and 
a great  feast  to  be  provided  for  his  Sikhs.  His 
rebeck-players  he  rewarded  with  money,  clothes,  and 
sweets. 

The  Sikh  writers  state  that  at  the  Guru’s  death 
the  sky  appeared  rose-red,  and  there  was  soft  singing 
heard  in  the  firmament.  Cool  and  fragrant  zephyrs 
blew.  All  good-hearted  and  saintly  men,  dwellers 
on  high  who  had  attained  the  most  exalted  position, 
demigods,  and  Sidhs,  singing  his  praises  came  to 
receive  him,  and  shouted  ‘ Victory  ! victory  ! ’ 

The  Guru  was  borne  on  a beautiful  bier  amid  the 
singing  of  hymns,  amongst  which  the  following 
passage  from  the  Sukhmani  received  special  promi- 
nence ; — 

He  who  knoweth  God  must  always  be  happy. 

And  God  will  blend  him  with  Himself. 

He  in  whose  heart  God  dwelleth  is  wealthy. 

Of  high  family,  honoured,  and  obtaineth  salvation  during 
life. 


^ M3ru  Ashtapadi. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  GOBIND  239 

Hail ! hail ! hail ! a man  hath  come 

By  whose  favour  the  whole  world  shall  be  saved. 

The  object  of  his  coming  was 

That  through  him  the  “Name  might  be  remembered. 

He  was  saved  himself  and  he  saved  the  world  : 

To  him,  Nanak,  I ever  make  obeisance. 

The  author  of  the  Dabistan-i-Mazahab,  who  ap- 
pears to  have  been  present  at  the  Guru’s  death, 
states  that  he  died  on  Sunday  the  third  day  of  the 
Muharrim,  a.  h.  1055  (a.  d.  1645),  after  a spiritual 
and  temporal  reign  of  thirty-seven  years  and  ten 
months.^ 

After  the  Guru’s  cremation  Lai  Chand,  son  of  Bidhi 
Chand,  read  the  Granth  as  far  as  his  father  Bidhi 
Chand  had  copied  it,  that  is,  as  far  as  the  end  of 
the  Bilawal  Rag. 

When  the  death  ceremonies  were  all  completed, 
Mata  Nanaki  and  her  son  Teg  Bahadur  set  out, 
according  to  the  late  Guru’s  order,  for  Bakala,  where 
they  both  dwelt  until  Teg  Bahadur  obtained  the 
Guruship,  Bhai  Budha’s  son  Bhana  entrusted  his 
son  Sarwan  to  the  new  Guru,  and  went  to  Ramdas, 
where  he  died. 

Bhai  Gur  Das  in  the  following  has  briefly  summed 
up  the  attributes  of  the  first  six  Gurus  : — 

The  divine  Guru  Nanak  was  the  Guru  of  gurus  ; 

In  an  unseen  and  inscrutable  manner  he  was  absorbed 
in  Angad, 

Who  was  absorbed  in  an  imseen  and  invisible  manner  in 
Amar  the  immortal. 

^ Hinduised  Sikh  chroniclers  have  invented  a story  that  the  Guru 
caused  himself  to  be  shut  up  in  Patalpuri,  and  ordered  Guru  Har  Rai 
to  lock  the  door  and  not  open  it  until  the  seventh  day.  This,  ac- 
cording to  Abulfazl,  was  deemed  by  the  Hindus  the  most  meritorious 
form  of  death,  and  so  ignorant  and  superstitious  persons  have  at- 
tributed to  the  Guru  this  form  of  suicide.  Had  it  occurred,  it  would 
certainly  have  been  recorded  by  Muhsan  Fani  among  the  other  details 
given  by  him. 


240 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


The  nectar  trickled  into  the  mouth  of  him  who  was  called 
Ram  Das,  the  destroyer  of  enemies : ^ 

Guru  Arjan  by  serving  him  bore  his  burden. 

Guru  Har  Gobind  the  measureless  churned  the  nectar. 

And  took  his  seat  on  eternal  truth. 

He  strung  the  Word  of  the  Ungraspable  and  Unknowable 
Spirit. 

Under  the  Guru’s  instruction  he  filled  what  could  not  be 
tilled,  and  dispelled  doubt  and  fear.^ 

Another  poet  has  composed  the  following  on  the 
same  subject : 

The  first  Guru  established  this  custom — he  became  the 
Guru’s  slave  and  was  called  the  Guru  of  his  slaves  (Sikhs). 

Amar  Das  by  serving  Guru  Angad  was  proclaimed  the 
true  Guru. 

Ram  Das  by  serving  Amar  Das  as  his  servant  pleased 
the  Guru. 

Guru  Arjan  obtained  the  nectareous  fruit  from  Guru  Ram 
Das  whose  nature  was  incomprehensible. 

Guru  Har  Gobind,  the  superior  being,  caused  Guru  Arjan 
to  hail  him  as  Guru. 

The  Guru  cannot  possibly  be  concealed  from  those  who 
have  obtained  some  knowledge  by  his  favour. 

^ That  is,  the  deadly  sins. 


2 Gur  Das,  War  III. 


241 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  OF  THE 
SIKH  RELIGION 

We  have  now  arrived  at  a stage  in  the  history  of 
the  Sikh  Gurus  and  of  the  Sikh  reformation  when 
the  religion  of  Guru  Nanak  may  be  said  to  have  been 
consolidated  by  his  genius,  by  the  impress  he  left 
on  his  successors,  by  their  general  fidelity  to  his 
teachings  and  example,  and  by  the  piety  and  industry 
of  Guru  Arjan. 

The  first  five  Gurus  were,  as  we  have  seen,  all 
sacred  bards.  The  last  of  them,  in  addition  to 
copious  original  compositions  of  his  own,  collected  all 
the  hymns  of  his  predecessors  into  one  volume  in 
order  to  be  a guide  to  Sikhs  for  all  time.  The  sixth, 
seventh,  and  eighth  Gurus  have  left  no  written 
memorials  of  their  teachings.  It,  therefore,  appears 
fitting  at  this  stage  to  give  the  analysis  of  the  tenets 
of  the  Sikh  religion  which  is  contained  in  the  Wars  of 
Bhai  Gur  Das,  who  was  a contemporary  of  the 
fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  Gurus,  and  who  was  acquainted 
with  them  and  their  contemporaries,  especially  Bhai 
Budha,  an  aged  Sikh  who  had  survived  from  the 
time  of  Guru  Nanak. 

Gur  Das’s  Wars  are  forty  in  number.  Each  war 
is  divided  into  a varying  number  of  pauris,  and 
each  pauri  contains  from  five  to  ten  lines.  The 
language  is  old  and  very  difficult  Panjabi.  The  Wars 
from  which  the  following  extracts  are  taken  are 
given  in  the  notes. 

The  advantage  of  the  society  of  the  holy : — 

Trees  which  grow  near  sandal  are  perfumed  like  sandal. 
If  any  of  the  eight  metals  be  touched  by  the  philosopher’s 
stone,  it  becometh  gold.  As  rivers,  streams,  and  water- 

R 


SIKH.  IV 


242 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


courses  which  fall  into  the  Ganges  become  the  Ganges,  so 
doth  the  society  of  holy  men  save  sinners  and  wash 
away  the  filth  of  sin.  It  saveth  countless  souls  from  hell, 
and  associateth  with  itself  hundreds  of  thousands  of  the 
lost.  The  holy  see  God  in  the  midst  of  them.^ 

By  associating  with  the  holy  the  way  of  union  with  God 
is  found  in  one’s  own  home.  To  cherish  the  Guru’s  instruc- 
tion is  to  obtain  salvation.* 

The  elixir  is  beneficent  and  turneth  baser  metals  into 
gold.  The  sandal-tree  perfumeth  other  trees  whether  they 
bear  fruit  or  not.  Rain  falleth  everywhere  whether  the 
ground  be  good  or  bad.  When  the  sun  riseth,  it  diffuseth  its 
beams  through  the  warp  and  woof  of  the  world.  The  earth 
hath  the  capacity  of  endurance.  Though  the  ruby,  jewels, 
gems,  gold,  iron,  the  philosopher’s  stone  are  all  produced 
from  it,  it  regardeth  not  outrages.  In  the  same  way  the 
company  of  the  saints  conferreth  on  men  indiscriminately 
benefits  which  cannot  be  estimated.® 

The  Sikh  religion  : — 

The  Sikh  religion  is  distinct,  and  superior  to  other  religions. 

The  faith  of  the  Sikhs  is  fixed,  and  by  it  man  is  absorbed 
in  God. 

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  groups  of  Sikhs  form  one  group 
and  have  no  false  pride,  that  is,  they  harbour  not  contempt 
for  one  another  on  account  of  pride  of  birth 

The  way  of  Sikhism  is  narrow  ; it  is  sharper  than  the  edge 
of  a sword  and  finer  than  a hair.  There  is  no  creed  equal  to 
it  in  the  past,  present,  or  future.  There  is  no  second  God  ; 
there  is  only  one  God  in  this  house.® 

There  is  but  one  dot  of  difference  between  the  holy 
and  the  unholy  : — 

There  is  but  one  step  from  the  holy  to  the  unholy.  For 
instance,  the  word  tnaharam  (holy)  by  the  addition  of  a 
point  becometh  mujaram  (criminal).  Sikhs,  otherwise 
sensible,  in  a state  of  aberration  ruin  their  minds  by  assisting 

* ill.  ® XL.  i Hi.  ■*  IX. 


1 War  II. 


BHAI  GVR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  243 

in  superstitious  ceremonies.^  They  who  ire  subordinate 
to  the  Guru  perform  his  Service  and  keep  their  secrets  to 
themselves.* 

The  unity  of  Sikhs  : — 

Where  there  is  one  Sikh  there  is  one  Sikh  ; where  there  are 
two  Sikhs,  there  is  a company  of  saints  ; where  there  are 
five  Sikhs  there  is  God.* 

Sikhs  must  have  faith  in  the  Guru’s  words,  and  not  allow 
their  minds  to  wander.^ 

O Sikhs  of  the  Guru,  hear  the  Guru’s  instruction.  Be 
wise  within  but  simple  without.  Fix  your  attention  on  the 
Word  and  be  wakeful.  Be  deaf  to  everything  except  the 
Guru’s  words.  Behold  the  true  Guru.  Where  there  is  not 
the  company  of  the  saints,  the  house  is  empty  and  dis- 
mantled. Utter  the  Guru’s  word  Wahguru,  and  silently 
quaff  the  cup  of  love.  Salute  and  be  humble  to  the  Sikhs. 
Sprinkle  in  thy  house  the  water  in  which  thou  hast  washed 
their  feet.  Deem  the  Guru’s  feet  a lotus  and  thy  mind 
a bumble-bee,  and  in  this  terrible  ocean  of  the  world  keep 
thy  faith  distinct.  The  Guru  is  the  true  mediator  to  bestow 
salvation  on  man  while  alive.® 

The  Sikhs  ponder  on  the  words  of  the  Ineffable,  and 
abstain  from  praise  and  blame.  Allowing  the  Guru’s 
instruction  to  enter  their  hearts,  they  speak  civilly  and 
thus  comfort  one  another.  The  Sikhs’  virtues  cannot  be 
concealed.  A man  may  hide  molasses,  but  ants  will  discover 
it.  At  the  same  time,  the  Sikhs  have  great  endurance. 
Sugar-cane  though  sweet  is  pressed  in  a mill,  and  so  must 
Sikhs  suffer  while  conferring  favours  on  others.® 

Worthy  of  praise  are  the  hands  of  the  Sikh  who  in  the 
company  of  the  saints  doeth  the  Guru’s  work,  who  draweth 
water,  fanneth,  grindeth,  washeth  his  feet,  and  drinketh  the 
water  therefrom ; who  copieth  the  Guru’s  hymns  and 

^ This  is  also  translated — Sikhs  associating  with  saints  become 
enthusiastic  in  devotion,  and  restrain , their  minds  from  thinking  of 
other  objects  of  worship  than  the  one  God., 

* XI.  This  is  also  translated — ^The;  Master’s  servants  perform 
hard  labour  and  never  complain  of  if *10  others. 

* XIII.  ® III.  ® IV.  .«  VI. 

R2 


244 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


playeth  the  C3anbals,  the  mirdang,^  and  the  rebeck,  in  the 
company  of  the  holy,  who  boweth  and  prostrateth  himself 
and  embraceth  a brother  Sikh ; who  liveth  honestly,  and 
who  by  his  munificence  conferreth  favours  on  others  ; who 
contented  with  touching  the  Guru  as  a philosopher’s  stone, 
toucheth  nothing  else,  and  layeth  not  his  hand  on  another’s 
wife  or  property  ; who  loveth  another  Sikh  and  embraceth 
the  love,  devotion,  and  fear  of  God ; and  who  effaceth  and 
asserteth  not  himself.* 

Blest  are  the  feet  of  the  Sikhs  who  walk  in  the  Guru’s 
way,  who  go  to  the  Guru’s  door,  and  sit  there  with  holy 
men,  who  search  out  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  and  haste  to  do  them 
favours,  who  run  not  in  mammon’s  way,  and  who  if  they 
happen  to  possess  wealth  remain  humble.  Few  are  the  slaves 
of  the  Commander,  who  do  Him  homage  and  thus  escape 
from  their  bonds  ; who  adopt  the  custom  of  circumambulat- 
ing the  Guru’s  Sikhs  and  falling  at  their  feet.  The  Guru’s 
Sikhs  delight  in  such  enjoyments.* 

The  Sikhs  erase  the  twelve  tilaks  of  the  Hindus,  applied 
to  various  parts  of  the  body,  and  apply  in  their  stead  the 
tilak  of  the  Guru’s  instruction.* 

Effect  of  the  Guru’s  teaching  : — 

By  the  Guru’s  hymns  the  mind  is  satisfied  and  man 
reacheth  his  own  home.* 

The  Sikh  who  receiveth  the  Guru’s  instruction  is  really 
a Sikh.* 

I By  the  Guru’s  instruction  the  four  castes  were  blended 
in  one  society  of  saints.  The  Guru’s  disciples  assumed  one 
red  colour  like  that  of  the  betel  made  from  four  ingredients — 
betel-leaf,  betel-nut,  catechu,  and  lime.* 

The  true  Guru,  the  real  king,  putteth  the  holy  on  the 
high  road  to  salvation.  He  restraineth  the  deadly  sins, 
evil  inclinations,  and  worldly  love.  The  Sikhs  pass  their 
time  in  remembering  the  Word  with  devotion,  and  therefore 
Death  the  tax-gatherer  approacheth  them  not.  The  Guru 
hath  dispersed  the  apostates  and  seated  the  guild  of  the 
saints  in  Paradise.  By  the  spell  of  the  Name  he  hath 

1 A small  dram.  * VI.  » Vll.  * III. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS 


245 


inculcated  love,  devotion,  fear,  charity,  and  ablutions. 
As  the  lotus  remaineth  dry  in  the  water,  so  doth  the  Guru 
keep  the  holy  man  unaffected  by  the  world.  The  Sikhs 
efface  and  assert  not  themselves.^ 

The  Guru’s  instruction  teacheth  to  praise  Wahguru.  The 
Veds  know  not  and  Sheshnag  hath  not  discovered  His  secret.* 
The  Guru’s  Sikh  becometh  of  the  Guru’s  line,  a supreme 
saint,  and  separateth  falsehood  from  truth  as  the  swan 
separateth  water  from  milk.®  The  Guru  then  becometh  a 
disciple  and  the  disciple  a Guru.^ 

There  can  only  be  dealings  at  one  shop,  the  owner  of 
which  is  the  true  perfect  Guru.  He  taketh  demerits  and 
selleth  merits  in  exchange,  and  he  dealeth  honestly.  He 
maketh  the  simmal-tree  bear  fruit,  and  he  turneth  dross 
into  gold.  He  perfumeth  the  bamboo,  and  changeth  the 
crow  into  a swan.  He  showeth  the  sun  to  the  owl,  and 
maketlr  the  shell  more  beautiful  than  pearls.  His  hymns 
which  are  before  us  are  superior  to  the  Veds  and  the  Quran.® 

The  attributes  of  a disciple  : — 

To  become  a disciple  is,  as  it  were,  to  become  dead. 
It  cannot  be  done  by  words.  A disciple  must  be  patient, 
faithful,  possess  a martyr’s  spirit,  and  free  himself  from 
superstition  and  fear.  He  must  be  like  a purchased  slave 
fit  to  be  yoked  to  any  work  which  may  serve  his  Guru.  He 
must  never  be  hungry,  and  never  require  sleep.  He  must 
be  ready  to  grind  and  bring  fresh  water  for  his  Guru.  He 
must  be  ever  prepared  to  fan  and  wash  his  Guru’s  feet.  He 
must  be  a sedate  servant  and  never  laugh  or  cry.  Thus 
shall  he  obtain  the  position  of  a darwesh,  be  absorbed  in 
the  relish  of  the  Beloved,  arrive  at  the  goal  of  emancipation, 
and  receive  those  congratulations  which  the  Muhammadans 
bestow  on  one  another  on  seeing  the  moon  of  the  Id  festival.® 
1 V.  2 IX. 

® An  oriental  belief  arising  from  the  peculiar  conformation  of  the 
swan’s  bill. 

® XI.  The  eleventh  War  contains  a list  of  the  principal  Sikhs  up 
to  the  time  of  Gur  Das.  ® XIII. 

* III.  The  Muhammadans  are  delighted  to  take  food  after  the 
Ramzan  fast. 


246  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  pious  man  : — 

To  the  pious  man  who  tffeasureth  in  his  heart  the  Guru’s 
instruction  and  effaceth  himself,  Gbd’s  will  will  naturally 
be  grateful.  He  shall  find  his  real  home  by  associating  with 
the  saints  and  fearing  and  loving  God.  Blest  the  mother 
who  bore  him ; and  profitable  his  advent  into  the  world.* 

Humility : — 

He  who  is  humble  is  dear  to  the  Guru.® 

He  who  is  humble  winneth,  he  who  is  proud  loseth  the 
game.® 

A pomegranate  seed  like  a speck  of  dust  entereth  the  dust. 
It  becometh  a green  tree,  and  rejoiceth  in  its  red  blossoms. 
One  tree  hath  a thousand  flowers  ; its  flowers  and  fruit  are 
superior  one  to  the  other.  From  one  seed  there  are  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  fruits,  and  in  every  fruit  there  is  a seed. 
There  is  no  deficiency  in  that  fruit.  The  more  its  fruits  are 
gathered,  the  more  it  beareth  fruit  and  flowers.  The  Guru’s 
religion  teacheth  to  walk  humbly,  thus  shall  all  Sikhs  become 
great? 

There  are  hundreds  of  thousands  of  men  high,  intermediate, 
and  low,  but  the  holy  man  calleth  himself  the  lowest  of  the 
low.* 

The  earth  is  the  most  humble  of  all,  but  in  God’s  court  it 
obtaineth  greatness  for  its  patience.  Some  weed  or  plough 
it,  and  Some  pollute  it.  The  holy  obtain  the  fruit  of  peace 
in  the  house  of  contentment.  They  efface  and  assert  them- 
selves not.  Whether  waking,  dreaming,  or  sleeping  deeply, 
they  with  love  in  their  hearts  remain  absorbed  in  God. 
They  remember  the  Guru’s  hymns  in  the  association  of  the 
saints.® 

The  elephant  is  not  eaten  on  account  of  its  pride,  and  no 
one  e'ateth  the  powerful  lion.  The  goat  is  unhonoured,  but 
obtaineth  religious  and  secular  distinction.  It  is  eaten  at 
deaths  and  marriages  and  accepted  at  feasts.  Its  flesh 

* III.  a IV. 

® IV.  In  the  fourth  War  Gur  Das  gives  several  examples  of 
humility. 

* VIII. 


« XVI. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  247 

is  holy  for  worldly  people,  and  strings  for  musical  instru- 
ments are  made  from  its  entrails.  Shoes  which  holy  men 
wear  are  made  from  its  skin.  Trumpets  and  drums  made 
from  goat-skin  afford  pleasure  by  their  music  to  the 
society  of  the  saints.^ 

To  call  oneself  the  lowest  of  the  low  is  the  Guru’s  teaching, 
if  any  one  act  according  to  it.  Sixty  copper  paise  are  equal 
to  one  silver  rupee  which  is  received  with  suspicion,  while 
the  paise  are  not.  Ten  rupees  are  equal  to  a gold  coin 
which  is  received  with  more  suspicion.  For  thousands  of 
gold  coins  a diamond  which  is  strung  on  a necklace  is  pur- 
chased, and  that  is  received  with  still  more  suspicion.  The 
Sikhs  who  fall  at  one  another’s  feet  and  become  the  dust 
of  one  another’s  feet,  are  equal  in  thought,  word,  and  deed 
to  saints,  and  become  freed  from  superstition  and  fear.^ 

There  is  sugar  in  a hornet’s  nest,  bees  swarm  together  and 
produce  honey.  Silk  and  satin  are  obtained  from  worms. 
Canvas  is  made  from  beaten  hemp.  Muslin  cometh  from 
cotton  seed.  The  lotus  with  which  the  bumble-bee  is 
enchanted  groweth  in  the  mire.  There  is  a jewel  in  the 
cobra’s  head.  The  diamond  is  a stone.  Musk  is  in  the 
deer’s  body.  The  sword  fashioned  from  steel  is  called 
bhagauti  (goddess).  Odour  from  the  civet  cat  perfumeth 
courts.  From  lowly  things  the  greatest  advantage  is  ob- 
tained.® 

Call  thyself  the  lowest  of  the  low,  become  a worm  and  be 
not  conceited.  Walk  in  the  Guru’s  way,  and  let  a thousand 
of  you  be  contained  in  one  worm-hole.*  Wherever  there  is 
the  smell  of  clarified  butter  and  sugar,  thither  throng  the 
worms  ; so  do  Sikhs  to  hear  the  Guru’s  words.  When  sugar 
is  spilled  in  sand,  worms  pick  up  the  grains.  Through  fear 
of  the  bhringi  ® the  ant  dieth,  but  the  bhringi  reanimateth 

1 XXIII. 

2 The  second,  third  and  fourth  lines  of  this  pauri  in  the  original 
mean  that  the  humble  man  goes  more  easily  and  securely  to  heaven 
than  he  who  holds  a high  position  in  this  world,  and  whose  actions 
are  therefore  more  severely  scrutinized.  XXIII. 

3 XXV. 

* That  is,  quarrel  not  with  one  another  if  shut  up  in  a small  space. 

® Bhringi  is  the  female  of  the  large  black  bee. 


248  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

it,  and  maketh  it  a bhringi  like  itself.^  He  who  receiveth  the 
Guru’s  instruction  feareth  to  do  evil  deeds.  The  Guru’s 
instruction  maketh  him  humble  and  again  exalteth  him. 
Thus  do  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  receive  the  reward  of  happiness.^ 

The  Guru’s  Sikhs  who  have  dispelled  their  pride  are 
continent  and  praiseworthy.® 

The  Guru’s  religion  and  his  teaching  : — 

Become  pious  by  association  with  the  saints  and  associate 
not  with  the  evil.  The  Guru’s  religion  conferreth  happiness. 
Make  not  thyself  miserable  in  other  sects.  Under  the 
Guru’s  instruction  abandon  caste,  acquire  the  excellent 
colour  of  tambol.*  Behold  the  Guru’s  school  and  put  no 
faith  in  the  six  schools.  Rely  upon  the  Guru’s  instruction. 
Be  not  led  away  by  any  other  love.  Act  according  to 
the  Guru’s  words  ; forsake  not  the  way  of  humility,  and, 
0 ye  pious,  derive  your  pleasure  from  love  and  devotion.® 

The  religion  of  the  Guru  conferreth  happiness  ; the  per- 
verse wander  in  every  direction.® 

The  Guru’s  hymn  is  the  Guru’s  image,  and  is  repeated 
in  the  company  of  the  saints.® 

How  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  love  the  society  of  the  holy: — 

The  people  of  the  four  castes  observe  the  customs  of  their 
castes  and  tribes.  The  believers  in  the  six  books  of  the  six 
schools  perform  six  duties  according  to  the  wisdom  of  their 
respective  spiritual  advisers.  Servants  go  and  salute  their 
masters,  merchants  deal  in  their  own  special  merchandise, 
agriculturists  sow  different  seeds  in  different  fields,  mechanics 
meet  mechanics  in  their  workshops — with  such  attention 
and  love  do  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  associate  with  the  company  of 
the  saints.® 

Examples  of  hypocrisy  and  superstition  : — 

^ If  a Sikh  were  to  die  through  fear  of  the  Guru,  the  Guru  would 
reanimate  him  and  make  him  like  himself. 

® XXV.  8 XXXVIII. 

* A compound  of  the  four  ingredients  betel-leaf,  betel-nut,  catechu, 
and  lime  dyes  the  lips  red;  when  the  four  castes  are  blended  together 
in  the  Sikhs  they  assume  an  excellent  colour. 

® V.  e XXIV. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS'S  ANALYSIS  249 

Into  the  practice  of  continence,  austerities,  hom,  feasts, 
Hindu  devotion,  penance  and  gifts,  hypocrisy  largely 
entereth ; incantations  and  spells  are  plays  on  a large 
scale.  The  worship  of  the  fifty-two  heroes,  of  the  eight 
joginis,  of  cemeteries  and  of  places  of  cremation  leads  to 
great  dissimulation.  Men  are  employed  in  purak,  kumbhak 
and  rechak,  in  the  performance  of  the  niwali  feat,  and  in  the 
drawing  up  of  their  breath  through  the  spinal  marrow.  Many 
employ  themselves  in  sitting  in  the  postures  of  the  Sidhs, 
and  obstinately  abandon  their  homes.  Hundreds  of  thou- 
sands of  such  tricks  have  I seen.  The  belief  in  the  philoso- 
pher’s stone,  the  jewel  in  the  serpent’s  head,  alchemy, 
miracles  is  all  a matter  of  ignorance.  Men  are  engaged  in 
the  worship  of  idols,  gods,  and  goddesses,  in  fasting,  uttering 
blessings  and  curses,  but  without  the  society  of  the  saints 
and  the  repetition  of  the  Guru’s  hymns  even  very  good 
men  find  not  acceptance.  The-  superstitious  have  bound 
themselves  with  a hundred  knots  of  falsehood.^ 

Paying  attention  to  omens,  the  nine  grihs,  the  twelve 
signs  of  the  Zodiac,  incantations,  magic,  divination  by  lines, 
and  by  the  voice  is  all  vanity.  It  is  vain  to  draw  conclusions 
from  the  cries  of  donkeys,  dogs,  cats,  kites,  malalis®  and 
jackals.  Omens  drawn  from  meeting  a widow,  a man  with 
a bare  head,  from  water,  fire,  sneezing,  breaking  wind, 
hiccups,  lunar  and  week  days,  unlucky  moments,  and 
conjunctions  of  planets  are  all  superstition.  If  a woman 
who  winks  at  every  man  try  by  deceit  to  inspire  belief  in 
her,  how  can  her  husband  feel  confidence  ? The  holy  who 
reject  such  superstitions  obtain  happiness  and  salvation.^ 
People  worship  departed  heroes,  ancestors,  satis,  deceased 
co-wives,  tanks,  and  pits,  but  all  this  is  of  no  avail.  They 
who  enjoy  not  the  company  of  the  saints  and  the  Guru’s 
instruction,  die  and  are  born  again  and  are  rejected  of  God. 
It  is  the  follower  of  the  Guru  who  weareth  God’s  name  as 
his  diamond  necklace.^ 

The  Guru’s  Sikhs  lead  a family  life,  but  wearing  a hair- 
1 V. 

* Maldli  is  a black  carnivorous  bird,  a little  larger  than  a sparrow. 


230 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


tuft  and  a janeu,  and  putting  the  latter  on  the  ear  when 
performing  offices  of  nature  are  all  superstition.  The 
Guru’s  Sikhs  recognize  divine  knowledge  and  the  advantage 
of  meditation  on  the  Supreme  Being  who  filleth  all  creation. 
When  they  associate  with  the  holy>  they  are  held  in  honour 
and  accepted  in  God’s  court.^ 

The  holy  man  rejecteth  the  worship  of  fire  with  its  seven 
colours,  trampleth  on  the  army  of  the  Bhairavs  and  the 
manifestations  of  Shiv,  and  is  not  pleased  with  omens  from 
the  seven  Rohinis,®  the  seven  days  of  the  week,  and  seven 
women  whose  husbands  are  alive.® 

The  thirteen  offerings  * made  by  Hindus  at  feasts  for  an- 
cestors have  led  men  astray  in  superstition.  Hundreds  of 
thousands  of  feasts  are  not  equal  to  drinking  the  water  in 
which  a Sikh  hath  washed  his  feet.  Hundreds  of  thousands 
of  sacred  feasts  and  offerings  are  not  equal  to  putting  one 
grain  into  a Sikh’s  mouth.  A Sikh  enjoyeth  supreme 
happiness  in  satisfying  another.® 

The  Sikhs  reject  superstition,  rejoicing,  and 
mourning : — 

On  the  occasion  of  Hindu  marriages  lascivious  songs  are 
sung  and  trumpets  played  on  the  part  of  the  bride  and 
bridegroom,  but  not  so  among  the  Sikhs.  People  weep 
and  utter  lamentations  for  the  dead,  but  the  Sikhs  on  such 
occasions  read  the  Sohila  in  the  company  of  the  saints. 
The  Sikhs  have  no  concern  with  the  Veds  or  the  books  of 
the  Moslems,  and  neither  rejoice  at  a birth  nor  mourn  at 
a death.  In  the  midst  of  desires  they  remain  free  from 
them.® 

1 VI. 

® Stars  in  the  fourth  lunar  mansion  specially  worshipped  by  Hindu 
women  to  save  them  from  widowhood. 

® VII.  The  women  indicated  are  the  wives ' of  the  immortal 
Rikhis  Marichi,  Atri,  Pulah,  Pulsat,  Kritu,  Angira,  Vishisht.  Gurumat 
Sudhakar, 

® An  umbrella,  shoes,  clothes,  a ring,  a waterpot,  a cloth  to  sit  on, 
five  cooking  vessels,  a stick,  a copper  vessel  for  distributing  water,  corn, 
cooked  food,  cash,  and  a sacrificial  thread.  Garur  Puran,  chap.  XIII. 

» VII.  ® V. 


BHAI  GUR’  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  251 

The  Sikhs  heed  not  omens  on  the  right  or  the  left.  They 
retrace  not  their  steps  on  seeing  a widow  or  a bare-headed 
man.  They  pay  not  attention  to  the  voices  of  birds  or  to 
sneezing.  They  worship  not  or  adore  gods  or  goddesses. 
They  allow  not  their  bodies  or  minds  to  wander.  The 
Guru’s  Sikhs  plant  a true  field  and  reap  the  harvest  thereof.^ 

Woman : — 

From  a temporal  and  spiritual  point  of  view  woman  is 
half  man’s  body  and  assisteth  to  salvation.  She  assuredly 
bringeth  happiness  to  the  virtuous.* 

The  perverse  compared  to  the  offspring  of  a 
courtesan : — 

A courtesan  who  hath  many  lovers  committeth  every 
species  of  sin.  An  outcast  from  her  people  and  her  country, 
she  bringeth  shame  on  her  father’s  and  mother’s  and  father- 
in-law’s  families.  She  is  ruined  herself  and  ruineth  others, 
and  giveth  them  to  eat  of  her  poison.  She  is  like  the  pipe 
which  lureth  the  deer,  or  the  lamp  which  burneth  the  moth, 
and  is  dishonoured  in  both  worlds.  She  is  a boat  of  stone 
which  drowns  its  passengers.  So  are  the  minds  of  the 
perverse  scattered  and  led  astray  by  superstition  in  the 
company  of  the  evil.  And  as  a courtesan’s  son  beareth  not 
his  father’s  name,  so  no  one  admitteth  the  ownership  of 
the  perverse.* 

The  condition  of  the  courtesan  : — 

An  abandoned  woman  leaving  her  father’s  and  father- 
in-law’s  house  becometh  shameless,  and  washeth  not  away 
her  evil  reputation.  Leaving  her  husband  she  enjoy eth 
her  lover.  How  can  she  be  happy  when  her  heart  is  drawn 
in  different  directions  ? She  heedeth  not  advice,  and  is 
despised  at  assemblies  of  mourning  and  rejoicing.  She 
weepeth  when  reproached  and  put  to  shame  at  every  house. 
She  is  arrested  for  her  sins,  and  punished  by  order  of  the 
court.  She  is  neither  dead  nor  alive,  she  sulfereth  misery  ; 
she  dwelleth  not  in  her  own  house  but  searcheth  for  another 
1 XX,  * V. 


252  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

to  ruin  it.  In  her  dubious  circumstances  she  weaveth  for 
herself  a garland  of  vice.^ 

The  man  who  adheres  not  to  one  religion  is  com- 
pared to  a courtesan  who  has  many  lovers  ; — 

The  prostitute  is  a decorated  and  ornamented  hell.  She 
deceiveth  by  her  airs  and  graces.  As  the  hunter’s  pipe 
allureth  the  deer,  so  do  her  songs  allure  men  to  their  de- 
struction. She  dieth  an  evil  death,  and  obtaineth  no 
entrance  into  God’s  court.  As  she  adhereth  not  to  one 
lover,  so  the  evil  person  who  followeth  two  religions  is  un- 
happy. He  is  like  a bad  rupee  nailed  to  the  coimter.  He 
is  ruined  himself  and  he  ruineth  others.^ 

The  fate  of  the  man  who  tries  to  follow  two 
religions  : — 

The  evil  man  who  followeth  two  religions  is  unhappy, 
and  is  as  useless  as  an  ostrich  which  cannot  fly,  which 
cannot  be  laden,  and  which  strutteth  ostentatiously.  The 
elephant  hath  one  set  of  teeth  for  display  and  another 
for  eating.  Goats  have  four  teats,  two  on  their  necks 
and  two  attached  to  their  udders.  The  latter  contain  milk, 
the  former  deceive  those  who  expect  milk  from  them. 
So  turning  one’s  attention  to  two  religions  leadeth  to 
disastrous  failure.^ 

A guest  remaineth  hungry  among  several  houses.  When 
a thing  held  in  partnership  is  lost,  scant  are  the  weeping  and 
mental  anxiety.  When  many  Dums  strike  a drum,  the 
discord  pleaseth  no  one.  The  crow  which  wandereth  from 
forest  to  forest  is  not  held  in  honour  ; how  can  it  be  happy  ? 
As  a prostitute’s  body  suffereth  from  having  many  lovers, 
so  they  who  worship  others  than  the  Guru  are  unhappy  in 
their  perversity.* 

The  religious  and  secular  observances  of  the 
Sikhs : — 

The  Sikhs  rising  at  the  ambrosial  hour  of  morning® 
bathe.  Collecting  their  thoughts  and  gently  meditating  on 
^ XXXIll.  * XXXIV. 

® When  three  hours  of  night  remain. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  253 

the  unfathomable  One,  they  repeat  the  Guru’s  Japji. 
They  then  go  into  the  company  of  saints,  and  sit  with 
them.  They  become  absorbed  in  remembering  and  loving 
the  Word,  and  sing  and  hear  the  Guru’s  hymns.  They 
pass  their  time  in  the  love  and  service  and  fear  of  God. 
They  serve  the  Guru  and  observe  his  anniversaries.  They 
sing  the  Sodar  in  company  and  heartily  associate  with  one 
another.  Having  read  the  Sohila  and  made  supplication 
at  night,  they  distribute  sacred  food.  Thus  do  the  holy 
Sikhs  gladly  taste  the  fruit  of  happiness.^ 

The  Sikhs  eat  little  food  and  drink  little  water.  They 
speak  little  and  boast  not.  They  sleep  little  and  only  in 
the  night,  nor  are  they  entangled  in  worldly  love.  When 
they  enter  a beautiful  house  they  covet  it  not.* 

Adultery  forbidden  : — 

A man  who  hath  one  wife  is  continent  and  calleth 
another’s  wife  his  daughter  or  his  sister.  To  covet  another 
man’s  property  is  forbidden  to  a Sikh,  as  the  swine  is  to 
the  Musalman  and  the  cow  to  the  Hindu.* 

The.  ordinary  secular  acts  of  a true  Sikh  are  equal 
to  all  the  religious  ceremonies  performed  by  members 
of  other  religious  denominations  : — 

The  polite  language  of  a Sikh  is  equal  to  a Hindu’s  devo- 
tion. A Sikh  beholdeth  God  ever)rwhere  with  his  eyes, 
and  that  is  equal  to  a Jogi’s  meditation.  When  a Sikh 
listeneth  attentively  to,  or  himself  singeth,  the  word  of  God, 
that  is  equal  to  the  five  ecstatic  sounds  in  the  brain  of  a 
Jogi.  When  a Sikh  doeth  anything  with  his  hands,  that 
is  equal  to  the  obeisance  and  prostration  of  Hindus.  When 
he  walketh  to  behold  the  Guru,  that  is  equal  to  an  extremely 
holy  circumambulation.  When  he  eateth  and  clotheth 
himself,  that  is  equal  to  the  performance  of  Hindu  sacrifice 
and  offering.  When  he  sleepeth,  that  is  equal  to  a Jogi’s 
suspended  animation.  A Sikh  withdraweth  not  his  thoughts 
from  where  he  hath  fixed  them.  When  a Sikh  leadeth  a 
family  life,  that  is  equal  to  salvation  while  alive.  A Sikh 
* VI.  * XX. 


254 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION: 


hath  no  fear  of  the  waves  of  the  world’s  ocean,  and  avarice 
entereth  not  his  heart.  He  hath  passed  beyond  the  region 
of  blessings  and  curses  and  uttereth  them  not.^ 

Who  are  acceptable  ? — 

They  who  have  restrained  the  five  evil  passions — ^lust, 
wrath,  covetousness,  worldly  love  and  pride — and  they 
who  have  embraced  the  five  virtues — truth,  contentment, 
mercy,  honesty,  and  an  understanding  of  the  Granth — are 
acceptable.® 

Vishnu’s  ten  avatars  and  the  ten  parbs  or  festivals 
of  the  Hindus  are  unavailing  : — 

Vishnu  hath  uselessly  assumed  ten  avatars  ; he  hath  not 
shown  unto  man  the  one  God  who  is  invisible.®  The  ten 
Hindu  festivals  observed  at  places  of  pilgrimages  are  not 
equal  to  the  Guru’s  anniversaries.® 

The  helplessness  of  the  Hindu  gods  and  of  the 
expounders  of  the  Hindu  religion  : — 

Millions  of  Brahmas^  have  received  the  Veds  without 
understanding  a letter  of  them. 

Millions  of  Shivs  who  sit  in  religious  attitude  recognize 
neither  the  form,  nor  the  outline,  nor  the  garb  of  the  Creator. 

Millions  of  incarnations  of  Shiv  in  human  form  have  not 
obtained  even  the  slightest  knowledge  of  God. 

Millions  of  serpents  which  repeat  ever  new  names  of  God 
daily,®  have  not  arrived  at  a knowledge  of  Him. 

They  who  have  lived  long  and  enjoyed  all  the  pleasures 
of  life,  the  followers  of  the  six  schools  of  philosophy,  and  of 

1 VI.  2 VII. 

® The  eighth  and  the  fourteenth  days  of  the  lunar  nnonth,  the  day 
when  there  is  no  moon,  the  day  of  the  full  moon,  the  first  day  of  the 
solar  month,  the  seventeenth  of  the  astronomical  yogas,  the  vernal 
equinox,  the  autumnal  equinox,  the  eclipse  of  the  sun,  the  eclipse 
of  the  mooa 

® Brahma  is  here  considered  merely  as  an  exalted  demigod  of  the 
Hindus. 

* The  serpent  Ananta  on  which  Vishnu  reposes  is  said  to  repeat  k 
thousand  new  names  of  God  daily. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS‘S  ANALYSIS  255 ' 

the  sects  of  Hinduism,  have  not  recognized  the  true  Name. 
Having  received  gifts  they  all  forget  the  Giver.^ 

The  Hindu  god  Brahma  cannot  be  accepted  as 
a moral  guide  : — 

Brahma  used  to  preach  to  others,  but  on  seeing  the  beauty 
of  Saraswati,  fell  in  love  with  her,  and  forgot  his  four  Veds.® 

Nor  can  man  expect  assistance  from  Ram  or 
Krishan ; — 

O fools,  ye  have  not  remembered  the  Creator,  and  ye  deem 
that  things  made  by  Him  are  God  Himself.® 

Why  the  feet  are  selected  for  reverence  and 
obeisance : — 

The  head  is  above,  the  feet  below,  yet  the  head  falleth  on 
the  feet  in  the  act  of  prostration.  They  support  the  weight 
of  the  mouth,  eyes,  nose,  ears,  and  hands.  Q.  What  have 
the  feet  done  that  they  should  be  worshipped  to  the  exclusion 
of  other  limbs  ? A.  They  go  to  the  Guru’s  asylum  and  to 
the  companionship  of  the  saints  They  go  to  the  best 
of  their  ability  to  do  good  acts.  May  the  Guru’s  Sikhs 
wear  my  skin  as  shoes  ! Very  fortunate  are  they  to  whose 
foreheads  the  dust  of  the  holy  man’s  feet  is  applied.* 

Scarcity  of  those  who  return  good  for  evil : — 

They  who  return  good  for  evil  are  few  in  the  world.* 

The  unity  of  God  : — 

As  there  is  but  one  sun  for  the  six  seasons  and  the  twelve 
months  of  the  year,  so  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  only  behold  the  one 
God.® 

Guru  Nanak’s  Guru  : — 

The  Supreme  Being,  the  All-pervading  God  is  the  divine 
Nanak’s  Guru.® 

* XVIII.  ® XII.  ® XV.  * IX. 

» XIII.  See  also  Sorath  XI. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


‘ 256 

His  extent : — 

Men  have  searched  for  God’s  limit,  but  have  not  found 
it.  They  who  went  to  search  for  His  limit  have  not  re- 
turned.^ 

His  court  is  upright  and  sincere  : — 

God’s  court  is  independent ; hypocrisy  entereth  not 
there.* 

Prayers  for  the  extension  of  Sikhism  : — 

May  there  be  hundreds  and  thousands  of  Sikhs  in  every 
city  and  hundreds  of  thousands  in  every  country  ! ® 

May  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  become  hundreds  of  thousands, 
yea,  countless  in  the  world,  and  may  a Sikh  temple  decorate 
every  place  ! * 

An  exhortation  to  the  same  effect : — 

Having  become  learned  in  the  Guru’s  wisdom,  enlighten 
the  world.® 

The  Sikhs  externally  and  internally  ; — 

The  true  Sikhs  dress  like  kings  and  think  not  of  mammon,* 

Philanthropy : — 

To  do  good  to  others  is  the  mark  of  a saint.* 

The  advantages  of  conferring  favours  on  Sikhs  : — 

To  feed  a Sikh  with  parched  gram  is  superior  to  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  horns  and  feasts,  and  to  cause  his  feet  to 
be  washed  is  superior  to  assemblages  at  places  of  pilgrimage 
on  the  occasion  of  the  ten  Hindu  festivals.  To  repeat  to 
a Sikh  the  Guru’s  hymns  is  equal  to  hundreds  of  thousands 
of  Hindu  devotional  exercises.  No  doubt  or  regret  re- 
maineth  when  man  hath  even  a glimpse  of  the  Guru.  Such 
a man  is  unscathed  in  the  terrible  ocean,  and  feareth  not 
its  waves.  He  who  embraceth  the  Guru’s  religion  hath 
passed  beyond  the  bounds  of  joy  or  grief  for  gain  or  loss.* 

1 XXII.  2 XXL  « XIII. 

« XXIII.  « XIX.  * XIV. 


, BHAI  GUR  DAS^S  ANALYSIS  257  - 
The  Apostate 

The  apostate  who  hath  renounced  the  true  Guru  becometh 
the  slave  of  a slave.  • Without  the  perfect  Guru  he 
wandereth  in  many  a birth 

He  who  renounceth  the  Guru,  who  is  the  ocean  of  happiness, 
wandereth  forlorn  in  the  world.  He  is  at  one  time  dashed 
down  by  the  waves,  and  at  another  burnt  in  the  fire  of 
pride.  He  is  bound  and  beaten  at  death’s  gate  and  buffeted 
by  Death’s  myrmidons.  Man  like  a herdsman  remaineth 
here  but  for  four  days,  yet  he  calleth  himself  Jesus  or  Moses. 
No  one  admitteth  his  own  deficiency,  but  wearieth  himself 
insisting  that  he  is  something  great.  The  ocean-diver 
worketh  and  exhausteth  himself  often  without  recompense. 
Without  the  Guru  there  is  painful  strife.^ 

Current  usages  without  the  Guru's  instruction  are 
of  no  avail : — 

Men  who  forget  the  true  Giver  beg  from  beggars.  Minstrels 
sing  martial  songs,  and  praise  the  strife  and  contests  of 
heroes.  Barbers  also  sing  songs.  They  who  reward  them 
for  the  sake  of  show  die  an  evil  death.  Bards  compose 
eulogies,  recite  them,  and  retail  false  genealogies.  It  is 
proper  for  priests  to  ask  for  alms  civilly.  Faqirs  who 
threaten  to  stab  themselves  if  they  receive  not  alms  or  who 
wear  wings,  may  beg  from  shop  to  shop,  but  without  the 
true  Guru  there  is  naught  but  weeping  and  lamentation.^ 

Inutility  of  Hindu  places  of  pilgrimage  : — 

They  who  leave  the  pilgrimage  of  the  true  Guru  and  go 
to  bathe  at  the  sixty-eight  places  of  the  Hindus,  sit  in 
contemplative  attitude  like  cranes,  and  rend  and  eat  the 
animals  in  the  water.  Elephants  may  be  washed,  but 
when  they  leave  the  water  they  bespatter  themselves  with 
dust.  The  gourd  sinketh  not  in  the  water,  nor  doth  its 
bitterness  depart  at  a place  of  pilgrimage.  If  a stone 
be  washed  in  water,  its  hardness  is  by  no  means  softened. 
The  superstition  of  the  perverse  man  departeth  not.  He 

1 XV. 

s 


SIKH.  IV 


258  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

wandereth  without  house  or  home,  and,  being  without  the 
true  Guru,  cannot  be  saved.^ 

Ask  not  for  a giver  from  whom  thou  shaft  have  to  appeal 
to  another.  Employ  not  a worthless  banker  who  will 
afterwards  defraud  thee.  Serve  not  such  a master  as  will 
render  thee  liable  to  Death’s  punishment.  Engage  not 
a physician  who  cannot  cure  the  malady  of  pride.  It  is  the 
filth  of  the  body  and  not  the  filth  of  evil  inclinations  which 
is  cleansed  by  bathing  at  places  of  pilgrimages.  Why  bathe 
at  them  ? Disciples  should  love  such  a priest  as  will  con- 
fer on  them  happiness  and  composure.® 

True  devotion  is  difficult  for  the  worldly  ; — 

Every  one  may  see  jewels,  but  few  can  appraise  them. 
Every  one  may  listen  to  songs  and  minstrelsy,  but  few  know 
how  to  fix  their  attention  on  the  Guru’s  words.^ 

The  holy  read  the  Guru’s  hymns  with  attention  to  their 
meaning.® 

Few  are  they  in  the  world  who  beheld  Guru  Nanak  and 
listened  to  and  obeyed  his  instruction.* 

The  perverse  fail  in  self-reliance  : — 

Beasts  and  creatures  without  instinct  are  superior  to  the 
perverse.  Man  from  being  reasonable  becometh  unreasonable 
and  looketh  to  another  for  help.  A beast  asketh  not  from 
a beast,  nor  doth  a bird  wait  on  a bird  for  assistance.* 

The  perverse  prefer  the  poison  of  sin  to  the  nectar 
of  virtue,  impure  blood  to  pure  milk  : — 

Vegetables  in  the  forest  bear  fruit  of  many  savours  and 
perfumes.  The  mango,  the  peach,  the  apple,  the  pome- 
granate, the  jaman,®  the  khirni,*  the  mulberry,  the  date, 
the  pilun,  the  wild  caper,  the  ber,  the  walnut — with  these 
the  cicala  who  eateth  the  akk  is  by  no  means  pleased.  It 
forsaketh  ambrosial  fruit  and  attacheth  itself  to  poison. 
If  a leech  be  applied  to  a female  breast,  it  will  not  drink 

* XV.  2 XXVII.  3 XIX.  * XXIX. 

® The  PruHus  Padus,  bird  cherry. 

* The  Mimusops  kauki. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  259 

milk  but  only  impure  blood,  so  the  perverse  man,  even  if 
he  hear  the  Guru’s  hymns  in  the  company  of  the  saints, 
uttereth  folly  in  his  conceit.  His  love  is  deception  and 
he  obtaineth  not  a position  in  God’s  court 

Truth  : — 

Devotion,  penance,  horn,  feasts,  fasting,  austerities, 
pilgrimages,  alms-gifts,  the  service  of  gods  and  goddesses, 
ceremonies,  are  all  inferior  to  truth,  and  so  are  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  devices.  Acting  truly  is  labelled  above  them 
all.2 

Falsehood  is  as  the  bitter  poisonous  akk ; truth  is  as  the 
sweet  mango.  Truth  is  a king  who  sleepeth  in  peace  ; 
falsehood  is  a thief  who  wandereth  without  a home.  The 
king  awake th,  seizeth  the  thief,  and  punisheth  him  in  his 
court.® 

Truth  is  beautiful  like  a turban  on  the  head.  Falsehood 
is  a polluted  clout.  Truth  is  a powerful  lion,  falsehood  a 
weak  lamb.  Deal  in  truth  and  thou  shalt  gain.  Why 
deal  in  falsehood  which  causeth  loss  ? Truth  is  a cur- 
rent coin,  falsehood  is  counterfeit  copper.  Hundreds  of 
thousands  of  stars  in  a dark  night  afford  light,  but  when 
one  sun  riseth  they  all  disappear.  In  the  same  way  false- 
hood disappeareth  before  truth.  Truth  and  falsehood  stand 
to  one  another  in  the  relation  of  a stone  to  an  earthen  vessel. 
If  a stone  be  thrown  at  an  earthen  vessel  it  is  the  earthen 
vessel  which  will  break.  If  the  earthen  vessel  be  thrown  at 
a stone  it  is  again  the  earthen  vessel  which  will  break.  In 
either  case  it  is  the  earthen  vessel  that  suffereth.® 

Falsehood  is  an  offensive  weapon,  truth  a defensive 
armour.  Falsehood  is  an  enemy  who  ever  looketh  for  his 
opportunity  of  attack,  truth  is  a real  friend  who  assisteth. 
Truth  is  a hero,  falsehood  amasseth  what  is  false.  Truth  is 
immovable  and  on  safe  ground  ; falsehood  standeth  and 
trembleth  on  an  insecure  basis.  Truth  seizeth  falsehood 
and  knocketh  it  down.  The  whole  world  may  see  this. 
Falsehood  which  is  deceitful  ever  aileth.  Truth  is  ever  safe 

1 XVII.  2 XVIII.  3 XXX. 

S2 


26o  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

and  whole.  Truth  ever  appeareth  true  and  falsehood 
false.* 

The  Sikhs  ought  to  contract  alliances  with  one 
another : — 

Let  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  contract  alliances  with  the  Guru’s 
Sikhs  * 

The  equality  of  the  Sikhs  and  their  distinctive 
salutation  : — 

When  Moslems  meet,  their  salute  is  ‘ Salam  alaikum  ! ’ A 
Jogi  saith  ‘ Adesh  ! ’ and  receiveth  in  reply  ‘ Adpurukh 
Adesh  ! ’ A Sanyasi  saith  ‘ O namo  ! ’ while  several  sects 
utter  ‘ Namo  Narayan  I ’ Men  bow  to  Brahmans  and 
receive  blessings.  But  the  Sikhs  of  the  true  Guru  say 
‘ Pairi  pawana  ’ — I fall  at  your  feet — which  is  the  correct 
salutation.®  Thus  the  rich  and  poor,  young  and  old,  are 
on  an  equality.  The  saints  exhale  holiness  as  the  sandal 
exhaleth  perfume.  There  is  no  distinction  among  them.^ 

The  universality  of  Guru  Nanak’s  religion  : — 

The  Ganges  and  Banaras  belong  to  the  Hindus,  Makka 
and  the  Kaaba  to  the  Musalmans,  but  Baba  Nanak’s  praises 
are  sung  in  every  house  to  the  music  of  cymbals,  drums,  and 
rebecks.® 

Holy  men  have  no  caste  and  are  not  liable  to  caste 
defilement : — 

As  ghi  is  never  impure,  so  the  saints  have  no  caste.® 

Follow  the  example  of  a tree  and  return  good  for 
evil : — 

It  is  the  specialty  of  a tree  that  it  returneth  good  for 
evil.  He  who  loppeth  its  branches  sitteth  in  its  shade,  and 
it  returneth  him  good  for  evil.  It  giveth  fruit  when  clods 

* XXX.  ® XX. 

® This  was  the  salutation  up  to  the  time  of  the  tenth  Guru.  He 
ordained  that,  when  Sikhs  met,  their  salutation  should  be,  Wa^guru 
ft  ka  Khdlsa,  Wahguru  ji  ki  Fatah. 

* XXIII.  » XXIV.  « XXV. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS'S  ANALYSIS  261 

are  thrown  at  it.  When  carved  into  a boat,  it  saveth  him 
who  carved  it.  The  perverse  who  have  not  the  endurance 
and  generosity  of  trees,  obtain  not  fruit,  while  for  the 
worshipper  countless  fruit*  is  produced.  Few  are  the  holy 
men  who,  like  trees,  serve  God’s  servants.  O God,  the 
world  is  his  slave,  who  hath  the  qualities  of  a tree.^ 

The  custom  of  the  world  is  to  return  good  for  good,  but 
the  custom  of  the  Guru  is  to  return  good  for  evil.^ 

Even  the  holiest  Hindus  violate  their  own  com- 
mandments : — 

The  ten  sects  of  Sanyasis  and  the  twelve  sects  of  Jogis  go 
to  strange  houses  to  beg,  and  eat  the  food  of  alms  which  is 
forbidden  them.^ 

The  fate  of  him  who  through  pride  rebels  against 
God 

If  any  one,  having  an  overweening  conceit  of  himself, 
rebel  against  a king,  the  traitor  is  put  to  death.  He  is 
not  allowed  a cot  to  bear  him,  a winding  sheet,  a funeral 
pyre,  or  a grave.  If  rupees  be  coined  not  at  the  mint,  they 
are  counterfeit,  and  the  coiners  wreck  their  lives.  If  any 
one  write  a forged  order,  it  shall  be  to  his  loss,  and  he  shall 
shed  bitter  tears.  He  shall  be  disgraced,  ride  on  a donkey, 
and  be  defiled  ; and  he  shall  have  to  wash  off  the  dust  that 
falleth  on  him.  If  a jackal  assume  sovereignty,  his  voice 
will  betray  him,  and  his  reign  shall  not  last  long.  He  who 
attacheth  himself  to  other  than  God  will  have  to  abide  in 
an  evil  place 

The  love  of  the  disciple  for  his  Guru  should  be 
superior  to  everything  that  has  been  said  or  sung  of 
lovers  in  all  ages  and  countries  : — 

The  lovers  Laili  and  Majnun  are  known  in  the  four 
quarters  of  the  world.  The  excellent  epic  of  Sorath  and 
Bija  is  sung  in  every  direction.  The  love  of  Sassi  and 
Punnu,  though  they  were  of  different  castes,  is  everywhere 
spoken  of.  The  fame  of  Sohni  who  used  nightly  to  swim 
the  Chinab  to  go  to  Mahinwal  is  well  known.  Ran] ha  and 
1 XXVI.  2 XXVIll. 


262 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Hir  are  renowned  for  the  love  they  bore  each  other.  But 
superior  to  all  is  the  love  the  disciples  bear  their  Guru. 
They  sing  it  at  the  ambrosial  hour  of  morning.^ 

Gur  Das  by  familiar  examples  continues  to  describe 
the  mutual  love  of  the  disciple  and  his  Guru  : — 

Opium-eaters  eschew  not  opium,  but  sit  down  together 
to  eat  it.  Gamblers  indulge  in  play  and  lose  their  stakes. 
Thieves  abandon  not  thieving  and  suffer  punishment  when 
caught.  Though  men  have  sold  their  clothes,  and  remain 
naked  to  provide  money  for  courtesans,  yet  are  they 
obstinate  in  doing  evil.  Sinners  commit  sin  and  abscond 
to  avoid  punishment,  but,  contrary  to  all  these,  the  Sikhs 
of  the  Guru,  whose  companionship  is  far  from  injurious, 
love  their  Guru,  and  he  absolveth  them  from  all  their  sins.* 

Gur  Das  in  his  three  hundred  and  twenty-third 
Kabit  has  given  different  expression  to  the  same 
idea : — 

A thief  abandoneth  not  thieving  through  fear  of  punish- 
ment. The  highwayman  looketh  for  an  opportunity  of 
highway  robbery.  Even  when  a man,  who  is  smitten 
with  a prostitute,  contracteth  disease  from  her,  he  still 
hesitateth  not  to  visit  her.  Even  when  the  gambler  hath 
lost  everything,  he  refraineth  not  from  gambling.  A 
drunkard  abstaineth  not  from  intoxicants,  but  continueth 
to  take  them  however  much  people  censure  him,  and 
however  much  medical  treatises  may  tell  him  of  their  evil 
effects.  The  base  renounce  not  the  sins  to  which  they 
have  once  become  addicted.  Wherefore  how  can  the  holy 
renounce  the  companionship  of  saints  ? 

The  love  of  the  Sikh  for  his  Guru  is  superior  to 
that  for  all  his  relations  : — 

There  are  three  degrees  of  relationship— first  those  of 
father,  mother,  sister,  brother,  and  their  offspring  and 
alliances ; second,  mother’s  father,  mother’s  mother, 
mother’s  sisters,  mother’s  brothers;  third,  father-in-law, 

» XXVII. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  263 

mother-in-law,  brother-in-law,  and  sister-in-law,  for  whom 
gold,  silver,  diamonds,  and  corals  are  amassed  ; but  dearer 
than  all  is  the  love  of  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  for  the  Guru. 
This  is  the  relationship  which  conferreth  happiness.^ 

The  eyes  are  not  satisfied  with  beholding  sights  and 
exhibitions  ; the  ears  are  not  satisfied  with  hearing  praise 
or  blame,  mourning  or  rejoicing  ; the  tongue  is  not  satisfied 
with  eating  what  affordeth  pleasure  and  delight ; the  nose 
is  not  satisfied  with  good  or  evil  odour ; nobody  is  satisfied 
with  his  span  of  life,  and  every  one  entertaineth  false  hopes ; 
but  his  disciples  are  satisfied  witli  the  Guru  ; theirs  is  the  true 
love.^ 

Love  none  but  the  Guru  ; all  other  love  is  false.  Enjoy 
no  other  relish  than  his,  for  it  would  be  poisonous.  Be  not 
pleased  with  any  one  else’s  singing,  for  listening  to  it  would 
bring  no  happiness.  All  acts  not  according  to  the  Guru’s 
teaching  are  evil,  and  bear  evil  fruit.  Walk  only  in  the 
way  of  the  true  Guru.  In  all  other  ways  there  are  thieves 
who  cheat  and  rob.  The  love  of  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  for  the 
Guru  causeth  their  souls  to  blend  with  the  True  One.^ 

The  chakor  loveth  the  moon  and  gazeth  at  it  continually. 
The  chakwi  loveth  the  sun,  and  on  seeing  it  is  happy.  The 
lotus  is  known  to  love  the  water,  and  showeth  his  smiling 
face  therein.  The  peacock  and  the  chatrik  shout  with  joy 
on  seeing  the  sable  clouds.  A husband  is  dear  to  his  wife, 
a mother  taketh  care  of  her  children  ; so  a disciple  loveth 
his  Guru  and  accompanieth  him  to  the  end.^ 

The  fate  of  him  who  is  not  totally  devoted  to  the 
Guru : — 

He  who  seeth  not  the  Guru  is  blind,  even  though  he  have 
eyes.  He  who  listeneth  not  to  the  Guru’s  words  is  deaf, 
even  though  he  have  ears.  He  who  singeth  not  the  Guru’s 
hymns  is  dumb,  even  though  he  have  a tongue.  Even 
though  he  who  smelleth  not  the  perfume  of  the  Guru’s  feet 
have  a nose,  it  is  as  if  it  were  cut  off.  He  who  doefh  not 
the  Guru’s  work,  even  though  he  have  hands,  is  without 
them,  and  waileth  in  sorrow.  He  in  whose  heart  the  Guru’s 

1 XXVII. 


264  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

instruction  abideth  not,  is  without  understanding  and 
obtaineth  not  entrance  into  God’s  court.  Let  no  one  abide 
with  such  a fool.^ 

The  Guru’s  spiritual  liberality  : — 

The  true  Guru  bestoweth  the  four  boons  which  are  spoken 
of  even  though  the  Sikhs  ask  not  for  them.* 

The  Sikh  catechism  : — 

Q.  What  is  a Sikh’s  ablution  ? A.  To  receive  the  Guru’s 
instruction  and  with  it  wash  away  the  filth  of  evil  inclinations. 
Q.  What  is  a Sikh’s  badge  ? A.  A necklace  of  the  Guru’s 
words.  Q.  What  is  a Sikh’s  life  ? A.  To  be  dead  while 
alive  and  to  renounce  pride.  Q.  What  is  a Sikh’s  duty  ? 
A.  To  obey  the  order  of  his  Guru.* 

Covet  not  thy  neighbour’s  wife  or  property,  and 
indulge  not  in  slander  : — 

When  we  see  other  men’s  wives  beautiful,  we  should 
consider  them  as  our  mothers,  sisters,  and  daughters. 
Another’s  property  should  be  to  the  Sikhs  as  the  swine  to 
the  Muhammadan  and  the  cow  to  the  Hindu.  When 
the  Sikhs  hear  slander  of  others,  they  should  say  ‘ There 
is  none  worse  than  ourselves.’  * 

A Sikh  ought  to  be  ashamed  to  hear  slander  of  another. 
Even  if  a holy  man  have  miraculous  power,  he  should  not 
use  it.^ 

Acceptance  of  God’s  will  inculcated  ; — 

He  to  whom  the  Master’s  will  is  pleasing,  is  pleasing  to 
the  Master.  He  who  obeyeth  the  Master’s  will  is  honoured. 
The  Master  causeth  his  order  to  be  obeyed.  Man  is  a guest 
in  this  world.  Wherefore  he  should  relinquish  claims  and 
cease  to  urge  them.® 

God  is  the  True  Guru  ; — 

The  supreme  God;  the  perfect  God,  the  primal  Being  is 
the  True  Guru.® 


1 XXXII. 


* XXVIII. 


® XXIX. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  265 
Loyalty : — 

Take  not  arms  against  thy  sovereign 

The  loyalty  of  a .man'  who  hath  eaten  his  master’s  salt  is 
proved  when  he  falleth  for  him  in  the  field  of  battle.  He 
who  striketh  off  the  heads  of  his  enemies  is  known  as  the 
bravest  of  the  brave. ^ 

Even  though  some  evil  persons  were  saved,  that 
is  no  excuse  for  committing  sin  : — 

Even  supposing  Putana  was  saved  because  she  was  killed 
by  Krishan  when  she  sought  to  administer  poison  to  him,  that 
should  not  be  deemed  a good  act.  Even  if  the  courtesan 
be  held  to  be  saved  because  she  had  taught  her  parrot  to 
repeat  God’s  name,  that  is  no  reason  why  a woman  should 
go  to  a man’s  house  for  fornication.  Even  if  Valmik  who 
used  to  commit  robbery  was  saved  on  meeting  a holy  man, 
that  is  no  reason  why  one  should  fearlessly  rob  on  the  high- 
way. People  say  the  huntsman  who  shot  Krishan  was 
saved,  but  that  is  no  reason  for  snaring  animals.  Even  if 
the  butcher  Sadhna  was  saved,  a man  should  not  recklessly 
take  life.  A boat  may  transport  gold  and  iron,  but  they 
are  not  of  the  same  colour  or  value.  It  is  not  right  to  hope 
for  salvation  by  doing  evil.^ 

The  good  and  the  evil  contrasted  : — 

Enmity  remaineth  not  in  the  mind  of  the  good  man,  nor 
friendship  in  the  mind  of  the  bad  man,  as  a line  made  in 
water  quickly  vanisheth.  The  good  man  forgetteth  not 
friendship,  nor  the  evil  man  enmity,  as  a line  made  on  a 
stone  is  not  readily  effaced.  Neither  the  desires  of  the 
evil  man  to  do  evil  nor  of  the  good  man  to  do  good  are 
ultimately  fulfilled.  The  good  man  doeth  not  good,  nor  the 
evil  man  evil.® 

The  difference  between  the  holy  and  the  unholy : — 

Why  should  the  branches  of  the  bead-tree  be  compared 
with  sweets  ? No  one  calleth  the  akk  berries  mangoes. 
Gilt  jewels  are  not  equal  to  gold.  Crystal  is  not  equal  to 
1 XXXIV.  2 XXX.  ® XXXI. 


266 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


diamonds.  Buttermilk  and  milk  are  both  white,  but  of 
different  quality  and  taste — so  the  holy  and  unholy  are 
distinguished  by  their  attributes.^ 

The  difference  between  associating  with  a wise  man 
and  a fool : — 

He  who  abideth  with  a sensible  man  will  be  satisfied  with 
humble  fare,  but  he  who  abideth  with  a fool  will  not  be 
satisfied  even  with  an  empire.® 

Associate  not  with  a fool : — 

A dog  in  anger  biteth  a man  and  he  becometh  mad.  In 
affection  it  licketh  him  and  he  becometh  disgusted.  When 
charcoal  is  cool  it  blackeneth  the  hands,  but  when  it  is  hot 
it  burneth  them.  A snake  which  catcheth  a musk-rat 
becometh  blind  if  it  let  it  go,®  and  leprous  if  it  swallow  it. 
If  a tumour  be  cut  it  causeth  pain  ; and  if  it  be  allowed  to 
remain  it  is  unseemly.  In  the  same  way,  if  a family  have 
a bad  son,  they  suffer  blame  whether  they  abandon  him  or 
receive  him.  Contract  neither  friendship  nor  enmity  with 
a fool.  Remain  aloof  from  both  passions.  In  either  camp- 
ing-place there  is  misery.® 

A female  camel  once  swallowed  a melon  which  stuck 
in  her  throat.  A surgeon  was  called.  He  put  a stone 
under  the  lower  part  of  the  camel’s  neck,  and  with 
another  stone  struck  the  upper  part  and  thus  crushed 
the  melon.  The  surgeon’s  assistant,  who  saw  the 
operation,  gave  out  that  he  too  was  an  accomplished 
surgeon,  and  set  up  in  business  on  his  own  account. 
When  an  old  woman  went  to  him  for  treatment  for 
some  illness,  he  assumed  that  a melon  had  lodged  in 
her  throat  also,  and  proceeded  to  cure  her  as  his 
master  had  cured  the  camel.  The  result  was  that  the 
inexperienced  surgeon  killed  the  old  lady. 

Gur  Das  tells  the  story  as  follows  : — 

A surgeon  cured  a female  camel.  He  put  one  stone 
beneath  the  camel’s  neck  and  struck  the  upper  part  of  the 

1 XXXV.  a XXXII. 

a The  musk-rat  scratches  out  its  eyes. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  267 

camel’s  neck  with  another,  and  thus  broke  the  melon. 
His  servant  thought  he  had  mastered  the  surgical  art.  He 
killed  an  old  woman  and  there  was  general  female  lamenta- 
tion. The  people  seized  the  pretended  surgeon,  and  gave 
him  a sound  beating,  upon  which  his  senses  returned  to  him. 
When  he  was  questioned,  he  confessed  the  whole  circum- 
stance, and  his  imposture  was  then  exposed.  Sensible  men 
took  and  expelled  him,  for  a glass  bracelet  cannot  rank  with 
jewels.  A fool  has  no  sense.  A bamboo  could  never  equal 
sugar-cane.  A fool  hath  only  the  body  of  a man  ; he  was 
created  a brute. ^ 

Associate  not  with  the  deceitful  and  the  perverse: — 

If  a man  enter  a house  of  lamp-black  his  face  will  be 
blackened.  If  seed  be  sown  in  a barren  field,  there  will 
be  no  produce.  If  a child  swing  in  a broken  swing,  he 
will  fall  and  kill  himself.  If  a man  who  knoweth  not  how 
to  swim,  lean  on  the  shoulders  of  another  equally  ignorant, 
how  shall  he  cross  a deep  river  ? Abide  not  with  him  who 
setteth  fire  to  his  own  house,  and  then  goeth  to  sleep.  Such 
is  the  society  of  the  deceitful  and  the  perverse.  A man  is 
ever  in  fear  of  his  life.^ 

Gur  Das  describes  an  uproar  raised  by  the  folly  of 
fools  : — 

A man  after  bathing  at  a well  forgot  his  turban  and  went 
home  bare-headed.  The  women  of  his  house  were  silly, 
and  on  seeing  the  unusual  circumstance  began  to  beat 
their  heads  as  if  a relation  had  died,  for  an  Indian  appearing 
bare-headed  is  a sign  of  mourning.  He  on  seeing  the  women 
weeping  began  to  cry  aloud  incontinently.  Men  and 
women  hearing  this  assembled  to  mourn.  A barber’s  wife 
asked  in  whose  name  she  should  mourn.  The  man’s  daughter- 
in-law  said,  ‘ Go  and  ask  my  father-in-law  the  name  of  the 
man  who  is  dead.’  There  is  an  uproar  raised  in  the 
company  of  fools  like  the  cawing  of  rooks 

The  Hindus  and  Moslems  may  hate  one  another, 
1 XXXII.  2 xxxiv. 


268  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

though  they  have  both  sprung  from  a common 
stock  : — 

From  the  union  of  one  couple  two  brothers  were  born,  and 
these  two  brothers  struck  out  two  ways.  The  Hindus  and 
the  Muhammadans  are  both  made  out  of  the  five  elements, 
but  two  names  are  given  to  the  same  substance.^ 

It  is  not  the  fault  of  the  Sikh  religion  if  an  occasional 
Sikh  obey  not  the  Guru's  instructions  and  grow 
wicked : — 

When  moth  ^ is  parched  over  the  fire  some  grains  remain 
hard.  This  is  not  the  fault  of  the  fire.  If  one  fruit  out 
of  a thousand  go  bad,  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  tree.  It  is 
not  the  fault  of  water  that  it  will  not  rest  on  a hill.  If  a sick 
man  die  from  not  observing  the  regimen  prescribed  for  him, 
it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  doctor.  If  a barren  woman  have  no 
offspring,  it  is  not  her  husband’s  fault.  In  the  same  way 
if  an  occasional  perverse  man  accept  not  the  Guru’s  instruc- 
tion, it  is  his  own  and  not  the  Guru’s  fault.® 

The  apologue  of  the  jackal  which  fell  into  a dyer's 
vat  applied  to  the  boastful  and  hypocritical. 

A jackal  fell  into  a dyer’s  vat  and  was  dyed.  He  went 
into  the  forest  and  pretended  to  be  its  king.  The  beasts 
waited  at  his  door  while  he  sat  down  in  his  glory.  In- 
toxicated with  falsehood  and  pride,  he  began  to  exercise 
his  authority.  But  when  he  opened  his  lips  to  speak,  he 
spoiled  his  disguise,  as  radish-eaters  make  themselves  known 
by  their  belching.  So  the  Mina  who  practiseth  falsehood 
and  disgraceful  acts,  was  ruined  at  God’s  court.^ 

Pretended  gurus  are  like  children  at  play  : — 

On  moonlight  nights  children  play  together.®  They 
personate  kings  and  subjects.  Some  take  armies  on  ex- 
peditions, and  some  run  away.  They  pay  land  revenue  in 
potsherds.  Being  'yery  fickle  they  leave  off  the  play  in 

^ XXXIII.  2 is  an  Indian  pulse. 

8 XXXIV.  4 xxxvi. 

® This  is  specially  the  case  before  and  after  the  hot  season  in  India. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  269 

an  instant  and  run  home.  So  they  who,  though  possessing 
no  merits,  call  themselves  gurus,  are  counterfeit  and  evil,^ 

It  is  impossible  to  dispense  with  the  Guru  : — 

The  mice  fashioned  a bell  to  put  on  the  cat’s  neck,  but 
they  could  not  do  so.  The  flies  resolved  to  bathe  in  ghi, 
but  they  never  extricated  themselves.  Insects  being  short- 
lived have  not  time  to  divest  themselves  of  impurity  of 
birth  ; if  they  did,  how  could  they  live  ? The  bhambiris  * 
would  live  in  the  rainy  season  if  they  could,  but  they  are 
killed  by  the  rain.  The  kulangs  would  remain  in  the  plains 
after  Baisakli,  but  they  cannot  live  in  heat.  People  may 
say  they  can  dispense  with  the  (iuru,  but  without  him 
salvation  cannot  be  obtained : men  would  wander  in 
transmigration  .1 

Secret  initiation  is  not  necessary.  Hindus  of  all 
sects  believe  that  until  a guru  secretly  communicates 
the  word  of  initiation  into  the  disciple’s  ear,  salvation 
is  not  obtained.  Gur  Das  on  the  contrary  writes  : — 

Wahguru  is  the  Guru’s  spell ; by  repeating  it  pride 
departeth.® 

Gur  Das  indulges  in  self-abasement : — 

The  owl  is  not  pleased  on  beholding  the  sun  or  the  chakwi 
the  moon.  The  simmal-tree  yieldeth  no  fruit,  the  bamboo 
groweth  near  the  sandal  but  is  not  perfumed  thereby.  If  you 
give  milk  to  a serpent  to  drink,  it  parteth  not  with  its  poison, 
nor  showeth  it  any  gratitude.  The  bitterness  of  the  colo- 
cynth  departeth  not,  the  tick  clingeth  to  the  cow’s  udder, 
but  drinketh  blood  instead  of  milk.  All  these  demerits 
reside  in  me.  If  any  one  do  me  a favour,  I return  it  with 
an  injury.  Garlic  hath  never  the  perfume  of  musk.* 

I am  wicked  and  sinful ; I am  an  apostate  and  evil, 

1 XXXVI. 

® Certain  Indian  insects  which  frequent  pools  and  rivers  in  the 
rainy  season. 

® XIII.  Gur  Das  means  that  there  should  be  no  secrecy  in  the 
initiation  of  a Sikh.  * VI. 


270 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


I am  a thief,  adulterer,  and  gambler  ; I covet  my  neighbour’s 
house,  I am  a slanderer,  unrighteous,  dishonest,  deceitful ; 
I deceive  the  country.  I indulge  in  lust,  wrath,  pride, 
greed,  and  worldly  love.  I kill  those  who  trust  me  ; I am 
ungrateful  and  unfaithful ; who  will  defend  me  ? The  true 
Guru  femembereth  and  pardoneth  his  disciples  and  singers.^ 

There  is  not,  there  was  not,  and  there  never  will  be  such 
an  ungrateful  person  as  I.  There  is  none  so  dishonest  or 
so  devoid  of  merit  as  1.  There  is  no  such  slanderer  as  I 
who  have  taken  on  my  head  the  heavy  sin  of  slandering  the 
Guru,  There  is  none  so  great  an  apostate  as  I who  have 
committed  the  heinous  sin  of  apostasy  from  the  Guru. 
There  is  none  so  evil  as  I who  have  committed  the  sin  of 
bearing  enmity  to  him  who  is  without  it.  There  is  no  such 
treacherous  friend  as  I who  sit  in  a devotional  attitude 
like  a crane  looking  out  for  fish  to  devour.  The  great  sin 
which  I have  committed  in  eating  with  those  who  do  not 
obey  the  Guru’s  words  departeth  not.  There  is  no  such 
backslider  as  I who  have  renounced  the  Guru’s  religion 
and  attached  myself  to  a false  one.  I am  called  a disciple, 
but  I meditate  not  on  the  Word  ^ 

Filial ‘duty  inculcated  : — 

A child  is  conceived  by  the  union  of  father  and  mother, 
and  while  in  the  womb  the  mother  is  full  of  hope.  She 
abstaineth  from  delicacies,  and  is  shy  to  appear  in  public. 
She  putteth  her  feet  cautiously  on  the  ground.  She  carrieth 
for  nine  months  and  suffereth  in  giving  birth  to  the  dear 
boy.  She  then  nourisheth  him  with  great  trouble,  and  must 
be  careful  in  what  she  eateth  and  drinketh.  She  suckleth 
and  cautiously  giveth  him  infant’s  medicine.  The  parents 
provide  him  with  clothing  and  food,  and  take  thought  for 
his  betrothal  and  education.  They  entrust  him  to  a tutor, 
and  as  in  duty  bound  spend  their  earnings  on  him.  The 
child  should  discharge  this  load  of  debt  to  the  parents.^ 

Filial  ingratitude  reprobated  : — 

His  parents  are  happy  while  performing  the  boy’s  be- 


BHAI  GUR  DAS’S  ANALYSIS  271 

trothal.  His  mother  cannot  contain  herself  with  joy,  and 
she  singeth  festal  strains.  When  the  boy  is  married,  she  is 
delighted  and  singeth  marriage  songs.  She  voweth  many 
offerings  when  her  son  bringeth  his  wife  home.  In  return 
for  all  this  the  daughter-in-law  ever  giveth  her  husband 
bad  advice,  and  slandereth  her  mother-in-law  with  the  object 
of  living  separate  from  her.  The  son  then  becometh  bad, 
forgetteth  the  countless  favours  conferred  on  him  by  his 
mother,  and  obligeth  her  to  grind  corn  for  the  house.  Few 
sons  are  dutiful  as  Sarwan.^ 

Filial  ingratitude  is  the  result  of  marriage  : — 

The  wife  the  enchantress  bewitcheth  her  husband.  When 
he  was  born  he  forgot  his  God,  and  now  that  he  is  married 
he  forgetteth  his  parents.^ 

A man  should  never  under  any  pretext  forsake  his 
parents : — 

He  who  forsaketh  his  parents  to  listen  to  the  Veds,  shall 
never  know  their  secret.  He  who  forsaketh  his  parents 
to  perform  penance  in  the  forest,  shall  go  astray  in  the 
wilderness.  He  who  forsaketh  his  parents  to  worship  gods 
and  goddesses,  shall  lose  the  reward  of  his  devotion.  He 
who  forsaketh  his  parents  to  bathe  in  the  sixty-eight  places 
of  pilgrimages,  shall  find  them  a whirlpool  to  drown  him. 
He  who  forsaketh  his  parents  to  give  alms,  shall  be  deemed 
without  faith  or  knowledge.  He  who  forsaketh  his  parents 
to  fast,  shall  die  and  be  born  again  and  stray  in  superstition. 
Such  a person  knoweth  nothing  of  God  or  the  Guru.® 

The  Sikhs  claim  superiority  to  all  races  : — 

The  Sunni,  the  Shiah,  and  the  Rafazi  sects  find  favour 
with  many,  but  they  are  all  pagans  and  hypocrites  and  lost 
in  superstition.  The  Christians  and  the  Jews  wander  dis- 
traught in  their  pride.  The  Europeans,  the  Armenians, 
and  the  Turks  are  filled  with  vainglory.  Faqirs  dressed 

^ A man  who  most  diligently  served  his  blind  parents.  He  was 
slain  by  mistake  by  Dasarath,  Ram  Cbandar’s  father.  XXXVII. 

® XXXVII. 


272 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


in  black,  qalandars,  darweshes,  and  twice  as  many  more 
are  not  equal  to  one  hair  of  a Sikh  who  hath  dedicated 
himself  to  the  Guru.^ 

Truth  is  hidden  both  from  the  Hindus  and  the 
Muhammadans  ; both  sects  have  gone  astray  : — 

There  are  four  castes  of  Hindus  and  four  sects  of  Muham- 
madans in  the  world.  The  members  of  both  religions  are 
selfish,  jealous,  proud,  bigoted,  and  violent.  The  Hindus 
make  pilgrimages  to  Hardwar  and  Banaras  ; the  Muhamma- 
dans to  the  Kaaba  of  Makka.  Circumcision  is  dear  to  the 
Muhammadans ; tilaks  and  janeus  to  the  Hindus.  The 
Hindus  invoke  Ram,  the  Muhammadans  Rahim ; but  in 
reality  there  is  only  one  God.  Since  they  have  both  for- 
gotten their  sacred  books,  worldly  greed  and  the  devil 
have  led  them  astray.  Truth  is  hidden  from  both  ; the 
Brahmans  and  the  Maulvis  kill  themselves  by  their  ani- 
mosities. Neither  sect  shall  find  salvation.® 

The  Hindus  read  the  Veds  ; the  Sufis  and  the  Muham- 
madans the  books  of  Islam.  The  Muhammadans  abstain 
from  food  during  the  Ramzan  and  read  Arabic  prayers  ; 
the  Hindus  rack  their  brains  over  idolatrous  worship  and 
periodical  fastings.  The  founders  of  the  six  Hindu  systems 
preach  each  a different  doctrine.  The  Hindus  have  ten 
incarnations,  the  Muhammadans  the  Merciful  One.  Both 
sects  practise  bigotry  and  violence.® 

When  Hindus  and  Moslems  lay  aside  superstition, 
they  form  one  body  of  Sikhs  who  quaff  the  cup  of 
God’s  love  and  obtain  final  deliverance  : — 

They  who  are  intoxicated  with  the  cup  of  love  in  the 
Guru’s  private  court,  behold  the  Unseen  One.  The  Sikhs 
spurn  as  well  the  hundred  and  eight-beaded  rosary  of  the 
Hindus  as  the  hundred-beaded  rosary  of  the  Muhammadans. 
The  Sikhs,  treating  both  rosaries  alike,  repeat  not  the  name 
Ram  or  Rahim  at  every  bead.  The  two  sects  united  form 
one  body  of  Sikhs,  and  are  not  then  separately  mentioned, 
so  when  one  speaketh  of  the  game  of  chaupar  the  pieces  are 
1 XXXVIII.  2 1.  3 XXXIX. 


BHAI  GUR  DAS'S  ANALYSIS 


273 


not  spoken  of.  The  Sikhs  rejecting  Shiv  and  his  energy 
Durga  arrive  at  their  own  home  by  means  of  the  cup  of 
God’s  love.  Unaffected  by  the  three  qualities,  they  attain 
the  fourth  degree  of  salvation.  Baba  Nanak  proclaimed 
the  true  Word,  and,  by  causing  the  true  Sikhs  to  fix  their 
attention  on  it,  blended  them  with  the  True  One  who  is  the 
true  King  to  whom  truth  is  pleasing.^ 

Extracts  from  Gur  Das's  Kabit  against  idolatry  : — 

As  a virtuous  woman  ever  thinketh  on  her  Iiusband  and 
desireth  not  to  behold  another  man  ; 

As  the  chatrik  never  longeth  for  lakes,  rivers,  or  seas, 
but  for  cloud-drops,  and  singeth  the  praises  of  the  Beloved  ; 

As  the  chakor  in  no  way  desireth  to  behold  the  sun, 
but  in  every  way  longeth  for  the  moon,  which  is  dearer  to 
it  than  life  ; 

So  do  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  naturally  refrain  from  worshipping 
other  gods,  but  not  insultingly  or  disdainfully. 

If  a man  look  at  two  mirrors  no  distinct  reflection  will 
be  formed.  If  a man  put  his  feet  in  two  boats,  he  cannot 
reach  the  shore. 

If  a man  go  in  two  directions,  his  feet  will  be  worn  out  ; 
if  a man  travel  by  two  roads,  he  will  be  puzzled  and  forget 
where  to  put  down  his  feet. 

When  there  are  two  kings,  the  subject  cannot  be  happy  ; 
when  a woman  has  two  husbands,  she  cannot  be  chaste. 

When  a Sikh  of  the  Guru  accepteth  the  support  of  other 
gods,  accursed  is  his  life  in  this  world,  and  hereafter  punish- 
ment from  Death  shall  await  him. 

According  to  the  rules  of  society,  the  sacred  books,  and 
the  teaching  of  divines,  it  is  proper  for  a chaste  woman  to 
serve  her  lord  in  thought,  word,  and  deed. 

To  the  chaste  woman  repetition  of  idols’  names,  ablutions, 
alms,  austerities,  penance,  pilgrimage,  fasting,  worship, 
and  daily  ceremonies  are  of  no  avail. 

1 XXXIX 
T 


SIKH.  IV 


274  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Burnt-offerings,  feasts,  food  offered  to  idols,  the  worship 
of  gods  and  goddesses,  the  singing  of  hymns  and  visiting 
strange  temples  are  all  vanity  of  vanities. 

So  among  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  One  Prop  is  the  best ; medita- 
tion, contemplation  and  remembrance  of  other  gods  is 
harlotry. 


GURU  HAR  RAI  BLESSING  YOUNG  PHUL 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI,  THE 
SEVENTH  GURU 


Chapter  I 

We  have  seen  that  Guru  Har  Gobind,  the  sixth 
Guru,  had  five  sons.  Baba  Gurditta,  Suraj  Mai, 
Ani  Rai,  Baba  Atal,  and  Teg  Bahadur.  Baba 
Gurditta,  who  predeceased  his  father,  left  two  sons, 
Dhir  Mai  and  Har  Rai.  Dhir  Mai  had  proved  disloyal 
and  disobedient  to  his  grandfather.  Guru  Har 
Gobind,  wishing  as  far  as  possible  to  observe  the 
custom  of  primogeniture,  and  seeing  Har  Rai  steady, 
pious,  and  in  every  respect  fitted  for  the  Guruship, 
bestowed  it  on  him  with  all  due  formality  and 
ancient  ceremony. 

Guru  Har  Rai  was  born  of  Gurditta’ s wife,  Nihal 
Kaur,  n^e  Natti,  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  light 
half  of  the  moon  of  Magh,  Sambat  1687,  A.  D.  1631. 
He  was  very  attentive  to  his  devotions  and  ablutions, 
and  loved  to  repeat  to  his  disciples  the  following 
verses  of  Gur  Das  : — 

Rise  in  the  end  of  the  night,  instil  into  men’s  minds  the 
merits  of  the  Name  and  of  charity. 

Speak  civilly,  be  humble,  do  good  to  others  with  the  gifts 
of  your  hands. 

Sleep,  eat,  and  speak  little  ; receive  the  Guru’s  instruc- 
tion. 

Live  on  your  earnings  ; do  good  works  ; even  if  you  are 
great,  be  not  conceited. 

Day  and  night  go  and  associate  with  the  saints  and  sing 
with  them  the  Gurus’  hymns. 

Regale  your  hearts  with  the  pleasure  which  the  true 
Gurus’  words  and  instruction  afford. 

Amid  hopes  remain  without  hopes.^ 

1 War  XXVIII. 


276  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Guru  employed  every  device  that  sleep  might 
not  overcome  him,  and  prevent  his  matutinal  devo- 
tions which  Were  the  object  of  his  earnest  solicitude. 
Although  many  rich  men  came  to  visit  him,  he  made 
no  distinction  between  rich  and  poor,  and  centred 
his  hopes  only  in  God.  His  food  was  very  simple. 
He  desired  not  dainty  dishes,  and  thanked  God  for 
all  His  mercies.  Whatever  valuable  offerings  were 
made  him  he  used  to  spend  on  his  guests.  He  was 
always  surrounded,  as  it  were,  by  a halo  of  visitors,  on 
.whom  he  conferred  delight. 

During  Guru  Har  Rai’s  stay  in  Kiratpur  a man 
named  Bhagtu  of  the  Bairar  tribe,  who  had  given 
Guru  Arjan  great  assistance  in  excavating  his  tank, 
waited  on  him,  said  he  was  a cultivator  by  trade, 
and  asked  for  employment.  The  Guru  engaged  him 
to  superintend  the  cultivation  of  his  land.  Once, 
as  Bhagtu  was  employed  as  overseer  of  the  Guru’s 
reapers,  they  complained  that  he  did  not  cause  suffi- 
cient ghi  to  be  put  into  their  bread.  At  that  time 
Bhagtu  happened  to  see  a man  called  Sangatia  passing 
by  with  hides  of  ghi,  and  asked  him  to  sell  it,  and 
he  would  receive  payment  on  the  morrow.  Sangatia 
agreed ; the  ghi  was  purchased  and  distributed 
among  the  labourers.  Sangatia  went  home,  and, 
to  his  surprise,  next  morning  found  the  hides  he 
thought  he  had  emptied  filled  with  ghi  as  before. 
He  returned  to  Bhagtu  to  inform  him.  Bhagtu 
offered  him  the  stipulated  price.  Sangatia  fell  at 
his  feet,  and  with  thankfulness  refused  the  money, 
telling  him  that  the  miracle  wrought  was  the  result 
of  his  kindness.  Bhagtu  replied  that  he  himself  had 
no  power.  Whatever  merit  he  possessed  was  derived 
from  the  Guru.  He  invited  Sangatia  to  go  to  the 
Guru  and  become  his  Sikh.  Sangatia  accordingly 
did  so.  The  Guru  initiated  him,  gave  him  the  name 
of  Pheru,  and  promised  that  he  should  have  a kitchen 
of  his  own  to  supply  the  wayworn  saint  and  stranger. 
In  the  atternoon  the  Guru  used  oiten  to  g,ird  on  his 


LIFE  OF  GURU!  HAR  RAI 


277 


sword’,  equip  himself  with  his  bow  and  arrows, 
mount  his  horse,  and  proceed  to  the  chase.  He 
maintained  two  thousand  two  hundred  mounted 
soldiers.  These  he  kept  by  his  grandfather  Guru 
Har  Gobind’s  advice  as  a precautionary  measure. 
The  Guru  took  some  of  the  animals  he  had  obtained 
from  the  chase  home  with  him,  and  freed  and  pro- 
tected them  in  a zoological  garden,  which  he  caused 
to  be  made  for  the  recreation  of  his  followers. 

In  the  evening  the  Guru  used  to  hold  his  court, 
listen  to  hymns  sung  by  his  choir,  and  then  give 
divine  instruction.  The  advantages  of  devotion  are 
briefly  put  by  Guru  Arjan. 

Learn  the  Word,  my  beloved,  which  is  our  support  in 
life  and  in  death. 

By  remembering  the  one  God  your  faces  shall  ever  be 
bright  and  happy 

The  Guru  used  to  select  suitable  passages  from 
the  Granth  Sahib  to  recite  to  his  followers,  such  as: — 

Make  effort,  ye  very  fortunate,  remember  God  the  King  ; 

Nanak,  by  remembering  Him  ye  shall  have  all  happiness, 
and  your  troubles,  pains  and  doubts  shall  disappear.* 

The  Emperor  Shah  Jahan  had  four  sons  Dara 
Shikoh,  Shuja  Muhammad,  Aurangzeb,  and  Murad 
Bakhsh.  Dara  Shikoh,  who  was  the  heir-apparent, 
was  very  dear  to  his  father.  Aurangzeb  who  was 
very  cunning,  clever,  and  ambitious,  aimed  at 
succeeding  to  the  throne.  He  administered  tiger’s 
whiskers  in  a dainty  dish  to  his  eldest  brother, 
who  became  dangerously  ill  in  consequence.  The 
best  physicians  were  consulted,  but  could  not  devise 
a remedy.  The  patient’s  illness  daily  increased. 
The  Emperor,  filled  with  anxiety,  sent  for  diviners 
and  astrologers  from  every  country,  propitiated  pirs 
and  faqirs,  and  had  recourse  to  all  known  charms, 
spells,  and  incantations,  but  without  avail. 

^ Ram  kali,  Ashtapadi.  * Asa  Chhant. 


278  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

When  the  wise  men  were  all  assembled,  they  arrived 
at  the  very  obvious  decision  that,  until  the  tiger’s 
whiskers  were  removed  from  Dara  Shikoh’s  bowels, 
there  was  no  hope  of  recovery.  They  were  of  opinion 
that  if  a chebulic  myrobalan  weighing  fourteen 
chitanks  ’ and  a clove  weighing  one  masha  could  be 
produced  and  administered  to  the  patient,  he  would 
be  restored  to  health.  For  these  articles  the  Emperor 
searched  everywhere  in  his  realm,  but  in  vain.  At 
last  the  prime  minister,  who  had  heard  the  fame  of 
the  Guru,  was  informed  that  the  required  simples 
were  in  his  storehouse.  Although  the  Emperor  was 
hostile  to  the  Guru,  yet  as  the  Guru’s  house  was  a 
mine  of  sympathy  and  compassion  for  all,  there  was 
no  doubt  that  he 'would  grant  the  articles  required. 
In  order  to  show  the  Guru’s  duty  in  such  a case,  the 
prime  minister  quoted  the  words  of  the  fifth  Guru  : — 

The  Guru  embraceth  him  who  seeketh  his  protection ; 
this  is  the  function  of  the  religious  teacher 

The  prime  minister  represented  to  the  Emperor, 
‘ It  becometh  thee  now,  O sire,  to  forget  thy  former 
feelings  of  enmity,  and  entreat  the  Guru  to  grant 
thee  what  is  required  and  thy  wishes  shall  be  imme- 
diately gratified.  In  the  words  of  a Panjabi  proverb, 

‘ Self-interest  causeth  barley  to  be  ground,  even  if 
it  be  wet.’  ® Shah  Jahan  found  it  necessary  to 
humble  himself  before  the  Guru,  and  accordingly 
addressed  him  the  following  letter  ; — 

‘ Thy  predecessor,  the  holy  Baba  Nanak  grab  ted 
sovereignty  to  the  Emperor  Babar,  the  founder  of 
my  dynasty ; Guru  Angad  was  exceedingly  well 
disposed  to  his  son  the  Emperor  Humayun ; and 
Guru  Amar  Das  removed  many  difficulties  from  my 
grandfather  Akbar’s  path.  I regret  that  the  same 

^ A chit^nk  is  five  tolas  or  two  ounces. 

2 Bihagra  Chhant. 

® Wet  Indian  barley  is  ground  with  more  difficulty  in  a hand-mill 
than  any  other  Indian  grain. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI 


279 


friendly  relations  did  not  subsist  between  Guru  Har 
Gobind  and  myself,  and  that  misunderstandings 
were  caused  by  the  interference  of  strangers.  For  this 
I was  not  to  blame.  My  son  Dara  Shikoh  is  now 
very  ill.  His  remedy  is  in  thy  hands.  If  thou  give 
the  myrobalan  and  the  clove  which  are  in  thy  store- 
house, and  add  to  them  thy  prayers,  thou  wilt  confer 
an  abiding  favour  on  me.’ 

A noble  took  this  letter  to  the  Guru  who  was  then 
in  Kiratpur  and  presented  it  in  darbar  on  the 
morning  after  his  arrival.  The  Guru  was  pleased  that 
the  Emperor  had  such  confidence  in  him  as  to  write 
him  such  a friendly  letter,  and  consented  to  give  the 
necessary  medicines.  He  quoted  a line  from  the 
fourteenth  slok  of  the  Asa  ki  War, 

Why  should  they  who  come  with  hope  depart  dis- 
appointed ? 

‘ Behold,’  said  the  Guru,  ‘ with  one  hand  man 
breaketh  flowers,  and  with  the  other  he  offereth  them, 
but  the  flowers  perfume  both  hands  alike.  Although 
the  axe  cuts  the  sandal-tree,  yet  the  sandal  per- 
fumeth  the  axe.  The  Guru  ought,  therefore,  to 
return  good  for  evil.’  The  myrobalan  and  clove  were 
weighed,  and,  as  if  God  had  so  ordained,  found  of  the 
required  weight  to  cure  the  Emperor’s  beloved  son 
and  heir-apparent.  It  was  explained  that  these 
medicines  would  cause  the  hardest  substance  taken 
into  the  stomach  to  be  digested.  To  these  articles 
the  Guru  added  a pearl  which  was  to  be  ground  and 
used  as  a subsidiary  remedy.  The  Guru  was  in 
the  position  of  a tree  which,  though  cut  with  a sharp 
axe,  feels  no  anger  and  imputes  no  blame  to  the 
wood-cutter,  but  ministers  unto  his  wants. 

The  Emperor  was  naturally  very  pleased,  forgot  all 
his  enmity  to  the  Guru,  and  vowed  that  he  would 
never  again  cause  him  annoyance.  The  medicine 
was  administered  and  effected  a speedy  and  complete 
cure. 


28o 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Chapter  II 

A pious  lady  continually  prayed  that  the  Guru 
might  eat  bread  cooked  by  her  hands.  One  day  she 
gained  four  paise  by  spinning,  and  bought  wheaten 
flour  and  pulse  for  the  money.  She  baked  two  cakes 
and  took  them  to  a spot  by  which  the  Guru  used  to 
pass  daily.  There  she  began  to  rack  her  brains  how 
to  procure  access  to  him.  Could  she  succeed  in  this, 
he  would  certainly  take  compassion  on  her  old  age 
and  eat  from  her  hands.  The  Guru,  having  by  his 
supernatural  power  become  aware  of  her  desire, 
mounted  his  horse,  and  on  his  way  to  the  chase,  went 
joyfully  to  the  spot  where  she  was  waiting. 

At  the  moment  when  she  was  reduced  almost  to 
a state  of  despair  the  Guru  arrived,  and  asked  her 
for  some  of  the  bread  she  had  prepared.  He  said  it 
would  be  very  late  when  he  returned  from  the  chase, 
and  he  desired  food  to  fortify  himself  until  then. 
The  Guru  partook  of  the  bread  on  horseback,  with- 
out washing  his  hands,  and  said  he  had  enjoyed  it 
as  if  it  were  the  most  dainty  food.  The  woman 
paid  the  Guru  compliments  for  his  humility  in 
visiting  her  and  accepting  her  hospitality.  The 
Guru  in  return  gave  her  spiritual  instruction,  and 
cut  off  the  shackles  of  her  transmigration. 

The  Sikhs  were  astonished  that  the  Guru  had  taken 
food  from  a strange  woman,  and  eaten  it  on  horse- 
back too  without  washing  his  hands.  They  asked  him 
why  he  had  done  so.  He  gave  no  answer,  but  con- 
tinued his  hunting  excursion.  Next  day  they  pre- 
pared sweet  cakes  with  great  attention  to  cleanliness, 
and  took  them  to  the  forest  with  the  Guru,  so  as  to 
obviate  any  necessity  he  might  be  under  to  take 
food  that  might  possibly  be  unclean  from  the  hands 
of  a person  who  might  be  of  low  caste.  In  due  time 
the  Sikhs  offered  the  Guru  the  cakes  they  had 
prepared.  The  Guru  said,  ‘ 0 Sikhs,  I ate  food  from 
that  woman’s  hands  because  she  was  holy.  This 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  281 

food  which  you  have  prepared  with  attention  to 
ancient  ceremonial  is  not  pleasing  to  me.  It  is 
written  in  the  Granth  Sahib : — 

He  whose  deeds  are  pure  is  called  a holy  man,^ 

from  which  it  appears  that  salvation  depends  on  good 
acts  and  not  on  the  food  which  is  eaten.' 

The  Sikhs  replied,  ‘ O true  king,  yesterday  thou 
atest  two  cakes  on  horseback  from  the  hands  of  an 
old  woman  whom  thou  knewest  not.  There  was  no 
consecrated  space  and  the  food  was  in  every  way 
impure.  To-day  we  have  with  great  labour  prepared 
and  baked  cakes  for  thee  ; no  impurity  attacheth  to 
them,  and  yet  thou  rejectest  them.  Be  kind  enough 
to  explain  the  reason.  We  made  a representation  to 
thee  yesterday  on  the  subject  but  received  no  reply.’ 

The  Guru  gave  the  following  explanation — ‘ The 
woman  with  great  devotion  and  faith  prepared  food 
for  me  out  of  what  she  had  earned  from  the  sweat  of 
her  brow.  On  this  account  the  food  was  very  pure, 
and  I partook  of  it.  The  Guru  hungereth  for  love 
and  not  for  dainty  food.  In  the  matter  of  love  for 
God  no  rule  is  recognized. 

‘ Ye  remember  how  Guru  Nanak  avoiding  the 
society  of  the  great  and  the  wealthy,  went  to  the 
house  of  Lalo  who  was  a carpenter,  abode  with  him, 
and  lived  on  his  coarse  fare.  It  may  therefore  be 
easily  understood  that  attention  to  culinary  rules 
and  exclusiveness  in  eating  are  of  no  avail  without 
real  devotion.  It  is  not  what  man  eateth  that 
pleaseth  God.  It  is  man’s  devotion  that  is  acceptable 
to  Him.’ 

On  hearing  this  discourse  the  Sikhs’  doubts 
vanished.  They  replied,  ‘ 0 true  king,  grant  that 
the  love  of  God  may  arise  in  our  hearts.  Although 
we  have  in  ourselves  no  merits,  yet  thou  who  hast 
vouchsafed  us  thy  protection,  art  responsible  for 
our  safe  keeping.  By  thy  favour  our  boats  shall 
reach  the  haven  of  the  blest.’ 

^ Sukhmani. 


282  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

During  this  colloquy  the  Guru  and  his  party 
penetrated  a deep  forest.  The  Guru,  seeing  a black 
buck  issue  from  the  thickets,  chased  him  on  horseback 
at  full  speed  and  prevented  his  escape.  The  animal 
was  caught  and  taken  to  the  Guru’s  zoological  gardens. 
Men  who  had  come  long  distances  to  see  the  Guru  were 
pleased  with  his  tenderness  to  animals,  particularly 
to  deer,  which  the  kings  of  old  used  to  sacrifice  at 
their  feasts. 

One  day  as  the  Guru  was  hunting  he  saw  a 
wounded  snake  crawling  with  difficulty.  It  was 
tortured  by  worms  which  it  tried  to  shake  off  by 
wriggling  and  shaking  its  body.  The  Guru  not  only 
put  the  animal  out  of  its  pain,  but  granted  it  salva- 
tion. The  author  of  the  Suraj  Parkash  states  that 
its  spirit  in  the  form  of  a bright  light  was  seen  to  issue 
from  its  body  and  soar  to  heaven.  The  Sikhs  asked 
the  Guru  what  light  it  was.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ This 
serpent  was  in  somewhat  the  same  state  as  the  python 
seen  by  my  grandfather  in  Malwa.  This  serpent  had 
been  a pandit  in  a previous  age,  who  used  to  falsely 
vaunt  the  power  of  the  Veds.  He  asserted  that  he 
himself  was  God,  but  his  conduct  in  no  wise  justified 
such  a boast.  He  used  also  to  make  injurious 
reflections  on  the  Guru’s  hymns,  saying,  ‘ \^at  is 
a hymn  in  the  vulgar  dialect  ? ’ He  did  not  know 
that  Guru  Nanak’s  compositions  were  superior  to 
the  Veds.  The  pandit’s  soul  passed  into  this  serpent, 
and  the  worms  have  been  causing  him  to  suffer  for 
the  deceit  he  practised  on  men.  There  were,  how- 
ever, some  good  acts  to  his  credit  from  previous 
births,  and  on  this  account  he  hath  met  Guru  Nanak’s 
followers  and  obtained  salvation.  As  Guru  Arjan 
hath  said : — 

By  association  with  the  saints  man  hath  no  travail ; 

There  is  no  necessity  to  toil  in  their  company  ; 

On  beholding  and  meeting  them  man  becometh  happy.^ 


^ Sukhmani. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  283 

‘ Carefully  remember  that,  however  much  you  read 
Vedantic  literature,  it  will  be  a source  of  misery 
unless  you  love  God.'  • Guru  Arjan  hath  also  said : — 

Though  one  be  very  beautiful,  of  high  birth,  clever, 
a divine  in  words  and  wealthy  ; 

Yet  shall  he  be  deemed  as  dead,  O Nanak,  if  he  have  no 
love  for  God.^ 

‘ Wherefore,  O my  Sikhs,  believe  in  the  words  of 
Guru  Nanak,  worship  God,  and  boast  not  of  your 
Vedantism.  He  who,  possessing  no  divine  know- 
ledge, calleth  himself  a guru  shall  have  no  happiness, 
but  on  the  contrary  terrible  suffering.  The  disciples 
of  a false  guru  shall  lose  their  human  birth  in  this 
world.  A guru  who  possesseth  no  holiness  shall  with 
his  disciples  endure  terrible  suffering.  Wherefore,  O 
my  Sikhs,  listen  unto  me,  never  consume  any  portion 
of  offerings.  They  will  not  assist  you  in  distress,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  lead  you  into  the  power  of  Death, 
whose  punishment  shall  wring  from*  you  loud  lamen- 
tations. Perform  honest  labour,  serve  the  saints, 
and  I shall  everywhere  be  your  succourer.  As  Guru 
Nanak  hath  said  : — 

They  who  eat  the  fruit  of  their  labour  and  bestow  some- 
thing, 

O Nanak,  recognize  the  right  way.* 

A deficiency  in  your  weights  or  want  of  equality  in 
your  scales  must  be  avoided.  Ever  abide  firm  in  your 
faith.’ 

‘ The  Sikhs  then  asked  the  Guru  to  give  them 
further  instruction  in  the  Sikh  religion.  He  re- 
plied, ‘ You  must  read  the  Granth  Sahib,  and  not 
worship  any  inanimate  object.  When  a Sikh  dieth, 
sacred  food  should  be  prepared  and  distributed  after 
reading  the  Sohila.  There  should  be  no  mourning, 
but  hymns  of  the  Gurus  should  be  sung,  and  the 
Granth  Sahib  should  be  intoned.  No  gods  or 
* Bawan  Akhari.  * Sarang  ki  War. 


284  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

goddesses  should  be  deemed  succourers  of  man. 
Reliance  must  be  placed  on  the  immortal  God  alone.’ 

A devout  Sikh  called  Bhai  Gonda  abode  with  the 
Guru.  He  was  a saint  in  thought,  word,  and  deed. 
The  Guru  was  very  much  pleased  with  his  sincere 
devotion  and  said,  ‘ 0 Bhai  Gonda,  go  thou  to  Kabul, 
instruct  the  Sikhs  there  in  the  worship  of  the  true 
Name,  and  preach  the  Sikh  faith.  Feed  holy  men 
and  pilgrims  with  the  offerings  thou  receivest,  and 
send  what  remaineth  for  the  maintenance  of  my 
kitchen.  These  are  thy  duties,  and  I am  confident 
that  thou  wilt  discharge  them.’ 

Although  Kabul  was  a foreign  country  and  there 
was  danger  from  Muhammadan  bigotry  in  residing 
there,  yet  Gonda  cheerfully  accepted  the  task 
imposed  on  him.  On  arriving  there  he  built  a Sikh 
temple  and  carried  out  all  the  Guru’s  instructions. 
In  other  respects  the  following  lines  of  Guru  Arjan, 
which  he  was  accustomed  to  repeat,  served  him  as 
a guide : — 

Meditate  in  thy  heart  on  the  Guru’s  image  ; 

Regale  thy  mind  with  the  Guru’s  word  and  spell. 

Put  the  Guru’s  feet  into  thy  heart. 

And  ever  bow  to  the  Gum  the  Supreme  Being.^ 

One  day  while  Gonda  was  repeating  the  Japji,  he 
fancied  he  was  clinging  to  the  Guru’s  feet.  He  was 
in  such  a state  of  abstraction  that  he  became  quite 
unconscious.  He  grew  as  absorbed  in  the  sight  of 
the  Guru  as  a drop  of  rain  in  the  ocean.  The  Guru 
by  his  occult  power  knew  what  was  passing  in 
Gonda’s  mind,  and  sat  firmly  on  his  throne  keeping 
his  feet  together.  When  dinner  was  announced,  as 
usual  at  mid-day,  he  made  no  response.  When  the 
announcement  was  repeated  about  an  hour  after- 
wards, he  still  remained  silent.  A third  time  after 
a longer  interval  dinner  was  announced,  and  the 
cook  asked  permission  to  serve  it  up,  but  even 

* Gaund. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  285 

then  the  Guru  spoke  not.  When  several  Sikhs  were 
on  the  point  of  making  a representation  to  him,  he 
broke  silence  and  said, ! Brother  Sikhs,  Bhai  Gonda  is 
in  Kabul.  He  is  in  thought,  word,  and  deed,  a saint 
of  the  Guru.  He  to-day  hath  clasped  my  feet.  How 
can  I withdraw  them  from  him  ? And  how  can  I go 
to  take  my  dinner  until  he  hath  let  them  go  ? I am 
therefore  waiting  until  the  conclusion  of  his  meditation 
and  obeisance.’  Bhai  Gonda  did  not  awake  from 
his  trance  before  twilight,  and  it  was  only  then  the 
Guru  felt  free  to  take  his  repast. 

When  afterwards  the  Sikhs  had  an  opportunity 
of  interrogating  Gonda  they  found  the  Guru’s  words 
verified  and  his  acts  explained  by  Gonda’s  reflections 
and  movements  during  the  state  of  trance.  The 
Sikhs  then  were  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  Guru’s 
greatness,  and  said  that  they  themselves  were  poor 
ignorant  people.  As  Guru  Arjan  has  said : — 

The  glory  of  the  saints  is  special  to  the  saints  : 

My  brethren,  there  is  no  difference  between  God  and  His 
saints.^ 

And  again  : — 

Know  that  God  and  the  Guru  are  one.^ 

The  Sikhs  said,  ‘ The  advantages  of  Guru  Nanak’s 
religion  are  indescribable,  and  whoever  leaveth  it 
and  strayeth  to  other  sects,  is  greatly  unfortunate, 
for  he  thereby  loseth  his  priceless  human  birth.’ 

Once  as  Sikhs  came  great  distances  to  the  Baisakhi 
fair  and  made  offerings  according  to  their  means,  men 
and  women  circumambulated  the  Guru  like  bumble- 
bees hovering  round  a lotus-flower.  The  Guru  inquired 
if  there  were  any  of  his  Sikhs  who,  having  established 
a kitchen  according  to  his  means,  shared  his  food 
with  others.  He  received  a reply  that  two  or  three 
Sikhs  had  come,  who  had  established  kitchens  in 
several  villages  and  distributed  their  food  among 
^ Sukhmaiii.  ^ Gaund. 


286 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


the  Guru’s  followers.  The  Guru  ordered  them  to  be 
called,  and  asked  them  on  what  principle  they  had 
established  kitchens,  and  whether  they  entertained 
all  Sikhs  on  the  same  terms  as  their  relations.  One 
Sikh  replied — ‘ When  a Sikh  is  kind  enough  to  visit 
me  at  the  time  of  distribution  of  food,  I first  satisfy 
him  and  then  myself.’  A second  said,  ‘ I cook  and 
distribute  food  with  my  own  hands.’  A third  said, 

‘ I wash  the  feet  of  Sikhs  and  drink  the  water  there- 
from, for  it  is  written  in  the  Sukhmani- : — 

Wash  the  feet  of  the  holy  men  and  drink  the  water  there- 
from.’ 

A fourth  Sikh  replied,  ‘ Whatever  thine  orders  are, 
O true  king,  they  shall  be  obeyed.  I wipe  Sikhs’ 
shoes,  and  place  them  before  them  as  they  are 
departing.’ 

The  Guru  interposed.  ‘It  is  superfluous  to  say 
any  more.  I desire  to  know  if  ye  feed  a Sikh  who 
presenteth  himself  after  the  time  fixed  for  distribu- 
tion of  food.’  The  Sikhs  requested  the  Guru  to 
explain  his  meaning  more  fully.  He  said,  ‘ 0 Sikhs, 
when  food  is  distributed  and  there  is  none  left, 
what  do  ye  do  if  a hungry  Sikh  afterwards  present 
himself  ? ’ The  Sikhs  replied,  ‘ We  do  not  serve  food 
after  the  appointed  time,  and  on  that  account  no 
doubt  some  Sikhs  go  away  disappointed.’  The 
Guru  rejoined,  ‘Ye  ought  to  keep  additional  food 
ready,  feed  your  guest,  and  not  send  him  away  disap- 
pointed. In  the  course  I recommend  there  is  great 
merit.  I shall  be  well  pleased  with  those  who  adopt 
it,  and  they  shall  enjoy  happiness  here  and  hereafter. 
Moreover,  it  is  written  in  the  Granth  Sahib  : — 

The  true  Guru  is  delighted  when  his  disciple  taketh  food.^ 

‘ He  who  through  laziness  and  pride  dismisseth  a Sikh 
$ns.a,ppdmt,e5i,  s\\a\\  gam  no  advantage  iiomtns.  past 

or  present  acts.  Farid  hath  Said  ; — 

^ Guru  Ram  Das,  Gauri. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  287 

All  men’s  hearts  are  jewels  ; to  distress  them  is  not  at  all 
good  : 

If  thou  desire  the  Beloved,  distress  no  one’s  heart. 

‘ There  is  also  a Persian  expression  attributed  to  God 
even  by  the  Muhammadans ; — 

I can  allow  you  to  destroy  a temple  or  a mosque, 

But  to  break  another’s  heart  is  an  act  that  cannot  be 
sanctioned. 

‘ The  temple  and  the  mosque  may  be  repaired  or 
renewed,  but  not  the  broken  heart.’  The  Sikhs  said, 
‘ Only  he  on  whom  the  Guru  looketh  with  favour 
obtaineth  such  wisdom.  We  possess . little  wisdom, 
and  have  erred.  It  is  by  thy  favour  all  our  troubles 
are  removed.  Thy  words  are  like  the  juice  of  nectar, 
mines  of  knowledge,  arrows  to  destroy  worldly  love 
and  hate,  or  guides  to  salvation.’ 

Two  hill  Rajas  went  with  a strong  force  to  the  Guru 
under  pretence  of  paying  him  a complimentary  visit, 
but  in  reality  to  obtain  tribute  from  him,  and 
remove  him  from  their  country.  On  arriving  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Kiratpur  they  encamped  near  a 
tank.  The  Guru  on  hearing  of  their  arrival  promptly 
sent  them  supplies  of  every  description. 

The  Rajas  presented  themselves  the  next  morning 
at  the  Guru’s  levee,  but  while  doing  obeisance  to 
him  retained  guile  in  their  hearts.  The  Guru,  by 
his  occult  power,  knew  their  designs,  and  represented 
to  them  that  faqirs  were  never  called  upon  to  pay 
tribute.  If  they  desired  anything  from  him  he 
would  give  them  divine  instruction,  which  would  be 
more  advantageous  than  any  sublunary  wealth. 

The  Rajas  on  hearing  this  found  their  business 
with  the  Guru  at  an  end.  They  both  stood  up,  then 
prostrated  themselves  before  him,  and  begged  to  be 
put  on  the  right  way,  for  they  had  seriously  erred. 
They  confessed  that  they  had  come  with  evil  inten- 
tions, but  they  would  never  again  harbour  thoughts 


288  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

to  the  Guru’s  detriment.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Show 
not  your  pride  to  the  Guru.  Go  and  rule  your  king- 
doms, oppress  not  your  subjects.  If  ye  do,  the 
Creator  will  show  you  His  anger,  and  consign  you 
to  hell.  Adhere  to  your  own  wives,  drink  not  wine, 
sleep  not  on  the  top  stories  of  your  palaces  out  of 
/reach  of  your  subjects.  Let  it  not  be  that,  while 
they  are  complaining  below,  ye  are  enjoying  your- 
selves above.  The  subj ects  are  the  root,  the  Rajas  the 
branches  of  the  trees.  Whatsoever  king  oppresseth 
his  subjects  applieth  the  axe  to  his  kingdom.  Con- 
struct tanks,  wells,  bridges,  and  schools,  and  extend 
religion  through  your  kingdoms.’  The  Rajas  much 
edified  by  this  .discourse,  took  leave  of  the  Guru  and 
returned  to  their  states. 

Chapter  III 

There  was  a Sanyasi  called  Bhagwan  Gir,  who, 
in  order  to  obtain  spiritual  consolation,  went  to 
visit  the  Guru  in  Kiratpur.  The  Guru  advised  him 
to  proceed  to  Dehra  Baba  Nanak  and  join  the 
Udasis  there.  This  was  tantamount  to  ordering 
Bhagwan  Gir  to  relinquish  his  sect,  for  the  Sanyasis 
worship  Dattatre,  while  the  Udasis  have  as  their  guru 
Sri  Chand,  the  eldest  son  of  Guru  Nanak. 

The  Mahant  at  Dehra  Baba  Nanak  at  ‘that  time 
was  Mihr  Chand,  the  great-grandson  of  Guru 
Nanak.  The  Guru  commended  Mihr  Chand  as  a 
man  of  piety.  Bhagwan  Gir  acted  on  the  Guru’s 
advice.  He  prostrated  himself  before  Mihr  Chand, 
and  received  from  him  initiation,  and  the  name 
Bhagat  Bhagwan,  or  saint  of  God.  Bhagwan  Gir  then 
travelled  in  various  countries  as  a missionary,  but 
without  any  success.  He  was  not  wanting  in  energy 
or  eloquence,  but  no  one  would  heed  him  or  listen 
to  his  exhortations.  Disheartened  he  returned  to 
Mihr  Chand  to  report  his  failure. 

Mihr  Chand  told  him  that,  if  he  had  desired  to 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  289 

become  a priest,  he  ought  to  have  recdyofi  initiation 
from  Guru  Har  Rai  who  was  the  real  Guru,  and  to 
have  solicited  his  orders  before  proceeding  on  his 
mission.  It  was,  howev^,  not  yet  too  late.  Bhagat 
Bhagwan  might  even  now  go  to  the  Guru  and  crave 
his  blessing.  On  appearing  before  the  Guru,  Bhagat 
Bhagwan  began  to  weep  and  repent  of  his  error  in 
not  having  asked  his  permission  before  he  had  set 
up  as  a teacher.  The  Guru  cheerfully  pardoned  him, 
and  said  that  he  had  now  become  acceptable  in  God’s 
court.  The  Guru  directed  him  to  go  to  Hindustan 
and  reform  its  people.  He  was  npt  to  hid^  hi^  li^ht. 
but  put  it  in  a conspicuous  place  to  iUunfxine 
minds.  The  Guru  promised  that  he  should  be  eywy- 
where  well  received,  and  that  his  preaching  should  be 
heartily  accepted.  Bhagat  Bhagwan  proceeded  on 
his  mission  and  irrigated  with  the  water  of  his 
instruction  the  dried  and  shrivelled  hearts  of  his 
Hindustani  hearers.  His  disciples  are  now  pros- 
perous land-owners  in  the  north  of  India. 

One  day  his  Sikhs  inquired  of  the  Guru  whether 
those  who  read  the  Gurus’  hymns  without  under- 
standing them  derived  any  spiritual  advantage  there- 
from. The  Guru  gave  ho  reply  at  the  time,  and 
next  morning  went  a-hunting.  On  a level  plain  on 
his  way  he  saw  pieces  of  a pot  which  had  held  butter. 
The  sun  was  melting  the  butter  on  the  potsherds. 
The  Guru  took  one  of  them  in  his  hand  and  said, 
‘ Ye  see,  my  Sikh  brethren,  these  are  old  potsherds, 
but  when  they  are  heated,  the  butter  tha,t  hath 
adhered  to  them  rapidly  melteth.  As  the  grease 
adhereth  to  the  potsherds,  so  do  the  Gurus’  hymns 
to  the  hearts  of  his  Sikhs.  At  the  hour  of  death  the 
Gurus’  instruction  shall  assuredly  bear  fruit.  Whether 
um^stood  or  riot,  it  hhffi  Mdthin  it  the  seed  of 
sahra^n.  ' Fetftttrie^till'oll^elh  to  the’l^hkeki  vase. 

Ih^  ft^niiig  Of  thi^  ptda^  id,  that  wlt^v^ 

rea(teth*  the  Gifrtid’ ' hy**ins  shkll  adsirii^e^  ol^iii 
peace.  And  even  though  h*  do  not  fully  understarid 

u- 


IV 


290 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


them,  God  will  undoubtedly  assist  him.  Guru  Ram 
Das  hath  said 

The  Word  is -the  Guru,  and  the  Guru  is  the  Word,  and  in 
the  Word  is  the  essence  of  ambrosia.^ 

‘ Guru  Arjan  too  hath  said : — “ God  will  not  destroy 
your  labour.”  * 

‘ That  is,  even  though  ye  understand  not,  God  will 
accept  your  prayers.  God  never  in  the  slightest 
degree  spoileth  a good  act,  so  why  should  daily 
repetition  of  our  hymns  be  wasted?’  The  Guru’s 
questioners  were  satisfied  and  their  devotion  in- 
creased. 

By  his  mother  Natti’s  advice  the  Guru  went  to 
Kartarpur  to  meet  his  elder  brother  Dhir  Mai.  The 
Guru  remained  with  him  some  time,  the  greater  part 
of  which  he  spent  in  giving  religious  instruction  to 
the  crowds  who  flocked  to  see  him. 

The  Guru  became  a great  centre  of  attraction  at 
the  Baisakhi  festival  in  Kartarpur.  Hymns  were 
sung  in  concert  such  as  : — 

O Guru,  may  I behold  thee  and  live  ! ® 

On  that  occasion  Bhagtu  returned  with  several  Sikh 
friends  to  visit  the  Guru.  He  was  now  old,  his  hands 
trembled,  and  a cane  supported  his  tottering  steps. 
The  Guru  having  received  him  with  great  respect  and 
seated  him  near  him,  asked  him  when  he  was  going 
to  marry,  that  is,  when  he  was  going  to  become 
Death’s  bride.  The  Guru  had  in  mind  the  following 
verse  of  Shaikh  Farid : — 

The  soul  is  the  bride.  Death  the  bridegroom  ; he  will 
marry  her  and  take  her  away. 

The  Guru  receiving  no  answer  repeated  the  ques- 
tion. Bhagtu  believed  that  the  Guru  was  banter- 
ing him,  and  went  homq, without  giving  a, reply, 
\^ile  ther:e  he  reflected—'  The  Guru  never  speaketh 

Nat  A&\ttapadi.  * Kedara  Chhant.  ^ Guru  Afism,  Stiw- 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI 


291 


in  vain.  His  words  ever  prove  true,  and,  though 
I am  old,  it  is  incumbent  on  me  to  marry  and  verify 
the  Guru’s  words.’ 

Bhagtu  set  out  again  to  meet  the  Guru.  On  the 
way  he  saw  a gir^  scaring  birds  off  a field  of  bajra,*^ 
and  decided  to  marry  her  if  she  gave  her  consent. 
He  then  addressed  her,  ‘ O fair  one,  I desire  to  fulfil 
thb  words  of  the  Guru  and  marry  thee.  Pardon  me 
for  the  proposal.  Be  these  birds  and  trees  our 
witnesses.’  The  girl  was  astonished  at  his  words, 
and  felt  so  alarmed  and  abashed  that  she  could  make 
no  reply.  Bhagtu,  however,  decided  to  go  through 
the  form  of  a marriage  ceremony  with  her,  and  instead 
of  the  actual  circumambulations  of  the  bride  moved 
his  cane,  which  did  duty  for  her,  round  a blade  , of 
bajra,  representing  the  Granth  Sahib.  This  cere- 
mony over,  Bhagtu  continued  his  journey,  leaving  the 
girl  in  her  bajra  field  to  wonder  at  his  eccentricity. 
When  he  reached  the  Guru  the  same  question  as 
before  was  put  to  him.  He  then  mentioned  his 
marriage  on  the  way  with  the  sole  object  of  fulfilling 
the  Guru’s  words.  The  Guru  explained,  ‘ I merely 
desired'  to  ask  thee  thine  age  or,  in  other  words,  when 
thou  wert  likely  to  die  and  perform  real  marriage. 
Tarry  with  me  now,  and  I will  assist  thee  to  the 
utmost  of  my  power.  She  whom  thou  didst  marry 
in  misconception  of  my  words,  shall  abide  in  virtue 
and  continence  ; and  the  children  of  thy  former  wife 
shall  call  her  mother  and  be  obedient  to  her.’  This 
event  occurred  in  the  beginning  of  the  cold  season 
when  bajra  ripens.  Bhagtu  lived  until  the  end  of 
the  following  April. 

The  manner  of  his  death  was  as  follows  : — He  con- 
tracted a severe  dysentery.  Several  Sikhs  went  to 
visit  him  . in  his  illness.  They  used  to  say  to  him, 
‘ Thou  hast  often  cured  others  ; why  not  cure  thy- 
self ? ’ He  would  reply,  ‘ O Sikhs,  entertain  no  such 
idea.  The  Guru  in  this  world  putteth  an  end  to  the 

^ A cereal  largely  cultivated  in  the  Panjab,  the  Penicellaria  spicala, 

U2 


a92  THE  SIKH  iRELICION  ' 

sorrows  of  his  SUchs.  In  the  realm  of  death  no  pain  is 
felt.  Some  of  my  followers  Msed  to  steal  cattle,  and 
give  me  their  milk,  but  it  was  a stolen  nutriment. 
For  drinking  it  I have  suffered  in  this  world,  but:  my 
pain  shall  end  here.  My  suffering  hath  purified  me> 
and  I shall  take  my  journey  to  the  next  world  in 
happiness.’  , Then  uttering  ‘ Wahgucu  ’ his  life  issued 
from' his  body  as  painlessly,  in  the ‘words  of  the 
chronicler,  as  a garland  of  flowers  falls  from  aUi  ele- 
phant’s neck.  ' . ' 

The  Guru  ordered  a sumptuous  bier  and  sent  for 
musicians  to  sing  the  Gurus’  hymns  to  rebeck 
accompaniments  on  the  occasion. 

’ The  true  GUru  hath  caused  my  cargo  to  arrive  in  safety. 

The  heated  caldron  hath  become  cold  ; the  Guru  hath 
given  me  the  cooling  Name.^ 

The  Guru  decided  to  set  fire  with  his  own  hands  to 
Bha^tu’s  funeral  pile,  but  the  masands  endeavoured 
to  dissuade  him.  He  silenced  their  remonstrances 
by  telling  them  that  Bhagtu,  born  to  his  parents  in 
their,  old  age,  was  the  result  of  Guru  Ram  Das’s 
prayer,  and  therefore  worthy  of  all  honour.  He  was 
a real  Sikh  and  dearer  to  the  Guru  than  the  Guru’s 
own  relations.  That  was  why  he  would  kindle  his 
pyre  with  his  own  hands. 

On  one  of  the  Guru’s,  preaching  tours  he  stayed  at 
Mukandpur  in  the  present  Jalandhar  district.  He 
there  drove  a bamboo  shoot  into  the  ground  in 
memory  of  his  visit ; and  it  still  survives  as  a stately 
tree.  , Thence  the  Guru  went  to  the  country  of  Malwa 
and  visited  the  tank  near  Nathana  where  Guru  Han 
Gobind  had  fought.  There  Kala  and  Karm.Chand, 
two  brothers  of  the  Marhaj  tribe,  came  to,  fo. 
couiplain  that  the  people  of  the  Kaura  : Would 

hot  allow  them  to.  Jive  among  thenu  Ujptm  this,  the 
Guru  sent  for  jait  Pirana,  the  head  erf,  the  Kauta 
tribe,  and  endeavoured  to  induce  ihim  to  give  five 
^ Guru  Arjan^ 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI 


293 


ploughs  of  land  to  the  complainants  for  their 
maintenance.  Jait  replied  with  a Panjabi  proverb, 
Gras  daiye,  bas  na  ^ ye  ’ — that  is,  give  a morsel 
to  eat,  but  not  land  to  live  upon — artd  represented 
that  the  complainants’  tribe  could  never  subsist  on 
five  ploughs  of  land.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Guru 
Nanak  will  shed  his  blessing  on  the  land,  so  that  it 
will  sufiice  for  the  Marhaj  tribe.’  Still  Jait  refused. 

The  Guru  informed  Kala  and  Karm  Chand  of  the 
failure  of  his  negotiations  with  Jait,  and  advised  theni 
to  leave  the  place  next  morning,  tarry  where  night 
overtook  them,  take  possession  of  the  land  around 
them,  and  call  it  Marhaj.  Thither  too  Jait  followed 
them  and  warned  them  off.  They  refused  to  leave 
and  quoted  the  Guru’s  order.  Kala  went  to  the 
Guru  to  tell  him  of  their  second  failure  to  establish 
a permanent  residence.  The  Guru,  seeing  his  friends’ 
difficulty,  recommended  forcible  resistance  to  Jait 
and  his  people.  Kala  represented  J ait’s  strength  and 
the  hopelessness  of  a struggle  with  him.  The  Guru 
encouraged  Kala  to  secure  a habitation,  and  said 
that  he  himself  would  aid  him  and  his  party.  This 
occurred  in  the  Sambat  year  1707,  a.  d.  1650. 

The  rival  tribes  engaged  in  combat.  Jait  drew  his 
sword  on  Kala  but  missed  him.  Kala  in  return  cut 
Jait  transversely  through  the  body,  as  if  the  passage 
of  his  sword  had  been  marked  by  J ait’s  sacrificial 
thread.  This  ended  the  warfare.  After  Kala’s 
party  had  settled  in  the  land  a second  difficulty 
arose.  Their  neighbours  would  not  intermarry  with 
them.  Here  again  the  Guru  interposed.  He  recom- 
mended the  Sikhs  who  visited  him  to  form  marriage 
alliahces  with  the  Marhaj  people.  The  Guru  remained 
for  some  time  at  Nathana  preachmg  to  the  people, 
and  Kala  and  his  friends  frequently  waited  on  him. 

The  Guru  by  his  diligent  and  earnest  preaching 
made  many  disciples.  His  hearers  abandoned  the 
worship  of  cemeteri^  and  cremation  grounds,  and 
embraced  the  simple  worship  of  God.  There  Kala 


294 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


and  his  two  nephews  Sandali  and  Phul,  sons  of  Rup 
G^nd,  went  to  visit  him.  Phul  was  borne  on  Kala’s 
shoulder,  and  Sandali  held  Kala’s  finger  as  he  walked. 
When  the  children  arrived  in  the  Guru’s  presence, 
Phul  put  his  hand  on  his  belly.  The  Guru  asked 
why  he  did  so,  and  Kala  told  him.  Phul  could  not 
speak  himself,  and  the  only  way  he  had  of  describing 
the  pangs  of  hunger  which  he  felt  was  to  slap  his 
belly.  The  Guru  took  compassion  on  him  and  said, 
‘ He  shall  become  great,  famous,  and  wealthy.  The 
steeds  of  his  descendants  shall  drink  water  as  far 
as  the  Jamna  ; they  shall  have  sovereignty  for  many 
generations,  and  be  honoured  in  proportion  as  they 
serve  the  Guru.’ 

When  Kala  reached  home,  and  his  wife  heard  of 
the  Guru’s  benediction,  she  upbraided  her  husband 
for  not  having  taken  his  own  children  to  the  Guru. 
‘They  also  should  in  that  case  become  kings.  Now 
our  sons  shall  have  to  pay  tribute  to  our  nephew.’ 
Kala  replied,  ‘Destiny  is  very  powerful.  I knew 
not  that  the  Guru  would  bestow  such  abundant 
blessings.’  Kala’s  wife  then  put  pressure  on  him 
to  take  his  own  sons  to  the  Guru,  and  teach  them 
to  strike  their  bellies  in  token  of  hunger.  When 
Kala  and  his  sons  appeared  before  the  Guru,  and 
the  children  enacted  the  part  in  which  they  had 
been  instructed,  the  Guru  demanded  an  explana- 
tion. Kala  said  he  had  thus  acted  in  obedience  to 
his  wife’s  orders.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ The  parents 
of  these  children  are  alive,  but  at  the  same  time  they 
shall  have  their  own  cultivation,  eat  the  fruit  of 
their  toil,  pay  no  tribute,  and  be  dependent  on 
no  one.’  This  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled.  Their 
descendants  own  twenty-two  villages  called  the 
Bahia,  which  pay  no  land  revenue. 

Phul  had  six  sons,  from  the  eldest  of  whom,  namely 
Tilok  Sifigh,  the  Rajas  of  Nabha  and  Jind  are 
descended.  Phul  died  in  Sambat  1740,  a.  d.  1689. 
From  Phul’s  second  son,  Ram  Singh,  the  Maharaja 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  295 

of  Patiala  fs  descended.  These  three  are  known  as 
the  Phul  ke  Raje,  or  Phulkian  chiefs.  The  state 
of  Patiala  is  now  the  largest,  but  it  was  the  Raja  of 
Nabha  who  in  ancient  times  bore  the  title  of  Chaudhri, 
then  an  office  of  power,  responsibility,  and  honour. 

Chapter  IV 

We  now  return  to  the  story  of  the  girl  who  guarded 
the  bajra  field,  and  whom  Bhagtu  so  unceremoniously 
wedded.  She  went  and  told  her  father ' that  an 
eccentric  old  man  had  pretended  to  marry  her,  and 
she  described  all  the  strange  proceeding.  At  the 
same  time  she  vowed  she  would  consider  him  her 
husband,  and  marry  no  one  else.  Her  father  inquired 
who  the  strange  bridegroom  was,  and  soon  learned 
that  it  was  no  other  than  the  saint  Bhagtu.  Father 
and  daughter  took  no  further  action  at  the  time. 
She  remained  in  her  father’s  house  and  continued 
to  work  in  his  fields.  It  became  known  in  due  time 
that  Bhagtu  was  dead,  and  that  he  had  left  two  sons, 
Gaura  and  Jiwan,  by  a former  wife.  Gaura  the  elder 
soon  became  the  Raja  of  Bhatinda.  To  him  the  girl’s 
father  addressed  himself  with  a view  to  procure  her 
suitable  maintenance.  Gaura  sent  for  her,  received 
her  with  the  greatest  respect,  and  treated  her  as  his 
own  mother. 

Gaura  visited  the  Guru  when  he  was  at  Nathana. 
During  his  stay  Jassa,  the  Guru’s  chauri-bearer,  said 
to  him,  ‘ Marry  me  to  thy  second  mother,  Bhagtu’s 
virgin  widow,  who  is  now  in  thy  house.  My  wife 
is  dead.  I am  a widower,  and  the  marriage  of  a 
widower  and  widow  would  be  very  suitable.’  Gaura 
felt  insulted  at  the  proposal,  and  bided  his  oppor- 
tunity to  take  revenge.  He  found  it  one  day  while 
they  werfe  both  hunting  with  the  Guru.  The  Guru 
had  advanced  in  front  of  the  party  when  Gaura  drew 
his  sword  and  killed  Jassa.  When  the  Guru  heard  of 
it,  he  forbade  Gaura  to  enter  his  presence. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


296 

After  this  the  Guru  returned  from  Nathana  to 
Kiratpur.  Wherever  he  went  he  was  followed  by 
Gaura,  who  hoped  to  find  an  opportunity  of  soliciting 
his  pardon,  and  a retractation  of  his  curse.  When 
the  iGuru  arrived  in  Kiratpur,  Gaura  encamped  a 
mile  distant.  For  six  months  the  Guru  remained  in 
Kiratpur,  and  was  ever  shadowed  by  Gaura.  When 
the  Guru  again  proceeded  to  Malwa,  Gaura  followed 
him.  As  the  Guru  was  proceeding  along  the  Satluj, 
he  met  some  Muhammadan  troops  who  were  marching 
from  Lahore  to  Dihli.  One  of  the  officers  inquired 
the  name  of  the  party  and  was  informed  that  it  was 
Guru  Har  Rai  and  his  bodyguard.  The  officer  was 
already  aware  that  it  was  the  Guru’s  grandfather. 
Guru  Har  Gobind,  who  had  killed  his  grandfather, 
General  Mukhlis  Khan,  at  Amritsar,  and  he  deter- 
mined on  taking  life  for  life. 

While  the  officer  was  thus  inquiring  and  cogitating 
the  Guru  passed  on.  The  officer  then  waylaid  the 
Guru’s  wives  who  were  following,  and  attempted 
violence.  Now  came  Gaura’s  opportunity  to  per- 
form signal  service  for  the  Guru  with  the  object  of 
obtaining  his  pardon.  The  Guru  had  been  forbidden 
by  his  grandfather  Guru  Har  Gobind  to  engage  in 
warfare,  but  Gaura  might  fight  for  him  and  defend 
his  family.  Gaura  had  his  own  troops.  They  set 
on  the  Musalmans  and  fought  valiantly  until  night 
closed  the  combat.  The  Musalmans  escaped  under 
cover  of  the  darkness,  and  the  Guru’s  wives  succeeded 
in  escaping  their  brutality.  When  the  Guru  heard 
of  Gaura’s  gallantry  he  at  once  sent  for  him  Gaura 
was  not  allowed  time  to  wash  his  face  and  hands, 
but  was  ushered  stained  with  blood  into  the  Guru’s 
presence.  The  Guru  learned  from  him  the  events  of 
the  battle  and  pardoned  him.  After  this  Gaura 
was  glad  to  return  to  his  own  territory.  The  Guru 
then  marched  to  Kartarpur  and  discontinued  his 
projected  tour  to  Malwa. 

A Brahman  of  Kai^tarpur  had  obtained  a son  as 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  297 

the  resuH  of  a vow  that  he  would  make  h'm  a tithe- 
paying Sikh  of  the  Guru.  The  child,  however,  died 
during  the  Gum’s  stay.  The  Brahman  took  the 
corpse  with  loud  lamentations  to  the  Gum’s  door, 
and  th^’e  sat  down  beside  it.  He  said,  ‘ If  my  son 
revive  not,  I will  die  myself.’  The  Gum  remonstrated 
with  him  on  his  dissatisfaction  with  the  will'of  God. 

‘ The  boy’s  life  was  complete.  When  the  oil  is  at 
an  end,  how  can  the  lamp  burn  ? Gum  Nanak  hath 
said : — 

If  a boy  die  amid  his  youthful  sports, 

People  will  weep  and  say  he  was  a merry  boy. 

He  who  gave  him  took  him,  the  weeper  erreth. 

What  can  be  done  if  he  die  in  the  ripeness  of  youth  ? 
There  is  this  difference — his  friends  and  relations  will 
mournfully  speak  of  him  as  theirs,* 

Accursed  in  the  world  are  they  who  weep  for  the  loss  of 
worldly  things.* 

‘0  Brahman,  it  wouM  have  been  worse  had  the 
boy  died  after  marriage.  Thou  wouldst  suffer 
misery  from  continually  seeing  his  widow  in  thy 
house.  The  world  is,  as  the  Gum  hath  said,  a 
chamber  of  lamp-black,  and  thy  son  hath  died  before 
becoming  defiled  with  it.’ 

However  much  the  Guru  preached,  the  Brahman 
only  ’earned  one  lesson,  name’y,  “hat  he  h'mself 
should  die.  The  Sikhs  took  compassion,  and  inter- 
ceded w.'th  the  Gum  for  him — ‘ Cherisher  of  the 
poor,  thou  art  potent  to  break  and  to  mend.  The 
Brahman  hath  now  for  a day  and  night  lain  pros- 
trate at  thy.  door.  Hungry  and  poor  he  too  will 
die  in  thy  presence.’  The  masands  also  went  and 
pleaded  for  the  Brahman — ‘ Great  king,  if  this  child 
revive  not,  people  of  other  creeds  will  make  various 
remarks  to  our  discreidit.’  The  Gum  replied,  ' Is 
there  any  among  you  who  now  make  these  repre- 

* He  will  have  more  relations  and  friends  to  weep  for  him  the 
older  be  grWs.  * Maru  Solha. 


298  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

sentations,  sufficiently  philanthropic  to  bestow  his 
sown  life  on  the  Brahman’s  son  ? ’ 

On  hearing  this  the  necks  of  the  hearers  sank 
into  their  bodies.  The  Guru  put  the  question  three 
times,  but  received  no  reply.  Within  less  than  half 
an  hour  Jiwan,  Bhai  Bhagtu’s  younger  son,  drawing 
a winding-sheet  over  him,  said,  ‘ O divine  Guru 
Nanak,  I will  take  this  boy’s  death  on  myself,  and 
give  my  life  to  him.’  Saying  this,  he  whose  name 
was  life — Jiwan — entered  eternal  life,  and  the 
Brahman’s  son  arose  repeating  the  spell  of  the  true 
Name.  While  the  people  were  wondering,  the  Guru 
said,  ‘ Blest  is  that  Sikh  who  for  the  sake  of  another’s 
life  hath  not  spared  his  own.’  When  the  Bairars,  the 
tribe  to  whom  Jiwan  belonged,  heard  of  his  self- 
sacrifice,  they  hastened  to  appear  before  the  Guru 
to  express  their  displeasure — ‘Great  king,  Jiwan  was 
only  eighteen  years  of  age,  and  had  but  recently 
brought  home  his  bride.  She  is  pregnant,  and  who 
will  cherish  her  now  ? He  hath  but  just  entered  the 
fair,  and  this  is  his  fate.’  The  Guru  said,  ‘ A son 
shall  be  born  in  his  house  whom  you  shall  call  Sant 
Das.  His  offspring  shall  greatly  increase  and  people 
many  villages.’  It  may  be  mentioned  that  his 
descendants  now  occupy  a tract  in  the  Firozpur 
district  called  Chak  Bhai.  After  this  the  Guru 
returned  to  Kiratpur. 

The  Emperor  Shah  Jahan  kept  near  him  his 
eldest  son  Dara  Shikoh  whom  he  loved.  His  second 
son  Shujah  Muhammad  he  made  Governor  of  Bengal. 
Aurangzeb  the  third  was  appointed  governor  of  the 
Dakhan,  and  Murad  Bakhsh  the  fourth  received  the 
province  of  Gujrat.  Their  ambition,  however,  was 
not  satisfied.  They  each  sought  to  become  Emperors, 
and  for  this  purpose  amassed  wealth  and  armies  in 
their  respective  provinces.  : In  doing  so  they  prac- 
tised great  oppression.  They  used  to  naake  the 
Rajput  Rajas  stand  with  clasped  hands  in  front  of 
them  and  bring  their  daughters  to  them  for  their 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI 


299 


enjoyment.  Thus  was  a stigma  attached  to  the 
Hindus  like  the  spot  on  the  moon.  The  Rajput 
princes  had  to  obey  in  everything,  or  they  would 
have  had  to  don  the  poisoned  skins  of  tigers  and  die. 

When  Shah  Jahan  had  reigned  for  many  years, 
he  contracted  the  germs  of  disease  and  showed  no 
signs  of  recovery.  No  one  but  Dara  Shikoh  was 
allowed  to  approach  him.  A rumour  then  spread 
that  His  Majesty  was  dead,  and  this  afforded  a good 
opportunity  to  thieves  and  highway  robbers  to 
exercise  their  self-elected  calling.  There  was  general 
confusion  far  and  near,  and  evil  fate  fell  on  the  com- 
munit5^  Dara  Shikoh  intercepted  letters  and  peti- 
tions to  his  father,  and  passed  on  them  such  orders 
as  he  thought  expedient.  People  were  afraid  to  go 
outside  their  houses.  No  complaints  were  listened 
to.  The  Emperor’s  sons  became  rebels,  and  assumed 
sovereignty  in  their  own  provinces.  In  every  village 
men’s  minds  were  unsettled  like  a boat  in  a whirlpool. 

It  was  ascertained  that  Shujah  Muhammad  had 
arrived  at  Banaras  from  Patna.  When  Dara  Shikoh 
heard  of  his  movements,  he  sent  for  Raja  Jai  Singh 
and  ordered  him  to  march  against  him.  Jai  Singh 
proceeded  with  all  haste  towards  Banaras.  He 
halted  at  Bahadurpur  and  Shujah  Muhammad  went 
forth  to  give  him  battle.  Shujah  Muhammad’s  troops 
were  defeated  with  great  slaughter  and  he  returned 
to  Bengal  pursued  by  Raja  Jai  Singh.  The  latter 
restored  tranquillity  in  the  districts  of  Patna  and 
Manger,  and  dried  the  weeping  eyes  of  the  populace. 

Dara  Shikoh  dispatched  Raja  Jaswant  Singh  of 
J odhpur  to  preserve  order  in  the  Dakhan.  He  gave 
him  special  instructions  to  punish  Aurangzeb  if  he 
strove  to  make  himself  independent,  and  bring  in 
chains  Murad  Bakhsh  who  had  shown  a disposi- 
tion to  usurp  sovereignty.  Jaswant  Singh  having 
received  command  of  a large  army,  proceeded  on 
his  expedition.  Before  his  arrival  in  the  Dakhan 
Aurangzeb  and  Murad  had  united  their  armies. 
Jaswant  Singh’s  men  fought  valiantly,  but  could  not 


300  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

succeed  against  numbers  and  were  obliged  to  retire. 
Aurahgzeb  was  enraged  that  Dara  Shikoh  should  haVe 
s^t  an  army  against  him,  and  he  at  once  prepaiied 
to  retaliate  and  if  possible  seize  the  reins  of  ettipire. 

Prior  to  the  departure  of  Jaswdnt  Singh  to  the 
Dakhan,  Shah  Jahan  and  his  son  Data  Shikoh  had 
resided  in  Agra.  During  Jaswant  Singh’s  absence 
they  removed  to  Dihli  for  the  benefit  of  Shah  Jahan's 
health,  the  climate  of  Agra  not  being  suitable  for  him. 
After  Jaswant  Singh’s' defeat  Dara  Shikoh  put  his 
father  under  restraint,  and  then  made  preparations 
to  oppose  Aurangzeb’s  progress.  The  Emperor 
cautioned  Dara  Shikoh  to  beware  of  Aurangzeb  who 
was  deceitful  and  vindictive,  but  the  warning  was 
of  no  avail.  Dara  Shikoh  proceeded  with  great 
pomp  and  rejoicing  to  oppose  Aurangzeb.  He 
pitched  his  camp  at  Samugarh  near  the  margin  of  the 
river  Chambal,  and  there  awaited  his  brother’s 
approach.  Aurangzeb  soon  appeared  at  the  head 
of  his  own  and  Murad’s  armies,  and  there  ensued 
a determined  battle.  Aurangzeb  succeeded  in 
capturing  several  of  Dara  Shikoh’s  nobles.  Dara 
Shikoh  himself  fled  from  the  field,  and  only  halted 
in  Dihli  where  he  entrenched  himself  in  the  fort. 

Aurangzeb  proceeded  to  Agra  to  seize  his  father 
who  by  this  time  had  returned  there.  The  old  man 
was  very  ill,  and  in  this  condition  was  imprisoned 
by  his  undutiful  son.  Aurangzeb  also  imprisoned 
his  brother  Murad  Bakhsh  though  he  had  assisted 
him  to  vanquish  Dara  Shikoh.  He  then  proceeded 
to  Dihli  with  his  own  and  Murad’s  armies,  and 
Dara  Shikoh's  fugitive  battalions*  Dara  Shikoh, 
fearing  that  the  Dihli  nobles  would  assist  his  brother 
and  that  he  himself  would  be  captured,  directed  his 
steps  to  the  Panjab,  taking  with  him  his  fauthful 
adherents  and  all  his  wealth  and  valuables. 

Aurangzeb  then  issued  a proclamation  that  no 
one  should  assist  or  receive  Dara  Shikoh  on  pain  of 
his  highest  displeasure.  The  result  was  that  Dara 
SMlbm  wandered  an  exile  from  town  to  town  and 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI 


301 


village  to  village.  In  this  extremity  he  decided  on 
visiting  the  Guru,  who  had  sent  him  the  healing  cloves 
and  myrobalans.  He  was,  in  the  first  place,  grateful 
to  the  Guru,  and,  in  the  second  place,  his  favourite 
priest  Mian  Mir  had  been  loud  in  the  Guru’s  praises. 
Dara  Shikoh  dispatched  the  following  letter  to  the 
Guru.  ‘ O saint  of  the  world,'  supremely  pious;  by 
meeting  whom  God’s  light  shineth  man,  pure 
image  of  God,  it  is  through  thy  favour  man  obtaineth 
salvation.  My  heart  longeth  to  behold  God,  but 
only  those  to  whom  thou  showest  favour  can  do  so. 
I desire  to  meet  thee  and  by  the  fulfilment  of  this 
wish  to  remove  my  doubts.  If  I may  fall  at  thy  feet 
the  wish  of  my  heart  will  be  fulfilled,  but  the  duties 
of  empire  leave  me  no  leisure  and  entangle  me  like 
a fish  in  a net.  My  priest  Mian  Mir  hath  praised 
thee,  and  since  then  I have  desired  to  meet  thee. 
Regard  me  with  a look  of  affection.  The  Emperor 
forced  empire  on  me,  but  I told  him  my  heart  desired 
not  greatness.  I was,  however,  obliged  to  obey  my 
royal  father’s  mandate.  Mercifully  assist  xne ! ’ 

To  this  letter  the  Guru  replied,  ‘ O Prince,  thou  art 
the  object  of  God’s  grace,  since  the  holy  saint  Mian 
Mir  showeth  thee  favour.  In  the  desire  to  tread  in 
God’s  way  and  know  thyself  thou  hast  obtained 
spiritual  empire.  Aurangzeb,  who  is  unmindful  of 
God,  may  obtain  worldly  empire,  but  shall  suffer 
without  respite  in  hell-fire.  Fear  not ; be  confident ; 
salvation  shall  be  thy  portion.  Thou  rulest  over 
the.  eternal  sovereignty  of  religion  which  will  last 
for  ever.  Great  is  thy  good  fortune  since  thou 
lovegt  God’s  name,  and  hast  met  Him  who  is  un- 
eqfipia^e4  and  indescribable.  Ever  blest  is  thy  devo- 
ti^.  Wherefcffe  be  happy  that  thou,  hast  dhtamed 
thy  sajygtion., , This  world  is  a play  .and  transient  in 
its  nature;  be  not  enamoured  therewith.’ 

Jplara  Shils^oh  proeee^ed  to  mratpnr  in  the  hope;  of 
oh^amihg  the,  Guru’s  ;a§«s.tani^,, (but  found  him 
ah^nt*  The  priij^ce  then  sent  secrnid  letter 

reached  him  in  Khadur.  . The  result  was  that 


302 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


the  Guru  and  the  prince  had  an  interview  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Bias.  On  this  occasion  the  prince 
made  large  offerings  to  the  Guru.  The  prince  had 
been  a diligent  student  of  the  Hindu  and  Muham- 
madan religions,  and  had  adopted  opinions  which 
belonged  to  the  enlightened  era  of  Akbar.  He  put 
the  Guru  some  questions  and  placed  before  him  some 
of  his  theological  doubts  and  difficulties.  The  Guru 
complimented  him  on  his  spiritual  knowledge,  and 
then  gave  him  instruction  in  the  Sikh  religion,  such 
instruction  as  has  often  been  repeated  in  the  preceding 
paiges.  The  Guru  added,  ‘ It  is  often  the  duty  of 
kings  to  take  arms  and  engage  in  battle,  and  either 
die  themselves  or  kill  their  enemies  for  the  acquisition 
of  wealth  and  territory.  Wherefore  collect  an  army 
and  obtain  as  many  allies  as  possible.  Go  to  Lahore, 
fortify  thy  position,  fight  when  necessary,  and  obtain 
victory.  God  assisteth  those  who  assist  themselves. 
Once  thou  inflictest  defeat  on  Aurangzeb,  thou 
shalt  have  many  Rajas  for  thine  allies.  They  now 
know  thine  excellent  disposition,  and  will  declare 
themselves  on  thy  side  when  they  are  convinced  that 
their  action  is  safe.  Thou  hast  now  no  resource  but 
the  arbitrament  of  battle.  All  the  kings  of  India 
are  subject  to  the  emperor  who  ruleth  in  Dihli,  and 
if  thou  recapture  it  not,  thou  shalt  have  no  abiding- 
place,  for  the  master  of  that  , city  shall  be  master  of 
India.  Therefore  thou  must  struggle  to  collect 
troops  for  battle  and  prevent  the  establishment  of 
Aurangzeb’s  authority.’  Dara  Shikoh  on  receiving 
this  encouragement  asked  the  Guru  to  grant  him  faith 
in  God,  and  said,  ‘ I do  not  require  a fleeting  temporal 
empire.  I merely  desire  spiritual  perfection.  I will 
fight  when  compelled  by  my  enemies  to  do  so  and 
endeavour  to  obtain  victory.  What  God  desireth  is 
unalterable.’ 

The  Guru  and  the  prince  retired  to  their  respective 

mformed  that  Aurangzeb’s  army  was  pursuing  him. 
e then  departed  for  Lahore  requesting  the  Guru  to 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  303 

impede  its  progress  as  much  as  possible.  Dara 
Shikoh  was  pursued  with  gr^at  vengeance  and 
hostility  by  his  brother’s  army  to  Lahore,  Multan, 
Bhakhar,  and  Gujrat  in  the  present  Bombay  presi- 
dency. He  was  finally  captured  through  the  infamous 
agency  of  a Pathan  named  Jiwan  who  betrayed  him. 
He  was  sent  to  Dihli,  where  his  political  conduct  and 
his  heterodox  opinions  were  charged  as  offences  against 
him.  In  the  hope  of  softening  his  brother’s  heart  he 
addressed  him  the  following  letter  : — ‘ My  brother 
and  my  emperor,  all  hail ! I congratulate  thee  and 
thy  children  on  the  empire  thou  hast  obtained. 
I have  no  worldly  desires  myself.  I only  want  a 
nook  to  dwell  in  and  a female  servant  to  cook  and 
fetch  for  me  so  that  I may  pray  for  thee.’  Entreaties 
never  availed  with  Aurangzeb.  Dara  Shikoh  was 
condemned  by  a jury  of  Muhammadan  priests  and 
executed  on  the  plea  of  apostasy  by  his  brother’s 
orders.  The  Guru’s  words  had  made  such  an 
impression  on  his  heart  that  he  never  uttered  a sigh 
of  pain  or  distress  in  his  last  moments.  It  is  said 
that  three  hundred  and  seventy  Muhammadan 
priests  signed  the  order  for  his  death.  One  man, 
named  Sarmad,  resolutely  refused  to  sign  it,  and 
thus  incurred  Aurangzeb’s  gravest  displeasure.^ 

^ Suraj  Parkash,  RSs  IX,  Chapters  2*,  23.  Sarmad  was  a man  of 
thought,  learning  and  enterprise.  Originally  a Jew,  he  nominally 
accepted  Islam.  He  left  his  native  country,  Kashan,  and  emigrated 
to*  India  as  a merchant  and  physician.  He  found  a patron  in  Dara 
Shikoh,  whom  he  nominated  as  the  rightful  successor  of  Shah  Jahan. 
Sarmad  used  to  sit  by  the  roadside  dressed  in  unfashionable  raiment, 
and  preach  to  the  populace  doctrines  not  in  accordance  with  the  rigid 
Moslem  orthodoxy  of  Aurangzeb.  It  became  well  known  that  Sarmad 
instead  of  repeating  the  orthodox  creed  of  Islam  used  to  repeat  a 
formula  which  did  not  acknowledge  Muhammad  as  the  prophe.t  of 
God,  On  account  of  this,  Ifis  friendship  for  Dara  Shikoh,  and  his 
geiKral. unconventionality,  Aurangzeb  ordered  that,  the . ‘ long-tongued 
unlj^iiever  ’ should  die.  His.executiqn  took  place  three  years  after  the 
murder  of  Dara  Shikoh.  He  was  buried  in  the  precincts  of  the  great 
Jamma  Masjid  in  Dihli. 


304 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


CHAPtER  V 

Aurangzeb  was  now  secure  on  the  throne  o£  Dihli. 
He  kept  his  father  a prisoner  in  Agra  until  he  died. 
Dara  Shikoh  was  dead,  Shujah  Muhammad  had  fled, 
and  Murad  Bakhsh  was  a prisoner  with  his  father. 
Aurangzeb  having  acquired  a bigoted  Muhammadan 
training  set  himself  to  uproot  the  Hindu  religion. 
He  began  with  the  temples  and  idols  in  the  sacred 
city  of  Mathura,  known  even  to  the  Greeks  of  the 
age  of  Alexander  as  a Hindu  place  of  sanctity,  and 
destroyed  there  every  vestige  of  Hindu  worship. 
He  then  destroyed  the  temples  and  idols  in  other 
parts  of  India.  He  pulled  down  the  temple  of 
Brahma  in  Pushkar  and  threw  its  materials  into  the 
neighbouring  lake.  He  demolished  seven  hundred 
temples  in  the  state  of  Ajmer.  He  then  proceeded 
to  Banaras,  the  great  stronghold  of  Hinduism,  where 
he  found  ample  materials  for  his  destructive  fury. 
Wherever  his  iconoclastic  zeal  prevailed  he  built 
Muhammadan  mosques.  Whenever  two  or  more 
men  had  a suit  or  a contention, . it  was  always 
decided  for  the  party  who  became  Muhammadan. 

Meantime  complaints  were  made  to  Aurangzeb 
against  the  Guru.  The  Guru,  it  was  said,  had  met 
Dara  Shikoh,  blessed  him,  and  assisted  him  in 
opposing  the  Emperor ; and  it  was  also  reported 
that  he  was  preaching  a religion  distinct  from 
Islam,,  .and  performing  miracles  in  evidence  of  his 
divine’  xa^on.  The  Emperor  was  accordingly 
advised  to  send  for  him  and  convert  him  to  Islam 
imljess  he  could  clearly  establish  his  religious  pre- 
t^fioBS  by  the  performance  of  miracles  at  the  royal 
court.  When  tlm  Guru  was  onde  converted/  hundreds' 
G^  '^touaahds  of  Hindds  would  follow  his  exampl^.' 
Moreover  the  (juru,  who  had  been  a frien^  of  tl|^^ 
Emperor's  enemy,  Iwa  Shikoh,  could  never  beeomeT 
his  iriend. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  305 

The  Emperor  accordingly  addressed  the  following 
to  the  Guru  : — ‘ Guru  Nanak’s  house  was  the  house 
of  holy  men.  He  treated  friend  and  foe  in  the  same 
way,  but  thou  hast  supported  Dara  Shikoh  in  his 
effort  to  obtain  sovereignty.  I have  captured  and 
put  him  to  death,  so  he  hath  in  no  way  benefited  by 
thine  assistance.  But  let  bygones  be  bygones,  and 
let  us  now  be  friends.  Come  to  me.  I am  now 
enthroned  as  Emperor.  I have  a great  desire  to 
behold  thee.  Wherefore  thou  shouldst  come  to  me 
without  delay.’ 

The  Guru  replied,  ‘ I have  no  business  with  thee 
that  thou  shouldst  have  summoned  me.  I am  not 
a king  who  payeth  thee  tribute,  nor  do  I desire  to 
receive  anything  from  thee,  nor  do  we  stand  in  the 
relation  of  priest  and  disciple  to  each  other,  so 
wherefore  hast  thou  summoned  me  ? So  far  from  my 
having  conferred  empire  on  Dara  Shikoh,  it  was  the 
eternal  throne  and  umbrella  of  religion  I conferred 
on  him.  He  had  no  wish  for  terrestrial  empire.  The 
empire  he  hath  obtained  is  imperishable.  It  is  only 
he  whom  God  loveth  who  can  be  like  Dara  Shikoh. 
If  thou  have  any  doubt  as  to  the  empire  Dara 
Shikoh  hath  obtained,  meditate  on  him  as  thou  goest 
to  sleep,  and  thou  shalt  have  a vision  of  the  reality.’ 

The  Guru’s  words  proved  true.  Aurangzeb  one 
night  saw  his  brother  seated  on  his  throne.  Celestial 
maids  were  dancing  round  him.  Sandal,  attar  of  roses, 
and  other  perfumes  exhaled  from  them,  and  garlands 
of  flowers  adorned  their  persons.  Aurangzeb  dressed 
in  dirty  clothes  in  the  style  of  a pariah  was  carrying 
a basket  of  filth.  Rain  fell  at  that  moment  and  the 
filth  overspread  his  features.  Then  up  came  a slave- 
driver  and  struck  him  such  a blow  with  a stick  that 
he  fell  on  his  face.  Upon  this  the  Emperor  awoke 
and  began  to  reflect.  ‘ The  Guru  sent  this  dream  to 
terrify  me.  Now  what  is  to  be  done  ? I will  not 
abate  a j ot  of  my  efforts  against  him.  I will  straight- 
way send  an  army  to  capture  him  and  bring  him 

X 


SIKH.  IV 


3o6  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

before  me. ' N ext  morning,  on  awaking,  the  Emperor 
called  one  of  his  nobles  and  said,  ‘ If  Guru  Har  Rai 
will  not  come  of  his  own  accord,  then  arrest  and 
produce  him  before  me.  If  he  struggle  against  his 
arrest,  then  write  to  me,  and  I will  send  a strong 
force  with  sufficient  munitions  of  war  to  thine 
assistance.’ 

The  noble,  seeing  the  difficulty  of  the  enterprise 
before  him,  left  the  royal  presence.  Go,  however,  he 
must,  but  his  object  was  never  accomplished.  On 
the  road  he  ate  some  badly  cooked  food  which  induced 
indigestion  and  caused  his  death.  At  that  time 
a company  of  Sikhs  arrived  from  Dihli  to  behold  the 
Guru.  They  informed  him  of  all  the  unsuccessful 
efforts  made  by  the  Emperor  to  arrest  him,  and  they 
expressed  their  apprehension  that  some  harm  would 
befall  him.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ At  the  time  of  my 
obtaining  the  Guruship,  my  grandfather  said  that  any 
person  who  strove  to  do  me  injury  should  vanish  like 
hail  before  the  fire.’  The  Guru  then  quoted  from 
Guru  Arjan  ; — 

God  is  the  Lord  of  all  creation  ; He  specially  assisteth 
His  servants.^ 

The  Muhammadan  priests  counselled  the  Emperor 
not  to  use  any  harsh  language  in  his  summons  to  the 
Guru,  but  write  to  him  in  an  apparently  friendly 
manner.  When  the  Guru  arrived,  the  Emperor  could 
treat  him  as  he  pleased.  This  advice  the  Emperor 
accepted,  and  wrote  as  follows : — ‘ O holy  Guru,  thou 
art  in  the  place  of  Guru  Ram  Das,  who  was  univer- 
sally known  as  the  Guru  of  the  world  and  lord  of 
mirjicles.  He  visited  my  ancestor  the  Emperor 
Akbar  and  was  on  friendly  terms  with  him,  so  kindly 
come  thou  too  and  grant  me  a sight  of  thee.  Show 
me  thy  miracles  and  tell  me  of  the  ways  of  God.’ 

The  messenger  duly  arrived  in  Kiratpur  and  pre- 
sented the  Emperor’s  letter.  The  Guru  consulted 

^ GttjarL 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI 


307 


his  Sikhs  as  to  the  expediency  of  going  to  Dihli,  and 
putting  himself  into  the  Emperor’s  power.  His 
counsellors  gave  their  opinion,  ‘ Take  care  that 
matters  go  not  from  bad  to  worse.  The  Emperor  is 
very  obstinate.  On  the  other  hand,  thou  possessest 
miraculous  power,  and  he  on  whose  head  thou  placest 
thy  hand  can  accomplish  everything.  Therefore  in 
our  humble  opinion  it  is  better  for  thee  to  go.  But 
thou  art  a searcher  of  hearts,  and  knowest  best.’ 

The  Guru  replied,  ‘ What  you  counsel  is  politic, 
but  I have  registered  a vow  that  I will  never  look  at 
the  wicked  Emperor  Aurangzeb.  In  the  first  place, 
I have  no  business  with  him.  Secondly,  he  is  very  de- 
ceitful and  treacherous.  Thirdly,  he  hath  imprisoned 
his  father  and  put  to  death  his  brother  Dara  Shikoh, 
who  was  a great  saint,  and  believed  in  the  All-per- 
vading Spirit.  Fourthly,  the  Emperor,  who  is  so 
cruel  and  bigoted  and  murder eth  holy  men,  is  every 
one’s  enemy.’ 

Ram  Rai,  son  of  the  Guru,  arrived  while  the  subject 
was  under  discussion.  The  descendants  of  the  Guru 
Were  all  assembled,  and  every  one  was  giving  his 
opinion.  Some  said  ‘Yes’,  and  some  said  ‘No’. 
Upon  this  Ram  Rai  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  some 
one  should  certainly  go  to  the  Emperor,  otherwise 
their  position  would  be  one  of  great  difficulty,  as  the 
Emperor  would  not  be  put  off  with  excuses.  Upon 
this  the  assembly  turned  towards  Ram  Rai  and  said, 
‘ Thou  art  the  Guru’s  elder  son  and  capable.  Go 
thou  and  settle  this  matter,  otherwise  there  will  be 
great  trouble.  Aurangzeb  hath  quite  determined  to 
carry  his  design  into  execution.  If  thou  go  not, 
there  will  be  a huge  conflagration.  It  is  not  on  any 
account  proper  to  quarrel  with  the  ruler  of  the  period.’ 
Upon  this  Ram  Rai  said  that  if  they  all  wished  it, 
he  would  go  himself  to  the  Emperor  and  effect  a 
satisfactory  settlement  with  him.  Guru  Har  Rai 
accordingly  gave  him  permission  to  depart. 

The  Guru  on  the  departure  of  his  son  Ram  Rai 

X 2 


3o8  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

for  Dihli,  enjoined  him  in  all  his  words  and  actions 
to  fix  his  thoughts  on  God,  and  everything  would 
prove  successful.  He  also  impressed  on  him  the  pro- 
priety of  not  countenancing  any  objections  the 
Emperor  might  make  to  the  Granth  Sahib,  but  of 
replying  to  him  patiently  and  to  the  purpose.  The 
Guru  continued, ' The  Emperor  J ahangir  told  my  great 
grandfather  Guru  Arjan,  that  certain  passages  reflect- 
ing on  the  Muhammadans  ought  to  be  expunged,  but 
he  indignantly  refused,  and  said  he  would  never 
alter  or  abri%e  the  writings  of  the  Gurus.  He 
suffered  much  in  consequence,  but  he  never  flattered 
any  one.’  Ram  Rai  was  then  instructed  to  rely  on 
the  divine  power  of  the  Gurus,  and  not  in  any  way 
recede  from  the  principles  of  his  religion. 

Ram  Rai  made  preparations  for  his  journey,  and 
next  morning  with  Gurdas^  and  Tara  (great-grand- 
son of  Bhai  Bahlo)  and  others  took  leave  of  the  Guru 
and  set  out  on  his  journey.  When  in  due  time  they 
reached  Dihli,  the  Emperor  was  informed  by  one  of 
his  stkff  that  Guru  Har  Rai  had  not  come  himself,  but 
had  sent  his  son  Ram  Rai  who  might  be  subjected 
to  the  same  trial  as  had  been  intended  for  his  father. 
The  Emperor  then  decided  that,  if  his  object  in 
making  trial  of  the  Guru  were  not  fulfilled  by  the 
Guru’s  son,  he  would  send  for  the  Guru  himself. 

It  is  said  that  Ram  Rai  performed  several  miracles 
in  Dihli.  The  Emperor  sent  him  poisoned  robes  which 
he  wore  unscathed.  At  one  interview  the  Emperor 
had  a sheet  spread  over  a deep  pit  so  that  Ram  Rai 
might  fall  into  it,  but  the  sheet,  it  is  said,  would  not 
give  way,  and  Ram  Rai  was  miraculously  preserved. 

By  the  Emperor’s  order  a meeting  of  Muhammadan 
priests  was  held  for  the  purpose  of  interrogating 
Ram  Rai  on  the  subject  of  the  Gurus’  hymns.  The 
Emperor  opened  the  conversation,  ‘ Ram  Rai,  your 
Guru  Nanak  bath  written  against  the  Moslem 
religion.  In  one  place  he  hath  said  : — 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  309 

Mitti  Musalman  ki  pere  pai  kumiar  ; 

Ghar  bhande  itan  kian,  jaldi  kare  pukar,^ 

the  translation  of  which  is : — 

The  ashes  of  the  Muhammadan  fall  into  the  potter’s  clod ; 

Vessels  and  bricks  are  fashioned  from  them ; they  cry  out 
as  they  burn. 

‘ What  say  you  the  meaning  is  ? ’ 

RamRai  began  to  reflect  that  it  was  with  great  diffi- 
culty he  could  please  Aurangzeb.  If  he  became  sulky, 
then  all  his  miracles  would  be  of  no  avail.  He  there- 
fore determined  to  alter  the  line  of  Guru  Nanak,  in  order 
to  gratify  the  Emperor.  He  thus  altogether  forgot  his 
father’s  parting  injunctions,  and  said,  ‘ Thy  Majesty, 
Guru  Nanak  wrote,  ‘Mitti  beiman  ki’,  that  is,  the 
the  ashes  of  the  faithless,  not  of  the  Musalmans,  fall 
into  the  potter’s  clod.  The  text  has  been  causelessly 
corrupted  by  ignorant  persons  and  thy  Majesty’s 
religion  and  mine  defamed.  The  faces  of  the  faithless 
and  not  of  the  Musalmans  shall  be  blackened  in  both 
worlds.  When  alive  they  shall  burn,  and  when  dead 
their  ashes  shall  be  defiled.’  All  the  Muhammadan 
priests  were  pleased  with  this  reply.  The  Emperor 
then  conferred  a mark  of  favour  on  Ram  Rai  and 
dissolved  the  assembly. 

The  Sikhs  of  Dihli  lost  no  time  in  reporting  Ram 
Rai’s  perfidy  to  his  father.  Their  envoy  swiftly  pro- 
ceeded to  Kiratpur,  informed  the  Guru  of  the  pomp 
and  honour  with  which  Ram  Rai  had  been  received  in 
Dihli,  and  detailed  the  miracles  he  had  exhibited. 
They  then  explained  how  he  had  made  an  alteration 
in  a line  of  Guru  Nanak  in  order  to  please  the  Emperor, 
and  asked  the  Guru  how  far  this  was  to  proceed. 

The  Guru  was  much  distressed  at  the  insult  to  Guru 
Nanak  and  the  Gran th  Sahib,  and  said,  ‘ The  words 
of  Guru  Nanak  are  unerring  arrows.  Great  priests, 
holy  men,  and  miracle- workers  revere  his  words. 

1 Asa  ki  War. 


310 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Guru  Nanak  was  a sovereign  who  established  his 
empire  over  men.’  The  Guru  then  passing  in  review 
the  whole  of  Ram  Rai’s  conduct  since  his  arrival  in 
Dihli,  his  treachery  to  his  faith,  his  unnecessary 
exhibition  of  miracles,  and  his  long  absence,  decided 
that  he  was  not  fit  for  the  Guruship.  ‘ The  Guruship,’ 
said  the  Guru,  ‘ is  like  a tigress’s  milk  which  can  only 
be  contained  in  a golden  cup.  Only  he  who  is  ready 
to  devote  his  life  thereto  is  worthy  of  it.  Let  Ram 
Rai  not  look  on  my  face  again.  Let  him  abide  with 
Aurangzeb,  and  amass  money  at  his  court.  In  the 
words  of  Guru  Amar  Das  : — 

Let  him  who  is  worthy  sit  on  the  king’s  throne.^ 

The  face  of  the  liar  shall  be  cursed  ; the  true  saint  only 
shall  be  magnified.’  * 

When  Ram  Rai,  who  remained  in  Dihli,  heard  of 
his  father’s  decision  to  exclude  him  from  the  succes- 
sion, he  began  to  repent  and  grieve : — ‘ Alas  ! why 
have  I done  such  an  evil  deed  ? To  flatter  a false 
monarch  I have  altered  a word  of  the  divine  Guru 
Nanak,  not  one  iota  of  whose  writings  is  inaccurate.’ 
While  Ram  Rai  said  this  in  his  heart,  he  began  to 
boast  to  the  world  at  large — ‘ It  is  of  no  consequence. 
What  care  I for  the  Guruship  ? I have  lakhs  of 
rupees,  I have  endless  Sikhs  and  followers.  The 
Emperor  is  now  a sincere  friend  of  mine.  Why  should 
I desire  the  Guruship  ? I will  seize  it  by  force  after 
my  father’s  death.  I will  now  hold  my  court  in 
Dihli.  What  care  I for  anybody  ? I have  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  brave  men  at  my  disposal  to  support 
me.’  Thus  stating  the  pros  and  cons  of  his  position 
and  tossing  his  opinions  from  side  to  side  as  if  they 
were  a magician’s  ball,  he  gave  himself  airs  as  if  he 
had  been  already  appointed  governor  of  a province. 

Prior  to  the  departure  of  Ram  Rai  for  Dihli  a 
Sikh  came  from  a distance  to  see  the  Guru,  and 
asked  him  which  of  his  sons  should  succeed  him. 

^ Maru  ki  War  1.  * Bilawal  ki  War. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  31 1 

It  is  said  that  he  suggested  the  following  test — ‘ Take 
a needle  to  where  my  two  sons  are  reading  the 
Granth  Sahib  by  turns.  Try  to  insert  the  needle 
into  the  couch  on  which  the  sacred  volume  is  sup- 
ported. The  couch  which  is  most  softened  by  the 
reading  shall  receive  the  needle.  If  thou  but  prick 
it,  the  needle  will  enter  of  its  own  accord.’  The 
Sikh  took  the  needle  and  first  tried  to  pierce  the 
couch  when  Ram  Rai  was  reading,  but  it  failed  to 
enter.  He  waited  until  it  was  the  turn  of  the  Guru’s 
youngest  son,  Har  Krishan  to  read,  and  after  a brief 
delay  inserted  the  needle.  It  is  said  that  it  at  once 
entered  the  couch  which  had  become  soft  as  wax  by 
the  force  of  Har  Krishan’s  devotion.^ 

The  Sikh  went  and  informed  the  Guru,  but  at  his 
request  kept  private  the  result  of  the  trial.  The 
Guru  then  said,  ‘ The  immortal  God  hath  given  thee 
answer.  What  impression  will  not  Har  Krishan’s 
voice  make  on  soft  minds  since  it  produceth  such  an 
impression  on  hard  wood  ? It  is  only  he  whose  words 
have  such  power  who  is  fitted  for  the  Guruship.’ 


Chapter  VI 

After  Ram  Rai  had  resided  in  Dihli  for  some 
time  he  decided  he  would  go  to  Kiratpur  to  endeavour 
to  induce  his  father  to  reverse  his  decision  regarding 
him.  ‘ The  rope  may  be  rotten,  but  the  twist  had 
not  yet  left  it  ’ — that  is,  though  his  hopes  were  little, 
yet  his  desire  for  the  Guruship  remained.  He  took 
leave  of  the  Emperor  and  proceeded  to  a spot  twelve 
kos  from  Kiratpur.  There  he  pitched  his  tent,  and 
wrote  to  his  father  for  permission  to  visit  him.  He 
said  he  had  suffered  for  his  sins  and  desired  to  implore 
the  parental  forgiveness.  The  Gutu  replied,  ‘ Ram 

^ This  parable  is  now  understood  by  the  Sikhs  to  mean  that  Ram 
Rai’s  reading  of  the  Granth  Sahib  produced  no  impression  on  the  Sikh, 
while  the  devout  manner  in  which  Har  Krishan  intoned  the  sacred 
volume  softened  the  Sikh’s  heart. 


312 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Rai,  thou  hast  disobeyed  my  order  and  sinned. 
How  canst  thou  aspire  to  become  a holy  man  ? Go 
whither  thy  fancy  leadeth  thee.  I will  never  see  thee 
again  on  account  of  thine  infidelity.  If  I appoint  thee 
Guru,  what  thou  hast  done  to-day  others  will  do 
to-morrow.’ 

f Ram  Rai  on  receipt  of  this  letter  proceeded  to 
Lahore  where  he  was  well  received.  Apart  from 
being  the  eldest  son  of  the  Guru  and  a reputed 
thaumaturge,  he  was  also  supported  by  the  Sikhs 
through  policy,  for  it  was  believed  that  he  possessed 
the  confidence  of  the  Emperor.  On  this  account 
men  who  had  previously  not  been  Sikhs,  now  became 
his  disciples  and  espoused  his  cause. 

Ram  Rai  in  process  of  time  wrote  to  his  uncle 
Dhir  Mai  to  request  him  to  intercede  for  him  with  his 
father.  ‘ Tell  him  that  it  is  not  a good  thing  to  up- 
root a household.  It  is  not  proper  to  bestow  the 
Guruship  on  my  younger  brother  Har  Krishan. 
On  this  some  very  severe  comments  will  be  made. 
When  Prithia  was  superseded  in  favour  of  Guru 
Arjan,  what  troubles  arose ! Let  not  this  happen 
again.  I am  besides  on  very  good  terms  with  the 
Emperor  Auraingzeb,  and  I shall  certainly  complain 
to  him.’  Dhir  Mai  took  this  letter  to  the  Guru’s 
mother  and  persuaded  her  to  accompany  him  to  the 
Guru,  who  by  this  time  had  returned  to  Kartarpur, 
in  the  hope  of  prevailing  on  him  to  pardon  Ram  Rai. 
Dhir  Mai  and  the  Guru’s  mother  both  pleaded 
earnestly  and  with  their  own  natural  eloquence 
expanded  Ram  Rai’s  arguments. 

The  Guru  replied,  ‘ ’\\^at  I have  done  is  not  at  all 
unusual.  Guru  Nanak  having  made  trial  of  his  sons 
gave  the  Guruship  to  a disciple.  Guru  Angad  and 
Guru  Amar  Das,  having  also  made  trial  of  their  sons, 
did  not  appoint  them  to  succeed,  but  gave  the  Guru- 
ship  to  their  servants.  After  full  consideration  I have 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  Ram  Rai  was  blinded 
by  the  love  of  pelf  when  he  so  far  forgot  himself  as  to 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  RAI  313 

alter  a word  in  a hymn  of  Guru  Nanak  to  please  the 
Emperor.  What  was  done  in  the  beginning  will 
also  be  done  now.’ 

Dhir  Mai  was  ndt  to  be  easily  balked.  He  kept 
continually  pressing  Ram  Rai’s  claims  on  the  Guru, 
so  the  latter,  in  order  to  avoid  an  altercation  with  his 
brother  resolved  to  leave  Kartarpur,  and  return  to 
Kiratpur.  There  is  an  Oriental  proverb  that  swans 
remain  not  in  the  mire  ; so  the  Guru  could  not  abide 
in  evil  association.  He  formed  his  plan  overnight, 
set  out  next  morning,  and  arrived  in  due  course  in 
Kiratpur  where  he  gave  a splendid  banquet  to  his 
people. 

On  one  occasion  when  some  Sikhs  singing  hymns 
from  the  Granth  Sahib  visited  the  Guru,  he  happened 
to  be  lying  on  his  couch.  On  hearing  the  hymns  he 
immediately  arose.  When  asked  the  reason  he  said, 
‘ Hear,  my  beloved  Sikhs,  the  Guru  is  embodied 
in  compositions  whose  sanctity  is  immeasurable 
and  unrivalled.  The  Guru’s  instruction  is  a raft 
to  cross  over  the  fiery  ocean  of  the  world.  It  con- 
ferreth  happiness  on  the  true  Guru’s  Sikhs,  and 
removeth  sin  from  the  hearts  of  the  readers.  It  may 
be  called  a lion  to  frighten  the  deer  of  avarice,  or  an 
elephant  to  break  down  the  great  tree  of  sorrow.  It 
produceth  divine  knowledge  and  dispelleth  ignorance. 
He  who  payeth  respect  to  the  Guru’s  hymns  shall 
without  further  effort  cross  over  the  terrible  ocean 
of  the  world,  for  great  is  their  efficacy.  Were  I not 
to  show  reverence  for  the  Guru’s  hymns,  my  Sikhs 
would  not  do  so,  and  without  such  reverence  bliss 
could  not  be  obtained.  That  is  why  I rose  from  my 
couch. 

‘ The  Sikh  who  acteth  according  to  the  Guru’s 
instruction,  shall  obtain  the  supreme  dignity.  It  is 
only  he  who  hath  no  devotion  or  faith,  who  rever- 
enceth  not  the  Guru’s  words.  Without  reverence 
devotion  is  not  obtained,  and  without  devotion  there 
is  no  holiness.  Without  holiness  how  can  there  be 


314  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

deliverance  ? And  without  deliverance  the  soul 
shall  be  subject  to  further  transmigration  and  shall 
not  be  absorbed  in  God.  It  is  incumbent  on  the 
Sikhs  to  obtain  happiness  by  pondering^  on  the 
Guru’s  words.  Pilgrimage,  fasting,  sacrifice,  and 
painful  austerities  are  of  no  avail.  The  Guru’s 
saint  is  my  Sikh,  and  delighteth  in  the  Guru’s  hymns. 
Be  assured  that  he  who  doth  not,  is  no  Sikh  of 
mine.’  The  Guru’s  example  to  rise  when  the  sacred 
volume  is  read  is  still  observed  by  his  followers. 

The  Guru  feeling  his  end  approaching  again 
thought  of  his  successor.  He  had  always  felt  that 
as  Ram  Rai,  who  was  plotting  and  struggling  for 
the  Guruship,  was  unworthy,  it  must  be  left  to  some 
holy  person.  He  remembered  the  wisdom  of  Kabir : — 

Do  now  the  work  of  to-morrow  ; and  if  thou  do  it  now, 
do  it  at  once, 

Nothing  can  be  done  hereafter  when  Death  standeth  over 
thy  head. 

The  Guru  having  thus  resolved  summoned  a great 
council  of  his  Sikhs  at  which  the  descendants  of  his 
predecessors  attended.  The  occasion  was  celebrated 
with  a banquet,  great  rejoicings,  the  songs  of  many 
minstrels,  and  the  music  of  many  rebeck-players. 
The  Guru  seated  his  second  son  Har  Krishan,  who 
was  still  a child,  on  a throne  in  the  centre  of  the 
assembly.  He  then  placed  a coco-nut  and  five  paise 
before  him,  circumambulated  him  three  times,  and 
had  a tilak  or  patch  put  on  his  forehead.  The  whole 
company  then  rose  and  did  obeisance  to  the  young 
Guru.  Guru  Har  Rai  enjoined  all  his  Sikhs  to  con- 
sider Har  Krishan  as  his  image,  to  put  faith  in  him, 
and  they  should  obtain  salvation.  -Thus  was  the 
ceremony  of  Har  Krishan’s  installation  complete. 

Guru  Har  Rai  closed  his  eyes  in  divine  pleasure 
and  went  to  his  final  rest  on  Sunday  the  ninth  day 
of  the  dark  half  of  the  month  of  Kartik,  Sambat 
1718  (a.d.  1661). 


Wi9*HinJ?9 


GURU  HAR  KRISHAN 


SIKH  IV  P.  315 


315 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  KRISHAN, 
THE  EIGHTH  GURU 
Chapter  I 

Guru  Har  Krishan,  the  second  and  younger  son 
of  Guru  Har  Rai  and  his  wife  Krishan  Kaur,  was 
born  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  dark  half  of  the  month 
of  Sawan  in  Sambat  1713  (a,d.  1656).  The  reason 
why  his  brother  Ram  Rai  was  superseded  has 
already  been  given.  Har  Krishan,  though  appointed 
Guru  at  the  age  of  five  years  and  three  months,  gave 
promise  of  a docile  spirit  and  acute  intellect.  Ac- 
cording to  a Hindustani  proverb,  the  nature  and 
ultimate  size  of  a tree  can  be  judged  by  its  sprouting 
leaves,  so  this  child  gave  early  indications  of  being 
worthy  to  succeed  to  the  high  dignity  of  his  line.  It 
is  said  that  even  at  that  early  a^e  Guru  Har  Krishan 
used  to  give  his  Sikhs  instruction,  resolve  their  doubts, 
and  lead  them  on  the  way  to  salvation,  Sikhs 
came  from  all  (Quarters  to  visit  him,  and  he  sent 
preachers  in  every  direction  to  fulfil  his  father’s 
pious  object  to  propagate  and  extend  the  faith. 

Ram  Rai  was  at  the  Emperor’s  court  in  Dihli 
when  his  younger  brother  was  appointed  to  the 
Guruship  in  Kiratpur.  On  hearing  of  it  be  became 
very  envious.  He  said,  ‘ I first  came  here  by  my 
father  Guru  Har  Rai’s  order.  This  powerful  Em- 
peror hath  so  appreciated  me  that  he  hath  given  me 
much  wealth.  I have  moreover  extended  the  faith, 
and  yet  my  father  hath  deprived  me  of  the  Guru- 
ship  and  conferred  it  on  my  younger  brother.’ 
Although  Ram  Rai’s  conscience  told  him  that  he 
liad  done  wrong,  yet,  in  the  words  of  the  chronicler, 
jealousy  stopped  the  ears  of  his  intelligence. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


316 

The  masand  Gurdas  who  attended  on  Ram  Rai, 
noticing  his  troubled  state  of  mind  said,  ‘ There  is  no 
need  to  be  sad.  Thou  hast  many  disciples  in  this 
part  of  the  country.  Even  the  great  Emperor  him- 
self holdeth  thee  in  honour.  Of  what  consequence 
is  ■ Guru  Har  Rai’s  neglect  of  thee  ? ’ Ram  Rai 
replied,  ‘ Knowest  thou  not  that  when  the  Sikhs  of 
this  country  learn  that  the  Guruship  hath  been  given 
to  my  younger  brother,  they  will  turn  away  from 
me  and  go  to  him  ? ’ Gurdas  was  ready  with  an 
expedient,  ‘ Send  thy  masands  in  every  direction 
to  proclaim  thee  Guru,  and  say  that  whoever  boweth 
to  any  other  shall  be  accursed.  By  this  device  people 
will  reverence  thee  as  Guru  Har  Rai’s  rightful  suc- 
cessor. If,  on  the  other  hand,  people  reverence 
Guru  Har  Krishan  and  make  him  offerings,  that 
needeth  not  disturb  thy  mind.  He  is  thy  younger 
brother  begotten  of  a Guru  and  entitled  to  mainte- 
nance.’ 

Ram  Rai  did  not  approve  of  the  latter,  but  he 
did  of  the  former  portion  of  Gurdas’ s advice, 
namely,  to  have  himself  proclaimed  Guru.  He 
then  assembled  the  masands,  ordered  them  to  go  in 
every  direction,  proclaim  his  succession,  and  bring 
him  the  offerings  of  the  faithful.  Ram  Rai  reflected 
not  on  the  words  of  Kabir  : — 

Where  there  is  covetousness  there  is  death  ; where  there 
is  forgiveness  there  is  God  Himself. 

The  object  of  the  Guruship  was  to  save  the  world, 
to  give  instruction  in  the  true  Name,  and  to  blend  men 
with  their  Creator,  but  Ram  Rai  thought  it  a means 
of  amassing  money,  and  for  this  among  other  reasons 
his  father  had  set  him  aside.  The  masands  followed 
the  example  of  Ram  Rai,  and  applied  themselves, 
not  to  spread  the  religion  of  the  Gurus,  but  to 
accumulate  wealth  for  their  pleasures. 

The  disciples  whose  guru  is  blind  act  blindly 
themselves.  The  masands  began  to  beat  and  plunder 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  KRISHAN  317 

poor  Sikhs,  and  threatened  with  the  Guru’s  curse  all 
who  resented  their  conduct.  Ram  Rai’s  desire  to 
collect-large  offerings  was  not  fulfilled.  The  masands 
became  proud  and  rebellious,  and  kept  the -greater 
part  of  the  offerings  for  themselves.  They  treated 
Ram  Rai  as  a nonentity,  for  they  deemed  that  all  the 
Sikhs  were  in  their  own  power,  and  that  they  could 
appoint  to  the  Guruship  whomsoever  they  pleased. 
Ram  Rai  found  himself  completely  at  their  mercy, 
and  was  obliged  to  act  according  to  their  dictation. 

After  much  reflection  Ram  Rai  decided  on  laying 
his  case  before  the  Emperor.  On  obtaining  an 
audience  he  thus  addressed  Aurangzeb,  ‘ Sire,  my 
father  hath  gone  on  high,  and  my  younger  brother 
hath  taken  possession  of  his  throne,  his  property, 
and  offerings.  This  misfortune  hath  befallen  me 
on  account  of  my  obedience  to  thee.  -My  father 
was  opposed  to  thee  on  that  account,  and  at  his 
death  ordered  my  younger  brother  never  to  be 
reconciled  to  thee  and  never  to  look  upon  thy  face. 
Now  I pray  thee  to  summon  him  to  Dihli,  and  order 
him  to  exhibit  miracles  as  I have  done.’ 

Aurangzeb,  who  was  himself  the  incarnation  of 
deceit,  instinctively  knew  what  Ram  Rai  was  plot- 
ting, but  yet  his  conscience  at  first  moved  him 
to  give  good  counsel,  ‘ O Ram  Rai,  thou  art  amply 
provided  for.  Why  annoy  thy  younger  brother  ? 
He  is  also  thy  father’s  son.’  When  Ram  Rai 
further  pressed  his  plaint,  it  occurred  to  Aurang- 
zeb that  he  might  avail  himself  of  Ram  Rai’s 
displeasure  for  his  own  religious  and  political  pur- 
poses. He  said  to  himself,  ‘ I want  to  convert  all 
the  Hindus  to  Islam,  but  I apprehend  failure  in 
the  Panjab,  for  there  the  people  greatly  reverence 
the  Guru,  and,  if  they  rise  against  me,  I shall 
have  great  difficulty  in  effecting  my  design;  I have 
already  several  times  considered  how  I can  induce 
the  Guru  to  accept  the  Muhammadan  faith.  It 
was  on  that  account  I summoned  Guru  Har  Rai. 


3i8  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

He  sent  his  son  to  me,  and  I have  him  now  in  my 
power.  There  is  yet  another  brother,  of  whose 
resistance  to  my  designs  I am  equally  apprehensive  ; 
but  if  I succeed  in  fonging  him  here,  I may  bribe 
him  into  acquiescence.  If  he  obstinately  resist, 
I will  set  both  brothers  at  variance,  and  they  shall 
die  by  mutual  slaughter.  In  this  way  my  faith 
will  quickly  spread  in  the  Panjab,  and  I shall  gain 
heaven  by  my  success  in  converting  the  infidels. 
The  Sikhs  will  never  suspect  that  I have  put  both 
brothers  to  death.  I shall  kill  the  snake  without 
breaking  my  stick.’ 

Aurangzeb  having  contrived  this  tortuous  and 
wicked  plan,  called  Raja  Jai  Singh  of  Amber  (Jaipur) 
who  happened  to  be  at  court  and  ordered  him  to 
summon  Guru  Har  Krishan  the  successor  of  Guru  Har 
Rai.  ‘ I wish  to  see  him,’  said  the  monarch,' be  careful 
that  he  be  treated  with  all  respect  on  his  journey.’ 

Ram  Rai  was  delighted  on  hearing  of  the  order  to 
summon  his  brother — ‘ If  my  brother  disobey,  the 
Emperor  will  send  an  army  to  destroy  him.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  he  come  here,  it  will  be  in  disobedience 
to  our  father’s  fifial  order  never  to  appear  before 
Aurangzeb  ; and  he  will  then  be  deemed  a greater 
sinner  than  I.  If  he  run  away  through  fear  of  the 
Emperor,  I will  then  go  and,  establishing  myself 
as  Guru,  take  possession  of  Kiratpur.’  Aurangzeb 
was  as  much  delighted  as  Ram  Rai  at  the  decision 
that  had  been  arrived  at,  though  for  quite  a different 
reason. 

Raja  Jai  Singh  who  had  previously  heard  the 
Guru’s  praises  was  pleased  at  the  prospect  of  making 
his  acquaintance,  and  of  listening  to  his  instruction. 
He  was  very  glad  that  such  a Wgoted  man  as  the 
Emperor  had  ordered  the  Guru  to  be  summoned  with 
tbe  high  respect  due  to  his  spiritual  position.  The 
Sikhs  of  Dihli  also,  who  were  displeased  at  Ram 
Rai’s  proceeding,  manifested  their  satisfaction  at 
the  hope  of  seeing  the  real  Guru  among  them,  and 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  KRISHAN  319 

begged  the  Raja  to  inform  him  that  not  only  the 
Emperor  but  the  Sikhs  of  Dihli  were  thirsting  to  be- 
hold him. 

Raja  Jai  Singh  Sent  a high  official  with  orders  that 
he  was  to  invite  rather  than  summon  the  Guru,  and 
escort  him  to  the  imperial  capital  with  all  pomp  and 
ceremony.  The  Raja  knew  that  Ram  Rai  and  the 
Guru  were  at  variance,  but  he  never  suspected  that 
the  Emperor  harboured  any  evil  designs. 

When  the  high  officer  deputed  to  summon  the 
Guru  arrived  in  Kiratpur  and  delivered  his  message, 
the  Guru  knew  that  Ram  Rai  had  instigated  the 
Emperor  to  summon  him,  and  said  he  would  give 
a reply  on  the  morrow.  When  the  Guru,  after 
breaking  up  the  assembly  in  which  the  officer  had 
been  received,  went  to  his  house,  he  found  his 
mother,  his  Sikhs,  and  his  masands  very  sad.  On 
inquiring  the  cause,  his  mother  said  that  she  was  in 
perplexity  as  to  what  advice  to  give  him,  whether 
he  should  proceed  to  Dihli  or  not.  He  was  a child, 
he  had  no  father  to  take  counsel  with,  his  elder 
brother,  a man  of  great  craft  and  worldly  experience, 
bore  him  enmity,  and  it  was  difficult  to  say  what 
plan  should  be  adopted.  The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Mother 
dear,  what  cause  is  there  for  anxiety  ? Whatever 
Wahguru  hath  decided  shall  take  place.  Why  be 
anxious  regarding  it  ? What  can  poor  mortal  do 
if  he  have  not  God’s  succour  ? I hold  my  father’s 
opinion  that  it  is  better  for  me  not  to  go  to 
Aurangzeb  or  hold  any  intercourse  with  him.’  The 
Guru’s  mother  rejoined,  ‘Thou  speakest  aright,  but 
the  Turks  hold  sway.  The  Emperor  is  obstinate  and 
violent.  If  thou  refuse,  an  army  may  be  sent  to 
fetch  thee,  in  which  case  there  would  be  sanguinary 
fighting  and  many  lives  lost.’ 

Next  day  the  Guru  sent  for  the  officer  and  said, 

‘ My  brother  is  with  the  Emperor,  I do  not  know  that 
I can  do  anything  for  His  Majesty  by  accepting  his 
invitation.  ’ The  officer  replied,  ‘ It  is  at  thy  brother’s 


320 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


suggestion  the  Emperor  hath  sent  for  thee,  but  he 
is  very  anxious  to  behold  thee  himself  also,  and 
the  Sikhs  of  Dihli  hunger  for  a sight  of  thee.  Where- 
fore come  with  me  and  please  them  all.’  The  Guru 
rejoined,  ‘ I will  go  by  all  means  where  I shall  be 
received  with  love,  but  it  hath  been  imposed  on  me 
as  a duty  not  to  look  on  the  Emperor’s  face.  Write 
and  tell  Raja  Jai  Singh  that,  if  the  Sikhs  of  Dihli 
want  me,  I will  go  to  them,  but  if  the  Raja  desire 
me  to  meet  the  Emperor,  I must  decline  the  invita- 
tion.’ The  officer  then  represented  that  Raja  Jai 
Singh  had  promised  to  call  the  Guru  to  Dihli,  but 
had  not  promised  to  bring  him  before  the  Emperor. 
The  officer  would,  however,  write  to  Raja  Jai  Singh, 
and  obtain  precise  information  as  to  what  was  in- 
tended. 

When  an  answer  arrived  the  officer  hastened  to 
communicate  it  to  the  Guru — ‘ Raja  Jai  Singh 
humbly  requesteth  the  Guru  to  come  to  Dihli,  so 
that  he  and  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  may  behold  him.  The 
Guru  may  act  as  he  pleaseth  regarding  an  interview 
with  the  Emperor.  If  the  Emperor  force  an  inter- 
view on  him.  Raja  Jai  Singh  will  foil  his  intention  by 
diplomacy-!  The  Guru  hearing  this  said,  ‘ It  is 
well.  I will  set  out  the  day  after  to-morrow.’ 

The  Guru  duly  set  out  from  Kiratpur.  On  the  way 
he  waited  for  some  Sikhs  who  had  come  thither  after 
his  departure.  Among  them  were  the  halt,  the 
maimed,  the  leprous,  &c.,  all  of  whom  he  cured  by  the 
imposition  of  hands.  In  the  same  way  he  waited  on 
the  road  for  other  Sikhs  who  had  come  from  distant 
countries  to  see  him.  Much  time  was  thus  spent, 
and  Raja  Jai  Singh’s  messenger  had  to  remonstrate. 
On  arriving  at  the  village  of  Panjokhara  near  Ambala, 
the  Guru  made  a boundary  of  sand  and  ordered 
that  no  Sikh  should  cross  it  after  his  departure,  so 
that  he  might  be  able  to  expedite  his  journey.  He 
said,  ' Let  any  Sikh  who  desireth  to  see  me  stand 
here  and  make  his  supplication,  and  he  shall  obtain 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  KRISHAN 


321 


his  wishes.’  He  left  some  of  his  disciples  there  to 
give  instruction.  There  is  now  a temple  on  the  spot 
in  memory  of  the  Guru’s  visit. 

Chapter  TI 

While  the  Guru  at  Panjokhara^  was  meditating 
on  God,  a Sikh  came  and  told  him  of  a proud  Brah- 
man who  was  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  Brahman 
had  asked  the  Guru’s  name,  and  learned  that  it  was 
Sri  Har  Krishan.  Hearing  this  the  Brahman  became 
very  angry  and  said,  ‘ The  poet  of  the  Bhagavat 
Gita,  whom  none  can  equal,  called  God  merely 
Krishan,  and  the  Guru  calleth  himself  Sri  Har 
Krishan,  as  if  he  thought  himself  superior  to  Krishan. 
If  he  be  such  a Guru,  let  him  come  and  translate 
the  Gita  with  me.’  The  -Guru  replied  to  his  in- 
formant, ‘ The  eyes  of  understanding  are  very  good, 
but  the  cataract  of  pride  so  blindeth  them  that  they 
cannot  see  God’s  way.  The  proud  think  all  persons 
beneath  them.’ 

The  Sikh,  however,  prevailed  on  the  Guru  to  allow 
the  Brahman  to  come  to  him.  When  the  Brahman 
came  he  did  not  salute  the  Guru,  but  unceremoniously 
sat  down  in  his  presence.  He  then  said,  ‘ Thou  who 
callest  thyself  Sri  Har  Krishan,  must  be  greater  than 
the  god  Krishan.  Translate  the  Gita  for  a little 
while  with  me.’  The  Guru  replied,  ‘The  Brahmans 
of  the  present  day  are  not  deeply  read.  They  are 
great  talkers  and  arguers,  and  are  deteriorating 
every  day  ; and  in  the  future  they  will  have  even 
less  religion  than  they  have  now.  What  the  Brah- 
mans know  is  not  real  knowledge,  and  they  are 
strangers  to  God.  I have  not  read  the  Gita,  and 
were  I to  translate  it  with  thee,  thou  wouldst  say 
I was  some  rich  man’s  son  who  had  had  a private 
tutor,  whereas  I should  translate  by  my  spiritual 
power.  Go  and  bring  some  ignorant  rustic  to  discuss 
^ Pandit  Tara  Singh’s  Gur  Tirath  Sangrah 
Y 


SIKH.  IV 


322 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


with  thee,  and  when  thou  hast  vanquished  him,  I 
will  speak  to  thee.’  The  Brahman  went  and  brought 
an  ignorant  water-carrier  called  Chhajju  from  the 
nearest  village.  The  Guru  looked  him  full  in  the 
face  and  said,  ‘ Thou  hast  become  a great  divinity 
scholar.  Now  discuss  the  meaning  of  the  Shastars 
with  this  Brahman.’  The  Brahman  and  the  water- 
carrier  accordingly  began  to  discuss,. and  the.  water- 
carrier  gave  such  learned  replies,  that  the  Brahman 
stood  in  astonished  silence.  The  questions  and 
replies  related  to  Hindu  theology. 

The  pandit  became  convinced  that  the  Guru  had 
infused  his  supernatural  power  into  the  water- 
carrier.  He  accordingly  begged  the  Guru’s  pardon 
for  the  unceremonious  manner  in  which  he  had 
approached  him.  The  Brahman  added,  ‘ Thou  art 
really  the  holy  god  Krishan.  Make  me  thy  disciple.’ 
The  Guru  did  so  and  discoursed  to  him  on  humility. 

Raja  Jai  Singh  went  forth  with  bare  feet  to  meet 
the  Guru.  The  Emperor  sent  large  presents  on 
the  Guru’s  arrival  and  expressed  a wish  to  see 
him.  In  reply  to  the  Emperor’s  message  the  Guru 
saidj  ‘ My  elder  brother  is  with  the  Emperor,  and 
is  ready  to  do  whatever  he  desireth.  I cannot 
meet  the  Emperor.  My  father  with  his  dying 
words  told  me  that  my  elder  brother  would  transact 
all  political  affairs  with  His  Majesty,  and  I had 
better  not  meddle  with  them.  My  mission  is  to 
preach  the  true  Name.  There  is  no  one  who  can 
be  so  affectionate  as  a brother,  and  there  is  no 
one  who  at  the  same  time  can  be  a greater  enemy. 
Witness  the  treatment  of  his  brothers  by  the  Em- 
peror himself.  Ram  Rai  beareth  me  great  enmity, 
and  were  the  Emperor  on  receiving  me  to  show  me 
any  favour,  Ram  Rai  would  become  still  more 
hostile,  and  grave  dissensions  in  families  had  better 
be  avoided.  For  this  and  other  reasons  my  father 
forbade  me  to  meet  the  Emperor.' 

When  this  speech  was  reported"  to  the  Emperor, 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  KRISHAN  323 

he  was  astonished  that  a child  of  seven  years  of  age 
could  have  uttered  it.  He  said  the  Guru  must  be 
some  person  possessing  supernatural  power,  and 
nothing  could  be ‘gained  by  annoying  him.  Such 
good  thoughts  however  merely  flashed  across  Aurang- 
zeb’s  mind  for  a moment.  They  were  but  the  light- 
ning shining  through  black  clouds  on  a dark  night, 
which  quickly^  vanishes  and  leaves  the  landscape 
in  greater  darkness  than  before.  Aurangzeb  bided 
his  time,  for  he  knew  the  Guru  must  grant  him  the 
desired  interview. 

Crowds  of  Sikhs  thronged  to  see  the  Guru  and 
receive  spiritual  consolation  from  him.  There  was 
then  a plague  raging  in  Dihli,  and  those  afflicted 
with  it,  who  sought  the  Guru’s  mediation,  were  all 
healed.  Ram  Rai  finding  the  Sikhs  falling  away  from 
himself,  and  flocking  round  the  Guru,  became  greatly 
incensed  and  said  to  himself,  ‘ The  evil  I intended 
for  him  has  turned  out  to  his  advantage.  I must  now 
contrive  some  other  expedient  that  he  may  not  be 
able  to  oppose  my  designs.’ 

The  following  day  the  Emperor’s  son  was  an- 
nounced. The  prince  said  that  his  father  desired 
to  see  the  Guru.  The  Guru  replied  that  he  had 
already  given  his  reason  for  not  seeing  the  Emperor, 
and  he  repeated  what  he  had  said  before,  namely, 
‘ Ram  Rai  who  is  at  court  will  transact  with  the 
Emperor  any  political  or  administrative  business 
that  may  be  necessary.  If  the  Emperor  desire  any 
religious  instruction,  I will  dictate  it  to  thee  and 
thou,  mayest  write  it  in  Persian  characters.  When 
he  understandeth  and  acteth  according  to  it,  the 
blessing  of  Guru  Nanak  shall  light  on  him,  and  he 
shall  be  happy.’ 

I The  Prince  was  astonished  at  this  reply  and  said 
the  Guru  might  write  down  his  instruction  for  the 
Emperor.  The  Guru  then  dictated  the  following 
hymn  of  Guru  Nanak  for  the  Emperor’s  edifica- 
tion : — 


Y2 


324  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

li  the  True  God  dwell  not  in  the  heart,  , 

What  is  eating,  what  clothing. 

What  fruit,  what  clarified  butter  and  sweet  molasses, 
what  fine,  flour  and  what  meat  ? . , 

What  clothes,  what  a pleasant  couch  for  billing  and  cooing, 

What  an  army,  what  mace-bearers  and  servants,  and  what 
palaces  to  dwell  in  ? 

Nanak,  except  the  true  Name  all  things  are  perishable^ 

The  prince  took  this  hymn  to  his  father  who  was 
much  impressed  with  it,  and  his  eyes  for  a moment 
opened  to  the  truth,  but  the  desire  of  converting  the 
Guru  to  Islam  and  prolonging  the  enmity  between 
the  two  brothers  again  blinded  him. 

The  Emperor  once  said  in  the  course  of  private 
conversation  to  Raja  Jai  Singh,  ‘Thou  and  others 
highly  praise  the  Guru  and  say  he  possesseth  miracu- 
lous power.  Hast  thou  ever  put  him  to  the  test? 
If  thou  have  not  done  so,  then  do  so  now,  and  if 
thou  find  he  possesseth  any  superhuman  power,  then 
let  me  know.’  Raja  Jai  Singh  replied,  ‘ It  is  difficult 
to  put  such  persons  to  the  test.  Dealing  with 
them  is  highly  dangerous  for  they  may  utter  curses 
instead  of  blessings,  but  I will,  however,  as  thy 
Majesty  ordereth,  contrive  some  means  of  proving 
him.’  Jai  Singh  then  went  home  and  in  con- 
sultation with  his  head  queen  contrived  a plan  to 
test  the  Guru.  She  was  to  dress  herself  as  a slave, 
and  sit  with  slaves  behind  the  other  queens  when 
the  Guru  visited  Jai  Singh’s  palace.  If  the  Guru 
recognized  her,  then  it  might  be  considered  a proof 
that  he  really  was  what  his  followers  deemed  him 
to  be. 

The  Guru  by  his  supernatural  power  knew  the 
plot  laid  for  him,  and  became  very  sad  at  being 
expected  to  show  to  the  world  what  saints  and  holy 
men  conceal,  namely,  miraculous  power ; so  when 
Jai  Singh  went  td  conduct  him  to  his  palace,  he  at 

^ Majh  ki  War. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  KRISHAN  325 

first  refused  to  receive  him.  On  pressure,  however, 
the  Guru  admitted  Jai  Singh  to  his  presence.  Jai 
Singh  told  him  in  a very  respectful  manner  that  his 
queens  desired  to*  see  him.  When  the  Guru  com- 
plied with  Jai  Singh’s  invitation,  he  found  a large 
female  assemblage  ready  to  receive  him.  The  Guru 
touched  the  front  queen  with  a wand  and  said, 
‘ Thou  art  not. the  head  queen.’  In  the  same  way 
he  touched  the  other  ladies  of  the  zanana  and  rejected 
them  all.  At  last  he  touched  the  head  queen 
whom,  notwithstanding  her  disguise,  he  recognized 
at  the  back  of  the  assembly  and  said,  ‘ Thou  art  the 
head  queen.’  She  was  very  pleased  at  being  re- 
cognized in  her  menial  attire.  The  Guru  then  said 
in  reference  to  the  trial  made  of  him  by  Raja  Jai 
Singh : ‘ Guru  Nanak  will  ever  confer  happiness  on 
those  who  have  unswerving  faith.  He  will  ever 
abide  with  them  and  assist  them,  and  God  will  love 
them  both  in  this  world  and  the  next.  He  whose 
mind  is  perplexed  with  doubts  is  not  a true  believer. 
He  who  through  pride  deemeth  himself  very  exalted 
must  like  a lofty  peak  on  the  surface  of  the  earth 
ultimately  have  a fall.  Devotion,  which  is  like  rain, 
resteth  not  on  lofty  places.  There  the  field  of  God’s 
love  germinateth  not,  and  the  harvest  of  salvation 
is  not  gathered.’  Upon  this  Raja  Jai  Singh  and,  his 
queens  admitted  the  Guru’s  sanctity. 

Chapter  III 

On  the  fourth  day  of  the  dark  half  of  Chet,  the  day 
after  the  above  occurrence,  the  Guru  was  seized  with 
fever.  His  eyes  were  seen  to  grow  red,  his  breathing 
became  very  rapid,  and  the  heat  of  his  body  was  felt 
at  k considerable  distance.  His  mother  Krishan  KauT 
sat  by  him  arid  began  to  lament,  saying,  ‘ My  son; 
why  art  thou  intent  on  thy  death  ? Thou!  hast  only 
lately  been  seated  on  the  Guru’s  throne,  thou  aft  still 
a child,  and  it  is  too  soon  for  thee  to  depart.  Mayest 


326  THE‘  SIKH  RELIGION  i 

thou  enjoy  the  fu|l  term  of  life,  have  a family,  and 
then  go  to  God ! , Why  at  this  tender  age  turn  thy 
thoughts  away  from  the  world  ? ’ i ! 

The  Guru  replied,  ? Mother  dear^  it  is  natural  that 
thou  shouldst  feel  this  paroxysm  of  love,  but  have 
ho  anxiety  for  me.  It  is  our  duty  to  accept  the  will 
of  the  Almighty.  As  Guru  Arjan  hath  said  : — ■ 

The  Master  may  gather  the  crop  whether  it  be  green,  half- 
ripe,  or  ripe  and  fit  to  be  cut. 

The  reapers  ^ make  preparations,  bring  sickles,  and  arrive 
dn' the  ground.  ■<  ■■  ■ 

They  cut  the  crbp  as  it  is  medsured  out  to  them  when  the 
Owner  giveth  orders.*® 

‘ When  it  is  the  Husbandman’s  pleasure  He  cutteth 
down  the  crop.  There  is  no  rule  as  to  whether  it 
must  be  green  or  half  ripe.  What  torture  Guru 
Arjan  suffered,  and  yet  he  uttered  not  a groan ! 
Why  should  we  mourn  for  the  body  when  it  is 
God’s  will  that  it  should  depart.  What  is  to-day, 
and  what  to-morrow  ? Whatever  God  doeth  is  for 
the  best.’ 

The  Guru,  however,  thought  it  proper  to  go  outside 
the  city  to  the  margin  of  the  Jamna  in  order  to 
breathe  a purer  atmosphere.  He  pitched  his  camp 
near  Raja  Jai  Singh’s  army.  Raja  Jai  Singh  himself 
lived  in  the  city,  and  on  hearing  that  the  Guru  had 
left  it,  sent  an  officer  to  ask  if  he  had  offended  him 
in  any  way.  The  Guru  explained  the  reason  of  his 
change  of  residence.' ' 

, Prior  to  the  officer’s  retiun  Raja  Jai  Singh  in- 
formed the  Emperor  of  the  manner  in  which  he  had 
tested  the  Guru.  The  Emperor  then  became  still 
more  anxious  for  an  interview,  and  again  ordered 
the  Raja  to  procure  it  for  him.  When  Raja  Jai 
Smgh  returned  to  his  palace,  he  bear'd  of  the  Guru’s 
iUnessi.  He  then  went  to  inquire^  after  his  health, 
and  also  to  discuss,  with  him  the  subject  of  his  inter- 
' ^ Death’s  myrmidons.'  ;•  * Sri  Rag. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  KRISHAN  327 

view  with  the  Emperor.  The  Guru  was,  however, 
too  ill, to  give  any  definite  reply. 

Next  day  small-pox  asserted  itself.  Its  unmis- 
takable pimples  appeared  on  the  Guru’s  body.  With 
it  a very  violent  fever  raged  and  unconsciousness 
ensued.  Sikh  writers  minutely  describe  the  effects 
of  the  small-pox  on  the  Guru’s  tender  and  handsome 
person,  and  the  pains  he  suffered.  A man  suffering 
from  small-pox  wriggles  like  a fish  on  hot  sand.  If 
he  desire  to  lie  down,  he  cannot  do  so.  On  whichever 
side  he  lies,  he  is  pained  and  writhes  in  anguish  and 
torture,  which,  as  the  chronicler  piously  remarks,  may 
God  not  inflict  even  on  an  enemy ! The  Guru, 
however,  uttered  no  cry  of  pain,  but  continued  to 
repeat  God’s  name. 

During  his  illness  every  one  was  ordered  to  repeat 
the  hymns  of  the  Granth  Sahib  for  the  occasion. 
The  Guru  continued  ill  for  several  days.  At  last 
his  condition  grew  desperate.  He  knew  his  end 
had  arrived,  and  he  invited  all  who  desired  to 
behold  him  for  the  last  time  to  present  themselves. 
Raja  Jai  Singh,  masand,  Gurbakhsh,  and  many 
others  went  to  his  bedside.  Gurbakhsh  with  clasped 
hands  thus  addressed  him — ‘ Great  king,  the  pre- 
ceding Gurus  before  their  departure  entrusted  their 
Sikhs  either  to  servants  or  sons.  Thou  being  so 
young  art  going  to  leave  us  without  a Guru. 
How  can  the  Sikhs  endure  such  a calamity  ? 
Cherish  thy  simple  Sikhs,  and,  when  thou  hast  a 
son  who  is  fit  for  the  Guruship,  then  mayest  thou 
depart,  not  now.’ 

The  Guru  repUed,  ‘ Be  not  anxious.  The  Creator 
will  do  what  is  best.  My  death  cannot  now  be  averted. 
The  glory  of  Guru  Nanak’s  throne  shall  increase  day 
by  day.  Gurus  may  die,  but  their  hearts,  that  is, 
the  Granth  Sahib,  shall  remain  with  you.  It  con- 
taineth  instruction,  divine  knowledge,  and  the  Guru’s 
spell.  It  will  satisfy  all  men’s  desires.  Read  it  and 
act  on  its  counsels>  and  Guru  Nanak  will  ever  assist 


328  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

you.  Wherefore  waver  not,  but  ever  turn  your 
thoughts  towards  the  immortal  God.  Salvation  is 
obtained  through  Guru  Nanak’s  mediation.  Put 
faith  in  him,  and  remember  his  words.' 

The  Sikhs  understood  from  the  Guru’s  language 
that  he  was  about  to  die.  They  began  to  mourn  his 
untimely  fate  and  to  reflect  that  there  was  none  so 
competent  as  he  to  give  them  divine  instruction. 
He  on  seeing  their  anxiety  thus  addressed  them — 
‘ This  world  is  transitory.  To  fix  your  minds  on 
it,  to  indulge  in  rejoicing  or  mourning,  and  to 
impute  blame  to  God  are  all  highly  sinful  acts.  We 
ought  all  to  accept  God’s  will  and  deem  his  pleasure 
as  our  own.  Whatever  he  doeth  is  for  the  best.  As 
Baba  Nanak  hath  said  in  the  Japji — 

What  pleaseth  Thee,  O God,  is  good. 

This  body  must  one  day  perish.  What  mattereth  it 
whether  it  perish  now  or  after  the  fullness  of  years  ? 
He  who  obeyeth  God’s  will  renounceth  pride  and 
other  deadly  sins.  He  remembereth  the  true  Name, 
crosseth  over  the  world’s  terrible  ocean,  and  is  for 
ever  emancipated  from  its  troubles.’ 

Here  the  Guru’s  strength  failed  him.  He  became^ 
silent  and  closed  his  eyes.  After  a short  time  he 
opened  them  and  gazed  affectionately  on  his  Sikhs. 
Raja  Jai  Singh  again  appeared  with  the  Emperor’s 
reiterated  request  for  an  interview.  To  this  the  Guru 
gave  the  same  reply  as  before,  and  expressed  a desire 
that  the  Emperor  should  fix  his  attention  on  the  hymn 
he  had  written  for  him. 

Next  day  the  Sikhs  went  in  a body  to  behold  their 
Guru.  Gurbakhsh  again  addressed  him,  ‘ Great 
king.  Ram  Rai  is  on  good  terms  with  the  Emperor 
here.  In  the  Panjab  there  is  Dhir  Mai,  as  also  other 
Sodhis  who  claim  the  Guruship.  They  are  only 
waiting  for  thy  death  to  assert  their  claims.  Simple 
Sikhs  will  fall  into  their  toiB,  and  intelligent  Sikhs 
will  suffer  in  the  midst  of  the  ensuing  troubles.  In 


LIFE  OF  GURU  HAR  KRISHAN  329 

this  manner  this  tree  of  Sikhism,  which  hath  been 
hitherto  cherished,  will  wither  away.  Every  one 
will  be  a guru  in  his  own  house,  and  several  sects 
of  opinionative  and' heterodox  Sikhs  will  arise.  Be 
pleased  to  appoint  some  one  like  thyself  for  our 
salvation.’ 

The  Guru  replied,  ‘ Why  be  anxious  ? The  tree 
planted  by  Guru  Nanak’s  holy  hands  shall  never 
wither.  Droughts,  storms,  and  heat  may  prevail, 
but  that  shall  never  fade.  There  shall  be  twofold 
and  fourfold  miracles,  and  one  Guru  shall  be  blended 
with  another.’ 

On  this  the  Guru  called  for  five  paise  and  a coco- 
nut. He  took  them,  and  not  being  able  to  move 
his  body,  waved  his  hand  three  times  in  the  air  in 
token  of  circumambulating  his  successor,  and  said 
‘ Baba  Bakale  ’,  that  is,  his  successor  would  be  found 
in  the  village  of  Bakala.  When  he  could  again 
speak  he  ordered  the  minstrels  to  sing  the  Gurus’ 
hymns  and  repeat  God’s  name. 

When  midnight  had  passed  and  there  was  no 
indication  of  the  Guru’s  recovery,  his  mother, 
Krishan  Kaur,  who  sat  by  his  bed,  looked  at  his 
handsome  face,  became  very  sad,  and  broke  forth 
into  lamentation — ‘ What  shall  I do  alone  in  the 
world  having  lost  my  dutiful  son  and  my  kind 
husband.  Where  shall  I find  them,  and  how  shall 
I live  without  them  ? ’ The  Guru  said  in  reply, 

‘ Mother  dear,  feel  no  anxiety,  the  greater  part  of 
thy  life  hath  been  spent  in  happiness.  Pass  the 
remainder  in  God’s  service.  Guru  Arjan  hath  said : — 

Where  the  physician  cannot  succeed,  where  there  is 
neither  sister  nor  brother,  God  alone  assisteth. 

What  He  doeth  cometh  to  pass.  He  washeth  away  the 
filth  of  sin  ; remember  that  Supreme  Being.^ 

By  remembering  God  thou  shalt  arrive  at  such 
a superior  position  that  thou  shalt  never  know 

^ MSru. 


330  mK  SIKH  RELIGION 

sonrow  and  neviea"  be  separated  from  us.’  , The  Guru’s 
na^uther  was  much  consoled  by  this  speechi  The 
Guru’s,  final  orider  was  that  none  should  weep. Tor 
him,  but  all  were  to  sing  the  Gurus’  hymns..  ,,In  the 
midst  of  the  hymns  and  the  repetition  of  God’s  name, 
the  Guru  breathed  his  last  on  Saturday,  the  fourteenth 
day  of  the  light  half  o<f  the  month,  of  Chet,  Sambat 
1721  (A..p.  1664).  His  body  was  cremated  on  a 
plain,  called  Tilofchari, south  of  Dihli  on  the  bank 
of  the  Jamna^  where  his '^cinerary  tomb  is  still  pre- 
served. A ' temple  was,  subsequently  built  at  the 
place  where  he  had  resided  when  in  the  city. 


GURU  TEG  BAHADUR 


SIKH  IV  P.  531 


331 


LIFE  OF^GpfRU  TEG  BAHAPU^l, 
THE  NINTH  GURU 

CHAPtElR  I ' 

' i , 'f 

Guru  Teg  Bahadur,  youngest  son  of  the  sixth 
Guru,  Hur  Gobind  and  his  wife  Nanaki,  was  born 
in  What  is  now  called  Guru  ke  Mahal,  Amritsar, 
in  the  Panjab  on  Sunday’  the  fifth  day  of  the  dark 
half  of  the  month  of  Baisakh,  a watch  and  a quarter 
before  day  in  the  Sambat  year  1679  (a.  d.  1622). 

Immediately  after  the  child’s  birth  Guru  Har 
Gobind  with  five  Sikhs  went  to  see  him.  On  con- 
templating him  the  Guru  knew  that  his  son  would 
be' a great  hero,  powerful  to  endure  the  sword,  and 
so  he  called  him  Teg  Bahadur.^  He  prophesied 
that  the  boy  should  have  a son  who  would  develop 
a third  religion  distinct  from  those  of  the  Hindus 
and  Musalmans,  and  who  would  also  destroy  the 
reign  of  tyranny  in  Hindustan. 

When  Teg  Bahadur  was  five  years  of  age,  he  used 
to  indulge  in  trains  of  thought,  during  which  he 
would  speak  to  no  one.  His  mother  Nanaki  in- 
quired of  his  father  why  he  tolerated  this  conduct 
on  the  part  of  his  son.  Guru  Har  Gobind  consoled 
her  by  telling  her  that  Teg  Bahadur  should  become 
a Gfiru;  prove  very  powerful,  and  sacrifice  himself 
for  the  Sikh  religion. 

Teg  Bahadur  was,  as  already  stated,  married  'to 
(atijari,  daughter  of  Bal  Qiand,  a native  of  Kartarpur 
ih  the  Jalafidhar  District.  After  the  death  of  Guru 
Har  Gobind,  Teg  Bdhadur  with  his  mother  and  wife’ 
wefit'^oTive  in  Bakala,  where  Guru  Har  Krishan 
^IWequefttly  said^his  successor  should  be  found. 

‘ ^ hksi  Nanil  Lil  calls  the  itlnth  Guru  Tek  Bahadur,  that  is,  a powerful 
prop  of  the  weak. 


332 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


When  the  Sodhis  of  Bakala  heard  of  the  last  words 
of  Guru  Har  Krishan,  twenty-two  of  them  claimed 
the  right  to  sucpeed  him.  l^heise  self-made  gurus 
forcibly  t6ok  the  offerings  of  the  Sikhs  who  came 
to  see  the  real  Guru,  with  the  result  that  true 
worshippers  suffered  great  hardship  for  a consider- 
able time.  At  last  a Sikh  called  Makkhan  Shah  of 
the  Labana  tribe  came  from  Gujrat  in  the  Dakhan  ^ 
vO’ith  an  offering  of  five  hundred  gold  muhars  which 
some  time  previously  he  had  vowed  to  make  to  the 
Guru  on  escaping  shipwreck.  What  was  his  surprise 
when  he  found  that  twenty-two  Sodhis  had  installed 
themselves  as  gurus  ! In  this  state  of  confusion  and 
uncertainty  he  resolved  to  make  trial  of  the  pre- 
tenders. He  visited  them  all,  and  made  them 
offerings  of  two  gold  muhars  each.  None  of  them 
kftew  that  he  had  brought  five  hundred  muhars  for 
the  real  Guru.  Every  one  of  them  extolled  him- 
self, and  said  the  others  were  hypocrites  and  de- 
ceivers. He  thought  of  the  words  of  Guru  Arjan  ■ 
in  the  Sukhmani : — 

Goodness  shall  not  even  approach  him 

Who  calleth  himself  good. 

And  again ; — 

He  who  considereth  himself  lowl 

Shall  be  deemed  the  most  exalted  of  all ; 

and  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  these  twenty-two 
men  only  claimed  to  be  gurus  in  order  to  plunder 
the  Sikhs. 

He  then  inquired  if  there  were  any  one  else  in 
Bakala  who  claimed  to  be  the  Guru,  He  was  fold 
there  was  another  man  popularly  called  Tega,  son  of 
Guru  Har  Gobind,  who  dwelt  there  in  silence . and 
retirement,  but  had  no  ambition  ito  undertake  the 
onerous  duties  of  the  position.  The  masands  tdd 
Makkhan  Shah  that  if  he  desired  to  interview  Tega 

. ^ Sukha  Singh's  Gur  Btlas^  Chap.  I. 


LIFE  OF.  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  333 

he  might  go  with  them.  Makkhan  Shah  on  arriving 
at  Teg  Bahadur’ s house  requested  an  interview.  T eg 
Bahadur  told  his  servant  to  inform  Makkhan  Shah 
that  if  he  wanted  to  see  him  he  must  come  alone. 
When  he  presented  himself  unaccompanied  by  the 
masands,  Teg  Bahadur  reflected  that  as  he  had  saved 
Makkhan  Shah  from  shipwreck,  so  he  must  now  dis- 
close himself.  ‘ Makkhan  Shah  hath  made  trial  of  all 
the  pretenders,’  thought  Teg  Bahadur,  ‘but  found 
not  the  true  Guru,  and  no  pretender  hath  been  able 
to  satisfy  him  by  telling  him  the  object  of  his 
visit.  If  I now  conceal  myself  from  him  he  will 
lose  faith  in  the  Gurus.  He  hath  placed  great 
reliance  on  the  last  words  of  Guru  Har  Krishan, 
“ Baba  Bakale  ”,  and  if  his  desires  be  not  fulfilled, 
he  will  die.  Moreover  he  hath  come  from  a great 
distance.  It  is  therefore  on  every  account  necessary 
that  I should  receive  him  and  tell  him  his  thoughts.’ 

Makkhan  Shah  was  highly  pleased  on  obtaining 
permission  to  interview  Teg  Bahadur,  and  concluded 
that  he  must  be  the  true  Guru  of  whom  he  had 
been  in  search.  On  being  ushered  into  his  presence, 
what  did  he  see  ? The  Guru  was  in  deep  contem- 
plation holding  his  senses  under  complete  restraint. 
Makkhan  Shah,  however,  fell  at  his  feet,  and  placed 
his  offering  of  two  gold  muhars  in  front  of  him. 
When  the  Guru  saw  the  two  coins  and  found  Makkhan 
Shah  seated  near  him,  he  said,  ‘ How  now,  0 Sikh, 
thou  art  trying  to  wheedle  the  Guru  by  presenting 
him  with  two  gold  muhars  ? Where  are  the  five 
hundred  gold  muhars  thou  didst  promise  when  thy 
vessel  was  sinking.’  Makkhan  Shah  was  delight- 
fully surprised — ‘O  Great  Kir^,  it  is  true.  When 
my  vessel  full  of  merchandise  was  sinking,  I invoked 
Guru  Nanak,  and  vowed  I would  offer  him  five 
hundred  gold  muhars  if  it  ever  reached  the  shore.’ 
Makkhan  Shah  prostrated  himself  before  Teg  Baha- 
dur, hailed  him  true  Guru  and  searcher  of  hearts, 
and  presented  him  the  five  hundred  gold  muhars 


334 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


of  his  vow.  He  then  ascended  a house-top  and, 
waving  a flag,  proclaimed  from  there,  ‘ I have  fdund 
the  Gum  ! T have  found  the  Guru  1 ! ’ ' On  hearing 
this  the  Sikhs  assembled  from  every  quarter,  and 
with  all  due  formalities  and  observances  placed 
Teg  Bahadur,  then  in  his  forty-third  year  and  the 
very  image  of  Guru  Nanak,  on  the  Guru’s  throne. 
On  being  installed  he  conferred  robes  of  honour  on 
his  Sikh^.  The  twenty-two  false  gums  hid  them^ 
selves  as  darkness  vanishes  before  the  sun^s  rays. 

Dhir  Mai,  the  eldest  son  of  Gurditta,  seeing  the 
offerings  made  to  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  and  the  honours 
he  received,  became  violently  jealous.  One  day  he 
communicated  his  feelings  to  his  masand,  Sihan, 
who  bade  him  be  of  good  cheer,  and  promised  that 
he  would  put  a bullet  through  his  enemy.  The 
masand  accordingly  took  about  a score  of  men  to 
kill  the  Guru.  Hei  fired  and  the  bullet  struck  his 
intended  victim,  but  did  not  prove  fatal.  The 
masand  seized  the  opportunity  to  pack  up  and  take 
away  the  Guru’s  movable  property.  The  Guru  in 
his  affliction  retained  his  composure  and  evenness 
of  mind.  He  felt  no  pleasure  at  access  of  wealth, 
nor  grief  at  its  departure,  or  at  the  bodily  harm 
caused  him,  but  was  happy  in  the  contemplation 
of  God’s  goodness. 

When  Makkhan  Shah  heard  of  this  occurrence 
from  the  Guru’s  mother,  he  with  the  Sikhs  pro- 
ceeded in  a body  to  the  Guru  to  condole  with  him. 
They  found  him  absorbed  in  contemplation.  Then 
with  loud  cries  they  went  off  to  Dhir  Mai’s  residence. 
He  closed  his  door  against  them,  but  they  burst  it 
open,  seized  him  and  his  accomplices,  and  tying  his 
masand’s  hands  behind  his  back,  took  him  off  to  the 
Guru.  They  also  recovered  and  restored  to  the 
Guru  all  the  property  which  Dhir  Mai  and  his  men 
had  tak^  away.  Not  only  that,  but  they  took 
Ifliir  Mai’s  own  jaivate  property  also,  including  the 
Granth  Sahibj  and  placed  all  at  the  Guru’s  disposal. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  335 

The  masand  professed  great  cointrition,  ■ and  with 
much  show  of  humility  bent  his  head  on  the  Guru's 
feet.  He  said  he  had  erred  and  asked  pardon  for 
his  offence,  ‘I  am  under' thy  protection ; have 
mercy  on  me ; 0 cherisher  of  the  poor,  hear  the 
prayer  of  a sinner.  Though  I am  a bad  son,  it  is 
incumbent  on  thee,  who  art  to  me  a father,  to  pre- 
serve mine  honour.’ 

The  Guru  on  seeing  the  masand  so  humbled  and 
distressed  ordered  him  to  be  released.  Makkhan  Shah 
remonstrated,  and  said  that  the  man  had  only  met 
his  deserts.  The  Guru  however  was  firm,  and  ordered 
all  the  property  taken  from  Dhir  Mai  to  be  restored 
to  him.  He  preached  to  Makkhan  Shah  and  his  Sikhs 
that  the  holy  Guru  Nanak  gave  them  the  wealth  of 
the  Name  which  was  sufficient  for  all  their  wants — 
‘ In  anger  man  committeth  evil  deeds.  He  loseth  at 
once  his  senses  and  his  religion.  When  anger 
spriiigeth  up  in  a man’s  heart,  what  crime  is  there 
he  will  not  perpetrate  ? He  thinketh  nothing  of 
sinning  against  his  parents  and  his  holy  Guru.  He 
taketh  the  life  which  he  ought  to  protect,  anduttereth 
nothing  but  harsh  language.  He  will  not  refrain 
from  any  act  even  though  he  sacrifice  his  life  in  its 
execution.  There  is  no  greater  sacrifice  than  life, 
and  yet  the  foolish  person  will  deliberately  make  it. 
The  angry  man’s  soul  burneth  if  he  obtain  not  his 
desires.  He  cannot  eat  or  sleep.  Day  and  night 
he  is  tortured  by  his  passion,  and  formeth  endless 
plans  for  its  gratification.  In  this  way  he  passeth 
his  time  in  misery. 

‘ To  exercise  forgiveness  is  a greit  act.  To  exer- 
cise forgiveness  is  to  give  ailms.  Forgiveness  is 
6^fial  to  ablutions  at  all  places  of  pilgrimage.  For- 
giveness ensureth  man’s  salvation.  There  is  no 
virtue  equal  to  forgiveness.  Wherefore  generously 
exercise  it.  Never  abandon  this  virtue,  but  ever 
preserve  it  in  your  hearts.  You  are  ordered  in  the 
Granth  Sahib  to  lay  up  the  wealth  of  the  Name,  so 


336  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

that  it  may  accompany  you  in  this  world  and  in  the 
next.  This  wealth  is  only  found  in  the  companion" 
ship  of  good  men,  and  cannot  be  obtained  by  any 
other  means.  My  followers  possess  - this  -wealth 
which  is  superior  to  all  jewels  and  gems.  The  saints 
hoard  it  day  and  night.  It  cannot  be  purchased, 
no  thief  can  steal,  no  fire  consume,  no  water  drown 
it,  whereas  worldly  wealth  is  generally  accumulated 
by  sin.  Thieves  can  steal  it,  pickpockets  purloin 
it,  kings  seize  it,  fire  burn  it,  and  earth  rot.  it.  At 
the  hour  of  death  this  sinful  wealth  only  causeth 
regret,  and,  through  man’s  desires  being  fixed  on  it, 
his  soul  falleth  into  terrible  hell.’ 


Chapter  II 

The  Guru  spent  some  time  at  Bakala  communi- 
cating similar  instruction.  In  the  month  of  Magh, 
Sambat  1722,  he  went  to  Amritsar  to  bathe  in  the 
sacred  tank,  and  behold  the  paradisal  temple . of 
Guru  Ram  Das.  He  bathed,  but  the  ministrants^ 
of  the  sacred  edifice  closed  the  doors  of  the  Har 
Mandar  against  him.  He  saluted  it  however  from 
without,  then  went  beyond  the  precincts,  and  rested 
on  a spot  where  now  is  a stone  platform  dedicated 
to  him.  He  said  it  was  they  who  were  rotten  within, 
who  had  through  greed  of  offerings  entered  the 
temple. 

The  Guru  then  went  and  sat  on  a common  near 
the  spot  where  now  is  a cattle-market,  and  on  which 
is  erected  a damdama,  or  resting-place,  in  his  honour. 
When  the  inhabitants  of  Amritsar  heard  what  had 
occurred,  they  went  in  a body  to  him,  and  with 
gre2(.t  humility  prayed  him  to  return  and  revoke  his 
prophetic  curse,  because  it  was  his  holy  ancestors 
who  had  founded  the  edifice.  The  Guru  denied 

^ Then  called  Mutasadis  or  clerks,  but  now  known  as  Pujaris  or 
receivers  erf"  offerings. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  337 

that  his  words  bore  the  significance  of  a curse.  He 
had  merely  stated  the  condition  in  which  the  minis- 
trants  then  were,  and  in  which  they  should  remain. 

Meanwhile  a company  of  Sikhs  came  from  the 
village  of  Walla,  and  with  great  humility  prayed 
him  to  go  and  live  with  them  and  bless  their  village, 
a prayer  to  which  the  Guru  graciously  acceded.  On 
leaving  Amritsar  the  Guru  was  escorted  by  the 
women  of  the  city.  On  seeing  their  devotion  he 
said,  ‘ God’s  love  and  devotion  shall  ever  abide 
among  you.’  In  commemoration  of  the  Guru’s 
visit  a fair  called  the  Kothe  da  Mela  is  held  yearly  at 
Walla  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon  in  the  month  of 
Magh. 

Having  communicated  religious  instruction  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Walla,  the  Guru  returned  to  his 
favourite  Bakala.  Here  too  he  was  not  allowed  to 
abide  in  peace,  for  the  old  jealousy  and  enmity  of  the 
Sodhis  had  revived.  He  therefore  decided  not  to  re- 
main there,  but  proceed  in  the  direction  of  the  river 
Bias.  On  arriving  at  its  margin  he  saw  some  of 
his  men  carrying  the  Granth  Sahib  and  said  to 
them  : ‘You  surely  have  not  brought  any  of  Dhir 
Mai’s  property  with  you  ? ’ They  replied  that  they 
had  returned  everything  they  had  taken  from  him 
except  the  Granth  Sahib  which  they  had  brought 
with  them.  He  became  angry  that  they  had  taken 
any  of  Dhir  Mai’s  property  and  ordered  the  Granth 
Sahib  to  be  restored  to  him.  The  Guru  upon  this 
crossed  the  river.^ 

Meanwhile  the  Guru  pursuing  his  journey  arrived 
at  the  village  of  Hazara  situated  not  far  from 
Kartarpur,  where  a memorial  Sikh  church  was  sub- 
sequently built  in  commemoration  of  his  visit.  The 
next  day  he  reached  Durga  near  Nawashahar  where 
also  an  edifice  was  erected  in  his  honour.  The 

^ Bhai  Santokh  Singh  states  that  the  Guru  entrusted  the  Granth 
Sahib  to  the  river  and  informed  Dhir  Mai,  whereupon  the  latter  went 
and  took  possession  of  it. 


SIKH.  IV 


z 


338  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Guru  thence  proceeded  by  very  easy  stages  to 
Kiratpur.  There  again  he  was  plagued  with  the 
jealousy  of  the  Sodhis,  and  sought  rest  on  some  land 
about  six  miles  distant,  which  he  subsequently  pur- 
chased from  the  Kahlur  Raja.  He  there  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  city  of  Anandpur  in  the  month  of 
Har,  Sambat  1722  (a.  d.  1665). 

On  hearing  of  the  founding  of  the  city,  Dhir  Mai 
and  the  Sodhis  became  still  more  envious  of  the 
Guru,  and  determined  to  ruin  him.  Of  this  the 
Guru  was  duly  warned  by  his  people.  He  merely 
said  in  reply  that  he  himself  entertained  no  envy  or 
jealousy  of  any  one.  ‘ He  who  is  angry  with  the 
Guru  without  cause  shall  obtain  his  deserts.  I do 
not  desire  to  annoy  any  one.  The  Guru’s  love  and 
kindliness  are  at  the  disposal  of  all.  I have  received 
Guru  Nanak’s  order  to  cause  the  true  Name  to  be 
repeated  throughout  the  world.’ 

The  Guru  at  that  time  had  another  cause  of  dis- 
quietude. The  Sikhs  of  Dihli  sent  a messenger  to 
inform  him  that  Dhir  Mai  had  instigated  Ram  Rai 
to  complain  again  to  the  emperor  regarding  his 
supersession.  The  Guru  dismissed  the  messenger, 
and  told  him  to  put  the  minds  of  the  Dihli  Sikhs 
at  ease.  He  at  the  same  time  wrote  to  them, 

‘ What  can  a thousand  enemies  do  to  those  on 
whose  side  God  the  great  Guru  is  ? Kings  and 
emperors  are  all  in  His  power.  No  one  can  be 
touched  except  by  His  will.’ 

The  Guru  determined  to  change  his  abode,  as  well 
to  give  instructions  to  his  Sikhs  as  to  avoid  annoyance 
from  his  relations.  On  hearing  of  his  intention  the 
people  of  Anandpur  waited  on  him.  They  represented 
that  they  had  all  come  thither  through  reliance  on 
him,  and  yet  he  was  now  going  to  leave  them. 
They  had  left  their  homes  for  the  twofold  advantage 
of  being  able  to  see  the  Guru  and  derive  material 
profit  from  their  change  of  residence.  The  Guru 
preached  to  them  in  reply  to  their  representations — 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  339 

‘This  world  is  transitory.  You  ought  never  to  fix 
your  hearts  on  it.  Profit  and  loss,  weal  and  woe, 
rejoicing  and  mourning,  which  come  according  to 
God’s  will,  ought  to  be  equally  endured.  Perform 
the  duties  of  your  religion,  and  repeat  God’s  name. 
Meditation  on  God’s  name  is  the  only  means  of  sal- 
vation in  this  world.  Wherefore  ponder  on  it,  give 
alms  and  practise  ablution,  serve  saints  with  your 
mind,  body,  and  wealth  ; speak  civilly  to  every  one, 
but  keep  your  thoughts  fixed  on  God.  A great 
being  shall  be  born  who  shall  come  to  abide  here, 
and  contribute  to  the  extension  and  importance 
of  this  city.  I have  only  sown  the  seed  ; he  shall 
shade  this  place  like  an  overspreading  tree.’ 

On  the  15th  of  Maghar,  Sambat  1722,  the  Guru 
set  out  on  his  tour  from  Anandpur.  His  first  long 
halt  was  at  Mulowal  in  the  Patiala  State.  On 
arriving  there  the  people  complained  to  him  that 
they  could  only  obtain  drinking  water  from  a great 
distance.  There  was  a well  near,  but  its  water  was 
brackish  and  unwholesome.  He  told  them  to  repeat 
God’s  name  over  it,  draw  water  therefrom,  and  they 
should  find  it  pure  and  sweet.  From  that  day  the 
well  has  yielded  sweet  water.  It  is  still  known  as 
the  Guru’s  well. 

The  Guru  then  proceeded  to  Handiaya,  where 
there  was  a severe  epidemic  of  fever  and  great  con- 
sequent mortality.  The  inhabitants  went  to  put 
themselves  under  his  protection  and  implore  him  to 
save  them.  Upon  this  the  Guru  uttering  the  true 
Name,  threw  a glance  of  favour  on  them  and  healed 
them  of  all  their  maladies.  Having  given  them  the 
usual  religious  instruction  he  proceeded  slowly  to 
Dhilwan.  ^ 

Thence  the  Guru  proceeded  to  the  villages  of 
Khiwa  and  Bhikki.  In  the  latter  lived  a man 
called  Desu  who  was  a disciple  of  Sakhi  Sarwar, 
He,  however,  went  to  see  the  Guru.  The  Guru, 
on  seeing  a piece  of  bent  iron  hanging  from  his 


340 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


neck,  asked  him  what  it  was.  He  said  it  was  an 
article  that  satisfied  all  his  necessities.  It  gave 
him  corn,  money,  and  clothing,  and  he  worshipped 
it  every  day.  ‘ I offer  a breakfast  of  bread  and 
sweets,’  said  he,  ‘to  Sakhi  Sarwar.  The  priest 
having  read  a blessing  and  set  aside  a portion  thereof, 
returneth  me  the  remainder,  which  I distribute 
among  the  people  after  satisfying  myself.’  The 
Guru  on  hearing  this  said  that  Desu,  a Hindu,  did 
what  a true-born  Musalman  would  never  do,  and  he 
was  ruining  his  prospects  both  in  this  world  and  the 
next.  The  Guru  then  gave  him  spiritual  instruction 
and  he  became  a Sikh.  At  parting  the  Guru  pre- 
sented him  with  five  arrows  in  memory  of  the 
occasion. 

On  arriving  at  home  Desu  fell  ill.  His  wife  said 
it  was  all  the  result  of  his  having  forsaken  Sakhi 
Sarwar  and  taken  the  Guru’s  arrows  with  him. 
She  pressed  him  to  return  the  arrows  and  resume  his 
religious  allegiance  to  the  Baloch  Pir.  At  first 
Desu  stoutly  refused,  but  afterwards  consented.  His 
wife  then  broke  the  arrows  and  threw  the  pieces 
away.  After  some  days  Desu  died,  leaving  a son 
called  Gainda.  Gainda’s  brother-in-law  committed 
a murder,  and  was  killed  by  Gainda.  The  other 
brothers-in-law  then  joined  and  killed  Gainda.  And 
Gainda’s  son  was  poisoned  by  his  relations  for  the 
sake  of  his,  property.  Desu’s  death  and  the  tragic 
fate  of  his  relations  were  popularly  attributed  to  his 
desertion  of  the  Guru. 

The  Guru  then  proceeded  to  Maur  on  the  Southern 
Panjab  Railway,  where  he  was  awaited  by  a great 
concourse  of  people  to  whom  he  preached  the  true 
Name.  He  induced  the  people  to  sink  a well.  It 
should  be  buttressed  with  baked  bricks  when  an 
op^rtunity.  olfeired.  The  Guru  thence  went  to 
Maisarkhana,  and  thence  to  Talwandi  Sabo,  now 
known  to  the  Sikhs  as  Damdama.  He  thence 
travelled  to  Kot  Dharmwala  and  was  everywhere 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  341 

received  with  affection  by  the  people.  During  his 
journey  he  was  pursued  by  two  thieves,  one  a 
Musalman  and  the  other  a Hindu,  who  watched  day 
and  night  fot  an  opportunity  to  steal  his  horse. 
While  the  Guru  Wearied  with  travel  lay  asleep  On 
a dark  night,  the  thieves,  it  is  said,  saw  from  their 
place  of  concealment  a tiger  issue  from  a lonely 
forest  and  make  three  prostrations  before  the  sleep- 
ing Guru.  The  Musalman  thief  became  afraid  and 
said  to  the  Hindu,  ‘ The  Guru  whom  a carnivorous 
animal  not  only  toucheth  not,  but  boweth  to,  must 
be  some  wonder-worker.’  The  Musalman  would 
therefore  never  steal  his  horse,  but  would  go  home. 
The  Hindu  thief  could  not  avoid  recognizing  the 
Guru’s  power,  but  at  the  same  time  remained  fixed 
in  his  resolution  to  commit  the  theft.  On  awaking  in 
the  morning  the  Guru  heard  of  the  theft,  and  in  reply 
to  his  men  said  that  the  horse  and  the  thief  would 
be  found  standing  on  a certain  spot  to  the  north 
of  his  camp.  He  accordingly  sent  his  servants,  and 
ordered  them  to  bring  the  horse  and  the  thief  before 
him.  The  Guru  asked  the  thief  why  he  had  stolen 
the  horse,  and  why  he  had  remainea  standing  with 
the  animal  instead  of  running  away.  The  thief  told 
him  all  that  had  occurred  prior  to  the  theft,  and 
added  that  when  he  had  mounted  the  horse  hfe 
became  blind  and  could  not  see  his  way.  He  had 
travelled  several  miles  but  could  not  find  the  road, 
and  therefore  halted  at  the  place  where  he  was 
arrested.  In  his  contrition  he  afterwards  climbed 
a jand  tree,  broke  off  a portion  of  a branch,  and 
impaled  himself  on  the  stump.  The  place  is  now 
called  Sulisar.  Thus  did  the  thief  gather  the  fruit 
df  his  sins.  Such  is  the  punishment,  as  saith  Shaikh 
Farid,  that  awaiteth  those  who  perpetrate  evil 
(feeds.  ' . ; 

The  Guru  then  proceeded  slowly  to  Dhamdhan  in 
the  Bangar  tract,  now  a station  of  the  Southern 
Panjab  Railway.  It  is  related  that  the  Guru  pre- 


342 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


sented  the  Chaudhri  of  the  village  with  funds  to 
construct  a well  and  a dharmsal  for  the  reception  of 
travellers.  The  inhabitants  at  that  ticae  largely 
subsisted  on  plunder,  and  the  Guru  was  anxious  to 
y/ean  them  from  that  mode  of  livelihood.  One  of 
them  took  milk  to  the  Guru  which  he  refused  as 
being  the  produce ^of  theft  and  violence. 

The  Guru  was*  accompanied  by  a Sikh  called 
Mihan  who  was  totally  devoted  to  his  service.  He 
drew  water,  brought  ferewood  from  the  forest,  and 
performed  the  most  menial  offices  for  him.  He 
always  kept  a cushion  on  his  head  for  lifting  burdens. 
It  was  continually  wet  from  water  dripping  on  it, 
and  his  head  in  consequence  soon  festered.  One 
day  as  he  was  on  the  point  of  depositing  a pitcher 
of  water  which  he  had  brought,  his  cushion  and 
turban  fell  off  when  maggots  were  seen  to  issue  from 
a sore  in  his  head.  The  Guru’s  mother  and.  wife 
observed  this,  and  brought  it  to  the  Guru’s  notice. 
The  Guru  sent  for  Mihan,  gave  him  a robe  of  honour, 
and  promised  him  that  he  should  be  a Mahant,  or 
superior  of  a religious  order.  The  Guru  then  put 
his  hand  on  his  head,  and  its  pain  and  sores  ^s- 
appeared.  Upon  this,  Mihan  obtained  a knowledge 
of  God  and  of  the  past,  present,  and  future.,  The 
Guru  presented  him  with  a bullock  of  the  famed 
Nagauri  breed  and  a drum  and  banner  to  grace  his 
new  position.  ^ 

The  Guru  then  proceeded  to  Tekpur  also  called 
Baharjakh.  He  abode  there  for  three  days  in  the 
house  of  a carpenter  who  conducted  him  as  far  as 
Kaithal.  Thence  he  proceeded  to  Barna.  The  Guru 
there  took  occasion  to  preach  against  the  use  of 
tobacco.  Save  thy  people  from  the  vile  drug,  and 
employ  thyself  in  the  service  of  Sikhs  and  holy  men- 
Rely  on  the  Guru  who  is  the  protector  in  both 
worlds.  He  giveth  his  hand:  and  saveth  from 
affliction.  When  thy  people  abandon  the  degrading 
smoke  and  cultivate  their  lands,  their  wealth  and 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  343 

prosperity  shall  greatly  increase,  and  they  shall 
want  for  nothing.  They  shall  possess  cows  and 
buffaloes  in  abundance,  and  they  shall  be  respected 
by  the  world,  but  when  they  inhale  the  vile  vegetable, 
they  shall  grow  poor  and  lose  their  wealth.’  Bhai 
Santokh  Singh,  author  of  the  Suraj  Parkash,  gives 
his  own  testimony  after  a visit  to  the  village  of 
Barna,  that,  as  long  as  the  people  abstained  from 
tobacco,  they  were  happy,  but  that  those  who  in- 
dulged in  its  use  became  idle  and  lost  all  their  pro- 
perty. Men  spent  money  on  tobacco  which  they 
ought  to  have  applied  to  the  purchase  of  grain  to 
live  on  or  sow  in  their  fields.  Bhai  Santokh  Singh 
baptized  several  of  their  descendants  according  to 
the  rites  prescribed  by  the  tenth  Guru,  and  did  all  in 
his  power  to  induce  them  to  abstain  from  the 
pernicious  stimulant. 

Chapter  III 

The  Guru  proceeded  to  Kurkhetar  (Thanesar)  on 
the  occasion  of  a solar  eclipse.  He  was  received 
with  the  greatest  distinction  by  all  the  holy  men  pre- 
sent, to  say  nothing  of  his  own  numerous  followers. 
During  his  stay  there  he  preached  the  true  Name. 
Then  he  went  to  Bani  Badrpur  where  he  contri- 
buted a bag  of  rupees  for  the  excavation  of  a well. 
Thence  he  crossed  the  Jamna  and  hunted  on  the 
way.  He  shot  some  animals  which  he  strung  to 
his  saddle  and  took  to  the  town  of  Kara  Manak,^ 
where  lived  an  eminent  saint  called  Maluk  Das. 
Having  heard  that  the  Guru  killed  animals,  he 
refused  to  receive  him.  It  is  said  that,  as  next  day 
the  saint  was  laying  food  before  his  idol,  he  found 
it  to  his  horror  changing  into  meat.  He  felt  that 
this  must  have  been  a miracle  wrought  by  the  Guru 
to  bring  him  to  his  senses,  so  he  thought  it  proper 

' In  this  itinerary  we  follow  the  author  of  the  Suraj  Parkash,  who 
wrote  his  work  at  Kaithal,  near  the  towns  and  villages  mentioned. 


344 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


to  go  and  bow  before  him.  He  mentally  argued, 
however,  that  if  the  Guru  had  the  preternatural 
power  attributed  to  him,  he  would  first  send  for 
him.  The  Guru  knew  what  was  passing  in  his  mind, 
and  sent  his  servants  and  a palki  to  fetch  him.  He 
Went  to  the  Guru,  received  initiation  and  instrucr 
tion,  and  became  one  of  his  most  devoted  followers. 

The  Guru  on  his  missionary  tour  visited  Agra, 
Itawa,  and  Priyag.  While  at  Priyag,  Nanaki,  the 
Guru’s  mother,  approached  him  with  a request  of 
the  highest  importance.  She  said  that  all  her  de- 
sires had  been  fulfilled,  but  there  was  yet  one 
remaining.  She  remembered  that  her  late  husband 
Guru  Har  Gobind  had  promised  that  a great  being 
should  be  born  in  the  house  of  Guru  Teg  Bahadur, 
and  she  was  awaiting  that  event.  The  Guru  replied 
that  all  her  desires  should  soon  be  fulfilled,  and  she 
should  have  a grandson  who  would  save  the  true 
religion.  She  had  only  to  meditate  continually  on 
Guru  Nanak.  The  Guru  remained  six  months  at 
Priyag,  during  which  time  his  wife  Gujari,  to  the 
great  joy  of  his  mother,  became  pregnant. 

The  Guru  next  proceeded  with  his  family  to 
Banaras.  He  rested  in  a house  which  he  called 
Shabd  ka  kotha,  or  the  mansion  of  the  Word.  It  is 
in  that  part  of  the  city  known  as  Resham  Katra. 
He  there  received  the  usual  honours  from  his 
followers.  Over  the  spot  on  which  he  rested  a 
raised  platform  has  since  been  erected,  and  the  place 
is  now  known  at  the  Bari  Sangat  or  the  Great  Society. 
The  Guru’s  shoes  and  coat  are  still  preserved  in 
memory  of  his  visit.  He  thence  proceeded  to  the 
river  Karmnasha,  so  called  because  it  was  believed 
that  all  the  good  acts  of  a man  who  bathed  in  iit 
would  be  forfeited.  The  Guru  scorning  that  tradi- 
tion bathed  in  its  waters,  and  affirmed  that  the  river 
could  never  wash  away  the  result  of  good  deeds.* 

* It  is  said  that  Raja  Trisanku  of  the  Solar  dynasty,  having  killed 
a Brahman,  was  purified  by  a saint,  who  collected  waters  from  all  the 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  345 

The  Guru  then  went  to  the  village  of  Sarasrawan, 
where  lived  a very  devout  and  truthful  discip)le 
popularly  known  as  Chacha  Phaggo.  He  had  built 
a very  beautiful  mansion  with  a stately  portico  and 
a large  hall  of  entrance.  He  was  perpetually  asked 
by  his  neighbours  why  he  had  built  such  a large 
building,  and  especially  such  a large  portico  and 
entrance  chamber.  He  said  his  object  was  that 
when  the  Guru  paid  a visit  he  should  not  have 
the  trouble  of  alighting,  but  could  enter  the  man- 
sion on  horseback.  Within  it  he  had  placed  a superb 
couch  for  the  Guru  to  lie  on.  Chacha  Phaggo  kept 
the  building  locked  so  that  the  couch  might  not 
be  soiled.  Every  morning  he  used  to  perfume  it 
and  then  close  the  doors,  declaring  that  he  would 
not  live  in  the  edifice  himself  until  the  Guru  had 
once  entered  it,  and  hallowed  it  with  his  footsteps. 
People  laughed  at  him,  and  asked  what  hope  there 
was  that  the  Guru,  who  resided  in  the  Panjab, 
should  ever  visit  his  village.  Chacha  Phaggo  dis- 
regarded such  banter,  and  maintained  that  the 
Guru  would  certainly  come  and  fulfil  his  desires, 
as  Guru  Nanak  went  to  the  house  of  I.alo;  and 
therefore  he  had  made  arrangements  for  a suit- 
able reception.  It  turned  out,  as  Chacha  Phaggo 
had  anticipated,  that  in  due  time  he  had  the  happi- 
ness of  entertaining  the  Guru. 

The  Guru  thence  departed  for  Gaya.  There  the 
Brahmans  visited  him  in  a body,  and  explained  the 
virtues  of  that  famous  place  of  pilgrimage.  They 
made  no  mention  of  Budha  having  made  his  great 
renunciation  and  penance  there — events  never  men- 

streams  in  the  world  to  wash  away  the  sin.  These  waters  after  the 
purification  collected  in  the  spring  from  which  the  Karmnasha  river 
issues. 

A more  probable  cause  of  the  evil  reputation  of  the  river  is  that  it 
once  formed  the  boundary  between  the  Aryan  colonies  of  the  north 
and  the  aborigines  of  the  south,  and  all  Aryans  who  crossed  it  were 
said  to  have  passed  beyond  the  pale  of  religious  merit.  Travellers  who 
still  cross,  take  care  that  not  a drop  of  its  water  touches  their  bodies. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


346 

tioned  for  centuries  by  ordinary  Hindus.  They  said 
if  barley  rolls  were  offered  at  Gaya  for  the  souls  of 
ancestors,  they  would  immediately  go  to  heaven, 
even  though  they  had  already  entered  hell.  Upon 
this  they  pressed  the  Guru  to  give  them  money  for 
the  ceremony.  The  Guru  refused  to  satisfy  their 
cupidit3^  He  exhorted  them  to  meditate  on  God 
and  instructed  them  in  divine  knowledge.  Having 
exposed  the  hypocrisy  and  deceit  of  the  Brahmans, 
he  taught  his  Sikhs  how  to  remain  for  ever  free 
from  their  toils.  He  then  recited  for  their  edification 
the  hymn  in  Rag  Asa  composed  by  Guru  Nanak  at 
Gaya,  the  second  Ashtapadi  of  the  Sukhmani,  and 
the  following  hymn  of  Kabir  : — 

Nobody  obeyeth  his  parents  when  alive,- yet  he  giveth  them 
feasts  when  dead ; 

Say  how  shall  the  poor  parents  obtain  what  the  ravens  and 
the  dogs  have  eaten. 

Let  some  one  explain  to  me  what  kushal  ^ means  ; 

The  world  dieth  talking  of  kushal ; how  ever  shall  kushal 
be  obtained  ? 

Men  make  goddesses  and  gods  of  clay,  and  offer  them 
living  sacrifices. 

As  your  lifeless  gods,  so  your  deceased,  who  ask  not  for 
what  they  want  themselves. 

You  kill  living  things,  and  you  worship  lifeless  things  ; at 
the  last  moment  great  shall  be  your  suffering. 

You  know  not  the  worth  of  God’s  name,  and  you  shall  be 
drowned  in  the  sea  of  terror. 

You  waver*  and  know  not  the  supreme  God  ; wherefore 
you  worship  gods  and  goddesses. 

Saith  Kabir,  you  have  not  thought  of  the  Unknowable,  and 
you  have  become  entangled  in  the  deadly  sins.® 

Kushal,  comfort  or  happiness.  The  word  is  uttered  by  the 
Brahmans  after  being  feasted  at  the  shradhs,  to  denote  that  the  manes 
for  whom  the  ceremony  is  performed  are  happy.  The  word  is  also 
used  to  express  the  thanks  or  satisfaction  the  Brahmans  feel  when  they 
have  filled  their  bellies  on  such  occasions. 

’ You  feel  no  certainty  in  your  devotion.  ® Gauri  Kabir. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  347 

After  this  the  Guru  dismissed  the  Brahmans  and 
departed  in  disgust  from  their  place  of  pilgrimage.^ 

The  Guru  in  the.  progress  of  his  mission  arrived 
at  Patna,  then  as  now  a strong  Muhammadan 
centre.  Crowds  of  both  sexes  hearing  of  his  re- 
ligious fame  went  to  behold  him  and  make  him 
offerings.  They  warmly  invited  him  to  abide  with 
them,  give  them  religious  instruction,  and  render 
them  happy.  The  Guru  replied  : ‘ Wherever  is  the 
congregation  of  saints,  there  it  is  God’s  order  for 
me  to  abide.’ 

There  lived  in  Patna  a Sikh  confectioner,  called 
Bhai  Jaita,  who  through  humility  always  wore  soiled 
clothes.  Noticing  this  the  Sikhs  thought  that  he 
never  bathed,  and  they  twitted  him  on  the  subject. 
He  told  them  they  might  go  to  his  house,  and  sec 
if  he  did  or  did  not.  They  accordingly  sent  two  of 
their  body  disguised  as  travellers.  He  received 
them,  washed  their  feet,  performed  every  menial 
service  for  them,  and  gave  them  bed  and  supper. 
A watch  and  a quarter  before  day  Bhai  Jaita  arose, 
and  performed  his  sacred  ablutions.  He  then  medi- 
tated on  God  and  the  Guru  till  daybreak,  after  which 
he  went  to  his  shop  to  attend  to  his  business.  On 
hearing  of  Bhai  Jaita’s  devotion,  the  Guru  went  to 
stay  with  him,  while  the  Sikhs  prepared  a magni- 
ficent mansion,  the  present  local  Har  Mandar,  for  the 
reception  of  the  head  of  their  religion. 

When  the  Guru  after  some  time  had  completed 
his  instructions,  he,  knowing  the  future,  said  one  day 
to  his  mother  Nanaki : ‘ Remain  here  with  thy 

^ There  is  a little  Sikh  temple  on  the  site  of  the  edifice  in  which 
Guru  Teg  Bahadur  lived  when  he  visited  Gaya.  We  found  there  one 
man  who  could  read  the  Granth  Sahib,  but  who  did  not  understand  it. 
The  principal  ministrant  wore  the  sacrificial  thread  of  the  Hindus. 
Within  the  temple  were  little  statues  of  Krishan,  Radha,  Baldeo,  and 
other  idolatrous  articles  of  worship.  On  the  outer  wall  of  the  temple 
were  represented  Guru  Nanak,  his  sons  and  his  attendants.  In 
friendly  proximity  to  them  were  representations  of  HanQman,  Ram 
Chandar,  and  his  consort  Sita. 


348  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

daughter-in-law ; I must  depart.’  His  mother  re- 
plied, ‘ Thou  knowest  my  love  for  thee  ; I cannot 
live  for  a moment  without  thee,  and  now  thou  art 
going  to  leave  me.’  He  represented  to  her  that 
many  Sikhs  were  waiting  for  him  in  a distant  land, 
and  he  must  go  to  them.  His  wife,  Gujari,  seeing 
that  the  Guru’s  mother’s  remonstrances  were  of  no 
avail,  then  began  to  ply  her  own  entreaties — ‘ O 
Guru,  thou  art  leaving  me  alone  in  this  foreign 
country.  I have  no  peace  when  I behold  thee  not. 
What  shall  become  of  me  ? ’ On  hearing  these 
words  the  Guru  remained  thoughtful  for  some  time, 
and  at  last  replied — ‘ The  prophecy  of  my  father. 
Guru  Har  Gobind,  is  now  about  to  be  accomplished. 
A son  shall  soon  be  born  to  thee,  who  shall  be  great 
and  powerful,  extend  the  faith,  establish  Sikh 
supremacy,  root  out  the  wicked,  and  destroy  the 
enemies  of  truth  and  true  religion.  Wherefore 
remain  thou  here  to  give  him  birth.  Thou  wouldst 
suffer  great  hardship  in  travelling,  so  be  happy  here. 
I shall  soon  return  after  having  made  a tour 
through  Bengal’  The  Guru’s  wife  felt  the  force 
of  these  words,  and  remained  silent. 

After  this  conversation  the  Guru  performed  his 
devotions  and  went  to  sleep.  He  arose  next  morn- 
ing some  hours  before  day,  and  engaged  in  worship. 
As  his  minstrels  began  to  chant  the  Asa  ki  War, 
an  envoy  arrived  with  many  offerings  from  Ram 
Singh,  son  of  Mirza  Raja  Jai  Singh  of  Amber  (Jaipur) 
in  Rajputana  and  fourth  in  descent  from  Raja  Man 
Singh,  who  had  been  a distinguished  general  under 
the  Emperor  Akbar.  The  envoy  related  the  object 
oj  his  mission:  ‘The  Emperor  Aurangzeb  hath 
ordered  my  master  to  send  a military  expedition  to 
the  Kamrup  country Thy  name  is  cherisher  of 

* ‘R5m  Singh,  who  succeeded  Mirza  Raja  Jai  Singh,  had  the 
imansab  of  four  thousand  conferred  upon  him,  and  was  sent  against 
the  Assamese/  Tod^s  Rajasthan^  vol  II,  ‘Annals  of  Amber',  chap.  i. 

The  Sikh  accounts  of  this  expedition  are  not  attested  either  by  the 
Muhammadan  historians  or  by  the  annals  of  Rajputana,  It  was  not 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  349 

those  who  seek  thy  protection.  Wherefore  merci- 
fully assist  my  master  that  he  may  conquer  Kamrup, 
and  remain  thou  , in  Patna  until  he  arrive  in  person 
to  offer  thee  homage  and  solicit  thy  succour.’  The 
Guru  granted  both  requests,  but  at  the  same  time 
kept  the  future  in  view. 

Raja  Ram  Singh  soon  appeared  accompanied  by 
his  ministers  and  a large  retinue  of  soldiers.  He 
proceeded  on  the  afternoon  of  the  day  of  his  arrival 
to  make  a state  visit  to  the  Guru,  and  on  arriving 
in  his  presence  made  his  prostrations,  presented  his 
offerings,  and  begged  the  Guru’s  protection.  The 
Guru  quoted  for  him  from  the  Sukhmani : — 

The  king  of  the  whole  world  would  be  unhappy. 

But  he  would  become  happy  by  repeating  God’s  name. 

And  again : — 

Where  there  are  very  great  difficulties, 

God’s  name  will  at  once  save  thee. 

The  Guru  then  invited  him  to  state  the  object  of 
his  visit.  He  spoke  as  follows  ; — ‘ O true  Guru,  we 
Rajas  of  Hindustan  were  subject  to  the  Emperor 
Akbar.  The  king  of  Kamrup  alone  became  a rebel, 
and  defied  his  authority.  The  Emperor  then  ex- 
pressed his  desire  that  some  brave  general  should 
take  an  army  and  conquer  that  country.  When  the 
Emperor’s  wishes  were  communicated  to  his  bravest 
Muhammadan  officers,  none  of  them  volunteered 
for  the  expedition.  On  the  contrary  they  repre- 
sented that  even  with  the  greatest  bravery  it  would 
be  impossible  to  carry  out  the  Emperor’s  design. 
There  was,  however,  they  represented,  among  the 
Hindu  Rajput  chiefs  one  man,  Raja  Man  Singh, 

RSja  Bishan  Singh,  whose  regal  digmfc)r  was,  according  to  Tod,  only 
for  a short  period,  who  went  on  this  expedition.  He  was,  according 
to  the  annals  of  Jaipur,  only  four  years  of  age  when  Guru  Teg 
Bahadur  was  executed.  There  was  no  Raja  Bishan  Singh  of  Jodhpur ; 
ahd  M^n  Singh  was  not  killed  in  the  expedition  he  undertook  to 
KamrQp  under  the  emperor  Akbar. 


350 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


who  might  be  sent  on  the  perilous  errand.  If  he 
perished  in  the  attempt,  no  matter,  there  would  be 
only  one  enemy  the  less  ; and  if  he  were  victorious, 
it  would  be  so  miich  the  better.  The  Emperor 
would  have  one  more  country  subjected  to  his 
authority. 

‘ Akbar  was  pleased  with  this  suggestion,  and 
next  day  in  public  darbar  informed  Raja  Man  Singh, 
who  he  said  was  the  first  of  all  his  brave  Rajput 
princes,  that  he  had  appointed  him  to  lead  the 
expedition.  The  Raja  had  no  choice  but  to  accept 
the  post,  and  as  soon  as  possible  proceeded  with  the 
Emperor’s  army  against  the  rebellious  king.  The 
tents  of  Man  Singh’s  army  extended  for  miles  on  the 
frontier,  and,  notwithstanding  the  spells  and  incan- 
tations of  the  inhabitants  of  Kamrup,  was  com- 
pletely successful.^ 

‘ Now  again  the  inhabitants  of  Kamrup  and  Asam 
have  proved  rebellious  to  authority.  The  Emperor 
recently  sent  Mir  Jumla  to  subdue  them  but,  though 
at  first  successful,  he  was  obliged  to  relinquish  his 
victories.  His  cavalry  was  cut  off,  a pestilence 
destroyed  his  infantry,  and  he  himself  perished  of 
exposure  and  fatigue  before  he  had  reached  Dhaka 
(Dacca)  on  his  return  journey.* 

‘ Aurangzeb’s  advisers  have  suggested  that  he 
should  send  me.  They  say  if  I conquer  the  country, 
it  will  be  an  addition  to  his  sovereignty ; and,  if 
I be  killed,  the  Emperor  may  annex  the  whole  of 
Rajputana.  The  Emperor  accordingly  sent  for  me, 
and  ordered  me  to  go  and  subdue  Kamrup.  On 
hearing  this  I went  home,  and  told  my  mother  and 
queens  of  the  order  I had  received.  They  became 
alarmed,  and  asked  me  if  I desired  an  untimely  death. 
They  represented  that  there  was  none  so  brave  as 

^ Ain-i-Akbari,  XXX,  30,  and  Tod’s  Rdjasihdn. 

* Hutory  of  India,  by  Elphinstone,  whose  account  is  based  on 
Khifi  Khan  and  Bernier.  See  also  Mir  Jumla’ s Invasion  of  Asdm, 
by  Shahab-ul-din  TalSsh. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  351 

Mir  Jumla,  and  if  he  perished  what  hope  was  there 
for  me  ? Of  all  the  generals  who  had  been  sent 
on  that  errand  none  except  Raja  Man  Singh  had 
ever  returned.  Then  I too  saw  the  danger  of  my 
position.  It  was  certain  death  to  command  the 
invading  army,  and  it  would  be  equally  fatal  fpr  me 
to  disobey  the  Emperor’s  orders. 

‘ My  principal  queen  then  came  to  my  assistance 
with  her  advice.  She  said,  “ My  father’s  family 
were  Sikhs  of  Guru  Nanak.  On  Guru  Nanak’s 
throne  is  now  seated  Guru  Teg  Bahadur.  Go  and 
ask  for  his  protection  and  support,  and  thy  prayer 
shall  not  be  in  vain.  Guru  Arjan  hath  said  : ‘ Em- 
brace him  who  seeketh  thy  protection.  This  is  the 
duty  of  the  religious  teacher.’ 

‘ “ The  Guru  can  fulfil  the  desires  of  all  creatures 
and  grant  deliverance  even  to  the  lowest  animals. 
The  Guru’s  father.  Guru  Har  Gobind,  secured  the 
release  of  fifty-two  Rajput  kings  confined  in  the 
fortress  of  Gualiar  by  order  of  the  Emperor  Jahangir. 
Since  then  all  Rajas  are  Sikhs,  and  reverence  the 
holy  Guru.  We  too  are  the  Guru’s  Sikhs.  Thou 
hast  forgotten  the  favours  conferred  on  us  by  the 
Gurus,  and  therefore  art  thou  unhappy.” 

‘ 0 Guru,  on  receiving  this  cheering  advice  from 
my  queen,  I was  consoled  and  regained  my  peace  of 
mind.  Hence  I have  come  from  distant  Rajputana 
to  seek  the  protection  of  thy  holy  feet.’ 

The  Guru  smiled  and  directed  the  Raja  to  con- 
tinually meditate  on  God’s  name.  ‘ God’s  name,’ 
as  Guru  Arjan  hath  said,  ‘ is  medicine  for  all  diseases. 
Guru  Nanak  will  assist  thee,  and  thou  shalt  conquer 
Kamrup.’  ^ 

Raja  Ram  Singh  was  overjoyed  on  hearing  this 

^ From  a map  attached  to  a ‘ Report  of  BhutSn  and  adjacent 
countries*,  by  Captain  Pemberton (1838),  it  appears  that  KamrCip  once 
comprised  the  whole  of  the  present  district  of  Goalpara  and  Kamrup 
between  the  state  of  Bhutan  on  the  north  and  the  river  Brahmaputar 
on  the  south.  The  Asam  of  old  times  lay  south  of  the  Brahmaputar. 


352 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


promise  from  the  Guru,  and  having  offered  a prayer 
distributed  sacred  food  to  the  whole  company.  His 
faith  was  confirmed,  and  he  received  initiation  as 
a Sikh  by  the  ceremony  of  charanpahul.  On  the 
following  day  he  had  a further  request  to  make  the 
Guru,  namely,  that  he  should  accompany  him  in  his 
expedition,  in  which  case  victory  would  certainly 
incline  to  his  side.  The  Guru  agreed,  bearing  in  mind 
that,  while  accompanying  the  Raja,  he  would  have 
an  excellent  opportunity  of  preaching  to  his  Sikhs, 
and  extending  the  Sikh  religion  throughout  the 
countries  traversed. 


Chapter  IV 

The  Guru  offered  words  of  consolation  to  his 
mother  and  wife,  and,  entrusting  them  to  his  brother- 
in-law  Kripal  Chand,  bade  them  an  affectionate 
farewell.  He  then  set  out  with  the  Raja.  Wherever 
he  went  he  was  received  with  great  honour  by  the 
people,  to  whom  he  communicated  religious  instruc- 
tion, and  on  whom  he  enjoined  devotion  to  the 
Deathless  Being.  He  and  the  Raja  marched  througli 
Hunger,  Rajmahal,  and  Maldah.  In  the  latter  place 
was  a dharmsal,  but  its  ministrants  did  not  come  to 
visit  him.  He  was  informed  that  they  had  all  gone 
to  a fair  in  the  village  of  Pandua,  but  that  on  their 
return  they  would  pay  him  their  respects.  He 
replied  that  he  could  not  meet  those  who  went  to 
such  idolatrous  gatherings.  In  Maldah  the  Guru 
met  only  one  Sikh,  a confectioner,  who  begged  him 
to  go  and  take  refreshment  in  his  house.  The  Guru 
did  so,  gave  him  instruction,  and  blessed  him. 

In  the  morning  the  Guru  set  out  with  the 
■^a)a..  Thew  next  halt  was  in  Dhaka.  There 
resid^  a masand  called  Bulaki  whose  mother  had 
vowed  that,  if  the  Guru  ever  visited  the  place,  she 
would  seat  him  on  a beautiful  couch  she  had  pre- 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  353 

pared,  dress  him  with  cloth  she  had  spun  herself, 
and  give  him  a dainty  meal  prepared  by  her  own 
hands.  The  Guru  knowing  her  heart’s  desire  went 
without  other  guidance  straight  to  her  residence. 
He  called  to  her  from  outside,  whereat  she  was  over- 
joyed, ran  forth  and  placed  her  head  on  his  feet. 
She  took  him  within,  and  lavished  on  him  all  the 
attentions  which  she  had  previously  vowed.  The 
Guru  said  he  had  come  to  visit  her  on  account  of 
her  pure  devotion,  and  invited  her  to  ask  him  a 
favour.  She  replied  that  the  only  favour  she  craved 
was  to  be  allowed  to  remain  ever  near  him.  He 
rejoined  that  she  might  behold  him  whenever  after 
ablution  she  deeply  meditated  on  God,  directed  her 
love  to  His  lotus  feet,  and  repeated  His  true  name. 

Bulaki  informed  all  the  Sikh  inhabitants  of  the 
Guru’s  arrival.  They  came  in  crowds  to  do  him 
honour,  and  receive  his  instruction  and  bene- 
dictions. The  Guru  on  seeing  their  enthusiasm, 
said  that  Dhaka  was  the  storehouse  of  his  faith. 
He  suggested  to  the  Sikhs  to  build  a dharmsal  in 
their  city  where  God’s  praises  should  be  ever  sung, 
for  Guru  Nanak  had  ordained  that  singing  God’s 
praises  was  the  highest  form  of  worship.  The  Guru 
also  directed  them  to  hold  meetings  on  the  anniver- 
saries of  the  Gurus,  and  ever  worship  the  Deathless 
Being. 

As  the  Guru  was  about  to  depart,  masand  Bulaki’s 
mother  came  to  visit  him  again.  She  begged  that 
he  might  remain  a few  days  longer  in  their  midst. 
He  replied  that  he  had  much  to  do  elsewhere  and 
must  proceed.  He  directed  her  to  worship  Wahguni 
and  serve  the  saints,  and  she  should  be  happy.  She 
sent  for  a painter,  and  had  a picture  of  the  Guru 
made.  She  hung  it  over  the  couch  on  which  he 
had  sat.  Thus  she  was  able  to  behold  the  Guru 
whenever  her  secular  avocations  admitted. 

The  Guru  and  the  Raja  then  set  out  for  the  city 
of  Rangamati  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Brahmaputar. 

SIKH.  IV  A3, 


354  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Tliere  the  Guru  took  up  his  quarters,  and  the  Raja 
and  his  host  followed  his  example.  When  the  king 
of  Kamrup  heard  of  Raja  Ram  Singh's  arrival  to 
attack  him,  he  vowed  that  he  would  destroy  him 
and  his  army.  He  began  to  make  incantations 
sCnd  spells,  but  none  succeeded.  As  ignorance  pales 
before  knowledge,  so  did  the  sorcerers  fail  and 
grow  weary  of  their  efforts.  The  king  of  Kamrup 
then  sent  for  all  the  women  of  his  land  who  were 
famous  for  their  magical  skill.  They  too  could  not 
succeed  against  the  Guru.  The  king  then  felt  con- 
vinced that  there  must  be  some  divine  personage 
with  the  invading  army  who  thwarted  the  efforts 
of  all  sorcerers.  He  went  to  worship  at  the  temple 
of  the  goddess  Kamakhsha,  offered  her  sacrifice, 
and  received  a blessing  from  her  priests.  He  then 
set  about  making  immediate  preparation  to  defeat 
Raja  Ram  Singh. 

He  thought  of  a novel  plan  of  hostilities.  It  was 
to  divert  a tributary  of  the  Brahmaputar  by  making 
a huge  dam  across  it  and  turning  it  on  Raja  Ram 
Singh’s  army.  The  Guru  apprised  the  Raja  that 
a great  torrent  should  come  that  night  and  his  army 
was  in  danger.  The  Sikhs  in  Raja  Ram  Singh’s 
service  removed  their  tents,  but  several  Musalmans 
who  did  not  believe  in  the  Guru  or  heed  his  warning, 
were  swept  away. 

The  king’s  mother  saw  in  a vision  the  goddess 
Devi,  who  thus  addressed  her  : — ‘ O mother.  Guru 
Nanak  hath  taken  birth  in  this  age.  On  his  throne 
is  now  seated  the  ninth  Guru,  Teg  Bahadur.  He 
is  here  with  Raja  Ram  Singh  who  hath  become 
a disciple  of  his.  Nowadays  the  Guru  is  sovereign. 
No  one  hath  strength  to  oppose  him.  Go,  make 
obeisance  to  him,  and  ask  pardon  for  thy  sins,  and 
thy  rule  shall  be  everlasting ; otherwise  it  shall 
perish,’ 

' The  queen  communicated  this  oidei  ot  the 

Vet  son,  andVe  accotdtn^V  ptepated  to 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  355 

go  to  interview  the  Guru.  He  took  with  him  an 
escort  and  presents,  and,  crossing  the  tributary  of 
the  Brahmaputar  previously  referred  to,  proceeded 
to  the  Guru’s  tent.  After  prostration  he  said  that 
he  had  come  by  order  of  the  goddess  to  pray  for 
pardon  and  protection.  He  begged  the  Guru  not  to 
allow  him  to  fall  into  the  power  of  the  Moslems. 
The  Guru  replied  that  Raja  Ram  Singh  was  a very 
religious  man.  He  told  the  king  to  fear  not ; his 
empire  should  be  permanent ; he  ought  to  meet 
Raja  Ram  Singh,  and  hold  no  communication  with 
the  Muhammadans.  The  king  was  delighted  with 
this  speech,  and  begged  the  Guru  to  set  foot  in  his 
city,  bless  it,  and  take  Raja  Ram  Singh,  but  no 
Muhammadans  with  him.  The  Guru  without  making 
him  any  promise  dismissed  him. 

The  Guru  then  went  among  Raja  Ram  Singh’s 
troops,  and  preached  the  blessings  of  peace.  He 
quoted  from  Guru  Nanak’s  ‘ Sidh  Gosht  ’ : — 

A holy  man  renounceth  enmity  and  hostility. 

Raja  Ram  Singh’s  army  had  no  intention  to  pro- 
long the  enmity,  and  declared  themselves  willing  to 
accept  the  Guru’s  advice. 

The  Guru  then  sent  for  Raja  Ram  Singh  himself, 
told  him  the  whole  conversation  with  the  king,  and 
asked  him  to  beat  the  drum  of  victory.  The  Raja 
was  delighted  with  the  Guru’s  negotiations.  He 
said  that  the  news  was  like  the  water  of  life  dropped 
into  a dying  man’s  mouth.  The  Guru  then  told  him 
to  prepare  to  cross  the  tributary  of  the  Brahmaputar 
with  him,  and  take  care  that  he  took  no  Muham- 
madans in  his  train  as  their  presence  would  be 
offensive  to  the  king  of  Kamrup.  The  Guru  and 
Raja  Ram  Singh  crossed  the  river  with  an  escort  of 
a thousand  Rajputs.  They  were  received  in  a 
friendly  manner  % the  king  who  advanced  to  meet 
them.  The  Guru  sat  down  placing  the  royal  dispu- 
tants on  either  hand,  and  effected  a reconciliation 

Aa2 


356  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

and  an  interchange  of  friendly  offices  between  them. 
By  his  influence  they  both  exchanged  turbans  in 
token  of  life-long  amity.  Raja  Ram  Singh  made 
large  presents  to  the  Guru  while  the  king  of  Kamrup 
asked  him  for  some  souvenir  which  he  might  look 
at  and  worship  in  his  absence.  The  Guru  took  his 
bow  and  arrow  and,  aiming  at  a pipal-tree,  drove 
the  arrow  through  and  through  it.  He  told  the 
king  that  he  might  always  remember  him  by  the 
mark  on  the  tree.  The  Guru  then  gave  him  in- 
struction to  repeat  the  true  Name,  serve  the  saints, 
and,  if  ever  he  encountered  a difficulty,  address  his 
supplication  to  the  immortal  God  and  rely  on  the 
words  of  the  Guru.  He  should  not  even  by  mistake 
worship  cremation-grounds,  cemeteries,  temples,  or 
goddesses,  and  he  should  ever  associate  with  the 
virtuous.  The  Guru  driving  a dagger  into  the  earth 
then  addressed  himself  to  both  kings : ‘ Let  all  the 
land  on  this  side  of  the  dagger  belong  to  the  Emperor, 
and  all  on  the  other  side  to  the  king  of  Kamrup,  and 
let  both  monarchs  forget  their  enmity.’  This  they 
both  agreed  to,  and  thus  was  the  serious  quarrel 
adjusted  and  bloodshed  avoided. 

At  Dhubri,  the  capital  of  Kamrup,  the  Guru  in- 
formed Raja  Ram  Singh’s  officers  that  Guru  Nanak 
had  visited  the  place  and  rendered  it  holy  by  his 
footsteps.  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  then  requested  that 
each  soldier  should  bring  five  shieldfuls  of  earth  to 
raise,  in  memory  of  the  founder  of  the  Sikh  religion, 
a mound  which  could  be  seen  at  a great  distance. 
The  whole  of  Raja  Ram  Singh’s  army  joined  in  the 
work,  and  it  is  said  to  have  been  accomplished  in 
a few  hours.  The  Guru  then  had  a pavilion  erected 
at  the  top.  Some  of  the  Guru’s  followers  remained 
in  Kamrup,  and  their  descendants  are  now  found 
both  in  Dhubri  and  Chaotala. 

The  Guru  spent  a few  days  on  the  cool  and  pleasant 
bank  of  the  great  river.  Crowds  hearing  of  his  fame 
came  long  distances  to  see  him,  and  obtain  from 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  357 

him  the  fulfilment  of  their  desires.  He  was  held 
in  great  honour  throughout  the  whole  country,  and 
his  reputation  having  reached  Raja  Ram  of  Asam, 
that  monarch  came  to  do  him  homage.  The  Raja 
had  no  offspring  and  earnestly  desired  a son.  He 
brought  his  two  wives,  and  they  made  obeisance  to 
the  Guru.  The  Raja  congratulated  himself  on  being 
so  fortunate  as  to  obtain  a sight  of  the  great  priest 
and  leader  of  the  Sikhs,  and  asked  him  for  religious 
instruction.  This  request  was  granted,  and  the  king 
was  delighted.  He  proceeded  next  morning  to  wait 
on  the  Guru,  but,  when  it  came  to  making  his 
request,  he  felt  abashed.  The  Guru  knowing  the 
working  of  his  mind  encouraged  him  to  speak.  He 
then  asked  the  Guru  to  grant  him  the  boon  of  an 
heir  to  his  throne,  as  he  had  been  hitherto  deprived 
of  the  fruit  of  this  world.  He  said,  addressing  the 
Guru  : ‘ 0 great  king,  bring  this  sinking  craft  to 
shore.’  In  reply  the  Guru  took  off  his  signet  ring, 
stamped  its  impression  on  the  Raja’s  thigh,  and  thus 
addressed  him  : ‘ O king,  the  impression  of  my  seal 
shall  be  on  thy  son’s  forehead.  By  this  know  that 
it  is  Guru  Nanak  who  hath  mercifully  granted  thee 
offspring.  Make  thou  thy  son  a Sikh  of  the  house  of 
the  Guru.’  After  this  the  Raja  drank  the  water  in 
which  the  Guru’s  feet  had  been  bathed,  thus  became 
a Sikh,  and  returned  happy  to  his  capital. 

At  this  juncture  a messenger  arrived  from  Patna 
to  inform  the  Guru  of  the  birth  of  his  son.  On 
hearing  this  Raja  Ram  Singh  inaugurated  great 
rejoicings.  Guns  were  discharged,  the  best  musicians 
exhibited  their  skill,  and  copious  alms  were  bestowed 
on  the  poor. 

On  the  birth  of  the  child  the  Sikh  historian  re- 
marks : ‘It  hath  ever  been  usual  that,  when  God 
seeth  His  people  suffering.  He  sendeth  a saviour  of 
the  world.’  Guru  Gobind  Singh  afterwards,  in  his 
Vichitar  Natak-,  described  the  circumstances  of  his 
birth.  He  was  born  three  hours  before  sunrise  on 


358  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

the  seventh  day  of  the  light  half  of  the  month  of 
Poh,  in  the  Sambat  year  1723  (a.d.  1666).  It  is 
stated  that  on  Guru  Teg  Bahadur’s  departure  to 
Asam  with  Raja  Ram  Singh,  he  directed  his  wife 
Gujari  to  give  the  name  Gobind  Rai  to  a son  who 
should  be  born  to  her  in  his  absence. 


Chapter  V 

At  the  time  of  Gobind  Rai’s  birth  there  lived  in  the 
city  of  Kuhram  a Saiyid  called  Bhikan  Shah.  On 
the  young  Guru’s  natal  morning  Bhikan  Shah  looked 
and  bowed  towards  the  east.  His  disciples  asked 
him  why  he  bowed,  contrary  to  all  Muhammadan 
custom,  in  the  direction  to  which  only  Hindus  turned 
in  their  matutinal  worship  of  the  sun.  He  repHed 
that  there  had  just  been  born  in  Patna  a spiritual 
and  temporal  king  who  should  establish  religion  and 
destroy  the  evil.  He  vowed  that  he  would  go  to 
worship  the  new-born  sovereign,  and  would  perform 
a daily  fast  till  he  had  seen  him.  He  went  by  Dihli 
and  arrived  in  Patna  suffering  great  hunger  and 
fatigue.  He  sat  down  near  the  Guru’s  house,  but 
apart  from  the  crowd  who  had  come  to  offer  their 
congratulations.  When  the  crowd  had  dispersed, 
Kripal  Chand,  the  child’s  uncle,  went  to  Bhikan 
Shah,  and  asked  him  for  what  purpose  he  had  come. 
He  told  him  the  nature  of  his  vow,  and  asked  to  see 
the  new-born  child.  The  mother  and  grandmother 
were  afraid  of  the  Muhammadans  and  their  Emperor 
Aurangzeb.  They  therefore  tried  to  put  off  Saiyid 
Bhikan  Shah,  and  told  him  he  might  return  after 
three  months  when  they  would  show  him  the  child. 
The  Saiyid  remonstrated  on  receiving  this  answer, 
and  represented  that  he  was  only  a faqir,  and  had 
come  hundreds  of  miles  to  see  the  boy.  At  last,  by 
the  advice  of  Kripal  Chand,  the  mother  and  grand- 
mother gave  way,  and  consented  that  the  faqir 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  359 

should  behold  the  child  but  only  in  public,  in  presence 
of  the  Sikhs  of  Patna,  and  amid  the  soul-inspiring 
strains  of  the  Gurus’  hymns  with  rebeck  accom- 
paniments. 

When  the  infant  was  produced,  the  whole  assem- 
bly rose  to  do  him  honour  and  present  their  offerings. 
The  Saiyid  too  presented  his,  and  bowed  at  the 
young  spiritual  prince’s  feet.  He  placed  before  him 
two  earthen  vessels  covered  with  muslin,  one  con- 
taining milk  and  the  other  water.  The  child  play- 
fully touched  both  vessels.  Upon  this  the  faqir  took 
them  up,  and  prepared  to  leave  amid  the  thanks  of 
the  Sikhs  for  having  been  the  means  of  giving  them 
a sight  of  their  future  Guru.  They  asked  Bhikan 
Shah  what  he  meant  by  the  two  vessels.  He  said 
that  if  the  child  had  only  touched  one  of  them,  no 
Muhammadan  should  be  left  in  the  land ; but  as  he 
had  touched  both,  the  Hindus  and  Muhammadans 
should  abide,  and  the  child  should  include  them  both 
in  his  religion.^  Saying  this  the  Saiyid  departed. 

When  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  had  adjusted  the  quarrel 
between  Raja  Ram  Singh  and  the  king  of  Kamrup, 
and  had  also  heard  of  the  birth  of  his  son,  he  and 
the  Raja  set  out  for  Patna.  Travelling  stage  by 
stage  they  at  length  arrived  on  the  bank  of  the 

^ There  are  different  versions  of  this  legend.  The  Khalsa  Tract 
Society  gives  the  following:  A light  was  seen  in  the  heavens  by  a 
pious  faqir  and  his  disciples  on  the  occasion  of  the  Guru*s  birth.  The 
faqir  explained  the  meaning  of  the  phenomenon.  He  said  that  some 
one  beloved  of  God,  who  would  be  at  once  a saint  and  hero,  was  born 
into  the  world.  The  faqir  followed  the  direction  of  the  light  until  he 
arrived  at  the  child's  residence  in  Patna.  He  made  several  entreaties, 
which  were  at  last  granted,  to  see  the  young  Guru.  The  faqir  bowed 
and  placed  an  offering  before  him.  He  then  filled  two  small  vessels, 
one  with  milk  and  the  other  with  water,  and  placed  them  before  the 
child  to  make  trial  of  him.  If  the  child  spilled  the  one  containing 
milk  it  meant  he  was  a Hindu : if  he  spilled  the  one  containing  water 
h^  would  be  deemed  a Muhammadan.  The  Guru  impartially  spilled 
both  vessels,  by  which  the  faqir  understood  that  the  child  would  not 
be  an  adherent  of  either  Hinduism  or  Islam.  He  would  have  his  own 
distinct  religion,  and  confer  salvation  on  sinful  mortals. 


36o  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

Ganges.  The  Guru  sent  a message  to  his  mother 
that  he  would  reach  home  early  in  the  morning. 
His  mother  and  wife  bathed,  and  put  on  their  best 
dresses  to  receive  him.  On  their  arrival  Raja  Ram 
Singh  beholding  the  future  Guru  presented  him  a 
latge  quantity  of  jewels  and  dresses,  and  foretold 
his  future  prowess  and  fame. 

When  the  family  was  alone,  his  wife  asked  the 
Guru  how  far  he  had  penetrated  into  Kamrup.  He 
replied  as  far  as  Guru  Nanak  had  gone.  He  also 
informed  her  that  he  had  erected  at  Dhubri,  where 
Guru  Nanak  once  preached,  a high  mound  and 
surmounted  it  with  a temple  which  could  be  seen 
at  a considerable  distance.  Some  of  his  companions 
remained  there  to  guard  the  temple  and  preach  the 
true  religion.  He  said  that  he  was  the  Creator’s 
servant  and  went  in  the  triple  capacity  of  friend  to 
Raja  Ram  Singh,  preacher  of  God’s  word,  and 
averter  of  bloodshed.  After  a few  days’  rest  and 
spiritual  comfort  Raja  Ram  Singh  went  to  Dihli  to 
report  his  success  to  the  Emperor,  and  thence  re- 
turned to  his  kingdom. 

The  chroniclers  of  the  life  of  Guru  Gobind  Singh 
delight  to  relate  stories  of  his  childhood.  He  re- 
ceived a little  boat  from  a merchant’s  son,  and  took 
great  pleasure  in  rowing  it  on  the  Ganges.  Once 
in  so  doing  he  dipped  his  feet  into  the  water,  upon 
which  the  Sikhs  repeated  the  words  of  Guru  Ram 
Das : ‘ The  Ganges,  Jamna,  Godavari,  and  Saraswati 
endeavour  to  obtain  the  dust  of  the  saint’s  feet.’  ^ 
He  used  to  set  other  children  fighting  and  watch 
their  contests.  On  being  lectured  by  his  mother 
on  this  impropriety  he  would  go  to  sleep.  On 
awaking  early  in  the  morning  he  used  to  be  seen 
in  a devotional  attitude. 

From  his  earliest  years  Gobind  Rai  was  accus- 
tomed to  practise  shooting  with  a pellet-bow,  and 
organize  a company  of  boys  of  his  own  age  to  practise 

^ Rag  Malar. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  361 

with  him.  His  father  used  to  seat  him  near  him 
and  tell  him  that,  though  the  practise  was  meri- 
torious, the  time  for  .putting  it  into  effect  had  not  yet 
arrived. 


Chapter  VI 

After  a protracted  residence  at  Patna  Guru  Teg 
Bahadur  turned  his  thoughts  towards  the  Panjab, 
and  communicated  his  resolve  to  return  thither  to 
his  mother  Nanaki.  He  said  to  her,  ‘ 0 mother  dear, 
it  is  now  a long  time  since  I left  the  Panjab.  If 
thou  permit  me,  I will  go,  give  instruction  to  my 
Sikhs  there,  and  lead  them  the  right  way.  Remain 
here  with  thy  grandson  and  nurse  him.  When  he 
groweth  strong,  bring  him  to  me.’  His  mother 
became  very  thoughtful  on  hearing  this,  and  repre- 
sented that  the  Pan  jab  was  politically  in  a very 
unsettled  state.  Moreover,  he  had  been  long  absent 
in  the  Kamrup  country,  had  only  now  returned,  and 
it  was  too  soon  to  leave  her  again.  While  thus 
speaking  tears  of  love  rained  from  her  eyes.  The 
Guru  represented  to  her  that  man’s  body  was  un- 
stable, and  vain  was  love  for  it.  He  on  that  occasion 
composed  the  following  hymn  : — 

I have  seen  that  love  of  the  world  is  false  ; 

Everybody,  whether  wife  or  friend,  is  intent  on  his  own 
happiness  ; 

Everybody  speaketh  of  his  relations,  and  attacheth  his 
heart  to  them  with  love  ; 

At  the  last  moment  nobody  will  accompany  him  ; this  is 
a strange  custom. 

Stupid  man  as  yet  understandeth  nothing,  though  I have 
grown  weary  of  continually  instructing  him. 

Nanak,  if  man  sing  the  praises  of  God,  he  shall  cross  over 
the  terrible  ocean 

On  hearing  this  hymn  the  Guru’s  mother  was 

^ Devgandhari. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


362 

consoled,  and  offered  no  further  objection  to  her 
son’s  departure. 

The  Guru  then  addressed  himself  to  his  wife 
Gujari,  ‘ 0 my  good  wife,  I am  going  to  the  Panjab. 
The  city  of  Anandpur  which  hath  been  built  must 
be  inhabited.  Remain  here,  bring  up  thy  son,  and 
oppose  not  his  wishes.  After  some  time  I will  send 
for  thee.  My  reason  for  asking  thee  not  to  thwart 
him  is  because  he  is  the  beloved  servant  of  the 
Deathless  Being.  When  he  groweth  up,  he  shall 
perform  great  deeds  for  the  world.  He  shall  destroy 
the  evil  and  cherish  his  religion.  I have  received 
God’s  order  to  go  to  the  Pan  jab,  and  discharge 
several  duties  there.  Ever  remember  the  Deathless 
Being.’  On  hearing  this  his  wife’s  eyes  filled  with 
tears,  and  she  replied  in  her  weeping,  ‘ 0 my  husband, 
I have  none  but  thee.  Our  child  is  still  young.  My 
mother-in-law  is  old.  To  whom  art  thou  going  to 
entrust  me  ? ’ The  Guru  replied,  ‘ This  body  is 
temporary,  the  soul  is  ever  permanent.  The  com- 
position of  the  body  is  like  that  of  the  current  of 
a river.  Whoever  fixeth  his  love  on  it  is  a fool.  Be 
satisfied  with  whatever  is  God’s  will.  Knowing  this 
give  thy  mind  contentment.  Ever  love  thy  son  and 
repeat  the  true  Name.’ 

After  this  conversation  the  Guru’s  son  went  to 
him  and  said,  ‘ Father  dear,  I have  heard  that  thou 
art  going  to  the  Panjab.  Take  me  with  thee.’  ^ 
The  Guru  replied,  ‘ My  son,  thou  art  still  young. 
Thou  wouldst  have  great  suffering  on  the  way. 
Therefore  remain  here  for  some  time,  and  I will  send 
for  thee  afterwards.  It  is  thou  who  hast  to  do  all 
the  work  at  Anandpur.’  At  the  Guru’s  departure 
his  wife  pressed  him  not  to  make  a long  march  on 
that  day  and  to  keep  his  child  with  him,  so  that  the 
parting  between  father  and  son  might  not  be  too 

^ Supposing  this  to  have  been  really  uttered  by  the  child  Gobind 
Rai,  it  would  show  that  his  father  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  had  spent  a con- 
siderable time  on  the  expedition,  and  again  at  Patna  after  his  return. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  363 

abrupt,  and  that  the  latter  might  be  able  to  endure 
it  without  too  much  sorrowing.  To  this  the  Guru 
agreed.  His  first  march  was  within  the  city  of 
Patna  itself,  where  all  his  Sikhs  went  to  bid  him 
farewell  and  sing  the  Gurus’  hymns  for  his  safe 
journey. 

The  Guru  taking  with  him  his  treasurer,  the  devout 
Mati  Das,  and  four  other  faithful  Sikhs,  proceeded 
march  by  march  till  he  arrived  at  Ropar  in  the 
Ambala  district,  where  a large  crowd  of  Sikh  followers 
came  to  see  him  and  make  him  offerings.  He 
then  directed  his  route  to  Kiratpur,  where  he  met 
his  half-brother  Suraj  Mai,  who  was  overjoyed  at 
seeing  him.  To  him  the  Guru  communicated  the 
news  of  the  birth  of  his  son,  whereat  Suraj  Mai  was 
greatly  delighted.  He  introduced  his  grandsons 
Gulab  Rai  and  Sham  Das  to  the  Guru,  who  bestowed 
costly  dresses  on  them.  While  staying  at  Kiratpur, 
the  Guru  visited  Patalpuri  where  Guru  Har  Gobind 
had  breathed  his  last.  The  Guru  after  staying  at 
Kiratpur  for  some  time  departed  for  Anandpur.  When 
he  arrived,  there  was  great  rejoicing.  The  whole 
city  went  forth  to  receive  him  and  do  him  homage. 

Gobind  Rai,  though  still  a child,  used  daily  to 
practise  the  use  of  arms.  Whenever  the  sons  of 
worthy  men  and  Sikhs  visited  him,  he  used  to 
instruct  them  in  military  tactics.  In  Gobind’s  area 
was  a well  of  sweet  water  which  the  neighbours  used 
to  draw.  One  day  as  a Muhammadan  woman  went 
with  her  pitcher  a pellet  from  the  boy’s  bow  acci- 
dentally struck  her  on  the  forehead.  She  went  with 
tears  and  lamentations  to  Gujari,  and  threatened 
to  report  to  the  Emperor  the  mischief  the  child  had 
been  doing  in  the  city.  The  mother  pleaded  that  her 
son  was  still  very  young,  and  knew  not  right  from 
wrong.  After  further  parley  Gujari  gave  her  money 
to  buy  clarified  butter  and  sweets,  upon  which  she 
promised  that  she  would  make  no  further  complaint 
against  Gobind  Rai. 


364  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Gujari  chased  the  boy  with  the  object  of  chastising 
him.  He  ran  upstairs  and  closed  the  door  behind 
him.  She  then  began  to  scold,  and  asked  him  if  he 
was  not  afraid  of  the  Emperor.  He  called  out  to 
her  that  he  was  afraid  of  none  but  the  Deathless 
God.  On  hearing  this  his  mother  desisted  from  her 
intention,  and  Nanaki,  his  grandmother,  then  quietly 
went  upstairs  and  brought  him  down  to  his  mother. 
Addressing  the  latter  Nanaki  said,  ‘ The  boy  shall 
be  a great  warrior  like  his  grandfather.  Guru  Har 
Gobind.’ 


Chapter  VII 

One  day  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  thought  of  his  death, 
and  determined  to  send  for  his  son  Gobind  so  that 
he  might  come  to  cherish  and  protect  Anandpur  in 
the  day  of  its  bereavement.  At  the  same  time 
Gobind  Rai  in  Patna  was  thinking  of  his  father. 
He  said  to  his  mother  that  when  his  father  was 
leaving  for  Anandpur  he  promised  to  write  on 
arriving  at  his  destination,  but  as  yet  they  had  not 
heard  from  him.  The  boy  expressed  his  desire  to 
go  to  the  Panjab.  His  mother  replied  that  they 
would  go  when  the  Guru  ordered  it.  The  boy  then 
urged  that  it  seemed  good  to  leave  Patna  with  which 
he  was  not  pleased.  His  mother  informed  him  that 
the  masands  in  arid  aroxmd  Patna  were  good  and 
obedient  men,  and  satisfied  their  wants,  but  they 
would  have  great  difficulties  in  the  Panjab  where 
they  would  find  envy  and  jealousy,  and  where, 
moreover,  they  would  be  in  danger  from  the  hostility 
of  the  Emperor.  His  mother  would  not  therefore 
consent  to  leave  Patna. 

Gobind  Rai  sent  for  a scribe  to  whom  he  dictated 
a letter  to  the  masand  Bulaki,  who  was  employed  to 
collect  the  Sikh  offerings  of  Dhaka,  ordering  him  to 
make  a very  costly  palki  and  ornament  it  with  gold 
and  ivory  for  his  journey.  This  article  Bulaki  caused 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  365 

to  be  made  as  quickly  as  possible  by  the  best  artists 
the  country  could  afford.  The  boy’s  mother  was  highly 
pleased  on  seeing  it,  and  pointed  it  out  as  an  instance 
of  the  obedience  ahd  good-will  of  the  masands  in 
that  part  of  India.  Gobind  Rai,  however,  on 
examining  the  palki  found  that  what  the  masands 
represented  to  be  gold  work  only  contained  one  part 
of  gold  to  nine  of  copper,  and  to  prove  what  he  said 
he  had  it  promptly  and  publicly  burned.  He  made 
the  dishonesty  of  the  masands  a reason  for  again 
urging  on  his  mother  the  necessity  of  going  to  the 
Panjab  where  he  said  he  had  many  things  of  import- 
ance to  do.  At  that  very  time  his  father’s  letter 
arrived  summoning  him,  his  mother,  and  his  Sikhs 
to  Anandpur.  When  the  news  of  Gobind’ s intended 
departure  had  spread,  several  persons  came  with 
offerings,  and  among  others  a banker  called  Jagat 
Seth,  who  offered  him  the  shelter  and  hospitality 
of  his  many  houses  on  the  way  northward — an  offer 
which  the  boy  was  not  disinclined  to  accept. 

Before  Gobind  Rai  departed,  a deputation  waited 
on  him  and  begged  him  to  leave  his  cradle  as  a 
memorial  behind  him.  When  they  urged  that  there 
was  nobody  left  to  confer  spiritual  benefits  on  them, 
he  told  them  that  whatever  supplications  they 
addressed  to  God  with  a pure  mind  should  be  ac- 
cepted. 

The  first  place  of  any  importance  at  which  Gobind 
Rai  halted  on  his  route  was  a town  south  of  Banaras 
called  Chhota  Mirzapur.  On  reaching  Banaras,  the 
ancient  stronghold  of  Hinduism,  crowds  came  with 
offerings  to  him.  They  were  enchanted  as  well  with 
his  mental  as  his  physical  beauty.  They  said  they 
were  beggars  and  had  come  to  beg  of  him.  Their 
applications  were  not  in  vain.  Whereupon  every- 
one praised  him  and  said  : ‘ How  generous  and  how 
young  ! ’ He  remained  there  for  several  days.  He 
used  to  hold  court  in  the  morning  and  then  delight 
in  sitting  in  a boat  on  the  Ganges,  from  which  he 


366  THE  SIKH  RELIGION  . 

admired  the  scenery,  the  verdure  on  the  one  hand, 
and  on  the  other  the  stately  and  picturesque  temples 
and  mansions  rising  from  the  margin  of  the  sacred 
river. 

From  Banaras  Gobind  Rai  proceeded  to  Ajudhia. 
There  crowds  came  with  offerings'  to  behold  him,  and 
on  seeing  his  beauty  were  loud  in  their  praises  and 
foretold  his  greatness  as  a hero.  The  Sikh  historian 
relates  that  flocks  of  monkeys — animals  so  cherished 
at  the  Hindu  shrine  of  Ajudhia — went  to  the  Guru’s 
tent.  He  first  fed  them  with  parched  gram  and 
then  threw  a lump  of  molasses  among  them,  for 
which  they  all  began  to  fight,  some  using  their  teeth 
and  others  their  hands.  The  boy  on  seeing  the 
simian  combat  was  delighted,  for  even  at  that  early 
age  he  loved  the  battle  and  the  fray. 

Gobind  Rai  then  proceeded  with  his  mother  and 
followers  to  Lakhnau  (Lucknow),  then  as  now  the 
capital  of  Awadh  (Oude),  where  they  were  all  hos- 
pitably entertained  by  Baba  Fatah  Chand,  the 
religious  superior  of  the  Sikhs,  to  whom  the  party 
gave  a letter  of  thanks  for  his  hospitality — a letter 
still  preserved  by  the  Sikh  Mahant  of  that  city. 
Gobind  Rai  and  his  party  then  proceeded  towards 
Anandpur.  On  the  way  they  tai'ried  at  Lakhnaur, 
a town  about  nine  miles  from  Ambala  in  the  Pan  jab. 
There  Bhai  Kripal,  the  Guru’s  uncle,  went  in  advance 
of  the  party  to  procure  conveyances  for  the  remain- 
der of  the  journey  to  Anandpur. 

While  Gobind  Rai  was  at  Lakhnaur  his  favourite 
amusement  was  playing  at  mimic  warfare.  Under 
the  tutorship  of  Magan  he  used  to  form  the  boys  of 
the  town  into  opposing  armies  and  engage  them  in 
^am  hghts  and  martial  exercises.  While  Gobind  Kai 
thus  engaged  he  was  visited  by  Saiyid  Bhikan 
Shah— owner  of  the  villages  of  Kuhram  and  Siana 
four  miles  from  Lakhnaur — who  had  previously  gone 
to  see  him  at  his  birth  in  Patna,  and  knew  that  the 
boy  was  destined  one  day  to  bestow  the  Mughal 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  367 

empire  on  the  Sikhs.  Bhikan  Shah  had  obtained 
the  village  of  Thaska  from  the  Emperor,  and  he  came 
to  beg  Gobind  Rai  to  allow  him  to  remain  in  undis- 
turbed possession  of  it  during  the  Sikh  Government 
which  was  to  follow.  Gobind  Rai  promised  that  no 
one  should  molest  him.  Upon  this  Saiyid  Bhikan 
Shah  fell  at  his  feet.  When  he  as  a Musalman  was 
reproached  for  prostrating  himself  before  a Sikh 
child,  he  justified  his  action  by  saying  that  the  boy 
was  on  the  spiritual  throne  of  Guru  Nanak,  that  he 
should  be  seen  hereafter  in  God’s  court,  and  that 
whatever  God  did  now  He  did  through  Gobind  Rai’s 
mediation.  The  boy  had  assumed  birth  to  establish 
the'Khalsa  religion,  and  overthrow  the  empire  of  the 
Turks. 

In  due  time  Bhai  Kripal  Chand  arrived  with  horses 
and  carriages  to  take  Gobind  Rai  and  his  mother  and 
grandmother  to  Anandpur.  Before  his  departure 
he  went  on  a shooting  excursion  accompanied  by  his 
uncle’s  huntsmen.  On  that  occasion  one  Ghogha, 
who  lived  in  the  neighbouring  village  of  Naneri,  came 
to  him  to  beg  forgiveness  for  an  offence  formerly 
committed.  Once  when  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  had 
gone  on  a pilgrimage  to  preach  the  faith,  Ghogha 
abducted  his  female  servant.  He  came  now  to  make 
his  peace  with  God  and  the  Guru.  He  prayed 
Gobind  Rai  to  go  to  his  house  and  bless  it  with  his 
presence.  Gobind  Rai  in  view  of  the  man’s  sincere 
repentance  generously  pardoned  him. 

The  young  boy  set  out,  and  was  followed  by  his 
mother  and  the  remaining  members  of  the  family. 
After  a few  nights’  journey  they  arrived  at  Kiratpur. 
Here  Gobind  Rai  was  met  by  Gulab  Rai  and  Sham 
Das,  grandsons  of  his  uncle,  the  late  Suraj  Mai. 
They  escorted  him  to  their  house  and  treated  him 
with  respect  and  affection.  At  Kiratpur  Gobind 
visited  the  shrines  of  Baba  Gurditta,  Guru  Har 
Gobind,  and  Guru  Har  Rai.  As  he  approached 
Anandpur,  the  women  and  men  of  the  city  came 


368  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

forth  to  escort  him.  They  were  all  astonished  and 
fascinated  on  seeing  the  beauty  of  the  young  Guru. 
Kripal  Chand  pointed  out  to  him  the  hill  of  Naina 
Devi  and  the  Satluj  flowing  by,  places  with  which 
he  was  afterwards  to  be  so  intimately  associated. 
He  was  affectionately  received  by  his  father  who  at 
once  ministered  to  his  physical  and  intellectual 
wants. 


Chapter  VIII 

The  cruel  and  bigoted  Emperor  Aurangzeb  still 
reigned  in  Dihli.  As  we  have  previously  seen;  he 
had  imprisoned  and  starved  to  death  his  own 
father,  killed  his  own  brothers — Dara  Shikoh  and 
Murad — and  disgraced  his  eldest  son  Muazim, 
afterwards  Bahadur  Shah.  On  account  of  all  his 
crimes  he  was  heartily  hated  even  by  his  own 
co-religionists.  He  then  sent  for  his  priests  and 
asked  them  what  he  was  to  do  to  regain  the  sym- 
pathy of  the  Muhammadans.  His  counsellors  said 
he  could  only  do  so  by  converting  the  Hindus  to 
Islam.  He  should  send  money  and  other  presents 
to  Makka  and  Madina.  His  priests  would  take  them 
and  bring  him  credentials  from  those  holy  cities  to 
show  that  he  was  an  orthodox  and  religious  Muham- 
madan. All  this  being  done  he  was  to  issue  pro- 
clamations throughout  the  empire  that  the  Hindus 
should  embrace  Islam,  and  that  those  who  did  so 
should  receive  jagirs,  state  service,  and  all  the  im- 
munities granted  to  royal  favourites.  The  Emperor 

According  to  the  Suraj  Parkdsh,  Gobind  Rai,  though  summoned 
by  his  father  from  Patna  to  Anandpur,  never  met  him  again.  But, 
according  to  Bhai  Sukha  Singh’s  Gvr  Bilas,  an  older  work,  Gobind 
Rai  reached  his  father  in  Anandpur.  Indeed,  this  would  appear  to 
be  the  case  from  Gobind  Rai’s  own  statement.  He  writes  : ‘ They 
took  me  to  the  PanjSb  where  nurses  of  different  sorts  fondled  me  and 
cherished  me  in  every  way.  I received  instruction  in  various  forms.’ 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  369 

took  the  advice  of  his  priests,  and  all  the  plans 
suggested  were  adopted. 

The  experiment  of  conversion  was  first  tried  in 
Kashmir.  There  were  two  reasons  for  this.  In  the 
first  place,  the  Kashmiri  Pandits  were  supposed  to 
be  educated,  and  it  was  thought  that,  if  they  were 
converted,  the  inhabitants  of  Hindustan'  would 
readily  follow  their  example ; secondly,  Peshawar 
and  Kabul,  Muhammadan  countries,  were  near,  and 
if  the  Kashmiris  offered  any  resistance  to  their  con- 
version, the  Muhammadans  might  declare  a religious 
war  and  overpower  and  destroy  them.  It  wS.s  also 
believed  by  the  Emperor — without  foundation  as  it 
afterwards  turned  out — that  the  Kashmiri  Brahmans 
might  be  tempted  by  promises  of  money  and  govern- 
ment appointments,  because  the  beggary  and  mean- 
ness of  the  inhabitants  of  that  country  were  pro- 
verbial.^ 

The  Emperor  Akbar  by  the  force  of  wealth 
and  military  genius  not  only  subdued  Muhammadan 
India  but  also  Rajputana.  His  obsequious  ministers 
signed  a document  which  allowed  him  as  the  shadow 
of  God  on  earth  full  jurisdiction  to  decide  all  religious 
questions.  Instead  of  the  Muhammadan  creed  he 
was  gratified  with  the  formula,  ‘ There  is  no  God 
but  God,  and  Akbar  is  God’s  representative.’  Men 
prostrated  themselves  before  him,  offered  him  vows, 
and  addressed  him  as  a deity.  He  caused  his  name 
to  be  inserted  in  the  hymns  to  the  gods  and  goddesses, 
£^nd  poets  were  found  to  grant  him  divine  honours. 
Aurangzeb  who  deemed  himself  an  orthodox  Muham- 
madan thought  that  byhisown  line  of  action  he  should 
be  even  greater  and  more  successful  than  Akbar. 

Sher  Afghan  Khan,  the  Emperor’s  viceroy  in 
Kashmir,  set  about  converting  the  Kashmiris  by  the 
sword  and  massacred  those  who  persevered  in  their 
adherence  to  the  faith  of  their  forefathers.  It  is 

^ Khulasat  ul-Tawartkh,  Abnl  Fazal  wrote — ‘ The  bane  bf  this 
country  is  its  j)eople.’ 

SIKH.  IV  B b 


370 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


said  there  was  piled  up  a heap  of  one  man  and  a 
quarter,  or  a hundred  weight  of  janeus  or  sacrificial 
threads.  The  Hindus  who  would  not  be  converted 
and  whom  Sher  Afghan  Khan’s  troops  could  not 
capture  fled  the  country.  Even  Muhammadans  who 
in  any  way  assisted  the  Hindus  were  mercilessly  put 
to  death. 

At  last  Sher  Afghan  Khan  began  to  reflect  that 
there  was  too  much  slaughter,  and  it  might  happen 
to  him  as  it  did  to  the  Emperor  Humayun,  whom 
Sher  Shah,  the  Afghan  chief,  expelled  from  India, 
or  as  it  happened  to  the  Muhammadans  whose  seed 
had  been  extirpated  from  his  dominions  by  Raja 
Jaipal,  whose  motto  was,  ‘ When  I die  there  shall 
be  an  end  of  the  world.’  Thus  reflecting,  Sher 
Afghan  Khan  sent  for  the  Kashmiri  Pandits,  in- 
formed them  of  the  Emperor’s  order,  said  he  was 
only  obeying  it,  and  begged  their  forgiveness.  They 
became  silent  for  a while,  and  then  sued  for  a respite 
of  six  months  to  consider  whether  they  should 
embrace  Islam  or  die  for  their  religion.  Sher  Afghan 
Khan  after  all  the  slaughter  of  which  he  had  been 
the  instrument,  was  glad  to  accede  to  their  request. 

Meanwhile  the  process  of  conversion  went  on  in 
India.  Aurangzeb  at  first  resorted  to  the  four  means 
of  traditional  Indian  policy  in  dealing  with  the 
Hindus.  He  made  peaceable  overtures,  then  offered 
money,  then  threatened  punishment,  and  lastly 
caused  dissension  among  them.  When  these  mea- 
sures failed,  he  had  recourse  to  forcible  conversion. 
He  destroyed  temples  and  converted  them  into 
mosques.  He  killed  cows,  so  sacred  in  Hindu  estima- 
tion, threw  their  flesh  into  wells,  and  forced  Hindus 
to  drink  the  water  therefrom.  Not  satisfied  with 
this  defilement,  he  used  to  send  the  Hindus  to 
mosques  and  force  them  to  pray  to  the  misnamed 
Rahim  (merciful  God),  instead  of  their  own  Ram, 
a god  of  mildness  and  compassion. 

When  the  respite  of  six  months  obtained  from 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  371 

Sher  Afghan  Khan  was  approaching  its  end,  the 
Kashmiri  Pandits  were  supernaturally  informed 
that  in  this  last  age  of  the  world  Guru  Nanak 
was  spiritual  king.  He  would  protect  religion.  No 
Hindu  god  had  power  to  do  so.  The  ninth  king  in 
succession  to  him,  Guru  Teg  Bahadur,  was  now  on 
his  throne.  They  should  repair  to  him,  and  he  would 
protect  their  honour  and  their  faith. 

The  Pandits  heard  that  the  Guru  was  then  at 
Anandpur  on  the  bank  of  the  Satluj,  and  thither  they 
proceeded.  On  their  way  they  stayed  at  Amritsar, 
where  they  bathed  in  the  sacred  tank  of  Guru 
Ram  Das.  They  then  proceeded  to  Anandpur,  where 
they  arrived  after  much  discomfort  and  suffering, 
owing  to  their  ignorance  of  travel  in  an  unknown 
country  in  the  plains  of  India  and  in  the  hot  season. 

On  their  arrival  in  Anandpur,  they  told  the  Guru 
their  sad  story — how  the  Hindus  of  their  country 
were  being  converted  notwithstanding  the  respite 
granted  to  themselves,  and  how  a man  and  a quarter 
weight  of  janens  had  been  collected  from  Hindu 
converts  to  Islam.  They  represented  to  the  Guru 
that  he  had  been  born  with  the  express  object  of 
preserving  religion,  that  his  very  name  had  power  to 
cherish  those  who  sought  his  protection  ; and  they 
implored  him  to  preserve  the  honour  of  their  faith 
in  whatever  way  he  deemed  most  expedient. 

The  Guru  sat  silent,  and  for  some  time  pondered 
on  their  request.  His  darling  boy  Gobind  was  then 
playing  in  the  hall,  and  on  seeing  his  father  sad  and 
thoughtful  went  to  him.  His  father  spoke  not,  but 
tenderly  embraced  him.  The  boy  said,  ‘ Father 
dear,  why  sittest  thou  silent  to-day  ? Why  not 
regard  me  with  thy  usual  look  of  affection  ? What 
offence  have  I committed  that  thou  wilt  not  even 
look  cheerfully  on  me  ? ' The  Guru  taking  com- 
passion on  his  dear  child — deaf  as  only  Gobind  Rai 
could  be— seated  him  near  him  and  said,  ‘ My  son, 
thou  knowest  nothing  yet.  Thou  art  still  a child. 

B b2 


373 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


This  matter  on  which  the  Kashmiris  have  come’ is 
of  vital  importance.  The  world  is  grieved  by  the 
oppression  of  the  Turks.  No  brave  man  is  now  to 
be  found.  He  who  is  willing  to  sacrifice  his  life  shall 
free  the  earth  from  the  burden  of  the  Muhammadans.’ 
The  child  replied : ‘For  that  purpose  who  is  more 
worthy  than  thou  who  art  at  once  generous  and 
brave  ? ’ ^ 

When  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  heard  this  from  his 
child’s  lips  he  divined  everything  that  was  to  follow. 
He  told  the  Kashmiris  to  go  in  a body  to  Dihli  and 
make  the  following  representation  to  the  Emperor  : 

‘ Guru  Teg  Bahadur,  the  ninth  Sikh  Guru  is  now 
seated  on  the  throne  of  the  great  Guru  Nanak,  who 
is  protector  of  faith  and  religion.  First  make  him 
a Musalman  and  then  all  the  people,  including  our- 
selves, will  of  our  own  accord  adopt  the  faith.’ 
They  obeyed  the  Guru  and  proceeded  to  Dihli  to 
urge  his  self-sacrificing  proposal.  The  Emperor, 
after  consulting  his  Muhammadan  doctors,  adopted 
it  with  extreme  joy.  He  said,  ‘ If  the  Guru  become 
not  a Muhammadan,  he  will  at  any  rate  show  us 
a miracle.’  Having  thus  decided  the  Emperor  sent 
two  officers  to  summon  him.  He  was  full  of  hope, 
which  he  expressed  to  his  Qazis,  that,  once  the  Guru 
was  converted,  there  would  be  a large  accession  of 
Hindu  and  Sikh  converts. 

The  officers  who  bore  the  Emperor’s  order  to  the 
Guru,  billeted  themselves  on  the  towns  and  villages 
through  which  they  passed.  Four  porters  pressed 
into  service  at  every  village  for  each  officer  were 
obliged  to  take  his  palki  to  the  next.  In  this  way 
they  were  not  long  in  comfortably  accomplishing  the 
journey  to  Anandpur.  On  hearing  that  the  Guru 
gave  audience  in  the  morning,  they  sent  word  that 
they  had  a message  for  him  from  the  Emperor.  The 
Guru  said  that  he  was  already  expecting  them,  and 
he  was  not  sorry  that  they  had  at  last  arrived.  He 
^ Sttkha  Singh's  Gur  JBtlas,  Chap.  V. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  373 

read  the  Emperor’s  order,  and  wrote  in  reply  that 
he  would  come  to  Dihli  after  the  rainy  season.  He 
then  handed  his  letter  to  the  officers  and  dismissed 
them.  They  proceeded  on  their  return  journey 
without  further  molestation  of  the  Guru. 

Chapter  IX 

The  Guru  took  leave  of  his  family  and  his  devoted 
Sikhs,  and  began  his  journey  to  Dihli  on  the  first  day 
of  the  month  of  Har — early  in  June  immediately 
preceding  the  rains — when  the  heat  is  extreme  in 
northern  India.  On  his  way  he  visited  his  sincere 
Muhammadan  friend  Saif-ul-din  who  lived  at  Saifa- 
bad,  near  the  present  fort  of  Bahadurgarh  in  the 
Patiala  state,  where  an  imposing  temple  has  been 
erected  in  honour  of  the  Guru.  This  man  received 
him  with  great  honour,  and  invited  him  to  stay  with 
him  during  the  rainy  season.  The  Guru  accepted 
the  invitation,  and  during  his  stay  gave  religious 
instruction  and  spiritual  happiness  to  many  faithful 
Sikhs.  Saif-ul-din  ever  found  some  new  service  to 
perform  for  the  Guru,  and  their  conversation  was 
continually  of  God.  Saif-ul-din  became  a convert 
to  the  Guru’s  faith. 

At  the  close  of  the  rains  in  the  beginning  of  October 
Aurangzeb  again  sent  two  messengers  to  hasten  the 
Guru’s  progress  to  Dihli.  They  went  to  Anandpur, 
but  he  was  not  there.  They  tried  Amritsar  but  with 
similar  ill  success.  They  then  returned  to  Dihli,  and 
reported  that  the  Guru  had  fled.  Aurangzeb  dis- 
patched orders  all  over  his  empire  to  find  and  arrest 
him.  The  Guru  remembered  his  own  promise  and 
took  his  leave  of  Saif-ul-din.  Saif-ul-din  became 
very  sad  at  parting  with  his  guest,  and  begged  him 
to  take  him  with  him.  The  Guru  excused  himself,’on 
the  ground  that  he  had  private  business,  in  which 
it  would  be  irksome  for  him  to  assist.  He  then 
dismissed  all  his  Sikhs  except  five,  namely,  Mati  Das, 


374 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Gurditta  of  the  line  of  Bhai  Budha,  and  three  others 
whose  names  are  said  to  have  been  Uda,  Chima,  and 
Dayala,  and  proceeded  to  give  himself  up  to  the 
Emperor  at  Dihli. 

The  Guru  and  his  five  followers  first  halted  at 
Garhi  near  Samana,  in  the  Patiala  state.  The 
Guru  pitched  his  tent  outside  the  village  walls. 
While  there  a Pathan,  who  had  been  introduced  to 
him  at  Saifabad,  went  and  paid  him  homage,  and 
made  him  offerings.  He  begged  the  Guru  to  remain 
with  him  for  some  days.  The  Guru  said  he  must 
move  onward,  and  asked  his  Pathan  friend  to  allow 
him. 

The  Guru  went  thence  to  a village  called  Hali. 
There  lived  a masand  who  through  fear  of  the  Muham- 
madans would  not  even  visit  him.  The  Guru  next 
proceeded  to  Chikha  in  the  present  Karnal  district, 
where  lived  a masand  called  Galaura.  The  Guru 
had  once  found  him  as  a waif,  and  brought  him  up 
to  manhood.  He  then  left  his  service  and  went  to  his 
native  village,  where  he  was  now  delighted  to  receive 
his  old.  master.  The  Guru  knowing  his  devotion 
stayed  with  him  and  gave  him  spiritual  instruction. 
Galaura’s  wife,  who  is  described  as  a very  simple^ 
minded  person,  the  Guru  blessed,  and  to  Galaura 
himself  he  gave  a quiver  full  of  arrows  to  serve  him  in 
the  hour  of  need.  He  exhorted  him  to  act  honestly 
on  all  occasions  and  he  should  prosper,  but  if  he  ever 
acted  dishonestly  he  should  perish. 

The  Guru  then  proceeded  to  Karha  where  there 
was  a temple  erected  to  Guru  Har  Gobind,  who  had 
rested  there  when  he  was  going  to  visit  Nanakmata. 
There  resided  another  masand  who  through  fear  of 
the  Muhammadans  would  not  visit  the  Guru.  The 
Guru,  however,  received  great  attention  from  an 
agriculturist  whom  he  induced  to  dig  a Bawali 
for  the  benefit  of  wayfarers.  - The  Guru  then  went 
to  the  village  of  Khar  where  he  passed  the  night 
giving  religious  instruction  to  Sikhs.  When  they 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  375 

heard  him  they  began  to  moralize  on  the  political 
condition.  They  said  that  the  Turks  had  arrived 
at  such  a pitch  of  power  that  no  one  could  with- 
stand them.  He  replied,  ‘The  king  who  acteth 
according  to  his  religion,  who  practiseth  justice,  who  is 
not  greedy,  who  protecteth  and  showeth  mercy  to  his 
subjects,  who  dispelleth  their  sorrows  and  conferreth 
happiness  on  them  instead,  who  receiveth  only 
reasonable  revenue,  who  suppressed!  thieves  and 
robbers,  who  removeth  the  many  similar  obstacles  to 
good  government,  and  who  ever  acteth  honestly,  shall 
secure  sovereignty  for  his  descendants. 

‘ But  those  who,  though  they  may  have  obtained 
empire  by  virtuous  conduct  in  previous  births,  now 
perform  evil  deeds,  who  devote  themselves  mainly 
to  sexual  pleasures,  and  neither  listen  to  nor  make 
themselves  acquainted  with  the  sufferings  of  their 
subjects,  who  seize  wealth  by  every  means  in  their 
power,  and  who  feel  not  compassion  for  the  poor, 
shall  find  their  empire  and  dignity  daily  decrease. 
Aurangzeb  hath  now  formed  very  evil  designs 
and  seeketh  to  destroy  the  Hindu  religion.  In  the 
wantonness  of  his  pride  he  practiseth  violence  and 
oppression.  His  suffering  subjects  fear  for  their 
lives.  Wherefore  it  is  now  abundantly  manifest 
that  his  empire  and  dignity  cannot  abide  but  shall 
all  gradually  perish,  and  that  there  shall  none  of  his 
progeny  remain  even  to  beat  a drum.’  ^ 

Many  Rajas  of  the  present  age  who  suppose  their 
position  is  the  result  of  greatly  meritorious  acts  in 
previous  births,  and  that  they  have  nothing  to  do  but 
enjoy  themselves  in  this,  may  not  unwisely  ponder 
on  the  Guru’s  words. 

Next  morning  the  Guru  reached  Khatkar  in  the 
Patiala  state.  He  sent  for  flour  and  dal,  and  had 
them  cooked  for  his  dinner.  During  the  night  the 
villagers  formed  a design  to  steal  his  horse,  which 

^ Suraj  ' Parkdshy  Ras  XII,  Chap.  34.  The  Guru's  prophecy  has 
been  amply  fulfilled. 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


376 

they  saw  was  of  excellent  strain  and  of  great  value. 
Six  men  went  to  take  away  the  animal,  but,  it  is  said, 
were  immediately  stricken  blind  and  had  to  abandon 
their  design.  On  this  they  recovered  their  sight  and 
went  to  their  homes.  On  discussing  the  incident 
there,  they  learned  that  the  horse  belonged  to  a cele- 
brated priest . They  then  decided  to  go  with  offerings 
and  beseech  his  pardon.  They  asked  for  another 
favour,  that  the  Guru  should  sweeten  the  brackish 
water  of  their  village.  Both  requests  were  granted. 
The  Guru,  drawing  an  arrow  from  his  quiver,  said 
that,  as  far  as  the  arrow  flew,  the  water  of  the  earth 
should  become  sweet.  They  were  enjoined  to  sink 
a well  within  that  radius,  and  their  labour  should  be 
rewarded.  In  this  way  the  Guru  continued  his 
journey,  conferring  temporal  and  spiritual  favours 
on  his  audience  until  he  reached  Agra.  There  he 
encamped  in  a garden  outside  the  city. 

The  Guru  sent  for  a shepherd  boy  he  saw  in  the 
garden  and  asked  him  to  do  him  a favour.  The 
Guru  took  from  his  finger  a large  gold  ring  set  with 
diamonds,  and  asked  the  shepherd  to  go  and  pledge 
it  and  bring  him  two  rupees’  worth  of  sweets.'  The 
shepherd  said  he  had  no  cloth  in  which  to  wrap 
them.  Upon  this  the  Guru  took  off  a very  valuable 
^hawl  he  wore,  and  handed  it  to  him  for  the  purpose. 
The  boy,  not  knowing  the  Guru,  enjoined  him  to  look 
after  his  herd  of  sheep  and  goats,  and  departed  on 
his  errand.  The  Sikhs  who  accompanied  the  Guru 
were  astonished  at  what  he  had  done.  Mati  Das 
took  the  liberty  of  saying,  * Have  we  not  money  ? 
why  hast  thou  parted  with  thy  ring  ? Moreover,  in- 
stead of  a handkerchief  thou  hast  given  thy  valuable 
shawl  to  bring  the  sweets  in.’  The  Guru  replied  that 
what  he  had  done  had  been  done  by  God’s  will  which 
could  not  be  set  aside  by  hundreds  of  devices. 

The  shepherd  went  into  the  city,  and  stopping  at 
a confectioner’s  shop  showed  the  ring.  The  con- 
fectioner on  examining  it  said  it  was  a priceless 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  377 

article,  and  asked  the  boy  from  whom  he  had 
received  it.  The  boy  told  him,  whereupon  the  con- 
fectioner weighed  the  sweets.  When  the  boy  pre- 
sented the  shawl  to  wrap  them  up  in,  the  confectioner 
became  still  more  astonished.  He  said  that  the  boy 
must  have  stolen  both  the  ring  and  the  shawl,  as 
the  owner  of  the  latter  could  never  have  sent  it  to 
be  spoiled  with  sweets.  The  confectioner  accordingly 
arrested  the  shepherd  and  took  him  to  the  police 
office.  The  boy,  on  being  interrogated,  said  he  had 
got  both  the  ring  and  the  shawl  from  a stranger  who 
had  taken  shelter  in  a certain  garden,  and  he  described 
him  and  his  five  companions.  The  police  officer  sent 
two  policemen  to  make  inquiries  regarding  the  visitor. 

When  the  policemen  arrived,  they  asked  the  Guru 
who  he  was.  The  Guru  candidly  told  them  his  name 
and  station.  On  hearing  this  one  of  the  constables 
returned  to  the  police  office  to  give  information  and 
the  other  remained  to  watch  the  Guru.  The  Kotwal 
was  delighted  to  hear  that  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  had 
been  found  at  last,  and  to  think  that  he  should  get 
a large  reward  from  the  Emperor  for  his  capture. 
The  police  officer  then  went  to  the  governor  of  the 
fort,  told  him  the  circumstances,  and  chuckled  at 
the  thought  that  they  should  all  become  great  men 
after  the  capture  of  the  much-sought-for  Guru.  The 
Governor  of  the  fort  ordered  one  hundred  horsemen 
to  equip  themselves  and  accompany  the  police  officer 
to  arrest  the  Guru.  The  Guru  frankly  replied  to 
all  their  questions.  They  then  informed  him  that 
the  Emperor  had  sent  written  orders  in  all  directions 
to  arrest  him,  and  asked  him  to  kindly  go  with  them 
to  the  fort,  and  they  would  inquire  the  Emperor’s 
wishes  regarding  him.  The  Guru  at  once  ordered 
his  horse  to  be  saddled  and  with  his  five  Sikh  fol- 
lowers entered  the  fort.  The  Guru  at  his  arrest 
and  in  the  fort  preserved  his  marvellous  equanimity, 
never  showing  the  slightest  sign  of  displeasure  or 
disappointment. 


378  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  Governor  of  the  fort  and  the  police  officer 
reported  the  arrest  to  the  Emperor.  The  latter  was 
overjoyed  at  the  capture  of  the  great  Guru  of  the 
Sikhs.  He  said  that  his  wish  had  been  fulfilled,  and 
he  would  now  convert  the  Guru  to  Islam,  and  the 
Muhammadan  religion  would  then  be  rapidly  ac- 
cepted by  the  people.  He  sent  off  a regiment  of 
twelve  hundred  horse  to  Agra  to  bring  the  Guru  to 
his  presence.  He  explained  to  them  that  the 
prisoner  must  not  escape.  If  any  persons  were  to 
assist  him  in  endeavouring  to  do  so,  the  regiment  was 
to  perform  its  duty.  The  soldiers  were  not,  however, 
to  annoy  the  Guru  in  any  way  on  the  journey  to  Dihli. 

Chapter  X 

When  the  Guru  with  his  five  Sikhs  arrived  in  Dihli 
the  Emperor  sent  for  him  and  thus  addressed  him, 
‘ It  is  my  pleasure  that  there  should  be  but  one  reli- 
gion. Hinduism  is  false  and  worthless,  and  those 
who  profess  it  will  suffer  punishment  in  hell.  I pity 
them  and  therefore  wish  to  do  them  a favour.  If 
they  of  their  own  accord  keep  the  Id,  and  fast,  and 
•repeat  the  Muhammadan  creed  and  prayers,  I will 
reward  them  with  wealth,  appointments,  land- 
revenue  grants,  and  lands  with  irrigating  wells.  In 
this  case  thou,  too,  shalt  have  many  disciples,  and 
thou  shalt  become  a great  priest  of  Islam.  Therefore 
accept  my  religion,  and  thou  shalt  receive  from  me 
whatever  thy  heart  desireth.’  The  Guru  replied, 

‘ O Emperor,  thou  and  I and  all  people  must  walk 
according  to  God’s  will.  If  it  were  the  will  of  God  that 
there  should  be  only  one  religion.  He  would  not  have 
allowed  theMuhammadan  and  Hindu  religions  to  exist 
at  the  same  time.  He  hath  no  partner  and  can  do  as 
He  pleaseth.  Neither  thou  nor  I can  oppose  Him.’ 

The  Emperor  seized  on  the  Guru’s  expression  that 
all  men  must  walk  according  to  God’s  will  and  said, 

‘ God  the  most  high  appeared  to  me  in  a vision,  and 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  379 

told  me  to  convert  the  whole  world  to  Islam.  I am 
therefore  obeying  God’s  order.’  The  Guru  replied, 
‘ I know  not  whether  thou  or  thy  God  speaketh 
falsely.  However,  since  thou  wilt  not  believe,  I will 
give  thee  ocular  proof  of  what  I say.’  The  Guru 
then  requested  the  Emperor  to  send  for  five  mans  of 
pepper,  and  he  did  so.  The  Guru  had  it  made  into 
a heap  which  he  caused  to  be  ignited.  It  burned  for 
twenty-four  hours  and  was  apparently  reduced  to 
ashes.  The  Guru  then  desired  that  the  heap  of 
ashes  should  be  pounded  and  sifted.  When  this  was 
done  three  pepper  pods  came  out  whole.  The  Guru 
then  said,  ‘ 0 king,  thou  hast  now  got  thine  answer. 
Thou  wishest  to  make  one  religion  out  of  two,  but 
God  wisheth  to  make  three  religions  out  of  two. 
Him  whom  the  Creator  desireth  to  preserve  not  even 
fire  can  touch.  On  that  account,  O king,  be  satisfied 
with  what  He  hath  done.  As  these  three  pepper 
pods  have  been  saved  from  the  fire,  so  shall  three 
religions,  Hinduism,  Islam,  and  Sikhism  survive  to 
future  ages.’ 

Upon  this  the  Emperor  ordered  that  the  Guru 
should  be  closely  imprisoned,  and  sufficient  guards 
placed  over  him  to  prevent  his  escape.  The  Guru 
then  wrote  as  follows  to  his  wife : — ‘ The  Turks  have 
imprisoned  me  in  Dihli.  Paying  due  regard  to  the 
words  of  Guru  Nanak  to  the  Emperor  Babar,  I 
have  come  here  to  deprive  them  of  their  sovereignty.^ 
Wherefore  have  no  anxiety  for  me.  Cherish  our  son 
and  recognize  him  as  the  Guru’s  image.’  Both  Mata 
Gujari  and  her  mother-in-law  received  this  letter 
as  if  their  hearts  had  been  pierced  with  arrows. 
The  messenger  essayed  to  console  them.  He  pointed 
out  that  the  Guru  had  brought  his  fate  on  himself 
as  the  result  of  a prayer  of  certain  Kashmiri  pandits. 
His  family  ought  not  therefore  to  take  the  matter 
to  heart,  but  accept  his  fate  with  resignation. 

1 The  Emperor  Babar’s  descendants  were  Humayun,  Akbar, 
Jahangir,  Shahjahan,  Aurangzeb,  and  Bahadur  Shah. 


38o  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

After  a conference  with  his  Muhammadan  doctors 
and  ministers  the  Emperor  again  sent  for  the  Guru, 
and  said  he  would  perform  for  him  every  service  in 
his  power  if  he  embraced  Islam,  otherwise  he  would 
have  him  severely  tortured.  The  Guru  replied, 
‘ Hear,  O Aurangzeb,  I will  never  embrace  Islam. 
Thou  and  I and  all  creatures  are  the  servants,  not 
the  equals  of  God.  The  world  is  subject  to  Him. 
The  prophet  of  Makka  who  originated  the  religion 
thou  professest,  was  unable  to  impose  one  faith  on  the 
world,  so  how  canst  thou  do  so  ? He  was  not  able 
to  convert  even  his  own  uncle  to  Islam.  Of  what 
account  art  thou  ? The  aswad  stone  which  the 
Muhammadans  set  up  in  memory  of  Adam,  and 
which  they  call  celestial,  but  which  the  Hindus  call 
the  lingam,  is  worshipped  by  Musalman  pilgrims.  Is 
it  anything  more  than  an  idol  ? ^ When  Muhammad 
drove  idolatry  out  of  Makka,  the  inhabitants  formed 
a design  to  assassinate  him.  When  he  became 
aware  of  this,  he  made  his  escape  at  night  to  Madina, 
leaving  all  his  property  behind,  and  never  returned. 
Canst  thou  justly  say  that  he  enjoyed  God’s  special 
favour  ? Nay,  we  are  all  God’s  people.  God  alone  is 
master  ; He  can  do  what  He  pleaseth.  O Aurangzeb, 
who  art  thou  and  what  power  hast  thou  to  convert 
the  whole  world  to  Islam  ? The  Guru  hath  said, 
“ Death  laugheth  over  man’s  head,  but  the  brute 
knoweth  it  not.”  O king,  through  pride  thou 
thinkest  not  that  thou  too  shalt  assuredly  die.  He 
who  practiseth  pride  shall  be'utterly  extirpated.’ 

On  hearing  this  the  Emperor  became  enraged  and 
remanded  the  Guru  to  prison,  giving  orders  that  he 
should  be  tortured  until  he  accepted  Islam.  The 
more,  however,  he  was  tortured,  the  more  happy  he 
appeared. 

^ The  Hindus  believe  that  the  aswad  or  black  stone  of  Makka  was 
a lingam  in  pre-Islamic  times.  The  Muhammadans  when  rejecting 
idolatry  preserved  the  stone  on  account  of  old  associations,  and 
inserted  it  in  the  wall  of  their  great  temple. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  381 

Notwithstanding  the  Guru’s  repeated  refusals,  the 
Emperor  still  entertained  hopes  that  he  might  be 
converted.  Messengers  continued  to  be  sent  at 
intervals  to  renew  the  Emperor’s  promises,  and  ask 
the  Guru  to  perform  a miracle  or  embrace  Islam. 
The  Guru  replied  that  a miracle  was  the  wrath  of 
God ; and  to  undo  what  God  had  done,  that  is,  to 
circumcise  himself  would  be  a crime  against  heaven. 
He  would  not  consent  to  the  Emperor’s  proposals. 
He  did  not  want  office  or  power ; he  felt  no  greed 
in  his  heart,  and  he  would  not  embrace  Islam,  but 
the  Emperor  might  act  as  he  pleased. 

In  the  Gurumukhi  chronicles  there  is  frequent 
mention  of  the  Guru  having  gone  outside  his  prison 
walls  to  meet  and  dine  with  his  Sikhs.  This  is  attri- 
buted to  his  thaumaturgic  power.  One  day  as  he 
was  on  the  top  story  of  his  prison,  the  Emperor 
thought  he  saw  him  looking  towards  the  south  in  the 
direction  of  the  imperial  zanana.  He  was  sent  for 
next  day  and  charged  with  this  grave  breach  of 
Oriental  etiquette  and  propriety.  The  Guru  rephed, 
‘ Emperor  Aurangzeb,  I was  on  the  top  story  of  my 
prison,  but  I was  not  looking  at  thy  private  apart- 
ments or  at  thy  queens.  I was  looking  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  Europeans  who  are  coming  from  beyond 
the  seas  to  tear  down  thy  fardas  and  destroy  thine 
empire.’  A Sikh  writer  states  that  these  words 
became  the  battle-cry  of  the  Sikhs  in  the  assault  on 
Dihli  in  1857  under  General  John  Nicholson,  and 
that  thus  the  prophecy  of  the  ninth  Guru  was 
gloriously  fulfilled.^ 

Mati  Das,  the  Guru’s  faithful  Sikh,  charged  his 
master  with  practising  too  much  humility,  and 
talked  of  destroying  the  whole  sect  of  Muhammadans 
and  putting  an  end  to  the  Mughal  rule.  The  Guru 
remonstrated  with  him,  and  said  that  man  must  accept 
and  obey  the  will  of  God.  Mati  Das  replied  that  the 

^ Lt/e  of  Guru  Teg  Bahadur^  by  Narain  Singh.  The  statement  is 
also  recorded  in  a work  called  the  Gur  Bans  Prakdsh* 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


382 

Guru’s  sufferings  were  intolerable.  A conversation 
ensued  in  which  the  Guru  referred  to  Guru  Nanak’s 
promise  to  Babar  that  his  empire  should  abide  for  a 
time.  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  said,  ‘ The  gift  the  Holy 
Guru  Nanak  gave  may  not,  it  is  true,  be  easily 
recalled.  But  I will  offer  my  life  and  in  doing  so 
prove  the  Turks  to  be  false  and  deprive  them  of 
sovereignty.  If  I lay  not  down  my  life  here,  the 
great  Turkish  Empire  in  India  will  long  survive  ; 
but  since  its  monarchs  have  committed  great  enor- 
mities, I will  now  extirpate  them  and  their  line.’ 

This  conversation  was  overheard  by  a priest  who 
reported  it  to  the  Emperor.  Mati  Das  was  in  con- 
sequence bound  between  two  pillars  and  his  body 
cut  in  twain  with  a saw.  When  the  executioners 
began  to  appl^  the  saw  to  his  body,  he  began  to 
repeat  the  Jap]i.  It  is  said  that,  even  when  his  body 
was  divided  in  two,  he  continued  to  repeat  the 
great  morning  prayer  of  the  Sikhs,  and  only  became 
silent  when  its  repetition  was  complete. 

On  witnessing  the  martyrdom  of  Mati ' Das,  the 
Guru’s  other  Sikhs  became  sore  afraid.  They  went  to 
him  at  night  and  represented  their  danger.  He  told 
them  that  they  were  free  to  leave  him.  They 
pointed  to  the  chains  on  their  feet,  and  asked  how 
their  release  could  be  effected  ? Through  the  Guru’s 
miraculous  interposition  their  fetters  fell  off,  the 
prison  doors  all  stood  open,  and  the  guards  snored  in 
the  sleep  of  neglect.^  One  of  the  Sikhs,  Bhai  Gurditta, 
repented  at  last  and  remained  with  the  Guru  to 
suffer  his  fate.  When  the  Guru  was  questioned  by 
the  jailor  as  to  how  his  three  Sikhs  had  escaped,  he 
replied  in  the  words  of  Guru  Arjan  ; — 

‘ God  playeth  in  everything  Himself  ; 

One  man  He  rescueth,  another  He  envelopeth  in  the  wave  ; 

As  He  causeth  men  to  dance,  so  they  dance  according  to 
the  past  acts  of  each.® 


^ Sura/  Parkash,  Ras  XI,  Chap.  55. 


® Maru. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  383 

‘ The  great  God  who  created  them  hath  rescued 
them  from  prison.  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  them 
now  ? Thy  business  is  with  me.  It  is  I who  have 
been  imprisoned.  Those  Sikhs  only  remained  through 
their  regard  for  me.’ 

The  Guru  sent  a message  by  the  departing  Sikhs 
to  his  son  to  abide  fearlessly  in  Anandpur.  The  time 
for  him  to  leave  his  own  body  had  arrived,  and  he 
would  leave  it  in  Dihli.  He  would  have  to  leave 
it  all  the  same  had  he  remained  in  Anandpur.  He 
enjoined  his  son  to  grieve  not  for  him  as  he  had 
brought  his  troubles  on  himself.  He  would  turn 
to  ashes  the  fruit  of  the  meritorious  acts  which  the 
Emperor  had  performed  in  former  births,  and  by 
which  he  had  obtained  sovereignty. 

Gobind  Rai  on  hearing  his  father’s  message, 
received  it  with  equanimity,  but  his  grandmother 
and  mother  began  to  weep.  He  tried  to  console  them, 
and  said,  ‘ We  will  abide  in  Anandpur  and  destroy 
the  Turks.’  His  mother  upon  this  cautioned  silence 
lest  some  agent  of  the  Emperor  should  hear  his 
words.  Gobind  replied  that  that  was  not  a time  for 
silence  or  concealment. 

Chapter  XI 

When  the  Governor  of  the  Dihli  jail  reported  that 
three  of  the  Guru’s  Sikhs  had  escaped,  the  Emperor 
ordered  the  Guru  to  be  locked  in  an  iron  cage,  and 
a sentry  with  a drawn  sword  placed  on  guard  over 
him.  The  Guru  on  hearing  this  order  calmly  replied 
with  a hyrgn  of  Guru  Arjan : — 

They  who  commit  sin  shall  assuredly  be  ruined  ; 

Azrail  shall  seize  and  smite  them  ; 

The  Creator  will  put  them  into  hell,  and  the  Accountant 
there  will  ask  for  their  accounts.^ 

The  Guru  in  reply  to  the  further  demand  of  the 

^ Maru. 


384  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

officer  sent  by  the  Emperor  answered  as  he  had  done 
on  a former  occasion — ‘ I will  not  accept  thy  law  or 
thy  religion,  and  I will  not  abandon  my  faith.  The 
glory  of  the  Turkish  power  is  now  at  an  end  since 
thou  art  forcibly  depriving  men  of  their  religion. 
I will  dig  up  the  roots  of  the  Turks  and  throw  them 
into  the  briny  ocean,  since  what  is  melted  with  salt 
never  reviveth,  and  they  shall  never  again  have 
sway  in  Hindustan.’  The  Guru  is  said  to  have  also 
quoted  the  hymn  of  Guru  Nanak  ; — 

When  kings,  lions,  headmen,  and  dogs. 

Instead  of  watching,  rest  in  sleep. 

King’s  servants  inflict  wounds  with  their  nails, 

And  taste  and  drink  the  subjects’  blood. 

Bhai  Gurditta  who  was  still  fettered  was  allowed 
to  wait  on  the  Guru.  Soon  after  this  a messenger 
arrived  bearing  a letter  from  his  wife  and  son. 
After  making  inquiries  regarding  them,  the  Guru 
wrote  his  first  slok  for  the  general  instruction  of 
his  followers  ; — 

He  who  singeth  not  God’s  praises  rendereth  his  life  useless  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  worship  God,  O my  soul,  as  the  fish  loveth 
water. 

He  then  wrote  the  fiftieth  slok  for  his  wife  Gujari’s 
special  consolation  : — 

Ram  passed  away,  Rawan  passed  away  with  his  large 
family ; 

Saith  Nanak,  nothing  is  permanent ; the  world  is  like  a 
dream. 

For  all  in  sorrow  he  wrote  the  fifty-first  slok  : — 

Be  anxious  only  regarding  what  is  not  expected  ; 

It  is  the  way  of  the  world,  Nanak,  that  nothing  is  per- 
manent. 

To  his  son  he  sent  the  fifty-third  slok  : — 

My  strength  is  exhausted,  I am  in  chains,  and  have  no 
resource. 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  385 

Saith  Nanak,  God  is  now  my  refuge  ; He  will  succour  me 
as  He  did  the  elephant. 

And  also  the  fifty-fifth  : — 

My  associates  and  companions  have  all  abandoned  me  ; no 
one  remaineth  with  me  to  the  last ; 

Saith  Nanak,  in  this  calamity  God  is  mine  only  support. 

It  is  believed  that  the  Guru  during  his  captivity 
composed  most  of  his  other  sloks  and  hymns,  and 
sent  them  with  the  above  by  the  messenger.  The 
Guru  said  to  him  at  parting  : ‘ My  end  hath  come ; 
console  all  my  people.  We  must  all  be  satisfied  with 
God’s  will.  Take  this  letter  quickly,  and  bring  me 
an  answer.’ 

Gobind  Rai  replied  to  the  slok  addressed  to  him 
with  the  fifty-fourth  slok  in  the  collection  bearing 
the  name  of  the  ninth  Guru  in  the  Granth  Sahib  ; — 

Strength  is  thine  ; thy  fetters  are  loosed  ; thou  hast  every 
resource  ; 

Nanak,  everything  is  in  thy  power  ; it  is  only  thou  who 
canst  assist  thyself.^ 

The  Guru  was  very  pleased  at  receiving  this  slok 
and  message  from  his  son,  and  remarked  that  he  was 
fit  for  the  Guruship.  He  sent  into  the  city  of  Dihli 
for  five  paise  and  a coco-nut  to  forward  him  in  token 
of  his  appointment  to  the  Sikh  spiritual  sovereignty. 
When  the  five  paise  and  the  coco-nut  arrived,  the 
Guru  placed  them  in  front  of  him,  meditated  on  his 
distant  son,  and  bowed  to  him.  He  sent  the  articles 
to  Gobind  Rai  with  the  fifty-sixth  slok  ; — 

The  Name  remaineth,  saints  remain.  Guru  Gobind  remain- 
eth ; 

Saith  Nanak,  few  are  they  who  in  this  world  follow  the 
Guru’s  instruction. 

Before  the  messenger  reached  Anandpur  the  Guru's 

* This  couplet  is  the  only  composition  of  the  tenth  Guru  found  in 
the  Granth  Sahib. 

C C 


SIKH.  IV 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


386 

family  was  in  great  distress  on  account  of  a vision 
which  his  wife  had  had.  She  thought  that  she  saw 
the  Guru  place  five  paise  and  a coco-nut  before  his 
son  Gobind  and  bow  to  him  in  token  of  his  appoint- 
ment, and  then  she  beheld  the  Guru’s  head  separated 
from  his  body.  She  requested  her  son  to  send  a Sikh 
at  once  to  ascertain  if  the  vision  had  any  reality. 
If  the  messenger  met  on  the  road  the  Sikh  who  was 
expected  from  Dihli,  he  was  to  let  him  come  on,  and 
himself  proceed  to  Dihli  to  obtain  the  latest  informa- 
tion regarding  the  Guru. 

Meanwhile  the  Emperor  kept  his  thoughts  on  the 
Guru’s  conversion.  He  sent  for  a Muhammadan 
priest  and  told  him  to  take  one  of  the  nobles  with  him 
to  the  prisoner  with  this  message,  ‘ Thou  art  to  accept 
the  Muhammadan  religion  or  work  a miracle.  If 
thou  work  a miracle,  thou  mayest  remain  a Guru  as 
thou  art.  If  thou  accept  Islam,  then  shalt  thou 
be  advanced  to  an  exalted  position,  and  be  happy. 
If  thou  fail  to  accept  these  offers,  thou  shalt  be  put 
to  death.  This  is  my  final  decision.’ 

The  Guru  replied  in  the  same  purport  as  before, 
and  added — ‘ I will  never  abandon  my  faith.  I want 
no  honour  in  this  life  ; I want  honour  hereafter.  The 
threat  of  death  possesseth  no  terrors  for  me,  since 
I must  one  day  assuredly  leave  this  perishable  body. 
For  death  I am  prepared  and  I cheerfully  accept  it.’ 

The  Emperor  on  hearing  this  reply  was  greatly 
incensed,  and  ordered  that  the  Guru  should  be 
executed. 

Meantime  the  messenger  from  the  Guru’s  son  and 
wife  arrived  from  Anandpur.  The  Guru  said  to 
him : ‘ My  last  hour  hath  come.  Stand  thou 
near  me.  My  head  shall  fall  into  thy  lap.  Fear 
nobody,  but  take  it  to  Anandpur,  and  cremate  it 
there.’  On  hearing  this  not  only  the  Sikh,  but  the 
Muhammadan  governor  of  the  jail  began  to  weep. 
The  Guru  gave  them  religious  instruction,  and  con- 
soled them.  Then  turning  to  his  faithful  companion, 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  387 

Gurditta,  he  said  : ‘ Thou  shall  be  released  after  my 
death.’  Gurditta  replied,  'O  great  king,  it  is  at  thy 
feet  I wish  to  leave  my  body.’  The  Guru  rejoined  : 
— ‘ O my  brother,  thy  cremation-ground  shall  be 
where  Bhai  Budha  used  to  graze  the  horses  of 
Guru  Har  Gobind  when  he  was  in  the  fortress  of 
Gualiar.  The  place  is  only  about  six  miles  distant. 
Thou  shall  leave  thy  body  there,  and  come  to  me  in 
heaven.’ 

Then  came  Saiyid  Adam  Shah  with  a warrant 
for  the  Guru’s  execution,  accompanied  by  all  the 
Emperor’s  courtiers  and  Muhammadan  priests  of 
Dihli.  Adam  Shah,  who  revolted  from  the  office  of 
executioner  of  the  Guru,  asked  him  why  he  was  bent 
on  losing  his  life  in  vain,  and  begged  him  to  embrace 
Islam.  The  Guru  replied  : — ‘ The  Sikh  religion  is 
dearer  to  me  than  life,  and  I cannot  renounce  it  even 
under  the  pressure  of  immediate  and  certain  death. 
The  Guru  was  then  taken  out  of  his  cage,  and  allowed 
to  perform  his  ablutions  at  a neighbouring  well.  There 
appeared  a great  crowd  to  witness  the  execution. 
The  Guru,  leaving  the  well,  went  and  sat  under 
a banyan-tree,  still  extant,  where  he  recited  the 
Japji.  He  then  told  Adam  Shah  to  take  his 
sword  and  strike  his  neck  when  he  bowed  to  God 
at  the  conclusion  of  his  devotions.  Adam  Shah  did 
so.  It  is  said  that  the  Guru’s  head  flew  off  into  the 
faithful  Sikh’s  lap. 

It  is  recorded  that  immediately  afterwards  a great 
storm  arose  which  filled  every  one’s  eyes  with  dust. 
The  Sikh  unobserved  by  anyone  took  away  the  Guru’s 
head  to  Anandpur,  hasting  with  it  as  fast  as  his  feet 
could  carry  him.  The  execution  of  Guru  Teg 
Bahadur  occurred  on  the  afternoon  of  Thursday  the 
fifth  day  of  the  light  half  of  the  month  of  Maghar  in 
the  Sambat  year  1732  (a.d.  1675). 


C C2 


388 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Chapter  XII 

The  Emperor  on  hearing  of  the  Guru’s  execution 
became  sad  and  repentant.  His  mind  is  said  to  have 
been  agitated  like  leaves  moved  by  the  wind.  He 
reflected : ‘ As  the  Guru  by  his  death  hath  fixed  a 
stain  on  me,  so  I think  that  my  own  life  will  now  be 
my  guest  for  only  a few  days.’  His  courtiers  on 
hearing  this  endeavoured  to  console  him : ‘ 0 mighty 
monarch,  the  Guru  disobeyed  thine  orders,  so  what 
sin  was  there  in  killing  him  ? Thou  didst  flay  and  put 
to  death  such  a great  man  as  Sarmad,  so  why  be 
distressed  in  the  Guru’s  case  ? Why  trouble  regarding 
an  accomplished  fact  ? ’ On  hearing  this  the  Emperor 
outwardly  appeared  consoled,  but  could  never  really 
regain  his  peace  of  mind. 

A Sikh  of  the  Labana  tribe,  on  happening  to 
see  the  Guru’s  dead  body  was  greatly  grieved,  and 
said  to  himself : ‘ A curse  on  the  Sikhs  who  look 
on  and  allow  this  dishonour  to  the  corpse  of  their 
Guru ! ’ The  Labana  went  home,  and  reproached 
his  tribesmen  on  the  subject.  They  collected  oxen 
on  which  they  loaded  sacks,  and  carts  on  which  they 
loaded  cotton,  and  drove  them  in  the  direction  of  the 
Guru’s  corpse.  In  this  way  they  hoped  that  their 
removing  it  for  the  performance  of  the  last  sad  rites 
would  not  be  noticed.  They  also  hoped  to  elude 
pursuit  in  the  dust-storm  which  arose  after  the 
Guru’s  death.  The  city  guards  were  greatly  troubled 
by  the  storm,  and  dispersed  in  different  directions. 
Five  Sikhs  then  took  up  the  Guru’s  body,  put  it  on 
a cart,  and  succeeded  in  taking  it  unobserved  through 
the  crowd.  When  they  had  taken  it  outside  the  city 
the  dust-storm  subsided. 

The  Sikhs’  houses  were  all  thatched,  so  when  the 
pyre  was  lighted  in  them,  they  would  take  fire,  and  in 
this  wa.y  the  Guru’s  body  would  not  be  discovered. 

\t  was  duly  reduced  to  ashes,  they  cried  out 
that  their  houses  had  caught  fire,  and  called  on  their 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  389 

neighbours  to  assist  them  in  extinguishing  it.  The 
houses,  however,  were  soon  burnt  to  ashes,  and  the 
call  to  their  neighbours  to  help  them  was  futile  as  it 
had  been  intended.  Next  day  they  collected  the 
Gtiru’s  remains  and  buried  them  in  a copper  vessel 
in  the  earth  immediately  under  his  funeral  pyre. 
Over  his  remains,  at  a spot  now  known  as  Rakab 
Gunj,  a shrine  was  subsequently  erected. 

The  Emperor  censured  his  staff  for  allowing  the 
Guru’s  head  and  body  to  disappear,  and  deemed  his 
own  object  frustrated  in  having  put  the  Guru  to 
death.  In  his  general  distress  at  what  had  occurred 
he  was  not  able  to  take  his  dinner,  and  retired 
hungry.  He  dreamt  that  Bhai  Mati  Das  appeared 
to  him,  upturned  his  bed,  and  ordered  him  to  leave 
Dihli.  The  Emperor  was  unable  to  sleep  for  the 
remainder  of  the  night,  and  endeavoured  to  lull  his 
conscience  by  a repetition  of  the  creed  and  the  prayers 
of  his  religion. 

While  all  this  was  taking  place,  the  Guru’s  family 
heard  of  his  death,  the  efforts  made  to  convert  him, 
and  his  noble  replies  to  all  the  overtures  made. 
The  messenger  told  how  the  Guru  had  sent  for  five 
paise  and  a coco-nut,  bowed  to  his  son  Gobind,  made 
him  his  successor,  and  infused  his  light  into  him. 
His  message  to  his  son  was  to  extend  the  true  rehgion, 
and  destroy  the  wicked.  The  whole  assembly  began 
to  weep,  but  the  young  Guru  endeavoured  to  console 
them.  He  said  that  there  should  be  no  mourning 
for  true  men  like  his  father,  who  on  seeing  the 
decline  of  religion  had  assumed  human  birth,  and 
having  placed  religion  on  a firm  basis  returned  to  his 
heavenly  home.  ‘ According  to  the  words  of  Guru 
Arjan : — 

Philanthropic  men  have  come  who  are  beyon^birth  and 
death ; 

They  give  their  lives,  turn  men  to  devotion,  and  cause 
them  to  meet  God. 


390 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Consequently,  my  brethren,  your  mourning  is 
vain.’ 

The  young  Guru  who  knew  that  his  father’s  head 
was  being  brought  to  Anandpur  by  the  last  messenger 
sent  to  Dihli,  dispatched  two  Sikhs  to  meet  and 
escort  it.  The  Sikhs  fell  in  with  its  bearer  about 
a mile  from  Anandpur.  He  told  them  to  return  and 
ask  Guru  Gobind  Rai  if  his  father’s  head  was  to  be 
cremated  at  Anandpur  or  Kiratpur  where  were  the 
shrines  of  the  sixth  and  seventh  Gurus  and  relations 
of  theirs.  The  young  Guru  decided  that  Guru  Teg 
Bahadur’s  head  should  be  taken  to  Anandpur  for  the 
last  rites. 

A pyre  of  sandal  wood  was  constructed  and  attar 
of  roses  sprinkled  on  the  head  which  the  young  Guru 
took  and  solemnly  placed  on  the  pyre.  He  then 
repeated  the  preamble  of  the  Japji  and  ignited  the 
pyre  with  his  own  hands.  While  the  head  was  being 
cremated,  the  Sikh  congregation  sang  hymns  of  the 
Guru.  They  called  to  memory  and  spoke  of  Guru 
Teg  Bahadur’s  philanthropic  and  self-sacrificing 
deeds.  The  Sohila  was  then  read  with  a conclud- 
ing benediction  and  sacred  food  distributed.  When 
Guru  Gobind  Rai  reached  home,  he  caused  the 
reading  of  the  Gurus’  hymns  to  be  begun,  and  this 
was  continued  for  ten  days,  when  alms  were  freely 
distributed.  Guru  Gobind  Rai  was  in  due  time 
proclaimed  the  tenth  Guru.  There  were  great 
rejoicings  on  the  occasion.  Bards  and  poets  assembled 
to  sing  the  new  Guru’s  praises  while  certain  Sikhs 
were  sad  at  heart  as  they  thought  of  the  late  Guru 
Teg  Bahadur.  The  memory  of  their  kind  friend  and 
spiritual  leader  ever  occurred  to  them. 

After  the  death  of  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  the  Muham- 
madans set  at  liberty  his  faithful  attendant  Gurditta, 
a lineal  descendant  of  Bhai  Budha.  He  then  went 
to  where  Bhai  Budha  used  to  graze  the  sixth 
Guru’s  horses,  and  there  after  seeing  the  seat  of 
his  ancestors  gave  up  his  spirit.  His  son  Ram 


LIFE  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  391 

Kaur,  who  was  then  only  thirteen  years  of  age, 
became  a very  learned  Gurumukhi  scholar.  It 
was  he  who  gave  the  tenth  Guru  the  tilak,  or 
patch  of  spiritual  sovereignty,  in  the  presence  of  the 
descendants  of  all  the  Gurus.  The  enthronement  of 
Guru  Gobind  Rai  was  performed  on  the  fifth  day 
of  the  first  half  of  Phagan  (February),  a.d.  1676,  with 
great  state  in  a lofty  building  erected  for  the  occasion. 

One  day  the  Labana  who  had  cremated  Guru  Teg 
Bahadur’s  body  paid  Guru  Gobind  Rai  a visit,  and 
detailed  all  the  circumstances  subsequent  to  Guru 
Teg  Bahadur’s  death.  When  the  Labana  said  that 
the  Sikhs  were  afraid  to  touch  the  body.  Guru  Gobind 
Rai  vowed  that  he  would  make  Sikhs  such  that  one 
of  them  could  hold  his  ground  against  one  hundred 
thousand  others.  When  the  Labana  told  the  Guru 
that  he  had  buried  the  ashes  of  his  father,  the  Guru 
ordered  him  to  leave  them  where  they  were  for  the 
present.  He  would  go  there  himself  one  day,  and 
erect  a temple  on  the  spot. 

The  Labana  continued  to  describe  the  mental 
state  of  Aurangzeb  after  the  execution  of  the  Guru. 
When  Aurangzeb  imprisoned  his  own  father  the  latter 
gave  him  three  counsels — not  to  try  to  convert  the 
Hindus,  to  pay  his  State  servants  well,  and  not  to 
engage  in  war  in  the  Dakhan.  All  these  counsels 
Aurangzeb  disregarded,  the  first  two  through  bigotry 
and  greed,  and  the  third  through  the  advice  of 
a wandering  faqir  who  told  him  it  would  now  be 
impossible  for  him  to  remain  in  Dihli.  Aurangzeb 
therefore  decided  to  make  an  expedition  against 
King  Tana  Shah  in  the  Dakhan.  From  that  moment 
Aurangzeb's  power  declined,  and  now  no  trace  is  left 
of  his  imperial  line. 

Such  is  the  account  of  the  death  of  Guru  Teg 
Bahadur  given  by  the  Sikh  historians.  The  Muham- 
madan author  of  the  Siyar-ul-Mutaakharin  states 
that  Aurangzeb  had  the  Guru’s  body  cut  up  into 
pieces  and  suspended  in  different  parts  of  the  imperial 


392 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


capital.  Whether  this  be  true  or  not,  it  is  certain  that 
the  other  circumstances  related  by  the  Muhammadan 
writer  are  utterly  incompatible  with  the  whole  tenor 
of  Guru  Teg  Bahadur’s  life  and  writings,  and  cannot 
be  accepted  as  even  an  approach  to  history.* 

Guru  Gobind  Rai  thus  writes  of  his  father  ; — 

He  protected  the  frontal  marks  and  sacrificial  threads  of 
the  Hindus 

And  displayed  great  bravery  in  this  Kal  age. 

When  he  put  an  end  to  his  life  for  the  sake  of  holy  men, 

He  gave  his  head,  but  uttered  not  a groan. 

He  suffered  martyrdom  for  the  sake  of  his  religion  ; 

He  gave  his  head  but  swerved  not  from  his  determination. 

God’s  people  would  be  ashamed 

To  perform  the  tricks  of  mountebanks  and  cheats.^ 

Having  broken  his  potsherd  on  the  head  of  the  King  of 
Dihli  he  departed  to  paradise. 

No  one  else  coming  into  the  world  acted  like  Teg  Bahadur. 

The  world  was  in  mourning  for  the  demise  of  Teg  Bahadur  ; 

There  was  weeping  for  him  in  the  whole  world,  but  rejoicing 
in  paradise.® 

The  following  hymn  of  Guru  Teg  Bahadur  is 
frequently  sung  in  assemblies  of  Sikhs  : — 

Put  the  support  of  God’s  lotus  feet  into  thy  heart,  and 
unite  it  with  them. 

The  mind  desireth  evil,  but  it  should  be  restrained  by  the 
Guru’s  instruction. 

Give  thy  head  rather  than  forsake  those  whom  thoii  hast 
undertaken  to  protect. 

Guru  Teg  Bahadur  said,  give  thy  life,  but  relinquish  not 
thy  faith. 

* The  Siyar-ul-Muhakhartn  contains  many  obvious  misstatements 
regarding  the  other  Gurus  also. 

® That  is,  he  might  have  performed  a miracle  and  saved  himself, 
but  he  scorned  to  do  so. 

• Vachitar  Chap.  v. 


393 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR^ 

Gauri 

I 

O good  people,  renounce  your  mental  pride, 

Day  and  night  flee  from  lust,  wrath,  and  the  company  of 
the  evil. 

He  who  recognizeth  pleasure  and  pain,  honour  and  dis- 
honour as  the  same. 

And  who  keepeth  aloof  from  joy  and  sorrow,  knoweth  the 
Real  Thing  in  the  world. 

One  should  renounce  praise  and  blame  and  search  for  the 
dignity  of  Nirvan  : 

Nanak,  this  is  a difficult  part  to  play  ; only  a few  pious 
men  know  how  to  do  so, 

II 

O good  people,  God  hath  thus  made  creation — 

Some  perish,  others  think  that  they  shall  live  for  ever  • 
this  is  a wonderful  thing  and  cannot  be  understood. 

Mortal  is  in  the  power  of  lust,  anger,  and  worldly  love, 
and  hath  forgotten  God. 

The  body  which,  like  a nightly  dream,  is  unreal  man 
deemeth  real.^ 

Whatever  is  visible  shall  all  vanish  like  the  shadows  of 
the  clouds  : 

Nanak,  they  who  know  that  the  world  is  unreal  shall 
abide  under  God’s  protection. 

III 

The  praise  of  God  entereth  not  into  the  heart  of  man  ; 

Day  and  night  he  remaineth  absorbed  in  mammon  ; say 
how  shall  he  sing  God^s  praises. 

^ The  hymns  of  the  ninth  Guru  are  not  found  in  the  oldest  copy  ot 
the  Granth  Sahib  preserved  at  Kartarpur.  They  were  incorporated  in 
the  sacred  volume  by  the  tenth  Guru  at  Damdama. 

^ That  is,  permanent. 


394 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


In  this  way  he  bindeth  himself  to  children,  friends, 
mammon,  and  selfishness. 

This  world  is  false  as  a mirage,  yet  man  on  beholding  it 
fleeth  after  it. 

The  Lord,  the  Cause  of  happiness  in  this  world  and  the 
next,  is  forgotten  by  the  fool. 

Nanak,  among  millions  few  there  are  who  find  the  way  to 
worship  God. 


IV 

O good  people,  the  heart  cannot  be  restrained  ; 

It  is  fickle,  greed  abideth  with  it,  therefore  it  cannot 
be  kept  stable ; 

Within  it  is  violent  rage  which  causeth  all  wisdom  to  be 
forgotten. 

And  which  hath  stolen  the  jewel  of  divine  knowledge  from 
all  men  : nothing  can  withstand  it. 

All  the  Jogis  making  efforts  and  the  eulogists  singing 
God’s  praises  have  failed  to  steady  their  minis. 

Nanak,  when  God  is  merciful,  everything  is  successful. 

V 

0 good  people,  sing  God’s  praises  ; 

You  have  obtained  priceless  human  life  ; why  waste  it  in 
v^in  ? 

Enter  into  the  sanctuary  of  God  who  is  the  purifier  of 
sinners  and  the  friend  of  the  poor. 

Why  forget  Him,  by  remembering  whom  the  elephant’s 
fear  departed  ? 

Lay  aside  pride,  worldly  love,  and  self,  and  then  apply 
your  minds  to  God’s  worship. 

Nanak  saith,  this  is  the  way  of  salvation  ; become  a fol- 
lower of  the  Guru  and  you  shall  attain  it. 

VI 

O mother,  let  some  one  instruct  this  erring  mind. 

Man  hath  heard  the  Veds  and  the  Purans  and  the  ways 
of  holy  men,  yet  he  singeth  not  God’s  praises  even  for  a 
moment : 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  395 

Having  obtained  a human  body  so  difficult  to  obtain,  he 
passeth  his  life  in  vain. 

Worldly  love  is  a very  toilsome  forest,  yet  man  conceiveth 
love  for  it. 

He  feeleth  no  love  for  God  who  is  ever  with  him  at  home 
and  abroad. 

Nanak,  consider  him  in  whose  heart  God  is  contained  as 
delivered. 


VII 

O good  people,  in  God’s  asylum  there  is  rest. 

The  advantage  of  the  study  of  the  Veds  and  the  Purans  is 
to  remember  God’s  name. 

The  man  who  is  untouched  by  covetousness,  worldly  love, 
selfishness,  joy,  and  sorrow. 

And  who  is  not  a slave  to  his  passion,  is  the  image  of  God  ; 

So  is  he  who  deemeth  heaven  and  hell,  ambrosia  and 
poison,  gold  and  copper,  as  the  same  ; 

And  so  also  is  he  who  deemeth  praise  and  blame  as  the 
same,  and  who  is  not  enslaved  by  avarice  and  worldly  love  : 

Recognize  him  as  possessed  of  divine  knowledge  who  hath 
not  the  entanglements  of  pain  and  pleasure. 

Nanak,  admit  that  such  a mortal  is  saved. 

VIII 

O man,  why  hast  thou  become  crazy  ? 

Knowest  thou  not  that  life  decreaseth  day  and  night,  and 
that  thou  art  degraded  by  avarice  ? 

In  the  body  and  the  beautiful  house  and  wife  which 
thou  deemest  thine  own, 

Thou  hast  no  share  ; see  and  carefully  reflect  on  this. 

Thou  hast  lost  the  jewel  of  human  life,  and  thou  knowest 
not  God’s  way ; 

Thou  hast  not  been  absorbed  in  the  feet  of  the  Lord  even 
for  a moment,  and  thou  hast  passed  thy  life  in  vain. 

Saith  Nanak,  that  man  is  happy  who  singeth  God’s  name 
and  praises  ; 

Mammon  hath  bewitched  all  the  rest  of  men  ; they  shall 
not  obtain  the  fearless  dignity. 


396 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


IX 

0 heedless  man,  fear  sin.^ 

Enter  the  protection  of  Him  who  is  compassionate  to  the 
poor  and  the  destroyer  of  every  fear. 

Clasp  to  thy  heart  the  name  of  Him  whose  praises  the  Veds 
and  Purans  sing. 

Pure  is  the  name  of  God  in  the  world  ; by  ever  remember- 
ing it  all  filth  of  sin  shall  be  cleansed. 

Thou  shalt  not  again  obtain  a human  body ; make  some 
efforts  now  for  thy  deliverance. 

Nanak  saith,  by  lauding  Him  who  is  full  of  mercy  thou 
shalt  cross  the  terrible  ocean. 

Asa 

To  whom  shall  I describe  man’s  troubles  ? 

The  prey  of  avarice  he  hasteth  in  every  direction  in  the 
hope  of  wealth ; 

For  the  sake  of  pleasure  he  undergoeth  much  suffering, 
and  is  the  slave  of  every  individual ; 

Like  a dog  he  wandereth  from  door  to  door,  and  heedeth 
not  God’s  worship ; 

He  loseth  his  human  life  in  vain,  and  is  not  ashamed  of 
men’s  laughter. 

Nanak,  why  dost  thou  not  sing  God’s  praises  so  that  thine 
e\fil  inclinations  may  depart  ? 

Devgandhari 

I 

Man  doeth  not  a particle  of  my  bidding. 

1 have  been  instructing  him,  yet  he  abstaineth  not  from 
wickedness ; 

He  hath  gone  mad  by  the  intoxication  of  mammon,  and 
repeateth  not  God’s  praises  ; 

By  fraud  he  deceiveth  the  world  and  fiUeth  his  own  belly  ; 

Like  a dog’s  tail  he  is  never  straight,  and  lendeth  not  an 
ear  to  what  I tell  him. 

* The  gySnis  generally  translate  this  verse — O man,  fear  even 
unintentional  sin. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  397 

Saith  Nanak,  continually  repeat  the  name  of  God,  so  shalt 
thou  be  successful. 

II 

All  thy  relations  are  only  for  life  ; 

Thy  mother,  father,  brothers,  sons,  kinsmen,  and  the  wife 
of  thy  house. 

When  the  soul  parteth  from  thy  body,  cry  out  and  call 
thee  a ghost ; 

Nobody  keepeth  thee  even  half  a ghari ; they  expel  thee 
from  the  house. 

The  structure  of  the  world  is  like  a mirage  ; understand 
this  and  ponder  on  it  in  thy  heart. 

Saith  Nanak,  ever  repeat  God’s  name  by  which  deliverance 
is  obtained. 

III 

I have  seen  that  the  love  of  the  world  is  false  ; 

Everybody,  whether  wife  or  friend,  is  intent  on  his  own 
happiness  ; 

Everybody  speaketh  of  his  relations,  and  attacheth  his 
heart  to  them  with  love  ; 

At  the  last  moment  nobody  will  accompany  him  : this  is 
a strange  custom. 

Stupid  man  as  yet  understandeth  nothing,  though  I have 
grown  weary  of  continually  instructing  him. 

Nanak,  if  man  sing  the  praises  of  God,  he  shall  cross  over 
the  terrible  ocean. 

Bihagra 

Nobody  knoweth  God’s  ways  ; 

Jogis,  jatis,  penitents,  and  several  wise  men  have  grown 
vfeaxy, thinking  of  Him  ; 

He  can  in  a moment  make  a beggar  a king,  or  a king 
a beggar ; 

What  is  empty  He  filleth,  and  what  is  full  He  emptieth  ; 
this  is  a practice  of  God  ; 

He  hath  spread  His  own  illusion,  and  He  Himself  beljold- 
eth  it ; 

He  assumeth  many  shapes  and  playeth  many  sports,  yet 
is  distinct  from  everything. 


398  THE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Incomputable,  illimitable,  unseen,  and  spotless  is  He  who 
hath  unsettled  all  men’s  minds. 

Saith  Nanak,  O mortal,  lay  aside  all  doubt,  and  think 
upon  God’s  feet. 


SOKATH 

I 

O man,  love  God  ; 

Hear  His  praises  with  thine  ears,  and  sing  His  songs  with 
thy  tongue. 

Associate  with  holy  men,  remember  God,  and  thou  shalt 
be  cleansed  from  sin. 

Death  wandereth  about,  O friend,  like  a serpent  with  pro- 
truding fangs. 

And  it  will  seize  thee  sooner  or  later ; understand  this  in 
thy  heart. 

Saith  Nanak,  worship  God ; thine  opportunity  is  passing 
away. 

II 

Man’s  intentions  are  never  carried  out ; 

He  neither  adoreth  God,  nor  worshippeth  at  places  of 
pilgrimage,^  so  Death  seizeth  him  by  the  top-lock. 

Know  that  wives,  friends,  sons,  carriages,  property, 
wealth,  the  whole  world. 

And  everything  else  is  false ; only  adoration  of  God  is 
true. 

Grown  weary  of  wandering  about  for  many  ages,  man 
hath  at  last  obtained  a human  body  ; 

Nanak  saith,  O man,  it  is  now  thy  turn  to  meet  God ; 
why  not  remember  Him  ? 

III 

O man,  what  evil  inclinations  hast  thou  entertained  ? 

Thou  hast  found  pleasure  in  other  men’s  wives  and  in 
calumny,  and  God  thou  hast  not  served  ; 

Thou  hast  not  known  the  way  of  deliverance,  but  hast 
hurried  to  amass  wealth. 


* By  pilgrimage  is  here  meant  the  society  of  saints. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  399 

At  last  nothing  shall  accompany  thee  ; in  vain  hast  thou 
entangled  thyself. 

Thou  hast  not  worshipped  God,  nor  served  holy  men,  nor 
hath  any  divine  knowledge  sprung  up  in  thy  heart. 

God  is  in  thy  heart,  yet  thou  searchest  for  Him  in  the 
wilderness ; 

Thou  hast  grown  weary  of  wandering  in  many  births,  and 
hast  not  acquired  a stable  mind  ; 

Having  now  acquired  a human  body  worship  God’s  feet  ; 
Nanak  giveth  thee  this  advice. 

IV 

O man,  think  of  seeking  God’s  protection  ; 

Fix  His  praises  in  thy  heart,  by  meditating  on  whom 
such  a person  as  the  courtesan  was  saved  ; 

By  remembering  Him  Dhru  became  immovable,  and  ob- 
tained the  fearless  dignity. 

Why  hast  thou  forgotten  the  Lord,  who  is  such  a Remover 
of  sorrow  ? 

When  the  elephant  took  the  protection  of  the  Ocean  of 
mercy,  he  escaped  from  the  crocodile. 

How  far  shall  I describe  the  praises  of  the  Name  ? He 
who  repeateth  it  bursteth  his  bonds. 

The  sinner  Ajamal,  the  world  knoweth,  was  saved  in  a 
moment. 

Nanak  saith,  think  upon  the  Fulfiller  of  desires,  and  thou 
too  shalt  be  saved. 

V 

What  efforts  shall  mortal  make 

By  which  he  may  obtain  God’s  service  and  dispel  the 
fear  of  death  ? 

Say  what  science  shall  he  study,  and  then  what  acts  and 
religious  ceremonies  shall  he  perform  ? 

What  is  that  great  name,  by  remembering  which  man 
may  cross  the  dreaded  ocean  ? 

In  the  Kal  age  there  is  one  Name,  that  of  the  Ocean  of 
mercy,  by  repeating  which  man  may  obtain  deliverance  ; 

There  is  no  other  religious  ceremony  equal  to  that,  as 
shown  by  sacred  writings. 


400 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


He  who  is  called  the  Lord  of  the  earth,  remaineth  ever 
free  from  joy  and  sorrow,  uncontaminated  hy  the  world. 

And  unaffected  by  it,  O Nanak,  like  a mirror  ; He  dwelleth 
within  thee. 

VI 

0 mother,  how  shall  I behold  the  Lord  of  the  earth  ? 

In  the  darkness  of  great  worldly  love  and  spiritual  igno- 
rance my  heart  hath  been  entangled  ; 

1 have  lost  the  whole  of  my  life  in  wandering,  and  not 
obtained  a stable  mind  ; 

I have  night  and  day  pursued  sinful  pleasures,  and  have 
not  abandoned  sinful  habits. 

I have  never  associated  with  saints  or  sung  God’s  praises. 

Nanak,  in  me  is  no  virtue ; take  me,  0 God,  under  Thy 
protection. 

VII 

0 mother,  my  heart  is  not  under  my  control ; 

Night  and  day  it  chaseth  sinful  pleasures  ; how  shall  I 
restrain  it  ? 

Although  I have  heard  the  teachings  of  the  Veds,  the 
Purans  and  the  Simritis,  yet  I have  not  given  them  a place 
in  my  heart  for  an  instant ; 

1 have  coveted  others’  goods  and  others’  wives,  and  have 
passed  my  life  in  vain  ; 

I have  become  mad  with  the  intoxication  of  mammon, 
and  I know  not  any  divine  knowledge  ; 

The  Pure  One  dwelleth  in  my  heart,  yet  I know  not  His 
secret. 

Since  I have  entered  the  asylum  of  the  Saints,^  my  evil 
thoughts  have  all  dispersed. 

Nanak,  when  I thought  upon  the  Fulfiller  of  desires, 
Death’s  noose  was  cut. 


VIII 

O man,  hold  this  for  certain  in  thy  heart — 

The  whole  world  is  like  a dream,  and  in  its  destruction 
there  shall  be  no  delay. 

^ The  Gurus,  his  predecessors. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  401 

As  a wall  of  sand,  even  when  elaborately  built  lasteth 
not  four  days, 

So  is  the  pleasure  of  mammon  ; why  art  thou  entangled 
in  it,  O ignorant  man  ? 

This  very  day  come  to  thy  senses ; no  harm  is  yet  done  ; 
repeat  God’s  name. 

Saith  Nanak,  I have  proclaimed  unto  thee,  0 man,  the 
special  teaching  of  holy  men. 

IX 

I have  seen  no  friend  in  this  world  ; 

The  whole  world  is  attached  to  one  for  its  own  interest, 
but  man  will  have  no  companion  in  adversity. 

Wives,  friends,  sons,  and  relatives  are  all  attached  to 
wealth  ; 

When  they  see  a man  poor,  they  all  forsake  his  company 
and  flee. 

What  shall  I say  to  this  demented  heart  which  is  attached 
to  them  ? 

I have  forgotten  the  praises  of  the  Lord  of  the  poor  and 
the  Destroyer  of  fear  ; 

However  much  I have  striven,  my  heart  remaineth  as 
crooked  as  a dog’s  tail,  and  will  not  straighten. 

Saith  Nanak,  0 God,  have  regard  for  Thy  practice  of 
forgiveness  ; I have  uttered  Thy  name. 

X 

O man,  thou  hast  not  embraced  the  Guru’s  instruction, 

What  availeth  thee  to  shave  thy  head,  and  put  on  an 
ochre-dyed  garment  ? 

Having  abandoned  truth  thou  hast  attached  thyself  to 
falsehood,  and  lost  thy  human  life  in  vain  ; 

Thou  hast  filled  thy  belly  by  deceit,  and  slept  like  a beast ; 

Thou  knowest  not  how  to  worship  God,  and  thou  hast 
sold  thyself  to  mammon. 

O madman,  thou  hast  remained  entangled  with  sin,  and 
forgotten  the  jewel  of  the  Name  ; 

Thou  hast  been  thoughtless,  thou  hast  not  thought  of 
God,  thou  hast  passed  thy  life  in  vain. 

D d 


SIKH.  IV 


402 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


Saith  Nanak,  O God,  recognize  Thy  daily  practice  of 
forgiveness  ; mortal  ever  erreth. 

XI 

He  who  in  adversity  heedeth  it  not, 

Who  in  prosperity  feeleth  neither  affection  nor  fear,  and 
who  deemeth  gold  as  dross  ; 

Who  uttereth  neither  praise  nor  blame,  and  who  suffereth 
not  from  avarice,  worldly  love,  or  pride  ; 

Who  is  unaffected  by  joy  or  sorrow,  by  honour  or  dis- 
honour ; 

Who  hath  renounced  all  hopes  and  desires,  and  expecteth 
nothing  from  the  world  ; 

Whom  lust  and  wrath  touch  not — in  such  a person’s 
heart  God  dwelleth. 

He  to  whom  the  Guru  hath  shown  favour  knoweth  the 
way  to  this. 

And  shall  be  blended  with  God,  0 Nanak,  as  water  with 
water. 

XII 

My  dear  friends,  know  this  in  your  hearts — 

The  whole  world  is  entangled  in  its  own  pleasures ; no- 
body is  any  one  else’s  friend. 

In  prosperity  many  persons  come  and  sit  together  by  one, 
encircling  him  on  all  sides  ; 

When  adversity  befalleth  him,  all  abandon  him  and  no- 
body cometh  near  him. 

The  wife  of  one’s  home  who  hath  been  dearly  loved,  and 
who  hath  ever  been  attached  to  her  husband. 

On  the  departure  of  his  soul  from  his  body  fieeth  away 
crying,  ‘ Ghost ! ghost ! ’ 

Such  is  the  conduct  of  those  whom  we  love  : 

At  the  last  moment,  Nanak,  none  but  God  is  of  any  avail. 

Dhanasari 

I 

0 Sir,  why  goest  thou  to  search  in  the  forest  ? 

God.  ever  apart  dwelleth  everywhere,  and  is  con- 

tained  even  in  thee. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  403 

As  in  flowers  there  is  odour  and  in  a mirror  reflection, 

So  God  dwelleth  continually  in  thy  heart ; search  for  Him 
there,  O brother. 

Whether  thou  art  abroad  or  at  home,  know  that  there  is 
but  one  God  ; this  knowledge  the  Guru  hath  given  me. 

Nanak,  without  knowing  thyself  the  scum  of  doubt  shall 
not  be  removed. 

II 

0 good  people,  this  world  hath  been  led  astray  by  super- 
stition ; 

It  hath  forsaken  the  memory  of  God’s  name,  and  it  hath 
been  sold  to  mammon. 

It  is  involved  in  the  love  of  mother,  father,  brother,  son, 
and  wife ; 

Day  and  night  it  is  mad  with  the  intoxication  of  youth, 
wealth,  and  splendour ; 

It  is  not  attached  to  Him  who  is  compassionate  to  the 
poor  and  ever  the  Destroyer  of  sorrow. 

Nanak,  among  millions  few  there  are  who  become  attached 
to  the  Guru  and  recognize  God. 

III 

Think  not  that  that  Jogi 

In  whose  heart  thou  recognizest  covetousness,  worldly 
love,  and  selfishness  is  united  with  God. 

He  who  neither  calumniateth  nor  flattereth  others,  to 
whom  gold  and  iron  are  the  same. 

And  who  is  free  from  joy  or  sorrow,  is  properly  called 
a Jogi. 

The  restless  mind  of  man  hasteth  in  every  direction,  but 
whoever  steadily  fixeth  it, 

Saith  Nanak,  thou  mayest  rest  assured  is  saved. 

IV 

What  effort  shall  I now  make 

That  my  mental  anxiety  may  be  at  an  end,  and  I may 
cross  the  terrible  ocean  ? 

1 have  done  nothing  good  since  I was  born,  wherefore  I 
fear  the  more ; 

D d 2 


404 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


I have  not  sung  God’s  praises  in  thought,  word,  or  deed  ; 
in  my  heart  I feel  anxious  regarding  this  ; 

Although  I have  heard  the  Guru’s  instruction,  yet  no 
spiritual  knowledge  hath  resulted ; I fill  my  belly  like  a 
beast — 

Saith  Nanak,  O God,  adopt  Thy  daily  practice  of  for- 
giveness, and  I a sinner  shall  be  saved. 

Jaitsari 

I 

My  erring  mind  hath  been  entangled  with  mammon  ; 

The  more  works  I performed  when  devoted  to  avarice, 
the  more  I entangled  myself ; 

I had  no  understanding,  I devoted  myself  to  sinful  plea- 
sures, and  I forgot  God’s  praises  ; 

The  Lord  who  was  with  me  I did  not  recognize,  I ran 
searching  for  Him  into  the  forest. 

The  jewel  of  God  was  in  my  heart,  but  I knew  it  not. 

Nanak,  without  worshipping  God  life  is  lost  in  vain. 

II 

0 God,  preserve  mine  honour  : 

When  the  fear  of  Death  entered  my  heart,  I clung  to  Thine 
asylum,  O Ocean  of  mercy. 

1 was  a great  sinner,  stupid  and  avaricious,  but  I have 
now  grown  weary  of  committing  sin. 

I have  not  forgotten  the  fear  of  Death  ; in  my  anxiety 
my  body  hath  wasted  away, 

I have  been  running  in  every  direction  contriving  plans 
for  my  salvation ; 

But  though  the  pure  God  dwelt  in  my  heart,  1 knew  it  not. 

I have  no  virtues  nor  have  I performed  devotion  or  pen- 
ance : what  work  shall  I now  perform  ? 

Nanak,  I have  grown  weary  and  have  sought  Thy  pro- 
tection ; 0 God,  grant  me  salvation. 

III 

0 man,  embrace  true  instruction. 

Admit  that  without  the  name  of  God  all  this  world  is 
false ; 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  405 

Know  that  the  Lord,  for  whom  the  Jogis  grow  weary  of 
searching  without  finding  His  limit, 

Is  near  thee,  but  without  form  or  outline. 

God’s  name  is  the  purifier  of  the  world,  yet  thou  hast 
never  remembered  it. 

Saith  Nanak,  I have  entered  Thine  asylum ; O Thou  to 
whom  the  world  boweth  down,  preserve  me  as  is  Thy 
practice. 

Todi 

What  shall  I say  of  my  baseness  ? 

I have  been  entangled  in  the  love  of  gold  and  woman,  and 
have  not  sung  God’s  praises. 

Believing  this  false  world  to  be  true  I conceived  an  attach- 
ment for  it ; 

I never  remembered  the  Protector  of  the  poor,  who  is 
my  companion  and  helper  ; 

I remained  night  and  day  absorbed  in  worldly  affairs, 
and  the  filth  of  my  heart  forsook  me  not. 

Saith  Nanak,  I have  now  nowhere  salvation  except  in  the 
protection  of  God. 

Tilang 

I 

O mortal,  if  thou  have  wisdom,  then  think  of  God  night 
and  day  ; 

Every  moment  life  is  passing  away  like  water  from  a 
cracked  vessel. 

Why  singest  thou  not  the  praises  of  God,  thou  ignorant 
fool  ? 

Attached  to  false  avarice  thou  hast  not  thought  of  death  ; 

No  harm  hath  yet  been  done  if  thou  even  now  sing  God’s 
praises. 

Saith  Nanak,  by  singing  them  thou  shalt  obtain  the  fear- 
less dignity. 

II 

Awake,  O man,  awake  ; why  dost  thou  heedlessly  sleep  ? 

The  body  which  was  born  with  thee  shall  not  depart  with 
thee  ; 


4o6  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  mother,  father,  sons,  and  relatives  whom  thou 
lovest, 

Will  throw  thy  body  into  the  fire  when  the  soul  departeth 
from  it. 

. Know  that  the  affairs  of  the  world  last  only  during  life. 

Nanak,  sing  God’s  praises  ; everything  is  like  a dream. 

Ill 

O man,  sing  the  praises  of  God  who  is  with  thee  : 

The  opportunity  is  passing  away,  obey  my  words. 

Thou  hast  loved  too  well  wealth,  equipages,  women,  and 
empire. 

When  Death’s  noose  falleth  on  thy  neck,  all  shall  become 
the  property  of  others. 

O madman,  thou  hast  intentionally  ruined  thine  affairs  ; 

Thou  didst  not  shrink  from  the  commission  of  sin  or 
dismiss  pride. 

Hear,  O my  brother,  how  the  Guru  hath  instructed  me. 

Nanak  loudly  proclaimeth — seek  God’s  protection. 

Bilawal 

I 

Recognize  God’s  name  as  the  remover  of  sorrow  : 

Know  in  thy  heart  that  by  remembering  Him  Ajamal  and 
the  courtesan  were  saved  ; 

The  elephant’s  fear  departed  directly  he  muttered  God’s 
name. 

The  boy  Dhru  listened  to  Narad’s  instruction,  and  became 
engrossed  in  worship ; 

He  obtained  the  durable,  immortal,  and  fearless  rank,  and 
the  world  was  amazed. 

Nanak  saith,  admit  that  God  the  Protector  of  saints  is 
near  thee. 

II 

Without  God’s  name  thou  shalt  suffer  ; 

Without  piety  doubts  are  not  at  an  end  ; the  Guru  gave 
me  this  secret. 

If  thou  enter  not  God’s  asylum,  what  shall  pilgrimage 
and  fasting  avail  thee  ? 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  407 

Be  assured  that  the  practice  of  Jog  and  sacrificial  feasts 
are  fruitless  if  man  forget  the  praises  of  God. 

Such  man  as  layeth  aside  both  pride  and  worldly  love, 
and  singeth  God’s  praises, 

Saith  Nanak,  shall  be  said  to  have  obtained  salvation, 
during  life. 

Ill 

He  in  whom  there  is  no  devotion  to  God, 

Hath  lost  his  life  in  vain  ; bear  this  in  mind. 

I speak  verily  unto  you ; believe  his  piety  to  be  fruitless 

Who  performeth  pilgrimage  and  even  fasting,  but  who 
hath  not  control  over  his  heart. 

As  water  penetrateth  not  stone  immersed  in  it. 

So  deem  that  mortal  who  worshippeth  not.^ 

In  the  Kal  age  salvation  is  obtained  by  the  name  of  God  ; 
the  Guru  discloseth  this  secret. 

Saith  Nanak,  he  is  a great  man  who  singeth  God’s  praises. 

Ramkali 

I 

O my  soul,  take  shelter  in  God’s  name  ; 

By  remembering  it  evil  thoughts  are  dispelled,  and  the 
rank  of  nirvan  obtained. 

Know  that  that  man  is  very  fortunate  who  singeth  God’s 
praises  ; 

Having  lost  the  sins  of  different  births  he  shall  go  to 
heaven. 

At  the  last  moment  Ajamal  thought  of  God, 

And  obtained  in  an  instant  the  state  which  superior  J ogis 
desire. 

The  elephant  had  no  merits,  no  learning,  and  what 
religious  ceremonies  had  he  performed  ? 

Yet,  O Nanak,  behold  the  daily  practice  of  God  who 
granted  him  safety. 

II 

O my  good  people,  what  way  shall  man  now  adopt 

By  which  all  evil  thoughts  may  be  dispelled  and  his  heart 
be  steeped  in  devotion  to  God. 

’ Religious  instruction  will  have  no  effect  on  his  hard  heart. 


4o8  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

The  heart  remaineth  entangled  by  mammon,  and  knoweth 
naught  of  divine  knowledge. 

Whose  name  is  that  in  the  world  by  remembering  which 
thou  shalt  obtain  the  rank  of  nirvan  ? 

When  the  saints  were  compassionate  and  kind  they  taught 
me  this — 

Know  that  he  who  hath  sung  God’s  praises  hath  performed 
all  religious  duties ; 

And  he  who  night  and  day  claspeth  God’s  name  to  his 
heart,  even  for  a moment. 

Shall  lose  all  fear  of  Death  and  reform  his  life. 

Ill 

O mortal,  think  of  God  : 

Every  moment  life  decreaseth  ; night  and  day  it  passeth 
away  in  vain. 

Thou  hast  lost  thy  youth  in  sensual  pleasures  and  thy 
childhood  in  ignorance ; 

Thou  hast  grown  old  and  even  now  thou  understandest 
not  in  what  folly  thou  art  entangled. 

Why  hast  thou  forgotten  God  who  gave  thee  human 
birth  ? 

Thou  hast  not  sung  for  a moment  the  praises  of  Him  by 
remembering  whom  man  obtaineth  salvation. 

Why  art  thou  proud  of  worldly  wealth  ? it  will  not  depart 
with  any  one. 

Nanak  saith,  think  upon  the  Fulfiller  of  desires  ; He  will 
be  our  Helper  at  last. 


Maru 

I 

God’s  name  ever  bestoweth  comfort ; 

By  remembering  it  Ajamal  was  saved,  and  the  courtesan 
also  obtained  delive'rance ; 

Panchali  * at  the  royal  assemblage  remembered  the  name 
of  God ; 

^ Yudhishtar,  the  eldest  of  the  five  Pandav  princes,  staked  his  king- 
dom, his  brothers,  himself,  and  lastly  his  wife  Draupadi  in  a gambling 
match  with  Duryodhan  the  eldest  of  the  Kaurav  princes,  and  lost  them 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  409 

The  Merciful  One  removed  her  suffering  and  enhanced 
His  own  renown.  - 

The  Oceein  of  mercy,  assisteth  whomsoever  hath  sung 
His  praises ; 

Saith  Nanak,  relying  on  this  I have  come  and  sought 
His  protection. 

II 

Now  what  shall  I do,  0 mother  ? 

I have  lost  my  whole  life  in  sensual  pleasures  and  have 
not  remembered  God. 

When  Death  throweth  his  halter  on  my  neck,  I shall  have 
lost  all  my  reason.^ 

Except  the  name  of  God  what  shall  assist  me  in  that 
affliction  ? 

The  wealth  thou  deemest  thine  own  becometh  in  one 
moment  another’s. 

Saith  Nanak,  I have  been  reflecting  in  my  mind  that 
I have  never  sung  God’s  praises. 

III 

0 mother,  I have  not  renounced  the  pride  of  my  heart ; 

1 have  passed  my  life  in  the  intoxication  of  worldly  love, 
and  have  not  applied  myself  to  the  worship  of  God. 

When  Death’s  mace  fell  upon  my  head,  then  I awoke  from 
my  slumber. 

But  what  availeth  present  repentance  ? I shall  not  escape 
even  by  running.* 

When  this  thought  arose  in  my  mind  I fell  in  love  with 
the  Guru’s  feet. 

Life  is  only  profitable,  Nanak,  when  we  are  absorbed  in 
God’s  praises. 

all.  Duryodhan  finding  himself  in  possession  of  Draupadi  ordered  her 
to  sweep  his  house.  On  her  refusal  she  was  dragged  by  Dhusasan, 
Duryodhan’s  brother,  before  an  assemblage  of  the  KaUravs.  He 
endeavoured  to  pull  off  her  clothes,  but  God  saved  her  from  disgrace. 
Draupadi  is  here  called  Panchali,  for  she  was  daughter  of  Drupad 
the  king  of  Panchal. 

^ I shall  have  no  consciousness  to  repent  and  make  up  for  lost 
opportunities. 

* Also  translated — Unfortunate  that  I am,  I shall  not  escape. 


4IQ  i i liHE  SIKH  RELIGION 

Basant 

I 

O jgood  people,  know  tl^at  this  body  is  temporary  ; 

The  God  who  dwelleth  within  it  recognize  as  permanent. 

This  world  is  like  wealth  obtained  in  a dream ; why  be 
elated  on  beholding  it  ? 

Why  are  you  wrapped  up  in  it  ? nothing  shall  depart 
with  you. 

Renounce  both  flattery  and  slander  ; take  God’s  praises 
to  thy  heart. 

Nanak,  the  one  God  filleth  all  things. 

II 

The  sinner  hath  given  lust  a seat  in  his  heart ; ^ 

Wherefore  his  restless  mind  is  not  restrained. 

This  net  of  lust  is  cast 

Over  Jogis,  Jangams,  and  Sanyasis. 

They  who  remember  the  name  of  God 

Cross  over  the  terrible  ocean. 

The  slave  Nanak  hath  taken  refuge  in  God  ; 

Grant  me  Thy  name,  0 God,  that  I may  continue  to  sing 
Thy  praises. 


Ill 

O mother,  I have  obtained  God’s  name  as  my  wealth  ; 
My  heart  hath  ceased  to  wander  and  lain  down  to  rest. 
Worldly  love  and  selfishness  have  fled  from  my  body,  and 
pure  spiritual  knowledge  hath  sprung  up  in  me. 

Avarice  and  worldly  love  cannot  touch  me  ; I have  em- 
braced God’s  service. 

When  I acquired  the  jewel  of  the  Name,  the  fear  of  con- 
tinual birth  was  at  an  end. 

‘ When  all  covetousness  hath  departed  from  the  heart  it 
is  absorbed  in  special  happiness. 

He  to  whom  the  Ocean  of  mercy  is  compassionate,  singeth 
Hjis  praises. 


^ Also  translated — Man  hath  implanted  sinful  last  in  his  heart. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAiHADUR  411 

Saith  Nanak,  this  form  of  wealth  some  rare  holy  man 
obtaineth. 


IV 

O my  soul,  why  hast  thou  forgotten  God’s  name  ? 

When  the  body  perisheth  thou  shalt  have  to  do  with 
Death. 

This  world  is  a hill  of  smoke  ; 

What  induced  thee  to  consider  it  real  ? 

Understand  that  wealth,  wife,  property,  and  home 
Will  not  depart  with  thee  ; 

The  worship  of  God  alone  will  accompany  thee. 

Saith  Nanak,  adore  Him  with  unmixed  love. 

V 

Why  hast  thou  gone  astray  and  attached  thyself  to  false 
avarice  ? 

There  is  no  harm  done  if  even  to-day  thou  awake'. 

Know  that  this  world  is  like  a dream  ; 

It  will  be  destroyed  in  a moment ; accept  this  as  true. 
Adore  that  God  day  and  night,  O my  friend. 

Who  dwelleth  continually  with  thee. 

Sing  the  praises  of  Him, 

Saith  Nanak,  who  will  assist  thee  at  the  last  moment. 

Sarang 

I 

Thou  hast  no  helper  but  God  ; 

Who  hath  a mother,  father,  son,  or  wife  ? who  hath  a 
brother  ? 

Of  all  the  wealth,  land,  and  property  which  thou  deemest 
thine  own, 

Nothing  shall  depart  with  thee  when  thou  diest ; why  art 
thou  wrapped  up  in  them  ? 

Thou  hast  not  increased  thy  love  for  Him  who  is  com- 
passionate to  the  poor  and  ever  the  Destroyer  of  misery. 

Nanak  saith,  the  whole  world  is  unreal  like  a nightly 
dream. 


41? 


OTE  SIKH  RELIGION 


II 

O my  soul,  why  art  thou  entangled  in  sensual  pleasures  ? 

In  this  world  none  may  remain  ; one  cometh  and  another 
goeth. 

Who  hath  body  and  wealth  ? who  hath  property  ? what 
shall  one  love  ? 

Everything  which  is  visible  shall  vanish  like  the  shadow 
of  a cloud. 

Lay  aside  pride,  grasp  the  protection  of  the  saints,  and 
thou  shalt  at  once  obtain  salvation. 

Nanak,  without  worshipping  God  there  is  no  happiness 
even  in  one’s  dreams. 


III 

Why,  0 man,  hast  thou  wasted  thy  life  ? 

Intoxicated  by  worldly  love  thou  hast  attached  thyself 
to  sensual  pleasures  and  not  entered  God’s  protection. 

This  world  is  all  a dream  ; so  why  art  thou  covetous  ? 

Everything  that  was  created  shall  perish ; nothing  shall  be 
allowed  to  remain. 

This  temporary  body  thou  deemest  permanent ; in  this 
way  hast  thou  entangled  thyself. 

Nanak,  Only  he  who  applieth  his  mind  to  the  adoration 
of  God,  shall  obtain  salvation  in  this  world.^ 

IV 

I never  heartily  sang  the  praises  of  God  ; 

I remained  attached  to  sensual  pleasures  night  and  day, 
and  did  what  pleased  myself. 

I never  carefully  listened  to  the  Guru’s  instruction  : I 
became  entangled  with  others’  wives. 

I busied  myself  greatly  in  calumniating  others,  and  under- 
stood not  the  counsels  I received. 

How  far  shall  I describe  my  acts — how  I have  wasted 
my  life  ? 

Saith  Nanak,  in  me  are  all  demerits  ; protect  me,  O God, 
I have  come  td  thy  sanctuary. 

^ That  is,  shall  obtain  salvation  during  life. 


HYMNS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  413 

Jaijawanti^^ 

I 

Remember  God,  remember  God,  this  is  thy  duty  ; 

Abandon  the  companionship  of  worldly  love ; cling  to 
God’s  sanctuary ; admit  that  the  pleasures  of  the  world  are 
false  ; everything  is  unreal. 

Consider  wealth  as  a dream ; of  what  art  thou  proud  ? 
the  empire  of  the  earth  is  as  a wall  of  sand. 

The  slave  Nanak  saith,  thy  body  shall  be  destroyed ; 
yesterday  passed  away  moment  by  moment,  so  also  shall 
to-day. 

II 

Adore  God,  adore  God  ; thy  life  passeth  away. 

Why  should  I warn  thee  every  moment  ? why  under- 
standest  thou  not,  O fool  ? The  body  is  like  hail,  it  vanisheth 
in  a moment. 

Reject  all  doubt  and  repeat  God’s  name ; at  the  last 
moment  this  alone  will  depart  with  thee. 

Forsake  sensual  pleasures  as  poison ; take  the  praise  of 
God  to  thy  heart ; Nanak  proclaimeth,  the  opportunity  is 
passing  away. 

III 

O man,  what  shall  be  thy  condition  ? 

In  this  world  the  only  means  of  salvation  is  God’s  name 
to  which  thou  hast  not  attentively  listened ; thou  hast 
been  excessively  addicted  to  sensual  pleasures,  and  not 
diverted  thy  thoughts  from  them. 

Thou  hast  obtained  human  life,  yet  thou  hast  not  FiCmem- 
bered  God  for  a moment ; thou  hast  been  in  subjection  to 
the  charms  of  woman  and  thy  feet  are  fettered. 

Nanak  proclaimeth,  the  extension  of  the  world  is  like 
a dream  ; why  thinkest  thou  not  upon  God  to  whom  mam- 
mon is  but  a handmaiden  ? ® 

IV 

Thy  life  shall  pass  away,  shall  pass  away  in  vain  ; 

Though  thou  hearest  night  and  day  the  aiici^t  histories, 

^ The  ninth  is  the  only  Guru  who  has  written  in  this  measure. 

* Why  worship  the  setvant  instead  of  the  Master  ? 


414 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION  ‘ 


yet,  O silly  man,  thou  understandest  them  not ; Death  hath 
arrived  ; whither  shalt  thou  flee  ? 

That  body  of  thine  which  thou  thinkest  permanent  shall 
become  diist ; why  repeatest  thou  not  the  name  of  God, 
thoii  shameless  fool  ? 

Introduce  the  service  of  God  into  thy  heart ; renounce 
mental  pride,  so  shalt  thou,  Nan^k  asserteth,  be  illustrious 
iri  the  world. 


SLOKS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR 


I 

He  who  singeth  not  God’s  praises  rendereth  his  life 
useless  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  worship  God,  O my  soul,  as  the  fish  lovdh 
water.  jj 

Why  art  thou  enamoured  of  the  deadly  sins  ? thou  re- 
nouncest  them  not  for  a moment. 

Saith  Nanak,  repeat  God’s  name,  O my  soul,  so  that 
Death’s  noose  may  not  fall  on  thee. 


Ill 

Youth  hath  passed  away  in  vain,  old  age  hath  overcome 
the  body ; 

Saith  Nanak,  worship  God,  O my  soul,  thy  life  passeth 
away.  ^ 

Thou  hast  become  old  ; knowest  thou  not  that  thy  time 
hath  arrived  ? 

Saith  Nanak,  0 crazy  man,  why  worshippest  thou  not 
Gdd  ? y 

Wealth,  wife,  riches,  all  that  thou  deemest  thine  own— 

None  of  these  shall  depart  with  thee  ; Nanak,  know  this 
as  true.  yj 

God  is  the  Saviour  of  sii^ners,  the  Dispelier  of  fear,  the 
Lord  of  the  helpless ; , , 

Saith  Nanak,  know  Him,  He  dwelleth  ever  with  thee. 


SLOKS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  415 

VII 

Thou  hast  not  loved  Him  who  gave  thee  a human  body 
and  wealth : 

Saith  Nanak,  O crazy  man,  why  dost  thou  abjectly 
tremble  ? 

VIII 

Saith  Nanak,  hear  O man,  why  rememberest  thou  not 
God  ' 

Who  gave  thee  human  body,  wife,  wealth,  prosperity, 
and  commodious  mansions  ? 

IX 

God  and  no  other  is  the  Bestower  of  all  happiness  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O man,  by  remembering  Him  deliver- 
ance is  obtained. 

X 

Adore  God,  O my  friend,  by  remembering  Him  deliver- 
ance is  obtained ; 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  0 man,  life  is  ever  growing  shorter. 

XI 

O clever  and  wise  man,  know  that  thy  body  is  composed 
of  five  elements ; 

Be  sure,  Nanak,  that  thou  shalt  blend  with  that  from 
which  thou  hast  sprung. 


XII 

The  saints  proclaim  that  God  dweUeth  in  every  heart — 
Saith  Nanak,  adore  Him,  O man,  and  thou  shalt  cross 
Over  the  terrible  ocean. 


XIII 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O man,  in  God’s  image  is  he 
Who  is  unaffected  by  weal  or  woe,  by  covetousness, 
worldly  love,  or  pride. 

XIV 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O man,  know  that  he  is  saved 
Who  utteveth  neither  praise  nor  blame,  and  to  whoih  gold 
and  iron  are  the  same. 


4i6  the  SIKH  RELIGION 

XV 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O man,  know  that  he  is  saved 

Who  feeleth  neither  joy  nor  sorrow,  and  who  treateth  an 
enemy  and  a friend  as  the  same. 

XVI 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O man,  call  him  a person  possessed  of 
divine  knowledge. 

Who  inspireth  no  fear,  and  who  hath  no  fear  of  others. 

XVII 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O man,  good  fortune  is  inscribed  on 
that  man’s  forehead. 

Who  hath  abandoned  all  evil  passions,  and  donned  the 
garb  of  retirement. 

XVIII 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  0 man,  God  dwelleth  in  the  heart  of 
him 

Who  hath  abandoned  mammon  and  selfishness,  and  re- 
nounced everything. 

XIX 

The  man  who  having  renounced  selfishness  recognizeth 
God  as  the  Creator, 

Saith  Nanak,  is  saved  ; be  sure,  my  soul,  that  this  is  true. 

XX 

In  the  Kal  age  God’s  name  is  the  destroyer  of  fear  and 
the  banisher  of  evil  thoughts  ; 

He  who  night  and  day  repeateth  it,  Nanak,  shall  be  suc- 
cessful in  his  undertakings. 


XXI 

Utter  God’s  praises  with  thy  tongue,  and  hear  God’s 
name  with  thine  ears  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O man,  thou  shaft  not  then  be  put 
into  Death’s  prison. 


SLOKS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  417 


XXII 

The  mortal  who  renoimceth  selfishness,  covetousness, 
worldly  love,  and  conceit,  . 

Saith  Nanak,  shall  be  saved  himself  and  shall  save  others. 

XXIII 

Know  that  the  world  is  like  a dream  or  ^ a play  ; 

There  is  nothing  real  in  it,  Nanak,  but  God. 

XXIV 

Day  and  night  mortal  wandereth  after  wealth  ; 

Among  millions,  0 Nanak,  few  there  are  who  remember 
God. 

XXV 

As  bubbles  are  formed  from  water  and  continually  dis- 
appear ; 

So  was  this  world  constructed,^  saith  Nanak;  hear  this, 
O my  friend. 

XXVI 

Mortal,  blinded  by  the  intoxication  of  mammon,  payeth 
no  heed  to  anything  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  without  uttering  God’s  name  Death’s  noose 
shall  fall  on  him. 

XXVII 

If  thou  desire  eternal  happiness  take  God’s  protection  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O man,  difficult  of  attainment  is 
human  birth. 

XXVIII 

Fools  and  ignorant  people  run  after  wealth  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  without  repeating  God’s  name  their  lives 
pass  in  vain. 

XXIX 

Know  that  that  mortal  is  like  God  who  worshippeth  night 
and  day ; 

Between  God’s  saint  and  God  there  is  no  difference ; 
Nanak,  recognize  that  this  is  true. 

^ Ar  in  the  original.  The  word,  however,  generally  means  ‘and.’ 

® That  is,  men  are  born  and  die  like  bubbles. 

Ee 


SIKH.  IV 


4i8  the  SIKH  religion 

XXX 

Man  is  entangled  with  mammon  and  forgetteth  God’s 
name ; 

Saith  Nanak,  without  repeating  God’s  name  of  what 
avail  is  life  ? 

XXXI 

Mortal  blinded  by  the  intoxication  of  mammon  remem- 
bereth  not  God ; 

Saith  Nanak,  without  worshipping  God  Death’s  noose 
shall  fall  on  man. 

XXXII 

Man  shall  find  many  companions  in  weal,  but  none  in 
woe ; 

Saith  Nanak,  worship  God,  O man,  and  He  will  assist 
thee  at  the  last  moment. 


XXXIII 

Man  wandereth  about  in  various  births  without  having 
his  fear  of  death  removed  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  O man,  worship  God,  and  thou  shalt  dwell 
in  the  fearless  state. 

XXXIV 

I have  made  many  efforts,  but  have  not  effaced  the  pride 
of  my  heart ; 

I am  bound  by  my  evil  thoughts,  saith  Nanak ; preserve 
me  from  them,  O God. 

XXXV 

Know  that  there  are  three  stages  of  life,  childhood,  youth, 
and  then  old  age  ; 

Saith  Nanak,  admit  that  they  are  all  in  vain  without 
worshipping  God. 

XXXVI 

What  thou  oughtest  to  have  done  thou  hast  not  done ; 
thou  hast  fallen  into  the  net  of  covetousness  ; 

Nanak,  the  opportunity  hath  now  passed  away ; why 
weepest  thou,  O blind  man  ? 


SLOKS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  419 

XXXVII 

The  heart  is  absorbed  in  mammon  and  cannot  escape 
from  it,  O my  friend ; 

As  a picture  painted  on  a wall,  0 Nanak,  leaveth  it  not, 
XXXVIII 

Man  desireth  one  thing,  but  something  different  hap- 
peneth  ; 

He  meditateth  deceiving  others,  O Nanak,  and  a halter 
is  put  round  his  neck. 

XXXIX 

Man  maketh  many  efforts  to  obtain  happiness,  but  none 
to  obtain  misery ; ^ 

Saith  Nanak,  hear,  O man,  what  pleaseth  God  happeneth. 

XL 

The  world  goeth  about  begging  ; God  is  the  Bestower 
of  all ; 

Saith  Nanak,  remember  Him,  O man,  and  thy  desires 
shall  be  fulfilled. 

XLI 

Why  entertainest  thou  false  pride  ? Know  that  the 
world  is  like  a dream  ; 

In  it  there  is  nothing  which  is  thine,  Nanak  preacheth. 

XLII 

Man  is  proud  of  his  body  which  perisheth  in  a moment, 
my  friend  ; 

The  man  who  reciteth  God’s  praises,  Nanak,  hath  con- 
quered the  world. 

XLIII 

Know  that  he  in  whose  heart  there  is  recollection  of  God, 
hath  obtained  salvation  ; 

Between  that  man  and  God  there  is  no  difference  ; Nanak, 
accept  this  as  a fact. 

XLIV 

Consider  that  person,  O Nanak,  as  a hog  or  a dog 

In  whose  heart  there  is  no  devotion  to  the  one  God. 

^ It  comes  of  itself  according  to  prenatal  acts.  \ 


420 


THE  SIKH  RELIGION 


XLV 

As  a dog  never  abandoneth  his  master’s  house, 

Nanak,  in  the  same  way  worship  God  with  single  mind 
and.  single  heart. 

XLVI 

Going  on  pilgrimages,  fasting,  and  giving  alms,  while 
pride  is  in  the  heart, 

Nanak,  these  things  are  as  fruitless  as  an  elephant’s 
bathing.^ 

XLVII 

Thy  head  shaketh,  thy  legs  totter,  thine  eyes  are  devoid 
of  lustre ; 

Saith  Nanak,  this  is  the  case  with  thee,  yet  thou  art  not 
absorbed  in  God’s  love. 

XLVIII 

I have  particularly  observed  that  in  this  world  no  one  is 
another’s  friend ; 

Nanak,  only  devotion  to  God  is  permanent ; preserve 
that  in  thy  heart. 

XLIX 

Know,  my  friend,  that  the  structure  of  the  world  is  all 
unstable ; 

Saith  Nanak,  like  a wall  of  sand  it  is  not  permanent. 

L 

Ram  passed  away,  Rawan  passed  away  with  his  large 
family ; 

Saith  Nanak,  nothing  is  permanent ; the  world  is  like 
a dream. 

LI 

Be  anxious  only  regarding  what  is  not  expected  ; 2 

^ There  can  be  no  purity  as  long  as  sin  dwells  in  the  heart ; ablutions 
will  then  be  like  those  of  the  elephant  which  after  being  bathed  be- 
spatters himself  with  mud. 

• If  thy  friends  die,  weep  not  over  much  for  them,  as  their  death 
is  certain. 


SLOKS  OF  GURU  TEG  BAHADUR  421 


It  is  the  way  of  the  world,  Nanak,  that  nothing  is  per- 
manent. 


LII 


What  is  born  dieth  to-day,  to-morrow,  or  the  next  day  ; 
Nanak,  sing  God’s  praises,  and  lay  aside  all  entangle- 
ments. 

LVIU 


God’s  name  to  which  nothing  is  equal  I have  clasped  to 
my  heart ; 

By  remembering  it  my  troubles  are  at  an  end,  and  I 
behold  Thee,  O God  ! 


1 Sloks  LIII,  LIV,  LV,  and  LVI  have  already  been  given  in  the 
Life  of  Guru  Teg  Bahadur. 


END  OF  VOL.  IV 


OXFORD 

PRINTED  AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
BY  HORACE  HART,  M.A. 
PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY 


^ snFT^Ht, 

BahadufShastri National  Academy  of  Administration  Library 

. Q, 

MUSSOORIE  |0^'>0'^ 

JT5  5?cr^  F^TP^TtF^cr  cTTTt^  ^iFtr^r  ^TJft  1 1 

This  book  is  to  be  returned  on  the  date  last  stamped. 


294«6 

Mac 

v,3 

Class  No. 


^’s3TT  loiO^'O 
Acc  No.  -%?8- 

Book  No. 


Author 


Titie_jai^  slkh^neligioiu 


Date  of  Issue! 


Borrower's  No.  I Siqnature 


^54-6  ^ 

LIBRARY 

y*0  LAb  BAHADUR  8HA8TRI 

National  Academy  of  Administration 

MUSSOORIE 


Accession  No*, 

V Books  sre  Issued  for  15  days  only  but 
may  have  to  be  recalled  earlier  If  urgen- 
tly required. 

2.  An  over-due  charge  of  25  Raise  per  day 
per  volume  will  be  charged. 

3.  Books  may  be  renewed  on  request,  at 
the  discretion  of  the  Librarian. 

4.  Periodicals,  Rare  and  Refrence  books 
may  not  be  Issued  and  may  be  con- 
sulted only  In  the  Library. 

6.  Books  lost,  defaced  or  Injured  in  any 
way  shall  have  to  be  replaced  or  Its 
double  price  shall  be  paid  by  the 
borrower.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 

i * 

j ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 

! CENTRAL 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 

ACCESSION NO 13815 

CALL No. 


D.G.A. 79 



*" ( '■rrdryR®$' 



m/ 


I 


THE SIKH RELIGION w 


ITS GURUS, SACRED WRITINGS 

AND AUTHORS ' , r V 

BY 

MAX ARTHUR MACAU LI FFE 

£ 

J 

■gref irkt t, §r? ’gfafr , w*. 

The egg of superstition hath burst; the 
mind is illumined : 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet 
and freed the captive. 

Guru Arjan 



AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 



fHUffTF *L 

u y:. ' 

Ace. Ns’ 
Date . ■ 
Cali 


:' n ^r r>rj : r ^GiGA% 


i A 1 +. * t * fc .£«. *■■*.** 

/ 3 r/r~ 

J/.i. / a- 

• : j j *; 3 ^ -.«.■. •". 

^(X<_ 


v^ 3 jy 


HENRY KROWDF itf . 
-HUSH.H TO THE V„ IVB £ T rt 

^ «™*n£,'ZZZ nn 

T0R6NT ° *«*> -SL80UW* 



CONTENTS OF VOL. IV 


PAGE 

Life of Guru Har Gobind, the Sixth Guru . i 

Gur Das’s Analysis of Sikhism .... 241 

Life of Guru Har Rai, the Seventh Guru . 275 

Life of Guru Har Krishan, the Eighth Guru . 315 

Life of Guru Teg Bahadur, the Ninth Guru . 331 

Hymns of Guru Teg Bahadur .... 393 
Sloks of Guru Teg Bahadur .... 414 






GURU HAR GOBIND 


SIKH IV P. I 




LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND , 1 
THE SIXTH GURU 


Chapter I 

Ille ego qui quondam gracili modulatus avena 
Carmen 

nunc horrentia Martis 

Arm a virosque 2 cano. 

Lo! I the man whose muse whilom did mask, 

As time her taught, in lowly shepherd's weeds, 

Am now enforced — a far unfitter task — 

For trumpets stem to change mine oaten reeds. 

Spenser. 

The early life of Guru Har Gobind has already 
been given in the life of his father Guru Arjan. On 

1 Besides the life of the sixth Guru by Bhai Santokh Singh, men- 
tioned in the Introduction, there is another work called Gur Bilas 
on the same subject. The name of the author is not given. In the 
preface to it it is stated that Bhai Mani Singh went to Nankana, The 
ragis were singing Gur Das's compositions. When they came to the 
following — There were five cups, five priests, the great priest the 
sixth Guru sat on his throne — one Bhagat Singh, a devout Sikh of 
the locality, called upon Mani Singh to give an account of Guru Har 
Gobind, the sixth Guru. Mani Singh replied, 4 1 will relate to thee 
what Guru Gobind Singh told Bhai Daya Singh, and what the latter 
communicated to me.' One Dharm Singh was present, and heard 
Mani Singh's narrative. He gave its details to the author of the Gur 
Bilas , whom be had previously baptized. The author of the work 
states that he completed it in Sambat 1775 (a.d. 1718). Sardar 
Kahn Singh of Nabha, however, givefc it as his opinion that the work 
was compiled by Bhai Gurumukh Singh and Bhai Darbara Singh, 
a priest and a chorister respectively of the Sikh temple at Amritsar, 
and that they began their literary labour in the reign of Maharaja 
Ranjlt Singh and finished it in the reign of Maharaja Sher Singh. 

We are also indebted for several details of the life of Guru Har 
Gobind to a manuscript life of that Guru in the Panjabi language, and 
also to the Hindi work, Itihas Guru Khalsa , of Sadhu Gobind Singh 
of Banaras. 

2 Virgil had only one hero ; we have several. 

B 


SIKH. IV 



• 2 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


ascertaining his father’s death, he caused the Grantli 
Sahib to he read, and employed Bhai Budha for 
the purpose. The musicians of the temple sang the 
Gurus’ hymns to the accompaniment of their instru- 
ments. The singing and the reading of the Granth 
Sahib lasted for ten days. 

When the final rites were ended, Bhai Budha 
clothed Guru Har Gobind in new raiment, and placed 
before him a seli — a woollen cord worn as a necklace 
or twisted round the head by the former Gurus — and 
a turban, as appurtenances of his calling. Guru Har 
Gobind ordered that the seli should be placed in the 
treasury, apparently because it was not suited to 
the altered political condition of the Sikhs. He 
then addressed Bhai Budha, * My endeavours shall 
be to fulfil thy prophecy. My seli shall be a sword- 
belt, and I shall wear my turban with a royal 
aigrette.’ He then sent for his arms, and arrayed 
himself in martial style so that, as the Sikh chronicler 
states, his splendour shone like the sun. 

Guru Har Gobind then, according to the custom 
usual on such occasions, summoned all his Sikhs, 
and invited the principal inhabitants of Amritsar 
to a banquet. He caused a large quantity of sacred 
food to be made and brought into the temple for 
the entertainment of his guests. While Bhai Budha 
read the Granth Sahib in the middle of a well-ordered 
assembly, Gur Das stood and waved a gorgeous 
chauri over the sacred volume. When the reading 
was ended, all the assembly reverently bowed their 
heads. The singers again began to sing the Gurus’ 
hymns. The Sadd was intoned and a solemn prayer 
offered. The Guru reaffirmed instructions for the 
guidance of future generations of Sikhs in the per- 
formance of obsequies : — 

' When a Sikh dieth, let not the obsequies of Hindus 
be performed for him. Let sacred food be prepared 
and distributed, let the Granth Sahib be intoned and 
a solemn prayer offered, as I caused to be done on 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


hearing of my father’s death. That is the way to 
prepare for the deceased a passage to Sach Khand.’ 

Only one body of men among his followers were 
dissatisfied at his accession. The masands, who 
used to collect offerings and tithes from the Sikhs, 
had become very corrupt and dishonest, and they 
now trembled for their misdeeds. They represented 
to the Guru’s mother, ‘ It is the reign of the 
Mughals. We have nobody of mature age to guide 
and protect us. The Guru is yet a boy. Chandu 
is still an enemy. The Guru girdeth on his arms, 
but for faqirs to lord it over men is a course that 
involveth peril. The preceding five Gurus never 
handled arms. If Jahangir hear of our Guru’s 
doings he will be angry ; and where shall we hide 
ourselves ? ’ The Guru’s mother replied, ‘ Have no 
anxiety. Guru Nanak’s hand is on my son’s head. 
The Guru ever liveth. Bhai Budha’s words, that 
Har Gobind shall be a temporal as well as spiritual 
ruler and shall wield two swords, are about to be 
fulfilled.’ Notwithstanding, however, the courageous 
face she showed the masands, she remonstrated with 
the young Guru. ‘ My son, we have no treasure, 
no state revenue, no landed property, no army. 
If thou walk in the way of thy father and grand- 
father, thou shalt be happy.’ The Guru replied 
in the words of Guru Arjan : — 

The Lord who is the Searcher of all hearts 

Is my guardian . 1 

' Have no anxiety whatever for nie, everything shall 
be according to the will of God.’ 

The Guru then issued an encyclical letter to the 
masands to the effect that he would be pleased with 
those who brought offerings of arms and horses 
instead of money. On Monday, the fifth day of the 
light half of Har, Sambat 1663, he laid the founda- 
tion of the Takht Akal Bunga. When it was built 

1 Bhairo. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


- 4 

of solid masonry, he took his seat on it. It is the 
corridor of the golden temple whereon the Akalis 
now sit and the arms of the Gurus are preserved. 

Bhai Budha, too, on seeing the young Guru in 
military harness mildly remonstrated with him. 
The Guru replied, ‘ It is through thine intercession 
I obtained birth ; and it is in fulfilment of thy 
blessing I wear two swords as emblems of spiritual 
and temporal authority. In the Guru’s house 
religion and worldly enjoyment shall be combined — 
the caldron to supply the poor and needy and the 
scimitar to smite oppressors.’ 

Several warriors and wrestlers hearing of the 
Guru’s fame came to him for service. He enrolled 
as his body-guard fifty-two heroes who burned for 
the fray. This formed the nucleus of his future 
army. Five hundred youths then came to him for 
enlistment from the Manjha (the country between 
the Ravi and the Bias), the Doab (the country 
between the Bias and the Satluj), and the Malwa 1 
countries. These men told the Guru that they had 
no offerings to make him but their lives ; for pay 
they only required instruction in his religion ; and 
they professed themselves ready to die in his service. 
The Gum gave, them each a horse and weapons 
of war, and gladly enlisted them in his army. He 
made Bidhi Chand, Pirana, Jetha, Paira, and 
Langaha, each a captain of a troop of one hundred 
horse. 

After this several men out of employ and without 
a taste for manual labour flocked to the Guru’s 
standard. People began to wonder how he could 
continue to maintain such an army. The Guru 
quoted from Guru Arjan : — 

God putteth their food even before the insects which He 
created in rocks and stones ; 

1 Malwa comprises that portion of the Panjab formed by the Patiala, 
Nabha, Jind, and Faridkot feudatory states, and the British districts 
of Firozpur and Ludhiana. 



THE ARAL BUNGA 


SIKH IV P. 4 





LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


He provideth every one with his daily food ; why, 0 man, 
art thou afraid ? 1 

The Guru by quoting such passages and by his 
own hopefulness and force of character removed 
men’s fears. In a short time, besides such as 
required regular pay, hordes gathered round him, 
who were satisfied with two meals a day and a new 
uniform every half-year. 

Guru Har Gobind appears to have been the first 
Guru who systematically turned his attention to 
the chase. He rose before day, bathed, dressed 
himself in full armour, and then went to the Har 
Mandar — God’s temple — to worship. There he 
heard the Japji and the Asa ki War recited. He 
then preached to his Sikhs. After his sermon the 
Anand of Guru Amar Das and a concluding prayer 
were read. Upon this all repaired to breakfast 
which was distributed indiscriminately to the Guru’s 
troops and followers as they sat in rows for the pur- 
pose. The Guru was in the habit of afterwards 
taking rest for about an hour and then preparing for 
the chase. Accompanied by an army of forest 
beaters, hounds, tame leopards, and hawks of every 
variety, he used to sally forth and traverse long 
distances. 

Once a sadhu, or Hindu holy man, on seeing 
the Guru’s proceedings expressed contempt for him 
as a destroyer of life. The Guru quoted in justi- 
fication Guru Nanak’s verses on the subject of 
flesh. Upon this the holy man repented of his 
censure. 

Late in the afternoon the Guru used to sit on his 
throne, and give audience to his visitors and followers. 
Minstrels sang the Guru’s hymns and at twilight the 
‘ Sodar ’ was read. Then all stood up and with 
clasped hands, offered a prayer to the Almighty. 
At the conclusion of the service musical instruments 
of many sorts were played. The congregation then 

1 Gujaii. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


- 6 

bowed to the Guru, and all adjourned for their 
evening repast. A sacred concert was afterwards 
held in which hymns were sung in the Kalian and 
Kanra measures. Next followed the minstrel Ab- 
dulla’s martial songs to inspire the Sikhs with love 
of heroic deeds and dispel feelings unworthy of 
warriors. 

The Sohila was then read, after which the Guru 
retired to his private apartment. Before going to 
sleep he used to place his head on his mother's feet 
in respectful salutation and receive her blessing 
and embrace. 

The Guru was fond of reciting Guru Nanak’s com- 
positions to his Sikhs, particularly the following: — 

Thou art the Creator, the Arranger, 

Who having Thyself created the world recognized it as 

good. 

Thou art Thyself the True Guru, Thyself the Worshipper, 
Thyself the Creator of the universe. 

Thou art near, not distant. 

They who know this under the Guru’s instruction are 
perfect. 

There is profit in associating with them day and night ; 
this is the advantage of association with the Guru. 

In every age, O God, Thy saints are good. 

Their tongues are flavoured by singing Thy praises. 

They utter Thy praises, disregard misery and poverty, 
and have no apprehension from others. 

They remain awake and are never seen asleep. 

By serving up truth they save their associates and 
families. 

They have not the filth of sin ; they are spotless ; they 
abide in devotion and love. 

Ye men of God, understand the true Guru’s word. 

This youth is but for a moment ; 1 the body groweth old. 

0 mortal, thou shalt die to-day or to-morrow ; repeat 
God’s name and meditate on it in thy heart. 

1 Siis. Literally — for a breath. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


7 


0 mortal, eschew falsehood and flattery. 1 

Death flayeth and killeth the false one : 2 

The apostate suffereth for his falsehood and pride ; he 
is tormented in both worlds. 

Renounce slander and envy of others. 

Man is ruined by perpetual reading, and to him peace 
cometh not. 

In the company of the saints praise the Name, and the 
Supreme God will be your Helper. 

Renounce the sins of lust and wrath ; 

Renounce works of pride and covetousness. 

Enter the true Guru’s protection, and you shall be saved ; 
thus shall you cross the tenable ocean, my brethren. 

In front is a noisome river and a poisonous whirlpool of fire. 

There will be no one to assist, the soul must go alone. 

The fiery flood formeth hissing waves : through perverse- 
ness man falleth and is burned therein. 3 


Chapter II 

According to the Sikh chronicler the Guru rained 
instruction like clouds in Sawan, and the Sikhs 
flourished under it like thirsty rice-fields. All the 
Sikhs revived like vegetables in season, but Chandu’s 
heart shrivelled up like the poisonous akk and the 
camel-thorn in the monsoons. Chandu’s daughter 
was still un wedded. It is written in the ‘ Chanakya 
Niti ’ : 4 — 

Sleep cometh not at nights to three persons — 

1 Rabat a. From this word comes the well-known kabari, a man 
who sells to Anglo-Indians furniture purchased at auctions. 

2 Uchhaliara. Believed to be the Panjabi ucherna. Others suppose 

it to be uchhahta, to leap, and translate the line — Death will make 
a bound and destroy the false one. 3 Maru Solha. 

4 Chanakya was a Brahman friend of the monarch Chandragupta. 
He wrote a work on polity and ethics, and has been called the Indian 
Machiavelli. His Niti was translated under the order of Guru Gobind 
Singh into elegant Hindi verse by Sainapati. 


* 8 THE SIKH RELIGION 

A debtor, the father of a maid, and a man in fear of an 
enemy. 

Chandu had to expiate the crime of having been 
instrumental in killing Guru Arjan ; his daughter re- 
mained unwedded, and he feared the growing military 
power of Guru Har Gobind. Chandu’s aspirations, 
however, like those of a poor man remained unful- 
filled. One day he was vaunting in his wife’s pre- 
sence, that if she said but the word, he would send 
Guru Har Gobind to his father. She replied, ' My 
lord, a tree beareth fruit at the proper season ; I fear 
that the thorns which we formerly planted shall now 
prick us. I hear that the young Guru hath vowed 
to avenge his father. May God preserve us ! There 
is no reliance on Emperors. In a moment they 
become as if they had never known one. When 
we extended our enmity to Guru Arj an, what return 
did we obtain for it ? Our daughter is still un- 
wedded, and thou art in fear. Wherefore let us 
make peace with the Guru.’ 

Upon this Chandu wrote to the Guru, ‘ My 
daughter is virtuous. Make her thy slave. Thou 
art Guru, , I am the Emperor’s minister. A man’s 
dignity increaseth by an alliance with the exalted. 
If thou listen to my words, it shall be greatly to 
thine advantage. At present thou understandest not, 
but thou shalt hereafter. On a former occasion thy 
father’s Sikhs called me a dog. It did them no 
harm ; it was thy father who suffered for it. I have 
now forgotten my former enmity ; but if thou listen 
not to my words, I will serve thee as I did thy 
father.’ The perusal of this letter brought all his 
father’s sufferings and dishonour to the Guru’s 
mind, and galled him to the heart. He wrote in 
reply, ' What the Sikhs said is true. Even still 
thou utterest harsh words. Thou shalt assuredly 
suffer for all thy misdeeds. The torture thou didst 
inflict on such a philanthropic and peaceful Guru 
as my father, must bring its vengeance in time. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


9 * 

Thou shalt die trodden in the dust and dishonoured 
by shoe-beatings inflicted by pariahs. Guru Ram 
Das hath said : — 

He who taketh reckoning from the Guru, shall lose 
everything in this world and the next. 

He shall gnash his teeth, foam at the mouth, and perish 
talking wildly. 

He shall ever strive for more wealth, and even his former 
wealth shall flee away. 

What shall he earn, what shall he eat in whose heart is 
the pain of anxiety ? 

He who beareth enmity to him who is without it, taketh 
all the sins of the world on his own head. 

His mouth blistereth uttering the slander of his heart ; 
and he shall find no shelter in this world or the next. 

If he obtain gold it shall turn into ashes ; but, if he 
again enter the Guru’s protection, his previous sins shall 
be remitted. 

The slave Nanak meditateth night and day on the Name ; 
by remembering God his enormities and offences have been 
erased . 1 

‘ I act according to my father’s orders, and rely on 
his words which ever prove true. He hath said : — 

Creatures and their designs are in God’s power ; what 
He ordereth that must they do. 

When God is pleased, there is no need to fear. 

Sorrow shall never affect one by remembering Thee, O 
God. 

The ministers of Death shall never approach the Guru’s 
beloved Sikhs. 

The Cause of causes is all-powerful : there is none but 
Him. 

Nanak hath entered God’s asylum ; my mind is sup- 
ported by the True One’s strength . 2 

‘And as to what thou hast written that a marriage 
alliance with thy family shall be greatly to my 

1 Gauri ki War I. 2 Bilawal. 



'10 THE SIKH RELIGION 

dignity and advantage, my reply is in the words of 
Guru Arjan — 

He who withdrawing his heart from religion turneth it 
to worldly affairs, 

Shall be known as a sinner in both worlds. 

He who is pleasing to God is acceptable. 

God Himself knoweth His own power. 

He whom He causeth to perform the good acts of true 
religion, 

Shall not lose the viaticum of his faith, nor shall this 
world fail him. 

One God shineth in all things without interruption. 

Men remain at the different posts to which God appointed 
them. 

O my inaccessible, inapprehensible, and true Lord, 

Nanak speaketh as Thou causest him to speak.’ 1 

Chandu’s servant taking this reply to his master 
further inflamed his mind by expatiating on the 
Guru’s state and wealth. ‘ His glory,’ said the ser- 
vant, ‘ is twice, nay four times greater than that of 
any previous Guru. His predecessors used to sit 
on couches ; he sitteth upon a throne. He weareth 
arms, calleth himself the true king, taketh presents 
like an emperor, maintaineth an army of a thousand 
brave youths, and careth for nobody.’ 

Chandu found an opportunity of communicating 
this and the contents of the Guru’s letter to the 
Emperor Jahangir. He added on his own account, 

‘ Thy majesty summoned the present Guru’s father, 
Arj an, to Lahore and entrusted him to me. The pre- 
sent Guru hath on account of his father’s death 
vowed to take vengeance on thee. There is fear 
of an insurrection from his proceedings. If thou 
order me, I will watch his proceedings. Otherwise 
thou mayest summon him here, and admonish him. 
He hath grown too proud. Thrones are for 
emperors, not for beggars.’ 

1 Suhi. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND n * 

The Emperor sent Wazir Khan and Kind Beg 
to summon the Guru. Wazir Khan, who was 
really a Sikh, on noticing the Emperor’s manner and 
countenance divined his object, and began to plead 
for Guru Har Gobind. He said, ‘ I everywhere 
hear his praises — that he is a worshipper of the 
one God ; that, though young in years, he is old 
in wisdom, ability, and knowledge of men ; and 
that he hath worthily undertaken the duties of his 
high and onerous station.’ The Emperor concealed 
his disapproval of this speech, and merely ordered 
Wazir Khan and Kind Beg to go to Amritsar and 
invite Guru Har Gobind to visit him in Dihli. 

Before his departure for Amritsar Wazir Khan 
made another representation to the Emperor — ‘ I 
pray thy Majesty not to hold communication with 
any detractor of the Guru, and not to listen to any 
slander or calumny of him. The Guru hath no desire 
for empire. His wealth increaseth of itself by the 
power of his repetition of God’s name. When he 
arriveth here, thou shalt be well pleased with 
him.’ 

When the Guru heard the Emperor’s order from 
the lips of Wazir Khan, he said, ‘ The Emperor 
formerly summoned my father to Lahore, and fine 
service he performed for him ! Six years have now 
elapsed since my father’s death, and what hath the 
Emperor done to make reparation to my family ? ’ 
How can the subjects of such a monarch be happy ? 
Kind Beg replied, ‘ 0 Guru, the Emperor was power- 
less in the matter. It was really Guru Arjan himself 
who did this, for by his supernatural power he might 
have averted his fate. Thou art also to blame for 
not having caused Chandu to be punished. He hath 
now again reported to the Emperor that thou hast 
erected a throne for thyself, raised an army, and art 
preparing to contend with the imperial forces.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ It was not for my father to display 
miracles before the Emperor ; it is the evil man 



12 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


himself who reapeth the reward of his evil deeds. 
I shall give a reply on the morrow to His Majesty’s 
message.’ 

At the afternoon meeting of the Sikhs the question 
was discussed whether the Guru should go to meet 
the Emperor or not. Bhai Budha and Bhai Salo 
counselled the Guru to go. Other Sikhs, on the 
contrary, advised him to make some pretext and 
not put himself in the Emperor's power. The 
Guru in this difficulty went to consult his mother 
Ganga. When she heard of the Emperor’s sum- 
mons she remained silent. She sent for Bhai Salo, 
Bhai Jetha, and others to ask their advice, where- 
upon the following decision was arrived at — ‘The 
Emperor hath already caused us to apprehend harm 
from him. Guru Arjan went to him and never re- 
turned. We can now only regret that circumstance. 
Instead of the Guru let some trustworthy Sikhs 
wait on the Emperor. Should he desire to come 
here, we are all ready to resist him. The Sikhs are 
ready to sacrifice their lives to avenge Guru Arjan. 
We rejoice in our woodland life. The Emperor’s 
army will find it difficult to traverse the distance 
between us. Emperors are like cobras. One can 
only abide near them in trepidation and uncertainty. 
If the Emperor be angry at this determination, then 
war is the only resource.’ To this Mata Ganga 
added, ' The joy of my life was at an end when my 
husband separated from me. If my son now leave 
me, I cannot survive.’ 

The envoys invited Guru Har Gobind to make 
complaint to the Emperor against Chandu, and have 
his whole conduct thoroughly investigated. After 
consideration the Guru decided to appear before 
the Emperor. The envoys were very pleased. 
Wazir Khan reminded the Guru of the fact that his 
father Guru Arjan had cured him of dropsy and 
restored him to life. He professed to be the Guru’s 
disciple, and to desire the destruction of his enemy. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


13 * 

The Guru replied with the following slok of Guru 
Ram Das : — 

God’s saints worship God and magnify Him. 

The saints ever sing God’s praises ; God’s name bestoweth 
happiness. 

God ever bestoweth on His saints the greatness of the 
Name which ever increaseth. 

God hath seated His saints firmly in their homes 1 and 
protecteth His own honour. 

God will call for their accounts from the slanderers and 
severely punish them. 

The slanderer shall obtain the fruit of what he meditateth 
in his heart. 

What he doeth in secret, even underground, shall assuredly 
be laid bare. 

The slave Nanak on seeing God’s greatness is happy . 2 

The Guru continued, ‘ It is God alone who will 
call the slanderers to account. Ill shall they then 
fare. Meditate not or do evil to any one.' The Guru 
quoted from his father’s hymn : — 

Harbour not evil to another in thy heart. 

And thou shalt not have trouble, my friend . 3 

The Guru then made preparations for his journey. 
He assigned the secular duties of the Har Mandar 4 
to Bhai Budha, and its spiritual duties to Bhai 
Gur Das. The Guru’s mother, seeing his resolve 
fixed, addressed him many words of affection, prayed 
for his safety, and repeated to him the following 
verses of her husband Guru Arjan : — 

Continually meditate on God’s name in thy heart, 

And thy associates and companions shall be saved. 

The Guru is ever with me : 

I ever repeat His name and remember Him. 

1 That is, they are no longer subject to transmigration. 

2 Gauri ki War I. 3 Asa. 

4 This, also called the Darbar Sahib, is known to Europeans as the 
Golden Temple in Amritsar. 



" I 4 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


What He hath done is sweet to me. 

Nanak craveth the boon of His name. 1 

The Guru set out for Dihli on Monday the second 
day of Magh 1669 (a. d. 1612). At the first halt 
on his journey, when parting with the Sikhs who had 
accompanied him thus far, he gave them the following 
injunctions : — ‘ The Har Mandar is specially devoted 
to God’s service, wherefore it should ever be respected. 
It should never be defiled with any impurity of the 
human body. No gambling, wine- drinking, light 
behaviour with women, or slander, should be allowed 
therein. No one should steal, utter a falsehood, 
smoke tobacco, or contrive litigation in its precincts. 
Sikhs, holy men, guests, strangers, the poor and the 
friendless should ever receive hospitality from Sikhs. 
My people should ever be humble, repeat God’s 
name, promote their faith, meditate on the Guru’s 
words, and keep all his commandments.’ The 
Guru then continued his journey to Dihli with an 
escort of three hundred men. 

When the Guru reached the Jamna river, he 
pitched his camp in a flower garden near Majnun’s 
hillock, and dismissed the envoys Wazir Khan and 
Kind Beg to inform the Emperor of his arrival. 
Wazir Khan highly praised the Guru in the hope 
of obtaining a friendly reception for him at court. 
Crowds of Sikhs came forth from Dihli to see him. 
The Guru’s arrival recalled Guru Arjan’s death to 
their recollection and they began to mourn. The 
Guru consoled them by repeating to them his father’s 
words : — 

Fortunate are those saints of Thine, 0 God , in whose houses 
the wealth of Thy name dwelleth. 

Their advent into the world is acceptable, and profitable 
are their acts. 

0 my God, I am a sacrifice to Thy saints. 

1 would make a chauri of my hair, wave it over them, 
and put the dust of their feet on my forehead. 

1 Asa. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


15 

Philanthropic men have come who are beyond birth and 
death ; 

They give their lives, apply men to devotion, and cause 
them to meet God. 

True their order ; true their empire ; with tnith are 
they imbued. 

True is their happiness, and true their praise ; they know 
God to whom they belong. 

I would fan, draw water, and grind for God’s servant. 

Nanak’s supplication to God is, that he may obtain a sight 
of His servant. 1 

The Guru satisfied all the doubts of his Sikhs. 
His instruction dispelled the fog of their ignorance, 
all light shone on them, and divine knowledge filled 
their hearts. 

The Emperor received the Guru with great 
apparent respect. Seeing him very young and 
already installed as Guru, he put him the following 
question to test his knowledge of divinity : — 
‘ What is the essential difference between the Hindus 
who worship Ram Narayan, Parbrahm, and Para- 
meshar, and the Musalmans who pray to Allah, 
the bounteous Lord ? ’ The Guru replied with the 
following hymn of Guru Arjan : — 

The Bounteous One is the Cause of causes ; 

The Merciful One cherisheth all. 

Allah is invisible and unequalled ; 

He alone is God great and infinite. 

I bow to the one God, the Lord of the earth : 

The Creator pervadeth every place. 

As Madho He is Lord and Life of the world, 

The Destroyer of fear ; worship Him in thy heart. 

Whether known as Rikhikesh, Gopal, Gobind, 

Or Mukand, 2 Thou alone, 0 God, art the kind Master. 

Thou art at once Pir, Prophet, and Shaikh ; 

Master of hearts, Thou dispensest justice. 

1 Suhi. 

8 The Hindi proper names in this hymn are all names of God. 



' 16 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thou art holier than the Quran and the other Muham- 
madan books. 

Whether as Narayan, Narhar, or the Compassionate, 

Thou pervadest every heart and art the heart’s support. 

As Wasdev Thou dwellest in every place. 

Thy sport is not understood. 

Thou art the Bestower of kindness and mercy. 

Grant us devotion and worship of Thee, O Creator. 

Saith Nanak, when the Guru hath removed superstition, 

Allah and Parbrahm are the same . 1 

The Emperor then asked the Guru to explain the 
order of the world. The Guru replied, ' He who 
created it preserveth it and will destroy it. Endless 
animals visible and invisible, which sprang from the 
Creator, shall be again absorbed in Him. Through 
pride they all suffer. But when man meeteth the 
true Guru, and frequenteth the saints’ society, his 
pride and arrogance are swept away, and he obtaineth 
salvation.’ 

Upon this the Emperor inquired how man could 
keep his mind pure from the contact of the world. 
The Guru replied with the following hymn of Guru 
Amar Das : — 

When the heart is filthy, everything in man is filthy ; 
the heart is not cleansed by cleansing the body. 

The world is led astray by superstition, my brethren ; 
only a few know it. 

O my soul, repeat the one Name : 

The true Guru hath given me this treasure. 

Even when men learn the postures of the Sidhs and 
practise restraint of their senses, 

Neither their mental filth nor the filth of their pride 
departeth. 

There is no means of purifying the heart except by t akin g 
shelter in the true Guru. 

By meeting the true Guru, my brethren, the heart is 
changed beyond expression, 

1 Ramkali. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 17 

Saith Nanak, if any one die on meeting the true Guru 
and be again reanimated by his teaching, 

The filth of his selfishness shall depart and his heart 
become pure. 1 

The Emperor then asked, ‘ O Guru, tell me who 
are holier, the Hindus or the Muhammadans. The 
four elements are equally diffused in all animals 
from the worm to the elephant, how then is it that 
their lights and understandings are different ?’ 

The Guru replied with the following hymn of 
Kabir 

In the beginning God by His Omnipotence created light 
and from it all the races of men. 

From the one light the whole world was created ; then 
who is good and who is bad ? 

0 my brethren, lose not yourselves in doubt. 

Creation is in the Creator, and the Creator in the creation ; 

He filleth every place. 

Matter is one, but the Fashioner fashioned it in various 
ways. 

There is no fault with the vessels of clay and no fault 
with the Potter. 2 

The one true God is in all ; everything turneth out as 
He hath ordained. 

He who obeyeth the will of God and recognizeth Him as 
one, is His servant. 

God is invisible ; He cannot be seen ; the Guru hath 
given me sweet molasses 3 to eat. 

Saith Kabir, my doubts are abandoned since I have seen 
the Spotless One everywhere. 4 

The Emperor was much interested in these 
hymns and with the Guru’s general exposition of 
his doctrines, and before dismissing him desired 
to hear his ideas on the duties and attributes of 

1 Wadhans. 

2 God cannot be blamed for creating vessels of clay, that is, human 

beings, and human beings cannot be blamed for being created by 
Him. 3 Good instruction. 4 Prabhati. 

C 


SIKH. IV 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


* 18 

a monarch. The Guru then said : * A good monarch 
is ever philanthropic. He can never endure to 
see a man in misery without making great efforts 
with mind, body, and wealth to remove all his 
sufferings. If he see a man hungry or in need of 
a house to dwell in, he supplieth his necessities. 
He provideth poor persons with work — to repair 
a fallen well or bridge, to level an uneven road, 
or to plant trees on the roadside.’ Upon this the 
Guru took his leave. 

Chapter III 

The Emperor having heard that the Guru loved 
the chase requested him to accompany him one 
day on a hunting excursion. When in the forest, 
a tiger issued forth and rushed at the Emperor. 
Elephants and horses took fright, and the beaters 
who accompanied the party loudly shouted in 
distress. Bullets and arrows were discharged, but 
went right and left of the tiger. The Emperor 
almost paralysed with fear called upon the Guru 
to save him. The Guru alighted from his horse, 
and taking his sword and shield ran between the 
Emperor and the tiger. As the tiger was going 
to spring, the Guru dealt him a blow with his sword, 
and he fell lifeless to the earth. The Emperor 
thanked his destiny that he was saved from the 
jaws of death by the Guru’s hand. 

When it was time for the Emperor to visit Agra, 
he invited the Guru to accompany him. The Guru, 
after repeated invitations, at last consented. As 
they were hunting on the way, the Emperor took 
the opportunity of telling him what people were 
saying against him — ‘ O Guru, my ministers and 
staff tell me that, although thou oughtest in reality 
to have no connexion with worldly affairs, yet thou 
callest thyself the true king of the world, and thy 
Sikhs call me who am descended from emperors, 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


19 ' 

who am the lord of many lands, and the cherisher of 
my subjects, a false king. Is all this true ? ’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ I have never told any one to call me 
true king, but where there exists love between people, 
there is no need of formality, and a man is treated 
as he treateth others. I love my Sikhs in propor- 
tion to the love they bear me. In Guru Nanak’s 
view God is the only Emperor. He hath said in the 
Japji : 

He is Emperor, King of kings ; Nanak, all must remain 
subject to His will.’ 

The Emperor listened but was not convinced, and 
he and the Guru went off to their respective tents. 

In the afternoon a young grass-cutter, hearing 
that the Guru had come, desired to see him. In reply 
to his inquiries some one, mistaking the Emperor 
for the Guru, said, ‘ There he is sitting under a tree.’ 
The grass-cutter went to make his prostration. He 
had only half an ana 1 as an offering. He drew it forth, 
laid it before the Emperor, and thus addressed him, 

‘ 0 true king, all earthly kings are false. Thy realm 
is permanent in every age. Protect me at my last 
hour, and extricate me from hell. I am a poor Sikh 
of thine ; thy sovereignty is real and potent to 
protect. ’ The Emperor said to his courtiers, ‘ I cannot 
protect myself ; how can I save this man in the way 
he desireth ? ’ The Emperor quite understood that 
the Guru had had no opportunity of prompting the 
petitioner to call him true king. He then addressed 
the grass-cutter, ‘ I am a false king. There (pointing 
to the Guru) is the true king.’ The grass-cutter took 
up his half ana, and ran with it to the Guru who 
received him affectionately, and gave him the follow- 
ing instruction : — ‘My brother, meditate on God, live 
honestly, covet not thy neighbour’s wife or property, 
compassionate the suffering, obey the Guru’s com- 

1 An ana is worth a penny of English money. There are sixteen 
anas in a rupee, which is now worth one shilling and four pence. 

C 2 



• 20 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


mandments, and thou shalt be happy in this world, 
and the next.’ 

When in due time the Emperor and the Guru 
arrived in Agra, the Guru was received with great 
rejoicings by the people. Chandu thought to him- 
self, ‘ The Guru will take revenge on me when 
he findeth an opportunity. I shall only be safe if by 
some means I succeed in having him imprisoned, and 
I must apply all my ingenuity and efforts to that 
end.’ 

The Emperor had a very severe illness in Agra, 
and considered what would be an auspicious time 
for him to sit on his throne after his recovery. It 
is said that, though a Muhammadan, he consulted 
an astrologer on the subject — a fact not improbable, 
seeing that his mother had been a Hindu princess 
and he was married to a lady of the same religion. 
Chandu went secretly to the astrologer, and told him 
how the Guru’s father had spurned his alliance, in 
consequence of which his daughter now sat neglected 
and despised at his door. On seeing her unwedded, 
he said he had no appetite by day and no sleep by 
night. Chandu accordingly gave a large bribe to 
the astrologer to contrive some plot by which Guru 
Har Gobind might be rendered powerless to do him 
injury. 

When the astrologer next day appeared before the 
Emperor, he said, ‘A calamity hath been hanging over 
thee for five and a half years, and thou art in danger for 
two and a half years more. Saturn is a very powerful 
god and still pursueth thee. He will show thee the 
might of his arm once again. Thou hast already 
bestowed thy weight in gold as alms, and offered 
endless sacrifices, but one thing yet remaineth to 
be done. It behoves thy majesty to send some 
holy man into the fort at Gualiar to do penance there, 
and pray for thy good health so that thou mayest 
escape from the evil influences of the planets. If this 
be not done, thy life shall be in serious danger.’ 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


21 


The Emperor began to fear, and asked the advice 
of his ministers. They being instructed by Chandu 
supported the advice of the astrologer, and suggested 
that Guru Har Gobind, who was now in the Em- 
peror’s camp and in his power, should be sent into 
the fort in accordance with the astrologer’s warning 
and advice. Their advice well suited the Emperor’s 
inclination. 

When the Emperor mentioned his decision to the 
Guru, the latter accepted it without hesitation. 
Having formed his determination, the Guru ordered 
that his troops and his camp should remain where 
they were. He next morning took his five Sikhs 
with him, and went to obey the order of the Emperor. 
At his departure his troops represented to him that 
he was leaving the wicked Chandu to revel in his 
villanies. The Guru replied, ‘The time hath not 
yet come. God will accomplish everything when He 
pleaseth. Best is the fruit that slowly ripeneth.’ 1 


1 Cunningham in his History of ihe Sikhs states that Har Gobind 
became 1 involved in difficulties vith the Emperor about retaining for 
himself that money which he should have disbursed to his troops.’ 
Cunningham’s authority for this statement was Captain Troyer, the 
translator of the Dabistan : ‘ Har Gobind became involved in many 
difficulties ; one of them was that he appropriated to himself the pay 
due to the soldiers in advance; he carried also the sword against his 
father; he kept besides many rervants, and was addicted to hunting. 
Jahangir, on account of the money due to the army, and of the mulct 
imposed upon Arjan Mai, sent Har Gobind to the fort of Gualiar, &c.’ 
As this is such a serious and wholly unwarranted calumny of the Guru, 
we feel constrained to quote the original Persian — 


cubil) ».Lb ^ ^ 0> — 


Here there is not one word about money due to the army, about 
Har Gobind’s criminal misappropriation, or about his having carried 
his sword against his father. The translation of the passage is this : 
* He had many difficulties to contend with. One of them was, that he 
adopted the style of a soldier, wore a sword contrary to the custom of 



22 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


There was joy in the fort when it was known that 
the Guru was coming. It contained many rajas 
who had been deprived of their kingdoms and 
thrones by Jahangir, and who now emaciated, filthy, 
foully clad, and subservient to low warders, dragged 
out a miserable existence. They believed that they 
should be released by the Guru’s intercession and 
then return to their states and their families. Hari 
Das the governor of the fort, too, was happy. He had 
long desired to see the Guru, but pressure of official 
duties had prevented him from absenting himself 
for the purpose. He now went forth to meet him, 
prostrated himself before him, and applied the dust 
ofJiis feet to his head and body. The Guru’s first 
act was to cause clean clothes and better food to be 
supplied to the imprisoned rajas, and to endeavour 
to make their prison a paradise in comparison with 
the hell it had previously been . 1 

Chandu wrote to Hari Das — ' Thou and I are ser- 


his father, maintained a retinue, and began to follow the chase. The 
Emperor in order to extort from him the balance of the fine which had 
been imposed on Arjan Mai, sent him to Gualiar, &c.’ 

We might suppose that T royer had translated from a different text, 
and that the Dabistan has since his time been altered at somebody's 
instigation, if some of the blunders of Troyer's translation were not so 
very palpable. For instance, assigning to the expression barkhildf-i- 
pidar shamsher bast the meaning that Har Gobind bore arms against 
his father, is not only opposed to the verbal and grammatical interpre- 
tation of the passage, but it is also opposed to the whole tenor of the 
accounts of both Arjan and Har Gobind given in the Dabistan itself. 
If the Persian writer had intended to convey the idea which Captain 
T royer does, he would have written ha mukabila-i-pidar shamsher bast ; 
but this, though grammatical, would not have been true, for Har Gobind 
was devotedly attached to his father, and even vowed deathless ven- 
geance on his father’s enemies. It is indeed hard that the fame of Har 
Gobind should have been tarnished by the blunders of a translator. 
Dr. Trurnpp in his Adi Granth has, with his usual theological bias, 
repeated the strange calumny. 

1 The room in which the Guru v r as incarcerated was in a top 
story to the left as one enters the Gualiar fort by the AlamgTr gate. 
It is on the eastern verge of the plateau, overlooks the ancient town of 
Gualiar, and commands a wide and not unpleasant prospect. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


23 

vants of the Emperor. I will assist thee in many 
ways, and grant thee a yearly income of five thousand 
rupees if thou find some means of disposing of the 
Guru who is now in thy power. It is because I 
depend on thee that I induced the Emperor to send 
him into the fort. Now that thou knowest my wishes, 
thou mayest act as it pleaseth thee, but, if thou do 
me the favour I desire, I shall never forget it. I 
depend altogether upon thee.’ Hari Das on receiving 
this letter placed it before the Guru for his informa- 
tion. 

The Guru took hardly any food, — his rations 
he distributed among the needy prisoners. The 
Sikhs who accompanied him represented ‘Thou 
eatest nothing while we fill our bellies twice a day. 
We curse ourselves that thou remainest hungry 
while we eat to repletion. Kindly tell us why 
thou actest so.’ The Guru replied, ‘ If thou bring 
me food obtained by labour I will eat it.’ His 
Sikhs went next morning to a brazier’s shop and 
there hammered copper all day long. With their 
earnings they purchased food for the Guru, which 
he ate as if it were ambrosia. The rajas prayed that 
the Guru might ever remain with them, and that the 
Emperor might order the governor to treat him well, 
and never impose any hardship on him. 

Chandu again wrote to the governor, ‘ My friend 
Hari Das, I send thee a poisoned robe for the Guru. 
He who putteth it on shall die immediately. Tell 
him the Emperor sent it. If he weareth it not, then 
destroy him in any way practicable. Tell me what 
thou succeedest in doing, so that I may show my 
gratitude. There will not again be such an op- 
portunity.’ Hari Das, as before, placed this letter 
and the poisoned robe at the Guru’s disposal. The 
Guru upon this repeated the following hymn of 
Guru Arjan : — 

The slanderer shall crumble down 



' 24 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Like a wall of kallar : hear, ye brethren, thus shall he 
be known. 

The slanderer is glad when he seeth a fault ; on seeing 
anything good he is filled with grief. 

He meditateth evil all day long, but it befalleth hot ; 
the evil-minded man dieth meditating evil. 

The slanderer forgetteth God, and, when death approach- 
eth, quarrelleth with God’s saint. 

The Lord Himself preserveth Nanak ; what can wretched 
man do ? 1 

The Guru’s mother, finding that he did not return 
in due time, felt very anxious and sent Bhai Budha 
to bring him home. Bhai Budha on entering the 
Guru’s chamber thus addressed him, ‘ What a fine 
return is thy confinement in this fort for having 
killed the tiger and saved the Emperor’s life ! The 
eyes of thy mother and of thy Sikhs are all turned 
towards thee. Night and day they await thy coming ; 
thou mayest escape if thou desire. Thy Sikhs who 
traverse great distances and endure great hardships 
in order to behold thee, are grievously disappointed.’ 
The Guru sent his mother and his Sikhs a letter 
of consolation, and expressed a hope that he should 
soon return to them. He said he was happy in the 
fort where he could repeat God’s name apart 
from the distraction of worldly people, who ever 
importuned him to gratify their petty desires. He 
added that his fellow prisoners were happy with him, 
and he with them. He directed Bhai Budha on his 
return journey to call at Dihli, see to the protection 
of his camp, and have his horses grazed where there 
was good pasturage. 

Bhai Jetha went on a mission to Dihli to secure 
the Guru’s release. He succeeded in. soothing the 
Emperor, who had been troubled with fearful visions. 
The Guru remarked that Jetha appeared conceited 
after this performance. In order to humble him he 

1 Bilawal. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


25 ' 

bade him take a vessel to the Jamna and fetch him 
water. When Jetha returned with the water, the 
Guru ordered him to take it back again, and throw 
it where he had taken it from. Jetha obeyed the 
order. The Guru then asked, ' When thou didst 
fill the vessel did the river appear less ; and when thou 
didst put back the water did the river appear 
more?’ Jetha replied, ‘No, what is a vessel in 
comparison with a river ? ’ The Guru then said, 

' The Guru is like the ocean, and thou like the vessel 
didst display in the Emperor’s case thy miraculous 
power. Such cleverness pleaseth me not.’ Bhai 
Jetha changed the subject, ‘ O true king, all thy 
Sikhs are unhappy, and thy mother is sore distressed 
on account of thine absence. Though thou art angry 
with me, I have been only fulfilling a former com- 
mandment of thine to do good to others whenever 
possible, an expression which I now venture to recall 
to thy memory, and beg that thou mayest return to 
Amritsar to cheer thy mother and bless thy people.’ 
The Guru replied by the following hymn of Guru 
Arjan : — 

Accept as good whatever is ; 

Abandon thy pride ; 

Day and night ever sing God’s praises : 

Make this thy whole aim. 

Rejoice, 0 saint, and repeat God’s name. 

Reject artifice and too much cleverness ; repeat the 
Guru’s holy spell. 

Centre thy hopes in the one God alone'; 

Repeat God’s pure name ; 

Bow to the Guru’s feet, 

And the Giver, the Bountiful, 

Will take thee across the terrible ocean. 

He in whose heart there is all treasure 

Hath no end or limits. 

He will preserve thee at last. 

Nanak hath obtained this treasure 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


' 26 

Of God’s pure name. 

He who repeateth it shall obtain salvation. 

Nanak, it shall be obtained by God’s favour . 1 

When the Emperor had heard Wazir Khan’s 
pleading on behalf of the Guru, whose sanctity was 
an object of general observation, he ordered that he 
should be presented to him. On hearing this the 
imprisoned rajas were much distressed. They appre- 
hended that they were now going to lose him whose 
presence had cheered their sufferings, and that they 
should have no one to cherish them and render 
them spiritual consolation. The Guru solaced them, 
and promised that he would not leave them until 
they were released. 

When Wazir Khan returned to Dihli, he reported 
the result of his mission to the Guru, and the Guru’s 
desire that the rajas should be released. The 
Emperor replied, ‘ The kings imprisoned in Gualiar 
are hostages for millions of money. Moreover, if 
I release them, there is danger of their inciting rebel- 
lion in my empire.’ On this some of the Emperor’s 
ministers, who were either friends or relations of the 
imprisoned raj as, represented that it was unnecessary 
to detain them any longer. Their spirits were now 
so cowed that there was no danger of their again 
disturbing His Majesty's peace. The Emperor, after 
full reflection on this and Wazir Khan’s arguments for 
the Guru’s recall, replied, 'I will so far meet the 
Guru’s wishes as not to further detain the rajas, 
and I will entrust them to him on condition that he 
be surety for their loyal behaviour.’ 

When Wazir Khan returned with this order to 
Gualiar, the Guru stood up, and taking Wazir Khan 
and Hari Das the governor with him, went and caused 
the fetters of the kings to be struck off. They addressed 
him, ‘ O true Guru, as thou hast cut these material 
fetters, so cut, we pray thee, our spiritual fetters 

1 Ramkali. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


27 ’ 

also.’ They seized the hem of his garment and held 
it until he had promised them salvation. On his 
doing so they all repeated with one voice the verse 
of Guru Arjan : — 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet and freed the 
captive . 1 

From this circumstance the Guru is still remem- 
bered in Gualiar as Bandi ChhorBaba, the holy man 
who freed the prisoners . 2 

Hari Das, the governor of the Gualiar fort and 
prison, expressed his regret on parting from the Guru. 
The Guru replied in the words of Guru Arjan : — 

Meditate in thy heart on the Gum’s image ; 

Obey the Guru’s word and instruction . 3 

‘ That we have met in the flesh is a temporary 
matter, the result of destiny; but that we have met 
in the spirit is a matter to be treasured for ever. 
As Gur Das hath said, “lama sacrifice to those Sikhs 
of the Guru who meet in the spirit.” And again 
Guru Nanak : — 

They who meet with their hearts really meet ; that is 
a real meeting . 1 

‘ While thou remainest in the Gualiar fort propagate 
the true faith, and, when thou thinkest of me, thou 
shalt behold me.’ 

Hari Das’s eyes were filled with tears, but he was 
comforted on hearing the Guru’s words of counsel 
and encouragement. 

The Guru with his five Sikhs set out with Wazir 
Khan for Dihli. The Guru took shelter in his old 

1 Maru. 

2 In the fort a cenotaph called Bandlshar, probably a contraction of 
Bandi Chhor, is pointed out to visitors, at which both the Sikhs and the 
Muhammadans worship — the Muhammadans every Thursday evening, 
and the Sikhs occasionally. At this spot the Guru used to pray. It 
is near a tank in and around which masonry work was constructed 
in ancient times. 

3 Gaund. 4 Tilang, Ashtapadi. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


- 28 

quarters on Majnun’s hillock. The Emperor in- 
vited him to his presence and thus addressed him — 
‘ I am very thankful to thee ; thou hast rendered me 
great assistance. Thy prayers have removed the 
effects of the conjunction of planets unfavourable 
to me, and effectually cured my maladies.’ The 
Guru replied, ' There was no conjunction of planets 
unfavourable to thee. That was only in the imagina- 
tion of thy advisers. Guru Nanak’s house is like 
a mirror. As a man presenteth himself to it so is 
he treated. What is there that cannot be found 
in the Guru’s house ? In it are the four great boons 
to mortals, but they can only be obtained by faith. 
He who hath devotion shall obtain the fruit thereof, 
as happened in the case of thine ancestors.’ 

The Emperor was struck with the beauty of a 
rosary the Guru carried. It was made from a yellow 
composition called kapur. The Emperor asked him 
for one of its beads. He would add it to his 
own rosary and preserve it in memory of the Guru. 
The Guru replied, that his father had a better 
rosary which he used to wear as a necklace, but 
it was now in Chandu’s possession. The Em- 
peror sent for Chandu and asked for the necklace. 
Chandu proceeded to his house to search for it. 
During his absence the Guru took occasion to bring 
the whole of Chandu’s conduct to the Emperor’s 
notice. Chandu, after a pretended search, repre- 
sented that the rosary had been lost. The Emperor 
suspected that he had really misappropriated it 
and would not produce it, and, as there were 
many other grounds for his displeasure with 
Chandu, he became quite satisfied of his perfidy and 
wickedness. 

The Emperor communicated to Guru Har Gobind 
the numerous complaints Chandu had made against 
him. The Emperor also pretended that Chandu had 
exceeded the orders he had received on the subject 
of Guru Arjan’s treatment. ‘ He told me,’ continued 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


29 ’ 

the Emperor, ‘ that thou saidst thou wouldst wreak 
vengeance on me. Therefore I sent Wazir Khan for 
thee, and now, on seeing thee and learning Chandu’s 
real character, my doubts and apprehensions regard- 
ing thee are all removed. Chandu is thine enemy, 
and thou mayest have revenge on him.’ The Guru 
replied that his father Guru Arjan did not wish to 
avenge himself on Chandu, for his principles were as 
stated in the following hymn of Guru Ram Das : — 

The true Guru is generous and compassionate ; he feeleth 
compassion ever. 

The true Guru’s heart is free from enmity, and in every- 
thing he beholdeth the one God. 

None who bear enmity to those who are without it shall 
abide. 

The true Guru wisheth well to all ; how could any evil 
befall him ? 

As men feel towards the true Guru, so shall they be 
rewarded. 

Nanak, the Creator from whom nothing is concealed, 
knoweth everything . 1 

The Guru continued, ‘ O Emperor, if thou do jus- 
tice, thou shalt be honoured in God’s court, and if 
thou do injustice thou shalt have to account for it. 
Thou hast put a bell in front of thy gate, and, when 
anybody ringeth it, thou comest forth thyself and 
hearest his complaint. But even so, thou shalt only 
be acquitted of all blame in respect of my father, if 
thou do justice now. He bore enmity to no one, but 
was every one’s friend and endeavoured to contribute 
to every one’s happiness. God, who is the Bestower 
of the fruit of past acts, will fulfil His commandment 
to destroy the enemy. But, 0 Emperor, take my 
father’s necklace from Chandu. It is the duty of 
a king to cherish his subjects, and that can only be 
done by punishing thieves and harmful men.’ Upon 

1 Gauri ki War I. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


' 30 

this the Emperor made over Chandu, as was the 
custom at that time, to the Guru for punishment. 

On a signal from the Guru, Bhai Bidhi Chand and 
Bhai J etha seized Chandu, led him outside the fort, 
took off his turban, tied his hands behind his back, 
and showered blows of slippers on his devoted head. 
While being thus castigated he was led through the 
streets of the city, a warning to all men. He was 
pelted with stones, mud, and filth, and several people 
spat on his face. He had said that he would attack 
the Guru like a mad dog, and his threat recoiled on 
himself. He would have died under the injuries 
he then received, only the Guru felt compassion and 
rescued him from the wrath of the people. The 
Guru caused his arms to be unbound, and put him 
into a house with a sentry over him, intending to 
take him alive to the scene of Guru Arjan’s death in 
Lahore. The Emperor sent for Chandu’s wife and 
son, and made them also over to the Guru, telling 
him to punish them as he pleased. The Guru, in reply, 
uttered the following verses of Guru Amar Das : — 

Curses be on the head of the false one ; greatness to the 
true saint ! 

True is the Lord, true is His justice, ashes be on the 
head of the slanderer ! 1 

The most severe punishment that was inflicted on 
Chandu’s wife and son was to cause them to behold 
Chandu's sufferings. The Sikhs bound him, and 
made him over to pariahs as if he were a dog. Dirt 
and filth continued to be poured on him, and he was 
reduced to a condition in which no one could re- 
cognize him. When his wife and son had seen his 
treatment, they were allowed to depart. Everybody 
congratulated the Guru on the mercy he had shown 
them. 


1 Bilawal ki War. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


3i * 


Chapter IV 

The Guru desired to return to Amritsar, and duly 
informed the Emperor. The Emperor replied, * I am 
not feeling well. My physicians tell me I must have 
change of air, and I shall thus regain my strength. 
I therefore intend to spend this summer in Kashmir. 
If thou desire to defer thy homeward journey until 
Thursday, the lucky thirteenth day of the half-lunar 
month, we will travel to Kashmir together, and I 
shall enjoy thy pleasant companionship.’ 

The Emperor and the Guru set out on the appointed 
day. Bhai Jetha, knowing the Guru’s compassionate 
disposition, concealed from his sight Chandu, led 
along amid the scavengers and dogs. The Guru’s tent, 
which was always pitched with the Emperor’s, was 
magnificently appointed, and the Guru’s youth and 
beauty excited universal admiration. One day the 
Empress Nur J ahan, beholding him, asked one of her 
handmaidens who that handsome young man was who 
ever accompanied the Emperor. The servant, who 
was well acquainted with the Guru’s circumstances, 
detailed them to Her Majesty. The Empress longed 
to meet him, and on the following night made further 
inquiries regarding him of her husband. ‘ Hath 
that priest who accompanieth thee a wife ? ’ The 
Emperor, in ignorance of the Guru’s status, replied in 
the negative. The Empress said it was very strange 
that at his age, and possessing health and wealth, he 
should have sufficient continence to lead a single life. 

Next morning, as the Guru’s tent was on the bank 
of the Bias, and he was alone, the Empress, accom- 
panied by her co-queens, nearly as fair as she, went 
with the Emperor’s permission to visit the great 
Sikh priest. The Empress was struck with awe on 
beholding the Guru. He thus addressed her and 
her companions : ‘ O fair queens, great hath been 
your good fortune that you have obtained in your 



' 32 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


human birth high family and high position without 
any anxiety for your maintenance, and that, being 
so beautiful, you are an emperor's consorts. Where- 
fore, worship God who gave you these manifold 
favours. Be virtuous ever. A woman’s happiness 
and salvation largely depend on her devotion to her 
husband. Fear God, preserve yourselves from sin 
and wickedness. Keep your hearts under restraint. 
However close may be the relationship of sons, 
wives, and husbands, at the last moment there shall 
be none to render assistance. It is only virtuous 
acts which uplift the soul to communion with God. 
The lower animals feel love and similar pleasures, 
but it is only human beings who are privileged to 
worship their Creator.’ The queens pondered on 
this discourse, returned to the Emperor, and ex- 
tolled the Guru’s passionless and sinless nature. 

When the Guru and the Emperor had crossed the 
river Bias, the Guru induced him to accompany him 
to Goindwal. There the Guru bathed in the Bawali, 
visited the upper room in which Guru Amar Das 
had lived, and held an affectionate interview with 
his sons. The Guru then said to the Emperor, ‘ I am 
now going to Amritsar, and thy Majesty may con- 
tinue thy journey to Lahore.’ The Emperor replied, 

‘ May I too not behold thy sacred temple ? ’ The 
Guru, seeing the Emperor’s friendly curiosity, con- 
sented to conduct him to Amritsar. On the way 
they passed a night at Tarn Taran, whose history 
the Guru related to the Emperor. 

The Emperor encamped at the village of Gumtala, 
near Amritsar, where now the district court is held, 
while the Guru with his followers went into the city. 
Bhai Jetha preceded the party to inform the Guru’s 
mother and the Sikhs of his approach. All the 
inhabitants came forth to meet him. When the 
Guru arrived at the Takht Akal Bunga, Bhai Budha 
offered a thanksgiving for his return. The Guru, 
having performed all due worship and observances, 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 33 ' 

prayed and circumambulated the temple. He then 
went to his private apartments, where his mother 
most affectionately greeted him after his long absence. 
The Emperor sent sacred food and offered to defray 
all the expenses of the completion of the temple. 
The Guru, however, wishing to retain for the Sikhs 
exclusive proprietary rights in it, replied, ‘ The place 
where the money of one person is spent becometh 
that person’s property. This temple erected to God 
belongeth to God. All are equal sharers in it. It 
will be gradually completed. The Sikhs will do the 
work. Like Guru Nanak’s religion, all are partners 
in it, and none are excluded.’ 

The Empress Nur J ahan, and her co-queens, went 
again to visit the Guru. They also went to see the 
temple, and ended by visiting the Guru’s mother. 
She gave them religious instruction, and recited 
to them the hymn which Guru Nanak addressed 
to Nur Shah, the queen of Kamrup. The Guru’s 
mother also recited to her visitors the following 
verses of Guru Nanak : — 

She who is pleasing to her beloved adorneth his home, 

While she who speaketh falsely is of no account ; 

She who speaketh falsely is of no account ; her spouse 
will not even behold her. 

Her spouse forgetteth the wicked wife ; false that she 
is, she passeth the night in separation . 1 

The Emperor said to the Guru, ( Thou art a very 
young man. - Many very beautiful women come to 
see thee. It is hard to subdue youthful passions. 
How dost thou succeed in doing so ? ’ The Guru 
replied by a parable : ‘ There was once a very religious 
and chaste man who had conquered his passions. 

A lewd and adulterous king used to wait on him. 
The saint once asked him what desire he sought to 
gratify by his attention to him. The king replied, 

“ I am a lustful man. I ever desire sexual pleasures 

1 Dhanasari Chhant. 

D 


SIKH. IV 



’ 34 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


and the gratification of all my desires.” The saint 
replied, “ Because of this enjoyment thou hast only 
eight days more of life which thou mayest enjoy as 
thou pleasest. On the ninth day thou shalt die.” 
The king inquired what he could do to avert his fate. 
The saint replied, " Meditate on God’s name.” The 
king then abandoned worldly affairs, and so ap- 
plied himself to devotion that all impure desires 
left his mind. On the ninth day he went to the 
saint and told him how he had spent his time since 
their last interview. The saint said that his life was 
saved by the power of his devotion, and inquired how 
he had abandoned sensuality. The king replied that 
it was through fear of impending death. Then the 
saint said, “ That is an answer to the question thou 
didst propound. That is the way to avert thy fate. 
Thou thoughtest that thou shouldst die in eight 
days, so no evil desires entered thy mind, while, as 
for myself, I am not certain that death will not come 
and seize me at any moment. On this account my 
mind is unswayed by passion.” 0 Emperor J ahangir, 
there is no reliance to be placed on death ; it cometh 
like a thief when we expect it not. If a man had 
information, he would not allow his house to be 
plundered. Guru Nanak hath said : — 

My brethren, know that death imfiendeth over your 
heads : 

Man is like a fish upon which the net falleth unawares .’ 1 

After hearing this the Emperor remained a few days 
with the Guru, and then proceeded to Lahore. 

The Emperor left Wazir Khan and Kind Beg at 
Amritsar with instructions to endeavour to induce 
the Guru to go to visit him at Lahore. When they 
succeeded in doing so, the Guru went to his mother 
to communicate his intention, and make his obeisance 
to her before his departure. Having made new 
arrangements for the performance of the duties of 
1 Sri Rag, Ashtapadi. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 35 ’ 

the temple and the kitchen, he mounted his horse, 
and set out with a small escort. He remained for 
a night at a village half-way, and next day pitched 
his tent in Muzang, a suburb of Lahore. The fol- 
lowing morning he visited the birthplace of Guru 
Ram Das, the Bawali whose construction Guru Arjan 
had planned, and the place where he gave up his 
spirit. He caused a small temple to be erected 
there, and appointed Bhai Langaha to take charge 
of it. A large fair is held at the place yearly on 
the anniversary of Guru Arjan’s death — the fourth 
day of the light half of Jeth (May-June). 

When people remarked that Chandu, who had 
been brought from Amritsar with the Guru’s party, 
justly suffered for his misdeeds, the Guru said that 
every man’s acts clung to him. Chandu was reduced 
to a most deplorable condition. His eyes became 
blind from weeping, his body dried up, and only 
a skeleton remained of what was once the sleek and 
handsome minister of the Emperor. He was daily 
led through the city streets, when the children used 
to throw handfuls of dust on his head, and the women 
to utter every imprecation on him. Bhai Bidhi 
Chand and Bhai Jetha delivered Chandu over to 
scavengers, who led him round the streets to beg. 
He who used to take bribes of thousands of rupees 
was now glad to get kauris and the leavings of others 
for his support. For a sacrificial mark on his fore- 
head he had now the marks of shoe-beatings, and for 
necklaces of pearls and diamonds he had old slippers 
suspended from his neck. After fifteen days of this 
treatment in Lahore death came to his relief. A 
grain-parcher, on seeing him, became so enraged 
that he struck him on the head with an iron ladle 
full of burning sand. On this Chandu fell with 
painful cries and swooned. The grain-parcher dealt 
him a similar blow as he lay unconscious on the 
ground. His skull was fractured, and his soul 
became the spoil of death’s myrmidons. The 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


" 36 

scavengers threw his body into the river Ravi. 
When the Emperor heard of Chandu’s death, he said 
that he richly deserved his fate. The Guru, however, 
prayed that as Chandu had suffered torment for 
his sins in this life, God would pardon him hereafter. 

When Prithia’s son Mihrban heard of Chandu’s 
death he was greatly distressed. He said, ‘ Sulahi 
died when he set himself against the Guru. When 
my father, too, became the Guru’s enemy he perished 
in his thoughtless career. And now Chandu is dead. 
It is not known what magic the Guru possesseth 
that no one may withstand him. ’ Mihrban exchanged 
turbans with Karm Chand, Chandu’s son, in token 
of life-long friendship, and took counsel with him 
how to effect the Guru’s ruin. They proceeded to 
Prince Khuram, afterwards the Emperor Shah 
Jahan, and poisoned his mind against the Guru. 

When the Guru heard of Mihrban’ s arrival in 
Lahore, he sent Bhai Paira and Bhai Pirana to try 
to dissuade him from his hostile designs. They 
exhorted him, ‘ Abandon strife and come to terms 
with the Guru. Nothing is gained by dissension. 
What did thy father gain by his enmity with Guru 
Arjan ? who said : — 

The advantage of union cannot be described, Nanak, it 
is beyond expression . 1 

Thy jealousy shall cause misery even to thyself.’ 

Mihrban replied, ‘My father at his death enjoined 
me never to make friendship with the Guru. I cannot 
disregard my father’s injunctions.’ When the envoys 
represented the Guru’s supernatural power, Mihrban 
replied, ‘ I am aware of that. Even with such power 
Guru Arjan abandoned Amritsar through fear of 
Sulahi, and was subsequently unable to avert his 
own death. The masands are now Har Gobind’s 
friends solely because he hath bribed them. My 

1 Literal!)- — beyond the beyond. Gujari. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


37 

father, it is true, failed, but he was a poor unsophis- 
ticated man, unable to cope with my clever uncle 
Arjan. Why did not Har Gobind work miracles 
against Chandu when he caused him to be sent to the 
fortress of Gualiar ? ’ Bhai Paira replied, f Thou 
art still a child and knowest nothing. Great men 
have great endurance. They can endure the bad 
language of enemies as if it were a rain shower, 
and can withstand them like mountains.’ On 
hearing this, Mihrban’s anger blazed forth, and, 
seeing it, Bhai Paira and Bhai Pirana returned to 
the Guru. 

The Guru, on hearing of the failure of their nego- 
tiations, said, ‘ I will go myself to Mihrban. He is 
my first cousin, and I will endeavour to conciliate 
him. Although he is at enmity with me, yet he 
cannot treat me with discourtesy.’ Mihrban gave 
him a respectful reception, and seated him by his 
side. The Guru opened the conversation, ' Thy 
father and mine are in heaven. We are both brothers 
now, so we ought not to bear each other enmity 
from which happiness can never result.’ The Guru 
then quoted the following slok of their common 
relation. Guru Ram Das : — 

He in whose heart there is jealousy shall never prosper. 

No one shall heed what he saith ; he is a fool ever crying 
in the wilderness. 

He in whose heart there is calumny is known as 
a calumniator ; everything he hath done or doeth is 
in vain. 

He ever causelessly slandereth others ; he cannot show 
his face to any one ; it hath become black. 

In the Kal age the body is the field of works ; as man 
soweth so shall he reap. 

Justice is not administered on false evidence ; when 
a man eateth poison he dieth. 

My brethren, behold the justice of the true Creator — as 
any one acteth, so shall be his reward. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


38 

The slave Nanak hath obtained all enlightenment and 
preached the words of God’s court. 1 

The Guru continued, ' The Lord of the world, the 
Supreme Being will not be pleased to bestow happi- 
ness or prosperity on those who harbour evil in their 
hearts, while, on the contrary, the Creator will make 
him happy who is pleased with the happiness of 
others.’ The Guru then quoted the following from 
Kabir : — 

Indulge not in envy and bickering, 0 my soul. 

Do good deeds and gain their reward. 2 

The Guru concluded his remonstrance, ' Friend- 
ship is ambrosia, dissension poison. Wherefore 
banish dissension, and thou shalt be happy. ' Kings 
and emperors bow before the Guru’s throne. It is 
not proper for scions of his house to flatter or pay 
court to worldly people like Chandu’s son ; nor does 
it beseem them to squander the wealth of the Sikhs 
in illicit gratuities.’ 

Mihrban, far from being convinced by all this 
good advice, only became more enraged. He vented 
his wrath on the Guru, and said, ‘ The enmity 
that hath subsisted between us I will never forget. 
Leave me.’ The Guru addressed him for the last 
time, ‘ I desire that thou mayest live in peace, 
but who can set aside God’s will ? ’ Saying this 
the Guru retired to his tent. He remained several 
months at Lahore, preaching to his disciples and 
leading them to the paths of religion and rectitude. 

A masand named Sujan resided in Kabul. He 
had there amassed for the Guru great wealth from 
tithes and offerings, and considered how this 
wealth could reach the Guru, or be best ap- 
plied to his advantage. He had heard that the 
Guru had a great love for horses. He there- 
fore searched Kabul and Bukhara for a steed 

1 Gauri ki War I. 2 ^sa. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


39 


worthy of his spiritual master. At last he found 
a horse of rare strain, beauty, and speed, which he 
purchased for a lakh of rupees as an offering likely 
to assist him in obtaining ultimate salvation and 
making the true king happy. Sujan covered the 
horse with dirty clothes, and took him with fifteen 
or twenty others which were going for sale to the 
Panjab. The object of these precautions was that 
the animal might not be specially remarked and 
coveted on the way by some Muhammadan official. 
In those days, whenever the Turks 1 saw a good 
horse, a good sword, or anything else desirable, they 
appropriated it for themselves with scant ceremony 
towards the owner. As the cavalcade was crossing 
the Indus at Atak, the eye of an official happened 
to fall on the Guru’s horse, and he inquired whence 
it had come and whither it was going, remarking at 
the same time that it would make a suitable present 
for the Emperor. Sujan said that the other horses 
were for sale, but he was taking this particular one 
as an offering to the true king. 

The official endeavoured to persuade Sujan to let 
him have the animal, but in vain. He thereupon 
wrote to the Emperor Jahangir that a Sikh was 
taking a horse of untold value to Guru Har Gobind, 
and advised him to take possession of the animal 
by every possible means, for he was worthy of a 
monarch. The Emperor, whose friendship for the 
Guru had never been real, replied by sending some 
troops to the official with an order that he must 
not allow the horse to cross the river. If the owner 
were very greedy, the price of the animal should be 
paid him, but if he refused to take it, force should be 
employed. Sujan refused to surrender the horse on 
any consideration. He maintained that the Guru 
had paid for him, and he was consequently his 
property. The Emperor’s men told Sujan he might 

1 The Mughal Emperors and their followers are always called 
Turks in Sikh compositions. 



40 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


give all the other horses to the Guru, but this 
particular one must be the Emperor’s perquisite. 
Sujan continued his journey to the Guru and told 
him how he had been robbed of the horse procured 
with such difficulty and solicitude. The Guru 
recommended patience, and predicted that nobody 
but himself should ever ride the animal. 

When the Emperor desired to mount, the animal 
shook its head, which was regarded as a bad omen. 
The Emperor then desisted, and ordered that he 
should be fed on rare mashes, but the next day the 
horse would neither eat nor drink. The Emperor’s 
most accomplished veterinary surgeons declared 
that an evil eye had caused the malady. Wazir 
Khan, the Guru’s friend, reminded the Emperor that 
the horse belonged to the Guru, and that property 
taken from others could not bring luck to its posses- 
sor. All known medicines were tried, but in vain. 
When the horse was on the point of death, Rustam 
Khan, the head Qazi, said, ‘ If the holy Quran 
were read for him he might recover.’ Upon this the 
Emperor presented him to the Qazi with permission 
to exercise on him his spiritual power. 

As the Qazi was leading him home, the animal 
neighed when passing the Guru’s tent. This was 
interpreted as an appeal to the Guru to rescue him 
from the Qazi’s hands. The Guru sent for the Qazi 
with the object of negotiating the purchase of the 
horse. It was agreed between them that the Guru 
should have the horse for ten thousand rupees. The 
Qazi signed an agreement to that effect, and it was 
further stipulated that the price should be paid at 
the time of the Diwali fair in Amritsar. The Guru 
took the animal to the stable, and by simply patting 
him on the neck restored him to his usual strength. 

A Muhammadan saint, Mian Mir, originally named 
Muhammad Mir, born in Sistan in a.d. 1550, found 
his way like many other distinguished Muhammadans 
to the Panjab, and settled in a barren plain about 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


4i 


five miles from Lahore. He gained a high reputa- 
tion for sanctity and devotion. Jahangir in his 
autobiography wrote of him : ‘ Truly he is the 
beloved of God. In sanctity and purity of soul, he 
hath no equal in this age. This humble servant 
[namely the Emperor] used to go to the darwesh, 
who explained to him many minute points of 
theology. It was my desire to make him an offering 
of money ; but as he was above worldly things, 
I dared not make the offer, and contented myself 
with the presentation of the skin of an antelope to 
serve as a mat for reading his prayers on.’ 

The Guru resolved to visit Mian Mir, and duly 
notified his intention. The saint went forth to 
meet him, entertained him in his house, and treated 
him in every way with the greatest respect. The 
Guru inquired to what degree of divine knowledge 
he had attained, if he had succeeded in keeping his 
mind under restraint and repressing his desires, and 
if he had yet felt the blissful inward satisfaction of 
having met God. Mian Mir courteously replied : 
‘ He to whom thou showest favour hath found 
everything. Having abandoned all false worldly 
things I have found the true God, who is beyond 
conception and expression. Whoever hath seen 
Him hath abandoned pride and obtained peace. 
My mind is at rest and no longer tormented by 
desires. The pleasure of meeting God is incom- 
municable. In the words of Bhikan : — 

Though one try to utter God’s praises, they cannot be 
fully uttered ; 

They are like sweets to a dumb person . 1 

‘The man who possesseth divine knowledge is 
happy at every time and in every place. The man 
who possesseth it not, is ever unhappy. ’ After further 
conversation on the same and kindred subjects 
the Guru returned to his camp. The nobles who 

1 Sorath. 


42 THE SIKH RELIGION 

had heard the colloquy reported it to the Em- 
peror, and expressed to him their surprise that an 
elderly saint like Mian Mir should treat a married 
Sikh Guru with such respect. The Emperor asked 
Mian Mir for an explanation. Mian Mir replied : 
‘ The Guru is a sincere believer in God. His heart 
is pure and his words leave an impression on the 
mind. From those who hear him all doubts depart. 
On this account I have received him, and thought 
him worthy of respect and reverence.’ 


Chapter V 

The Qazi, on seeing that the horse which was worth 
a lakh of rupees had recovered, and that the Guru 
daily rode him, felt that he had got the worst of the 
bargain, and began to clamour for his money without 
waiting for the Diwali fair. The Guru then reminded 
him of what had occurred : ‘ A Sikh paid a lakh of 
rupees for the horse, the Emperor seized and appro- 
priated him. The animal was dying when you sold 
him to me. I will, however, pay you the ten thousand 
rupees at the appointed time.’ 

On another occasion, as the Guru was taking his 
siesta, the Qazi came to dun him. Bhai Budha, who 
was sitting at the Guru’s door, said that that was 
not the time to approach the Guru, and suggested 
that the Qazi might return another day at an hour 
when it would be convenient for the Guru to receive 
him. The Qazi pressed Bhai Budha to awaken the 
Guru. He was not, he said, a courtier or royal 
favourite who might not be disturbed. Bhai Budha 
replied, ‘ What are wretched courtiers in comparison 
with our Guru ? He is king of kings. Depart, come 
again. What time is this to come begging for 
money.’ The Qazi replied, ‘ If I tell the Emperor, 
he will punish the Guru, and I shall then obtain the 
price of the horse.’ This threat Bhai Budha promptly 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 43 

resented : ' Fool, put a guard on thy tongue. Thou 
knowest not God’s will.’ 

The Guru, hearing an uproar, awoke and came 
forward, when the Qazi thus angrily addressed him : 
‘ Thou pretendest ignorance. Thou neither payest 
me the promised money nor returnest me my horse, 
and yet thou sleepest without anxiety. Thou shalt 
see into what a pleasant sleep I will put thee. If 
thou study thine own interests, pay me for the 
horse, otherwise I will complain to the Emperor.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘ Thou mayest tell the Emperor 
and act as it pleaseth thee.’ After this the Qazi 
departed. 

One morning the Guru called Bhai Budha, told 
him his business in Lahore was accomplished, and 
they must return home. Bhai Budha, having made 
all preparations, set out in advance. The Guru, 
with his army, then marched and overtook him. 

There was in the house of the Qazi a daughter, 
named by the Sikhs Kaulan, 1 who was a disciple of 
Mian Mir. She, in addition to being very beautiful, 
was both amiable and virtuous. From her earliest 
years she had occupied her mind with praising God’s 
name and remembering Him in the company of 
saints. Even when she attained puberty she de- 
clined her parents’ suggestions to marry. When at 
home, she used to dwell in a lonely chamber. When- 
ever she went abroad, it was to behold her spiritual 
guide Mian Mir ; otherwise she never even put her 
foot outside her house. In Mian Mir’s congregation, 
as she frequently heard, not only from Mian Mir 
himself but from other very holy men, various praises 
of Guru Har Gobind, so she also praised him in the 
midst of her own family. The Qazi, her father, was 
in the highest degree incensed with her ; in the first 
place, for refusing marriage, and secondly, for ‘fre- 
quenting the society of faqirs. When, moreover, he 

1 This was the lady’s name after her conversion to the Sikh religion, 
Her original Muhammadan name is not known. 



44 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


heard from her lips praises of Guru Har Gobind, he 
became exceedingly wroth, and thus addressed her : 
* 0 infidel, thou praisest an infidel and obeyest not the 
law of Muhammad, according to which it is forbidden 
under penalty of death to praise an unbelieving 
person.’ Kaulan replied, ‘Father dear, the law of 
Muhammad doth not apply to holy men or to me. 
It applies rather to those fools who neither know nor 
obey anything besides. Saints are God’s servants. 
At the same time, He obeyeth them, and they may do 
what they please. They have no concern with the 
law of Muhammad.’ On hearing this and similar 
replies from his daughter, the Qazi’s heart burned 
with bigotry and indignation. On that very day 
he, in consultation with his brother Qazis, issued an 
order for the execution of his daughter for her sin 
of transgressing the Muhammadan law. Kaulan’s 
mother, on hearing this decision, informed not only 
her daughter of it, but also Mian Mir. On this 
Mian Mir said to Kaulan : ‘ There appeareth no means 
of saving thee here. Thou shalt be innocently put 
to death, as Mansur was by these tyrants. 1 It is 
better, therefore, that thou at once go to Amr its a r 
and seek there the protection of Guru Har Gobind. 
In this age there is none but him to save thy life.’ 
Kaulan deemed her Pir’s advice the best. She at 
once packed up her effects, and taking with her 
a fellow disciple, set out for Amritsar. 2 

Meantime the Qazi was not idle. He complained 
to the Emperor that the Guru had promised to pay 
him the price of the horse, but now put him off with 
excuses. He procrastinateth, and will not fulfil his 
promise. If thy Majesty send an officer to remon- 


Husain ibn Mansur Sufi was put to death at Baghdad, a.d. 02a, 
after suffering grievous torture and mutilation. In a state of mystic 
ecstasy he had cried out, ' I am the Truth (God).’ Being rebuked 
for this and told to say instead, ‘He is the Truth,’ he replied, ‘Yes 
He is all, but you say He is lost. Husain is lost; the drop hath 
disappeared, but the ocean remaineth as it was.’ 

1 Itihas Guru Khalsa. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 45 

strate with him, I shall consider I have the money- 
in my pocket. Otherwise, he will always put me off 
as he doeth now.’ The Emperor replied, ‘ When 
day breaketh, take one of my men to the Guru. 
I will send him word to pay thee all thy money, and 
I think he will not fail to do so.’ 

The Qazi, on visiting the site of the Guru’s camp 
at Lahore, found that he had departed, so he pre- 
pared to follow him. He knew that the Guru must 
have gone to Amritsar, but he was not certain if he 
would remain there or seek concealment in the 
neighbouring wilderness, where he would have no 
fear of the Emperor, as no army could enter it to 
capture him. The Qazi decided that his case would 
be hopeless if he did not set out at once. He would 
return to Lahore and seek the Emperor’s assistance, 
if the Guru failed to keep his promise or used violence 
towards him. 

On his way the Qazi met the Guru hunting to 
the west of Amritsar. The Qazi respectfully saluted 
him. The Guru complimented him on the celerity 
with which he had pursued him. The Qazi replied 
civilly, but at the same time made it very clear that 
he desired to obtain his money without further 
delay. The Guru invited him to remain for the 
night, and in the morning he would give him a 
cheque on a Lahore banker. 

Not long- after the Qazi’s arrival in Amritsar he 
heard that his daughter was there. He besought her 
to return to her religion and her home, but she, 
exceedingly afraid of being put to death, did not at 
all desire to accompany him. He then went to 
where his pony was tethered, mounted him, and 
made the best of his way to Lahore. The Guru did 
his utmost to detain him for another day, until it 
was convenient for him to pay the price of the 
horse. ' 

The Qazi, on reaching home, found his wife in tears, 
and began in earnest to think of his own errors. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


46 

He said to himself, 'My daughter would have 
remained at home had I treated her less cruelly.’ 
His wife levelled at him her bitterest taunts, and 
increased his repentance and mortification. He 
decided to go next day to the Emperor, and make 
his complaint. When he arrived in court he took 
off his turban, dashed it on the ground, and made 
other signs of distress, but as he spoke in tears the 
Emperor could not quite follow his story. Moreover, 
the Emperor was in a bad humour at the time, 
having been irritated by some petitioner immediately 
before. He angrily replied to the Qazi’s complaint : 

‘ What disturbance is this that thou art causing ? 
I understand thee not. Thou speakest like a lunatic. 
Appear not bare-headed in my presence. Thou 
wast a sensible man once, but now thou seemest to 
have lost thy reason.’ 

Wazir Khan then interposed and made an inge- 
nious defence of the Guru. ' Sire, what shall I say 
about anybody ? It is a bad world, and the Qazi 
now appeareth to be as bad as the rest. He made 
his daughter miserable and used to beat her daily. 
Being thus helpless, she left her home and went to 
Amritsar. Through fear of her father, she has 
remained there and desireth not to return. The 
Guru, who is ever merciful, receiveth all visitors 
and provideth for them, the Qazi’s daughter among 
others. Mian Mir and other saints go to meet him, 
and treat him with respect. It is against such a 
man this fool maketh complaint. His case, more- 
over, is a very paltry one. Thou hast heard too 
much already. It is not proper to quarrel with the 
Guru. Some calamity may happen by interference.’ 

The Emperor then, addressing the Qazi, passed 
his final order : ‘ Art thou not ashamed of thyself ?- 
It became thee not to have acted as thou hast done. 
It is not proper for thee to quarrel with priests. 
Thou oughtest rather to do them reverence. In 
open court thou hast rent the veil of thy modesty. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


47 


and rendered thyself despised of all men. Thy 
daughter was obliged to leave her home Be silent ; 
say no more ; thou hast received only thy deserts/ 

The Oazi, complaining that the Emperor would 
not allow him to fully state his case, took up his 
turban and left the court. He then reflected : ‘ On 
every side I am in trouble. The very haughty Guru 
will keep this ten thousand rupees. He thinketh 
I am utterly resourceless ; How shall I teach him 
a lesson ? He will not pay me my money, and he 
hath all but killed me. Moreover, my daughter hath 
forsaken me and embraced another faith ; I cannot 
remedy what is done, so I must either take revenge 
or kill myself. I trusted to the Emperor J ahangir, 
but far from assisting me, he hath brought counter 
charges against me. What hath God done with me ? 
I am in a dire dilemma, and sped by troubles on 
every side. The whole family is mourning for my 
daughter, and yet she is so estranged from us, that 
we can never on any account see her more.’ 

Kaulan began her altered life under the protection 
of the Guru, the friend of her spiritual adviser 
Mian Mir. She found consolation in repeating the 
following hymn of the Guru’s father, which she had 
learned by hearing it often recited by the Sikhs : — 

0 mother, I awake by association with the saints ; 

On seeing the love of the Beloved, I repeat His name 
which is a treasure. 

Thirsting for a sight of Him, I long and look for Him ; 

1 have- forgotten my desire for other things. 

I have found the Guru, the giver of composure and 
peace ; 

On beholding him, my mind is wrapped up in God. 

On seeing God pleasure hath arisen in my heart ; Nanak, 
dear to me is His ambrosial word. 1 

The Sikh chronicler states that Kaulan in a 

1 Kedara. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


48 

previous birth desired to obtain the true Guru’s 
instruction and be happy. 

The Guru had a separate building prepared for 
her residence, and bade her occupy her time as she 
pleased. On beholding her continual dependence 
on God, he was specially pleased with her, and took 
care of her in every way. Some time passed in this 
manner, until one day Kaulan, putting together all 
her jewels, placed them before the Guru. With 
clasped hands she thus addressed him, ' Friend of 
the poor, be good enough to apply the price of these 
jewels to some religious object, by which my name 
may be remembered for some time in the world.’ The 
Guru accordingly, on the fifth day of the light half of 
the month of Magh, Sambat 1678 (a.d. 1621), caused 
a tank to be excavated in her name with the money. 
The tank is still famous as Kaulsar 1 (Kaulan’s tank) 
in the city of Amritsar. The Guru also constructed 
another tank called Bibeksar, which was meant to 
commemorate his spiritual instruction delivered on 
the spot to his followers. There are now altogether 
five sacred tanks in the vicinity of the Sikh temple 
in Amritsar : Santokhsar, Amritsar, Ramsar, Kaul- 
sar, and Bibeksar. 

The Sikhs in Amritsar were all the time apprehen- 
sive that the Emperor would send an army to arrest 
the Guru on the Qazi’s complaint. They were pre- 
pared, if necessary, for defence. The Emperor, how- 
ever, thought no more of the Qazi or his grievances, 
and refused to embroil himself with the Guru. The 
masands formed the next party of whom the Guru 
had to take account. They went and complained to 
his mother against him : ‘ The Guru’s proceedings 
please no one. The Qazi hath gone to complain to 
the Emperor. When the Emperor sendeth an army 
and maketh war on us, what shall we do ? We 
have no kingdom and no large force to defend our- 

1 Itihas Guru Khalsa. Some Sikhs suppose this name was given 
the tank because the lotus (haul) flourishes in it. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


49 


selves. How can we cope with the Emperor ? The 
Guru must abscond and leave his city. This place 
belonged to his father and grandfather. When it 
passeth out of his possession, where shall we abide ? ’ 
Mother Ganga replied, ‘ I cannot help it. The 
first five Gurus preached doctrines of peace ; my 
son the sixth Guru weareth arms. It must sooner 
or later come to war with the Emperor. I have 
continued to admonish him, and tell him that such 
conduct becometh him not. He is, however, very 
resourceful, and, if it come to a conflict, he will know 
how to defend himself. You and I can do nothing. 
If you think the Guru will listen to you, then advise 
him. Go and do everything to avert war, and convey 
to the Guru my feelings on the subject.’ As the 
masands were on the point of personally remonstrat- 
ing with the Guru, a messenger arrived from Lahore 
with a letter from Wazir Khan informing him of the 
Emperor’s decision on the Qazi’s complaints. The 
Sikhs were delighted at the result. The difficulty 
with the Emperor Jahangir, they hoped, was at an 
end. The vaticinations of the masands were falsified, 
and the Guru and his party made up their minds 
to dwell for ever in Amritsar . 1 

Not long afterwards the Guru and his mother 
went to the shrine of Guru Nanak to see Sri Chand, 
Guru Nanak’s son, who lived there. The Guru 
made an offering of a horse and one thousand rupees. 
The Guru’s mother said to Sri Chand, ‘ Thou art 
now old, thou hast supernatural power, bless my 
son that he may have offspring.’ Sri Chand replied, 
with a line of Guru Arjan : — 

The vine of the race hath grown and shall last for many 
generations . 2 

1 The Sikh chroniclers state that this occurred in the time of 
Shah Jahan, but this cannot be correct. Jahangir died in a.d. 1627, and 
Kaulan had taken up her residence in Amritsar at least seven years 
before that, for she was there when Baba Atal Rai was born. 

2 Asa. 

SIKH, IV E 



5 ° 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


It will be remembered that after Guru Arjan had 
refused to marry Har Gobind to Chandu’s daughter, 
the young Guru was offered two wives. One of 
them, Damodari, he had already married. When it 
was known that she had become pregnant, there 
were great rejoicings in both families. To the 
second lady, Nanaki, the daughter of Hari Chand, 
the Guru was not yet married, partly on account of 
her youth and partly on account of his absence in 
Dihh, Agra, Lahore, and other places. Hari Chand 
now wrote that the approaching Baisakhi would be 
a suitable time for the marriage. It was accordingly 
then celebrated with all due formalities and rejoicings. 

There was a Sikh called or styled Almast, which 
means the enthusiast. In his wanderings he arrived 
at that part of the district of Pilibh.it where there 
had been built a temple to commemorate Guru 
Nanak’s visit. Guru Nanak, it is said, had left the 
mark of his five fingers on every leaf of a pipal tree 
there, and made sweet the bitter fruit of a soap-nut 
tree some forty miles to the east of it. Some Jogis, 
who had now taken possession, wanted to root up 
the Guru's pipal, name the temple after Gorakh- 
nath, and abolish the name of Guru Nanak. Almast 
could not endure this. Considering the temple his 
own, he resided in it, and performed all the menial 
and religious duties connected with it. The Jogis 
sought to expel him, and thus stated their case, 

‘ Gorakhnath performed penance here, hence the 
name Gorakh-mata. Thy Guru only stayed here as 
a. traveller for four days. How can the temple be 
his ? ’ Almast pointed to the marks of Guru Nanak’s 
hand on every leaf of the pipal tree, and instanced 
the sweetness of the soap-nut. It would therefore 
not be proper for him to resign the place to the 
Jogis. He bluntly told them that Guru Har Gobind, 
who was now on Guru Nanak’s throne, would soon 
come and humble their pride. The Jogis were so 
angry at this, that they set fire to the pipal and left 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


5i 


not a trace of it. Almast told them that when the 
Guru came, he would restore the tree, and whoever 
committed a sin against Guru Nanak should perish 
root and branch. 

Night and day Almast read the compositions of 
the Gurus. He used to pray, ‘ 0 searcher of hearts, 
true Guru, render us assistance.’ Enduring hunger 
and thirst and the inclemency of all seasons, Almast 
waited until Guru Har Gobind should come to repair 
and take possession of Guru Nanak’s temple. 

The parents of Damodari, the Guru’s wife, lived in 
the village of Dalla. Her eldest sister Ramo was 
married to Sain Das, who lived inDaroli in the present 
district of Firozpur. Sain Das had not been origin- 
ally a Sikh, but, owing to the good example and 
advice of his father-in-law Narain Das, and the ex- 
hortations of his wife Ramo, who was a grand- 
daughter of Bhai Paro, Guru Amar Das’s faithful 
attendant, he became a convert to the teachings of 
Guru Arjan. Sain Das was ever praying that Guru 
Har Gobind would visit his village. He built a man- 
sion to receive him, and vowed that no one should live 
in it until the Guru had hallowed it by his presence. 
Sain Das laid a beautiful bed with soft bedding, and 
over the pillow he put a canopy. He used every 
morning to lay flowers in the room and perfume it, 
and pray that the Guru would soon come to bless the 
place. His wife used often to press him to send for 
the Guru. On such occasions he would say, ‘ The 
Guru is omniscient and will come of his own accord. 
There is something wanting in our devotion, or we 
have committed some sin that his visit hath been so 
long delayed. We dare not write him a letter or 
send for him.’ On account of the troubles in which 
Almast was involved, and the devotion of Sain Das, 
the Guru decided on visiting Daroli and Pilibhit, 
and taking with him a troop of his armed retainers. 
His mother and his wives were to accompany him 
as far as Daroli, and stay with Ramo until he 



52 THE SIKH RELIGION 

joined them after bringing the Jogis of Pilibhit to 
reason. 

Bhai Budha, and indeed all the Sikhs, on hearing 
of the Guru’s resolve, were very much disheartened 
at the thought of being left in Amritsar without 
their leader. The Guru consoled them by saying 
that if they daily offered their adorations at the Har 
Mandar or Golden Temple, all their affairs should 
succeed. When the Guru found that his mother 
and his wives had arrived safely in Daroli, he com- 
pleted his preparations for the journey to Pilibhit. 

The Guru took his horses to Kartarpur, where he 
left them to be fed during his absence. There some 
Pathans of the village of Wadamir, ready equipped 
with swords and shields, offered themselves for 
service. With them was a tall and powerful youth 
of sixteen summers, who had large eyes, strong arms, 
thick neck, and sprouting beard. The Guru was 
impressed with his appearance, and inquired whose 
son he was. Ismail Khan, the head of the band of 
Pathans, replied, ‘ This youth was born in the village 
of Ghilzai Alim. His parents are dead. He is my 
nephew and liveth with me in Wadamir. I have 
brought him up. He is versed in both military and 
general knowledge, and his name is Painda Khan.’ 
The Guru inquired if he would accept service or not, 
to which Ismail Khan made reply, ‘ Sir, we keep not 
shops or till land ; military service is what we 
aspire to. If thou desire to employ him in that 
capacity, thou mayest do so.’ The Guru gave him 
ten rupees as enlistment money, supplied him with 
dinner from his kitchen, and promised that on 
returning from his excursion he would retain him on 
his own personal staff. The Guru remained for some 
days in Kartarpur, and again had an interview with 
Painda Khan. He gave him a house and a female 
buffalo, and agreed to pay him five rupees a day 
as an officer of his army. 

When the Guru arrived in Nanakmata, which is 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


53 


several miles north of the city of Pilibhit, the Jogis, 
seeing his retinue, thought that some raja had 
arrived. On hearing who it was, they hid themselves 
in huts made of leaves. Almast came forth from his 
retirement on hearing the neighing of the Guru’s 
steed, uttered thanksgiving that his spiritual master 
had arrived, and seemed like a dead man restored 
to life. 

Near the spot where the pipal had been, the Guru 
constructed a platform, and sitting on it repeated 
the Sodar. This being ended he sprinkled saffron 
on which he had breathed God’s name, when lo, it is 
said, the pipal emerged from the ground as a serpent 
from its lair ! In proportion as the Guru sprinkled 
the saffron the pipal grew, and after one night 
appeared in full size in all its luxuriance. 


Chapter VI 

Next day, observing the Guru’s glory and splen- 
dour, the Jogis ran to their priest with the same 
haste as cowards flee from the field of battle, and 
related to him all that had occurred since Guru 
Nanak had visited the place. The priest called to 
their recollection how Guru Nanak had vanquished 
the Sidhs who opposed him, and advised them to 
subdue their pride, conceit, and arrogance, bow 
before the Guru, and seek his protection. The Jogis 
became very angry at not receiving a promise of 
assistance or even encouragement. One of them 
said, ‘ Shall we who are Sidhs and Jogis, and live 
for endless years, bow before a child of yesterday, 
who, moreover, is not a celibate like ourselves ? ' 
Another Jogi said, ‘ Guru Nanak is no more, let us 
take possession of our temple.’ The Jogis consulted 
with one another, and came to the conclusion that 
until the Guru was in some way dishonoured, he 
would never leave them alone. They then in a body 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


54 

went to the Guru in all the bravery of the habila- 
ments of their order — ochre-coloured robes, rings in 
their ears, selis on their necks, wallets on their 
shoulders, and crutches in their hands — and repre- 
sented to him, ' Thou art a married man ; we are 
well-known holy ascetics. From of old this place, 
bearing the name of Gorakhnath, hath notoriously 
been ours. Wherefore leave it, and go and abide 
wherever it pleaseth thee ! ’ The Guru replied, 
‘ Whom do you call a holy ascetic ? I apply the 
name only to him who hath renounced pride and 
who hath the love of God in his heart. It is he, and 
not a man who weareth an ascetic’s garb, who 
shall obtain salvation.’ 

The Jogis, in brder to terrify the Guru, then began 
to make a show of their pretended powers, and 
cries of ‘ Strike the Guru ! strike the Guru ! ’ arose 
from the whole band. The Sikhs began to grow 
apprehensive. The Guru pacified them, and said no 
harm should come to them. The Jogis exerted all 
their powers, but could produce no effect on the 
Guru. Weary and abashed, they returned to their 
priest, who told them that, on account of their 
pride, they had forfeited such reputation as they 
already possessed. Since that date the place has 
borne undisturbed the name Nanakmata, and re- 
mained in the possession of Udasi Sikhs. 

The Guru remained some time in that neighbour- 
hood. He occupied himself with the chase, with 
preaching to his Sikhs, and with the organization 
of a methodical Sikh service for them under the 
guidance of Almast. 

The Guru on his return journey proceeded to 
Daroli, where his mother and wives were anxiously 
awaiting him. They went forth to meet him, and 
great joy reigned in the village on his arrival. 

Sain Das said to the Guru, ‘ Almast is a very 
fortunate man, for whose sake thou didst undertake 
such a long journey, and whose devotion hath 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


55 

rendered thee so subservient to him. When did he 
become a Sikh ? ’ The Guru replied, ‘ He was 
originally a goat-herd on the banks of the Ravi, 
and was known as "The simpleton”. He had long 
cherished a desire to see Guru Nanak, and, on 
accidentally doing so, love and devotion sprang up 
in his heart. He milked one of his goats, and offered 
the milk to the Guru. The only recompense he 
asked was to be allowed to gaze on the holy man. 
The Guru requested him to ask for some further 
favour. He replied as before, that his only desire 
was to behold the Guru. Then Guru Nanak said, 
"Twice three are six. Thou hast thrice desired 
to behold the Guru, and now thou shalt live to behold 
the sixth Guru in succession to me.” ’ Sain Das 
on hearing this narrative congratulated Bhai Almast, 
and applied to his case the following hymn of Guru 
Arjan : — 

0 God, by Thy favour I have dispelled my doubts ; 

1 have reflected in my mind that by Thy favour every- 
thing is mine. 

By service to Thee millions of sins are erased ; by a sight 
of Thee sorrow departeth. 

By repeating Thy name I have obtained great happiness, 
and banished all my anxieties and maladies. 

In the company of the holy man I have forgotten lust, 
wrath, avarice, falsehood, and slander. 

I have cut off the shackles of mammon ; Nanak, God, 
the Ocean of mercy, hath Himself saved me. 1 

It was now time for Ramo, Sain Das’s wife, to 
hold a spiritual colloquy with the Guru — ‘ Friend 
of the poor, true Guru, my prayer is that I may 
worship my husband with my body, and discharge 
all the duties of conjugal chastity, that the love of 
God may abide in my heart, and that I may ever 
remember His name, so that at the last He may 
assist me, and that I may have no fear of death, 

1 Devgandhari. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


56 

or hell, or further transmigration.’ The Guru re- 
plied, ‘ God at all times assisteth those whose hearts 
are pure. With a pure mind meditate on His name, 
and accept His will. Then shalt thou be happy and 
all fear forsake thee.’ 

The time of Damodari’s lying-in was approaching, 
and her mother-in-law Ganga continued to pray for 
her safe delivery of a son. Damodari ever meditated 
on God and repeated Guru Nanak’s hymns and 
those of her husband’s father the late Guru. On a 
Wednesday night when the moon was full, in the 
month of Kartik, Sambat 1670 (a. d. 1613), she 
gave birth to a son, who was afterwards named 
Gurditta, and who bore a remarkable likeness to 
Guru Nanak. When morning dawned, the Guru 
went to see his child, and then distributed alms to all 
applicants. Instead of worldly songs of rejoicings 
the compositions of the Gurus were sung on the 
auspicious occasion. The hymn composed by Guru 
Arjan on the birth of Har Gobind received special 
prominence. 

During the Guru’s long absence from Amritsar, 
prayers were offered there for his speedy return, 
and a letter was sent reminding him of his duty to 
return quickly to his Sikhs and the temple of his 
forefathers. He told his mother of the communica- 
tion he had received, and she highly commended 
his resolution to attend to it. The Sikhs who ac- 
companied him also pressed him not to delay. On 
his arrival in Amritsar the following, among other 
hymns of the fifth Guru, was sung with rapture : — 
O Guru, may I behold Thee and live, 

Then shall my fortune be completed, 0 God ! 1 
Hear this supplication, 0 my God ; 

Grant me Thy name and make me Thy servant. 

0 God, the Giver, protect me in Thine asylum. 

1 Also translated — 

O God, may Thy full favour be extended to me, 

That through the Guru I may behold Thee and Jive I 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


57 


By the Guru’s favour some rare person knoweth Thee. 

O God, my Friend, hear my supplication. 

That Thy lotus feet may dwell in my heart. 

Nanak uttereth this one prayer — 

That he may not forget Thee, Thou Lord of perfect 
excellences ! 1 

The Guru having taken up his residence at home 
used to preach to his congregation and occasionally 
go on shooting excursions. When not occupied 
with preaching or. prayer, he generally sat in the 
open air and received his Sikhs. The places where 
he used to sit are now called Pipali, Lohgarh, and 
Chaurasti Atari. During the Guru’s absence Bhai 
Budha organized a nightly sacred concert to be sung 
round the tank of Amritsar. The Guru, on hearing 
of it, said, ‘ This choir shall for ever abide, and I shall 
be always with it.’ 

Painda Khan arrived in Amritsar with the army 
and the horses the Guru had left in Kartarpur. 
Painda Khan’s ordinary gymnastic practice was to 
tie two large earthen vessels filled with sand to his 
brawny arms, and thus encumbered swing clubs 
weighing one hundred and sixty pounds each round 
his head. The Guru was pleased with him, and used 
to make him presents of valuable clothes, horses 
of Iraq, clarified butter, sugar, and all such food 
as was calculated to promote strength. 

Two men, called Niwala and Nihalu, went to the 
Guru, and asked how they could be saved. The 
following was the Guru’s reply : ‘ As there is fire in 
all timber, but without attrition it lighteth not or dis- 
pelleth cold ; and as butter is contained in milk 
but cannot be extracted without churning ; so there 
is divine knowledge which yieldeth the essence of 
happiness in the hymns of the true Guru. In 
perusing them there is great merit, but divine 
knowledge is not to be obtained unless man meditate 

1 Suhi, 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


58 

on them, implant them in his heart, and act according 
to them in all his affairs. It is then he shall obtain 
bliss and a knowledge of God, and dispel for ever the 
pain of transmigration.’ 

The Guru thus addressed Krishan and Pammu 
who also had sought his advice : ‘ Even if an 
ignorant man read the Guru’s hymns, all his sins 
shall be remitted. When man putteth forward the 
feet of desire, he shall easily obtain divine knowledge 
by practice, and be strengthened in the service of the 
saints. But the sinners who read to receive honour 
from men, are worthy of expulsion from all societies. 
Though they cause themselves to be addressed by 
every one as gyanis, yet they have no faith or divine 
knowledge. Such people are proud, and associate 
not with the holy. They give themselves all praise 
in the hope of receiving money, but they never obtain 
divine knowledge. How can they who possess such 
pride enter God’s court ? ’ 

There was an ancient Jogi in Garhshankar in the 
Jalandhar district, who gave out that Shiv had 
promised that whoever beheld him should secure 
emancipation. Many persons went to see the Jogi 
on that account Tilak alone of his village refused. 
The Jogi became curious to know the cause, and 
decided that he would go to see him. Tilak at the 
interview put a screen between himself and the Jogi, 
so that the latter might not afterwards say that Tilak 
had seen him and thus obtained emancipation. Tilak 
told him that all his own devotion was centred in 
the Guru, and he would resort to no one else for his 
salvation. The Jogi on hearing accounts of the 
Guru’s teachings conceived a desire to visit him, 
and begged Tilak to introduce him. Tilak consented, 
and both proceeded to Amritsar for the purpose. 

The Jogi opened the conversation by saying to 
the Guru, ' If Guru Nanak had divine power, why 
hast thou, who sayest thou art the sixth Guru, 
not preserved his original body ? ’ By this the_ Jogi 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


59 

desired to know why Guru Nanak had not survived, 
and why it was necessary for him to appoint suc- 
cessors, The Guru replied, ‘The soul putteth on 
a body like clothes which when old fall into tatters. 
Kings and rich men take off their old clothes and put 
on new ones. Poor people patch and stitch their 
torn clothes, so that they may last a little longer ; 
but, when a man hath new clothes, why should he 
patch and wear the old ones ? ’ 1 The Guru in 
support of this argument quoted the following verses 
of his father : — 

He who remembereth not God, leadeth the life of a snake ; 2 

So liveth the infidel who forgetteth the Name. 

He who liveth remembering God even for one moment, 

Shall last for hundreds of thousands and millions of days, 
yea, for ever . 3 

The Jogi on hearing this began to feel humble. He 
became profuse in his thanks both to the Guru and 
Tilak who had led him to Amritsar. He then begged 
the Guru to make him like Tilak, a believer in one 
God, and grant him the gift of faith. The Guru 
replied, ‘ God is in the power of love, but love is not 
that which can be bought. It is the gift of God, 
and is bestowed on him to whom He showeth mercy. 
If thou have faith, thou shalt obtain what thou 
prayest for from Guru Nanak’ s house. The store 
of love and devotion, a little of which had been 
granted to the avatars, jogis, rikhis, and munis, 
was entrusted in full by the Creator to Guru Nanak. 
He hath generously distributed it with open hands 
and from him no account shall be taken. As hath 
been said : — 

He to whom God gave a drop of nectar became im- 
movable and immortal ; 

1 The Guru compares the Gurus to rich men who change their 
clothes, the Jogis to poor men who patch them. 

2 He may live long like the snake, but he possesses no knowledge 

of God. 3 Gauri AshLapadi. 



6o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


He entrusted a store of devotion to Guru Nanak, and 
then took no account from him. 1 

The Guru on hearing of the pride of a certain 
reputed holy man, said, ‘ God is not pleased with 
pride or insolence. See how humble Guru Nanak 
was, and what lessons of humility and devotion he 
gave to his Sikhs. Shaikh Farid did painful penance 
for twelve years in the forest living on tubers and 
roots, but on his return home his mother found he 
had not completely renounced pride. He was 
accordingly remanded to the forest where he renewed 
his penance for twelve years more, this time with 
body reversed in a well. Not satisfied with that, he 
went with a wooden cake tied over his stomach for 
a third term of twelve years in search of saints. In 
his wanderings he met a holy man whom he served. 
It was only then that he became emancipated from 
evil passions.’ 

One Sewa Das, a Brahman, who resided at Srinagar 
in Kashmir, and who had been converted by the 
Guru, became such an anchoret that he retained no 
love for his relations. When reproached for this 
by his mother Bhagbhari, he defended himself by 
repeating the following hymn of Guru Arjan : — 

Relations abandon one when alive ; 

Can any one when dead be benefited by them ? 

He for whom it is so predestined remembereth God in 
his soul and body. 

Mammon is of no avail — 

His thirst shall never depart 

Who hath partaken of the poison of deception. 

Without God’s name how shall one cross over 
The dangerous ocean of the world full of appalling woe ? 
By meeting the company of saints, and worshipping 
God’s name, 

0 Nanak, man’s father’s and mother’s families shall be 
saved. 2 

1 Guru Arjan, Sorath. 


2 Gauri. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


61 


Bhagbhari made a beautiful robe to give to the 
Guru when he visited her village. She did not 
know when that time would arrive, but she kept the 
robe for him, saying that as' he was a searcher of 
hearts, and would consequently be attracted by her 
devotion, he would certainly visit her before she 
died. The Guru accordingly determined to proceed 
to Kashmir to meet her. 

On proceeding as far as Chapamala near Sialkot, 
the Guru inquired of a Brahman, whom he casually 
met, where he could find water to drink and bathe in. 
The Brahman carelessly replied, that the soil was 
stony and water was very scant. Upon this the 
Guru drove a spear into the ground, and it is said, 
a spring of pure water issued forth. The Guru’s 
Sikhs constructed a tank at the spring. The Brah- 
man was quite put to shame by the power of the 
Guru, confessed that he had been drowning in the 
pride of caste, and asked pardon for not having 
recognized the Guru’s greatness. The Guru replied, 

‘ The sins of him who repenteth shall be par- 
doned.’ The tank was called Gurusar, or the Guru’s 
tank. 

The Guru continued his journey into the moun- 
tains of Kashmir, where he received offerings of 
delicious apples, and admired the beautiful scenery 
and the temperate climate of the country. There 
he met Kattu Shah, a converted Muhammadan and 
faithful Sikh who had visited him at Amritsar. The 
Guru passed a night in his house. Thence he pro- 
ceeded to Srinagar, where he found Sewa Das waiting 
for him and meditating on God. On hearing the 
neighing of the Guru’s horses, Sewa Das came forth 
and found the Guru already at his door. The Guru 
was received with great demonstrations of respect 
and affection. Sewa Das’s mother said she wor- 
shipped the very ground on which the Guru trod, 
and repeated for him the following hymn of Guru 
Arjan: — 



62 


THE SIKH RELIGION * 


May I remember the Guru at every breath ! 

The Guru is my soul, the true Guru is my capital — 

May I live continually beholding the Guru ! 

May I drink the water in which I have washed his feet ! 

May I ever bathe in the dust of the Guru’s feet ! 

May I thus wash away the filth of pride attached to 
preceding births ! 

May I fan that Guru 

Who hath put forth his hand and saved me from the 
great fire ! 

May I draw water for the house of that Guru 

From whom I learned the way of finding the Unknowable ! 

May I continually grind corn for the house of that Guru 

By whose favour mine enemies have all become friends ! 

The Guru who gave me life 

Hath purchased me and made me his slave. 

May I ever and ever make obeisance to that Guru 

Who caused me to love him ! 

Saith Nanak, my Guru is all powerful ; 

He hath removed my troubles and anxieties, my fears, 
doubts, and sufferings . 1 

The Guru requested Sewa Das’s mother to bring 
the dress she had made for him. He put it on, and 
she blessed her fate that she had been so honoured. 
She began to praise the Guru for his condescension 
and repeated to him the following hymn of Rav 
Das : — 

Who but Thee, my Jewel, could do such a thing ? 

Cherisher of the poor, Lord of the earth, Thou hast put 
over my head the umbrella of spiritual sovereignty ? 

Saying this she drank some of the water in which 
the Guru had washed his feet. Her son also partook 
of the same beverage, and the remainder she sprinkled 
over her house. She cooked with her own hands 
for the Guru as long as he remained her guest. 

The Guru was visited by crowds of Kashmiris, 

1 Gauri Ashtapadi. 2 Maru. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 63 

men and women, both from Srinagar and the sur- 
rounding villages, and many embraced Sikhism. 
The Guru satisfied their spiritual necessities by 
preaching to them the cardinal virtues, and their tem- 
poral necessities by feeding them from his ever open 
kitchen. A very remarkable circumstance is said 
to have occurred during the Guru’s stay in Srinagar. 
A company of Sikhs was coming from a distant village 
with offerings of honey for the Guru. On the way 
they stayed with Kattu Shah, who pressed them to 
let him have some of the offering. They refused, 
saying that they could not offer to the Guru Kattu 
Shah’s leavings. When the Sikhs reached the Guru, 
the honey was found rotten and full of worms. The 
Guru said, ‘ This is the result of not having given 
to my Sikh in whom is the spirit of the Guru.’ He 
ordered them to return and satisfy Kattu Shah. 
Upon this, it is said, the honey became fresh and 
sweet as before. The Sikhs remarked on the dis- 
interestedness of the Guru, who preferred one of his 
Sikhs to himself. On this occasion the following 
hymns of the fourth Guru were sung : — 

No one knoweth the secret of the true Guru’s mind or 
what shall please him. 

The true Guru pervadeth the hearts of his Sikhs ; he is 
pleased with him who loveth them. 

As the true Guru telleth them, so they act and pray ; 
the work of the Guru’s Sikhs findeth acceptance. 

No Sikh shall approach him who desireth to have any- 
thing done by Sikhs without the true Guru’s order. 

A Sikh will work for him who heartily worketh for the 
true Guru. 

A Sikh would never approach him who cometh and goeth 
to men for deception. 

Nanak proclaimeth God’s decree, that the creature who 
doeth anything without propitiating the true Guru shall 
suffer great misery . 1 


1 Gauri ki War I. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


6 4 

When God’s saints are praised, it is God’s glory. 

God is only pleased with His own praises when His saint 
is congratulated. 1 

The Guru is a Sikh, and the Sikh is a Guru ; they are 
both one, but it is the Guru who giveth instruction. 

He putteth the spell of God’s name in the heart, 0 Nanak, 
and then God is easily obtained. 

While the Guru was in Srinagar, Bhagbhari fixing 
her thoughts on him blended her spirit with her 
Creator. He built a temple before his depar- 
ture, and charged Sewa Das to remain and preach 
the true faith. The Guru returned to the Panjab 
by Baramula on the river Jihlam. The next day 
he visited the spot where the renowned Rikhi 
Kashyap had dwelt, and where Vishnu was said to 
have assumed the incarnation of a dwarf. Thence the 
Guru proceeded to Gujrat in the Panjab. The people 
of that city were so satisfied with their own priest 
Shah Daula 2 that they only laughed at the Guru’s 
dress, appearance, and retinue. 

Shah Daula went to visit the Guru and expressed 
his deep regret for the offensive remarks made by 
his fellow-citizens. He insisted on the Guru staying 
a night with him. The Guru was pleased with his 
affection and devotion and said, f Gujrat is a city 
of mockers. Shah Daula is God’s faqir.’ Shah 
Daula’s spiritual position was strengthened and 
enhanced by the Guru’s visit, instruction and 
patronage. 2 

The Guru thence proceeded to Wazirabad and 
thence to Hafizabad, both in the present district of 
Gujranwala. In Hafizabad he was hospitably received 

1 Sorath ki War, 

2 Shah Daula was believed to have attained such illumination of 
mind that he could discover hidden treasure. His successors at Gujrat 
now produce a class of men with small heads who are let out to beg. 
For an account of Shah Daula see the K hulas ai-nl- Tatmrihh . 

s Pandit Tara Singh’s Gar Tirath Sang rah. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 65 

by a Sikh called Karm Chand. The Guru read the 
Japji to him and explained its meaning, objects, and 
advantages. Karm Chand learning from the Guru 
the esoteric meaning of the hymns of the Granth 
Sahib obtained salvation during life. The Guru 
thence proceeded to a village called Muttu Bhai, 
sixteen miles south of Hafizabad, to whose inhabi- 
tants he communicated the principles of his religion. 
There he remained for some time. 

In the town of Mandiali, about five miles from 
Lahore, there dwelt a Sikh called Dwara. His wife 
Bhagan was a woman of great natural endowments. 
They had an only daughter, modest and pious, known 
among the Sikhs as Marwahi ; but also called Maha- 
devi. In proportion as she had been dear to her 
parents in her infancy, so distressed did she render 
them now by her enforced celibacy. Dwara had a 
Sikh friend who advised him to wed his daughter to 
the Guru, of whom he uttered high praises as an 
inducement to the alliance. Dwara accordingly dis- 
patched marriage presents which reached the Guru 
in Muttu Bhai. The Guru graciously accepted them 
and dispatched his own return presents by Dwara’ s 
agents. The marriage was afterwards duly solemnized 
in Mandiali with great pomp and ceremony. 


Chapter VII 

Bhai Langaha arrived from Lahore with informa- 
tion for the Guru — ‘ My lord, thy father and grand- 
father constructed a temple and other sacred build- 
ings in Lahore. Religious services are duly per- 
formed there, and travelling strangers are received 
and treated with hospitality. The Qazi of Lahore is 
now jealous of thy fame. When he findeth oppor- 
tunity he maketh representations to the Emperor 
that our sacred buildings should be dismantled and 
mosques built on their site. Thy friend Wazir Khan, 

F 


SIKH. IV 



66 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


however, is still alive and impede th the Qazi’s 
designs.' The Guru replied, ' The dharmsal is 
God’s place. The fool who wisheth its end shall he 
quickly uprooted. The Guru’s dharmsal shall be 
ever permanent, God hath rendered its foundation 
immovable. Relying on Him continue to dispense 
the Guru’s hospitality.’ Bhai Langaha then re- 
turned to Lahore, and the Guru at the same time 
prepared to leave Mandiali. 

Thence the Guru proceeded to Talwandi, by this 
time called Nankana, the birthplace of Guru Nanak, 
and visited the scenes of his miracles there. The 
Nimani fair, called by the Hindus the Nirj ala Ikadashi, 
held on the nth day of the light half of the month 
of J eth, was at its height at the time. The Sikhs still 
observe this fair in commemoration of the Guru’s 
visit. Thence the Guru proceeded to Madar, where 
Guru Arjan was said to have left his shoes after 
having touched the Sikh Kidara with them for 
tubercles on the neck. 

The Guru next went to Manga in the Lahore 
district to see the tree under which Guru Nanak 
had sat. Thence he proceeded to Amritsar where 
as usual great rejoicings were held on his return. 

His wife Damodari presented the Guru with 
another child, this time a daughter. Among the 
Sikhs a name is given to a new-born child by a process 
of divination. The Granth Sahib is opened and the 
initial letter of the first word of the last hymn on the 
right page becomes the initial of the child’s name. 
The Guru’s daughter was thus named Viro. 

Painda Khan, who had been recruited at Kar- 
tarpur, was continually pampered to increase his 
strength. He could raise the trunk of a tree weighing 
ten mans 1 and lift two young buffaloes. He could 
without the aid of rope or bridle arrest a horse 
running at full speed. No wrestler would engage 
with him. 

1 About 8oo pounds avoirdupois. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 67 

In Har, Sambat 1674, Marwahi gave birth to a son 
whom the Guru called Suraj Mai. Nanaki, the Guru’s 
second wife, represented to the Guru that she had no 
offspring. The Guru asked her to have patience 
and promised that a son of hers should one day sit 
on the Guru’s throne. On Monday the 16th day of 
Maghar, Sambat 1675 (a.d. 1618), she gave birth to 
her first son who was called Ani Rai. 

One Rama of Batala on seeing the child Gurditta 
the Guru’s eldest born in his father’s lap, was pleased 
and thought what an excellent husband the boy 
would make for his daughter. He was, however, 
disheartened by the thought that he himself was 
only a poor man, and the Guru before whom em- 
perors and kings bowed was great and famous. 
What alliance could there be between an elephant 
and an ant, an eagle and a sparrow ? Having, 
however, thought of the Guru’s other humble 
alliances after the rejection of a minister’s daughter, 
Rama decided on offering his daughter as a future 
wife for the Guru’s son Gurditta. The Guru con- 
sulted his mother, who gave it as her advice that the 
daughter of such an excellent Sikh ought not to be 
rejected. The Guru then consented to the union. 
The ardas (supplication) was read, and Rama’s mar- 
riage presents duly placed before Gurditta. 

One of the main occupations of elderly Oriental 
ladies is to contrive matrimonial alliances for their 
young relations. In process of time, as Viro the 
Guru’s daughter by Damodari was growing up, the 
Guru’s mother suggested to him that he ought to 
search for a spouse for her. The Guru replied that 
God would settle all such things. At the same time 
he did not forget his mother’s suggestion. At his 
levee one morning he saw a man in dirty clothes 
standing with his son at a distance. The Guru 
noticed something noble concealed under the man’s 
otherwise unpromising exterior, and beckoned him 
to approach. The Guru inquired his residence and 



68 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


status. He replied that his name was Dharma 
and his son was called Sadhu. They were residents 
of the village of Malha, and had little in the way of 
worldly wealth. Dharma politely added that his 
son was the gift of the Guru and consequently the 
Guru’s servant. They had both come to pay him 
their respects and solicit his blessing. The Guru 
seated Sadhu near him and without further con- 
sideration sent to his private apartments for marriage 
presents. He put them in God’s name into the 
boy’s lap. Dharma was surprised and confused 
at this unexpected accession of honour, and said to 
the Guru, ' Honour of the unhonoured, where is 
a drop of water and where is the ocean ? Where is 
the ant and where is the elephant ? I am a poor 
creature and thou art the king of kings.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ In the Guru’s house this hath ever 
been the rule, that he whom nobody knoweth be- 
cometh conspicuous. Have no anxiety, remain 
humble as before, and everything shall prosper.’ 
The Guru’s mother had not been consulted as to 
the status of the proposed bridegroom, and when 
told what the Guru had done, did not fail to give 
emphatic expression to her adverse opinion. ‘ What 
hast thou seen in him ? I hear he is a very poor 
man.’ The Guru replied, ‘ Mother dear, God will 
act for the best. The bridegroom is good and of 
good family. Father and son are Sikhs, and as 
for wealth there is no deficiency in the Guru’s store- 
house.’ 

On Wednesday at the full moon in the month of 
Kartik, Sambat 1677, Nanaki gave birth to another 
son. The midwife praised his qualities, and the 
Guru’s mother was delighted. When all the cere- 
monies attendant on childbirth were completed, the 
child was called Atal Rai. The Guru on seeing 
him uttered this prophecy : ‘ He shall be absorbed 
in fixed (atal) contemplation, be a benefactor to 
mankind, restore life to the dead, crown his life 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 69 

with glory, and after death attain the highest 
position in God’s court.’ 

A Sikh named Mihra resided at Bakala, a town 
near the river Bias. He built a mansion for the 
accommodation of the Guru, and went to Amritsar 
with the object of inviting him. The Guru gave 
him no definite promise, but said he would come at 
some time. Mihra then went to wait on the Guru’s 
mother, expecting a more satisfactory answer from her, 
and hoping she would prevail on the Guru to accept 
his invitation. It was the time of the wedding of 
her grandson Gurditta to Natti, also called Nihalo, 
daughter of Rama, and she was in a favourable 
mood to listen to a request. She at once consented 
to go to Bakala, told Mihra to proceed thither, 
and she would soon follow with her son the Guru. 
The Guru, on consideration, thought it proper to 
yield to his mother and accept the invitation. He 
was in due course received by Mihra and the other 
inhabitants of the village with great respect and 
rejoicing. 

After three days Ganga the Guru’s mother in- 
formed him that as she had now seen her daughters- 
in-law, and her grandchildren, it was time for her 
to depart. She said that she had no further desires 
on earth to gratify, and would go to dwell at her hus- 
band’s feet. She gave orders that as Guru Arjan’s 
body was thrown into the Ravi near Lahore, so 
should hers be thrown into the Bias. Then collect- 
ing her thoughts, repeating the Japji, the Sukhmani, 
and the Anand, and concentrating her attention 
on Guru Nanak, she went to her final repose on 
the 1st day of Jeth, Sambat 1678 (a.d. 1621). Four 
Sikhs took her body into the Bias until the water 
reached their necks, and there allowed it to be borne 
on the stream. 

When the Guru after his mother’s death was 
preparing to return to Amritsar, Mihra pressed him 
to remain in Bakala and there celebrate the cere- 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


70 

monies of the tenth day after his mother’s death, 
that is, put on a turban and affix a patch to his fore- 
head according to ancient customs. The Guru 
replied, * The patch of Gurudom shall be applied 
here to the forehead of the ninth Guru. Thou shalt 
survive till then, and thy desire to behold his instal- 
lation shall be gratified.’ 

The Guru went to Amritsar without waiting for 
the ceremonies of the tenth day. When his wives 
and other relations heard of his mother’s death,, 
they were naturally much grieved for the loss of such 
a capable and affectionate lady. They said, ‘ We 
had no anxiety as long as she presided over us. 
Who will now give us counsel and consolation ? ’ 
The Guru by way of solacing his people recited the 
Alahanian or Lamentations of Guru Nanak. 

Bhai Budha who had gone to Amritsar to condole 
with the Guru on his mother’s death, took an op- 
portunity of making a personal representation to 
him, ‘ Thy mother hath gone to heaven. I see thee 
girding on thine arms and preparing for battle. 
My body hath grown old. I am no longer strong for 
combat, and must return to my forest home as before.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘ I am but fulfilling thy prophecy 
that I should wear two swords, and twist the necks 
of the Mughals. Thou mayest go to live where and 
how thou pleasest.’ 

The Guru practised all martial exercises and col- 
lected arms of every description. He hunted, 
witnessed exhibitions of strength by Painda Khan, 
and occasionally visited Kaulan to afford her 
spiritual consolation. 

Another son, who was named Teg Bahadur, was 
born to Nanaki on the fifth day of the dark half of 
Baisakh, Sambat 1679 ( A - D - 1622). It was prophesied 
at his birth, that he should restrain his mind, subdue 
his passions, and beget a powerful arms-bearing and 
warrior son, who would promote religion, convert 
jackals into tigers, and sparrows into hawks. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


7i 

There was a Sikh called Gurumukh who was 
married to a devoted wife. They were happy in 
every respect except that they had no children. 
They requested the Sikhs to pray for them, that their 
desires might be fulfilled. They were advised to serve 
Sikhs in every way, and they did so. The result was 
that they had a son in due course. When he was 
ten years of age, his parents died within a short 
interval of each other. The son was brought up 
without a trade or profession of any sort, and had to 
sell his household property to maintain himself. No- 
body would pay what was due to him ; and if he 
owed anything, he had to pay twice or thrice more 
than was just, or, in default, pledge his house and 
movables. At last it came to pass that he found 
himself without house, or home, or property of any 
description except one solitary kauri. He took this 
humble coin to the market-place, but no one would 
give him food for it. His stomach was collapsing 
with hunger, and he began to weep and wail, ‘ I was 
my parents’ darling, but they gave me no education. 
How shall I earn my living ? ’ While thus complain- 
ing a company of Sikhs singing hymns was passing 
by. One of them asked him why he was thus stand- 
ing all forlorn. Having told his story, he was urged 
to join the party and proceed to Amritsar to seek 
the Guru’s protection. He would obtain mainten- 
ance from the Guru's kitchen, for did not Guru 
Arjan say : — 

My brethren, eat food to satiety, 

And meditate on the ambrosial Name in your hearts . 1 

Apart from maintenance the youth would obtain 
spiritual advantage by visiting the Guru. He ac- 
cordingly joined the Sikhs, and did menial service 
for them on the road. When not so occupied he was 
committing the Guru’s hymns to memory. So ab- 
sorbed was he in his devotions, that he forgot on 

1 Bilawal. 



72 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


one occasion to proceed with his party. He was 
found wandering by a Pathan trooper and impressed 
to carry his luggage. It was then the era of Musal- 
man domination, and no one had the courage to set 
him free. He was lamenting his fate in having parted 
from the Sikhs, and being thus delayed in seeing the 
Guru, when he accidentally met a masand. Having 
saluted him he placed his kauri before him, and 
begged him to offer it to the Guru and supplicate 
him to grant an interview to a Sikh in distress. The 
masand took the kauri, blessed the son of Gurumukh, 
and proceeded on his way. 

The youth and the Pathan went on until they were 
wearied from the heat and the journey. The Pathan 
espied a clump of trees and an adjacent well where 
he stopped to take rest and quench his thirst. As 
he stood on the edge of the well the masonry gave 
way, and he was launched into the water with tons 
of masonry on his head. This was understood to be 
a punishment from heaven for his tyranny in im- 
pressing a devout Sikh, and causing him to undergo 
excessive hardship. Gurumukh’s son began to con- 
sider what he was to do with the Pathan’s luggage. 
He did not know his name or address. He therefore 
decided that the things were a windfall for himself. 
He opened the bundle and found some clothes, jewels, 
and one thousand gold muhars. He tied them all up 
again, and, taking them with him on the Pathan’s 
horse, set out for Amritsar. When darkness was 
coming on he sought a night’s lodging, and was con- 
ducted to the house of a Hindu. The Hindu hap- 
pened to have gone abroad, leaving his wife at 
home. The visitor handed her a rupee and requested 
her to bake him two cakes. She took the money, 
observed his bundle, and at once made up her 
mind if possible to relieve him of whatever he was 
carrying. She laid him on a bed in the deudhi, or 
outer reception-room, had his horse tied up, and 
began to prepare his dinner. She made him a savoury 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


73 


dish, in which she mixed a potent narcotic and placed 
it before him. He took a morsel of the food, and re- 
peating ' Wahguru put it into his mouth. As the 
bard said in one of his verses in praise of Guru 
Amar Das : — 

The poison was changed into nectar when he uttered 
the True Guru’s name. 

The hostess called out to her guest every half-hour, 
and was astonished at hearing him speak in the 
ordinary manner. Before composing himself to sleep 
he repeated the Sohila with great devotion. 

Foiled in this attempt, the hostess thought of 
another plan whereby she might rob her guest. She 
persuaded him, on the pretext of safety, to go and 
sleep near his horse and leave his saddle-bags and 
bundle with her. She represented that if anything 
were stolen from him she would get a bad name ; 
hence her thoughtfulness for him and herself. When 
she found the Sikh’s property in her possession, she 
hastened to a burglar who was a lover of hers, and 
requested him to come and kill the man who was 
sleeping in her reception-room. She said, ‘ He is my 
enemy, and it is proper to kill him; I will never forget 
the favour, and I will besides substantially reward 
thee.’ Having received a promise from the burglar, 
she returned home and went to sleep. By accident 
her husband returned home that very night. On 
entering the deudhi, and seeing a stranger, he in- 
quired who he was and his business . Gurumukh’ s son 
informed him. The owner of the house, who was a 
kind and considerate man, took him within, the better 
to show his hospitality, and went himself to sleep in 
the deudhi. At the end of the night the burglar came 
and killed the master of the house, believing him to 
be the strange guest, and then absconded. In the 
morning it was ascertained that it was the newly 
arrived husband who had been killed, and not the 
wayfaring Sikh. The victim’s wife began to weep 



74 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and mourn, her husband was gone, and she found 
herself in the painful position of an Indian widow. 

Meantime the guest awoke, and heartily thanking 
the Guru for his escape took up his saddle-bags and 
bundle, mounted his horse, and lost no time in de- 
parting. On his escape he devoutly repeated the 
following hymn of Guru Arjan : — 

No hot wind toucheth him who is under the protection 
of the Supreme God. 

Round about me is God’s circle, so no trouble can afflict 
me, my brethren. 

I have met the perfect true Guru who hath reconciled 
me with God. 

He gave me God’s name as my medicine ; I have fixed 
mine attention on the one God. 

That Preserver hath preserved me, and cured all my 
maladies. 

Saith Nanak, mercy hath been extended to me, and God 
hath become my helper . 1 

In the Guru’s court it was usual for the masands to 
bring the offerings of the Sikhs and hand them to an 
officer called Ardasia or chamberlain. He used to 
call out the giver’s name and the nature of the offering 
and present it to the Guru. When it came to the 
presentation of Gurumukh’s son’s kauri, the Guru 
said, ‘He hath sent this kauri with faith, and hath 
received much more than a thousandfold from God. 
He is now on his way hither.’ While the Guru was 
speaking, and the masand who had brought the kauri 
was wondering how the Pathan could have parted 
with his impressed carrier, the Sikh arrived and ad- 
dressed the Guru, ‘ 0 true king, this horse, these arms, 
clothing, and gold coins are all thine. It is thou who 
hast freed me from the tyranny of the Pathan, the 
poison of the evil woman, and the sword of the robber; 
and now thou hast granted me a sight of thee, and 
the privilege of bathing in thine ambrosial tank.’ 

1 Bilawal. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


75 

The Guru replied, ' Thou hast with faith offered a 
kauri in return for which Guru Nanak hath granted 
thee a treasure. The horse, arms, and money 
are all thine.’ The Guru told the youth to trade 
with the property, do an honest business, give a 
tithe of his profits to the Sikh cause, and continue 
his religious duties as before. On the evil woman 
who caused her husband’s death, a poet composed 
the following : — 

As accursed is the wealth hoarded by a miser without 
generosity, 

As accursed is a learned man’s pride which benefiteth 
not the world, 

As accursed is beauty without wisdom, and accursed the 
wisdom which praiseth not God, 

As accursed is the tongue without God’s name, as accursed 
is the hand which serveth not His saints , 

As accursed are the ears which hear not God’s name, as 
accursed is the king whose minister is evil, 

As accursed is life without association with saints, so is 
woman’s life accursed without a husband. 

And on the Sikh who offered a kauri Bhai Gur 
Das composed the following : — 

When man goeth one step towards the protection of the 
Guru’s feet, the Guru advanceth a million steps to meet 
him. 

The true Guru ever remembereth him with love, who 
even once remembereth a particle of the Guru’s teaching. 

The Guru shall bestow all wealth on him who offereth 
even one kauri with faith, devotion, and love. 

The true Guru is an ocean of compassion ; unfathom- 
able is the knowledge of his greatness ; I bow, I bow, I bow 
to the Guru whose glory is indescribable . 1 


1 Gur Das’s Kabit. 



7 6 


THE SIKH RELIGION 



Chapter VIII 

intelligence arrived that the 


Sudden ^ 

Jahangir had died in Kashmir, whereupon his SOfi 
Shah Jahan immediately assumed regal power. 
The Guru knowing the future addressed Strife, 
as an evil agency. ‘ Go where thy companions 
falsehood, worldly love, and pride, have their dwel- 
lings, and be happy with them. Thou shalt have 
enough blood there to fill the skull thou earnest.’ 

When Damodari's daughter was to be married to 
the son of Dharma, she wished to invite all her 
relations on the occasion, but the Guru would not 
agree, because he had a presentiment of hostilities 
on the part of the new Emperor. He knew that 
Mihrban (Prithia’s son) and Karm Chand (son of 
Chandu) had poisoned Shah Jahan’s mind against 
him. The Sikhs were all distressed at this, and said 
to him/ If thou invite not thy relations at such a time, 
how shall they be known as thy relations ? ’ The 
Sikhs not knowing the Guru’s real motive considered 
that he was too much occupied with Muhammadans 
and military exercises. It is true that he excessively 
pampered Painda Khan in every way, and used fre- 
quently to present him with offerings made by the 
Sikhs. This caused great heart-burning to others. 
It was decided that a deputation consisting of Bhais 
Tilak, Tirath, Niwala, Krishan, Tulsi, Takhtu, and 
others should wait on Bhai Gur Das, now an old 
man, possessing much influence with the Guru, and 
endeavour to persuade him to remonstrate with 
the Guru on his general conduct. On this occasion 
Bhai Gur Das composed the following : — 


People say the former Gurus used to sit in the temple ; 
the present Guru remaineth not in any one place. 

The former Emperors used to visit the former Gurus ; 
the present Guru was sent into the fortress by the Emperor. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


77 


In former times the Guru’s darbar could not contain the 
sect ; the present Guru leadeth a roving life and feareth 
nobody. 

The former Gurus sitting on their thrones used to console 
the Sikhs ; the present Guru keepeth dogs and hunteth. 

The former Gurus used to compose hymns, listen to them, 
and sing them ; the present Guru composeth not hymns, 
or listeneth to them, or singetli them. 

He keepeth not his Sikh followers with him, but taketh 
enemies of his faith and wicked persons as his guides and 
familiars. 

I say, the truth within him cannot possibly be concealed ; 
the true Sikhs like the bumble-bees are enamoured of his 
lotus feet. 

He supporteth a burden intolerable to others and asserteth 
not himself . 1 

Bhai Gur Das told the Sikhs that, though the Guru 
was blameless, yet in order to silence his detractors 
it was advisable to send for Bhai Budha to apprise 
the Guru of the scandal that had arisen. The Sikhs 
accordingly went to Bhai Budha in the forest and 
represented to him the state of affairs. They found 
him already prepared to set out for Amritsar. The 
Guru treated him with marked respect and seated 
him near him. He said ' Bhai Budha, thy body 
is old, but thy love is ever young. Why hast thou 
undertaken such a journey in this hot month of 
Jeth ? Tell me thine object.’ Bhai Budha replied, 
‘Thou art like the Ganges, like the sun, and like 
the fire. The Ganges swalloweth corpses and bones 
of the countless dead, and yet remaineth pure ; the 
sun draweth towards it noxious vapours, and yet 
remaineth pure ; fire burneth and consumeth the 
dead, and yet remaineth pure. Thou art like all 
three. The Sikhs seeing thy love for sport and mili- 
tary exercises fear for thee. Wherefore abandon 
them.’ The Guru laughed and replied, ‘ I have done 

1 War XXVI. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


78 

nothing improper ; I am only obeying thine orders 
with my life, and improving the condition of my 
Sikhs.' Upon this Bhai Budha returned to his 
forest dwelling. 

The Guru once in a vision beheld his father Guru 
Arjan surrounded by his saints. He thought that 
Guru Arjan thus addressed him — ' As Guru Nanak 
on receiving God’s order resigned the supply office 
in Sultanpur, travelled in foreign countries, and 
preached the true Name, so the saints who are 
annoyed by the unjust acts of the Turks, pray thee 
to gird on thine arms, and make use of them to 
good effect against thine enemies, that the Sikhs 
may abide in peace.’ Guru Har Gobind replied, 
'The words of the saints are immutable. What 
they propose God accomplisheth. I shall be engaged 
in many battles in which enemies and oppressors 
shall perish.’ The Guru on awaking took his bow 
and quiver, girded on his two swords, his daggers 
and other arms, and distributed horses, uniforms, 
armour, shields, and guns among his soldiers. 

A company of Sikhs came from the West to behold 
the Guru, and present him with offerings. As they 
were hungry and weary, the Guru desired to give 
them their dinner. The Guru’s servants represented 
that dinner had already been served, the fires were 
extinguished, the cooks had all dispersed, and even 
if they could be found, it would be very late to 
retire for rest after a second dinner had been pre- 
pared. The Guru then bethought him of a room full 
of sweets collected for the marriage of his daughter, 
and ordered that they should be given to his 
visitors. The key of the room was with Damodari, 
the Guru’s wife, but she refused to give it up or 
bestow the sweets on any one till the bridegroom’s 
party had partaken of them. The Guru sent to 
her several times, but she obstinately adhered to 
her determination. The Guru then gave vent to 
his sentiments—' My Sikhs are dearer to me than 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 79 

life. Were they the first to taste the sweets, all 
obstacles to the marriage should be removed, but now 
the Muhammadans shall come and possess themselves 
of them. My Sikhs are like a garden. If its trees 
remain green they yield flowers, leaves, and wood for 
all purposes. Wherefore we should ever take care to 
foster Sikhs, and promote their comfort. From the 
days of Guru Nanak down to my father the fifth 
Guru, it hath ever been the practice to entertain five 
Sikhs, whenever anything of importance was to be 
done, and all efforts should thus prove successful. 
When wandering Sikhs come to my house and go 
away disappointed, it is but a just requital that the 
sweets should fall to the Muhammadans, and the 
marriage be interrupted.’ The bystanders began to 
tremble, but none of them durst beg the Guru, to recall 
his curse. Fortunately, however, at that time a Sikh 
came with five mans of sweets as a contribution to 
the marriage feast. The Guru distributed the offer- 
ing among the Sikhs who had come from the West, 
and thus succeeded in discharging the duties of hos- 
pitality. 

The Emperor Shah Jahan went hunting from 
Lahore in the direction of Amritsar. The Guru at 
the same time was similarly occupied. Both hunting 
parties unconsciously approached each other, but 
without meeting. The Emperor had a white hawk 
which had been sent him as a rare present from the 
King of Iran. As the Emperor was on the point of 
returning to Lahore, a Brahmani duck rose, and he 
with his own hand let fly the hawk in pursuit. The 
hawk which had been over pampered refused to strike, 
but began to play with the bird. The Emperor felt 
tired and did not wait to capture it, but hasted on 
his way to Lahore. He sent his huntsmen with 
some troops to search, and concluded that they would 
bring him back his treasure. They went wherever 
they saw the duck rising before the hawk. The bird 
and the hawk eventually fled in the direction of the 


8o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Guru’s party. The Sikhs at once let fly a hawk of 
their own which seized the duck. The Emperor’s 
hawk then joined in the seizure, and the Sikhs caught 
them both. They were pleased to behold such a 
beautiful hawk, and congratulated themselves on the 
acquisition. They decided that they would keep it 
for themselves since it had sought their protection. 

When the royal huntsman and his troopers arrived 
and saw the hawk, they told the Sikhs that it was 
theirs, and asked that it should be given them. The 
Sikhs refused to admit the ownership of men who 
were strangers to them, and said that, as they had 
caught the bird with difficulty in the forest, and it 
had no owner, they claimed it as their prize. The 
huntsman replied, ‘ Shah Jahan whose glory is great, 
is king of the whole world. The kings of all lands 
bow before him, and fear him. He hath left nowhere 
a rebel, and hath subjected all men to his authority. 
Know you him not ? We are his servants. The 
hawk alighted here before our arrival. You have 
caught him, and made him your own. Give him 
up quickly, displease us not, or the Emperor will be 
angry.’ The Sikhs rejoined, ‘We will not give up 
the hawk through fear of the Emperor. Go and 
make a complaint to him whose power you so vaunt.’ 

The head huntsman renewed the remonstrance. 

‘ Fear you not the Emperor ? Since you are within 
his cable-tow, why desire to behold a real exhibition ? 
You speak like intoxicated persons, and know not 
what you say. Even kings who have thousands of 
fighting men stand with clasped hands before the 
Emperor, and fear him in their hearts. If you give 
not up the hawk, how shall you escape ? Whither 
will you flee ? When the Emperor’s army cometh 
and falleth on you with violence, who will fight on 
your side ? Then you and the hawk will be captured 
and taken away. Ponder on my words.’ 

The Sikhs angrily retorted, ‘ Coward, why quarrel 
thus ? Go off with thine arms in safety. Why pro- 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


81 


voke chastisement for thine insolence ? We shall 
see if the hawk belongeth to the Emperor or to us. 
Go before him and complain, and do what he will 
tell thee. Stand not quarrelling here. If thou desire 
to retain thy self-respect, abandon the hawk and go. 
Otherwise thou shalt leave thine arms behind thee, and 
suffer the disgrace thereof.' As the altercation waxed 
hotter and more angry language was exchanged, 
the Sikh warriors called to arms, and inflicted severe 
chastisement on the Muhammadans. They who sur- 
vived hastened their steps to Lahore to report to the 
Emperor the seizure of the hawk and the violence of 
the Sikhs. Other enemies of the Guru thought it 
a good opportunity to revive the charges against him, 
and to remind the Emperor of his alleged misdeeds. 

‘ The Guru,’ they said, ‘ hath now crowned the 
measure of his iniquity by misappropriating the 
Emperor’s favourite hawk, and his Sikhs have slain 
several of the bodyguard.’ The Emperor was taunted 
with apathy and advised to arrest the Guru at once, 
lest he should seize some fort, rise in rebellion and 
defy constituted authority. 

The Emperor sent for Mukhlis Khan, one of his 
trusty general officers, seated him near him, gave him 
a dress of honour of great value and a swift and 
powerful charger with golden trappings, and ordered 
him to organize a military expedition to punish the 
Sikhs. Mukhlis Khan already commanded an army 
of seven thousand men, and he was empowered to 
take with him any further forces he might require. 
He was to bring the leader of the Sikhs and the hawk 
by any means he thought expedient to the Emperor ; 
and he should then be promoted to even a higher 
position than he had previously occupied. Mukhlis 
Khan told the Emperor that it was a very easy matter. 
At the very moment of his arrival in Amritsar he 
would arrest the Guru, and bring him before his 
Majesty without having to resort to force of arms. 

The Sikhs of Lahore hearing of the contemplated 

G 


SIKH, IV 



82 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


military expedition against the Guru sent a swift mes- 
senger to apprise him of it. The messenger reached 
Amritsar in the evening. There was a place called 
Lohgarh, or the iron (strong) fortress, outside the city. 
It was really a platform raised to resemble a species 
of tower, where the Guru used often to hold his court 
in the afternoon. He had a high wall built round it, 
prepared it in other ways for defence, and posted 
within the enclosure a small detachment of twenty- 
five men in anticipation of attack. He took out all 
his weapons, cleaned and sharpened his swords, and 
distributed them among his troops. Meantime, there 
were great rejoicings in the Guru’s palace on account 
of his daughter’s approaching marriage, and women 
sang the marriage songs composed by the Gurus. 

His Sikhs told the Guru that a big gun was neces- 
sary for the defence of Lohgarh. The Guru replied, 

‘ There is a hollow tree lying there which will serve 
as a cannon.’ It is said that from the hollow tree 
thus converted into a weapon of artillery the Sikhs 
subsequently discharged stones in such a manner 
as to dismay their adversaries and seriously thin 
their ranks. 

The Sikhs and their officers made preparations, 
and were soon ready for the fray. The Guru addressed 
his commander-in-chief Bhanu : ‘ It is not good 
to have the fighting near our homes, let the battle 
be fought outside our city. In the first place, the 
enemy may enter our houses and plunder our pro- 
perty, and secondly, we may kill our own brave men 
in the darkness. It is better, too, that our families 
be removed for safety outside the city. They must 
only take with them the first articles on which they 
can lay their hands.’ 

Bhai Niwala, who appears to have been an elderly 
man, went into the Guru’s private apartments and 
brought forth his wives and children. For the 
approaching marriage everything that was necessary 
had been stored up, but there was no time now to 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


83 


make a nice selection, and many valuables must be 
left behind. The twenty-five brave Sikhs on duty 
in Lohgarh restrained the imperial host, but were 
unable to cause much destruction among them owing 
to the darkness of the night. The defenders of the 
fort said, that in the morning they would show 
their strength to the Turks, that they would fight 
their way to Lahore, capture and bring back the 
Emperor, and thus prove to the world that they 
really were the Guru’s soldiers. Meanwhile the 
Guru’s wives and children were all removed to a house 
near Ramsar. The Guru went to the temple and 
there fervently prayed for victory. He repeated on 
the occasion these lines of Guru Arjan : — 

Wicked men and enemies are all destroyed by Thee, 0 
Lord, and Thy glory is manifested. 

Thou didst immediately destroy those who annoyed Thy 
saints. 1 

Several other verses of the Guru’s father recurred 
to his memory at the time : — 

God the Destroyer of fear removeth pride. 2 

They who harbour it shall drop and fall on the ground 
like leaves? 

It was discovered at Ramsar that the Guru’s 
daughter Viro, whose marriage had been thus rudely 
interrupted, was missing. At this her mother began 
to weep and wail. Singha and Babak were sent to 
search for her. It appears that when the Guru’s 
family were leaving their abode, the girl was acci- 
dentally left in the upper story of the house. The 
Guru gave Singha and Babak his rosary to satisfy 
her that they had been really commissioned to 
search for her, and that no treachery was contem- 
plated. 

The Sikh detachment in Lohgarh, though coura- 

1 Dhanasari 2 Maru Snlha. 3 Gauri ki War I. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


84 

geous to the last degree, were too few to cope with 
the Muhammadan host, and after destroying hun- 
dreds of the enemy fell martyrs to the Guru’s cause. 
The Muhammadans proceeded to the Guru’s palace 
in search of him, and on finding it empty became 
furious. They took possession of the house in which 
the sweets had been stored for the marriage feast, 
and gorged themselves to repletion. Viro remained 
silent in the upper story, and would not through fear 
open the door even when invited to do so by Singha 
and Babak. When, however, her father’s rosary 
was shown her by the light of a lamp, she became 
satisfied that no deceit was intended. She then 
descended, and Singha put her on horseback in front 
of him. The horse, which used to be kept at Ramsar, 
knew his way through the city, and so Singha gave 
him free rein that he might make his way in the dark. 
Mukhlis Khan, who was standing on the brink of the 
holy tank, on hearing a horse pass, challenged the 
rider. Babak, who was walking by the horse, replied 
in Mukhlis Khan’s Turkish dialect, ' We belong to 
you. We have grown weary of searching for you, 
but did not know where to find you. If you have 
seen the Guru anywhere pray tell us, and if not, then 
be on the alert.’ They were on the point of passing 
on when their movements were heard by one of the 
Muhammadan soldiers, who shouted aloud, ‘The 
Guru’s family is escaping, seize them.’ Upon this 
a Pathan soldier put his lance in rest for attack. 
Babak, noticing his action, discharged his musket, 
and the soldier fell like a plantain tree before a gale 
of wind. The Guru, hearing the report, sent Bidhi 
Chand and Painda Khan to assist Viro’s rescuers ; 
and they all made their way in safety to him and 
received countless congratulations. 

Three hours of night now remained. The Guru, 
feeling that his family would not be safe in Amritsar 
after daybreak, decided on at once sending them to 
Goindwal. It happened, too, that the coming day 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 85 

was the one fixed for Viro’s marriage. He ordered 
that his family and all the non-combatants of the 
city should halt at Jhabal, a town about seven miles 
to the south-west of Amritsar. They would spend 
the day there, and he would join them in the evening, 
when they would celebrate the marriage without 
interruption, and thence proceed to Goindwal. This 
was all arranged, and the Guru dispatched a guard 
of soldiers for the protection of his people. He took 
the precaution of sending two soldiers to stop the 
bridegroom’s procession, lest it might fall into the 
hands of the enemy. 

The enemy, wearied by the forced march of the 
previous day and their sleepless bivouac, and sur- 
feited by the Guru’s sweets, were sleeping on beds 
they had seized from the citizens. When they lay 
down they thought that the Guru had either been 
killed in the fight or had absconded. They were 
awakened by an unmistakable sound of muskets. 
Then began the conflict, the clashing of swords, and 
the hissing of bullets. Brave men fell and died, 
blood flowed in profusion, corpses were piled on one 
another, the wounded uttered piercing cries ; heads, 
bodies, arms, and legs were separated, and horses 
without riders careered round the city. 

Mukhlis Khan, on seeing his soldiers giving way, 
thus addressed them, ' Are you not ashamed to run 
away before a few Sikhs ? Charge, and either cap- 
ture or kill the Guru.’ The Turks, supposing that 
Bhai Bhanu, the Guru’s commander-in-chief, was 
the Guru himself, advanced against him. They were 
further incited to the combat by the shouts of Shams 
Khan, an officer of the imperial guard, and rushed 
on with drawn swords. Bhai Bhanu, too, cheered on 
his men, ‘ Advance, O Sikhs ; fight, and fear not. 
The Guru our preserver is with us. If your heads 
fly off, let them fly, but never allow yourselves to be 
called cowards. Charge in a body, strike and rout 
the enemy.’ On hearing these words of their chief. 



86 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


the Sikhs set their teeth and charged, crying, ' Smite ! 
smite ! ’ and challenging the enemy. Such was their 
onslaught that Shams Khan and his troops fled 
precipitately. Mukhlis Khan sent Anwar Khan to 
Shams Khan’s assistance. Anwar Khan addressed 
him, f 0 Shams Khan, thou hast disgraced the names 
of Mughal and Pathan. Think of thine ancestry, 
stand and fight the enemy, and lose not heart. Even 
if thou save thyself for a moment by flight, that 
shall not long avail thee, for Mukhlis Khan will 
afterwards put thee to death, and thou shalt then 
burn in hell-fire.’ 

Hearing Anwar Khan’s reproaches, Shams Khan 
returned and roared defiance at his opponents. This 
produced some confusion in the Sikh ranks. On 
observing this, Bhai Bhanu rushed with great 
velocity to the protection of his troops, and caused 
them to fire a volley which killed Shams Khan’s 
horse. Bhai Bhanu then dismounted, and he and 
Shams Khan engaged in single combat. Bhai Bhanu 
said to him, ' I will not suffer thee to escape now.’ 
Shams Khan replied, ‘ Defend thyself, I am going to 
strike.’ Bhai Bhanu received the sword on his shield, 
and then putting forward all his force, beheaded his 
adversary with one blow. The Muhammadans, see- 
ing their commander slain, rushed in a body on 
Bhai Bhanu, and assailed him on all sides. He, 
however, lost not heart, but cut down the enemy as 
if they were radishes. Observing him springing and 
roaring like a tiger, all feared to approach him. At 
last he received two bullets which passed through 
and through his body. With Wahguru on his lips 
the brave commander of the Guru’s army went to 
his repose at Guru Nanak’s feet. 

When Mukhlis Khan heard of Shams Khan’s 
death he dispatched a thousand horse under the 
command of Saiyid Muhammad Ali to the part of 
the field in which he had been slain. Muhammad 
Ali’s troops fought with great determination, and 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 87 

inflicted appalling loss on the Sikhs. Heads and 
legs flew off until heaps were formed on the plains. 
Kites uttered shrieks of joy, and the demonesses 
attendant on the goddess of war belched on receiving 
such a surfeit of flesh and gore. The marksmen 
Bhai Tota, Nihalu, Tiloka, Ananta, and Nivala, 
killed many Musalmans. Singha, too, did good ser- 
vice in encouraging the Guru’s men, ‘ Fight now ; 
remember, my friends, this opportunity will not 
come again.’ A Muhammadan trooper in the Guru’s 
army represented to him that his men were too few 
to cope with the thousands of brave troops against 
him. The Guru replied that he was not responsible 
for the war ; they who sought it should perish 
therein. His helper was God. In the words of the 
Sukhmani : — • 

If God infuse power into a little ant, 

It can reduce to ashes armies of hundreds of thousands 
and millions- of men. 

He is the Preserver of all creatures. 

Singha continued valorous to the last. He 
advanced with five hundred warriors, fought like 
a tiger, and put the Muhammadan hosts to flight, 
as if they were so many jackals. Muhammad Ali, 
seeing his army fleeing, pressed to the van and 
endeavoured to rally them. He fired at Singha and 
wounded both him and his horse. His adversary, 
seeing that Singha was not yet dead, fired again but 
missed him. Singha recovered consciousness, drew 
forth an arrow as he lay on the ground, and taking 
steady aim drove it through Muhammad Ali’s chest. 
The imperial army, on seeing him fall, fought with 
desperation to avenge him. Bhai Tota and Bhai 
Tiloka, who were so eager for the combat that they 
pushed others aside to reach the front, both fell 
mortally wounded. In the melee that ensued the 
Sikhs and the Turkish army became blended like 
two torrents. The soldiers of both armies wrestled 



88 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


with one another. The Muhammadans rushed on 
shouting ' Ya Ali ! Ya Ali ! 5 The brave Singha in 
the conflict died a hero’s death. 

When the news of Singha’s death reached the Guru 
he dispatched the powerful Painda Khan against 
the Muhammadans. Painda Khan advanced with 
his troops like a hawk moving amongst quails. 
The Guru himself, too, went into the thick of the 
fight, and adjusting his arrows to his bow discharged 
them hissing like snakes, and killed countless 
Muhammadans. These fell to the earth as if they 
were drunkards intoxicated with wine or bhang. 
When Mukhlis Khan heard that the Guru had 
personally taken the field, and was destroying his 
army, he ordered all his troops to charge, and not 
allow the Sikh priest to escape, as they had done 
on the previous night. ' God ’, the Muhammadan 
chief said, ‘ hath now given the Guru into our hands ; 
we will send him to the Emperor and receive rewards 
and honours for his capture.’ 

Upon this the Imperial army in a body plied their 
arrows, swords, and muskets, and rushed like clouds 
in the month of Sawan to the capture or destruction 
of the Guru, but the Guru’s arrows dispersed them 
like a westerly wind. When struck by him they lay 
on the ground like men in the deep sleep of indigestion 
induced by a surfeit of sweets. Those still able to 
fight advanced gnashing their teeth with rage, but 
on meeting the Guru wrung their hands in sorrow. 
The Guru in order to draw them on used sometimes 
to retire a little. The Turks would then advance and 
receive their death at his hands. Bhai Jaita and 
Takhtu thinking that the Guru’s retreat was due 
to weariness, prayed him to take a brief respite, 
and they would in the meantime hold the enemy 
m check. The Guru replied, ‘ No ; I have retreated 
that they may advance and be all destroyed in a 
body.’ 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


89 


Chapter IX 

Bidhi Chand and Painda Khan had been com- 
mitting great havoc among the Muhammadan 
army. They and Bhai Jati Mai — son of the hero 
Singha — Bhais Nan da, Piraga, Bhima, and Bhikhan 
mounted on their chargers, ran to the Guru’s assist- 
ance, and destroyed detachment upon detachment 
of the enemy. Bhai Nanda drew his sword, and 
cut off the heads of several Muhammadans. The 
conflict was so obstinate that the martial weapons 
on both sides were broken, and the combatants 
had then to fight with their fists. While they were 
thus contending, Muhammadans in their dismay and 
confusion fired both on the Guru’s troops and on 
their own. The Guru’s brave soldiers, Amira, Jaita, 
Tota, Krishan Das, Gulala, Gopala, Nihala, Diala, 
Takhtu, Mahita, Paira, Tiloka, Jati Mai, Piraga, 
Jetha, Bidhi, Chand, Babak, and Painda Khan 
cheerfully resolved to spurn life and devote them- 
selves soul and body to the Guru’s assistance. 

The Sikhs surrounded Ali Beg, Bahadur Khan, 
Saiyid Didar Ali, Mihr Ali, Ismail Khan, and others, 
who had acquired throughout India great fame in 
many a field. The brave youths Bidhi Chand and 
Painda Khan, lifting their lances, soon made their 
enemies’ horses riderless. The Guru himself so 
fought that no one whom he struck asked again for 
water. The Musalmans advanced against him with 
drawn swords. The four Sikhs Tota, Tiloka, Ananta, 
and N ihala hastened to his support. These four faith- 
ful and devoted Sikhs, having killed Bahadur Khan 
and the whole of his detachment, received the edge of 
the sword on their own necks, and went to heaven 
as a reward for their devotion. Seeing them fall 
Bhai Mohan, Bhai Bidhi Chand, Gopal Das, Jaita, 
Piraga, Paira, Damodar, Bhag Mai, Painda Khan, 
Jati Mai, Chandar Bhan, Chhajju, Gajju, Hira, 



90 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Moharu, Sujan, and other magnanimous Sikhs who 
had devoted their lives and property to the Guru, 
challenged, defied, and closed with the enemy. 

Mukhlis Khan then addressed his chosen warriors 
Karim Beg, Rahim Beg, Ali Beg, Jang Beg, Salamat 
Khan, and others : ' My brethren, why have you lost 
courage ? You enjoy revenue-free lands given you 
by the Emperor, and are called Sardars. Show your 
gratitude, earn fame and receive further rewards of 
bravery. The Guru hath no army, no soldiers, his 
Sikhs are common people. Charge, capture them, 
take them to the Emperor, and you shall receive re- 
wards.’ Saiyid Ali replied, ‘ 0 my lord, thou speakest 
justly, but the Guru’s arrows are like black snakes. 
If one of them strike a man, he requireth nothing 
more. Painda Khan is a powerful and brave warrior. 
Thou sayest that the Guru’s army is worthless • open 
thine eyes and see. We brought seven thousand 
men against him, how many of them now remain ? 
The Guru is a lamp around which his enemies fly 
like moths and are reduced to ashes.’ 

Mukhlis Khan finding himself defeated sent an 
envoy to propose terms of peace. The envoy 
addressed the Guru as follows : — ‘ 0 true Guru, 
fighting becometh thee not. Consider if thou hast 
any kingdom to enable thee to fight. The Emperor 
hath hundreds of thousands of men, many fortresses, 
and endless resources. If thou come to terms, thou 
shalt abide in thy city. Thou art already in pos- 
session of revenue-free villages, and hast up to the 
present lost nothing. All rajas, nawabs, and rulers, 
are subject to the Emperor. He is the lord of Balkh, 
Bukhara, Kabul, Balochistan, Hindustan and other 
countries. What power hast thou to contend with 
him ? If thou suffer a reverse, on whom wilt thou 
rely for assistance ? Whither wilt thou flee for 
safety ? If thou hearken to my words, then will we 
make peace. Be satisfied with the Guruship. What 
wilt thou gain by a prolongation of hostilities ? ’ 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


9i 


The Guru replied, ‘ The Emperor is without the 
fear of God in his heart. Why should we go to make 
peace with him ? Our reliance is on Wahguru, the 
King of kings, whose creature this Emperor is. 
If his descendants persist in quarrelling with the 
Guru, they shall forfeit their empire. Let the 
Emperor protect his throne. The army of which 
he is so proud shall perish like the seven thousand 
you have brought against me. If you retire now, 
you may survive, but if you persist in fighting, not 
one of you shall escape.’ 

Mukhlis Khan on receiving this message considered 
how he could show his face to the Emperor if his 
troops retired without victory. On the other hand, 
were they to renew the combat, they would have 
no chance of escape ; but at all events it was better 
to die fighting with the foe than to live by igno- 
minious flight. He therefore, after a short respite, 
ordered the renewal of hostilities. When the Guru’s 
men heard the Musalmans’ call to arms, they repre- 
sented to their spiritual and temporal master, ' O true 
king, only one hundred of us armed men are ready for 
the combat. All the rest are sleeping after the toil 
of battle. Mukhlis Khan’s troops who fled from the 
field have now rallied and sounded the call to arms.’ 
The Guru replied, ' We shall send them straight to 
death. Allow them not to escape.’ Bidhi Chand 
applauded the Guru’s determination. 

Upon this the Guru’s men called to arms, and 
lighting the fuses of their matchlocks advanced to 
repel the enemy. Every Musalman who advanced 
was slain. The Guru, who fought with conspicuous 
bravery and success, was a host in himself. He 
discharged in quick succession barbed and crescent- 
shaped arrows, which hissed as they left his bow- 
string, and killed men and horses of the opposing 
ranks. His handful of men blessed and praised his 
valour. Saiyid Sultan Beg, seeing his- own army 
fast perishing, decided' to make a united and 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


92 

determined rush on the Guru, as the only means of 
obtaining victory. The advice was accepted and the 
Musalmans charged. Bidhi Chand, Painda Khan, 
and Jati Mai hastened to oppose the onset of the 
enemy, and dealt them wholesale destruction. Sultan 
Beg aimed a lance at Bidhi Chand, whose horse 
providentially turned aside and thus saved his 
master. Upon this Sultan Beg retreated to escape 
a return stroke. Bidhi Chand called out to him, 
‘ Stand, why fleest thou ? ’ Sultan Beg received his 
adversary’s sword on his shield, and escaped for 
the moment. Bidhi Chand’s sword could not reach 
him as he fled, but a swift arrow overtook him. It 
pierced Sultan Beg’s body, and he fell lifeless from 
his horse. 

Painda Khan was equally successful in the combat. 
He made Didar Ali, the last survivor of Mukhlis 
Khan’s personal staff, bite the earth. Mukhlis 
Khan, now left alone, thought nothing remained for 
him but to engage the Guru himself. He said, 

‘ Let thee and me now decide the quarrel by single 
combat, and none else approach.’ In order to please 
him the Guru warned his own men to stand aside. 
He then discharged an arrow which killed Mukhlis 
Khan’s horse. Mukhlis Khan then said, ‘ Thou art 
on horseback and I am now on foot. Moreover, 
I want to fight with sword and shield, but thou art 
discharging arrows. It is not a fair fight.’ Upon 
this the Guru dismounted and said, ' Show thy 
utmost skill and strike the first blow.’ The Khan 
aimed a blow, which the Guru avoided by a swift 
side movement. The next blow fell on the Guru’s 
shield. The Guru then said, ‘ Thou hast made two 
strokes which I have parried. Now it is my turn.’ 
The Guru then lifting his powerful arm dealt Mukhlis 
Khan a blow which cleft his head in twain. 

Painda Khan, Bidhi Chand, and Jati Mai killed 
the Musalmans who held their ground, but the great 
majority of them fled without venturing to look 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


93 


behind. After nine hours of fighting the Guru’s 
victory was complete. All his surviving Sikhs 
exchanged congratulations, and the drums of vic- 
tory joyously sounded. 

The Guru went to inspect the field of battle, and 
then visited Lohgarh. On seeing his faithful friends 
Mohan and Gopala groaning in death’s agonies, 
he wiped their mouths and said, ‘ O Mohan and 
Gopala, whatever you ask me I will grant you. 
You have given your lives for my sake. There is 
nothing I would not give you.’ They replied, 

‘ We feared that at our last moment we should not 
behold thee; but thou, being a searcher of hearts 
and omniscient, hast come to gratify us. We have 
now no further desire.’ The Guru again pressed 
them to ask for a favour. They replied, ‘ Grant us 
that in whatever shape thou mayest be, we may 
ever abide with thee. Grant us also that all who 
die fighting on thy behalf may receive salvation.’ 
Then the Guru : ‘ I congratulate you on your 

disinterestedness. Both prayers shall be granted. 
You are happy in your death.’ Then fixing their 
thoughts on God they separated their eternal souls 
from their temporary bodies. 

The Guru had all the remaining corpses collected, 
washed, clothed with shrouds, and placed on funeral 
piles. He then with his own hands set fire to the wood. 
The battle extended to a distance of over four miles 
to the south of Amritsar, and there a dharmsal 
called the Sangrana or Battle was erected to com- 
memorate the Guru’s victory. The battle was 
fought in Sambat 1685 (a.d. 1628). A fair is 
held on the spot every year at the time of the full 
moon in the month of Baisakh. 

When the Guru had completed the last rites of his 
brave soldiers, he made preparations to go to his 
family in Jhabal. On arriving at Jhabal he had time 
to again turn his attention to his daughter’s marriage. 
He sent masands in advance to meet the bridegroom’s 



94 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


procession. Dharma, the bridegroom’s father, con- 
trary to custom, humbled himself before the Guru, 
and prepared and dressed his son Sadhu for the 
ceremony. A Muhammadan soldier who happened 
to be in Jhabal at the time heard rejoicings, saw 
fireworks, and inquired the cause. He learned that 
it was on account of the marriage of the Guru’s 
daughter, and that the Guru had just arrived after 
destroying the imperial army. It at once occurred 
to the soldier, that if he killed the Guru, he should 
receive a large reward from the Emperor. The soldier 
thought that as the Guru was then without suspicion 
of harm and unguarded, his death might be easily 
effected. Even if the project did not succeed, he 
thought he would at any rate frighten him, and 
the marriage festivities might be interrupted. He 
took up his matchlock, lit a fuse, and aimed at the 
Guru. The musket burst, and killed the soldier 
instead of his intended victim. His death was 
attributed to God’s special intervention, and the 
marriage was duly celebrated. Sadhu the bride- 
groom was inspired to compose the following hymn 
on the occasion : — 

I was reading the lesson 1 .of sin ; 

I was sitting at the shop of falsehood and deception, 
When the true Guru cut off my evil thoughts, 

And took and drew me out of hell. 

I am a sacrifice, my life is a sacrifice to the Guru. 

I was sullen, and blind, and saw not ; 

I was drowning in mammon. 

I praise the true Guru 
Who showed me light. 

The slave Sadhu hath seen the Guru, 

Washed his feet and drunk the nectareous water there- 
from. 

The perfect Guru hath given me to drink the nectar of 
the Name. 


1 Literally — tablet. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


95 


Before parting with his daughter the Guru gave her 
the following advice, ‘ How can I describe the worth 
and dignity of a husband ? Service to him is the 
most important duty a wife can discharge. Greatly 
honour his elders, and heartily serve thy mother-in- 
law.’ Viro then went to take leave of her mother, who 
addressed her, ‘ If thou desire to be happy, thou 
must ever serve thy husband. Ever consider the 
honour of thy family. Associate not with the evil. 
Rise early to perform thine ablutions, and read 
the Guru’s hymns. Let no complaint against .thee 
reach me. In this way shalt thou enjoy all happi- 
ness. Hearken my beloved daughter. In a short 
time I will send for thee. Guru Nanak hath been 
our protector, otherwise thy marriage would not 
have been celebrated.’ Her mother then embraced 
her and showed great concern at her departure. The 
Guru returned to his private apartments and said, 

‘ Daughters are other persons’ property. Why feel 
their loss ? ’ He again embraced his daughter and 
consoled her. Upon this Baba Gurditta came with 
great love in his heart, and he, too, embraced his 
sister. 

The Guru having no further business in Jhabal 
went with his family to visit Tarn Taran. On the 
way the Guru’s wives discussed the war and its 
causes — ‘ Were our mother-in-law Ganga now alive, 
she would read the Guru a lesson. However, 
perhaps it is all for the best, for such a large army 
of the enemy hath been destroyed, and God hath 
preserved most of the Sikhs.’ The Guru after ad- 
miring the tank and blessing the memory of Guru 
Arjan proceeded to Goindwal. 

The Emperor was dismayed on hearing of the 
defeat of his troops by what he called an army of 
faqirs. It must have been, he thought, the result 
of charms, spells, and incantations. The Muham- 
madan survivors of the war then related its details 
in their own way. 'Although the Sikhs were of 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


96 

all castes and trades, they proved brave in battle, 
and the imperial army was not to blame for its 
defeat.’ When the Emperor heard of Mukhlis Khan’s 
death, he flared up like a fire on which clarified 
butter has been thrown for sacrifice. He called a 
council of his chiefs, at which it was decided that the 
Guru should be captured or killed in the attempt, 
lest he should seize the reins of empire. 

Wazir Khan, ever mindful of the Guru’s welfare, 
thus defended him, ‘ Sire, the Guru is not a rebel, and 
hath no design on thine empire. He hath ever been 
the support of the state. Had he minded to raise 
a rebellion, he would have followed up his victory, 
seized some fortress, and taken possession of a portion 
of thy Majesty’s dominion, or plundered one of thy 
treasuries. But he centreth not his thoughts in 
worldly wealth. Is it not a miracle that with not 
fully seven hundred men he destroyed an army of 
seven thousand ? ’ These and many other argu- 
ments urged by Wazir Khan were supported by 
other friends of the Guru at court. Their arguments 
convinced the Emperor, and he decided that it was 
not good to engage in further warfare with priests 
and faqirs, and that it would be well to forget the 
past. 

The Guru having met his own relations and those 
of his predecessors at Goindwal, and visited all its 
sacred spots, took his departure for Kartarpur, 
accompanied by his trusty warriors Bidhi Chand, 
Jati Mai, Painda Khan, and others. He heard that 
Kaulan was ill, and went to render her necessary 
service. She could only address him in very feeble 
accents. He represented that she was fortunate in 
having left the society of bigots, in having been 
instructed in the Sikh faith, and in thus having been 
placed on the road to deliverance. He couns ell ed 
her to reflect on God who was within her, and whom 
death could not approach. He told her that she had 
only twenty-four hours to live, and during that time 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 97 

she must meditate on her Creator. He also pro- 
mised to come to her at her departure. 

Next day a Sikh came to tell the Guru of a tiger 
in the neighbourhood which had killed the villagers’ 
cattle. The Guru ordered his horse and girded on 
his arms. Taking Bidhi Chand, Painda Khan, and 
others, he proceeded to the tiger’s lair. It was in 
a dense forest where other game too were in abun- 
dance. The Guru dismounted with the intention of 
meeting the tiger on foot with sword and shield. As 
the animal sprang up, his men called out to the 
Guru to use his gun, and not allow the beast to 
approach too close. The Guru, protecting his head 
with his shield awaited the tiger’s assault, and dealt 
him a blow with his sword on the flank that cut him 
in twain. The Sikhs were astonished at the Guru’s 
courage and strength, and sang congratulations. 

On returning home the Guru proceeded to Kaulan’s 
apartments and addressed her consolatory words. 
‘Be ready, prepare thyself, thine hour hath come. 
Dismiss all consideration for thy body and fix thine 
attention on God, who is unborn and imperishable. 
The world is unreal and only shineth with His light. 
The soul is pure, real, conscious, and happy. As long 
as man is proud of his body he is subject to birth 
and death, but when he hath obtained divine 
knowledge and passed beyond the bounds of love 
and hate, then he obtaineth deliverance.’ When 
Kaulan, after meditating on the Guru’s instruction, 
again opened her eyes, she addressed her last words 
to the Guru, ‘ I thank thee ! I thank thee ! 0 patron 
of the homeless, that I found shelter in thee. Thou 
didst in a moment confer on me the position which 
Jogis for years vainly strive to attain. Thou didst 
dispel the ignorance which hung over my millions 
of births like an inveterate disease.’ She then fixed 
her attention on God, repeated ‘Wahguru’, and 
heaving her last breath departed to the heaven of 
her aspirations. The Guru ordered her maids and 

H 


SIKH. IV 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


98 

manservant to prepare her for the last rites. Her 
maids bathed her and clothed her in a shroud and 
costly shawl. While the minstrel sang the Guru’s 
hymns, her body was removed to the garden attached 
to her dwelling and there cremated. The Sohila was 
read and prayers offered for the repose of her soul. 

Chapter X 

While the Guru remained in Kartarpur, many men 
came to enlist under his banner. They said that no 
one else had power to contend with the Emperor or 
to kill such brave Muhammadans as had fallen in 
battle in Amritsar. The Guru was the bright gem 
of the world. So afraid was the Emperor of him, 
that he did not venture to send another army to 
avenge the recent defeat. The Guru set himself to 
replace the men who had fallen, and also to increase 
his army. He continued to instruct his soldiers in 
the science of warfare, and train them to archery 
and the use of fire-arms. 

Painda Khan soon became a source of concern to 
the Guru. He began to boast, ‘ It is absurd for the 
Guru to enlist so many men. If I am allowed, 

I will show the Muhammadans what I can do. 
Having eaten the Guru’s salt and been his servant, 
it is I who conquered the countless hosts opposed 
to him at Amritsar. With my arrow I skewered 
them like trussed fowl. Had I not been there, no 
one would have had the courage to oppose them. 
The Guru’s Sikhs would have all fled.’ When the 
Guru heard this he said Painda Khan was not a trust- 
worthy servant, and that his boasting would end 
badly. Notwithstanding this, the Guru provided 
him with a wife of good family in the village of 
Chhotamir, gave him I house to live in, and supplied 
him with funds to commence housekeeping. After 
his marriage Painda Khan used to sleep at night 
m his own house and wait on the Guru by day, but 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


99 


after a little time the Gum, desiring to have some 
respite from Painda Khan’s boasting, ordered him 
to remain at home, and only visit him occasionally. 

Meantime offerings of money, horses, arms, and 
ammunition continued to be made to the Guru, and 
the spirit of his troops rose as they devoted them- 
selves to exercises. They used to boast that if the 
Guru but gave them the order, they would in a day 
capture Dihli and Lahore. They vowed that if 
ever again there was fighting they would make 
short work of the enemy. 

While the Guru was in that neighbourhood he 
killed many beasts of prey and protected useful 
animals. There was such public tranquillity that 
travellers could pass through the forests without ap- 
prehension. Thieves, burglars, and highway robbers 
concealed themselves as effectually as owls and bats 
do at sunrise. It appeared as if the Sat, or golden 
age of the world, had returned to the Doab. Songs 
of joy and happiness resounded in every village. 

One day the Guru took Painda Khan and other 
Sikhs into the forest with him. There enjoying 
the beautiful prospect, inhaling the odour of sweet 
smelling flowers, and listening to the singing of 
birds, the Guru in an exaltation of spirit recited the 
following hymn of Guru Arjan : — 

Tell me where there is any one in whom God is not. 

The Creator who is full of mercy confeneth all happiness : 
ever meditate on that God. 

Sing the praises of that God on whose thread creatures 
are strung. 

Remember that God who gave thee everything ; to whom 
else shouldst thou go ? 

Profitable is the service of my God ; from it thou shalt 
obtain the fruit thy heart desireth. 

Saith Nanak, take the gain and profit of service, and 
thou shalt go home happy . 1 

1 Sarang. 

H 2 



100 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


An ex-officer of the Emperor’s army came to seek 
the Guru’s assistance. The officer had been charged 
with cowardice and dismissed with a reprimand. 
At the moment of his visit the Guru was absorbed 
in divine contemplation. The officer was kept wait- 
ing and manifested his displeasure. The Guru 
observing his insolent manner said, ‘ It is more 
glorious to contend with warriors than with faqirs. 
By annoying men engaged in God’s service thou 
shalt lose thy happiness in this world and the 
next.’ Hearing this the officer fell at the Guru’s feet, 
and begged pardon for his impatience and rudeness. 
The Guru pardoned him and instructed him to serve 
saints, worship God, practise forbearance, and repeat 
the true Name, and he should soon be reinstated 
in his original position. On this occasion the Guru 
repeated the following hymn of Guru Arjan : — 

Sit quietly in your homes, 0 dear saints of God ; 

The True Guru hath arranged your affairs. 

The Creator hath smitten the wicked and the evil. 

And preserved the honour of His s ain ts 
He hath subjected to me all kings and emperors, 

Since I have quaffed the great nectareous juice of the Name. 
Fearlessly worship God 

Whom the company of saints have granted you. 

Nanak hath sought the asylum of the Searcher of hearts, 

And taken the Lord God’s shelter. 1 

The officer acted on the Guru’s advice, and in a 
few days the Emperor was moved to send for him 
and restore him to the rank from which he had been 
removed in disgrace. 

The rains had set in, and the very hot season was 
now over. The clouds wandering in the heavens 
showered moisture which comforted the body, as 
the words of philanthropic men who wander over 
the earth comfort the soul. Vivid lightning played 
among the parti-coloured clouds, gentle zephyrs 

1 Gauri v 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


101 


diffused coolness, the earth saturated with water 
was covered with a carpet of verdure. Streams 
flowed in every direction, and tanks were filled to 
the brim. The greenness and the cleanliness of the 
trees afforded pleasure to the eye. The cuckoos 
called, frogs croaked, peacocks danced. The rain- 
bow — Indar’s bow without a string — reflected its 
beauty in the heavens, streams overflowed their 
banks, and the play of their waves and ripples excited 
gladness and exhilaration. The Guru praised the 
scene, and said that the months of Sawan and 
Bhadon gave renewed life unto mortals. 

It now became a question where the Guru was 
going to pass the rainy season, and on this subject 
he showed himself willing to accept the advice and 
suggestions of his Sikhs. One man said that there 
was a very beautiful place called Bagha on the 
elevated right bank of the river Bias. The river 
flowed pleasantly at its base, and contributed to 
the coolness of the climate. There was no mire in 
which the feet of men and beasts of burden would sink, 
and there was excellent shooting for an enthusiastic 
sportsman like the Guru. A second Sikh chimed 
in that the Guru ought certainly to see the place. 
A third recommended a thinly populated village 
called Ruhela, whither the Guru might proceed in 
order to confer salvation on its inhabitants. Ruhela 
was also on the right bank of the Bias. The Guru 
yielded to the last advice, and decided to go and 
spend the rainy season in or near Ruhela. 

The Guru thought it safe to dismiss his son 
Gurditta, and thus addressed him : ' We are at 
enmity with the Muhammadans. It is certain that 
they will attack us once more. Thou art still a child 
and not fit for arms or the fatigue of war. Moreover, 
thou hast for some time been separated from thy 
relations who are awaiting thee. Wherefore go to 
Goindwal, and remain with thy mother and thy 
friends.’ The Guru, when setting out for the Bias, 


102 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


prepared himself and his troops for the contingency 
of war. When Painda Khan heard this he expressed 
a desire to accompany him. The Guru remembering 
his boasting, and also feeling that God would give 
him victory without Painda Khan’s assistance, put 
him off with this reply, 'Thou hast been recently 
married, and it is well for thee to abide at home, and 
cherish thy young wife. I am not going far — only 
to the bank of the Bias. When I need thee, I will 
send for thee.’ Painda Khan urged, ' The Emperor 
is at enmity with thee. Should an army suddenly 
come and thou be attacked before I can arrive, men 
will curse me for not rendering thee timely assist- 
ance.’ The Guru replied, ' I am leaving thee behind 
of my own free will. During my absence share thy 
food with others, touch not another’s wife or pro- 
perty, turn not thy back on the enemy, ever remember 
God, and cheerfully accept His will.’ Painda Khan 
then went home. 

The Guru set out from Kartarpur for the Bias. On 
arriving on the left bank of the river, which is low, 
he found boats ready to take him and his troops 
across to the right bank, which is lofty. The river 
separates the country which is called the Manjha 
on the north-west from the Doab on the south-east. 
On crossing he pitched his camp on the tumulus of 
an ancient village. He observed that the dwellings 
were only in one direction, and the rest of the land 
quite unoccupied. Accordingly he decided that this 
would be a very suitable site whereon to found a 
city. He was received in a friendly manner by the 
people, who congratulated themselves that without 
any exertion on their part the Guru had come to 
visit them. The landlord and chaudhri was Bhagwan 
Das, a Khatri of the Gherar tribe. In Sikh histories 
he is generally called by his tribal name. 

Gherar’s person is minutely described. He had 
a fat paunch, a short neck as if his body was swallow- 
ing it, a large mouth, thick lips, and small eyes. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 103 

Although his hair and heard had grown grey and 
he walked with the support of a stick, yet he was 
strong of body. The fastenings of his coat were 
generally undone, and he wore his turban and loin- 
cloth loose. He was clever at litigation, as became 
a Panj abi bania. Pride took up its abode in his heart, 
and he considered no one equal to himself. He 
fancied he was of the Guru’s caste, and harboured 
a rivalry with him which was fatal to friendship. 
Gherar was not long in hearing of the Guru’s arrival. 
He was also informed that the Guru was a very power- 
ful man, and had no fear of the Emperor, whose 
army he had recently destroyed. Gherar began to 
consider what the Guru’s object could be. He went 
to him with pride in his heart, and did not salute 
him, but abruptly asked why he had left his home 
in the rainy season. The Guru replied, that on 
seeing this lofty place with the great river flowing 
beneath, he thought he would tarry there some days 
for the sake of sport. 

Gherar feeling angry ironically replied, ‘ Fine 
sport thou meanest ! How thou hast prejudiced 
thine affairs ! Thou hast made the Emperor thy 
deadly enemy, then how canst thou hope for peace ? 
Having ruined thy home thou hast fled hither 
from Amritsar. When a wise man erreth, he ought 
to take warning and amend his ways. The Gurus 
who preceded thee never used violence. The Em- 
peror and his subjects used all to visit them and 
bow before them. Thou hast struck out a new 
path.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ I have only injured myself. 
Why take it to heart ? Why should the troubles 
I have had fall on the heads of such people as thou ? 
The affairs of the Guru’s house shall ultimately be 
adjusted and the Turks deprived of empire ? ’ 
Hearing this Gherar arose and hastened home. 

The Guru made such an impression on the people 
by his teachings that they invited him to stay with 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


104 

them, and they would give him and his followers 
all the unoccupied land in the neighbourhood. 
Gherar, who was a bigoted Hindu, and, as we have 
seen, prejudiced against the Guru even long before 
his arrival, used all his efforts to induce his people 
to withdraw their offer to the Guru and expel him 
from the land . 1 

Gherar, who was unpopular for his oppression 
of the poor, was unable to persuade his people to 
act hostilely to the Guru, and was obliged for the 
time to curb his wrath. One day, however, as the 
Guru was denouncing Hindu superstitions Gherar 
rose from the assembly and communicated to the 
Brahmans of the village the Guru’s words, to which 
he made additions and comments of his own. He said 
that the Guru was reviling the Veds and Shastars, 
and that he ought to be banished from among them. 
He then began to utter vile abuse of the Guru, at 
which the Sikhs naturally took offence. There 
immediately arose a conflict between the Sikhs 
and the Hindus, in which Gherar was killed and 
thrown into the river. His people remembered his 
many acts of tyranny and regretted not his death. 
They were glad of the Guru’s instruction and pro- 
tection, and became daily more anxious that he 
should continue to abide among them. 

The Guru, having thus secured the goodwill of 
the people, communicated to Bidhi Chand his inten- 
tion of founding a city on the spot. Bidhi Chand 
replied in courtier phrase, that all places belonged 
to the world’s Guru, and that the lands and people 
with whom he was pleased were very fortunate. 
The Guru ordered that the city should be laid out 

1 Sadhu Gobind Singh slates in his ///has Guru Khalsa that there had 
been previously on the land a town belonging to Chandu, which with 
the rest of his property was confiscated by the Emperor’s order. It 
remained uninhabited for some time, and was afterwards conferred by 
Sanad on the Guru. Gherar sought to dispossess him and appro- 
priate the land. This led to a conflict, in which Gherar and his 
retainers were killed. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 105 

on the morrow, that an enclosing wall should first 
of all be built, and the whole work completed without 
delay. 

Before the Sikhs took breakfast the next morning 
they repeated the following prayer : ‘ Holy Guru 
Nanak, holy Guru Angad, holy Guru Amar Das, 
who grantest desires, holy Guru Ram Das, who art 
the source of happiness, holy Guru Arjan, who ful- 
fillest hopes, the holy Guru Har Gobind by your 
favour and by divine impulse desireth to found a 
city here. Be ever with him and assist him. 
Bestowers of happiness, by your favour all things 
prove successful. Ever vindicate the cause of your 
servants.’ Upon this all bowed their heads and ate 
the sacred food prepared for the occasion. After 
breakfast they beat the war drum and shouted in 
a body, ‘ Hail to the Guru ! ' 

The Guru cut the first sod himself and summoned 
masons and labourers from neighbouring villages. 
He was now surrounded with a larger and more 
devoted body of followers than ever. He found 
leisure to devote to the superintendence and com- 
pletion of the city he had projected. It was sub- 
sequently called Sri Har Gobindpur in honour of 
the Guru. 

Ratan Chand, son of Gherar, vowed that he would 
avenge his father’s death or meet him by drowning 
himself. ‘ I will trample the Guru’s dead body 
under my feet or secure him in fetters in a jail, or 
I will throw him into the river as his Sikhs did my 
father. I am on the best of terms with Abdulla 
Khan, the subadar of Jalandhar, to whom I shall 
go and complain. There too resideth Karm Chand, 
son of Chandu, who oweth the Guru a debt of revenge. 
We shall all three take counsel how we can arrest 
the Guru’s career.’ Ratan Chand hastened to Karm 
Chand, and urged him to join him against the com- 
mon oppressor. The present Guru had never met 
Shah Jahan. Nay more, there was special enmity 



io6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

between them, for the Guru had destroyed his army. 
If therefore the sons of the murdered parents were 
to combine, it was thought they would succeed in 
compassing the Guru’s ruin. 

Karm Chand, Chandu’s son, when consulted 
replied, ' How shall we capture or kill the Guru ? 
He is a great warrior, and hath moreover an army 
with him. The Emperor knowing this hath stifled 
his wrath. It would not be possible for us to kill 
the Guru openly. We must seize him by some skil- 
ful ambush. I will not wear a turban on my head 
till I have killed or at least captured him. Then 
shall I enjoy life, whereas I am now passing my 
time as a dead man. If the gods assist us, we shall 
succeed. I will join in any expenditure that may 
be necessary. If it come to representations to the 
Emperor, I have great interest with him. Thou 
and I have both the same cause, namely, to avenge 
our murdered fathers. I at first, as fire, desired to 
destroy the Guru, but I could not do so alone. 
Now thou, like wind, hast met me. Fire and wind 
combined will produce a conflagration in which the 
Guru shall certainly perish. Thou hast come to me, 
as I anticipated when I heard of thy father’s death. 
Exert thyself and the desires of our hearts shall be 
fulfilled.’ 

They both next morning proceeded to the subadar 
of Jalandhar. Ratan Chand, taking off his turban 
and throwing it on the floor before the subadar, 
poured forth his grievances and his wrath. He 
pointed out that if swift action were taken, the 
Guru might be at once secured. If they delayed 
till he had constructed his projected fort, his capture 
would be impossible. Ratan Chand further repre- 
sented how pleased the Emperor would be were the 
Guru put into his hands, and what high promotion 
the subadar would receive. The subadar and his 
advisers were convinced by Ratan Chand’s argu- 
ments, and an immediate expedition was planned 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


107 


and organized against the Guru. The belief was 
that the principal part of the Guru’s army had been 
slain at Amritsar, and that he was now compara- 
tively defenceless. It was also supposed that the few 
men the Guru had now with him were a worthless 
rabble, since they had been enlisted from the dregs 
of the people. It was said that they consisted only 
of strolling singers, barbers, washermen, cobblers, and 
such like, who would disperse the moment they found 
themselves confronted with regular troops. As to 
their numbers they resembled a small amount of 
salt in a large amount of flour, and were unnoticeable 
and negligeable. 

When the Guru heard of Ratan Chand’s indict- 
ment and the preparations for an expedition to Sri 
Har Gobindpur, he simply said, ‘ What pleaseth 
God is the best.’ The subadar’s army is said to 
have amounted to ten thousand men, and to have 
descended on the Guru like a swollen tropical river 
making its way to the sea. Abdulla Khan disposed 
his forces into divisions. Bairam Khan received 
command of one thousand men ; Muhammad Khan 
a tried warrior in many a field, a similar number ; 
Balwand Khan too received a divisional command. 
A division was entrusted to Ali Bakhsh, a renowned 
marksman. Imam Bakhsh was made commander 
of the fifth division. These five generals with their 
troops advanced and took the field. To each of his 
two sons, Nabi Bakhsh and Karim Bakhsh, who 
rode on chargers with gold embroidered saddles, the 
subadar gave the command of two thousand men. 
He retained one thousand horse as his own body- 
guard. 

When the Guru marshalled his army Bhai Jattu, 
an excellent marksman, appeared in the van with 
matchlock in hand. The Guru gave him command 
of two thousand horse. A troop of one hundred 
was given Bhai Kalyana. The Guru, seeing Bhai 
Nano well equipped and mounted, gave him also 



io8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


a troop of one hundred horse. To Bhai Piraga, 
already tried in warfare, five hundred men were 
entrusted with orders to resist the first onslaught of 
the Muhammadans. A troop of four hundred horse 
was placed under the command of Bhai Mathura. 
Bhai Jagannath, popularly known as Jagana, a power- 
ful and trained -soldier, also received command of 
a similar force. Troops of horse mustering one 
hundred each were placed at the disposal of Bhai 
Shaktu and Bhai Paras Ram, both accomplished 
archers. Jati Mai, Bhai Molak and other officers 
were told off to support Bhai Bidhi Chand. Thus 
the Guru divided his army into eight troops or 
companies. 

It was as if the Guru were founding another city, 
and desired to give a feast on its inauguration. The 
Muhammadan army came as if they were Brahmans 
who desired to eat to repletion. The feast provided 
for them was shields for plates, swords for pumpkins, 
bullets for sweets, daggers for jalebis, arrows for gul-i- 
bihisht, 1 and other weapons for other dainties. Before 
coming to blows Abdulla Khan sent an envoy to 
endeavour to come to terms with the Guru, and 
induce him to abandon the city he was building. 
The Guru replied, ' You rely on the Emperor alone; 

I rely on the Immortal God. The great Guru hath 
granted me temporal as well as spiritual authority, 
and made me a lord of war as well as of hospitality ; 
but war I desire not, and shall not assume the 
aggressive. Unless you attack me I shall bear you 
no enmity. I covet no one’s property. If you 
quarrel with me I shall send you where I sent 
Mukhlis Khan. Should you fight with me, it can 
only lead to your own destruction. If you go home 
I will not pursue you. But you have only two 
means of safety, either make peace with me or flee. 
Should you fight, victory shall never be yours.’ 

This answer was not conciliatory, and both sides 

1 Jalebis and gul-i-bihisht are Indian sweetmeats. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 109 

made preparations for the conflict. The Guru from 
the top of his rampart observed the enemy approach, 
and addressed his army. ' Brother Sikhs, this con- 
test is not for empire, for wealth, or for land. It is 
in reality a war for our religion. Wherefore turn 
not your backs on the foe, but confront them and 
destroy them. Let each commander keep watch 
over his men. Kill not those who flee or surrender. 
Lose not your courage, but fight to the death.’ 
Every species of weapon then known to Asiatic war- 
fare was brought into play. It is said that the 
Guru’s braves danced like peacocks, and the cowards 
among the enemy hid themselves like snakes on the 
approach of winter. As the battle advanced such 
was the melee that it was difficult to distinguish 
friend from foe. 


Chapter XI 

As Muhammad Khan led the van, he was chal- 
lenged by Bhai Jattu whose horse he at once killed 
with an arrow. Then simultaneously Jattu dis- 
charged his musket at Muhammad Khan, and 
Muhammad Khan another arrow at Jattu. Bullet 
and arrow both took effect, and the two heroes fell 
mortally wounded. When Muhammad Khan fell, 
his division fled. To take his place Abdulla Khan 
ordered Bairam Khan to advance with his men and 
not retreat, so that it might never be said they had 
run away as cowards from the Sikhs. Bairam Khan 
with his thousand men crying ‘ Strike ! strike ! ’ 
advanced and was received by Bhai Mathura who 
had been ordered by the Guru to resist his attack. 
Mathura seeing the superior force directed against 
him said to his soldiers, ' My brethren, every one 
must die. Generations have died, and are dying. 
Others die in vain, but if you die, your death shall 
be profitable, since you give up your lives as an 
offering to the Guru, and shall join the court of 



no 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


heaven; but if, on the other hand, you vanquish 
your enemies, then empire shall be yours, and you 
shall enjoy uninterrupted happiness and repose. In 
either alternative great shall be your gain/ 

The Sikhs fought with desperation and drove the 
enemy before them. Mathura disabled Bairam 
Khan’s horse with a bullet. Bairam Khan’s troop 
was then surrounded by the Sikhs and fought 
heroically. Seeing this, Mathura in a rage dis- 
mounted and rushed on Bairam Khan. Both heroes, 
brought by their impetuosity to close quarters, could 
not use their missiles, and engaged each other in 
a wrestling contest. Mathura got the better of the 
struggle, and throwing his adversary, snatched his 
sword from his scabbard and cut off his head. 
Bairam Khan’s army witnessing this, became en- 
raged, surrounded Bhai Mathura, and cut him to 
pieces. 

The Chief on seeing Bairam Khan slain ordered 
Balwand Khan to advance. Ali Bakhsh proceeded 
to support him. The Guru sent Kalyana to oppose 
them. Balwand Khan fought with great bravery 
and with his lance dispatched several Sikhs. Kal- 
yana seeing this took steady aim with his matchlock, 
and shot him through the heart. Seeing him lying 
on the field Ali Bakhsh called on his troops to 
avenge him. They surrounded Kalyana, but he 
kept them at bay with flights of arrows. When 
his quiver was empty he resorted to his sword. He 
was, however, no match for the numbers opposed to 
him, and gloriously fell with many wounds. His 
courage never failed him to the last, and he died 
repeating ‘ Wahguru ! ' 

Ali Bakhsh again directed his troops against the 
Guru. Seeing this Bhai Nano opposed the onslaught. 
The Guru, patting him on the back, placed two 
hundred more men at his disposal. Thus Bhai Nano 
had three hundred in all at his command. They 
fought with great determination and inflicted great 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


in 


loss on the enemy. Ali Bakhsh took up his match- 
lock and fired at Nano but missed him. Nano then 
discharged an arrow at Ali Bakhsh, which went 
through his body. Seeing him fall the Muham- 
madan army began to flee. It was, however, rallied 
by Sardar Imam Bakhsh, who now came up with 
his division. Meanwhile Nano continued to slay 
the Muhammadans. Imam Bakhsh hastened to stop 
his career. Nano on seeing him fixed his thoughts 
on the Guru, and drawing his two-edged sword 
struck off his left hand. Imam Bakhsh without 
faltering used his remaining arm on Nano and 
killed him, upon which Nano’s troops retreated. 

The Guru extolled Nano’s bravery, and asked if 
there was any Sikh who could now sustain the fight. 
Bhai Piraga came forward and said, ‘ My Lord, by 
thy favour I will destroy the army of the enemy.’ 
Bhai Jagana, Krishan, and other faithful officers 
with their troops went to Piraga’ s support. When 
Bhai Jagana and other distinguished Sikhs were 
slain, Bidhi Chand came forward and asked the 
Guru’s permission to join the combat and support 
Bhai Piraga. This being granted, Bidhi Chand and 
the Sikhs fought with their usual valour, the result 
of which was that the Muhammadan army became 
demoralized, turned, and fled. Abdulla Khan, the 
Muhammadan chief, came on the scene with a stick 
in his hand to strike and restrain the fugitives. He 
then appealed to Karm Chand and Ratan Chand to 
enter the combat, show their bravery, and not allow 
it to be said that ten thousand imperial troops were 
killed in vain. The Chief also ordered his eldest son 
Nabi Bakhsh to advance with the troops under his 
command. 

When the Guru heard of this he was very pleased 
and thought the time had arrived for himself to 
enter the battle. It is said that when he twanged 
his bow his enemies trembled, and that when the 
neighing of his horse was heard as he entered the 



112 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


battle-field, there was widespread consternation in 
the Muhammadan ranks. 

When the Guru showed himself fully accoutred to 
his troops, he called on them to slay Abdulla Khan 
and thus put an end to the combat. Karm Chand, 
Chandu’s son, said that he would now avenge his 
father’s death by killing Bidhi Chand and capturing 
the Guru. Bidhi Chand replied, f Take care ! I will 
send thee to thy father.’ Karm Chand discharged 
showers of arrows. One of them struck Bidhi Chand 
and lodged in his body. Bidhi Chand drew it out 
and hurled it back on Karm Chand. It missed him, 
but struck his horse, causing the animal to reel and 
fall. Bidhi Chand then bound Karm Chand, dragged 
him before the Guru, and addressed him, ' Thou didst 
owe one debt to the Guru, in that thy father killed 
his, and now thou owest him another for having 
made war on him.’ Bidhi Chand offered to put 
him to death if the Guru allowed him. The Guru 
seeing him in that miserable plight took compassion 
on him, and ordered his release, saying it was not 
proper to kill a defenceless prisoner. 

When Karm Chand, thus released, found his way 
to the Chief he gave him the following version of 
the incident. ‘ I went to the Guru to reconnoitre 
his army. He arrested and tortured me, but I 
escaped by stratagem and force of arms, and have 
brought thee this information. The Guru hath a 
very small army ; make a rush and we shall capture 
him with all his property.’ The Chief accordingly 
ordered his troops to charge, upon which there arose 
a sanguinary engagement on both sides. Nabi 
Bakhsh led one wing of the Muhammadan army, 
and his father the other. Karim Bakhsh, the Chief’s 
second son, on seeing his father personally engaged, 
hastened to his assistance. Their army, however, 
was destroyed like dry grass by a forest fire, prin- 
cipally owing to the exertions and bravery of Bhai 
Shaktu. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


ii3. 

Nabi Bakhsh discharged an arrow at Paras Ram, 
one of the Sikh leaders, and severely wounded him. 
The Sikhs with Shaktu at their head gathered round 
and rescued him. After recovering consciousness he 
rushed with his sword on Nabi Bakhsh, and cut off 
his head with one blow. The Muhammadans on 
this attacked Paras Ram and Shaktu, and killed 
them both. The Chief wept aloud at the loss of 
his son, and expressed a pious wish that he himself 
had been slain instead. Karim Bakhsh, the Chief’s 
second son, went to console his father, saying he 
would avenge his brother, and either kill the Guru 
or be killed himself — a resolution which the chief 
applauded. As the youth advanced he descried the 
Guru. He asked those who had no fear in their 
hearts or those who had no loved ones, to accom- 
pany him to seize and kill the Guru. They who 
chose might retire from the conflict. The Chief 
hearing his words and fearing he was too sanguine 
of success, warned him not to advance, but hold his 
ground where he was, for the Guru was not merely 
the bravest of the Sikhs, but a veritable messenger of 
death. The rash youth heeded not his father’s counsel. 

The Guru on seeing Karim Bakhsh at a distance 
called out to Bhai Bidhi Chand, ' Lo ! the Chief’s 
young son hath come to avenge his brother. The 
slanderers have incensed his mind. Now exert thy 
strength and engage him. He hath come to’assault 
thee, but do thou assault him.’ Bidhi Chand 
shouting defiance advanced. The Chief sent Ratan 
Chand and Karm Chand to his son’s assistance. 
Then arose a desperate effort to capture the Guru. 
They cried out that the Guru had no army, that he 
should become their easy prey, and that they should 
receive suitable rewards from the Emperor. Such 
was the fury of the imperial troops that some of 
the Sikhs were on the point of giving way when 
they were kept in position by Bidhi Chand. Karim 
Bakhsh couching his lance directed it at Bidhi Chand, 

1 


SIKH. IV 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


114 

but it only lighted on his saddle-bow. Bidhi Chand 
and Karim Bakhsh now rushed at each other with 
drawn swords. Karim Bakhsh dealt a blow at 
Bidhi Chand from which he was again providentially 
saved. It then for a time became a play of fence, 
when sword clashed against sword, until with one 
swashing blow Karim Bakhsh shattered Bidhi 
Chand’s weapon in twain. Bidhi Chand turned his 
horse and ran for another sword. On his return 
with a better tempered blade he dealt Karim Bakhsh 
a blow which terminated the combat. 

The sons of Chandu and Gherar, on seeing this, 
fled from the field, but were afraid to show their 
faces to the Chief, and so remained at a distance. 
Several followed their example, and were pursued 
by Bidhi Chand and other Sikhs at the head of their 
troops. The runaways told the Chief of his second 
son’s death, and the intelligence made him for a 
time unconscious. On being partially restored he 
began to mourn, ‘ Alas ! fool that I was not to 
consider that I was powerless against him about 
whom the Emperor was silent even after the loss 
of his army. Both my sons are dead, yet I behold 
the light of day. A curse on me and my life ! I 
have been untrue to my Emperor and also to my 
relations, who warned me not to contend with the 
Guru. He hath killed five of my bravest officers 
and my two darling boys. My progeny is at an 
end, and there will be none to preserve my name 
in the world.’ 

The Chief endeavoured to rally Ratan Chand 
and Karm Chand ‘ About two hours of day still 
remain. Advance and fight, and perhaps the Guru 
may come into our possession. Your boasts have 
all been in vain. Like jackals you are only fit to 
bark. There is even yet time to restore the fortune 
of war. Let me behold your manliness. Either 
conquer or die.’ The Chief then gave the order for 
a general advance. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 115 

The Guru, seeing the onslaught of the Muham- 
madans specially directed against himself, addressed 
his troops, ‘ My brethren, the Turks are advancing ; 
I will now myself fight and destroy those enemies 
who have without cause brought an army of thou- 
sands against God’s servant.’ Both armies then 
again hotly engaged. The Turks came as it were 
to offer themselves as sacrifice to the Guru. Abdulla 
Khan, maddened by the death of his sons, discharged 
flights of arrows, and heeded not whether he aimed 
at friend or foe. This was the most desperate por- 
tion of the conflict. None retreated, none sued for 
quarter. 

Under the favouring glance of the Guru the Sikhs 
who had formerly been weak as hares now became 
strong as lions. No matter what their birth or 
previous calling, they all proved themselves gallant 
heroes in the field. Abdulla Khan resolved to con- 
quer or die. He could not show himself again to the 
Emperor if his ten thousand troops were vanquished 
in vain. There would be no place in which to hide 
himself, and the earth would not open to receive 
him. It therefore would be better for him to receive 
death at the hands of the Guru. The Guru seeing 
Karm Chand and Ratan Chand in front addressed 
them, ‘ What think you on ? Now avenge your 
fathers. Retreat not like cowards. Be brave and 
stand before me ; otherwise go where your fathers 
have gone.’ 

The Guru let fly an arrow which disabled Ratan 
Chand’s horse. Then Karm Chand advanced, drew 
his bow-string to his ear, and shot the Guru’s horse, 
the famous charger sent from Kabul which the Guru 
had obtained with such difficulty. The Guru drew 
forth the arrow and pierced Karm Chand’s horse 
with it. Ratan Chand and Karm Chand had now 
to fight on the ground. J oined by their Chief they 
discharged flights of arrows at the Guru, who saved 
himself by his dexterity. The arrows fell like 



n6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

showers of flowers around him, and it seemed as if 
the three men had been worshipping him and begging 
of him the gift of salvation. The Guru was left 
alone to contend against all three, as Bidhi Chand 
and his other heroes were engaged fighting in a 
distant part of the field. His enemies were very 
pleased to see the Guru alone and unhorsed, at the 
approach of evening too. He, however, felt that 
victory was ever on the side of religion, ‘ God 
succoureth His servants,’ he thought, ‘ and the 
proud and the wicked shall be vanquished.’ 

The Guru on being closely assailed by Karm Chand 
struck him with his shield and made him stagger 
and fall. Ratan Chand seeing this ran to his aid. 
The Guru drew forth his pistol and shot him. Then 
fearing that his enemy might still escape, he dis- 
charged an arrow, which completed his discom- 
fiture. Abdulla Khan now lost all command over 
himself, and struck out with his sword right and 
left, before and behind, above and below. The 
Guru at first received all his blows on his strong 
shield. Then gathering his strength he drew his 
falchion on the Chief, and severed his head from his 
body. By this time Karm Chand had recovered 
consciousness and rushed at the Guru saying, 

‘ Whither goest thou after killing all my friends ? 
Deem not that by killing Ratan Chand the victory 
is thine.’ 

There ensued for a time a sword-play between 
the Guru and Karm Chand, until the sword of the 
latter was broken. The Guru as a holy man desiring 
to take no mean advantage of his adversary, put 
his own sword into his scabbard, and engaged with 
him in a wrestling combat. They were locked in 
one another’s arms, as if, after all the fighting, they 
had become fast friends. At last the Guru, seizing 
Karm Chand by both arms, swung him round as 
Krishan did his uncle Kans, and killed him by 
dashing his head on the ground. It had now become 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


ii; 


dark. The Chief and all his sardars were slain, his 
army had fled, the battle was ended, and victory 
remained with the Guru. Bidhi Chand lit a torch 
and passed through files of dead bodies in his search 
for his master, who was only found with delay and 
difficulty. 

The Guru went to his tent and Bidhi Chand 
sought out the wounded and attended to them. 
The next day was occupied with the disposal of the 
slain. The Chief, his two sons, and his five generals 
were all put into one grave. The bodies of the 
fallen Sikhs were brought to the Guru and their 
names announced. The Guru blessed' them one by 
one, and caused them to be thrown into the river 
Bias. The bodies of the fallen Muhammadans 
shared the same fate. A platform was erected near 
'the place where they were buried. In after days 
the Guru used occasionally to go and sit on it, and 
point out to Bidhi Chand and his other officers the 
advantages of a just cause, by means of which they 
had destroyed their proud enemies, and saved their 
own brave and loyal co-religionists. 

The Guru then delivered a funeral oration, in the 
course of which he said, ‘ Death is very potent and 
capablg of altering human affairs in a moment. It 
maketh those who are laughing weep, and those who 
are weeping laugh.’ He then recited the following 
hymn of Guru Arjan : — 

This, perishable world was made like a house of sand ; 

It is quickly destroyed like paper moistened with water, 

0 man, 1 behold and consider the True One in thy heart. 

Sidhs, Strivers, householders, and Jogis have departed 

abandoning their houses and homes. 

The world is like a nightly dream. 

What we see shall all perish ; why attach thyself to it, 
0 fool ? 

1 Mansha is here used for man. The word generally means 
desire, but it is used by the tenth Guru in the sense of conscience. 


n8 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Where are thy brothers and friends ? Open thine eyes 
and look. 

One goeth, another shall go — each in his turn. 

They who serve the perfect true Guru shall have a fixed 
place at God’s door. 

The man Nanak is God’s slave, preserve his honour, 
O God. 1 

And also the following : — 

0 man, why art thou puffed up with pride ? 

Within thee are bad odour, impurity, and uncleanness ; 
what is visible is ashes. 

0 mortal, remember Him who made all things, and who 
supporteth life and soul. 

The ignorant fool who forsaketh Him and attacheth him- 
self to other gods, shall be born again after death. 

1 am blind, dumb, crippled, devoid of understanding ; 
0 God, the Preserver, preserve me. 

God is omnipotent to act and cause others to act ; Nanak, 
what a wretched creature is man ! 2 

f His evil fate urged Abdulla Khan so that with- 
out cause or provocation he marched against us with 
ten thousand men. Besides his two sons he 
hath lost his state, authority, and prosperity, and 
become himself the prey of death. It hath, so dis- 
posed of him that no trace of him remaineth. There 
is no reliance to be placed on life. We know not 
when the last hour shall come The only gain is 
worship, and repetition of God’s name.’ Hymns 
were then recited and prayers offered for the repose 
of the souls of all who had fallen in the battle. 

Chapter XII 

To the masands was entrusted the construction 
of the city of Sri Har Gobindpur. The surrounding 
walls were to have five gates ; streets and market- 
places were to be laid out ; and houses constructed 
1 Bilawal. 2 Devgandhari. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


119 

for those who thronged to offer homage to the Guru. 
Gherar’s son having been killed, all his relations 
fled, and the Guru remained in peaceable possession. 
He projected the construction of a Sikh temple, but 
it occurred to him that his Muhammadan troops 
and labourers would also require a temple for their 
worship. He therefore constructed with thoughtful 
impartiality both a temple and a mosque. He pur- 
chased horses for his men to replace those which had 
been killed in action. His soldiers now considered 
where they should find a horse worthy of being 
ridden by the Guru himself. Inquiries were made 
even in distant countries, but no horse could be 
found to take the place of the Guru’s famous steed, 
killed by an arrow from Karm Chand’s bow. 

While the minds of the Sikhs were thus exercised 
a rich contractor called Subhaga came from the west 
of the Panjab with an offering of five horses. The 
Guru selected the best among them for his own 
use. He gave the second to his son Gurditta, the 
third to Bhai Bidhi Chand, the fourth he sent to 
Painda Khan, and the fifth he kept in his stable to be 
subsequently disposed of as might be deemed ex- 
pedient or necessary. 

One day as the Guru sat in the midst of his 
Sikhs he said, ‘ According to the rules of our re- 
ligion the repetition of the Gurus’ hymns with 
due understanding and with a pure heart is God’s 
real worship.’ The Sikhs represented that they 
all read the Gurus’ hymns daily. The Guru re- 
plied, ‘He who can repeat the Japji and under- 
stand the divine knowledge contained therein, shall 
have his desires fulfilled, and obtain deliverance 
hereafter.’ A Sikh named Gopal undertook the task. 
The Guru having caused his feet to be bathed, 
seated him on a lofty throne in front of him. Gopal 
then began to repeat the Japji. When he had 
nearly finished, the Guru began to consider what 
present he should make him. The wealth of the 



120 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


world would be insignificant for a man of perfect 
piety. The Guru seriously intended to offer him 
the Guruship, and sent for five paise and a 
coco-nut to perform the ceremony of his appoint- 
ment. When Gopal came to the line, ‘ God 
dwelleth in Sach Khand,’ in the thirty-seventh 
pauri of the great Sikh morning religious ser- 
vice, the Guru moved his feet to stand up and do 
obeisance to the reader as Guru. At that moment 
Gopal’s thoughts turned away from God, and he said 
to himself, ‘ Will the Guru reward me with his spare 
horse or not ? ’ The Guru read his thoughts, dis- 
closed them to him, and informed him that but 
for his mental wanderings he should receive the 
Guruship. The Guru gave him the fifth horse as 
his reward, but he lost the Guruship, which would be 
superior to the wealth of the world. So difficult 
is it to pray with attention. 

The party of Sikhs who had come with Subhaga 
received the Guru’s permission to visit the shrines 
and places sacred to the Gurus. They proceeded 
to Goindwal, and bathed in its Bawali. Thence 
they visited Khadur and Tarn Taran. From there 
they proceeded to the Guru’s forest to see Bhai 
Budha. They found Gur Das with him. Subhaga 
and his party told them who they were, and related 
all the incidents connected with the Guru’s occupa- 
tion of land on the margin of the Bias and the 
subsequent battle with the Muhammadans. As 
Subhaga and his party were departing for Amritsar,- 
Bhai Budha and Bhai Gur Das accompanied them. 
Subhaga and his friends after visiting Amritsar and 
beholding God’s temple returned to their own 
country. Bhai Budha, Bhai Gur Das, and three 
other Sikhs named Jiwa, Ajitta, and Jodha, who 
joined them in Amritsar, all proceeded to see the 
Guru at Sri Har Gobindpur. When Bhai Budha 
had inspected the Guru’s city he said that as he was 
now old, it was necessary for him to retire from the 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 121 

active service of religion and return to his village 
Ramdas. He requested the Guru’s permission to 
do so, and at the same time prayed him to appoint 
a successor who would manage the villages granted 
to Bibi Bhani by the Emperor Akbar. His heart 
was sad at parting from the Guru, and he begged 
him to show himself to him whenever he invoked 
him. Bhai Gur Das remained with the Guru in 
Sri Har Gobindpur. 

A man called Khwaja had accompanied the Guru 
as groom from Kashmir, and was very attentive 
and faithful in the discharge of his duties. The 
Guru once seeing him, while running by his horse’s 
side, perspiring profusely, invited him to ask a favour. 
Khwaja only requested that he might ever have the 
privilege to behold him. The Guru gave him the 
true Name, and made him happy. His under- 
standing then became enlightened, the veil of false- 
hood dropped from his eyes, and he saw God, first 
in the world and then in himself, but informed no 
one of his spiritual happiness. 

One Jani a Saiyid — or reputed descendant of the 
prophet Muhammad — chanced to turn his attention 
to religion and became a faqir. He resided among 
faqirs in the hope of meeting some religious men 
who would give him spiritual consolation. In his 
wanderings he met some very eloquent men, but 
none of heroic devotion. Having heard of Khwaja’s 
spiritual attainments he went to him for information, 
‘ 0 Khwaja, how hast thou escaped from the snares 
of the evil one ? When I try to fix my mind on God, 
I am beset with lust, wrath, avarice, worldly love, and 
pride. How shall I free myself from these deadly sins ? ’ 
Khwaja replied, ‘The true Guru hath banished my 
evil thoughts, and made me happy. Go thou and 
stand at his door. The Guru hath said : — 

If thou efface thyself and serve the Guru, thou shalt 
obtain some honour. 


122 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


‘ As the gold of the mine when twelve times 
annealed becometh fine gold, so the mind becometh 
pure by chastening and suffering. When the Guru 
knoweth thy heart’s devotion, he will at once make 
thee happy. If a poor man stand at a rich man’s 
door and remain there, he may, even though he 
receive buffets at first, obtain advantage at last.’ 
Jani on hearing this went and stood at the Guru’s 
door. The Guru sent for him, asked why he stood 
there, and what he wanted. Jani replied, ‘ Know- 
ing the things of this world to be perishable, I 
have abandoned them. Grant me a sight of the 
Ruler of the world and save me from the fire of 
hell.’ The Guru rejoined, * Tell me what else thou 
requirest. God is very remote.’ Jani refused to 
accept this answer, quoting Guru Arjan : — 

He who is infatuated with worldly love, deemeth God 
distant : 

But, saith Nanak, He is ever present . 1 

‘ If thou, 0 Guru ’, continued J ani, ‘ show me God, 
then He will not be distant.’ 

The Guru upon this directed his Sikhs to build 
a wall between Jani and himself. The object of this 
apparently was to test the sincerity of J ani’s devotion. 
Jani, however, held his ground and kept his attention 
fixed on the Guru. He yielded not to hunger, thirst, 
or sleep, but remained at the Guru’s door. When- 
ever he saw a Sikh passing, he implored him to take 
his message to the Guru. The Guru wearied by his 
importunities at last said, 'If he be in a great hurry 
to see me, let him leap into the river.’ Jani hearing 
this actually went to leap into the river. The Guru 
sent a Sikh to dissuade him. He then offered him 
wealth and supernatural power, but these boons were 
refused. J ani would only accept divine knowledge. 
The Guru then put his hand on his forehead, and made 
him happy. Another man called Lai Chand was 

1 Gauri. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


123 


attracted to the Guru by the religious proficiency 
attained by Khwaja and Jani, and remained in his 
service after they had departed. 

A deputation from Kashmir waited on the Guru, 
and requested him to send there as preacher Bhai 
Garhia, who is described as a very liberal, humble, 
and disinterested man. Bhai Garhia on his way 
encamped at some distance from the city of Gujrat, 
where he met Shah Daula. Bhai Garhia was well 
received in Kashmir. He used to sing the Gurus’ 
hymns and relate events in the lives of the Gurus. 
After some time Guru Har Gobind recalled him. 
Whatever offerings he received while in Kashmir 
he spent in the Guru’s name, and at his departure 
gave a feast in honour of his spiritual master. The 
Guru was pleased with the manner in which he had 
spent the offerings he had received in Kashmir. In 
due time Bhai Garhia returned to his native village. 

One day, as the Guru was sitting in open court, 
a proud Brahman called Nitya Nand, a native of 
Batala, entered leaning on his staff. His object 
was to discuss religious matters with the Guru. 
The Guru respectfully received him. Nitya Nand 
produced the Purans and began to read them. 
When he had finished, a Hindu invited him to read 
the Garur Puran, a Sanskrit composition recited 
for dying Hindus. According to it the soul reaches 
its abode in the next world a year after the dissolu- 
tion of the body. A Sikh called Sundar said, 

‘ By the Guru’s favour I can traverse that road in 
twelve hours.’ Bhai Lala said, ' I can do it in six 
hours.’ Bhai Manj said, ‘ I can do it in three hours.’ 
Bhai Nihala said, ‘ What need have we to go there 
at all ? ’ The Brahman then said to the Guru, 

‘ Listen to what thy Sikhs are saying.’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ What my Sikhs say is correct. The one 
year’s journey stated in thy text is only for sinners ; 
but for those who act without any worldly object, 
who possess divine knowledge, and who are saints 



124 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


of God, there is no necessity to traverse the journey 
at all. The companions of a king have no need 
to go to a subordinate of his, nor are good men sent 
to prison. In the same way good men suffer not 
on the way to their last abode, and have no concern 
with thy Dharmraj. Wherefore as Guru Ram Das 
hath said : — 

They who have meditated on God the best Being, the 
Root of joy, are ever in extreme happiness. 

They have ceased to regard Dharmraj ; all their concern 
for death is at an end. 1 

' Guru Arjan hath also said : — 

The road on which the evil passions plundered 

The traveller is far from the saints. 

It was the perfect Guru who pointed out to me the right 
road. 

Thy name, 0 Lord, is the way of salvation ; the road 
of Death is distant. 

The port where that greedy tax-gatherer watcheth 

Is far from the saint. 

While very many are tortured by Death, 

The saints abide with the Supreme God. 

The recording angels write all men’s accounts : 

They will take no notice of the saints. 

Saith Nanak, for him who hath found the perfect true 
Guru 

Unblown trumpets play. 2 

‘As a man on horseback can traverse a road in 
one hour which taketh a man on foot three hours, 
and he who hath a better conveyance can traverse 
it still more quickly, so the good suffer not like the 
bad, and their road is different. The coming and 
going of the soul is the result of spiritual ignorance. 
As Guru Arjan hath said : — 

My transmigration is at an end ; 

My heated caldron hath become cold ; the Guru hath 
given me the cooling Name. 3 

1 Bilawal. 2 Asa. 3 Maru. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


125 


' And again : — 

The saints who have taken God’s name as their support 
suffer not transmigration. 

It is all God’s play, saith Nanak ; God is altogether in- 
comprehensible.’ 1 

On hearing this the Brahman obtained peace, 
and became satisfied that the Guru’s words were the 
essence and conclusion of all wisdom. He confessed, 
‘ In the first place, I had pride of caste ; secondly, 
I had pride of learning which attacked me like fever ; 
but I thank the Guru, whose words are cooling, and 
who hath cooled with them my burning mind.’ The 
Brahman being thus humbled remained with the 
Guru, became a Sikh, and began to preach the Sikh 
religion. 

Bhai Budha remained in his village of Ramdas 
intent on his devotions. The True Name ever came 
spontaneously to his tongue. One night he saw 
Guru Arjan in a vision, and begged him to place him 
at his feet. Guru Arjan replied, ‘ Guru Nanak hath 
made death subservient to thee. Thou hast seen 
six spiritual kings, and mayest when it pleaseth thee 
go to Sach Khand, and there obtain imperishable 
dignity.’ After this Bhai Budha awoke, and telling 
his son Bhana of the vision, said his end had come, 
for Wahguru had called him. 

Bhai Budha then sent for a banker friend of his 
and said to him, ‘ Go to the Guru and remind him 
of a promise he once made to come to me whenever 
necessary.’ The Guru taking Bhai Gur Das and 
other Sikhs went to Bhai Budha, and took a last 
farewell of him. Bhai Budha had strength enough left 
to wash the Guru’s feet. He then drank some of the 
water therefrom and sprinkled the remainder over 
his house. It is said that, as the ocean is pleased on 
seeing the full moon, so was Bhai Budha pleased on 
beholding the Guru. The Guru said to him, ' Bhai 

1 Gauri. 



126 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Budha thou hast lived long. Thou hast been ever 
with the Gurus. Give me some instruction.’ Bhai 
Budha replied, ' Great king, thou art a sun ; I am 
a fire-fly before thee. Thou hast come to save me, 
and to hear my dying words. Guru Nanak had no 
worldly concerns or designs. He travelled over 
many lands, and established in them the worship of 
the true Name. Guru Angad by the force of his 
piety and devotion pleased him, and obtained the 
Guruship. He gave it to Guru Amar Das, he to 
Guru Ram Das, and he to Guru Arjan who with 
open hands showered upon men happiness in this 
life and salvation in the next. Guru Arjan possessed 
a treasury of the Name, which was never exhausted. 
His fame hath spread over the world. Thou his son 
art spiritual and temporal lord and protector of the 
holy. Though divine, thou also performest a human 
part. I have been a servant of the Guru’s house for 
six generations. Succour me in the next world, and 
allow me not to suffer when I enter death’s door, 
which I fondly hope is the portal of salvation. My son 
Bhana here is thy servant : take his arm and keep 
him at thy feet.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ Thou sawest Guru Nanak, and 
hast ever abided by his instruction. Guru Arjan 
hath said : — 

They with whom God is pleased love the saints’ society. 

They who touched Guru Nanak saved all their families. 

They to whom God hath been merciful have obtained 
all happiness. 

They who touched Guru Nanak have not been born again. 

They whose fetters the Merciful hath cut off, are attached 
to His worship. 

They who have touched Guru Nanak are ever emanci- 
pated in this world and the next . 1 

‘ Thou, O Bhai Budha, shalt assuredly obtain 
immortal bliss. Of this thy humility is an assurance.’ 

1 Guru Arjan’s Sawaiyas. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


127 


The Guru then put his hand on Bhai Budha’s 
head and blessed him. Next morning Bhai Budha 
arose before day and repeated the Japji. Then 
fixing the image of the true Guru in his heart and 
uttering ‘Wahguru! Wahguru!’ he departed for 
Sach Khand. The Guru and his Sikhs sang con- 
gratulations on the manner of Bhai Budha’s death 
after his long, holy, and eventful life, and lauded 
him for the assistance he had given in the propaga- 
tion and consolidation of the Sikh faith. The Guru 
himself ignited his funeral pile. 

At the request of Bhai Bhana the Guru, leaving 
his troops in Ramdas, proceeded with a few favourite 
Sikhs to Kartarpur on the right bank of the Ravi. 
They all did homage at the place where Guru Angad 
had received Guruship. The Guru after a three days’ 
sojourn re-crossed the river, and proceeded to Dehra 
Baba Nanak. Bhai Bhana inquired where the shrine 
of Guru Nanak was. The Guru replied, ‘ It was not 
Guru Nanak’s desire to set up shrines whether great 
or small. On this account the river absorbed his 
remains.’ 

Dharm Chand, Guru Nanak’s grandson, with all 
his male relations came forth from Dehra Baba 
Nanak to receive the Guru and escort him to their 
temple. The Guru made an offering to the temple 
of one thousand rupees, and to Dharm Chand’ s 
sons Mihr Chand and Manak Chand he presented 
clothes and golden bracelets. Dharm Chand, con- 
ceited at the Guru’s offering to his sons, began to 
think himself a person of great importance. Bhai 
Bhana on observing this remonstrated with him, 
and asked him to listen to the following stanza of 
Bhai Gur Das : — 

Sri Chand hath been continent from childhood and built 
the Guru’s shrine. 

Lakhmi Das his son and Dharm Chand his grandson had 
a high opinion of themselves. 



128 


THE .SIKH RELIGION 


Guru Angad seated his servant on his throne, yet Datu 
kicked him off it. 

Mohan became a fanatic, and Mohri caused the top story, 
where Guru Amar Das had resided, to be revered. 

Prithia became deceitful and urged false complaints and 
accusations against the Guru. 

Mahadev became proud — the Gurus' sons made men per- 
verse and led them astray. 

The odour of the sandal perfumeth not the bamboo . 1 

Dharm Chand became humble on hearing this. 
The Guru at his levee next morning expressed a 
desire to visit Sri Chand, son of Guru Nanak. He 
went to a solitary place where Sri Chand was en- 
gaged in austerities. The Guru saluted and offered 
him presents. Sri Chand complimented him on his 
bravery in war : ' Thou hast killed Moslems and 
given peace to the poor.’ The Guru politely replied, 

‘ It was all the result of thy favour.’ The Guru 
then set out with Bhai Bhana to Ramdas, his father 
Bhai Budha’s village. Bhai Bhana entertained the 
Guru there for a month, which they passed in spiritual 
converse. 

The Guru’s followers now reminded him that 
the Diwali fair would take place in a few days in 
Amritsar, and pressed him to return thither after 
his long absence. He took Bhai Bhana with him. 
On arriving there he sent for his family from Goind- 
wal and for Painda Khan from Kartarpur. Painda 
Khan on arriving expressed regret that the Guru had 
not sent for him to take part in the battle of the 
Bias. 

A daughter who was born to Painda Khan after 
the arrival of his family in Amritsar, was deemed 
a very unwelcome visitor. The Guru on hearing 
Painda Khan’s complaint on the subject, laughed 
and said that as God had sent her, so would He 

1 That is, proud men generally obtain no advantage by associating 
with the holy. War XXVI. - 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


129 


cherish her. Bhai Jetha asked the Guru why he 
laughed. The Guru replied, ‘ This child is strife 
incarnate. On her account there shall be a great 
battle, in which many Moslems shall perish. This is 
God’s will.’ 


Chapter XIII 

Natti, Gurditta’s wife, in due time became pregnant, 
whereat his mother Damodari greatly rejoiced. The 
Guru ordered Gurditta to go with his wife, spend the 
Baisakhi fair at Kartarpur, and take his place as 
expounder of the faith. While there a son was born 
to him. When the Guru in Amritsar heard of the 
glad event, he said that Gurditta’s son should prove 
a second Prithia. The Guru at the same time 
called Gurditta and his family. On their arrival 
in Amritsar the Guru put a shirt on the child and 
named him Dhir Mai. 

The Guru went one day a-hunting and heard a 
woman singing the following rustic verses : — 

Thou with the black beard and white turban, 

My name is Sulakhani, and I live in Chabba. 

I present a petition to the true Guru. 

May I, who am now without fruit, bear fruit ! 

Chabba is a village about four miles from Amritsar 
on the road to Tarn Taran and is near the Sangrana 
or monument raised to those who fell in the Guru’s 
battle with the imperial forces. The lady was the 
wife of a Jat agriculturist. She had come to implore 
the Guru to intercede for her that she might have 
a son. The Guru prayed for her and she was sub- 
sequently blessed with a family of seven children. 
A bard has celebrated this occurrence as follows : — 

As the Guru was touring, a woman came to him to ask for 
a son. 

He said, ‘ A son hath not been written on thy forehead ’ ; 
on hearing this she was disappointed. 

K 


SIKH. IV 



130 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Then the Guru wrote on her forehead the figure one. 

At the time of writing his hand shook and one became 
seven. 

There were seven sons born ; the universe knoweth it. 

By the Guru’s favour a stake is changed into a thorn. 

As the Guru on another occasion went hunting 
some thirty miles from Amritsar, he came on Sri 
Chand’s retreat. Sri Chand asked him to allow him 
to adopt one of his sons. The Guru with great 
reluctance gave his eldest son Gurditta, who appears 
to have accompanied him to the chase. Sri Chand, 
in token of adoption and succession to him, put on 
Gurditta’ s head a Persian hat, and on his neck a 
string of lotus seeds. 

Baba Atal, the Guru’s son by Nanaki, while playing 
with the children of the city used to instruct them 
by his conversation. Whatever he said even jest- 
ingly had a profound meaning. He was so beloved 
by all, that no one refused his requests. The Guru 
used to take him in his lap, fondle him, and say, 

' Display not thy power, or, if thou do, use it with 
discretion.. Squander it not in vain.’ Baba Atal 
would reply, * Great king, thy treasury never 
faileth.’ 

There lived in Amritsar a Sikh named Gurumukh 
who had an only son called Mohan, eight years of 
age. He and Baba Atal used to play at bat and ball 
together. Once they played until nightfall. The 
victory remained with Baba Atal, and it was agreed 
between the two boys that Mohan should pay his 
forfeit in the morning. Both boys went home. At 
night Mohan arose for purposes of nature, and walking 
in the dark was bitten by a cobra. On hearing his 
screams his father and mother arose and found him 
fainting. A physician was called, but the poison had 
done its work, and the boy succumbed. 

Next morning Baba Atal proceeded to Mohan’s 
house. He heard weeping on the way, and on being 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 131 

told that Mohan was dead, said, ‘ No, he is not dead. 
He is alive. Come, I will fetch him.’ Saying this 
he went to the apartment where Mohan’s body was 
lying. Touching it with his bat he said, ‘ Mohan, 
arise. Utter Wahguru ! Open thine eyes. Thou 
oughtest not to sleep so late, arise and pay me what 
I have won.’ Upon this, it is said, Mohan, though 
dead for four hours and a half, arose as if from 
sleep. A crowd of bystanders congratulated the 
Guru’s son, and said he had done a deed beyond 
the power of other mortal. 

The Guru while sitting in his court heard the 
rejoicings. People were saying, ‘ As is the father, so 
is the son, a treasury of miraculous power.’ But 
the Guru was not at all pleased. He said, ‘ It hath 
ever been Baba Atal’s custom to dissipate his power. 
Now whenever a son may die, the parents will bring 
him to our door. Whose son shall we reanimate, and 
whose shall we allow to die ? God showeth no favour 
to man, who must enjoy or suffer the result of his 
acts, and the religion of saints and holy men pre- 
scribed obedience to God’s will.’ 

While the Guru was thus speaking, Baba Atal 
returned from Mohan’s house. The Guru angrily 
addressed him : ' Thou must be working miracles, 
while I teach men to obey God’s will.’ Baba Atal 
replied, ' Great king, mayest thou live for ages ! I 
depart to Sach Khand.’ Saying this he left the 
assembly. It did not occur to any one to seek him 
or beg the Guru to pardon him. It was thought 
that the boy had simply gone to his mother’s apart- 
ments. He had, however, actually gone to bathe 
in the Guru’s tank of nectar. After his ablutions 
he four times circumambulated the Golden Temple, 
and then went and sat on the margin of the Kaulsar. 
Bending his head forward he supported his chin with 
his bat, and repeated the Japji with his eyes directed 
towards the Temple. As he finished his morning 
devotions, his light blended with the light of God 

K 2 


132 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


on the tenth day of the dark half of Assu, Sambat 
1685, when he was in his ninth year. 

The Guru seeing his wives, children, and Sikhs 
lamenting their beloved Baba Atal said, ‘ This world 
is perishable. Everything is the sport of death. It 
maketh the weepers laugh and the laughers weep, 
and produceth the other vicissitudes of life. Be con- 
soled. Baba Atal hath obtained immortal dignity and 
his fame shall for ever abide.’ When the Guru sent 
for a load of sandal wood to cremate him in the 
forest, the Sikhs suggested that the body should be 
taken near some inhabited place and not cremated 
in that unfrequented spot. The Guru replied, ‘ The 
city shall increase in population, and this shall be 
the centre of it. In the Guru’s city this place shall 
be as the Anpurna 1 in Banaras, where all comers 
are gratuitously filled with corn.’ Baba Atal at the 
time of cremation received the name of Kotwal, or 
police officer of the city, by which was meant that 
he would ever guard its inhabitants. The Guru 
said, * In commemoration of him who by God’s will 
hath resigned his body in his ninth year, a nine- 
storied shrine shall be erected which shall be seen 
from afar.’ The virtues and miracles of Baba Atal 
have been abundantly celebrated by the Sikhs in 
song and story. 

A great crowd of relations and friends came from 
Goindwal, Khadur, Daroli, Kartarpur, and other 
places to offer their condolences to the Guru on the 
death of his son. He repeated for them the following 
hymn of Guru Arjan : — 

1 Anpurna, a name of Parbati, is supposed to be the Anna Perenna 
of the Romans, whom Varro placed in the same rank as Pallas and 
Ceres, and who was deified by the Roman people in consequence of 
having supplied them with food when they retired to Mount Aventine. 
Besides the almost identity of names there is a singular coincidence in 
the times of their worship, the festival of Anpurna taking place in the 
early part of the increase of the moon in the month of Chet (March- 
April), 



BABA ATAL’S SHRINE 







LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 133 

As a husbandman having sown his field 

Cutteth down the crop whether ripe or unripe , 1 

So, O mortal, know that what is born shall die : 

God’s saint alone is permanent. 

Night shall assuredly follow day, 

And when the night is passed, mom shall dawn. 

The ill-fated sleep in the love of mammon, 

But by the Guru’s favour a few are wakeful. 

Saith Nanak, ever sing God’s praises. 

So shall thy face be bright and thy heart be pure . 2 

Sain Das, husband of the Guru’s sister-in-law, 
said to the Guru, ‘ Ordinary people suffer greatly 
on the loss of a son. What is the suffering of holy 
men in such cases ? ’ The Guru requested him to 
draw lines on the ground. He then requested him 
to erase them. He did so. The Guru then said, 

' Thou hast had no pleasure in making these lines 
and no pain in erasing them.’ Sain Das replied, 

‘ None whatever.’ Then said the Guru, ‘ That is all 
a holy man suffereth on the loss of a son.’ 

A Sikh called Prem Chand, resident of Kartarpur, 
proposed his daughter as a wife for Suraj Mai, the 
Guru’s third son. 

One day a conversation arose in the presence of 
the Guru as to the difficulties of Sikhism. Bhai 
Gur Das admitted the fact, but said that at the same 
time men should have faith in their religion. He 
then recited the twentieth pauri of his thirty-fifth 
War : — 

If a mother become unchaste, how can her son disgrace 
her ? 

If a cow swallow a gem, one would not tear open her 
belly and kill her. 

Even if a husband visit several women, his wife should 
preserve her chastity. 

Even if a ruler make current a leather coin, the subjects 
are powerless, and ought to accept it. 

1 Umipe crops are frequently cut in the East. 2 Asa. 



134 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


If Brahmans drink wine, shall people burn them ? 1 

Even if the Guru become a play-actor, his Sikhs should 
not lose their faith. 

The Guru was not pleased with the last verse, 
and thought he would do something to teach Gur Das 
humility. At the time he wanted two chargers, 
and was informed that Kabul alone produced horses 
worthy to bear him. He decided to send Bhai 
Gur Das thither, and gave him money to make the 
purchases. The horses were to be bought subject 
to the Guru’s approval. Gur Das found two chargers 
priced at fifty thousand rupees each, and sent them 
to the Guru. The Guru approved and wrote to 
him to pay their price and return forthwith to 
Amritsar. 

When the owner went to Gur Das for settlement, 
Gur Das seated him outside his tent and went within 
to count the money. On opening the saddle-bags 
he found that they contained not money but brick- 
bats. When he did not come forth from his tent 
within a reasonable time, the horse merchant went 
in to ascertain the cause of his delay. He found 
that Gur Das had escaped by an opening in the back 
of his tent, and left the saddle-bags, which to the 
merchant now appeared filled with money. The 
Sikhs who had come with Gur Das paid the merchant, 
returned with the balance to Amritsar, and in- 
formed the Guru of Gur Das’s sudden disappearance. 

Gur Das was afraid to return to the Guru, and 
sought refuge in Banaras, which he reached by a 
circuitous route after great hardship and suffering. 
Some Sikhs residing there received him with great 
respect on account of his former connexion with the 
Guru and his literary gifts. The Raja of the city 
heard from the Sikhs of the arrival of a very dis- 
tinguished member of their body, and went to do 
him honour. 

1 It is written in the Shastars that if a Brahman drinks wine, the 
only atonement is to kill himself by drinking it boiling hot. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 135 

The Raja used often to send for Gur Das and 
listen to his expositions of the hymns of the Gurus. 
Once several pandits and Sanyasis said, ‘ Banaras 
is the city of Shiv, and he dealeth salvation there to 
his worshippers. Wherefore abandon the teachings 
of the Guru and adore Shiv. What hast thou to 
gain from the Guru ? ’ Gur Das replied, ‘ As a vir- 
tuous woman leaveth not her husband to go to 
another man, so will I not abandon the Guru to 
worship a Hindu god. A calf which leaveth its 
mother and goeth to a strange cow, only receiveth 
kicks. If a swan abandon Mansarowar, it will not 
elsewhere receive pearls as food. If a man leave 
an emperor and go to serve his subjects, he will 
feel his altered position. So the Guru’s Sikhs can- 
not leave God or preserve their honour by wor- 
shipping the gods and goddesses of His creation.’ 1 

The pandits represented, ‘ The great God in 
Sanskrit literature bore the names Shiv, Gobind, 
Ram, &c. Why did Guru Nanak introduce the 
custom of uttering Wahguru and what is the meaning 
of the words ? ’ Gur Das replied that Wahguru was 
the greatest of all names. ' Wah means congratula- 
tion, and guru means great. Both words combined, 
therefore, mean congratulation to the Great God. 
They also mean that God is marvellous, that is, 
beyond human comprehension.’ 2 

The pandits discussed with him the relative merits 
of Sanskrit and the vulgar tongue. They said that 
Sanskrit, which was a written language, was the 
language of the gods, and Hindi, which was a spoken 
language, the language of men. Gur Das replied, 

‘ The Guru used the spoken language in order to 
communicate his ideas to men. Sanskrit was merely 
the language of priests. The current spoken lan- 
guage had preceded it and will succeed it. Sanskrit 

1 Gur Das's Kabit . 

2 Another interpretation of Wahguru has been given already in 
the Life of Guru Amar Das. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


136 

only holdeth an intermediate position. It was the 
current language Krishan used in his exhortations 
to Arjan. Whenever any one readeth or preacheth 
a Sanskrit discourse, he must explain it in the 
language of the people. Speech can only be uttered 
by a being with a body. God hath no body, there- 
fore He speaketh no language, nor was Sanskrit 
composed by Him. It is now found only in books, 
and is therefore a dead language. It is a tree which 
beareth no fruit, while the current language on the 
contrary is a tree with fruit-bearing branches. The 
Guru seeing that human life was limited, compiled 
the Granth Sahib in easy language. Sanskrit is so 
difficult that a whole life must be spent in acquiring 
it, wherefore we use the spoken language which 
children and women can read and understand . 1 It 
is on this account the Guru hath made the spoken 
language the vehicle for divine instruction. All 
persons of whatever caste may read it, not like 
your Sanskrit, a knowledge of which you deny to 
women and men of low caste.’ It is said that on 
this the pandits and Sanyasis of Banaras admitted 
the force of his argument and acknowledged them- 
selves vanquished. After a sojourn of two months 
in Banaras Gur Das felt an inclination to return to 
the Guru and brave his ire. 

Gur Das wrote to the Guru, ‘ As a tethered calf 
crieth for its dam ; as a labourer who desireth to go 
home, but is forced to work for another, passeth his 
time in anxiety ; as a wife detained by her parents 
and separated from her spouse pineth for him, so a 
Sikh desireth happiness at the Guru’s feet, but is 
kept in misery in a foreign land in obedience to his 
order .’ 2 

The Guru sent Bhai Jetha and some Sikhs to 
fetch Gur Das, but not in the manner in which he 
had anticipated. The Guru sent by Jetha a letter 


1 This is not now the case. 


2 Gur Das’s KabiL 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 137 

to the governor of Banaras to say that Gur Das had 
deserted him without his permission, and requested 
that he might be sent under arrest for punishment. 
The governor was astonished on receiving the Guru's 
letter, and said that he knew no thief called Gur 
Das, or Guru’s servant, but the Guru’s messengers 
might arrest himself and take him to serve the 
Guru. On this Gur Das, who had just finished 
reading the Japji, related to the governor and his 
staff the whole story of his journey to Kabul, and 
his flight from there, whereat there was further 
curiosity and astonishment. 

Gur Das’s hands were then tied behind his back, 
but, at the same time, he was dismissed with great 
respect by the governor and his people, who fully 
believed in his innocence. When the arresting party 
had proceeded about four miles on their homeward 
journey, Bhai Jetha unbound Gur Das, so that he 
might travel more comfortably. Bhai Gur Das had 
not requested this favour. When they arrived near 
Amritsar Bhai Jetha again bound his prisoner as 
before for presentation to the Guru. The Guru 
ironically told Gur Das that he was an excellent 
Sikh, and made several other cutting observations 
on his conduct. Bhai Gur Das replied : — 

If a mother poison her son, who is affectionate enough 
to save him ? 

If a sentry break into a house, who is to guard it ? 

If a guide take a traveller into a wilderness, to whom 
shall he complain ? 

If a fence devour the field, there will be no one to look 
after it. 

If the Guru become a play-actor and cause his Sikhs to 
doubt, what can the poor Sikhs do ? 1 

The Guru pardoned him and suggested that he 
might complete the compositions in which he had 
been engaged prior to his arrest. 

1 War XXXV. 



138 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chapter XIV 

The marriage of the Guru’s son Suraj Mai was 
duly celebrated with Khem Kaur, daughter of Prem 
Chand. One Lai Chand and his wife Bishan Kaur 
thought that they would like to betroth their 
daughter Gujari to Teg Bahadur, the Guru’s youngest 
son, on the occasion. When Lai Chand’s agent 
arrived with marriage presents, he did not know 
the name of the intended bridegroom, so Ani Rai, 
Teg Bahadur’s eldest brother, was asked if he would 
be married. He whose mind had been absorbed in 
spiritual thoughts, inquired what marriage meant. 
The agent explained the meaning and intention 
of the ceremony. Ani Rai replied, ' Married life is 
the foundation of misery. Sensual pleasures are 
like the husk of rice, spiritual pleasures like am- 
brosia.’ Ani Rai could not be induced to alter his 
opinions or his condition. Teg Bahadur, who had 
really been intended by Lai Chand for his son-in- 
law, was then consulted as to whether he would 
marry, and he replied that he would implicitly obey 
his father. He was accordingly in public darbar 
formally betrothed to Gujari, Lai Chand’s daughter. 

Wali Khan, the surviving son of the Subadar of 
Jalandhar, was waiting for an opportunity to avenge 
his father. That opportunity had now arrived. The 
Emperor Shah Jahan was on his way from Dihli 
to Lahore. Wali Khan presented him a horse with 
a gold embroidered saddle and other costly gifts. 
The Emperor remarked to him that his father and 
elder brother had not come to wait on him. Wali 
Khan replied that they had been killed by the 
priest of the Sikhs who had forcibly taken land in 
the village of Ruhela, thrown its owner Bhagwan 
Das Gherar into the river Bias, and caused an in- 
surrection in the country. Wali Khan then entered 
into all the details of the destruction of the army 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 139 

sent against the Guru. The Emperor was astonished, 
and inquired if there was any one who would lead 
another expedition against him. 

Wazir Khan, the Guru’s friend, was ready with 
his ingenious pleading — ‘ May it please thy Majesty, 
whosoever thou orderest is ready to proceed against 
the Guru, but it would not be improper to reflect 
before action. Had the Subadar of Jalandhar 
received thine orders when he marched against the 
Guru ? No ; he made war on his own responsibility. 
Ask Wali Khan where the Guru is now. Is he 
entrenched as a rebel in Ruhela ? Is he appropri- 
ating its land revenue ? No ; he is now living 
peaceably in Amritsar. He belongeth not to any 
Hindu or Muhammadan faction. The Gherar used to 
persecute his own people and oppress the poor. The 
Guru out of his own resources built them houses. 
He even built a mosque for Muhammadans on the 
land which he found unoccupied on the margin of 
the Bias. The Gherar was an ally of the Hindus, 
and he suffered for it. He came to fight and insult 
the Guru. The Sikhs could not tolerate his language. 
While quarrelling with them, he fell into the river, 
and was taken away by the current. His son Ratan 
Chand in collusion with Karm Chand, Chandu’s son, 
went to the Subadar to request him to aid them, 
and, as I hear from the best authority, tempted 
him with a very large bribe. It is on that account 
the Subadar made war on the Guru without thy 
Majesty’s authority. The Guru is a wonderful man. 
He hath no appliances of war and no troops. Thou 
art asked to believe that some petty shopkeepers 
killed ten thousand men of thine imperial army. 
If thou order me, I will go alone and destroy the 
fort the Guru is said to have constructed, and also 
the mosque occupied by a priest and a few feeble 
beggars. This Subadar’s son ought to be punished. 
A long time hath elapsed since his father made war, 
and he hath only informed thee of it to-day.’ 



140 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Emperor was astonished and inquired why 
the Guru had constructed a mosque. Wazir Khan’s 
answer was prompt — ' Sire, gurus and pirs are all 
men’s property. They feel neither love nor hate. 
The Guru sitteth on Guru Nanak’s throne. His is 
the abode of miracles. He looketh on Hindus and 
Muhammadans with an equal eye.’ The Emperor 
replied, ‘ Wazir Khan, I am pleased with thy faith- 
ful representation of the case.’ The Emperor then 
confiscated Wali Khan’s jagir 1 and refused to grant 
him his father’s post. After this the Guru was left 
in peace for some time. Every one hesitated to 
make further complaints against him. 

Baba Gurditta, the Guru’s son, founded the city 
of Kiratpur under the following circumstances : — On 
the peak of the black ridge of the Kahlur mountain 
there once lived Budhan Shah, a Muhammadan 
priest famed as a miracle-worker. He kept two 
goats which, it is said, a tame tiger used daily to 
take to graze. Guru Nanak and Mardana once 
visited the place. Budhan Shah asked the Guru 
who he was, and for what purpose he had come. 
Mardana took it upon himself to reply, ‘ This is the 
divine Guru Nanak, who hath been born to instruct 
the world, because all people are engaged in filling 
their bellies and gratifying their evil passions to the 
forgetfulness of God. I am Mardana, by profession 
a minstrel. I sing and proclaim God’s praises.’ 
Budhan Shah was pleased to receive such visitors, 
and passed some time in conversing with the Guru 
on religious subjects. He then told him that he 
might depart, as the tiger was returning home with 
the goats and might possibly alarm him. The Guru 
replied, that all noxious animals were in the Creator’s 
power, and he had no apprehension from them. 

The tiger with his charge returned in the evening, 
and, it is said, first bowed at Guru Nanak’s feet 
and then at his own master’s. Budhan Shah, 

1 A revenue-free tenure. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 141 

observing the tiger’s first obeisance to Guru Nanak, 
concluded that he must be a man possessing super- 
natural power, and treated him accordingly. He 
consulted him as to how pride could be erased from 
the heart, and the senses become disgusted with 
pleasure. Guru Nanak replied, ' When a man 
obtaineth fresh milk he will not taste sour milk. 
Without spiritual pleasure man resorteth to the 
gratification of his senses. When he forsaketh 
temporal pleasure he obtaineth divine pleasure. 
When all false pleasures are forsaken, the true 
pleasure is obtained ; and when permanent pleasure 
is obtained, transitory pleasures please no more. 
When man’s attention is fixed on God, there en- 
sueth a state of profound exaltation, man’s thoughts 
cease to wander, the senses stray not, and celestial 
light dawneth on the mind.’ 

Budhan Shah asked Guru Nanak how celestial light 
was manifested. The Guru explained the process 
to him, upon which he fell into a trance. When he 
arose from it, he milked his goats and laid a pail 
of milk before the Guru. The Guru drank half of 
it himself and returned the other half to Budhan 
Shah, telling him to keep it in memory of him. 
Budhan Shah pressed him to remain with him, 
otherwise how long was he to preserve the milk ? 
The Guru replied, ‘ Wait until my Sikh (Gurditta) 
cometh, thy life shall last till then. He will found 
a city and abide here.’ Saying this the Guru 
departed. 

Guru Nanak was ever present to Budhan Shah’s 
thoughts. He looked at the milk every morning 
and found it preserved its freshness. After some time 
he learned that Guru Nanak had forsaken his body. 
He then heard of the succession of the Gurus — 
Angad, Amar Das, Ram Das, Arjan, and Har Gobind 
— and seeing that the milk remained as before, would 
often say, ‘ 0 Guru, send thy Sikh to drink the milk 
and fulfil thy promise.’ 


142 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Har Gobind privately narrated all the circum- 
stances to his eldest son Gurditta, and sent him to 
Budhan Shah, whose devotion he commended. 
Gurditta took his wife and son Dhirmal with him. 
Budhan Shah met him on the bank of the Satluj, 
and asked him who he was, whence he had come, 
and if he knew Guru Har Gobind. Gurditta replied, 
' 0 priest, thou hast the milk that was entrusted 
to thee. Bring it to me. The Guru is my father, 
and hath sent me to taste it.’ Budhan Shah gave 
him the milk. He tasted it and, it is said, found 
it sweet as if it had been just set. Budhan Shah then 
addressed Gurditta, ‘ This hilly land is all thine ; 
fulfil my desires, and abide with me.’ Gurditta 
then laid the foundation of the city of Kiratpur at 
the base of the mountain. It was named Kiratpur 
as God’s praises — Kirat — were ever to be sung there. 

At the suggestion of Bhai Bhana the Guru visited 
his own native village Wadali, about four miles 
from Amritsar on the road to Lahore. He there 
pointed out the house in which he had been born. 
Thence he proceeded to the well with six Persian 
wheels constructed by Guru Arjan. There a villager 
represented to him that a wild boar was devastating 
the country and killing even cultivators. A hunting 
party was organized, the forest was beaten, and the 
boar rushed forth. The Guru told Painda Khan to 
attack the animal. He rushed forward but failed to 
strike. The boar then charged, threw horse and rider, 
and exulted in his feat. Burrowing the ground with 
his shining tusks, the animal again advanced to attack 
Painda Khan as he lay helpless. The Guru at once 
went to Painda Khan’s assistance, and drawing his 
sword confronted the boar. The boar made a charge 
which the Guru avoided by leaping aside. Then 
raising his sword and exerting all his strength, he 
struck the brute with such force across the back, 
that he cut him in twain. 

After this the Guru returned to Amritsar. Next 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


143 


morning Bhai Bhana prayed the Guru to relate to 
him the history of Amritsar, and he graciously did 
so. On another occasion Bhai Bhana asked the 
Guru to show him the forest land which the Emperor 
Akbar had granted to Bibi Bhani and within which 
Bhai Budha had dwelt. The Guru taking Gur Das 
and Bhai Bhana with him pointed out the locality. 
There they found that a solid brick building had 
been erected on Bhai Budha’s seat. It is situated 
some five miles south of Amritsar near the Bari 
Doab canal. An annual fair is held there on the 
21st of the month of Assu. 

In the month of Bhadon, during the rainy season, 
the Guru at Bhai Bhana’ s suggestion proceeded with 
his Sikhs to Tarn Taran. They all bathed there at 
the time when there was no moon visible. It was 
the anniversary, according to lunar reckoning, of the 
excavation of the tank by Guru Arjan. 

At the request of his Sikhs the Guru then pro- 
ceeded to Cholha to see the temple which had been 
erected to commemorate Guru Arjan’s visit. During 
their visit Bhai Gur Das at the Guru’s request 
related the history of Cholha. 

Having left Cholha the Guru and his Sikhs went 
to visit the ruins of Vindpur, a village in which Guru 
Nanak had been inhospitably received by his tribes- 
men. The Guru there related its history. 

The Guru and his party thence proceeded to the 
ruins of Khanpur which Guru Arjan had once 
visited. Bidhi Chand narrated its history to Bhai 
Bhana. Thence they all proceeded to Goindwal. 
On their arrival there, they met Sundar Das, the 
great-grandson of Guru Amar Das and author of 
the ‘Sadd’. 

One morning after the Guru had performed his 
devotions he went to Gur Das, whose end was now 
approaching. Gur Das begged pardon for any sins he 
might have committed. He then warmly embraced 
the Guru and Sundar Das. As a preparation for his 


i 4 4 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


death he recited the Asa ki War and said, ‘ There 
is no time now for delay. As I am dying, repeat 
Wahguru ! Wahguru ! Erect no shrine for me, but 
throw my remains from the pyre into the Bias.’ 
The Guru replied, ' I thank thee, Bhai Gur Das, for 
having assisted in laying out the road of the Sikh 
faith. Among the Gurus’ Sikhs thy name shall be 
immortal.’ Bhai Gur Das having heard this medi- 
tated on God, drew a sheet over himself, and closed 
his eyes in eternal sleep on Friday the fifth day of 
the light half of Bhadon, Sambat 1686 (a. d. 1629). 
After performing Gur Das’s last rites the Guru 
returned to Amritsar by way of Khadur. 

Bhai Bhana took leave of the Guru in Amritsar 
and returned to his village of Ramdas. Bibi Viro 
and her husband Sadhu also prepared for their 
departure. The Guru blessed her, and said that 
she should have five brave sons. She and her 
husband then proceeded to their residence in Malha. 

A married couple called Jalhan and Ramki of the 
village of Dobhirana, situated some ten miles from 
Amritsar, were anxious that the Guru should pay 
them a visit. He accordingly went shooting in their 
neighbourhood. Jalhan and his wife congratulated 
themselves on their good fortune that they should 
at last behold the Guru. He remained with them 
for a night. During his visit he revealed his hazard- 
ous position, ‘ O saint Jalhan, why do the Moslems 
cause me such annoyance ? They are pursuing me 
and will not desist. Wherever I go, they attack 
me.’ Jalhan replied, ‘0 great king, thou canst 
work miracles. In my opinion thou art doing deeds 
to please thyself. What power have the wretched 
Turks to contend with thee ? Thou art merely per- 
forming human play, and not thy supernatural r6le. 
Maya hath come to thee and thou attachest her to 
thy feet. They who long for her bear thee enmity, 
and are ready to die or be slain themselves in a 
contest with thee. If thou rid thyself of her, thou 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 145 

shalt have peace.’ The Guru replied, ‘ Since Maya 
hath become attached to me, I cannot detach myself 
from her, for I must now alter the constitution of 
Sikhism and defend my followers with force of arms.’ 
Jalhan had no further advice to offer, but on the 
contrary was willing to receive it. The Guru ex- 
horted him to honestly perform his worldly affairs 
in the station in which God had placed him, and 
never to forget his devotions. 

Gurditta and his wife Natti continued to reside 
in Kiratpur. There was a son born to them on 
Sunday the thirteenth day of the light half of 
Magh, Sambat 1687 (a. d. 1630). Gurditta sent a 
messenger to inform the Guru and invite him to 
Kiratpur on the joyful occasion; but the Guru had 
more pressing matters to attend to at the time. He 
opened the Granth Sahib, gave Gurditta’s child the 
name of Har Rai, and returned a message to the 
effect that he would soon proceed to Kiratpur. 

After a few months the Guru received a letter 
from Sain Das inviting him to attend the Baisakhi 
fair at Daroli. The Guru reflected on his own 
position. ‘ The Emperor beareth me malice in his 
heart. The honour of my temple shall be preserved 
if I go to Malwa and make its forest my fort. If 
the Emperor send an army thither to pursue me, it 
will die of thirst without my taking the trouble to 
destroy it.’ Thus reflecting, the Guru consulted his 
wife Damodari. She replied, ‘ My lord, I am a slave 
obedient to thy will. If thou depart, I will go with 
thee. If thou leave me behind, here will I remain.’ 
Before leaving Amritsar the Guru went to the temple 
and prayed to God to preserve him and ever grant 
him victory. The Sikhs inquired who would take care 
of the temple in their absence. The Guru replied, 

‘ The Sikhs will take care of it. We shall not 
return again.’ He complained to the people of 
Amritsar that they would be likely to suffer greatly 
were he to remain with them. He would now re- 

L 


SIKH* IV 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


146 

move the theatre of war to the forest, but would 
ever abide with them in the spirit. 

To his father-in-law Hari Chand, who said that 
the city would be ruined in his absence, the Guru 
represented, * The city shall increase in population 
day by day. He who meditateth evil to it shall die 
in misery himself. Here at the Guru’s feet shall be 
the spring of happiness in both worlds ; here shall 
the feast of the Name be ever served to my followers ; 
and here shall my Sikhs be ever happy. The 
foundation of the city hath been firmly laid, and 
never shall give way.’ He then proceeded on his 
journey, taking with him a mounted army of one 
thousand brave and devoted men. A band with 
banners flying preceded the party, and then came 
the Granth Sahib borne on the heads of two carriers. 
Sikhs were employed to wave fans over the sacred 
volume to add to its dignity, and hinder any thought- 
less insect from alighting on it. 

The Guru on arriving at Daroli by way of Tarn 
Taran was received with great affection by Sain 
Das. The Guru said to him, ‘ The cable of thy love 
hath so bound me that I have no hope of ever 
escaping from it.’ Sain Das replied, ‘ In all ages 
this hath been God’s way. His name is Bhagat 
Watsal — the saints are dear to Him — He knoweth 
the love of His slaves. Whether one be a pandit, 
a jogi, or a king, one cannot please God without 
love. If a man have love, even though he be poor 
and ignorant, yet is he dear to the Lord.’ 

An event occurred at the time of the Guru’s 
first visit to Daroli, which must be here narrated. 
In the village of Wadaghar in the present district 
of Firozpur was a Sikh called Akal, a carpenter by 
trade. He had been converted to Sikhism by Guru 
Ram Das and used often to visit Guru Arjan and 
Guru Har Gobind. He had an accomplished 
daughter for whom he desired to procure a husband. 
He found a suitable match for her in the person of 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


147 


Sadhu, son of Sada, a resident of the village of 
Tuklani. Akal’s family priest had made all in- 
quiries and performed all the necessary ceremonies, 
but had failed to inquire if the intended bridegroom 
were a Sikh or not. The priest replied to Akal’s 
inquiries that the boy was a Hindu held in high 
honour by his brethren ; and he deemed that sufficient 
without further investigation. Akal was not satis- 
fied, but said that God would put everything right. 
He heard some time afterwards that the bride- 
groom’s parents were followers of Sakhi Sarwar , 1 yet 
he accepted the alliance fearing that he could not 
find another mate so suitable for his daughter. 
At the same time he felt severe twinges of con- 
science on the subject. Accordingly, at the time of 
his daughter’s departure after the wedding he gave 
her this admonition — ‘ My beloved daughter, in all 
worldly matters obey and wait upon thy mother- 
in-law and thy husband, but never bow thy head 
to any but the Guru.’ The girl herself was much 
distressed at having to marry a youth of another 
religion, but she was obliged to accept her position. 

The marriage procession started from Wadaghar 
to Tuklani in the early morning. The intervening 
route not being safe, the procession passed by Daroli, 
where the bride heard the Sikhs singing sacred hymns. 
Being informed that the Guru was encamped in the 
village, and fearing that she might not again have 
an opportunity of seeing him, she ordered her 
bearers to let her alight and go to do him homage. 
The Guru on seeing her asked who she was. A Sikh 
who knew her whole history answered for her. The 
girl then addressed the Guru, ‘ Thou art a searcher 
of hearts, and knowest that I am a daughter of 
a Sikh, while my parents-in-law are followers of 
Sakhi Sarwar. Evil is my fate that I am in the 
power of others. If thou convert my husband to 

1 A famous Baloch pir, whose shrine, not far from the Sulaiman 
Mountains, is yearly visited by pilgrims of various Indian religions. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


148 

the Sikh religion, I shall be perfectly happy.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ My daughter, have no anxiety, God 
will act for the best. As thy father and mother 
were Sikhs, so shall thy husband and children also 
be Sikhs, and thy wishes be fulfilled.’ On hearing 
this the girl was consoled and felt satisfied that her 
evil destiny was now altered. 

Meantime Sada missed his daughter-in-law. On 
discovering that she had gone to visit the Guru, he 
became very angry and sent the bridegroom for her, 
saying, ‘ What have we to do with the Guru ? We 
are worshippers of Sakhi Sarwar. If we bow to the 
Guru, our priest will be very angry with us. Go 
quickly and bring back thy wife.’ Sadhu thus 
found his way to the Guru’s presence. The Guru 
was then holding court, and hymns were being 
sung. He shone among his Sikhs like the moon 
among the stars. Sadhu became at once filled with 
devotion and said, ‘ Alas ! we have wasted our lives 
in vain. Being of the Hindu faith we reverence and 
worship a Muhammadan. We make an offering of 
a cake to Sakhi Sarwar and then eat his leavings.’ 
Upon this the Guru said, ‘ Bhai Sadhu, repeat the 
Name and amend thy life. Cease to worship Sakhi 
Sarwar.’ Sadhu, after some further parley, begged 
the Guru to make him a Sikh, and pardon his past 
sins. The Guru, seeing him fit for the favour, 
initiated him with the usual ceremonies, and said 
that he should have a son who also would be true 
to the Sikh faith. 

When the marriage procession reached home, the 
bridegroom’s relations took him to the family shrine 
of Sakhi Sarwar and asked him to worship. He at 
once remembered the words of Guru Nanak: — 

I will not fall into idolatry ; I will worship none but 
God ; I will not go to graves or places of cremation. 1 

Saying this he kicked down the miniature likeness 
1 Sorath, Ashtapadi. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


149 

of a grave which had been erected for Sakhi Sarwar’s 
worship, and said, ‘ I will repeat the true Name of 
Wahguru and amend my life.’ Sada thought his 
son had lost his reason, and began to remonstrate 
with him, ‘ My son, it is through Sakhi Sarwar’s 
favour we have obtained wealth and thou hast found 
a bride, and yet thou spurnest his household shrine.’ 
Sadliu far from being satisfied with what he had 
done continued his work of destruction. He seized 
a mattock and removed the last vestige of Sakhi 
Sarwar’s worship. The father renewed the masonry 
work but, as fast as he did so, the son demolished 
it. Faith in Sakhi Sarwar began to be shaken. 
People said that he had become powerless to defend 
himself, much less to defend others. By the Guru’s 
favour Sadhu’s wealth and happiness continued to 
increase. A child, a treasury of beauty, was born 
to him in Sambat 1672, and his devotion acquired 
new fervour. The Guru named the child Rup Chand 
on account of his beauty, and said he should become 
a great saint. 

When the boy had attained the age of fifteen years, 
he and his father Sadhu went one day during the 
hot weather to the forest to cut wood. They took 
with them a leather bottle filled with water to quench 
their thirst. They hung the bottle on a tree, and 
afterwards, on going to drink from it, found the 
water had become cool. They remembered the Guru 
and thought to themselves that this would be 
pleasant water for him to drink. Although the 
heat was terrific, as if it rained sparks of fire, they 
refrained from drinking and began to meditate on 
the Guru, ‘ 0 true Guru, first drink this pure cool 
water, and then we will satisfy our thirst. Thou 
fulfillest the desires of thy servants. Ever present 
thou hearest their supplications. Drink this water. 
We may die, but we will never drink till thou hast 
tasted it.’ 

The village of Tuklani, where Sadhu and Rur- 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


150 

Chand lived, was some thirty miles distant, yet, it is 
said, the Guru heard their prayer as he lay in an 
apartment perfumed with sandal and fragrant grass 
and cooled by water sprinkled over a sandy floor. 
The Guru at once stood up and, leaving all his 
comforts, prepared to start in the appalling heat 
for Tuklani to see his Sikhs Sadhu and Rup Chand. 
He found them fainting from the heat, and called 
on them to arise. They arose as happy as the 
chatrik when he hears thunder presaging rain, or 
as the lotus when it beholds the sun. The Guru 
told them that he was thirsty and asked for cold 
water. On drinking from the leather bottle he 
said it was excellent, like nectar, and that he had 
never before drunk such delicious beverage. 

The Guru told them that the Sikh religion should 
ever remain in their family, but, as the people of 
Tuklani were annoyed at their having embraced it, 
and as the village would be destroyed on account of 
the several enormities of its inhabitants, Sadhu and 
Rup Chand ought to leave the place and found 
a village for themselves. The Guru was particularly 
pleased to see Rup Chand, and made him a present 
of clothes and arms. Rup Chand placed them 
reverently on his head, and said he would honour 
them. Through respect he refused to wear the 
sword which had been worn by the Guru. Upon 
this the Guru seated him on the couch, and said he 
should have a congregation of his own, in which he 
should use his tongue instead of a sword, spread Guru 
Nanak’s doctrines, and make the Sikhs firm in their 
faith. ‘Keep thy kitchen’, said the Guru, ‘ever 
open for the traveller and the stranger. What thou 
sayest shall be fulfilled, wealth and preternatural 
power shall hang upon thy tongue People will 
reverence thee, and great shall be thy glory .’ 1 

1 The lord of Bagrian in the Ludhiana district is a lineal de- 
scendant of Bhai Rup Chand. He maintains a public kitchen up to 
the present time, as ordered by the Guru. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


I5i 

The Guru on the thirteenth day of the light half of 
the month of Baisakh, Sambat 1688, laid the founda- 
tion of a village on an open plain six miles distant 
from Tuklani and called it Bhai Rupa in honour of 
his Sikh protege. Bhai Rupa is now a considerable 
town in the Nabha State. The Guru also ordered 
a house to be constructed for himself and promised 
on its completion to reside in it for some time. The 
Guru after a very brief visit to Bhai Rup Chand and 
his father, returned to Daroli, where he was joined 
by Gurditta and his wife and sons, Dhirmal and 
Har Rai. 

Damodari’s last hour had now arrived. She asked 
the Guru’s pardon for her sins or for any idle words 
she might have spoken during her married life. She 
said she had no fear of death and only felt one sorrow, 
that of leaving her husband. The Guru replied, 

‘ Have no anxiety. Bodies meet subject to destiny, 
but it is the meeting of souls that is important.’ He 
further consoled her, gave her parting spiritual 
instruction, and said her salvation was assured. She 
then sent for all the members of her family, and took 
leave of each in turn. She departed this life on 
Wednesday, the twelfth day of the light half of Sawan, 
Sambat 1688 (a.d. 1631). The Guru ordered that 
instead of mourning for her death his Sikhs should 
read the Japji and Sohila for her eternal repose. 

Ramo was so sad at the loss of her sister, that she 
too pined away and died. Her husband, Sain Das, 
perished from the shock of his wife’s untimely death. 
Damodari’s parents, that is the Guru’s parents-in-law, 
did not long survive Sain Das and Ramo. 

When the funeral ceremonies of his relations 
were completed, the Guru again began to consider 
his position. He trusted that Wazir Khan would 
prevent the dispatch of too powerful an army against 
him. He therefore decided on sending all his family 
and the Granth Sahib to Kartarpur, while he himself 
remained in Daroli. On seeing Sain Das’s un- 


152 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


tenanted and desolate mansion, once the abode of 
life and joy, the Guru repeated the following hymn 
of Guru Arjan 

Accursed the love of mother and father.; accursed the 
love of brothers and relations ! 

Accursed the love of wife and the pleasure of sons ; accursed 
the love of home ! 

The love of the guild of saints is true ; Nanak, happiness 
abideth with them. 

Perishable is the body, its strength faileth ; 

In old age the love of wealth increaseth. 

Though only a pilgrim in the world, man indalgeth in 
endless hopes 

While tei'rible Dharmraj counteth his breathings. 

Man faileth into the pit of mammon ; God’s mercy is the 
real support of his body obtained with so much difficulty. 

They whose desires are evil, attach themselves to a mirage, 
an enchanted city, or the shadow of a tree. 

Thus perishable is the love of family : Nanak, remember 
God’s name . 1 

One day the Guru addressed his Sikhs : ‘ Brethren 
dearer to me than life, you are one thousand brave 
men. Shall we remain here or proceed to spread our 
religion ? ’ A Sikh replied, ' O my lord, show thyself 
where the devout and grateful think of thee and 
await thee.’ The Guru beat the drum of departure, 
whereat the people of Daroli were very much grieved, 
and feared that they should have no one to protect 
them in his absence. The Guru recommended them 
to occupy their time in remembering God, in showing 
hospitality to travellers and visitors, and in repeating 
the true Name. Thus should all their desires be ful- 
filled, and their troubles and sorrows depart. Saying 
this the Guru and his party proceeded to his friends 
Sadhu and Rup Chand’s village. They had con- 
structed a splendid house for his reception. The 
Guru blessed them and exhorted them, as earnest 
1 Sahaskriti sloks. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 153 

and devout exponents of his religion, to practise 
charity and humility, in which case their homes 
should last for ever, and they should be reverenced 
as holy men. The Guru abode with them during the 
months of Bhadon and Assu. 

Near Bhai Rupa was a village called Kangar in 
the present state of Nabha, owned by Rai Jodh. He 
was third in descent from Mahar Mitha, who had 
been a contemporary of the Emperor Akbar. Mahar 
Mitha had a young daughter sixteen years of age, 
whose beauty attracted the Emperor’s notice. He 
vowed that if he did not obtain her with her parents’ 
consent, he would take her by force. Mahar Mitha, 
finding himself powerless to oppose a powerful 
monarch, sent him a message, that if he came veiled 
as an ordinary bridegroom, he might return with the 
coveted bride. Akbar consented, went to Mahar 
Mitha, and duly married his daughter. Mahar 
Mitha had a son called Chain Beg, who begot Amar 
Shah, who begot Rai Jodh. He had for a wife a 
Sikh lady. At her request he went with very costly 
presents and a retinue of five hundred men to pay 
his respects to the Guru. His wife subsequently 
visited the Guru alone, and prayed him to make her 
husband a Sikh. The Guru replied, ‘ Thy progeny 
shall increase and all become Sikhs. Thy great- 
grandson shall receive and serve the tenth Guru 
who will grant him salvation.’ 

Chapter XV 

Tois irepl tovs X oyovs kcrnovSaKoaLv i jyovpcu vpoa-rjKeiv pera 
rrjv iroWrjv tS>v avouSaiorepcou dvdyvcocnv ivicvai re Tpv 
SidvoLav Kal npos rov eireiTa Kaparov aKpotiorepav napa- 
crKevdfeiv . 1 

It is said that Bidhi Chand, before he entered the 
service of the fifth Guru, had been a famous highway- 

1 Methinks it befits persons of literary pursuits to relax their minds 
after protracted serious reading, and thus render them fresher for 
subsequent application. — Lucian’s Veracious History. 



154 THE SIKH RELIGION 

man and robber, and several of his exploits in that 
capacity are recorded. Once he stole some very valu- 
able buffaloes from Sultanpur. The owners awoke and 
hotly pursued him as far as the village of Cholha, where 
he was received by a man called Adali. Adali put 
the stolen buffaloes into a slimy pool so that when 
they emerged from it they were not recognized by 
the owners. Bidhi Chand, glad of his escape, begged 
Adali to make him a disciple. Adali said he had no 
spiritual power himself, and recommended him to 
go to Guru Arjan, who would grant him peace of 
mind. He also advised him to restore the stolen 
buffaloes to their owners and implore God’s pardon. 
Accordingly Adali took Bidhi Chand to the Guru 
and informed him that he desired to become a 
Sikh. Guru Arjan made him a Sikh and instructed 
him to renounce thieving, serve the saints, and medi- 
tate on God. Bidhi Chand represented, ' I have con- 
tracted this habit of thieving. The world is in the 
power of habit, which it is difficult to overcome.’ 
Guru Arjan replied, ' Do good to others, forswear 
falsehood, read and ponder on the Gurus’ hymns and 
associate with saints, so shall all thy evil inclinations 
depart.’ Upon this Bidhi Chand abandoned his 
village and attached himself to Guru Arjan. Adali his 
guide and friend then went home, pleased at having 
placed Bidhi Chand in the way of redemption. 

One day Bidhi Chand said to Guru Arjan, ' I began 
from my childhood to commit theft. How shall I 
be saved hereafter ? ’ Guru Arjan told him to repeat 
the following hymn : — 

The formless One, the Destroyer of sorrow, bringeth back 
what hath gone and freeth the captive. 

I know not good works, I know not religion ; I am greedy 
and avaricious. 

I am called a worshipper of God ; preserve Thine own 
honour, 

0 God ; Thou art the honour of the unhonoured. 



BSfSfi'fetsi 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 155 

Thou makest something out of those who are nothing ; 
I am a sacrifice unto Thy power. 

As when a boy following his natural inclinations com- 
mitteth hundreds of thousands of faults, 

His father adviseth him, chideth him in several ways, 
but at last embraceth him ; 

So pardon my past offences, 0 God, and put me in Thy 
way for the future. 

God the Searcher of hearts knoweth everything • then to 
whom shall man go to redress grievances ? 

God is not pleased with the utterance of words ; if it 
please Him, He preserveth our honour. 

Other shelters all have I tried : Thy shelter alone re- 
maineth me. 

Be merciful and compassionate, my Lord God, and hear 
Thou my supplication. 

Cause me to meet the perfect true Guru and put an end 
to my mental anxieties. 

God hath put His name as medicine into my mouth, and 
the slave Nanak abideth in happiness. 1 

Guru Arjan continued — ‘ Thy past sins shall be 
pardoned if thou seek God’s protection, and cease 
to commit sin for the future. Serve saints and 
worshippers who repeat the Name, sweep their floors, 
draw them water, scrub their vessels, fan them, and 
shampoo them, and thou shalt gain all possible ad- 
vantages. Theft is a baneful habit. It is the cause 
of entanglements in this world. Thy service to the 
saints will only be profitable if thou renounce all 
desire to appropriate others’ property.’ 

Two masands, Bakht Mai and Tara Chand, had 
been deputed to Kabul to collect funds for the Guru. 
They returned with a company of Sikhs who also 
brought offerings for their spiritual master. They 
were besides bringing two horses of surpassing beauty 
and fleetness for the Guru, but the animals were 
forcibly seized by the Emperor’s officials and duly 

1 Sorath.. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


156 

presented to him. Guru Har Gobind, who was then 
in Bhai Rnpa, received the Sikhs with great ceremony. 
Having laid their offerings before him they proceeded 
to inform him of the seizure of the excellent steeds 
they had intended for him. He bade them be of 
good cheer and not take the matter too much to heart. 

Some of the Sikhs invited the masands to give an 
account of their travels, what countries they had 
traversed, whether they saw Amritsar on the way, and 
by what route they had returned ? They replied that 
in their anxiety to see the Guru they had first gone 
to Lahore where they thought he was, and had re- 
mained there some days to see the Muhammadan 
festival of the Baqar Id, during which an ox is slain 
in commemoration of the intended sacrifice of Ismail 1 
by Abraham. They intended on their return journey 
to visit Amritsar and bathe in its sacred tank. The 
Sikhs hearing them mention Lahore asked them 
to give their impressions of it, and tell about the 
Emperor Shah J ahan, who was there at the time. They 
said that Shah Jahan publicly attended the mosque 
on the occasion, and the people of many villages came 
and assisted in the service. The Emperor appeared 
in great state on a beautiful tall elephant adorned 
with gold and silver trappings and bearing a glittering 
canopied hau da, whose ball-fringe was setwith precious 
stones. The masands said that they could not count 
the imperial army, which on that occasion descended 
on the parade ground like clouds. 

' Then came, led with embroidered silken ropes, the 
horses taken forcibly from us. Their bearing-reins 
were fastened to saddles studded with gems, which 
glittered in a manner to captivate the beholder. The 
horses were in superb condition and pranced as they 
were led along. The Emperor loved them so much 
that he would not allow them to go out of his sight. 
They appeared beautiful, as if made by Cupid’s own 
hands. If the god of the firmament saw them, even 

1 The Muhammadans have substituted Ismail for Isaac. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 157 

he would be enamoured of their beauty. We heard 
people say that the horses would cross a river with- 
out wetting their riders. One of them was called 
Dil Bagh and the other Gul Bagh. They were so 
swift that it was difficult to tell whether they put 
their legs on the ground or flew in the air. During 
our whole lives we have never seen such horses ; and, 
as they had been brought for the Guru, he ought 
certainly to possess them, so that he might in case 
of necessity have excellent chargers to bear him in 
a conflict with the enemy. What doth the Emperor 
want such horses for ? He cannot ride or fight like 
the Guru. The Guru is a man of great stature, 
and when mounted on such horses would appear 
doubly beautiful as he presented himself to his 
Sikhs, and would gladden their hearts as they beheld 
him.’ 

The party from Kabul returned home, except 
Bakht Mai and Tara Chand, who remained with the 
Guru at Bhai Rupa. Their conversation was ever of 
Dil Bagh and Gul Bagh. Bidhi Chand, notwith- 
standing his resolutions of amendment, began to 
consider how he could restore the belauded steeds. 
A horse destined for the Guru had once been taken 
away by the Emperor’s father and was duly re- 
covered. This afforded Bidhi Chand what he 
deemed a suitable pretext for his intended action. 
The Emperor was now at war with the Guru, had 
inflicted great losses on the Sikhs, and caused the 
death of many of his bravest warriors, and it would 
be a disgrace to allow him to retain possession of 
the horses brought all the way from Kabul for the 
Guru. It was impossible to secure them by purchase, 
and being very dear to the Emperor they were well 
guarded. Even were war to be declared against 
him, possession of the horses could not be obtained, 
as they were kept in an impregnable fortress. 

Some of the soldiers lately enlisted by the Guru 
said, ' We find on full consideration that no one 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


158 

but Bidhi Chand can accomplish the enterprise of 
recovering the horses. He is so clever that he can 
do what all the world thinketh impossible. As there 
are no horses like Dil Bagh and Gul Bagh, so there 
is no one like Bidhi Chand to secure possession of 
them. If Bidhi Chand by his great cleverness suc- 
ceed in bringing the horses, it will be a miracle 
famous throughout the world. Ram Chandar, on 
losing his queen Sita, selected the very wise and 
clever Hanuman, and dispatched him to Ceylon in 
search of his queen. Hanuman examined the whole 
island, discovered Sita, killed the great demons of 
Rawan’s army, set fire to his city, and crossed the 
ocean on his victorious homeward march. There is 
now a similar exploit to be performed. Hanuman’ s 
fame still liveth in the world. Bidhi Chand will 
accomplish it, and his fame shall be resplendent.’ 
Bidhi Chand on hearing himself thus praised and 
encouraged said, ' What are Gul Bagh and Dil Bagh ? 
I would even bring the Guru the horses of the sun’s 
chariot.’ 

Bidhi Chand then with clasped hands uttered a 
prayer. ‘ 0 Guru Arjan, I am now bent on acting in 
opposition to thine injunctions ; pardon me for ven- 
turing to restore to thy Sikhs horses wantonly taken 
from them by unrighteous Moslems. Assist me 
in the perilous path I am about to tread.’ He re- 
ceived the congratulations of his companions, and 
as soon as preparations for his journey were com- 
pleted departed for Lahore. On reaching the city 
gate he again considered how he was to perform the 
task. ‘ I cannot break the fort wall which is very 
strong. The horses are well guarded and no stranger 
may approach them. There are several sentries at 
the gates. If I can only enter the stable-keeper’s 
service, then I may have access to the horses ; but he 
will not take me without an introduction ; wherefore 
I must try some means of obtaining access to him in 
some other way, so that I may succeed in my object.’ 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 159 

The manner in which, without the Guru’ s knowledge, 
Bidhi Chand recovered the horses brought for him 
from Kabul, cannot afford edification to the strictly 
pious. We here, however, give a narrative current 
among the Sikhs partly to relieve the strain on the 
reader who has so far followed this serious narrative, 
and partly to show with what ingenuity, address, 
and daring Indians of former ages could succeed in 
transferring property. 

Bidhi Chand went to the house of a carpenter 
named J iwan who had previously known him. J iwan 
welcomed him as bringing a blessing on his house. 
Bidhi Chand in reply to Jiwan’ s inquiries frankly told 
him the nature of his errand, and asked his advice, 
and all information regarding the Emperor, his horses, 
and their keepers. Jiwan was astonished and said, 

‘ Thou hast come on a difficult errand. The Emperor 
resideth in the Saman Burj — octagonal tower — and 
the horses are kept near him. They are guarded by 
hundreds of men who serve their master with great 
fidelity. There are many sentries ever under arms at 
the gates. The Darogha or stable-keeper’s name is 
Sondha Khan. He hath many subordinates. To 
say nothing of taking away the horses, the stable is 
inaccessible. How canst thou ever reach it ? But 
if fortune favour thee, thou shalt accomplish a feat 
which is otherwise impossible. God can render what 
is difficult easy, can make the weak strong and the 
strong weak. Who but thee can reach the stables 
and obtain possession of the horses ? ’ 

Bidhi Chand requested his host to make him a 
khurpa, or iron instrument for grubbing up grass, 
and pray that success might attend his efforts. Bidhi 
Chand then went to rest and slept soundly, while his 
friend Jiwan sat up all night making the khurpa. 
Next morning Bidhi Chand took it with a net to 
hold grass, and proceeded to the bank of the river 
Ravi. There he began to cut beautiful soft grass to 
take to the coveted horses. He already deemed 


i6o THE SIKH RELIGION 

them the Guru’s, so he laboured with a will. He 
collected the grass with great care and put it in his 
net. He then took it to the market-place. Horse 
owners on seeing its emerald brightness hastened to 
negotiate for it. Bidhi Chand said that he would 
not sell it for less than a rupee, but no one would 
give him so much for a bundle of grass. He then 
moved on till he arrived opposite the gate of the 
fort. It was in the evening, and the time for the 
stable-keeper to go forth and breathe the fresh air 
on the margin of the Ravi. 

Bidhi Chand, on learning that Sondha Khan, the 
well-dressed man he saw before him, was the stable- 
keeper, congratulated himself for having been so 
fortunate as to meet on the very day after his arrival 
the man whose acquaintance he had so desired to 
make. When the grass was brought to the stable- 
keeper’s notice, he said that he had never seen such 
grass in all his life. It was fit for Dil Bagh and Gul 
Bagh, and he ordered his men to adjust the price 
and buy it for the horses. On observing Bidhi 
Chand he said that he appeared to be an honest man. 
Bidhi was ready with his reply, ‘ Thou art an appre- 
ciator of merit. Thou art very wise, and art there- 
fore employed in the Emperor’s service. I greatly 
desire that Dil Bagh and Gul Bagh should thrive, and 
to this end I have made great efforts. Now that 
this beautiful grass hath reached its proper place 
my wishes are fulfilled. As long as the horses of the 
true King ’ — a title of the Guru not understood by 
the stable-keeper — ‘ eat my grass, I will gladly sell 
it for whatever thou art pleased to give.’ 

His sweet words and civility induced Sondha Khan 
to take him with the grass on his head to where the 
horses were tethered with silken ropes. When Bidhi 
Chand laid down his bundle in front of them, they 
ate ravenously as if they had been fasting for a whole 
day. Before leaving the court he carefully surveyed 
the premises, and came to the conclusion that it 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


161 


would be very difficult to remove the horses. He 
went into the market-place, and changing the rupee 
he had received, distributed the money as alms, say- 
ing that he would never eat anything purchased 
with Muhammadans’ money, lest after taking away 
the prize he should be deemed ungrateful. 

After thus feeding the horses for six or seven days, 
they used to neigh welcome to him whenever he 
approached. He would then pat them on their backs 
to make them pleased with him. The stable-keeper 
one day inquired his name and whether he would 
consent to be a permanent servant. Bidlii Chand 
replied, ' The wise call me Kasera . 1 I bring thee 
grass daily ; wherefore make me thy servant and 
thou shalt see me serve thee daily more and more, 
but I will not work for hire. As these are the true 
King’s horses, I will serve them for love. If ever I 
obtain my wishes, my service to the horses shall 
not go unrewarded.’ Bidhi Chand was accordingly 
appointed grass-cutter to the Emperor’s favourite 
steeds at a wage of one rupee per day. The stable- 
keeper on appointing him warned him to do good 
work and nothing should be deducted from his 
stipulated pay, a practice so usual in former times. 
Bidhi Chand replied, ‘ What shall I say ? Thou 
shalt see the service I will perform. Good men say 
little^ and what they do say they fulfil in the end.’ 
When Bidhi Chand was not cutting or fetching grass, 
he was always occupied in washing and brushing the 
horses and attending to their comfort. 

Bidhi Chand requested the stable-keeper to give 
orders to the porters at all the fort gates to allow him 
free ingress and egress at all times. The stable- 
keeper took him round and gave all the necessary 
orders. Bidhi Chand continued his incessant labour 
and even did the work of the permanent stable-ser- 
vants, whereat they were much pleased. After some 
days Sondha Khan ordered that the bridling and the 

1 Bidhi Chand meant a ghasiyara or grass-cutter. 

M 


SIKH. IV 



162 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


unbridling of the horses should be entrusted to Kasera. 
They had become attached to him on account of his 
great attention to them day and night. Sondha Khan 
then told Bidhi Chand his principal duty would be 
to groom the horses. He needed only go occasionally 
for grass. Bidhi Chand replied that he was not above 
any service whether it were to go for grass or remain 
and groom the horses. He spoke civilly to every one 
and won all hearts without paying any money. 

Whenever for the future Bidhi Chand went for 
grass he brought a large stone concealed in it. At 
midnight he used to fling the stone into the river 
which then flowed under the fort. When the stone 
fell into the water it made a great noise, and awakened 
everybody in the neighbourhood. Bidhi Chand’s 
object was, that people might suppose it was a fish 
or the falling of a wall or of a stone off the parapet ; 
and that the occupants of the fort would gradually 
become habituated to the noise, and take no notice 
of it when he leaped one of the horses over the battle- 
ment into the river. If he once succeeded in getting 
the horse outside the fort walls, he knew he should 
succeed in taking him to Bhai Rupa, the Guru’s resi- 
dence at the time. 

The Emperor once went to see the horses and was 
very pleased to observe their excellent condition. He 
admired Bidhi Chand, said he appeared a smart ser- 
vant, and ordered the stable-keeper to treat him well, 
that he might remain in his service. He then made 
him a suitable money present. Bidhi Chand, who 
lived on Jiwan’s earnings, entrusted the money to 
the stable-keeper, told him to retain it, and also his 
monthly salary until such time as he required funds 
for his expenses. The stable-keeper was deceived by 
this apparent generosity. He thought that Bidhi 
Chand, who was really greedy to obtain the horses, 
had no greed in his heart, and he continued to repose 
the utmost confidence in him. He deemed him the 
best of all his servants and made the others sub- 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 163 

ordinate to him. Though Bidhi Chand thus became 
their superior officer, he used to treat them affec- 
tionately, so that they might be on his side in the 
hour of need. 

Bidhi Chand congratulated himself on his progress 
thus far. The next object of his ambition was to 
obtain a saddle for one of the horses to assist him in 
his escape. He accordingly set to work to secure the 
friendship of the man who kept the keys of the 
Emperor’s storehouse where his costly saddles were 
kept. In this also he succeeded by flattering and 
soft speeches. All the time he managed to conceal 
his extraordinary cleverness, and to pass for an igno- 
rant villager of mean understanding. As his fellow- 
servants listened to his simple talk, they began to 
love him and he gratified them in every way in his 
power. One day he said in their presence, * These 
are very fine horses. Does his Majesty keep them 
to look at, so that his heart may rejoice ; or do they 
always remain standing like this in the stable ? Have 
they any saddles, and if so what are their saddles 
like ? Will you show them to me ? ’ Somebody said 
to him in reply, ‘Thou simpleton, their saddles are 
very costly, set with pearls and well-cut diamonds, 
and inlaid with glittering gems which shine like the 
stars in heaven. The saddles are each worth a 
lakh and a quarter of rupees. The like of thee can 
never have seen such saddles. Who would show them 
to ignorant villagers ? And who could possess them 
but emperors with unbounded wealth ? ’ 

Bidhi Chand humbly represented, ‘ Pray consider 
me as one of yourselves. I am a servant of the 
horses of the true King. I live among you day and 
night. If my desire to see the saddles be not 
gratified, then everything I do is in vain. I have 
never seen a saddle of such value. Where did you 
have saddles made worth a lakh and a quarter of 
rupees each ? I am astonished at hearing such a 
thing. I have therefore a great desire to see them, 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


164 

and I beg you to gratify me.’ Another servant 
replied, ‘ The saddles are kept under lock and key 
and continually guarded. He in whose custody the 
keys are will show them to thee. Speak to him, he 
is here now.’ The custodian of the keys said he 
would be very pleased to show the saddles, if he 
received the stable-keeper’s permission, but other- 
wise he would be afraid to do so. The stable-keeper 
happened to arrive at the time, and asked the ser- 
vants what plot they were concocting. They replied, 
‘ Thou hast employed Kasera, a very simple-minded 
fellow, who says things to set us all a-laughing. He 
desireth to know how a lakh and a quarter of rupees 
could be spent on a saddle.’ Bidhi Chand himself 
then told the darogha he could not rest until he had 
seen saddles of such astonishing value. 

The darogha told him that on the great Id festival 
both horses would be saddled and led out, and then 
he would see such a sight as he had never seen 
before. Bidhi Chand, to whom time was valuable 
and delay a thing to be avoided, then philosophically 
addressed the darogha, ‘ What dependence is there 
on life ? It may cease within an hour. Who knoweth 
whether even the breath we now expire shall return 
again ? The moment I heard every one praise the 
saddles I conceived a desire to behold their wonderful 
workmanship. A thing worth a lakh and a quarter 
of rupees is a wonder to me, and I shall not be happy 
till I see it. I am always with thee here, and am I 
not to have my natural desires gratified in such 
a matter ? Wherefore, my master, I pray thee 
grant an order that their custodian show me the 
saddles.’ The darogha, overcome by these entreaties, 
ordered that Bidhi Chand should see the saddles. 
Bidhi Chand on seeing them pretended that he 
thought the diamonds were white stones, and the 
pearls grains of millet such as he had often chewed 
in his native village, and asked where the precious 
stones were of which he had heard so much. What 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 165 

he saw appeared to him of no value. At this every 
one laughed, and asked what he could know about 
precious stones. He had never heard of such things, 
and had never seen them before. Bidhi Chand, 
putting his hand on the diamonds, remarked that 
they were very hard, and would prick the Emperor’s 
body when he touched them. They could not 
possibly be comfortable things to sit on. The 
darogha explained to him, that what he saw were not 
things one could take into his hand and eat. They 
were for display on great occasions, and only found 
in the possession of emperors and great monarchs. 
Bidhi Chand replied, ‘ If a man like me got a thousand 
rupees it would last him for life. He could get a 
wife for himself and another for his son, when he had 
one, out of the money. It is only kings who squander 
money in vain.’ 

This conversation at an end, the darogha ordered 
Bidhi Chand to lift up the saddles and take them 
back into the store-room. Bidhi Chand kept his eyes 
well open, and took note of its interior. He also 
observed where the custodian laid the key after 
locking the door. Next day the darogha seeing him 
most attentive to the horses, ordered that he alone 
was to give them mashes and other food, and take 
care of them day and night. Meanwhile, Bidhi 
Chand carefully studied how he could take one or 
both away. He was ever searching for a low and 
suitable part of the fort’s ramparts over which he 
might leap them into the river. He said to himself, 

‘ I must hit on some plan by which the servants may 
go to sleep and not hear or see me saddling the horses. 
If the grooms remain awake, they will most probably 
catch me in the act.’ 

All the grooms employed on the horses were fond 
of music and dancing women. One day, as they 
were all laughing and talking together, one of them 
turned to Bidhi Chand and said, ‘ Look here, brother 
Kasera, thou art a new servant and receivest the 



i66 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


highest pay of us all. Thou hast also got a large 
present from the Emperor, and not yet given thy 
fellow-servants a dinner. This is not well of thee.’ 
This proposal was the very thing that Bidhi Chand 
had desired. He replied, ‘ I am at the service of 
you all. Why should I not please you ? I did not 
think of it ; you have reminded me. You have said 
well, and I have grasped your meaning. I am 
thinking, however, that it would not be proper for you 
who are of a different religion to receive food from 
my hands. I will do another thing as you ask me. 
You know well that I am no miser. I will spend all 
I have on you. I will tell you what I wish to do 
myself. I will give you wine — a hogshead among 
you — and you may enjoy yourselves and get drunk 
to your hearts’ content. With my own hands I 
will fill your cups, and you shall be delighted when 
I have satisfied you. Be happy in the enjoyment of 
God’s gifts. There is no reliance on life. The 
pleasure of the day is the only gain.’ 

The grooms on hearing this were all delighted and 
shouted ‘ Bravo ! Bravo Kasera ! ’ The prospect of 
getting drunk filled them with visions of bliss. They 
vowed that they would take no dinner that day, 
that they might the more eagerly partake of Bidhi 
Chand’s hospitality. They had dinner every day at 
home, but they had never yet joined in such a sym- 
posium as Kasera had proposed. Bidhi Chand 
at once saw his opportunity, and thus communed 
with himself, ' This is the eighth day of the dark half 
of the month, a convenient time for my purpose. It 
will be very dark in the beginning of the night. 
I will then jump one of the horses over the rampart, 
and after that when it is light make my way to Bhai 
Rupa. I will now so entertain my friends that they 
will curse me in the morning.’ 

Bidhi Chand then addressed his brother grooms — 

' Let no one take dinner to-day. I adjure all of you 
to assemble here this evening. I will go and fetch 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 167 

the wine. When you have drunk it, you may eat as 
much as you please. After that you may go home 
to your wives. If you do not wish to go home, then 
remain here. Have no anxiety whatever to-day. 
Enjoy for the moment the pleasures of love and wine. 
I will arrange everything for you.’ 

Bidhi Chandwent to his friend Jiwan, took twenty 
rupees from him to buy strong wine, 1 and going 
to a publican asked for his most potent liquor. 
The publican told him he would charge him fifty 
per cent, above ordinary market price for a special 
distillation which he kept in his private house, 
and which he would not sell to ordinary customers. 
The publican described its virtues, ‘ If a man drink 
even a little of it, he will so lose his senses that he 
cannot find even his own door. What higher praise 
can I bestow on it ? ’ Bidhi Chand told him that 
he would give him not fifty but one hundred per cent, 
above market price, if he supplied him with wine 
possessing four times the ordinary strength. 

When Bidhi Chand met his guests he told them all 
the trouble he had taken to procure them excellent 
wine, again pressed them to enjoy themselves, and 
assured them, with a covert meaning, that whenever 
he left them they should all remember him. Having 
addressed them loving words of that description he 
handed round the wine, but at first in small quan- 
tities. He then engaged them in pleasant conversa- 
tion, and they were delighted when he agreed with 
everything they said. As intoxication gradually 
came on, some were laughing and others thought 
they were in the seventh heaven. Hitherto he had 
taken care not to give them too much lest they should 
suspect his designs ; but, when a watch of night 
had elapsed, he began to give them wine without 
measure, and they drank with open mouths. The 
sentries also joined in the carousals and said while 
Bidhi Chand was filling their cups, ‘ Listen, brother 

1 Spirits were then much cheaper in India than they are now. 



i68 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Kasera, the sentry duty is thine to-night. Thou hast 
been so liberal of thy wine, that we cannot possibly 
remain awake, so keep guard thyself.’ Bidhi Chand 
replied, * Have no fear; I shall remain awake the 
whole night. Such is the dread of the Emperor 
that no one may approach. The whole country is 
under one powerful monarch. Who can come to 
spy out the land, much less to steal ? ’ 

Saying this Bidhi Chand let the wine flow. He 
filled to the brim a special goblet for the custodian 
of the keys, who took it and laughingly said, 1 0 
Kasera, seeing thy friendship I will drink this cup 
from thy hands. The protection of my storehouse 
I now entrust to thee. Thou hast not taken wine, 
so thou wilt remain awake and be fully on the alert.’ 
Bidhi Chand assured him that he would remain awake 
and that no stranger, however daring, should approach 
the premises. The key-holder might therefore sleep 
soundly and comfortably. All the company were 
reassured on hearing Bidhi Chand’s cheerful words, 
and began to drink on, big and little, old and young. 
They soon became unconscious and fell down uttering 
incoherent nonsense. When they could no longer 
speak, they took off their clothes and rolled naked 
on the floor. Bidhi Chand took each man’s arm and 
inquired how he was, and on receiving no answer 
knew that his friends were disposed of for the night, 
and he himself was free for action. It is true he 
heard the distant sentries calling, but they could 
not interfere with his operations. 

The author of the ‘ Gur Bilas ’, or Life of Guru 
Har Gobind, here makes the following reflection on 
the use of wine. ‘ Wine is evil on this account that 
he who drinketh it loses his senses. A king who 
drinketh becometh like a beast, and easily falleth 
a prey to his enemy. Good men, hear me on this 
subject. Monarchs who have conquered powerful 
enemies have been blinded by the intoxication of 
wine. Their kingdoms have passed out of their 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 169 

possession, and they have become poor in an instant. 
Men holy, clever, and great have degraded themselves 
to the level of brutes by the use of wine. It would 
hold men captive even without fetters.’ 

Bidhi Chand finding all his guests lying on the 
floor in Bacchanalian slumber tied his waistband and 
adjusted his turban for action. He then went to the 
niche in the wall where he knew the key of the 
harness-room was kept and immediately found it. 
Having taken out a saddle he went to Dil Bagh and 
undid his silken headstall. Caressing the animal 
he put on his bridle and drew the reins over his neck. 
He then laid on the saddle-cloth and the saddle, and 
fastened tight the soft silken girths. He attached 
on either side the golden stirrups, and further 
secured the saddle by carefully passing the crupper 
under Dil Bagh’s tail. This done he untied the 
horse’s heel ropes. He then mounted, taking in 
his hand a whip with a golden handle which he found 
attached to the saddle. He cantered the animal 
backwards and forwards until he found that he had 
got into his full stride. Then applying the whip 
he faced him at the fort-wall over which he was to 
leap. The horse, which had never previously been 
struck even by the stalk of a flower, on receiving a cut 
with the whip roused himself at the unusual summons, 
gathered his strength, set his limbs, and on Bidhi 
Chand lifting the reins cleared without hesitation 
the high battlement with a bound, and plunged with 
his rider into the river. Bidhi Chand, well skilled in 
horsemanship, steadied the animal in the water and 
guided him safely to shore. 

The residents of the fort who were awake had 
become accustomed to the report of bodies falling 
into the water, and thought the splash they had 
heard was due to the falling of one of the battlements 
as the result of erosion of the river. Bidhi Chand 
drawing in his reins on the bank patted the horse, 
and encouraged him after the fright he had sustained. 



170 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


While Bidhi Chand had been originally meditating 
this enterprise, he used to note every wall and rivulet 
and tree in the neighbourhood, and now carefully 
ex aminin g them took the road and directed his course 
to Bhai Rupa. The horse bounded along like the 
wind while Bidhi Chand gaily sang — 

May the Guru and God be always with me ! 

Remember, remember Him who ever protecteth . 1 

The moon rose two hours after his departure, and 
then he was able to steer his way by its position in 
the sky. He avoided all towns and villages. On 
reaching Harike at the junction of the rivers Bias and 
Satluj, he introduced Dil Bagh again into deep 
water by plunging him into the foaming Ghara . 2 
The horse was found to correspond exactly with the 
description the Kabuli Sikhs had given. Dil Bagh 
appeared as if he had sprung from a sea of beauty 
by the combined agencies of exquisiteness and 
strength. 


Chapter XVI 

The morning after Bidhi Chand had departed from 
Lahore the darogha Sondha Khan, finding one of 
the Emperor’s favourite horses missing and all the 
sentries and grooms asleep, was not in an enviable 
frame of mind. The grooms and guards, when 
roused up, maintained that they had been watchful 
during the night, and said the horse must have sunk 
into the earth or soared to the celestial regions. The 
Emperor Shah Jahan bemoaned his irreparable loss — 
' Who hath taken my most favourite steed and 
thus hastened his own destruction ? Can there be 
any one in the whole earth who hath not the fear 
of me in his heart ? When the kings of other lands 
cannot keep a particle belonging to me in their pos- 

1 Asa. 

2 The Satluj is so called after its junction with the Bias. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 171 

session, who hath two heads that he can afford to 
sacrifice one of them for stealing my horse ? If my 
enemy were to hide himself in the retirement of the 
mountains or in desert fastnesses, my army would 
not desist till it had found him. Whoever hath 
taken my steed is now my greatest enemy. I will 
assuredly put him to death whoever and wherever 
he may be.’ The Emperor sent trackers with an 
escort in every direction to endeavour to trace the 
missing animal, but no clue could be obtained. 

The Sikhs who had brought the horses from Kabul, 
on receiving charge of Dil BaghinBhaiRupa, observed 
that he did not eat his corn with a will, that tears 
were flowing from his eyes, and that his heart was 
sad. It was not known how he had become so weak. 
He was well groomed and treated with the utmost 
care. Rai Jodh thought that the horse had become 
weak as it was the first time he had been ridden any 
distance. He had previously been unaccustomed to 
travel and exertion. The Sikhs, however, came to 
the conclusion that the water which flowed from 
the horse’s eyes was simply the pain of his heart pro- 
jected on his body, and must be caused by separation 
from his hitherto inseparable stable companion. 
Bidhi Chand was easily able to confirm this opinion. 

‘ This Dil Bagh of ours and Gul Bagh were tethered 
together. They used to eat corn, grass, and mashes 
of different sorts side by side, so that affection sprang 
up between them. Manifestly it is on account of 
his separation from his brother that tears are 
flowing from his eyes.’ This speech convinced 
everybody. 

Bidhi Chand therefore decided on bringing Dil 
Bagh’s brother to him from the Lahore fort, so that 
the horse might no longer suffer from the pangs of 
separation. He said to himself, ' Although hundreds 
of thousands of brave men with arms in their hands 
were on the alert, I could so deceive them, that 
I would take the horse away before their very eyes.’ 



172 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


After Bidhi Chand had set out for Lahore, Rai J odh 
pressed the Guru to leave Bhai Rupa and go to his 
village of Kangar about four miles distant. Sadhu 
and Rup Chand, owners of the village of Bhai Rupa, 
desired to accompany the Guru, but he advised them 
to remain in their own village, and they should always 
have his company in the spirit. His bodily company 
would not he said be safe for them, for he was bent on 
perilous enterprises. He should have to encounter 
the Muhammadans in the blood-stained field of 
danger, when steel would resound on steel and brave 
men die amid the clash of arms. Meantime his 
beloved friends Sadhu and Rup Chand would lead 
the lives of saints, and practise the virtues of charity 
and benevolence in their native village. Sadhu and 
Rup Chand accepted the Guru’s decision, and made 
him their parting obeisance. Rup Chand’s wife also 
came and embraced the Guru’s feet. On the Guru’s 
arrival at Kangar he was similarly greeted by 
another lady, Rai Jodh’s wife, who made him large 
offerings. Such were the Guru’s gracious manners 
that he completely won Rai Jodh’s heart, and Rai 
Jodh daily showed him some new mark of affection. 

When Bidhi Chand arrived at the gate of I. ah ore 
he heard the town-crier publishing the theft of Dil 
Bagh, and offering to give the finder any reward he 
pleased. Bidhi Chand inquired what all this meant, 
and was duly informed by the Sikhs who were 
entertaining him of what had occurred. After 
considering his position, and the danger to himself 
in the event of failure, he carefully formed his 
plans. He went to a cloth-merchant and asked 
him to make him a fine Hindustani costume. He 
ordered three coats of different lengths, a paejama 
or trousers with a beautiful waistband, a turban 
several yards long with embroidered ends, and 
a pair of ornamental shoes low at the heels but with 
long toes pointed upwards. The cloth-merchant 
had everything ready by four o’clock in the after- 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


173 


noon, and his wife then served up dinner. Bidhi 
Chand expressed his satisfaction — 'When one Sikh 
serveth another, the Guru valueth that more than 
service to himself, as he hath said, “ Knowing h im 
to be my Sikh he hath honoured him.” On hearing 
of such love the Guru will be pleased.’ 

Bidhi Chand then asked his friendtogetamagician’s 
chain made for him by a clever smith before next 
morning, and not mention the circumstance to any 
one. On the morrow he put on his new dress and 
with coco-nut oil greased his long hair until it shone. 
He parted his beard in the centre, so that his chin 
could be seen. He also twisted up his moustaches. 
He then put on his three coats, one reaching below 
the knees, the second a shorter one over it, and the 
third a jacket over all. He tied on his turban in 
the shape of a shield, and buttoned his trousers 
at the ankles. He fastened its waistband so as 
to show the embroidered ends, and finally put 
on his long pointed shoes so that he looked a 
real Hindustani. He had just dressed when the 
magician’s chain he had ordered arrived. Holding 
it in his hand in front of him, he walked slowly into 
the streets and market-places and appeared an 
innocent and respectable man. At the same time 
people were astonished on seeing his strange costume, 
and thronged around him. Several questions were 
asked, ‘ To what country does he belong ? ’ ' What 
is his name ? ’ ' Where doth he reside ? ’ Bidhi 
replied, ' My country is far away. I am a profes- 
sional man and know something of occult science.’ 
So saying he strutted proudly along, followed by a 
crowd to the gate of the fort. 

Bidhi Chand sat down on a raised platform and in 
reply to further inquiries said, ‘ I am an experienced 
tracker and astrologer, and can trace anything that 
hath been lost.’ The crowd asked other questions 
which he answered oracularly, while at the same time 
he amused his audience. He procured a mirror into 



174 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


which he frequently looked, and then adjusted his 
heard and moustaches ; and he would now and again 
handle and shake his chain ostentatiously before the 
multitude. It happened that a servant of the stable- 
keeper, who was passing that way, stopped to see 
what was going on and inquired who the stranger 
was. Bidhi Chand replied, ‘ My name is Ganak. 1 
My ordinary residence is in a forest 2 in a distant 
country. I have come in quest of an opportunity 
to show my skill.’ 

The stable-keeper’s servant then began to tell him 
of the loss of the Emperor’s horse, and said that, if 
he thought he could give any clue to the recovery of 
the animal, he would introduce him to the Emperor 
who would generously reward him. Bidhi Chand 
then boasted of his skill. By merely smelling the 
ground, he said, he could tell the secrets of the upper 
and nether regions, to say nothing of this con- 
temptible planet. He could tell the Emperor in what 
direction the horse had been taken and where he was 
at that moment. He could not recover the horse, he 
admitted, for that was beyond his power, but the 
Emperor himself with his army could accomplish an 
enterprise of that nature. The Emperor heard of the 
self-constituted tracker and sent the stable-keeper to 
summon him. The stable-keeper went, and failing to 
recognize Bidhi Chand in his altered costume, took 
him inside the fort. He was duly presented to the 
Emperor, and stood up in court with the utmost confi- 
dence. In reply to the Emperor’s questions he said, 

' I dwell in a forest. Men call me "Tracker Ganak.” 
My skill I obtained from an ancient and venerable seer. 

I can interpret omens, discover tracks, and read the 
stars and planets. I am a wanderer because certain 
persons bear me great enmity. They are many 
while I am but one. I have come hither to obtain 
justice, and I will give thee information regarding 

1 This word means a diviner by numbers. 

3 The Malwa country is sometimes still called the Jangal or forest. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 175 

the horse thou hast lost.’ The Emperor then con- 
ferred on him a costly robe, gave him a large sum 
to defray the expenses attendant on his residence 
at the capital, and promised him lakhs of rupees if 
he pointed out where the stolen horse was concealed. 

Upon this Bidhi Chand, holding his magician’s 
chain, put his hand on the ground and raised it three 
times to his forehead. He then ostentatiously bowed 
to his supposed patron saint and preceptor. He 
began to count by the aid of his thumb the joints of 
his fingers, so that all might think he was interpreting 
omens. He then said to the Emperor, ‘ I know where 
the horse is, but I want to have one look at the place 
whence he was stolen, and then I will give thee all 
information. I will tell thee the thief’s name and 
how he effected the theft. It is then for thyself to 
consider whether thou canst recover the animal 
peaceably or go to war for him.’ The Emperor 
promised Bidhi Chand a high office at court ; he 
should have all his enemies in his power, and he should 
receive four lakhs of rupees on giving information 
which would lead to the recovery of the horse. 

Bidhi Chand requested the Emperor to reduce 
his promise to writing, and said, ‘ Let all the people 
in court pray with clasped hands that the two horses 
meet again. The prayers of many produce an effect, 
because the Lord is in the midst of a multitude. 
I shall obtain the desire of my heart if you will all 
heartily pray to God for my success.’ On this the 
courtiers clasped their hands and prayed that the 
stolen horse might again meet its mate. After this 
the Emperor reduced his promise to writing. Bidhi 
Chand then said, ‘ Let us now go to the place whence 
the horse was stolen. I will cast my chain and 
consider numbers, stars, and omens. I swear by 
my preceptor that I will tell thee truly where the 
horse is and the name of the thief. We diviners tell 
not lies, especially in the Emperor’s court.’ Upon 
this the Emperor, stable-keeper, Bidhi Chand, and 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


176 

a few others went to the stables. Some tried to 
dissuade the Emperor from trusting the stranger, 
but the advice was disregarded. 

When the Emperor, in reply to Bidhi Chand, said 
that the horse which had been stolen had his saddle 
on, Bidhi said that, if it had been otherwise, he could 
by the calculations he had already made discover 
the tracks. If, however, the remaining horse were 
saddled and bridled, he would consider what could 
be done without the delay which would be necessary 
to recast his numbers. His suggestion was adopted. 
Upon this he said he would ply his skill energetically 
and not go to sleep that night. He hoped, by 
observing the motions of the stars, to discover before 
morning the tracks desired. He would then be ready 
to receive the stipulated reward. The Emperor 
pressed him not to wait till morning but impart his 
secret at once, in which case he should receive a 
further reward of a lakh and a quarter of rupees. 
Bidhi Chand said that he could only succeed in 
divining the tracks in solitude and tranquillity at 
the particular hour when the horse had been stolen, 
so he requested the Emperor to cause all the inhabi- 
tants to close their doors and go to sleep at that time. 
He also made it a condition that all the gates of the 
fort should be shut, so that there might be no noise 
made by the ingress or egress of its occupants. The 
Emperor was deceived into issuing orders according 
to Bidhi Chand’ s wishes. When the fort gates were 
dosed on one side, Bidhi Chand contrived to cause 
them to be opened on the other side, in order to 
effectually secure himself from pursuit. 

When everybody else had retired to rest, Bidhi 
Chand undid the ropes that bound the horse. He put 
his head on the ground and prayed for his success. 
It is said that the Emperor heard a noise as if 
a horse had got loose, but Bidhi Chand allayed his 
apprehensions, and said that he had discovered where 
the horse was, and would surely fulfil his promise 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 177 

to tell the name of the thief. Bidhi Chand appears 
to have also found means of locking from the outside 
the door of the passage which led from the Emperor’s 
apartments. He then said aloud, ' Hear everything, 
consider not the thief a person to be forgotten. Thy 
father, by the power of his army, formerly took pos- 
session of an excellent horse intended for the holy 
and worshipful Guru Har Gobind, whose fame is like 
that of the sun, and thou hast now in imitation of 
thy unjust father seized these noble steeds specially 
intended by pious Sikhs for their beloved Guru. 
I have made reprisal and taken the first horse by my 
ingenuity. My name is Bidhi Chand ; I am the 
Guru’s servant. It was I who took home Dil 
Bagh, the horse thou art in search of. On account 
of separation from his mate he wept copiously on 
his arrival, and we could only induce him to eat and 
drink with difficulty. Wherefore, in the guise of 
a tracker and with a love for dumb animals, I have 
come to take his companion to join him. I am 
the thief, the true King is my master. Thou hast 
now given me Gul Bagh ready saddled. I have 
thoroughly gauged the wisdom of thy court. I will 
tell where the horse is, and in so doing remove all 
blame from myself. The Guru hath pitched his tent 
in the new village of Bhai Rupa. Know that Dil 
Bagh is standing there. Gul Bagh shall now go to 
join him.’ 

The Emperor on hearing this called to the darogha 
to stop the thief, but the darogha was also a prisoner 
and helpless. The Emperor again called out for 
help, but no help was forthcoming. The guards were 
all locked in. Bidhi Chand again addressed the 
Emperor, ‘ Why art thou angry ? I have taken the 
horse, as was fit and proper. Remember the promise 
thou hast made me. I have not received my former 
wages as groom and grass-cutter, nor the present 
of a thousand rupees which thou madest me. Thou 
hast promised me four lakhs of rupees for tracking. 

N 


SIKH. IV 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


178 

That thou hast not paid me. Again, thou didst 
promise a lakh and a quarter of rupees for immediate 
information. I have not yet received a kauri from 
thee. I have, therefore, virtually purchased the 
horses which with their saddles may be set against my 
account. Send me the balance and free thyself from 
the debt ; otherwise there shall remain an account 
between us which can only be adjusted in God’s 
court. If thou desire to stop me and determine not 
to pay me, then I shall go with the conviction that 
thou art a deceitful monarch. I have the keys of 
the fort here with me, and will throw them into the 
deep river. Make haste. Thou wilt have to fin d 
them before thou catchest me.’ Saying this, Bidhi 
Chand again prayed for the success of his enterprise, 
and finally addressed the Emperor — ‘Whatever efforts 
are to be made, make now, so that thou mayest not 
be sorry after my departure. Say not that thou 
hast not had full information.’ Upon this he took 
the bunch of keys and calling out, ‘Going, going, 
gone,’ threw them into the deep water, and left the 
Emperor to search for them and his precious steeds. 

He then applied his whip to the horse. The 
animal pulled himself together, leaped over the 
battlement, and dropped into the deep water of the 
Ravi. Bidhi Chand then rode off with him as he 
had done his companion Dil Bagh, gaily singing as 
he went along. Both horses were entrusted to the 
Sikhs who had brought them from Kabul. 

The Sikh chronicler, who is partial to detail, states 
that when the two horses met they neighed each other 
welcome, rubbed noses and offered mutual salutations' 
like two brothers who had met after long separation. 
The Kabuli Sikhs made them a present to the Guru. 
He changed Dil Bagh’s name into Jan Bhai, which 
means that the horse was as dear as life, and Gul 
Bagh’s name into Suhela, which means dear com- 
panion. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


179 


Chapter XVII 

There were warnings that the Emperor’s army 
would soon arrive to recover the horses, and it was 
necessary to prepare for defence and seek shelter in 
some advantageous position. Rai Jodh recom- 
mended the Guru to betake himself to a deep forest 
in which there was a tank, as otherwise there was no 
water for miles around. Two villages, Lahira and 
Marhaj, were subsequently built not far from this 
tank. The Guru with three thousand, and Rai Jodh 
with one thousand men marched to a tank in the 
lands of Nathana. The army was so disposed round 
the tank that when the enemy arrived they could not 
obtain access to its water, and must thus inevitably 
perish from thirst. 

The Emperor was thinking of proceeding himself 
to punish the Guru, but was dissuaded by Wazir 
Khan, who knew that his own happiness and pros- 
perity depended on the Emperor’s, and that the 
Guru would be victorious. Wazir Khan recom- 
mended that no artillery should be sent, but that 
the combat should be decided by swords, bows and 
arrows, and matchlocks. To this the Emperor 
agreed. Then, taking a naked sword in his hand 
and calling his chief secretary, he said, ‘ Is there any 
brave man who will undertake an expedition against 
the Guru ? ’ It was the custom of the time for a 
monarch on such occasions to lay down a sword and 
a packet of betel. Whoever put the betel into his 
mouth and took up the sword, bound himself to 
undertake the enterprise and defend the monarch’s 
cause. Up rose Lala Beg, a high officer of the im- 
perial army, and going through the usual ceremony 
said he would lead an expedition against the Guru, 
and produce him with the stolen horses before the 
Emperor in a few days. Lala Beg’s brother Qamar 
Beg with his two sons, Qasim Beg and Shams Beg, 



i8o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


and his nephew Kabuli Beg also volunteered. The 
Emperor made them anticipatory gifts— bracelets, 
necklaces, aigrettes for their turbans, and robes of 
honour — and put them in command of an army of 
thirty-five thousand horse and foot. He gave them 
orders not to delay, but make all possible speed 
and produce the Guru in chains before him. 

The imperial army marched to Bhai Rupa and 
not finding the Guru there proceeded to his new 
quarters. A spy named Hasan Khan was dis- 
patched by Lala Beg to make a reconnaissance. 
The nature of his errand was discovered by an 
expression which accidentally escaped him, namely, 
‘ Our army is much larger.’ Upon this he was 
seized by the Sikhs, cuffed and kicked, whereupon 
he asked for mercy in the name of the Guru. The 
Guru ordered that he should be released and not 
put to death. He was asked to tell the strength 
of the imperial army, and he in gratitude gave true 
details. He was then given a dress of honour and 
dismissed. 

A curious device for discovering the movements 
of a hostile army is here mentioned by the author 
of the Suraj Parkash. Rai Jodh’s wife put some 
pearls on a tray so that, when the imperial army 
moved, the tramp of the soldiers’ feet might cause 
the pearls to vibrate and the necessary information 
would thus be obtained. 

When the spy Hasan Khan returned to his chief, 
he, in giving details of what he had seen, incidentally 
praised the Guru’s troops. Though few in number, 
they were, he said, brave as tigers and longing for 
the fray. The imperial army were as so many 
jackals before them. This enraged Lala Beg, and 
he dismissed his spy on the pretext of disaffection. 
Upon this Hasan Khan returned to the Guru, 
and begged his patronage and protection. The 
Guru welcomed him in opposition to the advice of 
Rai Jodh, who represented that it was impolitic to 


i 

I 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 181 

entertain an enemy’s spy. The Guru, in reply, said 
that it would not be proper for him to refuse pro- 
tection to any one who sought it. Moreover, this 
Hasan Khan in God’s mysterious way should be- 
come a very distinguished person. Orders were then 
issued to Bidhi Chand and Jetha to hold their troops 
in readiness for defence. The orders had not been 
given too soon. That very night Rai Jodh’s wife 
knew by the movement of her pearls that the 
Emperor’s army was approaching, and wrote to that 
effect to her husband who was with the Guru’s army, 
so that the Guru might be duly apprised. 

The imperial army was composed of several 
nationalities. Some had large heads, others long 
noses, and others again red cheeks. There were 
sable Ethiopians, Ruhelas, Yusufzais, Daudzais, 
Gilzais, Baloches, and Pathans. Preceded by torches 
they advanced to the sound of drums of many 
descriptions. Lala Beg said to his troops that the 
Guru had nothing of an army ; with whom were 
they to fight ? They had only to go and seize the 
priest of the Sikhs. Qamar Beg addressing the Chief 
said, ‘0 my brother, if thou send me, I will bring 
thee even the angel of Death, to say nothing of the 
Guru ? ’ Upon this the Chief placed seven thousand 
men at his disposal. On seeing him approach, 
Hasan Khan, the late imperial spy, informed the 
Guru of his name, position, and capabilities. 

Rai Jodh with a thousand men went to oppose 
Qamar Beg. He ordered his troops to use their 
matchlocks at a distance, and not allow the enemy 
to come to close quarters. Showers of bullets soon 
thinned the ranks of the imperial army marching in 
close formation, and totally destroyed the torch- 
bearers who had been leading the way. Then 
ensued darkness, upon which the imperial army fell 
into dire confusion. They used their swords and 
guns, and, goaded by their misadventure and the 
havoc caused by the Guru’s troops, heeded not 



i8a 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


whether they slaughtered friend or foe. Very soon 
under all the circumstances — the darkness, the dust 
raised by men and horses, the day’s fatigue, the 
cold, and the severe losses in the ranks — they 
deemed it best to retreat. They thought their own 
troops who were in the rear were enemies, and 
received them with showers of bullets. Thus the 
imperial army was broken up and whole detach- 
ments fell by mutual slaughter. Qamar Beg left 
alone advanced in search of his army, and dis- 
charged showers of arrows as he proceeded. Rai 
Jodh finding an opportunity pierced Qamar Beg 
with his lance. He fell and soon after died in agony. 
Rai Jodh reported his victory to the Guru who 
warmly commended him. 

The Guru’s army was provided with sufficient 
firewood from the forest. The imperial army had 
no such comfort. Consequently at the end of the 
night the Emperor’s troops became frozen with the 
cold. When day dawned, there were heaps of 
soldiers of the imperial army found dead on the 
field. As the Guru surveyed them from an emi- 
nence, he was reminded of Hasan Khan’s words that 
his Sikhs were as brave as tigers, and that each of 
them should kill many flying jackals of the enemy.. 

The Chief on seeing Qamar Beg and thousands of 
his men slain was in sore anxiety. He thought of 
advancing himself into the thick of the fight, but 
Shams Beg, Qamar Beg’s son, asked to be allowed 
to go instead. The Chief yielded and gave him com- 
mand of a division of his army. As Shams Beg 
advanced he saw his father’s dead body, and well nigh 
succumbed at the sight. He, however, succeeded in 
putting himself at the head of his troops. Hasan 
Khan, the quondam spy, pointed him out to the 
Guru : ‘ Behold that powerful youth in blue uniform 
on a steed painted blue, at the head of the imperial 
forces. It is necessary to send some very brave 
men to oppose him.’ The Guru sent Bidhi Chand 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 183 

with fifteen hundred men. He, on seeing his antag- 
onist, thus addressed him : * O boy, why comest 
thou to die ? Seest thou not thy father already 
entered into Death’s abode ? Why seekest thou 
to follow him ? Thou art yet too young for the 
battle-field. Go home to thy mother’s protection.’ 
Shams Beg on hearing this angrily retorted, f If I 
die, I will take with me my father’s foe.’ Arrows 
and swords were then plied. Bidhi Chand’s powerful 
arm sent many Turks to untimely death. Though 
some of them fought well, they were defeated by 
the superior skill and bravery of Bidhi Chand and 
his troops. The two commanders, Bidhi Chand 
and Shams Beg, then approached each other and 
engaged in single combat. Bidhi Chand struck his 
adversary with his mailed fist, and sent him reeling 
to the earth. He then put his leg on his, and, taking 
hold of the other with his powerful arms, tore his 
body in twain. 

Lala Beg was enraged on seeing his nephew 
Shams Beg and his army slain. When he made 
a signal for some one to advance, his second nephew, 
Qasim Beg, offered himself, ‘ If thou wilt allow me, 
I will go and avenge my father and brother.’ The 
chief, on seeing the young hero come forward, gave 
him command of his reserve. Hasan Khan pointed 
him out to the Guru as he approached, ' 0 true King, 
Qasim Beg now advanceth against thee. He is a 
very powerful man and held in great esteem by the 
Emperor of Dihli. A brave warrior should be sent 
against him also. The Guru accordingly dispatched 
Bhai Jetha with five hundred men. Qasim Beg, 
seeing Bhai Jetha, thus addressed him : f O grey- 
beard, why comest thou with such a puny force to 
seek thy destruction ? Go and enjoy a few days 
more of this world, and send to the battle-field him 
who hath killed my father and brother.’ Bhai 
Jetha replied, ‘ I have enjoyed my life, but thou 
art young. I see thy beard is just sprouting. There 


184 THE SIKH RELIGION 

is yet time for thee to escape by flight and enjoy 
the wife of thy youth. Mistake not on seeing my 
small army. I, single-handed, will not suffer thee to 
abide alone, but will dispatch thee speedily to thy 
father and brother. If thou consent not to fly, let 
our armies engage, and then, if the issue be doubtful, 
we shall both decide the fortune of war by single 
combat.' 

Except cannon every weapon of warfare known 
at the time was brought into requisition. Bullets 
fell like hail ; swords, knives, and daggers glittered 
like lightning, quivers were emptied, bow-strings 
snapped, arrows broke, and warriors wrestled in 
deadly combat. Some of the raw undisciplined 
forces began to plunder one another, and there was 
general riot and disorder. Jackals, wolves, kites, 
and vultures feasted on the bodies of the slain. 
There were heard on all sides cries of ' Kill him ! 
kill him ! ’ ‘ Let him not escape ! ’ When Bhai 

Jetha saw Qasim Beg’s army falling in numbers, he 
confronted him as he had promised, and let fly 
showers of arrows which killed Qasim Beg’s horse. 
Jetha then seized the rider by the legs, whirled him 
round his head, and dashed him to the ground as 
an Indian washerman beats soiled linen on a plank. 
Qasim Beg immediately expired, while Jetha stood 
on the battle-field like a pillar driven into the earth. 
The Chief, Lala Beg, hearing of the destruction of 
Qasim Beg and his army, was only able to invoke 
Allah, whom he had so trusted, for a successful issue 
of his engagement with the infidels. 

The Chief himself then advanced with all his 
remaining men. Hasan Khan, who was at the 
Guru’s side and now thoroughly devoted to his 
cause, advised the dispatch of a force to support 
Jetha. The Guru replied that Jetha was like a 
, tiger, and would dispose of his enemies. The Turks 
surrounded and endeavoured to kill him with arrows, 
but these flew right and left of him and ever missed 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 185 

their mark. Jetha on his own part discharged 
arrows which never sped in vain. Lala Beg, seeing 
the destruction caused by Jetha, now went to oppose 
him. Lala Beg first used his lance, but Jetha 
parried it. Lala Beg then drew his sword, but 
Jetha received the first blow on his own. The next 
time Lala Beg was more successful, for he cut down 
his brave adversary, who died uttering Wahguru. 
Thus emboldened by success, Lala Beg advanced 
with three thousand men in armour against the 
Guru. J ati Mai, the son of Singha, asked the Guru’s 
permission to show Lala Beg the strength of his 
arm, and cut down the Turks. The Guru consented 
to his stemming the onset of the enemy. 

Jati Mai rained showers of arrows on the Turks, 
and sent them to death’s abode with the speed of 
hill torrents hastening to the sea. Lala Beg himself 
hurried to oppose him, and discharged an arrow 
which struck J ati Mai on the breast, and made him 
fall fainting to the earth. The Guru, seeing Jati 
Mai fall, entered the battle-field on his bounding 
steed. In mild accents he invited Lala Beg to 
approach and measure his strength with his. Lala 
Beg would not come near, but dispatched arrows 
from a distance, all of which missed their mark. 
The Guru, taking steady aim, shot Lala Beg’s 
horse, which fell with its rider. The Guru, on seeing 
the Chief on the ground, dismounted so as not to 
take an unfair advantage of his adversary. The 
Chief assumed the offensive and aimed several blows 
of his sword at the Guru, who parried them all. 
The Guru then putting forward his strength, struck 
the Chief a blow which completely severed his head 
from his body. It was as if the Chief had in his 
devotion offered his head as a sacrifice to the Guru, 
and the Guru in return had granted him escape 
from the ills of life and ultimate salvation. 

Kabuli Beg, the Chief’s sister’s son, was the only 
one of the commanders who now remained. On 



1 86 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


seeing him advance and make a final effort to 
restore the fortune of the day, the faithful Hasan 
Khan called the attention of the Guru to his in- 
trepidity and the impetuosity of his attack. Kabuli 
Beg meant to gather such a harvest as reapers do 
when they enter a ripe field. Bidhi Chand, Rai 
Jodh, and Jati Mai, who by this time had somewhat 
recovered from his wound, bravely confronted him. 
The battle was then fought with extreme fury on 
both sides. The three Sikh warriors committed such 
havoc among Kabuli Beg's troops that few remained. 
Kabuli Beg, maddened with rage on seeing the 
destruction they caused, rapidly discharged arrows 
which wounded all three. Seeing this the Guru 
himself hastened to their support. Kabuli Beg dis- 
charged arrows at the Guru which whizzed as they 
passed him. One arrow struck his horse, Gul Bagh, 
on the head and killed him. The Guru in retalia- 
tion killed Kabuli Beg's horse. Kabuli Beg now 
approaching the Guru made a stroke at him with 
his sword, which the Guru received on his shield. 
Kabuli Beg again and again slashed at the Guru, 
but every blow was parried. The Guru then, to 
change the monotony of defence, said to him, ‘ It 
is now my turn, be on thy guard.’ The Guru then 
dealt him such a blow as severed his head from 
his body. This ended the battle. The surviving 
Turks fled for their lives. Twelve hundred soldiers 
of the Guru were slain, and wounded. 


Chapter XVIII 

Bidhi Chand, Rai Jodh, and Jati Mai went to 
congratulate the Guru on his victory. The battle, 
which had begun at midnight, lasted for eighteen 
hours on the 16th of Maghar, Sambat 1688 (a. d. 
1631). The Guru allowed Hasan Khan to return to 
Lahore with the survivors of the imperial army. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 187 

The plunder obtained from the bodies of the deceased 
Turks was divided among the poor. A descendant 
of Marhaj appropriated to himself a costly sword 
belonging to a fallen Pathan. When the Guru 
heard of it, he called upon the Sikh to relinquish 
it, for it was not proper to retain booty. The Sikh 
denied all knowledge of it. The Guru said that the 
sword should ply in the family of him who had 
stolen it. It turned out that the members of his 
family died within a year by mutual slaughter. The 
Guru established the scene of the battle as a place 
of pilgrimage. It is now called Gurusar, or the 
Guru’s tank. It lies near the village of Nathana, 
about three miles from the Rampura Phul railway 
station. The Raja of Nabha has at considerable ex- 
pense built an imposing temple on the spot where 
the Guru encamped. The bard, Abdulla, composed 
a dirge on the battle, which is no longer extant. 

It was noticed that the horse Dil Bagh was very 
distressed at the absence of his mate. The Guru 
addressed him words of consolation : ‘ Such births 
as thine have been obtained and lost by sin. By 
sin hast thou obtained the body of a beast. Thy 
brother hath gone to heaven, have no more anxiety.’ 
It is said that upon this the horse recovered his 
usual spirits. Hasan Khan carried to the Emperor 
the news of the death of his generals and of the 
defeat of his army. The Emperor was in a fury. 
Wazir Khan was as usual ready with special pleading 
for the Guru : ' The Guru’s predecessors, from Guru 
Nanak down, had either done the Emperor’s line 
favours, or had been on good terms with them, 
and what was now to be gained by falling out 
with the Guru ? This was the third time that the 
Emperor’s forces had been defeated by his army. 
What then was the advantage of carrying on the 
contest and aggravating the enmity ? I pray thy 
Majesty, let this be the end of it, and let bygones 
be bygones. Let another officer be appointed 



i88 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


instead of Lala Beg the deceased chief.’ Upon this 
the Emperor, by the Guru’s occult inducement, gave 
Hasan Khan a dress of honour, and appointed him 
to a high office. 

After the Guru’s return to Kangar from the war, 
he went shooting in the adjoining forest. A hissing 
python crawled near his party. The Sikhs wanted 
to destroy it as vermin, but the Guru interposed and 
ordered them to allow the animal to approach him. 
The Guru touched it with his toe, whereupon it 
burst and died, and worms issued from its body. 
The Guru explained that it had been in a previous 
birth a very proud Mahant who used to embezzle 
his disciples’ property. He had not repeated God’s 
name or repented, so he became a python, and his 
victims in order to torture him, became the worms 
which now appeared. The Guru, quoting the follow- 
ing lines of the first Guru, granted him salvation : — 

They who give disciples hats 1 are fools, and they who 
receive them very shameless. 

A rat cannot go into its hole if there be a winnowing- 
fan tied to its belly . 2 

By this the Guru meant that hypocritical priests 
who make disciples are fools and make fools of their 
disciples, and that man cannot obtain salvation so 
long as he is entangled with mammon. The Guru 
also quoted the following pauri from Gur Das : — 

Though one wear man’s five garments ; 3 

Though his moustaches and whiskers appear beautiful and 
his dress be very effective ; 

Though he wear a hundred arms and associate with the 
elect ; 

1 It was and still is the custom in India for a religious teacher 
to take off his hat and put it on the head of his disciple as part of 
the ceremony of initiation. 

2 Malar ki War. 

3 The five garments of Gur Das’s time were paejama (drawers), kurta 
(shirt), angarkha (long coat), kamarband (waistband), dastar (turban). 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 189 

Though he be skilled in courtly graces, and known in 
many lands, 

Yet without virile power he cannot be deemed a man. 
What can a woman do with him ? 

So if a man without virtues be called a guru, who shall 
do him obeisance ? 1 

When the Guru was leaving Kangar, Rai Jodh 
expressed a wish to remain for ever in his service. 
The Guru did not encourage him in this, but told 
him to abide in his village. He then promised 
that when he became Guru Gobind Singh, he would 
pay an affectionate visit to Rai Jodh’s family. He 
crossed the Satluj and proceeded to Kartarpur, 
whither he had sent his family and the Granth Sahib 
from Daroli. 

' Preparations were now made for the marriage of 
the Guru’s son Teg Bahadur to Gujari, daughter of 
Lai Chand and Bishan Kaur. The ninth of Phagun, 
Sambat 1689, was fixed on as a suitable time for 
the purpose, and the marriage was then celebrated 
with great munificence and rejoicings. 

There was at that time one copy of the Granth 
with the Guru, and another at Mangat made by 
Bhai Banno. Bidhi Chand asked and obtained the 
Guru’s permission to make a third copy. 

One day as the Guru was hunting he had every- 
thing white on and about his person. He was 
clothed in white muslin, he was protected from the 
sun’s rays and the dust by a white umbrella, he 
carried his white hawk on his hand, rode on a 
white horse, and his groom waved a white chauri 
by his side. To him thus arrayed a father and son, 
Sikhs of Amritsar, presented themselves. The father 
represented that the son had with severe study 
learned the art of painting, and they were both 
ready to perform any service the Guru might desire. 
Bidhi Chand suggested that the youth should paint 


1 War XXXVI. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


190 

a picture of the Guru. The young man fixed his 
attention on the work, and drew a satisfactory like- 
ness of the Guru. The Guru presented the picture 
to Bidhi Chand. It is unfortunately no longer in 
existence. 

On the approach of the Baisakhi festival several 
Sikhs, including Rai Jodh, went to visit the Guru. 
A Sikh named Chitar Sain made him a present of 
a horse, a hawk, a dress, and some military weapons. 
The Guru gave all the offerings to Painda Khan 
except the hawk, which he reserved for his own son 
Gurditta. The dress and arms Painda Khan put 
on to adorn his person. He then appeared a magni- 
ficent warrior, and began to consider himself a very 
superior being. The Guru ordered him to appear 
before him always in that style. He mounted the 
horse which he had received, rode swiftly to his 
village, and showed himself to his admiring relations. 
Asman Khan, his son-in-law, asked him for all the 
presents given him by the Guru, but he very properly 
refused. 

Asman Khan then tried to steal them by suborning 
Painda Khan’s wife. He said that if he did not 
get them, he would either became a faqir or drown 
himself. She told this to Painda Khan, and re- 
presented how sad it would be if their daughter, 
Asman Khan’s wife, became a widow. Painda Khan, 
however, did not wish to displease the Guru by 
transferring the presents he had made him to 
another. Were the Guru to dismiss him, how could 
lie maintain himself ? Painda Khan’s, wife dis- 
regarding his strong remonstrance, stood up, and 
gave the sword, shield, and clothes which he had 
just taken off to her son-in-law, saying to her hus- 
band as she did so, ‘Thou needest nothing; the 
Guru will give thee other presents. May I not 
claim so much from thee ? ’ She then laughed away 
her husband’s displeasure. Asman Khan at once 
put on his father-in-law’s dress, buckled on his 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


191 

sword and shield, mounted his horse, and went forth 
to amuse himself with the chase. Painda Khan 
seeing this stared in blank astonishment at his wife 
who had robbed him in his own house. He threw 
himself on his bed, heaved cold sighs, and considered 
what the Guru would say to him for parting with 
his presents. He felt for the time mentally disor- 
ganized and unable to pay his respects to the 
Guru. 

It happened that Gurditta, taking the hawk which 
had been presented to the Guru, went hawking on 
that very day. In opposition to the advice of his 
attendants, he let fly the bird at a time when it was 
not hungry. The hawk consequently did not return, 
but flew off to the village of Wadamir, where Asman 
Khan happened to be resting from the fatigue of the 
chase. Asman Khan captured it, thinking to him- 
self that if he took it to the Emperor instead of the 
one the Sikhs had formerly appropriated, he should 
be rewarded with a grant of land. 

Asman Khan, on returning home, told his mother- 
in-law all the events of the day. She said, ‘ Conceal 
the hawk. If the Guru hear that thou art in posses- 
sion of it, he will not fail to punish thee. Painda 
Khan said, ‘ If thou give me the hawk I will take 
it to the Guru, and obtain his pardon for letting 
thee have his presents.’ Asman Khan laughingly 
said, ‘ Thou art ever prating of losing thine appoint- 
ment. I want this hawk to enable me to obtain 
a tract of country from the Emperor. Why shouldst 
thou be dependent on infidels for thy subsistence ? 
Pray to God to support thee.’ Father-in-law and 
son-in-law spent the whole night wrangling over the 
hawk, but without arriving at any satisfactory 
settlement. 

When the Guru heard that his son Gurditta’s 
hawk had been taken possession of by Asman Khan, 
he said, ‘ The will of God is very powerful. Worldly 
love destroyeth the understanding. Five days have 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


192 

now elapsed, and Painda Khan through shame hath 
not come near me.’ Painda Khan did not venture 
to go near the Guru during the Baisakhi fair, which 
is generally a time of universal enjoyment. The 
Guru again remarking his absence sent for him. He 
appeared looking dejected and wearing dirty clothes. 
The Guru inquired the cause of his altered appear- 
ance. Where were the clothes and the horse he had 
received ? Was he in possession of Gurditta’s hawk ? 
If he told the truth he should be pardoned and 
receive presents to make amends for those he had 
lost. 

Painda Khan, fearing his wife’s and son-in-law’s 
ire, falsely replied, ‘The horse and clothes thou 
gavest me are in my possession. As soon as thine 
order reached me, I hastened to come to thee with- 
out even thinking of my appearance. Were I in 
possession of the hawk, I would surrender it to thee. 
I would never detain thy property. Do me justice 
and listen not to slanderers.’ The Guru said, 
‘ Falsehood pleaseth me not. I have heard that 
thy son-in-law hath seized the hawk. There is even 
yet time for thee to make a full confession.’ Painda 
Khan swore by the Guru that he had not seen the 
hawk. Upon this the Guru whispered to Bidhi 
Chand to go and bring the hawk with all the offer- 
ings that had been presented to Painda Khan. 
Bidhi Chand found Asman Khan asleep, and quietly 
took all the property he had misappropriated. 
The Guru again pressed Painda Khan to tell the 
truth, but he swore for the third time that he knew 
nothing of the hawk, and that he was in full posses- 
sion of the Guru’s presents. Upon this the Guru 
called on Bidhi Chand to produce the hawk, the 
sword, and the dress he had taken from Asman 
Khan’s house. The Guru then in presence of his 
Sikhs charged Painda Khan with having sworn 
falsely three times in succession. When Painda 
Khan could make no reply, the Guru ordered him 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


193 


to be expelled from the darbar. The presence of 
Painda Khan had never been agreeable to the Sikhs, 
and they obeyed the Guru's order with alacrity. 
They seized Painda Khan and submitted him to 
very rough treatment. He could not bring himself 
to ask the Guru’s pardon. On the contrary he thus 
addressed him : ‘ I will go and complain to the 
Emperor. Thou shalt suiter as thy father did, and 
then I shall have my revenge.’ The Guru simply 
replied, ‘ Go by all means and complain to thy 
heart’s content. Thou shalt reap the reward of 
thine acts.' The Guru then caused him to be for- 
cibly expelled from the precincts of Kartarpur. 

When Painda Khan reached home he found his 
son-in-law Asman Khan weeping for the loss of the 
hawk. On seeing Painda Khan crestfallen and 
hearing him curse his fate, Asman Khan inquired 
the cause. Painda Khan then gave him all the 
details of his treatment at the hands of the Guru 
and his Sikhs, and vowed that he would have his 
revenge. He then went from his village of Chhota- 
mir to the Muhammadan village of Bassi. A resolu- 
tion was there passed at his instigation, that the 
priest of the Sikhs was a great tyrant, that his 
power daily increased to the public detriment, that 
he received countless offerings and possessed bound- 
less wealth, and that the Emperor should be invited 
to send an army to reduce him to subjection and 
take possession of all his property. Some people 
laughed, and said Painda Khan was an ungrateful 
scoundrel, who returned evil for good, and must one 
day inevitably receive his deserts. 

Painda Khan was able, under the promise of 
plunder, to induce five hundred horsemen to join 
him. Some far-seeing men among them, however, 
suggested that the advice of his cousin Qutub Khan, 
who was now governor of Jalandhar, should be taken 
before war was declared against the Guru. They 
accordingly proceeded to Jalandhar, where Painda 

o 


SIKH, iv 


194 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Khan laid his case before his cousin, and said, ‘ A 
generous man is tested in famine time. Join me 
and assist me.’ Qutub Khan was surprised, and 
asked why such a crowd had favoured him with 
a visit. Painda Khan told him of the ill-treatment 
he had received, and begged him to induce the 
Emperor to send an army to punish the Guru. His 
cousin replied, ' Thou sinner, masters are ever 
chastising their servants. What if the Guru hath 
taken his own property ? Thou hast eaten his salt 
and been brought up by him. Whatever desirable 
things the Guru obtaineth he ever bestoweth on 
thee. Disgrace not the Pathans by fighting with 
such a man. If thou do, the world will call thee 
ungrateful. If thou desire thine own advantage, 
make peace with the Guru.’ 

Painda Khan angrily replied, ‘ Perhaps thou hast 
eaten the Guru’s sacred food, and it speaketh 
within thee.’ Qutub Khan rejoined, ‘ Thou oughtest 
to be ashamed of thy words. I have never eaten 
the Guru’s food, sacred or profane ; but thou, having 
eaten it over and over again, hast been nourished 
on it. Everybody knoweth that thou desirest to 
fight with him whose menial thou hast been the 
greater part of thy life.’ Painda Khan then thought 
it proper to adopt a more concilatory tone, ‘ Deeming 
thee to be a Musalman and brother I have come 
to thee.’ Qutub Khan jeeringly retorted, ‘Fine Musal- 
man thou art to desire to do evil to him whose salt 
thou hast eaten ! ’ Painda Khan ingeniously gave a 
new turn to the discussion, ‘ I am waging a religious 
war. The Guru hath stolen thy master’s horses from 
the Lahore fort and ridden them. I desire to avenge 
that wrong.’ After much debate of this description 
Qutub Khan said, ‘ I have only been making trial 
of thee. True it certainly is that the Guru is an 
enemy of the Emperor. Proceed and I will follow 
and assist thee.’ Painda Khan and his cousin then 
swore fidelity to each other, and Painda Khan and 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 195 

his son-in-law proceeded to Lahore to lay their 
complaints in person before the Emperor. Qutub 
Khan promised to follow them. 

Chapter XIX 

When Painda Khan and his son-in-law reached 
Lahore, no one would allow them to approach the 
Emperor. They had spent all the money they had 
brought with them in maintaining themselves and 
their five hundred horses, and in bribing a courtier 
called Salamat Khan to procure them an audience ; 
but the ever-faithful Wazir Khan would not allow 
any one to poison the Emperor’s mind against the 
Guru. Painda Khan was consequently reduced to 
great straits. He could not return home, nor could 
he gain access to the Emperor. He was in the 
condition of a snake which takes a lizard into its 
mouth, and can neither swallow nor reject it. 

Qutub Khan soon arrived in Lahore, and listened 
to the story of his cousin Painda Khan’s disappoint- 
ment. He advised him to procure a long bamboo, 
tie a hen to the end of it, and lift her to the royal 
casement, when her clucking might perhaps awake 
the Emperor. Should this fail, he was to light 
torches at midnight and cause his five hundred men 
to raise a loud shout opposite the Emperor’s apart- 
ments, upon which an audience might be vouch- 
safed him on the morrow. This expedient proved 
successful. Next morning the Emperor sent for the 
men who had disturbed his rest over night, but it 
was not with the object of giving them a satis-, 
factory audience. He peremptorily demanded an 
explanation of their conduct. 

Before Painda Khan or Qutub Khan could address 
the Emperor on the subject of their grievances, 
Wazir Khan was ready with his usual pleading on 
behalf of the Guru. ' Thy majesty, this is not 
an age for an honest man. The evils prophesied 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


196 

for the thirteenth century 1 of our era have already 
begun. He whom thou treatest well doeth thee 
harm, in return. This Painda Khan was a poor 
unprotected child. His parents were dead. The 
Guru found him as a waif, took pity on him, and 
brought him up as if he were his own son. He 
bestowed on him every valuable present he received 
for himself. He procured a wife for him and made 
provision for his family. It is through the Guru’s 
munificence his daughter’s marriage hath been cele- 
brated. Now when he ought to be satisfied with 
his position, he hath stolen the Guru’s hawk, de- 
nied the offence on oath, and come to complain 
against the very man who cherished him and made 
him distinguished among his fellows. He hath thus 
committed the most heinous sin of ingratitude, the 
extreme of all wickedness.’ 

Wazir Khan in thus pleading was actuated as 
much by his devotion to the Emperor as by gratitude 
to the Guru. He knew the Guru’s power, and did 
not wish to embroil the Emperor in further warfare 
with him. It happened soon after, that there 
was urgent need of Wazir Khan’s services in 
a distant part of the empire, and thither he was 
accordingly dispatched. Painda Khan now found 
his opportunity of approaching the Emperor in 
person, and thus unburdened himself : ‘ Sire, the 
Guru hath done me grievous wrong. I have been 
his servant. I asked him for my last six months’ 
salary, but, instead of giving it to me, he hath con- 
fiscated my clothes and arms, and expelled me with 
ignominy from his court. Three times hath he con- 
quered in war by my assistance. I have killed 
a large portion of thine army. Thy chiefs now 

1 This was a Moslem prophecy which like others has not been 
fulfilled. The fourteenth century of the Muhammadan era has already 
begun. It must be stated, however, that orthodox Muhammadans 
maintain that the prophecies were not for the thirteenth century but 
for the day of judgement. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


197 


know my strength.’ The Emperor inquired what 
wars he referred to, and where they had been fought. 
Qutub Khan replied, ‘ First the Guru had an engage- 
ment in Amritsar with Mukhlis Khan, who had an 
army of seven thousand men, secondly at Har 
Gobindpur with Abdulla Khan, the governor of the 
Jalandhar province, and thirdly at the Nathana 
tank with Lala Beg. They with their armies were 
all vanquished by thy petitioner Painda Khan’s 
assistance.’ 

Painda Khan continued, ‘ I am so strong that I can 
throw an elephant. I can pulverize a rupee under my 
thumb. I bore with the kicking and cuffing I suf- 
fered from the Guru because I had patience and con- 
fidence in thy justice. He is thy deadly enemy and 
hath killed thousands of thine army. His robbers 
have stolen thy horses from thy fort at Lahore. He 
seized thy white hawk and refused to surrender it. 
I am in his secrets, and if thou entrust an army to 
me, thou shalt assuredly succeed in reducing him 
to submission. I promise to bring him and the 
horses he stole to thee, or kill him and have my 
revenge.’ Then spoke the corrupt Salamat Khan in 
support of the charges : ‘ Painda Khan’s assistance 
is providential. The Guru hath quarrelled with him 
without reason, and he hath come to thee for justice. 
Look at him. He hath the frame of a giant. If 
thou but order he will catch the Guru by the neck 
and produce him before thee, and what the Guru 
hath in his treasury shall become thy spoil.’ 

By such representations was the mind of the 
Emperor influenced. He inquired the strength of 
the Guru’s army and the amount of his wealth. 
Painda Khan replied, ‘ He hath no army. The halt, 
the cripple, the blind, the deaf and dumb, the 
diseased, the old, the poor, the lazy, and the good- 
for-nothings gather round him. Barbers, washer- 
men, pedlars, strolling minstrels, and similar unwar- 
like people compose what he calleth his army. As 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


198 

for wealth, he possesseth millions upon millions.’ 
Salamat Khan chimed in. ‘ Such an opportunity as 
this which God hath given us ought not to be lost.’ 
The Emperor was worked up to a passion and taking 
a sword in his hand said, ' Is there any one of my 
officers brave enough to go and assist Painda Khan, 
and subdue the Guru who hath caused all this 
trouble.’ Kale Khan, governor of Peshawar, desir- 
ous of avenging the fate of his brother, Mukhlis Khan, 
rose and said, ' May it please thy Majesty, I will 
capture the Guru and bring him before thee.’ 

The Emperor gave Kale Khan command of fifty 
thousand men, bestowed on him, as insignia of his 
appointment, a necklace of enormous pearls and 
a robe of gold lace, and ordered him to proceed 
forthwith against the Guru. Anwar Khan, a con- 
fidential officer of the Emperor, friend of the late 
Abdulla Khan, and anxious to be his avenger, joined 
Kale Khan with two thousand men. The Emperor 
decorated him too with a robe of honour worth five 
thousand rupees. Outub Khan, Painda Khan, and 
Asman Khan also received dresses of honour, and 
were commissioned to fight under Kale Khan. The 
Emperor on dismissing them said that, when they 
returned victorious, they should receive further 
marks of his favour. But the Emperor did not 
reflect that his army was as the ocean, and the 
Guru as the barwanal, the fire that consumed it. 
The imperial troops were in reality like a herd of 
deer proceeding to engage with a tiger. 

Kale Khan crossing the Bias proceeded to Jalan- 
dhar. Qutub Khan entertained all the generals and 
provided for the encampment of the troops. During 
the following night they planned their campaign. 
While they were so engaged a voice of warning 
proceeded as from a neighbouring tree, ‘ One of thee 
hath been untrue to his salt. With him thousands 
shall perish. These troops which have come in 
proud array, are like moths hovering round a lamp. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


199 

The Chaughatta 1 (Chaghtai) monarch too is ill- 
advised, and is sowing thorns for his children.’ 

When the generals heard this mysterious boding, 
they came forth from their tents, looked hither and 
thither and examined the trees in the vicinity, but 
could not see the speaker. They then said among 
themselves, ‘ The Guru is a great miracle-worker. 
This must be a voice from heaven.’ Painda Khan 
thought it necessary to encourage his brother 
generals, ‘ Fear not ; had the Guru the power of 
working miracles, could he not have made himself 
emperor of the whole world ? He hath been power- 
ful and victorious only through my assistance. Now 
victory shall no longer be his. You shall see my 
strength. If you allow me a free hand to plunder 
I shall capture the Guru this very day.’ Kale Khan 
thought it necessary to repress the speaker, ‘ Pride 
and braggadocio avail not. It seemeth to me it 
would be well to send an envoy to ascertain what 
the Guru meaneth — whether he will fight or come 
to terms with us.’ Anwar Khan suggested that 
they should make an offering to the Guru, and thus 
deceive him into believing that they were his friends. 
They would thus obtain an easy victory and succeed 
in capturing him. Qutub Khan was for more 
violent measures, ‘ Deceive him, deceive him ! and 
overpower him in any way you can ! ’ 

A faithful Sikh hearing of the arrival of an enor- 
mous imperial army in Jalandhar hastened to 
inform the Guru. Next arrived a masand who said 
that the imperial army was approaching thick as 
flies, and suggested to the Guru that he should take 
measures to protect himself and his followers, as, 
when it rained iron, the showers would not fall like 
ordinary raindrops. The Guru replied by a hymn 
of Guru Amar Das : — 

God Himself protecteth His saints ; what can a sinner do 
against them ? 

1 Babar, the Emperor’s ancestor, belonged to this family. 


200 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Proud fools practise pride, and die by eating poison. 

The few days they had to live are at an end ; they shall 
be cut down like a ripe crop. 

They shall be spoken of according to their acts. 

The slave Nanak’s Master is great ; He is the Lord of all . 1 

Painda Khan’s voice was soon heard inciting the 
troops to make a sudden charge and surround the 
Guru. Qutub Khan again counselled patience and 
the dispatch of an envoy to endeavour to make 
peace. This was at last agreed on, and Anwar Khan 
was the envoy selected. Anwar Khan thought to 
pitch his tent near the Guru, and thus find a con- 
venient opportunity of treacherously slaying him. 
The Guru, however, took care that Anwar Khan 
should not continue long in too close proximity to 
him. And though Anwar Khan was provided with 
many presents for the Guru, yet the Guru refused 
to accept them. 

A goldsmith came to the Guru with unusually 
rich offerings. He presented golden dice set with 
gems and an embroidered chaupar-board with varie- 
gated pieces formed of sapphires, rubies, and topazes. 
Although the Guru did not approve of such articles 
as tended to divert men’s minds from God, and 
were sources of falsehood, sin, and trouble, yet he 
accepted them, so that he might preserve the gold- 
smith in his faith and devotion. The imperial envoy 
on seeing the presents said to the Guru, ' Thou 
acceptest the offerings of all other Sikhs, but not 
mine. What is the cause ? ’ The Guru replied, 

' The Guru’s house is like a sea of milk. The offerings 
of the Sikhs are like streams which flow into it of 
their own accord, and blend with it. But thy heart 
is not sincere, and therefore, if put into the Guru’s 
sea of milk, would turn it acid and cause it to fer- 
ment.’ Anwar Khan rejoined, ‘ Wazir Khan fre- 
quently sent me with gifts to thee, and thou didst 
1 Garni ki War I. 



- "5-^ 3W Sfgsrjsm* 


f 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 201 

always accept them.’ The Guru said that they were 
gifts of love which easily amalgamated with the 
Guru’s milk. 

When Anwar Khan failed to persuade the Guru 
to take his presents, he challenged to play him at 
chaupar. The Guru replied that such play was not 
suitable for a priest. Anwar Khan pressed his pro- 
posal, and laid the chaupar-board before him. He 
had formed an idea that, if he conquered the Guru 
at the game, it would be a presage of victory for 
his army, and if the Guru defeated him, his army 
would also be defeated. The Guru at last con- 
sented to play with the envoy. Anwar Khan lost 
the first time, the second, and the third also, and 
then losing his temper with his game said to the 
Guru, ‘ Thou art a cheat, thou hast won by trickery ! 
Why have I always had threes ? ’ The Guru replied, 

‘ Cheating, deceit, and falsehood are the principal 
stock of thy house, while I am a faqir.’ Anwar 
Khan retorted, ‘ A fine faqir thou art, hunting and 
enjoying thyself and practising warfare for thine 
own amusement. Thou art a great deceiver, and 
so have been all the Gurus from Baba Nanak down.’ 

The Guru could endure the insults to himself, but 
not the defamation of his predecessors. ‘ If there 
is any Sikh of the Guru present, let him remove 
this fellow from my presence.’ Bidhi Chand duly 
obeyed the Guru’s order. Some Sikhs then on their 
own account administered Anwar Khan shoe-beatings 
until he fainted. The Guru interceded for him and 
allowed him to depart without renewed punishment. 

Anwar Khan on his return to his Chief reported 
the ill-treatment he had received, and advised an 
immediate attack on the Guru who had not one- 
tenth of the strength of the imperial army. Kale 
Khan was very pleased with this suggestion. Painda 
Khan too was for immediate action. Qutub Khan, 
however, was not so sanguine. The Guru had 
already had great experience of war; and it was 


202 THE SIKH RELIGION 

not likely that he would be now off his guard. It 
was, however, determined by a large majority of 
the generals to attack his position that very night. 
The Guru knowing their designs ordered Bidhi Chand 
to be on the alert. The Guru had by this time 
eighteen hundred regular fighting men who were 
supplied by his friends in Kartarpur. The whole 
force was so marshalled and disposed as to prevent 
surprise and capture. 

Meantime dissension was brewing in the Guru’s 
camp. Dhir Mai, his grandson, accepting the evil 
forebodings of the masands, said that the Guru would 
certainly be defeated. The imperial army had arrived 
like a flight of locusts. The Guru’s army was in- 
significant. It did not bear the same ratio to the 
imperial army as condiment to the viands of a feast. 

' The Guru,’ continued Dhir Mai, ‘ is in one of his 
fits of obstinacy, and knoweth not the enemy’s 
prowess and strategy. I shall, therefore, probably 
attain my object and succeed him in his holy office.’ 
Dhir Mai’s mind having been thus perverted, he sat 
down and wrote the following letter : — ‘ Brother 
Painda Khan, my grandfather hath expelled and 
disgraced thee without cause, but I know thee to 
be my friend, and I will do the best for thine interests. 
If thou come to-night and make a sudden attack, 
the fort and its treasure will fall into your hands, 
for here there is no preparation made. I will render 
thee every assistance.’ 

Needless to say that Painda Khan was highly 
pleased on receiving this letter. He showed it to 
the other generals, who were also pleased, par- 
ticularly when they learned the dissension in the 
Guru’s family. An immediate charge was ordered. 
The soldiers, heated with wine, began to boast and 
use ribald language. Dust arose and obscured the 
moon and stars. The earth shook beneath the 
tramp of the army. Sweets and offerings were 
vowed to Muhammadan saints for success. The 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 203 

Chief ordered that the whole army should assemble 
near Chhotamir, and thence they would assault 
Kartarpur and capture the Guru. It happened that, 
before the imperial army could enter Chhotamir, an 
earthquake occurred which swallowed the village 
with the greater portion of its inhabitants. Those 
who did not perish were plundered by the imperial 
troops. Painda Khan did his utmost to protect his 
fellow-citizens, but in vain. 

The Guru arose earlier than usual, and after bath- 
ing began his devotions. He repeated the Japji, and 
prepared sacred food. He then read the Anand, the 
third Guru’s song of rejoicing, and uttered a prayer 
suitable to the occasion. Sacred food was then 
distributed, and after partaking of it his soldiers 
received a substantial meal, upon which arms were 
served out to them. Jati Mai announced that the 
imperial army was approaching like a dust storm in an 
Indian summer. When the Guru heard this and other 
similar expressions of warning or dismay, he calmly 
said, ‘ Have no anxiety, stand fast, be united, put 
on your armour. The Creator will act for the best.’ 

On receiving the Guru’s orders, Jati Mai, Ami 
Chand, Mihr Chand, and Bhai Lakhu, taking five 
hundred men, advanced and showered bullets and 
arrows at the enemy. Baba Gurditta asked his 
father’s permission to enter the battle, but was 
ordered to keep guard in the village until daylight. 
The discharges of matchlocks were like fireworks 
at a wedding. The armies soon came to close com- 
bat when, it is said, twelve thousand of Kale Khan’s 
army slept their final sleep. Twenty thousand 
imperial troops then advanced. Kale Khan told 
them that the Guru’s army was insignificant, and, 
if they finished the fighting, they might plunder as 
much as they pleased. This permission greatly 
stimulated their bravery. Then ensued the usual 
carnage. Bows twanged, arrows hissed like snakes, 
bullets fell like hail. Here and there men engaged 



204 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


in close combat with swords, knives, and daggers. 
Horses fell or fled without their riders. Elephants 
wandered in quest of their drivers and stable com- 
panions. The wounded became so attached to the 
battle-field that they could not rise. The dead fell 
in rows like corn laid by reapers. 

Qutub Khan, seeing the destruction of his troops, 
addressed Kale Khan, ‘ We have made a great mis- 
take in engaging at night. Want of sleep hath 
disabled our brave soldiers. The darkness and the 
dust, too, have led to our troops turning against one 
another. Our Pathans are retreating before the 
Sikhs. Our losses are very serious, while the Guru’s 
are practically none.’ Painda Khan said, ‘ Make 
one charge and the battle shall be at an end. Know 
ye any men among the Sikhs able to resist vour 
onset ? ’ Kale Khan, the Chief, was not of this opinion, 
and replied, ‘ Are the Sikhs sweet food which we 
can gulp down ? Our army hath all been slain or 
routed. The Sikhs have made our teeth so bitter 1 
that we cannot eat any more. No Pathan will now 
advance. Lead thyself.’ Then Painda Khan and 
his son-in-law, Asman Khan, taking lighted torches 
advanced at the head of their troops, but they were 
only seeking their own destruction. Kartarpur was 
like a lamp round which they were fluttering as 
moths. 

Bidhi Chand, Jati Mai, Lakhu, and Rai Jodh 
ranged themselves and their troops on the four sides 
of Kartarpur. Qutub Khan, Painda Khan, Asman 
Khan, and Kale Khan, at the head of their respective 
detachments, advanced against them. The Pathans 
were, however, powerless against the brave Sikhs 
fighting for their religion and their Guru. Bidhi 
Chand was seen as usual fighting bravely and 
practising with signal success the skill in archery 
which he had acquired during an eventful life of 

1 The Sikhs have inflicted such injury on us that we cannot bear 
to look at them again. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 205 

foray and warfare. There was seen the Guru in 
glittering armour, mounted on Dil Bagh, once the 
Emperor’s pride. Fortunate, says the chronicler, 
were the Pathan chiefs that they obtained the price- 
less advantage of beholding the Guru on his beautiful 
charger with his resplendent armour and trappings. 

Bidhi C-hand discharged an arrow at Anwar Khan 
which struck him between the eyebrows, as if it 
were applying a Hindu sacrificial mark to his fore- 
head. He fell to the earth as if he were doing 
obeisance to the Guru, or begging his forgiveness 
and suing for salvation. The Guru’s order went 
forth that nobody who was fleeing should be put 
to death. The Sikhs were only to fight after chal- 
lenging the enemy face to face. The Guru’s arrows 
passed through the Muhammadan chiefs, Pathans, 
Mughals, and Saiyids, as if these men were only 
pancakes. Jati Mai and Qutub Khan encountered 
each other in the darkness and dust-cloud, but under 
the circumstances the contest between them re- 
mained undecided. 


Chapter XX 

Morning dawned on the combatants to find the 
Guru dispatching his enemies as the sun’s rays put 
darkness to flight. The Pathans died like sparrows 
struck by hail or lightning. Their hopes of victory 
were abandoned, and their spirits could not revive. 
They began to say to one another, ‘ Fine friendship 
hath Painda Khan shown for Islam and fine booty 
have we got ! While trying to empty the Guru’s 
treasury we have emptied the Emperor’s. We have 
awakened a sleeping tiger and sacrificed our lives 
and property. Thousands of brave Muhammadans 
have perished as the result of our espousing the 
cause of an ungrateful villain. Now we can neither 
flee away nor conquer. But it is better to turn 



206 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


our face to the enemy and die than disgrace our- 
selves by flight.’ 

The generals also conferred among one another. 
They had been fighting, they said, for six hours, 
and far from having succeeded, half their army had 
perished. It was inexplicable how the Guru had 
become such a soldier. Let Painda Khan, who 
boasted that it was through him the Guru had 
obtained his former victories, and that he would at 
once capture him, now show his prowess and put 
his word to the proof. Painda Khan replied, ' I am 
going to advance ; come and support me. In one 
bound I will catch the Guru as a tiger fasteneth on 
an elephant.’ Asman Khan followed up his father- 
in-law’s boasting : ‘ I, single-handed, will capture and 
bring the Guru with his sons and all his Sikhs.’ 
Saying this, Painda Khan and Asman Khan entered 
the battle-field. The Muhammadan army then 
rallied and discharged arrows like rain in the Indian 
month of Sawan. 

Nanaki watched the battle from the top story of 
her house. She was delighted as she saw her son, 
Teg Bahadur, wielding his sword and dealing out 
destruction to the enemy. Baba Gurditta, the 
Guru’s eldest son, also fought valiantly, and made 
the Muhammadans feel the strength of his power- 
ful and well-practised arm. Asman Khan, seeing 
his troops dying by Gurditta’ s hands, discharged 
arrows at him from afar, but it is said the Baba 
cut them with his sword as they flew in the air. 
Qutub Khan, putting a cannon in position, fired at 
the Sikhs, but nothing could restrain the havoc 
they were dealing among the Muhammadans. The 
Guru displayed prodigies of strength, bravery, and 
martial skill, and the enemy were not able to cope 
with him even single-handed. 

The Muhammadans again began to bewail their 
evil destiny : ‘ Alas ! alas ! why have we come 
hither ? We cannot, however, recall the time when 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 207 

we left our homes, our wives, and our children. 
What will the Emperor say ? Fine dresses of honour 
we shall obtain ! We are undone ourselves and have 
undone our army.’ Qutub Khan advanced gnashing 
his teeth with rage as he observed the Guru shining 
like a sun on his favourite charger. Bhai Lakhu, 
seeing Qutub Khan’s onset, discharged an arrow at 
him which caused him to fall swooning to the ground. 
Seeing this a body of Pathans moved against Lakhu. 
For the space of three-quarters of an hour he kept 
the opposing forces at bay. The Musalmans sur- 
rounded Bhai Lakhu and killed his horse. Shouting 
victory to the true Guru, he still defended himself 
with his sword. The Muhammadans said to one 
another, ‘ Thousands of us have been vanquished. 
This one man fighteth with his sword alone, and 
will not allow lances, arrows, or daggers to touch 
his body. He hath yet no need of the maids of 
paradise who bestow happiness on departed heroes.’ 
While men were thus speculating, Qutub Khan, who 
by this time had recovered consciousness, struck 
Bhai Lakhu on the forehead with an arrow, which 
caused him to reel and fall to the ground. Qutub 
Khan, then drawing his sword, struck the fallen hero as 
he lay wounded, and severed his head from his body. 

Bhai Lakhu’s death was a boon for the Muham- 
madans, and cheered their flagging spirits. Kale 
Khan again addressed Painda Khan, who seemed 
to have been playing the laggard : ‘ Painda Khan, 
half the day is now over and our army is perishing. 
Thou art the cause of this disaster : go forward and 
withstand the Guru. We will support thee.’ Ac- 
cordingly Kale Khan, Qutub Khan, and Asman 
Khan, putting Painda Khan in front, advanced 
against the Guru. The Guru, on seeing his deadly 
enemy Painda Khan, curbed his wrath and bided 
his opportunity. Bidhi Chand engaged with Kale 
Khan, and Baba Gurdittawith Asman Khan. Painda 
Khan with his drawn sword confronted the Guru, 



208 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


and thus addressed his former friend and master, 
' Stand, I will now revenge the ignominy thou hast 
caused me, and thus cool my burning breast. If 
thou desire to come to terms, do so at once, and 
I will take thee to the Emperor and induce him to 
pardon thy many offences.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ Painda Khan, why use haughty 
language ? Now that the sword is in thy hand and 
that thou art ready to do or die, what time is it to 
talk of peace ? The man who runneth away and 
turneth his back to the foe, hath no longer regard 
for his religion. As to what thou talkest of revenge, 
I am here alone prepared to afford it thee. Thou 
mayest even strike the first blow, otherwise thou 
mayest regret it afterwards.’ Painda Khan, on 
hearing this, became enraged and brandished his 
sword. Inclining his body, he aimed a blow at the 
calf of the Guru’s leg. The Guru turned his horse 
aside to avoid it, but the sword struck his stirrup. 
He smiled and said, ‘ O Painda Khan, strike me 
where thou pleasest, seize me, bind me, that thou 
mayest have no cause for repentance. Fear not 
that I shall flee thee.’ Painda Khan made another 
stroke at the Guru, which he received on his shield. 
The Guru was merely showing his science, for hitherto 
he had not intended to kill his adversary. Painda 
Khan then tried to seize the Guru’s bridle, and take 
him and the famed Dil Bagh to the Emperor’s 
general. As Painda Khan was making his attempt, 
the Guru kicked him so forcibly as to cause him to 
stagger. He, however, recovered himself and again 
assumed the offensive. He had sufficient insolence 
to provoke the war, but he could not look straight 
in the face of the Guru whose presents he had 
received, whose leavings he had eaten, and whose 
cast-off clothes he had worn. It was the Guru’s 
wish that Painda Khan should even now admit that 
he had erred, and he would then restore him to his 
former position. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 209 

Instead of that the ill-starred man made another 
blow of his falchion at the Guru. His weapon parted 
from the handle and fell on the ground. The Guru, 
deeming it a point of honour not to take advantage 
of the misfortune of his enemy, alighted and said, 
‘ Ingratitude and slander, both of which thou hast 
been guilty of, are very serious crimes, but to kill 
the person I have cherished is not a course I desire 
to adopt.’ Painda Khan mockingly replied, ‘ Come, 
I will take thee to the Emperor.’ The Guru, under 
all the provocation, drew his two-edged scimitar and 
struck Painda Khan so forcibly that he fell prone 
on the ground. The Guru said, ‘ Thou art a Musal- 
man. Now is the time to repeat thy creed.’ Painda 
Khan, repenting, replied, ‘ O Guru, thy sword is my 
creed and my source of salvation.’ 

The Guru, on seeing Painda Khan’s dead body, 
was filled with pity and regret. He took his shield, 
and put it over his victim’s face so as to shade it 
from the sun, and bursting into tears, said, ‘ Painda 
Khan, I cherished thee, I reared thee, and I made 
thee a hero. Though men spoke ill of thee, I forgot 
thy failings, and evil to thee never entered my mind ; 
but evil destiny so misled thee that thou broughtest 
an army against me. It is thine own acts of in- 
gratitude and insolence that have led to thy death 
at my hands. It is impossible to digest offerings 
without serving the saints and worshipping God, 
otherwise they ruin the understanding, become 
deadly poison to the body, and lead to man’s ulti- 
mate damnation. Though thou hast been ungrate- 
ful and untrue to thy salt, I pray the Almighty to 
grant thee a dwelling in heaven. 

Good men are honoured for their greatness ; God also 
adjusteth the affairs of the evil : 

He saveth sinners and those who fall away from Him .’ 1 

Asman Khan advanced, discharging arrows, and 
was confronted by Baba Gurditta, who showered 

1 Gur Das, X. 

P 


SIKH. IV 



210 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


arrows on him in return. One of them struck 
Asman Khan on the eyebrow and penetrated his 
brain. Baba Gurditta, seeing him dead, stood at 
his head and wept copiously. The Guru came 
up and inquired the cause of his grief. Baba 
Gurditta replied, ‘ He was my friend. We used to 
play together. He now tried to kill me with his 
arrows, from which I escaped, but one of mine hath 
lodged in his head. He reeled and fell, and never 
rose again. I have used great efforts to lift him 
up, but in vain.’ Saying this Baba Gurditta con- 
tinued to weep. The Guru inquired if dead men 
ever rose, and if he had ever known weeping of any 
avail. Baba Gurditta replied, ‘ This is the result 
of wearing arms. The mind becometh cruel. Take 
these weapons from me. I will now go home.’ 
Baba Gurditta then retired from the battle-field 
to weep over the friend of his youth, and embrace 
a more peaceful and holy life. 

The imperial army, hearing of the death of Painda 
Khan and Asman Khan, became totally demoralized. 
As they fled from the field they said, ‘ The Guru 
is the death of the Pathans. Let us return to 
Lahore.’ Others, more jealous of their reputation, 
inquired how they could dare go home and endure 
the reproach of cowardice. They were now not fit 
to show their faces to any one, much less to the 
Emperor. They had accordingly better sound the 
drum for another charge, and either conquer or die. 
This advice prevailed, and another attempt was 
made to retrieve the day’s misfortune. Bidhi Chand, 
seeing the enemy advancing, warned the Guru to 
prepare to receive them. There was, however, no 
necessity for warning. The Guru continued to dis- 
charge an incessant shower of arrows which caused 
unwonted havoc. There was such a collection of 
corpses on the battle-field that it was difficult to 
move without treading on them. The earth was 
stained with gore as if it had put on a red garment. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 211 

As Qutub Khan advanced, the Guru observed 
him and shot his horse. Qutub Khan thus dis- 
mounted, continued to discharge arrows, which the 
Guru cut with his sword in their flight. Qutub 
Khan approaching nearer fought desperately, and 
for a whole hour engaged the Guru in single combat. 
At last the Guru, who had better staying power, 
cut off his head with a single stroke. Kale Khan 
the chief, on seeing Qutub Khan’s corpse, massed 
his troops and said, ‘ This is a war for our religion. 
Behold the Sikhs — how insignificant in number, yet 
how desperately they have fought ! In a few hours 
they have repelled all our charges. Y ou have come like 
clouds, yet have achieved nothing. This is the last 
encounter. Take courage.’ Upon this the Muham- 
madan troops made a furious onslaught, but could 
make no sensible impression on the Sikhs. The 
imperial troops died in numbers, and now only 
about two thousand remained. Kale Khan became 
demented, and raised despairing cries. ‘ O God, 
who hath destroyed mine army ? whither hath it 
gone ? ’ 

The Commander-in-chief now confronted the Guru 
and said, ‘ Har Gobind, thou art very clever in the 
science of arms. Thou hast killed thousands of my 
soldiers. Until I send thee where thou hast sent 
them, my debt will not be discharged.’ The Guru 
smiled and said, ‘ Kale Khan, the soldiers who have 
gone before are now awaiting thee. Thou abidest 
in sorrow here, therefore I am going to dispatch 
thee quickly to thy friends.’ 

Kale Khan, maddened by rage, discharged an arrow 
which whizzed past the Guru. A second arrow 
grazed the Guru’s forehead, and drops of blood 
bespattered his face, as if they were tilaks of 
victory. The Guru again addressed him, ‘ I have 
seen thy science. Now observe mine.’ The Guru 
discharged an arrow which killed Kale Khan’s 
horse. Kale Khan thus dismounted confronted the 

p 2 



212 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Guru. The Guru thought it a point of honour also 
to dismount and offer his adversary a choice of 
arms. Kale Khan desired to fight with sword and 
shield. The Guru prepared to meet him with his 
own weapons. Sparks of fire issued from the clash 
of sword on sword. The Guru parried all his strokes. 
When not receiving them on his sword he dexterously 
stopped them with his shield. 

The chiefs of both armies fought thus for an hour, 
cut and guard. At last the Guru said to his adver- 
sary, ‘ As thy name is Kale Khan, so Kal — death — 
knocketh at the gate of thy life.’ Kale Khan on 
this became further enraged and dealt his blows 
recklessly and unskilfully. When the combat was 
becoming monotonous and the Guru had warded off 
the last stroke, he said to his adversary, ‘ Not thus; 
this is the way to fence.’ The Guru, then putting 
forth all his strength, dealt Kale Khan a blow with 
his two-edged scimitar which severed his head from 
his body. On this the Musalmans and their leaders 
retreated like clouds before an Indian westerly wind. 
Bidhi Chand and Jati Mai shouted victory. On 
hearing this, Qasim Khan ran towards the Guru in 
the hope that he would fall on him unawares and 
have the drum of victory beaten for himself. The 
Guru warded off his blows for some time, and at last 
easily dispatched him to his departed friends. 

A Sikh subsequently asked the author of the 
Dabistan-i-Mazahab, what the Guru meant by say- 
ing, ‘Not thus; this is the way to fence.’ Muhsan 
Fani replied that the Guru had not killed his enemy 
through hostility, but was merely giving him a lesson 
in sword-play. 1 

It is said that several thousand Muhammadans but 
only seven hundred of the Guru’s brave and s kilf ul 
Sikhs perished in this sanguinary battle. It ended 
an hour before nightfall on the 24th day of Har, 
Sambat 1691 (a.d. 1634). 

1 Dabistan-i-Mazahab, 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 213 

In the early morning the Guru determined to see 
his friend Budhan Shah, whose end was approaching, 
and who, the Guru well knew, was waiting for him 
near Kiratpur. The Guru started on his horse, and 
directed Bidhi Chand to follow with his family, and 
he would wait for them on the road. Bidhi Chand, 
taking charge of the Guru’s followers and some of his 
property, prepared for his journey. 

Dhir Mai and his mother Natti were the only 
members of the Guru’s family who did not accompany 
him on his journey to Kiratpur. In the first place, 
Dhir Mai had turned traitor, and was ashamed to 
show his face to the Guru and his Sikhs. In the 
second place, he thought that, if he remained behind, 
he could take possession of all the Guru’s property, 
including the Granth Sahib. It will be remembered 
that Bidhi Chand had begun to make a copy of the 
sacred book. He told Dhir Mai that he had copied it 
as far as the Bilawal Rag, or more than one half of 
the whole, and, if he might take the Granth Sahib 
with him, he would soon finish copying the remainder. 
Dhir Mai replied, ‘ Go to Kiratpur ; I will search the 
Guru’s house for the Granth Sahib, and if I find it, 
will send it to thee.’ When Bidhi Chand overtook 
the Guru, he told him of Dhir Mai’s continued con- 
tumacy. The Guru laughingly said, ‘ Kartarpur 
was founded by his ancestors. That is why he will 
not leave it. He desires to improve it, and hence his 
remaining there. It was improper for him to break 
with his father and grandfather and to ally himself 
with the Muhammadans, but he is an incarnation of 
Prithia and means to establish a sect of his own. Let 
the Granth Sahib remain with him. When the 
Sikhs feel devotion, they will deprive him of it.’ 

The Guru reached Phagwara on his journey. As 
the town was on the road to Lahore, whence reinforce- 
ments could easily be sent against him, he continued 
his march to Kiratpur. On arriving at the Satluj he 
pointed to a hill at the north, which he said the tenth 



214 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Guru would make his playground. Here the famous 
steed Dil Bagh, surnamed Jan Bhai, died from the 
effect of wounds in the recent battle. 

The Guru thence proceeded on his journey to 
Budhan Shah’s hut. Budhan Shah on awaking from 
a. deep trance addressed him — ‘ 0 true Guru, thou 
hast assumed birth to save the world. Although 
Gurus Nanak, Angad, Amar Das, Ram Das, Arjan, 
and thou have all had different bodies, they have 
been pervaded by the same light. My wishes have 
been fulfilled, and, now that I behold thee, I have no 
further object in life. As thou hast come to me 
regardless of the care of thy body overspent in the 
fatigue of war, so assist me in the next world also. 
Guru Nanak promised me that I should behold him 
before my death, so his light in thee hath brightened 
my departure.’ 

The Guru left his son Baba Gurditta and Bidhi 
Chand with Budhan Shah, and, promising to return, 
departed to Kiratpur, which he made his permanent 
residence. There he bathed, performed his de- 
votions, and medicated his wound. Bidhi Chand 
inquired Budhan Shah’s age and circumstances. 
He replied, ‘ In this Kal age few live for a hundred 
years, but by the Guru’s favour I have enjoyed a 
much longer span of life. Guru Nanak left milk with 
me and promised that a Sikh of his should return 
and drink it. Gurditta formerly came to me and 
received the trust. I pray him to deem me his 
servant and not forget me, and before he dieth to 
order his shrine to be made near mine.’ Baba 
Gurditta replied, ‘ Why art thou sad ? Remain 
with us for some time longer. Men worship thee, 
and thou art caressed and happy.’ Budhan Shah 
answered, ‘ However long I may remain, I must 
depart at last ; and this is the time to go while thou 
art by my side.’ 

The Guru returned from Kiratpur to Budhan Shah 
in time to bid him a last adieu. Budhan Shah 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 215 

grasped his feet and prayed for his intercession. His 
last words were, ‘ My mind is sinful, evil passions 
have overmastered it. I have called myself Thy 
servant, 0 God, wherefore preserve the honour of 
Thy name.’ Saying this, Budhan Shah, fixing his 
thoughts on God, parted with his body. 


Chapter XXI 

After the Guru’s departure from Kartarpur, Dhir 
Mai possessed himself of a large amount of the 
Guru’s property. He then feared that the Emperor 
might send another army to wrest it from him and 
capture him in mistake for the Guru. He accordingly 
wrote to the Emperor, ‘ Sire, I desire thy victory and 
thy support, but thy troops were fated to die, so 
how could they be saved ? The Guru hath destroyed 
the whole army, but I am thy friend, and I pray thee 
to deem me so.’ 

The Emperor was distracted at the loss of his army. 
He said, ‘ Several thousands of my troops slain ! 
Assuredly the Guru hath brought about the destruc- 
tion of the world ! ’ Wazir Khan, who by this time 
had returned to the Emperor, took the Guru’s part 
as he had so often done before. ‘ Sire, thou hast now 
ascertained for the fourth time that whosoever 
proceedeth with evil intention against the Guru, 
never returneth. Thine armies have been destroyed 
by the Guru’s supernatural power, and not by his 
material strength and strategy. Painda Khan was 
in the Guru’s secrets, but he died in return for his 
ingratitude and treachery. His family is ruined, 
and his town hath been swallowed up. I have often 
ventured to give thy Majesty advice, but thou hast 
deliberately sent thine armies to destruction.’ 

Then came Dhir Mai’s messenger with his letter. 
Wazir Khan read it to himself and was astonished at 
its contents. Whether the Emperor could read it 



2l6 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


or not he accepted the following version of Dhir Mai’s 
missive from the lips of Wazir Khan : ‘ 0 Sire, come 
to terms and be not at enmity with the Guru. Both 
thy steeds have been slain in battle, and there is now 
no hope of their recovery. The Guru is ever thine 
ally and well-wisher. Thou shalt have peace of 
mind by forgetting the past.’ It is to be feared 
that some Indian Rajas even in the present day have 
their communications read to them in this fashion, 
and are thus rendered incapable of administering 
their states. 

The Emperor was pleased at Wazir Khan’s version 
of Dhir Mai’s letter and said, ‘ Wazir Khan, thou 
gavest me good advice, but to my sorrow I did not 
accept it. Now write in reply that there shall be 
no enmity between the Guru and myself for the 
future.’ The ingenious Wazir Khan while adhering 
to the spirit of this order wrote a conciliatory letter 
to Dhir Mai. 

A messenger is said to have come about this time 
from an untraceable island in the Bay of Bengal to the 
Guru inviting him to go thither and bless the country. 
The Guru, however, could not leave his Sikhs to 
proceed to such a distant country, but deputed 
Bidhi Chand, who long before this had repented of 
his many misdeeds, to go and preach the principles 
of the Sikh religion. Bidhi Chand lost no time in 
executing the Guru’s order. On his way by the 
margin of the sea he arrived at a city called Deviiagar. 
In an adjoining forest lived a faqir named Sundar 
Shah, who by the practice of painful austerities had 
obtained miraculous power and was extensively 
worshipped. Bidhi Chand rested under a withered 
tree outside the city, and in devotional ecstasy sang 
the following hymn of the third Guru : — 

The spring hath appeared ; the forests are in bloom ; 

Men and lower animals fixing their attention on God are 
flourishing. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 217 

It is in this way the heart becometh glad. 

Repeat God’s name day and night ; under the Guru’s 
instruction pride is washed away. 

By preaching the verses and words of the true Guru 

This world becometh happy, and the true Guru is pleased. 

Fruit and flowers appear when God Himself causeth them. 

When man findeth the true Guru, he clingeth to the Root 
of joy. 

God is the spring ; all the world is His garden. 

Nanak, by perfect good fortune special service is obtained . 1 

It is said that on this the withered tree became 
green, and in consequence every one recognized 
Bidhi Chand’s miraculous power and did him homage. 
Sundar Shah on hearing of the miracle went riding 
on his tiger to see the stranger. He expected that 
Bidhi Chand would incontinently take to flight on 
seeing the tiger. The crowd of worshippers round 
Bidhi Chand departed precipitately, but he fearlessly 
held his ground. Sundar Shah incited the animal 
to attack Bidhi Chand, but a glance from the latter 
changed, it is said, the animal into a pillar of stone. 
Sundar Shah and Bidhi Chand then held a religious 
discussion in which the former was vanquished. 

Sundar Shah pressed Bidhi Chand to remain with 
him, but he pleaded the Guru’s order to visit the 
island for which he was bound. He promised, how- 
ever, with the Guru’s permission, to return and spend 
his last days with Sundar Shah. Bidhi Chand went 
to his destination, preached the Sikh religion to the 
people, and made many converts. Having fulfilled 
the Guru’s instructions and accomplished his mission 
he returned to Kiratpur. 

The anonymous author of the Dabistan-i- 
Mazahab, who wrote under the nom de plume of 
Muhsan Fani, states that he corresponded with 
Guru Har Gobind, who always signed himself Nanak. 
That author’s testimony, therefore, regarding the 

1 Basant. 



2l8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Guru we consider of the highest importance, and we 
shall give it as far as it extends : — 

Whilst the Guru and his party of Sikhs were at 
Kiratpur a Sikh called Bhairo cut off the nose of the 
goddess at Naina Devi, some ten miles distant. This 
was reported to the neighbouring Raja, who com- 
plained to the Guru of the outrage. Bhairo was 
summoned, and said he would admit the charge 
if the goddess herself attested it. One of the Raja's 
courtiers said in reply, ‘ O blockhead, how can the 
goddess speak ? ' Bhairo smiled and said, ‘ We now 
know who the blockhead is. If the goddess cannot 
repel her assailant and give evidence against him, 
how can you hope for any advantage from her ? ’ 
On this the Raja remained silent. 

One Jhanda, a very rich man, used to be very 
attentive to his devotions. When his foot was 
accidentally injured. Guru Har Gobind advised him 
not to wear shoes. Jhanda accordingly took off his 
shoes, and remained barefooted for three months. 
The Guru on hearing this said that he did not mean 
him to remain always barefooted, but only as long 
as his foot was sore. He then resumed his shoes. 
One day the Guru told his Sikhs to fetch firewood 
from the forest. Next day Jhanda was not to be 
found. The Sikhs searched for him, and about noon 
on the following day saw him with a bundle of fire- 
wood on his back. The Guru remonstrated with 
him for having undertaken such a menial office. 
He replied that the Guru had given an order to 
his Sikhs to fetch firewood, and, as he considered 
himself a Sikh, he decided to obey his order. Both 
these stories are given as instances of the Guru's 
influence even over rich men. 

The Guru commissioned a man called Basava to 
proceed from Balkh to Iraq to purchase horses. As 
he had advanced one stage from Balkh, some one 
told him that his son had fallen suddenly ill, and 
advised him to return home. He replied, ' If my 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 219 

son die, then let him die. There is sufficient fire- 
wood in the house to burn him. I will not flinch 
from my duty to the Guru.’ After his return home 
he heard that his son had died, but he felt no re- 
morse for having obeyed the Guru and proceeded 
on the journey he had undertaken. 

Muhsan Fani relates that as he was travelling 
with this man Basava from Kabul the fastening of 
his postin or sheep-skin jacket broke. Basava took 
off his janeu and gave it to him to tie his postin 
with, saying that janeus were best employed for 
such purposes. 

The Sikhs asked the Guru whom they should 
recognize as Guru when he was far away. He 
replied, ‘ Deem the Sikh who cometh to you with 
the Guru’s name on his lips as your Guru.’ The 
historian states that any one with the Guru’s name 
on his lips might then enter the house of a Sikh 
and receive welcome and hospitality. 

It became a custom of the Sikhs if any one of 
them desired a gift from heaven to mention his 
request before his brother Sikhs or before the Guru’s 
masands, and then all combined and prayed for 
the desired blessing. The Guru himself adopted 
the same custom. 

The Guru believed in one God. His disciples 
reprobate idol worship. They neither pray nor 
practise austerities in the Hindu fashion. They 
hold not sacred the temples of Hindus, or believe 
in their incarnations. They pay no regard to San- 
skrit compositions which the Hindus believe to be 
in the language of the gods. They believe that 
all the Gurus are the same as Nanak. The Sikhs 
are not restricted in the matter of eating or drinking. 
One Partap Mai, a learned man, said to a Hindu 
youth who felt caste restrictions irksome, and con- 
sequently desired to embrace Islam, ‘ Why become a 
Muhammadan ? If thou desire to have no restrictions 
on what thou eatest and drinkest, then become a Sikh.’ 



220 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Sikhs increased under all the Gurus to such 
an extent that even in the time of Guru Arjan one 
or more representatives of the Sikh religion could 
be found in every Indian city. To such an extent 
was caste disregarded that Hindus of the Brahman 
caste became disciples of Sikh Khatris, for none of 
the Gurus was a Brahman ; and Khatris did homage 
to the Jat masands, who were a low section of 
Vaisyas. Guru Har Gobind gained a large number 
of followers in Kiratpur. He kept seven hundred 
horses in his stables, and always entertained three 
hundred horsemen and sixty artillery men. 

One day Baba Gurditta joined a hunting party. It 
happened that one of his Sikhs shot a cow by mistake 
for a deer. The shepherds came and arrested the 
offending Sikh. Baba Gurditta went to his assist- 
ance and offered to give compensation. The shep- 
herds, however, would have from the Guru’s son 
nothing less than the restoration of the cow to life. 
Gurditta found himself in a dilemma. If he restored 
the cow to life, the Guru would be angry, as he had 
been before with Baba Atal, and if he refused to 
satisfy the shepherds, they would detain his Sikh 
as a hostage. He was at last persuaded to reani- 
mate the cow. He accordingly put his cane on her 
head and said, 'Arise, and eat thy grass!’ It is 
said that upon this the cow arose, and ran and 
joined the herd. 

The cause of Gurditta’s late return was inquired 
into, and he was obliged to give a narrative of the 
day’s events. The miracle wrought by him was 
reported to the Guru, who became angry, and said, 

‘ It is not pleasing to me that any one should set 
himself up as God’s equal, and restore life to the 
dead . 1 People die every day. Everybody will be 
bringing his dead to my door, and whom shall I 

1 It appears from this that the sixth Guru entertained no such special 
veneration for the cow as the Hindus have. He was only angry at 
the miracle wrought which altered the course of nature. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


221 


select for reanimation ? Guru Nanak ordered that 
we should accept the will of God — “ What pleaseth 
Thee, O Lord, is good.” If thou persist in doing 
acts contrary to God’s will thy further residence 
on earth is unprofitable.’ Baba Gurditta replied, 
‘ Mayest thou live for ever ! I depart.’ He then 
circumambulated the Guru in token of offering him- 
self as a sacrifice to him, and took his departure 
for Budhan Shah’s shrine. On arriving there he 
drove his cane into the ground, lay down, and, in 
the words of the Sikh chronicler, crossed the stream 
of the troubles of life at the early age of twenty-four 
years, in the Sambat year 1695 (a. d. 163 8). 

When Baba Gurditta did not return within a 
reasonable time, the Guru caused search to be 
instituted for him. His body was ultimately dis- 
covered. The Guru himself went to behold it, and 
was followed by other members of the family of the 
deceased, who mourned his untimely fate. 

After this the Guru sent to Kartarpur for Dhir Mai, 
Baba Gurditta’s elder son, and the Granth Sahib of 
which he had been left in custody. The Guru in- 
tended that the holy volume should be read for the 
repose of Gurditta’s soul, and also that Dhir Mai 
should be present to receive a turban after his 
father’s death in token of succession to his property 
and position. Dhir Mai possessed extraordinary 
acuteness for one so young. He said to himself, 

‘ If I leave the land and money which have come 
into my possession and go for a turban to the Guru, 
every one will think me a fool. I have the Granth 
Sahib and I will keep it.’ He then addressed the 
messenger, ‘ My father is not in Kiratpur. To 
whom shall I go ? It is through fear of the Guru 
my father died. I do not desire to die yet. I will 
myself have the Granth Sahib read here for my 
deceased father. I do not deem it advisable to 
leave my property in charge of servants. My 
younger brother Har Rai is with the Guru. The 



222 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


turban may be bound on him. What business have 
I in Kiratpur ? ’ 

The messenger represented to him, ‘ Thou art 
still young, and oughtest to be subject to thy grand- 
father the Guru. It is thy duty to obey him. Come 
by all means with the Granth Sahib to the Guru. 
Leave thy property in charge of thy servants, who 
are trustworthy. Thou mayest afterwards return 
and take charge of it. Be not too much in love 
with earthly things. Obey the order of the Guru.’ 
Dhir Mai then volunteered the following statement, 

‘ I have written to the Emperor and entered into 
an alliance with him. I have informed him that 
I now hold no parley with the Guru. If I go to 
the Guru, I shall prove false to the Emperor. And 
if the Emperor become angry and sack the city, to 
whom shall I go for redress ? I will not give up the 
Granth Sahib.’ Dhir Mai’s object was to secure the 
Guruship for himself. He hoped that, as long as he 
kept the sacred volume in his possession, the Sikhs 
would look on him as their religious leader. The 
messenger, however, failing to persuade Dhir Mai, 
succeeded in taking Natti, Dhir Mai’s widowed 
mother, to the Guru. When the Guru heard that 
Dhir Mai declined his invitation, he merely said, 

‘ Mammon is very powerful. It hath led the world 
astray. Dhir Mai is a very unfortunate child.’ 

The Guru now sent for Bhai Bhana, son of Bhai 
Budha. Bhai Bhana on the way from his village 
of Ramdas called at Batala, and thence took with 
him Gurditta’s parents-in-law to the Guru. There 
was a great gathering of Sikhs at Kiratpur on the 
occasion. Bidhi Chand read the Granth Sahib as 
far as he had copied it for Gurditta’s repose. Bhai 
Rup Chand also presented himself on the occasion. 
His father had died not long previously. All friends 
and relations appeared and mourned Gurditta’s un- 
timely fate. They praised his virtues, his beauty, 
his affability, and his bravery. The Guru offered 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 


223 


them all words of consolation, and begged them to 
dry their tears. He explained that Dhir Mai had 
acted with great treachery, and would neither come 
himself nor send the Granth Sahib. He would 
therefore bind the turban on the head of Har Rai, 
Dhir Mai’s youngest brother. Though very young in 
years, he was deemed worthy of succession to his 
grandfather. 

Suraj Mai, the Guru’s son by the Marwahi, was 
intelligent and performed his secular duties to his 
father’s satisfaction. Ani Rai, the Guru’s son by 
Nanaki, was a religious enthusiast. Teg Bahadur, 
the Guru’s son, also born of Nanaki, was worldly 
contempt incarnate. Satisfied that the world was 
transitory, he mixed not in it, but delighted in 
solitude. One day the Guru’s wife Nanaki addressed 
him, ‘ 0 my lord, thou ever showest great kindness 
to Har Rai, who is only thy grandson, but thou 
never regardest thine own son Teg Bahadur, who 
is simple and unsophisticated. Fulfil my wishes to 
put him on thy throne.’ The Guru replied, * Teg 
Bahadur is a Guru of gurus. There is none who 
can endure the unendurable so well as he. He hath 
obtained divine knowledge and renounced worldly 
love. If thou have patience the Guruship shall 
revert to him. From him shall be born a warrior 
who shall smite the Turks, free the earth from the 
burden of the evil, render Guru Nanak’s name 
illustrious, and spread his own glory and fame to 
the uttermost bounds of the world.’ 

The Marwahi dreamt that the late Damodari 
appeared to her and said, ' My sister, leave the 
world now. It is good to leave the fair when it 
is at its height. If thou live, thou shalt be greatly 
pained at the Guru’s death. If thou come with me, 
we shall both abide together in Sach Khand where 
there is perpetual happiness, where sorrow, sickness 
and death enter not, and where night and day the 
saints are ever hymning the Creator’s praise.’ 


224 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Marwahi on awaking related her dream to 
the Guru. He gave his interpretation to the effect 
that her end was near, and repeated for her the 
following hymn of Guru Nanak : — 

No one liveth as long as he desireth, or obtaineth his 
object. 

He who possesseth divine knowledge liveth for ever ; it 
is he who remembereth God who is ever honoured. 

By ever husbanding life it passeth away in vain. 

Nanak, to whom shall we complain ? Death taketh us 
away even without our permission . 1 

' If thou desire to go,’ continued the Guru, ‘ I will 
quickly follow thee.’ She called her son Suraj Mai, 
told him she was going to leave the world, and 
begged him to be patient and mourn not for her. 
She impressed on him the propriety of ever obeying 
his father. She then called the other members of 
the family and took leave of them. Putting herself 
in a devotional attitude she recited the Japji, and 
repeating the true Name, the holy Wahguru, re- 
signed her spirit to her Creator. 

On the tenth day after Marwahi’s death Bidhi 
Chand finished reading for the repose of her soul 
the portions of the Granth Sahib he had copied. 
Her son Suraj Mai duly received a turban and a 
shawl on the occasion. The Guru now became daily 
sadder and resigned every comfort. He removed 
a comfortable mattress on which he had slept and 
only put one sheet under him. Pillows he entirely 
rejected. 

The Guru kept Har Rai continually beside him, 
and taught him worldly and spiritual knowledge. 
One day a Sikh called Daya Ram, from Anupshahr 
on the bank of the Ganges, appeared before the 
Guru. He had come with people of his country and 
some members of his family to do homage to the 
Guru. His daughters had previously heard of Har 

1 Supplementary sloks. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 225 

Rai and conceived a desire to wed him collectively. 
On seeing Har Rai the Guru’s grandson, Daya Ram 
betrothed his daughters to him. The nuptial cere- 
monies took place on the tenth day of Har, Sambat 
1697 (a. d. 1640). 


Chapter XXII 

Bidhi Chand after a stormy, eventful, and perilous 
life felt that his end was approaching. He remem- 
bered his promise to Sundar Shah to return to him 
that they might go to paradise together, and asked 
the Guru’s permission to proceed on his long terres- 
trial and celestial journeys. The Guru addressed him 
the following parting words : £ All worldly persons 
dread death ; but the holy fear it not, and are 
happy since they exchange bodies, which are mines 
of sorrow and disease, for bodies which are like 
celestial light, and they roam for ever in the 
blissful fields of Sach Khand. Take Sundar Shah 
with thee to the Guru’s heaven, and I will come 
to you soon.’ Bidhi Chand put his son Lai Chand’s 
hand into the Guru’s and said, ‘ I pray thee to 
cherish my son as thy servant.’ He then addressed 
his son, ‘ If thou desire to obtain the wishes of thy 
heart and to live happy, be faithful to the Guru 
and ever serve and obey him.’ Saying this, the old 
man’s eyes filled with tears. The Guru tenderly 
embraced him, and offered him further words of 
consolation — ‘ This body is temporary and abideth 
not. How long can one keep life, which is like a 
mud vessel which breaketh sooner or later and 
alloweth its contents to flow away ? Look to thy 
soul, which is an emanation from God, and not to 
thy material body.’ Bidhi Chand on hearing this 
bowed to the Guru’s feet and, bidding farewell to 
the assembled Sikhs, went to join Sundar Shah and 
prepare for the road to paradise. 

Bidhi Chand after his toilsome and tedious journey 

Q 


SIKH. IV 


226 THE SIKH RELIGION 

to the south of India found his friend Sundar Shah 
contemplating God in a fit of abstraction. He said 
to him, ‘ My friend, arise, find a home with comfort 
and peace in God’s palace, and return not again to 
this world.’ 1 Sundar Shah opening his eyes said, 
* Brother, by thy favour my mind is at peace and 
all fear of death is dispelled. I have waited for 
thee, and now the wish of my heart is gratified.’ 
The people of the village came to see the devout 
Sikh from the Panjab, and received divine instruction 
from him for the space of three days. 

The fourth day, before Bidhi Chand arose for his 
devotions, he saw in a vision Bhais Budha, Paira, 
Pirana, Gur Das, Langaha, Jetha, and a whole 
assembly of departed Sikh saints. He heard them 
say, ‘ O Bidhi Chand, congratulations ! By re- 
pentance and service to the Guru thou hast 
made thy life profitable. Come now with us to 
abide in Sach Khand.’ Bidhi Chand on hearing 
this trembled with joy. When he related his 
vision to Sundar Shah they both agreed to aban- 
don their bodies and proceed to join the bliss- 
ful Sikhs in their heavenly abode. The date of 
Bidhi Chand’s death is given as the eighth day of 
the light half of Bhadon, Sambat 1697. The Guru 
caused his partially copied Granth to be read for 
Bidhi Chand’s eternal repose, and bound a turban 
on his son Lai Chand’s head. 

The Guru continued to be very thoughtful. His 
discourses were ever on the transitory nature of 
human life and the propriety of accepting the divine 
will. One day in spring, as he was seated alone in 
his garden, he saw the flower-beds blooming and 
the creepers adorning and clinging to the trees like 
loving and chaste wives to their husbands. He 
began to reflect on the many benefits which trees 
conferred on man. Their leaves, blossoms, fruit, 
branches, bark, shade, timber are all for human 
1 Guru Arjan, Gauri Purbi. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 227 

advantage. Whoever cometh to them with hope 
never goeth away disappointed. Even they who 
heartlessly throw stones at them receive their fruit. 
They supply food, covering, carriages, ships, utensils, 
furniture, perfume, and countless other favours. 

While the Guru was thus reflecting, Har Rai 
approached on horseback. On seeing the Guru at 
a distance he alighted and hastened to make his 
obeisance. He was dressed in the style of a noble- 
man of the time in a loose-flowing robe composed 
of one hundred and one pieces. The wind expanded 
it, and it broke several flowers as the wearer pro- 
ceeded to the Guru. Har Rai on seeing the damage 
his dress had caused sat down and wept, saying, 
‘ Alas ! I have spoiled these flowers.' A Sikh who 
had observed the occurrence informed the Guru. 
The Guru went and inquired why Har Rai was thus 
seated in sorrow. Har Rai duly informed him. The 
Guru then said, * Wear thy robe by all means, but 
lift up thy skirts when walking. It behoveth God’s 
servant to be tender to all things.’ Har Rai ever 
after remembered the Guru’s instruction as to how 
he was to carry his robe. 

When the Guru was pressed by some Sikhs to 
appoint his second son Suraj Mai as his successor, 
he replied, ‘ The Guruship is a heavy burden. Only 
the worthy can support it. The aspirant to it may 
know how to prophesy, but should keep his secrets 
to himself. Though he see offences he should 
forgive them. He should assist his Sikhs in their 
time of tribulation and give servants the reward of 
their services. Deeming the things of this world 
perishable, he should not covet them. Only he 
who possesseth these virtues is worthy to be a Guru. 
The Guru’s masands and servants are worthy of 
respect and receive offerings, but my son Suraj 
Mai is more worthy than they. He shall obtain 
other things — wealth, property, children — but the 
Guruship is the heritage of Har Rai.’ 

Q 2 


228 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


One day the Guru received a letter to the effect 
that Manohar Das, the great-grandson of Guru Amar 
Das, was dead. Upon this the Guru remained for 
some time absorbed in thought. He then said, 
‘ Congratulations to the saints ! His name was 
Manohar — heart-stealing — and of a truth he stole 
God’s heart.’ A Kashmiri Sikh on hearing this 
inquired what virtues Manohar possessed that he 
received this extravagant eulogy. The Guru replied 
with great affection, ‘ Manohar Das used to take 
Guru Arjan in his lap and play with him. It was 
by service to the Guru he obtained his greatness. 
He was free from covetousness, worldly love, and 
wrath, and never desired the world’s praises. His 
dependence was on the Name. That is why I con- 
gratulated him. I had myself intended to wait on 
him, but I was engaged in warfare, and now that 
he hath departed my opportunity of serving him 
hath gone.’ 

The Guru dispatched a letter to Anand Rai, 
Manohar Das’s son, who was living in Goindwal, 
and invited him to visit him. Anand Rai, over- 
joyed at the honour done him, speedily set out. 
The Guru went to meet him, and on account of the 
affection he bore him joined in carrying his palki. 1 
Anand Rai, who did not desire such condescension 
from the Guru, alighted and said, ‘ Thou art on the 
Guru’s throne and a mine of virtue. Thou treatest 
me as of higher dignity than thyself, but I am not 
equal to the dust of thy feet. What if the bamboo 
groweth very tall ? It is not equal in value to the 
smallest sandal tree.’ The Guru took his arm, con- 
ducted him to his private apartments, and ministered 
to his every comfort. Anand Rai persisted in saying 
that he was the Guru’s servant. This the Guru 
would not admit, and apologized to him for not 
having waited on him before for want of opportunity. 

‘ Without service to the saints,’ the Guru continued, 

1 Generally known as a palanquin. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 220 

‘ life is vain and profitless. It is by such service 
the advantage of human birth is obtained.' Anand 
Rai replied, ‘ Thou hast lifted my palki as an ex- 
ample of humility to others. Kindly grant that my 
mind may continue lowly, that I may be a true 
Sikh, and that worldly love may not enter my 
heart.’ The Guru replied, ‘ They who serve without 
hope of reward obtain distinction, but they who 
serve with ulterior motives merely accumulate sin.’ 

While the Guru and Anand Rai were thus con- 
versing, Man Singh and other servants of the latter 
arrived. The Guru respectfully seated them near 
him. He offered a tray full of rupees to Anand 
Rai, but he would not accept them. Anand Rai 
would not touch money of any description for the 
following reason. While Guru Amar Das was medi- 
tating on God, his son Mohri used to receive the 
offerings of the Sikhs. One day, while handling 
money, his hands became black, and he showed them 
to his father who said, * My son, silver is white and 
beautiful, but when thou takest it into thy hands 
it turneth them black. In the same way the minds 
of those who covet it become black ; and they 
fight and quarrel with one another until death 
releaseth them from their struggles.’ The Guru 
said to Anand Rai, ‘ If thou wilt not accept my 
offering, then distribute the money among the 
needy.’ Upon this Anand Rai accepted it, saying 
that as it was a present from the Guru he would 
make it an exception. The Guru sent an escort of 
honour with him. 

A rebeck-player called Babak is frequently 
mentioned in the life of the sixth Guru. He was 
a very devout and able servant of the Guru 
and assisted in attracting listeners to the temple. 
After service one morning he told the Guru that he 
had been very happy with him. He had risen 
rapidly from the position of humble player to that 
of honoured courtier of the Guru. He prayed the 



230 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Guru to give his son the same position and dignity 
he had held himself. The Guru consoled him on 
his departure — ‘ His turn shall come to every one. 
No one may abide here. The day of departure is 
certain for all. Repeat the true Name which 
assisteth in both worlds. I will as long as I live 
protect thy sons and grandsons. By the power of 
the Word thy father obtained happiness. Thou too 
shalt be happy. Nothing shall be wanting to those 
who possess the Gurus’ hymns. He who readeth 
them and renounceth worldly love shall have the 
four great boons as his attendants.’ Babak took his 
leave, repaired to his house, and there with Wah- 
guru on his lips died a painless death. 

One day the Guru, observing Jati Mai’s devoted 
service, thus addressed him, ‘ Thy father Singha was 
with me in my first battle. Thou hast been with 
me in three battles, and bravely hast thou sus- 
tained thy part in destroying enemies. Thou lovest 
me, and art even a greater warrior than thy father. 
Thy son Daya Ram shall be with my grandson, 
Guru Gobind Singh, and assist in destroying the 
Turks. I am delighted with thy conspicuous gal- 
lantry, and invite thee to ask any gift in my power 
to bestow.’ Jati Mai replied that the only boon he 
desired was that at the last moment he might not 
suffer the pain of death, but remember God and be 
released from further transmigration. The Guru 
replied, ' The time for thy departure is nigh. Birth 
and death are the law of the body; hunger and 
thirst of life ; weal and woe of the senses ; joy and 
mourning of the mind. The soul is pure as ether. 
When it through ignorance taketh on itself the 
duties of body, life, senses, and mind, it becometh 
subject to desires and doubts, and falleth into 
worldly entanglements ; but when it hath freed 
itself from these it obtaineth salvation and becometh 
absorbed in divine happiness. The soul associating 
with worldly wisdom falleth into ignorance and for- 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 231 

getteth God. The mind yielding to the senses mis- 
leadeth wisdom and falleth into sin. It is to the 
body the senses are attached. When the soul 
through divine knowledge separateth from the body, 
then it becometh pure, obtaineth salvation, is ab- 
sorbed in celestial happiness, and beholdeth God. 
Be not afraid of death, and be not desirous of life. 
Know the Creator who cherisheth all His creatures ; 
then shalt thou be free from all mortal ills and 
obtain peace.’ On hearing this Jati Mai’s mind was 
happy. He put his son’s hand into the Guru’s, 
upon which the Guru assured him of the youth’s 
future welfare. Jati Mai went home, repeated Sat 
Nam Wahguru, and gave up his spirit. The Guru 
on hearing of his death, said : — 

The love of the worshipper shall go with him to the end. 

While alive he worshipped his Master, and at his departure 
kept Him in his heart . 1 

The Guru deeply felt the loss of so many friends 
and relations, and thought it was time for himself, 
too, to depart and follow them. Preparing for death 
he abandoned all mundane affairs, and distributed his 
private property among those who had a claim to 
it. He then ordered the masands to collect all his 
Sikhs and bring them to him on the first day of 
the moon in the month of Chet. His Sikhs accord- 
ingly thronged from every quarter to see their Guru 
and do him homage on the day appointed. 

The Guru sent again for his grandson Dhir Mai, 
who was still living in Kartarpur. Dhir Mai being 
in possession of the Granth Sahib replied, ' I am 
already a guru. If the Guru supersede me and 
appoint my younger brother, what shall it avail me 
to go to Kiratpur ? ’ The messenger then went to 
Dhir Mai’s mother and represented to her that people 
had come in thousands from all parts to the Guru, 
and it would not be right for her and her son 

1 Maru. 



232 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


to remain absent at such a critical time. Dhir 
Mai’s mother tried to persuade him to go to the 
Guru. She said, * Fail not to take thy place in the 
family circle. Thou art his eldest grandson. He 
appeareth, it is true, to love thy younger brother 
more. But go to the Guru in any case. Thou shalt 
have an honourable reception. If thou even now 
please him, he may appoint thee his successor.’ 

Dhir Mai persisted, ' I possess the Granth, which 
is the outward and tangible sign of Guruship. The 
Guru may appoint whomsoever he pleaseth. I will 
deprive his nominee of the dignity, as I am on good 
terms with the Emperor. I hold this city of Kar- 
tarpur. Why should I go to the Guru ? ’ His 
mother replied, ‘ The Guru will neither take the 
Granth nor the city from thee. He hath two grand- 
sons of whom thou art the elder. Thou shalt obtain 
greatness by pleasing him. When the Sikhs see 
thee seated near him, they will recognize thee as 
his elder grandson. If thou go not to him, who 
will acknowledge thee ? He is now about to appoint 
a successor. If he choose to bestow the Guruship on 
one of thine uncles, we cannot help it. But whether 
he giveth it to thee or not, have thyself respected 
by showing that thou art on friendly terms with 
him.’ 

These arguments were successful. Dhir Mai 
mounted his horse and proceeded to Kiratpur. 
The Guru received him affectionately. After the 
usual commonplaces of meeting and salutation 
Dhir Mai said, ‘ I have written to the Emperor and 
adjusted the difference between thee and him . 
Therefore it is that thou dwellest in happiness and 
security.’ When the Guru heard this he thought 
to himself, ‘ This youth is deceitful and proud, and 
consequently not fit for the Guruship.’ Dhir Mai 
remained with the Guru and had ample opportunity 
of seeing that Har Rai was his favourite. It hap- 
pened that the Guru kept his private apartments 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 233 

for three days. Dhir Mai thought that that would 
be a good opportunity to put himself forward as 
the Guru’s successor, so in consultation with his 
masands he erected a throne, raised a canopy over 
it, and took his seat as Guru. When the Guru 
heard of this usurpation, he said, ‘ I sent for him 
to receive my parting instruction, but he hath come 
to practise deceit and guile. The succession to the 
Guruship depen deth on the Guru’s pleasure, and can 
only be obtained by service, humility, and devotion. 
It is not to be obtained by pride and trickery.’ 
Dhir Mai on hearing this became very angry, and 
gave expression to his feelings, ‘ Am I not the 
Guru’s grandson ? I am heir to the Guruship. The 
Guru may give it to whomsoever he pleaseth. I 
have the power to take it from him afterwards. 
It is my mother who hath brought this disgrace 
on me by persuading me to come here.’ Saying 
this Dhir Mai mounted his horse and rode back to 
Kartarpur. 


Chapter XXIII 

When the Guru’s Sikhs in response to his summons 
arrived from all quarters in Kiratpur, the Holi 
festival was being celebrated according to Sikh 
ritual. On that occasion the following hymn of 
Guru Arjan was sung : — 

Let us worship the Guru 1 and make obeisance to Him. 

To-day is our day of rejoicing ; 

To-day we are very happy ; 

Our anxieties have departed since we have met God. 

To-day spring is in our hearts, 2 

And, 0 God, we sing Thine endless praises. 

To-day our Phagan is celebrated. 3 

1 God. 

2 Literally — houses, but the word is often used for the heart. 

3 The Moll is celebrated in the month of Phagan. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


234 

We begin to play on meeting God’s companions ; 

Our service to them shall be our Holi. 

The very red colour of God attacheth to us ; 1 

Our souls and bodies bloom beyond comparison, 

And wither not in shade or sunshine ; 

They flourish in all seasons. 

It is ever spring when we meet the divine Guru : 

Then the tree of life is produced for us, 

And beareth many gems of flower and fruit. 

We are cloyed and satiated singing God’s praises — 

The slave Nanak meditateth on God . 2 

The following hymn was sung to remind the 
Sikhs that their time must not be spent in 
frivolity : — 

Man is led astray by recreation and varied amusements 
and by the pleasures of the eyesight. 

Such delights are unreal, for even kings and emperors are 
involved in anxiety . 3 

My brethren, happiness is obtained by association with 
saints. 

Sorrow and anxiety depart from him for whom God hath 
so destined. 

I have wandered through all countries, and observed that 

Lords of wealth and great lords of the soil perished 
speaking of their property ; 

They fearlessly enforced their orders, and treated men 
with haughtiness ; 

They subjected every one to them, but being without 
the Name they were blended with the dust. 

Great monarchs, at whose gates stood the thirty-three 
karors of gods, Sidhs, and Strivers as servants, 

Whose dominion was over mountain and sea, all passed 
away, Nanak, like a dream . 4 

1 The word rang means either colour or love. 2 Basant. 

3 These two lines are also translated- — • 

Those who enjoy much recreation, varied amusements, and plea- 
sures which lead the senses astray ; 

Who enjoy regal and imperial state, are involved in anxiety. 

4 Guru Arjan, Sri Rag. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 235 

The Gum added the following more particular 
instructions regarding the observance of the Holi 
festival : ‘ He who drinketh wine and throweth mud 
and dust and blackeneth his face, shall have dust 
thrown on his head, and his face shall be blackened 
in the next world ; while he who uttereth lascivious 
expressions shall suffer pain in the lowest hell. It 
is those who take delight in the true Name who 
enjoy the real Holi ; and it is for this purpose the 
soul obtaineth human birth in this world. Guru 
Arjan hath said : — 

Man hath come to hear and read God’s word. 

Vain is the human birth of those mortals who, forgetting 
the Name, conceive worldly desires. 

Understand this, 0 thoughtless man, that the saints have 
told the story of the Ineffable One. 

Receive the gain of worshipping God in thy heart, and 
thy transmigration shall be at an end. 

Effort, power, and cleverness are Thine ; if Thou grant 
them to me, I will repeat Thy name. 

They are servants, and it is they, 0 Nanak, who are 
attached to service, who are pleasing to God.’ 1 

A day was appointed for a great assemblage at 
which the Guru’s successor was to be consecrated. 
When all were assembled Guru Har Gobind rose, 
clasped his hands in an attitude of supplication, and 
uttered a prayer to the Supreme Being for the 
success of the day’s proceedings. Then, taking Har 
Rai by the hand, he seated him on the throne of 
Guru Nanak. Bhai Bhana, son of Bhai Budha, 
affixed the tilak to Har Rai’s forehead and decorated 
him with a necklace of flowers. The Guru putting 
five paise — farthings — and a coco-nut on a tray 
offered them to Har Rai. He then circumambulated 
him four times, bowed to him, and gave him the 
following instructions : — ' A watch and a quarter 
before day, shake off sleep, rise, bathe, and recite 

1 Sarang. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


236 

the Japji, which is the Guru’s spell. Be gentle in 
thy demeanour. Obtrude not thyself, repeat the 
Name, and cause others to do so. Sit in the com- 
pany of thy holy Sikhs twice a day.’ After this 
and similar instruction to his successor, the Guru 
addressed the Sikhs, ' In Har Rai now recognize me. 
The spiritual power of Guru Nanak hath entered 
him.’ Upon this the assembled Sikhs shouted con- 
gratulations and the minstrels began to sing. The 
heralds then announced that this was the seventh 
Guru duly appointed and consecrated. Bards and 
minstrels chanted the young Guru’s genealogy and 
eulogies. All were unanimous in saying that Har 
Rai, who by service had pleased his grandfather 
Guru Har Gobind, well merited the exalted position 
he had attained. 

Guru Har Gobind’s wife Nanaki thus addressed 
her spouse : ‘ Thou didst promise that my son 

should he a Guru of the world, and that thy grand- 
son should be a greater warrior than thou. My 
lord, when shall this prophecy be fulfilled ? ’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ I have told thee that thy son shall 
be a Guru, and he certainly shall. Everything 
cometh by patience.’ Go now to the village of Ba- 
kala, where my mother Ganga’s cenotaph is, and 
there abide. The Guru asked Suraj Mai what boon 
he desired for himself. He at once replied, ‘ To 
be a real Sikh.’ The Guru said, ‘ Well done ! my 
son, well done ! mayest thou live long ! Thou shalt 
greatly flourish. Thine offspring shall be rich and 
reverenced. Abide with Har Rai, and thou shalt 
obtain all spiritual and temporal blessings.’ 

The Guru then retired for introspection and divine 
meditation into a house called Patalpuri, which he 
had constructed on the margin of the Satluj, and, 
as the other Gurus had done, exhorted his people 
not to mourn for him. ' This visible and tangible 
body is false, God alone is true.’ 

Bibi Viro his daughter came to him with tears 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 237 

in her eyes and said, ‘ My mother departed and left 
me. Thou hast since then been a mother as well 
as a father -to me. What shall I do without thee ? ’ 
The Guru gave her every consolation, and thus con- 
cluded his address to her, ‘ Sorrow not for me. 
Everything that is born must perish. Thou shalt 
have sons who shall fight on the side of thy nephew 
the tenth Guru, and display great valour.' Guru 
Har Gobind then addressed words of parting or of 
advice and instruction to his friends and relations 
around him. 

Guru Har Rai put the departing Guru a question 
which needed an urgent reply — ‘ O great king, thine 
enmity with the Turks hath ceased. The Emperor 
is possessed of treasure, arms, and fortresses. If 
he proceed against me, how am I to act ? ' Guru 
Har Gobind replied, ‘ Have no anxiety. He who 
proceedeth against thee with enmity in his heart 
shall never prevail against thee. God will be with 
thee and assist thee. Keep two thousand two 
hundred mounted soldiers ever with thee.' 

To his Sikhs generally he said, ‘ The seventh king 
Guru Har Rai is now on Guru Nanak’s throne. 
I have attached you to the hem of his garment. 
If you serve him you shall obtain the fruit your 
hearts desire. He holdeth the storehouses both of 
salvation and of worldly enjoyment.’ When the 
Sikhs pressed him for further instruction he repeated 
the following hymn of Guru Arjan : — 

What is the moonlight on your floor ? Better is God’s 
light within you. 

Among forms of worship, the best is the worship of God’s 
name. 

Among things to be relinquished, the best is the relin- 
quishment of lust, wrath, and avarice. 

Among things to be prayed for, best is it to pray to the 
Guru for God’s praises. 

Among vigils, the best is to awake to sing God’s praises. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


238 

Among things to be attached to, the best is attachment 
to the Guru’s feet. 

These thin gs shall be obtained by him on whose forehead 
such destiny hath been written. 

Saith Nanak, he who hath entered God’s asylum findeth 
everything good . 1 

The Guru, having recited this hymn, thus addressed 
his Sikhs and his family : * When I am gone, be 
glad and rejoice. I am now departing to my final 
home. Let there be no mourning in my house, but 
let every one rely on God. He who obeyeth my 
words shall be dear to me, and shall obtain salvation 
with me. Ever love the Guru’s hymns, and regale 
your hearts by reading and listening to them. 
Remember the true Name with devotion, and be 
daily more and more intoxicated with its sweetness.’ 

The Guru then caused attar of roses, saffron, and 
sandal to be sprinkled in all his apartments, and 
a great feast to be provided for his Sikhs. His 
rebeck-players he rewarded with money, clothes, and 
sweets. 

The Sikh writers state that at the Guru’s death 
the sky appeared rose-red, and there was soft singing 
heard in the firmament. Cool and fragrant zephyrs 
blew. All good-hearted and saintly men, dwellers 
on high who had attained the most exalted position, 
demigods, and Sidhs, singing his praises came to 
receive him, and shouted ‘ Victory ! victory ! ’ 

The Guru was borne on a beautiful bier amid the 
singing of hymns, amongst which the following 
passage from the Sukhmani received special promi- 
nence : — 

He who knoweth God must always be happy, 

And God will blend him with Himself. 

He in whose heart God dwelleth is wealthy, 

Of high family, honoured, and obtaineth salvation during 
life. 


1 Maru Ashtapadi. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR GOBIND 239 

Hail ! hail ! hail ! a man hath come 

By whose favour the whole world shall be saved. 

The object of his coming was 

That through him the Name might be remembered. 

He was saved himself and he saved the world : 

To him, Nanak, I ever make obeisance. 

The author of the Dabistan-i-Mazahab, who ap- 
pears to have been present at the Guru’s death, 
states that he died on Sunday the third day of the 
Muharrim, A. H. 1055 (a. d. 1645), after a spiritual 
and temporal reign of thirty-seven years and ten 
months. 1 

After the Guru’s cremation Lai Chand, son of Bidhi 
Chand, read the Granth as far as his father Bidhi 
Chand had copied it, that is, as far as the end of 
the Bilawal Rag. 

When the death ceremonies were all completed, 
Mata Nanaki and her son Teg Bahadur set out, 
according to the late Guru’s order, for Bakala, where 
they both dwelt until Teg Bahadur obtained the 
Guruship. Bhai Budha’s son Bhana entrusted his 
son Sarwan to the new Guru, and went to Ramdas, 
where he died. 

Bhai Gur Das in the following has briefly summed 
up the attributes of the first six Gurus : — 

The divine Guru Nanak was the Guru of gurus ; 

In an unseen and inscrutable manner he was absorbed 
in Angad, 

Who was absorbed in an unseen and invisible manner in 
Amar the immortal. 

1 Hinduised Sikh chroniclers have invented a story that the Guru 
caused himself to be shut up in Patalpuri, and ordered Guru Har Rai 
to lock the door and not open it until the seventh day. This, ac- 
cording to Abulfazl, was deemed by the Hindus the most meritorious 
form of death, and so ignorant and superstitious persons have at- 
tributed to the Guru this form of suicide. Had it occurred, it would 
certainly have been recorded by Muhsan Fani among the other details 
given by him. 



240 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The nectar trickled into the mouth of him who was called 
Ram Das, the destroyer of enemies : 1 

Guru Arjan by serving him bore his burden. 

Guru Har Gobind the measureless churned the nectar, 

And took his seat on eternal truth. 

He strung the Word of the Ungraspable and Unknowable 
Spirit. 

Under the Guru’s instruction he filled what could not be 
filled, and dispelled doubt and fear . 2 

Another poet has composed the following on the 
same snbj ect : 

■ The first Guru established this custom — he became the 
Guru’s slave and was called the Guru of his slaves (Sikhs). 

Amar Das by serving Guru Angad was proclaimed the 
true Guru. 

Ram Das by serving Amar Das as his servant pleased 
the Guru. 

Guru Arjan obtained the nectareous fruit from Guru Ram 
Das whose nature was incomprehensible. 

Guru Har Gobind, the superior being, caused Guru Arjan 
to hail him as Guru. 

The Guru cannot possibly be concealed from those who 
have obtained some knowledge by his favour. 

1 That is, the deadly sins. 2 Gur Das, War III. 



241 


BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS OF THE 
SIKH RELIGION 

We have now arrived at a stage in the history of 
the Sikh Gurus and of the Sikh reformation when 
the religion of Guru Nanak may be said to have been 
consolidated by his genius, by the impress he left 
on his successors, by their general fidelity to his 
teachings and example, and by the piety and industry 
of Guru Arjan. 

The first five Gurus were, as we have seen, all 
sacred bards. The last of them, in addition to 
copious original compositions of his own, collected all 
the hymns of his predecessors into one volume in 
order to be a guide to Sikhs for all time. The sixth, 
seventh, and eighth Gurus have left no written 
memorials of their teachings. It, therefore, appears 
fitting at this stage to give the analysis of the tenets 
of the Sikh religion which is contained in the Wars of 
Bhai Gur Das, who was a contemporary of the 
fourth, fifth, and sixth Gurus, and who was acquainted 
with them and their contemporaries, especially Bhai 
Budha, an aged Sikh who had survived from the 
time of Guru Nanak. 

Gur Das’s Wars are forty in number. Each war 
is divided into a varying number of pauris, and 
each pauri contains from five to ten lines. The 
language is old and very difficult Panjabi. The Wars 
from which the following extracts are taken are 
given in the notes. 

The advantage of the society of the holy : — 

Trees which grow near sandal are perfumed like sandal. 
If any of the eight metals be touched by the philosopher’s 
stone, it becometh gold. As rivers, streams, and water- 

R 


SIKH. IV 



242 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


courses which fall into the Ganges become the Ganges, so 
doth the society of holy men save sinners and wash 
away the filth of sin. It saveth countless souls from hell, 
and associateth with itself hundreds of thousands of the 
lost. The holy see God in the midst of them . 1 

By associating with the holy the way of union with God 
is found in one’s own home. To cherish the Guru’s instruc- 
tion is to obtain salvation . 2 

The elixir is beneficent and turneth baser metals into 
gold. The sandal-tree perfumeth other trees whether they 
bear fruit or not. Rain falleth everywhere whether the 
ground be good or bad. When the sun riseth, it diffuseth its 
beams through the warp and woof of the world. The earth 
hath the capacity of endurance. Though the ruby, jewels, 
gems, gold, iron, the philosopher’s stone are all produced 
from it, it regardeth not outrages. In the same way the 
company of the saints conferreth on men indiscriminately 
benefits which cannot be estimated . 3 

The Sikh religion : — 

The Sikh religion is distinct, and superior to other religions. 

The faith of the Sikhs is'fixed, and by it man is absorbed 
in God. 

Hundreds of thousands of groups of Sikhs form one group 
and have no false pride, that is, they harbour not contempt 
for one another on account of pride of birth . 4 

The way of Sikhism is narrow ; it is sharper than the edge 
of a sword and finer than a hair. There is no creed equal to 
it in the past, present, or future. There is no second God ; 
there is only one God in this house . 5 

There is but one dot of difference between the holy 
and the unholy : — 

There is but one step from the holy to the unholy. For 
instance, the word maharam (holy) by the addition of a 
point becometh mu]aram (criminal). Sikhs, otherwise 
sensible, in a state of aberration ruin their minds by assisting 

1 War II. 2 HI. 3 XL. 4 III. 5 IX. 


BHAI GUR DAS'S ANALYSIS 243 

in superstitions ceremonies. 1 They who are subordinate 
to the Guru perform his service and keep their secrets to 
themselves. 2 

The unity of Sikhs : — 

Where there is one Sikh there is one Sikh ; where there are 
two Sikhs, there is a company of saints ; where there are 
five Sikhs there is God. 3 

Sikhs must have faith in the Guru’s words, and not allow 
their minds to wander. 4 

0 Sikhs of the Guru, hear the Guru’s instruction. Be 
wise within but simple without. Fix your attention on the 
Word and be wakeful. Be deaf to everything except the 
Guru’s words. Behold the true Guru. Where there is not 
the company of the saints, the house is empty and dis- 
mantled. Utter the Guru’s word Wahguru, and silently 
quaff the cup of love. Salute and be humble to the Sikhs. 
Sprinkle in thy house the water in which thou hast washed 
their feet. Deem the Guru’s feet a lotus and thy mind 
a bumble-bee, and in this terrible ocean of the world keep 
thy faith distinct. The Guru is the true mediator to bestow 
salvation on man while alive. 5 

The Sikhs ponder on the words of the Ineffable, and 
abstain from praise and blame. Allowing the Guru’s 
instruction to enter their hearts, they speak civilly and 
thus comfort one another. The Sikhs’ virtues cannot be 
concealed. A man may hide molasses, but ants will discover 
it. At the same time, the Sikhs have great endurance. 
Sugar-cane though sweet is pressed in a mill, and so must 
Sikhs suffer while conferring favours on others. 6 

Worthy of praise are the hands of the Sikh who in the 
company of the saints doeth the Guru’s work, who draweth 
water, fanneth, grindeth, washeth his feet, and drinketh the 
water therefrom ; who copieth the Guru’s hymns and 

1 This is also translated— Sikhs associating with saints become 
enthusiastic in devotion, and restrain their minds from thinking of 
other objects of worship than the one God. 

2 XI. This is also translated — The Master’s servants perform 
hard labour and never complain of it to others. 

3 XIII. 4 III. 5 IV. 6 VI. 

R 2 



244 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


playeth the cymbals, the mirdang , 1 and the rebeck, in the 
company of the holy, who boweth and prostrateth himself 
and embraceth a brother Sikh ; who liveth honestly, and 
who by his munificence conferreth favours on others ; who 
contented with touching the Guru as a philosopher’s stone, 
toucheth nothing else, and layeth not his hand on another’s 
wife or property ; who loveth another Sikh and embraceth 
the love, devotion, and fear of God ; and who effaceth and 
asserteth not himself . 2 

Blest are the feet of the Sikhs who walk in the Guru’s 
way, who go to the Guru’s door, and sit there with holy 
men, who search out the Guru’s Sikhs and haste to do them 
favours, who run not in mammon’s way, and who if they 
happen to possess wealth remain humble . Few are the slaves 
of the Commander, who do Him homage and thus escape 
from their bonds ; who adopt the custom of circumambulat- 
ing the Guru’s Sikhs and falling at their feet. The Guru’s 
Sikhs delight in such enjoyments . 2 

The Sikhs erase the twelve tilaks of the Hindus, applied 
to various parts of the body, and apply in their stead the 
tilak of the Guru’s instruction . 3 

Effect of the Guru’s teaching': — 

By the Guru’s hymns the mind is satisfied and man 
reacheth his own home . 4 

The Sikh who receiveth the Guru’s instruction is really 
a Sikh . 4 

t By the Guru’s instruction the four castes were blended 
in one society of saints. The Guru’s disciples assumed one 
red colour like that of the betel made from four ingredients — 
betel-leaf, betel-nut, catechu, and lime . 4 

The true Guru, the real king, putteth the holy on the 
high road to salvation. He restraineth the deadly sins, 
evil inclinations, and worldly love. The Sikhs pass their 
time in remembering the Word with devotion, and therefore 
Death the tax-gatherer approacheth them not. The Guru 
hath dispersed the apostates and seated the guild of the 
saints in Paradise. By the spell of the Name he hath 

1 A small drum. 2 VI. 3 VII. 4 III. 



BHAI GUR DAS'S ANALYSIS 


245 


inculcated love, devotion, fear, charity, and ablutions. 
As the lotus remaineth dry in the water, so doth the Guru 
keep the holy man unaffected by the world. The Sikhs 
efface and assert not themselves . 1 

The Guru’s instruction teacheth to praise Wahguru. The 
Veds know not and Sheshnag hath not discovered His secret . 2 

The Guru’s Sikh becometh of the Guru’s line, a supreme 
saint, and separateth falsehood from truth as the swan 
separateth water from milk . 3 The Guru then becometh a 
disciple and the disciple a Guru . 4 

There can only be dealings at one shop, the owner of 
which is the true perfect Guru. He taketh demerits and 
selleth merits in exchange, and he dealeth honestly. He 
maketh the simmal-tree bear fruit, and he turneth dross 
into gold. He perfumeth the bamboo, and changeth the 
crow into a swan. He showeth the sun to the owl, and 
maketh the shell more beautiful than pearls. His hymns 
which are before us are superior to the Veds and the Quran . 6 

The attributes of a disciple : — 

To become a disciple is, as it were, to become dead. 
It cannot be done by words. A disciple must be patient, 
faithful, possess a martyr’s spirit, and free himself from 
superstition and fear. He must be like a purchased slave 
fit to be yoked to any work which may serve his Guru. He 
must never be hungry, and never require sleep. He must 
be ready to grind and bring fresh water for his Guru. He 
must be ever prepared to fan and wash his Guru’s feet. He 
must be a sedate servant and never laugh or cry. Thus 
shall he obtain the position of a darwesh, be absorbed in 
the relish of the Beloved, arrive at the goal of emancipation, 
and receive those congratulations which the Muhammadans 
bestow on one another on seeing the moon of the Id festival . 6 

1 V. 2 IX. 

3 An oriental belief arising from the peculiar conformation of the 
swan's bill. 

4 XI. The eleventh War contains a list of the principal Sikhs up 

to the time of Gur Das. 6 XIII. 

6 III. The Muhammadans are delighted to take food after the 
Ramzan fast. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


246 

The pious man : — 

To the pious man who treasureth in his heart the Guru’s 
instruction and effaceth himself, God’s will will naturally 
be grateful. He shall find his real home by associating with 
the saints and fearing and loving God. Blest the mother 
who bore him ; and profitable his advent into the world . 1 

Humility : — 

He who is humble is dear to the Guru . 2 * 
He who is humble winneth, he who is proud loseth the 
game . 2 

A pomegranate seed like a speck of dust entereth the dust. 
It becometh a green tree, and rejoiceth in its red blossoms. 
One tree hath a thousand flowers ; its flowers and fruit are 
superior one to the other. From one seed there are hundreds 
of thousands of fruits, and in every fruit there is a seed. 
There is no deficiency in that fruit. The more its fruits are 
gathered, the more it beareth fruit and flowers. The Guru’s 
religion teacheth to walk humbly, thus shall all Sikhs become 
great? 

There are hundreds of thousands of men high, intermediate, 
and low, but the holy man calleth himself the lowest of the 
low . 4 

The earth is the most humble of all, but in God’s court it 
obtaineth greatness for its patience. Some weed or plough 
it, and some pollute it. The holy obtain the fruit of peace 
in the house of contentment. They efface and assert them- 
selves not. Whether waking, dreaming, or sleeping deeply, 
they with love in their hearts remain absorbed in God. 
They remember the Guru’s hymns in the association of the 
saints . 5 

The elephant is not eaten on account of its pride, and no 
one eateth the powerful lion. The goat is unhonoured, but 
obtaineth religious and secular distinction. It is eaten at 
deaths and marriages and accepted at feasts. Its flesh 

1 Hh 2 IV. 

3 IV. In the fourth War Gur Das gives several examples of 

humility. 

4 VIII. 


5 XVI. 



BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 


247 


is holy for worldly people, and strings for musical instru- 
ments are made from its entrails. Shoes which holy men 
wear are made from its skin. Trumpets and drums made 
from goat-skin afford pleasure by their music to the 
society of the saints . 1 

To call oneself the lowest of the low is the Guru’s teaching, 
if any one act according to it. Sixty copper paise are equal 
to one silver rupee which is received with suspicion, while 
the paise are not. Ten rupees are equal- to a gold coin 
which is received with more suspicion. For thousands of 
gold coins a diamond which is strung on a necklace is pur- 
chased, and that is received with still more suspicion. The 
Sikhs who fall at one another’s feet and become the dust 
of one another’s feet, are equal in thought, word, and deed 
to saints, and become freed from superstition and fear . 2 

There is sugar in a hornet’s nest, bees swarm together and 
produce honey. Silk and satin are obtained from worms. 
Canvas is made from beaten hemp. Muslin cometh from 
cotton seed. The lotus with which the bumble-bee is 
enchanted groweth in the mire. There is a jewel in the 
cobra’s head. The diamond is a stone. Musk is in the 
deer’s body. The sword fashioned from steel is called 
bhagauti (goddess). Odour from the civet cat perfumeth 
courts. From lowly things the greatest advantage is ob- 
tained . 3 

Call thyself the lowest of the low, become a worm and be 
not conceited. Walk in the Guru’s way, and let a thousand 
of you be contained in one worm-hole . 4 Wherever there is 
the smell of clarified butter and sugar, thither throng the 
worms ; so do Sikhs to hear the Guru’s words. When sugar 
is spilled in sand, worms pick up the grains. Through fear 
of the bhringi 5 the ant diefh, but the bhringi reanimateth 

1 XXIII. 

2 The second, third and fourth lines of this pauri in the original 
mean that the humble man goes more easily and securely to heaven 
than he who holds a high position in this world, and whose actions 
are therefore more severely scrutinized. XXIII. 

3 XXV. 

4 That is, quarrel not with one another if shut up in a small space. 

5 Bhringi is the female of the large black bee. 



248 THE SIKH RELIGION 

it, and maketh it a bhringi like itself. 1 He who receiveth the 
Guru’s instruction feareth to do evil deeds. The Guru’s 
instruction maketh him humble and again exalteth him. 
Thus do the Guru’s Sikhs receive the reward of happiness. 2 

The Guru’s Sikhs who have dispelled their pride are 
continent and praiseworthy. 3 

The Guru’s religion and his teaching : — 

Become pious by association with the saints and associate 
not with the evil. The Guru’s religion conferreth happiness. 
Make not thyself miserable in other sects. Under the 
Guru’s instruction abandon caste, acquire the excellent 
colour of tambol. 4 Behold the Guru’s school and put no 
faith in the six schools. Rely upon the Guru’s instruction. 
Be not led away by any other love. Act according to 
the Guru’s words ; forsake not the way of humility, and, 

0 ye pious, derive your pleasure from love and devotion. 5 

1 The religion of the Guru conferreth happiness ; the per- 
verse wander in every direction. 5 

The Guru’s hymn is the Guru’s image, and is repeated 
in the company of the saints. 6 

How the Guru’s Sikhs love the society of the holy: — 

The people of the four castes observe the customs of their 
castes and tribes. The believers in the six books of the six 
schools perform six duties according to the wisdom of their 
respective spiritual advisers. Servants go and salute their 
masters, merchants deal in their own special merchandise, 
agriculturists sow different seeds in different fields, mechanics 
meet mechanics in their workshops — with such attention 
and love do the Guru’s Sikhs associate with the company of 
the saints. 5 

Examples of hypocrisy and superstition : — 

1 If a Sikh were to die through fear of the Guru, the Guru would 
reanimate him and make him like himself. 

2 XXV. 3 XXXVIII. 

4 A compound of the four ingredients betel-leaf, betel-nut, catechu, 
and lime dyes the lips red ; when the four castes are blended together 
in the Sikhs they assume an excellent colour. 

6 V. e XXIV. 



BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 


249 


Into the practice of continence, austerities, hom, feasts, 
Hindu devotion, penance and gifts, hypocrisy largely 
entereth ; incantations and spells are plays on a large 
scale. The worship of the fifty-two heroes, of the eight 
joginis, of cemeteries and of places of cremation leads to 
great dissimulation. Men are employed in purak, kumbhak 
and rechak, in the performance of the niwali feat, and in the 
drawing up of their breath through the spinal marrow. Many 
employ themselves in sitting in the postures of the Sidhs, 
and obstinately abandon their homes. Hundreds of thou- 
sands of such tricks have I seen. The belief in the philoso- 
pher’s stone, the jewel in the serpent’s head, alchemy, 
miracles is all a matter of ignorance. Men are engaged in 
the worship of idols, gods, and goddesses, in fasting, uttering 
blessings and curses, but without the society of the saints 
and the repetition of the Guru’s hymns even very good 
men find not acceptance. The superstitious have bound 
themselves with a hundred knots of falsehood . 1 

Paying attention to omens, the nine grihs, the twelve 
signs of the Zodiac, incantations, magic, divination by lines, 
and by the voice is all vanity. It is vain to draw conclusions 
from the cries of donkeys, dogs, cats, kites, malalis 2 and 
jackals. Omens drawn from meeting a widow, a man with 
a bare head, from water, fire, sneezing, breaking wind, 
hiccups, lunar and week days, unlucky moments, and 
conjunctions of planets are all superstition. If a woman 
who winks at every man try by deceit to inspire belief in 
her, how can her husband feel confidence ? The holy who 
reject such superstitions obtain happiness and salvation . 1 

People worship departed heroes, ancestors, satis, deceased 
co-wives, tanks, and pits, but all this is of no avail. They 
who enjoy not the company of the saints and the Guru’s 
instruction, die and are born again and are rejected of God. 
It is the follower of the Guru who weareth God’s name as 
his diamond necklace . 1 

The Guru’s Sikhs lead a family life, but wearing a hair- 

1 V. 

2 Malali is a black carnivorous bird, a little larger than a sparrow. 



250 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


tuft and a janeu, and putting the latter on the ear when 
performing offices of nature are all superstition. The 
Guru’s Sikhs recognize divine knowledge and the advantage 
of meditation on the Supreme Being who filleth all creation* 
When they associate with the holy, they are held in honour 
and accepted in God’s court . 1 

The holy man rejecteth the worship of fire with its seven 
colours, trampleth on the army of the Bhairavs and the 
manifestations of Shiv, and is not pleased with omens from 
the seven Rohinis , 2 the seven days of the week, and seven 
women whose husbands are alive . 3 

The thirteen offerings 4 made by Hindus at f easts for an- 
cestors have led men astray in superstition. Hundreds of 
thousands of feasts are not equal to drinking the water in 
which a Sikh hath washed his feet. Hundreds of thousands 
of sacred feasts and offerings are not equal to putting one 
grain into a Sikh’s mouth. A Sikh enjoyeth supreme 
happiness in satisfying another . 5 

The Sikhs reject superstition, rejoicing, and 
mourning : — 

On the occasion of Hindu marriages lascivious songs are 
sung and trumpets played on the part of the bride and 
bridegroom, but not so among the Sikhs. People weep 
and utter lamentations for the dead, but the Sikhs on such 
occasions read the Sohila in the company of the saints. 
The Sikhs have no concern with the Veds or the books of 
the Moslems, and neither rejoice at a birth nor mourn at 
a death. In the midst of desires they remain free from 
them . 6 

1 VI. 

2 Stars in the fourth lunar mansion specially worshipped by Hindu 
women to save them from widowhood. 

3 VII. The women indicated are the wives of the immortal 
Rikhis Marlchi, Atri, Pulah, Pulsat, Krilu, Angira, Vishisht. Gurumcit 
Sudhakar . 

4 An umbrella, shoes, clothes, a ring, a waterpot, a cloth to sit on, 

live cooking vessels, a stick, a copper vessel for distributing water, corn, 
cooked food, cash, and a sacrificial thread. Garur Puran . chap. XIII. 

6 VII. 6 v. 



BHAI GUR DAS'S ANALYSIS 


251 


The Sikhs heed not omens on the right or the left. They 
retrace not their steps on seeing a widow or a bare-headed 
man. They pay not attention to the voices of birds or to 
sneezing. They worship not or adore gods or goddesses. 
They allow not their bodies or minds to wander. The 
Guru’s Sikhs plant a true field and reap the harvest thereof , 1 

Woman : — 

From a temporal and spiritual point of view woman is 
half man’s body and assisteth to salvation. She assuredly 
bringeth happiness to the virtuous . 2 

The perverse compared to the offspring of a 
courtesan : — 

A courtesan who hath many lovers committeth every 
species of sin. An outcast from her people and her country, 
she bringeth shame on her father’s and mother’s and father- 
in-law’s families. She is ruined herself and ruineth others, 
and giveth them to eat of her poison. She is like the pipe 
which lureth the deer, or the lamp which burneth the moth, 
and is dishonoured in both worlds. She is a boat of stone 
which drowns its passengers. So are the minds of the 
perverse scattered and led astray by superstition in the 
company of the evil. And as a courtesan’s son beareth not 
his father’s name, so no one admitteth the ownership of 
the perverse . 2 

The condition of the courtesan : — 

An abandoned woman leaving her father’s and father- 
in-law’s house becometh shameless, and washeth not away 
her evil reputation. Leaving her husband she enjoyeth 
her lover. How can she be happy when her heart is drawn 
in different directions ? She heedeth not advice, and is 
despised at assemblies of mourning and rejoicing. She 
weepeth when reproached and put to shame at every house. 
She is arrested for her sins, and punished by order of the 
court. She is neither dead nor alive, she suffereth misery ; 
she dwelleth not in her own house but searcheth for another 
1 XX. 2 V. 



252 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


to ruin it. In her dubious circumstances she weaveth for 
herself a garland of vice . 1 

The man who adheres not to one religion is com- 
pared to a courtesan who has many lovers : — 

The prostitute is a decorated and ornamented hell. She 
deceiveth by her airs and graces. As the hunter’s pipe 
allureth the deer, so do her songs allure men to their de- 
struction. She dieth an evil death, and obtaineth no 
entrance into God’s court. As she adhereth not to one 
lover, so the evil person who followeth two religions is un- 
happy. He is like a bad rupee nailed to the counter. He 
is ruined himself and he ruineth others . 1 

The fate of the man who tries to follow two 
religions : — 

The evil man who followeth two religions is unhappy, 
and is as useless as an ostrich which cannot fly, which 
cannot be laden, and which strutteth ostentatiously. The 
elephant hath one set of teeth for display and another 
for eating. Goats have four teats, two on their necks 
and two attached to their udders. The latter contain milk, 
the former deceive those who expect milk from them. 
So turning one’s attention to two religions leadeth to 
disastrous failure . 1 

A guest remaineth hungry among several houses. When 
a thing held in partnership is lost, scant are the weeping and 
mental anxiety. When many Dums strike a drum, the 
discord pleaseth no one. The crow which wandereth from 
forest to forest is not held in honour ; how can it be happy ? 
As a prostitute’s body suffereth from having many lovers, 
so they who worship others than the Guru are unhappy in 
their perversity . 2 

The religious and secular observances of the 
Sikhs : — 

The Sikhs rising at the ambrosial hour of morning 3 
bathe. Collecting their thoughts and gently meditating on 

1 XXXIII. 2 XXXIV. 

3 When three hours of night remain. 



BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 


253 


the unfathomable One, they repeat the Guru’s Japji. 
They then go into the company of saints, and sit with 
them. They become absorbed in remembering and loving 
the Word, and sing and hear the Guru’s hymns. They 
pass their time in the love and service and fear of God. 
They serve the Guru and observe his anniversaries. They 
sing the Sodar in company and heartily associate with one 
another. Having read the Sohila and made supplication, 
at night, they distribute sacred food. Thus do the holy 
Sikhs gladly taste the fruit of happiness . 1 

The Sikhs eat little food and drink little water. They 
speak little and boast not. They sleep little and only in 
the night, nor are they entangled in worldly love. When 
they enter a beautiful house they covet it not . 2 

Adultery forbidden : — 

A man who hath one wife is continent and calleth 
another’s wife his daughter or his sister. To covet another 
man’s property is forbidden to a Sikh, as the swine is to 
the Musalman and the cow to the Hindu . 1 

The ordinary secular acts of a true Sikh are equal 
to all the religious ceremonies performed by members 
of other religious denominations : — 

The polite language of a Sikh is equal to a Hindu’s devo- 
tion. A Sikh beholdeth God everywhere with his eyes, 
and that is equal to a Jogi’s meditation. When a Sikh 
listeneth attentively to, or himself singeth, the word of God, 
that is equal to the five ecstatic sounds in the brain of a 
Jogi. When a Sikh doeth anything with his hands, that 
is equal to the obeisance and prostration of Hindus. When 
he walketh to behold the Guru, that is equal to an extremely 
holy circumambulation. When he eateth and clotheth 
himself, that is equal to the performance of Hindu sacrifice 
and offering. When he sleepeth, that is equal to a Jogi’s 
suspended animation. A Sikh withdraweth not his thoughts 
from where he hath fixed them. When a Sikh leadeth a 
family life, that is equal to salvation while alive. A Sikh 
1 VI. 2 XX. 



254 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


hath no fear of the waves of the world’s ocean, and avarice 
entereth not his heart. He hath passed beyond the region 
of blessings and curses and uttereth them not . 1 

Who are acceptable ? — 

They who have restrained the five evil passions — lust, 
wrath, covetousness, worldly love and pride — and they 
who have embraced the five virtues — truth, contentment, 
mercy, honesty, and an understanding of the Granth — are 
acceptable . 2 

Vishnu’s ten avatars and the ten parbs or festivals 
of the Hindus are unavailing : — 

Vishnu hath uselessly assumed ten avatars ; he hath not 
shown unto man the one God who is invisible . 3 The ten 
Hindu festivals observed at places of pilgrimages are not 
equal to the Guru’s anniversaries . 2 

The helplessness of the Hindu gods and of the 
expounders of the Hindu religion : — 

Millions of Brahmas 4 have received the Veds without 
understanding a letter of them. 

Millions of Shivs who sit in religious attitude recognize 
neither the form, nor the outline, nor the garb of the Creator. 

Millions of incarnations of Shiv in human form have not 
obtained even the slightest knowledge of God. 

Millions of serpents which repeat ever new names of God 
daily , 5 have not arrived at a knowledge of Him. 

They who have lived long and enjoyed all the pleasures 
of life, the followers of the six schools of philosophy, and of 

1 VI. 2 vij. 

3 The eighth and the fourteenth days of the lunar month, the day 

when there is no moon, the day of the full moon, the first day of the 
solai month, the seventeenth of the astronomical yogas, the vernal 
equinox, the autumnal equinox, the eclipse of the sun, the eclipse 
of the moon. 

4 Brahma is here considered merely as an exalted demigod of the 
Hindus. 

The serpent Ananta on which Vishnu reposes is said to repeat a 
thousand new names of God daily. 



BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 255 

the sects of Hinduism, have not recognized the true Name. 
Having received gifts they all forget the Giver. 1 

The Hindu god Brahma cannot be accepted as 
a moral guide : — 

Brahma used to preach to others, but on seeing the beauty 
of Saraswati, fell in love with her, and forgot his four Veds. 2 

Nor can man expect assistance from Ram or 
Krishan : — 

0 fools, ye have not remembered the Creator, and ye deem 
that things made by Him are God Himself. 3 

Why the feet are selected for reverence and 
obeisance : — 

The head is above, the feet below, yet the head falleth on 
the feet in the act of prostration. They support the weight 
of the mouth, eyes, nose, ears, and hands. Q. What have 
the feet done that they should be worshipped to the exclusion 
of other limbs ? A. They go to the Guru’s asylum and to 
the companionship of the saints They go to the best 
of their ability to do good acts. May the Guru’s Sikhs 
wear my skin as shoes ! Very fortunate are they to whose 
foreheads the dust of the holy man’s feet is applied. 4 

Scarcity of those who return good for evil : — 

They who return good for evil are few in the world. 4 

The unity of God : — 

As there is but one sun for the six seasons and the twelve 
months of the year, so the Guru’s Sikhs only behold the one 
God. 2 

Guru Nanak’s Guru : — 

The Supreme Being, the All-pervading God is the divine 
Nanak’s Guru. 5 

1 XVIII. 2 XII. 3 XV. 4 IX. 

5 XIII. See also Sorath XI. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


256 

His extent : — 

Men have searched for God’s limit, but have not found 
it. They who went to search for His limit have not re- 
turned. 1 

His court is upright and sincere : — 

God’s court is independent ; hypocrisy entereth not 
there. 2 

Prayers for the extension of Sikhism : — 

May there be hundreds and thousands of Sikhs in every 
city and hundreds of thousands in every country ! 3 

May the Guru’s Sikhs become hundreds of thousands, 
yea, countless in the world, and may a Sikh temple decorate 
every place ! 4 

An exhortation to the same effect : — 

Having become learned in the Guru’s wisdom, enlighten 
the world. 5 

The Sikhs externally and internally : — 

The true Sikhs dress like kings and think not of mammon, 6 
Philanthropy : — 

To do good to others is the mark of a saint. 6 

The advantages of conferring favours on Sikhs : — 

To feed a Sikh with parched gram is superior to hundreds 
of thousands of horns and feasts, and to cause his feet to ' 
be washed is superior to assemblages at places of pilgrimage 
on the occasion of the ten Hindu festivals. To lepeat to 
a Sikh the Guru’s hymns is equal to hundreds <3f thousands 
of Hindu devotional exercises. No doubt or regret re- 
maineth when man hath even a glimpse of the Guru. Such 
a man is unscathed in the terrible ocean, and feareth not 
its waves. He who embraceth the Guru’s religion hath 
passed beyond the bounds of joy or grief for gain or loss. 6 

1 XXII. 2 XXI. 3 XIII. 

4 XXIII. 6 XIX. 6 XIV. 



BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 


257 


The Apostate : — 

The apostate who hath renounced the true Guru becometh 
the slave of a slave. Without the perfect Guru he 
wandereth in many a birth . 1 

He who renounceth the Guru, who is the ocean of happiness, 
wandereth forlorn in the world. He is at one time dashed 
down by the waves, and at another burnt in the fire of 
pride. He is bound and beaten at death’s gate and buffeted 
by Death’s myrmidons. Man like a herdsman remaineth 
here but for four days, yet he calleth himself Jesus or Moses. 
No one admitteth his own deficiency, but wearieth himself 
insisting that he is something great. The ocean-diver 
worketh and exhausteth himself often without recompense. 
Without the Guru there is painful strife . 1 

Current usages without the Guru’s instruction are 
of no avail : — 

Men who forget the true Giver beg from beggars. Minstrels 
sing martial songs, and praise the strife and contests of 
heroes. Barbers also sing songs. They who reward them 
for the sake of show die an evil death. Bards compose 
eulogies, recite them, and retail false genealogies. It is 
proper for priests to ask for alms civilly. Faqirs who 
threaten to stab themselves if they receive not alms or who 
wear wings, may beg from shop to shop, but without the 
true Guru there is naught but weeping and lamentation . 1 

Inutility of Hindu places of pilgrimage : — 

They who leave the pilgrimage of the true Guru and go 
to bathe at the sixty-eight places of the Hindus, sit in 
contemplative attitude like cranes, and rend and eat the 
animals in the water. Elephants may be washed, but 
when they leave the water they bespatter themselves with 
dust. The gourd sinketh not in the water, nor doth its 
bitterness depart at a place of pilgrimage. If a stone 
be washed in water, its hardness is by no means softened. 
The superstition of the perverse man departeth not. He 

1 XV. 

s 


SIKH. IV 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


258 

wandereth without house or home, and, being without the 
true Guru, cannot be saved . 1 

Ask not for a giver from whom thou shalt have to appeal 
to another. Employ not a worthless banker who. will 
afterwards defraud thee. Serve not such a master as will 
render thee liable to Death’s punishment. Engage not 
a physician who cannot cure the malady of pride. It is the 
filth of the body and not the filth of evil inclinations which 
is cleansed by bathing at places of pilgrimages. Why bathe 
at them ? Disciples should love such a priest as will con- 
fer on them happiness and composure . 2 

True devotion is difficult for the worldly : — 

Every one may see jewels, but few can appraise them. 
Every one may listen to songs and minstrelsy, but few know 
how to fix their attention on the Guru’s words . 1 

The holy read the Guru’s hymns with attention to their 
meaning . 3 

Few are they in the world who beheld Guru Nanak and 
listened to and obeyed his instruction . 4 

The perverse fail in self-reliance : — 

Beasts and creatures without instinct are superior to the 
perverse. Man from being reasonable becometh unreasonable 
and looketh to another for help. A beast asketh not from 
a beast, nor doth a bird wait on a bird for assistance . 1 

The perverse prefer the poison of sin to the nectar 
of virtue, impure blood to pure milk : — 

Vegetables in the forest bear fruit of many savours and 
perfumes. The mango, the peach, the apple, the pome- 
granate, the jaman , 5 the khirni , 6 the mulberry, the date, 
the pilun, the wild caper, the ber, the walnut — with these 
the cicala who eateth the akk is by no means pleased. It 
forsaketh ambrosial fruit and attacheth itself to poison. 
If a leech be applied to a female breast, it will not drink 

1 XV. 2 XXVII. 3 XIX. 4 XXIX. 

5 The Primus Padu$> bird cherry. 

6 The Mimusops kauki. 



BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 


-59 

milk but only impure blood, so the perverse man, even if 
he hear the Guru’s hymns in the company of the saints, 
utter eth folly in his conceit. His love is deception and 
he obtaineth not a position in God’s court . 1 

Truth : — 

Devotion, penance, horn, feasts, fasting, austerities, 
pilgrimages, alms-gifts, the service of gods and goddesses, 
ceremonies, are all inferior to truth, and so are hundreds 
of thousands of devices. Acting truly is labelled above them 
all . 2 

Falsehood is as the bitter poisonous akk ; truth is as the 
sweet mango. Truth is a king who sleepeth in peace ; 
falsehood is a thief who wandereth without a home. The 
king awaketh, seizeth the thief, and punisheth him in Iris 
court . 3 

Truth is beautiful like a turban on the head. Falsehood 
is a polluted clout. Truth is a powerful lion, falsehood a 
weak lamb. Deal in truth and thou shalt gain. Why 
deal in falsehood which causeth loss ? Truth is a cur- 
rent coin, falsehood is counterfeit copper. Hundreds of 
thousands of stars in a dark night afford light, but when 
one sun riseth they all disappear. In the same way false- 
hood disappeareth before truth. Truth and falsehood stand 
to one another m the relation of a stone to an earthen vessel. 
If a stone be thrown at an earthen vessel it is the earthen 
vessel which will break. If the earthen vessel be thrown at 
a stone it is again the earthen vessel which will break. In 
either case it is the earthen vessel that suffereth . 3 

Falsehood is an offensive weapon, truth a defensive 
armour. Falsehood is an enemy who ever looketh for his 
opportunity of attack, truth is a real friend who assisteth, 
Truth is a hero, falsehood amasseth what is false. Truth is 
immovable and on safe ground ; falsehood standeth and 
trembleth on an insecure basis. Truth seizeth falsehood 
and knocketh it down. The whole world may see this. 
Falsehood which is deceitful ever aileth. Truth is ever safe 

1 XVII. 2 XVIII. 3 XXX. 

S 2 


2 6o THE SIKH RELIGION 

and whole. Truth ever appeareth true and falsehood 
false. 1 

The Sikhs ought to contract alliances with one 
another : — 

Let the Guru’s Sikhs contract alliances with the Guru’s 
Sikhs 2 

The equality of the Sikhs and their distinctive 
salutation : — 

When Moslems meet, their salute is ‘ Salam alaikum ! ’ A 
Jogi saith ‘ Adesh ! ’ and receiveth in reply ‘ Adpurukh 
Adesh ! ’ A Sanyasi saith ‘ 0 namo ! ’ while several sects 
utter ‘ Namo Narayan ! ’ Men bow to Brahmans and 
receive blessings. But the Sikhs of the true Guru say 
‘ Pairi pawana ’ — I fall at your feet — which is the correct 
salutation. 3 Thus the rich and poor, young and old, are 
on an equality. The saints exhale holiness as the sandal 
exhaleth perfume. There is no distinction among them. 1 

The universality of Guru Nanak’s religion : — 

The Ganges and Banaras belong to the Hindus, Makka 
and the Kaaba to the Musalmans, but Baba Nanak’s praises 
are sung in every house to the music of cymbals, drums, and 
rebecks. 5 

Holy men have no caste and are not liable to caste 
defilement : — 

As ghi is never impure, so the saints have no caste. 6 

Follow the example of a tree and return good for 
evil : — 

It is the specialty of a tree that it returneth good for 
evil. He who loppeth its branches sitteth in its shade, and 
it returneth him good for evil. It giveth fruit when clods 

1 XXX. 2 XX. 

3 This was the salutation up to the time of the tenth Guru. He 
ordained that, when Sikhs met, their salutation should be, Wahgtirii 
ji ha Khalsa, Wahguru ji ki Fatah. 

1 XXIII. 5 XXIV. 6 XXV. 


BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 26- 

are thrown at it. When carved into a boat, it saveth him 
who carved it. The perverse who have not the endurance 
and generosity of trees, obtain not fruit, while for the 
worshipper countless fruit is produced. Few are the holy 
men who, like trees, serve God’s servants. 0 God, the 
world is his slave, who hath the qualities of a tree. 1 

The custom of the world is to return good for good, but 
the custom of the Guru is to return good for evil. 2 

Even the holiest Hindus violate their own com- 
mandments : — 

The ten sects of Sanyasis and the twelve sects of Jogis go 
to strange houses to beg, and eat the food of alms which is 
forbidden them. 1 

The fate of him who through pride rebels against 
God : — 

If any one, having an overweening conceit of himself, 
rebel against a king, the traitor is put to death. He is 
not allowed a cot to bear him, a winding sheet, a funeral 
pyre, or a grave. If rupees be coined not at the mint, they 
are counterfeit, and the coiners wreck their lives. If any 
one write a forged order, it shall be to his loss, and he shall 
shed bitter tears. He shall be disgraced, ride on a donkey, 
and be defiled ; and he shall have to wash off the dust that 
falleth on him. If a jackal assume sovereignty, his voice 
will betray him, and his reign shall not last long. He who 
attacheth himself to other than God will have to abide in 
an evil place. 1 

The love of the disciple for his Guru should be 
superior to everything that has been said or sung of 
lovers in all ages and countries : — 

The lovers Laili and Majnun are known in the four 
quarters of the world. The excellent epic of Sorath and 
Bija is sung in every direction. The love of Sassi and 
Punnu, though they were of different castes, is everywhere 
spoken of. The fame of Sohni who used nightly to swim 
the Chinab to go to Mahinwal is well known, Ranjha and 
1 XXVI. 2 XXVIII. 



262 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Hir are renowned for the love they bore each other. But 
superior to all is the love the disciples bear their Guru. 
They sing it at the ambrosial hour of morning . 1 

Gur Das by familiar examples continues to describe 
the mutual love of the disciple and his Guru : — 

Opium-eaters eschew not opium, but sit down together 
to eat it. Gamblers indulge in play and lose their stakes. 
Thieves abandon not thieving and suffer punishment when 
caught. Though men have sold their clothes, and remain 
naked to provide money for courtesans, yet are they 
obstinate in doing evil. Sinners commit sin and abscond 
to avoid punishment, but, contrary to all these, the Sikhs 
of the Guru, whose companionship is far from injurious, 
love their Guru, and he absolvetb them from all their sins . 1 

Gur Das in his three hundred and twenty-third 
Kabit has given different expression to the same 
idea : — 

A thief abandoneth not thieving through fear of punish- 
ment. The highwayman looketh for an opportunity of 
highway robbery. Even when a man, who is smitten 
with a prostitute, contracteth disease from her, he still 
hesitateth not to visit her. Even when the gambler hath 
lost everything, he refraineth not from gambling. A 
drunkard abstaineth not from intoxicants, but continueth 
to take them however much people censure him, and 
however much medical treatises may tell him of their evil 
effects. The base renounce not the sins to which they 
have once become addicted. Wherefore how can the holy 
renounce the companionship of saints ? 

The love of the Sikh for his Guru is superior to 
that for all his relations : — 

There are three degrees of relationship — first those of 
father, mother, sister, brother, and their offspring and 
alliances ; second, mother’s father, mother’s mother, 
mother’s sisters, mother’s brothers; third, father-in-law, 

1 XXVII. 



BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 263 

mother-in-law, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law, for whom 
gold, silver, diamonds, and corals are amassed ; but dearer 
than all is the love of the Guru's Sikhs for the Guru, 
This is the relationship which conferreth happiness . 1 

The eyes are not satisfied with beholding sights and 
exhibitions ; the ears are not satisfied with hearing praise 
or blame, mourning or rejoicing ; the tongue is not satisfied 
with eating what affordeth pleasure and delight ; the nose 
is not satisfied with good or evil odour ; nobody is satisfied 
with his span of life, and every one entertaineth false hopes ; 
but his disciples are satisfied with the Guru ; theirs is the true 
love . 1 

Love none but the Guru ; all other love is false. Enjoy 
no other relish than his, for it would be poisonous. Be not 
pleased with any one else’s singing, for listening to it would 
bring no happiness. All acts not according to the Guru’s 
teaching are evil, and bear evil fruit. Walk only in the 
way of the true Guru. In all other ways there are thieves 
who cheat and rob. The love of the Guru’s Sikhs for the 
Guru causeth their souls to blend with the True One . 1 

The chakor loveth the moon and gazeth at it continually. 
The chakwi loveth the sun, and on seeing it is happy. The 
lotus is known to love the water, and showeth his smiling 
face therein. The peacock and the chatrik shout with joy 
on seeing the sable clouds. A husband is dear to his wife, 
a mother taketh care of her children ; so a disciple loveth 
his Guru and accompanieth him to the end . 1 

The fate of him who is not totally devoted to the 
Guru : — 

He who seeth not the Guru is blind, even though he have 
eyes. He who listeneth not to the Guru’s words is deaf, 
even though he have ears. He who singeth not the Guru’s 
hymns is dumb, even though he have a tongue. Even 
though he who smelleth not the perfume of the Guru’s feet 
have a nose, it is as if it were cut off. He who doeth not 
the Guru’s work, even though he have hands, is without 
them, and waileth in sorrow. He in whose heart the Guru’s 

1 XXVII. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


264 

instruction abideth not, is without understanding and 
obtain eth not entrance into God’s court. Let no one abide 
with such a fool . 1 

The Guru’s spiritual liberality : — 

The true Guru bestoweth the four boons which are spoken 
of even though the Sikhs ask not for them . 2 

The Sikh catechism : — 

Q. What is a Sikh’s ablution ? A. To receive the Guru’s 
instruction and with it wash away the filth of evil inclinations. 
Q. What is a Sikh’s badge ? A. A necklace of the Guru’s 
words. Q. What is a Sikh’s life ? A. To be dead while 
alive and to renounce pride. Q. What is a Sikh’s duty ? 
A. To obey the order of his Guru . 2 

Covet not thy neighbour’s wife or property, and 
indulge not in slander : — 

When we see other men’s wives beautiful, we should 
consider them as our mothers, sisters, and daughters. 
Another’s property should be to the Sikhs as the swine to 
the Muhammadan and the cow to the Hindu. When 
the Sikhs hear slander of others, they should say ‘ There 
is none worse than ourselves .’ 3 

A Sikh ought to be ashamed to hear slander of another. 
Even if a holy man have miraculous power, he should not 
use it . 1 

Acceptance of God’s will inculcated : — 

He to whom the Master’s will is pleasing, is pleasing to 
the Master. He who obeyeth the Master’s will is honoured. 
The Master causeth his order to be obeyed. Man is a guest 
in this world. Wherefore he should relinquish claims and 
cease to urge them . 3 

God is the True Guru : — 

The supreme God, the perfect God, the primal Being is 
the True Guru . 3 


1 XXXII. 


2 XXVIII. 


3 XXIX. 



BHAI GUR DAS'S ANALYSIS 265 
Loyalty : — 

Take not arms against thy sovereign . 1 

The loyalty of a man who hath eaten his master’s salt is 
proved when he falleth for him in the field of battle. He 
who striketh off the heads of his enemies is known as the 
bravest of the brave . 2 

Even though some evil persons were saved, that 
is no excuse for committing sin : — 

Even supposing Putana was saved because she was killed 
by Krishan when she sought to administer poison to him, that 
should not be deemed a good act. Even if the courtesan 
be held to be saved because she had taught her parrot to 
repeat God’s name, that is no reason why a woman should 
go to a man’s house for fornication. Even if Valmik who 
used to commit robbery was saved on meeting a holy man, 
that is no reason why one should fearlessly rob on the high- 
way. People say the huntsman who shot Krishan was 
saved, but that is no reason for snaring animals. Even if 
the butcher Sadhna was saved, a man should not recklessly 
take life. A boat may transport gold and iron, but they 
are not of the same colour or value. It is not right to hope 
for salvation by doing evil . 3 

The good and the evil contrasted : — 

Enmity remaineth not in the mind of the good man, nor 
friendship in the mind of the bad man, as a line made in 
water quickly vanisheth. The good man forgetteth not 
friendship, nor the evil man enmity, as a line made on a 
stone is not readily effaced. Neither the desires of the 
evil man to do evil nor of the good man to do good are 
ultimately fulfilled. The good man doeth not good, nor the 
evil man evil . 3 

The difference between the holy and the unholy : — 

Why should the branches of the bead-tree be compared 
with sweets ? No one calleth the akk berries mangoes. 
Gilt jewels are not equal to gold. Crystal is not equal to 
1 XXXIV. 2 XXX. 3 XXXI. 



266 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


I 

diamonds. Buttermilk and milk are both white, but of 
different quality and taste — so the holy and unholy are ' 

distinguished by their attributes . 1 ; 

The difference between associating with a wise man t 

and a fool : — j 

He who abideth with a sensible man will be satisfied with j 

humble fare, but he who abideth with a fool will not be I 

satisfied even with an empire . 2 

Associate not with a fool : — 

A dog in anger biteth a man and he becometh mad. In 
affection it licketh him and he becometh disgusted. When 
charcoal is cool it blackeneth the hands, but when it is hot 
it burneth them. A snake which catcheth a musk-rat k 

becometh blind if it let it go , 3 and leprous if it swallow it. 

If a tumour be cut it causeth pain ; and if it be allowed to 
remain it is unseemly. In the same way, if a family have 
a bad son, they suffer blame whether they abandon him or 
receive him. Contract neither friendship nor enmity with 
a fool. Remain aloof from both passions. In either camp- 
ing-place there is misery . 2 

A female camel once swallowed a melon which stuck 
in her throat. A surgeon was called. He put a stone 
under the lower part of the camel’s neck, and with 
another stone struck the upper part and thus crushed 
the melon. The surgeon’s assistant, who saw the 
operation, gave out that he too was an accomplished 
surgeon, and set up in business on his own account. 

When an old woman went to him for treatment for 
some illness, he assumed that a melon had lodged in 
her throat also, and proceeded to cure her as his 
master had cured the camel. The result was that the 
inexperienced surgeon killed the old lady. 

Gur Das tells the story as follows : — 

A surgeon cured a female camel. He put one stone 
beneath the camel’s neck and struck the upper part of the 

1 XXXV. 2 XXXII. 

3 The musk-rat scratches out its eyes. 



BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 267 

camel’s neck with another, and thus broke the melon. 
His servant thought he had mastered the surgical art. He 
killed an old woman and there was general female lamenta- 
tion. The people seized the pretended surgeon, and gave 
him a sound beating, upon which his senses returned to him. 
When he was questioned, he confessed the whole circum- 
stance, and his imposture was then exposed. Sensible men 
took and expelled him, for a glass bracelet cannot rank with 
jewels. A fool has no sense. A bamboo could never equal 
sugar-cane. A fool hath only the body of a man ; he was 
created a brute . 1 

Associate not with the deceitful and the perverse: — 

If a man enter a house of lamp-black his face will be 
blackened. If seed be sown in a barren field, there will 
be no produce. If a child swing in a broken swing, he 
will fall and kill himself. If a man who knoweth not how 
to swim, lean on the shoulders of another equally ignorant, 
how shall he cross a deep river ? Abide not with him who 
setteth fire to his own house, and then goeth to sleep. Such 
is the society of the deceitful and the perverse. A man is 
ever in fear of his life . 2 

Gur Das describes an uproar raised by the folly of 
fools : — 

A man after bathing at a well forgot his turban and went 
home bare-headed. The women of his house were silly, 
and on seeing the unusual circumstance began to beat 
their heads as if a relation had died, for an Indian appearing 
bare-headed is a sign of mourning. He on seeing the women 
weeping began to cry aloud incontinently. Men and 
women hearing this assembled to mourn. A barber’s wife 
asked in whose name she should mourn. The man’s daughter- 
in-law said, 4 Go and ask my father-in-law the name of the 
man who is dead.’ There is an uproar raised in the 
company of fools like the cawing of rooks . 1 

The Hindus and Moslems may hate one another, 
1 xxxii. 2 xxxiv. 


ft 


268 THE SIKH RELIGION 

though they have both sprung from a common 
stock : — 

From the union of one couple two brothers were born, and 
these two brothers struck out two ways. The Hindus and 
the Muhammadans are both made out of the five elements, 
but two names are given to the same substance . 1 

It is not the fault of the Sikh religion if an occasional 
Sikh obey not the Guru’s instructions and grow 
wicked : — 

When moth 2 is parched over the fire some grains remain 
hard. This is not the fault of the fire. If one fruit out 
of a thousand go bad, it is not the fault of the tree. It is 
not the fault of water that it will not rest on a hill. If a sick 
man die from not observing the regimen prescribed for him, 
it is not the fault of the doctor. If a barren woman have no 
offspring, it is not her husband’s fault. In the same way 
if an occasional perverse man accept not the Guru’s instruc- 
tion, it is his own and not the Guru’s fault . 3 

The apologue of the jackal which fell into a dyer’s 
vat applied to the boastful and hypocritical. 

A jackal fell into a dyer’s vat and was dyed. He went 
into the forest and pretended to be its king. The beasts 
waited at his door while he sat down in his glory. In- 
toxicated with falsehood and pride, he began to exercise 
his authority. But when he opened his lips to speak, he 
spoiled his disguise, as radish-eaters make themselves known 
by their belching. So the Mina who practiseth falsehood 
and disgraceful acts, was ruined at God’s court . 4 

Pretended gurus are like children at play : — 

On moonlight nights children play together . 5 They 
personate kings and subjects. Some take armies on ex- 
peditions, and some run away. They pay land revenue in 
potsherds. Being very fickle they leave off the play in 

1 XXXIII. 2 Moth is an Indian pulse. 

3 XXXIV. - 4 XXXVI 

5 This is specially the case before and after the hot season in India. 


BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 269 

an instant and run home. So they who, though possessing 
no merits, call themselves gurus, are counterfeit and evil . 1 

It is impossible to dispense with the Guru : — 

The mice fashioned a bell to put on the cat’s neck, but 
they could not do so. The flies resolved to bathe in ghi, 
but they never extricated themselves. Insects being short- 
lived have not time to divest themselves of impurity of 
birth ; if they did, how could they live ? The bhambiris 2 
would live in the rainy season if they could, but they are 
killed by the rain. The kulangs would remain in the plains 
after Baisakh, but they cannot live in heat. People may 
say they can dispense with the Guru, but without him 
salvation cannot be obtained : men would wander in 
transmigration . 1 

Secret initiation is not necessary. Hindus of all 
sects believe that until a guru secretly communicates 
the word of initiation into the disciple’s ear, salvation 
is not obtained. Gur Das on the contrary writes : — 

Wahguru is the Guru’s spell ; by repeating it pride 
departeth . 3 

Gur Das indulges in self-abasement : — 

The owl is not pleased on beholding the sun or the chakwi 
the moon. The simmal-tree yicldeth no fruit, the bamboo 
groweth near the sandal but is not perfumed thereby. If you 
give milk to a serpent to drink, it parteth not with its poison, 
nor showeth it any gratitude. The bitterness of the colo- 
cynth departeth not, the tick clingeth to the cow’s udder, 
but drinketh blood instead of milk. All these demerits 
reside in me. If any one do me a favour, I return it with 
an injury. Garlic hath never the perfume of musk . 4 

I am wicked and sinful ; I am an apostate and evil, 

1 XXXVI. 

2 Certain Indian insects which frequent pools and rivers in the 
rainy season. 

3 XIII. Gur Das means that there should be no secrecy in the 

initiation of a Sikh. 4 VI. 



270 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


I am a thief, adulterer, and gambler ; I covet my neighbour’s 
house, I am a slanderer, unrighteous, dishonest, deceitful ; 
I deceive the country. I indulge in lust, wrath, pride, 
greed, and worldly love. I kill those who trust me ; I am 
ungrateful and unfaithful ; who will defend me ? The true 
Guru remembereth and pardoneth his disciples and singers . 1 

There is nGi, there was not, and there never will be such 
an ungrateful person as I. There is none so dishonest or 
so devoid of merit as I. There is no such slanderer as I 
who have taken on my head the heavy sin of slandering the 
Guru. There is none so great an apostate as I who have 
committed the heinous sin of apostasy from the Guru. 
There is none so evil as I who have committed the sin of 
bearing enmity to him who is without it. There is no such 
treacherous friend as I who sit in a devotional attitude 
like a crane looking out for fish to devour. The great sin 
which I have committed in eating with those who do not 
obey the Guru’s words departeth not. There is no such 
backslider as I who have renounced the Guru’s religion 
and attached myself to a false one. I am called a disciple, 
but I meditate not on the Word . 2 

Filial duty inculcated : — 

A child is conceived by the union of father and mother, 
and while in the womb the mother is full of hope. She 
abstaineth from delicacies, and is shy to appear in public. 
She putteth her feet cautiously on the ground. She carrieth 
for nine months and suffereth in giving birth to the dear 
boy. She then nourisheth him with great trouble, and must 
be careful in what she eateth and drinketh. She suckleth 
and cautiously giveth him infant’s medicine. The parents 
provide him with clothing and food, and take thought for 
his betrothal and education. They entrust him to a tutor, 
and as in duty bound spend their earnings on him. The 
child should discharge this load of debt to the parents . 2 

Filial ingratitude reprobated : — 

His parents are happy while performing the boy’s be- 
1 XXXVI. 2 XXXVII. 



BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 


271 


trotliaL His mother cannot contain herself with joy, and 
she singeth festal strains. When the boy is married, she is 
delighted and singeth marriage songs. She voweth many 
offerings when her son bringeth his wife home. In return 
for all this the daughter-in-law ever giveth her husband 
bad advice, and slandereth her mother-in-law with the object 
of living separate from her. The son then becometh bad, 
forgetteth the countless favours conferred on him by his 
mother, and obligeth her to grind corn for the house. Few 
sons are dutiful as Sarwan . 1 

Filial ingratitude is the result of marriage : — 

The wife the enchantress bewitcheth her husband. When 
he was born he forgot his God, and now that he is married 
he forgetteth his parents . 2 

A man should never under any pretext forsake his 
parents : — 

He who forsaketh his parents to listen to the Veds, shall 
never know their secret. He who forsaketh his parents 
to perform penance in the forest, shall go astray in the 
wilderness. He who forsaketh his parents to worship gods 
and goddesses, shall lose the reward of his devotion. He 
who forsaketh his parents to bathe in the sixty-eight places 
of pilgrimages, shall find them a whirlpool to drown him. 
He who forsaketh his parents to give alms, shall be deemed 
without faith or knowledge. He who forsaketh his parents 
to fast, shall die and be born again and stray in superstition. 
Such a person knoweth nothing of God or the Guru . 2 

The Sikhs claim superiority to all races : — 

The Sunni, the Shiah, and the Rafazi sects find favour 
with many, but they are all pagans and hypocrites and lost 
in superstition. The Christians and the Jews wander dis- 
traught in their pride. The Europeans, the Armenians, 
and the Turks are filled with vainglory. Faqirs dressed 

1 A man who most diligently served his blind parents. He was 
slain by mistake by Dasarath, Ram Chandar’s father. XXXVII. 

2 XXXVII. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


272 

in black, qalandars, darweshes, and twice as many more 
are not equal to one hair of a Sikh who hath dedicated 
himself to the Guru . 1 

Truth is hidden both from the Hindus and the 
Muhammadans ; both sects have gone astray : — 

There are four castes of Hindus and four sects of Muham- 
madans in the world. The members of both religions are 
selfish, jealous, proud, bigoted, and violent. The Hindus 
make pilgrimages to Hardwar and Banaras ; the Muhamma- 
dans to the Kaaba of Makka. Circumcision is dear to the 
Muhammadans ; tilaks and janeus to the Hindus. The 
Hindus invoke Ram, the Muhammadans Rahim ; but in 
reality there is only one God. Since they have both for- 
gotten their sacred books, worldly greed and the devil 
have led them astray. Truth is hidden from both ; the 
Brahmans and the Maulvis kill themselves by their ani- 
mosities. Neither sect shall find salvation . 2 

The Hindus read the Veds ; the Sufis and the Muham- 
madans the books of Islam. The Muhammadans abstain 
from food during the Ramzan and read Arabic prayers ; 
the Hindus rack their brains over idolatrous worship and 
periodical fastings. The founders of the six Hindu systems 
preach each a different doctrine. The Hindus have ten 
incarnations, the Muhammadans the Merciful One. Both 
sects practise bigotry and violence . 3 

When Hindus and Moslems lay aside superstition, 
they form one body of Sikhs who quaff the cup of 
God’s love and obtain final deliverance : — 

They who are intoxicated with the cup of love in the 
Guru’s private court, behold the Unseen One. The Sikhs 
spurn as well the hundred and eight-beaded rosary of the 
Hindus as the hundred-beaded rosary of the Muhammadans. 
The Sikhs, treating both rosaries alike, repeat not the name 
Ram or Rahim at every bead. The two sects united form 
one body of Sikhs, and are not then separately mentioned, 
so when one speaketh of the game of chaupar the pieces are 
1 XXXVIII. 2 I. 3 XXXIX. 


BHAI GUR DAS’S ANALYSIS 273 

not spoken of. The Sikhs rejecting Shiv and his energy 
Durga arrive at their own home by means of the cup of 
God’s love. Unaffected by the three qualities, they attain 
the fourth degree of salvation. Baba Nanak proclaimed 
the true Word, and, by causing the true Sikhs to fix their 
attention on it, blended them with the True One who is the 
true King to whom truth is pleasing . 1 


Extracts from Gur Das’s Kabit against idolatry : — 

As a virtuous woman ever thinketh on her husband and 
desireth not to behold another man ; 

As the chatrik never longeth for lakes, rivers, or seas, 
but for cloud-drops, and singeth the praises of the Beloved ; 

As the chakor in no way desireth to behold the sun, 
but in every way longeth for the moon, which is dearer to 
it than life ; 

So do the Guru’s Sikhs naturally refrain from worshipping 
other gods, but not insultingly or disdainfully. 

If a man look at two mirrors no distinct reflection will 
be formed. If a man put his feet in two boats, he cannot 
reach the shore. 

If a man go in two directions, his feet will be worn out ; 
if a man travel by two roads, he will be puzzled and forget 
where to put down his feet. 

When there are two kings, the subject cannot be happy ; 
when a woman has two husbands, she cannot be chaste. 

When a Sikh of the Guru accepteth the support of other 
gods, accursed is his life in this world, and hereafter punish- 
ment from Death shall await him. 


According to the rules of society, the sacred books, and 
the teaching of divines, it is proper for a chaste woman to 
serve her lord in thought, word, and deed. 

To the chaste woman repetition of idols’ names, ablutions, 
alms, austerities, penance, pilgrimage, fasting, worship, 
and daily ceremonies are of no avail. 

1 XXXIX 
T 


SIKH, IV 



274 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Burnt-offerings, feasts, food offered to idols, the worship 
of gods and goddesses, the singing of hymns and visiting 
strange temples are all vanity of vanities. 

So among the Guru’s Sikhs One Prop is the best ; medita- 
tion, contemplation and remembrance of other gods is 
harlotry. 





GURU HAR RAI BLESSING YOUNG PHUL 


LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI, THE 
SEVENTH GURU 

Chapter I 

We have seen that Guru Har Gobind, the sixth 
Guru, had five sons, Baba Gurditta, Suraj Mai, 
Ani Rai, Baba Atal, and Teg Bahadur. Baba 
Gurditta, who predeceased his father, left two sons, 
Dhir Mai and Har Rai. DhirMal had proved disloyal 
and disobedient to his grandfather. Guru Har 
Gobind, wishing as far as possible to observe the 
custom of primogeniture, and seeing Har Rai steady, 
pious, and in every respect fitted for the Guruship, 
bestowed it on him with all due formality and 
ancient ceremony. 

Guru Har Rai was born of Gurditta’s wife, Nihal 
Kaur, rnfe Natti, on the thirteenth day of the light 
half of the moon of Magh, Sambat 1687, A. D. 1631. 
He was very attentive to his devotions and ablutions, 
and loved to repeat to his disciples the following 
verses of Gur Das : — 

Rise in the end of the night, instil into men’s minds the 
merits of the Name and of charity. 

Speak civilly, be humble, do good to others with the gifts 
of your hands. 

Sleep, eat, and speak little ; receive the Guru’s instruc- 
tion. 

Live on your earnings ; do good works ; even if you are 
great, be not conceited. 

Day and night go and associate with the saints and sing 
with them the Gurus’ hymns. 

Regale your hearts with the pleasure which the true 
Gurus’ words and instruction afford. 

Amid hopes remain without hopes . 1 

1 War XXVIII. 

T 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


276 

The Gum employed every device that sleep might 
not overcome him, and prevent his matutinal devo- 
tions which were the object of his earnest solicitude. 
Although many rich men came to visit him, he made 
no distinction between rich and poor, and centred 
his hopes only in God. His food was very simple. 
He desired not dainty dishes, and thanked God for 
all His mercies. Whatever valuable offerings were 
made him he used to spend on his guests. He was 
always surrounded, as it were, by a halo of visitors, on 
whom he conferred delight. 

During Guru Har Rai’s stay in Kiratpur a man 
named Bhagtu of the Bairar tribe, who had given 
Guru Arjan great assistance in excavating his tank, 
waited on him, said he was a cultivator by trade, 
and asked for employment. The Guru engaged him 
to superintend the cultivation of his land. Once, 
as Bhagtu was employed as overseer of the Guru’s 
reapers, they complained that he did not cause suffi- 
cient ghi to be put into their bread. At that time 
Bhagtu happened to see a man called Sangatia passing 
by with hides of ghi, and asked him to sell it, and 
he would receive payment on the morrow. Sangatia 
agreed ; the ghi was purchased and distributed 
among the labourers. Sangatia went home, and, 
to his surprise, next morning found the hides he 
thought he had emptied filled with ghi as before. 
He returned to Bhagtu to inform him. Bhagtu 
offered him the stipulated price. Sangatia fell at 
his feet, and with thankfulness refused the money, 
telling him that the miracle wrought was the result 
of his kindness. Bhagtu replied that he himself had 
no power. Whatever merit he possessed was derived 
from the Guru. He invited Sangatia to go to the 
Guru and become his Sikh. Sangatia accordingly 
did so. The Guru initiated him, gave him the name 
of Pheru, and promised that he should have a kitchen 
of his own to supply the wayworn saint and stranger. 

In the afternoon the Guru used often to gird on his 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


2 77 


sword, equip himself with his bow and arrows, 
mount his horse, and proceed to the chase. He 
maintained two thousand two hundred mounted 
soldiers. These he kept by his grandfather Guru 
Har Gobind’s advice as a precautionary measure. 
The Guru took some of the animals he had obtained 
from the chase home with him, and freed and pro- 
tected them in a zoological garden, which he caused 
to be made for the recreation of his followers. 

In the evening the Guru used to hold his court, 
listen to hymns sung by his choir, and then give 
divine instruction. The advantages of devotion are 
briefly put by Guru Arjan. 

Learn the Word, my beloved, which is our support in 
life and in death. 

By remembering the one God your faces shall ever be 
bright and happy . 1 

The Guru used to select suitable passages from 
the Granth Sahib to recite to his followers, such as: — 

Make effort, ye very fortunate, remember God the King ; 

Nanak, by remembering Him ye shall have all happiness, 
and your troubles, pains and doubts shall disappear . 2 

The Emperor Shah Jahan had four sons Dara 
Shikoh, Shuja Muhammad, Aurangzeb, and Murad 
Bakhsh, Dara Shikoh, who was the heir-apparent, 
was very dear to his father. Aurangzeb who was 
very cunning, clever, and ambitious, aimed at 
succeeding to the throne. He administered tiger’s 
whiskers in a dainty dish to his eldest brother, 
who became dangerously ill in consequence. The 
best physicians were consulted, but could not devise 
a remedy. The patient’s illness daily increased. 
The Emperor, filled with anxiety, sent for diviners 
and astrologers from every country, propitiated pirs 
and faqirs, and had recourse to all known charms, 
spells, and incantations, but without avail. 

1 Ramkali, Ashtapadi. 2 Asa Chhant. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


278 

When the wise men were all assembled, they arrived 
at the very obvious decision that, until the tiger’s 
whiskers were removed from Dara Shikoh’s bowels, 
there was no hope of recovery. They were of opinion 
that if a chebulic myrobalan weighing fourteen 
chitanks 1 and a clove weighing one masha could be 
produced and administered to the patient, he would 
be restored to health. For these articles the Emperor 
searched everywhere in his realm, but in vain. At 
last the prime minister, who had heard the fame of 
the Guru, was informed that the required simples 
were in his storehouse. Although the Emperor was 
hostile to the Guru, yet as the Guru’s house was a 
mine of sympathy and compassion for all, there was 
no doubt that he would grant the articles required. 
In order to show the Guru’s duty in such a case, the 
prime minister quoted the words of the fifth Guru : — 

The Guru embraceth him who seeketh his protection ; 
this is the function of the religious teacher . 2 

The prime minister represented to the Emperor, 

‘ It becometh thee now, 0 sire, to forget thy former 
feelings of enmity, and entreat the Guru to grant 
thee what is required and thy wishes shall be imme- 
diately gratified. In the words of a Panj abi proverb, 

‘ Self-interest causeth barley to be ground, even if 
it be wet.’ 3 Shah Jahan found it necessary to 
humble himself before the Guru, and accordingly 
addressed him the following letter : — 

‘ Thy predecessor, the holy Baba Nanak granted 
sovereignty to the Emperor Babar, the founder of 
my dynasty ; Guru Angad was exceedingly well 
disposed to his son the Emperor Humayun ; and 
Guru Amar Das removed many difficulties from my 
grandfather Akbar’s path. I regret that the same 

1 A chitank is five tolas or two ounces. 

2 Bihagra Chhant. 

3 Wet Indian barley is ground with more difficulty in a hand-mill 
than any other Indian grain. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


279 


friendly relations did not subsist between Guru Har 
Gobind and myself, and that misunderstandings 
were caused by the interference of strangers. For this 
I was not to blame. My son Dara Shikoh is now 
very ill. His remedy is in thy hands. If thou give 
the myrobalan and the clove which are in thy store- 
house, and add to them thy prayers, thou wilt confer 
an abiding favour on me.’ 

A noble took this letter to the Guru who was then 
in Kiratpur and presented it in darbar on the 
morning after his arrival. The Guru was pleased that 
the Emperor had such confidence in him as to write 
him such a friendly letter, and consented to give the 
necessary medicines. He quoted a line from the 
fourteenth slok of the Asa ki War, 

Why should they who come with hope depart dis- 
appointed ? 

‘ Behold,’ said the Guru, ‘ with one hand man 
breaketh flowers, and with the other he offereth them, 
but the flowers perfume both hands alike. Although 
the axe cuts the sandal-tree, yet the sandal per- 
fumeth the axe. The Guru ought, therefore, to 
return good for evil.’ The myrobalan and clove were 
weighed, and, as if God had so ordained, found of the 
required weight to cure the Emperor’s beloved son 
and heir-apparent. It was explained that these 
medicines would cause the hardest substance taken 
into the stomach to be digested. To these articles 
the Guru added a pearl which was to be ground and 
used as a subsidiary remedy. The Guru was in 
the position of a tree which, though cut with a sharp 
axe, feels no anger and imputes no blame to the 
wood-cutter, but ministers unto his wants. 

The Emperor was naturally very pleased, forgot all 
his enmity to the Guru, and vowed that he would 
never again cause him annoyance. The medicine 
was administered and effected a speedy and complete 
cure. 



28o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chapter II 

A pious lady continually prayed that the Guru 
might eat bread cooked by her hands. One day she 
gained four paise by spinning, and bought wheaten 
flour and pulse for the money. She baked two cakes 
and took them to a spot by which the Guru used to 
pass daily. There she began to rack her brains how 
to procure access to him. Could she succeed in this, 
he would certainly take compassion on her old age 
and eat from her hands. The Guru, having by his 
supernatural power become aware of her desire, 
mounted his horse, and on his way to the chase, went 
joyfully to the spot where she was waiting. 

At the moment when she was reduced almost to 
a state of despair the Guru arrived, and asked her 
for some of the bread she had prepared. He said it 
would be very late when he returned from the chase, 
and he desired food to fortify himself until then. 
The Guru partook of the bread on horseback, with- 
out washing his hands, and said he had enjoyed it 
as if it were the most dainty food. The woman 
paid the Guru compliments for his humility in 
visiting her and accepting her hospitality. The 
Guru in return gave her spiritual instruction, and 
cut off the shackles of her transmigration. 

The Sikhs were astonished that the Guru had taken 
food from a strange woman, and eaten it on horse- 
back too without washing his hands. They asked him 
why he had done so. He gave no answer, but con- 
tinued his hunting excursion. Next day they pre- 
pared sweet cakes with great attention to cleanliness, 
and took them to the forest with the Guru, so as to 
obviate any necessity he might be under to take 
food that might possibly be unclean from the hands 
of a person who might be of low caste. In due time 
the Sikhs offered the Guru the cakes they had 
prepared. The Guru said, ‘ O Sikhs, I ate food from 
that woman’s hands because she was holy. This 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


281 


food which you have prepared with attention to 
ancient ceremonial is not pleasing to me. It is 
written in the Granth Sahib : — 

He whose deeds are pure is called a holy man , 1 

from which it appears that salvation depends on good 
acts and not on the food which is eaten.’ 

The Sikhs replied, ‘ 0 true king, yesterday thou 
atest two cakes on horseback from the hands of an 
old woman whom thou knewest not. There was no 
consecrated space and the food was in every way 
impure. To-day we have with great labour prepared 
and baked cakes for thee ; no impurity attacheth to 
them, and yet thou rejectest them. Be kind enough 
to explain the reason. We made a representation to 
thee yesterday on the subject but received no reply.’ 

The Guru gave the following explanation — ‘ The 
woman with great devotion and faith prepared food 
for me out of what she had earned from the sweat of 
her brow. On this account the food was very pure, 
and I partook of it. The Guru hungereth for love 
and not for dainty food. In the matter of love for 
God no rule is recognized. 

‘ Ye remember how Guru Nanak avoiding the 
society of the great and the wealthy, went to the 
house of Lalo who was a carpenter, abode with him, 
and lived on his coarse fare. It may therefore be 
easily understood that attention to culinary rules 
and exclusiveness in eating are of no avail without 
real devotion. It is not what man eateth that 
pleaseth God. It is man’s devotion that is acceptable 
to Him.’ 

On hearing this discourse the Sikhs’ doubts 
vanished. They replied, ‘ O true king, grant that 
the love of God may arise in our hearts. Although 
we have in ourselves no merits, yet thou who hast 
vouchsafed us thy protection, art responsible for 
our safe keeping. By thy favour our boats shall 
reach the haven of the blest.’ 

1 Sukhmani. 



282 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


During this colloquy the Guru and his party 
penetrated a deep forest. The Guru, seeing a black 
buck issue from the thickets, chased him on horseback 
at full speed and prevented his escape. The animal 
was caught and taken to the Guru’s zoological gardens. 
Men who had come long distances to see the Guru were 
pleased with his tenderness to animals, particularly 
to deer, which the kings of old used to sacrifice at 
their feasts. 

One day as the Guru was hunting he saw a 
wounded snake crawling with difficulty. It was 
tortured by worms which it tried to shake off by 
wriggling and shaking its body. The Guru not only 
put the animal out of its pain, but granted it salva- 
tion. The author of the Suraj Parkash states that 
its spirit in the form of a bright light was seen to issue 
from its body and soar to heaven. The Sikhs asked 
the Guru what light it was. The Guru replied, ‘ This 
serpent was in somewhat the same state as the python 
seen by my grandfather in Malwa. This serpent had 
been a pandit in a previous age, who used to falsely 
vaunt the power of the Veds. He asserted that he 
himself was God, but his conduct in no wise justified 
such a boast. He used also to make injurious 
reflections on the Guru’s hymns, saying, ‘ What is 
a hymn in the vulgar dialect ? ’ He did not know 
that Guru Nanak’s compositions were superior to 
the Veds. The pandit’s soul passed into this serpent, 
and the worms have been causing him to suffer for 
the deceit he practised on men. There wei'e, how- 
ever, some good acts to his credit from previous 
births, and on this account he hath met Guru Nanak’s 
followers and obtained salvation. As Guru Arjan 
hath said : — 

By association with the saints man hath no travail ; 

There is no necessity to toil in their company : 

On beholding and meeting them man becometh happy . 1 


1 Sukhmani. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 283 

‘ Carefully remember that, however much you read 
Vedantic literature, it will be a source of misery 
unless you love God. Guru Arjan hath also said : — 

Though one be very beautiful, of high birth, clever, 
a divine in words and wealthy ; 

Yet shall he be deemed as dead, O Nanak, if he have no 
love for God. 1 

‘ Wherefore, 0 my Sikhs, believe in the words of 
Guru Nanak, worship God, and boast not of your 
Vedantism. He who, possessing no divine know- 
ledge, calleth himself a guru shall have no happiness, 
but on the contrary terrible suffering. The disciples 
of a false guru shall lose their human birth in this 
world. A guru who possesseth no holiness shall with 
his disciples endure terrible suffering. Wherefore, 0 
my Sikhs, listen unto me, never consume any portion 
of offerings. They will not assist you in distress, but, 
on the contrary, lead you into the power of Death, 
whose punishment shall wring from you loud lamen- 
tations. Perform honest labour, serve the saints, 
and I shall everywhere be your succourer. As Guru 
Nanak hath said : — 

They who eat the fruit of their labour and bestow some- 
thing, 

0 Nanak, recognize the right way. 2 

A deficiency in your weights or want of equality in 
your scales must be avoided. Ever abide firm in your 
faith.’ 

‘ The Sikhs then asked the Guru to give them 
further instruction in the Sikh religion. He re- 
plied, ‘ You must read the Granth Sahib, and not 
worship any inanimate object. When a Sikh dieth, 
sacred food should be prepared and distributed after 
reading the Sohila. There should be no mourning, 
but hymns of the Gurus should be sung, and the 
Granth Sahib should be intoned. No gods or 
1 Bawan Akhari. 2 Sarang ki War. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


284 

goddesses should be deemed succourers of man. 
Reliance must be placed on the immortal God alone.’ 

A devout Sikh called Bhai Gonda abode with the 
Guru. He was a saint in thought, word, and deed. 
The Guru was very much pleased with his sincere 
devotion and said, ‘ 0 Bhai Gonda, go thou to Kabul, 
instruct the Sikhs there in the worship of the true 
Name, and preach the Sikh faith. Feed holy men 
and pilgrims with the offerings thou receivest, and 
send what remaineth for the maintenance of my 
kitchen. These are thy duties, and I am confident 
that thou wilt discharge them.’ 

Although Kabul was a foreign country and there 
was danger from Muhammadan bigotry in residing 
there, yet Gonda cheerfully accepted the task 
imposed on him. On arriving there he built a Sikh 
temple and carried out all the Guru’s instructions. 
In other respects the following lines of Guru Arjan, 
which he was accustomed to repeat, served him as 
a guide : — 

Meditate in thy heart on the Guru’s image ; 

Regale thy mind with the Guru’s word and spell. 

Put the Guru’s feet into thy heart, 

And ever bow to the Guru the Supreme Being . 1 

One day while Gonda was repeating the Japji, he 
fancied he was clinging to the Guru’s feet. He was 
in such a state of abstraction that he became quite 
unconscious. He grew as absorbed in the sight of 
the Guru as a drop of rain in the ocean. The Guru 
by his occult power knew what was passing in 
Gonda’s mind, and sat firmly on his throne keeping 
his feet together. When dinner was announced, as 
usual at mid-day, he made no response. When the 
announcement was repeated about an hour after- 
wards, he still remained silent. A third time after 
a longer interval dinner was announced, and the 
cook asked permission to serve it up, but even 

1 Gaund. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


285 

then the Guru spoke not. When several Sikhs were 
on the point of making a representation to him, he 
broke silence and said, ‘ Brother Sikhs, Bhai Gonda is 
in Kabul. He is in thought, word, and deed, a saint 
of the Guru. He to-day hath clasped my feet. How 
can I withdraw them from him ? And how can I go 
to take my dinner until he hath let them go ? I am 
therefore waiting until the conclusion of his meditation 
and obeisance.’ Bhai Gonda did not awake from 
his trance before twilight, and it was only then the 
Guru felt free to take his repast. 

When afterwards the Sikhs had an opportunity 
of interrogating Gonda they found the Guru’s words 
verified and his acts explained by Gonda’s reflections 
and movements during the state of trance. The 
Sikhs then were thoroughly convinced of the Guru’s 
greatness, and said that they themselves were poor 
ignorant people. As Guru Arjan has said: — 

The glory of the saints is special to the saints : 

My brethren, there is no difference between God and His 
saints . 1 

And again : — 

Know that God and the Guru are one . 2 

The Sikhs said, ‘ The advantages of Guru Nanak’s 
religion are indescribable, and whoever leaveth it 
and strayeth to other sects, is greatly unfortunate, 
for he thereby loseth his priceless human birth.’ 

Once as Sikhs came great distances to the Baisakhi 
fair and made offerings according to their means, men 
and women circumambulated the Guru like bumble- 
bees hovering round a lotus-flower. The Guru inquired 
if there were any of his Sikhs who, having established 
a kitchen according to his means, shared his food 
with others. He received a reply that two or three 
Sikhs had come, who had established kitchens in 
several villages and distributed their food among 
1 Sukhmani. 2 Gaund. 



286 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


the Guru’s followers. The Guru ordered them to be 
called, and asked them on what principle they had 
established kitchens, and whether they entertained 
all Sikhs on the same terms as their relations. One 
Sikh replied — f When a Sikh is kind enough to visit 
me at the time of distribution of food, I first satisfy 
him and then myself.’ A second said, ‘ I cook and 
distribute food with my own hands.’ A third said, 
‘ I wash the feet of Sikhs and drink the water there- 
from, for it is written in the Sukhmani : — 

Wash the feet of the holy men and drink the water there- 
from.’ 

A fourth Sikh replied, ‘ Whatever thine orders are, 
0 true king, they shall be obeyed. I wipe Sikhs’ 
shoes, and place them before them as they are 
departing.’ 

The Guru interposed. 'It is superfluous to say 
any more. I desire to know if ye feed a Sikh who 
presenteth himself after the time fixed for distribu- 
tion of food.’ The Sikhs requested the Guru to 
explain his meaning more fully. He said, ‘ 0 Sikhs, 
when food is distributed and there is none left, 
what do ye do if a hungry Sikh afterwards present 
himself ? ’ The Sikhs replied, ‘ We do not serve food 
after the appointed time, and on that account no 
doubt some Sikhs go away disappointed.’ The 
Guru rejoined, ‘Ye ought to keep additional food 
ready, feed your guest, and not send him away disap- 
pointed. In the course I recommend there is great 
merit. I shall be well pleased with those who adopt 
it, and they shall enjoy happiness here and hereafter. 
Moreover, it is written in the Granth Sahib : — 

The true Guru is delighted when his disciple taketh food . 1 

‘ He who through laziness and pride dismisseth a Sikh 
disappointed, shall gain no advantage from his past 
or present acts. Farid hath said : — 

1 Guru Ram Das, Gauri. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 287 

All men’s hearts are jewels ; to distress them is not at all 
good : 

If thou desire the Beloved, distress no one’s heart. 

' There is also a Persian expression attributed to God 
even by the Muhammadans : — 

I can allow you to destroy a temple or a mosque, 

But to break another’s heart, is an act that cannot be 
sanctioned. 

‘ The temple and the mosque may be repaired or 
renewed, but not the broken heart.’ The Sikhs said, 
‘ Only he on whom the Guru looketh with favour 
obtaineth such wisdom. We possess little wisdom, 
and have erred. It is by thy favour all our troubles 
are removed. Thy words are like the juice of nectar, 
mines of knowledge, arrows to destroy worldly love 
and hate, or guides to salvation.’ 

Two hill Rajas went with a strong force to the Guru 
under pretence of paying him a complimentary visit, 
but in reality to obtain tribute from him, and 
remove him from their country. On arriving in the 
neighbourhood of Kiratpur they encamped near a 
tank. The Guru on hearing of their arrival promptly 
sent them supplies of every description. 

The Rajas presented themselves the next morning 
at the Guru’s levee, but while doing obeisance to 
him retained guile in their hearts. The Guru, by 
his occult power, knew their designs, and represented 
to them that faqirs were never called upon to pay 
tribute. If they desired anything from him he 
would give them divine instruction, which would be 
more advantageous than any sublunary wealth. 

The Rajas on hearing this found their business 
with the Guru at an end. They both stood up, then 
prostrated themselves before him, and begged to be 
put on the right way, for they had seriously erred. 
They confessed that they had come with evil inten- 
tions, but they would never again harbour thoughts 



288 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


to the Guru’s detriment. The Guru replied, ‘ Show 
not your pride to the Guru. Go and rule your king- 
doms, oppress not your subjects. If ye do, the 
Creator will show you His anger, and consign you 
to hell. Adhere to your own wives, drink not wine, 
sleep not on the top stories of your palaces out of 
reach of your subjects. Let it not be that, while 
they are complaining below, ye are enjoying your- 
selves above. The subj ects are the root, the Raj as the 
branches of the trees. Whatsoever king oppresseth 
his subjects applieth the axe to his kingdom. Con- 
struct tanks, wells, bridges, and schools, and extend 
religion through your kingdoms.’ The Rajas much ! 

edified by this discourse, took leave of the Guru and j 
returned to their states. I 

c 

Chapter III j 

There was a Sanyasi called Bhagwan Gir, who, j 
in order to obtain spiritual consolation, went to 
visit the Guru in Kiratpur. The Guru advised him l 

to proceed to Dehra Baba Nanak and join the j 

Udasis there. This was tantamount to ordering f 

Bhagwan Gir to relinquish his sect, for the Sanyasis 
worship Dattatre, while the Udasis have as their guru 
Sri Chand, the eldest son of Guru Nanak. I 

The Mahant at Dehra Baba Nanak at that time t 

was Mihr Chand, the great-grandson of Guru f 

Nanak. The Guru commended Mihr Chand as a 
man of piety. Bhagwan Gir acted on the Guru’s | 
advice. He prostrated himself before Mihr Chand, 
and received from him initiation, and the name \ 

Bhagat Bhagwan, or saint of God. Bhagwan Gir then \ 

travelled in various countries as a missionary, but 
without any success. He was not wanting in energy 
or eloquence, but no one would heed him or listen 
to his exhortations. Disheartened he returned to 
Mihr Chand to report his failure. 

Mihr Chand told him that, if he had desired to 


LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 289 

become a priest, he ought to have received initiation 
from Guru Har Rai who was the real Guru, and to 
have solicited his orders before proceeding on his 
mission. It was, however, not yet too late. Bhagat 
Bhagwan might even now go to the Guru and crave 
his blessing. On appearing before the Guru, Bhagat 
Bhagwan began to weep and repent of his error in 
not having asked his permission before he had set 
up as a teacher. The Guru cheerfully pardoned him, 
and said that he had now become acceptable in God’s 
court. The Guru directed him to go to Hindustan 
and reform its people. He was not to hide his light, 
but put it in a conspicuous place to illumine men’s 
minds. The Guru promised that he should be every- 
where well received, and that his preaching should be 
heartily accepted. Bhagat Bhagwan proceeded on 
his mission and irrigated with the water of his 
instruction the dried and shrivelled hearts of his 
Hindustani hearers. His disciples are now pros- 
perous land-owners in the north of India. 

One day his Sikhs inquired of the Guru whether 
those who read the Gurus’ hymns without under- 
standing them derived any spiritual advantage there- 
from. The Guru gave no reply at the time, and 
next morning went a-hunting. On a level plain on 
his way he saw pieces of a pot which had held butter. 
The sun was melting the butter on the potsherds. 
The Guru took one of them in his hand and said, 
‘ Ye see, my Sikh brethren, these are old potsherds, 
but when they are heated, the butter that hath 
adhered to them rapidly melteth. As the grease 
adhereth to the potsherds, so do the Gurus’ hymns 
to the hearts of his Sikhs. At the hour of death the 
Gurus’ instruction shall assuredly bear fruit. Whether 
understood or not, it hath within it the seed of 
salvation. Perfume still clingeth to the broken vase. 
The meaning of this parable is, that whoever daily 
readeth the Gurus’ hymns shall assuredly obtain 
peace. And even though he do not fully understand 

u 


SIKH. IV 



290 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


them, God will undoubtedly assist him. Guru Ram 
Das hath said : — 

The Word is the Guru, and the Guru is the Word, and in 
the Word is the essence of ambrosia . 1 

' Guru Arjan too hath said : — “ God will not destroy 
your labour.” 2 

' That is, even though ye understand not, God will 
accept your prayers. God never in the slightest 
degree spoileth a good act, so why should daily 
repetition of our hymns be wasted?’ The Guru’s 
questioners were satisfied and their devotion in- 
creased. 

By his mother Natti’s advice the Guru went to 
Kartarpur to meet his elder brother Dhir Mai. The 
Guru remained with him some time, the greater part 
of which he spent in giving religious instruction to 
the crowds who flocked to see him. 

The Guru became a great centre of attraction at 
the Baisakhi festival in Kartarpur. Hymns were 
sung in concert such as : — 

O Guru, may I behold thee and live ! 3 

On that occasion Bhagtu returned with several Sikh 
friends to visit the Guru. He was now old, his hands 
trembled, and a cane supported his tottering steps. 
The Guru having received him with great respect and 
seated him near him, asked him when he was going 
to marry, that is, when he was going to become 
Death’s bride. The Guru had in mind the following 
verse of Shaikh Farid : — 

The soul is the bride, Death the bridegroom ; he will 
marry her and take her away. 

The Guru receiving no answer repeated the ques- 
tion. Bhagtu believed that the Guru was banter- 
ing him, and went home without giving a reply. 
While there he reflected — ‘ The Guru never speaketh 

1 Nat Ashtapadi. 2 Kedara Chhant. 3 Guru Arjan, Suhi. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


291 


in vain. His words ever prove true, and, though 
I am old, it is incumbent on me to marry and verify 
the Guru’s words.’ 

Bhagtu set out again to meet the Guru. On the 
way he saw a girl scaring birds off a field of bajra, 1 
and decided to marry her if she gave her consent. 
He then addressed her, ‘ O fair one, I desire to fulfil 
the words of the Guru and marry thee. Pardon me 
for the proposal. Be these birds and trees our 
witnesses.’ The girl was astonished at his words, 
and felt so alarmed and abashed that she could make 
no reply. Bhagtu, however, decided to go through 
the form of a marriage ceremony with her, and instead 
of the actual circumambulations of the bride moved 
his cane, which did duty for her, round a blade of 
bajra, representing the Granth Sahib. This cere- 
mony over, Bhagtu continued his journey, leaving the 
girl in her bajra field to wonder at his eccentricity. 
When he reached the Guru the same question as 
before was put to him. He then mentioned his 
marriage on the way with the sole object of fulfilling 
the Guru’s words. The Guru explained, ‘ I merely 
desired to ask thee thine age or, in other words, when 
thou wert likely to die and perform real marriage. 
Tarry with me now, and I will assist thee to the 
utmost of my power. She whom thou didst marry 
in misconception of my words, shall abide in virtue 
and continence ; and the children of thy former wife 
shall call her mother and be obedient to her.’ This 
event occurred in the beginning of the cold season 
when bajra ripens. Bhagtu lived until the end of 
the following April. 

The manner of his death was as follows : — He con- 
tracted a severe dysentery. Several Sikhs went to 
visit him in his illness. They used to say to him, 

‘ Thou hast often cured others ; why not cure thy- 
self ? ’ He would reply, ‘ 0 Sikhs, entertain no such 
idea. The Guru in this world putteth an end to the 

1 A cereal largely cultivated in the Panjab, the Penicellaria spicaia . 



292 THE SIKH RELIGION 

sorrows of his Sikhs. In the realm of death no pain is 
felt. Some of my followers used to steal cattle, and , 
give me their milk, but it was a stolen nutriment. 

For drinking it I have suffered in this world, but my 
pain shall end here. My suffering hath purified me, 
and I shall take my journey to the next world in 
happiness.’ Then uttering ‘ Wahguru ’ his life issued 
from his body as painlessly, in the words of the ’ 

chronicler, as a garland of flowers falls from an ele- : 

phant’s neck. 

The Guru ordered a sumptuous bier and sent for 
musicians to sing the Gurus’ hymns to rebeck ! 

accompaniments on the occasion. i 

The true Guru hath caused my cargo to arrive in safety. | 

The heated caldron hath become cold ; the Guru hath f 

given me the cooling Name . 1 \ 

| 

The Guru decided to set fire with his own hands to 1 

Bhagtu’s funei-al pile, but the masands endeavoured \ 

to dissuade him. He silenced their remonstrances I 
by telling them that Bhagtu, born to his parents in 
their old age, was the result of Guru Ram Das’s 
prayer, and therefore worthy of all honour. He was 1 
a real Sikh and dearer to the Guru than the Guru’s i 

own relations. That was why he would kindle his : 

pyre with his own hands. 

On one of the Guru’s preaching tours he stayed at 
Mukandpur in the present Jalandhar district. He 
there drove a bamboo shoot into the ground in 
memory of his visit ; and it still survives as a stately 
tree. Thence the Guru went to the country of Malwa 
and visited the tank near Nathana where Guru Har 
Gobind had fought. There Kala and Karm Chand, 
two brothers of the Marhaj tribe, came to him to 
complain that the people of the Kaura tribe would 
not allow them to live among them. Upon this the 
Guru sent for Jait Pirana, the head of the Kaura 1 
tribe, and endeavoured to induce him to give five 
1 Guru Arjan, Maru. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


293 


ploughs of land to the complainants for their 
maintenance. Jait replied with a Panjabi proverb, 
‘ Gras daiye, bas na daiye ’ — that is, give a morsel 
to eat, but not land to live upon — and represented 
that the complainants’ tribe could never subsist oh 
five ploughs of land. The Guru replied, ' Guru 
Nanak will shed his blessing on the land, so that it 
will suffice for the Marhaj tribe.’ Still Jait refused. 

The Guru informed Kala and Karm Chand of the 
failure of his negotiations with J ait, and advised them 
to leave the place next morning, tarry where night 
overtook them, take possession of the land around 
them, and call it Marhaj. Thither too Jait followed 
them and warned them off. They refused to leave 
and quoted the Guru’s order. Kala went to the 
Guru to tell him of their second failure to establish 
a permanent residence. The Guru, seeing his friends’ 
difficulty, recommended forcible resistance to Jait 
and his people. Kala represented J ait’s strength and 
the hopelessness of a struggle with him. The Guru 
encouraged Kala to secure a habitation, and said 
that he himself would aid him and his party. This 
occurred in the Sambat year 1707, A. D. 1650. 

The rival tribes engaged in combat. Jait drew his 
sword on Kala but missed him. Kala in return cut 
Jait transversely through the body, as if the passage 
of his sword had been marked by J ait’s sacrificial 
thread. This ended the warfare. After Kala’s 
party had settled in the land a second difficulty 
arose. Their neighbours would not intermarry with 
them. Here again the Guru interposed. He recom- 
mended the Sikhs who visited him to form marriage 
alliances with the Marhaj people. The Guru remained 
for some time at Nathana preaching to the people, 
and Kala and his friends frequently waited on him. 

The Guru by his diligent and earnest preaching 
made many disciples. His hearers abandoned the 
worship of cemeteries and cremation grounds, and 
embraced the simple worship of God. There Kala 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


294 

and his two nephews Sandali and Phul, sons of Rup 
Chand, went to visit him. Phul was borne on Kala’s 
shoulder, and Sandali held Kala’s finger as he walked. 
When the children arrived in the Guru’s presence, 
Phul put his hand on his belly. The Guru asked 
why he did so, and Kala told him. Phul could not 
speak himself, and the only way he had of describing 
the pangs of hunger which he felt was to slap his 
belly. The Guru took compassion on him and said, 
‘ He shall become great, famous, and wealthy. The 
steeds of his descendants shall drink water as far 
as the J amna ; they shall have sovereignty for many 
generations, and be honoured in proportion as they 
serve the Guru.’ 

When Kala reached home, and his wife heard of 
the Guru’s benediction, she upbraided her husband 
for not having taken his own children to the Guru. 
‘They also should in that case become kings. Now 
our sons shall have to pay tribute to our nephew.’ 
Kala replied, ‘ Destiny is very powerful. I knew 
not that the Guru would bestow such abundant 
blessings.’ Kala’s wife then put pressure on him 
to take his own sons to the Guru, and teach them 
to strike their bellies in token of hunger. When 
Kala and his sons appeared before the Guru, and 
the children enacted the part in which they had 
been instructed, the Guru demanded an explana- 
tion. Kala said he had thus acted in obedience to 
his wife’s orders. The Guru replied, ‘ The parents 
of these children are alive, but at the same time they 
shall have their own cultivation, eat the fruit of 
their toil, pay no tribute, and be dependent on 
no one.’ This prophecy has been fulfilled. Their 
descendants own twenty-two villages called the 
Bahia, which pay no land revenue. 

Phul had six sons, from the eldest of whom, namely 
Tilok Singh, the Rajas of Nabha and Jind are 
descended. Phul died in Sambat 1740, a. d. 1689. 
From Phul’s second son, Ram Singh, the Maharaja 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


295 


of Patiala is descended. These three are known as 
the Phul ke Raje, or Phulkian chiefs. The state 
of Patiala is now the largest, but it was the Raja of 
Nabha who in ancient times bore the title of Chaudhri, 
then an office of power, responsibility, and honour. 

Chapter IV 

We now return to the story of the girl who guarded 
the bajra field, and whom Bhagtu so unceremoniously 
wedded. She went and told her father that an 
eccentric old man had pretended to marry her, and 
she described all the strange proceeding. At the 
same time she vowed she would consider him her 
husband, and marry no one else. Her father inquired 
who the strange bridegroom was, and soon learned 
that it was no other than the saint Bhagtu. Father 
and daughter took no further action at the time. 
She remained in her father’s house and continued 
to work in his fields. It became known in due time 
that Bhagtu was dead, and that he had left two sons, 
Gaura and Jiwan, by a former wife. Gaura the elder 
soon became the Raja of Bhatinda. To him the girl’s 
father addressed himself with a view to procure her 
suitable maintenance. Gaura sent for her, received 
her with the greatest respect, and treated her as his 
own mother. 

Gaura visited the Guru when he was at Nathana. 
During his stay Jassa, the Guru’s chauri-bearer, said 
to him, ‘ Marry me to thy second mother, Bhagtu’ s 
virgin widow, who is now in thy house. My wife 
is dead. I am a widower, and the marriage of a 
widower and widow would be very suitable.’ Gaura 
felt insulted at the proposal, and bided his oppor- 
tunity to take revenge. He found it one day while 
they were both hunting with the Guru. The Guru 
had advanced in front of the party when Gaura drew 
his sword and killed Jassa. When the Guru heard of 
it, he forbade Gaura to enter his presence. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


296 

After this the Guru returned from Nathana to 
Kiratpur. Wherever he went he was followed by 
Gaura, who hoped to find an opportunity of soliciting 
his pardon, and a retractation of his curse. When 
the Guru arrived in Kiratpur, Gaura encamped a 
mile distant. For six months the Guru remained in 
Kiratpur, and was ever shadowed by Gaura. When 
the Guru again proceeded to Malwa, Gaura followed 
him. As the Guru was proceeding along the Satluj, 
he met some Muhammadan troops who were marching 
from Lahore to Dihli. One of the officers inquired 
the name of the party and was informed that it was 
Guru Har Rai and his bodyguard. The officer was 
already aware that it was the Guru’s grandfather, 
Guru Har Gobind, who had killed his grandfather, 
General Mukhlis Khan, at Amritsar, and he deter- 
mined on taking life for life. 

While the officer was thus inquiring and cogitating 
the Guru passed on. The officer then waylaid the 
Guru’s wives who were following, and attempted 
violence. Now came Gaura’ s opportunity to per- 
form signal service for the Guru with the object of 
obtaining his pardon. The Guru had been forbidden 
by his grandfather Guru Har Gobind to engage in 
warfare, but Gaura might fight for him and defend 
his family. Gaura had his own troops. They set 
on the Musalmans and fought valiantly until night 
closed the combat. The Musalmans escaped under 
cover of the darkness, and the Guru’s wives succeeded 
in escaping their brutality. When the Guru heard 
of Gaura’s gallantry he at once sent for him Gaura 
was not allowed time to wash his face and hands, 
but was ushered stained with blood into the Guru’s 
presence. The Guru learned from him the events of 
the battle and pardoned him. After this Gaura 
was glad to return to his own territory. The Guru 
then marched to Kartarpur and discontinued his 
projected tour to Malwa. 

A Brahman of Kartarpur had obtained a son as 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


297 


the result of a vow that he would make him a tithe- 
paying Sikh of the Guru. The child, however, died 
during the Guru’s stay. The Brahman took the 
corpse with loud lamentations to the Guru’s door, 
and there sat down beside it. He said, ‘ If my son 
revive not, I will die myself.’ The Guru remonstrated 
with him on his dissatisfaction with the will of God. 
‘ The boy’s life was complete. When the oil is at 
an end, how can the lamp burn ? Guru Nanak hath 
said : — 

If a boy die amid his youthful sports, 

People will weep and say he was a merry boy. 

He who gave him took him, the weeper erreth. 

What can be done if he die in the ripeness of youth ? 
There is this difference — his friends and relations will 
mournfully speak of him as theirs . 1 

Accursed in the world are they who weep for the loss of 
worldly things . 2 

'O Brahman, it would have been worse had the 
boy died after marriage. Thou wouldst suffer 
misery from continually seeing his widow in thy 
house. The world is, as the Guru hath said, a 
chamber of lamp-black, and thy son hath died before 
becoming defiled with it.’ 

However much the Guru preached, the Brahman 
only learned one lesson, namely, ihat he himself 
should die. The Sikhs took compassion, and inter- 
ceded with the Guru for him — ‘ Cherisher of the 
poor, thou art potent to break and to mend. The 
Brahman hath now for a day and night lain pros- 
trate at thy door. Hungry and poor he too will 
die in thy presence.’ The masands also went and 
pleaded for the Brahman — ' Great king, if this child 
revive not, people of other creeds will make various 
remarks to our discredit.’ The Guru replied, 1 Is 
there any among you who now make these repre- 

1 He will have more relations and friends to weep for him the 
older he grows. 2 Maru Solha. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


298 

sentations, sufficiently philanthropic to bestow his 
own life on the Brahman’s son ? ’ 

On hearing this the necks of the hearers sank 
into their bodies. The Guru put the question three 
times, but received no reply. Within less than half 
an hour Jiwan, Bhai Bhagtu’s younger son, drawing 
a winding-sheet over him, said, ‘ 0 divine Guru 
Nanak, I will take this boy’s death on myself, and 
give my life to him.’ Saying this, he whose name 
was life — Jiwan — entered eternal life, and the 
Brahman’s son arose repeating the spell of the true 
Name. While the people were wondering, the Guru 
said, ‘Blest is that Sikh who for the sake of another’s 
life hath not spared his own.’ When the Bairars, the 
tribe to whom Jiwan belonged, heard of his self- 
sacrifice, they hastened to appear before the Guru 
to express their displeasure — ‘Great king, Jiwan was 
only eighteen years of age, and had but recently 
brought home his bride. She is pregnant, and who 
will cherish her now ? He hath but just entered the 
fair, and this is his fate.’ The Guru said, ‘ A son 
shall be born in his house whom you shall call Sant 
Das. His offspring shall greatly increase and people 
many villages.’ It may be mentioned that his 
descendants now occupy a tract in the Firozpur 
district called Chak Bhai. After this the Guru 
returned to Kiratpur. 

The Emperor Shah Jahan kept near him his 
eldest son Dara Shikoh whom he loved. His second 
son Shujah Muhammad he made Governor of Bengal. 
Aurangzeb the third was appointed governor of the 
Dakhan, and Murad Bakhsh the fourth received the 
province of Gujrat. Their ambition, however, was 
not satisfied. They each sought to become Emperors, 
and for this purpose amassed wealth and armies in 
their respective provinces. In doing so they prac- 
tised great oppression. They used to make the 
Rajput Rajas stand with clasped hands in front of 
them and bring their daughters to them for their 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


299 


enjoyment. Thus was a stigma' attached to the 
Hindus like the spot on the moon. The Rajput 
princes had to obey in everything, or they would 
have had to don the poisoned skins of tigers and die. 

When Shah Jahan had reigned for many years, 
he contracted the germs of disease and showed no 
signs of recovery. No one but Dara Shikoh was 
allowed to approach him. A rumour then spread 
that His Majesty was dead, and this afforded a good 
opportunity to thieves and highway robbers to 
exercise their self-elected calling. There was general 
confusion far and near, and evil fate fell on the com- 
munity. Dara Shikoh intercepted letters and peti- 
tions to his father, and passed on them such orders 
as he thought expedient. People were afraid to go 
outside their houses. No complaints were listened 
to. The Emperor’s sons became rebels, and assumed 
sovereignty in their own provinces. In every village 
men’s minds were unsettled like a boat in a whirlpool. 

It was ascertained that Shujah Muhammad had 
arrived at Banaras from Patna. When Dara Shikoh 
heard of his movements, he sent for Raja Jai Singh 
and ordered him to march against him. Jai Singh 
proceeded with all haste towards Banaras. He 
halted at Bahadurpur and Shujah Muhammad went 
forth to give him battle. Shujah Muhammad’s troops 
were defeated with great slaughter and he returned 
to Bengal pursued by Raja Jai Singh. The latter 
restored tranquillity in the districts of Patna and 
Manger, and dried the weeping eyes of the populace. 

Dara Shikoh dispatched Raja Jaswant Singh of 
Jodhpur to preserve order in the Dakhan. He gave 
him special instructions to punish Aurangzeb if he 
strove to make himself independent, and bring in 
chains Murad Bakhsh who had shown a disposi- 
tion to usurp sovereignty. Jaswant Singh having 
received command of a large army, proceeded on 
his expedition. Before his arrival in the Dakhan 
Aurangzeb and Murad had united their armies. 
J aswant Singh’s men fought valiantly, but could not 



300 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


succeed against numbers and were obliged to retire. 
Aurangzeb was enraged that Dara Shikoh should have 
sent an army against him, and he at once prepared 
to retaliate and if possible seize the reins of empire. 

Prior to the departure of Jaswant Singh to the 
Dakhan, Shah Jahan and his son Dara Shikoh had 
resided in Agra. During Jaswant Singh’s absence 
they removed to Dihli for the benefit of Shah J ahan’s 
health, the climate of Agra not being suitable for him. 
After Jaswant Singh’s defeat Dara Shikoh put his 
father under restraint, and then made preparations 
to oppose Aurangzeb’ s progress. The Emperor 
cautioned Dara Shikoh to beware of Aurangzeb who 
was deceitful and vindictive, but the warning was 
of no avail. Dara Shikoh proceeded with great 
pomp and rejoicing to oppose Aurangzeb. He 
pitched his camp at Samugarh near the margin of the 
river Chambal, and there awaited his brother’s 
approach. Aurangzeb soon appeared at the head 
of his own and Murad’s armies, and there ensued 
a determined battle. Aurangzeb succeeded in 
capturing several of Dara Shikoh’s nobles. Dara 
Shikoh himself fled from the field, and only halted 
in Dihli where he entrenched himself in the fort. 

Aurangzeb proceeded to Agra to seize his father 
who by this time had returned there. The old man 
was very ill, and in this condition was imprisoned 
by his undutiful son. Aurangzeb also imprisoned 
his brother Murad Bakhsh though he had assisted 
him to vanquish Dara Shikoh. He then proceeded 
to Dihli with his own and Murad’s armies, and 
Dara Shikoh’s fugitive battalions. Dara Shikoh, 
fearing that the Dihli nobles would assist his brother 
and that he himself would be captured, directed his 
steps to the Panjab, taking with him his faithful 
adherents and all his wealth and valuables. 

Aurangzeb then issued a proclamation that no 
one should assist or receive Dara Shikoh on pain of 
his highest displeasure. The result was that Dara 
Shikoh wandered an exile from town to town and 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


301 


village to village. In this extremity he decided on 
visiting the Guru, who had sent him the healing cloves 
and myrobalans. He was, in the first place, grateful 
to the Guru, and, in the second place, his favourite 
priest Mian Mir had been loud in the Guru’s praises. 
Dara Shikoh dispatched the following letter to the 
Guru. ‘ 0 saint of the world, supremely pious, by 
meeting whom God’s light shineth on man, pure 
image of God, it is through thy favour man obtaineth 
salvation. My heart longeth to behold God, but 
only those to whom thou showest favour can do so. 
I desire to meet thee and by the fulfilment of this 
wish to remove my doubts. If I may fall at thy feet 
the wish of my heart will be fulfilled, but the duties 
of empire leave me no leisure and entangle me like 
a fish in a net. My priest Mian Mir hath praised 
thee, and since then I have desired to meet thee. 
Regard me with a look of affection. The Emperor 
forced empire on me, but I told him my heart desired 
not greatness. I was, however, obliged to obey my 
royal father’s mandate. Mercifully assist me ! ’ 

To this letter the Guru replied, ‘ O Prince, thou art 
the object of God’s grace, since the holy saint Mian 
Mir showeth thee favour. In the desire to tread in 
God’s way and know thyself thou hast obtained 
spiritual empire. Aurangzeb, who is unmindful of 
God, may obtain worldly empire, but shall suffer 
without respite in hell-fire. Fear not ; be confident ; 
salvation shall be thy portion. Thou rulest over 
the eternal sovereignty of religion which will last 
for ever. Great is thy good fortune since thou 
lovest God’s name, and hast met Him who is un- 
equalled and indescribable. Ever blest is thy devo- 
tion. Wherefore be happy that thou hast obtained 
thy salvation. This world is a play and transient in 
its nature ; be not enamoured therewith.’ 

Dara Shikoh proceeded to Kiratpur in the hope of 
obtaining the Guru’s assistance, but found him 
absent. The prince then sent him a second letter 
which reached him in Khadur. The result was that 



302 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


the Guru and the prince had an interview on the 
right bank of the Bias. On this occasion the prince 
made large offerings to the Guru. The prince had 
been a diligent student of the Hindu and Muham- 
madan religions, and had adopted opinions which 
belonged to the enlightened era of Akbar. He put 
the Guru some questions and placed before him some 
of his theological doubts and difficulties. The Guru 
complimented him on his spiritual knowledge, and 
then gave him instruction in the Sikh religion, such 
instruction as has often been repeated in the preceding 
pages. The Guru added, ' It is often the duty of 
kings to take arms and engage in battle, and either 
die themselves or kill their enemies for the acquisition 
of wealth and territory. Wherefore collect an army 
and obtain as many allies as possible. Go to Lahore, 
fortify thy position, fight when necessary, and obtain 
victory. God assisteth those who assist themselves. 
Once thou inflictest defeat on Aurangzeb, thou 
shalt have many Rajas for thine allies. They now 
know thine excellent disposition, and will declare 
themselves on thy side when they are convinced that 
their action is safe. Thou hast now no resource but 
the arbitrament of battle. All the kings of India 
are subject to the emperor who ruleth in Dihli, and 
if thou recapture it not, thou shalt have no abiding- 
place, for the master of that city shall be master of 
India. Therefore thou must struggle to collect 
troops for battle and prevent the establishment of 
Aurangzeb’s authority.’ Dara Shikoh on receiving 
this encouragement asked the Guru to grant him faith 
in God, and said, ' I do not require a fleeting temporal 
empire. I merely desire spiritual perfection. I will 
fight when compelled by my enemies to do so and 
endeavour to obtain victory. What God desireth is 
unalterable.’ 

The Guru and the prince retired to their respective 
tents for the night, and next morning the prince was 
informed that Aurangzeb’s army was pursuing him. 
He then departed for Lahore requesting the Guru to 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


303 


impede its progress as much as possible. Dara 
Shikoh was pursued with great vengeance and 
hostility by his brother’s army to Lahore, Multan, 
Bhakhar, and Gujrat in the present Bombay presi- 
dency. He was finally captured through the infamous 
agency of a Pathan named Jiwan who betrayed him. 
He was sent to Dihli, where his political conduct and 
his heterodox opinions were charged as offences against 
him. In the hope of softening his brother’s heart he 
addressed him the following letter : — ‘ My brother 
and my emperor, all hail ! I congratulate thee and 
thy children on the empire thou hast obtained. 
I have no worldly desires myself. I only want a 
nook to dwell in and a female servant to cook and 
fetch for me so that I may pray for thee.’ Entreaties 
never availed with Aurangzeb. Dara Shikoh was 
condemned by a jury of Muhammadan priests and 
executed on the plea of apostasy by his brother’s 
orders. The Guru’s words had made such an 
impression on his heart that he never uttered a sigh 
of pain or distress in his last moments. It is said 
that three hundred and seventy Muhammadan 
priests signed the order for his death. One man, 
named Sarmad, resolutely refused to sign it, and 
thus incurred Aurangzeb’s gravest displeasure . 1 

1 Suraj Parkdsh, Ras IX, Chapters 22, 23. Sarmad was a man of 
thought, learning and enterprise. Originally a Jew, he nominally 
accepted Islam. He left his native country, Kashan, and emigrated 
to India as a merchant and physician. He found a patron in Dara 
Shikoh, whom he nominated as the rightful successor of Shah Jahan. 
Sarmad used to sit by the roadside dressed in unfashionable raiment, 
and preach to the populace doctrines not in accordance with the rigid 
Moslem orthodoxy of Aurangzeb. It became well known that Sarmad 
instead of repeating the orthodox creed of Islam used to repeat a 
formula which did not acknowledge Muhammad as the prophet of 
God. On account of this, his friendship for Dara Shikoh, and his 
general unconventionality, Aurangzeb ordered that the ‘ long-tongued 
unbeliever ’ should die. His execution took place three years after the 
murder of Dara Shikoh. He was buried in the precincts of the great 
Jamma Masjid in Dihli. 



3°4 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chapter V 

Aurangzeb was now secure on the throne of Dihli. 
He kept his father a prisoner in Agra until he died. 
Dara Shikoh was dead, Shujah Muhammad had fled, 
and Murad Bakhsh was a prisoner with his father. 
Aurangzeb having acquired a bigoted Muhammadan 
training set himself to uproot the Hindu religion. 
He began with the temples and idols in the sacred 
city of Mathura, known even to the Greeks of the 
age of Alexander as a Hindu place of sanctity, and 
destroyed there every vestige of Hindu worship. 
He then destroyed the temples and idols in other 
parts of India. He pulled down the temple of 
Brahma in Pushkar and threw its materials into the 
neighbouring lake. He demolished seven hundred 
temples in the state of Ajmer. He then proceeded 
to Banaras, the great stronghold of Hinduism, where 
he found ample materials for his destructive fury. 
Wherever his iconoclastic zeal prevailed he built 
Muhammadan mosques. Whenever two or more 
men had a suit or a contention, it was always 
decided for the party who became Muhammadan. 

Meantime complaints were made to Aurangzeb 
against the Guru. The Guru, it was said, had met 
Dara Shikoh, blessed him, and assisted him in 
opposing the Emperor ; and it was also reported 
that he was preaching a religion distinct from 
Islam, and performing miracles in evidence of his 
divine mission. The Emperor was accordingly 
advised to send for him and convert him to Islam 
unless he could clearly establish his religious pre- 
tensions by the performance of miracles at the royal 
court. When the Guru was once converted, hundreds 
of thousands of Hindus would follow his example. 
Moreover, the Guru, who had been a friend of the 
Emperor’s enemy, Dara Shikoh, could never become 
his friend. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


305 


The Emperor accordingly addressed the following 
to the Guru : — ‘ Guru Nanak’s house was the house 
of holy men. He treated friend and foe in the same 
way, but thou hast supported Dara Shikoh in his 
effort to obtain sovereignty. I have captured and 
put him to death, so he hath in no way benefited by 
thine assistance. But let bygones be bygones, and 
let us now be friends. Come to me. I am now 
enthroned as Emperor. I have a great desire to 
behold thee. Wherefore thou shouldst come to me 
without delay.’ 

The Guru replied, ' I have no business with thee 
that thou shouldst have summoned me. I am not 
a king who payeth thee tribute, nor do I desire to 
receive anything from thee, nor do we stand in the 
relation of priest and disciple to each other, so 
wherefore hast thou summoned me ? So far from my 
having conferred empire on Dara Shikoh, it was the 
eternal throne and umbrella of religion I conferred 
on him. He had no wish for terrestrial empire. The 
empire he hath obtained is imperishable. It is only 
he whom God loveth who can be like Dara Shikoh. 
If thou have any doubt as to the empire Dara 
Shikoh hath obtained, meditate on him as thou goest 
to sleep, and thou shalt have a vision of the reality.’ 

■ The Guru’s words proved true. Aurangzeb one 
night saw his brother seated on his throne. Celestial 
maidswere dancing round him. Sandal, attar of roses, 
and other perfumes exhaled from them, and garlands 
of flowers adorned their persons. Aurangzeb dressed 
in dirty clothes in the style of a pariah was carrying 
a basket of filth. Rain fell at that moment and the 
filth overspread his features. Then up came a slave- 
driver and struck him such a blow with a stick that 
he fell on his face. Upon this the Emperor awoke 
and began to reflect. ‘ The Guru sent this dream to 
terrify me. Now what is to be done ? I will not 
abate a j ot of my efforts against him. I will straight- 
way send an army to capture him and bring him 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


306 

before me.’ Next morning, on awaking, the Emperor 
called one of his nobles and said, ‘ If Guru Har Rai 
will not come of his own accord, then arrest and 
produce him before me. If he struggle against his 
arrest, then write to me, and I will send a strong 
force with sufficient munitions of war to thine 
assistance.’ 

The noble, seeing the difficulty of the enterprise 
before him, left the royal presence. Go, however, he 
must, but his object was never accomplished. On 
the road he ate some badly cooked food which induced 
indigestion and caused his death. At that time 
a company of Sikhs arrived from Dihli to behold the 
Guru. They informed him of all the unsuccessful 
efforts made by the Emperor to arrest him, and they 
expressed their apprehension that some harm would 
befall him. The Guru replied, ' At the time of my 
obtaining the Guruship, my grandfather said that any 
person who strove to do me injury should vanish like 
hail before the fire.’ The Guru then quoted from 
Guru Arjan : — 

God is the Lord of all creation ; He specially assisteth 
His servants . 1 

The Muhammadan priests counselled the Emperor 
not to use any harsh language in his summons to the 
Guru, but write to him in an apparently friendly 
manner. When the Guru arrived, the Emperor could 
treat him as he pleased. This advice the Emperor 
accepted, and wrote as follows : — ' O holy Guru, thou 
art in the place of Guru Ram Das, who was univer- 
sally known as the Guru of the world and lord of 
miracles. He visited my ancestor the Emperor 
Akbar and was on friendly terms with him, so kindly 
come thou too and grant me a sight of thee. Show 
me thy miracles and tell me of the ways of God.’ 

The messenger duly arrived in Kiratpur and pre- 
sented the Emperor’s letter. The Guru consulted 

1 Gujari. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


307 


his Sikhs as to the expediency of going to Dihli, and 
putting himself into the Emperor’s power. His 
counsellors gave their opinion, ‘ Take care that 
matters go not from bad to worse. The Emperor is 
very obstinate. On the other hand, thou possessest 
miraculous power, and he on whose head thou placest 
thy hand can accomplish everything. Therefore in 
our humble opinion it is better for thee to go. But 
thou art a searcher of hearts, and knowest best.’ 

The Guru replied, 1 What you counsel is politic, 
but I have registered a vow that I will never look at 
the wicked Emperor Aurangzeb. In the first place, 
I have no business with him. Secondly, he is very de- 
ceitful and treacherous. Thirdly, he hath imprisoned 
his father and put to death his brother Dara Shikoh, 
who was a great saint, and believed in the All-per- 
vading Spirit. Fourthly, the Emperor, who is so 
cruel and bigoted and murdereth holy men, is every 
one’s enemy.’ 

Ram Rai, son of the Guru, arrived while the subject 
was under discussion. The descendants of the Guru 
were all assembled, and every one was giving his 
opinion. Some said ‘Yes’, and some said ‘No’. 
Upon this Ram Rai gave it as his opinion that some 
one should certainly go to the Emperor, otherwise 
their position would be one of great difficulty, as the 
Emperor would not be put off with excuses. Upon 
this the assembly turned towards Ram Rai and said, 

‘ Thou art the Guru’s elder son and capable. Go 
thou and settle this matter, otherwise there will be 
great trouble. Aurangzeb hath quite determined to 
carry his design into execution. If thou go not, 
there will be a huge conflagration. It is not on any 
account proper to quarrel with the ruler of the period.’ 
Upon this Ram Rai said that if they all wished it, 
he would go himself to the Emperor and effect a 
satisfactory settlement with him. Guru Har Rai 
accordingly gave him permission to depart. 

The Guru on the departure of his son Ram Rai 

x 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


308 

for Dihli, enjoined him in all his words and actions 
to fix his thoughts on God, and everything would 
prove successful. He also impressed on him the pro- 
priety of not countenancing any objections the 
Emperor might make to the Granth Sahib, but of 
replying to him patiently and to the purpose. The 
Guru continued, ‘ The Emperor J ahangir told my great 
grandfather Guru Arjan, that certain passages reflect- 
ing on the Muhammadans ought to be expunged, but 
he indignantly refused, and said he would never 
alter or abridge the writings of the Gurus. He 
suffered much in consequence, but he never flattered 
any one.’ Ram Rai was then instructed to rely on 
the divine power of the Gurus, and not in any way 
recede from the principles of his religion. 

Ram Rai made preparations for his journey, and 
next morning with Gurdas 1 and Tara (great-grand- 
son of Bhai Bahlo) and others took leave of the Guru 
and set out on his journey. When in due time they 
reached Dihli, the Emperor was informed by one of 
his staff that Guru Har Rai had not come himself, but 
had sent his son Ram Rai who might be subjected 
to the same trial as had been intended for his father. 
The Emperor then decided that, if his object in 
making trial of the Guru were not fulfilled by the 
Guru’s son, he would send for the Guru himself. 

It is said that Ram Rai performed several miracles 
in Dihli. The Emperor sent him poisoned robes which 
he wore unscathed. At one interview the Emperor 
had a sheet spread over a deep pit so that Ram Rai 
might fall into it, but the sheet, it is said, would not 
give way, and Ram Rai was miraculously preserved. 

By the Emperor’s order a meeting of Muhammadan 
priests was held for the purpose of interrogating 
Ram Rai on the subject of the Gurus’ hymns. The 
Emperor opened the conversation, ‘ Ram Rai, your 
Guru Nanak hath written against the Moslem 
religion. In one place he hath said : — 

1 This is not the author of the Wars. 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 309 

Mitti Musalman ki pere pai kumiar ; 

Ghar bhande itan kian, jaldi kare pukar, 1 

the translation of which is : — 

The ashes of the Muhammadan fall into the potter’s clod ; 

Vessels and bricks are fashioned from them ; they cry out 
as they burn. 

‘ What say you the meaning is ? ’ 

RamRai began to reflect that it was with great diffi- 
culty he could please Aurangzeb. If he became sulky, 
then all his miracles would be of no avail. He there- 
fore determined to alter the line of Guru N anak, in order 
to gratify the Emperor. He thus altogether forgot his 
father’s parting injunctions, and said, ' Thy Majesty, 
Guru Nanak wrotq, ‘Mitti beiman ki’, that is, the 
the ashes of the faithless, not of the Musalmans, fall 
into the potter’s clod. The text has been causelessly 
corrupted by ignorant persons and thy Majesty’s 
religion and mine defamed. The faces of the faithless 
and not of the Musalmans shall be blackened in both 
worlds. When alive they shall burn, and when dead 
their ashes shall be defiled.’ All the Muhammadan 
priests were pleased with this reply. The Emperor 
then conferred a mark of favour on Ram Rai and 
dissolved the assembly. 

The Sikhs of Dihli lost no time in reporting Ram 
Rai’s perfidy to his father. Their envoy swiftly pro- 
ceeded to Kiratpur, informed the Guru of the pomp 
and honour with which Ram Rai had been received in 
Dihli, and detailed the miracles he had exhibited. 
They then explained how he had made an alteration 
in a line of Guru N anak in order to please the Emperor, 
and asked the Guru how far this was to proceed. 

The Guru was much distressed at the insult to Guru 
Nanak and the Gran th' Sahib, and said, ‘ The words 
of Guru Nanak are unerring arrows. Great priests, 
holy men, and miracle-workers revere his words. 

1 Asa ki War. 



3io 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Guru Nanak was a sovereign who established his 
empire over men.’ The Guru then passing in review 
the whole of Ram Rai’s conduct since his arrival in 
Dihli, his treachery to his faith, his unnecessary 
exhibition of miracles, and his long absence, decided 
that he was not fit for the Guruship. ‘ The Guruship,’ 
said the Guru, ‘ is like a tigress’s milk which can only 
be contained in a golden cup. Only he who is ready 
to devote his life thereto is worthy of it. Let Ram 
Rai not look on my face again. Let him abide with 
Aurangzeb, and amass money at his court. In the 
words of Guru Amar Das : — 

Let him who is worthy sit on the king’s throne . 1 

The face of the liar shall be cursed ; the true saint only 
shall be magnified .’ 2 

When Ram Rai, who remained in Dihli, heard of 
his father’s decision to exclude him from the succes- 
sion, he began to repent and grieve : — ‘ Alas ! why 
have I done such an evil deed ? To flatter a false 
monarch I have altered a word of the divine Guru 
Nanak, not one iota of whose writings is inaccurate.’ 
While Ram Rai said this in his heart, he began to 
boast to the world at large — ‘ It is of no consequence. 
What care I for the Guruship ? I have lakhs of 
rupees, I have endless Sikhs and followers. The 
Emperor is now a sincere friend of mine. Why should 
I desire the Guruship ? I will seize it by force after 
my father’s death. I will now hold my court in 
Dihli. What care I for anybody ? I have hundreds 
of thousands of brave men at my disposal to support 
me.’ Thus stating the pros and cons of his position 
and tossing his opinions from side to side as if they 
were a magician’s ball, he gave himself airs as if he 
had been already appointed governor of a province. 

Prior to the departure of Ram Rai for Dihli a 
Sikh came from a distance to see the Guru, and 
asked him which of his sons should succeed him. 

1 Maru ki War I 2 Bilawal ki War. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 311 

It is said that he suggested the following test — ' Take 
a needle to where my two sons are reading the 
Granth Sahib by turns. Try to insert the needle 
into the couch on which the sacred volume is sup- 
ported. The couch which is most softened by the 
reading shall receive the needle. If thou but prick 
it, the needle will enter of its own accord.’ The 
Sikh took the needle and first tried to pierce .the 
couch when Ram Rai was reading, but it failed to 
enter. He waited until it was the turn of the Guru’s 
youngest son, Har Krishan to read, and after a brief 
delay inserted the needle. It is said that it at once 
entered the couch which had become soft as wax by 
the force of Har Krishan’ s devotion. 1 

The Sikh went and informed the Guru, but at his 
request kept private the result of the trial. The 
Guru then said, ' The immortal God hath given thee 
answer. What impression will not Har Krishan’s 
voice make on soft minds since it produceth such an 
impression on hard wood ? It is only he whose words 
have such power who is fitted for the Guruship.’ 


Chapter VI 

After Ram Rai had resided in Dihli for some 
time he decided he would go to Kiratpur to endeavour 
to induce his father to reverse his decision regarding 
him. 1 The rope may be rotten, but the twist had 
not yet left it ’ — that is, though his hopes were little, 
yet his desire for the Guruship remained. He took 
leave of the Emperor and proceeded to a spot twelve 
kos from Kiratpur. There he pitched his tent, and 
wrote to his father for permission to visit him. He 
said he had suffered for his sins and desired to implore 
the parental forgiveness. The Guru replied, ' Ram 

1 This parable is now understood by the Sikhs to mean that Ram 
Rai’s reading of the Granth Sahib produced no impression on the Sikh, 
while the devout manner in which Har Krishan intoned the sacred 
volume softened the Sikh's heart. 



312 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Rai, thou hast disobeyed my order and sinned. 
How canst thou aspire to become a holy man ? Go 
whither thy fancy leadeth thee. I will never see thee 
again on account of thine infidelity. If I appoint thee 
Guru, what thou hast done to-day others will do 
to-morrow.’ 

'' Ram Rai on receipt of this letter proceeded to 
Lahore where he was well received. Apart from 
being the eldest son of the Guru and a reputed 
thaumaturge, he was also supported by the Sikhs 
through policy, for it was believed that he possessed 
the confidence of the Emperor. On this account 
men who had previously not been Sikhs, now became 
his disciples and espoused his cause. 

Ram Rai in process of time wrote to his uncle 
Dhir Mai to request him to intercede for him with his 
father. ' Tell him that it is not a good thing to up- 
root a household. It is not proper to bestow the 
Guruship on my younger brother Har Krishan. 
On this some very severe comments will be made. 
When Prithia was superseded in favour of Guru 
Arjan, what troubles arose! Let not this happen 
again. I am besides on very good terms with the 
Emperor Aurangzeb, and I shall certainly complain 
to him.’ Dhir Mai took this letter to the Guru’s 
mother and persuaded her to accompany him to the 
Guru, who by this time had returned to Kartarpur, 
in the hope of prevailing on him to pardon Ram Rai. 
Dhir Mai and the Guru’s mother both pleaded 
earnestly and with their own natural eloquence 
expanded Ram Rai’s arguments. 

The Guru replied, ‘ What I have done is not at all 
unusual. Guru Nanak having made trial of his sons 
gave the Guruship to a disciple. Guru Angad and 
Guru Amar Das, having also made trial of their sons, 
did not appoint them to succeed, but gave the Guru- 
ship to their servants. After full consideration I have 
arrived at the conclusion that Ram Rai was blinded 
by the love of pelf when he so far forgot himself as to 



LIFE OF GURU HAR RAI 


3i3 


alter a word in a hymn of Guru Nanak to please the 
Emperor. What was done in the beginning will 
also be done now.’ 

Dhir Mai was not to be easily balked. He kept 
continually pressing Ram Rai’s claims on the Guru, 
so the latter, in order to avoid an altercation with his 
brother resolved to leave Kartarpur, and return to 
Kiratpur. There is an Oriental proverb that swans 
remain not in the mire ; so the Guru could not abide 
in evil association. He formed his plan overnight, 
set out next morning, and arrived in due course in 
Kiratpur where he gave a splendid banquet to his 
people. 

On one occasion when some Sikhs singing hymns 
from the Granth Sahib visited the Guru, he happened 
to be lying on his couch. On hearing the hymns he 
immediately arose. When asked the reason he said, 
‘ Hear, my beloved Sikhs, the Guru is embodied 
in compositions whose sanctity is immeasurable 
and unrivalled. The Guru’s instruction is a raft 
to cross over the fiery ocean of the world. It con- 
ferreth happiness on the true Guru’s Sikhs, and 
removeth sin from the hearts of the readers. It may 
be called a lion to frighten the deer of avarice, or an 
elephant to break down the great tree of sorrow. It 
produceth divine knowledge and dispelleth ignorance. 
He who payeth respect to the Guru’s hymns shall 
without further effort cross over the terrible ocean 
of the world, for great is their efficacy. Were I not 
to show reverence for the Guru’s hymns, my Sikhs 
would not do so, and without such reverence bliss 
could not be obtained. That is why I rose from my 
couch. 

‘ The Sikh who acteth according to the Guru’s 
instruction, shall obtain the supreme dignity. It is 
only he who hath no devotion or faith, who rever- 
enceth not the Guru’s words. Without reverence 
devotion is not obtained, and without devotion there 
is no holiness. Without holiness how can there be 



314 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


deliverance ? And without deliverance the soul 
shall be subject to further transmigration and shall 
not be absorbed in God. It is incumbent on the 
Sikhs to obtain happiness by pondering on the 
Guru’s words. Pilgrimage, fasting, sacrifice, and 
painful austerities are of no avail. The Guru’s 
saint is my Sikh, and delighteth in the Guru’s hymns. 
Be assured that he who doth not, is no Sikh of 
mine.’ The Guru’s example to rise when the sacred 
volume is read is still observed by his followers. 

The Guru feeling his end approaching again 
thought of his successor. He had always felt that 
as Ram Rai, who was plotting and struggling for 
the Guruship, was unworthy, it must be left to some 
holy person. He remembered the wisdom of Kabir : — 

Do now the work of to-morrow ; and if thou do it now, 
do it at once. 

Nothing can be done hereafter when Death standeth over 
thy head. 

The Guru having thus resolved summoned a great 
council of his Sikhs at which the descendants of his 
predecessors attended. The occasion was celebrated 
with a banquet, great rejoicings, the songs of many 
minstrels, and the music of many rebeck-players. 
The Guru seated his second son Har Krishan, who 
was still a child, on a throne in the centre of the 
assembly. He then placed a coco-nut and five paise 
before him, circumambulated him three times, and 
had a tilak or patch put on his forehead. The whole 
company then rose and did obeisance to the young 
Guru. Guru Har Rai enjoined all his Sikhs to con- 
sider Har Krishan as his image, to put faith in him, 
and they should obtain salvation. Thus was the 
ceremony of Har Krishan’s installation complete. 

Guru Har Rai closed his eyes in divine pleasure 
and went to his final rest on Sunday the ninth day 
of the dark half of the month of Kartik, Sambat 
1718 (a.d. 1661). 









GURU HAR KR1SHAN 


SIKH IV P. 315 





315 


LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN, 
THE EIGHTH GURU 
Chapter I 

Guru Har Krishan, the second and younger son 
of Guru Har Rai and his wife Krishan Kaur, was 
born on the ninth day of the dark half of the month 
of Sawan in Sambat 1713 (a.d. 1656). The reason 
why his brother Ram Rai was superseded has 
already been given. Har Krishan, though appointed 
Guru at the age of five years and three months, gave 
promise of a docile spirit and acute intellect. Ac- 
cording to a Hindustani proverb, the nature and 
ultimate size of a tree can be judged by its sprouting 
leaves, so this child gave early indications of being 
worthy to succeed to the high dignity of his line. It 
is said that even at that early age Guru Har Krishan 
used to give his Sikhs instruction, resolve their doubts, 
and lead them on the way to salvation. Sikhs 
came from all quarters to visit him, and he sent 
preachers in every direction to fulfil his father’s 
pious object to propagate and extend the faith. 

Ram Rai was at the Emperor’s court in Dihli 
when his younger brother was appointed to the 
Guruship in Kiratpur. On hearing of it be became 
very envious. He said, ‘ I first came here by my 
father Guru Har Rai’s order. This powerful Em- 
peror hath so appreciated me that he hath given me 
much wealth. I have moreover extended the faith, 
and yet my father hath deprived me of the Guru- 
ship and conferred it on my younger brother.’ 
Although Ram Rai’s conscience told him that he 
had done wrong, yet, in the words of the chronicler, 
jealousy stopped the ears of his intelligence. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


316 

The masand Gurdas who attended on Ram Rai, 
noticing his troubled state of mind said, ‘ There is no 
need to be sad. Thou hast many disciples in this 
part of the country. Even the great Emperor him- 
self holdeth thee in honour. Of what consequence 
is Guru Har Rai’s neglect of thee ? ’ Ram Rai 
replied, ' Knowest thou not that when the Sikhs of 
this country learn that the Guruship hath been given 
to my younger brother, they will turn away from 
me and go to him ? ’ Gurdas was ready with an 
expedient, ‘ Send thy masands in every direction 
to proclaim thee Guru, and say that whoever boweth 
to any other shall be accursed. By this device people 
will reverence thee as Guru Har Rai’s rightful suc- 
cessor. If, on the other hand, people reverence 
Guru Har Krishan and make him offerings, that 
needeth not disturb thy mind. He is thy younger 
brother begotten of a Guru and entitled to mainte- 
nance.’ 

Ram Rai did not approve of the latter, but he 
did of the former portion of Gurdas’s advice, 
namely, to have himself proclaimed Guru. He 
then assembled the masands, ordered them to go in 
every direction, proclaim his succession, and bring 
him the offerings of the faithful. Ram Rai reflected 
not on the words of Kabir : — 

Where there is covetousness there is death ; where there 
is forgiveness there is God Himself. 

The object of the Guruship was to save the world, 
togive instruction in the true Name, and to blend men 
with their Creator, but Ram Rai thought it a means 
of amassing money, and for this among other reasons 
his father had set him aside. The masands followed 
the example of Ram Rai, and applied themselves, 
not to spread the religion of the Gurus, but to 
accumulate wealth for their pleasures. 

The disciples whose guru is blind act blindly 
themselves. The masands began to beat and plunder 



LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 317 

poor Sikhs, and threatened with the Guru’s curse all 
who resented their conduct. Ram Rai’s desire to 
collect large offerings was not fulfilled. The masands 
became proud and rebellious, and kept the greater 
part of the offerings for themselves. They treated 
Ram Rai as a nonentity, for they deemed that all the 
Sikhs were in their own power, and that they could 
appoint to the Guruship whomsoever they pleased. 
Ram Rai found himself completely at their mercy, 
and was obliged to act according to their dictation. 

After much reflection Ram Rai decided on laying 
his case before the Emperor. On obtaining an 
audience he thus addressed Aurangzeb, ‘ Sire, my 
father hath gone on high, and my younger brother 
hath taken possession of his throne, his property, 
and offerings. This misfortune hath befallen me 
on account of my obedience to thee. My father 
was opposed to thee on that account, and at his 
death ordered my younger brother never to be 
reconciled to thee and never to look upon thy face. 
Now I pray thee to summon him to Dihli, and order 
him to exhibit miracles as I have done.’ 

Aurangzeb, who was himself the incarnation of 
deceit, instinctively knew what Ram Rai was plot- 
ting, but yet his conscience at first moved him 
to give good counsel, ‘ 0 Ram Rai, thou art amply 
provided for. Why annoy thy younger brother ? 
He is also thy father’s son.’ When Ram Rai 
further pressed his plaint, it occurred to Aurang- 
zeb that he might avail himself of Ram Rai’s 
displeasure for his own religious and political pur- 
poses. He said to himself, ‘ I want to convert all 
the Hindus to Islam, but I apprehend failure in 
the Panjab, for there the people greatly reverence 
the Guru, and, if they rise against me, I shall 
have great difficulty in effecting my design. I have 
already several times considered how I can induce 
the Guru to accept the Muhammadan faith. It 
was on that account I summoned Guru Har Rai. 



THE SIKH RELIGION. 


318 

He sent his son to me, and I have him now in my 
power. There is yet another brother, of whose 
resistance to my designs I am equally apprehensive ; 
but if I succeed in bringing him here, I may bribe 
him into acquiescence. If he obstinately resist, 
I will set both brothers at variance, and they shall 
die by mutual slaughter. In this way my faith 
will quickly spread in the Panjab, and I shall gain 
heaven by my success in converting the infidels. 
The Sikhs will never suspect that I have put both 
brothers to death. I shall kill the snake without 
breaking my stick.’ 

Aurangzeb having contrived this tortuous and 
wicked plan, called Raja Jai Singh of Amber (Jaipur) 
who happened to be at court and ordered him to 
summon Guru Har Krishan the successor of Guru Har 
Rai. ‘ I wish to see him,’ said the monarch, ‘ be careful 
that he be treated with all respect on his journey.’ 

Ram Rai was delighted on hearing of the order to 
summon his brother — ‘ If my brother disobey, the 
Emperor will send an army to destroy him. If, on 
the other hand, he come here, it will be in disobedience 
to our father’s final order never to appear before 
Aurangzeb ; and he will then be deemed a greater 
sinner than I. If he run away through fear of the 
Emperor, I will then go and, establishing myself 
as Guru, take possession of Kiratpur.’ Aurangzeb 
was as much delighted as Ram Rai at the decision 
that had been arrived at, though for quite a different 
reason. 

Raja Jai Singh who had previously heard the 
Guru’s praises was pleased at the prospect of making 
his acquaintance, and of listening to his instruction. 
He was very glad that such a bigoted man as the 
Emperor had ordered the Guru to be summoned with 
the high respect due to his spiritual position. The 
Sikhs of Dihli also, who were displeased at Ram 
Rai’s proceedings, manifested their satisfaction at 
the hope of seeing the real Guru among them, and 



LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 319 

begged the Raja to inform him that not only the 
Emperor but the Sikhs of Dihli were thirsting to be- 
hold him. 

Raja Jai Singh sent a high official with orders that 
he was to invite rather than summon the Guru, and 
escort him to the imperial capital with all pomp and 
ceremony. The Raja knew that Ram Rai and the 
Guru were at variance, but he never suspected that 
the Emperor harboured any evil designs. 

When the high officer deputed to summon the 
Guru arrived in Kiratpur and delivered his message, 
the Guru knew that Ram Rai had instigated the 
Emperor to summon him, and said he would give 
a reply on the morrow. When the Guru, after 
breaking up the assembly in which the officer had 
been received, went to his house, he found his 
mother, his Sikhs, and his masands very sad. On 
inquiring the cause, his mother said that she was in 
perplexity as to what advice to give him, whether 
he should proceed to Dihli or not. He was a child, 
he had no father to take counsel with, his elder 
brother, a man of great craft and worldly experience, 
bore him enmity, and it was difficult to say what 
plan should be adopted. The Guru replied, ‘ Mother 
dear, what cause is there for anxiety ? Whatever 
Wahguru hath decided shall take place. Why be 
anxious regarding it ? What can poor mortal do 
if he have not God’s succour ? I hold my father’s 
opinion that it is better for me not to go to 
Aurangzeb or hold any intercourse with him.’ The 
Guru’s mother rejoined, ‘Thou speakest aright, but 
the Turks hold sway. The Emperor is obstinate and 
violent. If thou refuse, an army may be sent to 
fetch thee, in which case there would be sanguinary 
fighting and many lives lost.’ 

Next day the Guru sent for the officer and said, 

‘ My brother is with the Emperor, I do not know that 
I can do anything for His Majesty by accepting his 
invitation,’ The officer replied, ‘ It is at thy brother’s 


320 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


suggestion the Emperor hath sent for thee, but he 
is very anxious to behold thee himself also, and 
the Sikhs of Dihli hunger for a sight of thee. Where- 
fore come with me and please them all.’ The Guru 
rejoined, ‘ I will go by all means where I shall be 
received with love, but it hath been imposed on me 
as a duty not to look on the Emperor’s face. Write 
and tell Raja Jai Singh that, if the Sikhs of Dihli 
want me, I will go to them, but if the Raja desire 
me to meet the Emperor, I must decline the invita- 
tion.’ The officer then represented that Raja Jai 
Singh had promised to call the Guru to Dihli, but 
had not promised to bring him before the Emperor. 
The officer would, however, write to Raja Jai Singh, 
and obtain precise information as to what was in- 
tended. 

When an answer arrived the officer hastened to 
communicate it to the Guru — ‘ Raja Jai Singh 
humbly requesteth the Guru to come to Dihli, so 
that he and the Guru’s Sikhs may behold him. The 
Guru may act as he pleaseth regarding an interview 
with the Emperor. If the Emperor force an inter- 
view on him, Raja Jai Singh will foil his intention by 
diplomacy.’ The Guru hearing this said, ' It is 
well. I will set out the day after to-morrow.’ 

The Guru duly set out from Kiratpur. On the way 
he waited for. some Sikhs who had come thither after 
his departure. Among them were the halt, the 
maimed, the leprous, &c., all of whom he cured by the 
imposition of hands. In the same way he waited on 
the road for other Sikhs who had come from distant 
countries to see him. Much time was thus spent, 
and Raja Jai Singh’s messenger had to remonstrate. 
On arriving at the village of Panjokhara near Ambala, 
the Guru made a boundary of sand and ordered 
that no Sikh should cross it after his departure, so 
that he might be able to expedite his journey. He 
said, ‘ Let any Sikh who desireth to see me stand 
here and make his supplication, and he shall obtain 


LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 


321 


liis wishes.’ He left some of his disciples there to 
give instruction. There is now a temple on the spot 
in memory of the Guru’s visit. 

Chapter II 

While the Guru at Panjokhara 1 was meditating 
on God, a Sikh came and told him of a proud Brah- 
man who was in the neighbourhood. The Brahman 
had asked the Guru’s name, and learned that it was 
Sri Har Krishan. Hearing this the Brahman became 
very angry and said, ' The poet of the Bhagavat 
Gita, whom none can equal, called God merely 
Krishan, and the Guru calleth himself Sri Har 
Krishan, as if he thought himself superior to Krishan. 
If he be such a Guru, let him come and translate 
the Gita with me.’ The -Guru replied to his in- 
formant, ‘ The eyes of understanding are very good, 
but the cataract of pride so blindeth them that they 
cannot see God’s way. The proud think all persons 
beneath them.’ 

The Sikh, however, prevailed on the Guru to allow 
the Brahman to come to him. When the Brahman 
came he did not salute the Guru, but unceremoniously 
sat down in his presence. He then said, ‘ Thou who 
callest thyself Sri Har Krishan, must be greater than 
the god Krishan. Translate the Gita for a little 
while with me.’ The Guru replied, ‘The Brahmans 
of the present day are not deeply read. They are 
great talkers and arguers, and are deteriorating 
every day ; and in the future they will have even 
less religion than they have now. What the Brah- 
mans know is not real knowledge, and they are 
strangers to God. I have not read the Gita, and 
were I to translate it with thee, thou wouldst say 
I was some rich man’s son who had had a private 
tutor, whereas I should translate by my spiritual 
power. Go and bring some ignorant rustic to discuss 
1 Pandit Tara Singh’s Gur Tirath Sangrah 
Y 


SIKH. JV 


322 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


with thee, and when thou hast vanquished him, I 
will speak to thee.’ The Brahman went and brought 
an ignorant water-carrier called Chhajju from the 
nearest village. The Guru looked him full in the 
face and said, ‘ Thou hast become a great divinity- 
scholar. Now discuss the meaning of the Shastars 
with this Brahman.’ The Brahman and the water- 
carrier accordingly began to discuss, and the water- 
carrier gave such learned replies, that the Brahman 
stood in astonished silence. The questions and 
replies related to Hindu theology. 

The pandit became convinced that the Guru had 
infused his supernatural power into the water- 
carrier. He accordingly begged the Guru’s pardon 
for the unceremonious manner in which he had 
approached him. The Brahman added, ' Thou art 
really the holy god Krishan. Make me thy disciple.’ 
The Guru did so and discoursed to him on humility. 

Raja Jai Singh went forth with bare feet to meet 
the Guru. The Emperor sent large presents on 
the Guru’s arrival and expressed a wish to see 
him. In reply to the Emperor’s message the Guru 
said, ‘ My elder brother is with the Emperor, and 
is ready to do whatever he desireth. I cannot 
meet the Emperor. My father with his dying 
words told me that my elder brother would transact 
all political affairs with His Majesty, and I had 
better not meddle with them. My mission is to 
preach the true Name. There is no one who can 
be so affectionate as a brother, and there is no 
one who at the same time can be a greater enemy. 
Witness the treatment of his brothers by the Em- 
peror himself. Ram Rai beareth me great enmity, 
and were the Emperor on receiving me to show me 
any favour, Ram Rai would become still more 
hostile, and grave dissensions in families had better 
be avoided. For this and other reasons my father 
forbade me to meet the Emperor.’ 

When this speech was reported to the Emperor, 



LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 323 

he was astonished that a child of seven years of age 
could have uttered it. He said the Guru must be 
some person possessing supernatural power, and 
nothing could be gained by annoying him. Such 
good thoughts however merely flashed across Aurang- 
zeb’s mind for a moment. They were but the light- 
ning shining through black clouds on a dark night, 
which quickly vanishes and leaves the landscape 
in greater darkness than before. Aurangzeb bided 
his time, for he knew the Guru must grant him the 
desired interview. 

Crowds of Sikhs thronged to see the Guru and 
receive spiritual consolation from him. There was 
then a plague raging in Dihli, and those afflicted 
with it, who sought the Guru’s mediation, were all 
healed. Ram Rai finding the Sikhs falling away from 
himself, and flocking round the Guru, became greatly 
incensed and said to himself, ‘ The evil I intended 
for him has turned out to his advantage. I must now 
contrive some other expedient that he may not be 
able to oppose my designs.’ 

The following day the Emperor’s son was an- 
nounced. The prince said that his father desired 
to see the Guru. The Guru replied that he had 
already given his reason for not seeing the Emperor, 
and he repeated what he had said before, namely, 
‘ Ram Rai who is at court will transact with the 
Emperor any political or administrative business 
that may be necessary. If the Emperor desire any 
religious instruction, I will dictate it to thee and 
thou mayest write it in Persian characters. When 
he understandeth and acteth according to it, the 
blessing of Guru Nanak shall light on him, and he 
shall be happy.’ 

The Prince was astonished at this reply and said 
the Guru might write down his instruction for the 
Emperor. The Guru then dictated the following 
hymn of Guru Nanak for the Emperor’s edifica- 
tion : — 

Y 2 



324 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


If the True God dwell not in the heart, 

What is eating, what clothing, 

What fruit, what clarified butter and sweet molasses, 
what fine flour and what meat ? 

What clothes, what a pleasant couch for billing and cooing, 

What an army, what mace-bearers and servants, and what 
palaces to dwell in ? 

Nanak, except the true Name all things are perishable . 1 

The prince took this hymn to his father who was 
much impressed with it, and his eyes for a moment 
opened to the truth, but the desire. of converting the 
Guru to Islam and prolonging the enmity between 
the two brothers again blinded him. 

The Emperor once said in the course of private 
conversation to Raja Jai Singh, 'Thou and others 
highly praise the Guru and say he possesseth miracu- 
lous power. Hast thou ever put him to the test ? 
If thou have not done so, then do so now, and if 
thou find he possesseth any superhuman power, then 
let me know.’ Raja Jai Singh replied, ‘ It is difficult 
to put such persons to the test. Dealing with 
them is highly dangerous for they may utter curses 
instead of blessings, but I will, however, as thy 
Majesty ordereth, contrive some means of proving 
him.’ Jai Singh then went home and in con- 
sultation with his head queen contrived a plan to 
test the Guru. She was to dress herself as a slave, 
and sit with slaves behind the other queens when 
the Guru visited Jai Singh’s palace. If the Guru 
recognized her, then it might be considered a proof 
that he really was what his followers deemed him 
to be. 

The Guru by his supernatural power knew the 
plot laid for him, and became very sad at being 
expected to show to the world what saints and holy 
men conceal, namely, miraculous power ; so when 
Jai Singh went to conduct him to his palace, he at 
1 Majh ki War. 


LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 325 

first refused to receive him. On pressure, however, 
the Guru admitted Jai Singh to his presence. Jai 
Singh told him in a very respectful manner that his 
queens desired to see him. When the Guru com- 
plied with Jai Singh’s invitation, he found a large 
female assemblage ready to receive him. The Guru 
touched the front queen with a wand and said, 
‘ Thou art not the head queen.' In the same way 
he touched the other ladies of the zanana and rejected 
them all. At last he touched the head queen 
whom, notwithstanding her disguise, he recognized 
at the back of the assembly and said, ‘ Thou art the 
head queen.’ She was very pleased at being re- 
cognized in her menial attire. The Guru then said 
in reference to the trial made of him by Raja Jai 
Singh : ‘ Guru Nanak will ever confer happiness on 
those who have unswerving faith. He will ever 
abide with them and assist them, and God will love 
them both in this world and the next. He whose 
mind is perplexed with doubts is not a true believer. 
He who through pride deemeth himself very exalted 
must like a lofty peak on the surface of the earth 
ultimately have a fall. Devotion, which is like rain, 
resteth not on lofty places. There the field of God’s 
love germinateth not, and the harvest of salvation 
is not gathered.’ Upon this Raja Jai Singh and his 
queens admitted the Guru’s sanctity. 

Chapter III 

On the fourth day of the dark half of Chet, the day 
after the above occurrence, the Guru was seized with 
fever. His eyes were seen to grow red, his breathing 
became very rapid, and the heat of his body was felt 
at a considerable distance. His mother Krishan Kaur 
sat by him and began to lament, saying, 1 My son, 
why art thou intent on thy death ? Thou hast only 
lately been seated on the Guru’s throne, thou art still 
a child, and it is too soon for thee to depart. Mayest 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


326 

thou enjoy the full term of life, have a family, and 
then go to God ! Why at this tender age turn thy 
thoughts away from the world ? ’ 

The Guru replied, ■ Mother dear, it is natural that 
thou shouldst feel this paroxysm of love, but have 
no anxiety for me. It is our duty to accept the will 
of the Almighty. As Guru Arjan hath said : — 

The Master may gather the crop whether it be green, half- 
ripe, or ripe and fit to be cut. 

The reapers 1 make preparations, bring sickles, and arrive 
on the ground. 

They cut the crop as it is measured out to them when the 
Owner giveth orders. 2 

‘ When it is the Husbandman’s pleasure He cutteth 
down the crop. There is no rule as to whether it 
must be green or half ripe. What torture Guru 
Arjan suffered, and yet he uttered not a groan ! 
Why should we mourn for the body, when it is 
God’s will that it should depart. What is to-day, 
and what to-morrow ? Whatever God doeth is for 
the best.’ * 

The Guru, however, thought it proper to go outside 
the city to the margin of the Jamna in order to 
breathe a purer atmosphere. He pitched his camp 
near Raja Jai Singh’s army. Raja Jai Singh himself 
lived in the city, and on hearing that the Guru had 
left it, sent an officer to ask if he had offended him 
in any way. The Guru explained the reason of his 
change of residence. 

Prior to the officer’s return Raja Jai Singh in- 
formed the Emperor of the manner in which he had 
tested the Guru. The Emperor then became still 
more anxious for an interview, and again ordered 
the Raja to procure it for him. When Raja Jai 
Singh returned to his palace, he heard of the Guru’s 
illness. He then went to inquire after his health, 
and also to discuss with him the subject of his inter- 
1 Death's myrmidons. 2 Sri Rag, 


LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 327 

view with the Emperor. The Guru was, however, 
too ill to give any definite reply. 

Next day small-pox asserted itself. Its unmis- 
takable pimples appeared on the Guru’s body. With 
it a very violent fever raged and unconsciousness 
ensued. Sikh writers minutely describe the effects 
of the small-pox on the Guru’s tender and handsome 
person, and the pains he suffered. A man suffering 
from small-pox wriggles like a fish on hot sand. If 
he desire to lie down, he cannot do so. On whichever 
side he lies, he is pained and writhes in anguish and 
torture, which, as the chronicler piously remarks, may 
God not inflict even on an enemy ! The Guru, 
however, uttered no cry of pain, but continued to 
repeat God’s name. 

During his illness every one was ordered to repeat 
the hymns of the Granth Sahib for the occasion. 
The Guru continued ill for several days. At last 
his condition grew desperate. He knew his end 
had arrived, and he invited all who desired to 
behold him for the last time to present themselves. 
Raja Jai Singh, masand Gurbakhsh, and many 
others went to his bedside. Gurbakhsh with clasped 
hands thus addressed him — ‘ Great king, the pre- 
ceding Gurus before their departure entrusted their 
Sikhs either to servants or sons. Thou being so 
young art going to leave us without a Guru. 
How can the Sikhs endure such a calamity ? 
Cherish thy simple Sikhs, and, when thou hast a 
son who is fit for the Guruship, then mayest thou 
depart, not now.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ Be not anxious. The Creator 
will do what is best. My death cannot now be averted. 
The glory of Guru Nanak’s throne shall increase day 
by day. Gurus may die, but their hearts, that is, 
the Granth Sahib, shall remain with you. It con- 
taineth instruction, divine knowledge, and the Guru’s 
spell. It will satisfy all men’s desires. Read it and 
act on its counsels, and Guru Nanak will ever assist 



328 THE SIKH RELIGION 4 

i 

you. Wherefore waver not, but ever turn your 
thoughts towards the immortal God. Salvation is 
obtained through Guru Nanak’s mediation. Put 
faith in him, and remember his words.’ 

The Sikhs understood from the Guru’s language 
that he was about to die. They began to mourn his 
untimely fate and to reflect that there was none so 
competent as he to give them divine instruction. 

He on seeing their anxiety thus addressed them — 

‘ This world is transitory. To fix your minds on ! 

it, to indulge in rejoicing or mourning, and to I 

impute blame to God are all highly sinful acts. We 
ought all to accept God’s will and deem his pleasure 
as our own. Whatever he doeth is for the best. As 
Baba Nanak hath said in the Japji — 

What pleaseth Thee, 0 God, is good. 

This body must one day perish. What mattereth it 
whether it perish now or after the fullness of years ? 

He who obeyeth God’s will renounceth pride and ; 

other deadly sins. He remembereth the true Name, 
crosseth over the world’s terrible ocean, and is for 
ever emancipated from its troubles.’ 

■ Here the Guru’s strength failed him. He became 
silent and closed his eyes. After a short time he 
opened them and gazed affectionately on his Sikhs. 

Raja Jai Singh again appeared with the Emperor’s 
reiterated request for an interview. To this the Guru 
gave the same reply as before, and expressed a desire 
that the Emperor should fix his attention on the hymn 
he had written for him. 

Next day the Sikhs went in a body to behold their 
Guru. Gurbakhsh again addressed him, ‘ Great 
king, Ram Rai is on good terms with the Emperor 
here. In the Panjab there is Dhir Mai, as also other 
Sodhis who claim the Guruship. They are only 
waiting for thy death to assert their claims. Simple 
Sikhs will fall into their toils, and intelligent Sikhs 
will suffer in the midst of the ensuing troubles. In 


LIFE OF GURU HAR KRISHAN 329 

this manner this tree of Sikhism, which hath been 
hitherto cherished, will wither away. Every one 
will be a guru in his own house, and several sects 
of opinionative and heterodox Sikhs will arise. Be 
pleased to appoint some one like thyself for our 
salvation.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ Why be anxious ? The tree 
planted by Guru Nanak’s holy hands shall never 
wither. Droughts, storms, and heat may prevail, 
but that shall never fade. There shall be twofold 
and fourfold miracles, and one Guru shall be blended 
with another.’ 

On this the Guru called for five paise and a coco- 
nut. He took them, and not being able to move 
his body, waved his hand three times in the air in 
token of circumambulating his successor, and said 
‘ Baba Bakale ’, that is, his successor would be found 
in the village of Bakala. When he could again 
speak he ordered the minstrels to sing the Gurus’ 
hymns and repeat God’s name. 

When midnight had passed and there was no 
indication of the Guru’s recovery, his mother, 
Krishan Ivaur, who sat by his bed, looked at his 
handsome face, became very sad, and broke forth 
into lamentation — ‘ What shall I do alone in the 
world having lost my dutiful son and my kind 
husband. Where shall I find them, and how shall 
I live without them ? ’ The Guru said in reply, 

‘ Mother dear, feel no anxiety, the greater part of 
thy life hath been spent in happiness. Pass the 
remainder in God’s service. Guru Arjan hath said : — 

Where the physician cannot succeed, where there is 
neither sister nor brother, God alone assisteth. 

What He doeth cometli to pass, He washeth away the 
filth of sin ; remember that Supreme Being . 1 

By remembering God thou shalt arrive at such 
a superior position that thou shalt never know 

1 Maru. 





330 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


sorrow and never be separated from us.' The Guru’s 
mother was much consoled by this speech. The 
Guru’s final order was that none should weep for 
him, but all were to sing the Gurus’ hymns. In the 
midst of the hymns and the repetition of God’s name, 
the Guru breathed his last on Saturday, the fourteenth 
day of the light half of the month of Chet, Sambat 
1721 (a. D. 1664). His body was cremated on a 
plain called Tilokhari south of Dihli on the bank 
of the Jamna, where his cinerary tomb is still pre- 
served. A temple was subsequently built at the 
place where he had resided when in the city. 




GURU TEG BAHADUR 




SIKH IV P. 331 



33i 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR, 
THE NINTH GURU 

Chapter I 

Guru Teg Bahadur, youngest son of the sixth 
Guru, Har Gobind and his wife Nanaki, was born 
in what is now called Guru ke Mahal, Amritsar, 
in the Panjab on Sunday, the fifth day of the dark 
half of the month of Baisakh, a watch and a quarter 
before day in the Sambat year 1679 (a. d. 1622). 

Immediately after the child’s birth Guru Har 
Gobind with five Sikhs went to see him. On con- 
templating him the Guru knew that his son would 
be a great hero, powerful to endure the sword, and 
so he called him Teg Bahadur. 1 He prophesied 
that the boy should have a son who would develop 
a third religion distinct from those of the Hindus 
and Musalmans, and who would also destroy the 
reign of tyranny in Hindustan. 

When Teg Bahadur was five years of age, he used 
to indulge in trains of thought, during which he 
would speak to no one. His mother Nanaki in- 
quired of his father why he tolerated this conduct 
on the part of his son. Guru Har Gobind consoled 
her by telling her that Teg Bahadur should become 
a Guru, prove very powerful, and sacrifice himself 
for the Sikh religion. 

Teg Bahadur was, as already stated, married to 
Gujari, daughter of Lai Chand, a native of Kartarpur 
in the Jalandhar District. After the death of Guru 
Har Gobind, Teg Bahadur with his mother and wife 
went to live in Bakala, where Guru Har Krishan 
subsequently said his successor should be found. 

1 Bhai Nand Lai calls the ninth Guru Tek Bahadur, that is, a powerful 
prop of the weak. 



332 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


When the Sodhis of Bakala heard of the last words 
of Guru Har Krishan, twenty-two of them claimed 
the right to succeed him. These self-made gurus 
forcibly took the offerings of the Sikhs who came 
to see the real Guru, with the result that true 
worshippers suffered great hardship for a consider- 
able time. At last a Sikh called Makkhan Shah of 
the Labana tribe came from Gujrat in the Dakhan 1 
with an offering of five hundred gold muhars which 
some time previously he had vowed to make to the 
Guru on escaping shipwreck. What was his surprise 
when he found that twenty-two Sodhis had installed 
themselves as gurus ! In this state of confusion and 
uncertainty he resolved to make trial of the pre- 
tenders. He visited them all, and made them 
offerings of two gold muhars each. None of them 
knew that he had brought five hundred muhars for 
the real Guru. Every one of them extolled him- 
self, and said the others were hypocrites and de- 
ceivers. He thought of the words of Guru Arjan 
in the Sukhmani : — 

Goodness shall not even approach him 

Who calleth himself good. 

And again : — 

He who considereth himself lowl 

Shall be deemed the most exalted of all ; 

and he came to the conclusion that these twenty-two 
men only claimed to be gurus in order to plunder 
the Sikhs. 

He then inquired if there were any one else in 
Bakala who claimed to be the Guru. He was told 
there was another man popularly called Tega, son of 
Guru Har Gobind, who dwelt there in silence and 
retirement, but had no ambition to undertake the 
onerous duties of the position. The masands told 
Makkhan Shah that if he desired to interview Tega 
1 Sukha Singh’s Gur Bilds, Chap. I. 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 333 

he might go with them. Makkhan Shah on arriving 
at Teg Bahadur’s house requested an interview. Teg 
Bahadur told his servant to inform Makkhan Shah 
that if he wanted to see him he must come alone. 
When he presented himself unaccompanied by the 
masands, Teg Bahadur reflected that as he had saved 
Makkhan Shah from shipwreck, so he must now dis- 
close himself. ‘ Makkhan Shah hath made trial of all 
the pretenders,’ thought Teg Bahadur, ‘but found 
not the true Guru, and no pretender hath been able 
to satisfy him by telling him the object of his 
visit. If I now conceal myself from him he will 
lose faith in the Gurus. He hath placed great 
reliance on the last words of Guru Har Krishan, 
“ Baba Bakale ”, and if his desires be not fulfilled, 
he will die. Moreover he hath come from a great 
distance. It is therefore on every account necessary 
that I should receive him and tell him his thoughts.’ 

Makkhan Shah was highly pleased on obtaining 
permission to interview Teg Bahadur, and concluded 
that he must be the true Guru of whom he had 
been in search. On being ushered into his presence, 
what did he see ? The Guru was in deep contem- 
plation holding his senses under complete restraint. 
Makkhan Shah, however, fell at his feet, and placed 
his offering of two gold muhars in front of him. 
When the Guru saw the two coins and found Makkhan 
Shah seated near him, he said, ‘ How now, O Sikh, 
thou art trying to wheedle the Guru by presenting 
him with two gold muhars ? Where are the five 
hundred gold muhars thou didst promise when thy 
vessel was sinking.’ Makkhan Shah was delight- 
fully surprised — ‘ 0 Great King, it is true. When 
my vessel full of merchandise was sinking, I invoked 
Guru Nanak, and vowed I would offer him five 
hundred gold muhars if it ever reached the shore.’ 
Makkhan Shah prostrated himself before Teg Baha- 
dur, hailed him true Guru and searcher of hearts, 
and presented him the five hundred gold muhars 



334 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


of his vow. He then ascended a house-top and, 
waving a flag, proclaimed from there, ‘ I have found 
the Guru ! I have found the Guru ! ! ’ On hearing 
this the Sikhs assembled from every quarter, and 
with all due formalities and observances placed 
Teg Bahadur, then in his forty-third year and the 
very image of Guru Nanak, on the Guru’s throne. 
On being installed he conferred robes of honour on 
his Sikhs. The twenty-two false gurus hid them- 
selves as darkness vanishes before the sun’s rays. 

Dhir Mai, the eldest son of Gurditta, seeing the 
offerings made to Guru Teg Bahadur and the honours 
he received, became violently jealous. One day he 
communicated his feelings to his masand, Sihan, 
who bade him be of good cheer, and promised that 
he would put a bullet through his enemy. The 
masand accordingly took about a score of men to 
kill the Guru. He fired and the bullet struck his 
intended victim, but did not prove fatal. The 
masand seized the opportunity to pack up and take 
away the Guru’s movable property. The Guru in 
his affliction retained his composure and evenness 
of mind. He felt no pleasure at access of wealth, 
nor grief at its departure, or at the bodily harm 
caused him, but was happy in the contemplation 
of God’s goodness. 

When Makkhan Shah heard of this occurrence 
from the Guru’s mother, he with the Sikhs pro- 
ceeded in a body to the Guru to condole with him. 
They found him absorbed in contemplation. Then 
with loud cries they went off to Dhir Mai’s residence. 
He closed his door against them, but they burst it 
open, seized him and his accomplices, and tying his 
masand’ s hands behind his back, took him off to the 
Guru. They also recovered and restored to the 
Guru all the property which Dhir Mai and his men 
had taken away. Not only that, but they took 
Dhir Mai’s own private property also, including the 
Granth Sahib, and placed all at the Guru’s disposal. 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 335 

The masand professed great contrition, and with 
much show of humility bent his head on the Guru’s 
feet. He said he had erred and asked pardon for 
his offence. ‘ I am under thy protection ; have 
mercy on me ; 0 cherisher of the poor, hear the 
prayer of a sinner. Though I am a bad son, it is 
incumbent on thee, who art to me a father, to pre- 
serve mine honour.’ 

The Guru on seeing the masand so humbled and 
distressed ordered him to be released. Makkhan Shah 
remonstrated, and said that the man had only met 
his deserts. The Guru however was firm, and ordered 
all the property taken from Dhir Mai to be restored 
to him. He preached to Makkhan Shah and his Sikhs 
that the holy Guru Nanak gave them the wealth of 
the Name which was sufficient for all their wants — 
‘ In anger man committeth evil deeds. He loseth at 
once his senses and his religion. When anger 
springeth up in a man’s heart, what crime is there 
he will not perpetrate ? He thinketh nothing of 
sinning against his parents and his holy Guru. He 
taketh the life which he ought to protect, anduttereth 
nothing but harsh language. He will not refrain 
from any act even though he sacrifice his life in its 
execution. There is no greater sacrifice than life, 
and yet the foolish person will deliberately make it. 
The angry man’s soul burneth if he obtain not his 
desires. He cannot eat or sleep. Day and night 
he is tortured by his passion, and formeth endless 
plans for its gratification. In this way he passeth 
his time in misery. 

‘ To exercise forgiveness is a great act. To exer- 
cise forgiveness is to give alms. Forgiveness is 
equal to ablutions at all places of pilgrimage. For- 
giveness ensureth man’s salvation. There is no 
virtue equal to forgiveness. Wherefore generously 
exercise it. Never abandon this virtue, but ever 
preserve it in your hearts. You are ordered in the 
Granth Sahib to lay up the wealth of the Name, so 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


336 

that it may accompany you in this world and in the 
next. This wealth is only found in the companion- 
ship of good men, and cannot be obtained by any 
other means. My followers possess this wealth 
which is superior to all jewels and gems. The saints 
hoard it day and night. It cannot be purchased, 
no thief can steal, no fire consume, no water drown 
it, whereas worldly wealth is generally accumulated 
by sin. Thieves can steal it, pickpockets purloin 
it, kings seize it, fire burn it, and earth rot it. At 
the hour of death this sinful wealth only causeth 
regret, and, through man’s desires being fixed on it, 
his soul falleth into terrible hell.’ 


Chapter II 

The Guru spent some time at Bakala communi- 
cating similar instruction. In the month of Magh, 
Sambat 1722, he went to Amritsar to bathe in the 
sacred tank, and behold the paradisal temple of 
Guru Ram Das. He bathed, but the ministrants 1 
of the sacred edifice closed the doors of the Har 
Mandar against him. He saluted it however from 
without, then went beyond the precincts, and rested 
on a spot where now is a stone platform dedicated 
to him. He said it was they who were rotten within, 
who had through greed of offerings entered the 
temple. 

The Guru then went and sat on a common near 
the spot where now is a cattle-market, and on which 
is erected a damdama, or resting-place, in his honour. 
When the inhabitants of Amritsar heard what had 
occurred, they went in a body to him, and with 
great humility prayed him to return and revoke his 
prophetic curse, because it was his holy ancestors 
who had founded the edifice. The Guru denied 

1 Then called Mutasadis or clerks, but now known as Pujaris or 
receivers of offerings. 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 337 

that his words bore the significance of a curse. He 
had merely stated the condition in which the minis- 
trants then were, and in which they should remain. 

Meanwhile a company of Sikhs came from the 
village of Walla, and with great humility prayed 
him to go and live with them and bless their village, 
a prayer to which the Guru graciously acceded. On 
leaving Amritsar the Guru was escorted by the 
women of the city. On seeing their devotion he 
said, ‘ God’s love and devotion shall ever abide 
among you.’ In commemoration of the Guru’s 
visit a fair called the Kothe da Mela is held yearly at 
Walla on the day of the full moon in the month of 
Magh. 

Having communicated religious instruction to the 
inhabitants of Walla, the Guru returned to his 
favourite Bakala. Here too he was not allowed to 
abide in peace, for the old jealousy and enmity of the 
Sodhis had revived. He therefore decided not to re- 
main there, but proceed in the direction of the river 
Bias. On arriving at its margin he saw some of 
his men carrying the Granth Sahib and said to 
them : ‘You surely have not brought any of Dhir 
Mai’s property with you ? ’ They replied that they 
had returned everything they had taken from him 
except the Granth Sahib which they had brought 
with them. He became angry that they had taken 
any of Dhir Mai’s property and ordered the Granth 
Sahib to be restored to him. The Guru upon this 
crossed the river. 1 

Meanwhile the Guru pursuing his journey arrived 
at the village of Hazara situated not far from 
Kartarpur, where a memorial Sikh church was sub* 
sequently built in commemoration of his visit. The 
next day he reached Durga near Nawashahar where 
also an edifice was erected in his honour. The 

1 Bhai Santokh Singh states that the Guru entrusted the Granth 
Sahib to the river and informed Dhir Mai, whereupon the latter went 
and took possession of it. 


SIKH. IV 


z 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


33 8 

Guru thence proceeded by very easy stages to 
Kiratpur. There again he was plagued with the 
jealousy of the Sodhis, and sought rest on some land 
about six miles distant, which he subsequently pur- 
chased from the Kahlur Raja. He there laid the 
foundation of the city of Anandpur in the month of 
Har, Sambat 1722 (a. d. 1665). 

On hearing of the founding of the city, Dhir Mai 
and the Sodhis became still more envious of the 
Guru, and determined to ruin him. Of this the 
Guru was duly warned by his people. He merely 
said in reply that he himself entertained no envy or 
jealousy of any one. ‘ He who is angry with the 
Guru without cause shall obtain his deserts. I do 
not desire to annoy any one. The Guru’s love and 
kindliness are at the disposal of all. I have received 
Guru Nanak’s order to cause the true Name to be 
repeated throughout the world.’ 

The Guru at that time had another cause of dis- 
quietude. The Sikhs of Dihli sent a messenger to 
inform him that Dhir Mai had instigated Ram Rai 
to complain again to the emperor regarding his 
supersession. The Guru dismissed the messenger, 
and told him to put the minds of the Dihli Sikhs 
at ease. He at the same time wrote to them, 
‘What can a thousand enemies do to those on 
whose side God the great Guru is ? Kings and 
emperors are all in His power. No one can be 
touched except by His will.’ 

The Guru determined to change his abode, as well 
to give instructions to his Sikhs as to avoid annoyance 
from his relations. On hearing of his intention the 
people of Anandpur waited on him. They represented 
that they had all come thither through reliance on 
him, and yet he was now going to leave them. 
They had left their homes for the twofold advantage 
of being able to see the Guru and derive material 
profit from their change of residence. The Guru 
preached to them in reply to their representations — 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 339 

* This world is transitory. You ought never to fix 
your hearts on it. Profit and loss, weal and woe, 
rejoicing and mourning, which come according to 
God’s will, ought to be equally endured. Perform 
the duties of your religion, and repeat God’s name. 
Meditation on God’s name is the only means of sal- 
vation in this world. Wherefore ponder on it, give 
alms and practise ablution, serve saints with your 
mind, body, and wealth ; speak civilly to every one, 
but keep your thoughts fixed on God. A great 
being shall be born who shall come to abide here, 
and contribute to the extension and importance 
of this city. I have only sown the seed ; he shall 
shade this place like an overspreading tree.’ 

On the 15th of Maghar, Sambat 1722, the Guru 
set out on his tour from Anandpur. His first long 
halt was at Mulowal in the Patiala State. On 
arriving there the people complained to him that 
they could only obtain drinking water from a great 
distance. There was a well near, but its water was 
brackish and unwholesome. He told them to repeat 
God’s name over it, draw water therefrom, and they 
should find it pure and sweet. From that day the 
well has yielded sweet water. It is still known as 
the Guru’s well. 

The Guru then proceeded to Handiaya, where 
there was a severe epidemic of fever and great con- 
sequent mortality. The inhabitants went to put 
themselves under his protection and implore him to 
save them. Upon this the Guru uttering the true 
Name, threw a glance of favour on them and healed 
them of all their maladies. Having given them the 
usual religious instruction he proceeded slowly to 
Dhilwan. 

Thence the Guru proceeded to the villages of 
Khiwa and Bhikki. In the latter lived a man 
called Desu who was a disciple of Sakhi Sarwar, 
He, however, went to see the Guru. The Guru, 
on seeing a piece of bent iron hanging from his 



340 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


neck, asked him what it was. He said it was an 
article that satisfied all his necessities. It gave 
him corn, money, and clothing, and he worshipped 
it every day. ‘ I offer a breakfast of bread and 
sweets,’ said he, ‘ to Sakhi Sarwar. The priest 
having read a blessing and set aside a portion thereof, 
returneth me the remainder, which I distribute 
among the people after satisfying myself.’ The 
Guru on hearing this said that Desu, a Hindu, did 
what a true-born Musalman would never do, and he 
was ruining his prospects both in this world and the 
next. The Guru then gave him spiritual instruction 
and he became a Sikh. At parting the Guru pre- 
sented him with five arrows in memory of the 
occasion. 

On arriving at home Desu fell ill. His wife said 
it was all the result of his having forsaken Sakhi 
Sarwar and taken the Guru’s arrows with him. 
She pressed him to return the arrows and resume his 
religious allegiance to the Baloch Pir. At first 
Desu stoutly refused, but afterwards consented. His 
wife then broke the arrows and threw the pieces 
away. After some days Desu died, leaving a son 
called Gainda. Gainda’s brother-in-law committed 
a murder, and was killed by Gainda. The other 
brothers-in-law then joined and killed Gainda. And 
Gainda’s son was poisoned by his relations for the 
sake of his property. Desu’s death and the tragic 
fate of his relations were popularly attributed to his 
desertion of the Guru. 

The Guru then proceeded to Maur on the Southern 
Panjab Railway, where he was awaited by a great 
concourse of people to whom he preached the true 
Name. He induced the people to sink a well. It 
should be buttressed with baked bricks when an 
opportunity offered. The Guru thence went to 
Maisarkhana, and thence to Talwandi Sabo, now 
known to the Sikhs as Damdama. He thence 
travelled to Kot Dharmwala and was everywhere 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 341 

received with affection by the people. During his 
journey he was pursued by two thieves, one a 
Musalman and the other a Hindu, who watched day 
and night for an opportunity to steal his horse. 
While the Guru wearied with travel lay asleep on 
a dark night, the thieves, it is said, saw from their 
place of concealment a tiger issue from a lonely 
forest and make three prostrations before the sleep- 
ing Guru. The Musalman thief became afraid and 
said to the Hindu, ‘ The Guru whom a carnivorous 
animal not only toucheth not, but boweth to, must 
be some wonder-worker.’ The Musalman would 
therefore never steal his horse, but would go home. 
The Hindu thief could not avoid recognizing the 
Guru’s power, but at the same time, remained fixed 
in his resolution to commit the theft. On awaking in 
the morning the Guru heard of the theft, and in reply 
to his men said that the horse and the thief would 
be found standing on a certain spot to the north 
of his camp. He accordingly sent his servants, and 
ordered them to bring the horse and the thief before 
him. The Guru asked the thief why he had stolen 
the horse, and why he had remained standing with 
the animal instead of running away. The thief told 
him all that had occurred prior to the theft, and 
added that when he had mounted the horse he 
became blind and could not see his way. He had 
travelled several miles but could not find the road, 
and therefore halted at the place where he was 
arrested. In his contrition he afterwards climbed 
a jand tree, broke off a portion of a branch, and 
impaled himself on the stump. The place is now 
called Sulisar. Thus did the thief gather the fruit 
of his sins. Such is the punishment, as saith Shaikh 
Farid, that awaiteth those who perpetrate evil 
deeds. 

The Guru then proceeded slowly to Dhamdhan in 
the Bangar tract, now a station of the Southern 
Panjab Railway. It is related that the Guru pre- 



342 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


sented the Chaudhri of the village with funds to 
construct a well and a dharmsal for the reception of 
travellers. The inhabitants at that time largely 
subsisted on plunder, and the Guru was anxious to 
wean them from that mode of livelihood. One of 
them took milk to the Guru which he refused as 
being the produce of theft and violence. 

The Guru was accompanied by a. Sikh called 
Mihan who was totally devoted to his service. He 
drew water, brought firewood from the forest, and 
performed the most menial offices for him. He 
always kept a cushion on his head for lifting burdens. 
It was continually wet from water dripping on it, 
and his head in consequence soon festered. One 
day as he was on the point of depositing a pitcher 
of water which he had brought, his cushion and 
turban fell off when maggots were seen to issue from 
a sore in his head. The Guru’s mother and wife 
observed this, and brought it to the Guru’s notice. 
The Guru sent for Mihan, gave him a robe of honour, 
and promised him that he should be a Mahant, or 
superior of a religious order. The Guru then put 
his hand on his head, and its pain and sores dis- 
appeared. Upon this, Mihan obtained a knowledge 
of God and of the past, present, and future. The 
Guru presented him with a bullock of the famed 
Nagauri breed and a drum and banner to grace his 
new position. 

The Guru then proceeded to Tekpur also called 
Baharjakh. He abode there for three days in the 
house of a carpenter who conducted him as far as 
Kaithal. Thence he proceeded to Barna. The Guru 
there took occasion to preach against the use of 
tobacco. ‘ Save thy people from the vile drug, and 
employ thyself in the service of Sikhs and holy men. 
Rely on the Guru who is the protector in both 
worlds. He giveth his hand and saveth from 
affliction. When thy people abandon the degrading 
smoke and cultivate their lands, their wealth and 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 343 

prosperity shall greatly increase, and they shall 
want for nothing. Tliey shall possess cows and 
buffaloes in abundance, and they shall be respected 
by the world, but when they inhale the vile vegetable, 
they shall grow poor and lose their wealth.’ Bhai 
Santokh Singh, author of the Sura j Parkash, gives 
his own testimony after a visit to the village of 
Barna, that, as long as the people abstained from 
tobacco, they were happy, but that those who in- 
dulged in its use became idle and lost all their pro- 
perty. Men spent money on tobacco which they 
ought to have applied to the purchase of grain to 
live on or sow in their fields. Bhai Santokh Singh 
baptized several of their descendants according to 
the rites prescribed by the tenth Guru, and did all in 
his power to induce them to abstain from the 
pernicious stimulant. 

Chapter III 

The Guru proceeded to Kurkhetar (Thanesar) on 
the occasion of a solar eclipse. He was received 
with the greatest distinction by all the holy men pre- 
sent, to say nothing of his own numerous followers. 
During his stay there he preached the true Name. 
Then he went "to Bani Badrpur where he contri- 
buted a bag of rupees for the excavation of a well. 
Thence he crossed the Jamna and hunted on the 
way. He shot some animals which he strung to 
his saddle and took to the town of Kara Manak, 1 
where lived an eminent saint called Maluk Das. 
Having heard that the Guru killed animals, he 
refused to receive him. It is said that, as next day 
the saint was laying food before his idol, he found 
it to his horror changing into meat. He felt that 
this must have been a miracle wrought by the Guru 
to bring him to his senses, so he thought it proper 

1 In this itinerary we follow the author of the Suraj Parkash , who 
wrote his work at Kaithal, near the towns and villages mentioned. 



344 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


to go and bow before him. He mentally argued, 
however, that if the Guru had the preternatural 
power attributed to him, he would first send for 
him. The Guru knew what was passing in his mind, 
and sent his servants and a palki to fetch him. He 
went to the Guru, received initiation and instruc- 
tion, and became one of his most devoted followers. 

The Guru on his missionary tour visited Agra, 
Itawa, and Priyag. While at Priyag, Nanaki, the 
Guru’s mother, approached him with a request of 
the highest importance. She said that all her de- 
sires had been fulfilled, but there was yet one 
remaining. She remembered that her late husband 
Guru Har Gobind had promised that a great being 
should be born in the house of Guru Teg Bahadur, 
and she was awaiting that event. The Guru replied 
that all her desires should soon be fulfilled, and she 
should have a grandson who would save the true 
religion. She had only to meditate continually on 
Guru Nanak. The Guru remained six months at 
Priyag, during which time his wife Gujari, to the 
great joy of his mother, became pregnant. 

The Guru next proceeded with his family to 
Banaras. He rested in a house which he called 
Shabd ka lcotha, or the mansion of the Word. It is 
in that part of the city known as Resham Katra. 
He there received the usual honours from his 
followers. Over the spot on which he rested a 
raised platform has since been erected, and the place 
is now known at the Bari Sangat or the Great Society. 
The Guru’s shoes and coat are still preserved in 
memory of his visit. He thence proceeded to the 
river Karmnasha, so called because it was believed 
that all the good acts of a man who bathed in it 
would be forfeited. The Guru scorning that tradi- 
tion bathed in its waters, and affirmed that the river 
could never wash away the result of good deeds . 1 

1 It is said that Raja Trisanku of the Solar dynasty, having killed 
a Brahman, was purified by a saint, who collected waters from all the 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 345 

The Guru then went to the village of Sarasrawan, 
where lived a very devout and truthful disciple 
popularly known as Chacha Phaggo. He had built 
a very beautiful mansion with a stately portico and 
a large hall of entrance. He was perpetually asked 
by his neighbours why he had built such a large 
building, and especially such a large portico and 
entrance chamber. He said his object was that 
when the Guru paid a visit he should not have 
the trouble of alighting, but could enter the man- 
sion on horseback. Within it he had placed a superb 
couch for the Guru to lie on. Chacha Phaggo kept 
the building locked so that the couch might not 
be soiled. Every morning he used to perfume it 
and then close the doors, declaring that he would 
not live in the edifice himself until the Guru had 
once entered it, and hallowed it with his footsteps. 
People laughed at him, and asked what hope there 
was that the Guru, who resided in the Panjab, 
should ever visit his village. Chacha Phaggo dis- 
regarded such banter, and maintained that the 
Guru would certainly come and fulfil his desires, 
as Guru Nanak went to the house of Lalo; and 
therefore he had made arrangements for a suit- 
able reception. It turned out, as Chacha Phaggo 
had anticipated, that in due time he had the happi- 
ness of entertaining the Guru. 

The Guru thence departed for Gaya. There the 
Brahmans visited him in a body, and explained the 
virtues of that famous place of pilgrimage. They 
made no mention of Budha having made his great 
renunciation and penance there — events never men- 

streams in the world to wash away the sin. These waters after the 
purification collected in the spring from which the Karmnasha river 
issues. 

A more probable cause of the evil reputation of- the river is that it 
once formed the boundary between the Aryan colonies of the north 
and the aborigines of the south, and all Aryans who crossed it were 
said to have passed beyond the pale of religious merit. T ravellers who 
still cross, take care that not a drop of its water touches their bodies. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


346 

tioned for centuries by ordinary Hindus. They said 
if barley rolls were offered at Gaya for the souls of 
ancestors, they would immediately go to heaven, 
even though they had already entered hell. Upon 
this they pressed the Guru to give them money for 
the ceremony. The Guru refused to satisfy their 
cupidity. He exhorted them to meditate on God 
a.nd instructed them in divine knowledge. Having 
exposed the hypocrisy and deceit of the Brahmans, 
he taught his Sikhs' how to remain for ever free 
from their toils. He then recited for their edification 
the hymn in Rag Asa composed by Guru Nanak at 
Gaya, the second Ashtapadi of the Sukhmani, and 
the following hymn of Kabir : — 

Nobody obeyethhis parents when alive, yet he givetli them 
feasts when dead ; 

Say how shall the poor parents obtain what the ravens and 
the dogs have eaten. 

Let some one explain to me what kushal 1 means ; 

The world dieth talking of kushal ; how ever shall kushal 
be obtained ? 

Men make goddesses and gods of clay, and offer them 
living sacrifices. 

As your lifeless gods, so your deceased, who ask not for 
what they want themselves. 

You kill living things, and you worship lifeless things ; at 
the last moment great shall be your suffering. 

You know not the worth of God’s name, and you shall be 
drowned in the sea of terror. 

You waver 2 and know not the supreme God ; wherefore 
you worship gods and goddesses. 

Saith Kabir, you have not thought of the Unknowable, and 
you have become entangled in the deadly sins. 3 

1 Kushal, comfort or happiness. The word is uttered by the 
Brahmans after being feasted at the shradhs, to denote that the manes 
for whom the ceremony is performed are happy. The word is also 
used to express the thanks or satisfaction the Brahmans feel when they 
have filled their bellies on such occasions. 

2 You feel no certainty in your devotion. 


3 Garn i Kabir. 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 347 

After this the Guru dismissed the Brahmans and 
departed in disgust from their place of pilgrimage. 1 

The Guru in the progress of his mission arrived 
at Patna, then as now a strong Muhammadan 
centre. Crowds of both sexes hearing of his re- 
ligious fame went to behold him and make him 
offerings. They warmly invited him to abide with 
them, give them religious instruction, and render 
them happy. The Guru replied : ‘ Wherever is the 
congregation of saints, there it is God’s order for 
me to abide.’ 

There lived in Patna a Sikh confectioner, called 
Bhai Jaita, who through humility always wore soiled 
clothes. Noticing this the Sikhs thought that he 
never bathed, and they twitted him on the subject. 
He told them they might go to his house, and see 
if he did or did not. They accordingly sent two of 
their body disguised as travellers. He received 
them, washed their feet, performed every menial 
service for them, and gave them bed and supper. 
A watch and a quarter before day Bhai Jaita arose, 
and performed his sacred ablutions. He then medi- 
tated on God and the Guru till daybreak, after which 
he went to his shop to attend to his business. On 
hearing of Bhai Jaita’s devotion, the Guru went to 
stay with him, while the Sikhs prepared a magni- 
ficent mansion, the present local Har Mandar, for the 
reception of the head of their religion. 

When the Guru after some time had completed 
his instructions, he, knowing the future, said one day 
to his mother Nanaki : ‘ Remain here with thy 

1 There is a little Sikh temple on the site of the edifice in which 
Guru Teg Bahadur lived when he visited Gaya. We found there one 
man who could read the Granth Sahib, but who did not understand it. 
The principal ministrant wore the sacrificial thread of the Hindus. 
Within the temple were little statues of Krishan, Radha, Baldeo, and 
other idolatrous articles of worship. On the outer wall of the temple 
were represented Guru Nanak, his sons and his attendants. In 
friendly proximity to them were representations of Hanuman, Ram 
Cbandar, and his consort Sita. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


348 

daughter-in-law ; I must depart.’ His mother re- 
plied, ‘ Thou knowest my love for thee ; I cannot 
live for a moment without thee, and now thou art 
going to leave me.’ He represented to her that 
many Sikhs were waiting for him in a distant land, 
and he must go to them. His wife, Gujari, seeing 
that the Guru’s mother’s remonstrances were of no 
avail, then began to ply her own entreaties — f 0 
Guru, thou art leaving me alone in this foreign 
country. I have no peace when I behold thee not. 
What shall become of me ? ’ On hearing these 
words the Guru remained thoughtful for some time, 
and at last replied — ‘ The prophecy of my father, 
Guru Har Gobind, is now about to be accomplished. 
A son shall soon be born to thee, who shall be great 
and powerful, extend the faith, establish Sikh 
supremacy, root out the wicked, and destroy the 
enemies of truth and true religion. Wherefore 
remain thou here to give him birth. Thou wouldst 
suffer great hardship in travelling, so be happy here, 

I shall soon return after having made a tour 
through Bengal.’ The Guru’s wife felt the force 
of these words, and remained silent. 

After this conversation the Guru performed his 
devotions and went to sleep. He arose next morn- 
ing some hours before day, and engaged in worship. 
As his minstrels began to chant the Asa ki War, 
an envoy arrived with many offerings from Ram 
Singh, son of Mirza Raja Jai Singh of Amber (Jaipur) 
in Rajputana and fourth in descent from Raja Man 
Singh, who had been a distinguished general under 
the Emperor Akbar. The envoy related the object 
of his mission : ‘ The Emperor Aurangzeb hath 
ordered my master to send a military expedition to 
the Kamrup country. 1 Thy name is cherisher of 

1 ‘Ram Singh, who succeeded Mirza Raja Jai Singh, had the 
mansab of four thousand conferred upon him, and was sent against 
the Assamese.’ Tod’s Rajasthan, vol. II, ‘Annals of Amber’, chap. i. 

The Sikh accounts of this expedition are not attested either by the 
Muhammadan historians or by the annals of Rajputana. It was not 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 349 

those who seek thy protection. Wherefore merci- 
fully assist my master that he may conquer Kamrup, 
and remain thou in Patna until he arrive in person 
to offer thee homage and solicit thy succour.’ The 
Guru granted both requests, but at the same time 
kept the future in view. 

Raja Ram Singh soon appeared accompanied by 
his ministers and a large retinue of soldiers. He 
proceeded on the afternoon of the day of his arrival 
to make a state visit to the Guru, and on arriving 
in his presence made his prostrations, presented his 
offerings, and begged the Guru’s protection. The 
Guru quoted for him from the Sukhmani : — 

The king of the whole world would be unhappy, 

But he would become happy by repeating God’s name. 

iVnd again : — 

Where there are very great difficulties, 

God’s name will at once save thee. 

The Guru then invited him to state the object of 
his visit. He spoke as follows : — ‘ 0 true Guru, we 
Rajas of Hindustan were subject to the Emperor 
Akbar. The king of Kamrup alone became a rebel, 
and defied his authority. The Emperor then ex- 
pressed his desire that some brave general should 
take an army and conquer that country. When the 
Emperor’s wishes were communicated to his bravest 
Muhammadan officers, none of them volunteered 
for the expedition. On the contrary they repre- 
sented that even with the greatest bravery it would 
be impossible to carry out the Emperor’s design. 
There was, however, they represented, among the 
Hindu Rajput chiefs one man. Raja Man Singh, 

Raja Bishan Singh, whose regal dignity was, according to 1 od, only 
for a short period, who went on this expedition. He was, according 
to the annals of Jaipur, only four years of age when Guru Teg 
Bahadur was executed. There was no Raja Bishan Singh of Jodhpur ; 
and Man Singh was not killed in the expedition he undertook to 
Kamrup under the emperor Akbar. 



35o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


who might be sent on the perilous errand. If he 
perished in the attempt, no matter, there would be 
only one enemy the less ; and if he were victorious, 
it would be so much the better. The Emperor 
would have one more country subjected to his 
authority. 

* Akbar was pleased with this suggestion, and 
next day in public darbar informed Raja Man Singh, 
who he said was the first of all his brave Rajput 
princes, that he had appointed him to lead the 
expedition. The Raja had no choice but to accept 
the post, and as soon as possible proceeded with the 
Emperor’s army against the rebellious king. The 
tents of Man Singh’s army extended for miles on the 
frontier, and, notwithstanding the spells and incan- 
tations of the inhabitants of Kamrup, was com- 
pletely successful . 1 

‘ Now again the inhabitants of Kamrup and Asam 
have proved rebellious to authority. The Emperor 
recently sent Mir Jumla to subdue them but, though 
at first successful, he was obliged to relinquish his 
victories. His cavalry was cut off, a pestilence 
destroyed his infantry, and he himself perished of 
exposure and fatigue before he had reached Dhaka 
(Dacca) on his return journey . 2 

‘ Aurangzeb’s advisers have suggested that he 
should send me. They say if I conquer the country, 
it will be an addition to his sovereignty ; and, if 
I be killed, the Emperor may annex the whole of 
Rajputana. The Emperor accordingly sent for me, 
and ordered me to go and subdue Kamrup. On 
hearing this I went home, and told my mother and 
queens of the order I had received. They became 
alarmed, and asked me if I desired an untimely death. 
They represented that there was none so brave as 

1 Ain-i-Akbari, XXX, 30, and Tod’s Rajasthan. 

2 History of India, by Elphinstone, whose account is based on 
Khafi Khan and Bernier. See also Mir Jumla’ s Invasion of Asam , 
by Shahab-ul-dln Talasb. 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 351 

Mir Jumla, and if he perished what hope was there 
for me ? Of all the generals who had been sent 
on that errand none except Raja Man Singh had 
ever returned. Then I too saw the danger of my 
position. It was certain death to command the 
invading army, and it would be equally fatal for me 
to disobey the Emperor’s orders. 

‘ My principal queen then came to my assistance 
with her advice. She said, “ My father’s family 
were Sikhs of Guru Nanak. On Guru Nanak’s 
throne is now seated Guru Teg Bahadur. Go and 
ask for his protection and support, and thy prayer 
shall not be in vain. Guru Arjan hath said : ' Em- 
brace him who seeketh thy protection. This is the 
duty of the religious teacher.’ 

‘ “ The Guru can fulfil the desires of all creatures 
and grant deliverance even to the lowest animals. 
The Guru’s father. Guru Har Gobind, secured the 
release of fifty-two Rajput kings confined in the 
fortress of Gualiar by order of the Emperor Jahangir. 
Since then all Rajas are Sikhs, and reverence the 
holy Guru. We too are the Guru’s Sikhs. Thou 
hast forgotten the favours conferred on us by the 
Gurus, and therefore art thou unhappy.” 

* 0 Guru, on receiving this cheering advice from 
my queen, I was consoled and regained my peace of 
mind. Hence I have come from distant Rajputana 
to seek the protection of thy holy feet.’ 

The Guru smiled and directed the Raja to con- 
tinually meditate on God’s name. * God’s name,’ 
as Guru Arjan hath said, ‘ is medicine for all diseases. 
Guru Nanak will assist thee, and thou shalt conquer 
Kamrup.’ 1 

Raja Ram Singh was overjoyed on hearing this 


1 From a map attached to a 1 Report of Bhutan and adjacent 
countries by Captain Pemberton (1838), it appears that KamrQp once 
comprised the whole of the present district of Goalpara and KamrQp 
between the state of Bhutan on the north and the river Brahmaputar 
on the south. The Asam of old times lay south of the Brahmaputar. 


352 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


promise from the Guru, and having offered a prayer 
distributed sacred food to the whole company. His 
faith was confirmed, and he received initiation as 
a Sikh by the ceremony of charanpahul. On the 
following day he had a further request to make the 
Guru, namely, that he should accompany him in his 
expedition, in which case victory would certainly 
incline to his side. The Guru agreed, bearing in mind 
that, while accompanying the Raja, he would have 
an excellent opportunity of preaching to his Sikhs, 
and extending the Sikh religion throughout the 
countries traversed. 


Chapter IV 

The Guru offered words of consolation to his 
mother and wife, and, entrusting them to his brother- 
in-law Kripal Chand, bade them an affectionate 
farewell. He then set out with the Raja. Wherever 
he went he was received with great honour by the 
people, to whom he communicated religious instruc- 
tion, and on whom he enjoined devotion to the 
Deathless Being. He and the Raj a marched through 
Munger, Rajmahal, and Maldah. In the latter place 
was a dharmsal, but its ministrants did not come to 
visit him. He was informed that they had all gone 
to a fair in the village of Pandua, but that on their 
return they would pay him their respects. He 
replied that he could not meet those who went to 
such idolatrous gatherings. In Maldah the Guru 
met only one Sikh, a confectioner, who begged him 
to go and take refreshment in his house. The Guru 
did so, gave him instruction, and blessed him. 

In the morning the Guru set out with the 
Raja. Their next halt was in Dhaka. There 
resided a masand •called Bulaki whose mother had 
vowed that, if the Guru ever visited the place, she 
would seat him on a beautiful couch she had pre- 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 353 

pared, dress him with cloth she had spun herself, 
and give him a dainty meal prepared by her own 
hands. The Guru knowing her heart’s desire went 
without other guidance straight to her residence. 
He called to her from outside, whereat she was over- 
joyed, ran forth and placed her head on his feet. 
She took him within, and lavished on him all the 
attentions which she had previously vowed. The 
Guru said he had come to visit her on account of 
her pure devotion, and invited her to ask him a 
favour. She replied that the only favour she craved 
was to be allowed to remain ever near him. He 
rejoined that she might behold him whenever after 
ablution she deeply meditated on God, directed her 
love to His lotus feet, and repeated His true name. 

Bulaki informed all the. Sikh inhabitants of the 
Guru’s arrival. They came in crowds to do him 
honour, and receive his instruction and bene- 
dictions. The Guru on seeing their enthusiasm, 
said that Dhaka was the storehouse of his faith. 
He suggested to the Sikhs to build a dharmsal in 
their city where God’s praises should be ever sung, 
for Guru Nanak had ordained that singing God’s 
praises was the highest form of worship. The Guru 
also directed them to hold meetings on the anniver- 
saries of the Gurus, and ever worship the Deathless 
Being. 

As the Guru was about to depart, masand Bulaki’ s 
mother came to visit him again. She begged that 
he might remain a few days longer in their midst. 
He replied that he had much to do elsewhere and 
must proceed. He directed her to worship Wahguru 
and serve the saints, and she should be happy. She 
sent for a painter, and had a picture of the Guru 
made. She hung it over the couch on which he 
had sat. Thus she was able to behold the Guru 
whenever her secular avocations admitted. 

The Guru and the Raja then set out for the city 
of Rangamati on the right bank of the Brahmaputar. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


354 

There the Guru took up his quarters, and the Raja 
and his host followed his example. When the king 
of Kamrup heard of Raja Ram Singh’s arrival to 
attack him, he vowed that he would destroy him 
and his army. He began to make incantations 
and spells, but none succeeded. As ignorance pales 
before knowledge, so did the sorcerers fail and 
grow weary of their efforts, The king of Kamrup 
then sent for all the women of his land who were 
famous for their magical skill. They too could not 
succeed against the Guru. The king then felt con- 
vinced that there must be some divine personage 
with the invading army who thwarted the efforts 
of all sorcerers. He went to worship at the temple 
of the goddess Kamakhsha, offered her sacrifice, 
and received a blessing from her priests. He then 
set about making immediate preparation to defeat 
Raja Ram Singh. 

He thought of a novel plan of hostilities. It was 
to divert a tributary of the Brahmaputar by making 
a huge dam across it and turning it on Raja Ram 
Singh’s army. The Guru apprised the Raja that 
a great torrent should come that night and his army 
was in danger. The Sikhs in Raja Ram Singh’s 
service removed their tents, but several Musalmans 
who did not believe in the Guru or heed his warning, 
were swept away. 

The king’s mother saw in a vision the goddess 
Devi, who thus addressed her : — ‘ 0 mother, Guru 
Nanak hath taken birth in this age. On his throne 
is now seated the ninth Guru, Teg Bahadur. He 
is here with Raja Ram Singh who hath become 
a disciple of his. Nowadays the Guru is sovereign. 
No one hath strength to oppose him. Go, make 
obeisance to him, and ask pardon for thy sins, and 
thy rule shall be everlasting ; otherwise it shall 
perish.’ 

The dowager queen communicated this order of the 
goddess to her son, and he accordingly prepared to 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 355 

go to interview the Guru. He took with him an 
escort and presents, and, crossing the tributary of 
the Brahmaputar previously referred to, proceeded 
to the Guru's tent. After prostration he said that 
he had come by order of the goddess to pray for 
pardon and protection. He begged the Guru not to 
allow him to fall into the power of the Moslems. 
The Guru replied that Raja Ram Singh was a very 
religious man. He told the king to fear not ; his 
empire should be permanent ; he ought to meet 
Raja Ram Singh, and hold no communication with 
the Muhammadans. The king was delighted with 
this speech, and begged the Guru to set foot in his 
city, bless it, and take Raja Ram Singh, but no 
Muhammadans with him. The Guru without making 
him any promise dismissed him. 

The Guru then went among Raja Ram Singh’s 
troops, and preached the blessings of peace. He 
quoted from Guru Nanak’s ' Sidh Gosht ’ : — 

A holy man renounceth enmity and hostility. 

Raja Ram Singh’s army had no intention to pro- 
long the enmity, and declared themselves willing to 
accept the Guru's advice. 

The Guru then sent for Raja Ram Singh himself, 
told him the whole conversation with the king, and 
asked him to beat the drum of victory. The Raja 
was delighted with the Guru’s negotiations. He 
said that the news was like the water of life dropped 
into a dying man’s mouth. The Guru then told him 
to prepare to cross the tributary of the Brahmaputar 
with him, and take care that he took no Muham- 
madans in his train as their presence would be 
offensive to the king of Kamrup. The Guru and 
Raja Ram Singh crossed the river with an escort of 
a thousand Rajputs. They were received in a 
friendly manner by the king who advanced to meet 
them. ” The Guru sat down placing the royal dispu- 
tants on either hand, and effected a reconciliation 

Aa 2 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


356 

and an interchange of friendly offices between them. 
By his influence they both exchanged turbans in 
token of life-long amity. Raja Ram Singh made 
large presents to the Guru while the king of Kamrup 
asked him for some souvenir which he might look 
at and worship in his absence. The Guru took his 
bow and arrow and, aiming at a pipal-tree, drove 
the arrow through and through it. He told the 
king that he might always remember him by the 
mark on the tree. The Guru then gave him in- 
struction to repeat the true Name, serve the saints, 
and, if ever he encountered a difficulty, address his 
supplication to the immortal God and rely on the 
words of the Guru. He should not even by mistake 
worship cremation-grounds, cemeteries, temples, or 
goddesses, and he should ever associate with the 
virtuous. The Guru driving a dagger into the earth 
then addressed himself to both kings : ‘ Let all the 
land on this side of the dagger belong to the Emperor, 
and all on the other side to the king of Kamrup, and 
let both monarchs forget their enmity.’ This they 
both agreed to, and thus was the serious quarrel 
adjusted and bloodshed avoided. 

At Dhubri, the capital of Kamrup, the Guru in- 
formed Raja Ram Singh’s officers that Guru Nanak 
had visited the place and rendered it holy by his 
footsteps. Guru Teg Bahadur then requested that 
each soldier should bring five shieldfuls of earth to 
raise, in memory of the founder of the Sikh religion, 
a mound which could be seen at a great distance. 
The whole of Raja Ram Singh’s army joined in the 
work, and it is said to have been accomplished in 
a few hours. The Guru then had a pavilion erected 
at the top. Some of the Guru’s followers remained 
in Kamrup, and their descendants are now found 
both in Dhubri and Chaotala. 

The Guru spent a few days on the cool and pleasant 
bank of the great river. Crowds hearing of his fame 
came long distances to see him, and obtain from 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 35; 

him the fulfilment of their desires. He was held 
in great honour throughout the whole country, and 
his reputation having reached Raja Ram of Asam, 
that monarch came to do him homage. The Raja 
had no offspring and earnestly desired a son. He 
brought his two wives, and they made obeisance to 
the Guru. The Raja congratulated himself on being 
so fortunate as to obtain a sight of the great priest 
and leader of the Sikhs, and asked him for religious 
instruction. This request was granted, and the king 
was delighted. He proceeded next morning to wait 
on the Guru, but, when it came to making his 
request, he felt abashed. The Guru knowing the 
working of his mind encouraged him to speak. He 
then asked the Guru to grant him the boon of an 
heir to his throne, as he had been hitherto deprived 
of the fruit of this world. He said, addressing the 
Guru : ‘ 0 great king, bring this sinking craft to 
shore.’ In reply the Guru took off his signet ring, 
stamped its impression on the Raja’s thigh, and thus 
addressed him : ‘ O king, the impression of my seal 
shall be on thy son’s forehead. By this know that 
it is Guru Nanak who hath mercifully granted thee 
offspring. Make thou thy son a Sikh of the house of 
the Guru.’ After this the Raja drank the water in 
which the Guru’s feet had been bathed, thus became 
a Sikh, and returned happy to his capital. 

At this juncture a messenger arrived from Patna 
to inform the Guru of the birth of his son. On 
hearing this Raja Ram Singh inaugurated great 
rej oicings. Guns were discharged, the best musicians 
exhibited their skill, and copious alms were bestowed 
on the poor. 

On the birth of the child the Sikh historian re- 
marks : ' It hath ever been usual that, when God 
seeth His people suffering. He sendeth a saviour of 
the world.’ Guru Gobind Singh afterwards, in his 
Vichitar Natak, described the circumstances of his 
birth. He was born three hours before sunrise on 


358 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the seventh day of the light half of the month of 
Poh, in the Sambat year 1723 (a.d. 1666). It is 
stated that on Guru Teg Bahadur’s departure to 
Asam with Raja Ram Singh, he directed his wife 
Gujari to give the name Gobind Rai to a son who 
should be born to her in his absence. 


Chapter V 

At the time of Gobind Rai’s birth there lived in the 
city of Ruhr am a Saiyid called Bhikan Shah. On 
the young Guru’s natal morning Bhikan Shah looked 
and bowed towards the east. His disciples asked 
him why he bowed, contrary to all Muhammadan 
custom, in the direction to which only Hindus turned 
in their matutinal worship of the sun. He replied 
that there had just been born in Patna a spiritual 
and temporal king who should establish religion and 
destroy the evil. He vowed that he would go to 
worship the new-born sovereign, and would perform 
a daily fast till he had seen him. He went by Dihli 
and arrived in Patna suffering great hunger and 
fatigue. He sat down near the Guru’s house, but 
apart from the crowd who had come to offer their 
congratulations. When the crowd had dispersed, 
Kripal Chand, the child’s uncle, went to Bhikan 
Shah, and asked him for what purpose he had come. 
He told him the nature of his vow, and asked to see 
the new-born child. The mother and grandmother 
were afraid of the Muhammadans and their Emperor 
Aurangzeb. They therefore tried to put off Saiyid 
Bhikan Shah, and told him he might return after 
three months when they would show him the child. 
The Saiyid remonstrated on receiving this answer, 
and represented that he was only a faqir, and had 
come hundreds of miles to see the boy. At last, by 
the advice of Kripal Chand, the mother and grand- 
mother gave way, and consented that the faqir 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 359 

should behold the child but only in public, in presence 
of the Sikhs of Patna, and amid the soul-inspiring 
strains of the Gurus’ hymns with rebeck accom- 
paniments. 

When the infant was produced, the whole assem- 
bly rose to do him honour and present their offerings. 
The Saiyid too presented his, and bowed at the 
young spiritual prince’s feet. He placed before him 
two earthen vessels covered with muslin, one con- 
taining milk and the other water. The child play- 
fully touched both vessels. Upon this the faqir took 
them up, and prepared to leave amid the thanks of 
the Sikhs for having been the means of giving them 
a sight of their future Guru. They asked Bhikan 
Shah what he meant by the two vessels. He said 
that if the child had only touched one of them, no 
Muhammadan should be left in the land ; but as he 
had touched both, the Hindus and Muhammadans 
should abide, and the child should include them both 
in his religion. 1 Saying this the Saiyid departed. 

When Guru Teg Bahadur had adjusted the quarrel 
between Raja Ram Singh and the king of Kamrup, 
and had also heard of the birth of his son, he and 
the Raja set out for Patna. Travelling stage by 
stage they at length arrived on the bank of the 

1 There are different versions of this legend. The lvhalsa Tract 
Society gives the following : A light was seen in the heavens by a 
pious faqir and his disciples on the occasion of the Guru’s birth. Ihe 
faqir explained the meaning of the phenomenon. He said that some 
one beloved of God, who would be at once a saint and hero, was born 
into the world. The faqir followed the direction of the light until he 
arrived at the child's residence in Patna. He made several entreaties, 
which were at last granted, to see the young Guru. The faqir bowed 
and placed an offering before him. He then filled two small vessels, 
one with milk and the other with water, and placed them before the 
child to make trial of him. If the child spilled the one containing 
milk it meant he was a Hindu : if he spilled the one containing water 
he would be deemed a Muhammadan. The Guru impartially spilled 
both vessels, by which the faqir understood that the child would not 
be an adherent of either Hinduism or Islam. He would have his own 
distinct religion, and confer salvation on sinful mortals. 


360 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Ganges. The Guru sent a message to his mother 
that he would reach home early in the morning. 
His mother and wife bathed, and put on their best 
dresses to receive him. On their arrival Raja Ram 
Singh beholding the future Guru presented him a 
large quantity of jewels and dresses, and foretold 
his future prowess and fame. 

When the family was alone, his wife asked the 
Guru how far he had penetrated into Kamrup. He 
replied as far as Guru Nanak had gone. He also 
informed her that he had erected at Dhubri, where 
Guru Nanak once preached, a high mound and 
surmounted it with a temple which could be seen 
at a considerable distance. Some of his companions 
remained there to guard the temple and preach the 
true religion. He said that he was the Creator’s 
servant and went in the triple capacity of friend to 
Raja Ram Singh, preacher of God’s word, and 
averter of bloodshed. After a few days’ rest and 
spiritual comfort Raja Ram Singh went to Dihli to 
report his success to the Emperor, and thence re- 
turned to his kingdom. 

The chroniclers of the life of Guru Gobind Singh 
delight to relate stories of his childhood. He re- 
ceived a little boat from a merchant’s son, and took 
great pleasure in rowing it on the Ganges. Once 
in so doing he dipped his feet into the water, upon 
which the Sikhs repeated the words of Guru Ram 
Das : ‘ The Ganges, Jamna, Godavari, and Saraswati 
endeavour to obtain the dust of the saint’s feet.’ 1 
He used to set other children fighting and watch 
their contests. On being lectured by his mother 
on this impropriety he would go to sleep. On 
awaking early in the morning he used to be seen 
in a devotional attitude. 

From his earliest years Gobind Rai was accus- 
tomed to practise shooting with a pellet-bow, and 
organize a company of boys of his own age to practise 

1 Rag Malar, 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 361 

with him. His father used to seat him near him 
and tell him that, though the practise was meri- 
torious, the time for putting it into effect had not yet 
arrived. 


Chapter VI 

After a protracted residence at Patna Guru Teg 
Bahadur turned his thoughts towards the Panjab, 
and communicated his resolve to return thither to 
his mother Nanaki. He said to her, ' O mother dear, 
it is now a long time since I left the Panjab. If 
thou permit me, I will go, give instruction to my 
Sikhs there, and lead them the right way. Remain 
here with thy grandson and nurse him. When he 
groweth strong, bring him to me.’ His mother 
became very thoughtful on hearing this, and repre- 
sented that the Panjab was politically in a very 
unsettled state. Moreover, he had been long absent 
in the Kamrup country, had only now returned, and 
it was too soon to leave her again. While thus 
speaking tears of love rained from her eyes. The 
Guru represented to her that man’s body was un- 
stable, and vain was love for it. He on that occasion 
composed the following hymn : — 

I have seen that love of the world is false ; 

Everybody, whether wife or friend, is intent on his own 
happiness ; 

Everybody speaketh of his relations, and attacheth his 
heart to them with love ; 

At the last moment nobody will accompany him ; this is 
a strange custom. 

Stupid man as yet understandeth nothing, though I have 
grown weary of continually instructing him. 

Nanak, if man sing the praises of God, he shall cross over 
the terrible ocean . 1 

On hearing this hymn the Guru’s mother was 

1 Devgandhari. 



362 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


consoled, and offered 110 further objection to her 
son’s departure. 

The Guru then addressed himself to his wife 
Gujari, ‘ O my good wife, I am going to the Panjab. 
The city of Anandpur which hath been built must 
be inhabited. Remain here, bring up thy son, and 
oppose not his wishes. After some time I will send 
for thee. My reason for asking thee not to thwart 
him is because he is the beloved servant of the 
Deathless Being. When he groweth up, he shall 
perform great deeds for the world. He shall destroy 
the evil and cherish his religion. I have received 
God’s order to go to the Panjab, and discharge 
several duties there. Ever remember the Deathless 
Being.’ On hearing this his wife’s eyes filled with 
tears, and she replied in her weeping, ' 0 my husband, 
I have none but thee. Our child is still young. My 
mother-in-law is old. To whom art thou going to 
entrust me ? ’ The Guru replied, ‘ This body is 
temporary, the soul is ever permanent. The com- 
position of the body is like that of the current of 
a river. Whoever fixeth his love on it is a fool. Be 
satisfied with whatever is God’s will. Knowing this 
give thy mind contentment. Ever love thy son and 
repeat the true Name.’ 

After this conversation the Guru’s son went to 
him and said, * Father dear, I have heard that thou 
art going to the Panjab. Take me with thee .’ 1 
The Guru replied, ' My son, thou art still young. 
Thou wouldst have great suffering on the way. 
Therefore remain here for some time, and I will send 
for thee afterwards. It is thou who hast to do all 
the work at Anandpur.” At the Guru’s departure 
his wife pressed him not to make a long march on 
that day and to keep his child with him, so that the 
parting between father and son might not be too 

1 Supposing this to have been really uttered by the child Gobind 
Rai, it would show that his father Guru Teg Bahadur had spent a con- 
siderable time on the expedition, and again at Patna after his return. 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 363 

abrupt, and that the latter might be able to endure 
it without too much sorrowing. To this the Guru 
agreed. His first march was within the city of 
Patna itself, where all his Sikhs went to bid him 
farewell and sing the Gurus’ hymns for his safe 
journey. 

The Guru taking with him his treasurer, the devout 
Mati Das, and four other faithful Sikhs, proceeded 
march by march till he arrived at Ropar in the 
Ambala district, where a large crowd of Sikh followers 
came to see him and make him offerings. He 
then directed his route to Kiratpur, where he met 
his half-brother Suraj Mai, who was overjoyed at 
seeing him. To him the Guru communicated the 
news of the birth of his son, whereat Suraj Mai was 
greatly delighted. He introduced his grandsons 
Gulab Rai and Sham Das to the Guru, who bestowed 
costly dresses on them. While staying at Kiratpur, 
the Guru visited Patalpuri where Guru Har Gobind 
had breathed his last. The Guru after staying at 
Kiratpur for some time departed for Anandpur . When 
he arrived, there was great rejoicing. The whole 
city went forth to receive him and do him homage. 

Gobind Rai, though still a child, used daily to 
practise the use of arms. Whenever the sons of 
worthy men and Sikhs visited him, he used to 
instruct them in military tactics. In Gobind’ s area 
was a well of sweet water which the neighbours used 
to draw. One day as a Muhammadan woman went 
with her pitcher a pellet from the boy’s bow acci- 
dentally struck her on the forehead. She went with 
tears and lamentations to Gujari, and threatened 
to report to the Emperor the mischief the child had 
been doing in the city. The mother pleaded that her 
son was still very young, and knew not right from 
wrong. After further parley Gujari gave her money 
to buy clarified butter and sweets, upon which she 
promised that she would make no further complaint 
against Gobind Rai. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


364 

Gujari chased the boy with the object of chastising 
him. He ran upstairs and closed the door behind 
him. She then began to scold, and asked him if he 
was not afraid of the Emperor. He called out to 
her that he was afraid of none but the Deathless 
God. On hearing this his mother desisted from her 
intention, and Nanaki, his grandmother, then quietly 
went upstairs and brought him down to his mother. 
Addressing the latter Nanaki said, ‘ The boy shall 
be a great warrior like his grandfather, Guru Har 
Gobind.’ 


Chapter VII 

One day Guru Teg Bahadur thought of his death, 
and determined to send for his son Gobind so that 
he might come to cherish and protect Anandpur in 
the day of its bereavement. At the same time 
Gobind" Rai in Patna was thinking of his father. 
He said to his mother that when his father was 
leaving for Anandpur he promised to write on 
arriving at his destination, but as yet they had not 
heard from him. The boy expressed his desire to 
go to the Panjab. His mother replied that they 
would go when the Guru ordered it. The boy then 
urged that it seemed good to leave Patna with which 
he was not pleased. His mother informed him that 
the masands in and around Patna were good and 
obedient men, and satisfied their wants, but they 
would have great difficulties in the Panjab where 
they would find envy and jealousy, and where, 
moreover, they would be in danger from the hostility 
of the Emperor. His mother would not therefore 
consent to leave Patna. 

Gobind Rai sent for a scribe to whom he dictated 
a letter to the masand Bulaki, who was employed to 
collect the Sikh offerings of Dhaka, ordering him to 
make a very costly palki and ornament it with gold 
and ivory for his j ourney . This article Bulaki caused 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 365 

to be made as quickly as possible by the best artists 
.the country could afford. The boy’s mother was highly 
pleased on seeing it, and pointed it out as an instance 
of the obedience and good-will of the masands in 
that part of India. Gobind Rai, however, on 
examining the fialki found that what the masands 
represented to be gold work only contained one part 
of gold to nine of copper, and to prove what he said 
he had it promptly and publicly burned. He made 
the dishonesty of the masands a reason for again 
urging on his mother the necessity of going to the 
Panjab where he said he had many things of import- 
ance to do. At that very time his father’s letter 
arrived summoning him, his mother, and his Sikhs 
to Anandpur. When the news of Gobind’s intended 
departure had spread, several persons came with 
offerings, and among others a banker called Jagat 
Seth, who offered him the shelter and hospitality 
of his many houses on the way northward — an offer 
which the boy was not disinclined to accept. 

Before Gobind Rai departed, a deputation waited 
on him and begged him to leave his cradle as a 
memorial behind him. When they urged that there 
w r as nobody left to confer spiritual benefits on them, 
he told them that whatever supplications they 
addressed to God with a pure mind should be ac- 
cepted. 

The first place of any importance at which Gobind 
Rai halted on his route was a town south of Banaras 
called Chhota Mirzapur. On reaching Banaras, the 
ancient stronghold of Hinduism, crowds came with 
offerings to him. They were enchanted as well with 
his mental as his physical beauty. They said they 
were beggars and had come to beg of him. Their 
applications were not in vain. Whereupon every- 
one praised him and said : ‘ How generous and how 
young ! ’ He remained there for several days. He 
used to hold court in the morning and then delight 
in sitting in a boat on the Ganges, from which he 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


366 

admired the scenery, the verdure on the one hand, 
and on the other the stately and picturesque temples 
and mansions rising from the margin of the sacred 
river. 

From Banaras Gobind Rai proceeded to Ajudhia. 
There crowds came with offerings to behold him, and 
on seeing his beauty were loud in their praises and 
foretold his greatness as a hero. The Sikh historian 
relates that flocks of monkeys — animals so cherished 
at the Hindu shrine of Ajudhia — went to the Guru’s 
tent. He first fed them with parched gram and 
then threw a lump of molasses among them, for 
which they all began to fight, some using their teeth 
and others their hands. The boy on seeing the 
simian combat was delighted, for even at that early 
age he loved the battle and the fray. 

Gobind Rai then proceeded with his mother and 
followers to Lakhnau (Lucknow), then as now the 
capital of Awadh (Oude), where they were all hos- 
pitably entertained by Baba Fatah Chand, the 
religious superior of the Sikhs, to whom the party 
gave a letter of thanks for his hospitality — a letter 
still preserved by the Sikh Mahant of that city. 
Gobind Rai and his party then proceeded towards 
Anandpur. On the way they tarried at Lakhnaur, 
a town about nine miles from Ambala in the Pan jab. 
There Bhai Kripal, the Guru’s uncle, went in advance 
of the party to procure conveyances for the remain- 
der of the journey to Anandpur. 

While Gobind Rai was at Lakhnaur his favourite 
amusement was playing at mimic warfare. Under 
the tutorship of Magan he used to form the boys of 
the town into opposing armies and engage them in 
sham fights and martial exercises. While Gobind Rai 
was thus engaged he was visited by Saiyid Bhikan 
Shah — owner of the villages of Kuhram and Siana 
four miles from Lakhnaur — who had previously gone 
to see him at his birth in Patna, and knew that the 
boy was destined one day to bestow the Mughal 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 367 

empire on the Sikhs. Bhikan Shah had obtained 
the village of Thaska from the Emperor, and he came 
to beg Gobind Rai to allow him to remain in undis- 
turbed possession of it during the Sikh Government 
which was to follow. Gobind Rai promised that no 
one should molest him. Upon this Saiyid Bhikan 
Shah fell at his feet. When he as a Musalman was 
reproached for prostrating himself before a Sikh 
child, he justified his action by saying that the boy 
was on the spiritual throne of Guru Nanak, that he 
should be seen hereafter in God’s court, and that 
whatever God did now He did through Gobind Rai’s 
mediation. The boy had assumed birth to establish 
the Khalsa religion, and overthrow the empire of the 
Turks. 

In due time Bhai Kripal Chand arrived with horses 
and carriages to take Gobind Rai and his mother and 
grandmother to Anandpur. Before his departure 
he went on a shooting excursion accompanied by his 
uncle’s huntsmen. On that occasion one Ghogha, 
who lived in the neighbouring village of Naneri, came 
to him to beg forgiveness for an offence formerly 
committed. Once when Guru Teg Bahadur had 
gone on a pilgrimage to preach the faith, Ghogha 
abducted his female servant. He came now to make 
his peace with God and the Guru. He prayed 
Gobind Rai to go to his house and bless it with his 
presence. Gobind Rai in view of the man’s sincere 
repentance generously pardoned him. 

The young boy set out, and was followed by his 
mother and the remaining members of the family. 
After a few nights’ journey they arrived at Kiratpur. 
Here Gobind Rai was met by Gulab Rai and Sham 
Das, grandsons of his uncle, the late Suraj Mai. 
They escorted him to their house and treated him 
with respect and affection. At Kiratpur Gobind 
visited the shrines of Baba Gurditta, Guru Har 
Gobind, and Guru Har Rai. As he approached 
Anandpur, the women and men of the city came 



368 THE SIKH RELIGION 

forth to escort him. They were all astonished and 
fascinated on seeing the beauty of the young Guru. 
Kripal Chand pointed out to him the hill of Naina 
Devi and the Satluj flowing by, places with which 
he was afterwards to be so intimately associated. 
He was affectionately received by his father who at 
once ministered to his physical and intellectual 
wants. 


Chapter VIII 

The cruel and bigoted Emperor Aurangzeb still 
reigned in Dihli. As we have previously seen, he 
had imprisoned and starved to death his own 
father, killed his own brothers — Dara Shikoh and 
Murad — and disgraced his eldest son Muazim, 
afterwards Bahadur Shah. On account of all his 
crimes he was heartily hated even by his own 
co-religionists. He then sent for his priests and 
asked them what he was to do to regain the sym- 
pathy of the Muhammadans. His counsellors said 
he could only do so by converting the Hindus to 
Islam. He should send money and other presents 
to Makka and Madina. His priests would take them 
and bring him credentials from those holy cities to 
show that he was an orthodox and religious Muham- 
madan. All this being done he was to issue pro- 
clamations throughout the empire that the Hindus 
should embrace Islam, and that those who did so 
should receive jagirs, state service, and all the im- 
munities granted to royal favourites. The Emperor 

1 According to the Suraj Parkash, Gobind Rai, though summoned 
by his father from Patna to Anandpur, never met him again. But, 
according to Bhai Sukha Singh's Gur Bilas, an older work, Gobind 
Rai reached his father in Anandpur. Indeed, this would appear to 
be the case from Gobind Rai’s own statement. He writes : ‘ They 
took me to the Panjab where nurses of different sorts fondled me and 
cherished me in every way. I received instruction in various forms,’ 
It is certain- that this was imparted under his father's supervision. 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 369 

took the advice of his priests, and all the plans 
suggested were adopted. 

The experiment of conversion was first tried in 
Kashmir. There were two reasons for this. In the 
first place, the Kashmiri Pandits were supposed to 
be educated, and it was thought that, if they were 
converted, the inhabitants of Hindustan would 
readily follow their example; secondly, Peshawar 
and Kabul, Muhammadan countries, were near, and 
if the Kashmiris offered any resistance to their con- 
version, the Muhammadans might declare a religious 
war and overpower and destroy them. It was also 
believed by the Emperor — without foundation as it 
afterwards turned out — that the Kashmiri Brahmans 
might be tempted by promises of money and govern- 
ment appointments, because the beggary and mean- 
ness of the inhabitants of that country were pro- 
verbial. 1 

The Emperor Akbar by the force of wealth 
and military genius not only subdued Muhammadan 
India but also Rajputana. His obsequious ministers 
signed a document which allowed him as the shadow 
of God on earth full jurisdiction to decide all religious 
questions. Instead of the Muhammadan creed he 
was gratified with the formula, ‘ There is no God 
but God, and Akbar is God’s representative.’ Men 
prostrated themselves before him, offered him vows, 
and addressed him as a deity. He caused his name 
to be inserted in the hymns to the gods and goddesses, 
and poets were found to grant him divine honours. 
Aurangzeb who deemed himself an orthodox Muham- 
madan thought that by his own line of action he should 
be even greater and more successful than Akbar. 

Sher Afghan Khan, the Emperor’s viceroy in 
Kashmir, set about converting the Kashmiris by the 
sword and massacred those who persevered in their 
adherence to the faith of their forefathers. It is 

1 Khulasat ul-Tawarikh. Abul Fazal wrote — 1 The bane of this 
country is its people . 5 

SIKH. IV B l) 



370 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


said there was piled up a heap of one man and a 
quarter, or a hundred weight of j emeus or sacrificial 
threads. The Hindus who would not be converted 
and whom Sher Afghan Khan’s troops could not 
capture fled the country. Even Muhammadans who 
in any way assisted the Hindus were mercilessly put 
to death. 

At last Sher Afghan Khan began to reflect that 
there was too much slaughter, and it might happen 
to him as it did to the Emperor Humayun, whom 
Sher Shah, the Afghan chief, expelled from India, 
or as it happened to the Muhammadans whose seed 
had been extirpated from his dominions by Raja 
J aipal, whose motto was, ‘ When I die there shall 
be an end of the world.’ Thus reflecting, Sher 
Afghan Khan sent for the Kashmiri Pandits, in- 
formed them of the Emperor’s order, said he was 
only obeying it, and begged their forgiveness. They 
became silent for a while, and then sued for a respite 
of six months to consider whether they should 
embrace Islam or die for their religion. Sher Afghan 
Khan after all the slaughter of which he had been 
the instrument, was glad to accede to their request. 

Meanwhile the process of conversion went on in 
India. Aurangzeb at first resorted to the four means 
of traditional Indian policy in dealing with the 
Hindus. He made peaceable overtures, then offered 
money, then threatened punishment, and lastly 
caused dissension among them. When these mea- 
sures failed, he had recourse to forcible conversion. 
He destroyed temples and converted them into 
mosques. He killed cows, so sacred in Hindu estima- 
tion, threw their flesh into wells, and forced Hindus 
to drink the water therefrom. Not satisfied with 
this defilement, he used to send the Hindus to 
mosques and force them to pray to the misnamed 
Rahim (merciful God), instead of their own Ram, 
a god of mildness and compassion. 

When the respite of six months obtained from 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 371 

Sher Afghan Khan was approaching its end, the 
Kashmiri Pandits were supernaturally informed 
that in this last age of the world Guru Nanak 
was spiritual king. He would protect religion. No 
Hindu god had power to do so. The ninth king in 
succession to him, Guru Teg Bahadur, was now on 
his throne. They should repair to him, and he would 
protect their honour and their faith. 

The Pandits heard that the Guru was then at 
Anandpur on the bank of the Satluj, and thither they 
proceeded. On their way they stayed at Amritsar, 
where they bathed in the sacred tank of Guru 
Ram Das. They then proceeded to Anandpur, where 
they arrived after much discomfort and suffering, 
owing to their ignorance of travel in an unknown 
country in the plains of India and in the hot season. 

On their arrival in Anandpur, they told the Guru 
their sad story — how the Hindus of their country 
were being converted notwithstanding the respite 
granted to themselves, and how a man and a quarter 
weight of janeus had been collected from Hindu 
converts to Islam. They represented to the Guru 
that he had been born with the express object of 
preserving religion, that his very name had power to 
cherish those who sought his protection ; and they 
implored him to preserve the honour of their faith 
in whatever way he deemed most expedient. 

The Guru sat silent, and for some time pondered 
on their request. His darling boy Gobind was then 
playing in the hall, and on seeing his father sad and 
thoughtful went to him. His father spoke not, but 
tenderly embraced him. The boy said, ‘ Father 
dear, why sittest thou silent to-day ? Why not 
regard me with thy usual look of affection ? What 
offence have I committed that thou wilt not even 
look cheerfully on me?’ The Guru taking com- 
passion on his dear child — dear as only Gobind Rai 
could be — seated him near him and said, ‘ My son, 
thou knowest nothing yet. Thou art still a child. 

b b 2 



3 72 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


This matter on which the Kashmiris have come' is 
of vital importance. The world is grieved by the 
oppression of the Turks. No brave man is now to 
be found. He who is willing to sacrifice his life shall 
free the earth from the burden of the Muhammadans.’ 
The child replied : ‘For that purpose who is more 
worthy than thou who art at once generous and 
brave ? ’ 1 

When Guru Teg Bahadur heard this from his 
child’s lips he divined everything that was to follow. 
He told the Kashmiris to go in a body to Dihli and 
make the following representation to the Emperor : 
‘ Guru Teg Bahadur, the ninth Sikh Guru is now 
seated on the throne of the great Guru Nanak, who 
is protector of faith and religion. First make him 
a Musalman and then all the people, including our- 
selves, will of our own accord adopt the faith.’ 
They obeyed the Guru and proceeded to Dihli to 
urge his self-sacrificing proposal. The Emperor, 
after consulting his Muhammadan doctors, adopted 
it with extreme joy. He said, ‘ If the Guru become 
not a Muhammadan, he will at any rate show us 
a miracle.’ Having thus decided the Emperor sent 
two officers to summon him. He was full of hope, 
which he expressed to his Qazis, that, once the Guru 
was converted, there would be a large accession of 
Hindu and Sikh converts. 

The officers who bore the Emperor’s order to the 
Guru, billeted themselves on the towns and villages 
through which they passed. Four porters pressed 
into service at every village for each officer were 
obliged to take his palki to the next. In this way 
they were not long in comfortably accomplishing the 
journey to Anandpur. On hearing that the Guru 
gave audience in the morning, they sent word that 
they had a message for him from the Emperor. The 
Guru said that he was already expecting them, and 
he Was not sorry that they had at last arrived. He 
1 Sukha Singh's Gur Bilas , Chap. V. 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 37.; 

read the Emperor’s order, and wrote in reply that 
he would come to Dihli after the rainy season. He 
then handed his letter to the officers and dismissed 
them. They proceeded on their return journey 
without further molestation of the Guru. 

Chapter IX 

The Guru took leave of his family and his devoted 
Sikhs, and began his journey to Dihli on the first day 
of the month of Har — early in June immediately 
preceding the rains — when the heat is extreme in 
northern India. On his way he visited his sincere 
Muhammadan friend Saif-ul-din who lived at Saifa- 
bad, near the present fort of Bahadurgarh in the 
Patiala state, where an imposing temple has been 
erected in honour of the Guru. This man received 
him with great honour, and invited him to stay with 
him during the rainy season. The Guru accepted 
the invitation, and during his stay gave religious 
instruction and spiritual happiness to many faithful 
Sikhs. Saif-ul-din ever found some new service to 
perform for the Guru, and their conversation was 
continually of God. Saif-ul-din became a convert 
to the Guru’s faith. 

At the close of the rains in the beginning of October 
Aurangzeb again sent two messengers to hasten the 
Guru’s progress to Dihli. They went to Anandpur, 
but he was not there. They tried Amritsar but with 
similar ill success. They then returned to Dihli, and 
reported that the Guru had fled. Aurangzeb dis- 
patched orders all over his empire to find and arrest 
him. The Guru remembered his own promise and 
took his leave of Saif-ul-din. Saif-ul-din became 
very sad at parting with his guest, and begged him 
to take him with him. The Guru excused himself on 
the ground that he had private business, in which 
it would be irksome for him to assist. He then 
dismissed all his Sikhs except five, namely, Mati Das, 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


374 

Gurditta of the line of Bhai Budha, and three others 
whose names are said to have been Uda, Chima, and 
Dayala, and proceeded to give himself up to the 
Emperor at Dihli. 

The Guru and his five followers first halted at 
Garhi near Samana, in the Patiala state. The 
Guru pitched his tent outside the village walls. 
While there a Pathan, who had been introduced to 
him at Saifabad, went and paid him homage, and 
made him offerings. He begged the Guru to remain 
with him for some days. The Guru said he must 
move onward, and asked his Pathan friend to allow 
him. 

The Guru went thence to a village called Hali. 
There lived a masand who through fear of the Muham- 
madans would not even visit him. The Guru next 
proceeded to Chikha in the present Karnal district, 
where lived a masand called Galaura. The Guru 
had once found him as a waif, and brought him up 
to manhood. He then left his service and went to his 
native village, where he was now delighted to receive 
his old master. The Guru knowing his devotion 
stayed with him and gave him spiritual instruction. 
Galaura’ s wife, who is described as a very simple- 
minded person, the Guru blessed, and to Galaura 
himself he gave a quiver full of arrows to serve him in 
the hour of need. He exhorted him to act honestly 
on all occasions and he should prosper, but if he ever 
acted dishonestly he should perish. 

The Guru then proceeded to Karha where there 
was a temple erected to Guru Har Gobind, who had 
rested there when he was going to visit Nanakmata. 
There resided another masand who through fear of 
the Muhammadans would not visit the Guru. The 
Guru, however, received great attention from an 
agriculturist whom he induced to dig a Bawali 
for the benefit of wayfarers. The Guru then went 
to the village of Khar where he passed the night 
giving religious instruction to Sikhs. When they 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 375 

heard him they began to moralize on the political 
condition. They said that the Turks had arrived 
at such a pitch of power that no one could with- 
stand them. He replied, ‘The king who acteth 
according to his religion, who practiseth justice, who is 
not greedy, who protecteth and showeth mercy to his 
subjects, who dispelleth their sorrows and conferreth 
happiness on them instead, who receiveth only 
reasonable revenue, who suppresseth thieves and 
robbers, who removeth the many similar obstacles to 
good government, and who ever acteth honestly, shall 
secure sovereignty for his descendants. 

‘ But those who, though they may have obtained 
empire by virtuous conduct in previous births, now 
perform evil deeds, who devote themselves mainly 
to sexual pleasures, and neither listen to nor make 
themselves acquainted with the sufferings of their 
subjects, who seize wealth by every means in their 
power, and who feel not compassion for the poor, 
shall find their empire and dignity daily decrease. 
Aurangzeb hath now formed very evil designs 
and seeketh to destroy the Hindu religion. In the 
wantonness of his pride he practiseth violence and 
oppression. His suffering subjects fear for their 
lives. Wherefore it is now abundantly manifest 
that his empire and dignity cannot abide but shall 
all gradually perish, and that there shall none of his 
progeny remain even to beat a drum.’ 1 

Many Raj as of the present age who suppose their 
position is the result of greatly meritorious acts in 
previous births, and that they have nothing to do but 
enjoy themselves in this, may not unwisely ponder 
on the Guru’s words. 

Next morning the Guru reached Khatkar in th 
Patiala state. He sent for flour and dal, and had 
them cooked for his dinner. During the night the 
villagers formed a design to steal his horse, which 

1 Suraj Par hash, Ras XII, Chap. 34. The Guru's prophecy has 
been amply fulfilled. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


376 

they saw was of excellent strain and of great value. 
Six men went to take away the animal, but, it is said, 
were immediately stricken blind and had to abandon 
their design. On this they recovered their sight and 
went to their homes. On discussing the incident 
there, they learned that the horse belonged to a cele- 
brated priest. They then decided to go with offerings 
and beseech his pardon. They asked for another 
favour, that the Guru should sweeten the brackish 
water of their village. Both requests were granted. 
The Guru, drawing an arrow from his quiver, said 
that, as far as the arrow flew, the water of the earth 
should become sweet. They were enjoined to sink 
a well within that radius, and their labour should be 
rewarded. In this way the Guru continued his 
journey, conferring temporal and spiritual favours 
on his audience until he reached Agra. There he 
encamped in a garden outside the city. 

The Guru sent for a shepherd boy he saw in the 
garden and asked him to do him a favour. The 
Guru took from his finger a large gold ring set with 
diamonds, and asked the shepherd to go and pledge 
it and bring him two rupees’ worth of sweets. The 
shepherd said he had no cloth in which to wrap 
them. Upon this the Guru took off a very valuable 
shawl he wore, and handed it to him for the purpose. 
The boy, not knowing the Guru, enjoined him to look 
after his herd of sheep and goats, and departed on 
his errand. The Sikhs who accompanied the Guru 
were astonished at what he had done. Mati Das 
took the liberty of saying, * Have we not money ? 
why hast thou parted with thy ring ? Moreover, in- 
stead of a handkerchief thou hast given thy valuable 
shawl to bring the sweets in.’ The Guru replied that 
what he had done had been done by God’s will which 
could not be set aside by hundreds of devices. 

The shepherd went into the city, and stopping at 
a confectioner’s shop showed the ring. The con- 
fectioner on examining it said it was a priceless 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 377 

article, and asked the boy from whom he had 
received it. The boy told him, whereupon the con- 
fectioner weighed the sweets. When the boy pre- 
sented the shawl to wrap them up in, the confectioner 
became still more astonished. He said that the boy 
must have stolen both the ring and the shawl, as 
the owner of the latter could never have sent it to 
be spoiled with sweets. The confectioner accordingly 
arrested the shepherd and took him to the police 
office. The boy, on being interrogated, said he had 
got both the ring and the shawl from a stranger who 
had taken shelter in a certain garden, and he described 
him and his five companions. The police officer sent 
two policemen to make inquiries regarding the visitor. 

When the policemen arrived, they asked the Guru 
who he was. The Guru candidly told them his name 
and station. On hearing this one of the constables 
returned to the police office to give information and 
the other remained to watch the Guru. The Kotwal 
was delighted to hear that Guru Teg Bahadur had 
been found at last, and to think that he should get 
a large reward from the Emperor for his capture. 
The police officer then went to the governor of the 
fort, told him the circumstances, and chuckled at 
the thought that they should all become great men 
after the capture of the much-sought-for Guru. The 
Governor of the fort ordered one hundred horsemen 
to equip themselves and accompany the police officer 
to arrest the Guru. The Guru frankly replied to 
all their questions. They then informed him that 
the Emperor had sent written orders in all directions 
to arrest him, and asked him to kindly go with them 
to the fort, and they would inquire the Emperor’s 
wishes regarding him. The Guru at once ordered 
his horse to be saddled and with his five Sikh fol- 
lowers entered the fort. The Guru at his arrest 
and in the fort preserved his marvellous equanimity, 
never showing the slightest sign of displeasure or 
disappointment. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


37 8 

The Governor of the fort and the police officer 
reported the arrest to the Emperor. The latter was 
overjoyed at the capture of the great Guru of the 
Sikhs. He said that his wish had been fulfilled, and 
he would now convert the Guru to Islam, and the 
Muhammadan religion would then be rapidly ac- 
cepted by the people. He sent off a regiment of 
twelve hundred horse to Agra to bring the Guru to 
his presence. He explained to them that the 
prisoner must not escape. If any persons were to 
assist him in endeavouring to do so, the regiment was 
to perform its duty. The soldiers were not, however, 
to annoy the Guru in any way on the journey to Dihli. 


Chapter X 

When the Guru with his five Sikhs arrived in Dihli 
the Emperor sent for him and thus addressed him, 
* It is my pleasure that there should be but one reli- 
gion. Hinduism is false and worthless, and those 
who profess it will suffer punishment in hell. I pity 
them and therefore wish to do them a favour. If 
they of their own accord keep the Id, and fast, and 
repeat the Muhammadan creed and prayers, I will 
reward them with wealth, appointments, land- 
revenue grants, and lands with irrigating wells. In 
this case thou, too, shalt have many disciples, and 
thou shalt become a great priest of Islam. Therefore 
accept my religion, and thou shalt receive from me 
whatever thy heart desireth.’ The Guru replied, 
' 0 Emperor, thou and I and all people must walk 
according to God’s will. If it were the will of God that 
there should be only one religion, He would not have 
allowed theMuhammadan and Hindu religions to exist 
at the same time. He hath no partner and can do as 
He pleaseth. Neither thou nor I can oppose Him.’ 

The Emperor seized on the Guru’s expression that 
all men must walk according to God’s will and said, 
' God the most high appeared to me in a vision, and 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 379 

told me to convert the whole world to Islam. I am 
therefore obeying God’s order.’ The Guru replied, 
‘ I know not whether thou or thy God speaketh 
falsely. However, since thou wilt not believe, I will 
give thee ocular proof of what I say.’ The Guru 
then requested the Emperor to send for five mans of 
pepper, and he did so. The Guru had it made into 
a heap which he caused to be ignited. It burned for 
twenty-four hours and was apparently reduced to 
ashes. The Guru then desired that the heap of 
ashes should be pounded and sifted. When this was 
done three pepper pods came out whole. The Guru 
then said, ' 0 king, thou hast now got thine answer. 
Thou wishest to make one religion out of two, but 
God wisheth to make three religions out of two. 
Him whom the Creator desireth to preserve not even 
fire can touch. On that account, O king, be satisfied 
with what He hath done. As these three pepper 
pods have been saved from the fire, so shall three 
religions, Hinduism, Islam, and Sikhism survive to 
future ages.’ 

Upon this the Emperor ordered that the Guru 
should be closely imprisoned, and sufficient guards 
placed over him to prevent his escape. The Guru 
then wrote as follows to his wife : — ‘ The Turks have 
imprisoned me in Dihli. Paying due regard to the 
words of Guru Nanak to the Emperor Babar, I 
have come here to deprive them of their sovereignty. 1 
Wherefore have no anxiety for me. Cherish our son 
and recognize him as the Guru’s image.’ Both Mata 
Gujari and her mother-in-law received this letter 
as if their hearts had been pierced with arrows. 
The messenger essayed to console them. He pointed 
out that the Guru had brought his fate on himself 
as the result of a prayer of certain Kashmiri pandits. 
His family ought not therefore to take the matter 
to heart, but accept his fate with resignation. 

1 The Emperor Babar’s descendants were Humayun, Akbar, 
Jahangir, Shahjahan, Aurangzeb, and Bahadur Shah. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


380 

After a conference with his Muhammadan doctors 
and ministers the Emperor again sent for the Guru, 
and said he would perform for him every service in 
his power if he embraced Islam, otherwise he would 
have him severely tortured. The Guru replied, 
‘ Hear, 0 Aurangzeb, I will never embrace Islam. 
Thou and I and all creatures are the servants, not 
the equals of God. The world is subject to Him. 
The prophet of Makka who originated the religion 
thou professest, was unable to impose one faith on the 
world, so how canst thou do so ? He was not able 
to convert even his own uncle to Islam. Of what 
account art thou ? The aswad stone which the 
Muhammadans set up in memory of Adam, and 
which they call celestial, but which the Hindus call 
the lingam, is worshipped by Musalman pilgrims. Is 
it anything more than an idol ? 1 When Muhammad 
drove idolatry out of Makka, the inhabitants formed 
a design to assassinate him. When he became 
aware of this, he made his escape at night to Madina, 
leaving all his property behind, and never returned. 
Canst thou justly say that he enjoyed God’s special 
favour? Nay, we are all God’s people. God alone is 
master ; He can do what He pleaseth. 0 Aurangzeb, 
who art thou and what power hast thou to convert 
the whole world to Islam ? The Guru hath said, 
“ Death laugheth over man’s head, but the brute 
knoweth it not.” O king, through pride thou 
thinkest not that thou too shalt assuredly die. He 
who practiseth pride shall be utterly extirpated.’ 

On hearing this the Emperor became enraged and 
remanded the Guru to prison, giving orders that he 
should be tortured until he accepted Islam. The 
more, however, he was tortured, the more happy he 
appeared. 

1 The Hindus believe that the aswad or black stone of Makka was 
a lingam in pre-Islamic times. The Muhammadans when rejecting 
idolatry preserved the stone on account of old associations, and 
inserted it in the wall of their great temple. 


LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 381 

Notwithstanding the Guru’s repeated refusals, the 
Emperor still entertained hopes that he might be 
converted. Messengers continued to he sent at 
intervals to renew the Emperor’s promises, and ask 
the Guru to perform a miracle or embrace Islam. 
The Guru replied that a miracle was the wrath of 
God ; and to undo what God had done, that is, to 
circumcise himself would be a crime against heaven. 
He would not consent to the Emperor’s proposals. 
He did not want office or power ; he felt no greed 
in his heart, and he would not embrace Islam, but 
the Emperor might act as he pleased. 

In the Gurumukhi chronicles there is frequent 
mention of the Guru having gone outside his prison 
walls to meet and dine with his Sikhs. This is attri- 
buted to his thaumaturgic power. One day as he 
was on the top story of his prison, the Emperor 
- thought he saw him looking towards the south in the 
direction of the imperial zanana. He was sent for 
next day and charged with this grave breach of 
Oriental etiquette and propriety. The Guru replied, 
‘ Emperor Aurangzeb, I was on the top story of my 
prison, but I was not looking at thy private apart- 
ments or at thy queens. I was looking in the direc- 
tion of the Europeans who are coming from beyond 
the seas to tear down thy ftardas and destroy thine 
empire.’ A Sikh writer states that these words 
became the battle-cry of the Sikhs in the assault on 
Dihli in 1857 under General John Nicholson, and 
that thus the prophecy of the ninth Guru was 
gloriously fulfilled. 1 

Mati Das, the Guru’s faithful Sikh, charged his 
master with practising too much humility, and 
talked of destroying the whole sect of Muhammadans 
and putting an end to the Mughal rule. The Guru 
remonstrated with him, and said that man must accept 
and obey the will of God. Mati Das replied that the 

1 Life of Guru Teg Bahadur , by Narain Singh. The statement is 
also recorded in a work called the Gur Bans Prakash. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


382 

Guru’s sufferings were intolerable. A conversation 
ensued in which the Guru referred to Guru Nanak’s 
promise to Babar that his empire should abide for a 
time. Guru Teg Bahadur said, ‘ The gift the Holy 
Guru Nanak gave may not, it is true, be easily 
recalled. But I will offer my life and in doing so 
prove the Turks to be false and deprive them of 
sovereignty. If I lay not down my life here, the 
great Turkish Empire in India will long survive ; 
but since its monarchs have committed great enor- 
mities, I will now extirpate them and their line.’ 

This conversation was overheard by a priest who 
reported it to the Emperor. Mati Das was in con- 
sequence bound between two pillars and his body 
cut in twain with a saw. When the executioners 
began to apply the saw to his body, he began to 
repeat the J apji. It is said that, even when his body 
was divided in two, he continued to repeat the 
great morning prayer of the Sikhs, and only became 
silent when its repetition was complete. 

On witnessing the martyrdom of Mati Das, the 
Guru’s other Sikhs became sore afraid. They went to 
him at night and represented their danger. He told 
them that they were free to leave him. They 
pointed to the chains on their feet, and asked how 
their release could be effected ? Through the Guru’s 
miraculous interposition their fetters fell off, the 
prison doors all stood open, and the guards snored in 
the sleep of neglect . 1 One of the Sikhs, Bhai Gurditta, 
repented at last and remained with the Guru to 
suffer his fate. When the Guru was questioned by 
the jailor as to how his three Sikhs had escaped, he 
replied in the words of Guru Arjan : — 

‘ God playeth in everything Himself ; 

One man He rescueth, another He envelopeth in the wave ; 

As He causeth men to dance, so they dance according to 
the past acts of each . 2 

1 Suraj Parkash, Ras XI, Chap. 55. 2 Ma.ru. 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 383 

‘ The great God who created them hath rescued 
them from prison. What hast thou to do with them 
now ? Thy business is with me. It is I who have 
been imprisoned. Those Sikhs only remained through 
their regard for me.’ 

The Guru sent a message by the departing Sikhs 
to his son to abide fearlessly in Anandpur. The time 
for him to leave his own body had arrived, and he 
would leave it in Dihli. He would have to leave 
it all the same had he remained in Anandpur. He 
enjoined his son to grieve not for him as he had 
brought his troubles on himself. He would turn 
to ashes the fruit of the meritorious acts which the 
Emperor had performed in former births, and by 
which he had obtained sovereignty. 

Gobind Rai on hearing his father’s message, 
received it with equanimity, but his grandmother 
and mother began to weep. He tried to console them, 
and said, ‘ We will abide in Anandpur and destroy 
the Turks.’ His mother upon this cautioned silence 
lest some agent of the Emperor should hear his 
words. Gobind replied that that was not a time for 
silence or concealment. 

Chapter XI 

When the Governor of the Dihli jail reported that 
three of the Guru’s Sikhs had escaped, the Emperor 
ordered the Guru to be locked in an iron cage, and 
a sentry with a drawn sword placed on guard over 
him. The Guru on hearing this order calmly replied 
with a hymn of Guru Arjan : — 

They who commit sin shall assuredly be ruined ; 

Azrail shall seize and smite them ; 

The Creator will put them into hell, and the Accountant 
there will ask for their accounts . 1 

The Guru in reply to the further demand of the 

1 Maru. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


384 

officer sent by the Emperor answered as he had done 
on a former occasion — ‘ I will not accept thy law or 
thy religion, and I will not abandon my faith. The 
glory of the Turkish power is now at an end since 
thou art forcibly depriving men of their religion. 
I will dig up the roots of the Turks and throw them 
into the briny ocean, since what is melted with salt 
never reviveth, and they shall never again have 
sway in Hindustan.’ The Guru is said to have also 
quoted the hymn of Guru Nanak : — 

When kings, lions, headmen, and dogs, 

Instead of watching, rest in sleep, 

King’s servants inflict wounds with their nails, 

And taste and drink the subjects’ blood. 

Bhai Gurditta who was still fettered was allowed 
to wait on the Guru. Soon after this a messenger 
arrived bearing a letter from his wife and son. 
After making inquiries regarding them, the Guru 
wrote his first slok for the general instruction of 
his followers : — 

He who singeth not God’s praises rendereth his life useless ; 

Saith Nanak, worship God, 0 my soul, as the fish loveth 
water. 

He then wrote the fiftieth slok for his wife Gujari’s 
special consolation : — 

Ram passed away, Rawan passed away with his large 
family ; 

Saith Nanak, nothing is permanent ; the world is like a 
dream. 

For all in sorrow he wrote the fifty-first slok : — 

Be anxious only regarding what is not expected ; 

It is the way of the world, Nanak, that nothing is per- 
manent. 

To his son he sent the fifty-third slok : — 

My strength is exhausted, I am in chains, and have no 
resource. 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 385 

Saith Nanak, God is now my refuge ; He will succour me 
as He did the elephant. 

And also the fifty-fifth : — 

My associates and companions have all abandoned me ; no 
one remaineth with me to the last ; 

Saith Nanak, in this calamity God is mine only support. 

It is believed that the Guru during his captivity 
composed most of his other sloks and hymns, and 
sent them with the above by the messenger. The 
Guru said to him at parting : ‘ My end hath come ; 
console all my people. We must all be satisfied with 
God’s will. Take this letter quickly, and bring me 
an answer.’ 

Gobind Rai replied to the slok addressed to him 
with the fifty-fourth slok in the collection bearing 
the name of the ninth Guru in the Granth Sahib : — 

Strength is thine ; thy fetters are loosed ; thou hast every 
resource ; 

Nanak, everything is in thy power ; it is only thou who 
canst assist thyself . 1 

The Guru was very pleased at receiving this slok 
and message from his son, and remarked that he was 
fit for the Guruship. He sent into the city of Dihli 
for five paise and a coco-nut to forward him in token 
of his appointment to the Sikh spiritual sovereignty. 
When the five paise and the coco-nut arrived, the 
Guru placed them in front of him, meditated on his 
distant son, and bowed to him. He sent the articles 
to Gobind Rai with the fifty-sixth slok : — 

The Name remaineth, saints remain, Guru Gobind remain- 
eth ; 

Saith Nanak, few are they who in this world follow the 
Guru’s instruction. 

Before the messenger reached Anandpur the Guru’s 

1 This couplet is the only composition of the tenth Guru found in 
the Granth Sahib. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


386 

family was in great distress on account of a vision 
which his wife had had. She thought that she saw 
the Guru place five paise and a coco-nut before his 
son Gobind and bow to him in token of his appoint- 
ment, and then she beheld the Guru’s head separated 
from his body. She requested her son to send a Sikh 
at once to ascertain if the vision had any reality. 
If the messenger met on the road the Sikh who was 
expected from Dihli, he was to let him come on, and 
himself proceed to Dihli to obtain the latest informa- 
tion regarding the Guru. 

Meanwhile the Emperor kept his thoughts on the 
Guru’s conversion. He sent for a Muhammadan 
priest and told him to take one of the nobles with kirn 
to the prisoner with this message, ' Thou art to accept 
the Muhammadan religion or work a miracle. If 
thou work a miracle, thou mayest remain a Guru as 
thou art. If thou accept Islam, then shalt thou 
be advanced to an exalted position, and be happy. 
If thou fail to accept these offers, thou shalt be put 
to death. This is my final decision.’ 

The Guru replied in the same purport as before, 
and added — ' I will never abandon my faith. I want 
no honour in this life ; I want honour hereafter. The 
threat of death possesseth no terrors for me, since 
I must one day assuredly leave this perishable body. 
For death I am prepared and I cheerfully accept it.’ 

The Emperor on hearing this reply was greatly 
incensed, and ordered that the Guru should be 
executed. 

Meantime the messenger from the Guru’s son and 
wife arrived from Anandpur. The Guru said to 
him: 'My last hour hath come. Stand thou 
near me. My head shall fall into thy lap. Fear 
nobody, but take it to Anandpur, and cremate it 
there.’ On hearing this not only the Sikh, but the 
Muhammadan governor of the jail began to weep. 
The Guru gave them religious instruction, and con- 
soled them. Then turning to his faithful companion, 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 387 

Gurditta, he said : ‘ Thou shalt be released after my 
death.’ Gurditta replied, ‘ 0 great king, it is at thy 
feet I wish to leave my body.’ The Guru rejoined : 
— ‘ 0 my brother, thy cremation-ground shall be 
where Bhai Budha used to graze the horses of 
Guru Har Gobind when he was in the fortress of 
Gualiar. The place is only about six miles distant. 
Thou shalt leave thy body there, and come to me in 
heaven.’ 

■ Then came Saiyid Adam Shah with a warrant 
for the Guru’s execution, accompanied by all the 
Emperor’s courtiers and Muhammadan priests of 
Dihli. Adam Shah, who revolted from the office of 
executioner of the Guru, asked him why he was bent 
on losing his life in vain, and begged him to embrace 
Islam. The Guru replied : — ‘ The Sikh religion is 
dearer to me than life, and I cannot renounce it even 
under the pressure of immediate and certain death. 
The Guru was then taken out of his cage, and allowed 
to per for m his ablutions at a neighbouring well . There 
appeared a great crowd to witness the execution. 
The Guru, leaving the well, went and sat under 
a banyan-tree, still extant, where he recited the 
Japji. He then told Adam Shah to take his 
sword and strike his neck when he bowed to God 
at the conclusion of his devotions. Adam Shah did 
so. It is said that the Guru’s head flew off into the 
faithful Sikh’s lap. 

It is recorded that immediately afterwards a great 
storm arose which filled every one’s eyes with dust. 
The Sikh unobserved by anyone took away the Guru’s 
head to Anandpur, hasting with it as fast as his feet 
could carry him. The execution of Guru Teg 
Bahadur occurred on the afternoon of Thursday the 
fifth day of the light half of the month of Maghar in 
the Sambat year 1732 (a.d. 1675). 


c c 2 



388 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chapter XII 

The Emperor on hearing of the Guru’s execution 
became sad and repentant. His mind is said to have 
been agitated like leaves moved by the wind. He 
reflected : ' As the Guru by his death hath fixed a 
stain on me, so I think that my own life will now be 
my guest for only a few days.’ His courtiers on 
hearing this endeavoured to console him : ' 0 mighty 
monarch, the Guru disobeyed thine orders, so what 
sin was there in killing him ? Thou didst flay and put 
to death such a great man as Sarmad, so why be 
distressed in the Guru’s case ? Why trouble regarding 
an accomplished fact ? ’ On hearing this the Emperor 
outwardly appeared consoled, but could never really 
regain his peace of mind. 

A Sikh of the Labana tribe, on happening to 
see the Guru’s dead body was greatly grieved, and 
said to himself : ‘ A curse on the Sikhs who look 
on and allow this dishonour to the corpse of their 
Guru ! ’ The Labana went home, and reproached 
his tribesmen on the subject. They collected oxen 
on which they loaded sacks, and carts on which they 
loaded cotton, and drove them in the direction of the 
Guru’s corpse. In this way they hoped that their 
removing it for the performance of the last sad rites 
would not be noticed. They also hoped to elude 
pursuit in the dust-storm which arose after the 
Guru’s death. The city guards were greatly troubled 
by the storm, and dispersed in different directions. 
Five Sikhs then took up the Guru’s body, put it on 
a cart, and succeeded in taking it unobserved through 
the crowd. When they had taken it outside the city 
the dust-storm subsided. 

The Sikhs’ houses were all thatched, so when the 
pyre was lighted in them, they would take fire, and in 
this way the Guru’s body would not be discovered. 
When it was duly reduced to ashes, they cried out 
that their houses had caught fire, and called on their 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 3 fir 

neighbours to assist them in extinguishing it. Ihe 
houses, however, were soon burnt to ashes, and the 
call to their neighbours to help them was futile as it 
had been intended. Next day they collected the 
Guru’s remains and buried them in a copper vessel 
in the earth immediately under his funeral pyre. 
Over his remains, at a spot now known as Rakab 
Gunj, a shrine was subsequently erected. 

The Emperor censured his staff for allowing the 
Guru’s head and body to disappear, and deemed his 
own object frustrated in having put the Guru to 
death. In his general distress at what had occurred 
he was not able to take his dinner, and retired 
hungry. He dreamt that Bhai Mati Das appeared 
to him, upturned his bed, and ordered him to leave 
Dihli. The Emperor was unable to sleep for the 
remainder of the night, and endeavoured to lull his 
conscience by a repetition of the creed and the prayers 
of his religion. 

While all this was taking place, the Guru’s family 
heard of his death, the efforts made to convert him, 
and his noble replies to all the overtures made. 
The messenger told how the Guru had sent for five 
paise and a coco-nut, bowed to his son Gobind, made 
him his successor, and infused his light into him. 
His message to his son was to extend the true religion, 
and destroy the wicked. The whole assembly began 
to weep, but the young Guru endeavoured to console 
them. He said that there should be no mourning 
for true men like his father, who on seeing the 
decline of religion had assumed human birth, and 
having placed religion on a firm basis returned to his 
heavenly home. ‘ According to the words of Guru 
Arjan : — 

Philanthropic men have come who are beyond birth and 
death ; 

They give their lives, turn men to devotion, and cause 
them to meet God. 



39 ° 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Consequently, my brethren, your mourning is 
vain.’ 

The young Guru who knew that his father’s head 
was being brought to Anandpur by the last messenger 
sent to Dihli, dispatched two Sikhs to meet and 
escort it. The Sikhs fell in with its bearer about 
a mile from Anandpur. He told them to return and 
ask Guru Gobind Rai if his father’s head was to be 
cremated at Anandpur or Kiratpur where were the 
shrines of the sixth and seventh Gurus and relations 
of theirs. The young Guru decided that Guru Teg 
Bahadur’s head should be taken to Anandpur for the 
last rites. 

A pyre of sandal wood was constructed and attar 
of roses sprinkled on the head which the young Guru 
took and solemnly placed on the pyre. He then 
repeated the preamble of the Japji and ignited the 
pyre with his own hands. While the head was being 
cremated, the Sikh congregation sang hymns of the 
Guru. They called to memory and spoke of Guru 
Teg Bahadur’s philanthropic and self-sacrificing 
deeds. The Sohila was then read with a conclud- 
ing benediction and sacred food distributed. When 
Guru Gobind Rai reached home, he caused the 
reading of the Gurus’ hymns to be begun, and this 
was continued for ten days, when alms were freely 
distributed. Guru Gobind Rai was in due time 
proclaimed the tenth Guru. There were great 
rejoicings on the occasion. Bards and poets assembled 
to sing the new Guru’s praises while certain Sikhs 
were sad at heart as they thought of the late Guru 
Teg Bahadur. The memory of their kind friend and 
spiritual leader ever occurred to them. 

After the death of Guru Teg Bahadur the Muham- 
madans set at liberty his faithful attendant Gurditta, 
a lineal descendant of Bhai Budha. He then went 
to where Bhai Budha used to graze the sixth 
Guru’s horses, and there after seeing the seat of 
his ancestors gave up his spirit. His son Ram 



LIFE OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 391 

Kaur, who was then only thirteen years of age, 
became a very learned Gnrumukhi scholar. It 
was he who gave the tenth Guru the tilak, or 
patch of spiritual sovereignty, in the presence of the 
descendants of all the Gurus. The enthronement of 
Guru Gobind Rai was performed on the fifth day 
of the first half of Phagan (February), A.D. 1676, with 
great state in a lofty building erected for the occasion. 

One day the Labana who had cremated Guru Teg 
Bahadur’s body paid Guru Gobind Rai a visit, and 
detailed all the circumstances subsequent to Guru 
Teg Bahadur’s death. When the Labana said that 
the Sikhs were afraid to touch the body, Guru Gobind 
Rai vowed that he would make Sikhs such that one 
of them could hold his ground against one hundred 
thousand others. When the Labana told the Guru 
that he had buried the ashes of his father, the Guru 
ordered him to leave them where they were for the 
present. He would go there himself one day, and 
erect a temple on the spot. 

The Labana continued to describe the mental 
state of Aurangzeb after the execution of the Guru. 
When Aurangzeb imprisoned his own father the latter 
gave him three counsels — not to try to convert the 
Hindus, to pay his State servants well, and not to 
engage in war in the Dakhan. All these counsels 
Aurangzeb disregarded, the first two through bigotry 
and greed, and the third through the advice of 
a wandering faqir who told him it would now be 
impossible for him to remain in Dihli. Aurangzeb 
therefore decided to make an expedition against 
King Tana Shah in the Dakhan. From that moment 
Aurangzeb’ s power declined, and now no trace is left 
of his imperial line. 

Such is the account of the death of Guru Teg 
Bahadur given by the Sikh historians. The Muham- 
madan author of the Siyar-ul-Mutaakharin states 
that Aurangzeb had the Guru’s body cut up into 
pieces and suspended in different parts of the imperial 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


3 9 2 

capital. Whether this be true or not, it is certain that 
the other circumstances related by the Muhammadan 
writer are utterly incompatible with the whole tenor 
of Guru Teg Bahadur’s life and writings, and cannot 
be accepted as even an approach to history . 1 
Guru Gobind Rai thus writes of his father : — 

He protected the frontal marks and sacrificial threads of 
the Hindus 

And displayed great bravery in this Kal age. 

When he put an end to his life for the sake of holy men. 
He gave his head, but uttered not a groan. 

He suffered martyrdom for the sake of his religion ; 

He gave his head but swerved not from his determination. 

God’s people would be ashamed 

To perform the tricks of mountebanks and cheats . 2 


Having broken his potsherd on the head of the King of 
Dihli he departed to paradise. 

No one else coming into the world acted like Teg Bahadur. 


The world was in mourning for the demise of Teg Bahadur ; 

There was weeping for him in the whole world, but rej oicing 
in paradise . 3 * 

The following hymn of Guru Teg Bahadur is 
frequently sung in assemblies of Sikhs : — • . 

Put the support of God’s lotus feet into thy heart, and 
unite it with them. 

The mind desireth evil, but it should be restrained by the 
Guru’s instruction. 

Give thy head rather than forsake those whom thou hast 
undertaken to protect. 

Guru Teg Bahadur said, give thy life, but relinquish not 
thy faith. 

- 1 The Siyar-ul-Mutaakharin contains many obvious misstatements 
regarding the other Gurus also. 

2 That is, he might have performed a miracle and saved himself, 
but he scorned to do so. 

3 Vachitar Natak, Chap. v. 



393 


HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR * 

Gauri 

I 

0 good people, renounce your mental pride, 

Day and night flee from lust, wrath, and the company of 
the evil. 

He who recognizeth pleasure and pain, honour and dis- 
honour as the same, 

And who keepeth aloof from joy and sorrow, knoweth the 
Real Thing in the world. 

One should renounce praise and blame and search for the 
dignity of Nirvan : 

Nanak, this is a difficult part to play ; only a few pious 
men know how to do so. 

II 

0 good people, God hath thus made creation — 

Some perish, others think that they shall live for ever ; 
this is a wonderful thing and cannot be understood. 

Mortal is in the power of lust, anger, and worldly love, 
and hath forgotten God. 

The body which, like a nightly dream, is unreal man 
deemeth real. 2 

Whatever is visible shall all vanish like the shadows of 
the clouds : 

Nanak, they who know that the world is unreal shall 
abide under God’s protection. 

III 

The praise of God entereth not into the heart of man ; 

Day and night he remaineth absorbed in mammon ; say 
how shall he sing God's praises. 

1 The hymns of the ninth Guru are not found in the oldest copy of 
the Granth Sahib preserved at Kartarpur. They were incorporated in 
the sacred volume by the tenth Guru at Damdama. 

2 That is, permanent. 



394 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


In this way he bindeth himself to children, friends, 
mammon, and selfishness. 

This world is false as a mirage, yet man on beholding it 
fleeth after it. 

The Lord, the Cause of happiness in this world and the 
next, is forgotten by the fool. 

Nanak, among millions few there are who find the way to 
worship God. 


IV 

0 good people, the heart cannot be restrained ; 

It is fickle, greed abideth with it, therefore it cannot 
be kept stable ; 

Within it is violent rage which causeth all wisdom to be 
forgotten, 

And which hath stolen the jewel of divine knowledge from 
all men : nothing can withstand it. 

All the Jogis making efforts and the eulogists singing 
God’s praises have failed to steady their minds. 

Nanak, when God is merciful, everything is successful. 

V 

O good people, sing God’s praises : 

You have obtained priceless human life ; why waste it in 
vain ? 

Enter into the sanctuary of God who is the purifier of 
sinners and the friend of the poor. 

Why forget Him, by remembering whom the elephant’s 
fear departed ? 

Lay aside pride, worldly love, and self, and then apply 
your minds to God’s worship. 

Nanak saith, this is the way of salvation ; become a fol- 
lower of the Guru and you shall attain it. 

VI 

0 mother, let some one instruct this erring mind. 

Man hath heard the Veds and the Purans and the ways 
of holy men, yet he singeth not God’s praises even for a 
moment ; 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 395 

Having obtained a human body so difficult to obtain, he 
passeth his life in vain. 

Worldly love is a very toilsome forest, yet man conceivetli 
love for it. 

He feeleth no love for God who is ever with him at home 
and abroad. 

Nanak, consider him in whose heart God is contained as 
delivered. 


VII 

0 good people, in God’s asylum there is rest. 

The advantage of the study of the Veds and the Purans is 
to remember God’s name. 

The man who is untouched by covetousness, worldly love, 
selfishness, joy, and sorrow, 

And who is not a slave to his passion, is the image of God ; 

So is he who deemeth heaven and hell, ambrosia and 
poison, gold and copper, as the same ; 

And so also is he who deemeth praise and blame as the 
same, and who is not enslaved by avarice and worldly love : 

Recognize him as possessed of divine knowledge who hath 
not the entanglements of pain and pleasure. 

Nanak, admit that such a mortal is saved. 

VIII 

0 man, why hast thou become crazy ? 

Knowest thou not that life decreaseth day and night, and 
that thou art degraded by avarice ? 

In the body and the beautiful house and wife which 
thou deemest thine own, 

Thou hast no share ; see and carefully reflect on this. 

Thou hast lost the jewel of human life, and thou knowest 
not God’s way ; 

Thou hast not been absorbed in the feet of the Lord even 
for a moment, and thou hast passed thy life in vain. 

Saith Nanak, that man is happy who singeth God’s name 
and praises ; 

Mammon hath bewitched all the rest of men ; they shall 
not obtain the fearless dignity. 



396 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


IX 

0 heedless man, fear sin . 1 

Enter the protection of Him who is compassionate to the 
poor and the destroyer of every fear. 

Clasp to thy heart the name of Him whose praises the Veds 
and Purans sing. 

Pure is the name of God in the world ; by ever remember- 
ing it all filth of sin shall be cleansed. 

Thou shalt not again obtain a human body ; make some 
efforts now for thy deliverance. 

Nanak saith, by lauding Him who is full of mercy thou 
shalt cross the terrible ocean. 

Asa 

To whom shall I describe man’s troubles ? 

The prey of avarice he hasteth in every direction in the 
hope of wealth ; 

For the sake of pleasure he undergoeth much suffering, 
and is the slave of every individual ; 

Like a dog he wandereth from door to door, and heedeth 
not God’s worship ; 

He loseth his human life in vain, and is not ashamed of 
men’s laughter. 

Nanak, why dost thou not sing God’s praises so that thine 
evil inclinations may depart ? 

Devgandhari 

I 

Man doeth not a particle of my bidding. 

1 have been instructing him, yet he abstaineth not from 
wickedness ; 

He hath gone mad by the intoxication of mammon, and 
repeateth not God’s praises ; 

By fraud he deceiveth the world and filleth his own belly ; 

Like a dog’s tail he is never straight, and lendeth not an 
ear to what I tell him. 

1 The gyanis generally translate this verse — 0 man, fear even 
unintentional sin. 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 397 

Sa.itli Nanak, continually repeat the name of God, so shalt 
thou be successful. 

II 

All thy relations are only for life ; 

Thy mother, father, brothers, sons, kinsmen, and the wife 
of thy house, 

When the soul parteth from thy body, cry out and call 
thee a ghost ; 

Nobody keepeth thee even half a ghari ; they expel thee 
from the house. 

The structure of the world is like a mirage ; understand 
this and ponder on it in thy heart. 

Saith Nanak, ever repeat God’s name by which deliverance 
is obtained. 

Ill 

I have seen that the love of the world is false ; 

Everybody, whether wife or friend, is intent on his own 
happiness ; 

Everybody speaketh of his relations, and attacheth his 
heart to them with love ; 

At the last moment nobody will accompany him : this is 
a strange custom. 

Stupid man as yet understandeth nothing, though I have 
grown weary of continually instructing him. 

Nanak, if man sing the praises of God, he shall cross over 
the terrible ocean. 

Bihagra 

Nobody knoweth God’s ways ; 

Jogis, jatis, penitents, and several wise men have grown 
weary thinking of Him ; 

He can in a moment make a beggar a king, or a king 
a beggar ; 

What is empty He filleth, and what is full He emptieth ; 
this is a practice of God ; 

He hath spread His own illusion, and He Himself behold- 
eth it ; 

He assumeth many shapes and -playeth many sports, yet 
is distinct from everything. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


398 

Incomputable, illimitable, unseen, and spotless is He who 
hath unsettled all men’s minds. 

Saith Nanak, O mortal, lay aside all doubt, and think 
upon God’s feet. 


SORATH 

I 

O man, love God ; 

Hear His praises with thine ears, and sing His songs with 
thy tongue. 

Associate with holy men, remember God, and thou shalt 
be cleansed from sin. 

Death wandereth about, 0 friend, like a serpent with pro- 
truding fangs, 

And it will seize thee sooner or later ; understand this in 
thy heart. 

Saith Nanak, worship God ; thine opportunity is passing 
away. 

II 

Man’s intentions are never carried out ; 

He neither adoreth God, nor worshippeth at places of 
pilgrimage, 1 so Death seizeth him by the top-lock. 

Know that wives, friends, sons, carriages, property, 
wealth, the whole world. 

And everything else is false ; only adoration of God is 
true. 

Grown weary of wandering about for many ages, man 
hath at last obtained a human body : 

Nanak saith, 0 man, it is now thy turn to meet God ; 
why not remember Him ? 

III 

0 man, what evil inclinations hast thou entertained ? 

Thou hast found pleasure in other men’s wives and in 
calumny, and God thou hast not served ; 

Thou hast not known the way of deliverance, but hast 
hurried to amass wealth. 

1 By pilgrimage is here meant the society of saints. 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 399 

At last nothing shall accompany thee ; in vain hast thou 
entangled thyself. 

Thou hast not worshipped God, nor served holy men, nor 
hath any divine knowledge sprung up in thy heart. 

God is in thy heart, yet thou sear chest for Him in the 
wilderness ; 

Thou hast grown weary of wandering in many births, and 
hast not acquired a stable mind ; 

Having now acquired a human body worship God’s feet ; 
Nanak giveth thee this advice. 

IV 

O man, think of seeking God’s protection ; 

' Fix His praises in thy heart, by meditating on whom 
such a person as the courtesan was saved ; 

By remembering Him Dhru became immovable, and ob- 
tained the fearless dignity. 

Why hast thou forgotten the Lord, who is such a Remover 
of sorrow ? 

When the elephant took the protection of the Ocean of 
mercy, he escaped from the crocodile. 

How far shall I describe the praises of the Name ? He 
who repeateth it bursteth his bonds. 

The sinner Ajamal, the world knoweth, was saved in a 
moment. 

Nanak saith, think upon the Fulfiller of desires, and thou 
too shalt be saved. 

V 

What efforts shall mortal make 

By which he may obtain God’s service and dispel the 
fear of death ? 

Say what science shall he study , and then what acts and 
religious ceremonies shall he perform ? 

What is that great name, by remembering which man 
may cross the dreaded ocean ? 

In the Kal age there is one Name, that of the Ocean of 
mercy, by repeating which man may obtain deliverance ; 

There is no other religious ceremony equal to that, as 
shown by sacred writings. 



400 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


He who is called the Lord of the earth, remaineth ever 
free from joy and sorrow, uncontaminated by the world, 

And unaffected by it, 0 Nanak, like a mirror ; He dwelleth 
within thee. 

VI 

0 mother, how shall I behold the Lord of the earth ? 

In the darkness of great worldly love and spiritual igno- 
rance my heart hath been entangled ; 

1 have lost the whole of my life in wandering, and not 
obtained a stable mind ; 

I have night and day pursued sinful pleasures, and have 
not abandoned sinful habits. 

I have never associated with saints or sung God’s praises. 

Nanak, in me is no virtue ; take me, 0 God, under Thy 
protection. 

VII 

0 mother, my heart is not under my control ; 

Night and day it chaseth sinful pleasures ; how shall I 
restrain it ? 

Although I have heard the teachings of the Veds, the 
Purans and the Simritis, yet I have not given them a place 
in my heart for an instant ; 

1 have coveted others’ goods and others’ wives, and have 
passed my life in vain ; 

I have become mad with the intoxication of mammon, 
and I know not any divine knowledge ; 

The Pure One dwelleth in my heart, yet I know not His 
secret. 

Since I have entered the asylum of the Saints, 1 my evil 
thoughts have all dispersed. 

Nanak, when I thought upon the Fulfiller of desires, 
Death’s noose was cut. 


VIII 

O man, hold this for certain in thy heart — 

The whole world is like a dream, and in its destruction 
there shall be no delay. 

1 The Gurus, his predecessors. 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 401 

As a wall of sand, even when elaborately built lasteth 
not four days, 

So is the pleasure of mammon ; why art thou entangled 
in it, 0 ignorant man ? 

This very day come to thy senses ; no harm is yet done ; 
repeat God’s name. 

Saith Nanak, I have proclaimed unto thee, 0 man, the 
special teaching of holy men. 

. IX 

I have seen no friend in this world ; 

The whole world is attached to one for its own interest, 
but man will have no companion in adversity. 

Wives, friends, sons, and relatives are all attached to 
wealth ; 

When they see a man poor, they all forsake his company 
and flee. 

What shall I say to this demented heart which is attached 
to them ? 

I have forgotten the praises of the Lord of the poor and 
the Destroyer of fear ; 

However much I have striven, my heart remaineth as 
crooked as a dog’s tail, and will not straighten. 

Saith Nanak, 0 God, have regard for Thy practice of 
forgiveness ; I have uttered Thy name. 

X 

0 man, thou hast not embraced the Guru’s instruction, 

What availeth thee to shave thy head, and put on an 
ochre-dyed garment ? 

Having abandoned truth thou hast attached thyself to 
falsehood, and lost thy human life in vain ; 

Thou hast filled thy belly by deceit, and slept like a beast ; 

Thou knowest not how to worship God, and thou hast 
sold thyself to mammon. 

O madman, thou hast remained entangled with sin, and 
forgotten the jewel of the Name ; 

Thou hast been thoughtless, thou hast not thought of 
God, thou hast passed thy life in vain. 

D d 


SIKH. IV 



402 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Saith Nanak, O God, recognize Thy daily practice of 
forgiveness ; mortal ever erreth. 

XI 

He who in adversity heedeth it not, 

Who in prosperity feeleth neither affection nor fear, and 
who deemeth gold as dross ; 

Who uttereth neither praise nor blame, and who suffereth 
not from avarice, worldly love, or pride ; 

Who is -unaffected by joy or sorrow, by honour or dis- 
honour ; 

Who hath renounced all hopes and desires, and expecteth 
nothing from the world ; 

Whom lust and wrath touch not — in such a person’s 
heart God dwelleth. 

He to whom the Guru hath shown favour knoweth the 
way to this, 

And shall be blended with God, 0 Nanak, as water with 
water. 

XII 

My dear friends, know this in your hearts — 

The whole world is entangled in its own pleasures ; no- 
body is any one else’s friend. 

i In prosperity many persons come and sit together by one, 
encircling him on all sides ; 

When adversity befalleth him, all abandon him and no- 
body cometh near him. 

The wife of one’s home who hath been dearly loved, and 
who hath ever been attached to her husband, 

On the departure of his soul from his body fleeth away 
crying, ‘ Ghost ! ghost ! ’ 

Such is the conduct of those whom we love : 

At the last moment, Nanak, none but God is of any avail. 

Dhanasari 

I 

O Sir, why goest thou to search in the forest ? 

God though ever apart dwelleth everywhere, and is con- 
tained even in thee. 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 403 

As in flowers there is odour and in a mirror reflection, 

So God dwelleth continually in thy heart ; search for Him 
there, O brother. 

Whether thou art abroad or at home, know that there is 
but one God ; this knowledge the Guru hath given me. 

Nanak, without knowing thyself the scum of doubt shall 
not be removed. 

II 

0 good people, this world hath been led astray by super- 
stition ; 

It hath forsaken the memory of God’s name, and it hath 
been sold to mammon. 

It is involved in the love of mother, father, brother, son, 
and wife ; 

Day and night it is mad with the intoxication of youth, 
wealth, and splendour ; 

It is not attached to Him who is compassionate to the 
poor and ever the Destroyer of sorrow. 

Nanak, among millions few there are who become attached 
to the Guru and recognize God. 

III 

Think not that that Jogi 

In whose heart thou recognizest covetousness, worldly 
love, and selfishness is united with God. 

He who neither calumniateth nor flattereth others, to 
whom gold and iron are the same, 

And who is free from joy or sorrow, is properly called 
a Jogi. 

The restless mind of man hasteth in every direction, but 
whoever steadily fixeth it, 

Saith Nanak, thou mayest rest assured is saved. 

IV 

What effort shall I now make 

That my mental anxiety may be at an end, and I may 
cross the terrible ocean ? 

1 have done nothing good since I was born, wherefore I 
fear the more ; 


D d 2 


404 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


I have not sung God’s praises in thought, word, or deed ; 
in my heart I feel anxious regarding this ; 

Although I have heard the Guru’s instruction, yet no 
spiritual knowledge hath resulted ; I fill my belly like a 
beast — 

Saith Nanak, O God, adopt Thy daily practice of for- 
giveness, and I a sinner shall be saved. 

Jaitsari 

I 

My erring mind hath been entangled with mammon ; 

The more works I performed when devoted to avarice, 
the more I entangled myself ; 

I had no understanding, I devoted myself to sinful plea- 
sures, and I forgot God’s praises ; 

The Lord who was with me I did not recognize, I ran 
searching for Him into the forest. 

The jewel of God was in my heart, but I knew it not. 

Nanak, without worshipping God life is lost in vain. 

II 

0 God, preserve mine honour : 

When the fear of Death entered my heart, I clung to Thine 
asylum, 0 Ocean of mercy. 

1 was a great sinner, stupid and avaricious, but I have 
now grown weary of committing sin. 

I have not forgotten the fear of Death ; in my anxiety 
my body hath wasted away, 

I have been running in every direction contriving plans 
for my salvation ; 

But though the pure God dwelt in my heart, I knew it not. 

I have no virtues nor have I performed devotion or pen- 
ance : what work shall I now perform ? 

Nanak, I have grown weary and have sought Thy pro- 
tection ; 0 God, grant me salvation. 

Ill 

O man, embrace true instruction. 

Admit that without the name of God all this world is 
false ; 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 405 

Know that the Lord, for whom the Jogis grow weary of 
searching without finding His limit. 

Is near thee, but without form or outline. 

God’s name is the purifier of the world, yet thou hast 
never remembered it. 

Saith Nanak, I have entered Thine asylum ; 0 Thou to 
whom the world boweth down, preserve me as is Thy 
practice. 

Todi 

What shall I say of my baseness ? 

I have been entangled in the love of gold and woman, and 
have not sung God’s praises. 

Believing this false world to be true I conceived an attach- 
ment for it ; 

I never remembered the Protector of the poor, who is 
my companion and helper ; 

I remained night and day absorbed in worldly affairs, 
and the filth of my heart forsook me not. 

Saith Nanak, I have now nowhere salvation except in the 
protection of God. 

Tilang. 

I 

0 mortal, if thou have wisdom, then think of God night 
and day ; 

Every moment life is passing away like water from a 
cracked vessel. 

Why singest thou not the praises of God, thou ignorant 
fool ? 

Attached to false avarice thou hast not thought of death ; 

No harm hath yet been done if thou even now sing God’s 
praises. 

Saith Nanak, by singing them thou shalt obtain the fear- 
less dignity. 

II 

Awake, 0 man, awake ; why dost thou heedlessly sleep ? 

The body which was bom with thee shall not depart with 
thee ; 



406 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The mother, father, sons, and relatives whom thou 
lovest, 

Will throw thy body into the fire when the soul departeth 
from it. 

Know that the affairs of the world last only during life. 

Nanak, sing God’s praises ; everything is like a dream. 

Ill 

O man, sing the praises of God who is with thee : 

The opportunity is passing away, obey my words. 

Thou hast loved too well wealth, equipages, women, and 
empire. 

When Death’s noose falleth on thy neck, all shall become 
the property of others. 

O madman, thou hast intentionally ruined thine affairs ; 

Thou didst not shrink from the commission of sin or 
dismiss pride. 

Hear, 0 my brother, how the Guru hath instructed me. 

Nanak loudly proclaimeth — seek God’s protection. 

Bilawal 

I 

Recognize God’s name as the remover of sorrow : 

Know in thy heart that by remembering Him Ajamal and 
the courtesan were saved ; 

The elephant’s fear departed directly he muttered God’s 
name. 

The boy Dhru listened to Narad’s instruction, and became 
engrossed in worship ; 

He obtained the durable, immortal, and fearless rank, and 
the world was amazed. 

Nanak saith, admit that God the Protector of saints is 
near thee. 

II 

Without God’s name thou shalt suffer ; 

Without piety doubts are not at an end ; the Guru gave 
me this secret. 

If thou enter not God’s asylum, what shall pilgrimage 
and fasting avail thee ? 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR '407 

Be assured that the practice of Jog and sacrificial feasts 
are fruitless if man forget the praises of God. 

Such man as layeth aside both pride and worldly love, 
and singeth God’s praises, 

Saith Nanak, shall be said to have obtained salvation 
during life. 

Ill 

He in whom there is no devotion to God, 

Hath lost his life in vain ; bear this in mind. 

I speak verily unto you ; believe his piety to be fruitless 

Who performeth pilgrimage and even fasting, but who 
hath not control over his heart. 

As water penetrateth not stone immersed in it. 

So deem that mortal who worshippeth not. 1 

In the Kal age salvation is obtained by the name of God ; 
the Guru discloseth this secret. 

Saith Nanak, he is a great man who singeth God’s praises. 

Ramkali 

I 

0 my soul, take shelter in God’s name ; 

By remembering it evil thoughts are dispelled, and the 
rank of nirvan obtained. 

Know that that man is very fortunate who singeth God’s 
praises ; 

Having lost the sins of different births he shall go to 
heaven. 

At the last moment Ajamal thought of God, 

And obtained in an instant the state which superior J ogis 
desire. 

The elephant had no merits, no learning, and what 
religious ceremonies had he performed ? 

Yet, O Nanak, behold the daily practice of God who 
granted him safety. 

II 

O my good people, what way shall man now adopt 

By which all evil thoughts may be dispelled and his heart 
be steeped in devotion to God. 

1 Religious instruction will have no effect on his hard heart. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


The heart remaineth entangled by mammon, and knoweth 
naught of divine knowledge. 

Whose name is that in the world by remembering which 
thou shalt obtain the rank of nirvan ? 

When the saints were compassionate and kind they taught 
me this — 

Know that he who hath sung God’s praises hath performed 
all religious duties ; 

And he who night and day claspeth God’s name to his 
heart, even for a moment, 

Shall lose all fear of Death and reform his life. 

Ill 

O mortal, think of God : 

Every moment life decreaseth ; night and day it passeth 
away in vain. 

Thou hast lost thy youth in sensual pleasures and thy 
childhood in ignorance ; 

Thou hast grown old and even now thou understandest 
not in what folly thou art entangled. 

Why hast thou forgotten God who gave thee human 
birth ? 

Thou hast not sung for a moment the f raises of Him by 
remembering whom man obtaineth salvation. 

Why art thou proud of worldly wealth ? it will not depart 
with any one. 

Nanak saith, think upon the Fulfiller of desires ; He will 
be our Helper at last. 


Maru 

I 

God’s name ever bestoweth comfort ; 

By remembering it Ajamal was saved, and the courtesan 
also obtained deliverance ; 

Panchali 1 at the royal assemblage remembered the name 
of God ; 

1 Yudhishtar, the eldest of the five Pandav princes, staked his king- 
dom, his brothers, himself, and lastly his wife Draupadi in a gambling 
match with Duryodhan the eldest of the Kaurav princes, and lost them 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 409 

The Merciful One removed her suffering and enhanced 
His own renown. 

The Ocean of mercy assisteth whomsoever hath sung 
His praises ; 

Saith Nanak, relying on this I have come and sought 
His protection. 

II 

Now what shall I do, 0 mother ? 

I have lost my whole life in sensual pleasures and have 
not remembered God. 

When Death throweth his halter on my neck, I shall have 
lost all my reason. 1 

Except the name of God what shall assist me in that 
affliction ? 

The wealth thou deemest thine own becometh in one 
moment another’s. 

Saith Nanak, I have been reflecting in my mind that 
I have never sung God’s praises. 

III 

0 mother, I have not renounced the pride of my heart ; 

1 have passed my life in the intoxication of worldly love, 
and have not applied myself to the worship of God. 

When Death’s mace fell upon my head, then I awoke from 
my slumber. 

But what availeth present repentance ? I shall not escape 
even by running. 2 

When this thought arose in my mind I fell in love with 
the Guru’s feet. 

Life is only profitable, Nanak, when we are absorbed in 
God’s praises. 1 

all. Duryodhan finding himself in possession of Draupadi ordered her 
to sweep his house. On her refusal she was dragged by Dhusasan, 
Duryodhan’s brother, before an assemblage of the Kauravs. He 
endeavoured to pull off her clothes, but God saved her from disgrace. 
Draupadi is here called Panchali, for she was daughter of Drtipad 
the king of Panchal. 

1 I shall have no consciousness to repent and make up for lost 
opportunities. 

2 Also translated — Unfortunate that I am, I shall not escape. 



4io 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Basant 

I 

O good people, know that this body is temporary ; 

The God who dwelleth within it recognize as permanent. 
This world is like wealth obtained in a dream ; why be 
elated on beholding it ? 

Why are you wrapped up in it ? nothing shall depart 
with you. 

Renounce both flattery and slander ; take God’s praises 
to thy heart. 

Nanak, the one God filleth all things. 

II 

The sinner hath given lust a seat in his heart ; 1 
Wherefore his restless mind is not restrained. 

This net of lust is cast 

Over Jogis, Jangams, and Sanyasis. 

They who remember the name of God 
Cross over the terrible ocean. 

The slave Nanak hath taken refuge in God ; 

Grant me Thy name, 0 God, that I may continue to sing 
Thy praises. 


Ill 

0 mother, I have obtained God’s name as my wealth ; 

My heart hath ceased to wander and lain down to rest. 

Worldly love and selfishness have fled from my body, and 
pure spiritual knowledge hath sprung up in me. 

Avarice and worldly love cannot touch me ; I have em- 
braced God’s service. 

When I acquired the jewel of the Name, the fear of con- 
tinual birth was at an end. 

When all covetousness hath departed from the heart it 
is absorbed in special happiness. 

He to whom the Ocean of mercy is compassionate, singeth 
His praises. 

1 Also translated — Man hath implanted sinful lust in his heart. 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 411 

Saith Nanak, this form of wealth some rare holy man 
obtaineth. 


IV 

0 my soul, why hast thou forgotten God’s name ? 

When the body perisheth thou shalt have to do with 
Death. 

This world is a hill of smoke ; 

What induced thee to consider it real ? 

Understand that wealth, wife, property, and home 
Will not depart with thee ; 

The worship of God alone will accompany thee. 

Saith Nanak, adore Him with unmixed love. 

V 

Why hast thou gone astray and attached thyself to false 
avarice ? 

There is no harm done if even to-day thou awake. 

Know that this world is like a dream ; 

It will be destroyed in a moment ; accept this as true. 
Adore that God day and night, O my friend, 

Who dwelleth continually with thee. 

Sing the praises of Him, 

Saith Nanak, who will assist thee at the last moment. 

Sarang 

I 

Thou hast no helper but God ; 

Who hath a mother, father, son, or wife ? who hath a 
brother ? 

Of all the wealth, land, and property which thou deemest 
thine own, 

Nothing shall depart with thee when thou diest ; why art 
thou wrapped up in them ? 

Thou hast not increased thy love for Him who is com- 
passionate to the poor and ever the Destroyer of misery, 
Nanak saith, the whole world is unreal like a nightly 
dream. 



412 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


II 

0 my soul, why art thou entangled in sensual pleasures ? 

In this world none may remain ; one cometh and another 

goeth. 

Who hath body and wealth ? who hath property ? what 
shall one love ? 

Everything which is visible shall vanish like the shadow 
of a cloud. 

Lay aside pride, grasp the protection of the saints, and 
thou shalt at once obtain salvation. 

Nanak, without worshipping God there is no happiness 
even in one’s dreams. 

A 

III 

Why, O man, hast thou wasted thy life ? 

Intoxicated by worldly love thou hast attached thyself 
to sensual pleasures and not entered God’s protection. 

This world is all a dream ; so why art thou covetous ? 

Everything that was created shall perish ; nothing shall be 
allowed to remain. 

This temporary body thou deemest permanent ; in this 
way hast thou entangled thyself. 

Nanak, only he who applieth his mind to the adoration 
of God, shall obtain salvation in this world. 1 

IV 

1 never heartily sang the praises of God ; 

I remained attached to sensual pleasures night and day, 
and did what pleased myself. 

I never carefully listened to the Guru’s instruction : I 
became entangled with others’ wives. 

I busied myself greatly in calumniating others, and under- 
stood not the counsels I received. 

How far shall I describe my acts — how I have wasted 
my life ? 

Saith Nanak, in me are all demerits ; protect me, 0 God, 

I have come to thy sanctuary. 

1 That is, shall obtain salvation during life. 



HYMNS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 413 

Jaijawanti 1 

I 

Remember God, remember God, this is thy duty ; 

Abandon the companionship of worldly love ; cling to 
God’s sanctuary ; admit that the pleasures of the world are 
false ; everything is unreal. 

Consider wealth as a dream ; of what art thou proud ? 
the empire of the earth is as a wall of sand. 

1 The slave Nanak saith, thy body shall be destroyed ; 
yesterday passed away moment by moment, so also shall 
to-day. 

II 

Adore God, adore God ; thy life passeth away. 

Why should I warn thee every moment ? why under- 
standest thou not, 0 fool ? The body is like hail, it vanisheth 
in a moment. 

Reject all doubt and repeat God’s name ; at the last 
moment this alone will depart with thee. 

Forsake sensual pleasures as poison ; take the praise of 
God to thy heart ; Nanak proclaimeth, the opportunity is 
passing away, 

III 

0 man, what shall be thy condition ? 

In this world the only means of salvation is God’s name 
to which thou hast not attentively listened ; thou hast 
been excessively addicted to sensual pleasures, and not 
diverted thy thoughts from them. 

Thou hast obtained human life, yet thou hast not remem- 
bered God for a moment ; thou hast been in subjection to 
the charms of woman and thy feet are fettered. 

Nanak proclaimeth, the extension of the world is like 
a dream ; why thinkest thou not upon God to whom mam- 
mon is but a handmaiden ? 2 

IV 

Thy life shall pass away, shall pass away in vain ; 

Though thou hearest night and day the ancient histories, 

1 The ninth is the only Guru who has written in this measure. 

2 Why worship the servant instead of the Master ? 


4 



414 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


yet, O silly man, thou understandest them not ; Death hath 
arrived ; whither shalt thou flee ? 

That body of thine which, thou thinkest permanent shall 
become dust ; why repeatest thou not the name of God, 
thou shameless fool ? 

Introduce the service of God into thy heart ; renounce 
mental pride, so shalt thou, Nanak asserteth, be illustrious 
in the world. 


SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 

I 

He who singeth not God’s praises rendereth his life 
useless-; 

Saith Nanak, worship God, O my soul, as the fish loveth 
water. jj 

Why art thou enamoured of the deadly sins ? thou re- 
nouncest them not for a moment. 

Saith Nanak, repeat God’s name, 0 my soul, so that 
Death’s noose may not fall on thee. 

Ill 

Youth hath passed away in vain, old age hath overcome 
the body ; 

Saith Nanak, worship God, 0 my soul, thy life passeth 
away. Iy 

Thou hast become old ; knowest thou not that thy time 
hath arrived ? 

Saith Nanak, 0 crazy man, why worshippest thou not' 
God? y 

Wealth, wife, riches, all that thou deemest thine own — 

None of these shall depart with thee ; Nanak, know this 
as true. y j 

God is the Saviour of sinners, the Dispeller of fear, the 
Lord of the helpless ; 

Saith Nanak, know Him, He dwelleth ever with thee. 



SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 415 

VII 

Thou hast not loved Him who gave thee a human body 
and wealth : 

Saith Nanak, 0 crazy man, why dost thou abjectly 
tremble ? 

VIII 

Saith Nanak, hear 0 man, why rememberest thou not 
God 

Who gave thee human body, wife, wealth, prosperity, 
and commodious mansions ? 


IX 

God and no other is the Bestower of all happiness ; 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 man, by remembering Him deliver- 
ance is obtained. 

X 

Adore God, 0 my friend, by remembering Him deliver- 
ance is obtained ; 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 man, life is ever growing shorter. 

XI 

0 clever and wise man, know that thy body is composed 
of five elements ; 

Be sure, Nanak, that thou shalt blend with that from 
which thou hast sprung. 


XII 

The saints proclaim that God dwelleth in every heart — 
Saith Nanak, adore Him, 0 man, and thou shalt cross 
over the terrible ocean. 


XIII 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 man, in God’s image is he 
Who is unaffected by weal or woe, by covetousness, 
worldly love, or pride. 

XIV 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 man, know that he is saved 
Who utter eth neither praise nor blame, and to whom gold 
and iron are the same. 



416 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


XV 

Saith Nanak, hear, O man, know that he is saved 

Who feeleth neither joy nor sorrow, and who treateth an 
enemy and a friend as the same. 

XVI 

Saith Nanak, hear, O man, call him a person possessed of 
divine knowledge, 

Who inspireth no fear, and who hath no fear of others. 

XVII 

Saith Nanak, hear, O man, good fortune is inscribed on 
that man’s forehead, 

Who hath abandoned all evil passions, and donned the 
garb of retirement. 

XVIII 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 man, God dwelleth in the heart of 
him 

Who hath abandoned mammon and selfishness, and re- 
nounced everything. 

XIX 

The man who having renounced selfishness recognizeth 
God as the Creator, 

Saith Nanak, is saved ; be sure, my soul, that this is true. 

XX 

In the Kal age God’s name is the destroyer of fear and 
the banisher of evil thoughts ; 

He who night and day repeateth it, Nanak, shall be suc- 
cessful in his undertakings. 


XXI 

Utter God’s praises with thy tongue, and hear God’s 
name with thine ears ; 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 man, thou shalt not then be put 
into Death’s prison. 


SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 41 

XXII 

The mortal who renounceth selfishness, covetousness, 
worldly love, and conceit, ' 

Saith Nanak, shall be saved himself and shall save others. 

XXIII 

Know that the world is like a dream or 1 a play ; 

There is nothing real in it, Nanak, but God. 

XXIV 

Day and night mortal wandereth after wealth ; 

Among millions, 0 Nanak, few there are who remember 
God. 

XXV 

As bubbles are formed from water and continually dis- 
appear ; 

So was this world constructed, 2 saith Nanak; hear this, 
0 my friend. 

XXVI 

Mortal, blinded by the intoxication of mammon, payeth 
no heed to anything ; 

Saith Nanak, without uttering God’s name Death’s noose 
shall fall on him. 

XXVII 

If thou desire eternal happiness take God’s protection ; 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 man, difficult of attainment is 
human birth. 

XXVIII 

Fools and ignorant people run after wealth ; 

Saith Nanak, without repeating God’s name their lives 
pass in vain. 

XXIX 

Know that that mortal is like God who worshippeth night 
and day ; 

Between God’s saint and God there is no difference ; 
Nanak, recognize that this is true. 

1 Ar in the original. The word, however, generally means 1 and.’ 

2 That is, men are born and die like bubbles. 

Ee 


SIKH. IV 



+ i8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


' XXX 

Man is entangled with mammon and forgetteth God’s 
name ; 

Saith Nanak, without repeating God’s name of what 
avail is life ? 

XXXI 

Mortal blinded by the intoxication of mammon remem- 
bereth not God ; 

Saith Nanak, without worshipping God Death’s noose 
shall fall on man. 

XXXII 

Man shall find many companions in weal, but none in 
woe ; 

Saith Nanak, worship God, O man, and He will assist 
thee at the last moment. 


XXXIII 

Man wandereth about in various births without having 
his fear of death removed ; 

Saith Nanak, 0 man, worship God, and thou shalt dwell 
in the fearless state. 

XXXIV 

I have made many efforts, but have not effaced the pride 
of my heart ; 

I am bound by my evil thoughts, saith Nanak ; preserve 
me from them, 0 God. 

XXXV 

Know that there are three stages of life, childhood, youth, 
and then old age ; 

Saith Nanak, admit that they are all in vain without 
worshipping God. 

XXXVI 

What thou oughtest to have done thou hast not done ; 
thou hast fallen into the net of covetousness ; 

Nanak, the opportunity hath now passed away ; why 
weepest thou, 0 blind man ? 



SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 419 

XXXVII 

The heart is absorbed in mammon and cannot escape 
from it, 0 my friend ; 

As a picture painted on a wall, 0 Nanak, leaveth it not. 

XXXVIII 

Man desireth one thing, but something different hap- 
peneth ; 

He meditateth deceiving others, O Nanak, and a halter 
is put round his neck. 

XXXIX 

Man maketh many efforts to obtain happiness, but none 
to obtain misery ; 1 

Saith Nanak, hear, 0 man, what pleaseth God happeneth. 

XL 

The world goeth about begging ; God is the Bestower 
of all ; 

Saith Nanak, remember Him, O man, and thy desires 
shall be fulfilled. 

XLI 

Why entertainest thou false pride ? Know that the 
world is like a dream ; 

In it there is nothing which is thine, Nanak preacheth. 

XLII 

Man is proud of his body which perisheth in a moment, 
my friend ; 

The man who reciteth God’s praises, Nanak, hath con- 
quered the world. 

XLIII 

Know that he in whose heart there is recollection of God, 
hath obtained salvation ; 

Between that man and God there is no difference ; Nanak, 
accept this as a fact. 

XLIV 

Consider that person, 0 Nanak, as a hog or a dog 

In whose heart there is no devotion to the one God. 

1 It comes of itself according to prenatal acts. 



420 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


XLV 

As a dog never abandoneth liis master’s house, 

Nanak, in the same way worship God with single mind 
and single heart. 

XLVI 

Going on pilgrimages, fasting, and giving alms, while 
pride is in the heart, 

Nanak, these things are as fruitless as an elephant’s 
bathing . 1 

XLVII 

Thy head shaketh, thy legs totter, thine eyes are devoid 
of lustre ; 

Saith Nanak, this is the case with thee , yet thou art not 
absorbed in God’s love. 

XLVIII 

I have particularly observed that in this world no one is 
another’s friend ; 

Nanak, only devotion to God is permanent ; preserve 
that in thy heart. 

XLIX 

Know, my friend, that the structure of the world is all 
unstable ; 

Saith Nanak, like a wall of sand it is not permanent. 

L 

Ram passed away, Rawan passed away with his large 
family ; 

Saith Nanak, nothing is permanent ; the world is like 
a dream. 

LI 

Be anxious only regarding what is not expected ; 2 

1 There can be no purity as long as sin dwells in the heart ; ablutions 
will then be like those of the elephant which after being bathed be- 
spatters himself with mud. 

2 If thy friends die, weep not over much for them, as their death 
is certain. 



SLOKS OF GURU TEG BAHADUR 4 21 


It is the way of the world, Nanak, that nothing is per- 
manent. 


LI I 


What is born dieth to-day, to-morrow, or the next day ; 
Nanak, sing God’s praises, and lay aside all entangle- 
ments. 

LVII 1 


God’s name to which nothing is equal I have clasped to 
my heart ; 

By remembering it my troubles are at an end, and I 
behold Thee, O God ! 


1 Sloks LIII, LIV, LV, and LVI have already been given in the 
Life of Guru Teg Bahadur. 


END OF VOL. IV 



\ 



') 


OXFORD 

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BY HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 








“A book that is shut is but a blocfc” 
c *fwEOLO C/ 

^ > 

<. 

£ GOVT. OF INDIA ^ 

Department of Archaeology VL 

C? NEW DELHI. % 


Please help us to keep the book 
eleau and moving.

I 

i 

i 


n 


5rT5r sriTf T wrr^ swr^nr sRTT^ift 
Lai. Bahadur Shastri Academy 
of Administration 

MUSSOORIE 
5??RiT5r?T 

S , library io:i3.8^jg 

g 3T5rTfc?r ^sqr . g 

n 


% 


Accession No, 
\ ?r®Tr 
j| Class No 

j 3??r^fTsrrT 
' Book No 


■•■•254-..d g 

Mftc... 

V* 0 


Gl. 294.6 
MAC V.5 


L.-HJI* Jfc*- 


102382 

LBSNAA 





THE SIKH RELIGION 

ITS GURUS, SACRED WRITINGS 
AND AUTHORS 

BY 

MAX ARTHUR MACAULIFFE 

*1^ wr 'acr, 'HTsfa 'vaarwT; 
% §ii a^ ^ 

The egg of superstition hath burst; the 
mind is illumined : 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet 
and freed the captive. 

Guru Arjan 

IN SIX VOLUMES 
VOL. V 

OXFORD 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


1909 



HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 

PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 
LONDON^ EDINBURGH, NEW YORK 
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 



CONTENTS OF VOL. V 


PAGE 


Life of Guru Gobind Singh, the Tenth Guru . i 
Guru Gobind Singh against Idolatry ... 67 

A Princess’s Discussion with a Brahman . . 68 

Extracts from Bhai Nand Lal’s Writings . . 103 

Zafarnama (the Guru’s Epistle to Aurangzeb) . 201 

Interview with Banda 237 

Banda’s Career in the Panjab and Death . 246 

Compositions of Guru Gobind Singh . . 260 

Extracts from Aral Ustat .... 261 
Extracts from Vichitar Natak . . . 286 

Introduction to the Hindu Incarnations 306 
Thirty-three Sawaiyas (Quatrains) . . 314 

Hazare Shabd 324 

Chaupai 328 

Ardas (supplication) 331 

rags, or Musical Measures of the Gurus’ Hymns 333 






GURU GOBIND SINGH 


SIKH V P. I 




LIFE OF GURV GOBIND SINGH, 

• THE TENTH AND LAST GURU^ 

Chapter T 

An Recount of the early years of Guru Gobind 
Rai has already been ^ven in the life of Guru Teg 
Bahadur. Guru Gobind Rai, after his father’s 
death, continued with even more diligence than 
before to prepare himself for his great mission. 
He procured a supply of sharp-pointed arrows from 
Lahore, and practised archery with great industry. 
The Guru’s principal companions and bodyguard at 

^ The main authorities for the life of Gum Gobind Singh are the 
Vtchtar Na/ak, or Wonderful Drama, composed by the Guru himself ; 
the Gur Bilds^ by Bhai Sukha Singh; and the Suraj Parkash^ by 
Bhai Santokh Singh. 

The Vzchitar Ndtak is a metrical composition divided into fourteen 
chapters, and written in archaic Hindi with a large admixture di 
Sanskrit in the Gurumukhi character. The date is probably about 
A. D. 169a. 

Bhai Sukha Singh, the author of the Gur Bilds^ was borp in 
A.n. 1^66 in Anandpur, where Guru Gobind Singh long had his 
residence. He became a pupil of Bhais Bhagwan Singh and Thakur 
Singh, and was subsequently a gyani or expounder of the Granth 
Sahib at Kesgarh, where the tenth Gum first administered his baptism. 
Bhai Sukha Singh completed the Gur Bilds in a. n. 1797, and died in 
A. D. 1838: His work is also in old Hindi in the Gurumukhi character. 

The author has also consulted with advantage Bhai Gyan Singh’s 
Panth Farkd^h* 

There is a book called the Sau Sdkhi which professes to be a 
cpnversaiipn between Sahib Singh and Gurbakhsh Singh on the 
sayings anti doings of the tenth Guru. It is held in high estimation 
by the Ktlkas-^folloWers of the late Bhai Ram Singh of Bhaini, In 
the Ltidhiana district of the Panjab — and is relied on by them as the 
main authority for their, heresy, Santokh Singh sometimes gives 
Bhai Qurbakhsh Singh’s communications tor Saliib $ingh as the b^sis 
of his history of the Gurps from the time of Guru Apgad, but he 
thakes m mention of the Satd SSkhL There appears nothing to 
^abllsh ita authenticity^ 

SIKH. V 


B 



2 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


this time were his aunt Viro’s five sons — Sango 
Shah, Jit Mai, Gopal Chand, Ganga Ram, Mahii 
Chand; his uncle Suraj Mai's two grandsons, Gulab 
Rai and Sham Das ; Kripal, his maternal uncle ; 
Bhai Daya Ram, the friend of his youth ; and Bhai 
Nand Chand, an upright and favourite masand. 
The descendants of the Gurus, the masands, and 
the sons and grandSons of those who had served 
Guru Gobind Rai’s father and grandfather gathered 
round his standard. He also entertained a number 
of singers, who sang the Gurus’ hymns, and a number 
of bards who composed and sang in succession qua- 
trains in praise of the Gurus. So great was the 
enthusiasm that the women of the city used to 
climb the top stories of their houses and chant the 
Guru’s praises in extempore verses. 

A man called Bhikhia residing in Lahore went to 
visit the Guru. Bhikhia, seeing him handsome and 
well-proportioned, thought he would be a suitable 
match for his daughter J ito. The Guru’s mother was 
pleased at Bhikhia’ s proposal, and asked her brother 
Kripal to advise the Guru to accept it. The Guru 
did so, and there were great rejoicings at Anandpur 
on the occasion of the betrothal. Great too were 
the rejoicings in Bhikhia’s domestic circle when he 
returned home with the good news. The twenty- 
third of Har, Sambat 1734 (a. d.. 1677), was fixed 
for the marriage, and Bhikhia returned to Anandpur 
to inform the Guru of the glad day, and invite 
him to proceed with his marriage procession to 
Lahore. The Guru, contrary to the custom on such 
occasions, refused to go to Lahore, and said he 
^ould make a Lahore near Anandpm: for the occa- 
sion. He sent written orders in every direction for 
assistance, and his wishes were amply gratified. 
The Sikhs thronged from the Panjab capital on the 
occasion, and with them came Bhikhia and his 
faniily. Shopkeepers and merchants opened shops 
and warehouses, and abode in Anandpur until the 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


3 


completion of the nuptial ceremonies. After the 
marriage Bhikhia remained sometime with the Guru 
and performed all possible service for him. 

The Guru, according to the custom of his prede- 
cessors, used to rise in the end of the night and 
perform his devotions. • He particularly delighted 
to hsten to the Asa ki War. After daybreak he gave 
his Sikhs divine instruction ^nd then practised 
martial exercises. In the afternoon he received his 
Sikhs, went shooting, or raced horses ; and ended the 
evening by performing the divine service of the 
Rahiras. 

Once in the hot season when bathing with his 
cousins and other youths of the same age in the 
Satluj, the Guru divided the party into two opposing 
factions to play a game of splash-water. The Guru 
being endowed with superior strength reduced his 
cousin Gulab Rai to such straits that he with diffi- 
culty emerged from the water. In his confusion he 
began to put on the Guru’s turban, believing it was 
his own. Bhai Sango ran to restrain him, for it 
would be a sacrilege for any one to put on the Guru’s 
turban. Gulab Rai accordingly laid it down in 
consternation. The Guru saw the occurrence and 
begged Gulab Rai to bind the turban on his head, 
and it would some day obtain him honour. When 
in after days the Guru had to leave Anandpur for 
the Dakhan, Gulab Rai obtained possession of the 
city and established himself as Sikh priest there, 
thus fulfilling the Guru’s prophecy. 

The Guru delighted to wear uniform and arms, 
and practise, and induce others to practise, archery 
and musket-shooting. His handsome exterior was 
much admired both by men and women. 

^ One day as he was seated in darbar some new 
converts to the Sikh faith came to do him homage. 
Among them was a Sikh, who had a daughter called 
Sundari, of marriageable age. tte proposed to the 
Guru to wed her and make her the slave of his feet. 



4 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru did not desire the alliance, but it was 
pressed bn him by his mother, and not long after- 
wards the Guru’s inuptials were solemnized.^ 

We have already seen that Raja Ram of Asam 
implored Guru Teg Bahadur’s intercession for a son, 
and a prince called Ratan Rai was duly born to him. 
Rj^ft Ram died whai his son was only seven years 
old. When Ratan Rai attained the age of twelve, 
he felt an inclination to see the son of the Guru by 
whose mediation he had been born. He accordingly, 
with his mother and several of his ministers, pro- 
ceeded to Anandpur. He took with him as an 
offering five horses with golden trappings, a very 
small but sagacious elephant, a weapon out of which 
five sorts of arms could be made — first a pistol, 
then by pressing a spring a sword, then a lance, then 
a dagger, and finally a club — a throne from which, 
by pressing a spring, puppets emerged and played 
chaupar, a drinking cup of great value, and several 
costly and beautifid jewels and raiment. 

The Raja was received in great state. He offered 
his presalts, prayed the Guru to grant him the Sikh 
faith and sincerity, i so that his love might be ever 
centred in the Guru’s feet. The Guru granted all 
his desires. The Raja exhibited the excellence and 
advantages of all his presents. He showed how five 
weapons could be made out of one, he unloosened 
the puppets from the throne and set them playing 
chaupar. He caused the elephant to wipe the Guru’s 
shoes and place them in order for him. The Guru 
at the Raja’s suggestion discharged an arrow. The 
elephant went and fetched it. The animal held 
a jug of water from which the Guru’s feet were 
washed, and then wiped them with a towel. At the 

^ A learned Sikh informs us that Sundari, a word which means the 
beautiful, frequently applied to the heroines of Indian history, was an 

^ of jno and not a . second wife of the Guru. The same learned 
, ^inks that j!to, who was generally known as Sundari, did not 
die in Anandpur, but live^d in DihK after the demise of Guru Gobind 
Singh. I 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


5 


word of command he took a chauri and waved it 
over the Guru, At night he took two lighted torches 
in his trunk, and showed the^ Guru and the Raja 
their homeward ways. In due! time the Raja bade 
farewell to the Guru, and on his departure requested 
him never to let the elephant out of his possesion. 

Several men went to the Guru for enlistment, and 
his army rapidly increased. He now set about < the 
construction of a big drum> without which he deemed 
his equipment would be incomplete. The work was 
entrusted to Nand Chand. When the masands found 
that it was nearly ready they said that when Bhim 
Chand, the king of the country, heard it, he would 
be wroth, and not suffer the Guru and his Sikhs to 
abide in the locality.^ Afraid, however, to make a 
representation to the Guru himself, they went to his 
mother Gujari and expressed their sentiments: ‘The 
Guru’s expenditure on works of charity and philan- 
thropy is already great, and now he is increasing his 
army and building a large drum. When the hill chiefs 
hear it beaten, they will regard it as a symbol of 
conquest and engage in battle with the Sikhs, He is 
daily adding to the number of his soldiers. Be pleased, 
O lady, to restrain him.’ This speech convinced the 
Guru’s mother. She sent for her brother Kripal, and 
begged him to dissuade her son from completing the 
drum. Kripal said he could! not take it on himself 
to make any such representation to the Guru. She 
must do so herself. She accordingly spoke to her 
son next morning in the terms used by the masands 
to her. She added, ‘ Our business is with religion, 
for which humility is required. Even if thou com- 
plete the drum, beat it not in public.’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ Mother dear, how long shall I remain in 
concealment ? I am not going to take forcible 
possession of the hill rajas’ territories. If they are 
jealous for nothing, and allow their hearts to rankle. 

^ In former times a rSja might not beat' a dram within another 
raja’s territory, for beating a drum was a syniljol of sovereignty. 



6 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


I cannot help it. This is the Guru's castle where men 
shall obtain their deserts.’ 

Oh this the Gtmi rose and went to inquire if the 
drum were ready. If not, its completion must be 
expedited. The masands then made a direct repre- 
sentation : ‘ Great King, first consider the resources 
of the enemy. They are kings and possess armies, 
wealth, and munitions of war. It is therefore not 
advisable to contend with them. What a number 
of troubles befell thy grandfather in his military 
career ! Wherefore thou hast need of peace. Our 
Guru’s business is with the Sikhism of his country ; 
war is the rOle of'kings,’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ How shall I conceal myself 
from those hillmen ? I have received the immortal 
God’s order to disclose myself, and you tell me to 
remain in concealment. I must obey God’s order, 
not yours. I have prepared the drum because my 
army would have no prestige without it. Even if 
Bhim Chand, Raja of Kahlur, and the other hill 
rajas grow angry, are we who sit here women ? We 
too shall meet sword with sword. If they keep the 
peace, so shall we. We shall soon see what the 
hillmen intend. .When we go hunting, we shall 
take the drum with us, and beat it aloud on 
arriving at the base of the mountain.’ 

The Guru celebrated with prayers and the distri- 
bution of sacred food the completion of the big 
drum, which he called Ranjit, or victorious on the 
battle-field. When it was beaten, the men and 
women of the city went forth to behold it, and 
there was great rejoicing. The Guru and his men, 
in full panoply, went hunting the same day. When 
the party arrived near Bilaspur, the capital of 
Kahlur, the Guru’s drummer beat the drum with 
much eneirgy and ostentation. It sounded hke 
thunder to the hillmen, who at once apprehended 
that some potentate had come to take possession of 
their country. Raja Bhim Chand consulted his 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


7 


prime minister who said, * It is Guru Gobind Rai, 
the tenth Guru in succession to Guru Nanak, who 
hath arrived. His father purchased some land^ at 
the base of the Tung mountain, and built a village 
thereon. Thousands of worshippers come to him 
from great distances. It. is only recently that the 
Raja of Asam came to visit him and presented him 
large offerings. He hath constructed a drum and 
come shooting here. My advice is to keep on good 
terms with him. In the first place, he is worthy of 
worship, secondly, he maintaineth a large army and 
is greatly feared. Thirdly, he is very brave, and 
such men are sometimes useful as allies.’ 

On hearing this Raja Bhim Chand determined to 
go to meet the Guru, and dispatched his prime 
minister to arrange for the interview. The minister 
informed the Guru that his master, who was the 
head of all the hill chiefs, desired to meet him, and 
it would be well for the Guru to be on good terms 
with him. Bhai Kripal, the Guru’s uncle, at a nod 
from the Guru replied, ‘ This is the Guru’s castle. 
As any one treateth him, so shall he be treated. If 
any one come here with good intentions, he shall be 
well received ; but if he come as an enemy, he shall 
be treated accordingly. For men to be on good 
terms with one another is very expedient and com- 
mendable. Wherefore go and bring your Raja. We 
shall receive him with great respect.’ The minister 
taking with him a robe of honour — the Guru’s gift — 
returned to his master, and recommended him to 
proceed immediately to the interview. The Raja 
accordingly went with his courtiers and escort to 
Anandpur. 

Raja Bhim Chand was received in darbar with 
great honour by the Guru, who invited him to tell 
him the whole circumstances of the hill chiefs. 
Bhim Chand gave him the desired information, and 
then prayed the Guru to let him see the presents 

1 This is mentioned in the Life of Guru Teg Bahadur. 



8 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


from the kir^ of Asam. The Guru at that interview 
showed him all the presents, except the elephant. 
Next morning the Guru had a costly tent erected 
which had been sent him from Kabul by an enthusi- 
astic Sikh named Duni Chand, and prepared to 
receive Bhim Chand in it at the second interview. 
With the Guru were his relations, courtiers, and 
principal wrestlers and warriors. When Bhim 
Chand saw the Kabuli tent he was astonished at 
its magnificence. In reply to his inquiry he was 
told that it had cost two and a half lakhs of rupees, 
and that it was the offering of a pious Sikh. During 
this conversation the elephant, beautifully decorated, 
was led forward. Bhim Chand expressed his un- 
bounded admiration of all that he had seen and 
heard. On his homeward journey his mind burned 
with envy of the Guru’s state and wealth, and he 
considered how he could take possession of all his 
valuables. On reflection, however, he came to the 
conclusion that he would be satisfied with the 
elephant, and he determined to have the animal 
whether by force or stratagem. 

On his arrival in his capital he unfolded his design 
to his courtiers, and asked them to suggest how 
possession of the elephant could be obtained. After 
some discussion it was agreed that a message should 
be sent to the Guru to the effect dhat an embassy 
was coming from Srinagar in the present British 
Garhwal district, with the object of betrothing the 
daughter of its Raja, Fatah Shah, to Bhim Chand’ s 
son j and Bhim Chand desired to borrow the elephant 
so as to make a display of wealth to his guests. It 
was accordingly decided that the Guru should be 
requested to lend the elephant for the purpose. 
When the Guru received this message he knew that 
it was simply a trick to obtain permanent possession 
of the animal. He thought to himself, ‘ If I refuse 
the elephant, it means war, and if I send him it 
also means war, as I must resort to force for his 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 9 

recovery.’ He accordingly replied to Bhim Chand’s 
message, ‘ The raja who presented me with the 
elephant requested me not to let the animal go out 
of my possession ; and it is a principle of the Guru’s 
house to comply with such requests. I have another 
elephant, and should Raja Bhim Chand require him 
he may take him.’ The messenger seeing that there 
was no chance of obtaining the desired elephant 
hastened to return to Bilaspur. 

. The Guru’s message was delivered with the addi- 
tion that he did not seem afraid of any of the hill 
chiefs. Raja Bhim Chand, much incensed, con- 
sulted his prime minister, who advised him not to 
provoke a quarrel with the Guru. Bhim Chand 
angrily retorted, and charged his minister with age 
and cowardice. The Guru had shown contempt for 
him, and was he to calmly endure it ? Upon this 
the minister advised his master to become a Sikh, 
receive initiation from the Guru, and all would be 
well. Bhim Chand replied, ‘ I am an idolater. 
I daily perform the tarpan,^ and repeat the sandhia ® 
and the gayatri. How can I forsake my religion, 
and become a Sikh of the Guru ? In the first place, 
I cannot as a Hindu be on good terms with a man 
who hath discarded our holy faith. Secondly, none 
of the hill rajas hath become a Sikh, and they 
would all laugh at me were I to change my religion. 
They would say that I did it with the mercenary 
object of obtaining the elephant. In the third 
place, no men of high caste have joined the Guru. 
His followers are carriers, barbers, fishermen, washer? 
men, sweepers, and similar nondescript persons. I am 
a great king of distinguished Rajput ancestors. How 
can I become the Guru’s follower and stand before 
him with clasped hands in supplication ? If he give 

^ A daily ceremony of the Hindus, in which water is presented to 
the manes of deceased ancestors. 

2 Prayers read by pious Hindus at morning and evening twilight. 
Sometimes similar prayers are offered at noon. 



10 


' THE SIKH RELIGION 

me not the elephant by peaceable means, I will take 
the animal by force. The Guru is already on bad 
terms with the Emperor, and, if he fall out with me 
also, he cannot abide here. He is still a mere boy ; 
arms are new to his hands. When I show him what 
I can do, he will know who I am and renounce his 
pride.’ 

Saying this Bhim Chand ordered his chief police 
officer to go to the Guru, and try to obtain the 
eliepheuit by soft and persuasive words. If these 
failed, the Guru was to be threatened with the 
strength of Bhim Chand’s army. The police officer 
went on his mission and ad^essed the Guru as 
directed. The Guru calmly replied, ‘ Thou givest 
one advice to me to lend the elephant, and another 
to Bhim Chand not to restore him.’ Upon this the 
police officer knew that the Guru could divine the 
secrets of others and begged his forgiveness. The 
Gtiru then said, ‘ Tell'the raja that if he have faith 
in the Guru and if his intentions be honest, the Guru 
can grant him what he desireth ; but if he practise 
fraud and deceit, the Guru can protect his own 
interests. The Guru knoweth the secrets of men’s 
hearts, and thou canst not deceive him. When 
thou talkest of the strength of the raja’s army, 
know that there is nothing wanting on the Guru’s 
side either. The Guru is already pBepared for battle. 
The Sikhs are not women, and they have had long 
practice in martial exercises.’ The police • officer 
departed and delivered this message to Bhim Chand, 
who decided that he would wait till the time had 
actually arrived for his son’s marriage, and then he 
would repeat his request for the elephant, and add 
to it an application for the magnificent Kabuli tent 
also. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


II 


Chapter II 

The Gum continued to hunt and practise arms. 
Companies of Sikhs used continually to visit hian 
and make him offerings. Those who came for 
military service were received without reservation, 
and taught the profession of arms. In this way 
the Guru soon collected a considerable army. The 
masands continued their opposition and again went 
to complain to the Guru’s mother. They repre- 
sented to her, ‘ The Guru is very young, and hath 
no worldly experience. He hath stirred up strife 
between himself and the hill Raja. He hath no 
ally, for the Emperor beareth him no love. He 
hath taken the unprecedented course of refusing on 
two occasions Bhim Chand’s request for the loan of 
the elephant. These hill chiefs are not afraid to fight 
and die. Wherefore, advise thy son that it is not 
politic to contend with them. If war begin, how 
shall Sikhs come with their offerings ? And where 
shall we procure supplies for our public kitchen ? ’ 

When the Guru’s mother remonstrated with him 
as thus advised, he replied, ‘ Mother dear, I have been 
sent by the immortal God. He who worshippeth 
Him shall be happy ; but he who acteth dishonestly 
and worshippeth stones shall receive well-merited 
retribution. This is my commission from God. If 
to-day I giv^ Raja Bhim Chand the elephant, I shall 
have to pay him tribute to-morrow. He essayeth 
to terrify me, but I only fear the immortal God and 
know none beside.’ 

Nand Chand then joined in the conference : ‘ Lady, 
hath a lion ever feared jackals ? Hath any one ever 
seen the light of the firefly in bright sunshine ? 
What availeth a drop of water in comparison with 
the ocean ? The Guru is a tiger brave and splendid 
as the sun. Shall he fear Bhim Chand ? When the 
foolish hillmen who are like mosquitoes contend 



12 ! 1 THE SIKH RELIGION 

with the Guru, they shall become acquainted with 
our strength and suffer the mortification of a late 
repentance.’ Bhai Kripal then interposed : ‘ Sister 
dear* Nand Chand understandeth the Guru’s plea- 
sure.’ The Guru ended the discussion by saying, 
‘Mother dear, heed not the evil advice of the masands. 
Tliey have become cowards from surreptitiously 
eating the- offerings of the Sikhs.’ 

The Guru, knowing Nand Chand to be brave and 
skilful in war,, made him his finance minister. More- 
ovetf Nand Chand’s father had done service for Guru 
Teg Bahadur, and the family was known to be loyal 
toi die Gurus. Pay was due to the troops, and tact 
and skilful management of them were necessary. 
Kripal accordingly highly approved of the Guru’s 
resolve, and accepted Nand Chand as the Guru’s 
finance minister. Nand Chand was invested with 
a robe of honour/ and appointed to his high position 
with all due formalities. 

The Guru and his troops continued to practise 
archery and devote themselves to the chase. When 
the other hill rajas heard of this and of the Gurji’s 
difference mth Bhim Chand, they began to fan the 
flame of enmity, thinking that they would be more 
secure themselves if the Guru and Bhim Chand 
eJdiausted their strength on contests with each 
other, Kripal, the Raja of Kangra^ sent Raja Bhim 
Chand a message, ‘Fear not, I am with you. The 
Guru is raiang an army. Thou oughtest conse- 
quently to be. on thy guard against him. There 
bannot be two kings in one state. Wherefore it is 
proper for thee to expel him with all expedition.’ 
Bhim Chand replied that peace was the best thing 
if it could be maintained ; otherwise he would 
welcome his friend’s assistance and expel the Guru. 

Raja Kripal then with exquisite treachery sent 
the following message to the Guru : ‘ Great king, 
fcH^tunate are we that thou hast come to dwell in 
this land. I have heard that thou hast some dis- 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 13 

agreement with Bhim Chand. That, fool knoweth 
not thy greatness. Assert thyself and bring hint! to 
reason by the sword. I will be thine ally. Directly 
thine order reacheth me, I shall be found fully 
prepared.’ To this the Guru merely replied, ‘ This 
is Guru Nanak’s house,' where men shall be treated 
as they deserve.’ Raja Kripal’s envoy took, note of 
the Guru’s intelligence, determination, and material 
strength, and on returning to his m^teri informed 
him that the Guru would certainly no;t yield to Bhim 
Chand without a struggle. 

The time for the marriage of Fatah Shah’s daughter 
to Bhim Chand’ s son was now approaching, so 
Bhim Chand decided to ask the Guru again to lend 
him the elephant and other artides of display for 
the occasion. He accordingly sent his brother-in-law, 
Kesari Chand, Raja of Jaswal, and a Brahman, with 
orders to bring what he desired by all possible means. 
They requested the Guru to lend Bhim Chand the 
throne, the elephant, the Kabuli tent, and the five- 
fold weapon. The family priest promised that 
the loan should be returned with a present of 
4,000 rupees. On this the Guru said, ‘ Am I a shop- 
keeper that I should take hire for what I lend ?' ’ 
Kesari Chand remonstrated, ‘ O Guru, thou livest 
by offerings. Thou art not a landowner, thou hast 
no kingdom, no fief from which thou mayest derive 
income, and offerings of this description have doubt- 
less often been made thee.’ The Guru on hearing 
this dechned further parley and abruptly dismissed 
the envoys. 

The masands again complained to the Guru’s 
mother: ‘The Guru’s action is impolitic. Bhim 
Chand’ s army will come and plunder Anandpur. 
The Guru is stiU a boy and hath never seen real 
warfare, though he ever babbleth of it. At onetime 
he saith, “We will destroy the oppressive. Turks.” 
Again he saith, “ I will give the whole country 
from Lahore to Peshawar as a kingdom to my 



14 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Sydis.” Advise thy son to cease uttering such 
irritating lan^age.’ His mother duly remon- 
strated with him : ‘ My son, why art thou stirring 
up strife ? Send thy minister Nand Chand and thy 
uncle Kripal to make peace, otherwise an army of 
hillmen will attack us immediately. Whither shall 
we go if we are obliged to depart hence ? Thy 
father purchased this land, and came here to live in 
retirement and peace.’ 

' The Guru replied : ‘ The hillmen have now come 
to beg with the humility of goats, but when they 
have received what they have asked for, they will 
assume the bravery of tigers. On this account why 
should we not take measures for our own safety ? 
Mother dear, if we now betray fear of them, they 
will soon be ready to devour us. They will only 
respect us when we show them the sword. If thou 
show a stick to a barking dog, he will fear to con- 
tmue his barking. We cannot remain subject to 
such people. If they play the part of aggressors, 
I will show them what the Guru can do. The immor- 
tal God hath sent me into the world to uproot evil 
and protect from tyranny the weak and oppressed.’ 
Oh hearing this the Guru’s mother retired in sorrow 
to her apartment, and the Guru proceeded to don 
his arms and coat of mail. 

When Raja Bhim Chand’ s envoys returned to 
their master, they repeated the Guru’s message with 
marginal additions of their own. Bhim Chand 
became very angry and addressed the Guru the 
following letter : ‘ If thou desire to dwell in Anand- 
pur, send the elephant quickly. If thou agree not to 
this, I will take an army, plunder and assail thy 
disdples of both sexes, expel them from the country, 
and imprison thee. To save thyself, however, from 
all these painful consequences, thou mayest imme- 
diately • depart from my state. ’ The Guru on perusing 
this letter smiled and said to his friends, ‘ I accept 
the alternative of war which he offereth me.’ He 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 15 

sent Bhim Chand a reply to this effect, and ordered 
Nand Chand to make immediate preparation for 
defence. 

When Bhim Chand received the Guru’s letter he 
called his brother hill chiefs to a council of 
war, and informed them of his negotiations with 
the Guru. He was himself, he said, for open hostiU- 
ties. Raja Kripal, however, counselled deliberation. 
He urged, ‘ Thou hast now made all preparations 
for thy son’s mmriage, and it is not time for war. 
Should any relation of thine be killed, thy rejoicings 
will be changed unto mourning. It is not well to 
die at a time of festivity, or sing songs of joy at 
a funeral.’ The other hill chiefs who were summoned 
to the council and also Bhim Chand’ s prime minister 
were precisely of the same opinion. The contem- 
plated war was consequently adjourned. Raja 
Kripal then suggested that, when the bridegroom’s 
party went to Srinagar, they should induce Raja 
Fatah Shah to ally himself with them and take up 
arms against the Guru. 

Meantime the Guru himself was making all pre?- 
parations to meet his opponents. He caused it to be 
publicly known that he would be grateful to all who 
brought him arms and horses, and his appeal met 
with a ready response. 

Raja Medani Barkash of Nahan at this time sent 
an envoy to the Guru with an invitation to pay him 
a visit. He was sure the Guru would be pleased 
to see the Dun, or valley par excellence^ which 
enjoyed a cool chmate and afforded abundant sport. 
Ram Rai, the Guru’s relation, dwelt there, and found 
it a pleasant and agreeable residence. The Raja of 
Nahan had heard that Raja Bhim Chand was at 
enmity with the Guru, but Raja Bhim Chand knew 
not the Guru’s greatness and would afterwards 
repent. The Raja of Nahan also desired the Guru’s 
assistance, which would be useful to him in time of 
^ The Dun lies between the Hin^layas and the Siw^k range. 



i6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

heed, and accordingly warmly invited him to make 
a lehgthened sojourn in his country. The Guru 
requested the envoy to wait a few days for an answer; 

The masands were very pleased to hear of the 
Raja of Nahan’s invitation and thought, if the Guru 
accepted it, there would be an end of the quarrel 
between him and Bhim Chand; They induced the 
Guru’s mother to persuade him to visit the Raja. 
She told the Guru that after some time spent in 
Nahan he might return to Anandpur, after which 
she hoped there would be peace. The Guru accepted 
her advice and promised to start for Nahan on the 
morrow. By way of precaution he decided to take 
the whole of his trained army with him, and ordered 
Nand Chand to make all necessary arrangements for 
the march. 

On the morrow the Guru caused his drum to be 
beaten as a signal for departure. He set out accom- 
panied by his minister Nand Chand, his relations, 
and five hundred Udasi Sikhs. For the defence of 
Anandpur he left Suraj Mai’s two grandsons, Gulab 
Rai and Sham Das, with a suitable guard. The 
Guru’s first march was to Kiratpur, where he visited 
the shrine of his grandfather. Guru Har Gobind. 
After a few days’ further journey he encamped at 
the foot of the Nahan mountain. 

The Raja duly went to greet and welcome his 
distinguished guest. He took him to his palace, 
be^cd him to enjoy himself with the chase, and 
meanwhile design and superintend the building of 
a fort lor the protection of the state. On one of the 
Raja’s and the Guru’s hunting excursions the subject 
was again mooted. The Raja explained that Raja 
Fatah Shah of Srinagar, the capital of Garhwal, had 
often quarrelled with him over the ground on which 
they wefe then standing. He would therefore be 
v&cy pleased when a fortress was constructed on the 
spot for protection against all enemies; 

The Guru erected a tent and in company with 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


17 


the Raja held a darbar. It was unanimously agreed 
that a fort was necessary for the protection of the 
country. The Raja accordingly requested the Guru 
to allow his army to assist in its construction, and 
he would send his own workmen and labourers for 
its speedy completion. 

The Guru caused sacred food to be prepared, 
and praying to the Creator distributed it. He then 
laid the foundation stone of the fort. Such was the 
zeal and energy of the workmen that it was completed 
in twelve days. The Guru gave it the name of 
Paunta. He abode there, and continued to increase 
his army and enlist all Muhammadans as well as 
Hindus who presented themselves for service. All 
recruits as well as disciplined soldiers rendered 
willing aid in the construction of the building. 


Chapter III 

Ram Rai of Dehra Dun heard of the Guru’s visit 
and of the construction of Paunta which was only 
about thirty miles distant from his residence. He 
apprehended that the Guru had come to punish him 
for his previous misdeeds, and he communicated his 
suspicions to his masands. Gurdas, who had accom- 
panied Ram Rai to Dihli when sent there by Guru 
Har Rai, and who had remained with him ever since, 
urged that Guru Gobind Rai was not so vindictive 
and base as to take revenge. If, however, he mani- 
fested any signs of aggression, Gurdas’s brother Tara, 
who was a warrior and skilful archer, would be able 
to oppose him and protect the city of Dehra Dun. 
Ram Rai replied that no one could contend with the 
Guru in archery. Even Bhim Chand hid himself in 
his castle through fear of the Guru’s arrows. Should 
the Guru decide to take action against them, whither 
should they go for refuge ? Gurdas rejoined, that 
if Ram Rai fled before there was even 9 , seml?lance 

c 


SIKH. V 



i8 THE SIKH RELIGION 

of an attack, there would be several tales circulated 
to his discredit. The Guru subsequently hearing of 
his anxiety and wishing to remove it, sent Nand 
Chand and Daya Ram to reassure him. Ram Rai 
on receiving the Guru’s message was delighted, 
invested the envoys with dresses of honour, and 
decided to remain on friendly terms with the martial 
son of Guru Teg Bahadur. 

Budhu Shah, a Saiyid, who lived in Sadhaura, 
went with his disciples to pay a visit to the Guru 
and make him offerings. Budhu Shah represented 
himself as a great sinner, said that he should cer- 
tainly have to render an account of his transgression 
hereafter, and why should he not be pardoned now 
by the Guru’s mediation ? The Guru replied, ‘ Thou 
shalt not have to render an account hereafter. Guru 
Nanak hath procured thy pardon.’ Budhu Shah 
remained for some time with the Guru, who con- 
ceived a great affection for him and vouchsafed him 
religious instruction suitable to his circumstances. 

Raja Fatah Shah of Srinagar in consultation with 
his ministers arrived at the conclusion that it would 
be politic to be on good terms with the Guru, and 
accordingly decided to visit him since he had ap- 
proached so near his territory. When the Guru was 
apprised of his intention, he prepared a magnificent 
entertainment for his reception, foch carpets were 
spread and minstrels engaged to contribute to the 
Raja’s amusement and enhance his enjoyment of 
the feast. During the Raja’s visit the Guru sent his 
uncle Kripal to him to suggest that it would be well 
if he and the Raja of Nahan also were on good terms. 
The Raja at once replied that he would act in all 
such matters as the Guru desired. The Guru then 
sent for the Raja of Nahan. He came and promised 
to forget his former enmity to the Raja of Srinagar. 
The Guru brought the two Rajas together in open 
court, caused them to embrace and promise eternal 
friendship. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


19 


Before the assembly was dissolved a hillman 
arrived with tidings of a fierce tiger which was 
destroying cattle in the neighbourhood. The mes- 
senger pressed the Guru to free the country from the 
pest. The Guru on the morrow took the two Rajas, 
together with Nand Chand and others, to where the 
tiger was reported to have his lair. The Guru asked 
the hillman who had brought the intelligence to lead 
the way. He guided the Guru and his party into 
a very dense forest. The tiger, which had been 
resting, awoke on hearing the tramp of the hunts- 
men’s feet, and sat on his haunches looking at his 
pursuers with tranquil curiosity. 

The Guru forbade a bullet or arrow to be dis- 
charged, and called on any one who deemed himself 
brave to engage the tiger with sword and shield. 
No one came forward in response to the challenge. 
Raja Fatah Shah addressed the Guru : ‘ Great king, 
this tiger is very strong and hath been for a long 
time in this forest. He hath destroyed several men 
and cattle. If any one had been able to cope with 
him, would he still be alive ? But as he is strong 
and thou too art mighty, why not engage him thy- 
self ? Who but’ thee hath prowess to contend with 
sword and shield ? ’ Hearing this the Guru alighted 
from his horse §.nd drew himself together for the 
attack. The Raja of Nahan interposed : ‘ O true 
Guru, why confront such a tiger ? We will shoot 
him with our matchlocks.’ The Guru replied, ‘ See 
how I will deal with this tiger. I shall have no 
difficulty in killing him.’ Saying this he took sword 
and shield, advanced, and challenged the tiger. The 
tiger rose with a roar and sprang at the Guru. The 
Guru received him on his shield and striking him 
on the flank with his sword cut him in twain. The 
Rajas and the hunting-party were naturally aston- 
ished and delighted at the Guru’s strength and 
bravery and the result of the encounter. 

The Guru took the opportunity to instruct his 



20 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


friends : ' The tiger hath died like a hero and ob- 
tained deliverance. It is cowards who suffer trans- 
migration. The brave enjoy celestial happiness. If 
a man die in battle, it should be with his face to the 
foe.’ Next morning the two Rajas, leaving the 
Guru in Paunta, departed to their several capitals. 

On Budhu Shah’s return to his home in Sadh- 
aura five hundred Pathans in uniform presented 
themselves before him one morning. They stated 
that they had been soldiers of the Emperor Aurang- 
zeb, but for some trivial offence had been disbanded. 
No one would now receive them through fear of the 
Emperor. It occurred to Budhu Shah that the Guru, 
who had no fear of anybody, would be likely to 
accept their services in his army. He accordingly 
took them to the Guru who was delighted to enlist 
them. The Guru fixed a salary of five rupees per 
day for each officer and one rupee a day for each 
trooper. The officers’ names were Haiyat Khan, 
Kale Khan, Nijabat Khan, and Bhikan Khan, men 
of whom we shall hear much hereafter. 

An envoy about this time arrived from Ram Rai. 
When he was allowed to approach the Guru on the 
morning after his arrival, he saw the- Guru’s troops — 
some fencing, some practising archery, and others 
performing miscellaneous military exercises. The 
envoy told the Guru that Ram Rai desired to meet 
him, but could not go to Paunta, and did not desire 
the Guru to come to Dehra Dun. They could meet 
at some intermediate spot. Ram Rai had then 
a large following, and did not desire that his disciples 
should think he went as an inferior to the Guru, but 
at the same time he never hoped that the Guru would 
proceed to visit him. Hence his unusual request. 
TYie Grutn consenVeA \.o xneeY ivim on the margin oi 
the Jamna on Sunday, the second day of the follow- 
ing month. The interview accordingly took place. 
When Ram Rai’s companions saw him touch the 
Guru’s feet, they said, ' See, Ram Rai does obeisance 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 21 

I 

to his rival,’ and they made many remarks deroga- 
tdr)^ to the rank arrogated to himself by their 
spiritual guide. 

The Guru and Ram Rai conversed on various 
matters, particularly on the Guru’s relations with 
Raja Bhim Chand. At the end of the colloquy Ram 
Rai said, ‘ I am fortunate to have obtained a sight 
of thee ; I have now but a brief time to live. My 
masands are very proud. When I am gone, protect 
my family and property. Thou art the sun of our 
race, and hast for many reasons assumed birth. 
The holy Guru Nanak made the name of the one 
God the sole raft to ferry mortals over the world’s 
ocean, and by means of it men have obtained deliver- 
ance. But when in time the wind of evil passions 
blew, the raft striking on the rock of pride was 
foundered, and many souls were lost. My father 
Guru Har Rai used to say that some one would be 
born from our family who would restore and refit 
the vessel for the safe conveyance of souls. Accord- 
ingly thou hast come into the world for this special 
purpose.’ 

When the Guru after hearing this looked round, 
he saw all Ram Rai’s men standing with their backs 
towards him and their master. The Guru then 
observed, ‘ Ram Rai’s Sikhs who turn their backs 
on us are fools. ’They are not pleased with the sight 
even of their own guru, so he will not render them 
assistance hereafter.’ 

The Guru by his occult power knew Gurdas’s 
boast that his brother Tara would be a match for 
him and protect Ram Rai’s city against any aggres- 
sion he might meditate. The Guru accordingly said 
to Gurdas, ‘ Tell thy brother to discharge an arrow 
in my presence. Thou saidst that thy brother could 
shoot like the Guru, and that no Guru could be so 
powerful as he.’ Gurdas on thus being taken to 
task, begged the Guru’s pardon, and was duly for- 
given. The Guru then returned to Paunta where he 



22 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


abode for a time composing poetry in its pleasant 
environment and salubrious climate. 

The author of the Suraj Parkash gives the method 
of the Guru’s composition. He used to rise early, 
bathe, walk along the bank of the river Jamna 
sufficiently far to obtain complete privacy and ensure 
himself against interruption. He would then sit 
down and compose poetry for three hours. He first 
translated from Sanskrit the history of Krishan 
avatar.* The translation is generally in quatrains 
adorned with similes and metaphors. The Guru 
delighted to describe the sports of Krishan, the 
circular dances performed by him and the milk- 
maids, and his special devotion to Radhika his 
queen. It was further to the south, on the margin 
of the same river, that Krishan disported himself and 
performed those great feats which have secured him 
deification among the Hindus. The Guru in his 
‘ Ras Mandal ’ or description of the circular dance 
of Krishan made an acrostic out of the thirty-five 
letters of the Gurumukhi alphabet. The letters do 
not begin but end the verses. At intervals in Jiis 
literary labour he used to watch the river rolling 
over its shingly bed, and admire its sparkling foam 
and blue wavelets. 

Some time after the Guru’s visit Ram Rai fell 
into a trance, and in that state ^as cremated by 
the masands in defiance of the prayers and en- 
treaties of his wife Panjab Kaur. The masands 
then proceeded to take possession of his property and 
of the offerings intended for him ; and each began 
to proclaim himself guru. Panjab Kaur, through 
the agency of Gurdas, who had remained faithful to 
her, sent a letter to Guru Gobind Rai to inform him 
of the circumstances, and to pray for his advice and 
assistance. She then invited all the masands to 

^ Suraj Parkash, Rut 11, Chapter 4 . Some learned Sikhs are of 
opinion that the translation was really made by one of the Guru’s 
bards named SySm, whose name frequently occurs in it. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 23 

a feast on a certain day which she had fixed on for 
the appointment of a successor to her husband, and 
promised to the deserving dresses of honour on the 
occasion. 

When the masands arrived they each presented 
a claim to spiritual authority. One man would say, 
‘ I want to be appointed guru of a certain country.’ 
Another would say, ‘ I want to be appointed guru 
of another country.’ When all the masands had 
arrived. Panjab Kaur sent to inform the Guru. The 
Guru at once ordered his troops to prepare for an 
expedition. On the morrow he proceeded with 
them to Dehra, leaving sufficient men to guard 
Paunta. When the masands saw the Guru, their 
faces grew pale and they asked one another why he 
had come. The Guru and Ram Rai, they said, were 
in opposition to each other, but perhaps the Guru 
had come to condole with the widow on her husband’s 
death. In any case the masands made certain that 
the Guru would only stay for a day or two, as Pan jab 
Kaur would be unable to provide supplies for him 
and his army for any length of time. 

Next day Panjab Kaur requested the Guru to 
punish the masands. Some of them suspected what 
was in store for them, but fate was too powerful to 
allow of their absconding. The Guru recalled to 
memory all their* crimes and misdemeanours. They 
used to go to the houses of Sikhs to take intoxicants, 
and frequent the society of courtesans. They used 
to boast that the Guru was of their own making, 
and, if they did not serve him, no one would even 
look at him. They practised oppression in every 
form ; they embezzled offerings made to the Guru 
and committed many other enormities. The Guru 
accordingly meted out condign punishment to the 
guilty among them, and rewarded those who had 
remained faithful to Panjab Kaur. He then returned 
to Paunta. 



24 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chapter IV 

The Guru set about extending Paunta and beauti- 
fying it with gardens and pleasure grounds. One 
day as he was sitting in his garden, he received an 
invitation* from Raja Fatah Shah of Srinagar to 
his daughter’s marriage with the son of Raja Bhim 
Chand of Bilaspur. The Guru declined the invita- 
tion on the ground that Bhim Chand was at enmity 
with him and a disturbance might result were the two 
to meet. The Guru, however, promised to send his 
finance minister with some troops to represent him. 
He accordingly gave orders to Diwan Nand Chand 
to hold himself in readiness and at the same time to 
provide a necklace of the value of one lakh and 
a quarter of rupees as a marriage present for Raja 
Fatah Shah's daughter. 

Nand Chand on his departure said to the Guru, 
‘ I go in obedience to thine order, but if Raja Bhim 
Chand force a quarrel on me, it may be difficult for 
me to return.’ The Guru replied, ‘ As the immortal 
God will take thee thither, so will He restore thee 
to me. Have no anxiety on that account.’ Nand 
Chand set out according to order with five hundred 
horse for Srinagar. The Raja sent officers some 
distance to receive him, and offered him suitable 
quarters within the city. Nand Chand urged diplo- 
matic reasons for not accepting the accommodation 
provided, but his real object was to encamp outside 
the city, so that he and his troops might be free to 
escape if treacherously attacked. Accordingly a spot 
on the road to Paunta was at his request assigned 
him for his camp. 

Raja Bhim Chand, Raja Kesari Chand, Raja Gopal, 
Raja Hari Chand, and the Rajas of Kangra, Mandi, 
and Suket, proceeded in great state to Srinagar. On 

^ In former times an invitation to a marriage was made by sending 
a piece of red string and some sweets. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 25 

their way they halted on the margin of the J amna not 
far from Paunta. There Raja Bhim Chand heard 
that the Guru with his forces was encamped at the 
ferry of Raj ghat four miles distant, and had made 
preparations to obstruct his progress. Bhim Chand 
accordingly considered what was to be done under 
the circumstances. He knew the Guru to be very 
brave, and he also knew the enmity he bore him. If 
Raja Bhim Chand went straight on, he would have 
to contend with the Guru’s troops ; and if he went 
by a circuitous route to another ferry, he could not 
arrive in time for the wedding. 

In this difficulty Raja Bhim Chand consulted his 
brother rajas, and recalled to their memory all the 
circumstances connected with his negotiations with 
the Guru. He had deferred making war on account 
of his son’s approaching marriage, but the very 
circumstance that he had apprehended now occurred, 
for the Guru was on the way to obstruct his progress 
and hinder his crossing the Jamna at Raj ghat. 
Various counsels were given, which were all rejected. 
At last Bhim Chand decided to send his prime 
minister to the Guru to represent that his son’s 
marriage was about to be celebrated, and it was no 
time for a clash of arms which would turn joy 
into sorrow. The prime minister received instruc- 
tions to presenf all this in the form of a respectful 
request to the Guru. If it failed, he was then to 
inform him of the names of the rajas who were with 
the marriage procession. It was thus hoped that, 
even if the Guru rejected the respectful request, he 
would hesitate to attack so many powerful chiefs. 

When the hill rajas’ envoy reached the Guru he 
said, ‘ O true Guru, Raja Bhim Chand with the hill 
rajas hath come with his son’s marriage procession, 
and they request thy permission to pass. They 
ordered me to entreat thee with clasped hands to 
consider this as the marriage of thine own son.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘ 0 envoy, there is no reliance to 



26 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


be placed on these false hill rajas. While uttering 
sweet words, they harbour enmity in their hearts. 
Therefore tell them from me that they may come 
this way if they are brave ; but, if they are cowards, 
they may take another route, in which case I will 
not molest them. Raja Bhim Chand threatened to 
come and attack me at Anandpur. I will myself 
proceed thither when I have vanquished him.’ 

When the Guru’s determination was communi- 
cated to Raja Bhim Chand and the other hill chiefs, 
there ensued a long discussion as to the best course 
of action. It was at last decided that the bride- 
groom should be sent with a few high officials to 
request the Guru to allow him safe conduct for the 
purpose of his marriage, and that the rest of the 
marriage procession should go to Srinagar by a cir- 
cuitous route. Bhim Chand vowed that after the 
celebration of the marriage he would take revenge 
on the Guru for his conduct, and bring Raja Fatah 
Shah to dislodge him from his position. 

When Raja Bhim Chand’ s son with his escort 
reached the Guru, he said, ‘ O true Guru, thy name 
is cherisher of those who seek thy protection, and 
I do so now. Had my father thought that thou wert 
likely to molest me, he would never have sent me 
hither. As I am his son, so I am now thine. I am 
altogether at thy mercy.’ The Guru* compassionated 
the youth, and at once allowed him to proceed to 
Srinagar for the due performance of his marriage 
rites. 

When the bridegroom and his small party in- 
formed Raja Fatah Shah of what had occurred, he 
felt sore grieved at the impediment placed by the 
Guru in the way of his daughter’s marriage. Before 
the hill chiefs had yet arrived, Diwan Nand Chand 
desired to offer the Guru’s wedding present, and 
then take his early departure. Raja Fatah Shah 
replied, ‘You may offer me the Guru’s present when 
all the rajas are assembled.’ 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 27 

When Raja Bhim Chand and the other hill chiefs 
arrived, Nand Chand was anxious to present the 
Guru’s wedding gift and leave Srinagar as early as 
possible. The herald in attendance proclaimed : 
‘ Guru Gobind Rai, who is seated on Guru Nanak’s 
throne, hath presented jewellery to the value of 
a lakh and a quarter of rupees as dowry to Fatah 
Shah’s daughter.’ Raja Bhim Chand on hearing 
this became enraged and said, ‘ Witness all ye 
people. My kurm ^ is friendly to the Guru, and 
taketh a marriage present from him, though he is 
an enemy of mine. I must therefore refuse to accept 
Fatah Shah’s daughter for my son.’ The Raja of 
Kangra said to the speaker, ‘ It is not well to act in 
haste. Send thy minister to Raja Fatah Shah, and 
ask him if he will take the initiative in a war with 
the Guru. If so, he is one of us, and we will conclude 
the alliance with him. If, however, he refuse to 
attack the Guru, then we will not accept his daughter.’ 

On this Raja Kesari Chand and Raja Bhim Chand’s 
minister went to Raja Fatah Shah, told him all the 
circumstances, and said that if he did not go to war 
with the Guru, he should be considered an enemy 
not only of Raja Bhim Chand, but of all the hill 
chiefs. Raja Fatah Shah was much perplexed on 
receiving this message, and saw that trouble awaited 
him on every side. He replied, ‘ It is a great sin to 
fight with a man who obviously manifesteth his 
friendship. The Guru is my greatest friend. How 
shall I engage in a conflict with him without reason ? 
Raja Bhim Chand is at enmity with the Guru with- 
out any just cause. If one man make a request and 
another cannot comply, what ground of enmity is 
that ? Come with me, and I will make peace between 
the Guru and Raja Bhim Chand.’ 

When Raja Bhim Chand was informed of this he 
caused the drum of departure to be beaten. When 

^ Son*s father-in-law. There is no one word in English for this 
relationship. 



28 THE SIKH RELIGION 

his horses were saddled and all preparation made he 
sent his minister with an ultimatum to Fatah Shah, 
‘ Raja Bhim Chand now breaks off his son’s marriage 
with thy daughter. On this account thou shalt 
suffer much obloquy. The Guru is here to-day and 
gone to-morrow. Thou hast no kinship to break 
with him, so why break with thine affianced rela- 
tions ? ’ Fatah Shah was weakly overcome by this 
representation, and promised to act as Raja Bhim 
Chand desired. Raja Bhim Chand, who was already 
on horseback, alighted on hearing Fatah Shah’s 
change of determination and went to him. Fatah 
Shah then renewed his promise to act according to 
Bhim Chand’ s wishes and join him in making war 
on the Guru. 

Meanwhile Nand Chand managed to secure his 
property, including the Guru’s unaccepted wedding 
present, and prepared for his homeward journey. 
On hearing this Raja Bhim Chand sent five hundred 
horse to intercept him and seize whatever he had 
in his possession. Raja Bhim Chand promised the 
leader of the detachment to send more troops to his 
assistance as soon as possible. When Nand Chand’s 
troops found their way obstructed, they began to 
reflect that they were few, while the hillmen were 
many, and they meditated flight or coalition with the 
enemy. On this a brave Sikh spokfe out, ‘ What are 
you soldiers meditating ? On your departure for 
Srinagar the true Guru promised that as the immortal 
God would conduct you to your destination, so would 
He restore you to your homes in safety. Put faith 
in the Guru’s words.' This short speech inspired 
the Sikhs with courage, and shouting ‘ Sat Sri Akal ! 
Sat Sri Akal ! ’ — ^True is the immortal God, true is 
the immortal God — ^prepared for the conflict. 

Nand Chand also addressed cheering words to his 
men. He assured them that the army in front of 
them was weak, and his men might fearlessly advance. 
They obeyed, and when within gunshot discharged 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 29 

a volley at the hillmen which threw their ranks into 
disorder. Nand Chand then shouted to the hill 
troops, ‘ Why waste your lives in vain ? The army 
which was to reinforce you hath not arrived. Fly ! ’ 
On hearing this the hillmen dispersed in every direc- 
tion. Their reinforcing army, which was approach- 
ing, heard the sound of the Sikhs’ muskets and 
feared to advance. Moreover, Raja Bhim Chand’s 
troops would never fight unless commanded by him- 
self. The result was that Nand Chand and his 
troops safely returned to Paunta, and offered their 
obeisance and congratulations to the Guru. Nand 
Chand gave him an account of what had occurred 
since his departure for Srinagar, and advised him 
to hold himself in readiness, for the hill rajas with 
Fatah Shah would certainly repeat their aggression. 
Upon this the Guru ordered ammunition to be 
served out to his army. It now became a ques- 
tion whether the Guru would wait for the enemy 
near Paunta, or advance to intercept their progress. 
The Guru’s uncle said that the enemy would come 
by Bhangani between the Jamna and the Giri,^ and 
it would be best to select Bhangani, which was six 
miles distant, for the field of battle. The Guru 
approved of this plan of operations. 

During Nand Chand’s stay in Srinagar a merchant 
arrived there wifh one hundred horses which he had 
purchased in Kashmir for the Guru. Nand Chand 
had a difficulty in saving them from Bhim Chand’s 
rapacity, and succeeded in taking them to Paunta. 
He now informed the Guru that the horses were 
present and at his disposal. The gift was a very 
opportune one, and the Guru expressed his highest 
satisfaction with the merchant. He distributed the 
horses among selected Sikhs. There was nothing 
now heard but warlike preparations and conversa- 
tions. The Sikhs, who in the words of the Sikh 
chronicler, watched for the enemy as a tiger for his 
1 Not far from the city of Rajpura on the Mansuri (Mussoorie) road. 



30 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


prey, enjoyed in anticipation the approaching battle, 
and vaunted that they would expel all the hill rajas 
and take possession of their territories. 

Raja Bhim Chand reproached his troops for failing 
to arrest the departure of Nand Chand’s detachment, 
and asked them if they had occupied their time in 
feasting on honey or doing their duty. He said, 
however, that he would forget the past if they 
promised amendment in the future. He then sent 
word to Fatah Shah to go and do battle with the 
Guru according to his promise. Fatah Shah, in 
order to please him, served out ammunition and beat 
the drum of war. His soldiers buckled on their 
swords, and slung their guns over their shoulders. 
Fatah Shah propitiated the goddess of his state, and 
putting himself at the head of his troops advanced 
to the combat. 

As already stated, the Guru’s army except the five 
hundred Pathans recently taken into his service on 
the recommendation of Budhu Shah, exulted in the 
prospect of battle. The Pathans took council with 
one another, and Bhikan Khan, one of their officers, 
said, ‘ The Guru's main dependence is on us. The 
rest of his army is a miscellaneous rabble who have 
never seen war, and will run away when they hear 
the first shot fired. Then the brunt of the battle 
will fall on us, and we shall be responsible for 
defeat. Why waste our lives in vain ? Let us go 
to the Guru and ask permission to return to our 
homes.’ 

Kale Khan, another of the Pathan officers, stoutly 
resisted the proposal : ‘You are untrue to your salt. 
Are you not ashamed to think of running away when 
your employer is involved in serious warfare ? No- 
body will trust you in the future ; and when you 
die, you shall be condemned to the abode of sorrow 
of which our holy prophet tells. You are a disgrace 
to the Pathan race.’ Bhikan Khan rejoined, ‘ O Kale 
Khan, remain thou loyal to the Guru. If any of us 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 31 

have business at home, why should he not go there ? 
Why should he die an untimely death ? Stay thou 
with the Guru and earn such advancement as he 
may confer on thee.’ On hearing this Kale Khan 
detached himself from the Pathans, and adhered to 
his allegiance to the Guru. 

Nijabat Khan and Haiyat Khan sided with the 
majority under Bhikan Khan, and proceeded to the 
Guru to ask on behalf of themselves and their 
followers leave to depart to their homes. One man 
had a child born to him, another was to be betrothed, 
a third was to be married, the mother of a fourth 
was dead, &c., &c., and all would suffer irrevocable 
disgrace were they not to return to their homes at 
once. They accordingly requested the Guru to 
settle their accounts and pay the balance of their 
salaries due to them. The Guru replied, ‘This is 
not a time to ask for leave. The enemy is upon us, 
and yet you desire to forsake me. If any one of 
you wish to marry, let him first marry battle, and 
then proceed to his home and celebrate marriage 
with his betrothed. In that case I will largely 
reward you.’ 

The Pathans again represented : ‘ It is incumbent 
on us to go to our homes in case of births, deaths, 
and marriages. Otherwise we could never show our 
faces again to our relations. We must therefore 
depart.’ To this the Guru replied, ‘ Be loyal to your 
sovereign ; leave death and life in the hands of God. 
Desert not your posts, abandon not your duty, and 
you shall be happy in this world and the next. If 
you die in battle, you shall obtain glory to which 
not even monarchs can aspire. Shame not your sires 
and your race. He who forsaketh his master in battle 
shall be dishonoured here and condemned hereafter. 
The vultures, knowing him to be disloyal, will not 
touch but spurn his flesh. He shall not go to heaven 
hereafter, nor obtain glory here ; abundant disgrace 
shall light upon his head. Be assured of this that 



32 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


human birth shall be profitable to him who loseth 
his life with his face to the foe. For all the drops 
of blood that fall from his body, so many years shall 
he enjoy the company of his God.’ ^ 

The Guru offered double pay, which the Pathans 
refused ; then triple, then quadruple. All the Guru’s 
overtures were rejected. The Pathans replied, 

‘ Money is a thing to be distributed among relations ; 
but if relations fall out, of what use is money ? ’ 
Kripal then addressed them, ‘ O fools, you are 
afraid to fight, and are only inventing excuses. 
Having eaten the Guru’s salt you are untrue to it, 
and are reflecting dishonour on the Pathan race. 
A curse on your pay and on yourselves ! ’ Kripal 
then quoted the texts from Bhai Gur Das’s Wars 
against ingratitude. 

Finding all remonstrance useless, Kripal recom- 
mended the Guru to dismiss the wretches from his 
service. The Guru again addressed the mutinous 
men : ‘You appear like tigers, but you have only 
the spirit of jackals.’ The Pathans cast down their 
eyes and said in reply, ‘ O great king, say what thou 
pleasest. We will serve thee no longer. We are not 
thy prisoners. Why tauntest thou us ? ’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ Leave my presence ; the immortal God will 
assist me.’ When the Pathans, having received their 
salary from the Guru, went to thar tents to make 
preparations for their departure. Kale Khan again 
advised them to serve the Guru for one year more. 
At the end of that time they should be wealthy men. 
Bhikan Khan replied, ‘ The Guru is evidently afraid 
of the enemy. If we want money, let us go and 
fight on the side of the hillmen and obtain their 
permission to plunder the Guru. The hillmen have 
not the same information regarding his treasure as 
we have. Accordingly, we shall be at the rear during 
the battle and at the front during the plunder. We 

^ Sukha Singh’s Gur Bilas, Chapter vi, and SuraJ Parkash, Rut II, 
Chapter 20, 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 33 

will then go straight to our homes taking with us 
all we can seize.’ 

This advice of Bhikail Khan was applauded by 
the Pathans. They accordingly sent five of their 
men to negotiate with Raja Fatah Shah, and tell 
him they would all serve him without pay if they 
were allowed to plunder the Guru. Moreover, their 
leaving the Guru would ruin him as they were the 
only fighting men he had. In fact, on their departure 
there would be none to fight on his side, and Fatah 
Shah would gain a bloodless victory. Fatah Shah 
was highly pleased, and at once gave the Pathans 
written permission to appropriate the Guru’s pro- 
perty. -When the document was shown to the body 
of the Pathans, they set about saddling their horses 
to join Fatah Shah’s standard. Kale Khan again 
remonstrated and threatened the mutineers, but in 
vain. Some further overtures of the Guru were also 
rejected. The upshot was that the Guru’s soldiers, 
who were only waiting for his order, expelled the 
mutinous Pathans from his camp. Kale Khan 
remained with the troop of one hundred men of 
whom he had been originally in command. 

The Guru lost no time in informing Budhu Shah 
of the misconduct of the mutinous Pathan soldiers 
whom he had introduced and recommended to him. 
Budhu Shah felt their behaviopr a personal dis- 
grace to himself. He sought to remove it, and also 
gain spiritual advantage by assisting the Guru. He 
accordingly placed himself, his brother, his four 
sons, and seven hundred disciples at the Guru’s 
disposal. 


Chapter V 

^When the Pathans joined Raja Fatah Shah, he 
asked them what the Guru, whose pay they had been 
receiving and whose salt they had been eating, must 
think of them after their desertion. Bhikan Khan 

D 


SIKH. V 



34 


THE SUCH RELIGION 


repjjed, ‘ Great king, the Guru is greatly afraid of 
thee. He only declared war on thee through reliance 
on us. He offered us shields full of rupees, but we 
refused and came to thee. He hath only eight men 
who know how to fight. These are his five cousins, 
his uncle Kripal, Diwan Nand Chand, and Bhai 
Daya Ram. The others who are with him are the 
dregs of the populace, and know not even how to 
handle a sword. We Pathans shall be too many for 
them, so it will not be necessary for thy troops to 
engage at all. The Guru hath treasure exceeding that 
of an emperor.’ On this Fatah Shah remarked that 
Providence was kind to him in having already granted 
him victory. He repeated his promise to the -Pathans 
that they might go and plunder the Guru, and, if he 
himself possibly could, he would generously reward 
them out of his own resources also. 

The Guru’s scouts, who had been sent to Bhangani, 
reported that the enemy were marching to the 
attack. He must therefore proceed at once to inter- 
cept them, otherwise they would enter Paunta on 
the morrow. The Guru sent orders to a body of 
Udasis to put on their turbans, take their arms, 
and prepare for defence. The Udasis too did not wish 
to lose their lives. They said that there were other 
countries where they might beg for their living, and 
that the Guru’s kitchen from which they used to 
eat, was not the only one in the world which remained 
to them. It was not for the purpose of fighting 
they had left their homes and become pilgrims. 
They accordingly resolved to abscond during the 
night one by one, so that their departure might be 
unobserved. 

Next morning the Guru was informed that the 
Udasis had all fled except their mahant Kripal, who 
remained in a state of abstraction. The Guru 
smiled and said, ‘ The root at any rate is left, and 
since there is the root the tree shall bear blossom 
and fruit. If the mahant had gone, the Udasis 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 35 

woiild have been totally extirpated, and excommu- 
nicated from Sikhism.’ The Guru then ordered the 
mahant to be sent for, and thus addressed him : 

' ‘ Ormahant, whither have thy Udasis fled ? Hearken 
to me. Thy disciples eat our sacred food, but when 
they see a green field dsewhere, they go to graze 
on it like cattle. They have all absconded in the 
present hour of need.’ The mahant calmly replied, 
‘ All disciples of the Gurus are made by thee, and 
thou thyself canst pardon them.’ 

' While the Guru was conversing with the mahant 
two Sikhs arrived to report that the army of the 
hillmen had arrived near Bhangani. The Guru gave 
orders to his five cousins to take troops and stop the 
entrance of the enemy into the town. Then making 
all arrangements for the defence of Paunta during 
his absence, he sent for his arms and armour and 
offered the following prayer to the Almighty : — 

Eternal God, Thou art our shield, 

The dagger, knife, the sword we wield. 

To us protector there is given 

The timeless, deathless. Lord of heaven ; 

To us All-steel’s unvanquished might ; 

To us All-time’s resistless flight ; 

But chiefly Thou, Protector brave. 

All-steel, wilt Thine own servants save.^ 

Then while repeating his orders he buckled on his 
sword, slung his quiver bvet his shoulder, took his 
bow in his hand, mounted his steed, and shouting 
‘ Sat Sri Akal ’ in his loudest voice proceeded to 
confront his enemies. It is recorded that the hoofs 
of the Guru’s horse in their quick movement raised 
clouds of dust which obscured the sun, and that the 
cheers of his men resembled thunder in the stormy 
and rainy month of Sawan. 

When the Guru arrived at Bhangani, Bhai Daya 

^ This is freely translated from a version of the first lines of the 
Ak&l Ustat found in Malcolm's Sketch of the Sikhi. 



36 < THE SIKH RELIGION 

Ram pointed out the positions of the armies arrayed 
against him. ‘ Behold ; there is Fatah Shah’s array, 
and to the right of it are the faithless Pathans who 
have deserted us. Behind them all stands Fatah 
Shah himself. In the van is seen Hari Chand, the 
Raja of Handur, a brave and accomplished archer.’ 

Meanwhile a contingent was seen to approach, 
.(^charging firearms and committing great havoc 
among the hillmen. Diwan Nand Chand was puzzled 
and applied to the Guru for information. A soldier 
arrived in breathless haste, and said that Budhu 
Shah had arrived to wipe out the Guru’s taunts for 
haying introduced the Pathans to him. The Guru 
was or course overjoyed to receive Budhu Shah with 
liis reinforcement, and at once gave the order to 
charge. Sango Shah, one of the Guru’s cousins, 
who discharged bullets like hail and committed 
fearful destruction among the enemy, is specially 
mentioned on this occasion for his conspicuous 
gallantry. 

Raja Fatah Shah soon learnt that the Pathans 
had misled him as to the character and strength of 
the Guru’s army. Raja Hari Chand then suggested 
that the Pathans under Bhikan Khan, being in the 
Guru’s secret and aware of his plan of operations, 
should be sent to the front. This was accordingly 
done. They charged the Guru’s army and used their 
muskets with great effect. The Guru sent Nand Chand 
and Daya Ram with their troops to check their 
onset. Nand Chand and Daya Ram advanced with 
the rapidity of arrows shot from the Guru’s bow- 
string. They and their men discharged missiles like 
winged serpents against the enemy. The Pathans 
too, fought well, the battle was hotly contested, and 
many brave men were untimely slain on both sides. 

The struggle was continued by both armies with the 
eagerness of wrestlers striving for victory. Sango 
Shah continued his brave career and killed many of 
the enemy. He was well supported by his brother 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 37 

Mahii Chand, who showered bullets with deadly 
precision on the Pathans, but was at last surrounded 
as i his missiles were ejthausted. Sango seeing his 
brother’^s perilous position put his horse at full speed 
to rescue him, and so deftly applied his arro\<^, that 
the Pathans soon surrendered their expected prey 
and fled. 

Budhu Shah, his relations, and his disciples, fought 
with great bravery and devotion, and succeeded 
in slaying numbers of the enemy. The ground 
resembled a red carpet. His men shouted like 
thunder, and drove the enemy before them as a 
hurricane drives chaff. Raja Gopal of Guler now 
arrived with his troops to reinforce Fatah Shahi 
He called out to the fugitives, ‘ Why run away ? 
I have come to your assistance.’ On this the hillmen 
took courage and renewed the combat. They 
directed their attack principally against Budhh 
Shah’s troops. Seeing this, Budhu Shah’s sons 
fought with the greatest bravery, felled the enemy 
as a woodcutter fells forest trees, and warded off 
all return strokes, so that they piled up corpses on 
corpses. Raja Gopal, seeing the destruction of his 
allies, addressed his men, ‘ My brethren, now is the 
time for action. Maintain the honour of the hill 
rajas.’ The result of this brief exhortation was that 
the enemy surrounded Budhu Shah’s son. In this 
critical position he fought with great desperation. 
His bravery attracted the attention of the Guru 
himself who sent his uncle Kripal with troops to 
rescue him. Kripal’s men showered arrows and 
bullets on the enemy, and succeeded in extricating 
the youth. He and Kripal then joined in a terrific 
charge on the hillmen. Raja Gopal seeing this dis- 
charged an arrow at Budhu Shah’s son which struck 
him on the chest, and brought him to the ground. 
This led to a close engagement of the combatants 
on both sides for the possession of the body. Every 
form of weapon was plied and the carnage became 



38 THE SIKH RELIGION ’ 

terrific. Such was the gallantry of Kripal and the 
spirit he infused into his followers, that the enemy 
fled, leaving the corpse of Budhu Shah’s son to be 
borne away from the field by his father’s disciples 
for honourable intennent. 

Raja Gopal, on Seeing the confusion produced in 
his ranks by the brave Kripal, directed his horse at 
full speed against him. As Gopal advanced he dis- 
charged an arrow at him, which lodged in his horse’s 
sad<Ee. On this Kripal shouted, ‘ O Gopal, thou 
hast had the first shot. It is for me to shoot now.’ 
On hearing this Gopal turned his horse round. 
Kripal at once discharged an arrow, which penetrated 
his horse’s temple, and the animal fell heavily on 
the ground. Gopal, unhorsed, ran away with the 
rapidity of a thief who finds day dawning on him in 
the exercise of his calling, and took refuge at the rear 
of his troops. He there provided himself with another 
steed which he mounted for the battle. 

The Rajas of Chandel and Handur now appeared 
on the scene, and desired to come to close quarters 
with the Guru himself. They and their troops were, 
however, kept at bay by the bravery of the Guru’s 
five cousins, supported by the faithful Sikhs. 

Raja Fatah Shah now called out to Bhikan Khan 
and his Pathans, and asked thern why they were 
concealing themselves and saving their skins like 
dastards. Bhikan Khan had represented that the 
Guru’s army was worthless, so Fatah Shah now. 
called on him to put that worthless army to flight. 
He and his men might then return to their homes 
with such plunder as they could obtain from their 
victory. Bhikan Khan, thus roused from his 
lethargy, joined in the fight. Haiyat Khan too 
advanced and killed several of the Guru’s troopers. 
Kripal, the mahant of the Udasis, now advanced on 
horseback, and asked the Guru’s permission to engage 
Haiyat Khan. The Guru replied, ‘ O holy saint, 
thou canst kill him with thy words. Pray that I may 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


39 


be victorious.’ Kripal, the Guru’s uncle, over- 
hearing this conversation, and seeing that the 
mahant was filled with martial enthusiasm, prayed 
the Guru to let him engage Haiyat Khan. The Guru 
inquired with what weapon the mahant was going 
to contend with his adversary. The mahant replied, 
‘ With this club.’ The Guru smiled and said, ‘ Go 
and engage thine enemy.’ It was a spectacle to see 
the mahant with his matted hair twisted round his 
head, his body only clothed with a thin plaster of 
ashes, and his belly projecting far in front of his 
saddle, proceeding to engage a practised warrior 
armed with the latest weapons of destruction. 

' When the mahafit approached and challenged 
Haiyat Khan, the latter saw that he had no warlike 
weapon and consequently retreated from him, scorn- 
ing to attack a defenceless man. The onlookers 
were amused and said, ‘ How can that faqir contend 
with a Pathan ? ’ The mahant, however, continued 
to challenge Haiyat Khan. As when a snake is 
escaping into its hole it will come forth if its tail be 
trodden on and attack the aggressor, so Haiyat 
Khan, who had been retiring before the mahant, now 
advanced against him goaded by his taunts. He 
aimed a blow of his sword at the mahant, which the 
latter received on his club, when lo ! Haiyat Khan’s 
sword fell to pidces. The mahant then addressed 
him, ‘ Now hold thy ground and defend thyself 
from me.’ The mahant rose on his stirrups, and 
wielding his club with both hands struck Haiyat 
Khan with such force on the head that his skull 
broke, and his brains issued forth and stained the 
battle-field.^ ' 

The Guru himself gives the following description of this single 
combat and of the fighting which immediately followed : — 

Mahant Kripal, raging, lifted lus mace and smote the fierce HaiySt 
Khan on the head, upon which his brains issued bubbling forth as 
butter from the earthen vessel which Krishan broke. Nand Chand raged 
in dreadful ire, launching his spear, then wielding his scimitar. When 
the keen weapon broke, he drew forth his dagger for the honour of the 



40 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The mahant continued to display his skill and 
bravery to the Pathans, but was at last surrounded 
by them and placed in a very hazardous position. 
When Jit Mai, one of the Guru’s cousins, saw. this, 
he rained such a shower of: arrows on the Pathans, 
that they retreated and left the mahant unmolested. 
He then made his way to the Guru, and received his 
approbation. 

Ram Singh, a mechanic from Banaras, had made 
a cannon for the Guru from which balls were dis- 
charged with great effect during this battle. People 
on seeing the impression made on the enemy con- 
cluded that ^he Guru was destined to be victorious. 

Bhikan Khan and Nijabat Khan taunted their 
men with being unable to cope with a rabble of 
villagers who did not even know how to handle 
a martial weapon. The result was that the Pathans 
made another desperate effort to brighten their 
gloomy prospects, and for a time caused the Guru’s 
army to waver. One Sahib Chand, a captain of 
a troop, asked the Guru’s permission to oppose the 
onset of the enemy. The Guru ordered him to act 
on his own responsibility. Sahib Chand and his men 
so deftly and rapidly plied their arrows that the 
Pathans found it necessary to take shelter behind 
trees. Bhikan Khan, seeing this, addressed his men : 
‘ How now, jackals, you are attaching a stigma to 
the Pathan race. The hillmen are laughing at you, 
and saying that a faqir, having killed Haiyat Khan, 
hath put all the Pathans to flight.’ Saying this, 

Sodlii race. Then iny maternal uncle, Krip^l, advanced in his rage. 
The brave man’s body received many arrows, yet he emptied the saddle 
of many a Turkish chief. Sahib Chand, as a true Kslratri, strove in the 
battle’s fury and slew bloodthirsty heroes, shining lights of Khurasan. 
Many excellent warriors were slain, and those who survived fled with their 
lives. Sango Shah, lord of battle, gloriously acquitted himself, and 
t^ampled underfoot bloodthirsty Pathans. Raja Gopal shouted as he 
stood in the battle-field, like a tiger in the midst of deer. The brave 
Hari Chand planted his feet firmly on the field and in his fury dis- 
charged sharp arrows which went through and through his adversaries. 
— Vichiiar Natak 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 41 

Bhikan Khan set an example of bravery to his 
soldiers, and discharged showers of arrows at the 
Guru’s troops. 

Sahib Chand, on the Guru’s side, continued to 
fight with great determination, and caused great 
havoc among the enemy. • Seeing this, Hari Chand, 
the Raja of Handur, became enraged and strove 
with equal valour against him. His archery was so 
unerring that the Guru’s army again wavered. 
Sahib Chand then occupied himself in warding off 
Hari Chand’ s arrows and inspiriting his men. They 
were not, however, to be encouraged, but were on 
the point of retreat when the Guru heard a great 
tumult near him. He at once ordered Nand Chand 
and Daya Ram to stay the attack of the enemy. 
These brave heroes discharged such showers of 
arrows as effectually checked the onward progress 
of the Pathans. Nand Chand, taking his sword in his 
hand and putting his horse to fuU speed, rode into 
the thick of his enemies, and chopped off their heads 
like pumpkins severed from their stalks. In his 
left hand he held a lance with which as occasion 
served he impaled his antagonists. The Pathans, 
however, retreated not, but with their religious 
battle-cry, ‘ Ya Ali ! Ya Ali ! ’ firmly held their 
ground and fell upon Nand Chand. He by his 
bravery and skill in arms sent every one who 
approached him to the next world by the way of the 
sword. A Pathan ran his horse forward and received 
Nand Chand’ s sword on his musket. The sword 
fell to pieces and then Nand Chand drew forth his 
two-edged dagger. Daya Ram went to his assist- 
ance at that critical moment, and a hand to hand 
engageinent with the Moslems ensued, in which they 
were worsted and put to flight. Raja Hari Chand 
still held his ground and was challenged by Daya 
Ram. Hari Chand avoided not the conflict, but 
continued to discharge arrows and bullets and 
inflict great damage on the Guru’s army. His horse 



42 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


was very swift and tractable, and he could turn him 
rapidly round so as^to save himself from a hostile 
attack, while at the same time he could discharge 
fatal missiles at his opponents. Saiyid Budhu Shah 
was found to have lost during the last charge a second 
son in the battle. " 

There came a confectioner named Lai Chand to 
the spot on which the Guru stood directing the 
battle. He said, ‘ I feel greatly tempted to join in 
the fray, but I have never learned how to handle 
warlike weapons.’ The Guru replied, ‘ If thou desire 
to fight, take and mount a horse.’ The confectioner 
did so. Then the Guru gave him a sword and shield. 
He inquired how they were to be held. The Guru 
told him to take the sword in his right hand and the 
shield in his left. The Guru’s soldiers laughed at 
the confectioner’s ignorance and said, ‘ Well done ! 
our Guru and great King wants to kill hawks with 
sparrows.’ 

The confectioner ran his horse into the Pathan 
army. Bhikan Khan on seeing him said to his 
friend Mir Khan, ‘ See, here comes an Arora.^ He 
hath been ail day weighing flour and salt, and now 
the Guru hath given him a sword and shield. Take 
his arms "and his horse, and then slay him.’ Upon 
this Mir Khan pounced on him like a hawk on a 
sparrow. When Mir Khan drew^ his sword the 
confectioner warded it off with his shield. Then 
meditating on the Guru he aimed a return blow at 
Mir Khan which separated his head from his body. 
The hillmen taunted the Pathans with not being able 
to contend with petty hucksters, and asked them if 
they were not ashamed of their cowardice. Pro- 
voked by these taunts, Nijabat Khan and Bhikan 
Khan urged their men to make a general charge and 
not die like jackals. Raja Hari Chand joined them 
in their onslaught. The Guru’s brave Sikhs, how- 
ever, firmly held their ground. In the action that 

^ A tribe of Khatris. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 43 

ensued Jit Mai and Hari Chand engaged in single 
combat. J it Mai discharged an arrow at Hari Chand, 
but the latter by an adroit movement of his horse 
escaped it. Jit Mai became angry at having missed his 
mark, and discharged another arrow at his opponent. 
Hari Chand followed his example. The arrows lodged 
in their horses’ foreheads and both horses fell. The 
combatants thus unhorsed continued to fight until 
they were both wounded. After a short breathing 
time, both again put forward their strength, when 
their swords simultaneously took effect. Hari Chand 
fell fainting to the earth, and Jit Mai drppped down 
dead with his face to the foe. His comrades blest 
the father who had begotten him and the mother 
who had borne him. 

When the hillmen found that their bravest warrior 
had fallen into a swoon, they assembled to consider 
what should be done. On seeing the enemy huddled 
together, the Guru ordered Ram Singh to direct his 
cannon towards them. Ram Singh obeyed, with the 
result that several of the enemy were killed. On 
this the Rajas of Dadhwal and Jaswal became 
enraged and actively joined in the battle. Fatah 
Shah, however, saw that the day was lost and took 
to flight. The Raja of Chandel was astonished at 
the conduct of Fatah Shah, and continued to do 
valiant battle on behalf of the hill chiefs. 

At the time when Jit Mai and Hari Chand were 
engaged in single combat, Sango Shah, the Guru’s 
cousin, and Nijabat Khan, the Pathan leader, were 
similarly eniployed, and both fell by mutual slaugh- 
ter. The Guru, on seeing the courage and fate of 
the hero who had performed for him such gallant 
deeds, changed his name from Sango to Shah San- 
gram — Lord of battle. The Guru, enraged at his 
loss, mounted his charger and rode into the thick 
of the combat. He so plied his arrows that sounds 
of woe arose on all sides from the Pathan ranks. 
The Guru, on seeing the renegade Bhikan Khan, 



44 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


discharged an arrow at him. It missed him but 
killed bis horse, upon which he took to flight. Nand 
Chand and Daya Ram now saw an opportunity ini 
the demoralized state ol the Pathans to make a final 
desperate charge and complete their discomfiture. 
The resiut was great slaughter of the treacherous 
Muhammadans. When the hillmen saw the total 
defeat of the Pathans, they too began to run away 
from the field of battle. 

Raja Hari Chand, who swooned on being 
wounded by Jit Mai, had by this time recovered, 
and appeared on the scene with the heroic resolution 
to secure victory for his side. He addressed his 
troops : ‘ Hillmen, once so brave, why die like 
cowards ? I have come to your assistance. Take 
courage.’ Saying this the Raja stayed the fleeing 
hosts. Meanwhile showers of arrows continued to 
speed from the Guru’s army. Raja Hari Chand 
shot many brave men with his own arrows. The 
Guru on seeing this confronted him, and after- 
wards thus described the combat that ensued : — 

Hari Chand, in his rage, drew forth his arrows. He 
struck my steed with one and then discharged another at 
me, but God preserved me and it only grazed my ear in 
its flight. His third arrow penetrated the buckle of my 
waist-belt and reached my body, but .wounded me not. 
It is only God who protected me, knowing me His servant. 
When I felt the touch of the arrow, my anger was kindled. 
I took up my bow and began to discharge arrows in 
abundance. Upon this my adversaries began to flee. 
I took aim and killed the young chief, Hari Chand, When 
he perished my heroes trampled their enemies under foot. 
The chief of Korori was seized by death. Upon this the 
hillmen fled in consternation and I, through the favour 
of The'eterlial God, gained the victory. Having thus held 
the battle-field, we raised aloud the song of triumph. 
I showered wealth on my warriors and they all rejoiced. 

Raja Fatah Shah saw there was only safety in 



LIFE OF GURU GQBIND SINGH 45 

flight, and hastened to retire to his capital. Praises 
of the Guru’s valour and skill in warfare were sung 
throughout the country. 

Chapter VI 

After the battle the Guru went to where lay the 
bodies of Sango Shah, Jit Mai, and his other brave 
fallen Sikhs. He ordered the slain on both sides to 
be disposed of. The bodies of the Sikhs were cre- 
mated, of the Hindus thrown into the adjacent river, 
and of the Musalmans buried with all solemnity. 
Bards assembled and chanted their praises. Saiyid 
Budhu Shah presented himself and his two surviving 
sons to the Guru. The Guru said, ‘ I hail thee as 
a true priest of God. Thy human life is profitable 
unto thee. Deem not that thy sons are dead. Nay, 
they shall live for ever. Only those die who despise 
God’s name and turn cowards on the field of battle.’ 
Budhu Shah replied, ‘ True king, I mourn not for 
my sons who are slain, because, in the first place, 
they have gone to enjoy seats in paradise, and, 
secondly, because they have lost their fives in defence 
of thee. Such a boon is not obtained even by the 
greatest austerities.’ 

The Guru considered how he should requite Budhu 
Shah for his supreme devotion to his cause. He 
decided that, as worldly possessions were fleeting, 
the gift of God's name was the highest reward of 
all, and so that inestimable boon he duly conferred 
on him. But he made him other gifts also. The 
Guru at the time was combing his long hair, and 
a servant stood by holding his turban. When the 
Guru had performed his toilet, he laid his comb with 
loose, hair in it upon the turban, and presented them 
to Budhu Shah to preserve in remembrance of him. 
He also gave him a small knife which Sikhs usually 
carry, and finally a sum of five thousand rupees to 
distribute among his disciples. The Guru’s turban. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


46 

his cdmb, hair, and knife are preserved as relics 
in. the Sikh state of Nabha. They were acquired 
from Budhu Shah’s descendants by Raja Bharpur 
Singh. 

The Guru remembered his cousins Sango Shah and 
Jit Mai, and proclaimed them brave and puissant 
warriors who had taken their seats in heaven. He 
bade their brothers not mourn for them. The 
brothers replied, ‘ For whom should we mourn? Sango 
Shah and Jit Mai have fought and obtained the 
dignity of salvation. War means either to kill or 
be killed, and there is no need to mourn the con- 
sequences.’ The Guru rewarded all those who had 
risked their lives for him and contributed to his 
signal and decisive victory. 

When the Guru’s fame extended after his recent 
success and prowess in arms, he was visited by many 
accomplished persons. Poets, singers, and musicians 
flocked to his court, and all who visited him he 
endeavoured to suitably reward. Now that the war 
was over, the Sikh soldiers formed various projects 
to occupy their time for the future. They would 
go and seize Raja Fatah Shah, and make him bow 
at the Guru’s feet. And they would conquer and 
obtain the freedom of the country between Paunta 
and Anandpur, so as to remove the obstacles inter- 
posed in marching hither and thither. This last 
enterprise, as being the one that affected them most 
closely, they specially urged on the Guru’s con- 
sideration. 

The Guru remonstrated and restrained them. He 
bade them bide their opportunity. Their empire 
should yet extend far and wide. He knew, however, 
that his troops would not sit down idle, flushed as 
they were with their recent victory. Accordingly 
he gaye them an order to return to Anandpur, an 
order with which they were delighted. They all set 
forth accordingly, taking their wounded and their 
baggage. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 47 

The Guru marched by way of Sadhaura and Lahar- 
pur. He encamped at the latter place, and was there 
met by the envoy of the Raja of Nahan, who desired 
to come to meet him. The Guru sent his army to 
Anandpur, and remained himself with only a few 
followers to meet the Raja. The Guru was fain to 
divert himself with the chase after his recent warfare, 
and ample opportunities were afforded him in that 
part of the country. During his stay in Laharpur, 
Budhu Shah often visited him, and held religious con- 
versations with him. Though the Raja of Nahan 
very much desired to entertain the Guru, yet he 
apprehended the wrath of the other hill chiefs if 
he were known to be still on amicable terms with 
the high priest of the Sikhs, who had inflicted on 
them such a signal defeat. The Raja used to send 
a messenger daily to say that he was coming ; but 
somehow he was accidentally prevented. He would, 
however, come on the morrow. The Raja carried on 
this method of procrastination from day to day. 
At last he asked the advice of his ministers, whether 
it was proper for him to meet the Guru or not. 
They advised him that it was not, seeing that the 
Guru was at enmity with all the hill chiefs. Were 
he now to meet the Guru, the chiefs would resent it 
and probably make war on him. On this the Raja 
sent a messengep to say he was very busy and could 
not go himself to meet the Guru, but he would send 
his chief minister to do him the honours of the 
state. The Guru did not conceal his knowledge of 
the Raja’s motives, and sent him a message that he 
would now continue his journey to Anandpur, and 
the Raja need not give himself any further concern 
on the subject of an interview. 

The Guru stayed altogether thirteen days at Lahar- 
pur, The principal inhabitants were Ranghars, 
thieves by instinct and profession, who stole two of 
his camels. When the Ranghars refused to give up 
the booty, the Guru sent for a faqir who lived near. 



48 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and told him to go, under pretence of begging, to 
the house of a certain Ranghar, and see whether the 
camels were there. The faqir went, saw the camels, 
and duly reported his discovery. The Guru sent for 
the Ranghar in possession, and told him to act as an 
honest man, and give up the camels, otherwise he 
would oust him from house and home. On this the 
Ranghar parted with the stolen property. The Guru 
called the Ranghars’ village counterfeit, and the 
faqir’ s village genuine, and said the faqir’s village 
should ever gain and the Ranghars’ ever lose. The 
prophecy of the Guru has been fulfilled. A temple 
called Toka was subsequently constructed in Lahar- 
pur in honour of the Guru’s visit. 

As the Guru proceeded to Anandpur he was met by 
the Rani of Raipur who waited for him on his route. 
After making her obeisance she asked him to take rest 
at her capital. The Guru gladly accepted her invita- 
tion. She showed him the greatest hospitality and 
sent her son to him with an offering of a bag of rupees. 
At a subsequent interview she entreated the Guru to 
pray that her son’s line might permanently endure. 
The Guru said that her son ought to allow his hair 
to grow and perfect himself in the practice of arms. 
The Rani replied that the Turks were in power, and 
she was afraid to allow her son to dress differently 
from them. The Guru exhorted heF not to be afraid. 
The rule of the Turks should only last for a brief 
period. ‘ When my sect groweth more numerous and 
obtaineth possession of the empire of the Turks, it 
shall then adopt long hair as a distinction. And 
when the line of the Turks is extirpated, thine shall 

^ Rs.ipur is in the sitb-collectorate of Naraingarh in the present 
district of AmbSla in the Panjab. To Raipur are attached about 
twenty-three .villages, yielding a yearly income of Rs, 18,000. The 
present proprietor is RSo Baldev Singh, a Hindu Rajput. His grand- 
father was z Sikh. In the fort of Raipur is a Gurdwara pn the spot 
where Gol)ind Rai dined as the Rani’s guest. There is also a 
<Gurdwara outside the fort on the spot where his tent was pitched. 
The Granth Sahib is kept in both Gurdwaras, 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 49 

remain in undiminished dignity. It shall then unite 
with the Khalsa and obtain all happiness.’ 

Upon this the Guru took his sword and shield and 
presented them to the Rani’s son. He said, ‘ Take 
them and treat them with respect, so that when the 
time of trouble ariseth, thy wishes may be fulfilled, 
and thy life and property preserved.’ The Rani was 
delighted with the Guru’s presents and words, and 
thus addressed him : ‘ Great king, great are thy 
gifts. Who can deprive us of them ? It is thy un- 
swerving duty to hold thyself bound by the bonds of 
love for the human race, and thou art, moreover, 
merciful and compassionate.’ The Rani, seeing that 
the Guru had made the gift with his own sacred hands, 
was filled with delight, and taking the sword and 
shield put them respectfully on her head and then 
touched her son’s head with them. She bound a 
coverlet on a couch and placed the weapons reverently 
on it. After this the Guru continued his journey to 
Anandpur. 

On the way the Guru halted at Kiratpur, where 
Gulab Rai and Sham Das, the grandsons of Guru 
Har Gobind, came to visit him. He there visited 
the shrines of his ancestors. When it became known 
that the Guru was returning to Anandpur, the 
inhabitants of that city came forth to receive him, 
and there were unusual rejoicings on his safe and 
glorious return. 

Not long afterwards complaints began to be made 
against the Guru’s troops to Raja Bhim Chand. 
Whenever the Guru’s men did not accompany him 
to the chase, they used to go hunting in detached 
groups by themselves. The Guru at that time set 
about the construction of a fort, and made a strong 
and lofty battlement around it. 

Raja Bhim Chand was greatly irritated by the 
numerous complaints he continually received against 
the Sikhs. He took counsel with his minister, ‘ What 
shall we do ? We are not strong enough to contend 

E 


SIKH. V 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


50 

with the Guru, but how long are we to endure this 
annoyance ? ’ The minister replied, ‘ 0 Raja, I see 
no solution of the difficulty except reconciliation 
with the Guru,’ All the other principal state officers 
who were consulted gave similar replies. Bhim 
Chand then decided that he would send an envoy 
to ascertain if the Guru had any intention of making 
an abiding peace with him. 

The envoy, who was selected from the most 
polished officials of the state, duly delivered his 
master’s message praying for peace and forgetfulness 
of the past. The Guru replied, ‘ I have not fallen 
out with Raja Bhim Chand, but he hath fallen out 
with me. See what deceit he exercised in his efforts 
to obtain my elephant. When his marriage proces- 
sion went to Srinagar, he endeavoured to kill my 
minister and his troops. It was only by God’s 
special favour they escaped. Even then thy Raja 
left nothing undone against us, for he incited Fatah 
Shah who had been my friend to make war on us. 
Here again God protected us and we obtained the 
victory. O envoy, our army hath taken possession 
of no fort or village of yours. My troopers are 
grievously in want of grass for their horses, and 
goats’ flesh for themselves. These can only be 
obtained from your villages. If we do not obtain 
them on payment we must starve, but we do not 
desire to accept anything else from you.’ 

The envoy smiled and said, ‘ Consider Raja Bhim 
Chand’s country as thine own. He is very anxious 
to meet thee, and if thou permit me I will conduct 
him here.’ The Guru replied, ‘ In Guru Nanak’s 
house men meet their deserts, li any one with lowly 
mind enter therein, he shall be happy ; but if any 
one, lifting his head too high, enter it, his life shall 
pay the forfeit. Then plainly tell thy Raja that if 
he entertain friendly intent, he may come to me, 
and he shall be received with due consideration.' 
The Raja was very pleased on receiving this message. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


51 

and at once made elaborate preparations for his 
visit to the Guru. 

When Bhim Chand was introduced into the Guru’s 
presence he said, ‘ 0 true Guru, thy name is cherisher 
of those who seek thy protection. I pray thee ‘ to 
pardon and forget any foolish words I might have 
uttered or any foolish acts I might have done.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘ 0 Raja, I have not been thine aggres- 
sor. The aggression hath been all on thy side. If 
thou act fairly towards the Guru, he will act fairly 
towards thee.’ Bhim Chand promised to act for the 
future according to the Guru’s wishes. Upon this 
the Guru gave him a magnificent robe of honour, 
and dismissed him highly delighted with the inter- 
view. 

The Guru’s wife Sundari now presented him with 
a son named Ajit Singh on the fourth day of the 
bright half of Magh, Sambat 1743 (a. d. 1687). 


Chapter VII 

During the absence of the Emperor Aurangzeb in 
the south of India, whither he had gone to make 
war on Tana Shah, King of Golkanda,^ there arose 
great administrative irregularities. At that time 
Mian Khan was Viceroy of Jammu. He sent his 
commander-in-chief, Alif Khan, to levy tribute on 
Kripal, Raja of Kangra, Kesari Chand, Raja of 
Jaswal, Prithi Chand, Raja of Dadhwal, Sukh Dev, 
Raja of J asrot, and others. Alif Khan first addressed 
himself to Raja Kripal, ‘ Either pay me suitable 
tribute or contend with me in arms.’ Kripal made 
him certain presents, and then told him that Raja 
Bhim Chand of Bilaspur was the greatest of all the 
allied hill chiefs. Were he first to pay tribute, all the 
rest would follow his exeunple, and then there would 

^ Goikanda was then the capital of the state of Haidarabad in the 
Dakhan. 



52 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


be no necessity for warfare. If, however, Bhim 
Chand were to refuse and elect the alternative of 
war, Kripal would still support Alif Khan. Raja 
Dayal, the chief of Bijharwal, probably persuaded by 
Raja Kripal, also promised to meet Alif Khan’s 
demands. 

Alif Khan adopted Raja Kripal’ s suggestion and 
proceeded towards Bilaspur, Raja Bhim Chand’ s 
capital. Halting at Nadaun he sent an envoy to 
Bhim Chand with the same demand as he had 
previously made Kripal. Bhim Chand replied that 
he would rather defend himself than pay tribute. 
Having dispatched this message he called his prin- 
cipal officials to a council of war. His prime minister 
thus advised him—' If thou desire victory, it shall be 
assured on condition that thou obtain the Guru’s 
assistance.’ This advice pleased Bhim Chand, and 
he accordingly sent the prime minister to the Guru 
to request his active support. 

■ The Guru pondered on the proposal and accepted 
it for the following reasons : — The friendship between 
himself and Raja Bhim Chand was duly ratified, 
and it would be a shame to him if, by his refusal to 
render assistance, his friend were defeated. Secondly, 
Bhim Chand’ s prime minister had put himself under 
the Guru’s protection as a suppliant, and the Guru 
felt that he could not refuse liis prayer. He 
accordingly sent Raja Bhim Chand the following 
message, ‘ I shall be with thee early on the morrow. 
Pay no tribute to the Turks. If thou pay it to-day, 
there will be another demand on thee to-morrow. 
But if thou fight and cause the Turks to retreat, 
then shall no one molest thee.’ 

Raja Bhim Chand on receiving this promise made 
certain of his victory. Raja Kesari Chand, Raja 
Prithi Chand, and Raja Sukh Dev took their forces 
to join his, and all proceeded to Nadaun to give 
battle to Alif Khan, Raja Kripal, and Raja Dayal’s 
troops. These were encamped on an eminence, and 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


53 


had therefore superiority of position. Bhim Chand 
ineffectually essayed to take them by surprise, but 
the arrows and bullets which his troops discharged 
only struck rocks and trees, and inflicted no loss on 
the enemy. Bhim Chand, much disheartened, im 
yoked with all fervour, Hanuman, the monkey-god 
who had assisted Ram Chandar in his expe&tion 
against Ceylon, and called on his allies to join him 
in another charge. This was met by Raja Kripal 
and Raja Dayal’s forces, who slew all the men that 
succeeded in scaling the eminence. Bhim Chand 
had now almost lost all hope when the minister 
reminded him that the Guru’s troops had not yet 
entered the field. The Guru receiving Bhim Chand’ s 
summons, mounted his steed, and at once proceeded 
to his assistance. 

Bhim Chand, after greeting the Guru, requested 
him, who was senior as well by virtue of his spiritual 
rank as by the bravery of his troops, to storm the 
enemies’ position. The Guru and his troops dis- 
charged fatal arrows, rushed the stockades, and 
created dismay in the ranks of the enemy. Alif 
Khan, Raja Kripal, and Raja Dayal now thought 
it time to leave their fastnesses and come forth to 
confront Bhim Chand and the Guru. Their main 
attack was directed against Bhim Chand whom they 
caused to retreart. Prithi Chand endeavoured to 
restrain Bhim Chand’s retreating forces, and single- 
handed, with drawn sword, set himself to oppose 
Alif Khan and Dayal’s onset. So completely did he 
succeed that Alif Khan and his allies’ troops turned 
to flee. Raja Dayal was enraged at seeing his troops 
retreating, and began to ply his arrows with such 
fatal effect on his opponents that Bhim Chand’s 
troops again waveared. Upon this Bhim Chand 
again addressed himself to the Guru, ' O Guru, 
seest Thou not that this brave man is destroying 
our army ? If I am defeated, thou shalt have the 
odium thereof.’ The Guru at once turned his steed 



54 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


round and challenged Raja Dayal, ' If thou mean to 
strike, then deal the first blow. Say not hereafter 
that the Guru hath struck thee unawares.’ This 
enraged Dawal, who at once made a desperate effort 
to kill the Guru. The Guru, seeing this, took steady 
aim with bis musket and lo^ed a bullet in Dayal’ s 
breast. Dayal fell like a tree blown down by the 
wind. 

When Raja Kripal saw his brave ally fallen, he 
knew that his cause was lost. He, however, put him- 
self in the van and made a desperate effort to retrieve 
the disaster. The Guru, now in full martial temper, 
incessantly discharged arrows which took deadly 
effect on the enemy. The survivors again fled to 
their fastnesses. Upon this Alif Khan and Kripal 
held a council of war. They both accepted the fact 
that they had been defeated owing to the assistance 
given Bhim Chand by the Guru, and they resolved to 
escape at night. In this they succeeded. When the 
allied army next morning found the ground un- 
occupied, they were profuse in their praises and 
acknowledgements to the Guru. The Guru in order 
to take rest and enjoy retirement and contemplation 
remained for eight days after the battle on the 
pleasant and picturesque banks of the river 
Bias. 

Raja Kripal proposed a reconciliation with Raja 
Bhim Chand, which, after some negotiations, was 
duly effected. The Guru on hearing this was greatly 
pleased. He decided on a speedy return to Anand- 
pur, and caused his drum to be beaten as the signal 
for his departure. His party arrived at Alsun on 
their way. The inhabitants, having heard of Raja 
Bhim Chand’s secret ill-will to the Guru, refused to 
sell his troops supplies. On this the Guru, owing to 
the necessity of travel, was compelled to order :that 
supplies be forcibly taken after payment at current 
rates. When the Guru approached Anandpur he 
caused his drum to be beaten. The inhabitants on 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 55 

hearing the once familiar sound joyoUvSly came forth 
to receive him. 

I The Guru’s wife, Jito, presented him with a son 
on the seventh day of the month of Chet, Sambat 
1747. The boy was called Zorawar Singh, or the 
powerful lion, to commemorate the battle of Nadaun.^ 

When it became known that the Sikhs had taken 
supplies forcibly at Alsun, some of the hill chiefs feared 
that the Guru would some day seize their territories 
also. Others were of a contrary opinion, and remained 
steadfast in their friendship for him. Some of the 
inhabitants of Anandpur who wavered in their 
loyalty, left the city lest they might suffer in any 
attack made on it by the Guru’s enemies. In this 
movement, however, they were far from successful. 
Branded with infamy they could obtain no place of 
rest elsewhere, and were glad to return and sue for 
the Guru’s pardon. 

One Dilawar Khan, who had attained power in 
the Panjab during the insurrections which arose 
while Aurangzeb was employed in the Dakhan, 
became jealous of the Guru’s fame and success, and 
sent his son with a force of one thousand men to 
exact tribute from him. If he refused, then Anandpur 
was to be sacked. When this was accomplished, 
Dilawar’ s son was to take tribute in a similar manner 
from all the hill sajas. The son hastened to obey the 
paternal command. When he reached the bank of 
the Satluj one of the Guru’s scouts hastened to give 
information of the approach of a hostile force. The 
Guru was roused from his sleep at night to receive 
this intelligence and make hasty preparations for 
defence. 

The Guru immediately ordered the drum to be 
beaten as the signal for his troops to take arms. 
His men fell into line almost immediately and 
marched to the Satluj . On their arrival they startled 

1 VVe here follow the Stlraj Parkdsh and the Gur Bilds. Others 
say it was Jujhar Singh who was bom in the Sambat year 1747. 



56 THE SIKH RELIGION 

the enemy by peals of artillery, and thus gave an 
exaggerated idea of their numbers. Dilawar Khan’s 
son, seeing that his men were suffering from the cold 
and unable to hold their weapons, yielded to the 
representations of his officers to beat a retreat. On 
their return march they plundered the town of 
Barwa. After that they marched to Bhalan, where 
they halted for two days and lived on the plunder 
of the village. They thence returned to Dilawar 
Khan. The son through shame durst not reply to 
his father when he censured him for his cowardice 
and the failure of his expedition. 

Dilawar Khan had a slave called Husain, who 
boasted that if his master gave him an army he 
would plunder the Guru’s city, Anandpur, exact 
tribute from Raja Bhim Chand, and return home 
either with tribute or the heads of the recusant hill 
chiefs. To effect these various objects, Dilawar 
Khan gave him command of two thousand men, 
with whom he promptly marched to Anandpur. 

The Guru kept his troops in readiness to oppose 
the Muhammadans. Meanwhile the latter were 
plundering the towns and villages through which 
they marched. They also attacked and were victori- 
ous over the Raja of Dadhwal. Seeing this and also 
the strength of Husain’s army, the faithless Raja 
Bhim Chand broke his treaty with the Guru, and 
threw in his lot with his enemies. Bhim Chand, 
following the example of Raja Kripal of Kangra, 
paid tribute to Husain, and in company with other 
traitorous chiefs proceeded with him to sack and 
destroy Anandpur. On hearing this the Guru’s 
mother, Diwan Nand Chand, the Guru’s three sur- 
viving cousins, and the masands, all waited on the 
Guru. His mother said, ‘ The brave Husain with 
a large army will soon be upon us, and thou hast 
not yet prepared for battle. My son, depute some 
masand to go and make peace with him.’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ Mother dear, be not in haste. I am only 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 57 

doing the work which the immortal God assigned 
me. The same imihortal God will not allow him 
whom thou counsellest me to fear to approach me. 
He shall perish before he reacheth Anandpur.’ 

When Husain was dn his way to Anandpur, Raja 
Gopal of Guler sent an envoy to say that he desired to 
meet him. Husain replied that he would be glad to 
see Gopal if he gave him a subsidy as Raja Bhim 
Chand and Kripal had done. Raja Gopal went with 
Raja Ram Singh to meet him. Gopal took some 
money with him, and went and sat in council with 
Bhim Chand and the other hill chiefs who were 
in Husain’s camp. Husain was not pleased with 
Gopal’s contribution, and told him to go home and 
bring as much again. Gopal set out for the purpose. 
On his homeward way he changed his mind, and 
decided that it would be more profitable to fight 
with Husain than give him more money. He accord- 
ingly sent a messenger to inform him of his deter- 
mination. When Husain received this message, he 
changed his objective from Anandpur to Guler to 
do battle with Gopal. He vowed that he would first 
destroy Gopal’ s city and then march on Anandpur. 

In pursuance of his vow Husain proceeded to Guler 
and invested it. The citizens were soon reduced to 
great straits, and the army asked permission to force 
their way out and contend with the Muhammadans 
in the open field. Raj a Gopal replied, ‘ Have patience ; 
I will at once send an envoy to make peace with 
Husain.’ Husain’s terms were the payment of ten 
thousand rupees, otherwise he would put Gopal and 
his troops to death and destroy their fortress. Gopal, 
unable to accept the terms, sent an envoy to the 
Guru to pray him to negotiate the desired peace with 
Husain. The Guru accordingly sent his agent San- 
gatia with an escort of seven troopers and orders to 
conclude such a peace between the combatants as 
would be advantageous to Gopal. 

Sangatia first took counsel with Bhim Chand and 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


58 

Kripal. Bhim Chand said, ‘ O Sikh, we have been 
waiting for thee. We advise thee to send for Raja 
Gopal at once, and effect a reconciliation between 
him and Husain.’ In pursuance of this object, 
Sangatia, who knew that Bhim Chand and Kripal 
were on Husain’s side, took an oath from them 
that if he could succeed in bringing Gopal to them 
for the purpose of arranging peace, they would 
not molest him. Sangatia then went to Gopal and 
stated all the circumstances. He promised Gopal 
that the Guru would conduct him to Bhim Chand 
and Kripal who were with Husain, and again take 
him back in safety to his fort. Sangatia added that 
if Husain did not agree to peace, but accepted the 
fate of battle, Gopal should by the Guru’s favour be 
victorious. 

When Gopal reached the allied chiefs, Bhim Chand 
told him that if he paid the tribute demanded all 
would be well. Gopal still refused to pay the money, 
and said Husain might do as he pleased. Upon this, 
Kripal plotted with Bhim Chand to arrest him 
and make him over to Husain. Gopal, who heard 
their intention, contrived to elude them, and having 
retired to the protection of his army sent a message 
of defiance to his enemies. 

On one side were ranged Husain, Raja Bhim 
Chand of Bilaspur, and Raja Kripal of Kangra. On 
the other were Raja Gopal of Guler and Raja Ram 
Singh, a powerful chief who was in alliance with him. 
The fight began with indescribable vehemence. The 
Guru’s envoy Sangatia and his seven Sikhs were 
slain. Husain having fought with great bravery 
perished on the battle-field. Raja Kripal of Kangra 
was slain. Himmat and Kimmat, two of Husain’s 
officers, were also slain. On seeing this, Bhim 
Chand fled with his army. Gopal then went with 
large offerings to the Guru and thanked him for his 
support and his prayers for the victory. 

Some masands escaped to the neighbouring hills 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 59 

and proclaimed themselves gurus. In this they had 
a twofold object. The Emperor Aurangzeb sent 
his son Muazzim, afterwards known as Bahadur 
Shah, into the Panjab to collect tribute, and the 
masands feared that they should have to part with 
their wealth both to the Emperor and the Guru. It 
does not appear that the Emperor’s son remained 
long in the Panjab or committed any depredations 
there. He was succeeded by General Mirza Beg, 
who peremptorily demanded tribute from the hill 
chiefs. They represented that the masands who had 
settled in their territories, were in possession of great 
wealth of which they had plundered the Guru and 
his Sikhs, and which they might be called upon to dis- 
gorge. Mirza Beg proceeded against them, stripped 
them of all they possessed, and subjected them to ex- 
quisite tortures. Any that escaped from him were 
afterwards punished by four other equally relent- 
less officers who succeeded him. 

A third son, Jujhar Singh, was now born to the 
Guru on Sunday, the first day of the second half of the 
month of Magh, Sambat 1753, a. d. 1697. This was 
his wife Jito’s second son. 

Among those who went to the Guru to congratu- 
late him on the birth of his son were many bards, 
Sanyasis, Udasis, and Bairagis, who had often lis- 
tened to the Guru’s conversation. At that time too 
came a bard called Kuwar, son of a famous poet 
called Kesho Das of Bundhelkhand. Aurangzeb had 
tried to convert Kuwar forcibly to Islam, upon 
which he fled for protection to the Guru. He pre- 
sented a very humble metrical petition, which the 
Guru was pleased to accept. The Guru took him 
into his service on a liberal salary, and in a similar 
way welcomed all bards who came to him for 
employment. 

The practice of arms was never lost sight of at the 
Guru’s court. Even his eldest son, Ajit Singh, though 
now only ten years of age, was duly instructed in the 



6o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


use of offensive and defensive weapons. The Guru 
used to take Zorawar Singh in his lap while he 
watched A jit Singh fencing. Jujhar Singh too used 
to be brought by his nurse to witness the performance 
and imbibe from infancy a love for martial exer- 
cises. The Guru used often to inform his children 
of what the country had suffered from the Turks, 
so it behoved them to learn how to protect them- 
selves and their Sikhs. 

Jito in due time gave birth to a third son, Fatah 
Singh, who was born on Wednesday, the eleventh 
day of Phagan, Sambat 1755, a. d. 1699. This was 
the Guru’s fourth son in all. 


Chapter VIII 

One day the Sikhs asked a pandit who used to 
read epic poems to the Guru, ‘ Are the deeds attri- 
buted to Bhim, Ar j an, and others, real or exaggerated? ’ 
The pandit, thus addressed, actuated by greed, de- 
cided to mislead his questioners, and replied, ‘ Bhim, 
Arjan, and the rest were really as powerful as they 
are described to have been. This was the result of 
their sacrifices and burnt offerings in honour of 
Durga which made her visible to them.’ The Sikhs 
then prayed the pandit to show them how they 
could behold the goddess, and vanquish their 
enemies. The pandit, on hearing this, inwardly 
rejoiced that the Sikhs had at last fallen into his 
power, and, what he deemed more important, that 
he had found an opportunity of making a compe- 
tence for himself. He replied, ‘ Although no god 
or goddess becometh visible in this Kal age, yet such 
a manifestation may be possible by a due expendi- 
ture of money and by the performance of certain 
acts of devotion. Were the goddess Durga to appear, 
she would fulfil all your desires. But a great feast 
must first be celebrated, and a trial made as to who 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 6i 

are the most holy Brahmans, so that they may 
perform sacrifice and burnt offerings with the object 
of ensuring the appearance of the goddess.’ The 
Sikhs informed the Guru of this conversation. He 
said to the pandit, ‘ Your statement that the goddess 
becometh not manifest in the Kal age is not supported 
by proof. ’ If she appeared in the past ages, why 
should she not also in this ? And if she appear not 
in this age, then it is unlikely that she appeared in 
any former age. At the same time, I require not 
her blessings or curses. I am son of the Immortal, 
who is the King of gods and men, who controlleth 
millions of worlds, who is omnipotent, who cherisheth 
me ; and I have no need to adore gods or goddesses.’ ^ 

The pandit again represented that if the Sikhs 
made Durga manifest, they should be successful in 
all their battles as Durga herself had been in all her 
contests** with the demons who had made war on 
the benign deities. The Guru being thus impor- 
tuned, determined to demonstrate the hypocrisy of 
the Brahmans. He invited them all to a great feast. 
Every form of viands, including meat, was provided 
for the guests. When they were assembled, he made 
it known that he would give five gold muhars to 
each Brahman who ate meat, while to each of those 
who ate food cooked with clarified butter he would 
give five rupees. * To eat meat is really forbidden to 
all Brahmans ; yet several of them did so, induced 
by the promised reward. According to one account 
fourteen, and according to another twenty-one 
Brahmans refused the meat offered them. The 
Guru went to the Brahmans who had eaten it, 
and rebuked them, saying, ‘ You are setting a bad 
example to your people. You are not Brahmans 
but ghouls. It is to deceive men you wear the tilaks 
on your foreheads and pretend you are high priests 

1 Bhai Gyan Singh's Panth Parkash, Chapter 25. 

2 These are related in the Markandeya Puran of the Hindus. The 
work has recently been translated by Mr. F. E. Pargiter. 



62 THE SIKH, RELIGION 

of religion, but in reality you are merely Chandals, 
the lowest class of pariahs.’ The Guru, however, 
‘gave them the promised reward. 

On that occasion the Guru quoted the following 
words of Kabir : — 

Kabir, where there is divine knowledge these is virtue ; 
and where. there is falsehood there is sin ; 

Where there is covetousness there is deatlf ; where there 
is forgiveness there is God Himself. 

The Guru also quoted the following slok of Guru 
Amar Das : — 

As far as possible rely not on the covetous : 

At the last moment they will plant thee where nobody 
will lend thee a hand. 

The Brahmans who abstained from meat pressed 
the pandit’s suggestion on the Guru, ‘ If thou by 
worship and austerities can behold Durga, who is the 
living burning light of this age, she will grant thee 
any boon thou mayest desire.’ The Guru inquired, 
‘ Can you render Durga manifest ? What you propose 
is not according to my religion.’ The Brahmans 
replied that there was a Brahman called Kesho at 
Banaras who had power to render the goddess 
manifest, but he would demand large remuneration. 
The Guru again asked how a man 'filled with greed, 
such as they represented Kesho to be, could possess 
such spiritual power as to cause Durga to appear. 
The Brahmans, unable to answer this question, took 
their departure. 

The Guru utilized the assemblage at the Hindu 
festival of the Holi to organize on the following day 
a mimic warfare, which he called mahalla,^for the 
exercise of his troops. The object of the Guru has 
in recent times been obtained by the camps of exercise 
yearly established by the Indian Government.® 

^ A place for halla or contest. 

® Sardar Kahn Singh's Gurumat Prabhdkar, p. 1 34. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 63 

Kesho, who was exceedingly avaricious, heard that 
the Guru was very open-handed, and accordingly 
went to him. He said he was on his way to behold 
the goddess of Jawalamukhi, but had halted to see 
the Guru whose greatness was universally recog- 
nized. He told the Guru that he had power to render 
the goddess manifest, but the ceremonies and burnt 
offerings which would have to be performed as 
a preliminary would be very expensive. Kesho was 
supported by the other Brahmans, who again pressed 
the Guru to have the necessary ceremonies and 
burnt offerings performed. The Guru in order to 
demonstrate Kesho’ s insincerity outwardly accepted 
his offer. The Brahman on ascertaining the Guru’s 
wealth was highly pleased and promised all assistance. 
He made out a list of materials for a horn or burnt 
offering, which would cost a large sum of money. 
The Guru provided what was required, and asked 
where the horn was to be performed. The Brah- 
man replied that it must be performed in a lonely 
spot. The Guru pointed to the beautiful hill of 
Naina Devi as a place where all ceremonies could 
be performed privately and without interruption. 
The Brahman was much pleased, praised the Guru’s 
judgement and liberality, and said that the god- 
dess would certainly appear at the place indicated. 
The Guru then drdered the ground to be cleared, 
after which the Brahman proceeded to perform the 
ceremonies necessary for the goddess’s manifesta- 
tion. • 

One day the Guru went out shooting and killed 
several forest birds. On his return Kesho told him 
the goddess would never appear to any one who took 
life. The Guru replied that animals were continually 
sacrificed to the Brahman’s goddess at Jawala- 
mukhi. He then ordered his servant to let go the 
birds. When the strings with which they had been 
fastened to the Guru’s saddle were undone, it is 
said, the birds flew away. Kesho was astonished and 



64 ' THE SIKH RELIGION 

expressed himself happy at having been brought in 
contact with such a holy man as the Guru. 

The Guru had many strange presents made him. 
One day a gardener presented himself. He had 
come all the way from Patna with a young mango- 
tree as an offering. The gardener narrated how he 
had planted a garden, and vowed in the hope of 
success to give the first tree it produced to the Guru. 
He now brought the tree, and asked the Guru where 
he would have it planted. The Guru said he would 
shoot an arrow, and where it fell the tree might be 
planted. The Guru’s arrow fell far distant, and 
there the young tree was duly planted. 

After nine months’ worship and invocation of the 
goddess the pandit told the Guru that she would soon 
appear. There would be many indications of such 
a result. A disastrous earthquake would occur, 
there would be unusual lightnings, and several other 
formidable portents would appear in the heavens. 
The Guru pressed the Brahman to fix a date for the 
goddess’s appearance. The Brahman fixed the first 
day of the Nauratar — a festival in honour of Durga 
held in the month of Assu and Chet — for the pheno- 
menon. The first day of Chet passed, and she did 
not appear. The Brahman then said she would 
appear on the fifth of the Nauratar. The fifth day 
passed, and she did not appear. The Brahman then 
said that some holy person must be offered as 
a sacrifice to her, and she would afterwards un- 
doubtedly disclose herself. The Guru replied, ‘ Who 
so worthy to be offered as a sacrifice as thou ? Thou 
sayest there are none so holy as Brahmans.’ The 
pandit on hearing this began to suspect that the 
Guru meant to sacrifice him to the goddess, and, 
if this occurred, what a sad recompense it would be 
for all his labours ! He then said, ‘ If thou give 
me permission, I will go and fetch a human sacri- 
fice. The Guru replied, ‘ No ; the sacrifice is here.’ 
On this the pandit’s courage oozed forth from the 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 65 

partitions of his brain. He immediately left the 
Guru’s presence on the pretext of performing an 
office of nature, and never paused in his flight until 
he had arrived at a safe retreat. 

After Kesho had thus absconded, the Guru ordered 
that the materials which "had been collected for the 
ceremony should be thrown into the hom-pit. Upon 
this a great flame shot up towards the heavens. When 
this was seen from afar, all the spectators felt certain 
that the Guru himself had caused Durga to appear. 
The Guru drew his sword and set out for Anandpur. 
When the people asked if the goddess had appeared 
to him, he raised his sword aloft, inasmuch as to 
say that by God’s assistance his sword would per- 
form the deeds which the Brahmans attributed to 
Durga. The people then erroneously believed that 
the goddess had given him the sword.' 

The Baisakhi festival was now approaching. The 
Guru gave a great feast to which he invited all 
who were assembled in Anandpur, but omitted the 
Brahman Kesho. He, however, sent for him when 
all the guests had partaken • of the feast. Kesho 
angrily refused the invitation, and said he would 
not eat the leavings of a low-caste rabble. Diwan 
Nand Chand, on behalf of the Guru, recalled 
to Kesho’ s memory the fact that he had like a 
coward deserted him. ‘ Fine service thou didst 
perform for him, and thine anger and disappoint- 
ment are the result ! ’ Kesho on further reflection went 
to the Guru, but at the same time refused to eat the 
remains of the feast. The Guru composed the fol- 
lowing on this occasion : — 

Whatever God wrote in thy destiny thou hast obtained ; 
O Brahman, banish thy regret : 

It is not my fault that it escaped my memory ; think not 
of anger. 

I shall send thee clothes and bedding to-day; be thoroughly 
assured of this. 

1 Cyan Singh’s Panih Parkash, Chapter 25. 



66 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Kesho replied — ^All Khatris are made by the Brahmans. 

The Guru — Look on my Sikhs here with a glance of 
favour.^ 

Here the Guru began to laud his Sikhs and acknow- 
ledge the powerful assistance he had received from 
them 

My victories in battle have been through their favour ; 
through their favour I have already made gifts ; 

Through their favour all my troubles have been removed ; 
through their favour again my house is replenished ; 

Through their favour I have acquired knowledge ; through 
their kindness all my enemies have been killed ; 

Through their favour I am exalted ; otherwise there are 
millions of ordinary men like myself.* 

To serve them pleaseth my heart ; no other service is 
dear to my soul. 

To bestow gifts on them is well ; to make gifts to others 
is not profitable for my Sikhs. 

To bestow upon them will bear fruit in the next world 
and will bring honour even in this : to bestow on others is 
altogether useless. 

All the wealth of my house with my soul and body is for 
them. 

The Brahman became angry and his, heart began to fry 
and burn like dry grass. 

He wept at the custom which had been established for 
the future. 

Some writers are of opinion that the Guru, during 
the time the chroniclers state he was occupied in wor- 
shipping Durga, was in reality translating Sanskrit 
works in the seclusion and tranquillity of the moun- 
tain glades. These events occurred in Sambat 1755, 

This was said ironically. The Guru did not require Kesho’s 
assistance for his Sikhs. 

* That is, if the Sikhs had not assisted me I should be now in the 
same plight as millions of others. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 67 

A. D. 1698/ and it was on the fourteenth day of June 
of that year the Guru according to his own state- 
ment completed his translation of the Ram Avatar 
from Sanskrit into Hindi. He adds that it was 
completed at the base of the lofty Naina Devi on 
the margin of the Satluj waters. 


Chapter IX 

We have now arrived at a very critical stSge of 
our biography of the Guru, and it is necessary to 
set forth with clearness and certainty what the 
Guru really thought of idolatry or the worship of 
inanimate objects. 

On this subject the best evidence obtainable is the 
Guru’s own acknowledged compositions. In the 
Akal Ustat he writes as follows : — 

Some worshipping stones put them on their heads, some 
suspend lingams from their necks ; 

Some see God in the south, some bow their heads to the 
west ; * 

Some fools worship idols, others busy themselves with 
worshipping the dead. 

The whole world entangled in false ceremonies hath not 
found God’s secret. 

• 

Again in the same composition the Guru addressing 
an idolater wrote as follows : — 

O great beast, thou recognizest not Him whose glory 
filleth the three worlds. 

Instead of the Supreme God thou worshippest things the 
touch of which shall cause thee to lose heaven. 

By way of doing good acts thou committest sin at which 
even the greatest sins are abashed — 

^ Suraj Parkdsh^ Rut III, Chapter 29. 

2 Dakhan desk Hart ka wdsa^pachJiim Allah mukdma^ Kabir. The 
God of the Hindus dwells in the south (in Dwaraka), of the Muham- 
madans in the west (Makka). 



68 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Fall at the feet of the Supreme Being, O fool ; He is not 
in a stone. 

In the Vichitar Natak are found the following 
among other similar verses : — 

I am not a worshipper of stones, 

Nor am I satisfied with any religious garb. 

In the thirty-three Sawaiyas the Guru expresses 
himself as follows ; — 

SoriH fasten an idol firmly to their breasts, some say that 
Shiv is God ; 

Some say that God is in the temple of the Hindus ; others 
believe that He is in the mosque of the Musalmans ; 

Some say that Ram is God ; some say Krishan ; some in 
their hearts accept the incarnations as God ; 

But I have forgotten all vain religion and know .in my 
heart that the Creator is the only God. 


Why worship a stone ? God is not in a stone;. 

Worship Him as God by the worship of whom all thy sins 
shall be erased. 

And by taking whose name thou shalt be freed from all 
thy mental and bodily entanglements. 

Make the meditation of God ever thy rule of action ; no 

advantage can be obtained by the practice of fake religion. 

• 

Again the Guru writes as follows in his celebrated 
letter to the Emperor Aurangzeb : — 

I .am the destroyer of the turbulent hillmen, 

Since they are idolaters and I am a breaker of idols. 

In further evidence of the Guru’s sentiments on 
the » subject of idolatry, we have a composition, 
either written or sanctioned by himself, which is 
found in his collected works, on which to base our 
conclusion. 

There was a king called Snmat Sain married to a lady 
called Samarmati. They had four sons and an only 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 69 

daughter called Rankhaiitbh-Kala, The children were put 
under the tuition of ' a Brahman. One day the princess 
went earlier than uSual to' the Brahman’s house and found 
him worshipping and prostrating himself before a salagram 
and a lingam.^ She smiled bn seeing her tutor thus engaged, 
and asked him the reason of h'is extraordinary conduct. 

The Brahman 

This salagram, O lady, is a god whom great kings adore. 
What dost thou who art ignorant know about it ? Thou 
deemest this salagram which is god to be a stone. 

The Princess 

O great fool, thou recognizest not Him whose glory tilleth 
the three worlds. Thou worshippest this stone at whose 
touch man’s future bliss is forfeited. Thou committest sin 
to attain thine own object — such sin as other sins would be 
aghast at. O beast, fall at the feet of the great God ; He 
is not a stone. He liveth in the water, in the dry land, in 
all things, and in all monarchs. He is in the sun, in the 
moon, in the sky. Wherever thou lookest, thou mayest 
fix thy gaze on Him. He is in fire, in wind, and be- 
neath the earth. In what place is He not ? He is con- 
tained in everything. Were all the continents to become 
paper and the seven seas ink ; were all the vegetables to be 
cut down and employed as pens ; were Saraswati, the goddess 
of eloquence, to dictate and all beings to write for sixty 
ages, they could not in any way describe God. Yet, O fool, 
thou supposest Him to be a stone. 0 man, thou findest not 
God’s secret. Thou deceivest the world in every way, and 
finest thy coffers with wealth as the reward of thy decep- 
tion. Thou art thyself called by the world a clever and 
Wise pandit, but thou worshippest a stone and therefore 
tfiou appearest to me to have abdicated thy reason. While 

^ The lingam sacred to Shiv is the symbol of procreation. It was 
worshipped in ancient times in Rome as it is now in India. The 
author saw a lingam in the temple of Venus in Pompeii, and was 
informed by his Italian guide that it was a stone on which barren 
women used to sit in the hope of offspring. ‘ 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


70 

uttering ‘ Shiv, Shiv ’ with thy mouth, thy heart is filled 
with greed. Thou practisest excessive hypocrisy before the 
world, and art not ashamed to beg from door to door. 
Thou remainest for nearly two hours holding thy nose as 
if thou wert practising Jog. Thou standest on one leg 
invoking Shiv. If any one pass by and give thee one paisa, 
thou pickest it up with thy teeth, and forgettest thy gods. 
Thou givest instruction to others, but meditatest not on God 
thyself. Thou ever preachest to people to despise money. 
Yet for that very money thou beggest at the doors of high 
and low, and art not ashamed to debase thyself before even 
the meanest of thy fellow creatures. Thou sayest that 
thou art holy, but thou art very unholy. Thou callest 
thyself contented, but thou art very discontented, and only 
leaves! one door to go and beg at another. Thou makes! 
a clay idol of Shiv, and having worshipped it throwest it 
into the river. When thou returnest home thou settest up 
another in its place. Thou fullest at its feet, and rubbest 
thy forehead on the ground for an hour. Think what it 
hath to give thee. Thou worshippest the symbol of pro- 
creation, and fallest before it believing it to be Shiv. Thou 
callest a stone God, but it will not avail thee. Since the 
stone belongeth to the lowest order of creation, say what 
shall it give thee even if propitiated and pleased with thee ? 
Even if it at any time make thee like itself, thou shalt be 
no better than a stone. Great simpleton, be assured that, 
when thy life hath departed, it will be too late for thee to 
know anything of God. . Thou hast passed thy childhood 
without prayer, but even in thy manhood thou hast not 
repeated God’s name. Thou hast induced others to give 
charity, but never lifted thy hand to assist another. Thou 
hast bent thy head to stones, but never to God. O fool, 
entangled in thy domestic affairs, thy life thou hast passed 
in procrastination. Having read one or two Purans, O 
Brahman, thou art swollen with conceit. .Thou hast not 
read the Puran through which all the sins of this life may 
be erased. It is for the sake of show thou practisest 
penance. Day and night thy mind is absorbed in lucre. 
Fools accept thy statements, but not I. Why practisest 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 71 

thou so much hypocrisy ? For what object adorest thou 
a stone ? Thou hast forfeited thy happiness here and 
hereafter. Thou givest false instruction and gladly accept* 
est all payment which thou claimest. It is enough that 
thou hast given evil instruction to my brothers ; instruct 
not me. 


The Brahman 

Hear me, O princess, thou hast not considered Shiv’s 
greatness. Ever worship the gods Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Shiv. Thou knowest not their greatness, and that is why 
thou talkest in that way. Know that they are the oldest 
of all the gods, and do thou recognize them as the lords of 
the world. I am, O princess, a fasting Brahmain, and love 
all both high and low. I communicate instruction to all and 
induce even great misers to practise charity. 

The Princess 

Thou communicatest spells in order to make disciples. 
Thou then takest money as offerings from them in whatever 
way thou canst, but thou teachest them not the truth, and 
marrest their happiness in this world and the next. Hear, 
O Brahman, thou plunderest in whatever way thou canst 
those to whom thou givest thine initiatory spell. The 
fools receive no divine knowledge from thee, but are fleeced 
for their pains. Thou tellest them that thy spell shall be 
advantageous to them, and that Shiv will grant them a 
boon. When the spells turn out imsuccessful, thou pre- 
tendest that they have omitted some necessary ceremony, 
cind that is why they have not been successful. Thou next 
tellest them to give alms to Brahmans and perform the 
spell by which they might behold the god. Thou takest 
a fine from them when they ought to take it from thee for 
misleading them, and in return for their money thou givest 
them the same spell over again. Thou leadest them astray 
all along the line, and at last thou tellest them that they 
have omitted certain words,' or that something interrupted 
the ceremonies to account for the non-appearance of the 
god and his failure to grant the de»red blessing. On 



72 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


this thou counsellest them to again give thee alms. O 
Br ahman , that is the sort of spell thou teachest those whose 
houses thou designest to plunder. And when thy victims 
become poor, thou goest to spy out others. Were thine 
incantations and spells efficacious, thou wouldst sit as a 
monarch at home and not go about begging. 

The Brahman filled with anger and heaping curses on 
the princess, said, ‘ How canst thou know mine affairs ? 
Thou talkest as if thou hadst taken bhang.’ 

The Princess 

Hear, O Brahman, it is thou who knowest not what thou 
sayest. Thou addressest me in an insolent manner. My 
senses are not stolen away by bhang. Whither have thine 
own senses gone without it ? Thou callest thyself wise in that 
thou never takest bhang even by mistake, but when thou 
goest a-begging, thou insultest, as if under the influence of 
bhang, him whose house thou visitest. Why beg from 
door to door for the money thou pretendest to despise ? 
Thou goest to rajas and takest morsels from them. Thou 
sayest thou hast abandoned all worldly things and preachest 
to everybody to do the same. Why stretchest thou forth 
thy hand to grasp what thou pretendest to renounce ? To 
one man thou preachest to renounce wealth, to another thou 
sayest that he is under the influence of malignant stars, and 
therefore he ought to pay thee for deliverance therefrom. 
It is in the hope of cheating people thou wanderest from 
door to door. Thou recitest the Veds, the Shastars, and 
the Simritis, so that a double paisa may fall to thee from 
some one. Thou praisest him who givest thee anything 
and revilest him who refuseth. In this way thou hopest to 
obtain alms from all people; But thou reflectest not that 
praise and blame are every one’s lot while alive, but affect 
not the dead. Thou canst not confer salvation on those 
who give thee alms, nor canst thou kill the son or father 
of him who giveth thee none. I only accept him as a 
Brahman who deemeth the givers arid the refusers, praise 
and blame as the same. O Brahman, the man from whom 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 73 

thou extortest money, or whom thou pleasest with thy 
varied flatteries, shall at last go to hell in thy company. 

Brahmans, though they say they have abandoned the 
world, are lovers of wealth, and in quest of it go to die 
either in Banaras or Kumaun. Some through, greed for 
money twist their matted hair round their heads. Others 
put on a wooden necklace and go forth shamelessly to the 
forest. Others again, taking tweezers, pluck out all the 
hair of their heads. The Brahmans practise hypocrisy in 
order to plunder the world, and they thus lose their happi- 
ness both here and hereafter. They make a clay lingam 
and worship it, but it hath no power for good or evil. Why 
do men who know that the lingam hath no light in it, light 
a lamp before it ? And why do very foolish and obstinate 
persons thinking it God fall down before it ? Thoughtless 
one, think of God and quickly cast away thy mind’s 
indecision. They who have studied for a long time in 
Banaras go at last to die in Bhutan. Having acquired 
a little learning thou leavest thy home and wanderest 
from country to country. Thy father and mother thou 
hast left somewhere ; thy wife, thy son, and thy son’s wife 
cannot find thee. No one hath passed beyond the goal of 
covetousness ; it hath beguiled adl people. 

Thou shavest the heads of some, on others thou imposest 
fines, and on others again thou puttest wooden necklaces. 
To one thou teachest spoken, to another written, and to 
a third other forms of incantations, yet thou conferrest no 
abiding spiritual knowledge. Some thou showest how to 
argue on learned subjects, but to all thou settest an example 
of covetousness in thine efforts to obtain wealth to the best 
of thine ability. Thou showest no mercy and never pro- 
pitiatest God, O fool, but worshippest clay. It is on this 
account thou art doomed to wander begging. Think, 
thoughtless one, on Him who made men conscious ; why 
deemest thou Him unconscious ? Why call a stone God ? 
Why sellest thou thy precious soul under its value ? Thou 
knowest nothing, great simpleton, and yet thou calle^t 
thyself a superior pandit. Diest thou not of shame, O great 
boaster ? In thy pride thou forfeitest thine honour. Thou 



74 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


callest thyself a prophet and pretendest to know the future, 
but yet thou knowest not even the past. Thou thinkest 
thyself very handsome and able, and claimest to be con- 
tinent and physically strong. Thou sayest that Shiv is 
certainly in the stone, but, O great fool, thou knowest 
nothing. 0 clever man, consider in what part of the stone 
Parbati’s lord is. Say what spiritual perfection thou attain- 
est by bowing thy head to clay ? He whom the world 
cannot please will not be pleased by thy offerings of rice. 
Thou bumest incense, blowest shells, and rainest a shower 
of flowers. Thou growest weary in thine endeavours, but 
findest not God in a stone. To those who accept not thine 
incantations and spells thou recitest songs and verses. In 
broad daylight thou stealest wealth from men’s houses. 
Thieves, pickpockets, and robbers seeing thy cleverness are 
ashamed of their ignorance. Thou payest no heed to the 
magistrate or the judge. Thou livest by cheating thy 
disciples. 

Rich people are like flowers, clever men like thee are the 
bumble-bees which, unmindful of their homes, continue to 
buzz over them. Every one is at last in Death’s power, 
and yet men have departed without resigning the craving 
for wealth. There are no bounds to this desire. It is the 
only thing in this world that surviveth. 

You shave the heads of some, you send others to places 
of pilgrimages, and at the same time ask for all they possess. 
Those thou seest wealthy thou entanglest in the narrow 
door^ and leviest a tax at so much per head on them. 
Thou then lettest them pass. It is thirst for money not 
love of God that actuateth Brahmans. 

^ In Gaya, Kamaksha, and other places of Hindu pilgrimage there 
is an aperture in a wall through which pilgrims are bidden to pass 
with the object of securing deliverance. When the pilgrim is a rich 
man, he is by some secret mechanism caught in the aperture and 
told that he cannot pass on account of his many sins and enormities. 
He is then obliged to vow to perform certain penances and make 
certain presents to the Brahmans. He is only allowed to pass through 
the aperture when the promised money has been paid down. — TAa^ 
Lila, p. 34. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 75 


The Brahman 

Hear, 0 my daughter, thou understandest noti Thou 
thinkest that he whom we call Shiv is a stone. All people 
bow their heads to Brahmans, and apply to their foreheads 
the water in which they have washed their feet. The whole 
world worshippeth them, while thou, O foolish girl, slan- 
derest them. This salagram is the primal and ancient 
Brahm and is prized even by monarchs. 

The Princess 

Hear, O foolish Brahman, thou knowest nothing. Thou 
recognizest a stone as the Primal Light of the world. 
Thou thinkest it holdeth the Supreme Being. Thou hast 
taken leave of thy senses. Deceive me not, but take what 
thou desirest to take. Tell me not that a stone is God. 
While telling fools so, thou plunderest them to thy heart’s 
content. Thou sendest men to rivers of pilgrimage to 
drown them in superstition. Thou makest unnumbered 
efforts to strip them of their wealth and not allow them to 
take a paisa home. Thou pretendest to find a number 
of inauspicious circumstances connected with, a rich man, 
so that he may give thee feasts to bribe thee to intercede 
for him. When thou knowest that a man hath spent all his 
wealth, thou never lookest at him. Brahmans hover over 
money like ravens, and quarrel like kites over a fish or 
dogs over a bone. In public thou expoundest the Veds, 
but in thy heart is worship of money. Thou findest not 
God, thy money soon departeth, and vain is all thy service. 
Thou paradest thy learning, but knowest not how to unite 
men with God. Thou callest thyself wise and me a fool. 
What if thou, O idiot, eat not bhang, even still thou art 
not in thy senses. Everybody can see this for himself. 
Brave men taking bhang fight and draw elephant’s teeth, 
and grasping the scimitar and lance fearlessly smite their 
enemies. Say, O tyrant, what couldst thou do even wert 
thou to take bhang ? Thou wouldst even then, if engaged 
in combat, fall on thy face like a corpse through fright. 



76 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Hear, O Brahman, give instruction to fools, save me from 
thy lies, and preach thy falsehood to others. Why passest 
thou leather for metallic coin ? Thou shalt go to terrible 
hell, and be born again as a pariah. Hung up by the heels 
thou shalt be tortured in the house of Death. When thou 
and all thy relations are suffering, what answer wilt thou 
make ? Say what books wilt thou then read, and wilt 
thou then worship the lingam ? Wilt thou find Shiv and 
Krishan there where God will send thee bound ? Where 
thou hast no son, mother, father, or brother, will Ram 
come to thine assistance ? Ever bow thy head to the great 
God whom the fourteen worlds fear, whom all recognize as 
the Creator and Destroyer, who hath no form or outline, 
whose dwelling, appearance, and name are unknown. By 
what name shall I speak of Him since He cannot be spoken 
of ? He hath no father, mother, or brother, no son or 
grandson. Unlike Ram Chandar or Krishan He hath no 
male or female nurse. He needeth no army to give Him 
dignity. What He saith is true, and what He desireth He 
doeth. Some He regenerateth, and others He consigneth 
to perdition. He buildeth, fashioneth, createth, and again 
destroyeth. It is the great God I recognize as my Guru. 
I am His disciple and He is my priest. I am a girl made 
by Him. O Brahman, I worship the great God. A stone 
is not to my mind. I call a stone a stone. On this account 
people are displeased with me. I call what is false false — 
a matter which is disagreeable to all. I ‘tell the truth, and 
pay no regard to any one. As for thee, O Brahman, art 
thou not ashamed of thy conduct ? Fix thy thoughts even 
for a brief period on God. 

The Brahman 

God will consider him a sinner who saith that this stone 
is other than God, and will cast into hell any one who 
useth profane language regarding it. It is the primal and 
ancient God. 

The Princess 

1 only worship the one great God. I regard not Shiv. 
Nor do I worship either Brahma or Vishnu. I fear not 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 77 

your gods. Know that whoever invoketh them is already 
dead, but death will not approach him who meditateth on 
the Deathless One. He who meditateth on the Deathless 
One and even once invoketh His name, shall obtain wealth 
and perfection in every act. He who meditateth on the 
immortal God shall never suffer, but enjoy great happiness 
in the world. When death tortureth thee, O Brahman, 
what book wilt thou then read ? Will it be the Bhagavat ^ 
or the Gita ? Wilt thou hold on to Ram or clutch at 
Krishan for protection ? The gods whom thou deemest 
supreme have all been destroyed by Death’s mace. None^ 
not even Brahma, Vishnu, or Indar — may escape it. The 
gods were born as the demons were, and both are subject 
to transmigration. The Hindus and the Turks are the 
same, and death is potent over them all. Sometimes the 
demons killed the gods, and sometimes the gods the demons. 
The Being who destroyed both gods and demons is He who 
cherisheth me, and whom I have taken as my Guru. I bow 
to Him whose sovereignty is recognized in the fourteen 
worlds, who destroyed Indar, Vishnu, the sun, the moon,* 
Kuver, Varun, and Sheshnag. 

The Brahman 

Shiv removeth all the sins of him who worshippeth this 
stone. He who forsaketh this god and worshippeth another 
shall fall into hell. He who giveth money to a Brahman 
shall obtain tenfold in the next world. He who giveth to 
other than a Brahman shall derive no advantage therefrom. 

The Poet 

Upon this the princess took the lingam in her hand, 
struck the Brahman with it, and smashed all his teeth. 
She then took away all the Brahman’s property. 

The Princess 

Say now, O Brahman, whither hath gone thy Shiv ? He 
whom thou hast ever served hath broken thy teeth. The 

^ One of the eighteen Purans. 

, ^ The Sikhs believe in the different creations and destructions of the 
world. 



78 THE SIKH RELIGION 

idol which thou hast spent thy life in invoking, hath at last 
entered thy mouth. 

The Poet 

All the property the Princess took from the Brahman she 
distributed among other Brahmans and then said to her 
antagonist, ‘ Never mind, thou shalt receive tenfold in the 
next world.’ ^ 

The Princess 

Thou sayest to others, ‘ Bestow your wealth or spend 
it ’ — thou who art so miserly that thou puttest not turmeric 
into the dal thou eatest. Thou art very deceitful and goest 
about for the purpose of deceit. Thou publicly plunderest 
people in the market-place. Thou spendest not a kauri 
and art ever begging. Calling girls thy daughters thou 
deflourest them. Thy mother was greed, thy father 
avarice, and thou art the incarnation of meanness. While 
practising greed thou boastest of thy prodigality, so that 
people may think thee a monarch. Thou art utterly worth- 
less. If any one knew the incantations thou pretendest to 
know he would not have to beg from door to door. By 
repeating even once such an incantation as thou boastest of, 
thou mightest fill thy house with wealth. Ram and Krishan 
of whom thou speakest, and those whom thou worshippest 
as Shiv and Brahma, were all destroyed by Death. In due 
time God will again give them birth. How many Ram 
Chandars and Krishans ! How many Brahmas, Shivs, and 
Vishnus ! The sun and moon — what are these poor wretches ? 
Simply water-carriers at God’s door. They were created in 
due time and Death sheill destroy them all. The Vishnu who 
was cursed by Jalandhar’s wife® and became a stone, thou 
callest a great god. Art thou not ashamed of thyself ? 

^ The princess is here casting up the Brahman’s wprds to him. 

® The legend is as follows: — ^Jalandhar was destroying the gods 
and none could withstand him as he had a virtuous wife. It was 
proposed to Vishnu to tempt her, and he accordingly simulated 
Jalandhar and approached her. Recognizing Vishnu by a particular 
mark on his side, the result of a kick given him by Bhrigu, a Rikhi, 
she cursed him, and he became the s^IagrSm stone. Vishnu in turn 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 


79 


The Brahman 

I will go to the Raja thy father and have thee imprisoned. 

The Princess 

I will tell him a different story, and have both thy hands 
cut off. Then shall I Se really the king’s daughter. 

The Brahman 

I will promise to do what thou tellest me provided thou 
dismiss thy wrath. 

The Princess 

Worship not stones, fall at the feet of the great God. 

The Poet 

Then the Brahman fell at the feet of the great God, and 
threw his idols into the river. 

Bhai Nand Lal,^ who was a famous Sikh of Guru 
Gobind Rai, and wrote several works in the Persian 
language on the Sikh religion, thus delivered him- 
self in his Jot Bikas : ‘ Thousands of Brahmas 
praise Guru Nanak, for his glory exceedeth that of 
them all. Thousands of Shivs and Indars place 
themselves at his feet, for his throne is more exalted 
than theirs. Thousands of Vishnus, many Rams 
and Krishans, thousands of Durgas and Gorakhs 
sacrifice themselves at his feet.’ Bhai Nand Lai 
further on writes that as Guru Nanak, so were all the 
Gurus his successors, including Guru Gobind Rai. 
It is therefore inferred that, so far from Guru Gobind 
Rai worshipping or doing homage to the goddess 
Durga, she was an insignificant _ entity who did 
homage to him. 

cursed her, and she became the tulsi plant, and grew where the 
salagram fell. 

^ An account of Bhai Nand Lai will subsequently be given. 



8o 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chapter X 

What is called the Granth of the tenth Guru is 
only partially his composition. The greater portion 
of it was written by bards in his employ. The two 
works entitled Chandi Charitar find the Bhagauti ki 
War found in it are abridged translations by dif- 
ferent hands ^ of the Durga Sapt Shati, or seven 
hundred sloks on the subject of Durga, an episode in 
the ‘ Markandeya Puran ’ on the contests of the 
goddess Durga with the demons who had made war 
on the gods. 


Chandi Charitar I ® 

The poet in the Guru’s employ, who translated 
this, states that he did it for amusement, but adds : 
‘ The man who heareth or readeth this for any object 
shall assuredly obtain it.’ This line is an abstract 
of the eleventh and twelfth sloks of the ninety-second 
canto of the original. The translator then darkly 
refers to a special object of his own. ‘ I have trans- 
lated the book called the Durga Sapt Shati, the equal 
of which there is none. O Chandi, grant the object 
with which the poet has translated.’ The translator’s 
object, however, is not stated. Whether he imbibed 
some of the principles of Sikhism or not from the 
Guru cannot be ascertained, but it is clear that he 
was largely tinctured with Hinduism. 

Chandi Charitar II 

At the end of this translation is found the couplet : — 

The saints who continually meditate on thee, O Chandi, 

Shall at last obtain salvation and find God as their reward. 

^ Any one even moderately acquainted with Hindi can tell from 
the internal evidence of style that these translations have been done 
by different persons. 

® European readers not familiar with Indian words, and not in- 
terested in the Hindi translations of the Durga Sapt Shati (Devi 
MahStamya) or their object, may omit the remainder of this chapter. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBINU SINGH 8i 

This is not in the original Sanskrit, but the general 
sense may be inferred by a believer in Chandi from 
her own self-glorification in the ninety-second canto. 

The first Chandi Charitar begins as follows : Ek 
odmhar, Sri Wahgwup kifatah. Ath Chandi Charitar 
ukt hilas—lAo'fr the tale (bilas) of the deeds of Chandi 
will be told (ukt). The second Chandi Charitar 
begins in the same way but without the words ukt 
Mias. The Bhagauti ki War begins as follows : 
Ek oamkar Sri Wahguru ji ki fatah ! Sri Bhagauti ji 
sahai ! War Sri Bhagauti ji ki Patshahi das — There 
is one, God. Victory to the holy Wahguru! We 
implore the favour of the holy Bhagauti (Sword) ! The 
p^an of the holy Bhagauti of the tenth Guru. 
It thus appears that the Bhagauti ki War was written 
by the tenth Guru himself. 

The Hindus maintain that in the tenth Guru’s 
writings the word Bhagauti means Durga. In the 
two Chandi Charitars the word Bhagauti does not 
occur at all, and even in the Bhagauti ki War it is 
only found three times — once in the title of the 
composition, a second time in the first line, and 
a third time elsewhere. In the latter instance, Lai 
Bhcigauti . Durg shah, it is clear that the word 
Bhagauti means a sword — ‘ The goddess Durga took 
up the sword.’ This is also attested by Gur Das. 
In the sixth paurr of his twenty-fifth War he refers 
to the manner in which the signification of words is 
often altered, and writes — Nam bhagauti loh gharaya 
— Man hath fashioned what is called, the sword 
{bhagauti) from iron. 

In further proof that Bhagauti does not mean 
Durga in the Sikh scriptures the following line 
in the Ad Granth is cited — BhagauH mudra mark 
mohiya maya, the translation of which is — Men 
wear God’s, marks while dieir minds are fascinated 
with mammon. 

The following are the first two pauris of the ‘ War 
Sri Bhagauti ji ki.’ 

SIKH. V 


G 



82 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


J Having first remembered the Sword> meditate on Guru- 
Nanidc; 

. Then on Guru. Angadj Amar Das, and Ram Das ; may 
they assist me t 

Remember Arjan, Har Gdbind, add the hely Hari Rai ; 

‘i lfeditate on the holy Hari Krishan, a sight of whom dis- 
pelled sill sorrows. 

. Remember Teg Bahadur and the nine treasures shall come 
hasteniM to your homes. ' 

'\1fe Gurus, everywhere assist us ! 

‘ i ' . ' 

God having first fashioned the Sword created the whole 
tvorid. 

- He created Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv, and made them 
the sport of His omnipotence ; 

He made the seas and mountains of the earth, and sup- 
poirted the firmament without pillars ; 

■ He made J;he demons and the demigods, and exdted 
dissension among them. 

Having created Durga, O God, Thou didst destroy the 
demons.! 

From Thee alone Ram received his power, and slew 
Rawan with his arrows. 

> From Thee alone Krishan received his power, seized Kans 
by the hair, and dashed him on the ground. 

• V4ry great munis and gods mortified their bodies for many 
ages. 

But none of them found Thy limit. 

The last line of the Bhagauti ki War is : — 

He who sang this was not born again, that is, he obtained 
^liverance. 

‘ This line gives the meaning of the twenty-second 
ilbk of the ninety-second canto of the ^ Markandeya 
Putan 

''The train -Of thought by which the Guru made 

line, showft .tfiat the Gpru believed Durga to be a creation 
of God atid not an independent divinity co- equal or co-powerful 
with Him and worthy of human worship. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 83 

God and the sword one was a,s follows : In the 
‘ Shastar Nam Mala ’ is read : — 

I first mention the word shatru (an enemy), and then the 
word daman (subduer). 

Know that the words compounded mean the Lord of the 
world : be assured of this. 

The meaning is — God subdues enemies, so does 
the sword ; therefore the sword is Gt>d, and- God is 
the sword. 

At that time it was the custom to recite on the 
eve of battle the praises and warlike deeds of the 
brave, so that the hearts even of cowards might be 
inspired with eagerness for the fray. On that 
account the tenth Guru maintained fifty-two bards 
to translate the Mahabharat, the Ramayan, and 
the gallant achievements of Ram, Krishan, Chandi, 
and others. It does not follow from this that the 
Guru worshipped those whose acts were thus cele- 
brated ; this was only done for the purpose of 
inciting to bravery, dispelling cowardice, and filling 
the hearts of his troops with valour to defend theit 
faith. This the Guru himself declares in his transla- 
tion of the tenth canto of the Bhagawat, in which 
are recounted the chivalrous exploits of Krishan. 
He says, ‘ I have rendered in the vulgar dialect the 
tenth chapter of the Bhagawat with no other Object 
than to inspire ardour for religious warfare.’ 

Secondly, the Guru himself specially translated 
the praises of Chandi so that they might be chanted 
for warlike purposes, and that even cowards on 
hearing her story might obtain courage and the 
hearts of the brave beat with fourfold enthusiasm. 
Such being the achievements of a woman, what 
ought not a brave man to accomplish ? The Guru 
maintained that if a man became a coward and 
turned away from the battle-field, he would not only 
become ashamed of himself, but also forfeit his 
advantages here and hereafter. 



84 THE SIKH RELIGION 

In the third place, the Guru desired that his Sikhs, 
on becoming acquainted with the Hindu sacred 
writings, might be able to form their own estimate 
of them and their inferiority to the compositions of 
the Gurus. Among the fifty-two bards employed by 
the Guru there must have been several who had 
suffered for their religion under the persecutions of 
Aurangzeb ; and for their opinions the Guru cannot 
be held responsible.^ 

Chapter XI 

The Guru directed all the masands to appear with 
their Sikh constituents before him at Anandpur at 
the Baisakhi festival, held about the middle of 
the month of April. They collected large sums of 
money as a preparation for their journey. Half they 
kept for tl^eir own use, and half they placed before 
the Guru. The Guru then addressed them, ‘O 
brother masands, you have been the servants of the 
Guru’s house since the time of Guru Ram Das. 
You used formerly to collect large sums of money. 
Why have you brought so little this year for the 
support of the faith ? ’ The masands replied, ‘ O true 
Guru, the rich Sikhs are all dead, and we must take 
what we can obtain from the survivors.’ The Guru 
rejoined, ‘Say not that my Sikhs are poor. I am 
going to make them all kings. If you desire your 
welfare, disgorge the offerings you have received 
from them.’ The masands became angry, and began 
to say among themselves, ‘ The Guru is of our own 
making. Did we not contribute the money necessary 
for his maintenance, no one would call him a Guru.’ 

1 The masands left the Guru’s court and went to 
complain to Bhai Chetu, the eldest member of their 
body who had survived since the days of Guru Ram 
Das. They represented to him that no Guru had 
previously fovmd fault mt}x them, but now Guru 

' Bhai Dit Singh’s Durga Prahodh. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 85 

Gobind Rai had threatened them with serious conse- 
quences. Chetu promised to speak to the Gmru on 
their behalf, but at the same time reminded themi 
that he was at the youthful age when men utter 
praise and blame without due discrimination. 

Chetu kept his promise and spoke to the Guru on 
behalf of the masands, ‘ True king, the masands are 
all thy servants. I beg thee to treat them with 
respect, so that the Sikhs may follow thy example. 
The next time they come they will bring a larger 
amount of money for the supply of thy public 
kitchen.’ The Guru replied, ‘ Ask their brother 
Sikhs here what language the masands have been 
using regarding me. They have stolen the Guru's 
money and deposited it in their own homes. They 
are very proud. They admit not the Guru’s power. 
They have called my Sikhs poor, whereas I am daily 
advancing them and bestowing on them the sove- 
reignty of the country. And, finally, the masands 
are telling me falsehoods.’ Chetu begged the Guru 
to pardon them. The Guru then said that Chetu 
had countenanced them in embezzling the offerings, 
and that he too deserved punishment like his fellows. 
At this Chetu began to storm and pretend innocence. 
The Guru was now thoroughly satisfied that the 
masands had arrived at a pass where they did not 
believe in any Guru, and that their insolence must 
be checked. He therefore decided that, as the human 
Guruship must end with himself, so must his Sikhs 
be freed from the tyranny of the masands. 

Chetu went to the Guru’s mother, and threatened 
that if the Guru disowned the masands, the Sikhs 
would go in a body to Dhir Mai, and the Guru 
would be left without any means of support. 
When the Guru heard this, he said, ‘ Be not anxious, 
O mother, my public kitchen belongeth to the im- 
mortal God, and He will supply it with provisions.’ 

It happened that at that time a man arrived at 
Anandpur from Chetu’s district. He had given 



86 iTHE 'SIKH RELIGION 

Chetu a set of bracelets ma<Je of rhinoceros hide 
as a present for the Guru’s mother. When Chetu 
was questioned, he said he had duly given her the 
bracelets, but it was satisfactorily proved that he 
had not, and that he had been prevailed on by his 
wife to bestow, them on her. Chetu was duly pun- 
ished for his dishonesty. 

The Guru continued to receive many complaints 
against the masands. One of them in particular 
bUleted himself on a poor Sikh, and claimed sweets 
instead of the crushed pulse and unleavened bread 
which formed the staple food of his host. The 
masand took the bread, threw it into his host’s face, 
and dashed the crushed pulse on the ground. He 
then began to abuse the Sikh, and would not cease 
until the poor man had sold his wife’s petticoat to 
provide him with sweets. When the Guru was 
informed of this he set about punishing the masand. 
He ordered that henceforth the Sikhs should them- 
selves present their offerings, and that the employ- 
ment of the masands for the purpose should cease. 

One day a company of mimes went to perform 
before the Guru. He ordered them to imitate the 
masands. One of them accordingly dressed as 
a masand, two as a masand’ s servants, and a fourth 
as a masand’ s courtesan riding behind him on horse- 
back as he went to collect offerings for the Guru. 
The mimes portrayed to life the villanies and oppres- 
sion practised by the masands. The Guru upon this 
finally resolved to free his Sikhs from their t3n‘anny. 
He ordered that all the masands should be arraigned 
for their misdemeanours. He listened in every case 
to their defences and explanations, punished those 
whom he found guilty, and pardoned those who 
succeeded in estamishing their innocence. Among 
the latter was a masand called Pheru, of whom 
mention has been made in the hfe of Guru Har Rai. 
Pheru lived in the country then called Nakka, 
between the rivers Ravi and Bias. The Guru ordered 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIN© SINGH 87 

that he should be brought before him* The Guru 
remembered an expression used fey Gufu Har Rai 
to Pheru, ‘ My purse is at thy disposal. Speind what 
thou pleasest from it/ Guru Gobihd . Rai added; 
‘ The purse is thine, and its disposal is also thine.’ 
Pheru replied, ‘ Great king, thine is the purse and 
thine also its disposal : whether I am bad or good 
I am thine.’ The Guru knowing him to be without 
guile acquitted him, and with his own hands invested 
him with a robe of honour. Some other masands 
too were acquitted as the result of Pheru’ s pleadings 
on their behalf. 

Once a company of Udasis brought the Guru 
a copy of the Granth Sahib, written with great 
elegance, for his attestation and signature. At that 
time no Granth was accepted as correct unless 
countersigned by the Guru. But petitioners had 
first to approach his minister, Diwan Nand Chand, 
and submit the work to him for approval. The 
latter observing the beautiful penmanship of the 
volume formed the dishonest intention of appro- 
priating it. He told the Udasis to come in a month’s 
time, and he would meanwhile find some means 
of obtaining the Guru’s signature. When they 
returned after the expiration of that period, he told 
them he had not yet had an opportunity of speaking 
to the Guru on •the subject, and suggested their 
waiting for another ten days. By similar subter- 
fuges he kept the Udasis going backwards and for- 
wards in suspense for six months. At the end of 
that time he asked them to take the price of 
the Granth Sahib from him, and prepare another 
for the Guru’s approval. The Udasis refused, 
whereupon he had them forcibly expelled from 
Anandpur. 

One day, when the Guru went hunting, the Udasis 
found an opportunity of complaining to him of 
Nand Chand’s conduct. The Guru at once ordered 
that their Granth should be restored to them. Nand 



88 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Cha>ad setit a message to the Guru that he was ready 
to return the book, but at the same time told the 
Udasis to leave the place at once if they valued 
their safety. If they made any further complaint 
to the Guru, they should be imprisoned and put to 
death. The Udasis were, however, not so easily 
deterred. They bided their time to approach 
the Guru on another occasion. They com- 
plained that Nand Chand had disobeyed his 
order, forcibly expelled them from the city, and 
threatened them with death in the event of their 
return and making a further complaint against him. 
The Guru sent a severe message to Nand Chand, 
‘ Evil days have come for thee. As I treated the 
masands so shall I treat thee. If thou desire thine 
own welfare, restore their Granth Sahib to the 
Udasis.’ When the Guru’s message was communi- 
ca,ted to Nand Chand, he said, ‘ Go away ; I will 
not return the Granth Sahib. See, my friends, how 
the Guru seeketh to frighten me. Were I to shake 
the dust off the skirt of my coat, I could make many 
Gurus like him.’ The Sikhs replied, ‘ Very well ; 
let the Guru come to thee, and thou shalt see. He 
will draw no distinction between thee and thy 
brother masands.’ 

Nand Chand, shrinking from the consequences of 
his temerity, fled with the Granth* Sahib to Kartar- 
pur. When the Guru heard that he had fled through 
fear of death, he repUed, ‘ Death will reach him 
there too.’ When Nand Chand reached Kartarpur, 
he sent a message to Dhir Mai, ‘ Hundreds of thou- 
sands of Sikhs adhere to thy cause ; they will all 
worship thee, and make thee the Guru of the world. 
It is in my power to-day to raise thee to that emi- 
nence.’ Nand Chand was, however, seriously dis- 
trusted at Kartarpur. It was suspected that he had 
come from the Guru to practise some treachery — 
cither to kill Dhir Mai or take possession of the town. 
Efliir Mai consulted his masands as to what was best 



LIFE OF GURU GO^BIND SINGH 89 

to be done. They advised that Nand Chand should 
be put to death according to the following strata- 
gem. As he came to pay a visit, a musketeer 
should be hidden within the house to fire at him. 
This was agreed on. When Nand Chand entered 
Dhir Mai’s anteroom, he received a bullet in the 
thigh. As he staggered, the doors were closed to 
prevent his escape, and he then received several 
fatal bullets from the roof which had been opened 
for the purpose. 

One day the Guru saw two horsemen pass his 
place and then make a diversion towards the Satluj . 
They were Gurdas and his brother Tara, great-grand- 
sons of Bhai Bahilo and masands of Ram Rai, who 
had come to seek the Guru’s protection, but whose 
courage failed them at the last moment. The Guru 
caused them to be brought before him. In reply 
to his messenger’s questions they had said that they 
were Bairars. When they appeared before the Guru, 
he detected their disguise and asked why they had 
falsely represented themselves as Bairars. They told 
their history. The Guru on his visit on a former 
occasion to Dehra, believing them to be trustworthy, 
allowed them to remain there with Panjab Kaur, 
Ram Rai’s widow, for her protection. The other 
masands had poisoned Panjab Kaur’s mind against 
them, and they now fled to the Guru for protection. 
On arriving at Anandpur they had heard of the 
Guru’s treatment of other masands, and through 
fear turned aside to avoid him. The Guru compli- 
mented them as the descendants of Bhai Bahilo on 
their finally confessing the truth to him, and men- 
tioned the respect in which Bhai Bahilo had been 
held by the preceding Gurus. After their repentance 
the Guru entertained them for some years, and then 
allowed them to depart to their homes. 

The Guru always held the belief that it would be 
proper and advantageous to his Sikhs to wear long 
hair and otherwise not alter man’s God-given body. 



90 


THj: SIKH RELIGION 


and he often broached the subject to them. On one 
occaaon they rephed that, if they wore long hair, 
they would be subjected to the banter and annoyance 
of both Hindus and Muhammadans. The Guru then 
suggested that they should wear arms, and be at 
all times ready to defend themselves. This advice 
was adopted. 

In ancient times the Guru said it was the universal 
custom to wear one’s natural hair, and he instanced 
the cases of Ram Chandar, Krishan, Christ, and Mu- 
hammad. ‘ Why should hair grow if God had meant 
it to be cut off ? A child’s hair groweth in the 
womb.’ ^ The Guru therefore hoped that his followers 
would never be guilty of the sin of shaving or cutting 
off their hair, and those who obeyed his injunctions 
he promised to consider true members of his faith. 

It is recorded that at this time the Sikhs lived in 
great social love and harmony. They regarded 
themselves as brothers. They used to feed one 
another, shampoo one another when tired, bathe 
one another, wash one another’s clothes, and one 
Sikh always met another with a smile on his face 
and love in his heart. 

A company of Sikhs came to visit the Guru and 
made the following representation : ‘We have found 
it very difficult to approach thee on account of the 
violence of the Muhammadans. Some of our com- 
pany have been killed by them on the way. Others 
have been wounded, and have returned to their 

^ Several texts from Hindu writings are cited on the importance 
and sanctity of hair. Thus in the Institutes of Manu — Even 
should a man be in wrath, let him never seize another by the hair. 
When a Brahman commits an offence for which the members of other 
castes are liable to death, let his hair be shaved off as suflScient punish- 
ment.’ In the Mahabharat it is stated that when Arjan was, according 
to the laws of warfare, on the point of killing Aswatthama for murdering 
the children of the PSndavs, he appeased his wrath by merely cutting 
off AswatthSma’s hair. And when Krishan defeated Rukmin, who 
had resented the abduction of his sister Rukmin i, he merely cut off his 
hair — a punishment deemed worse than death itself. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 91 

homes. To whom can we look for assistance but to 
thee ? ’ The Guru on hearing this remained silent, and 
reflected that the tyranny of the Turks had certainly 
become intolerable, and that all religion was being 
banished from the land. 

The Guru invited all his. Sikhs to attend the great 
Baisakhi fair at Anandpur without shaving or cutting 
their hair. . On finding them assembled, he ordered 
that carpets should be spread on a raised mound 
which he indicated, and that an adjacent spot should 
be screened off with qanats or tent walls. When 
this was done, the Guru ordered a confidential Sikh 
to go at midnight, tie five goats in the enclosure, 
and let no one know what he had done. The goats 
were duly tied, and separate orders were given to 
the Guru’s orderlies not to go within the tent walls. 

Next morning the Guru rose a watch , before day, 
performed his devotions, and put on his arms and 
uniform. He then proclaimed that there should be 
a great open-air gathering. When all were seated 
he drew his sword, and asked if there was any one 
of his beloved Sikhs ready to lay down his life for 
him. No reply was given. All grew pale on hearing 
such a proposal. The Guru asked a second time, 
but with the same result. A third time he spoke 
in a louder voice, ‘ If there be any true Sikh of mine, 
let him give me his head as an offering and proof of 
his faith.’ Daya Ram, a Sikh of Lahore, rose and 
said, ‘ 0 true king, my head is at thy service.’ The 
Guru took his arm, led him within the enclosure, 
and gave him a seat. He then cut off a goat’s 
head with one stroke of the sword, went forth and 
showed the dripping weapon to the multitude. The 
Guru again asked, ‘ Is there any other true Sikh 
who will bestow his head on me ? ’ The crowd felt 
now quite convinced that the Guru was in earnest, 
and that he had killed Daya Ram, so no one replied. 
At the third time of asking Dharm Das of Dihli 
answered, ‘ O great king, take my head.’ The Guru, 



92 ‘ THE SIKH RELIGION 

assuming an angry mien, took Dharm Das within 
the enclosure, seated Mm near Daya Ram, and 
killed another goat. The Guru then looking very 
fierce came forth and said, ‘ Is there any other Sikh 
who will offer me his head ? I am in great need of 
Sikhs’ heads.' 

On this some remarked that the Guru had lost his 
reason, others went to the Guru’s mother to com- 
plain, and said that he had undergone a complete 
change, and was no longer responsible for his actions. 
They instanced his sacrificing two Sikhs with ap- 
parently no object. His mother was advised to 
depose him and confer the Guruship on his eldest 
son. She sent a messenger for him, but he was too 
intent on his own purpose at the time to receive 
messengers of any description. He called out for 
a third Sikh ready to offer him his life, whereupon 
Muhakam Chand of Dwaraka offered himself as 
a sacrifice. Upon this the Guru handed him into 
the enclosure and killed a third goat. He then 
came forth showing his dripping sword as before. 
When the Guru called out for a fourth Sikh for 
sacrifice, the Sikhs began to think that he was going 
to kill them all. Some ran away and many hung 
down their heads. Sahib Chand, a resident of Bidar, 
clasped his hands in an attitude of supplication, and 
said he placed his head at the Guru’s disposal. The 
Guru took him behind the tent walls and killed 
a fourth goat. When he came forth as before, 
he asked for a fifth Sikh who was prepared to lay 
down his life for him. On this there was a general 
flight of the remaining Sikhs, and only those who 
weire very staunch in their faith ventured to stay. 
Himmat of Jaggannath answered the Guru’s last 
call, and said he might take his life also. The Guru 
then took him inside the enclosure and killed the 
remaining goa^. 

The Gurn#as ndw ready to sacrifice his own life 
for'the five Sikhs who showed such devotion to him. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBINU SINGH 93 

He clad them in splendid raiment, : so that they 
shone like the sun, and thus addressed them : ‘ My 
brethren, you are in my form and I am in yours. 
He who thinketh there is any difference between, us 
erreth exceedingly.’ Then seating the five Sikhs 
near him, he proclaimed to the whole assembly, 
‘ In the time of Guru Nanak, there was found one 
devout Sikh, namely. Guru Angad., In my time 
there are found five Sikhs totally devoted to> the 
Guru. These shall lay anew th^e foundation of 
Sikhism, and the true religion shall become current 
and famous through the world.’ The people became 
astonished at the Guru’s expedient, and fell at the 
feet of the five devoted Sikhs, saying, ‘ Hail to the 
Sikh religion ! You, brethren, have established it 
on a permanent basis. Had we offered our heads 
like you, we too should be blest.’ 

The Guru again addressed his Sikhs : ' Since the 
time of Baba Nanak charanpahul hath been cus- 
tomary. Men drank the water in which the Gurus 
had washed their feet, a custom which led to great 
humility ; but the Khalsa can now only be main- 
tained as a nation by bravery and skill in arms. 
Therefore I now institute the custom of baptism by 
water stirred with a dagger, and change my followers 
from Sikhs to Singhs or lions. They who accept the 
nectar of the pahul shall be changed before your 
very eyes from jackals into lions, and shall obtain 
empire in this world and bliss hereafter.’ 

According to the Persian historian Ghulam Muhai 
ul Din, the newswriter of the period sent the Emperor 
a copy of the Guru’s address to his Sikhs on that 
occasion. It is dated the first of Baisakh, Sambat 
1756 (a^d. 1699), and is us follows : ‘ Let all embrace 
one creed and obliterate differences of religion. Let 
the fom: Hindu castes who have different rules for 
their guidance abandon them ^all, , £^pt the one 
form of adoration, and become brothers. Let no 
one deem himself superior to another. Let none 



94 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


pay heed' to the Ganges, and other places of jnl- 
grimage which are spoken of with reverence in the 
Shastars, or adore incarnations such as Ram, Krishan, 
Brahma, and Durga, but believe in Guru Nanak and 
the other Sikh Gurus. Let men of the four castes 
receive my baptism, eat out of one dish, and feel 
no disgust or contempt for one another.’ 

The newswriter, when forwarding this proclamation 
to his 'master, submitted his own report : ‘ When the 
Gurtr had thus addressed the crowd, several Brah- 
inans and Khatris stood up, and said that they 
accepted the religion of Guru Nanak and of the other 
Gurus. OtherSj on the contrary, said that they 
would never accept any religion which was opposed 
to the teaching of the Veds and' the Shastars, and 
that they would not renounce at the bidding of a boy 
the ancient faith which had descended to them from 
their ancestors. Thus, though several refused to 
accept the Guru’s religion, about twenty thousand 
men stood up and promised to obey him, as they had 
the fullest faith in his divine mission.’ 

The Guru caused his five faithful Sikhs to stand 
up. He put pure water into an iron vessel and 
stirred it with a khanda or two-edged sword. He 
then repeated over it the sacred verses which he had 
appointed for the ceremony, namely, the Japji, the 
Japji,^ Guru Amar Das’s Anand, and certain Sawai- 
yas or quatrains of his own composition. 

The Guru in order to show his Sikhs the potency 
of the baptismal nectar which he had prepared put 
some of it aside for birds to drink. Upon this t\vo 
sparrows came and filled their beaks with it. Then 
flying away they began to fight, the chronicler 
states, like two raljas struggling for supremacy, and 
died by mutual slaughter. The inference was that 
all animals which drank the Guru’s baptismal watfer 
should become powerful and warlike. 

^ The Japji is Guru Nanak's, the Japji the tenth Quru’^ own 
composition. ' . . - 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 95 

Bhai Rai>|P^Kaar, a descendant of Bhai Budha, 
went and told the Guru’s wife, Mata Jito, that he was 
inaugurating a new form of baptism. He also gave 
her an account of the incident of the sparrows. 
Mata Jito, taking some Indian sweetmeats called 
patasha, went out of curiosity to the Guru. He 
said she had come at an opportune moment, and 
asked her to throw the sweets into the holy water. 
He had -begun, he said, to beget the Khalsa^ as his 
sons, and without a woman no son could be produced. 
Now that the sweets were poured into the nectar 
the Sikhs would be at peace with one another, 
otherwise they would be at continual variance. 

The five Sikhs, fully dressed and accoutred, stood 
up before the Guru. He told them to repeat 
‘ Wahguru’ and the preamble of the Japji. He then 
gave them five palmfuls of the amrit * to drink. He 
sprinkled it five times on their hair, and their eyes, 
and caused them all to repeat ‘ Wahguru ji ka 
Khalsa, Wahguru ji ki Fatah.’ On this he gave 
them all the appellation of Singhs or hons. He then 
explained to them what they might and what they 
might not do. They must always wear the following 
articles whose names begin with a K, namely, kes, 
long hair ; kangha, a comb ; kripan, a sword ; 
kachh, short drawers ; kara, a steel bracelet. They 
were enjoined to practise arms, and not show their 
backs to the foe in battle. They were ever to help 
the poor and protect those who sought their protec- 
tion. They must not look with lust on another’s 
wife or commit fornication, but adhere to their 
wedded spouses. They were to consider their 
previous castes erased, and deem themselves all 
brothers of one family. Sikhs were freely to inter- 
marry among one another, but must have no social 

^ This word comes from the Arabic khalts pure, and was applied 
by Guru Gobind Singh to the Sikhs who accepted the baptisna.of the 
sword, which will presently be described. 

Nectar. The consecrated water used in the baptism of Sikhs is 
so called. 



96 THE SIKH RELIGION 

or znalirimooial relations with smokerstt^th persons 
who killed their daughters, with the d^endants or 
followers of Prithi Chand, Dhir Mai, Ram Raiy or 
masands, who had fallen away from the tenets and 
principles of Guru Nanak. i.They must not worship 
idols, cemeteries,, or cremation-grounds. They must 
only believe in the immortal God, They must rise 
at dawnj bathe, read the prescribed hymns of the 
Gurus, meditate on the Creator, abstain from the 
flesh of an animal whose throat had been jagged 
with a knife in the Muhammadan fashion, and be 
loyal to their masters.^ 

When the Guru had thus administered baptism to 
his five tried Sikhs, he stood up before them with 
clasped hands, and begged them to administer bap^ 
tism to himself in precisely the same way as he had 
administered it to them. They were astonished at 
such a proposal, and represented their own un- 
worthiness and the greatness of the Guru, whom 
they deemed God’s vicar upon earth. They asked 
why he made such a request, and why he stood 
in a suppliant posture before them. He replied, 

‘ I am file son of the immortal God. It is by His 
order I have been born and have estabhshed this 
form of baptism. They who accept it shall hence- 
forth be known as the Khalsa. The Khalsa is the 
Guru and the Guru is the Khalsa. There is no 
difference between you and me. As Guru Nanak 
seated Guru Angad on the throne, so have I made 
you also a Guru. Wherefore administer the bap- 
dsmal nectar to me without any hesitation,’ Accord- 
ingly the five Sikhs baptized the Guru with the 
same ceremonies and injunctions he himself had 
employed. He thus invested his sect with the 
dignity of Gurudom, The Guru called the five Sikhs 
who had baptized him. his Panch Piyare, or five 

^ In the present day an injunction is added at the time of baptisni 
to be loyal to the British Government, which the neophytes solemnly 
promise. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 97 

beloved, and himself Gobind Singh, instead of Gobind 
Rai, the name by which he had been previously 
known. 

Upon this many others prepared to receive bap- 
tism. The first five to do so after the beloved of the 
Guru were Ram Singh, -Deva Singh, Tahil Singh, 
Ishar Singh, and Fatah Singh. These were named 
the Panch Mukte, or the five who had obtained 
deliverance. After them many thousands were 
baptized. A supplementary ordinance was now 
issued that if any one cut his hair, smoked tobacco, 
associated with a Muhammadan woman, or ate the 
flesh of an animal whose throat had been jagged 
with a knife, he must be re-baptized, pay a fine, and 
promise not to offend any more ; otherwise he must 
be held to be excommunicated from the Khalsa. 
The place where the Guru administered his first 
baptism is now known as Kesgarh. 

The Sikh chronicler, Bhai Santokh Singh, has 
composed the following on this memorable event : — 

God’s Khalsa which arose is very holy. When its followers 
meet, they say ‘ Wahguru ji ki fatah ! ’ 

The Khalsa hath abolished regard for pirs, spiritual 
rulers, and miracle-workers of other sects, whether Hindu 
or Musalman. 

The world on seeing a third religion was astonished ; 
enemies apprehende*d that it would deprive them of sove- 
reignty. 

The Guru inaugurated a new custom for the establish- 
ment of the faith, the effacement of sin, and the repetition 
of God’s name. 


Chapter XII 

We now come to further objections made by the 
Hindus to the Khalsa. They said, ‘ It is impossible 
to observe the rules of the Khalsa. How can the 
four castes dine together ? Were we to accept the 
Guru’s words, there would be no trace of caste left 

H 


SIKH. V 



98 THE SIKH RELIGION 

in the world. The Guru hath confounded the four 
castes. He hath stirred water with a dagger and 
called it nectar. No matter who cometh to him, 
he associateth with him without distinction of caste 
and without regard for the duty prescribed for his 
stage of life. He hath renounced the Veds and the 
popular beliefs, and only believeth in Asidhuj,^ of 
whom we have never before heard, and who is not 
known even to pandits. The, learned men among 
the Hindus preach of Ram, Krishan, and the other 
incarnations recorded in the Purans, and adhere to 
the ancient religions. Brethren, this Khalsa is 
a new-fangled institution for which we have no 
scriptural authority. It is the Guru who hath 
introduced this absurdity, and informed the world 
that there is only one caste. He hath broken the 
sacrificial thread of Brahmans and Khatris, and by 
causing them to eat together hath brought discredit 
on ancient customs sanctioned and hallowed by 
religion. He hath ordered us not to give our daugh- 
ters in marriage to any one who cutteth his hair. 
So smitten is he with affection for his Khalsa, that 
he hath rejected not only the Hindu but the Muham- 
madan religion. He hath prohibited tobacco, pil- 
grimages, and periodical oblations to the manes of 
ancestors.’ ® 

The Guru wrote to his Sikhs wherever they resided 
to come and accept baptism, and become members 
of the Khalsa. He warned those who failed to do 
so that they should afterwards regret it. When they 
met with affliction, they would be glad to seek the 
protection of the Khalsa, but this could only be 
obtained by their acceptance of baptism and by 
their repentance and submission. The holy Khalsa 
would then remove their entanglements and accept 
them as brothers in the faith. 

^ A name of God. He who hath the sword on his banner — an 
epithet invented by the tenth Guru. 

* Gur B Has, Chapter 12. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 99 

On this great occasion the hill chiefs, including 
Raja Ajmer Chand, the successor of the late Bhim 
Chand, went to visit the Guru. Ajmer Chand said, 
' It is thou who hast instituted the Khalsa religion. 
By thy power and greatness all the Turks shall be 
destroyed.’ The Guru replied, ‘ If thou be baptized 
and become a Sikh, thy glory shall increase tenfold.’ 
Ajmer Chand inquired what the marks of the Guru’s 
Sikhs were, that is, how they could be recognized. 
The Guru replied, ‘ My Sikhs shall be in their natural 
form, that is, without the loss of their hair or foreskin, 
in opposition to ordinances of the Hindus and the 
Muhammadans.’ In reply to Ajmer Chand’ s further 
inquiries, the Guru informed him of the acts allowed 
and disallowed his Sikhs. Ajmer Chand replied, 
‘ Great king, we must worship our idols and shave 
on the occasions of deaths in our houses. This is 
ordained by our religion.’ The Guru replied, ‘ If 
hair were not pleasing to God, why should he have 
caused it to grow ? In giving the baptismal nectar 
I change you from jackals to tigers. My Singhs shall 
destroy all oppressive Pathans and Mughals, and 
rule in the world.’ Ajmer Chand said, ‘ That is 
impossible. Each Turk can eat a whole goat. How 
can we who only eat rice, cope with such strong 
men ? ’ The Guru replied, ‘ My Singhs too are 
permitted to eat jlesh, and one of them shall be able 
to hold his ground against one hundred thousand 
Turks. .1 will kill hawks with sparrows. O Raja, 
have no anxiety. I shall make men of all four castes 
my Singhs (lions) and destroy the Mughals. If 
thou too embrace my faith and become a Singh, 
thy realm shall abide.’ 

The Guru’s teaching had the magical effect of 
changing a pariah or outcast through an intermin- 
able line of heredity into a brave and staunch soldier, 
as the history of the Sikh Mazhabi regiments con- 
clusively proves. This metamorphosis has been 
accomplished in defiance of the hide-bound preju- 



100 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


dices and conservatism of the old Hindu religious 
systems. Prior to the time of the Sikh Gurus no 
general ever conceived the idea of raising an army 
from men who were believed to be unclean and pol- 
luted from their birth ; but the watchword and 
war-cry of the Sikhs ‘Wahguru ji ka Khalsa, Wah- 
guru ji ki fatah’, and the stimulating precepts of 
the tenth Guru, altered what had hitherto been 
deemed the dregs of humanity into warriors whose 
prowess and loyialty never failed their leaders. 

The Guru continued to address the assembled 
rajas : ‘ How has your religious, political, and 

social status deteriorated ! You have abandoned 
the worship of the true God and addressed your 
devotions ‘ to gods, goddesses, rivers, trees, &c. 
Through ignorance you know not how to govern 
your territories ; through indolence and vice you 
disregard the interests of your subjects. You 
place over them officials who not only hate you, 
but are besides your mortal enemies. In your 
quarrels regarding caste and lineage you have not 
adhered to the ancient divisions of Hinduism into 
four sections, but you have made hundreds of sub- 
sections and suborffinate minor castes. You despise 
and loathe one another through your narrow preju- 
dices, and you act contrary to the wishes of the 
great Almighty Father. Your morals have become 
so perverted that through fear afid with a desire 
to please your Musalman rulers, you give them 
your daughters to gratify their lust. Self-respect 
hath found no place in your thoughts, and you have 
forgotten the history of your sires. I am intensely 
concerned for your fallen state. Are you not ashamed 
to call yourselves Rajputs when the Musalmans seize 
your wives and daughters before your very eyes. 
Your temples have been demolished and mosques 
built on their sites ; and many of your faith have 
been forcibly converted to Islam. If you still possess 
a trace of bravery and of the ancient spirit of your 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH loi 

race, then listen to my advice, embrace the Khalsa 
religion, and gird up your loins to elevate the fallen 
condition of your country.’ Upon this the rajas 
took their departure without accepting the Guru’s 
proposal to substitute his Khalsa for existing Indian 
religious systems. 

A Sikh called Ude Singh appeared before the Guru 
without any offering. He said he had one, but was 
unable to lift it. He had killed a tiger, but was not 
strong enough to bring its body to the Guru. The 
Guru sent for the tiger, skinned, it, and clothed 
a potter’s donkey with the skin. The donkey thus 
arrayed being let loose frightened all animals and 
rejoiced in his unmolested freedom. Several com- 
plaints and requests to kill him were made to the 
Guru. One day the Guru'and some Sikhs went to 
shoot him. On hearing the noise made by the Guru’s 
party the donkey fledT for protection to his old 
master. The potter, seeing the animal’s behaviour 
and movements those of a donkey and not of a tiger, 
and moreover hearing him bray, approached him, 
took off the tiger’s skin, gave him a sound drubbing, 
and employed him as before to carry burdens. The 
Sikhs on hearing this asked the Guru what he meant 
by such a stratagem. The Guru replied, ‘As long 
as you were bound by caste and lineage you were 
like donkeys and* subject to low persons. I have 
now freed you from these entanglements and given 
you all worldly blessings. I have clothed you in 
the garb of tigers, and made you superior to all men. 
Enjoy happiness in this world, and the Guru will 
take care of you in the next, and grant you the 
glorious dignity of salvation. When the donkey 
wore a tiger’s skin he was formidable, but when he 
fell into the potter’s power he was beaten and a load 
put on his back. In the same way, as long as you 
preserve your tiger’s exterior, your enemies shall 
fear you, and you shall be victorious, but if you part 
with it, and return to caste observances, you shall 



102 THE SIKH RELIGION 

revert to your asinine condition and become subject 
to strangers. Moreover, I have made you really 
tigers, and not merely given you their garb, and it 
is for you not to resume your caste habiliments. As 
I have raised you from a lowly to a lofty position by 
imparting to you spiritual knowledge, so if you 
revert to evil ways and Hindu superstitions from 
which I have delivered you, your last condition shall 
be worse than your first, for then there will be no 
hope of your amendment.’ 

Some Sikhs went to the Guru and told him that 
the Ranghars and Gujars of the village of Nuh had 
been plundering their property, but that those who 
were armed had successfully defended themselves. 
The Guru took this as a ^ext to preach to his people 
the advantage of wearing arms. They who practised 
their use should develop their martial instincts, 
enhance their prestige, and defend their property, 
while those who remained in the slough of ancient 
apathy should lose all they possessed. But in 
addition to arms men should also come to him to 
be baptized, and should for the purpose appear 
before him with their hair uncut, with drawers, 
daggers, and complete armour, and retain all these 
objects of defence as long as they had life. 

A man named Nand Lai now, visited the Guru, 
He was son of a Vaishnav Khatri and disciple of 
a Bairagi. At the age of twelve years the Bairagi 
desired to put on his neck a wooden necklace, one of 
the outward symbols of his sect. Nand Lai refused, 
and asked to be invested with the necklace of God’s 
name, which he might repeat to obtain future 
happiness. The Bairagi dismissed him, and subse- 
quently explained his action to Nand Lai’s father. 
He had not the particular necklace which Nand Lai 
had asked for, and so he set him free to select another 
spiritual guide. 

Nand Lai was an accomplished Persian scholar. 
There is a tradition preserved among his descendants. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 103 

that when the King of Persia sent a dispatch to 
Aurangzeb, his chief courtiers were invited to draft 
a reply. Nand Lai’s draft was deemed the most 
suitable, and it was accordingly selected for dispatch 
to Tuhran. Aurangzeb sent for Nand Lai, and after 
an interview remarked to his courtiers that it was 
a pity such a learned man snould remain a Hindu. 
Nand Lai on being apprised of the emperor’s desire 
to convert him to Islam, and ever thinking of the 
spiritual guide suitable for him, decided to flee from 
court and take refuge with the Guru. He communi- 
cated his intention to a friend of his, a high Muham- 
madan official. They resolved to go together to 
Anandpur and place themselves under the Guru’s 
spiritual guidance. Nand Lai presented the Guru 
a Persian work called Bandagi Nama in praise of 
God, a title which the Guru changed to Zindagi 
Nama, or ‘ Bestower of eternal life.’ The following 
are extracts from the work : — 

Both worlds, here and hereafter, are filled with God’s 
light ; 

The sun and moon are merely servants who hold His 
torches.^ 

If, my friend, thou associate with the holy. 

Thou shalt obtain abiding wealth. 

Evil is that society from which evil resulteth. 

And which will at last bring sorrow in its train. 

As far as may be, remain servants and claim not to be 
Master : ^ 

A servant ought not to search for aught but service. 

Hence, my dear friend, thou oughtest to distinguish 
between thyself and God. Even if thou art united with 

^ This was addressed to those who held the sun and moon to be 
gods and objects of worship. 

* Some Vcdantists with their pantheistic ideas claim to be God 
Himself. 



104 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Him, utter not one word which doth not express thy sub- 
jection to Him. When Mansur said, I am God, they put 
his head on the gibbet. 

This heart of thine, O man, is God’s temple : 

What shall I say ? This is God’s ordinance. 

Since thou knowest that God abideth in every heart, 

It is thy duty to treat every one with respect. 

Though thy Lord sitteth and converseth with thee, 

Yet through thy stupidity thou runnest in every 
direction to find Him.^ 

The Omnipotent is manifested by His omnipotence. 

Sweetness trickleth from the words of the holy ; 

The water of life drippeth from every hair of their bodies. 

The saints are the same without and within ; 

Both worlds are subject to their orders. 

They who search for God are ever civil. 

Courtesy pointeth out the way that leadeth to God. 

The discourteous are beyond God’s kindness.^ 

In the following extract from Nand LaTs Diwan 
Goya, a clear distinction is drawn between God and 
man: — 

Although the wave and the ocean both consist of water, 
yet there is a great difference between them. I am one 
wave of Thee who art an endless sea. Thou art as distinct 
from me as heaven is from earth. 

^ That is, thou goest on idolatrous pilgrimages 

2 After the death of Aurangzeb Bhai Nand Lai found a patron in 
his son the Emperor Bahadur Shah, under whom he found leisure to 
write his works on the Sikh religion. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 105 
Chapter XIII 

About this time the Guru, thinking that his 
kitchen was not well served, paid a visit to it in 
disguise, and asked fpr something to eat. He 
received various refusals- from the cooks. One of 
them said that prayer must first be offered. Another, 
‘ We must first give the Guru his dinner.’ When 
the Guru had received several similar excuses and 
nothing to eat, though he urged that he was hungry, 
he went to Nand Lai to beg his dinner. Nand Lai at 
once brought forth flour, vegetables, salt, and clari- 
fied butter, and handed them to the supposed 
mendicant, who took them and departed. Next 
day the Guru in open court told how he had 
paid a visit in disguise to his kitchen, and how he 
had been treated. The cooks were very much 
ashamed and craved forgiveness. He then gave 
orders that every wandering Sikh who came to his 
door should at once receive food, whether raw or 
cooked, without excuse or delay. The Guru con- 
tinued ; ‘ There is nothing equal to the bestowal 

of food. Blest is the man who giveth to the 
really hungry. Let no one fix a time for the 
exercise of this virtue. It is not necessary to consider 
whether it is night or day, evening or morning, 
whether the moon is dark or full, or if there is 
a particular anniversary. Nor is it necessary to 
consider what the social position of the applicant 
may be. Avoid all delay in such a matter. Charity 
is of all gifts the greatest, for it saveth life.’ 

The Guru had an opportunity of making further 
trial of the masands. Some Sikhs of Patna, Manger, 
and other parts of Bengal came to see him. These 
were accompanied by Chaia and Maia, sons of 
Bulaki, the masand of Dhaka. One of the Sikhs 
presented a piece of Dhaka muslin to the Guru as 
an offering. His courtiers began to admire it, and 
said they had never before seen such a beautiful 



io6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

fabric. On inquiry it was discovered that the same 
Sikh had previously made a similar present through 
the masands to the Guru’s mother, but it had never 
reached her. Chaia and Maia were^^ scourged as 
a punishment. 

The Guru heard that the Ranghars and Gujars of 
a town called Bajrur, beyond the Satluj, had plun- 
dered some Sikhs. The Guru took occasion during 
one of his hunting excursions to proceed thither 
with a small force. The town was invested and 
exemplary punishment meted out to its inhabitants, 
so that no one might afterwards be tempted to annoy 
the Guru’s followers. 

A story is told which illustrates the Sikh view 
of sacred music. A Sikh complained that the 
musicians on one occasion began to chant before 
he had quite finished reciting the Sukhmani. The 
Guru said that reciting the Gurus’ hymns bore the 
same comparison to chanting them to musical accom- 
paniments as coarse pulse to sweet sacred food. The 
gyanis supply another comparison, and say that 
recitation is to chanting with music as well water, 
which only benefits the owner of a few fields, to 
rain water which sheds blessings on all. 

There is an anecdote told of a Sikh who in the 
Guru’s presence mispronounced a word in the 
Granth Sahib, and so gave a wrofig meaning to the 
line in which it occurred. The Guru took the mis- 
take as a text to preach the advantages of correct 
reading of the Sikh sacred hymns. ‘ O Sikhs, listen 
to what I have to tell you on this subject. Read 
the Gurus’ hymns correctly. There is the greatest 
advantage in such reading, for it will ensure bliss 
here and hereafter. If a hymn be written incorrectly, 
correct it and then read it, as one may mend and use a 
household article which hath been broken. The man 
who thus correcteth not the Gurus’ hymns hath no 
love for them.’ 

It will be remembered that Guru Teg Bahadur, 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 107 

when in prison in Dihli, prophesied the advent of 
the English. One day the conversation between 
Guru Gobind Singh and his disciples turned on this 
subject. His disciples asked him what the condition 
of the Sikhs would be when the English arrived. 
The Guru replied, ‘ The English shall come with 
a great army. The Sikhs too shall be very powerful, 
and their army shall engage that of the English. 
Sometimes victory shall incline to my Sikhs, some- 
times to. the English. As long as the religion of the 
Sikhs remaineth distinct, so long shall the glory of 
those who profess it increase. But when the Sikhs 
become entangled in the love of mammon, think of 
nothing but their own children, their wives, and 
their homes ; when those who administer justice 
oppress the poor and take bribes ; when those who 
sit on carpets sell their daughters and sisters ; when 
Sikhs abandon the Gurus’ hymns and in lieu of them 
follow the Shastars and adopt the religion of the 
Brahmans ; when Sikh rajas forsake their Gurus 
and fall under the influence of the priests of other 
religions ; when they scruple not to consort with 
courtesans, and allow their states to be governed by 
evil influences, then shall the English rule and their 
glory increase.' ^ 

The Sikhs asked the Guru what should become of 
the great empire* of the Turks. The Guru replied, 
‘ Aurangzeb relying on Makkan oracles is destroying 
the Hindu religion, and in his insane career will stop 
at nothing short of a miracle. He is even preparing 
to contend with me. He respecteth not the religion of 
the Gurus, but we shall gain the victory, and the 
glory of the Turks shall fade away. Such of them 
as survive shall become common labourers and suffer 
indignities from their masters. At the end of the 
Sambat year 1800 (a. d. 1743) the Sikhs shall take 
possession of many countries. Three years after 
that Sikhs shall spring out of every bush, and there 
^ Siiraj Parkash, Rut III, Chapter 37. 



io8 THE SIKH RELIGION 

shall subsequently be terrible warfare between the 
Sikhs and the Muhammadans. 

‘ A powerful monarch shall come from Kandhar ^ 
and destroy countless Sikhs. Their heads shall be 
piled in heaps. He shall continue his progress of 
destruction to Mathura in Hindustan, and alarm 
many lands. None shall be able to withstand him. 
As prophesied by Guru Arjan, he shall raze the 
temple of Amritsar to the ground, but the Sikhs 
shall plunder his camp on his retreat from India. 

‘ In the Sambat year 1900 (a. d. 1843), the Turks 
who survive shall lose their empire. A Christian 
army shall come from Calcutta. The Sikhs who are 
at variance with one another will join them. There 
shall be great destruction of life, and men and 
women shall be expelled from their homes. The 
Sikhs who abandon their arms and join the Brah- 
mans against the English, shall have great sufferings. 
The real Sikhs shall hold their ground and survive.’ 

A Sikh called Kahn Singh was once plastering 
a wall and let a drop of mud fall on the Guru. The 
Guru ordered that he should receive one slight stroke 
as punishment. The Sikhs exceeded their orders, and 
several of them beat the man severely. The Guru 
on discovering this wished to make reparation, and 
the reparation was to provide the sufferer with 
a wife. The Guru asked his Sikhs if any of them 
would give his daughter in marriage to the plasterer. 
All remained silent. The Guru said, ‘ You found it 
easy to obey my order to strike this man. Why not 
obey my present order ? I find you are Sikhs only 
for your own advantage.’ 

It happened that at that time a Sikh called Ajab 
Singh from Kandhar was present with his virgin 
daughter, in darbar. He said, ‘ 0 true king, my 
daughter is at thy disposal.’ The Guru compli- 
mented him and said, ‘ O Sikh, thou hast to-day 

^ This refers to an invasion of Ahmad Shah in a.d. 1762 when 
he blew up the Har Mandar, or Golden Temple, at Amritsar. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 109 

proved that thou art a true member of the Khalsa.’ 
The plasterer represented that he would not marry 
on account of the endless troubles attending wedded 
life. The girl on hearing this said to him, ‘ By the 
Guru’s order I am already thine. If thou accept me 
not, I will not wed another, but remain here to do 
service at the Guru’s feet.’ The Guru then inter- 
posed and urged the plasterer to wed the girl. He 
accordingly did so by Sikh marriage rites known as 
Anand. The Guru promised that he should have 
five distinguished sons as the result of his marriage, 
a prophecy which was duly fulfilled. 

The Guru now became frequently silent, a matter 
which caused his mother great anxiety. Seeing him 
one day alone, she approached him, and after the 
usual blessing said, ‘ Blest am I that such a son 
hath been born from my womb ; but I am now 
anxious regarding thee. People say that thou art 
completely altered. Explain why thy spirits are 
depressed, and thou art no longer cheerful as before.’ 
The Guru replied, ‘ Mother dear, I will tell thee my 
secret. I have been considering how I may confer 
empire on the Khalsa.’ 

The Guru prescribed convivial rules as a pre- 
liminary to his great enterprise. Wherever he had 
a kitchen, it should.be considered God’s own, and 
the Sikhs should eat therefrom. Should any of them 
object on the ground of caste prejudice, he should 
be deemed beyond the pale of Sikhism. Before the 
distribution of sacred food a prayer should first be 
uttered. After meals the first stanza of the fifth 
Ashtapadi of the Sukhmani should be recited as a 
thanksgiving. When a man had satisfied himself 
at the Guru’s kitchen, he shquld take no food away 
with him. When a Sikh invited another to dine 
with him, he should accept his hospitality and not 
find fault with his viands. Whenever a Sikh was 
hungry, he should be fed and treated with respect. 

After this the Guru prescribed some general rules 



no 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


for the guidance of his Sikhs, At the beginning of 
every work or enterprise they should recite suitable 
prayers. They should always assist one another, 
they should practise riding and the exercise of arms. 
If the Sikhs remembered the Guru's instruction, he 
promised to make all the inhabitants of India sub- 
ject to them. He who cast a covetous eye on his 
neighbour’s property should go to hell. He who 
assisted a Sikh to complete any worthy or noble 
undertaking or study, should obtain spiritual reward. 

Being questioned on the subject of marriage 
relations, the Guru uttered the following : ' When 
I received understanding, my father Guru Teg 
Bahadur gave me this instruction, “ O son, as long 
as there is life in thy body, make this thy sacred 
duty ever to love thine own wife more and more. 
Approach not another woman’s couch either by 
mistake or even in a dream. Know that the love 
of another’s wife is as a sharp dagger. Believe me, 
death entereth the body by making love to another’s 
wife. They who think it great cleverness to enjoy 
another’s wife, shall in the end die the death of 
dogs.” ’ 

Once when there was scarcity in the land the 
Guru’s mother, without consulting him, ordered that 
food should be cooked only once a day, and even 
then be sparingly distributed. Upon this the Sikhs 
complained to the Guru. He said, ‘ Some evil 
persons have induced my mother to issue orders 
contrary to my wishes, but, O Khalsa, the Guru’s 
kitchen shall be ever open. The Turks shall flay 
those who have given evil advice to my mother.’ 
The Guru’s mother on hearing this became much 
distressed, and with tears in her eyes implored her 
son’s pardon. The Guru pardoned her, but added, 
' If thou close the Guru’s kitchen, my curse shall 
avail, but if thou keep it ever open, my curse shall 
be retracted.’ From that day forth, twofold, nay 
fourfold supplies poured into the Guru’s kitchen. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH iii 


Chapter XIV 

A handsome young goldsmith one day presented 
himself before the Guru and began to fan him. He 
said that his father had taken the charanpahul in 
vogue at the time of the preceding Gurus, and he 
himself had received baptism according to the new 
rite. The youth’s mother accompanied him, and 
the Guru invited them both to stay with him. The 
Guru, to make trial of the goldsmith’s skill, gave 
him ten gold muhars to convert into ornaments. 
When the work was subsequently submitted for the 
Guru’s inspection he was pleased, and ordered his 
treasurer to keep the young artisan supplied with 
gold, and store all the ornaments he made from it 
in his treasury. The Guru asked the goldsmith if 
he had any faults. He replied, ‘ O great king, I am 
the slave of thy feet, I only seek the society of the 
saints.’ Upon this the Guru replied, ‘ He who hath 
great talents must ever possess some fault. What 
is thine ? The man possessing talent who hath no 
fault must be in God’s own image.’ The young man, 
however, would not admit any imperfection. 

After this he was allowed to take as much 
gold as he pleased to work upon. It was never 
weighed to him,» and he was never asked how 
much he had taken. One day the Guru told his 
treasurer to weigh for the future, without the gold- 
smith’s knowledge, all the gold dispensed to him. 
Upon this the treasurer weighed him out twenty 
tolas of gold. When the goldsmith presented the 
ornaments made therefrom, they were found to 
weigh only seventeen tolas. Upon this the Guru 
ordered all the ornaments the youth had made since 
his arrival to be produced and weighed. The treasurer 
found them to be far short of the amount of gold 
taken from the treasury. On this the Guru remon- 
St):ate4 wth the young goldsmith. ‘ Thou impliedst 



II2 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


that thou hadst no fault. What greater fault can there 
be than to misappropriate what is entrusted thee ? 
Didst thou not receive thy wages from the Guru’s 
house, and was that not sufficient remuneration for 
thee ? Thou art as evil as the masands whom I have 
been punishing. I am pleased with those who, 
though they may wear coarse garbs, eat what they 
lawfully earn.’ It is said that on this censure the 
youth reformed his ways. 

The Guru being asked by a devout Sikh what he 
should do to cross over the world’s ocean, that is, 
to be saved and obtain deliverance from rebirth, 
gave the following recipe. ‘ My brother, repeat the 
name Wahguru. Eat what thou hast diligently 
earned. As Baba Nanak hath said, “ He who 
bestoweth a little out of his earnings recognizeth the 
right way.” Bear no one enmity. Know that God 
is with thee at all times and remember death. Recog- 
nize the world as unreal, and God alone as real.’ 

A Sikh went to the Guru and told him that he 
had abandoned the world, as it contained only 
trouble and anxiety. He added that he had come 
in quest of rest, and requested the Guru to point 
. out the way to him. The Guru congratulated him 
on having diverted his attention from the wickedness 
of men, and inquired if he could read. The Sikh 
replied in the negative. The Gurh then said, ‘ It is 
necessary that thou shouldst read little or much so 
as to acquire understanding and improve thy mind. 
Thou shalt thus learn the difference between good 
and evil, and what thou oughtest and what thou 
oughtest not to do. There are besides many other 
advantages in reading. Thou mayest thereby obtain 
everything beginning with the knowledge of God. 
The heart of him who is uninstructed remaineth in 
blind ignorance. He who readeth Gurumukhi is the 
best and obtaineth good understanding. There is 
great merit in reading the Japji and the other hymns 
of morning and evening divine service, for they 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 113 

erase the sins of many births. He wfio orally or 
mentally fixeth his attention on the Name, who 
worketh with his hands, who gladdeneth the hearts 
of holy Sikhs, who ever performeth noble deeds, 
and preserveth his mind humble, is very dear to me, 
and it behoves me to minister unto him.’ 

The Sikh expressed his earnest desire to learn, if he 
could only find a tutor. The Guru appointed his 
own Granthi, or reader, to instruct him. When the 
Sikh read as far as the line in the Anand, ‘Joy, 
my mother, that I have found the true Guru ! ’ he 
brought his tuition to an end, and never afterwards 
pursued his studies. The Guru, after some months, 
asked his Granthi how the pupil was progressing. 
The Granthi replied that he had not seen him since 
he had read that particular line of the Anand. Upon 
this the Guru sent for him, and asked him why he 
had ceased to attend his tutor. He replied that he 
had read enough, and had attained happiness on 
meeting the Guru. The Guru smiled and said, 
‘ Even with this little learning thou hast obtained 
a knowledge of God, and shalt eventually find 
deliverance.’ 

The Guru once asked his Sikhs to tell him who 
was emperor of India in Kabir’s time. One Sikh 
said Humayun ; a second, Alexander the Great ; 
a third, Madanpal. In short none of them could 
tell the emperor’s name. The Guru made this a text 
from which to preach the advantages of knowledge, 
as well as holiness, and the good repute obtained 
from them in both worlds — ‘ Every one, even down 
to ignorant women, knoweth the name of Kabir, 
though he was only a weaver. That is because he 
repeated God’s name and practised true devotion. 
Sikandar Lodi was then emperor ; but none of you 
even knoweth his name, and there is no trace of 
him left in the world, while Kabir’s fame is blazoned 
in every country and his memory is universally 
honoured. Wherefore, members of the Khalsa, 



1 14 THE SIKH RELIGION 

remember the true Name, serve the saints, be 
humble, lay your love and devotion at the feet of 
the immortal God, and you too shall be honoured 
here and hereafter.’ 

As the Guru’s power daily increased, the hill 
chiefs thought it expedient to send a resident to his 
court who would inform them of his movements and 
proceedings. A man called Paramanand was accord- 
ingly selected for that delicate mission. When he 
came to the Guru he told him that his object was 
to be in a position to behold him continually, and 
thus gain spiritual advantages. He added that he 
desired to send the rajas occasionally accounts of 
the Guru’s good health and welfare, and to preserve 
the amicable relations which already subsisted. 

Some Sikhs asked the Guru how karah parsad 
or sacred food should be prepared. He replied : 
‘ Wash and clean the cooking-place, then procure 
equal portions of refined sugar, fine flour, and 
clarified butter. Boil the sugar in water and render 
it liquid. Put the clarified butter and flour into 
another vessel, and boil them until they assume 
a reddish colour. Then mix the liquefied sugar with 
the clarified butter and flour, and boil all together. 
When this is done a Granthi must repeat certain 
prescribed prayers. The mixture then becomes 
sacred food {karah parsad) and is fit for use.’^ 
The cook must be a Sikh who has bathed in the 
morning and who can repeat at least the Japji from 
memory. 

A Sikh married couple came to the Guru in order 
to complain against their son. They said they were 
satisfied with the wealth God had given them ; 
their only trouble arose from their son’s contumacy. 
He was ever in attendance on religious men, and 
paid no regard to what he ate or what he wore. If 

^ The Hindus in the preparation of their sacred food use the same 
ingredients, but add coco-nut as a bonne bouche for the goddess 
Durga, and anise seed as a relish for the monkey-god Hanuman. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBINU SINGH 115 

the subject of marriage, so natural to a young man, 
were mentioned to him, he was ready to die as if 
poisoned. When pressed on the subject, he said 
that the Guru had forbidden his marriage. When 
they represented to him that the Guru himself was 
a married man, the youth would only say, ' He can 
do what he pleaseth himself. He hath forbidden 
me.’ The Guru sent for the youth and asked when 
he had forbidden him. He replied, ‘ O Guru, in the 
Anand which thou wrotest as Guru Amar Das for 
the instruction of the Sikhs, there is the following 
passage ; — 

O dear man, do thou ever remember the True One. 

This family which thou seest shall not depart with thee ; 

It shall not depart with thee ; why fix thy thoughts 
on it ? 

Never do what thou shalt have to repent of at last. 

Listen thou to the instruction of the true Guru, it is that 
which shall go with thee. 

Saith Nanak, O dear man, ever remember the True One. 

‘ This instruction,’ said the youth, ‘ is imprinted 
on my mind.’ The Guru was so pleased on hearing 
this that he embraced him, and said to his parents, 
‘ Men are continually warned, but none taketh heed. 
Blest is he who hath forsaken mammon. It is his 
good fortune that he hath awakened to contempt 
of the world. This son of yours shall save both your 
families, and you shall have another son besides to 
gladden your hearts.’ The Guru detained the youth, 
and dismissed his parents. He was pleased that the 
spontaneous love of God had sprung; up in the young 
man’s heart, and he instructed him in the duties 
both of a husband and a hermit. After a comparison 
of both, he embraced domestic life. 

Once in the sultry weather, as the Guru was 
perspiring, his servants took his bed from the ground 
floor to the top of his house. From there he heard 
an altercation between two Sikhs regarding a debt 



ii6 THE SIKH RELIGION 

of seven rupees. Mala Singh had lent this sum to 
Lahaura Singh, but the latter would not return it. 
When, at the suggestion of Mala Singh’s wife, 
Lahaura Singh was further dunned, he composed this 
couplet : — 

O Sikh, eat the wealth of a Sikh without anxiety ; 

Thou hast come to annoy me at which I am very angry ; 

and added: — 

A Sikh shall receive whatever is written in his destiny. 

Mala Singh replied, ‘ Thou embezzlest my money, 
and then lecturest me; thou forgettest what hath 
been said : — 

They whose acts are deceitful shall be punished in God’s 
court : 

Death shall smite them ; they shall greatly weep and 
regret when they enter hell.’ 

Lahaura Singh capped this with another : — 

No one shall ask for an account as long as God pardoneth.^ 

The Guru overhearing this interchange of verses 
cried out, ‘ They who live and spend money by de- 
ceiving others shall be bound in God’s court. Ponder 
on all your acts so as to preserve your honesty.’ The 
Guru then quoted for the dispuftints the lines of 
Baba Nanak against dishonesty. 

After hearing the Guru, Lahaura Singh began to 
speak civilly to Mala Singh, and promised to give 
him his money on the morrow. Lahaura Singh kept 
his promise, and then went to the Guru to solicit 
his pardon. The Guru upon this repeated for the 
first time his ‘ Muktnama ’, or means of salvation. 
The following are its principal injunctions : ‘ 0 Sikhs, 
borrow not, but, if you are compelled to borrow, 
faithfully restore the debt. Speak not falsely and 
associate not with the untruthful. Associating with 

^ Guru Arjan, MSru ki War IL 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 117 

holy men, practise truth, love truth, and clasp it to 
your hearts. Live by honest labour and deceive no 
one. Let not a Sikh be covetous. Repeat the Japji 
and the Japji before eating. Look not on a naked 
woman. Let not your thoughts turn towards that 
sex. Cohabit not with another’s wife. Deem 
another’s property as filth. Keep your bodies clean. 
Have dealings with every one, but consider your- 
selves distinct. Your faith and daily duties are 
different from theirs. Bathe every morning before 
repast. If your bodies endure not cold water, then 
heat it. Ever abstain from tobacco. Remember the 
one immortal God. Repeat the Rahiras in the 
evening and the Sohila at bedtime. Receive the 
baptism and teaching of the Guru, and act according 
to the Granth Sahib. Cling to the boat in which 
thou hast embarked. Wander not in search of 
another religion. Repeat the Gurus’ hymns day and 
night. Marry only into the house of a Sikh. Pre- 
serve thy wife and thy children from evil company. 
Covet not money offered for religious purposes. 
Habitually attend a Sikh temple and eat a little 
sacred food therefrom. He who distributeth sacred 
food should do so in equal quantities, whether the 
recipients be high or low, old or young. Eat not 
food offered to gods or goddesses. Despise not 
any Sikh, and never address him without the ap- 
pellation Singh. Eat regardless of caste with all 
Sikhs who have been baptized, and deem them your 
brethren. Abandon at once the company of Brah- 
mans and Mullas who cheat men out of their 
wealth, of ritualists who lead Sikhs astray, and of 
those who give women in marriage with concealed 
physical defects, and thus deceive the hopes of 
offspring. 

‘ Let not a Sikh have intercourse with a strange 
woman unless married to her according to the Sikh 
rites. Let him contribute a tenth part of his 
earnings for religious purposes. Let him bow down 



ii8 THE SIKH RELIGION 

at the conclusion of prayer. When a Sikh dieth, 
let sacred food be prepared. After his cremation 
let the Sohila be read and prayer offered for his 
soul and for the consolation of his relations. Then 
sacred food may be distributed. Let not the 
family of the deceased indulge in much mourning, 
or bevies of women join in lamentation. On such 
occasions let the Gurus’ hymns be read and sung, 
and let all listen to them. 

‘ Worship not an idol, and drink not the water in 
which it hath been bathed. The rules of caste and 
of the stages of Hindu life are erroneous. Let 
my Sikhs take care not to practise them. O Sikhs, 
listen to me and adopt not the ceremonies of the 
Hindus for the supposed advantages of the manes 
of ancestors. 

‘ My face is turned towards him who calleth out 
to a Sikh “ Wahguru ji ki Fatah ! ” my right shoulder 
towards him who returneth the salutation with love, 
my left shoulder towards him who returneth it as 
a matter of custom, and my back towards him who 
returneth it not at all.^ To him who abide th by 
these rules I will grant a position to which no one 
hath yet been able to attain, and which was beyond 
the conception of Shankar Acharya,® Dattatre, 
Ramanuj,® Gorakh, and Muhammad. 

‘ As, when rain falleth on the* earth, the fields 
yield excellent and pleasant fruit, so he who listeneth 
to the Guru and attendeth to all these injunctions 
shall assuredly receive the reward thereof. Whoever 
accepteth the Guru’s words, and these rules which 
he hath given, shall have his sins pardoned ; he shall 
be saved from transmigration through the eighty- 
four lakhs of animals, and after death shall enter 

^ Mani Singh^s Gyan Ratandwali, 

2 The great expounder of the VedSnt or pantheistic philosophy 
and opponent of the Buddhists. He lived in the eighth century. 

^ An account of this saint will be given in the final volume of this 
work. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 119 

the Guru’s abode. If any very worldly man devoted 
to pleasure tell you to the contrary, listen not to him, 
but ever follow the Guru’s instruction.’ 

Charter XV 

A Sikh went to the Guru, to complain that his wife 
having been enchanted by a Muhammadan desired 
to embrace Islam. He prayed the Guru to perform 
incantations whereby his wife might adhere to her 
faith and conjugal duties. The Guru replied, 
‘ Charms, incantations, and spells are useless. The 
Gurus’ hymns alone are of any avail. No jin,^ fairy, 
or demon shall approach her who daily reciteth or 
heareth the Japji. It is the duty of all Sikhs to give 
their wives religious instruction. Thy wife on 
receiving it shall return to her religion and allegiance 
to thee.’ 

One day the musicians were singing the story of 
Gopi Chand in presence of the Guru. The story 
being affecting, the audience were moved to tears. 
One man said that the musicians ought to be fined 
because they had in the Guru’s presence sung the 
epic of Gopi Chand instead of the hymns of the 
Gurus, and it was written in the Anand that all 
compositions except the Gurus’ were inadmissible. 
The Guru replied, ‘ Only those compositions are 
forbidden which lead men astray from God. When 
simple men sing verses which lead to a reconciliation 
with Him, it is not thy duty to spurn them. It 
cannot harm thee to listen to a story which containeth 
a moral.’ 

The Guru thought it prudent to be ever prepared 
for war, and he pontinued to enlist all who offered 
themselves for service. He provided them with 
horses and arms, and often represented to them that 
the power of the Turks had now grown beyond all 
endurance. 


The genius of Arabian tales. 



120 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


One day as the Guru was on a hunting excursion 
in the Dun, Balia Chand and Alim Chand, two hill 
chiefs, seeing him with only a small retinue, resolved 
to surprise and capture him. A fight ensued, but 
the Sikhs were too few in number to cope with their 
assailants and were obliged to retreat. A Sikh 
trooper came upon the Guru, who had lost his way 
in the mAde, and thus addressed him: ‘As a forest 
hath no beauty without a tiger, so a Sikh army 
hath no ornament without its Guru. If thou assist 
us not in our present difficulty, it will be a matter 
of eternal reproach to thee.’ The Guru then dis- 
charged five arrows at the enemy which took fatal 
effect. Upon this the Sikhs, though few in number, 
were encouraged to return to the combat. Blood 
was spilled on both sides like red powder at the 
Hindu festival of the Holi. Balia Chand, on seeing 
the destruction of his men, rushed forward, but 
found himself opposed by Ude Singh, one of the 
bravest soldiers of the Guru’s army. Alim Chand 
also advanced to support the hill army, but was con- 
fronted by Alim Singh. Both sides fought despe- 
rately, and men fell like trees cut down by the 
woodman’s axe. Alim Chand aimed a blow of his 
sword at Alim Singh, who received it on his shield, 
and then with his return blow struck off Alim 
Chand’ s right arm. Alim Chand, however, contrived 
to escape, leaving Balia in sole command of the hill 
troops. Balia Chand did not long enjoy that honour, 
as he was soon shot dead by Ude Singh. The hill 
troops, finding that one of their chiefs had fled with 
the loss of his arm, and that the other was dead, 
took to flight, leaving the honours of victory to the 
Guru and his Sikhs. After the battle the Guru, 
undismayed, continued his hunting excursion. 

After this defeat, the hill chiefs thought it highly 
dangerous to allow the Sikhs to increase in power 
and number. They remarked that the Sikhs were 
to-day in thousands, but in a short time they 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 121 


would be in millions, therefore immediate measures 
ought to be taken for their repression. An Indian 
fig-tree when small can be easily destroyed, but, 
if allowed to grow, it becomes a forest and cannot 
be eradicated. The hill chiefs therefore thought 
it desirable to complain- to the Dihli government 
against the Sikhs. The Emperor Aurangzeb was 
still engaged in warfare in the south of India. 
In his absence the Subadar or viceroy of Dihli 
heard their representations. The hill chiefs, having 
traced the Guru’s history from the time he had 
left Patna and settled with a humble following 
in Anandpur, thus continued : ‘ Knowing that he 
was a successor of the holy Guru Nanak, we made no 
objection to his residence among us. When he 
obtained power and we essayed to restrain him, he 
went to Nahan and there formed an alliance with 
its raja. He then came into collision with Raja 
Fatah Shah of Srinagar, which ultimately led to the 
battle of Bhangani, where there was great destruc- 
tion of human life. After his return to Anandpur, 
the Guru established a new sect distinct from the 
Hindus and Muhammadans, to which he hath given 
the name of Khalsa. He hath united the four castes 
into one, and made many followers. He invited us 
to join him, and promised, if we consented, that 
we should obtain empire in this world and salvation 
in the next. He suggested to us that if we rose in 
rebellion against the Emperor, he would assist us 
with all his forces, because the Emperor had killed 
his father, and he desired to avenge his death. As 
we did not think it proper to oppose the Emperor, 
the Guru is displeased with us, and now giveth us 
every form of annoyance. We cannot restrain him, 
and have accordingly come to crave the protection 
of this just government against him. If the govern- 
ment consider us its subjects, we pray for its assist- 
ance to expel the Guru from Anandpur. Should 
you delay to punish and restrain him, his next 



122 THE SIKH RELIGION 

expedition will be against the capital of your empire.’^ 
This ‘ representation was duly submitted by the 
Subadar to the Emperor. 

'■A Qazi called Salar Din came to visit the Guru, 
reminded him of the Sikh and Muhammadan belief 
in destiny, and upbraided him with having reversed 
the judgement of heaven. ' They on whose fore- 
heads unfavourable destiny was written,’ he said, 
‘ have been blessed and have received from thee all 
bounties and good gifts in return for their services 
and their fidelity.’ The Guru replied, ‘Destiny is 
as the reversed letters on a seal. I bless those who 
bow to the Guru. The letters of their destiny then 
present their ordinary appearance.’ This shows that 
the Sikhs need not implicitly believe in the con- 
trolling power of destiny. 

In October, when the cold season was. approaching, 
his troops represented to the Guru that they re- 
quired warm clothing. • He requested them to be 
patient. A Sikh, he said, was bringing him a bag 
of money to relieve all their necessities. A rich 
merchant, who had been originally a follower of 
Sakhi Sarwar, soon arrived with an offering of two 
thousand rupees, and related his story : ‘ While I was 
a follower of Sakhi Sarwar, I invested a large sum 
of mdhey in merchandise, but failed to dispose of 
it to advantage, notwithstanding *a large offering of 
sweets to my patron saint. That and other mercan- 
tile ventures of mine having failed, I set about finding 
a religious guide who possessed influence with the 
supreme powers. I then heard that the tenth Guru 
occupied thie seat of the holy Guru Nanak, and 
I vowed that in th^ event of commercial success 
I would give him a tithe of my profits. I have 
accordingly brought this bag of rupees, and I promise 
that I will no longer be a follower of any Muhamma- 
dan, but a Sikh of the Gpru.’ The Guru duly bap- 
tized him and accepted his offering. The Guru was 

^ Gur BtlaSy Chapter 14. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 123 

thus enabled to provide warm clothing for his troops, 
and their devotion to him and their belief in his 
prophetic and divine power increased in consequence. 

One day when the Guru felt thirsty, he asked a Sikh 
to fetch him water. Before the Sikh had time to do 
so, a young boy, who had come to see the Guru, 
volunteered to perform the service. The Guru 
noticing that the boy’s hands were soft and clean, 
asked him if he had any occupation. He replied in 
the negative. That was the first time he had ever 
offered to fetch water for any one. When he brought 
it the Guru refused to drink, saying it was impure. 
The boy remonstrated and insisted on its purity. 
The Guru replied, ‘ Hear me, O Sikhs, it is an impor- 
tant article of the Guru’s faith that performing 
service for saints contributeth to man’s salvation. 
The hands are purified by serving them. The feet 
are purified by going to behold the Guru. Without 
serving holy men ^ man’s body is as unclean as the 
limbs of a corpse from which all shrink and which 
all fear to touch.’ 

The Guru quoted the following from Gur Das’s 
Wars : — 

Curses on the head which boweth not to the Guru and 
which toucheth not the Guru’s feet ; 

Curses on the eyes which instead of -beholding the Guru 
look at another’s wife ; 

Curses on the ears which hear not and pay no attention to 
the Guru’s instruction ; 

Curses on the tongue which repeateth other spell than the 
word of the Guru ; 

Curses on the hands and feet which serve not the Gufu : 
all other work is fruitless. 

His disciples are dear to the Priest ; happiness is obtained 
by seeking the shelter of the Guru.* 

After this the boy placed himself under the Guru’s 
instruction and learned to know God. 

^ The youth had not previously served any one. 

* War XXVII, lo. 



124 the SIKH RELIGION 

In due time the orders of the supreme government 
were received on the representation of the hill rajas’ 
envoy to the viceroy of Dihli. An army would be 
sent to assist them against the Guru, if they paid its 
expenses, but not otherwise. They accordingly sent 
the necessary funds, and further represented that 
they had no hope except in the Emperor’s assistance. 
The viceroy sent for Generals Din Beg and Painda 
Khan,^ both commanding divisions of five thousand 
men, and ordered them to take their troops to resist 
the Guru’s encroachments on the rights of the hill 
chiefs. When the imperial troops arrived, at Ropar, 
they were joined by the hill chiefs at the head of 
their contingents. They decided to expel the Guru 
if he offered resistance, but, if he undertook to be 
a loyal subject for the future, they were prepared 
to allow him to abide in Anandpur. 

A Sikh, hearing of the force proceeding against 
the Guru, hastened from Kiratpur to Anandpur to 
give him information. The Guru’s men were soon 
under arms. He appointed the five whom he had 
first baptized, as generals of his army. The Sikh 
chronicler states that, when the engagement began, 
the Turks were roasted by the continuous and 
deadly fire of the Sikhs. The Guru went into the 
midst of his troops and gave them every form of 
encouragement. They never retreated, but staunchly 
confronted the enemy. 

General Painda Khan, seeing the determined 
resistance of the Sikhs, shouted to his men that they 
were engaged in religious warfare, and called on 
them to fight to the death against the infidels. Upon 
this his troops discharged clouds of arrows, which 
obscured the sky. Painda Khan himself formed 
the design of engaging in single combat with the 
Guru, and thus, deciding the battle. The Guru, on 
hearing his challenge, advanced on horseback and 
said, ‘ 0 Pathan, I am Guru Gobind Singh, the 

^ This is not the Painda Khan who was killed by the sixth Guru. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBINI) SINGH 125 

enemy of thy life.’ On hearing this Painda Khan’s 
eyes became bloodshot, and he vowed to fight to 
the death against the priest of the Sikhs. He invited 
the Guru to strike the first blow, so that he might 
not afterwards have cause for regret. The Guru 
refused the rOle of aggressor and said he had vowed 
never to strike except in self-defence. 

Painda Khan whirled his horse round and round 
to find an opportunity of attacking the Guru and 
breaking his guard. At last both warriors and their 
horses stood still, and both sides began to speculate 
on their .chances of victory. Painda Khan dis- 
charged an arrow which whizzed past the Guru’s 
ear. The Guru ironically complimented him on his 
archery, and invited him to shoot again so that he 
might have no cause for remorse. Painda Khan 
discharged another arrow which also missed its 
mark. Upon this he was on the point of retreating 
through shame and vexation, when the Guru ad- 
dressed him : ‘ O jackal, wait a little. Whither 
goest thou ? It is now my turn.’ 

The whole of Painda Khan’s body except his ears 
was encased in armour. The Guru knowing this 
discharged an arrow at his ear with such unerring 
aim that he fell off his horse prone on the ground, 
and rose no more. This, however, did not end the 
battle. Din Beg now assumed sole command, 
and urged on his troops. Maddened by Painda 
Khan’s death they fought with great desperation, 
but were unable to make any impression on the solid 
ranks of the Sikhs. On the contrary the Sikh forces 
caused great destruction among them. Ajmer Chand, 
seeing this, prepared for flight. The other hill chiefs 
followed his example. By this time Din Beg was 
severely wounded, and began to ask himself why 
he should try to keep the feld any longer, since all 
those whom he had come to assist had ingloriously 
fled. He accordingly beat a retreat, and was pursued 
by the Sikhs as far as Ropar. 



126 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The Guru sent an officer to recall his troops as fie 
did not think it became Sikhs to take the trouble 
to pursue cowardly and fugitive enemies. The Sikhs 
returned with horses, arms, and a vast quantity of 
other booty taken from the Muhammadans. The 
Sikh chronicler states that the enemies’ heads 
remained on the field like so many pumpkins, and 
that kites, ravens, and jackals hovered round them 
impatient for a feast. 

The Guru continued to keep his troops in readiness 
for defence whenever attacked. He sent for ar- 
mourers to make muskets, swords, and arrows, and 
filled his magazine with gunpowder and lead. He 
issued a proclamation that all Sikhs who came to 
see him should bring offensive and defensive weapons 
as offerings. Numbers, hearing of his bravery and 
piety, flocked to his standard. He baptized all 
comers and thus infused, into them the spirit of the 
Khalsa. 

The hill chiefs again took alarm and said to them- 
selves that the Guru who had defeated Painda Khan 
and Din Beg, though commanding an army of ten 
thousand men, would be soon emboldened to oust 
them altogether from their territories. They must 
therefore either kill him or expel him from Anandpur, 
and with this object they again thought it necessary 
to seek the assistance of the Dihli government. Raja 
Ajmer Chand was deputed as envoy, and it was 
resolved to provide him with costly presents for the 
Emperor. 

Raja Bhup Chand, now Raja of Handur, braver 
than his fellows, opposed the dispatch of an envoy. 
He said that nothing could be gained by again 
seeking the assistance of the Emperor. They ought 
to be able to defend themselves. If all the hill 
chiefs concerned were to contribute reasonable 
contingents, they could muster a large army which 
would be more than suf&cient to annihilate the Guru 
and his Sikhs. He, however, proposed as the most 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 127 

simple and feasible measure, to invest the Guru’s 
capital, Anandpur, and starve its occupants into 
submission. Should any hill chief not join in this 
enterprise, the others were to hold no intercourse 
with him, but treat him as an enemy. The Ranghars 
and Gujars, who were their subjects and were at 
ancient enmity with the Sikhs, would now be valuable 
allies against the Guru. The Raja of Handur con- 
cluded his address, ‘ 0 Ajmer Chand, a reed is 
a frail support, but a handful of reeds bound together 
is not easily broken. If we all join together, the 
Sikhs will be powerless to offer us resistance.’ 

Raja Ajmer Chand was gained over by the proposal, 
and both he and Raja Bhup Chand sent envoys to 
all the hill chiefs. Upon this the Rajas of Jammu, 
Nurpur, Mandi, Bhutan, Kullu, Kionthal, Guler, 
Chamba, Srinagar, Dadhwal, and others came with 
their contingents. When they met in council, 
Raja Ajmer Chand thus addressed them : ‘ Hear 
me, 0 rajas, the Sikhs are not merely my enemies. 
They -are the common enemies of all. No one is 
able to withstand them. They cannot even be 
bribed by money into submission. We know not 
what their Guru’s designs may be. He baptizeth 
Sikhs, and they beget Sikhs as wicked as themselves. 
We know not what the Guru whispereth into their 
ears, that night and day they think of nothing but 
harrying and slaying. Give me your counsel as to 
what you deem best to be done.’ 

The rajas were unanimous in promising that they 
would agree to any proposal made by Raja Ajnier 
Chand. If the Guru, they said, were put to death 
they might all reign in peace. Accordingly ammuni- 
tion was served out to the allied army over night, 
and before daybreak all were on their march to 
Anandpur, On arriving near the city the rajas drew 
up the following letter and dispatched it to the 
Guru : ‘ The land of Anandpur is ours. We allowed 
thy father to dwell on it, and he ever paid us rent, 



128 THE SIKH RELIGION 

but thou payest us not a single kauri. Nay, thou 
hast originated a new religion, and laid our country 
waste. We have endured this up to the present, 
but can now endure it no longer*. Wherefore we have 
come to blockade thy town and destroy thee and thy 
Sikhs. This is the time for thee to pay arrears of rent 
for the occupation of our land. We call on thee to 
do so, and undertake to pay it regularly every year 
for the future. If thou art not &sposed to accept 
these terms, then prepare for thy departure from 
Anandpur or take the consequences.’ 

To this the Guru sent reply, ‘ O Ajmer Chand, thou 
and thine allied rajas desire to take money from me ; 
but my father purchased and paid for the land and 
now the only further payment you deserve is with 
the sword. If you can deprive me of Anandpur, 
you shall have it with bullets added thereto. Seek 
my protection, and you shall be happy in both 
worlds. Seek the protection of the Khalsa too, and 
abandon pride. Part not with your senses and 
come to terms with us. This is the Guru’s house, 
in which men shall be treated as they deserve. It 
is like a mirror. As men make themselves so they 
appear in it. If you proceed to hostilities with the 
Sikhs, they will not allow you to drink even a drop 
of water. Now is the time for a settlement. I shall 
act as a mediator between the 'Khalsa and you. 
You may then rule your states without apprehen- 
sion.’ 


Chapter XVI 

It was now abundantly clear to the rajas that the 
Guru would neither make peace nor surrender. Next 
morning they beat the drums of war, and, as they 
had anticipated, large numbers of Ranghars and 
Gujars under one Jagatullah flocked to their stan- 
dard. The allied armies then proceeded with banners 
flying to Anandpur. In the van rode Kesari Chand, 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 129 

the haughty chief of J aswan, bearing himself, it was 
said, like a mighty elephant. The Guru prepared 
for defence and briefly addressed his men : ‘ O 
Khalsa, I am ever your companion and succourer. 
If you die fighting, you shall enjoy all the happiness 
reserved for martyrs, arid if you survive and gain 
the victory, empire shall be yours.’ The Sikhs were 
further encouraged by the arrival of five hundred 
men of the Man j ha under Duni Chand, grandson of 
Bhai Salo, a distinguished Sikh who lived in the time 
of the fourth and fifth Gurus. Reinforcements from 
other quarters also arrived at this conjuncture. 

The names of the weapons served out by the Guru 
to the Sikhs are given with minute detail : bows and 
arrows, teghe (cutlasses), katars (small daggers), 
jamdhars (two-edged dirks), sarohis (flexible swords), 
sangs (pikes), lances, bichhuas (daggers, literally 
scorpions), jambuas (daggers), scimitars, selas (spears), 
pistols, and muskets. • 

Within Anandpur were two forts, one called Fata- 
garh, the other Lohgarh. The Guru ordered his men 
not to advance beyond the city, but remain as much 
as possible on the defensive. Sher Singh and Nahar 
Singh, each commanding five hundred men, were 
told off to guard Lohgarh. The defence of Fatagarh 
was entrusted to Ude Singh, who received from Duni 
Chand command of the reinforcements of the Manjha. 
Meanwhile the allied armies advanced and fell on 
Anandpur like a flight of locusts. 

Aj it Singh, the Guru’s eldest son, now grown up 
to manhood, went to his father to offer him military 
service. He was, however, too shy to speak in his 
father’s presence, and requested Ude Singh to speak 
for him. The Guru replied that it was the duty of 
all true Sikhs to fight for their religion, their country, 
and a good cause, and he was glad to see his son 
adopting their hereditary profession. The Guru 
conferred on him the command of a company of 
one hundred, and advised him, as he was still in- 

K 


SIKH. V 



130 THE SIKH RELIGION 

experienced in warfare, to remain behind cover and 
await events. 

Raja Ajmer Chand, reminding his fellow chiefs that 
this was really the most important engagement with 
the Guru, advanced with his troops. The hill chiefs 
opened fire with large guns on the Guru’s fortresses. 
Raja Kesari Chand of J aswan with his troops attacked 
Ude Singh’s outposts. Arrows and bullets discharged 
from both sides fell like rain in the Indian months of 
Sawan and Bhadon.* The Ranghars and Gujars, 
who appear to have fought with much determination, 
were now reduced to half their numbers, and showed 
a disposition to retreat. Raja Ajmer Chand went 
to Jagatullah, their leader, and remonstrated with 
him. He called on him to avenge the sack and 
destruction by the Sikhs of the Ranghars* towns 
of Nuh and Bajrur. Jagatullah succeeded in rally- 
ing his men, and they again began to fight with great 
valour. Ude Singh on seeing this brought forth the 
Guru’s son and with a strong force led an attack on 
the enemy. Ajit Singh displayed great heroism and 
address, and the Sikhs following his example chopped 
off the heads of the enemy, as if they were water- 
melons. The Guru surveyed the battle from an 
eminence and continued to direct his arrows with 
fatal precision against the allied hosts. 

Several brave Sikhs made a determined stand 
against the enemy and forced them to retreat. On 
seeing this the allied chiefs held a brief council of 
war, wherein it was decided to dispatch Kesari 
Chand to attack the right flank and Jagatullah 
the left flank of the Guru’s position, while Ajmer 
Chand himself and his troops made a front attack 
on Anandpur. Jagatullah was soon shot in the 
chest by a bullet discharged from Sahib Singh’s 
musket, and fell lifeless to the earth. Man Singh, 
one of the bravest of the Guru’s Sikhs, arrived 

1 These are the principal months of the Indian rainy season — froih 
Ihe early part of July to the early part of September. ^ 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 131 

bearing the Guru’s standard, and planted it on the 
spot as an indication to the enemy that the Sikhs 
would not retreat a single pace, or allow them to 
remove Jagatullah’s body. 

Raja Ghumand Chand, now chief of Kangra, came 
and sought to uproot the' Guru’s standard and hinder 
the Sikhs from taking possession of the body of the 
fallen chief of the Ranghars. Upon this the allied 
armies rallied, and then ensued terrific slaughter. 
Ghumand Chand and his troops plied their arrows 
incessantly, but failed to cause the Sikhs to retreat. 
The latter defended themselves until nightfall and 
retained possession of Jagatullah’s body. The 
opposing armies then retired to their respective 
quarters for rest. The Guru complimented his son 
and Sahib Singh, the slayer oi Jagatullah, on their 
successful valour. It is stated that the leaves of the 
sal ^ tree were employed overnight to heal the injuries 
of the wounded. 

The hill chiefs were in great dismay at the result 
of the battle, and held a council of war during the 
night. Raja Ajmer Chand apprehended from the 
resistance offered by the Sikhs to the removal of 
Jagatullah’s body, that it would be useless to 
prolong the contest. If they had the same ill-for- 
tune on the morrow, there would be little left of 
the hill armies. The Raja of Kangra professed him- 
self ready to acquiesce in Raja Ajmer Chand’ s 
decision. The Raja of Mandi too was for peace, 
and advised suing for the Guru’s pardon, seeing that 
he occupied Guru Nanak’s spiritual throne, and there 
would be no indignity in appealing to him as sup- 
pliants. The Raja of Handur, however, did not 
consider that any reason for effecting a reconcilia- 
tion. Raja Kesari Chand of Jaswan affected to 
despise the Guru’s power, and promised to fight 
with more determination on the morrow and expel 
him from Anandpur. 

^ The Skorea robusla. Natural order, Dipterocarpaceae. 



132 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Next morning, when the hill armies proceeded to 
re-invest*Anandpur, the Sikhs offered vahant resist- 
ance. The allied troops contented themselves with 
concentrating their attack on one particular part of 
the city. The fighting continued with varying for- 
tune until the afternoon, when Ajit Singh prepared 
to renew the contest, and requested his father to 
observe how he comported himself in it. The Guru 
counselled caution, and forbade him to expose him- 
self unnecessarily. At the same time he sent thou- 
sands of Sikhs to siipport him in what he declared 
was a war for the defence of their religion. The 
allied armies rushed against them with the violence 
of a torrent issuing from the Himalayas in the 
height of the rainy season. 

Whithersoever Ajit Singh discharged his arrows, 
they were messengers of death. Wien his horse 
was killed under him he fought on foot, and inflicted 
great destruction on his opponents. He communi- 
cated his martial enthusiasm to his Sikh warriors, 
with the result that the hill armies began to retreat. 
Raja Kesari Chand, seeing this, addressed them 
severe reproaches, whereat they rallied and again 
began to ply their weapons. At the same time the 
enemy now clearly saw that they could not over- 
power the brave Sikhs, but must trust to time and 
the starving of the garrison for the success of their 
enterprise. 

The siege lasted for about two months, with the 
usual incidents appertaining to that mode of war- 
fare. The Sikhs at one time determined to remove 
the entrenchments of the enemy, and put them all 
to the sword without firing a shot. They accord- 
ingly made a night sortie in which several of the 
hill leaders were slain. 

As the hill chiefs unsuccessfully prolonged the 
blockade, Raja Kesari Chand prepared to intoxicate 
an elephant and direct him against the city. Kesari 
Chand compared the defences of the city to paper 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 133 

and sand, which would fall to the ground at the 
touch of the elephant’s trunk. The Raja pf Mandi 
again raised his voice in favour of peace and sub- 
mission to superior force. Kesari Chand, however, 
swore that if he did not take the fort by evening, 
he was no true son of his parents. All the future 
punishments attaching to great crimes against the 
Hindu religion should be his, if he failed in his 
enterprise. He represented that in point of numbers 
the Sikhs were not even as salt in the porridge of 
the hillmen. 

When the Guru heard of Kesari Chand’s boasts 
he said that Duni Chand, who had brought the 
reinforcement of Manjha troops, was his elephant, 
in comparison with whom Kesari Chand’s elephant 
was as an ant. Duni Chand, however, had no such 
confidence in his own strength and prowess, and 
counselled peace with the hill chiefs. He com- 
plained that the Guru was violent and quarrelsome, 
not mild and patient like his father. He therefore 
advised the Sikhs to fly from such a leader. None 
of the Guru’s immediate followers would listen to 
such advice, but Duni Chand succeeded in per- 
suading the troops he had brought with him to 
promise to desert to Dhir Mai in Kartarpur and 
adopt him as their guru. The plan of escape pro- 
posed was to descend by scaling-ladders. When 
Duni Chand was in the act of descending, his scaling- 
ladder gave way, and he fell heavily to the ground 
and broke his leg. This interfered with his design 
of going to Kartarpur to place himself and his 
troops under Dhir Mai’s orders, and he consequently 
thought it advisable to return to his own home in 
Amritsar. 

The next morning the Guru after his devotions 
observed that no soldier of Duni Chand’s contingent 
was present. In reply to his inquiries, his Sikhs 
told him of the flight of Duni Chand and his followers 
during the night. The Guru calmly remarked, ‘ He 



134 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


who hath run away through fear of death shall find 
death awaiting him at home.’ The conduct of 
Duni Chand, notwithstanding his efforts to con- 
ceal it, became known in Amritsar. All the Sikhs 
of that city were thus enabled to avoid intercourse 
with him, and he became an object of social as well 
as religious detestation. One night as he rose from 
his bed he was bitten by a cobra, and died almost 
immediately. His grandsons with his leading soldiers 
afterwards went to the Guru to pray him to efface 
the stigma attached to the family — a prayer which 
the Guru graciously granted. 

As proposed by Raja Kesari Chand, an elephant 
was intoxicated and prepared for the attack on 
Anandpur. All his body except the tip of his trunk 
was encased in steel. A strong spear projected from 
his forehead for the purpose of assault. Thus 
arrayed and prepared for offence and defence, he 
was directed towards the gate of the fort. After 
him came the hill rajas with their armies. They 
were overjoyed as they joined in the unwonted pro- 
cession, and made certain that on that very evening 
the fort would fall into their possession. The Guru 
asked Vichitar Singh, one of his bravest and most 
powerful soldiers, to become his elephant, and he 
cheerfully consented. The Guru gave him a trusty 
lance and said that as Vichitar Singh was prepared 
to resist the mad elephant, so some Sikh should 
now go to cut off Kesari Chand’s head. Ude Singh 
offered his services for the purpose, and received the 
Guru’s blessing and a sword. On this he dashed 
into Kesari Chand’s ranks like a tiger into a herd 
of deer. 

Kesari Chand’s elephant was specially directed 
against the fort of Lohgarh. On his way he killed 
some Sikhs, and so alarmed the sentries at the gate, 
that they deserted their posts and fled within the 
city for protection. Vichitar Singh found meajis of 
opening the gates and went forth to meet the furious 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 135 

animal. He raised his lance and drove it through 
the elephant’s head armour.^ On this the animal 
turned round on the hill soldiers, and killed several 
of them with the offensive weapons attached to his 
trunk. Some he trod under foot and others he 
impaled on his tusks, so tliat he became a powerful 
ally of the Sikhs. The hillmen made great efforts 
to stop his career, but in vain. 

Meanwhile Ude Singh continued to advance 
against Kesari Chand, challenged him, called him 
a great jackal, and asked why he was fleeing from 
his fate. Ude Singh vowed that he would take 
vengeance on him for all the Sikhs slain. Kesari 
Chand, infuriated at his taunts, discharged an arrow 
which lodged in Ude Singh’s saddle-cloth. Ude 
Singh on this dashed forward sword in hand, and 
with one blow cut off Kesari Chand’s head. Then 
poising the head on his spear, he rode into the fort 
to exhibit it as a tangible proof of his victory. 
Upon this the Sikhs rallied, and cut off all the foot 
soldiers of the hill army within reach. Muhakam 
Singh, one of the Guru’s five beloved, shore off the 
mad elephant’s trunk with one blow of his sword. 
The animal then hastened to the Satluj to bring his 
pains and his unsuccessful career to an end by self- 
destruction. 

What remained, alive of the hill army now took 
to flight pursued by the bravest of the Sikh warriors 
who slew them in numbers. In this retreat the 
Raja of Handur was severely wounded by the brave 
Sahib Singh, who thus added another to his long 
catalogue of triumphs. 

On the morrow the hill army rallied owing to the 

' In former times in India men were trained to contend and grapple 
even without weapons with elephants. In the Mahdbhdrat such 
a contest is described. The warrior Bhima is represented as 
crouching under the body of Bhagadatta's elephant and causing the 
animal to whirl round ai>d round by the deft application of his power- 
ful arms. 



136 THE SIKH RELIGION 

encouragement given it by Ghumand Chand, the 
Raja of Kangra. He disdained to retreat, and called 
on Ajmer Chand to witness his prowess. He said 
that death and life were the ordinary concomitants 
of warfare, and bravely maintained that neither 
should be taken into consideration. Ajmer Chand 
said, ‘ Thou art the pilot to take us across the sea 
of mourning. We depend on thee to kill the Guru 
and thus put an end to these protracted and un- 
satisfactory operations.’ The Raja of Mandi for 
the third time counselled peace; Meantime the 
homes of the hill rajas resounded with female lamen- 
tation for their husbands slain. Kesari Chand’s 
ranis plucked out their hair for the loss of their 
brave spouse, and heaped reproaches on Ajmer 
Chand as responsible for all this sanguinary and 
unavailing warfare. 

On the following day Ghumand Chand directed 
the efforts of his troops against the city, but the 
Sikhs behind their embrasures and defences were 
fully prepared to withstand them. The horse Ghu- 
mand Chand rode was killed by a bullet from the 
musket of Alim Singh. There was a sharp mil^e 
round Ghumand Chand when he fell, but his party 
succeeded in keeping the Sikhs at bay and rescuing 
their chief. The battle lasted with varying success 
until evening, when Ghumand Ghand, as he was 
proceeding to his tent to take rest after the day’s 
exertions, was mortally wounded by a chance bullet. 
All the hill chiefs now became disheartened and 
demoralized. Raja Ajmer Chand was the last to 
remain, but he .too left Anandpur, and marched 
home in the dead of night. 

Ajmer Chand, notwithstanding the disastrous 
defeat of the allied armies, determined to allow no 
repose to the Guru. As early as possible he dispatched 
an envoy to Wazir Khan,^ the Emperor’s viceroy in 
Sarhind, to complain that the Guru would not suffer 

This is, of course, not the old friend of the Guru. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 137 

His Majesty’s unoffending subjects to abide in peace. 
He prayed the viceroy to assist the hill chiefs in 
destroying the Guru’s power and expelling him from 
Anandpur. Another envoy was dispatched to the 
viceroy of Dihli to make a similar complaint. The 
two viceroys then made a joint representation to 
the Emperor against the Guru. It happened that 
at that time some wandering mimes visited the 
Emperor’s camp. He ordered them to imitate the 
Sikhs, and they accordingly did so. Though their 
performance was obviously a travesty, the Emperor 
could very clearly gather from it the love the Sikhs 
bore one another in popular estimation ; and he con- 
cluded that they had become a formidable power, 
which it would be expedient to crush. The 
viceroy of Dihli had enough to do to protect the 
capital during the Emperor’s absence in the distant 
Dakhan, so orders were issued to the viceroy of 
Sarhind to proceed at once with his army to expel 
the Guru from Anandpur. 


Chapter XVII 

After the Guru’s victory over the hill chiefs his 
disciples rapidly increased, and thousands of recruits 
were added to his army. To enhance his style and 
dignity he ordered that his body-guard should for 
the future be provided with arrows tipped with gold 
to the value of sixteen rupees each. 

Bhai Ram Kaur, came to visit the Guru. The 
Guru’s mother, it is said, had been expecting some 
holy man and was anxiously awaiting him. The 
Guru expressed the pleasure he felt to receive the 
representative of a family which ever since the days 
of Baba Nanak had been true and faithful to the 
Guru and the Sikh cause. The Guru baptized him 
and named him Gurbakhsh Singh. This man is 
principally remarkable for having, it is said, dictated 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


138 

to a scribe called Sahib Singh the work entitled Sau 
Sakhi, some account of which has already been given. 

One Joga Singh came from Peshawar to visit the 
Guru, and remained with him until the time for his 
marriage to a beautiful girl, when he departed to 
his own country. The Guru unwilling to lose his 
companionship, and wishing at the same time to 
make trial of his devotion, sent a letter to be delivered 
him in the midst of the marriage ceremony. It 
contained an order that whether Joga Singh was 
standing or sitting, sleeping or waking, he should 
on receiving it at once return to the Guru. The 
messenger presented the letter when only two of the 
marriage circumambulations had been completed. 
Joga Singh at once stopped the marriage ceremony, 
and forthwith proceeded to the Guru. On the way 
he plumed himself on his obedience, and thus com- 
mitted the sin of pride. In further forgetfulness 
of the Guru’s teaching, he on arriving at Hoshiarpur 
thought he would visit a courtesan to drown in her 
company his regret for the interruption of his 
marriage. Whenever he presented himself to the 
woman, a servant was found at her door to warn him 
away. Having waited until the early morning, he 
at last bethought him that he was violating the 
commands of the Guru, and he consequently deter- 
mined to proceed on his journey. .The Guru smiled 
on seeing him. When Joga Singh told the Sikhs' 
the incidents of his journey, they knew that he had 
been saved from sin by the miraculous interposition 
of the Guru. 

The Guru about this time heard that a large 
imperial army was on its way to attack Anandpur 
and assist the hill chiefs, so he deemed it expedient 
to advance to meet them on open ground. He 
accordingly went to Nirmoh, a village over a mile 
distant from Kiratpur. 

Raja Ajmer Chand and the Raja of Kangra said 
that now was their time to seize the Guru. He 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 139 

had no fort to protect him and no further means of 
withstanding them, and it was not necessary to 
await the arrival of the imperial army. Both sides 
were prepared for battle. The Guru and his troops 
took up a post on an eminence, and the hill chiefs 
also took up what seemed to them advantageous 
positions. A fierce combat ensued in which the 
Sikhs were ultimately victorious 

One afternoon as the Guru sat in court the hill 
chiefs engaged a Muhammadan gunner to kill him 
for adequate remuneration. Ajmer Chand under- 
took in the event of the assassin’s success, to give 
him Rs. 5000 and the proprietary rights of a village. 
The other rajas too promised proportionate rewards. 
The Muhammadan assured them that all prepara- 
tions for his design would be ready by the morrow. 

Next day, as the Guru sat in the same place, he 
was warned by a Sikh of the plot against his life, 
and advised to take precautions. The Guru replied, 
‘ How long am I to remain in concealment ? What- 
soever the Creator hath decided shall take place.’ 
During this conversation a cannon ball from the 
enemy’s camp took away the servant who was 
fanning him. The Guru took up his bow and arrow 
and shot the gunner while in the act of reloading. 
With a second arrow the Guru killed the Muham- 
madan gunner’s brother who also was serving the 
gun. On seeing these two skilled artillerymen slain, 
the hillmen took to flight. The Muhammadans were 
buried on the spot called Siyah Tibbi or black hill, 
and a votive temple was erected by the Sikhs to 
commemorate the Guru’s escape. 

The army of Wazir Khan, the viceroy of Sarhind, 
in due time proceeded against the Guru. The Guru 
now found himself in a very dangerous position 
between the hill chiefs on the one hand, and the 
imperial army on the other. He resolved, however, 
to defend himself where he was, and his Sikhs 
resolved to stand faithfully and valiantly by him. 



140 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


They discharged arrows with fatal effect on the 
imperial troops as they advanced, so that corpse 
rolled over corpse. Wazir Khan gave an order to 
his troops to make a sudden rush and seize the 
Guru. The Guru was ably and successfully pro- 
tected by his faithful son A jit Singh and his other 
brave warriors. They stayed the advance of the 
imperial troops, and cut them down in rows, as if 
they had lain down to sleep in their beds. The 
carnage continued until night rendered it no longer 
possible for the adversaries to see one another. 

After a council of war held during the night the 
crafty hill chiefs represented to Wazir Khan that 
the cause of enmity between the Guru and them- 
selves was that he had tried to forcibly convert 
them to his religion. They also stated that the 
Guru had offered to join them in making war on 
the Emperor, whom he proposed to kill, and whose 
empire he promised to transfer to them. Continuing 
their falsehoods, they further informed Wazir Khan 
that they had spurned all the Guru’s offers on account 
of their loyalty to the Emperor. 

Next day the imperial army and the contingents 
of the hill chiefs made such a furious assault on the 
Guru’s forces that he felt obliged to give way. For 
him to return to Anandpur would have been in- 
judicious under the circumstances, and would only 
lead to its destruction, so he decided on retiring to 
Basali whose raja had frequently invited him to his 
capital. Then marched in the van Ude Singh, Alim 
Singh, Daya Singh, and Muhakam Singh in command 
of two thousand men. They were accompanied by 
the Guru’s son Ajit Singh. Sahib Singh marched 
next with one thousand of the bravest of the Sikhs. 
The Guru himself took command of the rear guard. 

The Guru’s departure was the signal for an attack 
by the imperial army and a general miUe ensued 
in which dust obscured the sky. Cries of ‘ Kill 
him ! ’ ‘ Seize him ! ’ ‘ Allow not the Guru to 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 141 

escape ! ’ resounded. Wazir Khan bit his thumb, 
and said he had never before witnessed such des- 
perate fighting. Though the Sikhs were escaping, 
they were destroying his army. He urged the hill 
chiefs to support him, but they were unable to render 
effectual help. Until the Guru’s army reached the 
vSatluj there was stubborn fighting, in which the 
brave Sahib Singh was slain. The Guru then told 
his men to make a firm stand, while his son Ajit 
Singh crossed over with the baggage. The Guru 
with his troops then crossed over taking with them 
Sahib Singh’s body. The hill chiefs were overjoyed 
at being, as they thought, delivered from the Guru. 
They made presents of elephants to Wazir Khan 
and departed to their homes. 

The Guru having succeeded in crossing the river 
proceeded to Basali, and took up his residence with 
its hospitable raja. Wazir Khan did not avail him- 
self of his opportunity to pursue the Guru, but 
returned to his viceroyalty of Sarhind. After resting 
himself and his troops in Basali, the Guru amused 
himself with the chase as of yore. He occasionally 
crossed over to the left bank of the Satluj and made 
desultory attacks on Ajmer Chand’s army. 

One day during the chase the Guru was met by 
an envoy of the Raja of Bhabaur. The raja 
followed close behind, and pressed the Guru to pay 
a visit to his capital. The Guru, to the regret of 
the Raja of Basali, accepted the invitation. The 
Raja of Bhabaur had such faith in him, and was 
so favourably impressed with the general repute of 
the excellence of his religion, that he washed his 
feet, and performed for him all the duties of hospi- 
tality. The raja pressed him to remain with him 
for some time, a request with which the Guru com- 
plied. 

A company of Sikhs who had sought to make 
offerings to the Guru represented to him that the 
Ranghars and Gujars of Kalmot had violently seized 



142 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


what they had intended for him. They cried for 
justice in the name of the Guru, but the Ranghars 
and Gujars heeded not their adjurations. The Guru 
found it necessary to punish these turbulent tribes 
who had never allowed him peace. His troops dis- 
armed them and captured and destroyed their fort. 

The Sikhs having now enjoyed sufficient rest began 
to feel time drag slowly. Their trusted leaders 
Day a Singh and Ude Singh represented to the Guru 
that it was a disgrace to have evacuated Anandpur. 
The Guru was not long in determining to return 
and ordered the drum to be beaten for the march. 
The hill chiefs appear to have been unprepared for 
his return and offered no resistance. The inhabi- 
tants of the city were delighted on seeing the Guru 
again among them. Buildings were repaired and 
decorated, and offerings of every description were 
made to the great spiritual and temporal leader. 
It was one magnificent scene of rejoicing. 

Raja Ajmer Chand, the Guru’s most persistent 
enemy, finding him again firmly established in 
Anandpur, thought it expedient to sue for peace. 
Daya Singh recommended the Guru to return a 
favourable answer to Ajmer Chand’s prayer. The 
Guru accordingly wrote to say he was willing to 
come to terms with Ajmer Chand, but would punish 
him if he were again guilty of treachery. Ajmer 
Chand was glad to have a promise of peace for a 
time even with the threat held out to him ; and 
he sent his family priest with presents and con- 
gratulations to the Guru. The other hill chiefs on 
hearing of Ajmer Chand’s reconciliation with the 
Guru followed his example, and sent him tangible 
indications of their good-will and friendly intentions. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 143 


Chapter XVIII 

In a conversation regarding the fabulous bird 
called anal in Hindi and huma in Persian poetry, 
some one remarked that arrows winged with the 
bird’s feathers would reach a prodigious distance. 
The Guru remarked that, as it was the peculiarity 
of the bird’s feather's to carry arrows to its home 
in the sky, so the repetition of one of the Gurus’ 
hymns would take the soul to heaven. ‘ He ’, con- 
tinued the Guru, ‘ who speaketh truth, who serveth 
the congregation of saints, and who hath confidence 
in the Gurus’ hymns is my Sikh, and shall for ever 
abide in bliss.’ 

Several Sikhs from the north of the Pan jab came 
to visit the Guru and present their offerings. A 
Sikh residing in Rohtas in the present district of 
Jihlam^ thought that the most suitable offering he 
could make the Guru was his daughter Sahib Devi. 
He accordingly took her to him in a palki. The 
Guru, in response to this offer, said he had relin- 
quished family life. The girl’s father on hearing 
this became much disappointed and distressed. 
He pointed out that he had long since dedicated 
her to the Guru, that in consequence every one 
called her mother, and now no one would wed her 
after her rejection. On the other hand, if she 
remained single, great sin would in the estimation 
of pious persons attach to her parents. He accord- 
ingly pressed the Guru to reconsider his decision. 

The Guru then told him to ask her if she would 
consent to serve him. She replied in the affirmative. 
The Guru upon this baptized her, gave her the 
name Sahib Kaur, and consigned her to his mother’s 
apartments. There she made a vow that she would 

^ Bhai Sukha Singh makes this event occur when the Guru was on 
his way to the South of India. In that case the father of the girl 
might have come from Rohtas in Bihar. 



144 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


not touch food until she had seen the Guru. The 
Guru could not allow her to die of hunger, and 
accordingly visited her. One day as she was sham- 
pooing him, he asked her if she had any request to 
make. She replied, that as her two co-wives had 
sons, so she also desired a son to call her own. The 
Guru replied, ‘ I will give thee a son who will abide 
for ever. I will put the whole Khalsa into thy 
lap.’ The lady on hearing this was much pleased, 
and prostrated herself before her master. It is still 
not an uncommon thing for a Sikh to say, when 
asked regarding his parentage, that his father is 
Guru Gobind Singh, and his mother Sahib Kaur. 
Such a Sikh would also say that he was born in 
Patna, and resided in Anandpur. Indeed, Sikhs are 
enjoined to give these answers at the time of bap- 
tism. 

One Jagga Singh performed most assiduous ser- 
vice for the Guru, and was consequently much 
envied by his fellow servants. Some said that 
several men had done similar service and gone away 
ungrateful, and Jagga Singh was not superior to 
any of his predecessors. Others again said that he 
being a new servant was no doubt diligent, but his 
zeal would soon evaporate. The Guru overhearing 
these remarks sent for a vessel of water, a stone, 
and some sweets. He put the stone and sweets 
into the water. After a short time he ordered 
them to be taken out. The stone of course came out 
whole, but the sweets had all dissolved. The Guru 
read his servants a moral lesson from what they 
had seen. He said that those who served him well 
and heartily, blended with him as the sweets had done 
with the water ; while those who served him for 
show and appearance, had hearts like the stone 
which never dissolved. He then ordered that no 
one should for the future molest or speak evil of 
his faithful servant Jagga Singh. 

Raja Ajmer Chand, though outwardly professing 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 145 

peace, determined to again expel the Guru from 
Anandpur. He accordingly sent a Brahman as an 
ambassador, but really as a spy on the Guru’s pro- 
ceedings. The Brahman on being introduced to the 
Guru used very mild and plausible language. The 
Guru, however, soon discovered that he was a very 
dangerous person, in no way to -be trusted, soft to 
the touch like a snake, but filled with concealed 
poison. The man duly set himself to the task of 
ferreting out the Guru’s secrets. The Guru well 
understood his designs, but at the same time main- 
tained a semblance of friendship tow'ards him. The 
Brahman wrote to his master to describe the excel- 
lent and confidential relations that subsisted between 
him and the Guru, and at the same time suggested 
that some dexterous persons should be sent to steal the 
Guru’s horses. The Brahman also kept his eye on the 
Guru’s treasury with the object of ascertaining how 
much it contained, and how its contents could be 
abstracted. In due time Raja Ajmer Chand dis- 
patched some of the most expert thieves he could 
find in his state, and they succeeded in depriving 
the Guru of two of his favourite chargers. 

The Brahman suggested to the Guru to go to the 
approaching fair of Rawalsar near Mandi. The 
other chiefs would attend, and it would be a good 
opportunity of cementing friendly relations with 
them. At the same time, he told the Guru's Sikhs 
as an inducement that if they went there they should 
see stones swim. The Guru’s mother, his wives, 
and his sons all pressed him to visit the fair. He 
yielded to the wish of the majority, and ordered 
all preparations to be made for his departure. 

The Brahman informed all the hill chiefs of the 
Guru’s intention to appear at the fair, and suggested 
that they should be present also. The Guru prepared 
a magnificent reception for them, and they were all 
charmed with his engaging manners. The rajas 
entreated him to forget and forgive their former 

L 


SIKH. V 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


146 

offences. They were assured in reply that the Guru 
would treat them as they deserved at his hands. 

The Guru received the wives of the rajas in 
a separate tent. He gave them instruction suitable 
to their status and position, and they were entranced 
with the interview. The Guru noticing their admira- 
tion told the eldest among them that it was time 
for their departure. The ranis were, it is said, loth 
to move, but the eldest lady convinced them of the 
propriety of terminating their visit. One of them, 
Padmani, daughter of the Raja of Chamba, with 
her father’s permission, sent the Guru a letter in 
the form of a riddle — ‘ What is that which is com- 
plete ? What is its three-fourths ? What is duality ? 
What is departure ? What are the two houses for 
human beings ? They ate some and took the rest 
to sleep with them. O Guru, riddle me this.’ The 
Guru replied : — 

A god’s body is complete ; a man’s is only three-quarters 
thereof. 

People run after wealth ; men and women are but dust. 

People wander in both worlds after eating and spending 
their wealth in this. 

When the world is destroyed every one goeth to sleep ; 
this is the answer to thy riddle, O child. 

The princess was much pleased on receiving this 
answer, and with her father’s permission went again 
to visit the Guru. When she made her obeisance 
before him he patted her on the shoulder with his 
bow. She said, ‘ I am thy worshipper ; why hast 
thou not patted me with thy hand ? ’ The Guru 
replied he never touched any woman except his own 
wives with his hand. 

As the Guru was returning home from the fair, 
he was met by the Raja of Mandi who besought 
him to pay a visit to his capital The Guru readily 
accepted the invitation. During his stay the Guru 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 147 

promised the raja that Mandi should for ever remain 
in his line. 

While the Guru was occupied with the hill chiefs, 
the Brahmans were counteracting his religious 
efforts. Sikhs who before their conversion had 
been Brahmans and Khatris now came in fewer 
numbers to visit him. They did not wish that their 
sacrificial threads should be thrown away among 
the bushes, or that they should have to part with 
their loin-clothes^. It was in vain the Guru told 
them that Sikhs should spring from every bush on 
which their sacrificial threads had been thrown. 
He said that they who had no faith in him might 
or might not come as they chose. The paltry 
fellows who wore threads the Guru thought of 
no use to him. His Sikhs should become very 
powerful, if they freed themselves from Brahmanical 
prejudices and influences, and adopted the Sikh 
ritual when there were births, marriages, or deaths 
in their families. 

The Guru upon this prepared a general feast both 
for Sikhs and Brahmans, but the latter refused to 
attend, and reproached him with having taken away 
the distinguishing marks of the Hindus. When the 
Sikhs were feasting he said that as the Brahmans 
had forsaken him, so he would forsake them, and 
break off all relations with them. To some of his 
own people who manifested symptoms of dissatis- 
faction, he said that if they remained on good terms 
with the Khalsa, they should always be happy ; 
otherwise sorrow should be their portion. He had 
given everything to the Khalsa — spiritual and tem- 
poral power, enterprise, glory, self-devotion, skill in 
arms, and by these should they acquire empire. 
His speech was heard by his first wife, and when 
he went to his private apartments she inquired 
what he had left his family. He replied that he 

^ For the dhoii ox insecurely fastened loin-cloth worn by the , Hindus 
the Guru Substituted the short drawers called kachh. 

L2 



148 THE SIKH RELIGION 

had given to her children the stable empire of 
heaven. 

His Sikhs were one day discussing idolatry. The 
Guru when asked to give his opinion said, ‘ All 
worship is valueless without love. The worship of 
images is unreal : the worship of God alone is real. 
Nothing can be obtained by image-worship They 
who place images before them and worship them 
are fools. Let my Sikhs ever meditate on the Im- 
mortal God and worship none besides. Let them 
ever practise arms, that they may be enabled to 
defend themselves against their enemies.’ 

On another occasion the Guru gave the following 
reply to questions put him by his Sikhs : — 

He who ever thinketh of the future is accepted as the 
Guru’s disciple. 

Famine is bad, and bad is cold ; bad is the love of a 
courtesan ; 

Bad are debt and falsehood ; utter the truth, my friends. 

The Guru further advised his Sikhs not to employ 
an enemy as a doctor, not to listen to astrologers, 
to avoid greed, and to consider wealth unreal as 
a dream. Winding up his discourse he said, ‘ Let 
my Sikhs eschew evil, adopt what is good, and have 
confidence in me.’ 

Bishambhar of Ujjain had once fallen under the 
influence of the Guru’s teach'ng and made him an 
offering of one hundred rupees. He now sent his 
son, a Vaishnav called Har Gopal, with an offering 
of five times that amount. The son on seeing the 
Guru eat meat became disgusted. The Guru said 
in his presence, that all relishes were pleasing to the 
mind. A Sikh replied that a relish was only pleasing 
to the tongue. Others also gave their opinions, and 
when it came to Har Gopal’ s turn, he said that the 
real relish was faith in Sikhism. The Guru knowing 
that he was not uttering his real sentiments, said, 
‘ Thou enjoyest no such relish, for thou hast no 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 149 

faith in the Sikh religion.' When the Guru addressed 
him further reproaches, he fell at his feet and im- 
plored his pardon. He then laid his father’s present 
of five hundred rupees before the Guru. The Guru 
in return gave him a steel bracelet^ to wear, and 
promised that the love 'of God should abide in his 
family. 

Har Gopal, not at all satisfied or convinced by 
the Guru’s teaching or example, took his departure. 
On his way home he stopped at Chamkaur where 
he met an earnest Sikh named Dhyan Singh. He 
confided to him how he had wasted five hundred 
rupees in making a present to a Guru who ate meat. 
Dhyan Singh said he would restore him the money, 
if he in return gave him the steel bracelet and the 
love of God bestowed on him by the Guru. Har 
Gopal was delighted on receiving such an offer, and 
took the money in exchange for what he believed 
to be the worthless gifts of the Guru. He traded 
with the money and made a large profit. When he 
reached home he told his father Bishambhar all the 
events of the journey. Bishambhar was much dis- 
tressed at his want of faith in the Guru, and remon- 
strated with him. Har Gopal continued his pecuniary 
speculations, and in the end lost all his money. 
He was then satisfied that this was the result of 
his want of faith in the Guru, and he prayed his 
father to take him again to the spiritual and temporal 
head of the Sikhs. ' The father was pleased to do so, 
and set out with his wife and all his family. On 
the way the party called on Dhyan Singh at Cham- 
kaur and induced him to accompany them on their 
journey. 

Bishambhar on reaching the Guru begged forgive- 
ness for his unworthy son. The Guru baptized 

^ In the time of the Guru men who could afford the expense, wore 
gold and silver ornaments. The Guru desired to wean his followers 
from the practice, and counselled them to depend on steel both for 
ornaments and defensive weapons. 



150 THE SIKH RELIGION 

them all, and thus addressed Har Gopal — ‘Thou 
oughtest to have had confidence in my words. He 
who believeth that the ten Gurus are all the same 
is a Sikh of mine. T.ook on the hymns of the 
Granth as the embodiment of the true Guru. Put 
faith in the Guru, and becoming a Sikh perform 
thy worldly duties. With humble words induct 
others into the faith, and give thy daughter to 
a Sikh. Let him who is a Sikh according to 
the old rites, marry his daughter to him who is 
a Sikh according to the new rites. If a Sikh cannot 
find a husband according to the new rites for his 
daughter, then let him give her to him who is a 
Sikh according to the old rites, but willing to receive 
Sikh baptism. Let a Sikh receive instruction from 
another Sikh, and not consider whether he is of 
high or low degree. Look on him as a good Sikh 
who thinketh not of caste or lineage. Let a Sikh 
be honest in his dealings, and pray for him who 
affordeth him maintenance. Whoever of the rank 
of Sikh committeth treachery shall find no place of 
rest. 

‘ Love the Name ; repeat it in thine innermost 
heart ; teach the Name. In the Name is happiness ; 
the Name is a generous companion. He who liveth 
for his religion, who eateth only to support his 
body, who walketh in the Guru’s way, and who is 
not enamoured of the world, is my friend. As when 
a traveller goeth to a foreign land and is ever hoping 
for the end of his journey, so should man hope for 
his soul’s final repose by doing good works and 
remaining estranged from the world. Listen to me, 
my friend, and be ever ready to leave this life. Thou 
and I shall depart. This is not a new ordinance.’ 

After this the father and son proceeded rejoicing 
to their home. In the course of a short time their 
wealth increased, and Har Gopal recovered all that 
he had lost. Dhyan Singh told the Guru that, as 
he was ploughing in his field on the day after he 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 151 

had received the bracelet and God’s love from Har 
Gopal, his plough exposed a buried treasure of great 
value. The Guru congratulated him and called him 
a devout Sikh who would always possess God’s love 
and favour. 

One day Mata Jit6,*the Guru’s wife, appeared 
before him and said, ‘ Thou bestowest on thy Sikhs 
deliverance, union with God, and worldly blessings. 
Let me also be a partaker of thy gifts.’ The Guru 
told her to continually repeat Wahguru with fixed 
attention, and she should obtain what her heart 
desired. After some time she acquired by her 
devotion a knowledge of the future, and went to 
the Guru in great tribulation. She said, ‘ Mercifully 
save thy children, for I foresee thou art going to 
make them martyrs to thy cause.’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ Is it to reverse God’s decree thou didst 
receive instruction from me ? I intended that thou 
shouldst abandon worldly love, but it hath increased 
all the more. I have already granted thy sons high 
rank in God’s court. Wherefore anticipate not their 
fate.’ Jito, understanding that the Guru did not 
intend to save the lives of his children, said she was 
going to abandon her body for she could not bear 
to behold their death. The Guru replied, ‘ It is 
well ; thou mayest go ; thy children shall follow 
thee. Death is the law of all bodies. Some may 
perish four days before and some four days after ; 
but all must sooner or later pay the debt they owe.’ 
Upon this, it is said, Jito permanently suspeijjied 
her breath, and her soul took flight to heaven. 

One day the conversation turned on an expression 
used by Guru Har Rai, that the vessel which 
Baba Nanak had constructed for the salvation of 
the world had almost foundered. Guru Gobind 
Singh vowed that he would repair it for the deliver- 
ance of his Sikhs. On that occasion he gave 
the ^following instruction to his assembled Sikhs — 
‘ I have established the Khalsa for the advancement 



152 THE SIKH RELIGION 

of true religion. Let not my Sikhs live on religious 
offerings. He who bound by greed obeyeth me not 
in this, shall be bom again as a hog. Religious 
offerings have the same dissolving effect on men’s 
minds as borax on gold.’ He then quoted the fol- 
lowing lines from Gur Das : — 

As it is the custom of Hindus to abstain from the flesh of 
kine, 

As swijie and interest are solemnly forbidden the Muham- 
madans, 

As it is sinful for a father-in-law to drink even water in 
his son-in-law’s house. 

As even a sweeper though hungry will not eat hare’s 
flesh,^ 

As a fly gaincth no advantage but dieth in the clasp of 
honey, 

So is greed for sacred offerings which are like poison 
coated with sugar.* 

‘ Let those who are baptized according to my rites 
bear arms and live according to their means. Let 
them remain true to their sovereign in the battle- 
field, and not turn their backs to the foe. Let 
them face and repel their enemies, and they shall 
obtain both glory in this world and the heroes’ 
heaven in the next. He who fleeth from the battle- 
field shall be dishonoured in this world, and when 
he dieth shall be punished for his cowardice, and 
nowhere shall he obtain a state of happiness. Let 
the members of the Khalsa associate with one 
another and love one another irrespective of tribe 
or caste. Let them hearken to the Guru’s instruc- 
tion, and let their minds be thoroughly imbued 
with it.’ 

* The Shiah Muhammadans will not eat hare. In the Quran blood 

is forbidden as food, and it is believed by Shiahs that blood does not 
separate by any process from hare’s flesh. Lai Beg, ihe sweepers’ 
Pir, was a Shiah Muhammadan, so they adopt bis prejudice in this 
matter. * 

* W 5 r XXXV, 12. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 153 

It is said that, as the Guru was one day hunting, 
he came on a field of tobacco. He reined in his 
horse and gave expression to his hatred of the plant. 
He maintained that it burned the chest, induced ner- 
vousness, palpitation, bronchitis, and other diseases, 
and finally caused death. He therefore counselled 
his Sikhs to abstain from the destructive drug, and 
thus concluded his discourse — ‘ Wine is bad, bhang 
destroyeth one generation, but tobacco destroyeth 
all generations.’ 

The custom of sale and barter of horses and other 
animals at religious fairs prevailed even in the time 
of the Guru. He went to a fair held in Kurkhetar 
on the occasion of a solar eclipse in order to purchase 
horses to replace those which had been stolen or 
killed in the previous warfare. Among other ad- 
mirers Madan Nath, a superior of Jogis, waited on 
him. On seeing the Guru he remarked that he had 
the external appearance of a lion, but that he was 
inwardly a saint. The Guru explained that his 
external appearance had been assumed with the 
object of inspiring terror into the Turks, who had 
inflicted great misery and hardship on his country. 


Chapter XIX 

Two Muhammadan generals, SaiyadBeg^ and Alif 
Khan, were on their way from Lahore to Dihli. 
They were each in command of five thousand men. 
Raja Ajmer Chand having heard of them thought 
he would try to secure their assistance to attack 
the Guru. The generals on receiving a promise of 
one thousand rupees a day promised Ajmer Chand 
their assistance, Saiyad Beg, however, on subse- 
quently hearing favourable accounts of the Guru 

^ The word Sayid (jiL.) is different from saiyad (jll*), which 
literally means a hunter, and forms the first part of the name of 
the general above mentioned. 



154 the SIKH RELIGION 

and his Sikhs, changed his determination and with- 
drew from the Muhammadan army. The battle 
which ensued began with great fury between the 
Guru’s and Alif Khan’s troops. At a critical 
moment Saiyad Beg approached the Sikhs, and said 
that as they believed in the Guru, so did he, and 
he would therefore fight on their side. Alif Khan, 
on seeing that Saiyad Beg had joined the Sikhs, 
concluded that he had no chance of victory, and 
retired from the contest. He was hotly pursued by 
the Sikhs and Saiyad Beg. On the return of the 
latter from the pursuit, he alighted from his horse 
and went to offer his obeisance to the Guru. Having 
broken with the Emperor, whose servant he had 
been, he threw in his lot with the Sikhs, gave them 
all his wealth to assist them in their struggles with 
the Muhammadans, and remained with the Guru 
as a trusty and powerful ally. 

A Brahman appeared one day in the Guru’s court, 
and with a loud voice invoked his assistance against 
some Pathans who had forcibly abducted his bride 
at Bassi near Hoshiarpur. The Guru directed his 
son Ajit Singh to go with one hundred horse, fall 
suddenly on the Pathans at night, and restore the 
Brahman his bride. The expedition was carefully 
planned and courageously executed. In the early 
morning Ajit Singh produced before the Guru the 
Brahman’s bride and the offending Pathans. The 
latter received condign punishment. 

Raja Ajmer Chand again summoned his allies 
with the object of chastising the Guru. There 
came to him Raja Bhup Chand, Raja Wazir Singh, 
and Raja Dev Saran. Raja Ajmer Chand made 
a speech in which he warned his brother chiefs 
of the fate in store for them from the Guru, and 
advised them to join him in another expedition to 
crush him. They all expressed themselves in favour 
of immediate measures, and addressed the Guru a 
joint letter to the effect that they had lived peace- 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 155 

ably for some time, but found he would not cease 
his aggression, and they were therefore obliged to 
declare war against him. The Guru briefly replied — 

‘ My Sikhs have only come into collision with those 
who wantonly annoyed them. The Khalsa are 
ever awaiting battle. To fight and die is the 
duty of the brave. Come and see the power of the 
Khalsa.’ 

The hill chiefs on receiving this reply took the 
field without delay. It is said that they marched 
against Anandpur with ten thousand men. Saiyad 
Beg had not been able to induce his large force 
to remain with him, so the Guru’s available force 
at this time did not exceed eight hundred men. 
In the former battles of Anandpur the Sikhs appear 
to have remained behind their battlements and 
embrasures. On this occasion different tactics were 
adopted. They met the enemy in the open field 
outside Anandpur. The Sikhs fought with their 
usual courage and determination. Raja Ajmer 
Chand, on witnessing their prowess and the carnage 
they caused, retired from the battle in despair. 
The other hill chiefs continued the fight, but put 
themselves in the rear of their troops. Alim Singh 
and Ude Singh displayed their usual valour on 
behalf of the Guru. They wished to charge the hill 
hosts, but the Guru restrained them, and ordered 
them to use their muskets and arrows from where 
they stood. They obeyed the Guru, and plied their 
offensive weapons with signal success. The hill troops 
on seeing their own van stricken down retreated. 

The Guru surveyed the battle from a distance. 
He was delighted as he saw the enemy fleeing in 
every direction. The Sikhs now flushed with victory 
forgot his orders and pursued the retreating hill 
troops. The Guru was displeased at the temerity 
of his men, and mounting his horse rode back to 
Anandpur. The Sikh force, on finding the Guru 
had left them, lost heart, retreated, and were in 



156 THE SIKH RELIGION 

turn pursued by the enemy. On their return to 
Anandpur they tried to obtain the Guru’s forgive- 
ness, but he refused to speak to them. At last, 
5delding to the entreaties of Naurang Singh, one of 
his foremost warriors, he resolved to receive and 
pardon them. He said the Guru was the Khalsa 
and the Khalsa the Guru, and the old friendly and 
affectionate relations were renewed. .He then 
ordered his troops to return to the field and oppose 
the enemy. He took up his own bow and effected 
the usual destruction in the hostile ranks. This 
was the signal for the Sikhs to second his efforts 
and fall on the hill army like tigers on deer. Then 
ensued fearful carnage, upon which the hill troops 
again took to flight. Their leaders tried to restrain 
them, but in vain. The battle was at an end, and 
both sides departed to their homes. 

Raja Ajmer Chand, however, was not satisfied. 
He proposed to his brother chiefs that they should 
again make war on the Guru, this time with the 
assistance of the imperial troops. They accordingly 
sent an envoy to Aurangzeb, and prayed him to 
protect them against Guru Gobind Singh. They 
represented that they were ancient subjects of His 
Majesty, and would give him large tribute as the 
price of his assistance and protection. 

Meantime there were great rejoicings in the 
Guru’s camp, and the wounded were carefully 
attended to. Bir Singh, Madan Singh, a Rajput 
chief, and Sham Singh visited the Guru. Sham 
Singh pointed out to him that the Muhammadans 
and Hindus were very numerous, and how could the 
Sikhs who were so few contend against them, much 
less hope to obtain empire ? The Guru replied, 
' What God willeth shall take place. When the 
army of the Turks cometh, my Sikhs shall strike 
steel on steel. The Khalsa shall then awake, and 
know the play of battle. Amid the clash of arms 
the Khalsa shall be partners in present and future 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 157 

bliss, tranquillity, meditation, virtue, and divine 
knowledge. Then shall the English come, and joined 
by the Khalsa rule as well in the East as in the 
West. The holy Baba Nanak shall bestow all 
wealth on them. The English shall possess great 
power, and by force of arms take possession of many 
principalities. The combined armies of the English 
and Sikhs shall be very powerful as long as they 
rule with united councils. The empire of the 
English shall vastly increase, and they shall in every 
way attain prosperity. Wherever they take their 
armies they shall conquer, and bestow thrones on 
those who assist them. Then in every house shall 
be wealth, in every house happiness, in every house 
rejoicing, in every house religion, in every house 
learning, and in every house a woman. ^ The 
English shall rule for a long time.’ ® At the con- 
clusion of the Guru’s apocalypse the Sikhs respect- 
fully bowed. 

The Guru was asked to describe the state of the 
baptized Sikhs, whereupon he gave Alim Singh as 
an example. ‘ He was ’, the Guru said, ‘ originally 
a Brahman, but on adopting the religion of arms 
he now shineth like Indar. He ever worshippeth 
the Sword. He never accepteth gifts or invitations 
to feasts. I took away his sacrificial thread because 
if he retained it, he would still be a Brahman, and 
subject to Brahmanical superstitions.’ 

The Guru continued to instruct his Sikhs — ‘ He 
who weareth long hair without receiving baptism is 
a hypocritical and foolish Sikh. I wiU not show 
myself to him. It is best to adopt one religion and 
not distract one’s mind with others. They who call 
themselves my Sikhs and stray to other creeds are 

^ Under Muhammadan rule the Muhammadans used often to de- 
prive the Hindus of their wives and daughters. In many cases, too, 
the subjects were too poor to purchase wives for themselves. The 
Guru possibly also meant that his Sikhs should embrace domestic 
lives, and cease to demean themselves by religious mendicancy. 

^ Sitraj Parkashf Rut V, Chapter 36. 



158 THE SIKH RELIGION 

sinners. Let no Sikh associate with, much less offer 
presents to, those who worship Sarwar, Gugga,^ and 
similar pirs, or with the misguided men who .by 
order of their wives visit male and female Brahmans 
to have their fortunes told. He who giveth alms 
to Brahmans, who slandereth the Guru and his 
Sikhs, shall lay up for himself suffering. Put away 
from among you the hypocritical Brahman who, 
though he receive my baptism, remove th his hair 
in the fashion of the Hindus. 

‘ Let not any Sikh of mine worship Hindu or 
Muhammadan cemeteries and places of cremation, 
or give alms to one who weareth a religious garb 
for ostentation. I have forsworn such a person, if 
any there be, and let him who stupidly worshippeth 
false gods forswear me. He who feedeth the traveller, 
who giveth alms on the occasion of the Gurus’ anni- 
versaries, and who hath faith in the Guru shall 
hereafter go to the Gurus’ abode. Let not my 
Sikhs look at Brahmans who reside at places of 
pilgrimage, or at those who don religious garbs and 
strut foppishly. Let my Sikhs abide apart, and be 
ever full of thoughts of God. 

‘ He who giveth his daughter in marriage to a 
Sikh and taketh no money for her, is a Sikh of mine, 
and shall after his death reach mine abode. Let 
Sikh men and women sit together and hold divine 
discourse. Let them worship God themselves, and 
teach their children to do so. My Sikhs may receive 
a voluntary offering for reading the Granth, or for 
copying it, but must not demand remuneration. 
Let the Sikh priest who receiveth an offering of 
money feed the poor before he feedeth himself. Let 
not my Sikhs be covetous. They who disobey this 
order shall receive punishment from God, I love 

^ Gugga is the name of a saint who is supposed to have become 
a serpent and vanished beneath* the earth. In the Pan jab he is 
worshipped by Hindus of the lower classes on the ninth day of 
Bhadon. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 159 

neither religious garbs nor castes. Men’s observance 
of the Sikh tenets is dear to me, but still dearer is 
their observance with sincerity. Let my Sikh love 
not the world, but pass his time as if he were to 
die to-day or to-morrow. Let him be ever true to 
his sovereign. Let him cherish his neighbour, and 
seek after righteousness. Let him eat and worship 
at fixed -times. Let him shake off sloth and sing 
the Gurus’ hymns. Hear me, O Sikhs, practise not 
selfishness. Assist men whether of high or low 
degree, but contract not friendship with the evil. 
False is he who maketh promises without intention 
of fulfilment. 

‘ Let him who calleth himself a true Sikh of mine, 
accept baptism and do good acts, so shall his previous 
sins all depart on his seeking the Guru’s protection. 
Let him renounce the service of demons and sprites, 
and not worship stones or false gods. The hypo- 
crites who stop their noses under pretence of medita- 
tion and count their beads are very impure. Why 
do the fools into whose hearts God’s love entereth 
not, wander to places of pilgrimage ? ’ 

On another occasion his Sikhs requested the 
Guru to give them further instruction that would 
aid them in their temporal affairs and ensure 
their deliverance from transmigration. At that 
moment the Guru was engaged in other affairs, and 
he delegated Daya Singh to deliver the necessary 
instruction. Daya Singh thus spoke, ‘ Act as follows 
and you shall be happy — Clothe and feed the Sikhs 
as far as your means allow, shampoo them, and 
bathe them, wash their clothes, fan them when they 
perspire, wipe their shoes, wash their feet, scour the 
dishes from which they have eaten, draw them cool 
water from the well, and cook their food with the 
utmost attention and cleanliness. Let them perform 
night and day these and other similar offices for 
the Sikhs, commit to memory the Gurus’ hymns, 
and repeat the True Name. 



i6o THE SIKH RELIGION 

‘ On seeing any person involved in trouble take 
compassion on him, and remove his sufferings to the 
best of your abUity. The exercise of mercy and com- 
passionls very meritorious. He who practiseth these 
virtues becometh the greatest of the great, and the 
primal supreme Being will be merciful unto him. 

‘ Speak the truth. This bringeth great comfort. 
Renounce falsehood which bringeth great misery in 
its train. On seeing another’s happiness be not 
envious thereof ; why attach sin to yourselves for 
no sufficient reason ? In the first place, your jealousy 
will cause you annoyance, and you shall gain nothing 
therefrom ; and, in the second place, God will be 
angry with you and say, “ It is I who gave, and 
yet this man is burning with envy.” There are 
also other evils attendant on this passion. 

‘ Abandon covetousness, practise contentment, 
covet not another’s wife, another’s wealth, or 
another’s children. If you do, you shall assuredly 
suffer. My friends, practise not oppression on those 
whom you know to be weaker than yourselves. Be 
not proud of the possession of learning, beauty, 
great intellect, untold wealth, or similar fleeting 
advantages. Above all deem the bountiful Creator 
One alone. 

‘ If he who doeth good acts practise pride, they 
shall be as futile as the bathing of an elephant. 
Indulge not in praise of yourselves or dispraise of 
others. If you do, it will be a great sin. If ever 
you make a gift, boast not of it, but rather strive 
to conceal it. Speak civilly and satisfy everybody; 
Use not harsh language and annoy no one. Obtain 
wealth by honest means and share your meals with 
strangers. 

‘ Wear not dirty clothes, so shall your bodies be 
ever clean. Associate not with thieves, adulterers, 
highway robbers, gamblers, ingrates, thags, deceivers, 
or men of bad livelihood. Remember the sinner is 
worse than the sin, for he is the cause thereof. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBINB SINGH i6i 

When you see an evil man, avoid him at once hke 
red-hot iron which cannot be held in the hand. 
Associate with the good, for in such association vice 
is put to shame. Listen to the history of the lives of 
the Gurus. Afterwards where there is discourse of 
God, listen to it with rapt attention. 

‘ Bathe in holy Amritsar. Behold God’s temple 
where the Gurus’ words are ever repeated. Sit 
down therein respectfully, and allow your minds 
to think of nothing but God. Ever look with 
devotion on where His light is resplendent, 
whether you go there on the occasion of the Gurus’ 
anniversaries, or visit the place every six months, 
or once a year if you live at a distance. If he who 
deemeth himself a Sikh behold not Amritsar, why 
did he take birth in the world ? Unprofitable was 
his advent, and he shall afterwards regret his negli- 
gence.’ 

The Guru kept fifty-two bards permanently in 
his employ and others occasionally visited him. 
They wrote on all the nine subjects which in the 
opinion of Orientals are suitable themes for poetry ; ^ 
but the composition of eulogies on the Guru occu- 
pied most of their attention. The Guru once had 
the curiosity to weigh their compositions. They 
amounted to about two and a half hundredweight. 
The Guru included them in a compilation which 
he called Vidyadhar. He so valued the book that 
he ever kept it by him — even when he went into 
battle — but it was lost in one of his engagements. 
Some of the bards’ compositions are preserved in 
the Suraj Parkash, where they may be perused by 
th^e curious 

^ The nine subjects are love, mirth, pity, anger, heroism, l;error, 
hate, wonder, and contentment. 


SIKH, V 



i 62 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Chapter XX 

Owing to the repeated representations of the hill 
chiefs, the Emperor sent a large army under Saiyad 
Khan to reduce the Guru to submission. The Guru 
received intelligence that the imperial army had 
arrived in Thanesar, and would soon reach Anandpur. 
On hearing this he mustered his troops, and found 
they were only five hundred strong. The rest of 
his army had dispersed to their homes. Nothing 
now remained for the Guru but to make the best 
defence he could with his present force. In a few 
days Saiyad Khan’s troops appeared in sight singing 
a war hymn to stimulate their spirits. 

Maimun Khan, a faithful Musalman who had 
attached himself to the Guru, said that he was 
indebted to him for many favours, and asked per- 
mission to show his prowess. The Guru gave him 
a bow, and told him he would do well to kill even 
his own co-religionists on account of their misdeeds. 
The brave and faithful Saiyad Beg also came 
forward to continue his services to the Guru, 
Both Musalmans went like tigers into the battle, 
and were followed by the Sikhs. The latter 
represented to the Guru that it was futile to con- 
tend with such a large army as had now appeared. 
The Guru in reply encouraged them, and they 
advanced boldly against the enemy. The early part 
of the battle was signalized by a fierce single-handed 
combat between a hill chief and Saiyad Beg. After 
they had repeatedly missed each other, Saiyad Beg 
at last struck off the hill chiefs head. On seeing this 
Din Beg of the imperial army rushed at Saiyad Beg, 
for whom he cherished a double hatred as the slayer 
of the hill chief, and as a deserter from his sovereign, 
and mortally wounded him. Saiyad Beg died 
praising the Guru. Then ensued a general engage- 
ment of both armies. The Sikhs performed pro- 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 163 

digies of valour, and the Musalmans are said to 
have fallen to the earth like minarets toppling from 
ttieir heights. Maimun Khan charged on horseback 
in every direction and committed great havoc among 
the imperial troops. 

An unexpected circumstance now occurred. Saiyad 
Khan, the general of the imperial troops, had long 
been a secret friend of the Guru, and when he heard 
that an expedition was to be sent against him, con- 
trived to be put in command of it, so that he might 
at last be able to behold the great priest of the 
Sikhs, and do him signal service. The Guru knew 
what was passing in Saiyad Khan’s mind, and 
advanced ostensibly to challenge him, saying, ‘ If 
thou attack me not, I will not attack thee.’ Saiyad 
Khan on obtaining the wish of his heart to behold 
the Guru, said that he was the Guru’s servant and 
slave, and that he would never fight against him. 
The Guru replied, ‘ I am a poor man. It is only 
rich men who have slaves. To conquer in war is 
ever held honourable.’ 

Saiyad Khan dismounted and fell at the Guru’s 
feet. The Guru conferred on him the true Name 
and the supreme reward of salvation. Saiyad Khan, 
however, <hd not actively assist the Sikhs, but turned 
aside from the battle as he was unable to restrain 
his troops or divert their energies to the Guru’s 
assistance. They made a fierce onslaught on the 
Guru’s soldiers, who began to retire, overpowered 
as they were by a multitudinous host. But at 
a critical moment the Sikh war-cry was raised, 
upon which the Sikhs rallied and presented a bold 
front to the enemy. After Saiyad Khan’s defection 
from the imperial cause, Ramzan Khan took com- 
mand and fought with great bravery against the 
Sikhs. The Guru seeing this let fly an arrow at him 
which killed his horse. 

The Guru on closely observing tiie combat saw 
that there was no diance of retrieving his position, 

M 2 



1,64 the SIKH RELIGION 

so he decided to evacuate Anandpur. The Muham- 
madans then captured the city and plundered the 
Guru's property. On obtaining this booty they 
proceeded in the direction of Sarhind; Some Sikhs 
not yet satisfied with warfare asked the Guru’s per- 
mission to pursue them. The Guru replied that as 
his Sikhs were subservient to him, so was he sub- 
SCTvi^nt to God. He repeated on the occasion the 
third slok of the Asa ki War. By this he meant 
that it was God’s will that he should be defeated, 
and as all creation feared God, so did he himself at 
all times. 

i The Sikhs feeling their defeat, again pressed their 
request. The Guru at last yielded, and allowed 
them to pursue their enemies. The latter were un- 
prepared for attack, and fell into great confusion on 
finding themselves pursued by the very men whom 
they already thought they had vanquished. The 
Turks who turned to oppose the Sikhs were killed, 
and only those who took to flight escaped the ven- 
geance of the Guru’s pursuing army. In addition 
to killing and dispersing the Muhammadans, the 
Sikhs deprived them of all the booty they, had 
captured at Anandpur. The remnant of the Muham- 
madan army finaUy made their way to Sarhind. 
On this the Guru returned and took possession of 
Anandpur. 

The Ernperor called on his fugitive troops to 
account for their cowardicei They pleaded that 
they had been waylaid by the Sikhs and taken at 
an unfair advantage. This excuse seems to have 
been accepted, for the Emperor then turned the 
conversation in another direction, and asked what 
sort of person the Guru was, emd what forces he 
possessed. A Muhammadan soldier gave highly 
eoldured. accounts of the Guru’s beauty, sanctity, 
and prowess. He was, he said, a young handsome 
man, a living saint, the father of his people, and in 
war equal to one hundred thousand men. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 165 

The Emperor was much displeased on hearing 
this paneg5nic of the Guru, and ordered that the 
panegyrist should be excommunicated. The Court 
qazi advised that the Guru should be brought to 
the Emperor's presence by some stratagem. Accord- 
ingly the Emperor sent him the following message. 
‘ There is only one Emperor. Thy religion and mine 
are the same. Come to see me by all means, other- 
wise I shall be angry and go to thee. If thou come, 
thou shalt be treated as holy men are treated by 
monarchs. I have obtained this sovereignty from 
God. . Be well advised, and thwart not my wishes.’ 

To this the Guru replied, ‘ My brother, the Sove- 
reign who hath made thee emperor hath sent me 
into the world to do justice. He hath commissioned 
thee also to do justice, but thou hast forgotten His 
mandate and practisest hypocrisy. Wherefore how 
can I be on good terms with thee who pursuest the 
Hindus with blind hatred? Thou recognizest not 
that the people belong to God and not to the emperor, 
and yet thou seekest to destroy their religion.’ 
When dispatching this reply to the emperor the 
Guru conferred a robe of honour on his envoy. 

The Sikhs of the Malwa and Manjha districts 
now thronged to the Guru in great numbers, and 
began to study the science of war under his tutelage. 
Raja Ajmer Chand was distressed on seeing the 
power and glory of the Sikhs daily increase, and 
prevailed on the other hill chiefs to join him in 
another mission to the Emperor to make further 
complaints against the Guru. The Emperor was at 
that time in the south of India, and thither the 
raja proceeded in person to lay the petition of the 
allied chiefs before him. It described the founda- 
tion of Anandpur by Guru Teg Bahadur, whom the 
Emperor had executed, and the martial and trouble- 
some proclivities of his son the present Guru Gobind 
Singh. It then proceeded to give the rajas’ own 
Version of the Guru’s proceedings, and how he had 



i66 THE SIEH RELIGION 

asked them to embrace his new religion and join 
them in waging war against the Emperor. 

Aurangzeb fearing that the Guru would become 
too ^werful, and also displeased at the state of 
unrest that prevailed in the Pan jab, ordered all 
available troops under the viceroys of Dihli, Sarhind, 
and Lahore to be dispatched against the Guru. 
The hill chiefs who complained should also assist in 
repressing the common enemy. At the conclusion 
of the campaign the Guru was to be captured and 
brought before the Emperor. It would appear from 
an interview which Raja Ajmer Chand subsequently 
had with the Dihli viceroy, that the latter, in view 
of the safety of the capital of the empire, was not 
at the time in a position to dispatch any troops 
against the Sikhs. 

The Guru was informed by a faithful Sikh of the 
result of Raja Ajmer Chand’ s mission to the Emperor. 
He harangued his troops on the duty of religious 
warfare against the Muhammadans, and on this 
subject he had much to say. From the time of 
the persecution of Guru Arjan up to the present 
the emperors had been open or covert foes of the 
Gurus and their Sikhs. The Guru affirmed that 
death on the battle-field was equal to the fruit of 
many years’ devotion, and ensured honour and glory 
in the next world. 

The time for the Diwali fair was now approaching. 
Sikhs came in large numbers to make offerings. 
The Guru issued orders to absent Sikhs to come 
with their arms and assist him. The Guru’s orders 
were generally obeyed, and warlike preparations 
began at Anandpur. 

The hill chiefs who arrayed themselves against 
the Guru were Ajmer Chand of Bilaspur, Ghumand 
Chand of Kangra, Bir Singh of Jaspal, and the Rajas 
of Kullu, Kionthal, Mandi, Jammu, Nurpur, Chamba, 
Guler, Srinagar, Bijharwal, Darauli, hnd Dadhwal. 
They were joined by the Ranghars and the Gujars, 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 167 

and all formed a large and formidable host. The 
imperial army, however, amounted to double their 
number. Wazir Khan, who had been put in supreme 
command by the Emperor, mustered his troops at 
Sarhind for parade and inspection. 

Some faithful Sikhs ever kept the Guru informed 
of the movements of his enemies. He read in darbar 
the last letter of information he had received, and 
vowed to destroy his enemies and put an end to 
the sovereignty of the Mughals. The Sikhs were 
delighted at the prospect of battle, and congratu- 
lated themselves on their good fortune in being 
allowed to die for their Guru and their faith. Several 
of them put on saffron-coloured clothes in token of 
rejoicing, and said, ‘ We have only four days to live 
in this world. Why should we not endeavour to 
obtain the exalted ^gnity of mart5?rdom which will 
ensure salvation ? ’ 

Every variety of warlike weapon was served out 
to the Guru’s followers, and no one was left unarmed. 
The Guru took the precaution of laying in supplies 
for the maintenance of the garrison in the event of 
a siege. He addressed his troops, ‘ Consider the 
hill chiefs as well as the Muhammadans your 
enemies. Fight bravely, and they shall all flee 
away.’ The Guru then repeated the following 
quatrain of his own composition : — 

Blest is his life in this world who repeateth God’s name 
with his mouth and meditateth war in his heart. 

The body is fleeting and shall not abide for ever ; man 
embarking in the ship of fame shall cross the ocean of the 
world. 

Make this body a house of resignation ; light thine under- 
standing as a lamp ; 

Take the broom of divine knowledge into thy hand, and 
sweep away the filth of timidity. 

The chronicler judiciously remarks that the Khalsa 
ought to be congratulated because, though few in 



i68 THE SIKH RELIGION 


ritimber, they had confidence in themselves to fight 
for their religion, and delighted by anticipation in 
the approaching conflict. 


Chapter XXI 

Wazir Khan’s troops advanced from Sarhind like 
a surging sea. Drums sounded and banners flew at 
the head of every regiment. In similar formidable 
array came the troops of Zabardast Khan, the vice- 
roy of Lahore. The two viceroys joined their forces 
at Ropar. There they were met by the troops of 
the allied Hindu rajas, and all proceeded against 
the Guru to Anandpur. 

The Guru on seeing the enemy approach in a body 
ordered his artillerymen to light their fuses and 
discharge their cannon into the hostile army where 
thickest. When fire was opened, the enemy made 
a charge to seize the artillery, but were quickly 
restrained by the fatal accuracy with which the 
Guru’s men served their guns. Meanwhile the Sikh 
cavalry advanced and discharged their muskets at 
close quarters. They were well supported by the 
infantry who manned the embrasures. The allied 
army had no protection, and consequently fell in 
heaps before the city. 

The battle continued with terrific violence. The 
sun was obscured by the smoke from the Guru’s 
garrison guns. Heroes were all stained with blood, 
and cries of ‘ Strike, strike ! ’ ‘ Kill, kill ! ’ every- 
where resounded. Riders lost control over their 
horses, which fled in every direction, and the battle- 
field presented a truly ghastly spectacle. 

The Guru sent for his two brave generals, Ude Singh 
and Daya Singh, encouraged them, and gave them 
renewed orders. The two chiefs courageously ad- 
vanced with their troops and cut down the enemy 
as reapers a cornfield. Dust flew into the eyes 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 169 

of their opponents, and rendered them powerless for 
action. They had no power to ^thstand the forces 
now ranged on the Guru’s side, and consequently 
fell in large numbers. 

The two viceroys were astonished at the un- 
wonted destruction of their armies. They rallied 
their men, but again the same evil fate attended 
them. At last it was resolved to storm the fortress. 
The Muhammadan troops were told that the Guru 
was only a faqir, that he had no power to offer long 
resistance, and must soon capitulate. The carnage 
began anew. Many brave Muhammadans were dis- 
patched to wed the soul-delighting nymphs of 
paradise. The contest continued with the greatest 
obstinacy, and horse and foot for the space of three 
hours were mingled in indiscriminate slaughter. 

The Muhammadans hazarded different opinions as 
to the cause of the success of their enemies. Some 
said that the Guru was a miracle-worker, and that 
supernatural forces fought on his side. Others 
maintained that the Guru’s success was owing 
to the fact that his men were protected behind 
their ramparts. While such conversation was being 
held, the viceroys asked the hill chiefs to show them 
how they were to obtain victory. If the same ill 
success attended them to the end, the Sikhs would 
never allow them to escape. 

The hill chiefs suggested that they should then 
cease fighting, and next day bring cannon to batter 
down the fort. ‘ It is true,’ the hill chiefs said, 
‘ the Guru’s army is a low rabble, but very brave.’ 
On a muster being taken, it was found that nine 
hundred of the Muhammadan troops lay dead on the 
field of battle after the first day’s engagement. 

Next day the Guru mounted his charger, and put 
himself at the head of his troops. The viceroys 
observed a warrior mounted on a sable steed with 
a gold embroidered saddle. He carried a bow 
painted green, and his crest set with jewels glittered 



170 THE SIKH RELIGION 

on his turban. They inquired of Raja Ajmer Chand 
who it was, and he answered that it was the Guru. 
Every effort was now made to destroy him, but the 
first fire of the enemy was aimed too high and took 
no effect. The Muhammadan gunners were then 
ordered to fire low, and promised large rewards if 
they killed the Guru. They were equally unsuccess- 
ful when they fired low. The allied armies finding 
their guns useless resolved to charge the Guru and 
his Sikhs. The Guru seeing this began to discharge 
his arrows with marvellous effect. The fearful 
carnage of the preceding day was again renewed. 
Horses fell on horses and men on men. The Hindus 
and the Muhammadans entered on mutual recrimina- 
tions, each sect blaming the other for its ill-success. 
Upon this they combined and made a further effort 
to conquer, but were so vigorously and successfully 
repulsed, that they were obliged to suspend hostili- 
ties for that day also. 

The viceroys and the hill chiefs took counsel at 
night and resolved on the morrow to encompass the 
city, and cut off all external supplies, so that the 
Guru and his troops might be starved into sub- 
mission. While they were thus discussing, they 
apprehended a night attack from the Sikhs, and 
accordingly kept vigil. 

Next morning a watch before day the Guru and 
his Sikhs were found at their devotions. When 
divine service was finished, the Guru ordered his 
men to remain behind their embrasures and barri- 
cades, and not be tempted to advance or come to 
close quarters with the enemy. Meantime the 
Muhammadans and Hindus contented themselves 
with watching the city gates and hindering all ingress 
or egress. At the same time they remained at a 
safe distance from the missiles of the Sikhs. 

The allied forces made another assault on Anand- 
pur. They espied the Guru at a distance and again 
ordered their artillerymen to direct their cannon 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 171 

towards him. The Sikhs were much disconcerted 
by the enemy’s fire, and requested the Guru to 
take up a less exposed position. The Guru replied 
that he wore the armour of the immortal God, and 
consequently no weapon could harm him. God was 
his protector and had stretched forth His hand to 
save him from all assaults of his enemies. 

While the Guru was thus speaking, cannon balls 
from the enemy hurtled in the air. They were again 
aimed high and missed the Sikhs. When the 
artillerymen were ordered to lower the muzzles of 
their guns, their fire fell short of the Sikhs, and 
struck the base of the eminence on which the city 
stood. The allied armies discharged their cannon 
hundreds of times, but, whether they fired high or 
low, their missiles failed to have the desired effect. 
Thus the day passed until night terminated the 
conflict. 

On the morrow skirmishes were renewed on both 
sides, and the Sikhs inflicted severe chastisement on 
the enemy. The Guru called his son A jit Singh, 
and told him to hold that part of the city called 
Kesgarh and not venture forth. He gave him 
further orders to kill any one who approached, to 
remain on the alert at night, and to keep his guns 
loaded. The Guru directed Nahar Singh and Sher 
Singh to hold the fort called Lohgarh. For this 
purpose five hundred men were placed at their dis- 
posal. Alim Singh with another detachment of five 
hundred men was ordered to hold the fort of 
Agampur ^ Ude Singh also received command of 
five hundred men to defend another part of the 
city. Daya Singh was ordered to guard the northern 
ramparts. 

The Muhammadans and the hill chiefs had now 
completely invested the city, and the Guru’s supplies 
were failing. The enemy noticed that the Sikhs on 

1 This was a fortification within Anandpur, and not the town so 
called which is at a distance. 



172 ! ! ; THE SIKH RELIGION i : 

guard went twice a day from their embrasures to 
pray and do homage to their Guru. The Guru in 
turn kept an eye on the proceedings of the allied 
armies. One day he saw the generals play- 
ing Indian draughts. Raja Ajmer Chand and 
others were watching the game. The Guru taking 
up his bow discharged an arrow into their midst, 
but without striking any one. They examined the 
arrow and knew by its golden point that it had 
been discharged by the Guru. They admitted that 
only a miracle could have sent it such a distance. 
The Guru knew by his occult power what they were 
saying, and wrote them the following letter. ‘ O 
Viceroy, that was not a miracle. Miracle is a name 
for the wrath of God. I was merely practising 
archery. The brave men who have obtained skill 
in it, conceal not their accomplishments. Every- 
thing is in God’s hands, whether He desireth to 
make what is difficult easy, or what is easy difficult.’ 
The Guru attached this letter to an arrow, and then 
discharged it. It lodged in a branch of a tree under 
which the allied generals were seated. On perusing 
the Guru’s letter they were astonished that he could 
have divined what they were saying ; and it is 
said that they admitted his supernatural power and 
prayed to heaven to preserve them from his too 
unerring shafts, and his unsurpassed knowledge of 
warfare. 

On one occasion it was observed that the enemy 
had come very close to the city and far away from 
their defences. Sher Singh accordingly suggested 
to Nahar Singh that it would be expedient to make 
a night attack, and thus take them unawares when 
they should of necessity become an easy prey. 
If the Sikhs waited until morning, the enemy 
would be far away, and it would be impossible to 
reach them. The night was dark and favoured the 
enterprise. Nahar Singh did not at first approve of 
the suggestion, but subsequently altered his mind. 



LIFE OF GURU GGMND ' SINGH 173 

The Sikh troops were awakened at dead of night, 
aiiid arms served out to them. Having performed 
their ablutions, they sallied forth two hours before 
daybreak. Sher Singh commanded them to make 
but one charge and then return. They did great 
havoc among the Muhammadans, killing them in 
numbers, and succeeded in returning to Anandpur 
by daybreak. The enemy on being aroused could 
not see whence destruction had overtaken them, 
and began to turn their arms against one another. 
Father attacked son, and son attacked father, and 
with mutual reproaches there restilted internecine 
slaughter. 

The Muhammadan generals were greatly dis- 
tressed on learning what had occurred. They blamed 
Ajmer Chand for the disaster, and asked how he 
could again show his face to the Emperor. He had 
told the Emperor that the Sikhs were very few, 
and now whence had so many men sprung forth on 
a sudden ? The Muhammadan generals threatened 
to leave Ajmer Chand and his people to the mercy 
of the Sikhs, but Ajmer Chand and Bhup Chand 
offered them large presents, and thus prevailed on 
them to renew the conflict. 

Next day the allied forces advanced to take the 
citadel by storm. The Sikhs on seeing this put 
their two great guns called Baghan (tigress) and 
Bijai-ghosh (sound of victory) in position. The 
guns were then charged, the fuses lighted, and aim 
taken at the enemy where most thickly massed 
together. The tents and standards of the Muham- 
madans were first blown away. Their -two generals 
on seeing this retreated. As the guns committed 
further destruction, both the Muhammadan and the 
hill armies took to flight; That evening the Guru 
offered thanksgivings beat the drum of victory, and 
put his cannon into a place of shelter. 

The Guru was informed that a man called Kanaiy a 
used with absolute impartiality to draw water both 



174 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


for his Sikhs and the enemy. The Guru asked him 
if it was so, and he replied in the affirmative. He 
quoted the Guru’s own instruction that one should 
look on all men with an equal eye. The Guru 
mused on his reply, and dismissed him with the 
compliment that he was a holy man. His followers, 
called Sewapanthis, form an orthodox and honour- 
able sub-sect of Sikhs who live by honest labour 
and accept no alms or offerings of any descri^ 
tion. The Sewapanthis are also called Adanshahis 
from Adanshah, a rich banker who devoted his 
wealth and his leisure to the propagation of their 
doctrines. 

When provisions were running short, the Sikhs 
made several night sorties and took supphes from 
the enemy’s camp. On such occasions they were 
often attacked, but they generally contrived to 
return with scant loss. When any one of their 
party was cut down, they took his body and carried 
it into Anandpur. In one of these sorties a Sikh 
fainted. The Muhammadans seized him, cut off his 
hair, made him eat their food and repeat their creed, 
and finally circumcised him. They then, strange to 
say, allowed him to escape, probably because they 
thought they had accomplished a sufficiently pious 
work in forcibly converting him. He informed the 
Guru of what had happened to him, and prayed to 
be received again into the Sikh fold. The Guru 
inquired if he had cohabited with a Muhammadan 
woman. He rephed in the negative. The Guru then 
ordered him to prepare sacred food and distribute it 
among the Sikhs, and his reconversion should be 
complete. The Guru explained that a Sikh who 
was forcibly converted to Islam was still a Sikh, 
but that a Sikh who became a Muhammadan from 
motives of sensuality, should forfeit his happiness 
here and hereafter. 

Several of the inhabitants now deserted Anandpur 
on account of the difficulty of maintaining them- 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 175 

selves. Provisions became excessively dear, a pound 
of flour selling for a rupee. The Guru's troops, 
however, remained to endure hunger and every form 
of hardship. They had already decided to sacrifice 
their lives for him, and they could not leave him 
in this extremity. Complaints were made to his 
mother by some of the malcontents, but she only 
ventured to speak to him when her own private 
servants rebelled against their fate. She said, ‘ Thy 
Sikhs who Were foremost in the fight are now dying 
of hunger, and the enemy are at thy gates. Each 
of thy soldiers hath now but a quarter of a pound 
of corn daily. How can men fight on such a pit- 
tance ? Their patience is exhausted.’ The Guru 
replied, ‘ Having obtained the order of the immor- 
tal God, my object is to increase and not diminish 
the numbers of my religion. It is by enduring 
hunger and hardships my Sikhs become strong and 
brave.’ 

One day there was an alarm that the hillmen 
were advancing in force. The Guru having caused 
his great drum to be sounded, proceeded to the spot 
whither the assault was directed. Bullets and 
arrows poured from both sides, and the Sikhs being 
now reduced in numbers had to retreat. The Turks 
and hillmen inflicted great damage on them as they 
did so, and took from them a large quantity of 
booty. The Sikhs struggled, but their efforts were 
ineffectual against overpowering numbers. Ude 
Singh and others went to the Guru, and told him 
that the Sikhs were defeated and their property 
plundered. At this critical moment all his troops 
prayed to the Guru for protection. The Guru said 
they ought to feel no pleasure in the possession of 
wealth which was not permanent, and no sorrow 
at its departure. 

Until now the beleagured garrison had beeasupplied 
with water from a hiU stream. This was discovered 
by Raja Ajmer Chand, and he cut off the supply. 



176 THE SIKH RELIGION 

When the Guru was informed of this, he said the 
Satluj would for the future supply him with water, 
and the enemy should gain no advantage from the 
stream they had diverted. The Guru promised that 
water should come in time, and the name of the 
stream should be the Himaiti Nala, or stream of 
assistance. 


Chapter XXII 

As the siege was protracted the hardships of the 
troops and of the other inmates of Anandpur pain- 
fully increased. Rations were now reduced to less 
than a quarter of a pound of com daily, and some- 
times none at all were served out. The Sikhs 
occasionally made foraging expeditions at night, and 
fought hard for small booty. When this was ex- 
hausted, they ground the bark of trees and converted 
it into bread. They also lived on leaves and what- 
ever fruit and flowers they could collect. It is 
related that, notwithstanding their terrible sufferings, 
they never lost heart or relaxed in the defence of 
their city. 

The enemy heard of the Sikhs’ forays, and ap- 
pointed several scouts to watch their operations. 
One night, as the Sikhs sallied forth, they were 
observed and information promptly given to the 
allied army. No action, however, was taken until 
the Sikhs on their return approached the city. 
They were then attacked by both Hindus and Muham- 
madans in great numbers. The Sikhs threw down 
their bundles and determined not to die like jackals. 
‘ As long as there is breath in our bodies,' they 
said, ‘ let us wield our swords and place ourselves 
beyond the fear of transmigration.’ Although they 
were faint with hunger; yet each of them killed two or 
three of the enemy. Finally overpowered by superior 
numbers, and unable to receive assistance from 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 177 

within the city, they all perished fighting to the 
last. 

The rajas now formed a plan t^ induce the Guru 
again to leave Anandpur. They promised that, in 
the event of his doing sp, their armies would with- 
draw, and the Guru might afterwards return when- 
ever he pleased. The Guru heeded not this pro- 
posal. It was repeated several times, but the Guru 
still refused to accept it. The Sikhs never heard 
of these overtures until one day in darbar Raja 
Ajmer Chand’s envoy produced his master’s letter. 
Raja Ajmer Chand stated that it contained no 
deception, but was honestly intended. It would, he 
said, be well if the Guru and his troops evacuated 
the city as early as possible. They might take all 
their property with them. The Sikhs who heard 
this proposal went to the Guru’s mother to urge 
it on her, and she promised to use her influence 
with him. She said, ‘ My son, this is a propitious 
offer. Take us with thee and leave Anandpur. I am 
thy mother, and I ask thee to obey me and seek 
shelter elsewhere. Thus shalt thou restore life to 
thy starving Sikhs. My son, fighting were perhaps 
well if we had wherewithal to maintain ourselves; 
but now we are involved in poverty and hardships 
of every description. If thou let the opportunity 
pass, it will not return again. The hillmen and the 
Turks are prepared to swear that they will grant 
us safe conduct, so it is well that we should depart. 
Moreover, Khwaja Mardud hath now arrived from 
the Emperor with a message, that he hath vowed 
to capture thee or die in the effort. All the rajas 
are on his side. Wherefore, my son, let us with- 
draw from Anandpur. There is nothing more 
precious or dearer than life.’ The Guru replied, 
‘ Mother dear, the hillmen are idolaters and false. 
Their intellect is like that of the stones they worship. 
There is no reliance to be placed on their promises. 
The Turks are equally evil. Their very falsehood 

N 


SIKH. \ 



178 THE SIKH RELIGION 

will destroy them all. The Khalsa shall extend 
and wreak vengeance on its enemies.’ The Guru 
was unable to convince his mother or his Sikhs of 
the wisdom of the course he was following. He 
then hit on a plan by which they should be con- 
vinced that the overtures made to him had been 
treacherously intended. 

The Guru sent for Raja Ajmer Chand’s Brahman 
envoy, and told him he would evacuate Anandpur 
if the allied armies would first allow the removal of 
his property. He asked for pack-bullocks for the 
purpose. These with the necessary sacks were readily 
supplied him. The Hindus swore on the salagram 
and the Muhammadans on the Quran, that they 
would not deceive him or molest his servants de- 
parting with his property. The Guru then ordered 
his treasurer to collect all the old shoes, worn-out 
clothes, bones of dead animals, broken utensils, 
horse dung, and similar offal that could be found 
in the Anandpur bazar, and load the sacks there- 
with. On each sack was to be placed a piece of 
brocade to make it appear that the contents were 
valuable. To the bullocks’ horns were attached 
torches, so that the excellence of the cloth with 
which the sacks were covered, and also the depar- 
ture of the bullocks might not escape the observation 
of the enemy. It was arranged that the bullocks 
with their loads were to start in the dead of night. 
Naturally, the brilliancy of the procession did not 
escape the enemy’s notice, and they rejoiced like a 
parched field on receiving rain. Six thousand of them 
were in ambush to plunder the supposed property of 
the Guru. The Sikhs on discovering this discharged 
their cannon and caused great destruction among 
the serried ranks of the Hindus and Muhammadans. 
The sacks were, however, all seized by the enemy, 
and carefully guarded until morning, as it was then 
too late to examine their contents. It was only on 
the morrow the enemy discovered the Guru’s strata- 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 179 

gem, and painfully realized the fact that they had 
committed perjury for the sake of the sweepings of 
the Anandpur market-place ! The Guru availed 
himself of the incident to demonstrate his own fore- 
thought and the treachery of the enemy. He told 
his troops that everything they had endured had 
been by the will of God, and he quoted Guru Nanak — 
‘ Happiness is a disease, the remedy for which is 
unhappiness.’ 

At last came an autograph letter from the Emperor 
to the Guru — ‘ I have sworn on the Quran not to 
harm thee. If I do, may I not find a place in God’s 
court hereafter ! Cease warfare and come to me. 
If thou desire not to come hither, then go whither- 
soever thou pleasest.’ The Emperor’s envoy added 
on his own account, ‘ O Guru, all who go to the 
Emperor’s court praise thee. On that account the 
Emperor feeleth certain that an interview with thee 
will add to his happiness. He hath sworn by 
Muhammad and called God to witness that he will 
not harm thee. The hill rajas have also sworn by 
the cow and called their idols to witness, that they 
will allow thee safe conduct. Bear not in mind any- 
thing that hath occurred. The attack on thine oxen 
was not prompted by any raja. The attackers have 
been generally punished, and the ringleaders are in 
prison. No one now, O true Guru, dareth do thee 
harm, wherefore evacuate the fort, at any rate for 
the present, and come with me to the Emperor. 
Thou mayest afterwards do what thou pleasest.’ 
The Guru on hearing this said, ‘ You are all liars, 
and therefore all your empire and your glory shall 
depart. You all took oaths before this and then 
perjured yourselves. Your troops, whose business 
it was to fight, have become robbers, and therefore 
you shall all be damned.’ 

The Sikhs went again to the Guru’s mother to 
complain of his refusal to listen to reason. Upon 
this she told him that if he did not leave Anandpur, 

N2 



i8o THE SIKH RELIGION 

he would be deserted by his Sikhs and even by his 
family, and he would be then left alone to the 
mercy of the hostile armies. Some Sikhs also made 
a direct representation to him, and pleaded that 
through hunger they were unable to endure any 
longer the fatigue of the siege and the brunt of war. 
And if they were now in their weak and emaciated 
condition to make an effort to force their way 
through the enemy’s ranks, they would all be inevi- 
tably massacred. They therefore advised capitulation . 

The Guru on hearing these representations said to 
his Sikhs, ‘ My brethren, they who leave the garrison 
now will all be killed, and I do not desire to be 
held responsible. Wherefore give me a statement 
in writing that you have totally renounced me,. and 
then you may act as you please. But if, on the 
other hand, you wish to abide by my advice, I will 
support you, and the immortal God will extend His 
protecting arm over us all. Adopt whatever alter- 
native you please.’ On hearing this the Sikhs and 
the Guru’s mother hesitated. Her son was dear to 
her, but so was her own life. She resolved, however, 
that she would not separate from him. The Sikhs 
too. felt that having vowed never to leave the Guru, 
they could not abandon him or make a formal 
declaration that he was not their Guru, and they 
were not his Sikhs. 

When the Turks and the rajas heard from the 
imperial envoy of the failure of his negotiations, 
they decided to send the Guru’s mother an embassy 
with a request that she and her grandchildren 
should abandon the fort. This was in the hope that 
when the Guru found himself alone he would follow 
them. The envoy first proceeded to the Guru and 
endeavoured to persuade him to evacuate. The 
Guru replied that he could not rely on any promise 
made by the idolatrous rajas or the hypocritical 
Muhammadans. He then expatiated on the villanies 
and inherent turpitude of Aurangzeb — a man who 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH i8i 

had no regard for an oath, and whose god was 
money, as was apparent from his persecution of 
the King of Golkanda, against whom his operations 
were now directed. 

The envoy seeing there was no hope from the 
Guru then proceeded to‘ the Guru's mother, and 
employed all his arguments to convince her that it 
was expedient for the Guru and his Sikhs to leave 
Anandpur — ‘ 0 lady, save thyself and all thy 
family. What will it avail thee to remain here ; 
and if thou depart what harm will it do thee ? 
The Guru’s Sikhs are everywhere ready to receive 
thee, and, whithersoever thou decidest to go, thou 
mayest abide in happiness. This city will still be 
thy property, but leave it now and end the quarrel. 
Hundreds of thousands are waiting to behold thee. 
Explain matters to thy son and persuade him to 
obey thee. If not, then prepare to go thyself, and 
he will follow thee of his own accord. If thou listen 
not to this advice, great sufferings will result.’ 
The Guru’s mother promised to use all her efforts 
to persuade her son, and said she would place 
confidence in the oaths of the Turks and the hill 
rajas. 

The Sikhs, sore stricken with hunger, supported 
the envoy’s representation. ‘ O true Guru, Imowing 
us to be thine own, grant us the gift of life. If 
thou agree not to this, let us retire to some forest 
where the Turks cannot reach us. Here shut up 
in this fort many have died, and many more will 
die. No food can come to us from outside, and we 
have now been fighting for a long time. O great 
king, how can we who are famished with hunger 
continue to do battle. Accept our advice. Oblige 
us not. to renounce thee, and expel us not from thy 
faith. If thou adhere to thine own resolve, we must 
part company, for life is dear to every one, and 
what will a dying man not do ? Nay, we pray thee 
to assist thy sect and save our lives.’ 



i 82 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru replied, ‘ My brethren, waver not. I 
only desire your welfare. You know not that these 
people are deceivers and design to do us evil. If 
you hold out a little longer as you have done, you 
shall have food to your heart’s content. I ask you 
to wait only three weeks.’ When the Sikhs refused 
to wait so long, the Guru asked them to wait at least 
for five days, and the great God would send them 
succour.^ The Sikhs refused to wait even a single 
day, and said it was impossible for them to do so 
in their dire distress. The Guru repeated his request, 
and said that the enemy would then retire, and 
they should all be happy. If his Sikhs were to 
leave now they would inevitably be killed. ‘ As 
a child,’ continued the Guru, ‘ on seeing fire, trieth 
to grasp it while his parents restrain him, so, O dear 
Khalsa, you are rushing to your destruction, while 
I am endeavouring to save you.’ 

The Sikhs replied, ‘ O great king, we cannot be 
in a worse pUght outside the city than we are within. 
We shall all die of hunger here, and if we sally 
forth we may escape and kill some of the enemy. 
We cannot remain with thee an instant longer.’ 
These arguments were recommended for adoption 
by the Guru’s mother — ‘ My son, be not obstinate. 
It is best to leave the fort and save thy people. 
The Turks and the rajas will give thee solemn oaths 
of safe conduct, and what more can they do ? Now 
is the time, my son ; thou shalt not again have this 
opportunity. If the enemy come and take the fort 
by storm, what wilt thou do ? Thy Sikhs are dying 
of hunger, and they will all soon be dead.’ 

The Guru replied, ‘ O mother dear, thou knowest 
not the Turks and the hill rajas. I have already 
shown thee their deceit, but yet thou art not satisfied. 
Thou desirest to save thy family, but how wiU the 

^ The Guru was then expecting reinforcements of the Malwa Sikhs 
and hence his request for delay. In fact the reinforcements did come, 
but arrived too late for the defence of Anandpur. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 183 

enemy allow you all to pass ? Thou thinkest what is 
good is evil, and what is evil is good.’ The Guru 
then turning to the Sikhs said, ‘ My brethren, they 
who desire to go may now renounce me and depart.’ 
On hearing this the Guru’s mother was greatly dis- 
tressed, and rose and sat- apart to give vent to her 
grief. The Sikhs went and sat around her. The 
Guru’s wives then came forth and joined the sorrow- 
ing group. The Guru’s mother, wiping away her 
tears, broke silence — ‘The Guru deemeth it not 
proper to leave the fort. O holy Guru Nanak, dispel 
my sorrow, assist us now, and give my son right 
understanding that he may protect his people ! I 
have given him much advice, but he heedeth it not. 
Even if the Sikhs renounce him and depart, he 
telleth them they shall all be killed. What he saith 
is never uttered in vain, and of this I have abundant 
proof. Yet if we remain in Anandpur, the enemy 
will soon come and put us all to death.’ 

The Sikhs began to reflect — ‘ We have spent all 
our Uves in the Guru’s service. How can we leave 
him now ? It is he who assisteth us both here and 
hereafter. , , He asketh us to remain with him for 
five days more. What will happen in five days? 
We shall only lose our lives in vain. We will cer- 
tainly go forth. It is better to fight and die than 
to starve. We will not formally renounce the Guru. 
Were we to do so, we should incur great obloquy, 
and the seed of Sikhism would perish.’ After 
much reflection and hesitation, however, the Sikhs 
changed their minds and said, ‘ It is better for us 
to break with him, and write a document to the 
effect that he is no more our Guru and we are no 
more his Sikhs. If we again meet him alive, we 
shall induce him to pardon us.’ 

The allied armies too, hearing that the Guru’s 
mother was in favour of evacuating the fort, lost 
no time in their negotiations. They called a Saiyid 
(or reputed descendant of Ali the Prophet’s son-in- 



i 84 the SIKH RELIGION 

law), and a Brahman, both of whom were to swear, 
on behalf of the allied armies, solemn oaths of safe 
conduct for the Guru should he evacuate Anandpur. 
The likeness of a cow was made in flour, a salagram 
and a knife were placed in front of it, and these 
articles were sent to the Guru with a letter to the 
effect that whoever meditated evil against him, 
should be deemed a cow-killer or the worst form 
of assassin. All the Hindu chiefs put their seals to 
this letter. 

The Saiyid took the Emperor’s letter and the 
Quran on his head and, accompanied by several 
Muhammadan officers, proceeded to the Guru. The 
Guru refused to listen to them. They then went 
to Mata Gujari and repeated their representations. 
They asked her to leave Anandpur, in which case 
her son would assuredly follow. She was, however, 
unable to prevail on him. Gulab Rai and Sham 
Singh (Sham Das), grandsons of Suraj Mai addressed 
the Guru and advised him to obey his mother. The 
Guru still proved obdurate. Upon this his mother 
prepared to depart with her two youngest grandsons, 
Jujhar Singh and Fatah Singh. On seeing the 
Guru’s mother take her departure, the Sikhs began 
to waver in their allegiance to the Guru. Paper, 
pens, and ink were produced for those who wished 
to write letters of renunciation, and in the end only 
forty Sikhs decided to remain with their religious 
Chief and share his fortunes. The Guru told them 
that they too might desert him. They refused, and 
said that, if they did so, the service they had already 
performed for him would prove unavailing. They 
would either remain within the fort or force their 
way out as the Guru directed. The Guru then knew 
that the seed of his religion would germinate and 
flourish. He kept the deeds of renunciation, and 
also took from the envoys the documents they had 
brought. He then dismissed them and requested 
to be left alone. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 185 

When the Guru found himself alone, he set fire 
to his tents and other inflammable articles. What 
was non-inflammable he buried in the earth. He 
now finally determined to leave Anandpur, and gave 
orders to his men that they were all to march at 
night and during the darkness proceed to the east 
as far as their strength would allow them. When 
the Guru’s mother, wives, and two youngest children 
had set out, the Guru went to visit his father’s 
shrine and entrusted it to one Gurbakhsh, a holy 
Udasi, telling him that he should never suffer dis- 
tress as long as he remained its custodian. 

When the Guru was ready to depart, Daya Singh 
and Ude Singh walked in front of him, the second 
batch of baptized Sikhs on his left, Muhakam Singh 
and Sahib Singh on his right. His sons Ajit Singh 
and Zorawar Singh followed with bows and arrows. 
Then came Bhai Himmat Singh carrying ammunition 
and matchlocks. Gulab Rai, Sham Singh, and other 
friends and relations of the Guru accompanied him. 
The rest of the Guru’s servants and camp followers, 
about five hundred in all, brought up the rear. 


Chapter XXIII 

The Guru marched by Kiratpur and thence to Nir- 
moh. While at Nirmoh he gave Gulab Rai and 
Sham Singh a letter to the Raja of Sirmaur, which 
contained a request that he would give them a 
village to abide in. From Nirmoh the Guru and 
his party proceeded to Ropar. When the allied 
troops attacked the rear guard under Ajit Singh, 
Ude Singh asked and obtained permission to relieve 
him. The enemy surrounded and killed the daunt- 
less Ude Singh, the hero of many a desperate battle, 
the bravest of the Guru’s brave warriors, believing 
that he was the Guru himself. 

The Guru sat down on the margin of a stream 



i86 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


called Sarsa to await the issue of the conflict. When 
Ajit Singh delayed coming, the Guru sent Jiwan 
Singh to fetch him. Jiwan Singh was killed in the 
endeavour. Before arriving at Ropar, the Guru met 
his mother and two youngest children, and exhorted 
them to proceed quickly on their journey, A Sikh 
who resided in Dihli also met the Guru on the way, 
and asked if he could perform any service for him. 
The Guru said that he might take his family to 
Dihli. The Sikh said he had a relation in Ropar 
who would keep the Guru’s family there for the 
present. The Guru’s mother met a Brahman, a 
native of Kheri near Sarhind, and discharged cook 
of the Guru, who offered to entertain her party, and 
she decided to take her grandsons with her and 
accept his shelter and protection. Her daughters- 
in-law remained at Ropar for the night, and next 
day set out for Dihli under the trusty Sikh’s pro- 
tection. 

The alhed forces continued to harass the Guru’s 
retreat. He left some of his men at Ropar to arrest 
their progress, and went himself with thirty-five 
chosen Sikhs towards Chamkaur. On the way at 
a place called Baru Majara he received information 
that a fresh contingent of the imperial army was close 
at hand to capture him. In no wise dismayed he 
continued his journey towards Chamkaur. On 
arriving near that town he took refuge in a garden, 
and was joined by five of the Sikhs he had left at 
Ropar. All the others had been slain. 

The Guru sent to a Jat agriculturist to ask him 
for a place of rest. The Jat tried to put him off 
with excuses, but the Guru placed him under arrest 
for the moment. He then took the Jat’s house, 
and turned it into a miniature fort where he 
took shelter with his men. The allied forces could 
find no trace of him, and were much distressed 
at his disappearance. But the troops piarching 
from Dihli discovered the Guru’s residence and 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 187 

proceeded thither. The' [^united forces now con- 
centrated their attack on the Guru and were joined 
by his ancient enemies the Ranghars and Gujars. 

The Guru then addressed his men, ‘ You would 
not listen to my advice to remain in Anandpur. 
When you took your departure, you did not calcu- 
late that this time of peril would ever arrive. 
You trusted to the oaths of Muhammadans on the 
Quran and of the hillmen on their gods and cows, 
and this is the result. There is no opportunity now 
of employing the traditional means of dealing with 
enemies. We can only defend ourselves. There are 
hundreds of thousands against us. Die not the 
death of jackals, but fight bravely as you have 
hitherto done, and avenge the deceit practised by 
those great sinners. The more you strive, the 
greater shall be your reward. If you fall fighting 
you shall meet me as martyrs in heaven. If you 
conquer you shall obtain sovereignty, and in either 
case your lot shall be envied by mortals.’ 

Having thus addressed his Sikhs, the Guru 
appointed eight men to guard each of the four walls 
of his extemporized fort. Kotha Singh and Madan 
Singh held the door, he himself, his two sons, 
Daya Singh and Sant Singh the top story. Alim 
Singh and Man Singh were appointed sentinels. 
Thus was made up the number of forty who accom- 
panied the Guru. Five Sikhs went forth to contend 
with the enemy. After fighting with great bravery 
they were killed. Then Khazan Singh, Dan Singh, 
and Dhyan Singh went forth, and after killing 
several of the enemy, were killed themselves. The 
brave Muhakam Singh, following the example of his 
fellows, went forth and fell pierced by scores of 
bullets. 

While the Guru was lauding Muhakam Singh’s 
valour, and saying that he should be emancipated, 
Himmat Singh, who was one of the first Sikhs bap- 
tized, asked permission to go forth to repel the 



i88 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


enemy. When he was slain the second batch of five 
Sikhs baptized by the Guru went forth, and sold 
their lives dearly. Ishar Singh and Deva Singh were 
the next to contend with the Muhammadans. While 
these were alive and fought, the enemy thought 
they were endowed with supernatural power. 

Daya Singh and others prayed the Guru to escape 
by some means, and leave them to contend with 
the enemy. If the Guru were saved, the seed of 
religion would remain. Six more of the Guru’s 
warriors, Muhar Singh, Kirat Singh, Anand Singh, 
Lai Singh, Kesar Singh, and Amolak Singh asked 
permission to go forth and try their strength with 
the Turks. The six brave warriors were all killed. 
Nahar Khan, one of the recently arrived imperial 
officers, attempted to scale the little fort, but was 
shot down by the Guru. Ghairat Khan, another 
officer of the new army, then advanced, and was 
also slain by the Guru. After this none of the 
Muhammadan officers had the courage to attempt 
the fatal ascent. They formed a plan, however, to 
rush and seize the Guru. In this they utterly failed, 
for the Guru shot them down in numbers and held 
at bay the multitudinous Muhammadan host. 

The Guru’s son A jit Singh now asked permission 
to go forth and fight single-handed with the enemy. 
He said he was the Guru’s Sikh and son, and it was 
incumbent on him to fight even under desperate 
circumstances. The Guru approved of this proposal. 
Ajit Singh took with him five heroes, namely, Alim 
Singh, Jawahir Singh, Dhyan Singh, Sukha Singh, 
and Bir Singh. Ajit Singh performed prodigies of 
valour, and Muhammadans fell before him as shrubs 
before the wind. His companions all fought bravely 
and desperately. Zabardast Khan, the Lahore vice- 
roy, was greatly distressed on seeing so many of 
his men slain, and called on his army to at once 
destroy the handful of Sikhs who were causing 
such havoc in the imperial ranks. When the 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 189 

swords of the Sikhs were broken and their arrows 
spent, they spitted the enemy with their spears. 
Ajit Singh broke his spear on a Muhammadan. The 
enemy then made a fresh attack and fatally wounded 
him, defenceless as he- was. He realized, however, 
that he had acted as befitted his race. He fell and 
slept the sleep of peace on his gory bed. The Guru 
on his death said, ‘ O God, it is Thou who sentest 
him, and he hath died fighting for his faith. The 
trust Thou gavest hath been restored to Thee.’ 
The five Sikhs who accompanied him were also slain. 

Zorawar Singh, the Guru’s second son, on seeing 
his brother’s fate could not restrain himself, and 
asked his father’s permission to go forth and fight 
as Ajit Singh had done and avenge his death. The 
youth took five more Sikhs with him and proceeded 
to commit havoc among the enemy. The chronicler 
states that Zorawar Singh made his way through 
the Muhammadan army as a crocodile through a 
stream. The enemy dropped like rain in the month 
of Sawan and Bhadon, until Zorawar Singh and his 
five companions fell overpowered by numbers. 

His remaining Sikhs, seeing that all hope was at 
an end, again advised the Guru to effect his escape. 
He agreed, seated near him Daya Singh, Dharm 
Singh, Man Singh, Sangat Singh, and Sant Singh, 
who alone remained of the army, and proceeded to 
entrust the Guruship to them. He said, ‘ I shall 
ever be among five Sikhs. Wherever there are five 
Sikhs of mine assembled they shall be priests of 
all priests. Wherever there is a sinner, five Sikhs 
can give him baptism and absolution. Great is the 
glory of five Sikhs, and whatever they do shall not 
be in vain. They who give food and clothing to 
five Sikhs, shall obtain from them the fulfilment of 
their desires.’ Saying this the Guru circumam- 
bulated them three times, laid his plume and crest 
in front of them, offered them his arms, and cried 
out, ‘ Sri Wahguru ji ka Khalsa ! Sri Waghuru ji 



IQO 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


ki fatah ! ’ Sant Singh and Sangat Singh offered to 
remain in the fort while Daya Singh, Dharm Singh, 
and Man Singh determined to accompany the Guru. 
The Guru gave his plume to Sant Singh, clothed 
him in his armour, and seated him in the upper 
room which he was about to vacate. The Guru and 
his three companions escaped during the night. He 
told them, if perchance they separated from him, 
they were to go in the direction of a certain star 
which he indicated. 

When the Guru was escaping he bade his men 
stand firm. He said he was going to awaken the 
enemy, so that they might not say he had absconded. 
The Turkish sentries were imme&ately on the alert. 
He discharged two arrows at them. The arrows at 
first struck torches which they held in their hands 
and then passed through their bodies. In the 
darkness, which followed the extinction of the 
lamps, the Guru and his companions escaped, but 
did not travel together. He proceeded barefooted 
on his journey, and on becoming tired sat down to 
rest, on the margin of a lake in the Machhiwara 
forest between Ropar and Ludhiana. 

Sant Singh and Sangat Singh, who were left behind 
in the little fort, inflicted great loss on the enemy. 
The Muhammadans, however, succeeded in scaling 
the building and believed they were going at last 
to capture the Guru whose plume and arrow Sant 
Singh wore. Khwaja Mardud gave orders that Sant 
Singh and Sangat Singh should be beheaded and 
their heads sent to regale the Emperor’s eyes. The 
Muhammadans were much disappointed to subse- 
quently learn that Sant Singh was not the Guru, 
and that the Guru had escaped. They sent men to 
the known abodes of all faqirs in the country to 
search for him, but in vain. 

After this the armies dispersed. Zabardast Khan 
who was wounded in the recent battle retired to 
his viceroyalty of Lahore. Wazir Khan departed 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 191 

for Sarhind, and Khwaja Mardud went with the 
remnant of his army to reinforce the Emperor who 
was still campaigning in the south of India. 

The Guru’s three Sikhs followed the star he had 
pointed out to them, and they all four met at the 
place now called Bir Guru in the Machhiwara forest. 
His Sikhs found him sleeping with a waterpot for his 
pillow. They awakened him and told him that the 
Muhammadan army would probably be on them by 
daybreak. The Guru said he could not save him- 
self, as his feet were blistered. He told the Sikhs 
that they might seek shelter in a neighbouring 
garden. Man Singh took the Guru on his back and 
proceeded thither. The Guru found there a Sikh 
called Gulaba, who treated him and his faithful 
attendants with kindness and hospitality. 

Gulaba gave the Guru shelter in a top story 
which he had recently built to his house. The Guru 
wanted meat the next day, and a he-goat was pro- 
vided for him which he killed by shooting. Gulaba 
was alarmed lest some of the neighbouring Brahmans 
and Sai5dds might have heard the report of the gun. 
As a matter of fact one Brahman did hear it, and 
suspected the presence of the Guru in the village. 
He looked and saw the Guru on the top story of 
Gulaba’s house. It turned out, however, that the 
Brahman was friendly. He had previously visited 
the Guru in Anandpur and enjoyed his hospitality. 
He now in return put some sweets and a sacrificial 
thread of the Hindus on a plate, and sent them as 
an offering to the Guru. The offering of the sacri- 
ficial thread was a delicate hint to the Guru that 
the Brahman would like to lead him back to the 
ancient religion of India. The Guru returned the 
sweets and the thread with a present of five gold 
muhars from himself. Gulaba consulted with his 
brother as to the disposal of the Guru. They feared 
for their own safety should it be further known that 
he was among them. 



192 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


To Gulaba’s house now came two Muhammadans, 
Ghani Khan and Nabi Khan, who had previously 
known and visited the Guru. On hearing that the 
imperial troops were scouring the country in quest 
of him, they determined to go and offer him their 
humble services. The Guru reqiiested them to 
remain with him, and they readily consented. 

Gulaba and his family spent an anxious night. 
In the early morning he waited on the Guru with 
a present of five gold muhars, which he meant as 
a parting offering. He represented the danger he 
had incurred in entertaining his guest, and begged 
him to take compassion on him and arrange for his 
departure. 

It happened that while the Guru was in Gulaba’s 
house a Sikh woman also came to visit him. She 
had previously seen him and vowed that she would 
spin and weave cloth for him, which she would keep 
until his arrival in her village. The Guru had the 
cloth dyed blue, and a robe and sheet made from 
it in imitation of the dress of a Muhammadan pil- 
grim. He then departed from Gulaba’s village. He 
was borne on a litter which Ghani Khan and Nabi 
Khan lifted in front, and Man Singh and Dharm 
Singh in rear, while Daya Singh waved a chauri 
over him. They informed all inquirers that they 
were escorting Uch ka Pir. The expression Uch ka 
Pir meant either high priest as a general religious 
title, or priest of Uch, a well-known Muhammadan 
city in the southern part of the Panjab. The Guru 
and his carriers qn arriving at Led in the Patiala 
State accidentally came on a detachment of the 
imperial army which had been searching for him. 
The general suspected that the pilgrim was no other 
than the Guru, and determined to make trial of 
him by what he ate. A sumptuous dinner was pre- 
pared for the party. The Guru told his Sikhs that 
they might eat what the Musalman cooks had 
prepared, and they did so after touching the food 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 193 

with their swords. A friendly Saiyid from Nurpur 
near Machhiwara who was at the time an officer in 
the detachment, stated that the Guru was really 
Uch ka Pir. Upon this the general gave an order 
for the Guru’s immediate release. 


Chapter XXIV 

The Guru no longer travelled with the imperial 
army, but proceeded to Kanech in the eastern part 
of what is now the Ludhiana district. There one 
Fatah came to pay him his respects and ask if he 
could do him any service. The Guru asked for his 
best mare to aid him in his escape. Fatah, who had 
not been sincere in his protestations of friendship, 
put him off with excuses. It is said that when he 
left the Guru and went home, he found the mare 
had died of snake-bite. This was understood to be the 
result of his hypocrisy and churlishness to the Guru. 

The Guru thence proceeded to Hehar, also in the 
Ludhiana district, where lived Kripal, the Udasi 
Mahant who had so distinguished himself in the 
battle of Bhaiigani. The Guru on meeting him dis- 
missed Ghani Khan and Nabi Khan, after giving 
them presents and a letter recommending them to 
the consideration of the faithful. Though Kripal 
had been previously so devoted to the Guru, he 
now feared to entertain him lest the Muhammadans 
should be informed that he was sheltering an out- 
law. He accordingly advised the Guru to move on 
towards the villages of Lamma and Jatpura. 

On the way thither the Guru met a Muhammadan 
called Kalha, a rich and important person who was 
Chaudhri of Jagraon and Raikot, two considerable 
towns of the Ludhiana district. Kalha entertained 
him at Jatpura. The Guru requested him to send 
a messenger to Sarhind to inquire the fate of his 
mother and his two youngest sons. The Guru 

o 


SIKH. V 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


194 

remaihed at Jatpura until the messenger’s return; 
Jatpura is about fifty miles distant from Saurhind. 
This distance the messenger is said to have' traversed 
in an incredibly short space of time. 

The following is the messenger’s story, one of the 
most painful in history. It has been already stated 
that the Guru’s mother entrusted herself and the 
two grandsons, who accompanied her, to a Brahman. 
He with sweet words took them to his house and 
induced them to put faith in him. When the Guru’s 
mother went to sleep, he stole her money, which 
she carried in a saddle-bag and buried it. He then 
went to her and told her there were several thieves 
prowling about the neighbourhood, and she must be 
careful of her valuables. He said he gave her this 
information so that she might not afterwards blame 
him. She called her servant and told him what she 
had heard. He almost immediately afterwards in- 
formed her that her saddle-bag was missing. As no 
one had entered the house but the lady’s party and 
the Brahman, she interrogated the latter on the 
subject. He pretended to be furious at suspicion 
having been directed against him, and said that 
that was the result of doing good and of enter- 
taining homeless wayfarers and outlaws. He had 
saved the Guru’s mother and children from death, 
and the return they made him for his trouble and 
hospitality was to charge him with theft as if he 
were a vulgar malefactor. Then saying that he 
could not trust her and her children, he ordered 
them to leave his house. 

The Brahman with loud cries proceeded to the 
Chaudhri, or chief civil official of Kheri, and in- 
formed him that the Guru’s mother and sons had 
just come to his house, and both he and the Chaudhri 
would obtain a large reward for delivering them to 
the imperial authorities. The Brahman and the 
Chaudhri then went to the next highest official, a 
Ranghar, the governor of Murinda. He proceeded 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 195 

with them to the Brahman’s house, and thence they 
tcx>k the Guru’s mother and her two grandsons to 
Wazir Khan, Viceroy of Sarhind. He ordered 
them to be confined in a tower. People thronged 
next day to see them, and cursed and abused 
the treacherous Brahman to their hearts’ content. 
Wazir Khan ordered the children to be brought 
before him. When the Guru’s mother heard the 
order, it stung her like a sharp arrow. 

One Suchanand Khatri, who had vainly sued for 
one of the Guru’s sons as a husband for his daughter, 
now came forward and said the children were cer- 
tainly the progeny of the serpent, that is, sons of 
the Guru, and that when they grew up they would 
be as destructive as their father. The governor of 
Murinda told Mata Gujari, in order to pacify her, 
that he would send the children back after showing 
them to Wazir Khan. Not believing him, she put 
one of them at each side of her, and tried to conceal 
them with her dress. The Guru’s son Jujhar Singh 
on hearing the Ranghar’s voice stood up and said 
to his grandmother, ‘ The Turks have ever been our 
enemies. How can we escape from them ? There- 
fore let us go to the viceroy.’ Saying this he took 
his younger brother Fatah Singh and went with the 
Ranghar. When they reached the viceroy’s court, 
the Ranghar, in order' to add to their sufferings, 
told them that their father, their two eldest brothers, 
and their companions had all been killed in Cham- 
kaur. He added, ‘ Your only hope of escape now 
is to bow before the Viceroy and accept Islam ; 
and perhaps he will spare your lives.’ 

Jujhar Singh when confronted with the viceroy 
thus addressed him : ‘ My father, the holy Guru 
Gobind Singh is not dead. Who can kill him ? He 
is protected by the immortal God. If any one say 
that he can tear down heaven, how is that possible ? 
Were a storm to attempt to drive a mountain befor^ 
it, could it ever do so ? Were any one to try to 

02 



196 THE SIKH RELIGION ’ 

grasp the sun and moon, it would be a feat im- 
possible to accomplish. Were the Guru to desire it, 
he could destroy every trace of you, but he deemeth 
it his first duty to obey the laws of heaven. When 
we have dedicated our heads to our father who is 
such a Guru, why should we bow them before a 
false and deceitful sinner ? ’ On hearing this the 
people all cried out that the children ought to be 
allowed to go unharmed. The misnamed Suchanand 
now interposed, and repeated that these were the 
offspring of a cobra, and from their heads to their 
feet filled with venom. ‘ See my friends,’ he said, 

‘ they have not the least fear, and are so proud that 
they even insult and defy the Viceroy’. 

Wazir Khan then reflected that if the children 
became Muhammadans, it would be a gain and glory 
to his faith. He told them that, if they would 
accept his faith, he would grant them an estate, 
marry them to the daughters of chiefs, and they 
would become happy and be honoured by the 
Emperor. Jujhar Singh then looking at his younger 
brother said, ‘ My brother, the time to sacrifice our 
lives, as our grandfather Guru Teg Bahadur did, 
hath now arrived. What thinkest thou ? ’ Fatah 
Singh replied, ‘ Brother dear, our grandfather parted 
with his head but not with his religion, and he 
ordered us to follow his example. Now that we have 
received the baptism of the spirit and the sword, 
what care we for death ? Wherefore it is best that 
we should give our lives, thus save the Sikh religion, 
and bring down God’s vengeance on the Turks.’ 

Jujhar Singh again spoke on the same subject : 

‘ My brother, our grandfather Guru Teg Bahadur 
spurned the Miihammadan religion. Here is this 
noble family of ourS' — a man like Guru Gobind Singh 
our father, a man like Guru Teg Bahadur our grand- 
father, a man like Guru Har Gobind our great- 
grandfather. We, who are their descendants, can- 
not attach a stigma to their memories.’ The young 



LIFE OF GURU GOBINP SINGH 197 

boy waxing still more angry, continued, ‘ Hear, 0 
viceroy, I spurn thy religion and will not part with 
mine own. It hath become the custom of our family 
to forfeit life rather than faith. O fool, why seekest 
thou to tempt us with worldly ambition P We will 
never be led astray by 'the false advantages thou 
offerest. The indignities inflicted by the Turks on 
our grandfather shall be the fire to consume them, 
and our deaths the wind to fan the flame. In this 
way we shall destroy the Turks without forfeiting 
our holy faith.’ 

The Muhammadan viceroy could not endure out- 
spokenness of this description, and, in the words of the 
chronicler, began to burn like sand in a fiery furnace. 
He said he must put the children to death. They 
had no fear of any one, and their words were liable 
to cause disaffection and religious apathy in others. 
Suchanand was ready to support the viceroy, and 
suggested additional reasons for putting the children 
to death. He said they had spoken insolently 
before the Viceroy, and when they grew up they 
would follow their father’s example and destroy 
armies. What good could be expected from them ? 
They would be always exciting revolts. They were 
prisoners with no right of pardon ; and, if they 
were released, no one knew what they would do. 
There were no means for their repression but death. 

Then out spoke the Nawab of Maler Kotla, ‘ O 
Viceroy, these children are still drinking milk in the 
nursery, and are too young to commit an offence. 
They know not good from evil. Wherefore be 
pleased to allow them to depart.’ This representa- 
tion the Viceroy heeded not, but cast about for some 
one to kill the children. His servants who were 
present said they were willing to sacrifice their lives 
for him, but they were not executioners. He turned 
to right and left, but all his staff hung down their 
heads in token of refusal and pity for the children. 
At last looking behind him he espied a Ghilxai who. 



198 THE SIKH RELIGION 

with the cruelty of his race, offered to do the san- 
guinary deed. It is a general belief among the Sikhs 
that the children were bricked into a wall and suffered 
to die in that position, but the authors of the Suraj 
Parkash and of the Gur Bilas both state that 
the children were put to death in the order of their 
ages by the sword of the Ghilzai executioner. They 
vied with each other as to who should first have 
the honour of martyrdom. The two children Jujhar 
Singh and Fatah Singh, aged nine and seven years 
respectively, perished on the 13th of Poh, Sambat 
1762 (A. D. 1705). 

A rich Sikh called Todar Mai, as soon as he heard 
of the imprisonment of the Guru’s children, hastened 
to the viceroy with the intention of ransoming them, 
but arrived too late. The children had been already 
put to death. He then proceeded to the Guru’s 
mother Mata Gujari, who had not yet heard of the 
execution of her grandchildren, but was at the same 
time suffering extreme mental agony. She every 
now and again would pray to the Gurus to protect 
her little ones ; ‘ 0 Guru Nanak, may no hair of 
my grandchildren’s heads be touched! O my son. 
Guru Gobind Singh, pardon my sins and protect 
me now 1 Woe is me I I know not what may happen 
to my grandchildren to-day.’ Todar Mai sought 
to break the sad intelligence to her, but his voice 
was stifled in his throat. On seeing this, Mata 
Gujari became extremely alarmed, and standing up 
at once said, ‘ Tell me the truth. Why art thou 
sorrowful ? When will they allow my grandsons to 
return, and what questions have they put them ? ’ 
Todar Mai then strengthening his resolve, addressed 
her : ' I have made my heart harder than a stone, 
and come to tell thee of the death of thy grand- 
children. O mother, the light of thine eyes, the 
support of the world, the life of the Sikh^, the 
darlings of the Guru have been to-day massacred 
by the Turks.’ On receiving this news Mata Gujari 





f ATAHGARH 


LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 199 

was struck down as if a mountain had fallen on her. 
Todar Mai began to fan her in her swoon with the 
skirt of his dress. 

On recovering consciousness to some extent she 
began to call upon her grandsons, ‘ 0 Jujhar Singh, 

0 Fatah Singh, after such love for me whither have 
you gone ? Take me with you. Who will call now me 
mother or grandmother ? Who will come and sit on 
my lap ? How shall I now behold you ? O youthful 
warriors, light of my courtyard, sun of my family, 

1 know not what your sufferings must have been 
to-day. O my grandchildren, on whom T have 
never turned my back even when asleep. To-day, 
alas ! alas ! the Muhammadan tyrants have killed 
you, the darlings of mine eyes, my beautiful ones. 
I concealed my grandsons from the gaze of others, 
and behold what hath happened to-day ! What 
have I done to you, O children, that you should 
have abandoned me to misery ? ’ Saying this, she 
fell heavily to the ground, and gave up her spirit. 
Todar Mai cremated the bodies of the Guru’s mother 
and her grandchildren, and buried their ashes.^ A 
Sikh temple, now called Fatahgarh, was subse- 
quently erected on the spot. 

When the Turks heard that the Brahman who 
had betrayed the Guru’s mother and children 
possessed much wealth, they arrested him and all 
his family, and forced him by torture to tell where 
he had concealed his treasure. He pointed out the 
spot where he had buried Mata Gujari’s money, but 
it was not found there. The Turks believing that 
he was only deceiving them continued to torture 
him until his soul took flight to the infernal regions. 

While the Guru was listening to the narrative, he 
was digging up a shrub with his knife. He said, 
‘ As I dig up this shrub by the roots, so shall the 
Turks be extirpated.’ He inquired if any one 

^ In the Suraj Parhash it is stated that it was Tilok Singh and 
Ram Singh who cremated the bodies of the Guru’s mother and sons. 



200 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


except the Nawab of Maler Kotla had spoken on 
behalf of the children. The messenger replied in 
the negative. The Guru then said that after the 
roots of the oppressive Turks were all dug up, the 
roots of the Nawab should still remain. His Sikhs 
should one day come and lay Sarhind waste. 

Before the Guru had set out from Jatpura he pre- 
sented his host Kalha with a sword to preserve in 
memory of him. He was to honour it with incense 
and flowers. As long as he did so, he and his family 
should flourish, but, if ever he wore it, he should 
lose his possessions. Kalha during his lifetime 
treated the sword according to the Guru’s injunc- 
tions, and so did his son after him. But his grand- 
son put on the weapon, and employed it in the 
chase. In endeavouring to kill a deer with it he 
struck his own thigh and died of the wound. The 
author of the Suraj Parkash wrote that this incident 
actually occurred when he was a boy, and he still 
remembered it. 


Chapter XXV 

The Guru continued his retreat from the Turks, 
and proceeded on his litter from Jatpura to Dina. 
On the way he met a Sikh who presented him with 
a horse and saddle. On arriving at Dina, the Guru 
met Shamira, Lakhmira, and Takht Mai, grandsons 
of Jodh Rai, who had rendered material assistance 
to Guru Har Gobind in the battle of Gurusar. Jodh 
Rai’s family at first lived at Kangar. His grand- 
sons had now left that village and gone to Dina. 
The Guru represented to the young men that they 
incurred danger in entertaining him, but they felt 
no apprehension, and gave him hospitable treatment. 
While there the Guru gathered some fighting men to 
his standard. 

During the Guru’s stay at Dina he was visited 
by Farm Singh and Dharm Singh, descendants of 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 201 


Bhai Rupa, of whom mention has been made in the 
life of the sixth Guru. Farm Singh and Dharm 
Singh made the Guru an offering of a horse and 
a (hress. The Guru took special notice of Shamira, 
and gave him the horse and the dress which Farm 
Singh and Dharm Singh* had presented him. The 
Guru told Shamira that he should own land as far 
as he could course his steed. Shamira mentioned 
this in his household. His maternal uncle laughed 
at the Guru’s promise, and said that if the Guru 
had been able to work miracles, he would not now 
be a fugitive. Shamira was partially convinced by 
this argument, and merely coursed his steed round 
his own village. As the result of his want of faith, 
he only remained in possession of the land within 
the circle he thus described. 

The Viceroy of Sarhind heard that the Guru was 
being entertained by Shamira and his brothers in 
Dina. He wrote to Shamira on the subject, and 
ordered him under pain of his highest displeasure 
to arrest and surrender the Guru. Shamira replied 
that he was only entertaining his priest, as the 
Viceroy himself or any one else might do. The Guru 
was merely visiting his Sikhs and molesting no one. 
While sending this reply, Shamira feared that the 
Viceroy would send troops and arrest the Guru, so 
he sent a spy to obtain information of the Viceroy’s 
movements and proceedings. The Viceroy kept troops 
ready, but did not send them immediately. Mean- 
while the Guru enlisted several men and prepared 
for his defence. The Guru’s stay at Dina appears 
to have been somewhat protracted, for it was there 
he wrote his celebrated ‘Zafarnama’, or Fersian 
epistle to Aurangzeb. It begins, as usual in such 
compositions, with an 

Invocation to God 

‘ O Thou perfect in miracles, eternal, beneficent, Bestower 
of grace, maintenance, salvation, and mercy ; Dispenser 



202 THE SIKH RELIGION 

oi bliss, Pardoner, Saviour, Remitter of sins, dear to the 
heart. King of kings, Bestower of excellence, Indicator of 
the way, without colour and without equal. Lord, who 
giveth heavenly bliss to him who hath no property, no 
retinue, no army, and no comforts. Distinct from the 
world, powerful, whose light is everywhere diffused, Thou 
bestowest gifts as if Thou wert present in person. Pure 
Cherisher, Bestower of favours, Thou art merciful, and 
Provider of sustenance in every land. Thou art Lord of 
every clime, the greatest of the great. Perfect in beauty, 
merciful. Master of knowledge, Support of the unhappy. 
Protector of the Faith, Fountain of eloquence. Searcher of 
hearts. Author of revelation, Appreciator of wisdom. Lord 
of intelligence. Diviner of secrets. Omnipresent God, 
Thou knowest the affairs of the world. Thou resol vest its 
difficulties, Thou art its great Organizer. 

Address to Aurangzeb 

‘ I have no faith in thine oath to which thou tookest the 
one God as witness. I have not a particle of confidence in 
thee. Thy treasurer and thy ministers are all false. He who 
putteth faith in thine oath on the Quran is thereby a ruined 
man. The insolent crow cannot touch him who hath 
fallen under the shadow of the huma. He who taketh the 
protection of a powerful tiger cannot be approached by 
a goat, a buffalo, or a deer. Had I even secretly sworn on 
the volume of my choice faith to accept thy religion, I 
should not have had to withdraw my infantry and cavalry 
from Anandpur.^ 

‘ As to my defeat at Chamkaur, what could forty men do 
when a hundred thousand came on them unawares ? The 
oath-breakers attacked them abruptly with swords, arrows, 
and muskets. I was constrained to engage in the combat, 
and I fought to the utmost of my ability. When an affair 
passeth beyond the region of diplomacy, it is lawful to 
have recourse to the sword. Had I been able to repose 

^ The preceding part of this address refers to Anandpur; what 
follows to Chamkaur. 



203 


LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 

confidence in thine oath on the Quran, I would not have 
abandoned my city. Had I not known that thou wert 
crafty and deceitful as a fox, I would never on any account 
have come hither. He who cometh to me and sweareth on the 
Quran ought not to kill or imprison me. Thine army came 
clothed like blue-bottles, and all of a sudden charged with a 
loud shout. Every soldier of thine who advanced beyond his 
defences to attack my position, fell deluged in blood. Thy 
troops who had committed no aggression received no injury at 
our hands. When I saw that Nahar Khan entered the fight, 

I quickly gave him the taste of my arrow. Many soldiers who 
came with him and boasted of their prowess ignominiously 
deserted the field of battle. Another Afghan officer ad- 
vanced like a rushing flood, an arrow, or a musket ball. 
He made many assaults, received many wounds and at last, 
while in the act of killing two of my Sikhs, was killed himself. 
Khwaja Mardud remained behind a wall and came not 
forth like a man. Had I but seen his face, I would certainly 
have bestowed an arrow on him too. At last many were 
killed on both sides by showers of arrows and bullets, and 
the earth became red as a rose. Heads and legs lay in 
heaps as if the field were covered with balls and hockey- 
sticks. The whizzing of arrows, the twanging of bows, 
and a universal hubbub reached the sky. Men, the bravest 
of the brave, fought like madmen. But how could forty 
even of the bravest succeed when opposed by a countless 
host ? When the lamp of day was veiled, the queen of night 
came forth in all her splendour, and God who protected me 
showed me the way to escape from mine enemies. There 
was not a hair of my head touched, nor did I in any way 
suffer. 

‘ Did I not know that thou, O faithless man, wert a wor- 
shipper of wealth and perjurer ? Thou keepest no faith and 
observest no religion. Thou knowest not God, and belie vest 
not in Muhammad. He who hath regard for his religion 
never swerveth from his promise. Thou hast no idea of what 
an oath on the Quran is, and canst have no belief in Divine 
Providence. Wert thou to take a hundred oaths on the 
Quran, I would not even then trust thee in the slightest. 



204 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Hadst thou any intention of keeping thine oath, thou 
wouldst have girded up thy loins and come to me. When 
thou didst swear by Muhammad and called the word of 
God to witness, it was incumbent on thee to observe that 
oath. Were the Prophet himself present here, I would 
make it my special object to inform him of thy treachery. 
Do what is incumbent on thee, and adhere to thy written 
promise. Thou shouldst have cheerfully fulfilled it, and 
also the verbal promises of thine envoy. Everybody ought 
to be a man of his word, and not utter one thing while he 
meditateth another. Thou didst promise to abide by the 
words of thy qazi. If thou hast spoken truly, then come 
to me. If thou desire to seal thy promise on the Quran, 
I will gladly send it to thee for the purpose. If thou come 
to the village of Kangar, we shall have an interview. Thou, 
shalt not run the slightest danger on the way, for the whole 
tribe of Bairars ^ are under me. Come to me that we may 
speak to each other, and that I may utter kind words to 
thee. 

‘ I am a slave and servant of the King of kings, and ready 
to obey His order with my life. Should His order reach 
me, I will go to thee with all my heart. If thou have any 
belief in God, delay not in this matter. It is thy duty to 
know God. He never ordered thee to annoy others. Thou 
art seated on art emperor’s throne, yet how strange are 
thy justice, thine attributes and thy regard for religion ! 
Alas a hundred times ! alas for thy sovereignty ! Strange, 
strange is thy decree ! Promises not meant to be fulfilled 
injure those who make them. Smite not any one mer- 
cilessly with the sword, or a sword from on high shall 
smite thyself. O man, be not reckless, fear God, He can- 
not be flattered or praised. The King of kings is without 
fear. He is the true Emperor of earth and heaven. God 
is the master of both worlds. He is the Creator of all 
animals from the feeble ant to the powerful elephant. He 
is the Protector of the miserable and Destroyer of the reck- 
less. His name is the Support of the unhappy. It is He 
who showeth man the way he ought to go. Thou art bound 
^ From whom the PhQlkian chiefs and people are descended. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 205 


by thine oath on the Quran. Bring the matter to a good issue 
according to thy promises. It is incumbent on thee to act 
wisely, and be discreet in all thine actions. What though 
my four sons were killed, I remain behind like a coiled^ 
snake. What bravery is it- to quench a few sparks of life ? 
Thou art merely exciting a raging fire the more. How well 
spoke the sweet-tongued Firdausi,^ '' Haste is the devil’s 
work ! ” I would have gone many times to thee had tliy 
promise been kept when the bullocks were plundered. As 
thou didst forget thy word on that day, so will God forget 
thee. God will grant thee the fruit of the evil deed thou 
didst design. It is good to act according to thy religion, and 
to know that God is dearer than life. I do not deem thou 
knowest God, since thou hast done acts of oppression. 
Wherefore the great God knoweth thee not, and will not 
receive thee with all thy wealth. Hadst thou sworn a 
hundred times on the Quran, I would not have trusted 
thee in the slightest even for a moment. I will not enter 
thy presence, nor travel on the same road with thee, but, 
if God so will it, I will proceed towards thee. 

‘ Fortunate art thou Aurangzeb, king of kings, expert 
swordsman and rider. Handsome is thy person, and intelli- 
gent art thou. Emperor and ruler of the country, thou art 
clever to administer thy kingdom, and skilled to wield 
the sword. Thou art generous to thy co-religionists, and 
prompt to crush thine enemies. Thou art the great dis- 
penser of kingdoms and wealth. Thy generosity is profuse* 
and in battle thou art firm as a mountain. Exalted is thy 
position ; thy loftiness is as that of the Pleiades. Thou 
art king of kings, and ornament of the thrones of the world. 
Thou art monarch of the world, but far from thee is religion. 

‘ I wanted to kill the hillmen who were full of strife. They 
worshipped idols, and I was an idol-breaker. Behold the 
power of the good and pure God who by means of one man 
killed hundreds of thousands. What can an enemy do when 

^ Pechida, twisted, convoluted. The more coils a snake has the 
more poison it contains. The Guru here distinctly threatens the 
Emperor. 

2 A famous Persian poet, author of the Shah-uNama, 



2o6 the SIKH RELIGION 

God the Friend is kind ? His function it is, as the great 
Bestower, to bestow. He giveth deliverance and pointeth 
out the way to His creatures. He teacheth the tongue to 
utter His praises. In the hour of action he blindeth the 
enemy. He rescueth the helpless and protecteth them from 
injury. The Merciful showeth mercy to him who acteth 
honestly. God bestoweth peace on him who heartily per- 
formeth His service. How can an enemy lead astray him 
with whom the Guide of the way is well pleased ? Should 
tens of thousands proceed against such a person, the Creator 
will be his guardian. When thou lookest to thine army and 
wealth, I look to God’s praises. Thou art proud of thine 
empire, while I am proud of the kingdom of the immortal 
God. Be not heedless ; this caravansary is only for a few 
days. People leave it at all times. Behold the revolution 
which passeth over every denizen and house in this faithless 
world. Even though thou art strong, annoy not the weak. 
Lay not the axe to thy kingdom. When God is a friend, 
what can an enemy do even though he multiply himself 
a hundred times ? If an enemy practise enmity a thousand 
times, he cannot, as long as God is a friend, injure even a hair 
of one’s head.’ 

The Guru sent the above to the Emperor by 
Daya Singh and Dharm Singh, who had survived 
the battle of Chamkaur and escaped to Dina with 
the Guru. They disguised themselves as Muham- 
madan pilgrims, and proceeded on their journey to 
the south of India. On reaching Dihli they took 
shelter in the Sikh temple and received the visits 
of several admiring Sikhs. Next morning they set 
out for Agra. Thence they crossed the river Cham- 
bal and proceeded to Ujjain, whence they crossed 
the Narbada and travelled by Burhanpur to Auran- 
gabad. Thence they proceeded to Ahmadnagar, 
where the Emperor was encamped. There Daya 
Singh and Dharm Singh met a Sikh called Jetha 
Singh, who told them it would be very difl5cult for 
them to obtain an audience of the Emperor. They 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 207 

said it did not matter, and asked him to summon 
all the Sikhs who were there to meet them and hear 
their story. Daya Singh and Dharm Singh told the 
Sikhs of their mission, and read a letter specially 
addressed to them by the Guru. 


Chapter XXVI 

Meanwhile the Guru was preparing for his defence 
at Dina, but in order that the innocent villagers 
might not suffer from warlike operations directed 
against him, he pitched his tent in the neighbouring 
forest. It would appear that he approached, if he 
did not actually enter, the present village of Jalal, 
for it is recorded that the inhabitants of that village 
gave him supplies and a lance for defence. They 
complained that the inhabitants of a neighbouring 
village bore them enmity. There were always affrays 
between the two villages, and the inhabitants of 
Jalal were always worsted. The Guru told them to 
obey and believe in him, and they should always 
be victorious. They trusted him and obtained several 
victories. Subsequently, however, the inhabitants 
of Jalal forgot their promises to the Guru, and stole 
horses belonging to the Sikhs. The offenders were 
punished and expelled from their village by those 
whom they had wronged. They subsequently begged 
the Sikhs’ pardon, and were allowed to dwell at 
Gurusar^, where the Guru had encamped. 

The Guru thence proceeded to the village of 
Bhagta in the present state of Faridkot. The village 
had been called after Bhai Bhagtu, a grandson of 
Bhai Bahilo, who was a distinguished Sikh in the 
time of GuruArjan. Bhagtu had five sons, Gurdas, 
Tara, Bhara, Mihra, and Bakhta. They presented 
a fully caparisoned steed to the Guru. Gurdas and 

^ This is not the Gurusar the scene of Guru Har Gobind’s engage- 
ment with the imperial army. 



2o8 the SIKH RELIGION 

Tara are the men we have already described as 
masands of Ram Rai. By this time they had 
returned to their native village. The Guru remained 
in Bhagta for three days, and on the fourth travelled 
to Wandar in the present district of Firozpur. 
Thence he proceeded into a dense forest where he 
met a nephew of Kapura, the Chaudhri of several 
villages round Kot Kapura in the present state of 
Faridkot. The nephew complained that his uncle 
had expelled him. He was, he said, marching to do 
battle with him, but, on hearing of the Guru’s arrival, 
he first went to pay him his respects, that being 
a more holy object than making war on his uncle. 
The Guru said that Kapura’ s troops would arrive 
on the morrow, but his nephew must not at present 
engage in a combat with them. His troops would 
subsequently conquer those of Kapura. The nephew 
following the Guru’s advice decided to remain at 
home on the morrow. His wife, however, on seeing 
him thus ingloriously inactive, asked for his sword 
and turban, offered him her petticoat, and said she 
would go and fight herself. This taunt roused her 
husband to action. In disregard of the Guru’s 
advice he went to battle and was killed by his 
uncle’s forces. 

The Guru thence proceeded to Bahiwal and 
Sarawan and billeted his Sikhs on the villages. 
One Sikh, named Maliagar Singh, was fed by a poor 
villager on pilun, the tiny fruit of the jal-tree. He told 
the Guru that he had had an excellent dinner. The 
Guru on subsequently discovering that he had dined 
on pilun and thus received only indifferent food, 
complimented him on his contentment, and said 
that Sikhs ought ever to act as he had done, and 
never dispraise food offered them. The Guru con- 
tinued, ‘ If any one come to a Sikh, and receive not 
food from him, know that that Sikh hath sinned. 
If any one beg food from a Sikh, he too hath sinned 
because of his greed.’ 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 209 

The Guru then visited Kot Kapura, and put up 
outside the city under a pipal-tree, which is still 
pointed out to the traveller. It is in a little pro- 
montory in the centre of a lake formed by the 
excavation of earth to build the town. Kapura 
came to see him, and brought him a fully capari- 
soned horse and other presents. Next day Kapura 
again visited him and found him seated on one 
couch, while his weapons were laid before him on 
another. He reverenced arms because, he said, 
they who wore them and practised their use became 
brave and conquered their enemies. 

The Guru begged Kapura’s permission to take 
shelter in his fort. Kapura replied that he had no 
power to withstand the imperial army, and no desire 
to wander a fugitive like the Guru. The Guru then 
said the Muhammadans would take his fort, put his 
head into a bag of ashes, and then hang him. Kapura 
left in anger, and going home closed the gates of 
the fort, so that the Guru might not enter by sur- 
prise. 

The Guru heard that Wazir Khan’s army was 
now in hot pursuit. He accordingly set out from 
Kapura, and sought shelter in Dhilwan, a village 
about four miles to the south-east of it. There 
Prithi Chand’s descendants had been settled for 
some time. One of them called Kaul, now a very 
old man, visited the Guru and made him a present 
of a suit of clothes. Upon this the Guru threw off 
and burned the greater part of the blue dress which 
he had been using for disguise. In the Asa ki War 
occurs the line : — 

Nil bastar le kapre pahire Turk Pathani amal kiya. 

The Turks and Pathans put on blue clothes and reigned. 

For this the Guru read : — 

Nil bastar le kapre phare ; Turk Pathani amal gaya. 

I have torn the blue clothes which I wore ; the rule of the 
Turks and Pathans is at an end. 



210 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The Guru meant the alteration as a curse on the 
Turks and Pathans. It was deemed an impious act 
to alter any part of the Granth Sahib. This the 
Guru did not deny, but said he hoped that the 
murder of his father and of his own children and 
the grievous sufferings of his Sikhs were a sufficient 
atonement. A piece of his blue clothes which the 
Guru did not consign to the fire he preserved in 
memory of his troubles. It is said to have subse- 
quently suggested the blue dress of the Akalis or 
Nihangs. 

The Guru soon left Dhilwan and pitched his tent 
in a forest between Maluka and Kotha. Thence he 
proceeded to Jaito in the present state of Nabha. 
There Kapur a arrived on a ’hunting excursion. He 
complained of perturbation of mind on account of 
the curse the Guru had uttered. The Guru, how- 
ever, refused to retract his words. On the contrary 
he said that Kapura should ever remain a puppy 
of the Muhammadans, and have great suffering in 
consequence. 

While the Guru was in this locality, a messenger 
arrived with the news that Wazir Khan’s army was 
marching hither, and would arrive in a few days. 
The Guru asked Kapura for a guide. Kapura sent 
an officer called Khana and some troopers with 
instructions to show him the way as far as Khidrana, 
but not engage in any combat, and if possible hinder 
the Guru from doing so. Next morning the Guru es- 
caped to Ramiana in the Faridkot state. On the way 
he found a man gathering the fruit of the wild caper. 
The Guru tasted, but not relishing it, told the man to 
throw it away. The man would not do so altogether. 
The Guru said it had been his intention to banish 
drought from that part of the country, but now he 
could not do so owing to the man’s obstinacy and 
disregard of his orders. From Ramiana the Guru 
proceeded towards Khidrana. 

All the contests and sufferings of the Guru became 




AN AKALI 


SIKH V P. 210 




2II 


LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 

kuoNVU iw the Matv^ha, atvd the Sikhs wko dwelt 
there censured themselves for Taaving listerved to 
Duni Chand and abandoned the Guru at A.nandpur. 
They now began to consider how they could make 
reparation and assist their spiritual master in his dire 
extremity. They were, however, of the opinion of 
the Sikhs of Lahore that the Guru should adopt the 
way of Baba Nanak and cease all hostilities. They 
sent a large deputation to press their advice on him, 
and promised that, if he accepted it, they would 
use influence with the Emperor to pardon him ; 
otherwise they would not consider themselves his 
Sikhs or him their Guru. 

The Guru on the way to Khidrana arrived at 
a village owned by a Khatri called Rupa, who 
warned him off through fear of the Emperor’s dis- 
pleasure. The Guru had a Bairar named Dan Singh 
as his clerk and chamberlain. Dan Singh’s son saw 
the enemy approaching, and duly informed the 
Guru. The Guru took no notice, but continued to 
walk his horse. The warning was repeated, but the 
Guru heeded it not. The youth then struck the 
Guru’s horse with the object of quickening his pace. 
At this the Guru became angry and uttered words 
of censure. Dan Singh interceded for his son. 
The Guru replied that he treated Dan Singh’s 
son as his own, and a father’s censure would 
not affect his children. The Guru instanced the 
case of a tigress removing her cubs from a burning 
forest. When she takes them in her mouth, every 
one thinks she is going to devour them, but this is 
not so. Her act is prompted by love. 

The deputation of the Manjha Sikhs found the 
Guru after much search. On hearing their repre- 
sentation he said, ‘ If you were my Sikhs, you would 
receive and not give me instruction. I do not 
require you. You deserted me formerly. W'ho hath 
sent for you now ? You have come to adjust my 
quarrels, but where were you when I needed your 



212 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


assistance ? You used no influence with the Emperor 
when Guru Arjan was tortured to death, or when 
Guru Teg Bahadur was beheaded. On this account, 
my brethren, I cannot listen to your advice. When 
I am again in difficulty, you will betray me as 
before. Put on record that you renounce me and 
go to your homes.’ Upon this the deputation drew 
up a formal document to the effect that they re- 
nounced the Guru unless he ceased to contend with 
the Turks. 

A Sikh who had been put on a tree to keep watch 
said, ‘ I see the enemy approaching, and they will 
soon see us.’ The Guru took up his bow and arrows 
and mounted his horse. He was advised by Kapura’s 
guide to go to Khidrana, where there was water of 
which he could hold possession, and where the 
Muhammadans, if they ventured thither, would die 
of thirst. The Guru said, ‘ There is dust in the 
eyes of the Muhammadans and earth in their mouths. 
They may stare as much as they please, but when 
I remember the holy Baba Nanak they cannot see 
me.’ 

Five of the Manjha Sikhs repented of their re- 
nunciation of the Guru, and decided to return and 
render him all assistance. They induced thirty-five 
more of their number to return with them. The 
Guru thus obtained an unexpected reinforcement of 
forty good and earnest fighting men. They were 
joined by a heroine named Bhago, who through zeal 
for the Sikh cause had donned man’s attire and vowed 
to suffer death if necessary on the bloodstained field 
of danger on behalf of the Guru. The Guru and 
his personal guard preceded them to Khidrana in 
the present Firozpur district of the Panjab, but on 
finding no water there, the tank having run dry, 
moved on into the neighbouring forest, where they 
deemed they should be in greater safety, and whence 
they could more easily escape if overpowered. The 
forty men of the Manjha on arriving at Khidrana 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 213 

decided to cover the trees in the neighbourhood 
with clothes, so that the enemy might think they 
were encamped in great numbers, and not make 
a sudden attack on them. Kapura appeared in the 
enemies’ ranks. He overtly came to show them the 
way by which he had instructed his officer to take 
the Guru and his forty Sikhs to their destruction. 

Wazir Khan ordered his army to charge the Sikhs 
who stood to oppose him, and in whose ranks he 
believed the Guru to be concealed. They received 
the charge with the utmost bravery. The Muham- 
madans were giving way when Wazir Khan rallied 
them by asking if they were not ashamed to fly 
before such a handful of men. Five Sikhs who 
advanced to the 'front were riddled with bullets. 
Ten more advanced on the imperial army, and 
cleared the field wherever they went. When they 
were cut down, the enemy took courage and advanced 
nearer the remaining Sikhs. Eleven Sikhs then 
rushed on the enemy and smote them down. They 
were, however, unable to cope with superior numbers 
and fell under the swords of the Muhammadans. 
The woman Bhago fought heroically in their ranks, 
disposed of several of her Muhammadan opponents, 
and transmitted her name as an Indian heroine for 
the admiration of future generations. 

The Guru and his body-guard had taken up their 
position on a sand hill about two miles distant. He 
discharged arrows from there with fatal effect 
against the Muhammadans who could not see from 
what quarter destruction was raining on them. At 
the conclusion of the engagement Wazir Khan 
thought the Guru was killed, and ordered his men 
to search for his body. 

The tank at Khidrana, as already stated, having 
become dry, Wazir Khan’s army was in great straits 
for want of water. Kapura told him that it could 
only be obtained at a distance of thirty miles in 
front and ten miles in rear, and advised him to 



214 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


march back and save the lives of his men and horses, 
otherwise they would all perish. To such distress 
was the Muhammadan army reduced, that they 
abandoned their dead and wounded, and relinquished 
their search for the body of the Guru. Wazir Khan 
boasted that he had killed him, and that the Emperor 
on hearing the joyful intelligence would greatly 
honour and reward him. 

On finding that the Muhammadan army had 
departed, the Gum went to see the battle-field, 
relieve the wounded, and perform the obsequies of 
the slain. He went about wiping the faces of both 
dead and wounded, and extolling their unsurpassed 
valour. Copious tears flowed from his eyes. He 
said the dead had given up their lives for him, and 
they should abide in bliss in the Gurus’ paradise. 
He found Mahan Singh breathing heavily and 
desiring a last sight of his .spiritual master. The 
Guru told him to open his eyes, and when he did 
so his strength returned. The Guru invited him to 
ask for any boon he desired from empire to salva- 
tion. Mahan Singh thought it was best to ask for 
the cancellation of the deed of renunciation of the 
Guru drawn up by the Manjha Sikhs. The Guru 
at first refused, but on being pressed consented to 
cancel it. He drew the document from his pocket 
and destroyed it. Mahan Singh then breathed his 
last. The Guru ordered the Bairars he had recently 
enlisted to collect the slain and cremate them. He 
promised that all Sikhs who visited the place on 
the first of Magh, the anniversary of the battle, 
should become filled with the martial spirit of their 
sires. Khidrana has since that time been called 
Muktsar, or the tank of salvation, because those 
who fell on that spot were no more subject to trans- 
migration. 

In the process of collecting the slain it was found 
that another person showed signs of life. This was 
the heroine Bhago. The Guru addressed her : 








LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 215 

‘ Taking off thy woman’s dress thou didst come to 
me with the Manjha Sikhs. It is well that thou 
hzist fought here. Blessings on thy life ! Arise and 
come with me.’ She detailed the story of her 
departure from her home in the company of the 
Sikhs of the Manjha, and then continued : ‘ I 

obtained possession of a strong spear. When all the 
Sikhs were dead the Turks advanced on me. 
I spitted several of them. Others directed their 
weapons against me, but thou didst extend thine 
arm to save me. Now that I have seen thee I am 
happy, ^ind have no further desire than to abide 
with thee.’ 


Chapter XXVII 

The Guru thence proceeded to Saran and thence 
to Nautheha. The inhabitants of the latter village 
prayed him to leave them. He then went to Tahlian 
Fatah Sammtin, a village about twenty miles south- 
west of Muktsar, where he was welcomed. 

Some ' Sikhs from Harike came to him with 
an offering of a lungi and a khes. The Guru 
put the khes bn his shoulders and tied the lungi 
round his loins, Man Singh remonstrated and re- 
minded hiih of his own prohibition of the wearing 
of a lungi in this fashion, and said he was liable to 
a fine. The G’^ru replied, ' I am dressed according 
to the custom of the country., feha des teha bhes ; 
ter lungi modhe khes — Every country hath its own 
dress a lungr for the loins and a khes (shawl) 
for the shoulders.’ 

The Guru feeling his insecurity asked that a guard 
should be provided for him. The warlike Sikhs put 
some Dogars on guard. The Guru intended to 

^ Although the Guru allowed his Sikhs to adopt the dress of every 
country they inhabited, yet they must not wear hats but turbans to 
confine the long hair they are strictly enjoined to preserve. They must 
also put on a (drawers), but over it they may wear trousers. 



2I6 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


reward the Harike Sikhs had they kept guard them- 
selves, As it was, he blessed the Dogars and foretold 
that they should have possession of all the adjacent 
river banks. The prophecy has been fulfilled, and 
there their descendants have since remained. 

Next day the Guru continued his journey and 
rested under a ber-tree, where he passed the night. 
The following day he proceeded to Wajidpur, some 
six or seven miles to the east of Firozpur. The 
inhabitants told him that the Emperor’s drums were 
often heard there, and they suggested to him to de- 
part. The Guru said that instead of the drums of 
the Emperor, the praises of the Sikhs should subse- 
quently resound in the locality. The place after- 
wards fell into the possession of the Kanhaiya Misal.^ 

While in this neighbourhood the Guru heard the 
cry of a partridge and pursued it. The partridge 
gave chase and tired out men and horses. At last 
the Guru caught it, plucked it, and threw it before 
his hawk, which after some hesitation began to 
devour it. The Guru when asked the cause of this 
strange proceeding told the following anecdote : ‘ In 
a previous birth the partridge had been an agricul- 
turist, and the hawk a money-lender. The agri- 
culturist had borrowed from the money-lender, 
squandered the money, and then went to live in 
another village. The money-lender followed him and 
insisted on payment. The agriculturist begged for 
time, and promised to discharge the debt. The 
money-lender demanded a surety. The agriculturist 
said he had no surety but the Guru. The money- 
lender was then satisfied and went home. The 
agriculturist, however, ultimately failed to pay the 
money. Both died soon after, upon which the 
agriculturist became this partridge, and the money- 

^ When the Sikhs obtained supremacy over the Muhammadans 
they divided the Panjab into twelve misals or districts, under chiefs 
who exercised independent authority within their limits. Most of 
these misals were absorbed by MaharSja Ranjit Singh. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 217 

lender my hawk. The hawk at first refused to 
touch the partridge as the latter had given me as 
surety. I have now fulfilled my suretyship by 
bestowing the partridge on the hawk. If any one 
give me again as surety and discharge not his 
debt, I will treat him as the hawk hath done the 
partridge.’ 

The Guru left Wajidpur and returned to Muktsar. 
Thence he proceeded to Rupana and thence to 
Bhundar, Gurusar, and Thehri. After that he pro- 
ceeded to Kaljharani. Thence he marched to 
Chhatiana and on his way passed through several 
minor villages. In Chhatiana some of his soldiers 
clamoured for their pay, and said they would not 
allow him to proceed further until he had paid 
them their arrears. He offered them their choice of 
remaining his Sikhs or of taking their pay and re- 
turning to their homes. They elected to take their 
pay and dismissal. 

At this juncture a Sikh opportunely arrived with 
a large pecuniary offering for the Guru. He sum- 
moned his soldiers and gave them their pay at the 
rate of eight annas per day for cavalry, and four 
annas per day for infantry. To Dan Singh, their 
officer, the Guru offered his pay, but he refused to 
take it and elected to share the Guru’s fortunes. 
The Guru complimented him on laying the founda- 
tion-stone of the Sikh religion in Malwa as Mahan 
Singh had done in the Manjha. 

His troops were meditating how they could extort 
more money from the Guru. They told him he had 
offered them the alternative of taking their pay or 
becoming Sikhs. As they had accepted the former, 
they were now excluded from Sikhism. They asked 
for double pay partly to compensate them for their 
religious disability, and partly to support their 
people at home. The Guru complied with their 
demand and, that he might not be pestered with 
further extortionate demands, buried the remainder 



2i8 the SIKH RELIGION 

of the money which his pious follower had brought 
him. 

A Muhammadan faqir called Brahmi (Ibrahim), 
who lived on a neighbouring mound, came to the 
Guru with offerings, and asked to be baptized. The 
Guru expressed his satisfaction at the proposal. 
‘ Thou art the first Moslem to be baptized according 
to my rites. If any Moslem, whether of high or 
low position, in good faith desire to join the Khalsa, 
it is proper that he should be baptized and received 
into our community.’ The Muhammadan was 
accordingly baptized and received the name Ajmer 
Singh.^ 

The Guru thence went to the village of Sahib 
Chand and thence to Kot Bhai. On his way he 
baptized several people. From there he proceeded to 
Rohila and then to Bambiha, where he remained 
nine days. Thence he returned to Bajak. 

When the Guru was in the neighbourhood of 
Maluka and Kotha, one of the sect called Diwanas 
(madmen), who attempted forcible access to him, 
was cut down by his sentry. While the Guru was 
in Bajak, Ghudda, the Diwanas’ spiritual guide, 
sought to avenge the death of his follower, and 
accordingly sent fifty men of his sect to assassinate 
the Guru. On learning, however, that the Guru had 
a strong body-guard, forty-eight of them turned 
back and only two, Sukkhu and Buddha, proceeded 
to the Guru. They carried no weapons, but whiled 
away their time on the journey with the music of 
a sarangi. On reaching the Guru instead of trying 
to kill him they began to play and sing for him. 
They sang among others the following verses : — 

The soul resideth in a frail body. 

Parents are not for ever, nor doth youth abide. 

We must all march onwards : why should man be proud ? 

The Guru was much pleased with them, and they 

^ Suraj Parkash, Ayan 1, Chapter xviii. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 219 

were equally pleased with him. To show their satis- 
faction and the pleasure they felt in his company, 
they took up his bed on their shoulders,, and carried 
it for more than a mile. The Guru gave them a 
square rupee, and told them to preserve it in memory 
of him and promised that they should obtain what- 
ever their hearts desired. 

The Guru then proceeded to Jassi Baghwali and 
thence towards Talwandi Sabo, now called Dam- 
dama, in the Patiala state, halting on the way at 
a place called Pakka. In Talwandi Sabo resided 
his friend Dalla, who asked him why he had not 
previously applied to him for assistance against the 
treacherous Muhammadans. He said he could have 
saved the Guru much suffering. Here the Guru met 
some Sikhs who had come from Lahore with a 
musket as an offering. He asked Dalla for two 
men to serve as targets to make trial of the weapon. 
All who heard him thought he was insane and made 
no reply. The Guru then saw two Ranghreta Sikhs 
and invited them to submit to the trial. When the 
Guru called them they were tying on their turbans, 
but, so eager were they to please him, that they 
went before him with their turbans only half-bound, 
and vied with each other as to who should first be 
the subject of his experiment. The Guru said he 
only wanted one of them, and further explained 
that he merely desired to prove the cowardice and 
disloyalty of Dalla’ s soldiers, and show that, had 
they been with him in Anandpur, they would have 
deserted him in the hour of danger. 

The Guru’s wives Mata Sundari and Sahib Kaur here 
joined him in his wanderings. They wept copiously 
on hearing the fate of the young children. The 
Guru endeavoured to console them, and said, ‘ Ajit 
Singh, Zorawar Singh, Jujhar Singh, and Fatah 
Singh have been sacrificed for their religion and 
obtained eternal life, so why should the mothers 
of such heroes lament ? Lo ! the whole world is 



220 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


transitory. There is first childhood, then youth 
which diminisheth day by day, and at last old age, 
when the body perisheth. In the presence of God 
what is old age, what childhood, and what youth ? 
They are all the same — equally of short duration. 
The more we love our bodies, the more suffering 
we endure. Love for the body is meaningless. 
Only those who apply it to good works profit by 
their lives. Your sons have gone with honour to 
where bliss ever abide th. Having performed the 
work of the immortal God they have now returned 
to Him. Therefore accept God’s will as the best 
and most advantageous portion. Instead of your 
sons I present you with my Sikhs as a brave and 
worthy offspring.’ 

Dayal Das, a grandson of Bhai Bhagtu, came 
from Bhuchcho to visit the Guru. The Guru wished 
to baptize him, but he refused, saying he was a Sikh 
of the ancient fashion and wished to remain so. 
Ram Singh, a great-grandson of Bhai Bhagtu, came 
from Chakk Bhai to invite the Guru to go and stay 
with him. The Guru promised that he would go 
some day, and requested him to hold his house in 
readiness to receive him. 

The woman Bhago who remained with the Guru 
after the battle of Muktsar, in a fit of devotional 
abstraction tore off her clothes and wandered half 
naked in the forest. The Guru restrained her, gave 
her the kachh or Sikh drawers, and allowed her 
again to wear man’s costume. She attained a good 
old age, and died in Abchalanagar (Nander) revered 
by the Sikhs as a saint. 

While the Guru was in Talwandi Wazir Khan 
sent a peremptory note to Dalla to surrender him, 
or he would dispatch an army and put them both 
to death. Dalla replied that the Guru was his life, 
and he could not part with him. If Wazir Khan 
sent an army, the Guru and Dalla would go into 
the recesses of the forest, where, even if an army 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 221 

penetrated, it would perish for want of water. In 
fine Dalla manfully and courageously stated that he 
intended the Guru should reside with him for ever. 

One day the Guru, probably not wishing to com- 
promise his friend Dalla, said he would like to see 
the old fort of Bhatinda which had been founded 
by Binaipal. He first, however, in pursuance of his 
promise went to visit Ram Singh at Chakk Bhai. 
Ram Singh informed Dayal Das of the Guru’s visit, 
and suggested to him to prepare dinner for him in 
Bhuchcho. He did so, but the Guru refused his 
hospitality and proceeded to Bhagtu on his way to 
Bhatinda. The Guru took up his residence on the 
top of the fort where now is a small temple dedi- 
cated to him. 

At night some Baloches sang of Sassi and Punnu. 
Sassi had been brought up by a washerman. Punnu 
was a Baloch merchant who came to the Panjab 
with merchandise for sale. He met Sassi, fell in 
love with her, and remained with her, until his 
brother came and took him forcibly away by night. 
Sassi at daybreak hearing of his abduction followed 
him, and on arriving at a sandy desert was so over- 
come by the heat that she expired. The poet 
represented that she had entered the earth in quest 
of Punnu. Next day the Guru took occasion to 
expatiate on love. He said, ‘ Men may perform 
devotion and penance for hundreds of thousands of 
years, but it would be all in vain without the love 
of God.’ 

The Bairars told the Guru a legend regarding the 
founding of Bhatinda. One day, as Binaipal was 
hunting, he saw a wolf and a goat struggling. The 
goat was trying to save her young from the wolf. 
On the very spot where the struggle between the 
two animals took place Binaipal caused the fort to 
be erected. The Bairars told the Guru that there 
was a subterranean passage between Bhatinda and 
Bhatner in Bikaner. The chroniclers do not state 



222 THE SIKH RELIGION 

who was in possession of the fort when visited by 
the Guru.^ 

The Guru thence proceeded to Samma and thence 
returned to Talwandi Sabo. There his friend Dalla 
again met him. Dayal Das had been following the 
Guru for some time to present him with the sacred 
food he had prepared for him, and thus secure the 
Guru’s pardon. On arriving at Damdama Ram 
Singh, who was in the Guru’s service, interceded for 
Dayal Das, and the Guru was pleased to restore 
him to his friendship. 

Wazir Khan sent another letter to Dalla to arrest 
the Guru, or he would plunder his country and put 
him to death without mercy. Dalla replied, ‘ O 
viceroy, I fear thee not, however much thou threat- 
enest me with thine army. Having destroyed it, 
the Guru and I will retire into the forest where 
thou shalt have no power over us, and whence thou 
shalt have to return when thy troops have perished 
of hunger and thirst. I will by no means have the 
Guru arrested to please thee. Nay, I will defend 
him with my life.’ 

Zabardast Khan, the Viceroy of Lahore, plundered 
a party of Sikhs who were going to make offerings 
to the Guru. Wazir Khan, the viceroy of Sarhind, 
plundered another party going on the same errand. 
The Guru then repeated his exhortation to his Sikhs 
to wear arms and diligently practise their use. In 
the early days of Sikhism it was different. At that 
time the Guru’s teaching was to remember the true 
Name and not annoy anybody. Farid said, ‘ If any 
one strike thee with his fists, strike him not back.’ 
With such teaching, the Guru said, the Sikhs had 
become faint-hearted and ever suffered defeat. Now 
that the times had altered, and the Sikhs were 
obliged to defend themselves, he had established the 

^ There is a tradiiion in Bhatinda that the fort was partially 
destroyed by Shahab-ul-Din Ghori during his campaign for the recovery 
of the Panjab. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 223 

Khalsa, and whoever desired to abide in it should 
not fear the clash of arms, but be ever ready for 
the combat and the defence of his faith. At the 
same time the Name was still to remain the chief 
object of the Sikhs’ adoration. 


Chapter XXVIII 

While the Guru was at Damdama he dictated the 
whole of the Granth Sahib to Bhai Mani Singh, and 
added for the first time the hymns and sloks of his 
father Guru Teg Bahadur with a slok of his own.^ 

It is said that the Guru used to have baptismal 
water prepared and thrown among the bushes. He 
explained that he did so in order that the Malwa 
Sikhs might increase in number and spring from 
every forest shrub. He used also to have pens made 
and scattered in different directions. By this he 
meant that the inhabitants of the place should 
become learned and expert penmen. 

The Guru while at Damdama used in the after- 
noon to go into the forest and sit under a j and- tree. 
The place was hence called Jandiana. A temple 
was subsequently erected there. At night the Guru 
used to return to Damdama. It was while in this 
neighbourhood he baptized Dalla and one hundred 
other Sikhs. 

1 Slok LIV. It may here be staled that there were three editions 
of the Granth .Sahib. The first was written by Bhai Gur Das, the 
second by Bhai Banno, and the third by Bhai Mani Singh, under the 
superintendence of Guru Gobind Singh. The first two are believed 
to exist still, one being at Kartarpur in the Jalandhar District, and the 
other at Mangat in the Gujrat District of the PanjSb. Guru Gobind 
Singh’s copy of the Granth Sahib was the most complete. It is un- 
fortunately not now extant. It was either destroyed or taken away 
as booty by Ahmad Shah DurSni when he despoiled and profaned 
the Golden Temple at Amritsar. 

The Granth of the tenth Guru was really the Daswen Padshah ka 
Granth. The large volume which now bears that title, was c6m- 
piled from various materials twenty-six years after his demise. 



224 the SIKH RELIGION' 

The Guru sent for Tilok Singh and Ram Singh 
who had performed the obsequies of his two sons 
Ajit Singh and Zorawar Singh, fallen at Chamkaur. 
They came to visit him and made him large offer- 
ings. The Guru was well pleased with them and 
blessed them and their offspring. It may be here 
mentioned that Ram Singh is the ancestor of the 
Chief of Patiala, and Tilok Singh the ancestor of 
the chiefs of Nabha and Jind.^ 

One day the Guru said to Dalla, ‘ That is a fine 
field of wheat I see.’ Dalla replied, ‘ That is grass, 

0 true Guru, wheat groweth not here. Had we 
wheat the Muhammadans would oppress us. Say 
that moth and bajra^ are growing here.’ Another 
day the Guru said, ‘ O Dalla, I see excellent sugar- 
cane here.’ Dalla made the same reply as before 
when the Guru said he had seen wheat. The Guru 
said, ‘ Thou knowest not thine advantage. I desire 
to make thy land as fertile as Sarhind. The Turks 
whom thou fearest shall soon perish, and the soil 
of Malwa in time bear wheat and sugar-cane.’ 
This prophecy has been fulfilled. Canals made by 
the British Government have since fertilized that 
part of the country. 

It was here the Guru heard that Kapura had been 

^ It is stated by several Sikh writers that Tilok Singh was present 
at the battle of Chamkaur. Though inexperienced in war, he con- 
ceived a desire to engage in it, and went into the thick of the combat. 
A Pathin endeavoured to pierce him with a lance. He snatched the 
lance from the Pathan’s hands and cut off his head with his sword. 
He then took the head on the Pathan’s lance to the Guru. The Guru 
on seeing him approach cried out, Ao, Tilok Sing, Jang ke lare — 
Come, Tilok Singh, Bridegroom of war. 

Tilok Singh and R.am Singh had been hereditary Sikhs, and were 
ever regarded affectionately by the Guru, as is evidenced by his letter 
of the and of Bhadon, Sambat 1753 (a. d. 1696), in which he wrote, 
Meri tore upar bahut khushi hai, aur leva ghar mera hai, that is, 

1 am very well pleased with you, my house is yours, and your 
house is mine. This letter is now preserved with other relics of the 
Guru in the Sikh state of Nabha. 

® Molh and bajra are inferior Indian cereals only consumed by the 
poorest classes. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 225 

put to death by Isa Khan of Kot Isa Khan in the 
Firozpur district. The cause and manner of his 
death were as follows : — Kaul, a . descendant of 
Prithi Chand, had established a religious fair at 
Dhilwan ; Kapura attended it and became involved 
in a drunken brawl with some of the pilgrims. Kaul 
sent a great-grandson of his to interpose, but the 
youth was killed. Another great-grandson whom 
he dispatched on a similar errand met with the same 
fate. On this Abhai Ram, the father of the youths 
slain, became furious with Kapura, desired that the 
Guru’s curse on him might speedily take effect, and 
his line be extirpated. Isa Khan with all haste 
employed a party of men to attack Kapura, whom 
he suspected to be a friend of the Guru. The 
latter tried to defend himself, but was worsted, and 
then tried to conceal himself in a haystack. Isa 
Khan dragged him forth, and made him a prisoner. 
When taking him away he thought he would be 
only an encumbrance, so he ordered him to be hanged 
on the nearest tree. Kapura himself remembered 
the Guru’s curse, that his head should be put into 
a bag of ashes, so he requested that it should be 
done before his execution, that the words of the 
Guru might be fulfilled, and that he might be thus 
saved from further transmigration. 

On one occasion a question arose as to what the 
earth rested on. The theories of the Hindus and 
other sects were put forward. The Guru concluded 
the discussion by saying that the earth was sup- 
ported by the power of God who alone was true 
and permanent. He on that occasion repeated the 
sixteenth pauri of the Japji. 

Daya Singh and Dharm Singh, whom the Guru 
had sent with the Zafarnama to the Emperor, suc- 
ceeded in delivering it, and were furnished with 
a parwana of safe conduct for their return journey. 
The perusal of the Zafarnama is said to have 
softened the Emperor’s heart and led him to repent ; 

SIKH. V Q 



226 THE SIKH RELIGION 

hence his permission to the Guru’s messengers to 
return to their own country in peace and safety. 
They, however,, received no verbal or written reply 
to the Guru’s letter. 

The Guru asked Dalla to accompany him to the 
south of India. Dalla replied that he considered 
his humble couch at Damdama was equal to the 
throne of Dihli, and he pressed the Guru and his 
Sikhs to remain with him. The Bairars in the 
Guru’s service also endeavoured to dissuade him 
from his contemplated journey. He refused to listen 
to them, and on this several of them left his service. 
The Guru was now left with only Dalla Singh ; 
the two great-grandsons of Bhai Bhagtu, namely. 
Ram Singh and his brother Fatah Singh ; Param 
Singh and Dharm Singh, descendants of Bhai Rupa ; 
and Bhai Mani Singh, the Sikh biographer and ar- 
ranger of the Ad Granth and the tenth Guru’s 
Granth. 

Their first march was to Kewal, thence to Jhorar, 
thence to Jhanda, and thence to Sarsa. Param 
Singh and Dharm Singh had a new bed provided 
for the Guru at every march. Dalla Singh to every 
one’s intense amazement absconded during the march 
in the dead of night, and took with him a Sodhi 
and several Bairars. The Guru dismissed Fatah 
Singh on Ram Singh’s representation that his ser- 
vices and assistance were required at home. 

The Guru thence proceeded to Nauhar, a town 
of Bikaner about twenty miles south-west of Sarsa. 
Though the inhabitants were very rich, they do not 
appear to have been forward in providing supplies 
for the Guru and his few remaining followers. On 
the contrary, there was great commotion in the town 
because one of his SilAs had accidentally killed 
a pigeon. When the Guru went into the market- 
place he saw that the inhabitants were very proud 
of their wealth, and he foretold that it shoidd all 
soon vanish. In a. b. 1756 a Sikh expedition was 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 227 

directed against Charupur (Chainpura), but on 
finding the water on the march brackish, the soldiers 
made a diversion and plundered Nauhar. 

jThence the Guru proceeded to Bahaduran. There 
he gave Param Singh and Dharm Singh a horse 
each and also arms for their defence. On arriving 
at Sahewa (Saio) the Guru noticed that through 
respect for him they were taking the arms on their 
heads and walking beside their chargers as being 
a Guru’s gifts. The Guru said that they should 
obtain whatever they required, and that their tongues 
should be to them as arms. On bidding them fare- 
well he presented them with a religious work con- 
taining the morning and evening divine services of 
the Sikhs. 

The Guru’s next march was to Madhu Singhana. 
He thence proceeded to Pushkar, a place of pil- 
grimage sacred to Brahma. A Brahman called 
Chetan showed the Guru the sacred places of Ajmer. 
The Guru while in that neighbourhood was often 
severely heckled on the subject of his dress. People 
said it was neither Hindu nor Muhammadan. The 
Guru admitted the fact, and said it was the dress 
of the third distinct sect which he had established. 

Thence the Guru proceeded to Narainpur, generally 
known as Dadudwara, where the saint Dadu had 
lived and flourished. His shrine had by this time 
descended to a Mahant called Jait, who quoted two 
lines of Dadu to the Guru : — 

Dadu, surrender thy claim to every worldly thing ; pass 
thy days without claims. 

How many have departed after trading in this grocer’s 
shop ! ^ 

The Guru said these lines were applicable to the 
invention of a religion, but ill suited to its preserva- 
tion. Rather shonld the lines be read 

^ That is, the world. 

Q2 



228 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Asserting thy claiin in the woeld plunder the wicked. 

Extirpate him who doeth thee evil. 

The Mahant quoted two other lines to the Guru : — 

Dadu, taking the times as they come, be satisfied with 
this Kal age. 

If any one throw a clod or a brick at thee, lift it on thy 
head. 

The Guru would not admit the last line, and altered 
it thus : — 

If any one throw a clod or a brick at thee, angrily strike 
him with a stone. 

The Guru then explained the principles of his 
own religion to the Mahant : ‘ This age is very evil. 
The wicked rule in it, and cause suffering to saints 
and holy men. Tyrants therefore deserve to be 
punished. They will not refrain as long as they 
are pardoned. O Mahant, they who bear arms, who 
remember the true Name and sacrifice their lives 
for their faith, shall go straight to paradise. There- 
fore I have established the Khalsa religion, given my 
followers arms, and made them heroes.’ 

The Guru was censured by his staff for lifting his 
arrow in salutation of Dadu’s shrine. Man Singh 
quoted the Guru’s own written instructions. Got 
marhi mat hhul na mane — Worship not even by 
mistake Muhammadan or Hindu cemeteries or places 
of cremation. The Guru explained that he saluted 
the shrine to test his Sikhs’ devotion and their 
recollection of his instructions. The Guru, however, 
admitted that he had technically rendered himself 
liable to a fine, and cheerfully paid one hundred and 
twenty-five rupees. 

The Guru thence went to Lali, thence to Mag- 
haroda, and thence to Kulait. Here he met Daya 
Singh and Dharm Sing^ returning from their em- 
bassy to Aurangzeb. It is probable the embassy 
reached the Emperor when he was ill. The envoys 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 229 

told the Guru that when they left the Emperor’s 
court they heard he had been seized with a colic. 

The Guru thence proceeded to Baghaur. Here 
he heard of Aurangaeb’s death and the accession of 
his second son Tara Azim, called Muhammad Azim 
Shah by Muhammadan historians. The inhabitants 
of Baghaur refused supplies and quarrelled with the 
Guru’s escort. A camel belonging to the Guru 
trespassed on one of the town gardens. The gar- 
deners beat the camel and abused the camel-driver. 
Upon this the Sikhs went in a body and assaulted 
the gardeners. This led to a counter assault and 
fighting which lasted two days. By this time the 
Sikhs had stormed and plundered the city, but the 
fort remained to be captured. By the advice of 
Ratan Singh, a Sikh whom the Guru must have 
met on his travels, a cannon was placed on a hill 
commanding the fort. After a brief cannonade the 
occupants held out a flag of truce. Peace was pro- 
claimed, but on the arrival of the raja of the place, 
who had been absent when the fighting began, 
hostilities were resumed. Dharm Singh killed the 
raja’s commander-in-chief, and the Guru killed the 
raja himself. The Baghaur army then fled, and 
was pursued by the Sikhs until the Guru recalled 
them. Upon this the Guru resumed his march. On 
setting out he told the Sikhs that the Turks should 
soon fight against one another, and that the usurper, 
Tara Azim, should be killed. 

Chapter XXIX 

When Aurangzeb died, his eldest son, Bahadur 
Shah, was engaged in a military expedition in 
Afghanistan.^ When his younger brother Tara Azim 
usurped the throne, Badadur Shah hastened back 

^ The Emperor Aurangzeb had three sons, Bahadur Shlh, Muham- 
mad Azim Shah (called Tara Azim by the Sikhs), and Muhammad 
Kim Bakhsh. 



230 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


to India to claim and do battle for his heritage. 
He consulted Nand Lai, a friend of his, as to how 
he should be successful. Nand Lai advised him to 
seek the Guru’s assistance. The Guru, on being 
appealed to, promised him not only assistance but 
sovereignty if he agreed to a request he was about 
to make, and did not prove false like his father. 
Bahadur Shah was pleased to accept these vague 
conditions, and informed the Guru accordingly. 

The Guru sent Dharm Singh with some trusty 
Sikhs to render him all possible assistance, and, 
feeling anxiety regarding the grave political cir- 
cumstances of the country, deemed it advisable 
to retrace his steps to the north in the hope of 
meeting and conferring with the Emperor. 

When Bahadur Shah had fully equipped his army, 
he marched to Agra. Tara Azim, who was at the 
time in distant Ahmadnagar, on hearing of his 
brother’s operations, marched by Gualiar to con- 
tend with him for empire. Bahadur Shah advanced 
to meet him and encamped at Jaju near Dhaulpur 
(Dholpur) where the opposing armies met.^ After 
a fight of three days’ duration, not only Tara Azim, 
but several of his principal officers were slain. Upon 
this his army fled and victory remained with Bahadur 
Shah. He, now undisputed monarch of India, re- 
turned to Agra and dispatched Dharm Singh to 
inform the Guru of his victory. 

On the Guru’s arrival in DihlLhe encamped on 
the left bank of the Jamna. His* Sikhs thought it 
unsafe for him to enter that strong Muhammadan 
and imperial centre. He erected a temple on the 
spot where his father Guru Teg Bahadur had been 
cremated. On hearing of Bahadur Shah’s victory 
the Guru resolved to go to Agra to congratulate 
him, and made arrangements to leave his wives in 
Dihli under the protection of his Sikhs. Upon hear- 
ing this Mata Sundari wept copiously. The Guru 
^ Waqiat Hind, 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 231 

consoled her with the arguments and reflections he 
had previously employed at Damdama on the tran- 
sitoriness of human life and the bliss in which her 
son abode as a n\ighty hero and religious martyr. 

A goldsmith residing in Dihli came to the Guru 
to pray him to grant him the favour of a son. One 
day as the Guru went to the chase accompanied 
among others by the goldsmith, they saw a woman 
abandon her male infant in the forest. The Guru 
told the goldsmith to take and rear the child. The 
goldsmith said he could not afford a wet-nurse. 
The Guru directed him to take some water, recite 
Wahguru over it, -and wash his wife’s breasts there- 
with. When she took the child in her lap milk 
would at once come in abundance. The goldsmith 
accepted the Guru’s advice, and the promised result 
was obtained. When the child was five years of 
age, he was seen by Mata Sundari, who found in 
him a marvellous likeness to her martyred son, and 
duly adopted him. 

Sahib Kaur importuned the Guru to allow her to 
accompany him. At last he yielded to her entreaties. 
Bahadur Shah sent a messenger to the Guru to ex- 
pedite his departure. The messenger informed him 
that the Emperor feared the bigotry of his co- 
religionists were he himself to pay the first visit. 

The Guru on the third day after his departure 
from Dihli arrived at Mathura and encamped at 
Suraj Kund, on the banks of the Jamna. He made 
a tour through Bindraban and visited all its famous 
and interesting places. 

On his journey to Agra the Guru wanted water. 
One of his Sikhs fetched it from the house of a 
barren woman of the priestly class, and told the 
Guru that, there being no children there, the water 
must be pure. The Guru would not admit that 
children defiled water, and asked it to be brought 
him from some house, where there were sons and 
daughters. On that occasion he said, ‘ A hermit 



232 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


is best wiien alone; pure is his body and pure 
his mind ; but where there is a householder with 
a large family, his house is still purer, and so are 
his body, mind, and understanding.’ 

The Guru duly met the Emperor Bahadur Shah in 
Agra. The Emperor thanked him for such assist- 
ance as he had given him in obtaining the throne, 
made him costly presents, and invited him to spend 
some time with him. The Guru was pleased to 
accept the invitation. 

One day as the Guru and a high officer were 
seated together, a Saiyid of Sarhind asked the GufU 
if he could perform a miracle. The Guru replied 
that miracles were in the power of the Emperor. He 
could raise a humble person to the highest office 
and dignity, or degrade him therefrom. The Saiyid 
said he knew that, but had the Guru himself the 
power of working any miracles ? Upon this the 
Guru drew forth a gold coin and said that it was 
a miracle, for everything could be purchased with it. 
The Saiyid asked if he could show any further 
miracles. In reply the Guru drew his sword, and 
said that that also was a miracle. It could cut off 
heads and confer thrones and empires upon those 
who wielded it with dexterity. Upon this the 
Saiyid hung down his head and asked no further 
questions. 

Some rajas of Rajputana came to visit the 
Guru. He told them they did one very regret- 
table thing, namely, they gave their daughters in 
marriage to Muhammadan emperors and princes. 
He made them swear that they would for the 
future desist from the practice. 

One day in conversation with the Guru the 
Emperor maintained that if any one were to repeat 
the Muhammadan creed, he should not be consigned 
to hell. The Guru denied that the creed had that 
efficacy. If any one after repeating it were to do 
evil, the repetition of the creed would not avail him. 



LIFE OF GURU GOMND SINGH 233 

The Emperor asked how he was to be assured of 
that. The Guru replied, ‘ The creed is stamped on 
thy rupee ; we shall see the effect thereof.’ The 
Guru secretly sent a bad rupee to the market-place 
to be changed. The -money-changer applied to at 
once rejected it as counterfeit. It was then taken 
to the other money-changers with the same result. 
The Guru then addressed the Emperor : ‘ See, in 
thine empire, even in thine own market-place, no 
one hath paid any regard to thy creed engraved on 
this rupee, so how shall it conduct men to heaven ? 
Thou to-day enjoyest empire, and canst do what 
thou pleasest. If here in thy presence this bad 
rupee even with the creed on it cannot pass, how 
can it be accepted by another monarch ? In God’s 
court gilding availeth not. The counterfeit and the 
genuine are there distinguished, and men obtain the 
reward or punishment due to their acts. Thy creed, 
therefore, as in the present case, cannot avail thee 
for admission into heaven without good works. 
When all accounts are called for by the Great 
Examiner, it is only those who show balances to 
their credit who shall be delivered.’ 

The Guru and the Emperor’s conversation turned 
on the subject of Hindu pilgrimages. The Guru 
said he himself had no concern with them. Next 
day when he visited the Emperor, the latter said 
there were two ways — the Hindu and the Musal- 
man — in the world, and inquired which the Guru 
preferred to follow. The Guru said he was well 
disposed towards both, and he instructed every one 
as he found him. The Emperor replied : ‘ There is 
one God and one faith. On what dost thou rely ? ’ 
The Guru smiled and said, ‘ My brother, there are 
three Gods.’ The Emperor inquired where that was 
written, and added, ‘ A child bom yesterday knoweth 
there is only one God.’ The Guru continued, ‘ Why 
did thine ancestors hinder the' Hindus from wor- 
shipping Ram, Narayan, and tell them they must 



234 the SIKH RELIGION 

only utter Maula Pak or Khuda^ ? Thou proclaimest 
that heaven is made for Moslems and hell for the 
Hindus. Hindus will not associate with any one 
who adoreth Maula Pak or Khuda. Such is the 
quarrel between the two sects. Know that my 
religion is that regarding which there is no con- 
troversy. The Hindus have a God whom Moslems 
do not acknowledge, and I have a God whom neither 
of them acknowledge.’ 

The Emperor one day preached the Guru a sermon 
against Hindu superstitions. The Guru agreed with 
him, but at the same time would not flatter the 
Muhammadan religion. He said that as the Hindu 
worshipped stones, so did the Muhammadans wor- 
ship departed saints and even a black lifeless slab 
at Makka ; and as the Hindus when at prayer 
turned their faces to the east, the Muhammadans 
turned their faces to the west. The Muhammadans 
supposed that their prophet could mediate for them, 
but he had become ashes, and what advantage could 
his ashes or those of his saints confer on men ? The 
Guru thus found fault with both the Hindu and 
Muhammadan religions, and said that he had struck 
out a religion of his own, the basis of which was the 
worship of the sole immortal God. Some discus- 
sion arose on the subject of the Guru’s discourse, 
but he promptly answered all objections. 

The Guru now explicitly stated the request he 
had several times hinted that he desired to make. 
It was to deliver up to him Wazir Khan who had 
killed his children at Sarhind. The Emperor natur- 
ally desired to know what the Guru proposed to do 
with ' him. The Guru candidly replied that he 
would have life for life, according to the law of 
retaliation contained in the Emperor’s sacred book. 
The Emperor shuddered on hearing this request, but 
gave no direct refusal. He said he would reply 
after consulting his ministers. At the same time 
^ Muhammadan names of God. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 235 

he felt that if he surrendered a viceroy to the Guru, 
a popular rebellion* and a mutiny of his Muham- 
madan army would be the result. The Emperor 
therefore requested the Guru to wait for a year 
until his rule was more, firmly established, and then 
he would consider the request made. The Guru 
on this reproached the Emperor with falsehood, 
and said that a Sikh ^ should .arise who should call 
the false and counterfeit to account, who should 
seize and kill the Emperor’s viceroys, priests, and 
magistrates, and contribute to the ruin of the 
Mughal empire. 

Notwithstanding this blunt language and undis- 
guised menace, the Emperor invited the Guru to go 
with him on a visit to Jaipur and other cities. The 
Guru promised to join him on the march. * After 
a few days he set out and overtook the Emperor. 
They both visited Jodhpur and Chitaur. Each 
raja sent his envoy to conciliate and do homage 
to the Guru. At Chitaur there arose a quarrel 
between the Sikhs and the Rajputs on account of 
some grass the former had taken for their horses. 
The Guru censured his Sikhs, and ordered them to 
take nothing for the future without payment. 

The Emperor and the Guru continued their 
journey to the Narbada river. The quarrel between 
the Sikhs and the Muhammadans was kept alive by 
the Emperor’s escort, many of whom were relations 
of the imperial soldiers slain by the Sikhs at Anand- 
pur.' The Guru sent Man Singh, one of his Five 
Beloved, to* adjust the difference between both 
parties. While on his mission of peace the brave 
Man Singh, one of the surviving heroes of Cham- 
kaur, who had never parted from the Guru, was 
assassinated by a fanatic. The Emperor was much 
distressed on hearing of his death, and ordered 
that his murderer should be seized and given up to 
the Guru for punishment. The Guru pardoned him, 

^ No doubt Banda was meant. 



236 THE SIKH RELIGION 

and thus gained great praise from the Mtiham' 
madkns for his mercy and clemtocy. 

The Emperor and the Gum continued their march 
to Burhanpur on the Tapti river. The inhabitants 
had prepared a house there for the Gum, where he 
passed some time. A holy man came to visit him 
and said, ‘ O Gum, I was present with thy father on 
the bank of the Brahmaputra when thou wert born 
in Patna. He said that thou shouldst afterwards 
travel to the south of India, The prophecy having 
now been fulfilled, I have come to meet and wel- 
come thee.’ He then gave the Guru hospitable 
entertainment. 

The Emperor continued his journey and left the 
Guru at Burhanpur. After some days the Emperor 
wrote to him to join him, and he acceded to his 
request. Both then proceeded to Puna and thence 
to Nander on the margin of the river Godavari in 
the present state of Haidarabad and about one 
hundred and fifty miles north-west of its capital. 


Chapter XXX 

The original name of Nander was Nau Nand Dehra, 
because it is said that nine rikhis dwelt there in 
prehistoric times. It is supposed to occupy the 
site of the ancient city of Tagara described by 
the author of the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea. 
In the middle of the fourth century it was still 
a place of importance and the capital of a petty 
kingdom. Its fortifications have long since been 
dismantled or have perished by lapse of time ; and 
there is now no trace of any ancient buildings 
save a few old temple pillars pr^erved in a small 
mosque near the court of the sub-collector. The 
country is diversified by dale and hillock along the 
lazily flowing Godavari. 

The Guru arrived in Nander in Sawan (July- 
August), A. D. 1707, with some infantry and two or 



LIFE OF OURU GOBIND SINGH 237 

three hundred cavalry equipped with lances. He 
went to the hut of Madho Das, a Baira^ hermit. 
Finding the Bair^ absent, and hearing that he 
possessed such skill in magic that he could over- 
throw any one who sat on his couch, the Guru 
proceeded to sit thereon and make himself at 
home. He shot one of the Bairagi’s goats and 
cooked and ate the flesh. A disciple went to inform 
the Bairagi of the Guru’s proceedings. It was a 
sacrilege to kill an animal at the Bairagi' s seat, and 
another sacrilege to take possession of the couch 
which served him as a throne. He came to demand 
an explanation of the intruder’s strange conduct. 
The Bairagi represented that the place had been 
first his guru’s seat, then his own, and he did not 
desire to have it usurped by an unknown stranger, 
who moreover committed violence and sacrilege. 
The Guru replied that he had arrived fatigued in 
Nander, and having heard of the Bairagi’s hospitality 
and philanthropy, took the liberty of testing the 
favourable accounts he had received. The Bairagi 
accepted the Guru’s explanation, recognized from 
his words and manner that he was a great man, 
and called himself his Banda — slave — the name by 
which he was subsequently known. 

Banda, whose original name was Lachmandev, was 
son of Ramdev Rajput and native of Rajauri in the 
Himalayan State of Punch. Before he adopted a 
religious rdle he had been a zamindar or cultivator. 
In eeirly years he practised the use of firearms and 
was devoted to the chaise. Once when he shot a 
female deer he found two young ones in her womb. 
He was so distressed at what he had done, that he 
decided to renounce the world and became a disciple 
of a faqir named Janki Prasad. As a wandering 
mendicant he made his way to the source of the 
Godavari at Nasik. He there made himself a hut 
and began to. perform austeitties. 

A Jogi called Luni visited him and instructed him 



238 THE SIKH RELIGION 

in the science of Jbg and incantations. Being thus 
accomplished, he set out again on his travels, and 
followed the source of the Godavari until he arrived 
in Nander. There he became known as a holy man 
in possession of many charms for the acquisition of 
spiritual and temporal advantages. He used to 
pray and perform penance on a httle moimd over- 
looking the Godavari, and thence at intervals watch 
its slow and dreamy motion as if it were loth to 
lose itself in the open sea. 

The Guru was pleased with the position and 
seclusion of Nander, and decided to make it his 
permanent abode. He used to sit in prayer and 
meditation on a small stone structure on the margin 
of the river. Near it is a little larger building 
where the Granth Sahib was read. It is now and 
has been for years in a state of dilapidation. 

The Guru instructed Banda in the tenets of his 
religion, and in due time baptized him according to 
the new rites. On that occasion Banda received 
the name Gurbakhsh Singh, but continued to be 
known as Banda. He conceived a great affection 
for the true religious guide he had at last found, 
and one day asked him if there were any service he 
could perform for him. The Guru after reflection 
found that he had an account to settle with the 
Muhammadans of the Panjab, and replied, ‘ I have 
come into the world to consolidate the faith and 
destroy oppressors. Art thou prepared to assist 
me ? ’ Banda promised to undertake any enterprise 
suggested by the Guru. Upon this he was enjoined 
to proceed to the Panjab and wreak vengeance on 
the enemies of the Khalsa. ‘ Thou hast called thy- 
self my slave,’ said the Guru, ‘ but thou shalt be 
the most exalted of all.’ 

Saying this the Guru presented him with five 
arrows and thus addressed him, ‘ As long as thou 
remainest continent, thy glory shall increase. He 
who is continent, turneth not away from the combat. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 239 

and his opponents cannot withstand him. The 
continent man succeedeth in everything. Once thou 
forsakest the Khalsa principles and associatest un- 
lawfully with woman, thy courage shall depart.’ He 
then ordered Banda to. proceed towards the Jamna, 
wait at a little distance from Buria for reinforce- 
ments which he would cause to be sent him, then 
go to Sadhaura — Buria and Sadhaura are both in 
the present district of Ambala — and plunder and 
devastate it. The reason was that the Muham- 
madans of the place had caused Budhu Shah and 
his disciples to be executed by the Emperor for 
the offence of having assisted the Guru at the battle 
of Bhangani. When Banda had disposed of the 
Guru’s enemies at Sadhaura, he was to proceed to 
sack some more Muhammadan cities, then march 
to Sarhind, and put its governor Wazir Khan to 
death. The Guru gave him instructions to cut off 
Wazir Khan’s head with his own hands, and not 
entrust this pious duty to any subordinate. This 
done Banda was commissioned to go to the hills and 
search for the hill Rajas who had so often and so 
cruelly persecuted the Guru, and mete out to them 
the same justice as to the Mughal enemies of the 
Khalsa. 

With Banda the Guru dispatched Baba Binod 
Singh, his son Baba Kahn Singh — descendants of 
Guru Angad — and Baz Singh, a descendant of Guru 
Amar Das, who were all three to give Banda further 
instructions in the new religion he had adopted. 
With these the Guru sent five other Sikhs to assist 
in the enterprise and support the martial fame of 
the Khalsa. 

After Banda’s departure the Guru lived at various 
places in the immediate neighbourhood — at the 
Shikar Ghat, or game ferry, whence he used to go 
hunting, at the Nagina Ghat, where a Sikh presented 
him with a valuable signet ring which he flung into 
the river, at the Hira Ghat where he disposed in 



240 THE SIKH RELIGION 

a similar manner of a valuable diamond ring pre> 
sented him by the Emperor while in Nander, and 
at the spot now called the Sangat Sahib, where he 
used to give religious instruction to his followers 
and expound to them the Granth Sahib. 

While at the Sangat Sahib, a Multani Sikh brought 
the Guru an offering of a bow and two arrows. He 
was much pleased, and put the bow to the test by 
discharging one of the arrows from it. He sent one 
of his followers to inquire where the arrow had 
fallen. On being informed of the spot he said that 
was where lie wished to reside. The Muhammadans 
objected, but their objection was overruled by the 
Emperor, who made the Guru a present of the land. 
He went and abode there, and made it the scene 
of his propaganda. It is the place on which his 
shrine was subsequently erected. 

After some time a Pathan one day came and 
claimed from the Guru a sum of eleven thousand 
rupees as the price of horses he had supplied him. 
The Guru had not sufficient funds to discharge the 
debt. He said that thirty years after his decease 
the Sikhs should be in power, and the Pathan had 
only to present the Guru’s acknowledgement of the 
debt to their leaders, when he should receive the 
amount many hundredfold. The debt was duly dis- 
charged by the Sikhs under happier and more pros- 
perous circumstances. 

Chapter XXXI 

The Guru feeling that his end was approaching 
desired to send Sahib Kaur, to her co-wife Sundari 
whom he had left in Dihli on his departure 
to the south of India. He knew that she could 
not endure the shock which his demise would cause 
her. She at first refused to leave Nander, sa5dng 
th^t she had made a vow never to take her daily 
foo^ without seeing the Guru, and how could she 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 241 

fulfil her vow if she were to part from him ? The 
Guru then gave her six weapons which had belonged 
to his grandfather Guru Har Gobind, and told her 
to look at them whenever she desired to behold 
him. With these and other inducements he at last 
persuaded her to depart. She was accompanied by 
Bhai Mani Singh and both were enjoined to com- 
fort and console Sundari. 

The current Sikh account of the Guru’s death is 
that he was stabbed by Gul Khan, a grandson of 
Painda Khan, in revenge for the death of the 
latter at the hands of Guru Har Gobind.^ More 
probable is the account given in one of the re- 
censions of Bahadur Shah's history : — The Guru 
was in the habit of constantly addressing as- 
semblies of worldly persons, religious fanatics, and 
indeed all varieties of people. One day an Afghan, 
who frequently attended these meetings, was sitting 
listening to him, when certain expressions which 
were disagreeable to the ears of the faithful fell 
from the Guru’s tongue. The Afghan was en- 
raged and, regardless of the Guru’s dignity and 
importance, stabbed him twice or thrice with a 
poniard. 

^ Thucydides, the Greek historian, cites a proverb to the effect that 
the gratification of revenge is the sweetest feeling among mortals — 
"Pi-jm 8’ i\0povi &ixvvcurOai «Ky<vi;<ro/rtvov ‘^/uv, Kal to Xeyo/xevoy vov 
^Sixrrov ttvai — and even one of the most Christian of poets thought it 
not unbecoming his religion and philosophy to approve of the anger 
of one of the denizens of his Inferno for his unavenged death. His 
passion for revenge and his resentment at the inaction of his poetic 
relative only enhanced pity and estimation for him — 

ond’ei sen gfo 
Senza parlarmi, si com’io stimo; 

Ed in ci6 m’ha e’ fatto a sfe pih pio. 

Dante’s Inferno. 

Several Sikhs suppose that Gul Khan was specially deputed by 
the Emperor Bahadur Sh3h to assassinate the Guru because he had 
importuned him to fulfil a promise solemnly made. It has been 
. thought the Emperor believed that if he could remove the Guru from 
his pad?, all troubles would be at an end, 

R 


SIKH. V 



242 i THE SIKH RBUfGION 

iThe Emperor on heaiing^of the butrage dispatched 
some of his most skilful surgeons to attend to the 
Guru's injuries ; and so skilfully did; they perform 
their duty that the Guru's wounds were nearly 
healed in a fortnight, after which the surgeohs took 
their leave as being no longer required; In a short time 
the Emperor again sent to inquire after the Gurti’s 
health and made him several offerings which included 
two bows. A discussion arose whether the Guru 
could bend them. On this he took up one and on 
bending it burst open his imperfectly healed wounds. 
Blood began to flow copiously. The wound was 
bound up by the Guru’s attendants, but this time it 
was past medicament. 

The Guru set apart five hundred rupees for the 
preparation and distribution of sacred food and one 
hundred rupees to purchase sandal-wood and what- 
ever else was necessary for his obsequies. His Sikhs 
came to him, and said that while he was alive they 
had the benefit of his presence, but they required 
instruction which might remind them of him hereafter 
and guide them to salvation. The Guru replied, ‘ O 
dear and beloved Khalsa, the immortal God’s will can 
never be resisted. He who is bom must assuredly die. 
Guru Arjan hath said, “ Everything we behold shall 
perish.” Night and day are merely expressions of 
time. It is the immortal God alone who ever 
abideth. All other beings, however holy and exalted, 
must depart when the last moment allotted them 
arriveth, for none can escape the primordial law of 
corporeal dissolution. All this world, composed of the 
five elements, is Death’s prey. When the materials 
perish, how can the fabric remain ? God the Creator 
and Cherisher of all is alone immortal. Brahma, 
Vishnu, Shiv, and the other gods of the Hindus 
perished at their appointed time. Of what account 
is man ? Wherefore, O my friends, it is not good to 
be unduly enamoured of this fragile body. Know 
that the light of the imperishable God whose attri- 



LIFE OF GURU GOBI^ SINGH 243 

butes are permanence, consciousness, and happiness, 
shineth ever in you. Wherefore always abide in 
cheerfulness, and never give way to mourning. God 
is ever the same. He is neither young nor old. He 
is not born, neither doth he die. He feeleth not pain 
or poverty. Know that’ the true Guru abideth as He. 
Creatures who are steeped in bodily pride are 
very unhappy, and night and day subject to love and 
hate. Ever entangled and involved in the deadly 
sins, they perish by mutual enmity and at last find 
their abode in hell. Y et for the love of such creatures 
the Guru assumed birth to deliver them. He hath 
instructed them in the true Name, and very 
fortunate are they who have received and treasured 
his instruction. By it they are enabled to save 
themselves and others from the perils of the world’s 
ocean. As when after drought rain falleth and there 
is abundance, so the Guru, seeing human beings 
suffering and yearning for happiness, came to bestow 
it on them and remove their sorrows by his teaching. 
And as the rain remaineth where it falleth, so the 
Guru’s instruction ever abideth with his disciples. 
The Sikhs who love the true Guru are in turn beloved 
by him. O Khalsa, remember the true Name. 
The Guru hath arrayed you in arms to procure you 
the sovereignty of the earth. Those who have died 
in battle have gone to an abode of bliss. I have 
attached you to the skirt of the immortal God and 
entrusted you to Him. Read the Granth Sahib or 
listen to it, so shall your minds receive consolation, 
and you shall undoubtedly obtain an abode in the 
Guru’s heaven. They who remember the true Name 
render their lives profitable, and when they depart 
enter the mansions of eternal happiness.’ 

When the Sikhs came again to take their last fare- 
well of the Guru, they inquired who was to succeed 
him. He replied, ‘ I have entrusted you to the 
immortal God. Ever remain under His protection, 
and trust to none besides. Wherever there are five 



244 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Sildis assembled who abide by the Guru’s teachings, 
know that I am in the midst of them. He who 
serveth them shall obtain the reward thereof — the 
fulfilment of all his heart’s desires. Read the history 
of your Gurus from the time of Guru Nanak. Hence- 
forth the Guru shall be the Khalsa and the Khalsa 
the Guru. I have infused my mental and bodily 
spirit into the Granth Sahib and the Khalsa.’ 

After this the Guru bathed and changed his dress. 
He then read the Japji and repeated an Ardas or 
supplication. While doing so, he gave instruc- 
tions that no clothes should be bestowed as alms 
in his name. He then put on a muslin waist- 
band, slung his bow on his shoulder and took 
his musket in his hand. He opened the Granth 
Sahib and placing five paise and a coco-nut before it 
solemnly bowed to it as his successor. Then uttering 
‘ Wahguru ji ka Khalsa ! Wahgmu ji ki fatah ! ’ 
he circumambulated the sacred volume and said, 
‘ O beloved Khalsa, let him who desireth to behold 
me, behold the Guru Granth. Obey the Granth 
Sahib. It is the visible body of the Guru. And 
let him who desireth to meet me diligently search 
its hymns.’ 

The Guru went to an enclosure formed of tent 
walls where his bier had been erected. In the end 
of the night — a watch before day — ^he lay on his 
bier, and directed all his Sikhs except Bhai San- 
tokh Singh,^ who was specially attached to him, to 
go to their homes. He then gave his last orders to 
his last attendant. ‘ Keep my kitchen ever open, and 
receive offerings for its maintenance. If any one 
erect a shrine in my honour, his offspring shall perish.’ 
Bhai Santokh Singh represented that the Sikhs were 
few at Nander, and how were offerings to be obtained? 
The Guru replied, ‘ O Bhai Santokh Singh, have 
patience. Singhs of mine of very great eminence 
shall come here and make copious offerings. Every- 

* This is a diflferent man from the author of the Suraj Parkdsk, 



LIFE OF GURU GOBINB SINGH 245 

thing ^all be obtained by the favour of Gum 
Nanak.’ He thenj in grateful acknowledgement of 
the spiritual benefactions of the founder of his 
religion, uttered a Persian distich, the translation 
of which is:— 

Gobind Singh obtained from Guru Nanak 

Hospitality, the sword, victory, and prompt assistance.^ 

The Guru then breathed his last. The Sikhs made 
preparations for his obsequies as he had instructed 
them, the Sohila was solemnly chanted, and sacred 
food distributed. 

While all were mourning the loss of the Giuru 
a hermit arrived and said, ‘ You suppose that the 
Guru is dead. I saw him this very morning riding 
his bay horse. When I bowed to him he said, 
“ Come, O hermit, let me behold thee. Very happy 
am I that I have met thee at the last moment.” 
I then asked him whither he was wending his way. 
He smiled and said he was going to the forest on 
a hunting excursion. He had his bow in his hand, 
and his arrows were fastened with a strap to his 
waist.' 

The Sikhs who heard this statement arrived at the 
conclusion that it was all the Guru’s play, that he 
dwelt in uninterrupted bliss, and that he showed 
himself wherever he was remembered. He had 
merely come into the world, they said, to make trial 
of their faith, and remove the ills of existence. 
Wherefore for such a Guru who had departed bodily 
to heaven, there ought to be no mourning. The 
ashes of his bier were collected and a platform built 
over them. The Khalsa, to whom the Guruship had 
been entrusted, declared that all those who visited 
the spot should receive due spiritual reward. 

The Guru departed from the scene of his earthly 

^ These lines were impressed on a seal made by the Sikhs after the 
Guru’s demise, and were adopted by Ranjit Singh for his coinage 
after he had assumed the title of MaharSlja. 



246 ^ IHE SIKH RELIGteK 

tfii^phs and reverses Thnrsdky, the Mth ^yof 
haH'ol Kartik, Sambat 1765 (a.d. 170&), 
baving eoeeirctsed spirituai and temped sovereign^ 
Qv«: Ibe Sikhs lor Riree and thirty years, and reiided 
in Nander lor lourteen months and ten days. 

The Sikh temple at Nander, called Abchalnagar, 
isi an imposing structure with a cupola and two 
minarets. The interior is surrounded by a wall of 
martial knplements emblematic of the militant side 
of the Guru’s character. It was built by Mahataja 
Hanjit Singh in 1832 in defiance of the Guru's 
interdiction. Additions are being continually made 
to the edifice by the contributions of devout Sikhs.^ 


Chapter XXXII 

We now proceed to continue the history of Banda. 
Having set out for the Pan jab in accordance with the 
Guru’s instructions, and in due time taken up his post 
on an eminence near Buria, he found there the rein- 
forcements promised by the Guru. They came in 
numbers and clamoured for food. To supply them- 
selves they were obliged to resort to forcible measures. 
Upon this there arose a violent altercation between 
the Sikhs and the villagers, in which the latter were 

^ The state of HaidarabSd has set aside the revenue of five villages, 
namely, Bishanpuri, Bari, Bansari, Masor, and £lki, for the mainte- 
nance of the shrine. The yearly revenue of these villages amounts to 
about eighteen thousand rupees. The Sikh custodians of the shrine 
receive a similar sum from the State for their own maintenance. 

It. may here be mentioned that all places of wordiip in the Haidar- 
territory receive state assistance. A Hindu temple at the 
(kbitfil recMves an annual subsidy of seventy thousand rupees. In 
erar^ ^lagd Hindu as well as Muhammadan temples are treated as 
df the Ni^ni’s munificence. Even Christian and Farsi 
churches halae loadtnowledge bis bounty. 

Thein are twelve hundred Sikhs, inchidmg cavalry and infantry, 
commanded by twelve BistlldSrs, In the Nizim’s army. The Ris^dSrs 
reside af Nander each in turn for a whole year to protect the shrine 
and tjhe Sikhs who have gathered round it from different countries. 
There are also three or four hundred Sikhs in the State Constabulary, 




THE SIKH temple' (HAZUR SAHIB) AT NANDER 


SIKH V p. 246 






LIFE m GURU GO®INJ» SINGH 247 

put to > the sword. The inhabitioits uf ^ tivo or 'three 
other village were eimilitfly treated, s , . ; 1 

. On. seeaz^ the. licence granted to Ban^*a Mti?oei|>s 
all the robbk:$. of the cOUntry flocked to his stodai^ 
An ootdry everywhere arose, and the people went 
in large numbers to complain to. the governor of 
Mustafabad^-s-a city five or six miles to the west of 
Buria— r-where were two thousand impenal troops 
under arms dnd ready for any emergency. These 
were dispatched with two large guns agaii^ Banda, 
whereupon many of his mercenary recruits deserved 
him. He encouraged all who remainedi and promised 
them protection and pecuniary assistance. He then 
pulled forth one of the Guru’s arrows, drew a line 
on the ground with it, and said that no bullet or 
arrow should cross the demarcation thus made. 
Upon this his troops rallied and m^de such a success- 
ful defence that the Muhammadans all fled, leaving 
their cannon behind them. After this victory several 
of the deserters returned, and rejdned Banda’s 
army. His forces then proceeded to Mustafabad 
and laid it waste. 

Banda’s next expedition was against Sadhaura. 
The imperial troops stationed there came forth to 
oppose him, but were easily defeated. They fled 
and took shelter behind their city walls. Banda’s 
forces with great bravery captured the fort, and 
levelled it with the ground. Then ensued a general 
massacre of the inhabitants. Banda next marched 
and laid aege to Samana, a considerable town in 
the state of Patiala. Here there was a sanguinary 
battle. The city was sacked, and the male inhabi- 
tants put to the sword. 

He ; then proceeded to SarMnd. Oft the march 
his troops took supplies forcibly from villagers. 
Wazir Khan on hearing that Banda was mardimg 
s^ainst him seht to the^cehoy bf Lahore for^asidst- 
anoe; Banda plundered AmJb^ on the way. ^ Be 
then marched to Banur where he encountered 



248 THE SIKH RELIGION 

by Wazir Khan's army, which had marched from 
Sarhind to oppose him. The battle began on the 
following day; When several of the Muhammadans 
were slain, Wazir Khan and Banda engaged in single 
combat. Banda thus addressed him, ‘ O sinner, 
thon art the enemy of Guru Gobind Singh. Thou 
hast shown him no respect, but on the contrary 
hast put to death his innocent children, and thereby 
committed a grievous and unpardonable crime, the 
punishment for which I am now going to deal thee. 
Thine army and thy country shall be destroyed at 
my hands.' Upon this Banda struck off his head 
with one blow of his sword. Then the whole of the 
Muhammadan army fled followed by the Sikhs, who 
possessed themselves of their horses, arms, tents, 
cannon, and other munitions of war, and then 
advanced in triumph to Sarhind. There they effected 
a general massacre. The Sikhs captured Suchanand 
who had instigated the murder of Guru Gobind 
Singh's children. They put an iron ring in his nose, 
and passing a rope through it, led him round the 
streets to beg. At every shop he was shoe-beaten 
until he died. Such of the inhabitants as were not 
killed prostrated themselves before the conqueror. 
He was not disposed to mercy, but gave an order 
to raze the city to the ground and plough up its 
site. In the process large treasure was found which 
materially assisted him in his further career of 
rapine, bloodshed, and devastation. 

Banda then went on an expedition to the east 
and plundered most of the hill rajas' states. After 
this he made a pilgrimage to Anandpur, and per- 
formed reverent worship at the shrine of Guru Teg 
Bahadur. He then made pilgrimages to the places 
hallowed by the visits of Guru Gobind Singh. The 
Raja of Chamba, in order to conciliate him, sent him a 
supremely beautiful girl. She had large eyes, her 
limbs were graceful and delicate, and she is described 
by the enthusiastic chronicler as the very image of 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 249 

the goddess of love. Banda on seeing her, jMurted 
with his caution, and completely forgot the Guru’s 
injunctions. He dived into the ocean of sensuality, 
and thought not of the fate that awaited him on the 
forfeiture of his continence. 

Having subjected all'the hill chiefs, Banda planned 
a tour in the Bist Doab, and proceeded to Jalandhar 
where he killed the Muhammadan male inhabitants. 
The Muhammadan women were converted to Sikhism, 
and became wives 'of the Sikh soldiers by the cere- 
mony of Anand.^ He thence went into the Manjha 
and plundered Batala. Thence he marched to 
Lahore and put its viceroy Aslam Khan and all his 
principal officers to the sword. He there heard that 
troops sent by the Emperor Bahadur Shah were 
marching against him. He proceeded to meet them 
as far as Ludhiana and defeated them. He thence 
went on a pilgrimage to the shrine of Guru Nanak in 
the Gurdaspur district, where he met Bhai Ram Kaur, 
sixth in descent from Bhai Budha. Banda induced 
him to remain with him, probably with the object 
of persuading him, in imitation of his pious ancestor, 
to invest him with the dignity of Guru. 

Banda had by this time obtained supreme power 
from the neighbourhood of Dihli on the south to 
Lahore on the north. He appointed his own police, 
levied revenue, and ruled the country. Baba Binod 
Singh, whom the Guru had sent with him, gave him 
great assistance in administration. He endeavoured 
to dissuade him from the Chamba liaison and 
another of a disreputable character which Banda 
had also contracted. On one occasion when Baba 
Binod Singh remonstrated in open darbar with him 
for his departure from ascetic principles and the 
injunctions of the Guru, an altercation arose of such 
a violent character that Binod Singh drew his sword 
and would have cut off his head had not Kahn 
Singh interposed. Kahn Singh then foretold the 

. ^ Panth Parkash. 



250 THE SIKH RELIGION 

departure of Banda’s glory and his ignominious 
death. 

Banda next paid a visit to the great temple at 
Amritsar. He gave out that he had been empowered 
by the Guru to claim succession to the Guruship. 
The Sikhs then reflected that he did not live ac- 
cording to the rules prescribed for the Khalsa. In 
order to make trial of him, they put meat before 
him, at which he, as the result of early prejudice, 
became horrified. He fell into a passion with the 
Sikhs who had thus made trial of him, and they 
in turn grew enraged with him for refusing meat 
allowed by their religion and for his manifold irregu- 
larities. The result was that the Sikhs divided into 
two factions. Those who rejected Banda were 
called the Tat Khalsa, or real Sikhs, and those who 
accepted him, the Bandai Khalsa or followers of 
Banda. For the Sikh salutation, Wahguru ji ka 
Khalsa ! Wahguru ji hi fatah! he substituted Fatah 
Darshan ‘ Victory to the sect ’, an alteration which 
was deemed apostasy from the orthodox faith. 

Another cause of the dissatisfaction of the Sikhs 
with Banda was that he disregarded a letter of 
Mata Sundari to the effect that he had now accom- 
plished the mission imposed on him by the Guru, 
namely, to bring the Governor of Sarhind to justice, 
and it was time for him to arrest his career of carnage 
and spoliation. Banda said that as Mata Sundari 
was only a woman she was not competent to 
give him advice or orders. Many Sikhs thinking 
that this was a slight to the Guru’s wife, deserted 
Banda, and from that time his power began rapidly 
to decline. 

When the defeat of the army sent by the Emperor 
against Banda was heard of in Nander it was attri- 
buted to the Emperor’s failure to keep his promise 
to the Guru. 

Banda continued to pursue his violent career until 
Bahadur Shah, himself at the head of a powerful 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 251 

avenging army> proceeded against him. Banda not 
deeming his troops sufficient to cope with the im- 
perial host lied to the mountains and took refuge 
in a fort called Loh^h. The imperial army be- 
sieged him but the \«^y chief escaped in a desperate 
sally. A Hindu who remained behind to personate 
him was sent by the Subadar’s orders to be executed 
in Dihli. Very soon after this the Emperor died 
in Lahore, and then ensued the usual Oriental 
scramble for the throne. His eldest son Jahandar 
Shah, who has been described as a drunken profligate, 
succeeded, but was murdered by his nephew Farrukh 
Siyar, son of Bahadur Shah’s second son Azim-ul- 
Shan. While this struggle was in progress, Banda 
came forth from his hiding-place and again com- 
menced his depredations. 

Bayazid Khan, the new viceroy of Sarhind, went 
forth with his troops to oppose Banda, but was killed 
while at his prayers by a follower of the outlaw. On 
this the Emperor Farrukh Siyar sent Abd-ul-Samad 
Khan, also known as Diler Jang, to arrest Banda’s 
progress. When Diler Jang thought his troops had 
surrounded Banda, there was no Banda to be seen. 
He and his followers had again fled and disappeared 
in the mountains. Diler Jang took up his quarters 
at Lahore to await the outlaw’s reappearance. 
After a year Banda again emerged from his fastnesses 
and took possession of Kalanuar and Santokhgarh. 
He sent letters in all directions inviting the Sikhs 
to join his standard. In two months he received 
considerable reinforcements and defeated Sher Mu- 
hammad Daim, the general commanding at Ambala. 
The latter then went to Diler Jang at Lahore to com- 
plain of Banda’s lawlessness and t5n*annyand concert 
m(M:e stringent measures for his repression. Diler J ang 
sent the Ambala general’s complaint to the Emperor. 
Upon this the Emperor ordered Mir Ahmad Khan, 
the general commanding at Aurangabad, to join 
his forces with those of Diler Jang and the other 



252 THE SIKH RELIGION 

generals in the Panjab and all proceed against 
Banda. The latter took refuge in Gurdaspur, and 
strongly entrenched himself. The Muhammadan 
army besieged him. The Sikhs were reduced to 
such extremities that they killed for food all animals 
in their possession. Baba Binod Singh, who had 
hitherto accompanied Banda, now abandoned him. 
Banda, when rendered totally helpless, sent a letter 
under flag of truce to Diler Jang offering to sur- 
render if his life were spared, and his troops treated 
with consideration. Diler Jang promised to in- 
tercede with the Emperor for him, and held out 
hopes of his pardon. When Banda gave up his 
arms, he was not allowed an interview with Diler J ang, 
but placed at once with all his followers under 
restraint. They were all sent to Dihh with many 
circumstances of disgrace — Banda himself being put 
into an iron cage — to be disposed of by the Emperor. 

Here English testimony is available. The members 
of an Enghsh mission who went from Calcutta to 
Dihli in 1715 to petition the Emperor for certain 
privileges, have left on record that they saw a 
procession of eight hundred Sikh prisoners marched 
through Dihli with two thousand bleeding heads 
borne aloft on poles. The Sikhs vied with one 
another for precedence in death. 

While the executions were in progress, the mother 
of one of the prisoners, a young man just arrived 
at manhood, having obtained some influential sup- 
port, pleaded the cause of her son with great feeling 
and earnestness before the Emperor. She repre- 
sented that her son had suffered imprisonment and 
hardship at the hands of the sect. His property 
was plundered, and he was made prisoner. While 
in captivity, he was, without any fault of his own, 
introduced into the sect, and now stood innocent 
among those sentenced to death. Farrukh Siyar 
pitied the woman, and mercifully sent an officer 
with orders to release the youth. She arrived 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 253 

with the order of release just as the executioner 
was standing with his bloody sword upheld over 
the young man’s head. When she showed the 
imperial order the youth broke out into complaints, 
saying, ‘ My mother sp.eaketh falsely : I with heart 
and soul join my fellow-believers in devotion to, 
the Guru : send, me quickly after my companions.’ 
Needless to say his request was cheerfully granted. 

Here Baba Kahn Singh and Baba Baz Singh, 
whom the Guru had sent with Banda, succeeded 
in effecting their escape. Ghulam Husain Khan, 
author of the Siyar ul Mutaakharin, states that 
Banda’s son was put on his lap, and Banda was, 
obliged to cut his throat in the manner of Muham- 
madan sacrifice. He did so, not unwillingly, lest 
the child should afterwards be circumcised and made 
a Muhammadan. 

Muhammad Amin Khan, when he had an inter- 
view with Banda, said to him, ‘ The marks of sense 
and intelligence are visible on thy countenance : how 
is it thou hast never thought about the recompense 
of thy deeds, and that in a short span of life with 
a dreadful futurity thou hast been guilty of such 
cruelty and of such detestable actions to Hindus 
and Musulmans ? ’ He replied, ‘ In all religions 
and sects, whenever disobedience and rebellion 
among mortal men passeth all bounds, the Great 
Avenger raiseth up a severe man like me for the 
punishment of their sins and the due reward of 
their deeds. 

When He wisheth to desolate the world, 

He placeth dominion in the hands of a tyrant. 

‘ When He desireth to give the tyrant the recompense 
of his works. He sendeth a powerful man like thee 
to prevail over him, and to give him his due reward 
in this world: as thou and I can see.’ On this 
Banda’s flesh was torn from his body by red-hot 
pincers, and he expired under the horrible torture. 



254 the SIKH RELIGION 

During his execution he uttered the following 
warning t© his fellow creatures * 

Who hath not suffered for his acts? 

Who hath not reaped what he hath sown ? 

Forgdt not that you shall obtain retribution for your 
deeds. 

Wheat springeth from wheat, and barley from barley.^ 

Though such was the fate of Banda, yet Guru 
Gobind Singh had infused such martial spirit into 
his Sikhs, that they not long after obtained possession 
of the Panjab, and put an end to Muhammadan 
supremacy. 


Chapter XXXIII 

Mata Sahib Kaur, the Guru’s youngest wife, died 
of grief very soon after her husband. She was 
cremated at the shrine of Guru Har Krishan in Dihli. 
When Ajit Singh, the boy adopted by Mata Sundari, 
the Guru’s remaining wife, grew up, she provided 
him with a wife. He begot a son called Hathi Singh. 
Ajit Singh imitated the late Guru as much as possible. 
He used to hold court, call himself a guru, and enter- 
tain a retinue. He endeavoured to obtain from 
Mata Sundari the arms belonging to Guru Har Gobind, 
which the late Guru had given to Sahib Kaur on her 
departure from Nander. Ajit Singh believed that 
if he wore them, every one would hail him as Guru. 
WhMi he made his demand for the arms he was 
sharply reproved by Mata Sundari. On this he 
drew his dagger to kill her, but some friends inter- 
posed. Mata Sundari then cursed him, said he 
should forfeit his faith, and die an untimely death. 
One day as he was riding in the bazar his herald 
said to him, ‘O guru, behold the Muhammadans 
praying.' The Muhammadans overheard this, and, 

^ The Persian histdrian, Khafi Kh§n, gives many other details 
of Banda’s Oareer in the Panj&b, bat they are not generally accepted 
by the Sikhs. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBINDl SINGH 255 

believing that he ridiculed their religion, reported to 
the Emperor that under a Muhammadan administra- 
tion the Sikhs were mocking the faithful. The 
Empm)r at the instigation) of the qazis ordered Ajit 
Singh to cut off his hajr and appear thus humbled 
before him. If he failed in this, the Emperor reserved 
to himself the right to punish him as he thought fit. 
Ajit Singh, fearing death, cut off his hair, and grovelled 
before the Emperor. Mata Sundari was enraged on 
hearing of this act of apostasy, and told him never 
again to show her his face. She drew up a 
document to the effect that, though she had adopted 
and cherished Ajit Singh as a son, she now re- 
nounced him. She then entrusted Guru Har Gobind’s 
arms to the faithful Sikhs of Dihli, and expressed her 
desire to live no longer in such an evil and ill-omened 
city. The Sikhs, however, prevailed on her to alter 
her determination. Ajit Singh now abandoned by 
the Sikhs went to beg at Mata Sundari’s door. She 
sent him money, but would never consent to see 
him. 

A Muhammadan faqir on whom Ajit Singh when 
in good circumstances used to bestow money, one 
day met him in the Dihli bazar, and asked for alms. 
Ajit Singh in his poverty could only give him a few 
copper coins. The faqir was not satisfied, but fol- 
lowed him to his house, and further importuned 
him. He would not leave but dogged his steps as 
he went shooting during the afternoon. Ajit Singh 
complained to his servants of the annoyance the 
beggar was causing him, whereupon they beat the 
man so severely that he died. They disposed of 
his body by throwing it into a well for the purpose 
of concealment. 

The faqir’s fate gradually became known, and 
the Emperor ordered Ajit Singh to be arrested and 
brought before him. Ajit Singh refused to obey the 
order, and put himself in a posture of defence. His 
feotfce was besieged, and his adherents fought bravely 



256 THE SIKH RELIGION 

to protect him. He contrived to send his wife and 
son Hathi Singh, both disguised in soiled clothes, to 
Mata Sundari. He then succeeded in escaping from his 
house and concealed himself in astrawstack belonging 
to Hindus who lived near. The owner of the stack 
^covered him and on hearing that a proclamation 
hud been issued for his arrest, informed the authorities. 
Ajit Singh was seized, tied to an elephant’s tail, and 
dragged through the dty. At a turning in one of the 
streets the elephant trod on his head, upon which his 
brains oozed out. 

Mata Sundari, thinking her position unsafe in 
Dihli on account of having received Ajit Singh’s 
wife and son, put into execution her long-cherished 
project of abandoning that city and proceeded 
with her charge to Bhagatgarh. The head man of 
the place would not allow her, through fear of the 
Emperor, to remain in his city,*^ She thence went to 
Madura, where she was received with great distinc- 
tion. Tlie governor of the city induced the Raja of 
Jaipur to grant her the revenue of two villages and 
^so a suitable place of residence. In Mathura Hathi 
Singh grew up to manhood, adopted his father’s 
styl^ SU^d maintained a retinue of sixty mounted 
orderlies; He tried to compose hymns but inspiration 
failed him. He then abstracted some from the 
Granth Sahib, and wherever the name Nanak occurred 
inserted his own. Mata Sundari on being informed of 
this became very wroth, abandoned Hathi Singh 
and his mother at Mathura, and returned to Dihli. 
During the invasion of Ahmad Shah, Hathi Singh 
fled from Mathura to Burhanpur, where he subse- 
quently died, leaving no male issue. 

When Mata Sundari arrived in Dihli she by the 
kind offices of Raja Ram, the Emperor’s minister, 
obtained possessiion of hw’ house and property,, which 
had been seized by i the Muhammadans after her 
departure. She spent the refhainder of ‘her days 
there, and died in comparative worldly comfort in 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND : SINGH 257 

Saiikbat '11804 (A. D. 1747). Her body was cremated 
near the shrine of Guru Har Krishan. 

It' wiU be remembered that when the Giaru 
evacuated Anandpur< he ^nt Gulab Rai and Sham 
Singh with a letter to .the Raja of Nahan requesting 
him to grant them the means of subsistence. T^e 
raja gave them two villages. Gulab Rai afterwards 
purchased Anandpur for sixty thousand rupees from 
the Kahlur Raja and, returned to live there. He 
caused himself to be worshipped by the Sikhs and 
carried his unseemly pretensions so far as to actually 
instal himself in the Guru’s seat. Sadhu Gurbakhsh, 
who, had been an attendant on the Guru and had by 
him%een left in charge of Guru Teg Bahadur’s shrine, 
rel^onstrated against the usurpation, whereupon 
Gulab Rai became very angry, and addressed him 
in offensive language. Gurbakhsh then cursed him 
sa3nng, ‘ Thou and thy line shall perish ! ’ In a short 
time Gulab Rai and his two sons died. After that 
Gulab Rai’s widow took theofferings of the Sikhs, and 
remained in possession of Anandpur. When she was 
on the point of death she appointed Surjan Singh, 
Sham Singh’s son, now old and experiencesj|j aua heir 
of Anandpur. His descendants still occupy,' that 
city, and receive a yearly revenue from the Ibtiian 
government and the Sikh states. 

A Sikh writer called Gurdas, who lived long after 
the time of Guru Gobind Singh, wrote a War in his 
praise which the Sikhs appended to the compositions 
of Bhai Gur Das, and which now appears as the 
forty-first War. The following pauris are extracted 
from it : — 

Pauri 15 

Guru Gobind was manifested as the tenth avatar. 

He repeated the . name of the Creator who is unseen, 
eternal, and stainless. 

He established the Khalsa, a sect of his own, and gave it 
great glory. 



258 > ITHE SIKH RELIGION 

*Weau:ing long hair he grasped the sword and smote all his 
enemies. 

He put on the kachh of continence and practised arms. 

He' established the Sikh war-cry and was victorious in 
mighty battles. 

He caused all demon enemies" to be surrounded and 
trampled upon. 

Then his endless praise was gradually proclaimed through- 
out the world. 

Thus arose the race of Singhs who wore blue clothes, 

Who killed all the hostile Turks, and repeated God’s name. 

No one could withstand them, so the Turkish leaders 
decamped ; 

Rajas, kings, and amirs all became the dust beneath the 
Singhs’ feet. 

Great hills trembled when they heard their victorious 
drums. 

There was then great commotion throughout the whole 
world ; the enemy abandoned their homes. 

And perished in the great confusion and trouble that 
ensued. 

There is none so great a destroyer of fear as the true Guru. 

He handled and displayed such a sword as none could 
vrithstand. 

Well done ! well done Gobind Singh ! thou wert at once 
Guru and disciple ! 


Pauri i6 

By the order of the immortal God the great Guru obtained 
inspiration. 

Then he gradually established the Khalsa, whole-bodied ^ 
and manly. 

Then arose the roaring of the Singhs (lions) which terrified 
the whole world. 

They levelled with the earth the shrines of Hindus and 
Muhammadans. 

' SadiL Not circumcised like the Muhammadans, and not cutting 
their hair or shaving like the Hindus. 



LIFE OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 259 

They cancelled the Veds, the Purans, the six Hindu 
systems and the Quran. 

They abolished the call to prayer and the prayer-carpet of 
the Muhammadans and killed the Turkish monarchs. 

Temporal and spiritual leaders all hid themselves or became 
converted to Sikhism. 

The Mullas and the Qazis grew weary of reading, but 
found not God’s secret. 

Hundreds of thousancjs of Pandits, Brahmans, and 
Astrologers had become entangled in worldly affairs. 

Worshipping stones and temples they had become exceed- 
ingly superstitious. 

Both the Hindus and the Muhammadans were altogether 
engaged in deception. 

Consequently a third religion, the Khalsa, arose and 
became renowned. 

The Singhs by the order of Guru Gobind Singh seized the 
sword and wielded it. 

They killed all their enemies and caused the name of the 
Immortal God to be repeated. 

Then God’s order was promulgated in the world. 

The drum of victory resounded and drowned the cry of 
sorrow. 

The great sagacious Guru established a third sect. 

Well done ! well done Gobind Singh ! thou wert at once 
Guru and disciple ! 


S 2 



26 o *rHE SIKH RELIGION 


COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND 
SINGH 

In the year a. d. 1734 while in Amritsar Bhai Mani 
Singh, compiled the compositions and translations of 
Guru Gobind Singh and of the bards who were 
associated with him. The ‘ compilation was subse- 
quently known as the Granth of the tenth Guru, 
though Mani Singh did not give it that title.^ We 

1 After Mani Singh's execution the Sikhs took the volume for 
examination and approval to a village in the Patiala State called 
Talwandi Sabo, now known among the Sikhs as Damdama. Damdama 
was selected for examination of the volume as several learned Sikhs 
resided there, and that distant village was also deemed a place of 
safety. 

Several intelligent Sikhs were of opinion that the tales and transla- 
tions in the volume, as at present found, ought not to have been 
included ii> it, for many of them are of Hindu origin, others not fit for 
perusal, and none comparable with the hymns contained in the Ad 
Granth. The Sikhs therefore maintained that the Hikaydt or Persian 
tales, and the whole of the Tria Charitavy or stories illustrating the 
deceit of women, should be omitted, and included in a separate volume, 
which might be read, not for a religious purpose, but for the entertain- 
ment and delectation of the public. 

While this discussion was in progress, one Mahtab Singh of 
Mirankot arrived from Bikaner at Damdama. He had vowed to kill 
one Massa Ranghar, a Muhammadan official, who had obtained pos- 
session of the Golden Temple, and who used the place as a theatre 
for dancing women; and he was on his way to Amritsar to carry 
out his design. Mahtab Singh vowed that if he succeeded and re- 
turned to Damdama, Mani Singh's Granth should remain in one 
volume as he had arranged it. If, on the contrary, Massa killed 
him, the Granth might be arranged according to the wishes of the 
objectors. Mahtab Singh slew Massa Ranghar, returned in triumph 
to Damdama, and Mani Singh's Granth was allowed to remain accord- 
ing to his design. 

There are many obvious defects in the arrangement of the tenth 
Guru's Granth as it stands. For instance, there are several questions 
put in doharas 201 to 210 of the Akdl Usiat to which no answer is 
given. Chhands 211 to 230 are obviously out of place, and belong to 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 261 


now proceed to give translations from it of such 
doctrinal and historical portions as we believe to 
represent the Guru’s own opinions and acts. 

. jApi 

There is one God, the true, the great, and the 
bounteous : — 

The tenth Guru spoke with his holy mouth ^ — 

God hath no quoit ^ of marks, no colour, no caste,' no 
lineage, 

No form, no complexion, no outline, no costume ; none 
can in any way describe Him. 

He is immovable, fearless, luminous, and measureless in 
might ; 

He is accounted King of kings. Lord of millions of Indars ; 

He is Sovereign of the three worlds, demigods, men, and 
demons ; the woods and dales declare Him indescribable. 

0 Lord, who can tell all Thy names ? the wise call Thee 
special names according to Thy deeds. 

Aral Ustat 
(Praise of the Immortal) 

May we have the protection of the immortal Being ! * 


tlie second Chandi Charitar ; and the last Chhand of the Akdl Ustat 
is not complete. The Gyan Parbodh too has been left incomplete. 
There are besides many defects of arrangement. 

^ The Japji of Guru Gobind Singh is held by the Sikhs in the same 
estimation as the Japji of Guru Nanak. The Hindus have a work 
entitled Vishnu Sahasar Nam — Vishnu's thousand names. The Japji 
was composed to supply the Sikhs with a similar number of epithets 
of the Creator. 

* This line is Bhai Mani Singh's composition. 

^ Chakr, This word is also applied to depressions in the body 
noticed for mystical, astrological, or cheiromantic purposes. 

^ The tenth Guru invented new names for God — ^Akal (the 
Immortal), Sarbloh (All-steel), Mahanloh (Great-steel), Sarbkal (All- 
death), Mahankal (Great-death), Asidhuj, Asiketu, and Kharagketu 
(having the sword on His banner), Asipani (sword in His hand), timt is, 
God as the impersonation and source of bravery. 



262 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


May we have the protection of All-steel ! 

May we have the protection of All-death ! 

May we have the protection of All-sted 1 

I bow to the one primal God 

Who extended sea and land, the nether regions, and the 
firmament.^ 

He is the primal Being, unseen, and immortal ; 

His light is manifest in the fourteen worlds. 

He is contained in the ant as in the elephant ; 

He deemeth the rich and the poor alike ; 

He is unequalled, unseen, and eternal ; 

He is the Searcher of all hearts ; 

He is invisible, indestructible, and without distinguishing 
dress ® ; • • 

He is without passion, colour, form, or outline ; 

He is devoid of caste marks of every kind ; 

He is the primal Being, peerless and changeless ; 

He hath no enemy, no friend, no father, no mother ; 

He is far from all and near all ; 

His dwelling is in sea and land, the nether and upper 
regions. 

Boundless is His form, and boundless His voice ; 

In the shelter of His feet dwelleth Bhawani ® ; 

Brahma and Vishnu have not found His limits ; 

The four-faced Brahma pointeth out that God is indes- 
cribable. 

He made millions of Indars and Bawans ; ^ 

He created and destroyed Brahmas and Shivs. 

The fourteen worlds He made as a play. 

And again blended them with Himself. 

He made endless demons, deities, serpents, 

Celestial singers, Yakshas, excellent and beautiful. 

.He is spoken of in the past, the future, and the present. 
And He knoweth the secrets of every heart. 

* This is the traditional meaning of tnahtal, but it receives no sup- 
port from dictionaries. See Pandit Tara Singh’s Nirnai Sagar, 

* Anbhekh. The word also means without form. 

* Parbali or Durga, the consort of Shiv. 

* Bawan was the dwarf incarnation of Vishnu. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 263 

He is not attached to any one love ; 

He is contained in the light of all souls ; - 

He recognizeth all people and all places ; 

He is free from death and immortal ; 

He is the invisible, imperceptible Being, distinct from all 
the world. 

He is immortal, undecaying, imperishable, and of change- 
less purpose. 

He is the Destroyer and Creator of all ; 

He is the Remover of sickness, sorrow, and sin. 

He who with single heart meditateth on Him even -for 
a moment 

Shall not fall into Death’s noose. 


Thou art without sorrow, without form, yet beautiful, the 
King of kings, the Giver of great gifts. 

The Preserver of life, the Giver of milk and sons, the 
Remover of sickness and sorrow, sometimes honourable and 
inspiring great honour. 

Thou art a student of science, an unrivalled incarnation, 
Thou appearest as a Sidh, Thou art the glory of purity. 

Thou art the neP of youth, the death of Death, the torment 
of enemies, the life of friends. 


The following ten Sawaiyas, or quatrains, are 
recited at the administration of the pahul or baptism 
according to the rites of the tenth Guru : — 

I 

I have wandered and in their own' homes seen crowds of 
Saravagis, Sudhs^ Sidhs, Jogis, and Jatis, 

Brave demons, demigods feasting on nectar, and crowds of 
saints of various sects. 


1 This is said to mean — Thou attractest the world by Thy beauty. 

* Sudhs mean the clean in contradistinction to the Saravagis who are 
reputed to be dirty in their habits. 



364 ' THE SIKH RELIGION 

I have seen the religions of all countries, but none appeared 
to be that of the Lord of life. 

Without a particle of the love and favour of God they are 
only worth a ratti 


II 

Emperors before whom strong armed kings used to lowly 
bow their heads in countless numbers ; * 

Who possessed proud elephants with golden trappings, 
incomparable, tall, painted with bright colours ; 

Millions of horses which bounded like deer, and were 
fleeter than the wind — 

What mattered it how great those emperors were ? they 
at last departed barefooted. 


III 

Though they roamed and conquered all countries beating 
their various drums ; 

Though many beautiful elephants trumpeted loud, and 
thousands of horses of royal breed neighed for them — 

Who can number such kings in the past, the future, and 
the present ? They cannot be counted — 

Yet without worshipping the -name of God the Lord of 
wealth, they went at last to their final home. 

IV 

Men bathe at places of pilgrimage, exercise mercy, curb 
their passions, bestow gifts, exercise abstinence, and per- 
form various special ceremonies — 

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, and the other books of 
the Musalmans, the earth and heaven all have I seen ; 

Thousands of tasters, Jatis who practised continence, all 
have I carefully observed ; 

^ The seed of the Airus precatorius (N, O. Leguminosae) used in 
India as a small weight (see Vol. I, p. 158, n. i). 

® Also translated — ^regardless of their own position. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 265 

Yet without worshipping the name of the one God and 
loving Him even kin^s are of no account. 

V 

Trained soldiers, powerful, irresistible, well accoutred with 
coats of mail crush their enemies ; 

Filled with high martial spirit they would put mountains 
to flight, themselves unshaken ; 

They would shatter their enemies, destroy rebels, crush 
the pride of furious elephants ; 

Yet without the favour of God, the Lord of wealth, they 
should all depart at last and leave the world. 

VI 

Countless heroes very valiant without hesitation face the 
edge of the sword. 

Subdue countries, crush rebels, and the pride of furious 
elephants. 

Break powerful forts and even without fighting * conquer 
in every direction — 

But their efforts avail not ; the Lord is the Commander of 
them all — ^the suppliants are many while there is but one 
Giver. 


VII 

Even the demons, gods, serpents, and ghosts who repeat 
God’s name in the past, future, and present ; 

All the beings which in sea and land every moment set 
up God in their hearts. 

Shall find their good deeds and glory increase ; they 
shall hear the voices of gratxdation and the multitude of 
their sins shall depart. 

The congregations of saints wander happy in the world ; 
all their enemies on beholding them are cowed. 


1 Subatanhi. Also translated — at a word, rapidly. 



266 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


VIII 

Lords of men, and elephants, rulers who reign in the 
three worlds. 

Who perform millions of ablutions, make gifts of elephants 
and other animals, and marry brides at various splendid 
swayamvars ^ — 

They with Brahma, Shiv, Vishnu, and Indar shall at last 
be entangled and fall into Death’s noose ; 

But they who touch the feet of the Lord of wealth shall 
not again resume a body. 


IX 

What availeth it to sit closing both eyes and meditating 
like a crane ? 

This world is lost, and the next also for those who go 
about bathing in the seven seas. 

They pass their lives in vain, dwelling in the midst of 
sin.2 

I speak verily ; hear me all ye people — they who love 
God have obtained Him. 


X 

Some worshipping stones put them on their heads, some 
suspend lingams from their necks. 

Some see God in the south, some bow their heads to the 
west. 

Some fools worship idols, others busy themselves with 
worshipping the dead. 

The whole world entangled in false ceremonies hath not 
found God’s secret. 


God is not subject to birth or death. 

He is acquainted with the excellent fourteen sciences,^ 

^ Assemblages in ancient times at which young women selected 
their husbands. 

2 Also translated — sitting in the company of the vicious. 

® These included all ancient Indian knowledge. Different writers 
have given different lists of them. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 267 

He is without stain and infinite, 

He is of unfading brightness and generous, 

His form is not quickly recognized, 

He is head of the saints of the whole world, 

He is the highest object of praise ; hy Him the earth 
and sun are supported ; 

He is the treasury of the eighteen supernatural powers,^ 
He is the Dispeller of sorrow in all the worlds. 

He is not subject to time, to death, or to karma. 

He is versed in all religious ceremonies, 

His glory is infrangible and unequalled. 

He established all establishment, 

He is without sorrow, indivisible, and impenetrable. 
Brahma by his four Veds sings His praises. 

The Veds speak of Him as indescribable, 

Brahma speaks of Him as endless — 

His glory is unknowable and unequalled. 

Indivisible, immeasurable, and unestablished by any 
one 

He made the extension of the world : 

He created it with the utmost thought. 

His form is endless and infrangible. 

His glory is peerless and dazzling, 

He is invisible and noble. 

He made millions of Indars and kings. 

Many Brahmas and Vishnus who meditate on Him, 
Many Rams, Krishans, and prophets — 

No one is acceptable without devotion. 

There are many oceans, mountains great as Bind,^ 

Many fishes, tortoises, and serpents,® 

^ There are genei ally only eight sidhis or supernatural powers enume- 
rated — anuma^ to become so small as to be invisible ; mahimat to be 
able to increase one^s size indefinitely; garuivata^ to make oneself 
heavy ; laghuma^ to make oneself light ; prdpti, to go wherever one 
pleases ; wasi karna, to be able to reduce others to subjection ; hhta, 
to obtain glory or regal greatness ; kdm^ to be able to satisfy all one’s 
desires. A list of the eighteen supernatural powers may be left to 
the reader’s imagination. 

2 Bindhiachal, a holy peak of the Himalayas. 

3 The Sheshndg of the Hindus. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


268 

Many deities and sons of Brahma, 

Many incarnations of Krishan and Vishnu, 

Many Indars to sweep before His door, 

Many Veds and Brahmas, • 

Many Rudars^ and Bawans, 

And many unequalled Rams and Krishans. 

Many men recite amatory poetry. 

Many teU the secrets of the Veds, 

. Many recite the Shastars and Simritis, 

And some read the Purans. 

Many perform fire sacrifices. 

Many painful penances with bodies reversed. 

Many lift their arms in the fashion of the Sanyasis. 

Some don the garb of Jogis and abandon the world, 

Some perform the niwali feat. 

Some practise painful fasting. 

Some go on pilgrimages and give boundless alms. 

Some are generous in their worldly acts. 

Some perform unequalled burnt offerings. 

Some obtain regal state and dispense justice. 

Some act according to the Shastars and the Simritis, 

And some in opposition to the Veds. 

Many wander in different countries. 

And many remain fixed in one place. 

Some pray in water. 

Some endure five fires on their bodies. 

Some dwell in the forest. 

Some perform the endless duties of a family man. 

Some are generous in the fashion of kings. 

Some are free from sickness and error. 

Some perform good and others bad acts. 

Some pose as Shaikhs, others as Brahmans, 

Some perform the duties of kings in an incomparable 
manner, 

Some are free from bodily and mental suffering. 

Some are subject to the service of a special god, 

Some are poor, others the sons of kings, 

^ Rudar was the god who wielded the thunder. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 269 


And some are the incarnations of Vyas. 

Many Brahmas read the Veds, 

And many Sheshnags repeat God’s name. 
Some are Bairagis, others Sanyasis, 

And some wander in the guise of Udasis. 
Know that all these things are vain, 

And that all such religion is fruitless. 
Without the support of the One Name 
Deem all religious ceremonies as superstition. 


God is in the water, God is in the dry land, 

God is in the heart, God is in the forest, 

God is in the mountain, God is in the cave, 

God is in the earth, God is in heaven, 

God is here, God is there, 

God is in space, God is in time, 

God is invisible, God is without a garb, 

God is without sin, God is without enmity, 

God is deathless, God is uncherished, 

God is impenetrable, God is invulnerable.^ 

God is not moved by charms or spells ; 

God has His own light, He cannot be moved by incanta- 
tions. 

God is without caste, God is without lineage, 

God is without friends, God hath no mother, 

God feeleth no physical or mental suffering. 

God is without doubt, God hath no karma, 

God is invincible, God is fearless, 

God is infrangible, God is indissoluble. 

God cannot be punished, God is radiant, 

God is transcendent, God is inscrutable. 


Repeat God’s name, establish God’s name in thy heart : 
Do penance unto God, and repeat His name. 

Thou, O God, art in the water, Thou art in the dry land, 
Thou art in the river, Thou art in the sea, 

^ A hhed is often translated inscrutable. 



270 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Thou art in the tree, Thou art in its leaves, 

Thou art in the earth, Thou art in the firmament. 

Thy name is repeated again and again. Thy name is 
fixed in man’s heart. 

Thou art space, Thou art time, 

Thou art the occupant, Thou art the place, 

Thou art unborn. Thou art fearless. 

Thou art impalpable. Thou art indestructible, 

Thou art continence, Thou art fasting. 

Thou art deliverance. Thou art wisdom, 

Thou alone art. Thou alone art. 


The following is a satire on various penances and 
austerities practised by Hindu sects in India : — 

Swine eat filth ; elephants and donkeys bespatter them- 
selves with dust ; jackals live at places of cremation ; 

Owls live in tombs ; deer wander alone in the forest ; 
trees ever die in silence. 

The man who restraineth his seed should only have the 
credit of the hermaphrodite; monkeys ever wander bare- 
footed. 

How shall the wretch who is subject to a woman and 
devoted to lust and wrath, be saved without the knowledge 
of the one God ? 


It is known that demons live in the forest, all children 
on earth drink milk, and serpents live on air. 

They who eat grass and renounce the desire of wealth, 
are no more than calves and oxen. 

They who fly in the heavens have only the attribute of 
birds ; they who engage in meditation resemble cranes, 
cats, and wolves. 

All great gyanis who knew, but asserted not themselves, 
never allowed such deceit as the .above to enter their hearts 
even by mistake. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 271 

They who live in the earth should be called the offspring 
of worms ; they who live in the heavens shopld be called 
birds. 

They who eat fruit should be called the offspring of 
monkeys ; they who wander unseen should be accounted 
as ghosts. 

They who float on water are like gangeris ; ^ they who 
eat fire like chakors ; 

They who worship the sun have the attribute of the 
lotus ; they who worship the moon of water-lilies. 

The tortoise, the fish, and the shark may all be called 
Narayan ^ ; if you speak of God as Kaulnabh, the lake in 
which there is a lotus is also Kaulnabh.® 

If you speak of God as Gopinath, all Gujars are Gopinaths, 
all cowherds Gopals ; if you call God Rikhikesh, that is 
a name taken by superiors of religious orders. 

If you call God Madhav, that is the bumble-bee ; Kaniya 
is the name of the woodpecker ; if you speak of God as the 
Destroyer of Kans, you speak of the myrmidons of Death. 

Fools utter names, but know not their meanings, and 
worship not Him by whom man is protected. 

God is the Protector and Destroyer of the world. Com- 
passionate to the poor. Punisher of enemies, ever the 
Cherisher, and free from Death’s noose. 

Jogis, wearers of matted hair, celibates, the true, great 
Brahmacharis who undergo hunger and thirst in their 
divine meditation. 

They who perform the niwali feat, who sacrifice to water, 
fire, and wind, who hold their heads down, who stand or 
one leg and never sit. 

Men, serpents, deities, and demons find not God’s secrets ; 
the Veds and th6 books of the Musalmans say that God is 
indescribable. 

^ Small black flies on Indian rivers. 

^ God who moves in the waters. 

® One of the names of Vishnu. He was supposed , by the Hindus 
to have a lotus in his navel. 



272 THE SIKH RELIGION ; 

Peatocks skip about dancing, the thunder roareth and 
the lightning presenteth many phases.^ 

If God be obtained by being cold or hot, there is nothing 
colder than the moon, nothing hotter than the sun, if by 
being a raja God may be obtained, there is no king equal to 
Indar who lilleth the whole world. 

Nowhere can be found a penitent like a Shiv, a reader 
of the Veds like primal Brahma, or penitents like the sons 
of Brahma ; 

Yet without divine knowledge they are all subject to the 
noose of Death and ever wander through the cycle of the 
ages. 

One Shiv was born, one died, and one was born again ; 
there have also been many incarnations of Ram Chandar 
and Krishan. 

How many Brahmas and Vishnus have there been ! how 
many Veds and Purans ! how many collections of Simritis 
have been and passed away ! 

How many preachers and Madars ! ^ how many Castors 
and Polluxes ! how many Ansavatars® have succumbed to 
death ! 

How many priests and prophets have there been ! they 
are so many that they cannot be counted ; from dust they 
sprang and to dust they returned. 

Jogis, Jatis, Brahmacharis and very great kings, the 
shadow of whose umbrellas extended for many miles. 

Who wandered subduing kingdoms and crushing the pride 
of very great kings, 

Sovereigns like Man ® and lords of the umbrella like 

^ The reference is to dancing and roaring faqlrs. 

2 Monadi Maddr — Monadi is understood to be the Arabic munddi, 
a proclamation or preaching, Madar was a celebrated Muhammadan 
saint. If momin-i-din maddr be read, the translation will be — How 
many orthodox Muhammadans and supporters of the faith ! 

® An incomplete incarnation of Vishnu. 

^ Brahmacharis are young men who preserve continence during 
their studentship, Manu, the Hindu law-giver, fixes its limit at 
twenty-five years of age. 

® Mandhatri, a son miraculously born to Yuvanashwa of the line of 
IkshwSku, and author of a hymn in the Rig Veda. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 273 

Dilip, ^ great kings who prided themselves on the strength 
of their arms, 

Proud men like Dara,^ like the kings of Dihli, and like 
Durjodhan, having enjoyed the earth in their turn at 
last were blended with it. . 

Artillerymen, huntsmen wearing decoy dresses, and 
they who eat opium bow their heads many times. 

What availeth it that men perform prostrations of different 
kinds to God ? they are like wrestlers practising the exercise 
of dand.^ 

What availeth it that men lie with their faces turned 
up ? If they do not heartily bow to the supreme God, they 
are only as sick men. 

How can he who is the slave of worldly desires and ever 
clever in obtaining wealth, obtain the one Lord of the world 
without faith in Him ? 

He into whose ear an earwig hath entered shaketh his 
head ; he who hath lost a friend or son beateth his head in 
mourning. 

For grazing on akk, eating fruits and flowers, and ever 
wandering in the forests, there is no animal like a goat. 

What if a sheep rub its head against trees and thus take 
off its hair ? as for eating earth, call the leech and ask it. 

How can he who is a slave to worldly desires and addicted 
to lust and wrath, find God without faith ? 


The peacocks dance, the frogs croak, and the clouds ever 
thunder ; 

The tree ever standeth on one leg in the forest ; as for 
those who take not life, the Sara vagi bloweth on the ground 
before putting his feet on it ; 

^ He belonged to the solar race, and was^ ancestor of Ram Chandar. 

* Darius. 

3 An oriental exercise in which a man first lies down flat on the 
ground, then leans on bis hands so as to lift his body, and again 
depresses it so as almost to touch the ground with his chest. 



274 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The stones through several ages remain in one place ; the 
ravens and the kites travel from country to country. 

How can the wretch who is without divine knowledge 
and who is never absorbed in the great Benefactor, be saved 
without faith in Him ? 

Like an actor man sometimes poseth as a Jogi or Bairagi ; 
sometimes he assumeth the guise of a Sanyasi. 

Sometimes he appeareth to live on air, sometimes he 
sitteth in an attitude of contemplation, sometimes in his 
infatuation for pelf he singeth many praises of men. 

Sometimes he is a Brahmachari, sometimes he produceth 
a garden in his hand, sometimes he holdeth a fakir’* s staff 
and deceiveth men’s senses. 

He who is subject to worldly desires danceth witli 
gestures ; but being devoid of divine knowledge, how 
shall he obtain heaven ? 

In the cold season the jackal barketh live times, and the 
elephant and the donkey utter various cries. 

What availeth it to be cut in twain by the saw at Banaras? 
thieves cut men in pieces and kill them with axes. 

What availeth it that a fool hath put a halter round his 
neck and drowned himself in the Ganges ? Thags put men 
to death by putting halters round their necks. 

Without meditation on divine knowledge fools are drowned 
in hell’s river ; and without faith how can there be any 
such meditation ? 

If any one were to obtain by penance the Lord who 
suffereth not pain, the wounded man suffereth pain of 
many kinds. 

If any one were by repeating God’s name to obtain God 
who cannot be obtained by lip-worship the warbler ever 
uttereth ‘ Tu hi ! tu hi ! ’ 

If any one were to obtain God by flying in the heavens, 
the bird called anal wandereth in the firmamtot. 

Ajdp Dev^ ateo translated — God who repeats no name, 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 275 

If salvation be obtained by burning oneself in the fire, 
why should not the Sati and also the serpent which liveth 
in hell be saved ? ^ 

The following is a homily on the equality of men 
and on the Hindu and Muhammadan forms of 
worship : — 

One man by shaving his head is accepted as a Sanyasi, 
another as a Jogi or a Brahmachari, a third as a Jati. 

Some men are Hindus and others Musalmans ; among the 
latter are Rafazis,^ Imams, and Shafais — know that all men 
are of the same caste. 

Karta (the Creator) and Karim (the Beneficent) are the 
same, Razak (the Provider) and Rahim (the Merciful) are 
the same ; let no man even by mistake suppose there is 
a difference.® 

Worship the one God who is the one divine Guru for aU ; 
know that His Form is one, and that He is the one light 
diffused in all. 


The temple and the mosque are the same ; the Hindu 
worship and the Musalman prayer are the same ; all men 
are the same ; it is through error they appear different. 

Deities, demons, Yakshas, heavenly singers, Musalmans, 
and Hindus adopt the customary dress of their different 
countries. 

All men have the same eyes, the same ears, the same 
body, the same build, ^ a compound of earth, air, fire, and 
water. 

Allah and Abhekh are the same ; the Purans and the 

1 The Guru rejects the belief that a widow who cremates herself 
with her husband's corpse obtains salvation. The second part of the 
line may also be translated — If salvation were obtained by dwelling 
beneath the earth, the snake which dwelleth in the nether regions 
should also be saved. 

* Certain Shiahs or followers of Ali who renounced their allegiance 
tp Zaid, grandson of Husain. 

® There is not one God for the Hindus and another for th^ 
Musalmans. 

* Bd.n^ also translated — customs, habits. 

T2 



276 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Quran are the same ; they are all alike ; it is the one God 
who created all. 

The following gives the Sikh conception of the 
manner in which souls emanated from God and are 
again absorbed in Him : — 

As from one fire millions of sparks arise ; though rising 
separately, they unite again in the fire ; 

As from one heap of dust several particles of dust fill 
the air, and on filling it again blend with the dust ; 

As in one stream millions of waves are produced ; the 
waves being made of water all become water ; 

So from God’s form non-sentient and sentient things ^ 
are manifested, and, springing from Him, shall all be united 
in Him again. 


How many tortoises and fishes and how many eaters of 
them 1 how many excellent young animals become strong- 
winged and fly ! 

How many birds of prey in the firmament eat the excellent 
birds ! and how many animals eat and digest the birds of 
prey when they see them ! 

What mattereth it whether things live in water or land, 
or fly in the firmament ? God made them and will destroy 
them all. 

As light blendeth with darkness and darkness with light, 
so all things have sprung from God and shall be united in 
Him. 

How many go about howling ! how many die weeping ! 
how many are drowned in the water ! how many are burnt 
in the fire ! 

How many dwell by the Ganges ! how many in Madina 
and Makka ! how many wander as anchorets ! 

How many imdergo the pain of being cut by the saw ! 
how many of burying themselves in the earth ! how many 
of being impaled. 

^ Abhutbhut, also iranslaled — incorporeal and corporeal beings. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 277 

How many fly in the firmament ! how many dwell in 
water ! but they shall all be burnt in the fire ^ for want of 
divine knowledge. 

The demigods have grown weary searching for God ; the 
archdemons have grown weary striving with Him ; the 
wise have grown weary exercising their wisdom ; they who 
repeat His name have grown weary of watching. 

Men have grown weary of grinding and applying sandal 
to themselves ; they have grown weary of applying excellent 
atar of roses ; they have grown weary of worshipping stones 
and offering them pudding. 

They have grown weary of visiting cemeteries and Jogis’ 
places of burial, they have growm weary of smearing walls 
and of being marked with the brand 0/ idols? 

The celestial musicians have grown weary of singing ; all 
the Kinnars have grown weary of their penance, hut none 
of them hath found God, 

The following is Guru Gobind Singh's conception 
of the divinity : — 

God is without passion, without colour, without form, 
without outline ; 

He is without worldly love, without anger, without enmity, 
without jealousy ; 

He is without karma, without error, without birth, and 
without caste ; 

He hath no friend, no enemy, no father, no mother ; 

He hath no worldly love, no house, no desires, no home ; 

He hath no son, no friend, no enemy, no wife ; 

He is invisible, without distinguishing dress, and unborn ; 

He is ever the Bestower of supernatural power and 
wisdom ; He is of size beyond measure. 

His form and outline cannot be known. 

Nor where He dwelleth, nor in what disguises He^ 
wandereth, 

1 Jak=zakka (1^). The gyanis translate obstinacy. 

2 In DwSraka men are branded with a hot iron bearing the ensigns 
of Vishnu. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


2578 

Nor what His name is, nor what He is called. 

How shall I describe Him ? He cannot be described. 

He hath no disease, or sorrow, or worldly love, or mother, 

No karma, no superstition, no birth, no caste ; 

He hath no jealousy, no garb, and is unborn, 

I bow ‘to Him as one ! I bow to Him as one ! 

He is beyond all things, and from the beginning the 
Dispenser of wisdom. 

He is indivisible, indestructible, primal, peerless, and 
imperishable. 

He hath no caste, or lineage, or form, or colour. 

I bow to the primal and infrangible One. 

How many millions of worms like Krishan 

He created, built, fashioned, again destroyed, and created ! 

He is unfathomable, fearless, primal, unrivalled, imperisli- 
able. 

He is beyond all things, from the beginning, and perfect 
is His splendour. 

He feeleth nor mental nor bodily pain : He is unfathom- 
able. 

His glory is infrangible ; He is from the beginning, and 
His majesty is indestructible. 

He hath no birth, no death, no caste, no pain. 

He is infrangible, radiant, unamercible,^ impossible to be 
controlled ; 

He hath no worldly love, no home ; He hath affection for 
men and is His own master. 

He is powerful, cannot be anywhere contained, radiant, 
the Torturer of enemies. 

He cannot be depicted in the past, the present, or the 
future. 

' He is not rich or poor ; He hath no form or outline. 

He feeleth not covetousness or mental anxiety ; He is 
not formed out of the elements ; He belongeth to no sect. 

He hath no enemy, no frien^i, no worldly love, no home. 

1 He is not liable to be fined like mortals as a punishment. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 279 

He is eternal and ever contained in all things ; He beareth 
love to all. 

He hath no lust, no wrath, no avarice, no worldly love ; 

He is unborn, inde.structible, primal, peerless, in- 
visible ; 

He is not subject to birth or death ; He hath no caste, 
no pain ; 

He hath no sickness, no sorrow ; He is fearless, and with- 
out affliction.^ 

He is impenetrable, indivisible, without karma, and with- 
out death. 

He cannot be destroyed or defamed ; He is bright and 
without a cherisher ; 

He hath no father, no mother, no caste, no body ; 

He hath no worldly love, no home, no doubt, no fear ; 

He hath no form, there is no king over Him, He hath 
no body, no acts attach to Him ; 

He hath no fear ; He cannot be killed or pierced ; He 
hath no doubts. 

He is eternal, ever perfect, and of size beyond measure. 

I bow to Him as one ! I bow to Him as one ! 

His glory is inexpressible ; He is from the beginning, 

He is unassociated, imperishable, imperceptible, and un- 
established. 

I bow to Him as one ! I bow to Him as one ! 

He hath no worldly love, no home, no grief, no relation. 

He is afar off, pure, undefiled, none can behold Him. 

He hath no caste, no lineage, no friend, no minister. 

I bow to the one independent Being ! I bow to the one 
independent Being ! 

He hath no religion, no superstition, no shame, no rela- 
tion. 

No armour, no shield, no karma, no fear, 

1 Bikhad', in modern Panjabi this word means a quarrel. 



2&0 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


No enemy, no friends, no son. 

I bow to the primal Being ; I bow to the primal Being. 


The bodies of some undergo cold, heat, and rain, 

Some sit in one posture for an age. 

Some make efforts to study the science of Jog. 

Men strive but even then find not God’s limits. 

Some with their arms raised wander in different countries ; 

Some scorch themselves between the sun and surrounding 
fires ; 

Some recite the Simritis, the Shastars, the Veds ; 

Some expound amorous poetry, others the books of the 
Muhammadans ; 

Some perform fire sacrifice, some live on air ; 

Some millions eat carrion ; 

Some consume vegetables, some milk, some leaves ; 

But even so God becometh not manifest unto them. 

The following sawaiyas also are sometimes read at 
the administration of the pahul. 

I 

God ever cherisheth the poor, saveth saints, and destroyeth 
enemies. 

Birds, beasts, mountains, snakes, and kings — all he ever 
cherisheth. 

He cherisheth animals in sea and land ; he considereth 
not their evil acts. 

Compassionate to the poor, an ocean of mercy, He be- 
holdeth man’s sins, but wearieth not of giving. 

II 

He destroyeth misery and sin ; He crusheth an army of 
evil men in a moment ; 

He breaketh those unbreakable by human power ; he 
smiteth the very valiant, but cherisheth love for those 
who truly love Him. 

Vi.shnu, the lord of Lakshmi, cannot find His limit ; the 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 281 

Veds and the books of the Musalmans cannot utter His 
secret. 

The Beneficent One ever beholdeth men’s secrets ; yet 
He becometh not angry, and withholdeth not their daily 
bread. * . 

III 

He made worms, moths, deer, serpents, the past, the 
future, and the present. 

The demigods and demons were ruined through their 
pride ; they knew not God’s secret, and were led astray 
by error. 

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, and other Muhammadan 
books have grown weary of taking God^s account, but they 
have not found it. 

Without the light of true love hath any one obtained the 
honour of finding God ? 

IV 

He is primal, endless, unfathomable, without enmity, and 
fearless in the past, future, and present. 

He is without end, One out of many, without blemish, 
sin, or stain, and indestructible. 

He is the Creator and Destroyer of worlds ; He sup- 
porteth life on sea and land. 

Compassionate to the poor, a mine of mercy, beautiful is 
the holy Lord of wealth. 


V 

He hath not lust, or wrath, or covetousness, or worldly 
love, or sickness, or sorrow, or enjoyment, or fear. 

He is without a body ; He beareth love to all, yet is He 
devoid of sensual love ; He is homeless and indestructible. 

To those who know Him He giveth ; to those who know 
Him not He also giveth ; He giveth to the earth ; He 
giveth to the heavens.^ 

O man, why waverest thou ? the beautiful and holy Lord 
of wealth will care for thee. 


^ Zaman is liere understood to be for asman. 



282 THE SIKH RELIGION 

VI 

He preserveth men in many ways — from sickness, from 
sorrow, from water, and from sprites. 

When enemies aim blows at us, none of them may reach 
our bodies. 

For He holdeth out His hand to protect us and hinder 
the army of sin from approaching us. 

What else need I say to thee, 0 man ; God protecteth 
thee with the screen of the womb. 

VII 

The Yakshas, serpents, demons, demigods, all meditate 
on Thee, the Inscrutable One. 

On earth, in heaven, and in the nether regions of hell 
Yakshas, serpents, all bow their heads unto Thee ; 

But they cannot find the limit of Thy glory ; the Veds 
describe Thee as indescribable. 

All the demigods who searched for Thee have grown 
weary of their search ; they have not found Thee, O God. 

VIII 

Beings like Narad, Brahma, Rumna * the Rikhi all com- 
bine to sing Thy praises. 

The Veds and the books of the Musalmans have not 
found Thy secret ; all have grown weary in their search : 
God hath not been found by any one. 

Shiv, the lord of Uma,® cannot find Thy limit. The Sidhs 
with their spiritual leaders and the sons of Brahma meditate 
on Thee. 

0 men, meditate in- your hearts on Him whose immeasur- 
able power is diffused throughout the whole world. 

IX 

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, and other Musalman 


^ There are said to be seven hells. Fatal is the seventh and lowest. 
® Also known as Lomash, who was remarkable for his long life. 

® One of the names of Parbati. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 283 

books, ha^^e not found His secret ; all kings ^ have grown 
sore weary searching for it. 

They could not find the secret of the Inscrutable ; after 
great travail they proclaimed Him invulnerable. , 

Thou, O Lord, hast no passion, no form, no outline, no 
colour, no relation, no sorrow, no companion. 

Thou wast in the beginning and yet hadst no beginning ; 
Thou art unfathomable, without distinguishing dress,* and 
without jealousy : he who repeateth Thy name shall save 
his relations. 

X 

Men have performed millions of ablutions at places of 
pilgrimage ; they have made many offerings and endured 
great fasts. 

Putting on the dress of great penitents and wearing long 
hair, they have wandered in many countries, but they have 
not found the Beloved God. 

They have made millions of attitudes of contemplation 
and prostrations, many offerings of their limbs to tutelary 
divinities,® and blackened their faces ; 

But without meditating on the name of the Compassionate 
to the poor, the Deathless, they have at last gone to Death’s 
abode. 

Thou art the Discharger of arms, the Holder of the earth 
and the umbrella, the Betrayer of kings, the great Tor- 
mentor of enemies ; 

The Bestower of gifts, the great Enhancer of honour, the 
Giver of a resting-place, the Cutter of Death’s noose ; 

Conqueror in the fight. Remover of obstacles, great Be- 
stower of wisdom. Thou art honoured even among the most 
honoured. 

Thou art learned in divine knowledge ; Thou art the great 
Giver of wisdom, the Destroyer of the god of death. 

^ Such as Harischandar, and others. 

* Without the distinguisliing dress of a religious sect. 

® Baku nias kare, also translated — («) made many renunciations, 
(b) made many efforts. 



284 THE SIKH RELIGION 

The dwellers of the East know not Thy limit, the goddess 
Hingula ^ who dwelleth in the Himalayas meditateth on 
Thee ; the Gurdezife of Ghor ^ sing the praises of Thy name. 

The Jogis practise Jog to be unit^ with Thee ; how 
many suspend their breath to obtain Thee, The Arabs of 
Arabia worship Thy name. 

The Firangis of France worship Thee, the Kandharis and 
Qureshis know Thee, the residents of the West recognize 
Thee as the object of their love. 

The Marathas, the Magadhis ® heartily do Thee penance, 
the natives of Tilang ^ fix Thee in their hearts, and recognize 
Thee as the abode of religion. 

Like milk in Chirawadh, like buttermilk in Chhatraner, 
like moonlight on the banks of the Jamna, 

Like a female swan in Turkey of the Shiahs, like a diamond 
in Husainabad, like the stream of the Ganges when it 
blendeth with the seven seas. 

Like quicksilver in Palaugarh, like silver in Rampur, like 
saltpetre in Surangabad, 

Like the champa flower in Chanderikot, like moonlight 
in Chandagarh, Thy praise flourisheth like the malati flower.^ 

Like crystal in Kailas, Kamaungarh, and Kashipur, like 
a mirror in Surangabad, 

Like snow in the Himalayas, like Shiv’s necklace ® in 
Halbaner, like a swan in Hajipur on seeing which the heart 
is fascinated ; 

Like white sandal in Champawati, like the moon in Chan- 
dragir, like moonlight in Chandagarh, 

Like the Ganges on Shiv’s head, like cranes in Bulanda- 
bad shineth the light of Thy praises. 

1 Hingula is another of the names of Parbati or Durga. 

2 A mountainous tract of Afghanistan south-east of Harat. 

® Natives of the country of Magadha, now South Bihar. 

^ The Telegu country on the east coast of India between Urisa 
(Orissa) and Madras. 

® A kind of jasmin with fragrant white blossoms. 

® Har hilr. Shiv was believed to wear a white snake as a necklace. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 285 

The Persians, the English, the double-faced men of France, 
the mirdang ^ — ^players of Makran sing Thy praises. 

The inhabitants of Bhakhar, of Kandhar, and of Ghor, 
the Gakhars, the Gurdezis, and those who live on air medi- 
tate on Thy name. 

In the east in Palau, in Kamrup, and Kamaun, wherever 
man goeth there Thou presidest. 

Thy glory is perfect ; written and spoken incantations 
cannot affect Thee, O Lord, and none can find the limit of 
Thy praises. 


God is peerless, imperishable ; His throne is immovable ; 
He is peerless, endless ; His praise is unrivalled ; 

He is indestructible and the invisible Lord. 

He is everywhere king ; He blossometh in the forests and 
the glades. 

His splendour is like the spring everywhere diffused. 
The Great One pervadeth the woods and glades, birds 
and quadrupeds. 

He everywhere blossometh. He is beautiful and wise ; 

He blossometh like flowers, and glittereth like the peacock. 
Cupid on recognizing Him waveth a chauri over Him. 
His power is perfect. He is the Bestower of food, the 
Merciful, 

The Treasury of favour, the Perfect, the Bounteous. 
Wherever we look there appeareth His splendour. 

He is free from anger and a treasury of favour. 

He everywhere blossometh ; He is beautiful and wise. 
He is the great king of the woods and glades, of sea and 
land. 

His splendour appeareth ever5rwhere ; He is the treasury 
of favour. 

His light dazzleth. His glory is perfect. 

The sky and the earth repeat His name. 

Over the seven heavens and the seven hells 
His net of karma is spread unseen. 


^ A small drum or tambourine. 



286 THE SIKH RELIGION 

ViCHITAR NaTAK 
I 

Guru Gobind Singh addresses God as a sword to 
destroy his enemies. 

I bow with love and devotion to the Holy Sword. 

Assist me that I may complete this work. 

Thou art the Subduer of countries, the Destroyer of the 
armies of the wicked, in the battle-field Thou greatly adornest 
the brave. 

Thine arm is infrangible. Thy brightness refulgent. Thy 
radiance and splendour dazzle like the sun. 

Thou bestowest happiness on the good. Thou terrifiest the 
evil. Thou scatterest sinners, I seek Thy protection. 

Hail ! hail to the Creator of the world, the Saviour of 
creation, my Cherisher, hail to Thee, O Sword ! 

I bow to Him who holdeth the arrow in His hand ; I 
bow to the Fearless One ; 

I bow to the God of gods who is in the present and the 
future. 


I bow to the Scimitar, the two-edged Sword, the Fal- 
chion, and the Dagger. 

Thou, O God, hast ever one form ; Thou art ever un- 
changeable. 

I bow to the Holder of the mace 

Who diffused light through the fourteen worlds. 

I bow to the Arrow and the Musket, 

I bow to the Sword, spotless, fearless, and unbreakable ; 
I bow to the powerful Mace and Lance 
To which nothing is equal. 

I bow to Him who holdeth the discus, 

Who is not made of the elements and who is terrible. 

I bow to Him with the strong teeth ; 

I bow to Him who is supremely powerful, 

I bow to the Arrow and the Cannon 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 287 

Which destroy the enemy. 

I bow to the Sword and the Rapier 

Which destroy the evil. 

I bow to all weapons called Shastar (which may be held). 

I bow to all weapons called Astar (which may be hurled 
or discharged). 

Thou turnest men like me from blades of grass into 
mountains ; than Thou there is none other cherisher of the 
poor. 

O God, do Thou Thyself pardon mine errors ; there is 
none who hath erred like me. 

The houses of those who have served Thee are all seen 
filled with wealth. 

In this Kal age and at all times there is great confidence 
in the powerful arm of the Sword, 

Which in one moment destroyed millions of demons like 
Sumbh and Nisumbh ; ^ 

Which in an instant subdued demons such as Dhumar- 
lochan, Chand, Mund, and Mahikh ; 

Which in a trice repelled demons such as Chamar Ran- 
chichhar and Raktichhan — 

What careth Thy slave since he hath found a good Lord 
like Thee ? 

Which crushed millions like Mund, Madhu, Kitabh, Mur, 
and Agh ; 

They who never sought shelter in the battle-field and 
who retreated not even two paces when blows were dealt 
around them, 

The demons who could not be drowned in the sea, and 
who could not be burnt by fiery arrows. 

On beholding thy flash, O Sword, cast aside shame and 
fled. 


^ See that part of the Markandeya Puran which treats of the exploits 
of Chandi. The names of the demons mentioned in these quatrains 
M'ill be found there. 



288 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Thou in a moment didst destroy such heroes as Rawan, 
Maharawan Kumbhkaran 

Meghnad, and Akampan®, in waging war with whom even 
Death grew wearied — 

Kumbh, Akumbh, who having conquered the whole world 
washed their arms in the seven seas.® 

They who were invulnerable and huge were all wounded 
and killed by the sword in the hand of God. 

If any one flee to save himself from the Destroyer, say 
in what direction shall he flee. 

Can man run away from God who stoppeth him with 
a drawn sword thundering and brandishing it ? 

No contrivance hath been made by which man may escape 
from the wound God inflicteth. 

Why, O fool, seekest thou not cheerfully the asylum of 
Him from whom thou canst not escape ? 


Thou hast millions of times repeated the names of Krishan 
and Vishnu, and fully meditated on Ram Chandar and the 
Prophet ; 

Thou hast repeated Brahma’s name and established Shiv 
in thy heart, but none of them will save thee. 

Thou hast performed millions of penances for millions of 
days, but none of them will avail thee a kauri. 

Incantations to obtain thy desires will not be worth thee 
half a paisa ; none of them will save thee from the stroke 
of Death. 


Why performest thou false penance to the gods ? it will 
not avail thee a kauri. 

How can they save thee when they cannot protect them- 
selves from the stroke of Death ? 

They will suspend thee in the fiery pit of terrible wrath 
as they are suspended themselves. 

*■ A first cousin of Rawan. ® RSwan’s brother. 

® Rawan’s sons. 

® They never again expected to find an adversary. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 289 

Think, think even to-day in thy heart, O fool, without 
the favour of God nothing can avail thee. 

It is not by the practice of perpetual silence, nor by the 
ostensible relinquishment of pride, nor by the adoption of 
a religious dress, nor by shaving the head. 

Nor by wearing a wooden necklace, nor by twisting matted 
hair round the head that God is found. 

I speak the truth, hear it attentively — without entering 
the protection of the Compassionate to the poor 

And loving Him can God be found ? the Merciful One 
is not pleased with circumcision. 

Were I to make all the islands my paper, and the seven 
seas my ink ; 

Were I to cut down all trees, and turn them into pens 
for writing ; 

Were I to make Saraswati dictate for millions of ages ; 
were I to write with the hand of Ganesh, 

O Thou who boldest the destroying sword, I could not 
please Thee even a little without offering Thee homage. 


II 

Thy greatness is endless and boundless ; 

No one hath found its limits. 

Thou art God of gods, King of kings, 
Compassionate to poor, and Cherisher of the lowly. 


The dumb would recite the six Shastars, cripples would 
climb mountains. 

The blind would see, and the deaf hear, if God would 
only show favour. 

How can my feeble intellect, O God, 

Describe Thy greatness ? 

I cannot utter Thy praises. 

Do Thou correct this work : 


SIKH. V 


u 



290 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


How far can this worm speak ? 

It is only Thou, O God, who knowest Thine own praises. 
As a son knoweth not the time of his father’s birth, 
How can I tell Thy secret ? 

Thy greatness becometh Thee ; 

It cannot be described by others. 

Thou knowest Thine own works, O God. 

How shall high or low describe Thee ? 

Sheshnag whom Thou didst create with a thousand heads, 
Whom two thousand tongues ^ adorn. 

Until now is uttering Thy boundless names ; 

Yet even still he cannot find their limit. 

How far can any one describe Thy works ? 

The intellect is perplexed in trying to understand them. 
Thy subtile form cannot be described ; 

I shall describe Thy great form. 

When I have obtained Thy love and service, 

Then shall I put aside all other narratives and describe 
Thee. 

I shall now relate my own history. 

And how the Sodhi family originated. 

At first when God extended Himself, 

The world was created by Him. 

The man who doeth good deeds 
Is called a demigod in the world ; 

He who doeth bad deeds in the world 
Is styled a demon. 

Kalsain was the first king ; 

His strength and form were unsurpassed, incomparable, 
and unrivalled. 

Kalket was the second king ; 

Krurbaras was appointed the third king in the world ; 
Kaldhuj was the fourth king who graced sovereignty. 

In this line Raghu was born, 

From whom the Raghu race was descended. 

^ It is wiitten in Hindu books that Sheshnag has two tongues in 
each head. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 291 

From them an excellent son Aj was born, 

A great charioteer and archer. 

When he assumed the garb of a Jogi, 

He bestowed his empire and throne on Dasarath, 

Who also became a great archer. 

He felt desire and married three wives. 

His first son was the prince Ram, 

The second Bharat, the third Lachhman, and the fourth 
Shatrughan. 

They ruled for a long time ; 

They then died and went to heaven. 

Sita’s sons, Lahu^ and Kushu, afterwards both became 
kings, 

And graced kingdoms and thrones. 

On their marriage with the daughters of the king of the 
Pan jab. 

They performed various sacrifices. 

They built there two cities. 

One Kasur, the second Lahaur (Lahore). 

Both became very famous. 

Ceylon and Amrawati, the city of Indar, became ashamed 
on beholding them. 

Kushu and Lahu reigned for a long time. 

But were at length caught in the noose of Death. 

Their sons and grandsons 
Also ruled in this world. 

How far shall I tell their history ? 

I cannot even recount their names. 

It is related that Kalket ^ and Kalrai ^ 

Had innumerable sons in their homes. 

Kalket possessed peerless strength. 

And expelled Kalrai from the city. 

He fled to the Sanaudh ^ country 
Where he married a king’s daughter. 

^ Lav in the Ramayan, 

^ Descended from Kushu. ® Descended from Lahu. 

^ Near Banaras. Its inhabitants, the Sanaudhis, were afterwards 
called Sodhis. 

U 2 



292 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The son bom in his house of that marriage 
He named Sodhi Rai. 

The Sodhi race began from that time. 

It was made by the supremely pure Creator. 

The sons and grandsons who sprang from Sodhi Rai 
Were all called Sodhis in this world. 

They became very distinguished among men, 

And their wealth increased day by day. 

They exercised independent sway 

And conquered the kings of many countries. 

They enforced religion everywhere, 

Caused umbrellas to wave over their heads. 

And on many occasions performed sacrifices at royal 
coronations. 

Afterwards dissension arose among them. 

And no holy man could arrest its progress. 

Heroes and invincible warriors went about caparisoned. 
Took arms and went to fight in the field of battle. 

For wealth and land ancient is the struggle,^ 

To compass which men willingly die. 

Worldly love and pride have extended quarrels ; 

Lust and wrath have conquered the whole world. 

Nobody can compute the time 

When enmity, dissension, and pride were diffused. 

In this world their basis is greed. 

By the desire for which every one killeth himself. 

III 

The Sodhis returned to the Pan jab and waged war with 
the descendants of Kushu who had been left behind. The 
descendants of Kushu being defeated fled to Banaras, where 
they became readers of the Veds. 

IV 

Those of t}ie expelled descendants of Kushu who read the 
Veds were called Bedis. 

' Compare the Hindustani proverb — zan, zatmn, zar, tinm jhagre ka 
ghar ‘ Women, land, and money are the sources of strife among men.’ 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 293 

They carefully attended to their religious duties. 

The king of the Pan jab dispatched them a conciliatory 
letter 

To forget the enmity that prevailed among them. 

The raja’s messenger arrived in Banaras, 

And explained the contents of the missive to all the 
Bedis. 

Upon this all the readers of the Veds proceeded to the 
Pan jab, 

And on their arrival made obeisance to the king. 

He caused them to recite the Veds. 

While all his brethren were seated near him in the assembly, 
They recited the Sam Ved, the Yajur Ved, 

Then the Rig Ved, making gesticulations with their 
hands. 

And finally the Atharav Ved. 

The raja was pleased 

And gave them all his possessions. 

He elected to live in the forest 
To remove his great sins. 

On giving them his kingdom 
He assumed the garb of a Rikhi. 

The people tried to restrain him. 

But he dismissed all regret. 

And, relinquishing wealth and place. 

Became absorbed in God’s love. 

The Bedi chief was pleased on obtaining the kingdom. 
And in the joy of his heart blessed the Sodhi king, saying, 

‘ When I come in the Kal age under the name of Nanak, 
I will make thee worthy of worship in the world, and 
thou shalt attain the highest dignity. 

Thou hast heard the three Veds from us, 

On hearing the fourth Ved thou gavest thy territory. 
Having assumed three births 

^ When I have become Guru NSnak, Guru Angad, and Guru Ainar 
Das. 



294 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


In my fourth I will make thee Guru.’ ^ 

On the one hand the Sodhi king went to the forest, 

On the other the Bedi king was happy in his sovereignty. 
How far shall I amplify this story ? 

I very much fear to swell my book. 

V 

Afterwards again quarrels increased among the Bedis, 
Which no one could adjust. 

It was the will of God 

That sovereignty should pass from their family. 

Only twenty villages remained to the Bedis, 

Which they began to till. 

A long time passed in that way 

Until the epoch for the birth of Nanak arrived. 

Nanak Rai, born in the line of those Bedis, 

Conferred happiness on all his disciples, and assisted them 
in this world and the next. 

He established religion in the Kal age, 

And showed the way unto all holy men. 

Sin never , troubleth those 
Who follow in his footsteps. 

God removeth all suffering and sin 
From those who embrace his religion : 

Pain and himger never annoy them. 

And they never fall into Death’s noose. 

Nanak assumed the body of Angad, 

And made his religion current in the world. 

Afterwards Nanak was called Amar Das, 

As one lamp is lit from another. 

When the time for the fulfilment of the blessing came. 
Then Ram Das Sodhi became Guru. 

Amar Das gave him the Guruship according to the ancient 
blessing, 

^ The reference is to Guru Ram Das. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 295 

And took the road to paradise himself. 

The holy Nanak was revered as Angad, 

Angad was recognized as Amar Das, 

And Amar Das became Ram Das. 

The pious saw this, but not the fools. 

Who thought them all distinct ; 

But some rare person recognized that they were all one. 
They who understood this obtained perfection — 

Without understanding perfection cannot be obtained. 
When Ram Das was blended with God, 

He gave the Guruship to Arjan. 

When Arjan was going to God’s city 
He appointed Har Gobind in his place. 

When Har Gobind was going to God’s city. 

He seated Har Rai in his place. 

Har Krishan his son afterwards became Guru. 

After him came Teg Bahadur, 

Who protected the frontal marks and sacrificial threads 
of the Hindus, 

And displayed great bravery in the Kal age. 

When he put an end to his life for the sake of holy men. 
He gave his head but uttered not a groan. 

He suffered martyrdom for the sake of his religion ; 

He gave his head but swerved not from his determination.^ 

God’s people would be ashamed 

To perform the tricks of mountebanks and cheats.^ 


Having broken his potsherd on the head ^ of the King of 
Dihli, he departed to paradise. 

None came into the world who performed such deeds as he. 


^ Sirar, If this is a Panjabi word, its meaning is as we have given. 
Among the Sikhs, however, there is current what purports to be the 
Persian original of the line, as spoken by Guru Teg Bahadur himself 
on the eve of his execution — 

which is generally translated — I gave my head but not God’s secret. 

^ That is. Guru Teg Bahadur might have performed a miracle and 
saved himself, but he scorned to do so. 

® Having made the King of Dihli responsible for his death. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


296 

At his departure there was mourning in this world ; 
There was grief through the world, but joy in paradise. 

VI 

Guru Gobind Singh now speaks regarding himself: — 

I shall now tell my own history, 

How God brought me into the world as I was performing 
penance 

On the mountain of Hem Kunt,' 

Where the seven peaks are conspicuous — 

The place is called the Sapt Shring ^ — 

Where King Pandu practised Jog. 

There I performed very great austerities 
And worshipped Great-death. 

I performed such penance 
That I became blended with God. 

My father and mother had also worshipped the Unseen 
One, 

And strove in many ways to unite themselves with Him. 
The Supreme Guru was pleased 
With their devotion to Him. 

When God gave me the order 
I assumed birth in this Kal age. 

I did not desire to come, 

As my attention was fixed on God’s feet. 

God remonstrated earnestly with me. 

And sent me into this world with the following orders : — 
‘ When I created this world 

I first made the demons, who became enemies and op- 
pressors. 

They became intoxicated with the strength of their arms, 
And ceased to worship Me, the Supreme Being. 

I became angry and at once destroyed them. 

In their places I established the gods : 

^ In Sanskrit Hemakuta, the golden peak, a chain of mountains 
between the Himalayas and Mount Meru. 

* Meaning seven horns. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 297 

They also busied themselves with receiving sacrifices and 
worship, 

And called themselves supreme beings. 

Mahadev called himself the imperishable God. 

Vishnu too declared himself to be God ; 

Brahma called himself the supreme Brahm, 

And nobody thought Me to be God. 

Then I made the eight Sakhis ^ 

Who were appointed to keep watch over creatures. 

They told people to worship them, 

And said, “ There is no God but us.” 

They who did not recognize the Primal Essence, 
Worshipped them as God. 

How many worshipped the sun and moon ! 

How many made burnt offerings ! how many worshipped 
the wind ! 

Some recognized a stone as God. 

How many bathed in the water according to Shastrik rites! 
How many, recognizing Dharmraj as their supreme judge, 
Performed religious ceremonies through fear ! 

They whom I appointed to watch over creatures. 

On coming into this world called themselves God. 

They altogether forgot My orders. 

And became absorbed each in his own praise. 

When they did not recognize Me, 

Then I created men. 

They too fell under the influence of pride, 

And made gods out of stones. 

Then I created the Sidhs and the Sadhs, 

But they too found not the Supreme Being. 

Whoever was clever in the world 
Established his own sect. 

And no one found the Creator. 

Enmity, contention, rmd pride increased. 

Men began to bum trunk and leaves in their own fire,* 

* These are believed to be the Dikpals or regents of the eight points 
of the compass. 

* An Indian idiom for anarchy. Big and little perished by their 
own contentions. 



298 . THE SIKH RELIGION 

And none of them went My way. 

They who obtained a little spiritual power 
Struck out their own way. 

None of them recognized the Supreme Being, 

But became mad boasting of themselves. 

None of them recognized the Real Essence, 

But each became absorbed in himself. 

Then I created the supreme Rikhis 

Who afterwards made their own Simritis current. 

They who were smitten by the Simritis 
Abandoned My worship. 

They who attached their hearts to My feet 
Did not walk in the way of the Simritis.^ 

Brahma made the four Veds 

And caused all to act according to them ; 

But they whose love was attached to My feet 
Renounced the Veds. 

They who abandoned the tenets of the Veds and of other 
religious books, 

Became devoted to Me, the supreme God. 

They who follow true religion 

Shall have their sins of various kinds blotted out. 

They who endure bodily suffering 
And cease not to love Me, 

Shall all to go paradise, 

And there shall be no difference between Me and them. 
They who shrink from suffering, 

And, forsaking Me, adopt the way of the Veds and Simritis 
Shall fall into the pit of hell. 

And continually suffer transmigration. 

Afterwards I created Dattatre 
Who also struck out his own path. 

He pared not his finger nails, he decorated his head with 
matted hair ,2 

And paid no heed to My worship. 

Then I created Gorakh 

^ The Simritis purport to follow the Veds. 

• The milk of the leaves of the banyan-tree is used by faqirs to wet 
the hair. It is then smeared with ashes. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 299 

Who made great kings his disciples, 

And tearing their ears put rings in them : 

But he thought not of the way of My love. 

Then I created Ramanand 
Who wore the garb of a Bairagi, 

Put a wooden necklace on his neck, 

And paid no heed to My worship.^ 

They who were created by Me 
Struck out their several paths. 

I then created Muhammad, 

And made him king of Arabia. 

He too established a religion of his own. 

Cut off the foreskins of all his followers, 

And made every one repeat his name ; ® 

But no one fixed the true Name in man’s heart. 

All these were wrapped up in themselves. 

And none of them recognized Me, the Supreme Being. 

I have cherished thee as My son. 

And created thee to extend My religion. 

Go and spread My religion there. 

And restrain the world from senseless acts.’ 

I stood up, clasped my hands, bowed my head, and 
replied : — 

‘ Thy religion shall prevail in the world when Thou vouch- 
safest assistance.’ 

On this account God sent me. 

Then I took birth and came into the world. 

As He spoke to me so I speak unto men : 

I bear no enmity to any one. 

All who call me the Supreme Being 
Shall fall into the pit of hell. 

Recognize me as God’s servant only : 

^ This is not the RamanUnd whose hymn is found in the Granth 
Sahib. The author of that hymn lived long after this, and subsequent 
to the era of Muhammad. He was the Guru of Kabir who flourished 
in the fifteenth century a.d. 

* Muhammad, rasiil Alla, 



300 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Have no doubt whatever of this. 

I am the slave of the Supreme Being, 

And have come to behold the wonders of the world. 
I tell the world what God told me, 

And will not remain silent through fear of mortals. 

As God spoke to me I speak, 

I pay no regard to any one besides. 

I am satisfied with no religious garb ; 

I sow the seed of the Invisible. 

I am not a worshipper of stones. 

Nor am I satisfied with any religious garb. 

I will sing the Name of the Infinite, 

And obtain the Supreme Being. 

I will not wear matted hair on my head. 

Nor will I put on earrings ; 

I will pay no regard to any one but God. 

What God told me I will do. 

I will repeat the one Name 
Which will be everywhere profitable. 

I will not repeat any other name. 

Nor establish any other God in my heart. 

I will meditate on the name of the Endless One, 
And obtain the supreme light. 

I am imbued with Thy name, O God ; 

I am not intoxicated with any other honour. 

I will meditate on the Supreme, 

And thus remove endless sins. 

I am enamoured of Thy form ; 

No other gift hath charms for me. 

I will repeat Thy name. 

And avoid endless sorrow. 

Sorrow and sin have not approached those 
Who have meditated on Thy name. 

They who meditate on any one else 
Shall die of arguments and contentions. 

The divine Guru sent me for religion’s sake : 

On this account I have come into the world — ^ 

‘ Extend the faith everywhere ; 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 301 


Seize and destroy the evil and the sinful.’ 

Understand this, ye holy men, in your souls. 

I assumed birth for the purpose 
Of spreading the faith, saving the saints. 

And extirpating all tyrants. 

All the first incarnations 
Caused men to repeat their names. 

They killed no one who had offended against God, 
And they struck out no path of real religion. 

The Ghauses ^ and Prophets who existed 
Left the world talking of themselves. 

None of them recognized the great Being 
Or knew anything of real religion. 

Nothing is to be obtained by putting hopes in others ; 
Put the hopes of your hearts in the One God alone. 
Nothing is obtained by hoping in others ; 

Put the hopes of your hearts in Him. 

Some millions read the Purans together ; 

How many silly persons recite the Quran ! 

But these books shall be of no assistance at last. 

And shall save no one from Death’s toils. 

Why not, O brethren, repeat the name of Him 
Who will aid you at the last moment ? 

Consider spurious religion as superstition. 

No such things will avail you. 

On this account God created me ; 

Having communicated to me the secret, ^ 

He sent me into the world. 

I shall proclaim to all men what He told me. 

I will repeat God’s name. 

And all my affairs shall prosper. 

I will not close mine eyes,^ 

Or do anything for show. 

^ Muhammadan saints of excessive devotion. 

2 That spurious religion is of no avail. 

® As some Indian faqirs do. 



302 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


They who wear a religious garb 

Are deemed naught by the saints of God. 

Understand this, all men, in your hearts. 

That God is not obtained by hypocrisy. 

They who act for the sake of display. 

Shall not obtain salvation in the next world ; 

And it is only for life their affairs prosper. 

Kings on seeing their acting worship them ; 

But God is not to be found by mummery. 

Yet every one wandereth about thus searching for Him.^ 
He who keepeth his heart in subjection 
Recognizeth the Supreme Being. 

They who by wearing a religious garb keep the people 
of the world in subjection. 

Shall at last be cut with the sliears of Death and take 
up their abode in hell. 

They who present appearances to the world. 

Experience extreme pleasure in fleecing ^ others. 
Spurious, and not worth a kauri, is the religion 
Of those who practise suspension of breath by stopping 
their noses. 

They who practise spurious religion in the world 
Shall fall into the pit of hell. 

He who can in no way subdue his heart 
Shall not go to heaven by gesticulation. 

What God Himself told me I proclaim to the world. 
They who meditate on Him shall go to heaven at last. 

God and God’s servant are both one — deem not that 
there is any difference between them — 

As waves produced from water are again blended with it. 

^ Also translated — Since God is not to be found by mummery, why 
should everybody wander about thus searching for Him ? 

2 Also translated— In shaving the heads of others and then making 
them their disciples. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 303 

God remaineth apart from those 
Who indulge in wrangling and pride. 

He is not found in the Veds or the books of the Muham- 
madans. 

Know this in your hearts, O saints of God. 

They who practise hypocrisy by closing their eyes 
Should be treated as blind men. 

Since the road is not seen by closing one’s eyes, 

How can such persons, my brethren, meet the Infinite ? ^ 
How far could any one amplify this ? 

Men would grow weary trying to understand it. 

Though one had a million tongues. 

Even then he would fail to recount God’s praises. 

VII 

My father departed for the East 

And bathed at various places of pilgrimage. 

When he arrived at the Tribeni (Priyag), 

He passed his days in meritorious works and alms. 

There was I conceived. 

I was born in Patna city, 

And afterwards taken to the Panjab, 

Where nurses of different kinds fondled me, 

And tended my body in every way. 

I received instruction in various forms. 

When I arrived at the age to perform my religious duties, 
My father departed to God’s city. 

VIII 

When I obtained sovereignty, 

I promoted religion to the best of my power. 

I hunted various sorts of game in the forest. 

And killed bears, nilgaus,^ and elks. 

I afterwards left that country, 

And proceeded to the city of Paunta. 

1 Who cannot be seen at all. 

2 The Indian antelope. ^ 



304 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


I enjoyed myself on the bank of the Kalindri (Jamna), 
And saw amusements of every kind. 

There I selected and killed many lions, 

And slew many nilgaus and bears. 

Fatah Shah who was the king became angry with me, 
And came to blows with me without cause. 

Here follow in the Vichitar Natak an account of 
the battle of Bhangani ; the dispatch of Mian Khan 
and Alif Khan to Jammu and Nadaun respectively to 
collect revenue ; the victory gained with the Guru’s 
assistance by Raja Bhim Chand over Alif Khan ; 
the dispatch of General Dilawar Khan against the 
hill chiefs and of his son against the Guru, who 
was left unmolested owing to the son’s flight ; 
the dispatch by Dilawar Khan of Husain Khan to 
reduce the Guru to subjection ; the failure of Husain 
Khan to carry out his orders ; his attack on the 
weaker of the hill chiefs ; the victory of Gopal, King 
of Guler, and of Ram Singh, King of Jaswan, over 
Himmat, one of Husain Khan’s officers, whom they 
put to death ; the single-handed combat between 
Raja Ram Singh and Jujhar Singh, Raja of Chander, 
in which the latter was slain ; the dispatch by 
Aurangzeb of his son to the Pan jab, where the 
masands, fearing that he would attack the Guru, 
deserted him and fled to the highest mountains ; 
the dispatch of an officer named Mirza Beg to support 
the young prince and the subsequent expedition of 
an army under four other officers who, believing that 
the masands were men of wealth, destroyed their 
houses and plundered their property. All these 
details have been given at length in the Guru’s life. 

IX 

They who turn away from the Guru 
Shall have their houses demolished in this world and the 
next. 

They, shall be laughed at here, have no dwelling hereafter. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 305 

And be debarred from all hope. 

Sorrow and hunger shall ever attach to those 
Who forsake the service of the Saint. 

Nothing that they do shall succeed in this world, 

And at last they shall fall into the pit of hell. 

They who turn and fly from the Guru’s feet, 

Shall have their faces blackened in this world and the 
next. 

The successors of both Baba Nanak and Babar 
Were created by God Himself. 

Recognize the former as a spiritual, 

And the latter as a temporal king. 

Babar’s successors shall seize and plunder those 
Who deliver not the Guru’s money. 


They who love the Guru’s feet 
Shall never see misery. 

Wealth and supernatural power shall enter their houses, 
And sin and suffering not touch even their shadows. 


What is a wretched enemy ^ to him whom the Friend 
preserveth ? 

An enemy could not even touch his shadow ; the fool 
would lose his labour. 


Who can meditate anything against those who enter the 
Saint’s protection ? 

God preserveth them as the tongue is preserved among 
the teeth ; He destroyeth their enemies and allayeth their 
suffering. 


What can a miserable enemy do to him whom the Friend 
preserveth ? 

He cannot even touch his shadow ; the fool shall pass 
away. 

• 1 Or — What are the designs of an enemy against him ? 

X 


SIKH. V 



3o6 the SIKH RELIGION 

X 

All-death saveth all His saints ; 

He hath tortured and destroyed all sinners ; 

He hath shown wonderful things to His saints, 
And saved them from all misery. 

Knowing me to be His slave He hath aided me ; 
He hath given me His hand and saved me. 


Gyan Prabodh 

Neither the Veds, nor Brahma knoweth God’s secret, 

Neither Vyas nor his father Parasar, nor hi$ son Shukdev, 
nor the sons of Brahma, nor Shiv knoweth God’s limit. 

All four sons of Brahma know not God’s time. 

Lakhs of Lakshmis, lakhs of Vishnus, and many Krishans 
declare Him indescribable. 

Thou art incomprehensible, O God, and fearless ; Thou 
art most powerful, the Creator of sea and land. 

Thou art the unshaken, endless, unequalled, immeasurable 
Lord ; Pure One, I seek Thy protection. 

Here follow in the tenth Guru’s Granth transla- 
tions and abridgements of tales from the Purans 
on the twenty-four Hindu incarnations. The follow- 
ing is the Guru’s introduction to them : — 

O (jod. Thou art the Creator and the Destroyer ; 

Thou killest and puttest the blame on the lieads of others.* 

Thou dwellest apart and none can find Thee ; 

Wherefore Thou art called the Endless One. 

They who are called the twenty-four incarnations 

Have not found even a trace of Thee, 0 God. 

On seeing Thy saints distressed Thou becomest uneasy ; 

* Compare the Panjabi proverb: — 

Lain aia &p; 

Nam dharaia tap. 

Death cometh to take one, ’ 

But he is called by the name of fever. 

The meaning of the verse in the text is, that all acts ultimately proceed 
from God, though they appear to be done by His human instruments. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 307 

Wherefore Thou art styled the kinsman of the poor. 

At last Thou shalt destroy the whole world ; 

Wherefore the world calleth Thee Death. 

Thou aidest all the saints as occasion requireth ; 
Wherefore they call Thee their helper. 

On beholding the "poor, Thou art compassionate to 
them ; 

So we deem Thee the Friend of the poor. 

Since Thou sheddest the juice of favour on the saints, 
The world calleth Thee the Ocean of favour. 

Thou ever removest the troubles of the saints ; 

Wherefore Thou hast obtained the name of the Remover 
of trouble. 

Thou hast come to dispel the sorrows of the saints ; 
Wherefore, 0 God, Thou art called the Dispeller of sorrows. 
Thou remainest endless ; Thy end cannot be found ; 
Wherefore Thou hast obtained the name of the Endless 
One. 

Thou didst appoint the forms of all things in the world ; 
Wherefore Thou art called the Creator. 

No one hath ever seen Thee anywhere ; 

Wherefore Thou art called the Unseen, 

Thou wert never born in the world ; ^ 

Wherefore every one describeth Thee as Unborn. 

Brahma and the rest all grow weary of searching for Thine 
origin, 

Vishnu and Shiv — what are the wretched beings ? 

After consideration and deliberation God made the moon 
and sun ; 

Wherefore He is known as the Creator. 

Ever without a garb He remaineth without a garb ; 
Wherefore the world calleth Him the Garbless. 

Invisible is His form, no one knoweth Him ; 

On this account he is called the Unseen. 

His form is incomparable and unequalled ; 

He hath* no concern with garbs or no garbs. 

He bestoweth on all but beggeth from none 
Wherefore He is recognized as the Provider. 

^ This is an explanation of the word ajoni in the Japji. 

X 2 



3o8 the SIKH RELIGION 

He is not concerned with celestial appearances or omens ; 
This fact is known to the whole world. 

He is not appeased by incantations, written or spoken, 
or by charms. 

'No one hath found Him by adopting a garb. 

Men are entangled with their own affairs ; 

No one knoweth the Supreme God. 

Some (Hindus) go to places of cremation ; others (Musal- 
mans) to cemeteries ; 

But God is at neither. 

They who visit either are ruined by worldly love and 
contention. 

And the Lord remaineth separate from them. 

What is a Hindu or a Musalman to him 
From whose heart doubt departeth ? 

The Muhammadans use tasbis, ^ the Hindus malas ; * 

The former read the Quran and the latter the Purans. 
Fools have died over the discussion ; 

They were not imbued with God’s deep love. 

They who are imbued with love for the one God, 
Disregard human opinion and are happy. 

They who recognize the Primal Being as the one God, 
Allow no other belief to enter their hearts. 

They who cherish any other belief. 

Shall be debarred from meeting the Friend. 

He who knoweth the one Supreme Being even a little, 
Knoweth the Real Thing. 

All the Jogis and Sanyasis, 

The multitudes of Shaven-heads and Musalmans, 

Have plundered the world by their garbs. 

'The holy men whose support is God’s name remain un- 
known. 

The unholy practise hypocrisy for the sake of their bellies : 
Without hypocrisy they can obtain naught. 

The men who meditate on the one Being 
Never practise hypocrisy on any one. 

Without hypocrisy they would obtain nothing. 

For no one would bow before any of them. 

^ Muhammadan and Hindu names of rosaries. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 309 

If no one had a belly, 

Who would describe any one as rich or poor ? 

They who have concluded that God is one 
Never practise hypocrisy on any one. 
jThey give their heads, but abandon not their determina- 
tion : 1 

They regard their bodies as nothing. 

Men who split their ears are called Jogis ; 

With great deceit they betake themselves to the forest. 
They who know not the virtue of the One Name, 

Belong neither to the forest nor to the household. 

In the beginning God was the father of the whole world ; 
From Him light first proceeded. 

I have not sufficient ability to tell the tale, 

Or to mention the names of the different creatures He 
created. 

Things strong and weak were produced ; 

Things high and low were shown separately. 

The primal light which is called the one God, 

He at last infused into all His creatures. 

Know that the light of the one God 
Is in all the souls which are in this world. 

The whole world shall be blended with God, 

Who is described as Kalrup.* 

Whatever is visible and perceptible by the senses 
Man considereth Maya. 

The one God is contained in aU things. 

But He established them all separately. 

And He pervadeth them all unseen : 

He will call them all separately to account. 

They who have considered Him as One 
Have obtained the real thing.® 

The form of the one God is unequalled ; 

He is sometimes poor, sometimes a prince or a king. 

He hath given to all men their several entanglements ; 

He is SPnoro+/> t . — 

As Guru Teg Bahadur did. 

* Absorber by death. 


® Deliverance. 



310 THE SIKH' RELIGION 

He created all things separately, 

And will destroy them all separatdy. 

God accepteth not censure from any one ; * 

It is He who casteth censure on others. 

We now gi'^e the Guru’s remarks on the transla- 
tions and abridgements of the stories of the Hindu 
incarnations. 

Ram Avatar 

Since I have embraced Thy feet I have paid regard to 
none besides.* 

The Purans of Ram (the God of the Hindus) and the, 
Quran of Rahim (the God of the Musalmans) express various 
opinions, but I accept none of them. 

The Simritis, the Shastars, and the Veds all expound 
many different doctrines, but I accept none of them. 

O holy God, by Thy favour it is not I who have been 
speaking ; all that hath been said hath been said by Thee. 


Forsaking all other doors I have clung to Thine. 

It is to Thine honour to protect me whose arm Thou hast 
grasped ; Gobind is Thy slave.® 

Krishan Avatar 

I do not at the outset propitiate Ganesh ; * 

I never meditate on Krishan or Vishnu ; 

^ For destroying him. 

* Literally— I have not brought any one under my eye, 

* The Guru, with the joy of an author at the end of his toil, was 
pleased to note the date and place of the conclusion of his History of 
Ram — 

On the first day of the dark half of Har, a day of pleasure to me. 

In the Sambat year seventeen hundred and fifty-five, 

At the base of the lofty Naina Devi, on the margin of the Satluj 

that is, the translation of the Kam Avatar uuo 

* As is usual in Hindi literary works. The Guru no doubt meant 
these verses as an introduction to his Hindi translation of the Krishan 
Avatar, which forms the tenth chapter of the Bhag;wat. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 311 

I have heard of them but I know them not ; 

It is only God’s feet I I6ve. 

Great-death, be Thou my protector ; 

All-steel, I am Thy slave. 

Deeming me Thine own, preserve me ; 

Think of mine honour, ‘whose arm Thou hast taken. 
Deeming me Thine own, cherish me, 

Single out and destroy mine enemies. 

May both my kitchen and my sword prevail in the 
world ! ^ 

Preserve me and let none trample on me ; 

Be Thou ever my cherisher ! 

Thou art the Lord, I am Thy slave. 

Deeming me Thine own, be gracious unto me ; 

Perform everything for me Thyself ; 

Thou art the King of kings ; 

It is Thou alone who cherishest the poor ; 

Deeming me Thy slave, bestow Thy favour on me ; 

I have arrived and am lying weary at Thy door. 

Thou art my Lord, I am Thy slave. 

Deeming me Thy slave, reach me Thy hand and save me ; 
Destroy all mine enemies. 


They who loved not God, while performing great penance, 
who endured self-torment, excessively heated their bodies, 
Went to Banaras, and read the Veds very many times, 
obtained not the Real Thing. 

They gave alms so that Vishnu might come into their 
power, but they lost all their wealth. 

They who loved God with hearty affection found Him. 


What availeth it if a crane sit closing his eyes and dis- 
playing a religious garb to the world ? 

^ The pot to feed the poor and the stranger, regardless of caste and 
religion, and the sword to destroy the oppressors of humanity. An 
inscription on a sword in the possession of the Raja of Nabha is, 
Badhe degh feya tegh fe^ that is, man becomes great either by entertain- 
ing his friends or destroying his enemies. 



312 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


If man ever go about bathing in water like a fish, how 
shall he obtain possession of God ? 

If man croak day and night like a frog and fly like a bird, 
how shall he obtain possession of God ? 

Siam ^ and all these saints say, hath any one without love 
pleased God ? * 

Of those who through greed of wealth continued to loudly 
sing and recite God’s praises. 

And who danced but gave not their hearts thereto, hath 
any found the way to God’s wonderful world ? 

They excited laughter in the world, and knew not the 
essence of wisdom even in their dreams. 

The poet Siam asketh if God hath been obtained by any 
one without love. 

vSeveral meditated in the forest, and returned home weary. 

Sidhs in meditation and Munis in deep research have 
sought for God, but found Him not. 

Siam saith, all the Veds and the Muhammadan books 
and the wisdom of the saints have thus decided. 

Hearken, O saints, the poet speaketh, they who search 
with love obtain God. 


I am the son of a brave man, not of a Brahman ; how 
can I perform austerities ? 

How can I turn my attention to Thee, O Lord, and for- 
sake domestic affairs ? 

Now be pleased to grant me the boon I crave with clasped 
hands, 

That when the end of my life cometh, I may die fighting 
in a mighty battle. 

Blest is his life in this world who repeateth God’s name 
with his mouth and meditateth war in his heart. 

1 Some suppose that Siam is the Guru's takhallas or nom de plume. 
Others maintain that it was the real name of one of the fifty-two bards 
the Guru entertained, 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 313 

The body is fleeting and shall not abide for ever ; man 
embarking in the ship of fame shall cross the ocean of the 
world. 

Make this body a house of resignation ; light thine under- 
standing as a lamp ; 

Take the broom of divine knowledge into thy hand, and 
sweep away the filth of timidity. 

Parasnath Avatar 

O thoughtless fool, why knowest thou not thy Maker ? 

O man, why knowest thou not God ? 

O heedless beast bound with worldly love, they on whom 
thou* reposest confidence — 

Ram, Krishan, and the Prophet — whose names thou con- 
tinually utterest on rising — 

Where live they now in the world,^ and why singest 
thou their praises ? 

Why recognizest thou not Him who is now and ever 
shall be ? 

Why idly worship stones ; will they yield thee any 
return ? 

Worship Him by whose worship thy work shall be accom- 
plished. 

And by taking whose name all thy desires shall be fulfilled. 

O Jogi, Jog consisteth not in matted hair. 

Why wear thyself out and kill thyself wandering ? Con- 
sider this in thy mind. 

The man who knoweth the supreme divine knowledge 
shall obtain the great reward ; 

He shall then restrain his mind in one place, and not 
run wandering from door to door. 

What availeth it to leave one’s home, run away, and 
dwell in a forest. 

When one’s heart ever remaineth at home ? Such a per- 
son is not an Udasi. . 

^ That is, they were mortal like others, and what is the use of 
worshipping them ? 



314 i THE SIKH RELIGION ^ ’ ' 

Boasting of thy religious fervour, thou deceivest the 
world by the exercise of great deception. 

Thou thinkest in thy heart that thou hast abandoned 
worldly love, but- worldly love hath not abandoned thee. 

O man with the garb, religion consisteth not in wearing 
a garb. 

It consisteth not in wearing matted hair and long nails, 
or in smearing ashes on the body, or dyeing thy raiment. 

If man obtain Jog by dwelling in the forest, the bird ever 
dwelleth there. 

The elephant ever throweth dust on his head ; consider 
this in thy heart. 

Frogs and fishes ever bathe at places of pilgrimage. 

The cat, the wolf, and the crane meditate ; what know 
they of religion ? 

As thou endurest pain to deceive men, do so also for 
God’s sake. 

Thus shalt thou know great divine knowledge and quaff 
the supreme nectar. 

The following thirty-three sawaiyas are also read 
in Abchalangar and other places while the Sikh 
baptismal water is being prepared. Several orthodox 
Sikhs say that these are the sawaiyas which ought 
always to be read at the baptism, and of this indeed 
there is internal evidence. 

I 

He who repeateth night and day the name of Him whose 
enduring light is unquenchable, who bestoweth not a thought 
on any but the one God ; 

Who hath full love and confidence in God, who putteth 
not faith even by mistake in fasting, or worshipping ceme- 
teries, places of cremation, or Jogis’ places of sepulture ; 

Who only recognizeth the one God and not pilgrimages, 
alms, the non-destruction of life,’^ Hindu penances, or 
austerities ; 


^ As practised by the Jains. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 315 

And in whose heart the light of the Perfect One shineth, 
he is recognized as a pure member of the Khalsa. 

II 

God is true, Eternal,, true to His promise ; He is from 
the beginning, without Beginning, unfathomable, and in- 
vincible. 

Bounty, mercy, self-control, austerities, daily ceremonies, 
continence, fasting, clemency, religious observances are all 
contained in the name of the Immutable One. 

He is from the beginning, pure, without a beginning, 
infinite,^ endless, without enmity, without fear. 

He hath form, and is without form or outline ; He 
groweth not old, He is compassionate and merciful to the 
poor. 

III 

God is from the beginning, without enmity, without garb, 
great, true, refulgent, and resplendent. 

He filleth the inmost hearts of all ; meditation on Him, 
the Real Thing, curbeth natural inclinations. 

Thou wert in the beginning, before the ages, before the 
world ; O God, Thou art all-pervading and dweUest in every 
heart, 

Compassionate to the poor, merciful mine of mercy, from 
the beginning, unborn, invincible, indestructible. 


IV 


In the beginning, indestructible, imperishable, ever- 
lasting : — 0 God, the Veds and the books of the Musalmans 
have found not Thy secret. 

Compassionate to the poor, merciful. Ocean of mercy, 
true, everlasting, diffused in every heart, 

Sheshnag, Indar, Ganesh, and Shiv have searched the 
Veds, but found not Thy depth. 

O foolish man, say why hast thou forgotten God who is 
manifest ? 

^ Attanau. . 


invincible. 


—a it- must be translated invulnerable or 



3i6 the SIKH religion 

V 

God is immovable, from thei beginning, stainless, in- 
finite, true, and everlasting. 

He is adored 'as primaeval, unconceived, unborn, free 
from old age, supremely pure, illimitable. 

He is well known ^ as the self-existent, renowned in the 
whole world. One, yet in different places. 

O base man, why recognize not God who is without stain ? 

VI 

6 Creator, thou art imperishable, from the beginning, 
without blemish, without limits, true, and eternal. 

Thou ever providest sustenance for all animals which are 
in sea and land. 

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, describe Thee in various 
ways. 

In the rest of the world there is at last naught but 
Thee ; O divine One, Thou art Sovereign Ruler over all. 

VII 

Thou art known as from the beginning, unfathomable, 
imperishable, indivisible, invisible, invincible, and illimitable. 

Thou art in the past, the future, the present ; Thou art 
adored in every place. 

Demigods, demons, Sheshnag, Narad, and Saras wati 
recognize Thee as true and eternal. 

The Purans and the Quran know not the secrets of the 
Compassionate to the poor, the Ocean of mercy. 

VIII 

O true and eternal One, perpetual is Thy dominion ; it 
is ThovL.who madest the Veds and the Quran. 

Thou didst appoint demigods, demons, Sheshnag the past 
and the present. 

From the beginning, before the ages, the stainless, the 
indestructible. Thy light is seen, though Thou art 

.....tics. 


' St (/A. Some tran»>-‘ 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 317 

O foolish man, who hath come to tell thee of the in- 
visible God ? 1 


IX 

Demigods, demons, Shjeshnag, serpents, famous Sidhs 
have done great penance ; 

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, all have grown weary 
singing Thy praises, O God, but Thou art not known unto 
them. 

Thou knowest all hearts on earth, in heaven, in the 
nether regions, and in every direction. 

Thy praises fill the earth ; they entering my heart told 
me this. 

X 

The Veds and the books of the Musalmans have not 
found God’s secret ; all the Sidhs have grown weary con- 
templating Him. 

The Simritis, Shastars, Veds, and Purans all describe 
Him in various ways ; 

But God who was in the beginning, and who had no 
beginning, whose story is unfathomable, cannot he known. 
He saved such as Dhru, Prahlad, and Ajamal. 

The courtesan was saved by repeating God’s name ; that 
name is my support, the object of my thoughts. 

XI 

All recognize that God was in the beginning, that He had 
no beginning, that He is unfathomable, eternal, and perfect. 

The Gandharbs,^ the Yakshas, Sheshnag, the earth- 
dwelling serpents, the firmament, and the four quarters of 
the world know God. 

The visible and invisible worlds, the eight directions, the 
demons as well as the demigods all worship God. 

O man of ignorant mind, through regard for whom hast 
thou forgotten the Omniscient, the Self-existent, the 
Treasure ? 

^ The answer to this is found in the last line of the following 
sawaiya. * Heavenly musicians. 



3i8 : THE SIKH RELIGION 

. XII 

Some fasten an idol firmly to their breasts ; some say 
that Shiv is God ; 

Some say that God is in the temple of the Hindus ; others 
believe that He is in the mosque of the Musalmans ; 

Some say that Ram is God ; some say Krishan ; some 
in their hearts accept the incarnations as God ; 

But I have forgotten all vain religion and know in my 
heart that the Creator is the only God. 

XIII 

Ye say that God is unconceived and unborn ; how could 
He have been born from the womb of Kausalya ? 

If He whom we call Krishan were God, why was he sub- 
ject to death ? ‘ 

Why should God whom ye describe as holy and without 
enmity have driven Arjan’s chariot ? * 

Worship as God Him whose secret none hath known or 
shall know. 


XIV 

Say if Krishan were the Ocean of mercy, why should the 
hunter’s arrow have struck him ? * 

If he can save other families, why did he destroy his own ? 

Say why did he who called himself the eternal and the 
unconceived, enter into the womb of Devaki ? 

Why did he who had no father or mother call Vasudev * 
his father ? 


XV 

Why call Shiv God, and why speak of Brahma- as God ? 

^ In this line in the original the first Kal means God, and the 
second death. 

® Krishan, who was Arjan’s charioteer, proclaimed himself to 
be God. 

^ It is supposed that the hunter was an incarnation of Bali whom 
R9m Chandar had slain. Krishan was supposed to be an incarnation 
of Ram Chandar. 

* Father of Krishan. 



COMPOSITIONS OP GURU GOBINU SINGH 319 

God is not Ram Chandar, Krishan, or Vishnu whom ye 
suppose to be lords of the world. 

Shukdev, Parasar, and Vyas erred in abandoning the ope 
God and worshipping many gods.^ 

All have set up false religions ; I in every way believe 
that there is but one God. 


XVI 

Some worship Brahma as God, others point to Shiv as God ; 

Some say that Vishnu is the Lord of the world, and 
that by worshipping him all sins are erased. 

Think on this a thousand times, O fool, at the last hour 
all thy gods will forsake thee. 

Meditate on Him in thy heart who was, is, and ever 
shall be. 

XVII 

He who made millions of Indars, He who made an(^ 
destroyed some millions of Bawans, 

Demons, demigods, serpents, Sheshnags, birds and beasts 
innumerable, 

To whom till to-day Shiv and Brahma are doing penance 
without finding His limit. 

He whose secrets the Veds and the Quran have not 
penetrated, is the great Being whom the Guru^ hath shown 
me. 


XVIII 

O man, by attitudes of contemplation, matted hair, 
and the overgrown nails of thy hands thou deceivest all 
people. 

Thou goest about with ashes smeared on thy face and 
cheatest all the demigods and the demons. 

Addicted to avarice thou wanderest from house to house ; 
the means by which Jog is obtained thou hast all forgotten. 

Thou hast lost all shame and succeeded in nothing ; with- 
out love God cannot be obtained. 

^ Also translated — The abandonment of one God and the worship 
of several gods have been shown by Shukdev, PaiHsar, and Vyas to 
be vain. * Guru Teg Bahadur. 



320 THE SIKH RELIGION 

XIX 

O foolish man, why play the hypocrite ? thou losest 
thine honour by practising hypocrisy. 

O cheat, why cheat people ? this world is lost to thee 
and so is the next. 

Where the Compassionate to the poor dwelleth, there 
shalt thou find no place. 

Think, 0 think, thou thoughtless and great fool, the 
Unseen is not found by assuming garbs. 

XX 

Why worship a stone ? God is not in a stone. 

Worship Him as God, by the worship of whom all thy 
sins shall be erased. 

And by uttering whose name thou shalt be freed from all 
thy mental and bodily entanglements, 
i Make the meditation of God ever thy rule of action ; no 
advantage can be obtained by the practice of false religion. 

XXI 

False religion is without fruit ; by the worship of stones 
thou hast wasted millions of ages. 

How can perfection be obtained by touching stones ? 
nay, strength and prosperity thus decrease, and the nine 
treasures are not obtained. 

Time passeth away while saying to-day, to-day : thou 
shalt not accomplish thine object ; art thou not ashamed ? 

O fool, thou hast not worshipped God, so thy life hath 
been passed in vain. 


XXII 

If for ages thou do penance to a stone, it will never 
rejoice thee. 

O fool, it will never generously lift its arm to requite thee. 

Say what confidence can be placed in it ? when trouble 
ariseth, it will not come to save thee. 

O ignorant and obstinate man, be assured that thy false 
religion and superstition will ruin thee. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 321 

XXIII 

All are bound in the meshes of Death ; no Ram or Moslem 
prophet was able to save himself. 

God having created destroyed, and will again create and 
destroy demons, demigods, and Sheshnags. 

They who were called incarnations in the world at last died 
before men’s eyes ^ in remorse. 

O fickle man, why not run to touch the feet of God above. 

XXIV 

Brahma appeared by God’s order and taking his staff and 
waterpot wandered upon earth. 

We know that Shiv was born at the appointed time, and 
visited all countries. 

f The world was created and destroyed at the appointed 
time ; wherefore let all recognize God. 

Renouncing all the subtleties of the Veds and the Quran, 
I worship God alone, the Treasury of mercy. 

XXV 

0 blockhead, thy life hath passed in thy present occupa- 
tions; thou hast notthoughtinthy heart of the merciful God. 

Abandoning shame thou hast grown shameless, and 
leaving thy proper work hast done useless work for thyself. 

When thou hadst horses and great royal elephants, thou 
foolishly thought est to ride on donkeys.^ 

Thou didst not worship God, O fool, and so didst shame- 
fully spoil thy good business. 

XXVI 

Thou hast for long read the Veds and the books of the 
Musalmans, but not found a secret in them.^ 

Thou hast wandered in various places to worship, but 
the one God thou hast never seated in thy heart. 

Them hast bowed thy head to stones and cemeteries, but 
obtained naught. 

1 Literally — on earth. 

2 Leaving God thou hast turned to idolatry. 

® That is, they have no secret. 



322 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


’ O foolish man, forsaking the manifest God, why art thou 
entangled in thine obstinacy? 

XXVII 

If any one go to a monastery of Jogis, they will ask him 
to repeat the name of Gorakh ; 

If any one go to a monastery of Sanyasis, they will say 
that only Dattatre is true, and they will give him his 
name as the spell of initiation ; 

If any one go to the Musalmans, they will seize and 
convert him to the faith of Muhammad — 

Every sect deemeth that the Creator is with itself alone ; 
but no one can disclose the Creator’s secrets. 

XXVIII 

If any one go to the J ogis they will tell him to give every 
thing — chouse and property — ^to them ; ' i 

If any one haste to the Sanyasis, they will tell him to part 
with his house in the name of Dattatre ; 

If any one go to the masands, they will tell him to bring 
all his property at once and give it to them. 

Every one saith, ‘Bring me, bring me,’ but nobody will 
show me God. 

XXIX 

If any one serve the masands, they will say, ‘ Fetch and 
give us all thine offerings. 

‘ Go at once and make a present to us of whatever pro- 
perty is in thy house. 

‘ Think on us night and day, and mention not others 
even by mistake.’ 

If they hear of any one giving, they run to him even at 
night, ^ they are not at all pleased at not receiving. 

XXX 

They put oil into their eyes to make people believe that 
they are shedding tears. 


^ Also Uanslated — The night long they pretend to worship. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 323 

If they see any of their own worshippers wealthy, they 
serve up sacred food and feed him with it. 

If they see him without wealth, they give him nothing, 
though he beg for it ; they will not even show him their faces. 

Those beasts plunder men, and never sing the praises of 
the Supreme Being. 

XXXI 

They close their eyes like cranes and offer the world a 
spectacle of deceit. 

They go about with their heads bowed down like poachers ; 
cats on seeing such attitudes would be ashamed. 

The more they go about clinging to the hope of wealth, the 
more they lose this world and the next. 

Thou hast not repeated God’s name, O fool ; why art 
thou entangled in thy domestic affairs ? 

XXXII 

Why impress false religion on the world ? It will be of 
no service to it. 

Why run about for the sake of wealth ? thou shalt not 
be able to fly from Death’s myrmidons. 

Son, wife, friends, disciple, companions — none of these 
will bear witness for thee. 

Think, O think, thou thoughtless and great brute, thou 
shalt at the last moment have to depart alone, 

XXXIII 

Hear, O fool, when life leaveth thy body, thy wife crying 
out ‘ Ghost, ghost ’, will flee thee. 

Thy son, thy wife, thy friends, and companions will give 
orders to remove thee quickly. 

When life leaveth thy body all thy mansions, storehouses, 
lands, and forts ^ will become the property of others. 

Think, O think, thou thoughtless and great brute, thou 
shalt at the last moment have to depart alone. 


^ Also translated — hoarded and buried savings. 
Y 2 



324 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Hazare Shabd 

O man, practise asceticism in this way : — 

Consider thy house altogether as the forest, and remain 
an anchoret at heart. 

Make continence thy matted hair, union with God thine 
ablutions, thy daily religious duties the growth of thy nails. 

Divine knowledge thy spiritual guide ; admonish thy 
heart and apply God’s name as ashes to thy body. 

Eat little, sleep little, love mercy and forbearance. 

Ever practise mildness and patience, and thou shalt be 
freed from the three qualities. 

Attach not to thy heart lust, wrath, covetousness, obsti- 
nacy, and worldly love. 

Thus shalt thou behold the Real Soul of this world, and 
obtain the Supreme Being. 


0 man, practise Jog in this way : — 

Make truth thy horn, sincerity thy necklace, and apply 
meditation as ashes to thy body ; 

Make restraint of thy heart thy lyre, and the support of 
the Name thine alms ; 

Play the primal essence as thy strings, and thou shalt 
hear God’s sweet song. 

By the practice of the songs of divine knowledge, waves 
of melody and exquisite pleasure shall be produced. 

The demons and the demigods in their celestial chariots 
will be astonished and the munis intoxicated with delight. 

Admonish thy heart, don the garb of self-restraint, and 
utter God’s name inaudibly, 

. So shall thy body ever remain like gold, and Death 
never approach thee. 


0 mortal, touch the feet of the Supreme Being. 

Why sleepest thou the sleep of worldly love ? be some- 
times wakeful and alert. 

Why instruct others, 0 beast, since thou hast no know- 
ledge thyself ? 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 325 

Why ever accumulate sin ? even now lay aside the love 
of it. 

Deem such things simply as errors and love truly religious 
acts. 

Ever lay up the remembrance of God ; renounce and flee 
from mortal sin. 

By this means shalt thou not encounter sorrow or sin, 
and escape from Death’s noose. 

If thou desire ever to have happiness of every kind, be 
absorbed in God’s love. 

0 God, my honour resteth with Thee. 

It is Thou who art the blue-throated, man-lion, moving 
in the water, blue-robed, wearing a necklace of flowers.^ 

It is Thou who art the primal Being, supreme God, Lord, 
pure, living on air ; 

It is Thou who art the Lord of Lakshmi, great Light, 
Destroyer of the pride of Madhu, Bestower of salvation. 
Destroyer of Mur.^ 

It is Thou who art changeless, undecaying, sleepless, 
without evil passions. Preserver from hell, 

Ocean of mercy, Seer of the past, present, and future, 
Effacer of evil acts. 

It is Thou who hast the bow in the hand, who art patient. 
Supporter of the earth, changeless, Wielder of the sword. 

1 of feeble intellect have taken the protection of Thy 
feet ; take my hand and save me. 

0 man, worship none but God, not a thing made by Him. 

Know that He who was in the beginning, unborn, in- 
vincible, and indestructible is God. 

What if Vishnu coming into this world killed some of 
the demons, 

And exercising great deceit induced every one to call 
him God ? 

How can he who himself did not escape from the stroke 
of the sword of death, 

1 The gyanis translate banwdri — dweller in the forest. 

^ The names in this and the preceding lines of this hymn are epithets 
of Shiv, Vishnu, Balhhadar (brother of Krishan), and Krishan. 



326 THE SIKH RELIGION 

Be deemed God the Destroyer, the Fashioner, the Omni- 
potent, the Eternal ? 

Hear, O fool, how can he who was drowned in the ocean 
of the world save thee ? 

Thou shalt only escape from Death’s noose when thou 
seizest the feet of Him who existed before the world.^ 


When the Guru left Damdama, his disciples sent 
a messenger after him to tell him of their sad plight. 
The following is the complaint as versified by the 
Guru. Others say that the hymn was addressed to 
God by the Guru himself : — 

Tell the dear Friend the condition of His disciples — 

.. , Without Thee the wearing of our blankets is a disease to 
us, and dwelling in our houses is as if we dwelt with serpents. 

Our water-pots are stakes of torture, our cups are daggers ; 
Thy turning away from us is like what animals endure 
from butchers. 

Our Beloved’s pallet would be pleasant to us ; living in 
towns is like living in a furnace. 


God alone is the Creator, 

The beginning and the end of all things, endless, the 
Fashioner, and the Destroyer, 

To whom blame and praise are the same, who hath no 
enemy, no friend. 

What necessity had He to become the driver of Arjan’s 
chariot ? 

The Bestower of salvation hath no father, mother, caste, 
son, or grandson. 

Why should He have come into the 'world to be called 
the son of Devaki ? 

When He who created demigods, demons, the eight 
directions, and all extension. 

Is called by the name of Murar, what glory is it to Him ? 

^ That the Guru was a decided monotheist is proved by all his 
writings. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 327 

How can God be in human form ? 

Sidhs have grown weary sitting in contemplation of Him, 
but they have not been able to see Him in any way. 

Such persons as Narad, Vyas, Parasar, and Dhrii have 
deeply meditated on Hiin. 

The Veds and the Purans have grown weary and aban- 
doned their purpose, since they could form no conception 
of Him. 

Demons, demigods, fiends, sprites, describe Him as in- 
describable. 

! The faithful consider Him as the subtilest of the subtile, 
and again 'pointed Him out as the largest of the large.^ 

The one God having made the earth, the heaven, and 
all the nether regions they call many. 

He who entereth God’s asylum shall be saved from 
Death’s noose. 


I recognize none but the one God ; 

I know God as the Destroyer, the Fashioner, the Omni- 
potent and Eternal Creator. 

What availeth it to men to worship stones in various 
ways with great love and devotion ? 

The hand groweth weary by touching stones, and no 
spiritual power is obtained. 

Rice, incense, lamps are offered to stones, but they eat 
nothing. 

What spiritual power is in them, O fool ? what blessing 
can they bestow on thee ? 

If they had life, they might give thee something ; be 
assured of this in thought, word, and deed — 

Except in the protection of the one sole God nowhere 
is salvation. 


Without God’s name thou canst not be saved. 

How shalt thou flee from Him who holdeth the fourteen 
worlds in His power ? 

Ram and Rahim whose names thou repeatest cannot 
save thee. 


^ Since He exists in everything. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


328 

Brahma, Vishnu, Shiv, the sun and moon are all in the 
power of Death. 

The Veds, the Purans, the Quran, all sects, Indar, Shesh- 
nag, the kings of the Munis, 

Meditated for many ages on Him who is called the In- 
describable, but could form no conception of Him. 

Why should He whose form and colour are not known 
be called black ? ^ 

When thou shalt seize and cling to God’s feet, thou shalt 
be freed from the noose of Death. 

Prayer 

Chaupai 

0 God, give me Thy hand and protect me. 

And all my desires shall be fulfilled. 

May my heart be ever attached to Thy feet ! 

Deem me Thine own and cherish me ; 

Destroy all mine enemies ; 

O Creator, may my family and all my servants and 
disciples live in peace ! 

Destroy all mine enemies to-day, 

And all my hopes shall be fulfilled. 

May the thirst for repeating Thy name abide with me ; 
And may I not, forsaking Thee, meditate on any one 
besides ! 

May I obtain from Thee whatever boon I crave ! 

Save my servants and my disciples ; 

Single out mine enemies and smite them. 

Remove from me the fear of the hour of death. 

Be Thou always on my side ; 

O Thou with the sword on Thy banner, protect me ; 
Preserve me, O Thou Preserver, 

Beloved Lord, Protector of the saints. 

Friend of the poor. Destroyer of tyrants — 

Thou art Lord of the fourteen worlds. 

At the proper time Brahma obtained a body. 

At the proper time Shiv became incarnate, 

^ The reference here is to the Hindu gods Vishnu and Krishan. 



COMPOSITIONS OF GURU GOBIND SINGH 329 

At the proper time ^ Vishnu appeared — 

That was all the play of God. 

My obeisance to that God 
Who made Shiv a Jogi, 

Who made Brahma the king of the Veds, 

And who fashioned all the world. 

Know that He is my Guru 
Who made the whole world, 

Who created demigods, demons, and Yakshas, 

Who is the only God incarnate from beginning to end, 

My obeisance to Him alone 

Who Himself adorneth all His subjects, 

Who bestoweth divine attributes and happiness on His 
servants, 

Who destroy eth their enemies in a moment, 

Who knoweth what is within every heart, 

And the sufferings of the good and bad. 

He is pleased as He casteth a look of favour on all 
From the ant to the huge elephant. 

He is grieved when His saints are grieved. 

And happy when His saints are happy. 

He knoweth every one’s sufferings 
And every secret of man’s heart. 

When the Creator projected Himself, 

His creatures assumed endless shapes ; 

Whenever Thou drawest creation within Thyself, 0 Lord, 
All embodied beings are absorbed in Thee.^ 

All creatures endowed with speech ® 

Speak of Thee according to their understanding. 

Thou dwellest apart from everything ; 

^ The expression Ml pdi in this and the two preceding lines is also 
translated — having first died. 

2 ‘The universe comes from God, lives in Him, and returns to 
Him’ is an expression commonly used in the Upa?iishads and 
Mahdhhdrat. In the Bhagavat Gtla creation is represented as 
evolving from God as the world at the approach of day slowly 
emerges from the darkness of night, and again dissolving or vanishing 
in Him as the world disappears after evening twilight. 

® Badan, the mouth, literally — all things in creation which have 
a mouth. 



330 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


The wise and the learned know the secret of this.^ 

• O Formless One, Thou art changeless and independent ; 

Thou art the Primal One, stainless, without beginning, 
self-existent. 

The fool boasteth that he knoweth the secrets of Him 
Whose secrets are not known even to the Veds. 

The great fool supposeth that God is a stone, 

And knoweth not the difference between them ; 

He ever calleth the Eternal God Shiv, 

And knoweth not the secrets of the Formless One. 

Men according to their different understandings 
Give different descriptions of Thee, 0 God. 

Thine extension cannot be conceived, 

Nor how Thou didst first fashion creation. 

Thou hast but one form, and that form is incomparable. 
Thou art in different places a poor man, a lord, or a king ; 
Thou madest life from eggs, wombs, and perspiration, 
And again Thou madest a mine of vegetables. 

Sometimes Thou sittest as monarch on the lotus flower 
Sometimes as Shiv Thou gatherest up creation. 

Thou didst display the whole creation as a miracle ; 
Thou art the Primal One from the beginning of time ; 
Thy form was uncreated. 

0 God, protect me now ; 

Save those who are my disciples. 

And destroy those who are not. 

The enemies who rise in rebellion. 

And all infidels destroy Thou them in the battle-field. 
The enemies of those who sought Thy protection, 

O God, have died in misery. 

Thou hast removed all the troubles of those 
Who fall at Thy feet. 

Death shall never approach those 
Who even once meditate on Thee, 0 God ; 

^ Also translated — Thou knowest the secret of divine knowledge and 
of the world. Others suppose that bed and dim are epithets of Hindus 
and Musalmans respectively. 

* That is, as Brahma, through whose agency, according to the 
Hindus, the world was created. 



COMPOSITIOisrS of guru GOBINU SINGH 331 

They shall be protected at all times, 

And their enemies and their troubles shall instantly vanish. 

Thou removest in an instant the sufferings of those 

Whom Thou beholdest with a look of favour. 

They possess in their homes all temporal and spiritual 
blessings, 1 

And no enemies can touch even their shadows. 

Him who even once remembereth Thee 

Thou savest from the noose of Death. 

He who repeateth Thy name 

Shall be free from poverty and the assaults of enemies. 

O, Thou with the sword on Thy banner, I seek Thy 
protection ; 

Give me Thine own hand and save me ; 

Be Thou everywhere my helper, 

And save me from the designs of mine enemies. 

After the completion of the morning and evening 
obligatory divine services and of the uninterrupted 
reading or chanting of the Granth Sahib the Sikhs 
repeat a prayer or supplication called — 

Ardas, 

which may now suitably end our presentation of the 
Lives and Writings of the ten Gurus : — 

Sri Wahguru ji ki Fatah ! 

Having first remembered the Sword meditate on Guru 
Nanak ; 

Then on Guru Angad, Amar Das, and Ram Das ; may 
they assist us ! 

Remember Arjan, Har Gobind, and the holy Hari Rai ; 

Meditate on the holy Hari Krishan, a sight of whom 
dispelled all sorrow. 

Remember Teg Bahadur, and the nine treasures shall 
come hastening to your homes. 

Ye holy Gurus, everywhere assist us. 

May the tenth king, the holy Guru Gobind Singh, every- 
where assist us. 


^ Ridh sidh, literally — wealth and supernatural power. 



332 


tHE SIKH RELIGION 


God Himself knoweth, He Himself acteth ; it is He who 
adjusteth. 

Standing in His presence, Nanak, make supplication. 

Sikhs of the true Immortal God, turn your thoughts 
to the teachings of the Granth Sahib and the deeds of the 
Khalsa ; utter Wahguru ! 

Meditating on the Deathless One, endowed with all power, 
compassionate, and just, utter Wahguru ! 

Meditating on the deeds of those who worshipped the 
Name, plied the sword, ate and distributed their food in 
companionship, and overlooked others’ faults, 0 Khalsa, 
utter Wahguru ! 

0 Deathless Creator, illimitable, this creature forgetting 
Thy name is so attached to worldly goods, that he hath 
forgotten the Real Thing. Without Thy supreme mercy 
how shall we cross the ocean of the world ? 0 great King, 
lust, wrath, greed, worldly love, jealousy, and other evil 
passions greatly trouble our minds, but on coming towards 
Thee worldly maladies and afflictions are healed and dis- 
pelled. Show us such favour that we may by word and 
deed be Thine, and that in all things we may obtain Thine 
assistance and support. 

Grant to Thy Sikhs the gift of Sikhism, the gift of the 
Guru’s instruction, the gift of faith, the gift of confidence 
in Thee, and the gift of reading and understanding the holy 
Granth Sahib. 

May the Sikh choirs, mansions, and banners ever abide ! 
Victory to the faith ! May the minds of the Sikhs be humble 
but their intellects exalted ! Utter Wahguru ! Wahguru ! ! 
Wahguru ! 1 ! 

We offer this Ardas in Thy presence and at Thy lotus 
feet. Pardon our errors and mistakes. May all Sikhs who 
read and hear the Gurus’ hymns be profited ! 

Through Nanak, may Thy name, 0 God, be exalted, 

And all prosper by Thy grace ! 

Sri Wahguru ji ka Khalsa ! Sri Wahguru ji ki Fatah ! 



THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB* 


SRI RAG 


Slow, 



^ As stated in the Life of Guru N5nak, these Rags are sung 
differently in different provinces of India. Of eight of them we have 
given alternative versions extracted from Raja Sir Surindra Mohan 
Tagore’s collection of Indian airs made for the Coronation of the 
King-Emperor. The Raja’s music is in a high pitch adapted for 
musical instruments ; the Gurus’ R%s are in a low pitch adapted for 
the voice. 


334 


THE SIKH RELIGION 



THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 335 
GAURI 

Slow. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


336 



THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 337 


DEVGANDHARI 




338 


THE SIKH RELIGION 



THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 339 


TODI 



340 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


TILANG 


Moderaio* 




342 


THE SIKH RELIGION 




THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 343 





344 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


TUKHARl 





THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 345 




m U- 




346 


. THE SIKH RELIQION 



THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 347 

The following is another version of this RSg:— 


348 


THE SIKH RELIGION 



THE RAGS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 349 

The following is another version of this Rag : — 



350 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


kaliAn 





OXFORD 


PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BT HORACK IIAKT, M.A. 
PKIMTBR TO THE UJHVKRSITT 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


ITS GURUS, SACRED WRITINGS 
AND. AUTHORS 

BY 

MAX ARTHUR MACAULIFFE 

'mf^ UaOTlT; 

^’Hr V9fnr s, gw aClTir 

The egg of superstition hath burst; the 
mind is illumined: 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet 
and freed the captive. 

Guru Arjan 


IN SIX VOLUMES 
VOL. VI 


OXFORD 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


t909 



HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 

PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF* OXFORD 
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK 
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 



CONTENTS . OF VOL. VI 


■ _ PACK 

Bhagats of the Granth Sahib . . . . i 

Life and Hymns of Jaidev 4 

Life of Namdev 17 

Namdev’s Hymns 40 

Trilochan 76 

Parmanand 82 

Sadhna . . . . 84 

Beni 88 

Ramanand and Ramanuj 93 

Dhanna 106 

PiPA Ill 

Sain 120 

Life of Kabir 122 

Kabir’s Hymns 142 

Kabir’s Sloks 278 

Life of Rav Das 316 

Rav Das’s Hymns 321 

Mira Bai 342 

Life of Shaikh Farid 356 

Hymns and Sloks of Farid 391 

Bhikan 414 

SuR Das 417 




THE BHAGATS" OF THE GRANTH 
SAHIB 


There have lived in India from time immemorial 
saints and thinkers who were dissatisfied with the 
superstitions and religious vagaries of the Hindus. 
They gradually evolved a belief in one God and 
preceded Guru Nanak as the dawn before sunrise. 
Abrupt indigenous alterations of religion have rarely, 
if ever, been presented to human experience. Some 
of the writings of the Guru’s immediate precursors 
called Bhagats, or saints, are preserved in the Granth 
Sahib compiled by Guru Arjan. He selected for 
inclusion therein, with equal impartiality the writ- 
ings of both Hindus and Musalmans, as they suited 
His purpose, and contributed to the great cause of 
religious reformation. We find in the sacred volume 
compositions of Jaidev, Namdev, Trilochan, Parma- 
nand, Sadhna, Beni, Ramanand, Dhanna, Pipa, Sain, 
Kabir, Rav Das, Sur. Das, verses of at least two 
Musalman saints, Farid and Bhikan ; and one recen- 
sion of the sacred volume called Banno’s Granth, 
preserved at Mangat in the Gujrat district of the 
Panjab, contains a hymn composed by Mira Bai, 
Queen of Chitaur. It is believed that Guru Arjan 
did not give it a place in his collection because the 
lady lived and died an idolater. 

The Hindu Bhagats for the most part began life 
as worshippers of idols, but by study and con- 
templation arrived at a system of monotheism which 
was appreciated by Guru Arjan. The Muhammadan 
Bhagats lived in Hindu centres, and became largely 
imbued with Hindu modes of thought, while they 

^ The word Bhagat comes from the Sanskrit bhakti, which means 
devotion, love, &c. 

SIKH. YT B 



2 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

at the same time retained their traditional belief in 
the Divine unity. There is no account given of 
these saints in any of the classical Sikh writings ; 
but we have to the best of our power collected 
materials for the lives of most of them in the various 
places where they were bom or where they flourished 
in India. Some civil officers have kindly made 
inquiries and furnished us with details from their 
districts, and political officers have also assisted in 
procuring information from the annals of native 
states. 

The writings of Nabhaji, Uddava Chidghan, 
Mahipati, Ganesh Dattatre, Maharaja Raghuraj 
Sinha, Dahyabhai Ghelabhai pandit, and others in 
different Indian languages, on the mediaeval saints 
of India have also been consulted. 

Nabhaji, the author of the Bhagat Mai, was born 
in the state of Gualiar. His original name is said 
to have been Narain Das. Everything relating to 
him is as wonderful as the legends he himself relates 
of his Vaishnav saints. He was born blind. When 
he was about five years of age there was a great 
famine in the land, and he was deserted by his 
parents in a forest, owing to their inability to main- 
tain him. He was found by Agar Das and Kil, two 
Hindu pilgrims, who were on their way to the 
Ganges. He told them his history, and they adopted 
him. Kil sprinkled some holy water from his gourd 
on the child’s eyes, and he received his sight. He 
was employed to wait on the holy men, and in this 
capacity heard many legends of Indian saints of all 
epochs. These legends he recorded at the suggestion 
of Agar Das in a work called Sant Charitra, which 
formed the basis of his Bhagat Mai, a series of 
metricai chronicles in the Gualiar dialect, written 
about A. D. 1578. He was a contemporary of Raja 
Man Sinh of Jaipur, and consequently lived during 
the reign of the Emperor Akbar. It is recorded 
that he had an interview with Tulsi Das, the famous 



BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 3 

Hindu poet, who flourished in the reign of Shah 
Jahan. If so he must have lived to a very advanced 
age. Several additions and amplifications, were 
made to Nabhaji's work by Priya Das and Pandit 
Lai Ji of Bindraban. ■ It was subsequently written 
out in Hindu prose and translated into Urdu by 
different hands. Other writers in most of the great 
Indian dialects have written lives of the Vaishnav 
saints, but almost all are avowedly based on the 
work of Nabhaji. 

Nabhaji’s Bhagat Mai is in all versions painfully 
disappointing. It may be compared to the mediaeval 
legends of saints once current in Europe, but it has 
the additional defect of brevity, and, like Hindu 
works generally, shows a total contempt for chron- 
ology. When one great man is but an incarnation 
of another who lived hundreds or thousands of 
years before, it seems superfluous to the Hindu 
biographer to consider such a trifle as the date of 
his successive appearances upon earth. Even the 
pious Hindus who at different times expounded and 
translated Nabhaji’s work, each and all pass by the 
dates of the Bhagats without a word of apology to 
the reader. We are therefore generally left to shreds 
of extraneous evfdence for the epochs of the Bhagats 
whose writings are contained in the Bible of the 
Sikhs. 

Uddava Chidghan was born in Dharur in Khan- 
desh. Once when he was celebrating the anniversary 
of the birth of Rama, and taking an image of that 
god into his house at Bedar in the Barars, some 
bigoted Muhammadans stoned the procession. A 
fight arose between the Hindus and Muhammadans. 
It is said that Hanuman, the monkey-god, espoused 
the cause of the Hindus, and fought against the 
Muhammadans, as he had done thousands of years 
before against Rawan. By Hanuman’s aid Chid- 
ghan’s party was victorious, and succeeded in 
burning a mosque in which the Muhammadans had 



4 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

concealed themselves. The era in which Chidghan 
flourished has not been accurately ascertained. 

Mahipati was born in a. d. 1715 at Taharabad, in 
the Rahruri subdivision, about thirty-five miles 
from Ahmadnagar in the Bombay Presidency. He 
wrote the lives of saints in the Marathi language. 
His authorities were principally Nabhaji and Uddava 
Chidghan. He has himself given the Shaka year 
1696 (A. D. 1774) as the date of the completion of 
his Bhakta Lilamrita. He died in a. d. 1790. 

Maharaja Raghuraj Sinh, son of Maharaja Vi- 
swanath Sinh of the Baghel dynasty, chief of the 
Rewa state, was born in a. d. 1823, and died in 
1880. He inherited his literary talents from his 
father, who wrote a paraphrase of Kabir’s Bijak, 
and about fifty tracts on Hindu religion, philosophy, 
and literature. Maharaja Raghuraj Sinh was one of 
the most renowned Hindi poets of his time, and he 
was also a most generous patron of the many Hindi 
and Sanskrit scholars who flocked to his court. In 
religion he was a strict adherent of Vaishnav tenets. 

We shall attempt to give the Lives and Writings 
of the Bhagats in chronological order. 


JAIDEV 

There were two distinguished men called Jaidev, 
whose lives and acts are frequently confounded 
in Indian chronicles and biographies. One was a 
metaphysician and scholar who is said to have lived 
at the court of Vikramaditya. It is related of him 
that when a boy at school he was able to learn in 
a day as much as his schoolfellows could in a fort- 
night. Hence he was called Pakshadhar Misra. It 
is not with him we are at present concerned. 

The J aidev whose hymns are found in the Granth 
Sahib is the celebrated Sanskrit poet who wrote 



JAIDEV 5 

the Gitgovind. His father was Bhoidev, a Brah- 
man of Kanauj, and his mother Bamdevi. He was 
born at Kendxdi, about twenty miles from Sun, in 
the modern district of Birbhum in Lower Bengal. 
He became the most famous of the five distinguished 
poets who lived at the court of Lakshman Sen, king 
of Bengal, who dates from the year 1170 of the 
Christian era. The five poets were called the five 
jewels of Lakshman Sen’s court, and so proud was 
the monarch of them that he erected a monument 
to preserve their names to succeeding ages. The 
specialities of the five poets are thus described by 
Jaidev himself : — 

Umapatidhara excelleth in word painting ; 

Jayadeva alone knoweth purity of style ; 

Sarana is praised for extempore rendering of difficult 
passages ; 

Govardhana surpasseth in description of love ; 

No one is so famed as the king of poet's Dhoyi for remem- 
bering what he hath once heard. 

Very little is known of Jaidev's early life. It is 
certain that from his youth he was a diligent student 
of Sanskrit literature, and developed rare poetical 
talents. He is described by the author of the 
Bhagat Mai as an incarnation and treasury of 
melody, on which, however, he, owing to his ascetic 
habits, long preferred to feast his own soul rather 
than communicate to the world the splendid gifts 
he possessed. He wandered in several countries, 
provided with only a water-pot and dressed in the 
patched coat of a mendicant. Even pens, ink, and 
paper, generally so indispensable to literary men, 
were luxuries which he did not allow himself. Such 
was his determination to love nothing but God, 
that he would not sleep for two nights in succession 
under the same tree, lest he should conceive an 
undue preference for it and forget his Creator. 

It pleased God, with the object, it - is stated, of 



6 BHAGAtS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

saving the human race, to withdraw Jaidev from 
his ascetic life. For this purpose, the chronicler 
relates, God devised the following expedient. An 
Agnihotri Brahman of Jagannath, to whom a 
beautiful daughter named Padamavati had been 
born as the result of many offerings and prayers, 
brought her up with the object of dedicating her as 
a dancing girl to the local idol. Her father duly 
conducted her to the idol and was ordered to take 
her away and bestow her on the great saint Jaidev. 
On this she was taken to him, and he was in- 
formed of the divine decision in his favour. Jaidev 
reasoned with the Brahman, and told him he 
ought to give his daughter to some more wealthy 
man, who would be more suitable . for her than a 
homeless ascetic like himself. The Brahman replied 
that he could not disobey God’s order. Jaidev 
rejoined, ‘ God is master and omnipotent. He may 
have thousands and tens of thousands of wives, 
but one for me is the same as a hundred thousand; ’ 
that is, he had no more need or ability to medntain 
one than he had a hundred thousand. After further 
discussion, in which the Brahman failed, notwith- 
standing the exercise of all his powers of persuasion, 
he left his daughter with Jaidev. Before his depar- 
ture he told her it was impious to act in opposi- 
tion to the will of God. She was to remain with 
Jaidev, and obey him according to the instructions 
laid down for wives in the Hindu sacred writings. 

The tender ^rl remained with Jaidev and attended 
on him like his shadow. He is said to have repre- 
sented to her the futility of living with him : 
‘ Thou art wise,’ he said ; ‘ en4eavour to do some- 
thing to improve thy position ; I have no power to 
maintain and cherish thee.’ She replied, ‘ What 
power hath this poor creature ? Thou canst do as 
thou pleasest. 1 am a sacrifice unto thee and shall 
never leave thee.’ On this Jaidev bdieved that 
God was forcing him into the stance, smd he recon- 



JAIDEV t 

died himself to the situation. As the fitst prepara- 
tion for domestic life he built a hut for his spouse, 
set up an idol in it, and applied himself to its worship. 
He then began the composition of the celebrated 
poem the Gitgovind. This is believed to have been 
his second conapositioh, his first being a drama 
called Rasana Raghava. A third work attributed 
to him is Chandralok, an essay on the graces of 
style. 

The fact appears to be that the mantling fire of 
Jaidev’s genius sought for an outlet, that with 
experience of life a change came over his religious 
opinions, that he resolved no longer to play the 
hermit, but accept the wife offered him, distinguish 
himself, and seek for worldly fame and its pleasures. 
God has been introduced ex machind into the nar- 
rative to save Jaidev from the charges of incon- 
sistency and submission to human passion. 

The Gitgovind is well known in both hemispheres. 
It has been translated into EngUsh prose and para- 
phrased in English verse.^ It is perhaps a solitary 
instance of a great popular poem composed in a 
dead language. In the twelfth century of the 
Christian era Sanskrit was, it is true, used as Latin 
was at the same time in Europe, but the great age 
had passed away when Sanskrit was a living lan- 
guage — the only recognized Indian vehicle of men’s 
thoughts and aspirations. The Gitgovind is still not 
only remembered, but nightly chanted in the Kar- 
natik countries and other parts of India, because it 
is ostensibly a love song and its strains are sweet 
and find a responsive echo in the human heart.* 

During the composition of the Gitgovind Jaidev 


^ Into prose by Sir William Jones and into exquisite verse by the 
late Sir Edwin Arnold. 

* Jaidev hss been tnqre fortunate than Petrarch, tlw mediaeval 
Italutn poet, in composing in a dead language. Petrhrch composed 
a Latin pbcm entitled ‘ Affica ’, which is now never rendj while his love 
sonnets me the delight of many cultivated mh^ds. 



8 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

represented Radhika the heroine as pouting because 
Krishan the hero had followed other loves. Krishan 
alters his ways, and applies himself to the task of 
appeasing her and apologizing for his conduct. The 
poet was preparing to make Krishan address his 
lady love ; ‘ Adorn my head by putting on it the 
lotus leaves of thy feet, which are an antidote to 
the poison of Cupid,’ when he reflected that it would 
be a dishonour to his god if any woman were to put 
her feet on his head. While thus reflecting the poet 
ceased to write, and went to bathe, intending sub- 
sequently to alter the sentence into more conformity 
with the relative positions of the hero and heroine. 

What was Jaidev’s surprise when on returning 
from his bath he found the verse completed exactly 
as he had subsequently intended ! He asked his wife 
how it had occurred. She told him he had returned 
himself, and having written the verse gone away 
again. Upon this Jaidev knew that Krishan him- 
self had written the verse, and thus hallowed the 
composition. The fame of the event and of the 
poem spread far and wide, and Jaidev obtained the 
high renown he had so earnestly sought. - i- m 

Satvika, King of Urisa (Orissa) at the time, was 
also a poet and learned man. He had accidentally 
selected for a poem the same subject as Jaidev, and 
he appears to have produced a work of respectable 
merit, which he directed his Brahmans to copy and 
circulate. In reply they showed him the composi- 
tion of Jaidev. They meant by this that the Raja’s 
poem was as nothing in comparison with Jaidev’s. 
As well compare a lamp with the sun. The Raja 
in his pride could not accept the Brahmans’ criti- 
cism, but caused both poems to be placed in the 
temple of his capital, and promised to abide by the 
decision of the idol as to which was superior. 

The idol rejected the king’s Gitgovind and took 
to; his heart that of Jaidev. Upon this the Raja 
thinking himself greatly dishonoured was overcome 



JAIDEV 9 

by shame and jealousy, and set out to drown himself. 
Krishan is said to have taken pity on him. He 
appeared to him and told him it would be a vain 
and foolish act to put an end to his life. It was 
very clear that his poetical merit did not equal 
that of Jaidev, but, to compensate him for his dis- 
appointment, Krishan ordered that one of the Raja’s 
verses should be inserted in each of the twelve cantos 
of Jaidev’s poem, and both compositions should 
thus go forth to the world and down to distant 
ages. This was accordingly done. 

The estimation in which the Gitgovind was held 
may be gathered from the following anecdote. A 
gardener’s daughter while one day gathering egg- 
plants was singing with great zest the following 
verse from the fifth canto of the poem : — 

The zephyr gently bloweth on the banks of the Yamuna 
while Krishan tarrieth in the grove. 

On this, it is said, the idol of Jagannath fol- 
lowed her wherever she went, with the object of 
feasting his heart on the dulcet strains. The idol 
wore only a thin jacket which was torn by the 
brambles. When the king went to worship and saw 
the condition of the idol’s dress, he in astonishment 
asked the priests the cause. When the Raja learned 
what had occurred, he was perfectly satisfied of the 
superiority of the product of Jaidev’s genius, and 
issued a proclamation that the Gitgovind should 
only be read in a clean and purified place, as Jagan- 
nath, the lord of the world, himself was in the habit 
of going to listen to it. 

Not only Hindus, but men of all creeds were 
enchanted with the composition. It is related that 
a Mughal, on hearing of the divine honours paid to 
the work, used to peruse it with the greatest delight. 
One day while riding he was singing its verses, when 
he fell into an ecstasy of pleasure, and thought that, 
though a Moslem, he felt communion with Krishan. 



10 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Oriental chroniclers are enthusiastic in their 
praises of Jaidev. AH other jMjets are compared 
to petty kings while he is the great chakrawarti or 
poetical monarch of the world. As the moon can- 
not be concealed by the stars, as the eagle cannot 
be surpassed by any bird in flight, as Indar attracts 
notice in the midst of the gods, so is Jaidev’s fame 
conspicuous in the world. It may be added that 
Jaidev himself does not appear to have been in- 
sensible of his own merits. At the conclusion of 
the Gitgovind he writes, ‘ Whatever is delightful in 
the modes of music, whatever is exquisite in the 
sweet art of love let the happy and wise learn from 
the song of Jaidev.’^ 

Notwithstanding the lusciousness and sensuous 
beauty of several parts of the Gitgovind, there can 
be no doubt that Jaidev intended the poem as an 
elaborate religious allegory. This, too, is insisted 
on by the author of the Bhagat Mol, who states 
that the love scenes and rhetorical graces of the 
poet are not to be understood in the sense that 
persons of evil minds and dispositions attach to 
them. Radhika the heroine is heavenly wisdom. 
The milkmaids who divert Krishan from his al- 
legiance to her, are the senses of smell, sight, 
touch, taste, and hearing. Krishan represented as 
pursuing them is the human soul, which attaches 
itself to earthly pleasures. The return of Krishan 
to his first love is the return of the repentant sinner 
to God, which gives joy in heaven. 

After the completion of the poem Jaidev went 
to travel and visited Bindraban and Jaipur. To 
the latter place its king had given him a pressing 
invitation. While on those travels it is related that 
he met a party of thags. He knew what they were 
from their ready offer to accompany him on his journey. 
Without more ado be pulled out his purse and gave 

^ The reader will remember the exultations of Horace, Ovid, Moore, 
Poushhin, and others, on the completion of their immortal poems. 



JAIDEV II 

them all the money and valuables he possessed, 
thus reasoning, ‘ Wealth is the basis of sin ; glut- 
tony produceth disease ; and love of the world 
purchaseth pain, so it is proper to discard all 
three.’ 

The thags at once suspected him. They had not 
been accustomed to obtain men’s wealth without 
a struggle or without at least having made a request 
for it, and they concluded from Jaidev’s readiness 
to part with his money, that he merely designed to 
have them arrested on their return to the city. 
One of them proposed to put him to death, but 
another said that would be a meaningless act. 
They only required his wealth, and that they had 
obtained. It was at last decided that they should 
cut off his hands and throw him into a narrow and 
dark well, and this was accordingly done. 

Jaidev, it is said, meekly accepted the treatment 
he had received as a fate predestined for him, and 
applied himself to divine contemplation and the 
utterance of God’s name. It chanced that Karaunch, 
the King of Utkal, passed that way, and hearing 
that Jaidev was in the well caused him to be extri- 
cated. Jaidev was so little revengeful for the 
injuries he had sustained, that, in reply to the 
king’s inquiries as to the cause of his mutilation, 
he told him he had been born so. The king became 
convinced that Jaidev was a saint, and congratulated 
himself on his good fortune in meeting such a man. 
The king had him conveyed to his capital where 
he was treated with all honour and respect, and 
a house set apart for him. He was, moreover, 
provided with food and every article of comfort. 
The king himself offered to become his servant, and, 
with hands clasped in the Oriental attitude of sup- 
plication, begged J aidev to say what duty he could 
render him. Jaidev had one request to make, and 
that was that the king should serve holy men and 
not him. In happy faith and with open heart the 



12 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

king obeyed and performed menial service for the 
saints of God who were waiting at his gate.^ The 
fact that the, king was performing such services was 
noised abroad and the thags, among others, heard 
of it. They assumed the guise of religious men 
and proceeded to the monarch’s gate. This led to 
an interview with Jaidev. He recognized them, and 
told the king that they were his brethren and very 
holy persons. Fortunate was the king in having 
been favoured with a sight of them, and devoutly 
ought he to serve and minister unto them. The 
king took them into his palace, and lavished on 
them ev^y honour that Oriental politeness and 
hospitality could, suggest. 

The thags, however, recognizing Jaidev, were 
troubled for their safety, and applied for permission 
to depart. This was finally granted, and Jaidev 
dismissed them with a large present of money and 
a convoy of soldiers for their protection. On the 
way the soldiers fell into conversation with their 
charge. They remarked that they had never be- 
fore seen visitors to the king so heartily and 
kindly treated, and they inquired in what relation- 
ship the men they were escorting stood to Jaidev. 
The thags replied : ‘ What shall we say ? It is not 
a fit thing to tell.’ The soldiers promised them 
perfect secrecy. The thags then proceeded to exer- 
cise their inventive faculties developed by long 
practice. They said that Jaidev and they had been 
servants of a king. For some offence Jaidev had 
been condemned to death, and they had been ap- 
pointed his executioners. They merely, however, 
cut ofi his hands and thus saved his hfe. Through 
gratitude for that favour Jaidev induced the king 
to pay them such extraordinary attention. It is 
said that God could no longer endure the fabrica- ■ 
tion of false charges against His saint. The ground 

^ This service consists in washing the saints’ feet, waiting on them 
at dinner, walking round them in an attitude of adoration, &c., &c. 



JAIDEV 13 

opened beneath the feet of the thags, and they 
sank into the pit of hell. 

The soldiers in amazement returned to Jaidev 
and told him what had occurred. He began to 
tremble with pity for the thags, and made a gesture 
as if rubbing his hands — the Oriental attitude 
expressive of grief — whereupon, it is related, new 
hands sprouted from his body. The soldiers 
went and informed the king of the two miracles 
their eyes had beheld. The king proceeded to 
Jaidev and performed before him the prostration 
due to saints. He begged Jaidev to explain how 
the incidents had occurred. The saint for a long 
time refused, but, when greatly pressed by the king, 
gave him a detailed account of all the circum- 
stances. The king’s faith in J aidev had now reached 
its utmost limit, and he knew that the man before 
him in the guise of a saint was really a divine in- 
carnation. It is the usual custom of saints when 
they receive evil always to return good, even as 
bad men return evil for evil, so the king deemed 
his conclusion warranted by the forgiving conduct 
of Jaidev. 

Jaidev felt a longing for home and told the king 
of his determination to take his leave. The king 
put his head on the saint’s feet, and represented to 
him that his country had turned to God and the 
practice of virtue, since it had been trodden by his 
holy feet. If the saint were to depart, the king’s 
subjects would turn away from their faith. He 
therefore implored him to defer his departure. As 
a further inducement to Jaidev to abide with 
him, he went himself and brought Padamavati so 
that the saint’s happiness might be complete, and 
his distant home forgotten. Padamavati was in- 
stalled in the royal palace, and the queen received 
stringent orders to perform all menial offices for her. 

While Padamavati resided at the court the queen’s 
brother died, and his wife was burned with him on 



14 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

the funeral pyre. One day when the queen was 
boasting of the wonderful devotion of her sister- 
in-law, Padamavati smiled. When asked the reason 
she replied, ‘ To burn oneself alive with one's 
husband’s corpse is far from being the acme of 
affection. True affection and love require a woman 
to sacrifice herself directly she even heareth of her 
husband’s death.’ ‘ In the present age,’ replied the 
queen, ‘ thou alone art such a Sati,’ a word defined 
by the author of the Bhagat Mai as a. ‘ woman who 
cohsidereth her husband a god and hath no con- 
cern with any other deity.’ Not feeling flattered 
by the well-nigh unapproachable standard of con- 
jugal devotion which alone Padamavati considered 
as worthy of admiration, the queen determined to 
put her to the test at the first opportunity. 

One day when Jaidev was absent from home, the 
queen arranged that one of the royal servants in 
pretended haste was to come to her when with 
Padamavati, and inform the latter that Jaidev had 
been attacked and killed in the forest by a tiger. 
On the servant coming to where they were seated and 
repeating this carefully tutored story, Padamavati 
swooned and fell lifeless to the ground.^ 

The queen who had brought about this disaster, 
turned pale and became distracted at the unexpected 
turn of events. She was severely rebuked % the 
king when he heard of the occurrence. Life became 
bitter to her, and she made preparations for death 
on a funeral pyre which she had constructed. When 
the circumstances were communicated to J aidev, he 
appeared in time to hinder the immolation of the 
queen, and approaching the dead Padamavati sang 
his well-known ashtapadis. To the surprise and 
joy of all, she was restored to life, it is said, and 
joined her husband in his song. 

^ The story in Nabhaji’s Bhagat Mai makes the king join in the 
plot. We adopt in preference the story in the Marathi work, Bharat 
khanda cha aravacMn Kosh. 



JAIDEV 15 

J aidev and his wife by this time had had sufficient 
experience of regal life. They were glad to abandon 
all state and return to their lowly home at Kenduli, 
where they enjoyed the society of saints and trans- 
ferred their idolatrous, devotion to the love and 
homage of the one true God. 

On the anniversary of Jaidev’s birth a religious 
fair is held at Kenduli, the poet’s birthplace, and 
is attended by thousands of Vaishnavs who cele- 
brate the occasion by assembling round his cenotaph 
for worship, and singing the most sublime portions 
of his immortal songs. 

The following hymns of Jaidev in far other style 
and manner, and written in the popular language 
of his time, are found in the Granth Sahib. 


HYMNS OF JAIDEV 

Gujari 

God’s attributes, moral injunctions, and the in- 
utility of Hindu forms of worship : — 

Before all things was the Being who is unrivalled and 
endued with permanence and similar attributes ; ^ 

Who is supremely wonderful, distinct from nature, incom- 
prehensible, and pervade th creation. 

Repeat only the beloved God’s name, 

Which is ambrosia and the essence of all things. 

By remembering Him the fear of birth, old age, and 
death afflicteth us not. 

If thou desire the defeat of the god of death and his 
train, praise and bless God, and do good works. 

God is equally in the present, past, and future, im- 
perishable, and supremely happy. 

^ The attributes of God here meant are sal, stability or permanence ; 
chit, sensation ; and dnand, happiness. 



i6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


0 many if thou seek to do good acts, renounce greed and 
the coveting of another’s house/ 

Together with all evil deeds and evil inclinations, and 
seek the protection of God. 

Embrace the service of God alone in thought, deed, and 
word. 

What availeth the practice of jog, sacrifice, alms, and 
penance ? 

0 man, utter the name of God, the Bestower of all super- 
natural power. 

Jaidev hath come openly into the asylum of Him who is in 
the present and the past, who is contained in all things. 

Maru 

The following hymn, which in the original is per- 
haps one of the most difficult of human compositions, 
is given to illustrate the practice of jog.* 

1 drew up my breath by the left nostril, I fixed it 
between both nostrils* and I drew it down by the right 
repeating oam sixteen times at each process, 

^ That is, his wife and property. 

2 It has been explained that jog means the union of the soul with 
God, and the first means of effecting this is to train and obtain com- 
plete mastery over the inspiratory and expiratory organs. In the first 
stage ot this exercise the breath is drawn up through the left nostril, 
called iray while the syllable oaniy one of the symbols of God, is slowly 
repeated sixteen times. The breath is then suspended in the upper 
part of the nose where both nostrils meet. This junction of the nostrils 
is called sukhmana. As the breath has been drawn up by the left 
nostril, so it is forced down through the right, called pingala, the 
syllable oam being again sixteen times repeated. 

But the highest exercise of this practice is drawing the breath up to 
the brain, which in the language of the Jogis is styled the tenth gate, 
the other gates or apertures of the body being the eyes, ears, nose, 
mouth, &c. To assist in keeping the breath in the brain, the tongue 
is bent backw^ards so as to close the air passage. The operator also 
exerts himself to allow no breath to issue by the mouth or nostrils. 
A state of suspended animation then ensues. The brain is heated, 
and is said to distil nectar which falls on the tongue, and then a state 
of ecstasy supervenes. Skill in this practice, which is said to greatly 
weaken the body, is nowadays obtained by very few persons. 

® Nad appears to mean here what is known to the Jogis as the 
sukhmana. 



HYMNS OF iJAIDEV 17 

My strength I broke, and I have become weak ; my, 
unstable mind I fixed and made stable ; my unfashioned 
mind I fashioned, and then I quaffed nectar. 

In that state I sang of Him who preceded the soul ^ and 
the three qualities.® 

The idea that Thou and f are distinct hath been removed. 

What was worthy of worship I worshipped, what was 
worthy of trust I trusted ; and I have become blended 
with God £is water with water. 

Saith Jaidev, I have repeated God’s name,® and becoming 
absorbed in His love have obtained Him who hveth undis- 
turbed. 


NAMDEV® 

Namdev was the son of Damasheti, a tailor, who 
resided at Narsi Bamani, a village near Karhad in 
the Satara district of the Bombay Presidency. 
Namdev’s mother was Gonabai, daughter of a tailor 
at Kalyan, in the same district. Both Namdev’s 

^ God the Supreme Spirit, is the source whence the souls, jlvatamay 
of all animals have proceeded. The soul can only return to God by 
good works and laborious struggles for perfection. As long as God 
and the soul are distinct, the latter is subject to transmigration. 
When by the practice of good works the light of the soul blends 
with the light of God, nirvdn^ or eternal rest, is obtained. 

2 That is, from whom the soul and the three qualities emanated. 
God being a spirit cannot be said from a human point of view to 
possess any attributes. 

® Jaidev y which literally means victory to God. 

^ The accounts of Namdev current in different provinces and 
languages of India are, for the most part, incorrect. The most trust- 
worthy materials for his life are contained in the Gdiha, compiled by 
Mr. Tnkaram Tatya. It contains many hymns attributed to Namdev 
himself, but even ^ese contain several exaggerations. 

The anthoif is indebted to Messrs. A. F. Maconochie .and 
L. J. Moi^)tfQrd, governors of the Sholapur District, ,^nd to 
Messrs. N. 6. Chandorkar and S/ B. Sardesai, officials in the same 
district, for inquiries made regarding the lives of N&mdev arid other 
Slants <iS the Dakhan. 


SIKH. VI 


c 



i8 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


father and mother, and probably their ancestors for 
some generations, possessed great devotional enthu- 
siasm. 

Outside the village of Narsi Bamani stood the 
temple of Keshiraj (Shiv), of whom Damasheti was 
a devout worshipper. He never omitted to pay 
a daily visit to the temple and make an offering to 
his god. Namdev’s mother when pregnant used to 
request everybody she met to repeat the name of 
her favourite god. Namdev was born on Sunday 
the eleventh day of the light half of the month of 
Kartik in the Shaka year 1192, a. d. 1270. At the 
age of three years the young saint used to ejaculate 
the name of the local god of his devotion. At the 
age of five years he was sent to school, but he made 
no progress in learning. Whenever he found an 
opportunity, either in the absence of his teachers or 
otherwise, he set his schoolfellows singing songs to 
his favourite god, in which he joined both with 
voice and cymbal accompaniment. It is said that 
he loved God even from the day of his birth, and his 
divine love and devotion increased with his years. 

At the age of eight years Namdev was betrothed 
to Rajabai, daughter of Govind Sheti. By her he 
ultimately hadfour sons, Narayan, Mahadev, Govind, 
and Vithal, and one daughter named Limba Bai. 

His father finding that he made no progress in 
learning apprenticed him to his own trade. It very 
soon became manifest that Namdev paid no attention 
to practical business, but spent his time consorting 
with religious men^cants, visiting the temple of 
his god, and performing the devotions usual in such 
cases. It was then decided to put him to commerce. 
To this he consented, but represented that he 
possessed no capital. This was procured from a 
friendly banker. When Namdev found himself in 
the possession of funds, he gave a great feast to 
Brahmans, which exhausted all his money. At this 
both his parents and the money-lender were greatly 



NAMDEV 


19 

distressed. His mother bitterly reproached him for 
his recklessness and extravagance — 

‘ Was it for this I carried thee about for nine 
months ? Was this misery kept in store for my 
old age ? . O why did. I not rather remain a barren 
woman than give birth to such a son ? Art thou 
not ashamed of thyself ? People laugh at thee for 
thy madness. Have some respect for thy mother. 
Look at my grey hairs. Think of the miseries of 
thine aged father. What wilt thou gain by this 
madness ? There are also other worshippers of 
Keshiraj . Why canst_, thou not act like them ? 
What merits wilt thou obtain from this god ? All 
who cared for him were ruined.’ 

. “Namdev’s mother, finding her remonstrances and 
objurgations useless, appealed to the priests of the 
temple to remonstrate with her son and lead him 
to a right understanding of his worldly position 
From them, too, no hope was received of the youth’s 
amendment. They urged in reply to her repre- 
sentations that she was a fortunate mother, and 
that the good deeds of her previous births had 
ripened, and she had obtained a saint for a son. 

One day when Namdev’s father was absent, the 
son took the daily offering of the family to the 
temple. It consisted of milk, which the youth had 
just milked from his cow. He thought that the 
god would freely partake of the offering on which 
he had lavished so much care. The stony idol, 
however, would not vouchsafe to do so. Upon this 
Namdev began to cry, threw himself down at the 
god’s feet and uttered passionate supplications. In 
due time the god relented and accepted the boy’s 
offering. He celebrated the event in the following 
hymn in the Bhairo measure : — 

Nama having milked his brown cow took 
A cup of milk and a jug of water for the idol. 

‘ Drink milk and my mind will be at ease ; 

Otherwise my father will be angry.’ 

C 2 



20 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

A g«dden cup Med with nMc 

Nama took and placed before the idol — 

The saints alone wbide in my heart'^ 

On seeing Nama the god smiled ; 

Chi giving milk to the idol the worshipper Nama went 
home, 

And God appeared unto him. 

With reference to this mirade the author of the 
B hagai Mai, in a paroxysm of devotion, remarks, 
‘ Congratulations to God who loveth His saints, and 
is pleased with their devotion. Thou whom the 
Ve^ call Endless, and to attain whom Shiv and 
the other demigods performed every form of pen- 
ance, art so much in the power of the saints and 
their love, that Thou performest everything accord- 
ing to their desires.’ 

It appears that Namdev, on arriving at man’s 
estate, for a time grew weary of saintship. He 
records of himself that through evil destiny he began 
to associate with dakaits or Indian highwaymen, 
and plunder travellers. He and his gang killed 
several Brahmans, pilgrims, and innocent men. His 
father and other elderly persons remonstrated with 
him, but he heeded not their censures. At last the 
Emperor dispatched a squadron of cavalry to arrest 
the offenders. They refused to submit, and in the 
skirmish which ensued eighty-four of the troopers 
were slain, whereupon the remainder decamped. 

Namdev possessed a large and excellent mare on 
which he used to scour the country and visit distant 
places. Whether as the result of habit or repen- 
tance, he made a vow, which he rehgiously kept, to 
behold daily the idol of Nagnath in the village of 
Aundhi, about sixteen miles to the east of Pan- 
dharpur. 

There is another temple of .Nagnath in the village 
of Vadval and thither went Namdev to behold 
the great saint Vishoba Khechar. Vishoba, in order 



NAMDEV 


21 


to make a trial of Namdev, resolved to assume 
the appearance of a leper. He thought that in 
this way if Namdev’s faith were not strong, he would 
incontinently run away. Namdev in his search for 
Vishoba went into the neighbouring temple. There 
he saw a leper lying on the ground resting his shod- 
den feet on a lingam, the emblem of Shiv. On 
beholding the insult to the idol, Namdev chid the 
leper and asked him to leave the sacred edifice. 
Vishoba replied that he was an old man who could 
not attend to nice formalities of worship, but 
Namdev might turn his feet in whatever direction 
he pleased. Upon this Namdev raised the old 
man’s feet and turned them in a different direction. 
There, too, it is said, Namdev again saw a lingam 
under Vishoba’s feet. He was astonished, as well 
he might be, on beholding this extraordinary 
circumstance, and asked the leper where Vishoba 
was. The leper replied, ‘ I am Vishoba.’ Namdev 
then asked how a man reputed to be a saint could be 
guilty of placing his feet on a lingam and thus 
outraging the god. Vishoba replied that he found 
no place which was not filled with God. Namdev 
bowed to him, and expressed a desire to become his 
disciple. Vishoba then proposed to Namdev to 
take him outside the temple. When Vishoba was 
deposited there, he said he would accept Namdev 
as a disciple, and bade him close his eyes. Namdev 
did so, and on opening them saw no longer a leper, 
but a priest in vigorous health and manly beauty. 

Namdev abode for several months with Vishoba 
Khechar and received instruction from him as re- 
corded in a work called Namdev Gatha, principally in 
the Marathi language, but containing also one hun • 
dred and ten Hindi stanzas from which Namdev’s 
hymns in the Granth Sahib have been selected. 

On one occasion when Namdev went to behold his 
god in the temple he was not allowed to enter because 
a Brahman, who had brought cooked food to offer to 



22 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


the god, would not suffer persons of Namdev’s 
degraded caste to stand under the same roof with 
him. Namdev while detained outside the temple 
saw approach a very needy low-caste woman with 
a child on her hip. The child was crying piti- 
fully for a morsel of the food brought by wealthy 
persons as offerings to the god. The mother tried 
to restrain the child’s cries and longings. The child 
refused to be comforted and only cried and coveted 
the more. The woman then began to beat the 
child. Namdev’s heart melted at the sight, and he 
remonstrated with the mother for her behaviour. 
She replied, ‘ The child is very hungry and wishes 
me to give her the god’s food, which is impossible. 
I have nothing myself, I am totally without means. 
My husband was one of the eighty-four horsemen 
recently cut down by the inhuman dakaits. Being 
thus helpless myself, what can I give the child ? 
I only possess the bones in my body. Dost thou, 
by thy chiding and harsh words, desire me to feed 
her with them ? ’ 

Her words pierced Namdev’s heart, and he began 
to reflect how many families had been ruined through 
his reckless and lawless career. On leaving the 
temple precincts, he bestowed his mare and whatever 
clothes he could dispense with on the Brahmans, and, 
to use his own words, made a friend of repentance. 
He took up a knife, entered the temple in anguish, 
and began to pray to his god. ‘ O Shiv, O Mahadev, 
I have committed many crimes and shall have to 
suffer the torments of hell. How shall I find salva- 
tion ? ’ In his agony of remorse, he thrust the 
knife into his head, upon which blood spurted from it 
and fell on the idol. The ministrants of the temple 
ran up, snatched the knife from his hand, tied him 
hand and foot, and threw him outside the edifice. 
A crowd gathered round him and began to revile 
and spurn him, not for his attempt at suicide, but 
for having defiled the god. 



NAMDEV 


23 


When left alone, he thought he saw Nagnath in 
a vision, who thus addressed him : ‘ Namdev, thou 
hadst better proceed to Pandharpur at once. Its 
patron god, Vitthal, will purge thee of thy sins, and 
thou shalt not only obtain salvation, but renown, 
as one of God’s saints in the world.’ Namdev 
tied up the wound in his head and started for 
Pandharpur, in the company of pilgrims who were 
proceeding thither. On the way he was tormented 
physically by flies which sought to settle on his 
wound, and mentally by the curses and reproaches 
of his companions. 

Pundarik, who lived in the present district of 
Sholapur, was a saint c'elebrated for his devotion 
to his parents. It is said the god Krishan went with 
his cows and herdsmen all the way from Dwaraka 
on the margin of the Arabian Sea to behold the pos- 
sessor of such filial piety. Krishan left his belong- 
ings at Gopalpur on the margin of the Bhima river, 
and proceeded to the dwelling of Pundarik. Pun- 
darik by way of hospitality threw him a brick to 
stand on. The god accepted the offer in the hope of 
friendly converse with the saint, but the latter was 
so much engaged in the service of his parents that 
he had not leisure to speak to him. Krishan, dis- 
daining to return to Dwaraka without effecting his 
object, remained standing on the brick, and was 
named Vitthal.^ 

Long afterwards the place was the scene of the 
depredations of a famous robber. The renowned 
Emperor Salivahan, whose capital was at Paithan, 
south of Aurangabad, and who gave his name to an 

^ ' The name of a much worshipped god at Pandharpur. He is 
much resorted to by the low and mean and despised of all descrip- 
tions. Hence a descriptive derivation has been invented for his 
name, viz. vi, from vit, knowledge or understanding, th, cipher, i.e. 
privation, destitution, and I for lat, he takes. Thus vit, th, and / form 
Vitthal, and acquire the sense Receiver of the ignorant and the destitute 
of understanding.’ — Molesworth’s Marathi Dictionary. 



24 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

era which preceded the Christian by fifty-seven 
years, sent in the fifth year of his reign an officer 
to rid the land of the freebooter. The officer found 
the god still standing in the same posture as when he 
had been last seen by Pundarik. The place was 
named Pundarikpur — shortened into Pandharpur — 
in memory of the saint and it gradually rose to 
considerable importance and became the most im- 
portant place of worship in Maharashtar.^ 

The roQf of Namdev’s hut was blown away by 
a storm while the inmates were asleep. A devout 
friend whom Namdev recognized as God incarnate 
at once proceeded to re-roof the building. This 
incident was versified by 'Namdev in the Sorath 
measure as follows ; — 

A near neighbour asked Nama, ‘ By whom didst thou 
have this hut rebuilt ? 

‘ If thou show me the carpenter, I will pay him twice the 
wages thou didst.’ 

‘ O my sister, my Carpenter cannot be given thee ; 

Lo ! my Carpenter pervadeth all things ; 

My Carpenter is the Support of the soul. . 

Tf any one want such a hut to be built, the Carpenter 
will require love for His wages. 

When man breaketh with his family and all his friends, 
then the Carpenter of His own accord cometh to him. 

I cannot describe such a Carpenter ; He is contained in 
everything and in every place. 

As when a dumb man tasteth the great flavour of nectar, 
if thou ask him, he cannot describe it. 

Hear the praises of the Carpenter, my sister — He restrained 
the ocean and fixed Dhru as the polar star. 

Nama’s Lord recovered Sita, and bestowed Lanka on 
Babhikhan.’ * 

^ MahJlrSshtar, the country of the Marathas, bounded on the north 
by the Narbada river, on the south and east by the KarnStic and 
Telinga, and on the west by the ocean. • 

* Babhtkhan (Vibhishan), brother of the wicked R3wan, was granted 
RSwan’s kingdom by Ram Chandar. 



NAMDEV 


25 


The house i« which Namdev and his family lived 
and in which in early years he plied his trade, is 
pointed out to the visitor. It has been greatly 
enlarged and modified since the saint made it his 
residence. The roof of the large hall is now sup- 
ported by pillars. It is said that Namdev buried 
many of his voluminous works within the house, 
and forbade their exhumation under a solemn 
malediction. 

A girl called Janabai went with her parents to 
visit the temple of Pandharpur. She there obtained 
such an access of devotion that she refused to re- 
turn home, and her parents returned without her. 
Namdev happened to see her, and, taking an 
interest in her, made inquiries regarding her parents 
and place of residence. She replied that she had 
no parents but God, and no residence save His 
temple at Pandharpur. Namdev was moved to take 
compassion on her, and entrusted her to his mother. 
Janabai developed poetical talents, and several of 
her compositions are extant. She has given some 
particulars of Namdev’s life.^ 

The Hindus desired to test the reality of Namdev’s 
fast on the eleventh days of the light and dark 
halves of the month. They sent him a lean Brah- 
man who asked for some food. Namdev refused 
as it was the eleventh day. He was fasting himself, 
and he thought others ought to fast also. The 
pretended Brahman said that he was at his last 
gasp through hunger. ‘ Bring me something at 
once.’ In short, such was the insistence of the 
Brahman in asking and of Namdev in refusing, 
that a serious difference resulted between them. 
Several people assembled on hearing the uproar, 
and advised Namdev to give something from his 
kitchen for the sake of peace and dismiss the Brah- 

‘ In the courtyard of Namdev’s house is a miniature statue of 
the lady wearing an ample crinoline. She is reverenced as a saint 
both by inhabitants and pilgrims. 



26 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


man. Namdev refused, as he deemed fasting on 
the eleventh day the most important form of devo- 
tion. The Brahman insisted on not taking his 
departure till he had received something to eat. 
He accordingly fell down at Namdev’s door, and 
pretended to die of hunger the same evening. 

Persons unacquainted with the strict rules for the 
eleventh day’s fast began to charge Namdev with 
the heinous crime of having caused a Brahman’s 
death. Namdev neither feared nor heeded their 
censure. He prepared a funeral P3n:e, and seating 
himself on it beside the Brahman, ordered it to be 
lighted. The Brahman had no wish to immolate 
himself and promptly rose from the pyre and de- 
camped. Thus was Namdev rescued from the 
death which he had courted. The bystanders, on 
seeing what had occurred, became believers, and 
accepted as a fact that Namdev was under the 
special protection of heaven. 

A Brahman called Parisa Bhagwat lived in Pan- 
dharpur. He had a philosopher’s stone — paras — the 
word from which his name was apparently derived. 
His wife Kamalja one day went to the adjacent Bhima 
river and there met Rajabai, Namdev’s wife. The lat- 
ter complained that her husband Namdev would do 
no work, and that in consequence the family was in 
very straightened circumstances. Kamalja said she 
possessed a philosopher’s stone which she would 
lend her. It would convert everything into gold, 
and she would no longer be indigent. Rajabai, it is 
said, took the philosopher’s stone and produced 
much gold by its agency. When Namdev heard of 
this, he took the stone and threw it into the river. 
When Kamalja remonstrated with him, he dived 
into the water and brought iip two handfuls of 
gravel, which he threw in front of her. On looking 
she fancied that every bit of the gravel was a philo- 
sopher’s stone. On this she left her home and became 
a disciple of Namdev. 



NAMDEV 


27 


Gyandev/ a disciple of Vishoba Khechar, hearing 
of the fame of Namdev, went to Pandharpur to 
visit him. Gyandev was a Vedantist and pantheistic 
philosopher who relied on knowledge, while Namdev 
was thoroughly convinced of the superiority of de- 
votion or spiritual love to one God. The Brahmans 
deem Vedantism more orthodox as having been 
originally propounded in works which they accept as 
divine revelation. When a man becomes a Vedantist, 
he rejects religious observances and believes himself 
saved during life. Namdev now totally repudiated 
this belief. At the same time there was nothing to 
hinder a Pantheist from consorting with a monotheist, 
and both saints became fast friends ; Gyandev pro- 
posed to him that they should go together to visit 
holy places. Namdev replied that he was in the hands 
of Vitthal, and his permission must first be obtained. 
This preliminary having been arranged, Namdev 
fainted at the thought of leaving his god. Gyandev 
tried to console him, and said that as he was an in- 
carnation of Vitthal, the god could have no cause 
for regret. 

In the course of their conversation Gyandev 
asked him to indicate the way of devotion, and 
explain how man could make Vitthal his own. 
Namdev replied, ‘ The strength of contempt of the 
world should be in the body as an unchanging 
companion. Man should lay aside the difference 
between himself and others, and feel no anxiety for 
things of this world.’ 

The object of the saints was most probably rather 
a thirst for information than a desire to make a 
religious pilgrimage. Had the latter been their 
object, they would have gone first to Banaras, and 
endeavoured to obtain the hall-mark of orthodoxy 
and the favour of the great Hindu priests who 
resided there. The two saints set out from Pan- 

’ Jnyandev is the correct spelling, but on account of the difficulty of 
pronunciation the saint is known in Northern India as Gyandev. 



28 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

dharpur for Hastinapur, the name by which Dihli was 
then known. The Emperor Muhammad bin Tughlak 
hearing of Namdev’s influence with the people, and 
suspecting that it would lead to an insurrection, 
resolved to arrest his career. The following hymn 
in the Bhairo measure gives the result : — 

The emperor said, ‘ Ho, you Nama, 

Let me see the deeds of your God.’ 

The emperor had Nama arrested — 

‘ Let me see your God Vitthal ; 

Restore to life this slaughtered cow, 

Otherwise I will strike off thy head on the spot.’ 

‘ Your majesty, how can that be ? 

No man can reanimate what is slaughtered. 

All I could do would be of no avail ; 

What God doeth taketh place.’ 

The emperor fell into a passion. 

And set a huge elephant at Nama. 

Nama’s mother began to cry — 

‘Why dost thou not abandon the God of the Hindus 
and worship the God of the Musalmans ? ’ 

Namdev : ‘ I am not thy son, nor art thou my mother ; 
Even though I perish, I will sing God’s praises.’ 

The elephant struck him with his trunk, 

Bttt Nama was saved by the protection of God. 

The king said, ‘ The Qazis and the Mullas salute me. 

But this Hindu trampleth on mine honour.’ 

The Hindus said, ‘ O king, hear our prayer ; 

Take Nama’s weight in gold.’ 

‘ If I take a bribe I shall go to hell ; 

Shall I amass wealth by abandoning my faith ? ’ 

While Nama’s feet were being chained 

He sang the praises of God and beat time with his hands. 

The Ganges and the Jamna may flow backwards. 

But Nama will repeat God’s name. 

When seven gharis were heard to strike,^ 

^ NSmdev got orders from the Emperor to restore the cow within 
a pahar or watch of three hours or suffer death. When seven of the 



NAMDEV 


29 


The Loid of the three worlds had not yet arrived. 

God afterwards came mounted on His gariu:, 

Which beat the air with its wings.^ 

He took compassion on His saint, 

And came mounted on His garur, 

‘ Say but the word and I will turn the earth on its side ; 
Say but the word and I will upturn it altogether.® 

Say but the word and I will restore the dead cow to life, 
So that every one may behold and be convinced.’ 

Nama said, ‘ Spancel the cow 

They put the calf to her and milked her. 

When the pitcher was filled with the milk the cow gave, 
Nama took and placed it before the emperor. 

And the time of trouble came on him. 

He implored Namdev through the Qazis and the Mullas— 
‘ Pardon me, O Hindu, I am thy cow.’ 

Nama said, ‘ Hear, O monarch. 

Hath this credential been exhibited by me ? 

The object of this miracle is 

That thou, 0 emperor, shouldst walk in the paths of 
truth and humility — 

Namdev, God is contained in everything.’ 

The Hindus went in procession to Nama, 

And said, ‘ If the cow had not been restored to life. 
People would have lost faith in thee.’ 

The fame of Namdev remained in the world ; 

He took saints with him to salvation. 

All trouble and sorrow befell the revilers — 

Between Nama and God there is no difference. 

eight gharis of the pahar had elapsed and the cow was not reanimated, 
Namdev felt anxious ; but when the eighth ghari was struck, it is said 
God presented Himself and wrought this miracle to preserve His saint 
from the Emperor’s wrath. 

^ Also translated — When the end of the watch had struck, God 
came riding on His garur. Vide p. 81, n. i, infra, 

* Also translated — (a) I will take thee with Me on high ; (fi) 1 will 
take the earth and put it in the sky. 

* Sel masel. The gyJnis think that these words were intended as an 
anagram of Salim Shah, but Namdev lived long prior to that monarch. 
The Emperor at the time was certainly Muhammad bin Tughlak. 



30 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Namdev continued to preach that God and his idol 
were one, as holy water and ordinary water have 
the same appearance, as a lamp and its hght, as 
a flower and its fragrance, as the sun and its rays, 
as the cloud and water, as sweetmeats and their 
taste, as a musical instrument and its melody, as an 
object and its shadow are all inseparable. His 
teaching again involved Namdev in serious difficulty, 
and he had to hastily retreat to save himself from 
the indignation and violence of the Muhammadans. 

Namdev and Gyandev next proceeded to Kashi 
(Banaras), where they met the renowned Sanskrit 
scholars of the age. Thence they travelled to 
Priyag, Thence they went to Gaya, where Budha 
in days long past performed his heroic penance 
and renunciation. Thence the two saints pro- 
ceeded to Ajudhia, the birthplace of the god Ram 
Chandar. They then went to Mathura, the birth- 
place of the god Sri Krishan, thence to Gokal and 
Bindraban, thence to Jagannath, the temple of the 
lord of the world, on the shore of the Bay of Bengal. 
From there they made the long journey to Dwaraka 
by the shore of the Arabian Sea, the scene of Krishan’s 
retreat from the battle in which he was defeated by 
King Jarasandh. 

The two saints having thus proceeded to the utmost 
limit of India resolved to begin their homeward 
journey, and in due time reached Marwar, They 
tarried for a night in Kolad, probably the modern 
Koilath near Bikaner. Here occurred an incident 
which is related by the Marathi chronicler. Namdev 
and Gyandev both felt thirsty. There was a well 
in the neighbourhood, but it was very deep, and 
they had not the means of drawing water. It is 
said that Gyandev by the aid of jog science assumed 
a minute body, descended into the well, and quenched 
his thirst. He then challenged Namdev either to 
assume a minute body and descend into the well 
or drink water from his hands. Namdev, who was 



NAMDEV 


31 


no believer in the efficacy of jog, declined the 
challenge, and said that if his god Vishoba were 
there, he would supply him with water. Upon this, 
it is said, the well filled to the brim with sweet 
water, and Namdev’s^ desires were in every way 
gratified. 

; Namdev and Gyandev then departed for Rame- 
shwar in the extreme south of India, memorable as 
the place whence Ram Chandar set out on his 
expedition to Ceylon. After seeing the temple of 
Oamkar the two saints proceeded to Kalapdhara and 
thence to Dhara. In the latter place they visited 
the temple of Audhiya Nagnath. When Namdev 
arrived at the temple, he began to sing hymns with 
a loud voice. This attracted a crowd of people, 
so that the Brahman ministrants could not gain 
entrance without suffering the pollution of being 
touched by men of lower caste, deemed unworthy 
of salvation. Upon this they asked Namdev to 
cease singing and retire to a spot at the rear of the 
temple where he might continue his minstrelsy if 
he chose. Namdev told them that in God’s temple 
there were no higher or lower castes, and that no 
one’s touch could soil those who performed heartfelt 
worship. The Brahmans were not convinced ; they 
struck Namdev, deprived him of his cymbals, and 
insisted that he should leave the temple. He went 
and sat down behind it and thus addressed God, 
‘ I have no asylum but in Thee, and I want nothing. 
If Thou show Thyself to others and not to me, 
lend Thine ear at least to my songs.’ He then 
began to sing verses full of self-reproach and abase- 
ment. 

It is said that God, on hearing Namdev’s tuneful 
worship, was moved with kindness and compassion, 
and caused the temple to turn round, so that the 
door remained opposite His saint. Namdev has 
versified the incident in the following hymn in the 
Rag Malar : — 



32 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I went, O Lord, with lau^ter and gladness to Thy temple, 

But while Nama was worshipping, the Btethmans forced 
him away. 

A lowly caste is mine, O King of the Yadav,i why was 
I born a calico-printer ? 

I took up my blanket, went back. 

And sat behind the temple. 

As Nama repeated the praises of God 

The temple turned towards His saint. 

Namdev returned to the subject in the following 
hymn in the Bhairo measure : — 

Forget me not, forget me not. 

Forget me not, O God ! 

Those misled Brahmans of the temple were all furious 
with me ; 

Calling me a Sudar they beat me and turned me out ; 
what shall I do, Father Vitthal ? 

If Thou give me salvation when I am dead, nobody will 
be aware of it ; save me now.® 

If these pandits call me low, then, 0 God, Thine honour 
will be in the background. 

Thou who art called the compassionate and the merciful, 
altogether unrivalled is Thine arm — 

God turned round the front of the temple towards Nama, 
and its back towards the pandits. 

From Audhiya Nagnath the party proceeded to 
Paithan, Salivahan’s capital, on the margin of the 
Godavari in the present state of Haidarabad, and 
thence to Deogiri, once the capital of the Maratha 
kingdom, in the vicinity of the famous caves of 
Ellora, where they met Sadhna, who hospitably 
entertained them, and then joined them in their 
peregrinations. They visited several places in the 

^ That is, Krishan. NSmdev in the transition st^ of hia reforma- 
tion used the word or expression Yadav RSia for God. 

* The meaning of the saint’s prayer to God is — ‘ Assist ipe in this 
world so that men may know I am under Thy protection.’ ’ 



NAMDEV 


33 


neighbourhood of Nasik, and thence proceeded to 
Junagarh in the province of Kathiawar.^ 

No very important incidents are recorded relating 
to the saints’ homeward journey. On arriving at 
Pandharpur, Namdev applied himself to the com- 
position of his abhangs,* His fame rapidly extended 
and his compositions flew from mouth to mouth. 
Many accepted the incidents related in them, but 
others entertained doubts regarding Namdev’s ac- 
curacy. On being pressed to explain the miracles 
he recorded and give a clear reply as to whether 
he himself believed in them, he asked his inter- 
rogator if he had ever heard bells ringing in his ears, 
and if the ringing were real or imaginary. The inter- 
rogator replied that he had heard ringing in his 
ears but no material bells were actually ringing. 
Namdev practically admitted that his record of 
miracles was the result of similar deception and of 
excessive and childlike faith. He believed in the 
miracles himself, and gave poetical expression to his 
belief as his vivid imagination prompted him, 

Namdev once met an old friend who questioned 
him on his spiritual progress. Namdev unbosomed 
himself and described his mission to Vadval. His 
friend wondered that a man from whose hands 
his god had taken food, could put himself under 
a human guru inferior beyond all comparison to 
the much worshipped and much beloved Vitthal, 
Namdev replied as follows : ‘ Gods made of stone 
never speak. How can they heal worldly sorrows ? 
People suppose that idols of stone are God, but He 
is a real divinity and altogether different. If gods 
of stone can fulfil man’s desires why should he suffer 
sorrow and affliction ? They who worship gods of 

^ We have endeavoured to follow the saints’ itinerary as given in 
the Lives of Indian Saints, but it is possible that it will afterwards be 
re-arranged, should Namdev’s followers think it necessary. The 
geographical difficulties of the present itinerary are obvipus. 

Hymns principally in the Marathi langitage. 

D 


SIKH. VI 



34 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

stone are absolute idiola; Both they who fMreach and 
they who believe that gods of stone hold converse 
with saints have perverted intellects. They who 
call such gods great beings and style their priests 
saints are really degraded creatures unworthy of 
credence. Let not their words enter thine ears. 
How can men be saved who cause gods to be carved 
out of stone, and reverently regard them during the 
years of their mortal lives ? Hast thou never 
reflected on this ? Thou hast no gods except water 
and stones. Go visit all the places of pilgrimage 
small and great and see for thyself. I have learned 
in Vadval that God is everywhere contained. 
Khechar conferred the favour on me of showing 
me God in my own heart.’ 

The Marathi chronicles show that Namdev died 
on the thirteenth day of the dark half of the month 
Asu, A.D. 1350, at the age of eighty years, and that 
he was buried in Pandharpur, where his head, 
moulded in brass on the lower step of the temple 
of Vishoba, is now worshipped by the populace. 
He has left several abhangs in which he prayed 
Shri Vitthal to give him a last resting-place at his 
feet. He was accordingly buried at the entrance of 
the temple of Vishoba under the lowest step of the 
stairs by which pilgrims ascend. He desired that 
his head should be trodden on by holy men and 
that he should acquire spiritual advantage from the 
dust of their feet. The idea is that when a man 
prostrates himself at the foot of a saint the dust of 
the saint’s feet purifies him. The climax of beatitude 
is attained when the dust of the soles of the saint’s 
feet falls on the worshipper’s head. 

. C^posite Namdev’s grave was buried one Chokhya, 
a Mahar of the lowest grade of Sudars — a grade so 
socially spumed that they might not even be touched 
by the higher classes. They were not allowed even 
ih the time of Bajirao the last Pe^wa ,{1796-^8^7] 
to travel by the same road as Brahmans, and it is 



NAMDEV 


36 

believed that they are still not allov^ed to do so in 
certain places in Southern India. To tiie right eff 
the visitor is seen a representation of Gane^ tkfi 
elephant-headed god of learning, carved in relief out 
of a rock and painted red. Near Ganesh is a 8ha|i»- 
less block of stone said to represent Hanumsui the 
monkey-god and ally of Ram Chandar in his expe- 
dition to Ceylon. 

The temple extends far inwards and contains 
several apartments supported by pillars. Through 
these the pilgrims pass in batches controlled by 
police officials. Over the apartments are vent holes 
to prevent the pilgrims from being suffocated as 
they pass in large numbers. From the roof of the 
temple is seen a chapel sacred to Rukmani the 
consort of Krishan, at which principally Women 
worship. The temple was called Raul by Bhagat 
Namdev. It now contains many and various jewels 
of great value, the offerings of pious pilgrims for 
the decoration and glory of Vishoba. In the neck- 
laces are seen gold coins of Spain, Portugal, 
other European countries.^ 

All Namdev’s compositions bear convincing testi- 
mony to the love he bore his favourite deity. 
Accordingly, the local tradition that he spent his 
old age at Pandharpur in the immediate vicinity 
of Vishoba’ s temple, and that he was buried there 
must be implicitly accepted. 

The Sikhs and Panjabi followers of Namdev say 
that he was cremated at Ghuman in the Gurdaspur 
district of the Panjab. This beUef is founded on 
legends current in the north of India and the records 
at a shrine bearing the saint’s name in Ghuman, but 
it is resolutely denied by his followers in Pandhar|mr, 
who assert tihat, owing to the fame of his sanctity, 
possession of his remains was claimed by many 

^ It is satisfactory to find that the Bombay government allows the 
district British officials to be ex-officio guardians of fire properties of 
the temple. 



36 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

provinces of India in the same way as the god 
Ram was claimed by the Budhists as one of their 
gurus. 

The following account of Namdev in Nabhaji’s 
Bhagai Mai is accepted by his followers in the Panjab, 
though it probably refers to a different person who 
assumed his name. Bamdev was a calico-printer of 
Gopalpura near Pandharpur. He had a daughter, 
a virgin widow, whom he very much loved. Bamdev 
was himself a God-fearing man. When his daughter 
attained the age of twelve years, he instructed her 
to serve and worship God under the name of Vit- 
thalnath, informing her at the same time that, by 
hearty love and devotion to Him, aU her wishes 
should be fulfilled. She then applied herself with 
such zeal to the worship of God that in a short 
time, it is said, He even gratified her desire for 
a son, and she became pregnant. This became 
known all over the city, and to the whole tribe 
wherever dispersed. Evil persons rejoiced at the 
opportunity afforded them of defaming Bamdev. 
The matter eventually came to his ears, and he 
asked his daughter to explain her lapse of virtue. 
She rephed, ‘ Thou toldest me that by hearty love 
and devotion to God, He would satisfy all my wishes 
and desires. Whatever hath occurred hath been 
the work of God.’ Bamdev on hearing this was so 
overjoyed that he could hardly contain himself. 
When in due time a son was born to his daughter, 
he gave all he had in alms as a thanksgiving for the 
happy event. He called the child Namdev, and 
loved him more than his own life. 

To remove the objections of evil and slanderous 
people to the child’s birth the Purans and other 
sacred books were consulted, and the words of 
God in the second chapter of the Bhagawat were 
explained to the people. There God says, that if 
a man worship Him with constant love He will 
fulfil his desires whether for temporal or spiritual 



NAMDEV 


37 


objects. In the eleventh chapter of the Bhagawat 
it is written, that God bestoweth even salvation 
on His saints, so why not the fulfilment of their 
worldly desires ? It would be nothing strange if 
He fulfilled the desires of a saint of His who prayed 
to Him with love. 

There used to be a vigil held in Namdev’s house on 
the eleventh night of the light and dark halves of 
the month. On one occasion on a dark night the 
assembled saints were thirsty, but there was no 
water for them to drink. No one would go to 
draw from the adjacent well, which was haunted. 
Namdev himself took a pitcher and proceeded 
thither with the object of satisfying his guests. 
A terrible and frightful ghost appeared to him. 
For the object of exorcism Namdev extemporized 
a stanza which he sang to the accompaniment of 
cymbals. The first lines of the stanza are as 
follows : — 

My long-legg’d Sir, I see thy form arise, 

Thy feet on earth, thy forehead in the skies. 

Thine arms are long as jojans ^ to mine eyes. 

It is said that God revealed Himself in the ghost, 
and the latter through the favour of Namdev was 
translated to heaven.* 

The following parable is given by some of Namdev’s 
biographers. There was a banker whose riches were 
so great that he had himself weighed with gold 
which he distributed among his poor fellow citizens. 
He sent for Namdev at somebody’s suggestion. Nam- 
dev twice sent him word that he wanted nothing, 
but on the third invitation decided on going to meet 
him. The banker said that he had distributed 
a large amount of money through the city, and 
asked Namdev also to take some, so that he him- 

^ A jojan is four kos. A kos is a linear measure varying in different 
parts of India from one mile and a quarter to two miles. 

^ Nabhaji’s Bh^at MSl. 



38 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

dlH naight Teaj> stwne advantage from the btene- 
laetkiM. NajftdeV re|>Iied, ‘ Why should I refuse 
aaythi!^ that would be for thy benefit ? ’ At the 
same time he reflected that when the banker aban- 
doned the pride of wealth, it would be well for him. 
He therefore wrote the letter R, being half of God’s 
name*,^ on a sprig of sweet basil, and told the banker 
to weigh goM against it. The banker asked if he 
were Ihughing at him, and said, ‘Having regard 
for thy hoKness and kindness in visiting me, ask for 
what thou desirest.’ Namdev replied that laughter 
and pleasantry were out of place. He only required 
gold of the weight of the sprig of basil. Upon this 
the banker sent for small scales, and began to 
weigh the basil with a little gold. The gold was not 
sufficient to weigh down the sprig. The banker 
sent for larger scales, and finding the sprig weighed 
more than five or seven sers, put in six or seven 
mans of gold, but still the scale with the basil 
remained on the ground, while the scale with the 
gold kicked the beam. He then borrowed more 
gold from his tribesmen, but all would not suffice 
to lift the basil. At this the banker and his de- 
pendants were sore distressed. Namdev then 
saw that the banker had parted with his pride of 
wealth, but that he was still proud of the good acts 
he had done during his life, and it was necessary 
to dispel that pride also. Namdev told him to 
add the offering of the good acts of his life, and 
perhaps the scale with the sprig of basil would rise. 
The banker did so, but still the scale refused to 
move. The banker’s good acts possessed no weight. 
Upon this he told Namdev to take away all the gold. 
Namdev inquired what use it would be to him. 
He wanted the wealth of God’s service, to whom 
all the deities and the powers of both worlds were 
subservient. The banker grew ashamed and in- 
spired with faith became a saint of God. 

^ Ram. The vowel is not counted' a letter. 



NAMDEV 


3 ^ 


The following are given as specimehs of the 
preaching of Namdev. If a man greet another 
outwardly, and inwardly remember his demerits, he 
doeth not well. It is like eating a fly in sweets. 
The mind is made steady by the knowledge that 
God is all-pervading. That is the true form of 
meditation. As loose women, though in the arms 
of their husbands, think of their lovers, as the 
chatrik while resting on the earth thinketh of the 
clouds which will give it acceptable rain-drops, as 
the lotuses in the lake think of the sun, as a cow 
while grazing in the field thinketh of her calf, as 
a miser while walking in the streets thinketh of his 
wealth, as a goldsmith while making ornaments 
thinketh of stealing the gold given him for the 
purpose, as the chakor thinketh of the moonlight, 
as a woman returning from a well thinketh of her 
pitcher while conversing with her friends, as the 
bee while flitting in the glade thinketh of the flower, 
so should man while following the ways of the 
world think of God in his heart. 

Namdev visited the present district of Gurdaspur 
in the Panjab when fifty-five years of age. He first 
went to Bhattewal and dwelt beside a tank there, 
which is called Namiana in memory of him. He 
had two disciples — Ladha and Jalla, a carpenter — 
who settled down with followers of their own in 
the villages of Sukhowal and Dhariwal respectively, 
Namdev removed from Bhattewal, and took up his 
abode near another tank in a lonely forest, where he 
hoped for more leisure for prayer and meditation 
on God, His presence there soon attracted culti- 
vators, and the village of Ghuman gradually sprang • 
up over the spot where he is supposed to have been 
cremated, A fine domed building was erected to 
his memory by Sardar Jassa Singh Ramgarhia ; and 
th(^ tank was repaired by Mai Sada Kaur, the mother- 
indaw of Maharaja Ranjit Sin^h. Since then the 
yearly religious fair at the saint’s shrine on the 




NAMDEV’S SHRINE AT GHUMAN 


SIKH VI p. 39 



40 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

and of Magh— about the 13th of January — ^has 
assumed considerable proportions. His followers in 
the Gurdaspur district are of the same caste and 
occupation as himself, reverence the Granth Sahib, 
and in many respects resemble the Sikhs in their 
usages,^ 

The following hymns of Namdev are found in the 
Granth Sahib. They belong to three periods of his 
life — boyhood when he was an idolater, manhood 
when he was emancipating himself from Hindu 
superstitions, and old age when his hymns became 
conformable to the ideas of rehgious reformers at 
the time, and to the subsequent teaching of the 
Sikh Gurus. It is on account of his later and more 
matured opinions that his writings have been in- 
corporated in the sacred book of the Sikhs. 


NAMDEVS HYMNS 

Gauri 

The saving influence of God’s name. 

0 God, Thou didst cause stones to float ; ^ 

Why should not man float over by repeating Thy name ? 

Thou didst save the courtesan, the shapeless hunchback, 
the hunstman, and Ajamal. 

^ Settlement report of the Gurdaspur district by Sir L. W. Dane, 
now Lieutenant-governor of the Panjab. Lt.-Col. M. W. Douglas also 
has favoured us with some notes on Namdev. 

. ® Ram Chandar, when he went to war with Rawan, is said to have 
built a bridge from the mainland of India to Ceylon ; and this was 
effected by causing its rocky materials to float on the surface of the 
water. It is supposed that the word Ram (God) was impressed on 
every stone, and that it was thus made to float on the ocean. In the 
same way can cause men to swim safely across to the abode of 
bliss. The several persons mentioned — outcasts and sinners — 
succeeded independently of their birth and calling ; and their salvation 
was effected by repeating the name of God and offering Him suitable 
homage. 



NAMDEV^S HYMNS 41 

Even the murderer who shot Krishan in the foot was 
saved — 

I am a sacrifice to those who utter God’s name — 

Bidur, the son of a handmaiden, Sudama, and Ugarsen,^ 
who obtained regal state ; 

Men without devotion, without penance, without family 
and without good works, were saved by Kama’s Lord. 

Asa 

The omnipresence of God. In the Hindu system 
there is no teleological purpose assigned for the 
creation of the world. It is the sport of Maya who 
proceeded from God. Maya still practises every art 
to bewitch and deceive mankind. Namdev’s creed 
is the unity of God, who is contained in everything 
and fills all creation. 

I 

There is one God of various manifestations contained in 
and filling everything ; whithersoever I look there is He. 

Maya’s variegated picture hath so bewitched the world, 
that few know God. 

Everything is God, everything is God, there is nothing 
but God. 

One string holdeth hundreds and thousands of beads ; 
God is the warp and woof. 

Waves and foam and bubbles cannot be distinct from 
water. 

This illusion, the world, is the play of the Supreme God ; 
on reflection thou shall not find it different from Him. 

Fleeting phantoms, illusions of dreams man deemeth real 
advantages. 

My guru instilled into me right ideas, and when I awoke 
to reason my mind accepted them. 

Saith Namdev, behold the creation of God, and reflect 
on it in thy mind ; 

^ Ugarsen was father of Raja Kans, Krishan's uncle, who sought to 
kill him in his childhood lest he might usurp his kingdom. Instead 
of that Krishan killed Kans, and gave the kingdom to his father, 
Ugarsen. 



42 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

In every heart and in all things uninterruptedfy there is 
only the one God. 

The futility of idolatry. 

II 

If I bring a pitcher and fill it with water to bathe the 
idol, 

Forty-two lakhs ^ of animal species are in the water ; 
God is contained in them ; why should I bathe Him ? 

Wherever I go there God is contained ; 

God supremely happy ever sporteth. 

If I bring flowers and weave a garland to worship the 
idol, 

The bee hath first smelled the flowers ; God is contained 
in the bee ; why should I weave Him a garland ? 

If I bring milk and cook it with khir ® to feed the idol, 

The calf hath first defiled the milk by tasting it ; God is 
contained in the calf ; why should I feed Him ? 

In this world is God ; in the next world is God ; there 
is no -part of the world without Him. 

Thou art, O God, in every place ; Nama representeth, 
Thou fillest the whole earth. 

Namdev had renounced his secular duties, and it 
was represented to him that he ought to embrace 
them again. He here gives substitutes for the tools 
of his trade ; — 

III 

My heart is a yard measure ; my tongue a shears. 

With it I measure and cut off Death’s noose.® 

What care I for caste ? What care I for lineage ? 

I repeat the name of God day and night ; 

' Of the eighty-four lakhs of animal species in the world, half are 
supposed to be on land and half in water. 

® K^r is the Sanskrit kshtr, milk, but the word in later litera- 
ture generally means rice boiled in milk and sugar. 

The god of death is supposed to throw nooses to ensnare.inortals. 
He does not mow them down like Death in European mythology. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


43 

I dye what ought to be dyed,^ and I sew what ought to 
be sewed.* 

I cannot live for a ghari without God’s name : 

I perform worship and sing God’s praises ; 

During the eight watches of the day I meditate on my 
Lord. 

My needle is of gold, my thread of silver * — 

Nama’s soul is attached to God. 


The following hymn was addressed to a reputed 
holy man who had stolen a merchant’s money, and 
falsely imputed the offence to Namdev. The mer- 
chant had gone to bathe, and while doing so the 
hypocrite seated in a religious attitude stole his 
purse. The merchant missed it on returning. He 
could not think of attributing the theft to the man 
in the religious garb, so he charged Namdev with it. 
The merchant would not accept Namdev’ s denial, 
and had him flogged. While Namdev was being 
punished a storm arose which lifted the cloth on 
which the reputed holy man sat. The missing purse 
was then found under the cloth. Upon that Namdev 
addressed the following verses to the hypocrite ; — 

IV 

The serpent casteth its slough, but not its poison : 

Since thy heart is not pure. 

Why perform mock meditation and repetition of God’s 
name ? 

Thou art as the crane watching for fish in the water. 

The man who eateth the food of lions,* 

Is called the god of thieves. 

* I steep my mind in God’s name. 

* By meditation I unite my soul with God as the needle joins two 
pieces of cloth. 

* In this line the golden needle represents the guru’s instruction ; 
the silver thread the pure heart in which it is received. 

* That is, who lives on plunder. 



44 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Nama’s Lord hath settled the quarrel ; 

Drink God’s elixir,^ O double-faced one. 

Devotion to God is sufficient for human happiness. 

V 

If thou see the Supreme God, thou shalt have no other 
desire ; 

If thou think of the worship of God, thou shalt keep thy 
mind free from care. 

0>my soul, how shalt thou cross over the world’s ocean 
-filled with the water of evil passions ? 

O my soul, thou hast been led astray on seeing the deceit- 
ful world. 

A calico-printer’s 2 house gave me birth, yet I became 
saturated with the guru’s instruction. 

Through the favour of holy men Nama hath met God. 

Gujari 

Namdev worships the true God and is prepared to 
accept whatever He sends. 

I 

If Thou give me an empire, what glory shall it be to me ? 

If Thou cause me to beg, how shall it degrade me ? 

Worship God, O my soul, and thou shalt obtain the dignity 
of salvation. 

And no more transmigration shall await thee. 

0 God, Thou didst create all men and lead them astray 
in error : 

He to whom Thou givest understanding knoweth Thee. 

When I meet the true guru, my doubts shall depart. 

Whom shall I then worship ? none other would be seen 
but Thee. 

One stone is adored, 

^ That is, turn thine attention to God. 

2 Chhtpa is a tradesman who prints calico, sews it, and washes it. 
Hence Namdev is described by some as a washerman, by others as 
a tailor, and by others again as a calico-printer. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


45 


Another ^ is trodden under foot : 

If one is a god, the other is also a god — 
Saith Namdev, I worship the true God. 


God^s presence is, felt though He cannot be 
described. 


II 

He who hath no trace of impurity, who is beyond im- 
purity, and who is perfumed as with sandal hath taken 
His seat in my heart. 

No one saw Him coming ; who knoweth Him, O sister ? 

Who can describe, who can understand the All-pervading 
and Unknowable ? 

As the trace of a bird is not perceived in the sky, 

As the path of a fish is not seen in the water. 

As a vessel is not filled with the mirage-water of the sky. 

Such is God, Nama’s Lord, in whom these three qualities 
are blended ; ^ His coming or going is not seen. 


SORATH 

Namdev advises to accept divine instruction so 
that man may be contented and happy. 

I 

When I sing of God, tlien I behold Him ; 

Then I, His slave, obtain contentment. 

Accept divine instruction, O man ; the true guru shall 
cause thee to meet God. 

Where the heavenly light shineth. 

There playeth spontaneous music. 

‘ God’s ^ light is all-pervading ’ — 


^ The stone or stones on which worshippers tread as they enter 
temples. 

2 That is, God exists though no trace of Him is seen. 

® Joti, the luminous One, whose light is everywhere diffused. 
Joti jot satndni. This expression is an ordinary Sikh idiom meaning 
that the light of the soul is blended with the light of God, and is 
used on the occasion of the death of Gurus. The whole hymn is in 
praise of celestial light. 



46 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

By the guru’s favour I know that. 

In the chamber of the heart are jewels ^ 

Which glitter there like lightning. 

God is near, not distant, 

And His Spirit completely filleth mine. 

Where the inextinguishable sun of God's word shineth, 
There earthly lamps grow pale : 

Through the guru’s favour I have known this. 

God’s slave Nama hath been easily absorbed in Him. 

. The whole of the following hymn relates to the 
Jog philosophy and the exaltation of mind pro- 
duced by its practice : — 


IIP 

Without covering it with leather the drum of the brain 
playeth ; 

Without waiting for the month of Sawan the thrmder 
roareth, 

And it raineth without clouds. 

If any one consider the real state of things, 

I have met my dear Lord. 

By meeting Him my body hath become perfect ; ® 
Having touched the philosopher’s stone I have become 
gold. 

In word and thought I have strung the gems of God's 
name, 

I feel real love for God, my doubts are dispelled : 

On questioning the guru my mind is satisfied. 

As the pitcher is filled with water, 

I know that the world is filled with the one God. 

When the disciple’s mind accepted the guru. 

The slave Nama recognized God. 

However great man may be, he should reflect that 
death is his fate at last. 

^ Virtues. 

* Missing hymns have already been given in the Life of N&mdev. 

" This human life has become profitable. 



NAMDEV^S HYMNS 47 

Dhanasari 

I 

Men dig deep foundations and build palaces thereon. 

Was any one longer lived than Markand ^ who put grass 
on his head and thus whiled away his days ? 

Only God the Creator is dear to me ; ® 

0 man, why art thou proud ? this unsubstantial body 
shall be destroyed. 

The Kauravs, Duryodhan and his brothers, used to say, 
‘ Everything is ours 

Their umbrellas ® extended over a space of twelve jojans, 
yet the vultures devoured their bodies. 

Lanka was all gold ; was any one greater than Rawan ? ' 

What availed him the elephants tethered at his gate ? 
In a moment they became the property of others. ' 

The Yadavs practised deception on Durbasa,* and ob- 
tained the fiuit thereof. 

God showed mercy to His slave ; Namdev singeth His 
praises. 

The following hymn was addressed to a Jogi who 
endeavoured to induce Namdev to embrace his 
religion : — 

II 

1 have restrained the ten organs of sense ; the very name 
of the five evil passions I have erased. 

Having extracted the poison from the seventy-two tanks ® 
of the heart, I have filled them with ambrosia ; 

I shall not allow the poison to return again. 

^ Markand was a long-lived Rikhi who did penance in a forest. 
There is a temple dedicated to him at Jagannath. 

^ That is, I only think of Him, not of stately mansions or palaces. 

® Courtiers allowed umbrellas. * 

* The Yadavs sent a boy dressed as a pregnant woman to Durbasa, 
and put him the question whether a boy or a girl should be born. 
DurbJsa discovered the deception and cursed the Yadavs, with the 
result that they all perished. 

^ It was supposed by the mystics that the heart had seventy-two 
blood-vessels ; but this is not according to Hindu medical science, which 
only allows ten blood-vessels altogether for the chest.— 'Dr. Hoemle. 



48 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The ambrosial word I utter from my heart ; my spirit 
I instruct not to attach itself to worldly things. 

I have destroyed worldly love with an axe of adamant : 
I touch the guru’s feet and implore him. 

Turning away from the worlds I have become a servant 
of the saints and I fear them.^ 

I shall be saved from this world the moment I cease to 
be entangled by Maya. 

Maya is the name of the power which placeth man in 
the womb ; abandoning it I shall obtain a sight of God. 

The man who worshippeth in this way shall be freed 
from all fear. 

Saith Namdev, O man, why wander abroad ? ^ obtain 
God in the way I have told thee. 


Namdev tells by familiar examples how dear God 
is to him. 


Ill 


As water is dear to the traveller in Marwar, and the creeper 
to the camel ; 

As the huntsman’s bell at night is dear to the hind, so 
is God to my soul — 

Thy name is beautiful, Thy form is beautiful, very beauti- 
ful Thy colour, 0 my God — 

As rain is dear to the earth, as the odour of flowers is 
dear to the bumble-bee ; 

As the mango is dear to the kokil,® so is God to my soul. 

As the sun is dear to the sheldrake, as the lake of Maii- 
sarowar is dear to the swan ; 

As the husband is dear to the wife, so is God to my soul. 

As milk is dear to the child, as a torrent of rain to the 
mouth of the chatrik ; ^ 

As water is dear to the fish, so is God to my soul. 

All penitents, sidhs, and munis seek God, but few have 
seen Him. 


^ Also translated — I fear the courtesan Mdya. 

Why lead an ascetic life in the forest ? 

^ The kektl sings during the mango season. 



; N AMDEV’S HYMNS i 4^ 

As Thy name is dear to all creation, so is Vitthal to Nama’s 
heart, 

Namdev asked his guru how the world had been 
created. The guru replied : — 

* IV 

Before the world a lotus was formed ; 

From it proceeded Brahma, and from Brahma all men. 

Know that everything else was produced from Maya, who 
leadeth the world a dance. 

Namdev then inquired how Maya was produced. 
The guru replied : — 

First a voice proceeded from God ; 

Afterwards Maya proceeded from God 

Through that voice the parts of this Maya and of that God 
blended,^ and the world was produced. 

In this garden of God men dance like water in the pots 
of a well ; ^ 

Women and men dance.^ 

There is no god but God — 

Argue not on this point. 

If thou have doubts, 

God saith, ‘ Consider in thy heart that this world and 
I are one.' 

The world is like water-pots, sometimes above, sometimes 
below. 

Wandering about I have come to Thy gate. 

God — Who art Thou ? 

Nama — I am Nama, Sire — 

O Lord, save me from the world which bringeth death. 

^ This and the two preceding verses are also thus translated : — 

Man should first cease to love the world, 

He should next subdue his senses ; 

Then the soul and God become one. 

2 That is, are sometimes exalted, sometimes debased, sometimes 
high, and sometimes low, like the water-pots of a Persian wheel when 
in motion. 

* That is, perform their various functions. 

E 


SIKH. VI 



50 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The above hymn is also translated so as to give 
different versions of creation : — 

T. First a lotus was made by the all-pervading God ; 

From it proceeded Brahma and from him all human beings, 

2. Others say — Know that everything was produced by 
Maya who maketh men dance various dances. 

3. A third version is this — First a voice proceeded from 
God ; through that voice 

Maya and God united, 

Whence God’s garden,^ in which men dance like water 
in water-pots. 

Namdev gives his own opinion : — 

Women and men dance ; 

There is nothing but God, 

Dispute not this ; 

If thou have doubts, pray, 

0 God, be merciful ; come and save me ; Thou art mine 
only support. 

The world is like water-pots, now high now low. 

Wandering and wandering I have come to Thy door. 

God — ^Who art thou ? 

1 am, Sire, Namdev ; save me from the world which 
bringeth death. 

Namdev is happier than demigods and worldly 
men who profess religion. 

V 

0 Lord, the purification of sinners is Thy daily work ; 

Hail to those saints who have meditated on my God. 

On my forehead is the dust of God’s feet, 

Which is far from even demigods, worldly men, munis, 
and saints. 

Compassionate to the poor, O God, destroyer of pride, 

Nama hath found the asylum of Thy feet, and is a sacrifice 
unto Thee. 

^ Satf reality; chit, conscience; and dnand, happiness, are the 
attributes of God; ndin, name; and rup, form, of Maya. The five 
qualities united form the garden of the world. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


51 


It is said that Namdev composed the following 
on hearing two pandits disputing whether God was 
far or near : — 

Tom 

I 

Some say God is near, others that He is far away. 

To say He is near or far is, as it were, to say that a fish 
could climb a date-tree.^ 

Why, Sir, talkest thou nonsense ? 

They who have found God have concealed the fact. 

Men who are pandits shout the Veds, 

But the ignorant Namdev only knoweth God. 

On the eleventh day of every half-lunar month 
the Hindus fast. Namdev relinquished the practice, 
and also ceased to go on pilgrimages. A visitor to 
his house reproached him with his neglect of both 
these religious duties. The following is his reply 

II 

Who that uttereth God’s name retaineth the stain of sin ? 

Sinners have become pure by uttering His name. 

In the company of God His slave Namdev hath acquired 
ocular evidence. 

He hath ceased to fast on the eleventh day, and why 
should he go on pilgrimages ? 

Saith Namdev, my acts and thoughts have become 
good. 

Who hath not gone to heaven by uttering the name of 
God under the guru’s instruction ? 

Namdev is satisfied with God as his portion. 

III 

There is a play on three sets of words. 

There is a pot in a potter’s house, an elephant in a king’s 
house, 

^ Also translated — O man, thou art as a fish in water and seekest to 
climb a date-tree. 


E 2 



52 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

A widow ^ in a Brahman’s house® — sing randi, sandi, 
handi 0 ! ® 

Asafoetida in a baniya’s house, horns on a buffalo’s fore- 
head, 

A lingam in a temple of Shiv — sing ling, sing, hing 0 ! * 

Oil in an oilman’s house, creepers in a forest. 

Plantains in a gardener’s house — sing kel, bel, tel O ! ® 

Gobind in the company of the saints, Krishan in Gokal, 

And God in Kama — sing Ram, Siyam, Gobind 0 ! ® 

Tilang 

Namdev feels his dependence on God whom he 
magnifies. 

Of me who am blind Thy name, O King, is the prop. 

I am poor, I am miserable. Thy name is my support. 

Bounteous and merciful Allah, Thou art generous ; 

I believe that Thou art present before me ; 

Thou art a river of bounty, Thou art the Giver, Thou art 
exceeding wealthy ; 

Thou alone givest and takest, there is none other ; 

Thou art wise. Thou art far-sighted ; what conception 
can I form of Thee ? 

O Kama’s Lord, Thou art the Pardoner, O God.’ 

Namdev on the way to Dwaraka was seized by 
a Mughal official and made a forced labourer. In 
his devotion he appears to have recognized the 

’ Randi — some gyanis translate this word almanac, as the 
Brahmans were astronomers and astrologers. Others again translate 
the word learning. 

® Brahmans’ widows were well treated by the public. 

® Randi, sandi, handi are a widow, an elephant, and a pot 
respectively. 

* Ling, sing, hing are the lingam, a horn, and asafoetida respectively. 

* Kel, bel, and tel are plantains, creepers, and oil respectively. 

* Ram, SiySm, and Gobind are names of God. Siyam is Krishan, 
so called from his sable colour. 

’ This hymn, abounding in the original in Arabic words, appears to 
show that Namdev held frequent religious discussions with Mullas 
during his travels. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


53 


Mughal as Grod, and to have believed that his de- 
gradation was God’s will. He composed the follow- 
ing on the occasion : — 

II 

Halloo ! my Friend, halloo my Friend, how art Thou ? 

I am a sacrifice unto Thee, I am a sacrifice unto Thee. 

Good is Thy forced labour, exalted Thy name ; 

Whence hast Thou come ? where hast Thou been ? and 
whither art Thou going ? 

This is the city of Dwaraka ; tell the truth.^ 

Handsome is Thy turban, sweet Thy discourse ; 

But why should there be a Mughal in the city of Dwaraka ? 

Among several thousands of people Thou art the only 
Mughal seen ; 

Thou art the very picture of the king of sable hue ; ® 

Thou art the Lord of the horse, the Lord of the elephant, 
and the Ruler of men.® 

Thou art Nama’s Lord, the King of all, and the Giver 
of salvation. 


Bilawal 

Through his guru Namdev has obtained dis- 
cernment and rendered his life profitable. 

The guru hath made my life profitable — 

I have forgotten sorrow and obtained joy within me. 

The guru hath granted me the eye-salve of divine know- 
ledge.^ 

O my soul, without God’s name man’s life is vain. 

Namdev knoweth God by keeping Him in mind ; 

My soul is absorbed in Him who giveth life to the world. 

To sing God’s praises and remember Him is 
infinitely superior to all Hindu forms of devotion. 

® Because Dwaraka is a very holy place, and man must not utter 
falsehoods there. 

® Krishan, the lord of Dwaraka. 

® The Sun, Indar, and Brahma respectively. 

* To see more clearly. 



54 BHAGATS OF THE GHANTH SAHIB 

Gatjnd 

’ -T • 

Were I to perform the horse*sacrifice,^ 

Give my weight in gold ag. aims, 

Bathe at Pryag, . J 

It would not be equal, O^Nania, t6 singing God’s praises. 

0 listless man, worship thy God. 

Were I to offer rice-balls * at Gaya, 

Dwell at Banaras, 

Recite the four Veds, 

Fulfil all religious offices, 

Restrain my senses under the guru’s instruction. 

Perform the six duties of Brahmans, 

Read the conversations between Shiv and his consort ® — 
All these different occupations would be useless ; O my soul, 
lay them aside. 

And remember, remember God’s name.' 

Worship Him, Nama, and thou shalt swim across the 
world’s ocean. 

Namdev by familiar examples describes his love 
for God. 

II 

As the deer followeth the huntsman's bell. 

And giveth up its own life rather than cease its atten- 
tion, 

In the same way I gaze on God. 

1 do not leave Him to turn my mind in another direction. 
As the kingfisher gazeth on the fish. 

As the goldsmith meditateth stealing gold while fashion- 
ing it. 

As the lustful man gazeth on the wife of another, 

^ In the earliest ages of Hinduism the horse as an animal of great 
value was sacrificed by kings who were disappointed of offspring. In 
later times the sacrifice was made principally for ostentation by kings 
who aspired to be greater than their fellows. 

* Bails made of rice and barley are offered to the pHras, manes or 
ancestors, at Gaya, one of the holiest of Hindu places of pilgrimage. 

’ In the Tantar ShUstar. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 55 

As the gambler ni^itateth cheating while playing 
kauris,^ J 

So Kama ever meditateth. on God’s feet — 

Wherever I gaze there is God.. . 

A prayer for salvation 

' ni. 

Float me over, O God, float me over ! ^ 

I am unskilful and know not how to swim ; O God, my 
Father, give me Thine arm. 

He to whom the true guru hath taught knowledge, is 
changed in a moment from a man into a demigod. 

I have obtained the medicine by which, though begotten 
by man, I have conquered heaven. 

Place me even for a short time where Thou hast placed 
Dhru and Narad. 

By the support of Thy name many have been saved ; 
this is Kama’s private opinion. 

By other familiar examples Namdev describes his 
ardent longing for God. 

IV 

I am ardently longing for the Friend— 

Without her calf a cow is lonely. 

Without water a fish writheth. 

So without God’s name doth poor Kama. 

As the calf, when let loose, 

Sucketh his dam’s teats and swalloweth her milk. 

So Namdev hath obtained God — 

When man meeteth the guru he showeth the Unseen — 
As the wicked man loveth another man’s wife. 

So Kama loveth God. 

As wtaw’s body burneth in the bright sunshine. 

So doth poor Kama without the name of God. 

The advantages of repeating God’s name. 


^ In a game played with kauris the gambler cheats in the counting. 
* That is. Save me 1 Save me 1 



56 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

V 

By repeating the name of God all doubts are dispelled — 

Repeating the name of God is the highest religious 
exercise — 

By repeating the name of God caste and lineage are 
effaced. 

That God is the staff of the blind man. 

I bow before God ! I bow before God I 

By repeating God’s name Death tortureth not. 

God took the life of Harnakhas, 

And made for Ajamal a dwelling in heaven. 

The courtesan who taught her parrot to repeat Code's name 
was saved — 

That God is the apple of mine eye — 

By repeating the name of God, Putana ^ full of deceit, 

The destroyer of children was saved ; 

By remembering the name of God the daughter of Drupad 
was saved ; 

Gautam’s wife ^ though turned into a stone, was saved. 

^ Putana was a nurse whom Krishan's uncle, Kans, sent to destroy 
him by applying poison to the nipples of her breasts. Krishan, though 
an infant, squeezed her to death. With her last breath she said, 
‘ God, let me go.’ For mentioning the name of God thus once she 
obtained salvation. 

* Gautam, the husband of Ahalya, was a pious Rikhi who used to 
go and bathe in the Ganges after the first watch of night. The god 
Indar was wont to visit Gautam’s wife during his absence. One 
night the moon rose at midnight. Ahalya became impatient for the 
visit of her divine paramour, and went to awake her husband, telling 
him it was the usual time for his ablutions in the sacred river. 
Gautam arose and proceeded on his pious duty. While bathing 
a voice proceeded from the Ganges, and told him not to come so 
early to bathe. Gautam replied that it was the usual time of his 
visit. The Ganges explained to him that it was not three, o’clock 
in the morning. He must not judge by a deceptive midnight moon. 
Gautam cursed the moon. He returned to his house and found his 
daughter Anjani sitting in the court-yard. He asked her who was in 
the house ; she said ‘ Manjara ’, a word which means either cat or 
mother’s lover. Gautam, on account of her equivocation, cursed her 
too. He prayed that she a virgin might bear a child, and in due time 
she bore Hanum^, the monkj^-god» Gautam on entering his house 
found Indar with his wife. The holy Rikhi cursed Indar with dire 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


57 


God destroyed I^esi ^ and Kans, 

And conferred the gift of life on Kalinag. 

Nama representeth, by repeating the name of such a God 
fear and trouble depart. 

The fate of worshippers of false gods. 

VII 

They who worship Bhairav shall become sprites ; 

They who worship Sitala shall ride on donkeys and 
scatter dust — 

For myself I take the name of the one God ; 

I would give all other gods in exchange for it. 

They who repeat the name of Shiv and worship liim, 

Shall ride on an ox and play the drum ; 

They who worship the great mother Durga, 

Shall be born as women instead of men. 

Thou callest thyself, 0 Durga, the primal Bhawani, 

When it came to my turn to be saved, where didst thou 
hide thyself ? 

Under the instruction of the guru, O my friend, cling 
to God’s name — 

Nama representeth, thus saith the Gita.^ 

and shameful result. He cursed his wife too, and she was turned 
into a stone in the forest. The god Ram in his travels stumbled 
against the stone, and by the divine touch Ahalya obtained the boon 
of salvation. 

^ Kesi came in the disguise of a horse to eat up Krishan, but was 
killed by that hero thrusting his arm into his mouth and rending him 
asunder. 

^ The following are the allusions in the above hymn : — 

Bhairav is an inferior manifestation of Shiv and his consort Durga. 
Shiv in this form is represented riding on a dog. 

Sitala is the goddess who presides over small-pox. She is re- 
presented riding on a donkey, and is largely worshipped by Indian 
women, particularly during epidemics of the disease. 

Those who worship Bhairav, sprites, Sitala, and Shiv, contract the 
qualities of the steeds of the^objects of their worship. 

Durga cannot confer salvation. She bestows wealth, offspring, &c. 
When King Pipa asked her for salvation she professed herself unable 
to grant it. 



58 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Namdev admonishes an idolatrous Brahman. 

VIII 

To-day I Nama saw God, I now admonish the fool — 

O pandit, thy gayatri used to graze on the boor’s field ; 

He took a stick and broke her leg ; since then she hath 
walked lame.^ 

0 pandit, I have seen thy great god Shiv going along on 
a white bullock. 

In his consort ParhatVs house a banquet for him was 
prepared ; he killed her son.^ 

O pandit, thy Ram Chandar — I have seen him too going 
along ; 

Having lost his wife he fought with Rawan. 

The Hindus are blind, the Musalmans purblind ; 

The man who knoweth God is wiser than either. 

The Hindus worship their temple, the Musalmans their 
mosque. 

Nama worshippeth Him who hath neither temple nor 
mosque. 

The saint Trilochan once twitted Namdev with 

^ The gayatri is said to have originally been the wife of Brahma. For 
some shortcoming on her part Brahma cursed her, and she became a cow. 
In this form she used to graze on villagers’ fields until one of them took 
a stick and broke her leg ; since then she has been lame. There is 
another story in which the gayatri is mentioned. Vishwamitra and 
Vishisht were two eminent Rikhis. The former, in revenge for a slight 
offered him, killed the hundred sons of the latter. At every murder 
he used to repeat the gayatri to obtain absolution for the crime. Upon 
this Vishisht cursed the gayatri and it lost eight of its letters. See 
Vol. i, p. 1 66, n. 4. 

^ Shiv said he would not partake of the banquet prepared for him 
by PSrbati unless his ox were also fed. The lady inquired what meal 
would please the animal. Shiv replied ' Your son ’. This he said 
to make trial of her faith. She killed her son to offer his flesh to the 
ox, but Shiv, on seeing her devotion, restored the youth to life. 
Another version of this story is that Parbati told her son Ganesh to 
watch outside her door while she was bathing, and allow no one to 
enter and behold her nakedness. Shiv presented himself for admission 
which was refused by Ganesh. Upon this Shiv killed him, but, 
softened by the weeping of Parbati, again restored him to life, giving 
him, however, an elephant’s head instead of his own. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 59 

being always engaged in his trade. Namdev made 
him the foUowing reply : — 

Ramkali 

. I 

A boy taketh paper, cutteth it into a kite, and flyeth it in 
the sky. 

While conversing with his companions, he keepeth his 
attention on the string. 

I have pierced my soul with God’s name. 

As the goldsmith’s attention is engrossed in his work. 

The queen’s femeile servant taketh her pitcher, filleth it 
with water, 

Converseth laughingly and pleasantly, yet keepeth her 
attention on the pitcher. 

If the cows of a city with ten gates ^ be let loose to 
graze. 

And they go grazing for even five miles, they will remem- 
ber their young, and return each by her own gate. 

Saith Namdev, hear, O Trilochan, when a child is laid 
in its cradle. 

Its mother, whether engaged at home or abroad, keepeth 
her thoughts on her child. 

The following hymn embodying Namdev’s reso- 
lutions is also believed to have been addressed to 
Trilochan : — 

II 

The endless songs and poetry of the Veds, Purans, and 
Shastars I will not sing ; 

I will play unbeaten music in the imperishable region of 
God ; 

Ceasing to love the world I will sing of God. 

Imbued with Him who is beyond expression and indes- 
tructible, I shall go to the abode of the Inscrutable One. 

I will cease to hold my breath in the right or left nostril 
or between them both. 


^ This means a great city and a great number of cattle. 



6o BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


I deem the left and right nostril the same ; I shall be 
blended with the light of God. 

I will not go to see places of pilgrimages nor enter their 
waters ; I will not annoy men or lower animals. 

The guru showed me the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage 
in my heart where I will bathe. 

I will not have myself glorified and congratulated by my 
select friends. 

Nama saith, my heart is dyed with God, and I shall be 
absorbed in Him. 

God preceded all creation, all religious books, and 
all karma. 

III 

When there was no mother, no father, no karma, and 
nobody ; 

When we were not and you were not, who was there and 
whence did he come ? 

0 God, no one hath any relation ; 

Man’s dwelling in this world is lik& tho perching of a bird 
on a tree. 

When there was no moon, no sun, when there was only 
water and air blended together. 

When there were no Shastars and no Veds, whence did 
karma come ? ^ 

1 have by the favour of the guru obtained God, for whom 
the Jogis suspend their breath, and fix their attention on 
the bridges of their noses, and the Bairagis wear necklaces 
of sweet basil. 

Nama representeth, God is the Primal Essence ; when 
there is a true guru he showeth Him. 

The repetition of God’s name is superior to all 
other forms of worship. 

IV 

If one perform penance with body reversed at Banaras, 

^ NSmdev means that everything proceeded from God, whom he says 
in the following verse he has found. 



NAMDEV^S HYMNS 6i 

and die at a place of pilgrimage ; if one burn one’s body 
with fire, or strive to make it survive for a kalpa ; ^ 

If one perform the horse sacrifice or offer secret presents ^ 
of gold, 2JI that would not be equal to the name of God. 

O h5q>ocritical man, renounce deception ; practise it not ; 

Ever and ever take God’s name. 

Wert thou to go to the Ganges and the Godavari every 
twelfth year, bathe at Kedamath, 

And make offerings of thousands of cows at the Gomti ; ® 

Wert thou to perform millions of pilgrimages, freeze thy 
body in the Himalayas, all would not be equal to the name 
of God ; 

Wert thou to offer horses, elephants, women with their 
couches, lands, and make such gifts continually to Brahmans ; 

Wert thou to purify thy body and offer its weight in gold, 
all would not be equal to the name of God. 

Look for the pure dignity of Nirvan, and be not after- 
wards angry with thyself, or attribute blame to the god of 
death.^ 

Nama representeth, drink the real nectareous elixir of 
my king Ram Chandar, the son of Jasarath Rai.® 

Mali Gaura 

The following glorification of Krishan was com- 
posed after Namdev had embraced his worship : — 

^ A kalpa is a day and night of Brahma, four billion three hundred 
and twenty million years. 

2 Garbhddn^ gold concealed in fruit or similar articles such as were 
given to men in power in olden times to purchase their favour. 

® This is the well-known river in Awadh (Oude) generally known 
as the GSmti. It is so called not from its winding — gum — stream, 
but because it gave water and contributed to pasturage for kine. 
There were several rivers of that name, one of which at one time flowed 
into the Indus. 

^ It will be your own and not the fault of the god of death if you 
are not saved, and you should not blame him. 

® The preceding lines of this hymn and Bilawal VI, given in Namdev’s 
life, show that he worshipped the supreme God, here called Ram 
Chandar, as He is in other places Ram, Hari, &c. The words Jasarath 
Rat nand appear to have been added as a stereotyped expression of 
that transitional age. 



62 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


I 

Happy, happy that flute which Krishan played I 

A very sweet unbeaten sound issueth from it. 

Happy, happy that blanket which Krishan wore ! 

Happy, happy that ram and his fleece it was made from. 

Hail, hau to thee, mother Devaki, 

In whose house god, the lord of Lakshmi, was horn ! 

Blest, blest the forest glades of Bindraban, 

Where Nama’s god Narayan sported. 

Played his flute, herded his cows, 

And was happy. 

II 

God, my father, hail to thee, dark complexioned Vitthal 
with the long hair ! 

Holding in thy hand the discus, thou didst come from 
heaven and save the life of the great elephant ; 

Thou didst save Draupadi when her clothes were being 
tom off her in Duhsasan’s court ; 

Thou didst save Ahalya the wife of Gautam ; 

How many hast Thou purified and saved ! ^ 

Thus the lowly Namdev without caste hath entered Thy 
sanctuary. 

God is in everything and Namdev has become 
absorbed in Him. The following marks a stage in 
Namdev’s progress to divine unity. 

Ill 

In every heart God speaketh, God speaketh ; 

Doth any one speak independently of Him ? 

There is the same earth in the elephant and the ant ; 
vessels of many kinds * are made from earth. 

In mobile and immobile things, in worms and moths, and 
in every heart God is contained. 

Think of the one God who is endless ; abandon all other 
hope. 

^ Also translated — How many hast Thou saved by the touch of 
Thy feet 1 

® That is, various bodies are fashioned from the same material. 



NAMDEV^S HYMNS * 63 

Nama representeth ; I have become free from desires ; 
and in this state who is Lord and who is slave ? ' 

Maru 

God has showered His favours on Namdev as He 
did on other saints. 

When I entered the asylum of God the Bridegroom, I 
obtained the four stages of salvation and the four super- 
natural powers. 

1 have been saved, I have become famous through the 
four ages, and I have put the umbrella of praise and fame 
over my head. 

Who hath not been saved by repeating the name of the 
Sovereign God ? 

They who listen to the guru’s instruction and associate 
with holy men are called saints. 

On beholding the effulgence of the guru, who is conspicu- 
ous with his shell, discus, necklace, and sacrificial mark, 
Death becometh afraid. 

Man then becometh fearless, and by the power of God 
thundereth forth that he hath escaped the pain of trans- 
migration. 

God gave king Ambarik^ the gift of salvation, and 
aggrandized Babhikhan with sovereignty ; 

The Lord gave the nine treasures to Sudama, and made 
Dhru immovable in the north pole, where he is fixed to the 
present day ; 

God having assumed the body of Narsinh the man4ion, 
killed Harnakhas for the sake of his saint Prahlad. 

Nama saith, Vishnu is in the power of the saints, and is 
till now standing at the door of Bali.-’ 

^ The Lord and the slave are blended in one. Namdev has 
obtained salvation. 

2 Ambarik was a king of Ajudhia famed for his piety. He was an 
ancestor of Ram Chandar. 

^ Bali, son of Prahlad, through his devotion and penance humbled 
the gods, and extended his authority over the three worlds. The gods 
appealed to Vishnu for protection, and he, under the disguise of a 
dwarf, restrained the energies of Bali, took heaven and earth from him, 



64 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Bhairo 

Namdev enjoins his tongue under severest penalty 
to utter God’s name. 


I 

0 my tongue, if thou utter not God’s name, 

1 will break thee into a hundred pieces. 

0 tongue, dye thyself with God’s name ; 

Meditating on God’s name dye thyself with a good 
dye ; 

False, O my tongue, are all other occupations. 

The dignity of Nirvan is only obtained through the name 
of God. 

Wert thou to worship countless millions of other 
gods, 

It would not be equal to repeating God’s name alone, 

Namdev representeth, this do, 0 my tongue, and say ‘ O 
God, Thy forms are endless.’ 

A man may in other respects be perfect but he is 
lost if he repeat not God’s name. 

II 

God dwelleth near him 

Who coveteth not another’s wealth or another’s wife. 

1 will not look at him 

Who repeateth not God’s name. 

As a beast is that man 

Whose heart is estranged from God. 

Namdev representeth, a man without a nose 

Doth not look well even with the other thirty-two marks 
of beauty.^ 

and left him the infernal regions. Though Vishnu gained tliis 
supreme victory, yet, as he was pleased with Bali’s devotion, he agreed 
to stand at his door and wait upon him. 

^ These marks include not only perfection of limbs and features, 
but artificial ornaments and decorations by which beauty is supposed to 
be enhanced. 



NAMDEV'S HYMNS 65 

When Namdev gave up trade, and devoted him- 
self exclusively to the worship of God and attend- 
ance on His saints, people began to slander him. 
The following is his apology : — 

‘IV 

I am a mad woman and God is my spouse ; 

It is for Him I decorate myself elaborately. 

Abuse me well, abuse me well, abuse me well, O people ; 

My body and soul are for my beloved God. 

I hold no idle discussion with any one ; 

1 sip with my tongue the elixir of God. 

Now I know in my heart that such an arrangement hath 
been made, 

By which I shall meet God with banners and music. 

Whether any one give me praise or blame, 

Nama hath met God.^ 

Man ought to be satisfied with his lot ; he will 
be saved by devotion. 

V 

Sometimes man is not satisfied even with milk, molasses, 
and clarified butter ; 

Sometimes he beggeth morsels from house to house ; 

Sometimes he picketh up pulse-sweepings. 

Remain as God hath placed thee, O brother — 

The greatness of God cannot be described — 

Sometimes man rideth on prancing steeds ; ^ 

Sometimes he hath not shoes for his feet ; 

Sometimes he putteth himself to sleep on a couch witli 
a clean coverlet ; 

Sometimes he cannot get straw to sleep upon — 

Saith Namdev, the Name alone saveth ; 

He who hath found a spiritual guide shall be delivered. 

^ Srirang, a name under which God is worshipped in parts ol the 
south of India. The name Srirangapatam {Anglice\ Seringapatam) is 
derived from this word, and means the town of Srirang. 

2 Literally — he maketh liis Turkisiani steed dance. 

F 


SIKH. VI 



66 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Namdev describes by familiar examples how dear 
God is to him. 

VII 

As food is dear to the hungry, 

As the thirsty need water, 

.As the fool is attached to his family. 

So God is dear to Nama. 

Kama’s love is devoted to God, 

And he hath easily severed himself from the world. 

As a woman is smitten with a strange man. 

As a greedy man loveth wealth. 

As woman is dear to the lustful, 

Such is Kama’s love for God. 

That is real love by which God attacheth man to Him, 
And by which through the guru’s favour duality^ de- 
parteth. 

Love for Him who filleth my heart shall never be sundered ; 
Kama hath applied his heart to the true Kame. 

As the love between a child and its mother, 

So is my soul imbued with God. 

Kamdev represent eth, I love God ; 

He dwelleth in my heart. 

Man should rather seek the guru’s protection than 
devote himself to sinful pleasures. 

VIII 

As a fool leaveth the wife of his home, 

Hath intercourse with a strange woman, and is ruined. 
As the parrot is pleased on seeing the simmal,® 

But at last dieth clinging to it. 

So the home of the sinner shall be in hell-fire ; 

He shall continue to burn and never have respite. 

He never goeth to see where God is worshipped, 

He leaveth the right path and goeth the wrong one, 

^ Duhidha here means separation from God. 

^ The parrot is particularly pleased with the simmal-tree and its 
cotton pods, but when he pecks at it he cannot disengage his bill and 
thus perishes. 



r NAMDEV'S HYMNS 67 

He forgetteth God and snffereth transmigration, 

He rejecteth ambrosia and eateth a load of poison. 

When a dancing-girl arriveth on the dancing-floor, 

She putteth on rich dresses, adorneth herself, 

Danceth to measure, ayid modulateth hfer voice, 

While Death’s noose is oh her neck. 

He on whose forehead such destiny hath been written. 
Quickly entereth the protection of the guru. 

Saith Namdev, this is my decision — 

O saints, thus shall you obtain salvation. 

The fate of Harnakhas who objected to his son 
Prahlad's devotion. 

IX 

Sanda and Marka ^ went and complained to Harnakhas — 

‘ Thy son Prahlad will not study and we are tired of 
teaching him ; 

He singeth God’s praises, beateth time with his hands, 
and corrupteth all the other pupils ; 

He repeateth the name of God ; 

In his heart he remembereth God.’ 

The queen represented to her son — ‘ The king hath 
reduced the whole earth to subjection : 

My son Prahlad, thou doest not his bidding ; he hath 
some design on thee.’ 

A council of his enemies met and passed a resolution, 
‘ We will lengthen his life.’ ^ 

They terrified him by throwing him from a height, by put- 
ting him into water and fire, but God changed for him the 
properties of matter. 

Harnakhas enraged drew his sword, and threatened him 
with death, saying, ‘ Show me who will save thee.’ 

Prahlad replied, ‘ God who weareth yellow clothes, the 
Lord of the three worlds, is in the pillar.’ 

JJpon this God tore Harnakhas with his nails, and ren- 
dered demigods and inen happy.® 

^ These two brothers were both preceptors of Prahlad. 

2 Ironical, meaning ‘ We will kill him.’ 

^ Here the word sandih would also mean that God rpassumed his 

F 2 



^ BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Saith Namdev, I meditate on that God who bestoweth 
salvation. 

The advantajges of a guru. 

XI 

When one hath a guru, he meeteth God ; 

When one hath a guru, he is saved ; 

When one hath a guru, he goeth to heaven ; 

When one hath a guru, while he liveth he is dead — 

True, true, true, true, true is the guru ; 

False, false, false, false is all other service than his — 

When one hath a guru, he inculcateth the Name ; 

When one hath a guru, he runneth not in the ten direc- 
tions ; 

When one hath a guru, he is far removed from the five 
evil passions ; 

When one hath a guru, he dieth not of grief ; 

When one hath a guru, he obtaineth the ambrosial Word ; 

When one hath a guru, he heareth the story of the In- 
effable ; 

When one hath a guru, his body becometh immortal ; 

When one hath a guru, he uttereth the Name ; 

When one hath a guru, he seeth the three worlds ; 

When one hath a guru, he knoweth how to reach the 
e^ialted position ; 

When one hath a guru, liis head toucheth heaven ; 

When one hath a guru, he is ever congratulated ; 

When one hath a guru, he is ever estranged from the world ; 

When one hath a guru, he abandoneth slander ; 

When one hath a guru, he deemeth evil and good the same ; 

When one hath a guru, good destiny is written on his 
forehead ; * 

When one hath a guru, evil passions seduce not his body ; 

When one hath a guru, the temple turneth towards him ; 

• 

authority over demigods and men, who had previously been subjects 
of Harnakhas. 

^ According to the Sikhs evil destiny may be altered by the kind- 
ness of (he Guru, as a corn is renewed by restamping. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


69 


When one hath a guru, his hut is rebuilt for him ; 

When one hath a guru, his bed cometh forth from the 
river ; ^ 

When one hath a guru, he batheth in the sixty-eight 
places of pilgrimage ; 

When one hath a guru, the quoit of Vishnu is impressed 
on his body ; 

When one hath a guru, he performeth the twelve adora- 
tions ; 2 

When one hath a guru, all poisons become wholesome ; ® 

When one hath a guru, doubts are dispelled ; 

When one hath a guru, he escapeth from Death ; 

When one hath a guru, he crosseth over the terrible ocean ; 

When one hath a guru, he suffereth not transmigration ; 

When one hath a guru, he obtaineth the advantages of 
the eighteen Purans ; 

When one hath a guru, he obtaineth the eighteen loads 
of vegetables ; 

Without the guru, there is no r^s^tMg-place — 

Namdev hath entered the guru’s protection. 

Namdev once fell into a trance, and thought he 
was playing cymbals in God’s honour. God is said 
to have appeared before him as a Qalandar, and 
taken his cymbals from him. Namdev on awaking 
composed the following in God’s praise : — 

XII 

Come God, the Qalandar 

Wearing the dress of an Abdali.* 

^ The Emperor, on being satisfied of Namdev’s innocence, presented 
him with a gilt bed. Namdev at first refused to take it, but when great 
pressure was employed, he took it and threw it into the Ganges. The 
Emperor thereupon asked the saint to restore it. He called upon the 
holy river to give it up, and the story goes that it did so with six 
other similar beds. 

* There are twelve great lingams ; possessing a guru is equal to 
them all. 

* All pains are turned into pleasures. 

* This word now generally means a Muhammadan devotee. It 
literally means — servant of God. 



70 BHAGATS/OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The finnamoit is the hat on Thy head, the seven nether 
regions Thy shippers ; 

All animals with skins are Thy temples ; thus art Thou 
decked out, O God I 

The fifty-six millions of clouds are Thy robes and the 
sixteen thousand queens of Krishan Thy waistbands ; 

The eighteen loads of vegetables are Thy clubs, the whole 
world is Thy salver ; 

Kama’s body is Thy mosque, his heart Thy priest who 
tranquilly prayeth. 

0 Thou with and without form, Thou who art wedded to 
lady Lakshmi, 

While I was worshipping Thou hadst my cymbals taken 
from me : to whom shall I complain ? 

Kama’s Lord is the Searcher of all hearts, and wandereth 
in every land. 

Basant 

Man ought not to abandon God’s service even 
though it be irksome. 

I 

If a servant run away when his master is in trouble,^ 

The servant shall not be long-lived, he shall bring shame 
on his father and mother’s family. 

1 will not abandon Thy service, 0 Lord, even though men 
scoff at me ; 

Thy lotus feet dwell in my heart. 

As man accepteth death to secure wealth, 

So the saints relinquish not God’s name. 

Pilgrimages to the Ganges, Gaya, and Godavari are worldly 
acts ; 

If God be pleased, Kama shall be His worshipper. 

Namdev’s prayer when in danger of drowning in 
the stormy ocean of worldly love. 

II 

The waves of covetousness sound like a cataract, my 
body is drowning therein, O God. 

^ Also translated — Even if a master annoy his servant, and the 
latter flee away. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


71 

Float me over- the ocean of the world, O God, float me 
over. Father Vitthal. 

In this gale I cannot steer my boat, I cannot reach 
Thine opposite shore, O God. 

Be compassionate and cause me to meet a true guru ; 
take me across, O God. 

Nama saith, I do not even know how to swim ; give me 
Thine arm, give me Thine arm, O God. 

Man slowly grows up. He then becomes the sport 
of the world and commits sin, but his soul can be 
washed pure by the guru. 

Ill 

As an ant draggeth along a bit of cow-dung, 

So this cart fashioned from dust and seed 

At first moveth slowly ; 

But afterwards the world driveth it with a rod. 

My darling soul goeth to the wash-tank.^ 

The washerman * dyed with love washeth it with the water 
of God's name ; 

My heart is fascinated with God’s feet. 

Saith Nama, Thou, O God, who art everywhere diffused. 

Have compassion on Thy worshipper ! 

Sarang 

Man is intoxicated with worldly love but what 
he amasses will not go with him, wherefore he ought 
to prepare for hereafter. 

I 

O man, why hast thou gone into a forest of evil passions ? 

Thou hast partaken of the thieves’ plant® and gone 
astray. 

A fish abideth in water. 

And taketh no notice of the deadly net ; 

It swalloweth the bait to gratify its palate, 

^ The congregation of the saints. ® The guru. 

* DhatQra, bhang, &c., by which thags stupefy their victims. By it 
here spiritual ignorance is meant. 



72 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


So man is bound by the love of gold and woman. 

When the bees hoard up a great store of honey, 

Man taketh the honey and throweth dirt on the bees. 
The cow storeth up milk for her calf, 

But the milkman tieth the calf up by the neck and milketh 
the cow. 

For wealth man maketh great endeavours ; 

That wealth he taketh and burieth in the 'ground. 

He amasseth a great deal, but the fool understandeth not 
That his riches shall remain on the earth and his body 
become dust. 

He burneth with great lust, wrath, and avarice ; 

He never joineth the company of holy men. 

Saith Namdev, seek God’s protection ; ^ 

Become fearless and worship God. 


God is contained in everything. 

II 

Why layest Thou not a wager with me, O God, that there 
is nothing but Thee ? 

The servant is known from his master, and the master 
from his servant ; this is my game with Thee. 

Thou art God and Thine own temple. Thou worshippest 
Thyself. 

From water proceed waves, from waves water, though 
both have different names in conversation. 

Thou art the Singer, Thou ait the Dancer, Thou art the 
Trumpet-player — 

Saith Namdev, Thou art my Lord ; Thy servant is im- 
perfect ; Thou art perfect. 


In the following God is supposed to address 
Namdev 


III 


‘ The man who worshippeth none but Me is in Mine own 
image ; 

The sight of him even for a moment removeth man’s 

^ Tachi an is also translated — forswear those things, but this 
meaning would not be appropriate elsewhere. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 73 

three fevers,^ and his touch extricateth nian from the pit 
of family life. 

A saint can release one bound by Me, but I cannot 
release one bound by a saint. 

If a saint seize and hind Me at any time, I can say 
naught to him. 

1 am bound hy men^s merits ; I am the life of all things, 
but My slave is My life.^ 

O Namdev, My love shall shine over him whose heart hath 
such faith" 

Malar 

The extent and greatness of God’s palace, in which 
the demigods and all created things are servants. 

I 

Serve God who is unknowable and stainless. 

(jive me, O God, the gift of service for which saints beg. 

God’s palace hath pavilions on every side ; in heaven is 
His gorgeous dwelling and mansion ; 

He filleth equally the seven regions of the world. 

In His palace dwelleth the ever youthful Lakshmi ; 

The moon and sun are His lamps, the wretched mounte- 
bank Heath, who levieth a tax on all, is His judge — 

Such a Monarch is God. 

In His mansion Brahma with the four faces who created 
the whole world is the fashioning potter ; ^ 

In His mansion enthusiast^ Shiv, the world’s teacher, 
preacheth pure divine knowledge ; 

At His gate are the mace-bearers Evil and Good, and the 
accountants Chitr and Gupt ; 

Dharmraj the destroyer is His porter — 

Such a Monarch is God. 

In His mansion are the heralds, the heavenly dancers, the 
rikhis, and the poor minstrels who melodiously sing ; 

^ Adht, mental pain ; vtddht\ bodily pain ; upddhi, pain from external 
causes. A boil would be viddhi\ a fall upddhi. 

2 Is very dear to Me. 

3 In allusion to Brahma’s rdle as the creator. 

4 Filled with religious enthusiasm. 



74 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

All the Shastars are His actors ; ^ His theatre is stupend- 
ous ; kings sweetly sing His praises ; 

The winds are His waving chauris ; 

His handmaiden is Maya who hath vanquished the 
world ; 

His fire-place is the blind pit of hell fire , — 

Such a Monarch is the Lord of the three worlds. 

In His mansion the tortoise is a bed ; Vasuki ^ with its 
thousand hoods the cords to bind it ; 

His flower-girl is the eighteen loads of vegetables ; His 
water-carrier the ninety-six millions of clouds ; 

The Ganges is the perspiration of His feet, 

The seven seas His water-stands, 

All living things His vessels — 

Such a Monarch is the Lord of the three worlds — 

At His mansion wait Arjan, Dhru, Prahlad, Ambarik, 
Narad, Nejai,® the Sidhs, the Budhas, the heralds, and the 
heavenly dancers who extol Him and play before Him. 

In God’s mansion are so many living beings 
Within all of whom He is diffused. 

Namdev representeth, seek God’s protection, 

Whose standard all His saints bear. 

Kanra 

God compared to reflection in a mirror. 

God the Searcher of hearts. 

Like a body reflected in a mirror, 

Dwelleth in every heart ; nothing produce th an effect or 
impression on Him. 

He is free from all entanglements and devoid of caste. 
When one looketh at one’s own face in the water, the water 
can froduce no impression on it, 

So nothing can produce an impression on Vitthal, Nama’s 
Lord. 

^ In allusion to the various and different rites prescribed by the 
Shastars. 

® A serpent frequently identified with Sheshnag. 

® A holy Rikhi, of whom, otherwise, nothing is known. 



NAMDBV'S iMYMNS 


75 


Prabhati 1 

Everything is unreal ; God alone is real. 

I 

Only the heart knoweth its own state ; either keep thy 
secret to thyself, or tell it to a man of understanding. 

Since I repeat the name of God, the Searcher of hearts, why 
should I be afraid ? 

God, the Lord of the earth, hath penetrated me. 

My God is diffused in every place. 

Shops are only phantoms, shopkeepers^ are only phan- 
toms, cities are only phantoms. 

The- different grades of men who inhabit the earth are 
phantoms, and the world wandereth in errors 

When the heart is imbued with the guru’s instruction, 
duality is easily effaced. 

All things are subject to the Commander’s order ; He is 
fearless and regardeth all alike. 

He who knoweth and worshippeth the Supreme Being, 
uttereth words of divine knowledge. 

Nama saith, I have obtained the Life of the world in my 
heart ; He is invisible and wonderful. 

God communicates to man the perfume of holiness 
and changes him to gold. 

II 

God was in the beginning before the ages and in every 
age : His end is not known. 

God is contained in everything uninterruptedly ; thus is 
His form described. 

The unbeaten strain resoundeth for. him who repeateth 
God’s name — 

Happy is my God — 

^ PasSri, Literally — druggists. The. word here means men 
generally, because they make a display as Oriental druggists do of 
their wares. 

* This and the preceding line are also translated — 

To honour God is my shop, to honour God is my city, to honour God 
is my world ; 

To honour God is my residence ; others wander in different ways. 



76 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The sandal-tree by its perfume is pleasant to the other 
trees of the forest ; 

Through God who was before all things and who perfumeth 
like sandal, common wood becometh sandal.^ 

Thou, 0 God, art as the philosopher’s stone I am as 
the iron ; itt Thine association I have become gold. 

Thou art compassionate. Thou art the jewel and the ruby. 

Nama hath been absorbed in the True One. 

Man cannot hope to obtain bliss until he has 
learnt to know God who is within him. 

Ill 

The inscrutable Being invented a play — 

God is concealed in every heart, 

No one knoweth the nature of the soul’s light ; - 

What we ourselves have done Thou knowest. 

As' an earthen vessel is produced from clay. 

So Vitthal created the world. 

The soul’s entanglements depend on its acts ; 

It is itself responsible for what it hath done. 

Namdev representeth, the soul obtaineth tlie result of its 
thoughts ; 

The soul which always remaineth fixed on the Inscrutable 
One, becometh immortal.* 


TRILOCHAN 

Trilochan, a name which literally means three- 
eyed, that is, seer of the present, past, and future, 
was a celebrated saint of the Vaisya caste. His birth 
is said to have taken place in the year a. d. 1267.* He 

^ Men become holy by devotion and pious association. 

* Since it comes from God and has not been made by man. 

Shall no longer be subject to transmigration. 

* The dates of birth of Trilochan and several other Bhagats have been 
given to the author by Sadhu Janktbar Saran of Ajudhia. 



TRILOCHAN 77 

either lived at or visited Pandharpur in the Sholapur 
district of the Bombay Presidency, and was a contem- 
porary of Namdev, who mentioned or addressed him in 
his hymns. Inquiries at Pandharpur and the neigh- 
bouring city of Barsi have, however, failed to 
furnish any information regarding Trilochan. The 
following legend passes for history among his ad- 
mirers. He had a perfect faith in and love for saints, 
but they visited him in inconveniently large num- 
bers, and there were only he and his wife to attend 
and wait on them. He thought that they were not 
served as he could have wished, so he resolved on 
engaging a servant if he could find one who was 
accustomed to minister to holy men. He continued 
to search for such an attendant, but not finding 
one became sad at heart. It is said that God was 
not pleased at the sorrow of his saint, and sent him 
a candidate for service. Trilochan asked the candi- 
date who he was, whence he had come, and whether 
he had parents and a house and home. The man 
replied that he had no parents or home. He had 
merely come to be engaged as a servant. He could 
wait on the saints of God without assistance from 
others, as his life had been spent in such service. 
He gave his name as Antarjami, which interpreted 
means Searcher of hearts. Trilochan was highly 
pleased and ordered his wife to engage him and 
cheerfully supply all his wants. She was cautioned 
to consider his pleasure as her first duty. 

Antarjami performed menial services for the saints, 
such as cooking, drawing water, washing their feet, 
shampooing and bathing them, in such a manner that 
Trilochan’ s house became famous for its hospitality ; 
and a large crowd of saints began to live with him 
and consume his substance. Thirteen months passed 
in this way, until one day Trilochan’s wife went to 
visit a female neighbour. The latter inquired why 
she was so dirty and looked so miserable. She re- 
plied that her lord had taken into his employ a 



^8 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

ddrvant who required so much attention that she 
had to spend all her days grinding corn and cooking 
for him. This was reported to Antarjami and he 
promptly disappeared. 

When the time came to wait on the saints, Antar- 
jami could not be found. Trilochan became very 
much grieved, and, rebuking his wife, told her that 
it was through her indiscretion Antarjami had left 
their service. When Trilochan’s grief had lasted for 
three days it is said that he was comforted by 
divine interposition. He consequently applied him- 
self to the praise and contemplation of the one true 
God. His sorrow was then dispelled. 

The following h 5 anns of Trilochan are found in the 
Granth Sahib : — 


Sri Rag 

Trilochan admonishes mortals. 

The heart feeleth great worldly love, O mortal, through 
which man forgetteth old age and the fear of death. 

0 fool, thou art pleased on beholding thy family, like 
a thief on espying his neighbour’s house. 

When the powerful myrmidons of Death come with a 
rush, 

1 cannot withstand them. 

May some friend come and speak to me ! ^ 

Come to me, my God, throw Thine arms around me ! 

Come to me, my God, and rescue me ! 

In various pleasures and royal state, O mortal, hast thou 
forgotten God, and deemest thyself the only immortal one 
in this world. 

Deceived by mammon thou hast not thought of God, and 
hast lost thy life, O heedless man. 

Mortal, thou must tread a difficult and terrible path 
wjiere neither sUn nor moon hath entrance. 

When m^ hath abandoned the world, he forgetteth his 
worldly iove, 

^ That is,' give me spiritual consolation. ^ > > 



TRILOCHAN 79 

To-day it hath become clear to mine understandihg that 
Dharmraj will keep his eye on man. 

There his very powerful myrmidons will rub men between 
their hands, and none may withstand them. 

If any one give me instruction, let it be this that God is 
contained in every place.^ 

O God, saith Trilochan, Thou knowest everything. 

Gujari 

A Hermit, a Sanyasi, a Brahmin called Jai Chand, 
a Jogi, and a Kapria held a religious discussion in 
which each maintained the superiority of his own 
sect. They came in the heat of their arguments to 
Trilochan, and he, knowing that they were all 
hypocrites, addressed them each in turn as follows : — 

To the Hermit. — Thou hast not cleansed thy heart from 
filth, although thou wearest the dress of a hermit. 

To the Sanyasi. — In the lotus of thy heart thou hast 
not recognized God ; why hast thou become a Sanyasi ? 

To the Brahmin. — Thou hast gone astray in error, 0 Jai 
Chand, 

And not recognized God the Primal Joy. 

To the Jogi. — Eating in every house thou hast fattened 
thy body ; thou wearest a patched coat and beggar’s ear- 
rings for gain. 

Thou hast rubbed on thyself the ashes of the cremation- 
ground, hut, being without a spiritual guide, thou hast not 
found the Real Thing.* 

Why mutter sjells ? Why practise austerities ? Why 
churn water ? 

Remember God the Dweller at ease, who hath created 
the eighty-four lakhs of existences. 

To the Kapria. — O Kapria, why carriest thou a water- 
pot ? Why wanderest thou to the sixty-eight places of 
pilgrimage ? 

Saith Trilochan, hear, O mortal, having no corn why 
layest thou a threshing-floor ? 


^ Wan trin, literally — in the woods and glades. 


- * God. 



8o BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Last thoughts determine man’s future state. 

At the last moment, he who thinketh upon his wealth 
and dieth in that thought, 

Shall be bom again and again as a serpent, 

0 my friend, forget not God’s name. 

At the last moment, he who thinketh of a woman and 
dieth in that thought. 

Shall be born again and again as a prostitute. 

At the last moment, he who thinketh upon a boy^ and 
dieth in that thought. 

Shall be born again and again as a hog. 

At the last moment he who thinketh of a mansion and 
dieth in that thought, 

Shall be born again and again as a sprite. 

At the last moment he who thinketh upon God and dieth 
in that thought, 

Saith Trilochan, shall obtain salvation, and God shall 
dwell in his heart. 

Dhanasari 

Trilochan, engaged in his devotions, neglected his 
worldly calling, and this led to his straitened domestic 
circumstances. Thereupon his wife became discon- 
tented and upbraided God. The following is Trilo- 
chan’ s remonstrance. He endeavoured to console 
her by telling her that her distress was the result of 
her sins. 

Why slander God, 0 erring and ignorant woman ? 

Thy woe and weal are according to thine acts.® 

Though the moon is attached to Shiv’s forehead, and 
daily batheth in the Ganges ; 

Though Krishan the avatar of Vishnu became incarnate 
in the moon's family ; 

Yet the stain contracted on account of his misdeeds is 
ineffaceable from his head ; 

Arun, the charioteer, whose lord is the sun, the lamp of 

® Larkt, This phrase is also translated — He who thinketh upon 
his children. The idea apparently is that man ought to think of 
nothing but God in his last moments. 

® When such is the case, it is no use to rail at God in adversity. 



TRILOCHAN 8i 

the earth, whose brother was Garur, the king of birds, was 
horn without feet on account of his sins ; 

Shiv, the remover of many sins, the lord of the three 
worlds, wandered to many places of pilgrimage, but never 
reached the end of them-: ^ 

The act of cutting off Brahmans head was never effaced 
from his person. 

Although ambrosia, the moon, the all-yielding cow, 
Lakhshmi, the miraculous tree, the steed with seven faces, 
and the physician arose from the ocean, the lord of rivers. 

Yet on account of its deed the brackishness of the ocean 
departeth not ; 

Although Hanuman who burnt the fortress of Lanka and 
uprooted the park of Rawan, took the wound-healing plant 
to Ram Chandar and made him happy, 

Yet, on account of his act of theft the curse that he should 
never have more than a loin-cloth was not effaced from his 
person. 

The result of past acts is never effaced, O wife of my house ; 

Wherefore repeat for me the name of God ; 

Trilochan repeateth God’s name.^ 

^ The following are the allusions in the preceding hymn : — 

The Sursari is the Ganges, so called because it is suron ki sari, the 
river of demigods or divine heroes. It is said to flow from Shiv's 
head. 

Krishan belonged to the Chandarbans, or family of the moon. 
Ram Chandar, on the other hand, belonged to the Surajbans, or family 
of the sun. 

The moon fell in love with the wife of Brihaspati, the spiritual guide 
of the gods, and took her away. The dark spot in the moon is said 
to be the stain resulting from this act. In Sanskrit and cognate 
literature the moon is masculine. 

Arun was son of Vinata by Kashyap. Vinata prematurely hatched 

egg, and the offspring was born without thighs, hence he is called 
Anuru, thighless, or Vipad, footless. He cursed his mother, and 
prayed that, for having brought him forth before the due time, she 
should be a slave to her rival, Kadru. At his mother's earnest 
entreaties, however, he modified the curse, and said that her next son 
would deliver her from bondage. Arun, in later Hindu mythology, 
appears to be the same as the dawn and the charioteer of the sun. 

Garur, or Garuda, Arun’s younger brother, was chief of the feathered 
‘race, and an implacable foe of serpents. In a contest between his 

G 


SIKH. VI 



82 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


PARMANAND 

Parmanand resided at Barsi, north of Pandharpur. 
His era and history are not known. It is said that 
he had the same love and affection for God as the 
milkmaids had for Krishan. In his riper years he 
used to sing the praises of God with the zest of 
a boy of twelve or fourteen years of age, and he 
thus largely contributed to the magnification of 
God’s name. The beauty and deeds of Krishan’s 
external and internal body were ever present to him, 
so it is no wonder that he sang the graces, the 
splendour, the loveliness, and the pastoral and 
sylvan sports of that great king with all the en- 
thusiasm of earnest faith and devotion. 

Parmanand used to be so absorbed in the love 
and contemplation of God that tears, it is said, 
flowed continually from his eyes, and times without 
number he experienced an alteration and stoppage 
of his voice during his paroxysms of ecstasy. He 

mother and her rival, the latter was successful, and, in accordance with 
conditions previously agreed on, made Vinata her slave. Garur 
brought nectar from heaven to purchase her freedom. Vinata was 
released. The nectar was taken back by Indar, but recovered by 
Garur. Garur is represented as the vehicle of Vishnu and as having 
a white face, an aquiline nose, red wings, and a golden body. 

Shiv cut off Brahma’s head, and it would never leave his hand till 
at last it fell from it at the pilgrimage of Kapalmochan. 

The Rikhi Agast once invited the ocean to a banquet. It failed 
to answer the invitation, whereupon Agast became angry, took the 
ocean in his hand and drank it off. He afterwards voided it as urine, 
and hence its brackishness. 

Ram's brother Lakshman was wounded, and Hanuman, on the 
advice of the physician Sukhen, took the bisalya plant to heal the 
wound. 

Hanuman, the monkey-god, once plundered a holy man, leaving 
him only a loin-cloth. The holy man cursed him and said : ‘ Only 
a loin-cloth shall remain with thee also. Thou shalt never be able to 
put on other clothes.' 



PARMANAND 


83 


used to make seven hundred protestations to God 
daily, often on the muddy road. A merchant once 
offered him a silken cloth to protect his knees. He 
declined the offer and told him to give it to a 
more needy person, as. he himself would be satisfied 
with an old cloth instead. This the merchant 
granted him. 

Parmanand defended the utterance of God’s name 
as a devotional exercise by saying that prayers are 
often not felt, because while repeating them men’s 
minds are apt to wander ; but the continual utter- 
ance of God’s name must ever result in heartfelt 
devotion. 

In his hymns Parmanand called himself Sarang, 
by which he meant that he longed for God as the 
sarang or chatrik longs for its yearly raindrops. 

Parmanand’s writings are believed to excessively 
increase men’s love for God. It is said to be im- 
possible for one to read them without contemplating 
God or bearing an image of Him in the mind. A 
list of Parmanand’s works is given in the Asht 
Chhap or the Eight Marks of the followers of 
Vishnu. 

The following hymn of Parmanand’s composition 
is found in the Granth Sahib. 

Sarang 

O man, what hast thou done by hearing the Purans ? 

Thou hast performed no steady worship, and not given 
alms to the hungry. 

Lust hast thou not forgotten, wrath hast thou not for- 
gotten, covetousness hath not left thee ; 

Slander hath not left thy lips, and fruitless hath been all 
thy devotion. 

O sinful man, by highway robbery and house-breaking 
hast thou filled thy belly. 

Thou hast committed the folly from which on thy depar- 
ture to the next world infamy will result, 



84 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

= The desire <or the d^truction of life did not leave thy 
heart, and thou didst not cherish mercy for living 
things. 

Parmanand, thou hast not in the company of holy men 
made current God’s pure word.^ 


SADHNA 

Sadh'na is believed to have been born in Sehwan 
in Sind and to have been a butcher by trade. He 
was a contemporary of Namdev. He embraced a 
religious life by listening to the instructions of holy 
men. Sadhna never killed animals himself, but pur- 
chased those killed by others and then retailed their 
flesh. He wiped out the sins of previous births and 
became purified like fine gold which resists the touch- 
stone. His idol was the salagram or ammonite stone 
worshipped by Hindus. With this he weighed out 
meat to his customers. However much or little 
they required, they received the weight of the sala- 
gram. 

A Sadhu, or holy man, on seeing the use to which 
the salagram was applied, thought it ought no 
longer to remain with a butcher, and resolved to 
take possession of it. Sadhna gave it up without 
hesitation. After some time, however, the Sadhu 
took back the salagram to Sadhna, and told him 
that, though he had bathed it in the five am- 

^ The first duty inculcated in this hymn is, it will be noted, alms- 
giving. Lust, wrath, covetousness, and slander are to be avoided. 
Highway robbery and house-breaking, which still prevail in India, are 
duly reprobated. The life of no living thing is to be taken. This 
doctrine is accepted by countless Hindus. It has descended to them 
from the earliest ages. The hymn concludes by showing the value of 
good example. The good name suggested as an object is not the 
good name of this world, but the good name which is equivalent to 
the good will of heaveh. 



SADHNA 


85 

brosias,^ worshipped it with sandal, sweet basil, and 
so forth, his worship was unacceptable. ‘ The sala* 
gram is pleased with thee,’ said the Sadhu, ‘ and 
I have sinned by taking it,’ By this time, how- 
ever, Sadhna's thoughts took a different txxrn. He 
became wrapped up in the love of God, abandoned 
everything he possessed, and bent his steps towards 
the forest to enjoy the uninterrupted worship of 
God. 

On the way he saw some of his relations at a 
distance. He concealed himself and avoided them 
by taking another route lest any of them should put 
pressure on him to return. On arriving in the 
evening at a village, he went into the house of 
a married man and asked for something to eat. 
The lady of the house on seeing Sadhna young and 
handsome fell in love with him. She prepared 
exquisite food for his repast and induced him to 
stay. At night she proposed to elope with him. 
Sadhna spurned her, and said he would not do such 
a thing even though she were to cut his throat for 
refusing. Understanding by this that, if her hus- 
band’s throat were cut, Sadhna would be ready to 
accede to her wishes, she forthwith went and killed 
her husband. On returning to Sadhna she told him 
what she had done, and repeated her immoral pro- 
posal. Sadhna replied, ‘ O unworthy woman, thou 
hast lost thy reason ; how can I figree to what thou 
proposest ? ’ In her despair she raised loud cries 
and invented a false accusation against him : ‘ I 
believed this person to be a holy man, and accordingly 
entertained him. He hath now killed my husband, 
and made improper overtures to me.’ Sadhna was 
arrested and taken before a magistrate. When 
asked what he had to say, he, with the meekness 
and unwillingness to throw blame on others, which 
have characterized so many Hindu saints, pleaded 

^ The Panck amrit, or five nectars of the Hindus, ate curds, clarified 
butter, hofiey, Ganges water, and milk. 



86 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

guilty to the charge. He thought to himself, ‘ Since 
God hath placed me in this position, no one will 
accept my denial.’ He then composed the following 
hymn : — 

Even though Thou, O God, consign me to hell, I shall 
hot dispute it or turn away from it. 

Even though Thou bestow heaven on me, I shall not 
rejoice or praise it. 

If Thou reject me, I cannot constrain Thee ; if Thou 
accept me, I shall not be puffed up with excessive joy. 

He by whom Thou standest shoulder to shoulder is dyed 
with Thee. 

Let him whom Thou orderest cheerfully bum his body. 

My mind desireth not death, yet Thou mayest, if it please 
Thee, put me in the fire. 

What the Beloved desireth ought to be the heart’s desire 
also. 

The judge sentenced Sadhna to have his hands 
cut off. The punishment was duly carried out, and 
Sadhna was then discharged. He set out without 
a frown on his forehead notwithstanding his bar- 
barous mutilation. 

There is a tradition, which, however, is not found 
in the Bhagat Med, that the woman who had brought 
the false accusation against Sadhna of having killed 
her husband with the object of abducting her, burned 
herself on her husband’s funeral pyre. On seeing 
this Sadhna said, ‘ No one knoweth the way of 
a woman ; she killeth her husband and becometh 
a Sati.’ However this expression originated, it has 
passed into a proverb. 

Sadhna’s devotions proved so successful that, it 
is said, new hands then sprouted from his body, 
and he was released from all pain of future birth. 
* So efficacious,’ says the author of the Bhagat Mai, 
‘ is the love of God.’ In the Mahabhar at it is stated 
that, even were a man to study the four Veds, it 
would not avail him unless he loved God. And 



SADHNA 


87 

God said, ‘ Even though a man be the lowest social 
outcast, yet if he be a saint of Mine, he is dear 
to Me and worthy of worship/ 

There is a legend to the effect that Sadhna became 
the object of further persecution. A king, who was 
probably incensed against him on account of his 
religious opinions, ordered him to procure meat for 
him at an unusual hour of night. Sadhna was 
unable to do so, and the king thereupon ordered 
that he should be put to death by being built alive 
into a wall. While the wall was closing round him, 
Sadhna is said to have composed the following 
hymn in the Bilawal measure : — 

On account of a king’s daughter a man assumed the 
disguise of Vishnu, 

For love of her and for his own object ; but his honour 
was saved. 

What merit hast Thou, 0 Guru of the world, if my sins 
be not erased ? 

What availeth it to enter the asylum of the lion, if he 
allow the jackal ^ to clutch me ? 

For want of a drop of rain the chatrik suffereth agony ; 

When its life is gone, even were an ocean at hand, it 
would be of no avail. 

Now that my life is weary and abideth no longer, how 
shall I be patient ? 

When a man is drowned, even if a boat be obtained, say 
whom shall you put into it ? 

I am nothing, I am nothing, and I have nothing, 

At this conjuncture Thy slave, Sadhna, prayeth Thee to 
protect his honour.^ 

^ The lion here is God, the jackal is the king who sentenced Sadhna 
to death. 

^ The beginning of this hymn alludes to a carpenter^s son who, on 
hearing that a king’s daughter desired to marry Vishnu, decked himself 
out with Vishnu^s four arms, club, lotus, discus, and shell, rode on Vishnu’s 
garur, and thus gained the lady’s affection. A hostile king was subse- 
quently making war on her father, whereupon she declared she kept 
Vishnu with her and He would save her people. The carpenter’s son 



88 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Sadhna's tomb is at Sarhind in the Panjab, but 
the sadhu in charge of it can give no information 
regarding him. 


BENI 

Beni briefly traces the progress of man's spiritual 
degeneration from the time of birth. 

Owing to the great difficulty of his writings it is 
believed that he is of comparatively ancient date. 
Unfortunately no account of him is accessible. 

Srirag 

O man, when thou wast in the pit of the womb and didst 
meditate and fix thine earnest attention on God ; ^ 

Not proud of the dignity of thy mortal body, thou wast 
day and night free from the pride which is ignorance. 

Recall the travail and great suffering of those days ; 
now thou hast too much extended thy thoughts to worldly 
things, 

felt alarmed on the approach of the hostile army to the capital, and 
prayed to Vishnu to save him. Vishnu heard his prayers, caused the 
defeat of the hostile king, and thus saved the country and its people, 
including the lover of the king’s daughter. 

Several gyanis analyse the hymn as follows : In the first two lines 
Sadhna addresses God, ‘ Thou hast saved him, why not me ? * God 
is supposed to reply, ‘ This form of death was recorded in thy destiny.’ 
Sadhna then repeated the third and fourth lines. God then said that 
He would grant him salvation after death. Sadhna replied with the 
fifth and sixth lines. God then tells him to be of good cheer, after 
which Sadhna replied with the seventh and eighth lines. The ninth 
line is frequently paraphrased — I can do nothing for myself, I have 
no relation and no one to assist me. 

Sadhna founded a sect which does not appear to be numerous now, 
and which is confined to persons of the trade of butcher. The 
particular tenets of the Sadhnapanthis are nowhere stated, but it is 
probable they simply consist in worshipping Sadhna as an incarnation 
of Vishnu. 

^ Vrdh in the Granth Sahib often means God. It may, however, 
be also translated — with body reversed. 



BENI 89 

When thou didst leave the womb and enter this perish- 
able world, thou forgottest God. 

Thou shalt afterwards repent, O fool ; through what 
mental perversity hath superstition attached to thee ? 

Remember God ; otherwise thou shalt go to the abode 
of Death ; stray not in other worship. 

A child is anxious for play and sweets ; by degrees its 
worldly love increaseth. 

Under the pretext of its being a sacrifice,^ man tasteth 
meat as if it were ambrosia, though it is a poison ; then 
the five evil passions appear and torture him.^ 

He abandoneth devotion, penance, self-restraint, and good 
works, and in his heart he worshippeth not God’s name. 

His lust overfloweth, blackness attacheth to his heart, 
and he embraceth the strange woman. 

In the ardour of youth he stareth at another’s wife, and 
distinguisheth not good from evil. 

In the intoxication of lust and the other great sins he 
goeth astray, and distinguisheth not vice from virtue. 

Beholding his children and his wealth, he is proud and 
forgetteth God in his heart. 

He weigheth in his heart the wealth of some one who 
is dead, then ruineth his life by women and banquets. 

When his hair groweth grey — ^greyer than the jasmine — 
and his voice becometh feeble ; ^ 

When his eyes water, and his intellect and strength 
depart, then his desires are in a whirl.^ 

His mind is defiled by evil passions, and therefore his 
body withereth away like the lotus in the rainy season. 

He who renounceth God’s name in this perishable world 
shall afterwards repent. 

Beholding his near relations he muttereth something, and 
is proud of them, but they heed him not. 


1 Medh here means the animal killed in sacrifice, 

2 It must be remembered that this was written by a Vaishnav to 
whom all meat was forbidden, 

® Literally — as if it proceeded from the seventh nether region. 

^ Literally — the churn of desires is in his heart. 



90 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

He desireth the distinction of long life, though his eyes 
see not.^ 

The fire of his body is spent, the bird of his soul hath fled, 
and his corpse is disagreeable whether in the house or the 
courtyard. 

Saith Beni, hear me, O saints ; who hath obtained salva- 
tion after death ? ^ 

Divine instruction is communicated uilder the 
allegory of hathjog, the most difficult and painful 
form of a Jogi’s practice. 

Ramkali 

Unite the breath of the ira, pingla, and sukhmana to- 
gether in one place ; ^ 

There is the Beni ^ and Pryag where the three rivers meet ; 
let the soul lave therein. 

O saints, there is the pure God. 

A few understand this when they go to tlie guru ; 

There in the brain the Pure One is. 

What are the signs of God’s abode ? 

There is played the unbeaten nausic of the Word.^ 

There nor moon, nor sun, nor wind, nor water is 
worshipped. 

He whose conscience is awakened by the guru’s instruc- 
tion knoweth this. 

Through him divine knowledge is produced, evil inclina- 
tions depart. 

And ambrosial juice trickleth from the brain. 

He who knoweth the secret of this science,® 

Shall meet the Primal Divine Guru. 

^ Also translated — His body wasteth away ; on seeing somebody 
he speaketh ; he is proud, but knoweth nothing. 

2 That is, unless man have done good works in life there is no 
means of his salvation. 

® That is, the brain. 

^ At Priyag there is or was a temple called Beni M§dhav. 

® Not the bells, cymbals, or shells of Hindu worship. 

® Kala, literally— contrivances. 



BENI 


91 

The tenth gate is the abode of the inaccessible and un- 
equalled Supreme Being. 

Over the body and on the body is a chamber,^ and within 
the chamber is the Treasure. 

He who watcheth over .this shall never fall asleep ; 

The three qualities and the three worlds shall vanish for 
him in contemplation ; 

• He shall hold the Source ^ of all spells in his heart, 

And turning back his mind jrom the worlds fix it on 
heaven ; 

He shall be wakeful and not utter a lie, 

And shall keep the five organs of perception in subjection ; 

He shall treasure the guru’s instruction in his heart, 

And devote his soul and body to God’s love ; 

He shall meditate on the leaves and branches of his 
body,® 

And not lose his life in gambling ; ^ 

He shall tie up the sphincter ani, 

Turn his breath towards his back, and raise it to the brain. 

When he restraineth his breath difficult of restraint,® 
nectar trickleth forth, 

And he converseth with the Lord of the world. 

In the tenth gate is the light of a four-faced lamp ® to 
behold all things ; 

There are endless petals of the lotus, ^ and its cup is in 
the centre ; 

God dwelleth there with all His power. 

Let man string the precious jewel of God’s name within 
him — 

He hath a lotus in his brain and gems ® around it ; 

^ The brain. ^ That is, God. 

® Explained by the gyanis to mean the veins and muscles of the 
body. It is to the upper and lower limbs the word branches is applied 
in Hindu anatomy. — Dr. Hoernle. ^ That is, in vice. 

® Literally — when he has endured unendurable things. 

® A lamp with four wicks to give a bright light . Divine knowledge 
is meant. 

^ The mystics suppose that the brain contains a lotus flower, within 
which God dwells. 

® The leaves of the lotus. 



92 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

In the centre is the Spotless One, the Lord of the three 
worlds ; 

The five species of musical instruments are clearly 
heard ; 

Chauris appear to wave and a shell to reverberate like 
thunder — 

The pious by divine knowledge trample on their evil 
passions.^ 

Beni beggeth Thy name, 0 Lord, since the practice of Jog 
is profitless. 

Prabhati 

The following was addressed to a hypocritical 
Brahman 

Thou ruhhest sandal on thy body, and puttest leaves on 
thy forehead,® 

But thou hast a murderous knife in thy heart. 

Thou lookest on people like a thag, and watchest them 
like a crane looking for fish. 

The life of the Vaishnav when he seeth thee escapeth 
through his mouth.® 

Thou bowest daily to the beautiful idol of Vishnu for 
a long time ; 

With the evil eye art thou affected, and at night thou 
quarrellest ; ^ 

Thou ever bathest thy body ; 

Thou hast two dhotis,® thou ostensibly performest thy 
religious duties, and livest on milk alone. 

But in thy heart thou hast a knife to stab with. 

It is thy custom to plunder the property of others. 

^ Daint, literally — demons. 

'® To appear to have renounced the world. 

® The Vaishnav abstains from meat, and dies on seeing thee bent 
on deeds of blood. The verse is also translated — Thou lookest like 
a Vaishnav whose soul hath escaped from his body. 

® Over the. division of the offerings. Possibly, however, badan 
(quarrel) is for bdtnan (woman) which would rhyme with chirdman in 
the preceding line. If bdman be read; the translation will be — Thou 
lookest severely on women by day, but by night thou Ipvest them. 

® So as to have a change after bathing. 



BENI 93 

Thou adorest a stone, and in the worship of Kali makest 
a circle for Ganesh.^ 

Thou watchest at night so that men may think thou hast 
entered on God’s service ; 

With thy feet dost thou dance, but thy heart meditateth 
evil — 

0 sinner, thy dancing is wicked — 

Thou sittest on a deer-skin, and earnest a rosary of sweet 
basil ; 

Thou puttest a showy tilak on thy forehead ; 

In thy heart is falsehood, though thou wearest a neck- 
lace * on thy neck. 

O sinner, thou repeatest not God’s name. 

All that man’s worship is vain, and he is blind 

Who hath not recognized the Supreme God. 

Saith Beni, meditate on God by the guru’s instruction ; 

Without a true guru the way is not found. 


RAMANAND 

A SHORT account of Ramanuj appears to be neces- 
sary to explain the doctrines of Ramanand, and the 
progress of Hindu religious reform in India. Swami 
Ramanuj ® flourished in the eleventh century of the 
Christian era. He was born in the village of 
Bhutnagari, also called Perumbhudur, south-east 
of Kanchipur, the modern Kanjeveram, in the 

1 According to the Tantar Shaslar, there must be four circles for 
Kali’s attendant divinities, Ganesh, Kshetarpal, Bhairav, and Yogini. 

2 Rudrakhan, the Sanskrit rudraksh. ' A necklace made of the 
berries of the eleocarpus. This is generally worn by the worshippers 
of Shiv. It is the followers of Vishnu who carry rosaries of sweet 
basil. 

* The author is indebted to Mr. L. Rice of Bangalore for some 
valuable notes on the life of Ramanuj. 



94 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Madras Presidency, in the year a.d. 1017 during the 
reign of Betawardhan, King of Dwar Samudra 
in the Maisur (Mysore) state. The date of his birth 
is attested by the Sanskrit chronogram dhirlabdha, 
a word which yields the date 939 of the Saka era, 
and means that men received patience or consola- 
tion at his birth, Ramanuj’s father was Keshav 
Jajjwa, a Brahman said to be of the illustrious 
race of Harit, the spiritual and literary king of the 
Rikhis. His mother was called Kantimati. For 
a long time she was childless. Her husband 
prayed to heaven for a son when, it is said, 
a god appeared to him and told him his desire 
should be granted. To effect this, it is related 
that Sheshnag, the wise serpent, which according 
to the Hindus supports the earth, became incarnate 
as Ramanuj. 

On the mother’s side also Ramanuj belonged to 
an intellectual family, for it was his mother’s brother 
Yadav Acharya,^ who was Ramanuj’s first pre- 
ceptor and taught him the principles of the Hindu 
religion as expounded in the Simritis. Ramanuj 
became an apt pupil, and at a very early age 
mastered the Veds and the Shastars. While pur- 
suing his studies he delighted to sit under a tamarind 
tree near Perumbhudur, which is still worshipped by 
his followers. 

Ramanuj propounded new opinions with refer- 
ence to the relation between the Creator and his 
creatures. He refuted the theories of the famous 
Shankar Acharya who was a Vedantist, and he 
began to inculcate the superiority of the worship 
of Vishnu to that of Shiv, the principal object of 
worship in southern India. 

Ramanuj exorcised an evil spirit, of which the 
daughter of the king of Kanchipur had become 
possessed. The king was well pleased and gave 

Some followers of Ramanuj deny that Yadav Acharya was his uncle. 



RAMANAND 


95 


him munificent remuneration. Finding the king in 
a mood to listen to his teaching, ’he preached to 
him the advantages of the Vaishnav doctrines. His 
superior intellectual attainments and his success 
in everything to which he turned his attention 
excited the jealousy of his preceptor, who formed 
a plot to take him on a pilgrimage to Banaras, and 
secretly drown him in the Ganges. Ramanuj was 
saved from this fate by the timely information 
received from his aunt’s son.^ 

Ramanuj for a considerable time worshipped an 
idol called Bardraj , the tutelary deity of Kanchipur. 
Desirous to extend his theological studies, and 
thoroughly distrustful of his uncle, he went to Sri 
Rang Nath, the modern Srirangam at the parting of 
the rivers Kavari and Kolarun, near Trichinoply, to 
visit Yamun' Acharya, the great representative of 
the Sri sect, and obtain initiation from him and 
adoption as his disdple. Unfortunately Yamun 
Acharya had died before the arrival of Ramanuj. 
The latter then put himself under the tutelage of 
Mahapuran, Yamun Acharya’s disciple and successor. 
He subsequently became the disciple of Goshtipuran, 
who sent him back eighteen times before he was 
satisfied of h:s fitness for initiation. 

Nabhaji, writing from a Vaishnav standpoint, 
enumerates four great sects of Hindus, the Sri, the 
Shiv, the Brahma, and the Sankadik. The members 
of the Sri sect worship Vishnu under the form 
of his energy or consort Lakshmi. Indeed, it is said 
that Vishnu himself taught the proper form of his 
worship to Lakshmi, and she handed it down in 
a direct line to Ramanuj. 

Ramanuj continued his studies with ardour at 
Sri Rang Nath, and there composed his commen- 
taries on the Sutras of Vyas and other Vedic works. 

1 Nabhaji’s Bhagat Mai and also Maharaja Raghuraj Sinh’s 
Bhagat Mai. Some believe the lady whom RarnSnuj cured was the 
daughter of Dwarsamudar. 



96 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAlilB 

When past fifty years of age he left his family and 
devoted himself to the salvation of his fellow men. 
Mahapuran had communicated to him the spell by 
which God’s protection might be obtained, and told 
him that whoever heard it should be saved from 
the pain of transmigration. At the same time he 
informed Ramanuj that he was never to disclose 
the secret. Ramanuj pondered on the prohibition, 
and came to the conclusion that it was on every 
account proper to divulge to men the secret of 
salvation, even though he were to suffer eternal 
punishment for the disclosure. He accordingly went 
from place to place repeating with a loud voice the 
spell of human deliverance. He made pilgrimages 
to Triputi, Jagannath, and Banaras, and having 
successfully preached the Vaishnav doctrines at 
these holy places erected buildings for worship at 
them all. From Banaras he proceeded to Badri- 
nath in the Himalayas, where he did homage to 
Vishnu under his dual form of Nar Narayan. He 
is said to have made converts by thousands and 
tens of thousands. 

In the Prapann Amrit, a Sanskrit work devoted 
to Ramanuj and his doctrines, it is stated that in 
the month of Poh in the year 1012 of the Salava- 
hana era, corresponding to 1090 of the Christian 
era, he dedicated an idol to God under the name 
of Narayan at a place called Yadavachala.^ 

The chroniclers disclose the extent to which 
religious zeal and its allies, religious bigotry and 
persecution, even then prevailed in India. The 
Chola king Karikala, called Krimi Kantha on 
account of some affection of the throat from which 
he suffered, was a bigoted worshipper of Shiv, and 
held the doctrines of the Sri sect in devout abhor- 
rence. He engaged in controversy with Mahapuran, 
Ramanuj 's religious guide, and Kruresh, a disciple 
of Ramanuj. The monarch on being vanquished in 
^ Prapann Amrit, Bombay edition. 



RAMANAND 


97 


argument resorted to physical force for revenge, and 
put out the eyes of his antagonists. Mahapuran 
died in a few days, but Kruresh survived and sub- 
sequently rendered Ramanuj invaluable' service in 
the dissemination of hjs doctrines. 

Ramanuj himself, in order to escape from the fury 
of Krimi Kantha, took shelter in the court of Bitta 
or "Vitala Deva, the Jain monarch of Dwar Samudra 
in the Maisur state, who reigned from a.d. 1104 to 
1141.^ After a controversy with Ramanuj the king 
changed his faith and sought the protection of God 
in his teachings. Filled with new zeal he changed 
his name also to Vishnu Vardhana and set to 
work to convert his numerous subjects, who are 
stated to have been all of the Jain religion. Most 
of them were converted, but some fled, and the 
rest the monarch piously put to the sword. In 
A. D. 1117 the king erected the Belur temple in 
commemoration of his conversion to Vaishnavism 
by Ramanuj. 

Ramanuj fearing for his own safety in his native 
country and pleased with the holy zeal, friendship, 
and protection of the Maisur king, resided at his 
capital for twelve years, during which time he 
induced him to erect a temple to Krishan at Mailkot. 
Here Ramanuj continued to preach his doctrines, 
and made numerous converts among the Brahmans, 
whom he withdrew from their allegiance to Shiv. 

Ramanuj ’s religious teachings began to be adopted 
at Purushotampuri, the modern Jagannath, then as 
now one of the greatest strongholds of the Hindu 
religion. His rules for daily life, however, were of 
a very exclusive character, and such as could hardly 

1 Bitta Deva was king of the Hoysalas who lived on the west of the 
present Maisur state. Bitta Deva’s dynasty ruled Maisur from the 
eleventh to the fourteenth century. Their capital was Dwarsamudar, 
now Halebid, in the Belur district. The Cholas and their king liv^ 
to the east of the Hoysalas. The Hoysala kings were Jains up to 
the time of Bitta Deva. — Rice’s Mysore. 

H 


.SIKH. VI 



98 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

have been expected from a man who fearlessly 
disclosed to the world the secrets of salvation. He 
enjoined the utmost attention to cleanliness in 
cooking and eating, an injunction which must be 
commended on sanitary grounds, but he made 
regulations concerning dhess, salutation, and sacri- 
ficial marks of too strict a character for genersd 
observance. For instance, his followers cooked for 
themselves, and ate in the greatest privacy after 
bathing. On one point in particular he laid the 
greatest stress: If the sight or shadow of any 
person fell upon the food of a follower of his, it 
was to be immediately rejected. He believed that 
purity of thought could only be attained by eating 
food not seen by others. Nabhaji states that the 
strict culinary rules of Ramanuj were not made for 
caste purposes, but for the glory of God and purity 
of worship. 

Such teaching naturally met with opposition. It 
can easily be gathered that Jagannath became too 
dangerous a place for Ramanuj to permanently 
reside in, and he escaped at night to pursue his 
missionary career in other lands. He is said to 
have had ten thousand followers, seventy-four of 
whom were specially devoted to their teacher. 
These seventy-four, however, each put a different 
interpretation on his doctrines, and accordingly 
established as many sects of their own. Ramanuj 
died at Sriranganath at the age of one hundred and 
twenty years. The chronogram dharmonashta or the 
destruction of religion, gives the date of his death as 
1059 of the Shaka era, corresponding to a.d. 1137. 

The mantra or words of initiation of the sect 
consists of eight letters, and is communicated in 
a secret whisper by the teacher to his disciple. The 
proclamation of the mantra was made by Ramanuj 
from the loftiest gopura, known as the white gopura, 
or ornamental gateway of the temple at Srirangam. 
The motto of members of their order is ‘ Ramianuj- 



RAMANAND 


99 


assya daso asmi’ I am a slave of Ramanuj. The 
head is slightly inclined and the hands are joined 
and applied to the forehead for the purposes of 
salutation. The sacrificial marks of the sect are 
several. On the forehead there are two vertical 
streaks made with a calcareous clay called gopa- 
chandan. Within them is a vertical red streak made 
of turmeric and lime. The white streaks are con- 
nected over the nose by a transverse streak which 
admits of several varieties. The usual marks on 
the forehead are as follow ; — to denote that 
body, tongue, and mind should be kept under subjec- 
tion. On the breast and upper arms Ramanujis 
make white patches in which they enclose red streaks. 
The several marks represent the shell, quoit, club, 
and lotus carried in the four hands of Vishnu, and 
the central streak of red represents his consort or 
energy Lakshmi. It is piously believed that persons, 
no matter of what caste, who apply these marks to 
their foreheads are after their departure from this 
life not molested by Death’s ministers. The sect 
besides venerate the salagram stone and the sweet 
basil flower as indispensable adjuncts of worship. 

The followers of Ramanuj believe that Vishnu is 
the supreme Being, that he existed before edl worlds, 
and was the Creator of all things. Creation origi- 
nated in his desire to multiply himself and was 
formed from his material essence. This essence, 
however manifested, is pervaded by a portion of 
his vitality which again is distinct from his spiritual 
essence, as God the spirit and matter are all dis- 
tinct. Like the propounders of other religious 
systems, Ramanuj found himself in a difficulty 
between pantheism and anthropomorphism. Vishnu 
pervades all creation. ' Vishnu and the universe are 
one, but at the same time Vishnu is not devoid of 
form, and he is endowed with all good qualities. 
Vishnu has manifested himself to men in several 
human and other incarnations. He is present ifi 



100 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

objects of worship, and may be adored by the 
purification of temples and idols, by the presenta- 
tion of flowers and perfumes, by counting rosaries 
and repeating his name and that of his energy or 
consort Lakshmi, and finally by the practice of Jog. 
The reward of such devotion is release from all 
transmigration throughout eternity. 

Several temples were erected in Ramanuj’s 
honour, the principal of which are at Jadari, Galata, 
Ahobal, and Rewasa. In the famous fort of Sriran- 
gapatam, also, a temple sacred to Ramanuj is pointed 
out to visitors; 

Ramanuj wrote several works, the principal of 
which are the Sri Ramanuj Bhashya, the Gita 
Bhashya, the Vedaratha Sangraha, the Vedanta 
dipa, the Vedanta Sar, and the Dharm Sanhita} 

Ram AN AND, a Gaur Brahman, was born at Mailkot, 
where Ramanuj had set up an idol of Vishnu and 
induced the Brahmans to renounce their devotion 
to Shiv. Very little is known of Ramanand’s life. 
Only a page and a half is devoted to it in Nabhaji’s 
Bhagat Mol, where he is compared to Ram, and 
made an incarnation of God come down from heaven 
to save the world. 

The Ramanandis make it a special point to keep 
all details of their sect and its founder a profound 
secret. All the works that we have been able to 
obtain relating to Ramanand have been for the 
most part devoted to his praise. We give here such 
details of his life as have been gleaned from acces- 
sible sources. 

Nabhaji makes Ramanand the fourth in spiritual 

^ Besides the Prapann Amrii, the principal authorities for the life 
of Ramanuj are the Bhagai Mai (Hindi), the Divya Charitar (Kana- 
rese), the Bharat Khanda cha aravdchin kosh (Marathi), and the 
Kabi Charitar (Gujrati). 

For a further account of RamSnuj’s doctrines and followers see Sir 
Monier Williams's BrShmanism and Hinduism. 



RAMANAND 


lOI 


descent from Ramanuj. AUdwing a third of a 
century as an average period of incumbency for 
each religious teacher, Ramanand must have 
flourished in the end of the fourteenth and the first 
hadf of the fifteenth ogntury. This corresponds too 
with another reckoning which may be employed as 
a chronological test. The great religious reformer 
Kabir, of whom we shall presently have much to 
say, was according to all documentary and tradi- 
tional evidence a disciple of Ramanand. Now the 
followers of Kabir say that the year A. D. 1908 is 
the 510th of his era. His birth therefore, according 
to them, took place in the year a. d. 1398, a date 
which may be unhesitatingly accepted. We are 
thus able to fix Ramanand’s approximate epoch. 

Ramanand like Ramanuj originally imbibed the 
Hindu doctrines enunciated in the Simritis, in 
which he had been instructed by a hermit. He 
subsequently adopted the reformed principles of 
Ramanuj and became a prominent member of the 
Sri sect. It is related that Ramanand, while still 
a worshipper according to the Simritis, was one day 
gathering flowers in a garden when he saw Swami 
Raghwanand, a follower of Ramanuj. Raghwanand 
asked him if he knew anything of his own state, 
but, before he had time to answer, told him that 
he had reached the end of his life, and exhorted 
him to seek the protection of God at the last hour. 
Ramanand went and informed his hermit tutor of 
the message he had received. The hermit and his 
pupil proceeded to Raghwanand and besought his 
divine intercession. The great Swami took com- 
passion on Ramanand, and % his skill in the arduous 
practice of Jog suspended at the critical moment 
Ramanand’s hfe breath in the tenth gate of his 
body. The time fixed by destiny for Ramanand’s 
death having thus passed, Raghwanand bestowed 
on him the coveted boon of a protracted life. 

Ramanand served the Swami for some time^ and 



102 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

then went on a pil^image to Badrikashram, the 
modern Badri Narain in the Himalayas, and other 
places. In the course of his wanderings he visited 
Banaras, and liwd at the ghat called Panch Ganga, 
where his sandals were preserved at the time of 
the composition of Nabhaji’s Bhagat Mai. 

• It is certain that Ramanand came in contact at 
Banaras with learned Musalmans, for by that time 
there had been several conquests of India under the 
flag of the Prophet of Makka. It is natural to 
suppose that there should have been held at the 
ancient sacred city of the Hindus heated contro- 
versies between Mullas and Brahmans, and that the 
better informed classes of Hindus, who had already 
shown a predilection for monotheism, should have 
formed a just conception of the divine unity. We 
shall afterwards see how some of the followers of 
Ramanand at Banaras became fervent monotheists, 
and at the same time ridiculed the priestcraft of 
tile Mullas and the Brahmans. 

Being far from members of his own religious 
persuasion, Ramanand was now free to form his 
own ideas and speculations on religion, and he laid 
aside among other previous articles of belief several 
of the cumbrous social and caste observances of the 
Sri sect. When he returned after long absence to 
Raghwanand, his co-reUgionists and those who had 
previously lived with him interrogated him as to his 
observance of caste rules since his departure from 
them. It was found that his theological belief had 
altered in some respects, and that he had relaxed 
the severe culinary rules of Ramanuj. 

It is an ordinary practice of Hindu priests when 
they lay food before an idol to draw a screen over 
both' the idol and the food. When sufiicient time 
according to human ideas is allowed the idol for 
its ocajsumption, the ' screen is withdrawn. The 
followers of Ramanuj . . observe the same practice, 
laa)t,have:added to it a stern injunction that, if any 



RAMANAND 103 

tMie but the person cooking see the idol’s food, it 
must be immediately rejected. The followers of 
Ramanuj consider attention to such matters one of 
the most important elements of divine worship. 

Ramanand did not adopt this view. Like another 
great Teacher he could not understand what con- 
cern culinary rules had with the worship of God;^ 
and he must have freely given vent to his feelings, 
though his expressions have not been preserved. 
His sect promptly expelled him, but his religious 
guide Raghwanand appears to have felt some sym- 
pathy with him, for he authorized him to found 
a sect of his own, which he accordingly did. The 
theological tenets of the new faith corresponded to 
some extent with those of Ramanuj, except that 
Sita and Ram instead of Lakshmi and Narayan 
became special objects of Ramanand’s worship, and 
the culinary and kindred rules of the Ramanuj is 
were generously relaxed. 

Ramanand then applied himself to prove from 
the Shastars that the observance of caste rules was 
unnecessary for any one who sought the protection 
of God and embraced his service. He laid it down 
as a rule that all persons of any caste who accepted 
the tenets and principles of his sect, might eat and 
drink together irrespective of birth. All men who 
serve God in the same way are brothers and of the 
same social position. Contrary to the practice of 
Ramanuj, who had enforced a discipline too strict 
for ordinary mortals, Ramanand threw his spiritual 
door wide open, admitted disciples of all castes, and 
boldly announced that gyan, or knowledge of God, 
emancipated man from all social bondage. 

It is written in Nabhaji’s Bhagat Mai that even 
a low caste man who loves God is superior to a 
Brahman who, although irreproachable in his acts, 
possesses no love for the Creator. An instance of 

^ ‘ Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man ; but that 
which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.' 



104 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

this is cited. At the great feast given by Yu- 
(hiishtar to commemorate the ^victory of the Pan- 
davs over the Kaurays, the festal bell would 
not ring spoiitsmeously at the aj^inted time. 
Krishan, who attended the banquet^ inquired' if any 

S irson had failed to receive his share of the viands. 

e was' informed that food had not been served to 
Valmik because he was a Chandal, and, as a hunts^ 
man, destroyer of life. Krishan then ordered that 
Valmik should be seated in the midst of the assem- 
blage, and that Draupadi, the fractional wife ^ of 
Yudhishtar, should feed him with her own hamds. 
This she accordingly did, and the festal bell 
pealed forth struck by no earthly hands. 

Ramanand was distinguished for his kindness to 
others and his love of God. He pointed out the 
way of the Lord to men of the four castes and the 
four conditions of life.* He deemed forms of adora- 
tion superfluous, and held that the supreme reward 
of devotion was to be obtained by incessantly 
uttering God’s name. He called his disciples the 
Liberated, when he allowed them and they accepted 
a liberal interpretation of the Hindu social rules 
sanctioned by religion. At the same time he 
vehemently opposed atheists and those who boasted 
that they existed independently of God. He van- 
quished in argument the Jains, the Budhists, and 
the followers of the left way,® whose devotions were 
not addressed to the supreme Lord of the world. 

^ At that time polyandry was in force. Draupadi was wife of the 
whole five PSlndav broth^s, one of whom was Yudhishtar. 

* BrShmans, Kshatris, and Vaisyas ought, according to ancient 
Hindu writings, to be, first, BrahmacMrh, practising celibacy and 
dhVQting their lives to study and religious exercises; secondly, gri- 
haslMs, or uuurriQd men leading secular lives; thirdly, banparasihU, or 
anchorets, w^n their wives might ^company them apd they might liye 
on forest fruit, tubers, and, roots.; and fourthly, sanyasis, completely 
renouncing the world and subsisting altogether on alnisi 
.■*, VSmis or VSnaSchStis. For some account of . them see Professor 
H. H. Wilson’s Essays on the Religion ^ the Hindus, Vol, I, 







FOLLOWERS OF RAMANUJ AND RAMANAND 


cttirir vt p. loi; 




RAMANAND 


105 


Ramanand, having foEsaken the cat^ of the world, 
gave himself up to vairag or renunciation of all 
worldly things, and thus became the first Bairagi. 
He had four msciples, from each of whom arose four 
sects composed of Nagas, who are purely ascetic 
and practise seclusion, and Sanlayc^is, who marry 
and lead domestic lives. Both orders may eat 
together. They mostly belong to the’ Sudsrf’ class, 
but some wear the triple cord of the tv^e-born 
Hindusfand style themselves. Gaur iBrahmans who 
had their origin in the north of India. 

It is said that Ramanand at Ganga Sagar — ^at 
the mouth of the HughU branch of the Ganges — 
discovered a temple sacred to Kapilaj’ an incarna- 
tion of Vishnu and author of the Sankhya Shastars. 
A fair is annually held there aj; the time*’ of the 
winter solstice. 

The disciples of Ramanand were, according to 
Nabhaji, Anantanand, Sureshwaranand, Sukhanand, 
Bhawanand, Pipa, Sain, Dhanna, Ravdas, Kabir, 
and others. Ramanand died at Banaras at an 
advanced age. 

Most of the present followers of Ramanand appear 
to have completely fallen away from his teaching, 
and observe caste rules with the utmost strictness. 
As far as their tenets are concerned, they appear 
to have become hopelessly confused with the Rama-^ 
nujis, and to differ only in their sectarial marks 
and their preference for Sita and Ram to Lakshmi 
and Narayan as objects of worship. 

The following is the hymn of Ramanand found 
in the Granth Sahib. An invitation had been given 
him to attend a religious service of Vishnu, to which 
he replied : — 

* Basant 

Whither ^aJl I go, Sir ? I am happy at home. 

My heart will not go with me i it hath become a cripple.^ 

' ’ Compare the use of the word mancta by Horace. 



io6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

i C)tie day I did have an inclmation to go ; ». . ^ 

I ^und sandal, todc distilled aloe wood tmd many 
pedumes, 

And was proceeding to worship God in a temple, 

When ray sjpiritual guide showed me God in my heart. 
Wherever I go / find only watei or stones.^ 

But Thou, O God, art equally contained in everything. 
The Veds and the Purans all have I seen and searched. 
Go thou thither, if God be not here. 

0 true guru, I am a sacrifice imto thee 

Who hast cut away all my perplexities and doubts. 

Ramanand’s Lord is the all-pervading God ; 

The guru’s word cutteth away millions of sins. 


DHANNA 

Dhanna, generally known as Dhanna Jat, is said to 
have been born in the year a. d. 1415. He lived in 
the village of Dhuan in Tank territory, about twenty 
miles from the Deoli cantonments in Rajputana. 
A Tcligious bent was given to his genius from his 
^rliest years. A Brahman went to his parents’ 
house to worship. On seeing the ceremonials, 
Dhanna asked for an idol so that he too might 
worship on his own account in imitation of the 
Brahman. The Brahman at first put him off with 
excuses, but, when Dhanna further importuned, 
h€‘ handed him a small black stone for his youthful 
devotion. Dhanna took it up, applied it to his eyes 
and head, and began to worship it in imitation of the 
Brahman. The ceremony observed was this 
Dhanna first bathed himself, then bathed the stone, 
and put on it a tilak or patch made from the niud 

^ RiVeraf of pilgrimage or idols. '' 

^ For some local inquiries made regarding Dhanna we are indebted 
to Colonel £. R. Penrose, Cantonmeht Magistmte of Deoli. 



DHANNA 


107 

of a naghbouring tank. He had no sweet basil dear 
to gods and idols, but he offered green leaves instead, 
and then perfornted the customary devotional 
homage and prostration.^ 

When Dhanna’s mother brought him bread he 
put it in front of the idol, and shutting his eyes 
sat down hard by. He waited long in hope that 
the idol would eat, but, on finding that it would 
not, became sad and distressed. He repeatedly 
clasped his hands in supplication, and, when that 
form of inducement proved unavailing, began to 
ply the idol with boyish flatteries At last, when 
all failed, he threw the bread into the tank, by 
which he meant to clearly show the idol that if it 
did not eat it, he would not eat it himself. Some 
days passed in this way until Dhanna was well- 
nigh dead from weakness produced by thirst and 
hunger. At last the Brahman, anxious to confer 
a blessing on the youthful saint, appeared to him 
and urged him to satisfy his appetite. Dhanna did 
so and revived to pursue his devotions with even 
greater fervour than before. 

The Brahman again paid Dhanna a visit, and on 
seeing his progress towards spiritual perfection pros- 
trated himself before him and shed tears of love. 
By Dhanna’s contemplation, worship, and repetition 
of the Name, God was gladdened, and the Brahman, 
through Dhanna’s devotion, obtained, it was said, the 
object of his desires both in this world and the next. 

Dhanna was supernaturally directed to go to 
Banaras and receive the spell of initiation from 
Ramariand. He accordingly did so. Ramanand 
on seeing his purity of heart and devotion, recog- 
nized him as a great saint and apostle, and duly 
initiated him a.s a disciple. In due time Rama- 

^ Before adoration tlje Hindus perform a ceremony ca|led./r4» 
pratisjiUi, which consists, as they believe, in infusing life into the idol. 
In'fhis the idolatry of the Hindus appears to differ from that of other 
races, ‘ \ 



io8 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

nand, having enjoined the service of the saints on 
him as a special duty, dismissed him with every 
token of love and respect, and Dhanna on reaching 
his home duly followed his spiritual guide’s injunc- 
tions. 

One day, as Dhanna was taking wheat to sow, 
he met some holy men who urged their neces- 
sities. Accordingly, he bestowed his seed-wheat on 
them. God, on seeing Dhanna’s charity to his 
saints, said, ‘ He who casteth corn in the ground 
exp^teth a return several times greater. Now 
Dhanna putteth corn into the mouths of My saints, 
so I must give him a thousandfold return.’ Dhanna’s 
field accordingly flourished so much better than the 
fields of his neighbours that it became the subject 
of general congratulation. Dhanna thought the 
congratulations were merely jeers and jests, until 
one day he paid a visit to his field. Then he found 
that what people had been saying was really true. 
He became absorbed in the love of God, and re- 
doubled his devotion to Him and His saints. His 
land is still called Dhanne Bhagat ka khet, or Saint 
Dhanna’s field. It is said that the black stone of his 
youthful worship was subsequently embedded in one 
of the walls of his temple. 

Nabhaji concludes his account of Dhanna with 
the following invocation : — ‘ O God Indar, how pru- 
dent and wise art thou who madest thy thunderbolt 
out of the bones of Dadhich, king of the Rikhis ! 
Why hast thou not lifted up and taken away this 
wretched heart of mine which is millions of times 
harder, than adamant, since it is not in the slightest 
degree softened on reading the story of Dhanna and 
hearing of God’s kindness, love, and affection for 
His saints ? ’ 

Though Dhanna began life as an idolater, it is 
clear from the following hymn that he became in 
riper years a worshipper of the one God, and re- 
nounced all superstitious practices. 



DHANNA 109 

Asa 

In Gobind, Gobind, Gobind was Namdev^s heart absorbed ; 

A calico-printer worth half a dam became worth a lakh. 

Abandoning weaving and stretching thread, Kabir devoted 
his love to God’s feet ; ' • 

Though a weaver of low family he obtained untold virtues. 

Rav Das who used to remove dead cattle, abandoned 
worldly affairs, 

Became distinguished, and in the company of the saints 
obtained a sight of God. 

Sain, barber and village drudge,^ well known in every 
house. 

In whose heart the Supreme God dwelt, is numbered 
among the saints. 

Having heard all this I, a Jat, applied myself to God’s 
service ; 

1 have met God in person ^ and great is the good fortune 
of Dhanna.^ 

The following hymns of Dhanna afford abundant 
additional evidence that he by further study and 
meditation embraced a purer form of worship than 
that of his early youth. After a confessedly sinful 
life Dhanna met the guru, who united him with 
God 

Wandering and roaming many births have passed away ; 
my body, mind, and fortune ^ remain not constant. 

Attached to and stained with the sins of covetousness and 
lust, I have forgotten God, the diamond. 

The fruit of sin is sweet to the demented mind ; it 
knoweth not excellent meditation. 

My love, turning in a different direction from virtue, 
increaseth, and I again weave the web of birth and death. 

^ Butkaria^ from hiitii, forced labour. 

2 Partakhy the Latin praesens, 

^ In the Granth Sahib this hymn is headed Mahala V, under which 
the compositions of Guru Arjan are included, but there . appears no 
doubt that it was Dhanna’s composition. 

^ Vhattj literally — wealth. It is very likely this word is an expletive. 



no BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I did not know the way of recognizing Him who dwelleth 
in the heart ; ^ I burned in the fire of worldly love and fell 
into Death’s noose. 

I collected so many fruits of sin and filled my heart with 
them, that I forgot God the Supreme Being. 

When the guru caused the wealth of divine knowledge to 
enter me, I meditated on God, and accepted in my heart 
that He was One. 

I have embraced the love and service of God and known 
comfort ; I am satiated and satisfied, and have obtained 
salvation. 

He in whose heart God’s light which filleth creation is 
contained, recognizeth God who cannot be deceived. 

Dhanna hath obtained God ^ as his wealth ; * meeting 
with saints he hath become absorbed in Him. 

God is the universal Preserver. 

O my heart, why thinkest thou not of the God of mercy ? 
Why ignorest thou not all besides ? 

Wert thou to run through the universe and the continents 
of the earth, it would not avail thee ; only what the Creator 
doeth cometh to pass. 

He who made the body with its ten gates in the water of 
its mother’s womb, 

Nourisheth it and preserveth it in its fiery home ; such 
a Lord is ours. 

The female tortoise liveth in the water ; its young remain 
on land ; they have no mother's wings to shelter them, and 
no milk to drink. 

Yet God, the All-pervading, the Primal Joy, the Delightful 
feedeth them ; understand this in thy heart. 

A worm is embedded in a stone, and there is no exit for it : 

Saith Dhanna, God filleth it ; O my soul, fear not. 

Dhanna in order to maintain himself while en- 

’ Also translated— The manner of knowing God did not enter my 
heart. 

* Dhamidhar, literally — the Sustainer of the earth. 

* Dhan, the saint puns on the similarity of the word to his Own 
name. 



DHANNA III 

gaged in his devotions prays for the means of sub- 
sistence. 

Dhanasari 

O God, I Thine afflicted servant come to Thee : — 

Thou arranges! the affairs of those who perform Thy 
service. 

Dal, flour, ^ and ghi I beg of Thee 
So shall my heart be ever happy. 

Shoes and good clothes, 

The seven sorts of corn,^ 1 beg of Thee, 

Milch cows and buffaloes I beg ; 

A good Turkistani mare, 

And a good wife, 

The slave Dhanna beggeth of Thee.^ 


PI PA 

PiPA, born in the year a.d. 1425, was king of a 
state called Gagaraungarh. He possessed every 
spiritual excellence and conferred happiness and 
saintship on the human race. 

1 By sidha, literally, uncooked food given to fakirs, is generally 
meant flour. Some read nfidha, which means rock salt. 

2 Andj sat sika is the same as saindja, ‘ a mixture of seven kinds of 
grain bestowed on a caste of people called Dakaunt on certain occasions, 
for the benefit of a person who is supposed to be under the evil 
influence of some planet, the grain being equal in weight to the body 
of the person.' — The Ludhiana Panjabi Dictionary, 

Andj sat sika is also translated — corn grown on a field ploughed 
seven times, called in Panjabi sdt sidn Idnidn, 

^ As asking God for worldly favours is deemed inconsistent with 
the saintly character, the gySnis have exercised their ingenuity in 
finding one or more fanciful meanings for almost every substantive in 
the above hymn. For instance, ddt is made the subjection of the 
passions, sidha, or flour, is rectitude, £^hi is God's love, &c,, &c. 
They who choose may adopt such interpretations. It must be re^ 
membered, however, that Dhanna was a husbandman, and for the 
sake of his calling and livelihood, to say nothing of his devotions, 
generally needed What he prayed for. 



112 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Pipa had been at first a worshipper of Durga, the 
consort of Shiv. Some holy men came to his capital, 
and he with his usual generosity and devotion 
ministered to all their wants. They then prepared 
food, offered it to God, and prayed that the king 
might become a saint. At night he had a vision 
in which a holy man, who took an interest in his 
welfare, appeared to him and said, ‘ How foolish 
thou art who tumest away from God and yet askest 
for pardon ! ’ From that moment he desired nothing 
but the service of God. All the things of this world 
appeared to him to have no reality. 

It is said that the goddess subsequently appeared 
to him. Pipa prostrated himself before her, and 
asked her how he could serve God. She told 
him to go and take Ramanand as his spiritual 
guide. After this highly disinterested advice the 
goddess disappeared. Pipa manifested such a pas- 
sionate desire to see Ramanand that his friends 
apprehended he would lose his reason. At last he 
went to Banaras, where he had heard Ramanand 
resided. The great swami on hearing of Pipa’s 
arrival expressed his surprise and sent him a message, 

‘ My house is a place for faqirs. What business 
have kings here ? 

On Ramanand’ s refusal to receive him Pipa re- 
turned home, and bestowed his wealth on the poor. 
He again appeared before Ramanand, and said he had 
now become a faqir. Ramanand in order to test 
his sincerity told him to throw himself into a 
well. Without further reflection Pipa proceeded 
to do so, but Ramanand’ s disciples restrained him. 
They brought him back to Ramanand who, on 
being satisfied of his humility, forthwith made him 
a disciple and bestowed saintship on him. He then 
gave him permission to return to his own country, 
and continue to serve saints. Ramanand promised 
to go in company with other saints to visit him after 
a year of probation. Pipa departed, served holy 



PIPA 113 

men, and worshipped God with increased fervour. 
After a year he wrote to Ramanand and reminded him 
of his promise to sanctify Gagaraungarh with a visit. 

Ramanand set out with his forty chosen disciples, 
including Rav Das and the renowned Kabir. Pipa, 
having taken a palki for his guru, met the party 
outside the city. He prostrated himself before 
Ramanand and each of the disciples, and bestowed 
on the poor a large amount of money and the 
remnant of his property as a thanksgiving on that 
joyful occasion. He took the whole company to his 
palace, and bestowed such service on them that he 
quickly received the great spiritual reward of 
salvation during life. 

After some time Ramanand conceived a desire to 
visit the country of Dwaraka on the western coast 
of Kathiawar. Pipa on bearing this became dis- 
tressed at losing the companionship of his holy 
guide. Ramanand, on seeing the king’s heartfelt 
love, said he could make his choice either to remain 
where he was or become a mendicant of his order 
and accompany him. Upon this Pipa abdicated his 
sovereignty and joined Ramanand and his party. 

His queens prepared to share his poverty and his 
pilgrimage to Dwaraka. Pipa tried to dissuade 
them by pointing out the hardships of travel and 
sojourn in forests and solitude, but they would not 
be convinced. He then told them to take off their 
jewels and regal attire, and put on patched clothes, 
and they might thus accompany him if they pleased. 
The mention of the detrimental alteration of cos- 
tume was more efficacious than any expostulation. 
All his queens save one immediately returned home. 

The youngest, whose name was Sita, the best 
beloved of her husband, doffed the becoming attire 
of her graceful youth, and put on, as her husband 
had suggested, the coarse blanket of a mendicant. 

Ramanand, Pipa, and Sita duly arrived in Dwaraka, 
Ramanand merely desired to see the temples therey 



II4 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

and, this being done, declared his intention of 
returning to Banaras. But Pipa wished to settle in 
Dwaraka, and obtained Ramanand’s permission to 
do so. He and his consort abode there in the 
society of holy men and made great progress towards 
spiritual perfection. 

When the sanctity of Pipa and his faithful con- 
sort became known, a great crowd assembled to do 
them homage. Wearied with the attentions they 
received from the people, Sita pointed out to her 
spouse that in order to save themselves from in- 
convenience and preserve their humility, it would 
be expedient for them to go to a strange country. 
They accordingly departed for other places of pil- 
grimage. When they had proceeded six stages, 
they encountered Afghan troops. The soldiers finding 
Sita fair to look upon appropriated her for them- 
selves. In this difficulty she remembered God, and 
with fervent prayer supplicated His assistance. He 
rescued her from the Afghans, and restored her 
rejoicing to her husband. Pipa asked her if she 
would not even then go home, seeing that troubles 
arose on every side on her account. She replied, 
‘ Great king, what trouble hath caused any inter- 
ruption to thy devotion or hath been removed by 
any contrivance of thine ? It was all the work of 
God. Thou and I have proof and perfect assurance 
of this. To admonish me now, notwithstanding all 
that hath occurred, is not in accordance with the 
devotion of a husband or a saint.’ Pipa was pleased 
with her constancy, they became reconciled, altered 
their route, and continued their pilgrimage. 

Pipa and his consort visited a holy man whose 
name was Chidhar. He and his wife, though highly 
pleased to see them, had nothing wherewithal to 
show them hospitality. In this plight Chidhar’ s 
wife’s petticoat was sold to provide food for the 
guests. It was the only article of dress she possessed, 
and she had then to conceal herself in her room. 



PIPA 


115 

When the food was cooked and the guests sat down 
to dinner, Pipa requested Chidhar to bring his wife 
to join them. Chidhar bade them take their dinner, 
and his wife would eat their leavings. Upon this 
Pipa told Sita to go and fetch her. Sita went and 
found her hiding in her room. On inquiring the 
cause, Chidhar’ s wife said it was not by wearing 
clothes heavenly bhss was obtained, but the first 
and most proper duty of all was to contemplate 
God and serve His saints. Sita divined what had 
occurred, and arrived at the conclusion that her 
own devotion and service were as nothing in com- 
parison with what she had just witnessed. Half 
the clothes she wore she gave to Chidhar’ s wife, 
and brought her forth from her hiding-place. They 
then all dined together. 

Pipa and Sita then took leave of Chidhar and his 
wife, and after great hardships and privations 
arrived at the city of Toda near Tank, on the north- 
western frontier of India. One day, on going to 
bathe, Pipa found an earthen vessel full of gold 
coins, but did not touch them. He mentioned the 
matter at night to his wife, and she said it was 
better not to go to the same bathing-place again. 
Some thieves who had overheard their conversation 
went thither, and found a venomous serpent coiled 
up in the vessel. They said to themselves that the 
newly-arrived faqir had designed to kill them by 
speaking of gold coin instead of a serpent in the 
vessel. They then decided that they would have 
the faqir himself bitten by the serpent. They 
accordingly dug out the vessel, took it with its 
contents and threw it into Pipa’s house. But the 
original contents had not changed for the holy man. 
He found it still filled with gold coins as before. 
Pipa, believing this treasure to have been obtained 
by divine favour, spent all the money within three 
days in rejoicings in honour of God, and in feeding 
and serving His saints. 



jl6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

. Sur Sen, king of that country, hearing Pipa’s name 
and devotion went to see him, and falling at his 
feet prayed him to instruct him and make him 
a holy man. Pipa remonstrated with him and even 
attempted to dissuade him from adopting the life 
of a hermit. However, on seeing him determined, 
Pipa told him to relinquish all he possessed. The 
king immediately obeyed this order, and placed his 
wealth at the disposal of the saint. After this trial 
Pipa gave him the spell of initiation and made him 
his disciple. Sur Sen’s queen went veiled to Pipa 
to remonstrate against separation from her lord. 
Pipa restored her to Sur Sen and assured him that 
he could lead a religious life even in the married 
state, and added that it was unnecessary for women 
to veil themselves in the presence of holy men — 
probably the first effort in modern times in India 
to abolish the tyranny of the par da. 

In time an unfortunate difference arose between 
Sur Sen and Pipa which was rendered more acute 
by intrigues of the court Brahmans ; and Sur Sen 
threw off his spiritual allegiance to his royal guest. 
Pipa upon this reflected that it was the guru who 
frees men from sin and its consequences, and when 
a man throws off his allegiance to his guru, what 
hope is there for him ? He feared that the king 
would lose both this world and the next, so he 
resolved to save him. He accordingly proceeded to 
the king’s palace and caused himself to be announced. 
The king sent word that he was busy with his 
devotions and could not see the visitor. Upon this 
Pipa said the king was a great fool, for, while pre- 
tendipg to be performing his devotions, he was think- 
ing of obtaining new foot-wear for himself. When 
these words were repeated to Sur Sen he, knowing 
that Pipa had divined his thoughts, at once went 
to him and throwing himself at his feet, said, 
‘ I, ^m. unworthy and faithless, I did not know thy 
greatness. Be merciful and pardon me. I am 



PIPA 


ii7 

extremely ashamed of all the suSpiciOft's h'hd ei^rp- 
neous ideas I had formed regarding thee.* f^ipa 
replied, ‘ O king, remember thy faith and lo'vfe on 
the day thou becamest my disciple. According to 
all rules thy love for God and his guru ought to 
have increased. Instead of that thou hast turned 
thy back on them, and prepared thyself for hell. 
For the future consider the saints of God as His 
image and serve them. In this way shalt thou 
easily obtain the advantages of both worlds.’ Pipa 
gave the king other instructions of similar character, 
which sank deep into his heart. He then returned 
to his old allegiance to Pipa, and began anew his 
religious life and his repetition of God’s name. 

Pipa on more occasions than can be related 
showed a marked deference to the wishes of others. 
Once some holy men took a fancy to a dish of curds 
which they had seen with a njilkwoman, and asked 
Pipa to procure it for them. He caused the holy 
men to be served with curds daily, and cheerfully 
remunerated the milkwoman. 

There was a Brahman friend of Pipa who was 
a worshipper of Durga. Pipa prepared a religious 
feast in the Brahman’s house, partook of the food 
himself, and induced the Brahman also to do so. 
Through the intercession of Pipa it is related that 
Durga manifested herself to the Brahman. His 
heart became purified and he began to worship God 
instead of an idol. 

A handsome woman who sold oil used to go 
about saying, ‘ Buy my oil ! buy my oil ! ’ Pipa 
said it would be more becoming to her lips to utter 
God’s name. The woman became angry, and replied 
that it was only usual to utter God’s name when 
anybody died. On arriving at home she found her 
husband dead. She became a believer, fell at 
Pipa’s feet, and promised to utter with all her 
family the name of God. Upon this it is said Pipa 
restored her husband to life. 



ii8 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Pipa procured a female buffalo to supply milk to 
hiaholy guests. The buffalo wa^ stolen. Pipa took 
the buffalo’s calf and followed the thieves, telling 
them to take the calf also, as otherwise the buffalo 
would be displeased and not give milk.' The thieves 
repented and restored the stolen animal to her owner. 
‘ Pipa on another occasion was taking home some 
money and a cart laden with wheat . Highway robbers 
stole the cart with its burden. Pipa offered them 
his money also, telling them that they would require 
it to purchase utensils with which to cook the wheat. 
These robbers also repented and restored Pipa his cart. 

Somebody killed a cow and was expelled from 
his caste for a crime so heinous in the eyes of the 
Hindus. Pipa by inducing him to utter God’s 
name and prepare a feast in God’s honour con- 
verted him from, a sinner to a saint. His tribes- 
men, however, still refused to allow him to return 
to his brotherhood. Upon this Pipa proved the 
glory of God’s name from the Veds and the Shas- 
tars, and stated that whoever even once uttered it 
should be pardoned the mortal sins of hundreds of 
thousands of births. Consequently how could the 
sin of cow-killing remain attached to a man who 
uttered God’s name hundreds and thousands of 
times ? Everybody admitted the justice of this 
argument, and the cow-killer was restored to his 
caste and public favour. 

A saint called Sri Rang invited Pipa by letter to 
visit him. Pipa accepted the invitation. On his 
arrival he found Sri Rang engaged in idolatrous 
worship. He was putting on the idol’s neck a 
garland of flowers, but it became entangled in the 
idol’s diadem. At that moment he was informed 
of Pipa’s arrival. He rephed that he was occupied 
with divine service, and when it was completed he 
would go to receive his guest. Pipa replied, ‘ What 

} The Indian buffalo and cow will not give milk if separated from 
their calves. 



PIPA 


119 

sort of service is he performing ? He cannot put 
on a garland of flowers.’ On hearing this Sri Rang 
ran to meet him. They embraced each other, and 
Pipa remained with his new friend for several days. 
Sri Rang was greatly edified on witnessing Sita’s 
love and devotion, and applied himself with great 
fervour to imitate her example. 

Once on the occasion of a famine Pipa distributed 
such a quantity of eatables and drinkables that it 
appeared as if there had been no famine, and every- 
body’s sufferings were relieved. 

The author of the Bhagat Mai states that there 
are numberless similar anecdotes of Pipa which 
transcend all conjecture and conception. There is 
therefore, the writer states, no difference between 
God and His saints, since the glory of Pipa might 
be attributed to God. The Marathi chronicler sums 
up the character of Pipa by saying that he was brave, 
liberal, learned, religious, self-restrained, and watchful. 

The following hymn of Pipa, intended to show 
that it is internal not external worship which is 
advantageoiis, is found in the Granth Sahib. 

Dhanasaki 

In the body is God, the body is the temple of God, in the 
body are pilgrims and travellers ; 

In the body are incense, lamps, sacrificial food; in the 
body are offerings of leaves.^ 

I have searched many regions, and it is only in the body 
I have found the nine treasures. 

There is no coming and no going for me since I have 
appealed to God. 

What is in the universe is found in the body : whoever 
searcheth for it shall find it there. 

Pipa representeth, God is the Primal Essence ; when 
there is a true guru he will show him. 

1 Made to the manes of Hindus. Men can do homage in God's 
temple, the body, while they are alive, but when the soul separates 
from it, no pilgrimages or adorations can be made. 



120 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


SAIN 

Sain was a disciple of Ramanand and Conse- 
quently lived in the end of the fourteenth and the 
beginning of the fifteenth century of the Christian 
era. He was a barber at the court of Raja Ram, 
king of Rewa, then called Bandhavgarh. The 
tendency of the age was towards devotion and 
religious composition, and Sain found leisure in the 
midst of his duties to study the hymns of Ramanand, 
shape his life on the principles inculcated in them, 
and successfully imitate their spirit and devotional 
fervour. 

The accomplishments and duties of an Indian 
court barber at the time of Sain were and are still 
of a miscellaneous character. He is something of 
a surgeon and ordinarily a marriage or match-maker, 
he oils the king’s body, shampoos his limbs, pares 
liis nails, shaves his face and head, if he be a Hindu, 
and clips his moustache, if he be a Musalman ; 
amuses him with gossip and tales ; often plays the 
rebeck and sings his own compositions, which deftly 
combine flattery of his master with social satire or 
pleasantry.^ 

- God is said by the Hindu chronicler to have 
cherished Sain as a cow her calf. He frequented 
the society of holy men and was very happy in their 
company. He performed for them all menial offices, 
for he believed that serving saints was equivalent 
to serving God Himself. 

The Bhagat Mai contains a legend which at once 

^ Beaumarchais was censured by contemporary writers for the 
diversity of accomplishments of the hero of his great comedy — ‘ Figaro 
le barbier, beau diseur, mauvais po^te, hardi musicien, grand fringueneur 
de guitare, et jadis valet de chambre du comte, ^tabli dans Seville, 
y faisant avec succ^s des barbes, des romances, et des manages, y 
maniant dgalement le fer du phl^botome et le piston/ 



SAIN 


I2I 


illustrates Sain’s devotion to saints and the estima- 
tion in which he was held for his piety. When 
going one day to perform his usual ministrations 
for king Raja Ram, he met some holy men on the 
way. He thought it was his first duty to attend 
to them. He took them with him, and began to 
render them the customary services. With the 
greatest mental satisfaction to himself he gave 
them consecrated and secular food to relieve their 
souls and bodies. In thus acting Sain disregarded 
his duty to the king and braved his displeasure. 

The legend states that a holy man, by God’s 
favour, in order to avert the king’s wrath and save 
Sain from punishment, assumed his appearance, and 
having gone and performed the customary duties 
for the king, took his departure. Soon after Sain 
arrived and began to apologize for his delay. The 
king said, ‘ Thou hast only just gone after the usual 
services to me ; why apologize ? ’ Sain replied, ‘ I 
have not been here. Perhaps thy Majesty sayest 
so to excuse my absence.’ The Raja then knew that 
a special providence had intervened and performed 
for him the usual tonsorial duties. He was at 
once converted, fell at Sain’s feet, worshipped him 
as his guru, and thus sought an asylum in God. 
It had at any rate at the time of the composition 
of the Bhagat Mai become an established custom 
that the successive kings of the house of Bandhav- 
garh should always be disciples of the descendants 
of Sain. They are now said to be followers of Kabir.^ 

The following hymn of Sain in the Dhanasari 
measure is found in the Granth Sahib : — 

Having made an oblation of incense, lamps, and clarified 
butter, 

I go to offer them to Thee, O God.® 

1 The Bhagai Mol of Maharaja Raghuraj Sinh of Rewa. He 
stated that he was the tenth in descent from the RSja at whose court 
Sain lived. 

® Kawalapati, literally — Lord of Lakshmi. 



122 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


to Thee, O God, hail ! 

Ever hail to Thee, O Sovereign God 1 
Thy name is the best lamp, meditation thereon the purest 
wick ; - 

Thou alone art the Bright One, O God. 

It is the saints of God who feel divine pleasure ; 

They describe Thee as all-pervading and the Supreme Joy.^ 
Thou, of fascinating form, O God, float us over the ocean 
of terror. 

Sain saith, worship the Supreme Joy.* 


KABIR 

There was a certain Brahman in Banaras, who 
remained continually in attendance on Ramanand. 
The Brahman had a daughter, a virgin widow, who 
desired to behold the object of her father’s reverence 
and attentions. Her father took her one day to see 
the holy man. She was allowed to prostrate herself 
before him and touch his feet with her forehead. 
He in ignorance of her status prayed that she might 
be blest with a son. When her father replied that 
she was a widow, Ramanand said that his words 
could not be recalled and she should have a son ; 
but no one should see any signs of her pregnancy, 
and no stigma should attach to her reputation. 
Her son should reform religion and save the world. 
She consequently conceived, and in due time a son 
was born to her on Monday, the day of the full 
moon, in the month of Jeth, 1455, of the Vikrama- 
ditya era, corresponding to a.d. 1398.® She exposed 

^ This and the preceding line are also translated — 

It is RamSnand who knoweth devotion to God ; 

It is he who can describe th^ Perfect Primal Joy. 

* This hymn Ls included in the Arati, a divine service of the Sikhs 
when lamps are lit in the evening. 

® For many of the details in this account of Kabir the author is 



KABIR 


123 


her child on a lake called Lahar Talao/ a short 
distance from Banaras. He was found by a Musal- 
man weaver, called Ali — who from living beside the 
water (nir) was popularly known by the name of 
Niru — when he was taking home his wife from her 
parents’ house. 

He saw the boy lying in the lake, it is said, on 
a blossoming water-lily. The child had obviously 
been abandoned by an unmarried woman. Niru 
hastened to inform his wife Nima. They had no 
son of their own, and it was in their power to adopt 
him. Nima represented the gossip that would result, 
and the danger to their reputation and that of the 
whole tribe. On looking into the child’s face, 
however, her determination gave way. He was fair 
to look on, and did not scream like other children, 
but on the contrary looked bright and cheerful. 
They took him up and bore him home. 

The , Lahar Talao is a lake about a mile and a 
quarter long, and an eighth of a mile broad. At 
the time of the author’s visit in December, it was, 
except for some rushes here and there, covered with 
a russet weed on which aquatic birds alighted and 
sported. On the margin of the lake is a small temple 
sacred to Kabir. It is kept by some monks, who 
pride themselves on their knowledge of Sanskrit 
literature. Hard by is the tomb of Niru, Kabir’s 
foster-father. 

After the discovery of the child a Qazi was in 
due time called to give him a name. The Quran 
was opened, and a lot was cast. The word Kabir, 
which means great in the Arabic language, was the 
first that presented itself. This name was accord- 

indebted to the work Kabir Kasauti of the late Lahina Singh of 
Panjor in the Patiala State, the Kabir Manshur of Sadhu Paramanand 
(Hindi), the Kavi Charitar (Gujrati), the Bharat Khanda cha Arava- 
chin Kosh and the Bhakta Vijay of Mahipati (Marathi). The author 
also acknowledges assistance from inquiries made by Mr. G. H. Radice. 
of the Indian Civil Service. 



124 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

ingly given to the child. When Kabir arrived at 
an age to understand the nature of the doubts cast 
on his birth he composed the following : — • 

I have just come from God. 

Mammon hath led the world astray ; it hath not found 
the secret of my birth. 

I was not born, nor did I dwell in a womb ; I have ap- 
peared a child as I am. 

A weaver found me near his hut in a lake at Banaras. 

I was not in heaven, or in earth, or in any country ; 
my divine knowledge is endless. 

The spirit which is manifested in His own world is my 
name. 

I have no bones, no blood, no skin ; I have been manifested 
by the Word. 

I am beyond all body and endless, a superior being whom 
men call the immortal Kabir.^ 

It would appear that, though the boy was adopted 
by Musalmans, he was subjected to Hindu influences 
from his earliest years. Banaras was and is the 
stronghold of Hinduism, and even its Muhammadan 
inhabitants are often strongly tinctured with the 
ancient religion of India. 

Moreover, it is said that Gosain Ashtanand, a 
Hindu saint of the period, said to have been a disciple 
of Ramanand, saw the child at the time of his expo- 
sure in the tank ; and it is most probable that he 
subsequently followed his fate and gave him religious 
instruction as opportunities offered. 

At' a very early age Kabir’ s religious education 
was far advanced. While playing with his com- 
panions he used to repeat the name Ram or Hari, 
Hindu names of God. Musalmans said the child was 
an infidel. Kabir retorted that an infidel was he — 

1. Who struck any person without just cause, 

2. Who wore a religious garb to deceive the world, 

^ This is somewhat in imitation of the expressions attributed to 
Krisban, in the Bhagavad Gita. 



KABIR 


125 


3. Who drank wine, 

4. Who stole, 

5. Who committed suicide, 

6. Who smoked tobacco, 

7. Who committed high}vay robbery, 

8. Who took life. 

These became Kabir's commandments. 

One day he put on the frontal mark and the 
sacrificial thread of the Hindus. A Brahman called 
Mukand remonstrated, and said that Kabir, having 
been brought up a Muhammadan, and following, 
moreover, the trade of his foster-father, had no 
concern with Hinduism, and was not entitled to 
wear its distinguishing badge or symbols. Kabir 
replied with the following hymn : — 

In my house is thread, I am continually weaving, while 
only one sacrificial thread is on thy neck. 

Thou readest only the Veds and the Gayatri, while God 
is in my heart. 

On my tongue dwelleth God, in mine eyes dwelleth God, 
and in my heart dwelleth God.^ 

When thou art examined, O mad Mukand, at Death’s 
door, what shalt thou say ? 

I am the cow, thou the herdsman, lord of the earth, and 
guardian of man at every birth 

Thou hast not taken me beyond the river to graze ; ^ 
what sort of master have I ? 

Thou art a Brahman, I am a Banaras weaver, understand 
my instruction. 

Thou beggest from lords and kings, while I meditate on 
God ; which of us is better ? ^ 

As Kabir grew up, his devotion, spiritual power, 

^ In this verse in the original Kabir gives three different Sanskrit 
names of God. 

This is said ironically. The name Mukand is also applied 
to God. 

® Where the pasturage was good. That is, though bearing the 
name_ Mukand, thou art unable to save me. 

^ Asa. 



126 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

and miracles became famous. He deemed every- 
thing blasphemy which was opposed to the worship 
of God. He considered the practice of jog, alms, 
fasting, and the feeding of Brahmans not only 
useless, but improper, without the repetition of 
God’s name and love for Him. In reality the special 
tenor of the Shastars is, according to Nabhaji’s 
Bhagat Mai, that all the above-mentioned religious 
works are ciphers, and the name of God is, as it were, 
a numeral. The practice of jog, feeding Brahmans, 
&c., are useless without the numeral of God’s name. 
The meaning of the author of the Bhagat Mai is, 
that all religious works should be performed for the 
acquisition of devotion and love of God, and not for 
objects of a temporal character. 

Kabir has written works which all religious 
denominations can accept, and which, if perused 
without bigotry, are advantageous for the salvation 
of all persons. Kabir was so steadfast in his utterance 
of God’s name, that in comparison with it he deemed 
worthless the rules of caste and the Hindu and 
Muhammadan religious observances. 

From Kabir’s boyhood his mind was filled with 
intuitive knowledge, and his reasoning faculties were 
so acute that he vanquished the most learned men 
of his age, both Hindu and Musalman, in theological 
and ethical discussions. The Brahmans and the 
Mullas contrived many expedients to silence him, 
but all their efforts were baffled. At last they 
decided that they would call him a nigura, or person 
without a spiritual guide, and consequently an infidel, 
with the dubious moral character which that word in 
the estimation of the vulgar connotes, and that they 
would thus humble and shame him. Having heard 
of the Brahman’s resolution and of Ramanand’s 
fjune Kabir sought him out and became his disciple.^ 

^ There is. a story in Nabbaji's Bhagai Mdl purporting to describe 
the manner in which Kabir became Ramanand's disciple, but as it is 
derogatory to the character of both saints, it is omitted here. 



KABIR 


127 


When Kabir's foster-parents found they could not 
restrain his Hindu proclivities, they determined to 
circumcise him. Upon this he uttered the following 
hymn : — 

Whence have come the Hindus and Musalmans ? Who 
hath put them on their different ways ? ^ 

Having thought and reflected in thy heart, answer this — 
who shall obtain heaven and who hell ? 

O Qazi, what expoundest thou ? 

Such readers and students as thou have failed ; none of 
them hath obtained knowledge. 

Thou practisest circumcision for love of woman : ^ I shall 
never believe in it, 0 brother. 

If God had desired to make me a Musalman, I should 
have been born circumcised. 

If a man become a Musalman by circumcision, what is 
to be done to a woman ? ^ 

. Thou puttest not away thy wife who is half thy body ; 
wherefore thou remainest a Hindu. 

Give up thy books, O foolish man, and worship God ; thou 
practisest gross oppression. 

Kabir hath laid hold of the prop of God ; the Musalmans 
have totally failed.^ 

When Kabir' s mother found that his attention 
was directed to the worship of the God of the Hindus 
in opposition to the God of Islam, she raised loud 
complaints. Kabir paid no attention to her, but 
employed himself as usual in the repetition and 
remembrance of God's name. 

Kabir continued to follow his trade, but at the 
same time received and served holy men and mendi- 

^ Who invented their different religions ? 

^ The Musalmans tell a fanciful story regarding the origin of 
circumcision by Abraham. He had two wives, and one exacted 
a promise from him that he would not approach the other under pain 
of death. He broke his promise, but his favourite wife, subduing her 
rage, expressed herself satisfied with his circumcision instead of the 
decapitation which had been stipulated. 

^ As being uncircumcised, she is not a Musalman. ^ Asa. 



128 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

cants. At this his mother was greatly distressed, 
and uttered the complaints versified in the first part 
of the following hymn : — 

Thou art always rising early and bringing fresh ^ utensils ; 
thy life hath gone in plastering cooking squares ; 

Thou payest no attention to thy weaving ; thou art 
engrossed in the pleasure of saying ‘ God, God 

Who in our family hath ever uttered the name of Ram ? ^ 

Since this worthless ® son of ours began to wear a rosary, 
we have had no peace. 

Hear, wife of my eldest brother-in-law ; hear, wife of my 
youngest brother-in-law ; ^ a wonderful thing hath oc- 
curred ! 

This boy hath ruined our weaving business ; ® why is he 
not dead ? 

Kabir replied as follows : — 

The one God is the Lord of all happiness ; the guru hath 
granted me His name. 

He preserved the honour of the saint® Prahlad, and 
destroyed Harnakhas with Narsinh^s nails. 

Prahlad abandoned the gods ’ and ancestors ® of* his 
house, and embraced the instruction of his guru Narad. 

Saith Kabir, God is the destroyer of all sin ; He savcth 
His saints.® 

In Banaras, among opulent Hindus, sun-dried 
vessels are replaced daily. It is believed that the 

^ jLon\ also translated weaver. 

Kabir's mother was a IMusalman, and it certainly was not usual 
among her people to utter the Hindu word for God. 

® NipuU^ Literally — a man without sons, who has no one to toil 
for, and is therefore lazy. The word is a common one of abuse in 
the mouths of some Indian women. 

^ Kabir's mother sought to get all her female relations on her side. 

} Literally — our seven threads, probably with reference to the 
seven colours. 6 in the original. 

/ Galled Sanda and MarJka, ' descendants of Brahma. 

It is. usual forltlie Hindus to worship ancestors. ’ The clause is 
also translated — Prahlad rejected his tutor s and his father s advice. 

® Bilawal. 



KABIR 


129 


night renders them impure. Kabir was anxious to 
attract holy men, and followed the popular custom 
of daily renewing his cooking vessels and smearing 
his cooking places. The above hymn was written 
in Kabir’s youth. 

One. day he was selling a piece of cloth in the 
market-place. He asked five double paise for it, but 
no one would give him more than three. A broker 
came up, and, seeing that Kabir was undervaluing 
his cloth, began to assist him in its sale. The broker 
asked intending purchasers twelve double paise. They, 
forming an idea of the value of the cloth from the 
price put upon it by the seller, offered seven double 
paise, and at this sum a bargain was struck. Upon 
this Kabir uttered the following couplet : — 

If I speak the truth, you beat me down ; the world is 
pleased with falsehood. 

A sheet worth five double paise is sold for seven. 

Kabir kept his mind continually fixed on God, and 
worked sufficiently to maintain himself and his family. 
Another day, as he was standing in the market- 
place selling cloth, a faqir came and begged for 
wherewithal to cover his nakedness. Kabir offered 
him half the cloth he had for sale. The faqir replied 
that that was not enough. Upon this Kabir gave 
him the whole. Kabir then reflected that his mother 
and family were waiting for the price of the cloth, 
and how could he return to them with empty hands ? 
He therefore decided to conceal himself and not 
return home. His people became very anxious 
regarding him. 

Meantime God put it into the heart of a corn-mer- 
chant to take ox-lgads of food of every description to 
Kabir’s house, so that his family might not suffer 
during his absence. Kabir’s rnother strenuously 
resented the offering, and said, ‘ My son will uot ti^e 
even, a single grain of corn from any one. Who ar,t 
thou who throwest such a quantity of provisions at 

K 


SIKH. M 



130 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

my door ? ' The merchant; however, heeded her not, 
but leaving all the provisions took his depwture. 
Two or three men then went in quest of Kabir, and 
brought him home. ; When he saw the unexpected 
supplies and heard the circumstances, he knew it was 
all due to the kindness of God, and became highly 
pleased and grateful to the Giver. He then sent for 
some saints and distributed what he had received 
among them. 

When the Brahmans of Banaras heard that Kabir 
had given hundreds of mans of corn to holy men, 
but not even one grain to themselves, they went 
in a body to his house and thus addressed him: 
‘ Weaver, thou hast become very proud of thy 
wealth, since, without any intimation to us, thou 
hast distributed provisions among low caste faqirs 
and Sudars. Leave this city at, once, and take up 
thy residence elsewhere.’ Kabir asked why he should 
leave the city. Had he broken into any one’s house 
or committed highway robbery, that they sought to 
exile him ? The Brahmans replied that, since he had 
served and done honour to faqirs instead of them- 
selves, it was an offence sufficient to merit expulsion 
from the city. ‘ Say no more,’ they continued, 
* it is better for thee either to make us an offering 
or depart hence.’ Kabir replied that his house was 
all he had, and they could take possession of it. 
Thus saying, he escaped from them, and again con- 
cealed himself in a distant forest.^ 

Upon this some admirers of Kabir’s sanctity, and 
sympathizers with his troubles, distributed among 
the Brahmans such an amount of money and pro- 
visions that the name and praises of Kabir resounded 
throughout the whole city, and the Brahmans were 
highly delighted and gratified on finding their 
stomachs filled to repletion. After that, a holy man 
sought out Kabir, and asked him why he spent his 
days in the forest. ‘ Why goest thou not to thine 

^ Kabtr Kasauii. 



KABIR : 131 

Owii hottse ? Whoever goeth to thy door obtaineth 
money and provisions, and shall there be nothing for 
thee ? ’ Kabir then went home, and, finding ample 
supplies for his family, was grateful for God’s mercy 
and love. When the report of such good fortune and 
God’s bounty was noised abroad, people went in 
great numbers to the saint. Finding his meditations 
interrupted by his visitors, he resorted to a singular 
expedient to blacken his own character and keep 
them at a distance.^ Pious people were scandalized, 
and said that, though Kabir had been a perfect 
saint, he must now be deemed a wicked man unfit 
for the association of the virtuous. 

While Kabir’ s desire for seclusion was thus fully 
attained, and people ceased to throng round him 
in numbers, ignorant people uttered reproaches and 
satirized him. Kabir went in strange guise to the 
king’s court, and sat down in the midst of the 
assembly. The king and his courtiers, seeing his 
strange behaviour, treated him despitefully and 
ordered him out of their presence. The king, how- 
ever, on reflection was ashamed of his hasty order 
and want of consideration for such a saint, not- 
withstanding the strange guise he had adopted. 
The king then began to consider how his own sins 
could be pardoned. He put an axe on his shoulder 
and a bundle of firewood on his head, went bare- 
footed with his queen into Kabir’ s presence, and 
fell down with great humility and modesty at the 
saint’s feet. Kabir pardoned his discourtesy, and 
showed him the way of devotion to God. 

The bigoted emperor Sikandar Khan Lodi, son of 
Bahlol Lodi, visited Banaras in Sambat 1545, the 
year he ascended the throne. Owing to the damp- 
ness of the locality he contracted a severe fever • and 
ague. Kabir’s enemies suggested that he should be 
called to cure the emperor. Their object was that 

^ In Nabhaji’s Bhagat Mil it is stkted that 'Kabir' pretended to be 
drunk and went round the city with his ^rm round a courtesan's neck. 



132 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

KaJtnr should fail in his efforts, and then be puni^ed 
by the despot To the dismay of his enemies, how- 
ever^ Kabir is said to have cured the monarch by 
simply presenting himself. 

The Musalmans, headed by Shaikh Taqi and the 
unbelieving Brahmans, subsequently appeared before 
the emperor to make a complaint against Kabir. 
They represented that he had so led people astray 
ail over the city, that those who paid heed to what 
he said, remained neither Hindus nor Musalmans. 
The emperor summoned Kabir. When he appeared, 
the courtiers told him to salute and make obeisance 
to the monarch in the usual manner of subjects. 
Kabir replied that he was not accustomed to courts, 
and did not know how to make prostrations, nor 
had he any business with the emperor. He but 
knew the name of God, who was the Support of 
his soul, and only Sovereign of the world. The 
emperor became enraged on hearing this, and for- 
getting his former obligation to Kabir, loaded him 
with chains and had him thrown into the river. It 
is related that Kabir, who had previously cut off 
the chains of sin, easily swam to shore leaving his 
chains behind him. Unbelievers attributed this 
miracle to magic, so setting some wood on fire 
they threw the saint into it. By God’s favour the 
fire was completely extinguished, and Kabir’ s body 
emerged from it more handsome than before. When 
these means of destruction failed, a furious elephant 
was let loose on him. The elephant, however, not 
only did not approach Kabir, but fled on seeing 
him. Kabir composed the following on the occa- 
sion : — 

They tied my arms and threw me like a ball ; 

They beat an infuriated elephant on the head that he 
might trample on me, 

Blit he trumpeted and fled, saying, 

‘ L am a sacrifice to that shape which appeared' 



KABIR 


133 


Saith. Kabir, ‘ O my God, Thou art my strength ’ — 

The Qazi ordered, ‘ Drive on the elephant, 

O driver, or I will make mince-meat of thee ; 

Drive on the elephant, wound him.’ 

The elephant did not. move, but kept his attention on 
God, 

And God took possession of his heart. 

Men asked, ‘ What crime hath the saint committed,. 

That you have made a ball of him and thrown him to 
the elephant ? * 

The elephant lifting up the ball bowed to it ; 

Even then the infatuated Qazi could not comprehend. 

Three times he tried to kill me but failed ; 

Even then his hard heart would not be satisfied. 

Saith Kabir, O God, Thou art my protector ; 

Thy servant’s soul is in the fourth state.^ 

When Kabir had successfully escaped from these 
ordeals, another charge was invented against him, 
namely, that he . had been guilty of the blasphemy 
of calling himself God. This was deposed to by 
several witnesses, and the emperor was induced to 
give it credence. He again summoned Kabir. On 
Kabir’ s arrival the emperor caused a cow to be 
slaughtered and ordered Kabir to reanimate her. 
Kabir stroked her with his hand, and then made 
a noise with his lips as if driving her, upon which, 
it is related, the cow stood up, and all her wounds 
and injuries were healed. 

When the emperor saw the power of Kabir’s 
devotion, it is said he fell at his feet, and thus 
addressed him : ‘ I am thy servant and slave. 

Pardon my offences that I may be saved from God’s 
wrath. Ask what thou desirest — money, lands, and 
other things — and I will presefit them to thee ; and 
do thou in return bestow such kindness on my poor 
circumstances that I may be happy in this world and 
the next.’ Kabir replied that he had no concern 

^ The turlya pad in wiiich deliverance is obtained. Gaund. 



134 BHAGATS OF THEE GRANTH SAHIB 

with anything but the name of God. Gold and lands 
were all useless to hfan. Saying this he went hottie. 

The saints of God were all overjoyed at his 
safety, but the Brahmans irritated at their failure 
began to contrive further means of annoyance. They 
dressed up several persons as holy men, and sent 
them to various dignitaries to invite them on behalf 
of Kabir to a banquet on a certain date. Guests 
came in crowds at the appointed time. Kabir on 
discovering the trick that had been played, and 
knowing that on account of his poverty he was 
unequal to the entertainment of such a multitude, 
again fled, this time with the approbation of the saint 
Rav Das, to a neighbouring forest for concealment. 

But God did not wish that His saint should be 
made a laughing-stock. He sent in the guise of 
Kabir a holy man who perforpied the duties of 
host with such grace and dignity as was impossible 
for any ordinary mortal. As each party of visitors 
arrived, the holy man met them at the door, and 
performed for them all the rites of hospitality. He 
provided them with suitable apartments, washed 
their feet, and performed all necessary services. 
When all the guests had fared to their hearts’ con- 
tent, and the holy man obtained leisure from attend- 
ance on them, he sat down with each group and 
conversed with its members on sacred subjects. In 
this way the festival was prolonged for several days. 
After that he went to Kabir, and gave him a full 
account of the entertainment. Kabir then went 
home overjoyed with God’s love and kindness to 
him and composed the following slok : — 

Kabir, I did not do this, nor will I do it again, nor am 
I physic^y able to do it ; 

How do I know -what God may have done ? Yet it was 
all Kabir. 

To this Kabir in his thankfulness to God added 
the follpwing hymn 



KABIR 


135 


Endless salvation awaiteth him 

Who hath such a master as God, O brother. 

Say, now that my trust is in Thee, 0 God, 

What obligation am I under to any one else ? 

Why should God who b^reth the load of the three worlds 
not cherish me ? 

Saith Kabir, I have obtained one piece of knowledge by 
reflection — 

If a mother will poison her child, who can restrain 
her 

It is said that the entertainment took place on 
the spot where since has been built the Chaura 
Kabir, a temple dedicated to Kabir, in which his 
writings are said to be preserved. 

There was a renowned Brahman disputant, called 
Pandit Sarva Jit, who at his mother’s advice went 
to Banaras with several ox-loads of books. He had 
heard of Kabir’s fame and proceeded to visit him. 
On arriving at the Lahar Talao, he met Niru’s 
daughter drawing water, and requested her to show 
him Kabir’s place of residence. She said that it was 
on a lofty place, with a road so narrow that not 
even an ant could pass, much less the oxen he had 
brought with him. By her answer he felt sure that 
she knew where Kabir lived. He took a lota of 
water from her, and requested her to place it in 
front of Kabir. She did so, upon which Kabir put 
a needle into it and told her to carry the vessel back 
to Sarva Jit. There is a proverb that truth is found 
at the bottom of a well. By the needle Kabir meant 
that truth was small, exquisitely polished, and under- 
lay much unsubstantial matter. 

The Brahmans of Banaras on hearing of Sarva 
Jit’s arrival went to Ramanand, and informed him 
that a Pandit had come with whom nobody could 
cope. Ramanand was so little impressed with the 
Pandit’s great learning, that he told them to go out 

^ That is, I cannot compel God to cherish me. Gauri. 



136 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

into the street and bring in the first person they 
met ; and he undertook that he would vanquish 
Sarva Jit in argument. The Brahmans went forth 
into the street. Kabir happened to be the first they 
met, and they took him to Ramanand. Ramanand 
declared Kabir invincible, and the Brahmans accord- 
ingly put him forward as their spiritual champion. 
Sarva Jit on seeing him inquired his caste, where- 
upon Kabir answered that he was a weaver. The 
haughty Pandit turned up his nose and asked what 
a weaver was. Kabir replied as follows : — 

No one knoweth the secret of the Weaver ; 

God hath woven the warp of the whole world. 

If thou listen to the Veds and Purans, 

Thou shalt hear, ‘ I have stretched the warp so long ; 

I have made the earth and firmament My workshop ; 

• I have set the moon and sun in alternate motion ; 

Working My legs I did one work ’ ^ — with such a Weaver 
my heart is pleased. 

The weaver hath looked into his own heart and there 
recognized God. 

Saith Kabir, ‘ I have broken up my workshop. 

And the weaver hath blended his thread ® with the thread 
of God.* 

Sarva Jit admitted himself defeated, and begged 
Kabir to make him a disciple. Kabir modestly 
referred him to his guru Ramanand, who gave him 
the customary initiation. 

Tata and Jiwa, two Brahman brothers who lived 
in retirement on the bank of the river Narbada, 
doubting the spiritual perfection of their guru, 
planted a shoot of the Indian fig-tree near their 
dwelling, and vowed that, if it germinated when 

^ God is represented as the speaker. He made the world as a 
weaver makes a piece of cloth, and He also made the alternations of 
day and night 

* The weaver has obtained deliverance, blended his light with the 
light of God. 3 Asa. 



KABIR 


137 


irrigated with the water in which a holy visitor had 
washed his feet, they would’transfer their spiritual 
allegiance to such a visitor. Several reputed saints 
made pilgrimages to the locality, but it was only on 
Kabir's arrival that the desired result was attained. 
Upon this Tata and Jiwa had no difficulty in believing 
in Kabir’s superhuman power. 

A young woman of beautiful and bewitching form 
was sent by Kabir’s enemies to test his virtue, but 
she displayed all her attractions and fascinations in 
vain. God’s image was so firmly seated in Kabir’s 
heart, that the charming damsel’s wiles produced no 
effect on him. She therefore departed crestfallen 
and helpless. God was pleased on beholding the 
continence and devotion of Kabir, and appeared to 
him in a vision. He placed His hand on Kabir’s 
head and invited l\im to go bodily to heaven. Kabir, 
knowing that he had obtained complete deliver- 
ance, prepared himself to accept God’s invitation ; 
but, to show his contempt for Hindu superstitions, 
and to emphasize the power of devotion to God, he 
performed a very unusual act before his departure to 
the celestial realms. 

Kabir usually lived, until the last year of his life, 
at Banaras, the sacred city of Shiv, where alone, in 
the estimation of many Hindus, deliverance may be 
obtained. There is a town called Magahar beyond the 
Ganges, about eighty-five miles to the east of 
Ajudhia, and fifteen miles to the west of Gorakhpur, 
in which, according to Brahmanical belief, those 
who die have no hope of ultimate beatitude. Kabir’s 
biographer says that they who believe in the religious 
exercises prescribed in the Shastars, migrate into the 
bodies of donkeys if they die in Magahar; while for 
those who are fortunate enough to perform the real 
worship of God, every country and every place is 
equal to thousands of cities like the Hindu Banaras. 
Nay, such is the power of devotion, that God’s devotees 
who die in Magahar go to heaven. 



ISB BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

: ; Kahir, on arriving in Magahar, took possession of 
a saint’s cell he found on the margin of the river 
Ami. The river was then dry, but water has flowed 
in it ever since the day Kabir hallowed it with his 
presence. 

Kabir composed the following hymn at Magahar : — 

I am as a fish out of water, 

Because in a former life I performed no penance. 

Now say, 0 God, what shall be my condition. 

People tell me I had little sense to leave Banaras, 

■ That I wasted all my life in that city of Shiv ; ^ 

And now when about to die, I have removed to Magahar. 
For many years I did penance at Banaras, 

But, now that death is at hand, I have come to dwell in 
Magahar — 

I consider Magahar as good as Banaras — 

How shall he of scant devotion be s^ved ? 

Saith Kabir, my guru Ramanand,^ Ganesh, Shiv,® and all 
men know. 

That Kabir when dying uttered God’s holy name.* 

And also the following : — 

Thou art my great mountain ; O Lord, I have sought 
Thy shelter. 

Thou shakest not, nor do I fall ; Thou hast sheltered me, 

0 God j 

Now and then and forever more there is bid Thou. 

By Thy favour I am ever happy. 

Relying on Thee I have dwelt in Magahar ; Thou hast 
quenched the fever of my body. 

I first obtained a sight of Thee in Banaras, and afterwards 

1 went to live at Magahar. 

* Banaras, where the worship of Shiv specially prevails. 

* S<i>tne understand Brihaspati, the teacher of the gods. 

® Ganesh, it is said, endeavours to bring every one to die in Banaras 
who has ever visited that place of Hindu pilgrimage. Shiv is said to 
whisper his fdrak mqntar or farewell spell, ‘ R5m, Ram,’ (God, God) 
into the dying man’s ears. The idea is that Shiv is also a worshipper 
of Ram and recommends his friends to that god’s protection. 

* Gauii. 



KABIR 


139 


As Banaras so is M^ahar; I deem them both the same. 

I a poor man have .obtained this wealth on accoimt of 
which the proud pandits are bursting to death with envy. 

He who is proud suffereth that torture ; there is none to 
deliver him therefrom. ■ . 

In this life he crieth bitterly under the torture, and after 
death he shall be burnt in a frightful hell. 

What is hell and what heaven, the wretched places ? The 
saints have rejected them both.^ 

Through the favour of the guru I pay no regard to any 
one ; 

I have tlaimed God’s throne and met Him. 

God and Kabir have become one ; no one can'distinguish 
between them.* 

After Kabir’s death a quarrel arose between the 
Hindus and Muhammadans for the disposal of his 
body. Vir Sinh Baghela, the King of Banaras, wished 
to cremate it, while Bijli Khan, the Nawab of 
Gorakhpur, desired to bury it. They fought over the 
matter until a voice come from heaven and separated 
the combatants. When the quarrel was adjusted, it 
was found that there was no corpse to dispose of. 
Fragrant flowers were found in its place. The 
Musalmans, however, made a grave, and the Hindus 
erected a shrine in friendly proximity, as if each 
party were in possession of Kabir’s sacred remains. 

Kabir lived to such a great age — one hundred 
and nineteen years, five months, and twenty-seven 
days — that there are several fabulous accounts of 
his duration of life. Indeed some of his followers 
believe that he is still in existence. The following 
mnemonic lines, however, which are amply authenti- 
cated, show that Kabir went the way of all mortals : — 

Pandrahi sau pachhatar bikhe kiya Magahar ko gaun ; 

Magsar sudi ekadashi rali paun men pauh; 

Kabir went to Magahar in the Sambat year 1375 (a.d. 1518). 

* Kabir desired absorption in God, and not heaven where he should 
be again subject to transmigration. * Ramkali. 



140 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

On the eleventh day of the bright half of the month of 
Magyar his spirit blended with the spirit of the world.^ 

Nabhaji wrote on the circumstance : — 

Trusting to his devotion Kabir relinquished his body in 
Magahar, 

And now rejoiceth in the lap of the Immortal. 

The Dadupanthis, or followers of the saint Dadu, 
also corroborate the fact of Kabir’s death at the 
time above stated and in the town of Magahar. 

It is said that Kabir after some days rose from 
the dead^ and appeared to a disciple called Ratan 
in Mathura, and gave him divine instruction. Kabir 
then and there met Dharm Das, whom he had 
previously appointed his successor, and made him 
more completely acquainted with the principles of 
his religion. He laid down forty-'two articles which 
he called the pillars of faith, and having fully ex- 
plained them to his disciples finally departed to his 
eternal home. 

Besides Kabir’s compositions, preserved in the 
Granth Sahib, there is a long list of works attributed 
to him, the most famous of which is the Kabir 
Bijak. Many of his verses are repeated by wander- 
ing faqirs. 

On the subject of caste Kabir wrote : — 

The courageous man who effaceth caste and pride shall 
prove a saint. 

On the subject of idolatry he said : — 

If God be found by worshipping a stone, I will worship 
a mountain ; 

^ Professor H. H. Wilson has given different mnemonic verses, 
which allow Kabir. a fabulous age {Religion of the Hindus, Vol. I, 
pp. 71-3). In (he Bharat Khanda cha travachin Kosh, the date of 
Kabir’s death is given as the Saka year 1370, a. n. 1448, that is, 
twenty-one years before Guru NSnak’s birth. If the date given in the 
text be accepted. Guru Nanak was forty-nine years of age when Kabir 
died. 



KABIR ^ J41 

Better than that stone is a hand-mill which grindeth 
corn for the world to eat. 

Many similar verses in the mouths of the populace 
in upper India, and indeed all Kabir’s compositions, 
show him to have been ‘a daring and original thinker. 
It must be mentioned, however, that his writings 
are frequently of a mystical character, and much 
concentration of thought and knowledge of the 
spiritual and social condition of his age are necessary 
for their elucidation. The author has accepted the 
interpretation of Kabir’s hymns from the gyanis of 
the ^anjab, but possibly the saint’s followers in other 
parts of Inia may differ on some details. 

Kabir held the doctrine of ahinsa or the non-de- 
struction of life, which extended even to that of 
flowers. The Sikh Gurus, on the contrary, allowed, 
and even encouraged, the use of animal flesh as 
food. 

The visitor to Kabir’s temple in Banaras is shown 
what purports to be his picture. Dharm Das ^ and 
Surat Gopal, another of his disciples, are represented 
kneeling at his feet in an attitude of supplication, 
while his son Kamal, who, the Kabirpanthis beheve, 
was a child re-animated by him, is fanning him. The 
visitor may also see a picture of Kabir and Rav Das, 
a friend and fellow disciple and townsman of his. 
Rav Das is represented as a very attenuated old 
man, naked except for a red cloth round his middle, 
wearing a rosary in two folds round his neck, and 
beads on his wrists and arms. The saintly royal 
lady, Jhali, queen of Chitaur, richly dressed, , is 
offering him food on a platter. 

^ It is this man who compiled Kabir’s writings, it is said, in Sambat 
1521 (a.d. 1464) when Kabir was sixty-six years of age. 



142 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


KABIR’S HYMNS 

Sri Ra 

Without God’s assistance men are lost in worldly 
love. 

I 

The mother thinketh that her son is growing big, 

. But this she thinketh not, that day by day his life is de- 
creasing. 

She calleth him her own and fondleth him excessively, 
while the god of death looketh on and laugheth. 

So much hast Thou, 0 God, illuded the world ; 

How can it ever know Thee since mammon hath bewitched 
it?i 

Saith Kabir, abandon the pleasure of sin, for in such 
companionship thou must assuredly die. 

O mortal, repeat the name of the Lord, put aside mention 
of others, so shalt thou pass over the terrible ocean of this 
world. 

If it please God, man feeleth divine love. 

The error of superstition departeth from within him. 

Divine knowledge is spontaneously produced, intelligence 
awakened. 

And by the favour of the guru the heart is touched by 
God’s love. 

In such companionship there is no death ; 

Qbey the Master’s order and thou shalt meet Him. 

The following was addressed to a Jogi who offered 
wine to Kabir. 

II 

Hear a wonderful thing, 0 Pandit, I cannot now describe 
Maya, 

Who hath bewitched demigods, men, celestial heralds, and 
musicians, and girdled the three worlds. 

^ It is explained that this passage does not cast blame on God, 
because it is men’s acts which really lead them astray. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


143 

The sovereign God’s tyre playeth without being struck ; ^ 
And he on whom He looketh with favour loveth its sound. 
I have made my brain a furnace, the breath of my left 
and right nostrils two stills, and my heart the golden Vat, 

Into which a very pure stream hath trickled ; I have 
distilled the sweetest essence ; * 

A.nd — what is without parallel — I have made suspension 
of my breath my wine-cup. 

Say is there any Jogi in the three worlds who would be 
satisfied and not long for more? 

Such knowledge of the Supreme Being hath manifested 
itself ; saith Kabir, I am imbued with it. 

All the rest of the world is led astray in error, but my mind 
is intoxicated with God’s elixir. 

Gauri 

Devotion is the water which has quenched Kabir’s 
burning thirst for God. 

I 

I have been on fire, and have now found the name of God as 
water to extinguish it : 

The name of God is the water which hath cooled my burn- 
ing body. 

Men go to the forest to chasten their hearts. 

But without God they cannot find such water as will do so. 
The water of God’s name hath saved His burning slave 
From the fire which hath consumed demigods and men. 
In the terrible ocean there is an ocean of happiness ; * 

I continue to drink, but the water is not exhausted. 

Saith Kabir, worship God. 

God’s name is the water which hath extinguished my 
thirst. 

^ God gladdens man’s heart by divine knowledge . without any 
perceptible interference with him. * God’s name, 

® The line is also translated — ^He is a unique Jogi in the three 
wpiids who hath tasted such essence. Is there any king ef^ual to him ? 

* The terrible ocean is very bitter— -within it is found the sweet 
water of God's name. 



144 BHAGATS OF T0E GRANTH SAHIB 

Yet Kabir’s thirst ior God increases. 

II 

0 God, thirst lor the water of Thy name departeth not 
from me ; 

Nay for that water my ardour rageth the more. 

Thou art the ocean, I am a fish therein ; 

1 dwell in the water, I perish without it. 

Thou art the cage, I am Thy parrot ; 

What can the cat Death do to me ? 

Thou art a tree, I am the bird thereon ; 

Unfortunate is he who seeth Thee not. 

Thou art the True Guru, I am Thy novice. 

Saith Kabir, meet me, O God, at the last moment. 

A thief when hotly pressed sought refuge in 
Kabir’s house. It would have been foreign to 
Kabir’s character to refuse shelter to any one who 
sought it. Moreover he did not know the character 
of his guest, and accordingly gave him the usual 
permission to remain in his house. It happened 
that Kabir’s daughter was then on a visit to him, 
and when he entertained the thief at the same time, 
the circumstance led to much unfavourable com- 
ment. Kabir addressed the following hymn to his 
detractors : — 

III 

Since I recognized both the thief and my son-in-law as one. 

Why are people distressed at it ? 

If I am dishonoured and have lost my honour, 

Let no one follow in my footsteps. 

If I am bad the badness is confined to myself ; 

I have no partnership or connexion with any of you. 

You know nothing about honour or dishonour ; 

But you shall know when your gilding is laid bare.^ 

Saith Kabir, that is honour which is acceptable to God ; 

Forsaking all else worship only Him. 

^ Also translated — 

My honour or dishonour bringeth no shame on you. 

You shall know who is in the r^ht when all gilding is cast off. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


145 

A satire on the ritualistic practices of the Hindus. 

IV 

If union with God be obtained by going about naked, 

All the deer ^ of the forest shall be saved. 

What mattereth it whether man goeth naked or weareth 
a deerskin, 

If he recognize not God in his heart ? 

If perfection be obtained by shaving the head, 

Why should not sheep obtain salvation ? 

If, O brethren, the continent man is saved. 

Why should not a eunuch obtain the supreme reward ? 
Saith Kabir, hear, O my brethren. 

Who hath obtained salvation without God’s name ? 


V 

They who bathe in the evening and the morning, 

Are like frogs in the water. 

When men have no love for God’s name, 

They shall all go to the god of death. 

They who love their persons and deck themselves out in 
various guises. 

Feel not mercy even in their dreams. 

Many leading religious men call them quadrupeds. 

And say that only holy men shall obtain happiness in this 
ocean of trouble. 

Saith Kabir, why perform so many ceremonies ? 
Forsaking all other essences quaff the great essence of 
God's name. 


God ' prefers before all temples the upright heart 
and pure 


VI 


What availeth devotion, what penance, what fasting and 
worship 

To him in whose heart there is worldly love ? 

O man, apply thy heart to God ; 

Thou shalt not obtain Him by artifice. 

^ Mtrg also means beasts generally. 

L 


SIKH. VI 



146 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Put away covetousness and the example of others ; 

Lay aside lust, wrath, and pride. 

By the religious practices of the superstitious boasting is 
increased ; 

They join together and worship a stone. 

Saith Kabir, by devotion I have obtained the Lord ; 

By becoming simple in heart I have met God. 

The name Brahman should only be applied to 
a holy man. 

VII 

While dwelling in the womb man hath not family or 
caste ; 

All men have sprung from the seed of Brahm. 

Say, O Pandit, since when hast thou been a Brahman ; 
Waste not thy life in calling thyself a Brahman. 

If thou art a Brahman born of a Brahmani mother, 

Why hast thou not come by some other way ? ^ 

How art thou a Brahman ? How am I Sudar ? 

How am I of blood and you of milk ? ^ 

Saith Kabir, only he who meditateth on God 
Is a Brahman in my estimation. 

^ All are men condemned alike to groan.' 

VIII 

Man can never sleep comfortably in spiritual ignorance ; 
The rich and the poor both weep alike. 

When man^s tongue no longer uttereth God’s name, 

He shall continue to bewail birth and death. 

When life departeth, say whose shall be man’s wealth 
Which appeareth like the shadow of a tree ? ® 

As the life of a musical instrument is contained in itself. 
How can any one know the secrets of the dead ? ^ 

^ That is, why wert thou born of woman? The Brahmans are 
supposed to have issued from Brahma's mouth. 

* Among the Hindus blood is considered impure, and milk pure. 

* Man's wealth shall pass away with his life like the shadow of 
a tree. 

^ The life or sound of a musical instrument is contained within it. 
If the string breaks, no life or sound remains, and no one can lell 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


147 


As the swan presideth over the lake, so doth Death over the 
body. 

Drink God’s elixir, O Kabir. 


Without purification of the heart pilgrimages are 
of no avail. 


IX 


The Lord of light having created the races of men infused 
light into them. 

Which sometimes produceth glass ornaments, and some- 
times pearls.^ 

What abode is that which is called secure, 

Where fear is dispelled, and one abide th without fear ? 

The heart is not satisfied with pilgrimages to the banks of 
sacred streams ; 

Man remaineth entangled with good and bad acts. 

Demerits and merits are both the same ; ^ 

In thine own hecirt is God, the philosopher’s stone ; 
abandon the hope of obtaining merits from any one else. 

O Kabir, chide not the name of Him who is without 
qualities ; 

Enjoy thyself in intercourse with that Lord. 


Kabir desires not heaven but absorption in God. 


X 

The men who have no correct notion of the Supreme Being, 

, Think of entering heaven by mere words. 

whither it has gone. When human life fails, the soul departs, and no 
mortal knows its destination. 

' Good and bad fruit spring from human acts, which again proceed 
from the light or understanding that God has given. The first verse 
of this hymn is also translated : — 

There is a species of animal for every spark of light, and a spark of 
light for every species of animal. 

2 Good acts are compared to gold, bad acts to iron fetters; but 
both good and bad acts retard man’s progress towards absorption in 
God. These two lines are also translated : — 

They are entangled in religious ceremonies good and bad, 

And their acts whether bad or good have the same result. 

That is, they commit sins of various descriptions at places of pil- 
grimage, and their pilgrimages are therefore of no avail. 

L2 



148 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I know not where heaven is ; 

Everybody saith he longeth to go there, 

But there is no satisfaction in such conversation — 
The heart is only satisfied when pride departeth. 

As long as man desireth to go to heaven, 

So long shall he find no dwelling at God‘’s feet. 

Saith Kabir, to whom shall I tell this. 

That heaven is in the company of the saints ? 

The body is perishable. 


XI 

Man is born and groweth up, and when he hath grown up 
he dieth ; 

We see that the world passeth away in this wise. 

Diest thou not of shame talking of thy house ? 

At the last moment nothing is thine.’ 

With great efforts the body is cherished. 

But after death it is burned in the fire. 

The limbs to which thou appliest ground aloe-wood, 
sandal, and fragrant soap. 

Shall all be burned with wood. 

Saith Kabir, hear me, O virtuous man,^ 

While the whole world looketh on thy body shall be 
consumed. 


Since all must die, why mourn ? There is no death 
for the holy. 


XII 


When another dieth why mournest thou ? 

Do so, if thou art to live thyself. 

I shall not die like the rest of the World ; 

I have now met Him who reanimateth. 

The body is perfumed with sandal ; 

In such pleasures the Primal Joy is forgotten. 
There is one well and five water-carriers ; 


^ Spoken ironically. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


149 

Even when the well rope ^ is broken, the silly beings still 
draw water 

Saith Kabir, / have gained one piece of wisdom by reflec- 
tion — 

There is no more a well, or water-carriers for me.* 

Kabir' s transmigration. 

XIII 

I was in immobile and mobile creatures, in worms and in 
moths ; 

I passed through many births of various kinds. 

In this way I occupied many bodies, 

But when, O God, I assumed human birth, 

1 was a Jogi, a Jati, a penitent, a Brahmachari, 
Sometimes a king, an emperor, and sometimes a beggar. 
The apostates shall .die, but the saints shall all live. 

And drink the elixir of God with their tongues. 

Saith Kabir, O God, have mercy on us ; 

We have grown weary ; make us now whole ! 

Deadly sins veiled under allegories. 

XIV 

Kabir hath beheld such wonderful things — 

Water churned by mistake for cream ; ^ 

A donkey grazing on a green crop,* 

Which on rising every morning kiUeth itself laughing and 
braying ; 

A mad buffalo which could not be guided,® 

Gambolling as it grazed and falling into hell ; 

^ Here the well is the body; the well-rope, life; ihe five water- 
carriers the five evil passions. Others understand the well to mean the 
world, and translate this line as follows : — 

When the well-rope (sensual desire) is broken, the w^ater-carriers 
(the five organs of perception) grow weary of doing evil. 

2 Even when life is drawing to a close the evil passions are still 
active. 

* Since Kabir has obtained salvation during life. 

^ Stones are worshipped instead of God. 

* Men in power extorting money from the poor. 

® The perverse who listen not to the advice of their spiritual guides. 



150 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

A sheep ever sucking its lamb’s milk.* 

Saith Kabir, such sport hath been shown. 

By repeating God’s name my understanding hath become 
enlightened : 

Saith Kabir, I have obtained understanding from the 
guru.* 

(Hymn No. XV is in Kabir’s Life).® 

The body is false, God alone is true. 

XVI 

The limbs anointed with ground aloe-wood, sandal, and 
fragrant soap. 

Shall be burnt with wood. 

What is there to be proud of in this body and in wealth ? 
Both shall remain on earth and not go with the soul to 
the other world. 

They who sleep at night and work by day. 

Who utter not God’s name for a moment, 

Who eat betel, and stretch out their hands for more, 
Shall at the hour of death be firmly bound as thieves. 

If under the guru’s instruction thou joyfully sing the 
praises of God, 

And utter the name of Him who filleth all creation, thou 
shalt be happy. 

He in whose heart God mercifully establisheth His name, 
Giveth the odour and perfume of God a place in his heart. 
Saith Kabir, think, O blind man, 

God is true, all worldly occupations are false. 

The blissful peace of the holy. 

XVII 

Instead of death it is God who hath come for me ; 
Sorrow hath been removed and I have found a refuge in 
happiness. 

* Women who sell their daughters and live on the proceeds. 

* The fifth Guru is said to have composed a portion of this hymn. 

* Hymns missing from this collection will be found either in the Life 
of Kabir or that of Guru Nilnak. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


151 


Mine enemies have turned into friends ; 

The minds of the infidels have altered and become well- 
disposed towards me. 

I have now obtained all comfort, 

And peace hath come over me since I have known 
God. 

-My body suffered millions of ills ; 

They have now been converted into permanent happiness 
and composure. 

When man knoweth himself, 

He shall not suffer from illness or the three fevers. 

My mind hath now returned to the Eternal ; 

When in life I was dead,^ it was then I knew God. 

Saith Kabir, I have now entered happiness and rest ; 

I have no fear myself, and I inspire no fear in others.* 

It is said that Krishan Das Bairagi asked Kabir : — 

XVIII 

When the body dieth, to what abode shall the fious man's 
soul go ? 

Kabir — It shall unite with Him who is beyond expression 
and indestructible : 

He who knoweth God understandeth this, 

As the dumb man when pleased with sugar must keep his 
pleasure to himself. 

Such divine knowledge only God Himself expoundeth. 

O man, arrest thy breath at the junction of the nostrils ; 

Appoint such a guru as shall render another unnecessary ; 

Utter such a word as shall render another unnecessary ; 

Embrace such divine knowledge as shall render any 
more unnecessary ; 

So die that thou shalt not have to die again ; 

Turn back the Ganges and unite it with the Jamna ; * 

^ When I abandoned pride. 

* I do not threaten men with spiritual tortures for themselves or 
their deceased relatives if I do not receive money for my ministra- 
tions. 

* Unite the breath of the left and right nostrils, as the Jogis do. 



152 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

And think that thou art bathing without water at their 
confluence.^ 

Be it thy duty to look on all men as equal ; 

Reflect upon the Real Thing ; what else is there to reflect 
on ? 

’Water, lire, wind, earth, and the firmament — 

If thou abide like these,* thou shalt be near God. 

Saith Kabir, medftate on the Stainless One, 

And go to that place whence there shall be no returning. 

How Kabir found God. 

XIX 

God cannot be obtained even by offering one’s weight in 
gold; 

But I have purchased Him with my soul ; 

And now that I recognize Him as mine own. 

My mind is naturally at ease. 

Brahma, however much he talketh, hath not found God’s 
limit ; 

But by my devotion God came to me as I sat at home. 
Saith Kabir, I have cast off my wavering disposition ; 

It is only in God’s service I am now a sleeping partner. 

The holy cannot die for they are saved by divine 
knowledge. 

XX 

That death which terrifieth the whole world. 

The guru’s instruction hath set before me in a clear light. 
Now how shall I die although my mind accepteth death ? 
It is they who know not God who are always dying. 
Everybody talketh of dying, 

It is they who die in divine knowledge who are immortal. 
Saith Kabir, my mind is happy ; 

Doubt is dispelled, and supreme happiness abideth. 

' Make the breath of both nostrils meet in the brain, and thus 
obtain exaltation of spirit without bathing at the confluence of the 
Ganges and Jamna, as so many pilgrims do. 

* If thou adopt their properties, and remain sinless like them. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


153 


Kabir’s body is burning all over to meet God : 
it is useless to try to heal any particular part of it. 

XXI 

There is no special part of my body to which I may apply 
healing ointment ; 

I have examined my body but found no such place. 

He who feeleth pain knoweth it ; 

The service of God is a barbed arrow ; 

I consider all women ^ to be alike ; 

Who knoweth which shall be dear to the Bridegroom ? 
Saith Kabir, the Husband, forsaking all other women, 
Shall meet her on whose forehead such lot hath been 
written. 

It was believed that widows who immolated 
themselves on their husbands' pyres obtained salva- 
tion. Kabir traverses this belief. 

XXIII 

How can a woman without chastity be a sati ? 

O pandit, see and consider this in thy heart. 

If a woman have no love for her husband, how can her 
husband^ s love for her increase ? 

As long as there is worldly love, there can be no divine love. 
He who in his heart believeth mammon to be real. 

Shall not even in his dreams meet God. 

Kabir calleth her a happy wife. 

Who giveth up to God her body, soul, wealth, and house- 
hold. 

Devotion to God is the only dispeller of the deadly 
sins. 

XXIV 

The whole world is subject to the deadly sins ; 

The deadly sins have ruined whole families. 

O man, where hast thou wrecked and sunk thy boat ? 
Having broken with God thou hast joined the deadly sins, 
In whose fire demigods and men burn. 

^ That is, all human beings. 



154 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Water ^ is near, but, O beasts, why not drink it, removing 
its scum ? 2 

By contemplation water fit for drinking issueth forth ; 
That water alone is pure, saith Kabir. 

Only the holy who meditate on God are useful 
in the world. 

XXV 

Why was not the mother of the family barren,® 

Whose sons meditate not on divine knowledge ? 

Why did not the wicked man who hath performed no 
service for God, 

Die at his birth ? 

Many ^ miscarriages have occurred — how is it he escaped ? 
He liveth, it is true, but like a raven in the world. 

Saith Kabir, they who are beautiful and shapely. 

Shall become hunchbacked and deformed without God’s 
name. 

Kabir devotion to the saints. 

XXVI 

I am ever a sacrifice 

To those who repeat the Master’s name. 

He is pure who singe th the praises of the pure God ; 

He is my brother and dear to my heart. 

I am the dust of the lotus feet 

Of those whose hearts are filled with God. 

My caste, it is true, is that of weaver, but my heart is 
resigned ; 

Kabir very tranquilly repeateth God’s praises. 

Kabir thus addressed a Jogi who advised him to 
drink wine to concentrate his thoughts. 

XXVII 

I collected much molasses,® and turned my body into 
firewood ; 

' Divine knowledge 

® Man’s evil passions which conceal the water of divine knowledge. 

® Vidhwa, Literally — a widow not allowed to marry. 

* In the original much much, as in Spanish. 

® From which spirits are made. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


155 


Then wine trickled irom the roof of the house of pleasure ^ 
by means of the furnace of my heart. 

Describe him as intoxicated with the wine of divine love 
Who drinketh the sweetness of God’s name and meditateth 
on divine knowledge. 

Since the server * of the wine of divine love met me and 
gave it to me, 

My days and nights are passing away intoxicated with 
pleasure. 

I carefully applied my thoughts to the Pure One, 

And then, saith Kabir, I obtained Him the Fearless. 

A Jogi maintained that deliverance could not be 
obtained without chastening the heart, and that the 
heart could not be chastened without the practice of 
Jog. Kabir criticizes the statement. 

XXVIII 

Without devotion the qualities of the heart cling to the 
heart. 

Who secureth perfection by merely chastening his heart ? ® 
What holy man hath suceeeded in chastening his heart ? 
Say who hath saved any one by merely chastening his 
heart. 

Every one thinketh in his heart that he is going to chasten it, 
But the heart is not chastened without devotion. 

Saith Kabir, let him who knoweth this secret. 

Worship in his heart God, the Lord of the three worlds. 

The following was addressed to an atheist who 
maintained the theory of spontaneous creation. 

XXIX 

Who was the painter who painted 
The stars which appear in the sky ? * 

^ The brain. 

* Kalalin, corresponding to the European barmaid. Even in 

India in former times the distiller or publican used to employ a woman 
to serve wine to his customers. She probably here means R5m5nand, 
Kabir’s guru. * Man must also repeat God’s name. 

* According to the Muhammadan conception of the heavens, the 
sky is a fixed vault on which the stars are painted. 



156 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Say, O pandit, to what is the sky attached ? ^ 

Fortunate is the wise man who knoweth this. , 

The sun and moon diffuse light ; 

God hath extended Himself in everything. 

Saith Kabir, he shall know this, 

In whose heart is God, and in whose mouth is God. 

The evil wrought by the Simritis. 

XXX 

0 my brethren, the Simriti is the daughter of the Veds ; 
She hath brought a chain and a rope for men, 

And hath of herself imprisoned them in her capital ; * 

She hath flung the noose of worldly love, and discharged 
the arrow of death ; 

The former cannot be cut, and the latter cannot be broken. 
The Simriti hath become a serpent, eaten the world, 

And plundered the whole universe before my very eyes ; 
But, saith Kabir, I have escaped from her by uttering God’s 
name. 

The following was addressed to an admirer who 
had offered Kabir a horse. 

XXXI 

Let me put a bit and bridle on my steed^ 

And abandoning all else course him in heaven.* 

Let me make self-reflection my saddle. 

And put my foot in the stirrup of divine love. 

Come, my steed, let me drive thee to heaven ; 

If thou jib, I will strike thee with the whip of love. 

Saith Kabir, they are good riders 

Who keep themselves aloof from the Veds and the books 
of the Musalmans. 

The following was written after witnessing a 
cremation : — 

XXXII 

1 have seen fire applied to the mouth 
Which used to eat the five nectars.* 

* What supports the sky ? * Probably BanSras is meant. 

* The mind. * The brain. 

* These are bhakshya, what is masticated by the front teeth, the 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


157 


Remove, 0 God; my one misery 

Of abiding in the womb and being burned in its fire. 

The body is destroyed in various ways and manners — 

Some burn it, and some bury it in the earth. 

Saith Kabir, ‘ O God, show me Thy feet ; 

Afterwards why not send death ? ^ 

Kabir was engaged in his devotions when a hostile 
neighbour took the opportunity to set his house 
on fire. Kabir heard of it and returning home suc- 
ceeded in extinguishing the flames. It is said that 
the hostile neighbour’s house took fire from Kabir’ s, 
and was totally consumed. The following hymn 
was composed on the occasion ; — 

XXXIII 

God Himself is the fire. Himself the wind ; 

When the Master setteth fire to the house, who can save it ? 

What if even my body burn when I am repeating God’s 
name ? 

My mind was absorbed in God’s name ; 

Whose house burneth, and who suffereth loss ? - 

God playeth like an acrobat. 

Saith Kabir, utter two letters ; ® 

As sure as I have a Master, He will save me. 

Kabir thinks he has not performed sufficient 
worship. 

XXXIV 

I have not applied my mind to the science of union with 
God or contemplation of Him ; 

Without hate of the world I shall not escape from mammon. 

How shall I live 

back teeth, and the tongue ; bhojya, what is masticated by the back 
teeth and the tongue ; lehiya, what is licked or sipped by the tongue 
alone ; peya, what is drunk ; and choskya, what is sucked. 

Another list of the five nectars is — milk, cream, clarified butter, 
honey, and sugar. 

1 Kabir does not fear death provided he has first seen God’s feet. 

® All property belongs to God. 

* R and m which with a long vowel make Ram, God. 



158 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

If I have not God’s name as my support ? , 

Saith Kabir, I have searched in heaven, 

And have seen none equal to God. 

The following was written on seeing ravens sitting 
on a skull and feeding on its contents : — 

XXXV 

Ravens were cleaning their beaks on the skull 
On which a turban had been once very daintily bound. 
Why be proud of this body and of wealth ? 

Why dost thou not hold fast God’s name ? 

Saith Kabir, hear, O my man. 

This shall be thy condition at last. 

Kabir discourses on the soul. 

Gauri Ashtapaqi 

XXXVI 

Man prayeth for temporal happiness, but sorrow cometh 
to meet him. 

It pleaseth me not to pray for such happiness as shall 
bring sorrow. 

Man still intent on sin hopeth for happiness ; 

How shall he find his dwelling in the Supreme God ? 

The happiness which even Shiv and Brahma would dread, 
I supposed to be real. 

Even the four sons of Brahma, the muni Narad, and 
Sheshnag, 

Never found their minds stable in their bodies until they 
had given up hopes of such happiness. 

O my brethren, let any one inquire into the condition of 
the soul. 

When it escapeth from the body, where shall it be ? 

By the favour of the guru, Jaidev and Namdev 
Discovered that, by love and devotion to God, 

The soul shall not suffer transmigration. 

He whose doubts are dispelled knoweth the truth — 

This soul hath.no shape or outline ; 



KABIR’S HYMNS 159 

By God’s order it was created, and by understanding God’s 
order it shall be absorbed in Him. 

If any one understand the secret of the soul. 

It shall only obtain divine happiness when absorbed in 
God. 

There is but one Soul ^ which occupieth all bodies. 

Kabir worshippeth that Soul. 

God’s name is the tree of life. 

XXXVII 

Of those who watch day and night to utter the one Name. 
How many have become perfect by the love they bore to 
God! 

Sidhs and their disciples and all the munis have grown 
weary in their efforts without God’s name : 

The one Name like -the tree of life saveth mankind. 

They who are regenerated by God shall never alter. 

Saith Kabir, I have recognized God’s name. 

The worship of the one God inculcated. 

Gauri and Sorath 
XXXVIII 

O shameless man, art thou not ashamed ? 

Why dost thou forsake God, and go to some one else ? * 

It becometh not him whose God is the Most High 
To go to "a strange temple. 

That Lord pervadeth all space. 

Is ever present, and never distant. 

Say, O man, what is there not in His palace 
At whose feet Lakshmi taketh refuge ? 

Every one speaketh of Him : 

He is ommipotent, our own Lord, and our Benefactor. 
Saith Kabir, that man is perfect in the world. 

In whose heart no other than God abideth. 


^ The Soul of the world. 


® To worship idols. 



i6o BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


They who are absorbed in God feel not joy or 
sorrow for relations. 

XXXIX 

Who hath a sgn ? who hath a father ? 

Who dieth ? who inflicteth pain ? 

God is the Illusionist who hath illuded the world.^ 

If separated from God how shall I survive, my mother ? 
Who hath a husband ? who hath a wife ? reflect on this 
truth in thy heart. 

Saith Kabir, I have become reconciled with the Illusionist ; 
The illusion vanished when I recognized Him. 

Kabir’s satisfaction on feeling that he had ob- 
tained salvation. 

XL 

The sovereign God hath now become my helper ; 
Having cut away birth and death I have obtained the 
supreme state. 

God hath united me with the guild of the saints, 

And freed me from the five deadly sins. 

The ambrosial name I repeat with my tongue ; 

God hath made me His unbought ® slave. 

The True Guru did me a favour 
By rescuing me from the ocean of the world. 

I have begun to love God’s lotus feet. 

And God ever and ever dwelleth in my heart. 

The sparks of the fire of worldly love have become extin- 
guished. 

And my mind hath obtained resignation by the support 
of the Name. 

In sea and land the Lord God is fully contained ; 

Wherever I look, there is the Searcher of hearts. 

It is He Himself who implanteth His service in my heart ; 
God is obtained, my brethren, according to primal destiny. 

* Kabir believed with the Vedantists that everything was illusion. 
As all things emanated from God, it is He who continues the illusion, 
hence Kabir familiarly compares Him to an illusionist or actor. 

* As such I shall serve Him all the better. 



KABIR’S HYMNS i6i 

The man to whom He showeth favour succeedeth in his 
affaiis. 

Kabir’s Lord is the Chreisher of the poor. 

.The following was .a remonstrance *to a Brahman 
who had found impufity and caste defilement in 
almost everything. 

XLI 

There is impurity in water, there is impurity in land, there 
is impurity in whatever is born. 

There is impurity in birth, and again in death ; 

God's subjects are ruined by this impurity.^ 

O pandit, tell me who is pure ; 

Explain to me such knowledge as thou hast on the subject, 
my friend. 

There is impurity in the eyes, there is impurity in the 
tongue, there is impurity in the ears ; 

Standing or sitting there is impurity, impurity entereth 
the kitchen. 

Every one knoweth how to be caught in impurity, but 
few how to escape from it. 

Saith Kabir, no impurity attacheth to those who meditate 
on God in their hearts. 

God is greater than any creature, and His saint 
than any place of pilgrimage. 

XLII 

Decide one controversy, O Ramanand, 

If thou desire any service from thy slave. 

Is this soul or He to whom it is attached the greater ? 

Is God or he who knoweth God the greater ? 

Is Brahma or He who created him the greater ? 

Are the Veds or the source whence they came the greater ? 

Is the pilgrimage or God’s saint the greater ? 

Saith Kabir, I have been unhappy on this subject, 

^ When there is impurity in everything according to the Brahihahs, 
they must be very well remunerated to purify men. 

M 


6IKH. Vt 



i 62 bhagats of the granth sahib 


The effects of the influx of (hvine knowledge. 
Kabir likens his mind to a hut. 

XLIII 

Lo ! my bret&ren, a storm of divine knowledge hath 
come ; 

The screens of doubt have all been blown away, and even 
the ropes of mammon have not been left ; 

The two props of indecision ^ have been thrown down, 
and the beam * of worldly love hath been broken ; 

The thatched roof of avarice hath fallen to the groimd, 
and the vessel of evil inclinations hath burst. 

Saith Kabir, thy slave, 0 Lord, hath become saturated by 
the rain ® which fell after the storm. 

And when next he saw the sun appear,* his mind was 
illumined. 

The following was addressed to a Brahman. 
Kabir did not desire his followers to associate with 
infidels. 

XLIV 

What shall one say to such people 

As neither hear God’s praises nor sing His attributes. 

But who knock down the heavens by their boasting ? 

They whom God hath excluded from His service should 
always be feared. 

They who give not a handful of water to the thirsty 

Slander him ® who brought down the Ganges. 

Sitting or standing crooked are their ways ; “■ 

They have ruined themselves and ruined others : 

They know nothing save evil converse ; 

They obey not even Brahma’s bidding ; 

They have gone astray themselves and are leading others 
astray. 

* Whether man inclines to God or the world. 

* On which the rafters rested. 

* Internal peace or happiness. 

*. When he saw God after the attainment of divine knowledge. 

® Bhagirath. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


163 


They set fire to their houses and sl^p in them ; ^ 

They laugh at others, though they have only ope eye 
themselves ; 

Kabir is ashamed on beholding them. 

A lecture against the shradhs and idolatry of the 
Hindus. 


XLV 

Nobody obeyeth his parents when alive, yet he giveth 
them feasts when dead ; 

Say how shall the poor parents obtain what the ravens 
and the dogs have eaten. 

Let some one explain to me what kushal ^ means ; 

The world dieth talking of kushal ; however shall kushal 
be obtained ? 

Men make goddesses and gods of clay, and offer them 
living sacrifices — 

As your lifeless gods, so your deceased, who ask not for 
what they want themselves. 

You kill living things, and you worship lifeless things ; 
at the last moment great shall be your suffering. 

You know not the worth of God’s name, and you shall, be 
drowned in the sea of terror. 

You waver and know not the supreme God, wherefore you 
worship gods and goddesses. 

Saith Kabir, you have not thought of the Unknowable, 
and have become entangled in the deadly sins. 

The holy obtain their great reward. 

XLVI 

If while living thou be dead, while dead return to life 
by means of divine knowledge, and thus become absorbed in 
God ; 

If thou abide pure amid impurity, thou shalt not again 
fall into the terrible ocean of the world. 

^ They commit sin, and feel np compunction or repentance, 

^ A feeling of satisfaction after repletion^ 

M 2 



j 64 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

My God, such milk should be churned — ^ 

Keep thy mind steadfast under the guru’s instruction ; 
in this way shalt thou quaff nectar.* 

The guru’s arrow hath pierced this adamantine age, and 
let in the light of God’s word. 

The doubt which I felt, through the power of ignorance 
whether this world was a snake or a rope, is at an end ; I have 
a permanent abode in God’s house. 

The guru without putting an arrow on his bow hath 
pierced this world, my brethren. 

In all directions the kite® fluttereth in the wind, but its 
string is fixed in the love of God. 

My perturbed mind is absorbed in God ; duality and evil 
inclinations depart. 

Saith Kabir, I have seen the Fearless One by fixing my 
attention on His name. 


Rather than practise Jog search for God through 
the guru. 


XLVII 


When I turned my thoughts towards God, I restrained my 
mind and my senses *, and my attention became lovingly 
fixed on Him. 

O Bairagi, search for Him who neither cometh nor goeth, 
who neither dieth nor is born. 

My soul turning away from sin is absorbed in the 
universal Soul ; 

By the favour of the guru I have now obtained a different 
understanding ; otherwise I should become estranged from 
God. 

What was near ® hath become distant, what was distant « 
hath become near for him who accepteth God as He is. 


* Such good actions should be performed as shall ensure man 
against being born again. 

* That is, obtain the great boon of Unswerving faith. 

* The mind. 

* Chakr khal is here understood to be the mind and the five senses, 
not the six mystical divisions of the body. 

® The deadly sins are meant. • God. 



■ KAMR ’9 HYMNS 165 

As sharbat made sugar— ordy he wh<y' drinksth it 

knoweth its flavour, 

O Thou devoid of qualities, is there any discriminating 
parson to whom I may speak of Thee ? 

Saith Kabir, only he who applieth the spiritual fuse 
seeth the blast. 

Heaven described by negatives. 


XLVIII 

There (with God) is no rainy season, no ocean, no sun- 
shine, no shade ; there is no creation and no destruction ; 

No life, no death ; nor are sorrow and joy felt ; nor is 
there either retirement or contemplation — 

A description of celestial rest would be impossible and 
peculiar to itself — 

There nothing is ■yyeighed in the balance, and nothing is 
exhausted ; there is nothing light, nothing heavy. 

There are no nether or upper regions, neither night nor 
day ; 

There is no water, wind, or fire ; the True Guru is there 
contained. 

Inaccessible and inapprehensible, He dwelleth uninter- 
ruptedly in everything ; 

He is found by the favour of the guru. 

Saith Kabir, I am a sacrifice to my guru ; may I remain 
attached to his society ! 


Human life under the allegory of an ox and his 
burden. 


XLIX 


With merits and demerits an ox is purchased ; ^ life 
appeareth as the capital ; * 

In this way a herd is purchased ; ® covetousness which 
filleth man’s heart is as a sack on the ox's back. 

So potent a master is my God 


^ The soul enters a human body. 

® To earn further merits or demerits. 
® The mass of mankihd are born. 



i66 BHAGATS OF THE O^ANTH SAHIB 


Who made the whole world dealers.^ 

Lust and wrath are both tax-gatherers ; * the whims of 
the mind are highway robbers. 

The herd, which spring from the five elements, pay the 
tax,* and are saved. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O saints, this is nowthe state of things— 
One ox ^ hath grown weary of travelling the steep road, 
and dropping his sack, proceedeth on his journey.® 

The world under the allegory of a well, human 
life under that of a well-rope. 

L 

A woman hath four days in her father’s house ; she 
must then go to her father-in-law’s — 

The blind, the stupid, and the silly know not this — 

The bride with her sarhi round her is ready to go ; 

The guests arrive ; her husband hath come to take her 
home.® 

^ Who gave every one life as his capital. 

^ They subject the soul to punishment. 

* Are punished by the god of death. 

^ KabTr himself, who obtained salvation while alive. 

® The following is an alternative translation of this very difficult 
hymn. A friend of Kabir suggested to him to speculate in bullocks. 
They could at the time be purchased cheap, and Kabir could after- 
wards sell them at a profit, and thus provide himself with funds 
for the entertainment of holy men. Kabir replied : — 

Men have purchased the bullocks of their bodies with bad and good 
acts, the breath of life is their capital. 

Desires are packed in the sack of the heart, and thus are the good 
and evil produced by which oxen are purchased. 

Our God is such a head of the firm that He hath made the whole 
world His traders. 

Both lust and wrath become tax-gatherers, and mental vagaries high- 
way robbers. 

The man who associateth with the elect who know God, payeth 
the tax and his ox crosseth over. 

Saith Kabir, hear O ye saints, it hath now come to this with roe. 
That in scaling the pass of divine knmvledge one ox at least hath 
cast away his sack of desires and proceeded on his journey, 

® In the East, as still among the peasant classes in Ireland, women 
are allowed to remain sometime after marriage with their parents. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


167 

Who is that we see letting down the rope into the well ? 

When the rope breaketh by the weight of the watefr-pot, 
the water-drawer departeth. 

If the Lord be compassionate and show mercy, woman 
shall settle her affairs ; . 

She is known as a happy wife who pondereth on the 
guru’s instructions. 

All men bound by their acts transmigrate ; attentively 
consider this. 

Why blame woman ? what can the poor creature do ? 

Without hope she departeth ; she hath not the firmness 
of faith in her heart. 

Cling to the feet of God, and flee to His asylum, O Kabir. 

It is the truly pious and not the Jogis or Hindu 
sectaries who shall be saved. 

LI 

The Jogi says that jog and nothing else is good and 
sweet ; 

They who shave their bodies, and the Ekshabdis, say 
that they alone have obtained perfection. 

Without God thou art lost in error, O blind one ; 

They to whom I go to release myself, are themselves 
bound by many toils. 

You call yourselves pandits, virtuous, brave, generous, 
and assert that you alone are great ; 

It is only when this pride of yours is forgotten that you 
shall be absorbed in Him from whom you sprang. 

Only he understandeth whom Thou, O God, causest to 
understand ; how can man obtain permanence without 
understanding ? 

When the true guru is found, darkness is dispelled ; in 
this way the gem ^ is obtained. 

Lay aside the sins of thy left hand and thy right ; ® take 
firm hold of God’s feet. 

Then comes the mukalawa or ‘ hauling home ’. The meaning here is 
that Death takes away his victim. 

1 God’s name. * Thy besetting sins. 



zS8 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Kabdr, if a dumb man eat molassesi what can he 
say if questioned ? 

The following was composed by Kabir on the 
death of a Jogi : — 

LII 

Where there was something there is nothing ; iky body of 
five elements is no more. 

What availeth thee now the suspension of thy breath in 
the left and right nostrils and their junction ? 

The string ® is broken, thy brain destroyed ; whither 
hath thy speech gone ? 

I feel this anxiety night and day ; who will explain and 
ease my mind ? 

Thy body is no longer in the world ; thy creative mind is 
no more. 

The Joiner dwelleth ever separate from the world ; say 
who else hath this power ? 

If I try to join the elements of the body, I cannot join them ; 
if / try to separate them, they will not be separated until 
they perish. 

Who hath a master ? who hath a servant ? who waiteth 
on any one else ? ® 

Saith Kabir, my attention is directed to that place where 
God dwelleth night and day ; 

His secret He Himself fully knoweth ; He is ever im- 
perishable. 

Kabir was advised to become a J ogi ; the following 
was his reply : — 

LIII 

Meditation and remembrance of God are my two ear- 
rings, independence of the world my patched coat ; 

Dwelling in a silent cave my devotional posture, the 
abandonment of worldly desires my sect. 

He cannot describe his sensations. In the same way a man who 
has obtained God will be silent with pleasure. 

• Thy life has departed. 

* The meaning apparently is, that there are no earthly masters or 
servants, and that man should only acknowledge God as his Master. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 169 

My king,^ I am a Jogi without temporal love ; I repine 
not at death and separation. t 

In the regions of the universe I find my horn ; the whole 
world, which I hold as ashes, is my wallet ; 

Riddance of the three qualities and release from the world 
are my contemplative attitude. 

1 have made my heart and breath the two gourds of my 
lyre^ and unbroken attention on God its frame. 

The strings are strong and break not ; the lyre playeth 
spontaneously ; 

On hearing it the perfect are enraptured, and I no longer 
feel the swaying of worldly love. 

Saith Kabir, the soul which hath played in this way shall 
not be born again. 

The body under the allegory of a full piece of 
cloth 

LIV 

Reason went to the soul to order a body to be woven — 

Let a full piece of nine yards, ten yards, and twenty-one 
yards be woven 

Let there be sixty threads, nine joinings, and seventy- 
two cross threads ® added ; 

The weaver ^ then cometh, leaving his last abode 

Is not the body measured by yards, weighed by weight, 
and starched by two and a half sers of flour ? ® 

^ Applied respectfully to the Jogi. 

2 A full piece of - cloth generally measures forty yards. The nine 
yards mean the nine apertures of the body; the ten yards, the ten 
organs of action and perception ; and the twenty-one yards, the five 
subtle elements, the five gross elements, the ten breaths of the body, 
and the mind. The twenty-one yards may also be the twenty-one 
vertebrae of some Indian anatomists. The whole forty make up the 
body which, in weaver's parlance, is compared to a full piece of cloth. 

® The sixty threads are supposed to be sixty blood-vessels, though 
Indian anatomists count one hundred and seventy-five blood-vessels 
altogether. The nine sections are the four pieces of the legs, the four 
of the arms, and the head ; and the seventy-two cross threads are 
seventy-two chambers of the body according to the Jogis. 

^ The soul leaves its last abode, and takes possession of a new body. 

® One ser of the present standard ; as much as a man can eat daily 
is said to be applied as starch to the tissues of his body. 



170 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Hithie body obtain hot starch quickly, it will qtiarrel and 
destroy its abode.^ 

0 hmn, how many days are there for thee to sit idly ? 
When shalt thou, who art adverse to the Lord, again have 
the present opportunity ? 

The vessels 2 and the wetted bobbins shall fall to pieces, 
and the weaver depart in anger ; 

Thread cometh not out of an empty bobbin,^ and the 
cloth will not remain wound around the beam. 

0 wretched man, abide in the world, but renounce dis- 
play — Kabir giveth thee this advice.^ 

^ And then the soul and body shall separate. 

2 Kunda is an earthen pan which holds water to wet the thread. 
The thread, when wetted, is put into the bobbins. Here, kunda is 
understood to mean worldly possessions. 

2 No breath issueth from the throat after death. 

^ The following is an alternative translation of this most difficult 
hymn. Some pandits spoke contemptuously of Kabir's social position 
and said it was gross impudence on the part of a weaver to dare 
mention God’s name. Kabir replied, that every one must be a weaver 
in a mystical sense in order to gain salvation. The pandits inquired 
how all men could become weavers. Kabir explained : — 

The weaver’s wife (reason) went to her spouse (the mind) to have a 
piece woven, 

But the weaver was always leaving his home. 

Kabir was then asked how he could compare the body to a piece of 
cloth. He replied : — 

It consisteth of nine yards, ten yards, and twenty-one yards. 

Sixty threads of the warp, nin^ joinings, sixty-two cross threads. 

Is not the body measured by yards, weighed by weight, and starched 
by two and a half sers of flour } 

If the body obtain not starch quickly, its spouse (the mind) will 
quarrel. 

When shall such an opportunity come again ? The days of life soon 
end and the soul departeth. 

Thou must leave thy pans and thy wet bobbins, and the soul will 
depart in anger. 

Thread issueth not from the empty bobbin, and the cloth will not 
remain wound round the beam. 

Saith the mind to reason^ O wretched one, leave off this wrangling, 
abide with me here ; Kabir hath given this explanation. 



KABIR’S HYMNS : 171 


The light of God has an affinity for the lighft of 
man. . 


LV 


Can one light which is absorbed in another be separated 
from it ? 

May that man burst and die in whose heart the name 
of God springeth not up ! 

Dark and beautiful God, my soul is attached to Thee. 

When a holy man is found, supernatural perfection is 
obtained ; this is both union with God and worldly enjoy- 
ment. 

When two, the guru and the disciple, meet by means of 
God’s name, the disciple's business is accomplished.^ 

People think this is a song ; it is a meditation on God, 

Like the instruction given to men at Banaras when they 
are on the point of death. 

He who attentively heareth or singeth God’s name, 

Saith Kabir, shall certainly obtain the supreme state at 
last. 


Salvation can only be obtained by true devotion. 


LVI 

However great man’s exertions without God's name, he 
shall be drowned in the terrible ocean and not cross over. 

Thou hast practised thy religious duties and great austeri- 
ties, yet pride consumeth thy soul. 

Why hast thou forgotten the Lord who is the Giver of 
life and food ? 

Human birth is a priceless diamond or ruby ; thou hast 
lost it for a kauri. 

Not having thought of God in thy heart, thou sufferest 
from the thirst of covetousness and the hunger of error ; 

The intoxication of pride deceiveth those who keep not 
the word of the guru in their hearts. 

Sinful are they who are led away by pleasure, who are 

^ Also translated — {a) When both meet, this work is accomplished, 
namely, an alliance with Him whose name is God. {b) Both 
blessings result from meeting God or obtaining His name. 



172 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

tempted by sensual delights, and who enjoy the savour of 
wine. 

They who by destiny keep the company of the saints, 
float over like iron attached to timber. 

Through error I have wandered among human and lower 
births ; I am now weary and overspent with travail. 

Saith Kabir, on meeting the guru / have felt great joy, 
and my love and devotion have saved me. 

The deceits of the world. 

LVII 

Like the semblance of a female elephant, O foolish man, 
the Lord of the world made this play.^ 

The elephant impelled by the sweets of love is captured, 
O foolish man, and his head hath to endure the goad. 

Flee from evil passions, attach thyself to God ; heed this 
advice, O foolish man. 

Why dost thou not, O foolish man, fearlessly worship 
God, and take possession of His ship ? ® 

The monkey stretcheth out his hand, O foolish man, and 
taketh a handful of corn ; ® 

He is anxious to escape, O foolish man, but he shall be 
made to dance at the door of every house. 

As the parrot is caught by a trap,* O foolish man, so is 
man by worldly occupations.® 

As the fleeting dye of the safflower, O foolish man, so 
hath this world been shown. 

^ The play of the world. A likeness of a female elephant is made 
out of cardboard to catch wild elephants. They are allured by the 
likeness to the verge of a pit into which they fall and are secured. 

* To float thee over the terribje ocean of the world. 

* Monkeys are caught by putting dry grain into a vessel and 
partially burying it in the earth. The monkey puts in his hand, and 
fills it with grain. He is then caught, not having wit enough to open 
his fingers and let go his grasp. So, too, if man would abandon his 
vices, he would be saved. 

* The nalm is a contrivance made, of bamboo put over water. 
When the parrot perches on it, it revolves, and the bird’s body is 
below it and immediately over the water. The parrot clings to the 
nalni so as to avoid falling into the water, and is thus caught. 

® Literally — this is Miya’s doing. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 173 

There are many places for ablutions, O foolish man, and 
many gods to worship. 

Saith Kabif, thou shalt not be saved by means of these, 
0 foolish man ; thou shalt be saved by the worship of God. 

A raja offered temporal wealth to Kabir. The 
following was his reply — 


LVIII 

Lay up for yourselves the wealth of God’s name, which 
fire will not burn, which hot winds will not dry up. 

And which thieves will not approach ; that wealth shall 
never depart. 

My wealth is God, the Supporter of the earth ; He is 
the real wealth. 

The pleasure obtained from the service of God is not to 
be found in regal statp < 

Shiv and the four sons of Brahma in their search for 
this wealth abandoned the world. 

He in whose heart is God and on whose tongue is God, 
falleth not into Death’s noose. 

The guru’s private wealth of divine knowledge and devo- 
tion is like water to the thirsty, like a prop to the fickle 
mind ; 

The minds of those on whom He bestoweth it, conceive 
good resolutions, and their doubts, entanglements, and fears 
depart. 

Saith Kabir, O you who are intoxicated with wealth, 
reflect in your hearts and understand this. 

In your mansions are hundreds of thousands and millions 
of horses and elephants ; in mine is the one God. 


The love of worldly things leads men to damna- 
tion. 


LIX 


A monkey through greed will not let go the pulse in his 
hand. 

Man is responsible for acts done through greed. 

Without devotion to God human life passeth in vain. 



174 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

' Without assodation with the saints and worship of : God, 
truth nowhere abideth. 

As the flowers of the desert bloom, and no one enjoyeth. 
their odour. 

So men wander idly in many births, and Death destroyeth 
them again and again. 

God hath given wealth, youth, sons, and women fair to 
view ; 

By these man, prompted by the senses, becometh arrested 
and entangled. 

The body is a house of grass, life’s end the fire which 
assaileth it on every side, 

Saith Kabir, to cross over the terrible ocean I have taken 
the shelter of the true guru. 

A brief account of the process of procreation. 

LX 

There is dirty water and white earth ; 

From this earth a puppet is made. 

I am nothing and I have nothing ; 

My body, my wealth, all that is dear to me is- Thine, O 
God— 

Into this earth breath is infused. 

And forcibly setteth the false contrivance in motion. 

Such and such a person may have accumulated five lakhs 
of treasure. 

But at ^st his pitcher bursteth.^ 

Saith Kabir, the sole foundation thou hast laid 

Shall be destroyed in a moment, O thou proud one. 

By devotion to God through the guru Kabir has 
obtained salvation. 

LXI 

O my soul, repeat God’s name 

As did Dhru and Prahlad of old. 

O Thou compassionate to the poor, my reliance is on 
Thee. 


^ The body dies. 



: KABIJR’S HYMNS i 175 

I have therefore embarked all my family oai the guru's 
raft. 

If it please God He will have His order obeyed, 

And cause this raft to float over. 

By the favour of the guru such knowledge hath filled me 

That all my transmigration is at an end. 

Saith Kabir, worship God ; 

In this world and the next, everywhere, it is He alone 
who knoweth.^ 

The soul having obtained a human body has 
obtained its last chance of salvation. 

LXII 

When man leaveth the womb and cometh into the world, 

As soon as the air touche th him, he forgetteth his Master — 

O my soul, sing God’s praises ! 

When thou didst penance reversed in the womb. 

Thou didst escape its fire. 

Having wandered through the eighty-four lakhs of 
existences, 

If thou stumble now, thou shalt find nor house nor home. 

Saith Kabir, worship God 

Who is not seen coming or going, and who knoweth all 
things. 

Think not of heaven or hell, of prosperity or 
adversity ; leave everything to God. 

LXIII 

Long not for a dwelling in heaven, and fear not to dwell in 
hell ; 

What will be, will be ; O my soul, hope not at aU. 

Sing the praises of God from whom the supreme reward is 
obtained. 

What is devotion, what penance and austerities, what 
fasting and ablutions. 

Unless thou know the way to love and serve God ? 

^ The verse is also translated — I deem this world and the next all 
the same. 



176 BHAGATS OF tHE GRANTH SAHIB 

Be not glad at the sight of prosperity and grieve not at 
the sight of adversity ; 

As is prosperity so is adversity; what God proposeth shall 
be accomplished. 

Saith Kabir, through the saints I now know in my heart 

That the worshipper in whose heart God dwelleth, fer- 
formeth the best worship. 

Commit not sin for the sake of thy relations or 
others and mourn not for them. 

LXIV 

0 my soul, thou hast no helper ; drag not the weight of 
others' sins behind thee. 

As a bird percheth on a tree, such is the world.^ 

1 have drunk the elixir of God 

By which other elixirs are forgotten. 

Since we are not permanent ourselves, why should we 
mourn the death of others ? 

Whatever is born perisheth ; why should we be sorry and 
weep for that ? 

When man become th attached to holy men, he drinketh 
God's elixir, and is devoted to Him from whom he hath 
sprung. 

Saith Kabir, I have thought of God in my heart ; resign- 
ing the world remember Him. 

Kabir longs for God as a loving wife for her 
absent spouse. 

LXV 

Woman with her eyes filled with tears and heaving sighs 
awaiteth her lord ; 

Her heart is not happy ; she retraceth not her steps in 
the hope of seeing him. 

Why fliest thou not away, O black raven,* so that I may 
quickly meet my beloved ? 

^ Temporary or transitory. 

* If a raven come to a woman’s casement when her husband is 
absent, she says ‘ Fly away, O raven.’ If it fly away in obedience to 
her order, it is an omen that her husband will soon return. Here 
the word raven is understood to mean man’s evil passions. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 177 

Saith Kabir, perform God’s service to obtain the dignity of 
eternal life ; 

The name of God is the one support ; repeat it with thy 
tongue. 

There are many excellences in the body ; God 
resides within it and Kabir is delighted to behold 
Him. 

LXVI 

There are many shrubs of sweet basil ; near and within 
them is the village of Barsana.^ 

The milkmaid Radha on seeing Krishan*s beauty became 
enamoured : ‘ Leave me not ; go not hither and thither. 

‘ My heart is attached to thy feet ; O holder of the bow, 
very fortunate is she who meeteth thee.’ 

Enchanting is Bindraban where the fascinating Krishan 
grazed his kine. 

Since thou art my Lord, O holder of the bow, Kabir (great) 
is my name. 

Vain is the devotion of anchorets and idolaters. 

LXVII 

How many wear the bark of trees as clothes, but what 
availeth it to dwell in the forest ? 

What availeth it to man to offer incense to idols ? What 
to drench his body with ablutions ? 

O my soul, I know that thou shalt depart ; 

0 silly one, think of thy fall.^ 

Wheresoever I look, I see none but those who are en- 
tangled in worldly love ; 

Men of divine knowledge and meditation, great preachers 
are all engrossed in this world’s affairs. 

Saith Kabir, without the name of the one God this world 
is blinded by mammon. 

1 In the neighbourhood of Mathura and Bindraban. The original 
has Banlras, but the word does not suit the context. Bam ras goon 
is also read — In the midst of them is made an excellent village. 

2 A biga/ means descent, but the word may also here mean God, from 
the Sanskrit avyakt, imperceptible, transcendental, 

N 


SIKH. VI 



178 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Fearlessly worship God. 

LXVIII 

O man, victim of mammon, abandon doubt, come forth 
and dance.^ 

Doth a hero dread the conflict of the battle-field, doth 
a sati collect utensils when she is about to die ? 

Cease to waver, O foolish man ; 

Now that thou hast taken the red lead^ in thy hand, 
burn and die, and obtain perfection. 

The world is ruined by being absorbed in lust, wrath, and 
mammon. 

Saith Kabir, forsake not the sovereign God who is the 
highest of all the high. 

Kabir places himself altogether in God^s power. 

LXIX 

Thy commands are acceptable to pien ; I consider not 
their propriety. 

Thou art the river. Thou art the pilot, from Thee is salva- 
tion. 

O man, embrace the service of God, 

Whether He be angry with thee or love thee. 

Thy name, 0 God, is my support, as a woman rejoice th on 
beholding her son.^ 

Saith Kabir, I am the slave of Thy house, preserve me 
or destroy me. 

A homily against the worship of Krishan. 

LXX 

Nand^ became very weary wandering through the wombs 
of the eighty-four lakhs of existences ; 

^ Scorn the opinion of the world. 

2 It was the custom for a sati on the pyre to take some vermilion 
paint {sindur) in her hand, make a tilak on her forehead with it, then 
apply it to the foreheads of the bystanders and sprinkle it on them. 
After this ceremony she might not change her mind and must die. 
The sindiir is generally carried in the rind of a coco-nut and is employed 
at marriages. Its use at the concremation of widows was emblematic 
of a second marriage to which death is likened. 

* Also translated — As a flower bloometh in the water. 

^ The adoptive father of Krishan. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 179 

Through his devotion Krishan became incarnate ; great 
was the poor man’s good fortune. 

You who say that God was the son of Nand, whose son 
was Nand ? 

When the earth and the firmament and the ten quarters 
of the world were not, then where was this Nand ? 

He whose name is the Bright One falleth not into trouble, 
and undergoeth not birth. 

Kabir’s Master is such a Lord as hath neither father nor 
mother. 

Kabir hails slander to preserve his humility and 
lead him to God. 

LXXI 

•Slander, slander me, ye people, slander ! 

Slander is right pleasing to God's servant. 

Slander is my father, slander my mother ; ^ 

If I am slandered and store in my heart 

The wealth of God’s name, I shall go to heaven. 

If I am slandered my heart becometh pure. 

The slanderer washeth my clothes for me.^ 

He who slandereth me is my friend ; 

My heart goeth out to the slanderer ; 

He is the slanderer who preventeth my being slandered. 

The slanderer desireth long life for me ; 

I bear love and affection to him who slandereth me ; 

Slander effecteth my salvation. 

To God’s servant, Kabir, slander is the best thing ; 

The slanderer is lost, I am saved. 

Kabir feels that he has parted with egoism and 
become absorbed in God. 

LXXII 

O sovereign God, Thou art very fearless ; Thou art a raft 
to save the world, 0 God. 

When I was proud. Thou weft not in me ; now that Thou 
art in me I am not proud. 

^ Is dear to me as my father and mother. 

2 That is, he takes my impurity on himself. 

N 2 



i8o BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Now Thou and I have become one ; seeing that we are 
both one, my mind is satisfied. 

When there is worldly wisdom, how can there be spiritual 
strength ? 

Now I have spiritual wisdom, but no bodily strength. 

Saith Kabir, God hath taken away my worldly wisdom, and 
instead of it I have obtained perfection. 

The human body under the allegory of a house. 

LXXIII 

The Creator made the six mystical chambers ^ into a house, 
and in it He put a peerless thing ; ® 

Without delay He made divine knowledge its key, spiritual 
ignorance its lock, and life its watchman. 

Now, my brother, let thy mind remain awake ; 

Through carelessness thou hast lost thy human life ; thy 
house is being robbed by thieves.® 

Thy five senses stand as sentinels at the gate, but they 
cannot be trusted. 

Carefully think of God, and thou shalt obtain the light of 
divine knowledge. 

If woman go astray through only heeding the body of 
nine apertures, she shall not obtain the peerless thing — 
God’s name. 

Saith Kabir, thieves may plunder the body of nine aper- 
tures ; God's spirit dwelleth in the tenth. 

Kabir obtained perfection and complete faith on 
meeting the guru. 

LXXIV 

O mother, I know none beside God ; 

My soul dwelleth in that God whose praises Shiv and the 
sons of Brahma sing. 

^ The six mystical chambers of the body are — Muladhara, the 
parts about the pubis; Swadhshihanam, or vaabi^ciA region; Mani- 
pur am, or pit of the stomach or epigastrium ; An&hatam, the root of 
the nose; Visuddham, the hollow between the frontal sinuses; and 
Ajny&khyam, the fontcnelle or union of the coronal and sagittal 
sutures. * The soul. * Thy evil passions. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


i8i 


On meeting the guru enlightenment and divine knowledge 
entered my heart, and I meditated on God in my brain ; 

The disease of the deadly sins, fear, and worldly entangle- 
ments fled away, and my soul knew happiness in itself. 

Imbued with devotiop I know and obey the one God, and 
think of none beside. 

Having abandoned the pride of my heart, my soul is 
perfumed with the perfume of- sandal. 

God dwelleth in him who hath sung and meditated on 
His praises. 

Very fortunate are they in whose heart He dwelleth, and 
distinguished is the destiny recorded on their foreheads. 

I have destroyed Maya,^ divine knowledge is kindled in 
my heart, and I have become absorbed in the one God. 

Saith Kabir, on meeting the guru I have felt great 
comfort ; my mind hath ceased to wander and is happy. 

Kabir’s Acrostic 

I 

Everything connected with the three worlds is contained 
in the fifty-two letters ; 

These letters shall perish, but He who is beyond letters is 
not in them. 

2 

Where there is speech, there letters are used ; 

Where there is no speech there no mind abideth. 

God is contained both where there is speech and where 
there is not ; 

Nobody appeareth like unto Him.* 

3 

If I obtain God, what shall I say ? and if I say anything, 
what kindness do I show God, 

^ Shakti Shiv. Literally — the energy of Shiv; but Shiv may 
also be a separate word, meaning bliss or happiness, and the next 
clause of the verse would then be translated — happiness was being 
kindled in my heart, and God naturally appeared to me. 

* Also translated — No one knows Him as He is. 



i 82 bhagats of the granth sahib 


Who is diffused through the three worlds as well as in the 
tiny seed of the banyan-tree ? ^ 

4 

For him who hath obtained God, and knoweth to some 
extent God’s secret, the difference between God and himself 
hath disappeared. 

God’s secret penetrated my heart when it turned away 
from the world', and I have obtained Him who is Indestructible 
and Impenetrable. 

5 

The Musalmans accept the Tariqat ; the Hindus the Veds 
and Purans ; but for me the books of both religions are useless. 

A man ought to study divine knowledge to some extent 
to instruct his heart. 

6 

I know the one God who was in the beginning ; 

I do not believe in what can be written and erased. 
Whoever beholdeth the one God, 

Becometh as God, and shall not pass away. 

7 

K. When the rays of divine knowledge fall on the lotus of 
the heart, 

It closeth not even at the rising of the moon ; ^ 

And if man obtain the sweetness of that flower. 

He would grow mute in describing it, yea, to whom 
could he explain it ? 

8 

KH. My mind hath entered God’s cave ; ® 

It leaveth it not to wander in every direction. 

He who, knowing the Master, practiseth resignation. 
Shall become imperishable, and obtain the imperishable 
dignity. 

^ Also translated — He whose expansion the three worlds are, is 
contained in the tiny seed of the banyan-tree, 

‘ Once a man has obtained divine knowledge he is not again 
subject to spiritual ignorance. 

^ Has become attached to God. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


183 


9 

G. They who understand the guru’s instruction, 

Lend their ears to nothing else. 

He who graspeth the Ungraspable,^ and having grasped 
Him keepeth Him in his brain, 

Shall abide wealthless as a bird, and wander nowhere. 

10 

GH. God’s dwelling is in every heart ; 

Even though the heart break, God is never thereby 
diminished. 

When man findeth a way to God in his heart. 

Why should he leave that way and follow a difficult 
one ? 

11 

NG. Grasp the love of God, dismiss doubts. 

Even though thou see no way to God, flee not away ; 
this is the highest ‘cleverness. 

12 

CH. God painted the great picture of the world ; 

Dismiss the picture, and think of the Painter. 

This painted picture is an abode of strife ; 

Dismiss the picture, and keep thy mind on the Painter. 

13 

CHH. God the Lord of the umbrella is near ; 

Why dost thou not abandon desires and be happy ? 

O man, I admonish thee every moment ; 

Why dost thou leave God and entangle thyself with the 
world ? 

14 

J. If a man burn his body alive. 

And efface his youth, he shall find the right way. 

When man burneth the wealth of this and the next 
world,® 

He shall then proceed and obtain God's bright light. 

1 God. 

® When man only thinks of God, and not of rewards in this or the 
next world. 



i 84 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

15 

JH. Thou art entangled with the world, and knowest not 
how to disentangle thyself ; 

Thou shrinkest back, and art not accepted of God. 

Why talk nonsense trying to convince others ? 

Since thou stirrest up controversy, controversy thou 
shalt have. 

16 

NY. Since God dwelleth near thee in thy heart, why leave 
Him and go far to find Him ? ^ 

Him for whom thou searchest the world, thou shalt find 
near thee. 

T. . The difficult way to God is in man’s heart. 

Why open not the doors of thine understanding, and 
repair to His court ? 

There shalt thou behold the Immovable One, and thou 
shalt not move elsewhere. 

Thou shalt remain attached to God, and thy heart shall 
be glad. 

18 

TH. Keep the world, which is a deceitful mirage, at a 
distance — 

I have with difficulty rendered my mind patient — 

The cheat which cheated and devoured the whole world 

I have myself cheated, and my mind is now at ease. 

^9 

D. When the fear of God is produced, all other fears depart ; 

All other fears are absorbed in that fear. 

If man reject the fear of God, then he hath fear of man ; 

When he no longer feareth man, the fears of his heart 
flee away. 

20 

DH. Search for God near thee ; why search elsewhere ? 

While searching for Him elsewhere life departeth. 

When I ascended the mountain to search for Him, and 
returned home disappointed, 

^ Why lead the life of an anchoret in the forest. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 185 

I found Him in the fortress^ which He Himself had 
made. 

21 

N. The life of him is accounted happy 

Who, though surrounded in the battle-field, standeth 
fast like a man,^ 

Who doth not quail or retreat,® 

But killeth the opposing chief, upon which his army 
fleeth away.^ 

22 

T. The world is unfordable ; it cannot be forded. 

My soul is absorbed in the Lord of the three worlds. 

If the Lord of the three worlds enter into my heart. 

My soul shall blend with Him, and I shall find the True 
One. 

23 

TH. The Unfathomable cannot be fathomed. 

God is unfathomable ; this body shall not abide for ever. 
Though man’s span of life be brief, he beginneth to build 
many a mansion ® — 

But can mansions be supported without pillars ? 

24 

D. Everything we see is perishable ; 

Meditate on Him who is Unseen. 

When thou appliest the key of divine knowledge to the 
tenth gate. 

Thou shalt then behold the merciful One. 

25 

DH. Everything is settled when the soul blendeth with 
God 

Who dwelleth in earth and heaven. 

When the soul leaving earth goeth to heaven, 

The soul and God shall meet and happiness be obtained. 

^ My body. 

® Happy are they who are victorious over their evil passions. 

® The gyanis generally translate capitulate. 

^ When the heart is subdued, the evil passions flee away. 

® Man's ambition is too great for the brief span of his life. 



i86 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

26 

N. Man’s nights and days pass away waiting for God ; 

His eyes grow blood-shot by such waiting. 

When man findeth God after long waiting, 

He who waiteth is blended with Him who is waited for. 

27 

P. The Boundless One hath no bounds ; 

I am gladdened with the Supreme Light ; 

I have controlled the five senses, 

And relinquished all idea of demerits and merits. 

28 

PH. Fruit is produced without the blossom ; ^ 

If any one looked at a section ® of that fruit. 

And reflected on it, he would not contract duality. 
That section of fruit shall destroy all bodies.® 

29 

B. Blend drop with drop,^ 

When drop is blended with dr op, both cannot beseparated. 
Let man, becoming God's servant, embrace His service. 
And He becoming a friend will take caie of His ser- 
vant. 

30 

BH. Remove the difference between thyself and God, and 
thou shalt be united with Him ; 

Then shall thy fear be shattered, and thou shalt gain 
confidence. 

Him whom I thought without me I now find within me : 
When I found this secret, I recognized the Lord of the 
world. 

* If God pleases, divine knowledge may be obtained without effort. 

* Phank, a natural division of fruit as seen, for instance, in the 
orange. 

* Shall remove all transmigration. It is believed that bodies are 
made for the soul, but, when the soul is absorbed in God, bodies will 
of course not be necessary for it. 

* Blend ihy soul with God. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


187 


31 

M. He who graspeth the First Principle,^ shall be happy at 
heairt ; 

He who is in this secret knoweth his own mind. 

Let no one delay to attach his heart to God ; 

He who obtaineth the True One shall be immersed in 
delight. 

32 

M. Man’s business is with his heart ; he who chasteneth it 
obtaineth perfection. 

Kabir communeth with his heart, ‘ I have found nothing 
like thee, 0 my heart ! ’ 

33 

This heart is power ; this mind is God ; ® 

This heart is the life of the five elements of the body. 

If man restrain his heart and remain in a state of ex- 
altation,® 

He can tell the secrets of the three worlds. 

34 

Y. If thou know anything, destroy thine evil propensities 
and conquer the citadel of the body ; 

Thou who art surrounded by foes in battle and fleest not 
away, shalt be called a. hero. 

35 

R. He knoweth the real pleasure, who spurneth the pleasures 
of this world ; 

Having spumed the pleasures of the world he recog- 
nizeth the Real Pleasure ; 

When he abandoneth the former, he obtaineth the latter ; 
And when he quaffeth the latter, the former please him 
not. 

1 God. 

® Even Shiv and his consort are not superior to the human intellect 
which decides on the worship of one God. 

® Unman. The gySnis generally translate this word — to turn away 
from the world and direct one's thoughts to God. 



i88 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


36 

L. O man, so apply thy heart to God, 

That thou mayest not go elsewhere, but obtain the 
primal True One. 

If thou heartily love Him, 

Thou shalt obtain Him, and, obtaining Him, become 
absorbed in His feet. 

37 

W. Every moment remember God ; 

Remember God and defeat shall not come to thee. 

I am a sacrifice to those who sing the praises of the sons 
of Godi; 

He who meeteth God shall obtain all truth. 

38 

W. Know God ; by knowing Him thou shalt become as He. 
When the soul and God are blended, no one can dis- 
tinguish them. 

39 

S. Carefully strive to know Him ; 

Restrain every thought which allureth the heart. 

When love for God springeth up, there is mental happi- 
ness. 

And the Lord of the three worlds will fill thy heart. 

40 

RH. He who searcheth. 

He who searcheth for God shall not return. 

He who searcheth and knoweth God by meditation. 
Shall cross over the terrible ocean without delay. 

41 

SH. She who dispelleth all doubts of her spouse's affection 
for her, 

Shall adorn his bed. 

She resigneth a little comfort and obtaineth the highest 
gratification. 

Then is she justly styled a wife and he a husband. 

^ Bhhantana, an equivalent of the Persian ahl-i-khuda — sons of 
God, saints. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 189 

42 

H. God existeth, but the spiritually ignorant know not of 
His existence. 

From the moment man knoweth that God existeth his 
heart is satisfied. 

God certainly doth exist, if any one could see Him ; 
But in that case God alone would exist, and man exist 
not at all. 


43 

Everybody goeth about saying, ‘ I will take this, and 
I will take that.’ 

They therefore feel great sorrow when they are dis- 
appointed. 

He who fixeth his attention on God, 

Shall obtain all happiness and his sorrows shall depart. 

44 

KSH. How many have pined away and perished ! 

But, despite such destruction, man will not even now 
think of God. 

If any one even now know that the world is fleeting and 
restrain his heart. 

He shall obtain an abiding place with Him from whom 
he is separated. 

45 

The Pandits have in another way joined the fifty-two 
letters. 

But they cannot recognize one letter.^ 

Kabir uttereth the word of the True One — 

He is a pandit who abideth without fear — 

To join letters ^ is the business of the Pandits ; 

To meditate on God is the business of the holy man. 
Saith Kabir, man will understand which to do 
According to his intelligence. 

^ They cannot recognize the Imperishable One {Akshar), a play on 
the Sanskrit word. 

^ To write essays and theological disquisitions. 



190 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir’s calendar is arranged according to lunar 
days. The lunar month has thirty days. Fifteen 
of them are called shudi, the light half, and the other 
fifteen wadi, the dark half of the month. In this 
composition, however, sixteen days are counted. 

Kabir’s Lunar Days 

I 

There are fifteen lunar days and seven week days. 

Saith Kabir, they have no limits.^ 

The Strivers and Sidhs who know their secrets, 

Are creators and gods themselves. 

II ■ 

On the day when there is no moon remove worldly desires ; 

Remember God the Searcher of hearts, 

So shalt thou even in life obtain the gate of salvation, 

And the real word of the Fearless One, which is the essence 
of everything. 

He who loveth God’s lotus feet, 

And is night and day watchful in His praises, becometh 
pure in heart by the favour of the saints. 


On the first day of the moon meditate on the Beloved ; 

'He who cannot be lessened, and who hath no equal, 
sporteth in the heart. 

He who is absorbed in the primal God, 

Shall never suffer the pain of death. 

2 

On the second day know that there are two parts of the 
body, 

Maya and God,* who are contained in everything. 

God doth not increase or diminish ; 

He is unknowable, spotless, and changeless. 

* Literally — they have no hither and thither sides; a metaphor 
from the banks of a river. The meaning is that time has no limits. 

• Matter and spirit. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


191 


3 

On the third day let man apply his mind to God in the 
three states of waking, dreaming, and sleeping^ 

Thus shall he obtain the Root of Joy and the Supreme 
Delight. 

In the company of the saints ariseth the faith in man 
That God's light is ever within and without him. 

4 

On the fourth day restrain thy fickle mind ; 

Never associate with lust and anger. 

God is all in all in sea and land ; 

He repeateth His own praises.® 

5 

On the fifth day know that the world was extended from 
the five elements, 

And that the pursuit of gold and women form its occupa- 
tion. 

Whoever quaffeth the nectar of God's love, 

Shall not again feel the pains of old age and death. 

6 

On the sixth day the mind and the senses run in six 
directions ; 

The mind will not be restrained without the love of God, 
Efface duality and hold fast endurance ; 

Endure not the torture of absurd religious ceremonies. 

7 

On the seventh day know that the Word is true, 

And the Supreme Spirit will hold thee accepted ; 

So shall thy doubts and troubles be effaced, 

And thou shalt obtain happiness in the celestial sea. 

1 Also translated — Let man bring together the ira, pingla, and 
sukhmana. 

® Contained as He is in man. 



iga BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

8 

On the eighth day know that the body is made of eight 
ingredients. 

In it is the Unknowable, the King of great treasures. 
The guru who is versed in divine knowledge discloseth 
the secret 

How man may turn away from the world, and remain 
absorbed in the Infrangible and the Indivisible.^ 

9 

On the ninth day keep watch over the nine gates, 

And restrain thy flowing desires ; 

Forget all covetousness and worldly love, 

And thou shalt eat the immortal fruit and live through all 
ages. 

10 

On the tenth day joy prevaileth in the ten directions ; ^ 
Doubts are dispelled and God is found. 

God is light, the essence of all things, incomparable, 

Pure without a stain ; where He dwelleth is neither shade 
nor sunshine. 

11 

On the eleventh day, if man run in one direction,® 

He shall not again suffer the pain of birth ; 

His heart shall become cool and pure, 

And God, whom men say is distant, he shall find near. 

12 

On the twelfth day let twelve suns ^ arise for thee. 

And day and night trumpets shall play spontaneous 
music. 

1 Also translated— 

When a man meeteth a guru the latter discloseth to him the secret 
of divine knowledge, 

And man turneth away from the world and remaineth absorbed in 
the Infrangible and Indivisible. 

* A Hindi idiom for everywhere. ® Towards God. 

^ The Hindus believe that every monih has a sun of its own. On 
the last day the twelve suns shall shine together and bum the world. 
The twelve suns of the text mean the bright lights of divine knowledge. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


193 


Thou shalt behold the Father of the three worlds ; 

A miracle shall be wrought for thee, and from man thou 
shalt become God. 

On the thirteenth day they who repeat the name of the 
Inaccessible escape transmigration ; 

Know that God is equally diffused below and above. 

God is neither low nor high, in Him is neither honour nor 
dishonour ; 

He is equally contained in all things. 

14 

On the fourteenth day remember that God filleth the 
fourteen worlds, 

And that He dwelleth in every hair of man’s body. 

Meditate on truth and patience. 

And recite the legend of divine knowledge. 

15 

On the day of the full moon the moon is full in the heavens 

And there is gentle light diffused from its beams. ^ 

God is firmly fixed in the beginning, the middle, and the 
end of all things, 

Kabir is absorbed in the ocean of happiness. 

Kabir’s Week Days 

Sing God’s praises all the days of the week : 

On meeting the guru thou shalt obtain God’s secret. 

I 

On Sunday begin Gorf’s service, 

Restrain the desires in the temple of thy body. 

Let man day and night keep his attention on the Infrangible 
One, 

And the lute shall tranquilly play spontaneous music. 

^ Also translated— divisions. The Hindus divide the moon into 
sixteen sections. During the full moon the whole sixteen sections are 
seen. Solah kala sampuran — It is complete in its sixteen divisions. 
The same expression is applied to men of eminent virtue and 
goodness. 


SIKH. VI 


o 



194 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


2 

On Monday nectar trickleth from the moon ; ^ 

When tasted, it is a speedy antidote to all poison ; 

He who drinketh it shall become intoxicated. 

Let thy moixth remain closed to idle converse? 

3 

On Tuesday learn what thou really art ; 

Know how to guard against thine evil passions.® 

Leave not the God who is in thine own home * to wander 
abroad ; 

If thou do, He will be exceeding wroth. 

4 

On Wednesday let man enlighten his understanding. 

So that God’s dwelling may be in the lotus of his heart. 
Let him, on meeting his guru, consider both his soul and 
God as the same. 

And set erect the inverted lotus of his heart.® 

5 

On Thursday let him throw his evil passions into the 
river, 

And consider the three gods of the Hindus the same.® 
Why doth he not day and night wash away his sins 
At the junction where the three rivers meet ? 

6 

On Friday by the practice of endurance man shall attain 
his object. 

^ That is, from the guru. 

2 Literally — let the door of thy speech be locked up. 

® Literally — know the way of the five thieves, that is, the way by 
which they approach. ^ Heart. 

^ Inverted owing to its devotion to the world. 

® Being, as the great God's creatures, equally impotent for good or 
evil. 

’ The ira, pingla, and sukhmana, i. e. by the practice of Jog» 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


195 


By struggling with himself daily, 

And carefully restraining all his five senses, 

He shall never fall into duality. 

7 

On Saturday if man keep strong within him 
The wick of God’s light which shineth in his heart. 

He shall be illumined without and within. 

And all his sins shall be erased. 

8 

Know that as long as man hath duality in his heart. 

He shall not attain God’s court. 

Let him love the omnipresent God, 

And then, saith Kabir, his heart shall be pure. 

Asa 

The first three lines of the following were addressed 
by Kabir to his guru Ramanand. The remainder 
of the hymn contains Ramanand's replies and 
instruction, 

I 

Touching my guru’s feet I bow and ask him why the 
soul was made, 

Why man was born and why he shall perish — tell and 
explain to me. 

O divine one, show mercy to me and put me in the way 
of escaping from worldly entanglements and the fear of 
transmigration. 

The pain of transmigration resulteth from deeds done, 
and happiness cometh when the soul is released from it. - 
Man bursteth not the entanglements of worldly love, and 
therefore is not absorbed in God. 

He knoweth nothing of the rank of nirvan, and so his 
fears are not dispelled.^ ^ 

* Also translated — He is not without fear and hath erred. 

0 2 



196 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The soul is not born, though men think it is ; it is free 
from birth and death.^ 

When the idea of birth and death ^ departeth from man’s 
mind, he shall for ever be absorbed in God. 

As the reflection of an object in a vessel of water blendeth 
with the object when the vessel is broken, 

So, saith Kabir, through virtue doubts flee away, and the 
soul is absorbed in God.^ 


The following is a satire on the Brahmans of 
Banaras : — 


II 


They wear loin-cloths three and a half yards long and 
sacrificial threads of three strands ; 

They carry rosaries on their necks and glittering brass 
utensils in their hands ; 

They should not be called saints of God, but cheats of 
Banaras — 

Such saints are not pleasing to me — 

They gulp down trees with their branches ; 

They scrub their vessels, and put them on fires whose 
wood hath been washed ; ^ 

They dig up the earth, make two fire-places,® and eat 
up men whole I 

Those sinners ever wander in evil deeds, yet they call 
themselves Aparas. 

Ever and ever they wander about in their pride and ruin 
all their families. 

Man is attached to what God hath attached him, and 
his acts correspond. 


^ This line is also translated — The guru’s words make no impres- 
sion on him, he thinketh his own ideas best, he hath no love for God 
and no hate for Maya. 

* Literally — the rising and the setting of the sun. This phrase is 
also translated — when the feeling of joy and sorrow is dispelled. 

^ Kabir means that the soul is the reflection of God, and blends with 
Him when the vessel of the body is broken. 

^ So that impurities in the wood may not remain. 

® One for their bread and another for their lentils. Some strict 
Hindus suppose that a fireplace once used is unclean. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


197 

Saith Kabir, he who meeteth the true guru shall not be 
born again. 

Thanksgiving to God the father. 

ni 

The Father gave me this consolation — 

He made me a comfortable bed and put ambrosia into 
my mouth. 

Why should I forget that Father ? 

When I go to the next world I shall not lose my game.^ 
My mother * is dead, and I am quite happy. 

I do not put on a beggar’s coat ; I feel not the frost. 

I am a sacrifice to that Father who begot me. 

Who put an end to my companionship with the five 
deadly sins, 

Who enabled me to subdue, and trample on them. 

When I remember God, my soul and body are happy. 
My Father is the great Lord of the earth. 

To that Father how shall I go ? 

When I met the true guru, he showed me the way — 
The Father of the world then became dear to my mind ; 
I am Thy son. Thou art my Father ; 

We both live in the same place. 

Saith Kabir, God’s slave knoweth the one God ; 

By the guru’s favour I know everything. 

The central idea of the following is the worship 
of Maya. She is represented in a hideous and 
repulsive guise, her nose having been cut off for 
her infidelity. The first two lines of the hymn 
describe Tantric ceremonies. 

IV 

Into one vessel they put a slaughtered cock, and another 
they fill with liquor. 

Five Jogis sit round, and the noseless queen in the midst. 
The bell of the noseless one resoundeth in both worlds ; 
But some discriminating person cut off thy nose, 0 Maya. 

1 If I remember God. * Maya, or worldly love. 



198 BHAGATS 0F THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The noseless one hath her dwelling everywhere ; she 
killeth every one and looketh out for more. 

‘ I am,’ saith she, ‘ the sister and niece of all ; ^ I am the 
handmaiden of him ’who weddeth me.^ 

My husband is very wise and calleth himself a saint.* 

He standeth continually over me ; no one else cometh 
near me.’ 

It was I, saith Kabir, who cut off her nose and her ears, 
and assaulted and expelled her. 

Because, though dear to the three worlds, she was an 
enemy of the saints. 

All must die at last ; God’s name is their only 
salvation. 

V 

Jogis, celibates, penitents, anchorets, they who wander 
on many pilgrimages. 

They who pluck out and shave their hair, they who practise 
silence, and they who wear matted locks, must all die at 
last ; 

Wherefore worship God. 

What can the Jamna do for those whose tongues love 
God’s name ? * 

They who know the Shastars, the Veds, astrology, and 
various languages. 

Who know written and spoken incantations, and all 
medical science, must die at last. 

They who enjoy empires, umbrellas, thrones, many beauti- 
ful women. 

Betel, camphor, and highly fragrant sandal, must die at 
last. 

The Veds, Purans, and Simritis I have all searched, but 
there is no salvation anywhere in them. 

Saith Kabir, so repeat God’s name that transmigration 
may be at an end. 

* Every one treats, me well and cherishes me. 

* 1 serve him who controls me. 

* It is only the saint who can control her. 

* The river Jamna is a place of pilgrimage. It is supposed that 
death cannot molest those who bathe in it. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


m 

Kabir was asked whether the world was real or 
unreal. The following hymn was his reply. His 
meaning is that the world is unreal like the im- 
possibilities mentioned. 

VI 

Can an elephant be a rebeck-player, or an ox a drummer ? 
can a raven play the cymbals ? 

Can an ass put on a dancer’s skirt and dance ? Can 
a buffalo perform worship ? 

Can Raja Ram^ cook cakes of ice ? 

Can any man in his senses eat them ? 

Can a lion seated in his den prepare betel ? Can a mam- 
moth rat serve it when made up ? 

Can a mouse sing a song of rejoicing from house to house ? 
Can a tortoise blow a shell ? 

Can a barren woman’s son go to wed, and build a mansion 
in the sky ? 

Can he marry a fair and beautiful virgin ? Can the hare 
and the lion sing their eulogies ? 

Saith Kabir, hear, O saints, hath an ant eaten a moun- 
tain ? 

Can the tortoise say, ‘ I want fire ’ ? Can the gnat pro- 
claim God’s word ? ^ 

The following was addressed to a J ogi who main- 
tained the superiority of his sect and the advantages 
of its external accessories. 

VII 

I have one wallet which containeth seventy-two chambers 
and one door.3 

In the whole world he alone is a Jogi 

Who craveth for God in the earth containing nine regions.^ 

That Jogi shall obtain the nine treasures 

1 An eminent confectioner of Kablr's time. 

2 Some begin with * The son of a barren woman went to wed ’ and 
make the animals mentioned the marriage procession, putting the 
whole in narrative form. 

® The seventy-two chambers of the body and the brain or tenth gate. 

^ In. the body containing nine gates. 



200 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Who lifteth his soul from below to heaven, 

Who maketh divine knowledge his patched coat, medita- 
tion his needle. 

Who twisteth thfe thread of the Word and putteth it 
therein. 

Who maketh the five elements his deer-skin jacket, and 
walketh in the way of his guru, 

Who maketh mercy his fire-shovel, his body his fire-wood, 
and applieth to it the light of knowledge,^ 

Who loveth God within his heart, and ever sitteth in the 
attitude of contemplation. 

All the Jogi’s craft consisteth in the name of God, to 
whom belong the body and soul. 

Saith Kabir, if God be merciful. He will give man a true 
mark.® 

Trust to God alone and not to thy relations. 

IX 

As long as the oil and the wick ® are in the lamp, every- 
thing is visible ; 

When the oil is spent, and the wick goeth out, the chamber 
is dark. 

O madman, when thy lamp is out, no one will keep thee 
even for a ghari. 

Therefore repeat the name of God. 

Who hath a mother ? who hath a father ? what man 
hath a wife ? 

When the vessel bursteth,^ no one asketh about thee ; 
it is all ‘ Take him out ! Take him out ! ’ 

•' Thy mother sitteth and weepeth on the threshold, thy 
brother taketh away thy bier. 

Thy wife openeth the plaits of her hair and weepeth ; 
the soul departeth alone. 

Saith Kabir, hear, ye saints, regarding this terrible ocean. 

The slave man suffereth torture, and the lord of death 
retireth not from him, 0 God. 

^ The power of knowing the reality of things seen. 

* Mark him off for salvation. 

* The oil and wick mean life and breath. * When thou diest. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


201 


The body under the allegory of a churn from 
which salvation is obtained through the Word. 

X 

Sanak and Sanand, sons of Brahma, never found GocPs 
limits. ' . 

Nor did Brahma himself though he spent his life reading 
the Veds. 

Churn God’s churn, ^ my brethren. 

Gently churn it that the butter may not be lost.® 

Make thy body the churn, thy heart the churning-staff ; 

Into the churn put the Word instead of milk ; 

Make hearty meditation on God thy churning. 

Pour the guru’s favour into it as thy cold water. 

Saith Kabir, he on whom the King looketh with favour. 

And who clingeth to His name, shall gain the shore. 

When the deadly sins are subdued man arrives 
at a knowledge of the one God and obtains salvation. 

XI 

When the wick of pride is dry and the oil of worldly love 
is spent ; 

When the drum of boasting is not heard, and the mind ® 
is fast asleep. 

When the fire of avarice is out, and the smoke of desires 
no longer issueth. 

Then shall man know that one God is everywhere con- 
tained, and that there is no second. 

When the strings are broken, the rebeck no longer 
playeth,* — 

Man hath ruined his affairs by error — 

When man obtaineth understanding he shall forget 

Preaching, ranting, arguing, and intoning. 

Saith Kabir, the highest dignity shall not be far from those 

Who crush their deadly sins. 

^ Meditate upon divine knowledge. 

® Rapid churning is believed to spoil butter. 

® Nat, literally — the acrobat. 

^ When desires are at an end, man obtains deliverance. 



202 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


if Kabir csommits sin he hopes that God will 
pardon him as a mother pardons her child, when he 
prays for forgiveness. 


XII 

A mother beareth not in mind 
■ All the faults her son committeth. 

O God, I am Thy chUd ; 

Why destroyest Thou not my demerits ? ^ 

If a son in great anger rush at his mother. 

Even then she beareth it not in mind. 

Since I have fallen into the prison of anxiety, 

How shall I be saved without Go^s name ? 

0 God, ever cleanse my mind and body, 

And Kabir will tranquilly sing Thy praises. 

XIII 

My pilgrimage is to the bank of the Gomti, 

Where dwelleth the yellow-robed priest.^ 

Bravo ! bravo ! how sweetly he singeth 
God’s name delighteth my soul ; 

Narad and Saraswati wait on him, 

And near him sits lady Lakshmi as his handmaiden. 
With my rosary on my neck and God on my tongue 

1 repeat His thousand names and salute Him. 

Saith Kabir, I sing God’s praises, 

And instruct both Hindus and Musalmans. 

Kabir deprecated the destruction of life in any 
form for idol worship. 

XIV 

Thou cuttest leaves, 0 flower-girl ; in every leaf there 
is life. 

The stone for which thou gatherest the leaves is lifeless. 
Thou art in error, O flower-girl, in this ; 

The true Guru is a living God. 

* Why dost Thou not pardon my sins ? 

* This apparently is not the river which flows by Lakhnau (Luck- 
now). . a Krishan. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 203 

Brahma is in the leaves, Vishnu in the branches, and 
Shiv in the flowers. . 

Thou destroyest three gods in our presence ; whom dost 
thou worship ? 

The sculptor carving the stone turned it into an idol ; 
and, in doing so, put his* foot upon its breast. 

If it were a real God, it would have destroyed him. 

Men cook rice, dal, lapasi, pancakes, kasar ; * 

The Brahman feasters feast on these things, and put 
ashes into the idol’s mouth. 

The flower-girl is in error, and leadeth the world astray, 
but I go not astray. 

Saith Kabir, God hath mercifully preserved me from error. 

The stages of man. 

XV 

Twelve years pass away in childhood ; man performeth 
no penance even to the age of twenty ; 

Until thirty he worshippeth not God ; he repenteth when 
old age cometh upon him. 

His life hath passed in talking about his property ; 

His arms strong as the sea have dried up. 

He with his own hands constructeth a fence for a tank 
that hath dried up and a hedge for a reaped field. 

When the thief cometh, he quickly taketh what the fool 
hath preserved as his own. 

When the feet, head, and hands begin to totter, 

And water floweth copiously from the eyes ; 

When words come indistinctly from the tongue. 

Dost thou then, sir, hope to perform religious works ? 

If God be merciful and thou love Him, thou shalt obtain 
His name as thy profit. 

By the favour of the guru thou shalt obtain the wealth 
of God,2 

Which shall go with thee as thou departest. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O ye good people, ye shall not take 
other wealth with you ; 

^ Lapasi and k&sar are both made from clarified butter, flour, and 
sugar, but the former is made liquid by the addition of water. They 
are both Oriental puddings. ^ God’s name. 



204 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

When the Supreme God’s summons cometh, ye shall 
depart leaving your wealth and homes. 

The inequality of life due to man’s own acts and 
not to God’s caprice, 

XVI 

To one man God hath given silks and satins and a niwar 
bed,! 

Others have not even a ragged coat or straw in their 
houses to He on. 

Indulge not in envy and bickering, O my soul, 

Do good deeds and gain their reward. 

Out of the same earth the potter mouldeth vessels, but 
painteth different designs on them ; 

Into one vessel is put strings of pearls, and into another filth. 

God gave the miser wealth to keep, but the blockhead 
calleth it his own. 

When Death’s mace toucheth his head, it shall be decided 
in a moment whose wealth it is. 

God’s slave is the highest saint ; he obeyeth God’s order 
and obtaineth happiness. 

He accepteth as true what pleaseth God, and God’s will 
he treasureth in his heart. 

Saith Kabir, hear, 0 good people, to call things one’s own 
is untrue ; 

Death, breaking the cage, taketh away the bird ; ^ its 
wires and strings ® are then relaxed. 

The following is a remonstrance to a Qazi who 
desired that Kabir should perform the usual Muham- 
madan fasts and ceremonies : — 

XVII 

I am God’s poor slave, royal state is pleasing to thee ; 

The Supreme God, the Lord of religions, never ordained 
tyranny. 

‘ A niwSr bed is one whose bottom is of broad cotton tape instead 
of the grass rope used by the poorer classes. 

* That is, the soul. 

• Also translated — The cups. for the bird’s food and water, that is, 
man leaves his possessions including his food and drink behind him. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


205 


O Qazi, nothing is done by mere talk ; 

It is not by fasting and repeating prayers and the creed 
that one goeth to heaven. 

The inner veil of the temple of Makka is in man’s heart, 
if the truth be known. 

Just decisions should be thy prayers, knowledge of God, 
the inscrutable One, thy creed, 

The subjugation of thine evil passions the spreading of the 
prayer-carpet ; then shouldst thou know what religion is. 

Recognize thy Master and fear Him in thy heart ; despise 
and destroy thy mental pride.^ 

As thou deemest thyself so deem others, then shalt thou 
become a partner in heaven. 

Matter is one but hath assumed divers shapes ; in the 
midst of all recognize God. 

Saith Kabir, thou hast abandoned heaven and attached 
thyself to hell. 

The following was composed on the occasion of 
Kabir’ s visit to the house of a Jogi friend whom he 
found dead : — 

XVIII 

Not a drop now trickleth from the citadel of thy brain — 
where is the music that filled it ? 

The great saint hath departed with the name of the supreme 
Brahm, the supreme God. 

O father, whither hath departed the soul which dwelt 
with thy body. 

Which revelled in divine knowledge, expounded, and 
preached ? 

Whither hath the player gone who played the drum of 
thy body ? 2 

Thy tales, thy words, thy divine instruction, are no longer 
heard ; all thy vital energy hath been drawn away. 

Thine ears have become deaf, the vigour of thine organs 
hath declined ; 

Thy feet have failed, thy hands are relaxed, no word 
issueth from thy lips ; 

^ Also translated — Despise thy lust and pride. 

2 Where is now the life of thy body ? 



2o6 bhagats of the granth sahib 


The five enemies,^ robbers all, which wander according 
to their own will have grown weary ; 

The elephant,® thy mind, hath grown weary ; the heart 
which beat by the force of thy soul, the wire-puller, hath 
grown weary ; 

Thou art dead; the ten breaths which kept thee together 
have escaped ; thou hast left thy friends and relations. 

Saith Kabir, he who meditateth on God bursteth his 
bonds even while alive. 

Mammon under the guise of a serpent. 

XIX 

Nothing is potent against the serpent 

Which deceived Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv. 

The serpent having completely subdued the world hath 
entered pure water.® 

By the guru’s favour I have seen her coming who hath 
stung the three worlds, and guarded myself against her. 

0 my brethren, why call out ‘ Serpent, serpent ’ ? 

He who knoweth the True One hath destroyed the ser- 
pent ; 

No one else is free from her attack.* 

When the serpent is vanquished what can Death do to 
man ? 

This serpent is God’s creature ; 

She is weak, what can she do ? 

As long, however, as she abideth with man, his soul shall 
abide in bodies ; * 

By the favour of the guru Kabir hath easily escaped 
from her. 

‘Throw not pearls before swine.’ 

XX 

What availeth it to read the Simritis to a dog ? 

What to sing God’s praises to an infidel ? 

‘ The five evil passions. 

® The mind is likened to an elephant for it heedlessly pursues 
pleasures as the male elephant the female. 

® Has found access even to the holy. 

® Also translated— There is no other creature so vile as she. 

® He shall suffer transmigration. 



KABIR’S HYMNS > 


207 


Continue to repeat God’s name ; 

Speak not to the infidel even by mistake. 

What availeth it to give a raven valuable camphor to 
eat ? ^ 

What to give milk to a viper ? * 

Discrimination and understanding are obtained in the 
company of the saints. 

By the touch of the philosopher’s stone iron becometh 
gold. 

The dog of an infidel acteth in everything as he is (paused 
to act ; 

His acts are in accordance with his original destiny. 

Wert thou to take nectar and water the nim-tree with it, 

Saith Kabir, its natural bitter qualities would not depart. 

Worldly greatness secures not salvation. 

XXI 

There is no trace of Rawan or his line, 

Though Ceylon was his fortress and the ocean its moat. 

What shall I pray for ? nothing remaineth stable ; 

While I look on, the world passeth away. 

Though Rawan had a lakh of sons and a lakh and a 
quarter of grandsons. 

Yet at last he had neither lamp nor wick in his house. 

The sun and moon used to heat his kitchen,® the fire to 
wash his clothes.* 

He who through the guru’s instruction putteth God’s 
name in his heart, 

Shall remain permanent and be released from trans- 
migration.® 

Saith Kabir, hear, O ye people,® 

Without the name of God there is no salvation. 

* He will still rejoice in filth. 

® It will only become the more venomous after nourishment. 

® That is, to cook his food. 

* So potent was he over the heavenly bodies and the elements, that 
he subjugated them to his private purposes. 

®. Literally — and go nowhere. 

.*.Loi. This word means, people, but it was also the. natne of 
KabTr’s wife. 



2o8 bhagats of the granth sahib 

A mystical hymn with its interpretation. 

XXII 

Hear these wonderful things, my brethren — 

First a son ^ was born, and afterwards his mother ; ® 

The guru * worshipped his disciple’s * feet ; 

I have seen a lion ® herding kine ; * 

A fish ’ out of water give birth upon a tree ; * 

I have seen a cat ® taking away a dog ; 

The branches of a tree below, its roots “ above ; 

And its trunk bearing fruit “ and blossom 
A buffalo “ on horseback going to graze a horse ; “ 

An ox on his way while his burden arrived at home 
before him. 

Saith Kabir, he who understandeth this hymn. 

Shall know everything on repeating God’s name. 

The soul’s toil to obtain a human body shall all 
be lost if God be not remembered. 

XXIII 

God maketh the body from seed and placeth it in the pit 
of fire ; 

For ten months He keepeth it in the mother’s womb ; 
worldly love attacheth to it on emerging. 

0 mortal, why attaching thyself to covetousness losest 
thou the jewel of thy life ? 

In former births thou didst not sow the seed in this 
world : 

From childhood thou hast grown to old age ; what was 
to be hath been. 

1 Purity. ® Maya. ® Soul. 

* Heart or mind ® Conscience. 

® The organs of action and perception. ’’ Understanding. 

* To the company of the saints. ® Contentment. 

“ Greed. “ Worldly desires. 

*® Meditation on God. Salvation. Worship. 

“ Endurance. “ Fickleness. ” Laziness. 

“ Good works. 



n ^ ^ / i KABIR’& HYMNS' ^ 209 

: When Death cometh and fcatcheth thee by the top-loek,^ 
why then weep ? 

Thou hopest for longer life,: while he waiteth for thy last 
breath — 

The world is a game, O Kabir, carefully throw the dice.^ 

Kabir was invited to a marriage feast. He said 
his own marriage was being celebrated, and he could 
not go elsewhere. The following is a description 
of it. 

XXIV 

I turned my body into a dyer’s vat and then dyed my 
heart therein ; the five virtues ^ I made my marriage 
guests ; 

With God I made my marriage circumambulations,® my 
soul being dyed with His love. 

Sing, sing, ye brideswomen, the marriage song : 

The sovereign God hath come to my house as my husband, 

I made the bridal pavilion® in the lotus of my heart, 
and divine knowledge the recitation ^ of my lineage ; 

1 obtained God as my bridegroom ; so great hath been 
my good fortune. 

Demigods, men, saints, and the thirty-three karors of 
gods in their chariots came as spectators 

Saith Kabir, the one God, the divine Male, hath wed and 
taken me with Him, 

^ A lock of hair left unshaven on the top of a Hindu’s head. 

2 Also translated — Make recollection of God thy throw of the dice. 

3 Kabir represents himself as a bride and God the bridegroom. It 
is usual on occasions of marriage for people to have their clothes dyed. 

^ The word panchon is also translated the elect. 

® The Hindu bridegroom and bride circumambulate fire, in some 
places seven times and in other places four times, on the occasion 
of a marriage. 

® Four posts are erected to denote the mind, understanding, 
thought, and pride. The posts support a cloth covering, beneath 
which the very youthful Indian brides and bridegrooms are married. 

’ Uchar now called goirdchdr^ a panegyric on the families of the 
bride and bridegroom intoned by the ministering Brahmans. The 
word is ^dso translated— 4he repetition of the Vedic sloks for 
marriage. 


SIKH, VI 


P 



210 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

In the followii^ again Kabir represents himself 
as a wedded woman : — 

XXV 

I am plagued by my mother-in-law,^ beloved by my 
father-in-law ; * I dread the very name of my husband’s 
eldest brother * 

0 my friends and companions, my husband’s sister ^ hath 
seized me, and I bum by separation from my husband’s 
youngest brother.® 

My mind hath become insane since T have forgotten 
Qod ; how can I abide ? • 

1 behold not with mine eyes Him who enjoyeth me on 
the couch ; to whom shall I tell my sorrow ? 

My step-father quarrelleth with me ; my mother is ever 
intoxicated ; * 

As long as I remained with my elder brother ’ I was dear 
to my Spouse. 

Saith Kabir, I have lost my life struggling with the five 
evil passions — 

Deceitful Maya hath led captive the whole world, but 
I have obtained immunity by repeating God’s name. 

Mammon a thieving courtesan. 

XXVII 

Worldly life is like a dream. 

But, believing the world to be real, 1 attached myself to 
it, and abandoned the Supreme Treasure. 

0 father, I made love to the courtesan mammon, 

And she stole from me the jewel of divine knowledge. 

With its eyes open the moth becometh entangled ; the 

insect regardeth not the flame ; 

1 Maya. * God. ® The god of death. 

* Evil thought. ® Discrimination. 

.® Stepfather here means the body, and the mother is selfishness. 
Sap tSwaka is also translated — my former heart, that is, when 1 was 
unregenerate. 

God’s love. Some understand contentment ; others, divine 
knowledge. 



^ KABIR^S HYMNS ^ 211 

So, stupid man attached to gold and women heedeth not 
Death’s noose. 

Reflect, abandon sin ; and God will save thee. 

Saith Kabir, such is the Life of the world ; He hath no 
equal. 

Kabir has found God and put an end to his trans- 
migration. 

XXVIII 

Though I have assumed many shapes, this is my last.^ 

The strings and wires of the musical instrument are all 
worn out ; I am now in the power of God’s name ; 

I shall not have again to dance to the tune of birth and 
death ; 

Nor shall my heart accompany on the drum.^ 

I have taken and destroyed my bodily lust and anger ; 
the pitcher of avarice hath burst ; 

Lust’s raiment hath grown old, and all my doubts are 
dispelled. 

I recognize one God in all creatures ; vain wranglings on 
this subject are at an end. 

Saith Kabir, when God was gracious unto me, I obtained 
Him, the Perfect One. 

The following was addressed to a Qazi : — 

XXIX 

Thou fastest to appease God, yet thou destroyest life to 
please thy palate.^ 

Thou regardest not others as thou dost thyself ; why 
pratest thou ? 

O Qazi, thy one God is in thee, but thou beholdest Him 
not by thought and reflection. 

Mad on religion, thou heedest not, wherefore thy life is 
of no account. 

^ I have had many births, but I shall not be bom again. 

^ At a nach, or Oriental dance, the performers are the musicians, 
the female singers and dancers, and the drummers. 

* On the first day after the lent of Ramzan, the Muhammadans 
offer a sacrifice to God Here Kabir hints that the sacrifice i& made 
to please their palates, not to please God. 

P 2 



312 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


‘ Thy books tell thee thkt -.God is ’tfue,'-ahd thtii He is 
neither male nor female ; 

Thou gainest nothing by thy reading and study, O mad- 
man, since thou regardest Him’ not at heart : 

God is concealed in every heart ; reflect on this in thy 
mind. 

Kabir lou<fly proclaimeth — ^there is the same Gpd for the 
Hindu as for the Muhammadan. 

God becomes not propitious by the mere wearing 
of religious garbs. 

XXX 

I decorated myself to meet my Spouse, 

But God the Life and Lord of the world met me not, 

God is my husband, I am his wife ; 

He is big ; I am little. 

The wife and her husband dwell together, but to cohabit 
is difficult. 

Blessed the woman who is pleasing to her husband ; 

Saith Kabir, she shall not be born again. 

God under the allegory of a diamond. 

XXXI 

When the soul meeteth God,^ the once fickle mind is easily 
absorbed in Him. 

This diamond God filleth everything with light ; I have 
foimd this by the instruction of the true guru — 

The praise of God were an endless story — 

When a man becometh perfect he recognizeth the Dia- 
mond. 

Saith Kabir, I have seen such a Diamond as filleth the 
world with its light ; 

The concealed Diamond became manifest; when Tmet 
the guru he showed it to me. 

In the following allegory Kabir refers to his early 

. ■ ■ - ' 

LiteraUyr—when a diamond pietcetb a diamond. There are 
several interpretations of this line. 



= ! : ! K'ABIR’Si iHYMNS ' ' ' : 213 

understanding as his first wife and to his conversion 
as his second wife : — 

XXXII 

My first wife was ugly, of low caste, and bad character, 
evil both in her father’s house and mine. 

My present wife is handsome, sensible, of gbod Character ; 
I naturally took her to my heart. 

It turned out well that my first wife departed ; 

May she whom I have now taken live for ever ! 

Saith Kabir, when the young wife came I ceased to 
cohabit with the old one ; 

The young wife is with me now, the elder hath taken 
another husband. 

Kabir’ s mother addresses him in the first four 
lines of the following hymn. Kabir was married 
to Dhania. The holy men who frequented the 
house called her Kamjania, or worshipper of God. 
But the name is also applied to courtesans dedi- 
cated to idols, and it was consequently offensive to 
Kabir’s mother. She also complains that Kabir had 
devoted himself to religion and neglected his busi- 
ness : — 

XXXIII 

My daughter-in-law was called Dhania ; 

They have now given her the name of Ramjania. 

These shaven fellows have ruined my family ; 

They have set my son uttering the name of God. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O my mother. 

These shaven men have done away with my caste.^ 

The following is a lecture against the veiling of 
women. It was addressed to the second wife of 
Kamal, Kabir’s son : — 

XXXIV 

Stay, stay, my daughter-in-law, veil not thy face ; 

At the last mom«it it will not avail thee the eighth' of 
a paisa. > 

^ That is, I am no longer known as a weaver, but a worshipper of 
God. 



214 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

She who preceded thee used to veil her face ; 

Follow not thou in her footsteps. 

The only advantage of veiling thy face is 

That for five or ten days people will say a good daughter- 
in-law hath come. 

Thy veil will only be real 

If thou sing God’s praises and skip and dance in His 
service. 

Saith Kabir, 0 daughter-in-law, thou shalt be victorious ^ 

When thou passest thy life in singing God’s praises. 

Kabir’ s wife Loi refused to prepare a meal for 
a holy visitor, upon which Kabir manifested his 
displeasure. The following hymn except the last 
two lines is Loi’s pleading for forgiveness : — 

XXXV 

Better would it be to be cut in twAin with the saw than 
that thou shouldst turn thy back on me. 

Hear my entreaty and embrace me ; 

I am a sacrifice unto thee ; turn thy face towards me, my 
beloved. 

Why killest thou me by turning thy back on me ? 

Even though thou cut my body I will not turn it away 
from thee ; * 

My body may perish, but I will not. cease to love thee. 

There hath been no quarrel between thee and me ; 

Thou art the same good husband and I the same wife 
as before. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O Loi, 

I shall believe in thee no longer. 

The following was Kabir’s reply to a Brahman 
who had advised him to bathe in the sacred rivers 
of the Hindus. 

XXXVII 

He who is foul within will not go to heaven by bathing 
at a place of pilgrimage : 

^ Thou shalt obtain salvation. 

* Also translated — will not wince. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 215 

Nothing is gained by pleasing men ; ^ God is not a 
simpleton. 

Worship the Lord, the only God ; 

Serving the guru is the true ablution. 

If salvation be obtained by bathing in water, the frogs 
which are continually bathing will obtain it ; 

But as the frogs so the pilgrims ; they shall be born again 
and again. 

If a hardened sinner die in Banaras, he cannot escape hell. 

If a saint of God die in Haramba,* he saveth a whole 
multitude. 

Where there is neither day nor night, Veds nor Shastars, 
there dwelleth the Formless One. 

Saith Kabir, meditate on Him, ye foolish denizens of the 
world. 

Gujari 

The following was addressed to a Brahman who 
Kabir supposed would be turned into an ox for his 
idleness and gluttony. The Hindus believe that 
they who live on others’ wealth without any exer- 
tion on their own parts will become oxen, in which 
condition they will have to labour and suffer for 
their idleness in human lives. 

I 

With four legs, two horns, and a dumb mouth, how wilt 
thou sing God’s praises ? 

Standing or lying down the stick will fall on thee ; then 
where wilt thou hide thy head ? 

Without God thou shalt become somebody ® else’s bullock ; 

Thy nose shall be torn, thy shoulders maimed, and thou 
shalt eat worthless straw ; 

All day shalt thou wander in the forest, but even then 
thy belly shall not be satisfied. 

^ That is, by deferring to custom. 

® Previously called Magahar. 

3 Thou shalt be lent to somebody who will treat thee badly, and 
not as he would treat his own. 



ai6 BHAGATS OF TOE ORANTH SAHIB 


Thou didst not listen to the advice of holy men, and thou 
shalt suffer for thine omissions. 

' Overwhelmed with great superstition thou shalt endure 
hardship, and wander in many births. 

Thou hast lost thy precious life by forgetting God ; when 
wilt thou again have such an opportunity ? 

Thou shalt turn and revolve like an oilman’s bullodk ^ 
round his press, and restless shalt thou pass the night. 

Saith Kabir, for not having repeated God’s name thou 
shalt smite thy head and repent. 

Kabir’s mother was distressed at his conduct in 
relinquishing his trade and adopting a religious life. 
The following is a conversation between the mother 
and son on the subject. 

II 

Kabir’s mother sobbeth and weepeth — 

0 God, how shall these children livfc ? ® 

Kabir hath given up all his weaving, 

And hath inscribed God’s name on his body. 

Kabir replieth — 

While the thread was passing through the bobbin 

1 forgot my Beloved God.® 

My understanding is mean, my caste is that of weaver ; 

I have gained the name of God as my profit. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O my mother. 

The one God will provide for us and them. 

SORATH 

All are lost without devotion. 

I 

The Hindus kill themselves worshipping idols, the Musal- 
mans make prostrations ; 

The former are burned, the latter buried ; but neither 
sect knoweth anything of Thee, 0 God. 

® Also translated — Like a monkey after red seeds. 

® How shall Kabir’s children be maintained ? 

* Kabir means that even that was too long a time for him to abstain 
from repeating God’s name, and so he gave up weavings ' ' 



KABIR’S HYMNS 217 

O my soul, the world is stark blind ; 

On all sides Death’s noose is thrown* but ptfitt s(e, it,not. 

Poets kill themselves reciting verses ; the Kaparis kill 
tliemselves going to K^edarnath ; 

, Jogis kill themselves wearing matted hair ; but they know, 
nothing of Thee, 0 God.- 

Kings kill themselves amassing wealth and burying masses 
of gold ; 

Pandits kill themselves reading the Veds, and women in 
gazing on their beauty — 

Without the name of God all these are lost ; think and 
ponder upon this, O man. 

Without the name of God who hath obtained salvation ? 
Kabir giveth his admonition. 

The body is frail, yet it attaches itself to worldly 
things which desert it. 

II 

When the body is biirnt, it becometh ashes ; when it is 
not burnt, a host of worms eat it up. 

A soft clay vessel will break when water is put into it — 
such is the nature of the body. 

Why, O brother, goest thou about puffing and blowing 
thyself out ? 

How hast thou forgotten the ten months thou didst 
remain inverted in the womb ? 

As the bee collecteth honey with great zest, so the fool 
collecteth wealth. 

When a man is dead, they say ‘ Take him away ! take 
him away ! 

‘ Why allow a ghost to remain ? ’ 

His wedded wife accompanieth him to the door, and after 
that his male friends. 

All the other members of his family go as far as the 
cremation-ground ; the soul departeth alone. 

Saith Kabit, hear, O mortals, they who have entarigled 
themselves with the deceitful world, 

^e seized by Death, and fall into the pit Uke the parrot 
deceived by the trap. 



2i« BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


None may escape physical death, but it brings 
salvation to the holy. 

III 

Man hearing all the instructions of the Veds and the 
Purans, desireth to perform religious ceremonies to over- 
come death. 

Death hath seized all people, even the wise ; the pandits 
too depart without hope. 

0 man, thou hast not succeeded in thy sole object ^ 

Since thou hast not worshipped the supreme God. 

, Men have gone to the forests, practised jog, performed 
austerities, and lived on the tubers and roots they picked up. 

The Nadis,® the readers of the Veds, the Ekshabdis, and 
the Monis * are all enrolled in Death’s register. 

Loving service * entereth not into man's heart ; he pam- 
pereth his body and giveth it to Death ; 

He hypocritically singeth hymns, but what can he obtain 
from God ? 

Death hath fallen on the whole world ; in his register the 
sceptical theologian is recorded. 

Saith Kabir, they who know God's love and devotion to 
God are pure.® 

The holy are completely saturated with God. 

IV 

With both mine eyes I look. 

But I behold nothing save God ; 

Mine eyes gaze affectionately on Him ; 

There is now no other subject mentioned. 

My doubts have departed, my fear hath fled 

Since I applied my mind to God’s name : 

When the Actor beateth the drum, 

® To save thyself in this human birth. 

® Jogis who go about playing a small pipe. 

* Men vowed to perpetual silence. 

* Service such as that performed by Narad, the famous rikhi. 

* The Persian word khulSs, freed or delivered, was here originally 
written, but the tenth Guru altered its spelling to the Arabic khSlis, pure. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


219 


Everybody cometh to see the show.^ 

When the Actor coUecteth the stage properties,* 

He abideth alone in His happiness. 

Doubts are not dispelled by the use of words ; 
Everybody continueth to talk. 

God filleth the heart *of him 

To whom through the guru’s instruction He hath revealed 
Himself. 

When the guru bestoweth even a little kindness, 

Bodies and minds are all absorbed in God. 

Saith Kabir, I am dyed with the dye of God, 

And have found the munificent Life of the world. 

Man under the allegory of a milkmaid is won by 
the guru from neglect of God. 

V 

The words of the sacred texts are as seas of milk : 

For that ocean let the guru be the churning-staff. 

Be thou the churner of that milk ; 

Why shouldst thou be despoiled of thy butter ? 

O damsel, why makest thou not God thy husband ? 

He is the life of the world and the support of the soul. 
The strait collar ^ is on thy neck and chains on thy feet ; 
God hath sent thee wandering from birth to birth. 

Thou heedest not even yet, O damsel ; 

Thou art the wretched victim of Death. 

It is God who acteth and causeth men to act ; 

What power hath the poor handmaiden ? 

The damsel whom God awaketh 
Attendeth to the duties He assigneth her. 

O damsel, where hast thou obtained that wisdom 
By which thou hast erased the line of doubt ? 

Kabir feeleth great delight, 

And by his guru’s favour his mind is happy. 

^ When God creates the world, men appear. 

^ When God draws the world within Himself. 

® Connected by a chain with the feet and hindering the recumbent 
posture. 



3^ BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

In reply to an inquiry Kabir describes the happi- 
ness he obtained from humility and devotion. 

VI 

When He without whom one cannot live 
Is found, man’s toil is productive. 

: Men call it a good thing to live for ever, 

But there is no life without death.* 

Where divine knowledge is discussed what more remaineth 
to be said ? * 

As we look on, the things of this world pass away ; 

As men rub and mix saffron and sandal, so man's soul 
is blended with God, 

And thus seeth the world without bodily eyes.® 
Abandonment of the world as a father hath begotten divine 
knowledge as a son. 

Though placed m an unsubstantial Q,ity,* 

I a beggar have found the Giver. 

He hath given me so much that I cannot eat it ; 

I cannot leave off eating ® or finish it ; 

And I have ceased to go to strangers. 

The elect who know life to be death. 

Have obtained a mountain of happiness. 

Kabir hath obtained that wealth. 

And effaced his pride on meeting God. 

The lamp of holiness, not the Veds and Purans, 
lights up man’s heart. 

VII 

What availeth reading, what studying. 

What hearing the Veds and Purans ? 

What avail reading and listening 
If divine knowledge be not obtained ? 

* Without effacing oneself. 

* Also translated — 1/ man efface himself not, what use discussing 
divine knowledge ? 

* Also translated — Men grind and naix saffron and sandal and svaste 
them by applying them to idols ; 

The world appeareth to have no eyes. 

* The body. ® So dear is God’s name to me 



KABIR’S BYJINS 


221 


Thou repeatest not the name of God, O ignorant man ; 
Every moment of what thinkest thou ? 

A lamp ^ is required in this darkness 
To find the One Incomprehensible Thing.* 

The lamp hath lit up my heart, 

And I have found the Incomprehensible Thing. 

Saith Kabir, I now recognize Him ; 

And when I recognize Him my mind is happy. 

People do not believe that my mind is happy ; 

But even if they do not, of what consequence is it ? 

The following was addressed to a hypocritical 
Brahman who advised Kabir to bathe at Hindu 
places of pilgrimage. 

VIII 

In thy heart is deception, in thy mouth religion ; 

False man, why churnest thou water ? 

What advantage is ‘it to bathe the body 
If there be filth in the heart ? 

It the gourd be washed at the sixty-eight places of pil- 
grimage, 

Even then its bitterness will not depart. 

Thus saith Kabir deliberately — 

Cause me to cross over the tenible ocean, O God. 


Men should not practise deceit for the advantage 
of relations. 


IX 


With great deceit man acquireth othfer men’s wealth. 
And taketh it and lavisheth it on his son and wife. 

0 my man, practise not deception even by mistake ; 

At the last moment it is thine own soul that shall have 
to render an account. 

Every moment the body wasteth away and old age 
warneth thee ; 

Then no one will pour water into thy hands, 

Saith Kabir, thou shalt have no friend then ; 

Why not repeat God’s name in thy heart betimes ? ‘ 


* Divine knowledge. 


* God. 



222 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


The guru has shown man how to protect himself 
from ferocious animals, to which the evil passions 
are compared, 

X 

0 saints, my wandering mind hath obtained rest. 

1 reckon that I have obtained my deserts. 

The guru hath shown me the passage 

Through which wild animals surreptitiously enter. 

I have closed the gates thereof, 

And spontaneous music playeth for me. 

, The pitcher of my heart was filled with the water of sin ; 
When I upturned it, the water was spilled.^ 

Saith Kabir, the man of God knoweth this, 

And knowing it, his mind is happy. 

Kabir once felt hungry and rebelled against God. 

XI 

A hungry man cannot perform service ; 

Take back this rosary of Thine. 

I only ask for the dust of the saints’ feet, 

Since I owe not any man.* 

0 God, how shall I fare if I am shamed before Thee ? 

If Thou give me not of Thine own accord, I will beg for it. 

1 beg for two sers of flour, 

A quarter of a ser of clarified butter and salt ; 

I beg for half a ser of dal 
Which will feed rpe twice a day. 

I beg for a bed with four legs to it, 

A pillow and a mattress ; 

I beg for a quilt over me. 

And then thy slave will cheerfully serve Thee. 

I have never been covetous ; 

Thy name jilone becometh me.® 

^ This metaphor has often occurred. The hearts of men generally 
are said to be inverted. The holy have theirs erect. 

® I am not under an obligation to any one. 

* That is, I only ask for these things that I may be able to repeat 
Thy name. 



; KABIR’S HYMNS 223 

Saith Kabir, my soul is happy ; 

And when my soul is happy, then I recognize God. 

The gods of the Hindus are ignorant of the Creator. 

. Dhanasari 

I 

Beings like Brahma’s four sons, Shiv, 

And Sheshnag know not Thy secret. 

Through association with the saints God dwelleth in the 
heart. 

Beings like Hanuman and Garuda, 

Indar and Brahma, know not, O God, Thine attributes. 

The four Veds, the Simritis, and the Purans, 

Vishnu, and Lakshmi know them not. 

Saith Kabir, he who toucheth God’s feet and seeketh His 
shelter. 

Shall not wander in transmigration. 

Life gradually draws to a close : man should 
practise devotion betimes. 

II 

Pahars are made up of gharis, days of pahars ; life draweth 
to a close ; the body pineth away ; 

Death wandereth about like a poacher in quest of game : 
say what shall man do to escape ? 

The last day approacheth ; 

Mother, father, brother, son, wife — say whose are they ? ^ 

As long as the light of life remaineth in man’s body, the 
brute knoweth not himself. 

He is anxious to obtain a long life, but he seeth not 
Death who is at hand,^ 

Saith Kabir, hear, O mortal dismiss thy mental doubts ; 

Repeat only the one Name, O mortal, and seek the 
asylum of the one God. 

^ Literally — does any one belong to any one ? 

* Also translated — He is anxious to live longer though his eyes see 
not. 



BHAGATS THE GltAMH SAHIB 

Salvation depends on the state of man's heart 
not on the place of his death. ^ 

III 

What is strange to him who knoweth something of the 
love and service of God ? 

( As water when blended with water separateth not again, 
so the weaver ^ hath blended with God. 

O men of God, I am out of my senses — 

If Kabir leave his body at Banaras, what obligation is 
he xmder to God ? * 

Saith Kabir, hear, O people, let no one make a mistake ; 

What difference is there between Banaras and the barren 
Magahar, if God be in the heart ? 

Kabir requires nothing but God’s name. 

IV 

It is through insufficient devotion men go 

To the heavens of Indra and Shiv and are born again. 

What shall I pray for ? nothing is stable^ 

Keep God’s name in thy heart ; 

Fame, power, wealth, and greatness 

Help no one at the last moment. 

Say who hath derived any happiness 

From son, wife, or wealth. 

Saith Kabir, nothing else availeth me ; 

The name of God is sufficient wealth for my heart. 

Remember and love God. 

V 

Remember God, remember God, remember God, my 
brethren ! 

Without remembering God’s name the majority of men 
sliall be lost. 

Wife, son, body, house, and wealth confer happiness ; 

* Julaho. There is a pun on this word. It means a weaver^ and 
elsewhere it is applied to the soul. 

* Because all people who die at Banaras must be saved, according 
to Hindu belief. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 225 

But none of these shall be thine when the time of death 
arriveth. 

Ajamal, the elephant, and the courtesan committed sin- 
ful acts ; 

Yet they were saved by repeating God’s name. 

My brethren, you have wandered in the wombs of pigs 
and dogs, and yet you are not ashamed. 

Why forsake the ambrosia of God’s name and eat poison ? 

Abandon doubt regarding acts which are prescribed as 
well as those which are forbidden, and take God’s name. 

The slave Kabir saith, by the favour of the guru love God. 

SUHI 

Kabir calls on a worldly man to render an account 
of his life. 

I 

Having been born What hast thou done ? 

Thou hast never repeated God’s name. 

Thou wilt not repeat His name ; of what thinkest thou ? 

What preparation art thou mailing for death, O luckless 
one ? 

Though through woe and weal thou hast brought up thy 
family. 

At the time of death thou shalt bear thy troubles alone. 

When Death seizeth thee by the neck, thou shalt utter 
loud cries. 

Saith Kabir, why did I not remember God before ? 

The condition of one who fears God. 

II 

My woman’s heart palpitateth and trembleth ; : 

1 know not how my Spouse will treat me. 

The night hath passed away ; let not the .days also pass.^ 

The black flies have gone ; the white cranes have now 
taken their place 

^ That is, my youth has passed, let not my old age also pass in vain 

2 My dark hair has changed to grey. . 

Q 


8IKH. VI 



BHAGATS OF 'THE >QRANTH SAHIB 

' As water I will not temamin a ftail vessel,^ ' 

So the soul departeth when the body hath faded. > i 
- I adorn myself like a young virgin, , ■ 

But how can I enjoy dalliance without my Spouse ? 

My arm is paiiied from, driving away the crows. 

Saith Kabir, this tale is at an end.® 

A dialogue between the soul and the messengers 
of Death. He who feels God’s love needs have no 
apprehension. 

Ill 

Thy stewardship being ended, thou must give thine 
account, 

‘When the cruel messengers of Death come to take thee. 
They will ask thee what thou hast earned, and where thou 
hast squandered it ; 

They will say to thee, ‘ Come quickly, thou art summoned 
to court ; 

‘The warrant of God’s court hath come for thee,’ 

Thou dialt implore them, and say, ‘ I have to collect some 
outstandings in the village, 

‘ And I shall adjust my accounts to-night ; 

‘ I will also pay you something for your expenses ; ® 

‘At dawn we shall pray at an inn on the road 
Blest, blest is he and fortunate is his lot. 

Who feeleth God’s love by association with the saints. 
That man shall ever be happy in this world and the next ; 
He hath won the priceless prize of human birth. 

He who while awake to the world is asleep to God^ hath 
lost that birth ; 

The property and wealth he hath accunrulated shall 
become another’s. 

Saith Kabir, that man hath gone astray, 

^ A vessel made of clay not hardened by fire, 

* That is, llfe'is at tin end. 

* As a bribe to the messengers of Death to aHoW the soul 'lime to 

answer the warrant. . 

* That is, give me time to-day, and we shall be well on our journey 

,imu'ly>to>nipm>y‘mori){og. , , ! 

® Also translated — He who after bcihg awakened falleth kslebp. 



KABIR^S HYMNS ^ 227 

’Who forgetting the Bridegroom hath mixed himself up 
with things of clay. 

When avarice only departs with life and there is 
no thought of God, human birth is in vain. 

IV 

The eyes grow weary of seeing, the ears grow weary of 
hearing, this fair body groweth weary. 

When old age urgeth thee, all thy senses grow weary ; 
the desire for wealth alone wearieth not. 

O foolish man, thou hast not obtained divine knowledge 
and meditation ; 

Thou hast lost thy human birth in vain. 

0 mortal, serve God as long as there is breath in thy 
body ; 

Even though thy body perish, let not thy love for Him 
perish ; dwell thou at His feet. 

He in whose heart God hath implanted His Word hath 
ceased to thirst. 

Let the comprehension of God’s will be thy game of 
chaupar, and the conquest of thy heart the throwing of 
the dice. 

They who know and worship God shall not perish. 

Saith Kabir, they who know how to throw such dice 
shall never Ipse their game. 

Kabir has triumphed over his evil passions, his 
senses, and death itself. 

V 

There are five kings of one fortress ; the whole five ask 
for revenue 1 — 

1 have not tilled land belonging to any of them ; it 
would be hard on me to pay a tax for nothing. 

0 God’s people, the village accountant ^ continually 
worried me, 

1 Hdla from hal^ a plough — so tnuch revenue levied On every plough. 
The five evil passions claim their shares. 

^ Here meant for death, 

0 2 



228 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

But I raised my arms aloft, complained to my guru, and 
he saved me. 

Nine surveyors ^ and ten judges * go on tour, and will not 
allow the agriculturists » to live ; 

They measure not with a full tape, and they take many 
bribes. 

The one Being who is contained in the seventy-two 
chambers of the body hath written off my account ; 

I have searched Dharmraj’s office, and find I owe him 
not an atom. 

Let no one revile the saints ; the saints and God are one. 

Saith Kabir, I have obtained that Guru whose name is 
Bibeko.* 

Death triumphs over all except God’s sincere 
worshippers. 

Bilawal 

I 

This world is like a show ; none may remain here ; 

Proceed the straight way, otherwise thou shalt be severely 
buffeted. 

Children, the old, and the young, O my brethren, shall 
all be taken away by Death. 

God hath made poor man like a mouse ; Death like a cat 
eateth him up ; 

He payeth no regard to rich or poor ; 

He destroyeth kings equally with their subjects — so 
mighty is Death ! 

They who please God become His worshippers, and theirs 
is a special case ; 

They neither come nor go ; ® they never die ; God is 
with them. 

Know in your hearts that by forsaking son, wife, wealth, 
and property which are perishable, 

^ The nine gates of the body. 

* The organs of action and perception. 

® Virtues or good qualities. 

* Bibeko, God who makes one (eb) out of two (btb), who joins the 
soul of man with Himself. 

® They do not suffer transmigration. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 229 

Saith Kabir, you shall meet the Lord ; hear this, O ye 
saints. 

Kabir is frenzied with devotion. 

II 

I am not skilled in book knowledge, nor do I understand 
controversy ; 

I have grown mad reciting and hearing God’s praises. 

0 father, I am mad ; the whole world is sane ; I am 
mad ; 

1 am ruined ; let not others be ruined likewise ; 

I have not grown mad of mine own will ; God hath 
made me mad — 

The true guru hath dispelled my doubts — 

I am ruined, and have lost my intellect ; 

Let nobody be led astray in doubts like mine. 

He who knoweth not himself is mad ; 

When one knoweth himself he knoweth the one God. 

He who is not intoxicated with divine love in this human 
birth shall never be so. 

Saith Kabir, I am dyed with the dye of God.* 

Kabir’s self-abasement. 

III 

Though man leave his home for the forest region and 
gather tubers to live on. 

His sinful and evil mind even then abandoneth not mis- 
deeds. 

How shall I be saved ? how cross over the great terrible 
ocean ? 

Preserve me, preserve me, O God ; I Thy slave have 
come to Thine asylum. 

The desire to gratify my evil passions forsaketh me not ; 

Though I make many efforts to guard myself against them, 
I am entangled in them again and again. 

My life hath passed — ^youth and old age — ^no good have 
I done ; 


* I am imbued with God's love; 



230. BHAGATS OF THE GRANIH SAHIB 

.This priceless' humanf life, attached itself to a kaiiri and 
became like it. 

Saith Kabir, O my God, Thou art contained in every- 
thing ; 

There is none so merciful as Thou, none so sinful as I. 

The superiority of God’s saint. 

V 

There is no king equal to God ; 

All the kings of this world are only for four days, they 
make false display.^ 

Why should the slave of Him who overshadoweth the 
three worlds waver ? ® 

Who can lay hands on him when one cannot even speak 
with due respect before him ? 

0 thoughtless and foolish mind of mine, think upon God, 
and the unbeaten music of ecstasy shall play for thee. 

Saith Kabir, all my doubts and uncertainties are at an 
end ; God hath favoured me as He did Dhru and Prahlad. 

Kabir depreciates himself. 

VI 

Preserve me, O God, though I have offended Thee. 

1 have not practised humility, the duties of my religion, 
repetition of Thy name, or worship ; I am proud, I wear 
my turban on the side of my head. 

- Believing this body immortal I have pampered the frail 
and perishable vessel ; 

r have forgotten Him who made and favoured me, and 
I have attached myself to strangers. 

I am Thy house-breaker and not Thy saint ; I fall at 
Thy feet for protection — 

: Saith Kabir, hear this supplication ; send me not intelli- 
gence of death.® 

^ Alsp translated — They make a false claim to greatness. 

* That is, allow his mind to wander from God. 

® Holy men are not led off in triumph by Death; they become 
insensibly blended with God. 



KABliR'S 


2^1 


An appeal to God. 

VII 

O' God, I stand wearied at Thy court ; 

Who but Thee careth for ihe ? open Thy door and show 
Thyself unto me, , 

Thou art my wealth, -O Master ; Thou art generoas ; 
Thou art lavish ; I hear with mine ears Thy great praise. 

Of whom shall I beg ? I see every one poor ; from Thee 
alone I obtain salvation. 

Thou didst confer endless favour on Jaidev, Namdev, and 
the Brahman Sudama. 

Saith Kabir, Thou art all powerful, Thou art generous. 
Thou bestowest the four blessings without delay. 

The following was addressed to a Jogi : — 

VIII 

Thou dependest on a club, earrings, and patched coat ; 

In error thou wanderest in a Jogi's garb. 

Put away thy devotional attitudes and thy suspension 
of breath ; 

Abandon deception, and ever worship God, O fool. 

The wealth thou beggest for, the three worlds have en- 
joyed.^ 

Saith Kabir, God is the only Jogi in the world.* 

Kabir mourns his lukewarmness and condemns 
all worldly things. 

IX 

O Sovereign of the world. Lord of the earth, mamnion 
hath caused me to forget Thy feet. 

Even a little affection for Thee is not felt by Thy slaVe ; 
what shall Thy poor slave do ? 

Curse on this body, curse on this wealth, curse on these 
worldly things, a double curse on this perishable intellect 
and understanding ! 

0 man, firmly restrain this worldly love ; if thou subju- 
gate. it, thou shalt be saved.® 

* That is} it is the leavings of the three worlds. 

® Also translated — He who is united with God is the real jogi' 

® Also translated — Thou shalt be released from thine entanglements. 



232 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

What availeth agriculture ? what , commerce ? false is 
worldly pride. 

Saith Kabir, they who fraetise such things are ultimately 
ruined, and death cometh to them at last. 

The soul’s dependence is on God, not on the 
perishable body. 

The body is a lake in which a peerless lotus ^ bloometh ; 

The Supreme Being who hath neither outline nor form, 
the Primal Light, is within it. 

O my soul, worship that God, abandon doubt ; God is 
the life of the world. 

The soul is not seen either coming or going, as is the body. 

Where the body is born, there it perisheth ® like the leaves 
of the water lily. 

They who knowing the world to be transitory abandon 
it, are happy in the contemplation oi God. 

Saith Kabir, worship God in thy heart. 

During life Kabir was absorbed in God as the 
sound of a bronze vessel is absorbed in it when 
broken. 

XI 

Since my attention is fixed on God, I no longer suspect 
that I shall suffer transmigration ; ® 

Even in life I am absorbed in the Infinite ; the guru’s 
instruction hath awakened me. 

The sound which is produced from bronze blendeth again 
with it ; 

When the bronze is broken, O Pandit, where will the 
sound be ? 

At the union of the three breaths* in the brain I have 
seen Him who is awake in every heart, 

* The heart. 

® That is, the body is resolved into the elements whence it sprang. 

® Literally — my doubts regarding birth and death have departed. 

* Of the left and right nostrils and their junction. TrikuU sandhi 

also includes g^'Sia, .the knower ; the means of knowledge ; 

and gejtoi, the subject of knowledge.. Devout men endeavour to unite 
all'tbree. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 233 

And now such understanding hath entered my heart that 
I have abandoned the world. 

When I knew myself, my light was blended with God’s 
light— 

Saith Kabir, I now know God and. my mind is satisfied. 

The holy man will not waver but be everywhere 
happy. 

XII 

O God, why should that man waver in whose heart abide 
Thy lotus feet ? 

Believe that all happiness and the nine treasures are his 
who tranquilly repeateth God’s praises. 

When God openeth the hard knot,^ man shall be wise 
enough to behold Him in everything. 

He who ever avoideth worldly love a.nd weigheth his 
heart in the scale of meditation, 

Shall be happy wherever he goeth, O Lord, and worldly 
love shall not sway him. 

Saith Kabir, my heart is happy since it hath been absorbed 
in God’s love. 

An inquirer asked Kabir with whom one should 
converse. The following was his reply : — 

Gaund 

I 

When thorr meetest a saint, have some conversation with 
him ; 

When thou meetest a man who is not a saint, remain 
silent. 

Kabir was asked again — 

O father, if I speak what shall I speak about ? 

For instance, ‘ Continue to repeat God’s name.’ 

They who talk to saints confer advantage on others ; 

They who talk to fools talk in vain. 

^ The distance between God and the soul. 



234 BHAGATS OF THE G'RANTH SAHIB 

By incessant talking with theiH sin increaseth ; • i ’ 

If I speak not to them, what harm can the wretches! 
do me ? ^ 

Saith Kabir, an empty vessel soundeth ; 

When it is full it never giveth forth a sound. 

Man’s dead body is much more worthless than 
that of a beast, and consequently an object of con- 
tempt. 

II 

When a man dieth he is of no use ; 

When a beast dieth he is of ten uses. 

What do I know regarding my fate ; 

What do I know, O sir ? 

Man's bones burn like a heap of fire-wood ; 

His hair burneth like a bundle of grass. 

Saith Kabir, man only awaketh 

When the club of Death toucheth his head. 

God is everywhere, even in the acts which attach 
to the soul. 

III 

God abideth in the heaven above, in the earth beneath, 
and in every direction. 

The Supreme Being is ever the root of joy ; the body 
may perish, but God shall not. 

I am anxious to know 

Whence the soul cometh and whither it goeth. 

Five elements combined form the body ; out of what 
were the elements formed ? 

Thou sayest that the soul is bound by its acts ; who 
gave life to the acts ? 

The body is contained in God, God in the body ; He is 
iminterruptedly in all things. 

Saith Kabir, I will not abandon God’s name, come 
what may. 

^ Also translated — If I talk not to saints, how can I practise dis- 
crimination ? 



KABIR’S HYMNS 235 

The soul described by negatives. 

V 

Somebody asked Kahir : — 

What is that whose limit hath never been found, 

Which dwelleth within the temple of the body ? 

Kabir replied — It is neither man nor demigod ; 

It is not a Jati or a worshipper of Shiv ; 

It is not a Jogi or an Audhut ; 

It hath no mother, nor is it any one’s son ; 

It is not a householder or an anchoret ; 

It is not a king or a beggar ; 

It hath neither a body nor a drop of blood ; 

It is not a Brahman or a Khatri ; 

It is not an ascetic or a shaikh ; 

It is not born, nor is it observed to die ; 

Whoever weepeth for its death 
Shall lose his honour.^ 

By the favour of the guru, I have found the steep way ; 
Birth and death have both been erased for me. 

Saith Kabir, this soul is a part of God, 

As ink cannot be erased from paper 

Kabir's wife thus addressed him on the neglect 
of his trade and his attentions to saints. 

VI 

Thy threads are broken, thy size is at an end, 

Thy reeds shine over the door. 

Thy poor brush hath gone to pieces — 

May death light on this shaven fellow’s head ! 

This shaven fellow hath lost all his property. 

1 am persecuted by those fakirs coming and going,® 

^ Shall only excite contempt. 

2 Also translated — His praise cannot be erased from paper; that 
is. His praise is continually written and shall be permanent. 

* This and the two preceding lines are also translated — 

Death hath lighted on these shaven fellows' heads. 

They have caused us to lose all our property. 

There is no end to their coming or going. 



236 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir now never speaketh of his beam or his shuttle ; 

His mind is only concerned with the name of God. 

His daughter and sons have nothing to eat ; 

Men with shaven heads are crammed night and day ; 

One or two are in the house, and one or two on the way. 

We have only a pallet on the ground ; they get a bed to 
sleep on. 

They rub their heads with satisfaction and carry books in 
their waist-bands ; 

We get parched pulse, they bread to eat. 

The shaven-heads and my shaven-headed husband have 
become all one. 

Kabir replieth — These shaven-heads are the support of 
the drowning. 

Hear, O blind misguided Loi, 

Kabir hath taken the protection of these shaven-heads. 

When man dies, mammon, ^ho is described, 
weeps not for him. 

VII 

When the husband dieth, his wife weepeth not.^ 

She findeth another protector ; 

And when that protector also dieth, 

Hell await eth him though he have enjoyed pleasures here. 

One woman * alone is dear to the world ; 

She is the wife of all sentient beings. 

With a necklace on her neck she looketh beautiful ; 

She pleaseth the world, but is hateful as poison to the 
holy. 

Adorning herself she either sitteth like an abandoned 
woman, 

Or the wretch wandereth about accursed of the saints. 

When the saints flee from her, she pursueth them ; 

But, by the favour of the guru, she feareth punishment. 

She is the body and soul of the infidel ; 

Her dreadful witch’s eye falleth on me. 

^ When man dieth, his wealth does not weep for him. 

2 Maya, wealth. She never becomes a widow, hence the title 
suhdgan. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


237 


When the merciful holy guru met me, 

I became well acquainted with her secrets.^ 

Saith Kabir, I have now turned her out, 

And she hath attached herself to the skirt of the world. 

A further descripti9n of mammon. 

VIII 

The guest cometh and departeth hungry 
From the house which hath no wealth. 

The guest loseth patience. 

And the host is blamed because he hath not means to 
entertain him. 

Hail to the woman who hath turned the heads 
Of very holy men and penitents high and low ! 

She is a miser’s daughter ; 

Rejecting God’s worshippers she sleepeth with everybody. 
At last standing at the saints’ door. 

She saith, ‘ I have*sought your protection, save me ! ’ 
The woman is very beautiful ; 

Her ornaments tinkle on her feet ; 

As long as man is alive she attacheth herself to him ; 
When he dieth she quickly departeth without waiting for 
her shoes. 

The woman hath conquered the three worlds ; 

She hath made the eighteen Purans and the places of 
pilgrimage love her ; 

She hath pierced the hearts of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv, 
And infatuated great kings and sovereigns. 

There are no bounds to the woman ; 

She is in collusion with the five evil passions. 

Where the vessels of the five evil passions burst, 

Saith Kabir, I was delivered thence by the favour of the 
guru. 

Without a guru man must fall and perish. 

IX 

If the rafters be taken from a house, the roof will fall ; 
So without God^s name how can man be saved ? 

^ And was thus the better able to guard against her. 



238 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

As water will not remain without a vessel, 

So without a religious guide man shall go to hell. 

Burn him who thinketh not on God, 

But whose mind is ever absorbed in the field of his body. 
As without a ploughman land cannot be tilled, 

As without a thread jewels cannot be strung, 

And as without a loop clothes cannot be fastened, 

So without a holy guide man shall go to hell. 

As a child cannot be born without a father and mother, 
As clothes cannot be washed without water. 

As one cannot ride without an equipage. 

As without music there cannot be dancing, 

So without a guru man cannot reach Gorf’s court. 

As the bad woman leaving her husband looketh for an- 
other, thus eager should man be to obtain a guru. 

Saith Kabir, do one thing — 

Become holy and thou shalt not die again. 

The following hymn was a reply to some one who 
had addressed vile abuse to Kabir and called him 
a pander, a dancer, a street- walker, and a thief : — 

X 

Is he a pander ^ who chasteneth his heart ? 

He who chasteneth his heart shall escape from death. 
The pander who thoroughly chasteneth his heart, and 
applieth to it the touch-stone of love, 

Shall obtain complete deliverance. 

Whom do you call a pander, O people ? 

•In everything that is spoken discrimination should be used. 
Is he a dancer who danceth with his mind. 

Who is not satisfied with falsehood, who is pleased with 
truth, 

And who beateth time with his heart in the presence of God ? 
God, whose mind is pure, preserveth such a dancer.® 

^ Kuian as a noun is a pander and as a verb to beat or chasten. 
There is a play on the word in the original. It was applied to Kabir, 
because when his daughter was visiting him, he allowed a strange man 
shelter in his house. 

* Also translated— ^God steadieth the mind of such a dancer. 



fKABIR'S HYMNS 


239 


, Isi he a atreet-walker who sweepetli' the market-place, ^ 
And lighteth up the five wicks ? * 

I accept as my guru that street-walker 
Who embraceth the service of the lord of the nine con- 
tinents.® 

Is he a thief who is not envious, 

Who uttereth God’s name and curbeth his senses ? 

Saith Kabir, blessings on my divine guru, 

Who possesseth all such qualities and who is very hand- 
some and clever. 

The following is an encomium on the staff of 
life : — 

XI 

Hail, O God, hail, O divine guru ! 

Hail to the corn by which the hearts of the hungry rejoice ! 
Hail to that saint who realizeth this ! 

He shall meet Go(f. 

Corn cometh from the Primal Being — 

Repeat God’s name with the relish of corn. 

Praise His name, praise His corn ; 

With water pleasant is its taste. 

He who abstaineth from corn,* 

Shall lose his honour in the three worlds.® 

She ® who abandonetli corn and practiseth hypocrisy, 

Is neither a wife nor a widow.’ 

They who publicly boast that they live on milk, 

Secretly eat a whole five sers of corn. 

Without corn no one is happy ; 

Abandoii corn and you shall not meet God. 

Saith Kabir, such is what I think ; 

Blessings on that corn by which man loveth his God ! 

* That is, cleanses his heart. 

® Illumines his five senses. This is also translated — Who 
admonisheth his five evil passions. 

® Also translated — Who knoweth the nine forms of devotion to God. 

* As some' ascetics do. 

® Because he practises hypocrisy. 

.® The feipinine gender, ae usual, for man in general. 

’ Is neither a worldly person nor an anchoret. 



240 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The following was addressed to a Jogi who en- 
deavoured to induce Kabir to drink wine. 

Ramkali 

I 

Make thy body the vat, the guru’s instruction thy molasses; 

Cut up avarice, lust, wrath, pride, and envy as thy kikar 
bark ; thus mix thy yeast. 

Is there any saint, in whose heart composure and happi- 
ness dwell, to whom I may offer my devotion and penance 
as commission for procuring me such wine ? 

I will give my soul and body for one drop of the wine 
which that vat produceth. 

I have made the fourteen worlds my furnace, and heated 
it with the fire of divine knowledge ; ^ 

1 have sealed the still with the gentle sound of God's 
name, and plastered it with what yield eth mental happiness. 

Pilgrimage, fasting, daily religious ceremonies, purifica- 
tions, and austerities at eclipses of the sun and moon I 
would pledge for that wine. 

Make meditation thy cup, God’s ambrosial name the pure 
juice, and drink that elixir ; 

From such a still a very pure trickling stream ever issueth, 
and the soul is delighted therewith. 

Saith Kabir, all other wines are insipid ; this is the true 
elixir. 

On the same subject. 

II 

Make divine knowledge thy molasses, meditation thy 
bassia flowers, and the fear of God in thy heart thy furnace : 

The drinker who is absorbed in God by means of the 
breath of the sukhmana imbibeth such wine, 

O Jogi, my mind is intoxicated — 

When that wine ascendeth to the brain man relisheth no 
other ; * there is then light in the three worlds. 

^ I have taken the light of divine knowledge to guide me. 

2 Also translated — Those who are intoxicated with celestial wine 
never taste earthly wine. 



KABIR^S HYMNS ' 241 

Joining God and the soul I have prepared a fumacie^ and 
drunk the excellent elixir ; 

I have burnt lust and wrath as firewood, and escaped 
from worldliness. 

The light of divine knowledge appeared to me when I 
met my true guru and obtained understanding. 

The slave Kabir is intoxicated with that wine, and will 
never abstain therefrom.^ 

Kabir was likened to a Kotwal for his severity to 
the wicked, and to a dog for his barking. He accepted 
both imputations. 

IV 

I honour the saints and I punish the wicked ; this is my 
court-house.^ 

I shampoo Thy feet, 0 God, day and night ; I turn my 
hair into a chauri and wave it over Thee. 

I am the dog at Thy court ; 

1 bark in front of it ^ putting forward my snout. 

In a former birth I was Thy servant ; that position I 
cannot now resign. 

The gentle order of Thy court was branded on my fore- 
head.^ 

They who bear such brand fight bravely in battle ; they 
who bear it not flee away. 

He who is holy knoweth how to serve God, and God 
putteth him into His treasury.® 

In the house of the body is the chamber of the heart, which 
hecometh the most precious chamber of all when filled with 
meditation on God. 

The guru hath granted God’s name, the Real Thing, to 
Kabir, saying, ‘ Take it and guard it ’ ; 

Kabir hath offered it to the world, but only he who was 
so destined receiveth it — 

^ Also translated — that wine whose intoxication shall never subside. 

2 The Kotwal in modern times is a police-officer, but in the time of 
Kabir the Kotwal was a magistrate and police-officer combined. 

® That is, I pray to Thee. 

^ That is, I was branded as 'i'by slave in a former birth, 

® Because he is a genuine and not a counterfeit coin. 

R 


SIKH. VI 



242 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Abiding is the married state of her who hath found the 
immortal elixir. 

The Brahman trusts not to God but to the Veds 
and the Gayatri, and hence he shall be lost. 

V 

Why shouldst thou, O Brahman, forget Him from whose 
mouth the Veds and the Gayatri issued ? 

Why shouldst not thou, O Pandit, utter the name of 
God, whose feet every one toucheth ? 

O my Brahman, why not repeat God’s name ? 

If thou utter not His name, O Pandit, thou shalt be 
cast into hell. 

Thou callest thyself exalted, yet thou eatest in the houses 
of the low, and fillest thy belly by the exaction of alms.^ 

On the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the half month 
thou devisest tales and beggest, but even with a lamp in 
thy hand thou shalt fall into the pit. 

Thou art a Brahman, I am a weaver of Banaras ; how 
can I be a match for thee ? 

By repeating the name of God I have been saved, while 
thou, O Pandit, shalt be lost by trusting to the Veds. 

A mystic hymn in which God is represented under 
the allegory of a tree. 

VI 

There is one tree ; ® it hath endless branches and shoots ; 
its blossoms ® and leaves * are filled with nectar.® 

This world is a garden * of ambrosia ; God who is perfect 
hath created it. 

The few holy men in whose hearts the light of God shineth. 

Know the story of my beloved sovereign God. 

One bumble-bee ’ intoxicated with the juice of the flowers 

' Literally— by obstinate acts, by threatening suicide, &c. 

• God. * Saints. 

® The rest of sentient beings. ® God’s name. 

* In which the branches and shoots have been planted. 

’ The searcher for God. ' 



KABIR^S HYMNS 243 

hath fixed his mind within the twelve petals of the lotus 
of the heart ; 

He then raising his breath to the lotus of sixteen petals 
in his brain gaineth the ecstatic fruit thereof.^ 

Another tree ^ was produced in the silent vacuum ; it 
dried up the waters of the earth ; ® 

Saith. Kabir,' I am a servant of those who have seen that 
tree.^ 

The following was addressed to a Jogi : — 

VII 

Make silence thine earrings, mercy thy wallet, and medi- 
tation thy cup ; 

Stitch thy body for thy patched coat, and make the 
Name thy support. 

O Jogi, practise such Jog 

That thou mayest While enjoying the world perform thy 
devotion, penance, and austerities under the guru’s instruc- 
tion. 

Make the knowledge of God the ashes thou smearest on 
thy body,® and meditation thy horn ; 

Abandoning the world, roam in the city of the body, and 
play thy heart as a kinguri ; 

Plant the five virtues in thy heart so that thy contem- 
plation may be undisturbed by the world, 

Saith Kabir, hear, O saints, make honesty and mercy 
your garden. 

^ There is supposed to be a lotus with twelve petals in the heart. 
Kabir means that his mind as a bumble-bee has entered that lotus. 
There is also supposed to be another lotus in the brain which 
has sixteen petals, and to this again his mind ascends. 

Others suppose that the numbers twelve and sixteen in the above 
lines mean the repetition of 0am similar numbers of times. 

This tree is divine knowledge which has its seat in the brain. 

® It removed man's earthly desires, 

^ In this hymn tree is also said to mean the universe, the branches 
and shoots are the planets and stars, the flowers are the saints, the 
leaves the rest of sentient beings. 

® Jogis smear ashes on their naked bodies as clothing or protection 
against the elements. 


R 2 



.244 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir in a fit of introspection and self-abasement 
addressed himself. 

VIII 

For what object wast thou born in the world, and what 
advantage hast thou gained from thy human birth ? 

Thou hast not applied thy mind even for a moment to 
God, the Fulfiller of desires, the Vessel to take thee across 
the terrible ocean. 

0 God, such sinners are we. 

That we have never performed service for that Lord who 
gave us our souls and bodies. 

The passion to possess others’ wealth, children, and wives, 
and to slander and calumniate others hath not forsaken us. 

We suffer transmigration again and again ; this law is 
not broken. 

1 have not wandered even for a moment to where the 
conversation of the saints of God is .held. 

Libertines, thieves, panders, and drunkards — with them 
have I ever consorted. 

My possessions are lust, wrath, covetousness, pride, and 
envy. 

Mercy, honesty, and service to the guru have not come 
to me even in my dreams. 

O God, compassionate to the poor, merciful, dear to the 
saints. Remover of fear, 

Prayeth Kabir, preserve Thine afflicted slave, O God, 
and I will perform Thy service. 

Remember God and do Him homage. 

IX 

Remember in thy heart the Being, 

By whose remembrance thou shalt obtain the gate of 
deliverance. 

Go to heaven, and return not to this world. 

Play the trumpets in the house of the Fearless One, 

And the unbeaten strain shall ever fully resound for thee. 

Without remembering Him deliverance can never be 
obtained. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


245 


Heartily bow before the Being, 

By remembering whom none may refuse thee ; 

Who conferreth salvation by which great loads of sin 
drop off, 

And thy transmigration is at an end. 

Remember Him through whom thou enjoyest thyself, 
And an everburning^ lamp shall be placed within 
thee — 

The lamp ^ which rendereth the world immortal, 

And expellet h the poison of lust and wrath. 

Twine and wear on thy neck the rosary 
Of Him by remembering whom Thy salvation shall be 
obtained. 

Wear that rosary, doff it not, 

And by the favour of the guru thou shalt be saved. 
Remember the Beloved day and night. 

And thou shalt have^no regard for men ; 

Thou shalt sleep at home in silken bed-clothes. 

And thy heart shall be gladdened by a pleasant couch. 
Ever remember God in thy heart and sing His praises. 
By remembering Him thy troubles shall depart, 

Aud Maya affect thee not. 

From the true guru learn how to remember God ; 
Remember Him ever day and night. 

Standing or sitting, at every expiration and inspiration, 
Waking or sleeping, enjoy the sweets of remembering 
Him ; 

By remembering God thou shalt be united with Him.® 
Make the remembrance of God’s name thy support ; 

By remembering Him no weight of sin shall oppress 
thee. 

Neither wrought nor spoken incantations can prevail with 
Him,^ 

Saith Kabir, who hath no limit. 

^ Literally — a lamp not fed with oil. 

® Divine knowledge* 

® Also translated — Thou shalt obtain good fortune. 

^ God is only moved by our remembering Him and repeating His 
name with devotion. 



246 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The condition of him who has put his passions 
under subjection. 

X 

He who hath captivated the captivators,^ 

Shall obtain deliverance, and the guru shall put out the 
fire of his passions.® 

When I had thoroughly examined my heart, 

I miade my ablutions within it. 

To dwell in God, the Lord of life, is the best thing ; 
There is then no death, or birth, or decay. 

Turning away from mammon I restrained my mind. 

And I entered the region of God.® 

I have pierced the serpent’s way,® 

And assuredly met God. 

Worldly love and mammon no more affect me ; 

The sun hath restrained the moon.® 

When I completely stopped my brpath. 

The lute played spontaneously. 

The preacher hath communicated this instruction ; 

The hearer hath heard and treasured it in his heart. 

He who acteth according to it shall be saved, 

Saith Kabir verily. 

God is a luminous diamond whose light fills crea- 
tion. 

XI 

The moon and sun are both forms of light ; 

God the unequalled pervadeth their light. 

O wise man, meditate on God 
In whose light creation is contained. 

Beholding God, the Diamond, I prostrate myself before 
Him. 

Saith Kabir, He is bright and yet invisible. 

® He who has put his passions under subjection. 

* These two lines are also translated — 

They who are attached to worldly things fall into the net of Death, 
While they whose avarice the guru extinguisheth are delivered. 

® Gagan — literally, the firmament — is a word applied by Jogis to 
the brain or tenth gate of the body where God dwells. 

® A supposed passage for air through the spinal marrow to the brain. 
® The brain retains the breath, and a state of exaltation supervenes. 



KABIR‘S HYMNS 


247 

Some Hindus asked Kabir to give them instruc- 
tion, upon which he composed the following : — 

XII 

O world, be alert and wakeful ; even while awake you 
are being robbed, my brethren. 

Even while the Veds, who are alert sentinels, look on, 
Death will take you away. 

The fool, the blockhead, and the pagan think that the 
nim is a mango, and the mango a nim;i 

That a ripe plantain-tree* is but a prickly bush, and 
that the fruit of the coco-nut ® is like the ripe fruit of the 
simmal. 

God is the sugar which hath been spilled in the dust ; 
it cannot be picked up by the elephant. 

Saith Kabir, renounce family, caste, and lineage, become 
an ant, and thou canst pick up and eat the sugar. 

A remonstrance to a Brahman for offering animal 
sacrifice to an idol. 

Maru 

I 

0 Pandit, what folly meditatest thou ? 

Thou shalt be ruined with all thy family for not having 
repeated God’s name, 0 luckless man. 

What availeth thee to read the Veds and the Purans ? 
It is like loading a donkey with sandal whose perfume he 
valueth not. 

Thou knowest not how to repeat God’s name ; how shalt 
thou be saved ? 

Thou takest life and deemest it religious ; tell me, my 
brother, what thou callest irreligious. 

Thou makest thyself out an excellent muni ; whom callest 
thou a butcher ? 

Mentally blind thou knowest not th 3 rself ; * 

^ They think good evil and evil good. The fruit of the nira is 
bitter, of the mango sweet. 

* God's name. ® Association with saints. 

* That is, God who is in thee. 



248 BHAGATS OB THE GRANTH SAHIB 

What 3hajt thou qause others to know ? 

Thou selle$t knowledgo fpr money, thy life passeth in vain. 

Narad and Vyas declare — and thou mayest go and ask 
Shukdev also — 

, Saith Kabir, too, by uttering the name of God ye shall 
be delivered ; otherwise ye shall perish, my brethren. 

It is the condition of the heart, not man’s garb 
or place of residence, which produces happiness. 

II 

Unless you remove evil from your hearts, how shall you 
find God by dwelling in the forest ? 

They who deem their own homes equal to the forest are 
perfect among men. 

You shall obtain true happiness, 

If you lovingly repeat the name of the Life of the world. 

What avail wearing matted hair, smearing yourselves with 
ashes, and dwelling in caves ? 

He who hath conquered his own heart hath conquered 
the world, because he is free from the deadly sins. 

All people use eye-wash, but there is a difference in their 
blandishments. 

The eyes to which the surma of divine knowledge is 
applied, are acceptable to God. 

Saith Kabir, I now know God ; the guru hath explained 
divine knowledge to ine ; 

T have met God who dwelleth in the heart ; my mind 
shall now no more wander. 

The following was addressed to a Jogi whom Kabir 
found begging and boasting that he had obtained 
all spiritual wealth and perfection : — 

III 

What hath he who hath obtained spiritual wealth and 
supernatural power to do with any one ? 

What shall I say regarding thy language ? I am ihuch 
ashamed to speak to thee. 

He who hath obtained God, 



KABIR'S HYMNS 249 

Wandereth not from door to door. 

This false world greatly bumeth for wealth in the hope 
of using it for a few days. 

Whosoever drinketh God’s water shall not be thirsty 
again ; 

He who knoweth God'hy the favour of the guru abandoneth 
all woridly desires. 

When the heart is withdrawn from the world, the True 
One appeareth everywhere. 

The name of God saveth him who hath tasted its savour. 

Saith Kabir, I have become gold, my doubts have fled, 
and I have crossed the ocean. 

It was made a reproach to Kabir that he being 
a weaver dared preach to men of high caste. Upon 
this he preached equality of all men. 

IV 

As the bubbles of the river are accounted water and blend 
with the water of the ocean, 

So the man who looketh on all with an equal eye, shall 
become pure and blend with the Infinite. 

Why should I return to this world ? 

Transmigration taketh place by God’s order ; he who 
obeyeth it shall blend with Him. 

When this fabric of five elements perisheth, my wandering 
shall be at an end. 

Forswearing sects, I look on all as equal and meditate on 
the one Name. 

I devote myself to and perform the duties which God 
assigned me. 

If God bestow mercy on me, I shall be absorbed in Him 
under the instruction of my guru. 

He who in life is in death, and who from death ^ retumeth 
to life shall not be born again. 

Saith Kabir, he who is permeated with the Name fixeth 
his love on God. 


^ Being dead toward God. 



250 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir in a vision beheld God and rushed to em- 
brace Him, but was repulsed. The following was 
composed on the occasion : — 

V 

If Thou repulse me, then show me the way of deliverance ; 

One God in many forms. Thou art contained in every- 
thing ; why dost Thou now illude me ? 

0 God, whither dost Thou take me for salvation ? 

1 ask Thee where Thou wilt give me salvation and of 
what degree,^ seeing that by Thy favour I have already 
obtained it ? 

I called Thee my future saviour until I knew the reality ; * 

I have now become pure in heart, saith Kabir, and my 
mind is happy. 

Kabir is said to have uttered the following to 
'a man whom he found committyig an act of im- 
morality. 

VI 

Rawan had to leave the golden fortress and strongholds 
which he had made — 

0 man, why actest thou as it pleaseth thyself ? 

When Death cometh and catcheth thee by the hair, only 
God’s name will save thee. 

Death and life are the work of God ; this deceitful world 
is only an entanglement ; 

Saith Kabir, they who have the elixir of God in their 
hearts shall ultimately be saved. 

The body likened to a village, the soul to its 
headman, and the senses to its agriculturists. 

VII 

The body is a village ; the soul placed therein is its 
headman ; five husbandmen dwell in it — 

The senses — eyes, nose, ear, tongue, and touch — which 
obey not my orders. 

^ There are four degrees of salvation — saloh, heaven ; samip, being 
near God ; sarup, assuming God’s form ; sayuj, being absorbed in God. 

* That Thou hadst already saved me. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


251 


O father, I shall no longer dwell in this village ; 

The accountants called Chitr and Gupt ask for an account 
of every moment of mine, 

So when Dharmraj calleth for my account, there will 
be a heavy balance against me. 

The five husbandmen will then have all fled, and the 
bailiffs will arrest the soul. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O holy men, settle your accounts on 
the field ; ^ 

Pardon for this once thy slave, so that he may not have 
to return to this terrible ocean. 

A Bairagi who had come from Dwaraka told 
Kabir he had seen God there, and he asked him to 
go there too, and he would also see God. Upon 
this the following colloquy occurred. 

VIII 

O Bairagi, no one hath seen the Fearless One ; 

Can the Fearless One be obtained without fearing Him ? 

‘ Certainly not.’ ^ 

O Bairagi, if man were to see the Lord present, he would 
feel fear ; 

He who obeyeth God’s order is without fear — ‘ Certainly.’ 

0 Bairagi, though all people are imbued with hypocrisy. 

Practise it not thou before God — ‘ Certainly not.’ 

O Bairagi, men set not covetousness aside ; 

pgoism hath destroyed the body — ‘ Certainly.’ 

O Bairagi, the fire of care hath burnt the body. 

But thou shalt escape from it if thou deaden thy feelings — 
‘ Certainly.’ 

Without a true guru there can be no contempt of the 
world, O Bairagi, 

Even though everybody desire it — ‘ Certainly.’ 

O Bairagi, if it be God’s will, thou shalt meet the true 
guru, 

*■ That is, while alive. The metaphor is derived from the practice 
which prevailed before British rule of taking payments in kind. 
Creditors’ and debtors’ accounts were settled on the harvest field. 

* Wana hanbai. In the Malwa dialect hanbai means yes. 



252 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

And shalt easily obtain God — ‘ Certainly.’ 

Saith Kabir, 0 Bairagi, address one prayer to God, 

To take thee over the terrible ocean — ‘ Certainly.* 

Krishan was one day going to visit Duryodhan, 
but he heard that Duryodhan was then holding 
court. Krishan, in order to avoid the regal cere- 
monial and entertainments connected therewith, re- 
mained the night with Vidur. Next day when 
Krishan and Duryodhan met, the latter upbraided 
him in a friendly manner for not having gone straight 
to him. The following is Krishan’s reply : — 

IX 

0 king, who would go to thee ? 

1 have seen such affection on Vidur’s part that the poor 
man pleaseth me. 

Beholding thine elephants, thou ha*st been lost in error 
and hast not recognized God. 

I consider Vidur’s water as nectar in comparison with 
thy milk. 

I got vegetables without condiment, but to me they were 
equal to khir, and the night passed in Vidur’s singing 
God's praises. 

Kabir’s God is joyous and happy, and payeth no atten- 
tion to anybody’s caste. 


Sloks 

ITie following two sloks in the Rag Maru are 
attributed to Kabir. The battle referred to is 
perhaps intended to represent man’s struggle with 
his evil passions. These are the only lines in the 
Granth Sahib relating to war. 

When the drums sound aloud, the conspicuous warriors fall 
wounded ; ^ 

^ Also Uanslated — (a) Aim is taken, and wounds are inflicted ; 
{b) When the guru’s drum soundeth, the disciple, at whom it is aimed, 
is wounded. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 253 

The brave have entered the battle-field ; now is the time 
for combat. 

Recognize him as a hero who fighteth for the love of his 
religion ; 

He may die cut in pieces, but will never desert the battle- 
field. 

The following was a sharp remonstrance addressed 
to some men of high rank. 


You have forgotten your religion, O madmen ; ^ou have 
forgotten your religion. 

You fill your bellies, you sleep like beasts, you have lost 
your human births ; 

You have never associated with saints, but have adopted 
false occupations ; 

You wander like dogs, pigs, and ravens ; 

You deem yourselves great and others small ; ^ 

I have seen you going to hell in thought, word, and deed. 

The lustful, the wrathful, the deceitful, the dissemblers, ^ 
and the idlers, 

Pass their time in doing evil and never remember God. 

Saith Kabir, fools, blockheads, and pagans reflect not ; 

They know not God’s name ; how shall they be saved ? 

Men should remember God and not be led astray 
by worldly pleasures. 

XI 

Remember God or thou shalt repent it ; 

O sinful soul, thou practisest avarice, but thou shalt 
depart to-day or to-morrow. 

Through thine attachment to avarice and being led astray 
by mammon, thou hast wasted thy life. 

Be not proud of thy wealth and youth ; they dissolve 
like paper. 

^ Literally — you deem yourselves vowels and others consonants. 

* Literally— actors. 



254 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

When Death cometh and seizeth thee by the hair and 
knocketh thee down, on that day shalt thou be powerless. 

Thou hast not remembered God, or worshipped Him, or 
shown mercy to His creatures, therefore shalt thou be 
smitten on the mouth. 

When Dharmraj asketh for thine account, what face shalt 
thou show him ? 

Saith Kabir, hear, ye good men, ye shall be saved in the 
company of the holy. 

The condition of him who has obtained salvation 
during life. 

Kedara 

I 

They who abandon praise as well as blame, who reject 
honour as well as dishonour. 

Who consider iron and gold the same, are the image of God — 

Few, 0 Lord, are Thy servants ! 

They who abandon lust, wrath, covetousness, and worldly 
love behold God’s feet. 

What are called the qualities of impulse, ignorance, and 
goodness are all contained in Thy Maya. 

Only they who understand the fourth degree, have 
obtained the supreme position ; 

They never entertain love for pilgrimages, fasting, or for 
the religious ceremonies, purifications, and austerities of the 
superstitious. 

By meditating on God, avarice, worldly love, and doubt 
depart ; 

The darkness of the mansion in which the lamp of divine 
knowledge burneth is dispelled ; 

Its owner abideth completely fearless, and his doubts have 
fled ; saith Kabir, I am his slave.’ 

The saint deals in holiness and is thus emancipated 
during life. 

II 

Some deal in bronze and copper, others in cloves and 
betel-nut ; 

’ Also translated — The slave Kabir saith. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 255 

The saints deal in God’s name ; that is my merchandise. 

0 dealers in the name of God, 

' The priceless diamond hath come to hand, and worldly 
thoughts have fled. 

They whom the True One attached to truth, remain 
attached to it ; truth is their occupation. 

They dispatched a load of the true thing, and it reached 
God the storekeeper. 

God is Himself the gem, the jewel, and the precious 
stone ; He is Himself the jeweller ; 

He is in every direction immovable ; 

He setteth everything in motion ; 

He is a permanent dealer. 

0 man, make thy heart the ox, meditation the road, fill 
thy sack with divine knowledge, and load it on the ox ; 

Saith Kabir, hear, 0 saints, my goods have arrived at 
their destination. 

The following was addressed to a Jogi who forti- 
fied himself for his austerities by potations of wine. 

Ill 

O ignorant and stupid brawler,^ reverse thy breath and 
direct it to- thy hrain ; 

Then turn thy brain into a furnace, draw the nectareous 
stream, and thou shalt become divinely intoxicated. 

O brother, call upon God for assistance. 

O saints, ever drink this wine so difficult to obtain, and 
your thirst shall easily be quenched. 

In the fear of God is love ; he who knoweth this shall 
obtain God’s elixir, my brother. 

Ambrosia is in every heart ; God giveth it to whom- 
soever He pleaseth. 

There is one city ; ^ it hath nine gates ; 

Restrain thy wandering mind from issuing by them. 

After the exercise of the ira, pingla, and sukhmana, the 
tenth gate openeth and the mind becometh intoxicated. 

^ Kalwdr — also translated as if written kaldl, a wine-seller, then 
a drunkard. * The body. 



256 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

When the soul ohtaineth the fully fearless dignity, suffering 
is at an end, saith Kabir deliberately. 

Turning from the way of the world I have obtained this 
wine, a cup of which causeth divine intoxication. 

Religious instruction addressed to a dissolute fop. 

IV 

Thou who art saturated with lust, wrath, and covetous- 
ness, knowest not the way of the One God. 

Thine eyes are burst, thou seest nothing, thou art drowned 
even without water. 

Why walkest thou so foppishly ? 

Thou art a compound of bones, skin, and filth, and 
saturated with evil odour. 

Thou repeatest not God’s name ; in what doubts hast 
thou gone astray ? Death is not far from thee. 

Whatever efforts thou makest to preserve thy body, shall 
it last when thy term of life is complete ? 

Nothing resulteth from thine efforts ; what can any 
mortal do ? 

If it be God’s will, man shall meet a true guru and repeat 
the One name. 

Thou livest in a house of sand and puflfest out thy body, 
0 simpleton. 

Saith Kabir, they, however clever, who remember not 
God are lost. 

The following was addressed to the same person. 

V 

Crooked thy turban,^ crooked thy gait,^ thou beginnest 
to eat betel ; ^ 

Thou hast naught to do with the love and service of 
God ; thou sayest * I have business in court ’. 

Thou hast forgotten God in thy pride ; 

Ever gazing on thy gold and thy very beautiful women 
thou deemest them permanent ; 

^ Thou wearest thy turban on the side of thy head like a fop. 

* Thou walkest foppishly. 

* So as to give a rosy colour lo thy lips. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 257 

Thy life passeth away in covetousness, falsehood, sin, 
and great arrogance. 

Saith Kabir, Death will attack thee at last, O fool. 
Kabir reminds a worldly person of his death. 

• VI 

Having beaten thy drum for four days, thou shalt depart. 

With all thine earnings, thy ready money, and thy buried 
treasures, thou shalt take nothing with thee. 

Thy dear wife will sit and weep in the portico ; thy 
mother will go as far as the gate with thee ; 

All thy friends and relations will accompany thee to the 
burning-ground ; hut thy soul shall depart alone. 

Thou shalt not again behold thy sons, thy wealth, thy 
towns, and thy cities. 

Saith Kabir, why remember not God ? thy life is passing 
in vain. 

God's name is Kabir' s sole property. 

Bhairo 

I 

The name of God is my wealth ; 

I cannot tie it in a knot, or sell it for my livelihood. 

The Name is my field, the Name is my garden ; 

I Thy slave, 0 Gody perform Thy service and seek Thy 
protection. 

Thy name is my wealth. Thy name my capital ; 

I know none but Thee. 

Tliy name is my kindred, Thy name my brethren. 

Thy name my associates, who will assist me at the last 
moment. 

Saith Kabir, I am a slave to him 

Whom God keepeth in the world, but who is indifferent to it. 

The following was addressed to a rich man who 
had offered Kabir money : — 

II 

Naked thou earnest and naked shalt thou depart ; 

None shall remain — not even kings or rulers. 

S 


SIKH. M 



258 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I have the sovereign God as my nine treasures ; 

Thou hast the love of property, women, and wealth ; 

But they did not come with thee, nor shall they go with 
thee. 

What availeth thee to have elephants tied at thy gate ? 
The fortress of Ceylon was made of gold. 

But what did the fool Rawan take with him ? 

Saith Kabir, meditate some good acts : 

The gambler shall depart with empty hands. 

God alone is pure. 

III 

Impure is Brahma, impure is Indar ; 

Impure is the sun and impure the moon. 

This world is defiled with impurity ; 

Pure is God alone who hath neither end nor limit. 
Impure are the gods of the worlds.; 

Impure are nights, days, and months devoted to idolatry. 
Impure are pearls, impure are diamonds. 

Impure are wind, fire, and water ; 

Impure are Shiv, Shankar, and Mahesh ; ^ 

Impure are Sidhs, Sadhiks, and those who wear religious 
garbs ; 

Impure are J ogis, and J angams with their matted hair ; 
Impure is the body with the soul — 

Saith Kabir, only those who know God, 

Are pure and acceptable. 

The following was addressed to a hypocritical 
Muhammadan priest who had advised Kabir to 
make a pilgrimage to Makka. 

IV 

Make thy mind thy Kaaba, thy body its enclosing temple. 
Conscience ® its prime teacher ; 

Then, O priest, call men to pray to that mosque 
Which hath ten gates. 

1 Three names of Shiv. The Hindus say that there are eleven 
Shivs. 2 Literally — thy speaker. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


259 


Sacrifice ^ wrath, doubt, and malice ; 

Make patience thine utterance of the five prayers. 

The Hindus and the Musalmans have the same Lord ; 
What can the Mulla, what can the Shaikh do for man ? 
Saith Kabir, I have become mad ; 

Stealing my mind away from the world I have become 
blended with God. 

Some one represented to Kabir that he was com- 
pletely spoiled by his religious exercises. The 
following was his reply : — 

V 

When a stream is lost in the Ganges, 

It becometh as the Ganges itself ; 

Kabir is similarly lost in God by invoking Him ; 

I have become as the True One and need not go elsewhere. 
The perfume of tlie sandal is communicated to other 
trees ; 

They then become as the sandal itself. 

When the philosopher’s stone is applied to copper. 

It becometh gold ; 

So Kabir having met the saints, 

Hath become as God. 

The following was addressed to some Brahmans 
who had attributed Kabir’s contempt for their 
religious ceremonies to madness. 

VI 

You wear tilaks on your foreheads, carry rosaries in your 
hands, and put on sectarial dresses : 

People think that God is a plaything — 

If I am mad, 0 God, I am still Thine. 

How can people know my secret ? ^ 

1 gather no leaves ^ and I worship no idol ; 

^ Mismil a corruption of the Arabic btsmilldh, in the name of God, 
an expression used by Musalmans when slaughtering animals. 

2 That is, the cause of my madness. 

® To offer to idols. 


' S 2 



260 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Without devotion to God other worship is fruitless. 

I worship the True Guru, and ever and ever propitiate 
Him ; 

For such service I shall obtain happiness in His court. 
People say Kabir is mad, 

But only God knoweth Kabir ’s secret. 

Kabir renounces both the Hindu and the Muham- 
madan priests. 

VII 

Turning away from the world I have forgotten both caste 
and lineage ; 

My weaving is now in the infinite silence.^ 

I have now no quarrel with any one ; 

I have given up both the Pandits and the Mullas. 

I weave clothes and I wear them myself ; 

Where I see no pride ^ there I sing God’s praises. 

What the Pandits and the Mullas prescribed for me, 

I have received no advantage from, and have abandoned. 
My heart being pure ^ I have seen the Lord ; 

Kabir having searched and searched himself, hath found 
God within him. 

Kabir when reproached with his poverty replied : — 

VIII 

Nobody respecteth the poor man ; 

He may make hundreds of thousands of efforts, but no 
one will heed him. 

If a poor man go to a rich man. 

The latter, though opposite him, will turn his back. 

If a rich man go to a poor man. 

The latter respecteth, yea^ inviteth him ; 

Yet the poor man and the rich man are brothers : — 
God’s design ^ cannot be set aside. 

Saith Kabir, it is he who is poor. 

In whose heart the Name abideth not. 

1 In the realms of God. 2 is, in the society of the saints. 

® Also translated — being freed from the world. 

^ In making one poor and the other rich. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


261 


Worship God betimes. 

IX 

When man serveth the guru and worshippeth God, 

It is only then he really hath a human body.^ 

Even the demigods ^ long for this body ; 

Therefore having obtained it, 

Worship God ; forget Him not ; 

That is the advantage of human birth. 

Before the disease of old age hath come upon thee. 

Before Death hath seized thy body, 

Before thy voice hath grown weak, 

0 man, worship God. 

If thou worship Him not now, when wilt thou, my 
brother ? 

When the end comet h thou canst not do so. 

Whatever thou doest, it is best to do now ; 

Otherwise thou shalt not be saved, and shalt afterwards 
repent. 

He is a worshipper whom God applieth to His worship ; 
It is he who shall obtain the pure God. 

The doors of his understanding shall open to him by 
meeting the guru. 

And he shall not return again by the way of the womb. 
This is thine opportunity, this thy time ; 

Look into thy heart and reflect on this, 

Saith Kabir, 0 man, whether thou win or lose, 

1 have many times called out to thee. 

In the following Kabir appears to mean that God 
resides in the brain. 

X 

The best knowledge abideth in the city of Shiv ; ^ 

Having obtained it there, meditate upon God,^ 

^ That is, it is only then his human birth is piofitable. 

2 The demigods are proud, and do not praise God. They can only 
obtain deliverance by being born in human bodies. 

^ I'he brain or tenth gate. 

^ This and the preceding line are also translated — Men of the 
highest intellect raise their breath to the brain ; 

Do thou meeting them contemplate God. 



262 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


And thou shalt know this world and the next. 

Why should I kill myself performing works of pride ? 

My attention is fixed on the special place — the brain ; 

The name of the Sovereign God is my divine knowledge. 
He who hath closed his sphincter ani/ 

Hath placed the moon above the sun.^ 

At the western gate the sun is hot ; ® 

The breath then riseth to the brain from the spine. 

The western gate is closed by a rock ; ^ 

There is a window ® over that rock. 

. Over the window is the tenth gate — 

Saith Kabir, He who dwelleth there hath neither end nor 
limit. 

Kabir gives his ideas of what a MuUa, a Qazi, 
and a superior of Jogis ought to be. 

XI 

He is a Mulla who struggleth with^iis heart, 

Who by the instruction of the guru contendeth with Death, 
And crusheth Death’s pride. 

Salutation ever to that Mulla ! 

God is present ; why describe Him as distant ? 

If thou restrain thy pugnacity, thou shalt obtain the 
Beautiful One. 

He is a Qazi who pondereth on his body. 

Who burneth it with divine fire, 

And alloweth not his seed to drop even in his dreams — 
For such a Qazi there is no old age or death — 

He is an emperor ® who knoweth how to draw up his two 
breaths,’ 

^ So that all the breath of the body may go to the brain. This 
act is done mechanically by resting the anus on the heel. 

2 This verse is explained — He has set knowledge with its tiny light 
above universal ignorance. 

® When the breath rises to the top of the spine. 

^ A piece of flesh which the Jogis suppose to be at the top of the 
spinal column. 

® This is a second obstacle to the passage of the breath. 

® Sultan — By this word is here meant a superior of Jogis. 

’ Who knows how to exercise the ira and pingla. Also translated — 
who shoots two arrows — knowledge and contempt of the world. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 263 

Who recalleth his mind when it goeth abroad, who col- 
lecteth the army of breaths ^ in his brain — " 

Such a one is an emperor, and hath an umbrella over 
his head. 

The Jogis cry out ‘ Gorakh, Gorakh ’ ; 

The Hindus repeat ‘ Ram, Ram ’ ; 

The Musalmans have Khuda, 

But Kabir’s God is the All-pervading. 

The following hymn, which is a homily against 
idolatry, is said to have been composed by the fifth 
Guru from a theme of Kabir. 

XII 

Vain is his devotion, 

Who saith a stone is God. 

Idle shall be his labour 
Who falleth at the feet of a stone. 

My God always spea^eth ; ^ 

He bestoweth gifts on all living things. 

He who is blind knoweth not God who is within him ; 
He is led away by superstition, and entangleth others. 

A stone speaketh not, nor bestoweth gifts ; 

Vain are the ceremonies of idolaters and fruitless their 
service. 

Say what advantage can be gained 
By anointing a corpse with sandal. 

If any one roll a corpse in the dirt. 

What harm can it do the corpse ? 

Saith Kabir, I proclaim with a loud voice — 

Understand me, ye infidels and pagans ; 

The love of other gods hath destroyed many homes. 

The saints of God are ever happy. 

The universal influence of Maya and the means 
of counteracting it. 

XIII 

The fishes in the water are led by Maya ; ^ 

^ The body is supposed to have ten breaths, all of which the Jogis 
believe they can collect in the brain. ^ He is not silent like an idol. 
® Their sense of taste, their palates. 



264 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

The moths round the lamp are influenced by Maya ; 
Through Maya the elephant feeleth lust ; 

Creeping things and bumble-bees ^ perish through Maya — 
My brethren, Maya is so bewitching 
That she illudeth all living beings— 

Birds and beasts are imbued with Maya ; 

She causeth great hardship to the honey-bees ; ^ 

Horses and camels are saturated with Maya ; 

The eighty-four Sidhs are the sport of Maya ; 

The six Jatis are the slaves of Maya ; 

So are the nine Naths, the sun, and the moon ; 

Penitents and the supreme Rikhis are lulled by Maya ; 

In the power of Maya are Death and his five messengers ; ^ 
Dogs and jackals are imbued with Maya ; 

So are monkeys, leopards, lions, 

Cats, sheep, and foxes ; 

Trees and tubers are subject to M^a ; 

The demigods are saturated with Maya ; 

So are the ocean, the firmament, and the earth. 

Saith Kabir, he who hath a belly is subject to Maya ; 

But man shall be freed from her' influence when he hath 
found a saint. 

Let man fix his attention on God and not on 
worldly things. 

XIV 

As long as man speaketh of things as his own. 

So long not one of his affairs shall prosper. 

When he ceaseth to speak of things as his own. 

Then God shall come and adjust his affairs. 

To that end, O man, ponder on divine knowledge. 

Why rememberest thou not God, the Destroyer of misery ? 
As long as lions inhabit the forest, 

So long shall the forest not flourish.^ 

When the jackal eateth the lion,^ 

The whole forest bursteth out in bloom. 

^ The lotus closes on them at night. 

2 In their anxiety to store honey. ^ The five evil passions. 

^ The other animals of the forest will be unhappy. 

^ Wlien divine knowledge destroys pride. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 265 

They who think themselves victorious are lost : and they 
who think themselves defeated are saved ; ^ 

By the favour of the guru they cross over. 

The slave Kabir admonisheth all men 
To fix their attention on God alone. 

A brief description of God's court to which Kabir 
craves admittance. 

XV 

Who will introduce poor me to Him 
Who hath seven thousand commanders, 

A lakh and a quarter of prophets, 

Eighty-eight karors of men called Shaikhs, 

And fifty-six karors of servants to amuse Him ? 

His court is afar off ; who can reach His private chamber ? 
He hath thirty-three karors of play-houses ; 

Eighty-four lakhs of beings wander in them? 

He showed some favour to father Adam, 

And put him into paradise for a long time. 

The faces of those whose hearts are not right are pale, and 
their utterance is confounded ; 

They forsake their books and work evil. 

They who attribute blame to God and are angry with Him, 
Shall obtain the fruit of their acts. 

Thou art the giver, 0 Lord ; I ever beg of Thcc : 

If Thou refuse me, I am ruined.® 

The slave Kabir is in Thy sanctuary. 

Keep me, O Merciful One, near Thee. 

Kabir desires not heaven but absorption in God. 

XVI 

Everybody saith he is going thither ; ^ 

1 know not where heaven is. 

They who know not the secrets of their own hearts 

^ I'his verse is also translated — They who are overcome by their 
evil passions are lost, and they who conquer them are saved. 

2 Also tianslated — wander as His jesters. 

® The gy anis translate — A stain shall attach to Thee. The line is 
also translated— If 1 reply, I shall be at fault. ^ To heaven. 



266 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Glibly talk of heaven* 

As long as man desireth heaven, 

He shall not dwell at God’s feet. 

I know not where heaven’s gate is, 

Nor its moat, nor its plastered fortress. 

Saith Kabir, what more can I now say 

Than that the society of saints is heaven ? 

Kabir tells how he subdued his evil passions. 

XVII 

How shall I subdue this beautiful fortress,^ my brother, 

Which hath double walls ^ and triple moats,® 

Whose entrenchments are the five subtle elements, the 
twenty-five categories,^ worldly love, pride, jealousy, and 
very powerful Maya ? 

I who am poor cannot obtain strength to take that jortress ; 
what shall I do, O God ? 

Lust is its folding doors, woe and weal its gate-keepers, 
demerits and merits its gates ; 

Anger, which is very quarrelsome, its commander ; and 
the heart its rebel king. 

The defenders had dainties for their coats of mail, egoism 
for their helmets, and evil understanding for the bows they 
drew ; 

Covetousness, which dwelleth in the quiver of the heart, 
became their arrows ; thus the fortress was impregnable ; 

But I made divine love the fuse, meditation the howitzer, 
and divine knowledge the shells ; 

I gently lit the fuse with the fire of God’s name, and 
captured the fortress with one shot. 

1 began to fight assisted by truth and contentment, and 
battered both its doors ; 

^ The body. 

2 The two walls are doubt and wrong-headedness. 

® The three moats are the three qualities. 

^ The twenty-five categories of the Sankhya philosophy. See 
Monier Williams's Indian Wisdom and the Introduction to Cockburn 
Thompson's Bhagavai Giia, An enumeration of the categories here 
would not assist the Sikh student. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 267 

By the favour of the congregation of the saints and of 
the guru I made its king a prisoner. 

By dint of remembering God I, a coward, have cut the 
noose of Death. 

The slave Kabir hath scaled the fortress, and secured an 
imperishable empire. 

The following refers to another persecution of 
Kabir : — 

XVIII 

The Ganges is a deity deep and profound ; 

I, Kabir, was made to stand in it with chains on my feet. 
My spirits fell not ; why should my body fear ? 

My mind was absorbed in God’s lotus feet ; 

My chains were broken by the ripples of the Ganges, 
And I found myself seated on a deer-skin. 

Saith Kabir, I had no friend or companion 
But God the Proteclor both by water and land. 

God and His residence. 

Ashtapadi 

I 

God constructed an inaccessible fortress^ for His residence. 
Which He illumined with His light. 

The lightning playeth and pleasure reigneth 
Where the youthful ^ Lord God reposeth. 

If the soul love God’s name, 

Man shall be released from old age and death, and his 
doubts shall flee away. 

He whose mind loveth to consider whether a man’s caste 
is high or low, 

Chanteth the hymn of egoism. 

The sound of the unbeaten music is heard 
Where the Lord God reposeth. 

He who fashioned continents and different countries, 

The three worlds, the three gods, and the three qualities, 

^ The tenth gate or brain, 

2 Some translate this the minute or invisible. 



268 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Though styled inaccessible and invisible, dwelletli within 
the heart. 

None can find the limit or the secret of the Sustainer of 
the earth ; 

He shineth in the plantain blossom and in the sunshine, 
And hath taken His dwelling in the pollen of the lotus* 
God’s spell is within the twelve petals of the heart 
Where the holy Lord of Lakshmi reposeth. 

The great God reacheth from the lower to the upper 
regions of the firmament ; 

He illumineth the silent realm, 

Where there is neither sun nor moon. 

He was in the beginning ; He is without stain and happy. 
Know that he pervadeth the body as well as the universe ; 
He batheth in Mansarowar ; ^ 

His pass-word is ‘ Soham ’ (I am He) ; 

He is not subject to merits or demerits, ^ 

Nor concerned with caste, with sunshine, or with shade ; 
He is only found in the guru’s asylum. 

He who fixeth his attention on Him removeth it not, 
becometh released from transmigration, 

And absorbed in the Infinite. 

He who knoweth God in his heart 
And repeateth His name, becometh as He. 

Saith Kabir, that mortal shall be saved 
Who fixeth in his heart God’s light and spell. 

God, God's servants, and God's court. 

II 

Millions of suns shine for Him ; 

He hath millions of Shivs and Kailases 
Millions of Durgas shampoo His limbs ; 

Millions of Brahmas recite the Veds for Him — 

If I beg, let me beg only of God ; 

1 have naught to do with any other god — 

Millions of moons form His lamps ; 

Thirty-three demigods cook His food ; 

^ In the lake of the heart. 

2 A peak in the Himalayas where the Ganges is supposed to rise. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 269 

The nine planets ^ multiplied millions of times stand on 
duty in his court ; 

Millions of Dharmrajas are His porters ; 

Millions of winds from the four cardinal points fan Him ; 
Millions of Sheshnags, lay His bed ; 

Millions of ocee^ns are His water-carriers ; 

The eighteen million loads of vegetables are His hair ; 
Millions of store-keepers fill His store-houses ; 

Millions of Lakshmis decorate Him — 

He removeth many millions of demerits and merits — 
Millions of Indars wait on Him ; 

The fifty-six millions of clouds are His messengers ; 

He is celebrated and unrivalled in every land. 

With His tresses loose and with terrible as^ectHe moveth — 
God playeth in millions of ways — • 

There are millions of feasts at His court ; 

Millions of celestial singers hail Him ; 

Millions of sciences all describe His attributes, 

But even then they cannot find His end. 

In His hair are millions of Bawans, 

And Rams who out-generalled Rawan’s army, 

And Krishans who humbled the pride of Duryodhan, 
Greatly extolled by a thousand million Purans. 

Millions of Cupids cannot compete with Him in beauty — 
He stealeth away the inmost heart. 

Saith Kabir, hear me, O God, 

Grant me the fearless dignity, the gift I crave. 

The following was written under the grateful 
influence of early spring in the north of India. 

Basant 

I 

The earth bloometh, the firmament rejoiceth ; 

Every heart is gladdened by God’s light. 

The Lord God rejoiceth in endless ways ; 

These are — SQraj, Chand, Mangal, Budh, Brihaspali, Shukkar, 
Sanichar, Rahii; and Ketu. The days of the week are named, in 
India, after the first seven. 



270 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Whithersoever I look, there is He contained. 

The four Veds rejoice in worldliness ; 

So do the Simritis with the books of the Musalmans. 
Shiv practising Jog rejoiceth — 

Kabir’s Lord bloometh equally in all things. 

Kabir accepts as saints Shukdev, Akrur, Hanuman, 
and Shiv, famous for their continence, and rejects 
the hypocritical Brahmans, Jogis, Sanyasis, and Peni- 
tents of his time. 

II 

The Pandits grow proud reciting the Purans, 

The Jogis in practising Jog, 

The Sanyasis in saying there is no one like themselves ; 
The Penitents even in their different penances 
Are all intoxicated with pride ; none of them is awake. 
The thieves ^ who rob houses are already with them. 
Shukdev and Akrur ^ are awake ; * 

Hanuman with the tail is awake ; 

Shiv is awake and worshippeth God'^s feet ; 

In this Kal age Namdev and Jaidev are awake? 

There are several forms of waking and sleeping : — 

He who is awake under the guru’s instruction is the best. 
The most important duty of this body, 

Saith Kabir, is to repeat God’s name. 

To obtain salvation without a guru would be 
impossible. 

Ill 

Hath a wife ever given birth to her husband ? 

Hath a boy ever dandled his father ? 

Hath a woman without breasts ever suckled ? 

See, 0 people, the peculiarity of this Kal age — 

Hath a son ever taken his mother in marriage ? 

Can a man without feet ever leap ? 

Can a man without a mouth burst into laughter ? 
Without sleep can man repose ? 

^ The evil passions. 2 ^.n uncle of Krishan. 

® The persons mentioned did not allow worldly matters to interrupt 
their devotions. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


271 


Can one churn milk without a churn ? 

Can a cow without an udder give milk ? 

Can one accomplish a long journey without a road ? 

So the way cannot be found without a true guru, 

Kabir saith, and adraonisheth all men. 

God saves his saints as He did Prahlad. 

IV 

Prahlad was sent to school for instruction ; 

He took several boys with him as his class-fellows. 

He said to his teacher : — ‘ Why teach me worldly entangle- 
ments ? 

‘ Rather write on my tablet the name of God. 

‘ I will not, sir, abandon the name of God ; 

‘I have no concern with any other instruction.’ 

His tutor'" s sons, Sanda and Marka,^ went and reported 
the matter to Prahlad" s father. 

He sent for Prahlad, telling them to run quickly to him ; 
Then he addressed him : — ‘ Abandon the habit of repeating 
God’s name ; 

* I will let thee go at once if thou obey my words.’ 
Prahlad replied, ‘ Why dost thou continually annoy me ? 
‘ I should be a sinner were I to abandon the one God 
‘ Who made the water, the dry land, the hills, and the 
mountains. 

‘ Throw me into the fire or kill me if it please thee.’ 

His father became angry and drawing his sword said, 

‘ Show me that Preserver of thine.’ 

Upon this God expanding came forth from a pillar. 

And killed Harnakhas by tearing him with His nails. 

It was the Supreme Being, the God of gods, who appeared. 
For the sake of His saint He became incarnate as the 
man-lion. 

Saith Kabir, He whose limit cannot be seen 
Saved Prahlad several times.^ 

^ Brahma's son was Bhrigu, Bhrigu's son was Shukkar, Shukkar's 
sons were Sanda and Marka. 

2 His life had been often in danger before from the bigotry and 
violence of his father, and the present occurrence was but the 
culmination of many acts of paternal cruelty. 



372 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 
Kabir prays to be protected from lust. 

V 

Within this body and mind is the thief Cupid, 

Who hath stolen my jewel of divine knowledge. 

I have no patron, O God, to whom I may make my 
complaint. 

Whom hath Cupid not ruined ? Who am I that I should 
escape ? 

O God, this terrible pain cannot be endured ; 

What power hath my fickle mind against Cupid ? 

Sanak Sanandan, the sons of Brahma, Shiv, Shukdev, 
Vishnu, Brahma, and others know his power. 

The poets, the Jogis, the wearers of matted hair, 

Passed their lives guarding themselves against him. 
Thou, O God, art unfathomable ; I cannot find Thy depth. 

0 God, Lord of the poor, to whom else may I tell my 
woes ? 

Let the pain of birth and death subside, and grant me 
continence. 

Kabir singeth the praises of the Ocean of happiness. 

The body under the allegory of a merchant. 

VI 

There is one head of the firm and five traders,^ 

Who take with them spurious wares on twenty-five oxen.^ 
There are ten bags ^ and nine poles ^ to lift them ; 

The body is bound by seventy-two ropes. 

1 have nothing to do with that commerce 

By which my capital is lessened, and my interest ever 
increased. 

1 have trafficked by joining the seven threads ; ® 

^ The head of the firm is man, the five traders the five senses. 

2 The spurious wares are worldly things. 

^ Generally understood to be the ten breaths of the body. 

^ The nine gates of the body. 

^ j^airog, contempt of the world ; bibek, discrimination; khaisampai, 
the six acquisitions; moksk ichha, desire of deliverance; shrawan, 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


273 


I have joined with them good acts and God's love. 

The three tax-gatherers ^ wrangle for their share ; 

But I a trader put them aside and departed. 

The capital of the five traders is lost, their trade is ruined, 

And the oxen disperse in every direction. 

Saith Kabir, O man, tliy business shall prosper. 

And thy doubts depart when thou art absorbed in God. 

A Brahman had censured Kabir for not having 
paid due attention to caste rules in eating. The 
following was his reply : — 

VII 

Thy mother was impure, thy father was also impure, and 
impure is the fruit they have borne. 

The unlucky people came impure, they departed and died 
impure. 

Tell me, 0 Pandit, what place is pure 

Where I may sit and take my food. 

My tongue is impure, what it saith is impure, the ears 
and eyes are all impure. 

The impurity of the senses departeth not, 0 thou who 
art burning with Brahmanical wrath. 

Fire is also impure, water is impure, and impure the 
place where thou sittest and cookest it. 

With an impure ladle it is served up, and impure are 
those who sit and eat it. 

Impure thy cow-dung, impure thy cooking-square, and 
impure the lines which mark it out. 

Saith Kabir, that man is pure who hath obtained true 
knowledge. 

hearing God’s name ; manan^ obe} ing God’s will ; m'didhydsany 
profound and continued meditation. 

The six sampats or acquisitions are — Saniy restraint of the mind ; 
daniy restraint of the senses ; uparaiiy the preservation of the heart 
from love and hate ; tatikshay endurance of pain ; shradhay faith ; 
samddhdniay attention to the guru's instruction. Others, by the ^even 
threads, understand the five oigans of perception, the mind, and the 
understanding. 

1 The three qualities. 



274 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir’s wife had ground corn and gone out with- 
out collecting the flour. Kabir being left alone in 
the house paid more attention to his devotion than 
to his housekeeping. A dog came and began to 
lick the flour on the hand-mill. The following was 
addressed to the intruding animal : — 

VIII 

Thy stride is like that of a cow ; 

The hair over thy tail is shiny. 

Search for and eat anything in this house ; 

Go not to another’s house, 

Lick the hand-mill, eat the flour ; 

Whither takest thou the towel ^ of the hand-mill ? 

Thou gazest very intently on this safe ; 

Take care that the stick fall not on thy back.- 

Saith Kabir, thou hast fared well •; 

Take care that no one throw a brick or a clod at thee.® 

Kabir endeavours to recall man to a sense of his 
insignificance. 

Sarang 

I 

Why, O man, art thou proud of a small matter ? 

With a store of only ten mans of corn and four double 
Paise in thy pocket thou swaggerest along. 

Even if thou obtain greatness, yea, a hundred villages, 
and have an income of two lakhs of rupees. 

Thy authority shall only last for four days like the green 
leaves of the forest. 

No one hath brought wealth with him, and no one shall 
take it away. 

Greater sovereigns than even Rawan departed in a moment; 

God’s saints who worship Him and repeat His name abide 
for ever. 

^ A cloth to collect the flour as it falk from the hand-mill. 

® That is, run away before my wife or my son returns ; you shall 
meet with a different reception from them. 

® This h3’mn is also applied allegorically to man. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 275 

They to whom God is merciful meet the society of the 
saints. 

Neither mother, father, wife, son, nor wealth shall go 
with thee at the last moment. 

Saith Kabir, worship God, O fool, or thy life shall pass 
away in vain. 

God's omnipotence. 

II 

0 God, I know not the measure of Thy regal authority ; 

1 am the handmaiden of Thy saints. 

They who go laughing return weeping, and they who go 
weeping return laughing ; 

What is inhabited becometh deserted, and what is deserted 
become th inhabited. 

God turneth water into dry land, dry land He turncth 
into wells, and wells into mountains; 

He can raise man irom earth to heaven, and when he 
hath ascended to heaven dash him down. 

He can turn a beggar into a king, and a king into a beggar. 

He can turn an idiot into a pandit, and a pandit into an 
idiot. 

He can turn a woman into a man, and a man into a 
woman. 

Saith Kabir, God is beloved of the saints ; I am a sacrifice 
unto Him. 

Man should rely on God and practise humility. 

III 

Without God what succour hath man ? 

The love of parents, brethren, sons, and wife is all fleeting. 

Construct a raft for the other world ; what reliance can 
be placed on wealth ? 

What confidence can be reposed in this vessel, if it be 
chinked in the slightest ? ^ 

Thou shalt obtain the fruit of all religion and good works 
if thou desire to become the dust of everybody’s feet. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O saints, the mind is like the flying 
bM of the forest. 

^ If it receive even the slightest external pressure. 

T 2 



276 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir’s bliss in feeling that he is saved — 

Prabhati 

I 

My dread of transmigration is at an end 

Since God displayed His love for me. 

The light hath dawned, the darkness is dispelled ; 

I have obtained the jewel God by meditation on Him. 

When He conferreth happiness sorrow fleeth away ; 

The jewel of my heart is absorbed in God’s love. 

Whatever occurreth is according to Thy will, 0 God ; 

He who understandeth this shall be easily absorbed in 
Thee. 

Saith Kabir, all my sins have been blotted out. 

And my soul is absorbed in the Life of the world. 

God is not confined as regards place to the mosque 
or the temple, or as regards tiipe to any month or 
day. 

II 

If God dwell only in the mosque, to whom belongeth the 
rest of the country ? 

They who are called Hindus say that God dwelleth in an 
idol : I see not the truth in either sect. 

0 God, whether Allah or Ram, I live by Thy name, 

O Lord, show kindness unto me. 

Hari dwelleth in the south, Allah hath His place in the 
west. 

Search in thy heart, search in thy heart of hearts ; theie 
is His place and abode. 

The Brahmans yearly perform twenty-four fastings on the 
eleventh day of the dark and light halves of the lunar month ; 
the Musalmans fast in the month of Ramzan. 

The latter put aside eleven months of the year, and say 
that the Treasure is in one alone. 

What availeth the Hindus to bathe at Jagannath in 
Urisa (Orissa), what the Musalmans to bow their heads in 
a mosque ? 

With deception in their hearts they repeat prayers ; what 
availeth them to go on a pilgrimage to Makka ? 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


277 

The men and women Thou hast created, 0 God, are all 
in Thy form. 

Kabir is a child of Ram and Allah, and accepteth all 
gurus and pirs. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O men and women, seek the sanctuary 
of the one God ; 

O mortals, only repeat God’s name, and then shall you 
be assuredly saved. 

In Kabir’s presence a Brahman and a Muham- 
madan priest were reviling each others' sacred books. 
The Muhammadan expatiated on the merits of 
sacrifice. 

IV 

Say not that the Hindu and Musalman books are false ; 
false is he who reflecteth not on them. 

If you say that the one God is in everything, then why 
kill fowls ? • 

O priest, say is this God’s justice ? 

Thy mental doubts forsake thee not ; 

Thou seizest and bringest living things, and takest their 
lives, but thou merely killest their bodies of clay. 

Their souls return to the Indestructible ; say what hast 
thou killed. 

What avail thy purifications, thy rinsings of the mouth, 
and thy prostrations in the mosque ? 

If thou pray with deception in thy heart, what availeth 
thee thy pilgrimage to Makka ? 

Thou art impure ; thou knowest not the Pure One ; thou 
knowest not His secrets. 

Saith Kabir, thou hast missed heaven, and art satisfied 
with hell. 

Kabir offered to God the following oblation in- 
stead of incense, light, and the other accessories of 
Hindu worship. 

V 

Hear ^ me, God of gods. Supreme Lord, primal and omni- 
present, I offer my vespers unto Thee. 

^ Sun^ also translated — as an epithet of God— without desires. 



278 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The Sidhs even in deep meditation have not discovered 
Thy limits, but they continue to cling to Thine asylum. 

Accept this oblation,^ O bright Spirit ; worship the True 
Guru, my brethren. 

Brahma standeth and readeth the Veds, but the Unseen 
is seen not by him.^ 

With divine knowledge as mine oil and Thy name my 
wick I have made a lamp to illumine my body. 

I have lit the lamp with the light of the Lord of the world ; 
he who knoweth hoiv to do this knoweth the Omniscient.® 

The unbeaten sounds of God who dwelleth with man, are 
my five musical instruments. 

O Thou Formless and Undisturbed, Thy slave Kabir hath 
made Thee this oblation.^ 


KAKIR’S SLOKS 

I 

Kabir, my rosary is my tongue, on which I repeat God’s 
name ; 

In every age it bringeth peace and comfort to all God^s 
servants. 

II 

Kabir, everybody laugheth at my caste ; 

1 am a sacrifice to this caste in which Frepeat the Creator’s 
name. 

III 

Kabir, why waverest thou ? Why lettest thou thy mind 
vacillate ? 

God is the Lord of all happiness ; quaff the essence of 
His name. 

^ Of flowers, incense, light, &c. 

2 Tiiat is, God does not heed him. 

® Also translated — The wise man knoweth how to do this. If 
sujhe were read for bujhe the two words would be translated — The 
Omniscient would become manifest 

^ This hymn is included in the Arati of the Sikhs. 



KABIR’S SLOKS 


279 


IV 

Kabir, if golden earrings were to be made and rubies 
set in them, 

They would appear like burnt reeds if God’s name were 
not in the wearer^s heart.^ 

V 

Kabir, there are few who while alive are dead,^ 

And who fearlessly sing God’s praises ; whithersoever 
I look there is He to save me, 

VI 

Kabir, on the day I am dead there shall be rejoicing 
after me ; ^ 

I shall then have met my God, and my friends will worship 
Him instead of weeping. 

VII 

Kabir, I am tlic worst of men ; except myself everybody 
is good ; 

He who holdeth the same opinion is my friend. 

' VIII 

Kabir, worldly love came to me in various disguises. 

But my guru preserved me ; ' worldly love then made me 
obeisance and departed. 

IX 

Kabir, destroy that Maya whose death shall make thee 
happy ; 

Every one shall then say it is well ; no one shall deem 


Kabir, when the nights are dark, thieves arise ; 

They run about with nooses for men ; know that they 
are accursed of God. 

^ This is understood to be a satire on Indian bankers who generally 
wear large earrings. 

2 That is, who practise humility and efface their pride. 

® Also translated — On the day my pride is dead there shall be 
rejoicing. 



28 o bhagats of the granth sahib 


XI 

Kabir, the sandal-tree is good even though surrounded 
by the dhak-tree ; ^ 

If the latter be near the sandal-tree, it will also become 
fragrant as sandal. 

XII 

Kabir, the bamboo is drowned in its pride ; ^ may nobody 
be drowned so ! 

It may grow near the sandal, but it is never perfumed 
by it.® 

XIII 

Kabir, man hath lost his faith through mammon, hut 
mammon will not accompany him ; 

He hath carelessly struck his foot with an axe by his 
own hand. 

The following is said to have been written in reply 
to some one who had invited Kabir to attend a 
religious fair : — 

XIV . 

Kabir, wherever I wandered I saw spectacles everywhere ; 

Without the saint who loveth God, the world is in my 
opinion a desert. 

XV 

Kabir, the hut of the saints is comfortable ; the village 
of the false is a furnace. 

May fire prey upon that mansion where the name of God 
is not ! 

XVI 

Kabir, why weep when a saint dieth, since he is merely 
going home ? 

Weep rather for the poor infidel who is sold at every shop.'* 

* The Butea Frondosa. 

^ It holds its head high, yet it is hollow in the centre. 

® They who are hardened in their pride are not improved by asso- 
ciation with the humble. 

^ Who has to undergo transmigration. 



28 i 


KABIR’S SLOKS 

XVII 

Kabir, the infidel is like a dinner of garlic ; 

One may sit in the corner and eat it, hut its smell becometh 
manifest at last. 

XVIII 

Kabir, the body ^ is a churn, the breath of life its churning- 
staff ; 

The saints eat the butter, the world drinketh the butter- 
milk. 

XIX 

Kabir, the body is the churn, the breath of life the stream 
of iced water ; ^ 

He who hath churned shall eat the hutter, and so shall 
his helpmates also. 

XX ^ 

Kabir, Maya is a thief who breaketh into and robbeth 
the shop ; ^ 

One man, Kabir, wlio hath chased her in every direction,^ 
she shall not rob.® 

XXI 

Kabir, they who make many friends are not happy in 
this world ; 

But they who keep their minds fixed on the one God 
ever enjoy happiness. 

XXII 

Kabir, while the world feareth death, my heart is pleased 
therewith ; 

Since it is only by death supreme bliss is obtained. 

XXIII 

Kabir, when thou obtainest the jewel of God’s name keep 
it to thyself,® 

^ Maya here means body, because it is the result of illusion. 

2 Put into the churn in India in the hot weather to assist the 
churning process. 

® Who breaks into the heart, and robs it of its virtues. 

^ Others translate — Kabir hath cut her up in twelve pieces. 

® Kabir chased her to arrest her, but she ran in every direction, 
literally, by twelve ways to avoid him, and so she cannot rob him. 

® Literally — Open not the knots of thy dress in which it is tied. 



282 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


For there is no bazaar to sell it in, no connoisseur, no 
purchaser, no price for it, 

XXIV 

Kabir, love him who hath made God his master ; 

Learned men, kings, lords of the soil — of what avail is 
love for them ? 

XXV 

Kabir, by loving the one God all other love departeth. 

Whether thou wearest long hair, or shavest thy head 
clean. ^ 

XXVI 

Kabir, the world is a chamber of soot ; blind are they 
who enter it, and they become defiled, 

I am a sacrifice to those who have entered it, and come 
forth clean. 

XXVII 

Kabir, tliis body shall depart ; if possible detain ^ it : 

They who had hundreds of thousands and millions departed 
barefooted. 

XXVIII 

Kabir, this body shall depart ; put it on some road 

On which it may either hold converse with saints, or 
sing God’s praises. 

XXIX 

Kabir, everybody dieth in his turn, but no one even 
knoweth how to die ; 

When thou diest, so die that thou shalt not have to die 
again. ^ 

XXX 

Kabir, it is difficult to obtain human birth ; it cometh 
not again and again ; 

As the ripe fruit of the forest, when it falleth to the 
ground returneth not to the parent-hxdJich. 

^ Some understand this line to mean — Whether thou adoptest a 
worldly or an ascetic life Sanyasis or hermits shave their heads. 

* Let not thy human birth go in vain. 

3 That thou shalt have no more transmigration. 



KABIR’S SLOKS 


283 

Somebody came to visit Kabir, and asked him if 
Kabir (great) was his name. The following, addressed 
to God, was his reply : — 

XXXI 

It is Thou, 0 God,vA\6 art Kabir {great), and whose name 
is Kabir {great ) ; 

Man shall only obtain the jewel of the Lord when he 
despiseth his body. 

XXXII 

Kabir, utter not idle complaints against God ; nothing 
shall result from what thou sayest ; 

No one can set aside what the merciful One doeth. 

XXXIII 

Kabir, nobody who is counterfeit can withstand God’s 
touchstone ; 

Only he who in life* is dead can boar its ordeal. 

XXXIV 

Kabir, men wear gaudy robes, and eat betel leaves and 
betel nut ; 

But without the name of the one God they shall be bound 
and taken to the city of Death. 

XXXV 

Kabir, my boat is old, and leaketh in a thousand chinks ; 

Boats very lightly laden cross over, but those with heavy 
cargoes ^ founder. 

XXXVI 

Kabir, man^s bones burn like firewood, his hair burnetii 
like grass ; 

Kabir is sad on seeing everybody burning 

XXXVII 

Kabir, be not proud of thy bones wrapped up in skin ; 

They who rode excellent horses, and under umbrellas, were 
at last buried in the earth. 

Of sin is meant. 

^ This was written after witnessing a cremation. 



284 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

XXXVIII 

Kabir, be not proud on seeing thy lofty dwellings ; 

To-day or to-morrow thou shalt lie beneath the earth, and 
the grass shall grow over thee. 

XXXIX 

Kabir, be not proud, let none laugh at the poor ; 

Now thy bark is on the sea ; who* knoweth what shall 
happen.^ 

XL 

Kabir, be not proud on seeing thy beautiful body ; 

Thou shalt leave it to-day or to-morrow as a serpent its 
slough. 

XLI 

Kabir, if thou must plunder, then plunder, but let thy 
plunder be the name of God ; 

Otherwise thou shalt afterwards repent when life hath left 
thy body. 

XLII 

Kabir, few^ have been born who have applied the fire 
of divine knowledge to their bodies. 

Who have burnt the five evil passions, and with the same 
fervour continued to love God. 

XLIII 

Is there any one who will sell me his son ; any one who 
will sell me his daughter ? ^ 

Is there any one who will go into partnership with Kabir, 
and deal in God’s name with him ? 

XLIV 

Kabir, I remind thee, O man — and entertain no doubt 
on the subject — 

^ Thou maj est be brought low thyself, and men will laugh at thee. 

2 In the original, none, but this apparently is an exnggeration of 
religious enthusiasm. 

® This slok is an allegory. By son Kabir meant soul, and by 
daughter body. Is there any one who will devote his soul and body 
to God's worship? Another explanation is the following — Is there 
any one who will give me his son — his heart — in exchange for my 
daughter, religious instruction. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 285 

Thou canst not exchange the pleasures thou hast already 
enjoyed for even a morsel of coarse sugar.^ 

XLV 

Kabir, I first thought that learning was good, then that 
the Jog philosophy was better than learning ; 

Hui now I shall never forsake the service of God, even 
though men revile me for it. 

XLVI 

Kabir, how can the wretched people who have no divine 
knowledge in their hearts, revile me ? ^ 

Kabir having abandoned every occupation continueth to 
repeat God’s name. 

XLVII 

Kabir, the wanderer’s skirt hath caught fire on all sides ; ® 

The tattered garment hath been burnt and reduced to 
charcoal, but the flame hath not touched the waist-string.^ 

XLVIII 

Kabir, the tattered garment hath been burnt and reduced 
to charcoal, the skull hath burst into atoms ; 

The poor Jogi hath had his day, and dust only remaineth 
where he sat. 

XLIX 

Kabir, man is like a fish in a little water ; the angler 
casteth in his net ; 

Man shall not escape in this little pond ; he ought to 
think of returning to the Ocean.® 

L 

Kabir, leave not the Ocean, though it be very brackish ; ® 

^ The pleasures thou hast enjoyed are useless to thee now. 

2 That is, what care I for their reviling ? 

® Death has attacked man’s body. ^ The soul. 

® The little water and the little pond mean the world. The ocean is 
God. from whom man emanated, and with whom he ought to seek 
refuge from the angler’s net, that is, death. 

® Forsake not God’s service even though it be attended with hardship. 



286 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


If thou search for shelter in every pond,^ no one shall 
call thee good. 

LI 

Kabir, they who had no guru were wafted away ; there 
was no one to stop them — 

Practise meekness and humility, ^ come what may. 

LII 

Kabir, the bitch of God’s saints is good, but the mother 
of the infidel is bad ; 

The former ever heareth the Lord’s name and praises, 
the latter goeth to commit sin. 

LIII 

Kabir, man is like a lean stag ; this world is a lake sur- 
rounded by verdure ; 

There are hundreds of thousands of hunters and but one 
life — how long can it escape ? ® 

LIV 

Kabir, if thou make thine abode on the bank of the 
Ganges, thou mayest drink pure water ; 

But thou shalt not obtain salvation without devotion to 
God ; the great departed have said this.^ 

LV 

Kabir, me whose mind is pure as Ganges water, 

God folio weth and addresseth, ‘ Kabir ! Kabir ! ’ ® 

LVI 

Kabir, turmeric is yellow and lime white ; 

When both colours are blended, the beloved God is met.® 

^ If thou have recourse lo the gods and goddesses of the vulgar. 

2 Also translated — make humility thy religion. 

^ Man is like a hungry stag let loose on the grassy margin of a 
lake. He revels in the rich pasture afforded him, has no time for 
other reflection, and consequently becomes an easy prey to Death the 
hunter. 

^ Also translated — Saying this, Kabir departed from Banaras for 
Magahar. 

® Also translated — Kabir, God follo\teih those \vhose minds aie 
pure as Ganges water, and saith that they are superior to it. 

® Turmeiic and lime stand for men of different castes. Turmeiic 



KABIR^S SLOKS 


287 


LVII 

Kabir, turmeric then loseth its yellowness, and not a trace 
of the whiteness of lime remaineth ; 

I am a sacrifice to that love by which tribe and caste 
and lineage are effaced. 

‘ LVIII 

Kabir, the door of salvation is narrow, the breadth of the 
tenth of a grain of mustard ; 

The mind is as large as an elephant ; ^ how can it pass 
through ? 

LIX 

Kabir, if I meet a true guru and he kindly favour me, 

The door of salvation shall be made wide, and I can 
easily pass through. 

Kabir' s hut once fell, and people asked him to 
repair it ; the following was his reply : — 

LX 

Kabir, I have no hut or shed ; I have no house or village ; 

1 have no caste or name that God should ask who this 
man is. 

LXI 

Kabir, I desire to die, but when I die let it be at God’s 
gate, 

So that God may ask, ‘ Who is this lying at My door ? ’ 

LXII 

Kabir, I did not do this, nor will I do it again, nor am 
I physically able to do it ; 

How do I know what God may have done ? Yet \i was 
all Kabir.^ 

means men of low castes, lime men of high castes. High caste men 
were originally fair in comparison with the brown aborigines of 
India. When turmeric and lime are blended, a red product used 
for sacrificial marks on the forehead results. When holy . men of 
different castes meet, God is obtained by their association, and their 
castes disappear. 1 Man is very proud, 

2 This slok has already been given in the life of Kabir. 



288 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

LXIII 

Kabir, the skin of my body shall be shoes for his feet 

From whose mouth in his muttering dream issueth God’s 
name. 

LXIV 

Kabir, we are puppets of clay, but bear the name of 
men ; 

Though guests for only four days, we occupy very great 
space. 

LXV 

Kabir, I have converted myself into henna and thoroughly 
ground myself. 

But, even so, God never inquired about me and never 
allowed me to touch His feet. 

LXVI 

Kabir, the door from which no visitor is repelled 

How shall I leave, since such a door there is ? 

LXVII 

Kabir, I was drowning, but the wave of good qualities 
quickly washed me ashore and saved me ; 

When I saw the bark was rotten, I leapt from it at once. 

LXVI 1 1 

Kabir, the saint is not pleasing to the sinner ; the latter 
cannot bear the worship of God ; 

The fly avoideth the sandal, and goeth where there is an 
evil odour. 

LXIX 

Kabir, the physician is dead, the patient is dead, the 
whole world is dead in spiritual ignorance ; 

One person alone, Kabir, for whom none shall weep is 
not dead. 

LXX 

Kabir, man meditateth not on God ; such great sin 
attacheth to him : 



KABIR'S SLQKS 289 

The body is a wooden pot ; it cannot be put on the fire 
a second time.^ 

LXXI 

Kabir, it so happened to me that God did what was 
pleasing to my mind 

Why fear death when thou hast taken the red lead ^ in 
thy hand ? 

LXXII 

Kabir, as one sucketh sugar-cane, so ought one to strive 
most earnestly ^ for virtue : 

None calleth that man good who is without virtue.* 


LXXIII 

Kabir, the body is like an earthen pot filled with water ; 
it will burst to-day or to-morrow : 

If thou remember not thy great God, thou shalt be 
plundered half-way.® 

LXXIV 


Kabir, I am God’s dog ; Moti ® is my name ; 

There is a string ’ on my^^neck ; where I am pulled there 
I go. 


LXXV 


Kabir, why displayest thou to men thy wooden rosary ? 
If thou remember not God in thy heart, what availeth 
this rosary ? 

LXXVI 

Kabir, separation from God, like a serpent which yieldeth 
to no charm, dwelleth in the heart ; 


^ Human birth shall not be again obtained by those who meditate 
not on God. 

2 God admitted me to His service. 

® That is, why fear death which is imminent and unavoidable ? 

^ Literally — to weep and die in one's efforts to obtain it. 

® All the good works you have performed shall only help you half- 
way ; but, if you have meditated on God, you shall be saved. 

• Moti — literally pearl— is a common Indian name for a favourite 
dog. 

* God's love. 


SIKH. VI 


u 



ago BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

He who is separated from God shall not live, or if he do, 
he shall become insane.^ 

LXXVII 

Kabir, the philosopher’s stone and sandal have one good 
property in common ; 

By the touch of the former iron becometh the best metal ; ^ 
hy the touch of the latter inodorous wood is perfumed, 

LXXVIII 

Kabir, Death’s club is bad ; it cannot be endured : 

I have met a holy man ® and he hath attached me to his 
skirt. 

LXXIX 

Kabir, the physician, saith, ‘ I am the only good 
physician ; all medicines are in my power ’ : 

This thing life is God’s property. He taketh it when He 
pleaseth. 

LXXX 

Kabir, take and beat thy drum for ten days ; ^ 

This world is like the meeting on a river-boat of persons 
who shall never meet again.® 

LXXXI 

Kabir, were I to make the seven oceans my ink, the trees 
of the forest my pens. 

And the earth my paper, I should not succeed in writing 
God’s praises. 

LXXXII 

Kabir, what harm can my weaver caste do me since God 
dwelleth in my heart ? 

God hath embraced Kabir, and released him from all his 
entanglements. 

^ The serpent shall sling him, and he shall either die or become 
insane. 2 Gold. 

® RSmanand. * Be happy while you may. 

® Compare — 

The world *s a city full of straying streets, 

And death the market-place where each one meets. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 


291 


LXXXIII 

Kabir, there are few willing to burn their own houses/ 

Destroy their five children/ and concentrate their love 
on God. 

J.XXXIV 

Kabir, there are few who- will set fire to their own 
bodies ; ® 

Fools understand not though Kabir continueth to shout 
to them. 

LXXXV 

Kabir, the sati mounted on the pyre crieth out ‘ Hear 
my friends on this cremation-ground ; 

As people have all departed, so do we at last.’ 

LXXXVI 

Kabir, the mind is ^ bird which flieth and flieth in every 
direction ; 

Man is rewarded according to the tompany he keepeth. 
LXXXVII 

Kabir, the position thou wast seeking thou hast found ; 

Thou hast changed into God whom thou thoughtest was 
different. 

LXXXVIII 

Kabir, I am dying of evil company like the plantain near 
the wild caper ; 

The latter waveth and the former is pierced by its thorns, 
so avoid the apostate. 

LXXXIX 

Kabir, men ^ affect to travel with the burden of other 
men’s sins on their heads ; 

Why fear they not the burden of their own, since the road 
in front of them is difficult to travel ? 

^ To mortify their flesh. 

2 The five evil passions as dear to men as their children. 

® To subdue their concupiscence. ^ The Brahmans. 

U 2 



292 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

XC 

Kabir, a standing forest tree^ which is burning calleth out — 

‘ May I not fall into the power of the smith ® who would 
burn me again in his forge.'^ 

One day Kabir was sitting on the bank of the 
Ganges. He saw a hunter who had shot a deer. The 
deer had two young ones in her womb. Both these 
died. The buck then came, and was also shot by the 
hunter. The latter went to pick up the animal and 
was mortally bitten by a snake. The hunter’s wife 
then came and died through grief, or because the snake 
bit her too. Thus died four males and two females. 

XCI 

Kabir, on the death of one two died ; on the death of 
two, four ; 

On the death of four, six died — four males and two 
females.* 

XCII 

Kabir hath seen and searched the world, but found no 
abiding place anywhere : 

Why doth he, who hath not thought of God’s name, lose 
himself in other speculations ? 


XCIII 

Kabir, associate with the saint ; he will save thee at last ; 
Associate not with the infidel ; his company will be thy 


ruin. 

XCIV 

Kabir, knowing that God is everywhere diffused in the 
world,® I have remembered Him in this life ; 


^ The body. * The god of death. 

* That is, subject me to transmigration after the miseries of this life. 

* This enigmatical couplet is thus explained— On the death of 
spiritual ignorance, superstition and attachment to worldly things die. 
when these two evils die, then die lust, anger, worldly love, and 
covetousness. When these four deadly sins die, then die birth and 
death (jointly called transmigration), joy, grief, hope, and desire. The 
first four are feminine, the last two are masculine. 

® That is, not in the temple, or the mosque, or in any other place 
especially set apart for religious worship. 



KABIR’S SLOKS 293 


They who have thought not of God’s name, have been 
bom in vain. 


XCV 


Kabir, hope in God ; all other hope is hopeless : 

They who are bereft of God’s name shall admit Us power 
when they fall into hell. 

XCVI 

Kabir hath made many disciples and followers, but hath 
not made God his friend : 

He set out to meet God, but his heart failed him half- 
way. 

XCVII 


Kabir, what shall poor man do if God assist him not ? 
Whatever branch I put my foot on bendeth beneath me. 


XCVIII 

Kabir, sand shall fall ^he mouths of those who practise 
not what they preach to others ; 

They watch others’ property, while their own fields are 
being eaten up. 

XCIX 

Kabir, associate with holy men even though thou eat 
only barley bran ; 

What will be, will be ; associate not with the apostate 
even though he give thee better fare. 


C 

Kabir, by association ‘with the saints the love of God 
doubleth day by day ; 

The infidel is like a black blanket ; he becometh not white 
by washing. 

Cl 

Kabir, thou hast not shaved thy heart ; why shave thy 
hair ? 

Man’s sins are the work of his heart ; shaving the hfead 
is out of place. 

CII 

Kabir, forsake not God ; if thy body and wealth must 
go, let them go. 



294 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

They whose hearts are devoted to God’s lotus feet, shall 
be absorbed in His name. 

cm 

Kabir, the strings of the instrument we play upon are 
all broken ; ^ 

What can the poor instrument do when the player * hath 
departed ? 

CIV 

Kabir, shave the mother of that guru from whom doubt 
departeth not ; 

He is drowned himself in the four Veds and he drowneth 
his disciples therein. ' 

CV 

Kabir, man concealeth all the sins he committeth ; 

But at last they are all disclosed when Dharmraj maketh 
his inquiry. 

CVI 

Kabir, ceasing to remember God thou hast reared a 
numerous family : 

Thou continuest to practise thine avocations though thy 
brethren and relations are no more.® 

evil 

Kabir, the woman who ceasing to remember God goes 
to a wake at night * to practise witchcraft, 

Shall be born again as a serpent, and eat her own off- 
spring.® 

* The body has grown old, and its limbs have become useless. 

® Life. 

® That is, thou wilt not take warning by the fate of others. 

® After the cremation of a corpse and before the bones are collected 
strangers go to the burning-place at night, and practise incantations 
with the object of retaining the ghost of the departed so as to be 
serviceable to them in their worldly objects. When the relatives of the 
departed know of the ceremony, they do not allow it. 

® It is supposed that a female snake draws a circle round her eggs 
and then breaks them herself. The young snakes which can go out- 
side the circle are allowed to depart and live, but those not so able 
the mother is said to eat. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 


295 


CVIII 

Kabir, the woman who ceasing to remember God fasteth 
in honour of Hoi,^ 

^Shall be born again as a donkey and carry a weight of 
four mans.^ 

‘ CIX 

Kabir, very great skill is required to utter God’s name 
in the heart ; 

If the acrobat who performeth on the high pole fall, he 
cannot survive.® 

CX 

Kabir, blest is his mouth who uttereth God’s name ; 

His whole village shall be blest, to say nothing of the poor 
creature himself. 

CXI 

Kabir, the family is fortunate in which a slave of God 
is born ; • 

The family in which a slave of God is not born shall be 
fruitless as the dhak-irt^, 

CXII 

Kabir hath seen hundreds of thousands of horses, elephants, 
and carriages, and banners wave as thick as clouds — 

Begging, when the days pass in remembering God, is 
better than all this state. 

CXIII 

Kabir, I have traversed the whole world with my drum 
on my shoulder ; 

I have seen and carefully examined ^ everything, and I 
find no one hath a friend. 

^ Hoi is a representation of the goddess of small-pox. A festival. is 
held by women in her honour in the month of Kartik, eight days before 
the Diwali. Unmarried women make clay images of her with the 
object of obtaining their desires. These images are thrown into 
water after the Diwali. In the Panjab Hoi is known as Sanjhi. 

® At that time the man (maund) only weighed thirty-five pounds 
avoirdupois. At present it weighs eighty pounds. 

® If man, having once entered the path of devotion deflect from it, 
he shall And no abiding place. 

^ Thok hajdna is to clink a vessel with the middle Anger to test its 
soundness. 



396 BHAGATS QF IHE GRANTH SAHIB 

CXIV 

Kabir, pearls were scattered on the road ; a blind man 
came that way and Saw them not ; 

Without the light of the Lord of the world everybody 
like the blind man passeth the pearls by. 

It is said that Kamal, Kabir’ s son, met a rich 
leper who was going in despair to drown himself in 
the Ganges. Kamal begged him to desist and 
promised to cure him. Kamal took up some Ganges 
water in the palm of his hand, breathed on it, 
repeated the name of God, and then threw the water 
on the leper. The latter was instantaneously cured. 
He rewarded Kamal with a large gift of money. In 
the following couplet Kabir censures his son for 
having accepted it : — 

CXV 

Kabir’s family was ruined when his son Kamal was born ; 

Ceasing to remember God he brought home wealth. 

CXVI 

Kabir, go to meet a holy man but take no one with thee ; ^ 

Do not go back ; go on, come what may. 

CXVII 

Bind not thyself, O Kabir, with the rope ® by which the 
world is bound ; 

As salt is lost in flour, so shall this gold-like body dis- 
appear. 

CXVIII 

Kabir, the soul shall fly away and the body be buried ; 
man knoweth not when his time shall come ; * 

■ Yet even now he will not let covetousness escape from 
his eyes. 

^ That is, do not wait for a companion. It may also mean — take 
not with you a companion who may want you to change your mind, 
and turn back on the way. ‘ Worldly love. 

® Also translated — He expresses his wishes to his relations by signs. 



KABIR’S SLOKS 297 

CXIX 

Kabir, may I behold Thee, 0 God, with mine eyes, hear 
Thy name with mine ears. 

Utter Thy name with my tongue, and put Thy lotus 
feet within my heart ! . 

‘ CXX 

Kabir hath escaped from heaven and hell by the favour 
of the true guru ; 

I bask for ever and ever ^ in the joy of God’s lotus feet. 

CXXI 

Kabir, say how can I guess the joy of God’s lotus feet : 

Their beauty cannot be described ; it can only be realized 
when seen. 

CXXII 

Kabir, even if I see them, to whom shall I describe them ? 
no one would be satisfied with my words ; 

God is His own parallel ; I dwell in the delight of singing 
His praises. 

CXXIII 

Kabir, the kulang pecketh Us food and at the same time 
remembereth Us young ; it pecketh, and pecketh, and 
pecketh and remembereth Us young ; 

As its young are dear to the kulang, so is worldly love to 
the mind. 

CXXIV 

Kabir, the sky is overcast with clouds ; lakes and tanks 
are filled with rain-water ; 

Yet what shall be the condition of those who choose to 
remain thirsty as the chatrik ? * 

CXXV 

Kabir, the sheldrake which at night is separated from 
her mate, meeteth him in the morning ; 

But the man who is separated from God meeteth Him 
again neither in the morning nor in the evening. 

^ Literally — in the beginning and the end. 

‘ Those who accept not the teaching of holy men which is as 
plentiful as rain. 



298 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CXXVI 

Kabir, O shell, remain in the ocean ; if thou leave it, 

Thou Shalt have to scream at sunrise at every temple.^ 

CXXVII 

Kabir, what dost thou, O man, by sleeping ? arise and 
weep through fear of hell and its torments : 

How can he whose dwelling is in the grave sleep in peace ? * 

CXXVIII 

Kabir, what dost thou by sleeping ? why not arise and 
repeat God’s name ? 

One day thou shalt sleep stretched out at full length 
in the grave. 

CXXIX 

Kabir, what dost thou by sleeping ? awake, arise ; 

Attach thyself to Him from whom thou art separated. 

cxxx 

Kabir, leave not the way of holy men, walk on their 
road ; 

Purify thyself by the sight of them, and repeat God’s 
name on meeting them. 

CXXXI 

Kabir, associate not with the infidel ; flee far away from 
him ; 

If thou touch a black pot, some filth shall attach to thee. 

CXXXII 

Kabir, thou hast not thought of God, and old age hath 
come upon thee ; 

When the door of thy house is on fire, what can be taken 
out and saved ? 

* That is, O man, remain absorbed in the contemplation of God, 
otherwise thou shall have to undergo many births. At Hindu temples 
it is a custom to blow shells in the morning to summon worshippers. 

* Unless we have repented before death. 



KABIR’S SLOKS 299 

CXXXIII 

Kabir, the work which the Creator did was accomplished 
once for all. 

There is no God but Him, the one Creator. 

CXXXIV 

Kabir, when the fruit trees begin to bear fruit, and the 
mango beginneth to ripen. 

The fruit reacheth its owner if meantime the crows ^ 
have not eaten it. 

CXXXV 

Kabir, men purchase and worship an idol, and obstinately 
go on pilgrimages ; 

Like actors they imitate one another, but they only err 
and lose their way. 

. CXXXVI 

Kabir, men have turned a stone into God ; everybody 
worshippeth it ; 

They who abide in this belief are drowned in the sable 
stream. 

CXXXVIl 

Kabir, books ^ form a prison, the doors of which are the 
writing thereon : 

Stones * have drowned the world ; pandits have pillaged 
the road. 

CXXXVIII 

Kabir, do now the work of to-morrow ; and if thou do 
it now, do it at once ; 

Nothing can be done hereafter when Death standeth over 
thy head. 

^ If the evil passions of men do not mar their good works, they 
shall reach God. Kanb is also an insect which destroys fruit. The 
meaning of the slok is — Man may perform penance and many acts of 
worship, but all will be unavailing if there be a flaw in his devotion, 
if his heart be not right. 

* The writings in which idolatry and pilgrimages are prescribed. 

® Idol worship. 



300 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CXXXIX 

Kabir, I have seen such and such a person polished like 
wax ; ^ 

He appeareth quick and very virtuous, but he is without 
understanding and unholy. 

CXL 

Kabir, Death will not disgrace mine understanding * 

Since I have repeated the name of the Cherisher who 
created him. 

CXLI 

Kabir, God is as musk ; all His saints are as the bumble- 
bees around it : 

The more Kabir’s service, the more God dwelleth in his 
heart. 

CXLII 

Kabir, man falleth into the clutches of family ; God is 
left in the background : 

Dharmraj’s myrmidons fall on man in the midst of his 
pomp. 

CXLIII 

Kabir, better than an infidel is a pig ® which keepeth the 
village clean ; 

When the poor infidel dieth, nobody will mention him. 

CXLIV 

Kabir, men have amassed hundreds of thousands and 
millions, kauri by kauri ; 

But when departing they get nothing ; even their waist- 
cloths are taken from them. ' 

CXLV 

Kabir, were one to be a follower of Vishnu and wear 
a beautiful * necklace, what would it avail him ? 

^ Bracelets made of white wax are worn by women. They are 
showy but unsubstantial. 

* That is, he will do as I request him. 

® He is the village scavenger, and is remembered when the poor 
infidel is forgotten. 

^ Also translated— four necklaces as some followers of Vishnu 
\vear. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 


301 

He may be externally gold twelve times purified, but 
within he is only stutfed with wax. 

CXLVI 

Kabir, become the broken stones of the road ; lay aside 
thine intellectual pride ; 

If such a servant there be, he shall meet God. 

CXLVII 

Kabir, but what would it avail to be the broken stones ? 
they would hurt the traveller’s feet ; 

0 God, Thy servant should be as the dust of the earth.^ 

CXLVIII 

Kabir, but what would it avail to be dust which flieth 
and falleth on men’s bodies ? 

The servant of God .ought to be like water which cleanseth 
all the limbs.® 

CXLIX 

Kabir, but what would it avail to be water ? it becometh 
cold or hot according to the season ; 

Every servant of God ought to be perfect like God Himself. 

CL 

Flags wave on the tops of lofty mansions full of gold 
and of women — 

Better than all are the bread of alms ® and singing God’s 
praises in the company of His saints. 

CLI 

Kabir, the wilderness where God is worshipped is better 
than a city ; 

The place without the beloved God is in my opinion as 
the city of Death. 

® Which is soft, and hurts not the traveller’s feet. 

® When soiled by the dust. 

* Madhukaru This word is derived from the Sanskrit madhukar, 
the bee which extracts lioney from every flower. 



302 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CLII 

At the ferry of Saha j sun where the Ganges and the 
Jamna meet,^ 

Kabir hath built a hut where saints and men of God 
seek the way. 

CLIII 

Kabir, were man to continue to the end loving God ^ as he 
was born, 

Millions of precious stones, to say nothing of one poor 
diamond, would not be equal to him. 

CLIV 

Kabir, I have seen a strange thing — a diamond was sold 
in a shop ; 

In the absence of a purchaser who knew its worth, it went 
for a kauri. ^ 

CLV 

Kabir, where there is divine knowledge there is virtue ; 
where there is falsehood there is sin ; 

Where there is covetousness there is death ; where there 
is forgiveness there is God Himself. 

CLVI 

Kabir, what availeth it to abandon worldly love if pride 
be not also abandoned ? 

Munis and their spiritual superiors perished by pride ; 
their pride ate them all up. 

CLVII 

Kabir, a true guru met me and shot one word at me ; 

When it struck me I fell to the earth ; there was a hole 
made in my heart. 

^ The gyanis generally translate this — In the sukhmana where the 
breath of the left and right nostrils meet. 

® The belief is that the foetus in the womb prays to God, but 
when a child is born and brought into contact with the world, his 
devotion fails. 

® Divine grace so priceless was spurned by the common herd, and 
only valued at a kauri. 



KABIR’S SLOKS 


303 


CLVIII 

Kabir, what can the true guru do if his disciples be at 
fault ? 

Not one word of his impresseth the spiritually blind : it 
is like blowing into a bamboo. 

CLIX 

Kabir, the lady of a monarch who possesseth horses, 
elephants, and carriages in abundance, 

Is not equal to the female water-carrier of a saint of God. 

CLX 

Q. O Kabir, why revilest thou the king’s lady ? Why 
honourest thou God’s handmaiden ? 

A . The former parteth her hair with evil intentions ; the 
latter remembereth God’s name. 

CLXI 

Kabir, I propped myself up with Gorf’s name, and steadied 
myself ; the true guru gave me courage : 

I purchased large diamonds on the bank of lake Man- 
sarowar. 

CLXII 

Kabir, God is the diamond, God’s servant the jeweller 
who hath taken the gem and set up a shop for it ; 

As soon as an assayer is found, the price of the diamond 
shall be ascertained, 

CLXIII 

Kabir, as thou rememberest God when occasion requireth, 
so remember Him always ; 

Make thine abode in the immortal city ; God will restore 
the wealth thou hast lost. 

CLXIV 

Kabir, for worship two beings are necessary, one the 
saint, and the other God — 

God who bestoweth salvation, and the saint who causeth 
us to repeat His name. 



304 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CLXV 

Kabir, crowds followed the pandits by the way they went ; 

The one road to God by which Kabir hath been ascending 
is difficult. 

CLXVI 

Kabir, man acteth out of regard for his family and thus 
dieth from worldly troubles ; 

Who hath family pride when he is placed on the cremation- 
ground ? 

CLXVII 

Kabir, O wretched people, ye shall be ruined through 
your great regard for the opinion of others ; 

Know that the fate of your neighbours shall also be yours. 

CLXVIII 

Kabir, good is the meal of alms made of different kinds ^ 
of corn ; 

I have no claim on any one for it ; great is the country 
and great its government.^ 

CLXIX 

Kabir, heart-burning ariseth from claims ; he who hath 
no claim is without anxiety ; 

He who hath no claim deemeth Indar poor in comparison 
with himself. 

CLXX 

Kabir, the lake is filled to the brim, yet few can drink 
the water ; ^ 

With great good fortune hast thou found it ; drink it 
in handfuls, Kabir. 

^ And thus affording variety. 

* That is, the world is wide, and great is the empire of the holy. 
The words dawa kdhu ko nahin are also translated — To which no one 
hath a claim. 

® The saints are filled with holiness, yet few accept instruction from 
them. The verse is also translated — The lake is full, but there is a 
dike in front owing to which few can drink the water. The dike means 
worldly love, which hinders men from having recourse to the guru. 



KABIR’S SLOKS 305 

CLXXI 

Kabir, as the stars pass away in the morning, so doth 
this body pass away ; 

But the two letters of God’s name pass not away ; Kabir 
holdeth them fast. 

CLXXII 

Kabir, the house of wood is on fire on all sides ; ^ 

The pandits perish in the fire while the illiterate escape. 

CLXXIII 

Kabir, dispel doubts, leave the books of the pandits ; 

Having searched the Sanskrit books fix thy thoughts on 
God’s feet. 

CLXXIV 

Kabir, saints abandon not their saintship, even though 
they meet millions who are not saints : 

Even though sandal be entwined with serpents, it loseth 
not its coolness.^ . , 

CLXXV 

Kabir, the mind becometh cool when it hath obtained 
the knowledge of God : 

The fire which burneth the world is as water to God’s 
servant.® 

CLXXVI 

This world is the Creator’s play ; hardly any one under- 
standeth this ; 

The Master Himself or the slave at His court ^ under- 
standeth it. 

CLXXVII 

Kabir, it is well for me that I felt the fear of God and 
forgot all else : 

^ That is, evil passions assail the body, 

2 As poisonous serpents have no effect on sandal-wood, so the evil 
do not corrupt the holy. 

® The evil passions which inflame mankind produce no impression 
on him. 

^ Diwdni may also mean divine enthusiast deemed mad by the 
world. 


SIKH. VI 


X 



So6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

From hail I melted into water, and flowing on I blended 
with the Ocean.^ 

CLXXVIII 

Kabir, God having collected dust made bodies like a 
physician's powders — 

Spectacles for four days, but after all they are only dust. 

CLXXIX 

Kabir, all bodies are as the rising and setting of the sun 
and moon 

But if they meet not God and the guru, they all turn 
into dust again. 

CLXXX 

Where the Fearless One is, there is no fear of others ; 
where there is fear, there God is not : 

Kabir speaketh thus deliberately ; O saints, give me 
willing ear. 

CLXXXI ' 

Kabir, they who know naught pass their time in the 
sleep of peace ; 

While they who think they know have their fill of trouble. 

CLXXXII 

Kabir, they who are subdued by worldly love utter many 
cries, but different is the cry of the pir : ® 

Kabir who was struck on a vulnerable spot ^ fell where 
he stood. 

CLXXXIII 

Kabir, slight is the stroke of a lance ; though struck by 
it man may breathe for a time ; 

But he who can endure the stroke of the Word is a guru,® 
and I am his slave, 

1 Kabir’s heart was at first cold and hard as hail. When the fire of 
divine love shone on it, it melted into water, which, flowing on, blended 
with the ocean of God. 

* Animals’ bodies are born and die. 

Also translated— Many cry out that they are struck by God’s love, 
but the pain /Aey exhibit tells a different story. The word fir has two 
meanings : (a) a priest or saint ; (d) pain. 

® That is, the heart. * It can only be endured by a guru. 



KABIR^S SLOKS 


307 


CLXXXIV 

Kabir, why, O Mulla, ascendest thou the minaret ? the 
Lord is not deaf : 

Search within thy heart for Him for whose sake thou 
callest to prayer. 

XLXXXV 

Why doth the Shaikh who is without resignation, perform 
a pilgrimage to the Kaaba ? 

Kabir, how can God be for him whose heart is not firm 
in his faith ? 

CLXXXVI 

Kabir, offer thy homage to God, by remembering whom 
trouble shall depart ; 

The Lord will be manifest in thy heart, and the fire ^ 
which burnetii thee shall be extinguished. 

CLXXXVII 

Kabir, to use force is tyranny though thou call it lawful ; 

When thine accounts are called for at God*s office, what 
shall be thy condition ? 

CLXXXVIII 

Kabir, an excellent dinner is khichari^ seasoned with 
sufficient salt to make it palatable ; 

Who would cut his own throat by eating meat with his 
bread ? 

CLXXXIX 

Kabir, know that the guru will have touched thy heart 
when worldly love and ambition have been effaced ; 

Joy and sorrow shall not then affect thee ; thou shalt 
become God Himself.^ 

cxc 

Kabir, there are different ways of saying Ram ; ® there 
is one point to be considered : 

^ Some read ndi and translate — The fire of thy heart shall be 
extinguished by God's name. 2 Ri^e and dal boiled together. 

3 Kabir was a vegetarian, and objected to the slaughter of animals. 

^ Thu shalt have no consciousness of existence distinct from God. 

^ Ram is the name of God throughout Kabir and the other Bhagats’ 

X2 



3o8 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 


He whom everybody calleth Ram was only a mounte- 
bank,^ 


CXCI 


Kabir, call Him Ram who is omnipresent ; we must 
discriminate in mentioning the two Rams ; 

The one Ram (God) is contained in all things ; the other 
(Ram Chandar) is only contained in one thing, himself.^ 


CXCII 

Kabir, in the house in which saints are not served God 
, is not served ; 

That house is like a cremation-ground, and ghosts dwell 
therein. 

CXCIII 

Kabir, I have become dumb, insane, deaf, 

And lame from the stroke of the true guru’s arrow. 


CXCIV 


Kabir, the brave true guru shot an arrow at me ; 

On its striking me I fell to the ground with a hole in my 
heart.® 

cxcv 

Kabir, the pure rain of heaven ^ hath fallen on barren 
soil ; 

compositions. Sometimes Har, Hari, Gobind, and other names are 
used, but it is understood that the reference is always to the Supreme 
God, the Lord of creation, 

^ Although in some of their hymns Kabir and some of the other 
Bhagats of the Granth Sahib appear to have believed in the Hindu 
incarnations, they occasionally ridiculed them. 

2 Some Sikhs translate this and the preceding slok as follows : — 

CXC 

Kabir, there are different ways of uttering Ram ; in this there is an 
important point. 

People in general utter RSm one way, and the saints another way. 

CXCI 

Kabir, utter Ram, R^, but use discrimination in uttering it. 

Some while doing so are engaged in their various pursuits 
others are absorbed in the one God. 

® That is, the guru's exhortation made an impression on my heart. 

^ The true guru's instruction. 



KABIR’S SLOKS 


309 

Know that without good association it becometh like the 
ashes of a furnace ; 

CXCVI 

But, Kabir, when the pure rain of heaven meeteth absorb- 
ing soil,^ 

It cannot be removed, however much clever men may 
worry themselves. 

CXCVII 

Kabir, I was going on a pilgrimage to the Kaaba, and 
I met God on the way ; 

The Lord fell a-quarrelling with me, ‘ Who ordered thee 
to go to that place ? ’ 

CXCVIII 

Kabir, I have often made the pilgrimage to the Kaaba — 
how many times, 0 Kabir ? 

0 my Master, what fault have I committed that Thou 
wilt not speak to me i 

CXCIX 

Kabir, when God produceth His record, what shall be 
the fate of him 

Who violently killeth animals and calleth it lawful ? 

CC 

Kabir, to use violence is tyranny ; God will call for thy 
defence ; 

When thine account is produced from His office, thou 
shalt be beaten on the mouth. 

CCI 

Kabir, to render thine account is easy, if thy heart be pure ; 

In that True Court no one shall molest thee.* 

CCII 

Saith Kabir, 0 duality, in earth and heaven thou art 
very difficult to destroy ; * 

1 When the guru’s instruction is communicated to men capable of 

receiving it. * Literally— catch thee by the coat. 

* If iubari be read as one word, the translation will be— In earth 
and heaven there are two beggar's bowls — desire and covetousness — 
difficult to destroy. 



310 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The six religious systems and the eighty-four Sidhs are 
involved in doubt. 

CCIII 

- Kabir, whatever there is in me is not mine ; whatever 
there is, is Thine, 0 God. 

If Thine own property be rendered imto Thee, what doth 
it cost me ? 

CCIV 

Kabir, by repeating, ‘ Thou, Thou,’ I have become Thou, 
O God ; I have not remained in myself ; 

‘ When the difference between Thee and me was removed, 
wherever I looked there wast Thou. 

CCV 

Kabir, man meditateth sin and entertaineth delusive 
hopes ; 

None of his desires is satisfied ; he departeth in despair. 

CCVI 

Kabir, he who remembereth God is happy in (his world ; 

He whom the Creator protecteth wavereth not either in 
this world or the next. 

CCVII 

Kabir, I was being pressed like a handful of sesame when 
the true guru rescued me ; 

He came and appeared to me by primal and ancient 
destiny. 

CCVIII 

Kabir, my days have been spent in evading payment of 
my debts to God ; interest goeth on increasing ; 

I worshipped not God, nor had I my account torn up 
when Death arrived. 

Guru Arjan has here inserted the three following 
couplets : — 

CCIX 

Kabir, man is a barking dog which runneth after carrion : ^ 

By grace I have obtained the true guru who hath delivered 
me. 


Literally — a skeleton. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 


311 


CCX 

Kabir, the earth belongeth to the holy, but thieves have 
taken possession of it ; 

The earth feeleth not their weight ; to them it is clear 
gain.^ 

CCXI 

Kabir, on account of the husk rice is beaten with a mallet ; 

So when men sit in bad company, Dharmraj shall call them 
to account. 

Here Kabir’s couplets continue : — 

CCXII 

‘ 0 Namdev, worldly love hath bewitched thee,' said his 
friend Trilochan ; 

‘ Why printest thou chintzes and thinkest not on God ? ’ 
• CCXIII 

Namdev replied, ‘ Repeat God’s name with thy lips, 0 
Trilochan, 

‘ Perform all thy duties with thy hands and feet, hut let 
thy heart be with God.’ 

Guru Arjan again interposes 

CCXIV 

0 Kabir, no one hath any concern with me nor I with 
any one ; 

1 am contained in Him who hath created this world. 

Kabir’s instructions are resumed ; — 

CCXV 

Kabir, when flour hath fallen into the mud, none of it 
is saved ; 

It is that which is chewed while being ground that 
availeth.2 

^ In this line if bharan be read as one word, the translaiion will be — 
The earth feeleth their weight ; O God, remove them. 

* Human life is the time for man to work out his salvation. It is 
too late when the soul has departed. 



312 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


CCXVI 

Kabir, man knoweth everything, and yet he knowingly 
committeth sin ; 

What advantage is it to a man to have a lamp in his 
hand if he fall into a well ? 

CCXVII 

Kabir, my love is for the Friend ; foolish people try to 
dissuade me ; 

How can it be proper to break with Him to whom belong 
my life and soul ? 

CCXVIII 

Kabir, why killest thou thyself on account of houses, and 
mansions, and their decoration. 

When three and a half cubits, or at most three and three 
quarters, shall be thy lot ? 

CCXIX . 

Kabir, if God do not what I desire, what availeth my 
desiring it ; 

God doeth what He Himself desireth, not what I desire. 


The following couplet of Guru Amar Das, is here 
found : — 


CCXX 


God produceth anxiety in man, and also freeth him 
therefrom ; 

Nanak, praise Him who taketh care of all. 


A couplet of Guru Arjan here follows ; — 


CCXXI 

Kabir, man thinketh not of God ; he goeth astray through 
greed ; 

He dieth committing sin, and his life is at an end in 
a moment. 


Here Kabir’s couplets continue : — 

CCXXII 

Kabir, the body is a frail vessel of only frail metal ; 



KABIR’S SLOKS 313 

If thou wish to make it permanent, worship God, other- 
wise it will perish. 

CCXXIII 

Kabir, call out the name of God ; sleep not listlessly ; 

By calling out night and day God may sometime hear 
thy cries. 

CCXXIV 

Kabir, the body is a plantain grove, the heart an elephant 
maddened by passion, which hreaketh it down ; 

The jewel of divine knowledge is the goad, and a rare 
saint the tamer ^ of the elephant. 

CCXXV 

Kabir, God’s name is a jewel, the mouth a purse to hold 
it ; open it before him who can appreciate the jewel ; 

If any purchaser be found, he may take it at a high 
price 

CCXXVI 

Kabir, man knoweth not God’s name while bringing up 
a numerous family ; 

He dieth in the midst of his worldly duties, and is not 
heard of in the outer world. 

CCXXVII 

Kabir, in the twinkling of an eye and in a moment life 
passeth away ; 

Since the mind freeth not itself from entanglements. 
Death beateth his drum, and leadeth away his victim in 
triumph. 

CCXXVIII 

Kabir, God is as a tree, 'abandonment of the world as its 
fruit ; 

The saint who hath abandoned bootless discussions ® as its 
shade. 


^ Khewat^ literally — the pilot who steers the elephant. 

^ He may even give his life for it. 

® The saint, like a tree’s shade, affords comfort to man. 



314 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CCXXIX 

Kabir, plant the seed of such a tree as shall bear perennial 
fruit, 

Whose shade shall be cool, whose fruit shall be profuse, 
and on which birds ^ shall play. 

CCXXX 

Kabir, the Giver is a tree whose fruit is mercy which 
sheddeth favours on men ; 

When the birds which it sheltereth migrate,* they say 
‘ 0 Tree, mayest thou be fruitful ! ’ 

. CCXXXI 

Kabir, association with saints is obtained by destiny ; 

By such association the boon of salvation is obtained, 
and the difficult road to God not obstructed. 

CCXXXII 

Kabir, even for a ghari, half a ghari, or half that again, 

Converse held with the saints is clear gain. 

CCXXXIII 

Kabir, the mortals who eat bhang and fish ^ and drink 
wine. 

Shall all go to hell, whatever pilgrimages, fastings, and 
daily devotion they may perform. 

CCXXXIV 

Kabir, if I cast down mine eyes and take the Friend into 
my heart, 

I enjoy every pleasure with jny Beloved, and I disclose 
this to no one. 

The fifth Guru here interposes : — 

1 Holy men. 

* The saints wander abroad to blazon Qod's goodness. 

® In KabTr's time the Banaras pandits used to partake largely 
of fish.- . . . - ; . 



315 


KABIR’S SLOKS 

ccxxxv 

For the eight watches, the sixty-four gharis of the day, 
my soul looketh towards Thee, O God. 

Why cast down mine eyes since I behold the Beloved 
in every heart ? 

CCXXXVI 

Hear, my companions, either my soul dwelleth in my 
Beloved or my Beloved in my soul. 

I know not whether my soul is in my heart, or my Beloved 
dwelleth in my soul. 

CCXXXVII 

Kabir, the Brahman is the guru of the world, but he is 
not the guru of the saints ; 

He killeth himself over the perplexities of the four Veds. 

• CCXXXVIII 

God is as sugar scattered in the sand, but the elephant 
cannot pick it up : 

Saith Kabir, the guru gave this excellent advice, ‘ Become 
an ant and eat it.’ ^ 


CCXXXIX 

Kabir, if thou desire the Beloved, cut off thy head and 
make it into a ball ; * 

While playing attain such a state of ecstasy that thou 
shalt be satisfied with whatever happeneth thee. 

CCXL 

Kabir, if thou desire the Beloved, play with a true guru ; 

If unripe oil-seeds be pressed, neither oil-cake nor oil will 
be obtained.® 

Here a couplet of Nam dev is introduced ; — 

1 The humble succeed where the proud fail. 

^ Such is the sacrifice that must be made to enable man to play 
with the saints, and share in their bliss. 

^ Nothing can be obtained from a false guru’s instruction. 



3i6 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CCXLI 

Man searching for God stumbleth like a blind man and 
recognizeth not the saint ; 

Saith Namdev, how shalt thou obtain God without the 
mediation of His saints ? 

The following lines of Rav Das are here inserted : — 

CCXLII 

He who forsaking God the diamond yearneth for other 
gods, 

Shall go to hell, verily saith Rav Das. 

CCXLIII 

O Kabir, if thou embrace a domestic life, act honestly ; 
otherwise abandon the world ; 

But if any one, having abandoned the world, again 
become entangled with it, great indeed shall be his mis- 
fortune. 


RAV DAS 

Rav Das is the author of many hymns in the 
Granth Sahib. He was certainly a disciple of Rama- 
nand and a contemporary of Kabir, but otherwise 
there is nothing known regarding his precise date, 
parentage, or place of birth. When Rav Das arrived 
at years of discretion he began to wait on saints. 
He used to present them with everything he could 
procure from his father’s house. His father was 
displeased at this and gave him a separate place of 
residence. Though his father’s wealth and means 
were considerable, yet he gave nothing whatever to 
his son. The latter, who by this time had entered 
the married state, supported himself and his wife 
by making shoes, and lived very happily. Whenever 
he saw a holy man he supplied him gratuitously 
with covering for his feet. He afterwards built 
a hut, set up in it an idol which he had made from 



RAV DAS 


317 


a hide, and applied himself to its worship. When he 
was reproached for making an idol out of a hide, he 
defended himself by descanting on the various advan- 
tages of hides . Drums used in worship were made from 
hides. The cow held sacred by Hindus had a hide. 
God is contained in animals which have hides, &c., &c. 

Rav Das was ever immersed in his devotions, 
a circumstance which led to the abandonment of his 
trade and the deterioration of his circumstances. 
He soon presented all the external marks of poverty 
and hard life, yet his heart was glad and happy in the 
contemplation of God. It was during this period of 
distress that a holy man desired to render him assist- 
ance. Rav Das gave him bread to eat and lavished 
- every attention on him. His visitor in return pre- 
sented him with a philosopher’s stone, explained its 
qualities, and told him to keep it carefully. Rav Das 
replied that he did’ not require it, as his property 
and wealth consisted in the name of God. When 
the visitor saw that Rav Das absolutely coveted 
nothing, he implored him to accept the philosopher’s 
stone. Rav Das told him he might leave it in the 
thatch of his house, by which he meant that the 
article was not worth acceptance. The visitor 
obeyed Rav Das and departed. On that occasion 
Rav Das composed the following hymn 

God’s name is the great wealth of God’s saints ; 

Day by day it increaseth and in no way decreaseth. 

Nothing can steal it either by day or night ; its possessor 
sleepeth secure in his home. 

O God, what need of a stone hath he who possesseth 
this wealth ? 

After the lapse of thirteen months the visitor 
returned and found Rav Das in the same circum- 
stances as before. He asked him what had become 
of the philosopher’s stone. Rav Das replied, ‘ It 
must be where thou didst put it ; I have been afraid 
to touch it.’ Upon this the visitor took it from the 



3i8 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

thatch and departed, fully satisfied that Rav Das 
desired no earthly wealth. 

One day the saint found five gold coins in 
a basket employed to hold accessories of worship. 
The result was that he began to fear even devotion 
to God, lest it might bring him wealth. Then God 
said to him in a vision, ‘ Although thou absolutely 
desirest nothing, yet accept the wealth I give thee 
now.’ Rav Das promised to do so. A pious admirer 
gave him money with which he built a sara, or rest- 
house, wherein he entertained holy men. He then 
built a temple and so decorated it with a canopy, 
fringes, cords of gold lace, wall lamps, chandeliers, 
&c., that visitors on seeing its beauty became en- 
chanted. After that Rav Das built a two-storied 
house for himself on the site of the hut he had 
hitherto used as a temple, and there he continued 
to worship with perfect love. 

Rav Das experienced the ordinary fate of men 
suddenly enriched. The Brahmans, through envy 
and jealousy, complained to the king of Banaras 
that there was no authority in the Shastars for 
a shoemaker to make an image of God, yet Rav Das 
had without any fear or compunction set up such an 
image and was worshipping it and offering it homage. 
He ought therefore to be made to suffer for his pre- 
sumption. The king summoned Rav Das, but was 
so much impressed with the dignity and reasonable- 
ness of his defence that he found no difficulty in 
immediately declaring him guiltless of any offence 
against religion. 

Jhali, the Queen of Chitaur, hearing of Rav Das’s 
fame, visited him and became a disciple of his. At 
this her attendant Brahmans waxed highly indignant. 
They said that the queen had lost her reason, ‘and 
they went and complained of her to the Rana, her 
husband, who had accompanied her to Banaras. He 
sent for Rav Das, and heard the charges of the 
assembled Brahmans against him. They repre- 



RAV DAS 


319 


sen ted the supreme importance of caste, and the 
impropriety of allowing a shoemaker to usurp a 
higher spiritual or social position than that in which 
he had been born. Rav Das replied, ‘ What is dear 
to God is devotion ; He payeth no heed to caste.’ 
Upon this the Brahmans proposed to refer the matter 
to the arbitrament of prayer. They read the Veds 
for three full hours and repeated many spells, but 
did not succeed in inducing God to persuade the 
Rana of Rav Das’s guilt. When it came to Rav 
Das’s turn, he said, ‘ O Great King, be true to thy 
name of Pardoner of sinners.’ He then sang a couple 
of stanzas. The first line of the first stanza is 

O come without delay or call me unto Thee. 

The first lines of the second stanza are 

O God of gods, I Thy protection crave ; 

Have mercy on me,’ knowing me Thy slave. 

The Rana was easily convinced of Rav Das’s 
innocence and expressed himself accordingly. Upon 
this it is said all present became believers in Rav 
Das’s sanctity. 

After that Queen Jhali left Banaras, and returned to 
her kingdom, where she decided on holding a thanks- 
giving festival. With great modesty and humility 
she invited Rav Das to be pleased to attend it. He 
accepted her invitation and went to Chitaur. His 
visit afforded her intense pleasure. She distributed 
a large sum of money in alms on the occasion, and 
invited the principal Brahmans of her state to meet 
the holy man. The Brahmans knew that the queen’s 
guru had been a shoemaker, and it would be better 
for them to take raw provisions of their own and 
cook them than partake of food proffered by the 
queen. They accordingly had food cooked for them- 
selves, but, when they sat down to eat it, it is said, 
they saw. Rav Das seated between every two of 
them. They then believed in his divine mission and 
fell at his feet. It is stated that he gained many 



320 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

disciples on that occasion. Rav Das composed the 
following after the entertainment ; — 

Clever men,^ I am notoriously a tanner by caste, 

But in my heart I meditate on God. 

If wine be made even with Ganges water, you holy men 
will not drink it ; 

But if wine which is impure, or other liquid be put into 
Ganges water, the latter will not be altered.* 

The palmyra palm-tree, sirs, is admittedly impure,* as its 
leaves * are also deemed ; 

But if God’s words be written thereon, men will worship 
it and bow before it. 

My trade is dressing and cutting leather and daily remov- 
ing dead cattle round about Banaras. 

Yet prominent Brahmans now prostrate themselves before 
me, since I, the slave Rav Das, have sought the shelter of Thy 
name, 0 God. 

Rav Das is said to have been such a perfect saint 
of God that his conversation and poetry were like 
suns to dispel the darkness of doubt and infidelity. 
He performed the meritorious acts prescribed in the 
Veds and the Shastars. Orientals believe that if 
milk mixed with water be placed before a swan, it 
can by its peculiar bill separate both, and drink only 
the milk. In the same way Rav Das selected virtue 
from vice, made choice of good acts and avoided 
things forbidden. 

The following compositions of Rav Das are found 
in the Granth Sahib : 

^ Nagar Jan, also translated— Ye city men. 

^ If a man, no matter how highly born, become evil, he is not 
respected, as wine made with Ganges water is not fit for saints’ use. 
But if, on the contrary, wine be thrown into the Ganges, the Ganges 
water will still be holy, so the lowly are exalted by association with 
saints. 

* Because toddy, an intoxicating liquor, is made out of it. 

* Kigara, hence k9ghaz, the modern Hindustani name for paper. 
The leaves of the palm or palmyra-tree were originally used for 
writing on. 



321 


HYMNS OF RAV DAS 

God being light apd the soul also light, there is 
no difference between* them except that the soul is 
encumbered with a body. 

Sri Rag 

Between Thee and me, between me and Thee what 
difference can there be ? - 

The same as between gold and the bracelet, between 
water and its ripples. 

If I did not commit sin, O Eternal One, 

How shouldst Thou have gained the name of Purifier of 
sinners ? 

Thou who art the Lord, art the Searcher of hearts ; 

The servant is known from his master, and the master 
from; his servant. 

Grant me the wisdom to worship Thee with iny body. 

Rav Das, some rare person who destroyeth his evil 
passions,^ may explain this. 

Though Rav Das’s birth is low, he is a candidate 
for God’s favour. 

Gauri 

I 

My associations are low — I think of it day and night — 

My birth is mean, mine acts are crooked. 

0 God, Lord of the earth. Giver of life to men, 

Forget me not, I am Thy slave ; 

Remove my troubles, make Thy servant full of love for 
Thee^ ... 

1 will not forsake Thy feet even though my body perish 
to-morrow. 

Saith Rav Das, I seek Thy protection, 0 God. . 

Quickly come to Thy servant, delay not. . ; 

^ The gyanis translate — Some rare perton, may explain that God 
is equally contained in everything. 



322 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Rav Das’s conception of heaven, 

II 

There is a city narned Beghampur,^ 

Where pain and sorrow find no place ; 

There is no fear of tribute or of tax ; 

There is nor care, nor sin, nor dread nor death. 

Now have I found an excellent abode 

Where ceaseless happiness doth reign, my friends. 

There firm and for aye is sovereignty of God, 

No second or third is there adored,* He ruleth alone ;• 
Inhabited and ever famous is that city ; 

Its people are full dowered with wealth. 

Theirs it is to wander as they please ; 

None restraineth them known in the palace, 

Saith Rav Das, emancipated tanner. 

My friends become my fellow citizens there,® , 

It is said that a Labana offered an ox to Rav Das, 
On refusing the present, the saint wrote the fol- 
lowing : — 

III 

The road to God is very difficult and steep, and I have 
already one useless ox,* 

My one prayer to God is, ‘ Preserve my capital,® O God,’ 
Is there any merchant of God who will join me ? My 
goods are laden and about to start.® 

I am a merchant of God, and deal in divine knowledge. 
The wealth I have loaded is God’s name ; the world 
hath loaded poison. 

* A city where there is no sorrow. This is not Begampur, a village 
on the left bank of the Bhima, so called because one of Aurangzeb’s 
daughters died and was buried there, while her father was encamped 
at Brahmapuri on the opposite side of the' river. 

® That is, no Vishnu or Shiv. 

® That is, they ^hose lives fit them for that abode ' are my ftiends ; 
and obtain salvation, 

* My body. ® That is, my life. 

® That is, I am prepared to give religious instruction to whoever 
will join me. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


323 


Ye recoirding angels, who know this world and the next, 
write whatever nonsense you please about me, I care^ not ; 

The dub of death will not touch me since I have cast 
away all entanglements. 

This world is hke the fleeting colour of safflower, 

But the colour of my God is the permanent dye of madder, 
saith the tanner Rav Das. 

Rav Das prays for divine favour. 

IV 

As a pit full of frogs ^ which know nothing of different 
countries. 

So my mind infatuated with evil passions taketh no 
thought of this world or the next. 

' O Lord of all the world, grant me a sight of Thee for 
a moment ; 

My mind is not clear, O God, and so I cannot understand 
Thy condition. 

Take pity on me that my doubts may be dispelled, and 
teach me right understanding. 

Even supreme Jogis cannot explain Thine attributes which 
are beyond expression. 

The tanner Rav Das prayeth for Thy love and service. 

The following was Rav Das's reply to a holy man 
who asked the questions contained in thfe hymn. 

V 

In the Sat age was truth, in the Treta sacrifice, and in 
the’ Dwapar the performance of worship. 

In the three ages these three observances were established, 
but in the Kal age the Name is the only support. 

How shall I be saved ? 

No one explaineth to me 

How my transmigration may cease. 

There are many forms of religion described, but every- 
one appear eth to adopt his own. 

What are those acts by which I may be saved, and by 
the performance of which I may obtain all things ? 

^ ‘ Frog in a well * is applied in Hindustani to an ignorant person. 

Y 2 



324 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

If what are merits and what demerits be decided by 
listening to the Veds and Purans,^ doubt shall result ; 

Doubt shall thus ever dwell in the heart ; who shall 
dispel pride ? 

Man washeth his body with water, but in his heart there 
is evil of every description. 

How shall purity result ? My purity is such as the elephant 
practiseth. 

As by the sun’s light night departeth, as all the world 
knoweth ; 

As copper when touched by the philosopher’s stone at 
once becometh gold ; 

So if the supreme philosopher’s stone, the guru, be found 
by destiny. 

The perturbed mind shall meet God who is in the heart, 
and the doors of adamant shall be opened.* 

The doubts, the entanglements, and the sins of him who 
maketh the way of devotion firm in his heart shall be cut 
away ; 

He shall restrain his mind, obtain happiness, and .meditate 
on Him alone who possesseth all qualities and yet possesseth 
none. 

Many efforts have I made to ward off the noose of doubt, 
but, however much I tried, I did not succeed. 

Love and devotion have not sprung up in me, therefore 
Rav Das is sad. 

Man is a prey to all the five senses and their 
attendant passions, and not to one predominating 
and overmastering sense alone like the lower 
animals. Hence the following hymn 

Asa 

I 

The deer, the fish, the bumble-bee, the moth, and the 
elephant perish each for one sense ; 

So what hope is there for him who like man hath five im- 
placable enemies ? 

’ The Veds and Purans prescribe different forms of worship. 

* Hardness of heart shall depart. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


325 


O God, man loveth ignorance ; 

His lamp of discrimination hath grown dim. 

The thoughtless are born again as creeping things which 
distinguish not between good and evil ; 

They have now obtained human birth so difficult to 
obtain, and yet in it they associate with the base. 

Men and lower animals, wherever they are, are born 
subject to their previous acts. 

And the noose of Death which hangeth over them can 
by no means be warded off. 

Rav Das, renounce worldly love, dispel doubt, and make 
the guru’s divine knowledge thy religious fervour. 

0 Thou, who dispellest Thy worshipper’s fear, grant me 
supreme bliss at last. 

Rav Das prays for the saints' virtues and devotion 

II 

The company of the saints, who are Thine image, is my life. 

Through the divine knowledge of the guru I recognize 
the saints as gods of gods. 

Grant me the company of the saints, a taste for the 
saints’ converse, 

The saints’ love, O God of gods, 

The saints’ good works, and the saints’ way, that I may 
become attached to what they are attached.^ 

1 pray for one thing more, the miraculous gem of devo- 
tion 

Show me not the wicked and the sinner — 

Between the saints and the Infinite there is no difference ; 

Rav Das saith, he who knoweth this is wise. 

Rav Das is exalted by holy association. 

III 

Thou art sandal, I am the poor palma christi® plant, 
I dwell near Thee : 

^ Some read olag olagni^ and translate — That I may become their 
slave of slaves. 

2 Chintdmaniy a gem supposed to yield its possessor whatever he 

desired. In England the wishing-cap was said to possess the same 
virtue. 3 This is the Ricinus communis^ or castor-oil plant. 



326 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

From a humble shrub I have become a lofty tfee : Thine 
excellent perfume abideth *« we. 

0 God, I have sought the protection of Thy true cbn- 
gregation. 

1 am without virtues, Thou art beneficent, 

Thou art white ^ and yellow twisted silk ; we are the 
poof worms * who toil and make it. 

0 God, may I continue to associate with the saints as 
the bee with the honey ! 

My caste is low, my lineage low, and low is my birth ; 

1 have not served my sovereign God, saith the tanner 
Rav Das. 

For God’s love Rav Das would sacrifice himself. 

IV 

What would it matter were my body to be cut in pieces ? 

Thy slave, 0 God, only feareth that Thy love may depart : 

Thy lotus feet are the home of my' heart ! ® 

By drinking the nectar of His name, I have found God 
who is my wealth. 

Prosperity, adversity, worldly love, and wealth screen 
God from man ; ' 

In them Thy servant is not absorbed. 

Thy slave is bound by the rope of Thy love ; 

Saith Rav Das, what advantage is it to escape there- 
from ? 

God’s name saves saints and sinners. 

V 

God, God, God, God, God, God, God ; * 

By remembering God, saints and sinners ® are saved. 

^ Makhtul, from the Arabic maflul. 

2 Kira is by some gyanis translated canvas. 

* Also translated — Thy feet are the lotus, my soul the bumble-bee 
flitting over them. This is on the supposition that bhawar is read 
for bhawan. 

* This line is supposed to be an imitation of the devotee's repetition 
of God’s name. The gyanis translate — They who repeat God’s name 
in their hearts, they who repeat it with their tongues, and they who 
cause others to rep^t it, bloom afresh. 

® Nislar, literally — those who ought Uot to be saved. 



MYMNS OF, RAV DAS/ 


} 


; I ! 


327 


Through the name of God, Kabir became renowned^ and 
the ctccoimis of his'sins of many births were tom. up. 

Namdev as in duty bound gave milk to god to drink ; 

Wherefore he had not the pain of being bom again in 
the world. 

The slave Rav Das is "dyed with God’s love, 

And so, through the favour of the gum, he shall not go 
to hell. 

They who think not of God shall be condemned. 

VI 

How man, a puppet of clay, danceth ! 

He looketh and looketh, heareth, speaketh, runneth about. 

When he acquireth anything he is proud, 

But when his wealth is gone he beginneth to weep. 

In thought, word, and deed he is fascinated by pleasures. 

So when he perisheth he is contained somewhere else.® 

Saith Rav Das, the world is a play, my brethren ; 

I have established loving relations with the True Actor.® 

The object of the following hymn is to show that 
nothing offered to God by idolaters, even according 
to their own ideas, is pure, and that the true offering 
to God is the sincere heart. 

Gujari 

The calf hath defiled the milk in the cow’s udder by 
tasting it ; 

The bumble-bee hath spoiled the flowers, and the fish 
the water — 

My mother, where shall I find anything to offer in God’s 
worship ? 

I cannot find other flowers superior to these. 

Serpents twine round the sandal-tree ; * 

^ Nimat, Sanskrit niyamit. His father, before going on a journey, 
enjoined him to give milk to the family idol during bis absence. 

® Instead of bting absoibed in God’s light he is bom again as an 
inferior animal. ® And not with the play. 

* Serpents love the perfume of the sandal-tree and twine around it. 
They thus, in ihe estimation of stiict HindQs, spoil and render it 
unfit to be offered in worship, as is commonly done. 



328 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Poison and ambrosia dwell together ; 

Incense, lamps, and consecrated bread ate polluted.^ 

How shall thy slave perforih Thy worship ? ' 

Let me ' dedicate and offer my body and soul as my 
worship. 

Thus, by the guru’s favour, shall I find the Pure One. 

I cannot perform Thine adoration and worship according 
to Hindu rites ; 

Saith Rav Das, in what condition am I?® 

Rav Das concludes that everything is God. 

SORATH 

I 

When there was egoism in me. Thou wert not with me ; 
now that Thou art with me, there is no egoism. 

Huge waves are raised by the wind in the ocean, but 
they are only water in water.® 

O God, what shall I say ? Through illusion things 
are not as they are supposed to be. 

A king sleepeth on his throne ; in a dream he becometh 
a beggar ; 

He suffereth pain at losing his empire, though it is intact : 
such hath been my condition. 

Like the story of the rope and the serpent, I have now 
had the secret * explained to me. 

On seeing several® bracelets I erroneously supposed that 
they were distinct from the gold ; but what I then said I now 
say no longer. 

In all things the one Lord assumeth various shapes ; 
God sporteth in all hearts. 

® Somebody has touched them. 

® Since 1 cannot worship Thee with all the accessories of Hindu 
worship. 

® The meaning is, since the poet has abjured egoism, he has 
become a portion of God as the waves blend with the sea. 

® I thought a rope was a serpent, but it was not. . I thought that 
man eaist^, but now I find everything is God. 

^ If kanik were here read, . the translation would be — As man 
mislaketh by calling a thing a bracelet instead of calling it gold. 



- i / HYMNS OF RAV DAS 329 

Rav Dasy God is nearer to us than our hands and 
feet ; it is what taketh place by His will that taketh place. 

Rav Daa so loves God that he feels he has a claim 
on His mercy. 

n 

When Thou didst bind us with a noose of illusion, we 
bound Thee with a bond of love ; 

Try to release Thyself ; we have been released by adoring 
Thee. 

0 God, Thou knowest how we feel towards Thee ; 

Now what wilt Thou do with us, such being our love for 
Thee ? 

Man catcheth a fish, sUceth it, cutteth it up, and cooketh 
it in various ways ; 

He biteth and eateth it, still it forgetteth not the 
water.^ 

The Supreme Ruler is no man’s heritage ; He belongcth 
to him who loveth Him. 

Though the screen of illusion be spread over the whole 
world, yet it troubleth not the saint. 

Saith Rav Das, my devotion to the one God hath in- 
creased ; to whom shall I tell this now ? 

Shall I still suffer misery for the removal of which I 
worship Thee ? 

Rav Das on introspection finds himself wanting. 

Ill 

1 obtained this birth difficult of attainment as the reward 
of merit, but it passeth away in vain on account of my want 
of discrimination. 

Say of what account would a palace and a throne like 
King Indar’s be without devotion to God ? 

I have not thought of the pleasure in the Supreme God’s 
name, a pleasure in which all other pleasures are forgotten. 

What we ought to have known we knew not ; we have 


^ That is, its eater becomes thirsty. 



330 BHAGATS OF /THE‘ GRANTH SAHIB 

become^ mad, and not considered what we ought' to have 
condderfed) and SO our days have passed away. 

Our passions are strong, and our discrimination weak ; 
our understanding cannot enter into God’s designs. 

We say one thing, and do another ; ' worldly love* hin-^ 
dereth us from understanding. 

Saith Rav Das, J, Thy slave, am sad at heart ; ; 

Avert Thine anger from me and have mercy on my souL 

We should fix our attention on God who can 
adequately reward us. 

IV 

God is an ocean of pleasure ; in His power are the 
miraculous tree, and gem, and cow. 

The four advantages, the eighteen miraculous powers, 
and the nine treasures are in the palm of His hand. 

Why repeat not, ‘ God, God, God,’ with thy tongue, 

And abandon all other device of words ? 

The epic poems, the Purans, the Veds of Brahma, are all 
composed out of thirty-four letters.^ 

Bias having reflected expressed his conviction that there 
was nothing equal to the name of God. 

Very fortunate are they who tranquilly contemplate and 
fix their attention upon God ; they shall afterwards be 
freed from their troubles. 

Saith Rav Das, the fear of death and birth fleeth from 
him who hath put the light of divine knowledge into his 
heart. 

The saint's relation to God. 

V 

If Thou art a hill, then I am Thy peacock ; ^ 

If Thou art the moon, then I am Thy chakor ; 

O God, if Thou break not with me, I will not break with 
Thee ; 

^ Omitting the modifications and combinations of the Sanskrit 
characters and retaining only one s. The meaning apparently is that 
the letters which form God^s name are superior to all the bther lefiers 
employed in the Hindu sacred writings. 

2 In India peacocks generally live on undulating lands. 



; i ^ HYMNS OF iRAV DAS ^ 331 

If I break with Thee, whom shall I join ? 

If Thou art a lamp, then I am Thy. wick ; 

If Thou art a place of pilgrimage, then I am Thy pilgrim. 
I have joined true love with Thee ; 

Joining Thee I have.brcdcen with ail others. 

Wherever I go there is' Thy service ; 

There is no other Lord like Thee, O God. 

By worshipping Thee Death’s noose is cut away. 

Rav Das singeth to obtain Thy service. 

Man is too proud of his body though its origin 
and its end are contemptible. 

VI 

The body is a wall of water supported by a pillar of air ; 
blood ^ and semen are its mortar. 

The poor soul dwelleth in a skeleton of bones, flesh, and 
veins ; 

0 mortal, what is mine and what is thine ? 

As a bird percheth on a tree, so doth the soul on the body. 
Thou layest foundations and buildest thyself a house ; 
Three and a half cubits shall be thy measure at last. 

Thou curlest thy hair, and wearest thy turban on the 
side of thy head ; 

But thy body shall become a heap of dust. 

Even though thou possess lofty palaces and beautiful 
women. 

Without the name of God thy game is lost. 

My caste is low, my lineage low, and base is my birth : 

1 have sought Thy shelter, O God, saith the tanner 
Rav Das. 

The following was addressed to some one who re- 
proached Rav Das for not following his trade : — 

VII 

I a cobbler know not how to mend shoes. 

Yet people want me to mend their shoes. 

1 Rabat, the portion supposed to be contributed by the fem.ile 
instead of the ova of modern physiology. 



332 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I have no awl to stitch with ; 

I have no knife to patch with. 

People have been thoroughly ruined by mending shoes ^ — 

I have attained my object without mending shoes. 

Rav Das repeateth God’s name ; 

I have now no concern with Death. 

Rav Das’s devotion and hope in God. 

Dhanasari 

I 

There is none so poor as I, none so compassionate as 
Thou ; for this what further test is now necessary ? 

May my heart obey Thy words ! fill Thy servant therewith . 

I am a sacrifice to Thee, O God ; 

Why art Thou silent ? 

For many births have I been separated from Thee, O God : 
This birth is on Thine own account.® < 

Saith Rav DaS, putting my hopes in Thee I live ; it is 
long since I have seen Thee. 

Rav Das’s love for God. 

II 

I remember Thee, O God, in my heart ; I behold Thee 
with mine eyes ; I fill mine ears with Thy hymns ® and 
praises ; 

I make my mind the honey-bee, I put Thy lotus feet into 
my heart, and with my tongue I utter Thine ambrosial 
name. 

May my love for God not decrease I 

I have bought it dear in exchange for my soul. 

‘Without the companionship of the saints no love is pro- 
duced, and without love no service is performed for Thee. 

Rav Das offereth one prayer ' to God — ^preserve mine 
honour, O my sovereign Lord. 

1 And neglecting God, the expression ganthi ganthi also means to 
be attached to worldly things. 

® That I may worship Thee in human body. 

® The clause is also translated — I fill my ears and my tongue with 
Thy praises. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


333 


God’s name is for Rav Das equal to all the Hindu 
oblations. 


Ill 


Thy name, O God, is mine Arati and mine ablutions ; 

Without the name of .God all display is vain. 

Thy name is my prayer-mat. Thy name my saffron- 
grater, Thy name the saffron which I sprinkle for Thee ; 

Thy name is the water. Thy name the sandal, the repeti- 
tion of Thy name the grating thereof ; ^ taking it I offer it 
unto Thee ; 

Thy name is the lamp. Thy name the wick. Thy name 
the oil I pour therein ; 

Thy name is the light which I have applied to it, and 
which hath enlightened the whole world ; 

Thy name is the string. Thy name the necklace of flowers ; 
all the eighteen loads of vegetables are too impure * to offer 
Thee. 

Why should I offer Thee the work of Thy hands ? Thy 
name is the chauri which I wave over Thee. 

The whole world is engrossed in the eighteen Purans, the 
sixty-eight places of pilgrimage, and the four sources of life. 

Saith Rav Das, Thy name is the Arati ; the true Name 
is the food I offer unto Thee, O God.® 


God alone can save man from his evil passions. 

Jaitsari 

0 Lord, I know nothing ; 

1 have sold my soul to mammon. 

Thou art styled the great Lord of the world, and we the 
sensualists of the Kal age. 

The five evil passions which have corrupted my heart. 
Have at every moment thrown a barrier between Thee 
and me. 

Whithersoever I look, there is a stock of trouble. 

^ Sandal is grated and sprinkled by Hindus on their idol. 

® Because the bee has tasted them. 

* This hymn is recited in a collection of Sikh prayers called the 
Arati. 



334 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I. am not' yet satisfied, although the. Veds bear witness to 
God. • . ; I ; i ‘ , I ' ' ■ 

As, for his sin, on the body of Indar, the paramour of AhaJya 
Gautam’s \vife, a thousand vaginae formed, 

As the head of Brahma adhejreid, to the hand of Shiv the 
lord of Uma ^ for his sin, 

So these wicked enemies, the deadly sins, have bound and 
h&a.tenme also a sinner. 

I am very shameless, and have not yet grpwn weary of 
their company. 

Saith Rav Das, whither shaU I go ? What shall I do ?, 

Except God’s protection whose shall, I seek ? 

The saint and the sinner under the allegories of 
a good and a bad wife contrasted. 

SUHI 


The good wife knpweth her sphuse’s worth ; 

She renounceth pride and enjoyeth conjhgal happiness ; 

She giveth her husband her body and soul, and maketh 
no distinction between' him and herself ; 

She seeth no one else, heareth no one else, and speaketh 
to no one else. 

How should she, into whose heart no sorrow hath entered. 

Know of the woes of others ? 

The bad wife ^ who hath not served her spouse continually 

Is unhappy, and loseth both worlds — 

The way by the bridge of Sirat ® is difficult — 

She shall have no companion, and must go alone. 

In grief and in pain, 0 God, I have come to Thy door ; 
I am very thirsty, and I have received no answer from Thee. 

Saith Rav Das, I have come to Thy protection ; effecti my 
salvation as Thou thinkest best. 

. ' . ' ' 

1 Also called Parbati. 

2 Wife here is used for man in the generic sense, and the spouse is 
God. 

® Sirdt-uUmustakim. The bridge which leads to heayen,, according 
to Muhammadans. 



• HYMNS OF RiAY- DAS h i 335 

As everything here changes,! man should ; make 
provision for the hereafter. 

. • • . 1 

U 

The days which come, pass away again ; 

We must march on, nothing remaineth stable. 

Our companions are going, we too must go ; 

The journey is long ; Death standeth oyer us. 

Why sleepest; thou ? Awake for God’s service, 0 silly 
one ; 

Thou thoughtest life a real thing in this world, when thou 
ougktest to have thought of God. 

He who gave thee life conveyeth thee sustenance, , 

And in every heart openeth a shop.'^ 

Worship God, lay aside egoism ; 

In thy heart reniember God’s name betimes. 

. Thy life hath come to an end, yet thou hast not prepared 
thy way ; 

It is evening, and darkness is on every side. 

Saith Rav Das, O fool and madman. 

Didst thou not reflect that the world is a transitory 
abode ? 

Man can only rely on God, not on property or 
relations. 

Ill 

Man buildeth lofty mansions with halls and kitchens. 

But after Death he cannot remain in them for a ghari. 
This body is like a wainscoting of grass ; 

When the grass is burnt, it is blended with the dust. 
Even thy relations, thy family, and thy companions 
Set up a cry, ‘ Take him out quickly ! ’ 

The wife of thy house who embraced thee in lifCi 
Crieth out, ‘ Ghost ! ghost 1 ’ and runneth away from 
thee. , 

Saith Rav Das, Death hath plundered the whole world, 
But I have escaped by repeating the name of the one God. 

^ To dispense food. 



336 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 
God’s grace is unparalleled. 

Bilawal 

I 

Everybody used to laugh on seeing my poverty — such 
was my condition ; 

But I hold the whole eighteen supernatural powers in the 
palm of my hand through Thy favour. 

Thou knoWest I am nothing, O God, Destroyer of fear ; 

All men have sought Thy protection, O God, Fulfiller 6f 
desires ; 

They who have sought Thy protection no longer bear the 
load of sin. 

High and low have been delivered from the shameless ^ 
world through Thee. 

Saith Rav Das, why say more regarding the Ineffable ? 

Thou, O God, art Thine own patallel ; to what can I 
liken Thee ? 

The glorification of the saint. 

II 

The family in which a saint of God is born. 

Whether it be of high or low caste, poor or rich, shall have 
its unalloyed fame blazoned through the world. 

Whether man be a Brahman, a Vaisya, a Sudar, a Khatri, 
a Dum, a Chandal, or a Malechh, 

He becometh pure by worshipping God ; he saveth him- 
self and the families of both his parents. 

Blest the village, blest the place of his birth, blest his pure 
family in all worlds ! 

He hath quaffed the supreme essence ; abandoning all 
others, he hath become intoxicated with it, and renounced 
sin. 

Among pandits, heroes, and emperors, there is none 
equal to the saint. 

^ Also translated— -Have been delivered from the entanglements of 
the world through Thee. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 337 

As the leaves of the water-lily^ in the water, saith Rav 
Das, is the saint’s existence in the world ; he rentaineth 
uncontamincUed by it. 

God as the Dispenser of salvation. 

Gaund 

I 

Repeat the name of God, the Dispenser of salvation, ye 
people. 

Without the Dispenser of salvation the body groweth 
weary in transmigration. 

The Dispenser of salvation is the Giver of deliverance ; 
The Dispenser of salvation is our father and mother. 
Living repeat His name, dying repeat His name ; 

His worshipper is ever happy — 

The Dispenser of salvation is my life. 

If it have been so recorded on thy forehead, thou shalt 
repeat His name. 

Only he who hath ceased to love the world can serve God. 
That Dispenser of salvation, I, poor though I be, have 
obtained as my wealth. 

If the one Dispenser of salvation do me a favour. 

What can the world do to me ? 

Having effaced my caste I have become a courtier of 
God— 

Thou, O God, art able to save the world — 

Divine knowledge hath sprung up, and I have become 
enlightened ; 

God hath graciously accepted this worm as His slave. 
Saith Rav Das, my thirst hath now ceased ; 

I repeat the name of God and perform His service. 

The fate of the slanderer. 

II 

If man bathe at the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage. 

If he worship the twelve lingam stones, 

^ The water-lily is supposed to remain dry in the water. 

SIKH. VI 2^ 



338 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

If he dedicate a well or a tank,^ 

But practise slander^ all shall be in vain. 

How shall the slanderer of a saint be saved ? 

Know that he shall assuredly fall into hell. 

If man celebrate eclipses at Kurkhetar, 

Offer his wife with her decorations to the Brahmans, 

And hear with his ears all the Simritis, 

Yet if he practise slander, all shall be in vain. 

If he prepare many feasts to Brahmans, 

Make them gifts of land, and build them splendid public 
mansions r 

If, neglecting his own business, he perform that of others. 
And yet practise slander, he shall wander in many births. 
O, ye people, why do ye slander ? 

The slanderer’s character is well known. 

Holy men have considered and decided regarding the 
slanderer — 

Saith Rav Das, he is a sinner, and shall go to hell. 

It is the guru who communicates the Name by 
which God’s designs are manifested. 

Ramkali 

Men read, study, and hear all God’s names, yet God’s 
designs are not known. 

How shall iron become pure gold unless it be touched by 
the philosopher’s stone ? 

O God, the knots of doubt unravel not ; 

Lust, wrath, worldly love, pride, and jealousy — these five 
combined plunder the world. 

‘ We are great poets, of high family,® we are Pandits, we 
are J ogis, Sanyasis, 

‘ Gyanis, virtuous heroes, we are generous ’ — these ideas 
shall never perish. 

® Tata, here for tarag, a tank. Others understand the word to 
mean, a margin, and translate kup tata as a' well with its surrounding 
land. 

® Kultn, This word is now applied to a race of Brihmans in 
Ben^l,' who marry a huge plurality of wives. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


339 

Saith Rav Das, all these men do not understand Gody 
they go astray like madmen. 

God’s name is my support, my life, my soul, and my 
wealth. 

Rav Das in obtaining salvation acknowledges 
God's favour. 

Maru 

Who but Thee, my Jewel, could do such a thing ? 

Cherisher of the poor. Lord of the earth ; Thou hast put 
over my head the umbrella of spiritual sovereignty. 

Thou relentest towards him whose touch defileth the 
world ; 

The lowly dost Thou exalt, my God, and none dost Thou 
fear. 

Namdev, Kabir, Trilochan, Sadhna, and Sain were 
saved — 

Saith Rav Das, hear, O saints, through God everything 
is done. 

The man of low birth and caste may be saved by 
devotion. 

Kedara 

Though one perform the six good acts and belong to a 
high family, yet if he heartily worship not God, 

AniTlove not the mention of His lotus feet, he is equal 
to a pariah. 

O thoughtless man, think upon God in thy heart ; 

Why not look at Balmik ? ^ 

From a low caste what a high position he attained by his 
special devotion to God ; 

Though an eater of dogs, the lowest of all, he was beloved 
by Krishan. 

How can poor mortals praise God ? His praise extendeth 
to the three worlds. 

Ajamal, the courtesan, Lodiya the huntsman, and the 
elephant went to God. 

^ This is the man whose feet Krishan washed, not the author of the 
Rdmdyana, 



340 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Such degraded beings were saved ; why shouldst not thou 
too be saved, O Rav Das ? 

The advantages of repeating God’s name. 

Bhmro 

Without beholding God there is no hope ; 

Everything that we see perisheth. 

He who repeateth God’s name with due praise 

Is the only Jogi free from desires. 

If any gne employ himself in repeating God’s name, 

And God, the philosopher’s stone, touch him, his duaUty 
shall no longer remain. 

He who destroyeth the duality of his mind is a muni ; 

He shall be absorbed in God ^ who filleth the three worlds. 

Everybody acteth according to his natural inclinations ; 

It is only the Creator who abideth without fear. 

Vegetables blossom to produce fruit ; 

When the fruit appearefh the blossoms decay. 

For the sake of divine knowledge men practise religious 
ceremonies ; 

When divine knowledge is obtained, religious ceremonies 
are not performed. 

To make butter, knowing people churn coagulated milk ; 

So those who strive for divine knowledge obtain deliverance 
while alive, and are ever at rest. 

ft 

Saith Rav Das, having embraced supreme contempt for 
the world. 

Why not heartily repeat God’s name, O luckless man ? 

• Rav Das endeavours to humiliate, his body. . 

Basant 

Thou know^t nothtngr^O my body. 

On seeing thy fine clothes thou purest thyself up. 

No place can hold the proud 

Yet over thy head the crow caweth.* 

^ Bindware — God who is without the organs of action. 

* By some Oriental people th< dead are thrown to crows, kites, and 
vultures. 



HYMNS OF. RAV DAS 341 

Why art thou proud, O demented body ? 

Thou art much more short-lived than a toadstool in the 
month of Bhadon. 

The deer knoweth not the 'secret of his musk ; 

He hath it in his body, yet he searcheth for it abroad. 
He who understandeth his own fleeting body, 

Shall never be disgraced by the myrmidons of Death. 
Man is proud of his son and wife ; 

It is from him God will take an account. 

Thou shalt suffer for what thou thyself hast done, O soul. 
Whom shalt thou afterwards address as ‘ Dear one, dear 
one ? ’ 

If thou seek the protection of holy men, 

Thy sins, even though millions upon millions, shall all be 
erased. 

Saith Rav Das, he who repeateth God’s name 

Hath no concern with caste, or birth, or transmigration. 

The saint, no matter how low his caste, is superior 
even to the demigods. 


Malar 

II 

N’either the Lord of Lakshmi,^ nor the Lord of Kailas,^ 
nor any one else is equal to those who repeat God’s name : 

He is one alone though j^iffused in many ways ; recall, 
recall Hiln to your thoughts ; He filleth creation. 

He in whose house devotion to God and nothing else was 
seen, was by caste an untouchable calico-iprinter. 

The' greatness of God’s name was seen in Vyas ; it was 
obserVe4 in the sons of Brahma ; it is famous through the 
seven islaiyis ^ of the earth. v . 

He whose family^ used to sacrifice tows at the Id and 
Bakr Id, ^nd who worshipped Shaikhs, and martyrs, and pirs, 

^ Vishnu. 

^ Where. Shiv is supposed lo reside. 

^ The conception of ancient Hindu geographers. 

^ The* reference is to Niru, Kabir's adoptive father. This verse 
proves that Musalmans killed epws at the two festivals referred to long 
before the British occupation of India. 



342 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir, the son of a father who used to do such things, so 
succeeded that he became celebrated in the three worlds. 

All the chatnars ^ of my family even still go round Baiiaras 
removing dead cattle, 

Yet strict Brahmans prostrate themselves before their 
offspring, Rav Das, the slave of God’s slaves. 

The following hymn was composed in reply to 
a Brahman who inquired how Rav Das could obtain 
salvation : — 

III 

By what devotion shall I meet my Beloved, the Lord of 
souls ? 

The supreme state is obtained by association with saints. 

Soiled is my vesture,* how long shall I wash it ? 

How long shall I remain in this sleep ® which hath come 
upon me ? 

The things * to which I was attached have all perished ; 

The shop of spurious traffic hath closed.® 

Saith Rav Das, when my account is taken, 

I shall see whatever I have done recorded to my credit. 


MIRA BAI 

A HYMN of Mira Bai is preserved in the Granth 
Sahib of Bhai Banno, which can be seen at Mangat 
in the Gujrat district of the Pan jab, but it is not 
included in Guru Arjan’s collection. 

Mira Bai was daughter of Ratan ^ingh Rathaur 
of Merata, a town between Bikaner and Jodhpur 
in Rajputana. She was born about a.d. 1504. She 
appears to have inherited her religious proclivities 

1 Leather-cutters supposed by the higher Hindu castes to be 
unclean. 

2 Until God enters it, it is hopeless to suppose niy heart can be 
purified. 

* Spiritual ignorance. ^ The pleasures of the world. 

® I have no longer dealings with the world. 



MIRA BAI 


343 


from her mother. When Mira Bai was yet a child, 
the bridal procession of a youth of position passed 
by the palace. All the ladies of the court, except 
Mira Bai’s mother, went to the upper apartments; 
to view the procession. She took the opportunity 
of their absence to' worship an image of Krishan, 
called Girdhar Lai, which was set up in her private 
apartment. 

Mira Bai laid aside her playthings to follow her 
mother, and said to her, ‘ Who is my bridegroom ? ’ 
Her mother smiled, took her in her arms, and, 
pointing to Girdhar Lai, said, ‘ There is your bride- 
groom.’ Upon this Mira Bai instantly accepted 
him, and veiled her face according to the Oriental 
practice, which requires a wife to veil her face even 
from her mother in the presence of her husband. 
She became so enamoured of Girdhar Lai that she 
could not pass an instant without seeing him. Her 
love for him is compared to that of the milkmaids 
of Bindraban for Krishan. She in time indulged 
her passion without fear or shame, and without 
any regard for the traditions of her family con- 
cerning the retirement of women from the public 
gaze. 

While her affections were thus engaged, she was 
betrothed to Kan war Bhojraj, son of Rana Sanga 
of Mewar. The subsequent marriage in a.d. 1516, 
as might well have been expected, proved unhappy. 
Bhojraj came to Merata in great state with a large 
retinue, but when the marriage ceremony was being 
performed and the time came for the bride to cir- 
cumambulate the pavilion set up for the ceremony, 
Mira Bai walked around the idol of Girdhar Lai, 
and took no notice of the bridegroom. When the 
time for her departure with her husband arrived; 
her parents wished to send her off with suitable 
marriage presents, but she was miserable at leaving 
Girdhar Lai. She grew sad and restless, and wept 
to such an extent that she became insensible. When 



344 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

she regained consciousness, her parents affectionately 
told her that, if it made her happy, she might take 
Girdhar Lai with her without any further ceremony. 
She replied that if they valued her present and 
future happiness, they would ^ve her the image, 
and she would worship it with heart and soul. 
Her parents had already perceived that she was 
a saint and lover of God, and so at the moment of 
separation from their beloved daughter they pre- 
sented her with the image as part of her dowry. 

Mira Bai, who was overjoyed at obtaining posses- 
sion of the object of her devotion, set it up in her 
palanquin, and during the journey feasted her eyes 
on its beauty. On arriving at her new home, her 
mother-in-law, the Rani, had hardly paid her the 
rites of hospitality, when she asked her to worship 
Durga, a goddess of a totally different temper from 
the playful Krishan. Mira Bm replied that she 
had devoted her body to Girdhar Lai, and she 
would bow her head to none but him. Her mother- 
in-law replied that a good wife was improved by 
worshipping Durga. But Mira Bai closed the dis- 
cussion by saying it was of no use to press her 
further, and she would abide by her first determina- 
tion. On this the Rani became very angry, and 
went to complain of Mira Bai to the Rana i ‘ This 
daughter-in-law of ours is worthless, for on the very 
day of her arrival she refuseth to obey, me and 
putteth me to shame. It is clear what our future 
relations are to be.’ 

The Rana became excessively incensed, and went 
to his daughter-in-law with the intention of punishing 
her. The Rani, however, had sufficient sense to 
restrain him ; and he decided that the interests of 
domestic peace would be consulted by putting Mira 
Bai into a separate apartment. Though it is ad- 
mitted by Nabhaji that Rukmini, who became 
Krishan’s consort, and the milkmaids whp became 
Krishan’s playfellows, did not meet him, until they 



MIRA BAI 


345 


had sacrificed to Durga, yet as Mira Bai had already 
obtained Krishan, it was unnecessary for her to 
worship Durga, and no exception could be taken to 
her conduct on the precedent of Rukmini and the 
milkmaids. 

Mira Bai on finding herself in a private apart- 
ment became excessively happy, and gave full scope 
to her religious enthusiasm. She set up her image, 
decked and adorned it, and devoted herself night 
and day to the company of holy men. Her Sister-in- 
law Udai Bai was sent to remonstrate with her, 
and said, ‘ Thou art the scion of a noble house. 
Be wise and desist from the company of faqirs, 
which casteth a slur on both our families.’ Mira 
Bai replied, ' The slur of hundreds of thousands of 
births departeth on association with saints. The 
slur is on her who loveth not their company. My 
life dependeth on the company of saints. To any 
one who is displeased with it thy remonstrance would 
be proper.’ It was on this occasion that Mira Bai 
composed the following hymns : — 

0 my friend, my mind is attached to Krishan ; I shall 
not be restrained from loving him. 

If any one give me a reproach, I will give a hundred 
thousand in return. 

My mother-in-law is severe, my sister-in-law obstinate ; 
how can I endure this misery ? 

Mira for the sake of the lord Girdhar would endure thel 
obloquy of the world. 

1 have the god Girdhar and no other ; 

He is my spouse on whose head is a crown of peacock 
feathers. 

Who carrietb a shell, discus, mace, and lotus, and who 
weareth a necklace.^ 

I have forfeited the respect of the world by ever sitting 
near holy men. 

1 This is a description of Vishnu, of wliom Krishan was hn in- 
carnation. 



346 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The matter is niow public ; everybody knoweth it. 

Having felt supreme devotion I die as I behold the 
world. 

I have no mother, father, son, or relation with me. 

I laugh when I behold my beloved ; people think I weep. 

I have planted the vine of love, and irrigated it again and 
again with the water of tears. 

I have cast away fear of the world ; what can any one 
do to me ? ' 

Mira’s love for her god is fixed, come what may. 

The Rana, on being informed of Mira Bai’s de-> 
termination, became beside himself with rage, and 
sent her a cup of poison under the name of charn- 
amrit, that is, water in which an image had been 
bathed. When she tasted the liquor she knew it 
was poison, and thus apostrophized : ‘ The body is 
perishable, so why weep if it perish in the service 
of Krishan ? There needs be no regret at the dis- 
appearance of a mirage or at the failure of the son 
of a barren woman to wed. It is not right to say 
that the moon perisheth on the thirtieth day of the 
lunar month. Lamentations are as vain as the grief 
of a bee at the fading of an imaginary flower. As 
the fruit of a tree falleth, sooner or later, so have 
I fallen at Krishan’ s feet. As a pearl born in the 
ocean is turned into an ornament, so shall I glitter 
in Krishan's diadem. The world itself is an illu- 
sion.’ 

Mira Bai’s only grief at leaving her body was that 
the worship of Krishan might decline. Having in- 
formed the god of her father-in-law’s intention, she 
thus addressed the object of her worship — ‘ People 
will say that the king poisoned his daughter-in-law 
because she worshipped thee. I fear therefore that 
thy worship will be neglected, and the apprehension 
causeth me poignant misery. Who will now put on 
thy decorations ? Who wUl put the saffron mark 
on thy forehead, attach dazzling rings to thine ears. 



MIRA BAI 


347 


twine a garland of pearls round thy neck, girdle 
thee with a jewelled zone, tie on thy golden armlets 
and anklets, light incense to gratify thy nostrils, 
make thee offerings of sweet basil, present thee with 
sacred food to satisfy thy hunger, and prostrate 
herself in adoration before thee ? My father-in-law 
hath already abandoned thy worship in his dis- 
pleasure with me, others too will reproach thee with 
my death and cease to do thee homage. But after 
all why should I be anxious ? Thou thyself knowest 
the past, the present, and the future. Thou hast 
ever preserved thy saints from poison, fire, and 
sword, so why should I be anxious now ? ’ 

On this Mira Bai put the cup of poison on her 
head in token of submission, and then cheerfully 
drank it. On that occasion she composed the follow- 
ing verses : — 

Radha^ and Krishan dwell in my heart. 

Some say that Mira is insane, others that she hath dis- 
graced her family. 

Opening her veil and baring her breast, she danceth with 
delight before her god. 

In the bowers of Bindraban, Krishan with the tilak on 
his forehead gladdeneth my heart. 

The Rana sent a cup of poison and Mira drank it with 
delight. 

Mira’s lord is the all-wise Girdhar ; she is bound to his 
service. 

The Rana waited to hear of Mira’s death, but her 
life was miraculously preserved, and her cheeks 
gradually assumed a higher bloom. She devoted 
herself to the further decoration and ornamentation 
of the image, and decked it out in fashions ever 
new. She sang the praises of her god and filled 

* Wife of Ayana Ghosha (a cowherd) and favourite mistress of 
Krishan while he lived as Gop^l among the cowherds in Bindraban. 
— ^Dowson’s Dictionary of Hindu Mythology. 



348 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

her heart with delight and immortal love. She also 
composed the following on this occasion : — 

I knew the Rana had given me poison. 

God who caused my boat to float across, separated the 
milk and water for me.^ 

Until gold is annealed, it is not perfectly pure. 

0 king, keep thine own family in seclusion ; I am the 
wife of another.* 

1 sacrifice my mind and body to the saint even though he 
be a pariah ; I have sold myself to god. 

Mira for the sake of worshipping the lord Girdhar is 
entangled in the feet of holy men. 

When the Rana found that the poison had pro- 
duced no effect, he appointed tipstaffs to watch 
Mira Bai, and report when she again conferred with 
faqirs, so that she might be put to death when 
detected in the act. She was in the habit of laughing 
and holding playful converse with the idol. One 
day a tipstaff went and said to the king, ‘At this 
very moment Mira Bai is holding conversation and 
laughing with some one.’ The king took up his 
sword, and called out to her to open the folding 
doors. He asked her where the person was with 
whom she had been holding such pleasant discourse. 
She replied, ‘ There he is before thee, mine idol, 
mine adored. Open thine eyes and look. He is 
neither afraid nor ashamed of thee.’ 

Nabhaji states that Mira Bai and the idol had 
been pla5dng at Indian draughts, and at the time 
of the Rana’s entrance the idol actually extended 
its arm to move a piece. The Rana on witnessing 
the miracle became ashamed. There was, however, 
no real impression made on his obdurate heart.* 

* That is, saved me in the ordeal. 

* I am wedded to Girdhar Lsl, not to thy son. 

* Mira Bai’s idol is still preserved in a temple dedicated to her in 
the old abandoned fortress of Chitaur, once the home of the ancestors 
of the MahilrSna of Udaipur. 



MIRA BAI 


349 

Once when Mira Bai was ill she composed the 
following : — ^ 

Krishan with the large eyes looked at me, and smiled 

As I was going to draw water from the Jamna and the 
vessel glittered on ftiy head. 

Since then the delightful image of the dark and beautiful 
one hath dwelt in my heart. 

You may write and bring me incantations, you may write 
and bring me spells, grind medicine and give it me, that will 
not cure me. 

If any one bring me Krishan as my physician I will 
gladly arise. 

His eye-brows are bows, his eyes the arrows which he 
fitted thereto, and dischargeth to pierce me. 

Mira’s lord is the wise Girdhar ; how can I abide at home ? 

A dissolute and abandoned person tried to tempt 
Mira Bai’s virtue. He told her that he was armed 
with Girdhar Lai’s permission to give her such 
pleasure as she could only obtain from man’s em- 
braces. She replied that she humbly submitted to 
Girdhar Lai’s order, but that they must first dine. 
She meantime had a couch placed and dressed in 
the enclosure where saints were assembled. She there 
addressed her would-be paramour : ‘ Thou needest 
not be ashamed or afraid of any one, as the order 
of Girdhar Lai is on every account proper.’ The 
man replied, ‘ Does any one do such things before 
others ? ’ She said she knew of no secret place, for 
Krishan was everywhere present. ‘ He seeth the good 
and bad acts of all and rewardeth men according 
to their deserts.’ On hearing this the ruffian turned 
pale, and vice gave place to virtue in his heart. 
He fell at her feet and with clasped hands asked 
her mercy and divine intercession. Mira Bai felt 
compassion and brought him, in the words of the 
chronicler, face to face with God. 

Tulsi Das, according to all received accounts, 
lived nearly a century after Mira Bai, but some 



350 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

poets have made them contemporaries. The fol- 
lowing letter to Tulsi Das is attributed by Raja 
Raghuraj Sinh to Mira Bai : — 

To the holy lord Tulsi Das, the virtuous, the remover of 
sin, greeting — 

I ever bow to thee, dispel all my sorrow. 

All my husband’s relations give me continual annoyance. 

They cause me to endure great suffering when I associate 
with saints, and perform my worship. 

Since childhood Mira hath contracted love for Girdhar Lai : 

She cannot now free herself from it in any way ; it com- 
pletely overpowereth her. 

Thou art to me a father and mother ; thou conferrest 
happiness on God’s saints. 

Write and inform me what it is proper for me to do. 

Tulsi Das’s reply : — 

They who love not Ram and Sita 

Should be abandoned as if they were millions of enemies, 
however much we love them. 

Prahlad abandoned his father, Bibhishan his brother 
Rawan, and Bharat his mother, 

Bali his guru, the women of Brij their husbands, and 
their lives were all happier for having done so. 

The opinion of all holy saints is that relations with and 
love of God are alone true. 

Of what avail is the eye-salve which causeth the eyes to 
burst ; what more can I say ? 

Saith Tulsi Das, that spouse is worshipful, that son is 
dearer than life. 

Who is attached to Ram ; he is my real friend in this 
world. 

As Mira Bai has been made a contemporary of 
Tulsi Das, so also she has been made a contemporary 
of the Emperor Akbar. It is said that having 
heard of the virtues and beauty of Mira Bai, he 
went with his minstrel, Tansen, both disguised as 



MIRA BAI 


351 


hermits, to visit her. The following lines in attesta- 
tion of this circumstance are attributed to Mira 
Bai : — 

O mother, I recognize Krishan as my spouse. 

Akbar came to tesjt me and brought Tansen with him : 

He heard singing, music, and pious discourse ; he bowed 
to the ground again and again. 

Mira’s lord, the all-wise Girdhar, made me his prot6g6e. 

It is said that, on observing her devotion, Akbar 
was very pleased with the good fortune which 
enabled him to behold her. He made her a present 
of a jewelled necklace which she accepted with 
some misgivings, as it appeared too valuable an 
article for an ascetic to possess. The emperor was 
equal to the occasion, and said that he had found 
it while performing his devotional ablutions in the 
river Jamna, and ‘thought it would be a suitable 
present to make her god. Tansen, it is said, com- 
posed an ode in her honour, and he and his royal 
master then returned to their capital. The neck- 
lace was too valuable not to provoke remarks un- 
favourable to its recipient. The Rana submitted it 
to assayers who valued it at a fabulous sum of 
money. On inquiry it was found to be the same 
that a jeweller had sold not long previously for a 
large price to the empefor. Further inquiry led to 
the identity of the two strolling hermits with Akbar 
and his favourite minstrel. Mira Bai’s fate was now 
sealed. Her husband suspected that she had been 
polluted by the emperor. For this there was but 
one penalty in that age — ^she must die. Mira Bai’s 
father-in-law sent her a cobra in a box, so that when 
she opened it the reptile might sting her to death. 
She was told it was a salagram. Before opening 
the box she addressed it as follows : — 

0 salagram in the box, why speakest thou not ? 

1 speak to thee, but, thou repliest not ; why art thou 
silent ? 



352 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

This ocean of the world is very immense ; take mine anh 
and extricate me. 

Mira’s lord, wise Girdhar, thou alone art my helper. 

On opening the box Mira composed the following: — 

What shall the Rana do to me ? Mira hath cast off the 
restraints of her line. 

The Rana once sent a cup of poison to kill Mira ; 

Mira drank it with delight, loving it as if it were water 
blessed by her lord.^ 

The Rana hath now sent a box containing a cobra ; 

But when I opened it and looked, the cobra became a 
salagram. 

There was a sound of rejoicing in the company of the 
saints Krishan had mercy on me. 

I decorated myself, attached bells to my feet, and, keeping 
time with both my hands. 

Danced before the idol, and sang the praises of Krishan. 

The holy are mine and I am theirs ; the holy are my life. 

Mira is absorbed in the holy as butter is in milk before 
churning. 

Rana Sanga, Mira’s father-in-law, was still ob- 
durate and determined that she should die by the 
sword, but no one could be found to act as exe- 
cutioner. She was then ordered to kill herself in 
whatever way she thought fit. By this time she 
was a widow, her husband having predeceased his 
father, and her person was at her own disposal. 
Promising that she would obey the Rana’s com- 
mand she retired to her solitary apartment, during 
the night put on the dress of a mendicant, and left 
the palace. She plunged in the nearest river to die 
in obedience to the order she had received. It is 
said that she was miraculously preserved by an 
angel who brought her to shore and addressed her : 
‘ O queen, thou hast obeyed thy father-in-law and 
art worthy of all praise for thy devotion, but thou 

^ Water in which her idol had been bathed. 



MIRA BAI 


353 


hast a higher duty still to perform. It is thine to 
set a high example to the world, and show unto 
men how to fulfil the designs of the Creator and 
become absorbed in Him.’ When she recovered she 
found herself alone on the river’s bank with the 
current flowing at her feet. She stood up in amaze- 
ment, not knowing for the moment what to do. 
She met some cowherds, of whom she inquired the 
way to Bindraban. They presented her with milk, 
and directed her whither to proceed. She walked 
on singing her hymns, the object of blessings and 
attentions in the villages through which she passed. 

On her arrival in Bindraban she desired to see 
Jiv Gosain. To her disappointment he sent her 
word that he would allow no woman into his presence.^ 
She replied, ‘ I thought everybody in Bindraban 
a woman, and only Girdhar Lai a man.^ I learn 
to-day that there are other partners than Krishan 
in Bindraban.’ By this she scoffingly meant that 
the Gosain placed himself on an equality with 
Krishan as god of Bindraban. The Gosain, on 
hearing her rebuke, went barefooted to do her 
homage, and beholding her became filled with the 
love of God.® 

^ This originally Oriental exclusiveness had long previously been 
imitated by Christian ascetics. St. Senanus is represented as thus 
addressing a female saint who sought to land in his island — 

Quid foeminis 
Commune cst cum monachis ? 

Nec te nec ullam aliam 
Admittemus in insulam. 

® On the principle, already stated, that Ood is deemed a husband 
and human beings His wives. 

® Jiv Gosain was the son of Ballabh Acharya, and uncle of Rupa 
and Sanatan, two devout followers of Chaitanya, the great Vaishnav 
reformer of £ang 3 l (a.d. 1485-1533). RQpa and Sanatan had been 
ministers of the Muhammadan ruler of Bihar, and were of royal blood, 
high rank, and great wealth, all which advantages they relinquished 
to lead religious lives. Jiv Gosain was an author of some pretensions. 
He annotated a treatise of his nephew Rupa, describing religious 
pleasures and emotions. He wrote a book on the acts of Krishan, 
but his greatest work was one in which he amplified his annotations 



354 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Mira Bai with loving devotion traversed every 
grove and pathway of Bindraban, and having fixed 
the sweet image of Krishan in her heart returned 
to her late husband’s home. On finding her father- 
in-law still obdurate, she went on a pilgrimage to 
Dwaraka, where Krishan reigned after leaving 
Mathura. There again she became entranced with 
the pleasure of adorning and enhancing the beauty 
of her favourite god. 

During her absence from Chitaur, the capital of 
Mewar, the visits of holy men to that capital ceased. 
Dissensions arose in the state. It was only then that 
the Rana realized what a holy person he had lost. 
He sent several Brahmans and instructed them to 
use every entreaty to Mira Bai to induce her to 
return, and finally to tell her that it was impossible 
for him to live unless she complied with his prayer. 
The Brahmans executed his orders, but Mira Bai 
refused to put herself again in the Rana’s power. 
Upon this the Brahmans sat at her door and declared 
their intention of neither eating nor drinking till 
she had returned with them. She replied that she 
lived in Dwaraka only by the favour of Krishan. 
She would go and take leave of him and return to 
the Brahmans. She went to do homage to Ran- 
chhor,^ the visible representation of that god, became 
absorbed in his love, and what she had she gave — 
a humble offering of verses at his shrine ; — 

0 god, remove thy servant’s sufferings ; 

Thou didst supply Draupadi with endless robes and save 
her modesty ; 

For the sake of thy saint Prahlad thou didst assume the 
body of a man-lion ; 

Thou didst kill Hiranyakashapu, who had not the courage 
to oppose thee ; 

on the treatise of Rupa, and dwelt at length on the various phases of 
devotional exaltation. 

^ Krishan received the name Ranchhor when he fled from Raja 
JarSsandh to Dwaraka. 



MIRA BAI 355 

Thou didst kill the crocodile und extricate the drowning 
elephant from the water. 

0 beloved Girdhar, Mira is thy slave ; her enemies every- 
where annoy her. 

Take me, my friend, take me to thy care as thou knowest best . 

1 have none but thee ; do thou show mercy unto me. 

I have no appetite by day and no sleep by night ; my body 
pineth away. 

Lord of Mira, all-wise Girdhar, come to me now ; I cannot 
live in thine absence. 

It is said that Ranchhor, on beholding her supreme 
love, could resist no longer. He incorporated her 
in himself, and she became lost to human gaze. 
The Brahmans searched for her in vain. The only 
trace of her they could obtain was her sarhi, which 
was found enveloping the body of the idol. The 
Brahmans’ faith in Krishan was confirmed, but their 
mission otherwise was unsuccessful, and they re- 
turned sore disappointed to the Rana. The latter 
soon experienced the further mortification of be- 
holding his state conquered and plundered, it is said, 
by the victorious army of Akbar as a retribution for 
the ill-treatment of Mira Bai. 

The following is one of the hymns whose passionate 
devotion is said to have produced the result of Mira 
Bai’s union with Ranchhor : — 

0 Lord Ranchhor ; grant me to abide in Dwaraka, to abide 
in Dwaraka. 

With thy shell, discus, mace, and lotus dispel the fear of death. 

All places of pilgrimage ever abide in the Gomti for me. 

The clash of thy shell and cymbals is to me ever the 
essence of pleasure. 

1 have abandoned my country, my queenly robes, my 
husband’s palace, my property, and my kingdom. 

Mira, thy slave, cometh to thee for refuge ; her honour is 
now totally in thy keeping.^ 

^ The hymns in this life of Mira Bai are translated from Raja 
Raghuraj Sinh’s Bharat MdL 


Aa2 



356 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

It is said that in commemoration of the mira- 
culous disappearance of Mira Bai, her image is still 
worshipped at Udaipur in conjunction with that of 
Ranchhor, the beloved Girdhar of her childhood. 

The following is Mira Bai’s hymn in Bhai Banno’s 
Granth Sahib. 

Maru 

God ^ hath entwined my soul, O mother. 

With His attributes,* and I have sung of them. 

The sharp arrow of His love hath pierced my body through 
and through, O mother. 

When it struck me I knew it not ; now it cannot be en- 
dured, O mother. 

Though I use charms, incantations, and drugs, the pain 
will not depart. 

Is there any one who will treat me ? Intense is the agony, 
O mother. 

Thou, 0 God, art near ; Thou are not distant ; come 
quickly to meet me. 

Saith Mira, the Lord, the mpuntain-wielder,® who is com- 
passionate, hath quenched the fire of my body, O mother. 

The Lotus-eyed hath entwined my soul with the twine of 
His attributes. 


SHAIKH FARID 



are hymns and sloks bearing the name of 
“ jfoand in the Granth Sahib. The Persian 
jPaiishta states that when Taimur Lang 
-vr (Pak Pattan) in the Panjab 

in ttie year a. d. 1318, Sad-ul-Din,* a grandson of 
Shaikh Farid, who was then on his spiritual throne, 
fled with several of the leading inhabitants of the 
city to . Bhatner in the state of Bikaner, where 

t Kawalnain, the Lotus-eyed, an epithet of Krishan, the object of 
Mira Bai’s special worship. 

* Gun has two meanings — a rope or twine, and an attribute. 

* Krishan. - 

* In Arabic names the / is generally silent in such combinations. 



SHAIKH FARID 


357 


they subsequently made peace with the invaders. 
Guru Nanak was born in a. d. 1469, so he could not 
have met the original Farid. It is stated too in the 
oldest . account of the Guru’s life that it was with 
Shaikh Brahm (Ibrahim), Farid’s successor, known 
as Farid the Second, he had two interviews. It 
is certain that it was Shaikh Brahm who com- 
posed the sloks and hymns bearing the name of 
Farid in the Granth Sahib, though he used the 
name of the founder of his spiritual line as his 
poetical nom de plume. 

The following is the genealogy of Shaikh Brahm. 
He was the son of Khwaja Shaikh Muhammad, who 
was son of Diwan Pir Ataulla, who was son of Diwan 
Shaikh Ahmad Shah, who was son of Diwan Pir 
Baha-ul-Din styled Harun, who was son of Khwaja 
Munawwar Shah, who was son of Khwaja Diwan 
Pir Fazal, who was son of Khwaja Diwan Muiz-ul- 
Din, who was son of Khwaja Diwan Pir Ala-ul-Din 
called Mauj-i-darya— a wave of piety— who was son 
of Diwan Badar-ul-Din Sulaiman, who was son of 
Hazrat Baba Farid-ul-Din Masaud Shakar Ganj, the 
original Farid of Pak Pattan. 

Shaikh Brahm holds a distinguished place in the 
list of great saints, and bears several titles or appella- 
tions. He is called Farid Sani or Farid the Second, 
Salis Farid or the arbitrator Farid, Shaikh Brahm 
Kalan (Shaikh Brahm the elder), Bal Raja, Shaikh 
Brahm Sahib, and Shah Brahm. He is said to have 
performed many miracles. The following is given 
as an example. A thief once entered his house with 
criminal intent, but by God’s will was struck blind 
and could not find his way out. When Shaikh 
Brahm rose at night to pray, he told his servant 
to fetch water for his ablutions. The servant saw 
the blind thief standing helpless on the floor, and 
informed his master. The thief prayed for forgive- 
ness, and promised that, if he recovered his sight, 
he would renounce his evil ways. Upon this Shaikh 



358 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Brahm prayed for him ; he recovered his sight, and 
became a devout Musalman. Another of Shaikh 
Brahm’s miracles is this. In a season of drought 
he took off his turban and began to whirl it about, 
upon whicfi rain fell abundantly. 

Two sons of Shaikh Brahm are mentioned— one 
Shaikh Taj-ul-Din Mahmud, a great saint, and another 
Shaikh Munawwar Shah Shahid. Shaikh Brahm 
had several disciples, such as Shaikh Salim Chishti 
Fatahpuri, Shaikh Almadi of Chunian, Baba Ahmad 
Lanak of Dipalpur, Maulvi Jalal-ul-Din of Shaikha- 
bad, Shah Abdul Fatah of Ghazipur, Haji Niamat 
Ulla of Shaikhupur, &c. 

Shaikh Brahm died on the 21st of Rajab, a. h. 960 
(a. d. 1552), after a spiritual reign of forty- two 
years. The Khulasat-ul-T awarikh states that he was 
buried at Sarhind. Whatever^ other details are 
known of him have been given in the life of Guru 
Nanak, who went on two occasions to meet and 
converse with him. 

There is a great deal known or written regard- 
ing the original Shaikh Farid, and it appears that 
this sketch would be incomplete without some 
account of him.^ Two genealogies of Shaikh Farid, 
subsequently called Farid Shakar Ganj, are given in 


' The materials for the life of Farid, which are preserved at the 
shrine of Pak Pattan, are the Jawdhir-i-Faridi (the Gems of Farid) 
by Ali Asghar of Bahadal, a town near Sarhind; the Rdhai-ul-Qulub 
(Repose of Hearts), being a diary of Farid’s acts and instructions 
compiled by Nizam-ul-Din Auliya ; iht Makhaza?i-t’-Chtshii, and the 
Asrdr-i-Iirat-i-Farldi (Private lives of Farid’s descendants), by Pir 
Muhammad of Pak Pattan. The first three are in the Persian, the 
fourth in the Urdu language. 

Ali Asghar’s work, the Jawdhir-i-Faridi^ was completed during the 
reign of Jahangir on the 4th day of the month of Rajab a. h. 1033 
(a. d. 1623). Ali Asghar took the work for examination and correc- 
tion to Maulvi Shaikh Muhammad. The latter was grandson of 
Shaikh Taj-ul-Din Mahmud, who was, as we have seen, a son of 
Shaikh Brahm, called Farid the Second. The details given in the 
Jawdhir-i-Faridi are said to have been obtained from several volumes 
deposited in the sacred library at Baghdad. 



SHAIKH FARID 


359 

the J aw ahir-i-Faridi— one spiritual, the other tem- 
poral. He received his spiritual position from his 
priest Khwaja Qutub-ul-Din Bakhtiyar Ushi^ of 
Dihli, whose spiritual predecessors ascend in a direct 
line to the Prophet of Makka. Farid’s temporal or 
family genealogy is traced back through princes and 
kings to Hazrat Amir-ul-Mumanin Umr-bin-ul Khitab 
Qureshi Makki Faruqi, the second Khalifa of the 
Muhammadans. 

When Farrukh Shah, from whom Farid was 
descended, was king of Kabul, the kings of Ghazni 
and other states were subject to him. When Kabul 
was subsequently captured by the king of Ghazni, 
Farrukh Shah’s son went to him in quest of a liveli- 
hood. The king of Ghazni treated him with respect, 
and not only restored him his kingdom of Kabul, 
but gave him his daughter in marriage. It would 
appear that the kings of Ghazni and Kabul at the 
time were relations, for Shaikh Farid’s father, Shaikh 
Jamal-ul-Din, was nephew of the king of Ghazni. 

Shaikh Farid’s great-grandfather was killed in the 
struggles of that period.^ Farid’s grandfather. Shaikh 
Shaib, with his relations, including three sons, the 
eldest of whom was Jamal-ul-Din Sulaiman, aban- 
doned their country and took refuge in the Panjab in 
A.H. 519 (a. d. 1125). The Qazi of Kasur, who had 
been educated in Kabul and who was acquainted 
with the high position Shaikh Shaib had held there, 
treated him and his relatives with great respect and 
hospitality.* After some time Shaikh Shaib pro- 

^ So called as having come from Ush in Farghana. See Ain-i-Akhari. 

2 In the original it is stated that when Halaku, the grandson of 
Changez KhSn, invaded Ghazni and Kabul, he killed several princes 
and learned men, including Shaikh Farid's great-grandfather. This 
is not correct. Halaku's era was long subsequent. It was in 
A. D. 1258 he captured the city of Baghdad, and brought the Arab 
Khalafat to a close. 

® In the account preserved at Pak Pattan it is stated that the Qazi 
of KasQr, through the subadar of Lahore, informed the Emperor of 
Shaikh Shaib’s arrival in the Panjab. This must be an error. The 



36 o BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

ceeded to Multan where he deemed he should be 
less exposed to worldly influences or the temptings 
of ambition. When he heard of the attentions in 
store for him in that city, he decided that he could 
not there carry out his intention to lead a life of 
obscurity and self-effacement. He accordingly took ’ 
up his abode in Kothiwal, now known as Chawali 
Mushaikh, not far from Dipalpur. 

Shaikh Shaib, established in Kothiwal a private 
college for religious instruction, and in spite of him- 
self attracted much attention. His eldest son 
Jamal-ul-Din married Bibi Miriam,* daughter of 
Saiyid Muhammad Abdula Shah— a descendant of 
Ali — and adopted daughter of Maulvi Wajih-ul-Din, 
a descendant of Abbas, uncle of the Prophet of 
Makka. Wajih-ul-Din had fled from Kabul during 
political difficulties and taken up his abode in Karor 
in the Multan district. Miriam is described as a very 
pious lady and worker of some great miracles. She 
had three sons, Khwaja Aziz-ul-Din, Farid-ul-Din 
Masaud, Khwaja Najib-ul-Din, and one daughter, 
Bibi Khatun Jamila, the mother of Saiyad Ala-ul- 
Din Ali Ahmad Sabir. 

Nizam-ul-Din Auliya, a disciple of Farid, relates 
a legend of a robber who went to Farid’s mother’s 
house to steal. On beginning his operations he lost 
his sight. He then cried out that there must be 
some saint or miracle- worker present. He vowed 
that, if his lost sight were restored, he would renounce 
thieving and become a good Muhammadan. On 
hearing this vow Miriam prayed for him, and his 
sight was restored. He went home, and returned 
to her the following morning with an offering of milk. 
Accompanied by his wife and children, he expressed 
a desire that they should all become Muhammadans. 

Emperor of Hindustan was then Prithwi Raj. Shahab-ul-Din’s victo- 
rious Indian career did not begin until about fifty years afterwards. 

^ Jsrdr-i-llral-i-Fartdi. In the Jawahir-i-Faridi Jamal-ul-Din’s 
wife, Farid’s mother, is called Quresham. 



SHAIKH FARID 


361 

Miriam caused his wishes in this respect to be grati- 
fied, with the result that they all became holy. In 
reply to her, he said his name was Chawa. His 
shrine among others in that locality subsequently 
became a place of devout pilgrimage. 

When Farid was conceived, his mother used to 
spend her days and nights in prayer. He was 
born at Kothiwal on the first day of the month of 
Ramzan, a.h. 569 (a. d. 1173). The night of his 
birth was dark and cloudy, and the moon, whose 
appearance indicates the beginning of Ramzan— the 
Muhammadan Lent — could not be seen, so men did 
not know when to begin their fast. A holy man 
arrived and said that a wonderful son had been born 
to Jamal-ul-Din Sulaiman. If the infant suckled, 
the time for fasting had not yet begun, but if, on the 
contrary, he refused the breast, then all good Muham- 
madans must fast. Farid did not suckle, and so 
it was apparent the fast had begun. During the 
whole of the month of Ramzan, it is said, the infant 
only took milk by night in the Muhammadan fashion 
and fasted by day. 

When Farid was a few years old his mother taught 
him his prayers. The boy asked what was gained 
by prayer. His mother replied ‘ Sugar ’. She used 
accordingly to hide some sugar under his prayer- 
carpet, and, when he had finished his prayers, draw 
it forth, and give it to him as a reward for his devo- 
tion. On one occasion, when his mother was absent, 
he prayed a great deal, and, it is said, a great supply 
of sugar— a miraculous gift of God— was found under 
his carpet. Some he ate himself and the rest he gave 
to his playfellows. He related the circumstance to 
his mother on her return. It was then his mother 
gave him the surname Shakar Ganj, meaning a 
treasury of sugar. 

The following is another version of the reason why 
the name Shakar Ganj was bestowed on Farid. It is 
related that, when the Prophet Muhammad ascended 



362 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

into heaven, God gave him a plate of sugar, which He 
said was from the treasury of a saint who should be 
born in his sect. The Prophet was to eat some of it 
himself, and give the remainder to his disciples. 
When the Prophet returned to earth, his friends 
asked him whence he had obtained the sugar. He 
replied that a holy man should be born in his sect, 
who would become a mediator for sinners. When 
the Prophet was asked the holy man’s name 
he said, ‘ He shall receive from God the name 
Farid, as being fard-i-alam, unique in the world, and 
he shall be called by me Shakar Ganj.’ A third 
reason for the name will subsequently be given. 

His mother sent Farid to school at the age of four 
or five years. In a short time he committed the 
whole of the Quran to memory. He was then sent 
to Multan, where he became proficient in secular 
learning. His mother, it is said, was then counselled 
by an angel to send him on a pilgrimage to Makka. 
Farid himself had previously conceived the same 
desire, though he was then hardly more than a child. 
He was at the time reading the Ahul Nafa with 
Saiyid Nazir Ahmad. When the latter heard of 
Farid’s intended departure, he began to weep at the 
loss of his beloved pupil. His parents then resolved 
to take the boy’s preceptor also. They set out from 
Kothiwal on the 13th day of Jamadi ul Sani, a. h. 585, 
and arrived in the harbour of Jadda on the 12th 
of Zi Qada of the same year, that is, after a journey 
of five months. Thence they proceeded to Makka. 

Farid’s party stayed in the house of Abdul Rahim 
Ansari, whose wife was very attentive to them. 
They heard that Abdul Qadir Jilani, styled Hazrat 
Ghaus Pak Qutub-i-Alam, had come from Baghdad 
to perform the great Muhammadan pilgrimage, and 
taken up his position in the cave of Hura on mount 
Abu Qabis near Makka.^ Hazrat Ghaus’s praises 

* We here follow the annals of the shrine at Pak Pattan. Accord- 
ing to the Ain-i-Akbari Abdul Kadir died before the birth of Farid. 



SHAIKH FARID 


363 

were in every body’s mouth, and Farid did not 
conceal his admiration of the distinguished saint. 
An unkempt faqir on hearing Farid’s language fore- 
told the boy’s subsequent greatness. The faqir 
whispered something into his ear, and he at once 
became insensible. He was taken up and carried 
to Abdul Rahim’s house. 

Farid afterwards averred that while he was in this 
state of apparent insensibility the Prophet appeared 
to him, and foretold his future distinction and the 
fame of his shrine. Muhammad promised he would 
stand on Farid’s tomb every fifth day of the Mu- 
harram for nine hours through all time. Farid’s 
mother suggested to him to commit to writing all the 
details of his interview with the Prophet ; but the 
memorandum made in obedience to his mother’s 
suggestion has not, been found. 

When the pilgrimage to Makka was over, Hazrat 
Ghaus invited Farid and his party to visit him in 
his cave. Hazrat Ghaus there produced an iron box 
containing relics of the Prophet. They consisted of 
two banners which used to precede him in war, two 
covers for them, a cup made of olive wood, a pair 
of buskins, a saffron-coloured turban, and some 
alpaca cloth for a neckcloth. When these things after 
examination were restored to the iron box, it was 
placed on Farid’s head and bestowed on him. 

After this Farid’s party went to visit Madina, and 
after a brief sojourn there returned to India. On their 
way from the sea they visited Ajmer, where Farid 
received instruction from Khwaja Gharib Nawaz. 

Farid was in due time sent to Kabul to study 
theology. Having completed his course there he 
returned to Multan. At Minhaj-ul-Din’s mosque he 
met the saint Qutub-ul-Din, and became his disciple. 

Farid’s cousin, Baha-ul-Din Zakaria,^ Saiyid Jalal- 

1 Surnatned Makhdum-i-Alam. His tomb is within the Multan 
fort. An account of this saint will be found in the Khulasat-ul- 
Tawarikh. 



364 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

ul-Din Bukhari, and Lai Shahbaz Qalandar asked 
Farid to join them on a religious peregrination. They 
were to proceed as fancy dictated in quest of some 
man of eminent sanctity. Farid said that he only 
believed in his own priest Qutub-ul-Din. Baha-ul- 
Din, however, pressed him to join the party, and 
Farid finally consented. On the j ourney they arrived 
at a place where two ways met. On one way which 
was short there were thieves, while on the other which 
was long they might travel in safety. Baha-ul-Din 
advised them to go by the safe road even though it 
cost more trouble, lest they might be deprived of the 
money they had with them for their travelling 
expenses. Farid gave it as his opinion that they 
should divest themselves of everything that was 
likely to be stolen, and then proceed by the short 
road. This advice was adopted. _ 

On their way they arrived at the river Indus, 
where they found fishermen casting nets. Farid and 
his party were hungry and agreed to cast nets into 
' the river, each in his turn and in his own name, in the 
hope of catching some fish for their dinner. The 
nets were cast and found empty until it came to 
Farid’s turn. His net became so full of fish, and 
therefore so heavy, that the fishermen could not 
draw it out of the water. Farid repeating Bismillah 
easily drew it forth. 

The party then proceeded to cross the river. On 
the opposite shore there lived a saint called Shaikh 
Suf, under whose spiritual guidance Farid and his 
party wished to place themselves. Shaikh Suf told 
Farid and his friends that he had no power to make 
them his disciples, and referred them to Shaikh 
Shahab-ul-Din Saharwardi, the cynosure of the age, 
who lived in Bukhara. Farid and his three friends 
then set out for Bukhara. Shahab-ul-Din declared 
that Farid was a man of wonderful courage, and 
destined to obtain a high spiritual position. At the 
same time he ought to return to his own priest 



SHAIKH FARID 365 

Qutub-ul-Din. Before the return of the party Baha- 
ul-Din became a disciple of Shahab-ul-Din. 

As Farid, Baha-ul-Din, Saiyid Jalal-ul-Din Bukh- 
ari, and Lai Shahbaz Qalandar were returning from 
Bukhara they stayed near a village in Sindh. A charit- 
able person gave them a little corn for food, which 
they much required after a long fast. Farid bade 
his companions go and pray in the forest, while he 
took the corn to the village to be ground. He went to 
a woman’s house and asked her to grind the corn and 
take some of the flour for her labour. She seeing that 
he was very handsome invited him into her house, and 
told him that he might grind the corn himself. When 
he entered, she proposed that he should make love 
to her. Preparatory to the hoped-for act she put 
her child of three months old into a cradle. Farid 
repulsed her, and >vhen she further pressed her pro- 
posal took to flight. She then cried out, called all 
her neighbours to witness an indecent assault, and 
charged the runaway with having dishonoured her. 
The villagers collected, pursued and arrested Farid, 
and took him before the magistrate. He was called 
upon for his defence, and asked to produce witnesses 
of his innocence if he had any ; otherwise he should 
suffer the punishment provided for such a heinous 
crime. Farid said his witness was the woman’s 
child, who would support his statements. The child 
was Ijrought to court in his cradle. Farid adjured 
the child by his Creator to speak the truth, and tell 
what had occurred. He, to the astonishment of all, 
not only spoke intelligently, but gave evidence 
calculated to completely establish Farid’s innocence. 
Upon this the magistrate rebuked and imprisoned 
the woman. 

When Farid reached Khwaja Qutub-ul-Din, the 
latter was at the height of his fame. The author of 
the J awahir-i-F afidi states that he enjoined the 
observance of the following four rules on all who 
aspired to perfection— sleep little, eat little, speak 



366 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

little, associate little with the world. Farid said 
that, even were every hair on his body a tongue, he 
could not describe Qutub-ul-Din’s virtues.^ 

Qutub-ul-Din, on finding Farid deficient in scholar- 
ship, sent him to the shrine of Abdul Shakur of 
Sarsa to finish his education.* On that occasion 
Farid repeated the following 

O Farid, thou hast not walked in God’s way ; therefore 
He hath not appeared unto thee. 

Who is there who hath knocked at God’s door for whom 
it hath not been opened ? 

Lose thy life on the way of the Friend if thou desire to 
be even as those-holy men. 

The high reputation Farid obtained in Dihli soon 
became irksome to him. He therefore made his way 
to Hansi, where he remained for some time. Mean- 
time his high priest in Dihli appears to have died. 
Upon this Farid paid a second visit to that city, and 
assumed the mantle of his late spiritual guide. He 
ultimately left it in the keeping of Jamal-ul-Din of 
Hansi, and thence proceeded to Ajodhan, the present 
Pak Pattan, where he afterwards died, and where 
his followers now reside and receive offerings at his 
shrine. 

^ Khwaja Qutub-ul-Din Bakhtiyar Kaki was a Saiyid of the Jafiri 
Husaini tribe. He was born about the middle of the twelfth century a. d. 
Having studied under Abu Hifz, a celebrated Muhammadan doctor of 
Ush, he went to Ajmer and became a disciple of Muayan-ul-Dfn 
Hasan Chishti. In due time he proceeded to Dihli where not only 
Farid, but the Emperor Sultan Shams-ul-Din Altmish became his 
disciple. He is said to have been a worker of miracles, and to have 
obtained his surname Kaki from his ability to produce hot cakes (kak) 
at will from under his arm-pits. He died in a.d. 1235, and was 
buried in Dihli, where his tomb is held in devout reverence by pious 
Muhammadans. His descendants are called Chishlis from the tribe of 
Kls priest. — Makhazan-ul-Tawarlkh, 

Qutub-ul-Dln's tomb near the natural spring called Jh^lra in 
Ajmer was a favourite place of pilgrimage of the Emperor Akbar. — 
fiaflfdtitnt. 

* The 2iahal-ul-Quliib here gives a different legend. 



SHAIKH FARID 


367 

The manner in which the name of the place 
became changed to Pak Pattan may be here stated. 
A canal which derived its water from the Satluj 
passed near the town. It was usual for all who 
visited Farid to .wash their hands and feet there. 
The place then became known as Baha Sahib ka 
Pak Pattan, or Farid’s cleansing ferry. 

When Farid first went to Ajodhan, it is said that 
he lived on the fruit of the jal and the wild caper. 
These formed his staple food even when he subse- 
quently became great and famous. 

Abu Musalla, a qazi of Pak Pattan, grew jealous 
of the new-comer Farid, and complained to the 
subadar of Multan that he sang and danced. The 
subadar forwarded the complaint to the Emperor, 
who issued an order, as usual, in the Persian language, 

‘ Anra az shahar bg. dar kuned,’ turn him out of the 
city. When this order reached the subadar he read, 

‘ Qazira az shahar ba dar kuned,’ turn the qazi out of 
the city. The words, it was said, had been miracu- 
lously changed during the transit of the order from 
Dihli to Multan. When the qazi heard of the order 
he, deeming repentance convenient and more profit- 
able than expulsion, fell at Farid’s feet, implored 
his forgiveness, and became his disciple. The qazi 
in due time gave his daughter in marriage to Farid’s 
son Makhdum Badr-ul-Din. From this marriage 
was born Hazrat Ala-ul-Din Mauj-i-Darya. 

Farid after some time, in accordance with his 
mother’s advice, went to a forest, and lived there as 
an anchoret for twelve years, subsisting on the leaves 
of trees. On his return she began to comb his 
dishevelled hair. Farid complained that the opera- 
tion caused him pain. His mother replied that he 
must have caused similar pain to the trees when hg 
robbed them of their leaves and fruit for food. It is 
written in the Quran that everything prays to God, 
hence the trees must be sentient beings. Farid then 
felt for the first time that his penance had been profit- 



368 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

less. He accordingly set out on another pilgrimage 
of twelve years. This time, so as not to hurt any 
living thing, he tied a wooden cake to his stomach, 
and, it is said, subsisted on the imaginary sustenance 
it afforded him for the full term of his vow. If any 
one asked him to eat, he used to point to the wooden 
cake, and say that he had already dined, and that 
the remainder of his meal was attached to his 
stomach. One day in the dire pangs of hunger, it 
is said, he bit the wooden cake in the hope of satisfy- 
ing his appetite. The reputed marks of his teeth are 
shown on a piece of wood still preserved in Pak Pattan. 

Farid in his^ wanderings visited in A. D. 1244 the 
Girar hill in the Wardha ^strict of Central India, and 
lived there for some time. Two travellers, who at first 
mocked him and subsequently felt the effects of his 
miraculous power, became his disgiples. They died on 
the hill where their graves are still pointed out. 

Farid subsequently visited the hill of Datar in 
the state of Junagarh and abode there for some 
time. He was known under the name of- Shakar 
Bhai. His fireplace near a spring called Qalandar 
ka chashma — the Qalandar’ s well — is still pointed out 
and revered by pilgrims. Hindu lepers visit the place 
to be healed of their malady, and in the event of suc- 
cess become Musalmans. Of such are the men in a 
temple on the slope of the hill, who have acquired 
several well-marked Muhammadan characteristics. 

His mother, finding that Farid on his return had 
not lost all remnants of pride, dismissed him to do 
penance for a third period of twelve years. This time, 
it is said, he caused himself to be suspended by the 
feet in a well. He used sometimes, when wearied 
by the unnatural position of his body, to go out and 
pray, and express his satisfaction with the Divine 
will. It is said that birds used to build their nests 
in his hair, and beasts of prey to peck at or devour 
his flesh. He composed the following couplet in 
reference to these circumstances 



SHAIKH FARID 369 

Farid, thy body is on the stake ; thy head hath become 
a cage ; the crows peck at thy feet. 

If God come to me even now, happy shall be my lot. 

This couplet was subsequently expanded into 
the 90th, 91st, And 92nd sloks of Shaikh Brahm 
found in the Granth Sahib. After twelve years 
thus occupied it is said a voice called out to him, 
‘ God will grant any favour thou askest.’ Farid 
replied that he only desired salvation. 

Farid, on being questioned why he had endured 
so much penance, said that he desired to save all the 
followers of Muhammad whom he could fold within 
his arms. His questioner replied, ‘ Thou canst fold 
only two men within thine arms.' Farid then 
stretched out his hands, whereupon one of them 
seemed to reach to the east and the other to the 
west, and he said, All persons within the circuit of 
my arms shall accept Islam and be saved.’ His 
questioner stood abashed on hearing this and became 
his disciple. 

It is stated in the Gulshan-i-Auliya that God had 
an understanding with Farid, that He should give 
him three terms of life of forty years each. After 
the first forty years God said, ‘ Thou hast been 
searching for Me.’ After the second forty God said, 
‘ Thou hast done My bidding.’ After the third forty 
God again said, ‘ Thou hast done My bidding ; now 
I will do thine.’ It would thus appear that after 
a holy career Farid died at the age of one hundred 
and twenty years. Other writers, however, as we 
shall see, assign the saint a shorter period of life. 

The fame of Farid’s miracles widely extended, and 
some men through envy became exceedingly hostile tp 
him . Two darweshes, displeased at his high reputation 
for sanctity and thaumaturgy, came from a great 
distance to kill him. Farid spoke gently to his in- 
tended murderers, with the result that they departed 
fully satisfied that he was a great saint, and deserved 
praise rather than censure, long life rather, than death. 

SIKH. VI B b 



370 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

After that two saints arrived from Mount Lebanon 
to decide the question as to who was the spiritual 
ruler of India. On making Farid’s acquaintance, 
they became so enamoured of the beauty and saintli- 
ness of his character, that they decided to pass the 
remainder of their lives in his service. Others arrived 
on the same errand and from the same locality, so it 
was said that Lebanon was denuded of its male 
population. Farid in due time dismissed them all, 
saying that Lebanon was the home of saints, and 
they ought not to abandon it. 

In the train of other holy men who came from 
Ghazni, Kabul, and the cities to the west of it to 
engage in missionary enterprise in India, was Ahmad 
Danyal of Bukhara \ the father of Nizam-ul-Din 
Auliya. Having stayed for some time at Lahore, 
Ahmad Danyal in a. d. 1234 proceeded to Badaun, 
then a famous city of Muhammadan learning. There, 
three years after his arrival, Nizam-ul-Din, originally 
called Muhammad, was born to him. Nizam-ul-Din 
was left an orphan at the age of five years. He was 
carefully and piously instructed by his mother 
Zulaikha, and in early youth showed such extra- 
ordinary ability, that he was known as Nizam-ul-Din 
Bahhas, or the Controversialist, and Mahh^Shikan, 
the assembly-router. On arriving at manhood he 
was offered by the Emperor the coveted post of 
Qazi at Dihli, but, that being principally of a secular 
character, he preferred to embrace a religious life, and 
become a disciple of Farid. From him, according to 
Abul Fazal, author of the Ain-i-Ahhari, he obtained 
the key of the treasury of inward illumination. 
t Nizam-ul-Din had heard much of Farid, and longed 
to meet him and receive his spiritual instruction. 
Farid too was equally anxious to meet such a holy 
man. He said he had had an inspiration to confer 
the spiritual sovereignty of Hindustan on a man 

^ The Khulasat-ul-Tawarikh gives Ghazni as the birthplace of 
Ahmad Danyal. 



SHAIKH FARID 


371 

called Nizam-ul-Din. Accordingly, when the two 
holy men met, Farid gave Nizam-ul-Din his patched 
coat and wooden shoes, and appointed him head of 
the Muhammadan faith in India. He bade him be 
of good cheer and promised ever to assist him. On 
that occasion Farid made the following couplet 

The fire of separation from thee roasteth our hearts ; 

The torrent of thy love destroyeth our lives. 

These lines were intended to compliment Nizam- 
ul-Din on his personal popularity, and the love with 
which he inspired his associates. 

In the time of the Emperor Nasir-ul-Din there was 
a celebrated preacher called Afsah-ul-Din in Dihli. 
He visited Farid in Ajodhan to hold a religious con- 
troversy with him, and was encountered by Nizam- 
ul-Din, whom Farid deputed for the purpose. Nizam- 
ul-Din gave Afsah-ul-Din most unexpectedly clever 
and satisfactory replies to all his arguments, whereat 
he marvelled greatly and departed, saying, ‘ If the 
disciple is so, what must the master be ? ’ Farid 
ultimately made Afsah-ul-Din a disciple of his. 

Farid used generally to reject offerings of money. 
One day the emperor presented him with two plates 
of gold coins. Farid would only accept two muhars 
out of the imperial offerings. Those he accepted 
were devoted to the purchase of provisions for his 
public kitchen ; the remainder he ordered to be dis- 
tributed among faqirs. In the process of distribu- 
tion two of the coins fell, and were picked up by 
a disciple of Farid. Farid not observing this began 
to pray, but could not fix his thoughts on God. He 
knew therefore that some one in the assembly mu^t 
have worldly dross on him. After much inquiry he 
became aware of the act of his disciple, and ordered 
him to throw away the coins immediately. It was 
only then that Farid could fix his attention on his 
devotions. 

As an example of Farid’s frugal habits, the follow- 

B b 2 



372 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

ing anecdote is related. Nizam-ul-Din Auliya one day 
cooked some coarse lentils which he seasoned with 
borrowed salt. Farid ordered him to distribute ^the 
lentils and then give him his share. When it 
was brought to Farid, he said that it savoured of 
excessive expenditure. Nizam-ul-Din admitted that 
he had seasoned it with borrowed salt, whereupon 
Farid said he had done wrong. Food obtained in 
that way should not be eaten. Upon this Farid sent 
the food away. 

Farid accompanied Baha-ul-Din Zakaria at his 
request on another journey, namely, to the moun- 
tain of Qaf, the Caucasus. On descending therefrom 
they are said to have seen a man with a fiery dress 
riding on a fiery tiger, an allegory intended to repre- 
sent the burning zeal of the first propagators of 
Islam. The man put Farid behjnd him, and rode 
off with him for the conversion of the world. 

Farid, on returning to Ajodhan from his missionary 
journey, was hospitably received and entertained 
Ijy Shaikh Nasir IJlla’s mother, a widow named Bibi 
Um-i-Qulsum, whom he afterwards married. She 
brought him valuable building land to the west of 
the town. Farid cherished Nasir Ulla, and educated 
and brought him up as his own son. 

During Farid’s absence in the Caucasus a Jogi 
gained great spiritual ascendancy over the people 
of Ajodhan, and made many converts among them. 
In due time they all returned to Farid, who promptly 
repaired the mischief that had been done, and re- 
stored his flock to their former spiritual allegiance. 

The Emperor Nasir-ul-Din deputed Nawab Alif 
Khan to present Farid with a large sum of money in 
gold and a perpetual grant of the revenue of four 
villages. Farid refused both the money and the grant, 
and told Alif Khan to take them to those who needed 
them. If he himself accepted them, he would no 
longer be reckoned a darwesh. Men would upbraid 
him for his worldliness, and on the day of judgement 



SHAIKH FARID 


373 


he would not be allowed to take his place in the 
ranks of the elect. On this occasion Farid cited the 
precepts and example of his priest Qutub-ul-Din 
Bakhtiyar Ushi. Once the Emperor Shams-ul-Din 
Altmish sent him- a dish of gold and silver coins and 
a lease of six villages. Qutub-ul-Din rejected the 
royal offerings, saying that none of his predecessors 
had ever accepted such things, and, were he to do so, 
he would be no true follower of theirs. 

When Nawab Alif Khan was on his return journey 
to Dihli, it occurred to him that the Emperor Nasir- 
ul-Din had no heir, and he reflected that, if he could 
secure Farid’s intercession, he might become emperor 
himself. He therefore returned to Farid who gave 
him the following verses : — 

The great Faridun was not an angel ; 

He was not construtted out of rose-water and ambergris ; 

He obtained greatness by his justice and generosity. 

Dispense thou justice and generosity, and thou shalt be 
even as Faridun. 

Alif Khan receiving these lines joyfully returned 
to Dihli, and ultimately, on the death of Nasir-ul-Din, 
was saluted emperor under the title of Ghiyas-ul-Din 
Balban.^ 

Farid went to Dihli during the life-time of Nasir- 
ul-Din and received a most hospitable reception. 
The Emperor introduced him to his queens and 
made them his disciples. While in the female apart- 
ments Farid’s glance fell on Hazabra, the Emperor’s 
daughter. Farid first looked at her, and then looked 
up to heaven. He inquired whose daughter she 
was, and on being duly informed took his departure. 
The Emperor understood Farid’s desire, and sent 
his prime minister to offer, him Hazabra in marriage. 
Farid, who had already made up his mind on the 
subject, said that God, the Prophet, and the elders 
of the Chishtis had all given him orders to ally 

^ Jawihir-i-Fartdi. 



374 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

himself with the Emperor’s daughter. He averred 
that he had seen a sign on Hazabra’s forehead that 
she was intended for him. Upon that occasion Farid 
addressed God— ‘ Thou hast drawn away my heart 
from Thy love, and inclined it in another direction.’ 
God is said to have replied—' Perform the marriage 
for the love of my friend the Prophet.’ Farid 
prayed God to pardon him. God again replied— 
‘ I have an object in this. When sons are born to 
thee, it shall be to the advantage of thy people, and 
they shall be pardoned.’ Farid, still anxious on the 
subject, urged, ‘ If any of my descendants sin, I shall 
be called to account in Thy court.’ God replied, 
‘ Keep the good children thyself, and entrust the 
bad ones to Me.’ 

Farid and the Emperor’s daughter were duly 
married. The Emperor sent three hundred servants 
to wait on her. Of these Farid only allowed her to 
retain two men and two women. The first night 
the lady, richly apparelled^ lay on a gorgeous couch. 
Farid produced his prayer-carpet, and slept on it on 
the ground near her. Next day she told her nurse 
that Farid had not approached her. The nurse 
remonstrated with him on the subject. He replied 
that he did not approve of the regal style the lady 
had adopted. She must sell her jewels and rich 
dresses, devote the price of them to God’s service, 
and wear the habit of a darwesh. When the lady 
received this message, she said she would do as her 
husband had ordered. She accordingly devoted the 
proceeds of the sale of her jewels and dresses to the 
relief of the poor. Farid then procured for her wear 
a coarse jacket of a dirty brown colour, black 
paejamas, green glass bangles, and a pewter nose-ring. 
The Emperor was not pleased that his daughter 
should appear in such mean habiliments, and again 
supplied her with new clothes and jewellery to wear 
instead of what she had rejected at her husband’s 
desire. The new articles she again gave to the 



SHAIKH FARID 


375 


poor. A third time the Emperor sent her what he 
deemed suitable apparel and ornaments, but she and 
her husband parted with them as before. The 
Emperor continued to send her presents, but they 
were only a source of disagreement between her hus- 
band and herself. At last the lady proposed that 
they should leave Dihli and proceed to Pak Pattan. 
This was agreed upon. Farid left his brother Najib- 
ul-Din to do spiritual duty for him in Dihli. It may 
be here stated that the females of the shrine are still 
married in dresses similar to what Farid procured 
for his wife. After the honeymoons raiment more 
, suitable to their worldly position is adopted. 

The Emperor’s daughter bore Farid five sons— 
Badr-ul-Din, Shahab-ul-Din, Nizam-ul-Din, Yaqub, 
and Abdulla Shah ; and three daughters— Fatima, 
Mastura, and Shai;ifa. In the Itrat-i-Faridi it is 
stated that Farid had a third wife named Najib-ul- 
Nissa, sister of Shaikh Zakaria, and we shall subse- 
quently see that he procured a fourth wife on the 
Panjab mountains. 

Farid being once very ill sent Nizam-ul-Din and 
other darweshes to a cemetery to pray for him. 
The idea was and is, that prayers offered in the 
presence of men who have gone to God, are acceptable 
and successful. The prayer, however, proved of no 
avail. Upon this one of the darweshes remarked 
that the prayers of the worthless were of no advantage 
to the perfect, that is, the prayers of ordinary dar- 
weshes could not benefit Farid. This expression was 
subsequently repeated to Farid by Nizam-ul-Din. 
Farid was pleased with the compliment and, it is 
said, granted Nizam-ul-Din supernatural power. 
Nizam-ul-Din then returned to the cemetery, prayed 
for Farid’s recovery, and on his return found him 
in perfect health. 

To show the spiritual and social position held by 
the family it is related that Farid addressed his cousin 
as ‘ Hazrat Ghaus Shaikh Baha-ul-Din Zakaria ’. 



376 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

His cousin addressed him in reply, ‘‘ Mashuq-i-Khuda 
wa ashik4“Zat“i-Kibria Farid, fard-i-alam, Shah 
Shakar Ganj Ajodhani Chishti ’—Beloved of God and 
loving the Almighty Being, Farid, unique in the 
world, king, treasury of sugar, Chishti of Ajodhan. 

Shaikh Badr-ul-Din, descended from a noble family 
of Ghazni, was a disciple of Qutub-ul-Din of Dihli. 
Farid, highly impressed with Badr-ul-Din’s reputa- 
tion for sanctity, went one day to visit him. Badr- 
ul-Din had nothing for him to eat, so he sent his 
coarse blanket to the market to be sold for whatever 
it would fetch, in order to provide a meal for his 
distinguished guest. Malik Nizam-ul-Din, a different 
person from the Nizam-ul-Din Auliya with whom we 
have been concerned, made a monastery for Shaikh 
Badr-ul-Din, who was pleased to reside in it, and 
dispense to the poor the provisions which Nizam-ul- 
Din had provided for them in abundance. It hap- 
pened that this Nizam-ul-Din subsequently in some 
way offended the Emperor and was imprisoned. 
Badr-ul-Din wrote to Farid to pray to God for his 
release. Farid refused on the ground that Nizam- 
ul-Din had constructed a monastery for self- 
aggrandizement, a course which was not in accord- 
ance with the humble practice of his predecessors 
who sought retirement and self-effacement. 

There was a. religious man called Shams Dabir who 
lived in great indigence in Sunam in the present state 
of Patiala. He wrote some verses in praise of Farid, 
and went to him to recite them. Farid on hearing 
the eulogium asked the poet what he wanted. Shams 
Dabir replied that he was very poor, and had not 
wherewithal to support his aged mother. Farid 
replied that he gave not money, but he would pray 
very fervently for him. Shams Dabir ultimately 
became secretary to the Emperor’s prime minister. 

The Emperor Ala-ul-Din Masaud made Hamid, 
a learned man, his viceroy of Bengal. One day as 
Hamid was standing with clasped hands before the 



SHAIKH FARID 


377 


Emperor, a form of light appeared to him, and asked 
why he was standing in a suppliant attitude before 
a fool. The same question was asked Hamid the 
next day, and the next day again. Upon this 
he resigned his post and proceeded to Ajodhan, 
whither he was attracted by Farid’s spiritual power. 
On reaching Farid’s dwelling, he fell down and 
kissed his threshold. When Farid had heard his 
story, he made him his disciple, and gave him the 
patched coat of a Khalifa. Hamid remained for 
some time with Farid, and became a very eloquent 
preacher. Farid often called him a bright particular 
star, but at the same time remarked that a star looks 
not bright in the presence of the sun— a subtle com-, 
pliment to himself. Farid suggested that he should 
return, and live in the town of Andina near Dihli, and 
benefit God’s people by his preaching. Hamid, 
however, stated that his intention was rather to 
make a pilgrimage to Makka and Madina, the cities 
hallowed by the residence of his Prophet. Upon 
this Farid allowed him to take his departure. 

Maulana Badr-ul-Din, son of Saiyid Minhaj-ul-Din 
Najjari,^ was professor of Arabic in the Muhammadan 
college of Dihli. In the course of his theological 
studies he encountered several difficulties for which 
he could receive no satisfactory solution from the 
holy men of his acquaintance. He therefore resolved 
to travel to Bukhara, then the seat of some of the 
greatest Muhammadan scholars of the age. He went 
by Multan, whose learned men also he wished to 
consult. On the way he met some pious hermits, 
one of whom was a disciple of Farid, and had Farid’s 
name ever on his tongue. Badr-ul-Din, after a short 
conference with him, told him he was wasting his 
time in such occupation. The disciple said he could 
not help' it, for Farid’s name issued spontaneously 
from his lips. The disciple and his friends then 

^ In the English translation of xhe Aln-i-Akbanli\i)siAx\ is found for 
Najjari. 



378 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

suggested to Badr-ul-Din to pay Shaikh Farid a visit, 
and perhaps he would solve some of his difficulties. 
Badr-ul-Din replied that he had met several Shaikhs, 
that they were merely impostors, and that men 
wasted their time in converse with them. The 
disciple and his friends argued the matter with Badr- 
ul-Din, and represented to him that he could only 
appreciate Shaikh Farid’s merits when he had made 
his acquaintance. Badr-ul-Din at last gave way, and 
was conducted by his casual friends to Farid. Farid 
solved his theological difficulties in a satisfactory 
manner, and then made him his disciple. Upon this 
Badr-ul-Din decided not to proceed to Bukhara, but 
remain in Ajodhan with Farid. He became so 
humble that he used to wait on holy men, cut fire- 
wood in the forest, and cook their food with it. He 
was at the same time very attentive to his devotions, 
and used to mortify his body with fasting. 

Once, when there was a marriage in Pak Pattan, 
Badr-ul-Din, on seeing the relations of the bride 
draw water with which to bathe the bride and bride- 
groom according to ancient custom, thought that 
if he were ,in his own country and among his people 
his own marriage also, might be duly celebrated. 

Sometime afterwards Badr-ul-Din proceeded on 
a pilgrimage to Makka and Madina. On his return 
Farid informed him of the thoughts which had passed 
through his mind on seeing water drawn to bathe 
the bride and bridegroom, and said he could either 
have a temporal or a permanent marriage, as he 
deemed most advantageous. By permanent marriage 
Farid meant death, as among the ancient Greeks ; 
and if Badr-ul-Din desired it, not only water but milk 
and sugar should ever be offered at his shrine, and 
the fame of such a marriage should resound both in 
earth and heaven. 

It would appear from the J awahir-i-F aridi that 
Badr-ul-Din accepted both forms of marriage. Farid 
gave him his daughter Fatima in marriage. He also 



SHAIKH FARID 


379 

made him his chamberlain with the title of Badr- 
ul-Diwan. Whenever Farid spoke to him on the 
subject of appointing him to a position corresponding 
with that of bishop in partibus infidelium, he used 
to reply that he desired to live for ever under Farid’s 
shadow. Farid built him a house near the great 
mosque of the city, and there he lived in the service 
of God. After his death a mausoleum was erected 
over his remains. As promised by Shaikh Farid, his 
marriage ceremonies are celebrated once a year by 
a fair held on the sixth day of the month Jamadi ul 
Sani, when copious libations of sharbat are offered 
at his shrine. 

One day as Farid awoke from a trance, he said, ‘ The 
eye which looketh not towards God had better be 
blind ; the tongue which uttereth not His name had 
better be dumb ; .the ear which heareth not His 
praises had better be deaf; and the body which 
performeth not His service had better be dead.’ 
After this utterance Farid relapsed into his trance. 

Once seven hundred holy men were sitting together. 
An inquirer put them four questions to which they 
gave identically the same replies — 

Q. I. Who is the wisest of men ? A. He who refraineth 
from sin. 

Q. 2. Who is the most intelligent ? A. He who is not 
disconcerted at anything. 

Q. 3. Who is the most independent ? A. He who 
practiseth contentment. 

Q. 4. Who is the most needy ? A. He who practiseth it 
not. 

The following sentences are taken from Farid’s 
sermons : — 

God hesitateth to raise His hand against His creatures. 

Be not overjoyed with worldly wealth, and, if thou have 
none at all, be not depressed. 

The day we obtain not our desires should be to us as 



38 o BHAGATS OFTHE GRANTH SAHIB 

a time of rejoicing like the night of the Prophet’s ascension 
into heaven. i i ; 

Mait should not allow his ambition t6- be cooled by the 
discouraging remarks of the world. . 

When a faqir putteth on rich clothes, they- become his 
winding-sheet. 

Of all attractions, attraction towards devotion is the best. 

■It fareth well with him who thinketh on his own faults 
and not on the faults of othersi . ’ 

To the pure all things are pure; nothing can defile 
them. ■' 

If you aspire to attain the dignity of the departed saints, 
bow not to monarchs. 

The learned man is the most noble among men, and the 
holy man the most noble among noblemen. 

The holy man among the learned is like the full moon 
among the stars. , ' 

The most contemptible of men is he who occupieth him- 
self with eating and dressing. 

The repetition of the following lines gave great 
spiritual comfort to Farid : — 

Last night sad thoughts possessed me. 

But afterwards I reflected on my beautiful I,over. 

I said I would do. every thing to go to His door. 

My tears ran, and my Lover then caught my sleeve. 

A student asked Farid if singing were lawful and 
proper. He replied that, according to the Muham- 
madan religion, it was certainly unlawful, but its 
propriety was still a matter of discussion. 

Nizam-ul-Din Auliya told Nasir-ul-Din, a disciple 
of his, that one day when he went to visit Farid he 
stood at his door, and saw him dancing as he sahg 
the following : — 

I wish ever to live in Thy love, O God. 

If I become the dust under Thy feet, I ^all live. 

I Thy slave desire none but Thee in both worlds ; 

For Thee I will live and for Thee I will die. 



SHAIKH FARID 


381 

The follo^^ng was a favourite couplet of < Farid : — 

■Not every t\eart is capable of finding the secret of God’s 
love. 

There are not pearls in every sea ; there is not gold in 
every mine. ' • 

One of Farid’s beloved friends was Shaikh Jamal- 
ul-Din of Hansi, whom he called his senior Khalifa. 
Hazrat Shaikh Baha-ul-Din Zakaria of Multan, hear- 
ing of this man’s fame, begged Farid to lend him to 
bim to preach to the faithful. Farid refused, but, 
when pressed by Jamal-ul-Din, who was attracted 
to Baha-ul-Din by supernatural influence, replied, 
‘ Go and blacken thy face.’ It is said that upon this 
Jamal-ul-Din’ s face became black, and he fled to the 
forest to hide himself from human gaze. Farid for- 
bade all persons ta intercede for him or assist him 
in any way. It happened that, as a man called Alim 
was going to Ajodhan from Multan, he met Jamal- 
ul-Din on the way. Jamal-ul-Din begged him to 
intercede with Farid, and he did so. Lapse of time 
and importunity caused Farid to relent. He wrote 
to Jamal-ul-Din the four following lines and then 
restored him to favour ; — 

Go round the world, and in wandering raise blisters on 
thy feet ; 

If thou find any one like me, then forsake me. 

Come one morning with pure heart to my door ; 

If thou attain not thine object, then make complaint. 

' Jamal-ul-Din returned to Farid, and Farid’s love 
foi? him increased after the rupture. Jamal-ul-Din 
was a descendant of Abu Hanifa of Kusa. 

Farid visited Mokalhar, now called Faridkot in 
honour of the saint. The country was then ruled by 
Mokal. At the time of Farid's visit, Mokal was build- 
ing his capital^ and used to impress all visitors for the 
work. Though Farid wore the patched coat of a re- 



382 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

ligious man, he too was pressed into the Raja’s service. 
The masons and workmen on making Farid’s acquaint- 
ance bowed at his feet, and prayed him to grant them 
forgiveness of their sins. The Raja too followed their 
example, and for some days personally waited on him. 
Farid asked what name the king was going to give his 
city. The king replied Mokalhar. Then said Farid, 
‘ Berun khair wa andarun darr ’—it is fair without, 
but a ruin ‘ within —by which the saint meant that 
it should never be thoroughly inhabited. The king 
represented his hard fate to Farid. Though thousands 
of rupees had been spent on his capital, no one came 
to dwell in it. If his holiness Farid ordered, it should 
soon be full of inhabitants. Farid then told him to 
change the name and dwell in it himself. Mokal con- 
sented and called the city Faridkot in compliment to 
his holy guest. Farid then said, ‘ Go, God the most 
high will cause thee and thy descendants to abide in 
that fort.’ 

There is a legend that Farid once visited a city on 
the Panjab mountains. One day, as he was bathing, 
a beautiful young lady accidentally saw and con- 
ceived a desire to approach him, for a son by such 
a rtian should become king of the realm of beauty. 
It is said that Jamila Khatun — the beautiful lady — 
while revolving this in her mind, became pregnant. 
After Farid’s departure there was great commotion 
in the tribe on hearing of the young lady’s condition. 
She averred that she had committed no impropriety, 
but no one would believe her. Every one said it was 
of course that stranger Farid’s doing. Farid chanced 
to return to that part of the country six months 
afterwards. He was charged with the young lady’s 
seduction, which, apart from being a sin, was a 
grievous offence against the tribe. He solemnly 
denied the charge, but no one would accept his state- 
ment. He requested his accusers to ask the lady if 
she had ever conceived a desire to have a child- by 

^ Darr is so understood in Faridkot. 



SHAIKH FARID 


383 

him. She then admitted that such a desire had 
arisen in her mind. Upon this Farid, in self-defence, 
instanced the well-known case of Jesus having been 
born without a human father, and also the case of 
Adam, who had been produced without father or 
mother, and said that nothing was impossible to 
God’s Omnipotence, and He might in His mercy 
have given a son to the virgin. The tribe heeded 
not Farid’s words, and said they would only believe 
him if he wrought a miracle in their presence. They 
found no difficulty in suggesting a subject. They 
told him that no sugar-cane grew in their country. 
If he went with them to the forest and caused sugar 
to rain, they would accept his story of the young lady’s 
immaculate pregnancy, but not otherwise. Farid 
then said in the Persian language, which he habitually 
spoke, ‘ Chi ajab az Afridgare ki zan-i-bikr ra az 
qudrat-i-kamila-i-khud hamila be wasta shohar 
sakht, az asman shakar nisar farmayad ? ’ What 
wonder would it be if the Creator, who out of His 
perfect power maketh a virgin pregnant without 
human intervention, should rain sugar ? It is said 
that sugar immediately began to rain, and from that 
time Farid obtained the name of Shakar Ganj, the 
treasury of sugar.^ After this miracle all the people 
of the tribe became his followers, and he was formally 
wedded to Jamila Khatun, who soon afterwards 
gave birth to a son. Farid remained there for six 
months, during which time he fasted forty days. 
He locked up the house in which he had dwelt, 
saying that his successor would open it, and then 
returned to Ajodhan, 

As his successor Diwan Taj-ul-Din was returning 
from a pilgrimage to Makka and Madina, he hap- 
pened to visit that part of the country. He asked 
the people to what tribe they belonged. They said 
that they were descendants of Qutub-ul-Alam Baba 

^ Farishta, the Persian historian, has given other reasons for the 
appellation. Vide vol; II, p. 288. Lakhnau edition. 



384 BHAGATS .OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Farid Shakar Ganj. He inquired from which of 
Farid’S sons they were descended. They replied 
that th^y had not come in that way, but had been 
miraculously boih. When Taj-ul*Din had heard the 
whole story, he unlocked the door of Farid’s hut. 
The people were delighted to see Taj-ul Din, and 
became his followers in large numbers. 

• Farid <Med of pneumonia on the fifth day of the 
month of Muharrim, a. H. 664 (a. d. 1266). The 
date of Farid’s death is commemorated by the 
chronograms (a) ‘ Farid asari,’ {b) ‘ auliyae Khudai ’ — 
He Was unique, a saint of God.^ Farid’s last words 
were in Arabic, ‘ Ya hayyo, ya qayyum’— O ever 
living, O eternal God ! At the last word ‘ qayyum ’ 
Farid expired. 

Farid was to have been buried outside the town 
of Pak Pattan at a place called the Martyrs’ graves, 
where he had first alighted on his arrival, but 
his son Makhdum Khwaja Nizam-ul-Din arrived 
in time to alter the proposed arrangement. This 
son Who had been a general in the Emperor’s army, 
was then living in retreat at Patali. As he lay 
asleep one night before his father’s death, he thought 
he heard his father calling him. He arose and went 
to Ajodhan, but, as the gates of the town were all 
locked at the time, he could not gain access to Farid’s 
dwelling. Farid knew of his son’s arrival, but it 
was too late to see him. ‘ His advice, however,’ 
said Farid, ‘ should be taken in all matters regarding 
my funeral and burial.’’ The son advised that the 
family shotild wait for Nizam-ul-Din Auliya from 
Dihli, and expressed his intention of temporarily 
bnrying his father in thfe house where he had lived, 
and Mmere subsequently his eldest son Khwaja 
Shahab-ul-Din was buried. 

'On the arrival of Nizam-ul-Din Auliya from 
Dihli, he had a mausoleum erected for Farid. ^ He 

^ Farishta and thfe author of the Khulasat-ul^Tawinkh give different 
dates, but they are proved false by the chronograms. 



SHAIKH FARID 


365 

directed that the Quran should be read over clean 
brickS} that the reader should then blow on them 
and employ them for the construction of Farid's 
grave. This direction was obeyed. The Hafizes 
and the Khalifas .read the Quran over brides con- 
secrated as directed, and made Farid’s grave with 
them. A shrine was built with stone windows on 
the east and north sides for women to see through, 
and with a door on the south side to be called the 
bihishti darwaza, or gate of paradise, for men to 
enter by. The body was then exhumed from its 
temporary grave, and after being well perfumed 
placed within the mausoleum thus constructed. It 
is said that the souls of Muhammad and all the 
Muhammadan saints appeared on the occasion. At 
the advice of Nizam-ul-Din Auliya, the stone win- 
dow at the east was broken at Farid’s re-interment 
to admit of the exit of the souls of the Prophet and 
his saints. Where the soul of Muhammad had 
taken up its position within the mausoleum, there 
was a hujra or small chapel built, called Qadam 
Rasul or the Prophet’s footsteps. Nizam-ul-Din 
then stated that he had received a message from the 
departed Farid, that God would pardon and save 
from hell all who passed through the paradisal gate. 
This was everywhere proclaimed from the rising to 
the setting of the sun. Some persons, however, 
who had no internal eyes, refused to believe that 
the gate possessed such supreme efficacy. Upon 
this Nizam-ul-Din said to the Prophet, ‘ If the 
populace be allowed to behold thee, their spiritual 
darkness shall be dispelled.’ It is said that the 
Prophet then appeared to the whole multitude, and 
not a scintilla of doubt remained in any one’s mind 
as to the advantages to be obtained from passing 
through the sacred portal. 

, It was subsequently ordered that women should 
pray .at thf^ stone^ ^window on the nbrth. side; and 
that a wall shoul(^*,be.bnilt .outside it to secure their 

c c 


SIKH. VI 



386 BHAGATS ■ OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


piaVacyi ..The dodr openingt to< thei east: !was theh 
called fthe d<!>6r of' lig;hfo It that by which men 
geiierjdly enter and -leave the shrine. ; i '. 

Aftw Farid's ideath his son Badr-.iil-Din Sulaiman 
succeeded him in his spiritual, and Saiyid Maulvi 
Badr-ul-Din Ishaq in his tempoi'al duties^ Envious 
persons set the two Badr-ul-Dins at variance, upon 
uhich Nizam-ul-Din Auliya <came from Dihli and 
made peace between them. > 

We have mentioned the Rakat-ul^Qulub as one 
of our authorities for the life of Phrid. The first 
entry in it was made on the iith of the month 
Rajab, a. h. 655 (a. d. 1254) ; and the last on the 
25th of Safar, a. h. 656. The diary thus shows 
Farid'S acts and conversations for the space; Of 
eleven months. We shall here give some extracts 
from it. I 

Farid -considered that faqiri dr holiness consisted 
in four things,- namely, to ^ blind to the faults of 
Muhammadans, to be deaf to slander, to be dumb 
when evil speaking is suggested, and to be lame 
whhiii there is a desire to visit evil places. 

On one occasion Shaikh Badr-ul-Din : of Ghazni, 
Jamal-ul-Din of Hansi, Sharaf-ul-Din- of Nabha,^ 
and Qazi Hamid-uFDin of Nagaur met at Farid’s 
house. Farid dilated to them on the virtues of 
hospitality, and said it was proper for a host to give 
something to every guest whether he received an 
equivalent or not. 

At a religio(us conference at Farid’s house, where 
were assembled Maulvi Hamid-ul-Din of Nagaur, 
Shaikh Shams-ul-Din, Shaikh Bufhan-ul-EHny and 
others^ ' Shaikh Farid mentioned an expfessibn ih 
the- Hadis, or traditional sayings of the -Prophet, 
that ! love- - df ‘ the World was the - source ■ off all 
evil. A man called Shaikh AbdullarSuhei Of Tasfir 
yid that -God and mani were ’aill^^oneJ! There f^as 
ho - difference* between - them- except, that} hi proporr 



SHAIKH FARID 


387 

tion as man loved the world, he fell away from God. 
Farid expressed his concurrence with this state- 
ment, and added that the heart was like a mirror, 
and love of mammon was as rust on it, which should 
be removed by the file of God's love. Land covered 
with tares and thistles produced no good crop until 
they were eradicated. Facjirs should remain aloof 
from the world, and not visit even kings and nobles. 

Once when the king of Iraq was ifl, he sent for 
Abdulla Suhel to treat him. Suhel cured him, but 
thought it necessary to expiate the offence of visiting 
a king by living a life of absolute retirement for 
seven years. The friendship of wealthy men was in 
his opinion as poison for holy men. When a holy 
man associates with such men, his influence oh others 
is injurious to them. Abdulla defined the word 
tariqat — a spiritual stage of Muhammadans— to 
mean absolute disregard for the things of this world. 

Farid said he had lived for ten years with the 
saint Abu Yusuf Chishti, and during that time had 
never moved a foot in the direction of a king or 
noble, except on Fridays when he went to pray, 
for prayers should be said in common on the Sab- 
bath. He thought that whenever a faqir has 
visited a monarch, his patched coat and hat ought 
afterwards to be burned in order to remove the 
contagion of wealth and pride. 

It is not surprising to hear that a man of Farid’s 
sanctity and force of character made many converts 
among the Hindus within the reach of his influence. 
The Bahlis, the Sirhangs, the Jhakars, and the 
Adankans are enumerated among the tribes whom 
he induced to accept Islam. 

When Badr-ul-Din Sulaiman, Farid’s son, suc- 
ceeded him, he was invested with the turban which 
Farid himself had received from Shaikh Abdul 
Qadir Jilani (Hazrat Ghaus); The turban was of 
three colours, saffron at one end, brown at the 
otheri and white in the centre. Nizam-ul-Diri 

c c 2 



388 BHAGATS m THE GRANTH SAHIB 

purchase^ several white turbans, ind steeped them 
with Abdul Qadir Jilani’s in the same pot. The 
object of this was that Abdul Qadir : Jilam’s tiuban 
might communicate some (rf its virtues to the white 
turbans, and that the latter after such contact 
might confer blessings on Farid’s disciples and 
friends, when they bound them on their heads. 
When Badr-ul-Bin had put on Abdul Qadir Jilani’s 
turban, and Farid’s disciples and friends, the white 
turbans, the whole company went outsido the gate 
of paradise and sat down. Sweets were produced, 
and a priest read texts from the Quran over them,. 
They were then distributed for the repose of the 
souls of the Chishti Khwajas to whom Farid 
spiritually belonged. 

This custom is still observed by the followers of 
Farid. On the approach of fhe Muharrim, the 
Quran is read over a jug of sharbat for the souls of 
ancestors, and the sharbat is then distributed among 
the faithful. When the Muharrim begins, there is 
singing after breakfast, to which the high priest 
listens on his carpet of prayer. The whole audience 
then enters on a state of exaltation. The priest puts 
on a turban like Farid’s, and binds white turbans on 
the heads of his brethren and disciples. On the 
fifth day of the Muharrim he opens the ‘ Gate of para- 
dise’, and the crowd enters with a rush, in the hope 
that, when they cross the barrier, they shall secure 
in reality the bliss of the elect. 

The gate of paradise is a small door in the shrine, 
which is only opened twice a year, and on both 
occasions at night. In our time the crowd which 
passes through, shouting ‘ Haji Qutub Farid’, or 
simply ‘ Farid !, to maintain their fervour, has been 
tetimated sometimes at thirty thousand souls. To 
readi the gate of paradise three outer portals have 
to be traveled. Among the immense crowd; there is 
a rivalry to reach heaven in the shortest time, not 
by ! good deeds, but by physical strength.; and in 



SHAIKH FARID 


389 


th6 struggle numbers arc continually maimed, arid 
some aged and infirm persons occasionally killed; 
Were not a large force of police, generally feirifdrced 
from neighbouring districts, marched to the shrine 
to maintain order, great indeed would be, the destruc- 
tion of human life at this religious ceremony. Men 
are not content to pass the gate for themselves, they 
return again and again to vicariously conduct their 
female relatives to the abode of bliss, and this 
reiterated service increases the crowd, the confusion, 
and the danger to human life. 

On the seventh day of the Muharrim there is again 
singing, the reading of the Quran is finished, and 
the gate of paradise is left open. On the tenth of 
the month Farid’s mausoleum is washed and per- 
fumed within and without. 

In the month of Ramzan the banners which 
Abdul Qadir Jilani received from Madina and gave 
to Farid, are taken out and fitted with new cloth. 
The high priest's followers present him with an 
ordinary coat and a patched coat— meaning thereby 
temporal and spiritual raiment. When he puts 
them on, the prayers appointed for the Id in the 
end of Ramzan are read. Farid’s cup, stick, and 
rosary are then produced and prayers offered. The 
high priest with a rosary in one hand and Farid’s 
staff in the other begs for alms, upon which his 
followers present him with cakes of sugar, almonds, 
and coco-nuts. Such offerings are afterwards dis- 
tributed among the poor. 

It remains to add a few words regarding Nizam- 
ul-Din Auliya, the author of the Rahat-ul-Qulub 
and Farid’s faithful friend and disciple. He states 
that he visited Ajodhan three times during the life 
of Farid, and Farid charged him with the education 
of his children. 

Subsequently Nizam-ul-Din was sent by Farid as 
Khalifa or spiritual ruler of Hindustan, and in that 
capacity amassed great wealth and became known 



39P BHAGATS OP THE GRANTH SAHIB 

, Zar-ivzar Baft— woven, pr altogether, of ■ goJ, 4 , 
a name givoo him by, Bu ,AH , Sheh, a rei^o\:is , man 
of Paoipat- , 

It is probable that Nizam-ul-Din’s great wealth 
aroused the jeaWsy of Mubarak Khilji, who ascended 
the Dihli throne in a. d. 1317. He summoned 
Shaikh Rukn-ul-Din from Multan in the hope of 
counteracting Nizam-ul-Din’s unquestionably great 
influence with the people. Nizam-ul-Din went forth 
to meet the man who had been chosen as his anta- 
gonist, and produced a highly favourable impression 
on him. When the Emperor afterwards asked 
Rukn-ul-Din who had been the principal person to 
go forth and welcome him to Dihli, Rukn-ul-Din 
replied ‘ The foremost man of the age by which 
he meant Nizam-ul-Din. The Emperor after this 
testimony to Nizam-ul-Din's greatness withdrew his 
opposition to him, and allowed him to dwell in 
peace.^ 

The imperial hostility to Nizam-ul-Din descended 
to. Ghiyas-ul-Din Tughlak, one of the successors of 
Mubarak Khilji. When Ghiyas-ul-Din was return- 
ing from his expedition to Bengal, he no longer 
desired to see Nizam-ul-Din, and ordered him to 
leave the city. Nizam-ul-Din had no alternative 
but to obey, but decided to do so at leisure. He 
said to his friends ‘ Hanoz Dihli dur ast '—Dihli is 
still far off— by which he meant that the Emperor 
should never reach Dihli. The Emperor on his 
homeward march put up in a house at Afghanpur, 
hastily constructed for his reception by his son 
Alaf Khan. The house fell upon the monarch and 
killed him in a. d. 1325. The Emperor’s death was 
popularly attributed to his hostility to the saint. 
Nizam-ul-Din’s expression ‘ Dihli is far off ’ has 
passed into a proverb.* It corresponds to the 

^ Ain-i'Akbari. 

* Parishta gives many details of NizUm-ui'-Dtn which it is not 
necessary to reprodnce here. 



i i • i * iSHASKH FARID 391 

English &a3nng, ‘ There is many a slip ’twixt the 
cupi and ithe^ Ep.’ -Nizam-ul-Din himself died the 
same year as the Emperor. 

i Ni^rti-ui-Din, notwithstanding his worldly suc- 
cess, raised man}^ nien in Dihli, Bengal, Chanderi, 
Malwa, Bihar, Ujjain, Gujrat, and the Dakhan to 
the heights of spiritual sanctity. Having conferred 
his khalifaship on Khwaja Hazrat Nasir-ul-Din 
Chiragh, he died in Dihli on Wednesday, the i8th 
day of Rabi ul Sani, a. h. 725, a. d. 1325, that is, 
sixty years after the death of his beloved priest.^ 
He was buried in a quarter then known as Ghyaspur. 
He wrote the following Persian lines in praise of 
Farid : — 

Pir-i-man pirest maulana Farid ; 

Hamchu o dar sihar Maula na-farid. 

My priest is the holy Farid ; 

God created no one in the world like him. 


HYMNS OF SHAIKH FARID 

Miscellaneous Religious Instruction 

Asa 

Saith Shaikh Farid, my dear friends, attach yourselves 
to God. 

This body shall become dust and its abode be the un- 
honoured grave.* 

To-day God can be met, Shaikh Farid, if thou restrain 
the feelings which agitate thy mind. 

Had I known that I should die and not return again, 

I would not have devoted myself to this false world and 
ruined myself. 

1 The Khulasat-ul-Tawarikh gives the date of his death as a. h, 7 10. 
We accept in preference the date given in the Ain-uAkbari, 

* Nimani gor is a common expression in the writings of Farid. 
Nimant is not an epithet of the body as some suppose. 



392 BHAGATS OF THE' GRANTH SAHIB 

Honestly speak the truth ; utter not falsehood. 

The disciple ought to travel by the way the guru pointeth 
out. 

When the lover ^ is saved, the heart of the beloved * 
taketh courage. 

Thou who turnest to the glitter of gold shalt be split 
in twain by the saw. 

0 Shaikh, no man’s life is permanent in this world ; 

How many have sat on the seats on which we sit ! 

As kulangs come in Kartik, forest fires in Chet, lightning 
in Sawan, 

As woman’s arms adorn her husband’s neck in winter, 

So transitory things pass away ; reflect on this in thy 
mind. 

Man taketh six months to form® and one moment to 
break up. 

The earth asked heaven,^ saith Farid, how many pilots ® 
had passed away ; 

Some have been burnt, others are in the cemeteries, and 
their souls suffer reproaches from the angels of Death. 

Farid’s longing to meet God : — 

SUHI 

On account of the severe burning of high fever induced 
by separation from God, I wring my hands ; 

1 have grown crazy longing for my Spouse. 

Thou, O Spouse, wast angry with me in Thy heart ; 

It was through my demerits, and not my Spouse’s fault. 

My Lord, I did not know Thy worth ; 

I have lost my youth and repent too late. 

O black kokil, why art thou black ? 

^ Chhail, literally — a handsome young man ; here the reference is 
to the elect. 

* Gori, a handsome young woman ; here the reference is to those 
who aw striving for perfection. 

® That is, the foetus, is fornoed after six months in the womb. . 

^ That is^ the disciples asked the guru.. 

® Religious guides. 



HYMNS OF SHAIKH FARID 393 

The kokil — ‘ I have been burnt by separation from my 
Belpved ; 

Can she who is separated from her Beloved ever be 
happy ? ’ 

If the Lord be merciful, He will cause me to meet Him. 
Painful is the well ^ into which lone woman ^ hath fallen ; 
She hath no companions and no helper. 

Thou hast mercifully, O (iod, caused me to meet Thy 
saints ; 

When I look again, God is my helper. 

My way is thoroughly tedious ; 

It is sharper than a two-edged sword and very narrow ; 
Over that is my passage ; 

Shaikh Farid, prepare thyself betimes for that roeid. 


SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 

I 

The day that woman was to be married was previously 
fixed.^ 

The Spouse, the angel of Death of whom we have heard, 
hath come to show his face ; 

Having cracked the bones of the body he will take away 
the poor soul. 

The time recorded cannot be altered ; ^ explain this to 
thy soul. 

The soul is the bride, death the bridegroom ; he will 
marry her and take her away. 

As she goeth, whose neck shall she run to embrace with 
her arms ? ® 

Have you not heard of the bridge of Sarat, which is 
finer than a hair ? 

Farid, when the summons cometh, arise and deceive 
yourselves not. 

^ That is, the world. * The soul. 

^ Marriage here means death. ^ Man shall live his allotted span. 

^ Whose help shall the soul seek at the last moment 1 



594 BHAGAITS - OF HHE GRANTH SAHIB 


Farid, since I walk in the way of the world, it is difficult 
td be like the^ darwoih dt dodos' gite.^ 

I have tied and taken up my bundle of worldlifi^s •, 
whtfher shall I go to throw it away ? ' ’ [[ 

III 

I know nothing, I see nothing, the world is a smouldering 
fire ; 

My master did well to warn me, otherwise I tod shpuld 
have been burnt. 

IV 

Farid, had I known my sesames ^ were to be so few, 
I should have husbanded my handfuls ; 

Had I known that the Bridegroom® was so young, I 
should have been less vain. 

V 

Had I known that my dress * was opening, I should have 
put a fast knot on it.® 

So great as Thou I have found none ; I have seen and 
wandered the world over. 

VI 

Farid, if thou have acute wisdom, write not a black 
mark against others. 

Bend thy head and look beneath thy collar.® 

VII 

Farid, if men beat thee with their fists, beat them not 
in return ; 

Nay, kiss their feet and go home. 

^ That is, it is difiicuU for worldly people to be holy, ® Breathings. 

* Had I known that God, like a very young and innocent bride- 
groom, did not value me, I should have been less vain. The verse is 
also translated — Had I known that the Bridegroom was for the humble, 
I should have been less proud. 

® The body which contains the soul tied up in it. 

® If I had known that this trumpery body was so soon to ptes away, 
I dipuld have taken greater care. • J- 

® Look into thy heart, consider thine own fauhsandnot those ofbtfaers. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


595 


VIII 

Farid, when it was time for thee to earn,^ thou wast in 
love with the World : 

Death’s foundations are strong ; ^ when the last breath is 
drawn, thy soul shall be packed away. 

IX 

See, Farid, what hath occurred — thy beard hath grown 
grey ; 

The future is near, the past is left far behind. 

X 

See, Farid, what hath occurred — sugar hath become 
poison. 

To whom shall I tell my sorrow except to my Lord ? 

XI 

Farid, mine eyes have seen enough, and mine ears heard 
enough ; 

The tree of the body hath become ripe,^ and hath assumed 
another colour. 

XII 

Farid, hath any one who enjoyed not her spouse when 
her hair was black, enjoyed him when her hair was grey ? 

Love thy Spouse, so shall the colour of thy hair be restored.^ 

Guru Amar Das offers the following objection to 
this couplet : — 

XIII 

Farid, whether man’s hair be black or grey, the Lord is 
ever present if any one remember Him : 

^ That is, to serve God. 

2 Literally — increase by a fourth daily, 

® The gyanis translate — The vegetables have become ripe. That 
is, the field of life has yielded its harvest, and it is time for death. 

^ That is, youth shall return, and thou shalt have another op- 
portunity of enjoying thy Spouse. Rangan wela hoi is also read and 
translated — This is the time for enjoying Him. 



396 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Even if all men desire to love God, they will not succeed 
by their own endeavours : 

This cup of love belongeth to God ; He giveth it to 
whom He pleaseth. 

XIV 

Farid, I have seen those eyes which charmed the world — 

They could not endure the streak of lampblack,^ yet in 
them birds have hatched their young. 

XV 

Farid, men shout and shriek and ever give advice ; 

But how can they whom the devil hath led astray, turn 
their thoughts to God ? 

XVI 

Farid, if thou long for the Lord of all, become the grass 
on the pathway for men to tread on ; 

When one man breaketh thee and another trampleth on 
thee. 

Then shalt thou enter the court of the Lord. 

XVII 

Farid, revile not dust, there is nothing like it ; 

When we are alive it is beneath our feet, when we are 
dead it is above us. 

XVIII 

Farid, where there is greed, what love can there be ? 
Where there is greed, the love is false. 

How long canst thou pass thy time in a broken hut in 
the rain ? 

XIX 

Farid, why wanderest thou from forest to forest breaking 
down branches and thorns ? “ 

It is in the heart God dwelleth ; why seekest thou Him 
in the forest ? 

^ Used to darken the eyelids. This slok is said to have been written 
on seeing the skull of a beautiful courtesan who used to find fault 
with her servant for touching her eyes when applying lampblack. 

* Also translated — When the thorns of the forest seek to drive thee 
back. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


397 


XX 

Farid, with these spindle-shanks I have traversed plains 
and mountains. 

But to-day for Farid to lift his jug hath become as toil- 
some as a journey of. hundreds of miles. 

XXI 

Farid, the nights have grown long ; my sides ache and 
ache. 

Curse on the lives of those who have hopes other than 
in God. 

The following was written on Farid’s missing the 
visit of a holy friend who had come to see him ; — 

XXII 

Farid, had I been present when my friend came, I would 
have devoted myself to him. 

Now my body burneth like madder on the cinders, and 
I cannot pay him a return visit. 

XXIII 

Farid, the Jat^ planteth the kikar, yet he wanteth the 
grape-tree of Bijaur ; 

He spinneth wool, yet he wanteth to wear silk. 

XXIV 

Farid, in the streets there is mud : the house of my 
dear friend whom I love is distant : 

If I go to him, I shall wet my blanket ; If I remain at 
home, our love shall be severed. 

XXV 

O God, though Thou send Thy rain, and wet, and drench 
my blanket ; 

Yet shall I go to meet that friend so that our love may 
not be severed. 

1 A tribe generally employed in agriculture. 



398 BHA©ATS= OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

It is said that when Farid was dne day putting 
on his turban, it slipped from his hand. The follow- 
ing was composed on the occasion 

XXVI 

Farid, I fear that my turban will be soiled ; 

, My thoughtless soul knoweth not that dust will rot my 
head also. . 

XXVII 

Sugar unrefined and refined, loaf sugar, molasses, honey, 
and buffalo’s milk. 

Are all sweet things, but not, O God, so sweet as Thou. 

XXVIII 

Farid, my bread is made of wood,^ hunger is my con- 
diment ; 

They who eat buttered bread shall suffer great pain. 

XXIX 

Eat hard dry bread, and drink cold water ; 

Farid, on seeing another’s buttered bread let not thy 
heart long for it. 

XXX 

I slept npt with my husband last iiight ; my body is 
pining away ; 

Go ask the wife whom her husband hath put away, how 
she passeth the night.* 

Gvifu Amar Das has given the following reply to 
this question 

XXXI 

She findeth no entrance to the house of her father-in-law, 
and no place with her parents. 

^ A reference to the wooden cake Farid I wore on his stomach to 
ssltisfy the cntvihgS'df hunger; 

* This and the preceding line are explained. — If than feel so much 
from a temporary separation from God, what shall he feel from an 
eternal separation £ i. 



• SLOKS OF SHAIKH FAHID ' 399 

Can she f9r whom her husband careth not, be called 
a hc^ppy wife ? . ^ 

xxxn 

Woman, whether in -this world or the next, belongeth to 
her Spouse, the inaccessible and unfathomable One ; 

Nanak, she is a happy wife who is pleasing to God the 
Unconcerned. , 

XXXIII 

They who bathe, and wash, and adorn themselves, and 
then heedlessly sleep regardless of their spouses, 

Farid, are as it were smeared all over with asafoetidu, 
and the perfume of their musk departeth. • 

XXXIV 

I dread not the departure of youth if my Spouse’s love 
depart not therewith ; 

Farid, how often hath youth become dry and withered 
without love ! 

XXXV 

Farid, my bed is anxiety ; its bottom, affliction ; its 
mattress and coverlet, separation from God ; 

Such is my life ; do Thou, O true God, look upon me. 

XXXVI 

Men continually speak of love ; ^ O • Love, thou art a 
monarch ; 

Farid, deem the body in which there is not love a place 
of cremation. 

XXXVII 

Farid, pleasures ^ are like poisonous sprouts smeared with 
sugar ; 

Some die while planting them ; others are ruined while 
gathering them. 

^ Literally-1-separation, but here it means love in absence. 

*■ ^ome make wommi the subject of this slok, but this is contrary to 
the.' teaching of the Granth Sshib. ' Thus Guru NSnak writes, ‘ Why 
call atoman ' Guru Arjan, through his regard for womeh, re- 
jected (ft stnnza brought to him by Pilo for insertion in foe Granth 
Sahib. It began, ‘ look not even on a paper likeness of woman .' ' 



4po BHA(JATS OF iTHE GRANTH SAHIB 

, , XXXVIII 

Farid, men have lost the four watches of the day in wander- 
ing and the four watches of the night in sleep ; 

|i. God will call for thine account and ask why thou earnest 
into the world. 

XXXIX 

Farid, when thou wentest to the gate of the court, sawest 
thou not the gong ? 

When that sinless thing is thus beaten, what shall be 
the condition of us sinners ? 


XL 

It is beaten every ghari and receiveth complete punish- 
ment at the end of every watch ; ^ 

So the body like the gong passeth a painful night. 

XLI 

Shaikh Farid hath grown old, and his body hath begun 
to totter ; 

Were he to live even for hundreds of years, his body 
would become dust at last. 


XLII 

Saith Farid, allow me not, 0 Lord, to sit and beg at 
another’s gate. 

If that is how Thou art about to treat me, then take the 
life from my body. 

XLIII 

O blacksmith, thou goest to the forest with thine axe 
on thy shoulder, and thy water-pot on thy head ; 

Saith Farid, I am longing for my Lord, thou art longing 
for charcoal.* 

* At the end of the first ghari of the pahar the gong waa struck 

once ; at the end of the second ghart twice, and so on till the end of 
the/tfArr of eight when it was struck sixteen times. 

* This is Ibdieved to be an appeal from Farid to his ftiend Jassa, 
a smith, lio sptre, the .tree unebt which the saint used to pray. Jassa 
was not a'V^Kid'Ciittef, as the English reader may 'suppose. In the 
iSastfSmidiSjgo to the forest to oitdovn trees to ihake'cltaTceal fitom 
them, for the purpone of their trade. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


401 


XLIV 

Farid, some have a great deal of flour, others have hot 
even salt ; 

When they have all departed, it will be known who 
shall suffer punishment. 

XLV 

They who had drums, and trumpets, and umbrellas over 
their heads, and bards to sound their praises. 

Went to sleep in the cemetery, and were buried as if 
they had been poor orphans. 

XLVI 

Farid, they who built houses, mansions, and lofty palaces 
also departed ; 

False was their business and they dropped into their 
graves. 

XLVII 

Farid, there are m^tny tacks on the patched coat to make 
it last, but there are no such tacks on the soul ; ^ 

Shaikhs and their disciples have departed, each in his 
turn. 

XLVIII 

Farid, while the two lamps of man's eyes are shining, the 
angel of Death cometh and seateth himself on his body ; - 

He captureth the fortress, robbeth it of the soul, and 
having put out the lamp departeth. 

XLIX 

Farid, see what happeneth to cotton, what befalleth 
sesame. 

Sugar-cane, paper, earthen utensils, and charcoal ; 

The punishment they receive awaiteth those who do evil. 

L 

Farid, men carry prayer-carpets on their shoulders, wear 
a sufi’s Yohe^ and speak sweetly, but there are knives in 
their hearts ; 

^ There is nothing to restrain the soul from flying away from the body. 

2 That is, death comes while man is looking on. 

® Suph^ also called a kafm, a patched coal without sleeves worn by 

D d 


SIKH. VI 



402 BHAGATS OF THE GRANtH SAHIB 

' Externally they appear bright, but in their hearts is sable 
night. 

LI 

Farid, if any one were to cut my body, not a drop of 
blood would issue from it. 

Since the body which is dyed with God containeth no 
hLood. 

On this couplet Guru Amar Das made the follow- 
ing commentary 

LII 

This body is all blood ; the body cannot exist without 
blood ; 

But the blood of greed entereth not the body which is 
dyed with its Lord. 

When the fear of the Lord entereth the heart, the body 
groweth lean and the blood of greed departeth from it. 

As metals are purified by fire, so the fear of the Lord 
removeth the filth of evil inclinations. 

Nanak, that man is handsome who is dyed with the love 
of God. 

LIII 

Farid, search the lake^ where the Real Thing* is to be 
found ; 

What availeth it to search in a pond ? ® one’s hand 
merely sinketh into the mud. 

LIV 

Farid, the little girl did not enjoy her Spouse ; when she 
grew up she died. 

Lying in the grave she calleth, ‘ I have not met Thee, 
O my Lord.’ 

Musalm&n faqtrs. generally supposed to come from the Greek 

Sophia, wisdom, but in Arabic the word means wool. SQfIs affected 
tyoollen garments. 

* The guild of the saints. . * God’s name. . 

* In inferior company. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


403 


LV 

Farid, the hair of my head is grey, my beard is grey, 
my moustaches also are grey ; 

0 my heedless and insensate soul, why art thou devoted 
to sensual pleasures ? 

LVI 

Farid, how far canst thou run on a house-top ? banish 
thine indifference to the Dear One ; 

The days which were counted and allotted thee have 
passed away in vain. 

LVII 

Farid, attach not thy heart to houses, mansions, and 
lofty palaces ; 

When unweighable earth falleth on thee, thou shalt have 
no friend. 

LVIII 

Farid, set not thy heart on mansions and wealth ; think 
upon the grave ; 

Remember that place whither thou must go. 

LIX 

Farid, forsake those occupations from which no advantage 
result eth, 

Lest thou be put to shame in the court of the Lord, 

LX 

Farid, perform the service of the Lord, dispel the doubts 
of thy heart ; 

Darweshes require the endurance of trees, 

LXI 

Farid, black are my clothes, black my vestment ; 

1 wander about defiled by sin, yet men call me a dar- 
wesh. 

LXII 

That which hath been rotted by water, will not bloom 
if it be kept immersed in it ; 

Farid, the wife rejected by God ever and ever grieyeth. . 

D d 2 



404 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

LXIII 

When a woman is a virgin she is happy ; when she is 
married her troubles begin. 

Farid, she hath this regret that she cannot again become 
a virgin.’ 

LXIV 

The swans have alighted in a little tank of brackish 
water ; ® 

They dip in their bills, but drink not ; they thirst to 
fly away. 

LXV 

The swans fly away and alight on a field of kodhra ; ^ 
people go to drive them away ; * 

Heedless people know not that swans eat not kodhra.® 

LXVI 

The birds • which occupied the lake ’ have flown away ; 

Farid, the full lake shall also pass away, and the lotuses * 
alone remain. 

LXVII 

Farid, bricks shall be thy pillow, thou shalt sleep beneath 
the earth, worms shall eat thy flesh ; 

How many ages shall pass away for thee lying on one 
side.® 

LXVIII 

Farid, the beautiful water-pot shall be broken ; the 
excellent rope “ shall part therefrom ; 

In whose house shall the angel Azrail be a guest to-day ? 

The soul which has lost its opportunities of salvation regrets that 
it cannot again return to a human body. 

® That is, saints have fallen into the company of the wicked. 

® An inferior Indian cereal, the Paspalum scrohiculatum. 

* The saints fare badly among the perverse who annoy and slander 
them. ® Holy men do not covet worldly things. 

® That is, kings and persons in high positions. 

® The lake means the world. ® Holy men. 

® Not moving. The body. 

” The rope by which the water-pot is let down into the well. Here 
it means life. 



405 


SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 

LXIX 

The beautiful water-pot shall be broken ; the excellent 
rope shall part therefrom ; 

How shall our friends who were a burden to the earth 
return now ? 

LXX 

Saith Farid, thou dog who prayest not, this custom of 
thine is not good ; 

Thou never goest to the mosque at the live times of 
prayer. 

LXXI 

Rise in the morning, Farid, perform thine ablutions, 
repeat thy prayer ; 

Cut off the head which boweth not to the Lord. 

LXXII 

What is to be dohe to the head which boweth not to 
the Lord ? 

Burn it instead of firewood under the earthen pot. 


LXXIII 

Farid, where are the father and mother who gave thee 
birth ? 

They have departed from thee; art thou not yet convinced 
that the world is unstable ? 

LXXIV 

Farid, make thy heart a plain, level all its hollows and 
hills ; 

And the fire of hell shall never approach thee here- 
after. 


Guru Arjan makes the following observation on 
this 


LXXV 


O Farid, the Creator dwelleth in creation and creation 
in the Creator ; 

Whom callest thou bad, since there is none beside 
Him ? 



406 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

LXXVI 

Farid, if my throat had been cut on the same day as my 
navel string, . ; 

I should not have fallen into such trouble, nor undergone 
such hardship. 

LXXVII 

My teeth, my feet, mine eyes, mine ears have ceased their 
functions ; 

The body crieth aloud, ‘ Those acquaintances have gone 
away.’ 

LXXVIII 

Farid, do good for evil, clothe not thy heart with anger : 

Thus shall thy body not suffer pain, and thou shalt obtain 
everything. 

LXXIX 

Farid, the birds ^ are guests in the beautiful garden of the 
world ; 

The morning drum.beateth ; make preparations for thy 
departure. 

LXXX 

Farid, musk is distributed at night ; they who sleep 
obtain no share of it. 

How can they whose eyes are asleep obtain it ? 

LXXXI 

Farid, I thought I alone had sorrow, but the whole world 
also hath sorrow ; 

When I ascended an eminence and looked, I found the 
same anguish in every house. 

Guru Arjan replies to this as follows ; — 

LXXXII 

Farid, in the midst of this fair earth there is a thorny 
garden ; 

But the man favoured by the spiritual guide feeleth not 
its prickles. 

^ That is, souls. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


407 


LXXXIII 

Farid, few are found who love the Dear One ; 

They who do, find their lives happy and their persons 
beautiful. 

LXXXIV 

0 river,^ destroy not thy bank ; thou too must give an 
account ; 

The river floweth whithersoever God willeth. 

LXXXV 

Farid, my days have passed in sorrow, and my nights in 
anguish ; 

The ferryman standeth up and shouteth, ‘ The wind is 
driving the boat into the whirlpool.’ * 

LXXXVI 

The long river of life floweth and wasteth away its 
banks ; ® 

If the ferryman be on the alert, what harm can the 
whirlpool do the boat ? 

LXXXVII 

Farid, there are twenty friends in words ; but if thou 
search for one real friend, thou shalt not find him. 

1 am suffering like smouldering fuel for my beloved 
friends. 

LXXXVIII 

Farid, these people are ever barking ; * who can endure 
the continual annoyance ? 

I have stopped mine ears, and I care not how much wind 
is blowing. 

LXXXIX 

Farid, God’s dates are ripe ; rivers of honey flow past 
them ; ® 

^ This was addressed to the Satluj. 

^ The guru warns man that he is going to die. 

^ The body wastes away and death gradually approaches. 

* Ciying out for worldly things. 

® The' dates are the saints of God, the rivers of honey His praises. 



4o8 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The days that pass in enjoying them are profitable to my 


Farid, my dry body hath become a skeleton ; ravens peck 
at the hollows of my hands and feet ; 

Up to the present, God hath not come to mine aid ; 
behold His servant’s misfortune ! 

XCl 

O ravens, you have searched my skeleton and eaten all my 
flesh ; 

But touch not these two eyes, as I hope to behold my 
Beloved 

XCII 

O ravens, peck not at my skeleton ; if haply you sit on it, 
then fly away ; 

At any rate, eat not the flesh from wh«re my Lord dwelleth 
in my skeleton. 

XCIII 

Farid, the wretched tomb calleth out, ‘ O homeless, come 
home ! 

' You shall assuredly come to me ; fear not death.’ 

XCIV 

How many have departed before my very eyes ! 

Farid, men have different anxieties, and I have mine. 

XCV 

God saith, ‘ If thou reform thyself, thou shalt meet Me ; 
on meeting Me thou shalt be happy ; 

‘ Farid, if thou remain Mine, all the world shall be thine.’ 

XCVl 

How long shall the trees on the banks retain their place ? 

Farid, if thou put water into a frail vessel, how long will 
it remain ? 

^ ]!)ates and honey are promised to Muhammadans in beaveU, but 
Farid means that they can be obtained on earth. 



SL0K8 OF SHAIKH FARID 


409 


XCVII 

Farid, places have become empty and their occupants 
gone below ; 

The wretched graves take possession of souls ; ^ 

O Shaikh, say good-bye to your friends ; ^ thou must 
depart to-day or to-morrow. 

XCVIII 

Farid, death hath no more a boundary than a river ^ 
which washeth away its hanks ; 

When Death appeareth hell burneth in front ; terrible cries 
and sounds of woe are heard. 

To some all understanding hath come ; others wander 
about recklessly. 

Men’s acts in this world shall bear witness in God's court. 

XCIX 

Farid, the crane ^ sitteth on the bank of the river and 
sporteth ; 

While it is sporting the hawk suddenly striketh it ; ® 

When the hawk of God striketh it, it forgetteth its sport. 

God hath accomplished such things as could never have 
been conceived. 

C 

A body of three and a half mans is moved by water and 
grain ; 

Man entereth the world entertaining high hopes ; 

When the angel of Death cometh, he will break open 
every door ; 

He will take man prisoner in the presence of his dear 
brethren. 

^ The Musalmans believe that ihe soul remains with the body till 
its account is taken. 

2 Also translated — worship God. Some say this hymn was addressed 
to a disciple of Farid. Farid told him to worship God, as his sojourn 
in this world was uncertain. 

^ Literally —the boundary of death appears like that of a destroying 
river. DeaA does as much havoc in the world as a large tropical river 
during the rainy season to the surrounding country. 

* The soul. ® Death strikes the soul. 



410 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Lo 1 man departeth on the shoulders of four men, 

Farid ; but the good acts he performed in this world shall 
be serviceable to him in God’s court. 

Cl 

Farid, I am a sacrifice to those birds ^ which live in the 
forests ; 

They live on fruit, sleep on the ground, and never leave 
God’s side. 

CII 

Farid, the season changeth,* the forests wave, the leaves 
drop off ; 

I have searched in every direction, but found no place 
of rest. 

cm 

Farid, tear thy coat into tatters and wear a blanket 
instead ; , 

Adopt a dress by which thou mayest obtain the Lord. 

Guru Amar Das makes the following reflection 
on this couplet ; — 

CIV 

Why tear thy coat and put on a blanket ? 

Nanak, if thine intentions be good, seated at home thou 
shalt find the Lord. 

Guru Ram Das has added the following ; — 

CV 

0 Farid, they who were proud of their greatness and 
possessed youth and untold wealth. 

Went away bare from the Lord like a hillock after rain,® 

CVI 

Farid, terrible are the countenances of those who have 
forgotten the Name ; 

* Hermits. ® That is, old age c(»nes on. 

* Water will not rest on a hill, neither will God’s grace on him who 
holds his head too high. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


411 

Here they have abundant sorrow, and hereafter neither 
house nor home. 

evil 

Farid, if thou awake not in the end of the night, thou art 
dead while alive ; 

Even if thou forget God, God will not forget thee. 

Guru Arjan has here composed the following four 
couplets 

CVIII 

Farid, the Bridegroom is merry, and far beyond all need ; 

To be dyed with God is the true decoration. 

CIX 

Farid, treat pain and pleasure as the same ; banish sin 
from thy heart ; 

Consider what pleaSeth God as good, and thou shalt gain 
His court. 

CX 

Farid, the world playeth as mammon maketh it play ; 
thou too playest with it ; 

The soul for which God careth playeth not.^ 

CXI 

Farid, the heart is dyed with the world, though the world 
be worthless ; 

To be like faqirs is difficult ; their excellence can only be 
obtained by perfect acts.® 

Farid then proceeds 

CXII 

Devotion in the beginning of the night is the blossom, 
in the end of the night the fruit ; 

They who watch obtain gifts from the Lord. 

^ Is not subject to worldly love. 

* Also translated — by perfect good fortune. 



412 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

; Guru Nanak offers the following objection to this 
doctrine 

CXIII 

Gifts are the Lord’s ; what can prevail against Him ? 

Some who are awake receive them not ; others who are 
asleep He awaketh and conferreth presents upon. 

Farid continues to expound his doctrines ; — 

CXIV 

Thou who searchest for thy Spouse, must have some fault 
in thyself ; 

She who is called a good wife never looketh for any one 
else. 

CXV 

Make patience thy bow, patience thy bowstring. 

Patience thine arrow, and the Creator will not allow thee 
to miss thy mark. 

cxyi 

With such patience do the patient mortify their bodies ; 

They thus become near God, but tell their secrets to no one. 

CXVII 

This patience is the main object ; if thou, O mortal, 
adopt it. 

Thou shalt become a great river and not a separate 
branch thereof. 

CXVIII 

Farid, to be a darwesh at God's gate is difficult ; my love 
for God is only on the surface. 

Few there are who walk in the way of the darweshes at 
God’s gate. 

CXIX 

My body is heated like an oven ; my bones burn like 
firewood ; 

Were my feet to tire, I would walk on my head to meet 
the Beloved. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 413 

Guru Nanak has here composed the following 
couplet : — 

CXX 

Heat not thy body like an oven, burn not thy bones like 
firewood ; 

What harm have thy head and feet done thee ? Behold 
the Beloved within thee. 

The following is by Guru Ram Das 

CXXI 

I go searching for the Friend, but the Friend is with me ; 

Nanak, the Unseen is not seen, hut the pious show the 
way to Him. 

The following couplets have been contributed by 
Guru Amar Das . — 

CXXII 

« 

The crane seeing the swan ^ swimming conceived a desire 
to swim ; 

But the poor crane was drowned ; and its body turned 
upside down. 

CXXIII 

I thought he was a great swan, wherefore I associated 
with him ; 

Had I known that he was only a wretched crane, I would 
never have touched him. 

« CXXIV 

What mattereth it whether he whom God looketh on with 
favour be a swan or a crane ? 

Nanak, if it please God, He can change a crow into a swan. 

Farid thus closes his spiritual instructions : — 

CXXV 

In the lake there is but one bird, while there are fifty 
snarers ; ^ 

^ The crane is the hypocrite : the swan the holy man. 

® That is, the temptations of the world are many to lead the soul 
astray. 



414 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

This body is immersed in the waves of the world ; O True 
One, my hope is in Thee.* 

CXXVI 

What is that word, what those virtues, what that priceless 
spell ; 

What dress shall I wear that I may captivate the Spouse ? 

CXXVII 

Humility is the word, forbearance the virtue, civility 
the priceless spell ; 

Make these three thy dress, O sister, and the Spouse shall 
come into thy. power 

- CXXVIII 

There are few saints 

Who, though wise, are simple. 

Though strong, are weak. 

And, though having not, divide what they have. 

CXXIX 

Utter not one disagreeable word, since the true Lord is 
in all men. 

Distress no one’s heart ; every heart is a priceless jewel. 

cxxx 

All men’s hearts are jewels ; to distress them is by no 
means good ; 

If thou desire the Beloved, distress no one’s heart. 


BHIKAN 

Bhikan was most probably Shaikh Bhikan of 
Kakori who died in the early part of the Emperor 
Akbar’s reign. The Persian historian Badauni has 
the following account of him ‘ Kakori is a pargana 
town in the Sarkar of Lakhnau. Shaik Bhikan was 
the most learned of the learned men of his time, 

’ In the oldest Janamsakhi this reply is attributed to Guru Nanak. 



BHIKAN 


415 

abstemious and well versed in the holy law, while 
in devout piety even Abu Hanifa, the greatest of 
the Imams, was his inferior. For many years he 
was engaged in teaching and in instructing the 
people. He had committed the whole of the glorious 
word of God to memory, according to each of the 
seven methods of reading it. He used also to give 
instruction thereon. He reckoned his spiritual suc- 
cession from' Mir Saiyid Ibrahim of Irij, who was 
himself the most learned of the learned men of 
his time. The Shaikh would never mention the Sufi 
mysteries in a public assembly, but only in private 
to those who had been initiated into their secrets ; 
and one of his sayings was, “If the mystical profes- 
sion of the Unity of God be made public, it returns 
solely to him who uttered it, or to the learned few.” 
He would not listen to singing, and outwardly 
reprobated it. He left numerous children who 
attained perfection, all of ^whom were adorned with 
the embellishments of rectitude, piety, wisdom, 
knowledge, and virtue. 

‘ The compiler of these historical selections was 
honoured, in company with the late Muhammad 
Husain Khan by being permitted to pay his respects 
to the Shaikh in Lakhnau. It was the month 
of Ramzan and a certain one brought to the Shaikh 
a work on logic, asking him to set him a task in 
that book. The Shaikh said, “You should read 
some book on divinity.” The Shaikh’s death oc- 
curred in the year a. h. 981 (a. d. 1573-4).’ 

Badauni states that when Muzaffar Khan rose in 
revolt against Akbar, he on one occasion pitched 
his tent near the burial place of Shaikh Bhikan, no 
doubt with the object of praying for his intercession 
for the success of his enterprise. 

Badauni also speaks of ‘ that pilgrim to the two 
sacred precincts Haji Bhikan Basawani.’ This, how- 
ever, may have been a different person from Shaikh 
Bhikan pf, Kakpri. 



4i6 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Whoever wrote the following hymns bearing the 
name of Bhikan in the Granth Sahib, must have 
been some religious man who resembled Shaikh 
Farid II, and was largely tinctured with the reforma- 
tory ideas then prevalent in India. It has been 
conjectured, with some show of probaHlity, that 
Bhikan was a follower of Kabir. 

Only God’s name Oan heal a diseased mind and body. 

SORATH 

From mine eyes tears have flowed, my body hath become 
lean, and my hair the colour of milk. 

My throat is choked ; I cannot utter a word ; what can 
mortal now do ? 

0 Sovereign Lord, Gardener of the world, be Thou my 
physician. 

And save Thy saints. 

There is pain in my forehead ; my body is burning ; my 
heart ^ is in anguish ; 

Such pangs have been produced in me that there is no 
medicine for them. 

The name of God, a pure nectareous water, is the best 
medicine in the world. 

Bhikan prayeth, may I by the guru’s favour obtain the 
gate of salvation ! 

The bliss which Bhikan finds in devotion 

Such a Name, a priceless jewel, I have obtained as the 
reward of meritorious acts. 

With several efforts I put the jewel m my heart ; however 
much I tried to conceal it, it would not be concealed. 

Though one try to utter God’s praises, they cannot be 
uttered ; 

They are like sweets to a dumb person. 

My tongue is happy in repeating, mine ear in hearing, and 
my mind in thinking on God's name. 

Saith Bhikan, both mine eyes are satisfied ; wherever 
I look there is God 

' Karej * ; as in Latin, the liver is used here for the heart. 



417 


SUR DAS 

The Sur Das, one of whose hymns is found in the 
Granth Sahib, must. not be confounded with Sur Das, 
a blind poet famous in the north of India as the author 
of the Sur Sugar. The Sur Das with whom we are 
concerned was a Brahman born a. d. 1528. On 
account of his beauty he was surnamed Madan 
Mohan, an epithet which means that he bewitched 
Cupid himself, and it was said that his external and 
internal eyes bloomed like the lotus flower. He 
became highly proficient in music, poetry, and 
kindred arts, and at the same time possessed all 
the joy, comfort and pleasure to be obtained from 
esoteric divine knowledge. He sang of love, the 
first and greatest of the divine passions which form 
the proper subjects of poetry. As soon as a verse 
issued from his mouth it became celebrated. It is 
said that, even in that age of bad roads and slow 
locomotion, it would reach four hundred miles in 
a day as if it had acquired wings for flight. 

The Emperor Akbar, who admired poetical talents, 
appointed Sur Das governor of the province of 
Sandila. Its capital is in the present district of 
Hardoi in Oudh. His administration appears to 
have been by no means successful. The ordinary 
land revenue of Sandila was thirteen lakhs of 
rupees per year, but it was all spent by Sur Das in 
feeding holy men. When he heard of a contem- 
plated inspection of his province and the collection 
of its revenue, he fled to avoid the consequences of 
his too profuse generosity. When the officials 
arrived to take the revenue, they found stones in 
the sealed treasure-chests instead of money. Each 
chest was labelled with a slip containing these 
lines 

Sandila yields its thirteen lakhs ; 

They’re eaten up by men who pray ; 

E e 


SIKH. VI 



4i8 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

So Sur Das Madan Mohan now 

At dead of night hath run away. 

The Emperor on reading these verses said that 
eating was an excellent thing, but absconding was 
not a course to be commended. He was even 
pleased to learn Sur Das’s generosity and service 
to saints, and accordingly wrote an order par- 
doning his offence and expressing satisfaction at his 
devotion to holy men, but at the same time re- 
questing him to appear before him. Sur Das said 
that it was a thousand times better to wipe the 
shoes of holy men than be governor and revenue 
collector of a province, and he refused to appear 
before Akbar. Todar Mai, Akbar’s Prime Minister, 
could tolerate it no longer. He said to the Emperor, 
‘ If such people can with impunity spend the money 
which belongs to the state and then abscond, there 
will be an end to all government.’ Under the 
circumstances Akbar altered his resolution and 
ordered that Sur Das should be imprisoned. The 
poet’s jailor was named Timir Das. The word Hmir 
means night or darkness ; and the word das, if 
pronounced with a short vowel, means ten. From 
his prison the poet sent the Emperor the following 
couplet, which in the original contains a pun on the 
name of the jailor. 

One night brings darkness which a small lamp lights ; 

O may the sun king Akbar save me from Ten Nights ! 

Sur Das was immediately released from prison and 
the governor of the jail obtained the sobriquet of 
Ten Nights from the pun on his name. 

Sur Das subsequently wrote a stanza in which 
he prayed that the title of shoe-holder to the 
saints of God might be conferred on him. A holy 
man, to put him to the test, told him he was 
going to see the great lord Madan Mohan, also an 
epithet of Krishan, and asked him to keep watch 



SUR DAS 419 

over his shoes till he returned. Sur Das with great 
pleasure took up the saint’s shoes and said, ‘ Up 
to the present my wishes have only been expressed, 
but now they are fulfilled.’ The high priest in col- 
lusion with the sa’int several times sent a man to 
call Sur Das while holding the shoes. He refused 
to come until he had completed the menial service 
he had undertaken. The high priest and the saint 
were both highly pleased with Sur Das’s devotion. 

Sur Das passed the remainder of his life in forest 
tracts in the worship and contemplation of God in 
the society of holy men. His shrine is near Banaras. 

The following hymn of Sur Das in the Sarang 
measure on the happiness of communion with God 
is found in the Granth Sahib. 

The people of God dwell with God. 

They dedicate unto Him their bodies and souls ; all they 
possess they dedicate unto Him. While voicing His name 
they become intoxicated ^ with divine pleasure. 

On beholding Him men become free from sin, and obtain 
all things. 

After gazing on His beautiful face, there needs nothing 
else. 

He who forsaketh God and desireth any one else, is like 
a leech on a leprous body. 

Sur Das, God hath taken my soul into His keeping and 
granted me deliverance ® in exchange. 

In the Granth Sahib of Bhai Banno, the fol- 
lowing hymn of Sur Das in the same measure is 
also found. The ordinary Granth Sahib only con- 
tains the first line. The hymn was originally copied 
into the Granth Sahib of Kartarpur, but a pen was 
subsequently drawn through it and sulphate of 
arsenic rubbed over it for more complete erasure. 

^ Jhok, the falling of the head in deep thought or absorption. 

* Ih parlok, the next world, by which is understood the joy of the 
next world, that is, absorption in God and deliverance from trans- 
migration. 


E e 2 



420 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The reason for its erasure- has not been explained. 
The subject of the hymn is the old one — Evil com- 
munications corrupt good manners— as stated by the 
old Greek poet Menander. 

O man, abandon the society of those who turn away 
from God ; 

In association with them evil desires are produced, and 
devotion is interrupted. 

What availeth it to give milk to a serpent to drink ? It 
will not part with its poison. 

What availeth it to bathe an elephant in the river ? He 
will soil his body as before.^ 

What availeth it to a crow to peck at camphor, or to 
a dog to bathe in the Ganges ? 

What availeth it to a donkey to be smeared with fragrant 
aloes, or to a monkey to wear jewels on his body ? 

Sinners are like stones ; the arrows of divine knowledge 
pierce them not, even though a quiverful be discharged. 

Saith Sur Das, O God, this black blanket cannot be dyed 
another colour.^ 

^ This verse is omitted in some recensions of Bhai Banno’s Grantli 

Sahib. 

2 A blanket made of natural black wool cannot be dyed. The 
meaning is that the man who turns away from God cannot be re- 
generated. 


Grant to Thy Sikhs the gift of Sikhism, the gift of the 
Guru’s instruction, the gift of faith, the gift of confidence 
in Thee, and the gift of reading and understanding the holy 
Granth Sahib. 



INDEX 

Pref. stands for Preface, Int. for Introduction, and n for note. 


Abchalanagar (Nander), v 220, 
246. 

Abdali, vi 69 n4. 

Abdul QMir Jilani, vi 362 n i, 

387- 

Abdul Rahim Ansari, vi 362. 

Abdul Shakur of Sarsa, vi 366. 

Abdulla, bard, iv 6, 187. 

Abdulla Khan, Subadar of Ja- 
landhar, iv 105. 

Abdulla Shah, son of Shaikh 
Farid, vi 375. 

Abhijit, ii 1 12 n i. 

Abhyagat, ii 233 n i. 

Abraham, Musalman story of, vi 
127 n 2. 

Accounts, former Indian practice 
of settling, vi 251 n 

Achal Batala, i 157 n 2. 

Acquisitions, six, vi 273 n. 

Acrostics, G. Nanak’s Hindi, i | 
3; Persian, i 12; Kabir’s, vi 
181. 

Acts in human birth attach to 
the soul, i 67 n 1 ; result of, 
i 198 n I, 335 n I ; two kinds 
of, hi 225 n I ; vi 90 n2, 147 
n I and 2. 

Adanshahis, v 174, 

Adesh, i 213 n i. 

Adh, coin, i 12 n 3. 

Adi Granth, Int. Ixxiii, Ixxv. 

Aditi, Int. lx. 

Adonai, Lord, i 9 n2. 

Adultery forbidden, iv 253 ; v 
no. 

Ages, four, i 4 n6, 235 ; ii 230 ; 
iii 402. 

Agni, Int. Ixiii. 

Ahalya, vi 56 n2. 

Ahinsa, vi 14 1. 

Ahmad Danyal, vi 370 n i . 

Ahmad Shah Durani, iii 10 ; v 
108 n I, 223 n I. 

Aln-i-Akbari, i 157 n i ; vi 362 

^ III, 377 n, 390 ni. 

Ai Panth, i 212 n 4. 

Aj, grandfather of Ram Chandar, 
i 168 n 3. 


Ajamal, ii 339 n I. 

Ajit Singh, son of G. Gobind 
Singh, v 5 1 ; his heroism, 1 30, 
132, 140; sent against Pa- 
thans, 1 54 ; death at Cham- 
kaur, 188. 

Ajit Singh, adopted son of Mata 
Sundari, v 231, 254, 255, 
Ajmer Chand, Raja, v 99, 125, 
136, 145, 170, 172, 175. 
Ajodhan, i 84 ; Shaikh Farid at, 
vi 366. 

Ajudhia, Monkey temple at, iv 
366 ; vi 30. 

Akal, V 261 n4. 

Akal Biinga, iv 3, 32. 

Akalis, iv 4. 

Akal Ustatf v 260 n. 

I Akbar, his religion, Int. xlv, Ivi ; 

i 157 ni ; visits Amar ii 
97 ; summons G. Arjan, iii 
81, 83 ; remits land revenue of 
Panjab,84; addressed as deity, 
iv369; vi 350, 417. 

Akk, poisonous plant, i 288 n i. 
Akshar, vi 189 n i. 

Alahanian, i i89n ; iv 70. 

Alakh, the Invisible, iii 108 n3. 
Ala-ul-Din, last of Saiyad rulers, 
Int. xlii, Ixx. 

Alayar, ii 77. 

Alif Khan, v 51, 154. 

Alim, author of the Rag Mala, iii 
64. 

Alim Singh, v 140, 155, 171, 
Allah, name of God, iii 388 n 2 ; 
V 67 n 2. 

Allahabad (Priyag), place of 
pilgrimage, i 144. n i. 

Almast, Bhai, iv 50, 53, 55. 
Alms, i 39 n 4, 372 n 3 ; ii 206 
n I ; iii 70. 

Alphabet, Indian method of 
teaching, 13; vi 181 ; Guru- 
mukhi, i 256 n i ; ii 56 ; Hindi, 

ii 56; Sanskrit, iii 168 n i. 
Amar Das, Guru, birth, ii 30 ; 

visits Guru Angad, ii 32 ; 
becomes his disciple, ii 32 ; 



422 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Amar Das (continued ) — 
his devotion, ii 35, 40, 42 ; 
punishment of the Tapa of 
Khadur, ii 38, 39 ; appointed 
Guru, ii 43 ; mode of life as 
Guru, ii 58 ; sends Sawan Mai 
to Hard war, ii 60 ; Raja of 
Kangra's visit, ii 61 ; Raja's 
insane queen, ii 62 ; rebellion 
of Datu, ii 64 ; the Sikhs per- 
secuted by Muhammadans, ii 
68 ; prophecy at Kasur, ii 75 
annual gatherings instituted, 
ii 79 ; parable of the saint’s 
son, ii 83 ; Hawaii founded, ii 
87 ; Ram Das visits him, ii 
89 ; Bibi Bhani, the Guru’s 
daughter, married to Ram Das, 
ii 91 ; Emperor Akbar’s visit, 
ii 97 ; hostility of Hindus, ii 
102 ; sent for by the Emperor, 
ii 105 ; Ram Das deputed in 
his stead, ii 106 ; advised by 
the Emperor to placate the 
Hindus by visiting Hardwar, 
ii 1 1 2 ; rules of his religion, 
ii 137 ; tests Ram Das, ii 142 ; 
devotion of Bibi Bhani, ii 143, 
144; Ram Das appointed his 
successor, ii 146; death and 
cremation of, ii 1 50 ; hymns of, 
ii 154; denounces concrema- 
tion of widows, ii 228 n i. 

Ambaia, v 247. 

Ambarik, King of Ajudhia, vi 63 
n 2. 

Amber, ancient capital of Jaipur, 
Int. xlix. 

Ambrosias, five, ii 248 n i ; vi 85 
n I. 

Amils, surveyors, i 18. 

Amrit, baptism, Pref. xix ; v 95 
n I, 

Amritsar, founding of, ii 141 ; 
stages of completion, ii 258, 
267, 270, 276 ; iii 2 ; temple 
and tank, iii 3, g, 20, 33, 440 
n I ; Granth Sahib placed 
there, iii 65 ; visit of Emperor 
Jahangir, iv 32. 

Amritsar Singh Sabha, Author’s 
translation accepted by, Pref. 
xiii, xxix. 

Amro, G. Angad's daughter, ii 
1,31- 


Ana, coin, iv 19 n i.. 

Anal, bird, v 143, 276 n 2, 

Analogy of European and Indian 
conditions in fifteenth century, 
Int. xl. 

Anand, ii 1 17, 130 ; marriage by, 
V 109, 249 n I. 

Anand, grandson of G. Amar 
Das, ii 1 17. 

Anand Ghan, Int. Ixxx. 

Anandpur, founding of, iv 338, 
362 ; V 2 ; invested, v 1 30 ; 
plundered, v 164, 174 ; evacu- 
ated, V 185. 

Ananta, serpent, iv 254 n 6. 

Anatomy, Indian, vi 47, 169 
n 2 and 3. 

Ancestor worship, i 50, 65 n 5 ; 
ii 84 n I ; iv 249, 250 n 4, 346 
n I ; vi 128 n 8. 

Anchorets, vain devotion of, i 41 
n I ; vi 177. 

Angad (Lahina), Guru, meeting 
with G. Nanak, i 183 ; tested 
by him and named Angad, i 
185; ii II; appointed his 
successor, i 187 ; ii ii ; mar- 
riage, ii I ; hved in Khadur on 
becoming Guru, ii 1 1 ; his 
mode of life, ii 15 ; visit of 
Emperor Humayun, ii 19 ; 
cures Chaiidhri’s son, ii 28 ; 
Amar Das’s visit, ii 32 ; 
drought in Khadur, ii 36 ; 
Guru obliged to leave Khadur, 
ii 36 ; appointment of Amar 
Das as Guru, ii 43 ; G. Angad’s 
death and cremation, ii 44 ; 
his sloks, ii 46 ; adoption of 
the Gurumukhi characters foi 
the Gurus’ hymns, ii 56. 

Animation, suspended, vi 16 n 2. 

Ani Rai, son of G. Har Gobind, 
iv 67, 223. 

Anjan, a collyrium, ii 1 19 n 3. 

Anpurna, iv 132 n i, 

Ansavatar, v 274 n 3. 

Antarjami, \d 77. 

Anthropomorphism, Int. Ixi ; vi 
99- 

Antimony, ii 1 19 n 3. 

Aparas, iii 224 n i. 

Apollo, Int. lix. 

Apostasy, Gur Das on, iv 257. 

Arati, i 83 n 3 ; vi 122 n2, 333 n 3. 



INDEX 


423 


Archaisms avoided, Pref. xxxi. 

Archery of G. Gobind Singh, v 
172. 

Ardas, supplication, v 333. 

Arjan, Guru, order to translate 
Granth Sahib into all lan- 
guages, Pref. viii ; birth, ii 93 ; 
sent to Lahore, ii 277 ; Pri- 
thia’s jealousy, ii 279 ; ap- 
pointed his father’s successor, 

ii 281 ; building of Har 
Mandar, hi 9, 12 ; episode of 
Raja Birbar, iii 16 ; visit to 
Cholha, iii 21 ; to Khanpur, 

iii 22 ; founding of Tarn 
Taran, iii 25 ; of Kartarpur, 
iii 26 ; visit to shrine of G. 
Nanak and Sri Chand, iii 27 ; 
his wife’s desire for a son, iii 
29 ; she is sent to Bhai Budha, 

iii 30 ; birth of son Har 
Gobind, iii 35 ; controversy 
with Pandit, iii 50 ; decision 
to compile hymns of Sikh 
religion, iii 55 ; visit to Mohan 
to obtain sacred books, iii 56 ; 
completion of the Granth 
Saliib at Ramsar, iii 60 n i ; 
interviews with poets, iii 62 ; 
declines Chandu’s daughter for 
his son Har Gobind, hi 75 ; son 
betrothed to Narain Das’s 
daughter, iii 76 ; letter from 
Chandu, iii 79 ; marriage of 
Har Gobind, iii 80 ; Guru sent 
for by Emperor Akbar, iii 81; 
visited by Emperor Akbar, iii 
83 ; Emperor remits revenue 
in compliment to Guru, iii 84 ; 
death of Akbar, iii 84 ; Guru 
assists Khusro, hi 85 ; Prithia 
and Chandu plot against him, 
hi 87 ; departure for Lahore 
by Emperor Jahangir’s orders, 
hi 90 ; is tortured, iii 93 ; 
bathes in the Ravi, iii 98 ; his 
last injunctions, iii 99 ; is 
succeeded by Guru Har Gobind 

iv 2. 

Arjani resuscitated, ii 130. 

Arms, advantages of wearing, 
V 102. 

Arnold’s translation of Gitgovind, 
vi 7 n I. 

Arun or Anuru, vi 81 n i. 


As, son of Chitrbir, i 218 n 2. 

Asa ki War, i 218. 

Asam, iv 351 n i. 

Ascetics, exclusiveness of, vi 353 
n I. 

Ashes, use of, v 300 n 2 ; vi 243 n 5. 

Ashtapadi, iii 197 n i. 

Asht Chh§.p, vi 83. 

Asidhuj, V 98 n i. 

Asman Khan, son-in-law of 
Painda Khan, iv 190, 194, 198, 
204, 210. 

Asoka, Int. Iv. 

Asrdr-i-Itrdt-i-Faridif vi 358 n i. 

Aswad of Makka, iv 380 n i. 

Atal Rai, Baba, iv 49 n i, 130, 
lai- 

Atar Singh, Sir, Int. Ixxxvi n. 

Aurangzeb, Pref. xviii ; treat- 
ment of Hindus, Int. xlviii, 
xlix ; iv 277, 298, 300, 303, 
304, 305, 307, 317, 368, 369, 
37S> 3^8, 391 ; v 20, 107, 164, 
179, 201. 

Aurangzeb, sons of, v 229 n i. 

Austerities, G. Gobind Singh on, 
V 271. 

Authenticity of religious books, 
Int. liii. 

Awadh (Oude), vi 61 n 3. 

Azrail, i 178 n i. 


Baba, ii 2 n 2. 

Babar, Emperor, imprisons G. 
Nanak, i iii ; visits him, i 
113 ; succeeded by Humayun, 
ii 19 ; descendants of, iv 379 
n T. 

Babhikhan, King of Ceylon, vi 
24 n 2. 

Badaoni, iii 84. 

Badri Narain, vi 102. 

Badr-ul-Din, Maulana, Farid’s 
son-in-law, vi 378. 

Baghdad, G. Nanak’s visit to, i 
179. 

Bagrian, Lord of, iv 150 n i. 

Bahilo, Bhai, iii 8, 13 ; v 207. 

Bahlol Khan Lodi, Int. Ixxi. 

Bahadur Shah, Emperor, his 
relations with Guru Gobind 
Singh, V 230 ; their interview 
in Agra, v 232 ; his death in 
Lahore, 251. 



424 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Baha-ul-Din Zakaria, vi 363 n i, 


372, 375* 

Bahia villages, iv 294. 

Bairagi,i 141111, 161, 332; vi 105. 

Bairars, v 204 n i, 226. 

Beiisakhi festival, iii 26 ; iv 290. 

Bajra, iv 291 n i. 

Bakaia, iv 69 ; G. Teg Bahadur 
at, .329, 331* 

Bakrld, vi34i. 

Bala, Int. Ixxviii, Ixxix, Ixxx, 
Ixxxvii. 

Bali, portions of offerings, i 279 
n 2 ; iv 346 n i. 

Bali, son of Prahiad, vi 63 n 4. 

Balkrira, i 2. 

Ballu, Bhai, with G. Amar Das, 
ii58»ii7- 

Balmik, iii 414. 

Balwand, Musician, ii 15, 21, 23, 
253 - 

Bamdev, vi 36. 

Bam Maragis, iii 348 n i. 

Banaras, i 61 n 2 ; US/; saw 
at, i 274 n I ; iv 304 ; visit of 
Gobind Rai, iv 365 ; vi 27, 30, 
124, 131, 314 n 3, 138 n I. 

Banda, early history of, v 237 ; 
career in the Panjab, 246 ; 
execution of, 253, 

Bandai Khalsa, v 250. 

Bandishar, iv 27 n 2. 

Bania, iii 67. 

Banno, compiler of the Granth 
Sahib, i 41 n 5 ; iii66 ; vi i, 419. 

Baptism of Sikh recruits, Pref. 


XXV ; V 95 n I. 

Bar, tract in Pan jab, Int. Ixx. 
Bards employed by Guru Gobind 
Singh, V 83, 161, 314 n i. 
Barley rolls, iv 346, 

Barmaid, Indian, vi 155 n 2. 
Baroda, H.H. the Gaekwar of, 
Pref. xxvii. 

Barwanal, i 63 n 3. 

Basaii, V 1 41. 

Basant, Indian spring, i 371 n i. 
Basarka, ii 35, 66. 

Basava, horse dealer, iv 218. 
Bataia, birthplace of G. Nanak’s 
wife, i 19 n i, 109, 157, 158. 
Bathing, G. Nanak on, i 146, 152, 
177 n I, 372 ni; iii ii ; 
Hindu times for, ii 254 n 2 ; 
G. Gobind Singh’s injunctions 


Bathing (continued ) — 
regarding, v 16 1 ; Kabir on, 
vi 214. 

Bawa Wali of Kandhar, i 172. 

Bawan, V 262 n 4. 

Bawan Akhari, iii 168. 

Beauty, thirty-two marks of, vi 
64 n I. 

Bedis, V 294. 

Beni, Pandit, ii 134; Bhagat, 
vi 88. 

Bentinck, Lord W., Pref. xxii. 

Ber tree, i 122 ; ii 142. 

Betel, use of, iv 179 ; ingredients 
of, 244, 248 n 4 ; as lip-salve, 
vi 256 n 3. 

Betrothal ceremony, iii 76. 

Bhagat Mai, iii 415 n ; vi 2, 3, 5, 
20, 36, 37 n 2, 86, 95 n I, 100 
n I, 102, 119, 126 n I, 131 n i. 

Bhagat Ratandwali of Mani Singh, 
Int. Ixxv, ixxix. 

Bhagats, vi i n i. 

Bhagata of Granth Sahib, vi 1 ; 
authorities for their lives, vi 2. 

Bhagauti, iii 108 n i. 

Bhagauti ki War, v 81. 

Bhagaivad Gitay vi 124 n i ; G. 
Har Kishan's reading of, iv 32 1 . 

Bhago, Indian heroine, v 2 1 3, 2 1 5, 
220. 

Bhagwan Gir, iv 288. 

Bhagbhari, presents a robe to 
the Guru, iv 61. 

Bhagirath, i 145 ; ii 262 n i ; 
vi 162 n 5. 

Bhagtu, Bhai, ii 272 n i ; iv 276, 
290, 291. 

Bhai, meaning of, Int. Ixxiv n ; 
ii 5. 

Bhairo, mutilator of idol, iv 218. 

Bhai Rupa, iv 151. 

Bhana, Bhai, son of Bhai Buddha, 
iv 125, 142; sent for by G. 
Har Gobind, iv 222 ; conse- 
crates G. Har Rai, iv 235. 

Bhang, i 120, 174 ; v 153 ; vi 71 

314- 

Bhangani, battle of, v 35. 

Bhani, Bibi, daughter of G. Amar 
Das, ii 30 ; marriage with Ram 
Das, ii 91 ; devotion to her 
father, ii 144 ; birth of her son, 
ii 93- 

Bharthari, King of Uj jain, i 169 n 3 



INDEX 425 


Bhatinda, legend of, v 221, 222 
n I. 

Bhattewal, vi 39. 

Bhawani, v 262 n 3. 

Bhikan, Bhagat, vi i ; his 
hymns, 416. 

Bhikan Khan, v 20, 30, 40, 42. 

Bhikan Shah, Saiyid, iv 358, 366. 

Bhikha, bard, ii 85. 

Bhikhia, betrothal of his daugh- 
ter Jito, V 2. 

Bhim Chand, Raja of Bilasp>ur, 
V 5, 7 ; visit to G. Gobind 
Singh, 8 ; desires elephant, 8 ; 
scorns Guru, 9 ; quarrel with 
Fateh Shah, 27 ; subsequent 
war, 38, 50. 

Bhoi, Rai, Int. Ixxi. 

Bhringi, iv 247 n 5. 

Bhujangam, Jogi belief, iii 360 
n I. 

Bhup Chand, Raja of Handur, 

v 126, 131. 

Bias, river, -ii 34, 42, 66, ^09, 150 ; 
iv 102. 

Bibaris, ii 84 n i. 

Bibeksar, tank, iv 48. 

Bidhi Chand, iii 22 ; iv 4, 35, 84, 
89, 96, 108, III, 1 14; early 
history of, iv 154 ; recovery of 
horse for Guru, iv 158 ; goes 
disguised as magician for 
second horse, iv 175 ; at battle 
of Nathana, iv 181, 186; at 
battle of Kartarpur, iv 204 ; 
visit to Budhan Shah, iv 213; 
sent to Bay of Bengal, where 
he met Sundar Shah, iv 216, 
225 ; death, iv 226. 

Bidur, ii 331 n I ; iii 415 ; vi 
41, 252. 

Bigha, land measure, iii 252 n i. 

Bigotry of Muhammadans, Int. 
Ixxxvi. 

Bijli Khan, Nawab of Gorakhpur, 

vi 139. 

Bilaspur, capital of Kahlur, v 6. 

Bilawal, ii 229 n i. 

Binaipai, v 221. 

Bindhiachal, v 270 n i. 

Bindraban, i 57 ; vi 347 n i. 

Birbar, Raja, iii 15. 

Birth, human, vi 289 n i, 404 n i. 

Bishan Singh, Raja, iv 348 n i. 

Bisiar, G. Nanak’s visit to, i 93. 


Bismillah, i 240 n 5 ; vi 259 n i, 
3 < 54 - 

Body, compared to puddle, i 21 
n 4 ; formation of, 198 n i ; 
gates of, vi 16 n 2, 169 n 2 and 
3 ; mystical divisions of, 180 
n I. 

Bohr tree, ii 39 n i. 

Books, sacred, of Muhammadans, 
i 167 n I ; of Hindus, ii 192. 

Boons, four, iii 121 n 1. 

Brahma, god of Creation, i 40 
n 3, 215 n I, 300 n I ; ii 193 
n I ; iv 254 n 4, 255 ; sons of, 
vi 128 n 7, 201, 271 n I. 

Brahmand, mundane egg, iii 230 
n I. 

Brahmans, power of, Int. xxxix, 
Ivii ; duties of, i 255 n i ; 
sacred herbs of, 155 n 1, 307 
n2; cooking of, 132; cus- 
toms, iii 193 n I ; ii 204 n i ; 
iii 317 n 2 ; iv 134 n i ; v 74 
n I ; rules for, vi 104 n 2 ; 
origin of, 146 n i ; Kulin of 
Bengal, vi 338 n 2. 

Brahmaputra, G. Nanak’s jour- 
ney on, i 8 1 . 

Brahm Das, Kashmiri Pandit, i 
163, 167. 

Brahm, Shaikh, i 84, 102, 285 ; 
genealogy of, vi 357. 

Brain, nectar distilled from, vi 
16 n 2, 155 n I. 

Branding with irons, v 279 n 2. 

Breath, five species of, i 99 n i, 
378 n 2 ; suspension of, i 378 
n 2 ; exercises with, vi 16 n 2. 

Bridal dresses at Farid's shrine, 
vi 375- 

Bridge, of floating stones, vi 
40 n 2 ; to heaven, 334 n 4. 

Brihaspati, teacher of gods, wife 
abducted by moon, vi 81 n i, 
138 n 2. 

Brooms, Jains’ use of, i 151 n 2. 

Browning on transmigration, Int. 
Ixvii. 

Budha, Bhai, Int. Ixxiv, Ixxvii, 
meeting with G. Nanak, i 133 ; 
invests G. Angad, ii 1 1 ; find- 
ing of G. Angad, ii 1 3 ; invests 
G. Amar Das, ii 43 ; finchng 
of G. Amar D 3 s, ii 65 ; receives 
rules of religion from Guru, ii 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


426 

Budha (continued ) — 

137 ; invests G. Ram DSs, ii 
146 ; superintends building of 
tank at Amritsar, ii 271 ; 
teacher of Har Gobind, iii 49 ; 
entrusted with care of Granth 
Sahib, iii 66 ; inaugurated Har 
Gobind, iv 2, 4 ; visit to G. 
Har Gobind at Gualiar, iv 24 ; 
organizes sacred concerts, iv 
57 ; returns to forest hfe,- iv 
70 ; visit to Sri Har Gobind- 
pur, iv 120; retires to his vil- 
lage, iv 12 1 ; vision of G. 
Arjan, iv 125 ; death iv, 127. 

Budha, Int. liii, liv ; i 64 ; iv 345. 

Budhan Shah, meeting with G. 
Nanak, iv 140 ; with Gurdita 
at Kiratpur, iv 142 ; visit of 
Har Gobind to, 2 1 3 ; his death, 
215. 

Budhism, sacred books, Pref. v ; 
expulsion of, Int. Iv, Ivii ; 
causes thereof, Int. Iv, Ivi. 

Budhu Shah, v 18 ; bravery 37 ; 
Guru's gift, 45. 

Buh, G. Arjan's prediction on, iii 
22. 

Buiar, Rai, Int. Ixxi, Ixxii, i 2, 
II, IS, 19, 21, 31. 

Bull, supporter of earth, i 200 n 2, 
203 n 2. 

Bumble Bees, vi 264 n i . 

Burnt offerings, i 28 n 3. 

Butter-churning, vi 201 n 2. 

Caesar on German gods, Int. 
lx n. 

Cake, Shaikh Farid’s wooden, vi 
368, 398 n I. 

Calendar, Kabir’s, vi 190. 

Call to prayer, Muhammadan, i 
179 n 2. 

Canals of Malwa, v 224 ; canal 
at Pak Pattan, vi 367. 

Carrion, i 281 n i. 

Caste, Hindu castes, i 16 n r ; 
system attacked by Gurus, 
Ftef. xxii ; i 278, 283 ; ii 
84, 102 ; iv 220, 248 n 4 ; 
V 93, loi ; vi 22, 31, 34, 103, 
104, 126, 286 n 6, 319. 

Catechism, Sikh, iv 264. 

Categories, twenty-five, vi 266 

n4. 


Cattle, trespassing, iii 301 n i. 

Cemeteries, worship of, iv 293 ; 
prayers in, vi 375. 

Census of Sikh pilgrims at Har- 
dwar, Pref. xx, xxi n. 

Ceylon, i 146, 154. 

Chacha Phaggo, iv 345. 

Chaitanya, reformer of Bengal, 
vi 353 n 3. 

Chakars of body, v 261 n 3 ; vi 
91 n 8. 

Chakor, ii 2 n 3 ; iii 154 ; vi 39. 

Chakwi, ruddy sheldrake, i 271 
n I. 

Challenges, customs of, iv 179. 

Chamars, vi 342 n i. 

Chamkaur, battle of, v 186, 202. 

Chana (gram), i 68 n 2. 

Chanakkya, Niti, iv 7 n 4# 

Chandarbans, vi 81 n i. 

Chanda Singh, Bhai, commenta- 
tor of Granth Sahib, i 202 n 4. 

Chandel, Raja of, v 38. 

Chandi, v 80, 83, 289 n i. 

Chandu, Emperor’s Diwan, iii 70, 
79, 87, 98 ; iv 7, 20, 22, 28, 35. 

Chaparnala (Gurusar), iv 61. 

Charanpahul, initiation cere- 
mony, i 47 n I . 

Chatrik, pied Indian cuckoo, i 
83 n 6, 139 11 I ; ii 246 n i. 

Chatur Das, Banaras Pandit, i 61 . 

Chaudhri, ii 28 n i, 29, 136. 

Chaupar or Chausar, i 7 n i, 245, 
03; iii 426 n I ; iv 201 ; vi 

348. 

Chau tala, iv 356. 

Chhajju, water carrier, iv 322. 

Chhitank, weight, iv 278 n i. 

Chhotamir, iv 193, 203. 

Chintamani, jewel, vi 325 n 2. 

Chitaur, ancient capital of Mewfir, 
Int. xlix ; Rfina of, yi 318; 
Mira Bai’s temple, 348 n 3. 

Chitrgupt, i 210 n 2. 

Cholha, i 106 ; iii 21. 

Chronograms, vi 94, 98, 384. 

Chronology, Hindu contempt for, 
vi 3. 

Chuni Mandi, birthplace of G. 
Ram Das, ii 87. 

Circumcision, vi 127 n 2. 

Clarified butter (see Ghi). 

Clothes, dyeing, i 42 n i ; blue, 
i 1 17 n I ; r^, ii 226 n i. 



INDEX 


427 


Concremation of widows, Pref. 
xxii, xxiii ; i 381 ; ii 228 n i. 

Congress of Orientalists at Rome, 
Pref. xxvii, xxviii. 

Conversion, forcible, of Hindus, 
V 174. 

Cooking square, i 43 n i, 51, 132 ; 
vi 129. 

Corn, staff of life, vi 239. 

Coronation Ode, ii 24, 27 n 2, 58, 
253 - 

Courtesan, how saved, ii 338 n i ; 
iv 251 ; vi 213, 396 n i. 

Covetousness inveighed against, 
vi 16 n I. 

Cow, sacrifice of, vi 341 n 4 ; 
calf, vi 1 1 8 n I ; reanimation 
of, vi 220 n I ; vi 28 n i. 

Cow-dung, i 43 n i, 242 n 2. 

Crane, vi 413 n i. 

Creation, i 138 n 4, 195 n 2, 215 
n I. 

Creator, Indian belief in One, 
Int, Ixi ; i 3CX) n i. • 

Cremation grounds, worship of, 
iv 293 ; Kabir on, vi 283 n 2. 

Crows, human corpses thrown to, 
vi 340 n 2. 

Cuckoo, pied Indian, i 83 n 6, 
139 n I ; black Indian, i 139 
n 2. 

Cunningham’s History of the 
SikhSy iv 2 1 n i . 

Customs, Indian, i 39 11 2, 65 114 
and 7, 76 n 2, 1 12 n I, 1 15 n I, 
151-90, 181, 190 n I and 2; 
226-348, 279 n 2 ; hi 202 n 2, 
317 n 2 ; iv 250, 66 ; v 9 n i, 
24 n I ; vi 378. 

Dahistdn-i-Mazdhihj hi 100 n i ; 
iv 21 n, 212, 217, 239. 

Dadhich, vi 108. 

Dadu, saint, v 227. 

Dadupanthis, vi 140. , 

Daityas, ii 160 n i. 

Dakaits, vi 20. 

Dal, ii 32 n I ; vi 1 1 1 n 3. 

Dalla village, ii 22, 66 ; iv 51. 

Dalla Singh, v 223, 226. 

Dam, ii 1 14 n i. 

Damdama, ii 35 ; iv 336. 

Damodri, wife of G. Har Gobind, 
iii 80 ; iv 50, 56, 76, 151, 223, 

Damri, coin, i 16 n 2. 


Dance, religious, i 183, 305 n i ; 
V 22 ; vi 211 n 2. 

Dand, v 275 n 3. 

Dani, Bibi, daughter of G. Amar 
Das, ii 30, 89. 

Dan Singh, v 21 1, 217. 

Dara Shikoh, iv 277, 298, 300, 
302, 303. 

Daroli, iv 51, 54, 146. 

Darud, iii 419 n 2. 

Darwesh, i 55. 

Dasarath, iv 271 n r. 

Dasahra, ii 254 n 2. 

Dasu, son of G. Angad, ii i , 42, 44. 

Daswen Padshah ka Granth, v 
223 n I. 

Dattatre, ii 69 n i ; iv 288. 

Datu, son of G. Angad, ii i, 42, 
44, 63 ; iii 59. 

Daula Shah, of Gujrat, iv 64 n 2, 
123. 

Daulat Khan, i 33, 36, 37. 

Daya Kaur, mother of G. Angad, 

ii I. 

Daya Kaur, mother of G. Ram 
Das, ii 87. 

Daya Ram, father-in-law of G. 
Har Rai, iv 225. 

Daya Singh, one of the five 
beloved of G. Gobind Singh, 
v 91, 140, 1 59, 168. 

Dayal, Raja of Bijharwal, v 52. 

Deadly sins, i 13 n i. 

Dead, disposal of the, ii 222 ; vi 
340 n 2. 

Death, belief in existence after, 
Int. Ixv, Ixix ; i 89 n i, 201 
n 4 ; ii 302 ; G. Har Gobind 
on, iv 34 ; messenger of, vi 
226 n 3 ; of holy men, vi 230 
n 3 ; noose of, vi 42 n 3 ; 
havoc created by, vi 409 n 3 ; 
god of (see Dharmraj), river 
Jamna protects from, vi 198 
n 4 ; as angler vi 285 n 5. 

Death at will, i 181 ; ii 117 ; hi 
3, 100 ; iv 64, 224, 298. 

Defilement, Gurus deprecate 
Hindu ideas of, i 47, 51, 132, 
185. 

Dehra Baba Nanak, i 180; iv 
127, 288. 

Dehra Dun, residence of Ram 
Rai, V. 17. 

Deogiri, vi 32. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


428 


Dera Ghazi Khan, i 123. 

Destiny regulated by the Su- 
preme Deity, i 178 n 2, 214 
n 2 ; ii 322 n I ; iii 1 54 n 3 ; iv 
114 ; V 122 ; vi 68 n I. 

Devaki, mother of Krishan, i 57 
n I, 305 n4. 

Devi Mahdtamya, see Durga Sapt 
Shati, 

Devotees, self-immolation of, i 
274 n I. 

Devotions, Sikh, i 136; nine 
forms of, iii 108 n 2. 

Dhak-tree, vi 280 n i, 295. 

Dhaka, iv 352. 

Dhanna Bhagat, vi i, 105, 106 
n 2 ; hymns of, 109. 

Dhariwal, vi 39. 

Dharm Das, successor of Kabir, 
vi 141 n I. 

Dharmraj, god of death, i 126 
n I, 201 n 4 ; ii 148 ; iii 178 
n I, 277 n 5, 417 n I ; vi 42 
n 3, 61 n 4, 210 n 3, 285 n 5, 
292 n 2. 

Dharmsai, i 47 n 2. 

Dhatura, vi 71 n 3. 

Dhaulpur, battle of, v 230. 

Dhava plant, i 158 n 4. 

Dhilwan, V 209, 225. 

Dhir Mai, son of Gurditta and 
grandson of G. Har Gobind, 
birth of, iv 129; his treachery, 
iv 202 ; aspires to be Guru and 
takes possession of Granth 
sahib, iv 213 ; message to 
Emperor , Shah Jahan, iv 215 ; 
his continual disloyalty and 
disobedience, iv 208. 

Dhoti, i 239 n 2, 240 n 4 ; v 147 
n I ; vi 92 n 5. 

Dhru, i 215 n 3 ; iii, 414 ; vi 24. 

Dhubri, capital of Kamrup, iv 
3S6. 

Dialects and languages of the 
present work, Pref. v, vi, xv, 
xxxi, xxxii, xxxiii. 

Digambar, i 310 n 2 ; ii 336. 

Dihli, ii 20; iv 15, 24; v 295 
n 3 ; vi 28, 366, 373, 375. 

Dikpals, v 299 n i. 

Dilawar Khan, v 55. 

Dina, v 200, 207. 

Din Beg, Muhammadan General, 
V 124. 


Dipaipur, i 106. 

Directions, ten, vi 192 n 2. 

Disciples, duties of, i 75 n 4. 

Dit Singh, Bhai, Pref. xxx ; 
Int. Ixxxvii ; v 84 n i. 

Divination by sacred books, Int. 
Ixxxv. 

Diwali, ii 79 n I ; vi 295 n i. 

Diwana faqirs, v 218. 

Doab district, ii 109 ; iv 4, 102. 

Dogras, i 46 n 5. 

Donkey, use of, iii 165 n i ; 
Sitala’s, vi 57 n 2. 

Doulagarh, capital of Bengal, i 
169 n 3. 

Dowson’s Hindu Mythology, i 382 
n I. 

Draupadi or Panchaii, iv 408 
n I ; vi 104. 

Dravidian country, G. Nanak’s 
visit to, i 147. 

Dress, nobleman's, iv 227 ; Sikh’s 
V 95, 147 n I, 215 n I ; God 
without distinctive, v 285 n 2. 

Drum of G. Gobind Singh, v 5 n i , 

Duahty (Dwait), i 165 n 5 ; vi 
66 n I, 309. 

Dukhbhanjani, ii 142, 269 ; leper 
at, 267. 

Dums, minstrels, i 33, 52 n i. 

Duni Chand, i 129 ; v 129, 133, 
134- 

Durbasa, vi 47 n 4. 

Durga, goddess, i 138 n i, 166 
n 6, 183 ; ii I n I, 3, 133 ; iii 
6 n I, 45 ; V 60, 61 n I, 1 14 n I, 
286 n I ; vi 57 n 2, 1 17. 

Durga Prabodhy v 84 n i. 

Durga Sapt Shatiy v 80 n 2. 

Duryodhan, Kaurav prince, iv 
408 n I ; vi 252. 

Dwaraka, i 144 n i ; ii 93 ; v 
279 n I ; vi 23, 30, 53 n I, 1 13. 

Dying thoughts, effect of, i 67 
n I ; vi 80 n I. 

Earrings, banker’s, vi 279 n i . 

Earth, nine ancient divisions of, 
i 30 n I ; flora of the, i 282 n i ; 
support of, V 225. 

Ecstasy, Jogis’ state of, vi 17 n 2, 
91 n 6. 

Education, Indian system of, i 3. 

Effort encouraged, i 253. 
world as, i 1 16 n 2. 



INDEX 


429 


Elders, ii 234 n i. 

Ekshabdis, iii 108 n 3. 

Elect, i 202 n 3. 

Elements, five, i 178 n 4 ; ii 198 
n I ; of body, vi 169 n 2, 3. 

Eleocarpus, berries of, vi 93 n 2. 

Elephant, raising of the emperor 
Ibrahim Lodi's, i 56 ; saved 
by thinking of God, iii 41 5 n i ; 
presented to G. Gobind Singh, 

V 4 ; made drunk for battle, 

V 134; men's fights with, v 
135 n I ; trapping of, vi 172 
n I. 

Elliot, Sir Henry, History of 
India, Int. xlix n. 

Ellora, caves of, vi 32. 

Elphinstone's History of India, 
iv 350 n 2. 

Emanation from Primal Being, 
Soul an, Int. Ixviii. 

Eminabad, or Saiyidpur, i 43, 

End of world, G. Arjan on, iii 161. 

English occupation of» India, 
Guru's prophecy, Pref. xviii, 
xix ; iv 381 ; G. Gobind Singh 
on, V 107, 157; account of 
death of Banda, v 252. 

Equahty, G. , Nanak’s principles 
of, i 192 ; of man, Kabir on, 
vi 249. 

Eternal life, food of, ii 221, 

Ether, i 178 n 4. 

European and Indian conditions, 
analogy of, Int. xl. 

Exaltation of brain, vi 246 n 4, 5. 

Exercises, devotional, of Sikhs, 
i 136 ; iv 252. 

Existences, i 5 n i ; vi 42 n i, 63. 

Exultations of poets, vi 10 n i. 

Faqirs, customs of, i 230 n i ; iii 
360 n 2, 429 n ; v 274 n i, 300 
n2, 303n3; vi iin 1,379; rules 
for, 386 ; clothes, 401 n 3. 

Farid, Shaikh, i 52 n 3, 84, 92 ; 
his penance, iv 60 ; vi i ; his 
life, 356, 414. 

Faridkot, iv 4 n ; vi 381, 382. 

Farishta, historian, vi* 383 n i, 
'384 n I. 

Farrukli Shah, Empeipr, v 25 1, vi 
359 - 

Fasts, Hindu, ii 240 ; iii 420 n 2 ; 
eleventh day, vi 25, 51. 


Fatah Shah, Raja of Garhwal, v 
8 , 16, 18 ; marriage of daugh- 
ter arranged, v 24 ; quarrel 
with Raja Bhim Chand, v 27. 

Fatah Singh, great grandson of 
Bhai Bhagu, v 226. 

Fatah Singh, son of G. Gobind 
Singh, V 60, 97, 195 ; death of, 
V 198. 

Fatahgarh, fort, v 129. 

Fate, i 178 n 2, 214 n 2. 

Father-in-law's house, world as, 
i 74 n 7. 

Fatiha, Quran, i 125 n i. 

Faust, iii 238 n I. 

Feet, reverence of the, iv 255. 

Festivals, ten Hindu, iv 254 
n 3 - 

Fevers, three, vi 73 n i. 

Fig-tree, vi 137. 

Filial duties of Sikhs, iv 270. 

Firdausi, poet, v 205 n 2. 

Fire, five fires, i 70 n 2 ; penance 
of five fires, i 358 n i ; a 
purifier, iii 221 n2; inherent 
in timber, iii 339 n i ; sacri- 
ficial, iii 17. 

Firmament, ii 231 n i ; Muham- 
madan conception of, vi 155 
n 4 . 

Firozpur, iv 4 n. 

Firoz Shah Tuglak, Emperor, 
Int. xliv, Ixxi. 

Five rivers, land of, Pref. xxv. 

Flesh, G. Nanak on, i 47. 

Flora of the earth, i 282 n r. 

Food, unlawful, i 39 n 2 ; thirty- 
six palatable dishes, i 97 n 2 ; 
sacred, i 182, 185 ; of eternal 
life, ii 221 ; G. Har Rai on 
impure, iv 281 ; Malak Das, 
iv 343 ; for manes, iv 346 n i ; 
Brahman's, v 61 ; Hindu 
sacred, v 114 n i ; impure, v 
152 n I ; vi 319 ; distribution 
of, V 105. 

Fool, association with, ii 235. 

Four days, i 187 n 3 ; Ages, i 4 
n 5, 

France, v 286. 

Frog in a well, vi 323 n i. 

Fruit of immortality, Gopi 
Chand's, i 169 n 3, 

Funeral service of Sikhs, i 190 
n 3 - 



430 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Gaekwar of Baroda, H.H. the, i 
Pref. xxvii. i 

Gainda, son of Dcsu, iv 340. 

Gajja Singh, Mahant, Pref. xxvi. 
Gajmoti, lii 311 n i. 

Gandharbs, v 319 n 2. 

Ganesh, i 138 n 2 ; vi 35, 58 n 2, 
93 n I, 138 n 3. 

Ganga, wife of G. Arjan, iii i, 29, 
90 ; iv 3, 12, 33, 49, 69. 

Ganga Ram, merchant, iii 9. 
Ganga Ram, cousin of G. Gobind 
Singh, V 2. 

Ganga SSgar, vi 105. 

Gangasar, iii 26. 

Gangeris, v 273 n i. 

Ganges, Pref. xx ; i 144 n i, 
294 n 4 ; ii 254 n 2 ; iii 26 ; 
iv 365 ; vi 69 n I, 151 n 3, 
268 n 2. 

Garhia, Bh§.i, of Kashmir, iv 123. 
Garments, five, iv 188 n 3. 

Garur, or Garuda, vi 29 n i, 81 
n I, 87 n 2. 

Garur Puran, iv 123. 

Gate, i 159 n I. 

Gatha, iii 434 n i, 

Gaur Brahmans, vi 105. 

Gawar, iii 208 n 2. 

Gaya, i 64 ; iv 346, 347 n i ; vi 

30. . 

Gayatri, 1 166 n 4, 237 n i ; ii 
108 ; vi 58 n I. 

Ghar, i 278 n i. 

Ghara, iv 170 n 2. 

Ghari, i 5 n 2 ; vi 28 n i, 400 n i. 
Ghazni, King of, vi 359, 370. 
Gherar, iv 102. 

Ghi, i 243 n I ; iv 276. 

Ghogha’s repentance, iv 367. 
Ghulam Muhai-ul-Din, historian, 
V93- 

Ghuman, vi 35, 39. | 

Ghumand Chand, Raja of Kan- j 
gra, V136. 

Ghyas-ul-Din Tughlak, Emperor, I 
vi 390. 

Girdhari, shop-keeper, ii 79. 
Gitgovind, vi 5 ; English transla- 
tion of , vi 7 n 1,9. 

Gobind, founder of Goindwal, ii 

34. 

Gobind Singh, Guru, Pref. xii, 
xvi, xviii, xxv ; Int. xlix, hi, 
Ixiii, Ixxiv, Ixxvii ; birth, iv j 


Gobind Singh (continued) — 

357» 359 n I ; Bhikan Shah’s 
visit, iv 358 ; practises arms, 
iv 363 ; departure for Anand- 
pur, iv 365 ; visits Chhota 
Mirzapur, Banaras, Ajudhia, 
Lakhnau, Lakhnaur, and Kirat- 
pur, iv 365, 366, 367 ; arrival 
at Anandpur, iv 368 n i ; his 
father’s affection, iv 371 ; 
message from his father in 
prison, iv 383 ; his answer, iv 
385 ; execution of his father, 
iv 387 ; becomes Guru, iv 389 ; 
cremation of G. Teg Bahadur’s 
head, iv 390 ; practice of 
archery, v i ; Vichitar Natak, 

V I n I ; his companions, v 2 ; 
his marriage, v 2 ; Raja Ratan 
Rai’s presents, v 4 ; army in- 
creased and drum made, v 5 ; 
visit of Raja Bhim Chand, v 7 ; 
effort of the latter to obtain 
elephant, v 8 ; Guru’s refusal, 

V 13 ; preparations for war, 

V 15 ; departure for Nahan, v 
16 ; fort built at Paunta, v 1 7 ; 
visit to Ram Rai, v 20 ; com- 
poses poetry, v 22 ; death of 
Ram Rai, v 22 ; Guru’s depar- 
ture for Dehra Dun to punish 
masands, v 23 ; resumes quarrel 
with Raja Bhim Chand, v 26 ; 
war declared, v 29 ; disloyalty 
of Pathan soldiers, v 31 ; 
Guru’s description of Paunta 
battle, V 39 n I, 44 ; gifts to 
Budhu Shah, v 45 ; visit of 
Rani of Raipur, v 48 ; returns 
to Anandpur, v 49 ; reconcilia- 
tion with Raja Bhim Chand, 

V 5 1 ; Ajit Singh born, v 5 1 ; 
battle of Nadaun, v 53 ; Zora- 
war Singh born, v 55 n i ; 
alliance with Raja Gopal, v 58 ; 
Jujhar Singh born, v 59 ; Fatah 
Singh born, v 60 ; interview 
with Kesho Brahman, v 62 ; 
Ram Avatar translated, v 67 ; 
the Guru on idolatry, v 67 ; 
dialogue of the princess and 
the Brahman, v 69 ; •transla- 
tion of Hindu works, v 83 ; 
decision to abolish masands, 

V 86 ; on hair, v 89 ; tests - 



INDEX 


431 


Gobind Singh (continued ) — 
devotion of Sikhs, v 91 ; estab- 
lishes the pahul and the 
Khalsa, v 93 ; address to his 
Sikhs, V 93 ; preparation of 
Amrit, v 95 ; rules for mem- 
bers of the Khalsa, v 95 ; his 
own baptism, v 96 ; advocates 
wearing of arms, v 102 ; visits 
to his kitchen, v 105 ; on 
sacred music, v 106 ; pro- 
phecies on advent of the 
English, V 107, 157 ; pre- 
scribes rules for Sikhs, v 109 ; 
envoy from hill chiefs, v 114 ; 
preparation of sacred food, v 
1 14 ; rules for salvation, v 1 16 ; 
surprised by hill chiefs, v 120 ; 
complaints against the Guru 
to the Emperor, v 121 ; de- 
feat of Emperor’s troops at 
Anandpur, v 124; hill chiefs 
combine against the Guru, v 
1 27 ; battle, v 130;, siege, v 
132 ; repeated complaints to 
Emperor Aurangzeb, v 137 ; 
the Sikhs depart to Nirnioh, 

V 138 ; plot to assassinate the 
Guru, V 139; he retires to 
Rasali, v 141 ; visits Bhabaur, 

V 14 1 ; returns to Anandpur, 

V 142 ; discountenances wear- 
ing jewellery, v 149 n i ; in- 
veighs against tobacco, v 153 
n I ; Ajmer Chand causes 
renewal of hostilities, v 154; 
victory of the Sikhs, v 155 ; 
further instructions to the 
Sikhs, V 157 ; iny)erial forces 
again attack the Guru, v 162 ; 
siege of Anandpur, v 168 ; the 
Guru proves the treachery of 
the hill chiefs, v 178 ; letter 
from Emperor, v 179; desire 
of the Sikhs for capitulation, 

V 180 ; safe conduct promised, 

V 1 84 ; evacuation of Anand- 
pur, V 185 ; renunciation deeds, 

V 1 84 ; march through Kirat- 
pur to Ropar, v 185 ; the Guru 
proceeds to Chamkaur, v 186 ; 
and sends members of his 
family to Dihli, v 1 86 ; again 
attacked, v 187 ; appoints five 
Sikhs to the Guruship, v 1 89 ; 


I Gobind Singh (continued ) — 

escapes to Machhiwara forest, 
v 190 ; his mother arrested, v 
195 ; death of his mother and 
sons, V 198 ; liis Zafavndmay 
v 201 ; deputation from Man- 
jha Sikhs, v 21 1 ; defeat at 
Khidrana, v 213 ; visit to 
Dalla at Damdama, v 219 ; 
rejoined by his wives, v 219 ; 
dictates the Granth Sahib to 
Mani Singh, v 223 ; Dalla bap- 
tized, V 223 ; the Guru fines 
himself at Dadudwara, v 228 ; 
consulted by Emperor Baha- 
dur Shah, V 230 ; visits Dihli 
and rears a temple to his father, 

V 230 ; arrival at Agra, v 232 ; 
religious discussion with Baha- 
dur Shah, V 232, 233 ; de- 
mands Wazir Khan’s life, v 
234 ; travels with Emperor, 

V 235 ; visits Puna and pro- 
ceeds to Nander, v 238 ; gives 
Banda a mission, v 239 ; 
Guru’s wife sent to Dihli, v 
240 ; the Guru attacked with a 
poniard, v 241 ; wounds re- 
open, v 242 ; appoints the 
Granth and the Khalsa his 
successor, v 244 ; death, v 
245 ; compositions, v 260 ; 
the Guru on God, v 262 ; on 
penances and austerities, v 
270 ; baptismal rites, v 263, 
282. 

Gobind Singh, Sadhu, author of 
Itihds Guru Khalsa^ iv i n i, 
204 n I. 

God, man’s conception of, Int. 
Ixii ; Moses’ conception of, Int. 
Ixvi; Greek and Sikh do., 
Int. Ixii n, Ixiii ; not anthropo- 
morphic, Int. Ixiii, Ixiv ; as 
husband, i 6 n 3 ; as Bairagi, 
i 141 n I ; assayer, i 355 n 2 ; 
releitionship to man, iii 1 1 8 ; 
orders to God, iii 193 n i ; 
man’s account with, iii 194 n 2 ; 
conferrer of blessings, iii 21 1 
n I ; uncreated, iii 260 n i ; 
as milk, 318 n i ; creation, iv 
J7 n2; as destroyer, v 77; 
servants of, v 103 n i ; dwell- 
ings of, V 67 n 2 ; immortal, v 



432 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


God (continued)— 

243 ; source of bravery, v 261 
n4, 313 n I ; omniscience of, 
263 n I ; greatness of, v 269 ; 
infinite, v 305 n i ; Author of 
all acts, V 308 n i ; above 
censure, v 312 n i ; universe 
evolved from, 331 n i ; belief 
in unity of, vi i ; source of 
souls, VI 17 n 2 ; omnipresence, 
vi 41, 292 n 5 ; iii 83, 120 n i, 
150, 337 n I ; iv IS n 2, 146, 
254 n 5, 370; V 98 n I, 233; 
vi 32 n I, 124. 

God of death, see Dharmr§,j. 

Godavari river, v 236. 

Goindwai, i 107 ; ii 34, 68, 87, 
284 ; iv 32. 

Golden Temple, iii 3, 9, 10. 

Golkanda, v 5 1 n i . 

Gomti, vi 202 n 2. 

GonabSi, mother of Namdev, vi 

17. 

Gonda, Bhai, iv 284. 

Gong, vi 400 n i. 

‘ Good people ', iii 229 n 2. 

Gopai Chand, cousin of G. 
Gobind Singh, v 2, 

Gopaipur, vi 23. 

Gopi Chand, King of Bengal, i 
169 n 3, 

Gorakh, or Gorakhnath, i 41 n 2 ; 
shrine of, i 172 ; ii 140. 

Gorakhmata, i 59 n i ; iv 50. 

Gotrachar, vi 209 n 7. 

Gram, i 68 n 2. 

Grandfather's duties, ii 234 n i. 

Granth Sahib, languages of, Pref . 
vi, XV ; sanctity of, Pref. xvi ; 
contents of, Int. li ; G. Gobind 
Singh, Int. li, Iii ; Dharmsai, i 
47 n 2 ; Gurumukhi adopted 
for, by G. Angad, ii 56; Har 
Mandar built for its reception, 

iii 9; G. Arjan’s compila- 
tion, iii 59; arrangement of 
hymns, iii 61 ; emperor -orders 
erasure of hymns, iii 91 ; 
Granth entrusted to Bhai 
Budha, iii 66 ; slok sung at 
opening of, iii 183 n i ; Banno’s 
and Bhai Bidhi Chand's copies, 

iv 189 ; Granth appropriated 
by Dhir Mai, iv 213 ; G. Har 
Gobind's trial of Ram Rai and 


$ 

Granth Sahib (continued) — 

Har Krishan, iv 3 1 1 ; brought 
to G. Teg Bahadur, iv 334 ; 
returned to Dhir Mai, iv 337 n ; 
Tenth Guru's Granth at Dam- 
dama, iv 393 n i ; at Raipur, 

V 48 n I ; G. Gobind Singh 
on mispronunciation of words, 

V 106 ; editions of, v 223 n i. 

Grih (Grab), iii 305 n 2. 

Guahar, iv 22 n i. 

Guberpatis, Count A de, Pref. 

xxvii, xxviii. 

Ghudda, DiXvana, v 218. 

Gugga, V 158 n I. 

Gujari, wife of G. Teg Bahadur, 
iv 331, 344, 348, 357, 364, 379, 
386 ; V 5, 195, 199. 

Guiab Rai, grandson of Suraj 
MaUiv 363 ; y 2, 49, 185, 257. 

Gul Bagh, horse, iv 157, 16 1, 187. 

Gumti, vi 61 n 3. 

Gurbaksh Singh Bhai, or Ram 
Kaur,». Int. Ixxvii ; 19 n i ; 

V I n 1,95, 137. 

Guy BildSy Pref. xiii ; i v i n i , 
168 n I, 368. 

Gur Das, Bhai, Int. Ixiii, Ixxiii, 
Ixxiv, Ixxv, Ixxxvi ; iii 55, 82, 
83 ; on religion before advent of 
G. Nanak, i 100 n 2, 191 ; on 
succession of G. Angad, ii 12 ; 
on accession of G. Ram Das, ii 
149 ; visit to G. Ram Das, ii 
264 ; writes at Arjan's dicta- 
tion, ii 60, 63 ; appointed to 
spiritual duties at Har Man- 
dar, iv 13 ; on difficulties of 
Sikhism, iv 133 ; G. Har Go- 
bind's test, iv 134; flight to 
Banaras, iv 135 ; sent back to 
Amritsar under arrest, iv 137; 
death, iv 144 ; analysis of 
Sikh religion, iv 241. 

GurdSs, iv 308. 

Gurdaspur, i 109 ; vi 39, 40. 

Gurditta, son of G. Har Gobind, 
iv 56 ; his son Dhir Mai born, 
iv 129; Gurditta adopted by 
Sri Chand, iv 130; founded 
Kiratpur, iv 140 ; his son Har 
R§i born, iv 145 ; battle of 
KartSrpur, iv 203 ; kills As- 
man Khan, iv 210 ; raises cow 
to life, iv 220 ; death, iv 221, 



INDEX 


433 


Gurdwara, i 47 n 2. 

Gurmat Prahhdkar^ ii 254 n 2. 

Gurmat Sudhdkar, iii 6 n i. 

Guy Ttrath Sangrah, iv 64 n 3, 
321 n I. 

Guru, meaning of, i 4 n 3 ; true, 

iii 251 n I, 265 n I, 316 n 2 ; 

iv 59 n I. 

Gurumukhi, Int. 1, Ixxxvi, Ixxxvii ; 
lives of G. Nanak, Int. Ixxiii; 
Panjabi alphabet, ii 56 ; iii 
50, 82. 

Gurus, lives of, Pref. xv, xvii ; 
Int. Ixxvi, Ixxvii ; i i ; ii i, 
58, 253 ; iii I ; iv i, 275, 315, 
331 ; simplicity of language 
of, Pref. vi ; disciples’ love 
for, iv 261 ; twenty- two at 
Bakala, iv 332. 

Gurusar, temple, iv 61, 187 ; v 
207 n I. 

Gyani, Pref. vi, vii, ix, xiii, xiv, 
xxxiii. 

Gydn Parbodhf v 308. 

Gy^n Ratanawali, Int! Ixxv ; 
i 182 n 3. 

Gyandev, vi 27 n i, 30. 

Hadis, iii 19 n I ; vi 386. 

Haidarabad, Nizam of, v 246 n i. 

Hair, i 224 n i ; v 90 n i, 91, 97, 
136, 255, 258 n I, 300 n 2 ; vi 
209 n I, 225 n 2. 

Haiyat Khan, revolt of, v 20. 

Haji, i 166 n 5. 

Halaku, captor of Baghdad, vi 
359 n 2. 

Hamid, Khalifa, vi 376, 377. 

Handal of Jandiala, Int. Ixxx, 
Ixxxi ; ii 262. 

Hansi, vi 366. 

Hanuman, i 382 ; iv 158 ; v 53, 
114 n I ; vi 3, 56 n 2, 81 n i. 

Haqiqat, i 13 n 2. 

Har, month, iv 373. 

Har, God’s name, ii 330 n i. 

Harchandauri, mirage, iii 306 n i, 

Hardw3,r, ii 87, 109 ; iii 26. 

Hare’s flesh, v 152 n i. 

Har Gobind, Guru, birth, iii 35 ; 
life attempted by Prithi Chand, 
iii 37* 39* 47 J attacked by 
small-pox, iii 42 ; recovery, hi 1 
47 ; education by Bhai Budha, { 
iii 49 ; marriage, iii 80 ; ap- i 

F 


Har Gobind (continued ) — 
pointed successor of G. Arjan, 

iii 90 ; adopts a martial style 
of dress, iv 2 ; enlists soldiers, 

iv 4 ; mode of life, iv 5 ; corre- 
spondence with Chandu, iv 8 ; 
message from the Emperor 
Jahangir, iv ii ; departure for 
Dihli, iv 14 ; saves life of 
Emperor, iv 18 ; hostility of 
Chandu, iv 20 ; the Guru sent 
to Gualiar fort, iv 21 ; visited 
by Bhai Budha, iv 24 ; made 
surety for Rajais, iv 26 ; re- 
visits Emperor, iv 28 ; punish- 
ment of Chandu, iv 30 ; visited 
by Empress Nur Jahan, iv 31 ; 
hostility of Mihrban, iv 36, 37 ; 
horse bought for him by Sujan 
seized by Emperor's order, iv 
38 ; Guru visits Mian Mir, iv 
41 ; protects Kaulan, iv 47 ; 
enlists Pathans, iv 52 ; miracle 
of pipal-tree, iv 53; birth of 
son Gurditta, iv 56 ; Har 
Gobind’s return to Amritsar, 
iv 57 ; birth of son Atal Rai, 
iv 68 ; son Teg Bahadur born, 
iv 70 ; remonstrance of the 
Sikhs, iv 76 ; Sikh appropria- 
tion of Emperor Shah Jahan’s 
white hawk, iv 79 ; prepara- 
tions for vacating Amritsar, iv 
8 1 ; takes part in the battle, iv 
88 ; imperial envoy proposes 
peace, iv 90 ; Ruhela selected 
as residence during the rains, 
iv 10 1 ; Guru's interview with 
Gherar, iv 103 ; founding of 
Sri Har Gobindpur, iv 105 ; 
expedition of Abdulla Khan, 
Subadar of Jalandhar, against 
Guru, iv 107 ; battle of the 
Bias, iv 108 ; kills Abdulla 
Khan, Karam Chand, and 
Ratan Chand, iv 116; takes 
a last farewell of Bhai Budha, 
iv, 125 ; returns to Amritsar, 
iv 128 ; Baba Atal and Mohan, 
iv 130; death of Baba Atal, 
iv 1 31 ; Gur Das’s pride pun- 
ished, iv 134; arrest of Gur 
Das, iv 137 ; betrothal of Teg 
Bahadur, iv 138 ; visits Sadhu 
and Rup Chand, iv 1 50 ; found- 


SIKH VI 



434 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Har Gobind (continued ) — 
ing of Bhai Rupa, iv 1 5 1 ; Bidhi 
Chand, iv 153, 154; recovers 
horses, iv 158, 178 ; battle of 
Nathana, iv 18 1 ; Guru kills 
Lala Beg and obtains victory, 
iv 185, 186 ; marriage of Teg 
Bahadur, iv; 189 ; dismissal of 
Painda Khan, iv 193 ; revenge 
of the latter, iv 195 ; battle of 
Kartarpur, iv 204, 205 ; death 
of Painda Khan, iv 209 ; tenets 
of the Sikhs, iv 219; anger 
against Gurditta, iv 220 ; visit 
of Anand Rai, iv 228 ; pre- 
parations for death, iv 231 ; 
contumacy of Dhir Mai, iv 232 ; 
on the celebration of the Holi, 
iv 235 ; consecration of Har 
Rai, iv 235 ; G. Har Gobind’s 
death, iv 238 ; his five sons, 
iv 275. 

Hari, ii 329 n i. 

Hari Chand, father-in-law of G. 
Har Gobind, iii 77 ; iv 50, 146. 

Hari Chand, Raja of Handur, v 
24, 36, 38, 41, 43. 44- 

Hari Das, father of G. Ram Das, 

ii 87, 91. 

Hari Das, Governor of Guaiiar 
fort, iv 22, 23, 26, 

Harike, ii i, 29. 

Haripur, Kangra, ii 60. 

Harishchandar, son of Trisanku, 

iii 306 n I . 

Har Krishan, Guru, son of G. 
Har Rai, birth, iv 315, in- 
stalled as Guru, 314; age on 
succession, iv 315 ; Aurang- 
zeb's summons, iv 318 ; Raja 
Jai Singh’s embassy, iv 320 ; 
Guru’s departure for Dihh, iv 
320 ; discussion on the Bhag- 
wat Gita, iv 321 ; message to 
Aurangzeb, iv 322 ; Guru’s 
power tested, iv 324 ; seized 
with fever, iv 325 ; small-pox 
developed, iv 327 ; death and 
cremation, iv 330. 

Har Lai, Pandit of Banaras, ii 63, 
430 - 

Har Mandar, temple, iii 3, 9, 10, 
14; iv 13, 14, 336; V 108 n I. 

Harnakhas, father of Prahlad, ii 
160 n I. 


Har Rai, Guru, son of Gurditta 
and grandson of G. Har Go- 
bind, bom, iv 145 ; betrothal 
of, iv 225 ; tenderness for 
flowers, iv 227 ; consecration 
as Guru, iv 235 ; mode of life, 
iv 276 ; his standing army, iv 
277 ; cure of Emperor's son,, 
iv 279 ; the poor woman’s 
bread, iv 280 ; adventure with 
a python, iv 282 ; visit of the 
hill Rajas, iv 287 ; Bhagat 
Bhagwan, iv 288 ; episode of 
Bhagtu, iv 291 ; patronizes 
the Marhaj tribe, iv 293 ; 
receives a visit from Kala and 
his nephews Sandali and Phul, 
prophesies Phul's greatness, iv 
294 ; Gaura protects Guru’s 
family, miracle of Guru, iv 
297 ; Aurangzeb’s ascension, 
iv 300 ; Dara Shikoh seeks 
the Guru’s protection, iv 301 ; 
the Guru sent for by Aurang- 
zeb, fv 304 ; Ram Rai sent in- 
stead, iv 307 ; Har Krishan 
chosen as the Guru’s successor, 
iv 3 1 1 n I ; death of G. Har 
Rai, iv 314. 

Hasan Abdal, i 171. 

Hastinapur or Dihh, i 169 n i ; 
vi 28. 

Hat used by faqirs for initia- 
tion, iv 188 n I. 

Hath Jog, i 228 n 2 ; vi 90. i 

Hathi Singh, v 254, 256. 

Hawk, Emperor Shah Jahan’s, 
iv 79 ; parable, v 216. 

Hazara Singh, Bhai, Pref. xii, 

XXX,' 

Hazare Shabd, v 326, 

Heart reversed, vi 222 n i ; lotus 
in, vi 243 n i. 

Heaven, Kabir on, vi 1 39 n ; 
Muhammadan conception of, 
vi 155 n 4 ; described by nega- 
tives, vi 165. 

Hells, seven, v 284 n i ; Kabir 
on, vi 139 n I. 

Hem Kunt, golden peak, v 296 
n I. 

Hermit, see Sanyasis. 

Heron, i 46 n 2. 

Hide, uses of, vi 317, 

Hikayat, V 260 n i. 



INDEX 


435 


Hillock hurled at G. Nanak, i 172. 

HimSitL Nala, stream, v 176. 

HimaJayas, i 144 n 1. 

Himat Singh of Jagannath, v 92, 
185. 

Hinduism, Sikh reversion to, 
Pref. xxiii ; Int. Ivi, Ivii ; 
remarkable prophecies, Pref. 
xviii; under Jahangir, Int. 
xlvi; under Aurangzeb, Int. 
xlvi-xhx ; Muhammadan rule, 
Int. xli-xliv, xlix ; vitality of, 
Int. Ivii ; hi 43, 61, 71, 96 n i, 
202 n 2 ; iv 272 ; vi 54 n i ; 
90 n 5, 95, 97, loi, 102, 104 
n 2, 107 n I, 1 18, 119 n i, 192 
n 4 . 

Hindus, four sects of, vi 95. 

Hingula, goddess, v 286 n i. 

Hira Ghat, v 239. 

Hira Singh, H.H. the Raja of 
Nabha, Pref. xxvi. 

Hoi, goddess of small-pox, vi 
295 n I. 

Hola Mahalla, Int. Ixxxvl n. 

Holi, Saturnalia, i 65 n 7 ; iv 233 
n 3 * 

Horn, i 28 n 3 ; hi 204 n 2. 

Honour, protecting, iii 44 n 3. 

Horns, blowing of, i 60 n 3. 

Horse, iv 39, 156, 161, 169, 179, 
341 ; vi 54n i, 156. 

Hour, ambrosial, ii 248 n i. 

Hujra, iii 18 n 5 ; vi 385. 

Huma, see Anal. 

Human birth, i 335 n i. 

Humayun, i no n i ; ii 19, 20. 

Hunchback, ii 338 n 2. 

Husain Shah, faqir, ii 137. 

Husband, God as, i 6 n 3 ; Indian 
husband a god to his wife, i 76 
n 4 . 

Hymns, of G. Nanak, i 261 ; of 
G. Angad, ii 46 ; of G. Amar 
Das, ii 154 ; of G. Ram Das, 
ii 286 ; of G. Arjan, iii 102 ; 
of^G. Teg Bahadur, iv 393 ; of 
G. Gobind Singh, v 261 ; of 
Jaidev, vi 15 ; of Namdev, 
vi 40 ; of Trilochan, vi 78 ; 
Sadhna, vi 87 ; Beni, vi 88 ; 
Ramanand, vi 105 ; Dhanna, 
vi 109; Pipa, vi 119; Sain, vi 
121 ; Kabir, vi 142 ; Rav D^, 
vi 321 ; Mira Bai, vi 355 ; 

F 


Hymns {continued) — 

Shaikh Farid, vi 391 ; Bhikan, 
vi 416 ; Sur Das, vi 419. 

Ibn Batuta, historian, Int. xliii. 

Ibrahim Lodi, King of Dilih, i 56, 
119 n I. 

Id festival, iv 156 n i, 245 n 6 : 
vi 341 n 4. 

Idols, i 372 ; idol defiled by 
Namdev, vi 22 ; stone, vi 33, 
299 n 3 ; Dhanna’s idol wor- 
ship, vi 106. 

Idolatry, G. Nanak’s deprecation 
of, i 326, 336, 339 ; of ignorant 
Sikhs, hi 6 n i ; Gur Das’s 
Kahit against, iv 273 ; at 
Gaya, iv 347 n i ; G. Gobind 
Singh on, v 148 ; Namdev on 
vi 42 ; Kabir on, vi 140, 163. 

Illusion, vi 160 n i, 281 n i. 

Illustrations to this work, Pref. 
XX vh. 

Imams, vi 415. 

Immolation, self, i 274 n i. 

Immortality, fruit of, i 169 n 3. 

Impurity of birth and death, i 
242, 313 ; of food, i 132 ; iv 
281, 343 ; of songs, i 371 ; G. 
Arjan on, iii 221 n i ; of 
cooking vessels, &c., vi 129 ; 
Ramanuj's practice, vi 98 ; of 
blood, vi 146 n 2 ; Brahman’s 
ideas, vi 16 1 ; Kabir on, vi 258. 

Incantations at places of crema- 
tion, vi 294 n 4. 

Incarnations, G. Gobind Singh 
on, V 94, 274 n 3 ; belief in, vi 3. 

Indar, god, i 168 n i ; vi 53 n 3, 
56 n 2, 108 ; Indar’s bow, vi 
10, 81 n I, 

India, Muhammadan conquest 
of, Int. xli. 

Indian months and seasons, i 
138 n 3 ; philosophy, six 
schools of, i 8 n I ; Max 
Muller’s Indian Philosophy ^ i 
8 n I. 

Infanticide forbidden by Gurus, 
ih 7 1 n 2. 

Inferno f Dante's, v 241 n i. 

Infidels, Kabir on, vi 162. 

Initiation, form of, i 47 n i ; hat 
used in, iv 188 n 1 ; secret, iv 
260 n 3. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


436 


Ink, Indian, i 8 n 2. 

Inscription on G. Arjan’s temple, 
iii 10 1. 

Institutes of Parasar, i 12 n i. 

Instruments, five musical, i 99 
n I ; vi 146 n 4. 

Instruction, ethical, G. Amar 
Das’s, ii 71. 

Intoxicants, vi 320. 

Jra, vi 16 n 2. 

Iraq horses, iv 57. 

Isaiah, Int. liv. 

Ishar (Shiv), i 210 n 3. 

Islands of the world, seven, vi 
341 n 3. 

Islam forced on Hindus, iv 370. 

Ismail, sacrifice of, iv 1 56 n. 

Israr-i-Iirdt-i-Farldi, vi 360 n i, 


Itihds Guru khdlsa, iv i n i, 44 
n 2, 48 n, 104 n. 


Itinerary of Namdev, vi 33 n 1. 
Itineranes of Gurus unsatis- 


factory, Pref. xxvi. 


Jagannath, i 82 ; vi 9, 30, 97. 
jagir, iv 140 n i. , 

Jahan^r, Emperor, Int. xliv, 
xlv, xlvi, Ivi ; iii 84, 88, 90 ; 
iv II, 18, 29, 30, 33, 76. 

Jaidev, vi i ; his wife, vi 6 ; 
composes Gltgovind, vi 7 ; 
King Satvikra’s poem, vi 9 ; 
travels, vi 10 ; his mutilation, 
vi II ; miraculous restoration 
of hands, vi 1 3 ; his wife's 
devotion and the queen's plot, 
vi 14 ; hymns, vi 15. 

Jains, i 151 n i, 152, 280 n 3, 372 
n I ; V 316 n I ; vi 97 n i. 
Jaipur, Raja of, v 232 ; vi 10. 

Jai Ram, brother-in-law of G. 

NSnak, Int. Ixx ; i 18, 29, 32. 
Jai Singh, Raja, iv 299, 318, 322, 

325. 

^ ait Pirana, iv 292. 

Jaitsari ki War, iii 370. 

] alandhar city, ii 66. 

Jalandhar, destroyer of gods, v 
78 n 2. 

' alandhar Do&b, ii 66 ; iii 26. 

] ai-tree, i 19 n 2 ; v 208 ; vi 367. 
] am, god of death, i 2 qi n 4. 

] amila Khatfin, a wife of Shaikh 
jFarid, vi 382. 


Jamha, i 144 n i ; iv 14, 25 ; vi 
198 n 4. 

Janameja, i 169 n i. 

Janamsakhis, Pref. xv, xxvi ; 
Int. Ixxviii, Ixxx - Ixxxii, 
Ixxxiv, Ixxxvi, Ixxxvii ; i 10, 
242 n 3. 

Jand, iii 59. 

Jandiala, ii 262. 

Jandiana, v 223. 

Janeu, sacrificial thread, i 16, 
238 ; iv 219, 371 ; \ 98, 191. 

Jangams, i 133 n 2, 151. 

Japji, i 19s n I ; v 94 n i. 

Japji, Int. Iii; V 94 n i, 261 
n I. 

Jati Mai, warrior, iv 92, 96, 108, 
185, 203, 204, 212, 230. 

Jatis, i 93 n I. 

Jatpura, Guru at, v 194. 

J awdhir 4 -Fartdi, vi 358 n i, 360 
n i, 365. 

Jawalamukhi, sacred volcano, ii 
I n I. 

Jaziya/tax on infidels, ii 108 n i. 

Jehovah, i 9 n 2. 

Jetha, see Ram Das, Guru. 

Jetha, Bhai, G. Har Gobind’s 
captain, iv 4, 12, 24, 30, 32, 
35, 137, 181, 183, 185. 

Jewels, iii 204 n 2. 

Jewellery, worn by men, v 149 

n I. 

Jhabal, iv 85. 

Jhali, queen of Chitaur, vi 14 1, 
318. 

Jihlam, iii 85 ; iv 76. 

Jin, V 1 19 n I. 

Jind, genealogy of Rajas of, iv 
294 - 

Jit Mai, cousin of G. Gobind 
Singh, V 2, 43, 45, 46. 

Jito, wife of G. Gobind Singh, 
V 2, 55 n 1, 59, 60, 95 n I, 
151. 

Jivatama, soul, Int. Ixviii ; vi 
17 n I. 

Jodh, Rai, iv 153, 172, 181, 189, 
198, 190. 

Jodhpur, Raja of, Int. xlviii ; v 
232. 

Jog, i 10 n I, 53 n 2, 54 n 6, 228 
n2, 352 n I ; iii 55 n i, 176 
n I ; vi 16 n 2, 194 n 7, 232 
n 4 ; accessories of, ii 16. 



INDEX 


437 


Jogis, i lo n I, 54 n 7, 6o n 3, 
84 n I, 99 n I, 157 n i, 162, 
225 n 2, 274 n 2, 294, 350 n 2 
and 3, 378 n i and 2 ; ii 16, 72 
n I ; iii 94, 402 n 2 and 10 ; iv 
50, 54, 261 ; vi 199 n 3 ; 243 
n 5, 255, 262 n I and 4. 

Joga Singh, v 138. 

Jojan, vi 37 n I. 

Jones’s, Sir William, translation 
of Gttgovind, vi 7 n I. 

Jot BikdSf V 79. 

Jug, see Ages. 

Jugdwaliy G. Nanak’s poem, i 93. 

Jujhar Singh, v 59, 60, 184, 195, 
198. 

Junagarh, vi 33. 


K’s, the five, v 95. 

Kaaba, Makka temple, i 38 n 6, 
175- 

Kabir Bhagat, i 61 ; 111 332 ; v 
1 13, 310 n I ; authorities for 
life of, vi 122 n 3 ; his com- 
mandments, 125 ; trouble with 
Brahmans, 1 30 ; cures Em- 
peror, 132; charges against 
him, vi 132 ; his persecution, 
vi 132, 133; fictitious ban- 
quet by, vi 134; meets Brah- 
mans, vi 136; death at Maga- 
har, vi 138 ; quarrel about his 
corpse, vi 139; his resurrec- 
tion, vi 140 ; his hymns, vi 
142 ; acrostic, vi 18 1 ; lunar 
days, vi 190 ; week days, vi 
193 ; against parda, vi 213 ; 
sloks, 278. 

Kabirpanthis, vi 14 1. 

Kabit,.G\xx Das’s, Int. Ixxiii^lxxv 
Ixxix ; iii 54 n 2. 

Kabul, i 122 ; vi 359. 

Kachh, V 95, 147 n i. 

Kafni, coat of faqir, vi 401 n 3. 

Kahlur, Raja of, iv 338. 

Kahn Singh, Sardar of Nabha, 
Pref. xxix ; ii 254 n 2 ; iii 6 
n I. 

Kailas, vi 268 n 2, 341 n 2. 

Kaithal family, ii 272 n i ; iv 
343 n I. 

Kal age, i 147, 235 ; ii 312 ; iv 
214. 

Kal bard, ii 56. 


Kala and Karam Chand, iv 272. 

Kalaptaru, tree, growing in 
heaven, iii 204 n i. 

Kale Khan, iv 198, 207, 212 j 
V 20, 30, 33. 

Kalha, v 193, 200. 

Kaliana, Bhai, iii 3, 4, 7. 

Kaljug, i 78 n I ; ii 16. 

Kallar, i 73 n 2. 

Kalpa, vi 61 n i. 

Kalsahar, bard, ii 56. 

Kalu, father of G. Nanak, Int. 
Ixx, Ixxii ; i i, 19, 20, 23, 30, 
97, loi, 135. 

Kalyana, iv 107, no. 

Kam, god of love, i 198 n 5. 

Kamakhsha, goddess, iv 354. 

Kamdhenu, iii 148, 204 n i. 

Kamrup, i 73 n i ; iv 348, 351 
n I, 354» 356. 

Kanaiya, water-carrier, v 173. 

Kanhaiya Misal,‘ v 216 n r, 

Kans, Raja, i 57, 305 n 4 ; vi 
41 n I, 56 n I. 

Kantimati, mother of Ramanuj, 
vi 94. 

Kapalmochan, vi 81 n i. 

Kaparis, i 280 n i ; vi 217. 

Kapila, sage, i 89 n 2 ; ii 262 n i ; 
vi 105. 

Kapura, v 208, 225. 

Kar, Hindu sacred lines, i 225 n i. 

Karah Parshad, i 182 n2; recipe 
for, V 1 14. 

Karir tree, ii 42. 

Karma, or acts, Int. Ixvi ; i 6, 
n 2, 208 n 4 ; manmukh, i 137. 

Karm Bhumi, iii 132 n i. 

Karm Chand, son of Chandu, iv 
106, nr, 113. 

Karm Chand of the Marhaj tribe, 
iv 292. 

Karmo, wife of Prithi Chand, iii 
29, 33, 36, 39, 41. 

Karor, one hundred lakhs, ii 192 
n 2. 

Kartarpur, Int. Ixxiv; i 132, 136, 
180 ; ii 2, 9 ; iii 26 ; iv 52, 
151, 231, 232. 

Kasar, pudding, vi 203 n i. 

Kashi, see Banaras. 

Kashmir, i 163, iii 66 ; Aurang- 
zeb's attempts to convert, iv 
369 n I. 

Kasyapa, i 168 n 2 ; vi 81 n i. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


438 

Kasflr, ii 75. 

Kattu Shah, iv 63. 

Kaul, V 225. 

Kaulan, QSzi’s daughter, iv 43 
n I, 45, 48, 49 n I, 96. 

Kaulsar, iv 48. 

Kaura Mai, i 2. 

Kauravs, i 168 n 6. 

Kauri, vi 55 n i. 

Kedarnath, place of pilgrimage, 
ii 262 n 2. 

Kesri Chand, Raja of Jaswan, v 
27, 51, 128, 135. 

Kesgarh, v 97, 17 1. 

Kesho, Pandit, v 62, 65. 

Khadur, i 182 ; ii i, 7, ii. 

Khaiis, v 317 n I. 

Khaisa, Pref. xi, xiv, xviii, xix ; 
hi 10; V93, 95n i, 96 n 1,97, 

I 99, 128, 147, 155, 156, 157, 223, 
239, 242, 244, 250. 

Khaisa Tract Society, iv 359 n i. 

Khatris, i 106, 381 ; ii 30 ; v 94, 
98. 

Kheda Brahman, ii 133. 

Khem Singh, Sir Baba, Pref. xii. 

Khes, shawl, v 215. 

Khichari, vi 307 n 2, 

Khidrana or Muktsar, v 210, 213, 
214. 

Khir, vi 42 n 2. 

Khivi, wife of G. Angad, ii 1 . 

Khizr, i 147 n i. 

Khuda, i 113 n 2 ; hi 388 n i ; 
V 234. 

Khuldsat-ul-Tawartkhy i 157 n 2 ; 
iv 64; vi 363 n I ; 370 n i, 
384 n I, 391 n I. 

Khuram, Prince, iv 36. 

Khusro, son of Jahangir, Int, 
xliv, xlvi ; hi 84, 85. 

Kiara Sahib, i 15. 

Kikar-tree, i 158 n 5 ; ii 9. 

Kinars, hi 229 n 2. 

Kind Beg, iv ii, 34. 

Kine not eaten by Hindus, i 39 

‘ n 2, 

Kinguri, musical instrument, i 
274 n 2. 

Kiratpur, founding of, iv 140, 
232, 276. 

Kiriya, i 65 n 4. 

Kitchen, establishment of Sikh, 
iv 285 ; V 313 n 2. 

Kitchener, Lord, Prdf. xxix. 


Knowledge, G, Gobind Singh on, 
V 113. 

Kokil, i 139 n 2 ; vi 48 n 3. 

Koiad, or Koiiath, vi 30. 

Kos, vi 37 n I. 

Kotwal, vi 241 n 2. 

Kripai, Udasi mahant, v 34, 39 
n I, 193. 

Kripai, Raja, v 12, 51, 58. 

Kripai Chand, iv 352, 358, 366, 
367 ; V 2, 5, 32, 37. 

Krishan, birth of, i 57 n i ; his 
accomplishments, i 166 n i ; 
168 n7; visits Bidur, ii 331 
n I ; cures hunchback, ii 338 
n 2 ; colour of, i 213 n 2, 215 
n 3 ; h 93 ; v 330 n i ; vi 
53 n 2 ; dances, hi 4, 401 n 2, 
414 n 2 ; iv 255 ; sports, v 22 ; 
incarnation, v 320 n 2 and 3 ; 
Pundarik, vi 23 ; Dwaraka, vi 
30, 32 n I, 41 n I ; nurse, vi 
56 n I ; family, vi 81 n i ; 
Kabir on, 124 n i ; yellow- 
robed, vi 202 n 3 ; patronizes 
Baimik, 339 n i ; Parmanand, 
vi 82 ; temple of, at Mailkot, 
vi 97 ; Valmik, vi 104, 

Krishan Avatar, v 310 n 4. 

Krishanlila, play, i 57. 

Krishan Kaur, wife of G. Har 
Rai, iv 325, 329. 

Kshatri, militant caste, i 16 n i ; 
vi 104 n 2. 

Kucha jji, i 74. 

Kukah, i 142 n I. 

Kumbhak, hi 176 n i. 

Kurkhetar, Int. Ixxiv ; i 47 n 3 ; 
iv 343- 

Kurm, V 27 n i. 

Kurmavatar, i 1 5 1 n 4. 

Kusha, sacred gross, i 142 n i. 

Kuwar, bard, v 59. 

LabSna, rescuer of G. Teg 
Bahadur’s body, iv 388. 

Ladha, Bhai, intercedes for Bal- 
wand and Satta, ii 23. 

Lahina, see Angad, Guru. 

Lahore, Int. Ixix, Ixxvi, Ixxviii, 
Ixxxv, Ixxxvi; i 129, 145 n i ; 
well at, ii 258 ; G. Arjan’s 
visit to, hi 27, 90, 10 1 ; temple 
built by G. Har Gobind, iv 

35. 



INDEX 


439 


Lakh, one hundred thousand, i 
5 n I. 

Lakhmi Das, G. Nanak’s son, i 
29 ; ii 4, 6, 9, 1 1. 

Lakshman, brother of Ram 
Chandar, vi 81 n i. 

Lakshman Sen, King of Bengal, 
vi 5. 

Lakshmi, wife of Vishnu, i 151 
n 3 ; goddess of wealth, i 198 
n 5 ; iii 94 n I ; vi 95, 100. 

Lala Beg, Shah Jahan’s com- 
mander, iv 179, 184, 185. 

Lai Beg, V 152 n I. 

Lai Chand, father-in-law of G. 
Teg Bahadur, iv 138. 

Lai Chand, confectioner, v 42. 

Lai Chand, son of Bidhi Chand, 
iv 225, 226. 

Lalo, Bhai, carpenter, i 43, 109 ; 
ii 13. 

Lalo, Bhai, banker’s son,ii 66, 81. 

Lalu, headman of Khadur, ii 44. 

Lalu, uncle of G. Nanak,*i 26. 

Lampblack used as collyrium, vi 
396 n I. 

Land revenue, system of collect- 
ing, i 18 n 2. 

Lapgaha, captain in army of 
G. Har Gobind, iv 4, 35, 65. 

Langar khana, G. Arjan’s, i 253 
n 2. 

Languages and dialects used in 
Granth, Pref. v, vi, xv, xxv, 
xxxi, xxxii, xxxiii ; forbidden, 
i 12 n I. 

Lanka, i 168 n ^ ; vi ii. 

Lawan, Sikh marriage ceremo- 
nial, ii 334 n I. 

Lentils, vi 372. 

Leper of Dukhbhanjani, ii 267; 
guise assumed by Vishoba, vi 
21. 

Letter, torn, i 1 1 5 n i ; of God’s 
name, vi 38 n i, 157 n 3 ; vi 
189 n I ; thirty-four, vi 330 
n I. 

Libations, Hindu, to ancestors, 
i so, 129 n I. 

Life, four states of, i 309 n i ; 
unequal conditions of, i 289 ; 
four sources of, i 4 n 4 ; as 
night, iii 324 n I ; transitory, 
V 220. 

Lila Ram Diwan, Pref. xxx. 


Lime, vi 286 n 6. 

Ling, vi 52 n 4. 

Lingam, v 69 n i ; vi 21, 69 n 2. 

Literature, sacred, i 12 n i, 205 
n 2 ; G. Gobind Singh’s trans- 
lations of Hindu, v 83. 

Lodi, Pathan dynasty, i 1 19 n 2. 

Lohgarh, iv 57, 82 ; v 129. 

Loi, Kabir’s wife, vi 207 n 6, 214. 

Lotus, of wisdom, i 21 n4, 265 
n 2 ; birth of Brahma, i 300 
n I ; petals, iii 361 n i ; 439 
n I ; V 194 n 5, 232 n i, 273 
n 3, 332 n 2 ; in heart, vi 243 
n I. 

Love, primal, i 369 n i. 

Loyalty, of Sikhs, Pref. xix ; en- 
joined on Sikhs, v 31, 96 n i ; 
IV 265. 

Ludhiana, iv 4 n i ; Panjabi 
Dictionary, vi 1 1 1 n 2. 

Lunar month, ii 1 1 2 n i ; days, 
vi 190. 

Macliindar, Goraknath’s father, 
i 166 n 3. 

Machonochie, Mr. A. F., vi 17 
n4. 

Madan Mohan, vi 417, 

Mddhava Nal Sangit, iii 65. 

Madho, sent to Kashmir, iii 67. 

Madhukari, vi 301 n 3. 

Madhusudan, God, i 7 n 2. 

Madina, i 179. . 

Madiras, i 75 n 2. 

Madras, or Dravidian country, i 
147- 

Magahar, vi 137, 215 n 2. 

Mahdbhdrat, Sanskrit Epic, i 57 
n I, 144 n I, 168 n6, 169 n i, 
269 n 2 ; iii 54 n I ; vi 86. 

Mahadev, G. R5,m Das’s son, ii 
93, 277 ; iii 2, 48, 49. 

Mahalla, Int. li ; v 62 n i. 

Mahan Singh at Muktsar, v 214. 

Mahar Mitha, Rai of Kangar, iv 
153* 

Maharashtar, vi 24 n i. 

Mahipati, author of Bhakta LT- 
Idmrita, vi 2, 4. 

Mahri Chand, G. Gobind Singh’s 
cousin, V 2, 37. 

Mahtab Singh, v 260 n i. 

Mahurat, i n 4. 

Mai Das, Bairagi, ii 93. 



440 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Maimun Khan, v 163.^ 

Maipotre, ii 79. 

Majh ki War, i 152 n 2. 

Majnun’s hillock, iv 14, 28. 

Makhan Shah, iv 333. 

Makka, i 38 n 6, 174, 175 ; vi 258. 

Malar ki War, i 105 n i. 

Malay tree, i 82 n i. 

Malechh, i 204 n 2, 239. 

Maler Kotla, Nawab of, v 197, 
200. 

Maliagar Singh, v 208. 

Malik Bhago, i 43. 

Main Bhai, ii 78. 

Maluk Das, iv 343. 

Main Shah, soldier advised by 
Guru Angad, ii 18. 

Maiwa, iv 4 n I, 174 n 2 ; battle 
of, iv 1 8 1 ; Sikhs from, v 1 82 n. i. 

Man, ten stages of, i 279 ; com- 
position of, i 273 n I. 

Man, weight, iv 66 n i ; vi 38, 
295 n 2. 

Mana, G. Angad ’s servant, ii 20. 

Manak Chand, ii 95, 274. 

Manak Chand, G. Nanak’s great 
grandson, iv 127. 

Mandara, Olympus, i 1 5 1 n 3. 

Mandi, Raja of, iii 4, 7. 

Manes, i 50, 65 n 5 ; iii 70 ; vi 
54 n 2, 1 19 n I, 163 n 2, 388. 

Mangat, iii 66. 

Mango, i 74 n 2 ; vi 48 n 3, 247 
n 2. 

Mani Singh, Bhai, Int. Ixxiv, 
Ixxv, Ixxvi, Ixxix, Ixxxiv, 
Ixxxvi ; iv I n I ; v 223 n i, 
226, 241, 260 n I. 

Manj, Bhai, iii 7. 

Manjha country, G. Arjan’s tour 
through, iii 20 ; iv 4, 102 ; v 
211. 

Manjis, ii 151 n i. 

Manmukh Karm, perverse acts, i 
137 - 

Manohar Das, G. Amar Das*s 
great grandson, iv 222. 

Mansa Devi, wife of Guru Amar 

Das, ii 30, 91. 

Mansarowar, sacred lake in Tib- 
bat, i 357 n I ; ii 18, 267 ; vi 
268 n I. 

Man Singh, v 187, 189, 216, 235. 

Man Singh, Raja of Jaipur, iv 
350 ; vi 2. 


Mansions, lunar, iii 228 n 2, 

Mansur, Husain, Sufi, iv 44 n i. 

Manu, law-giver, i 89 n 2. 

Manuscripts, destruction of Sikh, 
Int. Ixxxiii. 

Mardana, minstrel, Int. Ixxxvii ; 
i 33, 44, 52, 58, 59, 65, 78, 94, 
172, 181. 

Marhaj, iv 179. 

Marhi, i 60 n 4. 

Markand, vi 47 n i. 

Markandeya Puran, v 61 n 2, 
289 n I. 

Marks, sacrificial, vi 99, 125. 

Marriage, i 342 ; iii 71 n 2, 350 ; 

v 24 n I, no, 232, 266 n i ; 

vi 166 n 6, 178 n 2, 209 n 3, 5, 
and 6, 378. 

Maru ki War, ii 229 n, 235 ; iii 
443 n 3. 

Marwahi, or Mahadevi, iv 65, 67. 

Marwar, vi 30. 

Masands, agents or collectors, ii 
271 ;„iii 10 ; iv 3, 364 ; v 23, 
84, 86, 106. 

Masha, i 63 n 6, 1 58 n i. 

Masnad-i-Ali, nobles, ii 271. 

Massa Ranghar, defiler of Har 
Mandar, v 260 n i. 

Matchmakers, Hindu, iii 71 n’l. 

Mathura, bard, ii 285. 

Mathura, Int. xlvii ; iii 72 ; iv 
304 ; V 256 ; vi 30, 140. 

Mati Das, martyr, iv 373, 381, 
382. 

Matta di Sarai, ii i. 

Maula, i 265 n 3. 

Maya, i 4 n 2, 167 n 2 ; iii 139, 
277 n I and 2, 299 ; iv 144 ; 
vi 41, 48 n I, 49, 1 81 n I, 197, 
210 n I, 236 n I and 2, 263, 281 
n I and 5. 

Mazhabi Regiments, v 99. 

Measures, Indian musical, i 3 n i. 

Meat forbidden to Vaishnavs, vi 
89 n 2. 

Medani Parkash, Raja of NShan, 
V 15. 

Merchant, God as wholesale, i 
60 n I. 

Meru, rosary bead, i 151 n 3, 
235 n I ; li 59. 

Metals, eight, i 273 n i. 

Metastasio, i 175 n i. 

Mian,^ title of respect, i 1 17 n 2. 



INDEX 


441 


Mian Khan, Viceroy of Jammu, 
V51. 

Mian Mir, vision of, iii 94 ; iv 
40, 43, 301. 

Mian Mitha, priest, i 123, 128. 

Mihan, devotion of, iv, 342. 

Mihrban, son of Prithi eiiand, iii 
28, 41, 89 ; iv 36. r. 

Milk, iii 3 1 8 n I ; v 300 n 2 ; vi 
146 n 2. 

Milkmaids, vi 10, 219. 

Mill, J. S., Utility of Religion^ Int. 
Ixix. 

Milton’s idea of God similar to 
Sikh, Int. Ixviii. 

Mimes at Guru’s court, v 86. 

Mina, villain, ii 284 n 2. 

Mines, i 4 n 5. 

Mir, Lord, i 1 17 n 3, 

Mira Bai, vi 342. 

Miracle plays, i 223 n 2 ; v 297 
n 2. 

Mirage, iii 306 n r. 

Mirdang, iv 244 n i ; v 287 n i. 

Miriam, mother of Shaikh Farid, 
vi 360. 

Mir Jumla, iv 350. 

Misals, Sikh, v 216 n i. 

Mispronunciation of Grant h, G. 
Gobind Singh on, v 106. 

Missars, i 353 n i. 

Mithankot, i 123. 

Mohan, son of G. Amar Das, ii 
30, 74, 148. 

Mohan, Gurumukh’s son, iv 130. 

Mohri, son of G. Amar Das, ii 30, 
74, 81, 91, 148, 150 ; iii I. 

Mokal, Raja of Faridkot, vi 
381. 

Mokalhar, vi 381. 

Mokhsh, salvation, iii 121 n i. 

Molasses, vi 154 n 5. 

Molesworth, Marathi Dictionary^ 
vi 23 n I. 

Money, Indian, i 12 n3, 16 n2, 
25 n 5, 45 n I, 223 n4 ; ii 114 
n I ; iii 83 n 2 ; iv 19 n i, 

Monier Williams, Brahmanism 
and Hinduism, vi 100 n i. 

Monis, vi 218 n 3. 

Monkeys, trapping of, vi 172 

Monogamy, G. Nanak on, i 100 
n 2 ; V I lo. 

Monotheism, Sikh, Pref, xix ; 


Int. xxxix, Iviii, lx, Ixi ; 
Gobind Singh on, v 328 n i ; 
vi I, 27, 102. 

Months and seasons, i 138 n 3, 
371 ni; lunar, ii 112; iii 
124. 

Moon, Hindu worship of, iii 420 ; 
supposed sections of, vi 193 n i. 

Moore, poet, vi 10 n i. 

Mosaic system, Int. Ivii, Ixvi ; 
i 89 n 2. 

Muazzim, or Bahadur Shah, V59. 

Muazzin, i 345 n i, 

Mubarik Khilji, King of Dihli, vi 
390. 

Muftis, i 40 n 2. 

Mughals, i non i. 

Muhakam Singh, v 92, 135, 140, 
185. 

Muhammad, Prophet, vi 363, 
385. 

Muhammad Azim, Int. xlviii. 

Muhammad bin Tughlak, Em- 
peror, Int. xliii ; vi 28. 

Muhammadan conquest of India, 
Int. xli ; of Turkey, Greece, 
and Otranto, Int. xl ; litera- 
ture, i 12 n I ; sects, i 192 n i ; 
books, i 207 n 2, 

Muhar, coin, iii 83 n 2. 

Muharrim, ceremonies at, vi 384, 

388. 

Muhsan Fani, historian, iv 212. 

Mukalawa, vi 166 n 6. 

Mukhlis Khan, general of Shah 
Jahan, iv 81, 92. 

Muktndma, v 1 16. 

Muktsar, v 210, 213, 214. 

Mula, Karar, i 122. 

Mulla, i 36, 41, 374 n i. 

Muller, Max, Pref. xi, xiv ; his 
Indian Philosophy, i 8 n i. 

Mulowal, Guru’s well, iv 339. 

Multan, town, i 180 ; ii 160 n i ; 
vi 362, 363, 367. 

Mundawani, ii 221 n i ; iii 64. 

Munis, i 210 n I ; ii 16. 

Muqaddami, i 84 n 2. 

Murad Baksh, son of Shah Jahan, 
iv 277, 298, 300. 

Musalmans, instructions to, iii 18. 

Music, Pref. xxvi ; i 3, 99 n i, 
274 n 2 ; V 106, 333. 

Mutasadis, clerks, iv 336 n i. 

Muzang, Lahore, iv 35, 



442 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Mythology, Hindu, vi 8i n i, 56 
n 2, 87 n 2, 104. 


Nabha, Raja of, Pref, xxvi, xxvii, 
XXX ; iv 4 n I ; Raja's temple, 
iv 187 ; descent of Raja, iv 
294 ; Guru's sword, v 46, 313 
n 2 ; vi 386 n i. 

Nabhaji, author, vi 2, 95, 344, 348. 

Nach, dance, vi 21 1 n 2. 

Nagina Ghat, v 239. 

Nagnath, temple at, vi 20, 23. 

Nahan, Raja of, v 47. 

Naina Devi, iv 368 ; v 67. 

Namdev, Bhagat, Int. xliii ; ii 
332 ; hi 332 ; vi 17 n4; his 
birth, vi 1 8 ; betrothal, vi 1 8 ; 
his mother’s complaint, vi 19 ; 
his offering to idol refused, vi 
19 ; becomes dakait, vi 20 ; 
becomes disciple of Vishoba, 
vi 21 ; his repentance, vi 22 ; 
advised in a vision to go to 
Pandharpur, vi 23 ; God re- 
builds his roof, vi 24 ; visited 
by Janabai, vi 25 ; his devo- 
tion tested, vi 25 ; his wife and 
the philosopher's stone, vi 26 ; 
visit from Gyandev, vi 27 ; 
they make preparations for a 
tour through India, vi 27 ; 
visits Dihli, vi 28 ; Namdev 
persecuted by Emperor, vi 28 ; 
miracle of reanimated cow, 
vi 28 n I ; visits Banaras, 
Priyag, Gaya, Ajudhia, Ma- 
thura, Gokal, Bindraban, 
Dwaraka, Marwar, and Kolad, 
vi 30 ; the well at Kolad, vi 
30 ; visits Rameshwar, Pai- 
than, Deogiri, Nasik, and 
Juna^arh, vi 31-2 ; miracle at 
Audhiya Nagnath, vi 31 ; 
death and burial, vi 34 ; 
version of Namdev's life in 
Bhagat Mai, vi 36; Namdev 
said to be son of Bamdev's 
daughter by immaculate con- 
ception, vi 36 ; haunted well, 
vi 37 ; the banker's gold, vi 
37 ; alleged visit to Bhattewai 
and Ghuman, where said to 
be cremated vi 39. 

Namdev Gdtha, vi 21. 


Name, i 9 n i ; of gods, i 138, 
348 n2; hi 56, 279 n 2, 412 
n I ; selection of, vi 123. 

Nanak, Guru, contemporaries of, 
Int. xl, Ixxiii ; rulers in time of, 
Int. xliv ; doctrines, Int. 1, Ixi ; 
birthplace, Int. Ixx ; Bidhi 
Chand’s life of, Int. Ixxxi ; 
Natal month, Int. Ixxxiv ; 
first nine Gurus' pom-de-guerre, 
Int. li ; birth of, i i ; educa- 
tion, i 2 ; his Hindi acrostic, 
i 3 ; Persian acrostic, i 12 ; 
Kiara Sahib, i 15 ; marriage, 
i 18 ; two sons, Sri Chand and 
Lakhmi Das, i 29 ; goes to 
Sultanpur, i 32 ; becomes 
accountant in Sultanpur, i 33 ; 
begins his mission, i 37 ; visit 
to Saiyidpur, i 43 ; miracle at 
Malik Bhago’s, i 44 ; cooks 
a deer at Kurkhetar, i 47 ; 
pretends to irrigate his field at 
Kartaimur, i 50 ; journey to 
Bindraban and Gorakhmata, i 
S 7 * 59 J discourse with Sidhs, 
i 59 ; with Chatur Das Pandit, 
i 61 ; visit to Gaya, i 64 ; 
parable of the shopkeepers, 
i 68 ; meets with Nurshah, i 
73 ; tempted by Satan, i 78 ; 
returns to Talwandi, i 95 ; 
heals a leper, i 107 ; imprisoned 
by Emperor Babar, i iii ; 
release, 1 121 ; converts Duni 
Chand, i 129 ; his Twelve 
Months, i 138 ; meeting with 
Bhai Budha, i 133-4; visits 
Ceylon, i 154; Mount Sumer, 
where he again meets Sidhs, 
i 170 ; travels to Makka, i 174 ; 
miracle at Makka, i 175 ; 
visits Baghdad, i 179 ; Lahina 
(Angad) becomes his disciple, 
i 183 ; ii 2, 4 ; devotion of 
Sikhs tested, i 183 ; ii 6 ; his 
successor Angad appointed, i 
187 ; ii 9 ; death, i 190 ; state 
of religion before his advent, 
i 191 ; Japji, i 195 ; Rahiras, 
i 250 ; Sohila, i 259 ; Asa ki 
war, i 218 ; defence of women, 
i 244 n 2 ; satire on Hindi 
sects, i 355 ; moral command- 
ments, i 372 ; instructions at 



INDEX 


443 


Namdev {continued ) — 

Baisakhi Fair, i 367 ; daily 
practice of, ii 5 ; meeting with 
Budhan Shah, iv 140. 

Nanakamata (Hlibhit), i 59 
n I ; ivso, 52, 54.. 

Nanaki, sister of G. Nanak, Int. 
Ixx ; i 18. 

Nanald, wife of G. Har Gobind, 
iii 77 ; iv 50, 67, 68, 70, 223, 
331, 361, 364. 

Nanak Pavkash^ Int. Ixxvi, 
Ixxviii, Ixxxiv. 

Nand Chand, v 2, 5, 12, 24, 29, 
36, 41, 44, 56, 87, 89. 

Nander, v 220, 236, 238. 

Nand Lai, Bhai, v 79 n i, 102, 
104 n 2. 

Nankana (Talwandi), Int. Ixxii, 
Ixxxv ; i 2, 18. 

Narad, son of Brahma, i 2 1 5 n 3 ; 
vi 218 n 4. 

Narain Das, iii 76. 

Narayan, ii 339 n i ; y 233, 273 
n 2. 

Narbada, river, vi 136. 

Narsi Bamani, temple at, vi 18. 

Narsinh, iii 415. 

Nasihat Nama, i 128. 

Nasir-ul-Din, Emperor, vi 373 
n I. 

Nath, superior of Jogis, i 165 n 4. 

Nauhar, v 226, 227. 

Nau Nidhi, i 150 n 2. 

Necklace of sweet basil, i 61 
n 4 ; vi 93 n 2 ; of eleocarpus 
berries, vi 93 n 2. 

Nectar, of the Name, ii 53 n 3, 
12 1 n I ; tank of, ii 267 ; 
baptismal water, v 95 n i ; 
five nectars enumerated, vi 
156ns. 

Nicholson, General Sir John, 
Pref. xviii. 

Nigura, vi 126. 

Nihaii, ii 12. 

Nihangs, iii 1 10 n 3. 

Nijabat Khan, officer, v 20, 31, 
40, 42, 43- 

Nilgaus, V 305 n 2. 

Nim, vi 247 n i. 

Nima, Kabir's foster mother, vi 
123. 

Niranldlr, God, Sikh conception 
of, Int. Ixiii. 


Nirgun sargun, iii 1 17 n 2. 

Nirjala Ikadashi, or NirnSni, iv 

66 . 

Nirmoh, v 138. 

Niru, Kabir's foster father, vi 
123, 341 n4. 

Nirvan, Int. Ixiv, Ixv ; exempli- 
fication of, Int. Ixv ; vi 17 n I. 

Niwali, Jog feat, i 378 n i. 

Noises in head, i 74 n 5 ; iii 402 
n 2. 

Nom-de-guerre^ Guru's, Int. li ; 
ii 1 3 n I ; of poets, i 9 n 3. 

Nur Jahan, Empress, Int. xliv, 
xlv ; iv 31. 

Nurshah, queen of Kamrup, i 73. 

O, symbol of God, i 64 n 2. 

Oam, vi 16 n 2, 243 n i. 

Oamkar, Ramkali, i 63. 

Oath, V 202. 

Obsequies, ii 150, 153 n i ; Sikh, 
iv 2. 

Observances, Sikh, religious and 
secular, iv 252. 

Ocean, world compared to, i 6 
n I ; of fire, i 63 n 3 ; terrible, 
ii 186 ; vi 143 n 4 ; God's ship, 
vi 172 n 2 ; vi 285 n 5. 

Offerings, burnt, i 28 n 3 ; thir- 
teen Hindu, to manes of 
ancestors, iv 250 n 4. 

Oil Press, Indian, i 125 n 2. 

Omens, futility of, iv 249 ; vi 
176 n 2. 

Omnipresence of God, i 265. 

Ontology, Int. Ixviii. 

Ordinances of Khalsa, v 95, 97. 

Organs of action and perception, 
i 159 n 3 ; 320 n ; iii 401 n 3, 
4, and 5 ; vi 149 n i, 169 n 2. 

Oriental Congress at Rome, pro- 
ceedings of Pref. xxvii, xxviii. 

Ornaments worn by men, v 149 
n I. 

Ouranos, Int. Iviii. 

Ovid, vi 10 n I. 

Oxen, vi 165, 166, 215. 

Padamavati, wife of Jaidev, vi 
6, 13, 14. 

Pahar, vi 28 n i, 400 n i. 

Pahoa, place of pilgrimage, ii 109. 

Pahul, baptism, Int. Ixxvii ; iii 
71 n2; V93, 263. 



444 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Pai, i i88 n I. 

Painda Khan, iv 52, 57, 66, 88, 
98, 128, 142, 192, 195, 194, 
195, 202, 203, 208, 209. 
Painda Khan, Muhammadan 
General, v 124. 

Pains, classified, vi 73 n i. 

Paira, Bhai, iii 3, 53. 

Paisa, ii 12 ; iii 67 ; iv 329, 385. 
Pak Pattan, i 84, loi ; vi 366 ; 

reason for name, vi 367. 

Palki, ii 61 ; iv 228 n i. 

Palma christi plant, vi 325 n 3, 
Palmyra palm, vi 320 n 3 ; 

leaves, vi 320 n 4. 

Panch, i 202 n 3. 

Panch Amrit, vi 85 n. 
Panchardtra of Narad, i 326 n i. 
Panch Mukti, v 97. 

Panch Piyare, v 96. 

Panch Sabd, i 99 n i . 
Pandharpur, vi 23, 27, 33. 
Pandits, i 4 n i ; ii 1 34 ; iii 50 ; 

vi 189 n 2, 314 n 3. 

Panipat, i 52 n 3. 

Panjab, land of five rivers, Pref. 
XXV ; capital of, Int. Ixix ; 
official language, Pref. xxiv, 

XXV. 

Panjabi, importance of language, 
Pref. xxiv. 

Panjab Kaur, wife of Ram Rai, 
V 22, 89. 

Panja Sahib, i 172. 

Panjokhara, iv 320. 

Pantheism, Int. Ixii ; claims of 
Vedantists, 103 n 2 ; vi 27, 99. 
Panth Parkdsht v i n i. 

Papias on Christian religion, Int. 

Ixxxvii n. 

Paper, vi 320 n 4. 

Param hans, explanation of, ii 18. 
Param Singh, v 226. 

Parasar, Institutes 0/, i 1 2 n i , 
Paras Ram, i 168 n 2. 

Parbati, consort of Shiv, i 166 
n 6 ; iii 213 n I ; iv 132 n i ; 
vi 58n2, 334 n 2. 

Parbs, iv 254. 

Parda, Rpa attempts to abolish, 
vi 1 16. 

Pargiter, translator of Markan- 
deya Puran, v 61 n 2. 

Pariah, iii 414 n i. 

Parmanand, vi 82, 84 n i. 


Parmatama, Supreme Being, Int. 
Ixviii. 

Paro, Bhai, ii 18, 66, 77, 79, 81. 
Parrot and simmal-tree, vi 66 n 2. 
Partridge and hawk, parable, v 
216. 

Pasari, vi 75 n i. 

Passions, five evil, i 13 n i, 54 
n 4, 70 n 2, 286 n I ; ii 243 ; 
iii 109 n 4, 309 n i, 328 n i ; 
vi 89 n 2, 149 n I, 154 n 2, 185 
n 2, 206 n I, 227 n i. 

Fatal, Hindu hell, v 284 n i. 
Patalpuri, iv 236. 

Pantanjalif Aphorisms 0/, i ion i. 
Patasha, sweetmeat, v 95. 
Pathan soldiers of G. Gobind 
Singh, V 20, 30, 40. 

Patiala, Singh Sabha of, Pref. 

xxi ; iv 4 n i, 295. 

Patna, birthplace of G. Gobind 
Singh, Pref. xii ; iv 348, 357 ; 

V 305- 

Patti, Tablets. 

Paul, St., Int. Ixiv, Ixviii n., 
Ixxx n. 

Paunta, battle of, v 34, 35. 

Pauri, i 105 n 2, 218 n i. 
Pavilion, bridal, vi 209 n 5. 
Payments of land revenue in 
kind, vi 251 n I. 

Peacock, home of, vi 330 n 2. 
Penances, Hindu, i 136, 358 n i ; 

V 272. 

Pens scattered in Malwa district, 

V 223. 

Periplus of the Erythrean SeUy 

V 236. 

Persian wheel, ii 10 n i, 252 n i ; 

language, i 1 1, 12 n i. 

Pheru, Bhai, iv 276 ; v 86. 
Pheru, G. Angad’s father, ii i. 
Philanthropy, Gur Das on, iv 256. 
Pliilosopher’s stone, ii 301, 345 ; 
vi 26, 317. 

Philosophy, systems of Hindu, 
Int. lix, lx ; i 8 n I. 

Phul, ancestor of the Phulkian 
Chiefs, iv 294. 

Pig as scavenger, vi 300 n 3. 
Pilgrimages reprobated by 
Gurus, Pref. xx, xxi, xxiii ; 

I Hindu places of, i 144 n i ; ii 
I 79 n I ; futihty of, iv 257 ; 
I iv 398 n I ; of Namdev, vi 27. 



INDEX 445 


Pilgrims, census of Sikh at Har- 
dwar, Pref. xxi n. 

Hlibhit, i 59. 

Find, or pinda, i 65 n 2. 

Pipa, Bhagat, vi 57 n 2, 105, vi 1 1 1 ; 
visit to Ramanand, vi 1 1 2 ; be- 
comes faqir, vi 1 1 3 ; pilgrim- 
age to Dwaraka, vi 1 1 3 ; his 
faithful wife Sita, v 1 1 3 ; visit 
to Toda, vi 1 1 5 ; Sur Sen visits 
him, vi 1 16; against parda, 
vi 1 16; secures pardon for a 
cow-killer, vi 1 1 8 ; his hymn, 
vi 1 19. 

Pipal-tree, Guru Nanak’s, i 59 
n 2 ; G. Gobind Singh’s, v 209. 

Pir, i 169 n 2 ; ii 350 n i ; vi 
306 n 3. 

Pitras, manes, vi 54 n 2. 

Planets, seven ancient, iii 305 
n 2 ; vi 269 n i . 

Plants used in worship, i 61 n 4, 
155 n I, 307 n 2. 

Pockets, Hindu substitutes for, 
iii 279 n 3 ; vi 281 n*6. 

Poetry, nine themes of Oriental, 

V 161 n I. 

Pollution, Hindu, 193; of articles 
of worship, vi 327 n 4. 

Polyandry, vi 104 n i. 

Polygamy of Gurus, reason for, 
iii 77 n I. 

Pompeii, Lingam in, v 69 n i. 

Postin, iv 219, 

Posture, dance, i 305 h i. 

Pothohar, Int. Ixxxvi. 

Poushkin, vi 10 n i. 

Poverty, Kabir on, vi 260 n 4. 

Prahlad, saint, ii 114, 160; vi 
67 n I, 128 n 6, 271 n 2. 

Prakrit, iii 63, 434 n i. 

Prdnsangali of G, Ndnak, i 1 56 ; 
iii 53, 55 n I. 

Prayers, five Musalman, i 39 n 5 ; 
of unborn child, vi 302 n 2. 

Prema, lame Sikh, ii 1 36. 

Prithi Chand, son of G. Ram 
Das, ii 92, 279, 281 ; iii i, 2, 17, 
20, 28, 36, 39, 41, 46, 48, 81, 85. 

Prithi Chand, Raja of Dadhwal, 

V 51. 

Prithwi Raj, Int. xli ; vi 359 n 3. 

Priyag, see Allahabad. 

Prohibitions of Khalsa, v 98, 

Promises, sanctity of, v 204. 


Prophecies, Moslem, iv 196 n ; 
of Gurus, iv 381 ; v 107. 

Psyche, i 6 n 3. 

Puna, V 236. 

Punnu and Sassi, story of, v 221. 

Purak, Jog exercise, iii 176 n i. 

Purans, Pref. v ; i 28 n 4, 207 n 2 ; 
iii 402 ; vi 36, 324 n i. 

Puri, G. Nanak's visit to, i 8r. 

Purity of Sikh religion, Pref. xii, 
xxiii. 

Pushkar, v 227. 

Qalandar, a Muhammadan an- 
choret, i 58 n 3. 

Qazi’s claim against G. Har 
Gobind, iv 42 ; complaint to 
Emperor, iv 46. 

Qualities, three, i 89 n 2 ; ii 47, 
198 n I ; iii 172 n 2; thirty- 
two, iii 278 n 2 ; vi 17 n 2, loi 
n 6 ; five forming the garden 
of the world, vi 50 n i. 

Queen, insane, and G. Amar Das, 
ii 62. 

Quoit, V 261 n 3. 

Quran, Int. hii, Ixxviii n. ; i 39 
n 5, 125 n I, 178 n i, 206 n 2 ; 
selecting name in, vi 123. 

Qutb-ul-Din Aibak, Emperor, 
Int. xlii. 

Qutub-ul-Din Bakhtiyar Ushi, vi 
359 n I, 365, 366 n I, 373. 

Rabab, or Rebeck, i 33 n i. 

Radha, or Radhika, v 22 ; vi 8, 
10, 347 n I. 

Rafazis, v 277 n 2. 

Raghuraj Sinh, Maharaja and 
poet, vi 2, 4, 95 n I, 121 n i, 

350. 

Rag Mala, 111 65. 

Rags, musical measures, Pref. 
xxvi ; i 3 n I ; V 335. 

Rahim, i 176 ; iv 370. 

Rahiras, i 250 n i. 

Rahu, demon, i 283 n i ; iii 305 
n 2. 

Rai Jodh, iv 180, 186. 

Raipur, Rani of, v 48. 

Raja Ram of Assam, iv 357 ; v 4. 

Rajindar Singh, Maharija of 
Patiala, Pref. xxvii. 

R&i jog, i 228 n 2. 

Rak&b Ganj, iv 389. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


446 


Ram, iv 370 ; letters of name, vi 
38 n I, 157 n3, 307 n 5. 

Rama, G. Amar Das’s son-in- 
law, ii 142. 

Ramanand Bhagat, vi 93. 

Ram A vatdr, translation of, v 67, 
310 n 3. 

Ramanuj, vi 93. 

Ram 3 ,nu]is, marks of, vi 99. 

RamSyan, epic poem, i 269 n 2. 

Ram Chandar, King of Ajudhia, 
Int. Ixxxii ; i 40 n 4, 113 n i, 
i68 n 3, 216 n 3, 305 n 2, 382 ; 
ii 30, 31 n I ; iii 50 ; iv 158 ; 
V 275 n I, 320 n 3 ; vi 24 n 2, 
30 » 31. 3 S» 40 n2, 52 n6, 56 
n 2, 61 n 5, 81 n I, 100, 263, 
308 n I. 

Ram Das (Jetha), Guru, birth, 
ii 88 ; visit to G. Amar Das, ii 
89 ; becomes his Sikh, ii 89, 
married to Bibi Bhani, ii 91 ; 
his sons Prithi Chand, Maha- 
dev, and Arjan born, ii 92, 
93 ; receives necklace from G. 
Amar Das, ii 10 1 ; deputed to 
Akbar, ii 106 ; expounds faith 
of Sikhs, ii 107 ; sent to build 
Santokhsar, ii 141 ; tested by 
G. Amar Das, ii 143 ; in- 
stalled as Guru, ii 146 ; visit 
of Sri Chand, ii 257 ; tank 
commenced at Amritsar, ii 
258; visits Lahore, ii 258; 
Arjan sent to Lahore, ii 277 ; 
deception of Prithi Chand, ii 
279 ; Arjan sent for and ap- 
pointed the Guru’s successor, 
ii 281 ; Guru Ram Das’s death 
at Goindwal, ii 284 ; hymns, 
ii 286. 

Ramdaspur (Amritsar), ii 276 n i, 

Ramkah, iii 84 n i. 

Ramo, sister of Damodari, iv 51, 
5 S» 151 - 

Ram Rai, son of G. Har Rai, Int. 
Iii; iv 307, 309, 310, 31 1, 312, 
3 i. 5 » 316, 338 ; V 17, 18, 20, 22. 

Ramsar, G. Arjan founds, iii 60. 

Ram Singh, Raja of Jaipur, iv 
348 n I, 355, 360; V58. 

Ramzan, iii 422 n j ; vi 211 n 3, 

361, 389- 

Ranbir Singh, Raja of Jind, Pref. 
xxvii. 


Ranjit, G. Gobind Singh’s drum 

V 6, ^ 

Ranjit Singh, Maharaja, Int. 
Ixxxiii, Ixxxiv ; iii 25 n i ; v 

245 n I, 246 ; vi 39. 

Ranjit Sin^, Sardar of Chi- 
charauh, Rref, xxvii. 
Rankhambh Kala, princess, v 69. 
Ras Mandal, dance, v 22. 

Ratan Chand, iv 105, in, 113. 
Ratti, i 58 n I ; seed or weight, v 

246 n 2. 

Rav Das, Bhagat, ii 332 ; iii 332 ; 

vi 105, 141, 316, 318, 321. 

Ravi, river, i loi, 129, 19 1. 
Rawan, King of Ceylon, i 305 
n 2 ; V 290 n 3 ; vi 3, 24 n 2, 
40 n 2, 207 n 3 and 4. 

Real Thing, vi 79 n 2, 402 n 2. 
Reay, Lord, Pref. xxix. 

Rechak, iii 176 n i. 

Red powder, i 65 n 7, 297 n i ; 
robe, ii 226 n i ; jacket, iii 
291 n I ; colour, iii 319 n i, 
369 n I ; lead, vi 178 n 2, 
Regions of earth, nine, i 30 n i . 
Relics at Nabha, v 224 n i ; 

Shaikh Farid's, vi 363. 
Religions, books of other, Pref. 
V ; causes for new, Int. Iv ; 
with and without State sup- 
port, Iv; religious systems, ii 
190 ; vi 310. 

Religion of the Hindus ^ vi 104 n 3, 
140 n j. 

Religious observances, Sikh, i 83 
n 5, 136, 181 ; iv 252. 

Renan, Int. liv. 

Repetition of Name, i 9 n 2, 49, 
147 ; vi 40 n 2, 60, 1 17, 124. 
Reward of good actions, vi 164 
n I. 

Rice, Mr. L., vi 93 n 3. 

Ridh Sidh, v 333 n i. 

Rikhis, i 207 n 2, 21 1 n i ; ii 
109. 

Ripudaman Singh, The Honor- 
able Tikka Sahlb of Nabha, 
Pref. xxvi. 

Roe, Sir Thomas, English Am- 
bassador, Int. xlv. 

Rome, Oriental Congress at, Pref. 
xxvii, xxviii. 

Rosaries, i 51, 61 ; iv 28 ; v 310 
n I ; vi 93 n 2, 389. 



INDEX 447 


Rossetti on transmigration, Int. 
Ixvii. 

Ruhela, iv loi. 

Rup Chand, Bhai, iv 149, 150 
n I, 152, 172. 

Rupee, i 63 n 6 ; v 233. 


Sachansach, Bhai, ii 62. 

Sach Khand, Int. Ixiv, Ixv, Ixxxi ; 
iv 3, 125, 131, 223, 225. 

Sacrifices, i 28 n 3 ; vi 89 n i, 
211 n3, 247, 315 n2. 

Sacrificial marl^, materials for, 
Int. Iviii, lix ; i 58, 135, 163 ; 
ii II, 43 ; vi 99, 125, 178 n 2, 
286 n 6. 

Sadd, hymn, ii 15 1 ; author of, 
iv 143- 

Sadhaura, v 239, 247. 

Sadhik, i 41 n 4 ; vi 258. 

Sadhna, Bhagat, iv 265 ; vi 32, 
84, 85, 87 n 2. 

Sadhu, holy man, iii 55 ; iv 5. 

Sadhu, son of Sada, iv I47, 148, 
149, 152, 172. 

Sadhu, married to Bibi Viro, iv 
68, 94, 144. 

Safflower, i 86 ni, 176; iii 173 
n I." 

Sagara, King of Ajudhia, ii 262 

n I. 

Sahaj jog, i 228 n 2. 

Sahari Mai, cousin of G, Amar 
Das, ii 276. 

Sahaskriti sloks, iii 29 n 2, 63, 
430 n I. 

Sahib, meaning of, Pref. vi n i. 

Sahib Chand, v 40, 135. 

Sahib Kaur, wife of G. Gobind 
Singh, V 143, 144, 219, 231, 
240, 254. 

Sahij, i 77 n 5. 

Sahijdhari, Int. Iii. 

Saido, Bhai,i 147, 153, 156; ii 13. 

Saif-ul-Din, friend of G. Teg 
Bahadur, iv 373. 

sain, Bhagat, ii 18 ; vi i, 105 ; 
life of, 1 20. 

sain Das, husband of Ramo, iv 
51, 55, 146, 151. 

Saints, iii 292 n i ; iv 400 n i. 

Saiyad Beg, general, v 153, 154, 
162. 

Saiyid Khan, v 162, 163. 


Saiyidpur, Int. xliv ; i 43, 109, 
III, 114, 118, 119. 

Sajjan, Shaikh, i 45, 46 n i, 47. 
Sakat, iii 213 n I. 

Sakhis, V 299 n i. 

Sakhi Sarwar, Hr, iii 7, 419 ; iv 
147 n I, 339. 
sal tree, v 1 3 1 n i . 

Saiagram, sacred stone, i 61 n 3 ; 

iii 4, 50, 51, 52 n I and 2 ; v 
75, 78n2; vi 84. 

Saiavahana, vi 23, 96. 

Salim Shah, vi 29 n 3. 

Saio, Bhai, iii 3, 20, 53 ; iv 12. 
Salvation, means of, ii 134 ; v 
1 16, 123; by repetition of 
Name, vi 40 n 2 ; four degrees 
of, vi 250 n I ; time for, vi 
311 n 2. 

Samana, sacked by Banda, v 247. 
Saman Burj, tower, iv 159. 
Samarmati, Queen, v 68. 

Sambat era, Int. Ixxix, Ixxxiv ; i 
no n I. 

Sampats, six, vi 272 n 6. 

Sanat, i 25 n 5. 

Sanath, vi 67 n 3» 

Sanctuary, Hindu, ii 344 n 2. 
Sanda, vi 67 n i, 128 n 7. 

Sandal, vi 76 n i ; wood, vi 305 
n 2 ; tree, vi 327 n 4 ; used in 
worship, vi 233 n i. 

SandaU, son of Rup Chand, iv 
294. 

Sandhia, v 9 n 2. 

Sandila, vi 417. 

Sanga, Rana, vi 352, 

Sangat Sahib at Nander, v 240, 
Sangatia envoy, v 57. 

Sango Shah, cousin of G. Gobind 
Singh, V 2, 3, 36, 43. 

Sangrana, memorial of victory, 

iv 93* 

Sanskrit, Int. 1 ; burning of 
Sanskrit library at Bihar, Int. 
xhi ; literature, ii no n i, 
134; letters, iii 168 n i; 
tongue, iv 135. 

Sant Das, son of Jiwan, iv 298. 
Santokhsar, founding of, ii 14 1 ; 

iii 2. 

Santokh Singh, Bhai, poet (au- 
thor of Suraj Parkdsh), Int. 
Ixxvi, Ixxvii, Ixxviii ; ii 24 n i ; 

iv 180 ; V I n I, 200, 244 n i. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


448 

Sant Singh of Kapdrthala, Bh§i» 
Pref. X ; Int. Ixxvi. 

Sanyasi, i 41 n i, 58 n 3, 106, 141 
n I ; riot at Govindwal, ii 69 ; 
iv 261, 288 ; vi 104 n 2, 282 
n I. 

Sprang, pied India cuckoo, i 83 
n 6. 

Saraswati, river^i 144 n i ; ii 109. 

Saraswati, goddess, i 198 n 6. 

Saravagis’ Temple, i 150; v 
264 n I. 

Sarbloh, v 313 n i. 

Sardul Singh, Gyani, Pref. ix, 
XXX ; ii 24 n i. 

Sarhind, V 1 39, 168, 193, 200, 201, 
232, 247. 

Sarmad, iv 303. 

Sas girSs, i loi n i. 

Sat, Golden Age, i 4 n 6 ; iv 99 ; 
vi 15 n I. 

Satbharai, ii 7. 

Sati, i 165 n 3 ; iii 91 ; v 277 
n I ; vi 14 ; Kabir on, vi 153, 
178 n 2. 

Sat Kartar, i 49. 

Satluj, river, i 85 n 5 ; ii 66, 109 ; 
iv 368 ; V 3, 176 ; vi 407 n i. 

Satnaja, vi 1 1 1 n 2. 

Sat Nam, true name, i 138. 

Satnamis, Int, xlvii, xlviii. 

Satogun, ii 198 n I. 

Sat Sangat, i 278. 

Sat Sri Akal, war cry, v 28. 

Satta, musician, ii 16, 21, 23, 24 
n I, 253 ; iii 61. 

Saw at Banarcis, i 274 n i. 

Sawaiyas of G. Gobind Singh, Int. 
Iii ; of the bard Mathura, iii 
72 n 2 ; read at baptism, v 265. 

Sawan, Hindi month, ii 55 n 3 ; 
iii 109 n I. 

Sawan Mai, nephew of G. Amar 
Das, ii 60, 61, 62. 

Sciences, fourteen Hindi, i 63 ; 
V 269 n I. 

Seasons, Indian, i 138 n i ; G. 
Arjan’s, iii 407. 

Second sight of Bhai Budha, ii 
13 - 

Sectaries, vi 167. 

Sects, four Muhammadan, i 192 
n I ; Hindu, vi 95, loi. 

Seh, faqir's necklace, iv 2. 

Senses, five, vi 164 n 4, 


Sepulture, Indian, i 60 n 4, 68 
n I, 115 n I, 181, 182 n 2, 279 
n 2, 348, 349 n 2 ; iii 202 n 2, 
285 n I ; Sikh, v 98, 118. 

Ser, weight, iii 282 n i ; vi 38, 
169 n 5. 

Serpent, i 305 n 3 ; tortured by 
worms, iv 188, 282 ; v 205 n i ; 
vi 246 n 4, 290 n I ; 294 n 5, 
305 n 2, 327 n 4. 

Services, Sikh, i 136, 181 ; menial, 
vi 12 n I. 

Sewapanthis, v 174. 

Shahab-ul-Din Ghori, Int. xli. 

Shah Jahan, Emperor, iv 36, 49 
n I, 76, 138, 156, I75 ; war 
with G. Har Gobind, 183 ; 
solicited by Painda Khan, 195, 
198 ; Shah Jahan’s sons, 277 ; 
letter to G. Har Rai, 278 ; his 
sons* rebellion, 299 ; vi 3. 

Shahzada, son of Mardana, i 182. 

Shaikhs, i 40 n i, 72 n 3. 

Shakar Ganj, vi 358, 361, 383. 

Shaktis, iii 213 n i. 

Shams-ul-Din, Emperor, i 52 n 3 ; 
vi 366 n I, 373. 

Shankar Acharya, v 1 1 8 n 2 ; vi 
94. 

Shankar Dial, Sardar, Pref. xxx. 

Sharaf, Shaikh, i 52 n 3. 

Shariat, i 13 n 2. 

Shastars, Pref. v ; i 8 n i ; iii 
260 n I, 330,402 ; vi 74 n I, 320. 

Shastar Nam Mala, Int. Iii ; v 83, 

Sheldrake, ruddy, i 271 n i. 

Shells to summon worshippers, vi 
298 n I. 

Sher Afghan Khan, iv 369. 

Sher Shah, conqueror of Bengal, 
ii 19. 

Sher Singh, Maharaja, iv i n i. 

Sheshnag, hydra-headed serpent, 
ii 348 n I ; iii 200 n i ; v 270 
n 2 ; vi 74 n 2, 94. 

Shiah Muhammadans, v 152 n i. 

Shikar Ghat, v 239. 

Shisham tree, ii 265 ; iii 2 n 2. 

Shiv, god, Int. xh, Ivii, lix ; i 40 
n 3, 138, 155 n I, n 6, 199 
n I ; ii 109, 262 n 2 ; iii 6 n i, 
203 n I, 432 n 2 ; v 69 n i, 
262 n 3, 284 n 3 ; vi 18, 20, 57 
n 2, 58 n 2, 93 n 2, 94, 138 n 3, 
258 n I, 341 n 2. 



INDEX 


Shivnabh, King of Ceylon, i 146, 
154. 

Shivrat, i 155 n I. 

Shopkeepers, parable of the, i 68. 

Shradh, 1 129 n i, 241 ; vi 163. 

Shukdev Rikhi, ii 3 1 n i . 

Sialkot, i 122. 

Sidh Gosht, i 171, 

Sidhis, eight, v 269 n 2, 318 n i. 

Sidhs, i 41 n 4, 59, 17 1. 

Sikandar Khan Lodi, Emperor, 
Int. xUv ; V 1 1 3 ; vi 1 3 1 . 

Sikhism, development, Int. Ixiv ; 
in danger, Int. Ivi, Ivii ; ritual 
of, iii 55 ; principles of, v 93, 
95, 1 16. 

Sikh rehgion, general ignorance 
of, Pref. V, vii, xx ; its advan- 
tages to the State, vii, xviii, 
xxiv ; merits of military guar- 
dians of, xix, XXV ; cathohcity 
of, xi, XX vi ; authenticity of, 
lii-liii ; originahty, liv ; two 
divisions of, hi ; not ascetic, 
Ixiv ; rules of, i 136, 21*7 n 3 ; ii 
1 37 ; superiority of, iv 27 1 , 283. 

Sikhs’ ignorance of their re- 
hgion, Pref. XX ; reversion* to 
Hinduism, xxiii ; Int. Ivi, 
Ivii ; rules and observances, 

iii 67 ; Sikhs and Hindus, iii 
422 n 3 ; vi 40. 

Sikh war-cry, v 97, 100, 

Sikh writings, difficulty of, Pref. 
vi, viii, xxxiii. 

Simmal tree, i 46 n 3 and 4 ; vi 
66 n 2. 

Simritis, i 117 n 4 ; v 300 n i ; 
vi loi, 156. 

Sindur, vi 178 n 2. 

Singhs, Int. hi ; v 95. 

Singh Sabha, letter to the author, 
ftef. xiii. 

Singing, Shaikh Farid on, vi 380. 

Sins, deadly, i 13 n i, 286 n i ; 
hi 432 ; see Passions. 

SiYat-ul-musiakim, vi 334 n 4. 

Sirmaur, Raja of, v 185. 

Sita, wife of Ram Chandar, i 40 
n 4, 168, 216 n 3, 305 n 2, 382 ; 

iv 158. 

Sitala Devi, goddess of small-pox, 
iii 43 ; vi 57 n 2. 

Siyar-ul-Mutaakharin, iv 392 n i; 
-V 253. 

G 


449 

Skull, Farid’s slok written on 
seeing, vi 396 n i. 

Slok, i 105 n 2 ; ii 46 ; iii 183. 

SmaU-pox, iii 43 ; iv 327. 

Snakes, iv 188, 282 ; v 205 n i ; 
vi 294 n 5. 

Sodar, i 136, 250 n 2. 

Sodhis, iii 65 ; iv 332, 337, 338. 

Sohan, vi 268. 

Sokrates, Int. liii, hv, Ixvii, Ixix. 

Solaha, i 164 n 2. 

Sondha Khan, Emperor’s stable- 
keeper, iv 159, 170. 

So Purukh, i 254. 

Soul, Int. Ixv-lxix ; i 198 n i, 
272 n I, 284 n I, 312 n I ; ii 
175 n I ; iii 285 n 2 ; iv 123, 
151 ; vi 17 n I, 45 n 3, 158, 
159 n I, 169 n 4, 186 n 3, 196 
n 3, 235, 404 n 1. 

Sound, unbeaten, i 274 n 2 ; iii 
266, 402 ; vi 90 n 5. 

Species, animal, vi 42 n i. 

Spell of salvation, g^yatri, i 166 
n 4, 237 n I ; ii 108 ; vi 58 n i ; 
Vishnu’s farewell, vi 138 n 3, 
254. 

SpeUing, Indian, Pref. xxxi. 

Sri Chand, G. Nanak’s son, Int. 
hi, Ixxx ; i 29 ; ii 4, 6, 9, ii, 
257 ; iii 27 ; iv 128, 130, 288. 

Sri Har Gobindpur, iv 104 n i, 
105, 1 18. 

Srinagar in Garhwal, v 8, 16. 

Srinagar in Kashmir, i 163 ; iv 
61, 63. 

Srirang, vi 65 n i. 

Sri sect, vi loi, 102. 

Stages of life, four of twice-born 
Hindus, vi 104 n 2. 

Standing on the head, penance of, 
205 n I. 

Stars, Muhammadan conception 
of, vi 1 5 5 n 4. 

Statius, Int. Iviii. 

Steel ornaments, v 149 n i. 

Stones, bridge of, vi 40 n 2, 45 
n I ; gods, iii 5 ; vi 33, 149 n 4. 

Strife (Greek Eris) iv 76. 

Strivers> i 41 n 4. 

Sudars, i 16 n i, 371 n 3 ; ii 184 
n I. 

Sufis of Persia, i 261 n i ; dress 
of, vi 401 n 3. 

Sufiism, stages of, i 13 n 2. 

g 


SIKH VI 



450 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Suhag, marriage state, iii 145 
^ 3 - 

Suhagan, i 76 n 6 ; vi 236 n 2. 

Suhela, or Gul Bagh, iv 178. 

Sukhmana, vi 16 n 2. 

Sukhmani of G. Arjan, iii 197 n i. 

Sulabi Khan, iii 88, 89. 

Sulahi Khan, iii 17, 33, 48, 85, 86. 

Sulakhani, G. Nanak’s wife, i 19 
n I, 32 ; ii 4. 

Sulisar, iv 341. 

Sultanpur, i 18, 108. 

Sumer Singh, Mahant, Pref. xii. 

Sun, vi 192 n 4. 

Sundar Das, author of the Sadd, 
ii 151. 

Sundari, Mata, wife of G. Gobind 
Singh, v 3, 4 n I, 51, 219, 230, 
240, 250, 254, 256, 257. 

Sundar Shah, faqir, iv 216, 217, 
225, 226. 

Superstition, iii 5 3 ; iv 249. 

Suph, vi 401 n 3. 

Surajbans, vi 81 n i. 

Suraj Mai, son of G. Har Gobind, 
birth of, iv 67 ; his marriage, 
iv 138 ; request to his father, 
iv 236 ; visit of G. Teg Baha- 
dur, iv 363. 

Suraj Parkdshf Pref. xiii, xv ; 
Int. Ixxvii ; iii 2 n i, 60 n 3, 
67, 69 n I ; iv 180, 303 n i ; 
V 199 n I. 

Sur Das, Bhagat, vi 417, 418 ; 
hymns, 419. 

Surjan Singh of Anandpur, v 257. 

Surma, collyrium, i 76 n 5 ; ii 
119 n 3 ; vi 396 n i. 

Suspended animation, i 287 n i. 

Swan, great, i 357 n i ; ii 18, 217 
n I ; bill, iv 245 n 3 ; vi 320, 
413 n I. 

Swayamvars, v 266 n i. 

Sweet basil, i 61 n 4, 155 n i ; iii 
6ni,73ni; vi 38, 93 n 2, 177. 

Swine’s flesh, i 39 n 2. 

Tablets for teaching alphabet, i 3. 

Tacitus on ancient German re- 
ligion, Int. lx n. 

Taimur Lang, Int. xl, Ixx. 

Taka, coin, i 223 n 4. 

Takhallus, i 9 n 3 ; v 314 n i. 

Talwandi, G. Nanak’s birthplace 
i I, 2 n I, 95 ; iv66. 


Talwandi Sabo, or Damdama, iv 
340; v 219. 

Tana Shah, King of Golkanda, 

V Si- 

Tank, measure, i 158 n i. 

Tanks, Hindu, ii 84 n i ; Sikh, 
i 2, 320 n I ; ii 87 ; iii 9, 10, 
II, 13 ; iv48. 

Tansen, Akbar’s minstrel, vi 350. 

Tantras, ancient scriptures of the 
Saktas, iii 213 n i ; vi 93 n i, 
197. 

Tapa, a penitent, ii 29, 35, 38, 
99, 261, 303. 

Tara, Masand, iv 308 ; v 17, 89, 
207. 

Tara Azim, usurper, v 229, 230. 

Tara Singh, Pandit, iv 64 n 3. 

Tariqat, i 13 n 2 ; vi 387. 

Tarn Taran, i 106 ; iii 25 n i, 
85, 89 ; iv 32. 

Tarpan, Hindu worship, v 9. 

Tasbi, see Rosary. 

Tash, i 87. 

Tastes, six physical, ii 116. 

Tasu, measure, iii 152 n i. 

Tat (pure) Khalsa, Prof, xi ; 

V 250. 

Teg Bahadur, Guru, prophecy 
regarding coming of English, 
Pref. xiii, xviii ; son of G. Har 
Gobind, iv 70, 331 ; marriage 
with Gujari, iv 189, 331 ; at 
battle of Kartarpur, iv 206 ; 
departure for Bakala, iv 239 ; 
discovered by Makhan Shah, 
iv 333 ; invested as Guru, iv 
334 ; Dhir Mai’s treachery, iv 
334 ; the Guru on forgiveness, 
iv 335 ; visit to Amritsar, iv 
336 ; refused admission to Har 
Mandar, iv 336 ; returns to 
Bakala, iv 337 ; founds Anand- 
pur, iv 338 ; malice of Dhir 
Mai, iv 338 ; visits Agra, 
Itawa, Priyag, BanSras, and 
bathes in Karmnasha, iv 344 ; 
visits Gaya, iv 345 ; Patna, iv 
347 ; visit of Raja Ram Singh, 
iv 349 ; who accompanies him 
to Kamrup, iv 352 ; receives 
King of Kamrup, iv 3 54 ; king's 
conversion, iv ^55; mound 
raised at Dhubri, iv 356; Raja 
Ram of Asam, iv 357; birth 



INDEX 


Teg Bahadur (continued ) — 
of Gobind Rai, iv 357; the 
Gum returns to Patna, iv 359 ; 
departure for Anandpur, iv 
362 ; sends for Gobind Rai, iv 
364 ; visit of Kashmiri Pan- 
dits, iv 371 ; message to 
Emperor, iv 372 ; departure 
for Dihli, iv 373 ; halts at 
Saifabad, iv 373 ; arrested at 
Agra, iv 377 ; efforts of Em- 
peror to convert him, iv 378 ; 
his refusal and torture, iv 380 ; 
his thaumaturgic power, iv 
381 ; prophesies coming of 
English, iv 381 ; locked in 
cage, iv 383 ; sloks of consola- 
tion to his wife and son, iv 
384 ; appoints his son Gobind 
Rai his successor, iv 385 ; 
instructions to Sikhs about the 
disposal of his head, iv 386 ; 
executed, iv 387 j head taken 
to Anandpur, iv 387 ; crema- 
tion of his body, Iv 388 ; 
cremation of his head, iv 390 ; 
his hymns, iv 393 ; sloks, iv 414. 

Tej Bhan, father of G. Amar Bas, 
ii 30. 

Temples, illustrations of, Pref. 
xxvii ; destruction of Hindu, 
Int. xlvii, xlviii, xhx ; ii 9 ; 
to Ramanuj, vi 100 ; to Rav 
Das, vi 318. 

Ten stages of man, i 279. 

Tewar, i 104 n i. 

Thags, robbers, i 71 n i ; Thags 
and Jaidev, vi 10, 12. 

Thanesar, ii 109. 

Thappas, marks on crops, i 263 
n 2. 

Theism and Pantheism, Int. Ixiii. 

Theology, comparative, Int. Iv. 

Thieves’ plants, vi 71 n 3. 

Thirty days’ fast, i 22 n i. 

Thok bajana, vi 295 n 4. 

Thoughts, dying, i 67 n i ; vi 
80 n I, 

Threads, seven, vi 272 n 6. 

Thucydides on Revenge, v 241 
n I. 

Tier’s whiskers, iv 277 ; skin, 
iv 299 ; tiger and Guru, v 19 ; 
love of ti^ss, V 21 1. 

Tikke di War, ii 25. 


451 

Tilak, i 58, 135, 163 ; ii ii, 43 ; 
vi 99, 178 n 2, 286 n 6. 

Tilang, measure, iii 387 n i ; v 
286 n 4. 

Tiloka, officer of Kabul army, iii 

67. 

Tilokhari, G. Har Krishan cre- 
mated at, iv 330. 

Tilok Singh and Ram Singh, v 
224 n I. 

Time-table, Indian, i 144 n 4, 

187 113. 

Tithes ordained for religious pur- 
poses, V 1 17. 

Tobacco forbidden to Sikhs, Pref. 
xxi, xxiii ; iv 342 ; v 97, 117, 
153 - 

Todar Mai, Sikh, v 198. 

Todar Mai, Akbar’s minister, vi 
418. 

Toddy, vi 320 n 3. 

Tola, weight, i 63 n 3. 

Tortoise, i 15 1 n 3, 165 n 2. 

Torture, implements of, Int. xlvi ; 
iii 92, 94. 

Trance, i 287 n i. 

Translation of Sikh writings, 
difficulty of, Pref. vi, viii, 
xxxiii ; examination of, Pref. 
ix ; G. Arjan’s injunction, 
Pref. viii ; certificate of cor- 
rectness of, Pref. X. 

Transmigration, Pref. xvi ; Int. 
liv, Ixv ; i5n2, 6n2, 9ni, 
38 n 4, 67 n I, 83 n i, 108 n i, 
129, 137, 142 n 4, 226 n I, 284 
n I, 332 ; ii 8 n I, 18, 207 ; iii 

68, 131, 136, 154 n3, 174 n2, 
185 n 2, 216 n I, 312 n i, 402 
n 7 ; iv 188, 230, 280, 282 ; 
V 20, 152, 214, 216, 225 ; vi 
17 n I, Son I, 96, 137, 139 n i, 
149, 169 n4, 186 n3, 215, 
289 n I, 327 n 2, 404 n i. 

Trees, benefits derived from, iv 
226 ; allegory, vi 242, 243 n 4. 

Tribeni Priyag, meeting of rivers, 
i 144 n I ; ii 257. 

Trilochan, Bhagat, iii 332 ; vi 
I, 58, 76, 77 ; hymns of, vi 78, 
79, 80, 81. 

Trinity, Hindu, i 40 n 3 ; iii 334 
n I. 

Tripta, G. Nanak’s mother, Int. 
Ixx ; i 96, 100. 


Gg 2 



452 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Trumpp's translation of Granth, 
Prel. xiii, xv ; i 82 n 3. 

Truth, iii 136 n I, 245 n I ; iv 
259; vi 53 n I. 

Tulsi Das, vi 349. 

Tulsi plant, v 78 n 2. 

Turban, tall, iii no n 3 ; Sikh, 

V 215 n I ; couplet repeated 
when tying on, iii 187 n i ; vi 
256 n I, 258, 387. 

Turiya Pad, vi 123 n i. 

Turks, iv 39 n i . 

Turmeric, vi 286 n 6. 

Uch ka Rr, v 192. 

Udaipur, Int. xlviii ; vi 348 n i. 
Udas, G. Nanak’s definition of, 
i 106. 

UdSsis, founder of, Int. Iii, Ixxix, 
Ixxx ; iv 288 ; revolt of, v 34 ; 
made copy of Granth Sahib, 

V 87. 

Ude Singh, Bhai, Int. Ixxvi ; v 
loi, 120, 129, 13s, 140, 142. 
Ugarsen, vi 41 n i. 

Uma, Parbati, v 284 n 3 ; vi 
334 n 2. 

Umbrellas, iii 1 5 n i ; vi 47 n 3. 
Union of soul with God, Int. Ixv ; 
i 10 n I. 

Unity of God, Sikh belief in, Int. 

Ixi, Ixii ; iv 255 ; vi 41. 
Universe evolved from God, v 

331 n 

Upanishads, iii 53 n i. 

Urdu, alien to Panjab, Pref. xxiv. 
Ursa, stone used in worship, i 
323 n I. 

Vairag, vi 105. 

Vaishnav faith, ii 32, 93 ; vi 89 
n 2, 92 n 3. 

Vaisyas, caste, i 16 n i ; vi 104 
n 2. 

Valmik, iv 265 ; huntsman, vi 104. 
Vamacharis, vi 104 n 3. 

Varans, or castes, i 16 n i. 
Vasudev, father of Krishan, i 57 
n I ; V 320 n 4. 

Vasuki, serpent, vi 74 n 2, 

Veds, Pref. v ; Int. In; i 4 n 4, 
116 n 3, 207 n I, 269 n 2, 348 
n I, 371 n3 ; ii 31 n i ; iii 
321,. 420 ; V 323 n 3 ; vi 125, 
320, 324 n I. 


Vedantists, claims of, v 103 n 2 ; 
vi 27, 160 n I. 

Vegetables of the earth, i 282 n i ; 
eighteen loads of, vi 333 n 2. 

Veiling of the face, ii 62 n i ; vi 
116, 213, 343. 

Veracious History, Lucian's, iv 
153 n I. 

Vessels of shopkeeper, i 23 n i ; 
sun-dried cooking, vi 128 ; 
clay, vi 226 n i ; testing 
soundness of, vi 295 n 4. 

Vibhishan, vi 24 n 2. 

Vichitar Ndtak, v i n i. 

Vichitar Singh and elephant, v 
134- 

Vidhwa, see Widow. 

Vidur (Bidur), ii 331 n i ; vi 252. 

Vikramadit, Raja, ii 102 n i ; 
and Mahabharat, ii 31 n i. 

Viro, G. Har Gobind’s daughter, 
iv 66, 84, 144, 236 ; V 2. 

Virtues, the five, i 127 n i. 

Vishisht and Vishwamitra, vi 
58 n I. 

Vishnu, Int. xli, Ivii, lix, Ixxxi ; 
i 40 n 3, 57 n I, 61 n 4, 81, 

151 n 3, 199 n I, 300 n I ; ii 

160 n I, 348 n I ; iii 6 n i, 

203 n I ; iv 254 n 5 ; v 273 

n 3, 274 n 3, 279 n 2, 330 n T; 
vi 63 n 4, 83, 87 n 2, 89 n 2, 
92 n 3, 93 n 2i 94, 99, 105 n i, 
345 n I. 

Vishnu Sahassar Nam, v 261 n i. 

Vitthal, god, vi 23 n i. 

Vows, religious, iii 77 n i. 

Vyas, compiler of Veds, ii 31 n i , 
234 n 2. 

Wadali, G. Arjan’s sojourn at, 

iii 34, 35 ; G. Har Gobind’s 
visit to, iv 142. 

Wahguru, i 56 n I ; ii 107, 207 
n I ; Gur Das's explanation of, 

iv 135 n 2. 

Wali, Bawa, of Kandhar, i 172. 

Wah Khan, son of Subadar of 
Jalandhar, iv 138. 

Wall, Hindus* path to paradise 
through opening in, v 74 n i. 

Wanni, gold colouring, ii 202 n i . 

War, i 218 n I. 

Water, Sikh initiation with, i 47 
n I, 372 n I and 2 ; G. Nanak’s 



453 



Water (continued ) — _ i Women, emancipation of Sikh, 

use of, 1 so ; waving of, i 231 prgf. xxii ; G. Nanak on duty 
G. Gobmd Singh’s baptismal.V of, i 289 ; customs of Hindu, 
V 94 ; scattered at Maiwa, v \ jj 84 n i ; G. Nanak’s defence 
223, 316; animals which live \of, i 244; married woman’s 
in, vi 42 n I ; of Ganges, vi ^iress, iii 112, 278, 319 n i. 


320 n 2. 

Water-lily, i 265 n 2 ; vi 337 n i. 

Wazir Khan, iii 17 ; iv 187, 195 ; 
sent to G. Har Gobind, iv ii, 
26, 34, 65 ; intervenes to pre- 
vent further war, iv 96. 

Wazir Khan, the emperor’s vice- 
roy, V 195, 209, 213, 220, 222, 
234, 248. 

Weapons used by Sikhs, v 129. 

Weavers, Kabir’s allegory on, vi 
136 n I and 2, 170 n 4. 

Week days, seven, vi 190 ; 
names of, vi 269 n i. 

Weights and measures, i 63 n 6, 
158 n I, 188 n I ; iii 152 n i, 
252 n I, 282 n I ; iv 66 n i, 
278 n I ; vi 37 n I, 169 n 5, 
295 n 2. * 

Well, bawali, ii 87 ; G. Nanak’s, 
i 172 ; iii 1 54 n 2 ; at Kolad, vi 
30 ; haunted well, vi 37 ; body 

as, vi 149 n I ; well rope, vi 
404 nil; allegory of, vi 166, 
368. 

Wheels, Persian, iii 35 ; vi 49 
n 2. 

White elephant’s pearls, iii 3 1 1 
n I. 

Wholesale dealer, God as, i 60 

n I. 

Widows, concremation of, for- 
bidden to Sikhs, Pref. xxii, 
xxiii ; i 381 ; ii 228 n i ; v 
277 n I ; vi 153 ; ceremonies 

at, vi 178 n 2 ; remarriage of, 
vi 154 n 3. 

Wife versus widow, i 76 n 6. 

Williams, Indian Wisdom^ i 129 
n I, 

Wilson, Religion of the Hindus, 
Int. xlvii ; vi 104 n 3, 140 n i. 

Wine, forbidden to Sikhs, Pref. 
xxi, xxiii ; G. N 3 ,nak on, i 182 ; 
Brahman’s punishment for 
drinking, iv 134 n i ; Gur Bilds 
on, iv 168 ; G. Har Rai’s 
interdict, iv 288 ; Kabir on, 
vi 142. 


n I ; Gur Das on, vi 251 ; 
Kfedu women abducted, v 157 
ii^once selected their own 
hus^ds, V 266 n I ; remain 
with^ents after marriage, vi 
166 n^^ 375* 

Wooden of Shaikh Farid, vi 
368, 398 i I. 

Wordsworth on transmigration, 
Int. Ixvii. 

Worlds, fourtecfv^ i 1 16 n 2, 344 
n 2 ; denizens of, hke children, 
i 217 n 2 ; dac^rous ocean, i 
6 n I ; father and father-in- 
law’s houses, i 74 n 7 ; world as 
an egg, i 1 16 n 2 ; creation and 
destruction of, i 138 n4; ii 
348 ; people of the, i 217 n 2, 
300 n 2 ; iii 230 n 2, 294 n i, 

391 n I. 

Worship, symbols of Hindu, i 
.99 n I ; iii 51, 83, I12, 329 
n I ; vi 90 n 5, 93 n 2. 

Wrestler’s turban, iii 1 10 n 3. 

Xenophon, Int. liii. 

Ya Ali, Muhammadan war-cry, 
V 41. 

Yadavs, deception of, vi 47 n 4. 

Yakshas, iii 229 n i. 

Yama, i 210 n 2. 

Yavan, i 12 n i. 

Year, Indian, i no n i, 138 n 3. 

Yog Sutra, ii 16 n i. 

Yogini, vi 93 n I. 

Yudhishtar, iv 408 n i. 

Zabardast Khan, Viceroy of 
Lahore, v 168, 222. 

Zafarndma, v 201. 

Zakaria Khan, Int. Ixxv, Ixxvi, 
Ixxxii, Ixxxiv.; i 2. 

Zamindar, Int. Ixxi. 

Zeus, Int. Iviii, hx, lx. 

Zindagi Ndma, v 103. 

Zoroastrianism, Int. Ivi ; i 89 
n 2, 



OXFORD 

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BY HORACE HART, M.A^ 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 




5nw 5nT|T Jrrr^ 3T^?rifr, 

\hadurShastri National Academy of Administrati~)n Library 

MUSSOORIE I Oy)^ 

nf 5Rr«P f^!TTF«F?r ^rf^r^r 1 1 

^is book is to be returned on the date last stamped. 





Mac* 

V«5 Acc No. 

^ ?T^!TT ?fW 

Class No, Book No. 

Author Ma^AUliffe* 

9ft^ 

Title The Sikh religion , 


^7^ LIBRARY 

* ^ LAL BAHADUR 8HA8TRI 

National Academy of Administration 

MUSSOORIE 


Accession No. j 

1. Books aro Issued for 15 days only but 
may have to be recalled earlier if urgen* 
tiy required. 

2. An overnlue charge of 25 Raise per day 
per volume will be charged. 

S. Books may be renewed on request, at 
the discretion of the Librarian. 

4. Periodicals, Rare and Refrence books 
may not bo issued and may be con- 
sulted only In the Library. 

9. Books tost, defaced or Inlured In any 
way shall have to be replaced or Its 
double price shall be paid by the 
borrower. 

NM to koot this iookjrssh^ clean & moving

GOVERNMEKT OF INDIA 
ARCMOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 


CENTRAL 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 


ACCESSION NO. 




CALL No. 





- . .. .r.1, j , M ri 111 IE u.ir -JW 

Grmi SSi'Miffl 

^ -if « 









THE SIKH RELIGION 


ITS GURUS, SACRED WRITINGS 
AND AUTHORS 

EY 

MAX ARTHUR MACAULIFFE 


twit 'grr Tiaam; 

'acT^ Tjw % iif ■act?T^ TfFrm:. 

The egg" of superstition hath burst; the 
mlud is illumined: 

The Guru hath cut the fetters off the feet 
and freed the captive. 

Guru Arjan 


IN SIX VOLUMES 
VOL. VI 




f ■ J ^ ■■■" Jf 'j' 

^ 


. r'*-- i 

^>1-" V.. H.-o: 

'-.V- 


v\ 


OXFORD 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


190 B 


1- t;' 




# 



HENKY EROWDE, M.A, 

TO THE UTJ(VKR5<tY OF OXFOFB 
LOSOON, ElllNBURaH, NEW TO»lK 

TMOITXO AHE MHL&CUnNK 


( 


CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGIGAt 
LIBRARY, NhW 
■\w. No .a 5:^.7 .. 


■ A '-A, 




5^9 <1, STS 




* 


4 





CONTENTS OF VOL. VI 


BhAGATS or THE GRAlfTH SaHTE 




PACK 

1 

Life and Hymns of Jaidev 



. 


4 

Life of Na^idev 

■1 


+ + 


V 

Namdev’s Hymns 





40 

Trtlochan 





76 

Parmanand 


+ 

. 


82 

Sadhna .... 

>1 


. 


84 

Beni . , , , . 



■ -h 

h 

88 

RamanAND and Eamanuj, 





93 

Dr ANNA , . , , 



li r 


106 

PiFA .... 





III 

Sain. 





T20 

Life of Kabik . 





133 

Kabie’s Hymns 





1:42 

Kabib’s StOKS . . 



■1 >1 


278 

Life of Rav Das 





316 

Rav Das’s HY.MN6 , . 



■ k 


321 

Mira Bai . , ■ ■ 


h 

^ ■ 


342 

Life of Shaikh Fahid 





336 

Hymns .and Sloes of F.aeid 





39 ^ 

Bhikan .... 





414 

SuR Das , . . , 





417 










THE BHAGATS' OF THE GRANTH 
SAHIB 


There have lived in India from time immemorial 
saints and thinkers who were dissatisfied with the 
superstitions and religious vagaries of the Hindus. 
They gradually evolved a belief in one God and 
preceded Guru Nanak as the dawn before sunrise. 
Abrupt indigenous alterations of religion have rarely, 
if ever, been presented to human experience. Some 
of the writings of the Gum’s immediate precursors 
called Bhagats, or saints, are preserved in the Granth 
Sahib compiled by Guru Aijan- He selected for 
inclusion therein, with equal impartiality the writ¬ 
ings of both Hindus and Musalmans, as they suited 
his purpose, and contributed to the great cause of 
religious reformation. We find in the sacred volume 
compositious of Jaidev, Namdev, Trilochan, Parma- 
nand, Sadlma, Beni, Ramanand, Dhanna, Pipa, Sain, 
Kabir, Rav Das, Sur Das, verses of at least two 
Musalman saints, Farid and Bhikan j and one recen¬ 
sion of the sacred volume called Eanno’s Granth, 
preserved at Mangat in the Gujrat district of the 
Panjab, contains a hymn composed by Mira Bai, 
Queen of Cbitaur. It is believed that Gum Arjan 
did not give it a place in his collection because the 
lady lived and died an idolater. 

The Hindu Bhagats for the most part began life 
as worshippers of idols, but by study and con¬ 
templation arrived at a system of monotheism wMdi 
was appreciated by Guru Arjan, The Muhammadan 
Bhagats lived in Hindu centres, and became largely 
iinbned with Hindu modes of thought, w'bile they 

^ The word comea from"'the Sanskrit u}i:ic]\ meaiiH 

devolion^ lovt, Sc, 

V* B 


* 



2 EHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

at the same time retained their traditional belief in 
the Divine nnity. There is no account given of 
these saints in any of tlie classical Sikh writings; 
but we have to the best of our power collected 
materials for the lives of moat of them in the various 
places where they were born or where they flourished 
in India, Some civil officers have kindly made 
inquiries and furnished ns with details from their 
districts, and political officers have also assisted in 
procuring information from the annals of native 
states. 

The writings of Nabhaji, Uddava Chidghan, 
Mahipati, Ganesh Dattatre, Maliaraja Raghuraj 
Sinha, Dahyabhai Ghelabhai pandit, and others in 
different Indian languages, on the mediaeval saints 
of India have also been consulted. 

Nabhaji, the author of the Bharat Mai, was born 
in the state of GuaJiar. His original name is said 
to have been Narain Das, Everything relating to 
him is as wonderful as the legends he himself relates 
of his Vaishnav saints. He was born blind. When 
he was about five years of age there was a great 
fannine in the land, and he was deserted by his 
parents in a forest, owing to their inability to rnaiH’ 
tain him. He was found by Agar Das and Kil, two 
Hindu pilCTims, who were on their \vay to the 
Ganges. He told them lib history, and they adopted 
him, Kil sprinkled some holy water from his gourd 
on the child’s eyes, and he received his sight. He 
was employed to wait on the holy men, and in this 
capacity heard many legends of Indian saints of all 
epochs, These legends he recorded at the suggestion 
of Agar Das in a work called Sant Charitra, which 
formed the basis of his Bhagat Mai, a series of 
metrical chronicles in the Gualiar dialect, written 
about A, i). 1578. He was a contemporary of Raja 
Man Sjnh of Jaipur, and consequently lived during 
the reign of the Efiiper&r Akbar. It is recorded 
that lie liad an interview with Tulsi Das, the famous 



BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 3 

Hind^^ poet, who flourished in the reign of Shah 
Jahan. If so he must have lived to a very advanced 
age- Several additions and amplifications were 
made to Nabhaji’s work by Priya Das and Pandit 
Lai Ji of Bindraban, It was subsequently written 
out in Hindu prose and translated into Urdu by 
different hands. Other writers in most of the great 
Indian dialects have written lives of the Vaishnav 
saints, but almost all are avowedly based on the 
work of Nabhaji, 

Nabhaji’s Bhagat Mai is in all versions painfully 
disappointing. It may be compared to the mediaeval 
legends of saints once current in Europe, but it has 
the additional defect of brevity, and, like Hindu 
works generally, shows a total contempt for chron- 
ology. When one great man is but an incarnation 
of another who lived hundreds or thousands of 
years before, it seems superfluous to the Hindu 
biographer to consider such a trifle as the date of 
his successive appearances upon earth. Even the 
jjions Hindus who at different times expounded and 
translated Nabhaji’s work, each and all pass by the 
dates of the Ehagats without a word of apology to 
the reader. We are therefore generally left to shreds 
of extraneous evidence for the epochs of the Bhagats 
whose writings are contained in the Bible of the 
Sikhs. 

Uddava Chidghan was bom in Dharur in Khan- 
desh. Once when he was celebrating the anniversary^ 
of the birth of Rama, and taking an image of that 
god into his house at Bedar in the Barars, some 
bigoted Muhammadans stoned the procession. A 
fight arose between the Hindus and Muhammadans. 
It is said that Hanuman, the monkey-god, espoused 
tlie cause of the Hindus, and fought against the 
Muhammadans, as he bad done thousan<^ of years 
before against Rawan. By Hanuman's aid Chid- 
ghan's party was victorious, and succeeded in 
burning a mosque in which the Muhammadans had 



4 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

concealed themselves, llie era in which Chidghan 
flourished has not been accurately ascertained. 

Mahipati was bom in a. p. 1715 at Taharabad, in 
the Eahruri subdivision, about thirty-five miles 
from Ahmadnagar in the Bombay Presidency. He 
wrote the lives of saints in the Marathi language. 
His authorities were principally Nabhaji and Uddava 
Qiidghan. He has himself given the Shaka year 
1696 (a. d. ry74) as the date of the completion of 
his Bhakta Lilamrita. He died in a. d. 1790. 

Maharaja Raghnraj Sinh, son of Maharaja Vi- 
swanath Sinh of the Baghel dynasty, chief of the 
Rew state, was born in a.Ei, 1823, and died in 
1S80. He inherited his literary talents from his 
father, who wrote a paraphrase of Kabir’s Bijak, 
and about fifty tracts on Hindu religion, philosophy, 
and literature. Maharaja Raghuraj Sinh was one of 
the most renowned Hindi poets of his time, and he 
was also a most generous patron of the many Hindi 
and Sanskrit scholars who flocked to his court. Tn 
religion he was a strict a^ierent of Vaishnav tenets. 

We shall attempt to give the Lives and Writings 
of the Bhagats in chronological order. 


JAIDEV 

There were two distinguished men called Jaidev, 
whose lives and acts are frequently confounded 
in Indian chronicles and biograplues. One was a 
metaphysician and scholai’ who is said to have lived 
at the court of Vikramaditya. It is related of him 
that when a boy at school he was able to learu in 
a day as much as his schoolfellows could in a fort¬ 
night. Hence he was called Pakshadhar Misra. It 
IS not with him we are at present concerned, 

TIi^s Jaidev whose Kymns are found in the Grantli 
bahib is the celebrated Sanskrit poet who wrote 


JAIDEV 5 

the Giigcvind, His father was Bhoidev, a Bra]!- 
man of Kanauj, and his mother Bamdevi. He was 
born at Kendiilij about twenty miles from Surij in 
the modern disUict of Birbhtim in Lower Bengal. 
He became the most famous of the five distinguished 
poets who lived at the court of Lakshman Sen, king 
of Bengal, who dates from the year 1170 of the 
Christian era. The five poets were called the five 
jewels of Lakshman Sen's court, and so proud was 
the monarch of them that he erected a monument 
to preserve their names to succeeding ages. The 
specialities of the five poets are thus described by 
J aidev himself:—■ 

Umapatidhara exc^eth in word painting; 

J ayadava alone ktioweth purity of style ; 

Saiajia is praised for extempore rendering of difficult 
passages; 

Govardhana suipasseth m description of love ; 

No one is so famed as the king of poets Dhoyi for remem¬ 
bering what he hath once heard. 

Very little is known of Jaidev’s early life. It is 
certain that fiom his youth he was a diligent student 
of Sanskrit literature, and developed rare poetical 
talents. He is described by the author of the 
Bhagat Mai as an incarnation and treasury of 
melody, on which, however, he, owing to his ascetic 
habits, long preferred to feast his owti soul rather 
than communicate to the world the splendid gifts 
he possessed. He wandered in several countries, 
provided with only a water-pot and dressed in the 
patched coat of a mendicant. Ever; pens, ink, and 
paper„ ^generally so indispensable to literary men, 
were luxuries which he did not allow himself. Such 
was his determination to love nothing but God, 
that he would not sleep for two nights in succession 
under the sanac'tree, lest he should conceive an 
undue preference for it and forget his Creator. 

It pleased God, with the object, it is stated, of 


6 EHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

sping the human race, to withdraw Jaidev from 
Ms ascetic hfe. For this purpose, the cJironicler 
relates, God devised the following expedient- An 
Agmhotn Brahman of Jagannath, to whom a 
beautiful daughter named Padamavati had been 
born as th6 result of many offerings and prayers 
brought her up with the object of dedicating her as 
a dancing girl to the local idol. Her father duly 
condneted her to the idol and was ordered to take 
her away and bestow her on the great saint Jaidev 
Un this she taken to him, and he was in- 
lOtmed of the divine decision in his favour, Jaidev 
reasoned with the Brahman, and told him he 
ought to give Ms daughter to some more wealthy 
man who would be more suitable for her than a 
homeless ascetic like himself. The Brahman rephed 
that he could not disobey God’s order. Jaidev 
rejoined, God is master and omnipotent. He may 
have thousands and tens of thousands of wives 
but one for me is the same as a hundred thousand:' 

iif' need or ability to maintain 

one th^ he had a hundred thousand. After further 
discu^on, in which the Brahman failed, notwith- 
s anmng tM ex^cise of all his powers of persuasion, 
he left his laughter with Jaidev. Before his depar¬ 
ture he told her it was impious to act in opposi- 
on to the will of God. She was to remain with 
Jaidev, and obey him according to the instructions 
laid down for wves m the Hindu sacred writings. 

Tht tender girl remained with Jaidev and attended 
his shadow. He is said to have repre- 
s^ted to her the futility of living with him : 

' endeavour to do some¬ 
thing to improve thy position; I have no power to 
maintain and cherish thee.’ She repUed, ^ What 
power hath this poor creature? Thou canst do as 

^ sacrifice unto thee and shall 
nevQT leave thee.; On this Jaidev believed that 
God was forcing him into the alliance, and he recon- 


JAIDEV 

died himself to the situation. As the first prepara¬ 
tion for domestic life he built a hut for his spouse, 
set up an idol in it, and applied himself to its worship* 
He then began the composition of the celebrated 
poem the Gitgovind, This is believed to have been 
his second composition, liis fust being a ^ama 
called Rasana Raghava. A third work attributed 
to him is Chemdralok, an essay on the graces of 

style. ‘ ^ t 

The fact appears to be that the mantkng fire of 
Jaidev's genius sought for an outlet, that with 
experience of life a change came over his religious 
opinions, that he resolved no longer to play the 
hermit, but accept the wife offered him, distinguish 
himself, and seek for worldly fame and its pleasures. 
God has been introduced ex machind into the nar¬ 
rative to save Jaidev from the charges of incon¬ 
sistency and submission to human passion. 

The Gitgovind is well known in both hemispheres. 
It haa been translated into English prose and para¬ 
phrased in English verseIt is perhaps a solitary 
instance of a great popular poem composed in a 
dead language. In the twelfth century of the 
Christian era Sanskrit was, it is true, used as Latin 
was at the same time in Europe, but the great age 
had passed aw-ay when Sanskrit was a living lan¬ 
guage—the only recognized Indian vehicle of men s 
thoughts and aspirations, The Gitgovind is stilTnot 
only remembered, but nightly chanted in the Kar- 
natik countries and other parts of India, because it 
is ostensibly a love song and its strains are sweet 
and find a responsive echo in the human heart. 

During the composition of the Gitgovind Jaidev 


I Into pmae by Sir WiHiam Jones and inUJ esqiiiate wrse by ihe 

late Bir Edwtn Arnold- ^ _ j- ' i 

9 Taidev has been move fortunate than Petrarch, ibe mediaeval 

Italian poet, in composing in a dead language, 
a Latin poem entilled 'Africawhisli is n(rn never read, uhile his love 
sonnets are the delight of many cultivated minds. 


8 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


represented Radhika the heroine as pouting because 
Krishan the hero had followed other loves. Krislian 
alters his ways, and applies himself to the task of 
appeasing her and apologizing for his conduct. The 
poet was preparing to make Krishan address his 
lady love ; ' Adorn my head by putting on it the 
lotus leaves of thy feet, which are an antidote to 
the poison of Cupid,’ when he reflected that it would 
be a dishonour to his god if any woman were to put 
her feet on his head. While thus reflecting the poet 
ceased to write, and went to bathe, intending sub¬ 
sequently to alter the sentence into more confonuity 
with the relative positions of the hero and heroine. 

What was Jaidev’s surprise when on returning 
from his bath he found the verse completed exactly 
as he had subsequently intended 1 He asked his wife 
how it had occurred. She told him he had returned 
himself, and having written the verse ^one away 
again. Upon this Jaidev knew that Krishan hitti- 
sdf had written the verse, and thus hallowed the 
composition* The fame of the event and of the 
poem spread far and wide, and Jaidev obtained the 
high renown he had so earnestly sought, 

Satvika, King of Urisa (Orissa) at the time, was 
also a poet and learned man. He had accidentally 
selected for a poem the same subject as Jaidev, and 
he appears to have produced a work of respectable 
merit, whicli he directed his Brahmans to copy and 
circulate. In reply they showed him the composi¬ 
tion of Jaidev* They meant by this that the Raja’s 
poem was as nothing in comparison with Jaidev’s, 
As well compare a lamp with the sun. The Raja 
in his pride could not accept the Bmhmans’ criti¬ 
cism, but caused both poems to be placed in the 
temple of his capital, and promised to abide by the’- 
decision of the idol as to which was superior. 

The idol rejected the king’s Gitgovind and took 
to his heart that of Jaidev. Upon this the Raja 
thinking himself greatly dishonoured was overcome 


JAIDEV 9 

by shame and jealousy, and set out to drovni himself. 
Krishan is said to have taken pity on him. He 
appeared to him and told him it would be a vain 
and foolish act to put an end to his life. It was 
very dear that his poetical merit did not equal 
that of Jaidev, but, to compensate him for his dis¬ 
appointment, Krishan ordered that one of the Raja’s 
verses should be inserted in each of the twelve cantos 
of Jaidev’s poem, and both compositions should 
thus go forth to the world and down to distant 
ages. This was accordingly done! 

The estimation in which the Gitgovind was held 
may be gathered from tlie following anecdote. A 
gardener’s daughter while one day gathering egg¬ 
plants was siu^ng with great zest the following 
verse from the fifth canto of the poem :— 

The zepliyi gently bloweth on the banks of the Yiumma 
wliile Krishan tarri^h in the grove. 

On this, it is said, the idol of Jagannath fol¬ 
lowed her wherever she went, with tlie object of 
feasting his heart on the dulcet strains. The idol 
wore only a thin jacket which was torn by the 
brambles. When the king went to worsliip and saw 
the condition of the idol’s dress, he in astonishment 
asked the priests the cause. When the Raja learned 
what had occurred, he was perfectly satisfied of tlie 
superiority of the product of Jaidev’s genius, and 
issued a proclamation that the Gitgomnd should 
only be read in a clean and purified place, as J agan- 
nath, the lord of the world, himsdf was in the habit 
of going to listen to it. 

Not only Hindus, but men of aU creeds were 
enchanted with the composition. It is related that 
•'a Mughal, on hearing of the divine honours paid to 
the w'ork, used to peruse it with the greatest delight. 
One day while riding he was aingiug its verses, when 
he fell into an ecstasy of pleasure, and thought that, 
though a Moslem, lie felt communion with Krishan. 



10 BHAGATS OF THE GKANTH SAHIB 


§ 

I 

Oriental chroniclers are enthusiastic in their 
praises of Jaidev. All other poets are comp^ed 
to petty kings while he is the great chakrawarti or 
poetical monarch of the world. As the moon can¬ 
not be concealed by the stars, as the eagle cannot 
be surpassed by any bird in flight, as Indar attracts 
notice in the midst of the gods, so is Jaidev’s fame 
conspicuous in the world. It may be added that 
Jaidev himself does not appear to have been in¬ 
sensible of his own merits. At the conclusion of 
the Gitgovind he writes, ‘ Whatever is delightful in 
the modes of music, whatever is ex(juisite in the 
sweet art of love let the happy and wise learn from 
the song of Jaidev.’ 

Notwithstanding the lusciousness and sensuous 
beauty of several parts of the Gtigovind, there can 
be no doubt that Jaidev intended the p^m as an 
elaborate religious allegory. This, too, is insisted 
on by the author of the Bhagai Mai, who states 
that tlie love scenes and rhetorical graces of the 
poet are not to be understood in the sense that 
persons of evil minds and dispositions attach to 
them. Radhika the heroine is heavenly wisdom. 

The milkmaids who divert Krishan from liis al¬ 
legiance to her, are the sejises of smell, sight, 
touch, taste, and heai'ing. Krishan represented as 
pursuing them is the human soul, which attaches 
itself to earthly pleasures. The return of Krishan 
to his first love is the return of the repentant sinner 
to God, which gives joy in heaven. 

After the completion of the poem Jaidev went 
to travel and visited Bindiaban and Jaipur. To 
the latter place its king had given him a pressing 
invitation. While on those travels it is related that 
he met a party of tliags, He knew w^hat they were' 
from their ready offer to accompany him on his journey. 
Without more ado he pulled out his purse and gave 

^ T^e reader will remember the exultations of Hcaace, Ovid, Moore, 
Poushtiiij and others, on ihe compltlion of tbftir imcDcrtaf poems. 


JAIDEV II 

them eJl the money and valuables he possessed, 
thus reasoning, 'Wealth is the basis o£ sin j glut¬ 
tony produceth disease ; and love of the world 
purchaseth pain, so it is proper to discard all 
tliree.’ 

The tliags at once suspected him. They had not 
been accustomed to obtain men's wealth without 
a struggle or without at least having made a request 
for it, and they concluded from Jaidev’s readiness 
to part with his money, that he merely designed to 
have them arrested on their return to the city. 
One of them proposed to put him to death, but 
another said that would be a meaningless act. 
They only required his wealth, and that they had 
obtained. It was at last decided that they should 
cut off his liands and throw him into a narrow and 
dark wed, and this was accordingly done. 

Jaidev, it is said, meekly accepted the treatment 
he had received as a fate predestined for him, and 
applied himself to divine contemplation and the 
utterance of God’s name, it chanced that Karaunch, 
the King of Utkal, passed that way, and hearing 
that Jaidev was in the w'eil caused him to be extri¬ 
cated. Jaidev was so little revengeful for the 
injuries he had sustained, that, in reply to the 
king’s inquiries as to the cause of his mutilation, 
he told him he had been born so. The king became 
convinced that Jaidev was a saint, and congratulated 
himself on his good fortune in meeting such a man. 
The king had him conveyed to his capital where 
he was treated with all honour and respect, and 
a house set apart for him. He was, moreover, 
provided with food and every article of comfort. 
The king himself offered to become his servant, and, 
with hands clasped in the Oriental attitude of sup¬ 
plication, begged Jaidev to say what duty he could 
r^der him. Jaidev had one request to make, and 
that was that the king should serve holy men and 
not him. In happy faith and witli open heart the 


12 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

king obeyed and performed menial service for the 
saints of God who were waiting at his gate.^ The 
fact that the king was performing such services was 
noised abroad and the thags, among others, heard 
of it. They assumed the guise of rehgious men 
and proceeded to the monarch’s gate. This led to 
an interview with Jaidev. He recognized them, and 
told the king that they were his brethren and very 
holy persons. Fortunate was the king in having 
been favoured with a sight of them, and devoutly 
ought he to serve and minister imto them. The 
king took them into his palace, and lavished on 
them every honour that Oriental politeness and 
hospitality could suggest. 

t^e thags, however, recognizing Jaidev, were 
troubled for their safety, and apphed for permission 
to depart. This was fmally granted, and J aidev 
dismissed them with a large present of money and 
a convoy of soldiers for their protection. On the 
way the soldiers fell into conversation with their 
charge. They remarked that they had never be¬ 
fore seen visitors to the king so heartily and 
kindly treated, and tliey inquired in what relation¬ 
ship the men they were escorting stood to Jaidev. 
The tha^ replied : ' What shall wc say ? It is not 
a ht thing to tell.’ The soldiers promised them 
perfect secrecy. The thags then proceeded to exer¬ 
cise- their inventive faculties developed by long 
practice. They said that Jaidev and thev had been 
servants of a king- For some offence Jaidev had 
been condemned to death, and they had been ap¬ 
pointed his executioners. They merely, however, 
cut off his hands and thus saved his life. Through 
gratitude for that favour Jaidev induced the king 
to pay them such extraordinary attention. It is 
said that God could no longer endure the fabrica¬ 
tion of false charges against His saint. The ground 

^ Tills service consists in washing the saiiiis’ feel, waiting on them 
at dinner, walking round them in an attitnde of adoration, See., &c. 


JAIDEV 13 

opened beneath the feet of the thags, and they 
sank into the pit ot hell. 

The soldiers in amazement returned to Jaidev 
and told him what had occurred. He began to 
tremble with pity for the tliags, and made a gesture 
as if rubbing his hands—^the Onental attitude 
expressive of grief—whereupon, it is related, new 
hands sprouted from his body. The soldiers 
went and informed the king of the two miracles 
their eyes had beheld, Tlie king proceeded to 
Jaidev and performed before him the prostration 
due to saints. He begged Jaidev to explain how 
the incidents had occurred. The saint for a long 
time refused, but, when greatly pressed by the king, 
gave him a detailed account of all the circum¬ 
stances. The king’s faitli in Jaidev had now readied 
its utmost limit, and he knew that the man before 
him in the guise of a saint was really a divine in¬ 
carnation. It is the usual custom of saints when 
they receive evil al^vays to return good, even as 
bad men return evil for evil, so the king deemed 
his conclusion warranted by the forgiving conduct 
of J aidev. 

Jaidev felt a longing lor home and told the king 
of his determination to take his leave. The king 
put his head on the saint’s feet, and represented to 
him that his country had turned to God and the 
practice of virtuef since it had been trodden by his 
holy feet. If the saint were to depart, the king’s 
subjects would turn away from their faith. He 
therefore implored him to defer his departure. As 
a further inducement to Jaidev to abide with 
him, he went himself and brought Padamavati so 
that the saint’s happiness might be complete, and 
his distant home forgotten. Padamavati was in¬ 
stalled in the royal palace, and the queen received 
stringent orders to perform all menial offices for her. 

While Padamavati resided at the court the queen’s 
brother died, and his wife was burned with him on 


14 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

the funeral pyte. One day when the queen was 
boasting of the wonderful devotion of her sister- 
in-law Padamavati smiled. When asked the reason 
she relied, 'To bum oneself alive with ones 
husband's corpse is far from being the acme of 
affection True affection and love require a woman 
to sacrifice herself directly she even heareth of her 
husband’s death.’ ‘ In the present age. replied the 
queen ' thou alone art such a Sati, a word defined 
by the author of the Bhagat Ma/ as a ' woman who 
considereth her husband a god and hath no con¬ 
cern with any other deity. Not feehng nattered 
by the well-nigh unapproachable stand^d of con- 
jugal devotion which alone Padamavati considered 
as worthy of admiration, the queen determined to 
put her to the test at the first opportunity. 

One day when Jaidev was absent from home, the 
queen arranged that one of the royal servants in 
pretended haste was to come to her when with 
Padamavati, and inforni the latter that Jaidev had 
been attacked and killed in the forest by a tiger. 
On the servant coming to where they were seated and 
repeating this carefully tutored story, Padamavati 
swooned and fell lifeless to tlie ground.^ 

The queen w'ho had brought about this disaster, 
turned pale and became distracted at the unexpected 
turn of events. She was severely rebuked by the 
king when he heard of tlie occurrence. Life became 
bitter to her, and she made preparations for death 
on a funeral pyre which she had constructed. WQien 
the circumstances were communicated to J aidev, he 
appeared in time to hinder the immolation of the 
queen, and approaching the dead Padamavati sang 
his well-kttowm ashtapadis. To the surprise and 
joy of all, she was restored to life, it is said, and 
joined her husband in his song. 

^ The story in Nabbaji'.s Mhaj^at Mai the join in the 

plot. We adopt ie prelerenee t'l^ atory in the Marathi workj BMraf 
kAanda fka 


JAIDEV 15 

Jaidev and his wife by this time had had sufficient 
experience of regal life. They were glad to abandon 
all state and return to their lowly home at Kenduli, 
whei'e they enjoyed the society of saints and trans¬ 
ferred their idolatrous devotion to the love and 
homage of the one true God. 

On the anniversary of Jaidev’s birth a religious 
fair is held at Kenduli, the poet's birthplace, and 
is attended by thousands of Vaishnavs who cele¬ 
brate the occasion by assembling round Ids cenotaph 
for worship, and singing the most sublime portions 
of his immortal songs. 

The following hymns of Jaidev in far other style 
and manner, and written in the popular language 
of his time^ are found in the Granth Sahib. 


HYMNS OF JAIDHV 

Gujari 

God’s attributes, moral injunctions, and the iU’ 
utihty of Hindu forms of worship 

Before all things was the Being who is unrivalkd and 
endued with peitnanence and similar attribute; ^ 

Who is supremely wonderful, distinct from nature, incom¬ 
prehensible, and pervadeth creation. 

Repeat only the beloved God’s name, 

Which is ambrosia and the essence of all things. 

By rememberiiig Him the fear of birth, old age, and 
death afflicteth us not. 

If thou desire the defeat of the god of death and his 
train, praise and bless God, and do good worts. 

God is equally In the present, past, and future, im¬ 
perishable, and supremely happy. 

^ The attributea of God here meant are m/, stability or penrnmence; 
ehil, sensation; and happiness. 



t6 bhagats of the gkantft sahib 

0 HiflTij if thou seek to do good acts, renounce greed and 
the coveting of another's house,^ 

Together with all evil deeds and e%dl inclinations, and 
seek the protection of God. 

Embrace the service of God alone in thoughtj deed, and 
word. 

What availeth the practice of jogj sacrifice, alms,, and 
penance ? 

0 man, utter the name of God, the Bestower of all super¬ 
natural jwwerp 

Jaidev hath come openly into the acylmn cf Him who is in 
the present aiid the past, who is contained in all things, 

MAiiU 

The following hymn, which in the original is per¬ 
haps one of the most difficult of human compositions, 
is given to illustrate the practice of jog A 
I drew up my breath by the left nostril,, 1 fixed it 
between both nostrils^ and 1 drew it down by the right 
repeating oam sixteen tinaes at eacli 

1 That ifij bis wife and property. 

^ It has been explained that jog means the union of ihe soul wkb 
God, and ih* first means of effecting this is to train nnd obtain corn- 
pktfi mastery over the itispiratory and expiratory organs. In the first 
stage oi dits exercise the breath is drarni up through the left nostril, 
called I'ra, while the syllable one of the symbols of God, is slowly 
repeated sixteen times. The breath is then suspended in the upper 
part of the nose where both no^triJs meet. This junction of the no&trila 
h called As ihe breath has been drawn up by the left 

nostril, so it is forced down through the right, called pings/^^ the 
S)^IIab!e cam being again sixteen times repeated- 
But ^ highest exerdse of this practice is drawing the breath up to 
itw brain, which in the language of Lhe Jogia is styled the tenth gate, 
the other gates or apertures of the body beiitg the eyes^ ears, nose^ 
mouth, &c. To assist in keeping the breath in the brain, the tongue 
is bene backwards so as io close the air passage. The operator also 
exerts himself (o allow no breath to issue by the mouth or nostrils. 

A state of susf^iided animation then ensues. The brain is heated^ 
and Is said to distil nectar which falls on the tongue, and then a state 
of ecstasy supervenes. Skill in this practice, Tvhich is said to greatly 
weaken the boriy, is now'ail^j’S obtained by very few persons. 

5 AW appears to mean here 'whaL is known to the Jogis as the 



HYMNS OF JAIDEV ly 

My streiigtli I broke, ahd I have become weak ; my 
unstable mind 1 fixed and made stable; my unfashioned 
mind I fashioned, and then I quaffed nectar. 

In that state I sang of iliin who preceded the soul ^ and 
the three qualities.® 

The idea that Thou and I are distinct hath been removed. 

What was wortliy of woi'sbip I worshipped, what was 
worthy of trust I tinisted; and I have become blended 
witli God as water ’with water. 

Saith JaideVj I have repeated God’s iiiune,® and becoming 
absorbed m His love iiave obtained Him who liveth undis¬ 
turbed. 


NAMDEV* 

Namdev was the son of Damasheti, a tailor, who 
resided at Narsi Bamaiii, a village neai’ Karbad in 
the Satara district of the Bonnbay Presidency. 
Namdev's mother was Gonabai, daughter of a tailor 
at Ealyan, in the same district. Both Namdev's 

^ God the Supreme Spirit, is the source whence the souls, JiTtHIatua, 
of all animals have proc^ded. The soul can only relurei to God by 
good works and Uborious struggles for perfection. As long as God 
and the aout are disLmct, the latter is subject to rrangmtgmtion. 
When by_ the practice of good works the light of the soul blends 
with the light of God, riiru^ or eternal rest, is obtained, 

^ That Ls^ from wjiom the sool and the three qualities emanated. 
God being a spirit cannot be said from a humaD point of view to 
possess any attributes, 

^ /dtda'j which literally means victory to God. 

* The acconnta of Namdev current in different provinces and 
languages of India are, for the most pa^t^ incorrect- The most trust¬ 
worthy materials for his life are contained in the compiled by 

Mr. Tiikarflm Tatya. Tt contains many hyiime attributed to Namdev 
himself, but even tJiese ooiitain several exaggerations. 

The author is indebted to Messrs. A, F. Maconochie and 
L. J. Mountford, governors of Lhe ShoJapur District^ and to 
Messrs, Nh G. Chandorkar and S, Sardesai, offidals in the ^ame 
diatrietj for inquiries made regarding the Jives of NamdeV and other 
saints of the DaKhau. 

I'F 






c 


i8 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

father and mother, and probably theii’ ancestors^ for 
some generations, possessed great devotional entnu- 

^"^^tside the village of Narsi Baraani stood the 
temple of Keshiraj (Shiv), of whom Bamasheti was 
a devout worshipper. He never omitted to pay 
a dSrily visit to the temple tiiid niak^ an ofiering to 
his god. NamdeVs mother when pregnant used to 
reouest everybody she met to repeat the name of 
her favourite god. Namdev was born on Sunday 
the eleventh day of the light lialf of tlie month of 
Kartik in the Shaka year 1192, A. a 1270. At the 
age of three years the young saint used to ejaculate 
the name of the local god of his devotion, At the 
age of five years he was sent to school, but he made 
no progress in learning. W'lienever he found an 
opportunity, either in the absence of his teachers or 
otherwise, he set his schoolfellows singing songs to 
his favourite god, in which he joined both w'ith 
voice and cymbal accompaniment. It is said tliat 
he loved God even from the day of his birth, and his 
divine love and devotion increased with his years. 

At the age of eight years Namdev was betrothed 
to Rajabai, daughter of Govind Sheti. By her lie 
ultimately had four sons, Narayan, Mahadev, Govind, 
and Vithal, and one daughter named Limba Bai. 

His father finding that he made no progress in 
learning apprenticed him to his own trade. It very 
soon became manifest that Namdev paid no attention 
to practical busings, but spent his time consorting 
with religious mendicants, visiting the temple of 
liis god, and performing the devotions usual in sudi 
cases, It was then decided to put him to commerce. 
To this he consented, but represented that he 
possessed no capital. This was procured from a 
friendly banker. When Namdev found himself in 
the possession of funds, he gave a great feast to 
Brahmans, which exhausted all his money. At this 
both his parents and the moneylender were greatly 



i NAMDEV 19 

y distressed. His mother bitterly reproached him for 
his recklessness and extravagance— 

' Was it for tins I carried thee about for nine 
months ? Was this misery kept in store for my 
old age ? 0 why did I not rather remain a barren 
woman than give birth to such a son? Art thou 
not ashamed of thyself ? People laugh at thee for 
thy madness. Have some respect for thy mother. 
Look at my grey hairs. Think of the miseries of 
thine aged father. What wilt thou gain by this 
madness ? There are also other worshippers of 
Keshiraj. Wliy canst thou not act like them ? 
What mei’its wilt thou obtain from this god ? All 
who cared for him were ruined.’ 

Namdev’s mother, finding her remonstrances and 
objurgations useless, appealed to the priests of the 
temple to remonstrate with her son and lead him 
to a right understanding of his worldly position. 
From them, too, no hope was received of the youth's 
amendment. They urged in reply to her repre¬ 
sentations that she was a fortunate mother, and 
that the good deeds of her previous births had 
ripened, and she had obtained a saint for a son, 

One day when Naindev’s father was absent, the 
son took the daily offering of the family to the 
temple. It consisted of milk, which the youth had 
just milked from his cow. He thought that the 
god would freely partake of the offering on which 
he had lavished so much care. The stony idol, 
however, would no^oudisafe to do so. Upon this 
Namdev began to cry, threw himself down at the 
god’s feet and uttered passionate supplications. In 
due time the god relented and accepted the boy’s 
offering. He celebrated the event in the following 
hymn in the Bhairo measure ;— 

Nama having milked his brown cow took 
A cup of milk and a jug of water for the idol. 

* Drink milk and my mind will he at ease j 
Otheiwise my father will be angry.’ 

C 2 





zo BH 4 GATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

A golden cup filled with milk 

Nama took and placed before the idol— 

The saints alone abide in my heart— 

On seeing Nama the god smiled ; ^ 

On giving milk to the idol the worshipper Nama went 
hojme, 

And God appeared unto him. 

With reference to this miracle the autlior of the 
Bhagat Mai, in a paroxysm of devotion, remarks, 
' Congratulations to God who loveth His samts, and 
is pleased with their devotion. Thou whom the 
Veda call Endless, and to attain whom Shiv and 
the other demigods performed every form of pen¬ 
ance, art so much in the power of the saints and 
their love, that Thou performest everything accord¬ 
ing to their desires.’ 

. It appears that Namdev, on arriving at man’s 
estate, for a time grew weary of saintship. He 
records of himself that through evil destiny he began 
to associate with dakaits or Indian highwaymenj 
and plunder travellers. He and his gang killed 
sever^ Brahmans, pilgrims, and innocent men. His 
father and other elderly persons remonstrated with 
him, but he heeded not their censures. At last the 
Emperor dispatched a squadron of cavalry to arrest 
the offenders. They refused to submit, and in the 
skirmish which ensued eighty-four of the troopers 
were slain, whereupon the remainder decamped. 

Namdev possessed a large and excellent mare on 
which he used to scour the country and visit distant 
places. \ATiether as the result of habit or repen¬ 
tance, he made a vow, which he religiously kept, to 
behold daily the idol of Nagnath in the village of 
Aundhi, about sixteen miles to the east of Pan- 
dJiarpur. 

There is another temple of Nagnath in the village 
of Vadval and thither, went Namdev to behold 
the great saint Vishoba Khechar. Vishoba, in order 


NAMDEV 


21 


to make a trial of Namdev, resolved' to assume 
the appearance of a leper. He thought that in 
this way if Namdev’s faith were not strong, he would 
incontmently mn away, Namdev in. his search for 
Vishoba went into the neighbouring temple. There 
he saw a leper lying on the ground resting his shod- 
den feet on a Hngam, the emblem of Shiv. On 
beholding the insult to the idol, Namdev chid the 
leper and asked him to leave the sacred edifice. 
Vishoba replied that he was an old man who could 
not attend to nice formalities of worship, but 
Namdev might turn his feet in whatever direction 
he pleased. Upon this Namdev raised the old 
man's feet and turned them in a different direction. 
There, too, it is said, Namdev again saw a lingam 
under Vishoba's feet. He was astonished, as well 
he might be, on beholding this extraordinary 
circumstance, and asked the leper where Vishoba 
was. The leper replied, ‘ I am Vishoba.' Namdev 
then asked how a man reputed to be a saint could be 
guilty of placing his feet on a lingam and thus 
outraging the god. Vishoba replied that he found 
no place which was not filled with God. Namdev 
bowed to him, and expressed a desire to become his 
disciple. Vishoba then proposed to Namdev to 
take him outside the temple. When Vishoba was 
deposited there, he said he w’ould accept Namdev 
as a disciple, and bade him close his eyes. Namdev 
did so, and on opening them saw no longer a leper, 
but a priest in vigorous health and manly beauty. 

Namdev abode for several months with Vishoba 
Khechar and received insti’uction from him as re¬ 
corded in a work called Namdev Gatha, principally in 
the Marathi language, but containing also one hun - 
dred and ten Hindi stanzas from which Namdev's 
hymns in the Granth Sahib have been selected. 

On one occasion when Namdev went to behold his 
god in the temple he was not allow'ed to enter because 
a Brahman, who had brought cooked food to offer to 


23 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

the god, would not suffer persons of Namdey*s 
degraded caste to stand under tlie same roof with 
him Namdev while detained outside the temple 
saw approach a veiy needy low-caste woman with 
a child on her hip. The child was crying piti¬ 
fully for a morsel of the food brought by wealthy 
persons as offerings to the god. The mother tried 
to restrain the Child’s cries and longings. Tlie child 
refused to be comforted and only cried and coveted 
the more. The woman then began to beat the 
child. Namde\ds heart melted at the sight, and he 
remonstrated with the mother for her behaviour. 
She replied,' The child is very hungry and wishes 
me to give her the god’s food, which is impossible. 
1 have nothing myself, I am totally without means. 
My husband was one of the eighty-four horsennen 
recently cut down by the inhuman dak aits. Being 
thus helpless myself, what can I give the child ? 
I only possess the bones in ray body. Dost thou, 
by thy chiding and harsh words, desire me to feed 
her with them ?' 

Her words pierced Namdev’s heartland he began 
to reflect how many families had been mined through 
his reckless and lawless career. On leaving the 
temple precincts, he bestowed his mare and whatever 
clothes he could dispense with on the Brahmans, and, 
to use his own words, made a friend of repentance. 
He took up a knife, entered the temple in anguish, 
and began to pray to his god. ' O Shiv, 0 Mahadev, 
I have committed many crimes and shall have to 
suffer the torments of hell How^ shall I find salva¬ 
tion ? ’ In his agony of remoree, he thrust the 
knife into his head, upon which blood spurted from it 
and fell on the idol. The ministrants of the temple 
ran up, snatched the knife from his hand, tied hfiri 
hand and foot, and threw him outside the edifice. 
A crowd gathered round him and began to revile 
and spurn him, not for his attempt at suicide, but 
for having defiled the god. 


NAMDEV 


^3 


When left alone, he thought he saw Nagnath in 
a vision, who thus addressed Mm: ' Namdev, thou 
hadst better proceed to Paiidharpur at once. Its 
patron god, Vittha], will purge thee of thy sins, and 
thou shaft not only obtain salvation, but renown, 
as one of God's saints in the world,’ Namdev 
tied up the wound in his head and started for 
Pandharpur, in the company of pilgrims who were 
proceeding thither. On the way he was tormented 
physically by flies which sought to settle on his 
wound, and mentally by the curses and reproach^ 
of his companions. 

Pundarik, who lived in the present district of 
Sholapur, was a saint celebrated for Ms devotion 
to his parents. It is said the god Krishan went with 
his cows and herdsmen all the way from Dwaraka 
on the margin of the Arabian Sea to behold the pos¬ 
sessor of such filial piety. Krishan left his belong¬ 
ings at Gopalpur on the margin of the Bhima river, 
and proceeded to the dwelling of Pundarik. Pun- 
darik by way of hospitality threw him a brick to 
stand on. The god accepted the offer in the hope of 
friendly converse with the saint, but the latter was 
so much engaged in the service of his parents that 
he had not leisure to speak to him. Krishan, dis¬ 
daining to return to Dwaraka without effecting his 
object, rernained standing on the brick, and was 
named Vitthal.’^ 

Long afterwards the place was the scene of the 
depredations of a famous robber. The renowned 
Emperor Salivahan, whose capital w'as at Paithan, 
south of Aurangabad, and who gave his name to a.n 

r ‘The rame of a, much worshipped god at Pandhirpur. He is 
much resorted to hy the ]ow and mean and despised of all desenp- 
tions. Hence a descriptive derivation has been invented for bis 
name, vis. •»(, from ct'/, knowledge or understanding, /A, cipher, i,e. 
privation, destitution, and / for ht, he takea. Thus vi'if tA, and / form 
ViKhed, and acquire the sense Receiver of the ignorant and the destitute 
of understanding.'—Moiesu orth's Marathi Dictionary. 


24 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

era which preceded the Christian by fifty-seven 
years, sent in the fifth year of his reign an officer 
to rid the land of the freebooter. The officer found 
the god still standing in the same posture as when he 
had been last seen by Pundarik. Tlie place was 
named Pundarikpur—shortened into Pandharpur— 
in memory of the saint and it gradually rose to 
considerable importance and became the most im¬ 
portant place of worship in Maharashfar.^ 

The roof of Namdev’s hut was blown away by 
a storm while the inmates were asleep, A devout 
friend whom Namdev recognized as God incarnate 
at once proceeded to re-roof the building. This 
incident was versified by Namdev in the Sorath 
measure as follows :— 

A near neighbour asked Nama, ‘ By whom didst thou 
liave this hut rebuilt ? 

‘ If thou show me the carpenter, I will pay him twice the 
wages thou didst.’ 

* 0 my sister, my Caipenter cannot be given thee ; 

Lo I my Carpenter pervadeth all things; 

My Carpenter is the Support of the soul. 

If any one want such a hut to be built, the Carpenter 
will require love for His wages. 

When man breaketh with his family and all his friends, 
flien the Carpenter of His own accord comefli to him. 

I cannot describe such a Carpenter ; He is contained in 
ei’Cjything and in ei'ery place. 

As when a dumb man tasteth the great flavour of nectar, 
if thou ask him, he cannot desenbe it. 

Hear the praises ofthe Carpenter, my sister—Herestrained 
the ocean and fixed Dlini as ike siar, 

Rama’s Lord recovered $ifa, and bestowed Lanka on 
Babhikhan.’ * 

1 . ^ ooumry of the Maratlias, bounded on ibe north 

by the Narbada river, «i the south and east by tbe Karrlu'c and 
i elinga, and on tbe \yest by the ocean. ■ ■ ■ ■ 

^ BaWiIfchan (VibMshjin)^ brother of the ft'icliedRawjiiis waaffranted 
Ra^i-an s hm^dotn by Ram Chandar, ^ 



NAMDEV 


35 


The house iii which Namdev and Ids family lived 
and in which in early jrears he plied his trade, is 
pointed out to the visitor. It has been greatly 
CTlarged and modified since the saint made it his 
residence. The roof of the large hall is now sup¬ 
ported by pillars. It is said that Namdev buried 
many of* his voluminous works within the house, 
and forbade their exhumation under a solemn 
malediction. 

A girl called janabai went with her parents to 
visit the temple of Pandharpur. She there obtained 
such an access of devotion that she refused to re¬ 
turn home, and her parents returned without her, 
Namdev happened to see her, and, taking an 
interest in her, made inquiries regarding hfu: paients 
and place of residence. She replied that she had 
no parents but God, and no residence save His 
temple at Pandharpur. Namdev was moved to take 
compassion on her, and entrusted her to his mother. 
Janabai developed poetical talents, and several of 
her compositions are extant. She has given some 
particulars of Namdev’s life,^ 

The Hindus desired to test the reality of Namdev's 
fast on the eleventh days of the light and dark 
halves of the month. Tliey sent him a lean Brah¬ 
man who asked for some food, Namdev refused 
as it was the eleventh day. He was fasting himself, 
and he thought others ought to fast also. The 
pretended Brahman said that he was at his last 
gasp through hunger. ‘Bring me something at 
f once.' In short, such was the insist^ce of the 
Brahman in asking and of Namdev in refusing, 
I that a serious difference resulted between them. 

I Several people assembled on hearing the uproar, 

i and advised Namdev to give something from his 
p kitchen for the sake of peace and dismiss the Brali- 

^ 1 In the courtyaid ol Namd«i.''s house is a niinia.lure statne ^of 

(he lady wearing an ample crinoline. She is reverenced as a saint 
both by inhabitants and pilgrims. 


36 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

man. Namdev refused, as he deemed fasting on 
the eleventh day the most important form of devo¬ 
tion. The Brahman insisted on not taking his 
departure till he had received something to eat. 
He accordingly fell down at Namdev's door, and 
pretended to die of hunger the same evening. 

Persons unacquainted with the strict rules for the 
eleventh day's fast began to charge Namdev with 
the heinous crime of having caused a Brahman's 
death. Namdev neither feared nor heeded their 
censure. He prepared a funeral pyre, and seating 
himself on it beside the Brahman, ordered it to be 
lighted, The Brahman had no wish to immolate 
himself and promptly rose from the pyre and de¬ 
camped, Thus was Namdev rescued from the 
death which he had courted. The bystanders, on 
seeing what had occurred, became believers, and 
accepted as a fact that Namdev was under the 
special protection of heaven. 

A Brahman called Parisa Bhagwat Hved in Pan- 
dharpur. He had a philosopher's stone——^the 
word from which his name was apparently derived. 
His wife Kamalja one day went to the adjacent Ehima 
river and there met Rajabai, Namdev's wife. The lat¬ 
ter complained that her husband Namdev would do 
no work, and that in consequence the family was in 
very straightened circumstances. Kamalja said she 
possessed a philosopher's stone which she would 
lend her. It would convert everything into gold, 
and she would no longer be indigent. Rajabai, it is 
said, took the philosopher’s stone and produced 
much gold by its agency. When Namdev heard of 
this, he took the stone and threw it into the river, 
^en Kamalja remonstrated with him, he dived 
into the water and brought up two handfuls of 
gravd, which he tlirew in front of her. On looking 
she fancied that every bit of the gravel was a philo¬ 
sopher s stone. On this she left her liome and became 
a disciple of Namdev. 



NAMDEV 


37 


Gyaiidev,^ a disciple of Vishoba Khecltar, hearing 
of the fame of Namdev, went to Pandharpnr to 
visit him. Gy an dev was a Vedaatist and pantheistic 
philosopher who relied on knowdedge, while Namdev 
was thoTonghly convinced of the snperiority of de¬ 
votion or spiritnal love to one God. The Brahmans 
deem Vedantism more orthodox as having been 
originally propounded in works which they accept as 
divine revelation. When a man becomes a Vedantist, 
he rejects religious observances and believes himself 
saved during life, Namdev now totally repudiated 
this belief. At the same time there was nothing to 
hinder a Pantheist from consorting with a monotheist, 
and both saints became fast friends ; Gyandev pro¬ 
posed to him that they should go together to visit 
holy places. Namdev replied that he was in the hands 
of Vitthal, and his permission must first be obtained. 
This prehrninary having been arranged, Namdev 
fainted at the thought of leaving his god. Gyandev 
tried to console him, and said that as he was an in¬ 
carnation of Vitthal, the god could have no cause 
for regret. 

In the course of their conversation Gyandev 
asked him to indicate the way of devotion, and 
explain how man could make Vitthal his own. 
Namdev replied, ' The strength of contempt of the 
world should be in tlie body as an unchanging 
companion. Man should lay aside the difference 
between himself and others, and feel no anxiety for 
things of this world.' 

The object of the saints was most probably rather 
a thirst for information than a desire to make a 
religious pilgriinag;e. Had the latter been their 
object, they would have gone first to Banaras, and 
endeavoured to obtain the hall-mark of orthodoxy 
and the favour of the great Hindu priests who 
resided there. The two saints set out from Pan- 

’ JnyCtidev is the correct spelling, but on account of tlie difficulty of 
pronunciation tlie saiot is knoiftT:i in Iticlta ea Gyandev. 



28 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

dharpur for Hastinapur, tlie name by which Dihli was 
then known. The Empfcror Muhammad bin Tughlak 
hearing of Namdev’s influence witli the people, and 
suspecting that it would lead to an insurrection, 
resolved to arrest his career. The following hymn 
in the Bhairo measure gives the result 

The emperor said, ‘Ho, you Nama, 

Let me see the deeds of your God.’ 

The emperor had Nama Birrested— 

‘ Let me see your God Vitthal; 

Restore to life this slaughtered cow, 

Otherwise I will strike off thy head on the spot.’ 

‘ Yoiir majesty, how can that be ? 

No rnan can reanimate what is slaughtered. 

All I could do would be oi no avail; 

TOiat God doeth taketh place.’ 

The emperor fell into a passion, 

And set a huge elephant at Nama. 

Nama’s mother began to cry— 

‘Why dost thou not abandon the God of the Hindus 
and worship the God of the Musalmans ?' 

Namdev ; ‘lam not thy son, nor art thou my mother ; 
Even though I perish, I will sing God’s praises.’ 

The elephant struck him with his trimk, 

Bui Nama was saved by the protection of God. 

Ths king said, ' The Qaais and the Mullas salute me, 

But this Hindu trampleth on mme honour.’ 

The Hindus ssid, *0 king, hear our prayer ; 

Take Nama’s weight in gold,’ 

‘ If I take a bribe I sliall go to hell; 

Sh;dl r amass wealth by abandoning my faith ? ’ 

While Nama’s feet were being chained 

Ho sang the praises of God and beat time with hts hands. 

The Ganges and the J amna may flow backwards, 

But Nama will repeat God’s name, 

Wlien seven gharis were heard to strike/ 

1 Kamdev got orders from the Braperor to restore the covv within 
a pahar or watch of three hours or stiller death. When seven of the ‘ 



NAMDEV 


29 


TJie Lord of the three worlds had not yet arrived. 

Cjod afterwards came mounted on His garur^ 

Which beat the air with its wings 
He took compassion on His saint, 

And came mounted on His garur, 

' Say but tho word and I will turn the earth on its side; 
Say but the word and I will upturn it altogether.^ 

. Say but tlie word and I will restore the dead cow to lifCt 
So tJiat every one may beJ^old and be convinced.' 

Nama said, ‘ Spancel the cow 

They put the calf to her and milked hew 

When the pitcher was filled, with tlie milk the cow^ gave., 

Nama took and placed it before the emperorp 

And the time of trouble came on him. 

He implored Namdev through the Qazis and tlie Muhas— 
■■ * Pardon me, O Hindu, 1 am tJiy cow.^ 

Nama said, * Hear, O monarcli. 

Hath this credential been exhibited by me ? 

The object of this miracle is 

That thou, O emperor^ shouldst walk in the paths of 
truth and humility— 

Namdev, God is contained in everything/ 

The Hindus went m procession to Nama, 

And said, * If the cow^ had not been restored to life. 
People would have lost faith in thee/ 

The fame of Namdev remained in the world ; 

He took saints with him to salvation. 

All trouble and sorrow befell the revilers— 

Between Nama and God there is no differeaceH 

eight ghaiis of die pahiir had elapsed and ihe cow was not reanimated, 
N^lmdev felt anxious; but when the eighth ghari was struck, it is said 
God presented Himself and wiought this mirade to preserve His saint 
from the Emperor^s wrath. 

1 Also ti^nslated—When the end of the watch had slruclt, God 
came riding gn Hisgarur, Vids p. 3l, n. J, 

^ Also tianskted—(a) 1 will take ihee with Me on high ; (1) I will 
take (.he earth and put it in the sky 
^ The gySnls think that these words were intended as ati 

anagram of Salim Shih^ hut Namdev Hvedlong prior lo that monarch. 
The Emperor at the time was certainly Muhatmaifad bin Tughlak. 


30 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Namdevcontinued to preach that God and his idol 
were one, as holy water and ordinary water have 
the same appearance, as a lamp and its Hght, as 
a flower and its fragrance, as the sim and its rays, 
as the cloud and water, as sweetmeats and their 
taste, as a musical instrument and its melody, as an 
object and its shadow axe all inseparable. His 
teaching again involved Namdev in serious difficulty, 
and he had to hastily retreat to save himself from 
the indignat io n and violence of the Muhammadans* 

Namdev and Gyandev next proceeded to Kashi 
(Banaras), where they met the renowned Sanskrit 
scholars of the age. Thence they travelled to 
Priyag. Thence they vrent to Gaya, where Budha 
in days long past performed his heroic penance 
and renunciation. Thence the two saints pro¬ 
ceeded to Ajudhia, the birthplace of the god Ram 
Chandar. They then went to Mathura, the birth¬ 
place of the god Sri Krislian, thence to Gokal and 
Bindraban, thence to Jaganiiath, the temple of the 
lord of the world, on the shore of the Bay of Bengal. 
From there they made the long journey to Dwaraka 
by the shore of the Arabian Sea, the scene of Krishan's 
retreat from the battle in which he v.'as defeated by 
King Jarasandh, 

The two saintshaving thus proceeded f o the utmost 
limit of India resolved to begin their homeward 
journey, and in due time reached Mar war. They 
tarried for a n^ht in Kolad, probably the modem 
Koilatli near Bikaner. Here occurred an incident 
which is related by the Marathi chronicler. Namdev 
and Gyandev both felt thirsty. There was a well 
in the neighbourhood, but it was very deep, and 
they had not the means of drawing water. It is 
said that Gyandev by the aid of jog science assumed 
a minute body, descended into the well, and quenched 
his thirst. He then challenged Namdev either to 
assume a minute body and descend info the weh 
or drink water from his hands. Namdev, who was 


NAMDEV 


31 


no believer in tlie efficacy of jog, declined the 
challenge, and said that if his god Vishoba were 
there, he would supply him with water. Upon this, 
it is said, the well filled to the brim with sweet 
water, and Namdev’s desires were in every way 
gratified. 

Namdev and Gyandev then departed for Rame- 
shwar in the extreme south of India, memorable as 
the place whence Ram Chandar set out on his 
expedition to Ceylon, After seeing the temple of 
Oamkar the two saints proceeded to Kalapdliara and 
thence to Dhara. In the latter place they visited 
the temple of Audhiya Nagnath. When Namdev 
arrived at the temple, he began to sing hymns with 
a loud voice. This attracted a crowd of people, 
so that the Brahman ministrants could not gain 
entrance without suffering the pollution of being 
touched by men of lower caste, deemed unworthy 
of salvation. Upon this they asked Namdev to 
cease singing and retire to a spot at the rear of the 
temple where he might continue his minstrelsy if 
he chose. Namdev told them that in God's temple 
there were no higher or lower castes, and that no 
one’s touch could soil those who performed heartfelt 
worship. The Brahmans were not convinced; they 
struck Namdev, deprived him of Ids cymbals, and 
insisted that he should leave the temple. He went 
and sat down behind it and thus addressed God, 
‘ I have no asylum but in Thee, and I want nothing. 
If i^ou show Tliyself to others and not to me, 
lend Thine ear at least to my songs.’ He then 
began to sing verses full of self-reproach and abase¬ 
ment. 

It is said that God, on hearing Namdev’s tun^ul 
worship, was moved with kindness and compassion, 
and caused the temple to turn round, so that the 
door remained opposite His saint. Namdev has 
versified the incident in the following hymn in the 
Rag Malar:— 



32 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Iw<>nt, 0 Lord,wi1:li kughter and gladness to Thy 

But while Nama was worshipping, ths Brnkmans forced 

’"'aS caste is mine, O King of the Yadav,i why was 
1 born a calico-printer ? 

I took up ray blanket, went back, 

And sat behind the temple. 

As Nama repeated the praises of God 
The temple turned towards His saint. 

Namdev returned to the subject in the following 
hymn in the Bhairo measure ; 

Forget mo not, forget roe Tiott 
Forget me notj O God I 

Those misled Brahmans of the temple were all furious 
with me; 

Calling me a Sudar they beat me and turned me out; 
what shall I do, Father Vitthal ? 

It Thou give me salvation w'herf I am dead, nobody will 

be aware of it; save me now*® 

If these pandits call me low, then, 0 God, Thine iioiiour 

will be in the backgiound. 

Thou who art called the compassionate and the merciful, 
altogether unrivalled is Tliine atm— 

God turned round the front of the temple towards Nama, 
and its back towards the pandits, 

From Audliiya Nagnath the party proceeded to 
Paithan, Salivahan’s capital, on the margin of the 
Godavari in the present state of Haidarabad, and 
thence to Deogiri, once the capital of the Maratha 
kingdom, in the vicinity of the famous caves of 
EUora, where they met Sadhna, who hospitably 
.entertained them, and then joined them in their 
peregrinations. They visited several places in the 

^ That iSj Krishtkii, Klmdev in die Lransition stage of hii refornia- 
Iton tised the word or estpre^sian YSdAV Raia for God 
^ The me^ln3^lg oF the saint's prayer to God is—Assist me iii this 
world so tliit men may know I am under Thy pruLeclbn/ 



NAMDEV 


33 

neighbourhood of Nasik, and thence proceeded to 
Junagarh in the province of KathiawarA 

No very important incidents are recorded relating 
to the saints’ homeward journey. On arriving at 
Pandharpur, Naindev applied himself to the com¬ 
position of his abhangs,^ His fame rapidly extended 
and his compositions flew from mouth to mouth. 
Many accepted the incidents related in them, but 
others entertained doubts regarding Namdev's ac¬ 
curacy. On being pressed to explain the miracles 
he recorded and give a clear reply as to whether 
he himself believed in them, he asked his inter¬ 
rogator if he had ever heard hells ringing in his ears, 
and if the ringing were real or imaginary. The inter¬ 
rogator replied that he had heard ringing in his 
ears but no material bells were actually ringing. 
Namdev practically admitted that his record of 
miracles was the result of similar deception and of 
excessive and childlike faith. He believed in the 
miracles himself, and gave poetical expression to his 
belief as his vivid imagination prompted him. 

Namdev once met an old friend who questioned 
him on his spiritual progress. Namdev unbosomed 
himself and described his mission to Vadval, His 
friend wondered that a man from whose hands 
his god had taken food, could put himself under 
a human guru inferior beyond all comparison to 
the much worshipped and much beloved Vitthal. 
Namdev replied as follows: ‘ Gods made of stone 
never speak, How can they heal worldly sorrows ? 
People suppose that idols of stone are God, but He 
is a real divinity and altogether different. li gods 
of stone can fulftl man's desires why should he suffer 
sorrow and affliction ? They who worship gods of 

^ We have endeavoured bo follow the saiats’ itinernTr)! ag given in 
the LfveE of Indian Saints, but it is possible that it will ifbenvards be 
re-arranged, should Namdev's Mowers think it necessary* The 
geographical difficulties of the present iimeraty are obvious, 

= Hymns principally in the Marathi language- 

miu Vi D 


* 


1- 


34 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

stone are absolute idiots. Both they who preach and 
they who believe that gods of stone hold converse 
with saints have perverted intellects. They who 
call such gods great beings and style their priests 
saints are really degraded creatures unworthy of 
credence. Let "not their words enter thine ears. 
Hovf can men be saved who cause gods to be carved 
out of stone, and reverently regard them during the 
years of thdr mortal lives ? Hast thou never 
reflected on this ? Thou hast no gods except water 
and stones. Go visit all the places, of pilgrimage 
small and great and see for thyself. I have learned 
in Vadval that God is everywhere contained. 
Khechar conferred the favour on me of showing 
me God iii my own heart.’ 

. The Marathi chronicles show that Namdev died 
on the thirteenth day of the dark half of the month 
Asu, A.D, 1350, at the age of eighty years^ and that 
he was buried in Pandharpur, where his head, 
moulded in brass on the lower step of the temple 
of Vishoba, is now worshipped by the populace, 
He has left several abhangs in which he praj'ed 
Shri Vitthal to give him a last resting-place at his 
feet. He was accordingly buried at the entrance of 
the^ temple of Vislioba under the low'est step of the 
stairs by which pilgrims ascend. He desired that 
liis head should be trodden on by holy men and 
that he should acquire spiritual advantage from the 
dust of their feet. The idea is that when a man 
prostrates himself at the foot of a saint the dust of 
the saint's feet purifies him. The climax of beatitude 
is attained when the dust of the soles of the saint's 
feet falls on the worshipper’s head. 

Opposite Namdev's grave was buried one Chokhya, 
a Mahar of the lowest grade of Sudars—a grade so 
socially spumed that they might not even be touched 
by the higher classes. They were not allowed even 
in the time of Bajirao the last Peshwa (179^1817) 
to travel by the. same road as Brahmans, and it is 



NAMDEV 


35 

believed that they are still not allowed to do so in 
certain places in Southern India, To the right of 
the visitor is seen a representation of Ganesh the 
elephant-headed god of learning, carved in relief out 
of a rock and painted red. Near Ganesh is a shape' 
less block of stone said to represent Hanuman the 
monkey-god and ally of Ram Chandar in his e;xpe- 
ditioTi to Ceylon. 

The temple extends far inwards and contains 
several apartments supported by pillars. Through 
these the pilgrirns pass in batches controlled by 
police officials. Over the apartments are vent holes 
to prevent the pilgrims from being suffocated as 
they pass in large numbers. From the roof of the 
temple is seen a chapel sacred to Rukmani the 
consort of Krishan. at which principally women 
worsliip. Tire temple was called Raul by Bhagat 
Namdev. It now contains many and various jewels 
of great value, the offerings of pious pilgrims for 
the decoration and glory of Vishoba. In the neck¬ 
laces are seen gold coins of Spain, Portugal, and 
other European countries/ . . 

- All Namdev's compositions bear convindng testi¬ 
mony to the love he bore his favourite deity. 
Accordingly, the local tradition that he spent liis 
old age at Pandharpur in tlie immediate vicinity 
of Vishoba’s temple, and that he was buried there 
must be implicitly accepted. 

The Sikhs and Panjabi followers of Namdev say 
that he was cremated at Ghuman in the Gurdaspur 
district of the Panjab. This belief is founded on 
legends current in the north of India and the records 
at a shrine bearing the saint’s name in Ghuman, but 
it is resolutely denied by his followers in Pandharpur, 
who assert that, owing to the fame of his sanctity, 
possession of his remains was claimed by many 

^ le is salisfactory to iind that the Eonbay government allows the 
district British otheiah to be ex-oiheio guardians of the properties of 
the temple. 


D 2 



36 BHx 4 GATS OF THE GROWTH SAHIB 

provinces of India in the same way as the god 
Ram was claimed by the Budhists as one of their 
gurus. 

The following account of Namdev in Nabhajis 
Bhagc^ Mol is accepted by his followers in the Panjab, 
though it probably refers to a different person who 
assumed his name. Bamdev was a calico-printer of 
Gopalpura near Pandliarpur. He had a daughtefi 
a virgin widow, whom he very much loved. Bamdev 
was himself a God-fearing man. When his daughter 
attcuned the age of twelve years, he instructed her 
to serve and worship God under the name of Vit- 
tlialnath, informing hei’ at the same time that, by 
hearty love and devotion to Him, all her wishes 
should be fulfilled. She then applied herself with 
such zeal to the worship of God that in a short 
time, it is said. He even gratified her desire for 
a son, and she became pregnant. This became 
known all over the city, and to the whole tribe 
wherever dispersed. Evil persons rejoiced at the 
^portuniiy afforded them of defaming Bamdev, 
TTie matter eventually came to his ears, and he 
asked his daughter to explain her lapse of virtue. 
She replied, ' Thou toldest me that by hearty love 
and devotion to God, He would satisfy all my wishes 
and desires. Whatever’ hath occurred hath been 
the work of God.' Bamdev on hearing this was so 
overjoyed that he could hardly contain himself. 
When in due time a son was born to his daughter, 
he gave all he had in alms as a thanksgiving for the 
happy event. He called the child Namdev, and 
loved him more than his own life. 

To remove tire objections of evil and slanderous 
jpeople to the child’s birth the Purans and other 
sacred books were consulted, and tlie words of 
God in the second chapter of the Bhagawat were 
explained to the people. There God says, that if 
a man worship Him \dth constant love He will 
fulfil his desires w'heth^ for temporal or spiritual 




NAMDEV 


37 


objects. In the eleventh chapter of the Bhagawat 
it is written, that God bestoweth even salvation 
on His saints, so why not the fnlfilment of their 
worldly desires ? It would be nothing strange if 
He fulfilled the desires of a saint of His who prayed 
to Him with love. 

There used to be a vigil held in Namdev’s bouse on 
the eleventh night of the light and dark halves of 
the month. On one occasion on a dark night the 
assembled saints were tliirsty, but there was no 
water for tliem to drink. No one w'ould go to 
draw from the adjacent well, which was haunted. 
Namdev himself took a pitcher and proceeded 
thither with the object of satisfying his guests. 
A terrible and frightful ghost appeared to him. 
For the object of exorcism Namdev extemporized 
a stanza which he sang to the accompaniment of 
cymbals. The first lines of the stanza are as 
follows ;—■ 

My lougdeggM Sir, I see thy form arise. 

Thy feet on earth, thy forehead in the skies. 

Thine arms are long as jojam ^ to mine eyes. 

It is said that God revealed Himself in the ghost, 
and the latter through the favour of Namdev was 
translated to heaven.® ^ 

The following parable is given by some of Namdev s 
biographers. There was a banker whose riches were 
so great that he had himself weighed with gold 
which he distributed among his poor fellow citizens. 
He sent for Namdev at somebody’s suggestion, Nam- 
dev twice sent him word that he wanted nothing, 
but on the third invitation decided on going to meet 
him. Tlie banker said that he had distributed 
a large amount of money through the city, and 
asked Namdev also to take some, so that he him- 

^ Ajijsii is four bfis. A koa is a linear measure varying in dilTerenl 
pans ofrndia from one mile and a quarter to two miles, 

® Nabhaji’s Biisgst MsL 



/ 


38 BHAGATS'OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

self might reap some advantage from the bene¬ 
faction. Namdev replied, 'Why should I refuse 
anything that would be for tliy benefit ?' At the 
same time he reflected that when the banker aban¬ 
doned the pride of wealth, it would be well for him. 
He therefore wrote the letter R, being half of God’s 
name/ on a sprig of sweet basil, and told the banker 
to weigh gold against it. The banker asked if he 
were laughing at him, and said, ‘Having regard 
for thy holiness and kindness in visiting me, ask for 
what thou desirest.’ Namdev replied that laughter 
and pleasantry were out of place. He only required 
gold of the weight of the sprig of basil Upon this 
the banker sent for small scales, and began to 
weigh the basil with a little gold. The gold was not 
sufficient to weigh down the sprig. The banker 
sent for larger scales, and finding the sprig weighed 
more than five or seven sers, put in siic or seven 
nutm of gold, but still the scale with the basil 
remained on the ground, while the scale with the 
gold kicked the beam. He then borrowed more 
gold from his tribesmen, but all would not suffice 
to lift the basil. At this the banker and his de¬ 
pendants were sore distressed. Namdev then 
saw that the banker had parted with his pride of 
wealth, but that he was still proud of the gcx)d acts 
he had done during his life, and it was necessary 
to dispel that pride also. Namdev told him to 
add the offering of the good acts of his life, and 
perhaps the scale with the sprig of basal would rise. 
The banker did so, but still the scale refused to 
move. The banker’s good acts possessed no weight. 
Upon this he told Namdev to take away all the gold. 
Namdev inquired what use it would be to him. 
He wanted the wealth of God’s service, to whom 
all the deities and the powers of both worlds were 
subservient. The banker grew ashamed and in¬ 
spired with faith became a saint of God. 

’ Ram. The lowel is tiol counted a letler. 








EI£H 1 ] 









NAMDEV 


39 


The following ajre given as specimens of the 
preaching of Namdev, If a man greet another 
outwardly, and inwardly remember his demerits, he 
doeth not well, It is like eating a fly in sweets^ 
The mind is made steady by the knowledge that 
God is all-pervading. That is the true form of 
meditation, As loose women, though in the arms 
of their husbands, think of their lovers, as the 
chatrik while resting on the earth thinketh of the 
clouds which will give it acceptable ram-drops, as 
the lotuses in the lake think of the sun, as a cow 
while gracing in the field thinketh of her calf, as 
a miser while walking in the streets thinketh of his 
wealth, as a goldsmith while making ornaments 
thinketh of stealing the gold given him for the 
purpose, as the chakor thinketh of the moonlight, 
as a woman returning from a well tliinketh of her 
pitcher while conversing with her Mends, as the 
bee while flitting in the glade thinketh of the flower, 
so should man while following the way^ of the 
world think of God in his heart. 

Namdev visited the present district of Gurdaspur 
in the Panjab. when fifty-five years of age, He first 
went to Bhattewal and dwelt beside a tank there, 
which is called Namiana in memory of him. He 
had two disciples—Ladha and Jalla, a carpenter— 
who settled down with followers of their owi in 
the villages of Sukhowal and Dhariwal respectively. 
Namdev removed from Bhattewal, and took up his 
abode near another tank in a lonely forest, where he 
hoped for more leisure for prayer and meditation 
on God. His presence there soon attracted culti¬ 
vators, and the village of Ghuman gradually sprang 
up over the spot where he is supposed to have been 
cremated, A fine domed building was erected to 
his memory by Sardar Jassa Singh Ramgarhia ; and 
the tank was repaired by Mai Sada Kaur, the mother- 
in-law of Maharaja Eanjit Singh. Since then the 
yearly religious fair at the saint’s shrine on the 



40 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

and of Magh.—about the 13th of January—has 
assumed considerable proportions. His followers in 
the Gurdaspur district are of the same caste aiid 
occupation as himself, reverence the Granth Sahib, 
and in many respects resemble the Sikhs in their 
usages.^ 

The following hymns of Namdev are found in the 
Granth Sahib. They belong to three periods of his 
life—boyhood when he was an idolater, manhood 
when he was emancipating himself from Hindu 
superstitions, and old age when his hymns became 
conformable to the ideas of religious reformers at 
the time, and to the subsequent teaching of the 
Sikh Gurus. If is on account of his later and more 
matured opinions tliat Ms writings have been in¬ 
corporated in the sacred book of the Sikhs. 


NAM DEV’S HYMNS 

Gauri 

The saving influence of God's name. 

0 Gud, Thou didst cause stones to float; ® 

Why should not man float over by repeating Thy name ? 

Thou didst save the courtesan, the shapelcH; hunchback, 
the hunstman, and Ajamal, 

1 Setdemert report of the Gurdaspui district by Sir L, W. Dane, 
nov Lisutenamt-govemor of the Panjlb. Lt.-Col. M. W. Bouglas also 
haa favumrtd us with some notes on Nlmdev. 

® Ram Chaiwtor, when he vent to war with Rawan, is said to have 
built a bridge from Ibe mainland of India to Ceylon; and this was 
effetted by causing its rocky maierials to float on the surface of the 
water. It is supposed that the word Ram (God) was impressed on 
every stone, and that it was thus made to float on ihe ocean. In the 
same way God can cause men to swim safely across to the abode of 
bUss, The several persons mentioned—outcasts and sinners— 
succerfed in^pendently of iheh birth and calling; and their salvation 
was effected by repeating the name of God and offering Him suitable 


NAMDEV'S HYMNS 41 

Even the imirderer who shot lirishan in the foot was 

saved— ^ 

I am a sacrifice to those who utter God s name— 

Bidur, the son of a handmaiden, Stidama, and Ugarsea,^ 
who obtained regal state; 

Men without devotion, without penance, without family 
and without good works, were saved by Nama's Lord. 

Asa 

The omnipresence of God. In the Hindu system 
there is no teleological purpose assigned for the 
creation of the world. It is the sport of Maya who 
proceeded from God. Maya still practises every art 
to bewitch and deceive mankind. Namdev's creed 
is the unity of God, who is contained in everything 
and fills all creation. 

I 

There is one God of various Ttutnifesiaiions contained in 
and filling every thing; whithersoever I look there is He. 

Maya’s variegated picture hath so bewitched the world, 
that few know God. 

Everything is God, everything is God, there is nothing 
but God* 

One string holdeth hundreds and thousands of beads; 
God is the warp and woof. 

Waves and foam and bubbles cannot be distinct from 
water. 

This illusion, the worlds is the play of the Supreme God ; 
on reflection thou shsU not f/fid tt different from Him. 

Fleeting phantoms, illusions of dreams man deemeih real 
advantages- 

My guru instilled into me rigid ideas, and when I awoke 
to reason my mind accepted them. 

Saith Namdev, behold the creation of God, and reflect 
on it in thy mind ; 

i Ugirsen was father of Itija Kans, Krishan's unde, who sought lo 
kill him in his childhood lesi he might usurp his kingdom. Instead 
of that Kvislian killed Kans, and gave the kingdom to hts father, 
Ugar&et]. 


42 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

In every heart and in all things nninterruptedly there is 
only the one God. 

The futility of idolatry. 

II 

If I bring a pitcher and fill it water to bathe the 
idol* 

Forty-two lakhs ^ of animal species are in the water; 
God is contained in thsm ; why should I bathe Him ? 

Wherever I go there God is contained ; 

God supremely happy ever sporteth. 

If I bring flowers and weave a garland to worship the 
idol, 

The bee hath first smelled the flowers ; God is contained 

ike bee ; why should I weave Him a gar^Tid ? 

I£ T bring milk and cook it with khir ® to feed the idol, 

Tlie calf hath first defiled the milk by tasting U; God is 
contained in the calf ; why should I feed Him ? 

Ln this world is God ; in the next world is God ; Ihe/e 
is no part of the world without Him. 

Thou art, 0 God, in every place ; Kama representeth. 
Thou flllesf the whole earth. 

Namdev had renounced his secular duties^ and it 
was represented to him that be ought to embrace 
them again. He here gives substitutes for the tools 
of his trade 

III 

My heart is a yard Tneasurc ; my tongue a shears. 

With it I measure and cut off Death's noose 

What care I for caste ? What care I for lineage ? 

I repeat the name of God day and night; 

* Of the eJghiy4our lakhs of animal species in the worJd^ half are 
supposed to be on knd and hatf in water. 

* A Air 13 the Sanskrit xnilk^ but the in later litera¬ 

ture generallj means rice boiled Sn milk and sugar. 

^ The god of death is supposed to throw nooses .to ensnare mortals. 
He does not mow them don-n like Bealh in European mythology. 


NAMDEV'S HVMNS 


43 

I dye wliat ought to be dyed,^ and I sew wliat ought to 
be sewed,® 

I cannot live for a ghari without God’s name : 

I perform worship and sing God’s praises; 

During the eight watches of the day 1 meditate on my 
Lord, 

My needle is of gold, my thread of silver ^— 

Nama’s soul is attached to God, 

The following hymn was addressed to a reputed 
holy man who had stolen a merchant’s money, and 
falsely imputed the offence to Namdev. The mer¬ 
chant had gone to bathe, and while doing so tlie 
hypocrite seated in a religions attitude stole his 
purse. The merchant missed it on returning. He 
could not think of attributing the theft to the man 
in the religious gai'b, so he charged Namdev with it. 
The merchant would not accept Namdev’s denial, 
and had him flogged. While Namdev was being 
punished a storm arose wliich lifted the doth on 
which the reputed holy man sat. The missing purse 
was then found under the cloth, Upon that Namdev 
addressed the following verses to the hypocrite 

IV 

The serpent casteth its slovigh, but not its poison : 

Since thy heart is not pure, 

Why perform mock meditation anti repetition of God’s 
name ? 

Thou art as the crane watching for ftsh in the water. 

The man who eateth the food of Lions,* 

Is called the god of thieves. 

^ 1 Steep my inind in God's n&me. ^ ^ 

^ By meditation 1 unite my son! with God as the needle joins two 

pieces of clothe , - . x- 

3 Ill this line the golden needle r^resenls the gurus instniction; 
the silver thread the pure heart in which it is received- 

^ That is, who lives on plunder. 


44 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Nama’s Lord hath settled tlie quarrel; 

Drink God’s dixirA 0 double-faced one. 

Devotion to God is sufficient for human happiness. 

V 

If thou see the Supreme God, thou shalt have Jio otlier 
desire ; 

If thou think of the worship of God, tliou shalt keep thy 
iTiind free from care, 

O my soul, how shalt thou cross over the wo^ld^s ocean 
filled with the water of evil passions ? 

O my soul^ thou ]\ast been led a^ti'ay on seeing the deceit^ 
ful ’^vorid. 

A citico-printer^s ^ house gave nne birth^ yet I became 
saturated with the guru^s instruction. 

Through the favour of holy men Nama hath met God. 

GujAiti 

Namdev worships the true God aiid is prepared to 
accept whatever He sends. 

I 

If Thou give me an empire^ what glory shall it be to me ? 

If Thou cause me to beg, how shall it degrade me ? 

Worship God, O my soul, afid thou sh'ii^U obiain the dignity 
of salvation, 

And no more tTansmigration shall ai^vait thee. 

0 God, Thou didst create all men and lead them astray 
in error: 

He to whom Thou givest understanding knoweth TheCn 

When I meet the true guru, my doubts shall depart. 

Whom shall I then worship ? none other would be seen 
but Thu. 

One stone is adored, 

^ That hj lurn thine auentiaii to God. 

^ is a traile^an w]io prints caiico, sews k, and Ti-ashes it. 

Hence Narndev is des&rrbed by some as a washerman, by others as 
a tailor, and by others again a calico-printer. 



NAMDEV'S HYMNS 


45 


Another ^ is trodden under icwjt: 

If one is a god, the other is also a god— 
Saitli Namdev, I worship the ime God. 


God's presence is felt though He cannot be 
described. 


II 


He who hath no truce of impurity, who is bey on d im- 
imrity, and who is perfumed as witli sandal bath taken 
His seat in nty }u:art. 

No one saw Him coming ; who knoweth Him, O sister ? 
Who can describe, wiio can understand the All-peivading 
and Unknowable ? 

As the trace of a bird is not perceived in the sky, 

As the path of a fish is not seen in the water. 

As a vessel is not filled with tlie mirage*^vater of the sky, 
Suck is God, Namazs Lord, in whom these three qualiiies 
are blended ; ® His coming or going is noi seen, 


SOKATH 

Namdev advises to accept divine instruction so 
that man may be contented and happy. 

I 

When 1 sing of Gcni, then I behold Him ; 

Then I, His slave, obtain contentment. 

Accept divine instruction, 0 man ; the trne gum shall 
cause thee to meet God. 

.Whej'e the heavenly light shineth. 

There playeth spontaneous music. 

* God’s ® light is all-pervading 


1 The stone or stones on which worahippei'S tread as they enter 
lempies. 

® That is, God exists though no trace of Him is seen. 

® Joti, the luminous One, whose light is everywhere diffused, 
_/?/( /oi sa/ndni. This es pr'essioti is an ordinary Sikh idiom meaning 
that the light of die soul is blended with the light of God. and is 
used Oft the occasion of the death oT Gurus. The whole hymft is in 
praise uf celestial light. 


46 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

By the guru’s favour 1 know that. 

In the chamber of the heart are jewels ^ 

Which glitter there like lightning. 

Goi h near^ hot distant. 

And Tfts Spini completely fillefh mine. 

Wlrere the inextinguishable sun of God's word shineth, 
There earthly lamps grow pale : 

Through the guru’s favour I have known this. 

God’s slave Nama hath been easily absorbed in Him. 

The whole of the following hymn relates to the 
Jog philosophy and the ex^tation of mind pro¬ 
duced by its practice 

IIP 

Withont covering it with leather the drum of ihe brain 
playeth; 

Without waiting for ike month of Sawan the thunder 
roaveth, 

And it rainetlr without clonds. 

If any one consider the real state of things, 

1 have met my dear Lord. 

By meeting Him my Hbedy liath become perfect; ® 
Having touched the philosopher’s stone I have become 
gold. 

Li word and thought I have strung the gems of God's 
name.' 

I ieel real love for God, my doubts are dispelled : 

On questioning the guru my mind is satisfied. 

As the pitcher is filled with, water, 

1 know that the world is filled with the one God, 

When the disciple’s mind accepted the guru, 

The slave Nama recognized God. 

However great man may be, lie should reflect that 
death is his fate at last. 

' Virtues. . . 

* Missing h^'niiiis have already been given in the Life of Nflmdev. 

® This human life has hecome profitable. 



47 


NAMDEV'S HYMNS 

DhaNjVSARI 

I 

Men dig deep foundations and ‘build palaces thereon. 

Was any one longer lived than Markand ^ who fut grass 
on his head and ihui whiled away his days ? 

Only God the Creator is dear to me ; ® 

O man, why art thou proud ? this unsubstantial body 
shall be destroyed. 

The Kauravs, Dutyodhan and his brothers, used to say, 

‘ Everything is ours 

Their umbrellas ^ extended over a space of twelve jojans, 
y$t the vultures devoured their bodies. 

Lanka was all gold ; was any one greater than Rawan ? 

What availed him the elephants tethered at his gate ? 
In a moment they became the property of others. 

The Yadavs practised deception on Durbasa,^ and ob¬ 
tained the fruit thereof. 

Cod showed mercy to His slave ; Namdev singeth His 
praises. 

The following hymn was addressed to a J ogi who 
endeavoured to induce Namdev to embrace his 
religion :— 

I have restrained the ten organs of sense ; tho tiety name 
of the five evil passions I have erased. 

Ha\dng extracted the poison from the seventy-two tanks* 
of the heart, I have filled them with ambrosia ; 

I shall not allow the poison to return again, 

1 Maiiand vi^s a long-lhtd Rikhi who did penance in a forest. 
Theie is a temple dedidaled to htm at JagaimiLtli. 

^ That is, I only think of Him, not of stately mansions or palaces- 

3 Ck5UTUers allo’VL-ed umbrellas^ 

^ The Yadavs sent a boy dressed as a pregnant woman m Darbasij 
and put him the question whether a boy or a girl ^onld be boro. 
Dtirb^a discovered the deception and cursed the YadavSj with tlic 
result that they aU perished- 

^ It was supposed by the myelies that' the heart liad seventy-two 
blood-vessels ; but this is not according to Hindu medical science^ which 
Only allows ten .blood-vessels altogether for the chest.^TJr. Hoeirile, 


48 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The ambrosial word I utter from my heart; my spirit 
I instruct W3t to (dtach to worldly tilings. 

1 have destroyed worldly love with an axe of adamant: 
I toucli the guru’s feet and implore him. 

Turning away from the worlds 1 have become a servant 
of the saints and I fear them.^ 

I shall be saved from this world the moment 1 cease to 
be entangled by Maya. 

Maya is the name of the power which placeth man in 
the womb ; abandoning it I shall obtain a sight of God. 

The man who womhippeth in this way shall be freed 
from all fear. 

Saith Namdev, 0 man, why wander abroad ? ® obtain 
God in the way / kav6 told tkes, 

Namdev tells by familiar examples how dear God 
is to him. 

Ill 

As water Ls dear to the traodlcr in Marwar, aird the creeper 
to tlie camel; 

As the huntsman’s bell at night is dear to tbc hind, so 
is God to my soul— 

Tliy name is beautiful, Tliy form is beautiful, very beauti¬ 
ful Thy colour, O my God— 

As rain is dear to the earth, as the odour of flowers is 
dear to the bumble-bee ; 

As the mango is dear to the kokil,^ so is God to my soul. 

As the sun is dear to the sheldrake, as the lake of Man- 
sarowar is dear to the swan ; 

As the husband is dear to the wife, so is God to my soul. 

As milk is dear to the child, as a torrent of rain to the 
mouth of the chatrik ; 

As water is dear to the fish, so is God to my soul. 

All penitents, sidhs, and munis seek God, but few have 
seen Him. 

^ Also tiatislated—I fear ibe courtesan MUya. 

^ Why lead an ascetic life in the forest ? 

® The k^kil aings during the mango season. 




NAMDEV'S HYMKS 


49 

As Thy name is dear to aJl creation, so is Vitthal to Nama's 
heart. 

Namdev asked his guru how the world had been 
created. The guru replied 

IV 

Before the world a lotus was formed; 

From it proceeded Brahma, and from Brahma all men. 
Know that everything else was produc&d from Maya, who 
leadeth the world a dance. 

Namdev then inquired how Maya was produged. 
The guru replied :— 

First a voice proceeded from God ; 

Afterwards Maya proceeded from God 
Through that voice the parts of this Maya and of that God 
blended,^ and the world was proikiced. 

In this garden of God men dance like water in the pots 
of a well: * 

Women and men dance.^ 

There is no god but God— 

Argue not on this point. 

If thou have doubts, 

God saith, * Consider in thy heart that this world and 
I are one/ 

The world is like water-pots^ sometimes above, sometimes 
below. 

Wandering about I have come to Thy gate. 

God —Who art Thou ? 

Nama—1 am Nama, Sire^— 

O Lord, save me from the world which bringeth death, 

^ Tills and Xht two preceding verses are also thus iranslaLed:— 
Mau should trsi cease to love the worlds 
He should next subdue his senses ; 

Then the soul and God become one. 

® ThaE IS, are Bcunelimes esaUed^ aometitines debased, sometimes 
high, aud sometimes ^ovrt like the water-pots of a Persian wheel when 
in motioh. 

^ That ia, perform thnr viirious functions, 

E 


prKH, VI 


50 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The abovB hymn is also translatsd so as to giv6 
different versions of creation : 

I First a lotus was made by the all-pervading God ; 

From it proceeded Brahma and from him all human beings. 

2 , Others say^Know that everything was produced by 
Maya who mateth men dance various dances, 

3 . A third verston is this — ^First a voice proceeded from 
God; through that voice 

Maya and God united, 

Whence God’s garden,^ in which men dance like water 
in water-pots. 

fftittidev gines his osrtt opi’ttion 

Women and men dance | 

There is nothing but God, 

Dispute not this; 

If thou have doubts,, pray, 

O God, be merciful; come and save me ; Tliou art mine 
only support. 

The world is like water-pots, now high now low. 

Wandering and wandering I have come to Thy door. 

God —Who art thou ? 

I am. Sire, Namdev; save me from the world which 
hringeth death, 

Namdev is happier than demigods and worldly 
men who profess religion. 

V 

0 Lord, the purification of sinners is Thy daily work ; 

Hail to those saints who have meditated on my God. 

On nay forehead is the dust of God’s feet, 

Which is far from even demigods, worldly men, munis, 
and saints. 

Gimpassionate to the poor, O God, destroyer of pride, 

Nama hath found the asylum of Thy feet, and is a sacrifice 
unto Thee. 

1 Saf, rciilily; eM, conscience; and anaud, happiness, are the 
attributes of God: nSfH, name; and riif, form, of Ma)'a. The five 
qualities united form the garden of the world. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


It is said that Namdev composed the following 
on hearing two pandits disputing whether God was 
far or near :— 

Tom 

I 

Some say God is near, others that He is far away* 

To say He is near or far is, ifS it were, to say that a fish 
could climb a date-tree.'^ 

YTiy, Sir, talkest thou nonsense ? 

Tliey who have found God have concealed the fad, 

Men who are pandits shout the Veds, 

But the ignorant Namdev only knoweth God, 

On the eleventh day of every half-lunar month 
the Hindus fast. Namdev relinquished the practice, 
and also ceased to go on pilgrimages* A visitor to 
his house reproached him with his neglect of both 
these religious duties* The following is liis reply : — 

II 

Who that uttereth God’s name retaineth the stain of sin ? 

Siimers have become pure hy uttering His name* 

In the company of God His slave Namdev hath acquired 
ocular evidence. 

He hath ceased to fast on the eleventh day, and why 
should he go on pilgrimages ? 

Saith Namdev, my acts and thoughts have become 

good. 

Who hath not gone to heaven by uttering the name of 
God under the guru’s instruction ? 

Namdev is satisfied with God as his portion, 

HI 

There is, a play on three of words. 

There is a pot in a potter’s house, an elephant in a king s 

house, 

r Also tiandated—0 mh, ihou iiri as a fish in waier and seekesi lo 
climb a dale-trcci 


52 EHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

A widow ^ in a Brahman’s houses ®—sing randi, sandi, 
hand! 0 1 ® 

Asafoetida in a baniya’s house, horns on a buffalo’s fore- 
head, 

A lingam in a temple of Shiv—sing ling, sing, hing O i * 

Oil in an oilman’s house, creepers in a forest, 

Plantains in a gardener’s horise^sing kel, bel, tel O ! ® 

Gobind in the company of the saints, Krishan in Gokal, 

And God in Naina—sing Earn, Siyam, Gobind O f ® 

TilanG 

Namdev feels his dependence on God whom he 
magnifies. ^ 

(if me who am blind Tliy name, O King, is the prop, 

I am pool, I am miserable, Thy name is my support. 

Bounteous and merciful Mah, Thou art generous ; 

T believe that Thou art present before me ; 

Thou art a river of bmnty. Thou art the Giver, Thou art 
eTcceediug wealthy; 

Thou alone givest and latest, tliere is none other j 

Thou art vrise. Thou art far-sighted; what conception 
can I form of Thee ? 

O Nama’s Lord, Thou art the Pardoner, 0 God.^ 

Namdev on the way to DwEiraka was seized by 
a Mughal official and made a forced labourer. In 
his devotion he appears to have recognized the 

1 Hdtidi—stiitA g>ams tiaJiskie this irord almanac, as ilie 
Srlhmans were asironomcrs and ascrologers. Others again translate 
the word learning. 

* Erihiuans' widows were well treated by the publEci 

* Handt, sandf] ianiit arc a widow, an elephant, and a pot 
respectively. 

* Zfrrg-jJttig, A:'sg arc tlje lingam, a horn, and asalbclida respectively, 

* Kfif ie/, and iti are plantains, creepers, and oil respectively, 

* Ram, Siyiin, and Gobind arc names of God, Sijam is ICriihan, 
so called from his sable colour. 

' ^ This hymn, abounding in the original in Arabic words, appears to 
show that NSindev held fiequent religions discussions witb Mullag 
during his travels. 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


53 


Mughal as God, and to have believed that his de¬ 
gradation was God's will. He composed the follow¬ 
ing on the occasion :—■ 

II 

Halloo ! my Friend, halloo my Friend, how art Thou ? 

1 am a sati'ifice unto Tliee, I am a sacrifice unto Thee. 

Good is Tliy forced lahour, exalted Thy name j 

Whence hast Thou come ? where hast Thou been ? and 
whither art Thou going ? 

Tins is the city of Dwaralta ; tell the truth.^ 

Handsome is Thy turban, sweet Thy discourse; 

But why should there be a Mughal in the city of Dwaraka ? 

Among several thousands of people Thou art the only 
Mughal seen; 

Thou art the very picture of the kmg of sable hue ; * 

Thou art the Lord of the horse, the Lord of the dephant, 
and the Ruler of men.® 

Thou art Nama’s Lord, the King of all, and the Giver 
of salvation. 


Bilawal 

Through his guru Namdev has obtained dis¬ 
cernment and rendered his life profitable. 

The guru hath made my life profitable— 

1 have forgotten sorrow and obtained joy within me. 

The guru hath granted me the eye-salve of divine know¬ 
ledge.* 

0 my soul, without God's name man’s life is vain. 

Namdev knoweth God by keeping Him in mind : 

My soul is absorbed in Him who giveth Ufc to the world. 

To sing God's praises and remember Him is 
infinitely superior to ail Hindu forms of devotion, 

^ ]^c?tus£ is ii very h&ly place^ Jm-il man iiiust: not uUer 

falsehoods the/t, 

^ Krishan, ihe lord of Dwimka, 

® The Sm, Indar, and Brahma respectively. 

^ To see more clearly. 



54 


BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHXB 


Gaund 

I 

Were I to perform tlie hoi:se- 5 acrifice,i 
Give my weight in gold as alins. 

Bathe at Pryag* 

It would not l>ft equal, 0 Kama, to singing God's praises. 
0 listless man, worship thy God* 

’Were I to offer rice-balls^ at Gaya, 

Dwell at Banaras, 

Recite the four Veds, 

Fulfil aU religious offices, 

Hestrain my senses under the guru's instruction, 

Perform the six duties of Brahmans, 

Read the conversations between Shiv and his consort 
All these different occupations ufouid be useless ; O my soul, 
lay them aside. 

And remember, remember God's name. 

Worship Him, Nama, and thou shalt swim across the 
world^s ocean. 

Namdev by familiar examples describes his love 
for God. 

II 

As the deer followeth the huntsman's bell. 

And giveth up its own life rather tiian cease its atten¬ 
tion, 

In the same way 1 ga^e on God. 

I do not leave Him to turn my mind in another direction. 
As the kinghsher gazcth on the fish. 

As the goldsmith meditaielh stealing gold while fashion- 
ingit, 

As the lustful mau ga^etJx on the wife of another, 

^ In the earliest ages of Hinduism the horse as an animal of greal 
value was sacrificed by hings who were disappointed of offspring, Iti 
later times the sacrifice was made priucipally for ostentarion. by kings 
who aspired io be greater than their fellows. 

® Bails made of rice and harley are offered to the pi£ras, manes or 
ancestors, at Gaya, one of the holiest of Hindu places of pilgrimage* 

^ In the TanUr Sl^star. 




NAMDEV'S HYMNS 

As the gaTtiblcr meditateth cheating while playing 
kauris,^ 

So Nama ever meditateth on God’s feet— 

Wherever I gaze there is God, 

A prayer for salvation ;— 

in 

Float me over, 0 God, float me over ! ^ 

I am unskilful and know not how to swim ; 0 God, my 
Father, give me Thine arm. 

He to whom the true gum hath taught knowledge, is 
changed in a moment from a man into a demigod, 

1 have obtained the medicine by which, though begotten 
by man, I have conquered heaven. 

Place me even for a short time where Thou hast placed 
Dhru and Naxad, 

By the support of Thy name many have been saved; 
this is Naina’s pri\'atc opinion, 

By other familiar examples Namdev describes his 
ardent longing for God, 

IV 

I am ardently longing for the Friend— 

Without her calf a cow is lonely. 

Without water a fish wiitheth, 

So without God’s name doth poor Kama. 

As the calf, when let loose, 

Sucketh his dam’s teats and swalloweth her milk. 

So Namdev hath obtained God^— 

>\’hen man meeteth the guru he showeth the Unseen— 
As the wicked man loveth anotlrer man’s vrife, 

So Nama loveth God, 

As matt’s body burneth in the bright sunshine, 

So doth poor Nama without the name of God. 

The advantages of repeating God's name, 

1 In a played with kauris the gambler cbeati in the counting. 
3 Tliatls, Save me! Save me I 



56 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

V 

By repeating the name of God all doubts are dispelled— 
Repeating the name of God is the highest rdigious 
fiieifcise — 

By repeating the name of God caste and lineage are 
effaced. : 

That God is the staff of the blind man. 

I bow before God ! I bow before God I 
By repeating God’s name Death torturetli not, 

God took the life of Haraakhas, 

And made for Ajamal a dwelling in heaven. 

The (XJurtesan who taught her parrot io repeat God's nanie 
was saved— 

That God is the apple of mine eye™ 

By repeating the name of God, Putana ^ full of deceit. 
The destroyer of clnldren was saved ; 

By remembering the name of God the daughter of Drupad 
Was saved; 

Gautam^s wife‘s though turned into a stone, was saved. 


1 Putana was a ihuse whom Kriahiii's uncle, Kans, sent to destroj? 
him by applying poison to the nipples of her breasts. Krfshan, thoujrli 
an uifant, squeezed her to death, With her last breath she said 
‘God, let me go.‘ For mentioning the name of God thus once she 
obUiiKd BaJvation^ 


s Gautam, the husband of Ahalya, was a pious Rikhi who used to 
go and bathe in the Gangea after the first watch of night. The god 
Indar waa wont to visit Gantam’s wife during his absence. One 
night the rose at midnight. Ahal^^a became impatient for the 
vieic of her divan* paramour, and went to awake her husband telEint 
him It was the usual time for his ablutions in the sacred river 
Gau^m arose and proceeded on hia pious duty. While batiiiiiff 
a voice prodded from the Ganges, and told him not to come so 
early to bathe. Gautam replied that it was the usual time of his 
visit. The Ganges eaplained to him that it was not thj'te o’clock 
.1 "^jidge by a deceptive midnight moon, 

? V? i “ >^e‘“rned to his house and found bis 

th» court-yard. He asked her who was in 

^ Manjlta' a word wliich means either cat or 
utother s ioyer. Gauiam, on account of her equivocation, cursed her 

Si T monkey*god. Gautam on entering Ids houS 

found liidar with his wife. The lioly Rikhi cursed IndstTwilh dire 


NAMDEV^S HYMNS 


57 


God destroyed Kesi^ and Kans, 

And conferred the gift of life on Kali nag. 

Naraa representeth, by repeating the name of such a God 
fear and trouble depart. 

The fate oi worshippers of false gods. 

VII 

They who worship Bhairav shall become sprites; 

They who worship Sitala shall ride on donkeys and 
scatter dust— 

For myself I take the naifie of the one God; 

1 would give alt other gods in exchange for it. 

They who repeat the name of Shiv and woi:ship him^ 

Shall ride on an ox and play the drum; 

They who worship the great mother Durga, 

Shall be born as women instead of men. 

Thou callest thyself, 0 Durga, the primal Bhawanij, 

When it came to my turn to be saved, where didst thou 
hide thyself ? 

Under the instruction of the guru, O my friend^ ding 
to God's name— 

Nama represent eth, thus aaith the Gita.^ 

and shanneful result. He cursed his wife too, and she was turned 
into a stone in the foreat. The god Ram in his ts^ivels sLtinibJed 
against the stone^ and by the diving touch Alialya abtained the boon 
of saivation. 

^ Kesi came in \ht disguise of a horse to eat up Krisban, but v?as 
killed by that hero thrusting his arm into his mmxh and rendmg him 
asunder* 

^ The following are ihe allusions in the above hymn r— 

Ehairav is an inferior manifestaLioii of Shiv and his consort iJurga. 
Shiv in this form is represented riding on a dog. 

Sltala is the goddess who presi^s over smaU-pos^ She is re¬ 
presented riding on a donkey^ and is largely woirahipped by Indian 
women, particularly during epidemics of the disease, 

Those who worsihip Bhairav, sprites, Sttala^ and Shiv, contract the 
qualities of the steeds of the ob}ects of their worship. 

■ Durga cannot-confer salvation^ She bestows wealthy, oifspringj Ac. 
When King Pipa asked l^er foi' salvation she professed herself unabk 
to grant it. 



58 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Namdev admonishes an idolatrous Brahman. 

VIII 

To-day I Nama saw God, I wrap admonish the fool— 

0 pandit, thy gayatii used to graze on the boor’s field; 

He took a stick and broke bar leg; since then she hath 
walked 

0 pandit, I have seen thy great god Shiv going along on 
a wlute bulloct, 

In his consort Parbaif's house a banquet for him was 
prepared ; he killed her son.® 

0 pandit, thy Ram Chandar—I have reen him too. going 
along; _ ^ 

Having lost his wife he fought with Rawan. 

The Hindus are blind, the Musalmans purblind ; 

The man w^ho knowetlx God is wiser than either. 

The Hindus worship their temple, the Musalmans their 
mosqne. 

Nama worshippeth Him who hath neither temple nor 
mosque. 

The saint Trilochan once twitted Namdev with 

1 The giyairi h saJd to have originally beeu the wife of Brahma. For 
some shortcoming on her part Brahma cursed her^and she became a cow^ 
Tu this form she used to gJ'ase on villagers^ fields until one of tliem took 
a stick and broke her leg; since then she has been lame. There is 
another story in wiueb the gayatri Is mentjoned- ■ Vjsbwamitra and 
Vishiaht ^-ere two eiBiiient Rikhk The former^ iu revenge for a slight 
oiFered binij killed the hundred sons of the latter. At every murder 
he used to repeat the gayatri to obtain absolnitEon for the crime. Upon 
this ViEhisht Cursed the glyatri and it lost eight of its lettera. See 
Vol. i, p. 166 , n. 4 . 

s Shiv said he would not partake of the banquet prepared for him 
by Parbali unless his ojt were also fed* The lady inquired what meal 
would please the animal. Shiv replied ^ Your son ^ This he said 
to make trial of her faith. She killed her son to offer his flesh to the 
oi, hut Sbivj on seeing her devotion^ restored the youth to life. 
Another version of this stoiy is tbit Parbati told her son Ganesh lo 
watch outride her door while she was bathing, and allow no one to 
enter and behold her naked ness. Shi v present.^ himself for adrai ssion 
which was refused by Ga-neah; Upon this Shiv killed him, but^ 
softened by the weeping of P^batii again restored him to Hfe, giving 
himj howflverp an elephant's head instead of his own. 




NAMDEV'S HYMNS 


59 

being always engaged in his trade. Namdev made 
him the following reply :— 

Ramkali 

I 

A bcfy takdh paper, cntteth it into a Jdte, and flyeth it in 
tire sky. 

While conversing with his companions, l^e keepetb his 
attention on the string. 

T have pierced my soul with God’s name, 

As the goldsmith’s attention is engrossed t» hh work. 

The queen’s female servant taketh her pitcher, hlleth it 
vidth water, 

Converseth laughingly and pleasantly, yet keepeth her 
attention on the pitcher. 

If the cows of a city with fen gates ^ be let loose to 
graze, 

And they go grazing for even five miles, they will remem¬ 
ber their young, and return each by her own gate. 

Saith Namdev, hear, 0 Triiochan, when a child is laid 
in its cradle, 

Its mother, whether engaged at homo or abroad, beejJeth 
her thoughts on her child. 

The following hymn embodying Namdev’s reso¬ 
lutions is also believed to have been addressed to 
TrUochan :— 

n 

The endless songs and poetry of the Veds, Purans, and 
Shastam I will not sing; 

I will play unbeaten music in the imperishable region of 
God; 

Ceasing to iove Uie world I will sing of God. 

Imbued with Him who is beyond expression and indes¬ 
tructible, I shall go to the abode of the Inscrutable One, 

1 will cease to hold my breath in the right or left nostril 
or between them both. 


^ Thiii means a great city and a great number of catiie. 



6o BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I deem tie left and right nostril the same ; 1 shall be 

blended with the light of God. 

I will not g£) to see places of pilgrimages nor enter their 
waters ; I wJU not annoy men or lower animals. 

Tlie gntu showed me the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage 
in my heart where I will bathe. 

1 will not have myself glorified and congratulated by my 
select friends. 

Nama saith, my heart is dyed with God, and I shall be 
absorbed in Him. 


God preceded all creation, all 
all karma. 


Ill 


religious books, and 


When there was no mother, no fatlier, no karma, and 
nobody ; 

When we were not and you were not, who was there and 
whence did he come ? 

0 God, no one hath any relation ; 

Man's dwelling in this world is lik$ ih& perching of a bird 
on a tree. 

When there was no moon, no sun, when there was only 
water and air blended together, 

When there were no Shastars and no Veds, whence did 
kanua come ? ^ 

I have by the favoui" of the guru obtained God^ f or whom 
the Jogis suspend tlidr breath, and fix their attention on 
the bridges of their noses, and t!)e Baimgis wear necklaces 
of sweet basil, 

Nama representeth, God is the Primal Elssence; when 
there is a true guru he showetlr Him, 


The repetition of God’s name is superior to all 
other forms of worship. 

IV 

If one perform penance with body reversed at Banaras, 


1 dev in eans that evejythmg proceeded from God, whom he says 
i» the follOhving; verse he ha 9 found. 



NAMDEV'S HYMNS 6i 

and die at a place of pilgrimage; if one burn one's body 
with fircj or strive to make it survive for a kalpa ; ^ 

If one perform the horse sacrifice or offer secret presents ® 
of gold, ail that worJd not be equal to the name of God. 

O hypocritical man, renouDCe deception ; practise it not; 
Ever and ever take God’s name. 

^ Wert thou to go to the Ganges and the Godavari every 
twelfth year, bathe at ICedamath, 

And make offerings of thousands of cows at the Gomti; ® 
Wert thou to perform millions of pilgrimages, freeze thy 
body in the Himalayas, all 'would not be equal to the name 
of God ; 

Wert thou to offer horses, elephants, 'women with their 
couches, lands, and make such gifts continually to Brahmans ; 

Wert thou to purify thy body and offer its weight in gold, 
all 'would not be equal to the name of God. 

Look for the pure dignity of Nirvan, and be not &p$r- 
angry with thyself, or attribute blame to the god of 
death.* 

Nama representeth, drink the real nectareous elixir of 
my king Ram Chandar, the son of Jasarath Rai,* 

Mali Gaura 

The following glorification of Krishan was com¬ 
posed after Namdev had embraced his worship;— 

I A ialpa is a. day and nig;ht of Brahma, four tiillion lliree hundred 
and tu'enty miJlion 

s gold concealed tn frail: or similar arttcles such aa were 

riven to naen in In olden limes to purchase ihelr favour- 

* This is the we)l-kna\Fn river in Awadh (Oude) generalfcy known, 
as ihc Gumti. It is so called uot from its winding—stream, 
but because h gave vater and coniiibuted to pasturage for tine. 
There were several rivers of that naniifj one of which a£ one time flawed 

into the Indus. f j -f 

^ It will tie your own and not the fault of the god of death u you 

are not saved, and you should noL blame him^ ^ j . 

The preceding lines of this hymn and EUawal \ I, mven m s 

life, show that he worshipped the supreme Godj. here called Kim 
Chandar, as He is in other places Ram, Hari, The words 
Rdt appear lo have been added ns a steteotyped expression of 

that transitional age. 



62 BHAGAT5 OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I 

Happy, liappy that flute which Krishati played ! 

A very sweet uiibeaten sound issueth from it. 

Happy, happy that blanket which Krishati wore t 
Happy, happy that ram and his fleece it was mad6 jrcm. 
Hail, hail to thee, mother Devaki, 

In whose house god, the lord of Lahshmi, was 5ofM ! 
Blest, blest the forest glades of Bindrahan, 

Where Nama’s god Narayan sported. 

Played his flute, herded his cows, 

And w'as happy. 

II 

God, my father, hail to thee, dark complexioned Vitthal 
with the long hair [ 

Holding in thy hand the discus, thou didst come from 
heaven and save the life of the great elephant; 

Thou didst save Dtaupadi when her dothes were being 
tom off her in Duhsasan’s court; 

Thou didst save Ahalyathe wife of Gautam; 

How many liast Thou purified and saved I ^ 

Thus the lowly Naradev without caste hath entered Thy 
sanctuary. 

God is in everything and Namdev has become 
absorbed in Him. The following marks a stage in 
Namdev’s progress to divine unity. 

Ill 

In every heart God speaketh, God speaketh ; 

Doth any one speak independently of Him ? 

There is the same earth in the elephant and the ant; 
vessels of many kinds ® arc made from saf^. 

In mobile and immobile things, in worms and moths, and 
ill every heart God is contained. 

Think of the one God who is endless; abandon all other 
hope. 

^ Also translated—How many hast Thou sai'ed by the touch of 
Thy feet I 

^ Thai 19, various bodies are fashioned from the some materia]. 


NAMDEV’S HYMNS 63 

Nama representeth ; I have become free Irom desires; 
in this staU who is Lord and who is slave ? ^ 

Maru 

God has showered His favours on Namdev as He 
did on other saints. 

Wlien I entered the asylum of God the bridegroom* I 
obtained the four stages of salvation and tile four super¬ 
natural powers. 

I have been saved> I have become famous through the 
four ages, and 1 have put the umbrella of praise and fame 
over my head. 

Who hath not been saved by repeating ih^ nam& of the 
Sovereign God f 

They who Hslm to the guru's instruction and associate 
with holy men are called saints. 

On beholding the effulgence of the gum^ who is conspicu¬ 
ous with his shell, discus, necklace, and saoifidal mark, 
Death becometh afraid. 

Man then becometh fearless, and by the power of God 
thundereth forth that he hath escaped the pain of tran;^ 
migratioiL. 

God gave king Ambarik ^ the gift of salvation^ and 
aggrandized Babhikhan with sovereignty ; 

The Lord gave the nine treasures to Sudama, and made 
Dhru immovable in th& m^th where he is fixed to the 
present day ; 

God having assumed the body of Narsinli the nuin-Uon, 
killed Harnaklias for the sake of his saint Prahlad. 

Nama saith, Vishnu is in the power of the saints* and is 
till now standing at the door of Bali,® 

^ The Lord and the slave are blended ici one, NSttndev has 
obtained salvation. 

® Ambairk was a king of Ajudbia famed for his pietj. He was an 
EUcestor of Ram Chandar. 

* Bali* son of Frahlfldn tbrough his devotion and penance humbkd 
the gods, and extended his authority over tlie three worlds. The gods 
appealed to Vishnu for probeclioUj and under the disguise of a 
dwarf, restrained the energies of Bali, took heaven and earth from him^ 



64 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Bkairo 

Namdev enjoins his tongue under severest penalty 
to utter God’s name. 

I 

O my ton^e, if thou utter not God's name, 

I win break thee into a hundred pieces. 

0 tongue, dye thyself with God’s name ; 

Meditating on God's name dye thyself with a good 
dye ; 

Fidse, O my tongue, are all other occupations, 

Tlie dignity of Nirvan is only oiiahted through the name 
of God, 

Wert tliou to worship coimtless millions of otlrer 
gods. 

It would not be equal to repeating God’s name alone, 
Namdev representeth, this do, 0 wiy tongue, and say ‘ O 
God, Thy forms are cudleas,’ 

A man may in other respects be perfect but he is 
lost if he repeat not God’s name. 

II 

God dwelloth near him 

Who coveteth not another's wealth or another’s wife. 

I will not look at him 

Who repeateth not God’s name. 

As a beast is that man 

Whose heart is estranged from God. 

Namdev representeth, a man without a nose 
Doth not look well even with the other tliirty-two marks 
of beautyd 

and left him the infernal regions. Though Vishnu gained dils 
supreme vielpry, yet, as he was pleased With Bail’s dei-otion, he agreed 
to stand at his door and wait upon him. 

' marks include npt only perfecUon of limbs and features, 

out arLficial ornamenb and decorations by which beauty is supposed to 
be enhanceOH 


NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


65 

Whan Namdev gave up trade, and devoted him¬ 
self eKclusively to the worship of God and attend¬ 
ance on His saints, people began to slander him. 
The following is his apology 

IV 

I am a mad woman and God is my spouse ; 

U is for Him 1 decorate myself elaborately. 

Abuse me well, abuse me well, abuse me well, 0 people ; 

My body and soul are for my beloved God. 

I hold no idle discussion with any one; 

T sip with my tongue the elixir of Gtid. 

Now I know in my heart that such an arrangement hath 
been made, 

By which I shall meet God with banners and music. 

Whether any one give me praise or blame, 

Naraa hath met God.'^ 

Man ought to be satisfied with bis lot; he will 
be saved by devotion. 

V 

Sometimes man is not satisfied even with milk, molasses, 
and clarified butter; 

Sometimes he beggeth moisds from house to house ; 

Sometimes he piefceth up pulse-sweepings. 

Remain as God hath placed thee, O brother— 

Tire greatness of God cannot be described—■ 

Sometimes man rideth on prancing steeds ; * 

Sometimes he hath not shoes for his feet; 

Sometimes he putteth himself to sleep on a coucli with 
a clean coverlet; 

Sometimes he cannot get straw to — 

Saith Namdev, the Name alone saveth ; 

He who hath found a spiritual guide shall be delivered, 

^ Sriraug, a name under which God is worshipped in parts ol the 
south of India. The nansc Srirangapacam {AngUc^, Seringapatam) is 
derived from this word, and means the town of Srirang. 

* Literally—he maketh his TurklstElrii steed tknee. 

F 


flKllh W 



66 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Namdev describes by familiar examples how deal' 
God is to him. 

vn 

As food is dear to the hungry, 

As the thirsty need watei’, 

the fool is attached to his family, 

So God is dear to Najua. 

Nania’s love is devoted to God, 

And he hath easily severed himself fram tlie world. 

As a woman is smitten with a strange man. 

As a greedy man loveth wealth, 

As woman is dear to the lustful, 

Such is Nanaa’s love for God. 

TJiat is real love by which God attacheth man to Him, 
And by which through the guru’s favour dusdity^ de- 
pailetli. 

Love for Him who hUeth «fy heart shall never be sundered ; 
Nama hath applied his heart to the true Name. 

As the love between a child and its mother. 

So is my soul imbued with God. 

Namdev representeth, I love God ; 

He dweheth in my heart. 

Man should rather seek the guru’s protection than 
devote himself to sinful pleasures. 

virr 

As a fool leaveth the wife of his home. 

Hath intercourse with a strange woman, and is ruined. 

As the parrot is pleased on seeing the simmal,® 

But at last dieth clinging to it, 

So the home of the sinner shall be in lielhfire ; 

He shall continue to bum and never have respite. 

He never goeth to see wliere God is worshipped, 

He ieaveth the right path and goeth the wrong one, 

^ Buhidha here means separalion froin God. 

The parrot h panieutarly pleased with the simmai-tree and ita 
wtton pads, but when he pecks at it he cannot diseiiigage his bill and 
thus perishes. 





NAMDEV'S HYMNS 


67 


He lorgetteth. God and suffereth trajismigratioiij 
He rejecteth ambrosia and eateth a load of poison. 

Wbon a dancing-girl arrivetli on the dancing-floor» 

She puttetli on rich dresses, adorneth herself, 

Danceth to measure* and niodulatetli her voice. 

While Deatli's noose is on her neck. 

He on whose forehead such destiny hath "been 
Quickly entereth tlie protection of the guru, 

Sait}^ NamdeVj this is my decision— 

0 saints, thus shall you obtain salvation. 

The fate of Harnakhas who objected to his son 
Prahlad's devotion. 

IX 

Sanda and Marka ^ went and complained to Harjuikhas — 

' Thy son Praklad will not study and we tired of 
teaching him ; 

He singeth God's praises, bcateth time with Ids hands, 
uiid cormpteth all the other pupils ; 

He repeats til the name of God; 
lu his heart he remembereth God." 

The queen represented to Iter son—‘ The king hath 
reduced the whole earth to subjection; 

My son Prahlad, thou doest not his bidding; he hath 
some design on thee.' 

A council of his enemies met and passed a resolution, 

^ We will lengthen his Ufe/ ® 

They terri^d him hy throwing him fro^n a height, by put¬ 
ting him into water and fire, but God changed for him the 
properties of matter. 

Hamakhas enraged drew his sword > and threatened liim 
with death, ^Show me who will save thee.' 

Prahlad replied, ^ Gcd who weareth yellow clothes^ the 
Lord of the three worlds* is in the pillar.'* 

Upon this God tore Hamaklias with his nails* and reii- 
dered demigods and men happy.® 

^ These two brothers were both preceptors of Prablad. 

2 Ironical, mea-ning ^ We will kill him. 

^ Here the ^ord sarifitA wonld also mean Lhat God reassumed his 

F 2 



68 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Saith Namdev, 1 meditate on that God who bestcweth 
salvation. 

The advantages of a guru. 

XI 

When one liath a guru, he meeteth God ; 

Wlien one hath a guru, lie is saved ; 

When one hatli a guru, he goeth to heaven j 

When one hath a guru, while he livetli he is dead— 

True, true, true, true, true is tlie guru; 

False, false, false, false is all other service than ftts— 

When one hath a gum, he inculcateth the Name ; 

When one hath a guru, he iunneth not in the ten direc¬ 
tions ; 

When one hath a guru, he is far removed from the five 
evil passions; 

When one hath a guru, he dieth not of grief ; 

When one hath a guru, he obtaineth the ambrosial Word ; 

When one hath a guru, he heareth the story of the In¬ 
effable ; 

Wlien one liatb a guru, his body becometh immortal; 

When one liath a guru, he utteretli the Name; 

WTien one hath a guru, he seeth the tiitee worlds ; 

When one hath a guru, he knoweth how to reach the 
exalted position; 

When one hath a gum, his head toucheth heaven ; 

When one hath a guru, he is ever congratulated ; 

When one hath a guru, he is ever estranged from the world; 

When one hath a guru, he abandoneth slander ; 

When one hath aguru,hedeemeth evil and good the same; 

When one hath a guru, good destiny is written on his 
forehead; ^ 

When one hath a guru, evil passions seduce not his body; 

When one hath a guru, the temple turneth him ; 

authority over demigods and tnen, who had previously been subjects 
of Harnakhas. 

^ According to the Sikhs evil destiny may be attened by the kind¬ 
ness of tbe Gum, as a coin is renewed by restannping. 




NAMDEV^S HYMNS 


69 


When one hath a guru, his hut is rebuilt for him ; 

When one hath a guru, his bed cometh forth from Ih^ 
river ; ^ 

When one hath a guru, he batheth in the sixty-eight 
places of pilgrimage ■ 

When one hath a gum, the quoit of Vishnu is impressed 
on his body ; 

Wlnen one hath a gnTU^ he petformeth the tVL^dve adora¬ 
tions ; ^ 

one hath a giiru> all poisons become wholeson^e ; ^ 

When one hath a guru^ doubts are dispelled ,; 

When one hath a gum, he cscapeth from Death ; 

When one hath a gum, he crosseth over the terrible ocean ; 

When one hath a guru, he snffereth not transmigration ; 

When one hath a guru, he obtaincth the advantages of 
the eighteen Purans ; 

When one hath a gum, he obtaineth the eighteen loads 
of vegetables ; 

Without the guru, there is no re$Hng-pl ^^—■ 

Nanidev hath entered the guru's protection, 

Namdev onco fell into a trance, and thought he 
was playing cymbals in God's honour. God is said 
to have appeared before him as a Qalandar, and 
taken his cymbals from him. Namdev on awaking 
composed the following in God's praise :— 

XII 

Come God, the Qalandar 

Wearing the dress of an Abdali.'^ 

^ The Emperor, on being satisfied of Niimdftv's iniQOcen^p presented 
him with a gilt bed- Kamd-ev at first refused lo it, buc when great 
presAiirfi was employed, took it and llirew it into the Ganges- The 
Emperor thereupon asked the saint \o restore it. He called upon the 
holy rive]' to give it up^ and the story goeg that st did so with six 
other similar beds. 

^ There are twelve great lEngams; possessing a guru Is equal to 
them all. 

^ All pains are turned into pEeasurea, 

^ This word now generally means a hlnhamniadan devotee. It 
literally means—servant of God. 



70 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The firmament is the hat on Tliy head, the seven nether 
regions Thy slippers; 

All animals with skins are Thy temples; thus art Thon 
decked out, O God! 

The fifty-six millions of clouds are Thy robes and the 
sixteen thousand queens of Kriskan Thy waistbands ; 

The eighteen loads of vegetables are Thy clubs, the whole 
world is Thy salver ; 

Nama’s body is Thy mosque, his heart Thy priest who 
tranquilly prayeth. 

0 Thou with and without form. Thou who art ivedded to 
lady Lakshmi, 

While I was woi-shipping Thou Imdst my cymbals taken 
from me ; to whom shall I complain ? 

Nama’s Lord is the Searcher of all h^atts, and wandereth 
in every land, 

Basant 

Man ought not to abandon God's service even 
though it be irksome, 

I 

If a servant run away when his master is in trouble,^ 

The servant shall not be long-lived, he shall Imng ^ame 
on his father and mother’s family. 

T will not abandon Thy service, 0 Lord, even though men 
scoff at me; 

Thy lotus feet dwell in my heart. 

As man accepteth death to secure wealth, 

So the saints relinquish not God’s name. 

Pilgrimages to the Ganges, Gaya, and Godavari are worldly 
acts; 

If God be pleased, Nama shall be His worshipper, 

Nam dev’s prayer when in danger of drowning in 
the stormy ocean of worldly love. 

11 

The waves of covetousness sound like a cataract, my 
body is drowning ihenin, 0 God. 

* Also transliKed—£veii if a mssler annoy hb servant, and the 
latter flee away, 




NAMDEV'S HYMNS 


71 

Float me over the ocean of the world, O God, float me 
over. Father Vitthal. 

In this gale I cannot steer my boat, I cannot reach 
Thine opposite shore, O God. 

Be compassionate and cause me to meet a true guru; 
take me across, O God. 

Nama saith, 1 do not even know how to swim ; give me 
Thine arm, give me Thine arm, 0 God. 

Man slowly grows up. He then becomes the sport 
of the world and commits sin, but his soul can be 
washed pure by the guru. 

nr 

As an ant draggeth along a bit of cow-dung, 

So this cart fashioned from dust and seed 

At first moveth slowly ; 

But afterwards the world driveth it with a rod. 

My darling soul goeth to the wash-tank,^ 

The washerman * dyed vith love washeth it wiih the water 
of God’s mute ; 

My heart is fascinated \vith God's feet. 

Saith Nama, Thou, 0 God, who art everywhere diffused. 

Have compassion on Thy worshipper ! 

Safang 

Man is intoxicated with w'orldly love but what 
he amasses will not go with him, wherefore he ought 
to prepare for hereafter. 

I 

O man, why hast thou gone into a forest of evil passions ? 

Thou hast partaken of the thieves’ plant ^ and gone 
astray. 

A fish abideth in water, 

And taketh no notice of the deadly net; 

It swalloweth the bait to gratify its palate. 

The congregation of the saints. ® The gvru. 

9 Dhatura, bhang, &e., by which thags stupefy thdi viclima. By it 
here spiritual ignorance is meanr. 



72 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


So man is bound by the love of gold and woman. 

Wlien the bees hoard up a great store of honey, 

Man taketh the honey and throweth dirt on the bees. 
The cow storefh up milk for her calf. 

But the rnilkman tieth the calf up by the neck and milketh 
the cow. 

For wealth man maketh great endeavours ; 

That wealtli lie taketh and burieth in the ground. 

He amasseth a great deal, but the fool understandeth not 
That his riches shall remain on the earth and his body 
become dust. 

He bumeth with great lust, wrath, and avarice ; 

He never joineth the company of holy men, 

Saith Namdev, seek God’s protection 
Become fearless and worship God. 


God is contained in everything. 


II 

WTiy layest Thou not a wager with me, O God, thai there 
is nothing but Thee ? 

The servant is known from his master, and the master 
from his servant; this is my game with Thee. 

Thou art God and Thine own temple, Thou worshippest 
Thyself, 

From water proceed waves, from waves water, though 
both have different names in conversation. 

Thou art the Singer, Thou ait the Dancer, Thou art the 
Trumpet-player— 

N^dev, Thou art my Lord; Thy servant is im¬ 
perfect ; Thou art perfect. 

Namdev^—supposed to address 


III 


‘The man who worsliippofh none but Me b in Mine own 
image; 

The sight of him even for. a moment removeth man's 


^ piehi an is also translated—foiswear those tliinas but this 
meaning would not be appropriate elsewhere. 






NAMDEV’S HYMNS 73 

three fevers,^ ^nd his touch cxtricateth man from the pit 
of family life, 

A saint can release one bound by Me, but I cannot 
release one bound by a saint. 

If a saint seize and bind Me at any time, I can say 
naught to him. 

T am bound by fnen's merits ; I am the life of aU things, 
but My slave is My life,® 

0 Namdev, My love shall shine over him whose heart bath 
such faith.' 

Mauau 

The extent and greatness of God’s palace, in which 
the demigods and all created things are servants. 

I 

Serve God who is unknowable and stainless. 

Give me, O God, the gift of service for mthich saints beg. 

God’s palace hath pavihons on every side ; in heaven is 
His gorgeous dwelling and mansion ; 

He filleth equally the seven regions of the world. 

In His palace dwelleth the &ver youthful Lakshmi ; 

The moon and sun are His lamps, the wretched mounte¬ 
bank Death, who levieth a tax on ah, is His judge— 


Such a Monarch is God. 

In His mansion Brahma with the four faces who created 
the whole world is the fashioning potter ; * 

In His mansion enthusiast* Shiv, the world’s teacher, 
preacheth pure divine knowledge ; 

At His gate are the mace-hearers Evil and Good, and the 
accountants Chitr and Gupt; 

Dharmraj the destroyer is His porter— 

Such a Monarch is God. 

In His mansion are the heralds, the heavenly dancers, the 
ttkhis, and the poor minstrels who melodiously sing; 

1 Adhi't mental pain j vittdhi, bodily pain; ^ipSdhi, pain from external 
causes. A boil would be viadhi, a fell upsdhi. 

® Is v^rj d^T to Me. 

3 Ill allusion to Brahma's r6k as Lbt creator. 

^ Filttd tvith religious enthusiasnip 


74 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

All the Sliastars are Hig actors ; ^ His theatre is stupend¬ 
ous ; kings sweetly sing His praises ; 

The winds are His waving chauris ; 

His handmaiden is Maya who hath vanquished the 
world; 

His fire-place i& the blind pit of hell — 

Such a Monarch is the Lord of the three worldSn 
In His mansion the tortoise is a bed; Vasuki^ with its 
thousand hoods the cords to bind it; 

His flower-girl is the eighteen loads of vegetables; His 
water-carrier the ninety-siK millions of douds ; 

The Ganges is the perspiration of His feet^ 

The seven seas His water-stands, 

All living things His vessels— 

Such a Monarch is the Lord of the three worlds— 

At His mansion wait Arjan, Dhru, Prahladj Ambarik, 
Narad, Nejai,^ the Sidhs, the Budhas, the heralds^ and the 
heavenly dancers who extol Him and play before Him. 

In God^s mansion are so many living beings 
Within all of whom He is diffused. 

Namdev represenfeth* seek God^s protection, 

Whose standard all His saints bear. 

Kanea 

God compared to reflection in a mirror. 

God the Searcher of hearts, 
like a body reflected in a mirror^ 

Dwelleth in every heart; nothing produce th an effect or 
impression on Him. 

He k free from all entanglements and devoid of caste. 
When one looketh at one’s own face in the water* the ^al^ 
can no impression on it. 

So nothing can produce m impression on Vitthal, Namazs 
Lord, 

^ In aliuELOn to the various and different r[tes prescribed bv the 
Shlstars. ^ 

* A serpent frequenUy identified with Sheshnag, 

A holy Rikhi, oftvfioin, olhervrisej noLhing is known ■ 



NAMDEV’S HYMNS 


75 


Phabhati 

Everything is unreal; God alone is real. 

I 

Only the heart knoweth its own state; eHher keep thy 
secret to tkyseif, or tell it to a man ol nnderstandiiig. 

Since I repeat the name of God, the Searcher of hearts, why 
sliould I be afraid ? 

God, the Lord of the earth, hath penetrated me. 

My God is diffused in every place. 

Shops are only phantoms, shopkeepers ^ are only phan¬ 
toms, cities are only phantoms. 

The different grades of men who inhabit the earth are 
phantoms, and the world wandereth in error,^ 

When the heart is imbued w-Lth the guru’s instmetion, 
duality is easily effaced. 

All things are subject to the &}mmander’s order ; He is 
fearless and regardeth all alike. 

He who knoweth and woi-shippeth the Supreme Being, 
uttereth words of divine knowledge, 

Nama saith, I have obtamed the Life of the world in my 
heart j He is invisible and wonderful, 

God communicates to man the perfume of holiness 
and changes him to gold, 

II 

God was in the beginning before the ages and in every 
age : His end is not known, 

God is contained in everything nnintermptedly ; thus is 
His form described. 

The wnbeaten strain resonndetlr for him who repeateth 
God^s n^me— 

Happy h my God^— 

^ J^ssan. Litenilly—draggasta. The wojfd Tiere means men 
generally^ betause they make a display as Oriental diujgtsls do of 
their wares. 

® This and the preceding ILne are also translated—- 

To honour God is my shop, to honour God i& my city, to honour God 

is my world; , 

To honour God is my residence; others wander m different way^ 


76 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The sandal-tree by its perfume is pleasant io the other 
frees of the forest; 

Through God who was before all things and who perfumeth 
like sandal, common wood becometli sandal,^ 

Thou, 0 God, art as the philosopher's stone; 1 am as 
the iroQ ; in Thine association I have become gold. 

Thou art compassionate. Thou art the }ewd and the ruby. 
Kama hath been absorbed in the Tme One, 

Man cannot hope to obtain bliss until he has 
learnt to know God who is within him. 

HI 

The inscrutable Being invented a play— 

God is concealed in every heart, 

No one knoweth the nature of tl^e soul’s light; ^ 

■ftTiat we ourselves have done Tlmu knowest. 

As an earthen vessel is produced from clay, 

So Vitthal created the world. 

The soul's entanglements depend on its acts; 

It is itself responsible for what it hath done. 

Namdev representeth, the soul obtameth the result of its 
thoughts; 

The soul which always remaineth fixed on the Inscrutable 
One, becometb immortal,® 


TRILOCHAN 

Trilochan, a name which literally means three¬ 
eyed, that is, seer of the present, past, and future, 
was a celebrated saint of the Vaisya caste. His birth 
is said to have taken place in the year a. d. 1267.'* He 

^ Men become holy by devotion and pious a^ciation, 

* Since it Domes frotn God and lias not been made by man. 

® Shalt no longer be subject to transtnigratlou. 

^ The dates of birth O'f Tritachao and several other Bhagats have been 
given to the author by Ssdhii Janklbar Satin of Ajudhia, 


TRILOCHAN 


77 


either lived at or visited Pandharpvir in tlie Sholapur 
district of the Bombay Presidency, and was a contem¬ 
porary of Namdev, wKo mentioned or addressed liim in 
his hymns. Inquiries at Pandharpur and the ndgh- 
bonring city of Barsi have, however, failed to 
furnish any information regarding Trilochan. The 
following legend passes for history among his ad¬ 
mirers. He had a peiTect faith in and love for saints, 
blit they visited him in inconveniently large num¬ 
bers, and there were only he and his wife to attend 
and wait on them. He thought that they were not 
served as he could have wished, so he resolved on 
engaging a servant if he could find one who was 
accustomed to minister to holy men. He continued 
to search for such an attendant, but not finding 
one became sad at heart. It is said that God was 
not pleased at the sorrow of his saint, and sent him 
a candidate for service. Trilochan asked the candi¬ 
date who he was, whence he had come, and whether 
he had parents and a house and home. The man 
replied that he liad no parents or home. He had 
merely come to be engaged as a servant. He could 
wait on the saints of God without assistance from 
others, as his life had been spent in such service. 
He gave his name as Antarjami, which interpreted 
means Searcher of hearts. Trilochan was highly 
pleased and ordered his wife to engage him and 
cheerfully supply all his wants. She was cautioned 
to consider his pleasure as her first duty. 

Antarjami performed menial services tor the saints, 
such as cooking, drawing water, washing their feet, 
shampooing and bathing them, in such a manner that 
Trilochan’s house became famous for its hospitality ■, 
and a large crowd of saints began to live with him 
and consume his substance. Thirteen months passed 
iu this way, until one day Trilochan’s wife went to 
visit a female neighbour. The latter inquired why 
she was so dirty and looked so miserable. She re^ 
plied that her lord had taken into his employ a 



78 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

servant who required so much attention that she 
had to spend all her days grinding corn and cooking 
for him. This was reported to Antaijami and he 
promptly disappeared. 

When the time came to wait on the saints, Antar- 
jami could not be found. :Trilochaii became very 
much grieved, and, rebuking his wife, told her tliat 
it was through her indiscretion Antarjami had left 
their service. When Trilochan’s grief had lasted for 
three days it is said that he was comforted by 
divine interposition. He consequently applied him¬ 
self to the praise and contemplation of the one true 
God. His sorrow was tlien dispelled. 

The following hymns of Triloclian are found in the 
Granth Saliib 

Sri Rag 

Trilochan admonishes mortals. 

The heart fedetli gi'eat worldly love, O mortal, through 
which man forgetteth old age and the fear of death. 

O fool, thou art pleased on beholding thy family, like 
a thief on espying his neighbour's house. 

When the powerful myrmidons of Death come with a 
rush, 

I cannot withstand them. 

May some friend «)me and speak to me I ^ 

Come to me, my God, throw Thine arms around me! 

Come to me, my God, and rescue me I 

In various pleasure and royal state, O mortal, hast thou 
forgotten Cod, and deemest thyself the only immortal one 
in this world. 

Deceived by mammon thou Ixast not thought of God. and 
hast lost thy life, 0 heedlejw man. 

Mortal, thou must tread a difficult and terrible path 
where neither sun nor moon hath entrance. 

Whan man hath abandoned the world, he forgetteth his 
worldly love. 

^ That is, give me spiriiiial consolation. 






TRILOCHAN 


79 

To-day it hath become clear to mine understanding that 
Dharmraj will keep his eye on nmn. 

There his very powerful myrtnidom wU I’ub men between 
thdr hands, and none may withstand them. 

If any one give me instruction, let it be Otis lhal God is 
contained in every place 

O God, saith Trilochan, Thou knowest everything. 

Gujaki 

A Hermit, a Sanyasi, a Brahmin called Jai Chand, 
a Jogi, and a Kapria held a religious discussion in 
which eacli maintained tlie superiority of his own 
sect. They came in the heat of their arguments to 
Trilochan, and he, knowing that they were all 
hypocrites, addressed them each in turn as follows : — 

To the Jimnit .—Thou hast not cleansed thy heait from 
filth, although thou wearest the dress of a hermit. 

To the Sanyasi .—In the lotus of thy heart tlvuu hast 
not recognized God ; why hast thou become a Sanyasi ? 

To the Brahmin.^T\\on hast gone astray in error, 0 Jai 
Chand, 

And not recognized God the Primal Joy, 

To the JogL —Eating in every house Oiou hast fattened 
thy body ; thou ixiearesi a patclied coat and beggar’s ear¬ 
rings for gain. 

Thou hast rubbed on thyself tiie ashes of tlie cremation- 
ground, bid, being without a spiritual guide, thou hast not 
found the Keal Thing,® 

Why mutter spells ? Why practise austerities ? Why 
churn w'atcr ? 

Remember God the Dweller at ease, who liatli created 
tlie eighty-four lakiis of eristences., 

To the Kapria.—0 Kapria, why carriest thou a water- 
pot ? Why wanderest thou to the sixty-eight places of 
pilgnmage ? 

Saitli Trilochan, hear, O mortal, having no com why 
layest thou a threshing-floor ? 


® fFafi Jtm, lileriUy— Id tbe woods and glades. 


s God. 


So BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Last thoughts determine man’s future state. 

At the last moment, he who thinketh upon his wealth 
and dieth in that thought, 

Shall be bom again and agam as a serpent. 

0 my friendj forget not God’s name. 

At the last moment, he who thinkcth of a woman and 
dieth in that thought, 

Shall be born again and again as a prostitute. 

At the last moment, he who thinketh upon a boy ^ and 
dieth in that thought, 

Shall be born again and again as a hog. 

At the last moment he who thinketh of a mansion and 
dieth in that thought. 

Shall be horn again and again as a sprite. 

At the last moment he who thinketh upon God and dieth 
in that thought, 

Saith Trilochan, shall obtain salvation, and God shall 
dwell in his heart. 

Dhanasari 

Trilochan, engaged in his devotions, neglected his 
worldly calling, and this led to his straitened domestic 
drcurnstances. Thereupon his wife became discom 
tented and upbraided God. The following is Trilo- 
clian’s remonstrance. He endeavoured to console 
her by telling her that her distress was the result of 
her sms. 

Why slander God, 0 erring and ignorant woman ? 

Thy woe and weal are according to thine acts.® ' 

Though the moon is attached to Shiv’s forehead, and 
daily bathetlr in the Ganges ; 

Though Krishun the avatar of Vishnu became indamate 
in the moon's family; . 

Yet the stain contracted on account of his misdeeds is 
ineffaceable from his head ; 

Arun, the charioteer, whose lord is the s«m, the lamp of 

^ * Lethe. This phrase is aiao translated—^Ile who thinketh upon 
his children. The idea apparently is that man ought to think of 
nothing hut God in his last moments, 

* When such is the case, it is no use to rail at God in adversity. 



TRILOCHAN 


8i 


the earth, who>se brother was Ciarur, the king of birds, was 
born without feet on account of his sins ; 

Shiv, the remover of many sins, the lord of the three 
worlds, wandered to many places of pilgrimage, but never 
reached tire end of them: 

The act of cutting of Brahmah head was never effaced 
from his person. 

Although ambrosia, the moon, the all-yielding cow, 
Lakhshmi, the miraculous tree, the steed with seven faces, 
and the physician arose from the ocean, the lord of rivers. 

Yet on account of its deed the brackishness of the ocean 
departeth not; 

Although Hanuman who burnt the fortress of Lanka and 
uprooted the park of Rawan, took the wound-healing plant 
to Ram Chandar and made him happy. 

Yet, on account of his act of theft the curse that he shotUd 
neoar have more than a loin-cloth was not effaced from his 
person. 

The result of past acts is never effaced, O wife of my house; 

WTierefore repeat for me the name of God ; 

Triloch an repeateth God’s name.^ 

I The foliowbig aie the allusions in ths preceding hymn 

The 5wrj<iri is the Ganges, so called because it (e sitrott ii sari, [he 
river of demigods or divine heroes. It is said to flow from Shiv's 
head. 

Krishan belonged to the Chandarbans, or family of the moon. 
Ram Cliandar, on the other hand, belonged to the Sflrajbaiis, or fuaily 
of the sun. 

The moon feD in love with the wife of Brihaspati, the spiritual guide 
of the gods, and took her away. The dark spot in the mooii is said 
to be the stain resulting from this act. In Sanskrit and cognate 

lUeralure the moon IS masculrne, 

Aron was son of Vinata by Kashyap. Vinata prematurely hatched 
an egg, and the offspring was bora without thighs, hence he is called 
Anuru, Lhighless, or VipSd, footless. He cursed his mother, and 
prayed that, for having brought him forth before the due lime, she 
should be a dave to her rival, Kadru. At his mother’s earnest 
eiUreaties, however, he modified the curse, and said that her next son 
would deliver her fi'om bondage. Arun, in later Hindu mythology, 
appears to be the same as the dawn and the charioteer of the sun. 

Garur,orGaruda, Arum's younger brother, was chief of the feathered 
race, and an implacable foe of serpents- In a contest between his 

C 


SLKH. VI 



82 BHAGATS OF THE GEANTH SAHIB 


PARMANAND 

Parmanand resided at Barsi, north of Pandharpur* 
His era and history are not known. It is said that 
he had the same love and affection for God as the 
milkmaids had for Krishan. In his riper years he 
used to sing the praises of God with the zest of 
a boy of twelve or fourteen years of age, and he 
thus largely contributed to the magnification of 
God’s name. The beauty and deeds of Krishan's 
extern^ and internal body were ever present to him, 
so it is no wonder that he sang the graces, the 
splendour, the loveliness, and the pastoral and 
sylvan sports of that great king with aB the en¬ 
thusiasm of earnest faith and devotion. 

Parmanand used to be so absorbed in the love 
and contemplation of God that tears, it is said, 
flowed continually from his eyes, and times without 
number he experienced an alteration and stoppage 
of his voice during his paroxysms of ecstasy. He 

mother and her rivals Lb& latter was stlccessftil^ a.ndj m accordance with 
ftjrdidons previously agreed oiip made Vtjiata her slave. Gamr 
brought RKtar from heaven to purchase her freedom. Vinana was 
released. The nectar was taken back hy Indar^ but recovered by 
Gamr. Gariir is represented as the vehide of Vishnu and as having 
a white face^ an anuiline nase^ red wings, and a golden body. 

Shiv cut QfFEiahina.'s head, and it would never leave his hand liil 
at last it fell from it at the pilgrimage of Kap^mcchan. 

The Rlkht Agust once tnyited the ocean to a banquet- It failed 
to answer Lhe invitation, wherenpon Agast became angry^ took the 
ocean in his hand and drank it off. He afEer\i?ard9 voided it aa urine^ 
and hence its brackishne^ 

Rain's brothfii: Lakshman was wounded^ and Hannmin, on the 
advice of the physician Sukhen^ took the ksa/j^a plane to heal the 
wound. 

Hfttiumilnj the niontey-godj once plundered a holy manj, leaving 
him only a loin-cloth. Tbe holy man cursed him and said: ^ Only 
a loin-cloth shall remain with thee also. Thou shale never be able to 
put on other clothes.' 



PARMANAND 


83 


used to make seven hundred, protestations to God 
daily, often on the muddy road, A merchant once 
offered him a silken cloth to protect his knees. He 
declined the offer and told him to give it to a 
more needy person, as he hin^elf would be satisfied 
with an old cloth instead. This the merchant 
granted him* 

Parmanand defended the utterance of God’s name 
as a devotional exercise by saying that prayers are 
often not felt, because while repeating them men’s 
minds are apt to wander ; but the continual utter¬ 
ance of God’s name must ever result in heartfelt 
devotion. 

In his hymns Parmanand called himself Sarang, 
by w'hich he meant that he longed for God as the 
sarang or chatrik longs for its yearly raindrops. 

Parmanand's writings are believed to excessively 
increase men’s love for God. It is said to be im¬ 
possible for one to read them without contemplating 
God or bearing an image of Him in the mind. A 
list of Parmanand’s works is ^ven in the Asht 
Chhap or the Eight Marks of the followers of 
Vishnu. 

The following hymn of Parmanand’s composition 
is found in the Granth Sahib. 

Sahang 

O man, what hast thou done by hearing the Purans ? 

Thou hast performed no steady worship^ and not given 
alms to the hungry. 

Lust hast thou not forgotten^ math hast thou not for¬ 
gotten, covetousness hath not left thee; 

Slander hath not left thy lips, and fruitless hath been all 
thy devotion. 

0 sinful man, by highway robbery and house-breaking 
hast thou filled thy belly. 

Thou hast committed the folly from which on thy depar¬ 
ture to the next world infamy will result. 



84 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The desire for the destruction of life did not leiive thy 
heart, and thou didst not cherish mercy for living 
things. 

Parmamnd, thou hast not in the company of holy men 
made current God’s pure word.^ 


SADHNA 

Sabhna is believed to have been born in Sehwan 
in Sind and to have been a butcha: by trade. He 
tra.5 a contemporary of Namdev, He embraced a 
religious life by listening to the instructions of holy 
men, Sadhna never hilled animals himself, but pur¬ 
chased those killed by others and then retailed their 
flesh. He "wiped out the sins of previous births and 
became purified like fine gold which resists the touch¬ 
stone, His idol was the salagram or ammonite stone 
worsliipped by Hindus. With this he weighed out 
meat to his customers. However much or little 
they required, they received the weight of the sala¬ 
gram. 

A Sadhu, or holy man, on seeing the use to which 
the saLagram was applied, thought it ought no 
longer to remain with a butcher, and resolved to 
take possession of it. Sadhna gave it up without 
hesitation. After some time, however, the Sadhu 
took back the salagiam to Sadhna, and told him 
that, though he had bathed it in the five am- 

1 The firit duly ioculcatetl in ihis hymn is, it will be noted, aJroa- 
givin^. Lust, wjRth, covelousneas, and alander ate to be avoided. 
Highway robbery and house-breaHng, which still prevail in India, are 
duly reprobited. The life of no living thing is to be talten. This 
doctnne accepted by countless Hindus, It has descended lo them 
ftotn the earliest ages. The hymn concludes by shoiving the value of 
good example. The good nams suggested as an object is not !be 
good name of this world, but the good name which is equivalent to 
the good will of heaven. 



SADHNA 


H 

brosias,' worshipped it with sandal, sweet basil, and 
so forth, his worship was unacceptable. ‘ The sala- 
gram is jpleased with thee/ said the Sadhu, ' and 
I have sinned by taking it/ By this time, how¬ 
ever, Sadhna's thoughts took a different turn. He 
became wrapped up in the love of God, abandoned 
everything he possessed, and bent his steps towards 
tlie forest to enjoy the uninterrupted worship of 
God. 

On the way he saw some of his relations at a 
distance. He concealed himself and avoided them 
by taking another route lest any of them should put 
pressure on him to return. On arriving in the 
evening at a village, he went into the house of 
a married man and asked for something to eat. 
The lady of the house on seeing Sadhna young and 
handsome fell in love with him. She prepared 
exquisite food for his repast and induced him to 
stay. At night she proposed to elope with him. 
Sadhna spumed her, and said he would not do such 
a thing even though she were to cut his throat for 
refusing. Understanding by this that, if her hus¬ 
band's throat were cut, Sadhna would be ready to 
accede to her wishes, she forthwith went and killed 
her husband. On returning to Sadhna she told him 
what she had done, and repeated her immoral pro¬ 
posal. Sadhna replied, ‘ O unworthy woman, thou 
hast lost thy reason; how can I agree to what thou 
proposes! ?' In her despair slie raised loud cries 
and invented a false accusation against him : ' I 
believed tliis person to be a holy man, and accordingly 
entertained him. He hath now killed my husband, 
and made improper overtures to me.' Sadhna was 
arrested and taken before a magistrate. When 
asked what he had to say, he, with the meekness 
and unwillingness to throw blame on others, which 
have characterized so many Hindu saints, pleaded 

^ The Pattek ainrii, or five necUrs of the Hindus, are curds, clarified 
butler, honey, Ganges ^ater, and milk, 



86 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


guilty to the charge. He thought to himself, * Since 
God hath placed me in this position, no one will 
accept my denial.’ He then composed the following 
hymn:— 

Even though Thou, 0 God, consign me to IieU, I shall 
not dispute it or turn away from it. 

Even though Thou bestow heaven on me, I shall not 
rejoice or praise it. 

If Thou reject me, I cannot constrain Thee; if Tlioii 
accept me, T shall not be puffed up with excessive joy. 

He by whom Thou standee t shoulder to shoulder is dyed 
with Thee. 

Let him whom Thou orderest cheerfully burn his body. 
My mind desireth not death, yet Thou mayest, if it please 
Thee, put me m the fire. 

What the Beloved desireth ought to be the heart’s desire 
also. 

The judge sentenced Sadhiia to have liis hands 
cut off. The punishment was duly carried out, and 
Sadhna was then discharged. He set out without 
a frown on his forehead notwithstanding his bar¬ 
barous mutilation. 

There is a tradition, which, however, is not found 
in the Bhagat M<d, that the woman who had brought 
the false accusation against Sadhna of having killed 
her husband with the object of abducting her, burned 
herself on her husband’s funeral pyre. On seeing 
this Sadhna said, ‘ Ho one kiioweth the way of 
a woman ; she killeth her husband and becometh 
a Sati.’ However this expression originated, it has 
passed into a proverb. 

Sadhna’s devotions proved so successful that it 
IS sard, new hands then sprouted from his body, 
and he was released from all pain of future birtli. 

^ So efficacious,' says the author of the Bhagat Mai 
IS the love of God.' In the Mahabhayai it is stated 
thatj even were a inan to study tlie four Veds it 
would not avail him unless he loved God. And 



SADHNA 


87 

God said, ' Even though a man be the lowest sodal 
outcast, yet if he be a saint of Mine, he is dear 
to Me and worthy of worship*’ 

There is a legend to the effect that Sadhna became 
the object of further persecution. A king, who was 
probably incensed against him on account of his 
religious opinions, ordered him to procure meat for 
him at an unusual hour of night. Sadhna was 
unable to do so, and the king thereupon ordered 
that he should be put to death by being built alive 
into a wall. While the wall w'as closing round him, 
Sadhna is said to have composed the following 
hymn in the Bilawal measure :— 

On account of a king’s daughter a man assumed the 
disguise of Vishnu, 

For love of her and for his own object; but his honour 
was saved. 

Wiat merit hast Thou, 0 Guru of the world, if my sins 
be not erased ? 

What availeth it to enter the asylum of the lion, if he 
allow the jackal^ to dutch me ? 

For want ol a drop of rain the chatrik suffereth agony ; 

When its life is gone, even were an ocean af hand, it 
would be of no avail. 

Now that my life is weary and abideth no longer, how 
shall I be patient ? 

When a man is drowned, even if a boat be obtained, say 
whom shall you put into it ? 

I am nothing, I am notliing, and I have nothing, 

At tJ)is conjuiicture Thy slave, Sadhna, prayeth Thee to 
protect his honour,^ 

^ The licrn here is God, the jackal is the king who sentenced Sadiina 
to death, 

^ The beginning of this hymn alludes to a carpenter’s son tvho, on 
hearing that a king’s daughter desired to marry Vishnu, decked himself 
out with Vishnu’s four arms, club, lotus, discus, and shell, rode on Vishnu’s 
garur, and thus gained the lady’s alTeclion, A hostile king was subse¬ 
quently making war on her father, whereupon she declared she kept 
Vishnu with her and He would save her people. The carpenter’s son 



88 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Sadhna's tomb is at Sarhind in the Panjab, but 
the sadhu in charge of it can give no infonnation 
regarding him, 


BENI 

Beni briefly traces the progress of man’s spiritual 
degeneration from the time of birth. 

Owing to the great difficulty of his writings it is 
believed that he is of comparatively ancient date. 
Unfortunately no account of him is accessible. 


Srirag 

0 man, when thou wast in the pit of the womb and didst 
meditate and fix thine earnest attention on God 

Not proud of the dignity of thy mortal body, thou wast 
day and night free from tAe pride which is ignorance. 

Recall the travail and great suffering of those days; 
now thou hast too much extended thy tlioughts to worldly 
things. 


felt alarmed on the approach of the hostile atiny to the capital, and 
prayed to Vishnu to save him. Vishnu heard his prayers, caused the 
defeat of the hostile kirtg, and thus saved the country and its people 
tneluding the lover of the ting's daughter. ' ’ 

Several gylnis analyse the hymn as follows: In tiie first iivo Hues 
S^dhiia addresses God, ^ Thoo hast saved him, Tivhy not me f ^ Gad 
is supposed to reply^ ^ This fomi of death was recorded in Eliy desiiny' 
Sadhna then repeated the third and fourth lines. God then sa[d that 
HemHild grani^him salvation afeer death,. Sadhiia- replied with the 
fifth ana siath lln-es. God then tells him to be of ffocxJ cheer, af^er 
which Sadhna replied with the seienth and eighth lines. The ninth 
Jme IS freqnendy paraphrased—I can do nothing for mystK 1 have 
no relation and no one to assist me. 

Sadh^ founded a sect which does not appear to be numerous now, 
and wtach le confined to persons of the trade .of butcher. The 
particular tenets of the Sadhrtlpauihis are nowhere staled, but it is 
5 VishSu^'^ " worshipping Sadhna as an incarnation 

1 I7r^fh in thcGrauth Sahib often means God. It may. how-ver 
be also translated-with body reversed. ^ ^’ 



BE?JI 89 

Wlien thou didst leave the womb and enteJf tliis perish¬ 
able world, thou forgottest God, 

Thou shalt afterwards repent, 0 fool; through what 
mental perversity hath superstition attached to thee ? 

Remember God ; otherwise thou shalt go to the abode 
of Death ; stray not in other worship. 

A diild is anxious for play and sweets ; by degrees its 
worldly love increasetli. 

Under the pretext of its being a sacrifice,^ man tastetli 
meat as if it were ambrosia, though it is a poison; then 
the five evil passions appear and torture him.® 

He abandoneth devotion, penance, self-restraint, and good 
works, and in his heart he worshippeth not God’s name. 

His lust overfloweth, blackness attacheth to his heart, 
and he embraceth the strange woman. 

In the ardour of youth he stareth at another’s wife, and 
distinguisheth not good from evil. 

In the intoxication of lust and the other great sins he 
goeth astray, and distinguisheth not vice from idrtue. 
Beholding his children and his wealth, he is proud and 
forgetteth God in his heart. 

He weigheth in his heart the wealth of some one who 
is dead, then ruineth Ins life by women and banquets. 
When bis hair groweth grey—greyer than the jasmine— 
and his voice becometh feeble ; ® 

When his eyes water, and his intellect and strength 
depart, then his desires are in a whiii,^ 

His mind it iefiUi by evil passions, and therefore his 
body witheieth away like the lotus in the rainy season. 

He who renounceth God’s name in this perishable world 
shall afterwards repent. 

Beholding his near relations he muttereth someiking, and 
is proud of them, but they heed him not. 


1 MedA here tnenns the animal tilled in sacririce. 

® It must be remembered (hat this was written by a Vaishnav to 
whom all meat was forbidden, 

® Literally—as if it proceeded from the seventh nether region. 

* Lilerall)'—the churn of desires is in his heart. 



90 BHAGAT5 OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

He desireth the distinction of lon^ life, though his eyes 
see not,i 

The fire of his body is spent, the bird of his soul hath fled, 
and his corpse is disagreeable 'whether in the house or tlie 
court3rard, 

Saith Beni, hear me, 0 saints ; who hath obtained salva¬ 
tion after death ? * 

Divine instractioii is communicated under the 
allegory of hathjog, the most difficult and painful 
form of a Jogi's practice. 

R.^mkali 

Unite the breath of the ira, pingla, and sukfjniana to¬ 
gether in one place; * 

There is the Beni * and Pryag where tlie three rivers meet; 
let the soul lave therein. 

0 saints, there is the pure God. 

A few understand this when they go to the guru ; 

There iho brain the Pure One is. 

"What are the signs of God’s abode ? 

Tliere is played the unbeaten music of the Word,* 

There nor moon, nor sun, nor wind, nor water fs 

o/orshipped. 

He w’hose consdence is awakened by the guru’s instruc¬ 
tion knoweth this. 

Through him divine knowledge is produced, evil inclina¬ 
tions depart, 

And ambrosial juice trickleth from the brain. 

He who knoweth the secret of tliis science,® 

Shall meet the Prirnd Divine Guru, 

* AJw tfanslaled—Hii l)ody wastelh away; on seeing somebody 
hespeaketh; be is proud, but knoveth nothing. 

* That is, unless luan have done good works in life there is no 
means of bis salvation. 

* That is, the brain. 

* At Priyag there is or was a temple calkd JBenI hfedhav. 

Not the bells, eyinbais, or shells of Hindu worship, 

£iiia, lilcrally^contrivanqes. 




BENI 91 

The tenth gate is the abode of the inaccessible and un¬ 
equalled Supreme Being* 

Over the body and on the body is a chamber/ and vwthin 
the chamber is the Treasure. 

He "who watcheth over this shall never fall asleep ; 

The three qualities and the three worlds shall vanish for 
him in contemplation; 

He shall hold the Source* of ail spells in his heart. 

And turning back his mind jfmn the world, It on 
heaven; 

He shall be wakeful and not utter a lie, 

And shall keep the five organs of perception in subjection; 
He shall treasure the guru’s instruction in his heart, 
x4iid devote his soul and body to God’s love ; 

He shall meditate on the leaves and branches of his 
body,® 

And not lose his life in gambling ; ^ 

He shall tic up the sphincter ani, 

Turn his breath towards his back, and raise it to the brain, 
^Vhen he rcstraineth his breath difficult of restraint,® 
nectar trickleth forth. 

And he converseth with the Lord of the world. 

In the lenth gate is the light of a four-faced lamp* /o- 
behold aU things * 

There are endless petals of the lotus/ and its cup is in 
the centre; 

God dwelleth tliere with all His power. 

Let man string the precious jewel of God’s name within 
him— 

He hath a lotus in his brain and gems * around it ; 

* The brain, ® Thai is, God. 

® Explained by (he gySnIs to mean the veins and muscles of ihe 
body. It is to the upper and lower limbs the word branches is applied 
in Hindu anatomy.—^Dr. Hoernte. * That is, in vice. 

® Literally—^when he has endured unendurable thliiga. 

* A lamp ivilli four wicks to give a bright light. Divine knowledge 
is meant. 

* The mystics suppose that the brain contains a lotus flower, within 
which God dwells. 

® The leaves of the lotus. 



92 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

In the centre is the Spotless One, the Lord of the tliree 
worlds; 

The five species ol musical instruments axe dearly 
leard ; 

Chauris appear to waveband a shell to reverbei-ate like 
thunder— 

Tlie pious by divine knowledge trample on their evil 
passions.^ 

Beni beggeth Thy name, 0 Lord^ sime the praoUt^e of Jog 
is profitl^s. 

Prabhati 

iTie foEowing v^as addressed to a hypocritical 
Brahman 

TJiou rubiest sandal on thy body,, and puUest leaves on 
Ihy forehead,^ 

But thou hast a murderous knife in thy heart. 

Thou lookest on people like a thag, and watch est them 
like a crane looking for fish. 

The life of the Vaishnav when he seeth iliee escapeth 
through his mouth 

Thou bow^t dmly to the beautiful idol of Vishnu for 
a long time ; 

With the evil eye art thou affected, and at night thou 
quEirrellest i ^ 

Thou ever bathest tliy body ; 

Hiou liast two dhotis,^ ihou ostmsibly perjor^nesi thy 
religious duties^ and livest on milk alonOd 

But in thy heart thou hast a knife to stab witlin 

It is thy custom to plunder the property of othei'ss. 

^ Hlerally—demons, 

® To appear ta have renounced the world. 

^ The Vaishnav abstains from meat, and dies on seeing thee bent 
on deeds of blood. The veree is also ti'anshted—Thou lookest Like 
a Vaishnav whose soul hath escaped from his body, 

^ Over the division of the offerings. Possibly^ howeverp Mdufi 
(quarrel) is for Mmnn (woman) which would rhyme with in 

the preceding line. If Sdman be read, the translation will be —Phou 
lookest severely on women ifaj, but ty night tbqu lomt them. 

^ So as to have a change after bathing. 




BENT 93 

Thou adorest a stone, and in the worship of Kali makost 
a circle for (ianesli.'' 

Thou watchest at night so that men may think thou hast 
entered on God’s service ; 

With thy feet dost thou dance, but thy heart meditateth 
evil— 

O sinner, thy dancing is wicked— 

Thou sittest on a deer-skin, and carriest a rosary of sweet 
basil ; 

Thou puttest a showy tilak on tJy forehead ; 

In thy heart is falsehood, though thou wearest a neck¬ 
lace ® on thy neck. 

0 sinner, thou repeatest not God’s name. 

All that man’s worship is vain, and he is blind 

Who hath not recognized the Supreme God. 

Saith Beni, meditate on God by the gum’s inst motion ; 

Without a true guru the way is not found. 


RAMANAND 


A SHOHT account of Ratnanuj appears to be neces¬ 
sary to explain the doctrines of Ramanand, and the 
progress of Hindu religious reform in India. S-vremii 
Raraanuj ® flourished in the eleventh century of the 
Christian era. He was born in the village of 
Bhutnagari, also called Perumbhudur, south-east 
of Kanchipur, the modern Kanjeveram, in the 


» Acccinllng to the latiiar SMfiar, there must be four circles for 
Kiili’s attendant divinitifis, Ganesh, Kshe(arp5.l, Bhairav, and Yogini. 

® Rudrlkhan, the Sanskrit I'luirsisA- A necklace made of the 
berries of the eieocarpus. This is generaUj worn by ihc worshippers 
of Shiv. It is the followers of Vishnu who carry rosaries of sweet 
basil, 

s The author is indebled to Mr. L. Rice of Bangalore for some 
valuable notes on ihe life of Ramanuj. 



94 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Madras Presidency, in the year a.d. 1017 during the 
reign of Betawardhan, King of Dwar Sairindra 
in the Maisur (Mysore) state. Tire date of his birth 
is attested by the Sanskrit chronogram dhirlahdha, 
a word which yields the date 939 ^21. 

and means that men received patience or consola¬ 
tion at his birth. Ramanuj's father was Keshav 
Jajjwa, a Brahman said to be of the illustrious 
race of Haiit, the spiritual and literary king of the 
Rikhis, His mother was called Kantimati. For 
a long time she was childless. Her husband 
prayed to heaven for a son when, it is said, 
a god appeared to him and told him his desire 
should be granted. To effect this, it is related 
that Sheshnag, the wise serpent, which according 
to the Hirdus supports the earth, became incarnate 
as Ramanuj. 

On the mother's side edso Ramanuj belonged to 
an intellectual family, for it was his mother’s brother 
Yadav Acharya,^ who w'as Ramanuj’s first pre¬ 
ceptor and taught him the principles of the Hindu 
religion as expounded in the Simritis. Ramanuj 
became an apt pupil, and at a very early age 
mastered the Veds and the Shastars. While pur¬ 
suing his studies he delighted to sit under a tamarind 
tree near Pernmbhudur, which is still worshipped by 
his followers, 

Ramanuj propounded new opinions with refer¬ 
ence to the relation between the Creator and his 
creatures. He refuted the theories of the famous 
Shankar Acharya who was a Vedantist, and he 
began to inculcate the superiority of the worship 
of Vishnu to that of Shiv, the principal object of 
worship in southern India. 

Ramanuj exorcised an evil spirit, of which the 
daughter of the king of Kanchipur had become 
possessed. The king was well pleased and gave 

Some followers of RSmanuj deny thii Y 5 < 1 av Acharya was hia uncle. 



RAMANAND 


95 


him munificent remuneration. Finding the king in 
a mood to listen to his teaching, he preached to 
him the advantages of the Vaishnav doctrines. His 
superior intellectual attainments and his success 
in everything to which he turned his attention 
excited the jealousy of his preceptor, who formed 
a plot to take him on a pilgrimage to Baiiaras, and 
secretly drown him in the Ganges. Ramanuj was 
saved from this fate by the timely information 
received from his aunt’s son.^ 

Ramanuj for a considerable time worshipped an 
idol called Bardraj, the tutelary deity of Kanchipur, 
Desirous to extend his theological studies, and 
thoroughly distrustful of his uncle, he went to Sri 
Kang Nath, the modern Srirangam at the parting of 
the rivers Kavari and Kolarun, near Trichinoply, to 
visit Yamun Achaiya, the great representative of 
the Sri sect, and obtain initiation from liim and 
adoption as his disciple. Unfortunately Yamun 
Acharya had died before the arrival of Ramanuj. 
Ihe latter then put himself under the tutelage of 
Mahapuran, Yamun Acharya's disciple and successor. 
He subsequently became the disciple of Goshtipuran, 
who sent him back eighteen times before he was 
satisfied of h's fitness for initiation. 

Nabhaji, writing from a Vaishnav standpoint, 
enumerates four great sects of Hindus, the Sri, the 
Sluv, the Brahma, and the Saiikadik. The members 
of the Sri sect worship Vishnu under the form 
of his energy or consort Lakshmi, Indeed, it is said 
that Vislinii himself taught the proper form of his 
worship to Lakshmi, and she handed it do’wm in 
a direct line to Ramanuj. 

Ramanuj continued his studies with ardour at 
Sri Rang Nath, and there composed his commen¬ 
taries on the Sutras of Vyas and other Vedic works. 

^ NSbhStji^s Bkagiri Afaf find abo Maharaja Ragliiir^ Sinh’s 
Mh/, Sotiie believe ihe lady whorni Ram5nuj cured was the 
daughter of DwI^rsaTHudan 



96 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

When past fifty years of age he left his family and 
devoted himself to the salvation of his fellow men. 
Mahapuran had communicated to him the spell by 
which God's protection might be obtained, and told 
him that whoever heard it should be saved from 
the pain of transmigration. At the same time he 
informed Eamanu] that he was never to disclose 
the secret. Ramamij pondered on the prohibition, 
and camp to the conclusion that it was on every 
account proper to divulge to men the secret of 
salvation, even though he w'ere to suffer eternal 
pnnishinent for the disclosure. He accordingly went 
from place to place repeating with a loud voice the 
spell of human deliverance. He made pilgrimages 
to Tripnti, Jagannath, and Banaras, and having 
successfully preached the Vaishnav doctrines at 
these holy places erected buildings for worship at 
them all. From Banaras he proceeded to Badii- 
iiath in the Himalayas, where he did homage to 
Vishnu under his dual form of Nar Narayan, He 
is said to have made converts by thousands and 
tens of thousands. 

In the Prapam Amrii, a Sanskrit work devoted 
to Ramanuj and his doctrines, it is stated that in 
the month of Poh in the year 1012 of the Salaya* 
hana era, corresponding to 1090 of the Christian 
era, he dedicated an idol to God under the name 
of Narayan at a place called Yadavachala.^ 

The chroniclers disclose the extent to whicli 
religious zeal and its allies, religious bigotry and 
persecution, even then prevailed in India. The 
Chola king Karikala, called Krimi Kantha on 
account of some affection, of the throat from which 
he suffered, was a bigoted worshipper of Shiv, and 
held the doctrines of the Sri sect in devout abhor¬ 
rence. He engaged in controversy with Mahapuran, 
Ramanuj's religious guide, and Kruresh, a disciple 
of Ramanuj, The monarch on being vanquished in 
^ Frffpami Bombay Elion. 



RAMANAND 


97 


argument resorted to physical force for revenge, and 
put out the eyes of his antagonists. Mahapuran 
died in a few days, but Kniresh survived and sub¬ 
sequently rendered Ramanuj invaluable service in 
the dissemination of his doctrines, 

Kamanuj himself, in order to escape from the fury 
of Krimi Kantha, took shelter in the court of Bitta 
or Vitala Deva, the Jain monarcli of Dwar Samudra 
in the Maisur state, who reigned from a.d. 1104 to 
1141,’^ After a controversy with Ramanuj the lang 
changed his faith and sought the protection of God 
in his teachings, Filled with new zeal he changed 
his name also to Vishnu Vardhana and set to 
work to convert his numerous subjects, who are 
stated to have been all of the Jain religion. Most 
of them were converted, but some fled, and the 
rest the monarch piously put to the sword. In 
A, D. 11 17 the king erected the Belur temple in 
commemoration of his conversion to Vaishnavism 
by Ramanuj. 

Ramanuj fearing for his own safety in his native 
country and pleased with the holy zeal, friendship, 
and protection of the Maisur king, resided at his 
capital for twelve years, during which time he 
induced him to erect a temple to Krishan at Mailkot. 
Here Ramanuj continued to preach his doctrines, 
and made numerous converts among the Brahmans, 
whom he withdrew from their allegiance to Shiv. 

Ramanuj's religious teachings began to be adopted 
at Purushotampuri, the modern Jagaiijiath, then as 
now one of the greatest strongholds of the Hindu 
religion. His rules for daily life, however, were of 
a very exclusive character, and such as coidd hai’dly 

1 Uitta Deva. was king of the Hojsftlas who lived on the west of the 
present Maisur state. Bitta Be^’a’s dynasty ruled Mitisur from the 
eleventh to the fourteenth ceniuiy'. Their capital was DwSrsamudai, 
now Malebid, in the Belur district. The Choks and their king lived 
to the east of the Hoysalas- The Hoysala kings were Jains up to 
the lime of Bit la Deva.—Rice's Jifytert', 

H 


* 


niKlE. VI 



98 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHTE 

have been expected from a. man who fearlessly 
disclosed to the world the secrets of salvation, He 
enjoined the utmost attention to cleanliness in 
cooking and eating, an injunction which must be 
commended on sanitary grounds, but he made 
regulations concerning dress, salutation, and sacri¬ 
ficial marks of too strict a character for general 
observance. For instance, his followers cooked for 
themselves, and ate in the greatest privacy after 
bathing. On one point in particular he laid the 
greatest stress: If the sight or shadow of any 
person fell upon the food of a follower of his, it 
was to be immediately rejected. He^ believed that 
purity of thought could only be attained by eating 
food not seen by others. Kabhaji states that the 
strict culinary rules of Ramanuj were not made for 
caste purposes, but for the glory of God and purity 
of worship. 

Such teaching naturally met with opposition. It 
can easily be gathered that Jagannath became too 
dangerous a place for Ramanuj to permanently 
reside in, and he escaped at night to pursue his 
missionary career in other lands. He is said to 
have had ten thousand followers, seventy-four of 
whom were specially devoted to their teacher. 
These seventy-four, however, each put a different 
interpretation on Ms doctrines, and accordingly 
established as many sects of their own. Ramanuj 
died at Sriranganath at the age of one hundred and 
twenty years. The chronogram dhafmonasUa or the 
destruction of religion, gives the date of his death as 
1059 of the Shaka era, corresponding to a.d, 1137. 

The mantra or words of initiation of the sect 
consists of eight letters, and is communicated in 
a secret whisper by the teacher to his disciple. Tlie 
proclamation of the mantra was made by Ramanuj 
from the loftiest gopura, known as the white gopura, 
or ornamental gateway of the temple at Srirangam, 
The motto of members of their order is ‘Ramanuj- 


-RAMANAND 


99 


assya daso asmi' I am a slave of Hamanuj. The 
head is slightly inclined and the hands are joined 
and applied to the forehead for the purposes of 
salutation. The sacrificial marks of the sect are 
several. On the forehead there are two vertical 
streaks made with a calcareous clay called gopi- 
chandan. Within them is a vertical red streak made 
of turmeric and lime. The white streaks are con¬ 
nected over the nose by a transverse streak which 
admits of several varieties. The usual marks on 
the forehead are as follow *—lij, to denote that 
body, tongue, and mind should he kept under subjec¬ 
tion. On the breast and upper arms Ramanujis 
make white patches in which they enclose red streaks. 
The several marks represent the shell, quoit, dub, 
and lotus carried in the four hands of Vishnu, and 
the central streak of red represents his consort or 
energy Lakshmi. It is piously believed that persons, 
no matter of what caste, who apply these marks to 
their foreheads are after their departure from this 
life not molested by Death’s ministers. The sect 
besides venerate the salagram stone and the sweet 
basil flower as indi^ensable adjuncts of worship. 

The followers of Ramanuj believe that Vishnu is 
the supreme Being, that he existed before all worlds, 
and was the Creator of all things. Creation origi¬ 
nated in his desire to multiply himself and was 
formed from his material essence. This essence, 
however manifested, is pervaded by a portion of 
his vitality which again is distinct from his spiritual 
essence, as God the spirit and matter are all dis¬ 
tinct. Like the propounders of other religious 
systems, Ramanuj found himself in a difficulty 
between pantheism and anthropomorphism. Vishnu 
pervades all creation. Vishnu and the universe are 
one, but at the same time Vishnu is not devoid of 
form, and he is endowed with all good qualities. 
Vishnu has manifested himself to men in several 
human and other incarnations. He is present in 



100 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


objects of worship, aiifl may be adored by the 
pTiriflcatioa of temples and idols, by the presenta¬ 
tion of flowers and perfumes, by counting rosaries 
and repeating his name and that of his energy or 
consort Lakshmi, and finally by the practice of Jog. 
The reward of such devotion is release from all 
trai;isn(iigraticin throughout eternity. 

Several temples were erected in Ramanuj’s 
honour, the principal of which are at Jadari, Galata, 
Ahobal, and Rew’asa. In the famous fort of Sriran- 
gapatam, also, a temple sacred to Ram arm] is pointed 
out to visitors; 

Ramaiiuj wrote several works, the principal of 
wliich are the Sri Hamanuj Bkaskya, the GUa 
Bhashya, the Vedar^tka Sangraha, the Vedanta 
dipa, the Vedanta Sar, and the Dharm Sanhiia} 

Ramanand, a Gaur Brahman,was born at Mailkot, 
where Ramanu] had set up an idol of Vishnu and 
induced the Brahmans to renounce their devotion 
to Shiv. Very little is known of Ramajiand’s life. 
Only a page and a half is devoted to it in Nabhajfs 
Bhagat Mai, where he is compared to Ram, and 
made an incarnation of God come down from heaven 
to save the world. 

The Ramanandis make it a special point to keep 
all details of their sect and its founder a profound 
secret. All the works that we have been able to 
obtain relating to Ramanand have been for the 
most part devoted to his praise. We give here such 
details of his life as have been gleaned from acces¬ 
sible sources* 

Nabhaji makes Ramanand the fourth in spiritual 

^ Besides the Pra^nw Amn'i, ihe principal auihorities for the life 
of iLamanuj are the BAagat Ml/ (Hindi), the Brvya CHan'/ar {Kana- 
nese), the Bkarai Khandit tha aravdihln k^ih (Marathi), and the 
Kixii Ch^ritAr (GujratiJ. 

For a farther account of Kamanuj’s doctrines and followers see Sir 
Mofiicr Williams's nrdhmsiniivi and llwdniim. 



RAMANAND 


lOT 


descent from Ramaiiuj. AUowing^ a tliird of a 
century as an average period of incumbency for 
eacli religious teacher, Ramanand must have 
flourished in the end of the fourteenth and the first 
half of the fifteenth century. This corresponds too 
with another reckoning which may be employed as 
a chronological test. The great religious reformer 
Kabir, of whom we shall presently have much to 
say, was according to all documentary and tradi¬ 
tional evidence a disciple of Ramanand. Now the 
foUowei’s of Kabir say that the year a.o. 1908 is 
the 510th of his era. His birth therefore, according 
to them, took place in the year a. n. 1398, a date 
which may be unhesitatingly accepted. We are 
thus able to fix Ramanand’s approxinn,ate epoch. 

Ramanand like Ramaiiuj originally imbibed the 
Hindu doctrmes enunciated in the Simritis, in 
which he had been instructed by a hermit. He 
subsequently adopted the reformed principles of 
Ramanu} and became a prominent member of the 
Sri sect. It is related that Ramanand, while still 
a worshipper according to the Simritis, was one day 
gathei’iiig flowers in a garden when he saw Swami 
Raghwanand, a follower of Ramanuj. Raghwaiiand 
asked him If he knew anything of his own state, 
but, before he had time to answer, told him that 
he had reached the end of his life, and exliorted 
him to seek the protection of God at the last hour, 
Ramanand went and informed his hermit tutor of 
the message he had received. The hermit and his 
pupil proceeded to Raghwanand and besought his 
divine intercession. The great Swami took com¬ 
passion on Ramanand, and by his skill in the arduous 
practice of Jog suspended at the critical moment 
Ramanand's life breath in the tenth gate of his 
body. The time fixed by destiny for Ramanand’s 
death having thus passed, Raghwanand bestowed 
on him the coveted boon of a protracted life. 

Ramanand served tlie Swami fur some time, and 


102 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

then went on a pilgrimage to Badrikashram, the 
modern Badri Narain in the Himalayas, and other 
places. In the course'of his wanderings he visited 
Banaias, and lived at the ghat called Panch Ganga, 
where his sandals were preserved at the time of 
the composition of Nabhaji’s Bhagat Mai. 

It is certain tliat Ramaiiand came in contact at 
Banaras with learned Musalmans, for by that time 
there had been several conquests of India under tlie 
flag of the Prophet of Maklca< It is natural to 
suppose that there should have been held at the 
ancient sacred city of the Hindus heated contro¬ 
versies between Mullas and Brahmans, and that the 
better informed classes of Hindus, who had already 
shown a predilection for moJiotheisni, should have 
formed a just conception of the divine unity. We 
shall afterwards see how some of the followers of 
Ramanand at Banaras became fervent monotheists, 
and at tlie same time ridiculed the priestcraft of 
the Mullas and the Brahmans. 

Being far from members of his own religious 
persu^on, Ramanand was now free to form his 
own ideas and speculations on religion, and he laid 
aside among other previous articles of belief several 
of the cumbrous social and caste obsei'vances of the 
Sri sect. When he returned after long absence to 
Raghwanand, his co-religionists and those who had 
previously lived with him interrogated him as to his 
observance of caste rules since his departure from 
them. It was found that his theological belief had 
altered in some respects, and that he had relaxed 
the severe culinary rules of Ramanuj, 

It is an ordinary practice of Hindu priests when 
they lay food before an idol to draw a screen over 
both the idol and the food. When sufficient time 
^cording to human ideas is allowed the idol for 
its consumption, the screen is withdrawn. The 
ffillowers of Ramanuj observe the same practice, 
but have added to it a stern in] miction that, if any 


RAMANAND 


103 


one but the person cooldng see the idol's foodj it 
must be immediately rejected. The followers of 
Rainanuj consider attention to such matters one of 
the most important elements of divine worship, 

Ramanand did not adopt this view. Like another 
great Teacher he could not understand what con¬ 
cern culinary rules had with the worship of God;^ 
and he must have freely given vent to his feelings, 
though his expressions have not been preserved. 
His sect promptly expelled him, but his religious 
guide Raghwanand appears to have felt some sym¬ 
pathy with him, for he authorized him to found 
a sect of his own, which he accordingly did, The 
theological tenets of the new faith corresponded to 
some extent with those of Ramanuj, except that 
Sita and Ram instead of Lakshmi and Narayan 
became special objects of Ramanand’s worship, and 
the culinary and kindred rules of tlie Ramanujis 
were generously relaxed. 

Ramanand then applied himself to prove from 
the Shastars that the observance of caste rules was 
minecessary for any one who sought the protection 
of God and embraced his service. He laid it down 
as a rule that all persons of any caste who accepted 
the tenets and principles of his sect, might eat and 
drink together irrespective of birth. All men who 
serve God in the same way are brothers and of the 
same social position. Contrary to the practice of 
Ramanuj, who had enforced a discipline too strict 
for ordinary mortals, Ramanand threw his spiritual 
door wide open, admitted disciples of all castes, and 
boldly announced that gyan, or knowledge of God, 
emancipated man frona all social bondage. 

It is written in Nabhaji's Bkagat Mai that even 
a low caste naan w'ho loves God is superior to a 
Brahman who, although irreproachable in his acts, 
possesses no love for the Creator. An instance of 

^ 'Not gooth into the mouth delileih a. man; but tJ^at 

tvhidi Cometh out of the nioulh, this dehleth a man.’ 



104 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

this is cited. At the great fea^t given by Yu- 
dhishtar to commemorate the victory of the Pan¬ 
da va over the K aura vs, the festal bell would 
not ring spontaneously at the appointed time* 
Krishan, who attended the banquet, inquired if any 
person had failed to receive his share of the viands. 
He was informed that food had not been served to 
Valmik because he was a Chiandal, and, as a hunts¬ 
man, djcstroyer of life. Krishan then ordered that 
Valmik should be seated in the midst of the assem¬ 
blage, and that Dranpadi, the fractional \rife’ of 
Yudhishtar, should feed him with her own hands. 
This she accordingly did, and the festal bell 
pealed forth struck by no earthly hands. 

Ramanand was distiiiguislied for Iris kindness to 
others and his love of God, He pointed ont the 
way of the Lord to men of the four castes and the 
four conditions of life,® He deemed forms of adora¬ 
tion superfluous, and held that the supreme reward 
of devotion was to be obtained by incessantly 
uttering God's name. He called his disciples the 
Liberated, when he allowed them and they accepted 
a liberal interpretation of the Hindu social rules 
sanctioned by religion. At the same time he 
vehemently opposed atheists and those who boasted 
that they existed independently of God. He van¬ 
quished in aigument the Jains, the Budlhsts, and 
tlie followers of the left way,=' w'hose devotions were 
not addressed to the supreme Lord of the world. 

^ At ihsit (irac polj'andi^'was in force. Braupadi wife of tijc 
whole five Pandav brotliers, one of whom '^vas Yudliishlar, 

^ Brahtoans, Kshatris, and \'4i&}’as ou^ht, according to ancient 
Hindu writiiigs, to be, first, Jlyaimacisn'j:, practisdtig celibacy and 
devoting (iieir iivea to study and religious exercises; secondly, g’/n'- 
haslhhi or mariied meo leading secular Jives; thirdly, or 

anchorets, when theirwivesinightaocompany them and they might live 
On forest frui t, mber.^ and roots; and fourthly, completely 

fenouncirg the world and subsisting altogether on alms, 

® ySmis or ^^machuis. For some account of them see Professor 
H. FJ, Wilson’s m ihi RrUghv of iht Hiitdmy Vol, I. 












RAMANAND 


X05 


Ramanand, having forsaken the cares of the world, 
gave himself up to aairag or renunciation of all 
worldly tilings, and thus became the first Bairagi. 
He had four disciples, from each of whom arose foim 
sects composed of Nagas, who are purely ascetic 
and practise seclusion, and Sainayogis, who marry 
and lead domestic lives. Both orders may eat 
together. They rnostly belong to the Sudar clzuis, 
but some wear the triple cord of the twice-born 
Hmdus, and style themselves Gaur Brahmans who 
had their origin in the'north of India. 

It is said that Ramanand at Ganga Sagar—at 
the mouth of the Hughli branch of the Ganges^ 
discovered a temple sacred to Kapila, an incarna¬ 
tion of Vishnu and author of the Sankhya Shastars, 
A fair is amiuaJly held there at the time of the 
winter solstice, 

The disciples of Ramanand were, according to 
Nabhaji, Anantanand, Suresliwaranand, Sukhanand, 
Bhawanand, Pip a, Sain, Dhanna, Ravdas, Kabir, 
and others. Ramanand died at Banaras at an 
advanced age. 

■ Most of the present followers of Ramanand appear' 
to have completely fallen away from his teaching, 
and observe caste rules with the utmost strictness, 
As far as their tenets are concerned, they appear 
to have become hopelessly confused with the Rama- 
nujis, and to differ only in their sectarial marks 
and their preference for Sita and Ram to Lakshmi 
and Narayan as objects of worship. 

The following is the hymn of Ramanand found 
in the Granth SaJiib. An invitation had been given 
lum to attend a religious service of Vishnu, to which 
he replied:— 

Basant 

Whither shall I go, Sir ? 1 am happy at home. 

My heart will not go with me ; it hatli become a cripple,^ 

’ Compare ilie use of llic word /lUiHCta by Horace, 


io6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


One day I did have an inclination to go ; 

1 ground sandal, took distilled aloe wood and many 
perfumes. 

And was proceeding to worship God in a teniplo, 

my spiritual guide showed me God in my heart. 
Wherever I go / find only watei or atones.^ 

But Thou, O God, art equally contained in eveiything. 
The Veds and the Piirans all Jiave I seen and searched. 
Go thou thither, if God be not here. 

O tine giutip I am a sacrifice untp thee 

Who hast cut away all my perplexities and doubts. 

Ramanand^s Lord is the aJl-pervadiiig God ; 

T]>e guru's word cutteth away millions of sins. 


DHANNA 

Dhanna, generally known as Dhanna Jat, is said to 
have been born in the year a. d. 1415. He lived in 
the village of Dhuanin Tank territory, about twenty 
miles from the Deoli cantonments in Rajputana. 
A rdigious bent was given to his genius from his 
earliest years. A Brahman went to his parents’ 
house to worship. On seeing the ceremonials, 
Dhanna asked for an idol so that he too might 
worship on his own account in imitation of the 
Brahman. The Brahman at first put him off with 
excuses, but, when Dhanna further importuned, 
he handed him a small black stone for his youthful 
devotion. Dhanna took it up, applied it to his eyes 
and head, and began to worship it in imitation of the 
Brahman, The ceremony observed was this: — 
Dhanna first bathed himself, then bathed the stone, 
and put on it a tilak or patch made from the mud 

^ Rii'trs of pilgrimage or idols. 

For some local inquiries made regarding Dhanna we are indebted 
to Lolonel R. Fenrose^ CauLcnineni: Magistrate of Deoli. 


DHANNA 


107 

of a neighbouring tank. He had. no sweet basil dear 
to gods and idols, but he offered green leaves instead, 
and then performed the customary devotional 
homage and prostration.^ 

WTien Dhanna’s mother brought him bread he 
put it in front of the idol, and shutting his eyes 
sat down hard by. He- waited long in hope that 
the idol would eat, but, on finding that it would 
not, became sad and distressed. He repeatedly 
clasped his hands in supplication, and, when that 
form of inducement proved unavailing, began to 
ply the idol with boyish flatteries At last, when 
all failed, he threw the bread into the tank, by 
which he meant to clearly show the idol that if it 
did not eat it, he would not eat it himself. Some 
days passed in this 'vva.y until Dhanna was well- 
nigh dead from weakness produced by thirst and 
hunger. At last the Brahman, anxious to confer 
a blessing on the youthful saint, appeared to him 
and urged him to satisfy his appetite. Dhanna did 
so and revived to pursue his devotions with even 
greater ferv'^our than before. 

The Brahman again paid.Dhanna a visit, and on 
seeing his progress towards spiritual perfection pros¬ 
trated liimself before him and shed tears of love. 
By Dhanna's contemplation, worship, and repetition 
of the Name, God w’as gladdened, and the Brahman, 
through Dhanna’s devotion, obtained, it was said, the 
object of his desires both in this world and the next. 

Dhanna was supernaturally directed to go to 
Banaras and receive the spell of initiation from 
Raman and. He accordingly did so, Ramanand 
on seeing his purity of heart and devotion, recog- 
niaed him as a great saint and apostle, and duly 
initiated him as a disciple. In due time Rama- 

^ Before adaration the Hindus perform a cere-Tnonjr called prdft 
praJ/s/tia, which consists, as they believe^ in infusing life into ihe idol. 
In this tlic idolatry of the Hindua appears to diifer from that of other 
rateSr 



io8 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


nand, Iiaving enjoined the service of the saints on 
him as a special duty, disinissed him with every 
token of love and respect, and Dhaniia on reaching 
his home duly followed his spiritual guide's injunc¬ 
tions. 

One day, as Dhanna was taking wheat to sow, 
he met some holy rneii who urged their neces¬ 
sities. Accc^rdingly, he bestowed his seed-wheat on 
them. God, on seeing Dhanna's charity to his 
saints, said, ' He who casteth corn in the groimd 
expectetli a return several times greater. Now 
Dhanna putteth corn into the mouths of My saints, 
so I must give hi m a thousandfold retu rn.' Dhann a’s 
field accordingly flourished so much better than the 
fields of his neighbours that it became the subject 
of general congratulation. Dhanna thought the 
congratulations were merely jeers and jests, until 
one day he paid a visit to his field. Then he found 
that what people had been saying was really true. 
He became absorbed in the love of God, and re¬ 
doubled his devotion to Him and His saints. His 
land is still called Dhannc Bhagst ka khet, or Saint 
Dhanna’s field. It is said that the black stone of his 
youthful worship was subsequently embedded in one 
of the walls of his temple. 

Nabhaji concludes his account of Dhaiiua with 
the following invocation :—‘0 God Indar, how pru¬ 
dent and wise art thou who madest thy thunderbolt 
out of the hones of Dadhicli, king of the Rikhis! 
Wiry hast thou not lifted up and taken away this 
\vretched heart of mine which is millions of times 
harder than adamant, since it is not in the slightest 
degree softened on reading the story of Dhanna and 
hearing of God’s kindness, love, and affection for 
His saints ? ’ 

Though Dhanna began life as an idolater, it is 
clear from the following hymn that he became in 
riper years a worshipper of the one God, and re¬ 
nounced all superstitious practices. 



DHANNA rog 

Asa 

In Gobindj Gobind^ Gobind was Namdev's heart absorbed- 

A calko-pTinter worth half a dam became worth a lakh. ■ 

. Abandoning weaving and stretching thread, Kabir devoted 
his love to God^s leet; ■ 

Though a weaver oi low family he obtained untold virtues, 

Rav Das who used to remove dead cattle, abandoned 
worldly affairs, 

Became distinguished, and in the company of the saints 
obtained a sight of God. 

Sain, barber and village drudgevi'ell known in every 
house, 

In whose heart the Supreme God dwelt ^ k numbered 
among the saints. 

Having heard all this T, a Jat, applied myself to God’s 
service ; 

1 have met God in. pei^on ^ and great is the good fortune 
of Dhanna.'^ 

The following hymns of Dhanna afford abundant 
additional evidence that he by further study and 
meditation embraced a purer form of worship than 
that of his early youth. After a confessedly sinful 
life Dhanna met the guru, w^ho united him with 
God 

Wandering and roaming many births passed away ; 
my body^ mind, and fortune'*’ remain not constant. 

Attached to and stained mth tlie sins of covetousness and 
hist^ I have forgotten God, tlie diamoiuL 

The fruit of sin is sweet to tin-! demented mind ; it 
knowcth not excellent meditation. 

My love, turning in a different direction from nhrtue, 
increaseth,. and I again weave the web of birth and death. 

^ from forced larbour. 

2 the Latin pr{iss£fsj. 

^ 111 ihe Grantii Sahib thiii hymn is beaded Mahala under which 
the coinposiiionE of Gm'U Arjan ai-e included^ bui there no 

doubt that it was Dhaniia's ooinposiiLotiH 

^ literally—"wealth. It is very likelj' this ^yord is an expietive^ 





no BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


I did not Icnow the way of rccogni^ng Him who dwelleth 
in the heart 1 burned in of and fell 

into I>eatb’s noose. 

I collected so many fruits of sin and filled my heart with 
them, that 1 forgot God the Supreme Being. 

When the guru caused the wealth of divJne knowledge to 
enter me, .1 meditated on God^ and accepted in my heart 
that He was One. 

I have embraced the love and sendee of God and known 
comfort.; I am satiated and satisfied, and have obtained 
salvation. 

He in w^hose heart God^s light which filleth creation is 
contained, recogni^eth God who cannot be deceived. 

Dhanna hath obtained God ® as his wealth; ® meeting 
with saints he hath become absorbed in Him. 

God is the universal Preserver. 

O my heart, why thinkest thou not odf the God of mercy ? 
Why ignorest thou not all besides ? 

Wert thou to run through the universe and the continents 
of the earth, it would nol a^ail Ihee; only what the Creator 
doetli cometh to pass. 

He who made the body with its ten, gates in the water of 
its mother^s womb, 

Nourisheth it and presen^etli it in its fiery home; such 
a Lord is ours. 

The female tortoise liveth in the water ; its young 
on land; they have no motker^^ wings io shatter Ihem^ and 
no milk drink, 

Yet Godi the All-pervading, the Primal Joy, the Delightful 
feedeih them ; understand this in thy heart, 

A worm is embedded in a stone, and there is no exit for it : 

Saith Dhanna, God filleth it ; 0 my soul, fear not. 

Dhanua in order fo maintain himself while cn- 

^ Also tmiislaled—The mfinner of knowing God diet nol entei- rfiy 

* lEterally—the Sustaincr of the earth. 

^ saint puns on the simifariEy of Lhe word to hfs own 

name. 




DHANNA 


III 


gaged in his devotions prays for the' means of sub¬ 
sistence. 

. .. Dhaitasa?! 

O God, I Thine afflicted smtutnf corns to Thes ‘— 

Tliou arrangest the affairs oi those who perform Thy 
service. . 

Dalt Ap^riJ-and ghi I beg of Thee 
So sliajtf 'iiy heart be ever happy. 

Shoes and good cJothes, 

The seven sorts of com,® 1 beg of Thee. 

Milch cows and buffaloes I beg ; 

A good Tiirkistani mare. 

And a good wife. 

The slave Dhanna beggeth of Thee.® 


PI PA 

PiPA, born in the year a.d. 1425, was king of a 
state called Gagaraungarh. He possessed every 
spiritual excellence and conferred happiness and 
saintship on the human race. 

^ By litfiTatl/, uncooked food given to is gene-raJly 

meaint flour^ Some read which means rock salt. 

* Anaf saf sUa is the as * 3 . miKture of seven kindE of 

grain bestowed on a caste of people called Dak&unt on certain Deensions, 
for the benefit of a person who is supposed to be under the evil 
influence of some planet, the gx^io being equal in weight to the body 
of the person/— TAi Dictionary, 

Ana/ is also translated—corn grown on a field ploughed 

seven tinies> called in Panjabi jb/ ^tdn idnj^L 

3 As asking God for worldly favours is deemed inconsistent with 
the saintly character, the gyanis have exercised their ingenuity in 
finding one or more fanciful meanings for alniDst every saibstanttve in 
the above hymn. For instance, dai la made the aubjecticn of the 
passions, sidAo^ or floarj is rectitude, gAt is God’s love^ &c«> Sec. 
They who choose may adopt such interpretationsH It must be re¬ 
membered, however, that Dhanna was a husbandman, and for the 
sake of his calling and livelihood^ to say nothing of his devotions,, 
generally needed w'hat he prayed for. 


1 X3 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Pipa had been at first a worshipper of Durga, the 
consort of Shiv. Some holy men came to his capital, 
and he with his usual generosity and devotion 
ministered to all their wants. They then prepared 
food, offered it to God, and prayed that the king 
might become a saint. At night he had a vision 
in which a holy man, who took an interest in his 
welfare, appeared to him and said, ' How foolish 
thou art who turnest away from God and yet askest 
for pardon [ ' From that moment he desired nothing 
but the service of God. All the things of this world 
appeared to him to have no reality. 

It is said that the goddess subsequently appeared 
to him. Pipa prostrated himself before her, and 
asked her how he could serve God, She told 
him to go and take Ramanand as his spiritual 
guide. After this highly disinterested advice the 
goddess disappeared, Pipa manifested such a pas¬ 
sionate desire to see Ramanand that his friends 
apprehended he would lose his reason. At last he 
went to Banaras, where he had heard Ramanand 
resided. The great swami on hearing of Pipa's 
arrival e.’cpressed his surprise and sent him a message, 

' My house is a place for faqirs. What business 
have kings here ? ' 

On Raman an d’s refusal to receive liim Pipa re¬ 
turned home, and bestowed his wealth on the poor. 
He again appeared before Ramanand, and said he had 
now become a faqir. Ramanand in order to test 
liis sincerity told him to throw himself into a 
well. V^ithout further reflection Pipa proceeded 
to do so, but Ramanand's disciples restrained him. 
Tliey brought him hack to Ramanand who, on 
being satisfied of his humility, forthwith made him 
a disciple and bestowed saintsliip on him. He then 
gave him permission to return to his own country, 
and continue to serve saints, Ramanand promised 
to go in company with other saints to visit him after 
a year of probation. Pipa departed, served holy 



PIPA 


113 

men, and worsliipped God with increased fervour. 
After a year he virrote to Ramanand and reminded him 
of his promise to sanctify Gagaraungarh with a visit. 

Ramanand set out with his forty chosen disciples, 
including Rav Das and the renowned Kabir. Pipa, 
having taken a paiki for his guru, met the party 
outside the city. He prostrated himself before 
Ramanand and each of the disciples, and bestowed 
on the poor a large amount of money and the 
remnant of his property as a thanksgiving on tliat 
joyful occasion. He took the whole company to his 
pdace, and bestowed such service on them that he 
quickly received the great spiritual reward of 
salvation duririg hfe. 

After some time Ramanand conceived a desire to 
visit the country of Dwaraka on the western coast 
of Kathiawar. Pipa on hearing this became dis¬ 
tressed at losing the companionship of his holy 
guide. Ramanand, on seeing the king’s heartfelt 
love, said he could make his choice either to remain 
where he ^vas or become a mendicant of his ordei’ 
and accompany him. Upon this Pipa abdicated his 
sovereignty and joined Ramanand and his party. 

His queens prepared to share his poverty and his 
pilgrimage to Dwaraka. Pipa tried to dissuade 
them by pointing out the hardships of travel and 
sojourn in forests and solitude, but they would not 
be convinced. He then told them to take off their 
jeweh and regal attire, and put on patched clothes, 
and they might thus accompany him if they pleased. 
The mention of the detrimental alteration of cos¬ 
tume was more efficacious than any expostulation. 
All Ms queens save one immediately returned home. 

The youngest, whose name was Sita, the best 
beloved of her husband, doffed the becoming attire 
of her graceful youth, and put on, as her husband 
had suggested, the coarse blanket of a mendicant. 

Ramanand, Pipa, and Sita duly arrived in Dwaraka. 
Ramanand merely desired to see the temples there, 

JiUlH, vj J 



II4 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

and, this being done, declared liis intention of 
returning to Banaras, But Pipa wished to settle in 
Dwaralca, and obtained Ramanand's permission to 
do so. He and his consort abode there in the 
society of holy men and made great progress towards 
spiritual perfection. 

\^'hen the sanctity of Pipa and his faithful con¬ 
sort became known, a great crowd assembled to do 
them homage. Wearied with the attentions they 
received from the people, Sita pointed out to her 
spouse that in order to save themselves from in¬ 
convenience and preserve their humility, it would 
be expedient for them to go to a strange country. 
Tliey accordingly departed for other places of pil¬ 
grimage. When they had proceeded six stages, 
they encountered Afghan troops. The soldiers fin di n g 
Sita fair to look upon appropriated her for them¬ 
selves, In this difficulty she remembered God, and 
with fervent prayer supplicated His assistance. He 
rescued her from the Afghans, and restored her 
rejoicing to her husband. Pipa asked her if she 
would not even then go home, seeing that troubles 
arose on every side on her account. She replied. 

Great king, what trouble hath caused any inter¬ 
ruption to tliy devotion or hath been removed by 
any contrivance of thine ? It was all the work of 
God. Tliou and 1 have proof and perfect assurance 
of this. To admonisli me now, notwithstanding all 
that hatli occurred, is not in accordance with the 
devotion of a liusband or e saint.^ Pipa was pleased 
with her constancy, they became reconciled, altered 
their route, and continued their pilgrimage. 

Pipa and his consort visited a holy man whose 
name was Chidhar, He and his wife, though highly 
pleased to see them, had nothing wherewithal to 
show tlieni hospitality. In this plight Chidhar’s 
wife s petticoat was sold to provide food for the 
guests. It was the only article of dress she possessed, 
arid sire had then to conceal herself in her room. 



PIPA 


115 

When tlie food was cooked and tlie guests sat down 
to dinnei’, Pip a requested CMdhar to bring his wife 
to join tliem, Chidhar bade them take their dinner, 
and his wife would eat their leavings. Upon this 
Pipa told Sita to go and fetch her, Sita went and 
found her hiding in her room. On inquiring the 
cause, Chidhar’s wife said it was not by wearing 
clothes heavenly bliss was obtained, but the first 
and most proper duty of all was to contemplate 
God and serve His saints. Sita divined what had 
occurred, ^d arrived at the conclusion that her 
own devotion and service were as nothing in com¬ 
parison with what she had just witnessed. Half 
the clothes she wore she gave to Chidhar’s wife, 
aaid brought her forth from her hiding-place. They 
then all dined together. 

Pipa and Sita then took leave of Chidhar and liis 
wife, and after great hardships and privations 
arrived at the city of Toda near Tank, on the iiorth- 
westei’n frontier of India. One day, on going to 
bathe, Pipa found an earthen vessel •f ull of gold 
coins, but did not touch them. He mentioned the 
matter at night to his wife, and she said it was 
better not to go to the same bathing-place again. 
Some thieves who had overheard their conversation 
went thither, and found a venomous serpent coiled 
up in the vessel. They said to themselves that tlie 
newly-arrived faqir had designed to kill them by 
speaking of gold coin instead of a serpent in the 
vessel. They then decided that they would have 
tlie faqir himself bitten by the serpent, 'fhey 
accordingly dug out the vessel, took it with its 
contents and threw it into Pipa's house. But the 
original contents had not changed for the holy man. 
He found it still filled with gold coins as before. 
Pipa, believing this treasure to have been obtained 
by divine favour, spent all the money within three 
days in rejoicings in honour of God, and in feeding 
and serving His saints. 

I 3 


n6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Sur Sen, king of that county, hearing Pipa’s name 
and devotion went to see him, and falling at his 
feet prayed him to instruct him and make him 
a holy man. Pipa remonstrated with him and even 
attempted to dissuade him from adopting the life 
of a hermit. However, on seeing him detennined, 
Pipa told him to relinquish all he possessed. The 
king immediately obeyed this order, and placed his 
wealth at the disposal of the saint. After this trial 
Pipa gave him the speh of initiation and made him 
his disciple. Sur Sen’s queen went veiled to Pipa 
to remonstrate against separation from her lord. 
Pipa restored her to Sur Sen and assured him that 
he could lead a religious life even in the married 
state, and added that it was unnecessary for women 
to veil themselves in the presence of holy men— 
probably the first effort in modern times in India 
to abolish the tyranny of the far da. 

In time an unfortunate difference arose between 
Sur Sen and Pipa which was rendered mom acute 
by intrigues of the court Brahmans; and Sur Sen 
threw off his spiritual allegiance to his royal guest. 
Pipa upon this reflected that it was the guru wlio 
frees men from sin and its consequences, and when 
a man tlirows off his allegiance to his guru, what 
hope is there for him ? He feared tJmt the king 
would lose both fliis world and the next, so he 
resolved to save him. He accordingly proceeded to 
the king's palace and caused himself to he announced, 
The king sent word that he was busy with his 
devotions and could not see tlie visitor. Upon tiffs 
Pipa said the king was a great fool, for, while pre¬ 
tending to be performing his devotions, he was tliink- 
iiig of obtaining new foot-wear for liimself. When 
these words were repeated to Sur Sen he, knowing 
that Pipa had divined his thoughts, at once went 
to him and throtving himself at his feet, said, 

' I am unworthy and faithless, I did not know tliy 
greatness. Be merciful and pardon me, I am 



PIPA 


1 - 

extremely ashamed of all the suspicions and erro¬ 
neous ideas I had formed regarding thee.’ Pipa 
replied, ‘ 0 king, remember thy faith and love on 
the day thou becamest my disciple. According to 
all rules thy love for God and his guru ought to 
have increased. Instead of that thou hast turned 
thy back on them, and prepared thyself for hell. 
For the future consider the saints of God as His 
image and serve them. In this way shalt thou 
easily obtain the advantages of both worlds.' Pipa 
gave the king' other instructions of similar character, 
which sank deep into his heart. He then returned 
to his old allegiance to Pipa, and began anew his 
religious life and his repetition of God's name. 

Pipa on more occasions than can be related 
showed a marked deference to the wishes of others. 
Once some holy men took a fancy to a dish of curds 
which they had seen with a milkwoman, and asked 
Pipa to procure it for them. He caused the holy 
men to be served with curds daily, and cheerfully 
remunerated the milkwoman. 

There was a Brahman friend of Pipa who was 
a worshipper of D^irga. Pipa prepared a religions 
feast in the EraUman's house, partook of the food 
himself, and induced the Brahman also to do so. 
Through the intercession of Pipa it is related tliat 
Durga manifested herself to the Brahman. His 
heart became purified and he began to worship God 
instead of an idol. 

A handsome woman who sold oil used to go 
about saying, ‘ Buy my oil! buy my oil! ’ Pipa 
said it would be more becoming to her lips to utter 
God’s name. The woman became angry, and replied 
that it was only usual to utter God's name when 
anybody died. On an'iving at home she found her 
husband dead. She became a believer, fell at 
Pipa's feet, and promised to utter with all her 
family the name of God, Upon this it is said Pipa 
restored her husband to life. 



TiS BHAGATS OF THE GEANTH SAHIB 


Pipa procured a female buffalo fo supply milk to 
his holy guests. The buffalo was stolen. Fips- took 
the buffdo’s calf and followed the thieves, telling 
them to take the calf also, as otherwise the buffalo 
would be displeased and not give milk.^ The thieves 
repented and restored the stolen animal to her ow^iier. 

^pa on anotlier occasion was taking home some 
moneyandacart laden with wheat. Highway robbers 
stole the cart with its burden. Pipa offered them 
his money also, telling them that they would require 
it to purchase utensils with which to cook the wheat. 
These robbers also repented and restored Pipa his cart. 

Somebody killed a cow and was expehed from 
his caste for a crime so heinous in the eyes of the 
Hindus, Pipa by inducing him to utter God’s 
name and prepare a feast in God’s honour con¬ 
verted him from a sinner to a saint. Hk tribes- 
men, liowever, still refused to allow him to return 
to his brotherhood. Upon this Pipa proved the 
glory of God’s name from the Veds and the Shas- 
tars, and stated that whoever even once uttered it 
should be pardoned the mortal sins of hundreds of 
thousands of births. Consequently how could the 
sin of cow-killing remain attached to a man who 
uttered God's name hundreds and thousands of 
times ? Everybody admitted the justice of this 
argument, and the cow-kiUer vi^as restored to his 
caste and public favour. 

A saint called Sri Rang invited Pipa by letter to 
visit him. Pipa accepted the invitation. On bus 
arrival he fonnd Sri Rang engaged in idolatrous 
worship. He was putting on the idol’s neck a 
garland of flowers, but it became entangled i]i the 
idol’s diadem. At that moment he was informed 
of Pipa’s arrival. He replied that he was occupied 
with divine ser\dce, and when it was completed he 
would go to receive his guest. Pipa replied, ' What 

^ Tlie Iiiilkn buffalo and cow will nOE milk if separated froin 
iheir caK'es. 



PIPA 


119 

sort of service is he performing ? He cannot put 
on a garland of flowers.' On hearing this Sri Rang 
ran to meet him. They embraced each other, and 
Pipa remained with his new friend for several days. 
Sri Rang was greatly edified on witnessing Sita's 
love and devotion, and applied himself with great 
fervour to imitate her eKample. 

Once on the occasion of a famine Pipa distributed 
such a quantity of eatables and drinkables that it 
appeared as if there had been no famine, and every¬ 
body's sufferings were relieved. 

The author of the Bhagai Mai states that there 
ai'e numberless similar anecdotes of Pipa whicli 
ti'anscend all conjecture and conception. There is 
therefore, the writer states, no difference between 
God and His saints, since the glory of Pipa might 
be attributed to God. The Marathi chronicler sums 
up the character of Pipa by saying that he was brave, 
liberal, learned, religious, self-restraiTied, and watchful. 

The following hymn of Pipa, intended to show 
that it is internal not external worship which is 
advantageous, is found in the Granth Sahib. 


Uhanasapi 

In the body is God, tlic body is the temple of God, in the 
body arc pil^ms and travellers ; 

In the body arc incense, lamps, sacrificial food; in the 
body are offerings of leaves.^ 

I have searched many regions, and it is only in the body 
I have found the nine treasures. 

There is no coming and no going for me since I have 
appealed to God. 

^Mrat is ill the universe is found in the body: whoever 
searciheth for it shall find it there. 

Pipa representeth, God is the Primal Essence ; when 
there is a true guru be will show him. 


^ LD the manes of Hindus, ^fen can do homage in God’s 
leinpk, ihe body, while ihey are alive, buL when ihe soul separates 


from i(, no pilgrimages or adorations can be made. 





120 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIE 


SAIN 

Sain was a disciple of Eamanand and conse¬ 
quently lived in the end of the fourteenth and the 
beginning of the fifteenth century of the Christian 
era. He was a barber at the court of Raja Ram, 
king of Rewa, then called Bandhavgarh. The 
tendency of the age was towards devotion and 
religious composition, and Sain found leisure in the 
midst of his duties to study the hymns of Ramanand, 
shape his life on the principles inculcated in them, 
and successfully imitate their spirit aud devotional 
fervour. 

The accomplishments and duties of an Indian 
court barber at the time of Sain were and are still 
of a miscellaneous character. He is something of 
a surgeon and ordinarily a marriage or match-maker, 
he oils the king’s body, shampoos his limbs, pares 
his nails, shaves his face and head, if he be a Hindu, 
and clips his moustache, if he be a Musalman; 
amuses him with gossip and tales; often plays the 
rebeck and sings his owji compositions, which deftly 
combine flattery of his master with social satire or 
pleasantry.* 

God is said by the Hindu chronicler to have 
cherished Sain as a cow her calf. He frequented 
the society of holy men aud was very happy in their 
company. He performed for them all menial ofiit^s, 
for he believed that serving saints was equivalent 
to serving God Himself. 

The Bhagat Mai contains a legend which at once 

1 Beaumarchais was censured by contemporai'y writers fcir the 
divcisJly of accomplishmeiite of the hero of his great cornedj'—‘ Figaro 
le barbier, beau diseur, mauvais pofete, hardi musicien, grand fringueneur 
de goitare, et jadis valet de chambre du comte, dlabli dans Seville, 
y faisatit avec eucc^s des barbes, dea romances, et dea mariages, y 
Tuaniant ^galemeni le fer du phi^botome et 9e piston/ 



SAIN 


T2T 


illustrates Sain’s devotion to saints and the estima¬ 
tion in which he was held for his piety. When 
going one day to perform his usual ministrations 
for king Raja Ram, he met some holy men on the 
way. He thought it was his first duty to attend 
to them. He took them with him, and began to 
render them the customary services. With the 
greatest mental satisfaction to himself he gave 
them consecrated and secular food to relieve their 
souls and bodies. In thus acting Sain disregarded 
his duty to the king and braved his displeasure. 

The legend states that a holy man, by God’s 
favour, in order to avert the king’s wrath and save 
Sain from punishment, assumed his appearance, and 
having gone and performed the customary duties 
for the king, took his departure. Soon aftei’ Sain 
arrived and began to apologize for his delay. The 
king said, ' Thou hast only just gone after the usual 
services to me; why apologize ? ’ Sain replied, ‘ I 
have not been here. Perhaps thy Majesty sayest 
so to excuse my absence.’ The Raja then knew that 
a special providence had intervened and performed 
for him the usual ton serial duties. He was at 
once converted, fell at Sain's feet, worshipped liim 
as his guru, and thus sought an asylum in God. 
It had at any rate at the time of the composition 
of the Bkagaf Mai become an established custom 
that the successive kings of the house of Bandhav- 
garb should always be disciples of the descendants 
of Sain, They are now said to be followers of Kabir.^ 

The following hymn of Sain in the Dhanasari 
measure is found in the Granth Sahib :— 

Having made an oblation of incense, lamps, and claxified 
butter, 

I go to offer them to Thee, O God.^ 

^ The Bhttgai MM of hlEihiraja Raghuraj Sioh of Hewa. He 
stated til at he ^vas the tenth in descerit from the ]R£ja at vi'hose court 
Sain lived, 

® Kawalapati, titerally—Lord of Laltshtnt. 



122 BHAGATS OF THF GRANTH SAHIB 


Hail to nieCj O God, ! 

Ever hail to Thee+ 0 Soverdgit God ! 

Tky is the best laiup^ meditation ikereon Ihe purest 
wick; 

Thou alone art the ETight One, O God. 

It is the sainls of God who feel divine pleasure ; 

Tiley describe Thee asi all-pervading and the Supreme Joy.^ 
ThoUj of fascinating form, O God^ float us over the ocean 
of terror. 

Sain saith^ worship the Supreme Joy,^ 


KABIR 

There was a certain Brahman in Banaras, who 
remained continually in attendance on Ramanand. 
The Brahman had a daughter, a virgin widow, who 
desired to behold the object of her father's reverence 
and attentions. Her father took her one day to see 
the holy man. She was allowed to prostrate herself 
before him and touch his feet with her forehead. 
He in ignorance of her status prayed that she might 
be blest with a son. When lier father replied that 
she was a window, Ramanand said that his words 
could not be recalled and she should have a son; 
but no ojie should see any signs of her pregnancy, 
and no stigma should attach to her reputation. 
Her soTi should reform religion and save the world. 
She consequently conceived, and in due time a son 
was born to her on Monday, the day of the full 
moon, in the month of Jeth, 1455, of the Vikrama- 
ditya era, eorresponding to A.D, 1398.® She exposed 

^ This and die preceding line are also tratislEiieJ.— 

It LE Rajufttiatid who tnoweih devoiion to God t 
It is he who can describe the Perfect Prtinai Joy. 

* This hymn is included in the Aratl, a divine service of ihe Sihhs 
when limps are lit in the evening, 

* For many of the delails in tliis account of Kabir the author is 



KABIR 


T23 


her child on a lake called Lahar Talao, a short 
distance from Banaras. He was found by a Musal- 
man weaver, called Ali—who from living beside the 
water (nir) was popularly known by the name of 
Nim—^when he vms taking home his wife from her 
parents’ house. 

He saw the boy lying in the lake, it is said, on 
a blossoming water-lily. The child had obvionsly 
been abandoned by an unmarried ’woman. Niru 
hastened to inform his wife Nima. They had no 
son of their own, and it was in theii’ power to adopt 
him. Nima represented the gossip that would result, 
and the danger to thedr reputation and that of the 
whole tribe. On looking into the child’s face, 
liowever, her determination gave way. He WtiS fair 
to look on, and did not scream like other children, 
but on the contrary looked bright and cheerful. 
They took him up and bore him home. 

The Lahar Talao is a lake about a mile and a 
quarter long, and an eighth of a mile broad. At 
the time of the author's visit in December, it was, 
except for some rushes here and there, covered with 
a russet weed on which aquatic birds alighted and 
sported. On the margin of the lake is a small temple 
sacred to Kabir. It is kept by some monks, who 
pride themselves on their knowledge of Sanskrit 
literature. Hard by is the tomb of Niru, Kabir's 
foster-father. 

After the discovery of the child a Qasti was in 
due time called to give him a name. The Qurmi 
was opened, and a lot was cast. The word Kabir, 
which means great in the Arabic language, was the 
first that presented itself. Tills name was accord- 

indebted to the work of ihe ]ite Lahina Singh of 

Panjor iq the Fatiak State, the of Sadhu ParamaiiaTid 

(Hindi), the Knvi Chaniar (Gujriiti), the Aram- 

fb}/ and the J3hakta Vijay of Mahipaii (Mavatlii). The autlior 
aTso acknowledges assistance from inquEries made by Mr. G, ff. Radi'ce. 
of the Indian Civil Service. ; 



134 BHAGATS of the granth sahib 

ingly given to the. child. When Kabir arrived at 
an age to understand the nature of the doubts cast 
on his birth he composed the following 

I have just come from God, 

Mammon hath led the world astray; it hatli not found 
the secret of wy Mr/A. '' 

I was not boriij nor did I dwell in a woml?; I irave ap¬ 
peared a child as I am. 

A weaver found me near his hut in a lake at Banarag, 

I was not in heaven, or in earth, or in any countiy; 
ray divine knowledge is endless. 

The spirit which is manifested in His own world is my 
name, 

X have no bones, no blood, no skin ; 1 have been manifested 
by the Word. 

I am beyond all body and endless, a superior being whom 
men call the immortal Kabir.^ 

It would appear that, though the boy was adopted 
by MusaJmans, he was subjected to Hindu influences 
from his earliest years. Banaras was and is the 
stronghold of Hinduism, and even its Muhammadan 
inhabitants are often strongly tinctured with the 
ancient religion of India. 

Moreover, it is said that Gosain Ashtanand, a 
Hindu saint of the period, said to have been a disciple 
of Ram an and, saw the child at the time of Ms expo¬ 
sure in the tank; and it is most probable that he 
subsequently followed his fate and gave him religious 
instruction as opportunities offered. 

At a very early age Kabir’s religious education 
was far advanced, V^Tiile playing with his com¬ 
panions he used to repeat the name Ram or Hari, 
Hindu names of God, Musalraans said the child was 
an infidel. Kabir retorted that an infidel was he— 

1. Who struck any person without just cause, 

2 . Who wore a reJigiotts garb to deceive the world, 

^ ^ This ia 3omewh2t in iTll^i^ation of the eipreasfoTis aUrlbuted to 
Krishiitj in the Bhaga\iad Gita, 



KABIR 


125 


3. Who drank wine, 

4. Who stole, 

Who committed suicide, 

6, Who smoked tobacco, 

7, Who committed highway I'obbery, 

6. WIio took life. 

These became Kabir’s commandments. 

One day he put on the frontal mark and tlie 
sacrificial tliread of the Hindus, A Brahman called 
Mukand remonstrated, and said that Kabir, having 
been brought up a Muhammadan, and following, 
moreover, the trade of his foster-father, had no 
concern wth Hinduism, and was not entitled to 
wear its distinguishing badge or symbols. Kabir 
replied with the following hymn :— 

In my house is thread, I am confimially weaving, while 
only one saci'ifidal thread is on thy neck. 

Thou readest only the Veds and the Gayatri, while God 
is in my heart. 

On my tongue dwelleth God, in mine eyes dwdleth God, 
and in my heart dwelleth Godi 

When thou art examined, O mad Mukaiid, af Death’s 
door, what shalt tliou say ? 

I am the cow, thou the herdsman, lord of the eartli, Eind 
guardian of man at every birth * 

Thou hast not taken me beyond the river to graze; ^ 
what sort 0! master have I ? 

Thou art a BraJ^man, I am a Banaras weaver, understand 
my instruction. 

Thou beggest from lords and kings, while I meditate on 
God I whi{^ of us is better ? 

As Kabir grew up, his devotion, spiritual power, 

^ In ihis verE« in the original Kabir three different Sanskrit 
names of God. 

^ This is said ironkaJiy, The name JMukand is also applied 
to God. 

9 Where the pasturage was good. That is, though bearing the 
iiame_ Makand, ihou art unable to save me, 

* Asa. 


126 EHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

and miracles became famous. He deemed every¬ 
thing blasphemy which was opposed to the worship 
of God. He considered the practice of jog, alms, 
fasting, and the feeding of Brahmans not only 
useless, but improper, without the repetition of 
God’s name and love for Him, In reality the special 
tenor of the Shastars is, according to Nabhaji's 
Bhagat Mai, that all the above-mentioned religious 
works are ciphers, and the name of God is, as it were, 
a numeral. The practice of jog, feeding Brahmans, 
&c,, are useless without the numeral of God’s name. 
The meaning of the author of the Bhagai Mai is, 
that all religious worlcs should be perfomned for the 
acquisition of devotion and love of God, and not for 
objects of a temporal character. 

Kabir has 'written works which all religious 
denominations can accept, and wliich, if perused 
without bigotry,, are advantageous for the salvation 
0 f all persons. Kabir was so steadfast in his ii 11 eran ce 
of God’s name, that in comparison with it he deemed 
worthless the rules of caste and the Hindu and 
Muhammadan religious observances. 

From Kabiris boyhood his mind was filled with 
intuitive kno’vvledge, and his reasoning faculties were 
so acute tliat he vanquished the most learned men 
of his age, both Hindu and Musalman, in theological 
and ethical discussions. The Brahmans and the 
Mullas contrived many expedients to silence him, 
but all their efforts were baffled. At last they 
decided that they would call him a nigum, or person 
without a spiritual guide, and consequently an infidel, 
with the dubious moral character which that word in 
tlie estimation of the vulgar connotes, and that they 
would thus humble and shame him. Having heaid 
of the Bpihman’s resolution and of Ramanand's 
fame Kabir sought him out and became his disciple.^ 

’ There is a. story jn t^Jbhaji^s Mdl purporting to describe 

the nunTieF in iviiicli Kabir became Rlmanand'a disciple, but as it is 
deiojalory to the character of botli saints, it is oniilted here. , 



KABIR 


1^7 


When Kablr's foster-parents found they could not 
restrain Hindu proclivities, they determined to 
circumcise him. Upon this he uttered the following 
hymn — 

Wience have come the Hindus and Musalmajis ? Who 
Jiath put them on their diflEerent w^ys ? ^ 

Having thought and reflected j]i thy heart, uiL^wer tJiis— 
who shall obtain heuTi’^en and ■who hell ? 

0 Qa^:ij what expoundcst thou ? 

Such readers and students as thou have failed; none ot 
them hath obtained knowledge. 

Thou practisest circumcision for love of woman 1 sirall 
never believe in it, O brother. 

■ If God had desired to make me a Musalman, I sliould 
have been born circumcised. 

If a man become a Musulman by circumcision, what is 
to be done to a woman ? ^ 

Thou puttest not away thy wife who is halt tliy body ; 
wherefore tliou remainest a Hindu. 

Give up thy book$, O foolish man, and worship God ; thou 
in-actisest gross oppression. 

Kabir bath laid l^old of the prop of God ; the Musalmans 
have totally failed.^ 

When Kabir's mother found that his attentiou 
was directed to the worship of the God of the Hindus 
in opposition to the God of Islam, she raised loud 
complaints. Kabir paid attention to her, but 
employed himself as usual in the repetition and 
remembrance of God's name. 

Kabir continued to follow^ his trade, but at the 
same time received and served holy men and mendi- 

^ Who invenLcd their different rdigions ? 

^ The Mu&alraSflS tetl a fanciriil story regardsiig the origin of 
circumcision by Abraham. He bad two wives, and one exiaicted 
a promise from him that he would not approach the other uiiider pain 
of dcaih. He broke his promise, but his favourite wife, subduing her 
rage, expressed herself satisfied with bis circumcision instead of ihe 
decapitaiion which had been stipulated. 

^ As being nncircumcised, alie is noi a AJusalman. ^ Asa, 



138 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

caiits. At this his mothei^ was greatly distrei^sed, 
and uttered the complaints versified in the first part 
of the following hymn z— 

Thon art always rising early and bringing Iresli ^ utensib ; 
thy life hath gone in plastering cooking $quarcs ; 

Thou payest no attention to thy weaving i art 

engrossed in the pleasure of saying ^ God^ God - 

Who in our family hath ever uttered tlie name of liam ? ^ 

Since this worthier ^ son of ours began to wear a rosary, 
we have had no peace. 

Hear;^ wife of my eldest hrothef-iu-law ; hear^ wife of my 
youngest bnotlier-indaw; ^ a wonderful tiling hath oc¬ 
curred ! 

Tin's boy hatJi ruined our weaving business;* why is he 
not dead ? 

Kabir replied as follows :— 

Thu one God is the Lord of ah liappiness ; tlie guru liath 
granted me His name. 

He preserved the l^onour of tlie saint ^ Pralilad, and 
destroyed Harnakhas witli Narsinh^s nails. 

Praldad abandoned the gods^ and ancestors* of his 
house, and embraced tite instruction of his guru Narad 

Saidi Itabir^ God is tlie destroyer of all sin ; He savetii 
His isaintS-* 

In Banaras, among opulent Hindus, sun-dried 
vessels are replaced daily., It is believed that the 

^ IC^n\ slIso LrauslaLed ^^taver. 

^ KabTr^s mother a J^tuealcn^i, and it ceriainly was? not usual 
among her people to utter the Hindu word for God. 

^ Literally—a man wirbout son&j who has no oue to ioil 

fotp and IS thereibre laay The word is a common one of abuse in 
the moulhs of some Indian women, 

^ KabTr's mother sought to get all her female relaiions on her side. 

* Literally—our seven threads, probably with reference lo the 
iseven colours. ® Siirif fn the origiJiab 

^ Called Sanda and ^Md^rka^ descendajits of Brahma. 

^ It IS usual for the Hindus to worship aticesEors. The clause is 
also translated— Prahlld rejected his tutor’s and his father's advice. 

^ BilCwal. 


KABIR 


night renders them impure* Kabir i^as anxious to 
attract holy men, and followed the popular custom 
of daily renewing his cooking vessels and smearing 
his cooking places. The above hymn was written 
in Kabir’s youth. 

One day he was selling a piece of doth in the 
market-place. He asked five double paise for it, but 
no one would give him more than three. A broker 
came up, and, seeing that Kabir was undervaluing 
bis cloth, began to assist him in its sale. The broker 
asked intending purchasers twelve double paise. They, 
forming an idea of the value of the cloth from the 
price put upon it by the seller, offered seven double 
paise, and at this sum a bargain was struck. Upon 
this Kabir uttered the following couplet;— 

If I speak the truth, you beat me down ; the world is 
pleased with falsehood. 

A sheet worth five double paise is sold for seven. 

Kabir kept his mind continually fixed on God, and 
worked sufficiently to maintain himself and his family. 
Another day, as he was standing in the market¬ 
place selling clotli, a faqir came and begged for 
wherewitlial to cover his nakedness. Kabir offered 
him half the cloth he had for sale. The faqir replied 
that tliat was not enough. Upon this Kabir gave 
liim the whole. Kabir then reflected that his mother 
and family were waiting for the price of the cloth, 
and how could he return to them with empty hands ? 
He therefore decided to conceal himself and not 
return home. His people became very anxious 
regarding bun. 

Meantime God put it into the heai’t of a corn-mer¬ 
chant to take ox-loads of food of every description to 
Kabir's house, so tliat his family might not suffer 
during his absence. Kabir's mother strenuously 
resented the offering, and said,' My son will not take 
even a single grain of corn from any one. Who art 
thou who tlmowest such a quantity of provisions at 


&\Kltr Vk 


i30 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

my door ?' The merchant, however, heeded her not, 
hnt leaving all the provisions took his departure. 
Two or three men then went in quest of Kabir, and 
brought him home. When he saw the unexpected 
supplies and heaid the circumstances, he knew it was 
all due to the kindness of God, and became highly 
pleased and gratejful to the Giver, He then sent for 
some saints and distributed what he had received 
among them. 

When the Brahmans of Banaras heard that Kabir 
had given hundreds of mans of com to holy men, 
hut not even one grain to themselves, tliey went 
in a body to his house and thus addressed him: 
' Weaver, thou hast become very proud of thy 
wealth, since, wdtiiout any intimation to us, thou 
hast distributed provisions among low caste faqirs 
and Sudars, Leave this city at once, and take up 
thy residence elsewhere, ’ Kabir asked why he should 
leave the city. Had he broken into any one’s house 
or committed highway robbery, that they sought to 
exile him ? The Brahmans replied that, since he had 
served and done honour to faqirs instead of them¬ 
selves, it was an offence sufficient to merit expulsion 
from the city. ‘ Say no more,’ they continued, 

* it is better for thee either to make us an offering 
or depart hence.' Kabir replied that his house was 
all he had, and they could take possession of it. 
Thus saying, he escaped from them, and again con¬ 
cealed himself in a distant fores 

Upon this some admirers of Kabir’s sanctity, and 
sympathizers with his troubles, distributed among 
the Brahmans such an amount of money and pro¬ 
visions that the uanie and praises of Kabir resounded 
tlmoughout the whole city, and the Brahmans were 
highly delighted and gratified on finding their 
stomachs filled to repletion. After that, a holy man 
sought out Kabir, aird asked him why he spent his 
days ill the forest. ‘ Why goest thou not to thine 


KABIR 


131 

cwn house ? Whoever goeth to thy door obtaineth 
money and provisions, and shall there be nothing for 
thee ? ’ Kahir then went home, and, finding ample 
supplies for his family, was grateful for God's mercy 
and love. When the report of such good fortune and 
God's bounty "was noised abroad, people went in 
great numbers to the saint. Finding his meditations 
interrupted by his visitors, he resorted to a singular 
expedient to blacken Iris own character and keep 
them at a distanced Pious people were scandalized, 
and said that, though Kabir had been a perfect 
saint, he must now be deemed a wicked man mifit 
for the association of the virtuous. 

While Kabir's desire for seclusion was thus fully 
attained, and people ceased to tlirong round him 
in numbers, ignorant people uttered reproaches and 
satirized him. Kabir went in strange guise to the 
king's court, and sat down in the midst of the 
assembly. Tlie king and his courtiers, seeing his 
strange behaviour, treated him despitefuUy and 
ordered him out of their presence. The king, how¬ 
ever, on reflection was ashamed of his hasty order 
and want of consideration for such a saint, not¬ 
withstanding the strange guise he had adopted. 
The king tlren began to consider how his own sins 
could be pardoned. He put an axe on his shoulder 
and a bundle of firewood on his head, went bare¬ 
footed with his queen into Kabir's presence, and 
fell down with great humility and modesty at the 
saint's feet, Kabir pardoned his discourtesy, and 
showed him the way of devotion to God. 

The bigoted emperor Sikandar Khan Lodi, son of 
Bahlol Lodi, visited Banaras in Sambat 1545, the 
year he ascended the throne. Owing to the damp¬ 
ness of the locality he contracted a severe fever and 
ague. Kabir’s enemies suggested that he should be 
called to cure the emperor. Tlieir object was that 

lu Nitbhaji’s BhagOil M«l it ia Sialcd that Kabif piietciKted 10 be 
dt'tmk and went round ihe city M/ith ])js arm round a courtesan's neck. 


133 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Eabir should, fail in his efforts, and then be punished 
by the despot. To the dismay of his enemies, how¬ 
ever, Kabir is said to have cured the monarch by 
simply presenting himself. 

The MusaJmans, headed by Shaikh Taqi and the 
unbelieving Brahmans, subsequently appeared before 
the emperor to make a complaint against Kabir. 
They represented that he had so led people astray 
all over the city, that those who paid heed to what 
he said, remained neither Hindus nor Musalmans. 
The emperor summoned Kabir. When he appeared, 
the courtiers told him to salute and make obeisance 
to the monarch in tlie usual manner of subjects. 
Kabir replied that he was not accustomed to courts, 
and did not know how to make prostrations, nor 
had he any business with the emperor. He but 
knew the name of God, who was the Support of 
his soul, and only Sovereign of the world. The 
emperor became enraged on hearing this, and for¬ 
getting his former obligation to Kabir, loaded him 
with chains and had him thrown into the river* It 
is related that Kabir, who had previously cut off 
tlie chains of sin, easily swam to shore leaving his 
chains behind liim. Unbelievers attributed this 
miracle to magic, so setting some wood on fire 
they threw the saint into it. By God’s favour the 
fire was completely extinguished, and Kabir’s body 
emerged from it more handsome than before, W^hen 
these means of destruction failed, a furious elephant 
was let loose on him. ITie elephant, however, not 
only did not approach Kabir, but fled on seeing 
him. Kabir composed the follc\ving on the occa¬ 
sion ;— 

They tied my arms and. threw me like a baU ; 

They beat an infuriated elephant on the head that he 
might trample on me, 

But he trumpeted and fled, saying, 

' I am a sacrifice to that shape which appeared,' 



KABTR 


133 


Saith Kabir, ‘ 0 my God, Thou art my strength 

The Qazi ordered, ‘ Drive on the elephant, 

0 driver, or I will make mince-meat of thee ; 

Drive on the elephant, wound him,’ 

The elephant did not move, but kept his attention on 
God, 

And God took possession of his heart. 

Men asked, ‘ Wfiat crime bath the saint committed, 

That you have made a ball of him and thrown him to 
the elephant ? ’ 

The elephant lifting up the ball bowed to it; 

Even then the infatuated Qazi could not comprehend. 

Three times he tried to kill me but failed ; 

Even then his hard heart would not be satisfied. 

Saith Kabir, 0 God, Thou art my protector ; 

Thy servant’s soul is in the fourth state.^ 

When Kabir had successfully escapetl from these 
ordeals, another charge was invented against liim, 
namely, that he had been guilty of the blasphemy 
of calling himself God, This was deposed to by 
several witnesses, and the emperor w'as induced to 
give it credence. He again summoned Kabir. On 
Kabir's arrival the emperor caused a cow to be 
slaughtered and ordered Kabir to reanimate her. 
Kabir stroked her with his hand, and then made 
a noise with his lips as if driving her, upon which, 
it is related, the cow stood up, and all her wounds 
and injuries were healed. 

When the emperor saw the power of Kabir's 
devotion, it is said he fell at liis feet, and thus 
addressed him: ' 1 am thy servant and slave. 

Pardon my offences that I may be saved from God’s 
wrath. Ask what thou desirest—money, lands, and 
other things—and 1 will present them to thee; and 
do thou in return bestow such kindness on my poor 
circumstances that I may be happy in this world and 
the next.' Kabir replied that he had no concern 

^ The /Hrfj-a paifin wliich deliverance is obtained, Gaund. 


134 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

with anything but the name of God. Gold and lands 
were all useless to him. Saying this he went home. 

The saints of God were all overjoyed at Ms 
safetyj but the Brahmans irritated at their failure 
began to contrive further means of annoyance. They 
dressed up several persons as holy raeUj and sent 
them to various dignitaries to invite them on behalf 
of Kabir to a banquet on a certain date. Guests 
came in crowds at the appointed time. Kabir on 
discovering the trich that had been played, and 
knowing that on account of his poverty he was 
unequal to the entertainment of such a multitude, 
again fled, this time wath the approbation of the saint 
Rav Das, to a neighbouring forest for concealment. 

But God did not wish that His saint should be 
made a laughing-stock. He sent in the guise of 
Kabir a holy man who performed the duties of 
host with such grace and dignity as was impossible 
for any ordinary mortal. As each party of visitors 
arrived, the holy man met them at the door, and 
performed for them all the rites of hospitality. He 
provided them with suitable apartments, wasJicd 
their feet, and performed all necessary services. 
Wlien all tlie guests had fared to their hearts' con¬ 
tent, and the holy man obtained leisure from attend¬ 
ance on them, he sat down with each group and 
conversed with its members on sacred subjects. In 
this way the festival was prolonged for several days. 
After that he went to Kabir, and gave him a full 
account of the entertainment. Kabir then went 
home overjoyed with God's love and kindness to 
him and composed the following slok:— 

Kabir, I did not do this, nor will I do it again, nor am 
I physically able to do it; 

How do I know wiiat God may have done ? Y$t it was 
all Kabir. 

To this Kabir in his thankfulness to God added 
the following hymn :— 



KABIR 


135 


Endless salvation awaitoth him 

Who hath sudi a master as Godj O brother. 

Say, now that my trust is in Thee, 0 God, 

"Wlrat obligation am I under to any one clso ? 

Why should God who beaveth the load of the three worlds 
not cherish me ? 

Saith Kabir, I have obtained one piece of knowledge by 
reflection— 

If a mother will poison her child, who Cfin restrain 
her ? ^ 

It is said that the entertainment took place on 
the £i>ot where since has been built the Chaura 
Kabir, a temple dedicated to Kabir, in whidi his 
writings are said to be preserved. 

Til ere was a renowned Brahman disputant, called 
Pandit Sarva Jit, who at his mother's advice went 
to Batiaras wdth several ox-loads of books. He had 
heard of Kabir’s fame and proceeded to visit him. 
On arriving at the Lahar Talao, he met Niru's 
daughter draw'iiig water, and requested her to show 
him Kabir's place of residence. She said tliat it was 
on a lofty place, with a road so narrow that not 
even an ant conld pass, much less the oxen he had 
brought with him. By her answer he felt sure that 
she knew where Kabir lived. He took a lota of 
w'ater from her, and requested her to place it in 
front of Kabir. She did so, upon which Kabir put 
a needle into it and told her to carry the vessel back 
to Sarva Jit, There is a proverb that truth is found 
at the bottom of a well. By the needle Kabir meant 
that truth w'as small, exquisitely polished, and under¬ 
lay much unsubstantial matter. 

The Brahmans of Banaras on hearing of Sarva 
Jit’s arrival w'ent to Raman and, and informed him 
tliat a Pandit had come with whom nobody could 
cope. Raman and was so little impressed with the 
Pandit’s great Icaming, that he told them to go out 

^ iSj 1 cniino£ cam pel God la cherish inc. Gauri. 


jj 6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

into the street and bring in the first person they 
met; and he undertook that he would vanquish 
Sarva Jit in argument. The Brahmans went forth 
into the street. Kabir happened to be the first they 
met, and they took him to Ramanand. Ramanand 
declared Kabir invincible, and the Brahmans accord¬ 
ingly put him forward as their spii’itual champion. 
Sarva Jit on seeing him inquired his caste, where¬ 
upon Kabir answered that he was a weaver. The 
haughty Pandit turned up Iris nose and asked what 
a weaver was. Kabir replied as follows 

No one knowetL the secret of the Weaver ; 

God hath woven the warp of the whole world. 

If thou listen to the Veds and Putans, 

Thou shalt hear, * I have stretched the warp so long ; 

I have made the earth and firmament My workshop ; 

I have set the moon and sun in alternate motion ; 

Working My legs I did one work * —with such a W eaver 
my heart is pleased. 

The weaver hath looked into his o\™ lieart and there 
recognized God. 

Saith Kabir, * 1 have broken up my workshop. 

And the wea^'er liatJi blcndcd his thread* with tlie thread 
of God.^ 

Sarva Jit admitted himself defeated, and begged 
Kabir to make him a disciple. Kabir modestly 
referred him to his guru Ramanand, who gave him 
the customary initiation. 

Tata and Jiwa, two Brahman brothers who lived 
in refiremeiit on the bank of the river Narbada, 
doubting the spiritual perfection of their guru, 
planted a shoot of the Indian fig-tree near their 
dwelling, and vowed that, if it germinated when 

* God 13 reprejenied as tbe speaker. He made the world as a 
weaveT makes a piece of cloth, and He also made the alternations of 
day and night 

^ The weave]' has obtained delii’crance, bfetirlerl his light with the 
light of God. » Astt 


KABIR 


^3; 

irrigated with the water in which a holy visitor had 
washed his feet, they would transfer their spiritual 
allegiance to such a visitor. Several reputed saints 
made pilgrimages to the locality, but it was onlv on 
Kabir’s arrival that the desired result was attained. 
Upon this Tata and Jiwa had no difficulty in believing 
in Kabir’s superhuman power. 

A young woman of beautiful and bewitching form 
was sent by Kabir's enemies to test his virtue, but 
she displayed all her attractions and fascinations in 
vain. God’s image was so firmly seated in Kabir's 
heart, that the charming damsel's wiles produced no 
effect on him. She therefore departed crestfallen 
and helpless. God w'as pleased on behokling the 
continence and devotion of Kabir, and appeared to 
him in a vision. He placed His hand on Kabir’s 
head and invited him to go bodily to heaven. Kabir, 
knowing that he had obtained complete deliver¬ 
ance, prepared himself to accept God's invitation; 
but, to show his contempt for Hindu superstitions, 
and to emphasize the power of devotion to God, he 
pei'formed a very unusual act before his departure to 
the celestial realms. 

Kabir usually lived, until the last year of his life, 
at Banaras, the sacred city of Shiv, where alone, in 
the e.'itimation of many Hindus, deliverance may be 
obtained. There is a town called Magahar beyond the 
Ganges, about eighty-hve miles to the east of 
Ajudhia, and fifteen miles to the west of Gorakhpur, 
in wliich, according to Brahmanical belief, those 
who die have no hope of ultimate beatitude. Kabir's 
biographer says that they who believe in the religious 
exercises prescribed in the Shastars, migrate into the 
bodies of donkeys if they die in Magaliar; while for 
those who are fortunate enough to perform the real 
worship of God, every country and every place is 
equal to thousands of cities like the Hindu Banaras. 
Nay, such is the power of devotion, that God’s devotees 
who die in Magahar go to heaven. 


138 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir, on axrmng in Ma.ga.harp took possession of 
a saint's cell he found on the margin of the river 
Ami. The river was then dry, but water has ho wed 
in it ever since the day Kahir hallowed it with his 
presence, 

Kabir composed the following hymn at Magahar 

I am as a fish out of water. 

Because in a former life I performed no penancen 
Now say, O God, what shall be my condition. 

People tell me I had little sense to leave Bajiaras> 

That I wasted all my life in that dty of Shiv ; ^ 

And now when about to die, I have removed to Magahar. 
For many years I did penance at Banaras, 

But, now that death is at hand> I have come to dwell in 
Magahcir— 

I consider Magahar as good as Banaras— 

How shall he of scant devotion be saved ? 

Saith Kabir, my guru Ramanand^^ Ganesb, Shiv,® and all 
men know. 

That Kabir when dying uttered God’s holy name.^ 

And also the following 

Tliou art my great mountain; O Lord, 1 havo sought 
Thy shelter. 

Thou ahalrest not, nor do I fall; Thou hast sheltered me^ 
O Godj 

Now and then and forever more there is but Thom 
By Tlry favour I am ever happy, 

Relying on Tliee I have dwelt in Magahar; Thou hast 
quenched the fever of my bodyn 

I first obtained a sight of Thee in Banaras, and afterwards 
I w^ont to live at Magaliar. 

^ BfinSraSp vb&n? die of Shiv specially prei'aih. 

^ Some uiiiicrstand J3rshclS[^ati^ the (eacher o\ tfcie gotTs. 

5 Ganesiijit is said, eiideavocni lo bring every one to die in Banaras 
who has ever visited that place of Hindu pil|;niiiage. Shiv h said to 
whisper ]\h or faretveil spell, ^Ram, Rfim^' (God, God) 

into the djing ears. The idea h that Shtv is also a woj-shtpper 
of Ram anri recommends his friends to that rad's projection. 

^ Gauti. 





KABIR 


139 


As Banaras so is Magahar; I deem them both the same. 

I a poor man have obtained this wealth on account oi 
which the proud pandits are bursting to death Tsiih envy. 

He who is proud suffereth that torture ; there is none to 
deliver him therefrom. 

In this life he crieth bitterly under the torture, and aftey 
death he shall be burnt in a frightful hell. 

What is hell and what heaven, the wretched places ? Tlie 
saints have rejected them bofh.^ 

Ti l rough the favour of the guru I pay no regard to any 
one; 

I have claimed God’s throne and met Him. 

God and Kabir have become one ; no one can distinguish 
between themA 

After Kabir's death a quarrel arose bet'W'ecn the 
Hindus and Muharnmadans for the disposal of his 
body, Vir Siuh Baghcla, the King of Banaras, wished 
to cremate it, while Bijli Khan, the Nawab of 
Gorakhpur, desired to bury it. They fought over the 
matter until a voice come from heaven and separated 
the combatants. 'When the quarrel was adjusted, it 
was found tliat there was no corpse to dispose of. 
Fragrant flowers were found in its place. The 
Musalnians, how'Cver, made a grave, and the Hindus 
erected a shrine in friendly proximity, as if each 
party were in possession of Kabir’s sacred remains, 

Kabir lived to such a great age-—one hundred 
and nineteen years, five months, and twenty-seven 
days—-that there are several fabulous accounts of 
his duration of life. Indeed some of his followers 
believe that he is still in existence. Tire following 
mnemonic lines, however, which are amply authenti¬ 
cated, show that Kabir went the way of all mortals :— 

Pandrahi sau pacliliatar bikhe kiya Magahar ko gaun ; 

Magsar sudi ekadaslii rali paun men paun. 

Kabir went to Magahar in the Sambatyear 1575 (a.o. 15 iS). 

^ Kabir desired nbsorptiori in God, and not heaven where be should 
be £i.g;ain aubject to trangmigration. “ lliiinkEi][. 



140 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

On the eleventh day of the bright half of the month of 
Maghar his spirit blended with the spirit of the world,^ 

Nabhaji ^^Tote on the circumstance :— 

Trusting to his devotion Kabir relinquished his body in 
Magahar, 

And now rejoiceth in tlie lap of the Immortal. 

The Dadupanthis, or followers of the saint Dadu, 
also corroborate the fact of Kabir's death at the 
time above stated and in the town of Magahar. 

It is said that Kahir after some days rose from 
the dead, and appeared to a disciple called Ratan 
in Mathura, and gave him divine instruction. Kabir 
then and there met Dharm Das, whom he had 
previously appointed his successor, and made him 
more completely acquainted with the principles of 
his religion. He laid down forty-two articles which 
he called the pillars of faith, and having fully ex- 
plained them to his disciples finally departed to his 
eternal home. 

Besides Kabir’s compositions, preserved in the 
Granth Sahib, there is a long list of w'orks attributed 
to him, file most famous of which is the Kabir 
Biiak. Many of his verses are repeated by wander¬ 
ing faqirs. 

On the subject of caste Kabir wrote :— 

The courageous man who effaceth caste and pride shall 
prove a saint. 

On the subject of idolatry he said :— 

If God be found by worshipping a stone, I will worship 
a mountain ; 

1 Professor 11. fj. Wilson has given different mnemonic veraes, 
ivliich alio IV Kabfr !\ fabulous age (Jff/rjjwi o/ tht Veil. I, 

PP- In the Bhwrai thu IravacMn Kos-h, tlie dale of 

KabTr’s deatli is given as die Safea jw 1370, a.d. 144S, ihac is, 
twenty-one ycnis before Guru Nilnult's birth. If the date given in the 
text be accepted, Gtint Niinak was forty-nine years of age when KabTr 
clktl. 



KABIR 


141 

Better tliaii that stone is a. hand’iniU which grindcth 
corn for the world to eAt. 

Many similar verses in the mouths of the populace 
in upper India, and indeed all Kabir's compositions, 
show him to have been a daring and original thinker. 
It must be mentioned, however, that his writings 
are frequently of a mystical character, and much 
concentration of thought and knowledge of the 
spiritual and social condition of his age are necessary 
for their elucidation. The author has accepted the 
interpretation of Kabir's hymns from the gyanis of 
the Panjab, but possibly the saint's followers in other 
parts of India may differ on some details. 

Kabir held the doctrine of aUnsa or the non-de¬ 
struction of life, which extended even to that of 
flowers. The Sikli Gurus, on the contrary, allowed, 
and even encouraged, the use of animal flesh as 
food. 

The visitor to Kabir's temple in Banaras is shown 
what purports to be his picture. Dharm Das ^ and 
Surat Gopal, another of his disciples, are represented 
kneeling at his feet in an attitude of supplication, 
while his son Kamal, wlio, the Kabirpanthis believe, 
was a child re-animated by him, is fanning him. The 
visitor may also see a picture of Kabir and Eav Das, 
a friend and fellow disciple and townsman of his. 
Rav Das is represented as a very attenuated old 
man, naked except for a red cloth round his middle, 
wearing a rosary in two folds round his neck, and 
beads on his wrists and ai’ms. The saintly royal 
lady, Jhali, queen of Chitaur, richly dressed, is 
offering him food on a platter. 

’• h is liiia man %vlio comiiil^d K«ibn'’s writings, it is said, in Sainbat 
I gar (A4D. 1464) when Kabir wag sixi^'-six j'ears of age. 



142 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


KABIR’S HYMNS 


Ski Ra 

Without God's assistance men are lost in worldly 
love. 


I 


The mother Uimlfeth tliat her son is growing big, 

But this shfi thinketli not, that day by day his life is de¬ 
creasing. 

She callefh him her own and fondleth him excessively, 
while the god of deatli looketh on and laugheth. 

So much hast Thou, 0 God, illuded the world ; 

How can it ever know Thee since mammon hatli bewitched 
it?» 

Saitli Kabir, abandon the pleasure of sin, for in such 
companionship thou must assuredly die, 

O mortal, repeat the name of the Lord, put aside mention 
of others, so slialt thou pass over the terrible ocean of this 
world. 

If it please God, man ledeth divine love. 

The error of superstition departeth from within liim, 

Dii'ine knowledge is spontaneously produced, intelligence 
awakened, 

And by the favour of the guru the heart is touched by 
God’s love. 

In such companion .ship there is no death ; 

Obey the Master’s order and tiiou shalt meet Him. 

The following was addressed to a Jogi who offered 
wine to Kabir. 

II 

Hear a wonderful tJiii^, 0 Pandit, I caimot now describe 
Maya, 

Who hath bewitched demigods, men, celestial heralds, and 
musicians, and girdled the three worlds. 

^ It is cxpliincd ihat this passage does not cast blame on God, 
because it is men's acts which really lead ibccn astray. 


KABIR'S HYMNS 


143 


The soverelga GchI^s lyre playeth without being struck ; ^ 
And he on whom He looketh mth favour loveth its soundn 
I have made nay brain a furnace^ the breath of my left 
and light nostrils slills^ and my heart the golden vat, 

Into whicli a very pure stream hath trickled j I have 
distilled the sweetest essence; ^ 

find —what is without parallel—I have made suspension 
of jny breath my wine-cup. 

Say is there any Jogi in the three worlds who would be 
satisfied and not long for moreJ^ 

Such knowledge of tlie Supreme Being hath manifested 
itself ; saith Kabir^ I am imbued with it. 

All the rest of the world is led astray in error, hut my mind 
is intoxicated with Ged^s elixir. 

Gauri 

Devotion is the water wdiich has quenched Kabir's 
burning thirst for God. 

1 

I have been on and have now^ found the mme of God as 
water to extinguish it : 

The name of God is the water which hath cooled my burn¬ 
ing body. 

Men go to the forest to chasten their hearts. 

But without God they cannot find sud^ w^atcr as will do so. 
Ihe water of God^s name ]iath saved His bmning slave 
From the fire which hatlii consumed demigods and men. 
In the terrible ocean there is an ocean of happiness ■ * 

I continue to diink^ but the water is not exhausted. 

Saith Kabicp ’worship God. 

God^s Tu^me is the water which hath extinffiudT.ed mv 
thirst. 

^ God gladdens idan^s heart by divine kno’wledge ’wiibout any 
perceptible iatederence with him. ^ God's name. 

^ The Jine is alEso translated—He is a unique Jogi in ibe three 
TVCrlds who haih ladled such essence. Is there any /i? Aipi ? 

^ 'the lernbit ocean is very bitter—Mitbin it is found ihe s^veet 
water of God's namt 


144 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

Yet Kabir's thirst for God increases. 

U 

0 God, thirst for the water of Thy naim departeth not 
from me; 

N ay for that water my ardour rageth the more. 

Thou art the ocean, I am a fish therein j 
I dw'ell in the water, I perish without it. 

Thou art the cage. I am Thy parrot; 

What can the cat Death do to me ? 

Thou art a tree, 1 am the bird thereon ; 

Unfortunate is he who seeth Thee not. 

Thou art tlie True Gum, 1 am Hiy novice. 

Saith Kabir, meet me, 0 God, at tire last moment. 

A thief when hotly pressed sought refuge in 
Kabir’s house. It would have been foreign to 
Kabir’s character to refuse shelter to any one who 
sought it. Moreover he did not know the character 
of his guest, and accordingly gave him the usual 
permission to remain in his house. It happened 
that Kabir’s daughter was then on a visit to him, 
and when he entertained tire thief at tlie same time, 
the circumstance led to much unfavourable com¬ 
ment, Kabir addressed the following hymn to his 
detractors :— 

III 

Since I recognized boih iks thief and my son-nn-ia^ us one. 
Why are people distressed at it ? 

If I am dishonoured and have lost tny honour. 

Let no one follow in my footsteps. 

If I am bad the badness is conhned to myself j 
l^have no partnership or connexion with any of you. 

You know nothing about honour or dishonour ; 

But you shall know when yout gilding is laid bare,^ 

Saith Kabir, that is Jionour which is acceptable to God; 
Forsaking all else w'orship only Him. 

^ Also tran slate#— 

Mj honotir or dislMJnour bringetb no shame on you, 

Yoj shall know who is in the riglii when all gilding is cast off. 




KABIR^S HYMNS 145 

A satire on the ritualistic practices of the Hindus. 

IV 

If anion with God be obtained by going about naked^ 

All the deer ^ of the forest shall be saved. 

WlT.at mattereth it whether man goeth naked or weareth 
a deerskin, 

If he recognize not God in his heart ^ 

If perfection be obtained by shaving the haad, 

\Vliy should not sheep obtain salvation ? 

Tfj 0 brethren^ the continent man is saved^ 

Why should not a eunuch obtain the supreme reward ? 
Saith Kabir, hear, 0 my brethren^ 

Wlio hath obtained salvation without God's name ? 

V 

They who bathe in the evening and the moniing. 

Are like frogs in the water. 

Whefti men have no love for God's name, 

They shall all go to the god of death* 

They who love their persons and deck tiiemsdves out in 
various guises. 

Feel not mercy even in their dreams. 

Many leading religious men call them quadrupeds* 

And sdy that only holy men shedl obtain happiness in this 
ocean of trouble. 

Saith Kabir, why perform so many ceremonies ? 

Forsaking all other essences quaff the great essence of 
God'$ namcr 

God ' prefers before all temples the upright heart 
and pure 

VI 

What availeth devotion, what penance^ what fasting and 
worship 

To him in whose heart there is worldly love ? 

O man, apply thy heart to God ; 

Tliou shaft not obtain Him by artifice, 

^ Jl/rg abo means beasls gencraEly. 

L 


flIKII. V[ 


146 BHAGATS OF THE GR.^NTH SAHIB 

Put away covetousness and the example of others j 
Lay aside lust, wrath, and pride. 

By the religious practices of ths SJiperiUtiO'iis boasting is 
increased ; 

They join together and worship a stone, 

Saith Kabtr, by devotion I have obtained tha LoH 
By becoming simple in keari I Itave met God, 

The name Brahman should only be applied to 
a holy man, 

vn 

While dwelling in the womb man hath not family or 
caste ; 

All men have sprung from the seed of Brahm. 

Say, O Pandit, since when hast thou been a Brrihman ; 
W'aste not thy life in calling thyself a Brahman, 

If thou art a Brahman born of a Brahmani mother, 

Wliy hast thou not come by some other way ? 

How art tliou a Brahman ? How am I Sudar ? 

How am I of blood and you of milk ? * 

Saith Kabir, only he who meditateth on God 
Is a Brahman in my estimation. 

' All are men condemned alike to groan.' 

VIII 

Man can never sleep comfortably in spmfiial ignorance ; 
The rich and the poor both weep alike. 

When man's tongue no longer uttereth God’s name, 

He shall continue to bewail birth and death, 

Wlien life departeth, say whose shall be man’s wealth 
Whicli appeareth like the shadow of a tree ? * 

As the life of a musical instrument is contained in itself, 
How can any one know the secrets of the dead ? * 

^ Thai is, why wert ihou bora of woman ? The Bra]imans are 
supposed Lo havft issued from Brabma^s mouth. 

Among thfi Hindus blood h considered impure, and milk pure, 

^ Man's weaiih shall paes away with his Jife like the shadow of 
a tree. 

* The life or sound of a musical instrument is contained wiifiiii it 
U the string breab. no life or sound remains^ and no one can tell 



KABTR'S HYMNS 14? 


As the swan pre^ideih ci;^ the lake, so dotii Defith o^'er the 
body. 

Drink God's elixir^ 0 Kabir. 

Without purification of the heart pilgrimages are 
of no avail 

IX 

The Lord of light having created the races of men infi:ised 
light into them, 

Wliieh sometimes produceth glass ornaments^ and some¬ 
times pearls.^ 

What abode is that which is called secure^ 

Where fear is dispelled, and one abide th without fear ? 

The heart is not satisfied with pilgrimages to the banks of 
sacred ; 

Man remaineth entangled with good and had acts. 

Demerits and merits arc both the same ; ^ 

In thine own heart is God, tlie philosopher's stone; 
abandon the hope of obtaining merits from any one else, 

0 Kabitp chide not the name of Him who is without 
qualities; 

Enjoy thyself in intercourse with that Lordn 

Kabir desires not heaven but absorption in God. 


X 

The men who have no correct notion of the Supreme Being, 
Think of entering heaven by mere words. 

\Fhithftr it has gone. When human life failsu, the soul departs, and no 
mortal knows its desdnahon. 

^ Good and bad fruit spring from human acta, which again proceed 
from the light or understanding that God has given. The first verse 
of this hymn is also translated 

There is a species of animal for every spark of light, and a spark of 
light for every species of animal. 

^ Good acts are compared to gold, had acts to iron fetters 3 but 
both good and bad acts retard inan''s progress towards absorption in 
God. These two lines are also translated — 

They are entangled in reit^oifs ceremonies good and bad, 

And their acts whether bad or good have the same result. 

That is, they commit sins of various descriptions at places of pil¬ 
grimage, and their pilgrimages are therefore of no avail. 

L 3 


148 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I know not wlie.ro heaven is ; 

Everybody saith he longeth to go there* 

But til ere is no satisfaction in mck conversation— 

The heart is only satisfied when pride departeth. 

As long as man desireth to go to heaven, 

So long shall he ^nd no d’^veUing at Goif s feet. 

Saith Kabir, to whom ^hall I tell this. 

That heaven is in the company of the saints ? 

The tody is perishable. 

XI 

Man is born and groweth up* and when he hath grown up 
he dieth; 

We see that the world passeth away in this wiss. 

Diest thou not of shame taUring of thy house ? 

At the last moment nothing is thine. 

With great efforts the body is cherished. 

But after death it is burned in the fire. 

The limbs to which thou appliest ground aloe-^wood, 
sandal, and fragrant soap, 

Shall all be burned with wood. 

Saith Kabir^ hear me, O virtuous man,^ 

While tJie whole world Jooketh on thy body shall be 
consumed. 

Since all must die, why mourn ? Tl^era is no death 
for the holy. 

XII 

Wlieu another dieth why uioumest thou ? 

Do so, if thou art to live thyself. 

I shall not die like the rest of the world ; 

1 have now met Him who reanimateth. 

The body is perfumed with sandal; 

In such pleasures the Primal Joy is forgotten. 

There is one well and five water-carriers; 


^ Spoken irouicdly. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 

Even when the weU rope ^ is broken^ the silly beings still 
dro-w water.® 

Saith Kabit, / gained one ^iece of wisdom by reflec¬ 
tion— 

There is no more a well or ’vira.ter-carriers for me.® 

Kabir's transmigratioiiH 

XIII 

I was m immobile and mobile creatures, in worms and in 
moths ; 

I passed through many births of various kinds. 

In this way I occupied many bodies, 

But when^ 0 God, I assumed human birth, , 

1 was a Jogi, a Jati, a penitent, a Brahmachari, 
Sometimes a king, an emperor, and sometimes a beggar h 
T he apostates shall die^ but the saints shall all hve^ 

And drink the elixir of God with their tongues. 

Saith Xabir, O God, ha^’o mercy on us ; 

We have grown weary ; make us now whole I 

Deadly sins veiled under allegories, 

XIV 

Kabir hath bdieJd sudi wonderful things— 

Water churned by mistake for cream ; * 

A donkey grazing on a green crop,® 

Which on rising every morning kiUeth itself laughing and 

braying ; 

A mad buffcLlo which could not be guideds® 

Gambolling as it grazed and falling into hell; 

^ Here the well is the body; the well-rope, life; die five waters 
carriers die five evil pjt?£:icins. btliers understand the well to mean the 
’v^■o^ld^ and txaiisilate this line as foliows r — 

When the weli-roj>E (serrsua] desire) is broken, the water-carriers 
(the five org^ms of perception) grow weary of doing evil. 

2 "Even when life is drawing to a dose tiie evil passions arc still 
aclive+ 

® Since Kabir has obtained tjah-bidon during life. 

^ Stones are worshipped instead of God. 

® Men in power extorting money from the poor. 

* The perverse who liiiLen not to die advice of tlieir spiritual ^ides. 



150 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


A sheep ever sucking its Jamb’s milk.^ 

Saitlt Kabir, s-wcA sport hath been shown. 

By repeating God’s tiams my understanding hatlr become 
enlightened : 

SaitJi Kabir, 1 have obtained understanding from the 
guru,® 

(Hymn No, XV is in Kabir’s Life).* 

1 he body is false, God alone is true. 


XVI 

The limbs etioinled mih ground aloowood, sandal, and 
fragrant soap, 

Shall be burnt with wood. 

What is there to be proud of in this body and in wealth ? 
Both shall remain on eartli and not go with £he sowf to 
the other worJdn 

They who sleep at night and work by day, 

Wlio utter not God^s name for a moment, 

Who eat betel, and stretch out tbdr hands for more, 

Shall at the hour of deatli be firmly bound as thieves. 

If under tire guru’s iustruction thou joyfully sing the 
praises of God^ ^ 

And utter the name of Him who fiUeth all creation, thou 
Shalt be Jiappy. 

He ill whose heart God mercifuUy establisheth His name, 
lyeth the odour and perfume of God a place in his hettrL 
Saith Kabir, think, O blind man, 

God is true, all worldly occupations are false. 

The blissful peace of the holy. 


XVll 

Instead of death it is God who hath come for me; 

Sorrow hath been removed and I have found a refuge in 
happiness. ^ 


a ThrfiOh'r'^ slaughters arJ live on il,e proceeds, 

j ^ composed a portion of this hrtnn. 


KABIR’S HYMNS 


^$1 


Mine enemies ]iavc turned into friends ; 

The minds of the infidels have altered and become well- 
disposed towards me. 

I have now obtained all comfort^ 

And peace hath come over me since I have known 
God. 

My body suffered millions of ills ; 

They have now been converted into pennanent happiness 
and coniposiire- 
When man knowetJi himsolfs 
He shall not suffer from illness or tlie three fevers. 

My mind hath now returned to the Eternal ^ 

Wlien in life 1 was dead,^ it was then I knew God. 

Saith Kabir^ I have now entered happiness and rest; 

I liave no fear myself, and I inspire no fear in others.^ 

It is said that Krishan Das Bairagi asked Kabir :— 

XVHI 

WJien tJic body dieth, to what abode shitll the pious mafi's 
soul go ? 

Kabir“It shall unite wdtli Him w]to is beyond expression 
and indesfrucfible : 

He wJio fcnoweth God understandeth this, 

As the dumb man wJien pleased with sugar m^ust keep his 
ple^^^wo io himself. 

Such divine knowledge tntly God Himself expoundeth. 

0 man, arrest thy breath at the junction of the nostrils ; 
Appoint sndi a guru as shall render another unnecessary ; 
Utter such a word as shall render'another unnecessary ; 
Embrace such divine knowledge fis shall render any 
more unnecessary; 

So die that tliou shalt not have to die again ; 

Turn back the Ganges and unite it with tlie Jamna ; ^ 

^ When T sibanflonetJ pride. 

“ I dn not LhreaLen men with spiritual torlisres for themselves or 
their deceased relatives if I do noi receive money for tny ministry- 
Lions. 

^ Unite the breath of the left and rigfa nostrils, as the Jo^is do« 


152 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

And that thou ai't bathing without water at theii’ 
confluence.^ 

Be it thy duty to look on all men as equal; 

Reflect npoh tlie Real Tiling ; what che is there to reflect 
on ? 

'Water^ hre^ ^vind, earth, and the flrmaiiLient— 

If thou abide hke these/ thou siialt be near God. 

Saith Kabir, meditate on the Stainless One, 

And go to tJiat place whence there shall be no returning. 

How Kabir found God. 

XIX 

God cannot be obtained by offering one^s weight in 
gold; 

But I have purchased Him witli my soul; 

And now that I recognize Him as noinc ovra, 

My mind is naturally at case. 

Braliniaj, however much he taltethj hath not found God's 
limit; 

But by my devotion God came to me as I sut ut Itome. 
SaitJi Kabir, I iurve cast oft my wavei'iug disposition ; 

It is only in Ciod’s service I am now a sleeping partner. 

The holy cannot die for they are saved by divine 
knowledge. 

XX 

Tliat death which terrifleth tlie whole worlds 
The guru's instruction hath set before me in a clear ligiit. 
Now how shall 1 die although my mind acceptoth deatli ? 
It is they who know not God who axe always dying. 
Everybody talketh of dying. 

It is they who die in divine knowledge who aie immortal. 
Saitli Kabir, my mind is happy ; 

Doubt is dispelled, and supreme happiness abideth. 

^ Miike the breath of hoib nostrils meet in ihe brain, and thus 
obtain MoJiaifon of spirit wiLhout bathing at the c□nliue^Le^^ of the 
Changes and Jamni, 60 manj pilgrims do. 

® If Lhou adopt their propeFfles^ and remain sinless like them. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


153 


Kabir's body is burning all over to meet God: 
it is Tiselesa to try to heal any particular part of it. 

XXI 

There is no special part of ^ny body to which I may apply 
Juialing ointmant; 

I liave examined my body but found no i^uck place^ 

Ho who fceleth pain knoweth it; 

TJ^e service of God is a barbed arrow ; 

I consider all women ^ to be alike ; 

Who knoweth which shall be dear to the Bridegroom ? 

Saitli Kabir, the Husband, forsaking all other wontm^ 

Shall meet her on whose forehead such lot hath bem 
wriUen. 

It was believed that widows who immolated 
themselves on their husbands' pyres obtained salva¬ 
tion. Kabir traverses this belief. 

XXIH 

How can a woman without diastity be a sati ? 

0 panditj see and consider this m thy heart. 

// a ^o?uan have no love for her husband, how can her 
JmsbffTid^s love for her mcreasc ? 

As long as there is worldly love, there can be no divine love. 

He who ju Ills heELtt believeth mammon to be real, 

SliriH not even in his dreams meet God. 

Kabir calleth her a happy wife. 

Who givGth up to God her body^ soul, wealth, and house¬ 
hold. 


Devotion to God is the only dispeUer of the deadly 
sins. 


XXIV 


The whole world is subject to the deadly sins ; 

Tire deadly sins have ruined whol£ families, 

O man, where hast thou wrecked and sunk thy boat ? 
Having btoken with God thou hast joined the deadly sins. 
In whose hre demigods and men burn. 

^ That is^ all human beings. 


154 BBAGATS OF THE GEANTH SAHIB 

Water ^ is near, but, 0 beiists, wliy not drink it, removing 
its scum ? ® 

By contemplation water fit for drinking issueth forth ; 
That water alone is pure, saitlx Kabir. 

Only the holy who meditate on God are useful 
in the world. 

XXV 

^Vl■^y was not the mother of the family barren * 

Whcee sons meditate not on divine knowledge ? 

Why did not the wicked man who hath performed no 
service for God, 

Die at his birth ? 

Many * miscarriages Iiave occurred—how is it he escaped ? 
He liveth, it is imSf but like a raven in the world, 

Saith Kabir, they who are beautiful and slxai>eiy, 

Shall become hunchbacked and deformed without God’s 
name, 

Kabir’s devotion to the saints. 

XXVf 

I am e\’er a sacrifice 

To those who repeat the Master’s name. 

He is pure who singetli the praises of tlic pure God ; 

He is my brother and dear to my heart. 

I am the dust of tlie lotus feet 

Of those whose hearts arc filled with God, 

My caste, it is true, is that of weaver, but my lieart is 
resigned; 

Kabir very tranquilly repeateth God's praises, 

Kabir thus addressed a Jogi who advised, him to 
drink wine to concentrate his thoughts. 

xxvri 

I collected mudi molasses,® and turned my body into 
firewood ; 

^ E>ivine kno^'ledgc 

^ evil passiong which conceal the water of HEvEnc knowledge. 

^ Lilerally—a widow not allowed lo marry* 

^ In the original ffitscA as in Spanish, 

* From which ^pirils are made. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


155 


Then wilts trickled from tire roof of ths house of plettsure *• 
hy means of ihe furnace of my heart. 

Describe him a« intoxicated with the wins of divine love 
Who drinketh the sweetness of God’s name and meditateth 
on divine knowledge. 

Since the server ^ 0 / the wine of divinv love met me md 
gave it io me, 

My days and uiglits ai\i passing away intoxicated with 
pleasure. 

I carefully applied my thonglrts to the Pure One, 

And then, saith Kabir, I obtained Him the Fearless. 

A Jogi niaintained that deliverance could not be 
obtained without chastening the fieart, and that the 
heart could not be chastened without the practice of 
Jog. Kabir criticizes the statement. 

XXVIII 

Without devotion the quixlities of the heart cling to the 

heart. 

Who secureth perfection by merely chastening Jiis lituirt ? ’ 
What holy man hailt succeeded in chastening his heart ? 
Say wlio hath saved any one by merely chastening his 
heart. 

Every one thiiiketh in his lieart that lie is going io chasten it. 
But the heart is not cliastened w'idiout devotion. 

Saith Kabir, let him who knoweth this secret, 

W^orship in his heart God, the Lord of the three worlds. 

Tlie following was addressed to an attieist tvho 
maintained the theory of spontaneous creation. 

XXIX 

Who was the painter who painted 
The stars which appear in the sky ? * 

^ Tlie brain. 

* JCatahft, corresponding (o tbe European barniaid. Even in 

India in former limes the disliller or publican used lo employ a woman 
to serve wine to his custoinera. She probably here means Rlmanand, 
KabJr's guru, 3 Man must also repeal God's name. 

* According to the lluhammadan conception of ibc heavens, the 
sky is 3 fixed vault on which the stars are painted. 


156 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Say* 0 panjdit, to what is the ^ky attached ? ^ 

Fortunate is the wise man wiio knoweth this. 

The sun and moan ditfuse light ■ 

God hath extended Himself in eveiything. 

Saith Kabir, he shall know this. 

In whose heart is God^ and in whose mouth is Gud. 

Tlie evil wrought by the Simritis. 

XXX 

O my brethren, the Simriti.is the daughter of the Veds ; 

She hath brought a chain and a rope for 

And hath of herself imprisoned tlicm in her capital; ^ 

She hath flung the noose of worldly love, and discliarged 
the arrow of death ; 

The former cannot be cut, and the latter cannot be broken. 
Tlie hath become a serpent, eaten the world. 

And plundered the whole universe before my very eyes ; 
saith Kabir, I have escaped fro?fi her by uttering God’s 

name. 

The following was addressed to an admirer who 
had ofiered Kabir a horse. 

XXXI 

Let me put a bit and bridle m my 
And abandoning all else course him in 
Let me make sGlf-rcflcctioii my saddle ^ 

And put ray foot in the stirrup of divine love. 

Come, my sietd, let me drive thee to heaven; 

If thou jib^ I \^ill strike thee witlr the whip of love. 

Saith Kabir, they are good riders 

Who keep themselves aloof from the Veds and the books 
0 / ihe Musahmns. 

The following was written after witnessing a 
cremation:— 

xxxn 

I have seen fire applied to the mouth 
Wliich used to eat the five nectarsn* 

^ What Kupporta ibe sky ? ^ Probably EanaT^is is meant. 

^ t he mind, ^ The brain. 

^ These are 'ivhat is masticated by the front tce!h, the 


KABIR'S HYMNS 


157 


Kemove, O God, ray one miseey 

Of abiding in the womb and being burned in its fire. 

The body is destroyed in various ways and mfumcrs— 

Some burn it, and some bury it in the eartli. 

Saith Kabir, ‘ O God, show me Thy feet; 

Afterwards why not send death ? ^ 

Kabir was engaged in bis devotions when a hostile 
neighbour took the opportunity to set his house 
on fire. Kabir heard of it and returning home suc¬ 
ceeded in extinguishing the flames. It is said tliat 
the hostile neighbour’s house took fire from KabiRs, 
and WEB totally consumed. The following hymn 
was composed on the occasion:— 

XXXIII 

God Himself is the fire. Himself the wdnd ; 

When the Master setteth fire to the howss, who can save it ? 

Wliat if even my body burn when I am repeating God’s 
name ? 

My mind was absorbed in God's name ; 

Whose house bumeth, and who suffer^th loss ? ® 

God playeth like an acrobat. 

Saith Kabii, utter two letters ; * 

As sure as I have a Master, He will save me. 

Kabir thinks he has not performed sufficient 
worship. 

XXXIV 

I have not applied my mind to the science of union with 
God or contemplation of Him ; 

Without hate of theworld I shall not escape from mammon. 

How shall I live 

bftek teeth, and the tongue; ^t hat is maiiLicated by the back 

teeth and the longue; Ifhtj.'a, 'what is licked or sipped by the tongue 
alone; what is drunk; find ciosh))a, what is sucked. 

Mother list of the five ncctai's is—milk, cream, clarified butler, 
honey, and sugar. 

^ KabTr does not fear death provided he has first seen God's feet. 

* All property belongs(0 God. 

“ Ji and f7t ivhich with along vowel make RSm, God. 



158 EHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

If I have not God's name as my support ? 

Saith Kabitp I have seaix:hed in heaven, 

And have seen none equal to God. 

The following was written on seeing ravens sitting 
on a skull and feeding on its contents 

XXXV 

Ravens were deaniag their beaks on the skull 
On which a turban had been once very daintily bound. 
Why be proud of this body and of wealth ? 

Wliy dost thou not hold fast God^s name ? 

Saith Kabir^ hear^ O my man. 

This slrall be thy condition at lost, 

Kabix discourses on the soul. 

GaURI ASHTAPADr 

XXXVI 

Man prajJ'eth for timiporal happiness^ but sorrow cometh 
to meet him. 

It plefiseth me not to pray for siicli happiness as skali 
bring sorrow. 

Man still intent on sin hopeth for happiness ; 

How shall lie find his dwelling in t)ie Supreme God ? 

The happiness which oven Shii^ and Brahma would dread, 
I supposed to be real. 

Even the four sons of Brahma, the niuni Karad, and 
Sheshnag, 

Never found their minds stabk in their bodies mitil Ihey 
had given up hopes of such happiness. 

0 my brethren, let any one inquire into the ciyndftion of 
ike sotd. 

When it escapeth from the body^ where shall it be ? 

By the favour of t]ie guru, Jaidev and Namdev 
Discovered that, by love and devotion to God, 

The soul shall not suffer transmigration. 

He whose doubts are dispelled knoweth the truth— 

This soul hath no shape or outline ; 


KABIR^S HYMNS I5g 

By God^s order it was created, and by understanding God’s 
order it shaH be absorbed in Him- 
If any one understand the secret of the soul. 

It shall only obtain divine happiness when absorbed in 
God. 

There is but one Soul^ wliich occupieth all bodies. 

Kabir worshippeth that Soul. 

God's name is the tree of life. 

XXXVII 

Of those who watch day and 3iight to utter the one Name* 
How many have become perfect by the love they bore to 
God! 

Sidhs and their disciples and all the munis have grown 
weary in th^ir efforis without nume : 

The one Name like the tree ol life saveth mankinds 
Tliey wdio are regenerated by God shall never alter, 

Saith Kabir, I have recognized God^s name. 

The worship of the one God-inculcated. 

Gauri and Soratu 
XXXVIII 

0 shameless man, art thou not ashamed ? 

Why dost thou forsake God^ and go to some one else ? ® 

It bccometh not him whoso God is the Most High 
To go to a strange temple. 

That Lord pervadeth a// 

Is ever present, and never distant. 

Say, O man, what is tl^ere not in His palace 
At wJiose feet Lakslimi taketh refuge ? 

Every one speaketh of Him: 

He is ommipotent, our own Lord, and our Benefactor. 
Saith Kabir„ that man is perfect in the world, 

In whose heart no other than God abideth. 


^ The Sou! of die worJd. 


^ To worship idols. 



i6o BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


They who are absorbed in God feel not joy or 
sorrow for relations, 

XXXIX 

Who Imth £L son ? who hath a father ? 

Who dieth ? who inflicteth pain ? 

God is the Illtisionist vAm hath illuded the world 
If separated from God how shall I survive, my mother ? 
Who hath a husband ? who hath a wife ? reflect on this 
truth in thy heart. 

Saith Kabir, I have become reconciled with the Illusionist ‘ 
The illusion vanished when I recogniaed Him. 

Kabir's satisfaction on feeling that he had ob¬ 
tained salvation K 

XL 

The sovereign God hath now become my helper; 
Having ent away birth and death I have obtained tlie 
supreme state. 

hath united me with the guild of the saints^ 

And freed me from the five deadly sins. 

The ambrosial nan^e T repeat with my tongue ; 

God hath made me His uiibought “ slave. 

The True Guru did me a favour 
By rescuing me from the ocean of the world. 

I have begun to love God’s lotus feet^ 

And God ever and ever dweheth in my heart. 

The sparks of the fire of worldly love have become extin- 
guishedj 

And my mind hath obtained: resignation by the support 
of the Name, 

In sea and land the Lord God is fully contained ; 

Wherever I lookj there is the Searcher of hearts. 

It is He Himself who impkuteth His service in my heart; 
G&d JS obtainedj my brethren^ according to primal destiny, 

* Xablr believed with the Vedjtutists lhat everything was iiliisianH 
As all! tbittgs esmimated from God^ it is He who coritinnea the illusion ^ 
hence Kablr familiarly cotnparcs Hitu to an illusion]&t or actor. 

^ As such I shall serve Him aEl the better* 



KABIR’S HYMNS i6i 

The to whom He showefth iavouv succeedeth, in his 

Kabir^s Lord is the Cherish er oi the poor. 

The following was a remonstrance to a Brahman 
who had found impurity and caste defilement in 
almost everything. 

XLI 

There is impurity in water* thci’s is impurity in laudp there 
is impurity in whatever is born. 

There is impurity in birth, and in death ; 

GoiTs subjects ai:e ruined by this impurity.^ 

O pandit^ tell me who is pure ; 

Explain to me such knowledge as thou has^ on th^ subject^ 
my friend. 

There is impurity in the eyes, there is impurity in the 
tongue, there is impurity in the ears ; 

Standing or sitting there is impurity, impurity entereth 
the kitchen. 

Every one knoweth how to bo caught in hnpKnfyf but 
few how to escape from it. 

Saith Kabir, no impurity attacheth to tliose who meditate 
on God in their hearts. 

God IS greater than any creature, and His saint 
than any place of pilgrimage. 

XLII 

Decide one controversy* 0 Eamanandj 

If thou desire any service from thy ^kve. 

Is this soul OT He to whom it is attached the greater ? 

Is God or he who knoweth God the greater ? 

Is Brahma or He who created him the greater ? 

Are the Veds or tl^e source Yvhence they came the greater ? 

Is the pilgrimage or God's saint the greater ? 

Saitlr Kabir, 1 have been unliuppy on Ikis- $ubjecL 

^ When there is Impririty in cveryihing according to the brabmana^ 
they n^ust be very well retnunerated to purify 

vL 


i62 bhagats of the granth sahib 

The effects of the influx of divme knowledge. 
Kabir likens bis mind to a. but. 

XUII 

Lo 1 my bretlii'en, a storm of divine knowledge hath 
come ; 

The screens ol doubt have sdl been blown away, and even 
the rope^ of nkammon have not been left ; 

The two props of indecision ^ have been thrown down^ 
and the beam ® of worldly love hatb been broken i 
The thatched roof of avarice hath fallen to tl^e ground, 
and the vessel of evil inclinations hath burst, 

Saith Kabir, thy slave, 0 Lord, hath become saturated by 
the rain ^ which fell after the storm. 

And when he saw the sun appear,^ his mind was 
illununed^ 

Tile following was addressed to a Brahman. 
Kabir did not desire his followers to associate with 
infidels. 

XLIV 

\Vliat shall one say to such people 

As neither hear God's praises nor sing His attributes, 

But who knock down the heavens by their boasting ? 
Tliey whom God hath excluded from His sendee sJiould 
always be feared. 

They who give not a Jmndful of watei' i& tJm Ihirsiy 
Slander him ® who brouglit down the Ganges. 

Sitting or standing crooked are tlieir ways ; 

They have ruined themselves and ruined others : 

They knovv notlhng save evil converse ; 

They obey not even Brahma's bidding; 

They have gone astray themselves and are leading others 
astray, 

^ Whether man iiidfiies to God or tlie vi'orld. 

^ On which the rafters resJedh 
^ Internal peace or happiness^ 

^ When he saw God afier the attainment of di^dne knowledge, 

^ Bhagirath. 




KABIR^S HYMNS 


163 


They set fire to their houses and sleep in them i ^ 

They laugh at others^ though they have only one eye 
themselves ; 

Kabir is ashamed on beholding them. 

A lecture against the shradlis and idolatry of the 
Hindtis. 


XLV 

Xobody obeyeth his parents when alive, yet he givetli 
them feasts when dead ; 

Say how shall the poor parents obtain what the ravens 
and the dogs have eaten. 

Let some one explain, to me what kushal ^ means ; 

The xvorld dieth talking of kushal ; however shall kushal 
be obtained ? 

Men make goddesses and gods of day> and offer them 
ihdng sacrifices— 

As your lifeless gods, so your deceaseds who ask not for 
what they w^ant themselves. 

You kill living things^ and you wTOship lifeless things; 
at the last moment great shall be ytwr su^eririg. 

You know not the worth of God^s name, and you shall be 
drowned in ihe sea of terror. 

You waver and know not the supreme God, wherefore you 
worship gods and goddesses. 

Saith Kabir, you have not thought of the Unknowable, 
and have become entangled in the deadly sins, 

The holy obtain their great reward, 

XLVT 

If while living thou be dead, while dead return to life 
Zjy of divine knowledge^ and thus become absorbed in 

God ; 

If thou abide pure amid impurity^ tliou shalt not again 
fall into the terrible ocean of ih$ ^orld. 

^ They commiL siu, and feel no compuncUon or repeiiLaiice. 

^ A feeling of satisfaction affer replelion. 



i 


164 BHAGATS OF THE GRAKTH SAHIB 

■My God* such milk should be churned—^ 

JKeep thy mind steadfast under the guru's instruction; 
in this wsLy shult thou quaff nectar.® 

The guru's arrow hath pierced this adamantine age, and 
let in the light of God's word. 

The doubt which I fcU, through the power of ignorance 
whdher this world a snAke or a ropc^ is at an end ; I have 
a pennnnent abode in God's house. 

The guru witJiout putting an arrow on his bow hath 
pierced this world, my brethren. 

In all directions the kite* flutteroth in the wind> but its 
string is fixed in the love of God. 

My perturbed mind is absorbed in God ; duality and evil 
inclinations depart. 

Saitl^ Kabir, I have seen the Fearless One by fixing my 
attention on His name. 


Rather than practise Jog search for God through 
the guru. 


XLVII 


When I turned my thoughts towards God> I restrained my 
rmnd and my senses ^ and my attention became Lovingly 
fixed on Him. 

O Bairagi, search for Him who neither cometh nor goeth, 
who neither dieth nor is born. 

My soul tTErniug away from sin is absorbed in the 
univmal Soul; 

By the favour of the gum I have nom obtained a different 
understanding; otherwise I should become estranged from 
God, 

What was near® hath become distant, what was distant s 
hath become near for him who accepteth God as He is. 


^ Such good a-cisons should be performed as shal] ensure man 
against being born Eignin. 

^ I’hat is, oblftin ihc great boon of uns^verving faith, 

* The mind. 

* CMr I'haf IS here undtir^Lood eo be the mind and 1 he five senses, 
noi the six Hiyslical divisions of the bchlj. 

^ The deadly sins are meant, ^ God. 




KABIR'S HYMNS 165 

As sharbat made from sugar—only he who drinltetb it 
knoweth flavour^ 

O Thou devoid of qualities, is there any discTimmating 
person to whom I may speak of Thee ? 

Saith Kabir, only he who applieth the spiritual fuse 
seeth the blast. 


Heaven described by negatives. 

XLVIII 

There {with God) is no rainy season, no ocean, no sun¬ 
shine, no shade ; there is no creation and no destruction ; 

No life, no death ; nor are sorrow and Joy felt ; nor is 
there either retirement or contemplation— 

A description of celestial rest would be impossible and 
peculiar to itself— 

There nothing is weighed in the balance, and nothing is 
exhausted ; there is nothing light, nothing heavy. 

There are no nether or upper regions, neither night nor 
day; 

There is no water, wind> ox fire; the True Guru is there 
contained. 

Inaccessible and inapprehensible, He dwelleth uninter¬ 
ruptedly in everything; 

He is found by the favour of the gum, 

S^th Kabirj I am a sacrifice to my guru ; may I remain 
attached to his society * 


Human life under the allegory of an ox and his 
burden. 


XLIX 


With merits and demerits an ox is purchased;^ life 
appeareth as the capital; ^ 

In this way a herd is purcliased covetousness which 
filletlTi man^s heart is as a sack on the back. 

So potent a master is my God 


^ The soul enters a hum?in body^ 
-To earn Tureher mcrrLs or demerit^. 
^ The mass of manlihiii ajc born^ 



i 65 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Who made the whole world dealers^ 

Fyst and wrath arc both tasc-gatlicrers ; the whim^ of 
the mind are highway robbers- 
The herd, which spring from the five elements, pay the 
tax® and are saved. 

Saith Kabir, hcEix, O paints, this is nowthe state of things— 
One ox * hath grown weary of travelling the steep road, 
and dropping his sachj proceedeth on bis journey.® 

The world under the allegory of a w^ell, human 
life under that of a wdl-rope. 

L 

A woman iiatJi four days in her fatlier*^ house; she 
must then go to her fatlier-in-law's — 

The blind, the stupid, and the silly hnow not this— 

The bride with hcf sarhi round her is ready to go; 

The guests arci^^e; her husband hath come to tahe her 

home.® 

^ Who gave every one life as his eapitaL 

* They subject the soul topuiusluneot, 

5 Are pufitsl ieii by the god of death. 

* Kiblr himseEf, who obtained salvation while alive. 

^ The following is an alternative translation of thfs very difficult 
hyinn. A fricrid of Kabtr suggested to him to speculate in hulioeks. 
They could at the lime be purchased cheap, and KahTr could after¬ 
guards sell them ai a profit, and thus provide himself with funds 
for the entert^tinment of holy men. Kabir replied ;— 

Men have pua-chased the bullocks of /hii'r ladirs with bad and good 
acts, the breath qf is their capltai. 

Desires are packed in die sack of the heart, and thus are the 
and ml fir&dncid 6 y osen art purchased. 

Our God is such a bead of the firm that He hath made the whole 
worEd riis traders. 

Both lust and wrath become tax-giiihererB, and mental vagaries high¬ 
way robbers. 

The man v-lio assaesateth ’n'iih the elect viho knoiv God, payeth 
the tasi and hEs ojt crosseth over. 

Saitli Kabir, hear O ye saints. It hath noiv come to this with me, 
That in scaling ihe pass af hfm^kd^e one ox d/ /wj/ haih 
cast away l^is sack and proceeded on /as 

® In ilie East, as still among the peasant classes in Irelandj women 
are allowed to remain sometime after marriage with their parent^ 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


167 

Who that we sae letting do™ the rope into the well ? 

Wlien the rope breaketh by the weight of the water-pot^ 
the water-drawer departeth. 

If the Lord be compassionate and show mercy, woman 
shaE settle her affairs ; 

She is known as a happy wife who pondereth on the 
guni^s instructions. 

All men bound by their acts transmigrate; attentively 
consider fliis. 

Why blame woman ? what can the poor creature do ? 

Without hope she departeth ; she hath not the firmness 
of faiih in her heart. 

Cling to the feet of God^ and flee to His asylum, 0 

It is the truly pious and not the Jogis or Hindu 
sectaries who shall be saved. 

LI 

The Jogi says that jog and nothing else is good and 
sweet; 

They who shave tlreir bodies^ and the Ekshabdis^ say 
that they alone have obtained perfection. 

Without God thou art lost in eiroi^ 0 blind one ; 

They to whom I go to release myself, are themselYcs 
bound by many toils. 

You call youtselves pandits, virtuous, hrave^ generous, 
and assert tliat you alone are gi’eat; 

It is only when ihis pride of yours is forgotten that you 
shall be absorbed in Him from whom you sprang. 

Only he undei^tandeth wliom Thou, O God, casisest to 
understand; how can. man obfairi permanence without 
understanding ? 

When the true giiiu is found, darkness is dispelled i in 
tins way the gem ^ is obtained. 

Lay a^^ide the sins of th5" left hand and thy right ; ^ take 
hmi hold of God's feet. 

Then comes the or * hauling home *. T]\t jueftiiing here is 

that TX^aih tstkes au-iy liis 

* Goii’s 


^ Thy bcscUiiig siiis. 


i68 BHAGATS OF THE GEANTH SAHIB 


Saith Kabir^ if a dumb man cat molasses, what can he 
say if questioned ? ^ 

The following w'as composed by Kabir on the 
death of a Jogi:— 

LII 

Where tliere was somethirtg there is nothin'^; ^ky body of 
five elements is no more, 

Wi^iat availeth thee now the suspension of thy breath in 
the left and right nostrils and their junction ? 

The string ^ is broken, thy brain destroyed; whither 
hath thy speech gone ? 

I feel tills anxiety night and day ; who will explain and 
ease my mind ? 

Thy body is no longer in the world ; thy creative ^lind is 
no more, 

The Joiner dwelleth ever separate from world; say 
who else hath this ? 

If I try to join t]ie dc^nonis of th-o body^ 1 cannot join them ; 
if I try to separate thera,^ they ™11 not be separated until 
they perisii. 

Who hath a master ? who hath a servant ? who waiteth 
on any one else ? ^ 

Saith Kabir, my attention is directed to that place where 
God dwcUeth niglit and day; 

His secret He Himself fully kneweth; He is ever im¬ 
perishable. 

Kabir was advised to become a Jogi; tJia following 
was his reply:— 

LIII 

Meditation and remembrance of God are my two ear¬ 
rings, independence of the world my patched coat' 

Dwelling in a silent cave my devotional posture, tlie 
abandonment of worldly desires my sect* 

^ IIs c-iiinot describe his sciisalions. In the way a man who 
ha5 obtained God will be silent ^ itli pleasure. 

3 Thj life has departeil 

* 1 he meaning Apparently Is^ that there are no earthly masters or 
sen'otits, and that man should only acltnowledge God aa his Master^ 



KABIR^S HYMNS 169 


My king/ I am ajogi witlmnt tempord love; I repine 
not at death and separation. 

In the regions of tlie universe / find my Jiorn ; the whole 
world, which I hold as aslies, is my wallet j 

Riddance oi the three qualities and release from the world 
are my contemplative attitude. 

I have made my heart and breath the two gourds of ^ 
lyre, and unbroken attention on God its frame. 

The strings are strong and break not; tlie lyre playeth 
spontaneously ; 

On hearing it the perfect are enraptured, and I no longer 
fed the swaying of worldly loven 

Saith Kabir, tlie soul which hath played in this way shall 
not he bom again. 


The body under the allegory of a full piece of 
cloth 


LIV 


Reason went to the soul to order a body to be woven— 
Let a full piece of nine yards ^ ten yards, and twenty-one 
yards he woven 

Let thci’e be sixty threads^ nine joinings^ and seventy- 
two cross threads ® added ; 

The weaver * then Cometh, leaving his last abode 
Is not the body measured by yards, weighed by weighty 
and starched by two and a half of flour ? ® 


^ Applied respecifuJlj^ to the Jogi. 

“ A full piece of clnth geneoJJiy measyres forty yards. The nine 
jard^ mesiXt the nine apej tures of the body; ihe ten yards, die ten 
organs of action and perception ^ and the hventy-one yards^ ihe five 
subtle clementSp llie five gross eletneniR, tlie ten breaths of the body^ 
and the mind. Tlie iwcnty^one yards may also be the twenty-one 
vertebrae of some Indim LUiaiomists. I'he whole forty make up the 
body which, in i^caver's piiriance, is compared to a full piece of doth. 

* The sistj- tlsreads are supposed to he sixty blood-vessels^ though 
Indian anatomists coutU one hundred and seventy-five blood-vessels 
aJ together. The nine sections are the four pieces of the tegs, llie four 
of the arms, and the head ; and the seventy-two cross threads are 
seventy-two chambers of the body according Eo the Jogss. 

* The snul leaves Its last abode, and takes possession of a new body. 

^ Ojie of the present standard; as much as a man cun eat dally 

is said to be applied as starch to the tissues of Ills body. 





170 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

If the body obtaio not staixh quickly, it will quarrel and 
destroy its abode > 

0 man, how many days are there for thee to sit idly ? 
When ahalt thou, who art adverse to the Lord, a|;ain have 
the present opportunity ? 

The vessels * and the wetted bobbins shall fall to pieces, 
and the weaver depart in anger ; 

Tliread comefh not out of an empty bobbin,® and the 
cloth will not remain wound around the beam. 

O wretched man, abide in the world, but renounce dis¬ 
play—Kabir givetk thee this advice.* 

^ And then th& aoul and shaliJ iseparate. 

® is in earthen jMn ^'hicb holds mter lo wet the thread. 

The thneadp when wetted^ is put into the bobbins. Here^ ^unifa is 
understood to mean wortdly possessions, 

^ Xo iMrtad^ issueth from the throat after death. 

^ The following is an alternative translation of this most difficult 
hymn. Some pandits spohe conlemptuonsly of Xabir's social position 
and sjtid it was gross impmiericc on the part of a weaver to dare 
mention God's name. Kabir replied^ that every one must be a weaver 
in a mystioa] sense in order to gain salvation. The pandits inquired 
Itow' all men could bcoome weavers, KabTr explained 

The w-eaver's wife (reason) went to her spouse (the mind) to have a 
piece wovenj 

But the weaver was alivays leaving his borne, 

JTa^r ?iwf /Af^t iis-Afff n&mpare tAt doffy A? 

f/pAt. //e riplf'ed:^ 

It oonsisleth of nine yards, ten yards, and twenty-one yards. 

Sixty threads of the warp^ nine joinings^ siKty-lwo cross threads. 

Ta not the body measured by yatdSp weighed by weight, and stairhed 
by two and a half sens of flgur? 

If the body obtain not starch quickly^ its spouse (the mind) will 
qilirreh 

When shall such an oppo rtuFiiiy come again ? The days of life soon 
end and (he soul depa^rteth. 

Thou must leave thy pans and thy wet bobbins^ and the soul will 
depart in angern 

Thread issiieth not frem the empty bobbin, and the cloth wil] not 
remain wound round the beam. 

Sajfh fht mnd O wrolched one, leave off this i^Tangling, 

abide vrith me here; KabTr ha(h given this explanation. 



KABIFS HYMNS 171 

The light of God has an affinity for the Light of 
man, 

LV 

Can one light which is absorbed in another be separated 
ftoni it ? 

May that man burst and die in wh(^e heart the name 
of God springeth not up 1 

Dark and beautiful God, my soul is attached to Thee, 
When a holy man is found, supernatural perfection is 
obtained ; this is both union with God and worldly enjoy¬ 
ment. 

When twoj th& guru and the diiciple, meet by means of 
God^s name, the disciple's business is accomplished-^ 

People think this is a song ■ it is a meditation on God, 
Like the instruction given to men at Banaras when they 
are on the point of deaths 
He wbo attentively beareth or singetJi God’s name, 

Saith Kabii', shall certainly obtain the supreme state at 
last. 

Salvatiori can only be obtained by true devotion, 

LVI 

However great man's exertions mthout God's he 

shall be drowned in the terrible ocean and not cross ovei". 
Thou hast practised thy religions duties and great austeri¬ 
ties, yet pride oonsumGth thy souL 
Why hast thou forgotten the Lord who is the Giver of 
life and food ? 

Human birth is a priceless diamond or ruby; thou hast 
lost it for a kauri. 

Not having tliougbt of God in thy heart, thou sufferest 
from the thirst of covetousness and the hunger of error ■ 
The intoxication, of pride deceiveth tliose who keep not 
the word of the guru in their hearts. 

Sinful are they who are led away by pleasure, wdio are 

^ Also translated—(tf) When both meet, this work is uccotripliahcid, 
namely, an alliance with Him ivhase name is God- (i^) Both 
bles&inga icsult from meeting God or obtaining His name^ 



172 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

tempted by sensual deiigbtSs and who enjoy the savour ai 
wine, 

Tliey who by destiny keep the company of the saints^ 
float over like iron attached to timber. 

Through error 1 have wandered among human and lower 
births ; I am now weary and overspent with travail. 

Saith Kabir, on meeting the guru / hav^ f&U great joy, 
and my love and devotion have saved me. 

The deceits of the world. 

LVTI 

Like the semblance of a female elephant, 0 foolish man, 
the Lord of the world made this play.^ 

The elephant impelled the sweets of love is captured^ 
O foolish man^ and his head hath to endure the goad. 

flee from evil passions^ attach thyself to God; heed this 
O foolish man. 

Why dost thou not, 0 foolish man, fearlessly worship 
God, and take possession of His ship ? ® 

The monkey stretcheth out his hand, O foolish man, and 
taketh a handhil of corn ; ^ 

He ss anxious to escape, O foolish man, but he shall be 
made fo dance at tlie door of e’^^ery house. 

As the parrot is caught by a trap/ 0 foolish man, so is 
man by worldly occupations.^ 

As the fleecing dye of the safflower, 0 foolish man, so 
hath tills world been shmvn. 

1 The play of tlie worlds A likeness of a female elephant Is made 
out of cardboard lo catch wild elepJiants. Tbey are alJored by the 
likeness to the verge of ^ pst into which they fall and are secured. 

2 To floai ibee over the lerrible ocean of the world, 

^ ^lonkeys are caught by putting dry grain inlo a vessel and 
partialSy btJii: 3 'irLg it m ihe earth. The monkey puts in his hand, and 
fills it wish grain. He js ihcti caught^ not having wit enough lo open 
his fingei-s and let go his grasp So, lOO, if mail would abandon his 
vices, he would be saved. 

* The mlfit is a contrivance made of bamboo put over water. 
When the parrot perel^es on it, it revolves, and the bird^s body is 
l^elow it and immediately over the water. The parrot clings lo the 
naJni so as to avoid falling into the waser, and is thus caught. 

* Lsieraily—this is hlS^-a^s doing. 



KABIK^S HYMNS i 73 

There are many places ioi ablutions, 0 foolish man, and 
many gods to worships 

Saith Kabir, thou shalt not be saved by means of these, 
O foolish man ; thou shalt be saved by the worship of God. 

A raja offered temporal wealth to Kabir, The 
following was his reply— 


LVIII 

Lay up for yourselves the wealth of God’s name, which 
fire will not burn^ which hot winds will not dry np^ 

And which thieves will not approach ■ that wealth shEtll 
never depart. 

My wealth is God, the Supporter of the earth; He is 
the real wealth. 

The pleasure obtained from the sendee of God is not to 
be found in regal state 3 

Shiv and the four sons of Brahma in their scardi for 
this wealth abandoned the world. 

He in whose heart is God and on whose tongue is God, 
falleth not into Death's noose. 

The guru'e private wealth of divine knowledge and devo¬ 
tion is like water to the thirsty, like a prop to the fickle 
mind; 

The minds of those on whom He bsstoweth it, conceive 
good resolutions, and their doubts, entanglements, and fears 
depart. 

Saith Kabir, 0 you who are intoxicated with wealth, 
reflect in your hearts and understand this. 

In your mansions are hundreds of thousands and millions 
of horses and elephants; in mine is the one God. 


The love of worldly things leads men to damna¬ 
tion. 


LIX 


A monkey through greed will not let go the pulse in his 
hand. 

Man is responsible for acts done through greed. 

Without devotion to God human life passeth in vaiup 



174 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

Without association with the saints and worship oi God^ 
truth nowhere abideth. 

As the fiowers of the desert bloom, and no one enjoyeth 
their odoiir^ 

So men wander idly in many births, and Death destroy eth 
them again and again. 

God hath given wealthy youths sons, and women fitir to 
view; 

By these man, prompted by the senses, becometh arrested 
and entangled. 

The body is a house ot grass^ life's end the fii'e which 
assaileth it on every side, 

Saith Kabir, to cross over the terrible ocean I have taken 
the shelter of the true guru, 

A brief account of the process of procreation, 

LX 

There is dirty water and white earth ; 

From this earth a puppet is made. 

I am nothing and I have nothing ; 

My body, my wealth, all tliat is dear lo me is TJiine, 0 
God— 

Into this earth breath is infused, 

And forcibly setteth the false contrivnance in raotioin 

Such and such a person may han'e accumulated ftve iakhs 
of ir^sure. 

But at last his pitcher bursteth.^ 

Saitli Kahir, the sole foundation thou hast laid 

Shall be destroyed in a moment^ 0 thou proud one. 

By devotion to God through the guru Kabir has 
obtained salvation. 

LXI 

0 my soul, repeat God's name 

As did Dhru and Pralilad of old. 

O Thou compassionate to the poor, my reliance is on 
Tliee. 


^ The body dies. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 175 

I have therefore embarked all my lamily on the guru's 
raft. 

If it please God He will have His order obeyed, 

And cause this raft to float over. 

By the favour of the guru such knowledge hath filled me 

That all my transmigration is at an end. 

Saith Kabir, worship God ; 

In this world and the next, everywhere, it is He alone 
who knowcth^ 

Tlie soul liaving obtained a liurnan body has 
obtained its last chance of salvation. 

LXII 

When nisti leaveth the womb and cometli into the world, 

As soon as the air toudreth him, he forgetteth his Master— 

O my soul, sing God’s praises I 

When thou didst penance reversed in the womb, 

Thou didst escape its fire. 

Having wandered through the eighty-four lakhs of 
existences. 

If thou stumble now, tliou shalt find nor liouse nor home. 

Saith Kabir, worship God 

Who is not seen coming or going, and who knowetlr all 
things. 

Think not of heaven or hell, of prosperity or 
adversity; leave every tiling to God. 

LXIII 

Long not for a dwelling in heaven, and fear not to dwell in 
hell; 

WItat will be, will be; 0 my soui, hope not at all. 

Sing tJie praises of God from whom the suprame reward is 
obtained. 

What is devotion, what penance and austerities, what 
fasting and ablutions. 

Unless thou know the way to love and serve God ? 

^ The verse is also trajislaled—I deem this world and the next aJl 
the same. 


176 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Be not glad at the sight of prosperity and grieve not at 
the sight of adversity ; 

As is prosperity so is adversity; what God proposeth shall 
be accomplished. 

Saith Kabir, through the saints I now tnow in my heart 

That the worshipper in whose heart God dweilethj per- 
forfndh the best worship. 

Coimnit not sin for the sake of thy relations or 
others and mourn not for them, 

Lxrv 

O my soul, thou hast no Mpsr i drag not tlie weight of 
t>£hers* Sins beliind thee. 

As a bird perclrcth on a tree, such is the world*^ 

I have drunk the elixir of God 

By which other elixirs are forgotten. 

Since we are not permanent ourselves^ why should we 
mourn the death of others ? 

Whatever is born perisheth i why should we be Sony and 
weep for that ? 

When man become th attached to holy men^ he drinketh 
God^s dixir, and is devoted to Him from wham he hath 
sprang. 

Saith Kabir, I have thought of God in my heart; resign¬ 
ing the world remember Him, 

Kabir longs for God as a loving wife for her 
absent spouse. 

LXV 

Woman with her eyes filled mih tears and heaving sighs 
awaiteth ksr lord ; 

Her heart is not happy j she retraceth not her steps in 
the hope of seeing him. 

Why fliest thou not away, O black ravenso that I may 
quickly meet my bdoved ? 

^ Or transitory. 

^ If a iflrVen coine lo a woman's casemeiit when her husband is 
absent, she says ' Fly O raven.' If ic fly away in obedience to 

her order, it is an onien ihat her husband wiJI soon Mum. Here 
the word raven is imdersLood to mean insLn''s evil passionsn 



KAFIR'S HYMNS 177 

Saith Kabir^ perform God^s service to obtEiin the dignity of 
eternal life ; 

The name of God is the one support; repeat it with thy 
tongue. 

There are many excellences in the body; God 
resides within it and Kabir is delighted to behold 
Him. 

LXVI 

There are many shrubs of sweet basil; near and within 
them is the viJlage of BarSr^na.^ 

The milkmaid Radha on seeing Krishan^s beauty became 
enamoured: ' Leave me not; go not hither and thither. 

' My heart is attached to thy feet; 0 holder of the bow, 
very fortunate is she who meeteth thee." 

Enchanting is Bindraban where the fascinating Krishan 
grazed his kine. 

Since thou art my Lord, 0 holder of the bow, Kabir 
is my name. 

Vain is the devotion of anchorets and idolaters. 
LXVII 

How many wear the bark of trees as clothes, but wliat 
availeth it to dwell in the forest ? 

What availeth it to man to offer incense to idols ? What 
to drench his body with ablutions ? 

O my soul, I know that thou shall depart; 

O silly one^ think of thy falL^ 

Wheresoever 1 look, I see none but those who are en¬ 
tangled in xvorldly loY^e ; 

Men of di\ine knowledge and medilation^ great preachers 
arc all in thi§ world's affairs. 

Saith Kabir, without the name of the one God this world 
is blinded by mammon, 

^ In ihe neighboui'hood onVfathura arid l^iiidf^ban- The originEij 
has Banaras^ but ihe word does not suit Ehe context. 

IS also read— In the midst of them is made an excellent village. 

^ means descent, but die word may also here meati Gadj from 

the Sanshril impercepiihle^ tranacciidental. 

K 


SIK1E. Vl 



X7S EHAGATS OF THE GRAKTH SAHIB 

Fearlessty worship God. 

LXVIII 

0 miTi, \dctiin of mfimmoD, abandon doubt> come forth 
and dancc.^ 

Doth a hero dread the conflict o£ the battle-field^ doth 
a sati collect utensils r^hen is. about to die ? 

Cease to waver, 0 foolish man ; 

Now that thou hast taken the red lead® in thy hand^ 
bum and die^ and obtain perfection. 

The world isi mined by being absorbed in lust, wrath, and 
mannnon. 

Saitli Kabir, forsake not the sovereign God who is the 
highest of all the highn 

Kabir places himself altogether in God's power. 

LXTX 

Thy commands arc acceptable to men; 1 consider not 
their propriety. 

Tliou art the river, Thou aii the pilot, from Thee is salva¬ 
tion. 

0 man, embrace the service of God^ 

Whether He he angry with thee or love tliee. 

Thy namCt O God^ is my support, as a woman rcjoiceth on 
beholding her soai.® 

Saitli Kabir, I am the slave of Thy house, preserve me 
or destroy me. 

A homily against the worship of Krishan. 

LXX 

Nand^ became very weary wandering through the w^ombs 
of the eighty-four lakhs of existences ; 

1 Scoin the opinion of the ’\vorld- 

^ It the cu&toin for a sad on tJie pyre to take some vermilion 
pahit (jiHrj'wf) ill her hand, make a t[lak on her forehead ivlLh ihen 
apply it [o ihe foreJicadg of ihe hyatanricrs and sprinkle it on them, 
J^ftcr^tliis ceremony slie ni,i£fht not change her mind and must die. 
ThesindQr is genemlly enrried rn the rind of a coco-nut and Is employed 
atmarnages. lis use at Ute eancremation of widows waji emblematic 
of a -Second mnrriage to which death likened► 

^ Also iranslated—As a flow'er blgomeLh in die water^ 

* The adoptive father of Kdshan. 


KABIR’S HYMNS 179 

Through his dev[>tion KHsha^ became incaTnate ; great 
was the poor man’s good fortune. 

You who say that Goi was the son of Nand, whose son 
was Nujid ? 

Y^len the earth and the firmarnent and the ten quarters 
of the world were not, then where was this Mand ? 

Hg whose name is the Bright One falleth not into trouble, 
and undergoeth not birth. 

Kabir’s Master is such a Lord as hath neither father nor 
mother. 

Kabir hails slander to preserve his humility and 
lead him to God. 

LXXl 

Slander, slander me, ye people, slander I 

Slander is riglit pleasing to God^s servant. 

Slander is my father, slander my mother ; ^ 

If I am slandered and store in my heart 

The wealtli of God’s name, I shall go to heaven. 

If I am slandered my heart becometh pure. 

The slanderer washeth my dotlres for me,^ 

He who slandercth me is my friend; 

My heart goeth out to the slanderer ; 

He is the slanderer who preventeth my being slandered. 

Tlie slanderer desireth hug life /or we; 

I bear love and affection to him who slandereth me ; 

Slander effectetli my salvation. 

To God’s servant, Kabir, slander is the be.st thing ; 

The danderer is lost, I am saved. 

Kabir feels that he has parted wdth egoism and 
become absorbed in God. 

LXXII 

O sovereign God, TJlou art very fearless; Thou art a raft 
to save the world, O God. 

When I was proud, Thou weri not in me ; now that Thou 
art iM me T am not proud. 

1 Is dear to me as my lalher and mother. 

* That is, he takes my impurity on himselE 
N 3 



i8o BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Novf Thou and I have become one; seeing that we are 
both one^ my mind is satisfied, 

WTien there is worldly wisdom^ how can there be spirikuil 
strength ? 

Now I have spirihial wisdom^ but no bodily strength - 

Saith Kebir, God hath taken away my worldly wisdono^ and 
instead of it 1 have obtained perfection. 

The human body under the allegory of a house. 
LXXin 

The Creator made the six mystical chambers ^ into a house^ 
and in it He put a peerless thing ; ® 

Without delay He made divine knowledge its key^ spiritual 
ignorance its lochj and life its watchman. 

Now, my brother, let thy mind remain awake ; 

Through carelessness thou hast lost thy human life ; tlly 
house is being robbed by thieves.^ 

Thy five stand as sentinels at the gate, but th:^r 

cannot be trusted. 

Carefully tliink of God, and thou shalt obtain the light rf 
divine knowledge. 

If woman go astray through only heeding the body of 
nine apertures^ she shall not obtain the peerless thing-— 
God^s name. 

Saith Kabir, tliieves may plunder the body of nine aper¬ 
tures ; God's spirit dwelleth in the tenth. 

Kabir obtained perfection and complete faith on 
meeting the guru. 

LXXIV 

O mother, I know none beside God ; 

My soul dwelleth in that God whose praises Shiv and the 
sons of Brahma sing, 

^ Tli-e BtK niysttca] chambers of the body are —MfdudAarat the 
parts about the pubis; or mnbili-cal region; 

or pit of the sLomach or epigastrium; the root of 

the nQsei the hollow between (he frontal sinuses; and 

AjTiyJ^'aoiy Ihe foiiiene]|e or union of the ooi'onal and sagiual 
sutures, ^ The souh ® Thy evil passions. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


i8i 

On meeting the guru enlightenment and divine knowledge 
entered my heart, and I meditated on God in my brain ; 

The disease erf the deadly sins^ foar, and worldly entangle¬ 
ments fled away, and my soul knew happiness in itself. 

Imbued with devotion 1 know and obey the one God, and 
think of none beside^ 

Having abandoned the pride of my licart, my soul is 
perfumed with tlie perfume of sandal. 

God dwelleth In him who hath siuig and meditated on 
His praises. 

Very fortunate are they in whose heart dwelletli, and 
dfetinguished is the destiny recorded on their foreheads. 

I have destroyed Maya,^ divine knowledge is kindled in 
my Iieart, and I have become absorbed in the one God, 

Saith Kabii% on meeting the guru I have felt great 
comfort; my mind hath ceased to wander and is happy. 

Kabik's Ackostic 


I 

Every tiling connected with the three worlds is contained 
in the fifty-two letters ; 

These letters shall perish, but He who is beyond letters is 
not in them. 


2 

Wliere there is speech, there letters are used ; 

Wliere tliere is no speech there no mind abideth. 

God is Contained both wliere there is speech and where 
there is not ; 

Nobody appeareih like imto Him.^ 


3 

If I obtain Godj w’hat shall I say ? and if 1 say anything, 
what kindness do 1 show God, 

^ Sh'v^ Literalij'’—the energy of Sl^iv; but Shiv may 

also be a separate word^ meaning bliss or happiness^ and die next 
clause of ibe would iJien be imnslaled—Ijappmesis was bting 
kindled in nay heart, and God naturally appeaned (o jne. 

" Abo translated—No one knows Him as He h. 



i 82 bhagats of the granth sahib 


Who is diffused through the three worlds iiS wdl as in the 
iii^y seed of the banyan-tree ? ' 

4 

For him who hath obtained God, and knowetli to some 
extent God^s secret^ the difference God and hifnself 

hath disappearedK 

God^s secret penetrated my heart when it turned away 
from the world; and I have obtained Him who is Indestructible 
and Impenetrable. 

5 

The Musalrnans accept t}ie Tariqat ; the Hindus the Veds 
and Purans; but for wif Iho books of both religions are usdess. 

A man ought to study divine knowledge to some extent 
to instruct his heart. 

6 

I know the one God who was in the beginning; 

I do not believe in what can be written and erased. 
Whoever beholdeth the one God^ 

as God, and shall not pass away. 

7 

K. When the rays of divine kTumledge fall on the lotus of 
the heart. 

It closeth not even at the rising of the moon ; ® 

And il man obtain the sweetness of that flower. 

He would grow mute in describing it, yea, to wliom 
could he explain it ? 

S 

KH, My mind liath entered Cod^s cave ; ^ 

It kaveth it not to wander in every direction. 

He who, knowing the Master, practiseth resignation. 
Shall become imperishable, and obtain the imperishable 
dignity. 

^ Also intnaJaled—He whose espai^sion Lbe ^bree worlds ore, is 
contained in the liny seed of tbe banyan-Lree. 

^ Once a uiau liaa obtiined divine knowledge he is not again 
stibjecE to spiriLuat ignorance. 

^ Has become attached to God. 



KABIK^S HYMNS 


183 


9 

G. They underatand the guru's mstructiorfe. 

Lend their cars to nothing else. 

He who gmspeth the Ungraspabk^^ and having grasped 
Him kecpeth Him in his brain* 

Shall abide a bird* and vL'nndGr nowhere. 

xo 

GH. God's dwelling is in every heart; 

Even though the heart break, God is never tJtcuby 

diminished. 

When man findeth a way Gcf? in his hearty 
Why should he leave ih^t way and foJlow a dii^icult 
one ? 

ii 

NG. Grasp the love of God, dismiss doubts. 

Even though thou sec no way to God, flee not away; 
this is the highest cleverness. 

13 

CH. God painted tJie great picture of the world ; 

Dismiss the picture* and tliink of the Painter. 

This painted picture is an abode of strsfe ; 

Dismiss tiie picture, and keep tlry minid on the Painter. 

CHHh God the Lord of the umbrella is near ; 

Why dost thou not abandon desires and be happy ? 

O man, I admonish thee eveiy moment ; 

Why dost thou leave God and entangle thyself t^nth the 

^orld ? 

14 

J* If a man burn his body alive, 

And efface his youth, he shall find the right way. 

When man burnetii the wealth of this and the next 
world,^ 

He shall then proceed and obtain God*s bright light. 

1 God. 

® When main only thinks of God, ind not of r-cwaida in thh or ^he 
next worliJ. 



i84 BHAGATS of THE GEANTH SAHIB 

JH, TItou art entangled Ihe 7s>&rld, and knowest not 
how to disentangle thyselt; 

Thou slirinkcst back, and art not accepted of God. 

Why talk nonseii&e tiying to convince others ? 

Suice thou stirrest up coutrovGi'sy, controversy thou 
shalt have. 

16 

NY. Since God dwdleth near thee in thy heart, why leave 
Him and go far Him ? ^ 

Him for whom thou seai’diest the world, thou &lialt find 
neai^ thee. 

T. The difficult way io God is in man’s heart. 

Wh}" open not the doors oi thine u?id^siii?iding, and 
repair to His court ? 

There alialt tliou bdiiold the Immo vable Ouet and thou 
shaft not move elsewhere. 

Thou shalt remain attached to God^ and thy heart shall 
be glad. 

18 

TH. Keep the worlds which is a deceitful miragej at a 
distance— 

I have with difficulty rendered my mind patient— 

The cheat wiiicli cheated and devoured the whole world 

I have myself cheated, and my mind is now at ease, 

19 

Dp When the fear of Cod is produced, aU oiher fears depart; 

AH other foars are absorbed in that fear. 

If man reject the fear 0 / God^ then he hatli fear of ^tan ; 

When he no longer feareth man^ the fears of his heart 
flee away. 

20 

DH. Search for God near thee ' why search elsewhere ? 

While searching for Him dsevvhere life departeth. 

When I ascended the mountain to search for Him, and 
returned home disappoifdcd^ 

^ WSiy lead ihe life of au ftnehoretin ttie forest. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 185 

I found Him in the fortress^ which He Himself had 
made. 

21 

N. The life of Jiim is accounted happy 

Who, though surrounded in the battle-field^ standeth 
fast like a man,^ 

Wlio doth not quail or retreat,^ 

But killeth tlic opposing chiefs upon tvhich his army 
fleeth away,'* 

T. The world is unfordabie ; it cannot be forded- 

My soul is absorbed in the Lord of tlie tlirec worlds. 

If the Lord of tlie three worlds enter into my hearty 
My soul shall blend with Him, and 1 sliall find the True 
One, 

23 

TH. The Unfathomable cannot be fathomed. 

God is unfathomable ; tins body shall not abide for ever- 
Though man's span of life be brief, he beginneth to build 
many a mansion 

But Cim mansions be supported without pillars ? 


34 

D, Evcryflung we see is perisliable ; 

Meditate oji Him who is Unseen. 

When fliou appliest the key of dmm knowledge to tlie 
tenth gate. 

Thou shalt then beiiold the merciful One. 

DH. Everything is settled when the soul blende^k with 
Cod 

Wlio dwdleth in earth and heaveu. 

When the soul leaving earth goeth to heaven, 

Tire soul and God shall meet and happiness be obtained. 

^ My body. 

^ Happy aie iliey who are victerious over thdr evil passions. 

^ The gyanls generally translate capltuLale. 

* the heart is subdutcf^ the evil passions flee 

^ JVIall's ambiLion is too gjeat for iht brief apan of his life. 



i86 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


26 

N. nights and days pass away waiting for Gcii ; 

His eyes grow blood^short by snch waiting. 

When man findeih GckI after long waitings 

He who waiteth is blended with Him who is waited for. 

27 

P. The Boundless One hath no bounds ; 

I am gladdened with the Supreme Light; 

I have controhed the five senses^ 

And rdmquished all idea of demerits and merits. 

28 

PH. Fruit is produced without the blossom ■ ^ 

If any one looked at a section ^ of that fruit, 

And reflected on it, he would not contract duality* 
That section cf fruit shall destroy all bodies.^ 

29 

B* Blend drop with drop,^ 

"When drop is blendodTsnih drop ^ both cannot beseparated. 
Let man, becoming Cod's servant^ embrace His service, 
And He becoming a friend will take caie of His ser¬ 
vant. 

30 

BH. Remove the difference between thyself and God, and 
thou shalt be united with Him \ 

Then shall thy fear be shattered,, and thou shalt gain 
confidence* 

Him whom I Umught without me I now find within me : 
When I found this secret, I recognize the Lord of the 
world. 

^ If God pleases, divine knovledge may be obtained without effort. 
^ a niiural division of fruit as seen, for instance, in the 

orange. 

^ Shall ffeinove all transmigraiion, It is believed that bodies are 
made for the soul, but, vhen the soul is absorbed in God, bodies will 
of Course not be necessary for it. 

^ Blend thy soal with God, 



K.^1R’S HYMNS 


187 


31 

M. He who grasp eth the First Principle,^ shall he happy at 
heart; 

Ht; who is in this secret knoweth ids own mind- 

Let no one delay to attach his heart to God ; 

Ho who obtaineth the Tme One shall be immersed w 

ddight. 

32 

M. Man*s busine.sa is with his heart ; he who chasteneth it 
obtai neth perfection. 

Kabir commimeth with his heart, ' I have found nothing 
like ti^ee, 0 my heart! * 

33 

Tlvis heart is power ; this mind is God ; * 

This heart is the life of the five elements 0 / ih& 

If man restrain his heart and remain in a state of ex- 
altatioHj^ 

He can tell the secrets of tlie tliree worlds. 


34 

Y. If thou know^ anything, destroy thine evil propensities 
and conquer the citadel of the body ; 

Thou who art surroimded foes in battle and fleest not 
away, shalt bo called a hero. 

35 

R. He knoweQi tlie real pleasure, who spurneth the pleBtsures 
of this world; 

Having spurned the pleasures of the world he recog- 
nizeth the Real Pleasure ; 

When heabandoneth the former^ he obtaineth the latter; 
And when he quaflelh the latter^ tire former please him 

not. 

1 God. 

^ E^^en Shiv and bis coiii^.ort are not superior to the huTna.11 intellect 
wliich decides on ihe worship of one Gad. 

^ I’lie gyanis generaU)- translate this word— to turn away 

from Lhe world and direct ones ihoirghts to God. 



i8S SHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


36 

L. O man, so apply thy heart to God, 

That thou mayest not go elsewhere, but obtain the 
primal True One, 

If thou heartily love 

Thou shalt obtain Himj and, obtaining Him, become 
absorbed in His feet. 

37 

W, Every moment remember God ; 

Remember God and defeat not come to thee. . 

I am a sacrifice to those who sing the praises of the sons 
of God 

He who meetetli God shall obtain all truth, 

W. Know God ; by knowing Him thou shalt become as He* 
Wlien the soul and God axe blended, no one can dis¬ 
tinguish them, 

39 

S. Carefully strive to know Him ; 

Restrain every thought which allureth tJie J^eart. 

When love for God springeth up, there is mental happi¬ 
ness, 

And the Lord of the tJircc worlds will fill thy heart. 

40 

KH. He who searcheth, 

He who searcheth for God shall not return. 

He who searclieth and knoweth God by meditation, 
Shall cross over the terrible ocean without delay. 

41 

SH. She who dispeileth all doubts of her spouss's affecHon 
for her, 

SliaJl adorn his bed. 

She resigneth a little comfort and obtain eth I he highest 
gratification. 

Then is she jvsily styled a wife and he a husband, 

Bishatiliinii, an equivalent of the Persian sM^i-khtida —sons of 
God, Saints. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


rSg 


42 

H* Cod e>:isteth, bu^ the spiritually ignorant know not of 
His eiiistence. 

From the moment man kmm'eth tlmi God existeth his 
heart is satisfied. 

God certainly doth exists if any one could see Him ; 
But in that case God alone would exists and man exist 
not at alL 


43 

Everybody goeth about saying, " I will take this, and 
I will take that/ 

They therefore feel great sorrow mh^n they are dis¬ 
appointed. 

He who fixetli his attention on God, 

Shall obtain aU liappiness and his sorrows shall depart. 

44 

KSH. How many have pined away and perished ! 

But, despite sudi destruction^ man will not even now 
think of God, 

If any one even now know that the world is fleeting and 
restrain his heart, 

He shall obtain an abiding place with Him from whom 
he is separated. 


45 

The Pandits have in another w^y joined the fifty-two 
letters, 

But they cannot recognize one letter/ 

Kabir utferetli the word of the True One— 

He is a pandit wdm abideth without fear— 

T 0 join kiiers ^ is the business of the Pandits ; 

To meditate on God is the business of the holy man. 
Saith Kabir, man will understand which to do 
According to his intelligence. 


^ They cfinnot recognise Lbs IitipenBhible One a pky on 

the Sanskrit word. 

s To wriic and tbeobgicil disquisitions. 



igo BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir's calendar is arranged according to lunar 
days. The lunar month has thirty days. Fifteen 
of them are called skudi, the light half, and the other 
fifteen wadi, the dark half of the month. In this 
composition, however, sixteen days are counted. 

Kabir's Lunar Days 

I 

There are fifteen lunar days and seven week days. 

Saith Kabir, they have no limits.^ 

The Sfrivers and Sidhs who know thdi secrets, 

Are creators and gods tliemselves. 

II 

On the day -when there is no moon remove worldly desires; 

Remember God the Searcher of hearts. 

So shalt thou esen in life obtain the gate of salvation, 

And the real word of the Fearless One, which is the essence 
of everything. 

He who lovefh God’s lotus feet, 

And is night and day watchful in His praises, becometh 
pure in heart by the favour of the saints, 

I 

On the first day a/ ihe moon meditate on the Beloved ; 

He who cannot be lessened, and who luith no equal, 
sporteth in the heart. 

He who is absorbed in the primal God, 

Shall never suffer the pain of death. 

On the second day know that there are two parts of the 
body, 

•Maya and God,* who are contained in everything. 

God doth not increase or diminish ; 

He is unknowable, spotless, and chaugdess. 

’ Literally—they iiave no hither and thither sides; a metaphor 
from the banks of a river. The meaning is that time has no limits. 

^ M&tter and spiist. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


191 


3 

On the third d^y let man apply his mind to God in th& 
si^Ues of and sls^ng.'^ 

Thus shall he obtain the Root of Joy and the Supreme 
Delight. 

In the company oi the saints axisetli the faith in man 
That God's light is ever within and without hiin. 

4 

On the fourth day restrain tlty fic-kle mind ; 

Never associate with lust and anger* 

God is all in all in sea and land ; 

He repcateth His own praises.* 

5 

On the fifth day Awusy ifmt the world was extended from 
the five elemenfSp 

And that the pursuit o£ gold and women form its occupa¬ 
tion. 

Whoever quaifeth the nectar of God's love, 

Shall not again feel the pains of old age and deaths 

6 

On the sixtli day the mind and the senses run in six 
directions ; 

The mind will not be restrained without tlie love of God. 
Efface duality and hold fast endurance ; 

Endure not tlie torture of absurd religious ceremonies. 

7 

On the seventh day know that the Word is true, 

And the Supreme Spirit will hold thee accepted ; 

So shall thy doubts and troubles be effaced, 

And thou shalt obtain happinesfi in the celestial sea. 

1 Alw Ir^nsIfUed—Let man bring together the ira, pingla^ and 
sufehniana. 

® Contained as He ts in man. 



igz BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

8 

On the eighth day know thfit the body is made of eight 
ingredients. 

In it is the Unknowable, the King of great treasTires. 
The gum who is versed in divine knowledge discioseth 
the secret 

How man may turn away from ihe world, and remain 
sorbed in the Infrangible and the Indivisible.^ 

9 

On the ninth day keep watch over the nine gates, 

And restrsun thy flowing desires ; 

Forget aE covetousness and worldly love, 

And thou sbalt cat the immortal fmit and live through all 
ages. 

10 

On the tenth day joy prevaikth in the ton directions ; ® 

Doubts are dispelled and God j& foundn 

God is lights the essence of ull things^ incomparable, 

Pure without a stain ; where He dwelleik is neither shade 
nor sunshine. 

II 

On the eleventh day, if man run in one direction,^ 

He shall not again suffer the pain of birth; 

His l^eart shall become cool and pure, 

And God, whom men say is distant^.be shall And near* 

On the twelfth day let twelve suns * arise for thee. 

And day and night trumpets sliall play spontaneous 
music. 

^ Also tranalated— 

When a man meetctb ft giiru the fatter disclogeth to him the secret 
of divine knowledge, 

And man tumOLh away from the ™iJd and rcmaiifietli absorbed in 
the Infrangible and Indivisible. 

^ A Hindi idicni for everj’where. ^ Towards God. 

^ Tlie Hindus believe that every monih has a sun of its oiV'U. On 
the Last day ibe tweb-e suns shall shine togeiher and bum the world. 
The twelve suns of the Lest mean ihe bright lights of dEvine knowledge. 



KABIR S HYMNS 


^93 


Thou shalt behold the Father of the tlirce worlds; 

A miracle shall be wrought for thse, and from man thou 
shall become God. 

On the tliirteenth day they who repeat the mme of the 
Inaccessible escape lr&.nsmgraMon ; 

Know that God is equally diffused below and above. 

God is neither low nor high^ in Him is neither honour nor 
dishonour ; 

He is equally contained in all things. 

14 

On the fourteenth day re^nember Cod hileth the 
fourteen worlds, 

And that He dwdleth in eveiy hair of man^s body. 

Meditate on truth and patieuce. 

And recite tlie legend of di\one knowledge. 

On the day of the fu!l moon the moon is full in the heavens 

And there is gentle light from its beams A 

God is firmly fixed in tJie beginnings the middle, and the 
end of all ihingSr 

Kabir is absorbed in the ocean of happiness. 

Kabir's Week Days 

Sing God*s praises all tlie days of lh& : 

On meeting the guru thou shalt obtain God’s secret. 

I 

On Sunday b^?gin God's service, 

Restrain the desires in the temple of thy body. 

Let man day and night keep hh aU^ntion on the Infrangible 
One, 

And tiie lute shall tranquilEy play spontaneous music. 

^ A [bo (run slaved — divisions. I’he Hindus divide Lhe mogti info 
sixteen sections. During the full tnoon the whole sixteen sections are 
seen. SelaA A'a/a ss^iipfiritn —II is complete in its sixteen divisions. 
The same expression is applied to men of eminent virtue aiid 
goodness. 


?rKic. VI 


O 



194 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

On Monday nectar trickleth from the moon ; ^ 

Wlien tasted, it is a speedy antidote to all poison ; 

He who drinketh it shall become intoxicated. 

Let thy month remain dosed to idU converse.^ 

3 

On Tuesday Icam what thou really art; 

Know how to guard against thine evil passions,^ 

Leave not the God who is in thine own hoirte * to wi^inder 
abroad ; 

If thou do^ He wiU be exceeding wroth. 

4 

On Wednesday let man enlighten Ids understanding, 

So that God's dwelling may be in the lotus of lii^ heart. 
Let him, on meeting his guru, consider both his soul and 
God as the same, 

And set erect the inverted lotus of his heart,'® 

5 

On Thursday let him throw his evil passions into the 

nvetj 

And consider the three gods of the Hindus the same./^ 
Why doth he not day and night wash away Ijis sins 
A.t the junction where the tlrree rivers ^ meet ? 

6 

On Friday by the practice of endurance man shall attain 
his object. 

^ That from the guru. 

^ Lilerally—Jet ihe door of l[^y spetch be locked up. 

^ Literacy—know tlie i^'ay of ihe five thieves, iliaL Ls^ the ^va.y by 
which they istpproach. ^ Heart. 

* Inverted ov^ing lo its devodoD Lo ihe world. 

^ Beingj, as the great God's erentures, equally impoteni for good or 
evil. 

The irn, pli^glSj and sukhmanaj i. e. by ihe pj'actico of Jog^. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


^95 


By stmggling with himself dfJiy* 

And carefully restraining all Jus five senses, 

He shall never fall into duality. 

7 

On Saturday if man keep strong within him 
The wick of God^s light which shineth in his heart, 

He shall be illummed without and within, 

And all his sins shall be erased* 

S 

Know that as long as man hath duality in his hearty 
He shall not attain God’s court. 

Let him love the omnipresent God, 

And then, saith Kabir^ his heart shall be pure, 

Asa 

The first three lines of the following were addressed 
by Kabir to his guru Ramaiiand. The remainder 
of the hymn contains Ramanand's replies and 
instruction. 

1 

Touching my guni^s feet I bow and ask him why the 
soul was made, 

Why man was born and why he shall perisli—tell and 
explain to me. 

0 divine one, sliow mercy to me and put me in the way 
of escaping from worldly entanglements and the fear of 
^ammigration. 

The pain of transmigration residtctJi fron^ deeds done, 
and happiness cometh wlien the soul is released Irotn it. 

Man bursteth not the entanglements of worldly love, and 
therefore is not absorbed in God, 

He kiioweth nothing of the rank of and so his 

fears are not dispelled.^ 

^ Also translated—Pie is not nviihout fea-r and Iwth erred, 

O 2 



196 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The soul is not bom, men. think it is ; it is free 

irom birth and death.^ 

When the idea of birth and death ^ deptirteth from man^s 
mindj he &JiaIL for ever be absorbed in God. 

the reflection of object in a vessel of water blendeth 
with the object when the vessel is broken, 

So, saith Kabir, through vuiue doubts fiee away, and the 
soul is absorbed in God.® 


The following a satire on the Brahniiins of 
Bananas :— 


n 


They wear loin^dotlis three and a half yards long and 
sacrifldal threads of three strands; 

They carry rosaries on their necks and glittering 
utensils in their hands; 

They should not be called saints of God, cheats of 
Banaras— 

Such saints are not pleasing to me— 

They gulp down trees with their branches ; 

They scrub their vessels, and put them on fires whose 
wood hath been washed ; ^ 

They dig up the earth, make two fire-places/ and eat 
up men whole ! 

Those sinners ever wander in evil deeds, yet they call 
themselves Aparas, 

Ever and ever they wander about in their pride atid rain 
all their families. 

Man is attached to what God hath attached him. and 
his acts correspond. 


^ This Line is also translated—The gunj^s words make no impres¬ 
sion on him, he thinketh bis own ideas best, he hath no Jove for God 
and no bate for Maja. 

2 literatly-—the rising and the setting of the sun. This phrase is 
also tiansJated —when the feeling of joy and sorrow is dispelied. 

® Kabir meani that the soul is the reflettion of God, and blends vnlh 
Him when the vessel of the body is brohen, 

* So that impurities in the wood may not remain, 

* One for their bread and anoLbei' for their lentils. Some strict 
Hindus suppose that a fiiepkce once used is uncleann 


KABIR’S HYMNS ig? 

Sdtii Kabir, he who rtieetetli the true guru sliaJL not be 
born again. 

Thanksgiving to God the fatlier, 

Ol 

ITie Father gave me (Ats consolation— 

He me a comfortable bed and put ambrosia into 
my mouth. 

Why should I forget that Father ? 

When I go to the neit world I shall not lose my game.'- 
^fy mother® is dead, and I am quite happy, 

1 do not put on a beggar’s coat; 1 feel not the frost. 

I am a sacrifice to that Father who begot me. 

Who put an end to my companionship with the five 
deadly $ins. 

Who enabled me to subdue, and trample on them. 

When I remember God, my soul and body are happy. 

My Father is the gi'eat Lord of the earth. 

To that Father how shall I go ? 

Wlien I met the true guru, he sliowed me the way— 

Tire Father of the world then became dear to my mind ; 

I am Thy son, Thou art my Father; 

We both live m the same place. 

Saith Kabir, GotPs slave knoweth the one God ; 

By the guru’s favour I know everything. 

The central idea of the following is the worship 
of Maya. She is represented in a hideous and 
repulsive guise, her nose having been cut off for 
her infidelity. The first two lines of the hymn 
describe Tantric ceremonies. 

IV 

Into one vessel they put a slaughtered cock, and another 
they fill with liquor. 

Five Jogis sit round, and tire noseless queen in the midst, 
Tlie bell of the noseless one resoundeth in both worlds; 
Blit some discriminating person cut off thy mosc, 0 Maysc. 

If I remember God. - Maya, or worldly lo^e, 



igS BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The noseless one hath her dwelling eveiywhere; slie 
killeth er^ery one and looketh out for more. 

' I am/ smih she, ' the sister and niece of elII ; ^ I am the 
handmaiden of him who weddeth me.^ 

My husband is very wise and calleth himself a saint*^ 

He standeth continoally over me ; no one else cometh 
near me/ 

It was I* saifh Kabir, who cut off her nose and her ears, 
and assaulted and expelled liei\ 

Because, though dear to tlxe tliree worlds^ she was an 
enemy of the saints. 

All must die at last; God's name is their only 
salvation. 

V 

Jogis, celibates^ penitentSj anchorets, tliey who wander 
on many pilgrimages^ 

They who pluck out and shave their hair, tl^ey who practise 
silence, and they who wear matted locks, must all die at 
last; 

Wherefore worship God. 

What can the Jamna do for those wliose tongues love 
God^s name ? ^ 

They who kiiow^ the Shastars, die Veds. astrology, and 
various languages, 

Who know' written and spoken incantations, and all 
medtcid science^ must die at last. 

Tlicy who enjoy empires,umbrellas, tlirones, many beauti- 
ful women, 

Bctd, camphor, and highly fragrant sandal, must die at 
last. 

The Vedsj Purans, and Slmritis I have all searched, but 
there is no salmtion anywhere in the^n. 

Saith Kabir, so repeat God’s name that transmigration 
may be at an end. 

^ Every one treats me well and cherishes ine. 

* 1 serve him who controls me, 

^ It is only ibe saint who can control her. 

^ The river /amiia ts a place of pilgrimage. It is. supposed that 
(iealh cannot molest those who liaLhe in i(. 


KABIH^S HYMNS 


m 

Kabir was aslced whether the world was real or 
unreal. The following hymn was his reply. His 
meaning is that the world is unreal like the im¬ 
possibilities mentioned. 

VI 

Can an elephant be a rebeck-player ^ or an ox a drunmiET ? 
can a raven play the cymbals ? 

Can an ass put on a dancer^s skirt and dance ? Can 
a buffalo perform worship ? 

Can Raja Ram ^ cook cakes of ice ? 

Can any man in his senses eat them ? 

Can a lion seated in his den prepare betel ? Can a mam- 
motJi rat serve it made up ? 

Can a mouse sing a song of rejoicing from house to house ? 
Can a tortoise blow a shell ? 

Can a barren woman's son go to wed^ and build a mansion 
in the sky ? 

Caj^ he marry a fair and beLUttiful vii'gin ? Can the hare 
and the lion sing their eulogies ? 

Saith Kabir^ heai'j O saints, hath an ant eaten a moun¬ 
tain ? 

Can the tortoise say, ' I want five' ? Can the gnat pro¬ 
claim God's word ? “ 

The following was addr^ed to a Jogi who main¬ 
tained the superiority of his sect and the advantage's 
of its external accessories. 

Vll 

I have one wallet which containcth seventy-two chambers 
and one door.^ 

In tl^e whole world he ahne is a Jogi 

Who cravetli for God in tlje earth containing nine regions.^ 

That Jogi shall obtain the nuie treasures 

^ An eminent confectioner of ICabfr'fc lime. 

^ Some begin with * The son of a barren woman ift'ent to wed '' and 
m^ike Lite ammak nieiiLLoned the marriage procession^ puUing the 
whole in narrative form, 

“ The geventpUva chfiinber.-i of the body and the brain or tenth 

^ In lEic body containiri^ nine 



200 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


1 


Who lifteth bis soul from below to heaven, 

Who maketh divine knowledge his patehed coat, medita¬ 
tion his needle, 

Who twisteth the thread of the Word and putteth it 
therein, 

Who maketli the five elements his deer-skin jacket, and 
walketh in the way of his guru, 

Who malceth mercy his fire-shovd, his body his fire-wood, 
and applieth to it tfie light of knowledge,^ 

Who loveth God within his heart, and evei' sitteth in tjie 
attitude of contemplation. 

All the Jogi’s craft consisteth in the name of God, to 
whom belong the body and soul, 

Saith Kabii, if Cod be mciciful, He will give man a true 
mark.® 

Trust to God alone and not to thy relations, 

IX 

As long as the oil and the wick ^ are in the lamp, every¬ 
thing is visible; 

When the oil is spent, and t]ie wick goeth out, the chamber 
is dark. 

O madman, wfien thy lamp is oui, no one will keep thee 
even for a ghari, 

Therefore repeat the name of God, 

Who hath a mother ? who hath a father ? what man 
hath a wife ? 

When the vessel burstctl;,^ no one asketh about tJiee; 
it is all ‘ Take him cut! Take him out! * 

' Thy mother sitteth and weepeth on the threshold, thy 
brother taketli away thy bier. 

Thy wife openath the plaits of her hair and weepeth ; 
the soul departeth alone. 

Saith Kabir, hear, ye saints, regarding tliis terrible ocean. 
Tire slave man suffereth torture, and the lord of death 
retireth not from him, O God. 

^ TJifi power of tuoving Llie reality of hiiags seen. 

® Mark him off for salvation. 

* The oil aitd vriclt mean life and brejili. 


* iVlien lliou cticsl. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


30 r 


The body under the allegory of a churn from 
which salvation is obtained through the Word. 

X 

Sanak and Sanand, of Brahma, never found Gcd's 
limits- 

Nor did Brahma himself though he spent his life reading 
the Veds, 

Chum Gad's clmrn,^ my brethien, 

Geittly churn it that the butter may not be lost.^ 

Make tliy body the chum, thy heart the churning-^taff ; 
Into the chum put the Word mislead of milk ; 

Make hearty meditatioti on God thy churaing. 

Pour the gum's favour into it as thy cold water. 

Saith Kabir, he on whom the King looketh with favour, 
And who clingeth to His name, shah gam the shore. 

Vivien the deadly sins are subdued man arrives 
at a knowledge of the one God and obtains salvation. 

XI 

When the wick of pride is diy and the oil of iss^orldly love 
i& spent ; 

Wlien the drum 0 / boasiing is not Ijeai’dn and the mind’® 
is fast adeep, 

When the fire of avarice is out, and the smoke of desires 
no longer issueth^ 

Thm shall man that one God is everywhere con- 
tained^ and that there is no second. 

When the strings arc broken, the rebet'k no longer 
playeth,^— 

Man hath ruined his affairs by error— 

When man obtaineth understanding he shall foi^et 
Preaching, ranting, arguing, and intoning, 

Saith Kabitj the highest dignity shall not be far from those 
Who crush their deadly suiSh 

^ Meditate upon divine Jinowl^^dge. 

- Rnpid churning is believed to spoil butter. 

^ AWp liler^[y—the acrobat. 

^ When ctetrircs aie at an end, man obtains dellveiancc* 



Z02 BHAGATS OF THE GKANTH SAHIB 


If Kabir commits sin he hopes that God will 
pardon him as a mother pardons her child, when he 
prays for forgiveness. 

XII 

A mother beareth not in mind 
AU the faults her son committeth. 

0 God* I am Thy child; 

Why destroyest Thou not my demerits ? ^ 

If a son in great anger rush at hu nU}th^r, 

Even tJ^eu she beareth it not in mind. 

Since I have fallen into the prison of anxiety* 

How shall I be saved without God's name ? 

0 God, e\''er cleanse my mind and body^ 

And Kabir will tranquilly sing Thy praises. 

xm 

My pilgrimage is to the bank of the Gomti, 

Where dwelleth the yeHow-robed priest.^ 

Bravo ! bravo ! liow sweetly he singcth 
God's name delighteth my soul; 

Narad and Saraswati wait on him, 

And ]rear him sits lady Lakshmi as his handmaiden^ 

With my rosary on my neck and God on my tongue 
I repeat His thousand names and salute Him. 

Saith Kabir^ I sing God's praises^ 

And instruct both Hindus and Musalmans. 

Kabir deprecated the destraction of life in any 
fonn for idol worship, 

XIV 

Thou cuttest leaves, O flower-girl; in every leaf there 
is hfe. 

The stone for which thou gatherest the leaves is lifeless. 
Thou art in error, 0 flower-girl, in this ■ 

The true Guru is a living God. 

^ tVhy dost Thou not pardon ray sins? 

^ This apparently is not the river which flowy by LatLlman (Luth- 
now). ^ Krisihan. 


KAEIR'S HYMNS 203 

Bialima is in -the leaves, Vishnu in the branches, and 
Shiv in th^ flowers. 

Thou deatroyest three gods in our pr-eseuce ; wliom dost 
thou worship ? 

The sculptor carving iht stone turned it into an idol; 
and, in d^nng sOt put his foot upon its breast. 

If it were a real God, it would have destroyed him. 

Met! cook rice, dal, lapasi^ pancakes, kasar ; * 

The Brahman (casters feast on these things, and put 
ashes into the tdors mouth. 

The flower-girl is Iq error, and leadeth the world astray» 
hut I go not astray. 

Saith Kabir, God hath merdfully preserved me from error. 

The stages of maUp 

XV 

Twelve years pass away in childhood j niau performeth 
no penance even fo the age of twenty; 

Until thirty he worshippeih uot God : he repent eth when 
old age cometh upon Jiim, 

His life hatli passed in talking about his propeiiy ; 

His arms strong as Ihe sea have dried up. 

He with his own hands const rue tetli a fence for a tank 
that hath dried up and a hedge for a reaped field. 

Wlien the thief comethj he quickly taketh what the fool 
hath preserved as hie own. 

When the feet, head, and hands begin to tottei, 

And water floweth copiously from the eyes; 

When words come indistinctly from the tongue, 

Dost thou tlien^ sir^ hope to perforin religious work^ ? 

If God be merciful and thou love Him, thou stialt obtain 
His name as tlay profit. 

By the favour of the guru thou shalt obtain the wealth 
of God^^ 

Which shall go with thee ixs thou departest. 

Saith Kabir, hear, 0 ye good people, ye shall not take 
other wealth with you ; 

^ Ldpan ^sstir are both made from clarified butter, flour, a.nd 
sugar, but Qie former is made liquid by the addition of water. They 
are both Oriental puddings, 2 Qo^'g name. 



204 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Wheri the Supreme God^s summons cometh, ye shall 
depart leaving your wealth and homes. 

The inequality of life due to man's own acts and 
not to God's caprice. 

XVI 

To one man God hath given silks and satins and a niwar 

Others have not even a ragged coat or straw in their 
houses to lie on. 

Indulge not in envy and bickering, 0 my soul, 

Do good deeds and gain ikeir reward. 

Out of the same earth the potter mouldeth ve^seh^ but 
painteth different designs on them ; 

Into one vesel is put strings of pearls, and into another filth. 

God gave the miser wealth to keep, the blockhead 
calleth it his own. 

When Death^s mace toucheth his head, it shall be decided 
in a moment T^hose weaUh ii is. 

God^s slave is the highest saint ; he obeyeth God's order 
and obtaineth happiness. 

He accepteth as true what pieaseth God, and God^s will 
he treasureth in his heart, 

Saith Kabir^ hear^ 0 good people, to things one’s own 
is untrue ; 

Dsathj breaking the cage* taketh away the bird; ® its 
wires and strings * are then relaxed. 

The following is a remonstrance to a Qazi who 
desired that Kabir should perfonn the usual Muham¬ 
madan fasts and ceremonies 

XVII 

I am God's poor slave* royal state is pleasing to thee i 

The Supreme God* the Lord of religions^ never ordained 
tyranny* 

^ A ntwlr bed is one whose bottom is of brond cotton tape instead 
of the grass nope used by the poorer classes. 

^ That is, the soul. 

® Also translated—The cups fov the bird's food and water, ibat is, 
man leaves his possessions induding his food and drink behind him. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


^05 


0 Qaai, nothing is done by mere talk; 

It is not by fasting and repeating prayers and the creed 
that one goeth to heaven. 

The inner veil of the temple of Makka is in man's heart, 
if the irulh be known. 

Just decisions should be thy prayers, knowledge of God, 
the inscrutable One, thy creed, 

The subjiigation of thine evil passions the spreading of the 
prayer-carpet; then shouldst thou know what religion is. 

Recognize thy Master and fear Him in thy Jieart; despise 
and destroy thy mental pride.^ 

As thou deemest thyself so deem others, then shalt thou 
become a partner in heaven. 

Matter is one but hath assumed divers shapes; in the 
midst of all recognise God. 

Saith Kabir, tlioTi hast abandoned heaven and attached 
thyself to ht\h 

The following was composed on the occasion of 
Kabir's visit to the house of a Jogi friend whom he 
found dead 

XVIII 

Not a drop now trickleth from the citadel of thy brain— 
where is the music that filled it ? 

The great saint hath departed with the name 0 / the supreme 
Brahm, the supreme God. 

0 father, whither hath departed the soul which dwelt 
with thy body; 

AVhich revelled in divine knowledge, expounded, arid 
preached ? 

^Vliithet hath the player gone vvho played the drum of 
tky body ? ^ 

Thy talcs, fby w^ords, thy divine instructioii, are no lo^tger 
heard ; all thy vital energy hath been drawn away. 

Thine ears have become deaf, the vigour of thine organs 
hath dedined ; 

Thy feet have failed, thy hands are reliLxed, no woj-d 
issueth from thy lips ; 

^ AiEo iraasJated—"Despiftc thy lust anti pride- 
^ Where h now the life of thy body 7 



^o6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


The five enemies/ robbers all, which wander ^tccording 
to their own will have grown weary; 

The elephant/ thy mind, hath grown weary ; the heart 
which beat by the force of thy soul, the wirepuller, hath 
grown weary ; 

Thou art dead; the ten brsaths ivhich kept thee together 
have escaped ; thou hast left thy friends and relations. 

Saitb Kabir, he who mcditateth on God bursteth his 
bonds even while alive. 

Mammon under the guise of a serpent. 

XIX 

Nothing is potent against the serpent 

Which deceived Brahma, Vishnus and Shiv. 

The serpent having completely subdued the world hath 
entered pure water/ 

By the guru^s favour I have seen her coming who hath 
stung the three worlds, ciind gm^rded £tgai?isi her. 

O my brethren, why call out ' Serpent, serpent' ? 

He who knoweth the True One hath destroyed the ser- 
pent; 

No 0 tie else is free from her attack^ 

Wlien the serpent is vanquished what can Death do ic 
man ? 

This serpent is God's creature ; 

She is weak, what can she do ? 

As long, however, as she abideth with man, hn soul shall 
abide in bodies ; ^ 

By the favour of the guru Kabir hath easily escaped 
from hen 

'Tlirow not pearls before swine.^ 

XX 

Wliat maileth ii to read the Siiniitis to a dog ? 

What to sing praises to an infidel ? 

^ The five evil passions. 

^ The mbd is likened to an elephant for it heedlessly pursues 
pleasures as the maie elephant the female. 

^ Has found access even to the holy 

* Also transla^ted—^ There is no other creature so vite as she. 

^ He shall suffer transmigration. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


207 


Continue to repeat God^s name ; 

SpeaJc not to the infidel even by mistake. 

What availeth tt to g^ive a raven valuable camphor to 
eat ? ^ 

Wliat to give milh to a viper ? ^ 

Discrimination and understanding are obtained in the 
company of the saints. 

By the toucli of the philosopher's stone iron becometh 
gold. 

The dog of Mi infidel acteth in everything as he is caused 
to act ; 

His acts are in accordance with his original destiny. 

Wert thou to take nectar and water the nim-tree with il> 

Saith Kabir, its naturcd bitter qualities would not depart. 

Worldly greatness secures not salvation. 

XXI 

There is no trace of Rawan or his line, 

Though Ceylon wa5 his fortress and the ocean its moat. 

What shall I pray for ? nothing remaineth stable ; 

Willie I look on, the world paaseth away. 

Though Rawan had a lakh of sods and a lakh and a 
quarter of grandsons. 

Yet at last he had neither lamp nor wick in his house- 

The sun and moon used to heat his kitchenthe fire to 
wash his clothes.* 

He who through the guru^s instruction putfeth God^s 
name in hn heart, 

Sliall remain permanent and be released from trans¬ 
migration.-^ 

Saith Kabir, hear, O yc people,® 

Without tlie name of God there is no salvation. 

^ He will sdl] rejoice in h](\\. 

^ h ^vilJ only became ihe more venoinoqs after nourisiiinent. 

^ That ie, to cook lais food. 

^ So potent ]\e over the heavenly bodies and the elements, that 
he subjugated them lo hia private purposes. 

® LiteraJly—and go nowhere. 

® LoL This w'ord means people, but it wag also die name of 
Kablr's wife. 



208 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 
A mystical hymn with its interpretation* 

xxn 

Hear these wonderful things* my brethren— 

First a soti ^ bornr^ anij aitei^rds his mother ; ^ 

The gtifu ^ worshipped his discipIe^s ^ feet ; 

I have seen a lion ^ herding kine ; * 

A fish ^ out of water give birth upon a tree ; ® 

1 have seen a eat ® taking away a dog ; 

The branches of a tree below, its roots ^ above ; 

And its trunk bearing fruit ^ and blossom 
A buff ado on horseback going to grase a horse ; 

An ox on his way while his burden ^ arrived at home 
before hi^- 

Saith Kabir, he who undei^tandeth this hymn, 

Shall know everything on repeating God^s 

The soul's toil to obtain a human body shall all 
be lost if God be not remembered* 

XXIII 

God maJteth the body from seed and placeth it in tlie pit 
of fire ; 

For ten months He keepeth it in the mother's womb; 
worldly love attacheth to it on emerging. 

O mortal, why attaching thyself to covetousness losesf 
thou the jewel of thy life ? 

In former births fhou didst not sow the seed in this 
world: 

From childhood tliou hast grown to old age; what was 
to be hath been. 

^ Furily* - Maya. ® SouL 

^ Heart Or fflindr * Conscicnoe* 

® Ttie organs of action and perception. ^ Understanding, 

® To the company of the saints, ^ Ccmtentmenl:, 

Greed. ^ Worldly desires. 

Meditation on God. Salvation. Worship. 

^ Endurancen Fickleness, Laziness. 

Good vorks. 



KABIH^S HYMNS 209 


W!icn Death cometlt and catcheth the(^ by the top-lock/ 
wliy then weep ? 

Thou hopest for life, while he waiteth for thy Iasi 

breath— 

The world is a game, O Kabtr* carefully throw the dice.^ 


Kabir was invited to a marriage feast. He said 
his own marriage was being celebrated, and he could 
not go elsewhere. The following is a description 
of it. 

XXIV 


I turned my body into a dyer’^s vat and fiien dyed uiy 
lieart therein;^ the five virtues^ I made my marriage 
guests; 

With God I made my marriage cirouman:ihulations,° my 
soul being dyed with His love. 

Sing, singj ye bridesw^oinen* the marriage song : 

The sovereign God hath come to my house as my husband. 

1 made the bridal pavilion^ in the lotus of my heart, 
imd divine knowledge the recitation ^ of my lineage ; 

I obtained God as my bridegroom; so great hath been 
my good fortune. 

Demigods, men, saints, and tiie thirty-three karors of 
gods in their chariots came as spectators 

Saith Kabir, the one God, the divine Male, hath wed and 
taken me with Him. 


^ A lock of hmir left unshaven on the Lop of a Hindu^s head+ 

^ Also iransklcd—Make recolleotion of God thy throw of the 

* Kabir represents himself as a bride and God liie bridegroom. It 
is usual on occnsijon& of marri^e for people to have their cJoihes dyxd. 

^ The word ia also translated Iht elect. 

^ The Hindu bridegroom and bride circnmambulale fire, in some 
places se^'cn times and in other p!aces four times, on tlie occasion 
of a marriage^ 

* Four posts are erected to denote ihe mind, understanding, 
thought, and pnde. The posts support a cbch covering, beneath 
which the very youthful Indian brides and bridegrooms are marriod* 

UcMr now called a panegyric on the families of the 

bride and bridegroom intoned by ihe ministering Ei^hmans. The 
word is also translated—the repetition of the Vedte sloks for 
marriage. 

Unci, 'll p 



210 BHAGATS OF THE GRA>JTH SAHIB 


In the following again Kabij’ represents himself 
as a wedded woman :— 

r K-r . XXV 

I am plagued by my mother-in-laWt=^ beloved by my 
father-in-law;^ I dread the name of my husband^a 
eldest brother.® 

0 my friends and companions^ my husband sister ^ hath 
seized mOj and I bum by sepaTation from my husband’s 
youngest brother.^ 

My mind hath become insane since T have forgotten 
God ; how can I abide ? 

I behold not with mine eyes Him who enjoyeth me on 
the couch ; to whom shall I tell my sorrow ? 

My step-father quarrelleth wi^ ; my mother is ever 
intoxicated ; ^ 

As long as I remained with my elder brother ^ I was dear 
to my Spouse. 

Saith Kabir, 1 have lost my life struggling with the five 
evil passions— 

Deceitful Maya hath led captive the wliole world, hu^ 
I have obtained immunity by repeating God^s najne. 

Mammon a thiaving courtesan* 

XXVII 

Worldly life is like a dream, 

But, believing the world to be real, 1 altaclied myself to 
it, and abandoned the Supreme Treasm'e. 

O father, 1 made love to the aourksm mainmon. 

And she stole from me the jewel of divine knowledge. 

With its eyes open the motli becometh entangled; the 
insect regatrdeUi not the flame ; 

^ M&ya. * God. ® The god ordealh. 

^ Evil thought ^ Discriffimation. 

® SLep-ialher here means the bE>dy, and the mother sclfiiihness. 
BUp tdvjo^ is aSso imnalated—my former heart, that is, iiuhen I ivas 
ua regenerate- 

^ God's love. Some understand contenluient; others, divine 
kJiowlcdgt. 


KABIR^S HYMNS 211 

So^ stupid fnan attached to gold and wom^ii heedetli not 
Death^s noose. 

Reflect^ abandon sin ; and God will save thee. 

Saith Kabir, such is the Life of the world i He hath no 
equal. 

Kabir has found God and put an end to his trans¬ 
migration. 

XXVIII 

Though I have assumed many shapes, this is my 

The strings and wires of the musical instrument axe all 
worn out; I am now in the power of God's name ; 

I shsdl not have again to dance (0 Ihe lune of birth and 

death ; 

Nor shall my heart accompany on the drum.^ 

I have taten and destroyed my bodily lust and anger; 
the pitcher of avarice hath burst; 

Lust's raiment hath grown old, and all my doubts are 
dispelled, 

I recognize one God in all creatures i vain wranglings on 
this subject are at an end. 

Saith Kabir, when God was gracious unto me, I obtained 
Hiuij the Perfect One. 

The following was addressed to a Qazi :— 

XXIX 

Thou fastest to appease God, yet thou destroyest life to 
please thy palate,® 

Thou tegardest not others as thou dost thy-self 5 why 
pratest thou ? 

O Qazi, Illy oue God is in thee, but thou beholdest Him 
not by thought and reflection. 

Mad on religion, thou Jjoedest not^ wiierefore thy life is 
of no account, 

^ I havfl hTtd many binbSj buL I shall not bs bom agiin. 

* At a nlch, or OrientaJ dance, the performers are Lhe muaicians, 
the female singers and dancers, and the di'ninmers, 

^ Oti ihe first after the lent of Ramzan, the Mubatnmadans 
offer a sacrifice to God. Here Kah!r bints Lhat ihe sacridee is made 
to please Ifieir palates, not to please God. 



212 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Thy books tdl thee that God is true, and that He is 
neither male nor female ; 

Thou gainest nothing by thy reading and study, O mad¬ 
man^ since thou regardest Him not at heart' 

God is concealed in every heart; reflect on this in thy 

mind 

Kabir loudly proclaimcth—there is the same God for the 
Hindu as for the Muhammadan. 

God becomes not propitious by the mere wearing 
of religious garbs, 

XXX 

1 decorated myself to meet my Spouse, 

But God tlie Life and Lord of tlic world met me not. 

God is my husband, I am his wife i 

He is big ; J am little. 

The wife and her husband dwelt together^ but to cohabit 
is difficult. 

Blessed the woman who is pleasing to her husband ; 

Saith Kabir^ she shall not be bom again* 

God under the allegory^ of a diamond* 

XXXI 

When the soul meeteth God,^ the once fickle mind is eiusily 
absorbed in Him. 

This diamond God filleth eveiything with light ; 1 have 
found this by the instruction of the true guru— 

The praise of God were an endless story— 

When a man bccometh perfect he recogniKeth the Dia¬ 
mond. 

Saith Kabir, I have seen such a Diamond as iilleth the 
world with its light; 

The concealed Diamond became manifest; when I met 
the gum he showed it to 

In the following allegory Kabir refers to his early 

^ Literally—when a diamond pierceth ^ diamond. There ^re 
severai interpretations of this linen 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


understanding as his first wife and to his conversion 
as his second wife:— 

XXXII 

My first wife was ugly, of low caste, and bad character, 
evil both in her fathei’s house and mine. 

My present wife is handsome, sensible, of good character ; 
I naturally took her to my heart. 

It turn^ out well that my first wife departed ; 

May she whom I have now taken live for ever [ 

Saith Kabir, when the young wife came I ceased to 
cohabit with the old one ; 

The young 'ivife is with me now, the elder hatlr taten 
another husband. 

Kabir’s mother addresses him in the first four 
lines of the following hjnnn. Kabir was married 
to Dhania, The holy men who frequented the 
house called her Ramjania, or worshipper of God, 
But the name is also applied to courtesans dedi¬ 
cated to idols, and it consequently offensive to 
Kabir's mother. She also complains that Kabir had 
devoted himself to religion and neglected his busi¬ 
ness :— 

XXXIII 

My daughter-in-law was called Dhania ; 

They have note> given her the name of Ramjania. 

These shaven fellows have ruined my family ; 

They have set my son uttering the name of God, 

Saith Kabir, hear, 0 my mother, 

These shaven men liave done away with my enste.^ 

The following is a lecture against the veiling of 
women. Tt u’as addressed to the second wife of 
Kamai, Kabir’s son ;— 

XXXIV 

Stay, stay, my daughtcr-in-law, veil not thy face; 

At tlie last momerit it will not avail thee tlie eiglrth of 
a paisa. 

^ Thai JSj 1 am no Jcjjiger linown aa a wpaver, bui a worshipper of 
God. 



214 ehagats of the granth sahib 

She who preceded tliee used to veil her face; 

Follow not thou in bei^ footsteps. 

The only advantage of veiling thy face is 

TIia.t for five or ten days people will say a good daugliter- 
in-law hath come. 

Thy veil will only be real 

If thoti sing God*s praises and skip and dance in 

Saith Kabir, 0 daughter-in-law, t It on stsalt l>e victorious ^ 

When thou passes! thy life in singing (jod"s praises. 

Kabir's wife Loi reftised to prepare a meal for 
a holy visitor, upon which Kabir manifested his 
displeasure. The following hymn except the last 
two lines is Loi's pleading for forgiveness :— 

XXXV 

Better would it be ^o cut twain with the saw than 
that tliou shouldst turn thy back on me. 

Heai' my entreaty and embrace me; 

1 am a sacrifice unto thee ; turn thy face tovt^rds me^ my 
beloved. 

Why kille&t thou me by turning thy back on me ? 

Even though thou cut my body I will not turn it a^^ay 
from ® 

My body may perish, but 1 will not cease to love thee. 

There hath been no quarrel between thee and me; 

Thou art the same good husband and I the same wife 
as b&for&. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O Loi, 

I shall believe in thee no longer. 

The following was Kabir’s reply to a Brahman 
wdio had advised him to bathe in the sacred rivers 
of the Hindus. 

XXXVIl 

He who is foul w'ithin will not go to hea^'en by bathing 
ai: a place of pilgrimage : 

^ Thou shall obiain sal^'alio^ip 
^ Also Uanslatcd—1 will not T^ince. 


KABIR’S HYMNS 215 

Nothing 3s gained by pkasuig tnenj^ God is not a 
simpleton. 

Worship the Lord^ the only God ; 

Serving the gnru is the true ablution. 

If salvation be obtained by bt^thing in water, the frogs 
which are contitiiially bathing mU obtain U i 

But as the frogs so the pilgrims ; they shall be bom again 
and again, 

If a hardened sinner die in BanaraSs he cannot escape helh 

If a saint of God die in Haramba^* he saveth a whole 
multitude. 

Where there is neither day nor night, nor Shastars^ 
there dwelleth the Formless One- 

Saith Kabir, meditate on Him, ye foolish denizens of the 
world. 

Gujari 

Tlie follovdng was addressed to a Brahman who 
Kabir supposed would be turned into an ox for his 
idleness and gluttony, Hindus believe that 

they who live on others' wealth without any exer¬ 
tion on thdr own parts will become oxen, in which 
condition they will have to labour and suffer for 
their idleness in human liv^. 

I 

With four legs, two horns, and a dumb mouth, how wilt 
thou sing God'S praises ? 

Standing or lying down the stick v^iU fall on l]^ee ; then 
sv^here wilt thou hide thy head ? 

Without God thou shall become somebody ^ dse^s bullock ; 

Thy nose be torn, thy shouldersv maimed, and thou 
shall eat worthless straw ‘ 

All day slialt thou wander in the forest^ but even then 
thy belly shall not be satisfied, 

^ That is, by deferring to cusiom* 

^ Previously called Magabar. 

^ Thou shfllt be lent to soiuebody who will treat thee badly, and 
not as ht ^'ould treat his oun^ 



2i6 bhagats of the granth sahib 


TtlOU didst not listen to the advice of lioly men, and thou 
shalt suffer for thine omissions. 

Overwhelmed with great superstition thou shalt endure 
hardship, and wander in many births, 

Thou hast lost thy precious life by forgetting God ; when 
wilt thou again have such an opportunity ? 

Tliou shalt tum and revolve like an oilman’s bullock ^ 
kis press, and restless slialt thou pass the night. 

Saith Kabir, for not having repeated God’s name thou 
shalt smite thy head and repent, 

Kabir's mother was distressed at his conduct in 
relinquishing his trade and adopting a religious life, 
The following is a conversation between the mother 
and son on the subject. 

II 

Kabir’s mother sobbeth and weepeth— 

0 God, how shall these children live ? ^ 

Kabir hath given up all his weaving, 

And hath inscribed God’s name on his body. 

Kabir repUeih — 

While the thread was passing through the bobbin 
I forgot my Beloved God.® 

My understanding is mean, my caste is that of weaver; 

I have gained the name of God as my profit. 

Saith Kabir, hear, 0 my mother. 

The one God will provide for us and them. 

SORATH 

All are lost without devotion. 

I 

The Hindus kill themselves worshipping idols, the Musal- 
roans make prostrations; 

The former are burned, the latter buried; but neither 
sect knoweth anything of Thee, 0 Coi. 

* Also translated—Like a monkey after red seeds, 

* How shall Kabir'schildren be maintained? 

® Kabir means that even that was‘too long a lime for hlin to abslain 
fyom repeating God's name, and so he gave up weaving. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


2T7 


0 my soul, the world is stark blind ; 

On all sides Deatli's noose is thrown, but ™ it mL 

Poets kill themselves reel ting verses; the Kaparis kill 
themselves going to Kedarnath ; 

Jogis kill themselves wearing matted liair ; but they know 
nothing of Thee, 0 God^ 

Kings kill tliemselves amassing wealth and burying masses 
of gold; 

Pandits kill tliemselvcs reading tl^e Vods, and women in 
gating on their beauty— 

Without the name of God all these are lost; think and 
ponder upon this, 0 man, 

Witliout the name of God who h^ih obtained sah=ution ? 
Kabir givetli his admooitiorix 

The body is frail, yet it attaches itself to worldly 
things which desert it. 

II 

When the body is burnt, it becon^et]-i ashes ; wlien it is 
not burnt, a host of worms eat it up. 

A soft clay vessel mil bre&k wlien watar is put into it— 
such Js the nature of the body. 

Why^ 0 brother, goest thou about puffing and blowing 
fh 5 ^^elf out ? 

How Irast thou forgotten the ten montlis thou didst 
remain inverted in the womb ? 

As the bee collecteth honey with great so the fool 
coUecteth wealth. 

When a man is dead^ they ^ay ^Take him away 1 take 
him away \ 

* Wiy allow a ghost to remain ? ' 

His w^edded wife Hiccompaniat]i him to the door, and after 
tiiat Ills male fi teiidi^. 

All the other mernhei'S of his family go as far as the 
cremation-ground ; tl'ie soul departeth alone. 

Saith Kabli, liear* O mortals, tliey who have entai^gled 
themselves whth ihe dccGitfuI world, 

Are seized by Death, and fjsrll into the pit like the parrot 
deceived by the trap. 


2i8 brag ATS OF THE GKANTH SAHIB 


None may escape pliysical death, but it brings 
salvation to the holy. 

III 

Man hearing all the instructicns of the Veds and the 
Purans, desireth to perfonn religious ceremonies to over- 

Death hatJi seized all people^ evm the wise ; the pandits 
too depart without hope. 

0 man* thou hast not succeeded in thy sole object ^ 

Since thou hast not worshipped the supreme God, 

Men have gone to the forests, practised jog, performed 
austerities, and lived on the tubers and roots they picked up. 

The Nadis,^ the readers ol the Veds, the Ekshabdis, and 
the Monis ^ are ah enrolled in Death^a register. 

Loving service^ entereth not into heart ; he pam- 

pereth his body and giveth it to Death ; 

He hypocritically singeth hymns, but what can he obtain 
from God ? 

Death hath fahen on the whole world i in his regisUr the 
sceptical theologian is recorded. 

Saith Kabir^ they who know God^s love and devotion to 
God are pure.^ 

The holy are completely saturated with God. 

IV - 

With both mine eyes I look, 

1 behold nothing save God ; 

Mine eyes ga_ze affectionately on Him ; 

There is now no other subject mentioned. 

My doubts have departed, my feair hath fled 

Since I applied my mind to God^s name 3 

When the Actor beateth the dnun^ 

^ Tq save thyself in this hum^n birtli. 

“ Jogis who go about playing a amah pipe. 

^ Men vowed to perpetual silence, 

^ Service such aa that performed by Narad^ the famoua likhi. 

* The Persian word freed or delivered, wag here origimlly 

written, but the tenth Guru altered its apelliug to the Arabic pure- 


KABIR^S HYMNS 


219 


Everybody cometh to ibt 

Wlien the Actor collect erth the stage proper ties A 

He abideth alone in His happsBesa. 

Doubts are not dispelled by the use of words ; 
Everybody continueth to talk. 

God fUleth the heart of him 

To whom through the guru's instruct son He hath revealed 
Himself, 

Wlien tire guru bestoweth even a httic kindness ^ 

Bodies and minds are all absorbed in God. 

Saith Kabir, I am dyed with the dye 0 / Godj 
And have found the munificent Life of the world. 

Man under the allegory of a milkmaid is won by 
the guru from neglect of God. 

V 

The words of the sacred texts are as seas of milk: 

For that ocean let tlie guru be the churning-staff. 

Be thou tlie churner of that milk; 

Why shouldst thou be despoiled of thy batter ? 

0 damsel^ why makest thou not God thy husband ? 

He is the life of the world and the support of tlie soul. 
The strait collar ^ is on thy neck aud chains on thy feet ■ 
God hath sent thee wandering from birth to birth. 

Thou heedest not even yet, O damsel; 

Thou art the wretched \nctim of Death. 

It is God who acteth and causetb men to act ; 

What power hath tJie poor hajidmaiden ? 

The damsel whom God awaketh 
Atfendeth to the duties He assignefh her. 

O damsel, wliere hast fhon obtained that wisdom 
By which thou hast erased the line of doubt ? 

Kabir feeleth great delight ^ 

And by his guru^s favour his mind is happy. 

^ When God creates the world, men appear. 

^ When God draws the world within HimEelf. 

* Connected b}- a chain with the feet and him Liering; ihc recumbeni; 
posture. 


BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


III reply to an inquiry Kabir describes the happi¬ 
ness he obtained from humility and devotion. 

yi 

When He without whom one cannot live 
Is found, nian*s toil is productive, 

■ Men call it a good thing to live for ever^ 

But there is no life witl’iout dea-th^^ 

W'here divine knowledge is discussed what more remaineth 
to be said ? ® 

As we look 011 ^ the things of this world pass away ; 

As men mb and mix saffron and sandal, so soul 

is blefided with God, 

And thus seeth the world without bodily eyes.^ 

A bandonmeftt of the world as a lather hath begotten divine 
knowledge as a son. 

Though placed m an unsubstantial city^^ 

I a beggar have found the Giver. 

He hath given me so much that I cannot eat it i 
I cannot leave off eating * or finish it; 

And I have ceased to go to strangers. 

The elect who know life to be death, 

Have obtained a mountain of happiness. 

Kabir hath obtained that wealth, 

And effaced his pride on meeting God. 

The lamp of holiness^ not the Veds and Pnrans, 
lights up man's heart. 

VII 

What avajleth readings what studying^ 

What hearing the Veds and Purans ? 

What avail reading and listening 
If divine knowledge be not obtained ? 

^ Without effajciiig oiieseli" 

^ Also translated— 1/ jadtt ttmsfl/ ?/&/, wbat use discuasing 

divine knowledgft? 

^ Also tranaJated—Men giind and mix safTron and sandal and umU 
//im to Ms ; 

The appeareth to have no eyes. 

^ The body. * So dear is God’s name to use. . 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


221 


ThoQ repeat est not the name of God, 0 ignorant man ; 
Every moment of what thinkest thou ? 

A lamp ^ IS required in this darkness 
To find the One Incompcehensible Thing 
Tlie lamp hath lit up my heart, 

And I have found the Incomprehensible Thing. 

Saith Kabir, 1 now lecogni^e Him ; 

And when I recognize Him my mind is happy. 

People do not bdieve that my mind is happy; 

But even if they do not, of wliat consequence is it ? 

The following was addressed to a hypocritical 
Braliman who advised Kabir to bathe at Hindu 
places of pilgrimage. 

VlII 

In thy heart is deception, in thy month religion ; 

False man, why dnirnest thou water ? 

What advantage is it to bathe the body 
If tilere be filth in the heart ? 

It tlm gourd be waslied at the sLxty-eiglit plates uf pil- 
griinage, 

Evw. then its bitterness will not depart. 

Thus saith Kabir deliberately— 

Cause me to cross over the terrible ocean, O God. 


Men should not practise deceit for the advantage 
of relations. 


IX 


With great deceit man acquire!Ii other men's wciilth. 

And takeih it and lavisheth it on Jris son and wife. 

O my maup ptcictise not dcccpiioti even by mistake ; 

At file last mom cut it is thine own soul that shall hav^ 
to render an account. 

E^T^y momcjit the body wasEeth away and old age 
wameth thee; 

Then no one will pour water into thy bands ^ 

Saith Kabir, thou shaJt have no frimd then ; 

Why not repeat Code's name in tJiy heart betimes ? 

^ Divine tnopledge, - God. 



222 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIE 


/■ 


The gum has shown man how to protect liimself 
from ferocious animals: to which the evil passions 
are campared. 

X 

0 SBLintSj my wandering mind hath obtained rest. 

1 reckon that I have obtained tny deserts. 

The guru hath shown me the passage 
Through which wild animals surreptitiously enter. 

I have closed the gates thereof j 
And spontaneous music playeth for me. 

The pitcher of my heart was hlled with the watci' of stJi ■ 
Wlien I upturned it, the water was spilled.^ 

Saith Kabir, the man of God knovveth this. 

And knowing it, his mind is happy. 

Kabir once felt hungry and rebelled against God. 

KI 

A hungry man cannot perform servdce ■ 

Take back this rosary of Thine. 

I only ask (or the du^ of the saints^ feet. 

Since I owe not any 

0 God+ how shall I fare if I am shamed before Thee ? 

If Thou give me not of Thine own e^coord^ I will beg for it. 
I beg for two sers of flour^ 

A quarter of a ser of clarified butter and salt; 

I beg for half a seft of dal 
Which will feed me twice a dayn 
I beg for a bed with four legs to it, 

A pillow and a mattress: 

I beg for a quilt over me, 

And then thy slave will cheerfully serve Thee. 

I have never been covetous ■ 

Thy name alone becomath me.^ 

^ This metaphor has often occurred. The hearts of men generally 
are said to be inverted. The holy have theirs efecU 
^ I am not under an ahligatioMi to any one. 

^ That is, I only ask for these things that I may be able to repeat 
Thy name. 


KABIR^S HYMNS 


223 


Saith Kabir^ my sc^ul is l^a.ppy ; 

And when my soul is ha-ppy^ then I recogniise God, 

The gods of the Hindus are ignorant of the Creator. 

DHANASAni 

I 

Beings like Brahma's f(ntr sons, ShiVj 

And Sheshnag know not Thy secret. 

Through association with the saints God du'eUetli in the 
heart. 

Beings like Hantunaii and Ganida, 

ludar and Brahma, know notj 0 God^ Thine attributes. 

The four Veds, the Siraritis, and the Purans, 

Vislinu, and Lakshmi know them not. 

Saith Kabir, he who toucheth God's feet and seeketh His 
shelter^ 

Sliall not wander in Iramndgralion. 

Life gradually draws to a close: man should 
practise devotion betimes. 

II 

Pahars are made up of gharis, days of pahars ; life draweth 
to a dose ; the body pitieth away ; 

Death wanderedi about like a poaclier in qu$st of game: 
say what shall man do to escape ? 

The last day approacheth ; 

Mother, father^ brother^ son^ wife—say whose are they ? ^ 

As long as the light of life remainetli in morn's body, the 
brute knoweth not himself. 

He is anxious to obtain a long life, but ho seefh not 
Death who is hand.^ 

Saith Kabir, hear, 0 mort;d dismiss thy mental doubts ; 

Repeat only the one Name, 0 mortal, and seek the 
asylum of the one God. 

^ LfitraJiy—docs any otic belong to any one ? 

^ Also translated—He is arufioufe lo live longer though his eyes see 


224 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Salvation depends on the state of man^s heart 
not on the place of Ills death. 

III 

What is strange to hiro who knoweth something af the 
love and service of God ? 

As water when blended with water sepaiateth not again ^ 
SD the weaver^ hatli blended with God. 

O men of God, I am out of my senses— 

If Kabir leave his body at Banara!?, what obligation is 
he under to God ? ® 

Saitli Kabir, hear, 0 people^ let no une make a mistake; 

Wliat is b^wecn Baiiaras and the barrai 

Magahaij if G<jd be in the lieart ? 

Kabir requires nothing but God's name. 

IV 

It is through msnfficient devotion men go 

To the heavGus of Indra and Shiv and are bom agam. 

What shall 1 pray for ? nothing is stable ^ 

Keep God’s name in thy heart i 

Fajne, power, wealth, aud greatness 

Help no onG at tlve last n^oment. 

Say who liatli derived any happiness 

From souj wifcj or wealth. 

Saith Kabir^ nothing else avaikth me ; 

The name of God h su^cient wealth for my heart. 

Remember and love God. 

V 

Remember God^ remember God, remember God, my 
brethren 1 

Witliout remembering God's name the majority of men 
shall be lost, 

Wiffij son> body, bouse, and wcaltli confer happiness; 

^ There is a ptan on ihia It means a weaver, and 

elsewhere it iy applied lo the Boui. 

® Because all people who die at Banaias must be laved, atcording 
to Hindu belief 


KABIR^S HYMNS 225 

Bui none of these shaJl be thine when the time of death 
iirriveth. 

Ajamal> the elephant, and the coiirtesan committed sin¬ 
ful acts; 

Yet they were saved by repeating God^s namen 

My brMh^sn, you have wandered in the wombs of pigs 
and dogSj and yet you are not ashamed. 

Why forsake the ambrosia of God's name and eat poison ? 

Abandon doubt regarding acts wirich are prescribed as 
well as those which are forbidden, and take God's name. 

The slave Kabir saifh, by the favour of the guru love God, 

SUHI 

Kabir calls on a worldly man to render an account 
of his life. 

1 

Having been born what hast thou done ? 

Thou hast never repeated God's name. 

Thou wilt not repeat His name ; of what thinkest thou ? 

What prep{zmti<^n art thou making for death, O luckless 
one ? 

Though tlirough woe and weal fliou hast brought up thy 
family, 

At the time of death thou shalt bear thy troubles alone. 

When Death seizeth thee by the neck^ tliou shalt utter 
loud cries. 

Saith Kabir, why did I not remember God before ? 

Tlie condition of one who Ubx5 God, 

ir 

My woman's ha&ri palpitateth and tremblcth ; 

I know not how my Spouse will treat me. 

The nigiif liafh passed away ; let not the days also pass.^ 

Tlie blAck flies hAvt gone; tlie cranes have now 

taken their place,® 

^ Thai my youth iias passed, lei not my old age also in vain 

^ My dark hair has cbajiged lo grey, 

iSk«. Vr n 



226 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


As water will not remain in a frail vessel,^ 

So the soul departeth when the body bafJi faded« 

1 adorn myself like a young virgin, 

But how can 1 enjoy dalliance without my Spouse ? 

My arm is pained from driving a^vay the crows. 

Saith Kabir, this tale is at an eud>^ 

A dialogue between the soul and the messengers 
of Death. He who feels God's love need^ have no 
apprehensioiiH 

III 

Thy stewai^d&hip being ended, thou must' give thine 
account^ 

Wlien the cruel messengers of Death come to take thee, 
Th&y wiil ask what thou hast earned, and where thou 
hast squandered it i 

Th^ mil th&c, ' Come quickly> thou art summoned 
to court; 

"The warrant of God'^ court hath come for thec.^ 

Thou shalt implore them, and * / hav^ to colkd some 
outstandings in the viUagCj 

^And I shall adjust my accounts to-night ; 

' I Will also pay you something for your expenses ; * 

^At daw^ji we sliall pray at an inn on £hc road \'^ 

Blestj blest is he and fortunate is his lot, 

Wiio feeleth God's lo\'e by association with the saints. 
That man shall ever be happy in this world and the next; 
He hath wo3v the priceless frize of human birth. 

He who while awake to ike world is asleep lo Cod^ hath 
lost tliat birth; 

The property and wealth he hath accumulated shall 
become another's, 

Saith Kahiit that man Iiath gone astray, 

^ A veaEjel mEideof clay nol hardened by firc^ 

® That is, life is at an end. 

^ As a bribe lt> tbe messengers of Death to allow the soul lime lo 
answer the warrant- 

^ That is, give me time to-d^y, and wt shak be well on our journey 
early to-norrow morning. 

* Aho trai:i slated— He who after being awakened falleth a&leep- 



KABIR^S HYMNS 227 

Who forgetting tlie Bridegroom hath mixed himself up 
\vith things of clay. 

When avarice only departs with life and there is 
no thought of God, human birth is m vain. 

IV 

The eyes grow weary of seeing, the ears grow weary of 
hearings this lair body groweth weary. 

When old age urgeth thee, all thy senses grow weary; 
d&sire for wealth alone 'wearieth not. 

0 foolish man, thou hast not obtained divine knowledge 
and meditation ; 

Tliou hast lost thy huffmn birth m vain. 

O mortal, serve God as long as there is breatli in fhy 
body; 

Even though thy body perish, let not thy love for Him 
perish ; dwell thou at His feet. 

He in whose heart God hatli implanted His Word hath 
ceased to thirst. 

Let tiie comprehension of God^s will be thy game of 
chaupar^ and the conquest of thy heart the throwing of 
the dice. 

Tliey who know and w^orship God shall not perish., 

Saith Kabir, they who know how to throw such dice 
shall never lose their game, 

Kabir has triumphed over his evil passions, his 
senses, and death itself. 

V 

Thera are five kings of one fortress; the whole five ask 
lor revenue ^— 

1 have not tilled land beloi^ging to any of them ; it 
would be hard on me to pay a for nothing. 

O God's people, the village accountant^ continually 
worried me, 

^ Jl^a froni a ploiigh—so much revenue Jevfed oneveiy pJough. 

The iive tvll jjassions claim iheir shirks, 

2 Here meatit for dcaih. 

Q 2 



228 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


But I raised my arms aloft^ complained to my guru* and 
he saved me. 

Nine surveyors ^ and ten judges ^ go on ioutf and will not 
allow the agriculturists a to live ; 

Tliey measute not with a full tape, and tliey take many 
bribes. 

The one Being who is contained in the seventy-two 
chambers of tJie body hath written oflE my account ; 

I have searched Dharmraj’s office, and ^nd I owe him 
not an atom. 

Let no one revile the saints ; the saints and God are one, 

Snith Kabir, I have obtained that Guru whose name is 
Bibeko.^ 

Death triumphs over all except God's sincere 
worshippers- 

BjtAWAL 

. I 

This world is like a show ; none may remain hei e ; 

Proceed the straight way, otherwise thou shalt be severely 
buffeted. 

Children, the old, iind the young, 0 my brethren, shall 
all be taken away by Death. 

God hath made poor man like a mouse ; Death like a cat 
eateth him up ; 

He payeth no regard to ricli or poor ; 

He destroyeth kings equally with their subjects—so 
miglity is Death ! 

They who please God Hh worshippers, and theirs 

is a special case ; 

They neither conae nor go:* tlicy never die; God is 
with them. 

Know in your hearts tJiat by forsaking son, wife, wealth, 
and property which arc pcri:>kablc, 

1 The nine gates of the body. 

® The organs of action and perception. 

* Virtues or good quaiiiteSd 

^ Gcxi who makes one out of two v-ho joinEi the 

soul of man HiFusein 

® They do noi suffer transmigration. 



KABIR^S HYMNS zzq 

Saith Kabir* you shtJl meet tbe Lord; hear this, O ye 
saints, 

Kabir is frenzied with devotion. 

11 

I am not skiEed in book knowledge, nor do T understand 
controversy; 

1 have grown mad reciting and hearing God's praises. 

O father, I am mad ; tlie w\\ol^ world is sane ; I am 
mad; 

I am ruined ; let not others be ruined likewise ; 

1 have not grown mad of mine own will; God Jiath 
made me mad— 

The true guru hath dispelled my doubts— 

I am rained, and have lost my intellect ; 

Let nobody be led astray in doubts like mine* 

He who knjoweth not himself is mad; 

When one knoweth himself he knowetli the one God. 

He who is not intoxicated wUh divine lotfe in this human 
birth shall never be so. 

Saith Kabir^ I am dyed with the dye of God.^ 

Kabir's solf-abasement. 

Ill 

Though man leave his home for the forest region and 
gather tubers to live on. 

His sinful and evil mind even then abandoneth not mis¬ 
deeds. 

How shall 1 be saved ? how cross over the great terrible 
ocean ? 

Preserve me^ preserve me, O God; 1 Thy slave have 
e&me io Thine asylum. 

The desire to gratify my evil passions forsaketh me not ; 

Though I make many efforts to guard myself against them, 

1 am entangled in them again and again. 

My life hath passed--youth and old age—no good have 
I done ; 


^ 1 am inibUKt wiili God's love. 


S30 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

This priceless human life attached itself to a kauri and 
became like it. 

Saith Kabir^ 0 my God, Thou art contained in ever^?- 
thing; 

There is none so merciful as Thou^ none so sinful as 1. 

The superiority of God's saint. 

V 

Tliere is no king equal to God ; 

All the kings of this world are only for four days, they 
make false display.^ 

Why should the slave of Him who overshadowcth the 
three worlds waver ? ^ 

Who can lay hands on him when one cannot even speak 
with due respect before him ? 

O thoughtless and foolish mind of mine, tlvink upon Gifd, 
and the unbeaten music of ecstasy shah pky for thee. 

Saith Kabir^ all my doubts and uncertainties are at an 
end I God hath favoured me as He did Dhni and Prahlad. 

Kabir depreciates himself. 

VI 

Preseive me, O God^ though I have ofiended Thee, 

I have not practised humility, the duties of my re!igion> 
repetition of Thy name, or worship ; T am proud, I 
my turban on side of my head. 

Believing this body immortal 1 have pampered the frail 
and perishable vessel; 

I have forgotten Him who made and favoured me, and 
I have attached myself to strangers. 

I am Tliy house-breaker and not Thy saint ; T fall at 
Thy feet for protection— 

Saith Kabir, heaj^ this supplication ; send me not intelli¬ 
gence of death 

^ Also iraTi?iki-ed—I'hey make a false claim to gfeauies^r. 

® I’hat i&, allow hts mind to wander from God- 

^ Holy men are not led ofT in triumph by Death; they become 
iiiseneibiy blended with God. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


231 


An appeal to God. 

VIT 

0 God, I stand wearied at Thy court; 

Who but Thee careth for me? open Thy door and show 
Thyself imto me. 

Thou art my wealth, O Master; Thou art generous; 
Thou art lavislr; I hear with mine ears Thy great praise, 

Of whom sliall T beg ? I see every one poor ; from Thee 
alouc 1 obtain salvation. 

Thou didst confer endless favour on Jaidev, Namdev, and 
the Brahman Sudama. 

Saith Kabir, Tliou art all powerful, Thou art generous, 
Thou bestowest the four blessings without delay. 

The following was addressed to a Jogi :— 

VIII 

Thou dependest on a club, earrings, and patched coat; 

In error thou wanderest in a /ogf’s garb, 

Put away thy devotional attitudes and thy suspension 
of breath; 

Abandon deception, and ever worgJdp God, O fool. 

The •weaUh thou beggest for, the three worlds Iiave en* 
joyed.* 

Saith Kabir, God is the oidy Jogi in the world.^ 

Kabir mourns his lukewarmness and condemns 
all worldly things. 

IX 

0 Sovereign of the world, Lord of tlie earth, mammon 
hath caused me to forget Thy feet. 

Even a little affection for Thee is not fdt by Thy slave ; 
wliat shall Thy poor slave do ? 

Curse on this body, curse on this wealth, curse on these 
worldly things, a double curse on tins perislmble intdket 
and nirdevsfanding J 

O tjian, firmly restrain tlris worldly love ; if thou subju¬ 
gate it, thou sbait be saved.'* 

* That IS, it is the lead ings of the three worlds. 

® Also translated—He who is united with God is the real Jogi. 

^ Also translated—-Thou shalt be released from thine entanglements. 



232 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

What availeth agriculture ? what commerce ? false is 
worldly pride. 

Saith Kabir, they who ft&cHse such things are ultimately 
ruiiied, and death cometh to them at last. 

The so^il’s dependence is on God, not on the 
perishable body. 

X 

The body is a lake in which a peerless lotus ^ bloometh ; 

The Stiprrejue Being who hath neither outline nor form, 
the Primal Lights is within iL 

O my soul, worship ihii God> abandon doubt; God is 
the life of the world. 

The sml is not seen either coming or goings a;S i$ the body. 

Where the is bom^ there it perisheth ^ like the leaves 
of the water lily. 

Tliey who knowing the world to be transitory abandon 
it^ are happy in the contemplation of God. 

Saith Kabitj worship God in thy heart. 

During life Kabir was absorbed in God as the 
sound of a bronze vessel is absorbed in it when 
broken. 

XI 

Since my attention is fixed on God, I no longa: suspect 
that I shall suffer transmigration ; ^ 

Even in life 1 am absorbed in the Infinite; tlie guru's 
instruct ion hath awakened me. 

The sound which is produced from bronze blendeth again 
with 5t; 

’Wrhen the bronge is broken, O Pandit, where will the 
sound be ? 

At the union of the three breaths^ in the brmn I have 
seen Him who is awake in every hearty 

^ The heart. 

® That is^ the body i& resolved into the elements whence in sprang* 

^ LiteraJjj—my doubts regarding birth and death have departed. 

^ Of the ieft and right nostrils ^nd ihetr junctionn Trfkutt tsndAi 
also includes the knower; the means of knowledge; 

and the subject of knowledge. Devout men endeavour to uniie 
all three- 



KABIR^S HYMNS 233 

And now such midcrstanding hath entered m,y heart that 
1 have abandoned the worlir 

Wlien I knew myself, my light was blended with 
light— 

Saith Kabir, I now know God and my mind is satisfied. 

The holy man will not waver but be everywhere 

XII 

0 God, why siionld that man waver in whose heart abid& 
Thy lotus feet ? 

Believe that ail liappin^s and the nine treasures are his 
who tranquilly repeateth God's praises. 

When God openeth the hard knot^^ man shall be wise 
enough to behold Him in e^^erything. 

He who ever avoidetli worldly love and weigheth his 
lieart in the scale medilAlimt, 

Shall be happy wherever lie goetli^ O Lordj and worldly 
love shall not sway him. 

Saith Kabir, my heart is happy aince it hath been absorbed 
in God's love. 

An inquirer asked Kabir with whom one should 
converse. The following his reply 

Gaund 

I 

When thou mectest a saint, ha\'e some conversation with 
him; 

When tliou meetest a man who is not a saint^ remain 
silenL 

Kiibir asJard again — 

0 father, if 1 speak what shah I speak about ? 

For instance, ' Continue to repeat God's name,^ 

They who talk to saints confer advantage on others; 

They who talk to fools talk in vain. 



^ The dists^ce beLiwn God and the soul. 



234 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

By incessant taUdiig wi^ sm increaseth; 

If 1 speak not to them^ what hai'm can th^ wretches 
do me ? ^ 

Saith Kabir, an empty vessel soundeth ; 

When it is full it never giveth forth a sound. 

Man's dead body is much more worthless than 
that of a beast, and consequently an object of con¬ 
tempt, 

ir 

When a man dieth he is of no use ; 

When a beast dieth he is of ten uses. 

Wliat do I know regarding my fate ; 

Wliat do I know^ 0 sit ? 

bones burn like a heap of fire^wood ; 

His bair bumeth like a bundle of grass. 

Saitli Kabir, man only awaketh 

When the dub of Death toiicheth his head. 


God is every^vhere, even in the acts which attach 
to the soul 


III 


God abideth in the heaven above, in the earth beneath, 
■and in every direction. 

The Supreme Being is ever the root of joy; tlie body 
may perish, but God shall not, 

I am anxious to kn&w 

Whence the soul comeih and whither it goeth. 

Five dements combined form the body; out of what 
were the elements formed ? 

Thou sayest that the soul is bound by its acts; who 
gave life to the acts ? 

The body is contained in God, God in the body; He is 
uninterruptedly in, all things. 

Saith KabiT, I will net abandon God's name, come 
what may. 


^ Also Iran slated—’If I talk net /p haw can I practi&e dis- 

ctimLnation ? 



KABIRS HYMNS 

The sou] described by negatives. 


235 


V 

Som^ody ask&d Kabir :— 

What is timt whose limit hath never been found, 

Which dwelleth within the temple of the body ? 

Kabir replud—It is neither man nor deofiigod ; 

It is not a Jati or a worshipper of Shiv ; 

It is not a Jogi or an Audhut ; 

It ]iath no mother, nor is it any one's son ; 

It is not a householder or an anchoret i 
It is not a king or a beggar ; 

It hath neither a body nor a drop of blood ; 

It is not a Brahman or a Khatri ; 

It is not an ascetic or a shaikh ; 

It is not born, nor is it observed to die ; 

Whoever weepeth for its death 
Shah lose his honour.^ 

By tlie favour of tlie gum, I have ftmnd the sleep way ; 
Birth and death have both been erased foi’ me^ 

Saith Kabir, this sotU is a part of God, 

As ink cannot be erased from paper.^ 

Kabiris wife thus addressed him on the neglect 
of his trade and his attentions to saints. 

VI 

Thy threads are broken, thy size is at an end. 

Thy reeds shine over the door. 

Thy poor brush hath gone to pieces— 

May deatli light on this kliaven fellow’s head ! 

This shaven fellow hath lost all his property. 

I am persecuted by those fakirs coming and going,® 

* Shall only excite contempt. 

^ AIho tratiylalcd—His praise caritiot be erasert from pap^r; that 
js^ His praise is co-nUnuaily written and ehal] be pettnanent. 

^ I'bia and ihe two preceding lines are also (ranslated— 

Death bath lighted on thefie fibaven fellows' headf^. 

They have caused us to lo^e ail our property. 

There is no end to their coming or goingn 



2^6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

KAbiT never speaketh ol hh beam or his shuttle ; 
His mi ad is only concerned with the name of God. 

His daughter and sons have nothing to eat; 

Men with shaven heads are crammed night and day ; 
One or two are in the hoase^ and one or two on the way. 
We have on]y a pallet on ihc ground; they get a bed to 
sleep 

They rub their heads with s&lisfadion and carry books in 
their waist-^bands ; 

We get parched pulse, they bread to catr 
The shaven-heads and my shaven-headed husband have 
hecome aU one. 

Kabir replidhr—The&^ shaven-heads are the support of 
the drowning, 

Hear^ 0 blind misguided Loi, 

Kabir hath taken the pi-otoction of these shaven-headSn 

When man dies, mammon^ \vho is described, 
weeps not for him. 

VII 

Wlieai the husband dieth, his wife weepeth not.^ 

She ftndeth another protector ; 

And when that protector also dieth. 

Hell awaiteth him Ihmigh he have enjoyed pleasures here. 
One woman * alone is dear to the world ; 

She is the wife of all sentient heings. 

With a necklace on her neck she looketh beautiful; 

She pleaseth the world, but is Jmieful as poison to the 
holy. 

Adorning herself she either sitteth like an abandonad 
woman^ 

Or the wretch wandereth about accursed of the saints. 
When the saints hee from her, she pursueth them; 

But, hy the favour of the guru, she fear eth punishment. 
She is the body and soul of the infidel; 

Her dreadful witches eye falleth on me. 

^ Wlien man dieih^ hig weallh dneis not weep for him. 

® Maya^ She never beeotnes ^ ’widow, hence ihe title 


KABIH^S HYMNS 


237 


When the merciful holy gum met me, 

I becsime wdt acquainted witli her secrets 
Saith Kabir, I have now turned her out, 

And she hath attached herself to the skirt of the world. 

A further description of mammon. 

vin 

The guest cometh and departetJi hungry 
From the house which hath no wealth. 

Tlie guest loseth patience, 

And the host is blamed because he hatli not means io 
cjilcrtain him. 

Hail to the woman who hath turned the heads 
Of vciy holy rnsn and penitents high and low! 

She is a miser^s daughter ; 

Rejecting God*s worshippers site sleepeth witli everyt>ody. 
At Iasi standing at the saints^ door, 

She saith, I have sought your protection, save me!' 

The woman is very beautiful; 

Her ornaments tinkle vn her feet; 

As long as man is alive she attaclicth herself to him ; 
When he dieth she quickly departeth without waiting for 
her shoes. 

Tlie woman hatj] conquered the three worlds ; 

She hath made the eighteen Purans and the places of 
pilgrimage love her; 

She hath pierced tk& hmrts of Brahma, Vislinu, and Shiv, 
And infatuated great kings and sovereigns. 

There are no bounds to the woman ; 

She is in eollusion with the five evil passions. 

Wliero the vessels of the five evil passions burst, 

Saith Kabir, 1 was delivered thence by the favour of the 
guru. 

Without a guru luaii must fall and perish. 

IX 

If the rafters be taken from a house, the roof will fall; 

So witli out God^s name how cun man be saved ? 

^ And was \hus the beaer able io guard against her. 



238 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

As water will not remain without a vessel, 

So without a rdigious guide man shall go to hell 
Burn him who thinketh not on God, 

Bui whose mind is ever absorbed in the field of his body. 
As Avithout a ploughman land cannot be tilled. 

As svithont a thread jewels cannot be strung, 

And as without a loop clothes cannot he fastened, 

So witliout a liqly guide man shall go to hell. 

As a child cannot be bom without a father and mother* 
As clothes cannot be washed wRtiout water. 

As one cannot ride without an equipage. 

As without music tl^ere cannot be dancing* 

So without a guru mm c&nnol reach God*s court* 

As the bad woman leaving her husband looketli for an¬ 
other, thus eager should man be to obtain a guru. 

SaiiJi .ILabir, do one thing—■ 

Become holy and thou shalt not die again. 

The following hymn was a reply to some one who 
had addressed vile abuse to Kabir and called him 
a pander, a dancer, a street-walker, and a tliief:—^ 

X 

Is he a pander ^ who cliasteJieth his heart ? 

He who chasteneth his heart shall escape from death. 
The pander who thoroughly cliasteiietli his heait. and 
applieth to it the touch-stone of iove. 

Shall obtain complete deliverance. 

Whom do you call a pander, O people ? 

iln everything that is spoken discrimination should b$ used. 

Is he a dancer who dancetl^ with his mind. 

Who is not satisfied with falsehood, who is pleased with 
truth, 

And who beateth time lehlh his heart in the presence of God ? 
(jod, whose mind is pure, preserveth such a dancer.^ 

^ as a noun is a pander and aa a verb to beat or cliasten. 

There is a play on the word in the original h was applied to Kabir, 
because when hia daughter was vbjliiig hiniy he allowed a strange man 
shelter in hia house. 

“ Also translated—G.od stead ieth the mind of stioh a dancer. 


KABIR^S HYMNS 


^39 


Is he a street-walk^ who sweepeth the market-plaot;,^ 
And iighteth up tlie five wicks ? ^ 

I accept as my gum that street-walker 
WEio emhi-aceth the service of the lord of the nine con¬ 
tinents.® 

Is he a thief who is not envious^ 

Who uttereth God's name and curbetli his senses ? 

Saith Kabir^ blessings on my divine guru, 

WJ^o po&sesaeth all sneh qualities and who is vary hand¬ 
some and clever. 

The following is an encomium on the staff of 
life 

XI 

Hailj O God^ hails O divine guru [ . 

Hail to the com by wiiich tlic hearts of the litmgry rejoice ! 
Hail to that saint who rcaliaeth this ! 

He shall meet God. 

Corn cometh from the Primal Being- 
Repeat God's name with the relish of corn. 

Praise His name, praise His corn ; 

With water pleasant is its taste. 

He who abstainefh from corn,^ 

Shall lose his honour in the three worlds.* 

She® who aha-iidotietli com and practiseth hypoerby, 

Is neither a wife nor a widow/ 

Tliey who publicly boast that tliey live on milk. 

Secretly eat a whole five sers of com. 

Without corn no one is happy ■ 

Abandon com and you sJniH not meet God. 

Saith Kabir, sucli is what I think ; 

Blessings on that com by which man loveth his God ! 

^ Tha.1 is, cleanses his heart. 

® Illumines his five seiistii. This is also Liunslated—Who 
a^monisheih his five evil pusatons. 

^ Also transtailed—'Who knowerh the nine forms of devotion to God. 

^ As some asceiics do. 

* Because he praeiises hypocrisy* 

* The feminine gender^ is umtal, for man in general. 

^ Is neither a worfdly person nor an anchoret. 



240 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The following was addressed to a Jogi who en¬ 
deavour ed to induce Kahir to drink wine. 

Ramkali 

I 

Make thy body the vat, the guru's instruction thy molasses; 

Cut lip avarice^ lust, wrath, pride, and envy iis thy kikar 
bark ; thus mix thy yeast. 

I5 there any saint, in whose lieart composure and happi¬ 
ness dwell, to whom I may offer my devotion and penance 
as commission fot mis smcA wiite ? 

I will my sotd and body for one drop of the wine 
which tliat vat produceth. 

I have made the fourteen worlds my furnace, and heated 
it witli the fire of divine knowledge ; ^ 

I have sealed! the still with the gentle sound of Godh 
mrne, and plastered it witli what yiddeth mental happiness. 

Pilgrimage, fasting, daily religions ceremonies, purifica¬ 
tions^ and austerities at eclipses of the sun and moon I 
would pledge for thal ledne. 

Make meditation tivy cup, God's ambrosial name the pure 
juice, and drink that elixir; 

From such a siiil a veiy pure trickling stream ever issueth, 
and the soul is delighted tlierewith. 

Saith Kabir, ail other wines are insipid; this is the true 
elixir. 

On the same subject. 

II 

Make divine knowledge thy molasses, meditation thy 
bassia flowers, and the fear of God in thy heart tJiy furnace : 

The drinker wlio is absorbed in God by means of the 
breath of five sukhmana imbibetli such wim. 

O J ogi, my mind is intoxicated— 

Wlien that wine ascendeth to the brain man relisheth no 
otlier; ® there is then light in the three worlds. 

^ I have ulten the llgU of divine knowledge to guide- me. 

s Also Iran slated—Those who are iinoxiealed with c^laU'al wine 
never la&te wine. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 241 

Joinbg God and the soul I have prepared a furnace and 
drunk the elixir i 

I have burnt lust and wtatb as firewood ^ and escaped 
from worldliness. 

The light of divine knowledge appeared to me when I 
met my true pxru and obtained understanding- ’ 

The slave Kabir is intoxicated with that wine, and will 
never abstain therefrom.^ 

Kabir wa.s likened to a Kotwal for his severity to 
the wicked, and to a dog for his barking. He accepted 
both imputations, 

IV 

I honour the saints and I punish the wicked ; this is my 
court'!) otise,® 

1 shampoo TJiy feet, 0 God, day and night; 1 turn my 
hair into a chanri and w^ave it over Thee. 

I a)n the dog at Tiiy court; 

I bark in front of it® putting forwaid my snout. 

In a former birth 1 was Tliy servant ; £hat position I 
cannot now resign. 

The gentle order of Tliy court was branded on my fore¬ 
head.'* 

They who bear such brand fight bravely in battle; they 
who bear it not flee away. 

He who is holy knoweth how to serve God, and God 
putteth him into His treasury/ 

Tn the house of the body is the chamber of ik'^ hearty which 
becomcih the most precious chamber of all when filled \dth 
meditation on God. 

The guru hath granted God's n^me, the Real Things to 
Ivabir, saying, ' Take it and guard it' ; 

Kabir hath offered it to the world, but only he who was 
so destined receivefh it— 

^ AJi'O Uanslakd—-ihat ivine whowL^ intoxication shall never subsider 

2 Tlie XoLwa] in modeni unnes is a [jolice-offlcer, btit in the time of 
KaJnr the Kotwal Tvas Ji magistraie police-officer com bin eel, 

* Tliat is, I pray lo Thee. 

* Thai isj I was brandei] as Tby slave in a fomner hirthF 

^ Because lie is a genuine and noi a counLerfeie coin. 

R 


VL 



343 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Abiding is the mairied state of her who Iiath found the 
immorfal elrar. 

The Brahman trusts not to God but to the Veds 
and the Gayatri, and hence he shall be lost. 

V 

Why sbouldst thou, O Braliman, forget Him from whose 
mouth the Veds and the Gayatri issued ? 

WTiy shouldst not thou, O Pandit, utter the name of 
God, whose feet every one toucheth ? 

0 my Brahman, why not repeat God's name ? 

If thou utter not His name, 0 Pandit, thou shalt be 
cast into hell, 

I Thou calkst thyself ejcalted, yet thou eatest in the houses 
of the low, and Meat thy belly by the exaction of abns.^ 

On the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the half month 
thou devisest tales and beggest, but even with a lamp in 
thy hand thou shalt fall into the pit. 

Thou art a Brahman, 1 am a weaver of Banaras; how 
can I be a match for thee ? 

By repeating the name of God I have been saved, while 
thou, 0 Pandit, shalt be lost by trusting to the Veds. 

A mystic hymn in which God is represented under 
the allegory of a tree. 

VI 

There is one tree ; ® it hath endless branches guid shoots ; 
its blossoms * and leaves * are filled with nectar.* 

This mrld is a garden * of ambrosia ; God who is perfect 
hath created it. 

The few holy men in whose hearts the light of God shineth, 

Know the story of my beloved sovereign God. 

One bumble-bee f intoxicated with the juice of the flowers 

^ Literally— by obitinate acts, by ihreatenlnt suiride, &c, 

* God. » Saints, 

* The rest of aeiuietil beings. 5 God's name. 

® Iq which the branches and ^ools have been planted. 

" The Searcher for God. 





KABIR'S HYMNS 343 

hath fixed his mind within the twelve petfils of the lotus 
of the heart; 

He then raising his breath to the lotus of sixteen petals 
in his brain gaineth the ecstatic truit thereof^^ 

Another tree ® produced in the silent vacuum; it 
dried up the waters of the earth ; ® 

Saith Kabir* 1 am a servant ol those who have seen that 
treon* 

The following was addressed to a Jogi : — 

vn 

Make silence thine earrings> mercy thy wallet^ and medi¬ 
tation thy cup; 

Stitch thy body for thy patched coat, and make the 
Name thy support. 

0 Jogi, practise such Jog 

Th^t thou mayest while enjoying Ihs world perform thy 
devotion, penance, and austerities under the giiru^s instrnc- 
tion. 

Make the knowledge of God the ashes thou smearest on 
thy body,^ aj^d meditation thy liorn \ 

Abandoning the world, roam in the city of the body, and 
play thy heart as a kinguri ; 

Plant the five virtues in thy heart so that thy contem¬ 
plation may be undisturbed by the world. 

Saith Kabir, liear, O saints, make honesty and mercy 
your garden. 

^ There is siipfKiged to be a lotus irith twelve petals in the heart. 
Kabir means that his mind as a bumble-bee has entered ihaL loLus. 
There also supposed to be another lotus in the brain which 
has sixteen pelu]^ and to this again his mind ascends. 

Olhers suppose that the numbers twelve and sixteen in the above 
lines mean the repelitbn of O&m esmitar numbers of times. 

^ This tree is divine knowledge which has its seat in the brainn 

^ It removed man's earthly desireSi 

^ In this hymn tree is aho said to mean the universej the bmuches 
and ehoois are the planets and s±ars^ the flowers ar-e the saints^ the 
leaves the rest of sentient beings. 

® Jogis smear aahes on their naked bodies as clothing or protection 
against the elements. 

ht 3 



244 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir in a fit of introspection and self-abasement 
addressed himself. 

VIII 

For what object wast tl’ioa born m the world, and what 
advantage hast thou gained from thy human birth ? 

Thou hast not applied thy mind even for a moment to 
Godj the FulfiUer of desires, tlie Vessel to take thee across 
the terrible ocean, 

O Godp such sinners are we. 

That we have never performed service for that Lord who 
gave us ouf souls and bodies. 

7he passion to possess others' wealth, children, and wives, 
and to slander and calumniate others hath not forsaken us. 

We suffer transmigration again and again ; this law is 
not broken. 

I have not wandered even for a moment to where the 
conversation of the saints of God is held. 

Libertines, thieves, panders, and drunkards—with them 
have I ever consorted. 

My possessions are lust, wrath, covetousness, pride, and 
envy. 

Mercy, honesty, ajid service to the guru have not com& 
io in my dreams. 

0 God, compassionate to the poor, merciful, dear to the 
saints. Remover oi fear, 

Prayeth Kabir, preserve Thine afflicted slave, 0 God, 
and I will perform Thy service. 

Rem ember God and do Him homage, 

IX 

Remember in thy heart the Being, 

By whose remembrance then shalt obtain the gate of 
deliverance, 

Go to heaven, and return not to this world. 

Play the trumpets in the bouse of the Fearless One, 

And the unbeaten strain shall ever fully resound for thee. 

Without remembering Him deliverance can never be 
obtained, 





KABIR^S HYMNS 


^45 


Heartily bow before the Beings 
By remembering whom none may refuse thee; 

Vh^o confeixeth salvation by which great loads of sin 
drop off^ 

And thy transmigration is at an end. 

Remember Him through whom thou enjoyest thyself, 
And an everburning ^ lamp shall be placed within 
tbeer— 

The lamp ® which rendereth the world immortal, 

And expelleth the poison of Inst and wrath^ 

Twine and wear on thy neck the rosary 
Of Him by remembering whom Thy salvation shall be 
obtained. 

Wear that rosarydoff it not, 

And by the favour of the guru thou shaft be saved. 
Remember the Beloved day and nigiit, 

And thou shalt have no regard for men ; 

Thou shalt sleep at home in silken bed-clothes^ 

And thy heart shall be gladdened by a pleasant coueb. 
Ever remember God in thy heart and sing His praises. 

By remembering Him thy troubles shall depart, 

And Maya affect thee not. 

From the true guru learn how to remember God ; 
Remember Him ever day and night. 

Standing or sitting, at every eKpiration and inspiration, 
Waking or sleeping, enjoy the sweets of remembering 
Him; 

By remembering God thou shalt be united with Him.^ 
Make the remembrance of God*s name thy support; 

Ey remembering Him no weight of sin sliaU oppress 
thee. 

Neither wrought nor spoken incantations can prevail with 

Him,^ 

Saith Kabir, who hath no limit. 

1 Liternlly—a lamp not fed with oil 
" Divine knowledge* 

® Also trjinsfated—Thou shalt obtain good fortune. 

* God is onlv moved by our remembering Him and repeating His 
name with devotion. 


246 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The condition of him who has put his passions 
under subjection. 

X 

He who hath captivated the captivatois^^ 

Shall obtain deliverance, and the guru sjiall pnt out the 
fire of his passions.® 

When I had thoroughly examined my heart, 

1 made my ablutions within it. 

To dwell in God, the Lord of life, is the best thing ; 
There is then no death, or birth, or decay. 

Turning away from mammon I restrained my mindt 
And I entered the region of God.^ 

I have pierced the serpent's 
And assuredly met God. 

Worldly love and mammon no more affect me; 

The sun hath restrained tire moon.-^ 

When 1 completely stopped my breath. 

The lute played spontaueously. 

Tlie preacher hath communicated this instruction ; 

Tlie hearer liath heard and treasured it in his heart. 

He who acteth according to it shall be saved, 

Saith Kabir verily. 

God is a luminous diamond whose light hlls crea¬ 
tion. 

XI 

The moon and sun are both forms of light , 

God the unequalled pervadeth their light. 

0 wise man, meditate 011 God 
In whose light creation is contained. 

Beholding God, the Diamond, I prostrate myself before 
Him. 

Saith Kabir, He is bright and y&l invisible. 

^ He who has puL his passLons under subjection^ 

3 These two lines are also trauEilaled— 

They who are attached to u-orldfy things fall into the neL of Deaths 
While they whose avarice the guru ejictinguisheth are delivered. 

^ Gagman —literally, the firmament—is a vord applied by Jogia {o 
the brahi or tenth gate of the body where God dwells, 

^ A snpposed passage for air through the spinal marrow lo the brain. 
^ The brain retains the brealbj and a state of exaltation supervenEf+ 


KABIR*S HYMNS 


247 

Some Hindus asked Kabir to give them instruc- 
tion^ upon which he composed the following :— 

XIT 

O world, be dert md wakeful; even while awake you 
axe being tobbed, my brethren. 

Even while the Veds, who are alert sentinels, look on. 
Death will take yon away. 

The fool, the blockliead, and the pagan think that the 
nim is a mango, and the mango a nim;^ 

That a ripe plantain-tree^ is but a prickly bushj and 
that the fruit of the coco-nut ^ is like the ripe fruit of the 
simmal. 

God is the sugar which hath been spilled in the dust; 
it cannot be picked up by the elephant, 

Saith Kabir^ renounce family, caste, and lineage, become 
an ant, and thou casist pick up and eat the sugar, 

A remonstrance to a Brahman for offering animal 
sacrifice to an idol. 

Maru 
I ■ 

O Pandit, what foUy meditatest thou ? 

Thou shalt be ruined with all thy family for not having 
repeated Goers luckless man. 

What availeth tliee to read the Veds and the Purans ? 
It is like loading a donkey with sartdal ferfutne he 

valui^h uoi\ 

Thou knowest not how^^^ r^^at God's name; how shalt 
thou be saved ? 

Thou takest life and deemest it religious ; tell me, my 
brother, what thou cailesf irreligious. 

Tito a makest thysdf out an excellent muni ; whom callest 
thou a butcher ? 

Mentally blind thou knowest not thyself; ^ 

^ They think good evil and evil good. I'he fruit of the nim is 
bliter^ of the mango sweet. 

^ God's name. ^ Association with saints. 

* That is, God who is iti thee. 


248 EHAGATS OF THE GHANTH SAHIB 

What shalt thou cause others to know ? 

Thou sellest knowledge for money, tliy life passetli in vain. 

Narad and Vyas declare^and thou mayest go and ask 
Shukdev aJso— 

Saith Kabir, too, by uttering the name of God ye shall 
be delivered ; otherwise ye shall perish, my brethren. 

It is the condition of the heart, not man’s garb 
or place of residence^ which produces happiness. 

II 

Unless you remove evil from 3?Qur hearts, how sJiall you 
find God by dwelling in the forest ? 

They who deem their own homes equal to the forest are 
perfect among men. 

You shall obtain true happiness, 

If you lovingly repeat ihs nam^ of the Life af ihe worM. 

WTiat avail it/eofing matted hair, smearing yourselves with 
ashes, and dwelling in caves ? 

He who hath conquered his own heart hatli conquered 
the world, because he is free from the deadly sins. 

AH people use eye-wash, but there is a difference in their 
blandishments. 

The eyes to which the surma of divine knowledge is 
applied, are acceptable to God. 

Saith Kabir, I now know God ; the gum hath explained 
divine knowledge to mo ; 

I have met God who dw'elleth in the heart; my mind 
shall now no more wander. 

The folio witig was addressed to a Jogi whom Kabir 
found begging and boasting that he had obtained 
all spiritual wealth and perfection :— 

III 

What Lath he who hath obtained spiritual wealth and 
supernatural power to do with any one ? 

What shall I say regarding thy language ? I am much 
ashamed to speak to thee. 

Ho who hath obtained God, ' 


KABIE’S HYMNS 


249 


Wandercth not from door to door. 

This fidso world greatly bumeth fvr Jtiealih in the hope 
of using it for a few days. 

Whosoever drinketh God’s water shall not be thirsty 
again; 

He who knoweth God by the favour of the gum abandoneth 
all worldly desires. 

When the heart is withdrawn from- the world, the True 
One appeareth everywhere. 

Tlie name of God saveth liim who hatli tasted its savour. 

Saifh Kabir, 1 have become gold, my doubts have fled, 
and 1 have crossed the ocean, 

It was made a reproach to Kabir that he being 
a weaver dared preach to men of high caste. Upon 
this he preached equality of all Tnen. 


IV 

As the bubbles of the rirer are accoiuitod water imd blend 
with the water of the ocearij 

So tJiE man hokdh on all with ^ii equal eye* shall 
become pure and blend vnth the Iniifiiie. 

Why ^ould I return to this imrld ? 

Transmigration taketh place by God's order ; he who 
obeyeth it shall blend with Him. 

"Wlien this fabric of five elements perisheth, my wandering 
shall be at an end. 

Forswearing sects, I look on all as equal and meditate on 
the one Name. 

I devote myself to and perform the duties which God 
assigned me. 

If God bestow' mercy on me, I shall be absorbed in Him 
under the instruction of my gum. 

He who in life is in death, and who from death ^ retumeth 
to life shall not be born again- 

Saitb Kabir, lie who is permeated with thtj Name futeth 
his love on God. 


^ being dead ioward God. 




250 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir in a vi^on beheld God and rushed to eirt' 
brace Him, bnt was repulsed. The following was 
composed on fhe occasion :— 

V 

If Thou repulse me, then show me th^ wayot deliverance ■ 

One God in many formSj Thou art contained in every¬ 
thing s why dost Thou now illude me ? 

0 Godj whither dost Thou take me for salvation ? 

1 ask Thee where Thou wilt give me salvation and ot 
what degree,^ seeing that by Tliy favour I Jiave already 
obtained it ? 

I called Thee my fu^re saviour until T knew the reality ; ^ 

I have now become pure in hearty saith Kabir, and my 
mind is happy, 

Kabir is said to have uttered the following to 
a man whom he found committing an act of im¬ 
morality. 

VI 

Rawan had to leave the golden fortress and strongholds 
whicli he Iiad made—■ 

0 man, why actest thou as it pleaseth thyself ? 

When Death cometli and catcheth thee by the hair* only 
God's name will save thee. 

Death and life are the work of God ; this deceitful world 
is only an entanglement ; 

Saith Kabirj they wlio have the elixir of God in their 
hearts shall ultitnateJy be saved. 

The body likened to a village, the soul to its 
headman, and the senses to its agriculturists. 

VII 

The body is a ^ullage; the soul placed therein is its 
headman ; five husbandmen dw^ell in. it^ 

The senses—eyes, nose, ear^ tongue, and touch—which 
obey not iny orders.' 

^ Tbere are four degrees of salvation—heaven ; being 

near God ; sarufi^ assuming God^s form ; sa)fu;\ being absorbed in Godi 

^ That Thou had&t already saved me. 




KABIR^S HYMNS 


25 ^ 


O father, I shall no longer dwU in tliis village; 

The accountants cahed Chitr and Gupt ask for an accotint 
of every moment of mine* 

So when Dharmraj calleth for my account, there will 
be a heavy balance against me. 

The five husbandmen \vill then have all fled, and the 
bailiffs will arrest the soul. 

Saith Kabir, hear, 0 holy men, settle your accounts on 
t}ie field ’ 1 

Pardon for this once thy slave, so that he may not have 
to return to this terrible ocean. 

A Bairagi who had come from Dwaraka told 
Kabir he had seen God there, and he asked him to 
go there too, and he would also see God, Upon 
this the following colloquy occurred. 

VlII 

O Bairagi, no one hath seen the Fearless One; 

Can the Fearless One be obtained witlioul fearing Him ? 

^ Certainly not.’ ^ 

0 Bairagi> if were to see the Lord present, he would 
feel fear ; 

He who obeyeth God^s order is without fear—* Certainlyp’ 

O Bairagi, though all people are imbued with hypocrisy^ 

Practise it not tliou before God“* Certainly not.^ 

0 Bairagi, men set not covetousness aside; 

Egoism hath destroyed the body—' Certainly/ 

O Bairagi, the fire of care hath burnt the body. 

But thou shali escape from U if thou deaden tby feelings— 
' Certainly/ 

Without a true guru there can be no contempt of the 
world, 0 Bairagi, 

Even though everybody desire it—Certainly/ 

0 Bairagi, if it be God*s will, thou shalt meet the true 
guru, 

' That ts, while altvt\ The metaphor h derived from the practice 
ttfhich prevailed before British ruie of Eating i^ymenls in kind, 
Creditora^ and debtors' accounts were settled on the harvest field. 

^ In the Mliwa dialect AariAai means yee- 




252 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

And Shalt easily obtain God—‘ Certainly.* 

Saith Kabir, 0 Bairagi, addr$s$ one prayer to God, 

To take thee over the terrible ocean—•' Certainly.’ 

Krishan was one day going to visit Buryodhan, 
but he heard that Duryodhan vt^ then ’^holding 
court. Krisharij in order to avoid the regal oere- 
monial and entertainments connected therewith) re¬ 
mained the night with Vidur. Next day when 
Krishan and Duryodhan met, the latter upbraided 
him in a friendly manner for not having gone straight 
to him. The following is Krishan’s reply ;— 

IX 

O king, who would go to tliee ? 

I have seen such affection on Vidur’s jiart that the poor 
man pleaseth me. 

Beholding thine elephants, thou hast been lost in eiror 
and hast not recognised God. 

1 consider Vidur’s water as nectar in comparison with 
thy mUk. 

I got vegetables mtkoid condiment^ but to me they were 
equal to AfeV, and the night passed in Vidur*s singing 
God's praises. 

Kabir’s God is joyous and happy, and payeth no atten¬ 
tion to anybody’s caste. 


Sloks 

The following two sloks in the Rag Maru are 
attributed to Kabir. The battle referred to is 
P^liaps intended to represent man's struggle with 
his evil passions. Tliese are the only lines in the 
Granth Sahib relating to war. 

When the drums sound aloud, the conspicuous warriofs fall 
wounded;^ 

^ Also translated—(a) Aim is taten, and wounds are inflicted ; 
( i) When the guru's drum soundeth, the disciple, at whom It is aimed, 
is wounded. 




KABIR'S HYMNS 253 

The brave have entered the batUe-fleid ; now is the time 
for combat. 

Recognixe him as a hero who fighteth for the love of his- 
religion ; 

He may die cut in pieces, but vviJl never desert the battle- 
fi^d. 

The following was a sharp remonstrance addressed 
to some men of high rank. 

X 

You have forgotten your rdigion, 0 madmen ■ you have 
forgotten your religion. 

You fill your bellies, you sleep 3iTce beasts, you have lost 
your human births ; 

You have never associated with saints, but have adopted 
false occupations i 

You wander like dogs, pigs, and ravens ; 

You deem yourselves great and others small ; ^ 

I have seen y-ou going to liell in thought, word, and deed. 

The lustful, the wrathful, the deceitful, the dissemblers^^ 
and the idlers, 

Pass their time in doing evil and never remember God. 

Saith Kabir, fools, blockheads, and pagans reflect not; 

They know not God's name ; how shall they he saved ? 

Men should remember God and not be led astray 
by worldly pleasures. 

XI 

Remember God thou shalt repent it ; 

0 sinful soul, thou practisest avarice, but thou shalt 
depart to-day or tcn-moiTow. 

Through thine attachment to avarice and being led astray 
by mammon, thou hast wasted thy hfc. 

Be not proud, of fhy wealth and youth ; they dissolve 
like paper- 

^ Lhemlly—you deem j'oursclves vo^veis oEhers consonants. 

® Literally—actors. 



254 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

Wlien Death cometh and seizeth thee by the hair and 
knocketh thee down, on thEXt day shalt thou be powerless. 

Tirol! hast not remembered God, or worshipped Him, or 
shown mercy to His creatures, therefore shalt thon be 
smitten on the month. 

When Dharmraj asketh for thine account, what face shalt 
thou show him ? 

Saith Kabir, hear* ye good men* ye shall be saved in the 
company of the holy. 

The condition of hmi who has obtained salvation 
during life. 

Kedara 

I 

They who abandon praise as well as blame, who reject 
honour as well as dishonour. 

Who consider iron and gold the same > are the image of God— 

Few, 0 Lurdj are Thy servants 1 

They who abandon lust, wrath, covetousness^ and worldly 
love behold God's feet. 

What are called the qualities of impulse, ignorance, and 
goodness are all contained in Thy Maya. 

Only they who understand the fourth degree* have 
obtained the supreme position ; 

Tliey never entertaiir love for pilgrimages, fasting, or for 
the religious ceremonies, purifications, and austerities of ike 

By meditating on God, avarice* worldly love, and doubt 
depart ; 

The darkness of the mansion in w^hich the lamp of divins 
knowledge bumeth is dispelled ; 

Its owner abideth completely fearless* and his doubts have 
fled ■ saith Kabir, I am his slaved 

The saint deals in holiness and is thus emancipated 
during life, 

II 

Some deal in bronze and copper, others in cloves and 
betel-^nut ; 

^ Also translated—The slave Kabir saith. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 


S55 

The saints deal in God^s name ; that is my merchandise. 

0 dealers in the name of Gcd^ 

The priceless diamond hath come to handj, and worldly 
thoughts have fled. 

They whom the True One attached to truth, remain 
attached to it; truth is their occupation. 

They dispatched a load of the true thing, and it reached 
God the storekeeper. 

God is Himself the gem, the jewel, and the precious 
stone ; He is Himsdf the jeweller; 

He is in e^veIy direction immovable ; 

He setteth in motion ; 

Pie is a permanent dealer. 

0 make thy heart the oXj meditation the roadj fill 
thy sack with divine knowledge^ and load it on ox; 

Saith Kabir, hear, O saints, my goods have arrived at 
their destination. 

The following wdiS addressed to a Jogi who forti¬ 
fied himself for his austerities by potations of wine^ 

JII 

0 ignorant and stupid brawler,^ reverse thy breath and 
direct it to Ihy brain ; 

Then turn thy brain into a furnace, draw the nectareous 
stream, and them shaft become dimndy intoxicated. 

O brother, call upon God for assistance. 

O saints^ ever drink this wine so difficult to obtain, and 
your thirst shall easily be quenched. 

In the fear of God is love ; he who knoweth this shall 
obtain God’s elixir, my brother. 

Ambrosia is in every heart ; God giveth it to whom¬ 
soever He pleaseth. 

There is one city ; ^ it hath nine gates ; 

Restrain thy wandering ?wmii from issuing by them. 

After the exercise of the ira, pingla, and sukhmana, the 
tenth gate openeth and the mind becometh intoxicated. 

^ iTa/yyflr—al^o translated as if wriLlen a ’wine^ller, then 

a drunkard. ^ The body. 


* 



256 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTII SAHIB 

Wlien Ihe rouI obtaineth the fully fearl^sa dignity, suflEering 
IS at an end> saith Kabir deliberately. 

Turning from the way of the world I have obtained thig 
winSj a cup of which causeth dimne intoxication. 

Religious instruction addressed to a dissolute fop. 

IV 

Thou who art saturated with lust, wrath* and covetous¬ 
ness* knowest not the way of the One God. 

Tliine eyes are bursty thou seest nothing, thou art drowned 
evm without water. 

Why walkest thou so foppishly ? 

Thou ait a compound of bones, skin, and filtli, and 
saturated mth evil odour. 

Thou repeatest not God’s name ; in what doubts hast 
thou gone astray ? Beatli is not far from thee. 

Whatever efforts thou makest to preserve thy body, sliall 
it last when thy iorm of life is oomplete ? 

Notlnng resulteth from thine efforts ; what can any 
mortal do ? 

If it be God’s will, man shall meet a true gum and repeat 
the One name. 

Thou livest in a house of sand and puffest out thy body, 
O simpleton. 

Saith Kabir^ they^ however clever, wlio remember not 
God are lost. 

The following was addressed to the saroe person* 

V 

Crooked thy turban,^ crooked thy thou beginnest 
to eat betel; ^ 

Thou hast naught to do with the love and service of 
God ; thou sayest ^ I have business in court \ 

Thou hast forgotten God in thy pride; 

Ever gating on thy gold and thy very beautiful women 
thou deemesi them permanent; 

^ Thou ^^'CaiPCEl thy turban on the side of thy ]^ead like a fop. 

s Thou walkest foppislily. 

^ So as CO give a. rosy colour to thy lips. 








KABIR'S HYMNS 


257 

Thy life passeth aw^iy in covetousness, falsehood^ sin^ 
and great arrogance^ 

Saith Kabir^ Death wiU attack thee at last, O fooL 

Kabir reminds a worldly person of his death. 

VI 

Having beaten thy drum for four days^ tliou shalt depart. 
With all thine earnings, thy ready money, and thy bwtied 
treasures, thou shalt take nothing with thee. 

Thy dear wdfe will sit and weep in the portico ; thy 
mother mill go as far as the gate with thee ; 

All thy friends and relations will accompany thee to the 
burning-ground ; bul thy soul shall depart alone. 

Thou shalt not again behold thy sons, thy wealth, thy 
towns, and thy cities, 

Saith Kabir, why remember not God ? thy life is passing 
in vain, 

God^s name is Kabir^s sole property. 

Bhmko 

I 

The name of God is my wealth ■ 

I cannot tie it in a knot, or sell it for my livelihood. 

The Name ia my field, the Name is my garden ■ 

I Thy slave, 0 God, perform Thy service and seek Thy 
protection. 

Thy name is my wealth, Thy name my capital; 

I know none but Thee, 

Thy name is my kindred, Thy name my bretlireiit 
Thy name my asaociafes^ who wll assist me at the lust 
moment, 

Saith Kabir* 1 am a slave to him 

Whom God keepeth in the world, but i$ indififerunt to it. 

The foJlomng was addressed to a rich man who 
had offered Kabir money 

T1 

Naked thou camest and naked shalt thou dcpait; 

None shall remain —eticn kings or rulers, 

s 


UIKH, V'l 



2 SB ehagats of the granth sahie 

I have the sovereign God as my nine treasures ; 

Thou hast the love of property, women, and w'ealth ; 

But they did not come with thee, nor shall they go with 
thee. 

What availeth thee to have elephants tied at thy gate ? 
The fortress of Ceylon was made of gold, 

But what did the fool Rawan take with him ? 

Saith Kabir, meditate some good acts t 
The gambler shall depart with empty hands. 

God alone is pure. 

in 

Impure is Brahma, impure is Indar ; 

Impure is the sun and impure the moon. 

This world is defiled with impurity ; 

Pure is God alone who liath neither end nor limit. 
Impure are the gods of the worlds; 

Impure are nights, days, and months deot>t$d (o idolutry. 
Impure are pearls, impure are diamonds, 

Impure are wind, fire, and water; 

Impure are Shiv, Shankar, and Mahesh ; ^ 

Impure are Sidhs, Sadhiks, and those who wear religions 
garbs; 

Impure are Jogis, and Jangajns u'ith their matted hair ; 
Impure is the body with the soul— 

Saith Kabir, only those w'ho know God, 

Are pure and acceptable. 

The following was addressed to a hypocritical 
Muhammadan priest who had advised Kabir to 
make a pilgrimage to Makka. 

IV 

Make thy mind thy Kaaba, thy body its enclosing temple, 
Conscience * its prime teacher ; 

Thei-t^ 0 priest, call men to pray to that mosque 
Which hath ten gates. 

^ ^ Three names of Shiv. The Hindus say that there are eleven 
Shivs. 3 Li[ 5 f^]|y—[jij speaker. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 


^59 


Saci ifice ^ doubt, and malice ; 

Make patience thine utterance of the five prayers. 

The Hindus and the Musalmans have tlie same Lord; 
What can the Mulla, what can the Shaikh do for ? 
Saith Kabiij I have become mad ; 

Stealing my mind away fifom the world I have become 
blended with God. 

Some one repres^ented to Kabir that he was com¬ 
pletely spoiled by his religious exercises. The 
following liis reply — 

V 

When a stream is lost in the Ganges^ 

It becoineth as the Gangf^s itself; 

Kabir is similarly lost in God by invoking Him ; 

I have become as the True One and need not go elsewhere* 
The perfume of the s^uidal is communicated to other 
trees ; 

They then become as t!ie sandal itsell. 

When the pliilosophcr's stone is applied to copper. 

It becometh gold ; 

So Kabir having met the saint s. 

Hath become as God. 

The following was addressed to some Brahmans 
who had attributed Kabir's contempt for their 
religious ceremonies to madness. 

VI 

You wear tilaks on your fore!leads, carry rosaries in your 
hands, and p^l on scckirial dresses : 

People think that God is a plaything— 

If I am mad, 0 God, I am still Thine. 

How can people know my secret ? ^ 

1 gather no leaves ^ and I worship no idol; 

^ forruplioiii of die Arabic in the name of God, 

an eKpression used by Musalnians when elaughiering animals. 

- That is, the cause of my madness. 

^ To offer lo idols. 



26 o bhagats of the gkanth sahib 


Without devotion to God oih^r worship is fruitl^jss, 

I worship the True Guru^ and ever and ever propitiate 
Htm; 

For such service I ^all obtain happiness in His courtn 
People say Kabir is mad, 

But only God knoweth Kabir's secret. 

Kabir renounces both the Hindu and the Muham¬ 
madan priests. 

VII 

Turning away from th& ^orld I have forgotten both caste 
and lineage ; 

My weaving is in the infinite silence.^ 

I have now no quarrel with t^ny om ; 

I have given up both the Pandits and the Mulhis. 

I weave clotlies and I wear them myself ; 

Where / see no pride ^ there 1 sing God^s 

What the Pandits and the Mnllas prescribed tor me^ 

I have received no advantage from^ and have abandoned. 
My heart being pure ® I have seen the Lord ; 

Kabir having searched and searched himself, hath found 
God within him. 

Kabir when re]>roacbed with his poverty replied:— 

vni 

Nobody respecteth the poor man ; 

He may make hundreds of thousands of efforts^ but no 
one will heed him. 

If a poor man go to a rich man, 

Tlie latter, though opposite him, wtll turn Jus buck. 

If a rich man go to a poor man, 

TJie latter respecteth, ym, inviteth him ; 

Ycl the poor man and the rich man are brothers 
God's design^ cannot be set aside, 

Saith Kabif^ it is he who is poor, 

In whose heart the Name abideth not. 

^ III the renJing of God. ^ I'hat is, in Lhe gocleny of the satnls. 

^ Also iianslated—being freed from the world. 

^ In tnaking one poor and the other rich. 




KAFIR'S HYMNS 


261 


Worship God betimes. 

IX 

When man servetli the ^iru and worshippeth Godp 
It is only then fie really hath a huniEin body,^ 

Even the demigods * long for this body ; 

Therefore having obtained it, 

Worsliip God ; forget Him not ; 

That is the advantage of human birth. 

Before the disease of old age hath come upon theOj 
Before Death hath seised thy body, 

Before thy voice liatli grovvii weak, 

0 man, ^vo^ship God. 

If thou vvorship Him not now, wlien wilt thoxi, my 
brother ? 

When the end cometh thou canst not do so. 

Wn^atever tlioxi doest, it is best to do now; 

Otherwise thou slutlt nrit be saT,’edj and slialt afterwards 
repent. 

He is a worshipper whom God applieth to His worship; 
It is he who shall obtain the pure God. 

The doors of his understanding shaU open to him by 
meeting the guru, 

And he not return again by the way of the womb. 
Tliis is fhino opporluuify, this fhy time ; 

Look into thy heart and reflect m this. 

Saith Kabir, 0 man, whether thou win or lose, 

I have many times called out to tliee. 

In the following Kabir appears to mean that God 
resides in the brain, 

X 

The best knowledge abideth in the city of Shiv ; ^ 

Having obtained it there^ meditate upon God,^ 

^ I'hai 19, it is only ihen his human birrh L» profiiatile. 

* The demigoJs are proud, and do not praise Cod. They eano^ily 
□b(a[n delivernnce by being born in humau bodies. 

^ I’he brain or ten lb gate. 

^ Tins and the j^recfiding line are also iranslaK-d—Mcn of llje 
iugliest intellect laise their breaih to the brain ; 

Do thou meeting ihcm coniemplaie God, 



262 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


And thou shalt know this world iuid the next. 

Why shoidd I kill myself perlorming works of pride ? 

My attention is fixed cm the special pla.ee —ike brain ; 
The name of the Sovereign God is my divine knowledge. 
He who hath closed his sphincter ani,^ 

Hath placed the moon above the sun.^ 

At the western gate the sun is hot; * 

The breath then riseth to the brain from the spine. 

The western gate is dosed by a rock ■ ^ 

There is a window^ over that rock. 

Over the window is the tenth gate— 

Saith Kabir^ He who dwdldh there hath neitlier end nor 
limit 

Kabir giv^ his ideas of what a Mulla, a Qazi, 
and a superior of J ogis ought to be- 

XI 

He IE a MuUa who stniggleth with his hearty 

Who by the instnictioii of thegnru contendeth with Death, 

And cTusheth Death^s pride. 

Salutation ever to that MuUa ! 

God is present ; why describe Him as distant ? 

If thou restrain thy pugnacity^ thou shall obtain the 
Beautiful One, 

He is a Q-azi who pondereth on hi& body^ 

Who burneth it with divine fire, 

And alloweth not his seed to drop even in his dreams— 
For such a Qasi there is no old age or death— 

He is an en^eror * who knomih how to draw up his two 
breaths^^ 

^ So t-hal all the breaih of ihe body m-ay go to ihe brain. This 
act is done mediaiiicahy by resting the anus on the heel. 

3 'PJus verse is eitptaincd—He has set knowledge with its liny liglU 
above uni versa] ignorance. 

® When die breath rises to die top of the spine. 

^ A piece of flesh which the Jogis suppose ^o be at the top of the 
spinal columii- 

® This is a second obstacle to the passage of ihe breath. 

® Biiltiin— 'Ey this word is here meant a superior of Jogis. 

^ Who knows how Lo exercise the ira aod pingia. Also transkled— 
who biioots two arrows—knowledge and contempt of the world. 


KABIR^S HYMNS 263 

WJio recfiiletii liis mind whm it goeth abroad, who col- 
Icctcth Hio ariny of breathe ^ in his brain— 

Such a one k an emperor, and hath an umbrella over 
his bead. 

The Jogis cry out * Goralch^ Gorakh "; 

The Hindus repeat ^ Ram, Ram *; 

The Mussdmans have Khuda, 

But Kabir's God is the All-pervading. 

The follovinng hymn, which 15 a homily against 
idolatry^ is said to have been composed by the 
Guru from a theme of Kabir, 

xn 

Vain is his devotion, 

Who saith a stone is God. 

Idle shall be his labour 
MHio fall et h at t ] le feet of a st one. 

My God always sj>eaketh ; ® 

He bestoweth gilts on all living things. 

He who is blind knoweth not God who is within him ; 

He is led away by superstitionj. and entangleth others,. 

A stone speaketh not^ nor bestoweth gifts; 

Vain are the ceremonies 0 / idolaters and fruitless their 
service. 

Say what iidvantage can be gained 
By anointing a corpse with sandal. 

If any one roll a corpse in the dirt. 

What harm can it do the corp&e ? 

Saith Kabir, 1 proclaim with a loud voice— 

Understand me, ye infidels and pagans; 

The love oi other goiis hath destroyed many homes. 

The saints ct God are ever happy. 

The universal influence of Maya and the means 
of counteracting it. 

xin 

The fishes in the w^ater are led by Maya ; ^ 

^ The body k supposed io luve le n breaihs, al] of wlikb ilie Jog is 
belkve they can collect in tlie br^in. ^ He is not silent like an idol. 
3 Their sense of ta&le, their palates. 


264 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The motjis round the lamp are mflucnced by Maya ; 
Tfirougli Maya the depliant fceleth lust; 

Creeping things and bumble-bees ^ perish through Maya— 
My brethren, Maya is so bewitching 
That she illudeth all living beings— 

Birds and beasts a»'e imbued with Maya; 
vShe canseth great hardship to the honey-bees; ® 

Homes and camels are saturated with Maya; 

The eighty-four Sidhs are the sport of Maya ; 

The six J atis are the slaves of Ma3ra ; 

So are the nine Naths, the sun, and the moon ; 

Penitents and the supreme Rikhis are lulled by Maya ; 

In the power of Maya are Death and his five messengers 
Dogs and jackals are imbued with Maya ; 

So are monkeys, leopards, lions, 

Cats, sheep, and foxes j 

Trees and tubers are subject to Maya ; 

The demigods are saturated with Maya ; 

So are the ocean, the firmament, and the earth. 

Saith Kabir, he who hath a belly ts suijeci to Maya ; 

But man shall be freed from h&t infiumci when he hath 
found a saint. 

Let man fix his attention on God and not on 
worldly things. 

XIV 

As long as man speaketh of things as his own, 

So long not one of his affairs shall prosper. 

"When he ceaseth to speak of things as his own, 

Then God sliall come and adjust his affairs. 

To that end, 0 man, ponder on divine knowledge. 

Why remeraberest titou not God, the Destroyer of misery 7 
As long as lions inhabit the forest. 

So long shall tiie forest not flourish,^ 

When the jackal eateth the lion,* 

TJie whole forest bursteth out in bloom. 

^ The lotus closes on them ai nigltt, 

^ III their ariKtely to store honey. ® The Jive evil passions. 

The other animals of the forest will be unhappy. 

* When dirine knowledge deslioys pride. 




KAEIR’S HYMNS 365 

Thay who think themselves victorious are lost : and they 
who think themselves defeated are saved ; ^ 

By the favonr of the guru they cross over. 

The slave Kabit admonisheth all men 
To fix their attention on God alone. 

A brief description of God's court to which Kabir 
craves admittance. 

XV 

Who will introduce poor me to Him 
Who hath seven thousand commanders, 

A lakh and a quarter of prophets^ 

Eighty-eight karors of men called Shaikhs, 

And fifty-six karor^ of servants to amuse Him ? 

His court is afar off ; who can reach His private chamber ? 
He hath thirty-three karors of play-houses ; 

Eighty-four lakhs 0 / beings ■wander in 
He showed some favour to father Adam, 

And jntt him into paradise for a long time. 

The f&c£s of those wkou hearts are not right are pale, and 
their utterance is confouiided ; 

They forsake their books aod work evil. 

They who attribute blame to God and are angry witli Him, 
Shah obtain the fruit of their acts. 

Thou art the giver, O Lord; I ever beg of Thee : 

If Thou, refuse me^ I am ruined.^ 

The slave Kabir is in Thy s3Lnctua^y^ 

Keep me, O Merciful One^ near Thee. 

Kabir desires not heaven but absorption in God. 

XVI 

Everybody saith he is going thither ; ^ 

I know not where heaven is. 

They wlio know not the secrets of their own hearts 

^ This vei-se is ako translated—They ^'lio are overgonit by their 
eviE pa 5 si 03 iiJ are lost, and they who conquer them are saved, 

® Also ti'anglaled—wander as His jesters. 

^ Ike gyanis translate—A sJasu shall aitacU to 'I hee. I'lte liiie is 
also [raiislaLfid—If 1 reply, I shall Le at fault. ■* To beavciin 


366 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Glibly ialk of heaven. 

As long as mm desirctJi heaven^ 

He shall not dwell at God^s leet+ 

I know not where heaven’s gate is, 

Nor Its moat, nor its plastered fortress. 

Saith Kabir, what can I now say 
Tlian that the society of saints is heaven ? 

Kabir tells how he subdued his evil passions. 

xvn 

How shall I subdue this beautiful fortressmy brother. 
Which hath double walls ^ and triple moats,® 

Whose entrenchments are the five ekmenis^ the 

twenty-five categories worldly Jove, pf'tde, jealousy * and 
very powei^ful Maya ? 

I who am poor cannot obtain strength to fortress ; 

what shall I do, O God ? 

Lust is its folding doors^ woe and weal its gate-keepers^ 
demerits and merits its gates ; 

Anger, which is very quarrelsome, its commander* and 
the heart its rebel king. 

The defenders had dainties for their coats of mail, egoism 
for their helmets, and evil understar-sdiug for the bows tJiey 
drew; 

Covetousness, which dwelleth in the quivi^ of the Jieart, 
became their arrows ; thus the fortress was impregnable ; 

But I made dmne love the fuse, meditation the howitzer, 
and divine knowledge the shells ; 

I gently lit the fuse with the fire of God^s nante^ and 
captured the fortress mth one shotn 
1 began to fight assisted by truth and contentment> and 
battered both its doors ; 

^ The body. 

^ I’hc two ™lls are doubt and wrong-headedness, 

^ The Three maats are the three qualities, 

^ The twenty-five calegories of the £a.Dkhya philosophy. See 
Monier Williams^a Indian Wisdem and the InEroducdon to Coefeburn 
ThompEon's An enumeratioti of the categories here 

^■ould not assist the Sikh student. 



KABIR'S HYMNS 267 

By tho ia-vour of the congregation of tiie saints and of 
the guru I made its king a prisoiaer. 

By dint of retnembering God I, a cowardf have ent tiie 
noose of Death. 

The slave Kabir hath scaled the fortress, and secured an 
imperishable empire. 

The following refers to another persecution of 
Kabir:— 

XVI r I 

The Ganges is a deity deep and profound; 

1) Kabir, was made to stand in it with chains on my feet. 
My spirits fdl not; wliy should my body fear ? 

My mind was absorbed in God’s lotus feet; 

My chains were broken by the ripples of the Ganges, 

And I ^Difnd myself seated on a decr-skin. 

Saith Kabir, 1 had no friend or companion 
Bui God the Protector both by W'ater and land. 

God and His residence. 

ASHT.tPADI 

I 

God constructed an inaccessible fortress* for His residence, 
Wltidi He illumined with His light. 

The lightning playcth and pleasure reigneth 
Where the youthful* Lord God reposeth. 

If the soul love God’s name, 

Man shall be released from old age and death, and liis 
doubts shall flee away. 

He whose mind bveth to con^idet whether a man’s caste 
is high or low, 

Chanteth the hymn of egoism. 

The sound of the unbeaten music is heaid 
Where the Lord God reposeth. 

He w)m fashioned continents and different countries. 

The three worlds, the three gods, and the three qualities, 

* 'I'tie tenth gale or brAin, 

* Some translale this the minute or inritiible. 


268 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Though stykd inaccessibk and in visible, dwelletl^ 
the heart. 

None can find the limit or the secret ul tlie Sustainer o| 
the earth ; 

He slnnetli in the plantain blossom cUid in the sunshiae, 
And hath taken His dwelling in tl^e pollen of the lotus. 
God^s spell is within the twelve petals oi the heart 
Where the holy Lord of Lakshmi reposeth. 

The great God reacheth from the lower to the upper 
regions of tlte firmament; 

He illumineth the silent realm, 

Where there is neither snn nor moon, 

wiis in the beginning ; He is without stain and happy. 
Know that he pervadeth the body a$ mil ss the universe ; 
He batheth in Mansarowar ; ^ 

His pass-word'is ' Soham^ (I am He) ; 

He is not subject to merits or demerits^ 

Nor concerned with caste, with sunshine» or with shade ; 
He is only found in the guru's asylum. 

He who hxeth hb attention on Him removeth it not, 
hecometh released from transmigration, 

And absorbed in the Infinite. 

He who knoweth God in his heart 
And repeateth His name, hecometh as He. 

Saith Kabir, that mortal shall be saved 
Who fixetli in his heart light and spelh 

God, God^s servants^ and God^s court. 

H 

Millions of suns shine for Him ; 

He hath millions of Shivs and Kailases 
Milhons of Dnrgas shampoo Hi$ linib$ i 
Millions of Brahmas recite the Veds for Him— 

If I beg. Id nse beg only of God ; 

I have naught to do with any other god— 

Millions of moons form His lamps ; 

Thirty-three demigods cook His food ; 

^ In ihe lake of the heart. 

^ A peak ia the Himalayas ’w’here ihe Ganges is supposed lo rise. 



KABIR’S HYMNS 269 

The nine planets^ multiplied of tunes stand 

duly in ]iis court; 

Millions of Dharnuajas are His porters ; 

Millions of winds from the four cardinal points fan Him; 
Millions of Sheshnags lay His bed ; 

Millions of ooeans are His vvater-carriers; 

The eighteen millbn loads of vegel^xMss are His hair; 
Millions of store-heepei's fill His store-houses; 

Millions of Lakshmis decorate Him— 

He removeth many milKons of demerits and merits— 
Millions of Indars wrait on Him ■ 

Tlie fifty-six millions of clouds are His messengers ; 

He is celebrated and unrivalled in every land. 

With His tresses loose and with terrible movetli— 

God playeth in millioni^ of ways— 

There are millions of feasts at His court ; 

Millions of celestial singers hail Him ; 

Millions of sciences all describe His attributes^ 

But even then they cannot find His end. 

In His hair are millions of Bawans, 

And liauts who out-generalled Rawan’s army, 

And Krishans who linmbled the pride of Duiyodhan, 
Greatly extolled by a thousand million Pnrans, 

Millions of Cupids cannot compete witli Him in beauly^ 
He stealeth away the inmost heart. 

Saith Kabir, hear me, O God, 

Grant me the fearless dignity^ the gift I crave. 

The following was written under the gi’ateful 
infltience of early spring in the north of India. 

Basant 

I 

TJie earth bloometh, the firmament rejoicetli; 

Every heart is gladdened by God^s light. 

The Lord God rej oiceth in endless ways ; 

^ These are—Siini), Ch^itid, Matigal, Budli, Brihaspaii, Sbukkar, 
Sanlcharj RahUp and The of the wteU are named, in 

India, after the first seven. 



270 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Whithersoever I look, there is He c-ontained. 

The four Vcds rejoice in worldliiiess ; 

So do the Simiitis with the books of the MusEiImans. 
Shiv practisiag Jog rejoiceth— 

Kabir's Lord bloometh equally in all things. 

Kabir accepts as saints Shukdev, Akrnr, Hanuman, 
and Shiv, famous for their continence, and rejects 
the hypocritical Brahmans, J ogis, Sanyasis, and Peni¬ 
tents of his time. 

11 

The Pandits grow proud reciting the Purans, 

The Jogis in practising Jog, 

Tlie Sanyasis in saying there is no one like themselves ; 
The Penitents even in their different penances 
Are all intoxicated with pride ; none of them is airake. 
The thieves * who rob houses are already with tlrem. 
Shnkdev and Akrur * are awake ; 

Hanuman with the tail is awake ; 

Shiv is awake siid worshippeth Coii*s feet; 

In this Kal age Namdev and Jaidev an 

There ate several forms of "waking and sleeping :— 

He who is awake under the gurn^’i«etMK*ion is the best. 
The most important duty of this body, 

Saith Kabir, is to repeat God’s name. 

To obtain salvation without a guru would be 
impossible. 

in 

Hath a wife ever given birth to her husband ? 

Hath a boy ever dandled his father ? 

Hath a woman without breasts ever suckled ? 

See, O people, the peculiarity of this Kal age— 

Hath a son ever taken his mother in marriage ? 

Can a man without feet ever leap ? 

Can a man without a mouth burst into laughter ? 
Without sleep can man repose ? 

^ The evil passions, * An uiKle of Krishan. 

® The persons mentionetl did not allow worldly makers to interrupt 
their devqiions. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


271 


Can onG chum mUk without a churn 7 
Can a cow without an udder give milk ? 

C^n one accompluh a long journey without a road ? 

So the way cannot be found without a true guni^ 
liabir saith, and admouishetb all men. 

God saves his saints as He did Prahlad. 

IV 

Prahlad was sent to school for instruction ; 

He took several boys -witli him as his dassrfellows. 

Ho $aid to hh leather Why teach me worldly entangle¬ 
ments ? 

‘ Rather write on my tablet the na?ne of God, 

* r will not, sir, abandon the name of God ; 

'I have no concern with any other instruction? 

His tutor's sons, Sanda and filajka? went and reported 
the jnaiicr to Praklad's father. 

He sent for Praiihid^ tdUng thorn to riiti quickly to liim; 
Th^n he ad^r^ssed him : —* Abandon the habit ol repeating 
God^s name ; 

* I will let tliee go at once if thou obey my ^vords.' 
Prahlad replied, * WJiy dost tjiou continually annoy me ? 

* I should be a sinner were I to abandon the one God 
^Who made the water, the dry land, the hills, and the 

mountains. 

' Throw me into the fire or kill me if it please theen^ 

His father became angry and drawing his sword said, 

^ Show me that Presenter of thine,' 

Upon this God expanding came forth from a pillar, 

And killed Harnakhas by tearing him wuth His nailSn 
It w'as the Supreme Being, the God of gods, wko appeared. 
For the sake of His &iint He became iHcar?iate the 
man-lion, 

Saith Kabir^ Ha whoso limit cannot be scon 
Saved Prahlad several times.® 

* Brabnirra non was Blifigi], Ihmguts son was SEmkkar, Shukkar'a 
sons were Sanda and Marka. 

“His life liad bEftn oftcti iti danger before fiom the bigoLry aud 
violence of his falhtr, and the present occurrence wag but the 
culmiitalion of many acts of paternal cruelty. 


372 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 
Kabir prays to be protected from lust. 

V 

Within tiiis body and mind is the thief Cupids 
Who hatli stolen my jewel of divine knowledge. 

I have no patron, 0 God, to whom I may make my 
complaint. 

Whom hath Cupid not ruined ? W]m am I ihai 1 shmld 
escape ? 

O Godj thi^ terrible pain cannot be endured ; 

Wliat poiw^i' hatJi my fickle mind againsi Cupid ? 

Sanak Sanandanj of Brakf^ta, Shiv, ShukdeVj 

Vishnu, Bralima, and others know his power. 

The poets, the Jogis, the wearers of matted hair^ 

Passed their Lives guarding themselves against him. 
Thou, 0 God, art unfathomable; I cannot find Thy depth* 
O God, Lord of the poor, to whom else may I tell my 
woes ? 

Let the pain of birth and death subside, and grant fne 
continence^ 

Kabir siiigeth the prai&es of the Ocean of happiness. 

The body under the allegory of a inarchant. 

VI 

There is one head of the firm and five traders/ 

Who take with them spurious ze/am on twenty-five oxen.’* 
There are ten bags * and nine poles ^ io lift th^m ; 

The body is bound by seventy^two ropes. 

I have nothing to do with tlmt commerce 
By which my capital is lessened^ and my interest ever 
increased. 

I have trafficked by joining the seven threads 

1 The head of L]ie Jirtn [-i man, the five Lraders the five senses. 

^ The spurious wares are worldly U^ingSr 
^ Generally understood io be ihe ten breatl^of the body. 

^ The nine gates of the body. 

^ (7^, contempt of the world ; discrimination; 

the six acquisitions; meA.sk desire of deliverance; skrawont 


KABIR'S HYMNS 27 j 

1 have joined with them acts and Cod's low. 

The three tax-gatherers ^ wrangle for their share ; 

But 1 a trader put them aside and departed. 

The capital of the five traders is lost, their trade is ruined, 
And the oxen disperse in every direction* 

Saith Kabir, 0 man, thy business shall prosper. 

And thy doubts depart when thou art absorbed in God. 

A Brahman had censured Kabir tor not having 
paid due attention to caste rules in eating. The 
following was his reply:— 

VTI 

Thy mother was impure, thy father was also impure^ and 
impure is the fruit they have borne. 

The unlucky people came impure, they departed and died 
impure. 

Tell me^ 0 Pandit, what place is pure 
Where I may sit and take my food. 

My tongue is impure^ what it saith is impure^ the ears 
and eyes are all impure. 

Tlie impurity of the senses departeth not^ 0 than wlio 
art burning with Brahmauical wrath. 

Fire is also impure, wafer is impute, and impure the 
place where thou sittest and cookest it^ 

With an impure ladle it is served up, and impure arc 
those who sit aiid eat it. 

Impure thy cow-duug^ impure thy cooking-square, and 
impure the lines which mark it out* 

Saith Kabir, that man is pure who hatli obtained true 
knowledge. 

hearing God's name; obeying God's 

profound and continued meditaLion. 

The six sampais or acquisiiions arc—restiaint of the mind * 
restraint of the senses ; the proscnulion of the heart 

from love and bate; endurance of sAradha, faiih; 

samddAtlHfaf attention to die guru's insiruciton. Others, by the seven 
threads, under^land ibe five organs of perception, the mind, the 
understanding. 

^ Tlie three qualities. 

T 


bJtell. h'L 


f 



274 bhagats of the granth sahib 

Kabir's wife had ground corn and gone out with¬ 
out collecting the floui*. Kabir being left alone in 
the house paid more attention to his devotion than 
to his housekeeping- A dog came and began to 
lick the flour on the hand-mill- The following was 
addressed to the intruding animal : — 

vni 

Thy stride is like that of a cow ; 

The hair over thy tail is shiny* 

Search for and eat anything in this house ; 

Go not to another’s house, 

Lick the hand-mill, cat the flour ; 

Whither takest thou the towel ^ of the hand-mill ? 

Thou gazest very intently on this safe; 

Take care that the stick fall not on thy back.® 

Saith Kabir, thou hast fared well; 

Take care that no one throw a brick or a clod at thee,® 

Kabir endeavours to recall man to a sense of his 
insignificance. 

Sarang 

I 

W^hy, O man, art thou proud of a small matter ? 

W^ith a store of only ten mans of corn and four double 
p&ise in thy pocket thou swaggeresf along. 

Even if thou obtain greatness, yea, a hundred villages, 
and have an income of two lakhs of rupees, 

Thy authority sliaJl only last for four days like the green 
leaves of the forest. 

No one hath brought wealth with him, and no one shall 
take it away. 

Greater sovereigns than even Rawan departed in a moment; 

God’s saints who worship Him and repeat His name abide 
for ever, 

A clolb to collect the dour as it falls from the haiid-ntill. 

* That is, run away before my wife or my son returns; you shait 
meet with a different reception from them. 

® This hymn is also applied allegorically to man. 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


^75 

They to ’whom God is merciful meet tlie society of Ihe 
siiints. 

Neither mother^ fatlier^ wife^ son, nor wealth shall go 
’witii thee at the last moment. 

Saith Kabir, worship God, 0 fooh or thy life shall pass 
away in vain. 

God's omnipotence. 

ir 

0 God, I know not the measure ol Thy regal authority ■ 

I am the handmaiden of Thy saints. 

They who go laughing tetum weeping, and they who go 
weeping return laughing ; 

What is inhabited becoinetli deserted, and what is deserted 
becometh inhabited. 

God turneth ’water into dry land, dry land He turneth 
into wells, and wells into mountains; 

He can raise mart from earth to heaven^ and when he 
hath ascended to hea^'en dash him down. 

He can turn a beggar into a king, and a king into a beggar. 

He can tum an idiot into a pandit, and a pandit into an 
idiot. 

He can turn a woman into a man^ and a man into a 
’woman. 

Saith Kabir, God is beloved of tile saints ; I am a sacrifice 
unto Him. 

Man should rely on God and practise humility. 

Ill 

Without God what succour hath man ? 

The love of patentbrethren, sons, and wife is all fleeting. 

Construct a raft for the other world ; what relianoe can 
be placed on wealth ? 

What confidence can be reposed in this vessel^ if it be 
chinked in the slightest ? ^ 

Thou shall obtain fiie fruit of all rdigioii and good works 
if thou desire to become the dust of everybody's feet. 

Saifh Kabii:, hear, 0 saints, the mind is like the Hying 
bird nf the forest. 

^ If it receive even die sligluesi exwrnal ihcvssarc. 

T 2 



EHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabk's bliss in feeliog that lie is saved— 

Prahhati 

I 

My dread of transmigration i^ at an end 

Since God displayed His love lor me. 

The light hath dawned, the darkness is dispelled; 

1 have obtained the jewel God by meditation on Him. 

When conferreth happiness sorrow fleeth away ; 

The jewel of my heart is absorbed in God's love. 

Whatever occurreth is according to Thy will^ 0 God ; 

He who understandeth this shall be easily absorbed tn 
Thee. 

Saith Kabir, all my sins have been blotted out, 

And my soul is absorbed in the Life of the world h 

God is not confined as regards place to the mosqtie 
or the temple, or as regards time to any month or 
day- 

II 

If God dwell only in the mosque^ to whom belongeth the 
rest of the coimtry ? 

They who are called Hindus say that God dwelleth in an 
idol : I see not the truth in either sect- 

0 God, whether Allal^ or Ram, I live by Thy name, 

O Lord, show kindness unto me, 

Hari dweEeth in the souths Allah hath Ilis place in the 
west. 

Search' in tl;y heart, search in thy heart of hearts ; them 
is His place and abode- 

The Brahmans perform twenty-four fasHngs on the 

eleventh day of tho dark and light halves of the lunar m&nth ; 
the Musalmans fast in the month of Ramzan . 

The latter put aside deveu months of the yca.r^ and say 
that the Treasure is in one alone. 

What availeth the Hindus to bathe at Jaganmlh in 
Urisa (Orissa), what th^ Musahnans to bow their heads in 
a mosque ? 

With deception in their hearts they repeat prayers ; what 
availeth them to go on a pilgrimage to Makka ? 



KABIR^S HYMNS 


277 

The men and women Thou hast created^ 0 God^ are all 
in Thy form. 

Kabir is a child of Ram and Allah> and accepteth all 
gurus and pirs. 

Saith Kabir, hear, O men and women, seek the sanctuary 
of the one God ; 

0 mortals, only repeat God's name, and then shall you 
be assuredly saved. 

In Kabir”s presence a Brahman and a Muham¬ 
madan priest were reviling each others^ sacred, books. 
The Muhamniadan expatiated on the merits of 
sacrificen 

IV 

Say not that the Hindu and ilusalman books are false j 
false is he who reflccteth not on iliem. 

If you say that the one God is in overytlhng, then why 
kill fowls ? 

0 priest, siay is this God's justice ? 

Thy mental doubts forsake tliee not; 

Thou seizest and bringest living things, and takest their 
lives, but thou m^ely killest their bodies of day. 

Their souls retitm to the Indestructible ; say what hast 
thou killed. 

Wlut avail thy purifications, thy rinsings of the mouth, 
and thy prostrations in the mosque ? 

If tSiou pray with deception in thy hearty what availeth 
thee thy pilgrimage to Makkii ? 

Thou art impure ; tivou knowost not the Pure One j thou 
knowest not His secrets, 

Saith Kabir, thou hast missed heaven, and art satisfied 
with hell. 

Kabir offered to God tlie following oblation in¬ 
stead of incense, light, and the other accessories of 
Hindu worship. 

Hear ^ me, God of gods. Supreme Lord, primnl and onini- 
pi'csent, / offer my vespers unto Thee. 

1 Sun, ftlso traiislalei]—as aii epiiliei of God —wiiliout desires. 


278 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The Sidhs even in deep meditation have not discovered 
Thy limits, but they continue to cling to Thine asylumn 

Accept this oblation0 bright Spirit; worship the True 
GiirUp my brethren. 

Brahma standeth and readeth the Veds, but the Unseen 
is- seen not by him.® 

With divine knowledge as mine oil and Thy name my 
wick I have made a lamp to iUamine my body. 

I have lit the Ump with the light of the T^rd of the world ; 
he who knowetli how to do ihi^ knoweth the Omniscient,® 

The imbeaten sounds of God who dwelletlt with man^ arc 
my five musical instruments. 

0 Thou Formless and Undisturbed, Tliy slave Kabir l^ath 
made Tliee this oblation.^ 


KABIR'S SLOKS 

I 

Kabir^ my rosary is my tongue, on whidi 1 repeat God’s 
name; 

In every age it bringeth peace and comfort to all God^$ 
servants. 

II 

Kabir, everybody laughetb at my caste; 

I am a sacrifice fo this caste in which I repeat the Creator's 
namCn 

III 

Kabirj why waverest thou ? Wliy lettest thou thy mind 
^=a.ciJlate ? 

God is the Lord of all happiness; quaff the essence of 
His name. 

^ or floiverSj incense, ligtih &c, 

^ Tijat is, G-od does not heed hiin, 

^ Also translated—^Tlie wise man knoweth bow lo do tlds. If 
.■sfij'/if were read for hy'/if Lhe two words would be iranslaied—The 
Omniscient vtsuld become manifesn 

^ ThiB Uymn is included in ihe Arati of tlie Sikhs. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 


^79 


IV 

XabiFj if goldei) earrijigs were to be made and rubies 
set in tiiendj 

Tliey would appear like burnt reeds if God^s name were 
not in the wearer^s heart 

V 

Kabir, there are few who while alive are dead,® 

And who fearlessly sing God's praises; whithersoever 
1 look there is He ito save me. 

VT 

Kabir, on the day I am dead there sliall be rejoicing 
after me: ^ 

1 shall then have met my God, and my friends will worship 
Him of weeping, 

VII 

Kabir* 1 am tlic womt of men ; e^^cept niysi^dt e^-'crybody 
is good ■ 

He who holdeth the same opinion is my friend. 

vin 

Kabir, worldly love came to me in various diK^i^tiiscs, 

Bui my guru preserved me; Uforldfy love ihen made me 
obeisance and depi^ried. 

IX 

Kabir> destroy that Maya who^e death shall make thee 
happy; 

Every one shall ihm say it is well; no one shall deem 
it ill. 

X 

Kabir, when the nights are dark, thieves arise ; 

They run about with nooses for men ; know tJiat they 
are accursed of God. 

1 This is understood lo be a satire on Indian baiikers who generally 
ivcar large earrings. 

^ TSi^t is, who pracisse humility and efface their pride- 

3 Also iTunslaled—On ibe day my pride is tfead ihcrc shall lie 
rejoicing. 


^8o BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


XI 

Ivabir, the sandal-tree is good even though suiTOunded 
by the dhak-tree ; ^ 

If the latter be near the 3andal-tree> it will ako become 
fragrant as sandal, 

XII 

Kabir, the bamboo is drowned in its pride ; * may nobody 
be drowned so! 

It may grow neat the sandal^ but it is never perfumed 
by it} 

XIII 

Kabir, man hath lost his faith through mammon, but 
mammon will not accompany him ■ 

He hath carelessly struck his foot mth an a5;e by liis 
own hand. 

The following is said to bav^j been written in reply 
to some one who had invited Kabir to attend a 
religious fair 

XIV 

Kabir, wherever 1 wandered I saw spectacles evetywhere ; 

Without the saint who loveth God, th^ is in my 

opinion a desert, 

XV 

Kabir, the hut of the saints is comfortable; the village 
of the false is a furnace. 

May fire prey upon that mansion where the name of God 
is not 1 

XVI 

Kabii\ why weep W'hen a saint dietli, since he is merely 
going homo ? 

Weep for the poor infidel who is sold at eveiy shop.^ 

^ The 

^ It holds Sts iicad high, j'et it is hollow in Eh* centre, 

^ They T^'ho are hardened in their pride are not improved by 
ciation ^vith the humble. 

^ Who has to nndei-go transmigration* 



281 


KABIR^S SLOKS 

XVir 

Kabir, the infidel is like a dinner of garlic ; 

One may sit iu the corner ajid eat it, bfd it$ $?ndl becoineth 
manifest at last. 

xviir 

Kabir, the body ^ is a chum, the breath of life its churning- 
staff I 

The saints eat the butter, the world drinketh the butter¬ 
milk, 

XIX 

Kabirj the body is the chum, the breath of life the stream 
of iced water ; “ 

He who hath clmrned shall eat the buiicr, and && shall 
his l^elpiTiates also. 

XX 

Kabir, Maya is a tliief who break el li into and robbeth 
tlie shop ; ^ 

One man, Kabir, who hath chased her iu e\'ery dtroction^^ 
she- shall not rob,^ 

XXI 

Kabir^ tliey who make many friends are not happy in 
this world ; 

But they who keep their minds fixed on the one God 
e^^er enjoy happiness. 

XXII 

Kabir, while tJie world feareth death, my Ijeiirt is pleased 
tlierewith ; 

Since it is only by death supreme bliss is obtained. 

XXIII 

. Kabirj wlicTt thou obtidnest the jewel of God's name keep 
it to thyself^® 

^ here means body^ becaufie it is die result of illnston. 

^ PuL ioto l1i€ cliuril in India in thE hot weather Lo assist die 
cliurning proce^^f?. 

^ Who breats inlo the heart, andvobs it of its virlues, 

^ Others tranjlate-"Kabir hath cut tser up in Lweh'e pieces. 

^ KabTr chased her lo arrest licr^ huL she ran in cver>' direction, 
Jiterallj', hy twelve \vays to avoid him, a»d so elie cannot rob him, 

^ Lilerally —Open not die knots of ihy dress in which it is lied.. 



2S2 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


Foi' there is no bazaar to sell it iw, no connoisseur, no 
purchaser^ no price for ii. 

XXIV 

Kabirj love him who hath mad6 God his master ^ 

Learned men, kings, lords of the soil— of what avail is 
Zmic for them ? 

XXV 

Kabir, by loving the one God all other love departethj 

Whether thou nearest long hair, or shavest thy licad 
clean,^ 

XXVI 

Kabir, the world is a chamber of soot ■ blind are they 
who enter it* and they become defded. 

1 am a sacrifice to those who have entered It, and come 
forth dean. 

xxvn 

Kabir, this body sliall depart ; if possible detain : 

They who ]iad hundreds of thousands and millions departed 
barefooted, 

xxvm 

Kabir, this body shall depart; put it on some road 

On which it may either hold converse with saints, or 
sing God^s praises. 

XXIX 

Kabir, everybody dieth in his turn, but no one even 
knoweth how to die ; 

When thou diest,. so die that thou shalt not have to die 
again 

XXX 

Kabir, it is difficult to obtain human birth: it cometh 
not again and again ; 

As the ripe fruit of the forest, when it falleth to the 
ground returneth not to the ^.fflff^r^branch. 

^ Some undersiarid this fine to mean—Wheiher thou adoptest a 
\Torl<l]y or an ascetic life. San^'osis or hermits shave their h-eads. 

^ Let not tby hwinan binh go in vain. 

^ That thau shalt have no more transmigration. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 


283 

Somebody came to visit Kabir, and asked him if 
Kabir (great) was his name. The following, addressed 
to God^ was his reply :— 

XXXI 

It is Thou, 0 God, who art Kabir (gr^ai!), and whose name 
is Kabir (great ); 

Man shall only obtain the jewel of the Lord when he 
despiseth his body. 

XXXII 

Kabir^ utter not idle complaints againsi God ; nothing 
shall result from what thou sayest ; 

No one can set aside what the merciful One doeth. 

XXXIII 

Kabir, nobody who is counterfeit can wit list and God's 
touchstone; 

Ojily lie who in life is dead can bear its ordeaL 

xxxrv 

Kabir, men wrear gaudy robes^ and cat betel leaves and 
betd nut; 

But without the name of tlie one God they shall be bound 
and taken to the city of Death, 

XXXV 

Kabir* my boat is old, and leaketb in a thousand chinks ; 

Boal$ very lightly laden cross over, but those with heavy 
cargoes ^ founder. 

XXXVI 

Kabir, bones burn like fircw'tjod, his hair bumoth 

like grass; 

Kabir is sad on seeing everybody burning,^ 

XXXVII 

K£ibir> be not proud of thy bones wrapped up in skin ; 

They who rode excellent 'hor^^yand under umbrdias, were 
at last buried in the earth. 

* Or sin is meant, 

^ This was written after witnessing r cremation. 



284 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

XXXVIII 

Kabir, be not prowd on seeing thy loity dwellings ■ 

To-day or to-morrow thou stialt He the earth, and 

the grass shall grow over thee. 

XXXIX 

Kabir, be not proud, let none laugh at the poor ; 

Now thy bark is on the sea; who knoweth what shall 
happen,^ 

XL 

Kahii's be not proud on seeing thy beautiful body ] 

Thou shall leave it tr^day or to-morrow as a serpent its 
slough. 

XLl 

Kabir, if thou must plunder, then plunder, but let thy 
plunder be the name of God ; 

Otherwise thou shall oiterwards repent wk^n life hath left 
thy body* 

XLII 

Kabir, few “ have been bom who have applied the fire 
of divim knowledge to their bodies, 

Wlio have burnt tlie five evil passions, and with th$ 5^™? 
favour continued to love God* 

XLiir 

Is there any one who will sell me his son ; any one who 
wiU sell me his daughter ? ^ 

Is Ihcre any fjne who will go into partnership with Kabir, 
and deal in God^s name with him ? 

XLIV 

Kabir, I remind thee, 0 man—and entertain no doubt 
on the subject— 

^ Thou maje&t he brought low thy self, and tnen ^vsll laugh at ihee. 

^ Jh ihe original, none, bnt this apparently is an exaggcratign of 
religious enthusiasm. 

® This Blok is an allegory. By for Kabh- meaut souh and by 
daughter body. Is there any one ivho will devote his soul and body 
to God's worship?' Another expfanation is the follo^ring^ —Is there 
any oriie who will give me his son—his heart—in exchange for my 
daughter, religious instruction. 


0 

KABIR’S SLOKS 285 - ' 

TlioQ canst not exdiange tli« pleasures thou hast already 
eujoyed for even a moi^el of coai-se sugar 

XLV 

Kabir, I first thought that learuing was good, that 
the Jog philo^<yphy better than learning ; 

But I shall never forsake the service of God, even 
thougli men revile me for it, 

XLVI 

Kabir, ]mw can the wretched people wJio have no divine 
knowledge in their hearts, revile me ? ® 

Kabir having abandoned every occupation continueth to 
repeat God's name. 

XLVII 

Kabir, the wanderer^s skirt hath caught fire on all sides ; ^ 

The tattered garment hath been burnt and reduced to 
charcoal^ but the flame hath not touched the waist-string.* 

XL VIII 

Kabir, the tattered garment ha+Ir been burnt and reduced 
to charcoal, the skull hath burst into atoms; 

Tl^e poorjogi hath had his day^ and dust only remaineth 
where he sat. 

XLIX 

Kabir, man is like a fish in a little water; the angler 
oasteth in his net; 

Man shall not escape in this little pond; he ought to 
think of returning to the Ocean 

L 

Kabir, leave not the Ocean, thougli it be very brackish ; ® 

1 The pleasures tIsOLi hast ciij&J'cU arc useless to thee noWn 

^ Thai la, lihal care 1 for their ie\'i Img ? 

^ Death has atiacked man's body^ ^ Tlic soul. 

^ The liitle water and the little poi^d mean the worldi The ocean is 
God froin v^bom man etnanaled, and wSth whom, he ought to seek 
refuge from the angler's neti that is, deacli. 

* Fensake not God's service even fhough it be attended with hardship^ 




286 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

If thou seiirch for shelter in every pond/ no one shfiU 
call thee good. 

LI 

Kabir, they who had no guru were wafted away; there 
■vvas no one to stop them— 

Practise meekness and humility,® come what may, 

Lll 

Kabir, the bitch of God’s saints is good, but the mother 
of die infidel is bad ; 

The former ever hcarefh the Lord’s name and praises, 
the latter goeth to commit sin. 

LIII 

Kabir, man is like a lean stag ; this world is a lake sur¬ 
rounded by verdure; 

There are hundreds of thousands of hunters and but one 
life—how long can it escape ? ’ 

LIV 

Kabir, if thou make thine abode on the bank of the 
Ganges, thou mayest drink pure water ; 

But thou shalt not obtain salvation without devotion to 
God ; the great departed have said this.* 

LV 

Kabir, me whose mind is pure as Ganges water, 

God foUow'eth and addresseth, * Kabir t Kabir ! ’ ® 

LVI 

Kabir, turmeric is yellow and lime white ; 

When both colours are blended, the beloved God is met.* 

^ If thou have recourse lo ihe gods and goddesses of the vuliar, 

® Also translated—make humility tby religion, * 

* Mm is like a hungry slag let loose on die grassy margin of a 
laJ«, He revels in the rich pasture afibidcd him, has no time for 
other reflection, and consequently becomes ati easy prey to Death the 
hunter. 

* Also translated—Saying this, Kabir departed froni Baitaras for 
Magahar. 

* Also translated—Kabir, Cod fciJoweih those whose minds are 
ptiie as Ganges water, and salth that they are superior tuit. 

* 'iurmeiic and Kme stand for men of dlfftjxnt castes. Turmeric 


KABTR'S SLOES 


287 


LVII 

Kabir^ turmevic then loseth its yellowne^^^ anti not a tracti 
of the whiteness of lime remaineth ; 

I am a sacrifice to that love by whicJi tribe and caste 
and lineage are effaced. 

LVIII 

Kabir, the door of salvation is narrow, ih^ brei^dth of the 
tenth of a grain of mustard ; 

The mind is as large as an elephant ; ^ how can it pass 
through ? 

LIX 

Kabirj if I meet a true guru and he kindly favour me, 

The door of salvation shall be made wide, and I can 
easily pass through, 

Kabir^s hut once fell, and people asked him to 
repair it; the following was bis reply :— 

LX 

Kabir, 1 have no hut or shed ; I have no house or village ; 

I have no caste or name that God should ask who this 
man h. 

LXI 

Kabir, I desiTc to die^ but when I die let it be at God^s 
gate. 

So that God may ask, * Who is this lying at My door ?' 

LXII 

Kabir, I did not do this, nor will 1 do it again, nor am 
I physically able to do it; 

How do I know what God may have done ? Yet it was 
all Xabir.^ 

means men of low casL^s^ limc: men of high cashes. High men 
were originally fair in oomparison with the bro^vn aboriginesi of 
IndifL When turmeric and lime are blended^ a red product used 
for sacrificial marks on the forehead rcsuks. When holy men of 
different castes meet, God isobEained by their assoeiaLson, and iheir 
castes disappear, ^ Man is very proud. 

- This Blok has already been given in the life of Kabir. 



288 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


LXIIl 

Kabiij the skin oi my body shall be shoes for liis feet 

From whose mouth in his muttering dream issueth God's 
name, 

LXIV 

KabiTp we are puppets oi clay, but bear the name of 
men; 

Though guests for only four days, we occupy veiy great 
space. 

LXV 

Kabir.I have conveited myself into henna and thoroughly 
ground myself^ 

Biitp even so, God never inquired about me and never 
allowed me to touch His feet. 

LXVl 

Kabir, the door from which no visitor is repelled 

How shall I leave, since such a door there is ? 

LXVII 

Kabir, T was drowning, but the wave of good qualities 
quickly ashore and saved me; 

\V1ien I saw the bark was rotten, I leapt from it at once. 

Lxvni 

Kabir, the saint is not pleasing to the sinner ; the latter 
cannot bear the worship of God i 

The fly avoideth the sandal, and goeth where there is an 
evil odour. 

LXIX 

Kabir, the physician is dead, the patient is dead, the 
whole world is dead in spiriiutil ignorance ; 

One person alone, Kabir, for whom none shall weep is 
not dead. 

LXX 

Kabir, man meditateth not on God; such great sin 
attacheth to him : 




KABIR'S SLOKS 


289 


Tlie body is a wooden pot; it cannot be put on the fire 
a second 

LXXI 

Kabirj it so happened to me that God did wliat was 
pleasing to my mind ; ® 

Why fear death when thou hast taken the red lead ® in 
thy hand ? 

LXXII 

Kabir, as one sucketh sugar-cane, so ought one to strive 
most earnestly ^ for virtue : 

None caUeth that man good who is without virtue, 


LXXII I 

Kabir, the body is like an earthen pot filled with water; 
it will burst to-day or to-mon'ow l 

If tliou remember not thy great God, thou shaft he 
plundered half-way/ 

LX XIV 

Kabir, I am God’s dog ; Moti * is my name ; 

There is a string ^ on my neck , where I am pulled there 
r go. 

LXXV 

Kabiij why displayest thou to men thy wooden rosary ? 
thou remember not God in thy heart, what availeth 
this rosary ? 

LXXVI 

Kabir, reparation fi^oin (rod, like a serpent whkli yieldeth 
to no charm^ dwelleth iji the heart; 

^ Humaiii bhth shall not i>c again obtained by those wbo meditate 
not on G06* 

^ God adminEed me lo His servicOr 

^ Thai \s, wSiy fear dcaLh fl?hich k immineni atid nisavoidabie ? 

* Lilcially^io weep and die in one s efforts to objain it. 

* All ihe good Tvorks j'oi] h 3 \'e pedbrnieiJ tliall only help you half¬ 
way ; btalp if you have meditated on God, yon shall be saved. 

^ Mod—literally pearl—ss a common Indian lume Fol' a favonriie 

dog. 

^ God’s lo\'c. 

MKM.. M U 


4 



ago BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

He who is separated itovti God shall not live, or if he do* 
he shall heconie insane.^ 

Lxxvri 

Kabir, the philosopher^^ stoae and sandal have one good 
property corn^n ; 

By the touch of the former iron becometh the best meUl ; ^ 
by touch of the latter inodoroiLis wood is perfumed. 

LXXVTII 

Kabir^ Death’s elpb is bad ; it cannot be.- endured : 

I have met a holy man® and he hath attached me to his 
skirt, 

Lxxrx 

KabLr, the physician^ saith, ‘ I am the only good 
physician ; medicines are in my power ' : 

This thing life is God's property^ He taketh it when He 
pleaseth. 

LXXX 

Kabir, take and beat thy drum for ten days ; ^ 

This ifforld is like the meeting on a river-boat of pen&m 
who shall never meet again.^ 

LXXXl 

Kabitj were I to make the seven oceans my ink, the trees 
of the forest my pens, 

And the earth my paper^ I ^hoold not succeed in writing 
God^s praises. 

Lxxxn 

Kabir, what harm can my weaver caste do me since God 
dwelleth in my heart ? 

God hath embraced Kabir, and released him from all ]iis 
entanglements, 

1 The serpent shalJ sting him, and he shall either riie or become 
insane: 3 Gold^ 

® Rlmanand. ^ Be happy while yon may, ■ 

* Compare— 

The world's a eky fulE of s(r4yiiig streets, 

And deadi the marketplace where each one. meets. 


KABIR^S SLOKS 


291 


LXXXIII 

Kabir, there arc few willing to burn their own JiotiseSj^ 

Destroy their five children,® and concentrate their love 
on God. 

LXXXIV 

Kabir, there are few who will set fire to their own 
bodies; ^ 

Fools understand not though Kabir continueth to shout 
to them- 

LXXXV 

Kabir, the sati mounted on the pyre crieth out ^Hear 
my friends on tliis creTnation-gronnd ; 

As people have all departed^ so do we at iast.^ 

LXXXVI 

Kabir^ the mind is a bird which flicth and flieth in every 
direction ■ 

Man is rewarded according to the company he keepeih. 

LXXXVII 

Kabitp the position thou w^ast seeking thou hast found ; 

Thou hast changed into God whom tliou thoughtest was 
different. 

LXXXVIII 

Kabir, 1 am dying of e’vil company like the plantain near 
the wild raper ■ 

The latter wavetli and the former is pierced fry its th^rus. 
so avoid the apostate. 

LXXXIX 

Kabir, meU”^ affect to travel with the burden of other 
men's sius on their heads ; 

Why fear tliey not the burden of fhei? ou^jk since tlie road 
in front of thsm is difficult ti> travel ? 

^ I'ci mDrEify dieirflefjij. 

“ I’he tive evil |.>as!tions as dear LoTne!i afi Lheir childrec], 

® To subdue ibeir concupiscence, The BriihinanSr 

U 2 



292 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

XC 

Kabir, a standing forest tree^ which is burning calleth out-^ 

‘ May I ntrt fall into the power of the smith ® who would 
burn me again iit A*s 

One day Kabir was sitting on tire banlc oi the 
Ganges, He saw a hunter who had shot a deer. The 
deer had two young ones in her womb. Both these 
died. The buck then came, and was also shot by the 
hunter. The latter went to pick up the animal and 
was mortally bitten by a snake. The hunter's wife 
then came and died through grief, or because the snake 
bit her too. Thus died four males and two females, 

XCI 

Kabir, on the death of one two died ; on the deatlr of 
two, four; 

On the death of four, six died—four males and two 
females.* 

xcn 

Kabir hath seen and searched the world, but found no 
abiding place anywhere: 

Why doth he, who hath not thought of God’s name, lose 
himself in other speculations ? 

xcni 

Kabir, associate with the saint; he will save thee at last; 

Associate not with the infidel; his company will be thy 
ruin. 

XCIV 

Kabir, knowing that God is everywhere diffused in the 
w'orld,* 1 have remembered Him in this life ; 

^ Tlie bodj'. ® The god of death, 

* That Is, subject me to tfansmigration after dse miseries of this Jife. 

* This enigmatical couplet is thus CKplained—On the death of 
spiritual ignorance, superstition and attachment to worldly things die. 
When these two etrila die, then die inst, anger, worldly love, and 
covetousness. When these four deadly sins die, then die birth and 
death (jointly called transmigration), joy, grief, hope, and desire. The 
first four are feminine, the last two are masculine, 

* That is, not in the temple, or the mostiue, or in any other place 
especially set apart for religious worship. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 293 


They who have thought not of God’s name, have been 
bom in vain, 


xcv 

Kabir, hope in Grod ; all other hope is hopeless ; 

They who are bereft of God’s name shall admit its ^aw$r 
when they fall into hell. 

XCVI 


Kabir hath made many disciples and followers, but hath 
not made God his friend : 

He set out to meet God, but his heart failed him half¬ 
way, 

XCVII 

Kabir, what shall poor man do if God assist him not ? 
Whatever branch I put my foot on bendeth beaemik me. 


xcvrii 

Kabir, sand shall fall into the rnoutlis of those mfto pracitse 
not what they preach to otliers ; 

They watch others’ property, while their o^vn fields are 
being eaten up. 

XCIX 

Kabir, associate with holy men even though thou eat 
only barley bran : 

WTtat will be, will be; associate not with the apostate 
even though he |jti^ thee better fare. 


C 

Kabir, by association with the saints the love of God 
doubleth day by day : 

The infidel is like a black blanket; he becometh not white 
by washing. 

cr 

Kabir, thou liast not shaved tliy heart; why shave thy 
hair ? 

Man’s sins are the work of liis heart; shaving the head 
is out of place. 

ClI 

Kabir, loi'sake not God; if thy body and wealth must 
go, let them go. 


594 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

They whose hearts are devoted to God^s lotus feet, shall 
be absorbed iii His name. 

cm 

Kabir, tlie strings of tine instmiuent we play iipon are 
all broken ; ^ 

What can the poor iastniment do when the player ^ hath 
departed ? 

crv 

Kabir, shave tiic mother of that gum from whom doubt 
departeth not; 

He is drowned himself m the four Veds and he drosvnoth 
his disciples therein, 

CV 

Kabir, man concealeth all the sins he committetli; 

But at last they are all disclosed when Dharmraj maketh 
his mqniry, 

CVI 

Kabir, ceasing to remember God thou hast reared a 
numerous family : 

Thou continuest to practise thine avocations though thy 
brethren and relations are no more.® 

cvn 

Kabir, the woman who c^iasing to remember God goes 
to a wake at night * practise mtchcrafl^ 

Shall be born again as a serpent, and eat her own off¬ 
spring.® 

^ The bod}' has grown oM, and its iSmbs ]iave become 
Life. 

^ That is, ihou wi!t not take warning by the fate of others. 

^ Ahti the cremaLion of a corpse and before the bones are collected 
strangers go lo the buming-place at nighty and practise iiicantations 
with the object of retaining the ghost of the departed so as to be 
Serviceable to them in their worEdEy objects. W’^hen the relati\'es of tl^e 
departed know of the ceremony, they do not allow it, 

^ hh supposed that ft fern ale snake draws a circle round her eggs 
and then breaks them herself The young siiakes which can go out¬ 
side the circle are allowed to depart and live, but those not so abk 
the mother is said to eat. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 


295 


CVIII 

Kabir, the woniiiii who ceasing to remember God fasteth 

in honour of Hoi,^ . 

Shall be bom again as a donkey and carry a weight 01 

four mans * 

CIX 

Kabir, very great -tbill is requited to utter God^s n&me 

in the heart; .. , t x 11 v 

If the atrohat who pei'fonneth on the lugh pole fall, ne 

cannot survive * 

CX 

Kabir, blest is his mouth who uttcreth God’s Jiai/ifi ; 

His whole village shall be blest, to sa.y nothing of the poor 
creature himselb 

CXI 

Kabir, the family is fortiuiato in which a sia'h e of God 


is born , 

The family 


ill which a slave of God is not born shall be 


iruUless as the ifftaA^tree. 

CXII 


Kabir hath seen hundreds of thousands of horses, elephants, 
and carriages, and banners wave as thick us clouds ■ ^ 

Begging, when the days pass in remembering God, is 
better than dl thb state. 

CXIII 

Kabir, 1 liave traversed the whole world \«th my dmm 


on my shoulder; 

I have seen and carefully examined ♦ eveiythmg, and 1 
fiiid no one hath a friend, 

1 Hoi is a representatiori of the gnddeSi of sm&il-pox, A “ 

held by wotnen in her honour in the rnouLh cf 

the Diwali. Unmarried women make cky images oi her aim uw 

object of obtaining their deaires, These images are 

water after the DiwalL In ihe Panjab Hoi is known as San:hi. 

2 At that Lime the man (maond) only weighed thirtypounds 
avoirdupois. At present ft weighs eighty poun^ _ 

a If man, having once entered the jiath of devotion deflect from , 

he shall find no abiding piace. . , . 

* Thok bajana is to clink a vessel with the middle finger to test its 

soundness. 



296 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CXIV 

Kabir, pearls were scattered on the road ; a blind man 
came that way anti &aw iftew ; 

, Without the light of the Lord of the world everybody 
like the blind man passeth the pearls by. 

It is said that Kamal, Kabir's son, met a rich 
leper who was going in despair to drown himself in 
the Ganges. Kamal begged him to desist and 
promised to cure him: Kamal took up some Ganges 
water in the palm of his hand, breathed on it, 
repeated the name of God, and then threw the water 
on the leper. The latter was instantaneously cured. 
He rewarded Kamal with a large gift of money. In 
the following couplet Kabir censures his son for 
having accepted it :— 

CXV 

Kabir’s family was ruined when his son Kamal was bom ; 

Ceasing to remember God he brought home wealth. 

CXVl 

Kabir, go to meet a holy man but take no one with thee ; ^ 

Do not go back ; go on, come what may. 

CXVIl 

Bind not thyself, 0 Kabir, with the rope * by which the 
w™ld is bound; 

As salt is lost in flour, so shall this gold-like body iis- 
ajtpear. 

CXVIll 

Kabir, the soul shall fly away and the body be buried j 
man knowetli not when his lime shaU come ; ® 

Yef even now he will not let covetousness escape from 
,his eyes. 

^ That is, do not wait for a companion. It may also mean—take 
not with you a companioti who may want you to change your mind, 

. and mrn back on the way. * Worldly love. 

® Also IramkEed—He espreases his wishes lo liia relations by signs. 



KABIR'S SLDKS 


29; 


CXZX 

Kabir, may I behold Thee, 0 God^ with mine eyes, hear 
Thy name with mine ears, 

Utter Thy name with my tongue, and put Thy lotus 
feet within my heart I 

CXX 

Kabir hath escaped from heaven and hell by the iavour 
of the true guru ; 

1 bask for ever and ever ^ in the joy of God^s lotus feetn 

CXXI 

Kabii', say how can I guess the joy of God^s lotus feet 1 

Their beauty cannot be described; it can only be realized 
when seen. 

CXXII 

Kabir, even if 1 see them, to whom shall I describe them ? 
no one would be satisfied my w&rds ; 

God is His own parallel: I dwell in the delight of singing 
His praises, 

CXXIIl 

Kabir, the kulang pecketh its food and at the same time 
remembereth il$ young ; it pedeeth, and pecketh^ and 
pecketh and remembereth its young ; 

As its young are dear to the kulang, so is worldly love to 
tlie mind, 

CXXIV 

Kabii j the sky b overcast witli clouds; lakes aud tanks 
are filled with rain-water ; 

Yet what shall be the condition of those who choose to 
remain thirsty as the cliatrik ? ^ 

exxv 

Kabir, the sheldrake which at nigJit is sepivraled Ituiii 
her mate, meeteth him in the morning; 

But the man who is separated from God meeteth Him 
again neither in the morning nor in tl^e evening. 

^ Literally—in the be^nniiyg and the end- 

“ Those who accept not the ttichiiig of holy men \v]jiieh h 
pkntirul as rain. 


298 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CXXVl 

Kabir, 0 shell, remain in the ocean ; if thou leave it. 

Thou Shalt have to scream at sunrise at every temple/ 

CXXVIl 

Kabir, what dost thou^ O man^ by sleeping ? arise and 
weep throiigli fear of hdl and ils torments : 

How can he whose dwelling is in tlie grave sleep in peace ? ^ 

cxxvni 

Kabii^ wliat dost thou by sleeping ? why not aiisc and 
repeat God^s ? 

One day thou shalt sleeps stretdied out at full length 
in the grave. 

CXXIX 

Kabir, what dost thou by sleeping ? awake, ai^ise; 

Attacli thyself to Him from whom thou art separated. 

cxxx 

Kabir, leave not the way of holy men^ walk on their 
road ■ 

Purify thyself by the sght of them, and repeat God's 
name on meeting them. 

CXXXI 

Kabir, associate not with the infidel; tiee lar away front 
him I 

If thou toudi a black pot, some filth shall attach to thee. 

CXXXII 

Kabii^ thou hast not thought of Godi and old itge liath 
come upon tliee' 

lATien the door of thy house is on fire, what can be taken 
out and saved ? 

* Tiist isj O main^ remain absorbed in Lbe ccnUemp)aLion of God, 
Olhen^ise thou sbaJt have Co undergo many births. Ac Hindu temjiks 
it is a cu&Lom to blow sheik in the m&iijing to summon n-oj-ahippera. 

^ Unless we have repented before death. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 299 

CXXXIII 

Kabiij the work which the Creator did was accomplished 
o?tce for alL 

There is no God btd Him, the one Creator. 

CXXXIV 

Kabir* when the iruit trees begin to bear fruit, and the 
mango begioneth to ripen. 

The fruit reacheth its owner if mea*ntime tlie crows ^ 
Inive not eaten it. 

cxxxv 

Kabir, men purchase and worsliip an idol, aud obstinately 
go on pilgrimages ; 

Like actors they imitate one another, but they only err 
and lose their way. 

CXXXVI 

Kabir, men have turned a stoiie into God ; e^■e^ybody 
worshippeth it; 

They who abide in this belief arc drowned in the sable 
Btreoan. 

CXXXVIl 

Kabir, books ^ ioim a prison, the doora of which are the 
waiting tliercon : 

Ston^^ have drowned the world ; pandits havt; pillaged 
the road- 

cxxxvin 

Kabir^ do now the work of to-jni.nro\v; iind if Lima do 
it now, do it at once ; 

Nothing can be done hereafter wheii Death staiideth over 
thy headr 

^ If ibe evil pisEionsi of men do not mar iIiulj- good wQi'ks, llsey 
aliall reacli God js a*so in inSccL w[»ch deilroya fruil. 'rbe 

meaning of the slok is—^lau perform penance and many acts of 

worship^ but all will be unavailing if there be a iia'tv tn his devotion^ 
if his heart be not righL 

^ The waitings in VL-iiicEi i-lolatry and pilgrhnages are pj't^^cribedH 

^ Idol worship. 




300 EHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 


CXXXIX 

Xabir^ I hstve seen such and such a person polished like 
wax ; ^ 

He appearetii quick and very virtuouSp but he is without 
understanding and unholy. 

CXL 

Kabir* Death win not disgrace mine understanding *■ 

Since I have repeated the name oi the Cherisher who 
created him, 

CXIJ 


Kabir, God is as musk ; all His saints ai e as the bumble¬ 
bees around it : 

The more Kabir's service^ the more God dwelleth in kis 
heart 

CXLII 


Kabir^ man faUeth into the clutches of family; God is 
left in ^e background : 

Dha^raj's m 3 crmidons iali on man in the midst of his 
pomp. 

CXLIII 


Xabir, l>etter than an infidel is a pig ® which keepetli the 
village clean ; 

When the poor infidel dieth, nobody will mention him. 


CXLIV 

Kabir, men have amassed hundreds of thousands and 
millions, kauri by kauri ; 

But when departing they get nothing ; their waist- 
cloths are taken from them. 


CXLV 

Kabir, were one to be a follower of Vishnu and wear 
a beautiful ^ necklaccp what would it avail him ? 

^ Bracelets made of white waK are worn by women. They are 
showy but ungubsiantiai^ 

“ That la, he will do as I reqnesf him. 

^ He is the viJia^e scavenger, aud is remembered when the poor 
infidel is TorgoLten. 

* Also tranalabcd—’four n-eckEaces as some foEiowers of Vishnu 
wear.. 




KABIR^S SLOKS 


301 

He m^y be externally gold twelve times purified^ but 
within he is only stuffed with wax, 

CXLVI 

Kabitj become the broken stones of the road ; lay aside 
thine infellectual pride; 

If such a seTT'^ant there be^ he shall meet God. 

CXLVII 

Kabtr^ bui what would it avail to be the broken stones ? 
they would hurt the tta^^eller's feet; 

O God, Thy sei-vant should be as the dust of the earth,^ 

CXLVriT 

Kabitj wbat would it avail to be dust which=^flieth 
and falloth on men's bodies ? 

The servant of God ougI>t to be like water which ckanseth 
all the limbs.^ ‘ * 

CXLIX V 

Kabii’j btU what would it avail to be wafer ? it becometh 
cold or hot according to season 5 

Every servant of God ought to be per feci like God Himself, 

CL 

Flags wave on tlie tops of lofty mansions full of gold 
and of women— 

Bettor than all are the bread of alms ^ and singing God's 
praises in the company of His saints. 

CLl 

Kabit^ tlie wilderness wlitre God is worsliipped is better 
than a city; 

Tlie place without tlic God is in my opinion as 

the city of Death, 

1 Which is softp stTid hurts noi die iraveller's feel. 

^ When soiled b}- the du-st, 

^ 1 ’his wonl is derii-fid from tlie ^^niishrii 

Lhe bee which extracts honey from e^ieiy flairer. 


302 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CLII 

At the ferry of Sathajsur^ ’where the Ganges and the 
Jamna meet,^ 

Kabir hath built a hut where saints and men 0/ God 
seek the way. 

CLIII 

Kabir j were man to continue to the end loving Cod^ as he 
was bom, 

Millions of precious stones, to say nothing of one poor 
diamond, would not be equal to him, 

CLIV 

Kabit, I have seen a strange thing—a diamond was sold 
in a shop; 

In the absence of a purchaser who knew worth, it went 
for a kaurin^ 

CLV 

Kabir, ’where there is divine knowledge there is virtue; 
where there is falsehood there is sin ; 

Where there is covetousness there is death ; wlrere there 
is forgiveness there is God Himself. 

CLVI 

Kabir, what availath it to abandon ’worldly love if pride 
be not also abandoned ? 

Munis and their spiritual superiors perished by pride- 
their pride ate them all up, 

CLVII 

Kabir, a true guru met me and shot one word at me; 

When it struck me I fell to the earth ; there was a hole 
made in my lieart. 

^ The gvanis generally U^nslat^ ibh —In Qie sukhtnana where the 
bftsilh of the left and right nostrils meeth 

^ The belief is Lbjit the foetus in the womb prays lo God, but 
vfhen a child is born and brought into contact ^vith the world, his 
devotion fails. 

® Eivine grace so priceless was spurned by the common herd, and 
CfliSy valued at a kauri. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 


303 


CLvm 

Kabir, what can the true guru do if his disciples be at 
fault ? 

Not one word of his impresseth the $‘pi¥UusU/^ blind i it 
is like blowing into a bamboo. 

CLIX 

Kabir, the lady of a monarch who possesseth horses, 
elephants, and carriages in abundance. 

Is not equal to the female water-carrier of a saint of God. 

GLX 

Q, 0 Kabir, wliy revilest thou the king’s lady ? Why 
honourest thou God’s handmaiden ? 

A. The former parteth her hair with evil intentions ; the 
latter remembereth God’s name. 


CLXI 

Kabir, 1 propped myself up with God’s nsntc^ and steadied 
myself; the true guru gave me courage : 

I purchased large diamonds on the bank of lake Man- 
sarowar. 

CLXII 

Kabir, God is the diamond, God’s servant the jeweller 
who hath taken the gem and set up a shop for if : 

As soon as an assayer is found, the price of the diamond 
shall be ascertained. 

CLXII 1 

Kabir, as thou remeinbertst God wtien occasion requireth, 
so remember Him always ; 

Make thine abode in the immortal city ; God svill restore 
the Vr'ealth thou liust lost, 

CLXIV 

Kabir, for worship two beiiigs arc necessary, one il^o 
saint, and the other God— 

God who bestoweth salvation, and the saint who causeth 
us to repeat His name. 



3^4 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CLXV 

Kabir, crowds iollowed the pandits by the way they went; 

The one road to God by which Kabh hath been ascending 
is difficult. 

CLXVI 

Kabir^ man acteth out of regard for his iamily and thus 
dieth from worldly troubles ; 

Who hath family pride when he is placed on the cremation- 
ground ? 

CLXVII 

Kabir, Q wretched people, ye shall be riiined through 
your great regard for th^ opinion of others ; 

Know that the fate of your neighbours shall also be yours. 

CLXVill 

Kabir, good is the meal of alms made of different hinds ^ 
of corn ; 

I have Jio claim on any one for it ; great is the country 
and great its government ® 

CLXTX 

Kabir^ heart-burning ariseth from claims ; he who hath 
no claim is without ausciety; 

He who hath no claim deemeth Indar poor in co>nparisof^ 

CLXX 

Kabir, the laJce is filled to the brim^ yet few can drink 
the water ; ® 

With great good fortune hast thou found it; drink it 
in handfuls, Kabir. 

^ And thus affording variety. 

® Thai is, the world is ^^ ide, and groat is the empire of the hcly. 
The words dazt'^i h are also translated—To which no one 

hath a claim. ^ 

* The sainls are filled with holiness, yet few accept insiruction ffom 
them. The verge ig also translated—The lake is full, but there is a 
dike in front owing to which few can drink the water, 'rhe dike means 
w^orldly love, which hinders men from having lecourse to the gum. 



KABIR^S SLOltS 30s 

CLXXI 

Kabir, as the stars pass away m the mornings so doth 
this body pass away; 

Bat the two letters of God's name pass not away; Kabit 
holdeth them fast. 

CLXXrr 

Kabir, the house of wockI is on fire on all sides ; ^ 

The pandits perish in the fire while the illiterate escape, 

CLXXITI 

Kabir, drspel doubts, leave the books of ihe pandits; 

Having searched the Sanskrit books fiK thy thoughts on 
God^s feet* 

CLXXIV 

Kabir, saints abandon not their saintship, even though 
they meet millions who are not saints: 

Even though sandal be entwined with serpents, it loseth 
not its coolnesSn^ 

CLXXV 

Kabir, the mind becometh cool when it hath obtained 
the knowledge of God: 

Tlie fire which bnrneth the world is as water to God's 
soivant,^ 

CLXXVI 

TJiis world is the Creator's play ; hardly any one nndcr- 
standeth tins ; 

The Master Himself or the sla\'e at His court ^ uiider^ 
standetli it. 

CLXXVlI 

Kabir^ it is well for me that 1 fell the feai' 0/ Goi and 
forgot all else : 

^ I’hal is, evtl pa&siona assail die hody^ 

^ Aa poiaojious serpents have no effect on sjindaf-^TOod, so ihe evil 
do not corrupt the holy. 

® The evil passions which inflanie mankbd produce no impression 
on him. 

^ BiWariz may inean divine enthn^st deemed mad by the 
worJdr 


EIKU- VI 


X 



3 o 6 bhagats of the granth sahib 

From hail I mdted into wratei’j and flowing on I blendiid 
with the Ocean,^ 

CLXXVHI 

■ Kabir, God having collected dust made bodies like a 
physician^s powders^— 

Spectacles for four daySj but after all they are only dust. 
CLXXIX 

Xabij, all bodies are as the rising and setting of tJie sun 
and moon 

But if they meet not God and the guru, they all turn 
into dust again. 

CLXXX 

Where the Fearless One is, there is no fear of others; 
where there is fear, there God is not: 

Kabir speaketh thus deliberately ; O saints, give me 
willing ear* 

CLXXXI 

KabiPj they who know naught pass tJieir time in the 
sleep of peace: 

While tliey who think they know have their fill of trouble. 

CLXXXIl 

Kabij j they wlio are subdued by worldly love utter many 
cries, but difierent is tlic cry of the pir 

Kabir ^vho wets struck on a vulnerable spot ^ fell where 
he stood. 

CLXXXIII 

Kabir^ slight is the stroke of a lance ; though struck by 
it man may breathe for a Hme ; 

But he who can endure the stroke of the Word is a guru/ 
and I am his slave. 

^ Kabar'a heart was at first co] J and hard as hail. When the fire of 
divinfi love shone on ic, ii melted into water, which, flowing on, blended 
with the ocefin of God* 

^ Animals^ bodies are bom and die. 

® Also tmnsJaied—Many cry out that they are struck by God's^ love, 
butihepatn /Afv tells adiflerent story. The word pir hag two 

meanings; («) a priest or saint; (i) pab. 

^ l-Jiat ig^ the heart. ^ It can only be endured by a guru. 



KABIR^S SLOKS 


3^7 


CLXXXIV 

Kctbirp why; 0 MuUa, ascendest thou ti:e minaret ? the 
Lord b not deal: 

Search witliin thy heart for Him for whose sake thou 
callest to prayer, 

CLXXXV 

Why doth the Sliaikh who is without resignation, perform 
a pilgrimage to the Kaaba ? 

Kabii’j how can God be for him whose heart is not fifin 
in his foritk ? 

CLXXXVT 

Kabir^ offer thy homage to God, by remembering whom 
trouble shall depart ‘ 

The Lord wiiJ be manifest in thy heart, and tl^e hre^ 
which hnmetli thee shaJl be extinguishedn 

CLXXXVIl 

Kabitj to use force is tyranny though thou call it lawful 

When thine accounts are csilled fur at office, wliat 
shall be thy condition ? 

CLXXXVIII 

Kabir, an excellent diimer is khidiari^ with 

sugicienl salt to make it palatable ; 

Who would cut his own throat by eating meat with liis 
bread ? ^ 

CLXXXIX 

liabir, know that the guru will have touched thy heart 
when worldly love and ambition have been effaced; 

Joy and soixow shall not then affect tliee; thou shait 
b6CQfn$ (lud Himself.* 

cxc 

Kabii'j there are different ways of laying Ram ; ** there 
b one point to be considered: 

* Soffie read iw and trauglace—The Jije ^ fAy hearf il^all be 

extinguished by GcmI's name. ^ Rice and boiled together. 

^ Kabir a vegetarian, and objected to ibe s^aughleJr of animals. 

* Thti shak have no consciousness of existence dEstinct from God- 

^ Rim h tlie iiainu of God throughout Kabir and the qiher Bh-agat^' 

X2 



joS BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

He whom everybody calletii Ram was only a mounte¬ 
bank,^ 

CXCI 

Kabir^ call Him Ram who is omnipresent ; we must 
discriminate in mentioning lh$ ; 

The one Ram (God) is contained in all tilings i tlie other 
[Ram Chandar) is only contained in one things 

CXCII 

Kabitj in the house in wliich samts are not served God 
is not served; 

That liouse is like a ci'emation-ground, and ghosts dwell 
therein. 

CXCIII 

Kabir, 1 have beccune dumbj insancj deaf, 

And lame from the sti>5ke of tlie true guns's arrow. 

CXCIV 

Kabir, the brave true guru shot an arrow at me ; 

On its striking me I fell to the ground with a hole in my 
heart 

CXCV 

Kabir, tiie pure rain of heaven^ hatli fallen oii barren 
soil ; 

compoai Lions. SometimeB Har^ Hari, Gobind, and other names are 
tisedj but it is □ndeianjod that the reference is always to the Supreme 
God^ the Lord of creation. 

1 Aitbough in some of tlieir hymiis KabTr and some of the oilier 
hbagals of ilie Grantb Sahib appear to have believed in the Hindu 
incainaUonSj they occasioiially ridiculed Lbem. 

^ Some Sikhs translate this and the preceding slok as follows :— 

cxc 

Kabir± there are different wa,ys of uiterEng; Ram j in this there is an 
important point. 

People in geueml utter RSm one way, and the saints another way. 

CXCI 

Kabb, utter Ram^ Rim, but use discrimination in uttering il^ 

Some ^(le deiri^' so are engaged in ihdr various wliile 

others are absorbed in the one God. 

That iSj tlie gum's exhortation made an impression on niy heart 

^ I’he true gum's instructioiu 


KABIRS SLOKS 


Know that without good association it becometh like the 
ashes of a furnace ; 

cxcvr 

Kabir^ when the pure rain of heaven meeteth absorb¬ 
ing soil,* 

It cannot be removed, however much clever men may 
worry themselves. 

CXCVII 

Kabir, 1 was going on a pilgrimage to tlic Kaaba, and 
I met God on the way ; 

The Lord fell a-quaiTcUing with me* ‘ Who ordered thee 
to go to that place ? ^ 

CXCVTII 

Kabir, I have often made the pilgrimage to the Kaaba— 
hovT many times, 0 Kabir ? 

0 my Master, what fault have I committed that Thou 
wilt not speak to me ? 

CXCIX 

Kabir^ when God produceth His record, what shall be 
the fate of him 

Who violently killeth animab and calleth it lawful ? 

CC 

Kabir, to use violence is tyranny; God will call for thy 
defence ; 

When thine account is produced from His office, thou 
shalt be beaten on the mouth. 

CCI 

Kabir, to render thine accomit is easy, if thy heart be pure; 

In that True Court no one shall molest thec.^ 


cell 

Saith Kabir, O duality, in eartli and heaven tlion art 
very difficult to destroy ; ^ 

^ When ihe guru's inslruciion is corritnunicM&d lo men capable of 
receiTdng it, ^ Literally—catch thee by the coat- 

^ 1( /u^ri be read as one word,, ihe translation will be—In earth 
and heaven there are tivo beggar's boTvIs—desire and coYeiouftness— 
difficult to destroy 



310 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The six rdigious systems and the eiglity-fonr Sidhs are 
inTclved in doubt, 

CCIII 

Kabirf whatever there is in me is not mine; whatever 
there is, is Thine, 0 God. 

If Thine own property be rendered unto Thee, what doth 
it cost me ? 

CCIV 

Kabir, by repeating, ‘ Thou, Thou,’ I have berxtme Thou, 
0 God ; I have not remained in myself ; 

' When the difference between Thee and me was removed, 
wherever I looted there wast Thou. 

CCV 

Kabir, man meditateth sin and entertaineth delusive 
liopes; 

None of his desires is satisfied ; he departetb in despair. 

CCVI 

Kabir, he who remembereth God is happy in ihis world; 

He whom the Creator protecteth wavereth not either in 
this world or the next. 

CCVIl 

Kabir, I was being pressed like a handful of sesame when 
the true guru rescued me ; 

He came and appeared to me by primal and ancient 
destiny. 

CCVIIT 

Kabir, my days have been spent in evading payment of 
my dfbts to God ; interest goeth on increasing ; 

I worshipped not God, nor had I my account torn up 
when Death arrived. 

Gnru Arjan has here inserted the three following 
couplets:— 

CCIX 

Kabir, man is a barking dog which runneth after carrion ; ^ 

By granc I have obtained the true guru who hath delivered 
me. 


’ Literaliy—a sbelelon. 



KABtR'S SLOKS 


Kabiij the earth belongeth to the holy, but tliieves haves 
taken possession of it; 

The earth feeleth not their weight; to them it is clear 

gain.^ 

eexr 

Kabir^ on accoimt of the husk rice is beaten with a mallet; 

So when man sit in bad rompany, Dhai mraj shall call them 
to account. 

Here Kabir's couplets continiie 

ccxn 

" 0 Namdev, worldly love hath bewitched said his 
fi’icnd Trilochao ; 

^ Wliy printest thou clnntze^i and thinfcest not on God ? * 
CCXIII 

Namdev replied> ^ Repeat God^s name with thy lips^ O 
Triloch an ^ 

'Perform all thy duties with thy hands and feet, hd let 
thy heart be with God,^ 

Guru Arjaii again interposes :■— 

OCXIV 

O Kabir, no one hath any concern with me nor I with 
any one; 

I am contained in Him who hath created this world, 
Kabir’s instructions are resumed :— 

CCXV 

Kabir, when flour hath fallen info the naud, none of it 
is saved; 

It is that w'hich is chewed while being ground that 
availeth,^ 

^ In this line if be read as one word, the iransiaiion i,vill Sie — 

The earth feeleih thetr weight; 0 G{fd, remove ihem, 

^ Human life is the time Tor man to work out Ills sahationi It ts 
too late wlien the soul has departed. 



313 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CCXVI 

Kabir, man knoweth everytliinig, and yet he knowingly 
committeth sin; 

What advantage is it to a man to have a lamp in his 
hand if he fall into a well ? 

ccxvn 

Kabir, my love is for tlie Friend; foolish people try to 
dissuade me; 

How can it be proper to break with Him to whom belong 
my life and soul ? 

ccxvni 

Kabir, wiry kiUest thou tliyself on account of houses, and 
mansions, and their decoration, 

\Vlieti three and a half cubits, or at most three and three 
quarters, shall be thy lot ? 

CCXIX 

Kabir, if God do oot what 1 desire, what availeth my 
desiring it; 

God docth what He Himself desireth, not wliot I desire, 

^The following couplet of Guru Amar Das, is here 
found :— 

ccxx 

God produceth ansdety in man, and also freeth him 
therefrom ; 

Nanak, praise Him who taketh care of all. 

A couplet of Guru Arjan here follotvs 

CCXXl 

■ Kabir, man thinketh not of God ; he goeth astray through 
greed; 

He dieth committing sin, and his life is at an end in 
a moment. 

Here Kabir's couplets continue ;— 

CCXXII 

Kabir, tlie body is a frail vessel of only frail metal; 



KABIR^S SLOKS 3^3 

If thoa wish to make it permanent, worship God, nth^ir- 
wise it will perislK 

CCXXIII 

Kabir, caJl ott the name of God ; sleep not listlessly ■ 

By calling out night and day G&d may sornetinae hear 
thy cries. 

CCXXTV 

Kabir, the body is a plantain grove, the heart an elephant 
madd&ned by passion^ which bre^kdh it down ; 

The jewel of divine knowledge is the goad^ and a rare 
saint the tamer ^ of the elephant. 

CCXXV 

Kabir, God's name is a jeiveh the month a pnrse to hold 
it ; opon it before him who can appreciate ji^d ; 

If any purchaser be found, he may take it iit a high 

CCXXVI 

Kabifp vim know^eth not God's name winle brining up 
a numerous family t 

He dieth in the midst of his, worldly duties^ and is not 
Iieai'd of in theouteriE^fff/i. 

CCXXVll 

Kabir, in the twinkling of an eye and in a moment life 
passetli aw^ay ; 

Sii^ce the mind freeth not itself from entanglements, 
Death beateth his drum^ and kadoih flippy his victim in 
triumph. 

ccxxvriT 

Kabir, God is as a trec^ abandonment of the world as its 
fruit; 

The saint W'hohath abandoned bootless discussions^ as its 
shade. 


* ]iteral]y~tJie pilot who steers the elephant. 

- He may even gi^^e Ins life for it. 

^ The saintj like a tree's shade, affords comfort to man. 



^14 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CCXXIX 

Kabir, plant the seed of such a tree as shall bear perennial 
fruit, 

Whose shade shall be cool, whose fruit shall be profuse* 
and on which birds ^ shall play. 

ccxxx 

Kabir, the GiFer is a tree whose Irnit is merq,' which 
shedddth favours on men ; 

\^Tien the bird.s which it sheltereth migrate * say 
^ 0 Tree, may^t thou be fruitful I' 

CCXXXI 

Kabir, association with saints is obtained by destiny; 

By such association the boon of salvation is obtained, 
and the difficult road io God not obstructed* 

ccxxxn 

Kabitj even for a ghari* half a ghari, or half that again ^ 

Converse held with the saints is clear gain. 

ccxxxni 

Itabir^ the mortals who eat bhang and fish * and drinh 
wine, 

Shall all go to hell, whatever pilgrimages, fastings, and 
daily devotion they may perform. 

CCXXXIV 

Kabir, if T cast down mine eyes and take the Friend into 
my heart, 

I enjoy every pleasure mth my Beloved, and I disclose 
this to no one. 

The fifth Guru here interposes :— 

^ Hotj men. 

^ The sflints warhdei' abroad lo blazon G&d’^ goodness. 

^ In Kabir's tsme the BanArag pandits used to partake largely 
of fish. 



KABIR'S SLOKS 


315 


ccxxxv 

For the eight watches, the sixty-four gh&n$ oi the day, 
my soul lookcth towards Thee, 0 God* 

^Tiy cast down mine eyes since I behold the Beloved 
in every heart ? 

ccxxxvi 

Heal', my companion b, either my soul dwelleth in my 
Beloved or my Beloved in my soxih 

I know not whether my soul ifi in my hearty or my Beloved 
dwelleth in my soul. 

CCXXXVII 

Kabir^ the Brahmati is the guru of the world, but he is 
not the guru of the saints ; 

He killeth himself over the perplexities of the four Veds, 

ccxxxvin 

God is as sugar scattered in the sand, but the elephant 
cannot pick it up ; 

Saith Kabif;, the guru gave this excellent advice, ^ Become 
an ant and eat it 3 ^ 


CCXXXIX 

Kabir, if thou desire the Beloved, cut off thy head and 
make it into a ball; ® 

While playing attain sudi a state of ecsiusy that thou 
shall be s&lisfiad with whatever happeneth thee. 

CCXL 

Kabir* if thou desire the Beloved, play with a true gnni i 

Tf unripe oil-seeds be pressed, neither oil-cjike nor oil will 
be obtained.^ 

Here a couplet of Namdev is introduced :— 

^ The hutnbk "succeed where the pioud fail. 

^ Such k the sacrifice that must be made to enable man to play 
with the samtB, and share in their bliss. 

^ Nothing can be obtained from a false gunik inscmction. 



3 i6 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

CCXLI 

Man searching for God stmnbleth like a blind man and 
recogiii2eth not the saint; 

Saith Namdev, how shalt thou obtain God without the 
mediation of His saints ? 

The following lines of Rav Das are here inserted :— 

ccxm 

He who forsaking God the diamond yearneth for other 
gods. 

Shall go to iiell, verily saith Rav Das. 

CCXLIII 

0 Kabir, if thon embrace a domestic life, act honestly; 
otherwise abandon the world ; 

But if any one, having abandoned the world, a gain 
become entangled inith if, great indeed shall be his mis¬ 
fortune. 


RAV DAS 

Ray Das is the author of many hymns in the 
Granth Sahib, He was certainly a disciple of Rarua- 
nand and a contemporary of Kabir, but otherwise 
there is nothing known regarding his precise date, 
parentage, or place of birth. When Rav Das arrived 
at years of discretioii he began to wait on saints. 
He used to present them with everything he could 
procure from his father’s house. His mther was 
displeased at this and gave him a separate place of 
residence. Though his father’s wealth and means 
were considerable, yet he gave nothing whatever to 
his son, The latter, who by this time had entered 
the married state, supported himself and his wife 
by making shoes, and lived very happily, ^Vhenever 
he saw a holy man he supplied him gratuitously 
with covering for his feet. He afterwards built 
a hut, set up in it an idol which he had made from 



a hide, and applied himself to its worship. When he 
was reproached for making an idol out of a hide, he 
defended, himself by descanting on the various advaii- 
t^es of hides. D rums used in worship were made from 
hides. The cow held sacred by Hindus had a hide. 
God is contained in animals whihh have hides, &c., &c. 

Rav Das was ever immeised in his devotions, 
a circumstance which led to the abandomnent of his 
trade and the deterioration of his circumstances. 
He soon presented all the external marks of poverty 
and hard life, yet his heart was glad and happy in the 
contemplation of God. It was during this period of 
distress that a holy man desired to render him assist¬ 
ance. Rav Das gave him bread to eat and lavished 
every attention on him. His risitor in return pre¬ 
sented him with a philosopher’s stone, explained its 
qualities, and told him to keep it carefully. Rav Das 
replied that he did not require it, as his property 
and wealth consisted in the name of God, When 
the visitor saw that Rav Das absolutely coveted 
nothing, he implored him to accept the philosopher's 
stone. Rav Das told him he might leave it m the 
thatch of his house, by which he meant that the 
article was not vrorth acceptance. The visitor 
obeyed Rav Das and departed. On that occasion 
Rav Das composed the following hymn :— 

God’s name is the great wealth of God's saints ; 

Day by day it increasetL and in no way deoreasetli. 

Nothing can steal it eitlier by day or night; its possessor 
sleepedi secure in lus Jioine. 

0 God, what need of a stone liath he who possesseth 
this wealth ? 

After the lapse of thirteen months the visitor 
returned and found Rav Das in the same circum¬ 
stances as before. He asked him what had become 
of the philosopher’s stone. Rav Das replied, ' It 
must be where thou didst put it ; I have been afraid 
to touch it.’ Upon this the visitor took it from tire 



3t8 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

thatch and departed^ fully satisfied that Rav Das 
desired no earthly wealth. 

One day the saint found five gold coins in 
a basket employed to hold accessories of worship. 
The result was that he began to fear even devotion 
to God, lest it might bring him wealth. Then God 
said to him in a vision, ‘ Although thou absolutely 
desirest nothing, yet accept the wealth I give thee 
now.’ Rav Das promised to do so. A pious admirer 
gave him money with which he built a sara, or rest- 
house, wherein he entertained holy men. He then 
built a temple and so decorated it with a canopy, 
fringes, cords of gold lace, wall lamps, chandeHers, 
that visitors on seeing its beauty became en¬ 
chanted. After that Rav Das built a two-storied 
house for himself on the site of the hut he had 
hitherto used as a temple, and there he continued 
to worship with perfect love. 

Rav Das experienced the ordinary fate of men 
suddenly enriched, The Brahmans, through envy 
and jealousy, complained to the Idng of Banaras 
that there was no authority in the Shastars for 
a shoemaker to make an image of God, yet Rav Das 
had without any fear oj" compunction set up such an 
image and was worshipping it and offering it homage. 
He ought therefore to be made to suffer for his pre¬ 
sumption. The king summoned Rav Das, but was 
so much impressed with the dignity and reasonable¬ 
ness of his defence that he found no difficulty in 
immediately dedaring him guiltless of any offence 
against religion. 

Jhali, the Queen of Chitaur, hearing of Rav Das's 
fame, visited him and became a disciple of his. At 
this her attendant Brahmans waxed highly indignant. 
They said that the queen had lost her reason, and 
they went and complained of her to the Rana, her 
husband, who had accompanied her to Banaras. He 
sent for Rav Das, and heard the charges of the 
assembled Brahmans against him. They repre- 


RAV DAS 


319 


seuted the supreme importance of caste, and the 
impropriety of allowing a shoemaker to usurp a 
higher spiritual or social position than that in whicli 
he had been born. Rav Das rephed, ' What is dear 
to God is devotion ; He payeth no heed to caste/ 
Upon this the Brahmans proposed to refer the matter 
to the arbitrament of prayer. They read the Veds 
for three full hours and repeated many spells^ but 
did not succeed in inducing God to persuade the 
Rana of Rav Das's guilt, When it came to Rav 
Das’s turn, he said, ‘ O Great King, be true to thy 
name of Pardoner of sinners.’ He toen sang a couple 
of stanzas. The first line of the first stanza is : — 

0 come without delay or call me unto Thee. 

The first lines of the second stanza are:— 

0 God of gods, I Thy protection crave ; 

Have mercy on me, knowing me Thy slave. 

The Rana was easily convinced of Rav Das’s 
innocence and expressed hin^elf accordingly. Upon 
this it is said all present became believers in Rav 
Das’s sanctity. 

After that Queen Jhali left Banaras, and returned to 
her kingdom, where she decided on holding a thanks¬ 
giving festival. With great modesty and humility 
she invited Rav Das to be pleased to attend it. He 
accepted her invitation and went to Chitaur, His 
visit afforded her intense pleasure. She distributed 
a large sum of money in alms on the occasion, and 
invited the principal Brahmans of her state to meet 
the holy man. The Brahmans knew that the queen’s 
CTru had been a shoemaker, and it would be better 
for them to take raw provisions of their o;vn and 
cook them than partake of food proffered by the 
queen. They accordingly had food cooked for them¬ 
selves, but, when tliey sat down to eat it, it is said, 
they saw Rav Das seated between every two of 
them. They then believed in his divine mission and 
fell at liis feet. It is stated that he gained many 



320 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

disciples on that occasion. R^v Das composed the 
following after the ^tertainment:— 

Qever men/ 1 am notoriously a tanner by caste. 

But in my heart I meditate on God. 

If wine be made even with Ganges water, you holy men 
will not drink it ; 

But if wine which is impure^ or other liquid be put into 
Ganges water, the latter wih not be altered/ 

The palmyra palm-tree, sirs, is admittedly impure/ as its 
leaves * are also deemed ; 

But if God's words be written thereon, men will worsliip 
it and bow before it* 

My trade is dressing and cutting leather and daily remov¬ 
ing dead cattle round about Banaras. 

Yet prominent Brahmans now prostrate themselves before 
me, since I, the slar^e Relv Das, have sought the shelter of Thy 
name, 0 God. 

Rav Das is said to have been such a perfect saint 
of God that his conversation and poetry were like 
suns to dispel the darkness of doubt and infidelity. 
He performed the meritorious acts prescribed in the 
Veds and the Shastars. Orientals believe that if 
milk mixed with water be placed before a swan, it 
can by its peculiar bill separate both, and drink only 
the milk. In the same way Rav Das selected virtue 
from vice, made choice of good acts and avoided 
things forbidden. 

The following compositions of Rav Das are found 
in tlie Granth Sahib : 

^ /sfi, also translated—Ye city men. 

jr a man, no m-atter how highly born, become evil^ he U' not 
respected, as wine made wUb Ganges v^-aler is not fit for ^nts' uge. 
But if, on the contrary, wine be thrown into the Ganges, ihe Ganges 
watej will stLl be holy, so the lowly are exalted by assodaticn with 
saints. 

3 Because toddy, an intoxicating liquor, is made out of it 
* hence taghais, -the modem llindustani name for paper. 

The leaves qf.the paEm or. palmyra-tree were originally used, for 
writing on. 


321 


HYMNS OF RAV DAS 

God being light and the soul also light, there is 
no difference between them except that the sonl is 
encumbered with a body. 

Ski Rag 

Between Thee and me, between me and Thee what 
difference con there be ? 

The same as between gold and the bracelet^ between 
water and its ripples. 

If I did not commit sin^ 0 Eternal One, 

How sbouldst Thou have gained the name of Purifier of 
sinners ? 

Thou who art the Lords ait the Searclier of hearts: 

The servant is known from his master, and the master 
from his servant* 

Grant me the wisdom to worship Tliee with my body* 

Rav Das, some rare person who dcstroyetli his evil 
passions,^ may explam this. 

Though Rav Das's birth is low, he is a candidate 
for God's favour. 

Gaur: 

1 

My associations are low—I think of it day and night— 

My birth is mean, mine acts axe crooked. 

0 God, Lord of the earthn Giver of life to men^^ 

Forget me not, I am Thy slave; 

Remove my troubles, make Thy servant full of love for 
Thee. 

I will not forsake Thy feet even though my body perish 
to-morrow. 

Saith Rav Das, I seek Thy protection, 0 God* 

Quickly come to 'fhy servant, delay 3V0t. 

^ The gyanis irmslaie-—Some rare perLon m'^y explain ihal God 
Is equally contained in everything, 

Y 


aiioc. v[ 




322 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Rav Das*5 conception of heaven. 

11 

There is a city named Beghampur,^ 

Where pain and sorrow find no place ; 

There is no fear of tribute or of tax ; 

There is nor care, nor sin, nor dread nor death, 

Now have 1 found an excellent abode 

Where ceaseless happiness doth rdgii, my friends. 

There firm and for aye is sovereignty of God, 

No second or third is there adored,* He rulcth alone; 
Inhabited and ever famous is that city; 

Its people are full dowered with wealth. 

Theirs it is to wander as they please ; 

None restraineth them known in the palace, 

Saith Rav Das, emancipated taimer. 

My friends become my fellow citizens there.* 

It is said that a Labana offered an ox to Rav Das. 
On refusing the present, the saint wrote the foT 
lowing:— 

III 

The road to Cod is very difficult and steep, and I have 
already one useless ox.* 

My one prayer to God is, ‘Preserve my capital,® 0 God.* 
Is there any merchant of God who will join me ? My 
goods are laden and about to start.® 

I am a merchant of God, and deal in divine knowledge. 
The wealth 1 have loaded is God’s name ; the world 
hath loaded poison. 

^ A city where there is no sorrow. This is not Begampur, a village 
On the left bank of the Bhima, so called because one of Aurangseb's 
daughters died and was buried there, white her father was encamped 
at Brahmapuri on the opposite side of the river. 

* That is, no Vishnu or Shiv. 

* That is, they whose lives Ht them for that abode are tny friends; 
and obtain salvation. 

* My body. * That is, my life. 

® Tiiac is, I am prepared to give religious instniclion to whoever 
will join me. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


3^3 


Ye recording angcds, who.know this world uiid the Jiextj 
write whatever non&ense you please aboul me, I care not; 

The dub of death will not touch me since I have cast 
away all entanglements. 

Tliis ’world is like t]T.e fieeHng colorir ol safflower^ 

But the colour of my God 5s the pertmnef^t dye of madder^ 
saith the tanner Rav Das. 

Rav Das prays for divine favour. 

IV 

As a pit full of frogs ^ which know notliing of different 
countries^ 

So my mind infatuated with e’vil pasdons taketh no 
thought of this ’world or the next, 

O Lord of all the worldj grant me a sight of Thee for 
a moment ; 

My mind is not clear, 0 God, and so I cannot understand 
Thy condition. 

Take pity on me that my doubts may be dispelled, and 
teach me right understanding. 

Even supreme Jogis cannot explain Thine attributes which 
are beyond expression. 

The tanner Rav Das prayeth for Thy love and service. 

The following was Rav Das^s reply to a holy man 
who asked the questions contained in the hymn. 

V 

In the Sat age was truth, in the Treta sacrifice, and in 
the Dwapar the performance of worship. 

In the three ages these three observances w^ere established, 
but in the Kal age the Name is the only support* 

How shah 1 be saved ? 

No one explaineth to me 

How my transmigration may cease. 

There are many forms of religion described, but every¬ 
one appeareth to adopt Ills own* 

What are those acts by whidr I may be saved, and by 
the performance of which I may obtain all things ? 

^ * Frog in a wcU^ is applied in HinduBLiliii to an ignoraut person. 

Y 2 



324 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

If what are mciits aud what demerits be decided by 
listening to the Veds and Purans,^ doubt sh&U resuU ; 

Doubt shall thus ever dwell in the heart; who shall 
dispel pride ? 

Man washeth his body with water, but in his heart there 
is evil of every description. 

How shall purity result ? My purity is such as the elephant 
practiseth. 

As by the sun’s light night departeth, as all tJie world 
knoweth; 

As copper when touched by the philosopher’s stone at 
once becometh gold i 

So if the supreme philosopher’s stone, the guru, be found 
by destiny, 

The perturbed mind shall meet God who is in tire heart, 
and the doors of adamant shall be opened.® 

Tire doubts, the entanglements, and the sins of him who 
maketh the way of devotion firm in his heart shah be cut 
away; 

He shah restrain his mind, obtain happiness, and meditate 
on Him alone who possesseth aU qualities and yet possessetli 
none. 

Many efforts have 1 made to ward off the noose of doubt, 
but, however much 1 tried, 1 did not succeed. 

Love and devotion have not sprung up in me, therefore 
Rav Das is sad. 

Man is a prey to all the five senses and their 
attendant passions, and not to one predominating 
and overmastering sense alone like the lower 
animals. Hence the following hymn : — 

Asa 

I 

The deer, tlie fish, the bumble-bee, the moth, and the 
elephant perish each for one sense; 

So what hope is there for him who like man hath five im¬ 
placable enemies ? 

’ The Veds and Purlns prescribe difTereni forms of worship. 

® Hardness of heart shall depart. 


HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


3‘J 


O God, mm loveth ignorance ; 

His lamp of discrimination hath grown dim. 

The thoughtless are born again as creeping things which 
distinguish not between good and evil; 

Thejr now obtained human birth so difficult to 

obtain, and yci in it they associate with the base. 

Men and lower animaJSf wherever they are, are born 
subject to their previous acts^ 

And the noose of Death which hangeth over them can 
by no means be warded off. 

Rav Das, renounce worldly iove^ dispel doubt, and make 
the guni^s divine knowledge thy religious fen'^our. 

O Thou^ who dispellest Thy worshipper's fear^ grant me 
supreme bliss at last. 

Rav Das pra}^ for the saints^ virtnes and devotion 

II 

The company of the saints, who are Thine image, is my life. 

Through the divine knowledge of the gum 1 recogiiije 
the saints as gods of gods. 

Grant me the company of the saints, a taste for the 
saints' converse, 

The saints' love, O God of gods, 

The saints’ good woikSj aild the saints^ way^ that I may 
become attached to what they are attached,^ 

I pray for one thing more^ the miraculous gem of devo¬ 
tion.^ 

Show me not the wicked and the sinner— 

Between the saints and the Infinite tliere is no difference ; 

Rav Das saith^ he who knoweth tliis is wise. 

Rav Das is exalted by holy association. 

III 

Diou art sandal, 1 am the poor palma clniBti® plant, 
I dwell near Thee : 

^ Some read and translate—Thai I may become tbeir 

slave of slaves. 

s a gem supposed to yield its possessor whatever he 

desired. In Enj^land the ^vishing-cap w'as said to posse??^ the ^me 
virtue. ^ This is the J^idnus or easLor-oil pbnL. 



3^6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

From a humble ^ruh I have become a lofty tr^e : Thine 
excellent perfume abideth in nte. 

0 Godj I have sought the protaction of Thy true con- 
gregatiofin 

I am without virtues, Tlvou art beneficent, 

Thou art white ^ and yellow twisted silk ; we are the 
poor worms ® tuho toil and make iL 
0 God, may I continue to associate with the saints as 
the bee with the honey [ 

My caste is low, my lineage low^ and low is my birth ; 

I have not served my sovereign God, saith the tanner 
Rav Das. 

For God's love Rav Das would sacrifice himself. 

IV 

Wliat would it matter were my body to be in pieces ? 
Thy slave, 0 God^ only feareth that Thy love may depart \ 
Thy lotus feet are the home of my heart 1 ® 

By drinking the nectar of His name, I have found God 
who is my wealth. 

Prosperity, adversity, worldly love, and wealth screen 
God from man ] 

In them Tliy servant is not absorbed. 

Thy slave is bound by the rope of Thy love j 
Saith Rav Das, what advantage is it to escape there¬ 
from ? 

Ged^s name saves saints and sinners. 

V 

God, God, God, God^ God, God, God 
By remembering God, saints and sinners^ are saved. 

^ from llie Arfibic 

® AYrfl is translated canvas. 

^ Atso translated—Thy feel are tlic lotus, my scut the bumbTe-bee 
flititng over them. This is ou the supposition that is read 

for 

* This line is supposed Co be an imiLation of tlie <levolee '3 repetition 
of God's jiame. The gy^nis traoslitc—-They who repeat God's name 
in iheir hearts, they who repeat it with dieir tongues, and they who 
cause oihei'E to repeat it, btoom afresh, 

5 JVts/drj Kterally—those who ought not to be saved. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


337 

Through the name of God, Kabir became renowned, and 
the accounts of his sins of many births were torn tip, 

Namdev as in duty bound ^ gave milk to god to drinl:; 

\\T;ierefore be liad not the pain of being born again in 
the world. 

The slave Rav Das is dyed with God’s love. 

And so, through the favour of the guru, he shall not go 
to hell. 

They who think not of God shall be condemned, 

VI 

How wuftt a puppet of clay, danceth ! 

He looketh and looketli, heareth, speaketh, ronneth about. 

When he acquireth anything he is proud. 

But when his wealth is gone he beginneth to weep. 

In thought, word, and deed he is fascinated by pleasures, 

So when he perisheth he is contained somewhere else.® 

Saitli Rav Das, tire world is a play, my brethren ; 

I liave established loving relations with the True Actor.* 

The object of the following hymn is to show that 
nothing offered to God by idolaters, even according 
to their own ideas, is pure, and that the true offering 
to God is the sincere heai't. 

GuJAKi 

The calf hath deftkd the milk in the cow’s udder hy 
tasting it ; 

The bumble-bee hath spoiled the flowers, and the fish 
the water— 

My mother, where shall 1 find anything to offer in God’s 
worship ? 

I cannot find other flowers superior to these. 

Serpents tW'Lne round the sandal-tree ; * 

^ Sansiirit Hls ^tber^ before gGing on a jom'neyp 

enjoined him to give milk to the famLty idol during his absence. 

* Instead of bein^ absorbed In God's tight he is born agaiii ^ an 
inferior animalr ® And not wtdi ihe play. 

Serpents fove ihe perfume of ibe sandil-trce and around it. 
They Lhus^ in the estimadon of sbkL Hiindfi?> spoil and render ic 
unfii 10 be offered in worship, ia commonly doncp 



328 EHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Poison and ambrosisi dwell together; 

Incense, lamps, and consecrated bread are polluted,^ 

How shall thy slave perform Thy worship ? 

Let me dedicate and offer my body and soul as my 
worship, 

Thus, by the guru^s favour, shall I find the Pure One, 

I cannot perform Tliine adoration and worship according 
to Hindu riUs ; 

Saith Rav Das, in what condition am I ? 

Rav Das concludes that everything is God. 

SOJSATH 

I 

Wl^en there was egoism in me, Thou wert not with me; 
now that Thou art with me^ there is no egoism. 

Huge ivaves are raised by the wind in the ocean, but 
they are only water in water.^ 

O God, what shall I say ? Through illusion things 
are not as they are supposed to be. 

A king sleepeth on his throne ; in a dream he becometh 
a beggar; 

He sufferetli pain at losing his empire, though it is intact: 
such hath been my condition. 

Like tlie story of the rope and the serpent, I have now 
had the secret ^ explained to me. 

On S6&ing several * bracelets I erroneously supposed that 
they wsra distinct from the g^ld ; but what I then said I now 
say no longer. 

In all things the one Lord assumeth viirious shapes; 
God sporteth in all hearts. 

^ Somebody ha& Loudied them. 

^ Since 1 cannot worship Thee wilh all the accessories of Hindu 
worship. 

® The meaning; is, since the poet has abjured egoism^ he has 
become a portion of God as the wives blend with the sea, 

* I thought a rope w^ls a serpen t but it was not. I thought that 
man existed, hut now I find everything is God. 

* If were here read, the transJalion would be—As man 

mistaketli by calling a thing a bmcelet instead of calling it gold. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


3^9 


Saith Rav Das, God is nearer to us thau our hands and 
feel i it is what taketh place by His will that taketh plaoen 

Rav Das so loves God that he feels he has a claim 
on His mercy. 

II 

When Thou didst bind us with a noose of illusionj we 
bound Thee with a bond of JoVe ; 

Try to release Thyself; we have been released by adoring 
Thee. 

O Godp Thou knowest how we feel tow^ards Thee ; 

Now what wilt Thou do with us, such bdng our lov^ for 
Thee ? 

Man catohcth a fisli, diceth it^ cutteth it up, and cooketh 
it in v arious ways; 

He bitelh and cELteth it, still it lorgetteth not tile 
watcrn^ 

TJic Supreme Ruler is no man^s lieriJagc ; He belongeth 
to him w^ho lovetli Him. 

Though the screen of illusion be spread over the whole 
world, yet it troubleth not the saint, 

Saith Rav Das, my devotion to tjie one God batli im 
creased ; to whom shall I teU this now' ? 

Shall I stiU suffer misery for the removal of which I 
worship Thee ? 

Rav Das on introspection finds himself w^anting. 

III 

I obtained this birth difficult of attainment as tlio toward 
of merit, but it passeth away in vain on flcccwni of my w^aut 
of discrimination. 

Say of what account would a palace and a throne like 
King IndaFs be without devotion to God ? 

I have not tliotiglit of the pleasure in the Supreme God^s 
fifljHf, a pleasure in whicli all other pleasures are forgotten. 

What we ought to have known we knew not ; we have 


^ Til at iia ealtr liecojues Uiirslv, 


330 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

become mad, aiid not considered what we oi^ight to have 
comidered^ and so our days have passed away. 

Our passions are strongs and onr discrimination weak; 
our understanding oannot enter into God^s designs. 

We say one thing, and do another; worldly love hin- 
dereth us from understandiag, 

Saith Rav Das, Thy slave, am sad at heart ; 

Avert Thine anger from me and have mercy on my soul. 

We should fix our attention on God who can 
adequately reward us- 

IV 

God is an ocean of pleasure; in His power are the 
miraculous tree, and gem^ and cow. 

The four advantages, the eighteen miraculous powers, 
and the nine treas-ures are in the palm of His hand. 

Why repeat not, ' God, God, Godn’ with thy tongue, 

And abandon all other device ot words ? 

The epic poems, the Purans, the Yeds- of Brahma, axe all 
composed out of thirty-four letters.^ 

Bias having reflected expressed ]hs conviction tJiat there 
was nothing equal to the name of God. 

Very fortunate are they who tranquilly contemplate and 
fix tlieir attention upon God ; they shall afterwards be 
freed from their troubles. 

Saith Rav the fear of death and birth- fleeth from 
liim who hath put the light of divine knowledge into his 
heart. 

The saint’s relation to God. 

V 

If Thou art a hill, then I am Thy peacock ; ^ 

If Thou art the moon, then I am Thy chakor ; 

O Godj if Tliou break not with me, I will not break with 
Thee ; 

1 Omitiirtg ihe modifications jind combinaLions of the Sanskrit 
characters and relainlng only one s* The meaning apparently is that 
the letters which form God^s name are superior to all the other tetters 
emplo^'ed in the Hindu Sflcned writings. 

2 In India peacocks generally live on undulating lands. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


331 


If I bresik with Thee, wliom shall I join ? 

If Thou art a lampj then I am Thy witk ; 

If Thou art a plac^ of pilgrimage, then I am Thy pilgrim. 
1 have joined true love with Thee ; 

Joining Thee I have broken with all others* 

Wherever I go there is Thy service ; 

There is no other Lord like Thee, 0 God. 

By worshipping Thee Death's noose is cut away. 

Rav Das singeth to obtain Thy service. 

Man is too proud of his body though its origin 
and its end are contemptibie. 

VI 

The body is a wall of water supported by a pillar of air i 
blood ^ and semen are its mortar* 

The poor soul dwdlcth in a skeleton of bones, flesh, and 
veins; 

O mortal, wliat is mine and what is thine ? 

As a bird perc-hetli on a tree, so doi-h the soul on the body^ 
Thou layest foundations and bnildest tliysdi a house ; 
Three and a half cubits shall be thy measure at last. 

Thou curlest thy hair, and wearest thy turban on the 
side of thy head ; 

But thy body shall become a heap of dust. 

Even though thou possess lofty palaces and beautiful 
women. 

Without the name of God thy game is lost. 

My caste is low, my lineage low, and base is jny birth: 

I have sought Thy sholterj O God, saith tlie tanner 
Rav Das. 

The following was addressed to some one who re- 
proaclied Kav Das for not following bis trade 

vn 

I a cobbler know' not how to mend shoes. 

Yet people want me to mend their shoes. 

1 the portion supposed lo bt conuibuled bj Ihe femnie 

inttoad of the ova of modern physiology. 


332 BHAGAT5 OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

T have no awl to stitch with ; 

I have no knife to patch with. 

People have been thoroughly ruined by mending shoes 

I have attained my object without mending shoes. 

Rav Das repeateth God^s name; 

1 have now no concern with Death. 

Rav Das^B devotion and hope in God. 

Dhanasaki 

I 

There is none 5o poor I, none so compassionate as 
Thou ; for this what further test is now necessary ? 

May my heart obey Thy words! fill Thy servant therewith. 

I am a sacrifice to Thee^ O God i 

Wliy art Thou silent ? 

For many births have I been separated from Tlieep 0 God: 
This birth is on Thine account.^ 

Saith Rav Das^ putting my hopes in Thee I live; it is 
long since I have seen Thee. 

Rav Das's love for God. 

II 

I lemember Tliee, 0 God^ in my heart; I behold Thee 
with mine eyes; 1 fill mine ears with Thy hymns ^ and 
praises ; 

I make my mind the honey-bee^ I put Thy lotus feet into 
my heart, and with my tongue I utter Thine ambrosial 
name. 

May my love for God not decrease ! 

I have bought it dear in exchange for my soul. 

Without the companionship of the saints no love is pro^ 
duced, and without love no service is performed for Thee. 

Rav Das offereth one prayer to God—preserve mine 
honour, 0 my sovereign Lord. 

^ And neglecting God, the expression garttAt ganfAt also means to 
be attached to worldly things, 

^ That I m^y worship Thee in human body. 

3 The clause m also trauslated—1 fill my ears and my tongue with 
Thy praises. 



HYMNS OF EAV DAS 


333 


God’s name is for Rav Das eqnal to all the Hindu 
oblations. 


Ill 


Thy tiEime, O God, is mine Arati and mine ablutions ; 

Without the name of God ah display is vain. 

Thy name is my prayer-mat, Ihy name my saffron- 
grjiter. Thy name the saffron which I sprinkle for Thee; 

. Thy name is the water, Thy name the sandal, the repeti¬ 
tion of Thy name the grating thereof; ^ faking it I offer it 
unto Thee; 

Thy name is tlie lamp, Thy name the wick, Thy name 
the oil I pour therein ; 

Thy name is the light whidi I have applied to it, and 
which hath enlightened the whole world ; 

Thy name is the string, Thy name the necklace of flowers ; 
all the eighteen loads of vcgclallcs are too impure^ to 
Thee, 

Wliy should I offer Thee the work of Thy hands ? Thy 
name is the chauri which I wave over Thee. 

The whole world is engrossed in the eighteen Purans, the 
sijcty-eight places of pilgrimage^ and the four sources of life, 

Saith Rav Das, Thy name is the Arati / the true Name 
is the food I offer unto Thee, O God,® 


God alone can save man from his evil passions, 

jAlISAal 

0 Lord, I know nothing; 

I have sold my aoxii to mammon. 

Thou art styled the great Lord of the world, and we the 
sensualists of the Kal age. 

The five evil passions which have corrupted my heart, 
Have at every moment thrown a barrier between Thee 
and me. 

Whithersoever I look, there is a stock of trouble. 

Sandal is grated and sprinkled by Hindus on [bek tdo], 

® Because the t>ee has tasted tbtm. 

This hymn is recited in a ool lection of Sikli prayers calletl ilie 
Aeaii. 



334 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

I am not y-et satisfied, althoxigh tiie Vcds bear vi^itncss Ig 
G od. 

As, for his sin, Qn lh&body of Indixr, tlie pajamour of Ahalyn 
Gautam's wife, a thousand vaginae formed ; 

As the head of Brahma adhered to the hand of Shi^ the 
lord of Uma ^ for his sin. 

So these wicked enemies, deadly sins, have bound and 
beaten me also & sinner, 

I am very shameless, and have not yet grown weary of 
their company ^ 

Saith Rav Bas^ wliither shall I go? What shall I do? 

Except God’s protection whose shall I seek ? 

The saint and the sinner -under the allegories of 
a good and a bad wife contrasted. 

Sum 

1 

The good wife knoweth her spouse’s worth ; 

She: renouuceth pride and cnjoyeth conjugal happiness; 

She giveth her husband her body and souh ^d makcth 
no distinction belwem him Anti hcrsdf ; 

She seetJi no one else, ]xearetli no one else, and speaketh 
to no one else. 

How should she, into wiiose heart no sorrow liatti entered, 

Know of the woes of others ? 

The bad wife ® who hath not sms^ed her spouse continually 

Is unhappy^ and loseth hotlr worlds— 

The way by the bridge of Sirat ® is difficult— 

Sh® shall have no companion, and must go alone* 

Ill grief and in pain, 0 God,. 1 have come to Thy door; 
I am very tliirsfy^ and I have received no answer from The^. 

Saith Rav Das, 1 have come to Thy protection ; effect my 
salvation as Thou thinkest best. 

^ Also called Parbati. 

^ Wife here is used for man in the generic sense, and the spouse is 
God. 

^ The bridge which leads to heaven^ according 

to Muhammadans. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


335 

As everything here changes, man bliould make 
provision for the hereafter, 


II 

The days which come, pass away again ; 

We must march on, nothing remainetli stable. 

Our companions are going, wc too must go ; 

The journey is long ; Death standeth over us. 

Why sleepest thou ? Awake /w Carf’s service, 0 silly 
one; 

Thou thoughtest life a real thing in this world, when ihou 
oughiest io have ihoughi of God. ^ 

He who gave thee life, cenveyeth thee sustenance. 

And in every heart openetli a shop,^ 

Worship God, lay aside egoism ; 

In thy heart remember God’s name betimes. 

Thy life hath come to an end. yet thou hast not prepared 
thy way ; 

It is evening, and darkness is on every side. 

Saith Rav Das, O fool and madman, 

Didst thou not reflect that the world is a transitory 
abode ? 


Man can only rely on God, not on property or' 
relations. 


111 


Man buLldeth lofty maasions with halls and kitchens, 
Btit after Death he cannot remain in them for a ghari. 
This body is like a wainscoting of grass ; 

Wlien tlie grass is burnt, it is blended witlr tfie dust. 
Even thy relations, thy family, and thy companions 
Set up a ciy, ^ Take him out quickly ! ’ 

The wife of thy house who embraced thee in life, 

Crieth out, ‘ Ghost 1 ghost! ’ and runnetli away from 
tliee. 

Saith Rav Das, Death hath plundered the whole wmrld, 
But 1 have escaped by lepeatii^ the name of the one God. 


^ To disipenae food. 



336 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

God’s gi’ace is unparalleled, 

Bilawal 

1 

Everybody used to laugh on seeing my poverty—such 
was my condition; 

But / hold the whole eighteen supernatural power's in the 
palm of my hand through Thy favour. 

Thou hnowest I am nothing, O God, Destroyer of fear; 

All men have sought Thy protection, O God, Fuliiller of 
desires; 

They who have sought Thy protection no longer bear the 
load of sin. 

High and low have been delivered fiom tire shameless i 
world through Thee. 

Saith Rav Das, why say more regarding the Ineffable ? 

Thou, O God, art Thine own parallei; to what can I 
liken Thee ? 

The glorification of the saint. 

11 

The family in which a saint of God is born, 

Whether it be of high or low caste, poor or rich, shall have 
its unalloyed fame blazoned through the world. 

Whether man be a Brahman, a Vaisya, a Sudar, a Khatri, 
a Dum, a Chandal, or a Malechh, 

He becometh pure by worshipping God ; he saveth him¬ 
self and the families of both his parents. 

Blest the village, blest the place of his birik, blest his pure 
family in all worlds ! 

He hath quaffed the supreme essence; abandoning all 
others, he hath beconre intoxicated with it, and renounced 
sin. 

Among pandits, heroes, and emperors, there is none 
equal to the saint, 

^ Also translated—Have been delivered from the entailglemenls of 
the world through Thee. 



HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


337 

As the Lea\’es of the \vater-lily^ in the 'water, saith Rav 
Das, is the saint’s existence in the world; remaindh 
wncoaimtiintdcd by ii. 

God as the Dispenser of salvation. 

Gaumd 

I 

Repeat the name oi God, the Dispenser of salvation^ ye 
people. 

Without the Dispenser of salvation the body groweth 
weary in transmigration. 

The Dispenser of salvation is the Giver of deliverance; 
The Dispenser of salvation is out father and mother. 
Living repeat His natfte, dying repeat His nanic^ 

His worsl^ipper is ever happy— 

The Dispenser of salvation is my life* 

If it have been so recorded on thy forehead ^ Uiou slialt 
repeat His name. 

Only he who hath ceased to love the world can serve God* 
That Dispenser of salvation, 1, poor though 1 be^ have 
obtained as my wealth. 

If the one Dispenser of salvation do me a favouir, 

What can the world do to me ? 

Having effaced my caste I have become A courtier of 
God— 

Thov^ O God, art able to save tlie world— 

Divine knowledge hath sprung up^ and I have become 
enlightened ■ 

God hath graciously accepted tliis worm as Ilis slave* 
Saith Rav Das^ my thirst hath now ceased ; 

I repeat the name of God and perform His service. 

The fate of the slanderer. 

II 

If man bathe at the sixty-eight places of pilgrimagCp 
If he w'orship tlic twelve lingi^ni stones, 

r The water-lily is supposed to remaiii dry in, Lhe water^ 

Z 


SiiotL VJ 



338 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

If he dedicate a well or a 

Bui practise slander^ all shall be in vain. 

How shall the slanderer of a saint he saved ? 

Know that he shall assoredly fall into hell. 

If man celebrate eclipses at Kurkhetar, 

Offer his wife with her decorations to /Ae 
And hear with his ears all the Simritis^ 

Yet if he practise slander, all shall be in vain. 

If he prepare many feasts io 

Make them gifts of land^ and build them splendid public 
mansions; 

If, neglecting his own business, he perform that of others^ 
And yet practise slander, he shall wander in many births, 
0^ ye people, why do ye slander ? 

The slanderer^s character is well known. 

Holy men have considered and decided regarding the 
slanderer— 

Saifli Rav Das, he is a sinner^ and sliall go to hell. 

It is tlie guru who communicates the Name by 
which God^s designs are manifested. 

Ramkali 

Men read, study, and hear ah God^s names, yet God's 
designs axe not known. 

How shall iron become pure gold unless it be touched by 
the philosopher's stone ? 

0 God, the knots of doubt unravel not ; 

Lust, wrath, worldly love, pride, and jealousy—these Jive 
combined plunder the world* 

* We are great poets, of high family,^ we are Pandits, we 
are Jogis, SanyasiSj 

' Gyanis, virtuous heroes, we are generous these ideas 
sliall never perish, 

^ here for fordg, a lank. Others undersiand the word to 
mean a margin^ and transiate tata as a well with its surrounding 
land. 

* Tills ^votd is now applied to a race of Bj'SJimans Ia 
B engal, who marry a large pturality of wives. 





HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


339 

Saith Rav Das, all tliese mm do not nnderstaitd God, 
they go astray like madmen, 

God's name is my support, my life, my soul, and my 
wealth. 

Rav Das in obtaining salvation acknowledges 
God's favour. 

Maeu 

Wlm but D)ee, my Jeweh could do such a thing ? 

Cherishcr of the poor, Lord of the earth ; Thou hast put 
over my head the umbrella of spiritual so^^rci^nty^ 

Thou Tolentest towards him whose touch defileth the 
world; 

The lowly dost TJiou exalt, my God, and none dost Thou 
fear- 

Namdev^ Kabir, Trilochan^ Sadlma, and Sain were 
saved— 

Saitli Rav Das, hear, O saints, through God every tiling 
is done. 

The man of low birth and caste may be saved by 
devotion, 

Kedaka 

Though one perform the six good acts and belong to a 
high family, yet if he heartily worship not God, 

And love not the mention of His lotus feet, he is equal 
to a pariah. 

O thoughtless man, think upon God in thy heart ; 

Why not look at Balmik ? ^ 

From a low caste what a high position he attained by his 
special devotion to God ■ 

Though an eater of dogs, the lowest of all, he was beloved 
by Krishun. 

How can poor mortals praise God ? His praise extendetli 
to the three worlds. 

A]amah the courtesan, Lodiya the huntsman, and the 
elephant went to God. 

1 This ii the mMi whose feet Krishan washed, net ihe author of the 





340 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Such degraded beings were saved; why shouldst not them 
too be savedj 0 Rav Das ? 

The advantages of repeating God's name. 

BllAIRO 

Without beholding God there is no hope; 

Everything that we sec peri&heth. 

He who repeatetli God’s name with due prn.ise 
Is the only Jogi free from desires. 

If ajny one employ himself in repeating God’s name, 

And God^ the philosopher’s stone^ touch his duality 
shall no longer remain- 

He who destroyeOi the duality of his mind is a mnni ; 
He shall be absorbed in God ^ who hlleth the three worlds. 
Everybody acteth according to his natural inclinations : 
It is only the Creator who abideth without fear. 
Vegetables blossom to produce fruit; 

When the fruit appeareth the blossoms decay. 

For the sake of divine knowledge men practise religious 
ceremonies j 

When divine knowledge is obtained^ religious ceremonies 
are not performed. 

To make butter^ knowing people clmrn coagulated milk; 
So those who strive for divine knowledge obtain deliverance 
while alivej and are ever at rest. 

Saith Rav Das, having embraced supreme contempt for 
the world, 

’Why not heartily repeat God’s name^ 0 luckless man ? 
Rav Das endeavours to humiliate his body* 

Basant 

Thou knowest nothing, 0 ?ny body\ 

On seeing thy fme dothes thou putfest thyself up. 

No place can hold the proud; 

Yet over thy head the crow cawefh.^ 

^ who ts without ihe organs of aclicji. 

^ Bj some Oriental people the dead are thrown to erows^ kites, and 
vultures. 


HYMNS OF RAV DAS 


34i 


Wliy act tliou proud, 0 demcnti^d body? 

Thou art much more short-lived than a toadstool in the 
month of Ehadon. 

The deer kno'weth not the secret of hi^ musk ; 

He hath it in his body* yet he searcheth for it abroad. 

He who understandeth his own fieding body, 

Shall never be disgraced by the myrmidons of Death. 

Man. is proud oi his son and wife; 

It is from him God wU take an account. 

Thou shaft suffer for what thou thysdf hast done, O soul. 

Whom shalt thou afterwards address as ' Dear one, dear 
one ? " 

If tiiou seek the protection of holy men, 

Thy sins, even though millions upon miOions, shall all be 
erased. 

Saith Rav Das^ he who repeateth God's name 

Hath no concern with caste, or birth, or transmigration. 

The saint, no matter how low his caste, is superior 
even to the demigods. 


Malar 

II 

Neither the Lord of Lakshmi,^ nor the Lord of Kailas,^ 
nor any one else is equal to tliose who repeat God's name i 

He is one alone tliough diffused in many ways; recall, 
recall Him to your thoughts ; He filleth cuation. 

He in whose house devotion to God and nothing else was 
seen, was by caste an untouchable calico-printer. 

The greatness of God’s name was seen in Vyas; it was 
observ^ed in the sons of Brahma ; it is fumou& through the 
seven islands® of the earth. 

He whose family* used to sacrifice cow's at the Id and 
Bakrld, and who worshipped Shaikhs,and martyrs, andpirs, 

^ YEshnu. 

® Where Shiv is supposed iq reside. 

^ Tlie coucepLion of ancient Hindu gcogrsi|>herSr 

* The reference is to KTfOj Kibir's adoptI yc fiulier. This wrse 
proves ihat MusalniSns killed cows at the two Teadvals referred to long 
before che British occupaUon of ludiar 



342 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Kabir, tlie son of a father who used to do such tilings, so 
succeeded that he became celebrated in the three worlds. 

All the chamars ^ of my family even still go round Banaias 
removing dead cattle. 

Yet strict Brahmans prostrate themselves before their 
offspring, Rav Das, the slave of God's slaves. 

The following hymn was composed in J'eply to 
a Brahman who inquired how Rav Das could obtain 
salvation:— 

III 

By what devotion shall I meet my Beloved, tjie Lord of 
souls ? 

The supreme state is obtained by association with saints. 

Soiled is my vesture,* how long shall 1 wash it ? 

How long shall 1 remain in this sleep * which hath come 
upon me ? 

The things * to which 1 was attached have all perished ; 

The shop of spurious traffic hath closed.® 

Saith Rav Das, when my account is taken, 

I shall see whatever I have done recorded to my credit. 


MIRA BA I 

A HYMN of Mira Bai is preserved in the Granth 
Saliib of Bhai Banno, which can be seen at Mangat 
in the Gujrat district of the Panjab, but it is not 
included in Guru Arjan’s collection. 

Mira Bai was daughter of Ratan Singh Rathatir 
of Merata, a town between Bikaner and Jodhpur 
in Rajputana. She was born about a.d, 1504. She 
appears to have inherited her religious proclivities 

^ Leallier-cutters supposed by the higher Hindu castes to 
uiicka]^. 

^ Until God Cillers itj it is hopeJe&s to suppose niy heart can be 
purified^ 

^ SpiriLual ignorance. * The pleasures of the iForld. 

^ I have no longer dealings with ihe world. 



MIRA BAI 


343 


from her motlier. When Mira Bai was yet a child, 
the bridal procession of a youth of position passed 
by the palace> All the ladies of the court, except 
Mira Eai’s mother, went to the upper apartments 
to view the procession. She took the opportunity 
of their absence to worship an image of Krishan, 
called Girdhar Lai, which was set up in her private 
apartment. 

Mira Bai laid aside her playthings to follow her 
mother, and said to her, ‘ Who is my bridegroom ? ’ 
Her mother smiled, took her in her arms, and, 
pointing to Girdiiar Lai, said, ' There is your bride¬ 
groom.’ Upon this Mira Bai instantly accepted 
him, and veiled her face according to the Oriental 
practice, which requires a wife to veil her face even 
from her mother in the presence of her husband. 
She became so enamoured of Girdhar Lai that sl;e 
could not pass an instant without seeing him. Her 
love for him is compared to that of the milkmaids 
of Bindraban for Krishan, She in time indulged 
her passion without fear or shame, and without 
any regard for the traditions of her family con¬ 
cerning the retirement of women from the public 
gaze. 

While her affections were thus engaged, slie was 
betrothed to Kanwar Bhojraj, son of Raiia Sanga 
of Mewar. The subsequent marriage in a.d, 1516, 
as might well have been expected, proved unhappy. 
Bhojraj came to Merata in great state with a large 
retinue, but when the marriage ceremony was being 
performed and the time came for the bride to cir¬ 
cumambulate the pavilion set up for the ceremony, 
Mira Bai walked around the idol of Girdhar Lai, 
and took no notice of the bridegroom. WTien the 
time for her departure with her husband arrived, 
her parents wished to send her off with suitable 
marriage presents, but she was miserable at leaving 
Girdhar Lai. She grew sad and restless, and wept 
to sucli an extent that slie became insensible. When 



344 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

she regained consciousness, her pareiits aflectionately 
told her that, if it made her happy, she might take 
Girdhar Lai with her without any further ceremony. 
She replied that if they valued her present and 
future happin^^s, they would give her the image, 
and she would worship it ^vlth heart and soul 
Her parents had already perceived that she was 
a saint and lover of God, and so at the monaent of 
separation from their beloved daughter they pre¬ 
sented her with the image as part of her dowry. 

Mira Bai, who was overjoyed at obtaining posses¬ 
sion of the object of her devotion, set it up in her 
palanquin, and during the journey feasted her eyes 
on its beauty. On arriving at her new home, her 
mother-in-law, the Raiti, had hardly paid her the 
rites of hospitality, when she asked her to worship 
Durga, a goddess of a totally different temper from 
the playful Krishan. Mira Bai replied that she 
had devoted her body to Girdhar Lai, and she 
would bow her head to none but him. Her mother- 
in-law replied that a good wife was improved by 
worshipping Durga. But Mira Bai closed the dis¬ 
cussion by saying it was of no use to press her 
further, and she would abide by her first determina¬ 
tion, On this the Rani became very angry, and 
went to complain of Mira Bai to the Rana: ‘ This 
daughter-in-law of ours is worthless, for on tlte very 
day of her arrival she refuseth to obey me and 
putteth me to shame. It is clear what our future 
relations are to be,’ 

' The Rana became excessively incensed, and went 
to his daughter-in-law with the intention of punishing 
her. The Rani, however, had sufficient sense to 
restrain him; and he decided that the interests of 
domestic peace would be consulted by putting Mira 
Bai into a separate apartment. Though it is ad¬ 
mitted by Nabhaji that Rukmini, who became 
Krishan's consort, and the milkmaids who became 
Krishan’s playfellows, did not meet him until they 


MIRA BAI 


345 


had sacrificed to Durga, yet as Mira Bai had already 
obtained Krishan> it was unnecessary for her to 
worship Durga, and no exception could be^ taken to 
her conduct on the precedent of Rukmini and the 
milkmaids, 

Mira Bai on finding herself in a private apart¬ 
ment became excessively happy, and gave full scope 
to her religious enthusiasm. She set up her image, 
decked and adorned it, and devoted herself night 
and day to the company of holy men* Her sister-in- 
law Udai Bai was sent to remonstrate with her, 
and said, ‘ Thou art the scion of a noble house. 
Be wise and desist from the company of faqirs, 
which caste th a shir on both our f^amilies,' Mira 
Bai rephed, ‘ The slur of hundreds of thousands of 
births departeth on association with saints. The 
slur is on her who loveth not their company. My 
life dependeth on the company of saints. To any 
one who is displeased with it thy remonstrance would 
be proper/ It was on this occasion that Mira Bai 
composed the following hymns :— 

O my friend, my mind is attached to Krishan; I shall 
not be restrained from loving him. 

If any one give me a reproach, I will give a hundred 
thousand in return. 

My mother-in-law is severe, my sistcr-in-law obstinate; 
how can 1 endure this misery ? 

Mira for the sake of the lord Girdhar would endure the 
obloquy of the world. 

I have the god Girdhar and no other ; 

He is my spouse on whose head is a crown of peacock 
feathers, 

Who carrieth a shell, discus, mace, <md lotus, and who 
weareth a necklace,^ 

I have forfeited the respect of the world by over sitting 
near holy men. 

^ TIj's ia a descriprion of Vislmv, of whom Kri^ihaii was an in¬ 
carnation. 



346 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The matter is now public ; everybody knoweth it. 

Having felt supreme devotion 1 die as I behold the 
world. 

I have no mother, father, son, or relation with me. 

1 laugh when I behold my beloved ; people think 1 weep, 

I have planted the vine of lov'c, and irrigated it again and 
again with the water of tears. 

1 have cast away fear of the world ; what can any one 
do to me ? 

Mira’s love for her god is fixed, come what may. 

The Raiia, on being infornaed of Mira Bai's de¬ 
termination, became beside himself with rage, and 
sent her a cup of poison under the name of cham- 
amtit, that is, water in. which an image had been 
bathed. When she tasted the liquor she knew it 
was poison, and thus apostrophized : ' The body is 
perishable, so why weep if it perish in the service 
of Krishan ? There needs be no regret at the dis¬ 
appearance of a mirage or at the failure of the son 
of a banren. woman to wed. It is not right to say 
that the moon perisheth on the thirtieth day of the 
lunar month. Lamentations are as vain as the grief 
of a bee at the fading of an imaginary flower, As 
the fruit of a tree falleth, sooner or later, so have 
I fallen at Krishan's feet. As a pearl born in the 
ocean is turned into an ornament, so shall I glitter 
in Krishan's diadem. The world itself is an illu¬ 
sion.' 

Mira Bai’s only grief at leaving her body was that 
the worship of Krishan might decline. Having in¬ 
formed tlie god of her father-in-law’s intention, she 
thus addressed the object of her worship—‘ People 
will say that the king poisoned his daughter-in-law 
because she worshipped thee. I fear therefore that 
thy worship will be neglected, and the apprehension 
causeth me poignant misery. Who will now put on 
thy decorations ? Who will put the saffron mark 
on thy forehead, attach dazzling rings to thine ears, 



MIRA BAX 


347 


twine a garland of peails round tliy neck, girdle 
thee with a jew’elled zone, tie on thy golden armlets 
and anklets, light incense to gratify thy nostrils, 
make thee offerings of sweet basil, present thee with 
sacred food to satisfy thy hunger, and prostrate 
herself in adoration before thee ? My father-in-law 
hath already abandoned thy worship in his dis¬ 
pleasure with me, others too will reproach thee with 
my death and cease to do thee homage. But after 
all why should I be anxious ? Thou thyself knoweat 
the past, the present, and the future, .Thou hast 
ever preserved thy saints from poison, fire, and 
sword, so why should I be anxious now ? ’ 

On this Mira Bai put the cup of poison on her 
head in token of submission, and then cheerfully 
drank it. On that occasion she composed the follow¬ 
ing verses;— 

Kadha ^ and Kiishan dwdl in my heart. 

Some say that Mira is insane, others that she hath dis- 
graced her family. 

Opening her veil and haring her breast, slie danceth with 
delight before her god. 

In the bowers of Bindraban, Krishan with tJie tilak on 
Jiis forehead gladdeneth my heart. 

Tlie Rana sent a cup of poison and Mira drank it with 
delight, 

Mira's lord is the all-wise Girdhar; she is bound to his 
service. 

The Rana waited to hear of Mira’s death, but her 
life w’as miraculously presert^ed, and her cheeks 
gradually assumed a higher bloom. She devoted 
herself to the further decoration and ornamentation 
of the image, and decked it out in fashions ever 
new. She sang the praises of her god and filled 

^ Wife of Ayana Ghosfia (a cowherd) and favouriie misires'i of 
iCi'isLan white he lived as Gop^t among the cowherds in Bindraban. 
— Dowson'a ^ 


346 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

her heart with deliglit and immortal love. She also 
composed the follovting on this occasion 

I knew the Rana had given me poison. 

God who caused my boat to float across, separated the 
milk and water for ma.^ 

Until gold is annealedj it is not perfectly pure. 

0 king, keep thine own family in seclusion ; I am the 
wife of another.® 

I sacrifice my mind and body to the saint even though he 
be a pariah ; I have sold myself to god, 

Mira for the sake of worshipping the lord Girdhar is 
entangled in the feet of holy men. 

When the Ran a found that the poison had pro¬ 
duced no effect, he appointed tipstaffs to watch 
Mira Bai, and report when she again conferred with 
faqirs, so that ^e might be put to death when 
detected in the act. She w^as in the habit of laughing 
and holding playful converse with the idol. One 
day a tipstaff went and said to the king, 'At this 
very moment Mira Bai is holding conversation and 
laughing with some one.' The king took up Ihs 
sw'ord, and called out to her to open the folding 
doors. He asked her where the person was with 
whom sire had been holding such pleasant discourse. 
She replied, ' There he is before thee, mine idol, 
mine adored. Open thine eyes and look. He is 
neither afraid nor asliamed of thee.’ 

Nabhaji states that Mira Bai and the idol had 
been playing at Indian draughts, and at the time 
of die Rama's entrance the idol actually extended 
its arm to move a piece. The Rana on witnessing 
the miracle became ashamed. There was, however, 
no real impression made on his obdurate heart.® 

^ That is, saved me in ihe ordeal. 

® 1 am wedded to Girdhar Lai, not lo [by son. 

^ Mtra Uai's idol is still preserved in a temple dedicated to her in 
the old abandoned fortress of Cbitaur, once the home of the ancesloia 
of the Mahllrina. of Udaipur. 



MIRA BAI 


349 

Once when Mira Bai was ill she composed the 
following:— 

Krishan with the large eyes laokcd at me, and smiled 

As I was going to draw water from the Jamna and the 
vessel glittered on my Lead. 

Since then the delightful image of the dark and beautiful 
one hath dwelt in my heart. 

You may wi'ite and bring me incantations, you may write 
and bring me spells, grind medicine and give it me, tk&i will 
n&t m&. 

If any one bring me Ktishan as my physician I will 
gladly arise. 

His eye-brows are bows, Iris eyes the arrows wMch he 
fitted thereto, and dischargeth to pierce me. 

Mira's lord is the wise Girdhar j how can I abide at home ? 

A dissolute and abandoned person tried to tempt 
Mira Bai’s virtue. He told her that he w'as armed 
with Girdliar Lai's permission to give her such 
pleasure as she could only obtain from man's em¬ 
braces, She replied that she humbly submitted to 
Girdhar Lai’s order, but that they must first dine. 
She meantime had a couch placed and dressed in 
the enclosure where saints were assembled. She there 
addressed her w'ould-be paramour : * Thou needest 
not be ashamed or afraid of any one, as tlie order 
of Girdhar Lai is on every account proper,' The 
man. replied, ' Does any one do such tilings before 
others ? ’ She said she knew of no secret place, for 
Krishan was everywhere present. ' He seeth the good 
and bad acts of all and rewardeth men according 
to their deserts.’ On hearing this the ruffian turned 
pale, and vice gave place to virtue in his heart. 
He fen at her feet and with clasped hands asked 
her mercy and divine intercession. Mira Bai felt 
compassion and brought him, in the words of the 
chronicler, face to face with God. 

Tnlsi Das, according to all received accounts, 
lived nearly a century after Mira Bai, but some 



350 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

poets have made them contemporaries. The fol¬ 
lowing letter to Tulsi Das is attributed by Raja 
Raghuraj Sinh to Mira Eai :— 

To the holy lord Tulsi Das, the virtuous, the remover of 
sin, greetmg“ 

I ever bow to tiiee, dispel all my soitovv. 

All my husband’s relations give me continual annoyance. 

They cause me to endure great suffering when I associate 
ivith saints, and perform my worship. 

Since childhood Mtra hath contracted love for Girdhar Lai; 

She cannot now free herself from it in any way ; it com¬ 
pletely oveipowereth her. 

Thou art to me a father and mother; thou conferrest 
happiness on God’s saints. 

Write and inform me what it is proper for me to do, 

Tulsi Das's reply :— 

They who love not Ram and Sita 

Should be abandoned as if they were millions of enemies, 
however much we love tliem. 

Prahlad abandoned his father, Bibhishan his brother 
Rawan, and Bharat his mother, 

Bali his guru, the women of Brij their husbands, and 
their lives were all happier for having done so, 

The opinion of all holy saints is that relations with imd 
love of God are alone true. 

Of what avail is the eye-salve which causeth the eyes to 
burst; what more can I say ? 

Saith Tulsi Das, that spouse is worshipful, that son is 
dearer than life, 

Who is attached to Ram; he is my real friend in this 
world. 

As Mira Bai has been made a contemporary of 
Tuhi Das, so also she has been made a contemporary 
of the Emperor Akbar. It is said that having 
heard of the virtues and beauty of Mira Bai, he 
went with his minstrel, Tansen, both disguised as 



MIRA BAI 


351 

hermits, to visit her. The following lines in attesta¬ 
tion of this circumstance are attributed to Mira 
Bai 

O mother, I recognise Krislian as my spouse, 

Akbar came to test mo and brought Tansen with him ; 
He heard singing, music, and pious discourse; he bow'ed 
to the ground again and again, 

Mira’s lord, the all-wise Girdhar, made me his protegee. 

It is said that, on observing her devotion, Akbar 
was very pleased with the good fortune which 
enabled him to behold her. He made her a present 
of a jewelled necklace whidi she accepted with 
some misgivings, as it appeared too valuable an 
article for an ascetic to possess. The emperor was 
equal to the occasion, ajtd said that he had found 
it while performing his devotional ablutions in the 
rivei' Jainna, and thought it would be a suitable 
present to make her god. Tansen, it is said, com¬ 
posed an ode in her honour, and he and his royal 
master then returned to their capital. The neck¬ 
lace was too valuable not to provoke remarks un¬ 
favourable to its recipient. The Rana submitted it 
to assayers who valued it at a fabulous sum of 
money. On inquiry it was found to be the same 
that a jeweller had sold not long previously for a 
large price to the emperor. Furtlier inquiry led to 
the identity of the two strolling hermits with Akbar 
and his favourite minstrel. Mira Bai’s fate was now 
sealed. Her husband suspected that she had been 
polluted by the emperor. For this there was but 
one penalty in that age—she must die. Mira Bai's 
father-in-law sent her a cobra in a box, so that when 
she opened it the reptile might sting her to death. 
She was told it was a salagram. Before opening 
the box she addressed it as follows :— 

O salagram in Uie box, wliy speakest thou not ? 

I speak to thee, but thou repliest not; why art thou 
silent ? 


353 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

This ocean of the world is very immenae ; take mine arm 
and extricate me. 

Mira’s lord, wise Gitdhar, thou alone art my helper. 

On opening the box Mira composed the following:— 

Wliat shall the Kana do to me ? Mira hath cast off the 
restraints of her line. 

The Ran a once sent a cup of poison to kill Mira ; 

Mira drank it with delight, loving it as if it Tvcre water 
blessed by her lord,^ 

The Rana hath now sent a box containing a cobra; 

But when 1 opened it and looked, the cobra became a 
salagram. 

There was a sound of rejoicing in the company of the 
saints ; Krishan had mercy on me. 

I decorated myself, attached bells to my feet, and, keeping 
time with both my hands, 

Danced before the idol, and sang the praises of Krishan. 

The holy arc mine and I am theirs ; tlie holy are my life. 

Mira is absorbed in the holy as butter is in milk before 
churning. 

Rana Sanga, Mira’s father-in-law, was stCl ob¬ 
durate and determined that she should die by the 
sword, but no one could be found to act as exe¬ 
cutioner. She was then ordered to kill herself in 
whatever way she thought fit. By this time she 
was a widow, her husband having predeceased his 
father, and her person was at her own disposal. 
Promising that she would obey the Rana’s com¬ 
mand she retired to her solitary apartment, during 
the night put on the dress of a mendicant, and left 
the palace. She plunged in the nearest river to die 
in obedience to the order she had received. It is 
said that she was miraculously preserved by an 
angel who brought her to shore and addressed her: 
' 0 queen, thou liast obeyed thy father-in-law and 
art worthy of ail praise for thy devotion, but thou 

Water in which her idol had been bathed. 






MIRA BAI 


353 


hast a higher duty still to perform. It is thine to 
set a high example to the world, and show unto 
men how to fulfil the designs of the Creator and 
become absorbed in Him,’ When she recovered she 
found herself alone on the river's bank with the 
current flowing at her feet. She stood up in amaze¬ 
ment, not knowing for the moment what to do. 
She met some cowherds, of whom she inquired the 
way to Bindraban, They presented her with milk, 
and directed her whither to proceed. She walked 
on singing her hymns, the object of blessings and 
attentions in the villages through which she passed. 

On her arrival in Bindraban she desired to see 
Jiv Gosain. To her disappointment he sent her 
word that he would allow no woman into his presence,’- 
She replied, ‘ I thought everybody in Bindraban 
a woman, and only Girdhar Lai a man,* I learn 
to-day that there are other partners tJian Krishan 
in Bindraban.’ By this she scoflingly meant that 
the Gosain placed himself on an equality with 
Krishan as god of Bindraban. The Gosain, on 
hearing her rebuke, went barefooted to do her 
homage, and beholding her became filled with the 
love of God.^ 

^ Tbi; originaJly Oriental esclusi^’^itess bad long previously been 
imitated by Chrisiiau ascetics. St. Senanus is represeuted as thus 
addressing a fentale saint who sought to Sand in his island— 

Quid foeminis 
Commune est cum monticbis P 
Nuc te tiec ullam aiiain 
Adiniuemus in insuSam. 

^ On the principle, already stated, that God is deemed a liusband 
and human beings His wives, 

^ Jiv Gosain was the son of Batlabh Actiaiya, and unele nf Rupa 
and SanSlan, two devout followers of Chaitaiiya, tlie great Vaisimav 
reformer of Baugai {a.p. 14^5-1^33)- Rupa and SanUlan had been 
ministers of the Muhammad^ ruler of BibHr. and were of royal blood, 
high rank, and great wealth, all which advantages they relinquished 
to lead religious lives. Jiv Go^in was an author of some pretensions, 
He annotated a treatise of tiis nephew Rupa, describing religious 
pleasures and emotions. He wrote a book on the acts of Krislian, 
but bis greatest work was one in which he amplified bis annoUttions 



s- 


354 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Mira Bai with, loving devotion traversed every j 
grove and pathway of Bindraban, and having iixed i 
the sweet image of Krishan in her heart returned . 
to her late husband's home. On finding her father- ! 
in-law still obdurate, she went on a pilgrimage to 
Dwaraka, where Krishan reigned after leaving 
Mathura. There again she became entranced with 
the pleasure of adorning and enhancing the beauty 
of her favourite god. 

During her. absence from Chitaur, the capital of 
Mewar, the visits of holy men to that capital ceased. 
Dissensions arose in the state. It was only then that 
the Rana realised what a holy person he had lost. 

He sent several Brahmans and instructed them to 
use every entreaty to Mira Bai to induce her to 
return, and finally to tell her that it was impossible 
for him to live unless she complied with his prayer. 

The Brahmans executed his orders, but Mira Bai 
refused to put herself again in the Rana’s power. 

Upon this the Brahmans sat at her door and declared | 
their intention of neither eating nor drinking till I 
she had returned with them. She replied that she 
hved in Dwaralca only by the favour of Krishan. 

She would go and take leave of him and return to 
the Brahmans. She went to do homage to Han- 
chhor,^ the visible representation of that god, became 
absorbed in his love, and what she had she gave— 
a humble offering of verses at his shrine ; — 

O god, remove thy servant’s sufferings ; 

Thou didst supply Draupadi with endless robes and save 
her modesty; 

For the sake of thy saint Prahlad thou didst assume the 
body of a man-lion ; 

Thou didst kill Hiranyakashapii, who had not the courage 
to oppose thee; 

on the Ireatise of Rupa, and dwelt at length on the various phases of 
devotional eia] tation. 

^ Krisltaii received the name RanchliOr when he fled from Raja 
Jarisandh to Dwaraka. 


MIRA BAI 


355 

TJiou didst Jiill tlie crocodile iuid extricate the drowning 
elephant from the water. 

0 beloved Girdhar, Mira is thy slave i her enemies every¬ 
where annoy her. 

Take me, my friend, take me to thy care as t hou knowest best. 

I have none but thee ; do thou show mercy unto me. 

I have no appetite by day and no sleep by night; my body 
pineth away. 

Lord of Mita, all-wise Girdhar, come to me Jiow ; I cannot 
live in thine absence. 

It is said that Ranchhor, on beholding her supreme 
love, could resist no longer. He incorporated her 
in himself, and she became lost to human gaze. 
The Brahnians searched for her in vain. The only 
trace of her they could obtain was her sarki, which 
was found envdoping tlie body of the idol. The 
Brahmans' faith in Krishati was confirmed, but their 
mission otherwise was unsuccessful, and they re¬ 
turned sore disappointed to the Rana. The latter 
soon experienced the further mortification of be¬ 
holding his state conquered and plundered, it is said, 
by the victorious army of Akbar as a retribution for 
the ill-treatment of Mira Bai. 

Tlie following is one of the hymns whose passionate 
devotion is said to have produced the result of Mira 
Bai’s union with Ranchhor 

O Lord Ranchhor ; grant me to abide in D waraka, to abide 
in Dwataka. 

With thy shell, discus, mace, and lotus dispel thefear of death. 

AU places of pilgrimage ever abide in the Gomti for me. 

The clash of thy shell and cymbals is to me ever the 
essence of pleasure. 

1 have abandoned my country, my queenly robes, my 
husband's palace, my property, and my kingdom. 

Mira, thy slav'e, cometh to thee for refuge ; her lionour is 
now* totally in thy keeping.* 

* The Itymiis in tliis life of Mira, BUI are translated frojii Raja 
Raghuriij Sinh’s Jihagat Mai, 


A a 2 



356 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

It is said that in commemoration of the mira¬ 
culous disappearance of Mira Bai, her image is still 
worshipped at Udaipur in conjunction with that of 
Ranchhor, the beloved Girdhar of her duldhood. 

The following is Mira Bai's hymn in Bhai Banno’s 
Granth Sahib. 

Maeo 

God^ liath entwined my soul, 0 mother, 

With His attiibutes,® and I have sung of them. 

The sharp arrow of His love hath pierced my body through 
and through, O mother. 

When it struck me I knew it not ; now it cannot be en¬ 
dured, 0 mother. 

Though I use charms, incantations, and drugs, the pain 
will not depart. 

Is there any one who will treat me ? Intense is the agony, 
O mother. 

Thou, 0 God, art near; Thou are not distant; come 
quickly to meet me. 

Saith Mira, the Lord, the mountain-wielder,^ who is com¬ 
passionate, hath quenched the fire of my body, O mother. 

The Lotos-eyed hath entwined my soul with the twine of 
His attributes. 


SHAIKH FARID 

There are hymns and sloks bearing the name of 
Farid found in tlie Granth Sahib. The Persian 
historian Farishta states that when. Taimur Lang 
approached Ajodhan (Pak Pat tan) in the Panjab 
in the ^ar a. d, 1318, Sad-ui-Din,* a grandson of 
Shaikh Farid, who was then on his spiritual throne, 
fled with several of the leading inhabitants of the 
city to Bhatner in the state of Bikaner, where 

^ Ka^'alnaio, ilLe Lotus-eyed, an epithet of Kris^han, the object of 

Mira spedal worship, 

^ Gwi has two raeanmg^^a rope or and an attribute, 

3 Krishan, 

^ In Arabic n^es the generallj silent in such combinational 


SHAIKH FARID 


357 


they subsequently made peace with the invaders. 
Guru Nanak was horn in A, D. 1469, so he could not 
have met the original Farid, It is stated too in the 
oldest account of the Guru's life that it was with 
Shaikh Brahm (Ibrahim), Farid’s successor, known 
as Farid the Second, he had two interviews. It 
is certain that it was Shaikh Brahm who com¬ 
posed the sloks and hymns bearing the name of 
Farid in the Granth Sahib, though he used the 
name of the founder of his spiritual line as his 
poetical ttom da flume. 

The follo\ving is the genealogy of Shaikh Brahm. 
He was the son of Khwaja Shaikh Muhammad, who 
was son of Diwan Pir Ataulla, who was son of Diwan 
Shaikh Ahmad Shah, who was son of Diwan Pir 
Baha-ul-Din styled Harun, who was son of Khwaja 
Munawwar Shall, who was son of Khwaja Diwan 
Pir Fazal, who was son of Khwaja Diwan Muiz-ul- 
Din, who was son of Khwaja Diwan Pir Ala-ul-Din 
called Mauj-i-darya—a wave of piety—who was son 
of Diwan Badar-ul-Din Sulaiman, who was son of 
Haarat Baba Farid-ul-Din Masaud Shakar Ganj, the 
original Farid of Pak Pattan. 

Shaikh Brahm holds a distinguished place in the 
list of great saints, and bears several titles or appella¬ 
tions. He is called Farid Sani or Farid the Second, 
Salis Farid or the arbitrator Farid, Shaikh Brahm 
Kalan {Shaikh Brahm the elder), Bal Raja, Shaikh 
Brahm Sahib, and Shah Brahm. He is said to have 
performed many miracles. The following is given 
as an example. A thief once entered his house with 
criminal intent, but by God’s will was struck blind 
and could not find Ins way out. When Shaikh 
Brahm rose at night to pray, he told Ins servant 
to fetch water for his ablutions. The servant saw 
the blind thief standing helpless on the floor, and 
informed his master. The thief prayed for forgive¬ 
ness, and promised that, if he recovered his sight, 
he would renounce his evil "ways. Upon this Shaikh 



358 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Brahm prayed for him ; he recovered his sight, and 
became a devout MusaJman, Another of Shaikh 
Brahm’s miracles is this* In a season of drought 
he took off his turban and began to whirl it about, 
upon which rain fell abundantly. 

Two sons of Shaikh Brahm are mentioned—one 
Shaikh Taj-ul-DinMahmud, agroat saint, and another 
Shaikh Munawwar Shah Shahid. Shaikh Brahm 
had several disciples, such as Shaikh Salim Chishti 
Fatahputi, Shaikh Almadi of Chunian, Baba Ahmad 
Lanak of Dipalpnr, Maulvi Jalal-ul-Din of Shaikha- 
bad, Shah Abdul Fatah of Ghazipur, Haji Niamat 
Ulla of Shaikhupur, &c. 

Shaikh Brahm died on the 2ist of Rajab, A. H. 960 
(a. d. 1552), after a spiritual reign of forty-two 
years. The Khtdasat-ul-TawaHkh states that he was 
buried at Sarhind. Whatever other details are 
known of him have been given in the life of Gum 
Nanak, who went on two occasions to meet and 
converse \vith him. 

There is a great deal known or written regard¬ 
ing the original Shaikh Farid, and it appears that 
this sketch would be incomplete without some 
account of him.^ Two genealogies of Shaikh Farid, 
subsequently called Farid Shakar Ganj, are given in 

’ The materials for the life of Farfd, wiiich are preserved at the 
shrine of Pak Pat tan, are the JawHhif-i-Farldi (the Gems of Farid) 
by Alj Asgfbar of Bahadal, a town near Sarhind' tht Jiahsi-ul-Qtt!ub 
(Repose of Hearts), b^ng a (liery of Farid’s acts and instniclians 
compiled by Niza,[in-Ll-Dln Anliya; the Makkssan-i-ChhMi, and the 
AsiSy-i-Ttral-i-Faridi (Private lives of FarTd'a dcacenriaiils), by Pir 
Muhammad of Psk Paltan, The first three are in the Persian, the 
fourtli in the Urdu language. 

All Aeghar's work, the Jmv&htr-t'Faridii uas completed during the 
reign of Jahangir on the 4th daj' of the month of Rajah a, h. 1033 
(a. n. id*3}. Ali Asghar took the work for e-tammation and correc- 
tioti to Maulvi Shaikh Muhammad. The latter ^vas grandson of 
Shaikh Tapnl-Din Mahmiid, who waa, as we have seen, a son of 
Shaikh Bralrni, called Farid the Second. The details given in the 
Jitimhtr-i-FsyWi are said to have been obtained from several volumes 
deposited in the sacred libmry at Baghdad, 



SHAIKH FARID 


359 


the Jawahir-i-Fandi—QXie spiritual, the other teni- 
porid. He received his spiritual position from his 
priest Khwaja Qutub-ul-Din Bakhtiyar Ushi’^ of 
Dihli, whose spiritual predecessors ascend in a direct 
line to the Prophet of Makka. Farid’s temporal or 
family genealogy is traced back through princes and 
kings to Hazrat Amir-ul-Mumauin Umr-bin-ul Khitah 
Qureshi Makki Faruqi, the second Khalifa of the 
jSluhammadans. 

When Farrukh Shah, from whom Farid was 
descended, was king of Kabul, the kings of Ghazni 
and other states were subject to him. When Kabul 
was subsequently captured by the king of Ghazni, 
Farrukh Shah's son went to him in quest of a liveh- 
hood. The king of Ghazni treated him wth respect, 
and not only restored him his kingdom of Kabul, 
but gave him his daughter in marriage* It would 
appear that the kings of Ghazni and Kabul at the 
time were relations, for Shaikh Farid's father. Shaikh 
Jamal-ul-Din, was nephew of the king of Ghazni, 

Shaikh Farid's great-grandfather was killed in the 
struggles of that period.Farid's grandfather, Shaikh 
Shaib, with his relations, including three sons, the 
eldest of whom was Jamal-ul-Din Sulaiman, aban¬ 
doned their country and took refuge in the Panjab in 
A.H* 5ig {a, d. IIZ5). The Qazi of Kasur, who had 
been educated in Kabul and who was acquainted 
with the high position Shaikh Shaib had held there, 
treated him and his relatives with great respect and 
hospitality.® After some time Shaikh Shaib pro- 

^ So willed as liavUigcome from UshiiiFarghana. See Ahi-i-Aibari, 

- Tn the original it is stated that when Htilaku, the grandson of 
Changer, Khan, invaded Ghaatii and Kabul, he killed several princes 
and learned men, including Shaikh Faifd’s great-grandfather. This 
Is not correct. Mal^ti’s era was long subsequent. It was in 
A.n. 1258 he captured the city of Baghdad, and brought (he Arab 
Khalafai to a dose. 

* In the account j^reserveii at Pak Pattan it is stated that the Qaii 
of K astir, through the subadar oF Lahore, informed the Fmjieror of 
Shaikh Sbalb’s arrival in the Pan jab. This mutt be an error. The 



36o BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

ceeded to Multan where he deemed he should be 
less exposed to worldly influences or the temptings 
of ambition. When he heard of the attentions in 
store for him in that city, he decided that he could 
not there carry out his intention to lead a life of 
obscurity and self-effacement. He accordingly took 
up his abode in Kothiwal, now known as Chawali 
Mushaikh, not far from Dipalpur. 

Shaikh Shaib, established in Kotbiwal a private 
collage for religious instruction, and in spite of him¬ 
self attracted much attention. His eldest son 
Jamal-ul-Din married Bibi Miriam,^ daughter of 
Saiyid Muhammad Abdula Shah—a descendant of 
Ali—and adopted daughter of Maulvi Wajih-nl-Din, 
a descendant of Abbas, uncle of the Prophet of 
Makka. Wajih-ul-Din had fled from Kabul during 
political difficulties and taken up his abode in Karor 
in the Multan district. Miriam is described as a very 
pious lady and worker of some great miracles. She 
had three sons, Khwaja Aziz-ul-Din, Farid-ul-Din 
Masaud, Khwaja Najib-ul-Din, and one daughter, 
Bibi Khatun Jamila, the mother of Saiyad Ala-ul- 
Din Ali Ahmad Sabir. 

Nizam-uI-Din Auliya, a disciple of Farid, relates 
a legend of a robber who went to Farid’s mothers 
house to steal. On beginning his operations he lost 
his sight. He then cried out that there must be 
some saint or miracle-worker present. He vowed 
that, if his lost sight were restored, he would renounce 
thieving and become a good Muhammadan. On 
hearing this vow Miriam prayed for him, and his 
sight was restored. He went home, and returned 
to her the following morning with an offering of milk. 
Accompanied by his wife and cliildren, he expressed 
a desire that they should all become Muhammadans. 

Empfror of Hindustan was then Prithwi Kaj. Shahab-uf-DTJi’s victo¬ 
rious Indian career did not begin until about fifty years alterwiards. 

^ Itrar-i-Jirnf-i-Faridt. In the JutvShif-j-FfiTidi Jamll-ul-Din's 
wfe, Farid's mother, is called Quresham. 



SHAIKH FARID 


361 

Miriam caused his wishes in this respect to be grati¬ 
fied, with the result that they all became holy. In 
reply to her, he said his name vms Chawa. His 
shrine among others in that locality subsequently 
became a place of devout pilgrimage. 

When Farid was conceived, his mother used to 
spend her days and nights in prayer. He ws 
bom at Kothiwal on the first day of the mouth of 
Ramzan, a.h, 569 (a,d. 1173). The night of his 
birth was dark and cloudy, and the moon, whose 
appearance indicates the beginning of Ramzan.—the 
Muhanrunadan Lent—could not be seen, so men did 
not know when to begin their fast. A holy man 
arrived and said that a wonderful son had been born 
to Jamal-ul-Din Sulaiman. If the infant suckled, 
the time for fasting had not yet begun, but if, on the 
contrary, he refused the breast, then all good Muham¬ 
madans must fast. Farid did not suckle, and so 
it was apparent the fast had begun. During the 
whole of the month of Ramzan, it is said, the infant 
only took milk by night in the Muhammadan fashion 
and fasted by day. 

When Farid was a few years old his mother taught 
him liis prayers. The boy asked what was gained 
by prayer. His mother replied ' Sugar She used 
accordingly to hide some sugar under his prayer- 
carpet, and, when he had finished his prayers, draw 
it forth, and give it to him as a reward for his devo¬ 
tion. On one occasion, when his mother was absent, 
he prayed a great deal, and, it is said, a great supply 
of sugar—a miraculous gift of God—was found under 
his carpet. Sonrehe ate himself and the rest he gave 
to his playfellows. He related the circumstance to 
his mother on her return. It was then his mother 
gave him the surname Shakar Ganj, meaning a 
treasury of sugar. 

The following is another version of the reason why 
the name Shakar Ganj was bestowed on Farid. It is 
related that, when the Prophet Muhammad ascended 



363 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

into heaven, God gave him a plate of sugar, which He 
said was from the treasury of a saint who should be 
born in his sect. The Prophet was to eat some of it 
himself, and give the remainder to his disciples. 
When the Prophet returned to earth, his friends 
asked him whence he had obtained the sugar. He 
replied that a holy man should be born in his sect, 
who would become a mediator for sinners. When 
the Prophet was asked the holy man's name 
he said, ' He shall receive from God the name 
Farid, as being fard-i-alam, unique in the world, and 
he shall be called by me Shakar Ganj.' A third 
reason for the name will subsequently be given. 

His mother sent Farid to school at the age of four 
or five years. In a short time he committed the 
whole of the Quran to memory. He was then sent 
to Multan, where he became proficient in secular 
learning. His mother, it is said, was then counselled 
by an angel to send him on a pilgTimage to Makka. 
Farid himself had previously conceived the same 
desire, though he was then hardly more than a child. 
He was at the time reading the Abul Nafa with 
Saiyid Nazir Ahmad. When the latter heard of 
Farid’s intended departure, he began to weep at the 
loss of his beloved pupil. His parents then resolved 
to take the boy’s preceptor also. They set out from 
Kothiwal on the 13th day of Jamadi ul Sani, A. h. 585, 
and arrived in the harbour of Jadda on the 12th 
of Zi Qada of the same year, that is, after a journey 
of five months. Thence they proceeded to Makka. 

Farid’s party stayed in the house of Abdul Ralfim 
Ansari, whose wife was very attentive to them. 
They heard that Abdul Qadir Jilani, styled Hazrat 
Ghaus Pak Qutub-i-Alam, had come from Baghdad 
to perform the great Muhammadan pilgrimage, and 
taken up his position in the cave of Hura on mount 
Abu Qabis near Makka > Hazrat Ghaus’s praises 

^ We here follow the annals of the shrine at Plik Accord¬ 

ing to the Aln-i-Ak^arl Abdul Kldlr died before the birth of Farfd. 




SHAIKH FARID 


363 

were in every body’s moutli, and Farid did not 
conceal his admiration of the distinguished saint. 
An unkempt faqir on hearing Farid’s language fore¬ 
told the boy’s subsequent greatness. The faqir 
whispered soniething into his ear, and he at once 
became insensible. He was taken up and carried 
to Abdul Rahim's house. 

Farid afterwards averred that while he was in this 
state of apparent insensibility the Prophet appeared 
to him, and foretold his future distinction and the 
fame of his shrine. Muhammad promised he would 
stand on Farid's tomb every fifth day of the Mu- 
harram for nine hours through all time. Farid’s 
mother suggested to him to commit to writing all the 
details of bis interview with the Prophet; but the 
memorandum made in obedience to his mother’s 
suggestion has not been found. 

When the pilgrimage to Makka was over, Hazrat 
Ghaus invited Farid and his party to visit him in 
his cave. Ha^rat Ghaus there produced an iron box 
containing relics of the Prophet. They consisted of 
two banners which used to precede him in war, two 
covers for them, a cup made of olive wood, a pair 
of buskins, a saffron-coloured turban, and some 
alpaca cloth for a neckcloth, "When these things after 
examination were restored to the iron box, it was 
placed on Farid’s head and bestowed on him. 

After tills Farid’s party went to visit Madina, and 
after a brief sojourn there returned to India, On their 
way from the sea they visited Ajmer, where Farid 
received instruction from Khwaja Gharib Nawaz. 

Farid was in due time sent to Kabul to study 
theology. Having completed his course there he 
returned to Multan, At Minhaj-uhDin’s mosque he 
met the saint Qutub-uI-Din, and became his disciple. 

Farid’s cousin, Baha^ul-Din Zakaria/ Saiyid Jalal- 

^ Surnatned jVrakhdtim-i-Alani. Hh Lomt> is wilhin the Llultan 
fort An account of ibis saint will be found in t!ie 
TtiwarlkA. 



364 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

nl-Din Bukhari, and Lai Shahbaz Qalandar asked 
Farid to join them on a religious per^ritiation, Tliey 
were to proceed as fancy dictated in quest of some 
man of eminent sanctity. Farid said that he only 
believed in his own priest Qntub-ul-Din. Baha-ul- 
Din, however, pressed him to join the party, and 
Farid finally consented. On the journey they arrived 
at a place where two ways met. On one way which 
was short there were thieves, while on the other which 
was long they might travel in safety, Baha-ul-Din 
advised them to go by the safe road even though it 
cost more trouble, lest they might be deprived of the 
money they had with them for their travelling 
expenses. Farid gave it as his opinion that they 
should divest themselves of everything that was 
likely to be stolen, and then proceed by the short 
road. This advice was adopted. 

On their way they arrived at the river Indus, 
where they found fishermen casting nets. Farid and 
his party were hungry and agreed to cast nets into 
the liver, each in his turn and in his own name, in the 
hope of catching some fish for their dinner. The 
nets were cast and found empty until it came to 
Farid's turn. His net became so full of fish, and 
therefore so heav}', that the fishermen could not 
draw it out of the water. Farid repeating BismiUah 
easily drew it forth. 

The party then proceeded to cross the river. On 
the opposite shore there lived a saint called Shaikh 
Suf, under whose spiritual guidance Farid and his 
party wished to place themselves. Shaikh Suf told 
Farid and his friends that he had no power to make 
them his disciples, and referred them to Shaikh 
Shahab‘Ul-Din Saharwardi, the cynosure of the age, 
who lived in Bukhara. Farid and his three friends 
then set out for Bukhara, Shahab-ul-Din declEired 
that Farid was a man of wonderful courage, and 
destined to obtain a high spiritual position. At the 
same time he ought to return to his own priest 



SHAIKH FARID 365 

Qutub-ul-Din, Before the return of the party Baha^ 
uhDin became a disciple of Shahab-ul-Din, 

As Farid, Baha-ul-Din, Saiyid Jalahtil-Din Btikh- 
arij, and. Lai Shahbaz Qalandar were returning from 
Bukhara they stayed near a village in Sindh. A charit¬ 
able person gave them a little corn for food, which 
they much required after a long fast, Farid bade 
his companions go and pray in the forest, while he 
took the corn to the village to be ground. He went to 
a woman’s house and asked her to grind the corn and 
take some of the flour for her labour. She seeing that 
he was very handsome invited him into her house, and 
told him that he might grind the corn himself, ^^en 
he entered, she proposed that he should make love 
to her, Prei>aratory to the lioped-for act she put 
her child of three months old into a cradle. Farid 
repulsed her, and when she further pressed her pro¬ 
posal took to flight. She then cried out, called all 
her neighbours to witness an indecent assault, and 
charged the runaway with having dishonoured her. 
The villagers collected, pursued and arrested Farid, 
and took him before the magistrate. He was called 
upon for Ins defence, and asked to produce witnesses 
of his innocence if he had any; otherwise he should 
suffer the punishment provided for such a heiiious 
crime, Farid said his witness was the woman's 
child, who would support his stetements. The child 
was brought to court in his cradle. Farid adjured 
the child by his Creator to speak the truth, and tell 
what had occurred. He, to the astonishment of all, 
not only spoke intelligently, but gave evidence 
calculated to completely establish Farid’s innocence. 
Upon this the magistrate rebuked and imprisoned 
the woman. 

When Farid reached Khwaja Qutub-uTDin, the 
latter was at the height of his fame. The author of 
the Jawahir-i-Faridi states that he enjoined the 
observance of the foUomng four rules on all who 
aspired to perfection—sleep little, eat little, speak 



366 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

little, associate littk with the world. Farid said 
that, even were every hair on his body a tongue, he 
could not describe Qutub-ul-Dm’s virtues.^ 

Qutub-ul-Din, on finding Farid deficient in scholar¬ 
ship, sent him to the shrine of Abdul Shakur of 
Sarsa to finish his education.® On that occasion 
Farid repeated the following : — 

0 Farid, thou hast not walked in God’s way; therefore 
He hath not appeared unto thee. 

Who is there who hath knocked at God’s door for whom 
it hath not been opened ? 

Lose thy life on the way of the Friend if thou desire to 
be even as those holy men. 

The high reputation Farid obtained in Dihli soon 
became irksome to him. He therefore made his w'ay 
to Hansi, where he remained for some time. Mean¬ 
time his high priest in Dihli appears to have died. 
Upon this Farid paid a second visit to that city, and 
assumed the mantle of his late spiritual guide. He 
ultimately left it in the keeping of Jamal-ul-Din of 
Hansi, and thence proceeded to Ajodhan, the present 
Pak Pattan, where he afterwards died, and where 
Ms foil owners now reside and receive offerings at his 
shrine. 

^ Khwajji QuluthUl-PTn Bitkhtiyar Kaki was a Saiyid of (be Jifiri 
Husaini nibe, was born about the middle of the Cwdlth century a,d, 
Having studied under Abu Hifs, a celebrated Muhaunmadan doctor of 
Osh, he went to Ajmer and became a disciple of Muayan-Lti-Din 
Hasan Chishti. In'due time he proceeded to Dihli where not only 
Farfd, but the Emperor Sultan Shams-ul-Din Altmish became his 
disctple. He is said to have been a worker of miracles, and to Have 
obtained his surname Kaki from his ability to produce hot cakes (ka,k) 
at will from Under his arm-pits. He died in a.d, lagg, and was 
buried in Dihli, where his tomb is held in devout reverence by pious 
Muhammadans, liis descendants are called Chishlis frotn Che tribe of 
his priest,— Jtfaihaxan-ul-TaiiiariiA^ 

Qutub-ul-Din's tomb near the natural spring called Jhllra in 
Ajmer was a iavouTiie place of pilgrimage of the Emperor Afcbar.— 
Bailaihfi, 

^ The BdMf-i/i-QuBilf here gives a dilTerent legend. 



SHAIKH FARID 


3f^7 

The maimer in which the name of the place 
became changed to Pak Pattan may be here stated, 
A canal which derived its water from the Satluj 
passed near the town. It was usual for all who 
visited Farid to wash their hands and feet there. 
The place then became known as Baba SaMb ka 
Pak Pattan, or Farid's cleansing ferry. 

"When Farid first w'ent to Ajodban, it is said that 
he lived on the fruit of the jal and the wild caper. 
These formed his staple food even when he subse¬ 
quently became great and famous, 

Abu Musalla, a qazi of Pak Pattan, grew jealous 
of the new-comer Farid, and complained to the 
subadar of Multan that he sang and danced. The 
subadar forwarded the complaint to the Emperor, 
who issued an order, as usual, in the Persian Language, 
' Anra az shahar ba dar kuned,' turn liim out of the 
city. When this order readied the subadar he read, 
‘ Qazira az shahar ba dar kuned,' turn the qazi out of 
the city. The words, it was said, had been miracu¬ 
lously changed during the transit of the order from 
Dihli to Multan. When the qazi heard of the order 
he, deeming repentance convenient and more profit¬ 
able than expulsion, fell at Farid’s feet, implored 
his forgiveness, and became his disciple. The qazi 
in due time gave his daughter in marriage to Farid’s 
son Makhdum Badr-ul-Din, From this marriage 
was born Hazrat Ala-ul-Din Mauj-i-Darya, 

Farid after some time, in accordance w'ith his 
mother’s advice, went to a forest, and lived there as 
an anchoret for twelve years, subsisting on the leaves 
of trees. On his return she began to comb his 
dishevelled hair. Farid complained that the opera¬ 
tion caused him pain. His mother replied that he 
must have caused similar pain to the trees when he 
robbed them of their leaves and fruit for food. I t is 
written in the Quran that everything prays to God, 
hence the trees must be sentient beings. Farid then 
felt for the first time that his penance liad been profit- 


368 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

less. He accordingly set out on another pilgrimage 
of twelve years. This time, so as not to hurt any 
living thing, he tied a wooden cake to his stomach, 
and, it is said, subsisted on the imaginary sustenance 
it afforded him for the full term of his vow. If any 
one asked him to eat, he used to point to the wooden 
cake, and say that he had already dined, and that 
the remainder of his meal was attached to his 
stomach. One day in the dire pangs of hunger, it 
is said, he bit the wooden cake in the hope of satisfy¬ 
ing his appetite. The reputed marks of his teeth are 
shown on a piece of wood still preserved in Pak Pattan. 

Farid in his wanderings visited in a. e, 1244 the 
Girar hill in the Wardha ^strict of Central India, and 
lived tliere for some time. Two travellers, who at first 
mocked him and subsequently felt the effects of his 
miraculous power, became hb disciples. They died on 
the hill where their graves are still pointed out. 

Farid subsequently visited the hill of Datar in 
the state of Junagarh and abode there for some 
time. He was laiown under the name of Shakar 
Bhai. His fireplace near a spring called Qalandar 
kachashma—the Qalandar's well—is still pointed out 
and revered by pilgrims. Hindu lepers visit the place 
to be healed of their malady, and in the event of suc¬ 
cess become Musalinans. Of such are the men in a 
temple on the slope of the hill, who have acquired 
several well-marked Muhammadan characteristics. 

His mother, finding that Farid on his return had 
not lost all remnants of pride, dismissed him to do 
penance for a third period of twelve years. This time, 
it is said, he caused himself to be suspended by the 
feet in a well. He used sometimes, when wearied 
by the unnatural position of his body, to go out and 
pray, and express his satisfaction with the Divine 
will. It is said that birds used to build their nests 
in his hair, and beasts of prey to peck at or devour 
his flesh. He composed the following couplet in 
reference to these drcimistances: — 



SHAIKH FARID 369 

FEtrid, thy body is on the stake ; thy liead hath become 
a cage ; the crows peck at thy feet. 

If God come to me even now, happy shall be my lot. 

This couplet vras subsequently expanded into 
the gotli, gist, and g2iid sloks of Shaikh Brahm 
found in the Granth Sahib. After twelve years 
thus occupied it is said a voice called out to him, 
‘ God will grant any favour thou askest,' Farid 
replied that he only desired salvation. 

Farid, on being questioned why he had endured 
so much penance, said that he desired to save all the 
followers of Muhaminad whom he could fold within 
his arms, His questioner replied, * Thou canst fold 
only two men within thine arms.’ Farid then 
stretched out his hands, i-vhereupon one of them, 
seemed to reach to the east and the other to the 
west, and he said, ‘ All persons within the circuit of 
my arms shall accept Islam and be saved.’ His 
questioner stood abashed on hearing this and became 
his disciple. 

It is stated in the Gulshan^-A^iliya that God had 
an understanding with Farid, that He should give 
him three terms of life of forty years each, After 
the first forty years God said, ' Thou hast been 
searching for Me.’ After the second forty God said, 

' Thou hast done My bidding.’ After the third forty 
God again said. ' Thou hast done bidding : now 
I will do thine.’ It would thus appear that after 
a holy career Farid died at the age of one hundred 
and twenty years. Other writers, however, as we 
shall see, assign the saint a shorter period of life. 

The fame of Farid’s miracles widely extended, and 
some men through env^^ became exceedingly hostile to 
him. Two darweshes, displease d at his high reputation 
for sanctity and thaumaturgy, came from a great 
distance to kill him. Farid spoke gently to bis in¬ 
tended murderers, with the result that tliey departed 
fully satisfied that he was a great saint, and deserved 
praise rather than censure, long life rather than death. 


S\KH. V| 


370 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

After that two saints ai’rived from Mount Lebanon 
to decide the question as to who was the spiritual 
ruler of India. On making Farid's acquaintance^ 
they became so enanaoured of the beauty and saintli¬ 
ness of his character, that they decided to pass the 
remainder of their lives in his service. Others arrived 
on the same errand and from the same locality, so it 
was said that Lebanon was denuded of its male 
population. Farid in due time dismissed them all, 
saying that Lebanon was tlie home of saints, and 
they ought not to abandon it. 

In the train of other holy men who came from 
Ghazni, Kabul, and the cities to the west of it to 
engage in missionary enterprise in India, was Ahmad 
Danyal of Bukhara^, the father of Nlzam-uLDin 
Auliya, Having stayed for some time at Lahore, 
Ahmad Danyal in a. d. 1Z34 proceeded to Badaun, 
then a famous city of Muhammadan learning. There, 
three years after his arrival, Rizam-ul-Din, originally 
called Muhammad, was born to him. Nizam-ui-Din 
^vas left an orphan at the age of five years. He was 
carefully and piously instructed by his mother 
Zulaikha, and in early youth showed such extra¬ 
ordinary ability, that he was known as Nizam-ul-Din 
Bahhas, or the Controversialist, and Mabfil-Shikan, 
the assembly-router. On arriving at manhood he 
vnas offered by the Emperor the coveted post of 
Qazi at Dihli, but, that being principally of a secular 
character, he preferred to embrace a reli^ous life, and 
become a disciple of Farid, From him, according to 
Abul Fazal, author of the Ain-i-Akhari, he obtained 
the key of the treasury of inward illumination. 

Nizam-ul-Din had heard much of Farid, and longed 
to meet him and receive his spiritual instruction. 
Farid too was equally anxious to meet such a holy 
man. He said he had had an inspiration to confer 
the spiritual sovereignty of Hindustan on a man 

^ Thfi Khtd^^^d-id-TawarJkh gives Ghazni as the birthplace of 
Ahmad Dfinyal, 



SHAIKH FARID 


371 


called Nizam-ul-Din, Accordingly, when the two 
holy men met, Farid gave Ni^am-ul-Din his patched 
coat and wooden shoes, and appointed him head of 
the Muhammadan faith in India- He bade him be 
of good cheer and promised ever to assist him. On 
that occasion Farid naade the following couplet : — 

The fire of separation fi'om thee roasteth our hearts ; 

The torrent of thy lo\'e destroyetll oiir lives. 

These lines were intended to compliment Nizani- 
ul-Din on his personal popularity, and the love with 
which he inspired his associates. 

In the time of the Emperor Nasir-ul-Din there was 
a celebrated preacher called Afsah-ul-Din in Dihll, 
He visited Farid in Ajodhan to hold a religious con¬ 
troversy with him, and was encountered by Nizam- 
ul-Din, whom Farid deputed for the purpose. Nizam- 
Ill-Din gave Afsah-ul~Din most unexpectedly clever 
and satisfactory replies to all his arguments, whereat 
he marvelled greatly and departed, saying, * If the 
disciple is so, what must the master be ? ' Farid 
ultimately made Afsah-ul-Din a disciple of his. 

Farid used generally to reject offerings of money. 
One day the emperor presented him with two plates 
of gold coins. Farid would only accept two mu bars 
out of the imperial offerings. Those he accepted 
were devoted to the purchase of provisions for his 
public kitchen ; the remainder he ordered to be dis¬ 
tributed among faqirs. In the process of distribu¬ 
tion two of the coins fell and were picked up by 
a disciple of Farid. Farid not observing this began 
to pray, but could not fix his thoughts on God. He 
knew therefore that some one in the assembly must 
liave worldly dross ou him. After much inquiry he 
became aware of the act of his disciple, and ordered 
him to tlirow away the coins immediately. It was 
only then that Farid could fix his attention on his 
devotions. 

As an example of Farid’s frugal habits, the follow- 

E b 2 


372 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

ing anecdote is relate d, N izam-ul-Din Auliya one day 
cooked some coarse lentils which he seasoned with 
borrowed salt. Farid ordered him to distribute the 
lentils and then give him his shar^e. When it 
was brought to Farid, he said that it savoured of 
excessive expenditure. Ni»am-ul-Din admitted that 
he had seasoned it with borrowed salt, whereupon 
Farid said he had done wrong. Food obtained in 
that way should not be eaten. Upon this Farid sent 
the food away. 

Farid accompanied Baha-ul-Din Zakaria at his 
request on another journey, namely, to the moun¬ 
tain of Qaf, the Caucasus. On descending therefrom 
they are said to have seen a man with a fiery dress 
riding on a hery tiger, an allegorj? intended to repre¬ 
sent the burning zeal of the first propagators of 
Islam. The man put Farid behind him, and rode 
off with him for the conversion of the world, 

Farid, on returning to Ajodhan from his missionary 
journey, was hospitably received and entertained 
by Shaikh Kasir tJlla's mother, a widow’ named Bibi 
UmT-Qulsum, whom he afterwards married. She 
brought him valuable building land to the west of 
the town. Farid cherished Nasir Ulla, and educated 
and brought him up as tiis own son. 

During Farid’s absence in the Caucasus a Jogi 
gained great spiritual ascendancy over the people 
of Ajodhan, and made many converts among them. 
In due time they ah returned to Farid, who promptly 
repaired the mischief that had been done, and re¬ 
stored his flock to their former spiritual allegiance. 

The Emperor Nasir-ul-Din deputed Nawab AHf 
Khan to present Farid with a large sum of money in 
gold and a perpetual grant of the revenue of four 
villages. Farid refused both the money and the grant, 
and told Alif Khan to take them to those who needed 
them. If he himself accepted them, he would no 
longer be reckoned a darwesh. Men would upbraid 
him for his worldliness, and on the day of judgement 


SHAIKH FARID 


he would not be allowed to take his place in the 
ranks of the elect. On this occasion Farid cited the 
precepts and example of his priest Qutub-ul-Din 
Bakhtiyar Ushi. Once the Emperor Shams-ni-Din 
Altmish sent him a dish of gold and silver coins and 
a lease of six villages. Qutub-nl-Din rejected the 
royal offerings, saying that none of his predecessors 
had ever accepted such things, and, were he to do so, 
he would be no true follower of theirs. 

When Nawab Alif Khan was on his return journey 
to Dihli, it occurred to him that the Emperor Nasir- 
ul-Din had no heir, and he reflected that, if he could 
secure Farid's intercession, he might become emperor 
himself. He therefore returned to Farid who gave 
him the following verses : — 

The great Faridun was not an angel; 

He not constructed cut ot rose-water and ambergris ; 

He obtained greatness by his justice and generosity. 

Dispense thou justice and generosity, and thou shaft be 
even as Faridun. 

Alif Khan receiving these lines joyfully returned 
to Dilili, and ultimately, on the death of Nasir-ul-Din, 
was saluted emperor under the title of Ghiyas-ul-Diii 
Balbaii 3 

Farid went to Dihli during the life-time of Nasir- 
ul-Din and received a most hospitable reception. 
The Emperor introduced him to his queens and 
made them his disciples. While in the female apart¬ 
ments Farid’s glance fell on Hazabra, the Emperor's 
daughter. Farid first looked at her, and then, looked 
up to heaven. He inquired whose daughter she 
was, and on being duly informed took his departure. 
The Emperor understood Farid's desire, and sent 
his prime minister to offer him Ha^abra in marriage. 
Farid, who had already made up his mind on the 
subject, said that God, the Prophet, and the elders 
of the Chishtis had all given him orders to ally 



374 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

himself with the Emperor’s daughter. He averred 
that he had seen a sign on Hazabra’s forehead that 
she was intended for Mm. Upon that occasion Faiid 
addressed God—'Thou hast drawn away my heart 
from Thy Im^e, and inclined it in another direction.' 
God is said to have replied—‘ Perform the marriage 
for the love of my friend the Propliet.’ Farid 
prayed God to pardon him. God again replied—^ 

‘ I have an object in this. When sons are born to 
thee, it shall be to the advantage of thy people, and 
they sliall be pardoned.’ Farid, still anxious on the 
subject, urged,' If any of my descendants sin, I shall 
be called to account in Thy court.’ God replied, 
' Keep the good children thyself, and entrust the 
bad ones to Me.' 

Farid and the Emperor’s daughter were duly 
married. The Emperor sent thr ee hundred servants 
to wait on her. Of tliese Farid only allowed her to 
retain two men and two women. The first night 
the lady, richly apparelled, lay on a gorgeous couch, 
Farid produced his prayer-carpet, and slept on it on 
the ground near her. Next day she told her nurse 
that Farid had not approached her. The nurse 
remonstrated with him on the subject. He replied 
that he did not approve of the regal style the lady 
had adopted. She must sell her jewels and ridi 
dresses, devote the price of them to God’s service, 
and wear the habit of a darwesh, When the lady 
received this message, she said she would do as her 
husband had ordered. She accordingly devoted the 
proceeds of the sale of her jewels and dresses to the 
relief of the poor. Farid then procured for her wear 
a (»arse jacket of a dirty brown colour, black 
paejamas, green glass bangles, and a pewter nose-ring. 
The Emperor was not pleased that his daughter 
should appear in such mean habiliments, and again 
supplied her with ne^v clothes and jewellery to wear 
instead of what she had rejected at her husband’s 
desire. The new articles she again gave to the 



SHAIKH FARID 


375 


poor, A third time the Enipeior sent her what he 
deemed suitable apparel and ornaments, but she and 
her hasband parted with them as before. The 
Emperor continued to send her presents, but they 
were only a source of disagreement between her hus¬ 
band and herself. At last the lady proposed that 
they should leave Dihli and proceed to Pak Patfan. 
This was agreed upon, Farid left his brother Najib- 
ul-Din to do spiritual duty for him in Dihlh It may 
be here stated that the females of the shrine are still 
married in dresses similar to what Farid procured 
for his wife. After the honeymoons raiment more 
suitable to their %’orldly position is adopted. 

Tlie Emperor's daughter bore Farid hve sons— 
Badr-ul-Din, Shahab-uI-Din, Nizam-ul-Din, Yaqub, 
and Abdulla Shah ; and three daughters—Fatima, 
Mastura, and Sharifa. In the Itraf-i-Faridi it is 
stated that Farid had a third wife named Najib-uF 
Nissa, sister of Shaikh 2 akaria, and we shall subse¬ 
quently see that he procured a fourth wife on the 
Punjab mountains. 

Farid being once very ill sent Nizam-ul-Din and 
other darweshes to a cemetery to pray for him. 
Tlie idea was and is, that prayers offered in the 
presence of men who have gone to God, are acceptable 
and successful. The prayer, hourever, proved of no 
avail, Upon this one of the darweshes remarked 
that the prayers of the worthless were of no advantage 
to the perfect, that is, the prayers of ordinary dar¬ 
weshes could not benefit Farid. This expression was 
subsequently repeated to Farid by Nizam-ul-Din. 
Farid was pleased with the compKment and, it is 
said, granted Nizam-ul-Din supernatural power. 
Nizam-ul-Din then returned to the cemetery, prayed 
for Farid's recovery, and on his return found him 
in perfect health. 

To show the spiritual and social position held by 
the family it is related that Farid addressed his cousin 
as ' Kazrat Ghaus Shaikh Baha-ul-Din Zakaria’. 



376 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

His cousin addressed him iu reply, ‘ Maslinq^i-Khuda 
wa ashifc-i-za.t-i-Kibria Faxia. fard-i-alam, Shall 
Shakar Ganj Ajodham CMshti ’—Beloved of God and 
loving the Almighty Being, Farid, unique in the 
world, king, treasury of sugar, Cliishti of Ajodhan. 

Shaikh Badr-ul-Din, descended from a noble family 
of Ghazni, was a disciple of Qutub-ul-Din of Dildi. 
Farid, highly impressed with Badr-ul-Din’s reputa¬ 
tion for sanctity, went one day to vfeit him. Badr- 
ul-Din had nothing for him to cat, so he sent his 
coarse blanket to the market to be sold for whatever 
it would fetdi, in order to provide a meal for his 
distinguished guest. Malik Nizam-ul-Din, a different 
person from the Nizam-ul-Din Auliya with whom we 
have been concerned, made a monastery for Shaikli 
Badr-ul-Din, who was pleased to reside in it, and 
dispense to tlie poor the provisions which NiKani-ul- 
Diu had provided for them in abundance. It hap¬ 
pened that this Hizam-nl-Din subsequently in some 
way offended the Emperor and was imprisoned. 
Badr-ul-Din wrote to Farid to pray to God for his 
release. Farid refused on the ground that Nizam- 
ul-Din had constructed a monastery for self- 
aggrg|idizemery ,^ar course which was not in accord¬ 
ance wifE^tfie humble practice of his predecessors 
who sought retirement and self-effacement. 

There was a religious man called Shams Dabir who 
lived in great indigence in Sunam in the present state 
of Patiala. He wrote some verses in praise of Farid, 
and went to him. to recite them. Farid on hearing 
the eulogium asked tlie poet what he wanted. Shams 
Dabir replied that he was very poor, and had not 
wherewithal to support his aged mother. Farid 
replied that he gave not money, but he would pray 
very fervently for him. Shams Dabir ultimately 
became secretaiy to the Emperor's prime minister. 

The Empeior Ala-ul-Din Masaud made Hamid, 
a learned man, his viceroy of Bengal. One day as 
Hamid was standing with clasped hands before the 



. SHAIKH FARID 


377 

Emperor, a. form of light appeared to him, and asked 
why he was standing in a suppliant attitude before 
a fool The same question was asked Hamid the 
next day, and the next day again, Ujjon this 
he resigned his post and proceeded to Ajodhan, 
whither he was attracted by Farid’s spiritual power. 
On reaching Farid’s dweHiug, he fell down and 
kissed his threshold. When Farid had heard his 
story, he made him his disciple, and gave him the 
patched coat of a Khalifa. Hamid remained for 
some time with Farid, and became a very eloquent 
preacher, Farid often called him a bright particular 
star, but at the same time remarked tltat a star looks 
not bright in the presence of the sun—a subtle com¬ 
pliment to himself. Farid suggested that he sltould 
return, and live in the town of Andina near Dihli, and 
benefit God’s people by his preaching, Hamid, 
however, stated that his intention was rather to 
make a pilgrimage to Makka and Madina, the cities 
hallowed by the residence of his Prophet, Upon 
this Farid allowed him to take his departure, 
Maulana Badr-uFDin, son of Saiyid Minhaj-ul-Din 
Najjari,^ was professor of Arabic in the Muhammadan 
college of Dihli. In the course of his theological 
studies he encountered several difficulties for which 
he could receive no satisfactory solution, from the 
holy men of his acquaintance. He therefore resolved 
to travel to Bukhara, then the seat of some of the 
greatest Muhammadan scholars of the age, He went 
by Multan, whose learned men also he wished to 
consult. On the way he met some pious hermits, 
one of whom W'as a disciple of Farid, and had Farid's 
name ever on his tongue. Badr-ul~Din, after a short 
conference with him, fold him he was wasting his 
time in such occupation. Tlie disciple said he could 
not help it, for Farid’s name issued spontaneously 
from his lips. The disciple and his friends then 

r In the English iraiislatvoii of ilie is found for 

Najjilrj. 



378 BHACtATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

suggested to Badr-ul'Din to pay Shaikh FaHd a visit, 
and perhaps he would solve some of his difficulties. 
Badr-ul-Din replied that he had met several Shaikhs, 
that they were merely impostors, and that men 
wasted their time in converse with them. The 
disciple and liis friends argued the matter with Badr- 
ul-Din, and represented to him that he could only 
appreciate Shaikh Farid's merits when he had made 
his acquaintance- Badr-ul-Din at last gave way, and 
was condneted by his casual friends to Farid. Farid 
solved his theological difficulties in a satisfactory 
marmei’, and then made him his disciple. Upon this 
Badr-ul-Din decided not to proceed to Bukhara, but 
remain in Ajodhan with Farid, He became so 
humble that he used to ■wait on holy men, cut hre- 
wood in. the forest, and cook their food with it. He 
was at the same time very attentive to his devotions, 
and used to mortify his body with fasting. 

Once, ■when tliei'e was a marriage in Pak Pattan, 
Badr-ul-Din, on seeing the relations of the bride 
draw water with which to bathe the bride and bride¬ 
groom according to ancient custom, thought that 
if he were in his own country and among his people 
his own marriage also might be duly celebrated. 

Sometime afterwards Badr-ul-Din proceeded on 
a pilgrimage to Makka and Madina. On his return 
Farid informed him of the thoughts which had passed 
through his mind on seeing water drawn to bathe 
the bride and bridegroom, and said he could either 
have a temporal or a permanent marriage, as he 
deemed most advantageous. By permanent marriage 
Farid meant death, as among the ancient Greeks; 
and if Badr-ul-Din desired it, not only w'ater but milk 
and sugar should ever be offered at his shrine, and 
the fame of sudi a marriage should resound both in 
earth and heaven. 

It would appCeir from the JawaJtir-i-Fcindi that 
Badr-ul-Din accepted both forms of marriage. Farid 
gave him his daughter Fatima in marriage. He also 



SHAIKH FARID 


379 


made hixn his chamberlain with tJie title of Badr- 
ul-Diwan. Whenever Faiid spoke to him on the 
subject of appointing him to a position corresponding 
with that of bishop in partibus m^slinin, he used 
to reply that he desired to live for ever under Farid's 
shadow. Farid built him a house near the great 
mosque of the city, and there he lived in the service 
of God. After his death a mausoleum was erected 
over his remains. As promised by Shaikh Farid, his 
marriage ceremonies are celebrated once a year by 
a fair held on the sixth day of the month J amadi ul 
Sani, when copious libations of sharbat are offered 
at his shrine. 

One day as Farid aw'oke from a trance, he said, * The 
eye which looketh not towards God had better be 
blind ; the tongue which uttereth not His name had 
better be dumb ; the ear which heareth not His 
praises had better be deaf; and the body which 
performeth not His service had better be dead,' 
After this utterance Farid relapsed into his trance. 

Once seven hundi'edholy men W'Cre sitting together. 
An inquirer put them four questions to which they 
gave identically the same replies— 

Q. I. Who is tlie wisest of men ? A. He who rcfrainetli 
from sin. 

Q. Who is the most inteUigent ? d. He who is not 
disconcerted at anything. 

Q, 3, Who is the most independent? A. He who 
practiseth contentment. 

Q. 4, Who is the most needy? A. He who prjictiseth it 

not. 

The following sentences are taken from Farid’s 
sermons : — 

God hesitateth to raise His hand against His creatures. 

Be not overjoyed with worldly w'eshth, and, if thou have 
none at all. be not depressed. 

The day we obtain not our desires sbendd be to us as 



380 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

a time of rejoidng like the night of the Prophet's ascension 
into heaven. 

Man should not allow his ambition to be cooled by the 
discouraging remarks of the world. 

When a faqir putteth on rich clothes, they become his 
winding-sheet. 

Of all attractions, attraction towards devotion is the best. 

It fareth well with him who tliLnketh on his own faults 
and not on the faults of others. 

To tho pure all things are pure; nothing can defile 
themn 

If you aspire to attain the dignity of the departed saints^ 
bow not to monarchs. 

The learned man is the most noble among men, and I he 
holy man the most noble among noblemen. 

The holy man among the learned is like the full moon 
among the stars. 

Tli.e most contemptible of men is be who occupieth him¬ 
self with eating and dressing. 

The repetition of the following lines gave great 
spiritual comfort to Farid: — 

Last night sad thoughts possessed me, 

But afterwards 1 reflected on my beautiful Lover* 

I said I would do everything to go to His door. 

My tears ran, and my Lover then caught my sleeve, 

A student asked Farid if singing were lawful and 
proper. He replied that, according to the Muham¬ 
madan religion, it was certainly unlawful, but its 
propriety was still a matter of discussion. 

Nizam-ul-Din Auliya told Nasir-uLDin, a disciple 
of his, that one day when he went to visit Farid he 
stood at his door, and saw him dancing as he sang 
the following:— 

I wish ever to live in Thy love, 0 God. 

If I become fhe dust under Thy feet> I shall live* 

I Thy slave desire none but Thee in both worlds ; 

Tor Thee I will live and for Thee I will die. 



SHAIKH FARID 381 

The following was a favourite couplet of Farid 

Not every heart is capable of finding the secret of God’s 
love. 

There axe not pearls in every sea; there is not gold in 
every mine. 

One of Farid’s beloved friends \vas Shaikh Janial- 
ul-Din of Hansi, whom he called his senior Khalifa, 
Hazrat Shaikh Baha-id'Din Zakaria of Multan, hear¬ 
ing of this man’s fame, begged Farid to lend him to 
him. to preach to the faithful. Farid refused, hut, 
when pressed by JamaFul-Din, who was attracted 
to Baha-ul-Din by supernatural influence, replied, 
‘ Go and blacken thy face/ It is said that upon this 
Jainal-nl-Din’s face became black, and he fled to the 
forest to hide himself from human gaze, Farid for¬ 
bade all persons to Intercede for him or assist him 
in any way. It happeried that, as a man called Alim 
was going to Ajodhan from Multan, he met Jamal- 
ul-Din on the way. Jamal-ul-Din begged liim to 
intercede with Farid, and he did'so. Lapse of time 
and importunity caused Farid to relent. He wrote 
to Jamal-ul-Din the four following lines and then 
restored him to favour :— 

Go round the v?oTld, and in wandering raise blisters on 
thy feet; 

If thou find any one like me, then forsake me. 

Come one morning with pure heart to my door ; 

If thoa attain, not thine object, then make complaint. 

Jamal-ui-Din returned to Farid, and Farid’s love 
for him increased after the rupture. Jamal-ul-Din 
was a descendant of Abu Hanifa of Kusa. 

Farid visited Mokalhar, now called Faridkot in 
honour of the saint. The country tvas then ruled by 
Mokal. At the time of Farid's visit, Mokal was build¬ 
ing his capital, and used to impress all visitors for the 
work. Though Farid wore the patched coat of a re- 



332 BHAGATS OF THE GKANTH SAHIB 

ligious maiij he too was pressed into the Raja’s service. 
The masons and workmen on making Farid’s acquaint¬ 
ance bowed at his feet, and prayed him to grant them 
forgiveness of their sins. The Raja too followed their 
example, and for some days personally waited on him, 
Farid asked what name the king was going to give his 
city. The king replied Mokalhar. Then said Farid, 
* Berun khair wa andarun darr ’ —it is fair without, 
but a min" within—by which the saint meant that 
it should never be thoroughly inhabited. The king 
represented his hard fate to Farid, Though thousands 
of rupees had been spent on his capital, no one came 
to dwell in it. If his holiness Farid ordered, it should 
soon, be full of inhabitants. Farid then told him to 
change the name and dwell in it himself. Mokal con¬ 
sented and called the city Faridkot in compliment to 
his holy guest, Farid then said, ‘ Go, God the most 
high will cause thee and thy descendants to abide in 
that fort.’ 

There is a legend that Farid once visited a city on 
the Panjab mountains. One day, as he was bathing, 
a beautiful young lady accidentally saw and con¬ 
ceived a desire to approach him, for a son by such 
a man should become king of the realm of beauty. 
It is said that Jamila Khatun—the beautiful lady— 
while revolving this in her mind, became pregnant. 
After Farid’s departure there was great commotion 
in the tribe on hearing of the young lad^s condition. 
She averred that she had committed no impropriety, 
but no one would believe her. Every one said it was 
of course that stranger Farid’s doing. Farid chanced 
to return to that part of the country six months 
afterwards. He was charged with the young lady's 
seduction, which, apart from being a sin, was a 
grievous offence against the tribe. He solemnly 
denied the charge, but no one would accept his state¬ 
ment, He requested Ins accusers to ask the lady if 
she had ever conceived a desire to have a child by 
^ Dat-r is so undorslood in Faridkot. 




.SHAIKH FARID 383 

him. She then admitted that such a desire had 
^isen in her mind. Upon this Farid, in self-defence, 
instanced the well-known case of Jesus having been 
born without a human father, ana also the case of 
Adam, who had been produced without father or 
mother, and said that nothing was impossible to 
God's Omnipotence, and He might in His mercy 
have given a son to the virgin. The tribe heeded 
not Farid's words, and said they would only believe 
him if he wrought a miracle in their presence. They 
ferund no difficulty in suggesting a subject. They 
told him that no sugar-cane grew in their country. 
If he went with them to the forest and caused sugar 
to rain, they would accept his story of the young lady's 
immaculate pregnancy, but not otherwise. Farid 
then said in the Persian language, which he habitually 
spoke, ' Chi a jab az Afridgare ki zan-i-bikr ra az 
qudrat-i-kamila-i-khud hamila be wasta shohar 
sakht, az asman shakar nisar fannayad ? ' What 
wonder would it be if the Creator, who out of His 
perfect power maketh a virgin pregnant without 
human intervention, should rain sugar ? It is said 
that sugar immediately began to rain, and from that 
time Farid obtained the name of Shakar Ganj, the 
treasury of sugar After this miracle all the people 
of the tribe became his followers, and he was form^y 
wedded to Jamila Kbatun, who soon afterwards 
gave birth to a son. Farid remained there for six 
montlis, during which time he fasted forty days. 
He locked up the house in which he liad dwelt, 
saying that his successor would open it, and then 
returned to Ajodhan. 

As Ills successor Diwan Taj-ul-Din was returning 
from a pilgrimage to Makka and Madina, he hap¬ 
pened to visit that part of the country. He asked 
the people to wliat tribe they belonged. They said 
that they were descendants of Qutub-ul-Alam Baba 

^ Firishta, the Persian historian, has given other reasons for the 
appellation. Vidt vol. II, Lakhnau fdiiioit. 


4 


■ 


I 





384 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Farid Shalcar Ganj. He inquired from which of 
Farid’s sons they were descended. They replied 
that they had not come in that way, but had been 
niiracxilously boni. When Taj-uhDin had heard the 
whole story, he nniocked the door of Farid’s hut. 
The people were delighted to see Taj-ul Din. and 
became his followers in large numbers, 

Farid died of pneumonia on the fifth day of the 
month of Muharrim, a. h. 664 (a. d. 1266). The 
date of Farid’s death is commemorated by the 
chronograms (a) ‘ Farid asari/ (6} 'auliYae Khudai 
He was unique, a saint of God.^ Farid's last words 
were in Arabic, ' Ya hajyo, ya qayyum'—O ever 
living, 0 eternal God t At the last word ‘ qayyum' 
Farid expired. 

Farid was to have been buried outside the town 
of Pak Pattan at a place called the Martyrs' graves, 
where he had first alighted on his arrivS, but 
his son Makhdmn Khwaja Nizam-iil-Din arrived 
in time to alter the proposed arrangement, This 
son who had been a general in the Emperor's army, 
was then living in retreat at Patali. As he lay 
asleep one night before his father’s death, he thought 
he heard his father calling him. He arose and went 
to Ajodhan, but, as the gates of the town were all 
locked at the time, he could not gain access to Farid’s 
dwelling. Farid knew of his son's arrival, but it 
was too late to see him, ' His advice, however,' 
said Farid, ' should be taken in all matters regarding 
my funeral and burial’ The son advised that tie 
family should wait for Nizam-ul-Din Auliya from 
Dihli, and expressed his intention of temporarily 
burning his father in the house where he had lived, 
and where subsequently his eldest son Khwaja 
Shahab-ul-Din was buried. 

On the arrival of Nizam-ul-Din Auliya from 
Dihli, he had a mausoleum erected for Farid. He 

^ Fafishc^ Aiid oi iChitititci-uI-Tawankh give difTerent 

dates, but they are proved false by the chronograms. 


SHAIKH FARID 385 

directed that the Quran should be read over clean 
bricks, that the reader should then blow on them 
and employ them for the construction of Farid's 
grave. Tliis direction was obeyed. The Hafizes 
and the Khalifas read the Quran over bricks con¬ 
secrated as directed, and made Farid's grave with 
them. A shrine was built with stone windows on 
the east and north sides for women to see through, 
and with a door on the south side to be called the 
bihishti darwaza, or gate of paradise, for men to 
enter by. The body was then exhumed from Its 
temporary grave, and after being well perfumed 
placed within the mausoleum thus constructed. It 
is said that the souls of Muhammad and all the 
Muhammadan saints appeared on the occasion. At 
the advice of Nizam-ul-Djn AuUya, the stone 
dow at the east was broken at Farid’s re-interment 
to admit of the exit of the souls of the Prophet and 
his saints. Where the soul of Muhammad had 
taken up its position within the mausoleum, there 
was a hujra or small chapel built, called Qadam 
Rasul or the Prophet’s footsteps. Nizam-ul-Din 
then stated that he had received a message from the 
departed Farid, that God would pardon and save 
from hell all who passed through the paradisal gate. 
This was everywhere proclaimed from the rising to 
the setting of the sun. Some persons, however, 
who had no internal eyes, rcfus^ to believe that 
tlie gate possessed such supreme efficacy. Upon 
this Nizam-ul-Din said to the Prophet, ‘ If the 
populace be allow^ed to behold thee, their spiritual 
darkness shall be dispelled.' It is said tliat the 
Prophet then appeared to the whole multitude, and 
not a scintilla of doubt remained in any one’s mind 
as to the advantages to be obtained from passing 
through the sacred portal. 

It ^vas subsequently ordered that women should 
pray at the stone window on the north side, and 
that a wall should be built outside it to secure their 



386 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

privacy. The door opening to the east was then 
called the door of light. It is that by which men 
generally enter and leave the shrine. 

After Farid's death his son Badr-ul-Din Sulaiman 
succeeded him in his spiritual, and Saiyid ^laulvi 
Badr-ul’Din Ishaq in his temporal duties, Envious 
persons set the two Badr-ul~Dins at variance, upon 
which Nizam-ul-Din Auliya came from Dihli and 
made peace between them. 

We have mentioned the Rahat-ul-Quiub as one 
of our authorities for the life of Farid. The first 
entry in it was made on the nth of the montli 
Rajah, a.h, 655 (a. d. 1:354) I the last on the 
25th of Safar, a, h. 656. The diary thus shows 
Farid's acts and conversations for the space of 
eleven months. We shall here give some extracts 
from it. 

Farid considered that faqiri or holiness consisted 
in four things, namely, to be blind to the faults of 
iluhamtnadans, to be deaf to slander, to be dumb 
when, evil speaking is suggested, and to be lame 
when there is a desire to visit evil places. 

On one occasion Shaikh Badr-ul-Din of Ghaaid, 
Jamal-ul-Din of Hansi, Sharaf-ul-Din of Nabha,*^ 
and Qazi Hamid-ul-Din of Nagaiir met at Farid's 
house. Farid dilated to them on the virtues of 
hospitality, and said it was proper for a host to give 
something to every guest whether he received an 
equivalent or not. 

At a religious conference at Farid's house, where 
were assembled Maulvi Hamid-ul-Din of Nagaur, 
Shaikh Shams^ul-Din, Shaikh Burhan-ul-Din, and 
others. Shaikh Farid mentioned an expression in 
the Hadis, or traditional sa3hiig5 of the Prophet, 
that love of the world was the source of all 
evil. A man called Shaikh Abdulla Suhel of Tastar 
said that God and man were all one. There was 
no difference between them except that, in propor- 
NUkt, £0 in ihe oiiginal. 



SHAIKH FARID 


3S7 

tion as man loved the world, he felt away from God. 
Farid expressed his concurrence with this state- 
ment, and added that the heart was like a mirror, 
and love of mammon was as rust on it, which should 
be removed by the file of God's love. Land covered 
with tares and thistles produced no good crop imtil 
they were eradicated, Faqirs should remain aloof 
from the world, and not visit even kingg and nobles. 

Once when the king of Iraq was Hi, he sent for 
Abdulla Suhel to treat him. Suhel cured him, but 
thought it necessary to expiate the offence of visiting 
a king by living a life of absolute retirement for 
seven years. The friendship of wealthy men was in 
his opinion as poison for holy men. When a holy 
man associates with such men, his influence on others 
is injurious to them. Abdulla defined the word 
tariqat—a spiritual stage of Muhammadans—to 
mean absolute disregard for the things of this world. 

Farid said he had lived for ten years with the 
saint Abu Yusuf Chishti, and during that time had 
never moved a foot in the direction of a king or 
noble, except on Fridays when he went to pray, 
for prayers should be said in common on the Sab¬ 
bath. He thought that whenever a faqir lias 
visited a monarch, his patched coat and hat ought 
afterwards to be burned in order to remove the 
contagion of wealth and pride. 

It is not surprising to hear that a man of Farid's 
sanctity and force of character made many converts 
among the Hindus within the reach of his influence. 
The Bahlis, the Sirhangs, the Jhakars, and the 
Adankans are enumerated among the tribes whom 
he induced to accept Islam. 

When Badr-ul-Din Sulaiman, Farid's son, suc¬ 
ceeded him, he was invested with the turban which 
Farid himself had received from Shaikh Abdul 
Qadir Jiiani (Hazrat Ghaus), The turban was of 
three colours, saffron at one end, brown at the 
other, and white in the centre. Nizam-ul-Din 

c c 2 


t 



388 BHAGA'rS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

purchased several white turbans, and steeped them 
with Abdul Qadir Jilani^s in the same pot. The 
object of this was that Abdul Qadir Jilani’s turban 
might communicate some of its virtues to the white 
turbans, and that the latter after such contact 
might confer blessings on Farid's disciples and 
friends, when they bound them on their heads. 
When Badr-ul-Din had put on Abdul Qadir Jilani's 
turban, and Farid's disciples and friends the white 
turbans, the whole company went outside the gate 
of paradise and sat down. Sweets were produced, 
and a priest read texts from the Quran over them. 
They were then distributed for the repose of the 
souls of the Chbhti Khwajas to whom Farid 
spiritually belonged. 

'fhis custom is still observed by the foEowers of 
Farid. On the approach of the Muharrim, the 
Quran is read over a jug of sharbat for the souls of 
ancestors, and the sharbat is then distributed among 
the faithful. When the Muharrim begins, there is 
singing after breakfast, to which the high priest 
listens on his carpet of prayer. The whole audience 
then enters on a state of exaltation. The priest puts 
on a turban like Farid’s, and binds white turbans on 
the heads of his brethren and disciples. On the 
fifth day of the Muharrim he ojpens the' Gate of para¬ 
dise and the crowd enters with a rush, in the hope 
that, when they cross the barrier, they shall secure 
in reahty the bliss of the elect. 

The gate of paradise is a small door in the shrine, 
which is only opened twice a yeai’, and on botli 
occasions at night, In our time the crowd which 
passes through, shouting ‘ Haji Qutub Farid or 
simply ’ Faridto maintain their fervour, has been 
estimated sometimes at thirty thousand souls. To 
reach the gate of paradise three outer portals have 
to be traversed. Among the immense crowd there is 
a rivalry' to reach heaven in the shortest time, not 
by good deeds, but by physical strength; and in 



SHAIKH FARID 


380 

the struggle numbers arc continually maimed, and 
some aged and infirm persons occasionally killed. 
Were not a large force of police, generally reinforced 
from neighbouring districts, marched to the shrine 
to maintain order, great indeed would be the destruc¬ 
tion of human life at this religious ceremony. Men 
are not content to pass the gate for themselves, they 
return again and again to vicariously conduct their 
female relatives to the abode of bliss, and this 
reiterated service increases the crowd, the confusion, 
and the danger to human life. 

On the seventh day of the Muharrim there is again, 
singing, the reading of the Quran is finished, and 
the gate of paradise is left open. On the tenth of 
the month Farid’s mausoleum is washed and per¬ 
fumed within and without. 

In the month of Ramzan the banners whicli 
Abdul Qadir Jilani received from Madina and gave 
to Farid, are taken out and fitted with new cloth. 
The high priest’s followers present him with an 
ordinary coat and a patched coat—meaning thereby 
temporal and spiritual raiment. When he puts 
them on, the prayem appointed for the Id in the 
end of Ramzan are read, Farid's cup, stick, and 
rosary are then produced and prayers offered. The 
high priest udth a rosary in one hand and Farid’s 
staff in the other begs for alms, upon which his 
followers present him mth cakes of sugar, almonds, 
and coco-nuts. Such offerings are afterwards dis¬ 
tributed among the poor. 

It remains to add a few words regarding Nizam- 
ui-Din Auliya, the author of the Rahat--ui-Qulub 
and Farid’s faithful friend and disciple. He states 
that he visited Ajodhan three times during the life 
of Farid, and Farid charged him with the education 
of his children. 

Subsequently Nizam-ul-Din was sent by Farid as 
Khalifa or spiritual ruler of Hindustan, and iu that 
capacity amassed great wealth and became known 



390 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

as 2 ar-i-zar Baft—woven, or altogether, of gold, 
a name given him by Bii Ali Shah, a religions man 
of Panipat. 

It is probable that Niaam-uTDin's great wealth 
aroused the jealousy of Mubarak Khilji, who ascended, 
the DihE throne in a, d, 1317. He summoned 
Shaikh Rukn-ul-Din from Multan in the hope of 
counteracting Ni2.am-ul-Din's unquestionably great 
influence with the people- Nizam-uTDin went forth 
to meet the man who had been chosen as his anta’ 
gonist, and produced a highly favourable impression 
on Mm. When the Emperor afterw'ards asked 
Rukn-ul-Din who had been the principal person to 
go forth and welcome him to Dihli, Rulcn-ul-Din 
replied ' The foremost man of the ageby which 
he meant Nizam-ul-Din. The Emperor after this 
testimony to Nisam-ul-Din's greatness withdrew his 
opposition to him, and allowed him to dwell in 
peace 

The imperial hostility to Nizam-ul-Din descended 
to Ghiyas-uTDin Timhlak, one of the successors of 
Mubarak Khilji. When GMyas-ul-^Din was return¬ 
ing from his expedition to Bengal, he no longer 
desired to see Nisam-ul-Din, and ordered him to 
leave the city. Nizam-ul-Din had no alternative 
but to obey, but decided to do so at leisure. He 
said to his friends ' Hanoz Dlhii dur ast ’—Dihli is 
stiU far off—by which he meant that the Emperor 
should never reach Dihli. The Emperor on his 
homeward march put up in a house at Afghanpur, 
hastily constructed for his reception by his son 
Alaf Khan. The house fell upon the monardi and 
killed him in a. d, 1325. The Emperor’s death was 
popularly attributed to his hostility to the saint, 
Nizam-ul-Din’s expression ' Dihli is far off' has 
passed into a proverb.* It corresponds to the 

^ Farishta gives in any oT Nizam-ul-Dln which it is not 

necessary to reproduce here. 



SHAIKH FARID 


391 

English saying, ‘ There is many a slip 'twixt the 
cup and the lip.’ Nizanti-ul-Din himself died the 
same year as the Emperor. 

Nizam-uhDin, notwithstanding his worldly suo- 
cess, raised many men in Dihli, Bengal, Chanderi, 
Malwa, Bihar, Ujjam, Gujrat, and the Dakhan to 
the heights of spiritual sanctity, Hating conferred 
Ills khalifaship on Khwaja Hazrat Nasir-ul-Din 
Chiragh, he died in Dihli on Wednesday, the 18 th 
day of Rabi ul Sani, a, h, 725, a, d. 1305, that is, 
sixty years after the death of his beloved priests 
He was buried in a quarter then known as Ghyaspur. 
He wrote the following Persian lines in praise of 
Farid: — 

Pir-i'-man pirest mEiulma Farid ; 

Hamchu 0 dar siliar Matila na*faritl. 

My priest is the holy Farid ; 

God created no one in the world tike him. 


hlYMNS OF SHAIKH FARID 

Miscellaneous Religions Instruction :— 

Asa 

Saith Shaikh Farid, my dear friends, attach yotii^lves 
to God. 

This body shall become diist and its abode bo the im- 
liononted grave.* 

To-day God can be met, Sliaikh Farid, if thou restrain 
the feelings whicli agitate thy mind. 

Had 1 known that I should die and not return again, 

I would not have devoted m\^elf to tins false world and 
ruined myself. 

1 The Kktt/Hsn/'ul-Ttutwfiih gives ihe date of his deatli a.^ a. }|. ijo. 
We accept in preference the date given in the Aln-i-Aii>nri. 

* gsr is a cenmnon eipreasion iti tbe T»Tit!iigs of FitkI. 

not an epithe t of the body as some suppose. 



393 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Honestly spsak tlie truth ; utter not falsehood. 

The disciple ought to travel hy the way the guru pointeth 
out. 

When the lover ^ is saved, the heart of the beloved * 
taketh courage. 

Thou who turnest to tlie glitter of gold shall be split 
ill twain by the saw. 

0 Shaikh, no man’s life is permanent in this w'orld; 

How many have sat on the seats on wltich we sit! 

As kulangs come in Kaitik, forest fires in Chet, lightning 
in Sawan, 

As woman’s arms adorn her husband’s neck in winter. 

So transitory things pass away ; reflect on this in thy 
mind, 

Man taketh si?c months to form * and one moment to 
break up. 

The earth asked heaven,* saith Farid, how' many pilots* 
had passed away; 

Some have been burnt, others are in the cemeteries, and 
their souls suffer reproaches from th& mgds of Deaik. 

Farid's longing to meet God : — 

SUHl 

On account of the severe burning of high fever induced 
by separation from God, I wring my bands ; 

1 have grown craay longing for my Spouse. 

Thou, O Spouse, wast angry with me in Thy iieart ; 

It was through my demerits, and not my Spouse's fault. 

My Lord, I did not know Thy w'orth ; 

I have lost my youth and repent too late. 

0 black kokil, wliy art thou black ? 

CMatl, liietally—a handsome young Dian; here the reference is 
to the elects 

* Gon\ 2 L handsome young here the reference is to tliose 

who are striving for perfection r 

^ That IS, the foeius is formed after six months in the womb, 

^ That ia, the disciples asted the guru. 

® Religious guides. 



HYMNS OF SHAIKH FARID 393 

The kokil^‘ I have been burnt by separtition from my 
Beloved; 

Can she who is separated from her Beloved ever be 
happy ? ’ 

If the Lord be merciful. He will cause me to meet Him. 
Painful is Ihe well ^ into which lone woman ® kaik fetUen ; 
She hath no companions and no helper. 

Thou hast mercifully, O God, caused me to meet Thy 
saints; 

When 1 look again, God is my helper. 

My way is tliorouglily tedious; 

It is sltarper than a two-edged sword and very narrow ; 
Over that is my passage ■ 

Shaikh Farid, prepare thyself betimes for that road. 


SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 

1 

Tlie day that w'oman was to be married was pre\'iou&ly 
fixed.® 

The Spouse, the angel of Deaih of whom we have heard, 
hath come to show' his face ; 

Having cracked the bones of the body he will take away 
the poor soul. 

The time recorded cannot be altered; * explain this to 
thy soul. 

The soul is the bride, death the bridegroom; he will 
marry her and take hei- away. 

As she goeth, whose neck sliall she run to embrace with 
her arms ? ® 

Have you not heard of the bridge of Sai'at, whicii is 
finer than a hair ? 

Farid, when the summons cometh, arise and deceive 
yonrseb'es not, 

^ Thai is, the world. ® The soul 

® Marriage here means death. * Man shall live his ailoited span. 

^ Whose help shall the soul seek sa the last moment L 



394 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

II 

Farid, since I walk in the way of the world, it is difficult 
to be like the darwesh at God’s gate,=^ 

I have tied and taken up my bundle of worldlifi&ss ; 
whither shall I go to throw it away ? 

III 

I know nothing, 1 see nothings the world is a smovildering 

fire; 

My master did well to me, otherwise 1 too should 
have been bumf. 

IV 

Farid, had I knowpi my sesames ^ were to be so few, 
1 should have husbanded my handfuls ; 

Had I known that the Bridegi^oom^ was so young, I 
should have bun less vain. 

V 

Had I known that my dress ^ was opening, I sliould 
put a fast knot on it.^ 

So great as Thou 1 have found none; I have seen and 
wandered the world over, 

VT 

Farid, if thou have acute wisdom, write not a black 
mark against 

Bend thy head and look beneath thy collar,® 

VII 

Farid, if men beat tliee with their fists, beat them not 
in return ; 

A/'ffy, kiss their feet and go home. 

^ That IS, it is difficult fonroddly people to be holy. ^ Brealhings. 

^ Had 1 known that God, Mke a veiy young and innocent bride¬ 
groom, did not value me, I ehoiakl have been less vain. The verse is 
aEac translated—Had 1 kno^i'n thaL the Eridegroom was for the humble. 
I should have been kss proud* 

^ The body ivhich contains the ^ul tied up in it, 

^ If I had known that this trumpevy body was so soon to pass aiiv-ay, 
1 should have t^ken greater care. 

^ Loo-kioro ihy heart, consider thine own faults and not those of otherR. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


395 


VIII 

Farid, when it was time for thee to eamA them wast in 
love with the world : 

Death’s foundations are strong ; ^ when the last breath is 
drawn, thy soul shall be packed away, 

IX 

See, Farid, what hath ocourt'ed—Ihy beard hath gro™ 
grey; 

The future is near, the past is left far behind. 

X 

See, Farid, what bath occurred—sugar hath become 
poison. 

To whom shall I tell my sorrow except to my Lord ? 

XI 

Farid, mine eyes have seen enough, and mine cars hoard 
enough j 

The free of the body hath become ripe,® and liath assumed 
another colour, 

XII 

Farid, hath any one who enjoyed not her spouse when 
her hair was black, enjoyed him her hair was grey ? 

Love thySpouse,so shall the colour of ihy hair be restored.* 

Guru Amar Das offers the following objection to 
tills couplet :— 

xin 

Farid, whetiier man’s hair be black or grey, the Lord is 
ever present if any one remember Him : 

1 That is, to serrc God, 

* Liteifill>"increase b^' a Fourth daily, 

* The gyanis translate—The vegetabies have become ripe. That 
is, the field of life has yielded ils liarvesl, and it is time for death, 

* That is, youth shall return, and thou shall have another op¬ 
portunity of enjoying thy Spouse, itfth hfli is also read and 

translated—This is the time Far enjoying Him, 



3 g6 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Even if all men desire to love God, thsy will noi succeed 
by their own endeavours : 

Thb cup of love belongeth to God ; He givctb it to 
whom He pleaseth. 

XIV 

Farid, I have seen those eyes which charmed the worlds 

They could not endure the streak of lampblack,^ yet in 
them birds have hatched their young, 

XV 

Farid, men shout and sliriek and ever give advice; 

But how can tliey whom tlie deril hatJi led astray, turn 
their thoughts to Gi^d ? 

XVI 

Farid, if thou long for the Lord of all, become tlie grass 
on the pathway for mm to trsud on ; 

When one man break efh fhee and another trampleth on 
thee, 

Then shalt thou enter the court of the Lord, 

XVII 

Farid, revile not dust, there is nothing like it ; 

When we are alive it is beneath our feet, when we are 
dead it is above us, 

XVIII 

Faridj where there is greed, what love can there be ? 
Where there h greedy the love is false. 

How long canst thou pass thy time in a broken hut in 
the rain ? 

XIX 

Farid, why wanderest thou from forest to forest breaking 
down branches and thorns ? ^ 

It is in tl^c heart God dwelleth ; why seekest thou Him 
in the forest ? 

^ Osed to darkan ihe eye^ids. This slok is said to have been written 
(jn Feeing the skull of a, beautiful courtesan who u^d to Huil fault 
with her servant for touching her eyes when applying lampblack, 

* Also transEaled^’^^hen the thorns of the forest seek to drive ihee 
back 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


397 


XX 

Farid, with the&e spindle-shanks I have traversed plains 
and mountains. 

But to-day for Farid to lift Ihs jug hath become as (oj^- 
some as a of hundreds of miles. 

XXI 

Farid, the nights liave grown long ; my sides ache and 
ache. 

Curse on the lives of those w'ho have hopes other Ihan 
in God, 

The following was written on Farid’s missing the 
visit of a holy friend who had come to see him : — 

XXil 

Fadd, had I been present when my friend cutne, 1 would 
have devoted myself to him. 

Now jjiy body humctli like madder on the cinders, and 
! catmoi pity him a rtdtirii visit. 

XXIII 

Farid, the Jat^ pUmteth the kikar, yet he wanteth the 
grape-tree of Bijaur; 

He spinneth wool, yet he wanteth to wear silk. 

XXIV 

Farid, in the streets tliero is mud: the house of my 
dear friend whom 1 love is distant; 

If I go to him, 1 shall wet my blanket ; If 1 remain at 
horns, our love slioll be severed. 

XXV 

O God, though Thou send Tliy rain, and wet, iind drench 
my blanket; 

Yet shall 1 go to meet tiiat friend su that our love may 
not he severed. 


^ A tribe generally employed in agiicuUure. 


398 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

It is said that when Farid was one day putting 
on his turban, it slipped from his hand. The follow¬ 
ing was composed on the occasion : — 

XXVI 

Farid, 1 fear "that my turban will be soiled; 

My thoughtless soul knoweth not that dust will rot my 
head also. 

xxvn 

, Sugar unrehned and refined, loaJ sugar, molasses, honey, 
and buffalo’s milk, 

Are all sweet tilings, but not, 0 God, so sweet as TJiou. 

xxvm 

Farid, my bread iu made of wood,^ hunger is my con¬ 
diment ; 

They who eat buttered bread shall suffer great pain. 

XXIX 

Eat hard dry bread, and drink cold water; 

Farid, on seeing another’s buttered bread let not thy 
Jieart long for it, 

XXX 

I slept not with my husband kst night; my body is 
pining away; 

Go ask the wife whom her husband hath put away, how 
slie passeth the night,® 

Guru Amar Das has given the following reply to 
this question 

XXXI 

SJic Hadeth no entrance to the house of her fathtu-in-law, 
and no place with her parents, 

^ A rtierance lo ths wooden cake Find 1 wore on his sLotiiach to 
(iaiLsfy the cravings of Imrger. 

* This and the preceding line are explained.—man feel io much 
from a limporaiy separation from God, what shall he feel from an 
eternal separaLica t 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


399 

Can she for whom her husband careth not, be called 
a happy wife ? 

XXXII 

Womanj whether in this world or the next^ belongeth to 
her Spouse^ the inaccessLbie and unfathomable One ; 

Kanak, she is a happy wife who is pleasitig to God the 
Unconcerned. 

xxxui 

They who bathe, and wash, and adon^ themsdves, and 
then heedlessly sleep regardless of ik^ir spouses, 

Farid> ai'e as it were smeared all over with asafoetida, 
and the perfume of their musk departeth. 

XXXIV 

1 dread not the departure of youth if my Spouse's love 
depart not tlierewitli; 

Farid, how often hath yooith become dry ai\d withered 
’without love 1 

XXXV 

Farid, my bed is anxiety ; its bottom> aihiction i its 
mattress and coverlet, separation from God; 

Such is life ; do Thou, O true God, look upon me. 

XXXVI 

Men continually speak of love; ^ O Love, thou art a 
tnonardi; 

Farid> deem the body in which there is not love a place 
of cremation. 

XXXVl! 

Farid, pleasures^ are like poisonous sprouts smeared witli 
sugar; 

Soma die while planting them; others vuined while 
gathering them. 

1 Literaifcj—separation, but here it means love in absence. 

^ Some make ’women the gubject of this sbk, but this is contrary lo 
tfje leaching of the Granth Sahib. Tbua Gum Nanak writesj ^ Why 
call ’^voman bad ?' Gum Arjau, through his regard for wocnefl-, re¬ 
jected a, stanza brought to l}im by Pilo for inseviion in the Granth 
Bihih It legan, * Look not even on a |^per Jikenei^s of woman J 



400 BHAGATS QF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

XXXVIII 

FarEd, men have lost the four watches of the day in wander¬ 
ing and the four watches of tlie night in sleep; 

God will call for thine account and ask why thou earnest 

ifilo th^ worldr 

XXXIX 

Farid, wiicn thou wen test to tlie gate of the court, sawest 
thou not the gong ? 

When tliat sinless thing is thus beatenj what sliall be 
the condition oi us sinners ? 


XL 

It is beaten every gliari and receiveth complete punisJi- 
ment at the end of eveiy watch ; ^ 

So tlie body like the gong passeth a painful night. 

XLI 

Shaikh Farid hath grown old, and his body hath begun 
to totter I 

Were he to live even for hnadreds of yearSj his body 
would become dust at last^ 


XLII 

Saith Farid, allow me not, O Lord, to sit and beg at 
another’s gate. 

If that is how Thou art about to treat me, then take the 
life from my body. 

XLIII 

O blacksmith, thou goest to tlie forest with thuie axe 
on thy shoulder, and thy water-pot on thy head ; 

Saith Farid> 1 am longing for my Lord^ thou art longing 
for charcoal.® 

^ Al the end of the firat g-hart of the paAar the gong struck 
once ; at tin; end o-f the second ghari twite, and so' on tiU the end of 
Uie r of eight gAaris^ when it ivas atmek sixteen time^. 

® Thh is believed to he an appeal from Farid to his friend Jassa, 
a amiLh, to spare the tree under which the saint used to pray. Jassi 
v^as not a wood-enuer^ as the English reader may suppose. In the 
East smiths go to the forest to cut down ir&es to make charcoal from 
them for the purpose of their trade. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 401 

XLIV 

Farid, some have a great deal of flour, others Iieivb not 
even salt; 

Wlien they have alt departed, it will be known who 
sliaJl suffer punishmeiit. 

XLV 

They who had drums, and trumpets, and umbrellas over 
iheir heads, and bards to sound their praises, 

Went to sleep in the cemeteiy, and were buried as if 
they had been orphans. 

XLVI 

Fatidj they’W'ho built houses^ manBions^ and lofty palaces 
also departed; 

False was theit business and they dropped mto their 
graves. 

XLVII 

Farid, there arc many tacks on the patched coat to make 
it kst> but there are no such tacks on the soul; ^ 

Shaikhs and their disciples liave departedt each in hh 
turn. 

XLVIIl 

Farid, while the two lamps of man^^ eyes are shining, the 
angel of Death cometh and seateth himself m his body ; ^ 
He captuTcth the fortress, robbeth it of the soul^ and 
having put out the lamp departeth. 

XLIX 

Farid, see what happeneth to cotton^ what befalleth 
sesame, 

Sugar-cane* paper, earthen utensils, and charcoal; 

The punishment they receive awaiteth those who do evil, 

L 

Farid* men carry prayer-carpets on their shoulders, wear 
a Sufi's and speak sweetly^ but there are knives in 

thei^ hearts * 

^ There Is nothing to restrain Lhe soul from flying away from the body, 
^ That is, death comes while man is looking on, 

^ also called a a patched coal without sleeves worn by 

&iK(i. vr J) cl 


402 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Externally they appea.r bright, but in their hearts is sable 
night. 

LI 

Farid, if any one were to cut my body, not a drop of 
blood would is^ae from it, 

Since the body which is dyed with God containeth no 
blood. 

On this couplet Guru Amar Das made the follow¬ 
ing commentary: — 

Lll 

This body is all hlood; the body cannot exist without 
blood; 

But the blood of gi'eed entereth not the body which is 
dyed with its Lord. 

When the fear of the Lord entereth the hearty the body 
groweth lean and the blood of greed depart eth from it. 

As metals are purified by fire, so the fear of the Lord 
removeth the filth of evil indinations, 

Nanah^ that man is handsome who is dyed with the love 
of God. 

LIII 

Farid, search the lake^ whei'e the Real Thing® is to be 
found; 

What availeth it to search in a pond ? ^ one's hand 
merdy sinketh into the mud. 

LIV 

Farid, the little girl did not enjoy her Spouse ■ when she 
grew up she died. 

Lying in the grave she calleth, * I have not met Thee, 
0 my Lord.* 

MysalmSn faqTrs. generally supposed \o come from the Greek 

s-opAi'a, ’^v'isdom^ but in Arabic the word means wool. SQfis affected 
woollen garments. 

^ The guild of the satjus, ^ God's name. 

® In inferior company. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 403 

LV 

Farid, tlie hair of my head is grey, my beard is grey, 
my moustaches dso are grey; 

0 my heedless and insensate soul, why art thou devoted 
to sensual pleasures ? 

LVI 

Farid, how far canst thou run on a house-top ? banish 
thine mdifference to the Dear One ; 

The days which were counted and allotted thee have 
passed away in vain, 

LVll 

Farid, attach not thy heart to lionses, mansions, and 
lofty palaces; 

When imweighable earth fatleth on thee, thou sbalt have 
no friend, 

LVIII 

Farid, set not thy heart on mansions and wealth ; think 
upon the grave; 

Remember that place whither thou must go. 

LIX 

Farid, forsake those occupations from which no ad'vmntage 
resulteth, 

Lest thon be put to shame in the court ol the Lord, 

LX 

Farid, perform the serrice of the Lord, dispel the doubts 
of thy heart; 

Darweshes require the endurance of trees. 

LXI 

Farid, black are my clothes, black my vestment; 

I wander about defiled by sin, yet men call me a dar- 
w'esh. 

LXII 

That which, hath been rotted by water, wiU not bloom 
if it be kept immersed in it; 

Farid, the wife rejected by tlod ever and ei er grieveth. 

D d 2 



404 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

LXTII 

WJien a woman h a virgin she is liappy' when she is 
maiTied her troubJes begin. 

Farid, she hath tMs regret tliat slic cannot again become 
a virgin J 

LXTV 

The swans have alighted in a little tank of brackish 
water ; ^ 

They dip in their billSj but drink not; they thirst to 
fly away, 

■ LXV 

The swans fly away and alight on a field of kodhra ; - 
people go to drive them away 

Heedless people know not that swans eat not kodhra,^ 

LXVl 

The birds ® which occupied the lake ^ have flown away ; 

Farid, the full lake shall also pass away^ and the lotuses ^ 
alone remaiTi. 

^LXVII 

Farid> bricks shall be thy pillow^ thou shalt sleep beneath 
the earthj worms shall eat thy flesh ; 

How many ages shall pass away for thee lying on one 
side.* 

LXVIII 

Farid, the beautiful water-pot shall be broken ; the 
excellent rope^ shall part therefrom ; 

In whose house shall the angel Aarail be a guest to-day r 

The Soul which has lost iEs opportuniiies of salvation regrels tliat 
it cftunot again rtlvm to a liumaii body. 

® I'hat is, saiats hw faikn into the company of the wickeiJ, 

^ An inferior Indian cereal, the Faspiihm 

* The satiits fare badly among the perverse ^vbo annoy and slander 
ihemn ^ Holy men do not covet briefly (hings« 

s That iSi kings and persons in high positions. 

^ The Jake means the ^^orld. ^ Holy men. 

® N'ot moving. The body. 

The rope by which the water-pot h let do^'n into the well. Here 
it means life. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 40^- 

LXIX 

The hestutifiil water*pot shall be broken; the excellent 
rope sl^ali part therefrom ; 

How shall our friends who were a burden to the earth 
return now ? 

LXX 

Saiih Farid, thou dog who prayeat not, this custom of 
thine is not good ; 

Thou never goest to the mosque at the five times of 
prayer, 

LXXI 

Rise in the morning, Farid, perform thine ablutions, 
repeat thy prayer; 

Cut off the head winch bowetJi not to the Lord. 


LXXTI 

What is to be done to the liead which bowetli not to 
tire Lord ? 

Bum it instead of firewood under the earthen pot. 


LXXIII 

Farid, where are the father and mother who gave thee 
birth ? 

They have departed from thee; art thou not yet convuiced 
ihai th$ lixifld is unstable ? 

LXXIV 

Farid, make thy heart a plain, level all its hollows and 
hills; 

And the fire of hell shall never approach thee here¬ 
after. 


Guru Arjaii makes the foFowiiig observation on 
this:— 


LXXV 


O Farid, the Creator dwelleth in creation and creation 
in the Creator; 

Whom callest thou bad, since there is none beside 
Him? 



4 o6 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

LXXVI 

Fatid, if my throat had been cut on the same day as my 
navel string, 

I should not have fallen into such trouble, nor undergone 
such hardship. 

LXXVII 

My teeth, my feet, mine eyes, mine ears Irave ceased their 
functions ; 

The body crieth aloud, ‘Those acquaintances have gone 
away,’ 

LXXVIII 

Farid, do good for evil, clothe not thy heart with anger: 

Thus shall thy body not suffer pain, and thou shall obtain 
everything. 

LXXIX 

Farid, the birds ^ are guests in the beautiful garden of the 
world; 

The morning drum beatetb ; make preparations for thy 
departure. 

LXXX 

Farid, mu^ is distributed, at night; they who sleep 
obtain no slrare of it. 

How can they whose eyes are asleep obtain it ? 

LXXXI 

Farid, I thought I alone had sorrow, but the whole world 
al&o hath sorrow; 

Wlien I ascended an eminence and looked, I found the 
same anguish in every house. 

Guru Arjan replies to this as follows : — 

LXXXIl 

Farid, in the midst of this fair earth there is a thorny 
garden j 

But the man favoured by the spiritual guide feeleth not 
its prickles. 


’ That is, souls. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


407 


LXXXIII 

Farid^ few ate found who love the Bear One ; 
They who do^ find their lives happy and theii 
beautiful. 


LXXXJV 


persons 


O river,^ destroy not thy bank; thou too must give an 
account ■ 

The rivet floweth whithersoever God willeth. 


LXXXV 

Farid, my days have passed in sorrow, and my nights in 
anguish ; 

The ferryman standeth up and shoutetJip *The wind h 
driving the boat into the whirlpool/ ^ 


LXXXVl 

The long rivet of life flowetli and wostetJi away its 
banks;^ 

If the ferryman be on the alert, what harm can the 
whirlpool do the boat ? 

LXXXVII 

Faridj there ate twenty tiends in words; but if thou 
search for one real friend^ thou shall not find him. 

I am suffering like smouldering fuel for my beloved 
friends. 

LXXXVII! 

Farid» these people are ever barking ; ^ who can endure 
the continual annoyance ? 

1 have stopped mine ears, and I care not how much wind 
is blowing. 

LXXXIX 

Farid, God^s dates are ripe; rivers of honey flow past 
them ; ^ 

^ This wag addressed to Uis Ssitluj. 

® The guru warns man that he is going to die. 

^ The body wastes away and death gruduaJiy approaches ^ 

^ Crying out for worldly things. 

^ The date^ are the samts of God, ibe river? of honey His praises. 


4 q8 BHAGATS of THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The days that pass in eojoyiDg them are piofitahle to my 


Faridj my dry body hath become a skeleton i. ravens peck 
at the hollows of my hands and feet j 

Up to the present, God hath not come to mine aid ; 
behold His sei-vaJit^s noisfortune ! 

XCI 

O ravens, you have searched my skeleton and eaten all my 
flesh; 

But touch not these two eyes, as I hope to behold my 
Beloved 

XCII 

O ravens, peek not at my skdeton ; if haply you sit on it, 
then fiy away ; 

A t any rate, eat not the flesh from wliete my Lord dwclleth 
in my skeleton. 

XCIII 

Farid, the wetdied tomb caUeth out^ ^ O homeless, come 
home [ 

' You shall assuredly come to me ; fear riot death.’ 

XCIV 

How many have departed, before my very eyes [ 

Farid, men have different anxieties, and 1 have mine. 

xcv 

Goi saithj ' If thou reform thyself, thou shaft meet Me 
on meeting Me tiiou shalt be happy ; 

^ Farid, if thou remain Mme, all the world shall he thine.' 

XCVl 

How long shall the frees on the banks retain their place ? 

Farid, tf thou put water into a frail vessel, how long will 
it remain ? 

^ ^ l>alea and Loney are promised lo Muhammadans in heaven, but 
Farid means thal they can be obtained on earth. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


409 


XCVII 

Farid p places have become empty and their eccupant^ 
gone below; 

Tlie wretched graves take possession of souls ; ^ 

0 Shaikh, say good-bye to your friends ; ^ thou must 
depart to-day or to-morrow, 

XCVIII 

Fai’id^ death hath no more a boundary than a river ^ 
which washeth away its banks ; 

D&fUh appearetk hell binrueth in front ; ierribk cries 
and sounds of woe are heard. 

To some all understanding hath come ; othets wander 
about recklessly. 

Men's acts in tliis world ^all bear witness in God's court, 

XCIX 

Farid p the crane ^ sitteth on the bank of the river and 
sporteth ; 

While it is sporting the hawk suddenly striketh it ; * 

When the hawk of God striketh it^ it forgetteth its sport, 

God hatlr accomplished such things as could never have 
been conceived. 

C 

A body of three and a half mans is moved by water and 
grain; 

Man entereth the world enfertamiiig high hopes ; 

When the angel of Death comethp he will break open 
every door; 

He will take man prisoner In the presence of his dear 
brethren. 

^ The Musaluians believe tha.i: the soul remains with the body till 
its account is takeur 

“ idso tianglated—wor&hip God, Some say Ihi^ hymn was addressed 
to a diacEpk of Farid. Fand told him to worship God^ as hfa flOjOEirn 
ID this world was uncertain. 

® Literally—the boundary of death appears like that of a deatroring 
river. Death does as much havoc in the world as a largu: tropical river 
during the rainy season to the surrounding country, 

* The soul. ^ Death strikes the soui. 



410 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

ho 1 man departeth on the shoulders of four men, 

Farid; but the good acts he i>erformjed in this world shall 
be serviceable to him in God’s court. 

Cl 

Farid, I am a sacrifice to those birds ^ wliich live in the 
forests; 

They live on fruit, sleep on the ground, and never leave 
God’s side. 

CII 

Farid, the season changeth,^ the forests wave, the leaves 
drop off; 

I have searched in every direction, but found no place 
of rest. 

cm 

Farid, tear thy coat into tatters and wear a blanket 
instead ; 

Adopt a dress by which tlrou raayest obtain the Lord, 

Guru Amar Das makes the following reflection 
on th^ couplet:— 

CIV 

Why tear thy coat and put on a blanket ? 

Nanak, if thine intentions be good, seated at home thou 
shalt find the Lord. 

Guru Ram Das has added the following :— 

cv 

0 Farid, they who were proud of their greatness and 
possessed youth and untold wealth, 

Went away bare from the Lord like a liillock after rain.* 

CVI 

Farid, terrible are the countenances of those 'who have 
forgotten the Name; 

* Hermits, ® That is, oid age comes on. 

® Water -will not rest on a hill, neither will God's grace on him who 
holds his head too high. 



SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


411 

Here they have abundant sorrow, and hereafter neither 
house nor home. 

evil 

Farid, if thou awake not in the end of tJie night, thou art 
dead 'while alive; 

Even if thou forget God, God will not forget thee. 

Guru Arjan has here composed the following four 
couplets : — 

CVIII 

Farid, tire Bridegroom is merry, and fai’ beyond all need ; 

To be dyed with God is tlie true decoration. 

CIX 

Farid, treat pain and pleasure as the same; banish sin 
from thy heart; 

Consider what pleasetJi God as good, and thou shalt gain 
His court. 

CX 

Farid, tl>e world playetii as mammon maketli it play; 
thou too playest with it ; 

The soul for which God careth playeth not.‘ 

CXI 

Farid, the heart is dyed w'ith the world, though the world 
be worthless; 

To be like faqits is difficult; their cxccUciice can only be 
obtained by perfect acts,® 

Farid then proceeds :™ 

CXll 

Devotion in the beginning of the night is the blossom, 
in the end of the night the fruit; 

They who watch obtain gifts from the Lord. 

>• Is no( subject to worldly love. 

® Also lran3lated“by perfect good fenune- 



412 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

Guru Nanak offei:s the following objection to this 
doctrine 

cxm 

Gifts are the Lord’s ; what can prevail against Him ? 

Some w^ho are awake receive them not; others who are 
asleep He avra-keth and conferreth presents upon. 

Farid continues to expound his doctrines : — 

CXIV 

Thou who searchest for thy Spouse, must have some fault 
in thysdf; 

She who is called a good wife never looketh for any one 
else. 

cxv 

Make patience thy bow, patience thy bowstring. 

Patience thine arrow, and the Qeator will mt allow thee 
to miss thy mark. 

CXVl 

With such patience do the patient mortify their bodies ; 

They thus become near God, but tell their secrets to no one, 

CXVII 

This patience is the main object; if thou, O mortal, 
adopt it, 

Thott shalt become a great river and not a separate 
branch thereof. 

exvm 

Farid, to be a darwesh at Cod's gate is difficult ; my love 
for God is only on the surface. 

Few there are who walk in the way of the darweshes at 
God's gate. 

CXIX 

My body is heated like an oven; my bones burn like 
firewood; 

Were my feet to tire, I would walk on my head to meet 
the Beloved. 


SLOKS OF SHAIKH FARID 


413 


Gum Nanak has here composed the follo^rine 
couplet:— 


CXX 


Heat not thy body like an oven, bum not thy bones like 
firewood ; 

What harm have thy head and feet done thee ? Behold 
the Beloved within thesn 


The following is by Gum Ram Das 

CXXI 

I go searching ioi the Friend^ but the Friend is with jne ; 

Nanak, the Unseen is not seen, but the pious show the 
way to Him, 

The following [x>upiets have been contributed by 
Gui’u Amar Das : — 

CXXII 

The crane seeing the swan ^ swimming conceived a desire 
io smm; 

But the poor crane was drowned j and its body turned 
upside down. 

CXXIII 

I thought he was a great swan, wherefore I associated 
with him ; 

Had I known that he was only a wretdied crauOs I would 
never have touched him. 

CXXIV 

’W^lat mattereth it whether he whom God looketh on witli 
favour be a swan or a crane ? 

Nanak, if it please God, He can cliange a crow into a swan. 

Farid tlms closes his spiritual instructions:— 

exxv 

In the lake there is hut one bird^ while there are fifty 
snai’ers ; * 

1 The crane is the hypocrite: ihe s^n the ]io]y man. 

* That is, the tempUitJons of ihe world are many to lead the soul 
astray^ 



414 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

This body is immorsod in the waves 0 / the world ; O True 
One, my hope is in Thee. 

CXXVI 

"ftTiat is that word, what those virtires, what that priceless 
spell; 

What dress shall I wear that I may captivate tlie Spouse ? 

CXXVI I 

Humility is the word, forbearance the virtue, civility 
the priceless spell; 

Make these three thy dress, 0 sister, and the Spouse shall 
come into thy pow'er.' 

cxxvin 

There ai'e few saints 

Who, though wise, are simple, 

Though strong, are weak. 

And, though having not, divide what they have, 

CXXIX 

Utter not Oiwe disagreeable word, since the true Lord is 
in all men. 

Distress no one’s heart; every heart is a priceless jewel, 

exxx 

All men’s h^ts are jewels; to distress them is by no 
means good; 

If thou desire the Beloved, distress no one's heart. 


BHIKAN 

Ehikan was most probably Shaikh Bhikan of 
Kakori who died in the early part of the Ernperor 
Akbar's reign. The Persian historian Badauni has 
the following account of him :—' Kakori is a pargana 
town in the Sarkar of Lakhnau. Shaik Bhikan was 
the most learned of the learned men of his time, 

‘ III the oldest Janamsakhi this reply is attributed to Guru Nanak, 



BHTKAN 


4^5 


abstemious and well versed in the holy law, while 
in devout piety even Abu Hanifa, the greatest of 
the Imams, was his inferior. For many years he 
was engaged in teaching and in instructing the 
people. He had committed the whole of the glorious 
word of God to memory, according to each of the 
seven methods of reading it, He used also to give 
instruction thereon. He reckoned his spiritual sue- 
cession from Mir Saiyid Ibrahim of Irij, who was 
himself the most learned of the learned men of 
his time. The Shaikh w'ould never mention the Sufi 
mysteries in a public assembly, but only in private 
to those who had been initiated into their secrets; 
and one of his sayings was, "If the mystical profes¬ 
sion of the Unity of God be made public, it returns 
solely to him who uttered it, or to the learned few/’ 
He would not listen to singing, and outwardly 
reprobated it. He left numerous children who 
attained perfection, all of whom were adorned with 
the embellishments of rectitude, piety, wisdom, 
knowledge, and virtue. 

'The compiler of these historical selections was 
honotired, in company with the late Muhammad 
Husain Khan by being permitted to pay his respects 
to the Shaikh in Lakhnau. It was the month 
of Ramzan and a certain one brought to the Shaikh 
a work on logic, asking him to set him a task in 
that book. The Shaikh said, "You should read 
some book on divinity." The Shaikh’s death oc¬ 
curred in the year A.H. 981 (a, d, 1573-4).’ 

Badauni states that when Muzaffav Khan rose in 
revolt against Akbar, he on one occasion pitched 
his tent near the burial place of Shaikh Bhikan, no 
doubt with the object of praying for his intercession 
for the success of his enterprise. 

Badauni also speaks of ' that pilgrim to the two 
sacred precincts Haji Bhikan Basawani.’ This, how¬ 
ever, may have been a different person from Shaikli 
Bhikan of Kakori. 



4 i6 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

Whoever wi'ote the folloMng hymns bearing the 
name of Bhikan in the Graiith Sahib, must have 
been some religious man who resembled Shaikh 
Farid II, and was largely tinctured with the reforma¬ 
tory ideas then prevalent in India. It has been 
conjectured, with some show of probability, that 
Bhikan was a follower of Kabir. 

Only God's name can heal a diseased mind and body. 

SORATH 

From mine eyes tears have flowed, my body hath become 
lean, and my hair the colour of milk. 

My throat is choked; I cannot utter a word ; what can 
mortal now do ? 

0 Sovereign Lord, Gardener of the world, be Tliou my 
physician. 

And save Thy saints. 

There is pain in my forehead; my body is burning ] my 
heart ^ is in anguish ; 

Such pangs have been produced in me that there is no 
medicine for them. 

The namfi of God, a pure nectareous water, is the best 
medicine in the world. 

Bhikan prayeth, may I by the guru’s favour obtain the 
gate of salvation i 

The bliss which Bhikan hnds in devotion :— 

Such a Name, a priceless jewel, I have obtained as the 
reward of meritorious acts. 

With several efforts 1 put tire jewd in my heart; however 
much I tried to conceal it, it would not be concealed. 

Though one try to utter God’s praises, they cannot be 
uttered; 

They arc like sweets to a dumb person. 

My tongue is happy in repeating, mine ear in hearing, and 
my mind in thiitking on mnis. 

Saith Bhikan, both mine eyes are satisfied; wherever 
I look there is God 


'■ Kanje ; as in Latin, the liver is used here for the heart 


SUR DAS 


The Sur Das, one of whose hymns is found in the 
Granth Sahib, must not be confounded with Sur Das, 
a blind poet famous in the north of India as the author 
of the Sur Sagar. The Sur Das with whom we are 
concerned was a Brahman bom a.d, 1528. On 
account of his beauty he was surnamed Madan 
Mohan, an epithet which means that he bewitched 
Cupid himself, and it was said that his external and 
internal eyes bloomed like the lotus flower. He 
became highly proficient in music, poetry, and 
kindred arts, and at the same time possessed all 
the joy, comfort and pleasure to be obtained from 
esoteric divine knowledge. He sang of love, the 
first and greatest of the divine passions which form 
the proper subjects of poetry. As soon as a verse 
issued from his mouth it became celebrated. It is 
said that, even in that age of bad roads and slow 
locomotion, it w'ould rea^ four hundred miles in 
a day as if it had acquired wings for flight. 

The Emperor Akbar, who admired poetical talents, 
appointed Sur Das governor of the province of 
Sandila. Its capital is in the present district of 
Hardoi in Oudh. His administration appears to 
have been by no means successful. The ordinary 
land revenue of Sandila was thirteen lakhs of 
rupees per year, but it was all spent by Sur Das in 
feeding holy men. When he heard of a contem¬ 
plated inspection of his province and the collection 
of its revenue, he fled to avoid the consequences of 
his too profuse generosity. When the officials 
amved to take the revenue, they found stones in 
the sealed treasure-chests instead of money. Each 
chest was labelled with a slip containing these 
lines 

Sandila yields its tliirteen lakhs ; 

TheyVe eaten up by men who pray : 




4t8 BHAGATS of the GRANTH SAHIB 

$0 Sur Das Madan Mohan now 

At dead of night hath run away. 

The Emperor on reading these verses said that 
eating was an excellent thing, hut absconding was 
not a course to be commended. He was even 
pleased to learn Sur Uas's generosity and service 
to saints, and accordingly wrote an order par¬ 
doning his offence and expressing satisfaction at his 
devotion to holy men, but at the same time re¬ 
questing him to appear before him. Sur Das said 
that it was a thousand times better to wipe the 
shoes of holy men than he governor and revenue 
collector of a province, and he refused to appear 
before Ahhar. Todar Mai, AkbaFs Prime Minister, 
could tolerate it no longer. He said to the Emperor, 
‘ If such people can with impunity spend the money 
which belong to the state and then abscond, there 
will be an end to all government.’ Under the 
circumstances Akbar altered his resolution and 
ordered that Sur Das sliould be imprisoned. The 
poet's jailor was named Timlr Das. The word timir 
means nigfit or darkness; and the word das, if 
pronounced with a short vowel, means ten. From 
his prison the poet sent the Emperor the following 
couplet, which in the original contains a pun on the 
name of the jailor. 

One night brings darkness which a small lamp lights ; 

O may the sun king Akbar save me from Ten Nights! 

Sur Das was immediately released from prison and 
tlie governor of the jail obtained the sobriquet of 
Ten Nights from the pun on his name, 

Sur Das subsequently wrote a stanza in which 
he prayed that the title of shoe-holder to the 
saints of God might be conferred on him. A holy 
man, to put him to the test, told him he was 
going to see the great lord Madan Mohan, also an 
epithet of Krishan, and asked him to keep watch 



SUR DAS 


419 

over his shoes till he returned, Sur Das with great 
pleasure took up the saint’s shoes and said, ‘ Up 
to the present my wishes have only been expressed, 
but now they are fulfilled.’ The high priest in col¬ 
lusion with the saint several times sent a man to 
call Sur Das while holding the shoes. He refused 
to come until he had completed the menial service 
he had undertaken. The high priest and the saint 
were both highly pleased with Sur Das’s devotion. 

Sur Das passed the remainder of his life in forest 
tracts in the worship and contemplation of God in 
the society of holy men. His shrine is near Banaras, 

The following hymn of Sur Das in the Sarang 
measure on the happiness of communion with God 
is found in the Granth Sahib. 

The people of God dwell with God. 

They dedicate unto Him their bodies and souls ; all tliey 
possess they dedicate unto Him. While voicing His name 
they become intoxicated^ with dhine pleasure. 

On beholding Him men become free from sin, and obtab 
all tilings. 

After gaxing on His beautiful face, there needs nothing 
else. 

He who foisaketh God and desireth any one else, is like 
a Leech ou a leprous body. 

Sur God hath taken my soul into His keeping and 
granted me deliverance * in exchange. 

In the Granth Saliib of Bhai Banno, the fol¬ 
lowing hymn of Sur Das in the same measure is 
also found. The ordinary Granth Sahib only con¬ 
tains the first line. The hymn was originally copied 
into the Granth Sahib of Kartarpur, but a pen was 
subsequently drawn tlirough it and sulphate of 
arsenic rubbed over it for more complete erasure. 

1 Jhi^k, tlie railing of the head in deep thought or absorption, 

* Ihj^rhk, the next world, by which is uiulei'sicwd ilie joy of the 
next tvoi'ld, tiiat is, absorption in God and detivieTBnce Irom Irans- 
migration. 


* 


31: e 3 



420 BHAGATS OF THE GRANTH SAHIB 

The reason toi its ei'asiu’e has not been explained. 
The subject of the hymn is the old one—Evil com¬ 
munications corrupt good manners—^as stated by tlie 
old Greek poet Menander- 

O man, abandon tJie society of those who turn away 
from God ; 

In association with them evil desires are producedij and 
devotion is interrupted. 

Wliat availeth it to give milk to a serpent to drink ? It 
will not part mth its poison- 

What availeth it to hatJie an elephant in the river ? He 
will soil his body as before.^ 

What availeth it to a crow to pock at camphor, or to 
^ dog to bathe in the Ganges ? 

TOiat availeth it to a donkey to be smeared with fragrant 
aloes, or to a monkej^ to wear jewels on his body ? 

Sinners are like stones; the arrows of divine knowledge 
pierce them not, even though a quiverful be discharged. 

Saith Sut Das, O God^ this black blanket cannot be dyed 
another colour,^ 

^ This verBC is omitted in some recensLonE of Bhai Eanno's Grantli 
Sahik 

2 A blanket made of natural biack wool cannot be dyed. The 
meaning is that the man who turns away from God cannot te re¬ 
generated. 


Grant to Thy Sikhs the gift of Sikhism, the gift of the 
Guru's instruction, the gift of faith, the gift of confidence 
in Thee^ and the gift of reading and understanding the holy 
Granth Sahib. 



INDEX 


Pref. stajids for Preface^ Int, for Introduction^ and- n for nat<j+ 


A’btli^lac&gar tNander), v 220^ 

24 ^h 

Abd^i^ VI 69 n 4. 

AbdiiL Qldir JiUnij vi ^62 n 

sS?- 

Abdul Rahim Ansaii^ vi _3<52+ 
Abdul Shakiir oi Saraap vi 
Abdulla, bardp iv 6, 187. 

Abdulla Sobadlr of Ja- 

landbar^ iv T05- 

Abdulla Shah^ son of Shaikh 
Farid, vi 575. 

Abhiijitp ii Him. 

Abhylgat, ii 3^3 n 
Abraham, htusftlman story of, vi 
1.27 u 3* 

Accounts^ formrar Indian practice | 
of settling, vi 231 m, 

AohaJi Batalap i 157 112. 
Acquisitions, six, vi 273 n. 
ActostieSp G, Nanak's Hindi, i 
3 s Pofsiaii, i J2; Kabir's, vi . 
181. ! 

Acts in Ivuman birth attajch to I 
the FKul, i 67 n T ; result of, ! 
i 19S n Tj 335 n i ; two Muds . 
of, iii 22| n I j vi 90 n2, 147 I 
n I and 2. I 

Adanshahis, v 174. 

Adoohj i 213 n I. 

Adh, coin* i T? 

Adi Granth, Iqt. Ixxiii, Ixxv, 

Aditi, Int. lx. 

Adonaij Lord, i p 112. 

Adultery forbidden, iv 253; v 

iio. 

Ages, four, i 4 n6, £33 ^ ii 230; 
iii 402. 

Agni^ mt, Isiii. 

Ahalya* vi 56 u 2. 

Ahinsa, vi 141. 

Ahmad Danya], vL 370 n i. 

Ahmad Shah Durahi, iii 10; v = 
lo8 n 223 n ]. i 

Aln-i-AkbATip i T37 n ^ s vi 362 | 
_ n i, 37; n. 390 nu | 

Ai Pauth, i 2T2 114. 

Aj, grandfather of Ram Qiandar, | 

J 16s 03. I 


Ajamal, ii 339 n i. 

AjTt Singtu 90-n of C. Gobiud 
Sittghd V 5t ^ his heroifsm-H 130, 
J32, 140 ; sent against Fa- 
thaus> 1545 death at Chains 
kaur, 18S. 

Ajit Singhj adopted son of Mata 
Sundari, v 331, 334, 255+ 

. Ajmor Chandn Rljit v 99, 125, 
14^* 170, 172, 175, 
Ajodhan,. 1 S4; Shaikh Fand at, 
vi 366. 

Ajudhia,. Monkey temple at^ iv 
^66; vi 30. 

Akjl, V sdl 714* 

Akil Bunga. iv 3, 32+ 

AkaliSt iv 4_p 
A hM V 260 n. 

Akbar^ his religion, Intr xlv, Ivi 3 

i 157 nl j visits. Amar D4Sp ii 
97 1 summons G* Arjan, iii 
5 t, 83; remits Jand revenue of 
Fanjib,84j aidresaod as doity^ 
iv3^; vi 350, 417* ^ 

Akk, poisonous plant* i 2SS n i. 
Akslmr^ vi 189 n 
AllhaniSn, i iSpn ; iv 70. 

Alakh, the Invisible, iii lOS n 3+ 
AJa-ubDln, last of Saiyad fii3crs+ 

Intr xlii^ Ixx. 

Alayar, ii 77. 

ALi Khan, v 51, 154. 

Alim, author of the RSg Mala, iii 
64. ^ 

AJim Singh, v T40, 15^, 171. 
Allah, name of God, Lii 38B n 2 ^ 
V 67 n 2. 

Allahabad (PriySg), place of 
pilgrimage, i 144 n i, 

Almast, Bliai, iv 53, 35^ 
yVlm.s, ] 39 n 4, 372 n 3 ; ii 20fi 
n T : iii 7a 

Alphabet, Indian method of 
teaching, i 3 ; vi i B i j Guru- 
maldiit t 2%6 m ; li 56 ; Hindi, 

ii ^5; Sanskrit, in 16H n i, 
Amur Das, Guru, biith, ii 30 [ 

visits Guru Angad, ii 32 ; 
becomes his disciple^ LL 325 


t 



422 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


AtBar (coniinusd ]— 

his dcvotioia, n ^Si 4^* 4= ; 
tmiiaslinfietit o£ the Tapa of 
lOiadtir, ii 39 ; a|^oitited 
Gunij ii 43 ^ mode oi lite as 
Gunij ii 5S s sends Siivan Mai 
to HardwSrv ii do j R|ja of 
Klngra^s visits ii di ; Kaja'e 
insane g^ueen* ii 62 ; rebellioti 
of riatUj ii 64 ; the Sikba per¬ 
secuted W MuhaTum&dans* ii 
6S ; prophecy at Kasdr, ii 75 ( 
annual gatherings instituted, 
ii 79 : parabln of the aaint^s 
son* ii 83 j ^wali founded, ii 
S7 ; RsJn Das visits him, ii 
89 j Bihi Bhani, the Guru's 
daughter, married to ttlrft 
ii 91 j Emper&t Akbar's visit, 
ii 97 ? hostility of Hindus, ii 
lOi ^ Sent for bv the Emperor, 
ii 105 5 l^Am isa deputed in 
his stead, ii to 6 ; advised by 
the Emperor bo placate the 
Hindus by visiting Hardwar, 
ii iia, rules of his religion, 
ii ; tests Ram Das, ii 142 ; 
devTOtioii of Blbi Bhinf, ii 143, 
144 j Eam D 3 a appointed his 
successor, ii 14^; death and 
cremation oi, ill 3QI hymns of ^ 
ii 154 s denounces coneiema- 
tion of widows, ii 228 n i. 

Amb^a^ v 247. 

Ambarik, King of AjutJlua, vj 63 

n 2* 

Amber, auclent capital of Jaipur, 
Int. xlix. 

Ambrosias, five, ii 24^ n i e vi 85 

n I. 

Ainils, survneyors, i tS. 

Anirit, baptisiii, Pref. xix; ■V 9 S 

n Ir 

Amritaat, fouudinj^ of, ii 141 ; 
stages of completiun, ii 238, | 
267+ 270 h 2p^6 j iii 2 E temple ' 
and tanJe^ hi 3, 0, so, 33, 440 
ji I i Graiilh SsJijb placed 
there, iii 65 ; visit of Emperor 
J ahlngTr^ iv 32. 

Amritsar Singh Sablia, Author's 
translation accepted by, 

Jtiii, uxix. 

Amna, G. Angad's daueJitor, ii 
ip 31. 


Ana, coin, iv 19 3 
Anal, bird, v 143, 276 n 2. 
Analogy of European and Indian 
conditiDus in Meenth conturv* 
Int. xl. 

Anand, ii 117, 130 i marriage by, 
V 109, 249 n j. 

Anand, grandson of G, Amur 

Das, h ijy. 

Anand Glian, Int- J^cxk. 
Anandpur, founding of, iv 33S, 
362 ; V 2 ; iivvested, v 130 ■ 
plundered, v 1154, 174 ; evacu¬ 
ated, V 185. 

Ananta, serpent, iv 254 n 
Anatomy, Indian^ vi 47, i6g 
n 2 and 3. 

Ancestor worship, i 50* 65 n ^ i 
ii 04 3 1 ; iv 249, 230 n 4, 346 
n I ; vi 120 u S, 

Anchorets, vain devotion of, i 41 
n I ; \'i 1^7, 

Angad. (Lahina), Gnrti, meeting 
with G. Nai^i, i 183 e tested 
by him and named Angad, i 
185; ii II; appointed hia 
successor,, i 187 ; ii ii ; mar- 
Tiage, ii 1 ; lived in Khndur on 
b&coming Guru, ii ii j liis 
^ mode of life, ii 15 ; visit of 
Emperor Hum^yun, ii 19 j 
cures Chaudhri's som ii 28 ; 
Amar Dfls's visit* ii 32 ; 
drought in Kl^adOr, ii 36 ; 
Guru obliged to leave Kjiadur^ 
ii 36; appointment of Am^ 
as Guru, ii 43 ; G. Angad's 
death, and cremation, ii 44; 
his slols, li 46 J adoption of 
the Gurumnkhi characters for 
the Gurus' hymns, ii 56. 
Animatjonp suspended, vi ifi n 2. 
Ani Rai, son or G. Har Go bind, 
iy 67, 253, 

Anjan, a colly rium, ii 119 nj. 
Anpurna, iv 132 m, 

Anshvatdr^ v 374 n 3^ 

Antarjami, vi 77^ 
Anthi-opomorphiam, Int. Ixi; vi 

Antimony, li 119 n 3, 

Apacas, iii 224 3 id 
Apollo, Tilt. lix. 

Apostasy, Gur DaS Oil, iv 257. 
Arati, i 8333^ vii22n2, 333113. 



INDEX 


423 


Archaisms avoidcd+ sxxi. 

Arcliery of 0 + Gobiitd Singh* v 

Ardis* supphcatiDii* v 333. 

Arj^j Guru, order to translate , 
Granth Slihib into alL lan- 
gnageSp Ptief. viii; birth, ii 93 j 
(Sent to Lahore^ ii 3^y ; Pn- 
tMa's jftaloosyn ii 3yg ; ap¬ 
pointed Ms father's successor, 

ii aSi j bonding a£ Har 
Mandar, iii pj 12; episode of 
Raja BirbaPj iii 16 i visit to 
Cholha, iii 3r; to Kba^nr^ 

iii 33; footiding of Tarn 
Tlran* iii 25 j of Kartlr'pnr^ 1 
ill 3 fi ( visit to shrine oi G. 
Kanak and Sri Chandp iii 27 ; 
his wiie^s desire for a son^ iii 
2p ; she is sent to Bhai Budbat, 
Ui 30; Mrth of son Uar 
Gobijid, iii 35 ; ecKntroversy 
with Pindit* iii 50; decision 
to compile hymns of Sikh 
religion, iii 55 ; visit to Mohan 
to obtain sacred books, iii 56 ; 
ootnpktion of tlio Granth 
S 4 Mb at Rlm^r, iii 60 n i j 
interviews mth poets, iii 6i ; 
declines Chandu^s daughter for 
his son Har Gobind, ui 75 ; son 
betrothed to K'arlin DSs's ^ 
daughter, lii 76; letter from , 
Chandu, iii 7^ ; marriage of 
Har Gobind, iii So ; Guru ecfit 
for by Emperor AkbaTj iii Si i i 
visited by Emperor Akbar^ iii ' 
S3 s Emperor remits revenae 
in compliment to Gnru^ iii 84 ; 
death of Akbar, iii &4 ; Grum 
assists Khnsres iii 85 ; Frithia 
and Chandn plot against him, 
iii S7 ; departure for Lahore 
by Emperor JahSngL'^s orders, 
iii 90; is tortured^ iii 93,- . 
bathes in the Ravi, iii 98 5 his ! 
last mjnnctions, ni 90 ; _ is , 
Succeeded by Guru Har Gobind i 

iV Zr 

Arjiini rtsusdtatcd, ii 130. 

Ai'ins, advantages of weaiing, 

V loz* 

Arnold's translatioji of Gtigouindr 
vi 7 n I. 

Arun or Anufu, vi S[ 11 i. 


As, son of Chitrbii% i 21S n 2, 

Asa Id Wajp i 21 g. 

Asanip iv 351 n r* 

Ascetics^ exclusiveness of, vi 353 

n r- 

AsheSs useof^ vjoonii vi24ja3. 
Ashlamdi, iii 197 n i* 
AshtClihSp, VI S3, 

Asidhnj, v gS n i. 

Asman Knaji, sonun-law o£ 
Paiuda Khan^ iv 190^ 194, 19S, 
204* 310- 
Asoka, Inb Iv. 

vi 33S n T 

Aswad of Makka, iv 3S0 n j. 

Atal Eaij Baba, iv 49 n i, ijo, 

l^ln 

Atar Singh^ Sir, Int^ Lexxvi 
Aarangzeb, Pfei. xtdii ; treat¬ 
ment of Hindus^ Int. xlvili, 
xlix; iv 377 , sgS, 300, 303, 

304. 30S. 307r 31;. ^63, 369, 
375 i 391 * V 30* 107* 164, 

T79, 20T. 

Aurangzeb, sons of, v 229 n r, 
Anstenties, G. Gobind Singh on, 

V 37IH 

Autlictiticity of religious books, 
Int. liii. 

Awadh (Onde)^ vi 61 n 3. 

A^rlU, i 178 n i- 


Baba+ ii 2 n 2. 

Babar, Emperor, imprisons G. 
N&nak, i til : visits him, i 
113; succeeded by Humayiinj 
ii ipj descendants of, iv 379 
n 1. 

Babhikhaiij King of Ccyloti, vi 
24 n 2. 

BadaoM, iii 34- 
Badri Narain, vi 102. 
Badr-ul-DIn, ilauliina, Farid's 
son-indaw, vi 378. 

Baghdad, G. N^ak's visit to, i 

179 

BS^ 4 n, Lord o^, jv 130 n t. 
Bahilo, Bh 3 i* iii 13 , 13 j v 20?. 
Eahlol EJiam Lodi^ Int. Ixxi- 
Baliadnr 5 bal], Entperor, his 
relations with Guru Gobind 
Singh, V 230 ; their interview 
Jrt Agra, V 332 ; his death in 
Lahore, 351. 



424 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Bah^ul-I>ln Zakaria, vi 36^ n u 
37 ^* 37 S- 

Bliiiia. villagieSp iv J94. 

Bairagi, 1141 n l, 1(^1,j^2; vi 105. 
Bairais, v 304 n i* 226, 

EaisIkHi fiistivalp iii 26 j iv ipOr 
Bsjra, iv 2^1 n i. 

B&kaia, iv 6^ ; G- Teg Bahadur 
at,_3zy, 33^:* 

Bakrld^vi 341, 

Bal^p Ini:. Ixxviii, l:x3djr* Ixix^ 

Bahp portions oi offflcringSj i 27g 
IX 2 ; iv 34.6 rt a h 
Bail, SQQ of Prg.iuad, vi dj n 4 h 
B alknrst, i 

BaLLup Bbiin with G. Amar BiSp 
it sSp 1X7* 

iii 414. 

Balwand, Musidaiip ii iSd 23, 

BatndeVp vi 36. 

Bam MaragiaT iii 54S n. j. 
BanaraSn i 6! d 2 ; ii S7 ; saw 
atp i 274 d I ; iv 304 ; visit of 
Gobind Rid, iv 365 j vi 27^ 30, 
t24. r^ip 3^4 3^38 Ih 

Bandip early hcstory crfp v 237 ; 
career in tbc Panjab, 246; 
execatiarL ofp 
Bandai KbSfsa, v 250. 

Bandishar, iv 27 n 2, 

Bdrtia^ iii 67. 

Banno, compiler of the Grantli 
S4hib^ i 41 n 5; iii 66; vi a, 410. 
Baptiam of 5ikli recruits^ Pteir 
XX.V ; V 95 n r* 

tract in Panitbp Inf. Ixk. 
Bards employed by G-uni Gobind 
Sin^hp V S3, 161, 314 n 1. 
Barley rollSp’iv 346. 

Barmaid, Indian, vi 155 ns* 
Baroda, the GSekw^ oi, 

Prcf+ iLitvii. 

BanWlnal, i 63 n 3. 

Basflii, V 14T. 

Basantp Indian spring, 1 371 n i. 
Baaarka, ii 35p 6 d. 

Basavap horse dealer, iv 21S. 
JBat5la.> birthplate of G. N^ak'a 
■wife, i 19 n i57? 

G. M^ak on, i 146, i^a, 
177 nip 372 nii iii m ; 
Hindu tiifnes for, ii 254 112 ■ 
G, Gobind Singh's injuDctioos 


Bathing {continued ]— 

regarding, v 161 ; Kabir on, 
vi 214. 

Bawa "Walt of Kftndllar^ i 172. 
Bft-wTin, V 262 n 4, 

B^wan Akliarip m i6Sh 
B eauty, thirty-two marks cfp vi 
64 n I. 

BediSp V 294. 

BeniT Panditp ii 134; Bhagat> 
VI 3S. 

BcSntirLtk, Lord W,, Pref. xxii. 
Ber tree, i 122 ; it 142. 

Betel, me of, iv 179 3 ingredients 
ofp 244, 24^ n 4 ; as Itp-salve, 
vi 256 n 3, 

BetrotJial ceremonyp iii 76. 
Bhagat iii 415 n ; vi 3, 3, 5, 
2Q, 36* 3; ^ 9S n Id 100 
n Xp 102, 119, 136 n 1, 131 n i. 
Bh^gat of Maxii Singh, 

Int. boevp IxxtK. 

Bhagats^ vi i n i. 

Bhagats of Granth SaMb^ vj 1 ; 

authorities for their lives^ vi 3, 
Bhagantip iii 10^ n i. 

Bhaganti kt v 
Bhagawod CUHi vi 124 n r ; G. 

Hat E4shan''6 read* ng of, iv 32U 
BhSgo, Indian besroint, v 313,315, 
220. 

BhagwSn Ghp iv aiJS,, 

Bh^bhaii, presents a robe to 
the Guru, iv 61. 

Bhi^iath^ i 145; ii 263 n [ ; 
vi 162 n S' 

Bhagtu^ Bh^, ii 272 n i ; Iv 2761 
2go, 291* 

Bhai, meantog of, Int, budv n ; 
ii 5. 

BhmrOp motivator of idol^ iv 21S. 
Bhal E-’^a^ iv 151, 

Bhana, Bhii, son of Bl'^ai Buddha, 
iv 125+ 142 ; sent for by G. 
Har tlobind^ iv 222; conse¬ 
crates G. Har Rai^ iv 335. 
Bhangp i 120, 174 ; v 153 j vi 71 

Bbaxiganip battle of^ v 35. 

Bh^m, Bibi, daughter of G. Aniar 
Bis, ii 30 ; mamage RSm 
I DSs, ii 91 ; dcvotioii to hei- 
I iatlicr, ii 144 ; birth of her son, 

I 1193^ 

I Eharthsui,KingoiUjiain^ii6gn3 


INDEX 


425 


Bhatinda^ legend of, v a2i* 222 

n I. 

vi 39. 

Bhaw^iiis V 262 n 
Bldkan, Bhagat, vi 1 j his ; 
lymns, 416. 

Bhifean v 20d 30^ 40, 42 h 

Bhlkaii Sh^ Saiyid, iv 358, 36^=. 
Bhikha, bard, ii 8j. 

Bhtkhi^ betrothal of bis daugh¬ 
ter Jito, V 2. 

BMm Chand, Ilaja of Bilaspur, 

V 5> 7 i visit to G. Gobind 
Singh, S ; desires elephant, 8 ; 
scorns Gnrj^ 9 ; q^uarrel ’with 
Fateh Shah, 27 j substituent 
war, 3S, 50. 

Bhoi, Raj, Int. bod 
Bhhngi, iv 3^1; d 5. 

Bhujangam, Jogi belief^ iii 360 

ji j. 

BhOp Cband, Elja of Handur, 

V ladp L31. 

Bias, river, ii 34, 42, 66, 109^ J 50 s 
iv 103, 

Bibarfs, ii 84 n i. 

Bibeksar, tank, iv 48. 

Bidhi Gland, iii 32 ; iv 4, 35, 84, 
89, 96, Tofl, ]iT* U4J cax]y 
]ii&tory of, iv j 54 ; recovery of 
horse for Guru, iv i^Sj goes 
disguised aa magidan for 
second horse, iv I75 ; at battle 
of Nathana, iv 181, 1S6; at 
battle of Kartityur, iv 304; 
visit to Budhau Shah, iv 213; 
sent to Bay of Benpi[, wlierc 
he met Sundar Shalt, iv 216, 
225 ; death, iv 226. 

Bidur, ii 331 n 1 i iii 4^5 ; vi 

4J, 2^2. 

Bjgha, land measure, iii 355 n j. 
Bigotry of MuhammadanSd Int 
JxKKVd. 

Bijli Khan, NawSb of GoraMipur, 
vi 139. 

Bilaspur, capital of ICalilur, v 6. 
Bild’wat ii 239 ^ t. 

BinaipSt v 321. 

BindbiachaJ, v 370 n i, 

Bindra.ban, i 57 j vi 347 n u 
Birbar, Riijn, Iii iq. j 

Birtli, human, _vJ 2^9 n 1,404 n 1. 
Bishan Sinnh, Baja, iv 34H n i. ! 

Bisi^ji G. Kanak's \'isit to, i ( 


Bismiliah, i 340 n 5 s vi 259 n i, 
3 ^ 4 ^ 

Body, compared to puddJe, i 3i 
114; formation of, 198 
gates Off, vi 16 n 2, 169 n 2 and 
3 ; mystical divisions of, iSo 
n I, 

Bohr tree, ii 39 n i. 

Books, sacred, of Muiiatnmftdans^ 
i 167 111 J of Hindusp ii 193, 

Boons, four, ui 121 ti 

Brahma, god of Gcaiion, i 40 
n 3, 215 n I, 300 n I; ii 193 
n j; s iv 354 n 4 j 35^ ; sons of, 
vi 128 n 7, 301 , 371 n 1+ 

Brahmand, mundane egg^ ui 330 
n r. 

Brahmans, power of, Int. xxxLx, 
Ivii ; duties of, i 235 n i ; 
sacred herbs of, 155 n l, 307 
n 3 ; cooking of, 132 ; cus¬ 
toms, Ui 193 n r i ii 204 111 i 
iii 317 n 2 ; iv 134 n I ; v 74 
n I I rules for, vi 104 n 2; 
Origin of, 746 n 1 ; Kulin of 
Bengal, vi 338 n 2. 

Brahmaputra, Gh NSnak's jour¬ 
ney on, i 81. 

Brahm Dds^ I^ashmlii Pandit, 5 
lOj, 167. 

Bralim, Shaikh, i 84, 102, 24 is ; 
genealogy of, vi 357. 

Brain, nectar distilled froinj v! 
16 n 2, J55 n 1* 

Branding with irons, v 2^9 n 2. 

Breatli, five specie cf, i 99 n 1 ^ 
378 n 2 ; suspension ofi i 378 
n 3 1 CTtercises with, vi 16 n 2. 

Bridal dres&c* at Farid's shiioe, 
vi .VS- 

Bridge, of foatlng stones,, vi 
4JO n 2 ; to heaven, 334 u 4. 

Brihaspati, teacher of gods, ’wife 
abducted by mooOd '"i xii, 
138 h 3. 

Bromns, Joins’’ use of, i 151 n 2, 

Browning on transmigratioilp Int. 
LwiL 

Budha, Bhm, Int. Ixxiv, isxvii, 
meeting wdtb G. i 133 ^ 

invests G. Aisga<k ii n ; find- 
jug of G. Angad, ii 13 ; invests 
Q. Amar ii 43 j finding 
oi Cw. Amar ii 65 \ receives 
niles of religion from GurUd tt 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


426 


Biicllia 

3f37 ; iTiv-Ci?ts Gh Bas, ll 

146 ; svpcrifttends buiidin^ of 
tajik at Amritsar^ ii ; 
teacher of Har Gobiiid, ifi 49 ; 
eotiusted mth care of Grantli 
Sahib* iii 66 i inanjfviratcs Har 
Gobind, iv 2, 4; visit to G, 
Hat Gobixid at GuSliar* iv 24 ; 
organiiCfi sacred concerta^ iv 
57 i teturns to forest lifcp iv 
70; visit to Sii Har Gobix^d- 
pur^ iv 120 j retires to his vjl- 
lage, iv 121 ; visioji. of G, 
Aijan, iv 125 j death iv, 127, 

Budha, lAt, Itii, liv; i 64 i W 345. 

Bixdban Shah, naMting with G, 
Ifaflalt, iv 140 i ivitii Gurdita 
at Kltatpur* iv 142 j tisit of 
Har GobLnd to^ 213 ; his death, 
215. 

Budliism* sacred books^ Pref. v ; 
exipulsioji of* Int, Iv, Ivii ; 
causes thereof* Int, Ivj lvi+ 

Badhu Shah* v iS j bravery 3^ ; 
Gnni^s gifh 4$^ 

Buh, G. Arjan's prediction oiv iii 

Eulafp Rai, Inh Ixxi, i 2, 

lU iSp £lp ar. 

BuH, supporter of eartJ^ i 200 u 2* 
203 tL 2. 

Bumble Bees, vE 2^4 u i. 

Burnt oifferin^ 128 03. 

Butter-chm'nm^* vi 201 n 2. 

Caesar on German gods* Int. 

lix. Ilr 

Cake* Shaikh Farid's wooden, vi 
36S, 39a n r+ 

Calendar, Kabir's, vi 190. 

GaU to prayer, Muhammadan, i 
179 n 2. 

Canals of Malwa, v 224 j canal 
at P3k P^ttan, vi 367, 

Carrion, i 281 n 

Caste* Hindu cartes, i i5 n r 3 
^tem attacked by Gurus* 
PreL X3m - i ayS* 283 ; ii 
84* 102 ^ iv 220, 24B n 41 
V 9 Sf loi j vi 22, 3t, 34, 103, 
104, i20p 28G a 6, 319. 

Catecldsm* Sikh, iv 264, 

Categories* twenty-hve* vi ed6 
ft 4. 


Cattle* trespassing* iii 301 n i. 
Cemeteries* worship of, iv 293 ; 

prayers in, vi 375. 

Census of Sikh pilgrims at Har- 
dwtr* PreL :30d n. 

CeyJon, i 14^ 154. 

Chaeixa Fha^fo, iv 345, 
ChaLfanya, reformer of Bengal* 
i ’^35Jft3- 

Chakars o£ body, v 261 n 3 ; vi 
gi nE. 

Chalcor* ii 2 n 3 ; iii 154 \ vi 39. 
Chakwi, ruddy sheldrake, i 27 j 
n I. 

Challeiiges* Customs of, iv 179. 
Cham^, vi 342 n 1+ 

Chamkaur* ba^o of, v 1&6, 202, 
Chana (gi'nin), i dS n a, 
CMnnkkya, Kiti, iv 7 114, 
Chandarbaiu?, vi £j n j- 
Chanda Bhai* tommenta- 

tor of Gran"^ Sflhlb* i 202 n 4. 
Chandel, R3,jaof, v 3B. 

] Chandi* v 3^ S3, 2S9 n i. 

' Chandu, Emperor’s Diwan, ill 70, 
79, ^ 7 , 9a s iv 7, 20, 22, 2E, 35. 
Chapamsua (Gurusar), iv 61, 
Charanpahnl, initiation cere¬ 
mony, i 47 n 1. 

Chatrik, pied Indian cuckoo, i 
S3 u 6, 139 n I ; ii 246 n i. 
ChatuT Dm* BanSras Pandit, i 6 l 
C haudhri, ii 20 n J, 29, 136. 
Chaupar or Qianaat, i 7 n i* 243, 
ft 3 ; iii 426 n 1 ; iv 201; vi 
34S. 

ChautHa, iv 356. 

Chhajju, water carrier, iv 322+ 
t Chhitank* weight, iv 27S 111. 
Chhotijcoir, iy 193* 203. 
Chiiatimani, jewel, vi 325 n 2. 
ChitauT, ancient capital ofMewIr, 
Int. scliK ; RSna of, vi 310^ 
Mira Bai's templOd 34S n 3. 
Cliitrgapt, i 210 n 2. 

I. Cbollia, i 106 ; iii zi* 

Chtono^ams, vf 94, 9a, 384. 
Chtoftology, Hindu contempt for, 

vl 3* 

Chuni Mandi* birthplaca of G. 

Ram Das* ii 87. 

Circumcision, vi 127 n 2. 

Qarified butter (see Gbi). 

Clothes, dyeing* i 42 n 1 ; blue* 

1 117 n I ( red* ii 226 n i. 



INDEX 


Concrcmition ol widows, Ftd. 

xxii, jutlii ; 1 381 ; ii siS n i* 
Congress of Oiientalists at Rome, 
Pref. xxvii, sutvinn 
Conversion, forcible* of Hindus, 
VI74- 

Cooking squaroj i 43 U 5i# 132 ; 

vi 1^9. 

Com, staff of life^ vi 339. 
CoroodtiQn Ode^ ii 24, 27 n 2, 381 

353^ 

CourtcsAH, how saved^ ii 338 n i j 
iv23ij vi ^96 n. I. 
Cove1:otisiies& inveighed against, 
vi 16 n T. 

Cow, sacrifice of, vi 341 n 4 ; 
GEili, vi iifi n 1 ; teanimation 
of, vi S20 n I ; vi 23 n 1, 
Cow-dungj i 43 n i, 242 n a> 
Crane, vi 413 n i. 

Creation, i n4, 195 n 2, 215 
n I, 

Creator, Indian belief in One, 
Int. M j i 300 n r- 
Cremation pounds, worship of, 
iv 293 j Kabir on^ vi 283 n 2 h 
C rowa^ human corpses tlu-own to, 
yi 340 n 2. 

Cu'ckno, pied Indian, i 83 n6, 
139 n 1. ; blaok Itwiian, i 139 
u 2. 

Cnnniiighani^s HistoTy of fhs 
Sikhst iv 21 n I. 

Customs, Indian, i 39 n 2, 6| n 4 
and 7, 76 n 2, 112 n a, 113 n i, 
190 n 1 and z; 
226-348, 279 n 2 ; iii 302 n 3^ 
317 n2 ; iv 250, 66i V 9 n I, 
24 n I ; vi 378. 

iii 100 n I j 
iv 21 n, 212, 217, 239. 

Dadhleh, vi 108. 

D^n, saint, v 227. 

DS^upautliis, vi 140. 

Daltyas, u 160 n J. 

Dakaits* vi 20- 
Dll, ii 32 n r ; vi 13 j n 
DalJa village, ii 22* 66 ; iv 5 in 
Dalla Singn^ v 323^ Z2^ 

Dam, ii I14 n 1. 

Damdaina, ij 33 ; iv 336. 
Damodri, ^vife of C- liar Cobisid* 
iu 80; iv sOs 56 h 76, 15J* 223- 
Dainri, coin* 11602, 


437 

Dancoj religious^ i 183, 305 u i ; 

V 33 ; vi 211 n 2. 

Dand* v 275 n 3 h 

Dani, Bibi» daughter of G. Amar 
Das, 11 30, 89, 

D^ Sin^, V 21 Ii 2T7- 
Dlra Shikohj iv 277, 39S, 300, 
/ 302, 

I Danoli, iv 51, 54, 146L 
Darfidi iu 419 n 2. 

Dnrwcsh, 3 55, 

Dasatath, ly 371 n 
Dasahra, ii 334 n 5, ■ 

Daau, son of G, Angal, il i ^ 42,44. 

2^3 n 1. 

Dattatre, ii 69 n i ; iv 288. 

■ Dltu, son of G. Augad, H i, 43, 
44, 63 J 59 ^ 

Daiita Shlli^ of Gujrlt, iv 64 n 2, 
123. 

Daulat Khan, 113, 36+ 17, 

Daya Kauj^ mother of & Angad^ 
ii I. 

Daya Kmr, motlier of G- R 5 m 
Das, ii S7, 

Ram* father-in-law of G. 
fiar Rai^ iv 213. 

Daya Singh, eno of the five 
j beloved of G, Gobind Singh, 

! V 91* 140* IJ9* ifiS. 
i DayoJ, R€ja of BijharPKal, v 52, 

I Deadly sins, i 13 n i. 
i Dead, disposal of the, h 222 ; vi 
i 340 n 3 * 

Death* belief in eiostence alter, 
Int. Ixv* Ixix ; i 89 n i, 30 i 
n 4 ; ii 302 j G. Har Gobind 
on, iv j4 “ meseenger of, vi 
£s 6 n 3 ; of holy mcn^ vi 230 
n 3; noose of, vi 42 n 3 ; 
havoc created by, vi 409 n } ; 

I god of (sM Dhatoivaff^ river 
f Jamna ^otccts from, vi 198 
1 n4 ; as angler vi 28^ n 5, 
Death at wili, 1 i8u ^ ii 7 i 
j, IQO- ivG4^ 224, 298. 
Defilement, Gurus deprecate 
Hindu ideas of, i 47* 51* 132* 
185, 

Dchra Daba Hujaat* i iSo; iv 
127, 388^ 

DcKira DOhn residence of Rdm 
Rat* V, 17. 

DoOgifi* vl 32. 


t 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


428 

Eera Ghl^i Khajl, i 123- 
De^ny ri^g^IatM by the Bu- 
premG Deity, i 17S n a, ai 4 
n 3 ; ii 522 a i ^ iii 154 n 3 s iv 
114 I V 132 ; vL 6S rt in 
Devgiki^ mother ot Krishaji* i 37 
n I, 305 n^r 

Dffvi see Sapi 

Shati. 

Devotees^ seU-immolatjiciii of^ i 
374 n I. 

Devotions, Bikh, 1 136; nine 
forme of, jii 108 n 3. 
DJiaic-tree, vi 280 n r, 2^5. 
Dh 3 J£a, iv 352. 

Dhaima Bha^t^ vi i, 105, ro6 
n 3 ; hvTiiiis of^ 109. 

Dh^Tv^, vi jg, 

Dha-rm D 3 ;s, successor of Kabir, 
vi T41: n I, 

Dbarmrlj, god of deathj, i 126 
n ip 201 04; ii 14^; iii 
n 377 n 5, 417 n I ; vi 42 
D 3p €1 n 4 p 210 n 3, aSi n 5^ ■ 
ag3 n i. 

DliarmeSii £ 47 a 2h ! 

Dhatihra, vi 71 n 3. 1 

Dhaulpurj battle of, v 230. 

DhEva plant, i 158 n 4. 

Dhilwan, v 309, 223. 

Dhir MaJ, son of CurdStta and 
grAndsoji ot Gh Har Cobind, 
birth of, iv 139 ; his treachery, 
Iv 302 p aspires to be Guru and j 
tak^B poasession of Giantb I 
Sibibd iv 213; message to ’ 
Emperor Shah Jahtn, iv 215 ; 
his contiJiual disloy^ty and 
disobedience, iv 30S. 

Dhotip i 339 n 2, 240 n 4 ; v 147 ^ 
Hi; vi 9 2 n i „ 

Dhru^ i 315 n 3 J iiip 4i4 p vi 24. 
DhQbri, capital of Kami up, iv 

and lan^fuagcs of the I 
present work, Pref. v, vi, xVp 
xxx\, xxxii, x^uixlii. 

Digambarp i 310 n 2 ; it 3:36. 

Dihh, ii 20 j iv i5p 24; v 3515 
n 3 ; vi 366, 373, 375. 
DikpSlSp V 2gg n i. 

Dilawar Khln, v 55^ 

Dina, v 200, 207. 

Din Beg, Muhammadan Geu&raJd 

V 134, 


' Dipalpurp i 106^ 

I Directions, teiip vi 192 n 2, 

I Disciples* duties of, 175 n 4 
I Dit Singh, Bh^, FreL xxx ^ 
I Lfit. Ixxxvii ; v S4 n i. 

! Divination by sacred books, Int, 
braxVi 

Diwili, ii 79 n r i vi 395 n i, 
DiwSnS faqirs, v 3 i 8 . 

Doib district, iL 109 j iv 4, 102, 
Dogras, i 46 n 5. 

Donkey, use of, iii 163 n i ; 

Sitala'Sp vi 57 n 3 . 

Donlagarh, capital of BengM, 1 
i 6 g n 3, 

Dowsem's Myihi>logy, i 3S2 

n I- 

Draupadi or PanchEli, iv 40& 
n I j vi 104 

Dravidian cormtey, G. XSnak's 
visit tOp i 147. 

Dress^ nobleinan's, iv 237 ; Sifch^s 
V 95. I47 Ti It 315 n I j C:od 
without distinctive, v 285 n 2. 
Drum of O- Gobind Singh, v 5 ii r. 
Duality (DwaLt), i 1^5 n g 3 vi 
66 n I, 309^ 

Duklibhanjani, ii 143, 269 i leper 
at, 267. 

Dtiins^ minstrels, i 33, 52 n i. 
Duni Chand, i 129 ; v 129, 133, 
134. 

DurbSsa, vi 47 n 4 
Durga, goddeisy, i JjS u i, 166 
u 6, 1S3 ; ii I n 1, 3, 133 j iii 
0 n I, 45 j V 60, Gi 11 I, 114 n i, 
2S6 n I j vi 57 n 2, 117^ 
Prabodh^ v 84 n i. 

Durga Sap^ Shatif v So n 2^ 
Durymihan, Kaurav prince, iv 
408 n I ; vi 253, 

Dwajaka, i 144 n 1 ; ii 93; v 
379 n 1 3 vi 23, 30, S3 n 1, 113. 
Dying thoughts, effect ofj i 67 
n I; vi 80 n I* 

Earriiigs, banker's, vi 279 n, r. 
Earth, miie ai^cicnt divisions of, 
i 30 n I; flora of tlic, i 383 n 1 i 
support of, V 225. 

Ecstasyp Jogis' state of* vi 17 n 3* 
91 n 6. 

Education, Indian system of, t 3, 
Effort encouraged, i 
Egg, world aSp i 116 n 2^ 



INDEX 




I 

Elders, ii 234 n i. 

Elcsliabdis^ iii lOS n 3, 

Eltjct* 1,202 Ti 3. 

ElcrmentSp ftvo, i 1^3 n 4 ; ii T^& 
n I i of body, vi i6p n 3 , jn 

Eleocarpu^?, berrio& ol, vi n 2. 

El^hant> raissng g£ the emperor 
rbr&Min Lodi's^ i 563, saved 
by tliinidiig of Godp iii 415 51 i ; 
presented to G, Gobind Sin(2fh, 

V 4 j made drunk for battle, 

V 1^4 ^ men^a fights with^ v ^ 
155 Ti 1 r trapping of, vi j 
n I. 

Elliot, Sir Hooryj of 

Int. xlbt n. 

Ellorat eaves of, vi ^2. 

ElpMajtone's History of Indiat 
iv 330 n 2. 

Emanatioii from Primal Being, 

Soulari, Intr l^cviun 

Eminabadp or SaTyidpTUTp i 

End of Tvodd, G, Arjan 00, iu 161. 

EngUsb occupation of India, 
Guru's prophecy,. Pref. xviii,, 
xix ; iv^Si ; G. Gobind Singh 
on, V io7> arcoiint of 

death of Bandas v 253, 

Equality, G, NanaJt'fi prin_ciplea 
of, i 1^2 5 of man, Kabir on, 
vi 24^^. 

Eternal Hfe, food of^ ii 221, 

Ether, i j/S n4. 

European and Indian conditions, 
analog of, Int. kL 

Exaltation of brain, vi 346 n 4,3. 

Exercises, devotional, nf Sikhs, 
i 136 j iv 252. 

Exisrtencea^ i 5 n i ^ \i 42 n i, 63, 

Exultationa oi poeta, vi 10 n 1. 

Faqfr^, enstoms of, i sjo ji i ; ui 
3(50 n 3, 425 n ; v 274 n i., 300 
n2* 303 n j s vi 11 n j, 3^9 3 rnlea 
for, 386 ; clothea, 401 n 3. 

Faridp Shaikh, i 52 n 3p 84, 92 ; 
his penancop iv Go; vj i ■ hLs 
life, 336, 414. 

Earidkot, iv 4 n.; vi 3S1, 382. 

Earish+a, hisrtorianj vi 383 n i, 
3^4 n I. 

Famikh Shalip Empcrorp v 351, vi 

Fa&ts, Hindu, ii 240 ; iii 420 n 2 j 
eJcventb day, -li 25, 51, 


Fatah Sh^i, Rdja of Garhwalp v 
Sf 16, iS ^ marriaEo of daugh¬ 
ter arrangedp v 34 3 quarrel 
with Raja Bhint Qiand, v 27^ 
Fatah SinghK great grandson of 
Bhai. BMgUp V 22fi, 

Fa tall Singhh son of G, Gobind 
Singh, 97> 195 ; death of, 
V 198. 

Fafahgarh^ fort, v j 29. 

Fate^ i 178 n 3, 214 n 2. 
Father-in-law's houae, ’aorld as, 
i 74 ii 7 « 

FtLliha, QiitIo, i n Ch 
F aasi, iii 238 n i. 

Feet, reseicnce of the, iv 335. 
FeativalSj ten Hindu, iv 254 
n 3 ’ 

Fevers, three^ vi 73 n i. 

Fi^-tree, vi 137, 

FiUal duties of Sikhs, iv 270^ 
f Firdausi, post, v 203 n 
Fire^ hve dres, i 70 n 2 j penance 
of i'^'e fires, i 338 iitj a 
puriheTp iii 221 n 2 ; inherent 
m timber^ iii 339 n l ; sacri¬ 
ficial, iii l7i 

Firmament, ii 331 n i ; Muham¬ 
madan. conception of, vi 153 
n 4 . 

Firozpur, iv 4 n, 

Firoz Shah Tuglak, Emperor^ 
Int, xliv, Ixxi. 

Five rivers, land of, Pref. xxv* 
Fies-h^ G, NSnak Qn^ i 47. 

Flora ol the earth, i 2S2 n r. 

Food, unlawful, i 39 n i ; thirty- 
aix palatable dishes, i 97 n 2 j 
Sacred, i J & 3 ^ 185; of eternal 
life, ji 221 J G^ Har Rai on 
impure, iv 2a i j Malak Hiia+ 
iv 343 ; for manes, iv 346 n i j 
Brahtnan% v 6^ ; Hindu 
sacredp v 114 n 1 i impure, v 
1^ 2 n 1 i vi 319; distribution 
of, V 105. 

Fool, association with^ h 3:35. 
Four days, i 1S7 n 3 j Ages, i 4 
nS- 

Francen v 3 ^ 6 . 

Prog in a wdlt vt 323 n 1. 

Fruit of inunortality, Gopl 
Chand's^ i 1O9 n 3. 

, Funeral service 01 Sikhs, i 190 
i ^ 3 ' 



430 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Gaekwfl^ of HhHh thcp 

PlXSC XKVli. 

Gainli, son of [Deau, iv ^40^ 
Gajja Sin^hj WTstbanl;, Pref. xxvi 
Gajmotip lii ^Tl a fp 
Gandharbs^ v jic> n z. 

Ganesh, i 13S n 2 j vi 35, ^3 m 
t?3 & I, i3Sii> 

Gaogap ’wife of G. Arjan, lii ij 29^ 
90 j. iv3p IS-, ^3, 49, 

Ganga Kairt, mtccliant, lii Ow 
Ganga cousin of G. Gobind 
Sioglij V 2+ 

Gaflga. ^gar* ’vi 105. 

Gaagasaip lii 26. 

Gangeria, v 3^3 n 1+ 

GangeSp E^. Xh: ; i 14^ n ip 
294 114; ii 554 iii 2^; 

Lv 36s ; v£ 69 HI, 151 n Jp 
36B n 2^ 

Garhiap Bhli, of K^hmir^ iv 1 sjh 
GariufiiitSp £vep iv 1 33 n 3* 

GaruT, Or Gaxndap vi zg n ij $i 
n I, S7 n 3. 

Gamt PuT^s iv 12J. 

Gate, i J59 n i* 

G^tJiap lii 434 n i. 

Gaur BrlJiinaiis* ’vi lOg.. 

Gaw 5 j:, iii 203 n 2. 

Gaya, i 64 ^ iv 346, 347 n l ; vi 

G 4 yafri> i 160 n 4, 237 n i ; 11 
loS i vi 53 n 1- 
Ghar^ i 27a n [, 

Ghara, iv j 70 n 3, 

Ghari, i 5 H 2 ; vi 28 n r* 400 11 Tp 
G baini, King of, vi 370, 
Gherar, iv 102. 

Ghi, i 24j n I ; iv 276. 

Ghogha's repentance, iv ;^ 67 , 
GhulJm Mnhad-ul-Din, historian, 

Ghuman, vi 3^, 19. 

Ghumand Cnandp Raja of K^n- 
giftp V 136. 

Ghyas-ul-Din Tugblak, EmperoTp 

yi 390- 

Girdhflii, shop-keepCT, ii 79. 
Cii^ovind, vi 5 ; Englisb tran^a- 
tioii of^ vi 7 n I, 9^^ 

Gobindp foimdei' of Goindw^, ii 

^ ^4. 

Gobind Singh, Gum^ Pref, xii, 
xvi, xviii, XXV ; Int. x!Lk* 
ixiii* Ixxiv, Ixxvii j birth* iv 


; Go land Singh (cOfihKu&d ]— 

■ 5^7j 359 n t i Bhncan ShSb's 

visit, iv J5S ; practises armg^ 
\ iv 3^3 3 depaxtune for Anand- 
piiir, iv 365 ; visits Chhota 
MifESpur* BanSraSs Ajndhiap 
iLaklinaUp Lathiiaur, and ICirat- 
pnr, iv 365, 366, 367 j arrival 
at AnandpuT, iv 368 n i j his 
fatberia affectionp iv 371 ; 
messago fioib his father ia 
prison, iv 383 ; Ids answer, iv 
385 ; execution of his father* 
iv 387 ; becomes Guru, iv 3B9 ; 
crenia’tion of G. Teg Balildnr^s 
lieadp iv 390; practice of 
archery, v i ; Vichitar KStak, 

V I n I i his companions, v 2; 
his mairiage, v z ; Raja Ratan 
R^i's presents, v 4 \ army in- 
croaaed and drum made, v 5 ; 
visit of Hlja Bhim Ghand, v 7 j 
effort of me latter to obtsin 

I elephant* v B ^ Gurti's refusal, 
j V 13 j preparations for vi2j.\ 
1 V 15 ; departure for 'Nahan* v 
[ id ; fort built at Paunta* v 17 j 
visit to Ram R^, v 20 ; com¬ 
poses poetry, V 22 ; death of 
Rim Rii, V 22 ; G^un'e depar¬ 
ture for Bchra l>an to punish 
masaiids, v 33; resniojes quaml 
w'ith R^a Bnim Chan^ v 2d; 
war declared, v 39 ; disloyalty 
of Fath^ soldiersp v 31 j 
Guru's description of Paunta 
battle, V 3p n i, 44 j gifts to 
Budliu ShSb, V 45 ; visit of 
RHiii of Raipur* v 48 ; returns 
to xAoandpur* v 4J5 ; reconcilia¬ 
tion ’with Raja Bhim Chand, 

V 31 ; Airt Singh horn^ v 51 ■ 
battle of Wadaunp v 53 ; Zorl- 
war Singh bom, v 55 n i ; 
alliance with Raja GopaL v 5S ; 
Jfujbar Singh bonn v 59; Fhtah 
Singh bom, v 6b ; interview 
with Kesho Brahman* v 6 z : 
Ram Avatir translated, v 67 : 
the Gum on idolatry^ v 67 s 
dialo^e of the princess, and 
tile Brahman* v f transla¬ 
tion 0! Hindu works, v 83 ; 
decision to abolish masands, 

V 36 ; OH hair, v 89; tests 



INDEX 431 

Gobind Singh —■ Gohind Shsgli (coniimted]^ 

devotion of Sikha, v^i; esta-b- CFScapftS to MftchM’imra iorest, 
lis!^ tho pihul and the v igo; his mother arrested, v 

V 93 i address to his 195 3 death of his mother and 

Sikhs, V 93 s preparation of sons, v 193 ; his 

Amrit, V 93 ; rules for mom- , v 201 j deputation from Man- 

bers ot the Khaka, ir 95 ; Ins jha Sikhs, v 211 ; defeat at 

own baptiain, v 96 ; aovoeatea Khidranap v at'i; visit to 


wtsttinE of arma, v 1O2 ; visits 
to Ms kitchen, v 105; on 
saered music, v io6; pro- 
pJiecies on advent of the 
English, V loj, 137; pre- 
scTiDes rules for Sikhs, v jop; 
envoy from hiU chiefs, v 114 j ; 
preparation of sacred food, v 
114; rules for salvation^ v it 6 ^ ' 
surprised by hill oliiefs^ v t to;. 
complain-ts against the Guru 
to the Empei-or, v 121 ; de¬ 
feat of Ejnperor^s troops at 
Anandpur, v 124 ; hiU chiefs 
combine the Gum, v 

137 i battle, V 130 ; aiege, v 
^33 3 repeated complaints to | 
Emperor Aurangzeb, v 137 > 1 
the Sikhs depaid to Nirmoh, 

V 13S j: plcft to assassinate the 
Guru, V 139; he retires to 
Jlaaalip v 141 ; visits Bhabaur, 

V 141 3 retxirns to Aitandpiir, 

V ; discounteuaJiices wear¬ 
ing 3ewelJer5r, v 149 n i; in- 1 
veighs a^ai^ tobacco, v 153 
n I : Ajmer Chand causes 
renewal of hostilitieSp v 154; 
victory of the Sikhs, v 133 ; 
further insiftactions to the 
Sikha, V 13 7 ; iry^eriai forces 
again attack the Guru, v 162 ; 
siege of AnandpiiTp v 16S 3 the 
Gyru proves the treachery of 
the Mil chiefs, v 176 5 letter 
from Emperor, v J79 |i desire 
of the Sikhs for capitulation, 

V I So 3 safe conduct proihisedi * 

V 1&4 ; evacuation of Anand- 
pnr, V1 ^5; renunciation deeds, 

V 184 3 nmreh through Kirat- 
pur to Ejopax, v 1 S3 ^ the Guru 
proceeds to Chamkaurp v i B6 ; 
and sends members of his 
family to Dibli, v (; agiin 
attacked, v i ft; ; appoints hve 
Sikhs to tlie Guriiship, v sEkj 3 


DalJa at Damdamaj v 2193 
rejoined by his wives, v 219: 
dictates fhd Grantb Sahib to 
Mani Singli, v ^23 ; Daila bap¬ 
tized, V 223 I the Guru lines 
liitn&elf at D^iitlwSra, v 22 ft; 
consulted by Emperor Baba^' 
dur ShSh, V 230 + viafts DihlL 
and rears a temple to his father, 

V 230 J arrival at Agra, v 232 ; 
relfpous dLsenssion with Baha¬ 
dur SMhp V 233j 233 ; de- 
mand$ Waa^r KMu's life, v 
234; travels with Emperor, 

V 235 i visits PQiia and pro* 
ceeds to Nander, v 23ft 3 gives 
Banda a imssion, v 239; 
Guru's wife sent to DShli, v 
24D ; the Gnm attacked with a 
poniard, v 241 j wounds re¬ 
open, V 242; appoints the 
cScanlb and the JChalsa bis 
successor, v 2^^; d<iath, v 
245 3 compositions, v 2^; 
liie Guru on God, v 2^2 ; on 
penances and austerities, v 
2JO; baptismal rites, v 2^3+ 
2 &2. 

Gobind Singh, S 5 dhii, author of 
ItiMs Guru Khdisa, iv i n i, 
204 n I, 

God, mank conception of, Itvt. 
Itii 3 Moses' conception of, Int. 
litvi; Greet and Sikh do., 
Lnt. Jxii n, bdii; not anthropo¬ 
morphic, Int. l:dii, lativ ; uta 
husband^ i 6 n 3 3 as Bair^gk 
i T4f n i ; assaycr, i ^^3 n 2 j 
rdafionship to mam, ui 118 ; 
orders to God, iii 193 n i 3 
mank account with, iii fl i ; 
conferrer of blessings, id 211 
n t ; uncreated, iii 260 n i ; 
aii milk, 31B nr; creation, iv 
17 n 2 s as destroyer, v 77 ; 
servants ofn v 1O3 n i ; dwell¬ 
ings of, V 67 TV 2; imrciortal* v 



432 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


God — 

243 ; aourCds of v 

n4t 313 n I ; omniscienCo 
263 n i ; grca.tHess of,, y ^6g j 
infinite, v 305 n i ; Antlmr of 
all SJOth V 308 n 1 ; abovs 
CanFiure, v 312 n i ; univei^s 
evolved irom, 331 n l ; belief 
in of, vi I ■ saur&e of 

aoule, vi n 2 ; onmipresenOD, 
vi 41, 293 ft 5 s iii 120 n i, 
150, 337 fti; iv 15 Ji2p 146, 
354 n 5 p 37Di V 58 ft I, 3331 
vi 32 n Tp 124, 

God of death, see Dharraraj. 
Godavari livcrp v 2^6^ 

GoindwSl, i 107; ii 34d ( 58 , 87, ! 
284; iv 32. 

Goldeo Temple, Hi 3, 9, 10. 
Golkanda, v 51 n i. 

Gomti, vi son n 2. 

GonabM^ mother of KiiivdcVp vi 
17, 

Gonda» Bliii, iy 284. 

Goftg, vi 400 ft b 
' Good people \ iii 229 n 2. 

Gopai Cliandp consin of Gr 
Gobind Singh, v 3 h 
G opS^jraip vi 23, 

Gopi Chand, Kjog of Eoog^p i 

i 69 ii 3 > I 

Gorakh, or Gorakhnath, i 41 n 2 ; 

shrifte ofp i 172 ; ii 140. ^ 

G^orakhmatap i n i ; iv 50, 
Goftrachlx, vi iop n 7. 

Gram, i 6S n 2 h 

Grandlather^fi dQtics> ii 334 ft b 
Granth SShib, Janguages of, Prel. 
vip XV ^ sanctity ot^ Pref. xvi ; 
contents of, Int Ii p G. Gobind l 
Singh* Ifift It, Iii j Dharmaal, i 
47 II 2 ■ Gurvmukhi adopted i 
iaij by G. Angad, U gSj ffax ! 
Mandar built tor its reception, \ 

iii g; G, Arjan's compila- \ 
tiOft, ill 59 ; arraagement of 
hymiis* iii ; emperor orders 
erasure of hymns, hi ^ 
Granth entrusted to BhSJ 
Budha^ iii 66 i slok sung 
opening of, iii 1S3 m ; Bannovs 
aid Bh^ ^dhi Chand^s copies^ 

iv jRgj Granth appropriated 
by Bhir hlaJ, iv 2 ] j ; G. Har 
Gobind's trial of Rai and 


Granth Salnb — 

Har Kris^hao, i v 311 j brought 
to G. Teg Bah^Ldutp 334; 
Totutued to Dhlt lV 3 a!, iv 3^7 n + 
Tcftth Guru's Granti'L at Dam- 
ciamaj iv 393 111 ; at Raipur, 

V 48 ft I j G. Gobtnd Sineh 
cm mispiTinunciation of ’ivori^^ 

V iq6 ; editiojis of, v 223 xi 1 . 
Grih (Giah), iii 305 n 2. 

Gu 5 liarp Iv 22 n i, 

GnbematiSp Ccnint A dcp Prefi 

xxviip Kxviii. 

Ghnddap Di-wSLna, v aiS, 

Giiggap V 138 n b 
Gujati, wife of G, Tog Boliudurp 
iv 33 b 344> 84St 357. 3H 179 , 
386; V j, ip5, T99. 

Gui 3 .b Haip grandson of Suraj 
MaV iv 363 i V 2, 49^ 1&5, 237, 
Gul B^h, homep iv 157, idi^ 187, 
Gniftti, vi 61 n 3r 
Giirbaksh Singh Bhai> or Ram 
Kanr, Inth l^tijrvii; ig n 1 ; 

V 1 n 137. 

Gwr Biittii Pref. xiii; jv i n 1, 
1^3 ft b JGS. 

Gur Bis, BhSip Int. Ldii, Ixidii* 
ixxiv* Ixxv, Ixxxvi j iii 3 82, 

B 31 on religion before advent of 
G. Nanak, i lOO n 3^ 191 ^ on 
succession of G. Ajigad, ii 12 : 
on accession of G- Rkm B 3 is, h 
)49 ; visit to G. Kim Das, it 
2^ ; vftites at Arjau^s dicta¬ 
tion, ii 60, ^3 ; appointed to 
spiritnal duties at Har Man- 
aacp iv ; on difficulties of 
Sikhism, iv 133 s G. Ifar Go- 
biud’s testp iv 1:34 ; flight to 
Banutas^ iv 133 , eont bS^k to 
Apiritaar under arrest, iv T37 | 
dtatli* iv 144 ; analysis oi 
Sikh religion, iv 241. 

Gurdls, Lv 308. 

Gurddspur, i 109 [ vi 39, 40 , 
Gnrditta, son of G. Har Gobind, 
iv 36 ; his son DVilr Mai boru, 
iv 129 ; Gnrditta adopted by 
Sri Chand, iv 130 ; founded 
Klratptir, iv 140 ; his son Har 
3 ^di bom* iv 145 ; battle of 
Kart^ipur, iv 203 j Idlls As- 
man KMCp iv 210 j ralsef^ OOvf 
to Hie, iv 220 j deathp iv 22lh 


INDEX 


433 


GurdivSj&p 1 47 n 3, 

Prabkc^ar, li 354 n i. 
Gumti^ iii 6 n i. 

Gwf SflwgriiAj iv 64 n 3 p 

321 n I- 

Guruj meaniilg of p 1 4 i 3 ; true, 

iii 251 n If £65 n 316 ra 3 : 

iv 59 n 1+ 

Guraiaukhit InlljlNxxvipUxjtvTJ; 
lives oi O- Nlrxaic* Inl:+ Ixxiii; 
Panjfl-bi aiphabetp li 56; iii 
50, S2. 

Gum&^ lives of^ Pref■ xv, xvii; 
Intfc IxKvi, Ixxvii ; i r ; iL i, 
5S, £i3; iii I ; iv j, 275, ^i^p 

331; simplicity oi lanfiiagC- 
of* Ffe£, vt; disciples" loyc 
foiv iv 2fii j iwenty-ivfO at 
Bakala, iv^is. 

Gurusar, temple;, iv 61, 1^7 ; v 
207 n l« 

Gyanip Pref. vi> vir, ix^ xiiip xiv^ 

Gyaw Farbcdh^ v 30S. 

Gy^n llataj^Hwalis lut. Ixxv; 

i 1^3 U 3. 

Gylndev* vi 37 n i* 30^ 

Hadis, iii Ip n I ; vi 331S. 
Hatidai’abad, Hizam of, v 246 n 1* 
Hair, 1 224 n t ; v 90 n l, pi, p7± 
13^. 255 p 258 n 1, 300 u 3; vi 
309 n T+ 225 n 2 h 
H aiyat Kli^* revolt ofs v 20, 
Hlji, i 166 n. 5, 

Halaku, captor of Baghdad, vi 
3 SPI 13 . 

Hamidp Khaltfa^ vi 376^ 377+ 
tr&od^ of JandiHa, Int- Ixxx, 
Ixxxi; li 762 . 

KSjisip vi 366 h 

HanumScLp i 3^2 ; iv 158 ; v 53, 
j i_4 n I i vi 3, 56 n 2* ; 3 1 n r. 
Haqiqat, i 13 n 2. 

Haip month, iv 37^. 

Hat, God's name, 11 330 n i, 
Harchandaxiti, mirage, iii 306111. 
Hardwlr, li £7* iii 26. 

Hare's flesh* V 152 n r. 

Har Gobind, Guru, birth, iii 35 ; 
life attempted by Prithi Chand, 
iii :5;r ^ 9 , 47 ; attacked by 
smaD-pox, iii 42 ; recovery, ui 
47 ; cduc^ation. by BliSi Budha, 
iii 4p i marriagCd iu So ^ ap- 

r 


Har Gobind 

pointed suE^s&or of O, Arjaup 
lii 90 j adopts a martial style 
of dress, iv 3 ; enlists soldiers, 
iv 4 j mode of life, Lv 5 ; corre^ 
spondence with Chaadn, iv £ ; 
message from the Emperor 
Tahflng^r, iv 11 j departore for 
Dihli* iv 145 saves life of 
Emperor, iv i£ ; hc^tiUty of 
Chandu, iv 20 ; the Gum sent 
to GuSiiar fort, iv 21 ; visited 
by BIxSi Budha> iv 34 ; made 
surety lor H^jas, iv 26; re¬ 
visits Emperor, iv 29 3 punish¬ 
ment of Chandu, iv 30 j visited 
by Empress Nor Jahaii, iv 31 j 
hostility of Mihrban, iv j6, 37 ; 
horse bought for him by SujSn 
seized by Emperor's order* iv 
3S; Guru visits MiS,n Mir, iv 
41 ; protects Kaolan* iv 47 ( 
enlists Pathans, iv 52 ; minitcLe 
of pipal-ttee, iv 53; birth of 
son Gurdittan iv 56: Har 
Gobind'fi return to Amritsar* 
iv 57 j birth of son Ata! Rai, 
iv 68 j son Teg Bahadur bom,, 
iv 70; remonstrance of fhp 
SLkbs> iv 76 : Sikh ap^pria- 
tion of Emperor Shin Jahmi's 
white hawkp iv 79; prepaid' 
tions for vacating Amritsati iv 
81 p takes part in the battlc^iv 
S 3 ( impenal envoy proposes 
peace, iv 90 i Euhela selected 
as residence during the rains, 
iv loi ; Gum's intervievr with 
Gherar, iv 103 ; founding of 
Sri Har Gobindpur, iv I0£ ; 
e?q5edition of Abdulla Khan, 
SubadSr of Jalandhar, against 
Guru, iv 107 f battle of the 
Bi 3 ,s, iv io£ ; kills Abdulla 
Khan, Karam Chand, and 
Ratan Chand, iv ii6; takes 
a last farsweb of Bh;Li Budha* 
iv^ 133 ; returns to Amritsar, 
1V j 2£"; Biba Atal and Mohan, 
iv 130 ; death of Baba Atali. 
iv 131 j Gur D^'3 ptido pun¬ 
ished, iv 134; arrost of Gqf 
D as, iv 137 ; bctrotlial of_Tfg 
Bahldni', iv 13S ; visits Sadhu 
and R&p Chandd lv 150 ; found- 


^LKJd VI 




434 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Hat Gobind — 

ifi^ of EhSi Riipa, iv 151 i Bidhi 
Chand* iv 153^ 154; recovers 
hcir?&Sj iv i^Sp 178 ; battle of 
ISTatham, iv iBi ; G-utm kills 
Lala Be^ and obtains victory, 
iv 1S5, 186 j marriage of Teg 
EahSdur, iv 189 j dismissal oi 
Bainda I^an, iv ig^ ; revenue 
of the latter, iv 195 ; battle of 
Kartarpur, iv_so4, 205 ; death 
of PaiildaKbafipiv209j tenols 
of the Sikhs, iv 215 j anger 
against G-urditta, iv 220 i visit 
of A-tiand Eiiip iv 32 S j pre- 
paratioiis for death, iv 231 ; 
contumaty oi Dbir Malp iv 3 3 i ; 
oil tho celebratloiL oi the Holi, 
iv 335 ^ conseciaticiit of liar 
Riit iv 335 ; G. Har Gobind's 
death, iv 238 ; his dve ^dds, 
iv 37 ^ 

Hari, I] 329 n T, 

Hari Cliand, father-in-law of G. 
Har Gobind, iii 77 ; Iv 50, 146. 

Hari Chand, Raja of Handor, v 

34, 36, 38, 4 tp 43 n 44 h 

Hari D 5 S, father of G. Ram BSs, 
iiS;, 9T. 

Hari D 3 s, Governor oi Gualiai 
fort, iv 32 , 33, 26. 

Harike, ii r, 39 . 

WarjpuT, KaTigra, ii 5 a, 

Hariahehandar, ^jon of Trisajiky, 
iii 306 n ,i. 

Har Krishan, Guru, son oi G. 
Har R^, birth, iv 315:^ io' 
stalled aa Gum, 314: age on 
successioii, iv 315; Aurang- 
zeb's sunitnons, iv 31®; Bfija 

i ai Singh's embassy, iv 320; 

^uni^s departure for DJhli, iv 
320 ; discussion on the Bhag- 
wat Gita, iv jsi ; message to 
Aurangsob, iv 322 ; Guru's 
pov^cr tested, iv 324 j seized 
with iever, iv 325 i small-pas: 
developed, fv 337 j death and 
crcmatiQU, iv 330, 

Har Lai, Pandit of Banaras, ii 63, 
43 ^- 

Haif Mandai-, temple, hi 3, g, lO, 
14: iv 13, 14, 33^ i V loB n i. 
Harn^klias, father of Pralijad^ ii 
160 n I* 


Har Rai, Guru* ^11 of Gurditta 
and grandson of G. Har Go- 
bind* born, iv 145 j betrothal 
of, iv 325 ; tendernsa for 
flowers, iv 227 ; consecration 
as Gum, iv 235 ; mode of life* 
iv 276 ; his standing army, iv 
277 ; cute of Emperor's son, 
iv 279; tlic poor woman^s 
broad, iv eBo ; adventure wlih 
a python, iv 2S2 ; visit of tho 
liiU Rajas^ iv 287 ; Bliagat 
Bhagwan, iv 28 &i episode of 
BhagtUp iv 291 ; patronizes 
the Marh3,j tribe, iv 293 , 
receives a visit front KaJ* and 
hJa nephews Sandaii and Phul, 
prophesies PhOLs greatness* iv 
294 i Gaura protects Guru^s 
family, miracle of Guru, iv 
297 j Aurartgzeb's ascension, 
iv 300; Dara Shikoh seeks 
the Gum's protection, fv 301 ; 
the Guru sent for by Aurang- 
zobn iv ^04 ; Rfim B3i sent in¬ 
stead, IV ^07 ; Har Ri'ishau 
chosen as the Guru^s successor, 
iv _311 n I i death oi G, Hac 
Rii, iv 314. 

Hasan Abd^ i 171. 

HastinapTir or Bihll, i 169 n i ; 
vi sk 

Hat used by faqTrs for initia¬ 
tion, iv ]B8 n 1. 

Hath jog, i 228 n 3 5 vi go. 

Hathi Singh, v 234^, 235+ 

Hawkp Emperor Shak JahS-o's, 
iv 79 ; parable* v 216- 
I’lajclra Singh, Bhai* Pref. sdi, 

XJCK= 

HazSro Shabd, v 326. 

Heart reversed* vi 222 n 1 ; lotus 
' in* vi 

Heaven, itabir on* vi I39nj 
Muhammadan conocption of, 
vi 155 n 4; described by nega¬ 
tives, vi 165. 

Hells, Seven, v 2S4 n r ; Kabir 
' on, vii39n i . 

Hem Kuht, golden peak, v 296 
n Ih 

Hermit, Satiyasia. 

Heron, 1 4-5 n 2. 

. Hide, uses oi, vi 317* 

L Htkayatp v 36a Xi l- 


INDEX- 


435 


Hillock hmiod at G. Ninak, 1172, f 
HimSiti Nala, stream, v i/fiw | 
HimalayM^ i 144 n I. 

Hlfiffet Singh ol Jafiannlth, v^,:, | 

;• 

liiiittuism, Sikh rcfvcreion to^ 

PtTcf^ xxijr; lut^ lvi+ Ivii ; I 
remarkable prophecies, Pref. ; 
xviU; under JaMngJr* Int. ■ 
xlvi; under Aurangzeb, Iiit. | 
xlvi-xlix; Muhammadan rule^ 
Int. ixli-xllv, 3dix ; vitality ; 
Intrlvii: iii 43, Si:+ 7 [, 96 n u . 
£03 n 3; iv 572 ; vL 54 n 1; ! 
. 90 n 5, 95, 97, iQi, 103 , 104 . 
ji 3, 107 n 118, 119 n I* Tg,3 

n 4 - I 

Hindus^ HoTiT sects of, vi 9^, 1 

Hlngulap goddeaa, v 2S6 n I. l 
Hira Ghat, V 239r 
Hira Singh, HhH. th# Raja of | 
Nabha, Prd- xxvi. 

Hail goddeas oi small-pox^ vi 
395 si T- 

Hola Mahalla^ Int. Jxxxvi n, 

Holi, SaturnaLia, i 65 n 7 ; iv 33 j 

113, 

Horn, i 3a n 3 ; lii 204 n 0. 
Honour, protcotine^i iti 44 n 3. 
HomSp blowing of* i >60 n 3. 

Hor^Op tv 39, Ljd* l6i^ 16^j l79p 
34J ; vi 5411 I, 1^6. 

HouTj ambrosial^ il 34^ n 1. 

Hujra, iii iS n S j vi 385, 1 

Huma^ see Anal^ 

Human bittbp i 335 n i. f 

Humayun, i 110 n i 5 ii zo. 
Hunchback, ii 338 n 2. I 

Husain SMii* faqiip h 137, ^ 

Kusbatud^ God as^, i 6 n 3 ; Indian 
husbaitd a god to his wJlc» i 76 .■ 

114. 

Hynins^ of G, ^T^nakn i 361 ; of 
G. Angad, ii 46; of G, Amar 
D&Sp h 154; of G. Earn, DSs, 
ii 236 ; o£ G..Arjaii> iti 102 ; 
of G. Teg Bahi^uTp iv 393 ; gf 
G.' Gobind Singh^ v 361 > of 
Jaidev, vi 1S j ol iSTamdeVp 
vi 40; oi TrilochuDj vi 78 ; 
Sadhna* vi S7 ; Beni, vi 33 ; 
R^Tn 3 .-naiid, vi 105 ; Dhanna, 
vi 109; Pipa, vi 1191 Sain, vi 
121 j Kabir, 142 : Kavl^is^ 
vi 3314 JKra vi 35-5 5 


Hymns 

Shaikh Faiid+ vi 391; Bhikaup 
vi 416; Sur Dls> vi 419 h 

Ibn BatSta^ historian, InL xliiL 

Ibrahim Lodi, King of Dihli, 156, 
119 n I. 

Id festival, iv 156 n i, 245 n 6: 
vi 341 n4. 

Idols, i 373 : idol defiled by 
N'ajndcv, vi 32 ; Stone* vi 33, 
209 n ^ ; Dhatina's idol wor¬ 
ship, VI iq6. 

Idolatry, G. NanaJt^s deprecation 
0f> j 326, 336, 339 ; 01 ignorant 
Stkiis, ici 6 n I ; Gur Dls's 

Jfabft against, iv 373; at 
Gaya, tv 347 n. i ; G, Gobind 
Smgh on, v 143 ; Namdev on 
vi 43 ( I^bli on, vi 140, 163. 

llLudom vi 160 n i, £&l n 1. 

Illustrations to this work, Prcfn 
xxviJh 

LmSms, vi 4T5. 

Immolation, self, 1 274 n i. 

Immortality^ fruit of, i 169 n 3. 

Impniity of birtJi and dcat 5 i* i 
243* 313 : of food, i 133 s iv 
2&1, 343 ; of song^p i 371 ; G. 
Arjan 011* iii 221 n ij of 
cooking vesselaT &Cr, vi 139; 
n^anuj's praeticev vi 9S i of 
blood, vi 146 n 3 ; Brahman’s 
ideas, vi 161; Kablroti* vi25S. 

Incantations at places of crema¬ 
tion* Vi 294 n 4. 

Incarnations, G. Gobind Singh 
on, V 94, 374 n 3; belief in, vi 3+ 

Indar, god, i 168 n i ; vi 53 it 3* 
S6 n 3 , lo 3 i Indar-'fi bow^ vi 
JO, 3j n I, 

India, Muhammadan conquest 

of, Int. xli. 

Indian months and sctisona, i 
138 n 3: pJulosophy, six 
schools ofh ^ ^ n I ; Max 
Miillcr^a Fhthsophy, i 

8 n I. 

Intantidde forbidden by Gurus, 
in 71 n 3 . 

/fi/ertffl, Dante's, v 04l£ n j. 

Jn#k 3 cl 9 , Kablr on, ’ll 162, 

Xjiitiatioii, form cf^ i 47 n i ; hat 
used ill* iv i8£i nr; secret, iv 
260 It 3. 


r 




THE SIKH RELIGION 


43^ 

Ink, Indian^ i & u 2. 

Inscrijition on G. ArjEiLii'& icmplQ, ■ 
iii HOT, 

Inslitiites of I^tnasar, i 12 n_i, | 
Instruments, five musical, i 99 |i 
n I ; vi J46 n ^ 

Instruction, ethical, G. Amar 
ji 71- 

Intoxicants, 320. 

Ira^ vi 16 n 2. 

Iraq horses^ iv 5;;'+ 

Isaiah, luth liy. 

Ishar (Sluv)* i 21Q n 
I^aods of the world, vi | 

341 n 3, 

IslAm forced ou Hindus^ iv 370, , 
Isn^l, sacrifice of, £y i jd n, S 
Israr-i^ItraH-Fn^idit vn 360 n I, ; 
375 ^ 

I(ih<is KJudsa^ iv i n l, 44 
n 2, 43 n, 104 n. 

Itinerary of N^dev, vi 33 u i_. 
Itineraries of Gurus unsatis- 
factory, Ptefn xxvl 

J aganna^tli, 1 32 j vi 9, 50, 97. 
ae^ri iv 140 u I. 

Jahangir, Emperor, Intr idiv, 
xiv, xlvi, Lvi; iii 84, 90; 

iv LI, 18, 29, 33+ 76, 

Jaidcv, vi 1 ; his v^ife, vi 6; 'J 
composes Gi^govind, vi ^ ^ \ 
King ^tvikra\ poem, vi 9 j 
travels, vi lO; hia mutilation, 
vi 11; miracuions rcstoratiDn 
of handSp vi 13 ; his wife's 
devotion and the queen^s plot, 
vi 14 i hymnsj vi 1$. 

Jains^ i 151 n i, 152, 2Z0 n 3^373 
n 1 ; V 316 n I ; vi 97 n l+ 

J aipur* KIja ofi v 232 j vi iOh - 
ai Earn, brother-in-law of G. ; 
KSnak* Int Ixx ; i iS, 29, 32. I 
Jai Singh, Raja, iv 299, 31S, 322, 
3 ^ 5 - 

Jait Pirana, iv a 93. 

Jaitsari ki WSr* iii 37CX 
Jalandhar city, ii 66 h 
J alandhar* destroyer of gods, v 
73 n 2- 

i aJandhar Doab* ii 66 ; iii 26. 
il-trees i 19 n 2 ^ v 208; vi 367. 
am, god of death, i sol 114. 
amila KJiatun, a wife of Shaikh j 
Fand^ vi 382, j 


Jamna, 1 144 n 1 j iv 14^ 25 ; vi 
198 n 4+ 

Janamcja, i 169 n i. 
Janamsi-kbisj Ptef. xv, iGc-vi ^ 
Int, Lxxviii, Ixkjt - 
IxxKLv, Ixxxvi^ Ijocstvii; i lOi 
24203. 
land* iii 59. 

Jandialam ii 26^+ 

Jaiidiiloa> V 23 ^. 

Janou, sacrificial thread, i 16, 
238 5 iv2i9, 371; V98, J91, 
Jangams*i 133 n 2, 151, 

Japii, i 195 n I ; v 94 w I* 

Japji, Int hi; v 94 n i± 361 
n I, 

Jlti M&l, wattior, iv 92, 96, iqS* 
185, 203, 204, 212* 230. 

Jatis, 193 “ 

Jatpura, Gum at, v 194, 
Ji£wM-ir-i-FarJdif vf 33& n t 360 

n I, 365, 

J aw^amukhi, sacred volcano, ii 

I n r. 

Jaaya, tax on infidelSs ii loS n 1, 
Jebovahp i 9 n 2+ 

Jetha, ssfi R 5 in Dfls, GurUn 

Ehai, Har Go hind's 
captain, iv 4, 12, 24, 30* 32, 
35, i37k iSi, 183, 185. 

Jewels* iii 204 n 2. 

Jewellery, worn by men, v 149 

n Ir 

Jhabal, iv 85 h 

Jhaii* queen of Chitaur, vi 141* 

lililam, iii 8| ; iv 76, 
jin, V 119 n I. 

Jlnd, genealogy of Rajas of* iv 
294 - 

Jit Mal> cousin of G. Gobind 
Singh, V 3 * 43, 45, 46. 

Jito* wife of G+ Gobind Singh, 
V 2 , 55 n I* 59* 60, 95 n I, 

151. 

Jivatama* soul, Int. Ixviii j vi 
17 n T, 

Jodh,. Rm, iv 153, 172* i 3 i* 189, 
198, 190. 

Jodhpur^ Raja of:^ Int. xlviii ; v 

232. 

Jogd i 10 ii I, 53 n 2, 54 n 6, 228 

Ji 2, 352 n 1 ; hi 55 n i, 176 

n J ^ vi n 7, 233 

114; accessories ii 16. 



INDEX 


437 


Jogia, i lO n I, 54 n 6t> n 3, 
34 n If n Zp 157 n r, 162^ 
2*5 n 3j. 274 n 2p 294 p 350 n 2 
and 3, n i arid 2; ii 16, 72 
n I ; iii 94, 4:12 n 2 and ro ; iv 
50 h 54 ^ 2 I 5 i ; Vi 199 u 3 ; 243 
n 5, 255* 262 n I and 4. 

Toga SiDgl^ V 13S. 

fojan, vi 57 n i, 

Jonea's^ Sir William p translation 
oi Citgovind^ vi 7 n i, 

V 79, 

{ iigdwaiti G. NSnak's pocHij i p^n 
Lijh&r Stngh^ v 59p 6op iS4p 

ipSp 

Juna^^arhp vi 55. 


K's, the fiv*. vgg, 

KaaTsSp M&kka fomple, i 5S n 
I 7 S- 

Kahar Bliagat, i ; ili 332 i v 
113, 31Q HI; authorities for 
life or, vi 122 n 3 ; his com- 
mandmentSp 125 ; trouble with 
BraJimaoSp 130; Curts Em- 
peraip 132; cbaj^ges against 
himp vi 132 : hie pMsecution^ 
vi 1^2, 133; fictitious ban¬ 
quet by* vi 1345 meets 
mansj vi 136 ; death at Magst- 
bar* vi 138 I quarrel about his 
corpse* vi 139; his nesurrec- ■_ 
tioup vi 140; hia h^THns, vi 
142; acrostiCp vi 181 : lunar 
days, vx 190 j week days, vi 
193 5 against parda* vi 213; 
slois, 27 S+ 

KabirpanthiSp vi 141. 

Kabitf Gur Das's* Int. Ixxiiip Ixkv 
I xxix 5 iii ^4 n 2. 

Kabulp i L22 j vi 339. i 

Kachh, V 95 p 147 n s* 

Katfii, coat of iaqir* vi 401 n 3. 

KahlOr, Sdja of^ iv 338, 

KaJm ^nghj Sard^ of Nabhfip 
Pref, xxix ; ii 254 n 2 j iii ri 

Q I. 

Kailas, vi 26S n 2* 341 n 2. ; 

KaithaJ family, n 272 n f ^ iv ’ 
J43nl[. : 

Kal agCp i 147, 233 ; n 31 a j iv | 
214. 

Kal har-dp ii ^6* \ 


KUa and Karam Chand* iv 272, 
Kalaptaru* tree^ grovring in 
heaven* iii 204 n t. 

EHe KhSn* iv 198* 207^ 212? 

V 20, 30, 33. 

Kalha* v ipjp 2CKJ. 

Kaliana, Bliai, iii 3. 4, 7. 

Kialjug, i 78 n i; ii„T6. 

I^I^allar, i 73 It 2, 

Kalpa* vi 61 n r. 

Kalsaliar, bard, ii ^6. 

Xalup father of G. Nanak, Int, 
Ikk* Ixxii; i jp 19, 20y 23, 30, 

9;. loi. 135^ 

Kalyati^ iv J07, ncx 
KSm, god of lovCx i 19S ^ S- 
K^makhsha, goddess, iv 354. 
KSindhenu, Li 148, 20411 i, 
Kamriip* i 73 n i ; iv 343p 35T 

n 1. 354. 335 - 

Kanaiya, water-cantictp v 173. 
Kanlwiiya Misal, v 2ifi n i, 

Kans, feg^ja, i 57, 305 114; vi 
4r 11 r* jfi n I, 

Kautlmati* mother of Ram^uj* 
vi 94, 

Kapalmochan, vi 8r 0 i, 

Kaparcs, i 280 n t ; vL 217, 
Kapila, sage, i 89 ti 2 3 ii 262 n i ; 


VI 103- 

Kapiirap v 20&S 225, 

Kir* Hindu sacred lineSp 1 225 n Ip 
K arah Parsh^* I 182 n2; recipe 
for, V LI4, 

Karir tree, iL 42. 

KarmOj ot acts* Ini Ixvi j i ^ 
n 3, 20S n ^ ; manmokh, i 137, 
Kami Bhfimi, iii 1320 i, 

Karm Cliand* son of Chandu, iv 
ro6p III* 1J3, 

Karm Chand of the Marhtj tribOj 
iv 292, 

KarmOp wife of Pritln Chand, Li 
29. 33. 3 < 5 p 39*41- 
Karor* one hundred lakhs* ii 192 


11 3. 

ICart 3 rpiir, Int, Ixxiv; 1 132^ 136, 
iSq ; ii 2, 9 j iii 26 iv 52^ 
151, 231, 232, 

Kaslr* puddings vi 203 n T+ 
Kashi., Bananl 3 + 

K^bmlr., i 163, iii d&; Aurang- 
Kob'a atteirq^s to convert* iv 
369111. 

Kasyapa, i 168 n 2 ; vi 3 1 n i. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


438 

Kasijr* ii 75. 

Kapttu Sii 5 b, Iv 6 ^. 

Katilj V 225. 

KaLilsin, Qazi's daugMev, iv 43 

n I, 45. 43 p 49 ^^^ 9 ^ 

Kaulsar, iv 
Kariira Wfalj i 2. 

Kauravs^ 1 16B n 
Kauri* vi 55 n i. 

KcdSrnath, place of pilgrimage^ 

ii 262 n 2. 

Kesri Chand, Raja ef v 

27, 5 Tp laS, isSh 

Kesgfl-rli, V 97, 171. 

KeBno, Pandit, v 62, 63- 
Khadiir^ i i S2 j ii i, 7^ 11. 

Kliaiis^ V 317 n r. 

KhaJaa, Ptef. xip xiv, KviiSp Jdic; 

iii 10 ; V 93, 95 n r, 96 a 1* 97, 

99 p U;^ 1 S 5 .156, js7p22j, 

235, ? 42 . 344 p 2SQ. 

Khalsa Tract Society, iv 359 n i. 
KhatriSp i 106* gSi ; ii 3a 3 v 94p 
93- 

Kheda ii 133. 

Khfim Singhj Sir Eabap Prei» ^ir 
KheSp shawls v 215. 

Khichari, vi 307 n a. 

Khidrtna ot Muktsar^ v 210, 213* 
214« 

KIiITs vi 42 n 2^ 

IQiivip wife of G-. Argadj ii i. 
KMzrj i 147 n i. 

Khudap i 113 n 2 j iii 3S& n 1 ; 

V 334 - 

Khuid^a^^-T&tmrt^K i 157 n 3 ; I 

iv 64; vi 3&3 n i ; n t, 
33411 ij 391 

Knuram, filnee, iv ^ 6 . 

Khusro^ son oi Janangfr, Int. 

■ xliv^ xlvi ; iii S4, S3. 

KjanL SIhibp i 1 
Kikaf-tree, i i ^3 ii 5 ? ii 9. 

Kinars, iii 229 n 
Kind Beg, iv ii, 34^ 

Kine not eaten by Hindus,, i 39 

Ti 2. 

Kingurip musical instrumentd i 
274 n 2. 

Klratpur, iounding oi, iv 140, 
333, 376, 

Kiriya* i 63 n4. 

Kitcben, establishmeiLt gf Sikii, 
iv 285 j V 313 Ji z. j 

Kitcliener* Lord, Pref. xxix, I 


Knowledge, G. Gobind Singh on^ 
V 113. 

Kokil, i 139 n 2 j vi 43 n 3, ^ 
Kolad, or KoiUtli^ vi 30. 

Kosp vi 37 n T, 

KotvdLlp vi 2^1 Ji 2. 

Kirip 3 i, Udflsi jTiahant^ v 34, 39 

n I* T93. * 

Kripnlp Raja, v 12, 51^ 53. 

Ktipal Chajid^ iv 352 ^ 35B, 36(5, 
367 ; V3, 5, 32, 37. 

Kiishaiip birth oh i 57 n i ; his 
acfiompliahmcnts, i 166 n i ; 
il 53 n7i visits Eidur, ii 331 
n 1; CUTC& hnnchbajck, ii 33S 
n 2 ; colour of* i 2.13 n 5, 215 
ns; ii 93 ± 33 ° n 1 ; vi 

53 n 2 ; dances* ui 4, 401 n 2, 
414 n 2 ; iv 255 ; sports, v 22 ; 
incarnation, v 32D n 2 and 3 ; 
Pundarik, vi 23 ; Dwaraka, vi 
30* 32 n I* 41 n I ; nurse, vi 
j6 n 1 ; family* vi Si n i; 
Kabir on, 124 n i ; yellow- 
robed, vi 302 n 3 i patronizes 
Bal-rnlk, 339 n t ; Farmaivand, 
vi 32 ; teTnple of, at Mailkot* 
vi 97 : Valmik, vi 104. 

Kiiehan AvatSr* v 31Q n4. 
KrishanlCa, play, i 57. 

Krishaji Kaur, wife of G. Har 
sai, iv 325, 329. 

Kshatrip militant castej i 16 n i ; 

vi 104 n 2. 

Knehajj-ip i 74. 

Kukab, i 14^ n i, 

Knmbhak, iii 176 n i. 

Kurkhjttar, Jut. l>£?^iv ; i 47 n 3 ; 
iv 343. 

Korm, V 27 n k 
K urmavatar, i 151 n 4, 

Kusba, sajcred gross, i 142 n 1+ 
Kuwar, bard* v 59. 

Labana^ rescoor □£ G. Teg 
Bahadnr^s body* iv 388. 
Ladha* Bh^* intercedes lor Bal- 
wand and Satta, ii 23. 

Lahina, see Angad, Gnru. 

I-ahore, Int. mx* Jxxvi* Ixxviil, 
IkjCcv* Ixxxvi; i J29* 145 n i ; 
weU at, ii 25S ; G. Arjan^s 
visit to* iii 27, 90p loi ; temple 
bnilt by G. Har Gobind* iv 
55 ^ 





INDEX 


439 


Lakh, one Uundred thousanilp i 
5 n I. 

Laltiiim DSs, G-. K^tnak's son^ t 

29 J ii 4 , 6, 9 , II. 

Lakshmaiip' hmtlier of Ram ( 
CViandar, i=i Si n u 
LakiUmaii Scn^ Kin^ of Bengal, 

Vi 

Lakalimi^ wiie oi Vistinu, i iji 
n 2 E goddess of wealth, i icjS 
n 5 ; iii 94 iL I ; vi lOo. 

Lala Bog*^ Shah Jalia-ri's com- 

itiRinaL'i'p iv i84p iS5h 

Lai Beg, V 1^2 n I. 

Lai Chand, father-in-law of Q. 

Bahidur, iv 13S. ) 

Lai Qiand, confectioner, v 42. . 

Chandp son of Bidhi Chand, 

iv ^ 36 ^ 

La.lo, BhaJ, carpenter, i 43+ 109; 

ii 13- 

Lalo^ Bhai^ bankffT^s aon^ii d6, Si, 
LalUj headman of Khadur^ ii 44. 

unole of G. tiianak, i 2^, 
Lampblack used as ooliytium, vi 
3^5 n T. 

Land revenue^ system oJ colSect- . 

ing, L iS 11 2. } 

Langata^ captain in arniy of 
G. Har Gobind^ iv 4^ 35^ 6$. 
Langar khana^ G, Arjan*Sp i 253 
n 2. 

Languages and dialects used in ■ 
Granth, Pref, v* vi, xv, xxv, 
xKxi, 3CX3di* xxxiii' forbidden, 
i 12 iL n 

Lanka, 1 idS n 5 ; vi ii. 

LawSn, Sikh maxriage Ceremo¬ 
nial ii j ^34 n i. 

Lentilk vi 3^2. 

Leper of BakhbhanjaTii, ii 
guise assumed by Vishobas vi 

Letter, tom, 1 n i j of God^s 
name* vi 3B n i, 157 n 3; vi 
189 n I ; thirty-four* vi 330 
n I. f 

Libations, Hindu, to aneestors, . 

i sOp 129 n I. ! 

Life, iour states of, I 309 n t ; | 
unequal conditions of, i ; | 
four sonrees of* i 4 n 4 j as I 
night, iii 324 n i j transitory, ' 
V 220. I 

Lila Ram DLwan, Pnef. xxs. I 


Limo, vi 2S6 n d. 

Ling, vd ^3 n 4, 

LLngam, v 69 n J ; vi 21, 69 n 2, 
Litemture, sacred, i 12 n x, 205 
n 2 I G. Gobind Singh's trans¬ 
lations of Hindu* v ^3^ 

Lofli, Pathan dynasty, i X19 n 2 h 
L oh^rhp iv 57^ &2 I V 129. 

Loi, Kabit's wife^ vi 207 n 6, 214+ 
Lotus, ol wisdom, i 21 n 4, 265 
n 3 ; hhtli of Brahma, i 300 
It I ; petals, iEi 3G1 n i ; 439 
n I j V 194 n 232 n i, 273 
n. 3* 332 n S' ill heart, vi 243 

n I, 

Love, primal, i 369 n i. 

Loy^iy, of Sikhs, RreL xbt j en¬ 
joined on Sikhs, v 31, 96 n i; 
iv 265* 

Ludhiana, iv 4 n i ; 

Dicitonary^ vi n i n 2, 

Lunar month, il 113 n 13 days, 
vi 190. 

ilacltindar:, Gcraknath^s fatticTp 
i 16G n 3* 

Machonochipp ^fr. A„ F.* vi 17 
n 4 . 

^tadaIl Mohan, vi 417. 

Madhava Nai iii 65+ 

Mldho, sent to Kashmir, jij 6 ;, 
^adhflkari, n 3. 

Madhasiidan, God* i 7 n 2. 
Medina, i 179. 

Madiras, i 75 n 2. 

Madras, Or Dtavidian country^ i 

14;- 

Magyar, vi 137* 215 n 2. 

Sanskrit Epic, i 57 
n I, 144 n I* i 63 116* i6g n i, 
269 n 3 ; iii 54 n 1 ; vi 96 , 
Mahidev, G. DIs's S031* ii 
93. 277 : lit 2, 4 Sh 49- 
MahaUa, Int. h; v 62 n i. 

Mah^ at Muktsar, v 2i4* 
Mahar Mitna* ol Kangars iv 

MaJiarnsbtar„ vi 24 n I* 

Mahipati, autiior of Bhahla Lt- 
idmrita, vi 2, 4, 

Muhri Cband, G* Gobind Singli's 
ooustn, V 2, ^7. 

Malitlb Singh, v 26a n t, 
Mahiirat* i 144 n 4. 

Mai Dn^y Bairagi, ii 93 f 



440 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Maimun 

Maipotre, ii 

Majb ki war^ i 15a n 2, 

MajnOn^B hiUock^ iv 14^ aSh 

Mttkliin Sha}]^ 

3^716,174^ i/ 5 ; vi258. 
Malar ki War^ i 105 a li 
Malay trc*, i n 1. 

Malochh^ i 2*4 n 239. 

Maleo- Kotla^ NaiA^b oi, y 197* 
200. 

MaUagar Singh, v 2a&. 

Malik Bhalfc, i 43 f 
M alu Ehaij ii 7S. 

Maluk iv 34 Jd 
Malu Shall, soldier advised by 
Gum Angad, ii jS. 

MllTva, iv 4 n I, 174 n 3 j battle 
off iV i^i; Sakbs fmnij v 182111. 
Man, teti stages of, i 379 ; coni' 
position oi, i 373 n 1 * 

Man, weight, iv 65 n i j vi jfi, 
295 n 3 . 

Mana, G+ Angad's servant, ii £0. 
M 5 iiak Chanda ii 95* 374. 

Miuok Chaud, G. rfanak^s great 
grandsoUp iv 127. 

M^dara, Olympus, i 131 n 3. 
Mandip l^ja of> iii 4, 7+ 

Manes, i 30, 65 n g ; iis 70 J vi 
54 n 3, 119 n Ih 1^3 n 2, 3SS. 
M^ngat, iii 66 - 

Mango, i 74 n 3 j vi 48 n 3,. 347 
n 3. 

Mani Singh, Bhii, Int, Ixxiv, 
Ixxv^ EdcvIt laudx* Ixzxiv, 
I^cxiivi i iv I n I j V 323 n i, 
226, 341, 260 n I. 

Manj, Bhdip iii 7, 

M^jha countryp O, Arjan's tour 
througlip iii 20; 4? *02 ; v 

311 . 

Mlnjis, ii 151 u 1+ 

Manmukb KanUp perverse acts, i 
137. 

Manohar Das, G. Amar Dis's 
great grandiou, iv 232. 

MoufSa Devip wile of Gum Amar 
D 3 Sp ii 30p 91. 

Mlnsarowar^ iacred lake in Tib- 
batp i 3S7 n 1 ; ii iS, 367 ; vi 
263 fi 

Man Singh, v 187, 189, 216, 235, 
Min Singh, Riija of Jaipur, iv 
350; vi 2. 


Matuions, lunar, iii asS n 2. 
Mansur, HnsaLn, Sflfi, iv 44 n i, 
Manu, law-giver, i S9 n 2, ^ 
Maniiscriipts, destruction of Sildln 
Int. Ixxxih. 

Mardana, minstrel, Int. Ixscxvii; 

i 33, 44 t 5S. S 9 f ^ 5 ^ 7 ^r 94 i 

172, iSi, 

Maxhij, iv 175, 

Marlii, i 56 n 4, 

MSrkand, vi 47 n r. 

Mlrkandeya Purfln, v 5 r n 2, 
2S9 It I. 

Marks, sacrihcial, vi 99, 125^ 
Marriage, i 34^ J iii 71 n 2, 350 ^ 
V 34 nip. iiOp 232, 266 ni- 
vi i 65 n 6 , 17S n 3 ^ 2C^ n 3, 
and 6 , 373 f 

Mini ki Wii-, it 229 n, £35 j iii 
443 HlJ. 

hfarwahi, or Mah 5 .devi, iv 65, 67 
MarwSr, vi 30. 

Mjasanjdsj agents or collectors> ii 
271 ; iii 10 ^ iv 3, 364; v ij, 
84, &6p 106. 

Masha, i 63 n6ji 15 S n r. 
M&snad-i-Ali, nohd-es^ ii 271. 
Massa J^lnghar, defilor oi Har 
Maudar, v 360 n i. 
Matchmakers, Hindu, iii 71 u 
Mathura, bard, li 285^ 

Mathura^ Int, xJvii 3 iii 72 ^ iv 
3CI4 3 V 256; vi 30, 140. 

Mati Dis, martyr, iv 373, 381, 

585+ 

Matta dl Sar^, ii i. 

Matila,i 263 n 3. 

M 5 .ya, i 4 n 2^ 167 n 3 ; iit 139, 
277 n I and 3, 399; iv 144; 
vi 41, 48 n 1, 49, 181 n 197, 
310 n 1, 236 n I and 2^ 263, 2Sr 
n I and 5. 

MasbaM EegimerLta, v 99^ 
Measures, Indian mnsical, i 3 n r. 
Meat forbidden to Vaishnavs, vi 
! 89 n 

MMard Farkieh, Rirja of Nihan, 

VIS. 

Merchant, God as wholesale, i 
60 n 1. 

Meru, rosary bead, i 151 n i, 
235 n I 3 n 39. 

^fetals, eight, i 275 n 1. 
Metast^o,i 175 n 1, 

Mi 5 n, title of respect, i 117 n 2, 



INDEX 


441 


MrSn Khin, Viceroy of JsiJiiTmi, 

V^lr 

MiIn*Kr* vision of, iil 54; iv 

MiSn Mithip pnest, 1 i2j* i2Sk 
JV lItianp devotion ci, Iv* 142. 
Mihrbdn. son oi Prithi Chand^ iii 
2&P 4 Tt 09 ^ iv 36. 

Milk^ iii :5 i 8 n 1; v 300 n 2 e vi 

146 n 2, 

Milkmaids^ vi 10, 210, 

Mill, |fS-H Uiiiity of Religion, Int* 
ixix. 

Milton^s idea of God similar to 
Sikh^ Int. Ixviii. 

Mimes at Gom^s court, v 36 . 
Mina, villsitip ii £^4 ft 2 , 

Mines, i 4 n 5+ 

Mlfp ijjrd* L 117 n 3. 

Mira B 3 ij vi 342. 

Miracle plays^ i 323 n 3 e v 297 
n 3. 

Mixa^, iii jo6 n i. 

Mirdangp iv £44 n, 1; v 337 n 1, 
Miriain> mother of SliaiWi F&rid* 
vi 360, 

MEt Jumlap iv 350. 

Misals, v 2 t 6 n i. 
Mispronunciation of Granth, G. 

Ciibind Binglionp v 106. 
Misdarsp i 35j n i. 

Mithaftiotp i 123. 

Mohan, son of G. Amar X>^p ii 

3D, 74, 143. 

Mohan, Guru mukh^s son, iv 130. 
Mohii, son of G. Amar D^j ii ^Op 
74 h®rt 9 i. 14&. 150 J iii i- 
Mokalp Haja oi Faridkot, vi 
3 & 1 . 

Mokalhat, vi 381+ 
iMokhsh, salvation* m 121 n 
Molasses, vi 134 n 
MoleBii*iortii* Marathi Diciionary, 
vi 23 n I. 

Mone/p Indian* i 12 n 16 n 2, 
25 n5p 45 n I, 223 114 ; ii 114 
n I ; iii 83 n 2 ; iv 19 ft 1* 
Monier Williams* 

HinduisiHt vi 100 n i , 
Monis, v£ 21S n 3. 

Monkeys* trapping ofp \i 173 

Monogamy* G. Xanak oUp i lOO 
n 2 ; V no. 

Monothejsm, Sikhp Pref. J^ix; 


I Int, xx^Xp Iviil* lx* Ixi; 
Gobind Singh on* v 328 n i ; 

vi I, 37, 103 . 

Monthi and seasons* i 138 n j, 
371 n I E lunar* ii 112; iii 
124, 

Moon^ Hindu worship of. in 420; 

supposed sections of* vi 193 n n 
Moore* poet, vi 10 n i. 

Mosaic system* Int» Mi, Ixvi) 
i 09 n 2. 

Muazsdm* or Bahadur ShSli, vso^ 
MiiaztiUp i 345 n T* 

MukSrik Khilji* King of Hihli, vi 




tfe* i 4D n 2. 

Mughsds, 1 iid n i. 

Muhakam Singh, v 92* 135+ I40^ 
I0S. 

Muhammad, Prophet, vi 363, 

3S5- 

Muhammad Azim, Inti xlviii. 

Muhammad bin Tnghlak, Em¬ 
peror, Int. xliii; vi 28. 

Muhammadan conquest of rndia. 
Inti 3cli; of Turkey, Greece, 
and Otranto* Inti 3d ; litera¬ 
ture* i 12 n I ; sects, L 192 n l ; 
books, i 30 ^ n 3. 

Muiar, coin, iii 03 n 2. 

MubaiiiiDp ceremonies at* vi 3S4, 
300 . 

MuJisan Fhnl, histoiiaJid iv 212. 

Mukaliwa, vi ^66 n 6. 

I Mukhlls KMn, general of Shih 
Jahan, iv Si, 92. 

V 1 16* 

Muktsar, v 210, 313. 214- 

Mula,, Kartr* i 122. 

Mulla, i 36. 41, 374 n i. 

Muller* Fhef, xi, sdv; his 

l*Efi'a» Philosf:fphyf i 8 n i, 

Mnlowai* Guru's ^cU, iv 339. 

Mnltin* town, i iBo j ii loo n i ; 
. vi 362, 363^ 367. 

I Muftd^wani^ ii 221 n i j in 641 
I Mimis* i 2ID n I ; ii 16. 
j Muqaddami, i 84 n 3. 
j Murid Bakeh* son of ShUh Jahin, 
I iv 377, 398, ;300. 
i Musalmaus^inatiuctious to, iii i S. 

Music* Fref, xxvi; i 3* 99 n i, 
274112 E V J06, 333. 

Mutasajdjs, clerks* iv 336 n i. 

Musangt Lahore, Lv 35. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


442 

Mythology^ Hindu, vi gi n 56 
Q S7 n 104. 


Kablia^ Rajaofp Prtf,. 3 c>qvi^ xxvn, \ 
XXX ; iv 4tL 1 ; Hija.-'s l;emplcp ] 
iv 187; descent of Elja, iv 
294; Guru's Siwords v 46^ 315 
_ n 2 ; vi 386 n 

^abhaji, Ituthor, vi 2, 95, 344 j. 34 ®' 
N^bp dance, vL 211 d a, 

Nagfna G]>at, v 239, 

Kaenath, temple fiX, vi 30, 23, 
NS-han, ^ja of, v 47 k 
^ 4 ina Devi, iv 3^5 ; v 67, 
N3.tndev, Bba^at* Int, xliii; ii 
333 : iii 332; vi 17 04; Ms 
bitthj vi. i & ; betroth&lp vi tK ; 
his motbjcr'5 complaint* vi 19 1 
his ofiering to idol relusedp vi 
19; becomes dakait, vi 20; 
becomes disciple of Vishoba* 
vi 21; hin repenta4iceH vi 22 j 
advised in a vision to go to 
Pandharpurj vi 23 ; God re¬ 
builds his roof, vi 24 ; visited 
by JauS-bSi* vi 25 ; his devo- 
tioii testedd vi 35 j bis wife and 
the philosopher's stone* vi 26 3 
visit imm Gyandev, vi 27 3 
they maJee pre^rations for a 
tour through India, vi 27 ; , 
visits Dihli, vi 28 3 NSnidev ' 
p^secuted by Emperor* vi 2S ^ 
miracle of reatniinated cow, 
vi 28 nr; visits Bao^ras, 
Piiyag* Gaya^ AjudMa^ Ma- 
thura^ Gokaij Bindraban, 
Dwtiaka, and Kolid^ 

vi 30; the well at Kblad, vi 
30 ; visits Rameshwar, Pai- 
than, Deogirip NSsik* and 
Jun^arhj vi 31-2 ; miracle at 
Audb^ya W-aerLatb, vi 311 
death and burial, vi 34 3 
version of_ Katndev's life in | 
Bhagai Mai, vi j6; Namdev 
said to bo sou of Bamdev^s 
daughter by immaculate con- 
cepttoOT vi haunted welh 

vi 37 3 the banker^s gold, vi 
37; aheged visit to Ehattewil 
and Ghumau, Avhere said to 
be Cremated vi 39. 

Gatha, vi sr. 


Name, i 9 u i ; of godg„ i ijS, 
34S n2i hi 56, 279 n2, 412 
n I ; selection of, vi 1237 
N^naJcj Guru, contemporaries of, 
Iiib xl, ixxiii; rulei'sintimcofp 
Int. xliv- doctrines* Int, ],lxi; 
birthplace, Int Ixx BidhL 
Ctiaud^s life of, Int l?cxxi [ 
Natal month, Int, IxxDtiv ; 
first nine Gurus' 

Int. hi birth of* i i; educa¬ 
tion, i 2 ; Ms Hindi ncrcsgtk, 
i ^ ; Persian acrostic, i 12 ; 
Ki^ra Sahib, i 15 ] marriage, 
i 16; two sons, Sri Chand and 
Lakhmi Das, i 29 i goK to 
Sultanpur* i 32 ; becornes 
accountant in SultSnpur, 1331 
begins Ms mis^on, i 3^ ; visit 
to Saiyidpur, i 43 3 miracle at 
MaJik Bhago's^ i 44; cooikB 
a deer at Kurldietoi'* i 47 j 
pretends to irrigate Ms field at 
I^artlrpur, i 50; journey to 
Bindi'^bon aud Goralchiuata, i 
57* 59; discourse with Sidhs, 
£ 59 ; with Cbatur DSs Pandit, 
i 5 i ; visit to Gaya, I 64; 
parable of the shopkeepers, 
T 6fi; meets with l^ursh^h, i 
73 ; tempted by Sat^, i 78 ; 
returu& to Talwandi, i 95 ; 
heals a leper, i 107; imprisoned 
by Emperor Btbar, i iri ; 
release, 1 I2i ; converta Dutii 
Chand, i lip; his 
Months, i 13a i meeting with 
Bh^ Budha, i 133-4 ; visits 
Ceylon, i i :54 ; Mount Sumer, 
where he again meets Sidha, 
i 170 : trav^a to Makka, i 174 : 
miracle at Makka, 1 173 ; 

viaits Baghd^, i 179 ; Lahina 
(Angad) becomes his disciple^ 
i 183 ; ii 2* 4 J devotio-n of 
Sikhs tested, i 183 j ii 6 j his 
Successor Angad appointed^ i 
187 ; ii 9 j death, i 190 ; state 
of religion before his advent, 
i ipT ; Japji, i 195 ; Kahiras, 
i 250 ; Miuia, i 259; Asa Id 
War, i 2rS ; defence of women, 
i 244 n 2 ; satire on Hindi 
sects* i 355 i moral command¬ 
ments* i 373; instructions at 


INDEX 


443 


4 

Niirtdev — 

Bai&akM Fair, i ; daily 

g raotice oi, il 5 j meeting with 
ndhan SMi^ iv 140, 
WInalcainata (Pilibhft), i 59 
n I ; iv^Q, $2, 54. 

Niinaki, sister of G+ NSnakp Int. 
] 3 : 3 C; 1 J 8. 

Nanaki^ wife of G. Har Gobindp 
aii 77 j iv 50, 67 p 68, 70. 233, 
331 p 361, 3^4. 

Niin^ih rarkn$K Int. Ixxvip 
Ixxviii^ Ixxxiv, 

Naxid Chand, v 2, 3, ts, 24, 29^ 
36, 4 ii 44 . 37, 89. 

FTander, v 220, 230, 23S, 

Kand Lai, Bha.ip v 79 n i, 102, 

104 n 2 r 

ISTaiildLiia {Talivandi), Int. Ixxti, 
bncxv s i 2, 18, 

N^ad, 9 on <ft Br 5 .hma, i 215 n ? ; 

VI 318 n 4, 

Narain Das, iii 76* 

^^TarSyaiip ai 339 ii t ; v 233, 27 

tl 2^ 

Narbada, river^ vi 13^, 

Narsi BSinanii temple a^ vi iS. 
Naj^inli, iii 415. 

Nasihat Kama* i 12S. 
Nasir^ukDin^ Emperor^ vi 373 
n I. 

Na.th^ superior of Jogis^ i 165 n 4. 
Nauhar^ v 22 l 5 , 227. 

Kau Nidhip i i^o n 2. 

Necklaoe of sweet basil,, i 61 
n 4 ; vi 93 n 2 ; of deocarpus 
berries, vi 93 n a. 

Nectar, of the NamCs n 53 n j, 
121 n 1 ; tank of, ii 2^7 ; 
baptismal water, v 9g n i j 
five neotars emimerated, vi 
156 n 5. 

Nicholson, General Sir Johu, 
Pref. xviii, 

Nigtira, vi 72 ( 5 . 

Nihali, J| 12. 

Nihangs, iii no n a- 
Kijabat Khan* ofl&ter, v 20^ 31^ 
40* 42* 43. 

NUgSus* V 303 n 2. 

Nim, vi 247 HI. 

Nlina, Kabir's foster mother, vi 

J33- 

Niraiikar* God^ Sikli conception 
of, Int, bdiL 


I Nir^n sargun, hi 117 n 2, 

I Nirjala Ikadashi, or Nimiini, iv 
(56. 

. Nirmoh, V 13S. 

I FTlru* Kabir's foster father, vi 
I 123, 341 114. 

Nirvan, Inti ixiv, liv; exempli- 
f fioatiDn of^ tntr l\v ; vi 17 ti 1, 

Niwali, Jog feat, i 378 n i. 
j Noises in bead, 1 74 n 5 ; iii 402 
■ n2. 

I^{im-di^-gucr¥£, Gum'S, Inf, li ; 
J J3 n I i of pootg^ ip n 3. 

Ni'r Jahdn, Emprws, Tnt. xUv, 
xlv ; ivji. 

I Nurshaii, qaeen of KSinrQp, i 7 j. 

Op symbol of God, i 64 o 2. 

Oam, vi 16 n 3, 243 n 1, 

Oamkaip Eamkali* i 63, 

1 Oath^ V 202. 

Obsequies, ii 150* 153 m 5 Sikh, 
iv 2. 

Observances, Sakh* religious and 
secular, iv 252, 

Ocean, world compared to, i G 
n I : of fire, i 63 n 3 ; terrible, 
ii 186 ; vi 143 n 4 ; God's sbip^ 
vi 17a n a ; vi 385 n 3. 

Offerings* burntn i 2Z n 3 ; tliir- 
teen Hindu, to manes of 
ancestors, iv 2^0 n 4. 

Oil Press, Indian, i 123 n a. 

Omens, futility cf, iv 249; vi 
176 n a. 

Omnipresence oi God, i 265. 

Ontology,, Int. Ixviii. 

, Ordinances of KMlsa, v 93^ py. 

; Organs of aetian and p^eptioc* 

I i 159 n3; 32on; iii 401 n 3, 
4, and 5 5 vi 149 n i, 169 n 2* 

Oriental Congress at Rome, pro- 
tendings of Pref. xxvii, xxviii. 

Ornajnents worn by men* v 149 
n I. 

Ouranos, Int. lviii« 

Ovid* vi lon i i 

Oxen* vi 165* jbfi, 215. 

Padama.vatij wife of Jaidev, vj 
6, 13, 14 ^ 

Pahar, vi 2l3 n 400 n i. 

Palioa* place of plgrimaffC, ii lofj. 

Paiiul, baptis^m, int. Ixxvii s iii 
71 n 2 ; V 93, 2G3P 


* 



444 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Pal, i iSS n I, 

E^inda Khan, tv 52, 57, 66, S 3 , 
(jS, 123 , 142, 1^2, tg^y 
19s, 202, 20J* 203 , 209. 
Palnda ithEln, Muhammadatt 
General, v 1^4. 

Pait^s, classifiedn vi 73 n i. 

Patva, Bli 3 i, iii 3, 55. 

Paisa, iiiz I iii 67 ; iv 329, 385, 
P 3 .k Pattan, i ^4+ iDi t vi 366; 

rflason for name, vl 367 ^ 

P^kl, 1161; Iv 223 n 1. 

Palma christl plant, vi 325 n 5. 
Palmyra palni;, vi .330 113; 

leaves, vi 320 n 4^ 

Paricb, L 302 n 3+ 

Pinch Annit, vi 8s n, 
Pfl«tA3r(lir£t crf Kii'ad* i 326 n i. 
Pinch Mukti, v 97^ 

Panch Piyare, v 96+ 

Pinch Sabd, i 99 n i, 
Pandhaipur, vi 23* 27, 33. 
Pandits, 14^1; ii 134 j iii 50 ; 

vi 189 112, 314 a 3. 

Panipat* j 52 a 3+ 

Panitb* land of five rivers, Pref, 
xiftv; capital oft Int. hdx j 
(Official language* Pref. xxiv, 
sesv, 

Panjabi* importance oi languagej 
PreL XXIV, 

Panjab Kaur* wife of Ram Kni, 

V 23 , So. 

Panja Sanib, i 172. 

Panjokhara, iv 32O. 

Pantheism, Inti Ixii ; claims of 
Vedantists, 103 n 2 j vi 27^ 99, 

Pfl-r^sA, V 1 n I. 

Papias on Christian teltgion, Int 
boexvii n. 

PapCTi vi 320 n 4-. 

ParamhatJR, CK|iiahation of, ii i 3 . 
Param Singh, v 226, 

Parisar* e/, i la n ir 

Paras Rdm, i n 2, 

Pfljrbati* consort ot Shiv^ t 166 
u 6 ^ ill 213 n I ; iv 132 n 1 ; 
vi sB n 2, 334 n 2^ 

Parbs, iv 254. 

Parda* Pipa attempts to abolish, 
vi nlS, 

PEirgiter* translator of Markan- 
deya Pura.n* v 61 0 2, 

Pariah, iii 414 n r+ 

Paimanand* vi 83 ^ 34 n r. 


E^rniSrtaman Supreme Being* Tnt, 
Ixviii* 

Pi.To, Bhai, ii i 3 ; 66, 77, ^9^ Si+ 
PaiT^ and siminaJ-trco, vi 65 n 2, 
Partridge and hawk, partible* v 
216. 

Pasari, vi 75 It 1* 

Passions, five evil, i 13 n t, 54 
114* 70 n2, 2S6 n I ; ti 243 ; 

iii 109 0 4 t 309 3a I, 32S n i ; 
vi 89 n 2, 140 n I, T54 n 2, 185 
ri 2, 206 n T, 227 n u 

PatSJ, Hindu hell, v 2S4 n 
PatSlpuri, iv 236. 

Pmiianjali, ApkoristKs 0/* i to n r, 
PatSshi, sweetmeat* v 95. 
PathSn sbldieTs of G+ Gobind 
Singh* V 20, 30, 40. 

Singh Sabha of* Pref, 
xxi ; iv 4 n I, 295. 

Patna, birthplace of G. Gobind 
Singli* PreL xii ^ iv 34^, 337 j 

V 3^35. 

Patti* se£ TabletSr 
Panlj St.* Int. Ixlv* Ixviii m, 
Ixxx nn 

Pamita, battle of^ v 34, 35. 

Panri, L 105 n 2, 31& n i. 
Pavilion* bridal, vi 209 n 5. 
Payments of land revenue in 
kind* Vi 351 n r. 

Peacock* home of, vi 330 n 2. 
PenanceSj Hindu, i 13^, 358 n i ; 

V 272. 

Pens scattered in Maiwa district* 

V 223. 

Pevip^us of the EryfArflatt Sea^ 

V 236. 

Peiaiaii wheel, ii id n i, 252 n r ; 

langnap, i tIi 12 n u 
Pheru, Bhai* iv 376 ; v 86- 
Phem, G. Angad's father, ii r, 
PhUanthropy, Gur DSs on*iv 256+ 
Philosopher's stone, ii 30T* 345 ; 
vi 26, 3T7. 

Philosophy, systems of Hindn^ 
Int. hx, lx ; i S n Ih 
P hhl* ancestor of the Phfilkiia 
Chiefs^ iv 394. 

Pig as scavenger* vi 300 n3. 
Pilgrimages reprobated bv 
Gurus, Preh xx, K?d, xxhi"; 
Hindu places of, i 144 n 1 : ii 
79 n r 3 futility of* iv 257 ; 

iv 398 n 1 ; of Itimdev, vi 37, 





INDEX 


445 


'^pilgrims. Census of Silth at Har- i 

Prcf. xxi n. 

Pilibhitj i 59^ 

Rnd, 9 i pindap i 65 n 2, 
Hpa^Bhagat, Vi 57 n ZpiogpVi 111; 
visit to H^jnS^tiandp vi 112; bc- 
cam-es. iajqlr, vi 113; pUgfim- 
ag;e to Dwfljaka, vi 113 ; liie 
fsutMul ivife Slta^ 1^3 ? visit 
to Tocla,vi 115 j Sar Sen visits 
him, vi 116; against parda, 
vi 116; Secures pardon for a 
cow-killerp vi 118 ; his hymn, 
vi 119. 

Plpal-treep Gnm ^raTiak''3t i S9 
n 2 ; G. Gobdnd Sinsh's, v 209. 
Kr, i 169 u 2 j U 350 n I i vi 
306 n 3. 

Pi'&aSp manfiSp vi 54 n 2^ 

PlanetSp seven ancientp ui 303 
n 2 ; 269 n i. 

Plants used in ’worship, i n 4, 
13s n Ip 307 n 2. 

Pockets, Hindu substitutes for, \ 
iii 279 a 3 ; ’vi aSi n 6, 

Poetry* mn* themes of Oriental, 

V idi n T+ 

Pollution, Hindo+ i 93 ; of articles 
of ’worship^ vi 327 u 4. 
Polyandry, vi 104 n i. 

Polygamy of Gurns^ reason for, 

iii 77 n I. 

Pompeii, Lingam in, v 69 u 1. 
Postinp iv 319., 

Posture, dauto, i 305 n i, 

Pothohir, InL 
Poushldn, vi 10 n i. 

Poverty, iCablr on, vi 260 n 4. 
PrahlSdp saint, ii 114, 160; vi 
67 n I, i2fi n 6p 271 u 2. 

Prakrit^ iii 63, 434 n in 

of <5. NdtUihj 1 15^ t 
iii 53, n r. 

Prayers^ fvvo Mo&ftlmflu, 1 39 n 5 ^ 
of unljonl thUdd vi 302 n 2. 
Prema, lame Sikh, it 136. 

Prithi Chand, son of Gr Pam ■ 
Das, ii 92* 279,281; iii 1,2, 17, 
^ sa, 3 ^* 39 ^ 4ij 415,48^81^85. 
Prifjii Chand^ R&ja of Dadh-wfil* 

Pnth-wi Raj, Int, xli ; vx 359 1- 

Priyag, ALababad. 

Prohibitions of KliU&a, v 
Promises^ sanctity of* v 204,, 


Prophecies^ MQskJXid iv 196 n; 

of Gurus, iv 3S1 j v 107- 
Psyche, 1603. 

Puna, V 236. 

Punun and Sassi, sto^ of, v 221. 
Purak, Jog e^ercise^ hi 17b n i. 
Furans^ Pref ^ v 3 i 28 n 4, 207 n 2; 

iii 402 3 vi36, 324 tl i. 

Pud, G. Ndnak's visit to* i 3 J* 
Purity cf Sikh religron^ Pfe£+ Kji^ 
xsdii^ 

Poshkar, v 227. 

Qalandar, a Muhatnmadan an- 
_choret, i 38 u 3. 

Qaii's claim against G, Har 
Gobmd> iv 42 j complaint to 
Emperor^ iv 4d. 

Qualities, three, i 89 n 3 ; it 47^ 
198 n I i iii 172 n 2 ; tbirty- 
two, iii 278 n 2 3 ’vi 17 n 2, loi 
n 6 ; fi’ve forming the garden 
of the world, vf 30 n i. 

Qineen, insane, and G. Amar D^, 
ii 62. 

ooit, V 261 n 3. 

ur^p Int, liii, bixviii il 3 i 39 
n 3, 125 n u i;8 n 3 s 206 n 2 ; 
sclecGng name in, vi 123. 
Qrutfa-nl-Din Aibakj Emperor^ 
Int. xlii. 

•Qutub-Tal-Din Bakhtiyar TJsht* yi 
359 n U 3<55 p 8^ n 373 * 

EabSh, or Fobeck, 1 33 n i. 
Radha, or Radbika, v 22 j vi 8, 
iq, 347 n I. 

Rafazis^ v 277 n 2* 

Raghnra] Sinhp MaMtSja and 
poet, vi fl, 4d 95 n 1* 121 n i. 

Mala, 11105. 

Rags, musical mea^iureSd PteL 
xxvi ; i 3 n I; V 333. 

Rahim, i 176 ; iv 370, 

RatuTS^, i 250 n i. 

Rahu, deman^ i 283 n I ; iii 305 

rt 2 h 

R5i Jodh, iv 180, J8d. 

Raipur, ^ni of, v 4S- 
Raja Earn of A5flam,iv 3573 v 4. 
R^indar Siuffh, Maliaraja of 
PatiSla, Prefl sex’™. 

Raj jog, i 228 n 2. 

Eak^b Ganj, iv 389. 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


446 

iv ; letters of name, vi 
3S n 1, 157 n 307 “ 5 - 

Rama, O , Amar Dae '3 son-in- 
law* ii J42. 

Kfljiianaad Bhagat, vi 95. 

Rdm Avat^j translation of, v 67, 
310 n 3. 

RaniSnujj 

R 5 .mSnu|is, marks of, vi g^. 

Rimayan, epic poem, i n 3 . 

Ram Cliandar, fcirt^; of Ajndliia, 
Int. l?nnni j i 40 n 4 j 113 n i, 
j 68 n 3, 216 n j, 305 n 2, 382 ; 
ii 30, 31 n I lii 50; iv 15S ; 
V 275 n I, 320 D 3 ; vi 24 n 2, 
30, 31, 3S. 4D 5^ 

n 3 , 61 115* Si ni, loOj 3 dj* 
30S n 1+ 

Ra.m rSs (Jetha)^ Guin, birth* 
ii BS j visit to G. Amar D^, ii 
89 i becomes hia SikK li Sg, 
married to Bibi Bhlni, ii 91 ; 
his sons Pfithi Chand, MaM- 
dev* ajid Ajjaji born* ii 92* 
9j ; receives oeckJace from G. 
Amar ii loi ; deputed to 
Akbar^ ii 106 ( expounds faith 
of Sikhs* ii 107 ; sent to build 
Santcikhsar, ii 141; testod by 
G. Amar Dis, ii 343 j in¬ 
stalled as Gnru, ii 14J&; visit 
of Sri Cband, ii 257 ; tank 
Cominenced at Amritsar, ii 
2SS; viats I-fthore, h ; 
Arjao. sent to Lahore, ii 277 ; 
deceptiDn of Prithi Chand, ii 
279 j Arjan sent for and ap¬ 
pointed the Gum's successor, 
ii 2S:; Guru Rim Das's death 
at Goindwil, i* 3S4 j hymns^ 
ii 2Se. 

Eamd^pur fAmritsar), u 276 n L 

KAmkali, iii B4 n r. 

Elmo, sister of Damodari, iv 51, 

Ram son of G, Har Rai, Int. 
lii^ iv 307* 309, j 10, 3ii,3i3> 
^15.316, 338; V 17* iB, £0, 35, 
G, Ariaii founds^ Jii 6 (X 

RSm Singh, Raja of Jaipur, iv 
34e 11 I* 35S. j6o; v ^S. 

Ramz^, iti 422 n 1 ; vi an n j, 
361, 3%- 

Raabir Singh, Raja of Jind, Pi-ef. 
sixvii. 


Ranjits G, Gobind Singh's drum 
V d- 

Ranjit Singh, MaJaaraj^ luL 
IxxxiiijH Ixxxiv ; iii 35 u i ; v 

245 n I, 246 ; vi 39. 

Ranjit Singh, SardSr of Chi- 
chararili, Pref. xxvii. 
Rankhambh Kala, princess, v 69. 
i^iLs Mandal, dance, v 22. 

Ratan Chand* iv 105* in, 113, 
Ratti* i 58 n 1 j seed or weight, v 

246 n 2. 

Ray DIs, Rliagat, ii33a; iii^js; 

vi IPS, i 4 rt 3 i> 5 , 31S, 321, 

Ravi, river* i loi, 159, 191* 
RAwan, King of Ceylon, i 305 
n 2 ; V 290 n 5 ; vi 3* 24 n 3, 
4D n 2* 207 n 3 and 4. 

Real Thing, vi 79 n 3 , 4O2 n 2. 
Refty, Lord, Prefi 
Rcciak, lii jjd n L 
Rjod powder* i 65 n 7* 297 n i ; 
robe, ii 226 n i ; jacksti iit 
291 nii colour* iii 319 ni, 
369 n I j leadj vi 37B n 2, 
Regions of earth* nine, i 30 11 i. 
R^hos at KIbha* v 224 n i ; 

Shaikh Farld'Sd vi 363. 
ReUgioiis, books of other, Ptef. 
V; causes for new, !nt. Iv ; 
with and without State sup¬ 
port, Iv; religious systems* ii 
190; vi 310. 

R^igim of Hindus j vi 104 n 3, 
n L 

Religious observances, Sikh* i 83 
n 5* ij6> t8i ; iv 555. 

Renan, Tnt. Uv. 

Repetition of Kanie* i 9 n 2, 49, 
147 ; vi 40 n 2, 6 q, 117, 124 
Reward of good actions, vi 194 
n r. 

Rice* Mr, L,, vi 93 n 3, 

Ridh Sidii* v 333 n i. 

Rikhis, i 207 n 2, 211 n i ; ii 
L09. 

Ripudaman Singh, TJie Honor¬ 
able Tikka siMb of Kabha* 
PteL xxvi, 

1^0*, Sir Thomas, English Am¬ 
bassador, Int. xlv. 

Rome, Oriental Congress at, Pref, 
xxvii, xstviii. 

Rosaries, i 51, 61 i iv 3B ; v 310 
n I i vl 93 n 3^ 3S9. 





INDEX 447 


¥ Rossetti on transmigration^ lnt. 
Ixvii. 

Ruhela, iv iqi+ 

Rtjp 0hand, iv 149, 150 

n ip J53, 172, 

Rupees i 6j n 6 j v 23^. 


Sachansachp Bhal> ii 62. 

Sacli Kliand, Int ; 

5. I2Sn 223, ^55. 
Sacrinoes, i 2S n 3; vi S9 n 
311 il3p 347 p 315 112. 

Saciifcial markup mateiiali? foFp 
Intr Iviii, Use; i 135, 163 ; 
ii II* 43 ; vi 99, 13 S, 17B a 3, 
2S^ n 6. 

Sadd, hymn, ii 151 j author of, 
iv 143. 

Sadliaura, v a39> £47. 

Sadhik, i 41 n 4 ; vi 358+ 

Sadhnap Etagaip iv 265 ; vi 33, 
B4, S5 j. 87 n 2. 

Sadhn, holy man, iii ; iv 5. 
Sadhn, son of Sada^ iv 147, 148, 
149, 153. 172. 

SSdhuj married to Bibi Vlro, iv 
63 , 94p 144. 

Safflower, i 3d ni, 176; hi 173 
n I." 

Sahara, King of Ajudliia, ii 262 
n 

Sahaj jog, i 228 n 2. 

Sah 3 *ri Mai, coasin of Amat 
Dasp ii 276. 

Sahaskriti sloks, iii 29 n 2, 6^, 
430 n I. 

Sahibp meaninE of, Pref. vi n I. 
Sahib Chandp v 40, 135, 

S^hib Kaufb wife of G. Gobin-d 
, Singlip V l4h J44h 319* 231, 
240p 254. 

Salhj^ i 77 n 5. 

Sabljdharlp Intr lii. 

Saido, Bhai^i 147^ 153, 156; ii 13+ 
Saif-ul-Din, friend of G, Teg 
Bahadur, iv 373- 
saiap tSlfcagat, ii iS ; vi j, 105 ; 
life ofp I2Q, 

Sain husband of Eimo, iv 
. 3 ip 55^ 151- 

Saints^ iii 292 n i ; iv 400 n K 
Saiyad Beg, general, v 153, 154, 

Saiyid KhSn^ y 163* 


Saiyidpur* In-L xh v; i 43,. 

lilt ii4p iiS, 119. 

Sajjan, Shaikh, i 45, 46 n 1* 47^ 
Sai^t^ iii 213 Ti 
Sakhis, v 299 n l- _ _ 

SakM Sarwar, Pir, iii 7, 419 ; iv 
147 n 1* 339^ 

Sit tree, v 131 n 

Sidagram, sacred stone, i 61 n 3 ; 
lu 4, 30j 51^ 52 n 1 and 2 ; v 
75, 7!^ n 2 ; vi 34. 

SMavlhana, vi 23* g6^ 

Salim Shll^* vi 29 n 3. 

Sato, Bhai, iii 3, 20, ^3 ; iv 12. 
Salvation, means oi,, ii 134; v 
rid, 123 j by repetition of 
hfame, vi 40 n 2 ; four degrees 
oi, vi 250 n 1 I time for^ vi 
^ i_i n 2. 

Samana, sacked by Banda^ v 247, 
Simaii Buij, tower, iv 
Samrarmati* Queen* v dS, 

Sambat era, Int. Ixjdx, Ixxxiv j i 

110 n i+ 

Sampats^ six* vi 272 n 6. 

Sanlit* i 25 n S- 
Sanlth, vi 67 n 3. 

Sanctuary, Hindu* ii 344 n 2. 
Sanda, \'i67 n i, 12S n 7. 

Sandal, vi 76 n i ; wood, vi 305 
ti 2 ; tree, vi 327 n 4 ; used in 
■wo^p. vi 233 

Sandali, son o£*ltup Chand* iv 
294. 

Sandhia, v 9 n 2. 

Sandila, vi 417. 

Sangan Rana, vi 352. 

Sangat Sahib at Rander, v 240, 
Sangatia envoyd v 57, 

Sango Shlh, cousin of O, Gobind 
Si&gh, V 2, 3, 36, 43. 

Sangraan* memorial of victory, 
iv 93 - 

San&krit^ Int. 1 ; burning of 
Sanskrit library at Bihtr, Int. 
jdii; literature* ii iso n i, 
134; letters, iii i6S n. j ; 
tongncp iv 133. 

Sant Das, sou of Jiwau, iv 298^ 
Santokhsar^ founding of, ii I41 ; 

111 2. 

Santokh Singh, Bbai, poet (au¬ 
thor oi Parhd^h), Int. 

Loivi^ btJtviJ* Bcxviii ; ii 24 n t j 
iv iSo f V i n T* 200* 244 n i. 



THE SIKH RELIGION 


448 

Sant Singh oi Kapiirthala^ BhBi, 
PfeL jc; Eat. Ixxvi. 

Sanyasip i 41 n i, 58 n 3, io6_, 141 
HI; tiot at Goviiiiiwal^ li 6g ; 
iv sdij 2SS ; ri J04 ns, 282 
n Ip 

S3j™gj, pied India cudsdOp i 3 5 
n 6. 

Saraswatip river, i 144 n 1; u lop. 
Saiaswati, goddesa, i i^jS n 6, 
Saiavdgi?" Temple, i lioj v 
364 n I. 

Sarhloh, V 31^ n I. 

SardOl Sin^p Gyaai? Pref, iTt, 
XKX ; ii 2411 Id 

Sarhind, V 139, i&S> ipjt 200, 201, 

353, 347* 

Saimadp iv 303. 

Sas i lOT n i. 

Sat, Golden Age, i 4 n 6 j Iv 99 ; 

vi 15 n r. 

SatbharM, it 7. 

Satip i 165 n 3 : iii 91 ; v 277 
n I f vi 14 j tCatiir on, vi 153, 
178 n 3 * 

Sat Karttr, i 49, 

Satluj, rivefi i n 5 ; ii 66^ 109 ; 

iv 368 V 3* 176; vi 407 a L. 
Satn^ja^ vi 111 n 2. 

Sat N 5 jn, true name, i I38d 
SatnSmiSj Int. xlvli, ^Iviii. 
Satognnp ii 198 n id 
Sat Sangatp i 278^ 

Sat Sri AkSlp war cry, v 28. 
Satta* mn^cian, ii 16, 21, 23, 24 

fl I, S153 j iii 61. 

Saw at BanaiaSp 1 274 n 
Sawaiy^ of G. Gkihind Singh* liit 
Iii; of the bard Mattiura, iii 
72 n 2 ; read at baptism^ v 26$. 
Sawnn, Hindi moathp ii 55 n 3 ; 
id 109 n I* 

Siwan Jialh iieptew of G. Amar 
Das, ii 60* dip 62. 

Sctcncesj fourteen Hindip i 63; 
V 269 n I, 

Seasons, Endian^ i 138 n 1 ; G, 
Arjan's, iii 407, 

Second sight of Eiiii Budba, ii 

ScotaneSd vx 167. 

Sects, four l^duliamrnadan* i 193 
u I ; Hindu* vi 9Sp lou 
Seli* faqlr^a necklace, iv 3* 

Senses* fivCp vi 164 114. 


S&pulture, Indian, i 60 n 4 , 
n I, I r^ n 18 Ip T 83 n 2 , 379 
n 2 , 348 p 349 It 3 ; iii 302 n 2 p 
285 n I ; Sikh* V 98 , 

Ser* weighty iii 282 n i ; vi 38p 
169 n 5. 

Serpent* i 305 n 3 ; tortured by 
worms, iv tSS* 282 j v 205 n i 5 
vi 2416 n 4 p 290 n i ; 294 n 5 , 
305 n2* 3^7 114- 
Services* Stklij i i3dp iMi j menial, 
vi 13 n I. 

SewS^pantbis, v 174+ 
Shahab-ul-l^in Ghori, lut^ ^li. 
Shah. Jalliu, Km-peror* iv 36, 49 
nip 76. 138* I5d, 17$; war 
with Gh Har Gobind, 183 ; 
soUtited by Painda Khdn* 195, 
19S ; Shah Jaban's sons* 377 ; 

to G. Har Rai, 278 j. his 
sons^ rebellion, 399 : vi 3, 
Sliabzada, son of Jtodiua^ i 182. 
Shaikhs, i 40 n i, 72 n 3 h 
S hakar Ganj, vi 358* 361, 38 3> 
Shaktis, iif 313 n t+ 
Shams'ul-Dlrt, Emperor^ i 52 n 3 ; 
vi 3156 n I, 373. 

Shankar Acharya* v 118 n 2 ; vi 

94 . 

Shankar Di^. Sardar, Pref. xxx. 
Sharaf, Shaikh* i 53 n 3. 

Shariat, i tj n s. 

ShS^ars* la-ei. v j i 3 n i ; iii 
2S0J11^330,402; -vi 74 n Ip 320. 
Shastar Nam Malap Int. Iii; v 83. 
Sheldrake* mddy* i 371 n 1. 

Shells to summon worshippers* vi 
298 n I, 

Sher Afghan Khin, iv 369. 

Sher Shah, conqueror of Btng 5 j, 
ii rp. 

Sher Singh> Mahirija, iv i n 
ShMhnag, hydra-headed: serpent, 
ii 34S n Iiii 200 n i; v 270 
jt a j vi 74 n 2, 94. 

%hiSh MnliammadajiSp v 152 n i. 
Shiklr Ghat, v 230. 

Shlshom tree, ii 365 ; iii 2 n 2. 
Shiv* godp Int. xli, Ivii, lix ; i 40 
n3, rjS, 135 n i* 166 n 6, 199 
n I ; 11 109* 262 n 2 ; iii 6 n 1, 
203 nl, 432 n 3 ; v 69 n lx 
262 n 3* 2S4 n 3 j vi i8p 30 p 57 
n 2p n 2* 93 n 2, 94, 138 n 3, 
258 n I* 34 i_n 2i 


INDEX 


« SMvn^bhp Kin^ ot Ceylon* i 146^ 

ShivrMp i 155 n i. 

Shc^pScepers^ parable of the, i 63- 
Shrldh, 1 15^ R r, 341 ; vi 163. 
Shukdev li ^ r n i. 

Sialkot^ i J 22 , 

Sidh Goshf, i 171, 

Sidliis^ tightp V 2^^ R 2, 31& n i> 
Sidhs, i4i n 4, 59, 171, 

Sikandar KhSn Lodip EmperoTp 
_ lut. jcliv + V 1L5 i vi 131, 

developRientp Tat. bdv ; 
in danger^ Int, }vi, Ivii ; ritual 
ofp iii 5 5 ; principM oip v ^jp 
95 p rid. 

SfkJi rTe3ig;ionp general ignoratite 
of, l^cfh V, vfip x!c; iik advan¬ 
tages to tfcie State, viip xviiip 
3™v s merits of miUtary g^ar- 
diaiM of, xixj XXV ; catLobcilT 
of, ^:^rvd ; authenticity of^ 
lii-Hii ; OfigiRfllityp liv j two 
dhisions of, lii 3 not aaceticp 
IxEv- rules of* i ijdl* aiyn 3 ; ii 
137; superiorityof, iv 271*233. 

ignorance of their re- 
li^on, Prof, xx; feversioR to 
fTinduisnip XKiii ; Ii\t- Ivi, 
Ivik; rules and observances, 
iii dy; Sikhs and Hindus* ui 
42a n 3 ; -vi 4J0, 

Sikb war-cry* v 97, 100. 

Sikh writings, rlfmculty of, Fref+ 
vi, viup xxxiii. 

SLmmal tree* i 4 j 6 n 3 and 4 ; vi 
66 n z, 

Simiitis, i 117 n 4 ^ v 300 n 1 ; 

vi_iOT, T56. 

Sindur* vi 17 S n 2, 

Singhs* Int. lii ; W95, 

Singh Sabha, letter to the author* 
Prcf. xiii. 

Singing, Shaikh Fand on, vi i&Or 
Sins, deadly^ i 13 n 236 ti l i 

iii 432 ; see Passions^ 

vi 334 n 4. 
Sirmaur* £Aja of, v 
Sita, wife of Chandar, i 40 
n 4, i63 * 2i 6 n 3* 505 n 2^ 3S2 j 

iv i 5 Sh 

Sltala Devip goddess of Bmall-poa:* 
iii 43 ; i4 57 n 3. 
Siyar-ul-Mutaakharln, iv392 n i; 
V333. 

G 


449 

' SkuUg Fsudd's slok written on 
seeing, vi 396 ft i. 

Slok* i 105 no; ii 4(S; iii 1^3. 
Small-pcKc, iii 43 > Iv 337. 

Snakes, iv iS@, 282 ; v 305 n l ; 
vi S94 n 5, 

Sodar, 1136* 230 n 2. 

Sodliis, iii 55 ; iv 331 , 337, 33S. 
SohaUp vi 26B+ 

Sokratesp Int, iiii, liv, Ixvii* Isis. 
Solaha, i 164 n 3. 

Sofldhs. ICh^* Emperor^B statde- 
keeper, iv 159, 170* 

So Piinikh* 1 254. 

Sonlp Int. Ixv-lxix j i 19S n 
272 n It 2S4 n 31* n 3 j ii 
173 n T ; fii ±Ss ns; iv 123* 
i 5 r j vl 17 n I* 45 n 3p i^S, 
159 n I p 169 n 4, isd n 3 p ig 6 
^ 3 ^ * 35 ^ 4^4 a 1. 

Sound, unbeaten, i 274 n 3 ; iii 
zde, 402 ; vi 90 u g. 

Species, animal, vi 4s n i. 

Spell of astlvsttioup f^yatn, 1 166 
n 237 n I j ii 108 ; vi 38 n I; 
Vishnu's farewell* vi J3S n 3, 
234. 

I Sj^Uingp Indian, Fref, xxxii. 

Sri Chandi G, Nanak's eon, Int* 

! lii, bexx ; i 2p j ii 4 p 6* 9* i r* 
237; ill 27 j Lv L2S* 130, 388+ 
Sri Kar GohindpuTp iv 104. n i* 
i03> JiS, 

Srinagar in Gaxhwtl, v S* 16. 
Srinagar in K^hmir* i 163 ; iv 
6ip 63. 

Srirang* vi 5 ^ a i, 

Sri sect, vi lOi, f02H 
Stages of life, four of t^rice-bom 
Hindus, vi 104 n 2. 

Standing or the head, penance of. 
30 S n 1* 

Stars, VEuhammadan conceptioR 
of, vL 155 n 4. 

Statius, Int. Ivili. 

Steel omamentfl, v 149 n i. 
Stones, bridge of, vi 40 n 2* 45 
n I I gods, iii 5 ; vi 33, 145^^ 4- 
Strife {Greek Eria) iv 70. 

Strivers, i 41 n4, 

Sudars, i 16 n i> 371 n 3; it 184 

ft Id 

Sufis of Persia, i 261 n i j dress 
of, vi 401 n 3. 

SQfiism, stages of * i 13 ft 2+ 

g 


£r«n VC 


450 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


StiliSg* marhage state, iii 145 
1L3, 

Siih^gan, i 76 n 6 j vi 336 n 2^ 
Siihela, o^r Gul iv 173^ 

Sukhman^ -vi n 2^ 

Sukhmajii Q^ G-. Aijanp iii ig^ n 1, 
Stilabi KMd, iii S Bp 
SulaM Kbimp iii 17, 33, 4@> 85* 
Sulakbani, G. winak's wife, i 
n I, 32i ii4. 

Sulisar^ iv ^41. 

SultaapuTp 1 iB, lOS. 

Sumer Singh, Maharit> Prcf. itiL 
Simp vi 114. 

Simdar autlmr of the Sadd^ 
ii 151. 

Simdarip Mata, wife of G. Gobind 

Sin^h, V 3, 4 n I, 51, itg , 330. 
240, 350, 354, Si'S. »57* 

Sufidar Shjh, faqir, iv zr£, 217, 

225^ 326. 

Superstition, iii 53 j iv 249. 

Suphp yi 401 n 3- 

Saragbitnsp vi Bi n I. ? 

Sdm] Malp son of G+ Hat Gobind, j 
hirth erf, iv 67 ; Ms marriage, 
iv 13a j reqne^ to his father, 
iv 23d ; visit of G. Teg BaM' 
dur, iv 363. 

PflS'SflJAp PneL aiii, ^v; 
Int Ixxvii ; iii 2 n 60 n 3* 
67, 69 n i ; iv lEOp 303 n i ^ 

V igg n i. 

Sur D^, Bhagatp vi 417, 41S ; 
hymns, 419. 

SuTjan Singh of Anandpur* v 237 h 

Sunna^ collyi'fuiiCL^ i 76 n 5 5 ii 
1190 3 ; vi 396 n r. 

Stiapended animatEonp i 287 n i. 
Svran, great I 357 n 1; ii 18, ii? 
n r 5 biUp iv 245 n 3; vi 33a. 
413 n r. 

Ewayamvars^ v 266 n 
Sweet basil, i 61 n4, 155 n r ; Mi 
dn I, 73 111; vi 38,93112, 177. 
Swine's desh, i 39 n 3i 

Tablets for teaching a^habci, I 3, 
Tacitua on ancient German re¬ 
ligion, Int. Ixn. 

Taimyr Lang^ Int. xlj \xx. 

TakS,, eoin^ i 223 n 4, 

Takhallus* 1 9 n 3 - v 314 n 1. 
Talwandi^ G. NSnak's birthplace 
i 1, 2 n I, 9J j iv66* 


I Taiwandi Sabo^ or Damdama, tv 
I 340 ; V 219. 

I Tana Shih, King of Godtonda^ 

Tank, mea^tire, i 158: n i. 

Tanks, Hindu, ii 84 n i; Sikh, 
1 2, 320 n i ; ii 87 i iii 9^ IQ, 
_ii, 13; iv4S. 

Tansen, Akbar's minstrel^ vi 350. 
Tantras, antient scriptures of the 
S^tas^ iii 213 n I j vi 93 n i, 

197- 

^ Tapa, a penitent ^ 29, 35, 38^ 
_99p 261, 303. 

Tara, Masand, iv 308 ; v 17, 89, 
207. 

Tara Aam, usurper* v 229, 230, 
T5ra Singli* Pandit iv 64 n 3. 
Tanqat i 13 n 2 ; vi 387. 

Tam Taian* i 106; iii 25 n i, 
85, S9 ; iv32. 

Taman^ Hindu worship, v g, 
Tasbi, Kosary, 

TSsh* t 87+ 

Tastes, six physical* ii ii6, 

Tasu, measure. Mi 132 n i. 

Tat (purej Khalsa, Preh xi ^ 
V 250. 

Teg Bahadur, Guru, prophecy 
regarding coming of English^ 
Preh xiii, xviii; son of G. Har 
Gobind^ iv 70, 331; marriage 
with Gujaiip iv iSp, J31; at 
battle of Kartaxpur* iv 206; 
departure for Bakala, iv 239 ; 
discovered by Makhan Shih, 
iv 333 ; invested as Gum, iv 
334; I>hir Mai's treachery* iv 
334 ; the Guru on forgiveness^ 
IV 33s ^ visit to Amritsar, iv 
336 : refused admission to Har 
MandaT, iv 336 ^ returns to 
BaktJa, iv 337 : founds Anand' 
pur* iv 33SJ malice of Dhlr 
M^* iv ^33; visits Agra, 
Itawa* Pny^, BanSras, and 
bathes in Kjarmn^ha, iv 34^ ; 
visits Gaya, iv 345 ; Patna, tv 
347 ; visit of Raja Ram Sin^h, 
iv 349 ; who accompanies him 
to Kimrup, iv 332 5 receives 
Kingof Kjmtnppiv354; Idng^s 
con version, iv ;j53; mound 
raised at Dhiibri, iv 356* 

Ram of As^m, iv 357; birth 



INDEX 451 


• Teg — 

of Gobind Rai^ iv 3575 the 
Qjjfu retoms to Patnaj iv 359 j 
departure for Anaudpiir^ iv 
3fi2 ; for Gobind Elli+ iv 
364; \isit of 10slmiiri Pan- 
ditSp iv J71 j message to 
Emperor, iv 372; departure 
for _rililij IV 373 ; halts at 
Saifabadp iv 373 ; arrested at 
Aetbu iv 377 ; efforts of Em- 
jicmr to oonvert him, iv 37S ; 
£iis refusal and toftitfOp iv 3S0 : 
his thaumaturgio powor* iv 
3S1 ; prophesies coming of 
English, iv 381 ; looked in 
cage^ Lv 383 d sloTta of ooneola- 
tion to Ms Wife and son* iv 
384 ; appoints his son Gobind 
Rai hie ancoe&eotp iv 383 ^ 
jnstructions to Sikhs about f ho 
disposal of his head, iv 3E6; 
ecKecuted, iv 387 ; head taken 
to Anaodpntp iv 387 ; crema¬ 
tion of his body* iv 3S8 ; 
cremation of his head, iv 390; 
his hymnSp iv 393 ; ^oks^iv 414. 
Tcj Bhin, father of G. Auiat Dia, 
li 30. 

TempOeap illustrations of, Pref. 
xxvii.j destruction of Hindn^ 
Int. ttIvu, jdviii* xlix: ii ^; 
to Kamantii, vi 100 j to Eav 

Dis, Vi 31E. 

Ten stages of man, i 279^ 

Tewaip 1 104 n i, 

Thagfl^ robbers, i 71 n l ; Thags 
and JaidoVp vi lOt 12* 
Thanesarp ii 109. 

Thappls, marls on crops ^ i 263 
n 2. 

Theism and Paniiieismp Int^ Ixiii, 
Theology* comparative^ Int. Iv, 
Thieves' plants, vi 71 n 3. 

Thirty days^ fast* i 22 n i. 

Thok baj^na* vi 295 n 4. 
Thoughts, dying, i 67 n 1 ; vi 
80 n 1+ 

Threads, seven* vi 272 n 
Thticydides on Revenge, v 241 
n I. 

Tl^^s whiekere* iv 277 ; skin, 
IV 299 ; tiger and Gurud v 19 ; 
love of tigresSi v 211, 

Tikke di. Wdr* ii 25+ 


I Tilak, L 58, i3Sp 163; ii ir, 43 ? 

99? 17^ n 2p i 86 n 6^ 

Tilangp measure^ jii 3S7 n i; v 
286 n 4. 

Tiloka* ofScer of KAbul aimyp iii 

67. 

Tdokhari, G. Har Keshan cro- 
matod at, iv 33a 

TiJok Singh and RSm Singh* v 
224 n I. 

Time-table, Indian, i 144 n 4* 
187 113, 

Tithes ordained for religions pur¬ 
poses, v 117. 

Tobacoo forbidden to Sikhs, Pref, 
isd, 3ndii ; iv 342 i V 97* 117, 

Toaar Mai* Sikh, v 198. 

Todar Malp Akbar's inimeter> vi 
41^* 

Toddy, vi 330 n 3. 

Tda, wei^t, i 63 n 3. 

Tortoise, 1 IC31 n j, 165 n 2. 

Torture, implements of, Int» xlvi j 
iii 92, P4. 

Trance, 1 287 n i. 

Translation of Sikh writings, 
difUculty of* Pref. vi, vui* 
xxxiii; estaminafioii of* Pref. 
\-^ j G. Ar|an's injunction 
FYk* viii; certiheato of cor¬ 
rectness of, Rref. X. 

Transmigration* Pref. xvl ^ Int. 
livp ; i5n2n6nz,9ni» 
38 n 4, 67 n 1, 83 n I* KoS n i, 
129, 137* j^2 ]14 p 326 n I, 2E4 
n I, 332 ; ii B n 1* 18, 207; iii 
6&, 131, 136^ 154 n 3, 174 ns, 
1:85 n2, 216 n 1, 3ii n Id 402 
n7; iv rSSp 23O1 3So* 282; 
V 20, Ij2, 214, 216, 225 i vi 
17 n I* n I, 96, 137 ? 139 ^ 
149, i6g n4p 186 113, 215* 
289 n I* 327 n 2*^04111. 

Tjhss, benehts derived from, iv 
22O i allegory, vi 242, 543 04, 

Tribeni Piiyag, mocting of rivers, 
i 144 n I ; li 257 + 

Trilochan, Bhagat, iii 332 ; vi 
r* 53* 7iip 77 s liymiis of, vi 78, 
79, So, 81. 

Trinity, Hindu, i 40 n 3 ; ih 334 

n I. 

Triptan G. !KSnakes mother, Int, 
Ixii ; i 9G* 100. 


G g 2 



452 


THE SIKH RELIGION 


Trampp^s traiisIatiorL of Gratiih^ 
Pret. xiiv * i n 
Tmtht m j 36 n I, 245 ni ; iv 

^ 59 ; $3 

Tulai Das, VI 349* 

Tula plant, v 7^5 n 2. 

Turban, taU, iii no n 3; Sikb, 

V SI 5 n I i couplet repeated 
Vflmi tyin^ on, ih 187 n i ; vi 
256 bl Ip 258, 3S7H 

Tniiya Pad* vi 123 n i. 

Turks, iv 39 n I. 

Turmeric^ vi 2S6 B 6 . 

Uch ka Hr, v 193^ 

Udaipur, Int, xlviii ; vi ^^48 n i, 
UdSi^^ Gh Nanaki^s defimtion of, 
i 106. 

TJdaaiSj founder of, Intn Iii, Ixidx, 
Ixxx ; iv i 38 ; refvolt of, v 34 ; 
naade copy of Uranth SaMb, 

V 37+ 

tide Bhai, Int. Iexvi : v 

joi* 120, 129, 135, 140, 14S+ 
Ugaraen, vi 4I B l> 

Uma, PdibatiH v 284 12,3; vi 

334 lfii- 

Umbrellas, ui n 1 j vi 47 n 3. 
Union of atmi with God, Int isv ; 
i TO n I. 

Uni^ of God, Sikh beli&f in, laU 
Isitlxii ; iv 255 3 vi 41. 
Universe evolvM from God, v 
331 ni. 

l^anishads, iii 53 n i. 

Urdu, alien to P^jab, Pref. stxiv, 
Ursa, stone used in worslnp, j 
323 ni, 

Vaiiag, vi 105. 

Vaitbnav faith, ii 32, 93 j vi Sg 
a 3 h 92 n 3. 

Vaiayas^ caste, i 16 n 1 j vi 104 

n 2. 

Valmlk, iv265 j huntsman, vi 104. 
VitnacMria, vi 104 n^. 

Varajis, or ca£tca> i 10 n i. 
Vasudev^ father of Krishan, i 57 
n r j V 320 n j\, 

Vi^siild, serpent, vi 74 n 2h 
Veds> Ptief* V ; lutfc In; i 4 n 4, 

116 B 3, 307 n I, 269 n 3 d 343 
n 371 n 3 ; ii 31 n i ; iii 
321, 420 ; V 323 n 3 ; vi 125* 
320, 324 n 1 h 


Vedantists, claims of^, v 103 n 2 ; 
vi 27, n I. 

Vegetables of the earth, i 2&;wa i i 
eighteen, loada of, vi 333 n 2. 
Veiling of the face, Ii 62 n i; vi 

116, 213, 345- 

Farscjows History^ Lndan^s, iv 

153 ^ r, 

Vessub of shopkeeper,, i 23 u i ; 
Sun-dried cooking, vi 128 ; 
clay, vi 22a n i ; testing 
soundness of^ vi 293 n 4, 
Vibhfahan^ vi 34 n 2. 

Natah, V r n I. 

Vichitar Singh and elephant, v 
134 ' 

Vidh’wa, ■Widow+ 

Vidur {Bidur), ii ^31 n i ; vi 332. 
Vikramadit, ii 102 ni; 

and Mahabharat^ ii 31 n i. 
\^ro, G. Har Gobind's daughter* 
iv 66 f 84, 144, 236 ; V 2. 
Virtues^ the hve, x 137 n 1. 
VisMsht and VighwSjnitra, vi 
5S n u 

Vishnu* Int. idi* Ivii* lix:, ixx^i ; 
i 40 n 3* 57 n I* 61 n 4, 8f, 
131 n 3, 199 n I, jDO n I ; ii 
i6o n I, 348 n I j iii 6 n i, 
203 n I j iv 254 n 3 ; v 273 
n 3* 374 n 3, 379 » 3, 330 n I : 
vi 63 114, 83, 87 ns, 89 113, 
92 n 3* 93 n 2* 94, 99, IQ5 n i* 
345 a r. 

FwAwm Sah^ssar Warn, v 261 n i. 
Vitthal, god, VL 23 n I. 

Voivs, religious, iii 77 n r. 

Vyls* compiler of Veda, ii 31 n i, 
234 n a, 

Wadali* G. Arjan's so-journ att 

iii 34* 3^ ; G. Har Gobind's 
visit to, IV 142. 

WlbguTu^ i ^6 n I ; ii 107^ 207 
n I ; Gur D^'a explanation 01, 

iv 135 n 3, 

Wah* mwa, of Kandb^, i 172, 
Wali KlMii, son of Subldir of 
Jalandhar* iv 138^ 

Wall, Hindus^ path to paradise 
through Dpenmg in, v 74 n i, 
Wanrd, gold colouring* ii 202 n 1, 
Wit, i 218 n I. 

Water, Sikh initiation with* 1 47 
B f, 372 n I and 2 ; G. Nanak's 



INDEX 


453 


UBS of, i 50 ; waving of, i 231 s 
G^Gobind Singb^a paj^smal, 
V 94 i scattered at v 

223, 316 f animals wMcb Uvc 
iii;r vi 43 n I ; of Ganges, vi 
520^3. 

Water-lily^ i 265 n 2 ; vi 3^7 n in 

WaziT KbSn, iii 17 ; iv 187* 195 j 
sent to G. Har Gobind, iv iij 
34, 65 ; intervenes to pre¬ 
vent further war, iv g6. 

Warn Eh^n, the emperoir's vioc- 

XOyr V 195, 209^ 21 j, 220, 223 j 

334^ 34B. 

Weapons used by Sikhs^ v izg^ 

W'eaverg, Kablr's iJlegory on, vi 
I j6 n I and 2, 170 n 4- 

Weok days, seven^ vi 190; 
names of, vi 269 n r. , 

Weights and measures, i 63 n 6* 
13s n I* 188 n 1 ; iii 153 n r, 
2^3 n 282 n I ; iv 66 n 1, 
278 n 1 ; vi 37 n Ip 169 n 
29s n 5. 

WeU, MwaJi, ii 87 ; O- NSnak^s, 
i [72K iii 15402; at Kol^^vi 
30 ; haunted well+ vi *, body 

as, vi 149 n I j well rope, vl 
404 n 11 j aUegory of* vi t66, 
^6S. 

Wheels^ Persian, iii 35 j vi 49 
n 2. 

Whito elephant's pearls, iii 31 j 
n j. 

Wholesale dealer> God as, i 60 

o 1. 

Widows, con-cremation of^ for¬ 
bidden to Sikhs, Pref, xciit 
3 Ddji; i 381 : ii 523 n i ; v 
277 n I ; vi 153 ; ceremonies 

at, vi 178 n 2 j remaixiagB of, 
vi 154 a 3 - 

Wife versus widow, i 76^ n 6h _ 

WilliansSi, /??dsa ?4 i 129 

n I. 

Wilson, Hfiigton of the HindaSf 
lot. xivii; vi 104 n 140 n r+ 

Wine, forbidden to Sikhs, Ptef+ 
xxi, Kxiii; G. K^ixak on, 11S2 ; 
Br^bmaju's punishment for 
drinking* iv 134 n i ; Gwr Bil&s 
on* IV 168 ; G^ Har R^^S 
interdict, iv 2S8 ^ Kabir on^ 
vi 142. 


Women, oTtiancipation of SikJi, 
Pmfn ?odi; Gh N'duak on duty 
oi, i 289 s customs of Hindu, 
ii 84 n i ; G. Ndoak's defence 
of, i 244; married woman's 
dross, hi 112, 2781 319 01, 
3^ n r ; Gur USs on* vi 2513 
Hindu women abducted, v 157 
n r f once selected their Own 
husbands ^ v 266 n 1* remaTti 
witi^ parents after tnarriagie* vi 
1156 n 6, 375. 

Wooden cake of Shaikh Fand, vi 
368, 398 n I. 

Word&worih on ti^uismigratiOEii 
Int. Ixvih 

W^orlds, fbuiteen, i i id o 2, 344 
n 2 : denizens of, like cbjldreu, 
i 317 n 2 : dangkous ocean, i 
6 u T s father and father-in- 
law^s houses, i 74 n 7 j world as 
an egg, 1 11602; creatfon and 
destruction of, i 138 n 4; li 
348; peoplfl of the* i 217 n 2, 
30Q n 2 ; hi 230 IL 2* 294 n 1, 
391 n 1. 

Worship. sjTnboJa of Hindu* i 
99 n j i iii su 33 * 3^9 

n [ ; vipon 5,9^u 2, 
Wrestler^fl turban, iii 110 n 3, 

Xenophon. Ink liii* 

Ya Aii* Muhammadan war-cry, 
V 41- 

Yi^davs, deceprion of, vi 47 n 4. 
Yakahas, iii 229 n u 
Vjma, i 31011 2, 

Yavan* i 12 n i. 

Year» Indian, i non r, ijS n 3+ 
Yog Sutra, ii 16 n 1* 

Yoginl, vi 93 ft I, 

YtidhigTitar* iv 4-08 n i. 

Zabardast Khare Viceroy of 
Lahore, v 168, 222. 

201. 

^karia Kh&n, Int. Ixxv, 
ixKsii, btixiv ; i 2. 

Zamlndar, Int. Ix^i- 
Zens, Int, Iviii^liic, Isd, 

V 103. 

Zoroastrianism, Int. Ivi ; i 89 
n 2. 


OXFORD 

PRlfqYED At ttiE CLAHHWDOJf PpE:3& 
BV HOSACE JfT^A, 

PftJUTER TO TJIE tiMJVEJlSlTV 






bock
