Karma Yoga (Swami Vivekananda, 1901)
====================================
Swami Vivekananda — Karma Yoga, from Vedanta Philosophy: Eight Lectures (New York: Vedanta Society, 1901), public domain. Eight lectures on the yoga of selfless work, including "Karma in its effect on character," "What is duty?" and "The ideal of Karma-Yoga." Scan via Internet Archive.

Karma  Yoga 


t 


• 


VEDANTA  PHILOSOPHY 

EIGHT  LECTURES 

BY  THE 

SWAMI  VIVEKANANDA 

ON 

KARMA  YOGA 

(THE  SECRET  OF  WORK) 


Delivered  under  the  Auspices  of  the  Vedanta  Society 


FIFTH  EDITION 


NEW  YORK 

THE  BAKER  & TAYLOR  COMPANY 
33-37  East  Seventeenth  St. 

1901 


Wellcorv;  .Library  \ 
for  the  Listory 
and  Understanding 

of  Medicine 


Copyright,  1896, 

BY 

SWAMI  VIVEKANANDA. 

Copyright,  1901, 

BY 

THE  BAKER  & TAYLOR  CO. 


C l)  ZFU,  Z3 


ROBERT  DRUMMOND,  PRINTER,  NEW  YORK. 


Preface  to  Second  Edition 


The  word  Karma  is  fully  explained  in 
the  text  of  this  book,  but  possibly  it  may 
not  be  out  of  place  to  give  a brief  idea  of 
what  is  meant  by  Yoga.  This  word,  which 
sounds  strange  to  Western  ears,  is  never- 
theless an  old  friend  in  a foreign  dress.  Its 
literal  meaning  is  “ To  join,”  and  it  has  the 
same  root  ( Yug ) behind  it  as  our  own  fa- 
miliar word  “ yoke.”  When  Yoga  is  used 
technically,  it  signifies  union  of  the  human 
with  the  Divine,  and  the  particular  name 
given  to  that  union  (or  Yoga)  stands  for 
the  method  by  which  it  is  attained.  Hence, 
Karma  Yoga  means  the  endeavor  to  reach 
Divine  realization  through  unselfish  work. 

Karma  Yoga  might  be  called  “applied 
ethics  ” in  the  highest  sense,  rather  than  a 
merely  theoretical  system.  This  book  is  in- 
tended to  give  an  insight  into  the  manner 
of  so  performing  the  inevitable  tasks  of 
daily  life  as  to  lift  our  lives  out  of  the  re- 
gion of  the  humdrum  and  the  common- 

7 


Preface  to  Second  Edition 

place  and  make  them  pathways  to  the 
loftiest  heights  of  spiritual  realization.  It 
presents  its  own  solution  of  the  eternal 
problem  how  we,  too,  “ can  make  our  lives 
sublime,”  and  gives  an  uplift  to  human  en- 
deavor on  even  the  humblest  planes. 

Karma  Yoga  proclaims  the  dignity  of  la- 
bor in  a way  peculiarly  its  own,  and  has 
words  of  help  and  encouragement  for  all 
grades  of  toilers  in  the  world’s  great  work- 
shop. 

To  those  who  imagine  that  Vedanta 
teaches  but  one  road  to  salvation,  this  book 
will  be  a revelation.  Its  language  is  un- 
mistakable when  it  asserts  over  and  over 
again  that  same  height  of  spiritual  realiza- 
tion that  is  reached  by  him  who  gives  up 
the  world,  is  also  attained  by  him  who 
knows  how  to  live  in  the  world  and  be  not 
of  it. 

Karma  Yoga  admits  the  necessity  of 
work,  but  shows  us  how  to  be  free  from  its 
bondage,  how  to  work  as  masters,  not  as 
slaves.  We  can  so  transmute  our  com- 
monest actions  into  spiritual  treasure,  as  to 
glorify  existence  and  make  it  a gateway  to 
Paradise. 

The  Editor. 

8 


Contents 


i. 

PAGE 

Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 11 

II. 

“Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place.” 30 

III. 

The  Secret  of  Work S3 

IV. 

What  is  Duty? 73 

V. 

We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 88 

VI. 

Non-Attachment  is  Complete  Self-Abnegation.  99 

VII. 

Freedom 124 

VIII. 

The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 150 

9 


KARMA  YOGA 


I 

KARMA  IN  ITS  EFFECT  ON  CHARACTER 

The  word  Karma  is  derived  from  the 
Sanskrit  “ Kri,”  to  do;  everything  that  is 
done  is  Karma.  Technically,  this  word 
also  means  the  effects  of  actions.  In  con- 
nection with  metaphysics  it  sometimes 
means  the  effects  of  which  our  past  actions 
were  the  causes.  But  in  Karma  Yoga  we 
have  simply  to  do  with  the  word  “ Karma  ” 
as  meaning  work.  The  goal  of  all  man- 
kind is  knowledge;  that  is  the  one  ideal 
placed  before  us  by  the  Eastern  philosophy. 
Pleasure  is  not  the  goal  of  man,  but  knowl- 
edge. Pleasure  and  happiness  come  to  an 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

end.  It  is  the  mistake  of  mankind  to  sup- 
pose that  pleasure  is  the  goal;  the  cause 
of  all  the  miseries  we  have  in  the  world  is 
that  men  foolishly  think  pleasure  to  be  the 
ideal.  After  a time  man  finds  that  it  is  not 
happiness,  but  knowledge,  towards  which 
he  is  going,  and  that  both  pleasure  and 
pain  are  great  teachers,  that  he  learns  as 
much  from  evil  as  from  good.  As  pleas- 
ure and  pain  pass  before  his  soul  they  leave 
upon  it  different  pictures,  and  the  result  of 
these  combined  impressions  is  what  is 
called  man’s  “ character.”  If  you  study  the 
character  of  any  man,  what  is  it  really  but 
the  tendencies,  the  sum  total  of  the  bent  of 
his  mind?  You  will  find  that  misery  and 
happiness  were  equal  factors  in  the  forma- 
tion of  that  character.  Good  and  evil  have 
an  equal  share  in  moulding  character,  and 
in  some  instances  misery  is  a greater 
teacher  than  happiness.  In  studying  the 


12 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

great  characters  that  the  world  has  pro- 
duced I dare  say  that,  in  the  vast  majority 
of  cases,  it  was  misery  that  taught  more 
than  happiness;  it  was  poverty  that  taught 
more  than  wealth;  it  was  blows  that 
brought  out  the  inner  fire,  more  than 
praise. 

Now  this  knowledge,  again,  is  inherent 
in  man;  no  knowledge  comes  from  out- 
side; it  is  all  within.  What  we  say  a man 
“ knows,”  should,  in  strictly  psychological 
language,  be  a man  “discovers;”  what  a 
man  “ learns  ” is  really  what  a man  “ dis- 
covers,” the  word  discover  meaning  “ he 
takes  the  covering  from  his  own  soul,” 
which  is  a mine  of  infinite  knowledge.  We 
say  Newton  discovered  gravitation.  Was 
it  sitting  anywhere  in  a corner  waiting  for 
him?  It  was  in  his  own  mind;  the  time 
came  and  he  found  it  out.  All  knowledge 
that  the  world  has  ever  received  comes 

13 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

from  the  mind;  the  infinite  library  of  the 
universe  is  in  your  own  mind.  The  exter- 
nal world  is  simply  the  suggestion,  the  oc- 
casion, which  sets  you  to  study  your  own 
mind,  but  the  object  of  your  study  is  al- 
ways your  own  mind.  The  falling  of  an  ap- 
ple gave  the  suggestion  to  Newton,  and  he 
studied  his  own  mind;  he  rearranged  all 
the  previous  links  of  his  mind  and  discov- 
ered a new  link  among  them,  which  we  call 
the  law  of  gravitation.  It  was  not  the  ap- 
ple nor  anything  in  the  centre  of  the  earth. 
All  knowledge,  secular  or  spiritual,  is  in  the 
human  mind.  In  many  cases  it  is  not  dis- 
covered, but  remains  covered,  and  when 
the  covering  is  being  slowly  taken  off  we 
say  “ we  are  learning,”  and  the  advance  of 
knowledge  is  made  by  the  advance  of  this 
process  of  uncovering.  The  man  from 
whom  this  veil  is  being  lifted  is  the  more 
knowing  man;  the  man  upon  whom  it  lies 

14 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

thick  is  ignorant,  and  the  man  from  whom  it 
has  entirely  gone  is  the  all-knowing,  the  om- 
niscient. There  have  been  omniscient  men, 
and,  I believe,  will  be  yet,  and  that  there 
will  be  myriads  in  the  cycles  to  come.  Like 
fire  in  a piece  of  flint,  knowledge  is  existing 
in  the  mind;  the  suggestion  is  the  friction 
that  brings  out  that  fire.  So  with  all  our 
actions — our  tears  and  our  smiles,  our  joys 
and  our  griefs,  our  weeping  and  our  laugh- 
ter, our  curses  and  our  blessings,  our 
praises  and  our  blames — with  every  one  of 
them  we  find,  if  we  calmly  study  our  own 
selves,  that  they  have  been  brought  out  by 
so  many  blows.  The  result  is  what  we  are; 
all  these  blows  taken  together  are  called 
“ Karma,”  work.  Every  mental  and  phy- 
sical blow  that  is  given  upon  the  soul  to 
strike  out  the  fire,  to  discover  its  own 
power  and  knowledge,  is  Karma,  Karma 
being  used  in  its  universal  sense;  so  we  are 

15 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

doing  Karma  all  the  time.  I am  talking  to 
you;  that  is  Karma.  You  are  listening; 
that  is  Karma.  We  breathe;  that  is  Kar- 
ma. We  walk;  Karma.  We  talk;  Karma. 

I 

Everything  we  do,  physical  or  mental,  is 
Karma,  and  is  leaving  its  marks  upon  us. 

There  are  certain  works  which  are,  as  it 
were,  the  aggregate,  the  sum  total,  of  a 
large  number  of  small  works.  If  we  stand 
near  the  seashore  and  hear  the  waves  dash- 
ing against  the  shingle  we  think  it  is  such 
a great  noise,  and  yet  we  know  that  one 
wave  is  really  composed  of  millions  and 
millions  of  minute  waves;  each  one  of  these 
is  making  a noise,  and  yet  we  do  not  catch 
the  sound  of  them;  it  is  only  when  they  be- 
come the  big  aggregate  that  we  catch  it. 
So  every  pulsation  of  the  heart  is  making 
work;  certain  works  we  feel,  and  they  be- 
come tangible  to  us;  they  are,  at  the  same 

time,  the  aggregate  of  a number  of  small 

16 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

works.  If  you  really  want  to  judge  the 
character  of  a man  look  not  at  his  great 
works.  Every  fool  becomes  a hero  at  one 
time  or  another.  Watch  a man  do  his  most 
common  actions;  those  are  the  things 
which  will  tell  you  the  real  character  of  a 
great  man.  Great  occasions  rouse  even  the 
lowest  of  human  beings  to  greatness,  but 
he  is  a really  great  man  whose  character  is 
great  always,  the  same  wherever  he  be. 

This  Karma  in  its  effect  on  character  is 
the  most  tremendous  power  that  man  has 
to  deal  with.  Man  is  a centre,  as  it  were, 
and  he  is  attracting  all  the  powers  of  the 
universe  towards  himself,  and  in  this  centre 
is  fusing  them  all  and  ejecting  them  again 
in  a big  current.  That  centre  is  the  real 
man,  the  almighty,  the  omniscient,  and  he 
draws  the  whole  universe  towards  him; 
good  or  bad,  misery  or  happiness,  all  run- 
ning towards  him,  clinging  round  him,  and 

*7 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

out  of  them  he  fashions  the  tremendous 
power  called  character  and  throws  it  out- 
wards. As  he  has  the  power  of  drawing  in 
anything,  so  he  has  the  power  of  throwing 
it  out. 

All  the  actions  that  we  see  in  the  world, 
all  the  movements  in  human  society,  all  the 
works  that  we  have  around  us,  are  simply 
the  display  of  thought,  the  manifestation  of 
the  will  of  man.  Machines  or  instruments, 
or  cities,  ships,  men-of-war,  everything  is 
simply  the  manifestation  of  the  will  of  man, 
and  this  will  is  made  by  character,  and 
character  is  manufactured  by  Karma.  As 
is  Karma,  so  is  the  manifestation  of  the 
will.  The  tremendous  willed  men  that  the 
world  has  produced  have  all  been  tremen- 
dous workers — gigantic  souls,  with  wide 
wills,  powerful  enough  to  overturn  worlds; 
and  they  got  that  by  persistent  work, 

through  ages  and  ages.  Such  a gigantic 

18 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

will  as  that  of  a Buddha  or  a Jesus  cannot 
be  got  in  one  life,  for  we  know  who  their 
fathers  were.  It  is  not  known  that  their 
fathers  ever  spoke  a word  for  the  good  of 
mankind.  Millions  and  millions  of  carpen- 
ters like  Joseph  have  gone;  millions  are 
still  living.  Millions  and  millions  of  petty 
kings  like  Buddha’s  father  have  been  in  the 
world.  If  it  is  only  a case  of  hereditary 
transmission,  how  do  you  account  for  this 
little  petty  prince,  who  was  not,  perhaps, 
obeyed  by  his  own  servants,  producing  this 
son,  whom  half  a world  worships?  How  do 
you  account  for  this  gap  between  the  car- 
penter and  his  son,  whom  millions  of  hu- 
man beings  regard  as  God?  It  cannot  be 
accounted  for  by  that  theory.  This  gigan- 
tic will  which  Buddha  threw  over  the 
world,  which  came  out  of  Jesus,  whence  did 
it  come?  Whence  came  this  accumulation 
of  power?  It  must  have  been  there  through 

19 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

ages  and  ages,  continually  growing  bigger 
and  bigger,  until  it  burst  on  society  in  a 
Buddha  or  a Jesus,  and  it  rolls  down  even 
to  the  present  day. 

And  all  this  is  determined  by  Karma, 
work.  No  one  can  get  anything  except  he 
earns  it;  this  is  an  eternal  law;  we  may 
think  it  is  not  so,  but  in  the  long  run  we 
shall  be  convinced  of  it.  A man  may  strug- 
gle all  his  life  in  becoming  rich;  he  may 
cheat  thousands,  but  he  finds  at  last  that 
he  did  not  deserve  it,  and  his  life  becomes 
a trouble  and  a nuisance  to  him.  We  may 
go  on  accumulating  for  our  physical  en- 
joyment, but  only  what  we  earn  is  ours.  A 
fool  may  buy  all  the  books  in  the  world, 
but  they  will  be  in  his  library,  and  he  will 
only  be  able  to  read  those  he  deserves,  and 
this  deserving  is  produced  by  Karma.  Our 
Karma  determines  what  we  deserve  and 
what  we  can  assimilate.  We  are  responsible 

20 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

for  what  we  are,  and  whatever  we  want  our- 
selves to  be  we  have  the  power  to  make 
ourselves.  If  what  we  are  now  has  been 
made  by  our  own  past  actions  it  certainly 
follows  that  whatever  we  want  to  be  we 
can  make  ourselves  by  our  present  actions; 
so  we  have  to  know  how  to  act.  You  will 
say,  “ What  is  the  use  of  learning  how  to 
work?  Every  one  works  in  this  world.” 
But  there  is  such  a thing  as  frittering  away 
our  energies.  With  regard  to  this  Karma 
Yoga,  in  the  Bhagavad  Gita  it  is  said  that 
Karma  Yoga  is  doing  work,  but  with  clev- 
erness and  as  a science;  knowing  how  to 
do  work  that  will  bring  the  greatest  results. 
You  must  remember  that  all  this  work  is 
simply  to  bring  out  the  power  of  the  mind 
which  is  already  there,  to  wake  up  the  soul. 
The  power  is  inside  every  man,  and  the 
knowledge  is  there;  these  different  works 
21 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

are  like  blows  to  bring  it  out,  to  cause  this 
giant  to  wake  up. 

A man  works  for  various  motives;  there 
cannot  be  work  without  a motive.  Some 
people  want  to  get  fame,  and  they  work 
for  fame.  Others  want  to  get  money,  and 
they  work  for  money.  Others  want  power, 
and  they  work  for  power.  Others  want  to 
get  to  heaven,  and  they  work  to  get  to 
heaven.  Others  want  to  leave  a name  when 
they  die,  as  they  do  in  China,  where  no  man 
gets  a title  until  he  is  dead;  that  is  a bet- 
ter way,  after  all.  When  a man  does  very 
good  things  they  give  a title  of  nobility  to 
his  father,  who  is  dead,  or  to  his  grand- 
father. Some  of  the  Mohammedan  sects 
work  all  their  lives  to  have  a gigantic  tomb 
when  they  die.  I know  sects  among  whom, 
as  soon  as  a child  is  born,  they  begin  to 
prepare  for  his  tomb;  that  is  the  greatest 
work  a man  has  to  do,  and  the  bigger  and 


22 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

finer  the  tomb  the  better  off  the  man  is  sup- 
posed to  be.  Others  work  as  a penance; 
do  all  sorts  of  wicked  things,  then  erect  a 
temple,  or  give  something  to  the  priests  to 
buy  them  off  and  give  them  a passport  to 
heaven.  They  think  that  will  clear  them 
and  that  they  will  go  scot-free.  These  are 
some  of  the  various  motives  for  work. 

Work  for  work’s  sake.  There  are  a few 
who  are  really  the  salt  of  the  earth  in  every 
country  and  who  work  for  work’s  sake, 
who  do  not  care  for  name,  or  fame,  or  to 
get  to  heaven.  There  are  others  who  do 
good  to  the  poor  and  help  mankind  from 
still  higher  motives,  because  it  is  good,  and 
they  love  good.  Desires  for  name  and 
fame  seldom  bring  immediate  results;  as  a 
rule,  they  come  to  us  when  we  are  old  and 
are  done  with  life.  If  a man  works  with- 
out any  selfish  motive  in  view  what  be- 
comes of  him?  Does  he  not  gain  any- 
23 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

thing?  Yes,  he  is  the  highest  gainer.  Un- 
selfishness pays  more,  only  people  have 
not  the  patience  to  practise  it.  It  is  more 
paying  in  physical  value  also.  Love,  and 
truth,  and  unselfishness  are  not  only  moral 
figures,  but  are  the  highest  ideals,  because 
they  are  such  manifestations  of  power.  In 
the  first  place,  a man  who  can  work  for 
five  days,  or  for  five  minutes,  without  any 
selfish  motive  whatever,  without  thinking 
of  the  future,  or  heaven,  or  punishment,  or 
anything  of  the  kind,  becomes  a giant.  It 
is  hard  to  do  it,  but  in  the  heart  of  our 
hearts  we  know  the  value  of  it,  and  what 
good  it  brings.  It  is  the  greatest  manifes- 
tation of  power  and  a tremendous  restraint; 
to  restrain  is  a manifestation  of  more  power 
than  all  outgoing  action.  A carriage  with 
four  horses  may  rush  down  a hill  without 
restraint;  or,  the  coachman  may  restrain 
the  horses.  Which  is  the  greater  manifes- 

24 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

tation  of  power,  to  let  them  go  or  to  re- 
strain them?  A cannon-ball  flying  through 
the  air  goes  a long  distance  and  then  falls. 
Another  is  cut  short  in  its  flight  by  strik- 
ing against  a wall,  and  intense  heat  is  gen- 
erated. So,  all  this  outgoing  following  a 
selfish  motive,  goes  away;  it  will  not  re- 
turn to  you,  but  if  it  be  restrained  it  will 
develop.  Restraint  will  produce  a gigantic 
will,  that  character  which  makes  a world 
move.  Foolish  men  do  not  know  the 
secret;  they  want  to  rule  mankind.  Man 
does  not  know  that  he  can  rule  the  whole 
world  if  he  waits.  Let  him  wait  a few  years, 
restrain  that  foolish  idea  of  governing,  and 
when  that  idea  is  wholly  gone  that  man  will 
be  a power  in  the  world.  But  we  are  such 
fools!  The  majority  of  us  cannot  see  be- 
yond a few  years,  just  as  animals  cannot  see 
beyond  a few  steps.  Just  a little  narrow  cir- 
cle; that  is  our  world.  We  have  not  the 
25 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

patience  to  look  beyond  and  thus  we  be- 
come immoral  and  wicked.  It  is  our  weak- 
ness, our  powerlessness. 

But  the  lowest  sorts  of  work  are  not  to 
be  despised.  Let  a man  who  knows  no 
better,  work  for  selfish  ends,  for  name  and 
fame;  but  a man  should  always  try  to  get 
towards  the  higher  motive  and  to  under- 
stand what  that  motive  is.  Krishna  tells 
us  in  the  Gita,  “ To  work  you  have  the 
right,  but  not  to  the  fruits  thereof.”  Leave 
the  fruits  alone,  leave  results  alone.  Why 
care  for  results?  When  wanting  to  help  a 
man,  never  think  what  that  man’s  attitude 
should  be  towards  you.  Do  not  care  to 
understand.  If  you  want  to  do  a great  or 
a good  work,  do  not  trouble  to  think  what 
the  results  will  be. 

There  comes  another  difficult  question 
with  this  sort  of  work.  Intense  activity  is 

necessary;  we  must  always  work.  We  can- 

26 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

not  live  a minute  without  work.  What  be- 
comes of  rest?  Here  is  one  side  of  life- 
struggle  work,  to  be  whirled  rapidly  round 
in  the  current  of  social  life.  And  here  is 
another  picture — calm,  retiring,  everything 
peaceful  around  you,  very  little  of  noise, 
only  nature.  Neither  of  them  is  a perfect 
picture.  If  a man  goes  to  live  in  such 
a place  as  soon  as  he  is  brought  in  contact 
with  the  surging  whirlpool  of  the  world  he 
will  be  crushed  by  it;  just  as  the  fish  that 
lives  in  the  deep  sea  water,  as  soon  as  it 
is  brought  to  the  surface,  breaks  into 
pieces;  the  weight  of  water  on  it  had 
kept  it  together.  Can  a man  who  has  been 
used  to  the  turmoil  and  the  rush  of  life  live 
if  he  comes  into  a quiet  place?  He  will 
suffer  and  perhaps  lose  his  mind.  Very 
few  are  able  to  bear  entire  solitude.  The 
ideal  man  is  he  who  in  the  midst  of  the 

greatest  silence  finds  the  intensest  activity 
27 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

and  in  the  midst  of  the  intensest  activity 
finds  the  silence  of  the  desert.  He  has 
learned  the  secret  of  restraint;  he  has  con- 
trolled himself.  He  goes  through  the 
streets  of  a big  city,  with  all  their  traffic, 
and  his  mind  is  as  calm  as  if  he  were  in  a 
cave,  where  not  a sound  could  reach  him. 
and  he  is  working  intensely  all  the  time. 
That  is  the  ideal  of  Karma  Yoga,  and  if  you 
have  attained  to  that  you  have  really 
learned  the  secret  of  work. 

But  we  have  to  begin  from  the  begin- 
ning, to  take  up  the  works  as  they  come 
to  us  and  slowly  make  ourselves  more  un- 
selfish every  day.  We  must  do  the  work 
and  find  out  the  motive  power  that  is  be- 
hind, prompting  us  to  the  work,  and,  al- 
most without  exception,  in  the  first  years, 
we  will  find  that  the  motives  are  always 
selfish,  but  gradually  this  selfishness  will 
melt,  by  persistence,  and  at  last  will  come 

28 


Karma  in  its  Effect  on  Character 

the  time  when  we  shall  be  able  to  do  really 
unselfish  work.  We  all  hope  that  some 
time  or  other,  as  we  struggle  through  the 
path  of  life,  there  will  come  a time  when  we 
shall  become  perfectly  unselfish,  and  the 
moment  we  attain  to  that,  our  powers  will 
be  concentrated,  and  the  knowledge  which 
is  ours  will  become  manifest. 


29 


II 


EACH  IS  GREAT  IN  HIS  OWN  PLACE 

According  to  the  Sankhya  philosophy, 
nature  is  composed  of  three  materials, 
called,  in  Sanskrit,  Sattva,  Rajas  and  Ta- 
nias. Tamas  is  typified  as  darkness  or  in- 
activity; Rajas  as  activity,  where  each  par- 
ticle is  trying  to  fly  off  from  the  attracting 
centre,  and  Sattva  is  the  equilibrium  of  the 
two,  getting  a control  of  both.  Each  man 
is  composed  of  these  three  materials;  in 
each  of  us  we  find  that  sometimes  the  Ta- 
mas prevails;  we  become  lazy;  we  cannot 
move;  we  are  inactive,  bound  down  by  cer- 
tain ideas.  At  other  times  activity  will  pre- 
vail, and  at  still  other  times  that  calm 
control  of  both  will  prevail  the  Sattva. 

30 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

Again,  in  different  men,  one  of  these  ma- 
terials is  generally  predominant.  The  char- 
acteristic of  one  man  is  that  of  inactivity, 
dullness  and  laziness;  the  characteristic  of 
another  man  is  activity,  power,  manifesta- 
tion of  energy,  and  in  still  another  man  we 
find  the  sweetness,  calmness,  gentleness, 
which  are  controlling  both.  So  in  creation 
— in  animals,  plants  and  men — we  find  the 
typification  of  all  these  different  materials. 

Karma  Yoga  has  specially  to  deal  with 
these  three  elements.  By  teaching  us  what 
they  are  and  how  to  employ  them  it  helps 
us  to  do  our  work  better.  Human  society 
is  a graded  organization.  We  all  know 
about  morality,  and  we  all  know  about 
duty,  but  at  the  same  time  we  find  that  in 
various  countries  morality  differs  greatly. 
What  is  regarded  as  moral  in  one  country 
may  in  another  be  considered  perfectly  im- 
moral. Yet  we  have  the  idea  that  there 
3i 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

must  be  a universal  standard  of  morality. 
So  it  is  with  duty.  The  idea  of  duty  varies 
much  among  different  nations.  Two  ways 
are  left  open  to  us — the  way  of  the  ig- 
norant, who  think  that  there  is  only  one 
way  to  truth,  and  that  all  the  rest  are 
wrong,  or  the  way  of  the  wise,  who  admit 
that,  according  to  the  mental  constitution 
or  the  different  plane  of  existence  in  which 
we  are,  duty  and  morality  may  vary.  The 
important  thing  is  to  know  that  there  are 
gradations  of  duty  and  of  morality — that 
what  is  the  duty  of  one  state  of  life  in  one 
set  of  circumstances  will  not  be  that  of  an- 
other. 

The  following  example  will  serve  to  il- 
lustrate:—All  great  teachers  have  taught 
“ resist  not  evil  ” — that  non-resisting  evil 
is  the  highest  ideal.  We  all  know  that  if 
a certain  number  of  us  attempted  to  put 
that  into  practice  the  whole  social  fabric 

32 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

would  fall  to  pieces,  society  would  be  de- 
stroyed, the  wicked  would  have  possession 
of  our  properties  and  our  lives  and  would 
do  whatever  they  liked  with  us.  Even  if 
only  one  day  of  such  non-resistance  were 
practised  it  would  lead  to  the  utter  disso- 
lution of  society.  Yet,  intuitively,  in  our 
heart  of  hearts  we  feel  the  truth  of  the 
teaching,  “ resist  not  evil.”  This  seems  to 
us  to  be  the  great  ideal;  yet  to  teach  this 
doctrine  only  would  be  equivalent  to  con- 
demning a vast  proportion  of  mankind. 
Not  only  so,  it  would  be  making  men  feel 
that  they  were  always  doing  wrong,  cause 
scruples  of  conscience  in  all  their  actions; 
it  would  weaken  them,  and  that  constant 
self-disapproval  would  breed  more  vice 
than  any  other  weakness.  To  the  man  who 
has  begun  to  hate  himself  the  gate  to  de- 
generation has  been  opened,  and  so  with  a 
nation.  Our  first  duty  is  not  to  hate  our- 

33 


“Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place” 

selves;  to  advance  we  must  have  faith  in 
ourselves  first  and  then  in  God.  He  who 
has  no  faith  in  himself  can  never  have  faith 
in  God.  Therefore,  the  only  alternative  re- 
maining to  us  is  to  recognize  that  duty  and 
morality  vary  under  different  circum- 
stances; not  that  the  man  who  resists  is  do- 
ing something  wrong,  but  that  in  the  dif- 
ferent circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed 
it  may  become  his  duty  to  resist. 

In  reading  the  Bhagavad  Gita  many  of 
you  in  Western  countries  may  have  felt 
astonished  at  the  second  chapter,  when 
Krishna  calls  Arjuna  a hypocrite  and  a 
coward  because  of  his  refusal  to  fight  or 
offer  resistance  on  account  of  his  adver- 
saries being  his  friends  and  relatives,  mak- 
ing the  plea  that  non-resistance  was  the 
highest  ideal  of  love.  The  great  lesson  to 
learn  is  that  the  two  extremes  are  alike; 
the  extreme  positive  and  the  negative  are 

34 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

always  similar;  when  the  vibrations  of  light 
are  too  slow  we  do  not  see  them,  nor  do 
we  see  them  when  they  are  too  rapid.  So 
with  sound;  when  very  low  we  do  not  hear, 
when  very  high  we  do  not  hear.  In  like 
manner  is  the  difference  between  resistance 
and  non-resistance.  One  man  does  not  re- 
sist because  he  is  weak,  lazy,  and  cannot, 
and  not  because  he  will  not;  the  other  is 
the  man  who,  knowing  that  he  can  strike 
an  irresistible  blow  if  he  likes,  not  only  does 
not  strike,  but  blesses  his  enemies.  The 
one  who  resists  not  from  weakness  com- 
mits a sin,  and  as  such  will  not  receive  any 
benefit  from  his  non-resistance,  while  the 
other  would  commit  a sin  by  offering  re- 
sistance. Buddha  gave  up  his  throne  and 
renounced  his  position;  that  was  true  re- 
nunciation; but  there  cannot  be  any  ques- 
tion of  renunciation  in  the  case  of  a beggar 
who  has  nothing  to  renounce.  So  we  must 
35 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

always  take  care,  when  we  speak  of  this 
non-resistance  and  ideal  love,  what  we 
really  mean.  We  must  first  take  care  to 
understand  whether  we  have  the  power  of 
resistance  or  not.  Then,  having  the  power, 
if  we  renounce  and  do  not  resist,  we  are  do- 
ing a grand  act,  but  if  we  cannot  resist  and 
at  the  same  time  try  to  deceive  ourselves 
that  we  are  actuated  by  motives  of  the 
highest  love  we  are  doing  the  exact  oppo- 
site. So  Arjuna  became  a coward  at  the 
sight  of  the  mighty  array  against  him;  his 
“ love  ” made  him  forget  his  duty  towards 
his  country  and  king.  That  is  why  Krishna 
told  him  that  he  was  a hypocrite: — “ Thou 
talkest  like  a wise  man,  but  thy  actions  be- 
tray thee  to  be  a coward;  therefore,  stand 
up  and  fight!  ” 

Such  is  the  idea  of  the  Karma  Yogi. 
The  Karma  Yogi  is  the  man  who  under- 
stands that  the  highest  ideal  is  non-re- 

36 


“Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place” 

sistance,  but  who  also  knows  that  this  is 
the  highest  manifestation  of  power,  and 
that  what  is  called  “ resisting  evil  ” is  but 
a step  on  the  way  towards  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  highest  power,  which  is  non-re- 
sistance. Before  having  attained  the  high- 
est ideal  his  duty  is  to  resist;  let  him  work, 
let  him  fight,  let  him  strike  straight  from 
the  shoulder.  Then  only,  when  he  has 
gained  the  power  to  resist,  will  non-re- 
sistance be  a virtue. 

Inactivity  should  be  avoided  by  all 
means.  Activity  always  means  resistance. 
Resist  all  evils,  mental  and  physical,  and 
when  you  have  succeeded  in  resisting,  then 
will  calmness  come.  It  is  very  easy  to  say, 
“ hate  not  anybody,  resist  not  any  evil,” 
but  we  know  what  that  means.  When  the 
eyes  of  society  are  turned  towards  us  we 
may  make  a show  of  non-resistance,  but  in 
our  hearts  it  is  canker  all  the  time.  We 
37 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

feel  the  want  of  it;  we  feel  that  it  would 
be  better  to  resist.  If  you  desire  wealth 
and  you  know  that  the  whole  world  will 
tell  you  that  he  who  aims  at  wealth  is  a 
very  wicked  man,  you,  perhaps,  do  not 
dare  to  plunge  into  the  struggle  for  wealth, 
yet  at  the  same  time  the  mind  is  running 
day  and  night  after  money.  This  is  hypoc- 
risy and  will  serve  no  purpose.  Plunge 
into  the  world,  and  then,  after  a time,  when 
you  have  enjoyed  all  that  is  in  it,  will  re- 
nunciation come;  then  will  calmness  come. 
So  fulfil  your  desire  for  power  and  every- 
thing else,  and  after  you  have  fulfilled  the 
desire  will  come  the  time  when  you  will 
know  that  these  are  very  little  things;  un- 
til you  have  fulfilled  this  desire,  until  you 
have  passed  through  that  activity,  it  is  im- 
possible for  you  to  come  to  that  state  of 
calmness  and  serenity.  These  ideas  of 
serenity  have  been  preached  for  thousands 

38 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

of  years;  everybody  born  has  heard  them 
from  childhood,  and  yet  we  see  very  few 
in  the  world  that  have  really  reached  that 
stage.  I do  not  know  if  I have  seen  twenty 
persons  in  my  life  who  were  really  calm  and 
non-resisting,  and  I have  travelled  over  half 
the  world. 

Every  man  should  take  up  his  own  ideal 
and  endeavor  to  accomplish  it;  that  is  a 
surer  way  than  taking  up  other  men’s 
ideals,  which  he  can  never  hope  to  accom- 
plish. For  instance,  we  take  a child  and 
at  once  give  him  the  task  of  walking 
twenty  miles;  either  the  little  one  dies  or 
one  in  a thousand  may  crawl  the  twenty 
miles,  to  reach  the  end  exhausted  and  half 
dead.  That  is  what  we  generally  try  to  do 
with  the  world.  All  men  and  women,  in 
any  society,  are  not  of  the  same  mind,  or 
capacity,  and  have  not  the  same  power  to 
understand  things;  they  must  have  differ- 
39 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

ent  ideals,  and  we  have  no  right  to  sneer  at 
any  ideal.  Let  every  one  do  the  best  he 
can  for  his  own  ideal.  I should  not  be 
judged  by  yours  or  you  by  mine.  The  ap- 
ple tree  should  not  be  judged  by  the  stand- 
ard of  the  oak  nor  the  oak  by  that  of  the 
apple.  To  judge  the  apple  tree  you  must 
take  the  apple  standard  and  for  the 
oak  its  own  standard,  and  so  with  all 
of  us. 

Unity  in  variety  is  the  plan  of  creation. 
However  men  and  women  may  vary  indi- 
vidually, there  is  unity  in  the  background. 
The  different  individual  characters  and 
classes  of  men  and  women  are  natural 
variations  in  the  law  of  creation.  Hence, 
we  ought  not  to  judge  them  by  the  same 
standard  or  put  the  same  ideal  before  them. 
Such  a course  creates  only  an  unnatural 
struggle,  and  the  result  is  that  man  begins 

to  hate  himself  and  is  hindered  from  be- 

40 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

coming  religious  and  good.  Our  duty  is 
to  encourage  every  one  in  his  struggle  to 
live  up  to  his  own  highest  ideal  and  strive 
to  make  this  ideal  as  near  as  possible  to  the 
truth.  In  the  Hindu  morality  we  find  that 
this  fact  has  been  recognized  from  very  an- 
cient times,  and  in  their  Scriptures  and 
books  on  ethics  different  rules  are  laid 
down  for  the  different  classes  of  men,  for 
the  householder,  the  Sannyasin  (the  man 
who  has  renounced  the  world)  and  the  stu- 
dent. 

The  life  of  every  individual,  according  to 
the  Hindu  Scriptures,  has  its  peculiar  du- 
ties apart  from  what  belongs  to  universal 
humanity;  to  each  stage  of  life  certain 
duties  are  attached  by  its  own  nature.  No 
one  of  these  stages  of  life  is  superior  to  the 
other;  the  life  of  the  married  man  is  quite 
as  great  as  that  of  the  man  who  is  not  mar- 
ried, but  who  has  devoted  himself  to  re- 
41 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

ligious  work.  The  king  on  his  throne  is 
as  great  and  glorious  as  the  scavenger  in 
the  street.  Take  him  off  his  throne,  make 
him  do  the  work  of  the  scavenger  and  see 
„how  he  will  fare.  Take  the  scavenger  and 
see  how  he  will  rule.  It  is  useless  to  say 
that  the  man  who  lives  out  of  the  world  is 
a greater  man  than  he  who  lives  in  the 
world;  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  live  in 
the  world  and  worship  God  than  to  give  it 
up  and  live  a free  and  easy  life.  The  house- 
holder marries  and  carries  on  his  duties  as 
a citizen,  while  the  duties  of  the  man  who 
gives  up  the  world  are  to  devote  his  ener- 
gies only  to  religion.  If  a man  goes  out 
of  the  world  to  worship  God  he  must  not 
think  that  those  who  live  in  the  world  and 
work  for  the  good  of  the  world  are  not 
worshipping  God;  neither  must  those  who 
live  in  the  world,  for  wife  and  children, 

think  that  those  who  give  up  the  world  are 

42 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 


low  vagabonds.  Each  is  great  in  his  own 
place. 

This  thought  I will  illustrate  by  a story. 

A certain  king  used  to  inquire  of  all  the 
Sannyasins  that  came  to  his  country,  - 
“ Which  is  the  greater  man — he  who  gives 
up  the  world  and  becomes  a Sannyasjn,  or  VT  JaWj 


he  who  lives  in  the  world  and  performs  his 
duties  as  a householder?  ” Many  wise  men 
sought  to  solve  the  problem.  Some  as- 
serted that  the  Sannyasin  was  greater,  upon 
which  the  king  demanded  that  they  prove 
their  assertion.  When  they  could  not  he 
ordered  them  to  marry  and  become  house- 
holders. Then  others  came  and  said,  “ The 
householder  who  performs  his  duties  is  the 
greater  man.”  Of  them,  too,  the  king  de- 
manded proofs.  When  they  could  not  give 
them  he  made  them  also  settle  down  as 
householders. 

At  last  there  came  a young  Sannyasin, 
43 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

and  the  king  inquired  of  him.  He  an- 
swered, “ Each,  O king,  is  equally  great 
in  his  place.”  “ Prove  this  to  me,”  replied 
the  king.  “ I will  prove  it  to  you,”  said  the 
Sannyasin,  “ but  you  must  first  come  and 
live  as  I do  for  a few  days,  that  I may  be 
able  to  prove  to  you  what  I say.”  The 
king  consented  and  followed  the  Sannyasin 
out  of  his  own  territory  and  passed  through 
many  territories,  until  they  came  to  another 
kingdom.  In  the  capital  of  that  kingdom 
a great  ceremony  was  going  on.  The  king 
and  the  Sannyasin  heard  the  noise  of 
drums,  and  music,  and  criers;  the  people 
were  assembled  in  the  streets  in  gala  ar- 
ray, and  a great  proclamation  was  being 
made.  The  king  and  the  Sannyasin  stood 
there  to  see  what  was  going  on.  The  crier 
was  saying  that  the  princess,  daughter  of 
the  king  of  that  country,  was  about  to 

44 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

choose  a husband  from  among  those  as- 
sembled before  her. 

It  was  an  old  custom  in  India  for 
princesses  to  choose  husbands  in  this  way, 
and  each  one  had  certain  ideas  of  the 
sort  of  man  she  wanted  for  a husband; 
some  would  have  the  handsomest  man; 
others  would  have  only  the  most  learned; 
others  would  have  the  richest  and  so  on. 
The  princess,  in  the  most  splendid  array, 
was  carried  on  a throne,  and  the  announce- 
ment was  made  by  criers  that  the  princess 
so-and-so  was  about  to  choose  her  hus- 
band. Then  all  the  princes  of  the  neigh- 
borhood put  on  their  bravest  attire  and 
presented  themselves  before  her.  Some- 
times they,  too,  had  criers  to  enumerate 
their  advantages  and  the  reasons  why  they 
hoped  the  princess  would  choose  them. 
The  princess  was  carried  around  and  looked 
at  them  and  heard  what  they  had  to  offer, 
45 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

and  if  she  was  not  pleased  she  said  to  her 
bearers,  “ Move  on,”  and  no  more  notice 
was  taken  of  the  rejected  suitors.  If,  how- 
ever, the  princess  was  pleased  with  any  one 
of  them  she  threw  a garland  upon  him,  and 
he  became  her  husband. 

The  princess  of  the  country  to  which  the 
king  and  the  Sannyasin  had  come  was  hav- 
ing one  of  these  ceremonies.  She  was  the 
most  beautiful  princess  in  the  world,  and 
the  husband  of  the  princess  would  be  ruler 
of  the  kingdom  after  her  father’s  death. 
The  idea  of  this  princess  was  to  marry  the 
handsomest  man,  but  she  could  not  find 
the  right  one  to  please  her.  Several  times 
these  meetings  had  taken  place,  and  yet 
the  princess  had  not  selected  any  one.  This 
meeting  was  the  most  splendid  of  all;  more 
people  than  ever  had  come  to  it,  and  it 
was  a most  gorgeous  scene.  The  princess 

comes  in  on  a throne,  and  the  bearers  carry 

46 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

her  from  place  to  place.  She  does  not  care 
for  any  one,  and  every  one  becomes  disap- 
pointed that  this  meeting  also  is  to  be 
broken  up  without  any  one  being  chosen. 
Just  then  comes  a young  man,  a Sannya- 
sin,  handsome  as  if  the  sun  had  come  down 
to  the  earth,  and  he  stands  in  one  corner 
of  the  assembly,  watching  what  is  going  on. 
The  throne  with  the  princess  comes  near 
him,  and  as  soon  as  she  sees  the  beautiful 
Sannyasin  she  stops  and  throws  the  gar- 
land over  him.  The  young  Sannyasin 
seizes  the  garland  and  throws  it  off,  ex- 
claiming, “ What  nonsense  you  mean  by 
that;  I am  a Sannyasin.  What  is  marriage 
to  me?  ” The  king  of  that  country  thinks 
that  perhaps  this  man  is  poor,  so  does  not 
dare  to  marry  the  princess,  so  he  said  to 
him,  “ With  my  daughter  goes  half  my 
kingdom  now  and  the  whole  kingdom  after 
my  death!  ” and  he  puts  the  garland  again 
47 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place 

on  the  Sannyasin.  The  young  man  threw  it 
off  once  more,  saying,  “ What  nonsense  is 
this?  I do  not  want  to  marry,”  and  walked 
quickly  away  from  the  assembly. 

Now  the  princess  had  fallen  so  much  in 
love  with  this  young  man  that  she  said,  “ I 
must  marry  this  man  or  I shall  die,”  and 
she  went  after  him  to  bring  him  back. 
Then  the  other  Sannyasin,  who  had 
brought  the  king  there,  said  to  the  king, 
“ King,  let  us  follow  this  pair,”  so  they 
walked  after  them,  but  a good  distance  be- 
hind. The  young  Sannyasin  who  had  re- 
fused to  marry  the  princess  walked  out  into 
the  country  for  several  miles,  when  he  came 
to  a forest  and  struck  into  it,  and  the 
princess  followed  him,  and  the  other  two 
followed  them.  Now  the  young  Sannya- 
sin was  well  acquainted  with  that  forest  and 
knew  all  the  intricate  passages  in  it,  and 

suddenly  he  jumped  into  one  of  these  and 

48 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

disappeared,  and  the  princess  could  not  dis- 
cover him.  After  trying  for  a long  time  to 
find  him  she  sat  down  under  a tree  and 
began  to  weep,  for  she  did  not  know  the 
way  to  get  out  of  the  forest  again.  Then 
the  king  and  the  other  Sannyasin  came  up 
to  her  and  said,  “ Do  not  weep;  we  will 
show  you  the  way  out  of  this  forest,  but  it 
is  too  dark  for  us  to  find  it  now.  Here  is 
a big  tree;  let  us  rest  under  it,  and  in  the 
morning  we  will  go  early  and  show  you  the 
road  to  get  out.” 

Now  a little  bird  and  his  wife  and  three 
little  baby  birds  lived  on  that  tree,  in  a 
nest.  This  little  bird  looked  down  and  saw 
the  three  people  under  the  tree  and  said 
to  his  wife,  “ My  dear,  what  shall  be  done; 
here  are  some  guests  in  the  house,  and  it 
is  winter,  and  we  have  no  fire?  ” So  he  flew 
away  and  got  a bit  of  burning  firewood  in 
his  beak  and  dropped  it  before  the  guests, 
49 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

and  they  added  fuel  to  it  and  made  a blaz- 
ing fire.  But  the  little  bird  was  not  satis- 
fied. He  said  again  to  his  wife,  “ My  dear, 
what  shall  we  do;  there  is  nothing  to  give 
these  people  to  eat,  and  they  are  hungry, 
and  we  are  householders;  it  is  our  duty  to 
feed  any  one  who  comes  to  the  house.  I 
must  do  what  I can.  I will  give  them  my 
body.”  So  he  plunged  down  into  the  midst 
of  the  fire  and  perished.  The  guests  saw 
him  falling  and  tried  to  save  him,  but  he 
was  too  quick  for  them  and  dashed  into  the 
fire  and  was  killed. 

The  little  bird’s  wife  saw  what  her  hus- 
band did,  and  she  said,  “ Here  are  three 
persons  and  only  one  little  bird  for  them 
to  eat.  It  is  not  enough;  it  is  my  duty  as 
a wife  not  to  let  my  husband’s  effort  be  in 
vain;  let  them  have  my  body  also,”  and 
she  plunged  down  into  the  fire  and  was 
burned  to  death.  Then  the  three  baby 

50 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

birds,  when  they  saw  what  was  done,  and 
that  there  was  still  not  enough  food  for  the 
three  guests,  said,  “ Our  parents  have  done 
what  they  could  and  still  it  is  not  enough. 
It  is  our  duty  to  carry  on  the  work  of  our 
parents;  let  our  bodies  g too,”  and  they 
all  dashed  down  into  the  fire  also.  The 
three  people  could  not  eat  these  birds,  and 
they  were  amazed  at  what  they  saw.  Some- 
how or  other  they  passed  the  night  without 
food,  and  in  the  morning  the  king  and  the 
Sannyasin  showed  the  princess  the  way, 
and  she  went  back  to  her  father. 

Then  the  Sannyasin  said  to  the  king, 
“ King,  you  have  seen  that  each  is  great 
in  his  own  place.  If  you  want  to  live  in 
the  world  live  like  those  birds,  ready  at  any 
moment  to  sacrifice  yourself  for  others. 
If  you  want  to  renounce  the  world  be  like 
that  young  man  to  whom  the  most  beauti- 
ful woman  and  a kingdom  were  as  nothing. 

5i 


“ Each  is  Great  in  his  Own  Place  ” 

If  you  want  to  be  a householder  hold  your 
life  a sacrifice  for  the  welfare  of  others,  and 
if  you  choose  the  life  of  renunciation  do 
not  even  see  beauty,  and  money,  and 
power.  Each  is  great  in  his  own  place,  but 
the  duty  of  the  ne  is  not  the  duty  of  the 
other.” 


\ 


52 


Ill 


THE  SECRET  OF  WORK 

Helping  others  physically,  by  relieving 
their  physical  needs,  is  indeed  great,  but 
the  help  is  greater  when  the  need  is 
greater  and  the  help  is  more  far-reaching. 
If  a man’s  wants  for  an  hour  can  be  re- 
moved it  is  helping  him  indeed,  but  if  his 
wants  can  be  removed  for  a year  it  will  be 
more  help  to  him,  and  if  his  wants  can  be 
removed  forever  it  is  the  greatest  help  that 
can  be  given.  Spiritual  knowledge  is  the 
only  thing  that  can  remove  our  miseries 
forever;  any  other  knowledge  satisfies 
wants  only  for  a time.  If  the  nature  of 
the  man  be  changed,  then  alone  all  his 
wants  will  vanish  forever.  It  is  only  with 

53 


The  Secret  of  Work 

the  knowledge  of  the  spirit  that  the  laculty 
of  want  is  annihilated  forever,  so  helping 
man  spiritually  is  the  highest  help  that  can 
be  given  to  him;  he  who  gives  man  spirit- 
ual knowledge  is  the  greatest  benefactor  of 
mankind,  and  as  such  we  always  find  that 
they  were  the  most  powerful  of  men  who 
have  helped  man  in  his  spiritual  needs,  be- 
cause it  is  the  basis  of  all  other  works  in 
life.  A spiritually  strong  and  sound  man 
will  be  strong  in  every  other  respect,  if  he 
wishes,  and  until  there  is  spiritual  strength 
in  mankind  even  the  physical  needs  can- 
not be  satisfied.  Next  to  spiritual  comes 
intellectual  help;  the  gift  of  knowledge  is 
a far  higher  gift  than  that  of  food  and 
clothes;  it  is  higher,  even,  than  giving  life 
to  a man,  because  the  real  life  of  man  con- 
sists of  knowledge;  ignorance  is  death,  and 
knowledge  is  life.  Life  is  of  very  little 
value  if  it  is  a life  in  the  dark,  groping 

54 


The  Secret  ofWork 


through  ignorance  and  misery.  Next  in 
order  comes,  of  course,  helping  a man  phy- 
sically. So,  in  considering  the  helping  of 
others,  we  must  always  strive  not  to  com- 
mit the  mistake  of  thinking  that  physical 
help  is  the  only  help  that  can  be  given; 
physical  help  is  the  last  and  the  least,  be- 
cause there  is  no  permanent  satiation.  1 he 
misery  that  I feel  when  I am  hungry  is  sat- 
isfied by  eating,  but  hunger  returns  again; 
misery  can  only  cease  when  I am  satisfied 
beyond  all  want.  Then  hunger  will  not 
make  me  miserable;  no  distress,  no  misery, 
no  sorrow  will  be  able  to  move  me.  So  that 
help  which  tends  to  make  us  strong  spirit- 
ually is  the  highest  help;  next  to  it  comes 
intellectual  help  and  after  that  physical 
help. 

The  miseries  of  the  world  cannot  be 
cured  by  simply  physical  help;  until  man’s 
nature  changes  these  physical  needs  will  al- 

55 


The  Secret  of  Work 


ways  arise,  and  miseries  will  be  always  felt, 
and  no  amount  of  physical  help  given  to 
the  world  will  cure  that  misery.  The  only 
solution  of  the  problem  of  all  this  misery 
in  the  world  is  to  make  mankind  pure.  Ig- 
norance is  the  mother  of  all  the  evil  and  all 
the  misery  we  see.  Let  men  have  light,  let 
them  be  spiritually  strong,  and  if  we  can 
accomplish  this,  if  all  mankind  becomes 
pure  and  spiritually  strong  and  educated, 
then  alone  will  misery  cease  in  the  world 
and  not  before  then.  We  may  convert 
every  house  in  the  country  into  a charity 
asylum;  we  may  fill  the  lands  with  hospitals, 
but  the  misery  will  still  exist  until  man’s 
character  changes. 

We  read  in  the  Gita  again  and  again 
that  we  must  all  work  incessantly,  but  all 
work  must  be  composed  of  good  and  evil; 
we  cannot  do  any  work  which  has  not  some 
part  of  good  somewhere;  there  cannot  be 

56 


The  Secret  of  Work 


any  work  which  will  not  injure  some  one 
somewhere.  Every  work  must  necessarily 
be  a mixture  of  good  and  evil;  yet  we  are 
told  to  work  incessantly;  the  good  and  evil 
will  both  have  their  results,  make  their 
Karma;  the  good  action  will  entail  upon 
us  good  effect;  the  bad  action  bad  effect, 
but  good  and  bad  are  both  bondages  of  the 
soul.  The  solution  reached  in  the  Gita  is 
that  if  we  do  not  attach  ourselves  to  the 
work  it  will  not  take  any  effect  on  us.  We 
will  try  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  this 
“ non-attachment  ” to  work. 

It  is  the  one  central  idea  in  the  Gita; 
work  incessantly,  but  be  not  attached  to  it. 
“ Samskara  ” can  be  translated  very  nearly 
by  the  word  tendency.  Using  the  simile 
of  a lake  for  the  mind,  every  ripple,  every 
wave  that  rises  in  the  mind  when  it  sub- 
sides does  not  die  out  entirely,  but  leaves 
a mark  and  a future  possibility  of  that 

57 


The  Secret  of  Work 


W • 


wave  coining  out  again.  This  mark,  with 
the  possibility  of  the  wave  reappearing,  is 
what  is  called  Samskara.  Each  work  that 
we  do,  each  movement  of  the  body,  each 
thought  in  the  mind,  is  leaving  such  an  im- 
i i ‘ ; ion  on  the  mind  stuff,  and  even  when 
ire  not  obvious  on  the  surface,  these 
are  sufficiently  strong  to  work  be- 
.a.h  the  surface,  sub-consciously.  What 
we  are  each  moment  is  determined  by  the 
sum  total  of  these  impressions  on  the 
mind.  What  I am  just  at  this  moment  is 
the  effect  of  the  sum  total  of  these  marks, 
of  my  past  life.  This  is  really  what  is  meant 
by  character;  each  man’s  character  is  de- 
termined by  the  sum  total  of  these  impres- 
sions. If  good  impressions  prevail,  that 
character  becomes  good ; if  bad,  that  char- 
acter becomes  bad.  If  a man  continuously 
hears  bad  words,  thinks  bad  thoughts,  does 
bad  actions,  his  mind  will  be  full  of  these 

58 


The  Secret  of  Work 


impressions,  or  marks,  and  they,  uncon- 
sciously, will  govern  the  tendency  of  his 
work.  In  fact,  these  impressions  are  al- 
ways working,  and  the  expression  will  be 
evil;  that  man  will  be  a bad  man;  he  can- 
not help  it;  the  sum  total  of  these  impres- 
sions will  create  the  strong  motive  power 
for  doing  bad  actions;  he  will  be  a machine 
in  the  hands  of  his  impressions,  and  they 
will  force  him  to  do  evil.  Similarly,  if  a 
man  thinks  good  thoughts  and  does  good 
works  the  sum  total  of  these  impressions 
will  be  good,  and  they,  in  a similar  manner, 
will  force  him  to  do  good  in  spite  of  him- 
self. When  a man  has  done  so  much  good 
work  and  thought  so  many  good  thoughts 
that  there  is  an  irresistible  tendency  in  his 
nature  to  do  good  in  spite  of  himself,  then, 
even  if  he  thinks  he  will  do  evil,  the  mind, 
in  the  sum  total  of  its  tendencies,  will  not 
allow  him  to  do  so;  the  tendencies  will 
59 


The  Secret  of  Work 


turn  him  back;  he  is  at  the  mercy  of  his 
good  tendencies.  When  that  is  the  case 
that  man’s  character  is  said  to  be  estab- 
lished. 

As  the  tortoise  tucks  his  feet  and  head 
inside  of  his  shell,  and  you  may  kill  him 
and  break  him  in  pieces,  yet  they  will  not 
come  out,  even  so  the  character  of  that 
man  who  has  control  over  his  centres  and 
organs  is  established.  By  this  continuous 
reflex  of  good  thoughts,  good  impressions 
moving  over  the  surface  of  the  mind,  the 
tendency  becomes  strong  for  good,  and  the 
result  is  that  we  control  the  “ Indriyas  ” 
(the  sensory  and  motor  organs).  Then 
alone  will  the  character  be  established; 
then  alone  you  get  to  truth;  that  man  is 
safe  forever;  he  cannot  do  any  evil;  you 
may  throw  him  anywhere;  you  may  put 
him  in  any  company;  there  will  be  no  dan- 
ger for  him.  There  is  a still  higher  stage 

60 


The  Secret  of  Work 

than  having  this  good  tendency,  the  desire 

for  liberation.  You  must  remember  that 

freedom  of  the  soul  is  the  goal  of  all  these 

Yogas,  and  each  one  equally  leads  to  the 

same  result.  Just  by  work,  men  can  get 

where  Buddha  got  by  meditation  and^  ^ ^ 

Christ  by  prayer.  Buddha  was  a Jnani; 

Christ  was  a Bhakta,  but  the  same  goal  ^ / , 
was  reached.  The  difficulty  is  here.  Lib- 
eration means  entire  freedom — freedom 
from  the  bondages  of  good,  as  well  as  from 
the  bondages  of  evil.  A golden  chain  is 
as  much  a chain  as  an  iron  chain.  There 
is  a thorn  in  my  finger,  and  I use  another 
thorn  to  take  the  first  thorn  out,  and  when 
I have  taken  it  out  I throw  both  thorns 
aside;  I have  no  necessity  for  keeping  the 
second  thorn,  because  both  are  thorns, 
after  all.  So  the  bad  tendencies  are  to  be 
counteracted  by  the  good  tendencies,  and 

the  bad  marks  of  the  mind  should  be  con- 

61 


The  Secret  of  Work 


quered  by  fresh  waves  of  good  marks,  un- 
til those  that  are  evil  almost  disappear,  or 
are  subdued  and  held  in  control  in  one 
corner  of  the  mind;  but  after  that,  the 
good  tendencies  have  also  to  be  con- 
quered; the  “attached”  must  become  “un- 
attached.” Work,  but  let  not  the  action  or 
the  thought  produce  a deep  impression  on 
the  mind;  let  the  ripple  come;  let  huge 
actions  proceed  from  the  muscles  and  the 
brain,  but  let  them  not  make  any  deep  im- 
pression on  the  soul.  How  can  that  be 
done?  We  see  that  the  impression  of  any 
action  to  which  we  join  ourselves  remains. 

I may  meet  hundreds  of  persons  during 
the  day,  but  I meet  one  I love,  and  when 
I retire  at  night  I may  try  to  think  of  all 
the  faces,  but  that  face  comes  which  I met 
only  for  one  minute,  and  which  I loved, 
and  all  the  others  have  vanished.  My  at- 
tachment to  this  particular  person  caused 

6a 


The  Secret  of  Work 

a deeper  impression  on  my  mind  than  all 
the  other  faces.  Physiologically,  the  im- 
pressions have  all  been  the  same;  every 
one  of  these  faces  that  I saw  pictured  itself 
on  the  retina,  and  the  brain  took  the  pic- 
ture in,  and  yet  there  was  no  similar  effect 
upon  the  mind.  But  in  the  case  of  that 
man,  of  whom  I caught,  perhaps,  only  a 
glimpse,  a deeper  impression  was  made,  be- 
cause the  other  faces  found  no  association 
in  my  mind;  most  of  them,  perhaps,  were 
entirely  new,  faces  about  which  I never 
thought  before,  but  that  one  face,  of  which 
I got  only  a glimpse,  found  associations  in- 
side. Perhaps  I had  pictured  him  for  years, 
knew  hundreds  of  things  about  him,  and 
this  one  new  thing  found  hundreds  of  kin- 
dred things  inside  my  mind,  and  all  these 
associations  were  aroused;  the  impression 
on  my  mental  vision  was  a hundred  times 
more  than  the  seeing  of  all  those  different 

63 


The  Secret  of  Work 


faces  together,  and,  such  being  the  case,  a 
deep  impression  will  be  immediately  made 
upon  the  mind. 

Therefore,  be  “unattached;”  let  things 
work;  let  brain  centres  work,  work  inces- 
santly, but  let  not  a ripple  conquer  the 
mind.  Work  as  if  you  were  a stranger  in 
this  land,  a sojourner;  work  incessantly, 
but  do  not  bind  yourselves;  bondage  is 
terrible.  This  world  is  not  our  habitation, 
it  is  only  one  of  the  many  stages  through 
which  we  are  passing.  Remember  that 
great  saying  of  the  Sankhya  Philosophy, 
“ The  whole  of  nature  is  for  the  soul,  not 
the  soul  for  nature.”  The  very  reason  of 
nature’s  existence  is  for  the  education  of 
the  soul;  it  has  no  other  meaning;  it  is 
there  because  the  soul  must  have  knowl- 
edge, and  through  knowledge  will  free  it- 
self. If  we  remember  this  always  we  shall 

never  be  attached  to  nature;  we  shall 

64 


The  Secret  of  Work 


know  that  nature  is  a book  in  which  we 
are  to  read,  and  when  we  have  gained  that 
knowledge  the  book  itself  ceases  to  be  of 
value  to  us.  Instead  of  that,  however,  we 
are  identifying  ourselves  with  nature;  we 
are  thinking  that  the  soul  is  for  nature,  just 
as  the  common  saying  is  that  one  man 
“ lives  to  eat  ” and  another  “ eats  to  live;  ” 
we  are  continually  making  this  mistake;  we 
are  regarding  nature  as  ourselves  and  are 
becoming  attached  to  it,  and  as  soon  as  this 
attachment  comes  there  is  this  deep  im- 
pression on  the  soul,  which  binds  us  down 
and  makes  us  work  like  slaves. 

The  whole  gist  of  this  teaching  is  that 
you  should  work  like  a master  and  not  as 
a slave;  work  incessantly,  but  not  slave’s 
work.  Do  you  not  see  how  everybody 
works?  Nobody  can  rest;  ninety-nine  per 
cent  of  mankind  work  as  slaves,  and  the  re- 
sult is  misery;  it  is  selfish  work.  Work 
65 


The  Secret  of  Work 


through  freedom!  Work  through  love! 
The  word  love  is  very  difficult  to  under- 
stand; it  never  comes  until  there  is  free- 
dom. There  is  no  love  in  the  slave.  If 
you  buy  a slave  and  tie  him  down  in  chains 
and  make  him  work  for  you  he  will  work 
like  a drudge,  but  there  will  be  no  love. 
So  when  we  ourselves  work  for  the  world 
as  slaves,  there  is  no  love,  and  it  is  not 
true  work.  The  same  applies  to  our  work 
for  our  relatives  and  friends,  even  for  our 
own  selves.  Suppose  a man  loves  a woman; 
he  wishes  to  have  her  all  to  himself  and 
feels  extremely  jealous  about  her  every 
moment;  he  wants  her  to  sit  near  him,  to 
stand  near  him  and  eat  and  move  at  his 
bidding.  He  is  a slave  to  her.  That  is  not 
love;  it  is  a sort  of  morbid  affection  of  the 
slave,  insinuating  itself  as  love.  It  cannot 
be  love,  because  it  is  painful;  if  she  does 
not  do  what  he  wants  it  brings  pain.  With 

66 


The  Secret  of  Work 


love  there  is  no  painful  reaction;  love  only 
brings  a reaction  of  bliss;  if  it  does  not  it 
is  not  love;  we  are  mistaking  something 
else  for  love.  When  you  have  succeeded 
in  loving  your  husband,  your  wife,  your 
children,  the  whole  world,  the  universe,  in 
such  a manner  that  there  is  no  reaction  of 
pain,  or  jealousy,  no  selfish  feeling,  then 
you  are  in  a fit  state  to  be  unattached. 

Krishna  says,  “ Look  at  me,  Arjuna!  If 
I stop  from  work  for  one  moment  the 
whole  universe  will  die.  Yet  I have  noth- 
ing to  gain  from  the  universe,  I am  one 
Lord.  I have  nothing  to  gain  from  the 
universe;  but  why  do  I work?  Because  I 
love  the  world.”  God  is  unattached  be- 
cause He  loves;  that  real  love  makes  us 
unattached.  Wherever  there  is  this  attach- 
ment, this  tremendous  clinging,  you  must 
know  it  is  physical,  a sort  of  physical  at- 
traction between  particles  of  matter  and 
67 


The  Secret  of  Work 


other  particles  of  matter,  something  that 
attracts  two  bodies  nearer  and  nearer  all 
the  time,  and  if  they  cannot  get  near  it  be- 
comes painful;  but  where  there  is  real  love 
it  does  not  count  on  physical  attachment  at 
all.  That  body  may  be  a thousand  miles 
distant,  love  is  all  the  same;  it  does  not 
die;  there  will  never  be  a painful  reaction. 

To  attain  this  non-attachment  is  almost 
a life  work,  but  as  soon  as  we  have  reached 
this  point,  we  have  attained  the  goal  and 
become  free.  The  bondage  of  nature  falls 
from  us,  and  we  see  nature  as  it  is;  she 
forges  no  more  chains  for  us.  We  stand 
entirely  free  and  take  not  the  results  of 
work  into  consideration.  Why  care  what 
may  be  the  results,  either  good  or  bad? 
The  man  who  works  through  freedom  does 
not  care  for  the  results.  Do  you  ask  any- 
thing from  your  children  in  return  for  what 
you  have  given  them?  It  is  your  duty  to 

68 


The  Secret  of  Work 

work  for  them,  and  there  it  stops.  What- 
ever you  do  for  a particular  person,  a city, 
or  a State,  do  it,  but  assume  the  same  atti- 
tude as  you  have  towards  your  children 
expect  nothing.  If  you  can  incessantly 
take  that  position  that  you  are  a giver,  that 
everything  given  by  you  is  a free  offering 
to  the  world,  without  any  thought  of  re- 
turn, that  will  be  work  which  will  not  bring 
attachment.  Attachment  only  comes  when 
we  expect  something. 

This  idea  of  complete  self-sacrifice  is  il- 
lustrated in  the  following  story: — After  the 
battle  of  Kurukshetra  the  five  Pandu 
brothers  held  a great  sacrifice  and  made 
very  large  gifts  to  the  poor.  All  the  peo- 
ple expressed  amazement  at  the  greatness 
and  richness  of  the  sacrifice  and  said  that 
such  a sacrifice  the  world  had  never  seen 
before.  But,  after  the  ceremony,  there 

came  a little  mongoose;  half  his  body  was 

69 


The  Secret  of  Work 


golden,  and  the  other  half  was  brown,  and 
he  began  to  roll  himself  on  the  floor  of  the 
sacrificial  hall.  Then  he  said  to  those 
around,  “ You  are  all  liars;  this  is  no  sac- 
rifice.” “What!”  they  exclaimed,  “you 
say  this  is  no  sacrifice!  Do  you  not  know 
how  money  and  jewels  were  poured  out 
upon  the  poor  and  every  one  became  rich 
and  happy?  This  was  the  most  wonderful 
sacrifice  any  man  ever  made.”  But  the 
mongoose  said,  “ There  was  once  a little 
village,  and  in  it  there  dwelt  a poor  Brah- 
min, with  his  wife,  his  son  and  his  son’s 
wife.  They  were  very  poor  and  lived  on 
alms  gained  in  preaching  and  teaching,  for 
which  men  made  little  gifts  to  them. 

“ There  came  in  that  land  a three  years’ 
famine,  and  the  poor  Brahmin  suffered 
more  than  ever.  At  last  for  five  days  the 
family  starved,  but  on  the  fifth  day  the 

father  brought  home  a little  barley  flour, 

70 


The  Secret  of  Work 

which  he  had  been  fortunate  enough  to 
find,  and  he  divided  it  into  four  parts,  one 
for  each  of  them.  They  prepared  it  for 
their  meal,  and  just  as  they  were  about  to 
eat  it  a knock  came  at  the  door.  The 
father  opened  it,  and  there  stood  a guest. 
In  India  a guest  is  sacred;  he  is  as  a god 
for  the  time  being,  and  must  be  treated  as 
such.  So  the  poor  Brahmin  said,  ‘ Come 
in,  sir;  you  are  welcome.’  He  set  before 
the  guest  his  own  portion  of  food,  and  the 
latter  quickly  ate  it  up  and  then  said,  ‘ Oh, 
sir,  you  have  killed  me;  I have  been  starv- 
ing for  ten  days,  and  this  little  bit  has  but 
increased  my  hunger.’  Then  the  wife  said 
to  her  husband,  ‘ Give  him  my  share,’  but 
the  husband  said,  ‘ Not  so.’  The  wife,  how- 
ever, insisted,  saying,  * Here  is  a poor  man, 
and  it  is  our  duty  as  householders  to  see 
that  he  is  fed,  and  it  is  my  duty  as  a wife 
to  give  him  my  portion,  seeing  that  you 

7 1 


The  Secret  of  Work 


have  no  more  to  offer  him.’  Then  she  gave 
her  share  to  the  guest,  and  he  ate  it  up  and 
said  he  was  still  burning  with  hunger.  So 
the  son  said,  ‘ Take  my  portion  also;  it  is 
the  duty  of  a son  to  help  his  father  to  fulfil 
his  obligations.’  The  guest  ate  that,  but 
remained  still  unsatisfied;  so  the  son’s  wife 
gave  him  her  portion  also.  That  was  suffi- 
cient, and  the  guest  departed,  blessing 
them. 

“ That  night  those  four  people  died  of 
starvation.  A few  grains  of  that  flour  had 
fallen  on  the  floor,  and  when  I rolled  my 
body  on  them  half  of  it  became  golden,  as 
you  see  it.  Since  then  I have  been  all  over 
the  world,  hoping  to  find  another  sacrifice 
like  that,  but  never  have  I found  one;  no- 
where else  has  the  other  half  of  my  body 
been  turned  into  gold.  That  is  why  I say 
this  is  no  sacrifice.” 


72 


IV 


WHAT  IS  DUTY  ? 

It  is  necessary  to  know  what  work  is, 
and  with  that  comes,  naturally,  the  ques- 
tion, “What  is  duty?”  If  I have  to  do 
something  I must  first  know  my  duty,  and 
then  I can  do  it.  The  idea  of  duty,  again, 
is  very  different  in  different  nations.  The 
Mohammedan  says  what  is  written  in  his 
book,  the  Qur’an,  is  his  duty;  the  Hindu 
says  what  is  in  his  book,  the  Vedas,  is  his 
duty,  and  the  Christian  says  what  is  in  his 
Bible  is  his  duty.  So  we  find  that  there 
must  be  varied  ideas  of  duty,  differing  ac- 
cording to  different  states  in  life,  different 
periods  and  different  nations.  The  term 
“ duty,”  like  every  other  universal  abstract 

73 


What  is  Duty  *? 

term,  is  impossible  to  define;  we  can  only 
get  an  idea  of  it  by  describing  the  sur- 
roundings and  by  knowing  its  actions  and 
its  results.  To  make  an  objective  definition 
of  duty  would  be  entirely  impossible;  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  objective  duty.  Yet 
there  is  duty  from  the  subjective  side. 
Any  action  that  makes  us  go  godward  is 
a good  action,  and  is  our  duty;  any  action 
that  makes  us  go  downward  is  an  evil 
action.  There  is  only  one  idea  which  is 
universal  for  all  mankind,  of  any  age,  sect 
or  country,  and  that  has  been  summed 
up  in  the  Sanskrit  aphorism: — “ Do  not  in- 
jure any  being;  non-injuring  any  being  is 
virtue;  injuring  any  being  is  vice.” 

One  point  we  ought  to  remember  is  that 
we  should  always  try  to  see  the  duty  of 
others  through  their  eyes,  and  never  judge 
the  customs  of  other  races  or  other  peo- 
ples by  our  own  standard.  This  is  the 

74 


What  is  Duty  ? 


great  lesson  to  learn.  “ I am  not  the  stand- 
ard of  the  universe.  I have  to  accommo- 
date myself  to  the  world,  and  not  the  world 
to  me.”  Therefore  we  see  that  environ- 
ments will  change  our  duties,  and  doing  in 
the  best  way  that  duty  which  is  ours  at  a 
certain  time  is  the  best  thing  we  can  do  in 
this  world.  Let  us  do  that  duty  which  is 
ours  by  birth,  and  when  we  have  done  that 
do  the  duty  which  is  ours  by  our  position. 
Each  man  is  placed  in  some  position  in  life, 
and  must  do  the  duties  of  that  position 
first.  There  is  one  great  difficulty  in  hu- 
man nature,  that  man  never  looks  at  him- 
self. He  thinks  he  is  quite  as  fit  to  be  on 
the  throne  as  the  king.  Even  if  he  is,  he 
must  first  show  that  he  has  done  the  duty 
of  his  own  position,  and  when  he  has  done 
that,  higher  duty  will  come  to  him. 

Later  on  we  will  find  that  even  the  idea 
of  duty  will  have  to  be  changed,  and  that 
75 


What  is  Duty? 

the  greatest  work  is  only  done  when  there 
is  the  least  motive  urging  us  from  behind. 
Yet  it  is  work  through  duty  that  leads  us 
to  work  without  any  idea  of  duty;  when 
work  will  become  worship — nay,  higher, 
work  will  stand  alone  for  its  own  sake. 
But  that  is  the  ideal,  and  the  way  lies 
through  duty.  We  shall  find  the  philosophy 
behind  all  duties,  either  in  the  form  of 
ethics  or  love,  is  the  same  as  that  in  every 
other  Yoga — attenuating  the  lower  self,  so 
that  the  real  Self  may  shine;  to  circum- 
scribe the  frittering  away  of  energies  on  the 
lower  planes  of  existence,  so  that  the  soul 
may  manifest  itself  on  the  higher  planes. 
This  is  accomplished  by  the  continuous  de- 
nial of  low  desires,  a denial  which  duty 
rigorously  requires.  The  whole  organiza- 
tion of  society  has  thus  been  developed, 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  as  the  land  of 

actions,  the  field  of  experience,  where,  by 

76 


What  is  Duty? 


limiting  the  desires  of  selfishness,  we  open 
the  way  to  an  unlimited  expansion  of  the 
real  nature  of  man. 

Duty  is  seldom  sweet.  It  is  only  when 
love  oils  its  wheels  that  it  runs  smoothly; 
else  it  is  a continuous  friction.  What  par- 
ents can  do  their  duties  to  their  children? 
What  children  to  their  parents?  What 
husband  to  his  wife?  What  wife  to  her 
husband?  Do  we  not  meet  with  cases  of 
friction  every  day  in  our  lives?  Duty  is 
sweet  only  through  love,  love  shines  alone 
in  freedom;  yet  is  it  freedom  to  be  a slave 
to  the  senses,  to  anger,  to  jealousies  and  a 
hundred  other  petty  things  that  must  occur 
every  day  in  human  life?  In  all  these  lit- 
tle roughnesses  that  we  meet  with  in  life 
the  highest  expression  of  freedom  is  to  for- 
bear. Women,  slaves  to  their  own  irritable, 
jealous  tempers,  are  apt  to  attribute  the 
blame  to  their  husbands,  and  assert  their 
77 


What  is  Duty  ? 

freedom,  as  they  think,  not  knowing  that 
they  are  only  proving  that  they  are  slaves. 
So  with  husbands  who  are  continually  find- 
ing fault  with  their  wives. 

Chastity  is  the  first  virtue  in  man  or 
woman,  and  the  man  who,  however  he  may 
have  strayed  away,  cannot  be  brought  to 
the  right  path  by  a gentle  and  loving  and 
chaste  wife,  is  indeed  very  rare.  This  world 
is  not  yet  as  bad  as  that.  We  hear  much 
about  brutal  husbands  all  over  the  world 
and  the  impurity  of  men,  but  it  is  true  that 
there  are  quite  as  many  brutal  and  impure 
women  as  men.  If  all  women  were  as  good 
and  pure  as  their  own  constant  assertions 
would  lead  people  to  believe,  I am  perfectly 
satisfied  that  there  would  not  be  one  im- 
pure man  in  the  world.  With  whom  could 
men  become  impure?  What  brutality  is 
there  which  purity  and  chastity  cannot  con- 
quer? A good,  chaste  wife,  who  thinks  of 

78 


What  is  Duty? 


every  other  man  except  her  own  husband 
as  her  child  and  has  the  attitude  of  a 
mother  toward  all  men,  will  grow  so  great 
in  the  power  of  purity  that  there  will  not 
be  a single  man,  however  brutal,  who  will 
not  feel  an  atmosphere  of  holiness  in  her 
presence.  Similarly  every  husband  must 
look  upon  all  women,  except  his  own  wife, 
in  the  light  of  his  own  mother  or  daughter 
or  sister.  That  man,  again,  who  wants  to 
be  a teacher  of  religion  must  look  upon 
every  woman  as  his  mother,  and  always  be- 
have toward  her  as  such. 

The  position  of  the  mother  is  the  highest 
in  the  world,  as  it  is  the  one  place  in  which 
to  learn  and  exercise  the  greatest  unselfish- 
ness. The  love  of  God  is  the  only  love 
that  is  higher  than  mother’s  love;  all  others 
are  lower.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  mother  to 
think  of  her  children  first  and  then  of  her- 
self. But,  instead  of  that,  if  the  parents  are 
79 


What  is  Duty? 

always  thinking  of  themselves  first,  the  re- 
sult is  that  the  relation  between  parents  and 
children  becomes  as  the  relation  between 
the  birds  and  their  offspring,  who,  as  soon 
as  they  are  fledged,  cease  to  recognize  any 
parents.  Blessed,  indeed,  is  the  man  who 
is  able  to  look  upon  woman  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  Motherhood  of  God. 
Blessed,  indeed,  is  the  woman  to  whom 
man  represents  the  Fatherhood  of  God. 
Blessed  are  the  children  who  look  upon 
their  parents  as  Divinty  manifested  on 
earth. 

The  only  way  to  rise  spiritually  is  by 
doing  the  duty  that  is  in  our  hands  now, 
and  making  ourselves  stronger  and  going 
higher,  until  we  reach  the  highest  state. 
Nor  is  duty  to  be  slighted.  A man  who 
does  the  lower  work  is  not,  therefore,  a 
lower  man  than  he  who  does  the  higher 

work.  A man  should  not  be  judged  by  the 

80 


What  is  Duty? 


nature  of  his  duties,  but  by  the  manner  in 
which  he  does  them.  His  manner  of  doing 
them  and  power  to  do  them  is  the  test  of 
a man.  A shoemaker  who  can  turn  out  a 
strong,  well-made  pair  of  shoes  in  the 
shortest  time  is  a better  man  according  to 
his  works  than  a would-be  professor  who 
talks  nonsense  every  day  of  his  life. 

A certain  young  Sannyasin  went  to  a 
forest  and  there  meditated  and  worshipped 
and  practised  Yoga  for  a long  time.  After 
twelve  years  of  hard  work  and  practice,  he 
was  one  day  sitting  under  a tree,  when 
some  dry  leaves  fell  upon  his  head.  He 
looked  up  and  saw  a crow  and  a crane 
fighting  on  the  top  of  the  tree,  and  they 
made  him  very  angry.  He  said: — “What! 
You  dare  throw  those  dry  leaves  upon  my 
head!  ” and  as  he  looked  upon  them  with 
anger,  a flash  of  fire  burst  from  his  head 
— the  Yogi’s  power — and  burnt  the  birds 
81 


What  is  Duty  ? 

to  ashes.  He  was  very  glad;  he  was  al- 
most overjoyed  at  this  development  of 
power;  he  could  burn,  at  a glance,  the  crow 
and  the  crane.  After  a time  he  had  to  go 
into  the  town  to  beg  his  bread.  He  came 
and  stood  at  a door  and  said: — “Mother, 
give  me  food.”  A voice  came  from  inside 
the  house: — “Wait  a little,  my  son.”  The 
young  man  thought: — “You  wretched 
woman,  dare  you  make  me  wait!  You  do 
not  know  my  power  yet.”  While  he  was 
thinking  this  the  voice  came  again: — 
“ Boy,  don’t  be  thinking  too  much  of  your- 
self. Here  is  neither  crow  nor  crane.”  He 
was  astonished;  still  he  had  to  wait.  At 

last  a woman  came,  and  he  fell  at  her  feet 

) 

and  said: — “Mother,  how  did  you  know 
that?”  She  said: — “My  boy,  I do  not 
know  your  Yoga  or  your  practices.  I am 
a common,  everyday  woman,  but  I made 

you  wait  because  my  husband  is  ill,  and  I 

82 


What  is  Duty '? 

was  nursing  him,  and  that  was  my  duty. 
All  my  life  I have  struggled  to  do  my  duty. 
As  a daughter,  when  I was  unmarried,  I 
did  my  duty,  and  now,  when  I am  married, 

I still  do  my  duty;  that  is  all  the  Yoga  I 
practise,  and  by  doing  my  duty  I have  be- 
come illumined;  thus,  I could  read  your 
thoughts  and  know  what  you  had  done  in 
the  forest.  But  if  you  want  to  know  some- 
thing higher  than  this  go  to  such  and  such 
a town  and  to  the  market,  and  there  you 
will  find  a butcher,  and  he  will  tell  you 
something  that  you  will  be  very  glad  to 
learn.”  The  Sannyasin  thought: — “ Why 
go  to  that  town  and  to  a butcher.”  (Butch- 
ers are  the  lowest  class  in  our  country , 
they  are  called  Chandalas;  they  are  not 
touched  because  they  are  butchers;  they 
do  the  duty  of  scavengers,  and  so  forth.) 

But  after  what  he  had  seen  his  mind  was 
opened  a little,  so  he  went,  and  when  he 
83 


What  is  Duty? 

came  to  the  city  he  found  the  market,  and 
there  saw,  at  a distance,  a big,  fat  butcher 
slashing  away  at  animals,  with  big  knives, 
and  bargaining  with  different  people.  The 
young  man  said,  “ Lord,  help  me,  is  this 
the  man  from  whom  I am  going  to  learn? 
He  is  the  incarnation  of  a demon,  if  he  is 
anything.”  In  the  meantime  this  man 
looked  up  and  said,  “ Swami,  did  that  lady 
send  you  here?  Take  a seat  until  I have 
finished  my  business.”  The  Sannyasin 
thought,  “ What  comes  to  me  here?”  but 
he  took  a seat  and  the  man  went  on,  and 
after  he  had  finished  all  his  selling  and  buy- 
ing, took  his  money  and  said  to  the  Sann- 
yasin, “ Come  here,  sir;  come  to  my  home.” 
So  they  went  there  and  the  butcher 
gave  him  a seat  and  said,  “ Wait  there.” 
Then  he  went  into  the  house  and  there 
were  his  father  and  mother.  He  washed 
them  and  fed  them  and  did  all  he  could  to 

84 


What  is  Duty‘S 

please  them,  and  then  came  and  took  a seat 
before  the  Sannyasin  and  said,  “ Now,  sir, 
you  are  come  here  to  see  me;  what  can  I 
do  for  you?”  Then  this  great  Sannyasin 
asked  him  a few  questions  about  the  soul 
and  God,  and  this  butcher  gave  him  a lec- 
ture which  is  a very  celebrated  book  in 
India,  the  “ Vyadha  Gita,”  and  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Mahabharata,  the  great  In- 
dian epic.  It  is  on,.  of  the  highest  flights 
in  the  Vedanta,  the  highest  flight  of  meta- 
physics. You  have  heard  of  the  Bhagavad 
Gita,  Krishna’s  sermon.  When  you  have 
finished  that  you  should  read  the  “ Vyadha 
Gita,”  it  is  an  epitome  of  Vedanta  phil- 
osophy. When  the  butcher  had  finished 
the  Sannyasin  was  astonished.  He  said, 
“ Why  are  you  in  that  body,  with  such 
knowledge  as  yours?  Why  are  you  in  a 
butcher’s  body,  and  doing  such  filthy,  ugly 
work?  ” “ My  son,”  replied  the  Chandala, 

85 


What  is  Duty? 

“ no  duty  is  ugly,  and  no  duty  is  impure. 
My  birth  placed  me  in  these  circumstances 
and  environments.  In  my  boyhood  I 
learned  the  trade;  I am  unattached,  and  I 
try  to  do  my  duty  well.  I try  to  do  my 
duty  as  a householder,  and  I try  to  do  all 
I can  to  make  my  father  and  mother  happy. 
I neither  know  your  Yoga,  nor  have  be- 
come a Sannyasin;  never  went  out  of  the 
world,  nor  into  a forest,  but  all  this  has 
come  to  me  through  doing  my  duty  in  my 
position.” 

There  is  a sage  in  India,  a great  Yogi, 
one  of  the  most  wonderful  men  I have  seen 
in  my  life.  He  is  a peculiar  man;  he  will 
not  teach  any  one;  if  you  ask  him  a ques- 
tion he  will  not  answer.  It  is  too  much 
for  him  to  take  the  position  of  a teacher; 
he  will  not  take  it.  If  you  ask  a question, 
and  if  you  wait  for  some  days,  in  the  course 

of  conversation,  he  will  bring  the  subject 

86 


What  is  Duty  ? 

out  himself,  and  wonderful  light  he  will 
throw  on  it.  He  told  me  once  the  secret 
of  work,  and  what  he  said  was,  “ Let  the 
end  and  the  means  be  joined  into  one,  and 
that  is  the  secret  of  work.”  When  you  are 
doing  work,  do  not  think  of  anything  be 
yond.  Do  it  as  worship,  and  the  highest 
worship,  and  devote  your  whole  life  to  it 
for  the  time  being.  Thus,  in  this  story,  the 
butcher  and  the  woman  did  their  duty  with 
cheerfulness,  and  wholeheartedness,  and 
willingness,  and  the  result  was  that  they 
became  illuminated,  clearly  showing  that 
the  right  performance  of  the  duties  of  any 
station,  and  being  non-attached,  lead  to  the 
highest  realization. 

8 7 


WE  HELP  OURSELVES,  NOT  THE  WORLD 


Our  duty  to  others  means  helping 
others,  doing  good  to  the  world.  Why 
should  we  do  good  to  the  world?  Appar- 
ently to  help  the  world,  but  really  to  help 
ourselves.  We  should  always  try  to  help 
the  world;  that  should  be  the  highest  mo- 
tive power  in  us;  but,  when  we  analyze  it 
properly,  we  shall  find  that  this  world  does 
not  require  our  help.  This  world  was  not 
made  that  you  or  I should  come  and  help 
it.  I once  read  a sermon  in  which  was 
said: — “All  this  beautiful  world  is  very 
good  because  it  gives  us  time  and  oppor- 
tunity to  help  others.”  Apparently,  it  was 

a very  beautiful  sentiment,  but,  in  one 

88 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

sense,  it  was  a curse,  for  is  it  not  a blas- 
phemy to  say  that  the  world  needs  our 
help?  We  cannot  deny  that  there  is  much 
misery  in  it;  to  go  out  and  help  others  is, 
therefore,  the  highest  motive  power  we 
have,  although,  in  the  long  run,  we  shall 
find  that  it  is  only  helping  ourselves.  As 
a boy  I had  some  white  mice.  They  were 
kept  in  a little  box  and  had  little  wheels 
made  for  them,  and  when  the  mice  tried  to 
cross  the  wheels,  the  wheels  turned  and 
turned,  and  the  mice  never  got  anywhere. 
So  with  the  world  and  our  helping  it.  The 
only  help  is,  that  you  get  exercise.  This 
world  is  neither  good  nor  evil;  each  man 
manufactures  a world  for  himself.  If  a 
blind  man  begins  to  think  of  it,  it  is  either 
as  soft  or  hard,  or  cold  or  hot.  We  are  a 
mass  of  happiness  or  misery;  we  have  seen 
that  hundreds  of  times  in  our  lives.  As  a 
rule,  the  young  are  optimistic  and  the  old 

89 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

pessimistic.  The  young  have  all  life  before 
them,  and  the  old  are  complaining  that 
their  day  is  gone.  Hundreds  of  desires, 
which  they  cannot  fulfill,  are  struggling  in 
their  brains.  Life  is  at  an  end  for  them. 
Both  are  foolish.  This  life  is  neither  good 
nor  evil.  It  is  according  to  the  different 
states  of  mind  in  which  we  look  at  the 
world.  The  most  intelligent  man  would 
call  it  neither  good  nor  evil.  Fire,  by  itself, 
is  neither  good  nor  evil.  When  it  keeps  us 
warm  we  say: — “ How  beautiful  is  fire!  ” 
When  it  burns  our  fingers  we  blame  the 
fire.  Still,  it  was  neither  good  nor  bad.  As 
we  use  it,  it  produces  that  feeling  of  good 
or  bad,  and  so  is  this  world.  It  is  perfect. 
By  perfection  is  meant  that  it  is  perfectly 
fitted  to  meet  its  ends.  We  can  all  be  per- 
fectly sure  that  it  will  go  on,  and  that  it 
does  not  need  any  help  from  us. 

Yet  we  must  do  good.  It  is  the  highest 
90 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

motive  power  we  have,  knowing  all  the 
time  it  is  a privilege  to  help.  Do  not  stand 
on  a pedestal  and  take  five  cents  and  say, 

“ Here,  my  poor  man,”  but  be  grateful  that 
the  poor  man  is  there,  so  that  by  giving 
to  him  you  are  able  to  help  yourself.  It 
is  not  the  receiver  that  is  blessed,  but  the 
giver.  Be  thankful  that  you  are  allowed 
to  exercise  your  power  of  benevolence  and 
mercy  in  the  world,  and  thus  become  pure 
and  perfect.  All  good  acts  tend  to  make 
us  pure  and  perfect.  What  can  we  do  at i 
best?  Build  a hospital,  make  roads,  or 
erect  charity  asylums!  We  may  organize 
a charity  and  collect  two  or  three  millions 
of  dollars,  build  a hospital  with  one  million, 
with  the  second  give  balls  and  drink  cham- 
pagne, and  of  the  third  let  the  officers  steal 
half,  and  the  rest  may  finally  reach  the 
poor,  but  what  are  these?  One  mighty 
wind,  in  five  minutes,  can  break  it  all  up. 

9i 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

What  shall  we  do  then?  One  volcanic 
eruption  can  sweep  away  all  our  roads,  and 
hospitals,  and  cities  and  buildings.  Let  us 
give  up  all  this  foolish  talk  of  doing  good 
to  the  world.  It  is  not  waiting  for  your  or 
my  help,  yet  we  must  work  and  constantly 
do  good,  because  it  is  a blessing  to  our- 
selves. That  is  the  only  way  we  can  be- 
come perfect.  No  beggar  ever  owed  a sin- 
gle cent  to  us,  we  owe  everything  to  him, 
because  he  has  allowed  us  to  exercise  our 
powers  of  pity  and  charity  on  him.  It  is 
entirely  wrong  to  think  that  we  have  done, 
or  can  do  good  to  the  world,  or  have 
helped  such  and  such  people.  It  is  a foolish 
thought,  and  all  foolish  thoughts  bring 
misery.  We  think  we  have  helped  some 
one  and  expect  him  to  thank  us,  and,  be- 
cause he  does  not,  unhappiness  comes  to 
us.  Why  expect  anything?  If  we  were 
really  uattached,  we  should  escape  all  this 

9* 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

pain  of  vain  expectation,  and  could  do  good 
work  in  the  world.  Never  will  unhappi- 
ness or  misery  come  through  work  done 
without  attachment.  This  world  will  go  on 
with  its  happiness  and  misery  through  eter- 
nity. 

There  was  a poor  man  who  wanted  some 
money,  and,  somehow,  he  had  heard  that 
if  he  could  get  hold  of  a ghost  or  some 
spirit,  he  could  command  him  to  bring 
money  or  anything  he  liked;  so  he  was  very 
anxious  to  get  hold  of  a ghost.  He  went 
about  searching  for  a man  who  would  give 
him  a ghost,  and  at  last  he  found  a sage, 
with  great  powers,  and  besought  this  sage 
to  help  him.  The  sage  asked  him  what  he 
would  do  with  a ghost.  “ I want  a ghost 
to  work  for  me;  teach  me  how  to  get  hold 
of  one,  sir,  I desire  it  very  much,”  replied 
the  man.  But  the  sage  said,  “ Don’t  dis- 
turb yourself,  go  home.”  The  next  day 
93 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

the  man  went  again  to  the  sage  and  began 
to  weep  and  pray.  “ Give  me  a ghost;  I 
must  have  a ghost,  sir,  to  help  me.”  At 
last  the  sage  was  disgusted,  and  said,  “Take 
this  charm,  repeat  this  magic  word,  and  a 
ghost  will  come,  and  whatever  you  say  to 
this  ghost  he  will  do.  But  beware;  they  are 
terrible  beings,  and  must  be  kept  contin- 
ually busy.  If  you  fail  to  give  him  work 
he  will  take  your  life.”  The  man  replied: — 
“ That’s  easy;  I can  give  him  work  for  all 
his  life.”  Then  he  went  to  a forest,  and 
after  long  repetition  of  the  magic  word,  a 
huge  ghost  appeared  before  him,  with  big 
teeth,  and  said: — “I  am  a ghost.  I have 
been  conquered  by  your  magic.  But  you 
must  keep  me  constantly  employed.  The 
moment  you  stop  I will  kill  you.”  The 
man  said: — “Build  me  a palace,”  and  the 
ghost  said,  “ It  is  done;  the  palace  is  built.” 
“ Bring  me  money,”  said  the  man.  “ Here 

94 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

is  your  money,”  said  the  ghost.  “ Cut  this 
forest  down,  and  build  a city  in  its  place.” 
“ That  is  done,”  said  the  ghost;  “ anything 
more?  ” Now  the  man  began  to  be  fright- 
ened and  said: — “ I can  give  him  nothing 
more  to  do;  he  does  everything  in  a trice.” 
The  ghost  said: — “ Give  me  something  to 
do  or  I will  eat  you  up.”  The  poor  man 
could  find  no  further  occupation  for  him, 
and  was  frightened.  So  he  ran  and  ran  and 
at  last  reached  the  sage,  and  said: — “ Oh. 
sir,  protect  my  life!  ” The  sage  asked  him 
what  was  the  matter,  and  the  man  replied: 
— “ I have  nothing  to  give  the  ghost  to  do. 
Everything  I tell  him  to  do  he  does  in  a 
moment,  and  he  threatens  to  eat  me  up  if 
I do  not  give  him  work.”  Just  then  the 
ghost  arrived,  saying,  “ I’ll  eat  you  up;  I’ll 
eat  you  up,”  and  he  would  have  swallowed 
the  man.  The  man  began  to  shake,  and 
begged  the  sage  to  save  his  life.  The  sage 
95 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

said: — “ I will  find  you  a way  out.  Look 
at  that  dog  with  a curly  tail.  Draw  your 
sword  quickly  and  cut  the  tail  off  and  give 
it  to  the  ghost  to  straighten  out.”  The 
man  cut  off  the  dog’s  tail  and  gave  it  to  the 
ghost,  saying,  “ Straighten  that  out  for 
me.”  The  ghost  took  it  and  slowly  and 
carefully  straightened  it  out,  but  as  soon  as 
he  let  go,  it  instantly  curled  up  again. 
Once  more  he  laboriously  straightened  it 
out,  only  to  find  it  again  curled  up  as  soon 
as  he  attempted  to  let  go  of  it.  Again  he 
patiently  straightened  it  out,  but  as  soon 
as  he  let  it  go,  it  curled  up  once  more.  So 
he  went  on  for  days  and  days,  until  he  was 
exhausted,  and  said,  “ I was  never  in  such 
trouble  before  in  my  life.  I am  an  old  vet- 
eran ghost,  but  never  before  was  I in  such 
trouble.  I will  make  compromise  with 
you,”  he  said  to  the  man.  “ You  let  me  off 

and  I will  let  you  keep  all  I have  given  you 

96 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

and  will  promise  not  to  harm  you.”  The 
man  was  much  pleased,  and  accepted  the 
offer  gladly. 

This  world  is  that  dog’s  curly  tail,  and 
people  have  been  striving  to  straighten  it 
out  for  hundreds  of  years,  but  when  they 
let  go,  it  curls  up  again.  How  can  it  be 
otherwise?  One  must  first  know  how  to 
work  without  attachment,  then  he  will  not 
be  a fanatic.  When  we  know  that  this 
world  is  like  a dog’s  curly  tail  and  will  never 
straighten,  we  shall  not  become  fanatics. 
They  can  never  do  real  work.  If  there  were 
no  fanaticism  in  the  world  it  would  make 
much  more  progress  than  it  does  now.  It 
is  all  silly  nonsense  to  think  that  fanaticism 
makes  for  the  progress  of  mankind.  On 
the  contrary,  it  is  a retarding  element,  cre- 
ating hatred  and  anger,  causing  people  to 
fight  each  other,  and  making  them  unsym- 
pathetic. Whatever  we  think  and  believe 
97 


We  Help  Ourselves,  not  the  World 

we  consider  the  best  in  the  world,  and 
what  we  do  not  believe,  we  regard  as  of  no 
value.  So,  always  remember  this  curly  tail 
of  the  dog  whenever  you  have  a tendency 
to  become  a fanatic.  You  need  not  worry 
or  make  yourself  sleepless;  the  world  will 
go  on.  When  you  have  avoided  fanaticism 
then  alone  will  you  work  well.  It  is  the 
level-headed  man,  the  calm  man  of  good 
judgment  and  cool  nerves,  of  great  sym- 
pathy and  love,  who  does  good  work.  The 

fanatic  has  no  sympathy. 

98 


VI 


NON-ATTACHMENT  IS  COMPLETE  SELF- 
ABNEGATION 

Just  as  every  action  that  emanates  from 
us  comes  back  to  us,  even  so  our  actions 
may  act  on  other  people  and  theirs  on  us. 
Perhaps  all  of  you  have  observed  it  as  a 
fact  that  when  persons  do  evil  actions  they 
become  more  and  more  evil,  and  when  they 
begin  to  do  good  they  become  stronger 
and  stronger  and  do  good  all  the  time. 
This  multiplication  of  action  cannot  be  ex- 
plained on  any  other  ground,  except  that 
we  can  act  and  react  upon  each  other.  To 
take  a simile  from  physical  science,  when 
I am  doing  a certain  action  my  mind  is  in 
a certain  form  of  vibration;  all  minds  un- 
99 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

der  similar  circumstances  would  have  the 
tendency  to  be  affected  by  my  mind.  If 
there  are  different  musical  instruments  in 
one  room  all  of  you  have  noticed  that  if 
one  is  struck  the  others  have  a tendency  to 
vibrate  the  same  note.  So,  taking  this  as 
an  illustration,  it  shows  that  the  instru- 
ments had  each  the  same  tension  and  would 
be  affected  alike  by  the  same  impulse.  So 
all  minds  that  have  the  same  tension  will 
be  equally  affected  by  the  same  thought. 
Of  course,  it  will  vary,  according  to  the  dis- 
tance, but  it  will  be  open  to  be  affected. 
Suppose  I am  doing  an  evil  act,  my  mind 
is  in  a certain  state  of  vibration,  and  all 
minds  in  the  universe,  in  the  similar  state, 
will  have  the  possibility  of  being  affected 
by  my  mind.  So,  when  I am  doing  a good 
action,  my  mind  has  another  state  of  ten- 
sion, and  all  minds  similarly  attuned  will 

have  the  possibility  of  being  affected,  and 

ioo 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

this  power  of  affection  will  be  more  or  less 
according  to  the  tension. 

Following  this  simile  further,  it  is  quite 
possible  that,  just  as  light  waves  may  travel 
for  millions  of  years  before  they  reach  their 
object,  so  these  thought  waves  may  travel 
hundreds  of  years,  until  they  meet  with  an 
object  with  which  they  vibrate  in  unison. 
It  is  quite  possible,  therefore,  that  this  at- 
mosphere of  ours  is  full  of  such  thought 
pulsations,  both  good  and  evil.  Every 
thought  projected  from  every  brain  goes 
on  pulsating,  as  it  were,  until  it  meets  an 
object.  Any  mind  which  is  opening  itself 
to  receive  some  of  these  will  receive  them 
immediately.  So,  when  a man  is  doing  evil 
action,  he  has  brought  his  mind  to  a cer- 
tain state  of  tension,  and  all  the  waves  cor- 
responding to  that  state  of  tension,  which 
are  already  in  the  atmosphere,  will  strug- 
gle to  enter  his  mind.  That  is  why  an  evil- 

IOI 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

doer  generally  goes  on  doing  more  and 
more  evil.  His  action  is  intensified.  Such, 
also,  will  be  the  case  with  the  doer  of  good; 
he  will  open  himself  to  all  the  good  waves 
that  are  in  the  atmosphere,  and  his  good 
actions  will  be  intensified.  We  run,  there- 
fore, a twofold  danger  in  doing  evil;  first, 
we  open  ourselves  to  all  the  evil  influences 
surrounding  us;  secondly,  we  create  evil 
which  will  affect  others.  It  may  be  possible 
that  our  evil  actions  will  affect  others  hun- 
dreds of  years  hence.  In  doing  evil  we  in- 
jure ourselves  and  others  also.  In  doing 
good  we  do  good  to  ourselves  and  to 
others,  and,  like  all  other  forces  in  man, 
these  good  and  evil  forces  gather  strength 
from  outside. 

According  to  Karma  Yoga,  the  action 
one  has  done  cannot  be  destroyed  until  it 
has  borne  fruit;  no  power  in  nature  can 

stop  it  from  bearing  its  results.  If  I do  an 

102 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

evil  action,  I must  suffer  for  it;  there  is  no 
power  in  this  universe  to  stop  or  stay  it. 
So,  if  I do  a good  action  there  is  no  power 
in  the  universe  which  can  stop  its  bearing 
good  results.  The  cause  must  have  its  ef- 
fect; nothing  can  restrain  it.  Now  comes 
a very  fine  and  serious  question  about 
Karma  Yoga — that  these  actions  of  ours, 
either  good  or  evil,  are  intimately  con- 
nected with  each  other.  We  cannot  put  a 
line  of  demarcation  and  say  this  action  is 
entirely  good  and  this  entirely  evil.  There 
is  no  action  which  does  not  bear  good  and 
evil  at  the  same  time.  To  take  the  nearest 
example:  I am  talking  to  you,  and  some 
of  you,  perhaps,  think  I am  doing  good, 
and  at  the  same  time  I am,  perhaps,  killing 
thousands  of  microbes  in  the  atmosphere; 
I am  doing  evil  to  something  else.  When 
it  is  very  near  to  us  and  affects  those  we 
know  we  say  it  is  very  good  action,  if  it 

103 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

affects  them  in  a good  manner.  For  in- 
stance, you  may  call  my  speaking  to  you 
very  good,  but  the  microbes  will  not;  the 
microbes  you  do  not  see,  but  yourselves 
you  do  see.  The  effect  on  you  is  obvious, 
but  that  on  the  microbes  is  not  obvious. 
And  so,  if  we  analyze  our  evil  actions,  we 
will  find  that  some  good  was  done  some- 
where. “ He  who  in  good  action  sees  that 
there  is  something  evil  in  it  and  who  in  the 
midst  of  evil  sees  that  there  is  some  good 
in  it  somewhere  has  known  the  secret  of 
work.” 

But  what  follows  from  it?  That,  how- 
ever we  may  try,  there  cannot  be  any 
action  which  is  perfectly  pure,  or  any  which 
is  perfectly  impure,  taking  purity  or  im- 
purity in  the  sense  of  injury  or  non-injury. 
We  cannot  breathe  or  live  without  injuring 
others,  and  every  bit  of  food  we  eat  is  taken 

from  another’s  mouth;  our  very  lives  are 

104 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

crowding  out  some  other  lives.  It  may  be 
men,  or  animals,  or  small  microbes,  but 
some  one  we  have  to  crowd  out.  That  be- 
ing the  case,  it  naturally  follows  that  per- 
fection can  never  be  attained  by  work.  We 
may  work  through  all  eternity,  but  there 
will  be  no  way  out  of  this  intricate  maze; 
you  may  work  on,  and  on,  and  on;  there 
will  be  no  end. 

The  second  point  to  consider  is,  What  is 
the  end  of  work?  We  find  the  vast  ma- 
jority of  people  in  every  country  believing 
that  there  will  be  a time  when  this  world 
will  become  perfect,  when  there  will  be  no 
disease,  nor  death,  nor  unhappiness,  nor 
wickedness.  That  is  a very  good  idea,  a 
very  good  motive  power  for  the  ignorant, 
but  if  we  think  for  a moment  we  will  find 
that  on  the  very  face  of  it  it  cannot  be  so. 
How  can  it  be,  seeing  that  good  and  bad 

are  the  obverse  and  reverse  of  the  same 

105 


Non-Attachment  it  Self-Abnegation 

coin?  How  can  you  have  good  without 
evil  at  the  same  time?  What  is  meant  by 
perfection?  A perfect  life  is  a contradic- 
tion in  terms.  Life  itself  is  a state  of  con- 
tinuous struggle  between  ourselves  and 
everything  outside.  Every  moment  we  are 

i 

fighting  with  external  nature,  and  if  we  are 
defeated  our  life  will  have  to  go.  It  is  a 
continuous  struggle  for  food.  If  food  fails 
we  die.  Life  is  not  a simple  effect,  but  a 
compound  effect.  This  compound  strug- 
gle between  something  inside  and  the  ex- 
ternal world  is  what  we  call  life.  So,  on 
the  very  face  of  it,  when  this  struggle 
ceases,  there  will  be  an  end  of  what  we  call 
life. 

What  is  meant  by  this  ideal  happiness  is 
that  this  struggle  will  cease  altogether. 
But  then  life  will  cease,  for  the  struggle  can 
only  cease  when  life  has  ceased.  Then, 

again,  before  we  have  attained  to  one- 

106 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

thousandth  part  of  it,  this  earth  will  have 
cooled  down,  and  we  will  not  be.  So  this 
millennium  cannot  be  in  this  world,  if  it  can 
be  anywhere  else.  Every  act  of  charity, 
every  thought  of  sympathy,  every  action 
of  help,  every  good  deed,  is  taking  so  much 
away  from  our  little  selves  and  making  us 
think  of  ourselves  the  least  and,  therefore, 
is  good.  Here  we  find  that  the  Jnani,  or 
Bhakta,  or  Karmi,  all  come  to  one  point. 
The  highest  ideal  is  eternal  and  entire  self- 
abnegation,  where  there  is  no  “ I,”  but  is 
all  thou;  and  consciously,  or  unconsciously, 
Karma  Yoga  leads  to  that.  It  is  the  basis 
of  all  morality;  you  may  extend  it  to  men, 
or  animals,  or  angels,  but  it  is  the  one  basic 
idea,  the  one  fundamental  principle  run- 
ning through  all  ethical  systems. 

You  will  find  various  classes  of  men  in 
this  world.  First,  there  are  the  God-men, 
who  are  abnegating  themselves  entirely 
107 


Non- Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 


and  will  do  good  to  others,  even  at  the  sac- 
rifice of  their  own  lives.  These  are  the 
highest  of  men.  If  there  are  a hundred  of 
such  in  any  country,  that  country  need  not 
despair.  Then  there  are  good  men,  who 
do  good  to  others  so  long  as  it  does  not  in- 
jure themselves;  and  there  is  a third  class, 
who,  to  do  good  to  themselves,  would  injure 
others.  It  is  said  there  is  a fourth  class  of 
people,  who  will  injure  others  for  injury’s 
sake.  Just  as  there  are  at  one  pole  of  ex- 
istence the  good  men,  who  will  do  good  for 
good’s  sake,  so,  at  the  other  pole,  there  are 
others  who  will  injure  others,  just  for  the 
sake  of  injury.  They  do  not  gain  anything 
thereby,  but  it  is  their  nature.  So  we  see 
that  the  man  who  sacrifices  himself  to  do 
good  to  others,  the  man  with  the  highest 
self-abnegation,  is  the  greatest  man. 

Here  are  two  Sanskrit  words.  One  is 

called  “ Pravritti,”  revolving  towards,  and 

108 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

the  other  is  “ Nivritti,”  revolving  away. 
The  “ revolving  towards  ” is  what  we  call 
the  world,  “ I and  mine,”  those  who  are  al- 
ways enriching  that  “ me  ” by  wealth,  and 
property,  by  power,  and  name,  and  fame, 
always  wanting  to  accumulate  everything 
towards  one  centre,  and  that  centre  “ my- 
self.” That  is  the  “ pravritti,”  the  natural 
tendency  of  every  human  being;  taking 
everything  from  everywhere  and  heaping  it 
around  one  centre,  and  that  centre  his  own 
sweet  self.  When  this  begins  to  break, 
when  it  is  “ nivritti,”  “ going  away  from,” 
then  begin  morality  and  religion.  Both 
“ pravritti  ” and  “ nivritti  ” are  work,  but 
one  is  evil  work,  and  the  other  is  good 
work.  This  “ nivritti  ” is  the  basis  of  all 
morality  and  all  religion,  and  the  very  per- 
fection of  it  is  entire  self-abnegation,  readi- 
ness to  sacrifice  mind,  body  and  every- 
thing for  another  being.  When  a man  has 
109 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

reached  that  state  he  has  attained  to  the 
perfection  of  Karma  Yoga.  This  is  the 
highest  result  of  good  works.  If  a man  has 
not  studied  a single  philosophy,  if  he  does 
not  believe  in  any  God,  and  never  has,  if 
he  has  never  prayed  even  once  in  his  whole 
life,  but,  if  the  simple  power  of  good  ac- 
tions has  brought  him  to  that  state  where 
he  is  ready  to  give  up  his  life  and  all  else 
for  others,  he  has  arrived  at  the  same  point 
to  which  the  religious  man  will  come 
through  his  prayers  and  the  philosopher 
through  his  knowledge,  and  so  you  find 
that  the  philosopher,  the  worker,  and  the 
devotee,  all  meet  at  one  point,  and  that  one 
point  is  self-abnegation.  However  the  sys- 
tems of  philosophy  may  differ  in  opinion, 
all  mankind  stands  in  reverence  and  awe 
before  the  man  who  is  ready  to  sacrifice 
himself  for  others.  No  more  question  of 

icreed,  or  doctrine— even  men  who  are  very 

i io 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

much  opposed  to  all  religious  ideas,  when 
they  see  one  of  these  acts  of  complete  self- 
sacrifice,  must  revere  it.  Have  you  not 
seen  even  a most  bigoted  Christian,  when 
he  reads  Sir  Edwin  Arnold’s  “ Light  of 
Asia,”  stand  in  reverence  for  Buddha,  who 
preached  no  God,  preached  nothing  but 
self-sacrifice?  The  only  thing  is  that  the 
bigot  does  not  know  that  his  own  aim  and 
end  in  life  is  exactly  the  same.  The  wor- 
shipper, by  keeping  constant  the  idea  of 
God  and  a surrounding  of  good,  comes  to 
the  same  point  at  last,  “ Thy  will  be  done,” 
and  keeps  nothing  for  himself.  That  is 
self-abnegation.  The  philosopher,  with  his 
knowledge,  sees  that  the  seeming  self  is  a 
delusion  and  easily  gives  it  up;  yet  it  is 
self-abnegation.  So  the  paths  of  Karma, 
Bhakti  and  Jnana  all  meet  here,  and  this 
is  what  was  meant  by  all  the  great  preachers 
of  ancient  times,  when  they  taught  that 


hi 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

God  is  not  the  world.  There  is  one  thing 
which  is  world  and  another  which  is  God, 
and  this  is  very  true;  what  they  mean  by 
the  world  is  selfishness.  Unselfishness  is 
God.  One  may  live  on  a throne,  in  a gol- 
den palace,  and  be  perfectly  unselfish,  and 
he  is  in  God.  Another  may  live  in  a hut, 
and  wear  rags,  and  have  nothing  in  the 
world,  yet,  if  he  is  selfish,  he  is  intensely 
merged  in  the  world. 

To  come  back  to  one  of  our  points,  we 
say  that  we  cannot  do  good  without  doing 
some  evil,  or  evil  without  doing  some 
good.  Knowing  this,  how  can  we  work? 
A solution  is  found  in  the  Gita,  the  theory 
of  non-attachment,  to  be  attached  to  noth- 
ing. Know  that  you  are  separated  entirely 
from  this  world;  that  you  are  in  the  world, 
but  whatever  you  are  doing,  you  are  not 
doing  for  your  own  sake.  Any  action  that 

you  do  for  yourself  will  bring  an  effect  on 

1 12 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

you.  If  it  is  a good  action  you  will  have 
to  take  the  good  effect,  and,  if  bad,  you 
will  have  to  take  the  bad  effect;  but  any 
action  that  is  not  done  for  your  own  sake, 
whatever  it  be,  will  have  no  effect  on  you. 
Even  if  a man  kill  the  whole  world,  he  is 
neither  killed  nor  is  killing,  when  he  knows 
that  he  is  not  acting  for  himself  at  all. 
Therefore,  Karma  Yoga  teaches,  do  not 
give  up  the  world;  live  in  the  world,  take 
it  in  as  much  as  you  can,  but  not  for  the 
sake  of  enjoyment.  Enjoyment  should  not 
be  the  goal.  First  kill  yourself  and  then 
take  the  whole  world  as  yourself.  “ The 
old  man  must  die.”  This  old  man  is  this 
selfish  idea  that  the  whole  world  is  made  for 
our  enjoyment.  There  are  people  who 
teach  us  that  all  the  animals  were  created 
for  us  to  kill  and  eat,  and  that  this  universe 
is  for  the  enjoyment  of  man.  That  is  all 
foolishness.  A tiger  might  as  well  say, 
ii3 


Non- Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

“ Man  was  created  for  me,”  and  cry,  “ O 
Lord,  how  wicked  are  these  men,  who  do 
not  come  and  put  themselves  before  us  to 
be  eaten;  they  are  breaking  your  law.”  If 
the  world  is  created  for  us  we  are  also  cre- 
ated for  the  world.  That  this  world  is 
created  for  our  enjoyment  is  the  idea  that 
holds  us  down.  This  world  is  not  for  our 
sake;  millions  pass  out  of  it  every  year; 
the  world  does  not  feel  it;  millions  of  others 
have  been  supplied.  Just  as  the  world  is 
for  us,  we  are  for  the  world. 

To  work,  therefore,  first  give  up  the  idea 
of  attachment.  Secondly,  do  not  mix  in 
the  fray;  hold  yourself  as  a witness  and  go 
on  working.  A sage  has  said,  Look  upon 
your  children  as  your  nurse  does.  The 
nurse  will  take  your  baby  and  fondle  it  and 
play  with  it  and  behave  as  gently  as  if  it 
were  her  own  child,  but  as  soon  as  you 

give  her  notice  she  is  ready  to  start  off  with 

1 14 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

her  baggage  from  the  house.  Everything 
is  forgotten;  it  would  not  give  the  ordinary 
nurse  the  least  pang  to  leave  your  children 
and  take  up  other  children.  Even  so  be 
with  your  own.  You  are  the  nurse,  and,  if 
you  believe  in  God,  believe  that  these  are 
all  His.  The  greatest  weakness  generally 
insinuates  itself  as  the  greatest  good  and 
i strength.  This  is  weakness  to  think  that 
some  one  depends  on  me,  and  I can  do 
good  to  somebody.  This  pride  is  the 
mother  of  all  our  attachment,  and  through 
this  attachment  comes  all  our  pain.  We 
must  inform  our  minds  that  no  one  in  this 
universe  depends  upon  us;  not  one  beggar 
depends  on  our  charity;  not  one  soul  on 
our  kindness;  not  one  on  our  help.  They 
are  all  helped  and  will  be  helped  if  millions 
of  us  were  not  here.  The  course  of  nature 
will  not  stop  for  you  and  me;  it  is  only  a 
blessed  privilege  to  you  and  me  that  we 
"5 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

are  allowed  in  the  shape  of  help  to  others, 
to  educate  ourselves.  This  is  one  lesson  to 
learn,  through  the  whole  of  our  lives,  and 
when  we  have  learned  it  fully  we  shall  never 
be  unhappy;  we  can  go  and  mix  anywhere 
and  everywhere.  This  very  year  some  of 
our  friends  may  have  died.  Is  the  world 
waiting  for  them?  Is  its  current  stopped? 
It  goes  on.  So  drive  out,  thrash  out  of  your 
mind,  this  idea  that  you  have  to  do  some- 
thing for  the  world;  the  world  does  not  re- 
quire any  help  from  you.  When  you  have 
trained  your  nerves  and  your  muscles  to 
this  idea  there  will  be  no  reaction  in  the 
form  of  pain.  When  you  give  something 
to  a man  and  expect  nothing — do  not  ex- 
pect the  man  to  be  grateful — it  will  not  tell 
upon  you,  because  you  never  expected  any- 
thing, never  thought  you  had  a right  to 
anything;  you  gave  what  he  deserved;  his 

own  Karma  got  it  for  him;  your  Karma 

116 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

made  you  the  carrier.  Why  should  you  be 
proud  of  giving  something?  You  are  the 
porter  who  carried  the  money,  and  the 
world  deserved  it  by  its  own  Karma. 
Where  is  the  reason  for  pride?  There  is 
nothing  very  great  in  what  you  give  to  the 
world.  When  you  have  got  the  feeling  of 
non-attachment  there  will  be  neither  good 
nor  evil  work  for  you.  It  is  only  selfishness 
that  makes  the  difference  of  good  and  evil. 
It  is  a very  hard  thing  to  understand,  but 
you  will  come  to  learn  in  time  that  noth- 
ing in  the  universe  has  power  over  you  un- 
til you  admit  it.  Nothing  has  power  over 
the  Self  of  man  until  the  self  becomes  a 
fool  and  obeys  the  power.  So,  by  non-at- 
tachment, you  deny  the  power  of  anything 
to  act  upon  you.  It  is  very  easy  to  say  that 
nothing  has  the  right  to  act  upon  you  until 
you  allow  it,  but  what  is  the  sign  of  the  man 
who  really  does  not  allow  anything  to  work 
ii  7 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

upon  him,  who  is  neither  happy  nor  un- 
happy, when  he  is  acted  upon  by  the  ex- 
ternal world?  The  sign  is  that  it  makes  no 
change  in  his  mind;  in  good  fortune  or  in 
ill  he  remains  the  same. 

There  was  a great  sage  called  Vyasa. 
This  Vyasa  was  the  writer  of  the  Vedanta 
philosophy,  a holy  man.  His  father  had 
tried  to  become  a very  perfect  man  and 
failed;  his  grandfather  tried,  failed.  His 
great-grandfather  tried,  failed.  He  himself 
did  not  succeed  perfectly,  but  his  son, 
Shuka,  was  born  perfect.  He  taught  this 
son,  and,  after  teaching  him  himself,  he 
sent  him  to  the  court  of  King  Janaka. 
There  was  a great  king  called  Janaka 
Videha.  Videha  means  “outside  the  body.” 
Although  a king,  he  had  entirely  forgot- 
ten that  he  was  a body;  he  was  a spirit  all 
the  time.  This  boy  was  sent  to  be  taught 
by  him.  The  King  knew  that  Vyasa’s  son 

1 1 8 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

was  coming  to  him  to  learn,  so  he  made 
certain  arrangements  beforehand,  and  when 
this  boy  presented  himself  at  the  gates  of 
the  palace  the  guards  took  no  notice  of  him 
whatsoever.  They  only  gave  him  a place 
to  sit,  and  he  sat  there  for  three  days  and 
nights,  nobody  speaking  to  him,  nobody 
asking  who  he  was  or  whence  he  was. 
He  was  the  son  of  this  great  sage;  his 
father  was  honored  by  the  whole  country, 
and  he  himself  was  a most  respected  per- 
son, yet  the  low,  vulgar  guards  of  the  pal- 
ace would  take  no  notice  of  him.  After 
that,  suddenly,  the  ministers  of  the  King 
and  all  the  high  officials  came  there  and 
received  him  with  the  greatest  honors. 
They  took  him  in  and  showed  him  into 
splendid  rooms,  gave  him  the  most  fra- 
grant baths  and  wonderful  dresses,  and  for 
eight  days  they  kept  him  there  in  all  kinds 

of  luxury.  That  face  did  not  change;  he 

119 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

was  the  same  in  the  midst  of  this  luxury  as 
at  the  door.  Then  he  was  brought  before 
the  King.  The  King  was  on  his  throne, 
music  was  playing,  and  dancing  and  other 
amusements  going  on.  The  King  gave 
him  a cup  of  milk,  full  to  the  brim,  and 
asked  him  to  go  seven  times  round  the 
hall  without  spilling  a drop.  The  boy  took 
the  cup  and  proceeded  in  the  midst  of  this 
music  and  the  beautiful  faces.  Seven  times 
he  went  round,  and  not  a drop  of  milk  was 
spilled.  The  boy’s  mind  could  not  be  at- 
tracted by  anything  in  the  world,  unless  he 
allowed  it.  And  when  he  brought  the  cup 
to  the  King,  the  King  said  to  him,  “ What 
your  father  has  taught  you  and  what  you 
have  learned  yourself  I can  only  repeat; 
you  have  known  the  truth;  go  home.” 
Thus,  the  man  that  has  practised  control 
over  himself  cannot  be  acted  upon  by  any- 
thing outside;  there  is  no  more  slavery  for 

120 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

him.  The  mind  has  become  free;  such  a 
man  alone  is  fit  to  live  in  the  world.  We 
generally  find  men  of  two  opinions.  To 
those  who  have  not  controlled  their  own 
minds  this  world  is  either  full  of  evil  or  a 
mixture  of  good  and  evil.  This  very  world 
will  become  an  optimistic  world  when  we 
have  become  masters  of  our  own  minds. 
Nothing  will  work  upon  us  as  good  or  evil; 
we  shall  find  everything  harmonious.  Some 
men  who  begin  by  saying  the  world  is  a 
hell  will  end  by  saying  it  is  heaven.  If  we 
are  genuine  Karma  Yogis  and  want  to 
train  ourselves  to  this  state,  wherever  we 
may  begin  we  shall  end  in  perfect  self-ab- 
negation, and  as  soon  as  this  seeming  self 
has  gone  this  whole  world,  which  at  first 
appears  to  us  to  be  filled  with  evil,  will  ap- 
pear to  be  heaven  and  full  of  blessedness. 
Its  very  atmosphere  will  be  blessed;  every 
human  face  will  be  good.  This  is  the  goal 


1 2 1 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Ahnegation 

and  end  of  Karma  Yoga,  and  this  is  per- 
fection. So,  you  see,  these  various  Yogas 
do  not  conflict  with  each  other;  each  one 
goes  to  the  same  goal  and  makes  us  per- 
fect, but  each  one  has  to  be  practised.  The 
whole  secret  is  in  practising.  First  hear, 
then  think,  and  then  practise.  This  is  true 
of  every  Yoga.  You  have  first  to  hear 
about  it  and  understand  what  it  is,  and 
many  things  you  do  not  understand,  by 
constant  hearing,  will  be  made  clear.  It  is 
hard  to  understand  everything  at  once. 
The  explanation  of  everything  is  in  your- 
self. No  one  was  ever  taught  by  another; 
each  one  of  us  has  to  teach  himself.  The 
external  teacher  is  only  the  suggestion 
which  rouses  the  internal  teacher  to  under- 
stand things.  Then  things  will  be  made 
clearer  by  the  power  of  perception,  and  we 
shall  realize  them  in  our  own  souls,  and 
that  will  become  an  intense  power  of  will. 


122 


Non-Attachment  is  Self-Abnegation 

First  feeling,  then  it  becomes  willing,  and 
out  of  that  willingness  will  come  the  tre- 
mendous power  of  work  that  will  go 
through  every  vein,  and  nerve,  and  muscle, 
until  the  whole  mass  of  your  body  is 
changed  into  that  unselfish  Yoga  of  work, 
and  the  result  will  be  perfect  self-abnega- 
tion; utter  unselfishness.  It  does  not  de- 
pend on  any  dogma,  or  doctrine,  or  belief; 
either  Christian,  or  Jew,  or  Gentile,  it  does 
not  matter.  Are  you  unselfish?  That  is 
the  question.  If  you  are,  you  will  be  per- 
fect without  reading  a single  religious 
book,  without  going  into  a single  church  or 
temple.  “ Fools  alone  say  that  work  and 
philosophy  are  different,  not  the  learned.” 
The  learned  know  that,  though  apparently 
different  from  each  other,  they  at  last 
come  to  the  same  goal,  and  that  is  per- 
fection. 


123 


VII 


FREEDOM 

In  addition  to  meaning  work,  we  have 
seen  that  the  word  Karma  also  means 
causation.  Any  work,  any  action,  any 
thought,  that  produces  an  effect  is  called  a 
Karma.  This  law  of  Karma  means  the  law 
of  causation;  wheresoever  there  is  a cause, 
an  effect  must  be  produced;  it  cannot  be 
resisted,  and  that  law  of  Karma,  according 
to  our  philosophy,  is  pervading  the  whole 
universe.  Whatever  we  see,  or  feel,  or  do; 
whatever  action  there  is  anywhere  in  the 
universe,  is  but  the  effect  of  past  work  on 
the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  be- 
comes the  cause,  and  produces  another  ef- 
fect. It  is  necessary,  together  with  this,  to 

124 


Freedom 


consider  the  word  law.  We  see  psycho- 
logically that  law  is  the  tendency  of  a series 
to  repeat  itself.  When  we  see  one  event 
followed  by  another,  or  sometimes  happen- 
ing simultaneously,  we  expect  this  will  al- 
ways follow.  A series  of  phenomena  be- 
come associated  in  our  mind  in  a sort  of 
invariable  order,  so  that  what  we  see  at  one 
time  immediately  refers  to  other  facts  in  the 
mind.  One  idea,  or,  according  to  our 
psychology,  one  wave,  produced  in  the 
mind  stuff,  always  produces  many  similar 
ones.  This  is  the  law  of  association,  and 
causation  is  only  a part  of  this  law  of  per- 
vasive association.  In  the  external  world 
the  idea  of  law  is  the  same  as  in  the  internal 
world — the  expectation  that  one  phenome- 
non will  be  followed  by  another,  and  that 
the  series  will  repeat  itself,  so  far  as  we  can 
see.  Really  speaking,  therefore,  law  does 

not  exist  in  nature.  Practically,  it  is  an 

125 


Freedom 


error  to  say  that  gravitation  exists  in  the 
earth,  or  that  there  is  any  law  existing  any- 
where in  nature.  Law  is  the  method,  the 
manner  in  which  our  mind  grasps  a series 
of  phenomena;  it  is  all  in  the  mind.  Cer- 
tain phenomena  happening  together,  fol- 
lowed by  the  conviction  with  which  our 
mind  grasps  the  whole  series,  is  what  we 
call  law. 

The  next  question  will  be  what  we  mean 
by  law  being  universal.  Our  universe  is 
that  portion  of  existence  which  is  cut  off 
by  what  the  Sanskrit  psychologists  call 
“ Nama-Rupa  ” (name  and  form).  This 
universe  is  only  one  part  of  that  infinite  ex- 
istence, which  has  been  thrown  into  a pe- 
culiar mould,  or  that  is  composed  of  name 
and  form,  and  when  it  fills  that  mould  that 
part  of  the  sum  total  of  existence  which 
fills  the  mould  is  what  is  called  our  uni- 
verse. It  necessarily  follows  that  law  is 

126 


Freedom 


only  possible  within  this  universe;  beyond 
that  there  can  not  be  any  law.  W hen  we 
speak  of  this  universe  we  only  mean  that 
portion  of  existence  which  is  limited  by  our 
mind;  the  universe  of  senses,  which  we  can 
see,  feel,  touch,  hear,  think  of,  imagine; 
that  portion  of  the  universe  alone  is  under 
law,  but  beyond  that  it  cannot  be  under 
law,  because  causation  does  not  extend  be- 
yond that.  Anything  beyond  the  range  of 
our  mind  and  our  senses  is  not  bound  by 
the  law  of  causation,  as  there  is  no  associa- 
tion beyond  the  senses,  and  no  causation 
without  association  of  ideas.  It  is  only 
when  it  gets  moulded  into  name  and  form 
that  existence  obeys  the  law  of  causation, 
and  is  said  to  be  under  law,  because  law  has 
its  essence  in  causation.  Therefore,  we  see 
at  once  that  there  cannot  be  any  free  will; 
the  very  words  are  a contradiction,  because 
will  is  what  we  know,  and  everything  that 
127 


Freedom 


we  know  is  within  our  universe,  and  every- 
thing within  our  universe  has  been  moulded 
into  name  and  form,  and  everything  that 
we  know,  or  can  possibly  know,  must  obey 
causation,  and  that  which  obeys  the  law  of 
causation  cannot  be  free.  It  is  acted  upon 
by  other  agents,  and  becomes  cause  in  turn, 
and  so  on.  But  that  which  became  con- 
verted into  the  will,  which  was  not  the  will, 
but  which,  when  it  fell  into  this  mould,  be- 
came converted  into  the  human  will,  is  free, 
and  when  this  will  gets  out  of  this  mould  of 
causation  it  will  be  free  again.  From  free- 
dom it  comes,  and  becomes  moulded  into 
this  bondage,  and  it  gets  out  and  goes  back 
to  freedom. 

The  question  was  raised,  “ From  whom 
this  universe  comes,  in  whom  it  rests,  and 
to  whom  it  goes?  ” The  answer  was  given, 
“ From  that  Freedom  it  comes,  it  rests  in 
bondage,  and  it  goes  back  into  that  Free- 

128 


Freedom 


dom.”  So,  when  we  speak  of  man  as 
that  being  who  is  manifesting,  only  one 
part  is  man;  this  body  and  this  mind  which 
we  see  are  only  one  part  of  the  whole  man, 
only  one  spot  of  that  infinite  Being  which 
is  man.  This  whole  universe  is  only  one 
speck  of  the  infinite  Being,  and  all  our  laws, 
and  our  bondages,  our  joys  and  our  sor- 
rows, our  happinesses,  and  our  expecta- 
tions, are  only  within  this  small  universe, 
all  our  progression  and  digression  are 
within  this  small  space.  Thus  you  see  how 
childish  it  is  to  expect  a continuation  of 
this  world,  to  expect  and  hope  to  go  to 
heaven,  which  means  a repetition  of  this 
world  that  we  have.  You  see  at  once  that 
it  is  an  impossible  and  childish  desire  to 
make  the  whole  infinite  universe  conform 
to  that  existence  which  we  know.  When  a 
man  says  he  will  have  this  thing  again  and 
again  which  he  is  having  now,  or,  as  I 
129 


Freedom 


sometimes  say,  when  he  asks  for  a com- 
fortable religion,  you  may  know  that  he  has 
become  so  degenerate  that  he  cannot  think 
of  anything  higher  than  he  is  now,  just  his 
little  present  surroundings.  He  has  for- 
gotten his  infinite  nature,  and  his  whole 
idea  is  confined  to  these  little  joys  and  sor- 
rows, and  jealousies  of  the  moment.  He 
thinks  this  is  the  infinite,  and  not  only  so, 
he  will  not  let  it  go.  He  clings  on  desper- 
ately to  “ Trishna,”  the  thirst  after  life. 
There  are  millions  of  happinesses,  and  be- 
ings, and  laws,  and  progresses,  and  causa- 
tions all  acting  apart  from  what  we  know. 
This  is  but  one  section  of  our  infinite  na- 
ture. 

To  acquire  freedom  we  have  to  get  be- 
yond this  universe;  it  cannot  be  found 
here.  Perfect  equilibrium  cannot  be  at- 
tained in  this  universe,  nor  in  heaven,  nor 
earth,  nor  anywhere  where  thoughts  can 

130 


Freedom 


go,  or  the  mind,  where  the  senses  can  feel, 
see,  hear  or  touch,  or  which  we  can  imag- 
ine. No  such  place  can  give  freedom,  be- 
cause it  would  be  all  within  our  universe, 
and  that  universe  must  be  bound  by  causa- 
tion. It  may  be  much  finer  than  this; 
there  are  places  that  are  much  finer  than 
this  earth  of  ours,  where  enjoyments  will 
be  keener,  but  it  will  be  in  the  universe, 
and  therefore  in  bondage,  so  we  will 
have  to  go  beyond,  and  real  religion  be- 
gins there,  where  this  little  universe  ends. 
Where  these  little  joys,  and  sorrows,  and 
knowledges  end,  there  the  Real  begins. 
Until  we  can  give  up  this  thirst  after  life, 
this  strong  attachment  to  this  existence  of 
one  moment,  we  have  no  hope  of  catching 
even  a glimpse  of  that  infinite  freedom  be- 
yond. It  stands  then  that  there  is  only  one 
way  to  attain  to  that  freedom  which  is  the 
goal  of  mankind,  and  that  is  by  giving  up 
I31 


Freedom 


this  little  life,  giving  up  this  little  universe, 
giving  up  this  earth,  giving  up  heaven,  giv- 
ing up  the  body,  giving  up  the  mind,  giving 
up  everything.  If  we  can  give  up  this  lit- 
tle universe  of  the  senses,  or  the  mind,  im- 
mediately we  shall  be  free.  The  only  way 
to  come  out  of  bondage  is  to  go  beyond 
law,  go  beyond  causation,  and  wherever 
this  universe  exists,  there  causation  pre- 
vails. 

But  it  is  the  most  difficult  thing  to  give 
up  this  universe;  few  ever  attain  to  that. 
There  are  two  ways  in  our  books.  One  is 
called  the  “ Neti  Neti  ” (not  this,  not  this), 
the  negative;  and  the  other  is  called  the 
“ Iti  Iti  ” (this,  this),  the  positive  way.  The 
negative  way  is  the  most  difficult.  It  is 
only  possible  to  the  very  highest,  excep- 
tional minds,  with  gigantic  will  powers, 
who  simply  stand  and  say,  “ No,  I will  not 

have  this,”  and  the  mind  and  body  obey, 

132 


Freedom 


and  they  come  out.  But  such  people  are 
very  rare,  and  the  vast  majority  of  man- 
kind choose  the  positive  way,  the  way 
through  this  world,  making  use  of  all  the 
bondages  themselves  to  break  those  bon- 
dages. That  is  also  giving  up,  only  slowly 
and  gradually,  by  knowing  things,  enjoy- 
ing things,  and  thus  getting  experience, 
and  knowing  the  nature  of  things,  until  the 
mind  lets  them  go  away  and  becomes  unat- 
tached. The  one  is  by  reasoning  and  the 
other  is  through  work.  The  first  is  for  the 
Jnani,  and  is  by  refusing  to  work,  and 
the  second  is  Karma  Yoga,  by  working. 
Every  one  must  work  in  the  universe. 
“ Only  those  who  are  perfectly  satisfied 
with  the  Self,  whose  desires  do  not  go  be- 
yond the  Self,  whose  mind  never  strays  out 
of  the  Self,  to  whom  that  Self  is  all  in  all, 
do  not  work.”  The  rest  must  all  work.  A 
current  rushing  down  stream  of  its  own  na- 
133 


Freedom 


ture,  falls  into  a hollow  and  makes  a whirl- 
pool, and,  after  running  a little  in  that 
whirlpool,  it  emerges  again  in  the  form  of 
the  free  current.  So  each  human  life  is  like 
that  current.  It  gets  into  the  whirl,  gets 
involved  in  this  world  of  name  and  form, 
whirls  round  a little,  crying,  my  father,  my 
brother,  my  name,  my  fame,  and  at  last 
emerges,  and  regains  its  freedom.  The 
whole  universe  is  doing  that,  whether  it 
knows  it  or  not.  Every  one  is  having  this 
experience,  consciously  or  unconsciously, 
and  in  the  long  run  getting  out  of  this 
whirlpool. 

But  what  is  Karma  Yoga?  Knowing  the 
secret  of  work.  We  see  that  the  whole  uni- 
verse is  working.  For  what?  For  salva- 
tion, for  liberty,  from  the  atom  to  the 
highest  being;  working  for  that  one  end, 
liberty  for  the  mind,  for  the  body,  for  the 
spirit,  for  everything;  always  trying  to  get 

134 


F reedom 


freedom,  flying  away  from  bondage.  The 
sun,  moon,  earth,  the  planets,  are  all  try- 
ing to  fly  from  bondage.  Karma  Yoga 
tells  us  the  secret,  the  method  of  work.  In- 
stead of  being  knocked  about  in  this  uni- 
verse, and  after  long  delay  and  thrashing, 
getting  to  know  things  as  they  are,  Karma 
Yoga  teaches  us  the  secret  of  work,  the 
method  of  work,  the  organizing  power  of 
work.  The  vast  mass  of  energy  may  be 
spent  in  vain,  if  we  do  not  know  how  to 
utilize  it.  Karma  Yoga  makes  a science  of 
it;  you  learn  how  to  utilize  all  the  work- 
ings of  this  world.  Work  is  inevitable, 
it  must  be,  but  work  to  the  highest  pur- 
pose. Karma  Yoga  makes  us  admit  that 
this  world  is  a world  of  five  minutes;  that 
it  is  something  we  have  to  pass  through; 
that  real  freedom  is  not  here,  but  we  must 
go  beyond  to  come  to  freedom.  To  find 
the  way  out  we  will  have  to  go  through  it 
135 


Freedom 


slowly  and  surely.  There  may  be  those  ex- 
ceptional persons  about  whom  I just  spoke, 
who  can  stand  aside  and  give  it  up,  as  a 
snake  casts  off  its  skin  and  stands  aside  and 
looks  at  it;  there  are  some  of  these  excep- 
tional beings;  but  for  the  rest  of  mankind, 
they  have  to  slowly  go  through  it,  and  Kar- 
ma Yoga  shows  to  the  world  the  process, 
the  secret,  the  method  of  doing  it  to  the 
best  advantage. 

What  does  it  say?  “ Work  thou  inces- 
santly, but  give  up  all  attachment  to  work.” 
Do  not  identify  yourself  with  anything. 
Hold  your  mind  free.  All  this  that  you  see, 
the  pains  and  the  miseries,  are  but  condi- 
tions of  this  world;  poverty  and  wealth,  and 
happiness,  are  but  momentary;  they  do  not 
belong  to  our  nature  at  all.  Our  nature  is 
far  beyond  misery,  or  happiness,  beyond 
everything  of  the  senses,  beyond  the  im- 
agination; and  yet  we  must  go  on  work- 

136 


Freedom 


ing  all  the  time.  “ Misery  comes  through 
attachment,  not  through  work.”  As  soon 
as  we  identify  ourselves  with  the  work  we 
feel  miserable,  but  if  we  do  not  identify  our- 
selves with  it  we  do  not  feel  that  misery. 

If  a beautiful  picture  belonging  to  another 
is  burned,  a man  does  not  become  miser- 
able, but  when  his  own  picture  is  burned 
how  miserable  he  feels!  Why?  Both  were 
beautiful  pictures,  perhaps  copies  of  the 
same  original,  but  in  one  case  misery  is 
felt  and  not  in  the  other.  It  is  because  in 
one  case  he  identifies  himself  with  the  pic- 
ture, and  not  in  the  other.  This  I and 
mine  ” causes  the  whole  misery.  With  pos- 
session came  selfishness,  and  selfishness 
brought  misery.  Every  act  of  selfishness 
or  thought  of  selfishness  makes  us  attached 
to  something  behind,  and  immediately  we 
are  made  slaves.  Each  wave  in  the  Chitta 
that  says  “ I and  mine,”  immediately  puts 
137 


Freedom 


a chain  round  us  and  makes  us  slaves,  and 
the  more  we  say  “ I and  mine  ” the  more 
slavery  grows,  the  more  misery  increases. 
Therefore,  Karma  Yoga  tells  us  to  enjoy 
all  the  pictures  in  the  world,  but  not  to 
identify  ourselves  with  them.  Never  say 
“ Mine.”  Whenever  we  say  a thing  is  ours, 
misery  will  immediately  come.  Do  not 
even  say  “ My  child  ” in  your  mind.  En- 
joy the  child,  but  do  not  say  “ Mine.”  If 
you  do,  then  will  come  the  misery.  Do  not 
say  “ My  house,”  do  not  say  “ My  body.” 
The  whole  difficulty  is  there.  The  body  is 
neither  yours  nor  mine  nor  anybody’s. 
These  bodies  are  coming  and  going  by  the 
laws  of  nature,  but  we  are  free,  standing  as 
witness.  This  body  is  no  more  free  than  a 
picture,  or  the  wall.  Why  should  we  at- 
tach ourselves  to  a body?  If  somebody 
paints  a picture,  he  does  it  and  passes  away. 
Why  be  attached  to  it?  Let  it  pass.  Do 

138 


Freedom 


not  project  that  tentacle  of  selfishness,  “ I 
will  possess  it.”  As  soon  as  that  is  pro- 
jected misery  will  begin. 

So  the  Karma  Yogi  says,  first  destroy 
the  tendency  to  project  this  tentacle  of 
selfishness,  and  when  you  have  the  power 
of  checking  that,  hold  it  in,  do  not  allow 
the  mind  to  get  into  that  sort  of  wave. 
Then  go  out  into  the  world  and  work  as 
much  as  you  can.  Mix  everywhere;  go 
where  you  please;  you  will  never  be 
touched.  Like  the  lotus  leaf  in  water, 
which  the  water  cannot  wet,  so  will  you  be. 
This  is  called  “ Vairaghyam.”  It  is  the  law 
of  Karma  Yoga,  non-attachment.  I have 
just  told  you  that  without  non-attachment 
there  cannot  be  any  Yoga.  It  is  the  basis 
of  all  the  Yogas,  and  this  is  the  real  mean- 
ing of  non-attachment;  the  man  who  gives 
up  living  in  houses,  and  wearing  fine 
clothes,  and  eating  good  food,  and  goes 
139 


Freedom 


into  the  desert,  may  be  a most  attached 
person.  His  only  possession,  his  own  body, 
may  become  everything  to  him,  and  he  is 
struggling  for  his  body.  Non-attachment 
does  not  mean  what  we  do  in  our  external 
body,  but  it  is  in  the  mind;  this  connect- 
ing link  of  “ I and  mine  ” is  in  the  body. 
If  we  have  not  this  link  with  the  body,  and 
with  things  of  the  senses,  we  are  non-at- 
tached,  wherever  we  be.  A man  may  be  on 
a throne  and  perfectly  non-attached;  an- 
other man  may  be  in  rags  and  still  very 
much  attached.  First,  we  attain  to  this 
non-attachment,  and  then  we  work  inces- 
santly. Karma  Yoga  gives  a method  to 
help  us  in  giving  up  this  attachment.  It  is 
hard  to  give  it  up. 

Here  are  the  two  ways  of  giving  up  all 
attachment.  The  one  is  for  those  who  do 
not  believe  in  God,  or  in  any  outside  help. 
They  are  left  to  their  own  devices;  they 

140 


Freedom 


have  simply  to  work  with  their  own  will, 
the  power  of  the  mind,  that  “ I must  be 
non-attached and  with  the  power  of  dis- 
crimination. For  those  who  believe  in 
God,  it  is  less  difficult.  They  give  up  the 
fruits  of  work  unto  the  Lord,  and  then  go 
to  work  and  are  never  attached  to  the  re- 
sults. Whatever  they  see,  feel,  hear,  do,  is 
for  Him.  Whatever  good  work  we  do,  let 
us  not  take  any  praise  to  ourselves.  It  is 
the  Lord’s;  give  up  the  fruits  unto  Him. 
The  grandest  works  that  we  do  in  our  lives, 
never  let  us  think  that  we  shall  receive  the 
benefits  thereof,  or  that  we  have  done  a 
good  work.  Let  us  be  at  peace,  perfect 
peace,  with  ourselves,  and  give  up  our 
whole  body  and  mind  and  everything  as  an 
eternal  sacrifice.  Instead  of  the  sacrifice  of 
pouring  oblations  into  the  fire,  make  this 
one  great  sacrifice  day  and  night — the  sac- 
rifice of  the  little  self.  Day  and  night  re- 


Freedom 


nounce  the  seeming  self  until  it  becomes  a 
habit,  until  it  gets  into  the  blood,  the 
nerves,  the  brain,  and  the  whole  body  is 
every  moment  obedient  to  this  idea.  Then 
we  can  get  out  anywhere,  nothing  will 
touch  us.  Go  into  the  midst  of  the  battle- 
field, with  roaring  cannon  and  the  din  of 
war,  and  we  shall  be  free  and  at  peace. 

Karma  Yoga  teaches  us  duty  as  on  the 
lower  plane;  each  one  of  us  must  do  his 
duty.  This  is  my  duty,  and  that  is  my  duty. 
Yet  we  see  that  this  duty  is  the  one  great 
cause  of  misery.  It  becomes  a disease  with 
us,  drags  us  ever  forward.  It  clutches  hold 
of  us  and  makes  our  whole  life  miserable. 
It  is  the  bane  of  human  life.  “ This  idea  of 
duty  is  the  mid-day  summer  sun  which 
scorches  the  innermost  soul  of  mankind.” 
Look  at  those  poor  slaves  to  duty.  Duty 
leaves  them  no  time  to  think  of  anything 

else,  no  time  to  say  prayers,  no  time  to 

142 


Freedom 


bathe.  Duty  is  ever  on  them.  They  go 
out  and  work.  Duty  is  on  them.  They 
come  home  and  think  of  the  work  for  next 
day.  Duty  is  on  them!  It  is  living  a slave’s 
life,  at  last  dropping  down  in  the  street  and 
dying  in  harness,  like  a horse.  This  is  duty 
as  it  is  understood.  The  only  duty  is  to  be 
unattached  and  to  work  as  free  beings. 
Blessed  are  we  that  we  are  here.  We  serve 
our  time;  whether  we  do  it  ill  or  well,  who 
knows?  If  we  do  it  well,  we  do  not  get  the 
reward.  If  we  do  it  ill,  neither  do  we  get 
the  punishment.  Be  at  rest,  be  free,  and 
work.  This  is  a very  hard  thing  to  attain. 
How  easy  it  is  to  interpret  slavery  as  duty 
— the  morbid  attachment  of  flesh  for  flesh 
as  duty!  Men  go  out  into  the  world  and 
struggle  and  fight  for  money.  Ask  them 
why  they  do  it.  They  say: — “ It  is  a duty.” 
It  is  the  absurd  greed  for  gold,  and  they 
want  to  cover  it  with  a few  flowers. 


143 


Freedom 


What  is  duty,  after  all?  It  is  this  impul- 
sation  of  the  flesh,  our  attachment;  and 
when  an  attachment  has  been  established, 
we  call  it  duty.  For  instance,  in  countries 
where  there  is  no  marriage,  there  is  no  duty 
between  husband  and  wife;  when  marriage 
comes  and  husband  and  wife  live  together, 
they  live  together  on  account  of  flesh  at- 
tachment, and  that  becomes  settled  after 
generations,  and  when  it  becomes  settled 
it  becomes  a duty.  It  is  a sort  of  chronic 
disease.  When  it  is  acute  we  call  it  a dis- 
ease, when  it  is  chronic  we  call  it  nature. 
But  it  is  a disease  just  the  same.  So  when 
attachment  becomes  chronic  we  baptize  it 
with  the  high  sounding  name  of  duty.  We 
strew  flowers  upon  it,  trumpets  sound, 
sacred  texts  are  said  over  it,  and  then  the 
whole  world  fights,  and  each  one  robs  the 
other  for  this  duty’s  sake.  Duty  is  good; 

it  checks  brutality  to  a certain  extent.  To 

144 


Freedom 


the  lowest  men,  who  cannot  have  any  other 
ideal,  it  is  of  some  good,  but  those  who 
want  to  be  Karma  Yogis  must  throw  this 
idea  of  duty  overboard.  There  is  no  duty 
for  you  and  me.  Whatever  you  have  to 
give  to  the  world,  give,  but  not  as  a duty. 
Do  not  take  any  thought  of  that.  Be  not 
compelled.  Why  should  you  be  compelled? 
Everything  that  you  do  under  compulsion 
is  attachment.  Why  should  you  have  any 
duty?  You  have  no  duty  under  the  sun. 
If  you  want  reward  you  must  also  have 
punishment;  the  only  way  to  get  out  of 
the  punishment  is  to  give  up  the  reward. 
The  only  way  of  getting  out  of  misery  is 
by  giving  up  the  idea  of  happiness,  because 
these  two  are  linked  to  each  other.  On 
one  side  happiness,  on  the  other  misery. 
On  one  side  life,  on  the  other  death.  The 
only  way  to  get  beyond  death  is  to  give  up 
life;  not  to  care  for  it.  Life  and  death  are 
145 


Freedom 


the  same  thing,  looked  at  from  different 
points.  So  the  idea  of  happiness  without 
misery,  or  life  without  death  is  very  good 
for  school  boys  and  children,  but  the 
thinker  sees  that  it  is  a contradiction  of 
terms  and  gives  up  both.  Seek  no  praise, 
no  reward,  for  anything  you  do.  It  is  a 
very  hard  task.  No  sooner  do  we  do  a good 
action  than  we  begin  to  desire  credit  for 
it.  No  sooner  do  we  give  money  to  some 
charity  than  we  want  to  see  our  names  in 
the  papers.  Misery  must  come  as  the  re- 
sult of  such  desires.  The  greatest  men  in 
the  world  have  passed  away  unknown.  The 
Buddhas  and  the  Christs  that  you  see  are 
but  second  degree  men  in  comparison  with 
them.  Hundreds  of  them  have  lived  in 
every  country,  working  silently.  Silently 
they  pass  away,  and  in  time  their  thoughts 
find  expression  in  Buddhas  or  Christs,  and 

the  latter  become  known  to  us.  The  highest 

146 


Freedom 


men  did  not  seek  to  get  any  name  or  fame 
from  their  knowledge.  Their  whole  nature 
shrank  from  it.  They  are  the  pure  Satt- 
vikis,  who  can  never  make  any  stir,  but 
melt  down  in  love. 

Next  in  order  come  men  with  more 
Rajas,  or  activity,  combative  natures,  who 
take  up  the  ideas  of  the  perfect  ones  and 
preach  them  to  the  world.  These  highest 
ones  silently  collect  ideas  and  the  others, 
— the  Buddhas  and  Christs, — go  from  place 
to  place  preaching  and  working.  The 
highest  men  are  calm,  silent  and  unknown. 
They  are  the  men  who  really  know  the 
power  of  thought;  they  are  sure  that  even 
if  they  go  into  a cave  and  close  up  the  door, 
simply  think  five  thoughts  and  pass  away, 
these  five  thoughts  will  live  through  eter- 
nity. They  will  penetrate  through  the 
mountains  and  cross  oceans,  and  travel 
through  the  world,  and  will  enter  into  some 
147 


Freedom 


brain  and  raise  up  some  man  who  will  give 
expression  to  these  thoughts.  These  men 
are  too  near  the  Lord  to  become  active  and 
fight,  working,  struggling,  preaching,  and 
doing  good  to  humanity.  The  active 
workers,  however  good,  have  still  a little 
remnant  of  ignorance.  When  our  nature 
has  yet  some  impurities  left,  then  alone  can 
we  work.  The  highest  men  cannot  work. 
“ Those  whose  whole  soul  is  gone  into  the 
Self,  those  whose  desires  are  confined  in  the 
Self,  who  have  become  ever  associated  with 
the  Self,  for  them  there  is  no  work.”  So 
these  are  the  highest  of  mankind,  who  can- 
not work;  but  aside  from  these,  every  one 
has  to  work.  But  never  think  that  you  can 
help  the  least  thing  in  this  universe.  You 
can  not.  You  only  help  yourself  in  this 
gymnasium  of  the  world.  This  is  the  atti- 
tude of  work.  If  you  work  in  this  way;  if 
you  always  remember  that  it  is  a privilege 

148 


Freedom 


which  has  been  given  you,  you  will  never 
be  attached.  This  world  goes  on.  Millions 
like  you  and  me  think  we  are  great  people 
in  the  world,  but  we  die,  and  in  five  min- 
utes the  world  has  forgotten  us.  Give  up 
all  fruits  of  work;  do  good  for  good’s  sake; 
then  alone  will  come  perfect  non-attach- 
ment. The  bonds  of  the  heart  will  break, 
and  we  shall  reap  perfect  freedom.  This  is 
the  secret  of  Karma. 

149 


VIII 


THE  IDEAL  OF  KARMA  YOGA 

The  idea  is  that  we  are  to  reach  the  same 
goal  by  different  means,  and  these  means 
I generalize  into  four — work,  love,  psychol- 
ogy and  knowledge.  But  you  must,  at 
the  same  time,  remember  that  these  divis- 
ions are  not  very  marked.  Each  blends 
into  the  other,  but  as  the  type  prevails  the 
divisions  come.  It  is  not  that  you  cannot 
find  a man  who  has  no  other  faculty  ex- 
cepting that  of  work,  or  that  you  cannot 
find  men  who  are  more  than  worshippers 
only,  nor  men  who  have  more  than  knowl- 
edge. These  divisions  are  made  on  account 
of  the  type  or  tendency  that  predominates 

in  a man.  We  have  found  that,  in  the  end, 

150 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 


they  all  converge  and  become  one,  reach- 
ing one  goal.  All  religions  and  all  methods 
of  work  are  going  towards  that  goal. 

First  I will  try  to  point  out  the  goal. 
What  is  the  goal  of  the  whole  universe? 
Freedom.  Everything  that  we  see,  feel, 
hear  is  struggling  towards  freedom,  from 
the  atom  to  the  man,  from  the  insentient, 
lifeless  particle  of  matter  to  the  highest  hu- 
man existence,  the  human  soul.  The  whole 
universe  is  the  result  of  this  struggle  for 
freedom.  In  all  these  combinations  every 
particle  is  trying  to  fly  from  the  other  par- 
ticles, and  the  others  are  holding  it  in 
check.  Our  earth  is  trying  to  fly  from  the 
sun  and  the  moon  from  the  earth.  Every- 
thing has  a tendency  to  infinite  dispersion. 
All  that  we  see  in  this  universe,  good,  bad 
or  indifferent,  all  the  work  or  thought  that 
is  in  this  universe,  has  for  its  basis  this  one 
struggle  towards  freedom;  it  is  under  the 
I5i 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

impulse  of  this  that  the  saint  prays  and  the 
robber  robs.  When  the  line  of  action  taken 
is  not  a proper  one  we  call  it  evil,  and  when 
the  manifestation  is  proper  and  high  we  call 
it  good.  But  the  impulse  is  the  same,  to 
struggle  towards  that  freedom.  The  saint 
is  oppressed  with  the  idea  of  his  bondage, 
and  he  wants  to  get  rid  of  it,  so  he  worships 
God.  The  thief  is  oppressed  with  the  idea 
that  he  does  not  possess  certain  things,  and 
he  wants  to  get  rid  of  that,  to  get  freedom 
from  it,  so  he  steals.  Freedom  is  the  one 
goal  of  all  nature,  sentient  or  insentient, 
and,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  every- 
thing is  struggling  towards  that. 

We  find  in  every  religion  the  manifesta- 
tion of  this  struggle  towards  freedom.  It 
is  the  groundwork  of  all  morality,  of  un- 
selfishness, which  means  getting  out  of  the 
idea  that  I am  this  little  body.  When  we 

see  a man  doing  good  work,  helping  others, 

152 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Y oga 

it  means  that  that  man  will  not  be  con- 
fined within  the  limited  circle  of  “ me  and 
mine.”  There  is  no  limit  to  this  getting 
out.  All  the  great  systems  of  ethics  preach 
absolute  unselfishness  as  the  goal.  Sup- 
posing this  absolute  unselfishness  can  be 
reached  by  a man,  what  becomes  of  that 
man?  He  is  no  more  that  little  Mr.  So- 
and-So;  he  has  acquired  infinite  expansion. 
That  little  personality  which  he  had  before 
is  lost  forever;  he  has  become  infinite,  and 
the  attainment  of  this  infinite  expansion  is 
the  goal  of  all  religions  and  of  all  teach- 
ings. The  personalist,  when  he  hears  the 
idea  philosophically  put,  gets  frightened. 
At  the  same  time,  when  he  is  preaching 
morality,  he  is  preaching  the  very  same 
thing.  He  puts  no  limit  to  the  unselfish- 
ness of  man.  Suppose  a man  becomes  per- 
fectly unselfish  under  the  personalistic  sys- 
tem. how  are  we  to  distinguish  him  from 
*53 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

others  in  other  systems?  He  is  one  with 
the  universe,  and  that  is  the  goal,  only  the 
poor  personalist  dares  not  follow  out  his 
own  premises  to  their  right  conclusion. 
Karma  Yoga  is  attaining  this  goal  through 
unselfish  work,  that  freedom  which  is  the 
goal  of  human  nature.  Every  selfish  action, 
therefore,  retards  our  reaching  the  goal, 
and  every  unselfish  action  takes  us  towards 
the  goal;  that  is  why  the  only  definition 
that  can  be  given  of  morality  is  this — that 
which  is  selfish  is  immoral,  and  that  which 
is  unselfish  is  moral. 

But,  if  you  come  to  the  details,  you  will 
find  a difference.  For  instance,  environ- 
ment will  make  the  details  different.  The 
same  action  under  one  set  of  circumstances 
will  be  unselfish,  and  under  another  set  will 
be  selfish.  So  we  can  give  only  a general 
definition  and  leave  the  details  to  be 
worked  out  by  the  difference  in  time,  place 

1 54 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

and  circumstance.  In  one  country  one  sort 
of  behaviour  will  be  considered  moral,  and 
in  another  very  immoral,  because  the  cir- 
cumstances differ.  We  find  that  the  goal 
of  all  nature  is  freedom,  and  that  this  free- 
dom is  only  to  be  attained  by  perfect  un- 
selfishness, and  every  action,  thought, 
word  or  deed  that  is  unselfish  takes  us  to- 
wards the  goal  and,  as  such,  is  called  moral. 
That  definition,  you  will  find,  will  hold 
good  for  every  religion  and  every  system  of 
ethics.  For  instance,  you  will  find  different 
ideas  of  ethics.  In  some  systems  they  are 
derived  from  a superior  Being,  God.  If 
you  ask  why  a man  shall  do  this  and  not  do 
that  they  will  answer,  Because  it  is  the  com- 
mand of  God.  But  whatever  be  the  source 
from  which  it  is  derived,  their  code  of  ethics 
will  have  as  the  one  central  idea  not  to 
think  of  self,  to  give  up  self.  And  yet  some 
of  them  with  this  high  ethical  idea  are 
155 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

frightened  to  give  up  their  little  personali- 
ties. I would  ask  the  man  who  would 
cling  to  the  little  personalities  to  consider 
the  case  of  a man  who  has  become  perfectly 
unselfish,  who  has  no  thought  for  himself, 
who  does  no  deed  for  himself,  who  speaks 
no  word  for  himself,  where  then  is  “ him- 
self? ” That  “ himself  ” is  personal  to  him 
so  long  as  he  thinks,  acts  and  knows  for 
himself.  If  he  is  only  conscious  of  others, 
of  the  universe,  where  is  “ himself?  ” It  is 
gone  forever. 

This  Karma  Yoga,  therefore,  is  a system 
to  attain  to  freedom  through  unselfishness, 
by  good  works.  The  Karma  Yogi  need 
not  have  any  doctrine  whatever.  He  may 
not  believe  in  a God,  may  not  ask  what  his 
soul  is  or  think  of  any  metaphysical  specu- 
lation. He  has  got  his  special  task;  he  has 
got  to  work  it  out  himself.  Every  moment 
of  his  life  must  be  realization,  because  he  is 

156 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

working  out,  without  a doctrine  or  theory, 
the  very  same  problem  that  the  Jnani  or 
the  worshipper  speculates  upon  and  formu- 
lates as  doctrines. 

Now  comes  the  next  question.  What  is 
this  work?  What  is  this  doing  good  to  the 
world?  Can  we  do  good  to  the  world?  In 
an  absolute  sense,  no;  in  a relative  sense, 
yes.  No  permanent  good  can  be  done  to 
this  world;  if  it  could  be  it  would  not  be 
this  world.  We  can  satisfy  the  hunger  of 
a man  for  five  minutes,  and  he  will  be 
hungry  again.  Every  pleasure  with  which 
we  can  supply  a man  can  only  be  momen- 
tary. No  one  can  permanently  cure  this 
ever-recurring  series  of  pleasure  and  pain. 
Can  any  permanent  mass  of  happiness  be 
given  to  the  world?  No,  not  even  that.  In 
the  ocean  you  cannot  raise  one  wave  with- 
out making  a hollow  somewhere  else.  The 
sum  total  of  the  energies  in  the  world  is  the 
*57 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

same  throughout,  always  the  same.  It  can- 
not be  increased  or  decreased.  Take  the 
history  of  the  human  race  as  we  know  it  to- 
day. The  same  miseries  and  the  same  hap- 
pinesses, the  same  pleasure  and  pain,  the 
same  differences  in  position;  some  rich, 
some  poor,  some  high  in  position,  some 
low,  some  healthy,  some  unhealthy.  You 
find  it  was  just  the  same  with  the  ancient 
Egyptians,  the  Greeks,  the  Romans,  as 
with  the  Americans  to-day.  So  far  as  his- 
tory is  known  it  has  always  been  the  same; 
yet,  at  the  same  time,  we  find  that,  run- 
ning along  with  all  these  differences  of 
pleasure  and  pain,  there  has  ever  been  the 
struggle  to  alleviate  it.  At  every  period  of 
history  there  have  been  thousands  of  men 
and  women  who  have  been  struggling  to 
smooth  the  passage  of  life  of  others.  And 
they  have  never  succeeded.  We  can  only 
play  at  driving  the  ball  from  one  place  to 

158 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 


another.  We  take  pain  from  the  physical 
body,  and  it  goes  to  the  mental  body.  It 
is  like  that  picture  in  Dante’s  hell  where 
the  misers  were  given  a mass  of  gold.  They 
began  pushing  it  up  the  hill,  and  again  it 
rolled  down.  Thus  this  wheel  is  going  on. 
All  these  talks  about  a millennium  are  very 
nice  as  schoolboys’  stories,  but  no  better 
than  that.  All  nations  that  dream  of  mil- 
lenniums also  think  that  they  will  have  the 
best  of  it  at  that  time;  this  is  the  wonder- 
fully unselfish  idea  of  this  millennium! 

We  come  to  this,  that  we  cannot  add 
happiness  to  this  world;  similarly,  we  can- 
not add  pain.  The  sum  total  of  the  ener- 
gies displayed  will  be  the  same  throughout. 
We  just  push  it  from  this  side  to  the  other 
side,  and  from  that  side  to  this,  but  it  will 
remain  the  same,  because  it  is  its  very  na- 
ture. This  ebb  and  flow,  this  rising  and 
falling,  is  its  very  nature;  it  would  be  as 
159 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

logical  to  say  we  can  have  life  without 
death.  It  is  complete  nonsense,  because 
the  very  idea  of  life  is  constant  death.  The 
lamp  is  constantly  burning  out,  and  that 
is  its  life.  If  you  want  life  you  will  have  to 
die  every  moment  also.  These  are  only 
different  expressions  of  the  same  thing, 
looked  at  from  different  standpoints;  each 
of  them  is  the  falling  and  the  rising  of  the 
same  wave,  and  the  two  form  one  link. 
One  looks  at  the  “ fall  ” side  and  becomes 
a pessimist  or  at  the  “ rise  ” side  and  be- 
comes an  optimist.  When  a boy  is  going 
to  school  and  his  father  and  mother  are 
taking  care  of  him  everything  seems 
blessed  to  him;  his  wants  are  simple;  he  is 
a great  optimist.  But  the  old  man,  with  his 
experience,  has  become  calmer,  and  he  has 
cooled  down.  So  old  nations,  with  decay 
all  around  them,  are  less  hopeful  than  new 

nations.  There  is  a proverb  in  India: — “ A 

160 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

thousand  years  a city  and  a thousand  years 
a forest.”  This  change  is  going  on,  and  it 
makes  people  optimists  or  pessimists  ac- 
cording to  the  side  they  see. 

The  next  idea  we  will  take  up  is  the 
idea  of  equality.  These  millennium  ideas 
have  been  great  motive  powers  to  work. 
Many  religions  preach  this  as  an  element. 
God  is  coming  to  rule  the  universe;  there 
will  be  no  difference  in  conditions.  The 
people  who  preach  this  are  fanatics,  and 
fanatics  are  the  sincerest  of  mankind. 
Christianity  was  preached  just  on  this 
fanaticism,  and  that  was  what  made  it  at- 
tractive to  the  Greek  slaves  and  the  Roman 
slaves.  They  believed  they  would  have  no 
more  slavery,  plenty  to  eat  and  drink,  and 
therefore  they  flocked  round  the  standard. 
Those  who  preached  the  idea  first  were,  of 
course,  ignorant  fanatics,  but  very  sincere. 

In  modern  times  it  takes  the  form  of 

161 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

equality — equality,  liberty  and  fraternity. 
This  is  also  fanaticism.  This  equality  has 
never  been  and  never  can  be.  How  could 
you  be  equal  here?  That  would  be  death. 
What  makes  this  world?  Lost  balance.  In 
the  primal  state,  which  is  called  Chaos, 
there  is  perfect  balance.  How  do  all  these 
forces  come?  By  struggling,  competition, 
conflict.  Suppose  all  these  particles  of 
matter  were  held  in  equilibrium,  would 
there  be  creation?  We  know  from  science 
there  would  not  be.  Disturb  the  water, 
and  you  find  every  particle  of  water  trying 
to  become  calm  again,  one  rushing  against 
the  other,  and  in  this  way  come  all  these 
phenomena  which  you  call  the  universe — 
all  things  are  struggling  to  get  back  to  the 
state  of  perfect  balance.  Then  again  a dis- 
turbance will  come,  and  this  combination 
will  go  on,  making  creation.  Inequality  is 

the  very  basis  of  creation.  At  the  same 

162 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

time,  the  forces  struggling  to  obtain 
equality  are  as  much  a necessity  of  creation 
as  those  which  destroy  it. 

Absolute  equality,  that  which  means  a 
perfect  balance  of  all  the  struggling  forces, 
will  never  be  in  this  world.  Before  you 
have  attained  to  that  state  the  world  will 
have  cooled  down  and  become  a lump  of 
ice,  and  no  one  will  be  here.  We  find, 
therefore,  that  all  these  ideas  of  millen- 
nium, or  absolute  equality,  are  not  only 
impossible,  but,  if  we  could  carry  them  out, 
they  would  lead  to  the  day  of  destruction. 
There  is,  again,  the  difference  in  the  brains 
of  men.  What  makes  the  difference  be- 
tween man  and  man?  It  is  the  difference 
in  the  brain.  Nowadays  no  one  but  a 
lunatic  will  say  we  are  all  born  with  the 
same  brain  power.  We  have  come  into 
the  world  as  unequal;  we  have  come  as 

greater  men  or  as  lesser  men,  and  there  is 

163 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

no  getting  away  from  that.  The  American 
Indians  were  in  this  country  for  thousand' 
of  years,  and  a few  handfuls  of  your  ances- 
tors came.  What  made  all  this  difference, 
if  we  are  all  the  same?  Why  could  not  the 
Indians  have  made  improvements  and  built 
cities,  why  did  they  only  go  about  hunt- 
ing in  the  forests  all  the  time,  if  we  are  all 
equal?  A different  sort  of  brain  matter 
came,  different  bundles  of  past  impressions 
came,  and  they  worked  out  and  manifested 
themselves.  Absolute  non-differentiation 
is  death.  So  long  as  this  world  lasts,  this 
differentiation  will  be,  but  the  millennium 
will  come,  when  the  cycle  comes  to  an  end. 
Before  that  equality  cannot  be.  Yet  this 
idea  is  a great  motive  power.  Just  as  this 
inequality  is  necessary  for  creation,  so  the 
struggle  to  limit  it  is  necessary.  If  there 
were  no  differentiation  there  would  be  no 

creation;  if  there  were  no  struggle  to  be- 

164 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

come  free  and  get  back  there  would  be  no 
creation;  but  it  is  the  difference  between 
the  two  forces  that  makes  the  motive 
power.  There  will,  therefore,  always  be 
these  motive  powers  to  work. 

This  wheel  within  wheel  is  terrible  me- 
chanism; if  we  put  our  hands  in,  as  soon 
as  we  are  caught  we  are  gone.  Each  one 
of  us  thinks  that  when  we  have  done  a cer- 
tain duty,  we  will  be  at  rest,  but  before  we 
have  done  a part  of  that,  another  is  wait- 
ing. We  are  all  being  dragged  along  by 
this  machine.  There  are  only  two  ways; 
one  is  to  give  up  the  machine,  to  let  go,  and 
stand  aside.  Give  up  our  desires.  That  is 
very  easy  to  say,  but  it  is  almost  impossible 
to  do.  I do  not  know  whether  in  twenty 
millions  of  men  one  can  do  that.  The 
other  way  is  to  plunge  into  the  world  and 
learn  the  secret  of  work,  and  that  is  Kar- 
ma Yoga.  Do  not  fly  from  it,  but  stand 
i6$ 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

inside  and  know  the  secret  of  work. 
Through  work  we  shall  come  out.  Through 
that  machinery  is  the  way  out. 

We  have  now  seen  what  this  work  is. 
To  sum  up  the  whole  thing,  this  work  goes 
on  all  the  time,  and  those  that  believe  in 
a God  will  understand  it  better  by  think- 
ing that  God  is  not  such  an  incapable  per- 
son as  to  require  our  help.  Secondly,  this 
universe  will  go  on  always.  We  must  re- 
member that  our  goal  is  freedom;  our  goal 
is  unselfishness,  and  that  goal  is  to  be 
reached  through  work,  and,  therefore,  we 
must  learn  the  secret  of  work.  So  far  we 
have  learnt  that  this  work  goes  on;  all  such 
ideas  as  of  making  this  world  perfectly 
happy  may  be  good  as  motive  powers,  for 
fanatics;  such  silly  ideas  may  have  been 
good  in  old  times,  but  we  must  always 
know  that,  although  fanaticism  is  a very 

good  motive  power,  and  does  some  good 

1 66 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

work,  at  the  same  time  it  brings  as  much 
evil  as  good.  The  Karma  Yogi  asks  why 
should  you  require  any  motive  to  work? 
Be  beyond  motives.  “ To  work  you  have 
the  right,  but  not  to  the  fruits  thereof.” 
Man  can  train  himself  to  that,  says  the 
Karma  Yogi.  When  the  idea  of  doing 
good  will  come  into  his  very  being,  then 
he  will  not  seek  for  any  motive  outside. 
Why  shall  we  do  good?  Because  we  like, 
and  ask  no  questions.  Do  good  because  it 
is  good  to  do  good;  he  who  does  good 
work  in  order  to  get  to  heaven  binds  him- 
self, says  the  Karma  Yogi.  Any  work  that 
is  done  with  a motive,  instead  of  making  us 
free,  which  is  the  goal,  makes  one  more 
chain  for  our  feet.  If  we  think  by  such  and 
such  work  we  shall  get  to  heaven,  we  shall 
be  attracted  to  a place  called  heaven,  and 
we  shall  have  to  go  and  see  all  these 

things;  that  will  be  one  more  bondage. 

167 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

So  the  only  way  is  to  give  up  all  the 
fruits  of  work;  be  non-attached.  Know 
that  this  world  is  not  we,  or  we  this  world; 
that  we  are  really  not  the  body;  that  we 
really  do  not  work.  We  are  the  Self,  eter- 
nally at  rest  and  at  peace.  Why  should  we 
be  bound  by  anything?  We  must  not  weep; 
there  is  no  weeping  for  the  Soul.  We  must 
not  even  weep  for  sympathy.  Only,  we 
like  that  sort  of  thing,  and,  in  our  imagina- 
tion, we  think  that  God  is  weeping  in  that 
way  on  His  throne.  Such  a God  would  not 
be  worth  attaining.  Why  should  God  weep 
at  all?  It  is  a sign  of  weakness,  of  bon- 
dage. There  should  not  be  a drop  of  tears. 
How  can  it  be  done?  It  is  very  good  to 
say  be  perfectly  non-attached,  but  what  is 
the  way  to  do  it?  Every  good  work  we  do 
without  any  ulterior  motive,  instead  of 
forging  a chain,  will  break  one  of  the  links 

in  our  chain.  Every  good  thought  that  we 

1 68 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

send  to  the  world,  without  thinking  of  the 
return,  will  be  stored  up,  and  break  one 
link  in  the  chain,  and  make  us  purer,  until 
we  become  the  purest  of  mortals.  Yet  it 
seems  to  be  rather  quixotic  and  phil- 
osophical, than  practical.  I have  read 
many  arguments  against  the  Gita,  and 
many  have  raised  the  argument  that  with- 
out motive  you  cannot  work.  They  have 
never  seen  work,  except  fanaticism,  and, 
therefore,  speak  in  that  way. 

I will  tell  you  in  a few  words  about  one 
man  who  carried  non-attachment  into  prac- 
tice. That  man  was  Buddha.  He  is  the 
one  man  who  ever  carried  this  into  perfect 
practice.  All  the  prophets  of  the  world,  ex- 
cept Buddha,  had  external  motive  power 
to  move  them.  The  prophets  of  the  world, 
with  his  exception,  can  be  divided  into 
two  sets,  one  set  who  say  they  are  God 

come  down  on  earth,  and  the  other  who  say 
169 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

they  are  messengers  from  God;  and  both 
draw  their  impetus  from  outside,  expect 
reward  from  outside,  however  spiritual 
may  be  the  language  they  use.  But  Buddha 
is  the  only  prophet  who  said  “ I do  not 
care  to  know  your  various  theories  about 
God.  What  is  the  use  of  discussing  all  the 
subtle  doctrines  about  the  soul?  Do  good 
and  be  good.  And  this  will  take  you  to 
whatever  truth  there  is.”  He  was  abso- 
lutely without  external  motive  power,  and 
what  man  worked  more  than  he?  Show  me 
in  history  one  character  who  went  so  high 
above  all.  The  whole  human  race  has  pro- 
duced but  one  such  character;  such  high 
philosophy;  such  sympathy;  this  great 
philosopher,  preaching  the  highest  phil- 
osophy, and  yet  having  sympathy  for  the 
lowest  animals,  and  never  making  any 
claims.  He  is  the  ideal  Karma  Yogi,  act- 
ing entirely  without  personal  motive,  and 

170 


The  Ideal  of  Karma  Yoga 

the  history  of  humanity  shows  him  to  have 
been  the  greatest  man  ever  born;  beyond 
compare  of  all  others,  the  greatest  combi- 
nation of  heart  and  brain  that  ever  ex- 
isted, the  greatest  soul-power  that  was  ever 
manifested.  He  was  the  first  great  re- 
former the  world  ever  saw.  He  was  the 
first  who  dared  to  say,  “ Believe  not  be- 
cause some  old  manuscripts  are  produced, 
believe  not  because  it  is  your  national  be- 
lief, because  you  have  been  made  to  believe 
from  your  childhood,  but  reason  truth  out, 
and  after  you  have  analyzed  it,  then,  if  you 
find  it  will  do  good  to  one  and  all,  believe 
it,  live  up  to  it,  and  help  others  to  live  up 
to  it.”  He  works  best  who  works  without 
any  selfish  motive,  desiring  neither  money 
nor  anything  else,  and  when  a man  can  do 
that,  he,  too,  will  be  a Buddha,  and  out  of 
him  will  come  the  power  to  work  in  such 
a manner  as  to  transform  the  world.  This 

is  the  very  ideal  of  Karma  Yoga. 

171 


BAKER  & TAYLOR  CO.’S  PUBLICATIONS. 


PRESS  NOTICES  OF  RAJA  YOGA. 

The  whole  spirit  of  the  book  is  candid  in  the  extreme.  It 
appeals  to  what  is  best  and  noblest  in  ma.  It  makes  no 
foolish  mysteries,  and  demands  no  blind  belief.  It  puts  forth 
its  system  in  a plain  and  simple  manner.  It  is  able  to  pre- 
sent its  own  method  without  in  any  way  attacking  the 
method  of  others.  It  manifests  a charity  that  it  is  usual  to 
call  Chri  .ian,  b.t  which  Vivekananda  proves  is  equally  the 
property  of  the  Hindu.  If  this  little  book  had  nothing  to 
teach  but  the  beautiful  toleration  it  advocates,  it  . ould  be 
well  worth  reading;  but  many  will  find  in  it  valuable  sug- 
gestions to  aid  in  reaching  the  higher  life. — Arena,  March, 
1897.  _ 

This  work  embraces  a series  of  lectures  that  fully  explain 
the  doctrines  and  principles  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Indian 
monks,  w'  • have  aroused  such  a widespread  interest  in  this 
country.  To  the  reader  who  is  seeking  after  the  truth  and 
light,  this  volume  will  be  indeed  welcome.  It  is  written  in 
an  unusually  clear  style  that  all  readers  can  understand. — 
Bookseller  and  Newsman. 

How  to  get  at  the  soul  and  put  the  reins  of  the  mind  and 
the  body  into  its  hands,  is  the  problem  that  Raja  Yoga  at- 
tempts to  solve,  and  all  those  persons  who  practice  Yoga 
are  known  as  Yogis.  Then — how  to  become  a Yogi,  how  to 
rise  to  a high  state  of  psychic  control  is  what  Vivekananda 
endeavors  to  point  out  in  these  lectures. — Literary  Digest. 

A large  part  of  the  book  is  occupied  with  that  method  of 
attaining  perfection  known  as  Raja  Yoga,  and  there  are  also 
translations  of  a number  of  aphorisms  and  an  excellent  glos- 
sary.— Living  Age,  Aug.  5th,  1899. 

A valuable  portion  of  the  volume  to  students  is  the  glos- 
sary of  Sanskrit  technical  terms.  This  includes  not  only 
such  terms  as  are  employed  in  the  book,  but  also  those  fre- 
quently employed  in  works  on  the  Vedanta  philosophy  in 
general. — New  York  Times,  July  22nd,  1899. 

A new  edition,  with  an  enlarged  glossary,  which  will  be 
welcomed  by  students  of  comparative  religion,  who  are  al- 
ready familiar  with  the  author’s  lectures  in  this  country. — 
Review  of  Reviews,  Oct.,  1899. 

The  methods  of  practical  realization  of  the  divine  within 
the  human  are  applicable  to  all  religions,  and  all  peoples, 
and  only  vary  in  their  details  to  suit  the  idiosyncrasy  of  race 
and  individuals. — Post,  Washington,  D.  C.,  June  12th,  1899. 


BAKER  TAYLOR  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 


PRESS  NOTICES  OF  RAJA  YOGA.— (Continued.) 

This  application  of  an  ancient  -/stem  of  Indian  philosophy 
will  doubtless  be  of  much  interest  to  those  who  delve  into 
such  subjects. — Los  Angeles  Times,  July  2nd,  1899. 

The  mental  and  physical  processes  are  described  through 
which  man  may  be  brought  to  a full  knowledge  in  life  of  the 
secrets  of  his  being. — San  Francisco  Chronicle,  Aug.  6th,  1899. 

The  work  is  exceedingly  interesting. — Religio- Philosophical 
Journal,  San  Francisco,  Sept.  21st,  1899. 

As  a study  of  Vedanta  Philosophy  and  Raja  Yoga  it  is, 
perhaps,  unequalled  by  any  other  book  in  the  English  lan- 
guage.— The  Progressive  Thinker,  Sept.  26th,  1899. 

With  the  simplicity  of  language  of  a child’s  primer,  and 
the  progressive  logic  of  a mathematical  proposition,  the 
Swami  explains  the  simple  working  rules  of  this  science, 

. . . The  book  is  charming  to  any  one  interested  in  the  sub- 
ject, and  an  instructive  study  in  logic  to  even  the  most  in- 
different.— Public  Opinion,  N.  Y.,  July  27th,  1899. 

You  cannot,  you  must  not,  fail  to  study  it.  It  is  truth,  life, 
peace,  joy.  We  beg  all  our  readers  to  look  into  it  in  the 
most  thorough  manner. — Occult  Truths,  Sept.,  1899. 

This  work  is  essentially  uplifting  and  breathes  in  every 
line  the  divinity  of  man.  It  is,  of  course,  the  Hindu  idealist’s 
conception  of  God,  infinity,  man,  and  his  relations  to  the 
whole,  and  carries  throughout  the  pure  and  lofty  idealism 
of  the  Hindu  philosophy. — Light  of  Truth,  Sept,  nth,  1897. 

As  an  exposition  the  book  is  good.  It  conveys  a definite 
idea  of  what  the  aim  and  end  of  the  Hindu  religion  is. — • 
The  Truth  Seeker,  Nov.  nth,  1899. 

That  he  (Swami  Vivekananda)  is  master  of  the  science  of 
Raja  Yoga,  that  contains  so  much  that  is  mysterious  to  the 
Western  world,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  These  lectures  give 
a thorough  and  lucid  explanation  of  it,  and  contain  much 
that  Christians  must  accept  as  sound  and  wise.— Bookseller, 
Newsdealer,  and  Stationer,  Aug.  1st,  1899. 

Raja  Yoga  is  an  ancient  system  of  Indian  Philosophy,  anh 
one  of  the  four  chief  methods  that  the  Vedanta  Philosophy 
offer  to  obtain  freedom  and  perfection. — Book  News , Aug., 

T8The  foregoing  books  mailed  postpaid  on  receipt  of  the 
price  by 

THE  BAKER  & TAYLOR  CO.,  PUBLISHERS, 

1 33-37  E.  17th  St.,  Union  Sq.  North,  New  York. 


Pamphlets  on  Vedanta  Philosophy. 

The  following  lectures  by  Swami  Vivekananda  contain  a 
comprehensive  statement  of  the  fundamental  teachings  of  Ve- 
danta, and  furnish  a clear  exposition  of  this  Philosophy. 
They  are  in  pamphlet  form  and  will  be  mailed  to  any  address 
for  10  cents  each  and  i cent  postage. 

The  Ideal  of  a Universal  Religion, — setting  forth  the  fun- 
damental principles  underlying  all  religions,  in  which 
principles  those  of  different  faiths  can  find  a basis  for  har- 
mony, thus  promoting  toleration  and  sympathy  instead  of 
bigotry  and  hatred. 

The  Cosmos, — two  lectures  giving  a survey  of  the  Vedantic 
conception  of  the  Universe  and  the  philosophy  upon 
which  that  conception  rests. 

The  Atman. — The  “Self”  of  the  Vedanta.  A lecture  deliv- 
ered before  the  Brooklyn  Ethical  Association,  explaining 
the  most  important  doctrine  of  the  Vedanta  Philosophy. 
The  Real  and  the  Apparent  Man. — A further  elucidation  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  “Self,”  or  Atman. 

Bhakti  Yoga, — which  most  beautifully  expounds  the  ideal 
held  up  by  Vedanta  of  a religion  of  Love  for  love’s  sake 
alone,  of  absolute  devotion  to  the  All-Merciful  Ruler  of 
the  Universe. 


LECTURES  BY  SWAMI  ABHEDANANDA: 


Christian  Science  and  Vedanta. 
Cosmic  Evolution  and  its  Purpose. 
Divine  Communion. 

Does  the  Soul  Exist  after  Death  ? 
Religion  of  the  Hindus. 

Scientific  Basis  of  Religion. 
Simple  Living. 

Spiritualism  and  Vedanta. 

The  Philosophy  of  Good  and  Evil. 


The  Way  to  the  Blessed  Life. 

The  Word  and  Cross  in  Ancient 
India. 

Who  is  the  Saviour  of  Souls  ? 
Woman’s  Place  in  Hindu  Religion. 
Why  a Hindu  Accepts  Christ  and 
Rejects  Churchianity. 

Why  a Hindu  is  a Vegetarian. 


NEW  BOOK  BY  SWAMI  ABHEDANANDA. 
Self-Knowledge  (Atma-Jnana).  Cloth,  $1.00.  Postage,  7 
cents.  Portrait  of  author,  frontispiece. 

Mailed  on  receipt  of  price  and  postage  by 

THE  VEDANTA  SOCIETY, 

135  West  80th  Street,  N.  Y. 


Works  on  Vedanta  Philosophy. 


By  SWAMI  ABHEDANANDA. 


DIVINE  HERITAGE  OF  MAN. 

Cloth,  $1.00.  Postage,  7 cents.  Portrait  of  author,  frontispiece. 

In  these  lectures  the  problems  which  are  puzzling  the  minds 
of  every  earnest  seeker  alter  Truth  are  boldly  met  and  solved 
in  strict  accord  with  the  discoveries  of  modern  science. 

PHILOSOPHY  OF  WORK. 

Cloth,  50  cents.  Paper,  35  cents.  Postage,  6 and  2 cents. 

The  Swami  Abhedananda  in  this  volume  shows  with  con- 
vincing force  the  value  of  work  as  a means  of  self-development 
and  the  attainment  of  perfection. 

HOW  TO  BE  A YOGL 

Cloth,  $1.00.  Postage,  7 cents. 

I.  Introductory.  II.  What  is  Yoga?  III.  Science  01 
Breathing.  IV.  Was  Christ  a Yogi  ? 

SPIRITUAL  UNFOLDMENT. 

Cloth,  50  cents.  Paper,  35  cents.  Postage,  6 and  2 cents. 

I.  Self-control.  II.  Concentration  and  Meditation.  IIL 
God  - consciousness. 

An  exposition  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  spiritual 
growth  as  well  as  of  all  character-building. 

REINCARNATION. 

Cloth,  40  cents.  Paper,  25  cents.  Postage,  5 and  2 cents. 

I.  Reincarnation.  II.  Evolution  and  Reincarnation.  III. 
Which  is  Scientific,  Resurrection  or  Reincarnation  ? 

THE  SAYINGS  OF  SRI  RAMAKRISHNA. 

Compiled  by  Swami  Abhedananda. 

Flexible  cloth,  gilt  top,  75  cents  net.  Postage,  4 cents. 


FOR  SALE  BY 

THE  VEDANTA  SOCIETY, 

135  WEST  80th  STREET,  - - NEW  YORK. 


* 


* 


*
