THE     TRIUMPHAL     CHARIOT

OF

ANTIMONY.


THE

TRIUMPHAL   CHARIOT
OF    ANTIMONY.


BY

BASILIUS     VALENTINUS


WITH    THE    COMMENTARY    OF

THEODORE     KERCKRINGIUS,

A  Doctor  of  Medicine.


BEING  THE  LATIN   VERSION    PUBLISHED  AT  AMSTERDAM    IN   THE

YEAR    1685    TRANSLATED    INTO   ENGLISH,    WITH

A     BIOGRAPHICAL    PREFACE.


JAMES   ELLIOTT  AND    CO.,
TEMPLE   CHAMBERS,    FALCON   COURT,  FLEET   STREET,  E.C.


CONTENTS.


122.4


PAGE.

Biographical  Preface           ...         ...         ...  ix.

Dedication       ...          i

Dedicatory  Epistle      ..  3

To  the  Reader          8

The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony      ...  n

Appendix         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  181

On  the  Triumphal   Chariot  of  Antimony,

and  the  Nature  of  the  Fire  Stone  ...   183

Index   .  ...   201


BIOGRAPHICAL     PREFACE.


SHOULD  any  uninstructed  per-
son who  might  chance  upon
Basil  Valentine's  ''Triumphal
Chariot  of  Antimony  "  undertake  to  read
that  work,  he  would  probably  be  mystified
by  much  of  its  contents,  by  its  references
to  the  Spagyric  art,  to  the  grand  Magis-
terium,  the  true  and  universal  Medicine,
the  Tinctures  which  transmute  metals,
with  other  unknown  quantities  and  other
deep  mysteries  which  make  part  of  the
Sacramentum  Regis.  But  if  he  were
asked  what  he  thought  of  Basil  Valentine
in  his  historical  and  personal  character,
it  is  unlikely  that  he  would  suppose  for
a  moment  the  existence  of  any  romantic
mystery  encompassing  the  mere  life  of
the  man.  He  would  regard  him  as  a
pious  Benedictine  monk,  uncommonly
well  versed  for  his  period  in  certain


x.       The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

departments  of  experimental  and  medi-
cal chemistry,  and,  perhaps,  as  a  bizarre
speculator  in  the  cloudy  borderlands  of
physical  science ;  but  such  biographical
data  as  can  be  gathered  concerning  him
from  his  writings,  he  would  naturally
accept  without  question,  because  there
would  be  no  ground  for  assuming  any
reason  to  doubt  them.  Yet  even  as
such  a  person  would  be  mistaken  in  his
estimate  of  Valentine  the  alchemist,  as
distinguished  from  Valentine  the  inves-
tigator of  antimonial  therapeutics,  so  it
is  just  possible  that  he  would  be  astray
in  his  estimate  of  the  man,  being  misled
by  a  veil  of  simplicity  which  skilfully
conceals  the  adept  under  the  unpre-
tending mask  of  a  monastic  canon.
"  When  I  had  emptied  to  the  dregs  the
cup  of  human  suffering,  I  was  led  to  con-
sider the  wretchedness  of  this  world,"  so
Valentine  tells  us  in  his  preface  to  "  The
Great  Stone  of  the  Sages,"  "and  the
fearful  consequences  of  our  first  parents'
disobedience.  Then  I  saw  that  there
was  no  hope  of  repentance  for  mankind,


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.     xi.

that  they  were  getting  worse  day  by
day,  and  that  for  their  impenitence  God's
everlasting  punishment  was  hanging
over  them  ;  and  I  made  haste  to  with-
draw myself  from  the  evil  world,  to  bid
farewell  to  it,  and  to  devote  myself  to
the  service  of  God."  *  After  the  manner
of  his  age,  as  he  goes  on  to  inform  us,  he
took  refuge  in  a  monastery,  where  the
time  that  he  could  spare  from  his  de-
votions was  made  use  of  for  "the  study
and  investigation  of  those  natural  secrets
by  which  God  has  shadowed  out  eternal
things."  Here,  in  this  pious  retirement,
there  was  ultimately  revealed  to  him
"  that  great  secret  which  God  ever  con-
ceals from  those  who  are  wise  in  their
own  conceits."  As  appears  from  the
Currus  Triumphalis  and  other  of  his
works,  he  belonged  to  the  religious  order
of  S.  Benedict,  and  he  is  said  to  have
been  canon  of  the  priory  of  S.  Peter  in


*  See  Basil  Valentine's  treatise,  entitled  "Practica,
with  the  Twelve  Keys  and  an  Appendix,"  p.  313  of  The
Hermetic  Museum  Restored  and  Enlarged,  Vol.  I.,  London,
4to,  1893.


xii.     The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Erfurt.  It  is  further  stated  that  his
philosophical  "Last  Testament"  re-
mained concealed  for  a  number  of  years
in  the  high  altar  of  the  church  belonging
to  the  priory.  There  seems,  at  first
sight,  no  reason  to  challenge  the  literal
veracity  of  these  matters  ;  the  conven-
tual institutions  of  the  middle  ages  were
frequently  centres  of  scientific  research  ;
innumerable  monks  have  practised  al-
chemy ;  and  works  which  their  authors
regarded  as  too  good  for  the  time  when
they  were  written,  have  been  entombed
for  the  benefit  of  a  more  deserving  epoch
both  before  and  after  the  age  of  Basil
Valentine.  There  is  some  occasion,  not-
withstanding, for  suspecting  that  here,
as  in  everything  connected  with  the
alchemists,  the  most  simple  facts  are
apparently  the  most  deceptive.  "  Even
unto  the  points  and  pricks  here  are  to  be
found  great  mysteries."  The  suspicion  is
not  the  result  of  an  over  great  subtlety
on  the  part  of  modern  mystical  criticism,
which  is  accused,  and  not  always  un-
justly, of  everywhere  supposing  the


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,  xiii.

wonderful  ;  it  was  far  back  in  the  early
seventeenth  century  that  the  doubt  was
raised  originally,  and  such  investigations
as  were  possible  have  tended  rather  to
confirm  than  dispose  of  it.  It  is  ad-
vanced that  the  monastic  character
assumed  by  Basil  Valentine  was  simply
a  veil  and  an  evasion  to  conceal  his  real
identity,  and,  further,  that  his  name  was
a  pseudonym  which  was  Hermetic  and
allegorical  in  its  significance.  Maxi-
milian Stoel,  the  author  of  a  handbook
of  practical  medicine,  which  is  now  most
readily  accessible  in  its  fourth  edition,
adopted  this  view.*  So  also  did
Boerhaave,  the  celebrated  physician  of
Leyden,  whose  proposed  chronological
history  of  the  alchemists  has  been  a  loss
yet  to  be  repaired.t  Jacobus  Tollius
contrived  to  resolve  the  enigma  of  the

*  See  La  Medicine  Pratique,  forming  the  seventh
division  of  the  Encyclopedie  des  Sciences  Medicates,  Paris,
1834,  8vo.

t  On  this  and  other  points  consult  Dallowe's  translation
of  Boerhaave's  Elements  of  Chemistry,  2  vols.,  1735?  4to  ;
also  Herman  Boerhaave  :  His  Academical  Lectures  on
Lues  Venerea,  translated,  London,  1763,  8vo.


xiv.   The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

assumed  name  by  a  consideration  of  the
philosophical  significance  attaching  to
the  two  words  in  Greek  and  Latin  res-
pectively.* According  to  this  interpre-
tation, Basil  in  Greek  is  equivalent  to
royal,  while  Valentine  is  the  Latin
valendo.  The  union  of  the  two  terms
formulates  the  symbol  of  power  "  which
gives  the  regulus  for  the  penetration  of
bodies."  In  another  aspect,  Basil
Valentine  signifies  "  the  mighty  king,"
who  rules  by  initiation  and  adeptship
"the  three  analogical  worlds  of  occult
philosophy."  This  interpretation  of
itself  has  little  but  a  show  of  ingenuity
to  recommend  it,  yet  as  early  as  the
year  1515  the  identity  of  Basil  Valentine
was  involved  in  so  much  uncertainty
that  the  Emperor  Maximilian  the  First,
in  his  passion  for  the  sciences,  searched
the  Benedictine  archives  at  Rome,  and
also  made  many  inquiries  in  different
monasteries  about  him,  but  without

*  Jacobus  Tollius  :  Fortuita.  In  quibus  prater  critica
nonulla,)  iota  fabularis  historia  Graca  Phoenicia  ^.gyptiaca
chemiam  pertinere  asseritur.  Amsterdam,  1687,  8vo.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,    xv.

success.  Vincent  Placcius,  one  of  the
earliest  bibliographers  and  investigators
of  the  secret  history  of  anonymous  and
pseudonymous  authors,  affirms  that  the
real  name  of  Valentine  was  Tholden.*
Others  state  that  it  was  John  Estchen-
reuter.  The  evidence  for  the  statement
of  Placcius  is  not  satisfactory,  and  as
Prosper  Marchand  calls  his  curious  work
mare  magnum  erratorum,  it  might  be
unwise  under  any  circumstances  to  accept
him  as  a  guide.  On  the  other  hand,
the  alternative  statement,  equally  unsup-
ported by  reference,  appears  in  the
monographs  of  certain  biographical  dic-
tionaries which  are  not  very  trustworthy,
if  only  because  they  betray  little  or  no
acquaintance  with  the  works  of  Basil
Valentine.

In  order  to  appreciate  the  assertion
of  Vincent  Placcius,  it  must  be  noted
that  it  was  owing  to  the  solicitude  of
John  Tholden  Hessius,  that  is,  Johann
Thoelde,  that  the  works  of  Basil  Valen-

*  Theatrum  Anonymorum  et  Pseudonymorum.     In  two
parts.     Hamburg,  1708,  Fol.


xvi.    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

tine  began  to  be  issued  from  the  press.
Under  his  editorial  auspices  The  Tract
of  the  Great  Stone  appeared  in  1602,
the  treatise  Concerning  Natural  and
Supernatural  Things  in  1603,  and  The
Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony  in  1 604.
That  Placcius  was  aware  of  these  facts
seems  doubtful,  but  he  knew  that  in
1603  there  was  published  at  Eissleben  a
work  entitled  Haligraphia,  on  the  title-
page  of  which  Thoelde  is  indicated  as
the  author.*  Now  in  1644,  under  the
auspices  of  another  editor,  a  certain  por-
tion of  this  book  was  translated  into
Latin,  and  published  as  a  work  of  Basil
Valentine  t  under  the  slightly  altered
name  of  Haliographia.  The  claim  of
its  editor  that  it  is  produced  from  the

*  Haligraphia :  that  is,  a  Complete  and  Exhaustive
Description  of  all  the  Mineral  Salts,  effectively  describing
the  Salt  of  the  First  Matter,  the  tests  for  Salt  Waters,  the
means  of  obtaining  the  Salt  of  the  Sun  through  fire,  by
various  methods,  and  the  improvement  of  the  same.  By
Johann  Thoelde  Hesse.  At  the  cost  of  Jacob  Apel,  book-
seller, Eissleben,  1603,  8vo.

t  It  represents  less  than  half  the  original,  namely,  from
p.  1 68  onwards,  as  far  as  p.  310,  missing  the  Lonclusio
Autoris,  and  other  matter  at  the  end.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,  xvii.

manuscripts  of  the  great  alchemist  seems
wholly  without  foundation ;  its  attri-
bution to  Valentine  may  perhaps  be
accounted  for  by  a  blunder ;  but  there  is
no  reason  for  supposing  that  it  was  other
than  an  original  storehouse  of  Hermetic
theories  and  experiments,  compiled  by
Thoelde  himself.  That  so  far  as  he  is
known  at  all  he  is  known  chiefly  as  the
editor  of  Valentine  does  not  preclude
Thoelde  from  having  appeared  indepen-
dently as  an  author,  and  so  early  as  the
year  i  599  we  find  that  he  actually  did
so.*  At  the  same  time,  it  is  possible
for  a  mistake  to  have  arisen  through  a
misconception  of  some  prefatory  verses
prefixed  to  the  first  Haligraphia.

Sic  tu  Mater  es   autorum,    quos,  Tholde,
sophorum,

Eruis  e  tenebris,  dasque  videre  diem.
Per  te  Basilius  lucem  squallore  remote,

Cernit,  Basilii  mater  es  alma  tui.*

*  Information  concerning  the  Revolting  Malady  called
Red  Dysentery,  Diarrhea,  and  the  extremely  swift  and  dan-
gerous sickness   of  the   Pestilence.      By  Johann   Tholden
Hesse.     Erfurt,  1599,  4to  (a  pamphlet  of  22  pages).

*  From  the  prefatory  verses  of  Hermannus  Kircnerus.

2  A


xviii.  The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

And  again  : —

Depromis  Sal,  Tholde,  penu  mortalibus  ;   ergo
Condimenta  coquus,  tumque  Hygiea  paret

Non  condus  sis,  Basilii  monumenta  recondens,
Sed  promus,  pateat  Basiliique  penu.

Quo  mage   Basilii   a  doctis   nunc  scripta

leguntur,
Tanto   major  erit   gloria,  Tholde,   tua.*

But  the  reference  was  not  to  the
Haligraphia,  but  to  Thoelde's  editorial
labours  over  Basil  Valentine,  then  in
progress,  and  probably  well  known  to
his  friends.

While,  however,  there  is  no  reason
for  fathering  the  Haligraphia  upon
Valentine,  with  Thoelde  as  editor,  so
is  there  less  ground  for  identifying
Thoelde  with  Valentine,  or  Valentine
with  any  of  his  family,  which  is  the
course  that  is  countenanced  by  Placcius
on  the  authority  of  a  vague  reference.

The  claim  of  John  Estchenreuter
to  have  worn  the  mask  of  Basil  Valen-
tine, is  negatively  more  difficult  to  dis-

*  From  the  prefatory  verses  of  M.  Johannes  Tanckius,
who  himself  shortly  afterwards  figured  as  an  editor  of
alchemical  literature.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,   xix.

pose  of,  because  nothing  is  known  about
him,  nor,  indeed,  has  it  been  possible  to
discover  by  whom  his  claim  has  been
preferred.  At  the  period  of  Theolde's
activity,  we  find  Johannes  Tanckius
editing  a  collection  of  alchemical  tracts,
among  which  there  is  a  brief  epistle  by
Gallus  Eschenreuter,  or  Schonreuter,  but
there  is  nothing  known  concerning  him.  *
Boerhaave  denies  that  there  was  a
monastery  of  S.  Peter's  at  Erfurt,  but  on
this  point  there  is  no  reasonable  doubt.
A  certain  Mollenbseck, — whose  identity
is  difficult  to  determine,  while  his  record
does  not  seem  to  remain,  so  far,  at  least,
as  libraries  in  England  are  concerned — is
said  to  have  visited  it  personally,  and  to
have  ascertained  from  the  prior  that  the
name  of  Basil  Valentine  did  not  appear
on  the  records.  What  is  more  to  the
purpose  is  the  testimony  of  Joannes
Mauritius  Gudenus,  the  historian  of


*  See  the  Epistle  of  Ga'lus  Schonreuter,  Doctor  of
Medicine  and  Ordinary  Physical  Chemist  at  Galenstadt,
addressed  to  William  Gratalorum.  It  is  the  third  tract  in
the  collection,  entitled  Opuscula  Chemica.  1605,  8vo.


xx.    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Erfurt,  which  is  conclusive  as  to  the
existence  of  the  convent,  and  testifies  to
the  connection  of  the  Alchemist  there-
with ;  though  the  latter  point  is  perhaps
on  the  authority  of  the  Alchemist,  and
not  on  that  of  the  records  of  the  place.  *

It  is  obvious,  of  course,  that  if  the
name  of  Basil  Valentine  was  assumed,
he  might  still  have  been  a  monk  of  the
convent,  and  he  would  have  appeared  in
its  archives  only  under  his  true  title.

Despite  the  doubts  that  have  been
raised,  the  preponderating  feeling  of
critics  inclines  to  the  belief  that  a  person
named  Basil  Valentine  really  existed,
and  actually  filled  that  position  in  the
devout  life  which  is  described  in  the
Currus  Triumphalis.  This,  however,
is  the  utmost  extent  of  their  unanimity,

*  "  Dicitu r  fuisse  adeptus"  says  Gudenus,  and  again
"  Eadem  estate  (Scilicet,  1413),  Basilius  Valentinus  in
divi  Petri  monasterio  lixit^  arte  medico,  et  naturalium
indagine  mirabilis.  Insuper  its  accensetur  quos  in  augn-en-
tum  spei  nominant  aurum  conjecisse,  sic  aliena  dementia
post  secula  fallit,  idea  minima  culpabilis,  quod  nan  tnsi
decipi  amantes  Jacultatibus  exuat.  Volumen  Ptimum
Rerum  Moguntiacarum,  1722.  Fol.  The  history  was
published  at  Erfurt.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,   xxi.

for,  on  the  one  hand  it  is  asserted  that
he  was  born  at  Alsace,  on  the  borders
of  the  Rhine,  and,  on  the  other,  that  he
was  himself  a  native  of  Erfurt.  By
some  again  he  is  referred  to  the  twelfth
century,  and  by  others  to  the  four-
teenth;  the  year  1394  has  been  named
as  the  date  of  his  birth,  and  in  1415  he
is  supposed  to  have  commenced  his
literary  labours  in  Alchemy  and
Hermetic  Medicine.  But  these  dates
are  unable  to  support  any  test  of
examination.  A  passage  on  page  181
of  the  present  volume  is  conclusive  as  to
the  earliest  period.  "  You  should  know
that  Antimony  is  used  for  a  good  many
purposes  besides  those  of  the  typo-
grapher." It  is  perhaps  difficult  to
assign  the  exact  date  when  Antimony
was  first  used  as  an  alloy  for  the
founding  of  metal  types,  but  the  close  of
the  fifteenth  century  is  likely  to  have
been  the  earliest  period.  There  is,  how-
ever, another  and  more  important  point.
The  reader  of  the  Currus  Triumphalis
will  find  numerous  references  therein  to


xxii.  The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

the  recent  appearance  in  Germany  of  the
venereal  scourge,  which  h^  calls  the
French  disease — -Morbus  Gallicus  and
Lues  Gallica.  Now  it  appears  to  be
certain,  from  abundant  historical  testi-
mony, that  the  name  of  Morbus  Gallicus
was  given  to  the  complaint  after
the  expedition  of  the  French,  under
Charles  VIII.,  to  Naples,  which  took
place  in  1495.*

Basil  Valentine  is  one  of  the  few
Alchemical  writers  who  does  not,  at  least
in  the  undoubtedly  genuine  works,  such
as  the  Currus  Triumphalis  and  the

*  A  synopsis  of  the  testimony  is  as  follows  :  In  1497,
Nicolaus  Leonicenus,  of  Vicentia,  calls  it  by  this  name,
though  he  denies  the  novelty  of  the  disease,  saying  :  "  I  can
by  no  means  imagine,  with  some,  that  this  complaint  never
appeared  till  now."  In  1498,  Natalis  Montesaurus,  of
Verona,  remarks  upon  ''  those  dispositions  commonly  called
A/al  Franzozo."  In  1499,  the  Spaniard,  Caspar  Torellf,
narrates  that  the  disease  broke  out  in  Alvernia  in  the  year
1493,  thence  making  its  way  into  Spain,  afterwards  into
Italy,  and  from  Italy  into  all  Europe.  Joannes  de  Vigo,  of
Genoa,  writing  in  1503,  says  that  it  appeared  almost  all  over
Italy  in  the  month  of  December,  1494,  and  he  adds  :  "  The
French  disease,  when  once  it  comes  to  be  confirmed,  seldom
admits  of  any  other  than  a  palliative  cure."  Leonardus
Schmai,  of  Salzburg,  in  1518,  bears  witness  to  the  same  date,
and  makes  use  of  the  same  name.  In  the  year  following,


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,  xxiii.

Twelve  Keys,  betray  the  approximate
date  of  his  treatise  by  citations  from
slightly  anterior  adepts.  On  the  whole,
it  is  safe  to  place  him  at  the  end  of  the
fifteenth  and  the  beginning  of  the
sixteenth  centuries.  He  had  probably
passed  the  prime  of  life  when  he  entered
upon  his  labours  in  literature,  and  a
whole  century  was  destined  to  elapse
before  any  of  his  works  found  their  way
into  the  hands  of  the  printer.  The
following  bibliographical  list,  while  it
includes  all  his  extant  treatises,  in  the
matter  of  the  dates  appended  does  not


1519,  Ulrichus  de  Hutten,  a  German,  discoursed  upon  a
"method  of  curing  the  French  disease  by  Guaiacum,"  fixing
1493  for  the  date,  and  Naples  for  the  place  of  its  appearance.
Joannes  Baptista  Montanus,  1550,  affirms,  on  the  other  hand,
that  it  was  the  soldiers  of  Columbus  who  imported  the
disease  from  Antigua,  and  the  West  India  Islands,  to  the
siege  of  Naples,  in  1496.  In  1554,  Joannes  Langius,  of
Limburg,  speaks  of  the  French  disease,  maintaining  that
"  although  some  would  have  it  to  be  a  new  one,"  it  is  "  no
other  than  a  farrago  of  diseases  known  to  the  ancients."
Compare  also  Bernardinus  Tomitanrus,  of  Padua,  1566 ;
Joannes  Astruc,  De  Morbis  Venens  :  Adrianus  Tollius  ;
Herman  Boerhaave,  etc.  See  further,  John  Armstrong's
"  Synopsis  of  the  HL-tory  and  Cure  of  Venereal  Diseases,"
London,  1737,  8vo.


xxiv.  The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

necessarily  determine  the  original  period

of  publication  in  every  case.

Concerning  Natural  and  Supernatural
Things  :  also  concerning  the  First
Tincture,  Root,  and  Spirit  of  Metals  :
how  they  are  generated,  brought
forth,  smelted,  altered,  and  aug-
mented. A  true  account,  by  Prater
Basil  Valentine,  of  the  Benedictine
Order,  printed  from  his  own  manu-
script by  John  Tholden  Hessius,
cum  privileoio.  Leipzig,  at  the  cost
of  Jacob  Apel,  bookseller.  A.D.,  1603.

Prater  Basil  Valentine's  Treatise  con-
cerning the  Great  Stone  of  the
Ancients,  whereat  so  many  thousands
of  Masters  have  worked  since  the
beginning  of  the  world.  Accom-
panied by  his  clear  repetition  and
reiteration,  wherein  the  true  Light
of  the  Wise  is  philosophically  ex-
hibited. Together  with  an  account
of  the  principal  metals  and  their  pro-
perties. II.  Of  the  Microcosmos,
or  the  small  world  of  man.  III.  Of
the  Great  Secret  of  the  World,  and


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,  xxv.

of  the  Medicine  pertaining  to  man  :
highly  useful  for  all  who  desire  to
know  the  source  of  wisdom.  (This
tract  is  termed  in  some  later  editions
De  Macrocosmo.}  IV.  Of  the  know-
ledge and  hidden  secrets  of  the
planets.  Newly  printed  and  pub-
lished for  the  Sons  of  the  Doctrine,
with  appropriate  diagrams,  by  John
Tholden  Hessius,  at  the  cost  of
Jacob  Apel,  bookseller,  in  the  year
1602.

The  Revelation  of  Prater  Basil  Valen-
tine, of  the  Benedictine  Order,
concerning  the  Hidden  Operations
directed  towards  the  Universal
Subject.  Also  conclusions  and
arguments  from  all  his  writings  and
treatises  on  Sulphur,  Vitriol,  the
Magnet  Stone,  both  the  philoso-
phical, from  which  the  universal
originates,  and  the  ordinary,  which
originates  the  particular.  (The  first
treatise  in  this  volume  is  better
known  under  the  Latin  title,  Apoca-
lypsis  Chemical)  Printed  at  the


xxvi.  The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

expense  of  John  Birkner,  bookseller
in  Erfurt,  1624.

Prater  Basilius  Valentinus,  of  the  Bene-
dictine Order  :  Twelve  Keys,  where-
by the'  doors  are  opened  to  the
Ancient  Stone  of  our  Forefathers,
and  wherein  the  inexhaustible  foun-
tains of  all  health  are  found.
Frankfort,  1611.  (A  Latin  transla-
tion stands  first  in  the  Golden  Tripod
of  the  celebrated  Michael  Maier.
Other  editions  in  German  appeared
in  1677,  r700>  and  1717.)

Azoth  ;  or,  the  secret  Aureliae  of  the
Philosophers,  faithfully  and  clearly
explaining  the  First  Matter,  and  the
famous  Stone  of  the  Philosophers,
unto  the  sons  of  Hermes,  by  way  of
a  Philosophical  Enigma,  parabolic
colloquy,  the  Smaragdine  Table  of
Hermes,  and  the  Saturnian  Parables
and  Figures  of  Frater  Basil  Valen-
tine. Interpreted  by  M.  Georgius
Beatus.  Frankfort,  1613.  (A  French
translation  of  this  work  appeared  at
Paris  in  1624.  It  is  difficult  to  say


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,  xxvii.

how  much,  if  any,  of  the  original  is
to  be  attributed  to  Valentine.)

Haliographia :  concerning  the  Prepara-
tion, the  Use,  and  the  Virtues  of  all
Salts,  mineral,  animal,  and  vegetable  ;
from  the  manuscripts  of  Basilius
Valentinus,  collected  by  And.  Sal-
minicius,  Bononia,  1644,  ^va
(Doubtful.)

Secret  Books,  or  Last  Testament  of
Basil  Valentine,  of  the  Benedictine
Order.  Copied  from  the  original
which  was  discovered  in  the  high
altar  of  the  Church  at  Erfurt,  under
a  marble  tablet.  Now  printed  in
accordance  with  numerous  requests
on  the  part  of  the  Sons  of  the
Doctrine.  Strasburg,  at  the  cost  of
Caspar  Dietzel,  1645.*  (Contains
long  treatises  on  mines  and  the

*  "  According  to  Glaus  Borrichius,  he  enclosed  his
writings  in  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  abbey  church  ;  they
remained  for  many  years  in  this  hiding-place,  but  were  at
length  discovered  by  the  fortunate  violence  of  a  thunder-
bolt."— Lives  of  Alchemystical  Philosophers.  But  Olaus
Borrichius  wrote  his  De  Arte  et  Progressu  C he  mice  in  1668,
and  probably  derived  his  information  from  the  so-called
Last  Testament.


xxviii.  The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

generation  of  metals,  a  commentary
on  The  Twelve  Keys,  and  other
matters,  but  it  is  in  all  probability
spurious.)

The  Fifth  Part  of  the  Last  Testament
of  that  estimable  Hermetic  Philoso-
pher, Prater  Basil  Valentine ;  part
of  which  has  never  been  previously
printed,  part  of  which  is  now  pub-
lished in  completely  fresh  order,
and  differs  from  former  exemplars.
All  translated  literally  from  a  secret
manuscript,  printed  for  the  public
good,  by  John  Hiskias  Cardilucius,.
Com.  Pal.,  Phil.,  et  Med.,  etc.  (Ap-
parently a  spurious  rechauffe.)

In  addition  to  these  there  is  the
Manifestatio  Artificiorum,  Erfurt,  1624,
8vo,  which  the  present  editor  has
not  been  able  to  trace,  except  in  its
French  edition,  published  in  1646,  under
the  title  Revelation  des  Mysteres  des
Teintures  essentielles  des  sept  Metaux,
et  de  leur  Vertus  Medicinales.  There
is  also  a  Manuductio  Medicince  men-
tioned by  Boerhaave,  and  by  no  other


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,  xxix

writer.  Finally,  there  is  the  "  Tri-
umphal Chariot  of  Antimony,"  which
is  translated  in  the  following  pages ;
this  is  by  far  the  most  important,  as  it  is
also  the  most  lucid  and  simple,  of  all
Valentine's  works ;  it  has  done  more
than  any  other  to  establish  his  reputation
as  a  chemist  on  the  solid  basis  of  plain,
practical  experiment.  It  is  not,  there-
fore, surprising  that  it  achieved  an  im-
mense success,  that  it  has  passed  through
many  editions,  and  has  been  translated
into  various  languages,  while  it  is  still  a
subject  of  reference  for  the  archaeology
of  exoteric  chemistry.  Its  presentation
in  accessible  form  to  the  modern  student
of  the  old  alchemists  will,  it  is  believed,
prove  of  good  service  in  redeeming
those  profound  investigators  of  Nature
from  the  undeserved  disdain  of  to-day,
albeit  Basil  Valentine  himself  stands
scarcely  in  need  of  vindication,  for  even
the  biographical  dictionaries  *  of  the

*  "Among  his  discoveries,  since  improved  on,  and  still
medical  preparations  in  constant  use,  are  sulphuric  ether,
vinegar  from  honey- water,  sugar  of  lead,  litharge,  fuimi-


xxx.  The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

early  nineteenth  century  did  honour  to
the  philosopher  of  Erfurt.  At  the  same
time,  there  will  be  some  satisfaction  in
citing  the  panegyric  of  a  French  scien-
tist, Louis  Figuier.

"  Every  one,"  says  the  author  of
VAlchimie  et  les  Alchimistes,  "  is
acquainted  with  the  remarkable  dis-
coveries relative  to  Antimony  which
are  contained  in  the  celebrated  work  of
Basil  Valentine,  Currus  Triumphalis
Antimonii.  The  German  Alchemist  had
so  thoroughly  investigated  the  properties
of  this  metal,  scarcely  indicated  before
him,  that  we  find  many  facts  stated  in
his  treatise  which  in  our  day  have  been
brought  forward  as  modern  discoveries.
In  the  same  work  Basil  Valentine  speci-
fies many  other  chemical  preparations  of
the  first  importance,  such  as  spirit  of
salt,  or  our  hydro-chloric  acid,  derived
after  our  own  manner  from  marine  salt
and  oil  of  vitriol  (sulphuric  acid).  He

nating  gold,  many  mercurial  preparations,  empyreumatic
carbonate  of  ammonia,  claimed  as  his  own  by  Sylvius
Deleboe,  etc." — Biographie  Universelle.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,  xxxi.

gives  the  method  of  obtaining  brandy
by  the  distillation  of  wine  and.  beer,
rectifying  the  product  of  the  distillation
on  calcined  tartar  (carbonate  of  potass).
He  even  teaches  the  extraction  of  copper
from  its  pyrites  (sulphur),  by  first  of  all
transforming  it  into  vitriol  of  copper
(sulphate  of  copper),  with  the  help  of
moist  air,  and  afterwards  plunging  a  bar
of  iron  into  the  aqueous  dissolution  of
this  product.  This  operation,  which  Basil
Valentine  was  the  first  to  describe,  was
often  profitably  made  use  of  by  Alchem-
ists at  a  later  date,  but,  notwithstanding
the  fact  of  the  precipitation  of  metallic
copper,  they  mistook  it  for  a  transmuta-
tion of  iron  into  copper,  or  at  least  as
the  commencement  of  a  transmutation
which  could  be  perfected  by  art.  .
One  may  regard  this  Alchemist  as
having  been  the  first  to  obtain  sul-
phuric ether,  which  he  prepared  by
distilling  a  mixture  of  spirit  of  wine
and  oil  of  vitriol.  In  a  word,  there
are  few  chemical  preparations  known
to  his  period  concerning  which  Basil


xxxii.  The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Valentine  has  not  registered  some  valu-
able facts."

Concerning  the  subject  matter  of
the  "Triumphal  Chariot"  it  will  be  seen
by  the  general  reader,  who  has  an
elementary  acquaintance  with  the  proper-
ties of  Antimony,  that  the  account  of
Basil  Valentine  is  correct,  not  only  as  to
general  characteristics,  but  in  many
points  of  detail.  As  to  the  value  of  the
metal  as  a  factor  in  the  act  of  transmuta-
tion, the  modern  chemist  is  not  in  a
position  to  adjudicate,  nor  have  we  as
yet  a  canon  of  interpretation  by  which
we  can  distinguish  the  true  meaning
of  the  adept.

The  method  of  the  translation  which
follows  is  literal  as  regards  all  that  is  of
practical  importance  ;  for  the  rest,  while
it  is  by  no  means,  and  in  no  sense,  an
abridgment,  it  makes  for  brevity  by
the  skilful  compression  of  a  prolix
and  tautological  original.  The  trans-
lation has  been  subjected  to  revision  at
the  hands  of  the  editor,  and  the  general
plan,  it  is  believed,  will  commend  itself


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,  xxxiii.

not  only  to  the  English  reader,  but  to
those  who  are  acquainted  with  the
Currus  Triumphalis  in  either  its  Ger-
man or  Latin  guise.

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  added  that
no  particulars  are  forthcoming  as  to
Theodore  Kerckringius,  the  commen-
tator, who  is  interesting  by  his  aspirations
and  his  modesty.  He  does  not  appear
to  have  entered  a  second  time  into  the
field  of  Hermetic  literature.  In  the  year
1670  he  published,  at  Amsterdam,  a
century  of  anatomical  observations,  under
the  title  Spicilegium  Anatomicum,  a
very  beautiful  specimen  of  typography,
adorned  with  valuable  plates,  but  having
no  connection  with  esoteric  medicine  or
chemistry.

ARTHUR  EDWARD  WAITE.


3  A


TO    THE    ILLUSTRIOUS,
VENERABLE,     SAINTLY,     AND     BLESSED

MEN,

ADEPTS    OF  THE  TRUE  PHILOSOPHY,

LOVERS    OF    VIRTUE,

LORDS     OF     FORTUNE,

DESPISERS     OF     THE     WORLD,

WHOSE    LIFE    IS    HOLINESS    IN    HOLINESS,

KNOWLEDGE     IN    KNOWLEDGE,

AND  WHOSE    WORK    CONSISTS    IN    THE

RELIEVING    OF    THE    SICK

AND    POOR.


B


DEDICATORY    EPISTLE.


IT  is  not  arrogance,  but  reverence,
saintly  and  blessed  men,  that  em-
boldens me  to  address  you,  whom
I  do  not  know,  but  whom  I  admire,  love,
venerate,  and  all  but  worship.  For,
though  you  are  strangers  to  me,  I  know
what  sort  of  men  you  are,  and  what  you
have  attained  ;  so  that  even  if  you  were
known  to  me,  I  would  address  you  rather
as  Alchemists,  than  by  your  own  proper
names.  In  return  for  this  dedication  I
expect  no  reward  but  to  bask  in  the  rays
of  your  favour,  and  to  be  promoted  in
the  way  you  know,  since  you  will  see
from  this  book  that  I  am  in  the  straight
road,  and  am  mounting  to  the  bright
temple  of  knowledge  by  the  right  path.
Do  not  refuse  me  the  kindness  which  I
here  publicly  confer  on  the  lovers  of
Alchemy,  which  also,  the  inventor  Apollo


4      The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

and  lord  Mercury  do  not  forbid  me  to
shew  forth,  since,  in  the  words  of
Basilius,  I  have  already  gained  a  place
in  a  higher  class.  To  speak  to  you  in
your  own  phraseology,  Mercury  appeared
to  me  in  a  dream,  and  brought  me  back
from  my  devious  courses  to  the  one  way.
"  Behold  me  clad  not  in  the  garb  of  the
vulgar,  but  in  the  philosopher's  mantle ! ""
— so  he  said,  and  straightway  began  to
leap  along  the  road  in  headlong  bounds.
Then,  when  he  was  tired,  he  sat  down,
and,  turning  to  me,  who  had  followed
him  in  the  spirit,  bade  me  mark  that  he
no  longer  possessed  that  youthful  vigour
with  which  he  would  at  the  first  have
overcome  every  obstacle,  if  he  had  not
been  allowed  a  free  course.  Encouraged
by  his  friendly  salutation,  I  addressed
him  in  the  following  terms  :  "  Mercury,
eloquent  Scion  of  Atlas,  and  father  of  all
Alchemists,  since  thou  hast  guided  me
hitherto,  shew  me,  I  pray  thee,  the  way
to  those  Blessed  Isles,  which  thou  hast
promised  to  reveal  to  all  thine  elect
children."  "  Dost  thou  remember,"  he


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.      5

replied,  "  that  when  I  quitted  thy  labora-
tory, I  left  behind  me  a  garment  so
thoroughly  saturated  with  my  own  blood,
that  neither  the  wind  could  efface  it,  nor
all-devouring  time  destroy  its  indelible
essence  ?  Fetch  it  hither  to  me,  that  I
may  not  catch  a  chill  from  the  state  of
perspiration  in  which  I  now  am  ;  but  let
me  clothe  myself  warmly  in  it,  and  be
closely  united  thereto,  so  that  I  may
safely  reach  my  bride,  who  is  sick  with
love.  She  has  meekly  borne  many
wrongs,  being  driven  through  water  and
fire,  and  compelled  to  ascend  and  descend
times  without  number — yet  has  she  been
carried  through  it  all  by  the  hope  of
entering  with  me  the  bridal  chamber,
wherein  we  expect  to  beget  a  son
adorned  from  his  birth  with  the  royal
crown  which  he  may  not  share  with
others.  Yet  may  he  bring  his  friends  to
the  palace,  where  sits  enthroned  the
King  of  Kings,  who  communicates  his
dignity  readily  and  liberally  to  all  that
approach  him."  I  brought  him  the  gar-
ment, and  it  fitted  him  so  closely,  that  it


6      The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

looked  like  an  iron  skin  securing  him
against  all  the  assaults  of  Vulcan.  "  Let
us  proceed,"  he  then  said,  and  straight-
way sped  across  the  open  field,  while  I
boldly  strove  to  keep  up  with  my  guide.
Thus  we  reached  his  bride,  whose  virtue
and  constancy  were  equal  to  his  own.
There  I  beheld  their  marvellous  conjugal
union  and  nuptial  consummation,  whence
was  born  the  son  crowned  with  the  royal
diadem.  When  I  was  about  to  salute
him  as  the  King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of
Lords,  my  Genius  stood  by  me,  and
warned  me  not  to  be  deceived,  since  this
was  only  the  King's  forerunner,  but  not
the  King  himself  whom  I  sought.  When
I  heard  the  admonition,  I  did  not  know
whether  to  be  sad  or  joyful.  "  Depart,"
then  said  Mercury,  "  with  this  bridal
gift,  and  when  you  come  to  those  dis-
ciples who  have  seen  the  Lord  himself,
shew  them  this  sign  " — and  therewith  he
gave  me  a  gold  ring  from  his  son's
finger.  "  They  know  the  golden  branch
which  must  be  consecrated  to  Proserpina
before  you  can  enter  the  palace  of  Pluto.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.      J

When  he  sees  this  ring,  perhaps  one
will  open  to  you  with  a  word  the  door  of
that  chamber,  where  sits  enthroned  in
his  magnificence  the  Desire  of  all
Nations,  who  is  known  only  to  the
Sages."  When  he  had  thus  spoken,  the
vision  vanished,  but  the  bridal  gift  that
I  still  held  in  my  hand,  shewed  me  that
it  had  not  been  a  mere  dream.  It  was
of  gold,  but  to  me  more  precious  than
the  most  prized  of  all  metals.  Unto  you
I  will  shew  it  when  I  am  permitted  to
see  your  faces,  and  to  converse  with  you
freely.  Till  that  earnestly  wished-for
time,  I  bid  you  farewell.  When  I
behold  you,  the  sight  will  be  to  me  more
pleasant  by  far  than  that  of  Mercury,  or
my  Genius.  I,  your  humble  servant  and
worshipper,  shall  easily  recognize  you  by
your  auroral  necks  and  ambrosial  locks,
which  do  give  forth  a  fragrant  odour.


To    THE    READER.


I  WISH  to  deal  candidly  with  you,
gentle  reader,  and  I  therefore  pre-
sent to  you  here  the  work  of  Basil
Valentine  in  a  Latin  garb,  in  order  that  it
may  be  widely  understood,  with  a  Com-
mentary of  my  own.  To  me  he  spoke  in
German,  and  without  a  commentator  ;  I
studied  his  work  carefully,  because  I  be-
lieved his  promises,  practically  carried
out  all  his  directions,  yet  incurred  much
useless  expense,  made  many  mistakes,
and,  though  I  went  through  each  oper-
ation more  than  ten  times,  could  not
succeed,  not  through  the  Author's,  but,  as
I  will  confess  honestly,  through  my  own
fault.  For  Basil  is  the  Prince  of  all
chemists,  and  the  most  learned,  upright,
and  lucid  of  all  alchemistic  writers.  He
tells  the  careful  student  everything  that
can  be  known  in  Alchemy  :  of  this  I  can


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.      9

most  positively  assure  you,  not  as  though
I  had  already  attained,  or  knew  every-
thing ;  that  would  be  a  bold  assertion.
But  what  I  have  already  learned  from
this  writer  fills  me  with  hope,  the  aliment
of  the  Alchemist,  that  I  shall  attain  the
remainder  also.  The  Author  needs  no
further  commendation  ;  did  I  add  more
it  would  be  insufficient  to  satisfy  those
who  reject  this.  The  Commentary
which  I  subjoin,  I  do  not  commend.  In
these  notes  I  only  give  information  which
in  itself  is  humble  enough,  but  the  want
of  which  has  cost  me  many  thousands.
If  you  do  not  care  to  avoid  this  expense,
you  may  do  without  my  guidance.  You
will  learn  perhaps  through  your  own
mistakes,  if  neither  money  nor  patience
fail  you.  My  guides  have  been  constant
attention  and  the  most  careful  thought ;
nor  do  you  need  any  other  leaders.  So
therefore  do  without  me,  by  all  means,
if  you  can  afford  it.  But  if  you  wish  to
avoid  unnecessary  delay,  mistakes,  and
useless  expense,  I  may  be  to  you  a  not
quite  worthless  counsellor,  or  at  least  a


io    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

humble  finger-post,  when  perchance  you
stand  perplexed  by  the  multiplicity  of
intersecting  roads.  Farewell !  If  you
will  take  my  advice,  reject  not  my
services,  and  you  will  enjoy  many  ad-
vantages. Again  farewell !


THE  TRIUMPHAL  CHARIOT  OF  ANTIMONY,

BY

BASILIUS    VALENTINUS,

WITH

THE  COMMENTARY  OF
THEODORE    KERCKRINGIUS,

A  Doctor  of  Medicine.


WHEREAS  I,  Basil  Valentine,
belong  to  the  religious  order
of  S.  Benedict,  and  such  a
life  requires  a  higher  spirit  of  holiness
than  that  which  satisfies  the  multitude  in
this  profane  age,  I  consider  it  my  duty
to  declare  at  the  outset  that  it  is  necessary
for  the  disciple  of  the  Spagyric  Art  to
know  how  he  should  lay  stable  founda-
tions, so  that  his  structure  may  not  be  at
the  mercy  of  the  winds,  or  be  shaken
into  ruins  by  every  stormy  gust.  In
dealing  thus  thoroughly  with  my  subject,
I  am  thinking  not  only  of  the  present


12    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

age,  but  of  future  generations,  when  we
shall  be  in  our  graves,  and  when  of  our
contemporaries,  neither  king  nor  peasant
will  be  surviving.  This  object  I  pursue
not  only  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  the
Divine  Majesty,  but  also  in  order  that
men  may  render  to  God  implicit  obedi-
ence in  all  things.

I  have  found  that  in  this  Meditation
there  are  five  principal  heads,  which  must
be  diligently  considered,  as  much  by  all
who  are  in  possession  of  the  wisdom  of
philosophy  as  by  all  who  aspire  after
that  wisdom  which  is  attained  in  our  art.
The  first  is  the  invocation  of  God  ;  the
second,  the  contemplation  of  Nature ;
the  third,  true  preparation  ;  the  fourth,
the  way  of  using ;  the  fifth,  the  use  and
profit.  He  who  does  not  carefully  attend
to  these  points  will  never  be  included
among  real  Alchemists,  or  be  numbered
among  the  perfect  professors  of  the
Spagyric  science.  Therefore  we  will
treat  of  them  in  their  proper  order  as
lucidly  and  succinctly  as  we  can,  in  order
that  the  careful  and  studious  operator


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    13

may  be  enabled  to  perform  our  Magistery
in  the  right  way.

First,  there  should  be  the  invocation
of  God,  flowing  from  the  depth  of  a  pure
and  sincere  heart,  and  a  conscience  which
should  be  free  from  all  ambition,  hypoc-
risy, and  vice,  as  also  from  all  cognate
faults,  such  as  arrogance,  boldness,
pride,  luxury,  worldly  vanity,  oppression
of  the  poor,  and  similar  iniquities,  which
should  all  be  rooted  up  out  of  the  heart
—that  when  a  man  appears  before  the
Throne  of  Grace,  to  regain  the  health
of  his  body,  he  may  come  with  a
conscience  weeded  of  all  tares,  and  be
changed  into  a  pure  temple  of  God,
cleansed  of  all  that  defiles.  For  "God
is  not  mocked,"  as  worldly  men  fondly
suppose  ;  He  is  not  mocked,  I  say,  but
will  be  called  upon  with  reverence  and
fear,  and  acknowledged  as  the  Creator
of  all,  with  proper  proofs  of  obedience.
For  what  has  man  that  he  does  not  owe
to  God  ? — whether  you  look  at  his  body,
or  at  the  soul  which  works  in  his  body.
Does  he  not  nourish  the  latter  with  the


14    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

word  of  His  mercy  ?  and  has  not  he
promised  to  it  eternal  life  ?  Does  he
not  give  to  our  bodies  food  and  clothing,
without  which  we  could  not  even  live  ?
All  this  man  must  obtain  from  the
Blessed  Father,  who  has  created  the
earth,  things  visible  and  invisible,  the
firmament,  elements,  vegetables,  animals,
and  all  things.  Hence  a  wicked  man
can  never  obtain  the  true  Medicine,
much  less  become  partaker  of  the
heavenly  eternal  bread.

Therefore,  let  all  your  hope  be
stayed  on  God,  and  let  constant  prayer,
to  impart  to  you  this  Blessing,  be  the
beginning  of  your  work,  in  order  that
you  may  safely  reach  the  end,  for  the
"fear  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  wis-
dom."

He  who  would  seek  the  greatest  of

o

all  earthly  benedictions,  the  knowledge
of  all  created  good,  and  of  the  effectual
virtue  which  God  has  liberally  implanted
in  stones,  herbs,  roots,  seeds,  animals,
plants,  minerals,  metals,  and  all  things,
must  fling  away  every  earthly  thought,


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    15

hope  only  for  freedom  of  heart,  and
pray  to  God  with  the  greatest  humility.
Thus,  the  aspiration  after  freedom  will
soon  be  realized.  This  truth  no  one
will  call  in  question  who  knows  that  it
is  God  who  redeems  Israel  from  all
foes,  and  not  only  Israel  but  all  that
call  upon  Him  with  a  contrite  and
broken  spirit.

The  first  head  of  our  teaching,  then,
must  be  prayer,  which  we  call  the  INVO-
CATION OF  GOD,  and  see  that  it  comes
not  forth  out  of  feigned  lips,  but  is  the
fruit  of  faith  and  confidence,  like  that  of
the  Centurion  of  Capernaum ;  in  humility
and  contrition,  like  that  of  the  Canaan-
itish  woman  ;  in  charity,  like  that  of  the
Samaritan  who  took  up  the  wounded
man  on  the  way  to  Jericho,  pouring  into
his  wounds  wine  and  oil,  and  paying  his
expenses  at  the  inn,  with  an  injunction
that  proper  care  should  be  taken  of  him  ;
in  brief,  let  the  prayer  be  offered  up  in
that  spirit  of  Christian  charity  which
desires  to  share  what  it  obtains  with  its
neighbour  ;  then  you  will  doubtless  attain


1 6    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

the    object   of    your   undertaking,    viz.,
riches  and  health.*

Next  in  order  after  prayer  follows
CONTEMPLATION,  by  which  we  apprehend

*  It  is  not  for  me  to  criticise  by  praise  or  blame  what  the
Author  here  says  about  piety,  the  worship  of  God,  and  the
invocation  of  His  Name.  No  doubt  it  was  natural  for  Basil
to  write  as  he  did,  and  my  business  does  not  extend  beyond
the  task  of  rendering  his  remarks  in  Latin.  In  the  mean-
time, I  have  endeavoured  to  acquit  myself  of  my  task  so  as
to  give  as  little  offence  as  possible  to  more  advanced  thinkers.
The  Scripture  says  that  godliness  is  profitable  to  all  things,
and  prayer  is  the  most  important  exercise  of  godliness.  If
prayer  fulfilled  no  other  purpose,  it  would  at  least  be  useful
in  imparting  earnestness  to  every  search,  and  concentrating
the  mind  on  the  object  in  view.  It  prevents  all  distraction,
and  that  perfunctory  treatment  of  our  problem  which  is  one
of  the  most  frequent  causes  of  failure.  It  often  happens  in
this  search  that  what  you  vainly  endeavoured  to  understand
for  many  days,  suddenly  is  rendered  plain  to  you  in  a  single
moment  by  an  instantaneous  flash  of  inspiration,  which  one
would  be  ungrateful  not  to  attribute  to  Divine  assistance.
But  if  your  oration,  or  prayer,  is  to  be  of  any  avail,  there
must  also  be  co-operation  on  your  part  :  the  solution  which
you  then  find,  by  dint  of  perseverance  and  concentrated  effort,
may  be  fitly  called  revelation.  This  would  never  have  come
to  you  without  oration  and  co-operation  ;  and  yet,  as  the
solution  is  nowhere  contained  in  the  process  by  which  it  is
sought,  it  appears  to  you  like  a  marvel,  and  a  celestial  revela-
tion. Thus,  if  prayer  be  the  power  of  concentration,  we  can
easily  understand  how  it  is  the  means  of  placing  temporal  and
spiritual  blessings  within  our  reach.  Hence  prayer  is  highly
commended  by  Basil,  and  all  the  Sages  ;  for  godliness  is
profitable  to  all  things,  and  especially  to  that  which  is  the
greatest  of  all  earthly  blessings.


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    17

the  essential  properties  of  a  thing,  the
circumstances  by  which  it  is  conditioned,
its  matter,  its  form,  its  operations  and
their  source,  whence  it  is  infused  and
implanted,  how  it  is  generated  by  the
Stars,  formed  by  the  elements,  produced
and  perfected  by  the  three  principles.

Again,  it  enables  us  to  understand
how  the  body  of  anything  can  be  dis-
solved, i.e.,  resolved  into  its  first  matter
or  essence ;  to  this  change  I  have  referred
in  my  other  writings  as  the  transmuta-
tion of  the  last  substance  into  the  first,
and  of  the  first  substance  into  the  last*

This  Contemplation,  which  forms
the  second  part  of  our  work,  is  heavenly,
and  spiritually  apprehended,  for  only  the
spiritual  mind  can  grasp  the  circum-

*  Here  you  have  an  epitome  of  all  the  elaborate  and
obscure  teaching  of  the  Sages,  which  is  comprised  in  so
many  books.  The  Author  had  a  perfect  knowledge  of  that
spirit  which  permeates  all  creation,  and  is  the  efficient  cause
of  all  things,  yet  is  everywhere  bound  up  with  the  defile-
ments and  dross  of  matter;  if  freed  from  this  dross,  it  returns
to  the  purity  of  its  substance,  in  which  it  produces  every-
thing, and  becomes  everything  in  every  form.  To  comment
on  it,  or  attempt  its  explanation,  would  be  trying  to  con-
dense the  work  of  all  the  Sages  into  the  compass  of  a
foot-note.

C


1 8    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

stances  and  foundation  of  all  things.
Now,  this  Contemplation  is  two-fold :
one  is  called  impossible,  the  other
possible.  The  former  consists  in  end-
less meditations,  which  can  have  no
result  because  their  object  is  intangible.
Such  problems  are  the  Eternity  of  God,
the  Sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  the
infinite  nature  of  the  Godhead.  They
are  incomprehensible,  and  necessarily
baffle  the  finite  enquirer.

The  other  part  of  Contemplation,
which  is  possible,  is  called  Theoria.  It
deals  with  the  tangible  and  visible  which
has  a  temporal  form — shewing  how  it
can  be  dissolved  and  thereby  perfected
into  any  given  body;  how  every  body
can  impart  the  good  or  evil,  medicine
or  poison,  which  is  latent  in  it ;  how
the  wholesome  is  separated  from  the
unwholesome;  how  to  set  about  des-
truction and  demolition  for  the  purpose
of  really  and  truly  severing  the  pure
from  the  impure  without  any  sophistic
guile.

This  separation  is  brought  about  by


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    19

different  manual  operations,  and  in
various  other  ways,  some  of  which  are
already  familiar  to  the  multitude,  while
others  are  by  no  means  well  known.
They  are  as  follows  :  CALCINATION,
SUBLIMATION,  REVERBERATION,  CIRCU-
LATION, PUTREFACTION,  DIGESTION,  DIS-
TILLATION, COHOBATION,  FIXATION,  and
the  like.  The  meaning  of  these  terms
gradually  comes  to  be  understood  by  the
practical  experimentalist.  In  the  same
way  you  come  to  see  the  meaning  of  the
terms  :  movable,  fixed,  white,  red,
black,  blue,  green,  viz.,  by  sound  practi-
cal experience.  For  the  operator  may
err,  and  deflect  from  the  rectilineal  way,
but  that  Nature,  when  rightly  treated,
should  ever  err,  is  impossible.

If,  therefore,  the  substance  be  not
perfectly  dissolved,  and  set  free  from  all
corporeal  poison,  know  that  you  have
made  a  mistake.  Retrace  your  steps,
learn  the  theory  more  perfectly,  and  en-
quire more  accurately  into  the  method
of  operation,  so  as  to  find  the  true
foundation,  and  certainty  in  the  separa-


2O     The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

tion  of  all  things — which  is  a  matter  of
the  greatest  importance.

This,  then,  is  the  second  founda-
tion of  philosophy,  and  follows  upon
Invocation.  It  is  the  most  important
aspect  of  our  Art,  and  is  expressed
in  the  following  words  :  Seek  first  the
Kingdom  of  God,  and  His  justice—
by  Invocation — and  all  other  things
that  men  need,  for  the  support  and
health  of  the  body,  will  be  added  unto
you.

On  theory,  which  lays  bare  the
most  intimate  relations  of  things,  follows
PREPARATION,  which  is  perfected  by
manual  operation,  and  yields  a  tangible
result.  Out  of  preparation  arises  know-
ledge, which  lays  bare  the  foundations
of  Medicine.

Manual  Operation  requires  diligent
application,  and  knowledge  is  founded
on  experience,  while  the  difference  be-
tween the  two  is  set  forth  by  Anatomy.
Operation  shews  how  all  things  spring
into  existence,  and  become  visible.
Knowledge  points  out  practical  methods,


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    21

and  is  nothing  but  Confirmation ;  manual
operation  shewing  the  good,  eliciting  the
latent  and  hidden  nature,  and  bringing
it  forth  into  the  light  for  good  ;  for  as  in
spiritual  things  the  way  of  the  Lord
must  be  prepared,  so  in  this  Art  also
the  way  must  be  opened  and  made
straight,  in  order  that  the  goal  may  be
reached  without  any  false  step  or  aber-
ration.*

After  preparation,  and  especially
after  separation  of  good  and  bad  (brought
about  by  dissolution),  we  must  proceed
to  the  Proportions  of  Weight,  or  dosis.
For  you  must  avoid  taking  either  too
little  or  too  much  :  this  is  a  point  to
which  the  physician  should  pay  the
closest  attention,  if  he  would  not  "make
a  fat  churchy ard."t

When    the     Medicine    is     diffused

*  In  this  third  part,  manual  experiment  is  indispensably
necessary,  since  without  it  the  student  is  driven  about  by
every  passing  wind  like  a  rudderless  ship.  Concerning  this,
it  is  difficult  to  give  directions  in  writing.  One  hour  of
practice  teaches  more  than  many  pages  of  the  most  lucid
written  instructions.

t  If  you  do  not  know  the  right  quantity  of  a  Medicine,  it
may  produce  an  effect  directly  the  opposite  of  that  which


22     The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

through  the  whole  body,  to  counteract
its  defects  we  become  acquainted  with
its  USES.  For  it  may  happen  that  a
Medicine  properly  prepared,  and  given
in  proper  quantity,  is,  nevertheless,  rather
harmful  than  curative,  in  certain  diseases  ;
and  therefore  we  must  discover  the  con-
ditions under  which  alone  it  is  likely  to
be  beneficial.

In  answering  this  question,  you
must  observe  whether  the  wound  is
internal  or  external — for  the  treatment
is  widely  different  in  the  two  cases.
Hence  you  must  go  to  the  root  of  every
disease,  and  determine  whether  it  can  be
cured  by  external  remedies  only,  or
whether  it  must  be  driven  out  by  internal
applications.  For  if  its  centre  lie  hid
within,  you  want  a  medicine  which  will
penetrate  to  the  centre  and  restore  it ;

you  contemplate  as  desirable.  To  discover  the  doctrine  of
doses  by  experience  is  very  risky,  and  yet  this  is  the  only
method  by  which  it  has  been  found  out.  In  this  matter  we
may  profit  by  the  teaching  of  our  predecessors,  and  withal  be
rather  over  timid  than  over  bold.  Still,  when  Antimony  is
properly  prepared,  it  is  as  harmless  as  cassia  or  manna.  But
in  the  first  stages  of  its  preparation,  where  it  retains  much  of
its  poisonous  crudity,  you  ought  to  be  very  careful.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    23

else  all  your  healing  efforts  will  be
fruitless.*

An  external  disease,  admitting  of
external  treatment,  cannot  be  driven
inward  without  fatal  results.  If,  while  a
tree  is  putting  forth  leaves  and  blossoms,
you  were  to  drive  the  sap  inward  or
downward,  you  would  not  only  obtain  no
fruit,  but  probably  blast,  wither,  and
destroy  the  entire  growth.

There  is  a  great  difference,  then,
between  fresh  wounds,  inflicted  with  a
sword  or  dagger,  or  in  some  other  way,
and  old  wounds  which  have  an  internal
origin.  Fresh  wounds  can  be  perfectly
cured  only  by  external  remedies  ;  but  in
the  case  of  internal  diseases  the  external
application  of  oils,  plasters,  ointments,  and
balms  will  be  of  little  avail.  The  inward
fountain  of  the  disease,  whence  the
morbid  humours  flow  to  the  outward


*What  is  here  said,  about  internal  and  external  diseases,
merits  careful  attention.  If  the  Reader  be  wise,  he  will
understand  that  Basilius  here  speaks  ironically,  in  order  to
lead  all  scorners  and  ignorant  persons  astray.  While  others
yield  to  indignation  at  his  method  of  instruction,  the  true
student  will  gather  the  fruit  which  hangs  in  clus'ers  among
the  thorns.


24    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

parts,  must  be  dried  up.  Then  the  flux
will  cease,  and  the  evil  can  be  cured  by
means  of  diet  alone.

It  does  not  require  much  skill  to
heal  a  common  fresh  wound  ;  any  boor
can  do  so  with  a  little  crude  lard.  But
to  stop  all  the  symptoms,  by  drying
up  the  fountain  of  an  internal  wound,
tests  to  the  utmost  the  physician's
cunning.

Come  hither,  then,  ye  that  claim  to
be  doctors  of  both  branches  of  Medicine,
healers  of  internal  as  well  as  of  external
diseases  :  see  whether  you  can  make
your  claim  good  ;  ask  yourselves,  in  the
sight  of  God,  whether  you  really  possess
this  knowledge,  or  whether  it  belongs  to
you  as  a  mere  formal  title  of  honour.
For  as  great  as  is  the  distance  between
heaven  and  earth,  so  great  is  the  differ-
ence between  the  art  of  healing  internal
and  external  diseases.  If  your  honour-
able title  be  the  gift  of  God,  the  same
God  will  also  follow  it  up  with  blessing,
success,  and  happiness  ;  but  if  your  title
be  a  vain  imagination  of  your  own  am-


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    25

bitious  heart,  all  your  attempts  will  fail  ;
your  honour  will  be  grievously  sullied,
and  you  will  prepare  for  yourself  the  fire
of  hell,  which  can  no  more  be  put  out
than  it  can  be  explained  in  words.  For
Christ  says  to  His  disciples:  "Ye  call
me  Lord  and  Master,  and  ye  do  well."
Whoever,  therefore,  takes  to  himself  a
title  of  honour,  should  be  careful  to  see
whether  he  does  well,  whether  he  does
not  arrogate  to  himself  too  much,  more
than  he  knows  or  has  learned,  which
would  be  an  abuse  of  the  title.  Who
ever  calls  himself  a  Doctor  of  both
branches  of  Medicine  must  be  skilled
alike  in  internal  and  external  pathology  ;
he  should  also  know  anatomy,  which
teaches  the  constitution  of  the  human
body,  and  the  part  in  which  every
disease  originates  and  is  localized.  He
must  know  the  remedies  which  are
applicable  to  the  several  varieties  of
disease,  and  the  peculiar  conditions  of
external  wounds.  Good  God !  If  an
examination  were  held  on  these  points,
how  many  doctors  of  both  branches  of


26    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Medicine  would   be  compelled  publicly
to  declare  their  ignorance !

Once  upon  a  time  Doctors  of
Medicine  were  content  to  cure  external
wounds,  and  looked  upon  this  task  as
part  of  their  duty  ;  but  now  they  leave
it  to  ignorant  and  inexperienced  begin-
ners, who  hardly  know  "how  to  drive  a
donkey  out  of  a  field."  These  persons
style  themselves  masters  in  the  art  of
healing  wounds,  and  great  Doctors  ;  and
I  am  ready  to  admit  that  they  have  a
better  claim  to  such  title  than  you,  illus-
trious surgeon,  who  do  most  impudently
arrogate  to  yourself  a  false  title,  calling
yourself  a  Doctor  of  both  branches  of
Medicine.

What  more  would  you  have,  my
lord  Doctor  ?  What  say  you,  O  expert
Surgeon  ?  If  I  were  to  put  to  you
some  searching  questions  respecting  the
nature  and  cure  of  external  wounds,  I
should  find  that  there  is  in  you  about  as
much  knowledge  as  there  is  in  the  brain
of  a  cock  on  the  title  page  of  a  child's
spelling-book.


The  Triiimphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    27

Hence  I  would  thus  advise  men  of
all  ranks,  who  are  anxious  to  obtain  know-
ledge :  Demand  first  of  your  masters  true
teaching,  which  consists  in  preparation
and  the  proportion  of  ingredients  ;  then
you  will  hold  your  title  with  honour,  and
give  real  help  to  your  fellow-men  ;  you
will  also  have  good  reason  to  return
thanks  to  the  Creator  out  of  an  unfeigned
heart.

Let  every  one  seriously  consider  in
his  own  mind  what  he  should  do,  what
he  should  leave  undone,  and  whether  his
title  belongs  to  him  of  right,  or  not.
Whoever  assumes  a  title  should  know
its  meaning,  and  whether  he  is  justified
in  claiming  it.  A  rational  man  must  be
able  to  assign  a  reason  for  everything,
and  when  he  smells  a  dung-heap  of  a
very  penetrating  odour,  he  should  be
able  to  say  why  he  calls  it  good  dung,
and  also  why  a  certain  person  who  has
partaken  of  fragrant  and  sweet-smelling
food,  gives  it  out  in  the  shape  of  highly
malodorous  excrement.  The  answer  is
to  be  found  in  the  conditions  of  natural


28    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

putrefaction  and  corruption.  The  same
thing  is  observable  in  the  transmutations
of  all  fragrant  substances.  Hence  the
Sage  should  enquire  what  an  odour  is,
whence  it  derives  its  properties,  and  how
those  properties  can  be  turned  to  good
account.  For  the  earth  is  nourished
with  stinking  dung,  and  precious  fruits
are  produced  thereby.  To  account  for
this  phenomenon  there  is  a  multiplicity
of  causes  which  it  would  take  a  whole
book  to  explain,  if  we  attempted  to  des-
cribe, even  briefly,  all  natural  mutations
and  generations.  But  digestion  and
putrefaction  are  the  Master  Keys  of  the
process.  Fire  and  air  produce  a  kind
of  maturity,  by  which  a  change  can  take
place  out  of  water  and  earth.  This  is
the  kind  of  transmutation  by  which  fra-
grant balsam  becomes  stinking  dung,
and  stinking  dung  fragrant  balsam.  But
you  will  ask  me  why  I  quote  such  simple
and  absurd  examples.  The  example,  I
confess,  smacks  of  the  stables  rather  than
of  the  drawing-room ;  but  the  careful
student  of  Nature  will  understand  me  all


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    29

the  better  for  that  reason.  He  will  see
that  the  highest  things  become  the
lowest,  and  the  lowest  are  changed  into
the  highest  —  i. e.,  a  medicine  into  a
poison,  and  a  poison  into  a  medicine  ;  a
sweet  thing  into  a  bitter,  acid,  and  corro-
sive substance  ;  and  a  common  thing,  on
the  other  hand,  into  something  useful.

But,  good  God ! — how  difficult  it  is
for  us  shortlived  men  to  explore  the
whole  compass  of  Nature.  Thou  hast
reserved  to  Thyself  many  things  in
Creation  which  are  objects  of  marvel
rather  than  of  knowledge.  Therefore
permit  me  to  the  end  of  my  life  to  keep
Thee  in  my  heart,  that  in  addition  to  the
temporal  health  and  wealth,  which  Thou
givest  freely,  I  may  also  obtain  the  sal-
vation of  my  soul,  and  spiritual  riches.  Of
this  I  dare  not  doubt,  for  Thou  hast  shed
the  balm  and  sulphur  of  my  soul  on  the
bitter  cross — a  balm  which  to  the  Devil
is  deadly  poison,  but  to  sinners  the  most
potent  medicine.  I  strive  to  heal  the
souls  of  my  brethren  with  prayer,  and
their  bodies  with  suitable  remedies.  May


3O    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

God  grant  that  we  may  all  dwell  together
in  His  mansions  on  high  !

But  to  return  to  the  science  of  Anti-
mony. You  should  know  that  all  things
contain  operative  and  vital  spirits,  which
derive  their  substance  and  nourishment
from  their  bodies  ;  nor  are  the  elements
themselves  without  these  spirits,  whether
good  or  evil.  Men  and  animals  have
within  them  an  operative  and  vitalizing
spirit,  and  if  it  forsakes  them,  nothing
but  a  dead  body  is  left.  Herbs  and
trees  have  spirits  of  health,  else  no  Art
could  turn  them  to  medicinal  uses.  In
the  same  way,  minerals  and  metals
possess  vitalizing  spirits,  which  consti-
tute their  whole  strength  and  goodness  :
for  what  has  no  spirit  has  no  life,  or
vitalizing  power.  Know  that  in  Anti-
mony also  there  is  a  spirit  which  is  its
strength,  which  also  pervades  it  invisibly,
as  the  magnetic  property  pervades  the
magnet.

Now,  there  are  different  kinds  of
spirits,  which  are  partly  visible,  and  yet
cannot  be  touched  as  the  natural  body  of


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    31

a  man  can  be  touched.  Such  are
especially  those  spirits  which  have  fixed
their  domicile  in  the  elements,  spirits  of
fire,  light,  and  other  light-dispensing
objects.  Such  are  the  aerial  spirits
which  dwell  in  the  air  ;  watery  spirits  in
the  water;  terrestrial  spirits,  or  "earth
men  "  in  the  earth,  especially  where  there
are  rich  veins  of  ore.  These  spirits
have  reason  and  sensation,  are  skilled  in
the  different  Arts,  and  can  assume  a
variety  of  shapes,  until  the  time  of  the
judgment,  which  perhaps  even  now  God
has  pronounced  against  them.*

Other  spirits  which  cannot  speak,
nor  exhibit  themselves  by  their  own
power,  are  those  which  dwell  in  men
and  animals,  in  plants  and  minerals.


*  What  is  here  said  about  spirits  looks  like  a  medley
from  the  works  of  some  theologians  who  speak  of  intelli-
gence being  inherent  in  fire,  air,  and  the  other  elements,  and
are  ultimately  doomed  to  eternal  fire.  The  nature  and  the
fate  of  these  spirits  we  will  leave  to  the  omniscience  and
justice  of  God ;  but  as  to  the  material  spirits  of  Antimony,
and  other  visible  objects,  all  that  our  Author  ascribes  to
them  is  true  ;  and  the  things  they  accomplish  are  far  more
wonderful  than  the  fabulous  achievements  of  any  so-called
supernatural  beings.


32    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

They  have  an  occult,  operative  life,  and
manifest  themselves  by  the  efficacy  of
their  working  ;  when  separated  from
bodies  by  our  Art  they  have  a  most
marvellous  sanative  virtue.

In  this  way  the  operative  spirit  and
virtue  of  Antimony  bestows  its  gifts,  and
imparts  them  to  men,  when  it  has  been
separated  from  its  body  so  as  to  pene-
trate other  bodies  with  its  sanative
virtue.  In  this  process  the  Artist  and
Vulcan  (fire)  must  be  of  one  mind.  The
fire  causes  the  separation,  the  Artist
forms  the  substance.  So  the  smith  uses
one  fire  and  one  material,  viz.,  iron  ;  and
yet  produces  out  of  them  a  great  variety
of  different  instruments,  a  spit,  spurs,  an
axe,  or  some  other  tool.  In  the  same
way  Antimony  can  be  put  to  a  great
many  different  uses,  wherein  the  smith
is  the  skilled  Artist,  while  the  fire  is,  as
it  were,  the  key  which  opens,  and  practi-
cal experiment  results  in  experience  and
a  useful  conclusion.

Alas,  if  men  only  had  eyes  to  see,
and  ears  to  hear  not  merely  what  I  say,


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    33

but  to  understand  the  secret  meaning,
they  would  no  longer  drink  those  turbid
and  unwholesome  potions,  but  would
hasten  hither,  and  receive  the  limpid
water  of  the  well  of  life  !

It  is  my  design  to  shew  that  those
great  doctors,  who  think  themselves
wise,  are  very  fools,  while  my  book
may  make  many  foolish  and  unlearned
persons  the  depositaries  of  true  wisdom.

All  men  who  are  real  lovers  of
knowledge,  and  humbly  seek  after  it  by
day  and  by  night,  are  herewith  cordially
invited  to  listen  to  my  teaching,  to  pore
over  my  book  with  the  greatest  care,  and
thereby  to  obtain  the  desire  of  their
hearts.  Their  gratitude  will,  after  my
death,  raise  me  from  the  grave,  and
render  my  name  immortal.  If  any  one
be  opposed  to  my  opinions,  he  will  find
a  crushing  reply  in  this  work.  Nor  am
I  fearful  that  my  disciples  who,  through
my  teaching,  obtain  the  empire  over
Nature,  will  ever  suffer  my  name  to
sink  into  oblivion,  or  to  be  bespattered

with  vile  calumnies.

D


34    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Know  then,  benevolent  and  sincere
observer  of  art,  that  there  are  twojdnds
of  Antimony,  which  differ  widely  from
each  other.  One  is  beautiful,  pure,  and
,  of  a  golden  quality,  containing  a  con-
siderable amount  of  Mercury.  The
other  has  much  Sulphur,  is  not  so
friendly  to  gold  as  the  first,  and  is  known
by  its  beautiful,  long,  brilliantly  white
streaks.  Now,  one  Antimony  is  more
useful  than  the  other,  both  for  Alchem-
istic  and  Medicinal  purposes.  There
are  many  different  kinds  of  flesh,  the
flesh  of  fishes  and  the  flesh  of  animals  ;
and  as  both  are  flesh,  so  two  widely
different  substances  may  be  called  Anti-
mony.

Many  have  written  about  the  inward
virtue  of  Antimony,  but  few  know  either
the  true  foundation  of  its  power,  or  the
origin  thereof.  Their  knowledge  is
verbal  erudition  only  ;  it  is  devoid  of  a
solid  grounding,  and  bears  no  fruit.

To  write  on  Antimony,  there  is
needed  profound  meditation,  a  large
mind,  a  wide  knowledge  of  its  prepara-


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    35

tion,  and  of  its  true  soul,  in  which
consists  all  its  usefulness.  If  you  are
familiar  with  these,  you  can  truly  tell
what  is  good  and  medicinal,  what  is  bad
and  poisonous,  in  it.  It  is  surely  worth
while  to  enquire  into  the  essential  and
fundamental  nature  of  Antimony,  and  to
discover  how  its  venomous  quality,
against  which  so  loud  an  outcry  is
raised,  may  be  removed,  and  itself  pre-
pared, changed,  and  transmuted  into  a
pure  Medicine,  containing  not  a  single
trace  of  poison.

Many  Anatomists  have  subjected
Antimony  to  all  manner  of  singular
torments  and  excruciating  processes,
which  it  is  difficult  either  to  believe  or
to  describe.  Their  studies  have  led  to
no  result,  because  they  did  not  seek  the
true  soul  of  Antimony,  and,  therefore,
did  not  soon  find  that  fictitious  soul  of
which  they  were  in  search,  their  path
being  obscured  with  black  colours  which
rendered  invisible  what  they  desired  to
see.  Antimony,  like  Mercury,  is  com-
parable to  a  circle,  without  beginning  or


36    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

end,  composed  of  all  colours  ;  and  the
more  is  always  found  in  it,  the  more
diligent  and  prudent  the  search  which  is
made.  One  man's  life  is  too  short  to
discover  all  these  mysteries.  It  is  a
most  potent  poison  ;  then,  again,  it  is
free  from  poison,  and  a  most  excellent
Medicine,  both  for  external  and  internal
application.  This  is  hidden  from  many
through  their  blindness,  and  they  judge
it  to  be  a  foolish,  incredible,  and  vain
thing.  We  must  excuse  them  on  account
of  their  ignorance,  and  permit  them  to
plead  their  stupidity  in  extenuation  of
their  folly.  The  worst  of  it  is  that  they
will  not  be  taught.

Antimony  has  the  four  first  qualities ;
it  is  frigid  and  humid,  and  yet  hot  and
dry  ;  it  accommodates  itself  to  the  four
seasons  of  the  year,  and  is  both  volatile
and  fixed.  Its  volatility  is  poisonous,
its  fixed  state  free  from  all  poison.  Hence
Antimony  is  one  of  the  seven  wonders  of
the  world,  and  many  have  written  about
it  without  knowing  the  meaning  of  their
own  words  ;  no  one  before  me,  and  even


T/te   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    37

at  the  present  time  no  one  besides  my-
self, has  any  real  acquaintance  with  its
potency,  virtues,  powers,  operation,  and
efficacy.  If  any  such  person  could  be
found,  he  would  be  worthy  to  be  drawn
about  in  a  triumphal  car,  like  great
kings  and  warriors  after  mighty  and
heroic  achievements  in  the  battlefield.
But  I  am  afraid  that  not  many  of  our
Doctors  are  in  danger  of  being  forcibly
placed  in  such  a  car.*

Men  of  this  world,  who  are  at  the
same  time  students  of  our  art,  are  so
given  up  to  the  desire  of  gain  that  they
can  think  only  of  the  riches  which  Anti-
mony is  to  bestow  upon  them  ;  they  do
not  realize  that  the  medicinal  virtues  of
Antimony  should  be  the  first  object  of


*  Read  carefully  all  that  our  friend  Basilius  says  in  praise
of  Antimony.  You  will  find  here  no  vain  boasting  or  foolish
exaggeration,  for  as  yet  no  man  has  been  able  to  sound
the  wonderful  depths  of  this  marvellous  Medicine.  We  see
many  things,  new  things  are  daily  discovered,  and  still  more
remain  to  be  found  out.  The  resources  of  Antimony  are  as
inexhaustible  and  infinitely  varied  as  those  of  fire,  which  are
not  diminished  by  taking  away  from  them.  Hence  Basilius
rightly  judged  him  who  should  sound  the  mystery  of
Antimony  worthy  of  a  triumphal  car.


38    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

our  search,  in  order  that  the  name  of
God  shall  be  glorified,  and  that  our
fellowmen  may  be  truly  benefitted.

We  admit  that  greater  riches  are  to
be  found  in  Antimony  than  it  is  possible
to  imagine,  even  for  me,  though  I  know
much  more  about  this  matter  than  you
who  are  so  exceedingly  wise  in  your  own
conceits.  But  let  none  be  afraid  for  this
reason,  or  despair  of  ultimately  attaining
to  this  highest  felicity  of  human  life  ;  for
the  loving  kindness  of  God  is  great  in
the  dispensation  of  His  gifts.  But  be-
cause of  the  ingratitude  of  men,  He  has
covered  their  eyes,  as  it  were,  with  cob-
webs, so  that  they  cannot  perceive  the
mysteries  hidden  in  this  mineral  form.

All  clamour  aloud  :  We  want  to  be
rich,  rich !  Yes,  you  desire  wealth,  and
say  with  Epicurus  :  Let  us  provide  for
our  bodies,  and  leave  our  souls  to  take
care  of  themselves.  Even  as  Midas  in
the  fable,  you  desire  to  change  all  things
into  gold.  So  are  there  numerous  per-
sons who  seek  this  coveted  wealth  in
Antimony,  but  since  they  do  not  care  for


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    39

God,  and  have  cast  far  away  from  them
the  love  of  their  neighbour,  they  will
look  at  the  horse's  teeth  of  Antimony  for
ever  without  knowing  anything  about  its
age  or  qualities.  Like  the  wedding-
guests  of  Cana,  they  may  behold  the
miracle  by  which  water  is  turned  into
wine  ;  they  may  know  that  it  was  water,
and  they  may  taste  that  now  it  is  wine  ;
yet  they  can  never  learn  the  way  in
which  the  change  was  brought  about.

Nevertheless,  it  is  every  one's  duty
to  investigate  the  mysteries  and  wonder-
ful secrets  which  the  Creator  has  infused
into  all  things.  We  may  not  be  able  to
understand  and  explain  everything.  Yet
many  things  are  possible  to  industry  and
perseverance  ;  and  though  many  an  one
may  be  severely  handicapped  in  the
struggle  for  wealth  and  health,  yet,
through  the  grace  of  God,  he  may  still
attain  thereto.  Therefore  he  should  not
think  any  labour  too  great  which  is  likely
to  advance  his  knowledge  of  Antimony.
Whoever,  then,  would  perfectly  under-
stand the  Anatomy  of  Antimony,  should,


40    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

in  the  first  place,  become  acquainted  with
the  manner  of  its  solution,  so  that  he
may  be  able  to  seize  it  in  the  right  place,
and  proceed  in  the  right  way,  without
entering  into  devious  paths.  In  the
second  place,  he  should  learn  how  to
regulate  the  fire,  so  that  it  shall  be
neither  too  fierce  nor  too  feeble.  Fire
is  the  root  of  the  whole  matter.  By
means  of  fire  the  vitalizing  spirits  are
extracted  and  dissolved  for  the  purposes
of  our  operation.  But  care  must  be
taken  not  to  mortify  and  destroy  the
spirit  by  means  of  too  much  heat.

The  third  point  for  consideration  is
the  proportion  of  the  substance,  the  dis-
covery of  the  proper  measure,  as  I  have
already  noted,  when  enumerating  the
five  points  which  are  requisite  in  Al-
chemy. It  is  necessary  to  enlarge
further  upon  this  matter.

The  substance  is  prepared  by  means
of  dissolution  ;  it  is  perfected  by  means
of  coction  in  fire.  This  is  the  axe  that
kills  the  ox,  and  divides  it  into  parts.
But  men  cannot  partake  of  the  flesh  till


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   41

it  has  been  cooked  over  the  fire,  by
which  means  the  red  colour  of  the  meat
is  removed,  and  a  white  nutritious  sub-
stance is  substituted  in  its  place.  If  a
man,  driven  by  hunger,  were  to  eat  the
raw,  red  flesh,  it  would  be  a  poison  to
him  rather  than  a  medicine,  because  the
stomach  has  not  sufficient  natural  heat  to
digest  the  raw  material.  In  the  same
way,  it  will  be  so  much  the  more  danger-
ous for  you  to  use  Antimony  before
separation,  preparation,  and  coction,  as
the  mineral  substance  is  more  gross  and
poisonous  in  its  raw  state  than  that
obtained  from  the  animal  body.

Therefore  Antimony  must  be  so
thoroughly  deprived  of  its  poisonous
nature  that  it  can  never  again  return  to
it,  just  as  wine  which  has  once  been
changed  into  vinegar  by  putrefaction  and
corruption,  can  never  again  produce  the
spirit  of  wine,  but  must  always  remain
vinegar.  But  when,  by  means  of  distilla-
tion, the  spirit  alone  is  removed  from  the
wine,  so  that  the  watery  part  is  separated
from  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  is  after-


42    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

wards  sublimed,  the  wine  can  never
thenceforth  become  vinegar,  even  though
it  were  kept  a  hundred  years,  but  would
always  remain  spirit  of  wine,  just  as  the
vinegar  always  remains  vinegar.

This  change  of  wine  into  vinegar  is
a  wonderful  thing,  for  thereby  something
is  actually  produced  out  of  the  wine
which  did  not  before  exist  in  its  vege-
table essence.  In  the  distillation  of  wine
the  first  product  is  a  spirit ;  in  the  distil-
lation of  vinegar  the  first  product  is  a
watery  substance,  and  thus  a  spirit,  as  I
explained  above.  Hence  the  spirit  of
wine,  being  itself  volatile,  renders  other
things  volatile,  but  the  spirit  of  vinegar
fixes  and  renders  solid  all  medicaments,  //,
both  mineral  and  vegetable,  so  that  they
attract  fixed  matter  and  expel  fixed
diseases.

Pay  diligent  attention  to  this  fact,
and  observe  it  well,  for  here  lies  the
master  key  of  our  whole  Art.*

*  Do  not  blindly  believe  these  and  similar  assertions  of
Basilius,  but  keep  your  eyes  wide  open.  Herein  is  the  first
key,  herein  the  chief  point  of  the  whole  Art.  This  will  open


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   43

Antimony,  which  contains  within
itself  its  own  vinegar,  should  be  so  pre-
pared as  to  entirely  remove  its  poisonous
nature,  in  order  that  he  who  drinks  it
may  not  swallow  with  it  any  venom,  but
rather  drive  away  and  cast  out  all  poison
from  his  body.

The  preparation  of  Antimony,  or  the
Key  of  Antimony,  is  that  by  which  it  is
dissolved,  opened,  divided  and  separated.
Such  processes  are  calcination^'  reverber-jlfl/vva
ation,  sublimation,  as  we  have  previously
declared.  In  extracting  its  essence,  in
vitalizing  its  Mercury,  the  process  is
continued,  and  this  Mercury  must  after-
wards be  precipitated  in  the  form  of
a  fixed  powder.  By  our  Art  it  can  also
become  an  oil,  which  is  a  specific  against
the  new  disease  imported  into  this
country  by  French  soldiers.

to  you  the  first  portal  and  the  last,  leading  to  the  chamber  of
the  King.  You  now  stand  on  the  threshold  of  the  work.  If
you  take  a  false  turning  at  this  point,  or  enter  by  a  wrong
door,  the  whole  of  your  subsequent  journey  will  be  mis-
directed. He  who  holds  the  right  key  in  his  hand,  and  has
that  strength  to  turn  it  which  is  supplied  by  Plutus  (who  is
god  of  wealth),  the  entrance  to  the  inmost  shrine  of
Alchemy  lies  open  before  him.


44    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

The  same  process  may  be  observed,
for  instance,  in  the  brewing  of  beer  ;  bar-
ley, wheat,  or  other  grain,  must  undergo
all  these  processes  before  it  becomes  a
palatable  beverage.  It  must  first  be
mashed  and  dissolved  in  water,  as  I  have
observed  them  do  in  Belgium  and  Eng-
land, when  I  was  a  young  man.  This  is
Putrefaction,  or  Corruption.  Then  the
water  is  poured  off,  and  the  moist  grain
is  left  in  a  warm  place,  till  it  germinates
and  sticks  together.  This  is  Digestion.

Thereupon  the  grains  are  once
more  separated  from  each  other,  and
dried,  either  in  the  sun  or  before  the  fire.
This  is  Reverberation  and  Coagulation.

The  prepared  germ  is  then  ground
in  the  mill.  This  is  vegetable  Calcina-
tion. It  is  afterwards  cooked  over  the
fire,  and  its  nobler  spirit  is  mingled  with
the  water  in  a  way  which  would  not  have
been  possible  before  it  was  so  prepared.
Thus,  water  becomes  beer,  and  this  we
may  call  Distillation.  If  hops  are  added
to  the  beer  they  are  its  vegetable  salt,
which  preserves  it  from  all  adverse


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   45

corrupting  influences.  This  method  of
converting  water  into  a  fermented  bever-
age by  the  extraction  of  the  spirit  of
grain  is  unknown  to  the  Spaniards  and
Italians,  and  in  my  native  country  of
Germany  I  have  only  found  a  few,  in  the
Rhenish  districts,  who  understand  such
Art.

Afterwards  a  new  separation  takes
place  by  means  of  Clarification.  A  little
yeast  is  added  to  the  beer,  which  stirs  up
its  internal  heat  and  motion,  and  thus,  in
time,  the  gross  is  separated  from  the
subtle,  and  the  pure  from  the  impure.
The  beer  thereby  becomes  a  perfect
beverage  of  great  efficacy  ;  before  this
clarification  this  would  not  be,  because
such  operative  spirit  was  clogged  and
hindered  by  its  own  uncleanness  from
fulfilling  its  objects.  Does  not  experi-
ence teach  the  same  lesson  in  the  case  of
wine?  It  is  not  perfect,  nor  can  it
properly  fulfil  its  object,  till  it  has  been
freed  from  all  impurity.  Unclarified
beer  or  wine  is  not  half  so  intoxicating
as  beer  or  wine  when  it  is  purified.


46    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

After  this,  we  may  bring  about
another  separation  by  means  of  Vege-
table Sublimation.  The  spirit  of  wine,
or  beer,  by  this  process,  and  by  Dis-
tillation, is  separated,  and  prepared  in
the  form  of  another  beverage,  or  ardent
spirits.  Here  the  operative  virtue  is
separated  from  its  body  ;  the  spirit  is
extracted  by  means  of  fire,  and  has  de-
serted its  inert  and  lifeless  habitation,
in  which  before  it  was  domiciled.

If  such  ardent  wine,  or  spirit  of
wine,  be  rectified,  you  have  Exaltation.
When  this  is  done,  the  spirit  of  wine  is
several  times  distilled,  and  so  condensed
by  being  purified  from  all  phlegm  and
wateriness  that  one  measure  is  more
effectual  than  twenty  measures  were  be-
fore ;  it  intoxicates  more  rapidly,  and  is
volatile,  and  subtle  in  penetrating  and
acting  upon  substances."*

*  Do  not  despise  these  remarks  on  the  preparation  of
beer  and  wine.  There  may  be  apparent  repetition  here,  but
there  is  nothing  superfluous.  Return  often  mentally  to  this
beershop  ;  read,  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest  all  that  is
said.  It  may  be  that  in  this  turbid  water,  which  looks  so
unlikely,  you  may  after  all  catch  your  fish.  If  the  excess  of


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   47

Here    I     exhort    you,    who   desire
through    my   teaching  to   secure  health
and  riches  as  the  reward  of  your  study  of
Antimony,  not  to  suppose  that  there  is
so  much  as  a  superfluous  word  or  letter
in  what  I  have  hitherto  said.      I  tell  you
there  are  many  words  sprinkled  up  and
down  in  my  writings  which  may  make  it
well  worth  your  while  to  turn  over  the
pages  again  and   again,   and   to  ponder
very  frequently  the  meaning  of  sentences
in  which  every  word  is  worth  its  weight
in  gold.      Know  that  though  the  illus-
trations which  I  have  given  have  a  rustic
and  simple  appearance,  they  set  forth  a
grand  truth  of  the  highest  moment.     But
it  is  neither  desirable  nor  necessary  to
praise  my  own  works  :  they  will  praise
themselves,  as  soon  as  the  suggestions
contained  in  them  are  practically  tried.
I  purposely  use  rude  and  common  illus-
trations.    For  it  is  my  business  to  set
forth  the  hidden  virtues  of  Antimony  ;

light  which  prevails  here  should  not  enable  you  to  see,  no
amount  of  obscure  alchemistic  reading  will  disperse  your
inward  darkness.


48    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,

and  as  this  is  a  very  profound  and
abstruse  speculation,  it  is  useful  to  pre-
pare the  way  by  throwing  upon  my
subject  all  the  light  which  can  be  gained
from  common  and  familiar  things  ;  other-
wise, you  might  be  in  danger  of  losing
your  road  at  the  very  outset  of  your
journey.  Antimony  is  also  likened  to  a
bird  which  is  borne  through  the  air  on
the  wings  of  the  wind,  and  turns  whither
it  will.  The  wind,  or  air,  here  repre-
sents the  Artist,  who  can  move  and
impel  Antimony  whither  it  pleases  him,
and  place  it  wherever  he  likes.  He  can
colour  it  red  or  yellow,  white  or  black,
according  to  the  way  in  which  he  regu-
lates the  fire,  since  Antimony,  like
Mercury,  contains  within  itself  all  colours.
If  a  book  be  placed  before  an
illiterate  person,  he  does  not  know  what
the  letters  mean ;  he  stands  staring
stupidly  at  the  characters,  like  a  cow  at
a  new  gate.  But  if  that  person  were
taught  to  read,  were  shewn  the  significa-
tion of  the  letters,  and  instructed  in  the
meaning  of  the  work,  he  would  no  longer


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,   49

be  a  prey  to  stupid  wonder,  but  the  why
and  the  wherefore  of  the  whole  thing
would  be  plain  and  familiar  to  him.
Such  a  book  is  Antimony  to  those  who
have  not  yet  learned  to  read  it :  hence
all  such  persons  should  pay  the  most
careful  attention  to  my  preliminary  in-
struction, and  should  not  be  offended  if  I
offer  to  teach  them  the  alphabet  of  Anti-
mony. Let  them  study  this  alphabet
diligently,  in  order  that  they  may  learn
to  read  the  book,  and  thus  advance  from
class  to  class  in  this  our  school  of
Alchemy,  until  they  have  reached  the
highest  grade  of  all.

But  at  this  point  I  remember  that
there  is,  from  time  to  time,  a  great
clamour,  and  cry  of  "Away  with  them,
crucify  them,  crucify  them ! "  raised
against  those  who  prepare  medicines  out
of  poisons  such  as  Mercury,  Arsenic,
and  Antimony.  It  is  averred  that  by
means  of  such  medicines  many  have  met
with  a  sudden  death,  or  are  dragging  on
a  miserable  existence.  This  clamour  is

most  persistently  raised  by  those  Doctors

E


5O    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

of  Medicine  (save  the  mark ! )  who  do
not  know  the  difference  between  a  poison
and  a  theriac,  nor  yet  how  a  poison  shall
be  prepared  in  order  that  it  may  become
a  salutary  medicine,  and  exchange  its
malignancy  for  health-giving  qualities.  I
protest  against  being  numbered  amongst
the  persons  who  administer  to  their  pa-
tients orpiment,  arsenic,  and  mercury,
which,  in  their  unprepared  state,  are,
of  course,  deadly  poisons.*  But  after
legitimate  preparation  all  venom  is  re-
moved and  expelled,  and  there  remains
only  a  Medicine  which  resists  all
internal  poisons,  and  radically  removes
them.  It  is  also  the  surest  antidote
against  every  unprepared  poison,  and

*At  the  time  when  Basilius  wrote,  the  ignorance  of
certain  physicians  was  so  great  that  they  administered  as
medicines  many  poisons  in  their  raw  and  unpurified  state,
and  ignorantly  proscribed  the  means  by  which  the  Alchemists
rendered  them  truly  salutary  to  the  human  system.  Against
these  pseudo-doctors  honest  Basilius  and  his  friends  were
wont  to  inveigh  with  the  greatest  sharpness.  But  in  this
imperfect  world  truth  is  not  necessarily  victorious,  and
though  the  Alchemists  had  the  better  cause,  their  opponents
had  the  advantage  of  numbers.  Yet,  even  then,  Paracelsus
foresaw  the  dawn  of  better  times  which  should  be  ushered  in
by  the  coming  of  the  Artist  Elias.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    51

changes  all  such  into  its  own  wholesome
nature.

This  assertion  will  excite  a  fierce
controversy  among  Doctors,  and  many
will  be  ready  to  maintain  to  the  last
breath  that  it  is  utterly  impossible  to
remove  the  deadly  nature  of  mineral
poisons.  I  do  not  wonder  at  their
incredulity,  since  they  are  hopelessly
ignorant  of  all  similar  preparations,  and
have  no  conception  of  the  deeper
mysteries  of  science.  Yet  those  who
are  more  reasonable  will  be  ready  to
admit  that  it  is  possible  considerably  to
improve  a  vile  and  worthless  substance.

Moreover,  you  Doctors  yourselves
must  admit  that  your  object  is  to  make
better  that  bad  thing  which  causes  the
disease.  Must  you  not  also  acknow-
ledge that  the  diseases  of  minerals,  and
especially  of  medicinal  minerals,  can  be
so  removed  that  a  state  of  perfect  health
may  be  restored,  and  that  the  medicines
must  thereby  be  rendered  infinitely  more
efficacious.  But  I  do  not  expect  you  to
agree  with  me,  since  you  are  not


52    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

familiar  with  the  method  of  preparation.
The  unreasoning  clamour  of  the  majority :
"  Poison,  poison ! "  will  doubtless  carry
the  day,  just  as  the  senseless  clamour
of  the  Jews,  "Crucify,  crucify  Him!"
doomed  to  death  the  Saviour  of  the
world,  Whom  the  multitude  pronounced
a  most  deadly  and  injurious  poison,
while  in  reality  He  was  the  only  true,
noble,  and  effectual  Medicine  of  our
souls,  come  to  deliver  us  from  eternal
death,  hell,  the  power  of  Satan,  and  all
other  evils  and  misfortunes.  This  pro-
found truth  those  supercilious  Scribes
and  Pharisees  could  and  would  not
understand,  yet  it  was  the  truth  then,
and  will  remain  so  throughout  all  eter-
nity ;  nor  will  the  devil,  or  death,  or  the
gates  of  hell,  ever  be  able  to  prevail
against  it,  or  to  prove  it  a  lie.

So  I  know  that  in  spite  of  the
clamorous  outcry  raised  against  it  by
quacks,  mountebanks,  and  idle  Doctors
resident  in  towns,  yea,  by  all  men  who
profess  to  have  any  knowledge  of  the
noble  Art  which  they  disgrace,  Antimony


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    53

will  triumph  and  trample  underfoot  the
whole  rout  of  its  assailants,  and  its  false
and  hypocritical  judges  will  receive  the
same  condemnation  as  the  wicked  Jews.
What  a  poor  figure  do  they  cut  in  my
eyes— all  these  grand,  conceited  magnifi-
coes  who  solemnly  admonish  Emperors,
Kings,  Princes  not  even  to  touch  such
medicines  with  their  lips,  because  they
are  poisonous,  noxious,  and  most  danger-
ous. I  will  not  attempt  to  refute  them,
for  they  speak  at  random  without  the
slightest  knowledge  of  their  subject.  I
will  only  say  this,  that  I  offer  to  give  to
one  who  has  swallowed  the  most  deadly
of  all  poisons  so  powerful  an  antidote,
that,  if  he  be  left  altogether  to  my  treat-
ment, the  venom  will  at  once  be  totally
expelled  from  his  system.

As  to  the  rest,  I  do  not  care  in  the
least  whether  you,  Sir  Doctor,  who  know
nothing  at  all  about  this  matter,  and
have  never  given  the  least  thought  to  it,
condemn  my  medicine,  or  not  ;  it  is
enough  for  me  that  I  can  prove  its
efficacy,  that  I  have  prepared  this  Medi-


54    The   TriumpJial  Chariot  of  Antimony.

cine  with  my  own  hands,  and  admin-
istered it  with  unvarying  success  to  great
numbers  of  people,  who  are  ready  to
bear  me  witness  under  their  own  hand
and  seal.

If  I  ever  had  to  dispute  in  the
schools  with  this  quality  of  Doctor,  who
cannot  prepare  his  own  medicines  (such
as  they  are),  but  must  leave  that  work  to
another,  I  should  justly  claim  pre-emi-
nence over  him.  For  he  does  not  even
know  the  colour  of  the  remedies  which
he  prescribes.  He  has  not  the  slightest
idea  whether  they  are  white  or  black,  red
or  grey,  blue  or  yellow,  or  whether  the
medicament  is  hot,  cold,  dry,  or  humid.
He  only  knows  one  thing — that  he  has
found  the  name  of  that  medicine  in  his
books,  and,  pluming  himself  on  the
antiquity  of  his  hoary  ignorance,  he
claims  the  right  of  prior  possession.

Here  again  I  am  tempted  to  cry
woe  upon  these  foolish  doctors  whose
consciences  are  seared  with  a  hot  iron,
who  do  not  care  in  the  least  for  their
patients,  and  will  be  called  to  a  terrible


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    55

account  for  their  criminal  folly  on  the
day  of  judgment.  Then  they  will  behold
Him  Whom  they  have  pierced  by  neg-
lecting their  neighbour's  welfare,  while
pocketing  his  money,  and  they  will  see
at  last  that  they  ought  to  have  laboured
night  and  day,  in  order  to  acquire  greater
skill  in  the  healing  of  disease.  Instead
of  this  they  complacently  go  on  trusting
to  chance,  prescribing  the  first  medicine
they  happen  to  find  in  their  books,  and
leaving  the  patient  and  the  disease  to
fight  it  out  as  best  they  can.  They  do
not  even  trouble  to  enquire  in  what  way
the  medicines  they  prescribe  are  pre-
pared. Their  laboratory,  their  furnace,
their  drugs,  are  at  the  Apothecary's,  to
whom  they  rarely  or  never  go.  They
inscribe  upon  a  sheet  of  paper,  under
that  magic  word  "Recipe"  the  names
of  certain  medicines,  whereupon  the
Apothecary's  assistant  takes  his  mortar,
and  pounds  out  of  the  wretched  patient
whatever  health  may  still  be  left  in  him.

Change  these  evil  times,  oh  God !
Cut  down  these  trees,  lest  they  grow  up


56    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

to  the  sky !  Overthrow  these  over-
weening giants,  lest  they  pile  mountain
upon  mountain,  and  attempt  to  storm
heaven !  Protect  the  conscientious  few
who  quietly  strive  to  discover  the  mys-
teries of  Thy  creation  !

I  will  ask  all  my  brothers  in  our
Monastery  to  unite  with  me  in  earnest
prayer,  by  day  and  by  night,  that  God
may  enlighten  the  ignorance  of  these
Pseudo- Doctors,  that  they  may  under-
stand the  virtues  which  He  has  implanted
in  created  things,  and  may  learn  also
that  they  can  become  manifest  and
operative  only  by  means  of  that  prepara-
tion which  removes  all  harmful  and
poisonous  impurities.  I  trust  that  God
will  answer  our  prayer,  and  that  .some  of
my  brothers  at  least  will  survive  to
witness  the  blessed  change  which  shall
then  take  place  on  earth,  when  the  thick
veil  of  ignorance  shall  have  been  re-
moved from  the  eyes  of  our  opponents,
and  their  minds  shall  have  been  en-
lightened to  find  the  lost  piece  of  silver.
May  God,  who  overrules  the  destinies  of


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    57

x

men,  in  His  goodness  and  mercy  bring
about  this  consummation !

Since  I  have  undertaken  to  publish
a  set  treatise  on  the  subject  of  Antimony,
it  is  fitting  that  I  should  begin  with  an
explanation  of  its  name.  The  Arabs,  to
whom  this  metal  has  long  been  known,
called  it  As  IN  AT  ;  the  Chaldeans  desig-
nated it  STIBIUM  ;  its  usual  name  among
the  Latins  is  ANTIMONY.  The  German
name  (Spies^las)  reflects  one  of  the
peculiarities  of  the  metal,  viz.,  the  streaks
by  which  it  is  distinguished,  and  the  ease
with  which  it  is  changed  into  a  kind  of
coloured  glass.*

This  variety  of  names  teaches  us
two  things :  first,  that  Antimony  was
known  to  the  Arabs,  Chaldeans,  Latins,

*  Poets  sometimes  commence  their  tale  in  the  middle,  and
then  work  back  to  the  beginning,  in  order  to  sustain  the  in-
terest of  their  readers.  Alchemists  sometimes  adopt  the
same  device  in  order  that  their  meaning  may  be  hidden  from
all  except  the  worthy.  Here  Basilius,  in  the  middle  of  the
treatise,  begins  to  discuss  the  name  of  his  substance,  with
which  an  ordinary  writer  would  have  commenced,  but  soon
he  abandons  this  plan,  and  proceeds  to  answer  the  question,
already  mooted,  whether  Antimony  can  be  deprived  of  all
its  poison, — a  question  which  is  explained  by  means  of  useful
and  highly  significant  illustrations.


58    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

and  Germans,  and,  second,  that  its  vir-
tues were  held  in  the  highest  estimation
among  them  ;  but  that  afterwards  hereti-
cal notions  crept  in,  the  potency  of
Antimony  was  more  and  more  forgotten,
and  its  glory  obscured  and  finally  ex-
tinguished. That  this  should  be  so,
must  appear  very  natural  to  any  one
acquainted  with  the  wiles  and  cunning*
craftiness  of  the  great  Arch-enemy  of  our
race,  who  ever  lies  in  wait  to  deceive  the
children  of  men,  and  to  rob  them  of  the
light  which  they  possess.  And  especially
does  he  put  forth  all  his  power  in  order
to  induce  amongst  men  ignorance  of  the
true  medicine,  and  to  discourage  its  use.
He  knows  well  that  thereby  the  glory  of
God  is  obscured,  and  the  sacrifice  of
thanksgiving  kept  back  which  else  would
rise  from  many  a  human  heart  to  the
Giver  of  All,  who  has  shed  abroad  among
created  things  the  outer  rays  of  His
glory.  However,  it  is  comparatively  of
little  use  to  speak  about  the  name  of
Antimony.  Its  great  virtue  and  utility
can  be  known  only  to  those  who  are


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    59

familiar  with  the  method  of  its  prepara-
tion. Hence  I  will  rather  strive  to
immortalize  my  name  by  throwing  as
much  light  as  I  can  on  this  part  of  the
subject.

But  before  I  attempt  to  declare  the
virtue  of  Antimony,  you  should  know
that,  although  Antimony  in  its  raw  state
is  a  deadly  poison,  yet  poison  can  attract
to  itself  poison  more  effectually  by  far
than  any  other  heterogeneous  substance.

This  assertion  is  proved  by  the  fact
that  the  body  of  an  unicorn,  which  is
entirely  free  from  poison,  repels  every
poisonous  thing.  Place  a  live  spider  in-
side a  circle  formed  by  a  strip  of  the  skin
of  an  unicorn,  and  you  will  observe  that
the  spider  will  not  be  able  to  pass.  But
if  the  circle  be  composed  of  some  en-
venomed substance,  the  spider  will  have
no  difficulty  in  crossing  the  line,  which
is  homogenous  to  its  own  nature.

Any  similar  experiment  would  yield
the  same  result.  Hollow  out  a  silver
coin,  and  let  it  float  on  the  water  like  a
boat.  Then  hold  close  to  it,  yet  without


60    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

making"  actual  contact,  a  particle  of  a
true  unicorn.  The  coin  will  be  as  surely
repelled  and  moved  backward  as  the
duck  which  sees  the  sportsman  taking
aim  at  it  with  his  gun.

That  homogeneous  substances
always  attract  each  other  you  may  learn
from  the  fact,  that  if  you  place  a  piece
of  pure,  unadulterated  bread  in  a  bowl
of  water,  so  that  it  floats  on  the  surface,
and  hold,  not  very  far  from  it,  a  piece  of
true  unicorn,  the  bread  will  float  in  any
direction  in  which  the  piece  of  unicorn  is
moved.  So  great  is  the  attraction  of
like  to  like  in  Nature  that  poison
always  draws  towards  it  irresistibly  all
that  is  poisonous,  and  substances  which
are  free  from  venom  exert  the  same
influence  over  substances  which  enjoy  a
similar  immunity.

Hence  poison  can  be  removed  in
two  ways  :  firstly,  by  its  contrary  which
repels  it,  as  the  unicorn  repels  the  spi-
der ;  secondly,  by  its  like,  which  attracts
it  by  magnetic  power.  The  poison  which
is  to  cure  a  homogeneous  poison  must


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    6 1

have  been  so  prepared  that  it  shall  have
become  a  medicine  instead  of  a  poison,
in  order  that  it  may  attract  the  other,
may  take  it  up  into  its  own  nature,  and
expel  it.

A  proof  of  this  action  of  natural
affinities  may  be  observed  in  the  effect
of  soap  upon  linen.  Soap  is  composed
of  oil,  fat,  and  other  greasy  substances,
which  seem  much  more  likely  to  sully
than  to  cleanse  linen.  But  by  means  of
digestion,  and  through  the  action  of  salt,
a  certain  rectification  and  separation  Has
taken  place,  so  that  the  soap  now,  in-
stead of  smirching  the  linen,  attracts  to
itself  all  the  impurities  with  which  it  is
defiled,  and  renders  it  clean  and  white.
In  the  same  way  poison  may  be  so  pre-
pared as  to  become  instead  a  purifying
medicine,  which  attracts  to  itself  all  the
corruption  of  the  human  system,  and
restores  it  to  perfect  soundness  and
health.

As  we  have  begun  to  point  out  to
the  true  student  of  medicine  what  is
good  and  what  is  evil  in  Nature — a


62    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

question  in  regard  to  which  our  so-called
doctors  maintain  a  supine  carelessness —
it  will  be  well  to  set  forth  the  truth,  and
to  make  it  plain  by  a  few  more  experi-
ments and  illustrations.

Let  an  egg,  which  is  congealed  by
the  winter's  frost,  be  placed  in  icy-cold
water.  The  shell  will  soon  be  covered
with  ice,  but  the  frost  will  be  extracted
from  the  egg,  and  it  will  be  fresh  and
vital  as  before.

If  any  man's  hand  or  foot  be  frozen,  W
he  should   at  once  apply  snow    or  ice-  ru
water   to   it.       The   cold   will    thus   be
extracted  and  the  limb  saved.

On  the  contrary,  inflammation  is
best  cured  by  means  of  some  hot  or
burning  substance.  If  you  have  an  in-
flammation in  your  hand,  apply  to  it
I  spirit  of  wine  (which  is  pure  fire),  or
quintessence  of  sulphur ;  the  outward
heat  will  attract  to  itself  the  inward  fire,
and  not  only  will  you  experience  imme-
diate relief,  but  the  limb  will  become
strong  as  before.

In    order    still    further    to   confirm


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   63

this  truth,  I  add  yet  another  illustration.
Take  the  spawn  of  frogs,  which  is  found
in  March  ;  dry  it  on  a  plate  in  the  sun,
place  it  on  a  wound  inflicted  by  a  viper
or  other  venomous  serpent,  and  the
wound  will  be  so  prepared  as  to  be
healed  subsequently  by  other  medicines.
Or  you  may  spread  the  spawn  on  a  linen
rag,  and  then  apply  it  to  the  wound  with
the  same  result.

Similarly,  you  may  take  a  venomous
toad,  dry  it  in  the  sun,  reduce  it  to  ashes
in  a  carefully  closed  pot,  pulverize,  and
apply  the  powder  to  any  poisoned  wound,
whereupon  it  will  attract  to  itself  all  the
xj poison  of  the  wound.  Why?  By  the
combustion  or  calcination  of  the  toad,  its
inward  efficacy  is  called  out,  and  becomes
operative.  The  principle  which  we  have
so  largely  illustrated  holds  good  in  all
cases.  If  you  are  seized  with  the  plague,
treat  it  with  astrum  solis,  or  spirit  of  Mer-
cury, for  the  spirit  of  Mercury  attracts
every  poisonous  matter,  and  purifies  the
system  of  all  its  morbific  particles.

The  efficacy  of  astrum  soiis  (Star  of


64    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

the  Sun)  is  infinitely  greater.  For  it
concentrates  within  itself  all  the  quick-
ning  power  of  the  Sun,  which  is  the  life
of  Nature.  It  is  the  Soul  of  Gold,  and
the  generative  principle  of  all  minerals
and  metals.  I  will  say  more  about  this
wonderful  astrum  solis  in  its  own  proper
place.

In  the  same  way,  we  must  treat
Antimony,  which  has  the  like  operative
qualities  as  the  body  of  gold.  I  do  not
now  speak  of  the  Star  of  the  Sun.
"For,"  says  Antimony,  "  I  know  that  I
must  quake  and  tremble  exceedingly
before  it,  and  though  I  greatly  excel  it
in  many  principal  respects,  yet,  on  the
whole,  I  can  effect  none  of  those  things,
which  the  Star  of  the  Sun,  strengthened
by  heavenly  testimony,  is  able  to  accom-
plish. I  do  not  speak  either  of  the  star
of  Mercury,  whose  parentage  is  the  same
as  mine.  But  as  to  intense  penetrative
virtue,  I  must  yield  the  palm  to  the
Star  of  the  Sun."

My  books  and  sayings  are  related  to
each  other  by  experience,  like  the  metals,


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    65

one  of  which  must  be  tested  and  known
in  its  relation  to  the  rest.  In  like
manner,  my  writings  and  prescriptions
have  one  common  scope  or  aim.  The
guide  who  alone  can  lead  you  to  the
place  where  Plutus  sits  enthroned,  is
Vulcan  (the  god  of  fire).  If  you  strike
steel  with  a  flint,  the  violent  collision
elicits  a  spark,  and  calls  forth  the  hidden
sulphur,  or  hidden  fire,  which  is  kindled
by  the  air  so  that  it  burns  truly  and
effectually.  Salt  remains  in  the  ashes,
and  mercury  is  struck  out  together  with
the  burning  sulphur.*

In  Antimony,  too,  the  mercury  must,
by  a  natural  method,  be  separated  from
its  sulphur  and  salt.  Unless  the  fire
which  is  latent  in  the  steel  becomes  visible
and  tangible,  it  can  be  of  no  use  ;  and  so
our  Medicine  will  produce  no  effect,

*  This  illustration  is  as  remarkable  and  suggestive  as  it
is  simple.  From  cold  steel  there  is  struck  out  with  a  cold
flint  a  tiny  spark  of  fire,  which  has  power  to  penetrate  a
whole  mountain  of  fuel  with  intense  burning  flame.  This
phenomenon  is  of  daily  occurrence,  and  in  it  the  fixed
becomes  volatile,  and  the  volatile  is  fixed.  Here  is  wisdom
for  him  who  has  eyes  to  see,  and  an  answer  for  those  who
doubt  the  power  of  Alchemy.

F


66    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

unless  it  be  first  separated  from  its  gross
elements,  rectified,  manifested,  clarified,
and  prepared,  that  all  may  see  how  a
separation  of  the  pure  from  the  impure
has  taken  place,  and  that  the  pure  metal
is  purged  of  all  earthy  elements,  after
which  the  harvest  may  be  expected.  But
this  cannot  take  place,  until  the  metal
has  been  opened  and  dissolved  by  a
carefully  regulated  fire.

In  order  that  I  may  comprehend
much  matter  of  importance  within  a
small  compass,  this,  shortly,  is  the  sum
of  the  science  of  Antimony.

Whatever  is  hidden  from  common
observation  is  the  province  of  Art  ;  but
as  soon  as  the  hidden  has  become  mani-
fest and  visible,  the  task  of  our  Art  is
accomplished,  and  all  that  remains  to  be
done  is  purely  mechanical,  as  I  have
more  than  once  set  forth  in  my  other
books.  '

The  bee  extracts  honey  from  the
flower  by  the  art  which  God  has  given
to  her  ;  but  when  once  the  honey  is
visibly  perfect,  that  sweet  and  fragrant


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   67

liquid  can  be  prepared  in  such  a  way  as
to  become  a  most  potent  and  deadly
poison.  This  is  a  fact  which  no  one
will  believe  who  has  not  seen  experi-
mental proof  of  it.  Nevertheless,  though
a  corrosive  poison  is  prepared  from
honey,  no  one  has  any  right  to  say  that
honey  itself  is  poisonous  or  harmful.
Here  is  something  which  may  deliver
our  doctors  from  Divine  vengeance.
Honey  is  indirectly  prepared  from  the
excrements  of  brute  beasts,  with  which
the  meadows  are  manured,  and  whence
hundred  and  thousands  of  sweet  and
fragrant  flowers  spring  up.  From  these
the  quintessence  is  sucked  by  the  bees,
whereby  there  takes  place  an  alteration
and  generation  of  one  thing  into  another,
i.e.,  into  an  aliment  of  different  form  and
taste,  resembling  its  former  condition  in
no  particular,  and  designated  honey.
This  honey  may  be  either  a  pleasant
form  of  food  for  man,  or  there  may  be
prepared  from  it  a  poison  of  the  most
deadly  effect,  both  on  man  and  beast.
Therefore,  gentle  reader,  whoever


68    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

and  whatever  you  are,  follow  me  and
Nature.  I  will  teach  you  the  whole
truth  without  any  admixture  of  false-
hood. I  will  instruct  you  how  to
distinguish  truth  from  error,  good  from
evil,  the  highest  from  the  lowest.  For
though  Antimony  be  a  deadly  poison,
there  can  be  prepared  from  it  a  medicine
which  radically  destroys  all  diseases,  and
penetrates  and  consumes  them,  by  coc-
tion,  like  fire.

First,  Antimony  must  be  prepared
so  as  to  become  a  true  Stone,  which  is
its  quintessence.  And  forasmuch  as  in
this  operation  it  is  in  all  things  like  fire,
I  call  it,  after  its  coagulation,  the  Fire
Stone.  When  this  Fire  Stone  has  been
properly  prepared,  according  to  the
directions  given  at  the  end  of  this
treatise,  its  medicinal  virtue  is  such  as  to
consume  all  noxious  humours,  purify  the
blood  to  the  highest  degree,  and  be  in
all  things  equal  to  the  efficacy  of  potable
gold.

Here  I  ask  you,  my  inexperienced
doctors,  not  to  judge  me  by  the  standard


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.   69

of  your  own  ignorance.  It  is  not  enough
for  you  to  read  my  book,  and  to  become
acquainted  theoretically  with  the  prepar-
tion  of  Antimony ;  you  must  experiment-
ally follow  my  directions,  and  thus  gain
the  knowledge  which  will  teach  you  both
how  to  prepare  and  apply  this  medicine.*

When  you  have  done  this,  you  will
begin  to  have  some  notion  of  that  which
is  now  hidden  from  your  purblind  gaze.

O  wretched  and  pitiable  medicasters,
who  walk  on  the  clouds,  and  on  moun-
tains in  the  air,  thinking  highly  of
yourselves  in  your  own  conceit,  and  yet
having  no  solid  foundation  for  your  feet,
take  heed,  I  beseech  you,  what  answer
you  will  make  to  God  on  the  day  of
judgment !  Think  of  the  sacred  duty
which  rests  upon  you  before  it  is  too
late,  and  then,  if  you  are  really  willing
to  do  that  which  is  right,  God  will  most
assuredly  help  you.  But  you  who,  in
your  extreme  folly  and  madness,  do  not

*  Here  Basilius  once  more  yields  to  his  indignation
against  the  false  Doctors  ;  but  afterwards  he  gives  some  use-
ful hints  embodied  in  remarks  on  aqua  fortis  and  spirit  of
wine.


7O    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

care  to  learn,  or  to  become  any  wiser,
refrain,  at  least,  from  pronouncing  upon
what  you  do  not  understand,  lest  your
own  judgment  be  harder  than  you  can
bear.

It  should  be  the  principal  aim  of
every  physician,  whilst  he  does  every-
thing he  can  to  cure  the  disease,  not  to
hinder  rather  than  help  the  cure  which
Nature  is  trying  to  effect.  If  the  spirit
of  wine  be  added  to  a£ua_jortis,  there
will  be  a  strong  effervescence,  and  these
two  substances  will  not  agree ;  but  if
they  be  properly  united,  by  means  of
philosophical  distillation,  they  will  form
a  highly  useful  compound.  Oil  of  tartar
and  grape  vinegar  are  similarly  related.
They  are  as  incompatible  as  fire  and
water,  although  they  are  both  prepared
from  the  same  substance.  Hence  it
should  be  the  physician's  first  care  to
become  acquainted  with  all  the  circum-
stances of  the  disease.  These  circum-
stances he  should  then  diligently  consider,
and  select  such  remedies  as  are  likely  to
remove  the  disorder,  lest,  by  giving  the


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    71

wrong  medicine,  he  does  more  harm  than
good.  For  instance,  if,  while  iron  is
being  dissolved  in  aqua  fortis,  you  sup-
denly  pour  into  it  oil  of  tartar,  you  will
burst  the  glass  vessel :  for  contrary  quali-
ties, when  brought  into  collision,  generate
a  consuming  fire.  Of  these  things  our
solemn,  begowned  doctors  know  nothing,
and  can  conceal  their  ignorance  only  by
judicious  silence.  To  you  I  speak,  ye
solemn  titular  physicians,  and  to  you,
apothecaries,  who  fill  with  your  concoc-
tions dire  pots  as  large  as  those  which
are  used  to  cook  soup  for  a  hundred
persons — ye  that  are  stoneblind,  pray
that  your  eyes  may  be  anointed  with
eyesalve,  and  that  the  thick  scales  of
darkness  may  fall  from  your  mind !
Then  you  may  perhaps  see  the  truth  as
in  a  bright  mirror.  Pray  that  you  may
find  the  medicine  which  God  has  im-
planted in  the  noblest  and  most  precious
of  created  things  for  the  good  of  the
human  race,  whereby  we  may  obtain
help  at  need,  and  health  when  laid  low
with  sickness  !  Why  are  you,  wretched


72    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

worms  of  the  dust,  and  food  for  worms,
always  stopping  short  at  the  husk,  and
neglecting  the  precious  kernel,  forgetful
of  your  Creator,  who  has  formed  you
after  His  own  image?  Why  do  you  not
rather  thank  Him  by  studying  His  works
which  transcend  Nature?  Return,  be-
hold in  your  heart  the  image  of  your
ingratitude,  and  pray  that  you  may  feel
heartily  ashamed  of  yourself  for  not
having  realized  and  accepted  with  a
thankful  heart  what  God  has  prepared
for  you !

But  I  must  conclude  this  appeal,
lest,  while  I  write,  I  stain  the  pages  of
my  book  with  tears  of  indignation,  and
lest,  while  deploring  the  blindness  of  the
world,  I  render  these  words  illegible,
which  I  wish  to  become  known  to  all.
I  am  a  man  belonging  to  a  most  holy
religious  order,  in  which  I  shall  continue
to  live  so  long  as  God  is  pleased  to
animate  this  wretched  body  of  mine  with
the  breath  of  life.  Hence  I  must  needs
write  as  becomes  a  religious  man.  But
if  I  were  a  secular  judge,  I  would  lift  up


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    73

my  voice,  and  speak  out  in  loud  clarion
tones,  so  as  to  force  those  deaf  persons  to
hear  who  now  stop  their  ears,  and  blas-
pheme, despise,  and  ignorantly  calumni-
ate the  truth.

But  Thou,  O  Lord  God,  Who
dwellest  on  high,  and  art  truly  called  the
God  of  Sabbaoth,  Who  rulest  heaven  and
earth,  which  thou  hast  created,  Who
orderest  the  course  of  the  stars,  Whom
the  elements  obey,  before  Whom  all  crea-
tion trembles  and  quails,  both  in  heaven,
on  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  look  down,
I  beseech  Thee,  on  this  world,  and  teach
the  children  of  men  the  inner  meaning  of
those  things  which  Thou  hast  visibly  set
forth  before  their  eyes !  As  for  me,  I
know  that  I  am  utterly  unworthy  of  the
gifts  of  health  and  riches  which  Thou
hast  so  graciously  bestowed  on  me.  Yet,
as  long  as  I  live,  I  will  praise  and  bless
Thy  Holy  Name.  More  than  this,  my
Father,  I  cannot  do  in  this  miserable  and
imperfect  world.

In  beginning  a  treatise  on  Anti-
mony, we  must  first  describe  the  root


74    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

whence  it  receives  all  its  glory  and
strength,  and  is  exalted  to  the  perfection
of  operation.  We  must  shew  also  how  it
originates  in  the  earth,  after  what  man-
ner it  is  made  subject  to  the  dominion
of  the  stars,  by  which  elements  it  is
cooked,  and  by  which  led  to  maturity.
Antimony  is  nothing  but  a  vapour,  or  a
mineral  exhalation,  produced  by  the  stars
above,  and  digested  through  elementary
media  to  a  state  of  coagulation  and
maturity.  Observe  that  Antimony  has
originally  received  its  virtue,  essence,
properties,  and  efficacy  from  the  same
planet  as  common  Mercury ;  but  its
coagulation  and  its  essence  are  harder.
The  reason  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that
of  the  three  principles,  it  has  received
more  salt  than  liquid  Mercury.  For
though  salt  is  the  least  important  of  its
three  first  principles,  yet  it  has  more  of
the  essence  of  salt  than  common  Mercury,
and  consequently  a  more  permanent
coagulation.  For  it  is  salt  that  imparts
hardness  to  minerals,  and  an  excess  of
hot  spirit  of  sulphur  keeps  Mercury  in  a


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    75

liquid  condition — nor  can  it  be  coagu-
lated, unless  there  are  added  to  it  certain
other  metallic  spirits,  infused  by  a  wond-
rous process  into  the  Mother  of  Saturn.
Without  this,  Mercury  cannot  be  fixed
except  by  the  Philosopher's  Stone.
Through  the  mediation  of  the  Stone,
indeed,  its  three  principles  are  har-
monized, and  it  acquires  a  fusible  and
malleable  body.  Only  in  this  way  can
the  volatility  of  Mercury  be  permanently
removed.

No  animal  or  vegetable  contains
anything  that  can  avail  to  fix  Mercury  ;
the  attempt  to  do  this  has  always  ended
in  failure,  because  none  of  these  sub-
stances have  a  metallic  nature.  Mercury
is  both  inwardly  and  outwardly  pure  fire  ;
therefore  no  fire  can  destroy  it,  no  fire
can  change  its  essence.  It  flees  from  the
fire,  and  resolves  itself  spiritually  into
an  incombustible  oil ;  but  when  it  is  once
fixed  no  cunning  of  man  can  volatilize  it
again.  Then  everything  can  by  art  be
made  of  it  that  can  be  produced  from  gold,
because  after  its  coagulation  it  perfectly


76    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

resembles  gold,  seeing  that  it  has  grown
from  the  same  root,  and  sprung  from
exactly  the  same  branch  as  that  precious
metal.  But  just  now  I  am  not  concerned
with  Mercury.  I  have  proposed  to  my-
self at  present  to  describe  the  true  origin
of  Antimony.  Nevertheless,  what  has
been  said  of  Mercury  is  important  for
the  due  apprehension  of  certain  ulterior
considerations,  and  for  the  clearer  under-
standing of  the  nature  of  Antimony
itself,  which  is  sprung  from  the  same
root  as  Mercury.*

Let  me  tell  you,  then,  that  all
metals  and  all  minerals  grow  in  the
same  way  from  the  same  root,  and  that
thus  all  metals  have  a  common  origin.
This  first  principle  is  a  mere  vapour
extracted  from  the  elementary  earth
through  the  heavenly  planets,  and,  as  it
were,  divided  by  the  sidereal  distillation

of  the  Macrocosmos.  This  sidereal  hot
/H-  >t.cv^  llWuMM^N

*  The  great  question  which  vexes  all  the  students  of  our
Art  :  "What  is  our  Mercury?"  is  here  clearly  and  lucidly
answered.  Attend  carefully  to  all  that  Basilius  says.  Any
light  that  I  could  add  to  his  brightness  would  be  darkness
indeed.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    77

infusion,  descending  from  on  high  into
those  things  which  are  below,  with  the
aero-sulphureous  property,  so  acts  and
works  as  to  engraft  on  them  in  a
spiritual  and  invisible  manner  a  certain
strength  and  virtue.  This  vapour  after-
wards resolves  itself  in  the  earth  into  a
kind  of  water,  and  out  of  this  mineral
water  all  metals  are  generated  and  per-
fected. The  mineral  vapour  becomes
this  or  that  metal  according  as  one  or
the  other  of  the  three  first  principles
predominates,  i.e.,  according  as  they
have  much  or  little  mercury,  sulphur,  or
salt,  or  an  unequal  mixture  of  their
weights.  Hence,  some  metals  are  fixed,
and  some  are  not  fixed  ;  some  are  per-
manent and  unchangeable ;  some  are
volatile  and  variable,  as  you  may  see  in
gold,  silver,  copper,  iron,  tin,  and  lead.

Besides  these  metals,  other  minerals
are  generated  from  these  three  principles ;
according  to  the  proportion  of  the  ingre-
dients, we  have  vitriol,  antimony,  marca-
site,  electrum,  and  many  other  minerals.

In  its  very  first  astrum,  or  star,  and


78    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

its  first  substance,  gold  has  more  perfect
sulphur,  and  more  perfect  mercury  than
the  other  metals  and  minerals.  Hence
its  operative  virtue  is  much  stronger  and
more  potent,  as  it  is  also  more  efficacious
than  the  stars  of  the  other  metals.  The
qualities  which  are  found  singly  in  other
metals  are  all  united,  with  many  more,  in
the  composition  of  the  solar  star,  which
is  gold.

When  the  substance  of  gold  is
matured  and  perfected  by  fire,  it  em-
bodies more  perfections  than  all  other
metals  and  minerals  together.  There  is
only  one  metal  (which  we  have  already
mentioned)  wherein  the  solar  sulphur  is
quite  as  potent,  or  even  more  potent
than  in  gold.  Of  the  two  metals  in
which  the  substance  strongly  predomin-
ates, we  can  here  say  no  more.  I  must
remain  within  the  limits  which  I  have
set  myself,  and  confine  my  attention  for
the  present  to  Antimony.

Antimony  is  a  mineral  made  of  a
terrestrial  vapour  changed  into  water,
which  sidereal  change  is  the  true  Star  of


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    79

Antimony.  This  water  has  been  extrac-
ted from  elementary  earth  by  the  stars
and  the  fire  which  is  contained  in  the
air.  Through  coagulation  it  has  then
become  a  tangible  essence.  This  tan-
gible essence  encloses  a  large  quantity
of  predominating  sulphur  ;  after  it  comes
mercury,  and  of  salt  there  is  least  of  all,
yet  it  has  enough  salt  to  make  it  hard
and  immalleable.

Its  chief  quality  is  hot  and  dry — of
frigidity  and  humidity  it  has  very  little
indeed.  The  same  is  true  of  common
Mercury,  and  of  gold,  which  has  more
heat  than  frigidity.

Enough  has  been  said  about  the
substance  and  the  three  radical  principles
of  Antimony,  as  also  of  its  perfection
by  the  Archseus  in  elementary  earth.
Students  of  Alchemy  do  not  care  to  be
told  where  to  find  the  Star  to  whose
influence  Antimony  is  subjected  ;  they
rather  desire  to  be  instructed  in  its  pre-
paration and  its  uses.  They  wish  to  be
able  to  test  for  themselves  the  truth  of
all  the  wonders  that  have  been  related  of


8o    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Antimony  at  all  times  by  men  of  all
classes.  Both  the  learned  and  the  un-
learned look  directly  for  satisfaction  of
this  their  burning  and  insatiable  desire.
Therefore,  I  will  not  try  the  patience  of
my  readers  by  any  unnecessary  delay,
but  will  briefly  set  forth  the  results  of
my  diligent  researches  as  to  the  nature
of  Antimony,  though  human  life  is  too
short  for  any  one  to  be  fully  acquainted
with  all  its  secrets.  For  in  the  pre-
paration of  Antimony  miracle  follows  on
miracle,  colour  upon  colour,  and  the
potency  and  operation  of  each  succeeding
degree  is  greater  than  that  which  went
before.

To  begin  with,  Antimony  is  a  rank
and  deadly  poison,  which  may  cause  the
death  of  men  and  beasts,  so  thoroughly
has  the  destructive  essence  pervaded
every  part  of  this  mineral.  Hence  the
universal  outcry,  which  is  raised  both  by
the  vulgar  and  by  those  doctors  who
are  ignorant  of  the  real  nature  of  Medi-
cine. All  exclaim  with  one  accord  :
"  Poison,  poison,  poison  !  "  Now  we  do


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    81

not  advise  any  one  to  apply  common
Antimony  as  a  Medicine,  because  its  use
would  really  be  fatal  to  health  and  life.
Both  at  the  courts  of  the  princes  and  in
towns  the  brethren  of  the  profession
warn  kings,  courtiers,  and  burghers  not
to  have  anything  to  do  with  Antimony.
This  outcry  has  actually  brought  the
substance  into  evil  repute,  and  to  this
very  day  no  one  ventures  to  avail  him-
self of  the  wonderful  and  various  medi-
cinal qualities  latent  therein.  Yet  I
solemnly  declare,  in  the  presence  of  God,
the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  of
things  both  visible  and  invisible,  which
we  either  know  now  or  shall  one  day
know,  that  there  is  not  beneath  the
sun  any  more  efficacious  Medicine,  or
stronger  pillar  of  health,  than  this  very
same  Antimony.

Hearken  diligently  to  my  wrords,
and  ye,  wise  men  of  this  world,  observe
well  the  announcement  which  I  shall
make  concerning  Antimony  :  for  my
theory  is  based  upon  Nature,  and  my

practice  on  experience.     I  am  fully  pre-

G


82    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

pared  to  admit,  and  I  have  already
admitted,  that,  before  its  preparation,
Antimony  is  a  poison,  and  nothing  else.
Nevertheless,  you  Doctor,  or  Master  of
Arts,  or  Bachelor  of  Arts,  or  whatever
your  title,  on  the  strength  of  which  you
speak  ignorantly  and  arrogantly  about
things  which  you  do  not  understand :
listen  carefully  to  my  words,  and  hearken
to  what  I  have  to  say  to  you.

Antimony,  you  affirm,  is  a  poison  :
therefore  let  every  one  beware  of  using
it  !  But  this  conclusion  is  not  logical,
Sir  Doctor,  Magister,  or  Baccalaureus  ;
it  is  not  logical,  Sir  Doctor,  however
much  you  may  plume  yourself  on  your
red  cap.  Theriac  is  prepared  from  the
venom  of  the  viper,  the  most  deadly
poison  in  the  world.  Does  it  therefore
follow  that  Theriac  ought  not  to  be  used
as  a  Medicine  ?  You  know  that  it  is  so
employed  ;  and,  similarly,  Antimony  can
be  so  freed  of  its  poison  by  our  Spagyric
Art  as  to  become  a  most  salutary  Medi-
cine, just  as  the  viper's  poison  acquires
medicinal  properties  after  its  conversion


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   83

into  Theriac.  Without  preparation,  in-
deed, Antimony  can  do  no  good,  but
only  harm.

Whoever  desires  to  become  a  dis-
ciple of  Antimony,  let  him,  after  earnest
prayer  and  calling  upon  God,  betake
himself  to  the  school  of  Vulcan  (fire),
who  is  the  Master  and  Revealer  of  all
arcana.  This  teacher  is  scorned  and
despised  by  the  wise  of  this  world,
because,  through  their  own  carelessness
and  stupidity,  they  have  learned  nothing
of  him.  Yet  no  medicine  can  possibly
be  prepared  without  Vulcan,  whatever
any  persons,  in  their  ignorance  and
senseless  arrogance,  may  affirm  to  the
contrary.

But  I  must  now  proceed  to  declare
the  processes  by  which  Antimony  is  pre-
pared. I  know  that  I  shall  meet  with  loud
and  sustained  opposition.  But  I  do  not
care  ;  I  will  ask  my  opponents  one  ques-
tion, and  one  only  :  Can  they  produce
anything  that  is  better  than  Antimony,
seeing  that  from  Antimony  it  is  possible
to  prepare  medicines  equal  to  those


84    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

which  exist  in  gold  and  mercury,  with
the  exception  of  the  Star  of  Sol  ?  From
this  can  be  prepared  potable  gold
(against  leprosy),  spirit  of  mercury  (that
sovereign  remedy  for  the  French  disease),
and  many  other  medicines.  I  pity  the
ignorance  of  our  adversaries,  for  they
speak  of  those  things  which  they  do  not
understand,  and,  therefore,  no  weight
whatever  can  attach  to  their  words.  In
vain  would  the  stable  boy  attempt  to
teach  the  donkey  to  tune  his  voice  to
sweet  harmonious  music,  for  he  cannot
learn.  In  our  Art  only  those  are
qualified  to  deliver  a  sound  opinion  who
have  listened  to  the  voice  of  experience.
Any  other  person,  whatever  high-sound-
ing title  may  be  attached  to  his  name,
is  no  better  than  an  ignoramus  and  a
charlatan.

But,  before  I  go  on  to  the  practical
part  of  this  treatise,  someone  may  ask  :
How  minerals  and  metals  come  to  contain
poison  ?  What  poison  is  ?  How  anything
can  be  purified,  and  have  its  envenomed
nature  removed?  These  and  similar


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    85

enquiries  I  desire  first  to  answer  briefly
and  clearly.

The  origin  of  poison  is  either
natural  or  supernatural.  One  reason
why  God  has  implanted  poison  in
created  things  was  His  purpose  to
shew  us  His  wonders,  and  to  teach  us
how  to  distinguish  good  from  evil —
how  to  choose  the  good  and  eschew
the  evil.

In  the  same  way  the  tree  of  life  was
set  in  Paradise.  Its  proper  use  would
have  tended  to  our  benefit.  Its  abuse
brought  about  our  fall,  and  all  the  suffer-
ing that  has  followed  from  it.

The  second  reason  that  there  is
such  a  thing  as  poison  is  God's  purpose
that  we  should  thereby  learn  the  ugliness
and  hatefulness  of  evil,  and  conceive  a
desire  to  substitute  that  which  is  good  in
its  place.  For  God  hates  nothing  that
He  has  made,  but  rather  desires  our
moral  and  physical  amendment.  By
eschewing  poison  we  are  to  be  taught
how  to  avoid  the  evil  and  choose  the
good.


86    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Poison  is  also  produced  by  contrary
oppositions  and  conjunctions  among  the
stars,  which  infect  the  elements,  and
are  the  cause  of  the  plague  and  other
contagious  diseases  in  this  nether  world.
This  is  clearly  seen  in  the  case  of
comets.

Poison  is  further  occasioned  by  hos-
tile extremes — for  instance,  by  excessive
anger,  or  by  drinking  cold  water  when
you  are  very  hot.  Deadly  weapons  may
also  be  enumerated  among  causes  of
poison,  though  when  used  in  self-defence,
they  are  rather  of  the  nature  of  medicines.

The  natural  origin  of  poison  is  as
follows.  Whatever  is  repugnant  to
Nature  is  poison ;  as,  for  instance,  if
anyone  takes  food  which  does  not  agree
with  him,  that  food  is  poison,  because
repugnant  to  his  nature.  Yet  to  another
with  whom  it  may  agree,  it  is  medicine.

But  poison  is  specially  attracted  to
bodies  in  the  earth,  where  a  certain
crude,  undigested  mercurial  essence  (I
speak  of  mineral  poisons),  which  has  not
yet  undergone  any  proper  coction,  so


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    87

pervades  the  whole  body  as  to  make  it  a
crude,  immature,  undigested  mineral.
For  instance,  if  a  man  were  to  eat  raw
grain,  his  stomach  would  be  too  feeble
to  digest  it,  because  it  has  not  sufficient
natural  heat.  Grain  which  is  first  digested
by  the  fire  of  the  great  world,  must  be  still
further  digested  by  the  little  fire,  in  order
to  be  easy  of  digestion  in  our  little  world.
It  is  the  same  with  raw  meat— and,
similarly,  crude  Antimony  is  not  yet
sufficiently  digested  to  be  capable  of
assimilation  by  a  feeble  human  stomach.
All  cathartics,  both  animal  and  vege-
table, as  well  as  mineral,  contain  a  certain
volatile,  undigested  Mercury.  This  vola-
tility is  the  cause  that  all  other  things
in  the  human  stomach  are  expelled  by  a
cathartic,  though  the  root  of  the  disease
itself  is  left  untouched,  and  can  be  re-
moved only  by  a  fixed  medicine.  Only
fixed  medicines  can  cope  with  fixed
diseases,  but  these  purgatives  are  like
water  dashed  on  the  pavement,  which
cleans  the  stones  outwardly,  though  it
does  not  enter  them.  Fixed  medicines


88    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

attack  the  seat  of  the  disease,  and  are
not  content  with  a  mere  external  wash-
ing away  of  impurities.  Hence  we
admonish  all  and  sundry  that  Antimony
has  to  be  freed  of  its  crudeness  and
poisonous  indigestibility  before  it  can  be
safely  applied  as  a  medicine  ;  and  this
transformation  is  effected  by  fire,  and  by
fire  only.  Vulcan  is  the  only  arbiter  of
such  a  purifying  process.  What  Vulcan
(fire)  of  the  upper  sphere  has  left  crude
and  unfinished  is  accomplished  by  the
Vulcan  of  the  lower  world.  He  matures
the  immature,  digests  the  crude  with  his
heat,  and  separates  the  pure  from  the
impure.  By  the  separation  and  fire
which  perfect  fixation,  its  poisonous
nature  is  removed,  and  all  that  is  evil  in
Antimony  is  changed  into  something
good.  Fire  purges  away  the  deadly
nature  of  our  medicine,  as  is  known  only
to  those  who  have  fraternally  co-opera-
ted with  Vulcan,  and  have  seen  the  bride
cleansed  of  all  impurity  in  the  fiery  bath,
which  enables  her  to  lie  in  the  bridal  bed
with  her  chosen  spouse.


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.    89

Woe  unto  you,  who  neither  under-
stand, nor  care  to  understand  my  words !
If  you  knew  the  meaning  of  fixation  and
volatility,  and  of  the  separation  of  pure
and  impure,  you  would  cease  from  your
foolish  occupation  and  follow  me  alone.
It  is  I,  Antimony,  that  speak  to  you.  In
me  you  find  mercury,  sulphur,  and  salt,
the  three  great  principles  of  health.
Mercury  is  in  the  regulus,  sulphur  in  the
red  colour,  and  salt  in  the  black  earth
which  remains.  Whoever  can  separate
these,  and  then  re-unite  and  fix  them  by
art,  without  the  poison,  may  truly  call
himself  blessed  ;  for  he  has  the  Stone,
which  is  called  fire,  and  in  the  Stone,
which  can  be  composed  out  of  Antimony,
he  has  the  means  of  perfect  health  and
temporal  subsistence.

In  Antimony  you  will  find  all
colours,  black,  white,  red,  green,  blue,
and  an  incredible  number  of  mixed  tints
(besides  grey  and  yellow),  which  must
all  be  severally  known,  and  used  in  their
own  proper  order.

Now  I  will  declare  how  the  medi-


go    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

cine  should  be  prepared  and  fixed,  and
how  all  that  is  good  in  it  may  be  in-
creased, and  all  that  is  bad  diminished
and  destroyed.

Here  let  me  advertise  the  lover  of
art  that  the  virtue  of  Antimony  is  not
one  among  many  precious  stones,  but  it
combines  the  virtues  of  all  other  precious
stones,  as  is  sufficiently  evidenced  by  its
colours.  Its  red  represents  carbuncle,
pyropus,  and  coral ;  its  white,  diamond
and  crystal ;  its  blue,  sapphire  ;  its  green,
emerald  ;  its  yellow,  jacynth  ;  its  black,
granite.  As  to  the  metals,  its  black  cor-
responds to  Saturn,  its  red  to  iron,  its
yellow  to  gold,  its  green  to  copper,  its
blue  to  silver,  its  white  to  mercury,  its
mixed  colours  to  tin.  And  not  only  does
Antimony  contain  the  colours,  it  also
contains  the  virtues  and  qualities  of  all
other  stones  and  metals,  only  human  life
is  too  short  for  any  one  to  learn  how  to
educe  all  the  potencies  that  lie  concealed
in  the  heart  of  Antimony.  You  may  get
from  it,  by  distillation,  an  acid  humour,
like  pure  vinegar.  By  another  way,  you


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   91

may  prepare  a  red  pellucid  substance,  as
sweet  as  refined  sugar  or  honey — or  you
may  obtain  a  bitter  substance,  like  ab-
synth— or  an  acid  substance,  like  salt
oil.  At  one  time  it  is  red,  yellow,  or
white,  and  is  borne  upward  like  a  flying-
eagle.  Then,  again,  it  exhibits  various
colours,  and  is  driven  downwards,  and,
by  reverberation,  becomes  a  metal,  like
lead.  Sometimes  it  looks  like  transpa-
rent glass  of  a  red,  yellow,  black,  white,
or  variegated  colour.  All  of  these  it  is
inadvisable  to  use  in  medicines  unless
they  have  been  subjected  to  some  other
test.  It  may  also  become  a  variety  of
subtle  oils,  whose  medicinal  virtue  trans-
cends their  outward  appearance  ;  their
use  is  chiefly  for  applications  to  wounds
and  ulcers.  The  manifold  variations
which  it  undergoes  might  puzzle  the
oracle  of  Delphi.

Out  of  it  we  may  evolve  living
mercury,  and  sulphur  which  burns  like
common  sulphur  ;  moreover,  a  grey  pow-
der can  be  prepared  from  it,  with  real
natural  salt  and  many  other  things.


92    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

We  will  therefore  now  speak  of  its
preparations,  its  magistery,  arcanum,  and
tincture,  its  elixir,  and  its  special  essence,
which  you  will  be  able  to  extract  when
I  have  told  you  about  the  Fire-Stone  and
its  preparation,  and  many  other  arcana
and  secrets,  of  which  the  wise  men  of
this  world  know  nothing,  and  to  which
too  little  attention  has  been  paid  since
the  decay  of  the  Egyptians,  Arabs,  and
Chaldeans.  These  truths  are  of  the
greatest  importance  in  the  study  of  the
true  medicine.

Take  care  that  the  different  opera-
tions shall  follow  each  other  in  the  exact
order  in  which  I  declare  and  describe  ;
for  if  the  result  is  to  be  perfection,  every
part  of  the  work  must  be  properly
attended  to.  Now,  fixed  medicines  ex-
pel and  eradicate  fixed  diseases  ;  but
Antimony,  in  its  crude  state,  is  only  a
purgative,  which  does  not  touch  the  real
root  of  the  disease.

I  will  therefore  declare  the  pre-
paration of  all  things  which  belong  to
Antimony  ;  I  will  deliver  up  the  keys


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   93

thereof,  and  earnestly  ask  the  student  to
bear  in  mind  that  fire  is  the  sure  key  by
which  access  is  obtained  to  most  of  the
secrets  of  our  Art.  This  mineral  pre-
paration of  Antimony  is  prepared  in
various  manners  by  the  regimen  of  fire
and  by  a  multiple  manual  operation,
whence  its  medicinal  activity,  virtue,
potency,  and  colour  flow  and  emanate.

As  Antimony  is  distinguished  by  a
crude,  black  colour,  variegated  with  white,
I  will  now  speak  of  the  first  operation  to
which  the  substance  is  subjected,  viz.,
calcination,  or  incineration,  which
carried  out  in  the  following  manner  :

Take  best  Hungarian  Antimony,  or
any  kind  you  can~get ;  pulverize  it  asTine-
ly  as  possible,  spread  thinly  on  an  earth-
enwarejdish  (round  or  square)  provided
with  a  low  margin  ;  place  the  dish  on  a
calcinatory  furnace  over  a  coal  fire,  which
should  at  first  be  moderate.  As  soon  as
you  see  smoke  rise  from  the  Antimony,
stir  it  about  with  an  iron  spoon,  and  con-
tinue doing  so  till  there  is  no  more
smoke,  and  the  Antimony  sticks  together


94    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

in  the  shape  of  small  globules.  Remove
it  from  the  fire,  pulverize  again  into  a  fine
powder,  place  it  on  fire,  and  calcine,  as
before,  till  there  is  no  more  smoke.  This
calcination  must  be  repeated  not  only  till
the  Antimony  gives  out  no  more  smoke,
but  does  not  conglomerate  into  globules,
and  has  the  appearance  of  pure  white

y ashes.       Then    has    the    calcination    of

Antimony  been  successfully  completed.

Place  this  calcined  Antimony  in  a
crucible,  such  as  goldsmiths  use  for
melting  gold  and  silver,  and  set  it  over
a  violent  fire,  either  lighted  in  a  wind
furnace  or  increased  by  means  of  the
bellows,  till  the  Antimony  becomes
liquid  like  pure  water.  To  test  whether
Antimony  has  acquired  its  proper  glassy
transparency,  dip  in  it  an  oblong  piece  of
cold  iron,  and  examine  the  Antimony
which  clings  to  it  carefully.  If  it  be
clear,  pure,  and  transparent,  it  is  all
right,  and  has  attained  its  due  maturity.
The  tyro,  or  beginner,  should  Icnow
(these  remarks  are  addressed  to  begin-
ners who  are  students  of  the  Spagyric


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   95

Art)  that  glass,  whether  prepared  from
metals,  minerals,  or  any  other  substance,
must  be  subjected  to  heat,  till  it  has
attained._tojnaturity,  and  exhibits  a  clear
and  pellucid  transparency.  Let  all  and
several  remember  that  that  maturity  and
this  transparency  are  performed  solely  by
Vulcan  operating  on  the  secret  and  con-
cealed nature.  Otherwise,  it  is  unprofit-
able for  any  further  medicinal  develop-
ment. *

When  Antimony  has  become  vitri-


fied  in  the  way  described,   heat  aTS0
__  -  _

*  It  is  obvious  that  Basilius  is  here  writing  for  beginners  —
so  clearly  and  circumstantially  does  he  describe  the  very
rudiments  of  the  work.  Yet  even  veterans  may  now  and
then  find  it  no  easy  task  to  put  his  directions  into  practice.
In  such  difficulties  I  hope  that  my  commentary  may  prove
useful.  I  have  paid  for  the  experience  which  it  contains
with  much  time,  labour,  and  expense  ;  and  therefore  I  have
thought  it  my  duty  to  warn  and  instruct  those  who  after  me
should  travel  the  same  road.  I  cannot  say  that  I  greatly
pity  people  whose  minds  are  set  only  on  wealth  ;  but  I  do
wish  to  help  those  who  have  undertaken  this  study  for  the
sake  of  their  suffering  neighbours.  Such  persons  I  exhort  to
read  my  commentary  :  for  one  word  from  me  may  often  save
them  endless  trouble  and  expense.  Such  a  warning  in  time
might  frequently  have  been  worth  several  thousand  florins  to
me.  I  do  not  undertake  to  give  elementary  instructions  to
the  beginner,  but  only  to  remove  certain  obstacles  out  of  the
way  of  the  student.


96    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

broad  copper  dish  over  the  fire,  pour  into
it  the  Antimony  in  as  clear  and  thin  a
state  as  possible,  and  you  will  have  pure,
yellow,  pellucid  glass  of  Antimony.  This
preparation  of  what  I  call  the  glass  of
Antimony  is  the  simplest,  best,  and  most
efficacious  with  which  I  am  acquainted.*


*  This  is  a  now  familiar  way  of  preparing  glass  of  Anti-
mony. It  is  serviceable  in  many  cases  of  illness,  but  (so
precarious  a  thing  is  the  human  constitution)  its  use  may
now  and  then,  in  one  case  out  of  a  hundred,  be  attended
with  fatal  results.  I  once  saw  a  man  who  had  taken  a
quantity  give  up  the  ghost  after  much  vomiting  and  violent
purging.  Such  casualties  give  a  handle  to  the  enemies  of
Alchemy,  but  the  medicine  in  question  is  administered  only  by
unscrupulous  pseudo-Alchemists,  who  do  not  mind  how
many  people  they  kill,  so  long  as  they  cure  some,  and  gain
for  themselves  the  reputation  of  great  doctors.  The  fact  is,
that  the  emetic  virtue  of  Antimony  inheres  in  its  salt,  which
salt  harbours  all  its  poisonous  qualities.  Hence  feeble  per-
sons derive  more  harm  from  its  poison  than  good  from  its
medicinal  properties.  But  if  Antimony  produces  beneficial
results  even  when  it  still  has  an  admixture  of  poison,  how
much  more  beneficial  is  it  when  the  poison  has  been  re-
moved. The  following  is  a  recipe  for  the  glass  of  Antimony,
which  may  be  used  without  any  fear  of  fatal  results :

Take  the  pure  glass  of  Antimony  (of  Basilius),  melt  in
crucible  till  one-third  part  evaporates,  pound  into  fine
powder,  pour  on  it  best  rectified  spirit  of  wine,  which  must
cover  the  powder  to  the  height  of  three  inches,  close,  allow  to
circulate  for  three  months,  and  extract,  spirit  of  wine  by  dis-
tillation. If  the  tincture  be  red,  as  it  will  be  invariably
'  should  the  operation  have  been  rightly  conducted,  decant  it


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.   97

Glass  of  Antimony  may  also  be
prepared  with  an  admixture  of  borax,  as
follows  :

Take  one  part  of  crude  Antimony";
and  two  of  Venetian  borax  ;  pound  finely,
place  in  crucible,  melt  them  together  in
a  reverberatory  furnace,  or  by  a  fire  kept
up  with  the  bellows,  pour  into  hot  copper
dish,   and  prepare  as  before  ;    you  will
then  have  a  beautiful,  pellucid  Antimony  ^
like  pyropus.*

The  redness  of  this  Antimony  may
be  extracted  by  means  of  spirit  of
wine.j"


\v
'


and  set  it  apart  as  an  excellent  medicine.  Once  more  place
the  body  which  remains  in  a  crucible,  and  melt  and  mould
into  whatever  manner  you  please.  In  artistic  shapes  it  may
be  worn  as  an  ornament  on  a  ring.  This  substance,  when
dissolved  overnight  in  a  glass  of  wine,  will  act  as  a  gentle
purgative  or  emetic  if  taken  by  a  sick  person  the  next
morning.  The  dose  (two  ounces  or  less)  must  be  adapted  to
the  strength  of  the  patient.

*  This  colour  is  only  obtained  by  a  very  powerful  fire.

\  Not  common  spirit  of  wine,  which  would  be  useless  for
this  operation,  but  that  of  the  Sages,  which  is  prepared  as
follows  for  the  extraction  of  this  tincture  :  Take  four  ounces
of  thrice-sublimed  salt  of  ammonia ;  of  spirit  of  wine  distilled
over  salt  of  tartar,  so  that  it  is  quite  clear — ten  ounces  ;  place
in  phial  over  digestive  fire  till  the  spirit  of  wine  is  filled  with
the  fire  or  sulphur  of  the  salt  of  ammonia,  distil  thrice  in  the-,

H


98    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.


Transparent  white  glass  of  Anti-
mony, after  its  commixture,  is  further
prepared  as  follows:  Pound,  together,
one  part  of  Antimony  till  it  becomes  a
fine  powder,  and  four  parts  of  Vene-
tian borax  ;  melt  in  crucible  till  the
substances  are  in  flux,  when  they  will
become  first  yellow,  and  then  white  as
glass,  for,  under  the  continuous  regimen
of  the  fire,  the  yellow  here  gives  place
to  the  white,  and  a  beautiful  glass
results.  The  white  colour  is  matured
as  before,  and  is  tested,  in  like  man-
ner, by  the  insertion  of  a  piece  of  cold
iron.

There  are  many  other  ways  in  which
Antimony  may  be  vitrified.*  I  only
describe  the  results  of  my  own  practical
experience,  and  the  first  way  of  prepar-
ing Antimony,  or  glass  of  Antimony,  is


ic,  and  you  have  our  true  menstruum,  whereby  the
colour  is  extracted  out  of  glass  of  Antimony.  The
tincture  of  this  glass  is  also  extracted  by  means  of  its
own  vinegar,  and  thence,  in  this  last  operation,  is  ob-
tained a  most  excellent  medicine.

*  The  curious  reader  may  find  such  methods  in  Hart
mann,  Crollius,  Beguinus,  and  others.


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    99

the  very  best  that  can  be  conceived  for
all  practical  purposes.  We  thus  purge
out  the  black  colour,  which  has  evapora-
ted in  a  volatile  form  through  the
chimney.  Nevertheless,  the  Antimony
still  retains  a  considerable  amount  of  its
poisonous  nature,  and  I  will  now  pro-
ceed to  declare  to  you  how  the  poison  is
separated  from  the  medicine,  the  pure
from  the  impure,  in  return  for  which
instruction  I  expect  the  everlasting
gratitude  of  all  my  readers,  and  the
approbation  of  all  discerning  men  in
every  part  of  the  world.

The  first  separation  of  sulphur  from
its  body,  and  the  extraction  of  the  Tinc-
ture from  its  salt,  are  performed  as
follows  :

Take  pure  glass  of  Antimony  pre-
pared in  the  first  way,  and  uncombined
with  any  foreign  matter  ;  pound  it  as  fine
as  the  finest  flour,  and  place  in  a  broad-
bottomed  glass  vessel,  called  Cucurbit.1*

*  In  order  that  the  powder  may  be  as  fine  as  required,
mix  the  Antimony  with  some  distilled  vinegar  into  a  thickish
paste,  and  pound  in  a  mortar  of  porphyry.


ioo    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Pour  over  the  Antimony  some
highly  rectified  vinegar,  subject  to  di-
gestive fire,  or,  in  summer,  expose  to  the
rays  of  the  sun,  shaking  it  once  and  again
every  day.*

Let  this  slow  digestion  be  con-
tinued till  the  vinegar  assumes  a  yellow,
or  rather  a  reddish,  colour,  like  that  of
well  purified  gold.  Then  pour  off  this
clear  and  pure  extracted  substance,  add
more  vinegar,  and  repeat  the  same  pro-
cess till  no  more  gold-coloured  Tincture
can  be  extracted.  Mix  all  the  extract,
filter,  place  in  cucurbit,  put  on  lid,  distil
the  vinegar  in  S.  Mary's  Bath,  till  there
remains  at  the  bottom  a  gold-coloured
powder  approaching  red  ;  pour  on  this
powder  distilled  rain  water  ;  let  it  evapo-
rate by  distillation,  add  more  rain  water,

*  When  I  followed  this  latter  direction  literally,  the  sub-
stance became  solid  like  a  stone,  and  stuck  to  the  bottom  of
the  vessel,  so  that  I  could  not  get  it  off.  At  length,  being
warned  by  experience,  I  shook  the  vessel  five  or  six  times
daily,  stirring  the  substance  with  a  wooden  spoon,  and  you
will  be  wise  if  you  profit  by  my  experience  in  this  matter,  not
only  as  regards  the  present  experiments,  but  in  the  prepara-
tion of  the  glass,  and  in  every  exti  action  of  the  tincture  of
Antimony.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    101

k(V  /"and  repeat  this  till  all  the  acidity  is
,>  washed  out,  and  there  remains  a  sweet
Land  pleasant  powder.*

This  sweet  powder  you  should  pound

in  a  hot  marble  or  glass  mortar,  place  in
»  cucurbit,  pour  on  it  best  highly  rectified
j  spirit  of  wine  till  it  covers  the  powder
I  to  the  height  of  three  inches  ;  expose
>  to  gently  digestive  heat,  as  above,  and

there  will  be  extracted  a  beautiful  red
1  Tincture  with  an  earthy  sediment  at  the
,  bottom.


*  The  Author's  directions  are  correct,  but  if  you  have
much  extract,  you  must  take  a  large  vessel ;  yet  the  vessel
should  not  be  larger  than  the  quantity  of  the  extract  requires
— else  the  fire  necessary  to  bring  about  the  distillation  will
h^ve  to  be  fiercer  than  the  Tincture  can  bear.  When  two-
thirds  of  the  Tincture  have  evaporated,  change  the  vessel,
and  distil  the  remaining  Tincture  in  a  smaller  vessel,  till
there  is  left  a  thickish  paste.  If  you  drain  the  powder
altogether  of  moisture,  it  will  be  burned.  The  method  by
which  you  may  know  whether  the  powder  is  as  sweet  and
free  from  acid  taste  as  it  should  be,  is  to  taste  a  little  of  the
water  which  you  have  drained  off  by  evaporation.  If  you
are  not  careful,  however,  you  may  still  make  a  mistake,  and
spoil  everything.  For  you  must  distinguish  carefully  between
the  acidity  of  the  vinegar  and  the  acidity  of  the  Antimony  ;
else  you  may  go  on  with  the  distillation  after  all  the  acidity
of  the  vinegar  has  been  removed,  and  distil  all  the  acidity,
i.e.,  all  the  strength  out  of  the  Antimony.


IO2    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

The  extract  is  sweet  and  pleasant
to  the  taste  ;  the  sediment  still  retains  its
poisonous  character,  but  the  Tincture  is
a  wonderfully  potent  external  Remedy,
both  for  man  and  beast,  passing  almost
the  possibility  of  belief  in  any  one  who  is
inexperienced  in  this  matter.

Three  or  four  grains  of  this  medi-
cine will  cure  leprosy,  and  the  new
French  disease.  It  purifies  the  blood,
dispels  melancholy,  resists  every
poison,  removes  asthma  and  all  chest
complaints,  including  difficulty  of
breathing,  and  relieves  the  stitch  in  the
side.  Moreover,  this  Remedy  cures
many  other  diseases,  if  it  be  properly
applied.*

The  yellow  powder  mentioned  above,^
from  which  the  extract  has  not  yet  been  l

*  This  Medicine,  which  has  no  violent  cathartic  or  pur-
gative effects,  acts  gently  on  our  spirits,  imparting  to  them
the  Universal  Spirit  of  Nature,  and  insensibly  restoring  the
whole  organism  to  perfect  health.  But  before  its  purification
it  is  like  a  jewel  on  a  dung  heap,  and  utterly  unable  to  mani-
fest or  exhibit  its  virtue.  The  Tincture  spoken  of  in  the  text
has  all  the  virtue  ascribed  to  it  by  the  Author.  But  its  use
should  be  continued  for  some  time,  in  order  to  secure  its  full
benefits.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    103

made  by  means  of  spirit  of  wine,  should
be  pounded  on  a  hot  stone,  and  placed  in
n  egg,  boiled  hard,  from  which  the  yolk
has  been  taken  out ;  leave  the  powder  in
a  humid  place,  till  it  is  dissolved  into  a
yellow  liquid.  This  Tincture,  used  as  a
liniment,  is  an  excellent  remedy  for  all
fresh  wounds  and  bruises.  The  wound
should  be  painted  with  it  by  means  of  a
soft  feather,  and  then  bandaged  with
clean  linen.  The  cure  will  be  effected
without  putrefaction,  inflammation,  or
suppuration,  and  that  so  completely  as
to  call  forth  adoration  and  thanks  unto
Him  who  hath  created  heaven  and  earth,
and  hath  permitted  such  a  medicine  to
exist  therein.*

You  may  use  this  extract  or  balm  of
Antimony  for  the  cure  of  all  inveterate,
inflamed,  or  corrosive  wounds,  and  it  will
never  fail  you  ;  lupus  and  cancer  yield  to
it ;  so  does  caries,  and  the  most  malignant


*  Take  care,  in  removing  the  yolk,  not  to  tear  or  disturb
the  thin  pellicle  which  separates  the  white  from  the  yolk— or
else  your  Tincture  will  get  mixed  with  albumen  and  the
greater  part  will  be  lost  to  you.


IO4    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

and  neglected  of  ulcers,  even  those  that
are  alive  with  worms  cannot  withstand
it.*

I  am  acquainted  with  two  methods
of  reducing  the  glass  of  Antimony  to  an
oil  by  means  of  distillation  in  the  alembic.
Take  glass  of  Antimony,  just  as  it  is7
:>  composed  from  the  minera  of  Antimony,
pound  to  fine  powder,  extract  its  tincture
by  means  of  distilled  vinegar,  remove  all
traces  of  acidity  (as  above),  add  spirit  of
wine,  and  circulate  in  a  pelican  vessel,
well  closed,  for  a  month ;  dexterously

*  If  our  Surgeons  believed  the  words  of  Basilius,  how
ea -jer  they  would  be  to  obtain  this  balm  of  Antimony  !  And,
indeed,  the  Author  rather  underrates  the  virtues  of  this
remedy  than  otherwise,  as  I  myself  can  testify.  A  woman
of  40  years  had  for  seven  years  suffered  from  a  hard
malignant  swelling  in  her  left  breast.  All  the  Doctors  and
Surgeons  whom  she  consulted  declared  her  disease  to  be  an
aggravated  case  of  cancer.  A  most  celebrated  physician
said  that  the  only  means  of  cure  was  the  amputation  of  the
breast.  To  this  doubtful  and  desperate  course  the  woman
would  not  consent,  and,  as  a  last  resource,  she  came  to  me.
I  thought  that,  in  an  extreme  instance  like  this,  where  one
breast  was  twice  as  large  as  the  other,  and  filled  with
cancerous  matter,  I  might  venture  to  employ  the  balm  of
Antimony,  even  for  a  disease  in  which  Basilius  does  not
authorize  its  use.  The  upshot  of  the  matter  was  that,  in  less
than  two  months,  the  woman  was  restored  to  perfect  health.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    105

distil  it,*  without  adding  anything,  and
you  will  have  a  red  oil,  from  which  the


Fire  Stone  is  afterwards  formed,  which,
also,  is  a  sweet,  pleasant,  and  wonderful
Medicine.

This  oil  is  the  quintessence,  or  the
highest  form  of  Antimony.  There  must
be  four  preparations  before  Antimony  is
perfect,  and  the  fifth  point  of  consid-
eration is  its  USES  and  its  APPLICATION  to
the  human  body.  The  first  preparation
is  calcination  and  liquefaction  into  glass ;


*  The  great  difficulty  which  puzzled  me  for  many  years,
is  how  to  bring  about  this  dexterous  distillation.  Shall  I
describe  it  to  you  in  a  riddle  ?  Haste  slowly  ;  "  a  bitch  in  a
hurry  brings  forth  blind  pups."  By  mean  of  Bacchus,  Juno,
and  Vulcan,  you  must  give  your  substance  wings,  but  restrain
it  from  flying  away.  Let  Mercury  instruct  it  in  the  Art  of
flying.  Hold  it  at  first  by  a  string,  lest  it  rise  upward  beyond
your  reach  before  the  time  and  fall  headlong,  like  Icarus,  with
scorched  wings.  In  due  season,  you  may  suffer  it  to  spread
its  wings,  for  then  it  will  wing  its  flight  to  the  Isles  of  the
Blest.  Do  you  accuse  me  of  mocking  you  after  the  manner
of  Tantalus  ?  What  would  you  have  ?  I  may  not  cast  pearls
before  swine,  or  lightly  make  the  mystery  of  mysteries  the
common  property  of  fools  and  knaves.  Those  who  under-
stand the  Art,  understand  me.  If  you  do  not  understand
me,  ponder,  read,  and  study  the  books  of  the  Sages  ;  com-
pare their  parables  with  mine,  and  you  will  see  that  I  have
shed  much  ?dditiona.l  light  on  the  subject.


106    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

the  second  is  digestion,  by  which  the  ex-
tract is  perfected  ;  the  third  is  coagula-
tion ;  the  fourth  is  its  distillation  into  an
oil,  the  subtle  being  separated  from  the
gross.  Then  follows  fixation  by  the  last
coagulation,  and  thereby  you  obtain  the
pellucid  fiery  Stone  -  which  can  operate
on  metals  only  when  it  is  fermented,  and
rendered  penetrative.  Even  so,  it  can
only  act  in  a  particular  manner,  as  I
shall  explain  further  on,  when  I  speak
of  the  Fire  Stone.

The  distilled  oil,  of  which  I  have
spoken,  accomplishes  all  purposes  for
which  it  can  be  employed  by  the  phy


sician.*


*  If  I  did  not  know  that  Basilius  is  here  declaring  no
more  than  the  bare  truth,  I  should  take  him  for  one  of  the
quacks  and  mountebank  charlatans  of  the  market  place.
But  experience  has  taught  me  that  he  rather  understates  than
exaggerates  his  case.  If  you  do  not  believe  me,  the  way  is
open  for  you  to  try.  I  repeat  that  this  Oil,  if  properly  used,
is  truly  an  Universal  Medicine.  The  body  must,  however,
first  have  been  purged  of  its  gross  humours  by  means  of
general  remedies.  Moreover,  there  are  some  diseases  which
are  incurable,  r.nd  I  do  not  say  that  our  Oil  is  of  any  avail
against  these.  I  have  the  most  irrefragable  evidence  that  this
medicine  acts  like  magic  in  all  fever,  and  especially  the  quartan
fever,  the  reproach  of  the  old  system.  In  1665  I  cured  a


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    107

The  proper  dose  of  this  oil  before
coagulation  is  eight  grains  dissolved  in
pure  wine.  It  restores  youth  and  dis-
pels melancholy  ;  the  hair  and  the  nails
are  renewed,  and  the  whole  frame  is
renovated,  as  the  Phcenix  is  said  to  be
renovated  by  fire.  It  destroys  all  ad-
verse symptoms  like  a  consuming  fire,
but  itself  cannot  be  consumed  by  fire  ;
its  action  is  as  universal  as  that  of
potable  gold.  The  Star  of  the  Sun,  if
properly  fixed,  alone  excels  all  other
remedies  ;  for  the  Star  of  the  Sun  and
the  Star  of  Mercury  arise  from  one


very  bad  case  of  dropsy  <  a  girl  of  twenty-one)  by  two  doses
of  this  medicine  daily  for  twenty  days ;  at  the  end  of  that
period  the  body  had  been  reduced  to  its  proper  dimensions
by  means  of  profuse  perspirations  and  other  modes  of  excre-
tion. Notice,  O  lover  of  learning,  should  you  chance  to
prepare  it  yourself,  or  to  receive  it  prepared  by  another,  that
this  oil  does  not  imitate  the  operation  of  other  diaphoretics,  the
first  dose  of  which  provokes  perspiration.  But  if  it  be  placed
in  a  body  obstructed  by  humours,  the  first  dose  effects  nothing,
except  slowly  opening  the  pores ;  on  the  second  day  it
gently  stimulates  perspiration ;  on  the  third  day  there  is
profuse  sweating  ;  on  the  fourth  day  water  is  removed  from
the  system  in  large  quantities.  But  this  is  a  matter  for  the
physicians  ;  the  Key  of  Hercules  is  useless  if  it  be  iiot  in  the
hands  of  Hercules.


io8    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

mother's  blood,  and  from  one  fountain
of  vitalizing  health.*

No  one  need  be  afraid  that  this  oil
of  Antimony,  distilled  with  vinegar,
afterwards  with  the  purest  spirit  of
wine,  then  most  skilfully  extracted,  and,
lastly,  though  of  all  most  important,
exalted  by  means  of  fire,  will  ever  act
as  a  purgative  ;  it  purifies  the  body  by
means  of  perspiration,  and  by  means  of
urinary  and  salivary  excretions.

Common  glass  of  Antimony  is  pul-
— ^  verized  ;  six  grains  or  more  are  absolved
in  warm  wine  overnight  ;  in  the  morn-
ing the  wine  is  drunk  without  the
sediment,  and  purges,  both  by  laxation
and  vomiting,  on  account  of  the  poison-
ous crudeness  which  still  remains  in
glass  of  Antimony. f  It  is  impossible

*  The  gold  and  the  Mercury  here  spoken  of  are  not  the
common  metals,  but  the  gold  and  Mercury  of  the  Sages,
more  precious  by  far  than  is  any  ordinary  metal,  more
powerful  than  all  other  Mercury,  that  even  which  was
fabled  to  restore  the  dead  to  life.  Therefore,  I  advise  you
not  rashly  to  spend  your  money  on  that  which  cannot  profit.

t  This  emetic  is  now  commonly  used  by  all  quacks,  but
not  always  with  happy  results.  It  is  as  with  the  sword  of
brave  Scanderbeg,  the  Castriot.  The  Sultan  Mahomet


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    109

that  I  should  be  acquainted  with  all  the
secrets  of  Antimony,  as  my  life  is  short,
and  I  am  only  a  man  ;  but  even  in  the
grave  I  will  praise  you,  if  by  careful
study  and  experiment  you  succeed  in
improving  upon  and  supplementing  my
discoveries.  Common  glass  of  Anti-
mony may  be  reduced  into  an  oil,  which
will  be  quite  safe,  and  of  great  value,  in
epileptic  cases,  as  I  shall  at  once  pro-
ceed to  explain.

Pound  the  glass  of  Antimony  intoTl
as  fine  a  powder  as  possible,  add  ompha-
cium,  digest  for  some  days  in  a  broad-
bottomed  cucurbit  well-closed  with  clay,  N

desired  to  see  this  miraculous  sword  which  had  wrought
such  wonders  in  the  battlefield.  But  when  it  was  sent  to
him,  he  could  perceive  nothing  remarkable  about  it.  "  No
wonder,"  said  a  courtier,  "for  Scanderbeg  has  sent  his
sword,  but  he  has  not  sent  his  arm. "  The  best  medicine  in
unskilled  hands  may  produce  fatal  results.  In  order  to  be
quite  safe,  I  prepare  this  emetic  as  follows  :  R.  Four  ounces
of  pure  glass  of  Antimony,  and  half-an-ounce  of  Venetian
borax  ;  melt  them  together,  when  you  will  have  a  green  glossy
substance  like  emerald  ;  pound  fine,  and  put  into  French
wine  ;  keep  it  in  a  warm  place  for  some  days  ;  then  give  to
the  patient,  according  to  his  strength,  one  to  two  ounces  of
this  mixture.  This  emetic  is  quite  safe,  and  if  you  pour
more  wine  on  the  sediment  it  will  be  just  as  efficacious  an
emetic  as  the  first.


no    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.


IV


till  all  the  moisture  is  abstracted  ;  pound
with  a  double  quantity  of  clarified  sugar,
moistened  with  spirit  of  vinegar ;  place
in  a  retort,  and  distil,  in  the  name  of
God,  at  the  end,  with  a  strong  fire  ;  you
will  then  have  a  red  oil — which  must  be
clarified  to  transparency  with  spirit  of
wine.*

To  this  oil  add  a  little  spirit  of  salt,
and  pour  the  whole  into  a  subtle  prepa-
ration of  "calx  of  gold,"  which  has
previously  been  prepared  with  its  water,
after  a  manner  which  I  have  laid  down  in
my  other  writings  ;  it  will  then  transcend
the  alembic.  When  they  are  thus  dis-
tilled together,  it  assumes  the  Tincture
of  gold,  and  leaves  the  body  intact,  t


*  This  process  is  somewhat  difficult.  Basilius  would  say
thxt  the  oil  must  be  carried  across  the  alembic.  It  is  the
"  dexterous  distillation  "  which  I  explained  to  you  above.

t  Do  you  understand  the  riddle,  my  friend  ?     You  can-
not understand  it,  unless  there  come  an  CEdipus  to  solve  it
_  for  you,  or  an  Alexander  to  cut  the  Gordian  Knot.      The
difficulty  lies  in  the  fact  that  all  solvents  by  which  tinctures
are  extracted  must  themselves  be  colourless  ;  for,  unless  they
)    are  so,  how  can  you  know  whether  you  have  really  extracted
the  Tincture,  or  only  recovered  your  solvent  ?     I  will  tell  you
\_briefly  how  I  carried  out  this  operation  in  the  year  1665.     I
V  rectified  the  red  oil  in  the  retort,  and  obtained  a  white  oil  of


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,    in

When  this  fermentation  has  taken  V
place,  the  medicine  which  results  is  so
wonderfully  efficacious  that  I   might  fill
several  books  with  an  enumeration  of  its
virtues.

But    any  physician,   who    will    dili-

a  pleasant  acid  taste  ;  I  poured  to  it  half  as  much  spirit  of  T
salt,  digested  the  two  together  for  a  month  in  a  retort,  in
order  to  effect  their  conjunction,  and  then  still  further  amal-
gamated them  by  distillation  ;  then  I  poured  them  on  the
calx  of  gold,  and  digested  the  mixture  for  a  month,  till  it  was
of  a  golden  colour,  approaching  red.  Thereupon,  I  gently
poured  out  the  tincture,  and  softly  removed  the  moisture  after
it  had  been  placed  in  a  retort.  A  reddish  powder  then  re-
mained at  the  bottom,  which  I  sweetened  with  distilled  rain
water,  and  again  extracted  the  Tincture  with  spirit  of  wine.


Then  I  restored  that  winged  red  dragon,  gave  him  his  tail  to  1  (\     I   fo
eat  for  six  whole  months,  and  obtained  a  most  sweet  and
pleasant  Tincture,  ten  or  twelve  grains  of  which  remove,  by

»%-n"irt »-».-.    ^-T   t-v/avc-r-viwof  4/^*1      tit  A    Y>-n-\vV»i£r»    *v»o  f  f/av    *~f    t*\7f*r\r    i^iirfaVilf*


means  of  perspiration,  the  morbific  matter  cf  every  curable
disease.  The  solvent  which  is  employed  must  not  only  be
sweet  and  free  from  corrosive  properties,  it  must  also  be  of
a  nature  homogeneous  with  that  of  the  substance  on  which  it
is  poured,  in  order  that  it  may  extract  from  the  mercury  of
the  body  a  good  and  pure  sulphur.  Rectified  spirit  of  wine
is  the  most  congenial  to  the  sulphur  of  our  substance,  which
does  not  amalgamate  with  the  spirit  of  salt.  But  as  to  the
Tincture  which  is  obtained  in  this  way,  you  must  not  suppose
for  a  moment  that  it  is  the  Potable  Gold  of  the  Sages.  That
would  be  a  serious  mistake.  The  Tincture  is  most  precious,
but  it  has  only  the  colour,  and  not  the  weight  of  potable  ,
gold.  About  this  potable  Tincture  of  Gold  it  is  not  my.
business  to  speak  in  this  place.


1 1 2    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

gently  and  philosophically  consider  the
subject,  will  discover  fresh  virtues  in
this  Medicine  every  day,  and  will  learn
more  from  its  use  than  from  his  whole
Pharmacopoeia  beside.

When  you  have  prepared  Antimony
to  this  point,  you  may  justly  boast  that
you  have  solved  the  enigma  of  the
Sages,  and  that  you  have  learned  the
Magistery  which  is  known  only  to  few.

This  Magisterium,  when  mixed
with  a  solution  or  tincture  of  corals,  and
taken  in  some  cordial  water,  heals  all
diseases  which  proceed  from  some  im-
pure condition  of  the  blood,  strengthens
the  nerves,  promotes  chastity  and  good-
ness, and  makes  a  man  fit  for  every
business  which  he  takes  in  hand.

We  should,  therefore,  at  all  times
thank  the  Creator  for  implanting  such
wonderful  virtues  in  created  things,  and
for  supplying  us  with  the  means  of  dis-
pelling every  disease  and  weakness.

We  will  now  briefly  continue  our
instruction  concerning  the  Arcana  of
Antimony.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    113

Take  one  part,  of  finely  pulverized
Antimony,     and "„ pulverized     salt-armo-


niac,*  so  called  because  it  comes  from
Armenia ;  mix  these  together,  place
in  a  retort,  and  distil  together,  t  On
the  product  of  this  distillation  pour  hot,
distilled  (common)  rain  water,  removing
thereby  every  salt  and  acrid  taste.  Then
the  Antimony  will  be  of  a  pure,  brilliant,
and  feathery  white  ;  dry  with  subtle  heat,
place  in  the  circulatory  vessel  called
pelican,  pour  to  it  highly  rectified  spirit
of  vitriol,  and  circulate  till  they  are
properly  amalgamated.  J  Then  distil

*  The  quantities  of  the  two  should  be  equal.

tThe  retort  should  be  of  the  kind  exhibited  on  page
114,  consisting  of  A  Furnace,  P.  Retort,  C  Receiver,  D  Tube,
between  Receiver  and  Alembic  E.  F  is  a  furnace  which
sublimes  by  its  moderate  heat  all  that  is  in  the  Receiver  into
Alembic  E  ;  and  so  the  substance  which  is  distilled  from  the
Retort  B  is  immediately  sublimed  by  the  fire  of  the  furnace
F.  This  retort  is  useful  in  every  kind  of  sublimation.

JThis  union  must  be  so  close  that  in  distillation  the
two  shall  rise  together,  otherwise  you  will  lose  both  your
oil  and  your  labour.  Amalgamation  in  Alchemy  is  not
merely  mixing  two  liquids  :  the  union  must  be  inseparable,
and  the  ingredients  must  really  change  and  modify  each
other.  The  union  should  be  like  that  of  male  and  female
seed,  which  produces  a  real  organism,  that  is,  something  more
than  a  mere  mixture  of  the  two  ingredients.  Later  on  in

I


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    115

together,  pour  to  mixture  spirit  of  wine,
and  circulate  again.  Remove  the  sedi-
ment, which  will  have  settled  at  the
bottom,  and  you  will  then  have  the
arcanum  thoroughly  amalgamated  with
the  spirits  of  vitriol  and  of  wine.  When
this  arcanum  has  been  rectified  a  final
time,  one  drop  of  it  mixed  with  rose
water  has  greater  medicinal  value  than
a  whole  potful  of  herbs  ;  it  is  a  good
appetizer  and  digestive,  purifies  the
blood,  and  cures  colic  as  by  magic.

After  the  arcanum  of  Antimony
comes  its  Elixir.*  In  the  name  of  the
Lord,  take  some  good  minera  of  Anti-
mony, pulverize  it  finely,  sublime  with
half  as  much  salt  of  ammonia ;  put  all
that  is  sublimed  into  a  glass  retort,  distil
thrice  (always  removing  sediment),  ab-
stract salt  by  edulcoration,  reverberate

this  work  I  give  a  drawing  of  the  vessel  in  which  I  effect  this
union  between  different  substances.  Spirit  of  wine  easily
unites  with  other  substances,  but  is  as  easily  separated
from  them.

*  This  operation  is  easy,  and  we  say  nothing  about  it,
to  shew  that  we  have  not  written  our  commentary  for  the
purpose  of  putting  ourselves  forward.


•


u6    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

T  the  Antimony  over  a  moderate  fire  in  a
]  well-closed  vessel,  till  it  becomes  red,
add  strong  distilled  vinegar  of  wine,
extract  its  redness,  remove  vinegar,  till
there  remains  a  powder  (by  means  of
S.  Mary's  Bath).  Extract  with  spirit
of  wine,  so  as  to  remove  the  sediment :
you  will  then  have  a  clear  and  pure
Tincture.  Place  this  spirit  of  wine  with
the  tincture  in  a  broad-bottomed  cucur-
bit, add  some  tincture  of  corals,  and
quintessence  of  rhubarb,  and  administer
a  dose  of  three  or  four  drops.  It  acts
as  a  painless  purgative,  and  has  an
exhilarating  effect  on  the  animal
spirits.

Some  physician  may  wonder  that  a
mixture  of  Antimony  and  rhubarb,  which
are  both  violent  in  their  action,  should
answer  for  a  gentle  laxative.  Let  such
an  one  know  that  purified  Antimony
does  not  affect  the  bowels  at  all ;  the  pur-
gative action  proceeds  from  the  rhubarb,
which  is  rendered  more  soothing  by  the
Antimony.  By  means  of  the  clearance
which  the  rhubarb  effects,  the  Antimony


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    117

is  enabled  to  work  more  successfully  on
the  system.*

The  Elixir  prepared  in  this  way  has
the  same  power  of  penetrating  and  per-
vading the  body  with  its  purifying-
properties,  that  Antimony  has  of  pene-
trating and  purifying  gold.  If  I  were
to  count  up  and  describe  all  its  virtues,
I  should  have  to  ask  God  to  grant
me  a  longer  life,  in  order  that  I  might
be  able  to  explore  so  many  wonderful
properties.

In  fulfilment  of  my  promise,  I  here
describe  those  experiments  which  I  have
myself  carried  out.  It  would  not  become
me  to  speak  of  that  which  I  do  not  know.
I  have  quite  enough  to  do  to  commemo-
rate that  of  which  I  have  had  practical
experience.  There  is  plenty  of  scope
for  those  who  come  after  me  to  inves-
tigate the  marvels  of  Antimony.  No
one  is  more  acutely  sensible  than  myself

*  The  difference  between  the  purgatives  of  Medicine  and
the  purgatives  of  Alchemy  is  as  follows  :  the  former  cause
violent  purging,  but  have  no  power  to  set  up  a  curative  pro-
cess ;  the  latter  possess  the  double  virtue  both  of  purging  and
healing.


1 1 S    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

that  I  have  by  no  means  exhausted  the
subject.

This  much,  however,  I  have  proved
beyond  a  possibility  of  doubt  —  that
Antimony  not  only  purifies  gold,  and
frees  it  from  all  foreign  matter,  while  it
also  ameliorates  all  other  metals,  but  it
does  the  same  for  animal  bodies,  as  re-
gards both  men  and  brutes.  I  may
illustrate  this  by  a  simple  experiment.  If
a  man  wishes  to  fatten  a  pig,  let  him
give  to  the  pig,  two  or  three  days  before
he  begins  to  fatten  it,  half  a  drachm  of
crude  Antimony,  so  as  to  cause  a  thorough
cleaning  out  of  the  bowels  ;  the  pig  will
then  eat  more  freely,  fatten  more  quickly,
and  be  freed  from  any  bilious  or  leprous
disease  to  which  he  may  be  subject.

This  illustration  may  seem  some-
what unpolished  and  unsavoury  to  the
great ;  but  it  has  the  strong  recom-
mendation of  being  familiar  and  apposite,
and  of  rendering  the  matter  really  clear
to  the  general  body  of  my  readers.  Of
course,  I  do  not  advocate  that  crude  Anti-
mony should  be  administered  to  human


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.    1 1 9

beings  :  the  brutes  can  digest  raw  flesh,
and  many  other  things  which  would
overpower  the  strength  of  the  human
stomach.  Amongst  different  individuals
of  the  human  family,  there  are  also  con-
stitutional and  other  differences,  which
tax  the  skill  and  knowledge  of  the
physician  in  determining  the  quantity
that  will  be  relatively  suitable  for  a  strong
young  man  and  a  feeble  old  woman.

I  will  now  proceed  to  speak  of  the
further  preparation  and  fixation  of  Anti-
mony. Antimony,  in  its  fixed  state,
resembles  the  spirit  of  wine  which  is
separated  from  its  body,  and  warms  the
body  of  man  inwardly,  while,  if  applied
outwardly,  it  attracts  to  itself  all  the  heat
of  an  inflamed  part.  But  wine  which  has
become  vinegar  cools  both  inwardly  and
outwardly.  Yet  both  spirit  of  wine  and
vinegar  are  preparations  of  the  same
substance.

The  reason  of  this  difference  is  that
vinegar  has  undergone  only  digestion,
i.e.,  putrefaction  of  the  wine,  with  vege-
table fixation.  But  the  spirit  of  wine  is


I2O    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

prepared  by  separation,  i.e.,  distillation,
or  vegetable  sublimation,  which  renders
the  spirit  volatile.  In  the  same  way,
Antimony  has  different  effects  in  accord-
ance with  the  difference  of  its  preparation.
Its  fixation  is  brought  about  in  the
following  manner  :  Pulverize  some  Anti-
mony, place  it  in  a  broad-bottomed  dis-
tilling-vessel,  namely,  in  a  cucurbit,  pour
upon  it  aqua  fortis  to  the  height  of  six
inches,  close  well  with  clay,  and  expose
to  gentle  heat  for  ten  days,  to  accomplish
extraction :  decant  the  pure  and  clear
extract  thus  obtained,  free  it  by  filtration
from  all  faecal  impurities,  place  in  glass
vessel,  and  remove  all  the  aqua  fortis
by  distillation  in  the  ashes.  There  will
then  remain  at  the  bottom  a  dry,  yellow
powder  of  Antimony  :  pour  on  it  dis-
tilled rain  water,  expose  in  similar  glass
vessel  to  moderate  heat,  and  you  will
have  a  red  tincture  (or  extract) ;  filter,
distil  the  rain  water  gently  in  S.  Mary's
Bath,  and  there  will  remain  a  red  pow-
der. Pour  on  it  strong  distilled  vinegar,
which,  in  time,  is  coloured  red,  like  blood,


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    121

and  deposits  a  sediment.  Distil  this
vinegar  again,  and  again  there  remains  a
red  powder.  Reverberate  this  powder
continuously  for  three  days  over  an  open
fire,  and  extract  from  it  the  tincture  with
spirit  of  wine  ;  then  strain  off  the  sedi-
ment that  remains  from  the  Tincture.

Again  remove  by  distillation  the
spirit  of  wine  (by  S.  Mary's  Bath),  and
there  will  remain  a  fixed  red  powder  of
wondrous  efficacy/''"  Half  a  drachm
should  be  taken  thrice  daily,  in  the
morning,  at  noon,  and  in  the  evening.
It  cleanses  all  ulcers,  radically  cures  the
French  disease  (syphilis),  and  renovates
the  whole  frame.

It  is  now  desirable  that  I  should
proceed  to  describe  the  preparation  of
the  Flowers  of  Antimony,  which  is  per-
formed in  various  manners,  j"

*  This  is  not  the  fixed  Antimony  sold  by  apothecaries  :
no,  our  fixed  red  powder  is  not  to  be  bought  either  with
silver  or  with  gold,  seeing  that  it  is  infinitely  more  precious
than  either.  Let  him  that  has  this  fixed  powder  use  it  in
chronic  diseases,  especially  where  it  is  important  to  excite
perspiration,  and  he  will  see  the  most  wonderful  effects.

t  From  the  following  pages,  as  from  all  contemporary
literature,  you  may  see  in  what  evil  repute  the  Art  of


122    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Of  these  flowers  of  Antimony  the
world  knows  little  or  nothing,  and  it
will  not  be  able  to  appreciate  my  pre-
scription. The  students  and  friends  of
this  Spagyric  Art,  on  the  other  hand,
will  estimate  it  at  its  right  value.
Nevertheless,  I  warn  you,  my  disciples,
that  if  you  desire  to  be  true  and  earnest
Alchemists,  you  must  take  your  cross
upon  you,  and  follow  me.  You  must
learn,  as  I  have  learned,  to  suffer,  to
submit  to  persecution,  to  knock  at  the

Alchemy  was  held  in  the  time  of  Basilius,  and  how  many
theological  and  political  authorities  were  to  be  found  in  the
army  of  ignorance  arrayed  against  it.  Now,  you  should
understand  that  I  do  not  blame  these  writers  for  visiting
with  the  most  severe  invective  those  mountel  ank  quacks
who  practised  their  criminal  intrigues  under  the  cloak  of
this  Art.  Such  persons  I  consider  as  deserving  not  only
emphatic  censure,  but  the  most  severe  punishment.  But
men  of  education  and  piety  should  not  have  been  so  blind
as  to  confound  the  innocent  with  the  guilty,  and  to  involve
honest  Alchemists  in  one  sweeping  condemnation  with  these
charlatans.  In  our  times  the  dense  cloud  of  ignorance  is
here  and  there  shot  with  light ;  physicians  do  not  venture  to
condemn  Alchemy,  and  even  prescribe  Alchemistic  remedies.
When  will  the  darkness  be  utterly  dispersed  by  the  advent,
of  the  Artist  Elias,  which  Paracelsus  predicts  in  some  of  his
books,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  8th  chapter  of  his  treatise  De
Mtnerahbus :  "  The  common  things  God  permits  us  to
make  known,  but  the  more  momentous  secrets  cannot


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony*    123

gate  of  God's  mercy  without  ceasing,
and  to  work  patiently  and  unweariedly.
Then  God  will  never  leave  you  nor
forsake  you,  as  He  has  never  forsaken
me.  But  as  to  the  flowers  of  Antimony,
you  should  learn  that  they  may  be
prepared  in  different  ways,  which  all
students  of  Alchemy  know.  Some  mix
them  with  salt  ammonia,  drive  them
through  the  retort,  and  then  wash  out
the  ammonia.  These  flowers  are  of  a
beautiful  white  colour.  Others  sublime


become  public  property  till  the  coming  of  the  Artist  Ettas/'
And  to  the  same  notion  he  gives  expression  in  another  place
(  Lib.  Min.  Tract.  7.)  :  " It  is  indeed  true  that  many  things
still  remain  hidden  in  the  earth  of  which  I,  as  well  as  others,
am  ignorant.  But  this  I  know,  that  God  will  successively
reveal  many  marvels,  and  will  bring  to  light  many  more
things  than  have  hitherto  been  known  to  us  all.  This  is
true — there  is  nothing  hidden  which  shall  not  be  uncovered.
After  me  there  shall  come  one,  whose  equal  does  not  live,  and
who  shall  reveal  many  things."  Therefore  take  heart,  good
student  of  Alchemy,  and  prepare  the  way  of  EJias,  who  will
reveal  more  than  has  ever  been  known  on  earth  before,
because  of  the  wickedness  of  men.  Give  to  the  world  as
much  of  this  medicine  of  1ruth  as,  in  its  present  condition,
it  can  assimilate,  in  order  that  it  may  gradually  get  well,
and  be  prepared  for  the  times  of  Elias.  "  For  the  arts,"
adds  Theophrastus,  "  equally  possess  their  Elias,  and  it  is
understood  of  the  rest."


124    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

them  over  a  strong  fire,  and,  by  placing
three  alembics  on  each  other,  they
manage  to  prepare  white,  yellow,  and
red  flowers  at  the  same  time.  I  have
tried  these  ways,  and  find  them  useful  ;
but  the  most  potent  and  efficacious
flowers  of  Antimony  are  prepared  as
follows  :  Mix  red  flowers  of  Antimony
with  colcotar  of  vitriol,  and  sublime  the
mixture  thrice.  Then  the  essence  of
vitriol  ascends  with  the  flowers,  and
they  become  more  effectual.  Extract
the  flowers  with  spirit  of  wine,  remove
sediment,  distil  spirit  of  wine  in  Bath  of
S.  Mary,  till  there  remains  a  dry
powder,  which  represents  the  purified
flowers  of  Antimony.  These  I  have
shewn  to  the  other  friars,  and  to  many
who  have  consulted  me  in  their  spiritual
and  physical  difficulties.

These  flowers  act  as  a  gentle  pur-
gative ;  they  cure  tertian  and  quartan
fever,  and  most  other  diseases,  so  much
so  that  I  have  determined,  by  the  help
of  my  Saviour  Jesus  and  the  most  holy
Mary,  His  Mother,  to  bequeath  in  my


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    125

will  to  suffering  humanity  all  the  reme-
dies which  I  have  extracted  from  the
bowels  of  the  earth.  The  sublimed
Antimony,  called  flowers  of  Antimony,
is  like  the  springs  which  well  forth  on
high  mountains.  Water  is  found  both
by  digging  in  the  deep  places  of  the
earth,  and  it  rushes  forth  with  great
force  on  the  summits  of  high  mountains.
How  is  this  most  remarkable  fact  to  be
explained  ?  I  believe  that  the  womb  of
waters  in  the  earth  is  more  copiously
stored  in  some  places  than  in  others,  so
that  while  you  have  to  dig  for  water  in
certain  districts,  in  others,  owing  no
doubt  to  sidereal  influences,  it  is  drawn
upward  with  great  force  to  the  snowy
summits  of  the  Alps,  and  to  the  pin-
nacles of  the  Tower  of  Babylon.*  If
any  foolish  person  should  read  these


*  This  parable  is  so  clear  to  those  from  whose  eyes  the
cataract  has  been  removed,  that  to  explain  it  would  be  like
lighting  a  candle  at  noonday.  Those  who  do  not  under-
stand it  should  ponder  it  again  and  again,  and  let  that  which
they  read  to-day  explain  the  difficulties  of  yesterday,  and  the
studies  of  to  morrow  throw  light  on  the  uncertainties  of  to-
day.


126    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

words,  he  will  think  that  I  am  either
mad  or  drunk  with  wine.  Well,  I  shall
then  only  be  subjected  to  the  same
suspicion  as  the  disciples  of  the  Saviour.
The  water  which  rises  by  sublimation  to
the  mountain  tops  is  purer  and  more
wholesome  than  that  which  is  found  in
the  bowels  of  the  earth.  But  if  it  be
driven  upward,  the  earth  still  remains  to
the  Sages,  and  the  salt  can  be  extracted
as  a  means  of  separating  the  good  from
the  evil,  the  pure  from  the  impure,  the
gross  from  the  subtle,  the  medicine  from
the  poison.  Just  in  the  same  way,  we
sons  of  earth  are  laid  in  the  earth,  and
there  putrefy  and  are  corrupted,  till  at
the  last  we  are  sublimed  by  the  fire  and
heat  of  heaven,  and  are  purged  of  all
our  sins  and  impurities,  and  become  sons
of  God  and  heirs  of  eternal  life.

Let  no  one  be  offended  at  this
comparison  of  earthly  and  temporal
sublimation  to  heavenly  and  spiritual
sublimation.  What  I  say,  I  say  ad-
visedly, and  yet  I  know  very  well  the
difference  between  black  and  white,


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    127

between  the  gloom  of  earth  and  the
serene  brightness  of  heaven.  Let  us,
therefore,  proceed  to  describe  another
preparation  of  Antimony.  All  the  dif-
ferent extracts  of  Antimony  exhibit  the
most  striking  diversity  in  their  practical
effects.  Yet  their  substance  is  the  same,
and  they  all  are  produced  from  the  same
source.  It  follows  that  their  practical
difference  is  altogether  due  to  their  pre-
paration.

For  instance,  whatever  is  extracted
from  Antimony,  or  from  anything  else,
by  means  of  spirit  of  wine,  acts  quite
differently  from  that  which  is  extracted
by  means  of  good  vinegar.  Extracts
made  by  means  of  spirit  of  wine  have  a
strongly  purgative  effect ;  extracts  due  to
vinegar  are  rather  constipating,  because
the  volatile  is  thereby  fixed  and  solidified.

This  is  a  great  arcanum,  and  of
much  more  profound  application  than
the  common  herds,  whether  they  be
masters  or  slaves,  learned  or  unlearned,
will  be  disposed  to  think.

Extracts  are  made  from  Antimony


128    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

either  by  means  of  spirit  of  wine,  or  by
means  of  vinegar.  Extract  of  glass  of
Antimony  purges  when  made  in  the
former  way  ;  but  made  in  the  latter  way,
it  does  not  occasion  purgative  action,
and  rather  the  reverse.  Such  facts  as
these,  with  which  I  have  dealt  at  some
length  in  my  other  writings,  should  set
thoughtful  men  meditating,  and  may
open  up  to  them  the  inmost  shrine  of
philosophical  knowledge.

First  of  all,  it  is  wonderful  that
every  extract  made  with  spirit  of  wine
should  have  purgative  properties  ;  while
an  extract  of  glass  of  Antimony,  first
made  with  vinegar,  and  (after  the
purging  away  of  the  vinegar)  extracted
with  spirit  of  wine,  retains  not  a  trace  of
its  purgative  properties,  but  cleanses  the
system  by  means  of  sweats  and  salivary
excretion  through  the  mouth,  purifies
the  blood,  cures  pulmonary  disease,  re-
lieves asthma,  and  the  most  inveterate
coughs  and  colds  ;  and  is  a  most  ad-
mirable medicine.

Another  extract  of  Antimony  is  pre-


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    129

pared  in  the  following  way  :  Pulverize
crude  Antimony,  pour  to  it  strong  min-
eral vinegar,  put  in  vessel,  close  well,
and  expose  to  the  gentle  rays  of  the  sun.
After  some  time  the  vinegar  will  assume
a  blood-red  colour.  Filter  the  extract,
and  distil  again  in  an  alembic  ;  it  will
then  exhibit  some  admirable  and  beauti-V
ful  colours.

This  oil  is  red  as  blood,  has  a
considerable  sediment,  and  is  of  the
greatest  medicinal  value,  especially  in
the  cure  of  leprosy.*  It  heals  the  new


*  How  timid  has  the  wickedness  of  his  contemporaries
made  our  Valentine  !  He  does  not  tell  us  that  from  this
oil  is  prepared  the  quintessence  of  all  things,  extolled  by
Peter  of  Spain  as  the  greatest  secret  of  philosophy.  He
speaks  so  obscurely  here  of  this  all-important  matter  that  it
is  clear  he  has  only  written  it  in  order  to  let  the  initiated
see  that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  mystery.  But  in  order
that  you  may  not  have  spent  your  money  in  vain  in  buying
this  book,  and  your  time  in  reading  it,  I  will  give  you  clear
and  straightforward  directions  which  you  must  take  care  to
follow  out  in  every  particular.  Take  best  friable  Antimony,  •
for  the  crude  kind,  in  spite  of  the  advice  of  Basilius,  is  of  <
no  use,  because  in  its  first  distillation  it  has  been  deprived  of
its  most  subtle  sulphur  ;  pulverise  finely,  pass  through  fine
sieve,  place  in  broad-bottomed  distilling  vessel  (cucurbita),
add  vinegar,  distilled  from  its  own  proper  minera,  digest  for
forty  days.  The  vinegar  will  then  be  tinged,  as  it  were,  with  J

K


1 30    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

disease  which  has  only  recently  made  its
appearance  among  our  soldiers  (venereal
disease),  and  utterly  consumes  all  morbific
matter.  Hence  the  physician  should  not
grudge  the  time  and  trouble  which  must
be  given  to  the  preparation  of  this
Remedy.

Another  extract  of  Antimony  is
prepared  as  follows  :  In  the  name  of  the
Lord,  take  Antimony  and  crude  tartar  in
equal  parts,  pulverize  well  together,  place
in  strong  crucible,  which  will  not  let  the
spirits  escape  ;  calcine  the  substances  in


r


blood.  Pour  this  red  Tincture  into  a  retort,  gently  remove
the  vinegar  by  distillation^ Make  an  extract  of  the  powder
which  remains  with  spirit  of  wine,  which  will  be  of  a  blood-
red  colour.  Pour  into  a  circulatory  vessel,  like  that  repre-
sented on  page  131,  which  is  the  most  suitable  I  have  met
with  for  the  volatilisation  of  substances.  Digest  the  extract
in  S.  Mary's  Bath,  till  you  see  the  tincture  rise  upward,  and
pass  in  a  volatile  state  through  the  alembic.  Let  it  cool.
Place  the  whole  substance  in  a  glass  cucurbit,  distil  the
spirit  according  to  art,  and  when  it  passes  through  the
alembic  it  will  be  of  a  blood-red  colour.  Remove  the  spirit
,  of  wine,  and  you  will  have  a  thick,  heavy  oil.  How  this
oil  is  united  with  its  salt,  and  is  then  most  valuable  for  the
amelioration  of  metals,  I  will  tell  you  in  another  place.
In  the  meantime  you  may  use  the  oil  as  a  most  efficacious
Medicine,  which  prevails  in  desperate  cases,  accomplishing
its  purpose  by  profuse  sweating.


132    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

a  wind  furnace  till  the  tartar  is  entirely
burned  ;  pulverize  the  burnt  substance,
pour  over  it  common  hot  water,  and
cleanse  and  sweeten  the  substance  with
lye.  It  will  then  become  a  "  liver"
(hepar),  a  name  given  to  it  by  the
ancients.*  Dry  this  "liver,"  place  it  in
a  cucurbit,  add  pure  spirit  of  wine,  ex-
tract the  spirit  by  distillation  in  S.
Mary's  Bath,  so  that  a  third  part  of  it
remains.  (First  strain  the  spirit,  etc.,
through  a  piece  of  paper.)  This  extract
should  be  used  with  great  caution.  It  is

*  The  liver  is  a  thing  highly  esteemed  by  gourmands,
and  so  is  liver  of  Antimony  among  Alchemists.  The  opera-
tion is  greatly  improved  by  substituting  salt  of  tartar  for
plain  tartar.  Nor  does  Basilius  tell  us  that  the  mortar  in
which  they  are  pounded  must  be  hot ;  also  he  forgets  to
specify  the  quantity  of  the  water  in  which  the  powder  must
be  dissolved  that  it  may  assume  a  more  beautiful  colour.
Now,  in  this  exaltation  of  colour  there  is  a  great  inhering
virtue.  Further,  he  omits  to  say  that  the  precipitation  of
the  "liver"  in  the  water  takes  place  by  means  of  vinegar.
Moreover,  this  fusion  of  Antimony,  like  all  such  fusions,
must  be  carried  out  on  a  bright  sunny  day.  For,  if  you
laugh  at  me  when  I  affirm  that  the  heavenly  bodies  have
an  important  influence  on  the  operations  of  the  Alchemist,
I  also  will  laugh  at  you  when  your  experiments  come  to
nought.  I  know  better  than  to  waste  any  elaborate  refu-
tation on  those  who  make  our  Art  and  its  claims  the  subject


TJie   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    133

a  remarkable  fact  that  the  spirit  of  wine
thenceforward  refuses  to  mingle  with  the
red  extract  whence  it  is  derived,  but
floats  on  it,  like  oil  upon  water.  But  if
the  tincture  of  spirit  of  wine  be  poured
on  the  Hver__of\Antimony,  it  will  attract
it,  yet  the  two  will  not  amalgamate  with
the  first  extract.  Who  can  declare  all
the  wonders  of  God  ?  Or  who  can
rightly  value  the  gifts  which  He  has  im-
planted in  His  creatures?*

I  have  spoken  of  the  extract  made
from  glass  of  Antimony    by   means    of


of  their  scorn.  For  we  speak  of  what  we  have  seen  with  our
eyes,  and  handled  with  our  hands — but  those  ignorant  per-
sons suppose  that  they  can  establish  a  claim  to  wisdom  by
sneering  at  that  of  which  they  can  know  nothing.  True
lovers  of  Alchemy  refuse  to  cast  their  pearls  before  swine.  I
affirm,  then,  that  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year,  the  liver  of
Antimony  has  a  deeper  colour  and  greater  efficacy  than  that
prepared  at  other  times,  its  curative  potency  being  greater
both  with  regard  to  metals  and  to  human  bodies.  As  to  the
virtues  of  this  medicine,  there  is  no  need  of  any  elaborate
recommendation.  Everyone  who  has  tried  it  knows  its
value,  and  is  ready  to  exchange  for  it  its  weight  in  gold.

*  In  the  following  passage  the  Author  speaks  like  a.  faith-
ful teacher,  who  again  and  again  inculcates  the  same  truths
upon  the  minds  of  his  disciples.  Yet  he  says  that  he  does  not
u>e  a  single  word  too  many,  and  therefore  it  will  be  well  for
you  to  keep  your  eyes  open,  and  to  listen  with  both  your  ears.


1 34    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

vinegar,  and  also  by  means  of  spirit  of
wine.  Now  I  say  that  when  this  extract
has  been  made  with  vinegar,  and  the
vinegar  removed  (in  S.  Mary's  Bath),
the  powder  which  remains  is  dissolved
in  a  moist  place  into  a  yellow  liquid.
This  liquid  is  wonderfully  effective  in
the  cure  of  old  and  fresh  wounds,  and  my
hand  would  weary  of  holding  my  pen  if
I  attempted  to  set  forth  all  its  virtues.
The  same  efficacy  belongs  to  an  extract
from  this  powder  before  the  solution
with  spirit  of  wine  has  been  made.  In
the  matter  of  internal  disorders,  it  yields
nothing  to  other  medicaments.

I  have  described  this  preparation  at
some  length  in  this  treatise  on  Anti-
mony, as  well  as  in  my  other  writings,
because  I  know  its  value  ;  and  I,  there-
fore, trust  and  hope  that  my  readers  will
not  think  the  apparent  repetitions  in  my
books  tedious.  For  though  I  may  seem
to  repeat  myself,  I  can  assure  you  that  I
do  not  write  a  single  word  which  does
not  demand  the  most  careful  attention  on
the  part  of  the  reader.  Children  and


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    135

fools  suppose  that  all  is  easy,  because
they  do  not  understand  it — but  my  true
disciples  will  in  course  of  time,  and  by
dint  of  steady  thought,  apprehend  my
meaning.

Another  extract  is  obtained  by
means  of  caustic  water  in  the  following
manner  :  Take  equal  parts  of  vitriol  and
of  common  salt  ;  from  these  distil  a  water
through  the  side.*  The  product,  after
violent  heat,  is  a  substance  like  melted
butter,  or  olive  oil.  Reserve  it  for  use.
Pulverize  the  caput  mortuum  very  finely,
dissolve  in  water,  strain  through  paper  ;
take  Hungarian  Antimony,  pulverize
finely,  place  in  broad-bottomed  cucurbit,
add  to  it  water,  and  subject  to  heat.
After  remaining  there  for  a  certain  time,
it  becomes  like  an  amethyst,  of  a  dark
violet ;  increase  the  heat  of  the  fire  till

*  I  will  tell  you  how  to  do  this,  in  order  to  avoid  burst-
ing your  vessels,  during  the  distillation  of  the  spirits  of
metals.  Put  the  substance  into  an  earthen  retort  A,  through
opening  B,  but  gradually  ;  close  up  the  opening  ;  the  spirits
then  pass  into  recipient  C,  thence  through  D  into  recipient
E,  and  thence  again  into  receiver  F  ;  the  grosser  spirits  (G)
remain  at  the  bottom  of  receiver  C,  the  more  subtle  spirits
settle  at  the  bottom  of  receiver  F.  See  page  136.


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    137

the  substance  becomes  blue  like  a  sap-
phire ;  from  this  is  precipitated  a  white
powder  by  the  effusion  of  common  water.
This  powder  is  an  emetic  and  purgative
like  the  red^  extract  of  glass  of\Ajritimony.
In  the  first  solution  made  of  the  caput
mortuum,  you  may  subject  thin  plates  of
iron  to  coction,  and  will  then  truly  trans-
mute Mars  into  Venus,  as  experience
shews  us.  Again  take  the  distilled  oil
or  water  before  mentioned,  pour  over  it
crocus  of  Mars,  reverberate  with  sulphur
until  it  becomes  red,  expose  to  heat,
and  the  tincture  of  iron,  like  blood,  will
be  extracted.  Take  one  part  of  this  ex-
tract and  three  parts  of  the  red  extract
of  Antimony,  which  was  prepared  with
burnt  saltpetre  and  spirit  of  wine.*

*  In  the  next  sentence  Basilius  asks  us  to  use  water  of
Mercury,  whose  preparation  he  describes  in  the  tract  called
Supplement.  Moreover,  there  must  be  an  opening  in  the
retort,  through  which  the  water  of  Mercury  is  gradually
poured  in.  If  you  put  in  too  much  of  the  Mercury  at  once,
it  may  burst  and  overturn  the  retort  and  the  furnace  as  well  ;
hence  you  should  have  a  succession  of  retorts  (as  on  page
136)  all  in  communication  with  each  other.  But  as  every
true  chemist  is  familiar  with  the  potency  of  this  Mercury  in
the  resolution  of  metals,  I  will  not  enlarge  on  this  point.


138    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Inject  gradually,  by  means  of  a  long  tube,
one  part  of  water  of  Mercury  ;  add  half-
a-part  of  calx  of  gold  dissolved  in  caustic
water ;  distil  all  together  over  a  gentle
fire,  and  there  will  remain  at  the  bottom
a  beautiful  fixed  solution.*  The  sanative
virtues  of  this  fixed  solution  are  great,
especially  in  the  cure  of  open  wounds.
From  the  dead  body  which  remains  is
prepared  a  solvent  far  more  acrid  than
the  strongest  agua^fortis.  The  white
powder  is  prepared  from  Antimony  in
the  following  way  :  Pulverize  pure  Hunj
garian  Antimony,  and  an  equal  quantity
of  thrice-purified  saltpetre ;  burn  this

*  This  solution  is  not  yet  fixed,  but  may  become  so  by
dint  of  patient  work.  Its  chief  use,  which  Basil  does  not
even  allude  to,  consists  in  the  perfection  of  metals.  For  this
purpose  an  extract  must  be  made  from  the  powder  with  strong-
est vinegar ;  remove  vinegar  by  distillation,  sweeten  what
remains  at  the  bottom  with  distilled  water  ;  make  a  second
extract  with  spirit  of  wine,  abstract  spirit ;  the  red  powder
which  remains  should  be  mixed  with  fixed  salt  prepared  from
the  sediment  which  remained  after  the  removal  of  the  vinegar.
After  three  months  they  should  become  fixed,  and  able  to
remain  unchanged  in  the  fire,  as  in  their  own  proper  element.
When  you  have  done  this,  you  have  made  the  fixed  volatile,
and  the  volatile  fixed,  and  are  not  far  from  the  fulfilment  of
your  heart's  desire.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    139

composition  all  together  in  a  new  glazed
pot,  which  is  free  from  all  grease,  over
a  circulatory  fire,  but  not  all  at  once.
(This  operation  the  ancients  called  deto-
nation.) Then  pulverize  the  hard  matter
which  remains  in  the  pot ;  pour  over  it
moderately  hot  ordinary  water,  and  when
the  powder  has  settled  at  the  bottom,  add
more  water,  till  all  the  saltpetre  is  ex-
tracted.* Dry  the  substance,  and  again
add  to  it  its  own  weight  of  saltpetre ;  burn
again,  and  repeat  this  operation  three
times  ;  pulverize  what  then  remains,  add
best  spirit  of  wine,  circulate  diligently  for
a  month  in  a  well-closed  cucurbit  or  cir-
culatorium  ;  pour  to  it,  and  remove,  spirit
of  wine  nine  or  ten  times.  Gently  dry

*  At  this  stage  the  substance  is  the  powder  of  Ruland,
with  which  he  performed  so  many  medicinal  miracles.  It
should  be  prepared  under  a  certain  heavenly  conjunction,
and  is  the  better  the  redder  it  is  :  for  its  colour  is  its  soul.
This  is  the  true  "  crocus  of  metals,"  though  not  like  the
emetic  which  is  sold  under  that  name  in  shops.  Take  8,  9,
10,  or  1 1  grains  of  this  powder,  according  to  the  strength  of
the  patient ;  pour  on  them  3  or  4  oz.  of  wine ;  distil  for
four  or  five  hours;  the  tincture  of  crocus  of  metals  which
is  then  extracted,  is  like  blood  ;  give  it  to  the  patient  as  a
gentle  purgative  ;  it  will  radically  cure  any  disease  in  the
treatment  of  which  it  may  be  employed.


140    T/te   TrininpJial  Chariot  of  Antimony.

powder  ;  heat  for  a  whole  day  in  crucible,
such  as  is  used  by  goldsmiths  for  the
melting  of  silver  and  gold ;  dissolve
powder  in  a  humid  place,  on  a  stone  table,
or  in  a  hard-boiled  egg.  Dry  the  liquid
which  results,  and  restore  to  a  pulverized
condition.*  The  medicinal  efficacy  of
this  powder  is  great,  but  it  requires  time
for  its  operation.  If  a  man  suffers  from
an  internal  tumour  and  takes  a  quarter  of
a  drachm  of  this  white  fixed  powder  of
Antimony  in  generous  wine,  five  or  six
times,  the  tumour  will  be  emptied  of  its
corrupted  blood  without  any  prejudice  to
vital  processes.  It  also  consumes  the
new  soldier's  (venereal)  disease,  and  ex-
pels it  from  the  body.  It  renews  the
hair  and  the  whole  frame,  invigorates
the  blood,  and  does  more  good  than  I
am  able  to  describe.

It  would  not  be  right  for  me  to  set
down  the  whole  of  this  Art  so  plainly
and  clearly  that  any  one,  even  the  most

*  If  you  have  experienced  the  virtues  of  the  detonated
powder,  you  will  not  be  a  Thomas  as  to  the  potency  of  this
powder,  which  has  been  thrice  detonated.


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    14 T

ignorant,  might,  on  its  perusal,  become  a
perfect  adept ;  just  as  it  is  not  well  for  a
country  bumpkin  to  eat  the  finest  baker's
bread.*

If  any  one  should  marvel  because
my  book  describes  some  operations  which
apparently  differ  from  those  of  other
Sages,  let  him  know  that  the  style  of
the  Sages  exhibits  many  important  points
of  difference  from  that  of  other  writers.
You  must  not,  therefore,  quarrel  with  me  :
for  I  only  adopt  the  necessary  rules  laid
down  by  the  ancient  Masters  of  our  Art.

The  balm  of  Antimony  is  prepared,
not  of  crude  Antimony,  but  of  the
Regulus  of  Antimony,  whence  the  living
Mercury  of  Antimony  is  derived,  and  in
the  following  manner.

*  Yet  Valentine  has  revealed  the  secrets  of  this  Art  more
clearly  than  his  successors,  who  have  been  busily  employed
in  obscuring  his  light.  Hence  they  do  not  praise  him  in  the
market  place,  though  they  esteem  him  most  highly  in  the
laboratory  ;  and  they  do  not  translate  him  into  other  tongues,
though  he  is  worthier  than  any  other  to  speak  all  the
languages  of  the  world.  But,  of  course,  Basilius  cannot
describe  the  Art  so  clearly  that  any  one,  on  taking  up  the
book  in  an  idle  moment,  may  at  once  become  a  master  of  our
noble  Magistery.


142    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Take  equal  parts  of  best  Hungarian
Antimony  and  crude  tartar,  and  half  the
quantity  of  saltpetre ;  pound  together,
melt  over  wind  fire,  pour  into  copper
dish,  allow  to  cool,  and  you  will  find  the
Regulus.*  The  Regulus  is  thrice,  or
oftener,  purified  with  tartar  and  saltpetre
till  it  becomes  of  a  brilliant  silvery  white.
Pulverise  finely,  place  in  vessel,  add  oil
of  juniper,  or  spirit  of  terebinth,  which
must  have  been  previously  distilled  and
must  be  pure  as  spring  water ;  digest  in
closed  vessel  in  S.  Mary's  Bath  ;  the  oil
of  juniper,  or  spirit  of  terebinth,  will
become  red,  like  blood  ;  pour  it  out,  and
rectify  with  spirit  of  wine.  The  virtues
of  this  balm  of  Antimony  are  the  same
as  those  of  spirit  of  sulphur,  which  I  will
describe  hereafter.

*  As  in  the  preparation  of  liver  of  Antimony,  so  here,
you  should  take  salt  of  tartar  instead  of  crude  tartar.  The
sal  nitri  is  useless  in  this  operation.  Do  not  throw  away
the  glassy  substance  ;  for  from  it  an  useful  cordial  (dose  30
to  50  drops  twice  or  thrice  a  day,  in  a  suitable  liquid)  may
be  prepared  by  pounding  it  in  a  hot  mortar,  protecting  it
well  from  the  moisture  of  the  air  ;  place  it  in  a  vial,  extract
its  tincture  with  alcohol  of  wine  :  it  will  be  of  a  beautiful
red  colour.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    143

Three  drops  of  this  balm,  taken
thrice  a  week  in  warm  wine,  cure  pul-
monary complaints,  coughs,  colds,  and
asthma.

Many  other  oils  are  prepared  from
Antimony,  some  simple  and  some  com-
pound. But  the  effects  of  all  are  differ-
ent according  to  the  difference  in  the
method  of  their  preparation.  This  fact
may  be  illustrated  in  the  following  way.
There  are  many  living  beings  which
dwell  in  and  on  the  earth  ;  many  have
their  abode  in  the  air,  many  in  the  water,
and  some  in  the  fire,  like  the  salamander.
Moreover,  there  are  in  tropical  climes
other  animals  of  which  we  know  nothing,
except  that  they  can  live  only  in  the
warmth  of  the  sun.  In  the  same  way,
Antimony  assumes  a  different  nature
according  as  it  is  prepared  with  water
or  with  fire,  only  fire  is  in  all  cases  indis-
pensable. Again,  the  addition  of  earth
produces  a  totally  different  compound  to
that  produced  by  the  addition  of  water  ;
and  the  result  is  quite  different,  again,
when  Antimony  is  sublimed  in  the  fire.


144    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

The  way  of  preparing  simple  uncom-
pounded  oil  of  Antimony,  and  true
sulphur,  is  as  follows  :  Place  pulverised
Hungarian  Antimony  in  a  glass  cucur-
bit ;  add  true  vinegar  of  the  Sages,
rendered  more  acid  by  means  of  its  salt.
Close  the  cucurbit,  plunge  it  in  horse
dung,  or  S.  Mary's  Bath,  for  forty  days,
till  the  matter  putrefies  and  the  vinegar
turns  a  deep  red.  Decant  this  vinegar,
and  keep  adding  more  till  no  more  red
colour  can  be  extracted.  Strain  off  all
the  vinegar,  pour  into  a  clean  vessel,
plunge  in  horse  dung,  and  allow  to
putrefy  for  forty  days.  Then  the  body
is  again  dissolved,  and  the  substance
becomes  as  black  as  ink.  This  is  the
sign  that  the  true  solution  has  taken
place,  which  will  ultimately  effect  the
separation  of  the  elements.

Place  this  black  substance  into
another  cucurbit,  and  on  an  alembic  ;
distil  the  vinegar  over  a  moderate  fire,
and  it  will  rise  as  a  clear  fluid,  while
there  remains  at  the  bottom  a  dirty  sub-
stance. Pulverise  this,  sweeten  with


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    145

distilled  rain  water,  dry  gently,  and  place
in  a  long-necked  circulatory  vessel.  The
circulatory  vessel  should  resemble  three
hollow  balls  placed  one  on  the  other,  and
communicating  by  means  of  tubes  with
a  long  neck  at  the  top.  Add  highly
rectified  spirit  of  wine,  so  that  it  covers
the  substance  to  a  height  of  two  or  three
inches  ;  close  the  vessel  well,  and  expose
to  gentle  heat  for  two  months,  when
the  spirit  of  wine  will  become  of  a  bright
red  ;  pour  out  the  extract,  filter,  place  in
a  cucurbit,  and  remove  the  black  sedi-
ment, which  is  of  no  further  use  to  us.

Place  the  alembic  on  the  cucurbit,
and  distil  gently  ;  the  spirit  of  wine  will
carry  the  tincture  of  Antimony  upward,
the  elements  are  separated,  and  the
alembic  and  receiver  present  the  aspect
of  bright  gold.  Finally,  some  few  dregs
remain,  but  the  gold  colour  in  the  glass
utterly  perishes.  Place  the  red  sub-
stance, which  by  distillation  has  passed
into  the  receiver,  in  a  circulatory  vessel
for  ten  days.  By  means  of  this  circula-
tion separation  takes  place  ;  for  the  oil

L


146    Tke  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

has  thereby  acquired  gravity,  and  sinks
to  the  bottom,  while  the  spirit  of  wine  is
limpid,  as  at  first,  and  floats  above  the
oil.  Then  separate  the  oil  from  the
spirit  in  a  separatory  vessel.*  This  oil  is
of  remarkable  sweetness,  most  pleasant
to  use,  and  free  from  all  corrosiveness.

No  one  can  understand  or  compre-
hend the  incredible  virtue  and  potency
of  this  Royal  Oil.  I  call  it  the  Balm  of
Life,  because  it  can  help,  by  the  grace  of
God,  those  whom  all  physicians  have
given  up.  It  renews  a  man's  system
just  as  if  he  were  born  again,  purifies
the  blood,  and,  in  conjunction  with  tinc-
ture of  corals,  casts  out  leprosy,  drives
away  melancholy  and  sadness,  braces  up

*  This  is  the  substance  of  which  all  the  Sages  and
Alchemists  have  written.  This  is  the  goal  of  all  Alchemists,
the  oil  of  Antimony,  which  is  soon  to  be  converted  into  the
Fire  Stone.  It  is  a  Proteus  which  appears  to  us  under
different  forms,  and  yet  is  ever  the  same.  If  you  put
together  all  the  different  operations  which  have  been  des
cribed,  and  regard  them  in  the  light  of  my  commentary,  you
will  have  all  the  parts  of  the  process  by  which  our  Stone  is
evolved  ;  you  will  make  the  volatile  fixed,  and  the  fixed
volatile,  and  then  you  have  the  great  treasure  coveted  by  the
multitude.  If  you  do  not  understand  me,  three  shiploads  of
hellebore  will  not  cure  your  folly.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    147

the  joints  and  the  heart,  improves  the
memory,  and  is  our  great  sheet-anchor  in
consumption.

But  why  should  I  continue  to  enu-
merate the  blessed  virtues  of  this  Oil  ?
Few  indeed  of  our  doctors  and  medical
magnificoes  will  credit  a  tittle  of  what
I  say.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  who
have  experienced  the  magical  potency
of  our  Medicine,  and  do  listen  to  my
teaching,  will  believe  me  without  much
praise  and  recommendation,  nay,  will
bless  my  memory  when  I  am  moulder-
ing in  the  grave.  Another  way  in  which
this  Oil  may  be  prepared,  is  as  follows  :

Place  Regulus  of  Antimony,  well
pulverised,  in  a  great  round  glass  vessel,
over  a  gentle  fire  in  the  sand.  Brush  off
all  that  is  sublimed,  so  that  it  falls  down
again  to  the  bottom,  and  continue  to  do
this  till  no  further  sublimation  takes
place,  but  the  whole  substance  remains
at  the  bottom.  Then  the  Regulus  of
Antimony  has  been  fixed  without  any
addition.  But,  in  order  to  bring  about
this  result,  you  need  patience.  Pulverize


148    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

the  red  precipitate,  place  on  a  smooth,
clean  stone  in  a  humid  cave  ;  leave  it
there  six  months,  till  the  precipitate
resolves  itself  into  a  pure  red  liquid,  and
a  sediment  is  separated  from  it,  i.e.,  the
salt  of  Antimony  only  is  dissolved.  Fil-
ter the  liquid,  place  in  cucurbit,  extract
phlegm,  place  again  in  the  cave,  and  it
will  crystallize  beautifully  ;  separate  from
the  phlegm  ;  the  crystals  are  pellucid,
mixed  with  red  colour.  When  they  are
again  purified,  they  become  white.*  Dry
this  Salt  of  Antimony,  mix  with  it  three
parts  of  Venetian  earth  (called  tripel),
and  distil  over  strong  fire.  There  will
be  sublimed  first  a  white  and  then  a  red
spirit,  which  also  becomes  white.  Rectify
gently  in  a  dry  bath,  and  you  have
another  white  oil  distilled  from  Anti-
mony, but  it  is  by  no  means  so  good  as
the  former  salt  made  of  the  red  Tincture.
This  spirit,  or  salt,  distilled  after  a
spiritual  manner,  is  useful  in  quartan

*  ''  Like  to  like"  is  a  Greek  proverb,  and  certainly  this
salt  is  more  effectual  in  making  extracts  from  Antimony  than
even  from  other  metals.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    149

fever,  and  in  the  breaking  up  of  vesical
stones,  as  also  in  gout ;  it  purifies  wounds
inflicted  with  iron,  and  the  blood  gener-
ally. Yet  it  is  not  as  perfect  in  its
operation  as  the  red  oil  of  Antimony,
the  sulphur  of  which  is  highly  and  per-
fectly digested.

I  have  spoken  of  the  salt  and  sul-
phur of  Antimony,  and  have  described
their  medicinal  uses  ;  I  now  proceed  to
discuss  the  medicine,  which  is  profoundly
hidden  in  its  Mercury.

Take    eight   parts    of    Regulus    of
r^Antimony,  one  part  of  salt  clarified  and

;  sublimed  from  human  urine,  one  part  of

I  A

(  sal  ammoniac,  and  one  of  salt  of  tartar ;
mix  well  in  vessel,  add  strong  vinegar,
and  close  up  with  the  clay  of  the  Sages  ;
digest  the  salts  with  vinegar  a  whole
month  over  a  suitable  fire.  Put  all  into
a  cucurbit  and  distil  vinegar  in  ashes.
Mix  to  salts,  thus  dried,  three  parts  of
Venetian  earth  ;  distil  with  strong  fire
through  the  retort,  and  you  have  a
marvellous  spirit,  which  add  to  the
pulverized  Regulus  of  Antimony  ;  let


150    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

them  putrefy  two  months,  then  distil
vinegar  gently,  and  mix  with  that  which
remains  a  fourfold  weight  of  steel  filings  ;
distil  over  a  strong  fire  through  the
retort ;  the  spirit  of  salt  will  then  carry
the  Mercury  with  it  in  form  of  smoke  ;
let  it  be  driven  into  a  large  glass  receiver
full  of  water :  the  spirit  of  salt  then
mingles  with  the  water,  but  the  Mercury
is  precipitated  to  the  bottom,  as  true
Mercury.*  This  is  the  way  in  which
running  Mercury  is  prepared  from  Anti-
mony :  we  must  now  go  on  to  describe
its  uses.

Take,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  one
part  of  this  Mercury,  and  strain  it
through  leather  ;  take  four  parts  of
highly  rectified  oil  of  red  vitriol ;  extract

*  Certain  secrets  which  were  deeply  concealed  in  the
days  of  Basilius  are  now  included  among  the  common  pro-
cesses of  chemists  No  person  could  now  be  regarded  as  a
true  chemist  who  is  ignorant  of  the  method  by  which  Mer-
cury is  composed  out  of  Antimony,  whether  that  which
Basilius  teaches,  or  anolher  method,  for  various  artists  have
excogitated  various  ways,  and  that  which  has  been  success-
fully proved  by  one  is  by  him  favoured  in  proportion.  How
many  Alchemists  in  those  times  could  elicit  the  Mercury  of
Antimony  ?  Yet  they  looked  down  on  Basilius,  forsooth,  and
upon  his  whole  system.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    151

the  oil,  when  there  will  remain  its  spirit,
with  the  Mercury  ;  sublime  over  a  strong
fire,  and  place  all  that  is  sublimed  again
at  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  Pour  to  it
as  much  of  the  oil  of  vitriol  as  before,
and  repeat  the  process  three  times.  At
the  fourth  time  place  all  that  is  sublimed
with  the  sediment  ;  pound,  and  it  will  be
pure  and  bright  as  crystal ;  place  in  cir-
culatory vessel,  add  the  same  quantity
of  oil  of  vitriol,  and  three  times  as  much
spirit  of  wine  ;  circulate  till  separation
takes  place,  and  the  Mercury  is  resolved
into  oil,  floating  over  the  rest  like  olive
oil.  Separate  this  oil  from  the  re-
mainder, place  in  circulatory  vessel,  pour
to  it  strong  distilled  vinegar,  and  leave
for  twenty  days  ;  hereby  the  oil  recovers
its  gravity,  and  drops  to  the  bottom,
while  all  that  was  poisonous  in  it  remains
in  the  vinegar.*

*  No  candle  is  needed  at  midday,  nor  need  the  com-
mentator speak  when  the  author  is  so  clear  and  lucid.  Only
go  forward  bravely,  planting  your  feet  firmly  at  every  step,
and  you  will  at  last  obtain  the  golden  branch.  For  this  oil
itself  possesses  marvellous  efficacy  in  the  improvement  of
metals,  and  yields  only  to  the  King  of  Kings  himself.


152    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

This  is  that  great  wonder,  by  which
the  oil  first  floats,  and  then  becomes
heavy  and  sinks  to  the  bottom.  Observe
that  the  oil  of  vitriol  is  also  heavy,  but
at  first  the  Mercury  is  rendered  lighter
by  the  impurities  which  still  adhere  to
it  ;  subsequently  those  impurities  remain
in  the  vinegar  ;  the  Mercury  recovers
its  proper  gravity,  and  is  precipitated  to
the  bottom.  This  oil  of  Mercury  is  the
fourth  pillar  of  Medicine.  It  stimulates
the  vital  action  of  the  brain,  makes  men
active,  and  cures  both  leprosy  and
paralysis.  If  any  one  who  has  been
suffering  from  chronic  disease  uses  this
oil  daily  for  some  time,  his  nails  and
hair  drop  off  and  grow  again,  his  whole
frame  is  rapidly  renovated,  his  blood
purified,  and  all  morbid  matter  expelled.
The  French  disease  is  easily  and  radi-
cally cured  by  this  remedy.

Let  us,  then,  thank  God  from  the
bottom  of  our  hearts  for  this  Medicine
which  He  has  so  graciously  bestowed
upon  us  !  And  you,  Doctors  and  Sur-
geons, you  I  exhort  to  come  to  me,  a


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    153

monk,  and  servant  of  God,  and  I  will
shew  you  what  your  eyes  have  never
seen  ;  I  will  point  out  to  you  the  way  of
health,  along  which  you  have  never  led
your  patients.  If  any  one  should  under-
stand this  Art  better  than  myself,  let
him  not  be  silent,  nor  attach  a  padlock
to  his  lips.  I  shall  not  be  ashamed  to
learn  of  him.  I  have  often  said  that  our
life  is  too  short  for  one  man  to  investi-
gate all  the  mysteries  of  knowledge.  On
the  other  hand,  let  those  be  silent  who
know  less  than  I,  who  also  do  not  even
understand  my  books  ;  let  them  refrain
from  hasty  reprehension,  and  from  teach-
ing their  schoolmaster  the  alphabet.

My  terminology  has  a  different
sound  and  a  different  meaning  from  that
of  my  opponents,  who  are  too  lazy  and
indolent  to  plant  and  graft  trees,  and,
therefore,  never  get  beyond  their  wilding
plants  or  withered  branches  carelessly
stuck  in  the  ground.

Be  not  over  hasty  in  judging  and
condemning  that  of  which  you  know
absolutely  nothing.  You  may  be  one  of


154    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

those  who  suppose,  with  the  multitude,
that  in  winter  fishes  are  frozen  to  death
in  the  water.  But  that  is  a  notion  in
support  of  which  not  a  tittle  of  evidence
has  ever  been  produced.

The  reason  that  fishes  sometimes
die  in  the  winter  is  to  be  sought  in  the  fact
that  no  animal  can  live  without  air,  and
when  the  ice  is  frozen  over  the  fish
are  frequently  suffocated.  Now,  if  Anti-
mony is  to  bear  its  own  proper  fruit,  it
must  not  be  suffocated  in  the  bowels  of
the  earth  ;  but  it  must  be  dug  out,  and
prepared  by  the  auxiliary  media  of  water,
air,  and  fire,  lest  its  fruitfulness  be
strangled  in  the  earth.  It  must  be  made
manifest  by  many  laborious  preparations
of  the  artist,  in  order  that  it  may  be
effectual  for  the  healing  of  diseases  and
for  the  perfecting  of  metals.

What,  then,  can  you  say,  or  what
argument  can  you  bring  forward  that  is
of  the  slightest  weight  ?  Since  you  are
so  densely  ignorant  as  to  have  not  even
the  slightest  idea  of  the  composition  of
Antimony,  you  do  well  to  keep  your  own


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    155

counsel,  and  to  suffer  this  tempest  of
rebuke  and  censure  to  sweep  over  your
bowed  head,  lest  you  suffer  shipwreck  of
reputation  as  well  as  of  knowledge.

In  order  that  you  may  escape  this
danger,  call  at  once  upon  your  sleeping
Master,  as  the  disciples  of  Jesus  called
upon  their  Lord  while  He  slept ;  invoke
Him  with  an  unfeigned  heart,  and  you
will  be  helped,  and  will  see  the  wind
and  waves  obedient  to  His  Word,  while
your  undertaking  will  be  brought  to  its
desired  close.  If  men  would  only  be
more  earnest  in  their  endeavour  to  know
the  truth,  God  would  then  give  them
grace  and  wisdom,  and  they  would  in  due
time  find  the  precious  corner-stone  on
which  the  whole  structure  rests.  Then
the  ears  of  students  in  the  schools,  and
the  heads  of  patients  in  sick-rooms,
would  no  longer  be  tormented  with  the
absurdities  of  the  old  system  of  medicine.
The  stone-built  citadel  of  our  Art  cannot
be  so  quickly  destroyed  by  fire  as  a
dovecote  or  a  stork's  nest  made  of  rotten
wood,  and  dried  day  after  day  by  the  sun.


156    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

But  you  who  are  true  disciples  of
this  Art,  strive  to  penetrate  to  its  centre ;
be  not  content  to  linger  on  the  surface.
Pursue  your  object  as  the  hunter  pursues
the  quarry,  and  take  care  that  you  do
not  catch  a  hind  for  a  buck,  or  a  fox  for
a  hare.  Cast  your  nets  well,  and  you
will  enclose  a  great  multitude  of  fishes  ;
lay  your  traps  discreetly,  and  the  birds
will  not  escape.  Let  the  fowler  place
his  snares  with  due  regard  to  the  wind  ;
let  the  mariner,  who  is  driven  hither  and
thither  by  the  tempestuous  heavings  of
the  vast  ocean,  look  well  to  his  compass,
and  then  his  ship  will  surely  return  with
a  rich  cargo  of  merchandise.

But  why  do  I  waste  my  time,  like
those  empty-headed  boasters,  in  treading
out  straw  ?  Nay,  but  I  am  not  threshing
empty  straw,  for  there  is  not  a  single
word  in  my  books  that  is  without  its
significance  and  utility.

Now  I  will  fall  back  one  step,  like
the  gladiators,  and  introduce  a  new  sub-
ject, viz.,  the  way  in  which  Antimony
should  be  prepared  for  the  treatment  of


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    157

external  wounds.  I  have  already  briefly
described  the  preparations  which  are
most  useful  from  a  medical  point  of
view;  I  will  next  mention  some  other
preparations  which  will  one  day  revolu-
tionize the  Art  of  the  surgeon.

Young  man,  you  who  desire  to  know
the  secret  things  of  Nature,  and  to  bring
to  light  her  hidden  mysteries,  listen  to
me,  that  you  may  be  able  to  distinguish
day  from  night,  and  the  clear  from  the
obscure.  Take  one  part  of  Hungarian
Antimony,  half  a  part  of  common  salt,
six  parts  of  unburned  clay  ;  pound  to-
gether and  distil  vehemently,  without
intermission,  till  the  oil  passes  upward  ;
then  remove  its  thickness  by  distillation,
so  that  a  red  dry  powder  remains  at  the
bottom  of  the  cucurbit  ;  pulverize,  dis-
solve on  a  slab  of  marble,  and  you  have
a  red,  brilliant  balm  for  wounds,  which
far  excels  all  other  similar  remedies.  Its
utility  is  great  in  the  case  of  wounds
which  have  been  open  for  a  long  time.*

*  A  prudent  general  so  arrays  his  forces  as  to  place  the
good  soldiers  in  the  front  ranks,  the  best  in  the  rear,  and


158    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

The  open  wounds,  in  the  treatment  of
which  this  balm  produces  striking  results,
are  especially  those  on  which  the  medical
profession  have  brought  their  plasters,
ligaments,  and  ointments  to  bear  in
vain.

You  see  that  I  speak  out  with  great
simplicity,  for  I  am  a  monk,  and  know
not  the  ways  of  the  world.  Yet  I  can-
not always  discourse  so  plainly  and  lucidly
as  the  nature  of  the  subject  would
seem  to  require.

This  oil  is  very  helpful  in  serious
cases  of  accident,  and  more  especially  in
old  wounds,  so  that  few  medicines  can  sur-
pass it.  That  oil  which  is  prepared  with
the  common  sublimate  of  the  apothecaries
has  equal  efficacy,  and,  frequently,  as  ex-
perience has  taught,  is  superior  in  cancer,
lupus,  and  similar  complaints.  But  in
ordinary  cases  of  fistula,  and  in  bruises
and  ruptures,  this  balm  has  great  efficacy.
I  do  not  mention  all  its  marvellous  effects,

those  that  are  less  good  and  brave  in  the  middle.  The
orator  arranges  his  arguments  on  the  same  principle,  and
Basilius  follows  their  precedent.


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    159

which  only  experience  can  prove,  lest  I
should  be  thought  to  be  excited  by  am-
bition, or  by  desire  for  fame.  I  declare
I  have  sought  or  desired  neither.  I  deny
that  either  can  be  sought  with  righteous-
ness. The  other  oil  is  prepared  in  the
following  manner  :

Take  mortified  Mercury,  sublimed
into  a  state  of  great  brilliancy  (this  may
be  bought  at  the  apothecary's),  and  Anti-
mony in  equal  parts  ;  pulverize  together,
distil  thrice  out  of  a  retort  which  retains
the  spirits,  rectify  the  oil  with  spirit  of
wine,  and  your  oil  will  be  of  a  blood-red
colour.  At  first,  however,  it  is  white
like  ice,  or  coagulated  butter.  This  oil
exhibits  its  efficacy  in  all  desperate  cases,
and  especially  in  the  perfect  emendation
of  the  evil  into  good.

By  means  of  an  addition,  you  may
also  prepare  another  oil  for  external
wounds,  which  will  be  of  palmary  utility.
It  is  composed  in  the  following  manner  :

Take  one  part  of  Antimony,  one  of
sulphur,  half  a  part  of  salt  ammoniac,  or
purified  salt  of  urine,  and  two  parts  of


160    T/ie   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

quicklime.  Expel  the  oil  strongly,  pound
all  that  is  sublimed  with  the  dead  body,
pour  to  it  oil  a  second  time,  distil  thrice,
and  the  oil  is  prepared.

In  cases  where  old  wounds  resist  all
other  remedies,  you  may  use  this  oil.
For  it  is  strong,  potent,  and  penetrative,
and  lays  a  good  foundation  for  other
medicines.

An  admirable  balm  for  old  wounds
is  prepared  with  various  ingredients  in
the  following  manner  :

Digest  four  ounces  of  sulphur  and
half  a  pound  of  Mercury  over  a  moderate
fire,  stirring  with  a  wooden  spoon ;  pound
fine  till  they  form  one  solid  mass  (for  it
is  made  as  cinnabar  is  usually  prepared),
and  with  it  four  ounces  of  Antimony,
four  ounces  of  red  arsenic,  and  two
ounces  of  ''crocus  of  iron."  Place  in
glass  cucurbit,  and  sublime.  As  the
result  of  this  operation  you  will  have
pyropus  stones  the  colour  of  which  is
fully  equal  to  those  of  the  East,  except
that  they  are  not  fixed,  and  vanish  in

*  Sulphate  of  iron.


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    161

the  fire.  In  order  that  the  artist  may
separate  the  pyropus  stones  from  the
cinnabar,  which  during  sublimation  as-
cends, pulverize,  and  make  an  extract
with  strong  distilled  vinegar.  Distil
vinegar  gradually  in  S.  Mary's  Bath,  and
there  remains  a  powder  ;  further  pulver-
ize, place  in  another  glass  vessel,  extract
tincture  with  spirit  of  wine,  and  throw
away  the  sediment.  Digest  the  extract
in  a  well-closed  bath  for  a  month,  remove
spirit  of  wine  by  distillation,  place  the
remaining  powder  on  a  flat  glass  dish  in
a  tub  full  of  water,  so  that  the  plate  floats
on  it  like  a  boat  ;  in  a  few  days  the
powder  will  resolve  itself  into  a  clear
liquid.

This  tincture  is  useful  in  the  treat-
ment of  old  open  wounds,  and  is  sure  to
be  highly  efficacious  in  cases  where  all
other  remedies  have  failed.  Open  ulcers
which  have  their  origin  in  internal  con-
ditions, must  be  treated  internally,  and
thus  radically  extirpated.  But  ulcers
caused  by  inflammation  may  be  success-
fully cured  with  this  Tincture.

M


1 62    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

If  men  would  consider  the  mass  of
suffering  which  the  sin  of  our  first  parents
has  brought  upon  our  race,  and  the  sor-
row, disease,  misery,  and  pain  which  have
followed  in  the  train  of  that  first  fall,  they
would  be  more  industrious  in  seeking  the
salvation  of  their  neighbour,  proffered  at
so  great  a  price  by  the  Chief  Ruler  of
Heaven.  But  alas,  great  numbers  of
men  live  on  from  day  to  day  without  thus
redeeming  the  time  for  the  glory  of  God
and  the  good  of  their  neighbours  !  They
are  afraid,  forsooth,  of  soiling  the  very
tips  of  their  fingers,  just  as  if  they
grudged  the  grocer  the  profits  which  he
derives  from  the  sale  of  soap.  But  do
we  not  all  live  in  this  world  as  the  vas-
sals of  God,  and  are  not  all  our  goods
His  feudal  possessions,  granted  to  us
during  life  only?  Let  us,  therefore,
make  a  good  and  kindly  use  of  them  in
order  that  we  may  be  able  to  render  a
joyful  account  in  the  presence  of  the
Great  Master,  instead  of  being,  by  reason
of  our  ingratitude,  cast  into  outer  dark-
ness, where  there  is  weeping  and  gnash-


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    163

ing  of  teeth.  If  all  were  inspired  and
actuated  by  this  solemn  thought,  there
would  be  less  sin  and  more  persevering-
effort  for  the  good  of  the  whole  race.
But  for  these  things  worldly  men  do
not  care.  Their  one  desire  and  aim
is  gold,  and  only  gold ;  the  powerful
seek  to  obtain  it  by  violence,  and  the
poor  by  crying  servility — that  they,  too,
may  be  partakers  of  the  Mammon  of
iniquity.

But  beware  lest  you  be  choked  by
the  bone  in  your  greedy  throats,  and  lest
the  fish  bones  pierce  your  hearts  !  And
you  who  will  not  listen  to  exhortation,
hear  a  parable.  When  I  was,  in  pursu-
ance of  a  vow,  performing  a  pilgrimage
to  San  Jago,  I  prayed  that  God  might
grant  me  a  safe  return  to  our  monastery.
God  answered  my  prayer,  and  I  believed
that  my  return  would  give  great  and
sincere  joy  to  all ;  for  I  brought  back  a
large  number  of  relics  for  the  honour  of
our  monastery,  and  the  relief  of  the  sick
and  poor.  Yet  I  am  afraid  that  few  men
derived  wonderful  benefit  from  these


164    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

relics,  or  were  grateful  to  God,  but  per-
sisted in  their  mockery  and  scorn.

The  following  preparation  of  Anti-
mony is  useful  against  fevers  and  the
plague  itself,  as  I  have  myself  experi-
enced :  Pulverize  Antimony,  place  in  a
glass  retort,  distil  over  a  strong  fire  three
or  four  times  ;  let  it  be  kept  in  a  large
vase  till  it  becomes  a  red  powder  ;  ex-
tract with  vinegar,  circulate,  extract  ten
days  over  a  gentle  fire,  remove  vinegar
by  distillation,  and  transfuse  what  re-
mains by  a  skilful  process  into  an  oil.*

Four  grains  of  this  oil,  taken  with
St.  Benedict's  cordial,  cures  quotidian,
tertian,  and  quartan  fevers,  if  the  patient
be  well  covered  and  perspire  freely.
The  same  dose  is  an  efficacious  remedy
against  the  plague,  being  mingled  with
spirit  of  wine  or  distilled  vinegar,  accord-
ing as  the  disease  first  makes  itself  felt
in  an  excess  of  heat  or  cold.  Three
friars  in  our  monastery,  who  had  already

*  This  extract  must  be  made  volatile  with  spirit  of  wine,
as  above.  Let  the  humidity  of  the  oil  be  removed  by  cir-
culation, so  that  it  becomes  a  dry  powder.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    165

made  their  wills,  were  thus  restored,  and
ever  since  that  time  their  gratitude  in-
duced them  to  take  a  great  interest  in
our  Art,  and  to  assist  me  as  much  as
they  could  during  their  spare  time.
For  all  the  help  so  kindly  rendered  to
me,  I  would  have  allotted  to  them  a
prominent  place  in  my  last  will,  but
they  have  now  gone  to  their  rest  before
me,  and  I  commit  them  to  the  Great
Physician  who  is  in  heaven.  May
He  give  them  a  good  recompense  of
joy  which  was  denied  them  here  on
earth !

Another  oil,  which  is  good  for  the
cure  of  wounds,  is  prepared  from  Anti-
mony in  the  following  manner  :  Take  of
Antimony,  sulphur,  and  saltpetre,  equal
parts  ;  detonate  under  a  bell,  like  the  oil
of  sulphur.  This  method  of  preparation
was  early  known  to  the  Ancients.  It  is
better  still  to  take  an  alembic  instead  of
the  bell,  and  place  near  it  a  receiver ;
thus  you  obtain  more  oil,  and  of  the
same  colour  as  that  extracted  from
vulgar  sulphur,  but  highly  superior  as  to


1 66    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

its  strength  and  efficacy.*  We  use  three
drops  of  this  oil  with  the  spirit  of  wine
internally  against  pulmonary  consump-
tion ;  used  outwardly  as  a  liniment,
covered  with  a  stiptic  plaster,  it  is  most
efficacious  in  the  treatment  of  foul  or
festering  wounds  and  sores.

Another  oil  of  Antimony  for  the
cure  of  cancerous  and  corrosive  wounds
is  prepared  as  follows  :  Pound  together
one  pound  of  Antimony,  half  a  pound  of
common  salt,  and  five  pounds  of  broken
latera  ;  place  in  retort  and  distil  a  yellow
oil,  when  all  the  spirits  will  pass  away.
Pour  into  fresh  vessel,  and  remove  its
oiliness  ;  there  remains  a  powder,  which,
spread  on  a  stone,  in  a  humid  place,  and
you  will  have  a  humid  balm  which  is  of
great  efficacy  against  foul  wounds,  and
cancer  in  the  face,  or  when  it  attacks  the
breasts  of  women.


*  If  you  use  the  vessel  roughly  sketched  on  page  167,
you  will  get  as  much  oil  of  sulphur  from  one  ounce,  as  from
a  pound  by  the  ordinary  method,  i.e.,  from  sixteen  ounces  of
sulphur  you  will  get  half-an-ounce  of  oil,  for  which  you  would
otherwise  require  sixteen  pounds.


1 68    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

I  would  dilate  still  further  on
the  virtues  of  this  oil,  only  I  am
afraid  that  some  foolish  member  of
the  profession  may  charge  me  with
saying  more  than  I  know,  and  com-
mitting to  paper  mere  wild  specula-
tions.

Another  oil  is  prepared  as  follows  :
Let  one  part  of  Antimony  be  sublimed
with  a  fourth  part  of  salt  armoniac.
The  salt  raises  the  sulphur  of  Antimony
to  a  bright  red.  Pound  the  sublimed
substance,  and  if  at  the  first  you  have
taken  one  pound  of  Antimony,  pound
with  it  again  five  ounces  of  Antimony  ;
sublime  as  before ;  and  dissolve  the
sublimed  substance  in  a  moist  place.
Sweeten  by  removing  the  salt  added  to
it ;  dry  gently,  and  you  have  a  sulphur
which  burns  like  that  of  the  apothecary.
Extract  its  tincture  with  distilled  vinegar.
Remove  vinegar  gently  in  S.  Mary's
Bath,  transtil  the  remaining  powder  very
gradually,  and — if  you  have  made  no
mistake — you  have  an  excellent  oil,
sweet,  pleasant,  and  grateful  in  its  use,


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    169

without  any  corrosivity  or  danger.*
There  are  other  effects  which  this
Medicine  has  in  common  with  other
preparations  of  Antimony,  and,  there-
fore, I  do  not  enumerate  them,  in  order
to  give  no  occasion  to  the  adversary,  and
to  avoid  wearying  the  reader  by  repe-
tition. The  liquid,  which  is  dissolved  in
a  moist  place,  is  an  external  medicine,
and  very  useful  in  skin  diseases.  Mixed
with  oil  of  tartar,  and  applied  to  a  whit-
low, it  produces  marvellous  effects  ;  it  is
also  of  great  utility  in  the  treatment  of
scrofula.

Sulphur  of  Antimony  may  also  be
prepared  in  the  following  manner  :  Pul-
verize the  Antimony,  and  digest  for  two

*  This  is  another  way  of  preparing  the  balm  or  quint-
essence of  Antimony — for  by  that  latter  name  Basilius
describes  it  in  his  other  writings.  There  is,  of  course,  a
difference,  e.g.,  here  the  separation  is  made  with  salt  of
ammonia,  and  there  it  was  made  with  vinegar.  But  even
these  slight  divergencies  afford  scope  for  the  ingenuity  of  the
operator.  This  oil  cures  consumption  and  all  pulmonary
complaints  ;  it  relieves  asthma  and  difficulty  of  breathing.
Take  two  grains  in  spirit  of  wine  in  the  morning,  and  in  the
evening,  before  retiring,  in  elixir  or  spirit  of  wine.  It  will
enlarge  the  chest,  and  purge  out  all  phlegm  and  every
obstruction.


170    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

hours,  or  longer,  in  a  strong  lye  made  of
the  ashes  of  beechwood.  Strain,  add
vinegar,  and  the  sulphur  will  be  of  a  red
colour,  and  sink  to  the  bottom  ;  pour  off
the  liquid,  and  dry  the  powder  gently.
Distil  this  powder  with  grape  vinegar,
extract  the  tincture,  and  treat  the  sulphur
as  in  the  last  operation,  i.e.,  convert  it
into  oil  by  distillation.  The  sulphur
mentioned  above  has  indeed  greater
potency,  because  it  was  sublimated  and
better  dissolved  at  the  beginning  with
salt  armoniac.

The  other  preparations  of  Antimony
which  the  Spagyrist  should  be  able  to
make,  are  the  Vinegar  of  Antimony,  the
Philosophical  Signed  Star,  and  the  Lead
of  the  Sages,  concerning  which  there  has
been  much  vain  speculation,  it  being  said,
for  instance,  that  genuine  Mercury  could
be  prepared  from  it.  But  Mercury,  as
the  first  substance  or  first  water  of  the
metals,  and  the  seed  thereof,  whence  the
Stone  of  the  Ancient  Sages  is  evolved,
is  not  found  in  Antimony,  but  in  another
mineral  which  has  a  more  potent  metallic


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    171

action  than  Antimony ;  yet  Antimony
supplies  a  particular  and  most  useful
operation.  The  Alchemist  should  know
exactly  the  uses  of  Antimony,  both  as  an
external  and  internal  medicine,  and  also
the  distinctive  aspects  of  Antimony  as
compared  with  metals,  for  not  until  then
will  he  have  a  perfect  judgment  on  these
points.

I  will  now  proceed  to  satisfy  my
disciples,  and  give  them  proper  instruc-
tion how  they  are  to  separate  the  good
from  the  evil  in  the  preparation  of
vinegar  from  Antimony.

Pulverize  ore  of  Antimony,  place  in
round  glass  vessel,  with  an  oblong  neck,
pour  on  it  distilled  rain  water,  so  as  to
half-fill  the  cucurbit ;  close  well,  and
plunge  in  horse  dung  for  putrefaction,  till
the  ore  begins  to  effervesce  and  deposit
a  foam  on  the  surface.  Then  it  is  time
to  take  it  out,  as  it  is  a  sign  that  the  body
has  opened.  Place  in  another  cucur-
bit, close  well,  and  extract  water,  which
will  have  an  acid  taste.  When  all  the
water  is  distilled,  increase  the  heat,  and


172    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

the  substance  will  be  sublimed.  Pound
again  with  the  sediment  and  add  the  same
water,  and  again  extract,  when  it  will
already  be  much  more  acid.  Repeat  the
operation  till  the  water  is  as  sour  as  ordin-
ary vinegar.  The  oftener  the  process  is
repeated,  the  less  there  is  of  the  sublimed
substance.  Pour  this  vinegar  over  some
more  of  the  raw  ore  to  the  height  of
about  three  inches.  Digest  in  a  pelican
for  twelve  days,  till  the  vinegar  becomes
red,  and  more  acid  than  before.  Decant
and  distil  in  S.  Mary's  Bath,  without
addition  of  anything  ;  the  clear  vinegar
will  then  rise,  while  the  red  powder
remains  at  the  bottom,  and  if  an  extract
be  made  with  spirit  of  wine,  it  is  an
excellent  medicine.  Rectify  the  vinegar
once  more  in  S.  Mary's  Bath,  to  free  it
from  its  phelgm.  Dissolve  in  its  own
salt,  i.e.,  one  ounce  in  four  ounces  ;  sub-
lime in  ashes,  and  the  vinegar  will  be  more
acid,  and  acquire  greater  strength  and
efficacy.*  This  vinegar  has  a  wonderful

*  This    vinegar    is    one  of    the    principal  preparations
from  Antimony,  and  therefore  I  subjoin  the  following  par-


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    173

cooling  effect,  being  far  more  potent  in
this  respect  than  is  ordinary  vinegar  ;  it
stops  gangrene  and  heals  cancerous
wounds  by  outward  application,  if  it  be
made  into  an  ointment  with  Soul  of
Saturn.  It  also  soothes  and  relieves
inflammation,  when  mixed  with  endive
water  to  which  sal  prunella  has  been
added.  The  activity  of  inflamed  blood
is  also  soothed  thereby.  At  the  time  of
plague  the  vinegar  (one  spoonful)  is  a
wonderful  preventive,  and  extracts  the
poison  from  the  boils,  if  applied  as  an
ointment.  For  this  purpose  it  should  be

ticulars,  which  will  enable  you  to  carry  out  the  directions  of
Basilius  more  perfectly.  To  six  pounds  of  Antimony  you
require  fourteen  pounds  of  distilled  water  ;  the  success  of  the
next  distillation  is  ensured  by  placing  the  alembic  so  that  its
spout  is  immersed  in  water  (see  p.  174),  else  more  than  one-
half  of  the  spirit  of  Antimony  will  be  lost.  When,  after  the
distillation  of  the  water,  the  fire  is  quickened,  you  should
keep  it  up  for  three  days  and  three  nights  ;  then  let  it  cool,
and  mix  that  which  is  sublimed  with  fresh  Antimony  ;  resume
the  process  again  for  three  days  and  three  nights,  and  so  a
third  time.  If  you  convert  the  vinegar  into  a  tincture  with
some  more  ore  of  Antimony,  you  will  have  the  tincture
which  Basilius  calls  the  balmof_life.  Did  men  only  know
the  mysteries  which  lie  concealed  therein,  I  know  not
whether  any  other  operation  upon  Antimony  would  be
attempted.  Verily,  this  contains  them  all.


(pf


;' ;  (•••,-,'   "  ;'


The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    175

mixed  with  a  third  part  of  water  distilled
from  -frog's  spawn.

Many  have  esteemed  the  Signed
Star  of  Antimony  very  highly,  and
spared  neither  labour  nor  expense  to
bring  about  its  preparation.  But  very
few  have  ever  succeeded  in  realizing
their  wishes.  Some  have  thought  that
this  Star  is  the  true  substance  of  the
Philosopher's  Stone.  But  this  is  a  mis-
taken notion,  and  those  who  entertain  it
stray  far  afield  from  the  straight  and
royal  road,  and  torment  themselves  with
breaking  rocks  on  which  the  eagles  and
the  wild  goats  have  fixed  their  abode.
This  Star  is  not  so  precious  as  to  contain
the  Great  Stone  ;  but  yet  there  is  hidden
in  it  a  wonderful  medicine,  which  also
may  be  prepared  from  it.  The  Star  is
compounded  in  the  following  way  :

Take  two  parts  of  Hungarian  Anti-
mony, and  one  part  of  steel ;  melt  with
four  parts  of  burnt  tartar  in  an  iron  basin,
such  as  those  in  which  goldsmiths  refine
gold.  Cool,  take  out  the  Regulus,  re-
move all  impurities  and  scoriae,  pulverize


176    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

finely,  add  to  it,  after  ascertaining  its
weight,  three  times  as  much  burnt  tartar ;
melt,  and  pour  into  basin  as  before.  Re-
peat a  third  time,  and  the  Regulus
becomes  highly  refined  and  brilliant.  If
you  have  performed  the  fusion  properly
— which  is  the  point  of  greatest  impor-
tance— you  will  have  a  beautiful  star  of  a
a  brilliant  white.1*  The  Star  is  as
distinct  as  if  a  draughtsman  had  traced
it  with  a  pair  of  compasses.

This  star  with  salt  armoniac  is  re-
duced to  a  red  sublimate,  for  the  tincture
of  iron  ascends.  This  sublimate  may
be  dissolved  into  a  liquid  of  highly
surgical  utility,  f

This  Regulus,  or  Star,  may  be  very
often  carried  through  the  fire  with  a
stone  serpent,  till  at  length  it  consumes
itself,  and  is  completely  joined  to  the


*  In  the  third  fusion  of  the  Regulus  the  fire  should  be
most  intense,  so  as  to  remove  any  remaining  impurity.

t  The  said  sublimate,  before  being  placed  in  a  cave  for
dissolution,  should  be  purged  of  its  salt  armoniac  with
distilled  water.  For  want  of  such  trifling  hints  much
labour  and  expense  may  often  be  vainly  incurred.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    177

serpent.*  The  Alchemist  has  then  a  hot
and  ignitable  substance,  in  which  won-
derful possibilities  are  latent.  It  is  dis-
solved into  an  oil,  which  should  be
purified  and  clarified  by  transfusion  and
distillation.  Three  drops  of  this  oil  in
two  ounces  of  wine  may  be  administered
internally,  but  with  great  caution,  and
not  oftener  than  twice  a  week.  The
proportion  should  be  determined  by  the
peculiar  circumstances  of  the  disease,
which  should,  therefore,  be  known  to  the
physician.

This  is  a  remarkable  acrid  sub-
stance, comprehending  within  itself
many  arcana,  but  there  is  no  need  to
reveal  everything  at  once  to  the  ignorant.
Some  Arts  must  be  kept  secret,  in  order
to  stimulate  the  spirit  of  enquiry,  f  Who-
ever would  follow  in  my  footsteps  should


*  The  serpent  is  that  which  mingles  with  the  King,
and  he  calls  it  a  serpent  of  stone,  because  it  is  a  salt.

t  Whoever  understands  the  immense  importance  of
extracting  essences  from  metals  will  value  this  acrid  oil,
which  is  really  the  great  metallic  solvent,  and  without
which  the  entrance  to  the  Great  Arcanum,  and  to  the
throne  of  the  kingdom  of  chemistry,  would  be  closed.

N


1/8    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

never  grow  weary  in  the  search,  but  do
in  all  things  as  I  have  done,  and  he  will
attain  to  the  same  result.

This  is  a  book  which  sets  forth  the
rudiments  of  the  Art.  Many  spend
their  whole  life  in  trying  to  master  the
elements,  and  never  attain  to  the  real  ob-
jects of  their  search.  In  order  to  prevent
the  recurrence  of  such  fruitless  lives,  I
have  here  set  down  a  full  account  of  all
that  is  necessary  for  the  beginner  to  know.

In  this  oil  wonderful  effects  lay
hidden.  For  if  circulated  a  long  time,
it  finally  forms  into  crystals,  and  after
three  days  and  three  nights  calcination
there  is  elicited  from  them  a  salt ;  and
then  this  oil  is  again  distilled  through  the
retort.  In  this  way  is  prepared  a  medi-
cine which  dissolves  vesical  stones,  and  is
of  great  efficacy  in  many  other  complaints.

As  to  the  Lead  of  the  Sages,  let
me  tell  the  student  that  there  exists  a
great  affinity  between  common  lead  and
Antimony.  As  some  trees  separate
through  their  bark  a  certain  resin  or
gum,  like  that  of  the  cherry  tree,  for


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    179

instance,  which  gum  bears  no  manner  of
resemblance  to  the  tree  itself,  or  to  its
natural  fruit,  differing  as  it  does  from
them  in  taste  and  in  its  other  properties  -
so  the  earth  brings  forth  certain  abor-
tions which  are  separated  and  purged  off
from  the  pure  metals.

Though  lead  has  a  close  affinity  to
Antimony,  yet  Antimony  has  been  cast
out  by  lead  on  account  of  its  excess  of
sulphur,  so  that  it  could  not  bring  its
viscous  body  to  perfection,  and  takes  its
place  among  the  minerals.  Its  abund-
ance of  sulphur  has  hindered  the  coagu-
lation of  its  Mercury,  and  thus  prevented
it  from  becoming  a  malleable  body.
There  is  no  lead  in  Antimony  but  its
Regulus,  though  this  Regulus  has  not
yet  attained  to  its  brilliancy,  and  though
the  Philosopher's  Stone  cannot  be  evolved
from  it.  The  reason  why  lead  is  called
tke  Regulus,  or  King,  is  as  follows :
If  the  King  which  Antimony  gives  out
in  the  preparation  of  glass  be  taken  and
placed  in  a  fire-resisting  and  well-closed
crucible,  with  salt  of  Saturn,  and  melted


i8o    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

in  a  wind  furnace  till  the  Regulus  is
extracted,  it  is  rendered  more  viscous
and  ponderous  than  before  ;  for  it  has
received  ponderosity  from  the  spirit  of
salt,  and  consistency  as  well,  its  body
having  become  compact  and  heavy.  *
Hence  I  say  that  there  is  no  very  great
difference  between  the  Signed  Star  and
the  Lead  of  Antimony ;  for  both  are
prepared  from  glass  of  Antimony,  and
their  medicinal  effects  are  the  same.  But
now  I  will  break  off,  and,  after  setting*
forth  my  appendix,  I  will  explain  the
meaning  and  the  nature  of  the  Fire  Stone.
Bestow  upon  us  Thy  blessing,  O
God,  and  open  the  hearts  of  my  readers
that  they  may  see,  know,  and  acknow-
ledge Thy  omnipotence  and  wonderful
working  in  Nature,  for  Thy  glory,  and
the  healing  of  the  sick  !  Amen.

*  Let  this  Regulus,  which  is  rendered  malleable  with
salt  of  Saturn,  be  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  Mercury,  con-
densed with  Saturn ;  let  them  be  lused  and  well  combined
in  a  hot  furnace,  and  you  have  a  substance  which  in  its  out-
ward appearance  resembles  silver,  but  in  its  properties  is
far  more  precious  than  silver.  Hammer  into  thin  plates,
and  apply  to  any  inveterate  wound,  fistula,  or  ulcer,  which
has  resisted  all  the  plasters  and  ointments  of  the  profession.


APPENDIX.


IN  conclusion,  you  should  know  that
Antimony  is  used  for  a  good
many  purposes  besides  those  of
the  typographer.  Under  a  certain
favourable  stellar  conjunction  there  are
cast  from  it  certain  characters  and
amulets  of  great  virtue  and  potency.
In  the  same  way  metal  mirrors  may  be
prepared  which  possess  all  but  magical
properties.  There  are  also  founded
from  it  bells  of  great  sweetness  of
sound,  images  of  men,  and  many  other
things  besides.*  But  as  these  matters

*  Without  yielding  to  the  temptation  of  taking  up  the
lamentation  of  Basilius  over  the  folly  and  carelessness  of  men,
who  are  so  engrossed  with  the  greed  of  gold  that  they  do  not
bestow  much  attention  on  the  wonderful  virtues  which  God
has  implanted  in  created  things,  let  me  at  least  make  the
following  remark  :  Antimony  is  a  mineral  in  which  so  won-
derful a  spirit  is  hidden,  that  its  virtues  are  inexhaustible,
and  its  powers  transcend  human  knowledge.  Nor  do  I


1 82    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

have  nothing  to  do  with  my  vocation
and  calling  in  life,  I  leave  them  to  those
who  can  do  them  more  justice  than
myself.


believe  that  in  other  things  Antimony  would  possess  less  re-
markable capabilities  than  in  Alchemy  and  Medicine  I  will
not  tell  you  what  I  think  of  the  characters  and  amulets  which
Basilius  mentions  ;  but  it  is  a  fact  that  Antimony  exhibits  far
more  sympathetic  affinity  to  the  stars  than  any  other  metal
or  mineral.


ON  THE  TRIUMPHAL  CHARIOT  OF

ANTIMONY,  AND  THE  NATURE

OF  THE  FIRE  STONE.


BEING  removed  from  all  worldly
care  by  the  fervour  of  prayer
and  heaveniy  thoughts,  I  deter-
mined to  yield  up  my  soul  to  those
spiritual  inspirations  without  which  it  is
impossible  to  have  a  right  knowledge  of
created  things.  I  proposed  to  furnish
myself  with  wings  wherewith  I  might
ascend  to  the  stars  and  inspect  the
heavens,  as  Icarus  had  done  before  me,
if  we  may  believe  the  old  writers.*

But,  when  I  approached  the  sun  too
closely,  my  feathers  were  consumed  by

*  We  cannot  wonder  if  here,  where  he  has  reached  the
climax  of  his  work,  and  is  about  to  explain  the  secret  of
secrets,  Basilius  hides  his  meaning  from  the  foolish  and
the  scornful  under  the  guise  of  a  parable.  The  true  disciple
of  our  Art  will  be  all  the  more  encouraged  to  press  onward,
and  to  remove  the  veil  which  hides  the  secret.


1 84    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

his  burning  heat,  and  I  fell  headlong  into
the  sea ;  then,  in  answer  to  my  prayer,
God  sent  an  angel  to  help  me,  who  bade
the  waves  be  still,  and  caused  a  great
mountain  to  arise  in  the  midst  of  the
water.  I  ascended  it  to  see  whether
there  really  existed  that  correspondence
between  things  below  and  things  above
of  which  so  much  has  been  said,  and
whether  the  stars  possess  the  power  of
producing  things  resembling  them  on
earth.*  As  the  result  of  my  investiga-
tion I  found  that  what  the  ancient  Doc-
tors have  delivered  to  their  disciples  was
God's  own  truth.  Therefore  I  rendered
profound  thanks  to  the  Lord  of  Heaven
and  earth  for  His  wonderful  works.

To  put  the  matter  briefly,  I  find
that  all  that  is  dug  up  from  the  bowels
of  the  mountains  is  infused  by  the  stars
and  celestial  bodies,  and  derives  its
origin  from  a  certain  aqueous  vapour,
which,  after  being  nourished  by  the
stars  for  a  long  time,  is  reduced  to  a

*  This  correspondence  exists,  and  no  one  who  has  the
Jeast  Alchemistic  experience  can  be  disposed  to  deny  it.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    185

tangible  shape  by  the  elements.  Further-
more, as  the  fire,  with  the  aid  of  air,
gains  the  ascendency,  that  aqueous  sub-
stance becomes  dry ;  out  of  water  is
produced  fire,  and  out  of  fire  and  air  we
obtain  earth  ;  all  these  elements  are  still
found  in  all  bodies  before  their  separa-
tion. Water,  formed  into  earth  by  fire
and  air,  is  thus  the  first  substance  of  all
things.*

The  Fire  Stone  which  is  prepared
from  Antimony,  which  also  I  have
promised  to  describe,  does  not  only  cure
the  diseases  of  men,  but  it  removes  the
imperfections  of  metals.  I  must  proceed
to  tell  you  what  the  Fire  Stone  is  ;  what
is  its  ore  ;  whether  it  can  be  prepared
without  a  proper  substance ;  wherein
consists  the  difference  of  the  stones ;
how  many  kinds  of  them  there  are  ;  and,
finally,  what  are  their  uses.  May  God

*  This,  as  all  Sages  agree  in  telling  us,  is  the  substance
from  which  is  prepared  the  lesser  Fire  Stone,  and  the  Great
Stone  of  the  Philosophers.  It  is  the  Water  of  Anaxagoras,
the  Fire  of  Empedocles,  the  First  Substance  of  Aristotle.
It  is  that  by  which  trees  grow,  men  are  nourished,  and
metals  generated.


1 86    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

illumine  my  mind  by  His  Holy  Spirit
that  I  may  perform  this  task  aright,  and
be  able  to  appear  before  Him  with  a
clear  conscience  on  the  day  of  judgment,
when  sentence  will  be  pronounced  upon
the  lives  of  all  men  !

Above  everything  you  should  know
that  the  true  tincture  of  Antimony,
which  is  the  Medicine  of  men  and
metals,  is  not  prepared  from  crude,
melted  Antimony,  which  is  bought  in
shops,  but  from  the  ore  of  Antimony,  as
it  is  dug  up  from  the  mine,  and  is  first
formed  into  glass.  The  great  and  im-'
portant  question  is  :  How  is  this  tincture
extracted  ?  Know  also  that  the  prepared,
fixed,  and  solid  tincture  of  Antimony,  or
Fire  Stone,  as  I  prefer  to  name  it,  is  a
pure  essence  of  penetrative,  spiritual,
and  igneous  quality,  and  is  reduced  into
a  coagulated  substance,  which,  like  the
salamander,  rejoices  in  the  fire  as  in  its
own  proper  element.

But  the  Fire  Stone  is  not  an
universal  Tincture,  like  the  Philoso-
pher's Stone,  which  is  prepared  from  the


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    187

essence  of  gold*  Our  Fire  Stone  tinges
silver  into  gold,  and  also  perfects  tin
and  lead,  but  does  not  transmute  iron
and  copper,  nor  does  it  impart  to  them
more  than  can  be  obtained  from  them
by  separation.  One  part  of  this  tincture
has  no  power  to  transmute  more  than
five  parts  of  any  imperfect  metal.  The
great  Philosopher's  Stone,  on  the  other
hand,  has  infinite  power  of  transmuta-
tion. Yet  the  precious  metal  produced
by  the  Fire  Stone  is  pure  and  solid  gold.

The  ore  from  which  this  tincture  is  ^
prepared,  is,  as  I  have  already  stated,
the  earth  of  Antimony.  In  the  mean-
time, let  the  reader  observe  that  there
are  many  kinds  of  stones,  which  tinge
in  a  particular  way.  All  fixed  powders
that  have  the  power  of  tinging,  I  call
Stones.  The  first  and  foremost  of
all  Stones  is  the  Philosopher's  Stone  ;
then  comes  the  Tincture  of  the  Sun
and  Moon  in  the  white ;  then  the

*  As  far  as  the  heaven  is  from  the  earth,  so  far  is  the
true  Philosopher's  Stone  from  this  Fire  Stone.  I  confess
that  though  I  have  found  the  Fire  Stone,  I  have  yet  much
to  learn  concerning  the  more  potent  tincture.


1 88    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

Tincture  of  Vitriol  or  Venus  ;  and  also
the  Tincture  of  Mars.  The  two  latter
include  the  Tincture  of  the  Sun.  Then
come  the  Tinctures  of  Jupiter  and
Saturn,  for  the  coagulation  of  Mercury,
and,  finally,  the  Tincture  of  Mercury
itself.  All  these  different  Tinctures  are
generated  from  one_original  mother,  to
which  the  great  Universal  Tincture  also
mito&u^i  owes  its  birth ;  but  apart  from  these
there  are  no  other  tinctures.  It  is  not,
however,  my  business,  in  this  place,  to
describe  these  tinctures  or  stones,  be-
cause they  have  no  medicinal  value.
The  animal  and  vegetable  Stones,  in-
deed, have  certain  curative  properties  ;
but  all  these  are  contained  and  summed
up  in  the  great  Philosopher's  Stone.

The  salts  have  no  power  of  tinging,
but  are  only  keys  in  the  preparation  of
the  tinctures  which  we  have  named. *


*  The  salts  open  the  chest  in  which  the  treasure  is  pre-
served, but  are  not  themselves  the  treasure.  You  should,  of
course,  distinguish  between  those  salts  which  have  a  dissolv-
ing action,  and  those  which  coagulate  and  enter  into  the
composition  of  the  Stone — a  distinction  that  is  implied  in
the  text.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    189

Metallic  salts  should  by  no  means  be  de-
spised nor  rejected  in  the  preparation  of
the  tincture,  since  they  form  an  indis-
pensable element  in  their  composition  ;
for  they  contain  the  precious  substance
which  is  the  cause  of  all  fixation.

Next,  the  question  arises  whether
the  Stone  can  be  prepared  without  a  sub-
stance. The  answer  is  in  the  negative,
for  everything  must  have  its  substance.
Animals,  vegetables,  and  minerals,  have
each  their  own  particular  first  substance.
But  no  substance  can  be  of  any  use  in
the  generation  of  our  Stone  without  fer-
mentation. From  the  tangible  and  for-
mal body  we  must  elicit  the  spiritual  and
celestial  entity  (I  hardly  know  what
expression  to  use  in  describing  it).  This
entity,  or  essence,  has  first  been  infused
into  the  body  by  stellar  influences,  and
perfected  and  digested  by  the  elements.
By  the  digestion  and  regimen  of  the
lesser  fire,  the  spiritual  entity  must
become  a  tangible,  fixed,  and  solid
substance.

But  to  what  purpose  do   I   speak,


igo    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

and  what  do  I  say  ?  I  speak  as  one  who
has  temporarily  lost  control  over  his
organs  of  speech.  If  an  atom  of  judg-
ment still  remained  to  me,  I  should  not
have  opened  my  mouth  so  wide,  and  I
should  have  stayed  my  hand,  even  at  the
last  moment*

All  tinctures  should  be  so  prepared
as  to  have  an  irresistible  attraction  to-
wards the  metals,  and  an  irresistible
inclination  to  mingle  with  them,  and  per-
fect them  by  removing  their  infirmities.
It  is  the  same  as  with  human  beings  who
are  inflamed  with  mutual  love,  and  can-
not rest  by  day  or  night  till  they  are
brought  together  in  loving  union,  and
satisfy  their  desire  ;  after  that  they  rest,
and  multiplication  takes  place  according
to  the  order  of  Nature.

Man    is   subject  to  many  grievous


*  Are  you  in  your  right  mind,  Basilius,  so  to  prostitute
the  Stone,  which  has  hitherto  been  so  carefully  kept  a  secret
by  all  the  Sages  ?  You  have  here  let  out  the  whole  secret,
and  now  we  see  how  the  pure  and  the  impure  are  separated,
how  the  fixed  become  volatile,  and  the  volatile  fixed.  Now,
you,  my  reader,  attend  carefully  !  There  is  here  for  you  a
precious  pearl ;  do  not  resemble  the  fowl  in  the  fable.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    191

diseases,  some  of  which  so  weaken  and
impair  his  vitality  that  he  cannot  be  re-
restored  to  perfect  health  by  any  means.
But  love  is  a  disease  to  wrhich  no  other
disease  can  be  compared,  which  can  be
cured  only  by  the  production  of  its
counterpart  ;  nor  is  either  of  the  two
natures  satisfied  until  the  desire  of  both
parts  has  met  with  fruition.  Love  assails
the  young  as  well  as  the  old,  the  poor  as
well  as  the  rich,  the  woman  as  well  as
the  man,  and  will  take  no  denial.  Those
whom  it  attacks  it  pervades,  body,  soul,
and  spirit.  In  the  heart  it  kindles  a
torch,  whose  fire  is  diffused  through  the
veins,  the  arteries,  and  all  the  limbs  of
the  body.  Where  love  once  has  struck
root  it  enslaves  the  whole  man,  and  he
forgets  God,  heaven,  hell,  honour,  the
present  life  and  the  life  to  come,  in  the
frenzied  pursuit  of  his  desire.  Such  a
person  tramples  underfoot  the  wise  and
sober  counsel  of  parents,  and  breaks  loose
from  all  restraint.  Love  renders  a  man
blind,  deaf,  and  dulls  all  other  feelings
and  thoughts  ;  it  robs  him  of  his  sleep,


192    The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

his  appetite  for  food  and  drink,  and  ren-
ders him  incapable  of  exercising  prudent
forethought  with  regard  to  the  future  ;  it
makes  him  forget  his  calling,  vocation,
study,  prayer.  If  the  lover  does  not  ob-
tain what  he  desires,  or  if  his  wishes  are
not  immediately  fulfilled,  by  what  melan-
choly, sorrow,  and  anguish  is  he  tor-
mented !  How  soon  he  wastes  away  to
a  mere  shadow !  How  often  does  he
not  die  of  a  broken  heart!  In  short,
such  persons  think  very  slightly  either  of
this  life  or  of  the  life  to  come,  until  they
have  been  satisfied  with  the  enjoyment
of  the  loved  object.

But  I,  as  a  monk,  must  not  dilate
any  further  upon  the  symptoms  of  this
unholy  and  consuming  passion.  I  have
kept  myself  pure  from  it  all  my  life,  and
pray  God  that  He  may  preserve  me
faithful  to  my  holy  spouse,  the  Church,
even  to  the  end.  Even  what  I  have
said  was  only  mentioned  for  the  purpose
of  shewing  by  what  passionate  love  the
tinctures  should  be  violently  attracted
towards  their  metals,  in  order  that  they


T/ie  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    193

may    penetrate    them    wholly,  and    thus
bring  them  to  perfection.

Our  Stone  is  digested  and  matured
by  fire,  like  all  things  else  that  are  found
in  this  world.  Nevertheless,  different
substances  require  different  fires  for  their
development.

The  first  fire  is  that  of  heaven,  and
quickens  in  our  hearts  love  towards  God
our  Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
our  Saviour.  The  faith  enkindled  by
this  love  can  never  forsake  us  in  any
trouble  or  distress.

Another  fire  is  the  elementary  heat
of  the  Sun,  which  brings  everything  in
the  great  world  to  perfection.

The  third  fire  is  that  corporal  fire
with  which  we  cook  our  food  and  medi-
cines— without  which  we  could  not
maintain  our  health,  or  even  our  life.
The  fourth  fire  is  that  mentioned  pre-
viously, which  will  one  day  consume
the  visible  world.  The  fifth  fire  is  the
instrument  of  everlasting  punishment,  in
which  the  devils  and  wicked  men  will  be

tormented  for  ever  and  ever.      I  exhort

o


194    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

all  men  to  seek  God,  and  to  listen  to  His
gracious  voice  while  it  may  be  heard,  in
order  that  they  may  escape  from  the
terrible  fire  of  hell.

Our  Fire  Stone  should  be  pre-
pared and  matured,  like  our  food  and
all  other  medicines,  by  the  corporal  fire
which  reigns  in  the  little  world.  Where
the  solar  fire  of  the  great  world  leaves
off,  there  our  corporal  fire  begins  a  new
generation.  Corn  grows  and  ripens  by
the  heat  of  the  great  Fire  ;  but  a  new
process  of  cooking  and  maturing  is
brought  about  by  the  action  of  the  little
fire,  in  order  that  men  may  be  able  to
use  it  for  their  bodily  sustenance.

The  oiljrf  Antimony,  from  which
our  Fire  Stone  is  prepared,  is  exceed-
ingly sweet.  It  is  rendered  so  brilliant
by  the  removal  of  its  earth,  and  of  all
impurities,  that  it  may  be  compared  to  a
bit  of  crystal  on  which  the  meridian  rays
of  the  sunshine  fall.  The  method  of  its
preparation  is  as  follows  :

Take,  in  the  name  of  God,  equal
parts  of  the  ore  of  Antimony^  obtained


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    195

after  sunrise,  and  of  saltpetre  ;  pulverize
finely,  mix  well,  place  over  a  gentle  fire,
bake  dexterously  (and  the  method  of
this  baking  is  the  key  of  the  whole
work).  There  will  remain  a  blackish
substance.  Out  of  this  prepare  glass,
which  pound,  extract  its  red  Tincture
with  strong  distilled  vinegar  (made  of  the
same  ore),  and  remove  the  vinegar  by
distillation  in  the  bath.  There  remains
a  powder  from  which  you  should  make  a
second  extract  with  highly  rectified  spirit
of  wine. '  Let  the  faeces  settle.  You
have  then  a  beautiful,  sweet,  red  extract
of  great  medicinal  value.  This  is  the
pure  Sulphur  pf^Antimony.  If  you  have
two  pounds  of  this  extract,  take  four
ounces  of  salt  of  Antimony  (of  which
I  have  given  the  receipt).  Pour  over
these  the  extract,  circulate  for  at  least  a
month  in  a  well-closed  vessel,  when  the
salt  will  unite  with  the  extract  of  sul-
phur ;  remove  sediment,  if  any,  extract

*  Take  care  at  this  point  not  to  scorch  the  pinions  of
your  bird,  which  is  already  winging  its  flight  above  the
hills.


1 96    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

spirit  of  wine  in  S.  Mary's  Bath,  sublime
the  powder  which  remains,  and  it  will
be  distilled  in  the  form  of  a  many-
coloured,  sweet,  pellucid,  reddish  oil.
Rectify  this  oil  in  S.  Mary's  Bath,  so
that  the  fourth  part  remains,  and  it  is
then  prepared.

Then  take  living  Mercury  of  Anti-
mony, which  I  have  taught  you  how  to
compose."5'"  Pour  to  it  red  oil  of  vitriol,
made  over  iron,  and  highly  rectified ;
remove  by  distillation  in  sand  the  vis-
cidity of  the  Mercury,  and  you  will  have
a  precious  precipitate  of  a  glorious
colour,  which  is  of  the  greatest  medicinal
value  in  chronic  diseases  and  open
wounds.  For  it  quickly  dries  up  their
symptomatic  humours,  which  represent
the  radical  moisture  of  the  disease.

Take  equal  parts  of  this  precipitate
and  of  our  sweet  oil  of  Antimony  ;  put
into  a  well-closed  phial ;  if  exposed  to


*  That  is,  the  Mercury  of  the  Sages  so  often  alluded  to.
Whoever  tells  you  the  secret  of  this  Mercury  will  be  your
Pylades,  and  you  will  be  his  Orestes.  I,  for  my  part,
shall  be  glad  to  make  a  third  in  such  a  company.


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.    197

gentle  heat,  the  precipitate  will  gradually
be  dissolved  and  fixed  in  the  oil :  for  the
fire  consumes  its  viscidity,  and  it  becomes
a  red,  dry,  fixed,  and  fluid  powder,  which
does  not  give  out  the  slightest  smoke. *

When  you  have  reached  this  point,
my  friend,  you  have  the  Medicine  of
men  and  of  metals  ;  it  is  pleasant,  sweet,
and  penetrating,  and  may  be  used  with-
out any  risk.  Without  being  a  purga-
tive, it  expels  all  impure  and  morbid
matter  from  the  body.  It  will  restore  to
you  health,  and  relieve  you  of  want  in
this  life  ;  nor  can  you  ever  discharge  to
God  your  obligation  of  gratitude  for  it.
I  fear  that  as  a  monk  and  religious  man
I  have  transcended  the  proper  bounds  of
reticence  and  secrecy,  and  spoken  out
too  freely,  t  At  any  rate,  I  have  told

*  Keep  reverent  silence  :  for  now  the  King  enters  his
bridal  chamber,  where  he  will  delight  himself  many
months  with  his  spouse  :  and  they  will  only  leave  the
chamber  when  they  have  grown  together,  and  produced  a
son  who,  if  not  the  King  of  Kings,  is  at  least  a  King,  and
delivers  his  subjects  from  disease  and  want.

t  Our  Author  fears  that  he  has  said  too  much.  If  you
share  this  opinion,  his  anxiety  will  be  joy  to  you.  It  is
marvellous  that  when  a  Sage  has  thrown  ever  so  little  light
on  this  subject,  he  immediately  regrets  having  done  so.


198    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.

you  enough  ;  and  if  after  all  that  has
been  said  you  do  not  discover  the  secret,
it  will  not  be  my  fault.

I  have  spoken  as  lucidly  and  openly,
nay,  I  fear,  more  openly,  than  the  rules
of  our  brotherhood  permit.  For  it  is
not  lawful  for  every  one  to  eat  of  the
Tree  of  Knowledge  which  stands  in  the
midst  of  Paradise.  I  will  now  proceed
to  describe  the  uses  of  this  Elixir.

With  reference  to  its  medicinal
application  to  the  human  body,  the  dose
ought  to  be  regulated  and  determined
by  careful  observation  of  individual
peculiarities  of  constitution.  Neverthe-
less, an  excessive  quantity  is  not  really
dangerous,  as  there  is  no  poison  in  our
Elixir.  Three  or  four  grains  at  a  time,
given  in  spirit  of  wine,  are  sufficient  for
the  cure  of  every  disease ;  for  this
Medicine  penetrates  every  part  of  the
body,  and  contains  within  itself  the
potency  of  many  arcana.  It  removes
dizziness  and  all  pulmonary  complaints,
as  well  as  coughs  and  all  difficulty  of
breathing.  It  is  a  wonderful  remedy  for


The  Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.    1 99

leprosy  and  the  French  (venereal)
disease.  It  cures  the  plague,  dropsy,
and  all  kinds  of  fevers,  and  constitutes
a  powerful  antidote  to  poison.  It  in-
vigorates the  brain  and  the  whole  nervous
system,  the  stomach,  the  liver,  and  the
kidneys,  breaks  up  the  calculus  and
expels  it,  restores  the  vital  spirits,  pro-
motes the  menstrual  discharge,  removes
barrenness  both  in  men  and  women.
Taken  internally,  and  aided  by  suitable
external  plasters,  it  cures  cancer,  fistula,
caries  of  the  bones,  and  all  corroding
ulcers.  In  short,  it  relieves  and  finally
removes  all  symptoms  which  indicate
disease  in  the  human  body,  as  you  will
soon  discover,  if  God  has  called  you
to  be  a  physician.*

I  have  now  told  you  all  that  I  know
about  Antimony  ;   it  is  my  prayer  that

*  You  see  Basilius  speaks  only  of  the  medicinal  virtues
of  this  Fire  Stone.  For  he  assumes  that  you  are  chiefly
inspired  by  the  wish  to  help  your  suffering  neighbour,  and
that  you  despise  all  sordid  thoughts  of  filthy  lucre.  Fare-
well, gentle  Reader,  and  if  this  Book  has  revealed  to  you
the  Grand  Secret,  shew  your  gratitude  to  God  by  kindly
help  rendered  to  your  suffering  brethren.


2OO    The   Triumphal  Chariot  of  A  ntimony.

you  may  discover  the  rest,  so  that  the
fulness  of  God's  wonderful  gifts  to  men
may  be  made  known  before  the  end  of
the  world.  I  return  to  my  Monastery,
where  I  mean  to  devote  myself  to  further
study,  and,  if  possible,  to  elucidate  the
secrets  of  vitriol,  common  sulphur,  and
the  magnet,  their  origin,  preparation,
and  virtues.

May  the  God  and  Lord  of  Heaven
and  Earth  vouchsafe  unto  us  health  in
time  here,  and  hereafter  salvation,  with
eternal  rest  to  our  souls,  on  thrones  of
joy  and  gladness,  world  without  end !
Amen.

Thus  I  conclude  this  Treatise  on
Antimony.  Pay  particular  attention  to
what  has  been  said  of  the  red  oil  of
Antimony,  which  is  prepared  from  highly
purified  sulphur,  and  of  the  spirit  which
is  prepared  from  its  salt ;  compare  these
operations  with  what  I  have  written  con-
cerning the  Fire  Stone,  and  then  put  the
two  together.  For  in  this  way  you  will
run  down  the  deer  which  you  have  been
pursuing  for  so  long.


INDEX.


Aerial  Spirits,  31.

Antidotes,  53.

Antimony,  Spirit  in,  30  ;  two
kinds  of,  34. ;  anatomy  of,
35>  39;  mysteries  of,  36;
qualities  of,  ib.  ;  riches  of,
38 ;  solution  of,  40  ;  dangers
of  its  unprepared  state,  41  ;
vinegar  of,  43 ;  key  of,  ib.  ;
hidden  virtue  of,  47 ;  colours
of,  48,  89,  90,  91  ;  names  of,
57 ;  toxology  of,  59,  80-82;
Mercury  , of,  65,  142,  198;
medicine  of,  68  ;  stone  of,  ib. ;
quintessence  of,  ib.,  105,  169;
root  of,  73,  74  ;  components
of,  74 ;  Antimony  and  Mer-
cury, 74,  75  ;  what  Antimony
is,  78 ;  star  of,  79  ;  miracles
of,  80  ;  crude  Antimony,  87  ;
Antimony  and  precious  stones,
90  ;  oils  from  Antimony,  91  ;
purgative  nature  of  crude
Antimony,  92  ;  mineral  pre-
paration of,  93  ;  calcination
°f>  93»  94  j  vitrification  of,
95,  96 ;  a  method  with
borax,  97  ;  transparent  white
glass  of  Antimony,  98  ;  other
methods  of  vitrification,  ib.  ;
red  tincture  of,  100  ;  yellow
tinctuie  of,  103 ;  balm  of,


id.,  141 ;  reduction  of  glass
of,  104  ;  distilled  oil  of,  106  ;
common  glass  of,  108  ;  oil  of
the  common  glass,  109 ;  Ar-
canum of  Antimony,  113;
elixir  of,  115  ;  Antimony  and
purgatives,  1 16  ;  Antimony
and  gold,  117,  118;  prepa-
ration and  fixation  of  Anti-
mony, 119,  120;  flowers  of,
121-125  ;  various  extracts  of,
127,  et  seq.  ;  friable  Anti-
mony, 129  ;  liver  of,  132  ;
regulus  of,  141,  142,  147,
179 ;  various  oils  of,  142,
&c.  ;  royal  oil  of,  144  ;  salt
of,  148  ;  sulphur  of,  149,  168,
l69>  r95  J  medicine  hidden
in  the  Mercury  of,  149  ;  Anti-
mony for  external  wounds,
156;  other  Antimonial  oils,
159 ;  balm  for  old  wounds,
1 60 ;  Antimony  against  fevers,
164 ;  another  oil  for  wounds,
165  ;  vinegar  of  Antimony,
170,  171  ;  signed  star  of,
I7°>  !75»  1 80;  Antimonial
lead  of  the  Sages,  170;  vari-
ous uses  of  Antimony,  181  ;
fire  stone  of,  185,  et  seq,.  ;
ore  of,  195  ;  red  oil  of,  200.
Apollo,  inventor  of  Alchemy,  3.


2O2


Index.


Aquafortis,  70,  71,  138,
Archseus,  79.
Arsenic,  160.

Astrum   Solis,  63,  77,  78,  84,
107.

Bacchus,  105.

Basil,  the  Prince  of  Chemists,  8.

Blessed  Isles,  4.


Calcination,    19,    43,    93.    115,

130.

Cathartics,  87.
Caustic  Water,  135.
Christ  the  True  Medicine,  53.
Circulation,  19,  145.
Clarification,  45.
Clay  of  the  Sages,  149.
Coagulation,  44,  79,  106.
Cohobation,  19.
Contemplation   of  Nature,    12,

16-20.
Crocus  of  Mars,  137,  160;    of

metals,  139.

Deficiencies  of  Medical  Art,  24-
26,  50,  54-56,  69,  71-73,  83.

Desire  of  the  Nations,  7.

Detonation,  165.

Digestion,  19,  28,  44,  100,  106,
119.

Diseases  of  Minerals,  51.

Dissolution,  40.

Distillation,  19,  44,  104,  132,
i6r.

Earth-Men,  31.
Edulcoration,  115.


Exaltation,  46.
Excrement,  27,  28.

Fermentation,  in.

Fire,  regulation  of,  40  ;  various
kinds  of,  193.

Fire  Stone,  68,  92,  104,  106,
146,  185,  194.

First  Key  of  Art,  42.

Fixation,  19,  106,  119,  120.

Fixed  Medicines,  87.

Foundations  of  Hermetic  Prac-
tice, 12.

French  Disease,  43,  102,  121,
130,  140,  152,  199.

Gold,  64,  75,  187  ;  calx  of,
no;  tincture  of,  ib.  ;  potable
gold,  in.

Grape  Vinegar,  70,  71.

Great  Arcanum,  177.

Honey,  toxology  of,  66,  67.

Invocation  of  God,  12,  13-16.
Isles  of  the  Blest,  105.

Juniper,  oil  of,  142.
Juno,   105.

Key  of  Hercules,  107.
King  of  Kings,  5,  6.

Latera,  166.

Lead  of  the  Sages,  170,  178.

Liquefaction,  105.

Macrocosmos,  76.
Magisterium,  112.


Index.


203


Medicine  of  Men  and  Metals,
197.

Mercury,  4,  6,  74-76,  87,  89,
91,  105,  150,  152,  159,  160,
170,  179  ;  Water  of  Mercury,

137,  138.

Metallic  Salts,  188.
Mineral  Vapour,  77.
Mother  of  Saturn,  75,

Oil  of  Tartar,  70.
Omphacium,  109.
Operative  and  Vital  Spirits,  30.

Planetary  Influences,  184.

Pluto,  6,  43,  65.

Poison,    origin   of,    85,    86 ;

poison  as  medicine,  49.
Preparation,  12,  20,  21.
Profit  and  Use.  12.
Proportions  of  Weight,  21.
Proserpine,  6.
Purgatives,  117.
Putrefaction,  19,  28,  44,  119.
Pyropus  Stones,  160.

Quicklime,  160.

Quintessence  of  all  things,  129.

Reverberation,  19,  43,  44,  115,

1 16.

Rhubarb,  116.
Root  of  Metals  and  Minerals,

76.

Saint  Benedict's  Cordial,  164.

Saint  Mary's  Bath,  100,  116,
120,  121,  130,  132,  134,  142,
144,  161,  168,  172,  196.


Sal  Prunelloe,  173.

Salt,  89,  91,  99,  135,  138,  149,

157,  166  ;  spirit  of  salt,  no.
Salt  of  Ammonia,  97,  113,  115,

123,  159,  168,  176.
Salt  of  Saturn,  1 79.
Saltpetre,   137,  138,   139,   142,

165.

Soul  of  Gold,  64.
Soul  of  Saturn,  173.
Spagyric  Art,  n,  12.
Spawn  of  Frogs,  63.
Spirit   of  Wine,   41,    42,    103,

104,  108,  115,  116,  119,  127,

128,  132,  133,  134,  145,  146,

164,  1 66.

Spirit  of  Wine  of  the  Sages,  97.
Spirits,  various  kinds  of,  30.
Star  of  Mercury,  64,  107.
Stone  of  the  Sages,   75,    170,

175,  179,  187,  190.
Sublimation,    19,   43,  46,    123,

126.
Sulphur,  79,  89,  91,  137,  159,

165,  179;  separation  of  sul-
phur, 99.

Tartar,  130,  132,  142,  169.  176.
Terebinth,  spirit  of,  142.
Terrestrial  Spirits,  31.
Tincture  of  Corals,  116.
Tincture  of  Sun  and  Moon,  187.
Tree  of  Life,  85.
Tripel,  148.

Unicorn,  59,  60.
Universal  Medicine,  106.
Universal  Spirit  of  Nature,  102.


204  Index.

Urine,  159.  Vinegar,  41,  42,  100,  104,  108,
Uses  of  a  Medicine,  22.  119,  128,  129,  132,  138,  149,

151,  161,  164,  170.  }a^

Vegetable  Fixation,  119.  Vinegar  of  the  Sages,  144.

Vegetable  Sublmation,  46,  120.  Vitriol,  115,  124,  135,  150,  152,
Venetian  Borax,  97,  98,  109.  188.

Venetian  Earth,  148,  149.  Vulcan,  65,  83,  88,  105.
Venom  of  the  Viper,  82.

Venus,  Tincture  of,  188.  Watery  Spirits,  31.


JAMES    ELLIOTT   AND    CO.,

TEMPLE   CHAMBERS,    FALCON   COURT,    FLEET   STREET,
LONDON,    E.G.


PRICE  Two  GUINEAS.

In  two  volumes,   small   quarto,  cloth  extra,  gilt.


Cf)e  pfermettc  jHuseum

Restored  and  enlarged,  most  faithfully  instructing  all  the  Disciples

of  the  Sopho-Spagyric  Art  how  that  Greatest  and  Truest  Medicine

of  the  Philosopher's  Stone  may  be  found  and  held.

Now  first  done  into  English  from  the  rare  Latin  original,  published

at  Frankfort  in  the  year   1678.      The  illustrations  reproduced  in

fac-simile  by  a  photographic  process.


This  curious  storehouse  of  Hermetic  Science  comprises  twenty-
two  choice  treatises  on  the  Mysteries  of  Alchemy,  and  the  com-
position of  the  Medicine  of  the  Philosophers,  namely  : —

The  Golden  Treatise  concerning  the

Philosopher's  Stone.
The  Golden  Age  come  back.
The    Sophie    Hydrolith,    or    Water

Stone  of  the  Wise.
The  Demonstration  of  Nature.
A  Philosophical  Summary.
The  Path  of  the  only  Truth.
The  Glory  of  the  World,  or  Table

of  Paradise.

The  Generation  of  Metals.
The  Book  of  Alze.
Figures  and  Emblems  concerning  the

Philosopher's  Stone.
The    Practice    and    Keys   of    Basil

Valentine.


The  Ordinal  of  Alchemy.

The  Testament  of  John  Cremer,  some-
time Abbot  of  Westminster.

The  New  Light  of  Alchemy.

The  Sulphur  of  the  Philosophers.

An   Open    Entrance  to  the  Closed
Palace  of  the  King.

A  Subtle    Allegory    concerning  the
Secrets  of  Chemistry.

The  Metamorphosis  of  Metals.

A  Short  Guide  to  the  Celestial  Ruby.

The  Fount  of  Chemical  Truth.

The  Golden  Calf.

The  All-Wise  Doorkeeper.


While  affording  to  the  modern  student  of  Hermetic  Doctrines
an  unique  opportunity  of  acquiring  in  English  a  representative  col-
lection of  the  chief  alchemical  writers,  this  edition  of  THE
HERMETIC  MUSEUM  claims  consideration  at  the  hands  of  the
historian  and  archaeologist  as  a  contribution  of  real  value  to  the
early  history  of  chemistry.  The  translation  is  the  work  of  a
gentleman  who  has  had  a  life-long  acquaintance  with  alchemical
literature,  and  has  been  subjected  to  careful  revision  by  another
expert  in  Hermetic  Antiquities.


N.B.  —  This  Edition  is  limited  to  250  copies,  numbered  and  signed.


Now  Ready.

Crown  8vo,   printed    from  old-faced  type,  on  antique  laid  paper,
cloth  extra.      Price  IDS.  6d.

&  ©niton  ana  ISlessetr  Casfeet  of
fiature'g  JBlarbds.

CONCERNING  THE  BLESSED  MYSTERY  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHER'S
STONE.

Containing  the  Revelation  of  the  Most  Illuminated  Egyptian
King  and  Philosopher,  Hermes  Trismegistus  :  translated  by  our
German  Hermes,  the  Noble  and  Beloved  Monarch  and  Philosopher
Trismegistus,  A.  Ph.  Theophrastus  Paracelsus.  Also  Tinctura
Physicorum  Paracelsica,  with  an  excellent  explanation  by  the
Noble  and  Learned  Philosopher,  Alexander  von  Suchten,  M.D.,
together  with  certain  hitherto  unpublished  treatises  by  this  author,
and  also  other  corollaries  of  the  same  nature  as  specified  in  the
preface.  Now  published  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  all  sons  of  the
Doctrine  of  Hermes.

BY  BENEDICTUS    FIGULUS,    OF    UTENHOFEN.


In  Preparation.

Crown  8vo,  printed  from  old-faced  type,  on  antique  laid  paper,  cloth
extra.     Price  IDS.  6d.


The  most  ancient  of  Western  Treatises  on  Alchemy  and  the
Great  Work,  the  subject  of  continual  reference  by  all  later  adepts,
ranking  second  only  to  the  writings  of  Hermes  Trismegistus,  and
recognised  as  a  final  authority  in  the  "practice  of  the  philosophers."

While  it  has  been  the  subject  of  innumerable  commentaries  and
of  the  most  pious  veneration  on  the  part  of  Hermetic  students,  this
curious  fountain-head  of  alchemical  literature  has  never  been
previously  translated.  A  very  careful  version,  containing  both  of
the  accepted  recensions  and  the  most  important  of  the  varied
readings  in  the  different  printed  editions,  and  in  available  manu-
scripts, is  now  preparing,  and  a  limited  number  of  copies  will
shortly  be  issued  to  the  public.  The  elucidations  of  selected
commentators  will  be  added  to  the  text,  and  in  the  introduction
prefixed  to  the  work  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  trace  the  history
and  influence  of  this  archaic  Colloquium  Sophorum.


Crown  8vo,  printed  from  old-faced  type,  on  antique  laid
paper,  cloth  extra,  price  75.  6d.

Collectanea  Cfjemica:

Being  certain  select  treatises  on  Alchemy  and  Hermetic

Medicine,  by  EIREN^EUS    PHILALETHES,    FRANCIS

ANTONY,    GEORGE    STARKEY,  SIR    GEORGE

RIPLEY,  and    ANONYMOUS    UNKNOWN.


CONTENTS :

The  Secret  of  the  Immortal  Liquor  called  Alkahest.

Aurum  Potabile.

The  Admirable  Efficacy  of  the  True  Oil  of  Sulphur  Vive.

The  Stone  of  the  Philosophers.

The  Bosom  Book  of  Sir  George  Ripley.

The  Preparation  of  the  Sophie  Mercury.


The  Hermetic  Tracts  comprised  in  this  volume  are
printed  from  a  quarto  manuscript  belonging  to  the  cele-
brated collection  of  the  late  Mr.  Frederick  Hockley,  who
was  well  known  among  modern  students  of  the  secret
sciences  not  only  for  the  resources  of  his  Hermetic
Library,  but  for  his  practical  acquaintance  with  many
branches  of  esoteric  art,  and  for  his  real  or  reputed
connection  with  the  numerous  but  unavowed  associations
which  now,  as  at  anterior  periods,  are  supposed  to  dis-
pense initiation  into  occult  knowledge.


In  Preparation.

Crown  8vo,  printed  from  old-faced  type  on  antique  laid
paper,  cloth  extra,  illustrated  with  symbolical  designs,
photographically  reproduced.  Price  IDS.  6d.

Cfje  pearl  of  <§reat  Price.

A   NEW  TREATISE  CONCERNING  THE  TREASURE    AND
MOST  PRECIOUS  PHILOSOPHER'S  STONE  ;

Or  the  Method  and  Procedure  of  this  Divine  Art  ;
being  observations  drawn  from  the  works  of  Arnold,
Raymond,  Rhasis,  Albertus,  and  Michael  Scotus.  Now
first  published  by  James  Lacinius  the  Calabrian,  with  a
copious  Index.

Translated  into  English  from  the  much-prized  edition
of  Aldus,  which  appeared,  with  the  privilege  of  Pope  Paul
III.  and  the  Senate  of  Venice,  in  1546.


The  Pretiosa  Margarita  Novella  is  supposed  to  be  a
"  faithful  abridgment "  of  a  work  entitled  Margarita
Pretiosa,  which  appears  to  have  circulated  in  manuscript
in  Italy  during  the  first  half  of  the  fourteenth  century,
but  does  not  seem  to  have  been  printed.  It  was  written
by  Pietro  Bono,  who  enjoys  high  repute  as  an  adept  in
the  art  of  Alchemy  ;  and  the  present  version,  which  has
been  subjected  to  a  searching  revision,  is  edited  with  an
introductory  analysis  of  the  various  Hermetic  books
which  are  attributed  to  this  author.  The  Pretiosa
Margarita  Novella  has  special  interest  as  one  of  the
earliest  books  which  appeared  in  print  on  Alchemy.

\\


THE  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  SANTA  CRUZ

SCIENCE  LIBRARY

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  DATE  stamped  below.

To  renew  by  phone,  call  459-2050.

Books  not  returned  or  renewed  within  14  days

after  due  date  are  subject taiylling.


Series  2477


Series  2373


R128.6.B6C85  Sci


3  2106  00261  7469
