The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Bible, King James version, Book 30: Amos
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Bible, King James version, Book 30: Amos

Author: Anonymous


        
Release date: April 1, 2005 [eBook #8030]
                Most recently updated: December 26, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8030

Credits: This eBook was produced by David Widger with the help of Derek Andrew's text from January 1992 and the work of Bryan Taylor in November 2002


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BIBLE, KING JAMES VERSION, BOOK 30: AMOS ***




This eBook was produced by David Widger
with the help of Derek Andrew's text from January 1992
and the work of Bryan Taylor in November 2002.





Book 30        Amos

30:001:001 The words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which
           he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah,
           and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel,
           two years before the earthquake.

30:001:002 And he said, The LORD will roar from Zion, and utter his voice
           from Jerusalem; and the habitations of the shepherds shall
           mourn, and the top of Carmel shall wither.

30:001:003 Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Damascus, and
           for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because
           they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron:

30:001:004 But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shall
           devour the palaces of Benhadad.

30:001:005 I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the
           inhabitant from the plain of Aven, and him that holdeth the
           sceptre from the house of Eden: and the people of Syria shall
           go into captivity unto Kir, saith the LORD.

30:001:006 Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Gaza, and for
           four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because
           they carried away captive the whole captivity, to deliver them
           up to Edom:

30:001:007 But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall devour
           the palaces thereof:

30:001:008 And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that
           holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon, and I will turn mine hand
           against Ekron: and the remnant of the Philistines shall
           perish, saith the Lord GOD.

30:001:009 Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Tyrus, and
           for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because
           they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered
           not the brotherly covenant:

30:001:010 But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall
           devour the palaces thereof.

30:001:011 Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Edom, and for
           four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he
           did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all
           pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and he kept his
           wrath for ever:

30:001:012 But I will send a fire upon Teman, which shall devour the
           palaces of Bozrah.

30:001:013 Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of the children
           of Ammon, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment
           thereof; because they have ripped up the women with child of
           Gilead, that they might enlarge their border:

30:001:014 But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall
           devour the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of
           battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind:

30:001:015 And their king shall go into captivity, he and his princes
           together, saith the LORD.

30:002:001 Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Moab, and for
           four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he
           burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime:

30:002:002 But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the
           palaces of Kirioth: and Moab shall die with tumult, with
           shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet:

30:002:003 And I will cut off the judge from the midst thereof, and will
           slay all the princes thereof with him, saith the LORD.

30:002:004 Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Judah, and
           for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because
           they have despised the law of the LORD, and have not kept his
           commandments, and their lies caused them to err, after the
           which their fathers have walked:

30:002:005 But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the
           palaces of Jerusalem.

30:002:006 Thus saith the LORD; For three transgressions of Israel, and
           for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because
           they sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of
           shoes;

30:002:007 That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor,
           and turn aside the way of the meek: and a man and his father
           will go in unto the same maid, to profane my holy name:

30:002:008 And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by
           every altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned in the
           house of their god.

30:002:009 Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was like
           the height of the cedars, and he was strong as the oaks; yet I
           destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.

30:002:010 Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you
           forty years through the wilderness, to possess the land of the
           Amorite.

30:002:011 And I raised up of your sons for prophets, and of your young
           men for Nazarites. Is it not even thus, O ye children of
           Israel? saith the LORD.

30:002:012 But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink; and commanded the
           prophets, saying, Prophesy not.

30:002:013 Behold, I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is
           full of sheaves.

30:002:014 Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the
           strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the
           mighty deliver himself:

30:002:015 Neither shall he stand that handleth the bow; and he that is
           swift of foot shall not deliver himself: neither shall he that
           rideth the horse deliver himself.

30:002:016 And he that is courageous among the mighty shall flee away
           naked in that day, saith the LORD.

30:003:001 Hear this word that the LORD hath spoken against you, O
           children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought
           up from the land of Egypt, saying,

30:003:002 You only have I known of all the families of the earth:
           therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

30:003:003 Can two walk together, except they be agreed?

30:003:004 Will a lion roar in the forest, when he hath no prey? will a
           young lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?

30:003:005 Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no gin is for
           him? shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken
           nothing at all?

30:003:006 Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be
           afraid? shall there be evil in a city, and the LORD hath not
           done it?

30:003:007 Surely the Lord GOD will do nothing, but he revealeth his
           secret unto his servants the prophets.

30:003:008 The lion hath roared, who will not fear? the Lord GOD hath
           spoken, who can but prophesy?

30:003:009 Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in the
           land of Egypt, and say, Assemble yourselves upon the mountains
           of Samaria, and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof,
           and the oppressed in the midst thereof.

30:003:010 For they know not to do right, saith the LORD, who store up
           violence and robbery in their palaces.

30:003:011 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; An adversary there shall be
           even round about the land; and he shall bring down thy
           strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled.

30:003:012 Thus saith the LORD; As the shepherd taketh out of the mouth
           of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear; so shall the
           children of Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria in the
           corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.

30:003:013 Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, saith the Lord
           GOD, the God of hosts,

30:003:014 That in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of
           Israel upon him I will also visit the altars of Bethel: and
           the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the
           ground.

30:003:015 And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and
           the houses of ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall
           have an end, saith the LORD.

30:004:001 Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain of
           Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which
           say to their masters, Bring, and let us drink.

30:004:002 The Lord GOD hath sworn by his holiness, that, lo, the days
           shall come upon you, that he will take you away with hooks,
           and your posterity with fishhooks.

30:004:003 And ye shall go out at the breaches, every cow at that which
           is before her; and ye shall cast them into the palace, saith
           the LORD.

30:004:004 Come to Bethel, and transgress; at Gilgal multiply
           transgression; and bring your sacrifices every morning, and
           your tithes after three years:

30:004:005 And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and
           proclaim and publish the free offerings: for this liketh you,
           O ye children of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.

30:004:006 And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your
           cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet have ye not
           returned unto me, saith the LORD.

30:004:007 And also I have withholden the rain from you, when there were
           yet three months to the harvest: and I caused it to rain upon
           one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city: one
           piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not
           withered.

30:004:008 So two or three cities wandered unto one city, to drink water;
           but they were not satisfied: yet have ye not returned unto me,
           saith the LORD.

30:004:009 I have smitten you with blasting and mildew: when your gardens
           and your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees
           increased, the palmerworm devoured them: yet have ye not
           returned unto me, saith the LORD.

30:004:010 I have sent among you the pestilence after the manner of
           Egypt: your young men have I slain with the sword, and have
           taken away your horses; and I have made the stink of your
           camps to come up unto your nostrils: yet have ye not returned
           unto me, saith the LORD.

30:004:011 I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and
           Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the
           burning: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD.

30:004:012 Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I
           will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

30:004:013 For, lo, he that formeth the mountains, and createth the wind,
           and declareth unto man what is his thought, that maketh the
           morning darkness, and treadeth upon the high places of the
           earth, The LORD, The God of hosts, is his name.

30:005:001 Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a
           lamentation, O house of Israel.

30:005:002 The virgin of Israel is fallen; she shall no more rise: she is
           forsaken upon her land; there is none to raise her up.

30:005:003 For thus saith the Lord GOD; The city that went out by a
           thousand shall leave an hundred, and that which went forth by
           an hundred shall leave ten, to the house of Israel.

30:005:004 For thus saith the LORD unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me,
           and ye shall live:

30:005:005 But seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, and pass not to
           Beersheba: for Gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and
           Bethel shall come to nought.

30:005:006 Seek the LORD, and ye shall live; lest he break out like fire
           in the house of Joseph, and devour it, and there be none to
           quench it in Bethel.

30:005:007 Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness
           in the earth,

30:005:008 Seek him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and turneth
           the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark
           with night: that calleth for the waters of the sea, and
           poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The LORD is his
           name:

30:005:009 That strengtheneth the spoiled against the strong, so that the
           spoiled shall come against the fortress.

30:005:010 They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him
           that speaketh uprightly.

30:005:011 Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor, and ye
           take from him burdens of wheat: ye have built houses of hewn
           stone, but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have planted
           pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them.

30:005:012 For I know your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins:
           they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside
           the poor in the gate from their right.

30:005:013 Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time; for it
           is an evil time.

30:005:014 Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live: and so the LORD,
           the God of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken.

30:005:015 Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in
           the gate: it may be that the LORD God of hosts will be
           gracious unto the remnant of Joseph.

30:005:016 Therefore the LORD, the God of hosts, the LORD, saith thus;
           Wailing shall be in all streets; and they shall say in all the
           highways, Alas! alas! and they shall call the husbandman to
           mourning, and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing.

30:005:017 And in all vineyards shall be wailing: for I will pass through
           thee, saith the LORD.

30:005:018 Woe unto you that desire the day of the LORD! to what end is
           it for you? the day of the LORD is darkness, and not light.

30:005:019 As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went
           into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent
           bit him.

30:005:020 Shall not the day of the LORD be darkness, and not light? even
           very dark, and no brightness in it?

30:005:021 I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in
           your solemn assemblies.

30:005:022 Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I
           will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace
           offerings of your fat beasts.

30:005:023 Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not
           hear the melody of thy viols.

30:005:024 But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a
           mighty stream.

30:005:025 Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the
           wilderness forty years, O house of Israel?

30:005:026 But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your
           images, the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves.

30:005:027 Therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond
           Damascus, saith the LORD, whose name is The God of hosts.

30:006:001 Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the
           mountain of Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to
           whom the house of Israel came!

30:006:002 Pass ye unto Calneh, and see; and from thence go ye to Hamath
           the great: then go down to Gath of the Philistines: be they
           better than these kingdoms? or their border greater than your
           border?

30:006:003 Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of
           violence to come near;

30:006:004 That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their
           couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves
           out of the midst of the stall;

30:006:005 That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves
           instruments of musick, like David;

30:006:006 That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
           ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of
           Joseph.

30:006:007 Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go
           captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves
           shall be removed.

30:006:008 The Lord GOD hath sworn by himself, saith the LORD the God of
           hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces:
           therefore will I deliver up the city with all that is therein.

30:006:009 And it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one
           house, that they shall die.

30:006:010 And a man's uncle shall take him up, and he that burneth him,
           to bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto
           him that is by the sides of the house, Is there yet any with
           thee? and he shall say, No. Then shall he say, Hold thy
           tongue: for we may not make mention of the name of the LORD.

30:006:011 For, behold, the LORD commandeth, and he will smite the great
           house with breaches, and the little house with clefts.

30:006:012 Shall horses run upon the rock? will one plow there with oxen?
           for ye have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of
           righteousness into hemlock:

30:006:013 Ye which rejoice in a thing of nought, which say, Have we not
           taken to us horns by our own strength?

30:006:014 But, behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house of
           Israel, saith the LORD the God of hosts; and they shall
           afflict you from the entering in of Hemath unto the river of
           the wilderness.

30:007:001 Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me; and, behold, he formed
           grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter
           growth; and, lo, it was the latter growth after the king's
           mowings.

30:007:002 And it came to pass, that when they had made an end of eating
           the grass of the land, then I said, O Lord GOD, forgive, I
           beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.

30:007:003 The LORD repented for this: It shall not be, saith the LORD.

30:007:004 Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me: and, behold, the Lord
           GOD called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep,
           and did eat up a part.

30:007:005 Then said I, O Lord GOD, cease, I beseech thee: by whom shall
           Jacob arise? for he is small.

30:007:006 The LORD repented for this: This also shall not be, saith the
           Lord GOD.

30:007:007 Thus he shewed me: and, behold, the LORD stood upon a wall
           made by a plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand.

30:007:008 And the LORD said unto me, Amos, what seest thou? And I said,
           A plumbline. Then said the LORD, Behold, I will set a
           plumbline in the midst of my people Israel: I will not again
           pass by them any more:

30:007:009 And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the
           sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste; and I will rise
           against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.

30:007:010 Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of
           Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst
           of the house of Israel: the land is not able to bear all his
           words.

30:007:011 For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and
           Israel shall surely be led away captive out of their own land.

30:007:012 Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thee away
           into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy
           there:

30:007:013 But prophesy not again any more at Bethel: for it is the
           king's chapel, and it is the king's court.

30:007:014 Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet,
           neither was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdman, and a
           gatherer of sycomore fruit:

30:007:015 And the LORD took me as I followed the flock, and the LORD
           said unto me, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel.

30:007:016 Now therefore hear thou the word of the LORD: Thou sayest,
           Prophesy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the
           house of Isaac.

30:007:017 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Thy wife shall be an harlot in
           the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the
           sword, and thy land shall be divided by line; and thou shalt
           die in a polluted land: and Israel shall surely go into
           captivity forth of his land.

30:008:001 Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me: and behold a basket of
           summer fruit.

30:008:002 And he said, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A basket of
           summer fruit. Then said the LORD unto me, The end is come upon
           my people of Israel; I will not again pass by them any more.

30:008:003 And the songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day,
           saith the Lord GOD: there shall be many dead bodies in every
           place; they shall cast them forth with silence.

30:008:004 Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the
           poor of the land to fail,

30:008:005 Saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn?
           and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah
           small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by
           deceit?

30:008:006 That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair
           of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?

30:008:007 The LORD hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will
           never forget any of their works.

30:008:008 Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that
           dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood; and
           it shall be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of Egypt.

30:008:009 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord GOD,
           that I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will
           darken the earth in the clear day:

30:008:010 And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs
           into lamentation; and I will bring up sackcloth upon all
           loins, and baldness upon every head; and I will make it as the
           mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day.

30:008:011 Behold, the days come, saith the Lord GOD, that I will send a
           famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for
           water, but of hearing the words of the LORD:

30:008:012 And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even
           to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the
           LORD, and shall not find it.

30:008:013 In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for
           thirst.

30:008:014 They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy god, O
           Dan, liveth; and, The manner of Beersheba liveth; even they
           shall fall, and never rise up again.

30:009:001 I saw the LORD standing upon the altar: and he said, Smite the
           lintel of the door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in
           the head, all of them; and I will slay the last of them with
           the sword: he that fleeth of them shall not flee away, and he
           that escapeth of them shall not be delivered.

30:009:002 Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them;
           though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down:

30:009:003 And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will
           search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from
           my sight in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the
           serpent, and he shall bite them:

30:009:004 And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence
           will I command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will
           set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.

30:009:005 And the Lord GOD of hosts is he that toucheth the land, and it
           shall melt, and all that dwell therein shall mourn: and it
           shall rise up wholly like a flood; and shall be drowned, as by
           the flood of Egypt.

30:009:006 It is he that buildeth his stories in the heaven, and hath
           founded his troop in the earth; he that calleth for the waters
           of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth:
           The LORD is his name.

30:009:007 Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children
           of Israel? saith the LORD. Have not I brought up Israel out of
           the land of Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the
           Syrians from Kir?

30:009:008 Behold, the eyes of the Lord GOD are upon the sinful kingdom,
           and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth; saving
           that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the
           LORD.

30:009:009 For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel
           among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet
           shall not the least grain fall upon the earth.

30:009:010 All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which
           say, The evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.

30:009:011 In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is
           fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up
           his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old:

30:009:012 That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the
           heathen, which are called by my name, saith the LORD that
           doeth this.

30:009:013 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the plowman shall
           overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth
           seed; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the
           hills shall melt.

30:009:014 And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel,
           and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and
           they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they
           shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

30:009:015 And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more
           be pulled up out of their land which I have given them, saith
           the LORD thy God.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BIBLE, KING JAMES VERSION, BOOK 30: AMOS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


