Class  J;

BooL

1

Cqpgttl^?-

COPYRIGHT  DEPOSm

THE

KEY   TO   THEOSOPHY

BEING  A  CLEAR  EXPOSITION,   IN  THE  FORM 
OF  QUESTION  AND  ANSWER,  OF  THE

ETHICS,  SCIENCE,  AND  PHILOSOPHY,  FOR  THE  STUDY  OF

WHICH  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

HAS  BEEN  FOUNDED

WITH  A

COPIOUS  GLOSSARY   OF  GENERAL 
THEOSOPHICAL  TERMS

BY

H^pfeLAVATSKY

\></

Second  anD  IRevieeD  Bmertcan  BDitton

'A

NEW   YORK

THEOSOPHICAL   PUBLISHING    COMPANY

144    MADISON   AVENUE

1896

Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1889,  by

H.  P.  Blavatsky,

in  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington,  D.C.

DEDICATED

BY

*'  H.   P.   B.''

TO   ALL   HER   PUPILS,

THAT

THEY   MAY   LEARN   AND   TEACH

IN   THEIR  TURN.

/

J

PREFACE.DEDICATED

BY

*'  H.   P.   B.''

TO   ALL   HER   PUPILS,

THAT

THEY   MAY   LEARN   AND   TEACH

IN   THEIR  TURN.

/

J

PREFACE.

The  purpose  of  this  book  is  exactly  expressed  in  its  title, 
The  Key  to  Theosophy,  and  needs  but  few  words  of  ex- 
planation. It  is  not  a  complete  or  exhaustive  text-book  of 
Theosophy,  but  only  a  key  to  unlock  the  door  that  leads 
to  the  deeper  study.  It  traces  the  broad  outHnes  of  the 
Wisdom- Religion,  and  explains  its  fundamental  principles ; 
meeting,  at  the  same  time,  the  various  objections  raised  by 
the  average  Western  inquirer,  and  endeavoring  to  present 
unfamiliar  concepts  in  a  form  as  simple  and  in  language  as 
clear  as  possible.  That  it  should  succeed  in  making  The- 
osophy intelligible  without  mental  effort  on  the  part  of  the 
reader  would  be  too  much  to  expect ;  but  it  is  hoped  that 
the  obscurity  still  left  is  of  the  thought,  not  of  the  language ; 
is  due  to  depth,  not  to  confusion.  To  the  mentally  lazy  or 
obtuse  Theosophy  must  remain  a  riddle ;  for  in  the  world 
mental  as  in  the  world  spiritual  each  man  must  progress  by 
his  own  efforts.  The  writer  cannot  do  the  reader's  thinking 
for  him,  nor  would  the  latter  be  any  the  better  off  if  such 
vicarious  thought  were  possible.  The  need  for  such  an  ex- 
position as  the  present  has  long  been  felt  among  those  in- 
terested in  the  Theosophical  Society  and  its  work,  and  it  is 
hoped  that  it  will  supply  information,  as  free  as  possible  from 
technicalities,  to  many  whose  attention  has  been  awakened, 
but  who,  as  yet,  are  merely  puzzled  and  not  convinced.

Some  care  has  been  taken  in  disentangling  some  part  of

vii

r

viii  PREFACE.Some  care  has  been  taken  in  disentangling  some  part  of

vii

r

viii  PREFACE.

what  is  true  from  what  is  false  in  Spiritualistic  teachings  as 
to  the  post-mortem  life,  and  in  showing  the  true  nature  of 
Spiritualistic  phenomena.  Previous  explanations  of  a  simi- 
lar kind  have  drawn  much  wrath  upon  the  writer's  devoted 
head,  the  Spiritualists,  like  too  many  others,  preferring  to 
believe  what  is  pleasant  rather  than  what  is  true,  and  be- 
coming very  angry  with  any  one  who  destroys  an  agree- 
able delusion.  For  the  past  year  Theosophy  has  been  the 
target  for  every  poisoned  arrow  of  Spiritualism,  as  though 
the  possessors  of  a  half-truth  felt  more  antagonism  to  the 
possessors  of  the  whole  truth  than  those  who  had  no  share 
to  boast  of.

Very  hearty  thanks  are  due  from  the  author  to  many 
Theosophists  who  have  sent  suggestions  and  questions,  or 
have  otherwise  contributed  help  during  the  writing  of  this 
book.  The  work  will  be  the  more  useful  for  their  aid,  and 
that  will  be  their  best  reward.

H.  P.  B.

London,  1889.

PREFACE    TO    THE    SECOND    EDITION.

In  order  to  further  facilitate  the  study  of  Theosophy, 
which  the  Key  has  already  made  an  easy  task,  I  have 
added  a  copious  Glossary  of  all  the  technical  terms  found 
in  it.  Most  of  the  definitions  and  explanations  are  transcrip- 
tions or  abbreviations  from  the  larger  Theosophical  Glossary, 
It  is  hoped  that  both  Glossaries  will  supply  a  long-felt 
want,  and  that  the  larger  one  will  cover  the  whole  range 
of  occult  terminology  as  completely  as  possible.

H.  P.  B.

London,  1890.

PREFACE   TO    THE    SECOND    AND    REVISED 
AMERICAN    EDITION.H.  P.  B.

London,  1890.

PREFACE   TO    THE    SECOND    AND    REVISED 
AMERICAN    EDITION.

The  main  features  of  the  revision  attempted  are:  (i)  a 
systematic  use  of  italics  and  capitals ;  (2)  a  consistent  trans- 
literation of  Sanskrit  words  ;  (3)  the  correction  of  some  mis- 
takes intimated  by  H.  P.  B.  while  still  living ;  (4)  the  re- 
moval of  some  obscurities  of  style  ;  (5)  the  omission  of  some 
passages  of  a  controversial  nature  which  are  no  longer  of 
general  interest.

It  is  thought  that  a  change  of  form  in  the  mechanical  con- 
struction of  the  book  will  be  welcomed  by  most  students, 
numerous  complaints  having  been  made  concerning  the  size 
and  generally  unwieldy  form  of  all  the  preceding  editions.

New  York,  1895.

CONTENTS.

SECTION    I.

Theosophy  and  the  Theosophical  Society.

PAGE

The  Meaning  of  the  Name         .......        i

The  Policy  of  the  Theosophical  Society      .....        5

The  Wisdom-Religion  Esoteric  in  all  Ages         ....        7

Theosophy  is  not  Buddhism      .  .  .  .  .         .  .12

SECTION    II. 
Exoteric  and  Esoteric  Theosophy.

What  the  Modern  Theosophical  Society  is  not    . 
Theosophists  and  Members  of  the  Theosophical  Society 
The  Difference  between  Theosophy  and  Occultism     . 
The  Difference  between  Theosophy  and  Spiritualism 
Why  is  Theosophy  Accepted?  .....

15 
18

23

25 
32

SECTION    III.

The  Working  System  of  the  Theosophical  Society.

The  Objects  of  the  Society         .......     36

The  Common  Origin  of  Man     .  .  .  .  .  .  -38

Our  Other  Objects    .........     43

On  the  Sacredness  of  the  Pledge        ......     44

SECTION    IV.

The  Relations  of  the  Theosophical  Society  to  Theosophy.

On  Self- Improvement        ........     47

The  Abstract  and  the  Concrete  ......      50

xu

CONTENTS,SECTION    IV.

The  Relations  of  the  Theosophical  Society  to  Theosophy.

On  Self- Improvement        ........     47

The  Abstract  and  the  Concrete  ......      50

xu

CONTENTS,

SECTION   V. 
The  Fundamental  Teachings  of  Theosophy.

On  God  and  Prayer  ....

Is  it  Necessary  to  Pray?   .

Prayer  Kills  Self-Reliance

On  the  Source  of  the  Human  Soul    .

The  Buddhist  Teachings  on  the  Above

55 
59 
64 
67 
69

SECTION    VI.

Theosophical  Teachings  as  to  Nature  and  Man.

The  Unity  of  All  in  All 75

Evolution  and  Illusion      ........     76

On  the  Septenary  Constitution  of  our  Planet      .  .  .  -     79

The  Septenary  Nature  of  Man  .         .         .  .  .         ,  .81

The  Distinction  between  Soul  and  Spirit    .  .         .         .  -83

The  Greek  Teachings 86

SECTION   VII.

On  the  Various  Post- Mortem  States.

The  Physical  and  the  Spiritual  Man  .... 
On  Eternal  Reward  and  Punishment,  and  on  Nirvana 
On  the  Various  *'  Principles  '*  in  Man        .         .

SECTION  VIII.

On  Reincarnation  or  Rebirth.

What  is  Memory  according  to  Theosophical  Teaching? 
Why  do  we  not  Remember  our  Past  Lives? 
On  Individuality  and  Personality       .... 
On  the  Reward  and  Punishment  of  the  Ego

90

97 
104

109

113 
118 
122

SECTION  IX.

On  Kamaloka  and  Devachan.

On  the  Fate  of  the  Lower  Principles 127

Why   Theosophists    do   not   Believe   in   the    Return    of    Pure

'*  Spirits" 129

CONTENTS,  xiii

PAGE

A  Few  Words  about  the  Skandhas    .         .         .         .         .         .137

On  Post- Mortem  and  Postnatal  Consciousness  .         .  .   139

What  is  Really  Meant  by  Annihilation 145

Definite  Words  for  Definite  Things 152

SECTION    X.

On  the  Nature  of  our  Thinking  Principle.

The  Mystery  of  the  Ego  ........    157

The  Complex  Nature  of  Manas 162Definite  Words  for  Definite  Things 152

SECTION    X.

On  the  Nature  of  our  Thinking  Principle.

The  Mystery  of  the  Ego  ........    157

The  Complex  Nature  of  Manas 162

The  Doctrine  is  Taught  in  St.  John's  Gospel     .         .         .         .165

SECTION    XI.

On  the  Mysteries  of  Reincarnation.

Periodical  Rebirths 175

What  is  Karma? 178

Who  are  Those  who  Know?     .         .         .         .         .         .         .191

The  Difference  between  Faith  and  Knowledge;  or,  Blind  and

Reasoned  Faith 193

SECTION   XII. 
What  is  Practical  Theosophy?

Duty 202

The    Relations   of  the   Theosophical    Society  to   Political   Re- 
forms        ..........  206

On  Self-Sacrifice       .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .211

On  Charity 215

Theosophy  for  the  Masses 2x8

How  Members  can  Help  the  Society 221

What  a  Theosophist  ought  not  to  Do         .         .         »         .         .  222

SECTION   XIII.

On  the  Misconceptions  about  the  Theosophical  Society.

Theosophy  and  Asceticism 230

Theosophy  and  Marriage 234

Theosophy  and  Education 235

Why,  then,  is  there  so  Much  Prejudice  against  the  Theosophical

Society?    ..,..,....  242

xiv  CONTENTS,

SECTION    XIV. 
The  "  Theosophical  Mahatmas."

PAGE

Are  they  '*  Spirits  of  Light"  or  ''  Goblins  Damn'd"  ?          .         .  244 
The  Abuse  of  Sacred  Names  and  Terms 252

CONCLUSION.

The  Future  of  the  Theosophical  Society    .....   254

Glossary        .         .  261

Index 325

THE  KEY  TO  THEOSOPHY.

I.

THEOSOPHY  AND  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY.

THE  MEANING   OF   THE  NAME,

Inquirer. —  Theosophy  aiid  its  doctrines  are  often  referred 
to  as  a  new-fa?tgled  religion.     Is  it  a  religion  ?

Theosophist. — It  is  not.  Theosophy  is  Divine  Know- 
ledge or  Science.Theosophist. — It  is  not.  Theosophy  is  Divine  Know- 
ledge or  Science.

Inq. —  What  is  the  real  meaning  of  the  term  ?

Theo. — Divine  Wisdom,  Theosophia  (Qsoao'f ta),  or  Wis- 
dom of  the  Gods,  as  Theogonia  (OeoYovia),  Genealogy  of 
the  Gods.  The  word  Bsot;  means  a  God  in  Greek,  one  of 
the  divine  beings ;  certainly  not  ''  God  "  in  the  sense  at- 
tached in  our  day  to  the  term.  Therefore  it  is  not  ''  Wis- 
dom of  God,"  as  translated  by  some,  but  Divine  Wisdom 
such  as  that  possessed  by  the  Gods.  The  term  is  many 
thousand  years  old.

Inq. —  What  is  the  origin  of  the  name  ?

Theo. — It  comes  to  us  from  the  Alexandrian  philoso- 
phers, called  lovers  of  truth,  Philaletheians,  houiphil  (cpiX), 
*' loving,"  and  aletheia  (aX-fjOeia),  ''truth."     The  name  The-

2  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

osophy  dates  from  the  third  century  of  our  era,  and  began 
with  Ammonius  Saccas  and  his  disciples,  who  started  the 
Eclectic  Theosophical  system,  and  were  also  called  Analoget- 
icists.  As  explained  by  Professor  Alexander  Wilder,  M.D., 
F.T.S.,  in  his  New  Platonism  and  Alchemy ^^  they  were  so 
called —

Because  of  their  practice  of  interpreting  all  sacred  legends  and  nar- 
ratives, myths  and  mysteries,  by  a  rule  or  principle  of  analogy  and 
correspondence,  so  that  events  which  were  related  as  having  occurred 
in  the  external  world  were  regarded  as  expressing  operations  and  ex- 
periences of  the  human  soul.They  were  also  denominated  Neoplatonists.  Though 
Theosophy,  or  the  Eclectic  Theosophical  system,  is  gener- 
ally attributed  to  the  third  century,  yet,  if  Diogenes  Laertius 
is  to  be  credited,  its  origin  is  much  earlier,  as  he  attributed 
the  system  to  an  Egyptian  priest,  Pot  Amun,  who  lived  in 
the  early  days  of  the  Ptolemaic  dynasty.  The  same  author 
tells  us  that  the  name  is  Coptic,  and  signifies  one  consecrated 
to  Amun,  the  God  of  Wisdom.  Theosophy  is  the  equiva- 
lent of  the  Sanskrit  Brahma- Vidya,  Divine  Knowledge.

Inq. —  What  was  the  object  of  this  system  ?

Theo. — First  of  all  to  inculcate  certain  great  moral  truths 
upon  its  disciples  and  all  those  who  were  *' lovers  of  the 
truth.'*  Hence  also  the  motto  adopted  by  the  Theosoph- 
ical Society  :  ''  There  is  no  religion  higher  than  truth."

Eclectic  Theosophy  was  divided  under  three  heads: 
(i)  Belief  in  one  absolute,  incomprehensible,  and  supreme 
Deity,  or  infinite  essence,  which  is  the  root  of  all  Nature, 
and  of  all  that  is,  visible  and  invisible.  (2)  Belief  in  man's 
eternal  immortal  nature,  which,  being  a  radiation  of  the 
Universal  Soul,  is  of  an  identical  essence  with  it.    (3)  The-

*  A  Sketch  of  the  Doctrines  and  Principal  Teachers  of  the  Eclectic  or  A  lexan- 
drian  School ;  also  an  Otitline  of  the  Interior  Doctrines  of  the  Alchemists  of  the 
Middle  Ages.     Albany,  N.  Y.,  1869.

#

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  3#

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  3

urgy,  or  ''  divine  work,''  or  producing  a  work  of  Gods  ;  from 
theoiy  *' Gods,"  and  ergem,  *'to  work."  The  term  is  very 
old,  but,  as  it  belongs  to  the  vocabulary  of  the  Mysteries, 
was  not  in  popular  use.  It  was  a  mystic  belief — practically 
proven  by  initiated  Adepts  and  priests — that,  by  making 
one's  self  as  pure  as  the  incorporeal  beings — i.e.,  by  retiurn- 
ing  to  one's  pristine  purity  of  Nature — man  could  move  the 
Gods  to  impart  to  him  Divine  Mysteries,  and  even  cause 
them  to  become  occasionally  visible,  either  subjectively  or 
objectively.  It  was  the  transcendental  aspect  of  what  is 
now  called  ''  Spiritualism  " ;  but  having  been  abused  and 
misconceived  by  the  populace,  it  had  come  to  be  regarded 
by  some  as  necromancy,  and  was  generally  forbidden.  A 
travestied  practice  of  the  Theurgy  of  lamblichus  lingers 
still  in  the  ceremonial  magic  of  some  modern  Kabalists. 
Modern  Theosophy  avoids  and  rejects  both  these  kinds  of 
magic  and  necromancy  as  being  very  dangerous.  Real 
divine  Theurgy  requires  an  almost  superhuman  purity  and 
hoKness  of  life ;  otherwise  it  degenerates  into  mediumship 
or  black  magic.  The  immediate  disciples  of  Ammonius 
Saccas,  who  was  called  Theodidaktos, '' God-taught" — such 
as  Plotinus  and  his  follower  Porphyry — rejected  Theurgy 
at  first,  but  were  finally  reconciled  to  it  through  lamblichus, 
who  wrote  a  work  to  that  effect  entitled  De  Mysteriis^ 
under  the  name  of  his  own  master,  a  famous  Egyptian 
priest  called  Abammon.  Ammonius  Saccas  was  the  son  of 
Christian  parents ;  but  being  from  his  childhood  repelled 
by  dogmatic  spiritualistic  Christianity,  he  became  a  Neo- 
platonist,  and,  hke  Jakob  Bohme  and  other  great  seers  and 
mystics,  is  said  to  have  had  Divine  Wisdom  revealed  to  him 
in  dreams  and  visions.  Hence  his  name  of  Theodidaktos. 
He  resolved  to  reconcile  every  system  of  religion,  and,  by 
demonstrating  their  identical  origin,  establish  one  universal 
creed  based  on  ethics.  His  life  was  so  blameless  and  pure, 
his  learning  so  profound  and  vast,  that  several  church4  7V/£  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

fathers  were  his  secret  disciples.  Clemens  Alexandrinus 
speaks  very  highly  of  him.  Plotinus,  the  ''  St.  John  "  of 
Ammonius,  was  also  a  man  universally  respected  and 
esteemed,  and  of  the  most  profound  learning  and  integ- 
rity. When  thirty-nine  years  of  age  he  accompanied  the 
Roman  Emperor  Gordian  and  his  army  to  the  East,  to  be 
instructed  by  the  sages  of  Bactria  and  India.  He  had  a 
school  of  philosophy  in  Rome.  Porphyry,  his  disciple,  a 
Hellenized  Jew,  whose  real  name  was  Malek,  collected  all 
the  writings  of  his  master.  Porphyry  was  also  himself  a 
great  author,  and  gave  an  allegorical  interpretation  of 
some  parts  of  Homer's  writings.  The  system  of  medita- 
tion the  Philaletheians  resorted  to  was  ecstasy,  a  system 
akin  to  Indian  Yoga-practice.  What  is  known  of  the  Ec- 
lectic school  is  due  to  Origen,  Longinus,  and  Plotinus,  the 
immediate  disciples  of  Ammonius.*

The  chief  aim  of  the  founders  of  the  Eclectic  Theo- 
sophical  school  was  one  of  the  three  objects  of  its  modem 
successor,  the  Theosophical  Society,  namely,  to  reconcile 
all  religions,  sects,  and  nations  under  a  common  system  of 
ethics  based  on  eternal  verities.

Inq. —  What  have  you  to  show  that  this  is  not  an  impos- 
sible dream,  and  that  all  the  world's  religions  are  based  on 
the  one  and  the  same  truth  ?

Theo. — Their  comparative  study  and  analysis.  The 
''  Wisdom-Religion  "  was  one  in  antiquity ;  and  the  same- 
ness of  primitive  religious  philosophy  is  proven  to  us  by 
the  identical  doctrines  taught  to  the  Initiates  during  the 
Mysteries,  an  institution  once  universally  diffused.  As 
Dr.  Wilder  says :All  the  old  worships  indicate  the  existence  of  a  single  Theosophy 
anterior  to  them.  The  key  that  is  to  open  one  must  open  all ;  other- 
wise it  cannot  be  the  right  key.

*  For  further  information  see  Dr.  Wilder's  pamphlet.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

THE  POLICY  OF   THE    THEOSOPHICAL   SOCIETY,

li^Q.^—I/i  the  days  of  Animonius  there  were  several  great 
a>*cient  i-eligions,  and  the  sects  m  Egypt  and  Palestine  alone 
were  numerous.     How  could  he  reconcile  them  ?

Theo. — By  doing  that  which  we  again  try  to  do  now. 
The  Neoplatonists  were  a  large  body,  and  belonged  to  va- 
rious religious  philosophies ;  so  do  our  Theosophists.

It  was  under  Philadelphus  that  Judaism  established  itself 
in  Alexandria,  and  forthwith  the  Hellenic  teachers  became 
the  dangerous  rivals  of  the  College  of  Rabbis  of  Babylon. 
As  the  author  of  New  Platonism  very  pertinently  remarks :

The  Buddhistic,  Vedantic,  and  Magian  systems  were  expounded 
along  with  the  philosophies  of  Greece.  It  was  not  wonderful  that 
thoughtful  men  supposed  that  the  strife  of  words  ought  to  cease, 
and  considered  it  possible  to  extract  one  harmonious  system  from  the 
various  teachings.  .  .  .  Pantaenus,  Athenagoras,  and  Clement  were 
thoroughly  instructed  in  the  Platonic  philosophy,  and  comprehended 
its  essential  unity  with  the  Oriental  systems.In  those  days  the  Jew  Aristobulus  affirmed  that  the 
ethics  of  Aristotle  represented  the  esoteric  teachings  of  the 
law  of  Moses ;  Philo  Judaeus  endeavored  to  reconcile  the 
Pentateuch  with  the  Pythagorean  and  Platonic  philosophy ; 
and  Josephus  proved  that  the  Essenes  of  Carmel  were 
simply  the  copyists  and  followers  of  the  Egyptian  Thera- 
peutae,  or  Healers.  So  it  is  in  our  day.  We  can  show 
the  line  of  descent  of  every  Christian  religion,  as  of  every 
— even  the  smallest — sect.  The  latter  are  the  minor  twigs 
or  shoots  grown  on  the  larger  branches ;  but  shoots  and 
branches  spring  from  the  same  trunk — the  Wisdom-Re- 
Ugion.  To  prove  this  was  the  aim  of  Ammonius,  who 
endeavored  to  induce  Gentiles  and  Christians,  Jews  and 
idolaters,  to  lay  aside  their  contentions  and  strifes,  remem- 
bering only  that  they  were  all  in  possession  of  the  same

6  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

truth  under  various  vestments,  and  were  all  the  children  of 
a  common  mother.  This  is  the  aim  of  Theosophy  like- 
wise.

Says  Mosheim  of  Ammonius :

Conceiving  that  not  only  the  philosophers  of  Greece,  but  also  all 
those  of  the  different  barbarous  nations,  were  perfectly  in  unison  with 
each  other  with  regard  to  every  essential  point,  [he]  made  it  his  busi- 
ness so  to  expound  the  tenets  of  all  these  various  sects  as  to  make  it 
appear  they  had  all  originated  from  one  and  the  same  source,  and 
tended  all  to  one  and  the  same  end.

If  the  writer  on  Ammonius  in  the  Edinburgh  Encyclo- 
pedia knows  what  he  is  talking  about,  then  he  describes 
the  modern  Theosophists,  their  behefs  and  their  work,  for 
he  says,  speaking  of  the  Theodidaktos :He  adopted  the  doctrines  which  were  received  in  Egypt  [the  esoteric 
were  those  of  India]  concerning  the  universe  and  the  Deity,  consid- 
ered as  constituting  one  great  whole ;  concerning  the  eternity  of  the 
world.  .  .  .  He  also  established  a  system  of  moral  discipline  which  al- 
lowed the  people  in  general  to  live  according  to  the  laws  of  their  country 
and  the  dictates  of  Nature,  but  required  the  wise  to  exalt  their  mind  by 
contemplation.

Inq. —  What  are  yoicr  authorities  for  saying  all  this  of  the 
a7icient  Theosophists  of  Alexandria?

Theo. — An  almost  countless  number  of  well-known 
writers.  Mosheim — one  of  them — says  that  Ammonius 
taught  that —

The  religion  of  the  multitude  went  hand  in  hand  with  philosophy, 
and  with  her  had  shared  the  fate  of  being  by  degrees  corrupted  and  ob- 
scured with  mere  human  conceits,  superstition,  and  lies  ;  and  it  ought, 
therefore,  to  be  brought  back  to  its  original  purity  by  purging  it  of  this 
dross  and  expounding  it  upon  philosophical  principles  ;  and  the  whole 
which  Christ  had  in  view  was  to  reinstate  and  restore  to  its  primitive 
integrity  the  Wisdom  of  the  ancients  ;  to  reduce  within  bounds  the  uni- 
versally prevailing  dominion  of  superstition ;  and  in  part  to  correct,  and 
in  part  to  exterminate,  the  various  errors  that  had  found  their  way  into 
the  different  popular  religions.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  7THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  7

This,  again,  is  precisely  what  the  modern  Theosophists 
say;  only  while  the  great  Philaletheian  was  supported  and 
helped  in  the  policy  he  pursued  by  two  church  fathers, 
Clement  and  Athenagoras,  by  the  learned  rabbis  of  the 
synagogue,  by  the  philosophers  of  the  Academy  and  the 
Grove,  and  while  he  taught  a  common  doctrine  for  all,  we, 
his  followers  on  the  same  line,  receive  no  recognition,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  are  abused  and  persecuted.  People  fifteen 
hundred  years  ago  are  thus  shown  to  have  been  more  tol- 
erant than  they  are  in  this  ''  enlightened  "  century.

Inq. —  Was  Ammomus  encouraged  a?id  supported  by  the 
church  because^  notwithsta7idi7ig  his  heresies^  he  taught  Chris- 
tianity and  was  a  Christiaii  ?

Theo. — Not  at  all.  He  was  born  a  Christian,  but  never 
accepted  church  Christianity.   As  said  of  him  by  Dr.  Wilder :

He  had  but  to  propound  his  instructions  **  according  to  the  ancient 
pillars  of  Hermes,  which  Plato  and  Pythagoras  knew  before,  and  from 
them  constituted  their  philosophy. "  Finding  the  same  in  the  prologue 
of  the  Gospel  according  to  John,  he  very  properly  supposed  that  the 
purpose  of  Jesus  was  to  restore  the  great  doctrine  of  Wisdom  in  its 
primitive  integrity.  The  narratives  of  the  Bible  and  the  stories  of  the 
Gods  he  considered  to  be  allegories  illustrative  of  the  truth,  or  else 
fables  to  be  rejected.

Moreover,  as  says  the  Edinburgh  Encyclopedia:

He  acknowledged  that  Jesus  Christ  was  an  excellent  man  and  the 
friend  of  God,  but  alleged  that  it  was  not  his  design  entirely  to  abolish 
the  worship  of  demons  [Gods],  and  that  his  only  intention  was  to 
purify  the  ancient  religion.

THE  WISDOM-RELIGION  ESOTERIC  IN  ALL  AGES,THE  WISDOM-RELIGION  ESOTERIC  IN  ALL  AGES,

Inq. — Sifice  A7?imonius  never  committed  anythiiig  to  writ- 
ings how  can  one  feel  sure  that  such  were  his  teachings?

Theo. — Neither  did  Buddha,  Pythagoras,  Confucius, 
Orpheus,  Socrates,  nor  even  Jesus,  leave  behind  them  any

8  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

writings.  Yet  most  of  these  are  historical  personages,  ana 
their  teachings  have  all  survived.  The  disciples  of  Am- 
monius,  among  whom  were  Origen  and  Herennius,  wrote 
treatises  and  explained  his  ethics.  Certainly  the  latter  ar^ 
as  historical,  if  not  more  so,  than  the  apostolic  writings. 
Moreover,  his  pupils — Origen,  Plotinus,  and  Longinus, 
counselor  of  the  famous  Queen  Zenobia — have  all  left  rec- 
ords of  the  Philaletheian  system — so  far,  at  all  events,  ay 
their  pubHc  profession  of  faith  was  known ;  for  the  school 
was  divided  into  exoteric  and  esoteric  teachings.

Inq. — How  have  the  latte?^  tenets  reached  our  day,  sifici 
you  hold  that  what  is  properly  called  the  Wisdom- Re ligioi 
was  esoteric?

Theo. — The  Wisdom- ReHgion  was  ever  one  and  th^ 
same,  and  being  the  last  word  of  possible  human  know 
ledge,  was  therefore  carefully  preserved.  It  preceded  bj 
long  ages  the  Alexandrian  Theosophists,  reached  the  mod 
em,  and  will  survive  every  other  religion  and  philosophy.

Inq. —  Where  and  by  whom  was  it  so  preserved  ?

Theo. — Among  Initiates  of  every  country ;  among  pro- 
found seekers  after  truth — their  disciples ;  and  in  those  part^ 
of  the  world  where  such  topics  have  always  been  most 
valued  and  pursued— in  India,  central  Asia,  and  Persia.

Inq. — Can  you  give  fue  some  proofs  of  its  esotericism?Inq. — Can  you  give  fue  some  proofs  of  its  esotericism?

Theo. — The  best  proof  you  can  have  of  the  fact  is  that 
every  ancient  religious,  or  rather  philosophical,  cult  con- 
sisted of  an  esoteric  or  secret  teaching,  and  an  exoteric  oi 
outward  public  worship.  Furthermore,  it  is  a  well-known 
fact  that  the  Mysteries  of  the  ancients  comprised  with  every 
nation  the  Greater  (secret)  and  Lesser  (pubHc)  Mysteries — - 
as,  for  instance,  in  the  celebrated  solemnities  called  the 
Eleusinia,  in  Greece.  From  the  Hierophants  of  Samothrace, 
Egypt,  and  the  initiated  Brahmans  of  the  India  of  old,  down 
to  the  later  Hebrew  rabbis,  all,  for  fear  of  profanation,  kept

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  9THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  9

their  real  bona-fide  beliefs  secret.  The  Jewish  rabbis  called 
their  secular  religious  series  the  Mercavah,  or  exterior  body, 
the  ''  vehicle  "  or  covering  which  contains  the  hiddeii  soul — 
their  highest  secret  knowledge.  The  priests  of  the  ancient 
nations  never  imparted  their  real  philosophical  secrets  to  the 
masses.  They  allotted  to  the  latter  only  the  husks.  North- 
ern Buddhism  has  its  Greater  and  its  Lesser  Vehicle,  known 
as  the  Mahayana,  the  esoteric,  and  the  Hinayana,  the  exo- 
teric, schools.  Nor  can  you  blame  them  for  such  secrecy ; 
for  surely  you  would  not  think  of  feeding  your  flock  of 
sheep  on  learned  dissertations  on  botany  instead  of  on 
grass.  Pythagoras  called  his  Gnosis  *'the  knowledge  of 
things  that  are,"  or  •/]  ^\(hzic,  Tdiv  ovtojv,  and  preserved  that 
Knowledge  for  his  pledged  disciples  only — for  those  who 
could  digest  such  mental  food  and  feel  satisfied ;  whom 
he  pledged  to  silence  and  secrecy.  Occult  alphabets  and 
secret  ciphers  are  the  development  of  the  old  Egyptian 
hieratic  writings,  the  secret  of  which  was,  in  the  days  of  old, 
in  the  possession  only  of  the  Hierogrammatists,  or  initiated 
Egyptian  priests.  Ammonius  Saccas,  as  his  biographers 
tell  us,  bound  his  pupils  by  oath  not  to  divulge  his  higher 
doctri7ies  except  to  those  who  had  already  been  instructed 
in  preliminary  knowledge,  and  who  were  also  bound  by  a 
pledge.  Finally,  do  we  not  find  the  same  also  in  early 
Christianity,  among  the  Gnostics,  and  even  in  the  teachings 
of  Christ  ?  Did  he  not  speak  to  the  multitudes  in  parables 
which  had  a  twofold  meaning,  and  explain  his  reasons  only 
to  his  disciples  ?  ''  Unto  you,"  he  says,  ''  it  is  given  to  know 
the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  of  God :  but  unto  them  that 
are  without,  all  these  things  are  done  in  parables."  *  And 
the  author  of  New  Platonism  tells  us  that —The  Essenes  of  Judea  and  Carmel  made  similar  distinctions,  divid- 
ing their  adherents  into  neophytes,  brethren,  and  the  perfect  [or  those 
initiated],

*  Mark  iv.  w-

10  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

Examples  might  be  brought  from  every  country  to  this 
effect.

Inq. — Ca?t  you  attam  the  ^'Secret  Wisdo?n''  simply  by 
study?  Encyclopedias  deji?ie  Theosophy  pretty  much  as 
Webster's  Dictiofiary  does,  i,e,,  as  ''  supposed  intercourse  with 
God  and  superior  spirits,  and  conseque?it  attainment  of  super- 
humaii  knowledge  by  physical ,  ,  ,  or  ,  ,  ,  chemical  processes  T 
Is  this  so  ?

Theo. — I  think  not.  Nor  is  there  any  lexicographer 
capable  of  explaining,  whether  to  himself  or  others,  how  S2i- 
perhuman  knowledge  can  be  attained  by  physical  or  chemical 
processes.  Had  Webster  said  by  metaphysical  and  alchemi- 
cal processes,  the  definition  would  be  approximately  cor- 
rect ;  as  it  is,  it  is  absurd.  Ancient  Theosophists  claimed, 
and  so  do  the  modern,  that  the  Infinite  cannot  be  known  by 
the  finite — i.e.,  sensed  by  the  finite  self — but  that  the  divine 
essence  could  be  communicated  to  the  higher  spiritual  Self 
in  a  state  of  ecstasy.  This  condition  can  hardly  be  attained, 
like  hypnotism,  by  ''  physical  and  chemical  processes."

Inq. —  What  is  your  explanation  of  it?Inq. —  What  is  your  explanation  of  it?

Theo. — Real  ecstasy  was  defined  by  Plotinus  as  ''the 
liberation  of  the  mind  from  its  finite  consciousness,  becom- 
ing one  and  identified  with  the  Infinite."  This  is  the  high- 
est condition,  says  Dr.  A.  Wilder,  but  not  one  of  permanent 
duration,  and  it  is  reached  only  by  the  very,  very  few.  It 
is,  indeed,  identical  with  that  state  which  is  known  in 
India  as  Samadhi.  The  latter  is  practised  by  the  Yogis, 
who  facilitate  it  physically  by  the  greatest  abstinence  in 
food  and  drink,  and  mentally  by  an  incessant  endeavor  to 
purify  and  elevate  the  mind.  Meditation  is  silent  and  un- 
uttered  prayer,  or,  as  Plato  expressed  it :

The  ardent  turning  of  the  soul  toward  God ;  not  to  ask  any  particu- 
lar good  [as  in  the  common  meaning  of  prayer],  but  for  good  itself —

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  11

for  the  universal  Supreme  Good  [of  which  we  are  a  part  on  earth,  and 
out  of  the  essence  of  which  we  have  all  emerged].  .  .  .  Therefore  re- 
main silent  in  the  presence  of  the  divine  ones,  till  they  remove  the 
clouds  from  thy  eyes  and  enable  thee  to  see,  by  the  light  which  issues 
from  themselves,  not  what  appears  as  good  to  thee,  but  what  is  intrin- 
sically good.

This  is  what  the  scholarly  author  of  N'ew  Flatonism, 
Dr.  A.  Wilder,  describes  as  ''  spiritual  photography  "  :This  is  what  the  scholarly  author  of  N'ew  Flatonism, 
Dr.  A.  Wilder,  describes  as  ''  spiritual  photography  "  :

The  soul  is  the  camera  in  which  facts  and  events,  future,  past,  and 
present,  are  alike  fixed;  and  the  mind  becomes  conscious  of  them. 
Beyond  our  every-day  w^orld  of  limits,  all  is  one  day  or  state — the  past 
and  future  comprised  in  the  present.  .  .  .  [Death  is  the  last  ecstasis 
on  earth.]  Then  the  soul  is  freed  from  the  constraint  of  the  body, 
and  its  nobler  part  is  united  to  higher  Nature  and  becomes  partaker  in 
the  wisdom  and  foreknowledge  of  the  higher  beings.

Real  Theosophy  is,  for  the  mystics,  that  state  which 
Apollonius  of  Tyana  was  made  to  describe  thus :

I  can  see  the  present  and  the  future  as  in  a  clear  mirror.  The  sage 
need  not  wait  for  the  vapors  of  the  earth  and  the  corruption  of  the  air 
to  foresee  [events].  .  .  .  The  theoi,  or  Gods,  see  the  future;  com- 
mon men,  the  present ;  sages,  that  which  is  about  to  take  place.

The  Theosophy  of  the  sages  he  speaks  of  is  well  ex- 
pressed in  the  assertion,  '^  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within 
us."

Inq. — Theosophy^  then^  is  7iot^  as  held  by  some,  a  newly 
devised  scheme  ?

Theo. — Only  ignorant  people  can  thus  refer  to  it.  It 
is  as  old  as  the  world,  in  its  teachings  and  ethics,  if  not  in 
name,  as  it  is  also  the  broadest  and  most  catholic  system 
among  all.

Inq. — How  comes  it,  then,  that  Theosophy  has  remained 
so  u7iknown  to  the  natiojis  of  the  western  he7nisphere  ?  Why 
should  it  have  been  a  sealed  book  to  races  confessedly  the  most 
cultured  and  advanced?

12  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.12  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

Theo. — We  believe  there  were  nations  as  cultured  in  days 
of  old,  and  certainly  more  spiritually  "  advanced,"  than  we 
are.  But  there  are  several  reasons  for  this  wiUing  igno- 
rance. One  of  them  was  given  by  St.  Paul  to  the  cultured 
Athenians — a  loss,  for  long  centuries,  of  real  spiritual  in- 
sight, and  even  interest,  owing  to  their  too  great  devotion 
to  things  of  sense  and  their  long  slavery  to  the  dead  letter 
of  dogma  and  rituahsm.  But  the  strongest  reason  for  it  lies 
in  the  fact  that  real  Theosophy  has  ever  been  kept  secret.

Inq. —  You  have  brought  fo^^ward proofs  that  such  secrecy 
has  existed;  but  what  was  the  real  cause  for  it?

Theo. — The  causes  for  it  were :  Firstly,  the  perversity 
of  average  human  nature,  and  its  selfishness,  always  tending 
to  the  gratification  oi  perso7ial  desires  to  the  detriment  of 
neighbors  and  next  of  kin.  Such  people  could  never  be 
intrusted  with  divifte  secrets.  Secondly,  their  unreHability 
to  keep  the  sacred  and  divine  knowledge  from  desecration. 
It  is  the  latter  which  led  to  the  perversion  of  the  most  sub- 
lime truths  and  symbols,  and  to  the  gradual  transformation 
of  things  spiritual  into  anthropomorphic,  concrete,  and  gross 
imagery — in  other  words,  to  the  dwarfing  of  the  God-idea 
and  to  idolatry.

THEOSOPHY  IS  NOT  BUDDHISM,

Inq. —  Yo7i  are  often  spoke?i  of  as  "  Esoteric  Buddhists.^^ 
Are  you  ^  theu^  all  followers  of  Gautama  Buddha?THEOSOPHY  IS  NOT  BUDDHISM,

Inq. —  Yo7i  are  often  spoke?i  of  as  "  Esoteric  Buddhists.^^ 
Are  you  ^  theu^  all  followers  of  Gautama  Buddha?

Theo. — No  more  than  musicians  are  all  followers  of 
Wagner.  Some  of  us  are  Buddhists  by  religion ;  yet  there 
are  far  more  Hindus  and  Brahmans  than  Buddhists  among 
us,  and  more  Christian-born  Europeans  and  Americans  than 
converted  Buddhists.  The  mistake  has  arisen  from  a  mis- 
understanding of  the  real  meaning  of  the  title  of  Mr.  A.  P. 
Sinnett's  excellent  work,  Esoteric  Buddhism,  The  last  word 
ought  to  have  been  spelled  with  one  instead  of  two  d'Sy  for

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  13

then  Budhism  would  have  meant  what  it  was  intended  for, 
namely,  ''  Wisdom- Religion  "  (from  bodha^  bodhi,  *'  intelli- 
gence," *'  wisdom  "),  instead  of  Buddhisiii^  Gautama^s  re- 
ligious philosophy.  Theosophy,  as  already  said,  is  the 
Wisdom-Religion.

Inq. —  What  is  the  difference  between  Buddhism,  thereIigio?i 
fou7ided  by  the  Priiice  of  Kapilavastu^  and  Budhism,  the  ''  Wis- 
dom-Religio7i  "  which  you  say  is  synonymous  with  Theosophy?

Theo. — Just  the  same  difference  as  there  is  between  the 
later  rituahsm  and  dogmatic  theology  of  the  churches  and 
sects,  and  the  secret  teachings  of  Christ,  which  are  called 
''  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Buddha  means 
the  ''  Enhghtened  "  by  Bodha,  or  Understanding,  Wisdom. 
This  has  passed  root  and  branch  into  the  esoteric  tesLchings 
that  Gautama  imparted  to  his  chosen  Arhats  only.

Inq. — But  some  Orientalists  deny  that  Buddha  ever  taught 
any  esoteric  doctrine  at  all,Inq. — But  some  Orientalists  deny  that  Buddha  ever  taught 
any  esoteric  doctrine  at  all,

Theo. — They  may  as  well  deny  that  Nature  has  any 
hidden  secrets  for  men  of  science.  Further  on  I  will  prove 
it  by  Buddha's  conversation  with  his  disciple  Ananda.  His 
esoteric  teachings  were  simply  the  Gupta-Vidya,  or  secret 
knowledge,  of  the  ancient  Brahmans,  the  key  to  which  their 
modern  successors  have,  with  few  exceptions,  completely 
lost.  And  this  Vidya  has  passed  into  what  is  now  known 
as  the  inner  teachings  of  the  Mahayana  school  of  North- 
ern Buddhism.  Those  who  deny  it  are  simply  ignorant 
pretenders  to  Orientalism.  I  advise  you  to  read  the  Rev. 
Mr.  Edklns's  Chinese  Buddhisifi — especially  the  chapters  on 
the  exoteric  and  esoteric  schools  and  teachings — and  then 
compare  the  testimony  of  the  whole  ancient  world  upon 
the  subject.

Inq. — But  are  not  the  ethics  of  Theosophy  identical  with 
those  taught  by  Buddha  ?

14  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Theo. — Certainly ;  because  these  ethics  are  the  soul  of 
the  Wisdom-Religion,  and  were  once  the  common  property 
of  the  Initiates  of  all  nations.  But  Buddha  was  the  first  to 
embody  these  lofty  ethics  in  his  public  teachings,  and  to 
make  them  the  foundation  and  the  very  essence  of  his 
public  system.  It  is  herein  that  lies  the  immense  differ- 
ence between  exoteric  Buddhism  and  every  other  religion. 
For  while  in  other  religions  ritualism  and  dogma  hold  the 
first  and  most  important  place,  in  Buddhism  it  is  the  ethics 
which  have  always  been  the  most  insisted  upon.  This  ac- 
counts for  the  resemblance,  amounting  almost  to  identity, 
between  the  ethics  of  Theosophy  and  those  of  the  religion 
of  Buddha.

Inq. — Are  there  any  great  points  of  difference?Inq. — Are  there  any  great  points  of  difference?

Theo. — One  great  distinction  between  Theosophy  and 
exoteric  Buddhism  is  that  the  latter,  represented  by  the 
Southern  Church,  entirely  denies  {a)  the  existence  of  any 
Deity,  and  (h)  any  conscious  post-mortem  life,  or  even 
any  self-conscious  surviving  individuality  in  man.  Such,  at 
least,  is  the  teaching  of  the  Siamese  sect,  now  considered  as 
ih^  purest  form  of  exoteric  Buddhism.  And  it  is  so,  if  we 
refer  only  to  Buddha's  public  teachings  ;  the  reason  for  such 
reticence  on  his  part  I  will  give  further  on.  But  the  schools 
of  the  Northern  Buddhist  Church,  estabhshed  in  those 
countries  to  which  his  initiated  Arhats  retired  after  the 
Master's  death,  teach  all  that  is  now  called  Theosophical 
doctrines,  because  they  form  part  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Initiates — thus  proving  how  the  truth  has  been  sacrificed  to 
the  dead  letter  by  the  too-zealous  orthodoxy  of  Southern 
Buddhism.  But  how  much  grander  and  more  noble,  more 
philosophical  and  scientific,  even  in  its  dead  letter,  is  this 
teaching  than  that  of  any  other  church  or  religion!  Yet 
Theosophy  is  not  Buddhism.

II.

EXOTERIC  AND  ESOTERIC  THEOSOPHY.

WHAT   THE  MODERN  THEOSOPHICAL   SOCIETY  IS

NOT

Inq. —  Your  doc tr 'me s^  theii^  are  not  a  revival  of  Buddhism^ 
nor  are  they  entirely  copied  fro7n  the  Neoplatonic  Theosophy  ?

Theo. — They  are  not.  But  to  these  questions  I  cannot 
give  you  a.  better  answer  than  by  quoting  from  a  paper  read 
on  ''  Theosophy  "  by  Dr.  J.  D.  Buck,  F.T.S.,  before  the  last 
Theosophical  Convention,  at  Chicago,  111.  (April,  1889). 
No  living  Theosophist  has  better  expressed  and  understood 
the  real  essence  of  Theosophy  than  our  honored  friend 
Dr.  Buck.The  Theosophical  Society  was  organized  for  the  purpose  of  promul- 
gating the  Theosophical  doctrines,  and  for  the  promotion  of  the  Theo- 
sophic  life.  The  present  Theosophical  Society  is  not  the  first  of  its 
kind.  I  have  a  volume  entitled  Theosophical  Transactions  of  the 
Philadelphian  Society,  published  in  London  in  1697 ;  and  another  with 
the  following  title :  Introdiictioji  to  Theosophy  ;  or,  The  Science  of  the 
Mystery  of  Christ,  that  is,  of  Deity,  Nature,  and  Creature  ;  embracing 
the  Philosfphy  of  all  the  Workijtg  Powers-  of  life,  Magical  and  Spir- 
itual, and  forming  a  Practical  Guide  to  the  Subliniest  Purity,  Sanctity, 
and  Evangelical  Perfection  ;  also  to  the  Attain7nent  of  Divine  Vision, 
and  the  Holy  Angelic  Arts,  Potencies,  and  other  Prerogatives  of  ihe 
Regeneration ;  published  in  London  in  1855.  The  following  is  the 
dedication  of  this  volume  :

**  To  the  students  of  Universities,  Colleges,  and  Schools  of  Chris-

15

16  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

tendom :  To  Professors  of  Metaphysical,  Mechanical,  and  Natural 
Science  in  all  its  forms  :  To  men  and  women  of  education  generally,  of 
fundamental  orthodox  Faith :  To  Deists,  Arians,  Unitarians,  Sweden- 
borgians,  and  other  defective  and  ungrounded  creeds,  rationalists  and 
skeptics  of  every  kind  :  To  just-minded  and  enlightened  Mohammedans, 
Jews,  and  Oriental  Patriarch-Religionists  :  but  especially  to  the  gospel 
minister  and  missionary,  whether  to  the  barbaric  or  intellectual  peoples, 
this  introduction  to  Theosophy,  or  the  science  of  the  ground  and  mys- 
tery of  all  things,  is  most  humbly  and  affectionately  dedicated."In  the  following  year  (1856)  another  volume  was  issued,  royal  octavo, 
of  six  hundred  pages,  diamond  type,  of  Theosophical  Miscellanies,  Of 
the  last-named  work  five  hundred  copies  only  were  issued,  for  gratu- 
itous distribution  to  libraries  arid  universities.  These  earlier  move- 
ments, of  which  there  were  many,  originated  within  the  church,  with 
persons  of  great  piety  and  earnestness,  and  of  unblemished  character ; 
and  all  of  these  writings  were  in  orthodox  form,  using  the  Christian 
expressions,  and,  like  the  writings  of  the  eminent  churchman  William 
Law,  would  only  be  distinguished  by  the  ordinary  reader  for  their 
great  earnestness  and  piety.  These  were  one  and  all  but  attempts  to 
derive  and  explain  the  deeper  meanings  and  original  import  of  the 
Christian  Scriptures,  and  to  illustrate  and  unfold  the  Theosophic  life. 
These  works  were  soon  forgotten,  and  are  now  generally  unknown. 
They  sought  to  reform  the  clergy  and  revive  genuine  piety,  and  were 
never  welcomed.  That  one  word  *' heresy"  was  sufficient  to  bury 
them  in  the  limbo  of  all  such  Utopias.  At  the  time  of  the  Reformation 
John  Reuchlin  made  a  similar  attempt  with  the  same  result,  though  he 
was  the  intimate  and  trusted  friend  of  Luther.  Orthodoxy  never  de- 
sired to  be  informed  and  enlightened.  These  reformers  were  informed, 
as  was  Paul  by  Festus,  that  too  much  learning  had  made  them  mad, 
and  that  it  would  be  dangerous  to  go  further.  Passing  by  the  verbiage 
— which  was  partly  a  matter  of  habit  and  education  with  these  writers, 
and  partly  due  to  religious  restraint  through  secular  power — and  com- 
ing to  the  core  of  the  matter,  these  writings  were  Theosophical  in  the 
strictest  sense,  and  pertained  solely  to  man's  knowledge  of  his  own 
nature  and  the  higher  life  of  the  soul.  The  present  Theosophical 
movement  has  sometimes  been  declared  to  be  an  attempt  to  convert 
Christendom  to  Buddhism,  which  means  simply  that  the  word 
'*  heresy  "  has  lost  its  terrors  and  relinquished  its  power.  Individ- 
uals in  every  age  have  more  or  less  clearly  apprehended  the  Theo- 
sophical doctrines  and  wrought  them  into  the  fabric  of  their  lives. 
These  doctrines  belong  exclusively  to  no  religion,  and  are  confined  to 
no  society  or  time.     They  are  the  birthright  of  every  human  soul.     SuchTHE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHW  17

a  thing  as  orthodoxy  must  be  wrought  out  by  each  individual  according 
to  his  nature  and  his  needs,  and  according  to  his  varying  experience. 
This  may  explain  why  those  who  have  imagined  Theosophy  to  be  a 
new  religion  have  hunted  in  vain  for  its  creed  and  its  ritual.  Its  creed 
is  Loyalty  to  Truth,  and  its  ritual  ''  To  honor  every  truth  by  use."

How  little  this  principle  of  Universal  Brotherhood  is  understood  by 
the  masses  of  mankind,  how  seldom  its  transcendent  importance  is  rec- 
ognized, may  be  seen  in  the  diversity  of  opinion  and  fictitious  interpreta- 
tions regarding  the  Theosophical  Society.  This  society  was  organized 
on  this  one  principle,  the  essential  Brotherhood  of  Man,  as  herein 
briefly  outlined  and  imperfectly  set  forth.  It  has  been  assailed  as 
Buddhistic  and  antichristian,  as  though  it  could  be  both  these 
together,  when  both  Buddhism  and  Christianity,  as  set  forth  by  their 
inspired  founders,  make  Brotherhood  the  one  essential  of  doctrine  and 
of  life.  Theosophy  has  been  also  regarded  as  something  new  under 
the  sun,  or  at  best  as  old  mysticism  masquerading  under  a  new  name. 
While  it  is  true  that  many  societies  founded  upon  and  united  to  sup- 
port the  principles  of  altruism  or  essential  Brotherhood  have  borne  vari- 
ous names,  it  is  also  true  that  many  havfe  also  been  called  Theosophic, 
and  with  principles  and  aims  as  the  present  society  bearing  that  name. 
With  these  societies,  one  and  all,  the  essential  doctrine  has  been  the 
same,  and  all  else  has  been  incidental,  though  this  does  not  obviate  the 
fact  that  many  persons  are  attracted  to  the  incidentals  who  overlook 
or  ignore  the  essentials.No  better  or  more  explicit  answer — by  a  man  who  is 
one  of  our  most  esteemed  and  earnest  Theosophists — 
could  be  given  to  your  questions.

Inq. —  Which  system  do  you  prefer  or  follow^  hi  that  case, 
besides  Buddhistic  ethics  ?

Theo. — None,  and  all.  We  hold  to  no  religion  and  to 
no  philosophy  in  particular;  we  cull  the  good  we  find  in 
each.  But  here,  again,  it  must  be  stated  that,  like  all  other 
ancient  systems,  Theosophy  is  divided  into  exoteric  and 
esoteric  sections.

Inq. —  What  is  the  difference  ?

Theo. — The  members  of  the  Theosophical  Society  at 
large  are  free  to  profess  whatever  rehgion  or  philosophy

18  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,Inq. —  What  is  the  difference  ?

Theo. — The  members  of  the  Theosophical  Society  at 
large  are  free  to  profess  whatever  rehgion  or  philosophy

18  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

they  like — or  none,  if  they  so  prefer — provided  they  are  in 
sympathy  with,  and  ready  to  carry  out  one  or  more  of,  the 
three  objects  of  the  association.  The  Society  is  a  philan- 
thropic and  scientific  body  for  the  propagation  of  the  idea 
of  brotherhood  on  practical  instead  of  theoretical  Hnes. 
The  Fellows  may  be  Christians  or  Mussulmans,  Jews  or 
Parsis,  Buddhists  or  Brahmans,  Spiritualists  or  materialists 
— it  does  not  matter ;  but  every  member  must  be  either  a 
philanthropist  or  a  scholar,  a  searcher  into  Aryan  and  other 
old  literature  or  a  psychic  student.  In  short,  he  has  to  help, 
if  he  can,  in  the  carrying  out  of  at  least  one  of  the  objects 
of  the  program.  Otherwise  he  has  no  reason  for  becoming 
a  Fellow.  Such  are  the  majority  of  the  exoteric  Society, 
composed  of  ''attached"  and  "unattached"  members.* 
These  may  or  may  not  become  Theosophists  de  facto. 
Members  they  are,  by  virtue  of  their  having  joined  the  So- 
ciety ;  but  the  latter  cannot  make  a  Theosophist  of  one  who 
has  no  sense  for  the  divine  fitness  of  things,  or  of  him  who 
understands  Theosophy  in  his  own — if  the  expression  may 
be  used — sectarian  and  egotistic  way.  "  Handsome  is  as 
handsome  does"  could  be  paraphrased  in  this  case,  and 
made  to  run,  ''  Theosophist  is  who  Theosophy  does."

THEOSOPHISTS  AND  MEMBERS  OF  THE  THEOSOPH- 
ICAL   SOCIETY.

Inq. —  This  applies  to  lay  me^nbers^  as  I tmderstand.  And 
what  of  those  who  pursue  the  esoteric  study  of  Theosophy — 
are  they  the  real  Theosophists?Inq. —  This  applies  to  lay  me^nbers^  as  I tmderstand.  And 
what  of  those  who  pursue  the  esoteric  study  of  Theosophy — 
are  they  the  real  Theosophists?

Theo. — Not  necessarily,  until  they  have  proven  them- 
selves to  be  such.    They  have  entered  the  inner  group  and

*  An  "attached"  member  means  one  who  has  joined  some  particular  Branch  of 
the  Theosophical  Society.  An  "unattached,"  one  who  belongs  to  the  Society  at 
large,  has  his  diploma  from  the  Headquarters  (Adyar,  Madras),  but  is  connected  with 
no  Branch  or  Lodge.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  19

pledged  themselves  to  carry  out,  as  strictly  as  they  can,  the 
rules  of  the  occult  body.  This  is  a  difficult  undertaking, 
as  the  foremost  rule  of  all  is  the  entire  renunciation  of  one's 
personality — i.e.,  a  pledged  member  has  to  become  a  thor- 
ough altruist,  never  to  think  of  himself,  and  to  forget  his 
own  vanity  and  pride  in  the  thought  of  the  good  of  his 
fellow-creatures,  besides  that  of  his  fellow-brothers  in  the 
esoteric  circle.  He  has  to  live,  if  the  esoteric  instructions 
shall  profit  him,  a  Hfe  of  abstinence  in  everything,  of  self- 
denial  and  strict  morality,  doing  his  duty  by  all  men.  The 
few  real  Theosophists  in  the  Theosophical  Society  are 
among  these  members.  This  does  not  imply  that  outside 
of  the  Theosophical  Society  and  the  inner  circle  there  are 
no  Theosophists ;  for  there  are,  and  more  than  people  know 
of — certainly  far  more  than  are  found  among  the  lay  mem- 
bers of  the  Theosophical  Society.

Inq. — -Then  what  is  the  good  of  joining  the  so-called  Theo- 
sophical Society  in  that  case  ?      Where  is  the  incentive  ?Inq. — -Then  what  is  the  good  of  joining  the  so-called  Theo- 
sophical Society  in  that  case  ?      Where  is  the  incentive  ?

Theo. — None,  except  the  advantage  of  getting  esoteric 
instructions,  the  genuine  doctrines  of  the  Esoteric  Phi- 
losophy, and,  if  the  real  program  is  carried  out,  deriving 
much  help  from  mutual  aid  and  sympathy.  Union  is 
strength  and  harmony,  and  well-regulated  simultaneous 
efforts  produce  wonders.  This  has  been  the  secret  of  all 
associations  and  communities  since  mankind  existed.

Inq. — But  why  could  not  a  man  of  well-balanced  mind 
and  singleness  of  purpose^  one^  say,  of  indomitable  energy  and 
perseverance,  become  an  Occultist,  and  even  an  Adept,  if  he 
works  alone  ?

Theo. — He  may;  but  there  are  ten  thousand  chances 
against  one  that  he  will  fail.  For  one  reason  out  of  many 
others,  no  books  on  Occultism  or  Theurgy  exist  in  our  day 
which  give  out  the  secrets  of  Alchemy  or  medieval  The-

20  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.20  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

osophy  in  plain  language.  All  are  symbolical  or  in  para- 
bles ;  and  as  the  key  to  these  has  been  lost  for  ages  in  the 
West,  how  can  a  man  learn  the  correct  meaning  of  what  he 
is  reading  and  studying?  Therein  lies  the  greatest  danger 
— one  that  leads  to  unconscious  black  magic  or  the  most 
helpless  mediumship.  He  who  has  not  an  Initiate  for  a 
Master  had  better  leave  the  dangerous  study  alone.  Look 
around  you  and  observe.  While  two  thirds  of  ''  civilized  '* 
society  ridicule  the  mere  notion  that  there  is  anything  in 
Theosophy,  Occultism,  Spiritualism,  or  in  the  Kabalah,  the 
other  third  is  composed  of  the  most  heterogeneous  and 
opposite  elements.  Some  believe  in  the  mystical  and  even 
in  the  supernatural  (!),  but  each  beheves  in  his  own  way. 
Others  will  rush  single-handed  into  the  study  of  the  Kabalah, 
Psychism,  Mesmerism,  Spiritualism,  or  some  form  or  another 
of  Mysticism.  Result :  no  two  men  think  alike,  no  two 
are  agreed  upon  any  fundamental  occult  principles,  though 
many  are  those  who  claim  for  themselves  the  Ultima  Thule 
of  knowledge,  and  would  make  outsiders  believe  that  they 
are  full-blown  Adepts.  Not  only  is  there  no  scientific  and 
accurate  knowledge  of  Occultism  accessible  in  the  West — 
not  even  of  true  Astrology,  the  only  branch  of  Occultism 
which,  in  its  exoteric  teachings,  has  definite  laws  and  a  defi- 
nite system — but  no  one  has  any  idea  of  what  real  Occult- 
ism means.  Some  limit  ancient  wisdom  to  the  Kabalah 
and  the  Jewish  Zohar^  which  each  interprets  in  his  own 
way  according  to  the  dead  letter  of  the  rabbinical  methods. 
Others  regard  Swedenborg  or  Bohme  as  the  ultimate  ex- 
pressions of  the  highest  wisdom ;  while  others,  again,  see  in 
Mesmerism  the  great  secret  of  ancient  magic.  One  and 
all  of  those  who  put  their  theory  into  practice  are  rapidly 
drifting,  through  ignorance,  into  black  magic.  Happy  are 
those  who  escape  from  it,  as  they  have  neither  test  nor 
criterion  by  which  they  can  distinguish  between  the  true 
and  the  false.THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  21

Inq. — Are  we  to  miderstand  that  the  inner  group  of  the 
Theosophical  Society  claims  to  learn  what  it  does  from  real 
Initiates  or  Masters  of  Esoteric  Wisdom  ?

Theo. — Not  directly.  The  personal  presence  of  such 
Masters  is  not  required.  Suffice  it  if  they  give  instructions 
to  some  of  those  who  have  studied  under  their  guidance  for 
years  and  devoted  their  whole  lives  to  their  service.  Then, 
in  turn,  these  can  give  out  the  knowledge  so  imparted  to 
others  who  had  no  such  opportunity.  A  portion  of  the  true 
sciences  is  better  than  a  mass  of  undigested  and  misunder- 
stood learning.     An  ounce  of  gold  is  worth  a  ton  of  dust.

Inq. — But  how  is  one  to  know  whether  the  ounce  is  real 
gold  or  only  a  counterfeit  ?Inq. — But  how  is  one  to  know  whether  the  ounce  is  real 
gold  or  only  a  counterfeit  ?

Theo. — A  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit,  a  system  by  its  re- 
sults. When  our  opponents  are  able  to  prove  to  us  that 
any  solitary  student  of  Occultism  throughout  the  ages  has 
become  a  saintly  Adept  hke  Ammonius  Saccas,  or  even  a 
Plotinus,  or  a  Theurgist  like  lamblichus,  or  achieved  feats 
such  as  are  claimed  to  have  been  done  by  St.  Germain, 
without  any  Master  to  guide  him,  and  all  this  without  being 
a  medium,  a  self-deluded  psychic,  or  a  charlatan,  then 
shall  we  confess  oiu-selves  mistaken.  But  till  then  Theos- 
ophists  prefer  to  follow  the  proven  natural  law  of  the  tradi- 
tion of  the  Sacred  Science.  There  are  mystics  who  have 
made  great  discoveries  in  chemistry  and  physical  sciences, 
almost  bordering  on  Alchemy  and  Occultism ;  others  who, 
by  the  sole  aid  of  their  genius,  have  rediscovered  portions, 
if  not  the  whole,  of  the  lost  alphabets  of  the  ''mystery  lan- 
guage," and  are  therefore  able  to  read  correctly  Hebrew 
scrolls ;  others  still  who,  being  seers,  have  caught  wonderful 
glimpses  of  the  hidden  secrets  of  Nature.  But  all  these  are 
specialists.  One  is  a  theoretical  inventor,  another  a  Hebrew 
— i.e.,  a  sectarian  Kabahst — a  third  a  Swedenborg  of  mod- 
em times,  denying  all  and  everything  outside  of  his  own  par-

22  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.22  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

ticular  science  or  religion.  Not  one  of  them  can  boast  of 
having  produced  a  universal  or  even  a  national  benefit 
thereby,  or  a  benefit  even  to  himself.  With  the  exception 
of  a  few  healers — of  that  class  which  the  Royal  College  of 
Physicians  or  Surgeons  would  call  quacks — none  have  helped 
with  their  science  humanity,  or  even  a  number  of  men  of 
the  same  community.  Where  are  the  Chaldees  of  old — 
those  who  wrought  marvelous  cures,  ''  not  by  charms,  but 
by  simples  "  ?  Where  is  an  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  who  healed 
the  sick  and  raised  the  dead  under  any  climate  and  circum- 
stances? We  know  some  specialists  of  the  former  class  even 
in  Europe,  but  of  the  latter  only  in  Asia,  where  the  secret 
of  the  Yogi — ''  to  live  in  death  " — is  still  preserved.

Inq. — Is  the  productio7i  of  such  healing  Adepts  the  ami  of 
Theosophy  ?

Theo. — Its  aims  are  several ;  but  the  most  important  are 
those  which  are  likely  to  lead  to  the  relief  of  human  suffer- 
ing imder  any  or  every  form,  moral  as  well  as  physical. 
And  we  believe  the  former  to  be  far  more  important  than 
the  latter.  Theosophy  has  to  inculcate  ethics;  it  has  to 
purify  the  soul  if  it  would  relieve  the  physical  body,  whose 
ailments,  save  cases  of  accidents,  are  all  hereditary.  It  is 
not  by  studying  Occultism  for  selfish  ends — for  the  gratifi- 
cation of  one's  personal  ambition,  pride,  or  vanity — that 
one  can  ever  reach  the  true  goal  of  helping  suffering  man- 
kind. Nor  is  it  by  studying  one  single  branch  of  the 
Esoteric  Philosophy  that  a  man  becomes  an  Occultist,  but 
by  studying,  if  not  mastering,  them  all.

Inq. — Is  help,  then,  to  reach  this  most  imp 07't ant  aim  given 
only  to  those  who  study  the  esoteric  sciences  ?Inq. — Is  help,  then,  to  reach  this  most  imp 07't ant  aim  given 
only  to  those  who  study  the  esoteric  sciences  ?

Theo. — Not  at  all.  Every  lay  member  is  entitled  to 
general  instruction  if  he  only  wants  it ;  but  few  are  willing 
to  become  what  is  called  ''working  members,"  and  most

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  23

prefer  to  remain  the  ''  drones  "  of  Theosophy.  Let  it  be 
understood  that  private  research  is  encouraged  in  the 
Theosophical  Society,  provided  it  does  not  infringe  the 
Umit  which  separates  the  exoteric  from  the  esoteric,  the 
blind  from  the  co?iscious  magic.

THE   DIFFERENCE   BETWEEN  THEOSOPHY  AND 
OCCULTISM,

Inq. —  Yon  speak  of  Theosophy  and  Occultis7n;  are  they 
identical  ?

Theo. — By  no  means.  A  man  may  be  a  very  good 
Theosophist  indeed,  whether  in  or  outside  of  the  Society, 
without  being  in  any  way  an  Occultist.  But  no  one  can 
be  a  true  Occultist  without  being  a  real  Theosophist ;  other- 
wise he  is  simply  a  black  magician,  whether  conscious  or 
unconscious.

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  ?

Theo. — I  have  said  already  that  a  true  Theosophist 
must  put  in  practice  the  loftiest  moral  ideal;  must  strive 
to  realize  his  unity  with  the  whole  of  humanity,  and  work 
ceaselessly  for  others.  Now,  if  an  Occultist  does  not  do 
all  this,  he  must  act  selfishly  for  his  own  personal  benefit ; 
and  if  he  has  acquired  more  practical  power  than  other 
ordinary  men,  he  becomes  forthwith  a  far  more  dangerous 
enemy  to  the  world  and  those  around  him  than  the  average 
mortal.     This  is  clear.

Inq. — Then  is  an  Occultist  si7nply  a  man  who  possesses 
more  power  than  other  people  ?Inq. — Then  is  an  Occultist  si7nply  a  man  who  possesses 
more  power  than  other  people  ?

Theo. — Far  more — if  he  is  a  practical  and  really  learned 
Occultist,  and  not  one  only  in  name.  Occult  sciences  are 
not^  as  described  in  encyclopedias, ''  those  imaginary  sciences 
of  the  middle  ages  which  related  to  the  supposed  action  or

24  THE  KEY  TO    THEO SOPHY.

influence  of  occult  qualities  or  supernatural  powers,  as 
alchemy,  magic,  necromancy,  and  astrology,"  for  they  are 
real,  actual,  and  very  dangerous  sciences.  They  teach  the 
secret  potency  of  things  in  Nature,  developing  and  culti- 
vating the  hidden  powers  ''  latent  in  man,"  thus  giving  him 
tremendous  advantages  over  more  ignorant  mortals.  Hyp- 
notism— now  become  so  common,  and  a  subject  of  serious 
scientific  inquiry — is  a  good  instance  in  point.  Hypnotic 
power  has  been  discovered  almost  by  accident,  the  way  to 
it  having  been  prepared  by  Mesmerism.  And  now  an  able 
hypnotizer  can  do  almost  anything  with  it,  from  forcing  a 
man,  unconsciously  to  himself,  to  play  the  fool,  to  making 
him  commit  a  crime — often  by  proxy  for  the  hypnotizer, 
and  for  the  latter's  benefit.  Is  not  this  a  terrible  power  if 
left  in  the  hands  of  unscrupulous  persons  ?  And  please  to 
remember  that  this  is  only  one  of  the  minor  branches  of 
Occultism.

Inq. — But  are  not  all  these  occult  sciences^  magic ^  and  sor- 
cery considered  by  the  most  cultured  a?td  learned  people  as 
relics  of  ancient  ignorance  and  superstitio?t  ?Inq. — But  are  not  all  these  occult  sciences^  magic ^  and  sor- 
cery considered  by  the  most  cultured  a?td  learned  people  as 
relics  of  ancient  ignorance  and  superstitio?t  ?

Theo. — Let  me  remind  you  that  this  remark  of  yours 
cuts  both  ways.  The  ^'  most  cultured  and  learned  "  among 
you  regard  also  Christianity  and  every  other  religion  as  a 
relic  of  ignorance  and  superstition.  People  begin  to  be- 
lieve now,  at  any  rate,  in  Hypnotism,  and  some — even  of 
the  most  cultured — in  Theosophy  and  phenomena.  But 
who  among  them,  except  preachers  and  blind  fanatics,  will 
confess  to  a  belief  in  biblical  miracles  ?  And  this  is  where 
the  point  of  difference  comes  in.  There  are  very  good  and 
pure  Theosophists  who  may  believe  in  the  supernatural — 
divine  "  miracles  "  included — but  no  Occultist  will  do  so. 
For  an  Occultist  practises  scientific  Theosophy,  based  on 
accurate  knowledge  of  Nature's  secret  workings;  but  a 
Theosophist,  practising  the  powers  called  abnormal,  minus

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  25

the  light  of  Occultism,  will  simply  tend  toward  a  dangerous 
form  of  mediumship ;  because,  although  holding  to  Theos- 
ophy  and  its  highest  conceivable  code  of  ethics,  he  practises 
it  in  the  dark,  on  sincere  but  blind  faith.  Any  one,  Theos- 
ophist  or  Spiritualist,  who  attempts  to  cultivate  one  of  the 
branches  of  occult  science — e.g.,  Hypnotism,  Mesmerism,  or 
even  the  secrets  of  producing  physical  phenomena — without 
the  knowledge  of  the  philosophic  ratmiale  of  those  powers, 
is  like  a  rudderless  boat  launched  on  a  stormy  ocean.

\y

THE  DIFEERENCE  BETWEEN  THE O SOPHY  AND 
SPIRITUALISM.

Inq. — -But  do  you  not  believe  in  Spiritualism  ?\y

THE  DIFEERENCE  BETWEEN  THE O SOPHY  AND 
SPIRITUALISM.

Inq. — -But  do  you  not  believe  in  Spiritualism  ?

Theo. — If  by  ''  Spiritualism  '^  you  mean  the  explanation 
which  Spirituahsts  give  of  some  abnormal  phenomena,  then 
decidedly  we  do  not.  They  maintain  that  these  manifesta- 
tions are  all  produced  by  the  ''  spirits  '*  of  departed  mortals 
— generally  their  relatives — who  return  to  earth,  they  say,  to 
communicate  with  those  they  have  loved  or  to  whom  they 
are  attached.  We  deny  this  point-blank.  We  assert  that 
the  spirits  of  the  dead  cannot  return  to  earth,  save  in  rare 
and  exceptional  cases,  of  which  I  may  speak  later ;  nor  do 
they  communicate  with  men  except  by  entirely  subjective 
means.  That  which  appears  objectively  is  only  the  phantom 
of  the  ex-physical  man.  But  in  psychic  and,  so  to  say, 
spiritual  Spiritualism  we  do  believe  most  decidedly.

Inq. — Do  you  reject  the  phenomena  also  ?

Theo. — Assuredly  not — save  cases  of  conscious  fraud.

Inq. — How  do  you  account  for  them^  then  ?

Theo. — In  many  ways.  The  causes  of  such  manifesta- 
tions are  by  no  means  so  simple  as  the  Spiritualists  would 
like  to  believe.    Foremost  of  all,  the  deus  ex  machind  of  the

26  THE  KEY  TO   THEO SOPHY.

so-called  ''materializations"  is  usually  the  astral  body  or 
"  double  "  of  the  medium  or  of  some  one  present.  This 
astral  body  is  also  the  producer  or  operating  force  in  the 
manifestations  of  slate-writing,  "  Davenport  "4ike  manifes- 
tations, and  so  on.

Inq. —  You  say  ''  usually  "/  then  what  is  it  that  produces 
the  rest?Inq. —  You  say  ''  usually  "/  then  what  is  it  that  produces 
the  rest?

Theo. — That  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  manifes- 
tations. Sometimes  the  astral  remains,  the  kamalokic 
''  shells  "  of  the  vanished  personalities  that  were ;  at  other 
times,  elementals.  ''Spirit''  is  a  word  of  manifold  and 
wide  significance.  I  really  do  not  know  what  Spirituahsts 
mean  by  the  term ;  but  what  we  understand  them  to  claim 
is  that  the  physical  phenomena  are  produced  by  the  reincar- 
nating Ego,  the  spiritual  and  immortal  individuality.  And 
this  hypothesis  we  entirely  reject.  The  conscious  individu- 
ality of  the  disembodied  caniiot  materialize^  nor  can  it  return 
from  its  own  mental  devachanic  sphere  to  the  plane  of  ter- 
restrial objectivity.

Inq. — But  many  of  the  communications  received  from  the 
^^  spirits  "  show  not  o?ily  intelligence,  but  a  knowledge  of  facts 
not  known  to  the  mediu7n,  and  sometiines  even  7iot  consciously 
present  to  the  mind  of  the  investigator  or  any  of  those  who 
compose  the  audience,

Theo. — This  does  not  necessarily  prove  that  the  intelli- 
gence and  knowledge  you  speak  of  belong  to  spirits,  or 
emanate  from  disembodied  souls.  Somnambulists  have  been 
known  to  compose  music  and  poetry  and  to  solve  mathe- 
matical problems  while  in  their  trance  state,  without  having 
ever  learned  music  or  mathematics.  Others  answered  in- 
telligently questions  put  to  them,  and  even,  in  several  cases, 
spoke  languages,  such  as  Hebrew  and  Latin,  of  which  they 
were  entirely  ignorant  when  awake — all  this  in  a  state  of

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  27

profound  sleep.     Will  you,  then,  maintain  that  this  was 
caused  by  ''spirits"?

Inq. — But  how  would  you  explain  it  ?THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  27

profound  sleep.     Will  you,  then,  maintain  that  this  was 
caused  by  ''spirits"?

Inq. — But  how  would  you  explain  it  ?

Theo. — We  assert  that,  the  divine  spark  in  man  being 
one  and  identical  in  its  essence  with  the  Universal  Spirit, 
our  "spiritual  Self"  is  practically  omniscient,  but  that  it 
cannot  manifest  its  knowledge,  owing  to  the  impediments 
of  matter.  Now  the  more  these  impediments  are  removed 
— in  other  words,  the  more  the  physical  body  is  paralyzed 
as  to  its  own  independent  activity  and  consciousness,  as  in 
deep  sleep  or  deep  trance,  or,  again,  in  illness — the  more 
fully  can  the  in7ier  Self  manifest  on  this  plane.  This  is  our 
explanation  of  those  truly  wonderful  phenomena  of  a  higher 
order  in  which  undeniable  intelligence  and  knowledge  are 
exhibited.  As  to  the  lower  order  of  manifestations — such 
as  physical  phenomena  and  the  platitudes  and  common  talk 
of  the  general ''  spirit  ''—to  explain  even  the  most  important 
of  the  teachings  we  hold  upon  the  subject  would  take  up 
more  space  and  time  than  can  be  allotted  to  it  at  present. 
We  have  no  desire  to  interfere  with  the  belief  of  the  Spirit- 
ualists any  more  than  with  any  other  belief.  The  onus  pro- 
bandi  must  fall  on  the  believers  in  "spirits."  And  at  the 
present  moment,  while  still  convinced  that  the  higher  kind 
of  manifestations  occur  through  disembodied  souls,  the 
leaders  of  the  Spiritualists,  and  the  most  learned  and  intelli- 
gent among  them,  are  the  first  to  confess  that  not  all  the 
phenomena  are  produced  by  spirits.  Gradually  they  will 
come  to  recognize  the  whole  truth ;  but  meanwhile  we  have 
no  right  nor  desire  to  proselytize  them  to  our  views — the 
less  so,  as  in  the  cases  of  purely  psychic  and  spiritual  mani- 
festations we  believe  in  the  intercommunication  of  the  spirit 
of  the  living  man  with  that  of  disembodied  personalities.We  say  that  in  such  cases  it  is  not  the  spirits  of  the  dead 
who  descend  on  earth,  but  the  spirits  of  the  living  that  ascend

28  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

to  the  pure  spiritual  souls.  In  truth  there  is  neither  ascend- 
ing nor  descending^  but  a  change  of  state  or  condition  for  the 
medium.  The  body  of  the  latter  becoming  paralyzed  or 
entranced,  the  spiritual  Ego  is  free  from  its  trammels,  and 
finds  itself  on  the  same  plane  of  consciousness  as  the  dis- 
embodied spirits.  Hence,  if  there  is  any  spiritual  attrac- 
tion between  the  two,  they  can  communicate^  as  often  occurs 
in  dreams.  The  difference  between  a  mediumistic  and  a 
non-sensitive  nature  is  this :  the  liberated  spirit  of  a  medium 
has  the  opportunity  and  facility  of  influencing  the  passive 
organs  of  its  entranced  physical  body,  and  making  them 
act,  speak,  and  write  at  its  will.  The  Ego  can  make  it  re- 
peat, echo-like,  and  in  human  language,  the  thoughts  and 
ideas  of  the  disembodied  entity  as  well  as  its  own.  But 
the  non-receptive  or  non-sensitive  organism  of  one  who  is 
very  positive  cannot  be  so  influenced.  Hence,  although 
there  is  hardly  a  human  being  whose  Ego  does  not  hold  free 
intercourse,  during  the  sleep  of  its  body,  with  those  whom 
it  loved  and  lost,  yet,  on  account  of  the  positiveness  and 
non-receptivity  of  its  physical  envelope  and  brain,  no  recol- 
lection, or  a  very  dim,  dreamlike  remembrance,  lingers  in 
the  memory  of  the  person  when  once  awake.

Inq. — This  77ieans  that  you  reject  the  philosophy  of  Spirit- 
ualism in  toto  ?Inq. — This  77ieans  that  you  reject  the  philosophy  of  Spirit- 
ualism in  toto  ?

Theo. — If  by  ''  philosophy  "  you  mean  its  crude  theories, 
we  do.  But  it  has  no  philosophy,  in  truth.  The  best,  the 
most  intellectual  and  earnest  defenders  of  Spiritualism  say 
so.  Their  fundamental  and  only  unimpeachable  truth — 
namely,  that  phenomena  occur  through  mediums  controlled 
by  invisible  forces  and  intelligences — no  one,  except  a  blind 
materialist  of  the  Huxley  "  big-toe  "  school,  will  or  can  deny. 
With  regard  to  their  philosophy,  however,  let  me  quote  to 
you  what  the  able  editor  of  Light — than  whom  the  Spirit- 
ualists will  find  no  wiser  or  more  devoted  champion — says

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  29

of  them  and  their  philosophy.  This  is  what ''  M.A.  Oxon.," 
one  of  the  very  few  philosophical  Spiritualists,  writes,  with 
respect  to  their  lack  of  organization  and  blind  bigotry :. It  is  worth  while  to  look  steadily  at  this  point,  for  it  is  of  vital  mo- 
ment. We  have  an  experience  and  a  knowledge  beside  which  all  other 
knowledge  is  comparatively  insignificant. The  ordinary  Spiritualist 
waxes  wroth  if  any  one  ventures  to  impugn  his  assured  knowledge  of 
the  future  and  his  absolute  certainty  of  the  life  to  come. Where  other 
men  have  stretched  forth  feeble  hands  groping  into  the  dark  future,  he 
walks  boldly  as  one  who  has  a  chart  and  knows  his  way. Where  other 
men  have  stopped  short  at  a  pious  aspiration,  or  have  been  content  with 
a  hereditary  faith,  it  is  his  boast  that  he  knows  what  they  only  believe, 
and  that  out  of  his  rich  stores  he  can  supplement  the  fading  faiths  built 
only  upon  hope. He  is  magnificent  in  his  dealings  with  man's  most 
cherished  expectations. * '  You  hope, "  he  seems  to  say,  '  *  for  that  which 
I  can  demonstrate. You  have  accepted  a  traditional  belief  in  what  I 
can  experimentally  prove  according  to  the  strictest  scientific  method. The  old  beliefs  are  fading;  come  out  from  them  and  be  separate. They  contain  as  much  falsehood  as  truth. Only  by  building  on  a  sure 
foundation  of  demonstrated  fact  can  your  superstructure  be  stable. All 
round  you  old  faiths  are  toppling. Avoid  the  crash  and  get  you  out." 
When  one  comes  to  deal  with  this  magnificent  person  in  a  practical 
way,  what  is  the  result? Very  curious  and  very  disappointing. He 
is  so  sure  of  his  ground  that  he  takes  no  trouble  to  ascertain  the  inter- 
pretation which  others  put  upon  his  facts. The  wisdom  of  the  ages 
has  concerned  itself  with  the  explanation  of  what  he  rightly  regards  as 
proven ;  but  he  does  not  turn  a  passing  glance  on  its  researches.of  them  and  their  philosophy.  This  is  what ''  M.A.  Oxon.," 
one  of  the  very  few  philosophical  Spiritualists,  writes,  with 
respect  to  their  lack  of  organization  and  blind  bigotry :

He 
is  so  sure  of  his  ground  that  he  takes  no  trouble  to  ascertain  the  inter- 
pretation which  others  put  upon  his  facts. The  wisdom  of  the  ages 
has  concerned  itself  with  the  explanation  of  what  he  rightly  regards  as 
proven ;  but  he  does  not  turn  a  passing  glance  on  its  researches. He 
does  not  even  agree  altogether  with  his  brother  Spiritualist. It  is  the 
story  over  again  of  the  old  Scotch  body  who,  together  with  her  hus- 
band, formed  a  **  kirk."  They  had  exclusive  keys  to  heaven,  or  rather 
she  had,  for  she  was  *'na  certain  aboot  Jamie."  So  the  infinitely 
divided  and  subdivided  and  re-subdivided  sects  of  Spiritualists  shake 
their  heads,  and  are  *'  na  certain  aboot "  one  another. Again,  the  col- 
lective experience  of  mankind  is  solid  and  unvarying  on  this  point  that 
union  is  strength  and  disunion  a  source  of  weakness  and  failure. Shoulder  to  shoulder,  drilled  and  disciplined,  a  rabble  becomes  an 
army,  each  man  a  match  for  a  hundred  of  the  untrained  men  that  may 
be  brought  against  it. Organization  in  every  department  of  man's 
work  means  success,  saving  of  time  and  labor,  profit  and  development. Want  of  method,  want  of  plan,  haphazard  work,  fitful  energy,  undis-

30  THE  KEY  TO   THEOSOPHY.

ciplined  effort — these  mean  bungling  failure.  The  voice  of  humanity 
attests  the  truth.  Does  the  Spiritualist  accept  the  verdict  and  act  on 
the  conclusion?  Verily,  no.  He  refuses  to  organize.  He  is  a  law 
unto  himself,  and  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  his  neighbors.*Inq. — I  was  told  thai  the  Theosophical  Society  was  origi- 
nally founded  to  crush  Spiritualis77i  and  belief  in  the  survival 
of  the  ifidividuality  in  7nan,

Theo. — You  are  misinformed.  Our  beliefs  are  all 
founded  on  that  immortal  individuality.  But  then,  like 
so  many  others,  you  confuse  persoiiality  with  individuality. 
Your  Western  psychologists  do  not  seem  to  have  estabhshed 
any  clear  distinction  between  the  two.  Yet  it  is  precisely 
that  difference  which  gives  the  key-note  to  the  understand- 
ing of  Eastern  philosophy,  and  which  lies  at  the  root  of 
the  divergence  between  the  Theosophical  and  Spiritualistic 
teachings.  And  though  it  may  draw  upon  us  still  more 
the  hostility  of  some  Spiritualists,  yet  I  must  state  here  that 
it  is  Theosophy  which  is  the  true  and  unalloyed  spiritual- 
ism, while  the  modern  scheme  of  that  name  is,  as  now 
practised  by  the  masses,  simply  transcendental  materialism.

Inq. — Please  explain  your  idea  more  clearly,

Theo. — What  I  mean  is  that,  though  our  teachings  insist 
upon  the  identity  of  spirit  and  matter,  and  though  we  say 
that  spirit  is  potential  matter,  and  matter  simply  crystallized 
spirit,  just  as  ice  is  solidified  steam,  yet,  since  the  original 
and  eternal  condition  of  the  All  is  not  spirit,  but  ''  super- 
spirit,"  so  to  speak — visible  and  solid  matter  being  simply 
its  periodical  manifestation — we  maintain  that  the  term 
*'  spirit "  can  only  be  applied  to  the  true  individuality,

Inq. — But  what  is  the  distinction  betwee7i  this  ''  true  in- 
dividuality^^ and  the  "/"  or  ^^  Ego""  of  which  we  are  all 
conscious  ?

*  Light,  June  22,  1889.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  31*  Light,  June  22,  1889.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  31

Theo. — Before  I  can  answer  you,  we  must  agree  upon 
what  you  mean  by  ''  I "  or  ''  Ego."  We  distinguish  be- 
tween the  simple  fact  of  self-consciousness — the  simple  feel- 
ing that  *'  I  am  I  " — and  the  complex  thought  that  ''  I  am 
Mr.  Smith  or  Mrs.  Brown."  Believing  as  we  do  in  a  series 
of  births  for  the  same  Ego,  or  reincarnation,  this  distinction 
is  the  fundamental  pivot  of  the  whole  idea.  You  see  '^  Mr. 
Smith  "  really  means  a  long  series  of  daily  experiences  strung 
together  by  the  thread  of  memory,  and  forming  what ''  Mr. 
Smith"  calls  ''himself."  But  none  of  these  ''experiences" 
are  really  the  "  I "  or  the  Ego,  nor  do  they  give  "  Mr. 
Smith  "  the  feeling  that  he  is  himself,  for  he  forgets  the 
greater  part  of  his  daily  experiences,  and  they  produce  the 
feeling  of  egoity  in  him  only  while  they  last.  We  Theoso- 
phists,  therefore,  distinguish  between  this  bundle  of  "  ex- 
periences," which  we  call  ih^  false  (because  so  finite  and 
evanescent)  personality^  and  that  element  in  man  to  which 
the  feeling  of  "  I  am  I  "  is  due.  It  is  this  "  I  am  I  "  which 
we  call  the  true  individuality;  and  we  say  that  this  Ego  or 
individuality,  like  an  actor,  plays  many  parts  on  the  stage 
of  life.*  Let  us  call  every  new  life  on  earth  of  the  same 
Ego  a  night  on  the  stage  of  a  theater.  One  night  the  actor, 
or  Ego,  appears  as  Macbeth,  the  next  as  Shylock,  the  third 
as  Romeo,  the  fourth  as  Hamlet  or  King  Lear,  and  so  on, 
until  he  has  run  through  the  whole  cycle  of  incarnations. 
The  Ego  begins  his  life-pilgrimage  as  a  sprite,  an  Ariel,  or 
a  Puck ;  he  plays  the  part  of  a  "  super  " — is  a  soldier,  a  ser- 
vant, one  of  the  chorus;  rises  then  to  "speaking  parts," 
playing  leading  roles,  interspersed  with  insignificant  parts, 
till  he  finally  retires  from  the  stage  as  Prospero,  the 
magician,Inq. — /  understand.  You  say,  then,  that  this  true  Ego 
cannot  return  to  earth  after  death.    But  surely  the  actor  is  at

*  See  further,  Section  VIII. ,  "On  Individuality  and  Personality."

(i

32  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

liberty^  if  he  has  preserved  the  sense  of  his  individuality^  to  re- 
turfi^  if  he  likes ^  to  the  scene  of  his  former  actions  ?

Theo. — We  say  not ;  simply  because  such  a  return  to 
earth  would  be  incompatible  with  any  state  of  unalloyed 
bliss  after  death,  as  I  am  prepared  to  prove.  We  say  that 
man  suffers  so  much  unmerited  misery  during  his  life, 
through  the  fault  of  others  with  whom  he  is  associated,  or 
because  of  his  environment,  that  he  is  surely  entitled  to  per- 
fect rest  and  quiet,  if  not  bhss,  before  taking  up  again  the 
burden  of  life.  However,  we  can  discuss  this  in  detail 
later.

WHY  IS    THEOSOPHY  ACCEPTED?

Inq. — I  understand  to  a  certaifi  extent;  hut  I  see  that  your 
teachiiigs  are  far  more  complicated  a?id  metaphysical  than 
either  Spiritualism  or  cur7mt  religious  thought.  Can  you 
tell  me^  then^  what  has  caused  this  system  of  Theosophy  which 
you  support  to  arouse  so  much  interest  and  so  much  animosity 
at  the  saine  time  ?Theo. — There  are  several  reasons  for  it,  I  believe. 
Among  other  causes  that  may  be  mentioned  are:  (i)  The 
great  reaction  from  the  crassly  materialistic  theories  now 
prevalent  among  scientific  teachers.  (2)  General  dissatis- 
faction with  the  artificial  theology  of  the  various  Christian 
churches  and  the  number  of  daily  increasing  and  conflict- 
ing sects.  (3)  An  ever-growing  perception  of  the  fact  that 
the  creeds  which  are  so  obviously  self-  and  mutually  con- 
tradictory cannot  be  true,  and  that  claims  which  are  unveri- 
fied cannot  be  real.  This  natural  distrust  of  conventional 
religions  is  only  strengthened  by  their  complete  failure  to 
preserve  morals  and  to  purify  society  and  the  masses.  (4) 
A  conviction  on  the  part  of  many,  and  kfiowledge  by  a  few, 
that  there  must  be  somewhere  a  philosophical  and  religious 
system  which  shall  be  scientific  and  not  merely  speculative.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  33

(5)  Finally,  perhaps,  a  belief  that  such  a  system  must  be 
sought  for  in  teachings  far  antedating  any  modern  faith.

Inq. — But  how  did  this  system  come  to  be  put  forward  just 
now  ?

Theo. — Just  because  the  time  was  found  to  be  ripe — a 
fact  shown  by  the  determined  effort  of  so  many  earnest 
students  to  reach  the  truth,  at  whatever  cost  and  wherever 
it  may  be  concealed.  Seeing  this,  its  custodians  permitted 
that  some  portions  at  least  of  that  truth  should  be  pro- 
claimed. Had  the  formation  of  the  Theosophical  Society 
been  postponed  a  few  years  longer,  one  half  of  the  civilized 
nations  would  have  become  by  this  time  rank  materialists, 
and  the  other  half  anthropomorphists  and  phenomenalists.

Inq. — Are  we  to  regard  Theosophy  i7i  any  way  as  a  reve- 
latiofi  ?Inq. — Are  we  to  regard  Theosophy  i7i  any  way  as  a  reve- 
latiofi  ?

Theo. — In  no  way  whatever,  nor  even  in  the  sense  of  a 
new  and  direct  disclosure  from  some  higher,  supernatural, 
or,  at  least,  superhuman  beings;  but  only  in  the  sense  of 
an  "unveiUng'*  of  old — very  old — truths  to  minds  hitherto 
ignorant  of  them — ignorant  even  of  the  existence  and  pres- 
ervation of  any  such  archaic  knowledge.

It  has  become  fashionable,  especially  of  late,  to  deride 
the  notion  that  there  ever  was  in  the  Mysteries  of  great 
and  civilized  peoples,  such  as  the  Egyptians,  Greeks,  or 
Romans,  anything  but  priestly  imposture.  Even  the  Rosi- 
crucians  were  no  better  than  half  lunatics,  half  knaves. 
Numerous  books  have  been  written  on  them;  and  tyros, 
who  had  hardly  heard  the  name  a  few  years  before,  saUied 
out  as  profound  critics  and  gnostics  on  the  subject  of 
Alchemy,  the  fire-philosophers,  and  Mysticism  in  general. 
Yet  a  long  series  of  Hierophants  of  Eg3^pt,  India,  Chaldaea, 
and  Arabia,  together  with  the  greatest  philosophers  and 
sages  of  Greece  and  the  West,  are  known  to  have  included 
under  the  designation  of  Wisdom  and  Divine  Science  all

34  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

knowledge ;  for  they  considered  the  base  and  origin  of 
every  art  and  science  as  essentially  divine.  Plato  regarded 
the  Mysteries  as  most  sacred ;  and  Clemens  Alexandrinus, 
who  had  been  himself  initiated  into  the  Eleusinian  Mys- 
teries, has  declared  that  '^  the  doctrines  taught  therein  con- 
tained in  them  the  end  of  all  human  knowledge."  Were 
Plato  and  Clemens  two  knaves  or  two  fools,  we  wonder, 
or — both?

Inq. —  You  spoke  of  ^^  animosity T  If  truth  is  as  repre- 
sented by  Theosophy,  why  has  it  met  with  such  opposition,  and 
with  no  general  acceptance  ?Inq. —  You  spoke  of  ^^  animosity T  If  truth  is  as  repre- 
sented by  Theosophy,  why  has  it  met  with  such  opposition,  and 
with  no  general  acceptance  ?

Theo. — For  many  and  various  reasons  again,  one  of 
which  is  the  hatred  felt  by  men  for  ''  innovations,"  as  they 
call  them.  Selfishness  is  essentially  conservative,  and  hates 
being  disturbed.  It  prefers  an  easy-going,  unexacting  lie 
to  the  greatest  truth,  if  the  latter  requires  the  sacrifice  of 
one^s  smallest  comfort.  The  power  of  mental  inertia  is 
great  in  anything  that  does  not  promise  immediate  benefit 
and  reward.  Our  age  is  preeminently  unspiritual  and 
matter-of-fact.  Moreover,  there  is  the  unfamiliar  charac- 
ter of  Theosophic  teachings ;  the  highly  abstruse  nature  of 
the  doctrines,  some  of  which  contradict  flatly  many  of  the 
human  vagaries  cherished  by  sectarians,  which  have  eaten 
into  the  very  core  of  popular  beliefs.  If  we  add  to  this  the 
personal  efforts  and  great  purity  of  life  exacted  of  those  who 
would  become  the  disciples  of  the  inner  circle,  and  the  very 
limited  class  to  which  an  entirely  unselfish  code  appeals, 
it  will  be  easy  to  perceive  the  reason  why  Theosophy  is 
doomed  to  such  slow,  uphill  work.  It  is  essentially  the 
philosophy  of  those  who  suffer,  and  have  lost  all  hope  of 
being  helped  out  of  the  mire  of  life  by  any  other  means. 
Moreover,  the  history  of  any  system  of  belief  or  morals 
newly  introduced  into  a  foreign  soil  shows  that  its  begin- 
nings were  impeded  by  every  obstacle  that  obscurantism

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

35

and  selfishness  could  suggest.  *'The  crown  of  the  in- 
novator is  a  crown  of  thorns'^  indeed!  No  pulling  down 
of  old,  worm-eaten  buildings  can  be  accomplished  without 
some  danger.Inq. — All  this  refers  rather  to  the  ethics  and  philosophy  of 
Theosophy.  Can  you  give  me  a  general  idea  of  the  Theosoph- 
ical  Society^  its  objects  and  statutes  ?

Theo. — This  has  never  been  made  secret.  Ask,  and 
you  shall  receive  accurate  answers.

Inq. — But  I  heard  that  you  were  bound  by  pledges,

Theo. — Only  in  the  arcane  or  esoteric  section.

Inq. — And  also^  that  some  members  after  leaving  did  not 
regard  themselves  bound  by  them.     Are  they  right  ?

Theo. — This  shows  that  their  idea  of  honor  is  an  imper- 
fect one.  How  can  they  be  right  ?  As  well  said  in  the 
Path^  our  Theosophical  organ  at  New  York,  treating  of  such 
a  case :  ''  Suppose  that  a  soldier  is  tried  for  infringement  of 
oath  and  discipline,  and  is  dismissed  from  the  service.  In 
his  rage  at  the  justice  he  has  called  down,  and  of  whose 
penalties  he  was  distinctly  forewarned,  the  soldier  turns  to 
the  enemy  with  false  information — a  spy  and  traitor — as  a 
revenge  upon  his  former  chief,  and  claims  that  his  punish- 
ment has  released  him  from  his  oath  of  loyalty  to  a  cause." 
Is  he  justified,  think  you  ?  Do  not  you  think  he  deserves 
being  called  a  dishonorable  man,  a  coward?

Inq. — I  believe  so;  but  some  think  otherwise.

Theo. — So  much  the  worse  for  them, 
on  this  subject  later,  if  you  please.

But  we  will  talk

III.

THE  WORKING  SYSTEM  OF  THE  THEOSOPHICAL 
SOCIETY.

THE   OBJECTS   OF   THE   SOCIETY,

Inq. —  What  are  the  objects  of  the  Theosophical  Society  ?But  we  will  talk

III.

THE  WORKING  SYSTEM  OF  THE  THEOSOPHICAL 
SOCIETY.

THE   OBJECTS   OF   THE   SOCIETY,

Inq. —  What  are  the  objects  of  the  Theosophical  Society  ?

Theo. — They  are  three,  and  have  been  so  from  the  be- 
ginning, (i)  To  form  the  nucleus  of  a  Universal  Brother- 
hood of  Humanity  without  distinction  of  race,  color,  sex, 
caste,  or  creed.  (2)  To  promote  the  study  of  Aryan  and 
other  Scriptures,  of  the  world's  religions  and  sciences,  and 
to  vindicate  the  importance  of  old  Asiatic  literature,  such 
as  that  of  the  Brahmanical,  Buddhist,  and  Zoroastrian  phi- 
losophies. (3)  To  investigate  the  hidden  mysteries  of  Nature 
under  every  aspect  possible,  and  the  psychic  and  spiritual 
powers  latent  in  man  especially.  These  are,  broadly  stated, 
the  three  chief  objects  of  the  Theosophical  Society.

Inq. —  Can  you  give  me  sojne  more  detailed  information 
upon  these  ?

Theo. — We  may  divide  each  of  the  three  objects  into  as 
many  explanatory  clauses  as  may  be  found  necessary.

Inq. — Then  let  us  begin  with  the  first.  What  means 
would  you  resort  to  in  order  to  promote  such  a  feeling  of

36

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  37

Brotherhood  a^nong  races  that  are  known  to  be  of  the  most 
diversified  religions^  customs^  beliefs^  and  modes  of  thought  ?

Theo. — Allow  me  to  add  that  which  you  seem  unwilling 
to  express.  Of  course  we  know  that,  with  the  exception  of 
two  remnants  of  races — the  Parsis  and  the  Jews — every 
nation  is  divided,  not  merely  against  all  other  nations,  but 
even  against  itself.  This  is  found  most  prominently  among 
the  so-called  civilized  Christian  nations.  Hence  your  won- 
der, and  the  reason  why  our  first  object  appears  to  you  a 
Utopia.     Is  it  not  so?Inq. —  Well^  yes;  but  what  have  you  to  say  against  it  ?

Theo. — Nothing  against  the  fact,  but  much  about  the 
necessity  of  removing  the  causes  which  make  Universal 
Brotherhood  a  Utopia  at  present.

Inq. —  What  are^  in  your  view,  these  causes  ?

Theo. — First  and  foremost,  the  natiu-al  selfishness  of 
human  nature.  This  selfishness,  instead  of  being  eradi- 
cated, is  daily  strengthened  and  stimulated  into  a  ferocious 
and  irresistible  feeHng  by  the  present  rehgious  education, 
which  tends  not  only  to  encourage,  but  positively  to  justify 
it.  People's  ideas  about  right  and  wTong  have  been  entirely 
perverted  by  the  literal  acceptance  of  the  Jewish  Bible.  All 
the  unselfishness  of  the  altruistic  teachings  of  Jesus  has  be- 
come merely  a  theoretical  subject  for  pulpit  oratory;  while 
the  precepts  of  practical  selfishness  taught  in  the  Mosaic 
Bible,  against  which  Christ  so  vainly  preached,  have  be- 
come ingrained  into  the  innermost  hfe  of  the  Western  na- 
tions. ''  An  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,"  has 
come  to  be  the  first  maxim  of  your  law.  Now,  I  state 
openly  and  fearlessly  that  the  perversity  of  this  doctrine 
and  of  so  many  others  Theosophy  alone  can  eradicate.

38  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

THE   COMMON  ORIGIN  OF  MAN

Inq. — How  ?38  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

THE   COMMON  ORIGIN  OF  MAN

Inq. — How  ?

Theo. — Simply  by  demonstrating  on  logical,  philosoph- 
ical, metaphysical,  and  even  scientific  grounds  that:  {a) 
All  men  have  spiritually  and  physically  the  same  origin, 
which  is  the  fundamental  teaching  of  Theosophy.  (b)  As 
mankind  is  essentially  of  one  and  the  same  essence,  and 
that  essence  is  one — infinite,  uncreate,  and  eternal,  whether 
we  call  it  God  or  Nature — nothing,  therefore,  can  affect  one 
nation  or  one  man  without  affecting  all  other  nations  and 
all  other  men.  This  is  as  certain  and  as  obvious  as  that  a 
stone  thrown  into  a  pond  will,  sooner  or  later,  set  in  motion 
every  single  drop  of  water  therein.

Inq. — But  this  is  not  the  teaching  of  Christy  but  rather  a 
pantheistic  notion.

Theo. — That  is  where  your  mistake  lies.  It  is  purely 
Christian,  although  7iot  Judaic,  and  therefore,  perhaps,  your 
biblical  nations  prefer  to  ignore  it.

Inq. — This  is  a  wholesale  and  tmjust  accusation.  Where 
are  your  proofs  for  such  a  stateme?it  ?

Theo. —  They  are  ready  at  hand.  Christ  is  alleged  to 
have  said,  "  Love  one  another,'^  and  "  Love  your  enemies  '* ; 
"  for  if  ye  love  them  [only]  which  love  you,  what  reward 
[or  merit]  have  ye?  do  not  even  the  pubhcans*  the  same? 
And  if  ye  salute  your  brethren  only,  what  do  ye  more  than 
others?  do  not  even  the  pubHcans  so  ?  "  These  are  Christ's 
words.     But  Genesis  (ix.  25)  says:  ''Cursed  be  Canaan;  a*  Publicans— regarded  as  so  many  thieves  and  pickpockets  in  those  days.  Among 
the  Jews  the  name  and  profession  of  a  pubHcan  was  the  most  odious  thing  in  the  world. 
They  were  not  allowed  to  enter  the  Temple,  and  Matthew  (xviii.  17)  speaks  of  a  hea- 
then and  a  publican  as  identical.  Yet  they  were  only  Roman  tax-gatherers,  occupying 
the  same  position  as  the  British  officials  in  India  and  other  conquered  countries.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  39

servant  of  servants  shall  he  be  unto  his  brethren."  And, 
therefore,  not  Christians,  but  biblical  people  prefer  the  law 
of  Moses  to  Christ's  law  of  love.  It  is  upon  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, which  panders  to  all  their  passions,  that  they  base 
their  laws  of  conquest,  annexation,  and  tyranny  over  races 
which  they  call  '*  inferior.''  What  crimes  have  been  com- 
mitted on  the  strength  of  this — if  taken  in  its  dead-letter 
sense — infernal  passage  in  Genesis,  history  alone  gives  us  an 
idea,  however  inadequate.*

Inq. — I  have  heard  yoic  say  that  the  identity  of  our  physical 
origin  is  proved  by  science^  that  of  our  spiritual  origin  by  the 
Wisdom- Religio7i.  Yet  we  do  notfi?id  Darwinists  exhibiting 
great  fraternal  affection.

Theo. — Just  so.  This  is  what  shows  the  deficiency  of 
the  materialistic  systems,  and  proves  that  we  Theosophists 
are  in  the  right.  The  identity  of  our  physical  origin  makes 
no  appeal  to  our  higher  and  deeper  feelings.  Matter,  de- 
prived of  its  soul  and  spirit,  or  its  divine  essence,  cannot*  **  At  the  close  of  the  middle  ages,  slavery,  under  the  power  of  moral  forces,  had 
mainly  disappeared  from  Europe ;  but  two  momentous  events  occurred  which  overbore 
the  moral  power  working  in  European  society,  and  let  loose  a  swarm  of  curses  upon 
the  earth  such  as  mankind  had  scarcely  ever  known.  One  of  these  events  was  the 
first  voyaging  to  a  populated  and  barbarous  coast  where  human  beings  were  a  familiar 
article  of  traffic ;  and  the  other  the  discovery  of  a  new  world,  where  mines  of  glittering 
wealth  were  open,  provided  labor  could  be  imported  to  work  them.  For  four  hundred 
years  men  and  women  and  children  were  torn  from  all  whom  they  knew  and  loved,  and 
were  sold  on  the  coast  of  Africa  to  foreign  traders ;  they  were  chained  below  decks — the 
dead  often  with  the  living — during  the  horrible  'middle  passage,'  and,  according  to 
Bancroft,  an  impartial  historian,  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  out  of  three  and  a  quar- 
ter millions  were  thrown  into  the  sea  on  that  fatal  passage,  while  the  remainder  were 
consigned  to  nameless  misery  in  the  mines,  or  under  the  lash  in  the  cane  and  rice 
fields.  The  guilt  of  this  great  crime  rests  on  the  Christian  church.  *  In  the  name 
of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity '  the  Spanish  government  concluded  more  than  ten  treaties 
authorizing  the  sale  of  five  hundred  thousand  human  beings  ;  in  1562  Sir  John  Haw- 
kins sailed  on  his  diabolical  errand  of  buying  slaves  in  Africa  and  selling  them  in  the 
West  Indies  in  a  ship  which  bore  the  sacred  name  of  Jesus ;  while  Elizabeth,  the 
Protestant  queen,  rewarded  him  for  his  success  in  this  first  adventure  of  Englishmen 
in  that  inhuman  traffic  by  allowing  him  to  wear  as  his  crest  *  a  demi-Moor  in  his  proper 
color,  bound  with  a  cord,'  or,  in  other  words,  a  manacled  negro  slave." — Conquests 
of  the  Cross,  quoted  from  the  Agnostic  Journal.40  THE  KEY  TO    THEO SOPHY,

speak  to  the  human  heart.  But  the  identity  of  the  soul 
and  spirit,  of  real,  immortal  man,  as  Theosophy  teaches  us, 
once  proven  and  become  deep-rooted  in  our  hearts,  would 
lead  us  far  on  the  road  of  real  charity  and  brotherly  good 
will.

Inq. — But  how  does  Theosophy  explai7i  the  common  origin 
of  man  ?

Theo. — By  teaching  that  the  root  of  all  Nature,  objective 
and  subjective,  and  everything  else  in  the  universe,  visible 
and  invisible,  is,  was,  and  ever  will  be  one  absolute  essence, 
from  which  all  starts,  and  into  which  everything  returns. 
This  is  Aryan  philosophy,  fully  represented  only  by  the 
Vedanta  and  the  Buddhist  system.  With  this  object  in 
view,  it  is  the  duty  of  all  Theosophists  to  promote  in  every 
practical  way,  and  in  all  countries,  the  spread  of  non- 
sectarian  education.

Inq. —  What  else  is  to  be  done  besides  this  ? — on  the  physi- 
cal plane  ^  I  mean.

Theo. — The  organization  of  society  depicted  by  Edward 
Bellamy  in  his  magnificent  work  Looking  Backward  admi- 
rably represents  the  Theosophical  idea  of  what  should  be 
the  first  great  step  toward  the  full  realization  of  Universal 
Brotherhood.  The  state  of  things  he  depicts  falls  short  of 
perfection,  because  selfishness  still  exists  and  operates  in  the 
hearts  of  men.  But  in  the  main,  selfishness  and  individual- 
ism have  been  overcome  by  the  feeling  of  solidarity  and 
mutual  brotherhood  ;  and  the  scheme  of  life  there  described 
reduces  the  causes  tending  to  create  and  foster  selfishness 
to  a  minimum.

Inq. — Then  as  a  Theo  sophist  you  will  take  part  in  an  effort 
to  realize  such  an  ideal?

Theo. —  Certainly;  and  we  have  proved  it  by  action. 
Have  not  you  heard  of  the  Nationalist  party  and  clubsTheo. —  Certainly;  and  we  have  proved  it  by  action. 
Have  not  you  heard  of  the  Nationalist  party  and  clubs

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  41

which  have  sprung  up  in  America  since  the  pubhcation  of 
Bellamy's  book?  They  are  now  coming  prominently  to 
the  front,  and  will  do  so  more  and  more  as  time  goes  on. 
Well,  this  party  and  these  clubs  were  started  in  the  first  in- 
stance by  Theosophists.  One  of  the  first,  the  Nationalist 
Club  of  Boston,  Mass.,  has  Theosophists  for  president  and 
secretary,  and  the  majority  of  its  executive  belong  to  the 
Theosophical  Society.  In  the  constitution  of  all  their 
clubs,  and  of  the  party  they  are  forming,  the  influence  of 
Theosophy  and  of  the  Society  is  plain;  for  they  all  take 
as  their  basis — their  first  and  fundamental  principle — the 
Brotherhood  of  Humanity  as  taught  by  Theosophy.  In 
their  declaration  of  principles  they  state :  "  The  principle  of 
the  Brotherhood  of  Humanity  is  one  of  the  eternal  truths 
that  govern  the  world's  progress  on  lines  which  distinguish 
hmnan  nature  from  brute  nature."  What  can  be  more 
Theosophical  than  this  ?  But  it  is  not  enough.  What  is 
also  needed  is  to  impress  men  with  the  idea  that,  if  the  root 
of  mankind  is  one,  then  there  must  also  be  one  truth  which 
finds  expression  in  all  the  various  religions — except  in  the 
Jewish,  as  you  do  not  find  it  expressed  even  in  the  Kabalah.

Inq. — TJiis  refers  to  the  common  origin  of  religions^  and 
you  may  be  right  there.  But  how  does  it  apply  to- practical 
brotherhood  on  the  physical  plane  ?Inq. — TJiis  refers  to  the  common  origin  of  religions^  and 
you  may  be  right  there.  But  how  does  it  apply  to- practical 
brotherhood  on  the  physical  plane  ?

Theo. — First,  because  that  which  is  true  on  the  meta- 
physical plane  must  be  also  true  on  the  physical.  Secondly, 
because  there  is  no  more  fertile  source  of  hatred  and  strife 
than  religious  differences.  When  one  party  or  another 
thinks  itself  the  sole  possessor  of  absolute  truth,  it  becomes 
only  natural  that  it  should  think  its  neighbor  absolutely  in 
the  clutches  of  error  or  the  '^  devil."  But  once  get  a  man 
to  see  that  none  of  them  has  the  ivhole  truth,  but  that  they 
are  mutually  complementary ;  that  the  complete  truth  can 
be  found  only  in  the  combined  views  of  all,  after  that  which

42  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

is  false  in  each  of  them  has  been  sifted  out — then  true 
brotherhood  in  rehgion  will  be  estabhshed.  The  same  ap- 
plies in  the  physical  world.

Inq. — Please  explain  further,

Theo. — Take  an  instance.  A  plant  consists  of  a  root, 
a  stem,  and  many  shoots  and  leaves.  As  humanity,  as  a 
whole,  is  the  stem  which  grows  from  the  spiritual  root,  so  is 
the  stem  the  unity  of  the  plant.  Injure  the  stem  and  it  is 
obvious  that  every  shoot  and  leaf  will  suffer.  So  it  is  with 
mankind.

Inq. —  Yes  ;  but  if  you  injure  a  leaf  or  a  shoot ^  you  do  not 
injure  the  whole  plant,Inq. —  Yes  ;  but  if  you  injure  a  leaf  or  a  shoot ^  you  do  not 
injure  the  whole  plant,

Theo. — And  therefore  you  think  that  by  injuring  one 
man  you  do  not  injure  humanity  ?  But  how  Aoyou  know  ? 
Are  you  aware  that  even  materialistic  science  teaches  that 
any  injury  to  a  plant,  however  slight,  will  affect  the  whole 
course  of  its  future  growth  and  development  ?  Therefore 
you  are  mistaken,  and  the  analogy  is  perfect.  If,  however, 
you  overlook  the  fact  that  a  cut  on  the  finger  may  often 
make  the  whole  body  suffer,  and  react  on  the  whole  nervous 
system,  I  would  all  the  more  remind  you  that  there  may  well 
be  other  spiritual  laws,  operating  on  plants  and  animals  as 
well  as  on  mankind,  although,  as  you  do  not  recognize  their 
action  on  plants  and  animals,  you  may  deny  their  existence.

Inq. —  What  laws  do  you  mean  ?

Theo. — We  call  them  karmic  laws;  but  you  will  not 
understand  the  full  meaning  of  the  term  unless  you  study 
Occultism.  However,  my  argument  does  not  rest  on  the 
assumption  of  these  laws,  but  really  on  the  analogy  of  the 
plant.  Expand  the  idea,  carry  it  out  to  a  universal  appli- 
cation, and  you  will  soon  find  that  in  true  philosophy  every 
physical  action  has  its  moral  and  everlasting  effect.  Injure 
a  man  by  doing  him  bodily  harm :  you  may  think  that  his

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  43THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  43

pain  and  suffering  cannot  spread  by  any  means  to  his  neigh- 
bors, least  of  all  to  men  of  other  nations.  We  affirm  that 
it  will,  in  good  time.  Therefore  we  say  that  unless  every 
man  is  brought  to  understand,  and  accept  as  an  axiomatic 
truths  that  by  wronging  one  man  we  wrong  not  only 
ourselves,  but  the  whole  of  humanity  in  the  long  run, 
no  brotherly  feelings  such  as  preached  by  all  the  great  re- 
formers— preeminently  by  Buddha  and  Jesus — are  possible 
on  earth.

OUR   OTHER   OBJECTS,

Inq. —  Will  you  now  explaiii  the  methods  by  which  you 
propose  to  carry  out  the  second  object  ?

Theo. — To  collect  for  the  hbrary  of  our  Headquarters  at 
Adyar,  Madras,  and  by  the  Fellows  of  the  Branches  for  their 
local  libraries,  all  the  good  works  upon  the  world's  reli- 
gions that  we  can ;  to  put  into  written  form  correct  infor- 
mation upon  the  various  ancient  philosophies,  traditions, 
and  legends,  and  disseminate  the  same  in  such  practicable 
ways  as  the  translation  and  pubHcation  of  original  works 
of  value,  and  extracts  from  and  commentaries  upon  the 
same,  or  the  oral  instructions  of  persons  learned  in  their 
respective  departments.

Inq. — And  what  about  the  third  object,  to  develop  in  man 
his  latent  spiritual  or  psychic  poivers  ?Inq. — And  what  about  the  third  object,  to  develop  in  man 
his  latent  spiritual  or  psychic  poivers  ?

Theo. — This  has  to  be  achieved  also  by  means  of  publi- 
cations in  those  places  where  no  lectures  and  personal 
teachings  are  possible.  Our  duty  is  to  keep  aUye  in  man 
his  spiritual  intuitions;  to  oppose  and  counteract — after 
due  investigation  and  proof  of  its  irrational  nature — bigotry 
in  every  form,  religious,  scientific,  or  social,  and  "cant" 
above  all,  whether  as  religious  sectarianism  or  as  belief  in 
miracles  or  anything  supernatural.     What  we  have  to  do

44  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

is  to  seek  to  obtain  knowledge  of  all  the  laws  of  Nature, 
and  to  diffuse  it;  to  encourage  the  study  of  those  laws 
least  understood  by  modern  people — the  so-called  Occult 
Sciences,  based  on  the  true  knowledge  of  Nature,  instead  of, 
as  at  present,  on  superstitious  beliefs  based  on  blind  faith 
and  authority.  Popular  folk-lore  and  traditions,  however 
fanciful  at  times,  when  sifted,  may  lead  to  the  discovery  of 
long-lost  but  important  secrets  of  Nature.  The  Society, 
therefore,  aims  at  pursuing  this  line  of  inquiry,  in  the 
hope  of  widening  the  field  of  scientific  and  philosophical 
observation.

ON  THE  SACREDNESS  OF  THE  PLEDGE.

Inq. — Have  you  any  ethical  system  that  you  carry  out  in 
the  Society  ?ON  THE  SACREDNESS  OF  THE  PLEDGE.

Inq. — Have  you  any  ethical  system  that  you  carry  out  in 
the  Society  ?

Theo. — The  ethics  are  there,  ready  and  clear  enough  for 
whomsoever  would  follow  them.  They  are  the  essence  and 
cream  of  the  world's  ethics,  gathered  from  the  teachings  of 
all  the  world's  great  reformers.  Therefore  you  will  find  rep- 
resented therein  Confucius  and  Zoroaster,  Lao-Tze  and  the 
Bhagavad'Gitd^  the  precepts  of  Gautama  Buddha  and  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  of  Hillel  and  his  school,  as  also  of  Pythagoras, 
Socrates,  Plato,  and  their  schools.

Inq. — Do  the  members  of  your  Society  carry  out  these  pre- 
cepts ?  I  have  heard  of  great  dissensions  and  quarrels  among 
them,

Theo. — Very  naturally,  since,  although  the  reform  in  its 
present  shape  may  be  called  new,  the  men  and  women  to 
be  reformed  are  the  same  human,  sinning  natures  as  of  old. 
As  already  said,  the  earnest  working  members  are  few ;  but 
many  are  the  sincere  and  well-disposed  persons  who  try 
their  best  to  live  up  to  the  Society's  and  their  own  ideals. 
Our  duty  is  to  encourage  and  assist  individual  Fellows  in

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  45THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  45

self-improvement,  intellectual,  moral,  and  spiritual ;  not  to 
blame  or  condemn  those  who  fail.  We  have,  strictly  speak- 
ing, no  right  to  refuse  admission  to  any  one — especially  in 
the  Esoteric  Section  of  the  Society,  wherein  ''  he  who  enters 
is  as  one  newly  born."  But  if  any  member — his  sacred 
pledges  on  his  word  of  honor  and  Immortal  Self  notwith- 
standing— chooses,  after  that  ''  new  birth,"  to  continue  with 
the  new  man  the  vices  or  defects  of  his  old  life,  and  to  in- 
dulge in  them  still  in  the  Society,  then,  of  course,  he  is  more 
than  likely  to  be  asked  to  resign  and  withdraw,  or,  in  case 
of  his  refusal,  to  be  expelled.  We  have  the  strictest  rules 
for  such  emergencies.

Inq. — Can  some  of  them  he  mentioned?

Theo. — They  can.  To  begin  with,  no  Fellow  in  the 
Society,  whether  exoteric  or  esoteric,  has  a  right  to  force 
his  personal  opinions  upon  another  Fellow.  This  is  one  of 
the  offenses  in  the  Society  at  large.  As  regards  the  inner 
section,  now  called  the  Esoteric,  the  following  rules  were 
laid  down  and  adopted  so  far  back  as  1880:  ''No  Fellow 
shall  put  to  his  selfish  use  any  knowledge  communicated  to 
him  by  any  member  of  the  first  section  [now  a  higher  ''  de- 
gree "],  violation  of  the  rule  being  punished  by  expulsion." 
Now,  however,  before  any  such  knowledge  can  be  imparted, 
the  apphcant  has  to  bind  himself  by  a  solemn  oath  not  to 
use  it  for  selfish  purposes,  nor  to  reveal  anything  said  except 
by  permission.

Inq. — But  is  a  man  expelled  or  resigning  fro7n  the  sec- 
tion free  to  reveal  anything  he  may  have  learned^  or  to  break 
any  clause  of  the  pledge  he  has  taken  ?Inq. — But  is  a  man  expelled  or  resigning  fro7n  the  sec- 
tion free  to  reveal  anything  he  may  have  learned^  or  to  break 
any  clause  of  the  pledge  he  has  taken  ?

Theo. — Certainly  not.  His  expulsion  or  resignation  only 
relieves  him  from  the  obligation  of  obedience  to  the  teacher, 
and  from  that  of  taking  an  active  part  in  the  work  of  the 
Society,  but  surely  not  from  the  sacred  pledge  of  secrecy.

46  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

Inq. — Bid  is  this  reasonable  and  just  ?

Theo. — Most  assuredly.  To  any  man  or  woman  with 
the  slightest  honorable  feeling  a  pledge  of  secrecy  taken 
even  on  one's  word  of  honor,  much  more  to  one's  Higher 
Self — the  God  within — is  binding  till  death.  And  though 
he  may  leave  the  section  and  the  Society,  no  man  or 
woman  of  honor  will  think  of  attacking  or  injuring  a  body 
to  which  he  or  she  has  been  so  pledged.

Inq. — But  is  not  this  going  rather  far  ?

Theo. — Perhaps  so,  according  to  the  low  standard  of  the 
present  time  and  morality.  But  if  it  does  not  bind  as  far 
as  this,  what  use  is  a  pledge  at  all  ?  How  can  any  one  ex- 
pect to  be  taught  secret  knowledge  if  he  is  to  be  at  liberty 
to  free  himself  from  all  the  obligations  he  had  taken  when- 
ever he  pleases  ?  What  security,  confidence,  or  trust  would 
ever  exist  among  men  if  pledges  such  as  this  were  to  have 
no  really  binding  force  at  all  ?  Believe  me,  the  law  of  ret- 
ribution (Karma)  would  very  soon  overtake  one  who  so 
broke  his  pledge;  perhaps  even  as  soon  as  the  contempt 
of  every  honorable  man  would,  even  on  this  physical  plane. 
As  well  expressed  in  the  Path^  July,  1889,  just  cited  on  this 
subject :A  pledge  J  once  taken,  is  forever  binding  in  both  the  7noral  and 
the  occult  worlds.  If  we  break  it  once  and  are  punished,  that  does  not 
justify  us  in  breaking  it  again ;  and  so  long  as  we  do,  so  long  will  the 
mighty  lever  of  the  Law  [of  Karma]  react  upon  us.

IV.

THE  RELATIONS  OF  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCI- 
ETY TO  THEOSOPHY.

ON  SELF-IMPROVEMENT.

Inq. — Is  moral  elevation^  then^  the  principal  thing  insisted 
upon  ifi  the  Society  ?

Theo. — Undoubtedly.  He  who  would  be  a  true  Theos- 
ophist  must  bring  himself  to  live  as  one.

Inq. — If  so,  theft,  as  I  remarked  before,  the  behavior  of 
some  7nembers  strangely  belies  this  fundamental  rule,

Theo. — Indeed  it  does.  But  this  cannot  be  helped 
among  us,  any  more  than  among  those  who  call  them- 
selves Christians  and  act  like  fiends.  This  is  no  fault  of 
our  statutes  and  rules,  but  that  of  human  nature.  Even  in 
some  exoteric  public  Branches  the  members  pledge  them- 
selves on  their  Higher  Self  to  live  the  life  prescribed  by 
Theosophy.  They  have  to  bring  their  Divine  Self  to  guide 
their  every  thought  and  action  every  day  and  at  every 
moment  of  their  lives.  A  true  Theosophist  ought  "  to  deal 
justly  and  walk  humbly."

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  by  this  ?

Theo. — Simply  this :  the  one  Self  has  to  forget  itself  for 
the  many  selves,  .  Let  me  answer  you  in  the  words  of  a  true

47

48  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Philaletheian,  a  Fellow  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  who 
has  beautifully  expressed  it  in  the  Theosophist  :

What  every  man  needs  first  is  to  find  himself,  and  then  take  an  hon- 
est inventory  of  his  subjective  possessions ;  and,  bad  or  bankrupt  as 
it  may  be,  it  is  not  beyond  redemption  if  we  set  about  it  in  earnest.But  how  many  do  ?  All  are  willing  to  work  for  their  own 
development  and  progress;  very  few  for  those  of  others. 
To  quote  the  same  writer  again :

Men  have  been  deceived  and  deluded  long  enough ;  they  must  break 
their  idols,  put  away  their  shams,  and  go  to  work  for  themselves — nay, 
there  is  one  little  word  too  much  or  too  many,  for  he  who  works  for 
himself  had  better  not  work  at  all ;  rather  let  him  work  himself  for 
others,  for  all.  For  every  flower  of  love  and  charity  he  plants  in  his 
neighbor's  garden  a  loathsome  weed  will  disappear  from  his  own,  and 
so  this  garden  of  the  gods — humanity — shall  blossom  as  a  rose.  In 
all  Bibles,  all  religions,  this  is  plainly  set  forth ;  but  designing  men 
have  at  first  misinterpreted  and  finally  emasculated,  materialized,  be- 
sotted them.  It  does  not  require  a  new  revelation.  Let  every  man 
be  a  revelation  unto  himself.  Let  once  man's  immortal  spirit  take 
possession  of  the  temple  of  his  body,  drive  out  the  money-changers  and 
every  unclean  thing,  and  his  own  divine  humanity  will  redeem  him ; 
for  when  he  is  thus  at  one  with  himself  he  will  know  the  **  builder  of 
the  temple."

Inq. —  This  is  pure  altruism^  I  confess,Inq. —  This  is  pure  altruism^  I  confess,

Theo. — It  is.  And  if  only  one  Fellow  of  the  Theosoph- 
ical Society  out  of  ten  would  practise  it,  ours  would  be  a 
body  of  elect  indeed.  But  there  are  those  among  the  out- 
siders who  will  always  refuse  to  see  the  essential  difference 
between  Theosophy  and  the  Theosophical  Society,  the  idea 
and  its  imperfect  embodiment.  Such  would  visit  every  sin 
and  shortcoming  of  the  vehicle — the  human  body — on  the 
pure  spirit  which  sheds  thereon  its  divine  light.  Is  this  just 
to  either  ?  They  throw  stones  at  an  association  that  tries 
to  work  up  to,  and  for  the  propagation  of,  its  ideal  with  most 
tremendous  odds  against  it.  Some  vilify  the  Theosophical 
Society  only  because  it  presumes  to  attempt  to  do  that  in

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  49

which  other  systems — church  and  state  Christianity  pre- 
eminently— have  failed  most  egregiously;  others  because 
they  would  fain  preserve  the  existing  state  of  things; 
Pharisees  and  Sadducees  in  the  seat  of  Moses,  and  pub- 
licans and  sinners  reveling  in  high  places,  as  under  the 
Roman  empire  during  its  decadence.  Fair-minded  people, 
at  any  rate,  ought  to  remember  that  the  man  who  does  all 
he  can  does  as  much  as  he  who  has  achieved  the  most  in 
this  world  of  relative  possibihties.  This  is  a  simple  truism 
— an  axiom  supported  for  believers  in  the  Gospels  by  the 
parable  of  the  talents,  given  by  their  Master:  the  servant 
who  doubled  his  two  talents  was  rewarded  as  much  as  the 
other  fellow-servant  who  had  received  five.  To  every  man 
it  is  given  ''  according  to  his  several  abihty."Inq. —  Yet  it  is  rather  difficult  to  draw  the  line  of  demar- 
cation between  the  abstract  and  the  concrete  in  this  case^  as  we 
have  only  the  latter  by  which  to  form  our  judgment.

Theo. — Then  why  make  an  exception  for  the  Theosoph- 
ical  Society  ?  Justice,  like  charity,  ought  to  begin  at 
home.  Will  you  revile  and  scoff  at  the  Sermon  pn  the 
Mount  because  your  social,  political,  and  even  rehgious 
laws  have,  so  far,  not  only  failed  to  carry  out  its  precepts 
in  their  spirit,  but  even  in  their  dead  letter  ?  Abolish  the 
oath  in  courts,  parliament,  army,  and  everywhere,  and  do 
as  the  Quakers  do,  if  you  will  call  yourselves  Christians. 
Abolish  the  coiu"ts  themselves ;  for  if  you  would  follow  the 
commandments  of  Christ,  you  have  to  give  away  your  cloak 
to  him  who  deprives  you  of  your  coat,  and  turn  your  left 
cheek  to  the  bully  who  smites  you  on  the  right.  ''  Resist 
not  evil,"  ''  love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  ciu"se  you, 
do  good  to  them  that  hate  you ; "  for  ''  whosoever  shall  break 
one  of  the  least  of  these  commandments,  and  shall  teach 
men  so,  he  shall  be  called  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,"  and  ''  whosoever  shall  say,  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in

50  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

danger  of  hell-fire."  And  why  should  you  judge,  if  you 
would  not  be  judged  in  your  turn  ?  Insist  that  between 
Theosophy  and  the  Theosophical  Society  there  is  no  differ- 
ence, and  forthwith  you  lay  the  system  of  Christianity  and 
its  very  essence  open  to  the  same  charges,  only  in  a  more 
serious  form.

Inq. —  Why  more  serious  ?Inq. —  Why  more  serious  ?

Theo. — Because,  while  the  leaders  of  the  Theosophical 
movement,  recognizing  fully  their  shortcomings,  try  all  they 
can  to  amend  their  ways  and  uproot  the  evil  existing  in  the 
Society,  and  while  their  rules  and  by-laws  are  framed  in  the 
spirit  of  Theosophy,  the  legislators  and  the  churches  of  na- 
tions and  countries  which  call  themselves  Christian  do  the 
reverse.  Our  members — even,  the  worst  among  them — are 
no  worse  than  the  average  Christian.  Moreover,  if  the 
Western  Theosophists  experience  so  much  difficulty  in  lead- 
ing the  true  Theosophical  life,  it  is  because  they  are  all  the 
children  of  their  generation.  Every  one  of  them  was  a 
Christian,  bred  and  brought  up  in  the  sophistry  of  his 
chm'ch,  his  social  customs,  and  even  his  paradoxical  laws. 
He  was  this  before  he  became  a  Theosophist — or  rather  a 
member  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  as  it  cannot  be  too 
often  repeated  that  between  the  abstract  ideal  and  its 
vehicle  there  is  a  most  important  difference.

THE  ABSTRACT  AND    THE   CONCRETE.

Inq. — Please  elucidate  this  difference  a  little  more,

Theo. — The  Society  is  a  great  body  of  men  and  women, 
composed  of  the  most  heterogeneous  elements.  Theosophy 
in  its  abstract  meaning  is  Divine  Wisdom,  or  the  aggregate 
of  the  knowledge  and  wisdom  that  underlie  the  universe — 
the  homogeneity  of  Eternal  Good ;  and  in  its  concrete  sense

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  51THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  51

it  is  the  sum  total  of  the  same  as  allotted  to  man  by  Nature 
on  this  earth,  and  no  more.  Some  members  earnestly  en- 
deavor to  realize  and,  so  to  speak,  to  objectivize  Theosophy 
in  their  hves ;  while  others  desire  only  to  know  of,  not  to 
practise  it ;  and  others  still  may  have  joined  the  Society 
merely  out  of  curiosity  or  a  passing  interest,  or  perhaps, 
again,  because  some  of  their  friends  belong  to  it.  How, 
then,  can  the  system  be  judged  by  the  standard  of  those 
who  would  assume  the  name  without  any  right  to  it  ?  Is 
poetry  or  its  muse  to  be  measured  only  by  those  would-be 
poets  who  afflict  our  ears  ?  The  Society  can  be  regarded 
as  the  embodiment  of  Theosophy  only  in  its  abstract 
motives;  it  can  never  presume  to  call  itself  its  concrete 
vehicle  so  long  as  human  imperfections  and  weaknesses  are 
all  represented  in  its  body ;  otherwise  the  Society  would  be 
only  repeating  the  great  error  and  the  overflowing  sacrileges 
of  the  so-called  churches  of  Christ.  If  Easterncomparisonj 
may  be  permitted,  Theosophy  is  the  shoreless  ocean  of  uni- 
versal truth,  love,  and  wisdom,  reflecting  its  radiance  on 
the  earth ;  while  the  Theosophical  Society  is  only  a  visible 
bub'BTe  on  that  reflection.  Theosophy  is  divine  nature, 
visible  and  invisible,  and  its  Society  human  nature  trying 
to  ascend  to  its  divine  parent.  Theosophy,  finally,  is  the 
fixed,  eternal  sun,  and  its  Society  the  evanescent  comet  try- 
ing to  settle  in  an  orbit  to  become  a  planet,  ever  revolving 
within  the  attraction  of  the  sun  of  truth.  It  was  formed  to 
assist  in  showing  to  men  that  such  a  thing  as  Theosophy 
exists,  and  to  help  them  to  ascend  toward  it  by  studying 
and  assimilating  its  eternal  verities.Inq. — I  thought  you  said  you  had  no  tenets  or  doctrines  of 
your  own  ?

Theo. — Nor  have  we.  The  Society  has  no  wisdom  of 
its  own  to  support  or  teach.  It  is  simply  the  storehouse 
of  all  the  truths  uttered  by  the  great  seers,  Initiates,  and

52  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

prophets  of  historic  and  even  prehistoric  ages — at  least, 
as  many  as  it  can  get.  Therefore  it  is  merely  the  channel 
through  which  more  or  less  of  truth  found  in  the  accumu- 
lated utterances  of  humanity^s  great  teachers  is  poured  out 
into  the  world.

Inq. — But  is  such  truth  unreachable  outside  of  the  Society  ? 
Does  not  every  church  claim  the  saine  ?

Theo. — Not  at  all.  The  undeniable  existence  of  great 
Initiates — true  ^^  Sons  of  God  " — shows  that  such  wisdom 
was  often  reached  by  isolated  individuals ;  never,  however, 
without  the  guidance  of  a  Master  at  first.  But  most  of  the 
followers  of  such,  when  they  became  Masters  in  their  turn, 
have  dwarfed  the  Catholicism  of  these  teachings  into  the 
narrow  groove  of  their  own  sectarian  dogmas.  The  com- 
mandments of  a  chosen  Master  alone  were  then  adopted 
and  followed,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others — if  followed  at 
all,  note  well,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. 
Each  religion  is  thus  a  bit  of  the  divine  truth,  made  to 
focus  a  vast  panorama  of  human  fancy  which  claims  to 
represent  and  replace  that  truth.

Inq. — But  Theosophy,  you  say,  is  not  a  religion  ?Inq. — But  Theosophy,  you  say,  is  not  a  religion  ?

Theo. — Most  assuredly  it  is  not,  since  it  is  the  essence 
of  all  religion  and  of  absolute  truth,  a  drop  of  which  only 
underlies  every  creed.  To  resort  once  more  to  metaphor, 
Theosophy  on  earth  is  like  the  white  ray  of  the  spectrum, 
and  every  religion  only  one  of  the  seven  prismatic  colors. 
Ignoring  all  the  others,  and  cursing  them  as  false,  every 
special  colored  ray  claims  not  only  priority,  but  to  be  that 
white  ray  itself,  and  anathematizes  even  its  own  tints  from 
hght  to  dark  as  heresies.  Yet  as  the  sun  of  truth  rises 
higher  and  higher  on  the  horizon  of  man's  perception,  and 
each  colored  ray  gradually  fades  out  until  it  is  finally  re- 
absorbed in  its  turn,  humanity  will  at  last  be  cursed  no

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  53

longer  with  artificial  polarizations,  but  will  find  itself  bath- 
ing in  the  pure,  colorless  sunlight  of  eternal  truth.  And 
this  will  be  Theosophia.

Inq. —  Your  claim  is,  then,  that  all  the  great  religions  are 
derived  fro?n  TJieosophy ,  and  that  it  is  by  assimilating  it  that 
the  world  will  be  fijially  saved  from  the  curse  of  its  great  illu- 
sions and  er7^ors  ?Theo. — Precisely  so.  And  we  add  that  our  Theosoph- 
ical  Society  is  the  humble  seed  which,  if  watered  and  let 
live,  will  finally  produce  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of  Good 
and  Evil  which  is  grafted  on  the  Tree  of  Life  Eternal. 
For  it  is  only  by  studying  the  various  great  rehgions  and 
philosophies  of  humanity,  by  comparing  them  dispassion- 
ately and  with  an  unbiased  mind,  that  men  can  hope  to 
arrive  at  the  truth.  It  is  especially  by  finding  out  and  not- 
ing their  various  points  of  agreement  that  we  may  achieve 
this  result.  For  no  sooner  do  we  arrive — either  by  study 
or  by  being  taught  by  some  one  who  knows — at  their  inner 
meaning  than  we  find,  almost  in  every  case,  that  it  expresses 
some  great  truth  in  Nature.

Inq. —  We  have  heard  of  a  golden  age  that  was^  and  what 
you  describe  would  be  a  golden  age  to  be  realized  at  some  fu- 
ture day.      When  shall  it  be  ?

Theo. — Not  before  humanity  as  a  whole  feels  the  need 
of  it.  A  maxim  in  the  Persian  Javida?t  Khirad  says: 
"Truth  is  of  two  kinds — one  manifest  and  self-evident, 
the  other  demanding  incessantly  new  demonstrations  and 
proofs."  It  is  only  when  this  latter  kind  of  truth  becomes 
as  universally  obvious  as  it  is  now  dim  and  therefore  liable 
to  be  distorted  by  sophistry  and  casuistry — it  is  only  when 
the  two  kinds  will  have  become  once  more  one,  that  all 
people  will  be  brought  to  see  alike.

Inq. — But  surely  those  few  who  have  felt  the  need  of  such 
truths  must  have  made  up  their  minds  to  believe  in  something

54  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,Inq. — But  surely  those  few  who  have  felt  the  need  of  such 
truths  must  have  made  up  their  minds  to  believe  in  something

54  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

definite  ?  You  tell  me  that,  the  Society  having  no  doctrines 
of  its  oivn,  every  member  may  believe  as  he  chooses  and  accept 
what  he  pleases.  This  looks  as  if  the  Theosophical  Society 
were  be?it  upon  reviving  the  confusion  of  languages  and  beliefs 
of  the  Tower  of  Babel  of  old.    Have  you  no  beliefs  in  common  ?

Theo. — What  is  meant  by  the  Society  having  no  tenets 
or  doctrines  of  its  own  is  that  no  special  doctrines  or  behefs 
are  obligatory  on  its  members;  but  of  course  this  appUes 
only  to  the  body  as  a  whole.  The  Society,  as  you  were 
told,  is  divided  into  an  outer  and  an  inner  body.  Those 
who  belong  to  the  latter  have,  of  course,  a  philosophy  or, 
if  you  so  prefer  it,  a  religious  system  of  their  own.

Inq. — May  we  be  told  what  it  is  ?

Theo. — We  make  no  secret  of  it.  It  was  outlined  a  few 
years  ago  in  the  Theosophist  and  Esoteric  Buddhis77i,  and 
may  be  found  still  more  elaborated  in  The  Secret  Doctrine, 
It  is  based  on  the  oldest  philosophy  of  the  world,  called 
the  Wisdom-Rehgion  or  the  Archaic  Doctrine.  If  you  like, 
you  may  ask  questions  and  have  them  explained.

V.

THE  FUNDAMENTAL  TEACHINGS  OF  THE- 
OSOPHY.

ON  GOD  AND  PRAYER.

Inq. — Do  you  believe  in  God  ?

Theo. — That  depends  upon  what  you  mean  by  the  term.

Inq. — /  mean  the  God  of  the  Christians^  the  Father  of 
Jesus ^  and  the  Creator — the  biblical  God  of  Moses ^  in  short.Theo. — That  depends  upon  what  you  mean  by  the  term.

Inq. — /  mean  the  God  of  the  Christians^  the  Father  of 
Jesus ^  and  the  Creator — the  biblical  God  of  Moses ^  in  short.

Theo. — In  such  a  God  we  do  not  believe.  We  reject 
the  idea  of  a  personal  or  an  extracosmic  and  anthropo- 
morphic God,  who  is  but  the  gigantic  shadow  of  man,  and 
not  even  of  man  at  his  best.  The  God  of  theology,  we  say 
— and  prove  it — is  a  bundle  of  contradictions  and  a  logical 
impossibility.  Therefore  we  will  have  nothing  to  do  with 
him.

Inq. — State  your  reasons^  if  you  please,

Theo. — They  are  many,  and  cannot  all  receive  attention. 
But  here  are  a  few.  This  God  is  called  by  his  devotees 
infinite  and  absolute,  is  he  not  ?

Inq. — I  believe  he  is.

Theo. — Then,  if  infinite — i.e.,  limitless — and  especially 
if  absolute,  how  can  he  have  a  form  and  be  a  Creator  of

55

56  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

anything  ?  Form  implies  limitation,  and  a  beginning  as 
well  as  an  end ;  and  in  order  to  create,  a  Being  must  think 
and  plan.  How  can  the  Absolute  be  supposed  to  think — 
i.e.,  have  any  relation  whatever  to  that  which  is  limited, 
finite,  and  conditioned  ?  This  is  a  philosophical  and  a 
logical  absurdity.  Even  the  Hebrew  Kabalah  rejects  such 
an  idea,  and  therefore  makes  of  the  one  and  the  Absolute 
Deific  Principle  an  Infinite  Unity  called  Ain  Suph.*  In 
order  to  create,  the  Creator  has  to  become  active ;  and  as 
this  is  impossible  for  Absoluteness,  the  Infinite  Principle  had 
to  be  shown  becoming  the  cause  of  evolution  (not  creation) 
in  an  indirect  way — i.e.,  through  the  emanation  from  itself 
(another  absurdity,  due  this  time  to  the  translators  of  the 
Kabalah)  t  of  the  Sephiroth.Inq. — How  about  those  Kaba lists  who,  while  being  such, 
still  believe  i7i  Jehovah,  or  the  Tetragravimaton  ?

Theo. — They  are  at  liberty  to  believe  in  what  they 
please,  as  their  behef  or  disbelief  can  hardly  affect  a  self- 
evident  fact.  The  Jesuits  tell  us  that  two  and  two  are  not 
always  four  to  a  certainty,  since  it  depends  on  the  will  of 
God  to  make  2  x  2  =  5.  Shall  we  accept  their  sophistry 
for  all  that  ?

Inq. — Then  you  are  atheists?

Theo. — Not  that  we  know  of,  and  not  unless  the  epithet 
of  ''atheist"  is  to  be  applied  to  all  those  who  disbelieve 
in  an  anthropomorphic  God.  We  believe  in  a  Universal 
Divine  Principle,  the  root  of  all,  from  which  all  proceeds,

*  Ain  Suph,  P\')D  rK>='^0  TraVz^aireipOV,  the  Endless,  or  Boundless,  in  and 
with  Nature,  the  Non-existent  which  IS,  but  is  not  a  Being.

t  How  can  the  non-active  eternal  principle  emanate  or  emit  ?  The  Parabrahman 
of  the  Vedantins  does  nothing  of  the  kind ;  nor  does  the  Ain  Suph  of  the  Chaldaean 
Kabalah.  It  is  an  eternal  and  periodical  law  which  causes  an  active  and  creative 
force  (the  Logos)  to  emanate  from  the  ever-concealed  and  incomprehensible  one  prin- 
ciple at  the  beginning  of  every  Mahamanvantara,  or  new  cycle  of  life.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  57

and  within  which  all  shall  be  absorbed  at  the  end  of  the 
great  cycle  of  Being.

Inq. — TTiis  is  the  old,  old  claim  of  pantheism.  If  you  are 
pantheists,  you  can?iot  be  deists;  a7id  if  you  are  not  deists,  then 
you  have  to  answer  to  the  name  of  atheists,Theo. — Not  necessarily  so.  The  term  ''  pantheism  "  is, 
again,  one  of  the  many  abused  terms  whose  real  and  primi- 
tive meaning  has  been  distorted  by  blind  prejudice  and  a 
one-sidedness  of  view.  If  you  accept  the  Christian  ety- 
mology of  this  compound  word,  and  form  it  oi  pan  (tckv), 
*'  all,"  and  theos  (Osoc;),  "  god,"  and  then  imagine  and  teach 
that  this  means  that  every  stone  and  every  tree  in  Nature  is 
a  God  or  the  One  God,  then,  of  course,  you  will  be  right, 
and  make  of  pantheists  fetish-worshipers,  in  addition  to 
their  legitimate  name.  But  you  will  hardly  be  as  success- 
ful if  you  etymologize  the  word  ^'pantheism  "  esoterically, 
and  as  we  do.

Inq. —  What  is,  then,  your  definition  of  it  ?

Theo. — Let  me  ask  you  a  question  in  my  turn.  What 
do  you  understand  by  Pan,  or  Nature  ?

Inq. — Nature  is,  I  suppose,  the  sum  total  of  things  existing 
around  us  ;  the  aggregate  of  causes  and  effects  in  the  world  of 
7natter,  the  creation  or  universe,

Theo. — Hence  the  personified  sum  and  order  of  known 
causes  and  effects ;  the  total  of  all  finite  agencies  and  forces, 
as  utterly  disconnected  from  an  intelligent  Creator  or  Cre- 
ators, and  perhaps  "  conceived  of  as  a  single  and  separate 
force  " — as  in  your  cyclopedias  ?

Inq. —  Yes,  I  believe  so.

Theo. — Well,  we  neither  take  into  consideration  this 
objective  and  material  nature,  which  we  call  an  evanescent 
illusion,  nor  do  we  mean  by  Pan,  Nature,  in  the  sense  of  its

58  THE  KEY  TO   THEOSOPHY,58  THE  KEY  TO   THEOSOPHY,

accepted  derivation  from  the  Latin  natura^  "becoming," 
from  nasci,  ''to  be  born."  When  we  speak  of  the  Deity 
and  make  it  identical — hence  coeval — with  Nature,  the 
eternal  and  uncreate  Nature  is  meant,  and  not  your  aggre- 
gate of  flitting  shadows  and  finite  unrealities.  We  leave  it 
to  the  hymn-makers  to  call  the  visible  sky  or  heaven  God's 
throne,  and  our  earth  of  mud  his  footstool.  Our  Deity  is 
neither  in  a  paradise  nor  in  a  particular  tree,  building,  or 
mountain ;  it  is  everywhere,  in  every  atom  of  the  visible  as 
of  the  invisible  cosmos ;  in,  over,  and  around  every  invis- 
ible atom  and  divisible  molecule ;  for  IT  is  the  mysterious 
power  of  evolution  and  involution,  the  omnipresent,  omnip- 
otent, and  even  omniscient  creative  potentiality.

Inq. — Stop  I  Omniscience  is  the  prerogative  of  something 
that  thi7tks^  and  you  deny  to  your  Absoluteness  the  power  of 
thought.

Theo. — We  deny  it  to  the  Absolute,  since  thought  is 
something  limited  and  conditioned.  But  you  evidently  for- 
get that  in  philosophy  absolute  unconsciousness  is  also  abso- 
lute consciousness,  as  otherwise  it  would  not  be  absolute.

Inq. — Then  your  Absolute  thinks  ?

Theo. — No,  IT  does  not — for  the  simple  reason  that  it 
is  Absolute  Thought  itself.  Nor  does  it  exist,  for  the  same 
reason,  as  it  is  absolute  existence,  and  "Be-ness,"  not  a 
Being.  Read  the  superb  Kabalistic  poem  by  Solomon  ben- 
Yehudah  Ibn  Gebirol,  in  the  Kether  Malchuth,  and  you 
will  understand :Thou  art  one,  the  root  of  all  numbers,  but  not  as  an  element  of 
numeration ;  for  unity  admits  not  of  multiplication,  change,  or  form. 
Thou  art  one,  and  in  the  secret  of  Thy  unity  the  wisest  of  men  are 
lost,  because  they  know  it  not.  Thou  art  one,  and  Thy  unity  is  never 
diminished,  never  extended,  and  cannot  be  changed.  Thou  art  one, 
and  no  thought  of  mine  can  fix  for  Thee  a  limit,  or  define  Thee. 
Thou  ART,  but  not  as  one  existent,  for  the  understanding  and  vision

THE  KEY  TO   THEO SOPHY,  59

of  mortals  cannot  attain  to  Thy  existence,  nor  determine  for  Thee  the 
where,  the  how,  and  the  why.

In  short,  our  Deity  is  the  eternal,  incessantly  evolving, 
not  creating,  builder  of  the  universe ;  that  universe  itself 
unfolding  out  of  its  own  essence,  not  being  made.  It  is  a 
sphere,  without  circumference,  in  its  symbolism,  which  has 
but  one  ever-acting  attribute  embracing  all  other  existing 
or  thinkable  attributes — Itself.  It  is  the  one  law,  giving  the 
impulse  to  manifested,  eternal,  and  immutable  laws,  within 
that  never-manifesting,  because  absolute.  Law  which  in  its 
manifesting  periods  is  The  Ever-Becoming.

Inq. — 1 07ice  heard  one  of  your  members  remark  that  Uni- 
versal Deity  ^  being  everywhere  ^  was  in  vessels  of  dishonor^  as 
in  those  of  honor ^  and  therefore  was  present  in  every  atom  of 
my  cigar-ash  I     Is  this  not  ra?ik  blasphemy  ?

Theo. — I  do  not  think  so,  as  simple  logic  can  hardly  be 
regarded  as  blasphemy.  Were  we  to  exclude  the  Omni- 
present Principle  from  one  single  mathematical  point  of  the 
universe,  or  from  a  particle  of  matter  occupying  any  con- 
ceivable space,  could  we  still  regard  it  as  infinite  ?

u

IS  IT  NECESSARY  TO  PRAY?u

IS  IT  NECESSARY  TO  PRAY?

Inq. — Do  you  believe  in  prayer^  and  do  you  ever  pray  ?

Theo. — We  do  not.     We  act  instead  of  talk.

Inq. —  You  do  not  offer  prayers  even  to  the  Absolute  Prin- 
ciple ?

Theo. — Why  should  we  ?  Being  well-occupied  people, 
we  can  hardly  afford  to  lose  time  in  addressing  verbal 
prayers  to  a  pure  abstraction.  The  Unknowable  is  capable 
of  relations  only  in  its  parts  one  to  another,  but  is  non-exis- 
tent as  regards  any  finite  relations.     The  visible  universe

60  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

depends  for  its  existence  and  phenomena  on  its  mutually 
acting  forms  and  their  laws,  not  on  prayer  or  prayers.

Inq. — Do  you  not  believe  at  all  in  the  efficacy  of  prayer  ?

Theo. — Not  in  prayer  taught  in  so  many  words  and 
repeated  externally,  if  by  prayer  you  mean  the  outward 
petition  to  an  unknown  God  as  the  addressee,  which  was 
inaugurated  by  the  Jews  and  popularized  by  the  Pharisees.

Inq. — Is  there  a7iy  other  kind  of  prayer  ?

Theo. — Most  decidedly ;  we  call  it  willprayer,  and  it  is 
rather  an  internal  command  than  a  petition.

Inq. — To  whom,  then,  do  you  pray  when  you-  do  so?

Theo. — To  ''our  Father  in  heaven" — in  its  esoteric 
meaning.

Inq. — Is  that  different  from  the  one  given  to  it  in  theology  ?

Theo. — Entirely  so.  An  Occultist  or  a  Theosophist  ad- 
dresses his  prayer  to  his  ''  Father  "  which  is  in  secret  (read, 
and  try  to  understand,  Matthew  vi.  6),  not  to  an  extracos- 
mic  and  therefore  finite  God ;  and  that  ''Father"  is  in  man 
himself.

Inq. — The?t  you  make  of  man  a  God?Inq. — The?t  you  make  of  man  a  God?

Theo. — Please  say  "  God  "  and  not  "  a  God."  In  our 
sense,  the  inner  man  is  the  only  God  of  whom  we  can  have 
cognizance.  And  how  can  this  be  otherwise  ?  Grant  us 
our  postulate  that  God  is  a  universally  diffused,  infinite  prin- 
ciple, and  how  can  man  alone  escape  from  being  soaked 
through  by  and  in  the  Deity  ?  We  call  our  "  Father  in 
heaven "  that  deific  essence  of  which  we  are  cognizant 
within  us,  in  our  heart  and  spiritual  consciousness,  and 
which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  anthropomorphic  concep- 
tion we  may  form  of  it  in  our  physical  brain  or  its  fancy : 
"  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  61

the  Spirit  of  [the  absolute]  God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  "  *  Yet 
let  no  man  anthropomorphize  that  essence  in  us.  Let  no 
Theosophist,  if  he  would  hold  to  divine,  not  human  truth, 
say  that  this  ''  God  in  secret  "  listens  to,  or  is  distinct  from, 
either  finite  man  or  the  infinite  essence;  for  all  are  one. 
Nor,  as  just  remarked,  that  a  prayer  is  a  petition.  It  is  a 
mystery,  rather ;  an  occult  process  by  which  finite  and  con- 
ditioned thoughts  and  desires,  unable  to  be  assimilated  by 
the  absolute  Spirit  which  is  unconditioned,  are  translated 
into  spiritual  wills  and  the  will ;  such  process  being  called 
"spiritual  transmutation."  The  intensity  of  our  ardent 
aspirations  changes  prayer  into  the  '*  philosopher's  stone," 
or  that  which  transmutes  lead  into  pure  gold.  The  only 
homogeneous  essence,  our  "  will-prayer,"  becomes  the  ac- 
tive or  creative  force,  producing  effects  according  to  our 
desire.

Inq. — Do  you  mean  to  say  that  prayer  is  an  occult  process 
bringing  about  physical  results  ?Inq. — Do  you  mean  to  say  that  prayer  is  an  occult  process 
bringing  about  physical  results  ?

Theo. — I  do.  Will-power  becomes  a  living  power.  But 
woe  unto  those  Occultists  and  Theosophists  who,  instead 
of  crushing  out  the  desires  of  the  lower  personal  ego  or 
physical  man,  and  saying — addressing  their  Higher  Spirit- 
ual Ego,  immersed  in  Atma-Buddhic  light — "  Thy  will  be 
done,  not  mine,"  send  up  waves  of  will-power  for  selfish  or 
unholy  purposes  !      For  this  is  black  magic,  abomination.

*  One  often  finds  in  Theosophical  writings  conflicting  statements  about  the  Christos 
principle  in  man.  Some  call  it  the  sixth  principle  (Buddhi),  others  the  seventh 
(Atman).  If  Christian  Theosophists  wish  to  make  use  of  such  expressions,  let  them 
be  made  philosophically  correct  by  following  the  analogy  of  the  old  Wisdom-Religion 
symbols.  We  say  that  Christos  is  not  only  one  of  the  three  higher  principles,  but  all 
the  three  regarded  as  a  Trinity.  This  Trinity  represents  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Father, 
and  the  Son,  as  it  answers  to  abstract  spirit,  differentiated  spirit,  and  embodied  spirit. 
Krishna  and  Christ  are  philosophically  the  same  principle  under  its  triple  aspect  of 
manifestation.  In  the  Bhagavad-Gitd  we  find  Krishna  calling  himself  indifferently 
Atman,  the  Abstract  Spirit,  Kshetrajna,  the  Higher  or  reincarnating  Ego,  and  the 
Universal  SELF*--all  names  which,  when  transferred  from  the  universe  to  man,  an- 
swer to  Atma,  Buddhi,  and  Manas.     The  A  nugitd  is  full  of  the  same  doctrine.

62  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.62  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

and  spiritual  sorcery.  Unfortunately,  all  this  is  the  favorite 
occupation  of  our  Christian  statesmen  and  generals,  espe- 
cially when  the  latter  are  sending  two  armies  to  murder 
each  other.  Both  before  action  indulge  in  a  bit  of  such 
sorcery,  when  severally  offering  prayers  to  the  same  God  of 
hosts,  each  entreating  his  help  to  cut  his  enemies'  throats.

Inq. — David  prayed  to  the  Lord  of  hosts  to  help  hhn  smite 
the  Fhilisti?ies  and  slay  the  Syriaiis  and  the  Moabites^  and 
*'  the  Lord  preserved  David  whithersoever  he  we7it,^^  Ln  that 
we  only  follow  what  we  find  in  the  Bible.

Theo. — Of  course  you  do.  But  since  you  delight  in 
calling  yourselves  Christians,  not  Israelites  or  Jews,  as  far  as 
we  know,  why  do  you  not  rather  follow  that  which  Christ 
says  ?  And  he  distinctly  commands  you  not  to  follow 
"  them  of  old  times,"  or  the  Mosaic  law,  but  bids  you  do 
as  he  tells  you,  and  warns  those  who  would  take  the  sword 
that  they  too  will  perish  by  the  sword.  Christ  has  given 
you  one  prayer,  of  which  you  have  made  a  lip-prayer  and  a 
boast,  and  which  none  but  the  true  Occultist  understands. 
In  it  you  say,  in  your  dead-sense  meaning,  "  Forgive  us  our 
debts,  as  we  forgive  our  debtors  " — which  you  never  do. 
Again,  he  told  you  to  love  your  enemies  and  do  good  to 
them  that  hate  you.  It  is  surely  not  the  ''  meek  prophet 
of  Nazareth  "  who  taught  you  to  pray  to  your  *'  Father  " 
to  slay  and  give  you  victory  over  your  enemies  !  This  is 
why  we  reject  what  you  call  *' prayers."Inq. — But  how  do  you  explain  the  universal  fact  that  all 
nations  and  peoples  have  prayed  to  and  worshiped  a  God  or 
Gods  ?     Sojne  have  adored  and  propitiated  devils  and  harm- 
ful spirits^  but  this  only  proves  the  universality  of  the  belief  in 
the  efficacy  of  prayer.

Theo. — It  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  prayer  has  sev- 
eral other  meanings  besides  that  given  to  it  by  the  Chris-

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  63Theo. — It  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  prayer  has  sev- 
eral other  meanings  besides  that  given  to  it  by  the  Chris-

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  63

tians.  It  means  not  only  a  pleading  or  petition,  but  in 
days  of  old  meant  far  more  an  invocation  and  incantation. 
The  mantra^  or  the  rhythmically  chanted  prayer  of  the 
Hindus,  has  precisely  such  a  meaning,  for  the  Brahmans 
hold  themselves  higher  than  the  common  Devas  or  '*  Gods.'* 
A  prayer  may  be  an  appeal  or  an  incantation  for  maledic- 
tion and  a  curse — as  in  the  case  of  two  armies  praying  sim- 
ultaneously for  mutual  destruction — as  much  as  for  bless- 
ing. And  as  the  great  majority  of  people  are  intensely 
selfish,  and  pray  only  for  themselves,  asking  to  be  given 
their  ''  daily  bread  "  instead  of  working  for  it,  and  begging 
God  not  to  lead  them  ''  into  temptation,"  but  to  deliver  them 
(the  memorialists  only)  from  evil,  the  result  is  that  prayer, 
as  now  understood,  is  doubly  pernicious :  {a)  it  kills  in  man 
self-reliance ;  (h)  it  develops  in  him  a  still  more  ferocious 
selfishness  and  egotism  than  he  is  already  endowed  with 
by  nature.  I  repeat  that  we  believe  in  ''  communion  "  and 
simultaneous  action  in  unison  with  our  ''  Father  in  secret " ; 
and,  in  rare  moments  of  ecstatic  bliss,  in  the  mingling  of 
our  higher  soul  with  the  universal  essence,  attracted  as  it 
is  toward  its  origin  and  center — a  state  called  during  life 
Samadhi,  and  after  death  Nirvana.  We  refuse  to  pray 
to  created  finite  beings — i.e.,  gods,  saints,  angels,  etc. — 
because  we  regard  it  as  idolatry;  we  cannot  pray  to  the 
Absolute  for  reasons  explained  before ;  therefore  we  try  to 
replace  fruitless  and  useless  prayer  by  meritorious  and  good- 
producing  actions.Inq. — Christians  would  call  this  pride  and  blasphemy. 
Are  they  wrong?

Theo. — Entirely  so.  It  is  they,  on  the  contrary,  who 
show  Satanic  pride  in  their  belief  that  the  Absolute  or  the 
Infinite — even  if  there  were  such  a  thing  as  the  possibility 
of  any  relation  between  the  unconditioned  and  the  condi- 
tioned— will  stoop  to  listen  to  every  foolish  or  egotistical

64  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

prayer.  And  it  is  they,  again,  who  virtually  blaspheme  in 
teaching  that  an  Omniscient  and  Omnipotent  God  needs 
uttered  prayers  to  know  what  he  has  to  do  !  This,  under- 
stood esoterically,  is  corroborated  by  both  Buddha  and 
Jesus.  The  one  says:  ''Seek  naught  from  the  helpless 
Gods — pray  not  !  but  rather  act ;  for  darkness  will  not 
brighten.  Ask  naught  from  silence,  for  it  can  neither 
speak  nor  hear.''  And  the  other — ^Jesus — recommends: 
"  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name  [that  of  Christos], 
that  will  I  do."  Of  course  this  quotation,  if  taken  in  its 
literal  sense,  goes  against  our  argument.  But  if  we  accept 
it  esoterically,  with  the  full  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of 
the  term  Christos — which  to  us  represents  Atma-Buddhi- 
Manas,  the  Self — it  comes  to  this :  the  only  God  we  must 
recognize  and  pray  to,  or  rather  act  in  unison  with,  is  that 
Spirit  of  God  of  which  our  body  is  the  temple,  and  in  which 
it  dwelleth.

PRAYER  KILLS  SELF-RELIANCE.

Inq. — But  did  not  Christ  himself  pray  and  recommend 
prayer  ?PRAYER  KILLS  SELF-RELIANCE.

Inq. — But  did  not  Christ  himself  pray  and  recommend 
prayer  ?

Theo. — It  is  so  recorded;  but  those  prayers  are  pre- 
cisely of  that  kind  of  communion  just  mentioned  with  one's 
''  Father  in  secret."  Otherwise,  and  if  we  identify  Jesus 
with  the  Universal  Deity,  there  would  be  something  too 
absurdly  illogical  in  the  inevitable  conclusion  that  he,  the 
"  very  God  himself,"  prayed  to  himself,  and  separated  the 
will  of  that  God  from  his  own  !

Inq. — One  argument  more  ;  an  argument^  moreover^  much 
used  by  some  Christians,  They  say,  "  I  feel  that  I  am  not 
able  to  co7iquer  my  passions  and  weaknesses  in  my  own  strength. 
But  when  I  pray  to  Jesus  Christ  I  feel  that  he  gives  me  strength^ 
and  that  in  his  power  I  am  able  to  conquer. ^^

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  65

Theo. — No  wonder.  If  ''  Christ  Jesus  "  is  God,  and 
one  independent  and  separate  from  him  who  prays,  of 
course  everything  is,  and  must  be,  possible  to  ^'Almighty 
God."  But,  then,  where  is  the  merit,  or  justice  either,  of 
such  a  conquest  ?  Why  should  the  pseudo-conqueror  be 
rewarded  for  something  done  which  has  cost  him  only 
prayers  ?  Would  you,  even  a  simple  mortal  man,  pay 
your  laborer  a  full  day's  wage  if  you  did  most  of  his  work 
for  him,  he  sitting  under  an  apple-tree  and  praying  to  you 
to  do  so  all  the  while  ?  This  idea  of  passing  one's  whole 
life  in  moral  idleness,  and  having  one's  hardest  work  and 
duty  done  by  another — whether  God  or  man — is  most  re- 
volting to  us,  as  it  is  most  degrading  to  human  dignity.Inq. — Perhaps  so;  yet  it  is  the  idea  of  trusting  in  a  personal 
Saviour  to  help  and  strengthen  in  the  battle  of  life  which  is  the 
fundamental  idea  of  fnodern  Christianity.  And  there  is  no 
doubt  that,  subjectively,  such  belief  is  efficacious  ;  that  is,  that 
those  who  believe  do  feel  themselves  helped  and  strengthened.

Theo. — Nor  is  there  any  more  doubt  that  some  patients 
of  "  Christian  "  and  "  Mental  Scientists  " — the  great  ''  De- 
niers  "  * — are  also  sometimes  cured ;  nor  that  hypnotism 
and  suggestion,  psychology  and  even  mediumship,  will 
produce  such  results  as  often,  if  not  oftener.  You  take 
into  consideration,  and  string  on  the  thread  of  your  argu- 
ment, successes  alone.  And  how  about  ten  times  the  num- 
ber of  failures  ?  Surely  you  will  not  presume  to  say  that 
failure  is  unknown,  even  with  a  sufficiency  of  blind  faith, 
among  fanatical  Christians  ?

Inq. — But  how  can  you  explain  those  cases  which  are  fol- 
lowed by  full  success  ?  Where  does  a  Theosophist  look  for 
power  to  subdue  his  passions  and  selfishness  ?

*  A  new  sect  of  healers,  who,  by  disavowing  the  existence  of  anything  but  spirit, 
which  can  neither  suffer  nor  be  ill,  claim  to  cure  all  and  every  disease,  provided  the 
patient  has  faith  that  what  he  denies  can  have  no  existence.  A  new  form  of  self- 
hypnotism.

66  THE   KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.66  THE   KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

Theo. — To  his  Higher  Self,  the  divine  spirit  or  the  God 
in  him,  and  to  his  Karma.  How  long  shall  we  have  to 
repeat  over  and  over  again  that  the  tree  is  known  by  its 
fruit,  the  nature  of  the  cause  by  its  effects  ?  You  speak  of 
subduing  passions  and  becoming  good  through  and  with  the 
help  of  God  or  Christ.  We  ask,  where  do  you  find  more 
virtuous,  guiltless  people,  abstaining  from  sin  and  crime — 
in  Christendom  or  Buddhism ;  in  Christian  countries  or  in 
heathen  lands  ?  Statistics  are  there  to  give  the  answer 
and  corroborate  our  claims.  According  to  the  last  census 
in  Ceylon  and  India,  in  the  comparative  table  of  crimes 
committed  by  Christians,  Mussulmans,  Hindus,  Eurasians, 
Buddhists,  etc.,  in  two  milHons  of  population  taken  at  ran- 
dom from  each,  and  covering  the  misdemeanors  of  several 
years,  the  proportion  of  crimes  committed  by  the  Christian 
stands  at  about  fifteen  to  four  committed  by  the  Buddhist 
population.*  No  Orientalist,  no  historian  of  any  note,  or 
traveler  in  Buddhist  lands,  from  Bishop  Bigandet  and  Abbe 
Hue  to  Sir  William  Hunter  and  every  fair-minded  official, 
will  fail  to  give  the  palm  of  virtue  to  Buddhists  before 
Christians.  Yet  the  former — not  the  true  Buddhist  Siamese 
sect,  at  all  events — do  not  believe  in  either  God  or  a  future 
reward  outside  of  this  earth.  They  do  not  pray — neither 
priests  nor  laymen.  ''  Pray  !  "  they  would  exclaim  in  won- 
der ;  ''  to  whom,  or  to  what  ?  "

Inq. — Then  they  are  truly  atheists,Inq. — Then  they  are  truly  atheists,

Theo. — Most  undeniably ;  but  they  are  also  the  most 
virtue-loving  and  virtue-keeping  men  in  the  whole  world. 
Buddhism  says :  Respect  the  religions  of  other  men  and  re- 
main true  to  your  own ;  but  church  Christianity,  denounc- 
ing all  the  gods  of  other  nations  as  devils,  would  doom 
every  non-Christian  to  eternal  perdition.

Inq. — Does  not  the  Buddhist  priesthood  do  the  same?

*  See Z«<:j/^r  for  April,  1888,  p.  147,  art.  "Christian  Lectures  on  Buddhism."

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  67

Theo. — Never.  They  hold  too  much  to  the  wise  precept 
found  in  the  Dhani7napada  to  do  so,  for  they  know  that :

If  any  man,  whether  he  be  learned  or  not,  consider  himself  so  great 
as  to  despise  other  men,  he  is  like  a  blind  man  holding  a  candle — blind 
himself,  he  illumines  others.

ON  THE   SOURCE   OF   THE  HUMAN  SOUL,

Inq. — Hoiv^  then,  do  you  account  for  man  being  endowed 
with  a  spirit  and  soul  ?      Whence  these  ?

Theo. — From  the  Universal  Soul;  certainly  not  be- 
stowed by  a  Personal  God.  Whence  the  moist  element 
in  the  jellyfish  ?  From  the  ocean  which  surroimds  it,  in 
which  it  lives  and  breathes  and  has  its  being,  and  whither 
it  returns  when  dissolved.

Inq. — So  you  reject  the  teaching  that  soul  is  given,  or 
breathed  into  man,  by  God?

Theo. — We  are  obhged  to.  The  *'  soul "  spoken  of  in 
Genesis  (ii.  7)  is,  as  therein  stated,  the  '"living  soul"  or 
nephesh,  the  vital,  animal  soul  with  which  God — we  say 
Nature  and  inmiutable  Law — endows  man  like  every  ani- 
mal. It  is  not  at  all  the  thinking  soul  or  mind;  least  of 
all  is  it  the  immortal  spirit.

Inq. —  Well,  let  us  put  it  otherwise :  is  it  God  who  endows 
w£in  with  a  human  rational  soul  and  immortal  spirit  ?Inq. —  Well,  let  us  put  it  otherwise :  is  it  God  who  endows 
w£in  with  a  human  rational  soul  and  immortal  spirit  ?

Theo. — Again,  in  the  way  you  put  the  question,  we 
must  object  to  it.  Since  we  believe  in  no  Personal  God, 
how  can  we  believe  that  he  endows  man  with  anything  ? 
But  granting,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  a  God  who  takes 
upon  himself  the  risk  of  creating  a  new  soul  for  every  new- 
born babe,  all  that  can  be  said  is  that  such  a  God  can 
hardly  be  regarded  as  himself  endowed  with  any  wisdom 
or  prevision.    Certain  other  difficulties,  and  the  impossibil-

6S  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

ity  of  reconciling  this  with  the  claims  made  for  the  mercy, 
justice,  equity,  and  omniscience  of  that  God,  are  so  many 
deadly  reefs  on  which  this  theological  dogma  is  daily  and 
hoiurly  broken.

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  ?      What  difficulties  ?

Theo. — I  am  thinking  of  an  unanswerable  argument 
offered  once  in  my  presence  by  a  Cingalese  Buddhist 
priest,  a  famous  preacher,  to  a  Christian  missionary — one 
in  no  way  ignorant  or  unprepared  for  the  public  discussion 
during  which  it  was  advanced.  It  was  near  Colombo,  and 
the  missionary  had  challenged  the  priest  Megittawatti  to 
give  his  reasons  why  the  Christian  God  should  not  be  ac- 
cepted by  the  ''heathen."  Well,  the  missionary  came  out 
of  that  memorable  discussion  second-best,  as  usual.

Inq. — /  should  be  glad  to  learfi  in  what  way.Inq. — /  should  be  glad  to  learfi  in  what  way.

Theo. — Simply  this:  the  Buddhist  priest  premised  by 
asking  \h.^ padre  whether  his  God  had  given  commandments 
to  Moses  for  men  only  to  keep,  but  to  be  broken  by  God 
himself.  The  missionary  denied  the  supposition  indig- 
nantly. ''Well,"  said  his  opponent,  "you  tell  us  that  God 
makes  no  exceptions  to  this  rule,  and  that  no  soul  can  be 
born  without  his  will.  Now  God  forbids  adultery,  among 
other  things,  and  yet  you  say  in  the  same  breath  that  it  is 
he  who  creates  every  babe  born,  and  he  who  endows  it 
with  a  soul.  Are  we  then  to  understand  that  the  millions 
of  children  born  in  crime  and  adultery  are  your  God's 
work  ?  that  your  God  forbids  and  punishes  the  breaking 
of  his  laws,  and  that,  nevertheless,  he  creates  daily  and 
hourly  souls  for  just  such  children  ?  According  to  the 
simplest  logic,  your  God  is  an  accomplice  in  the  crime; 
since,  but  for  his  help  and  interference,  no  such  children  of 
lust  could  be  born.  Where  is  the  justice  of  punishing  not 
only  the  guilty  parents,  but  even  the  innocent  babe,  for

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOFHY.  69

that  which  is  done  by  that  very  God,  whom  yet  you  exon- 
erate from  any  guilt  himself  ?  "  The  missionary  looked  at 
his  watch  and  suddenly  found  it  was  getting  too  late  for 
further  discussion.

Inq. —  You  forget  that  all  such  inexplicable  cases  are  mys- 
teries^ and  that  we  are  forbidden  by  our  religion  to  pry  into 
the  mysteries  of  God,

Theo. — No,  we  do  not  forget,  but  simply  reject  such 
impossibilities.  Nor  do  we  want  you  to  believe  as  we  do. 
We  only  answer  the  questions  you  ask.  We  have,  how- 
ever, another  name  for  your  ''  mysteries."

THE  BUDDHIST   TEACHINGS   ON  THE  ABOVE.THE  BUDDHIST   TEACHINGS   ON  THE  ABOVE.

Inq. —  What  does  Buddhism  teach  with  regard  to  the  soul?

Theo. — It  depends  whether  you  mean  exoteric,  popular 
Buddhism,  or  its  esoteric  teachings.  The  former  explains 
itself  in  the  Buddhist  Catechism  in  this  wise :

**  Soul "  it  considers  a  word  used  by  the  ignorant  to  express  a  false 
idea.  If  everything  is  subject  to  change,  then  man  is  included,  and  every 
material  part  of  him  must  change.  That  which  is  subject  to  change 
is  not  permanent ;  so  there  can  be  no  immortal  survival  of  a  changeful 
thing.

This  seems  plain  and  definite.  But  when  we  come  to 
the  question  that  the  new  personality  in  each  succeeding 
rebirth  is  the  aggregate  of  skandhas^  or  the  attributes  of 
the  old  personality,  and  ask  whether  this  new  aggregation 
of  skandhas  is  a  new  being  likewise,  in  which  nothing  has 
remained  of  the  last,  we  read  that :

In  one  sense  it  is  a  new  being,  in  another  it  is  not.  During  this 
life  the  skandhas  are  continually  changing;  and  while  the  man  A  B 
of  forty  is  identical,  as  regards  personality,  with  the  youth  A  B  of 
eighteen,  yet  by  the  continual  waste  and  reparation  of  his  body,  and 
change  of  mind  and  character,  he  is  a  different  being.     Nevertheless

70  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

the  man  in  his  old  age  justly  reaps  the  reward  or  suffering  consequent 
upon  his  thoughts  and  actions  at  every  previous  stage  of  his  life.  So 
the  new  being  of  a  rebirth,  being  the  same  individuality  as  before  [but 
not  the  same  personality],  with  but  a  changed  form,  or  new  aggrega- 
tion of  sJzandhas,  justly  reaps  the  consequences  of  his  actions  and 
thoughts  in  the  previous  existence.This  is  abstruse  metaphysics,  and  plainly  does  not  ex- 
press disbelief  in  soul  by  any  means.

Inq. — Is  fiot  something  like  this  spoken  of  in  esoteric 
Budhism  ?

Theo. — It  is ;  for  this  teaching  belongs  both  to  esoteric 
Budhism,  or  Secret  Wisdom,  and  to  exoteric  Buddhism,  or 
the  religious  philosophy  of  Gautama  Buddha.

Inq. — But  we  are  distinctly  told  that  most  of  the  Buddhists 
do  not  believe  in  the  soul's  immortality,

Theo. — Nor  do  we,  if  you  mean  by  soul  the  personal 
Ego,  or  life-soul — nephesh.  But  every  learned  Buddhist 
believes  in  the  individual  or  divine  Ego.  Those  v^ho  do 
not,  err  in  their  judgment;  they  are  as  mistaken  on  this 
point  as  those  Christians  who  mistake  the  theological  inter- 
polations of  the  later  editors  of  the  Gospels  about  damna- 
tion and  hell-fire  for  verbatim  utterances  of  Jesus.  Neither 
Buddha  nor  Christ  ever  wrote  anything  themselves,  but 
both  spoke  in  allegories  and  used  *'dark  sayings,"  as  all 
true  Initiates  did,  and  will  do  for  a  long  time  yet  to  come. 
Both  Scriptures  treat  of  all  such  metaphysical  questions 
very  cautiously,  and  both  Buddhist  and  Christian  records 
sin  by  that  excess  of  exotericism,  the  dead-letter  meaning 
far  overshooting  the  mark  in  both  cases.

Inq. — Do  you  mean  to  suggest  that  neither  the  teachings  of 
Buddha  nor  those  of  Christ  have  been  heretofore  rightly  un- 
derstood ?

Theo. — What  I  mean  is  just  as  you  say.  Both  gospels 
' — the  Buddhist  and  the  Christian — were  preached  with  the

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  71Theo. — What  I  mean  is  just  as  you  say.  Both  gospels 
' — the  Buddhist  and  the  Christian — were  preached  with  the

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  71

same  object  in  view.  Both  reformers  were  ardent  philan- 
thropists and  practical  altruists,  preaching  most  unmistak- 
ably sociaHsm  of  the  noblest  and  highest  type,  self-sacrifice 
to  the  bitter  end.  ''  Let  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  fall 
upon  me,  that  I  may  reheve  man's  misery  and  suffering  ! " 
cries  Buddha.  *'  I  would  not  let  one  cry  whom  I  could 
save  ! "  exclaims  the  prince-beggar,  clad  in  the  refuse  rags 
of  the  burial-grounds.  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor 
and  are  heavy-laden,  and  I  wall  give  you  rest,"  is  the  ap- 
peal to  the  poor  and  the  disinherited  made  by  the  '^  Man 
of  Sorrows,"  who  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head.  The 
teachings  of  both  are  boundless  love  for  humanity,  charity, 
forgiveness  of  injury,  forgetfulness  of  self,  and  pity  for  the 
deluded  masses ;  both  show  the  same  contempt  for  riches, 
and  make  no  difference  between  meiun  and  tuuin.  Their 
desire  was,  without  revealing  to  all  the  sacred  mysteries  of 
initiation,  to  give  the  ignorant  and  the  misled,  whose  bur- 
den in  life  was  too  heavy  for  them,  hope  enough  and  an 
inkling  into  the  truth  suflScient  to  support  them  in  their 
heaviest  hours.  But  the  object  of  both  reformers  was 
frustrated,  owing  to  excess  of  zeal  of  their  later  followers. 
The  words  of  the  Masters  having  been  misunderstood  and 
misinterpreted,  behold  the  consequences  !

Inq. — But  surely  Buddha  must  have  repudiated  the  souVs 
imfnortality  if  all  the  Orie7italists  and  his  oum  priests  say 
so?Inq. — But  surely  Buddha  must  have  repudiated  the  souVs 
imfnortality  if  all  the  Orie7italists  and  his  oum  priests  say 
so?

Theo. — The  Arhats  began  by  following  the  policy  of 
their  Master,  and  the  majority  of  the  priests  who  followed 
them  were  not  initiated,  just  as  in  Christianity;  and  so, 
little  by  Httle,  the  great  esoteric  truths  became  almost  lost. 
A  proof  in  point  is  that,  out  of  the  two  existing  sects  in 
Ceylon,  the  Siamese  beHeves  death  to  be  the  absolute  anni- 
hilation of  individuality  and  personality,  and  the  other  ex- 
plains Nirvana  as  we  Theosophists  do.

72  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

Inq. — But  why,  in  that  case,  do  Buddhism  and  Christianity 
represent  the  two  opposite  poles  of  such  belief  ?

Theo. — Because  the  conditions  under  which  they  were 
preached  were  not  the  same.  In  India  the  Brahmans, 
jealous  of  their  superior  knowledge,  and  excluding  from  it 
every  caste  save  their  own,  had  driven  millions  of  men 
into  idolatry  and  almost  fetishism.  Buddha  had  to  give 
the  death-blow  to  an  exuberance  of  unhealthy  fancy  and 
fanatical  superstition  resulting  from  ignorance,  such  as  has 
rarely  been  known  before  or  after.  Better  a  philosophical 
atheism  than  such  ignorant  worship  for  those

Who  cry  upon  their  gods  and  are  not  heard 
Or  are  not  heeded,Who  cry  upon  their  gods  and  are  not  heard 
Or  are  not  heeded,

and  who  live  and  die  in  mental  despair.  He  had  to  arrest 
first  of  all  this  muddy  torrent  of  superstition ;  to  uproot 
errors  before  he  gave  out  the  truth.  And  as  he  could  not 
give  out  all,  for  the  same  good  reason  as  Jesus — who  re- 
minds his  disciples  that  the  mysteries  of  heaven  are  not  for 
the  unintelligent  masses,  but  for  the  elect  alone,  and  there- 
fore he  spoke  to  the  people  in  parables  (Matt.  xiii.  lo,  ii) 
— so  his  caution  led  Buddha  to  conceal  too  much.  He 
even  refused  to  say  to  the  monk  Vacchagotta  whether 
there  was  or  was  not  an  Ego  in  man.  When  pressed  to 
answer,  ^^  the  exalted  one  maintained  silence."

Buddha  gives  his  initiated  disciple  Ananda,  who  inquires 
for  the  reason  of  this  silence,  a  plain  and  unequivocal 
answer  in  the  dialogue  translated  by  Oldenburg  from  the 
Samyuttaka  Nikaya  :

If  I,  Ananda,  when  the  wandering  monk  Vacchagotta  asked  me, 
*'  Is  there  the  Ego?  "  had  answered,  "'  The  Ego  is,"  then  that,  Ananda, 
would  have  confirmed  the  doctrine  of  the  Samanas  and  Brahmanas, 
who  believed  in  permanence.  If  I,  Ananda,  when  the  wandering  monk 
Vacchagotta  asked  me,  ^'  Is  there  not  the  Ego?  "  had  answered,  *'  The 
Ego  is  not,"  then  that,  Ananda,  would  have  confirmed  the  doctrine  of

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  73THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  73

those  who  believed  in  annihilation.  If  I,  Ananda,  when  the  wander- 
ing monk  Vacchagotta  asked  me,  *'  Is  there  the  Ego?  "  had  answered, 
''  The  Ego  is,"  would  that  have  served  my  end,  Ananda,  by  producing 
in  him  the  knowledge,  all  existences  {dhammd)  are  non-ego?  But  if  I, 
Ananda,  had  answered,'**  The  Ego  is  not,"  then  that,  Ananda,  would 
only  have  caused  the  wandering  monk  Vacchagotta  to  be  thrown  from 
one  bewilderment  to  another :  **  My  Ego,  did  it  not  exist  before?  But 
now  it  exists  no  longer!"

This  shows  better  than  anything  that  Gautama  Buddha 
withheld  such  difficult  metaphysical  doctrines  from  the 
masses  in  order  not  to  perplex  them  more.  What  he 
meant  was  the  difference  between  the  personal  temporary 
Ego  and  the  Higher  Self,  which  sheds  its  light  on  the  im- 
perishable Ego,  the  spiritual  '*  I  "  of  man.

Inq. — This  refers  to  Gatitama,  but  in  what  way  does  it 
touch  the  Gospels  ?Inq. — This  refers  to  Gatitama,  but  in  what  way  does  it 
touch  the  Gospels  ?

Theo. — Read  history  and  think  over  it.  At  the  time  the 
events  narrated  in  the  Gospels  are  alleged  to  have  hap- 
pened there  was  a  similar  intellectual  fermentation  taking 
place  in  the  whole  civiHzed  world,  only  with  opposite  re- 
sults in  the  East  and  the  West.  The  old  gods  were  dying 
out.  While  the  civilized  classes  drifted,  in  the  train  of  the 
unbelieving  Sadducees,  into  materialistic  negations  and 
mere  dead-letter  Mosaic  form  in  Palestine,  and  into  moral 
dissolution  in  Rome,  the  lowest  and  poorest  classes  ran 
after  sorcery  and  strange  gods,  or  became  hypocrites  or 
worse.  Once  more  the  time  for  a  spiritual  reform  had 
arrived.  The  cruel,  anthropomorphic,  and  jealous  God  of 
the  Jews,  with  his  sanguinary  laws  of  ''  an  eye  for  an  eye, 
and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,"  of  the  shedding  of  blood  and  ani- 
mal sacrifice,  had  to  be  relegated  to  a  secondary  place  and 
replaced  by  the  merciful  ''  Father  in  secret."  The  latter 
had  to  be  shown,  not  as  an  extracosmic  God,  but  as  a 
divine  Saviour  of  the  man  of  flesh,  enshrined  in  his  own 
heart  and  soul,  in  the  poor  as  in  the  rich.     No  more  here

74  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,74  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

than  in  India  could  the  secrets  of  initiation  be  divulged, 
lest  by  giving  that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs,  and  casting 
pearls  before  swine,  both  the  revealer  and  the  things  re- 
vealed should  be  trodden  underfoot.  Thus  the  reticence 
of  both  Buddha  and  Jesus — whether  the  latter  lived  out  the 
historic  period  allotted  to  him  or  not — led  in  the  one  case 
to  the  blank  negations  of  Southern  Buddhism,  and  in  the 
other  to  the  three  clashing  forms  of  the  Christian  church 
and  the  two  hundred  sects  in  Protestant  England  alone.

VL

THEOSOPHICAL  TEACHINGS  AS  TO  NATURE 
AND  MAN.

THE    UNITY  OF  ALL  IN  ALL.

Inq. — Having  told  me  what  God,  the  soul,  and  man  are 
not,  in  your  views,  ca7i  you  ifiform  me  what  they  are,  accord- 
ing to  your  teachings  ?

Theo. — In  their  origin  and  in  eternity  the  three,  hke  the 
universe  and  all  therein,  are  one  with  the  absolute  unity,  the 
unknowable  deific  essence  I  spoke  about  some  time  back. 
We  believe  in  no  creation,  but  in  the  periodical  and  con- 
secutive appearances  of  the  universe  from  the  subjective 
on  to  the  objective  plane  of  being,  at  regular  intervals  of 
time,  covering  periods  of  immense  duration.

Inq. — Can  you  elaborate  the  subject?

Theo, — Take  as  a  first  comparison,  and  a  help  toward  a 
more  correct  conception,  the  solar  year ;  and  as  a  second, 
the  two  halves  of  that  year,  producing  each  a  day  and  a 
night  of  six  months'  duration  at  the  north  pole.  Now 
imagine,  if  you  can,  instead  of  a  solar  year  of  365  days, 
eternity.  Let  the  sun  represent  the  universe,  and  the  polar 
days  and  nights  of  six  months  each  days  and  nights  lasting 
each  182  trillions  and  quadrillions  of  years,  instead  of  182

75

76  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.75

76  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

days  each.  As  the  sun  rises  every  morning  on  our  objec- 
tive horizon  out  of  its  (to  us)  subjective  and  antipodal 
space,  so  does  the  universe  emerge  periodically  on  the 
plane  of  objectivity,  issuing  from  that  of  subjectivity — the 
antipodes  of  the  former.  This  is  the  '*  Cycle  of  Life." 
And  as  the  sun  disappears  from  our  horizon,  so  does  the 
universe  disappear  at  regular  periods,  when  the  "Uni- 
versal Night "  sets  in.  The  Hindus  call  such  alternations 
the  "  Days  and  Nights  of  Brahma,"  or  the  times  of  man- 
vantara  and  J>ra /ay a  (dissolution).  The  Westerns  may  call 
them  Universal  Days  and  Nights  if  they  prefer.  During 
the  latter  (the  Nights)  All  is  in  All ;  every  atom  is  resolved 
into  one  homogeneity.

EVOLUTION  AND  ILLUSION,

Inq. — But  who  is  it  that  each  time  creates  the  universe  ?

Theo. — No  one  creates  it.  Science  would  call  the  pro- 
cess evolution ;  the  pre-Christian  philosophers  and  the  Ori- 
entalists called  it  emanation ;  we  Occultists  and  Theosophists 
see  in  it  the  only  universal  and  eternal  Reality  casting  a 
periodical  reflection  of  Itself  on  the  infinite  spatial  depths. 
This  reflection,  which  you  regard  as  the  objective  material 
universe,  we  consider  as  a  temporary  "  illusion  "  and  noth- 
ing else.     That  alone  which  is  eternal  is  real.

Inq. — At  that  rate^  you  and  I  are  also  "  illusions.^^Inq. — At  that  rate^  you  and  I  are  also  "  illusions.^^

Theo. — As  flitting  personalities — to-day  one  person,  to- 
morrow another — we  are.  Would  you  call  the  sudden 
flashes  of  the  aurora  borealis — the  northern  lights — a 
''reality,"  though  it  is  as  real  as  can  be  while  you  look  at 
it  ?  Certainly  not ;  it  is  the  cause  that  produces  it,  if  per- 
manent and  eternal,  which  is  the  only  reality,  while  the 
effect  is  but  a  passing  illusion.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  77

Inq. — All  this  does  not  explain  to  me  how  this  "  illusio7i  " 
called  the  universe  originates  ;  how  the  conscious  to  be  pro- 
ceeds to  manifest  itself  from  the  unconsciousness  that  is.

Theo. — It  is  ^'  unconsciousness  "  only  to  our  finite  con- 
sciousness. Verily  may  we  paraphrase  St.  John  (i.  5),  and 
say,  ''And  the  [absolute]  Kght  [which  is  darkness  to  us] 
shineth  in  darkness  [which  is  illusionary  material  light] ;  and 
the  darkness  comprehended  it  not."  This  absolute  hght  is 
also  absolute  and  immutable  Law.  Whether  by  radiation 
or  emanation — we  need  not  quarrel  over  terms — the  uni- 
verse passes  out  of  its  homogeneous  subjectivity  on  to  the 
first  plane  of  manifestation ;  of  which  planes  there  are 
seven,  we  are  taught.  With  each  plane  it  becomes  more 
dense  and  material  until  it  reaches  this  our  plane,  on  which 
the  only  world  approximately  known  and  understood  in  its 
physical  composition  by  science  is  the  planetary  or  solar 
system — one  sui  generis^  we  are  told.

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  by  sui  generis  ?Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  by  sui  generis  ?

Theo. — I  mean  that  though  the  fundamental  law  and 
the  universal  working  of  laws  of  Nature  are  uniform,  still 
our  solar  system — like  every  other  such  system  in  the  mil- 
lions of  others  in  cosmos,  and  even  our  earth — has  its  own 
program  of  manifestations,  differing  from  the  respective 
programs  of  all  others.  We  speak  of  the  inhabitants  of 
other  planets,  and  imagine  that  if  they  are  men — i.e.,  think- 
ing entities — they  must  be  as  we  are.  The  fancy  of  poets 
and  painters  and  sculptors  never  fails  to  represent  even 
the  angels  as  a  beautiful  copy  of  man — plus  wings.  We 
say  that  all  this  is  an  error  and.  a  delusion ;  because,  if  on 
this  little  earth  alone  one  finds  such  a  diversity  in  its  flora, 
fauna,  and  mankind — from  the  seaweed  to  the  cedar  of 
Lebanon,  from  the  jellyfish  to  the  elephant,  from  the  Bush- 
man and  negro  to  the  Apollo  Belvedere — alter  the  condi- 
tions, cosmic  and  planetary,  and  there  must  be  as  a  result

78  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

quite  a  different  flora,  fauna,  and  mankind.  The  same 
laws  will  fashion  quite  a  different  set  of  things  and  beings 
even  on  this  our  plane,  including  in  it  all  our  planets. 
How  much  more  different,  then,  must  be  external  Nature 
in  other  solar  systems;  and  how  foolish  is  it  to  judge  of 
other  stars  and  worlds  and  human  beings  by  our  own,  as 
physical  science  does  !

Inq. — But  what  are  your  data  for  this  assertion  ?Inq. — But  what  are  your  data  for  this  assertion  ?

Theo. — What  science  in  general  will  never  accept  as 
proof — the  cumulative  testimony  of  an  endless  series  of 
seers  who  have  testified  to  this  fact.  Their  spiritual  visions 
— real  explorations  by  and  through  psychic  and  spiritual 
senses  untrammeled  by  blind  flesh — have  been  systemati- 
cally checked  and  compared  one  with  the  other,  and  their 
nature  sifted.  All  that  was  not  corroborated  by  unanimous 
and  collective  experience  was  rejected,  while  that  only' was 
recorded  as  established  truth  which,  in  various  ages,  under 
different  climes,  and  throughout  an  untold  series  of  inces- 
sant observations,  was  found  to  agree  and  receive  constantly 
further  corroboration.  The  methods  used  by  our  scholars 
and  students  of  the  psychospiritual  sciences  do  not  differ 
from  those  of  students  of  the  natural  and  physical  sciences, 
as  you  may  see.  Only  our  fields  of  research  are  on  two  dif- 
ferent planes,  and  our  instruments  are  made  by  no  human 
hands ;  for  which  reason,  perchance,  they  are  but  the  more 
reliable.  The  retorts,  accumulators,  and  microscopes  of 
the  chemist  and  naturalist  may  get  out  of  order ;  the  tele- 
scope and  the  astronomer^s  horological  instruments  may 
get  spoiled ;  our  recording  instruments  are  beyond  the  in- 
fluence of  weather  or  the  elements.

Inq. — And  therefore  you  have  implicit  faith  in  them  ?

Theo. — Faith  is  a  word  not  to  be  found  in  Theosophical 
dictionaries ;  we  say  knowledge  based  on  observation  and 
experience.     There  is  this  difference,  however :  that  while

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  79THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  79

the  observation  and  experience  of  physical  science  lead  the 
scientists  to  about  as  many  working  hypotheses  as  there 
are  minds  to  evolve  them,  our  knowledge  consents  to  add 
to  its  lore  only  those  facts  which  have  become  undeniable 
and  which  are  fully  and  absolutely  demonstrated.  We 
have  no  two  beliefs  or  hypotheses  on  the  same  subject.

Inq. — Is  it  on  such  data  that  you  came  to  accept  the  strange 
theories  we  find  in  esoteric  Budhism  ?

Theo. — Just  so.  These  theories  may  be  slightly  incor- 
rect in  their  minor  details,  and  even  faulty  in  their  exposi- 
tion by  lay  students  ;  they  are  facts  in  Nature,  nevertheless, 
and  come  nearer  the  truth  than  any  scientific  hypothesis.

ON  THE  SEPTENARY  CONSTITUTION  OF  OUR 
PLANET,

Inq. — I  understand  that  you  describe  our  earth  as  forming 
part  of  a  chain  of  earths  ?

Theo. — We  do.  But  the  other  six  *'  earths  "  or  globes 
are  not  on  the  same  plane  of  objectivity  as  our  earth  is; 
therefore  we  cannot  see  them.

Inq. — Is  that  on  account  of  the  great  distance  ?Inq. — Is  that  on  account  of  the  great  distance  ?

Theo. — Not  at  all ;  for  we  see  with  our  naked  eye  not 
only  planets,  but  even  stars  at  immeasurably  greater  dis- 
tances; but  it  is  owing  to  these  six  globes  being  outside 
our  physical  means  of  perception  or  plane  of  being.  It  is 
not  only  that  their  material  density,  weight,  and  fabric  are 
entirely  different  from  those  of  our  earth  and  the  other 
known  planets ;  but  they  are  (to  us)  in  an  entirely  different 
layer  of  space,  so  to  speak — a  layer  not  to  be  perceived 
or  felt  by  our  physical  senses.  And  when  I  say  ''layer," 
please  do  not  allow  your  fancy  to  suggest  to  you  layers  like 
strata  or  beds  laid  one  over  the  other ;  for  this  would  only 
lead  to  another  absurd  misconception.  What  I  mean  by 
'*  layer  "  is  that  plane  of  infinite  space  which  by  its  nature

80  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

cannot  fall  under  our  ordinary  waking  perceptions,  whether 
mental  or  physical,  but  which  exists  in  Nature  outside  of 
our  normal  mentality  or  consciousness,  outside  of  our  three- 
dimensional  space,  and  outside  of  our  division  of  time. 
Each  of  the  seven  fundamental  planes  or  layers  in  space — 
of  course  as  a  whole,  as  the  pure  space  of  Locke's  defini- 
tion, not  as  our  finite  space — has  its  own  objectivity  and 
subjectivity,  its  own  space  and  time,  its  own  consciousness 
and  set  of  senses.  But  all  this  will  be  hardly  comprehen- 
sible to  one  trained  in  the  modern  ways  of  thought.

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  by  a  different  set  of  senses  ?  Is 
there  anything  07i  our  human  ^' plane  "  that  you  could  bring  as 
an  illustration  of  what  you  say  ^  just  to  give  a  clearer  idea  of 
what  you  may  mean  by  this  variety  of  senses^  spaces^  and  re- 
spective  perceptions  ?Theo. — None,  except,  perhaps,  that  which  for  science 
would  be  rather  a  handy  peg  on  which  to  hang  a  counter- 
argument. We  have  a  different  set  of  senses  in  dream-life, 
have  we  not?  We  feel,  talk,  hear,  see,  taste,  and  function 
in  general  on  a  different  plane,  the  change  of  state  of  our 
consciousness  being  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  a  series  of 
acts  and  events  embracing  years,  as  we  think,  passes  ideally 
through  our  mind  in  one  instant.  Well,  that  extreme  rapid- 
ity of  our  mental  operations  in  dreams,  and  the  perfect 
naturalness,  for  the  time  being,  of  all  the  other  functions, 
show  us  that  we  are  on  quite  another  plane.  Our  philos- 
ophy teaches  us  that  as  there  are  seven  fundamental  forces 
in  Nature,  and  seven  planes  of  being,  so  there  are  seven 
states  of  consciousness  in  which  man  can  live,  think,  re- 
member, and  have  his  being.  To  enumerate  these  here  is 
impossible,  and  for  this  one  has  to  turn  to  the  study  of 
Eastern  metaphysics.  But  in  these  two  states — the  waking 
and  the  dreaming — every  ordinary  mortal,  from  a  learned 
philosopher  down  to  a  poor  untutored  savage,  has  a  good 
proof  that  such  states  differ.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  81

Inq. —  Yoli  do  not  accept^  then,  the  well-know?t  explanations 
of  biology  and  physiology  to  account  for  the  drearfi-state  ?

Theo. — We  do  not.  We  reject  even  the  hypotheses  of 
your  psychologists,  preferring  the  teachings  of  P^astern  Wis- 
dom. BeHeving  in  seven  planes  of  cosmic  being  and  states 
of  consciousness  with  regard  to  the  universe  or  the  macro- 
cosm, we  stop  at  the  fourth  plane,  finding  it  impossible  to 
go  with  any  degree  of  certainty  beyond.  But  with  respect 
to  the  microcosm,  or  man,  we  speculate  freely  on  his  seven 
states  and  principles.Inq. — How  do  you  explain  these?

Theo. — We  find,  first  of  all,  two  distinct  beings  in  man — 
the  spiritual  and  the  physical ;  the  man  who  thinks  and  the 
man  who  records  as  much  of  these  thoughts  as  he  is  able 
to  assimilate.  Therefore  we  divide  him  into  two  distinct 
natures — the  upper  or  the  spiritual  being,  composed  of  three 
"  principles  "  or  aspects  ;  and  the  lower  or  the  physical  qua- 
ternary, composed  of  four — seven  in  all.

THE   SEPTENARY  NATURE   OF  MAN

Inq. — Is  this  the  same  as  the  divisioft  we  call  spirit  and 
soul,  a?id  the  man  of  flesh  ?

Theo! — It  is  not.  That  is  the  old  Platonic  division. 
Plato  was  an  Initiate,  and  therefore  could  not  go  into  for- 
bidden details ;  but  he  who  is  acquainted  with  the  archaic 
doctrine  finds  the  seven  in  Plato's  various  combinations  of 
soul  and  spirit.  He  regarded  man  as  constituted  of  two 
parts — one  eternal,  formed  of  the  same  essence  as  the  Abso- 
luteness ;  the  other  mortal  and  corruptible,  deriving  its  con- 
stituent parts  from  the  minor  ''created"  Gods.  Man  is 
composed,  he  shows,  of  (i)  a  mortal  body;  (2)  an  immor- 
tal principle;  and  (3)  a  "separate  mortal  kind  of  soul." 
It  is  that  which  we  respectively  call  the  physical  man,  the 
spiritual  soul  or  spirit  [nous),  and  the  animal  soul  {psuche). 
This  is  the  division  adopted  by  Paul,  another  Initiate,  who

82

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,82

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

maintains  that  there  is  a  psychical  body  which  is  sown  in 
the  corruptible  (astral  or  physical  body),  and  a  spiritual 
body  that  is  raised  in  incorruptible  substance.  Even  James 
(iii.  15)  corroborates  the  same  by  saying  that  the  ''wis- 
dom "  (of  our  lower  soul)  descendeth  not  from  above,  but 
is  terrestrial,  ''psychical,"  "demoniacal"  {vide  Greek  text), 
while  the  other  is  heavenly  wisdom.  Now,  so  plain  is  it 
that  Plato  and  even  Pythagoras,  while  speaking  but  of 
three  "  principles,"  give  them  seven  separate  functions  in 
their  various  combinations,  that  if  we  contrast  our  teachings 
this  will  become  quite  plain.  Let  us  take  a  cursory  view 
of  these  seven  aspects  by  drawing  a  table.

THEOSOPHICAL    DIVISION.

>

Sanskrit  Terms.

Exoteric  Mean- 
ing.

Explanatory.

%

(«)  R6pa,  or  Sthula 
Shaiira.

(«)  Physical  body.

(«)  Is  the  vehicle  of  all  the  other

** principles"  during  life.

{b)  Prdna.

{b)     Life,    or    vital 
principle.

{h)  Necessary  only  to  a,  c,  d,  and 
the  functions  of  the  lower  Manas, 
which  embrace  all  those  limited  to 
Xh^  physical  brain.

\

(c)  Linga  Sharira.     \  if)  Astral  body.

{c)  The  double,  the  phantom  body.

I 
H

{d)  Kama  Riipa.          (^)  The  seat  of  ani- 
mal   desires    and 
passions.

(d)  This  is  the  center  of  the  animal 
man,  where  lies  the  line  of  demar- 
cation which  separates  the  mortal 
man  from  the  immortal  entity.

H

to

{e)    Manas — a  dual 
principle     in     its 
functions.

{e)     Mind,      intelli- 
gence ;  the  higher 
human           mind, 
whose  light,  or  ra- 
diation,  links  the 
Monad,     for     the 
lifetime,     to      the 
mortal  man.{e)     Mind,      intelli- 
gence ;  the  higher 
human           mind, 
whose  light,  or  ra- 
diation,  links  the 
Monad,     for     the 
lifetime,     to      the 
mortal  man.

(^)  The  future  state  and  the  karmic 
destiny  of  man  depend  on  whether 
Manas  gravitates  more  downward 
to  Kama  Rupa,  the  seat  of  the  ani- 
mal passions,  or  upward  to  Bud- 
dhi, the  spiritual  Ego.  In  the  lat- 
ter case,  the  higher  consciousness 
of  the  individual  spiritual  aspira- 
tions of  mind  (-Vlanas),  assimilat- 
ing Buddhi,  is  absorbed  by  it  and 
forms  the  Ego,  which  goes  into 
devachanic  bliss.*

CO  Buddhi.

(/)     The    spiritual 
soul.

(/)  The  vehicle  of  pure  universal

spirit.

X

H

(^)  Atmd.

{g)   Spirit.

(^)  One  with  the  Absolute,  as  its 
radiation.

*  In  Mr.  Sinnett's  Esoteric  Buddhism,  d,  e,  and  /"are  respectively  called  the  ani- 
mal, the  human,  and  the  spiritual  souls,  which  answers  as  well.  Though  the  princi- 
ples in  Esoteric  Buddhism  are  numbered,  this  is,  strictly  speaking,  useless.    The  dual

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  83THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  83

Now  what  does  Plato  teach  ?  He  speaks  of  the  interior 
man  as  constituted  of  two  parts — one  immutable  and  always 
the  same,  formed  of  the  same  substance  as  Deity,  and  the 
other  mortal  and  corruptible.  These  two  parts  are  found 
in  the  upper  triad  and  the  lower  quaternary  of  our  table. 
He  explains  that  when  the  soul  [psuche)  '^  allies  herself  to 
the  nous  (divine  spirit  or  substance  *),  she  does  everything 
aright  and  felicitously '* ;  but  the  case  is  otherwise  when  she 
attaches  herself  to  anoia  (folly,  or  the  irrational  animal 
soul).  Here,  then,  we  have  Manas,  or  the  soul  in  general, 
in  its  two  aspects :  when  attaching  itself  to  anoia  (our  Kama 
Rupa,  or  the  "animal  soul "  in  Esoteric  Buddhism)  it  runs 
toward  entire  annihilation,  as  far  as  the  personal  Ego  is 
concerned ;  when  allying  itself  to  the  nous  (Atma-Buddhi) 
it  merges  into  the  immortal,  imperishable  Ego,  and  then 
its  spiritual  consciousness  of  the  personal  Ego  that  was  be- 
comes immortal.

THE  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  SOUL  AND  SPIRIT.

Inq. — Do  you  really  teach ^  as  you  are  accused  of  doing  by 
some  Spiritualists  and  Frefich  Spiritists^  the  annihilation  of 
every  personality  ?

Theo. — We  do  not.  Our  opponents  have  started  the 
nonsensical  charge  because  this  question  of  duality — the 
i7tdividuality  of  the  divine  Ego  and  the  persoJiality  of  theTheo. — We  do  not.  Our  opponents  have  started  the 
nonsensical  charge  because  this  question  of  duality — the 
i7tdividuality  of  the  divine  Ego  and  the  persoJiality  of  the

Monad  alone  (Atma-Buddhi)  is  susceptible  of  being  thought  of  as  the  two  highest 
numbers  (the  6th  and  7th).  As  to  all  others,  since  that  "principle"  only  which  is 
predominant  in  man  has  to  be  considered  as  the  first  and  foremost,  no  numeration  is 
possible  as  a  general  rule.  In  some  men  it  is  the  higher  intelligence  (Manas,  or  the 
5th)  which  dominates  the  rest ;  in  others  it  is  the  animal  soul  (Kama  Rupa)  that  reigns 
supreme,  exhibiting  the  most  bestial  instincts,  etc.

*  Paul  calls  Plato's  nous  "spirit";  but  as  this  spirit  is  "substance,"  then,  of 
course,  Buddhi  and  not  Atma  is  meant,  as  the  latter  cannot  philosophically  be  called 
"  substance  "  under  any  circumstance.  We  include  Atma  among  the  human  "  prin- 
ciples "  in  order  not  to  create  additional  confusion.  In  reality  it  is  no  human  princi- 
ple, but  the  Universal  Absolute  Principle  of  which  Buddhi,  the  soul-spirit,  is  the  car-

84  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

human  animal — involves  that  of  the  possibility  of  the  real 
immortal  Ego  appearing  in  seance-rooms  as  a  ''material- 
ized spirit,"  which  we  deny,  as  already  explained.

Inq. —  You  have  just  spoken  of  psuche  running  toward  its 
entire  annihilation  if  it  attaches  itself  to  anoia.  What  did 
Plato ^  and  what  do  yoti,  mean  by  this  ?Inq. —  You  have  just  spoken  of  psuche  running  toward  its 
entire  annihilation  if  it  attaches  itself  to  anoia.  What  did 
Plato ^  and  what  do  yoti,  mean  by  this  ?

Theo. — The  entire  annihilation  of  the  personal  con- 
sciousness, as  an  exceptional  and  rare  case,  I  think.  The 
general  and  almost  invariable  rule  is  the  merging  of  the 
personal  into  the  individual  or  immortal  consciousness  of 
the  Ego — a  transformation  or  a  divine  transfiguration — 
and  the  entire  annihilation  only  of  the  lower  quaternary. 
Would  you  expect  the  man  of  flesh  (or  the  temporary  per- 
sonality), his  shadow  (the  astral),  his  animal  instincts,  and 
even  physical  life,  to  survive  with  the  spiritual  Ego  and 
become  sempiternal  ?  Naturally  all  this  ceases  to  exist, 
either  at  or  soon  after  corporeal  death.  It  becomes  in 
time  entirely  disintegrated  and  disappears  from  view,  being 
annihilated  as  a  whole.

Inq. — Then  you  also  reject  resurrection  in  the  flesh?

Theo. — Most  decidedly  we  do.  Why  should  we,  who 
believe  in  the  archaic  Esoteric  Philosophy  of  the  ancients, 
accept  the  unphilosophical  speculations  of  the  later  Chris- 
tian theology,  borrowed  from  the  Egyptian  and  Greek  exo- 
teric systems  of  the  Gnostics  ?

Inq. — The  Egyptians  revered  nature-spirits^  and  deified 
even  onions ;  your  Hindus  are  idolaters  to  this  day  ;  the  Zoro- 
astrians  worshiped^  and  do  still  worships  the  sun;  and  the 
best  Greek  philosophers  were  either  dreamers  or  materialists — 
witness  Plato  and  Democritus.     How  can  you  compare  I

Theo. — It  may  be  so  in  your  modern  theological  and 
even  scientific  catechisms ;  it  is  not  so  for  unbiased  minds. 
The  Egyptians  revered  the  ''One-Only-One"  as  Nout;  and

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  85THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  85

it  is  from  this  word  that  Anaxagoras  got  his  denomination 
nous^  or,  as  he  calls  it,  vo5(;  aDTo%paTT|<;,  ''  the  mind  or  spirit 
self-potent;"  ap/Y]  tyj^  y.ivY]a£u>(;,  ''the  leading  motor"  ox pri- 
mum  mobile  of  all.  With  him  the  nous  was  God,  and  the  logos 
was  man,  his  emanation.  The  nous  is  the  spirit  (whether 
in  cosmos  or  in  man),  and  the  logos ^  whether  universe  or 
astral  body,  the  emanation  of  the  former,  the  physical 
body  being  merely  the  animal.  Our  external  powers  per- 
ceive phenomena;  our  nous  alone  is  able  to  recognize  their 
nou7nena.  It  is  the  logos  alone,  or  the  noumenofi^  that  sur- 
vives, because  it  is  immortal  in  its  very  nature  and  essence ; 
and  the  logos  in  man  is  the  eternal  Ego,  that  which  rein- 
carnates and  lasts  forever.  But  how  can  the  evanescent 
or  external  shadow,  the  temporary  clothing  of  that  divine 
emanation  which  returns  to  the  source  whence  it  proceeded, 
be  that  which  is  ''raised  in  incorruptibility"?

Inq. — Still  you  ca7i  hardly  escape  the  charge  of  having  in- 
vented a  new  division  of  man'^s  spiritual  and  psychic  constitu- 
ents; for  no  philosopher  speaks  ofthe7n,  though  you  believe  that 
Plato  does.

Theo. — And  I  support  the  belief.  Not  only  Plato,  but 
also  Pythagoras  followed  the  same  division.*  He  de- 
scribed the  soul  as  a  self-moving  unit  [monas)  composed  of 
three  elements — the  notis  (spirit),  t]\Q  phren  (mind),  and  the 
thumos  (life,  breath,  or  the  nephesh  of  the  Kabalists),  which 
three  correspond  to  our  Atma-Buddhi  (higher  spirit-soul),  to 
Manas  (the  Ego),  and  to  Kama  Rupa  in  conjunction  with 
the  lower  reflection  of  Manas.     That  which  the  ancient*  "Plato  and  Pythagoras,"  says  Plutarch,  " distribute  the  soul  into  two  parts,  the 
rational  [noetic]  and  irrational  soul  [agnoza]  ;  that  that  part  of  the  soul  of  man  which 
is  rational  is  eternal— for  though  it  be  not  God,  yet  it  is  the  product  of  an  eternal  Deity — 
but  that  part  of  the  soul  which  is  divested  of  reason  [the  agnoza^  dies."  The  modem 
term  agnostic  comes  from  a-gnosticos,  a  word  cognate  with  agnoza.  We  wonder  why 
Mr.  Huxley,  the  author  of  the  word,  should  have  connected  his  great  intellect  with 
"the  soul  .  .  .  divested  of  reason,"  which  dies?  Is  it  the  exaggerated  humility  of  the 
modem  materialist?

86  THE   KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.86  THE   KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

Greek  philosophers  termed  soul,  in  general,  we  call  spirit, 
or  spiritual  soul — Buddhi,  as  the  vehicle  of  Atma ;  the  To 
Agathon,  or  Plato's  Supreme  Deity.  The  fact  that  Py- 
thagoras and  others  state  that  phreii  and  ihuinos  are  shared 
by  us  with  the  brutes  proves  that  in  this  case  the  lower 
manasic  reflection  (instinct)  and  Kama  Rupa  (animal  liv- 
ing passions)  are  meant.  And  as  Socrates  and  Plato  ac- 
cepted the  clue  and  followed  it,  if  to  these  five — namely, 
To  Agatho7i  (Deity  or  Kxxvi.2^^  psuche  (soul  in  its  collective 
sense),  nous  (spirit  or  mind),  phren  (physical  mind),  and 
thiwios  (Kama  Rupa  or  passions) — we  add  the  eidolo7i  of  the 
Mysteries  (the  shadowy  form  or  human  double),  and  the 
physical  body,  it  will  be  easy  to  demonstrate  that  the  ideas 
of  both  Pythagoras  and  Plato  were  identical  with  ours. 
Even  the  Egyptians  held  to  the  septenary  division.  They 
taught  that  the  soul  (Ego)  in  its  exit  had  to  pass  through 
its  seven  chambers  or  principles — both  those  it  left  behind 
and  those  it  took  along  with  itself.  The  only  difference  is 
that,  ever  bearing  in  mind  the  penalty  of  revealing  Mystery- 
doctrines,  which  was  death,  they  gave  out  the  teaching  in 
broad  outline,  while  we  elaborate  it  and  explain  it  in  its 
details.  But  though  we  do  give  out  to  the  world  as  much 
as  is  lawful,  even  in  our  doctrine  more  than  one  important 
detail  is  withheld,  which  those  who  study  the  Esoteric  Philos- 
ophy and  are  pledged  to  silence  are  alone  entitled  to  know.

THE    GREEK  TEACHINGS,

Inq. —  We  have  magnificent  Greek  and  Latin,  Sanskrit  and 
Hebrew  scholars.  How  is  it  that  we  find  nothing  in  their 
translations  that  would  afford  us  a  clue  to  what  you  say  ?Theo. — Because  your  translators,  their  great  learning 
notwithstanding,  have  made  of  the  philosophers — the 
Greeks  especially — misty  instead  of  mystic  writers.  Take 
as  an  instance  Plutarch,  and  read  what  he  says  of  the  '*  prin-

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  87

ciples "  of  man.  What  he  describes  is  accepted  literally 
and  attributed  to  metaphysical  superstition  and  ignorance. 
Let  me  give  you  an  illustration  in  point  from  this  author :

Man  is  compound ;  and  they  are  mistaken  who  think  him  to  be  com- 
pounded of  two  pai'ts  only.  For  they  imagine  that  the  understanding 
[brain-intellect]  is  a  part  of  the  soul  [the  upper  triad]  ;  but  they  err  in 
this  no  less  than  those  who  make  the  soul  to  be  a  part  of  the  body  [i.e., 
those  who  make  of  the  triad -psirt  of  the  corruptible  mortal  quaternary^ 
For  the  understanding  \jious\  as  far  exceeds  the  soul  as  the  soul  is 
better  and  diviner  than  the  body.  Now  this  composition  of  the  soul 
[psuche'\  with  the  understanding  \jiou5\  makes  reason,  and  with  the 
body  [or  thumos^  the  animal  soul]  passion ;  of  which  the  one  is  the  be- 
ginning or  principle  of  pleasure  and  pain,  and  the  other  of  virtue  and 
vice.  Of  these  three  parts  conjoined  and  compacted  together,  the  earth 
has  given  the  body,  the  moon  the  soul,  and  the  sun  the  understanding, 
to  the  generation  of  man.This  last  sentence  is  purely  allegorical,  and  will  be  com- 
prehended only  by  those  who  are  versed  in  the  esoteric  sci- 
ence of  correspondences  and  know  what  planet  is  related  to 
every  principle.  Plutarch  divides  the  principles  into  three 
groups,  and  makes  of  the  body  a  compound  of  physical 
frame ^  astral  shadow^  and  breathy  or  the  triple  lower  part, 
which  '^  from  earth  was  taken  and  to  earth  returns  " ;  of 
the  middle  principle  and  the  mstinctual  soul  the  second 
part,  derived  from  and  through,  and  ever  influenced  by,  the 
moon ;  *  and  only  of  the  higher  part,  or  the  spiritual  soul 
(Buddhi),  with  the  dtmic  and  mdnasic  elements  in  it,  does 
he  make  a  direct  emanation  of  the  sun,  who  stands  here  for 
To  Agatho7t^  the  Supreme  Deity.  This  is  proven  by  what 
he  says  further  as  follows :

Now  of  the  deaths  we  die,  the  one  makes  man  two  of  three  and  the 
other  one  of  [out  of]  two.  The  former  is  in  the  region  and  jurisdic- 
tion of  Demeter ;  whence  the  name  given  to  the  Mysteries,  reT^elVf  re- 
sembled that  given  to  death,  reAevrdv.     The  Athenians  also  heretofore

*  The  Kabalists  who  know  the  relation  of  Jehovah,  the  life  and  children  giver,  to 
the  moon,  and  the  influence  of  the  latter  on  generation,  will  again  see  the  point  as 
much  as  will  some  astrologers.

88  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

called  the  deceased  sacred  to  Demeter.    As  for  the  other  death,  it  is  in 
the  moon  or  region  of  Persephone.88  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

called  the  deceased  sacred  to  Demeter.    As  for  the  other  death,  it  is  in 
the  moon  or  region  of  Persephone.

Here  you  have  our  doctrine,  which  shows  man  a  septe- 
nary during  life ;  a  quintile  just  after  death,  in  Kamaloka ; 
and  a  triad.  Ego,  spirit-soul,  and  consciousness  in  Deva- 
chan.  This  separation,  first  in  the  ''  Meadows  of  Hades," 
as  Plutarch  calls  the  Kamaloka,  then  in  Devachan,  was 
part  and  parcel  of  the  performances  during  the  Sacred 
Mysteries,  when  the  candidates  for  initiation  enacted  the 
whole  drama  of  death  and  the  resurrection  as  a  glorified 
spirit,  by  which  name  we  mean  consciousness.  This  is  what 
Plutarch  means  when  he  says :And  as  with  the  one,  the  terrestrial,  so  with  the  other,  celestial, 
Hermes  doth  dwell.  This  suddenly  and  with  violence  plucks  the  soul 
from  the  body ;  but  Proserpina  mildly  and  in  a  long  time  disjoins  the 
understanding  from  the  soul.  *  For  this  reason  she  is  called  monogenesy 
only  begotten,  or  rather  begetting  one  alone;  for  the  better  part  of 
man  becomes  alone  when  it  is  separated  by  her.  Now  both  the  one 
and  the  other  happens  thus  according  to  nature.  It  is  ordained  by 
Fate  [Fatum  or  Karma]  that  every  soul,  whether  with  or  without  un- 
derstanding [mind],  when  gone  out  of  the  body,  should  wander  for  a 
time — though  not  all  for  the  same — in  the  region  lying  between  the 
earth  and  moon  [Kamaloka]. t  For  those  who  have  been  unjust  and 
dissolute  suffer  then  the  punishment  due  to  their  offenses ;  but  the 
good  and  virtuous  are  there  detained  till  they  are  purified  and  have, 
by  expiation,  purged  out  of  them  all  the  infections  they  might  have  con- 
tracted from  the  contagion  of  the  body,  as  if  from  foul  health — living  in 
the  mildest  part  of  the  air,  called  the  Meadows  of  Hades,  where  they 
must  remain  for  a  certain  prefixed  and  appointed  time.  And  then,  as 
if  they  were  returning  from  a  wandering  pilgrimage  or  long  exile  into 
their  country,  they  have  a  taste  of  joy,  such  as  they  principally  receive 
who  are  initiated  into  Sacred  Mysteries,  mixed  with  trouble,  admira- 
tion, and  each  one's  proper  and  peculiar  hope.*  Proserpina,  or  Persephone,  stands  here  for  post-mortem  Karma,  which  is  said  to 
regulate  the  separation  of  the  lower  from  the  higher  **  principles  " — the  soul,  as  ne- 
phesh,  the  breath  of  animal  life,  which  remains  for  a  time  in  Kamaloka,  from  the 
higher  compound  Ego,  which  goes  into  the  state  of  Devachan,  or  bliss,

t  Until  the  separation  of  the  higher,  spiritual  **  principle  "  from  the  lower  principles, 
which  remain  in  Kdmaloka  until  disintegrated.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  89t  Until  the  separation  of  the  higher,  spiritual  **  principle  "  from  the  lower  principles, 
which  remain  in  Kdmaloka  until  disintegrated.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  89

This  is  nirvanic  bliss,  and  no  Theosophist  could  describe 
in  plainer  though  esoteric  language  the  mental  joys  of 
Devachan,  where  every  man  has  his  paradise  around  him, 
created  by  his  consciousness.  But  you  must  beware  of  the 
general  error  into  which  too  many  even  of  our  Theosophists 
fall.  Do  not  imagine  that  because  man  is  called  septenary, 
then  quintuple  and  a  triad,  he  is  a  compound  of  seven,  five, 
or  three  entities ;  or,  as  well  expressed  by  a  Theosophical 
writer,  of  skins  to  be  peeled  off  like  the  skins  of  an  onion. 
The  "principles,"  as  already  said — save  the  body,  the  life, 
and  the  astral  eidolon^  all  of  which  disperse  at  death — are 
simply  aspects  and  states  of  consciousness.  There  is  but  one 
real  man,  enduring  through  the  cycle  of  life  and  immortal 
in  essence,  if  not  in  form,  and  this  is  Manas,  the  mind-man 
or  embodied  consciousness.  The  objection  made  by  the 
materialists,  who  deny  the  possibility  of  mind  and  con- 
sciousness acting  without  matter,  is  worthless  in  our  case. 
We  do  not  deny  the  soundness  of  their  argument,  but  we 
simply  ask  our  opponents:  Are  you  acquainted  with  all 
the  states  of  matter — you  who  knew  hitherto  but  of  three  ? 
And  how  do  you  know  whether  that  which  we  refer  to  as 
Absolute  Consciousness  or  Deity,  forever  invisible  and  un- 
knowable, be  not  that  which,  though  it  forever  eludes  our 
human  finite  conception,  is  still  universal  spirit-matter  or 
matter-spirit  in  its  absolute  infinitude  ?  It  is  then  one  of 
the  lowest,  and  in  its  manvantaric  manifestations  frac- 
tioned,  aspects  of  this  spirit-matter  which  is  the  conscious 
Ego  that  creates  its  own  paradise — a  fools'  paradise,  it  may 
be,  still  a  state  of  bliss.Inq. — Btit  what  is  Devachan  ?

Theo. — The  "land  of  Gods,"  Kterally;  a  condition,  a 
state  of  mental  bliss.  Philosophically,  a  mental  condition 
analogous  to,  but  far  more  vivid  and  real  than,  the  most 
vivid  dream.     It  is  the  state  after  death  of  most  mortals.

VII. 
ON  THE  VARIOUS  POST-MORTEM  STATES.

THE  PHYSICAL  AND    THE   SPIRITUAL  MAN.

Inq. — I  am  glad  to  hear  you  believe  in  the  immortality  of 
the  soul.

Theo. — Not  of  the  soul,  but  of  the  divine  spirit;  or 
rather  in  the  immortahty  of  the  reincarnating  Ego.

Inq. —  What  is  the  difference  ?

Theo. — A  very  great  one  in  our  philosophy ;  but  this  is 
too  abstruse  and  difficult  a  question  to  touch  lightly  upon. 
We  shall  have  to  analyze  them  separately,  and  then  in  con- 
junction.    We  may  begin  with  spirit.

We  say  that  the  spirit — the  ''  Father  in  secret "  of  Jesus 
— or  Atman  is  no  individual  property  of  any  man,  but  is 
the  divine  essence  which  has  no  body,  no  form,  which  is 
imponderable,  invisible,  and  indivisible,  that  which  does 
not  exist  and  yet  is^  as  the  Buddhists  say  of  Nirvana.  It 
only  overshadows  the  mortal,  that  which  enters  into  him 
and  pervades  the  whole  body  being  but  its  omnipresent  rays, 
or  light,  radiated  through  Buddhi,  its  vehicle  and  direct 
emanation.  This  is  the  secret  meaning  of  the  assertions 
of  almost  all  the  ancient  philosophers  when  they  said  that

90

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  91

"  the  rational  part  of  man^s  soul "  *  never  enters  wholly  into 
the  man,  but  only  overshadows  him  more  or  less  through 
the  irrational  spiritual  soul,  or  Buddhi.t

Inq. — /  labored  under  the  impression  that  the  ''  animal 
souV^  alone  was  irratiofial^  a?id  not  the  ^*  divine  soul^Inq. — /  labored  under  the  impression  that  the  ''  animal 
souV^  alone  was  irratiofial^  a?id  not  the  ^*  divine  soul^

Theo. — You  have  to  learn  the  difference  between  that 
which  is  negatively  or  passively  irrational,  because  undiffer- 
entiated, and  that  w^hich  is  irrational  because  too  active  and 
positive.  Man  is  a  correlation  of  spiritual  powers,  as  well 
as  a  correlation  of  chemical  and  physical  forces,  brought 
into  function  by  what  we  call  "  principles."

Inq. — /  have  read  a  good  deal  upon  the  subject^  and  it 
seems  to  me  that  the  notions  of  the  older  philosophers  differed 
a  great  deal  fro7n  those  of  the  medieval  Kabalists,  though  they 
do  agree  in  some  particulars,

Theo. — The  most  substantial  difference  between  them 
and  us  is  this:  while  we  beHeve,  with  the  Neoplatonists 
and  the  Eastern  teachings,  that  the  spirit  (Atma)  never  de- 
scends hypostatically  into  the  living  man,  but  only  showers 
more  or  less  its  radiance  on  the  in7ier  man — the  psychic 
and  spiritual  compound  of  the  astral  principles — the  Kaba- 
lists  maintain  that  the  human  spirit,  detaching  itself  from 
the  ocean  of  light  and  universal  spirit,  enters  man's  soul, 
where  it  remains  throughout  life  imprisoned  in  the  astral 
capsule.  All  Christian  Kabalists  still  maintain  the  same,  as 
they  are  unable  to  break  quite  loose  from  their  anthropo- 
morphic and  biblical  doctrines.

Inq. — And  what  do  you  say  ?

^  In  its  generic  sense,  the  word  "  rational"  meaning  something  emanating  from  the 
Eternal  Wisdom.Inq. — And  what  do  you  say  ?

^  In  its  generic  sense,  the  word  "  rational"  meaning  something  emanating  from  the 
Eternal  Wisdom.

t  Irrational  in  the  sense  that  as  2iptire  emanation  of  the  Universal  Mind  it  can  have 
no  individual  reason  of  its  own  on  this  plane  of  matter,  but,  like  the  moon,  who  bor- 
rows her  light  from  the  sun  and  her  life  from  the  earth,  so  Buddhi,  receiving  its  light 
of  wisdom  from  AtmA,  gets  its  rational  qualities  from  Manas.  As  something  homo- 
geneous, however,  it  is  devoid  of  attributes  per  se.

92  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,92  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

'  Theo. — We  say  that  we  only  allow  the  presence  of  the 
radiation  of  spirit,  or  Atma,  in  the  astral  capsule,  and  so 
far  only  as  that  spiritual  radiancy  is  concerned.  We  say 
that  man  and  soul  have  to  conquer  their  immortality  by 
ascending  toward  the  unity  with  which,  if  successful,  they 
will  be  finally  linked,  and  into  which  they  are  finally,  so  to 
speak,  absorbed.  The  individualization  of  man  after  death 
depends  on  the  spirit,  not  on  his  soul  and  body.  Although 
the  word  "  personality,"  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  usually 
understood,  is  an  absurdity  if  applied  literally  to  our  im- 
mortal essence,  still  the  latter  is,  as  our  individual  Ego,  a 
distinct  entity,  immortal  and  eternal  per  se.  It  is  only  in 
the  case  of  black  magicians  or  of  criminals  beyond  redemp- 
tion— criminals  who  have  been  such  during  a  long  series  of 
lives — that  the  shining  thread  which  links  the  spirit  to  the 
personal  soul  from  the  moment  of  the  birth  of  the  child  is 
violently  snapped,  and  the  disembodied  entity  becomes 
divorced  from  the  personal  soul,  the  latter  being  annihi- 
lated without  leaving  the  smallest  impression  of  itself  on 
the  former.  If  this  union  between  the  lower  or  personal 
Manas  and  the  individual  reincarnating  Ego  has  not  been 
effected  during  life,  then  the  former  is  left  to  share  the  fate  of 
the  lower  animals — to  gradually  dissolve  into  ether  and  have 
its  personality  annihilated.  But  even  then  the  spiritual  Ego 
remains  a  distinct  being.  It  only  loses — after  that  special, 
and  in  that  case,  indeed,  useless  life — one  devachanic  state 
which  it  would  otherwise  have  enjoyed  as  that  idealized  per- 
sonality, and  is  reincarnated  almost  immediately,  after  en- 
joying for  a  short  time  its  freedom  as  a  planetary  spirit.Inq. — //  is  stated  in  Isis  Unveiled  that  such  planetary 
spirits  or  angels^  *'  the  gods  of  the  pagans  or  the  archangels  of 
the  Christians'^  will  never  be  men  07t  otir  planet,

Theo. — Quite  right.  Not  '*  such  planetary  spirits,"  but 
some  classes  of  higher  planetary  spirits.     They  will  never

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  93

be  men  on  this  planet,  because  they  are  Hberated  spirits 
from  a  previous;  eariier  world,  and  as  such  they  cannot  re- 
become  men  on  this  earth.  Yet  all  these  will  live  again  in 
the  next  and  far  higher  mahdmanvantara^  after  this  "  Great 
Age  "  and  its  Brahmic  pralaya  (a  little  period  of  sixteen 
figures  or  so)  are  over.  For  you  must  have  heard,  of 
course,  that  Eastern  philosophy  teaches  us  that  mankind 
consists  of  such  ''spirits"  imprisoned  in  human  bodies. 
The  difference  between  animals  and  men  is  this:  the 
former  are  ensouled  by  the  ''  principles "  potentially^  the 
latter  actually,^     Do  you  now  understand  the  difference  ?

Inq. —  Yes ;  but  this  specialization  has  beeii  in  all  ages  the 
stumbling-block  of  metaphysicians,Inq. —  Yes ;  but  this  specialization  has  beeii  in  all  ages  the 
stumbling-block  of  metaphysicians,

Theo. — It  has.  The  whole  esotericism  of  the  Buddhistic 
philosophy  is  based  on  this  mysterious  teaching,  under- 
stood by  so  few,  and  so  totally  misrepresented  by  many  of 
the  most  learned  modern  scholars.  Even  metaphysicians 
are  too  inclined  to  confound  the  effect  with  the  cause. 
An  Ego  who  has  won  his  immortal  life  as  spirit  will  remain 
the  same  Inner  Self  throughout  all  his  rebirths  on  earth ; 
but  this  does  not  imply  necessarily  that  he  must  either 
remain  the  Mr.  Smith  or  Mr.  Brown  he  was  on  earth,  or 
lose  his  individuality.  Therefore  the  astral  soul  and  the 
terrestrial  body  of  a  man  may,  in  the  dark  hereafter,  be 
absorbed  into  the  cosmical  ocean  of  sublimated  elements, 
and  he  may  cease  to  feel  his  last  perso7ial  Ego  (if  it  did  not 
deser\^e  to  soar  higher) ;  and  yet  his  divine  Ego  may  still 
remain  the  same  unchanged  entity,  though  this  terrestrial 
experience  of  its  emanation  may  be  totally  obHterated  at 
the  instant  of  separation  from  the  unworthy  vehicle.

Inq. — If  the  spirit^  or  the  divine  portion  of  the  soul,  ispreex- 
istent  as  a  distinct  being  from  all  eter7tity ,  as  Origen,  Synesius,

*  This  is  fully  explained  in  the  Commentaries  of  the  second  volume  of  Tkg  Secret 
Doctrine.

94  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

and  other  semi- Christians  and  semi-Platonic  philosophers 
taught^  and  if  it  is  the  safne,  and  nothi?ig  more  tha?i  the  meta- 
physically objective  soiil^  how  ca7i  it  be  otherwise  than  eternal? 
And  what  matters  it,  in  such  a  case,  whether  mail  leads  a  pure 
or  an  a?iimal  life,  if  do  what  he  may,  he  can  never  lose  his 
individuality  ?Theo. — This  doctrine,  as  you  have  stated  it,  is  just  as 
pernicious  in  its  consequences  as  that  of  vicarious  atone- 
ment. Had  the  latter  dogma,  in  company  with  the  false 
idea  that  we  are  all  immortal,  been  demonstrated  to  the 
world  in  its  true  light,  humanity  would  have  been  bettered 
by  its  propagation.

Let  me  repeat  to  you  again :  Pythagoras,  Plato,  Timaeus 
of  Locris,  and  the  old  Alexandrian  school  derived  the  soul 
of  man,  or  his  higher  "  principles  '*  and  attributes,  from  the 
Universal  World-Soul,  the  latter  being,  according  to  their 
teachings,  ^ther  (Pater-Zeus).  Therefore  none  of  these 
*'  principles  "  can  be  the  unalloyed  essence  of  the  Pythago- 
rean monas,  or  our  Atma,  because  the  ani7?ia  mtindi  is  but 
the  effect — the  subjective  emanation  or  rather  radiation — 
of  the  7?ionas,  Both  the  human  spirit,  or  the  individuality, 
the  reincarnating  spiritual  Ego,  and  Buddhi,  the  spiritual 
soul,  are  preexistent.  But  while  the  former  exists  as  a  dis- 
tinct entity,  an  individualization,  the  soul  exists  as  preexist- 
ing breath,  a  nescient  portion  of  an  intelligent  whole.  Both 
were  originally  formed  from  the  eternal  ocean  of  light; 
but  as  the  Fire- Philosophers,  the  medieval  Theosophists, 
expressed  it,  there  is  a  visible  as  well  as  invisible  spirit  in 
fire.  They  made  a  difference  between  the  anima  bruta  and 
the  afiima  divina.  Empedocles  firmly  believed  all  men  and 
animals  to  possess  two  souls ;  and  in  Aristotle  we  find  that 
he  calls  one  the  reasoning  soul  (voo<;)  and  the  other  the  ani- 
mal soul  (<]^D)^-fi).  According  to  these  philosophers,  the 
reasoning  soul  comes  from  within  the  Universal  Soul,  and 
the  other  from  without.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  95THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  95

Inq. —  Would  you  call  the  soul,  i,e.,  the  human  thinking 
soul,  or  what  you  call  the  Ego,  matter?

Theo. — Not  matter,  but  substa?tce,  assuredly ;  nor  would 
the  word  ''matter/'  if  prefixed  with  the  adjective  ''primor- 
dial," be  a  word  to  avoid.  This  matter,  we  say,  is  coeter- 
nal  with  spirit,  and  is  not  our  visible,  tangible,  and  divisible 
matter,  but  its  extreme  sublimation.  Pure  spirit  is  but  one 
remove  from  the  ;/(?-spirit,  or  the  absolute  All,  Unless  you 
admit  that  man  was  evolved  out  of  this  primordial  spirit- 
matter,  and  represents  a  regular  progressive  scale  of  "  prin- 
ciples "  from  superspirit  down  to  the  grossest  matter,  how 
can  we  ever  come  to  regard  the  i7iner  man  as  immortal,  and 
at  the  same  time  as  a  spiritual  entity  and  a  mortal  man  ?

Inq. — 77ieft  why  should  you  ?tot  believe  i?t  God  as  such  an 
entity  ?

Theo. — Because  that  which  is  infinite  and  uncondi- 
tioned can  have  no  form,  and  cannot  be  a  being — not  in 
any  Eastern  philosophy  worthy  of  the  name,  at  any  rate. 
An  "entity"  is  immortal,  but  is  so  only  in  its  ultimate 
essence,  not  in  its  individual  form,  when  at  the  last  point 
of  its  cycle  it  is  absorbed  into  its  primordial  nature ;  and 
it  becomes  spirit  when  it  loses  its  name  of  entity.Its  immortality  as  a  form  is  limited  only  to  its  life-cycle 
or  the  mahdmanvantara,  after  which  it  is  one  and  identical 
with  the  Universal  Spirit,  and  no  longer  a  separate  entity. 
As  to  the  personal  soul — by  which  we  mean  the  spark  of 
consciousness  that  preserves  in  the  spiritual  Ego  the  idea 
of  the  personal  "  I "  of  the  last  incarnation— this  lasts,  as 
a  separate  distinct  recollection,  only  throughout  the  deva- 
chanic  period,  after  which  time  it  is  added  to  the  series  of 
other  innumerable  incarnations  of  the  Ego,  hke  the  re- 
membrance in  our  memory  of  one  of  a  series  of  days  at 
the  end  of  a  year.  Will  you  bind  the  infinitude  you  claim 
for  your  God  to  finite  conditions  ?     That  alone  which  is

96  THE  KEY  TO    THEO SOPHY.

indissolubly  cemented  by  Atma — viz.,  Buddhi- Manas — is 
immortal.  The  soul  of  man — i.e.,  of  the  personality — -per  se 
is  neither  immortal,  eternal,  nor  divine.     Says  the  Zohar  :

The  soul,  when  sent  to  this  earth,  puts  on  an  earthly  garment, 
to  preserve  herself  here ;  so  she  receives  above  a  shining  garment,  in 
order  to  be  able  to  look  without  injury  into  the  mirror,  whose  light 
proceeds  from  the  Lord  of  Light.Moreover,  the  Zohar  teaches  that  the  soul  cannot  reach 
the  abode  of  bHss  unless  she  has  received  the  ''holy  kiss," 
or  the  reunion  of  the  soul  with  the  substance  fro 711  which  she 
emanated — spirit.  All  souls  are  dual ;  and  while  the  latter 
is  a  feminine  principle,  the  spirit  is  masculine.  While  im- 
prisoned in  body,  man  is  a  trinity,  unless  his  pollution  is 
such  as  to  have  caused  his  divorce  from  the  spirit.  *'  Woe 
to  the  soul  which  prefers  to  her  divine  husband  [spirit]  the 
earthly  wedlock  with  her  terrestrial  body,"  records  a  text 
of  the  Book  of  the  Keys — a  Hermetic  work.  Woe  indeed ; 
for  nothing  will  remain  of  that  personality  to  be  recorded 
on  the  imperishable  tablets  of  the  Ego's  memory.

Inq. — How  ca7i  that  which ^  if  not  breathed  by  God  into 
man^  is  yet,  on  your  own  confession,  of  an  identical  substance 
with  the  divine,  fail  to  be  immortal  ?

Theo. — Every  atom  and  speck  of  matter,  not  of  sub- 
stance only,  is  imperishable  in  its  essence,  but  rot  in  its  in- 
dividual consciousness.  Immortality  is  but  one's  unbroken 
consciousness,  and  the  personal  consciousness  can  hardly 
last  longer  than  the  personality  itself.  And  such  conscious- 
ness, as  I  have  already  told  you,  survives  only  throughout 
Devachan,  after  which  it  is  reabsorbed,  first  in  the  individ- 
ual, and  then  in  the  universal  consciousness.  Better  in- 
quire of  your  theologians  how  it  is  that  they  have  so  sorely 
jumbled  up  the  Jewish  Scriptures.  Read  the  Bible,  if  you 
would  have  a  good  proof  that  the  writers  of  the  Pentateuch 
— Genesis  especially — never  regarded  nephesh — that  which

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  97THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  97

God  breathes  into  Adam  (Gen.  ii.  7) — as  the  immortal  soul. 
Here  are  some  instances :  ''  And  God  created  .  .  .  every 
life  \nephesJi\  that  moveth  "  (Gen.  i.  21),  meaning  animal. 
"And  man  became  a  living  soul  \7iepheshY'  (Gen.  ii.  7), 
which  shows  that  the  word  7iephesh  was  indifferently  applied 
to  immortal  man  and  to  77tortal  beast.  ''  And  surely  your 
blood  of  your  lives  \iiepheshim\  will  I  require :  at  the  hand 
of  every  beast  will  I  require  it,  and  at  the  hand  of  man  " 
(Gen.  ix.  5).  ''  Escape  for  thy  life  ^^lephesh^  "  (Gen.  xix.  17). 
"Let  us  not  kill  him"  (Gen.  xxxvii.  21).  "Let  us  not  kill 
his  nephesh  "  is  the  Hebrew  text.  "  Nephesh  for  nephesh^^ 
says  Leviticus.  "  He  that  killeth  any  man  shall  surely  be 
put  to  death  "  — Hterally,  "  He  that  smiteth  the  nephesh  of 
a  man"  (Lev.  xxiv.  17).  "And  he  that  killeth  a  beast 
\nephesh\  shall  make  it  good;  beast  for  beast"  {ibid.^  18), 
whereas  the  original  text  has  it  '^nephesh  for  nephesh^ 
How  could  man  kill  that  which  is  immortal  ?  This  ex- 
plains, also,  why  the  Sadducees  denied  the  immortality  of 
the  soul,  and  also  affords  another  proof  that  very  probably 
the  Mosaic  Jews — the  uninitiated,  at  any  rate — never  be- 
lieved in  the  soul's  survival  at  all.

ON  ETERNAL  REWARD  AND  PUNISHMENT,  AND 
ON  NIRVANA,

Inq. — //  is  hardly  necessary^  I  suppose^  to  ask  you  whether 
you  believe  in  the  Christian  dogmas  of  paradise  and  hell,  or  in 
future  rewards  and  punishments  as  taught  by  the  orthodox 
churches  ?Theo. — As  described  in  your  catechisms,  we  reject  them 
absolutely ;  least  of  all  would  we  accept  their  eternity.  But 
we  believe  firmly  in  what  we  call  the  Law  of  Retribution^ 
and  in  the  absolute  justice  and  wisdom  guiding  this  law, 
or  Karma.    Hence  we  positively  refuse  to  accept  the  cruel

98  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

and  unphilosophical  belief  in  eternal  reward  or  eternal  pun- 
ishment.    We  say  with  Horace  :

Let  rules  be  fixed  that  may  our  rage  contain, 
And  punish  faults  with  a  proportion' d pain  ; 
But  do  not  flay  him  who  deserves  alone 
A  whipping  for  the  fault  that  he  has  done.

This  is  a  rule  for  all  men,  and  a  just  one.  Have  we  to  be- 
lieve that  God,  whom  you  make  the  embodiment  of  wis- 
dom, love,  and  mercy,  is  less  entitled  to  these  attributes 
than  mortal  man  ?

Inq. — Have  you  any  other  reaso7is  for  rejecting  this  dogma  ?

Theo. — Our  chief  reason  for  so  doing  is  the  fact  of  re- 
incarnation. As  already  stated,  we  reject  the  idea  of  a 
new  soul  created  for  every  newly  born  babe.  We  believe 
that  every  human  being  is  the  bearer,  or  vehicle,  of  an  Ego 
coeval  with  every  other  Ego ;  because  all  Egos  are  of  the 
same  essence  and  belong  to  the  primeval  emanation  from 
one  universal  infinite  Ego.  Plato  calls  the  latter  the  Logos 
(or  the  second  manifested  God) ;  and  we,  the  manifested 
Divine  Principle,  which  is  one  with  the  Universal  Mind  or 
Soul — not  the  anthropomorphic,  extracosmic,  and  personal 
God  in  which  so  many  theists  beHeve.    Pray  do  not  confuse.

Inq. — But  where  is  the  difficulty^  once  you  accept  a  mani- 
fested Principle^  in  believi?ig  that  the  soul  of  every  new  mortal 
is  created  by  that  Principle^  as  all  the  souls  before  it  have  been 
so  created?Theo. — Because  that  which  is  impersonal  can  hardly 
create,  plan,  and  think,  at  its  own  sweet  will  and  pleasure. 
Being  a  universal  Law,  immutable  in  its  periodical  manifes- 
tations— those  of  radiating  and  manifesting  its  own  essence 
at  the  beginning  of  every  new  cycle  of  life — It  is  not  sup- 
posed to  create  men,  only  to  repent  a  few  years  later  of 
having  created  them.     If  we  have  to  beHeve  in  a  Divine

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  99

Principle  at  all,  it  must  be  in  one  which  is  as  absolute  har- 
mony, logic,  and  justice,  as  it  is  absolute  love,  wisdom,  and 
impartiality ;  and  a  God  who  would  create  every  soul  for 
the  space  of  one  brief  span  of  Hfe,  regardless  of  the  fact 
whether  it  has  to  animate  the  body  of  a  wealthy,  happy 
man  or  that  of  a  poor  suffering  wretch,  hapless  from  birth 
to  death,  though  he  has  done  nothing  to  deserve  his  cruel 
fate,  would  be  rather  a  senseless  fiend  than  a  God.*  Why, 
even  the  Jewish  philosophers,  believers  in  the  Mosaic  Bible 
(esoterically,  of  course),  have  never  entertained  such  an  idea. 
Moreover,  they  beheved  in  reincarnation,  as  we  do.

Inq. — Ca?i  you  give  77ie  some  i?ista?ices  as  a  proof  of  this  ?

Theo. — Most  decidedly  I  can.     Philo  Judaeus  says :

The  air  is  full  of  them  [of  souls]  ;  .  .  .  those  which  are  nearest  the 
earth,  descending  to  be  tied  to  mortal  bodies,  TraTuvSpofiomiv  avOtg, 
return  to  other  bodies^  being  desirous  to  live  in  themA

In  the  Zohar  the  soul  is  made  to  plead  her  freedom  be- 
fore God:

Lord  of  the  universe!  I  am  happy  in  this  world,  and  do  not  wish  to 
go  into  another  world,  where  I  shall  be  a  handmaid,  and  be  exposed 
to  all  kinds  of  pollutions  4Lord  of  the  universe!  I  am  happy  in  this  world,  and  do  not  wish  to 
go  into  another  world,  where  I  shall  be  a  handmaid,  and  be  exposed 
to  all  kinds  of  pollutions  4

The  doctrine  of  fatal  necessity,  the  everlasting  immutable 
law,  is  asserted  in  the  answer  of  the  Deity :

Against  thy  will  thou  becomest  an  embryo,  and  against  thy  will  thou 
art  born.  %

Light  would  be  incomprehensible  without  darkness  to 
make  it  manifest  by  contrast;  good  would  be  no  longer 
good  without  evil  to  show  the  priceless  nature  of  the  boon ; 
and  so  personal  virtue  could  claim  no  merit  unless  it  had 
passed  through  the  furnace  of  temptation.    Nothing  is  eter-

*  See,  further,  '*  On  the  Reward  and  Punishment  of  the  Ego." 
1  De  Gignat,  p.  222  c;  De  Sontniis,  455  D.

*  Zohar ^  ii.,  96.

§  Mishna,  Aboth,  iv.,  29.

100  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

nal  and  unchangeable  save  the  concealed  Deity.  Nothing 
that  is  finite — whether  because  it  had  a  beginning  or  must 
have  an  end — can  remain  stationary ;  it  must  either  pro- 
gress or  recede ;  and  a  soul  which  thirsts  after  a  reunion 
with  its  spirit,  which  alone  confers  upon  it  immortality, 
must  purify  itself  through  cyclic  transmigrations  onward 
toward  the  only  land  of  bliss  and  eternal  rest,  called  in  the 
Zohar  the  ''  Palace  of  Love,"  TO,T\'^  S2^'^ ;  in  the  Hindu 
rehgion,  ''  Moksha  "  ;  among  the  Gnostics,  the  '*  Pleroma 
of  Eternal  Light "  ;  and  by  the  Buddhists,  ''  Nirvana."  And 
all  these  states  are  temporary,  not  eternal.

Inq. —  Yet  there  is  no  rehicaiiiation  spoken  of  in  all  this,Inq. —  Yet  there  is  no  rehicaiiiation  spoken  of  in  all  this,

Theo. — A  soul  which  pleads  to  be  allowed  to  remain 
where  she  is  must  be  preexistent,  and  not  have  been  cre- 
ated for  the  occasion.  In  the  Zohar^  however,  there  is  a 
still  better  proof.  Speaking  of  the  reincarnating  Egos,  the 
rational  souls,  those  whose  last  personality  has  to  fade  out 
entirely,  it  is  said :

All  souls  which  are  not  guiltless  in  this  world  have  already  alienated 
themselves  in  heaven  from  the  Holy  One  (blessed  be  he)  ;  they  have 
thrown  themselves  into  an  abyss  at  their  very  existence,  and  have  an- 
ticipated the  time  when  they  are  to  descend  (once  more)  on  earth.*

The  "  Holy  One  "  means  here,  esoterically,  the  Atman,  or 
Atma-Buddhi.

Inq. — Moreover^  it  is  very  strange  to  find  Nirvana  spoken 
of  as  something  synojtymous  with  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  or 
paradise,  since  according  to  every  Orientalist  of  note  Nirvana 
is  a  synonym  of  aiinihilation  !

Theo. — Taken  literally,  with  regard  to  the  personality 
and  differentiated  matter ;  but  not  otherwise.  These  ideas 
on  reincarnation  and  the  trinity  of  man  were  held  by  many

*  iii.,  6i  ^.  The  above  quotations  are  from  K.  R.  H.  Mackenzie's  Masonic  CyclO' 
Pedia,  art.  **  Kabbalah."

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  101*  iii.,  6i  ^.  The  above  quotations  are  from  K.  R.  H.  Mackenzie's  Masonic  CyclO' 
Pedia,  art.  **  Kabbalah."

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  101

of  the  early  Christian  fathers.  It  is  the  jumble  made  by 
the  translators  of  the  New  Testament  and  ancient  philo- 
sophical treatises  between  soul  and  spirit  that  has  occa- 
sioned the  many  misunderstandings.  It  is  also  one  of  the 
many  reasons  why  Buddha,  Plotinus,  and  so  many  other 
Initiates  are  now  accused  of  having  longed  for  the  total 
extinction  of  their  souls — ''  absorption  into  the  Deity,"  or 
"reunion  with  the  Universal  Soul,"  meaning,  according  to 
modern  ideas,  annihilation.  The  personal  soul  must,  of 
course,  be  disintegrated  into  its  particles  before  it  is  able 
to  link  its  purer  essence  forever  with  the  immortal  spirit. 
But  the  translators  of  both  the  Acts  and  the  Epistles,  who 
laid  the  foundation  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven^  and  the 
modern  commentators  on  the  Buddhist  Sutta  of  ih^  foun- 
dation of  the  kingdom  of  right€ous7iess^  have  muddled  the 
sense  of  the  great  Apostle  of  Christianity  as  of  the  great 
reformer  of  India.  The  former  have  smothered  the  word 
psuchikos  (4^oxty.6c)  so  that  no  reader  imagines  it  to  have  any 
relation  with  soul ;  and  with  this  confusing  together  of  soul 
and  spirit,  Bible  readers  get  only  a  perverted  sense  of  any- 
thing on  the  subject.  On  the  other  hand,  the  interpreters 
of  Buddha  have  failed  to  understand  the  meaning  and 
object  of  the  Buddhist  four  degrees  of  Dhyana.  Ask  the 
Pythagoreans :  Can  that  spirit  which  gives  life  and  motion 
and  partakes  of  the  nature  of  light  be  reduced  to  nonentity  ? 
Can  even  that  sensitive  spirit  in  brutes  which  exercises 
memory — one  of  the  rational  faculties — die  and  become 
nothing  ?  observe  the  Occultists.  In  Buddhistic  philosophy 
''  annihilation  "  means  only  a  dispersion  of  matter,  in  what- 
ever form  or  semblance  of  form  it  may  be ;  for  everything 
that  has  form  is  temporary,  and  is,  therefore,  really  an  illu- 
sion. For  in  eternity  the  longest  periods  of  time  are  as  the 
wink  of  an  eye.  So  with  form.  Before  we  have  time  to 
realize  that  we  have  seen  it,  it  is  gone  like  an  instantaneous 
flash  of  Hghtning,  and  passed  forever.     When  the  spiritual102  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

entity  breaks  loose  forever  from  every  particle  of  matter, 
substance,  or  form,  and  re-becomes  a  spiritual  breath,  then 
only  does  it  enter  upon  the  eternal  and  unchangeable  Nir- 
vana, lasting  as  long  as  the  cycle  of  life  has  lasted — an 
eternity,  truly.  And  then  that  Breath,  existing  i7i  spirit^  is 
7iothi7ig  because  it  is  all ;  as  a  form,  a  semblance,  a  shape, 
it  is  completely  annihilated ;  as  absolute  spirit  it  still  is^  for 
it  has  become,  to  coin  a  word,  be-ness  itself.  The  very 
phrase  "  absorbed  in  the  universal  essence,'*  when  used  of 
the  soul  as  spirit,  means  ii7iio7i  with.  It  can  never  mean 
annihilation,  for  that  would  mean  eternal  separation.

Inq. — Do  you  710 1  lay  yourself  ope7i  to  the  acaisatio7i  of 
preachi7ig  a7i7tihilatio7i  by  the  la7iguage  you  yourself  use  ? 
You  have  fust  spoke7i  of  the  soul  of  77ian  retur7ii7ig  to  its  pri- 
iTiordial  ele77ie7its.Theo. — But  you  forget  that  I  have  given  you  the  differ- 
ences between  the  various  meanings  of  the  word  *'soul," 
and  shown  the  loose  way  in  which  the  term  ''spirit*'  has 
been  hitherto  translated.  We  speak  of  an  animal,  a  human, 
and  a  spiritual  soul,  and  distinguish  between  them.  Plato, 
for  instance,  calls  ''rational  soul"  that  which  we  call  Bud- 
dhi,  adding  to  it  the  adjective  of  "spiritual,"  however;  but 
that  which  we  call  the  reincarnating  Ego,  Manas,  he  calls 
spirit,  7wus^  etc.,  whereas  we  apply  the  term  "spirit,"  when 
standing  alone  and  without  any  qualification,  to  Atma  only. 
Pythagoras  repeats  our  archaic  doctrine  when  stating  that 
the  Ego  (7ious)  was  eternal  with  Deity ;  that  the  soul  only 
passed  through  various  stages  to  arrive  at  divine  excellence  ; 
while  thu77ios  returned  to  the  earth,  and  even  the  phren^  the 
lower  Manas,  was  eliminated.  Again,  Plato  defines  soul 
(Buddhi)  as  "the  motion  that  is  able  to  move  itself." 
"Soul,"  he  adds  [Laws,  x.),  "is  the  most  ancient  of  all 
things,  and  the  commencement  of  motion  " — thus  calling 
Atma-Buddhi  soul,  and  Manas  spirit,  which  we  do  not.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  103

Soul  was  generated  prior  to  body,  and  body  is  posterior  and  secon- 
dary, as  being,  according  to  Nature,  ruled  over  by  the  ruling  soul.  .  .  . 
The  soul  which  administers  all  things  that  are  moved,  in  every  way, 
administers  likewise  the  heavens.   .   .   .Soul,  then,  leads  everything  in  heaven,  and  on  earth,  and  in  the  sea, 
by  its  movements — the  names  of  which  are,  to  will,  to  consider,  to  take 
care  of,  to  consult,  to  form  opinions  true  and  false,  to  be  in  a  state  of 
joy,  sorrow,  confidence,  fear,  hate,  love,  together  with  all  such  primary 
movements  as  are  allied  to  these.  .  .  .  Being  a  goddess  herself,  she 
ever  takes  as  an  ally  nous,  a.  god,  and  disciplines  all  things  correctly 
and  happily ;  but  when  with  anoia  [not  notis^  it  works  out  everything 
the  contrary.

In  this  language,  as  in  the  Buddhist  texts,  the  negative 
is  treated  as  essential  existence.  "  Annihilation "  comes 
under  a  similar  exegesis.  The  positive  state  is  essential 
being,  but  no  manifestation  as  such.  When  the  spirit,  in 
Buddhistic  parlance,  enters  Nirvana,  it  loses  objective  exis- 
tence, but  retains  subjective  being.  To  objective  minds  this 
is  becoming  absolute  ''nothing";  to  subjective,  no-thi?ig — 
nothing  to  be  displayed  to  sense.  Thus  their  Nirvana 
means  the  certitude  of  individual  immortality  in  spirit^  not 
in  soul,  which,  though  ''the  most  ancient  of  all  things,"  is 
still — along  with  all  the  other  Gods — a  finite  emanation  in 
forms  and  individuality,  if  not  in  substance.

Inq. — /  do  7iot  quite  seize  the  idea  yet,  and  ivotdd  be  tha?ik- 
ful  to  have  you  explai7i  this  to  me  by  some  illustratiojis.Inq. — /  do  7iot  quite  seize  the  idea  yet,  and  ivotdd  be  tha?ik- 
ful  to  have  you  explai7i  this  to  me  by  some  illustratiojis.

Theo. — No  doubt  it  is  very  difficult  to  understand,  espe- 
cially to  one  brought  up  in  the  regular  orthodox  ideas 
of  the  Christian  church.  Moreover,  I  must  tell  you  one 
thing ;  and  this  is  that  unless  you  have  studied  thoroughly 
well  the  separate  functions  assigned  to  all  the  human  ''  prin- 
ciples," and  the  state  of  all  these  after  death,  you  will 
hardly  realize  our  Eastern  philosophy.

104  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

ON  THE   VARIOUS  *' PRINCIPLES''   IN  MAN

Inq. — /  have  heard  a  good  deal  about  this  constitution  of 
the  ^^  inner  7na7i,^^  as  you  call  it ^  but  could  never  make  *'  head 
or  tail  071' t,^'  as  the  tra7islator  of  Le  Co77ite  de  Gabalis  ex- 
presses  it.

Theo. — Of  course  it  is  most  difficult,  and,  as  you  say, 
puzzling  to  understand  correctly  and  distinguish  between 
the  various  aspects,  called  by  us  the  ''principles,"  of  the 
real  Ego.  It  is  the  more  so  as  there  exists  a  notable  differ- 
ence in  the  numbering  of  these  principles  by  various  East- 
ern schools,  though  at  the  bottom  there  is  the  same  iden- 
tical substratum  of  teaching.

Inq. — Do  you  77iea7i  the  Vedd7itins,  as  a7i  i7ista7ice  ?  Do 
they  710 1  divide  your  seve7i  '^ pri7iciples  "  into  five  07ily  ?Inq. — Do  you  77iea7i  the  Vedd7itins,  as  a7i  i7ista7ice  ?  Do 
they  710 1  divide  your  seve7i  '^ pri7iciples  "  into  five  07ily  ?

Theo. — They  do ;  but  though  I  would  not  presume  to 
dispute  the  point  with  a  learned  Vedantin,  I  may  yet  state 
as  my  private  opinion  that  they  have  an  obvious  reason  for 
it.  With  them  it  is  only  that  compound  spiritual  aggregate 
which  consists  of  various  mental  aspects  that  is  called  man 
Sit  all,  the  physical  body  being,  in  their  view,  something 
beneath  contempt,  and  merely  an  illusion.  Nor  is  the 
Vedanta  the  only  philosophy  to  reckon  in  this  manner. 
Lao-Tze,  in  his  Tao-te-King^  mentions  only  five  principles, 
because  he,  like  the  Vedantins,  omits  to  include  two  prin- 
ciples, namely,  the  spirit  (Atma)  and  the  physical  body,  the 
latter  of  which,  moreover,  he  calls  the  ''cadaver."  Then 
there  is  the  Taraka  Raja  Yoga  school.  Its  teaching  recog- 
nizes only  three  "  principles,"  in  fact ;  but  then,  in  reality, 
their  sthulopddhi,  or  physical  body,  in  its  waking,  conscious 
state,  their  sukshmopddhi,  the  same  body  in  svapna,  or  the 
dreaming  state,  and  their  kd7^anopadhi^  or  "causal  body," 
or  that  which  passes  from  one  incarnation  to  another,  are 
all  dual  in  their  aspects,  and  thus  make  six.     Add  to  this

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  105

Atma^  the  impersonal  Divine  Principle  or  the  immortal  ele- 
ment in  man,  undistinguished  from  the  Universal  Spirit, 
and  you  have  the  same  seven  again.*  They  are  welcome 
to  hold  to  their  division ;  we  hold  to  ours.

Inq. — The7i  it  see?ns  almost  the  sa??ie  as  the  division  made 
by  the  mystic  Christians  :  body^  soul,  and  spirit.Inq. — The7i  it  see?ns  almost  the  sa??ie  as  the  division  made 
by  the  mystic  Christians  :  body^  soul,  and  spirit.

Theo. — Just  the  same.  We  could  easily  make  of  the 
body  the  vehicle  of  the  vital  double ;  of  the  latter  the 
vehicle  of  life,  or  Prana;  of  Kama  Rupa,  or  animal  soul, 
the  vehicle  of  the  higher  and  the  lower  mind ;  and  make 
of  this  six  principles,  crowning  the  whole  with  the  one  im- 
mortal spirit.  In  Occultism  every  quahficative  change  in 
the  state  of  our  consciousness  gives  to  man  a  new  aspect ; 
and  if  it  prevails  and  becomes  part  of  the  Hving  and  act- 
ing Ego,  it  must  be  (and  is)  given  a  special  name,  to  dis- 
tinguish the  man  in  that  particular  state  from  the  man  he 
is  when  he  places  himself  in  another  state.

Inq. — It  is  Just  that  which  it  is  so  difficult  to  understand,

Theo. — It  seems  to  me  very  easy,  on  the  contrary,  once 
that  you  have  seized  the  main  idea,  i.e.,  that  man  acts  on 
this  or  another  plane  of  consciousness  in  strict  accordance 
with  his  mental  and  spiritual  condition.  But  such  is  the 
materialism  of  the  age  that  the  more  we  explain  the  less  peo- 
ple seem  capable  of  understanding  what  we  say.  Divide 
the  terrestrial  being  called  man  into  three  chief  aspects,  if 
you  like ;  and  unless  you  make  of  him  a  pure  animal  you 
cannot  do  less.  Take  his  objective  body;  the  thinking 
principle  in  him — which  is  only  a  little  higher  than  the  in- 
stinctual element  in  the  animal — or  the  vital  conscious  soul ; 
and  that  which  places  him  so  immeasurably  beyond  and 
higher  than  the  animal,  i.e.,  his  reasoning  soul  or  spirit.

*  See,  for  a  clearer  explanation,  The  Secret  Doctrine^  i.,  157    (ist  ed.);  i.,  181 
(3d  ed.).

106  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,*  See,  for  a  clearer  explanation,  The  Secret  Doctrine^  i.,  157    (ist  ed.);  i.,  181 
(3d  ed.).

106  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Well,  if  we  take  these  three  groups  or  representative  en- 
tities, and  subdivide  them  according  to  the  occult  teaching, 
what  do  we  get  ?106  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Well,  if  we  take  these  three  groups  or  representative  en- 
tities, and  subdivide  them  according  to  the  occult  teaching, 
what  do  we  get  ?

First  of  all,  spirit — in  the  sense  of  the  absolute  and  there- 
fore indivisible  All — or  Atma.  As  this  can  neither  be 
located  nor  limited  in  philosophy,  being  simply  that  which 
is  in  eternity,  and  which  cannot  be  absent  from  even  the 
tiniest  geometrical  or  mathematical  point  of  the  universe 
of  matter  or  substance,  it  ought  not  to  be  called,  in  truth, 
a  "  human  "  principle  at  all.  Rather,  and  at  best,  it  is,  in 
metaphysics,  that  point  in  space  which  the  human  monad 
and  its  vehicle,  man,  occupy  for  the  period  of  every  life. 
Now  that  point  is  as  imaginary  as  man  himself,  and  in 
reality  is  an  illusion,  a  mdyd;  but  then  for  ourselves,  as  for 
other  personal  Egos,  we  are  a  reality  diu'ing  that  fit  of  illu- 
sion called  Hfe,  and  we  have  to  take  ourselves  into  account 
— in  our  own  fancy,  at  any  rate — if  no  one  else  does.  To 
make  it  more  conceivable  to  the  human  intellect  when  first 
attempting  the  study  of  Occultism,  and  to  solve  the  a-b-c 
of  the  mystery  of  man.  Occultism  calls  this  seventh  prin- 
ciple the  synthesis  of  the  sixth,  and  gives  it  for  vehicle  the 
spiritual  soul  (Buddhi).  Now  the  latter  conceals  a  mystery 
which  is  never  given  to  any  one,  with  the  exception  of  ir- 
revocably pledged  chelds^  or  those,  at  any  rate,  who  can  be 
safely  trusted.  Of  course  there  would  be  less  confusion 
could  it  only  be  told;  but  as  this  is  directly  concerned 
with  the  power  of  projecting  one^s  double  consciously  and 
at  will,  and  as  this  gift,  like  the  ''ring  of  Gyges,"  would 
prove  very  fatal  to  man  at  large  and  to  the  possessor  of 
this  faculty  in  particular,  it  is  carefully  guarded.  But  let 
us  proceed  with  the  "principles."  This  divine  soul,  or 
Buddhi,  then,  is  the  vehicle  of  the  spirit.  In  conjunction 
these  two  are  one,  impersonal  and  without  any  attributes 
(on  this  plane,  of  course),  but  make  two  spiritual  ''princi- 
ples." If  we  pass  on  to  the  human  soul,  Manas  or  mens^ 
every  one  will  agree  that  the  intelligence  of  man  is  dual.THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  '     107

to  say  the  least — e.g.,  the  high-minded  man  can  hardly 
become  low-minded;  the  very  intellectual  and  spiritual- 
minded  man  is  separated  by  an  abyss  from  the  obtuse, 
dull,  and  material,  if  not  animal-minded,  man.

Inq. — Buf  why  should  not  man  be  rather  represented  by 
two  principles  or  two  aspects  ?Inq. — Buf  why  should  not  man  be  rather  represented  by 
two  principles  or  two  aspects  ?

Theo. — Every  man  has  these  two  principles  in  him,  one 
more  active  than  the  other ;  and  in  rare  cases  one  of  them 
is  entirely  stunted  in  its  growth,  so  to  say,  or  paralyzed  by 
the  strength  and  predominance  of  the  other  aspect  in  every 
direction.  These,  then,  are  what  we  call  the  two  principles 
or  aspects  of  Manas,  the  higher  and  the  lower ;  the  former, 
the  higher  Manas,  or  the  thinking,  conscious  Ego,  gravitat- 
ing toward  the  spiritual  soul  (Buddhi) ;  and  the  latter,  or  its 
instinctual  principle,  attracted  to  Kama,  the  seat  of  animal 
desires  and  passions  in  man.  Thus  we  have  four  principles 
justified,  the  last  three  being  (i)  the  double,  which  we  have 
agreed  to  call  protean  or  plastic  soul,  the  vehicle  of  (2)  the 
life  principle;  and  (3)  the  physical  body.  Of  course  no 
physiologist  or  biologist  will  accept  these  principles,  nor 
can  he  make  head  or  tail  of  them.  And  this  is  why,  per- 
haps, none  of  them  to  this  day  understand  either  the  func- 
tions of  the  spleen,  the  physical  vehicle  of  the  protean 
double,  or  those  of  a  certain  organ  on  the  right  side  of 
man,  the  seat  of  the  above-mentioned  desires ;  nor  yet  do 
they  know  anything  of  the  pineal  body,  which  is  described 
as  a  gland  with  a  little  sand  in  it,  whereas  it  is  in  truth  the 
very  seat  of  the  highest  and  divinest  consciousness  in  man 
— his  omniscient,  spiritual,  and  all-embracing  mind.  And 
this  shows  you  still  more  plainly  that  we  have  neither  in- 
vented these  seven  principles,  nor  are  they  new  in  the 
world  of  philosophy,  as  we  can  easily  prove.

Inq. — But  what  is  it  that  reincarnates^  in  your  belief?Inq. — But  what  is  it  that  reincarnates^  in  your  belief?

Theo. — The  spiritual,  thinking  Ego,  the  permanent  prin- 
ciple in  man,  or  that  which  is  the  seat  of  Manas.    It  is  not

108  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Atma,  or  even  Atma-Buddhi,  regarded  as  the  dual  monad, 
which  is  the  individual  or  divine  man,  but  Manas ;  for  At- 
man  is  the  Universal  All,  and  becomes  the  Higher  Self  of 
man  only  in  conjunction  with  Buddhi,  its  vehicle,  which 
Hnks  It  to  the  individuality  or  divine  man.  For  it  is  the 
Buddhi- Manas — the  united  fifth  and  sixth  principles — which 
is  called  the  Causal  Body  by  the  Vedantins,  and  which 
is  consciousness^  that  connects  It  with  every  personality  It 
inhabits  on  earth.  Therefore,  soul  being  a  generic  term, 
there  are  in  men  three  aspects  of  soul:  (i)  the  terrestrial 
or  animal;  (2)  the  human  soul;  and  (3)  the  spiritual  soul; 
these,  strictly  speaking,  are  one  soul  in  its  three  aspects. 
Now  of  the  first  aspect  nothing  remains  after  death;  of 
the  second,  nous  or  Manas,  only  its  divine  essence,  if  left 
u7isoiled,  siurvives ;  while  the  third,  in  addition  to  being  im- 
mortal, becomes  consciously  divine,  by  the  assimilation  of 
the  higher  Manas.  But  to  make  it  clear  we  have  to  say  a 
few  words  first  of  all  about  reincarnation.

Inq. —  You  will  do  well,  as  it  is  agaifist  this  doctrine  that 
your  eneinies  fight  the  most  ferociously,Inq. —  You  will  do  well,  as  it  is  agaifist  this  doctrine  that 
your  eneinies  fight  the  most  ferociously,

Theo. — You  mean  the  Spiritualists  ?  I  know ;  and  many 
are  the  absurd  objections  laboriously  spun  by  them  over 
the  pages  of  their  journals.  So  obtuse  and  malicious  are 
some  of  them  that  they  will  stop  at  nothing.  One  of  them 
recently  found  a  contradiction — which  he  gravely  dis- 
cusses in  a  letter  to  Light — in  two  statements  picked  out 
of  Mr.  Sinnett's  lectures.  He  discovers  this  grave  contra- 
diction in  the  two  sentences :  '^  Premature  returns  to  earth- 
life,  in  the  cases  when  they  occur,  may  be  due  to  karmic 
complication ; "  and  "  There  is  no  accident  in  the  supreme 
act  of  divine  justice  guiding  evolution."  So  profound  a 
thinker  would  surely  see  a  contradiction  of  the  law  of 
gravitation  if  a  man  stretched  out  his  hand  to  stop  a  fall- 
ing stone  from  crushing  the  head  of  a  child  !

VIII. 
ON  REINCARNATION  OR  REBIRTH.

WHAT  IS  MEMORY  ACCORDING    TO   THEOSOPHICAL 
TEACHING?

Inq. — The  pwst  difficiclt  thing  for  you  will  be  to  explain 
and  give  reasonable  groimds  for  such  a  belief  No  Theoso- 
phist  has  ever  yet  succeeded  in  bringing  forward  a  single  valid 
proof  to  shake  my  skepticism.  First  of  all ^  you  have  against 
this  theory  of  reincarnatio7i  the  fact  that  no  single  7nan  has  yet 
bee7i  found  to  reme77iber  that  he  has  livedo  least  of  all  who  he 
was  duri7ig  his  previous  life.

Theo. — Your  argument,  I  see,  tends  to  the  same  old 
objection :  the  loss  of  memory  in  each  of  us  of  our  previ- 
ous incarnation.     You  think  it  invalidates  our  doctrine  ? 
-  My  answer  is  that  it  does  not ;  or  that,  at  any  rate,  such 
an  objection  cannot  be  final.

Inq. — I  should  like  to  hear  your  argtcme7its.Inq. — I  should  like  to  hear  your  argtcme7its.

Theo. — They  are  short  and  few.  Yet  when  you  take 
into  consideration  the  utter  inability  of  the  best  modem 
psychologists  to  explain  to  the  world  the  nature  of  mind, 
and  their  complete  ignorance  of  its  potentiaHties  and  higher 
states,  you  have  to  admit  that  this  objection  is  based  on 
an  a  priori  conclusion  drawn  from  prima  facie  and  circum-

109

110  THE  KEY  TO    THEO SOPHY.

stantial  evidence  more  than  anything  else.     Now,  what  is 
memory  in  your  conception,  pray  ?

Inq. — That  which  the  generally  accepted  definition  ex- 
plains :  the  faculty  in  our  mind  of  reme??ibering  a?td  of  retain- 
i?ig  the  knowledge  of  previous  thoughts^  deeds  ^  and  events,

Theo. — Please  add  to  it  that  there  is  a  great  difference 
between  the  three  accepted  forms  of  memory.  Besides 
memory  in  general  you  have  reme?nbrance,  recollectio7t^  and 
reininiscence^  have  you  not  ?  Have  you  ever  thought  over 
the  difference  ?     Memory,  remember,  is  a  generic  name.

Inq. —  Yet^  all  these  are  o?ily  synonyms,

Theo. — Indeed,  they  are  not — not  in  philosophy,  at  all 
events.  Memory  is  simply  an  innate  power  in  thinking 
beings,  and  even  in  animals,  of  reproducing  past  impres- 
sions by  an  association  of  ideas  principally  suggested  by 
objective  things  or  by  some  action  on  our  external  sensory 
organs.  Memory  is  a  faculty  depending  entirely  on  the 
more  or  less  healthy  and  normal  functioning  of  our  phys- 
ical brain ;  and  remembrance  and  recollectio7i  are  the  attri- 
butes and  handmaidens  of  this  memory.  But  re7niniscence 
is  an  entirely  different  thing.  Reminiscence  is  defined  by 
the  modem  psychologist  as  something  intermediate  be- 
tween remembrance  and  recollection,  or :A  conscious  process  of  recalling  past  occurrences,  but  without  thai, 
full  and  varied  reference  to  particular  things  which  characterizes  recoU 
lection.

Locke,  speaking  of  recollection  and  remembrance,  says:

When  an  idea  again  recurs  without  the  operation  of  the  like  object 
on  the  external  sensory,  it  is  remembrance  ;  if  it  be  sought  after  by  the 
mind,  and  with  pain  and  endeavor  found  and  brought  again  into  view, 
it  is  recollection.

But  even  Locke  leaves  reminiscence  without  any  clear 
definition,  because  it  is  no  faculty  or  attribute  of  our  phys-

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  111

ical  memory,  but  an  intuitional  perception  apart  from  and 
outside  our  physical  brain  ;  a  perception  which,  being  called 
into  action  by  the  ever-present  knowledge  of  our  spiritual 
Ego,  covers  all  those  visions  in  man  which  are  regarded 
as  abnormal — from  the  pictures  suggested  by  genius  to 
the  ravings  of  fever  and  even  madness — and  are  classed 
by  science  as  having  no  existence  outside  of  our  fancy. 
Occultism  and  Theosophy,  however,  regard  reminiscence 
in  an  entirely  different  hght.  For  us,  while  memory  is 
physical  and  evanescent,  and  depends  on  the  physiological 
conditions  of  the  brain — a  fundamental  proposition  with  all 
teachers  of  mnemonics,  who  have  the  researches  of  modem 
scientific  psychologists  to  back  them — reminiscence  is  the 
memory  of  the  soul.  And  it  is  this  memory  which  gives 
the  assurance  to  almost  every  human  being,  whether  he 
understands  it  or  not,  of  his  having  lived  before  and  hav- 
ing to  live  again.     Indeed,  as  Wordsworth  has  it :

Our  birth  is  but  a  sleep  and  a  forgetting ;

The  Soul  that  rises  with  us,  our  life's  Star, 
Hath  had  elsewhere  its  setting,

And  Cometh  from  afar.Our  birth  is  but  a  sleep  and  a  forgetting ;

The  Soul  that  rises  with  us,  our  life's  Star, 
Hath  had  elsewhere  its  setting,

And  Cometh  from  afar.

Inq. — If  it  is  071  this  kind  of  memory — -poetry  and  abnormal 
fancies^  o?t  your  own  co7ifession — that  you  base  your  doctrine^ 
then  you  will  convince  very  few^  I  am  afraid.

Theo. — I  did  not  confess  it  was  a  fancy.  I  simply  said 
that  physiologists  and  scientists  in  general  regard  such  remi- 
niscences as  hallucinations  and  fancy,  to  which  *'  learned  " 
conclusion  they  are  welcome.  We  do  not  deny  that  such 
visions  of  the  past  and  glimpses  far  back  into  the  corridors 
of  time  are  abnormal,  as  contrasted  with  our  normal  daily 
life  experience  and  physical  memory.  But  we  do  maintain, 
with  Professor  W.  Knight,  that  ''the  absence  of  memory 
of  any  action  done  in  a  previous  state  cannot  be  a  conclu- 
sive argument  against  our  having  lived  through  it."     And

112  THE  KEY   TO    TIIEOSOFHY.112  THE  KEY   TO    TIIEOSOFHY.

every  fair-minded  opponent  must  agree  with  what  is  said 
in  Butler's  Lectures  on  Platonic  Philosophy^  "  that  the  feel- 
ing of  extravagance  with  which  it  [preexistencej  affects  us 
has  its  secret  source  in  materiaHstic  or  semi-materiaUstic 
prejudices."  Besides  which,  we  maintain  that  memory  is, 
as  Olympiodorus  called  it,  simply  ''  fantasy,"  *  and  the 
most  unreliable  thing  in  us.  Ammonius  Saccas  asserted 
that  the  only  faculty  in  man  directly  opposed  to  prognosti- 
cation, or  looking  into  futurity,  is  memory.  Furthermore, 
remember  that  memory  is  one  thing  and  mind  or  thought 
is  another :  memory  is  a  recording  machine,  a  register  which 
very  easily  gets  out  of  order ;  but  thoughts  are  eternal  and 
imperishable.  Would  you  refuse  to  believe  in  the  existence 
of  certain  things  or  men  only  because  your  physical  eyes 
have  not  seen  them  ?  Would  not  the  collective  testimony 
of  past  generations  who  have  seen  Julius  Csesar  be  a  suffi- 
cient guaranty  that  he  once  lived  ?  Why  should  not  the 
same  testimony  of  the  psychic  senses  of  the  masses  be 
taken  into  consideration  ?

Inq. — But  do  yoti  not  think  that  these  are  too  fine  distiiic- 
tions  to  he  accepted  by  the  majority  of  mortals  ?

Theo. — Say,  rather,  by  the  majority  of  materialists. 
And  to  them  we  say:  Behold,  even  in  the  short  span  of 
ordinary  existence  memory  is  too  weak  to  register  all  the 
events  of  a  lifetime.  How  frequently  do  even  most  im- 
portant events  lie  dormant  in  our  memory  until  awakened 
by  some  association  of  ideas,  or  aroused  to  function  and 
activity  by  some  other  link!      This  is  especially  the  case*  "The  fantasy,"  says  Olympiodorus,  in  Plato's  Phcedo,  "is  an  impediment  to 
our  intellectual  conceptions ;  and  hence,  when  we  are  agitated  by  the  inspiring  influ- 
ence of  the  Divinity,  if  the  fantasy  intervenes,  the  enthusiastic  energy  ceases;  for 
enthusiasm  and  the  ecstasy  are  contrary  to  each  other.  Should  it  be  asked  whether 
the  soul  is  able  to  energize  without  the  fantasy,  we  reply  that  its  perception  of  uni- 
versal proves  that  it  is  able.  It  has  perceptions,  therefore,  independent  of  the  fan- 
tasy ;  at  the  same  time,  however,  the  fantasy  attends  in  its  energies,  just  as  a  storm 
pursues  him  who  sails  on  the  sea."

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  113

with  people  of  advanced  age,  who  are  always  found  suffer- 
ing from  feebleness  of  recollection.  When,  then,  we  bear 
in  mind  what  we  know  about  the  physical  and  the  spiritual 
principles  in  man,  it  is  not  the  fact  that  our  memory  has 
failed  to  record  our  precedent  hfe  and  Uves  that  ought  to 
surprise  us,  but  the  contrary,  were  it  to  happen.

WHY  DO    WE  NOT  REMEMBER    OUR  PAST  LIVES?

Inq. —  Yoii  have  given  me  a  bird^s-eye  view  of  the  seven 
principles.  How  do  you  account  for  our  complete  loss  of  any 
recollection  of  having  lived  before^  in  the  light  of  what  you 
have  said  concerning  these  principles  ?Theo. — Very  easily.  Those  principles  which  we  call 
physical  *  are  disintegrated  after  death  together  with  their 
constituent  elements,  and  memory  along  with  the  brain. 
This  vanished  memory  of  a  vanished  personality  can  con- 
sequently neither  remember  nor  record  anything  in  the  sub- 
sequent reincarnation  of  the  Ego.  Reincarnation  means 
that  the  Ego  will  be  furnished  with  a  new  body,  a  new  brain, 
and  a  7iew  memory.  Therefore  it  would  be  as  absurd  to 
expect  this  new  memory  to  remember  that  which  it  has 
never  recorded  as  it  would  be  to  examine  under  a  micro- 
scope a  shirt  which  had  never  been  worn  by  a  murderer, 
and  seek  on  it  for  the  stains  of  blood  which  are  to  be  found 
only  on  the  clothes  he  has  worn.  It  is  not  the  clean  shirt 
that  we  have  to  question,  but  the  clothes  worn  during  the 
perpetration  of  the  crime ;  and  if  these  are  burned  and  de- 
stroyed, how  can  you  get  at  them  ?

*  Namely,  the  body,  life,  passional  and  animal  instincts,  and  the  astral  eidolon  of 
every  man,  whether  perceived  in  thought  or  our  mind's  eye,  or  objectively  and  sepa- 
rate from  the  physical  body  ;  which  principles  we  call  Sthula  Sharira,  Prana,  Kama 
Rupa,  and  Linga  Sharira.  None  of  these  is  denied  by  science,  though  it  calls  them 
by  different  names.

114  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

Inq. — Aye^  how  can  yon  get  at  the  certainty  that  the  crime 
was  ever  conunitted  at  all,  or  that  the  man  i7i  the  cleaii  shirt 
ever  lived  before  ?Inq. — Aye^  how  can  yon  get  at  the  certainty  that  the  crime 
was  ever  conunitted  at  all,  or  that  the  man  i7i  the  cleaii  shirt 
ever  lived  before  ?

Theo. — Not  by  physical  processes,  most  assuredly,  nor 
by  relying  on  the  testimony  of  that  which  exists  no  longer. 
But  there  is  such  a  thing  as  circumstantial  evidence,  since 
our  wise  laws  accept  it,  more,  perhaps,  even  than  they 
should.  To  get  convinced  of  the  fact  of  reincarnation  and 
past  hves,  one  must  put  one's  self  eii  7'apport  with  one's  real 
permanent  Ego,  not  with  one's  evanescent  memory.

Inq. — But  how  caii  people  believe  in  that  which  they  do  not 
know,  nor  have  ever  seen,  far  less  put  themselves  e?i  rapport 
with  it?

Theo. — If  people,  and  they  the  most  learned,  will  be- 
lieve in  the  ''gravity,"  ''ether,"  "force,"  and  what  not  of 
science — abstractions  and  working  hypotheses  which  they 
have  neither  seen,  touched,  smelled,  heard,  nor  tasted — why 
should  not  other  people  believe,  on  the  same  principle,  in 
the  permanent  Ego,  a  far  more  logical  and  important 
*'  working  hypothesis  "  than  any  other  ?

Inq. —  What  is,  finally,  this  mysterious  eternal  principle  ? 
Can  you  explain  its  nature  so  as  to  7?iake  it  compreheiisible  to 
all?

Theo. — The  Ego  which  reincarnates  is  the  individual — 
not  personal — and  immortal  "  I  "  ;  the  vehicle,  in  short,  of 
the  Atma-Buddhic  monad ;  that  which  is  rewarded  in  De- 
vachan  and  punished  on  earth ;  and  that,  finally,  to  which 
the  reflection  only  of  the  skandhas,  or  attributes,*  of  every 
incarnation  attaches  itself.*  There  are  five  skandhas y  or  attributes,  in  the  Buddhist  teachings :  **  riipa  [form  or 
body],  material  qualities;  vedaiLa^  sensation:  sauna,  abstract  ideas ;  sanikhara^  ten- 
dencies of  mind  ;  z'innana,  mental  powers.  Of  these  we  are  formed  ;  by  them  we  are 
conscious  of  existence ;  and  through  them  communicate  with  the  world  about  us."

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  115

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  by  skandhas?

Theo. — Just  what  I  said — ''  attributes,"  among  which  is 
memory.  All  of  these  perish  like  a  flower,  leaving  behind 
them  only  a  feeble  perfume.  Here  is  another  paragraph 
from  Colonel  H.  S.  Olcott's  Bitddhist  Catechism^^  which 
bears  directly  upon  the  subject.  It  deals  with  the  ques- 
tion as  follows :

The  aged  man  remembers  the  incidents  of  his  youth,  despite  his 
being  physically  and  mentally  changed.  Why,  then,  is  not  the  recol- 
lection of  past  lives  brought  over  by  us  from  our  last  birth  into  the 
present  birth?

Because  memory  is  included  within  the  skandhas,  and  the  skandhas 
having  changed  with  the  new  existence,  a  memory,  the  record  of  that 
particular  existence,  develops.  Yet  the  record  or  reflection  of  all  the 
past  lives  must  survive ;  for,  when  Prince  Siddhartha  became  Buddha, 
the  full  sequence  of  his  previous  births  was  seen  by  him.  .  .  .  And 
any  one  who  attains  to  the  state  oijhana  can  thus  retrospectively  trace 
the  line  of  his  lives.This  proves  to  you  that  while  the  undying  qualities  of  the 
personahty — such  as  love,  goodness,  charity,  etc. — attach 
themselves  to  the  immortal  Ego,  photographing  on  it,  so 
to  speak,  a  permanent  image  of  the  divine  aspect  of  the 
man  who  was,  his  material  skandhas — those  which  gener- 
ate the  most  marked  karmic  effects — are  as  evanescent  as 
a  flash  of  lightning,  and  cannot  impress  the  new  brain  of 
the  new  personality;  yet  their  failing  to  do  so  impairs  in 
no  way  the  identity  of  the  reincarnating  Ego.

Inq. — Do  you  mean  to  infer  that  that  which  survives  is 
oftly  the  soul-memory,  as  you  call  it,  that  soul  or  Ego  being 
07ie  and  the  sa?ne,  while  nothing  of  the  perso?iality  re?nains  ?

Theo. — Not  quite ;  something  of  each  personality — un- 
less the  latter  was  an  absolute  materialist,  with  not  even  a

*  By  Henry  S.  Olcott,  president  and  founder  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  The 
accuracy  of  the  teaching  is  sanctioned  by  the  Rev.  H.  Sumangala,  high  priest  of  the 
Sripada  and  Galle,  and  principal  of  the  Widyodaya  Parivena  (College)  at  Colombo, 
as  being  in  agreement  with  the  Canon  of  the  Southern  Buddhist  Church.

116  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

chink  in  his  nature  for  a  spiritual  ray  to  pass  through — 
must  survive,  as  it  leaves  its  eternal  impress  on  the  incar- 
nating permanent  Self  or  spiritual  Ego.*  The  personality, 
with  its  ska?idhas,  is  ever  changing  with  every  new  birth. 
It  is,  as  said  before,  only  the  part  played  by  the  actor,  the 
true  Ego,  for  one  night.  This  is  why  we  preserve  no 
memory  on  the  physical  plane  of  our  past  hves,  though  the 
real  Ego  has  lived  them  over  and  knows  them  all.Inq. — Then  how  does  it  happen  that  the  real  or  spiritual 
man  does  not  impress  his  new  personal ''/"  with  this  know- 
ledge ?

Theo. — How  is  it  that  the  servant-girls  in  a  poor  farm- 
house could  speak  Hebrew  and  play  the  violin  in  their 
trance  or  somnambulic  state,  and  knew  neither  when  in 
their  normal  condition  ?  Because,  as  every  genuine  psy- 
chologist of  the  old — not  yoiu-  modern — school  will  tell 
you,  the  spiritual  Ego  can  act  only  when  the  personal  Ego 
is  paralyzed.  The  spiritual  ''  I  "  in  man  is  omniscient  and 
has  every  knowledge  innate  in  it,  while  the  personal  self  is 
the  creature  of  its  environment  and  the  slave  of  the  physical 
memory.  Could  the  former  manifest  itself  uninterruptedly 
and  without  impediment,  there  would  be  no  longer  men  on 
earth,  but  we  should  all  be  Gods.

Inq. — Still  there  ought  to  be  exceptions^  and  some  ought  to 
remember.

Theo. — x\nd  so  they  do.  But  who  believes  in  their  re- 
port ?  Such  sensitives  are  generally  regarded  as  halluci- 
nated hysteriacs,  as  crack-brained  enthusiasts  or  humbugs, 
by  modern  materialists.  Let  them  read,  however,  works 
on  this  subject,  preeminently  Reincarnation :  A  Study  of  For-

*  Or  the  spiritual  in  contradistinction  to  the  personal  self.  The  student  must  not 
confuse  this  spiritual  Ego^  with  the  Higher  Self,  which  is  Atma,  the  God  within  us, 
and  inseparable  from  the  Universal  Spirit.  (See  Section  IX.,  *•  On  Post-mortem  and 
Postnatal  Consciousness.")

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  117THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  117

gotten  Truths  by  E.  D.  Walker,  F.T.S.,  and  see  in  it  the 
mass  of  proofs  which  the  able  author  brings  to  bear  on  this 
vexed  question.  Speak  to  some  people  of  soul,  and  they 
ask,  What  is  soul  ?  Have  you  ever  proved  its  existence  ? 
Of  course  it  is  useless  to  argue  with  those  who  are  mate- 
rialists. But  even  to  them  I  would  put  the  question,  Can 
you  remember  what  you  were  or  what  you  did  when  a  baby  ? 
Have  you  preserved  the  smallest  recollection  of  your  life, 
thoughts,  or  deeds,  or  that  you  Hved  at  all  diuring  the  first 
eighteen  months  or  two  years  of  your  existence  ?  Then 
why  not  deny  that  you  have  ever  Hved  as  a  babe,  on  the 
same  principle  ?  When  to  all  this  we  add  that  the  reincar- 
nating Ego,  or  individuality,  retains  during  the  devachanic 
period  merely  the  essence  of  the  experience  of  its  past  earth- 
life  or  personality,  the  whole  physical  experience  involving 
into  a  state  of  i7i  potentid^  or  being,  so  to  speak,  translated 
into  spiritual  formulae  ;  when  we  remember,  further,  that  the 
term  between  two  rebirths  is  said  to  extend  from  ten  to 
fifteen  centuries — during  which  the  physical  consciousness 
is  totally  and  absolutely  inactive,  having  no  organs  to  act 
through,  and  therefore  no  existence — the  reason  for  the 
absence  of  all  remembrance  in  the  purely  physical  memory 
is  apparent.

Inq. —  You  just  said  that  the  spiritual  Ego  was  omniscient. 
Where ^  then,  is  that  vaunted  omniscience  during  its  devachanic 
life,  as  you  call  it  ?Inq. —  You  just  said  that  the  spiritual  Ego  was  omniscient. 
Where ^  then,  is  that  vaunted  omniscience  during  its  devachanic 
life,  as  you  call  it  ?

Theo. — During  that  time  it  is  latent  and  potential,  be- 
cause, first  of  all,  the  spiritual  Ego,  the  compound  of  Eud- 
dhi-Manas,  is  not  the  Higher  Self,  which,  being  one  with 
the  Universal  Soul  or  Mind,  is  alone  omniscient ;  and,  sec- 
ondly, because  Devachan  is  the  idealized  continuation  of 
the  terrestrial  life  just  left  behind,  a  period  of  retributive 
adjustment,  and  a  reward  for  unmerited  wrongs  and  suffer- 
ings undergone  in  that  special  life.     The  spiritual  Ego  is

118  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,118  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

omniscient  only  potentially  in  Devachan;  it  enjoys  actual 
omniscience  in  Nirvana  alone,  when  the  Ego  is  merged  in 
the  Universal  Mind-Soul.  Nevertheless  the  Ego  re-becomes 
quasi-omniscient  during  those  hours  on  earth  when  certain 
abnormal  conditions  and  physiological  changes  in  the  body 
make  it  free  from  the  trammels  of  matter.  Thus  the  exam- 
ples cited  above  of  somnambulists — a  poor  servant  speak- 
ing Hebrew,  and  another  playing  the  violin — give  you  an 
illustration  of  the  case  in  point.  This  does  not  mean  that 
the  explanations  of  these  two  facts  offered  us  by  medical 
science  have  no  truth  in  them,  for  one  girl  had,  years  be- 
fore, heard  her  master,  a  clergyman,  read  Hebrew  works 
aloud,  and  the  other  had  heard  an  artist  playing  a  violin  at 
their  farm.  But  neither  could  have  done  so  as  perfectly  as 
they  did  had  they  not  been  ensouled  by  That  which,  owing 
to  the  sameness  of  its  nature  with  the  Universal  Mind,  is 
omniscient.  In  the  former  case  the  higher  principle  acted 
on  the  skandhas  and  moved  them ;  in  the  latter,  the  per- 
sonality being  paralyzed,  the  individuality  manifested  itself. 
Pray  do  not  confuse  the  two.

ON  INDIVIDUALITY  AND  PERSONALITY,

Inq. — But  what  is  the  difference  between  the  two  ?  I  con- 
fess that  I  am  still  in  the  dark.

Theo. — In  his  Buddhist  Catechism^  Colonel  Olcott,  forced 
by  the  logic  of  Esoteric  Philosophy,  found  himself  obliged 
to  correct  the  mistakes  of  previous  Orientalists  who  made 
no  such  distinction,  and  gives  the  reader  his  reasons  for  it 
as  follows :The  successive  appearances  upon  one  or  many  earths,  or  **  descents 
into  generation,"  of  the  tanhaically  coherent  parts  {skandhas)  of  a 
certain  being  are  a  succession  of  personalities.  In  each  birth  the 
personality  differs  from  that  of  the  previous  or  next  succeeding  birth. 
Karma,  the  deus  ex   machind,  masks    (or,  shall  w^e   say,  reflects?)

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  HdTHE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  Hd

itself  now  in  the  personality  of  a  sage,  again  as  an  artisan,  and  so  on 
throughout  the  string  of  births.  But  though  personalities  ever  shift, 
the  one  line  of  life  along  which  they  are  strung  like  beads  runs 
unbroken ;  it  is  ever  that  particular  line,  never  any  other.  It  is  there- 
fore individual,  an  individual  vital  undulation,  which  began  in  Nirvana, 
or  the  subjective  side  of  Nature,  as  the  light  or  heat  undulation  through 
ether  began  at  its  dynamic  source ;  is  careering  through  the  objective 
side  of  Nature  under  the  impulse  of  Karma  and  the  creative  direction 
of  tanha  [the  unsatisfied  desire  for  existence]  ;  and  leads  through 
many  cyclic  changes  back  to  Nirvana.  Mr.  Rhys-Da\ads  calls  that 
which  passes  from  personality  to  personality  along  the  individual 
chain  **  character  "  or  'Moing."  Since  ^'character"  is  not  a  mere 
metaphysical  abstraction,  but  the  sum  of  one's  mental  qualities  and 
moral  propensities,  w^ould  it  not  help  to  dispel  what  Mr.  Rhys-Davids 
calls  *'  the  desperate  expedient  of  a  mystery"  {Biiddhisjn,  p.  lOi),  if 
we  regarded  the  life-undulation  as  individuality,  and  each  of  its  series 
of  natal  manifestations  as  a  separate  personality?  The  perfect  individ- 
ual, Buddhistically  speaking,  is  a  Buddha,  I  should  say ;  for  Buddha 
is  but  the  rare  flower  of  humanity,  without  the  least  supernatural  ad- 
mixture. x\nd  as  countless  generations  (*'  four  asankheyyas  and  a 
hundred  thousand  cycles  " — FausboU  and  Rhys-Davids's  Buddhist 
Birth-Stories,  p.  13)  are  required  to  develop  a  man  into  a  Buddha, 
and  the  iron  will  to  become  one  runs  throughout  all  the  sticcessive 
births,  what  shall  we  call  that  which  thus  wills  and  perseveres? 
Character?  or  individuality — an  individuality  but  partly  manifested  in 
any  one  birth,  but  built  up  of  fragments  from  all  the  births  ?I  have  long  tried  to  impress  this  distinction  between  the 
individuality  and  personality  on  people's  minds;  but  alas! 
it  is  harder  with  some  than  to  make  them  feel  a  reverence 
for  childish  impossibilities,  only  because  they  are  orthodox, 
and  because  orthodoxy  is  respectable.  To  understand  the 
idea  well,  you  have  to  first  study  the  dual  sets  of  princi- 
ples :  the  spiritual,  or  those  which  belong  to  the  imperish- 
able Ego  ;  and  the  material,  or  those  principles  which  make 
up  the  ever-changing  bodies  or  the  series  of  personalities  of 
that  Ego.    Let  us  fix  permanent  names  to  these,  and  say  that :

I.      Atma,  the  Higher  Self,  is  neither  your  spirit  nor 
mine,  but,  like  sunlight,  shines  on  all.    It  is  the  uni-

120  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,I.      Atma,  the  Higher  Self,  is  neither  your  spirit  nor 
mine,  but,  like  sunlight,  shines  on  all.    It  is  the  uni-

120  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

versally  diffused  Divine  Principle,  and  is  inseparable 
from  its  one  and  absolute  superspirit,  as  the  sun- 
beam is  inseparable  from  sunlight. 
II.  Buddhi,  the  spiritual  soul,  is  only  its  vehicle. 
Neither  Atma  nor  Buddhi  separately,  nor  the  two 
collectively,  are  of  any  more  use  to  the  body  of 
man  than  sunlight  and  its  beams  are  for  a  mass  of 
granite  buried  in  the  earth,  unless  the  divine  duad 
is  assimilated  by,  and  reflected  in,  some  conscious- 
ness. Neither  Atma  nor  Buddhi  is  ever  reached 
by  Karma,  because  the  former  is  the  highest  aspect 
of  Karma,  the  working  agent  of  Itself  in  one  aspect, 
and  the  latter  is  unconscious  07i  this  plaiie.  This 
consciousness  or  mind  is 
III.  Manas,*  the  derivation  or  product,  in  a  reflected 
form,  of  ahainkdra^  ^^the  conception  of  I"  or  '^Ego- 
ship."  It  is  therefore,  when  inseparably  united  to 
the  first  two,  called  the  spiritual  Ego,  and  taijasa^ 
the  radiant.  This  is  the  real  individuality,  or  the 
divine  man.  It  is  this  Ego  which — having  origi- 
nally incarnated  in  the  senseless  human  form  ani- 
mated by,  but  unconscious  of,  the  presence  in  itself 
of  the  dual  monad,  since  it  had  no  consciousness — 
made  of  that  human-like  form  a  real  man.  It  is  this 
Ego,  this  ''  causal  body,"  which  overshadows  every 
personality  into  which  Karma  forces  it  to  incarnate. 
It  is  this  Ego  which  is  held  responsible  for  all  the 
sins  committed  through  and  in  every  new  body  or 
personality — the  evanescent  masks  which  hide  the 
true  individual  through  the  long  series  of  rebirths.*  Makat,  or  the  universal  mind,  is  the  source  of  Manas.  The  latter  is  makai,  i.e., 
mind  in  man.  Manas  is  also  called  kshefrajna,  embodied  spirit,  because  it  is,  accord- 
ing to  our  philosophy,  the  mdnasa-Putras,  or  "sons  of  the  universal  mind,"  who 
created,  or  rather  produced,  the  thinking  man,  vianu,  by  incarnating  in  the  third, 
race  mankind  in  our  Round.  It  is  Manas,  therefore,  which  is  the  real  incarnating 
and  permanent  spiritual  Ego,  the  individuality,  and  our  various  and  numberless  per- 
sonalities only  its  external  masks.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  121

Inq. — But  is  this  Just  ?  Why  should  this  Ego  receive  pun- 
ishment as  the  result  of  deeds  which  it  has  forgotten  ?

Theo. — It  has  not  forgotten  them;  it  knows  and  re- 
members its  misdeeds  as  well  as  you  remember  what  you 
did  yesterday.  Is  it  because  the  memory  of  that  bundle 
of  physical  compounds  called  ''  body  "  does  not  recollect 
what  its  predecessor,  the  personality  that  was,  did,  that  you 
imagine  that  the  real  Ego  has  forgotten  them  ?  As  well 
say  it  is  unjust  that  the  new  coat  on  the  back  of  a  boy  who 
is  flogged  for  stealing  apples  should  be  punished  for  that 
of  which  it  knows  nothing.

Inq. — But  a7r  there  no  modes  of  communication  between 
the  spiritual  a?id  human  co?isciousness  or  ??ie77wry  ?Inq. — But  a7r  there  no  modes  of  communication  between 
the  spiritual  a?id  human  co?isciousness  or  ??ie77wry  ?

Theo. — Of  course  there  are ;  but  they  have  never  been 
recognized  by  your  modern  scientific  psychologists.  To 
what  do  you  attribute  intuition,  the  ''  voice  of  conscience,'* 
premonitions,  vague,  undefined  reminiscences,  etc.,  if  not 
to  such  communications  ?  Would  that  the  majority  of 
educated  men,  at  least,  had  the  fine  spiritual  perceptions 
of  Coleridge,  who  shows  how  intuitional  he  is  in  some  of 
his  comments.  Hear  what  he  says  with  respect  to  the 
probabiHty  that  "  all  thoughts  are  in  themselves  imperish- 
able " :

If  the  intelligent  faculty  [sudden  *'  revivals  "  of  memory]  should  be 
rendered  more  comprehensive,  it  would  require  only  a  different  and  ap- 
propriate organization — the  body  celestial  instead  of  the  body  terrestrial 
— to  bring  before  every  human  soul  the  collective  experience  of  its  whole 
past  existence  {existences,  rather] .

And  this  body  celestial  is  our  manasic  Ego.

122  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

ON  THE  REWARD  AND  PUNISHMENT  OF  THE  EGO,

Inq. — I  have  heard  you  say  that  the  EgOy  whatever  the  life 
of  the  person  he  i7icar7iated  m  may  have  been  07i  earthy  is  never 
visited  with  post-mortem  punish7nent,

Theo. — Never,  save  in  very  exceptional  and  rare  cases, 
of  which  we  will  not  speak  here,  as  the  nature  of  the 
"  punishment "  in  no  way  approaches  any  of  your  theolog- 
ical conceptions  of  damnation.

Inq. — But  if  the  Ego  is  punished  i7i  this  life  for  the  77iis- 
deeds  committed  i7i  previous  lives ^  then  it  ought  to  be  rewarded 
also,  whether  here  or  whe7i  disincar7iated,Theo. — And  so  it  is.  If  we  do  not  admit  of  any  punish- 
ment outside  of  this  earth,  it  is  because  the  only  state  the 
spiritual  Self  knows  of  hereafter  is  that  of  unalloyed  bliss.

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  ?

Theo. — Simply  this :  crimes  and  sins  committed  on  a  plane 
of  objectivity  and  in  a  world  of  matter  cannot  receive  punish- 
ment in  a  world  of  pure  subjectivity.  We  believe  in  no  hell 
or  paradise  as  locahties;  in  no  objective  hell-fires  and 
worms  that  never  die,  nor  in  any  Jerusalems  with  streets 
paved  with  sapphires  and  diamonds.  What  we  believe  in 
is  a  post-mortem  state  or  mental  condition  such  as  we  are 
in  during  a  vivid  dream.  AVe  beHeve  in  an  immutable  law 
of  absolute  Love,  Justice,  and  Mercy.  And  believing  in 
it,  we  say:  Whatever  was  the  sin  and  whatever  were  the 
dire  results  of  the  original  karmic  transgression  of  the  now 
incarnated  Egos,*  no  man — or  the  outer  material  and  peri-

*  It  is  on  this  transgression  that  the  cruel  and  illogical  dogma  of  the  **  fallen  angels  " 
has  been  built,  which  is  explained  in  the  second  volume  of  The  Secret  Doctrhte.  All 
our  Egos  are  thinking  and  rational  entities  {mdtiasa-ptitras)  who  had  lived,  whether 
under  human  or  other  forms,  in  the  precedent  life-cycle  {7na?tvantara),  and  whose 
Karma  it  was  to  incarnate  in  the  man  of  this  one.  It  was  taught  in  the  Mysteries 
that,  having  delayed  in  complying  with  this  law  (or  having  **  refused  to  create,"  as

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  123THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  123

odical  form  of  the  spiritual  entity — can  be  held,  with  any 
degree  of  justice,  responsible  for  the  consequences  of  his 
birth.  He  does  not  ask  to  be  born,  nor  can  he  choose  the 
parents  that  will  ^\w^  him  hfe.  In  every  respect  he  is  a 
victim  to  his  environment,  the  child  of  circumstances  over 
which  he  has  no  control ;  and  if  each  of  his  transgressions 
were  impartially  investigated,  it  would  be  found  that  in 
nine  out  of  every  ten  cases  he  was  the  one  sinned  against, 
rather  than  the  sinner.  Life  is  at  best  a  heartless  play,  a 
stormy  sea  to  cross,  and  a  heavy  burden  often  too  difficult 
to  bear.  The  greatest  philosophers  have  tried  in  vain  to 
fathom  and  find  out  its  raison  d^efre,  and — except  those 
who  had  the  key  to  it,  namely,  the  Eastern  sages — have 
all  failed.     Life  is,  as  Shakespeare  describes  it :

.   .   .  but  a  walking  shadow — a  poor  player, 
That  struts  and  frets  his  hour  upon  the  stage, 
And  then  is  heard  no  more.     It  is  a  tale 
Told  by  an  idiot,  full  of  sound  and  fury, 
Signifying  nothing —nothing  in  its  separate  parts,  yet  of  the  greatest  importance 
in  its  collectivity  or  series  of  lives.  In  any  case,  almost 
every  individual  life  is,  in  its  fall  development,  a  sorrow. 
And  are  we  to  beheve  that  poor  helpless  man,  after  being 
tossed  about  hke  a  piece  of  rotten  timber  on  the  angry  bil- 
lows of  life,  is,  if  he  proves  too  weak  to  resist  them,  to  be 
punished  by  a  sempiternity  of  damnation,  or  even  a  tempo- 
rary punishment  ?  Never  !  Whether  a  great  or  an  aver- 
age sinner,  good  or  bad,  guilty  or  innocent,  once  delivered 
of  the  burden  of  physical  hfe,  the  tired  and  worn-out  7nanu, 
or  ''  thinking  Ego,"  has  won  the  right  to  a  period  of  abso-

Hind^ism  says  of  the  kumdras  and  Christian  legend  of  the  archangel  Michael) — i.e., 
having  failed  to  incarnate  in  due  time — the  bodies  predestined  for  them  became  defiled. 
Hence  the  original  sin  of  the  senseless  forms  and  the  punishment  of  the  Egos.  What 
is  meant  by  the  rebellious  angels  being  hurled  down  into  hell  is  simply  explained  by 
these  pure  spirits  or  Egos  being  imprisoned  in  bodies  of  unclean  matter,  flesh.

124  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.124  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

lute  rest  and  bliss.  The  same  unerringly  wise  and  just, 
rather  than  merciful,  Law  which  inflicts  upon  the  incarnated 
Ego  the  karmic  punishment  for  every  sin  committed  dur- 
ing the  preceding  life  on  earth  has  provided  for  the  now 
disembodied  entity  a  long  lease  of  mental  rest,  and  the  en- 
tire oblivion  of  every  sad  event — aye,  to  the  smallest  pain- 
ful thought — that  took  place  in  its  last  life  as  a  personality, 
leaving  in  the  soul-memory  nothing  but  the  reminiscence 
of  that  which  was  bhss,  or  which  led  to  happiness.  Plo- 
tinus,  who  said  that  our  body  was  the  true  river  of  Lethe, 
for  ''souls  plunged  into  it  forget  all,"  meant  more  than  he 
said.  For,  as  our  terrestrial  body  on  earth  is  like  Lethe, 
so  is  our  celestial  body  in  Devachan,  and  much  more.

Inq. —  Then  a?n  I  to  imderstand  that  the  murderer^  the 
transgressor  of  law  divi7ie  aiid  hionan  iii  every  shape ^  is  al- 
lowed to  go  U7ipu7iished  ?

Theo. — Who  ever  said  that  ?  Our  philosophy  has  a 
doctrine  of  punishment  as  stern  as  that  of  the  most  rigid 
Calvinist,  only  far  more  philosophical  and  consistent  with 
absolute  justice.  No  deed,  no  sinful  thought  even,  will 
go  unpunished.  In  fact,  the  latter  are  even  more  severely 
punished  than  the  former,  as  a  thought  is  far  more  potent 
in  creating  evil  results  than  deeds.*  We  believe  in  an  un- 
erring law  of  retribution,  called  Karma,  which  asserts  itself 
in  a  natural  concatenation  of  causes  and  their  unavoidable 
results.

Inq. — A7id  how,  or  whe7r,  does  it  act  ?Inq. — A7id  how,  or  whe7r,  does  it  act  ?

Theo. — Every  laborer  is  worthy  of  his  hire,  saith  Wis- 
dom in  the  gospel ;  every  action,  good  or  bad,  is  a  prolific 
parent,  saith  the  Wisdom  of  the  Ages.  Put  the  two  to- 
gether and  you  will  find  the  "why."     After  allowing  the

*  **But  I  say  unto  you,  That  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her  hath 
committed  adultery  with  her  already  in  his  heart."     (Matt.  v.  28.)

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  125

soul,  when  escaped  from  the  pangs  of  personal  life,  a  sufS- 
cient — aye,  a  hundredfold — compensation,  Karma,  with  its 
army  of  skandhas,  waits  at  the  threshold  of  Devachan, 
whence  the  Ego  reemerges  to  assume  a  new  incarnation. 
It  is  at  this  moment  that  the  future  destiny  of  the  now 
rested  Ego  trembles  in  the  scales  of  just  retribution,  as  // 
now  falls  once  again  under  the  sway  of  active  karmic  law. 
It  is  in  this  rebirth  which  is  ready  for  // — a  rebirth  selected 
and  prepared  by  this  mysterious,  inexorable,  but,  in  the 
equity  and  wisdom  of  its  decrees,  infallible  Law — that  the 
sins  of  the  previous  life  of  the  Ego  are  punished.  Only  it 
is  into  no  imaginary  hell,  with  theatrical  flames  and  ridic- 
ulous tailed  and  horned  devils,  that  the  Ego  is  cast,  but 
verily  onto  this  earth,  the  plane  and  region  of  his  sins, 
where  he  will  have  to  atone  for  every  bad  thought  and 
deed.  As  he  has  sown,  so  will  he  reap.  Reincarnation 
will  gather  round  him  all  those  other  Egos  who  have  suf- 
fered, whether  directly  or  indirectly,  at  the  hands,  or  even 
through  the  unconscious  instrumentality,  of  the  past  person- 
ality. They  will  be  thrown  by  Nemesis  in  the  way  of  the 
new  man,  concealing  the  old,  the  eternal  Ego,  and  .   .  .Inq. — But  where  is  the  equity  you  speak  of,  siiice  these  new 
personalities  are  not  awa7'e  of  having  sinned  or  beeii  si?27ied 
against  ?

Theo. — Has  the  coat  torn  to  shreds  from  the  back  of  the 
man  who  stole  it,  by  another  man  who  was  robbed  of  it 
and  recognizes  his  property,  to  be  regarded  as  fairly  dealt 
with  ?  The  new  person ahty  is  no  better  than  a  fresh  suit 
of  clothes,  with  its  specific  characteristics,  color,  form,  and 
quahties ;  but  the  real  man  who  wears  it  is  the  same  cul- 
prit as  of  old.  It  is  the  individuality  which  suffers  through 
its  personality.  And  it  is  this,  and  this  alone,  that  can  ac- 
count for  the  terrible  seeming  injustice  in  the  distribution  of 
lots  in  life  to  man.     When  your  modern  philosophers  will

126  THE  KEY  TO    THE 0 SOPHY,

have  succeeded  in  showing  us  good  reason  why  so  many 
apparently  innocent  and  good  men  are  born  only  to  suffer 
during  a  whole  lifetime ;  why  so  many  are  born  poor  unto 
starvation  in  the  slums  of  great  cities,  abandoned  by  fate 
and  men ;  why,  while  these  are  born  in  the  gutter,  others 
open  their  eyes  to  the  light  in  palaces ;  why  a  noble  birth 
and  fortune  seem  often  given  to  the  worst  of  men  and  only 
rarely  to  the  worthy;  why  there  are  beggars  whose  i7tner 
selves  are  peers  to  the  highest  and  noblest  of  men — when 
this,  and  much  more,  is  satisfactorily  explained  by  either 
your  philosophers  or  theologians,  then  only,  but  not  till 
then,  you  will  have  the  right  to  reject  the  theory  of  rein- 
carnation. The  highest  and  grandest  poets  have  dimly 
perceived  this  truth  of  truths.  Shelley  believed  in  it; 
Shakespeare  must  have  thought  of  it  when  writing  on  the 
worthlessness  of  birth.     Remember  his  words :Why  should  my  birth  keep  down  my  mounting  spirit? 
Are  not  all  creatures  subject  unto  time? 
There's  legions  now  of  beggars  on  the  earth, 
That  their  original  did  spring  from  kings, 
And  many  monarchs  now,  whose  fathers  were 
The  riffraff  of  their  age.

Alter  the  word  '*  fathers  "  into  Egos,  and  you  will  have  the 
truth.

IX. 
ON  KAMALOKA  AND  DEVACHAN.

ON  THE  FATE   OF   THE  LOWER  PRINCIPLES.

Inq. —  You  spoke  of  Kdmaloka;  what  is  it?

Theo. — When  the  man  dies  his  three  lower  principles 
leave  him  forever — i.e.,  body,  life,  and  the  vehicle  of  the 
latter,  the  astral  body  or  the  double  of  the  living  man. 
And  then  his  four  principles — the  central  or  middle  princi- 
ple (the  animal  soul  or  Kama  Rupa),  with  what  it  has  assim- 
ilated from  the  lower  Manas  and  the  higher  triad — find 
themselves  in  Kamaloka.  The  latter  is  an  astral  locality, 
the  lifnbus  of  scholastic  theology,  the  hades  of  the  ancients, 
and,  strictly  speaking,  a  locality  only  in  a  relative  sense.  It 
has  neither  a  definite  area  nor  boundary,  but  exists  within 
subjective  space,  i.e.,  i»  beyond  our  sensuous  perceptions. 
Still  it  exists,  and  it  is  there  that  the  astral  eidolons  of  all 
the  beings  that  have  lived,  animals  included,  await  their 
''  second  death."  For  the  animals  it  comes  with  the  disin- 
tegration and  the  entire  fading  out  of  their  astral  particles 
to  the  last.  For  the  human  eidolon  it  begins  when  the 
Atma-Buddhi-Manasic  triad  is  said  to  ''  separate  "  itself  from 
its  lower  principles,  or  the  reflection  of  the  ex-personality, 
by  falling  into  the  devachanic  state.

Inq. — And  what  happens  after  this  ?

127

128  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOFHY.Inq. — And  what  happens  after  this  ?

127

128  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOFHY.

Theo. — Then  the  kama-rupic  phantom,  remaining  bereft 
of  its  informing,  thinking  principle,  the  higher  Manas,  and 
the  lower  aspect  of  the  latter,  the  animal  intelligence,  no 
longer  receiving  Hght  from  the  higher  mind,  and  no  longer 
having  a  physical  brain  to  work  through,  collapses.

Inq. — In  what  way  ?

Theo. — Well,  it  falls  into  the  state  of  the  frog  when  cer- 
tain portions  of  its  brain  are  taken  out  by  the  vivisector. 
It  can  think  no  more,  even  on  the  lowest  animal  plane. 
Henceforth  it  is  no  longer  even  the  lower  Manas,  since  this 
"lower"  is  nothing  without  the  "higher."

Inq. — A7id  is  //this  no7ientity  which  we  find  materializing 
in  seance-rooms  with  7nediums  ?

Theo. — It  is  this  nonentity — a  true  nonentity,  however, 
only  as  to  reasoning  or  cogitating  powers ;  still  an  entity^ 
however  astral  and  fluidic.  This  is  shown  in  certain  cases 
when  this  entity,  being  magnetically  and  unconsciously 
drawn  toward  a  medium,  is  revived  for  a  time  and  lives  in 
him  by  proxy,  so  to  speak.  This  "spook,"  or  the  Kama 
Rupa,  may  be  compared  with  the  jellyfish,  which  has  an 
ethereal  gelatinous  appearance  so  long  as  it  is  in  its  own 
element,  or  water  (the  medium's  specific  aura) ;  no  sooner 
is  it  thrown  out  of  the  water,  however,  than  it  dissolves  in 
the  hand  or  on  the  sand,  especially  in  sunlight.  In  the 
medium's  aura  it  lives  a  kind  of  vicarious  hfe,  and  reasons 
and  speaks  either  through  the  medium's  brain  or  those  of 
other  persons  present.  But  this  would  lead  us  too  far,  and 
upon  other  people's  grounds,  whereon  I  have  no  desire  to 
trespass.     Let  us  keep  to  the  subject  of  reincarnation.Inq. —  What  of  the  latter  ?  How  long  does  the  incarnat- 
ing  Ego  remain  in  the  devachanic  state  ?

Theo. — This,  we  are  taught,  depends  on  the  degree  of 
spirituality  and  the  merit  or  demerit  of  the  last  incarna-

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  129

tion.     The  average  time  is  from  ten  to  fifteen  centuries,  as 
I  have  already  told  you.

Inq. — But  why  could  not  this  Ego  ma?iifest  and  communi- 
cate with  mortals  as  Spiritualists  will  have  it?  What  is 
there  to  prevent  a  7710 1 her  from  communicating  with  the  chil- 
dren she  left  on  earthy  a  husband  with  his  wife,  and  so  o?i  ? 
It  is  a  77iost  consoling  belief,  I  must  confess ;  7ior  do  I  wonder 
that  those  who  believe  i7i  it  are  so  averse  to  give  it  up.

Theo. — Nor  are  they  forced  to,  unless  they  happen  to 
prefer  truth  to  fiction,  however  ''  consoling."  Uncongenial 
our  doctrines  may  be  to  Spiritualists ;  yet  nothing  of  what 
we  believe  in  and  teach  is  half  as  selfish  and  cruel  as  what 
they  preach.

Inq. — /  do  not  understand  you.      What  is  selfish  ?

Theo. — Their  doctrine  of  the  return  of  spirits,  the  real 
*'  personalities,"  as  they  say ;  and  I  will  tell  you  why.  If 
Devachan — call  it  "paradise,"  if  you  like;  a  ''place  of 
bliss  and  of  supreme  felicity,"  if  it  is  anything — is  such  a 
place,  or  say  state,  logic  tells  us  that  no  sorrow,  nor  even 
a  shade  of  pain,  can  be  experienced  therein.  ''  God  shall 
wipe  away  all  tears  "  from  the  eyes  of  those  in  paradise,  we 
read  in  the  book  of  many  promises.  And  if  the  ''spirits 
of  the  dead  "  are  able  to  return  and  see  all  that  is  going  on 
on  earth,  and  especially  in  their  homes,  what  kind  of  bliss 
can  be  in  store  for  them  ?

WHY  THEOSOPHISTS  DO  NOT  BELIEVE  IN  THE 
RETURN  OF  PURE   ''SPIRITS.''WHY  THEOSOPHISTS  DO  NOT  BELIEVE  IN  THE 
RETURN  OF  PURE   ''SPIRITS.''

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  ?  Why  should  this  interfere  with 
their  bliss  ?

Theo. — It  is  quite  simple ;  let  us  take  an  instance.     A 
mother  dies,  leaving  behind   her  httle  helpless  children

130  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.Theo. — It  is  quite  simple ;  let  us  take  an  instance.     A 
mother  dies,  leaving  behind   her  httle  helpless  children

130  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

whom  she  adores ;  perhaps  a  beloved  husband  also.  We 
say  that  her  spirit  or  Ego — that  individuahty  which  is  now 
wholly  impregnated,  for  the  entire  devachanic  period,  with 
the  noblest  feehngs  held  by  its  late  personality,  with  love 
for  her  children,  pity  for  those  who  suffer,  and  so  on — is 
now  entirely  separated  from  the  ''  vale  of  tears  " ;  that  its 
future  bliss  consists  in  the  blessed  ignorance  of  all  the  woes 
it  left  behind.  Spiritualists,  on  the  contrary,  say  that  it 
is  as  vividly  aware  of  them,  and  viore  so  thafi  before,  for 
'*  spirits  see  more  than  mortals  in  the  flesh  do."  We  say 
that  the  bhss  of  the  Devachani  consists  in  its  complete  con- 
viction that  it  has  never  left  the  earth,  and  that  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  death  at  all ;  that  the  post-mortem  spiritual 
consciousness  of  the  mother  will  cause  her  to  think  that 
she  lives  surrounded  by  her  children  and  all  those  whom 
she  loved ;  that  no  gap,  no  link,  will  be  missing  to  make 
her  disembodied  state  the  most  perfect  and  absolute  happi- 
ness. The  Spiritualists  deny  this  point-blank.  According 
to  their  doctrine,  unfortunate  man  is  not  liberated  even  by 
death  from  the  sorrows  of  this  life.  Not  a  drop  from  the 
Hf e-cup  of  pain  and  suffering  will  miss  his  lips ;  and  nolens 
volens,  since  he  sees  everything  then,  shall  he  drink  it  to  the 
bitter  dregs.  Thus  the  loving  wife,  who  during  her  lifetime 
was  ready  to  save  her  husband  sorrow  at  the  price  of  her 
heart's  blood,  is  now  doomed  to  see,  in  utter  helplessness, 
his  despair,  and  to  register  every  hot  tear  he  sheds  for  her 
loss.  Worse  than  that,  she  may  see  the  tears  dry  too  soon, 
and  another  beloved  face  smile  on  him,  the  father  of  her 
children ;  find  another  woman  replacing  her  in  his  affec- 
tions ;  doomed  to  hear  her  children  give  the  holy  name  of 
"mother"  to  one  indifferent  to  them,  and  to  see  those  little 
ones  neglected,  if  not  ill  treated.  According  to  this  doc- 
trine, the  ''gentle  wafting  to  immortal  life"  becomes  the 
way  into  a  new  path  of  mental  suffering  without  any  tran- 
sition.    And  yet  the  columns  of  the  Banner  of  Light-,  theTHE  KEY   TO    THEOSOFHY.  131

veteran  journal  of  the  American  Spiritualists,  are  filled  with 
messages  from  the  dead,  the  ''dear  departed  ones,"  who  all 
write  to  say  how  very  happy  they  are  !  Is  such  a  state  of 
knowledge  consistent  with  bliss?  Then  ''bliss"  stands,  in 
such  a  case,  for  the  greatest  curse,  and  orthodox  damna- 
tion must  be  a  relief  in  comparison  to  it !

Inq. — But  how  does  your  theory  avoid  this  ?  How  can 
you  reco7icile  the  theory  of  the  souths  otiiniscieiice  with  its  blind- 
ness to  that  which  is  taking  place  on  earth  ?

Theo. — Because  such  is  the  law  of  love  and  mercy. 
During  every  devachanic  period  the  Ego,  omniscient  as  it 
is  per  se,  clothes  itself,  so  to  say,  with  the  reflection  of  the 
personality  that  was.  I  have  just  told  you  that  the  ideal 
efflorescence  of  all  the  abstract,  and  therefore  undying  and 
eternal,  qualities  or  attributes — such  as  love  and  mercy,  the 
love  of  the  good,  the  true,  and  the  beautiful — which  ever 
spoke  in  the  heart  of  the  living  personality,  after  death  cling 
to  the  Ego,  and  therefore  follow  it  into  Devachan.  For 
the  time  being,  then,  the  Ego  becomes  the  ideal  reflection 
of  the  human  being  it  was  when  last  on  earth,  and  that  is 
not  omniscient.  Were  it  that,  it  would  never  be  in  the  state 
we  call  Devachan  at  all.

Inq. —  What  are  your  reasons  for  it  ?Inq. —  What  are  your  reasons  for  it  ?

Theo. — If  you  want  an  answer  on  the  strict  lines  of  our 
philosophy,  then  I  would  say  that  it  is  because  everything 
is  "  illusion "  (indya)  outside  of  eternal  truth,  which  has 
neither  form,  color,  nor  limitation.  He  who  has  placed 
himself  beyond  the  veil  of  7nayd — and  such  are  the  highest 
Adepts  and  Initiates — can  have  no  Devachan.  As  to  the 
ordinary  mortal,  his  bliss  in  Devachan  is  complete.  It  is 
an  absolute  oblivion  of  all  that  gave  it  pain  or  sorrow  in  the 
past  incarnation,  and  even  oblivion  of  the  fact  that  such 
things  as  pain  or  sorrow  exist  at  all     The  Devachan!  lives

132  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

its  intermediate  cycle  between  two  incarnations  surrounded 
by  everything  it  had  aspired  to  in  vain,  and  in  the  com- 
panionship of  every  one  it  loved  on  earth.  It  has  reached 
the  fulfilment  of  all  its  soul-yearnings.  And  thus  it  lives 
throughout  long  centuries  an  existence  of  unalloyed  happi- 
ness, which  is  the  reward  for  its  sufferings  in  earth-life.  In 
short,  it  bathes  in  a  sea  of  uninterrupted  felicity  spanned 
only  by  events  of  still  greater  felicity  in  degree.

Inq. — But  this  is  more  than  simple  delusion;  it  is  an  exis- 
tence of  insane  hallucinations  /Inq. — But  this  is  more  than  simple  delusion;  it  is  an  exis- 
tence of  insane  hallucinations  /

Theo. — From  your  standpoint  it  may  be ;  not  so  from 
that  of  philosophy.  Besides,  is  not  our  whole  terrestrial  life 
filled  with  such  delusions  ?  Have  you  never  met  men  and 
women  living  for  years  in  a  fools'  paradise  ?  And  because 
you  should  happen  to  learn  that  the  husband  whom  a  wife 
adores,  and  believes  herself  loved  in  turn  by  him,  is  untrue 
to  her,  would  you  go  and  break  her  heart  and  beautiful 
dream  by  rudely  awakening  her  to  the  reality  ?  I  think 
not.  I  say  it  again,  such  oblivion  and  hallucination,  if 
you  call  it  so,  is  only  a  merciful  law  of  Nature  and  strict 
justice.  At  any  rate,  it  is  a  far  more  fascinating  prospect 
than  the  orthodox  golden  harp  with  a  pair  of  wings.  The 
assurance  that  "  the  soul  that  lives  ascends  frequently  and 
runs  familiarly  through  the  streets  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem, 
visiting  the  patriarchs  and  prophets,  saluting  the  apostles, 
and  admiring  the  army  of  martyrs,"  may  seem  of  a  more 
pious  character  to  some.  Nevertheless  it  is  an  hallucination 
of  a  far  more  delusive  character,  since  mothers  love  their 
children  with  an  immortal  love,  we  all  know,  while  the  per- 
sonages mentioned  in  the  ''heavenly  Jerusalem"  are  still  of 
a  rather  doubtful  nature.  But  I  would  still  rather  accept 
the  ''  new  Jerusalem,"  with  its  streets  paved  like  the  show- 
windows  of  a  jeweler's  shop,  than  find  consolation  in  the 
heartless  doctrine  of  the  Spiritualists.    The  idea  alone  that

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  133THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  133

the  intellectual  conscious  souls  of  one's  father,  mother,  daugh- 
ter, or  brother  find  their  bHss  in  a  ''  summer-land  " — only  a 
little  more  natural,  but  just  as  ridiculous  as  the  ''new  Jeru- 
salem "  in  its  description — would  be  enough  to  make  one 
lose  every  respect  for  one's  "  departed  ones."  To  believe 
that  a  pure  spirit  can  feel  happy  while  doomed  to  witness 
the  sins,  mistakes,  treachery,  and,  above  all,  the  sufferings 
of  those  from  whom  it  is  severed  by  death,  and  whom  it 
loves  best,  without  being  able  to  help  them,  would  be  a 
maddening  thought.

Inq. —  There  is  something  in  your  argument,  I  confess  to 
having  never  seeii  it  i7i  this  light,Inq. —  There  is  something  in  your  argument,  I  confess  to 
having  never  seeii  it  i7i  this  light,

Theo. — Just  so  ;  and  one  must  be  selfish  to  the  core,  and 
utterly  devoid  of  the  sense  of  retributive  justice,  to  have 
ever  imagined  such  a  thing.  We  are  with  those  whom  we 
have  lost  in  material  form,  and  far,  far  nearer  to  them  now 
than  when  they  were  alive.  And  it  is  not  only  in  the  fancy 
of  the  Devachani,  as  some  may  imagine,  but  in  reality. 
For  pure  divine  love  is  not  merely  the  blossom  of  a  human 
heart,  but  has  its  roots  in  eternity.  Spiritual  holy  love  is 
immortal,  and  Karma  sooner  or  later  brings  all  those  who 
loved  each  other  with  such  a  spiritual  affection  to  incarnate 
once  more  in  the  same  family  group.  Again  we  say  that 
love  beyond  the  grave,  illusion  though  you  may  call  it, 
has  a  magic  and  divine  potency  which  reacts  on  the  living. 
A  mother's  Ego  filled  with  love  for  the  imaginary  children 
it  sees  near  itself,  living  a  life  of  happiness  as  real  to  it  as 
when  on  earth,  will  ever  cause  that  love  to  be  felt  by  the 
children  in  flesh.  It  will  manifest  in  their  dreams,  and 
often  in  various  events — in  ''  providential  "  protections  and 
escapes ;  for  love  is  a  strong  shield,  and  is  not  limited  by 
space  or  time.  As  with  this  devachanic  "mother,"  so  with  the 
rest  of  human  relationships  and  attachments,  save  the  purely 
selfish  or  material.    Analogy  will  suggest  to  you  the  rest.

134  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

Inq. — In  no  case,  the7i,  do  you  admit  the  possibility  of  the 
comjHiuiication  of  the  livi?ig  with  the  disembodied  spirit  ?134  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

Inq. — In  no  case,  the7i,  do  you  admit  the  possibility  of  the 
comjHiuiication  of  the  livi?ig  with  the  disembodied  spirit  ?

Theo. — Yes ;  there  are  even  two  exceptions  to  the  rule. 
The  first  case  is  during  the  few  days  that  immediately  fol- 
low the  death  of  a  person,  and  before  the  Ego  passes  into 
the  devachanic  state.  But  whether  any  hving  mortal  has 
derived  much  benefit  from  the  return  of  the  spirit  into  the 
objective  plane  is  another  question.  Perhaps  it  may  be  so 
in  a  few  exceptional  cases,  when  the  intensity  of  the  desire 
in  the  dying  person  to  return  for  some  purpose  forced  the 
higher  consciousness  to  remain  awake,  and  therefore  it  was 
really  the  individuality,  the  '^spirit,"  that  communicated. 
But  in  general  the  spirit  is  dazed  after  death,  and  falls  very 
soon  into  what  we  call  ''  pre-devachanic  unconsciousness." 
The  second  exception  is  found  in  the  iiirmdnakdyas,

Inq. —  What  of  them  ?  What  does  the  name  signify  for 
you  ?

Theo. — It  is  the  name  given  to  those  who,  though  they 
have  won  the  right  to  Nirvana  and  cyclic  Rest,*  yet,  out 
of  pity  for  mankind  and  those  they  have  left  on  earth,  re- 
nounce this  nirvanic  state.  Such  an  Adept,  or  saint,  or 
whatever  you  may  call  him,  believing  it  a  selfish  act  to  rest 
in  bliss  while  mankind  groans  under  the  burden  of  misery 
produced  by  ignorance,  renounces  Nirvana,  and  determines 
to  remain  invisible  iii  spirit  on  this  earth.  Nirmanakdyas 
have  no  material  body,  for  they  have  left  it  behind ;  but 
otherwise  they  remain  with  all  their  principles,  even  in  astral 
life,  in  our  sphere.  And  such  can  and  do  communicate  with 
a  few  elect  ones,  but  surely  not  with  ordinary  mediums.Inq. — I  have  put  you  the  question  about  mnn.a.nsikeiya,s  be- 
cause I  read  in  some  German  and  other  works  that  it  was  the

*  Not  Devachan,  as  the  latter  is  an  illusion  of  our  consciousness,  a  happy  dream, 
and  as  those  who  are  fit  for  Nirvana  must  have  lost  entirely  every  desire  or  possibility 
of  desire  for  the  world's  illusions,

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  135

naine  given  in  Northern  Buddhistic  teachings  to  the  terrestrial 
appearafices  or  bodies  assu7ned  by  Biiddhas.

Theo. — This  is  so,  only  the  OrientaHsts  have  confused 
this  '' terrestriaP'  body  by  understanding  it  to  be  objective 
and  physical  instead  of  purely  astral  and  subjective.

Inq. — And  what  good  can  these  nirmanakayas  do  07i  earth  ?

Theo. — Not  much,  as  regards  individuals,  as  they  have 
no  right  to  interfere  with  Karma,  and  can  only  advise  and 
inspire  mortals  for  the  general  good.  Yet  they  do  more 
beneficent  actions  than  you  imagine.

Inq. —  To  this  science  would  never  subscribe^  noteveii  modern 
psychology.  For  science  a7id psychology^  no  portion  of  intelli- 
ge?ice  can  survive  the  physical  h^aiii.  What  would  you  an- 
swer to  this  ?

Theo. — I  would  not  even  go  to  the  trouble  of  answering, 
but  would  simply  say,  in  the  words  given  to  ''  M.A.  Oxon."  :

Intelligence  is  perpetuated  after  the  body  is  dead.  Though  it  is  not 
a  question  of  the  brain  only.  ...  It  is  reasonable  to  propound  the  in- 
destructibility of  the  human  spirit  from  what  we  know.  *

Inq. — But  ''M.A.  Oxon.^^  is  a  Spiritualist?Inq. — But  ''M.A.  Oxon.^^  is  a  Spiritualist?

Theo. — -Quite  so,  and  the  only  true  Spiritualist  I  know 
of,  though  we  may  still  disagree  from  him  on  many  a  minor 
question.  Apart  from  this,  no  Spiritualist  comes  nearer  to 
the  occult  truths  than  he  does.  Like  any  one  of  us,  he 
speaks  incessantly  ''of  the  surface  dangers  that  beset  the 
ill-equipped,  feather-headed  muddler  with  the  occult,  who 
crosses  the  threshold  without  counting  the  cost.^t  Our 
only  disagreement  rests  in  the  question  of  ''  spirit  identity." 
Otherwise  I,  for  one,  almost  entirely  agree  with  him,  and 
accept  the  three  propositions  he  embodied  in  his  address

*  spirit  Identity,  p.  69.

t  **  Some  things  that  I  do  know  of  Spiritualism,  and  some  that  I  do  not.**

136  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

of  July,  1884.     It  is  this  eminent  Spiritualist,  rather,  who 
disagrees  from  us,  not  we  from  him.

Inq. —  What  were  these  propositions  ?

Theo. — They  are  as  follows :

1.  That  there  is  a  life  coincident  with,  and  independent  of,  the 
physical  life  of  the  body.

2.  That,  as  a  necessary  corollary,  this  life  extends  beyond  the 
life  of  the  body.     [We  say  it  extends  throughout  Devachan.]

3.  That  there  is  communication  between  the  denizens  of  that 
state  of  existence  and  those  of  the  world  in  which  we  now  live.

All  depends,  you  see,  on  the  minor  and  secondary  aspects 
of  these  fundamental  propositions.  Everything  depends  on 
the  views  we  take  of  spirit  and  soul,  or  individuality  and 
personality.  Spiritualists  confuse  the  two  ''  into  one  "  ;  we 
separate  them,  and  say  that,  with  the  exceptions  above 
enumerated,  no  spirit  will  revisit  the  earth,  though  the  ani- 
mal soul  may.  But  let  us  return  once  more  to  our  direct 
subject,  the  skandhas.Inq. — I begi?t  to  understand  better  now.  It  is  the  spirit^  so 
to  say^  of  those  skandhas  that  are  the  most  ennobling^  which ^  at- 
taching itself  to  the  incarnatijig  Ego^  survives^  and  is  added  to 
the  stock  of  its  angelic  experiences.  And  it  is  the  attributes 
con7iected  with  the  material  ska,udh.RS,  with  selfish  and  personal 
motives^  which  ^  disappearing  from  the  field  of  action  betwee7i 
two  incarnations^  reappear  at  the  subsequent  i?icarnation  as 
karmic  results  to  be  ato7ied  for;  and  therefore  the  spirit  will 
7iot  leave  Devacha7i.     Is  it  so  ?

Theo. — Very  nearly  so.  If  you  add  to  this  that  the  law 
of  retribution,  or  Karma,  rewarding  the  highest  and  most 
spiritual  attributes  in  Devachan,  never  fails  to  reward  them 
again  on  earth  by  giving  them  a  further  development,  and 
by  furnishing  the  Ego  with  a  body  fitted  for  it,  then  you 
will  be  quite  correct.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  137

A   FEW  WORDS  ABOUT   THE   SKANDHAS.

Inq. —  What  becomes  of  the  other ^  the  lower  skandhas  of 
the  personality^  after  the  death  of  the  body  ?  Are  they  quite 
destroyed  ?

Theo. — They  are  and  yet  they  are  not — a  fresh  meta- 
physical and  occult  mystery  for  you.  They  are  destroyed 
as  the  working  stock  in  hand  of  the  personality ;  they  re- 
main as  karmic  effects^  as  germs,  hanging  in  the  atmosphere 
of  the  terrestrial  plane,  ready  to  come  to  life,  as  so  many 
avenging  fiends,  to  attach  themselves  to  the  new  personal- 
ity of  the  Ego  when  it  reincarnates.

Inq. — This  really  passes  my  comprehension^  and  is  very 
difficult  to  tmderstand.Inq. — This  really  passes  my  comprehension^  and  is  very 
difficult  to  tmderstand.

Theo. — Not  once  that  you  have  assimilated  all  the  de- 
tails. For  then  you  will  see  that  for  logic,  consistency,  pro- 
found philosophy,  divine  mercy,  and  equity,  this  doctrine 
of  reincarnation  has  not  its  equal  on  earth.  It  is  a  belief 
in  a  perpetual  progress  for  each  incarnating  Ego,  or  divine 
soul,  in  an  evolution  from  the  outward  into  the  inward,  from 
the  material  to  the  spiritual,  arriving  at  the  end  of  each 
stage  at  absolute  unity  with  the  Divine  Principle.  From 
strength  to  strength,  from  the  beauty  and  perfection  of  one 
plane  to  the  greater  beauty  and  perfection  of  another,  with 
accessions  of  new  glory,  of  fresh  knowledge  and  power,  in 
each  cycle — such  is  the  destiny  of  every  Ego,  which  thus 
becomes  its  own  savior  in  each  world  and  incarnation.

Inq. — But  Christianity  teaches  the  same.  It  also  preaches 
progression.

Theo. — Yes,  only  with  the  addition  of  something  else. 
It  tells  us  of  the  impossibility  of  attaining  salvation  without 
the  aid  of  a  miraculous  savior,  and,  moreover,  dooms  to  per- 
dition all  those  who  will  not  accept  the  dogma.    This  is  just

138  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

the  difference  between  Christian  theology  and  Theosophy. 
The  former  enforces  belief  in  the  descent  of  the  spiritual 
Ego  into  the  lower  self;  the  latter  inculcates  the  necessity 
of  endeavoring  to  elevate  one's  self  to  the  Christos  or 
Buddhi  state.

Inq. — By  teaching  the  aiinihilatioii  of  consciousness  in  case 
of  failure^  however^  do  you  ?iot  think  that  this  amounts  to  the 
annihilation  ^self,  iii  the  opinion  of  the  7ion-metaphysical  ?Theo. — From  the  standpoint  of  those  who  believe  in 
the  resurrection  of  the  body  literally,  and  insist  that  every 
bone,  every  artery  and  atom  of  flesh  will  be  raised  bodily 
on  the  judgment-day,  of  course  it  does.  If  you  still  insist 
that  it  is  the  perishable  form  and  finite  qualities  that  make 
up  immortal  man,  then  we  shall  hardly  understand  each 
other.  And  if  you  do  not  understand  that,  by  limiting  the 
existence  of  every  Ego  to  one  life  on  earth,  you  make  of 
Deity  an  ever-drunken  Indra  of  the  Pauranic  dead  letter, 
a  cruel  Moloch,  a  god  who  makes  an  inextricable  mess  on 
earth,  and  yet  claims  thanks  for  it,  then  the  sooner  we  drop 
the  conversation  the  better.

Inq. — But  let  us  return^  now  that  the  subject  of  the  skand- 
has  is  disposed  of  to  the  questiofi  of  the  consciousness  which 
survives  death.  This  is  the  point  which  interests  most  people. 
Do  we  possess  more  knowledge  in  Devachan  than  we  do  in 
earth-life  ?

Theo. — In  one  sense  we  can  acquire  more  knowledge — 
that  is,  we  can  develop  further  any  faculty  which  we  loved 
and  strove  after  during  life,  provided  it  is  concerned  with 
abstract  and  ideal  things,  such  as  music,  painting,  poetry, 
etc.,  since  Devachan  is  merely  an  idealized  and  subjective 
continuation  of  earth-Hfe.

Inq. — But  if  in  Devachan  the  spirit  is  free  from  matter^ 
why  should  it  not  possess  all  knowledge  ?

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  139Inq. — But  if  in  Devachan  the  spirit  is  free  from  matter^ 
why  should  it  not  possess  all  knowledge  ?

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  139

Theo. — Because,  as  I  told  you,  the  Ego  is,  so  to  say, 
wedded  to  the  memory  of  its  last  incarnation.  Thus,  if 
you  think  over  what  I  have  said,  and  string  all  the  facts 
together,  you  will  realize  that  the  devachanic  state  is  not 
one  of  omniscience,  but  a  transcendental  continuation  of 
the  personal  life  just  terminated.  It  is  the  rest  of  the  soul 
from  the  toils  of  life.

Inq. — Bui  the  scie7itific  materialists  assert  that  after  the 
death  of  i7ian  nothing  remains  ;  that  the  human  body  simply 
disiiite grates  into  its  compo7ie7it  ele77te7its;  a7id  that  what  we 
call  soul  is  77ierely  a  te7nporary  self-co7iscious7iess  p7^oduced  as 
a  byproduct  of  or ga7iic  action^  which  will  evaporate  like  steam. 
Is  7iot  theirs  a  stra7ige  state  of  77ii7id  ?

Theo. — Not  at  all  strange,  as  far  as  I  see.  If  they  say 
that  self-consciousness  ceases  with  the  body,  then  in  their 
case  they  simply  utter  an  unconscious  prophecy ;  for  once 
they  are  firmly  convinced  of  what  they  assert,  no  conscious 
after-life  is  possible  for  them.  For  there  are  exceptions  to 
every  rule.

ON  POST-MORTEM  AND  POSTNATAL    CONSCIOUS- 
NESS.*

Inq. — But  if  hu77ian  self  conscious  7iess  survives  death  as  a 
rule^  why  should  there  be  exceptio7is  ?

Theo. — In  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  spiritual 
world  no  exception  is  possible.  But  there  are  rules  for  those 
who  see,  and  rules  for  those  who  prefer  to  remain  blind.

Inq. — Quite  so,  I  understand.  This  is  but  a7t  aberration 
of  the  blind  77ian,  who  denies  the  existence  of  the  sun  becauseInq. — Quite  so,  I  understand.  This  is  but  a7t  aberration 
of  the  blind  77ian,  who  denies  the  existence  of  the  sun  because

*  A  few  portions  of  this  chapter  and  of  the  preceding  were  published  in  Lucifer  in 
the  shape  of  a  "Dialogue  on  the  Mysteries  of  the  After-life,"  in  the  January  num- 
ber, 1889.  The  article  was  unsigned,  as  if  it  were  written  by  the  editor,  but  it  came 
from  the  pen  of  the  author  of  the  present  volume.

140  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

he  does  7iot  see  it.     But  after  death  his  spiritual  eyes  will  cer- 
tainly compel  him  to  see.     Is  this  what  you  mean  ?140  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

he  does  7iot  see  it.     But  after  death  his  spiritual  eyes  will  cer- 
tainly compel  him  to  see.     Is  this  what  you  mean  ?

Theo. — He  will  not  be  compelled,  nor  will  he  see  any- 
thing. Having  persistently  during  life  denied  the  continu- 
ance of  existence  after  death,  he  will  be  unable  to  see  it, 
because  his  spiritual  capacity,  having  been  stunted  in  life, 
cannot  develop  after  death,  and  he  will  remain  Wind.  By 
insisting  that  he  nmst  see  it,  you  evidently  mean  one  thing 
and  I  another.  You  speak  of  the  spirit  from  the  Spirit, 
or  the  flame  from  the  Flame — of  Atma,  in  short — and  you 
confuse  it  with  the  human  soul,  Manas.  .  .  .  You  do  not 
understand  me ;  let  me  try  to  make  it  clear.  The  whole 
gist  of  your  question  is  to  know  whether,  in  the  case  of  a 
downright  materialist,  the  complete  loss  of  self-conscious- 
ness and  self-perception  after  death  is  possible.  Is  it  not 
so?  I  answer,  it  is  possible.  Believing  firmly  in  our  Eso- 
teric Doctrine — which  refers  to  the  post-mortem  period,  or 
the  interval  between  two  lives  or  births,  as  merely  a  transi- 
tory state — I  say  that  whether  that  post-mortem  interval 
between  two  acts  of  the  illusionary  drama  of  life  lasts  one 
year  or  a  million,  it  may,  without  any  breach  of  the  funda- 
mental law,  prove  to  be  just  the  same  state  as  that  of  a 
man  in  a  dead  faint.

Inq. — But  since  you  have  just  said  that  the  fundamental 
law  of  the  after-death  state  admits  of  7io  exceptions^  how  can 
this  be  ?Inq. — But  since  you  have  just  said  that  the  fundamental 
law  of  the  after-death  state  admits  of  7io  exceptions^  how  can 
this  be  ?

Theo. — Nor  do  I  say  now  that  it  does  admit  of  an  ex- 
ception. But  the  spiritual  law  of  continuity  applies  only 
to  things  which  are  truly  real.  To  one  who  has  read  and 
understood  Mundaka  Upanishad  and  Veddnta  Sara  all  this 
becomes  very  clear.  I  will  say  more :  it  is  sufficient  only 
to  understand  what  we  mean  by  Buddhi  and  the  duality  of 
Manas  to  gain  a  clear  perception  why  the  materialist  may 
fail  to  have  a  self-conscious  sur^aval  after  death.     Since

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  141

Manas,  in  its  lower  aspect,  is  the  seat  of  the  terrestrial 
mind,  it  can  therefore  gv^^  only  that  perception  of  the  uni- 
verse which  is  based  on  the  evidence  of  that  mind ;  it  can- 
not give  spiritual  vision.  It  is  said  in  the  Eastern  school 
that  between  Buddhi  and  Manas,  the  Ego,  or  Ishvara  and 
Prajfia,*  there  is  in  reality  no  more  difference  than  between 
a  forest  and  its  trees,  a  lake  and  its  waters,  as  the  Mundaka 
teaches.  One  or  a  hundred  trees  dead  from  loss  of  vitality, 
or  uprooted,  are  yet  incapable  of  preventing  the  forest  from 
being  still  a  forest.

Inq. — But^  as  I  U7iderstand  it,  Buddhi  represe7its  in  this 
simile  the  forest,  and  Majias-Taijasa\  the  trees.  And  if 
Buddhi  is  im??iortal,  how  ca7i  that  which  is  similar  to  it — />., 
Manas 'Taifasa — etitirely  lose  its  consciousness  till  the  day  of 
its  7iew  i7icar7iatio7i  ?     I  ca7i7iot  understa7id  it.Theo. — You  cannot  because  you  will  mix  up  an  abstract 
representation  of  the  whole  with  its  casual  changes  of  form. 
Remember  that  if  it  can  be  said  of  Buddhi-Manas  that  it 
is  unconditionally  immortal,  the  same  cannot  be  said  of  the 
lower  Manas,  still  less  of  Taijasa,  which  is  merely  an  attri- 
bute. Neither  of  these — neither  Manas  nor  Taijasa — can 
exist  apart  from  Buddhi,  the  divine  soul,  because  the  first 
(Manas)  is,  in  its  lower  aspect,  a  qualificative  attribute  of 
the  terrestrial  personality,  and  the  second  (Taijasa)  is  iden- 
tical with  the  first,  because  it  is  the  same  Manas,  only  with 
the  light  of  Buddhi  reflected  in  it.  In  its  turn,  Buddhi 
would  remain  only  an  impersonal  spirit  without  this  element 
which  it  borrows  from  the  human  soul,  which  conditions

*  Ishvara  is  the  collective  consciousness  of  the  manifested  deity,  Brahma — i.e.,  the 
collective  consciousness  of  the  Host  of  Dhyan  Chohans  of  The  Secret  Doctrine;  and 
Prajiia  is  their  individual  wisdom.

t  Taijasa  means  the  radiant  in  consequence  of  its  union  with  Buddhi — i.e.,  Manas, 
the  human  soul,  illuminated  by  the  radiance  of  the  divine  soul.  Therefore  Manas- 
Taijasa  may  be  described  as  radiant  mind,  the  human  reason  lit  by  the  light  of  the 
spirit ;  and  Buddhi-Manas  is  the  revelation  of  the  divine  plus  human  intellect  and  self- 
consciousness.

142  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.142  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

and  makes  of  it,  in  this  illusive  universe,  as  it  were  something 
separate  from  the  universal  soul  for  the  whole  period  of  the 
cycle  of  incarnation.  Say,  rather,  that  Buddhi- Manas  can 
neither  die  nor  lose  its  united  self-consciousness  in  eternity, 
nor  the  recollection  of  the  previous  incarnations  in  which 
the  two — i.e.,  the  spiritual  and  the  human  soul — had  been 
closely  linked  together.  But  it  is  not  so  in  the  case  of  a 
materiahst,  whose  human  soul  not  only  receives  nothing 
from  the  divine  soul,  but  even  refuses  to  recognize  its  exis- 
tence. You  can  hardly  apply  this  axiom  to  the  attributes 
and  quahfications  of  the  human  soul,  for  it  would  be  like 
saying  that  because  your  divine  soul  is  immortal  therefore 
the  bloom  on  your  cheek  must  also  be  immortal,  where- 
as this  bloom,  like  Taijasa,  is  simply  a  transitory  phe- 
nomenon.

Inq. — Do  I  understand  you  to  say  that  we  must  not  con- 
fuse in  our  minds  the  noumenon  with  the  phenomenon,  the 
cause  with  its  effect  ?

Theo. — I  do  say  so,  and  repeat  that,  limited  to  Manas 
or  the  human  soul  alone,  the  radiance  of  Taijasa  itself  be- 
comes a  mere  question  of  time,  because  both  immortality 
and  consciousness  after  death  become,  for  the  terrestrial 
personality  of  man,  simply  conditioned  attributes,  as  they 
depend  entirely  on  conditions  and  beHefs  created  by  the 
human  soul  itself  during  the  life  of  its  body.  Karma  acts 
incessantly ;  we  reap  in  our  after-life  only  the  fruit  of  that 
which  we  have  ourselves  sown  in  this.

Inq. — But  if?ny  Ego  can,  after  the  destruction  of  my  body, 
become  plunged  in  a  state  of  e7itire  unconsciousness,  then  where 
can  be  the  punishme?it  for  the  sins  of  my  past  life  ?Theo. — Our  philosophy  teaches  that  karmic  punishment 
reaches  the  Ego  only  in  its  next  incarnation.  After  death 
it  receives  only  the  reward  for  the  unmerited  sufferings

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  143THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  143

endured  during  its  past  incarnation.*  The  whole  punish- 
ment after  death,  even  for  the  materiaUst,  consists,  there- 
fore, in  the  absence  of  any  reward,  and  the  utter  loss  of  the 
consciousness  of  one's  bliss  and  rest.  Karma  is  the  child 
of  the  terrestrial  Ego,  the  fruit  of  the  actions  of  the  tree 
which  is  the  objective  personality  visible  to  all,  as  much  as 
the  fruit  of  all  the  thoughts  and  even  motives  of  the  spirit- 
ual ''  I  " ;  but  Karma  is  also  the  tender  mother  who  heals 
the  wounds  inflicted  by  her  during  the  preceding  life  before 
she  begins  to  torture  the  Ego  by  inflicting  new  wounds.  If 
it  may  be  said  that  there  is  not  a  mental  or  physical  suffer- 
ing in  the  life  of  a  mortal  which  is  not  the  direct  fruit  and 
consequence  of  some  sin  in  a  preceding  existence,  on  the 
other  hand,  since  the  man  does  not  preserve  the  shghtest 
recollection  of  it  in  his  actual  life,  feels  himself  not  deserv- 
ing of  such  punishment,  and  therefore  thinks  he  suffers  for 
no  guilt  of  his  own,  he  is  thus  sufficiently  entitled  to  the 
fullest  consolation,  rest,  and  bliss  in  his  post-mortem  exis- 
tence. Death  ever  comes  to  our  spiritual  selves  as  a  de- 
liverer and  friend.  For  the  materialist  who,  notwithstand- 
ing his  materiahsm,  was  not  a  bad  man,  the  interval  between 
the  two  lives  will  be  like  the  unbroken  and  placid  sleep  of 
a  child — either  entirely  dreamless,  or  filled  with  pictures  of 
which  he  will  have  no  definite  perception ;  while  for  the 
average  mortal  it  will  be  a  dream  as  vivid  as  life,  and  full 
of  realistic  bliss  and  visions.

Inq. — The7i  the  personal  man  must  always  go  on  suffering 
blindly  the  karmic  pefialties  which  the  Ego  has  i7icurred?Inq. — The7i  the  personal  man  must  always  go  on  suffering 
blindly  the  karmic  pefialties  which  the  Ego  has  i7icurred?

*  Some  Theosophists  have  taken  exception  to  this  phrase,  but  the  words  are  those 
of  Master,  and  the  meaning  attached  to  the  word  **  unmerited"  is  that  given  above. 
In  the  Theosophical  Si/tings,  vol.  i..  No.  6,  a  phrase,  criticized  subsequently  in  Lu- 
cifer^  was  used  which  was  intended  to  convey  the  same  idea.  In  form,  however,  it 
was  awkward  and  open  to  the  criticism  directed  against  it ;  but  the  essential  idea  was 
that  men  often  suffer  from  the  effects  of  the  actions  done  by  others,  effects  which  thus 
do  not  strictly  belong  to  their  own  Karma ;  and  for  these  sufferings  they  of  course 
deserve  compensation.

144  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

Theo. — Not  quite  so.  At  the  solemn  moment  of  death 
every  man,  even  when  death  is  sudden,  sees  the  whole  of 
his  past  life  marshaled  before  him  in  its  minutest  details. 
For  one  short  instant  the  personal  becomes  one  with  the 
individual  and  all-knowing  Ego.  But  this  instant  is  enough 
to  show  him  the  whole  chain  of  causes  which  have  been  at 
work  during  his  life.  He  sees  and  now  understands  him- 
self as  he  is,  unadorned  by  flattery  or  self-deception.  He 
reads  his  life,  remaining  as  a  spectator  looking  down  into 
the  arena  he  is  quitting ;  he  feels  and  knows  the  justice  of 
all  the  suffering  that  has  overtaken  him.

Inq. — Does  this  happen  to  every  one  ?Inq. — Does  this  happen  to  every  one  ?

Theo. — Without  any  exception.  Very  good  and  holy 
men  see,  we  are  taught,  not  only  the  life  they  are  leaving, 
but  even  several  preceding  lives  in  which  were  produced 
the  causes  that  made  them  what  they  were  in  the  hfe  just 
closing.  They  recognize  the  law  of  Karma  in  all  its  majesty 
and  justice.

Inq. — Is  there  anything  corresponding  to  this  before  re- 
birth ?

Theo. — There  is.  As  the  man  at  the  moment  of  death 
has  a  retrospective  insight  into  the  life  he  has  led,  so,  at  the 
moment  he  is  reborn  onto  earth,  the  Ego,  awaking  from 
the  state  of  Devachan,  has  a  prospective  vision  of  the  hfe 
which  awaits  him,  and  realizes  all  the  causes  that  have  led 
to  it.  He  reahzes  them,  and  sees  futurity,  because  it  is  be- 
tween Devachan  and  rebirth  that  the  Ego  regains  his  full 
manasic  consciousness,  and  rebecomes  for  a  short  time  the 
god  he  was,  before,  in  compliance  with  karmic  law,  he  first 
descended  into  matter  and  incarnated  in  the  first  man  of 
flesh.  The  ''golden  thread'*  sees  all  its  ''pearls"  and 
misses  not  one  of  them.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  145

WHAT  IS  REALLY  MEANT  BY  ANNIHILATION.

Inq. — I  have  heard  some  Theosophists  speak  of  a  golden 
thread  on  which  their  lives  were  strung.  What  do  they  fnean 
by  this  ?WHAT  IS  REALLY  MEANT  BY  ANNIHILATION.

Inq. — I  have  heard  some  Theosophists  speak  of  a  golden 
thread  on  which  their  lives  were  strung.  What  do  they  fnean 
by  this  ?

Theo. — In  the  Hindu  sacred  books  it  is  said  that  that 
which  undergoes  periodical  incarnation  is  the  sutrdt?nd, 
which  means  hterally  the  *' thread  soul."  It  is  a  synonym 
of  the  reincarnating  Ego — Manas  conjoined  with  Buddhi 
— which  absorbs  the  manasic  recollections  of  all  our  pre- 
ceding lives.  It  is  so  called  because,  like  the  pearls  on  a 
thread,  so  is  the  long  series  of  human  lives  strung  together 
on  that  one  thread.  In  one  of  the  Upanishads  these  re- 
current rebirths  are  likened  to  the  life  of  a  mortal  which 
oscillates  periodically  between  sleep  and  waking.

Inq. — This,  I  must  say,  does  not  seem  very  clear,  and  I 
will  tell  you  why.  For  the  ma7i  who  awakes,  another  day 
C07n77ie7ices,  but  he  is  the  same  in  soul  and  body  as  he  was  the 
day  before  ;  whereas  at  every  i7icarnation  a  full  change  takes 
place  not  only  of  the  external  envelope,  sex,  and  personality, 
but  even  of  the  7Jiental  a7id psychic  capacities.  The  si7nile  does 
not  seem  to  77ie  quite  correct.  The  77ia7i  who  arises  f 7^0 m  sleep 
re7ne77ibers  quite  clearly  what  he  has  do7ie  yesterday,  the  day 
before,  and  eve7i  mo7iths  a7id years  ago.  But  7io7ie  of  us  has 
the  slightest  recollectio7i  of  a  precedi7ig  life  or  of  any  fact  or 
event  C07icer7ii7ig  it.  1 7nay  forget  i7i  the  morning  what  I  have 
drea7ned  duri7ig  the  7iight;  still  I  know  that  I  have  slept,  and 
have  the  certainty  that  I  lived  during  sleep  ;  but  what  recollec- 
tio7i  can  I  have  of  my  past  incarnation  until  the  7nor7ie7it  of 
death  ?     How  do  you  reco7icile  this  ?Theo. — Some  people  do  recollect  their  past  incarnations 
during  life ;  but  these  are  Buddhas  and  Initiates.  This  is 
what  the  Yogis  call  samma  sambuddha,  or  the  knowledge  of 
the  whole  series  of  one's  past  incarnations.

146  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Inq. — But  we  ordinary  mortals  who  have  not  reached 
samma  sambuddha,  how  are  we  to  understand  this  simile  ?

Theo. — By  studying  it  and  trying  to  understand  more 
correctly  the  three  kinds  and  characteristics  of  sleep. 
Sleep  is  a  general  and  immutable  law  for  man  as  for  beast, 
but  there  are  different  kinds  of  sleep  and  still  more  differ- 
ent dreams  and  visions.

Inq. — But  this  takes  us  to  another  subject.  Let  us  return 
to  the  materialist  who,  though  ?iot  denying  dreams — -for  he 
could  hardly  do  so — yet  de7iies  immortality  in  general  and  the 
survival  of  his  own  individuality.Theo. — And  the  materialist,  without  knowing  it,  is  right. 
In  one  who  has  no  inner  perception  of  and  faith  in  the  im- 
mortality of  his  soul,  that  soul  can  never  become  Buddhi- 
Taijasa,  but  will  remain  simply  Manas,  and  for  Manas 
alone  there  is  no  immortality  possible.  In  order  to  live  a 
conscious  life  in  the  world  to  come,  one  has  first  of  all  to 
believe  in  that  life  during  terrestrial  existence.  On  these 
two  aphorisms  of  the  Secret  Science  all  the  philosophy  as 
to  post-mortem  consciousness  and  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  is  built.  The  Ego  receives  always  according  to  its 
deserts.  After  the  dissolution  of  the  body  there  com- 
mences for  it  a  period  of  full  awakened  consciousness,  or 
a  state  of  chaotic  dreams,  or  an  utterly  dreamless  sleep  un- 
distinguishable  from  annihilation ;  and  these  are  the  three 
kinds  of  sleep.  If  our  physiologists  find  the  cause  of  dreams 
and  visions  in  an  unconscious  preparation  for  them  during 
the  waking  hours,  why  cannot  the  same  be  admitted  for  the 
post-mortem  dreams  ?  I  repeat  it :  death  is  sleep.  After 
death,  before  the  spiritual  eyes  of  the  soul,  begins  a  per- 
formance according  to  a  program  learned  and  very  often 
unconsciously  composed  by  ourselves :  the  practical  carry- 
ing out  of  correct  beliefs  or  of  illusions  which  have  been 
created  by  ourselves.    The  Methodist  will  be  a  Methodist,

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  147THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  147

the  Mussulman  a  Mussulman,  at  least  for  some  time,  in  a 
perfect  fools*  paradise  of  each  man's  creation  and  making. 
These  are  the  post-mortem  fruits  of  the  tree  of  life.  Natu- 
rally our  belief  or  unbelief  in  the  fact  of  conscious  immor- 
tality is  unable  to  influence  the  unconditioned  reality  of  the 
fact  itself,  once  that  it  exists ;  but  the  belief  or  unbelief  in 
that  immortality  as  the  property  of  independent  or  sepa- 
rate entities  cannot  fail  to  give  color  to  that  fact  in  its  ap- 
plication to  each  of  these  entities.  Now  do  you  begin  to 
understand  it  ?

Inq. — I  think  I  do.  The  materialists^  disbelieving  in  every- 
thing that  cannot  be  proven  to  them  by  their  Jive  senses^  or  by 
scientific  reasoning  based  exclusively  on  the  data  furnished  by 
these  senses^  i7i  spite  of  their  inadequacy^  and  rejecting  every 
spiritual  manifestation^  accept  life  as  the  only  conscious  exis- 
tence. Therefore  accordi?tg  to  their  beliefs  so  will  it  be  unto 
them.  Tliey  will  lose  their  perso7ial  Ego^  and  will  plunge 
into  a  dreamless  sleep  imtil  a  7iew  awakeni?ig.     Is  it  so  ?

Theo. — Almost  so.  Remember  the  practically  universal 
teaching  of  the  two  kinds  of  conscious  existence — the  ter- 
restrial and  the  spiritual.  The  latter  must  be  considered 
real  from  the  very  fact  that  it  is  inhabited  by  the  eternal, 
changeless,  and  immortal  Monad ;  whereas  the  incarnating 
Ego  dresses  itself  up  in  new  garments  which  are  entirely  dif- 
ferent from  those  of  its  previous  incarnations,  and  in  which 
all  except  its  spiritual  prototype  is  doomed  to  a  change  so 
radical  as  to  leave  no  trace  behind.Inq. — How  so?  Can  my  co?tscious  terrestrial  ^' I^' per- 
ish not  07ily  for  a  time^  like  the  consciousness  of  the  materialist^ 
but  so  entirely  as  to  leave  no  trace  behind  ?

Theo. — According  to  the  teaching,  it  must  so  perish  and 
in  its  entirety,  all  except  the  principle  which,  by  uniting 
itself  with  the  Monad,  thereby  becomes  a  purely  spiritual 
and  indestructible  essence,   one  with  it  in  the  eternity.

148  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

But  in  the  case  of  an  out-and-out  materialist,  in  whose 
personal  *'  I  "  no  Buddhi  has  ever  reflected  itself,  how  can 
that  Buddhi  carry  away  into  the  eternity  one  particle  of 
that  terrestrial  personality  ?  Your  spiritual  "  I  "  is  immor- 
tal ;  but  from  your  present  self  it  can  carry  away  into  eter- 
nity only  that  which  has  become  worthy  of  immortality — 
namely,  the  simple  aroma  of  the  flower  that  has  been  mown 
down  by  death.

Inq. —  Well^  and  the  flower^  the  terrestrial  "/"  ?

Theo. — The  flower,  as  all  past  and  future  flowers  which 
have  blossomed  and  will  have  to  blossom  on  the  mother- 
bough — the  sutrdtmd,  all  children  of  one  root  or  Buddhi 
— will  return  to  dust.  Your  present  *'  I,"  as  you  yourself 
know,  is  not  the  body  now  sitting  before  me,  nor  yet  is  it 
what  I  would  call  Manas-Sutratma,  but  Sutratma- Buddhi.

Inq. — But  this  does  not  explaift  to  me  at  all  why  you  call 
life  after  death  immortal^  infinite^  and  real^  and  the  tei^restrial 
life  a  simple  phantom  or  illusion;  since  even  that  post-mortem 
life  has  limits ^  however  much  wider  they  may  be  than  those  of 
terrestrial  life,Theo. — No  doubt.  The  spiritual  Ego  of  man  moves 
in  eternity  like  a  pendulum  between  the  hours  of  birth  and 
death.  But  if  these  hours,  marking  the  periods  of  life  ter- 
restrial and  life  spiritual,  are  limited  in  their  duration,  and 
if  even  the  very  number  of  such  stages  in  eternity  between 
sleep  and  awakening,  illusion  and  reality,  is  also  limited, 
on  the  other  hand  the  spiritual  pilgrim  is  eternal.  And  so 
the  only  reality  in  our  conception  is  the  hours  of  man's 
post-mortem  life,  when,  disembodied — during  the  period  of 
that  pilgrimage  which  we  call  ''  the  cycle  of  rebirths  '* — 
he  stands  face  to  face  with  truth,  and  not  the  mirages  of 
his  transitory  earthly  existences.  Such  intervals,  however, 
their  limitation  notwithstanding,  do  not  prevent  the  Ego,

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  149THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  149

while  ever  perfecting  itself,  from  following  undeviatingly, 
though  gradually  and  slowly,  the  path  to  its  last  transfor- 
mation, when,  having  reached  its  goal,  it  becomes  a  divine 
being.  These  inter\'als  and  stages  help  toward  this  final 
result  instead  of  hindering  it ;  and  without  such  hmited  in- 
tervals the  divine  Ego  could  never  reach  its  ultimate  goal. 
I  have  given  you  once  already  a  famihar  illustration  by 
comparing  the  Ego,  or  the  individuality,  to  an  actor,  and 
its  numerous  and  various  incarnations  to  the  parts  it  plays. 
Will  you  call  these  parts  or  their  costumes  the  individuality 
of  the  actor  himself  ?  Like  that  actor,  the  Ego  is  forced, 
during  the  cycle  of  necessity,  which  continues  up  to  the 
very  threshold  of  pa7'anirvd7ia^  to  play  many  parts  which 
may  be  unpleasant  to  it.  But  as  the  bee  collects  its  honey 
from  every  flower,  leaving  the  rest  as  food  for  the  earthly 
worms,  so  does  our  spiritual  individuality,  whether  we  call 
it  sutrdtnid  or  Ego.  Collecting  from  every  terrestrial  per- 
sonality into  which  Karma  forces  it  to  incarnate  the  nec- 
tar alone  of  the  spiritual  qualities  and  self-consciousness,  it 
unites  all  these  into  one  whole,  and  emerges  from  its  chrys- 
alis as  the  glorified  Dhyan  Chohan.  So  much  the  worse 
for  those  terrestrial  personalities  from  which  it  could  collect 
nothing.  Such  personalities  assuredly  cannot  consciously 
outlive  their  terrestrial  existence.

Inq. — Thiis^  the7i,  it  seei?is  that,  for  the  terrestrial  per so7i- 
ality,  immortality  is  still  conditional.  Is,  the?i,  i^mnortality 
itself  not  u7iconditional  ?Inq. — Thiis^  the7i,  it  seei?is  that,  for  the  terrestrial  per so7i- 
ality,  immortality  is  still  conditional.  Is,  the?i,  i^mnortality 
itself  not  u7iconditional  ?

Theo. — Not  at  all.  But  immortality  cannot  touch  the 
non-existent ;  for  all  that  which  exists  as  sat,  or  emanates 
from  sat,  immortality  and  eternity  are  absolute.  Matter  is 
the  opposite  pole  of  spirit,  and  yet  the  two  are  one.  The 
essence  of  all  this — ^i.e.,  spirit,  force,  and  matter,  or  the 
three  in  one — is  as  endless  as  it  is  beginningless ;  but  the 
form  acquired  by  this  triple  unity  during  its  incarnations,

150  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

its  externality,  is  certainly  only  the  illusion  of  our  personal 
conceptions.  Therefore  do  we  call  Nirvana  and  the  uni- 
versal life  alone  a  reahty,  relegating  the  terrestrial  life,  its 
terrestrial  personality  included,  and  even  its  devachanic 
existence,  to  the  phantom  realm  of  illusion.

Inq. — But  why  in  such  a  case  call  sleep  the  reality^  and 
waking  the  illusion  ?

Theo. — It  is  simply  a  comparison  made  to  facilitate  the 
grasping  of  the  subject,  and  from  the  standpoint  of  terres- 
trial conceptions  it  is  a  very  correct  one.

Inq. — And  still  I  cannot  understand^  if  the  life  to  come  is 
based  o?z  justice  and  ??ierited  retribution  for  all  our  terrestrial 
sufferiiig^  how  in  the  case  of  materialists^  many  of  whom  are 
really  honest  and  charitable  men^  there  should  remain  of  their 
personality  nothing  but  the  refuse  of  a  faded  flower,Theo. — Such  a  thing  was  never  stated.  No  materialist, 
however  unbelieving,  can  die  forever  in  the  fullness  of  his 
spiritual  individuality.  What  was  said  is  that  conscious- 
ness can  disappear  either  fully  or  partially  in  the  case  of  a 
materialist,  so  that  no  conscious  remains  of  his  personality 
survive.

Inq. — But  surely  this  is  aiinihilation  ?

Theo. — Certainly  not.  One  can  sleep  a  dead  sleep  and 
miss  several  stations  during  a  long  railway  journey,  without 
the  slightest  recollection  or  consciousness,  and  awake  at 
another  station  and  continue  the  journey  past  innumerable 
other  halting-places  till  the  end  of  the  journey  or  the  goal 
is  reached.  Three  kinds  of  sleep  were  mentioned  to  you — 
the  dreamless,  the  chaotic,  and  the  one  which  is  so  real  that 
dreams  become  full  reahties  to  the  sleeper.  If  you  believe 
in  the  latter,  why  can  you  not  believe  in  the  former  ? 
According  to  the  after-hfe  a  man  has  beheved  in  and  ex- 
pected, such  is  the  life  he  will  have.    He  who  expected  no

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  151THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  151

life  to  come  will  have  an  absolute  blank,  amounting  to  an- 
nihilation, in  the  interval  between  the  two  births.  This  is 
just  the  carrying  out  of  the  program  we  spoke  of — a  pro- 
gram created  by  the  materiahsts  themselves.  But  there  are 
various  kinds  of  materialists,  as  you  say.  A  selfish,  wicked 
egoist,  one  who  never  shed  a  tear  for  any  one  but  himself, 
thus  adding  entire  indifference  to  the  whole  world  to  his 
unbelief,  must,  at  the  threshold  of  death,  drop  his  person- 
ality forever.  This  personality  having  no  tendrils  of  sym- 
pathy for  the  world  around,  and  hence  nothing  to  attach 
it  to  stitrdtmd,  it  follows  that  with  the  last  breath  every 
connection  between  the  two  is  broken.  There  being  no 
Devachan  for  such  a  materialist,  the  siltrdtmd  will  reincar- 
nate almost  immediately.  But  those  materialists  who  erred 
in  nothing  but  their  disbelief  will  oversleep  but  one  station. 
And  the  time  will  come  when  such  ex-materialists  will  per- 
ceive themselves  in  the  eternity,  and  perhaps  repent  that 
they  lost  even  one  day,  one  station,  from  the  life  eternal.

Inq. — Still  would  it  not  be  more  correct  to  say  that  death 
is  birth  into  a  new  life,  or  a  return  once  7nore  into  eternity  ?Inq. — Still  would  it  not  be  more  correct  to  say  that  death 
is  birth  into  a  new  life,  or  a  return  once  7nore  into  eternity  ?

Theo. — You  may  if  you  like.  Only  remember  that  births 
differ,  and  that  there  are  births  of  still-born  beings,  which 
are  failures  of  natiure.  Moreover,  with  your  fixed  Western 
ideas  about  material  life,  the  words  ''  living  "  and  ''  being  '^ 
are  quite  inapplicable  to  the  pure  subjective  state  of  post- 
mortem existence.  Save  in  a  few  philosophers  who  are  not 
read  by  the  many,  and  who  themselves  are  too  confused  to 
present  a  distinct  picture  of  it,  your  Western  ideas  of  life 
and  death  have  become  so  narrow  that  on  the  one  hand 
they  have  led  to  crass  materialism,  and  on  the  other  to 
the  still  more  material  conception  of  the  other  life  which 
the  Spiritualists  have  formulated  in  their  ''summer-land." 
There  the  souls  of  men  eat,  drink,  marry,  and  live  in  a 
paradise  quite  as  sensual  as  that  of  Mohammed,  and  even

152  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

less  philosophical.  Nor  are  the  average  conceptions  of  the 
uneducated  Christians  any  better ;  if  possible,  they  are  still 
more  material.  What  between  truncated  angels,  brass  trum- 
pets, golden  harps,  and  material  hell-fires,  the  Christian 
heaven  seems  like  a  fairy  scene  at  a  Christmas  pantomime. 
It  is  because  of  these  narrow  conceptions  that  you  find 
such  difficulty  in  understanding.  It  is  just  because  the  life 
of  the  disembodied  soul,  while  possessing  all  the  vividness 
of  reality,  as  in  certain  dreams,  is  devoid  of  every  grossly 
objective  form  of  terrestrial  hfe  that  the  Eastern  philoso- 
phers have  compared  it  with  visions  of  sleep.

DEFINITE   WORDS  FOR  DEFINITE    THINGS.DEFINITE   WORDS  FOR  DEFINITE    THINGS.

Inq. — Do  you  not  think  that  it  is  because  there  are  no  defi- 
nite and  fixed  terms  to  indicate  each  ^^  principle  "  i7i  man,  that 
such  a  confiision  of  ideas  arises  i7i  our  minds  with  respect  to 
the  respective  functions  of  these  principles  ?

Theo. — I  have  thought  of  this  myself.  The  whole  trouble 
has  arisen  from  our  having  begun  with  Sanskrit  names  in 
our  expositions  of  and  discussion  about  the  ''principles," 
instead  of  immediately  coining,  for  the  use  of  Theosophists, 
their  equivalents  in  English.  We  must  try  and  remedy  this 
now.

Inq. —  You  will  do  well,  as  it  may  avoid  further  confusion  ; 
no  two  Theosophical  writers,  it  see7?is  to  me,  have  hitherto 
agreed  to  call  the  same  principle  by  the  sa7?te  na7ne,

Theo. — The  confusion  is  more  apparent  than  real,  how- 
ever. I  have  heard  some  of  our  Theosophists  expressing 
surprise,  and  criticizing  several  essays  speaking  of  these 
principles.  When  examined,  however,  there  was  no  worse 
mistake  in  them  than  the  use  of  the  word  "  soul "  to  cover 
the  three  principles,  without  specifying  the  distinctions. 
The  first  and  positively  the  clearest  of  our  Theosophical

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  153

writers,  Mr.  A.  P.  Sinnett,  has  some  comprehensive  and 
admirably  written  passages  on  the  ''  Higher  Self."  *  Never- 
theless his  real  idea  has  also  been  misconceived  by  some, 
owing  to  his  using  the  word  ''  soul "  in  a  general  sense. 
Yet  here  are  a  few  passages  which  will  show  you  how  clear 
and  comprehensive  is  all  that  he  writes  on  the  subject :The  human  soul,  once  launched  on  the  streams  of  evolution  as  a 
human  individuality,!  passes  through  alternate  periods  of  physical  and 
relatively  spiritual  existence.  It  passes  from  the  one  plane  or  stratum 
or  condition  of  nature*  to  the  other  under  the  guidance  of  its  karmic 
affinities ;  living  in  incarnations  the  life  which  its  Karma  has  preor- 
dained ;  modifying  its  progress  within  the  limitations  of  circumstances  ; 
and — developing  fresh  Karma  by  its  use  or  abuse  of  opportunities — it 
returns  to  spiritual  existence  (Devachan)  after  each  physical  life — 
through  the  intervening  region  of  Kamaloka — for  rest  and  refresh- 
ment and  for  the  gradual  absorption  into  its  essence,  as  so  much  cos- 
mic progress,  of  the  life's  experience  gained  **  on  earth"  or  during 
physical  existence.  This  view  of  the  matter  will,  moreover,  have 
suggested  many  collateral  inferences  to  any  one  thinking  over  the  sub- 
ject; for  instance,  that  the  transfer  of  consciousness  from  the  Kama- 
loka to  the  devachanic  stage  of  this  progression  would  necessarily  be 
gradual  ;t  that,  in  truth,  no  hard-and-fast  line  separates  the  varieties 
of  spiritual  conditions ;  that  even  the  spiritual  and  physical  planes,  as 
psychic  faculties  in  living  people  show,  are  not  so  hopelessly  walled 
off  from  one  another  as  materialistic  theories  would  suggest ;  that  all 
states  of  nature  are  all  around  us  simultaneously,  and  appeal  to  differ- 
ent perceptive  faculties  ;  and  so  on.  ...  It  is  clear  that  during  physical 
existence  people  who  possess  psychic  faculties  remain  in  connection 
with  the  planes  of  superphysical  consciousness ;  and  although  most 
people  may  not  be  endowed  with  such  faculties,  we  all — as  the  phe- 
nomena of  sleep,  even,  and  especially  .  .  .  those  of  somnambulism  or 
mesmerism,  show — are  capable  of  entering  into  conditions  of  conscious-*  See  Transactions  of  the  London  Lodge  oftJie  Theosophical  Society  y  No.  7,  Octo- 
ber, 1885.

t  The  reincarnating  Ego,  or  human  soul,  as  he  called  it ;  the  "  causal  body  '*  with 
the  Vedantins.

X  The  length  of  this  "  transfer"  depends,  however,  on  the  degree  of  spirituality  in 
the  ex-personality  of  the  disembodied  Ego.  For  those  whose  lives  were  very  spiritual 
this  transfer,  though  gradual,  is  very  rapid.  The  time  becomes  longer  with  the  mate- 
rialistically inclined.

154  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

ness  that  the  five  physical  senses  have  nothing  to  do  with.  We — the 
souls  within  us — are  not,  as  it  were,  altogether  adrift  in  the  ocean  of 
matter.  We  clearly  retain  some  surviving  interest  or  rights  in  the 
shore  from  which,  for  a  time,  we  have  floated  off.  The  process  of  in- 
carnation, therefore,  is  not  fully  described  when  we  speak  of  an  alter- 
nate existence  on  the  physical  and  spiritual  planes,  and  thus  picture 
the  soul  as  a  complete  entity  slipping  entirely  from  the  one  state  of 
existence  to  the  other.  The  more  correct  definitions  of  the  process 
would  probably  represent  incarnation  as  taking  place  on  this  physical 
plane  of  nature  by  reason  of  an  efflux  emanating  from  the  soul.  The 
spiritual  realm  would  all  the  while  be  the  proper  habitat  of  the  soul, 
which  would  never  entirely  quit  it ;  and  that  non-mate7'ializable  portion 
of  the  soul  which  abides  permanently  on  the  spiritual  plane  may  fitly, 
perhaps,  be  spoken  of  as  the  Higher  Self.This  ''Higher  Self  ^'  is  Atma,  and  of  course  it  is  "non- 
materiaHzable,"  as  Mr.  Sinnett  says.  Even  more,  it  can 
never  be  objective  under  any  circumstances,  even  to  the 
highest  spiritual  perception.  For  Atman,  or  the  ''  Higher 
Self,"  is  really  Brahma,  the  Absolute,  and  indistinguishable 
from  it.  In  hoiu'S  of  sa77iddhi  the  higher  spiritual  conscious- 
ness of  the  Initiate  is  entirely  absorbed  in  the  One  Essence, 
which  is  Atman,  and  therefore,  being  one  with  the  whole, 
there  can  be  nothing  objective  for  it.  Now  some  of  our 
Theosophists  have  got  into  the  habit  of  using  the  words 
''  Self  "  and  "  Ego  "  as  synonymous  ;  of  associating  the 
term  ''  Self "  with  only  man's  higher  individual  or  even 
personal  ''  Self ''  or  Ego,  whereas  this  term  ought  never  to 
be  applied  except  to  the  07ie  Universal  Self.  Hence  the 
confusion.  When  speaking  of  Manas,  the  ''  causal  body," 
and  connecting  it  with  the  Buddhic  radiance,  we  may  call 
it  the  ''  Higher  Ego,"  never  the  ''  Higher  Self."  For  even 
Buddhi,  the  spiritual  soul,  is  not  the  Self  but  the  vehicle 
only  of  Self.  All  the  other  selves — such  as  the  individual 
self  and  personal  self — ought  never  to  be  spoken  or  written 
of  without  their  qualifying  and  characteristic  adjectives.

Thus  in  the  above  most  excellent  essay  on  the  "  Higher 
Self  "  the  term  is  apphed  to  the  sixth  principle  or  Buddhi

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  155Thus  in  the  above  most  excellent  essay  on  the  "  Higher 
Self  "  the  term  is  apphed  to  the  sixth  principle  or  Buddhi

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  155

— of  course  in  conjunction  with  Manas,  as  without  such 
union  there  would  be  no  thinking  principle  or  element  in 
the  spiritual  soul — and  has  in  consequence  given  rise  to 
just  such  misunderstandings.  The  statement  that  ''a  child 
does  not  acquire  its  sixth  principle — or  become  a  morally 
responsible  being  capable  of  generating  Karma — until  seven 
years  old "  proves  what  is  meant  therein  by  the  term 
"  Higher  Self."  Therefore  the  able  author  is  quite  justi- 
fied in  explaining  that,  after  the  ''Higher  Self"  has  passed 
into  the  human  being  and  saturated  the  personality — in 
some  of  the  finer  organizations  only — with  its  conscious- 
ness, "people  with  psychic  faculties  may  indeed  perceive 
this  Higher  Self  through  their  finer  senses  from  time  to 
time."  But  so  also  are  those  who  limit  the  term  ''  Higher 
Self  "  to  the  Universal  Divine  Principle  ''  justified  "  in  mis- 
understanding him.  For  when,  without  being  prepared 
for  this  shifting  of  metaphysical  terms,*  we  read  that  while 
"  fully  manifesting  on  the  physical  plane  .  .  .  the  Higher 
Self  still  remains  a  conscious  spiritual  Ego  on  the  corre- 
sponding plane  of  nature,"  we  are  apt  to  see  in  the 
"  Higher  Self  "  of  this  sentence  Atma,  and  in  the  spiritual 
Ego  Manas,  or  rather  Buddhi-Manas,  and  forthwith  to 
criticize  the  whole  thing  as  incorrect.

To  avoid  henceforth  such  misapprehensions,  I  propose 
to  translate  the  occult  Eastern  terms  into  their  English 
equivalents,  and  offer  these  for  future  use.To  avoid  henceforth  such  misapprehensions,  I  propose 
to  translate  the  occult  Eastern  terms  into  their  English 
equivalents,  and  offer  these  for  future  use.

'  Atma,  the  inseparable  ray  of  the  Uni- 
versal and  One  Self.  It  is  the  God 
above,  more  than  within,  us.  Happy 
the  man  who  succeeds  in  saturating 
his  Inner  Ego  with  it  !

*  **  Shifting  of  metaphysical  terms"  applies  here  only  to  the  shifting  of  their  trans- 
lated equivalents  from  the  Eastern  expressions ;  for  to  this  day  there  have  never  ex- 
isted any  such  terms  in  English,  every  Theosophist  having  to  coin  his  own  terms  to 
render  his  thought.     It  is  high  time,  then,  to  settle  on  some  definite  nomenclature.

The  Higher  Self  is  <

156

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

The  Spiritual 
Divine  Ego  is

The  Liner  or 
Higher  Ego  is

The  Lower  or  Per- 
so?ial  Ego  is

{the  spiritual  soul  or  Buddhi,  in  close 
union  with  Manas,  the  mind-principle, 
without  which  the  former  is  no  Ego  at 
all,  but  only  the  Atmic  Vehicle.

C  Manas,  the  ''fifth  "  principle,  so  called, 
independently  of  Buddhi.  The  mind- 
principle  is  only  the  Spiritual  Ego 
when  merged  into  one  with  Buddhi ; 
no  materialist  being  supposed  to  have 
in  him  such  an  Ego,  however  great  his 
intellectual  capacities.  It  is  the  per- 
manent individuality  or  the  reincarnat-

^ing  Ego. 
the  physical  man  in  conjunction  with 
his  lower  self — i.e.,  animal  instincts, 
passions,  desires,  etc.  It  is  called  the 
false  perso7iality ^  and  consists  of  the 
lower  Manas  combined  with  Kama 
Rupa,  and  operating  through  the  phys- 
ical body  and  its  phantom  or  double.The  remaining  principle,  Prana,  or  life,  is,  strictly  speaking, 
the  radiating  force  or  energy  of  Atma — as  the  Universal 
Life  and  the  One  Self — its  lower,  or  rather  (in  its  effects) 
more  physical  (because  manifesting),  aspect.  Prana,  or  life, 
permeates  the  whole  being  of  the  objective  universe,  and  is 
called  a  principle  only  because  it  is  an  indispensable  factor 
and  the  deus  ex  mac  hind  of  the  living  man.

INQ.—This  division  will  answer  better^  I  believe^  as  it  is  so 
much  simplified  iii  its  combinations.  The  other  is  much  too 
metaphysical.

Theo. — If  outsiders  as  well  as  Theosophists  would  agree 
to  it,  it  would  certainly  make  matters  much  more  compre- 
hensible.

X.

ON  THE  NATURE  OF  OUR  THINKING  PRINCIPLE.

THE  MYSTERY  OF   THE  EGO,

Inq. — In  the  quotation  you  brought  forward  a  little  while 
agofrofu  the  Buddhist  Catechism  I  perceive  a  discrepancy  which 
I  should  like  to  hear  explained.  It  is  there  stated  that  the 
skandhas — memory  included — change  with  every  new  incar- 
nation. And  yet  it  is  asserted  that  the  reflection  of  the  past 
lives,  which,  we  are  told,  are  entirely  made  up  of  skandhas, 
*^  must  survive, ^^  At  the  present  mome7it  I  am  not  quite  clear 
in  my  mind  as  to  what  it  is  precisely  that  survives,  a?id  I  should 
like  to  have  it  explained.  What  is  it  ?  Is  it  only  that  ''  re- 
flection^'* or  those  skandhas,  or  always  that  same  Ego,  the 
Manas  ?Theo. — I  have  just  explained  that  the  reincarnating  prin- 
ciple, or  that  which  we  call  the  divine  man,  is  indestruc- 
tible throughout  the  hfe-cycle — indestructible  as  a  thinking 
entity,  and  even  as  an  ethereal  form.  The  ** reflection"  is 
only  the  spiritualized  reinembrafice ,  during  the  devachanic 
period,  of  the  ex-personality — Mr.  A  or  Mrs.  B — with  which 
the  Ego  identifies  itself  during  that  period.  Since  the  de- 
vachanic period  is  but  the  continuation  of  the  earth-life,  so 
to  say — the  very  acme  and  pith,  in  an  unbroken  series,  of

157

158  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

the  few  happy  moments  in  that  now  past  existence — the 
Ego  has  to  identify  itself  with  the  personal  consciousness 
of  that  earth-life  if  anything  shall  remain  of  it.

Inq. —  This  means  that  the  Ego^  7iotwithsta7iding  its  divine 
nature^  passes  every  such  period  betweefi  two  incarnations  i?i 
a  state  of  mejital  obscicration  or  temporary  insanity  ?Theo. — You  may  regard  it  as  you  like.  Believing  that, 
outside  the  One  Reality,  nothing  is  more  than  a  passing 
illusion — the  whole  universe  included — we  do  not  view  it 
as  insanity,  but  as  a  very  natural  sequence  or  development 
of  the  terrestrial  life.  What  is  life  ?  A  bundle  of  the  most 
varied  experiences,  of  daily  changing  ideas,  emotions,  and 
opinions.  In  our  youth  we  are  often  enthusiastically  de- 
voted to  an  ideal,  to  some  hero  or  heroine  whom  we  try 
to  follow  and  revive ;  a  few  years  later,  when  the  freshness 
of  our  youthful  feelings  has  faded  out  and  sobered  down, 
we  are  the  first  to  laugh  at  our  fancies.  And  yet  there  was 
a  day  when  we  had  so  thoroughly  identified  our  own  per- 
sonality with  that  of  the  ideal  in  our  mind — especially  if  it 
was  that  of  a  living  being — that  it  became  entirely  merged 
and  lost  in  our  ideal.  Can  it  be  said  of  a  man  of  fifty  that 
he  is  the  same  being  that  he  was  at  twenty  ?  The  inner 
man  is  the  same ;  the  outward  living  personality  is  com- 
pletely transformed  and  changed.  Would  you  also  call 
these  changes  in  the  human  mental  states  insanity  ?

Inq. — How  would  you  name  them,  and  especially  how 
would  you  explai?i  the  permanence  of  o?ie  and  the  evanescence 
of  the  other  ?

Theo. — We  have  our  own  doctrine  ready,  and  to  us  it 
offers  no  difficulty.  The  clue  lies  in  the  double  conscious- 
ness of  our  mind,  and  also  in  the  dual  nature  of  the  mental 
principle.  There  is  a  spiritual  consciousness — the  manasic 
mind  illumined  by  the  light  of  Buddhi — which  subjectively

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  159THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  159

perceives  abstractions,  and  a  sentient  conscionsness — the 
lower  manasic  light — inseparable  from  our  physical  brain 
and  senses.  The  latter  consciousness  is  held  in  subjection 
by  the  brain  and  physical  senses,  and,  being  in  its  turn 
equally  dependent  on  them,  must  of  course  fade  out  and 
finally  die  with  the  disappearance  of  the  brain  and  physical 
senses.  It  is  only  the  spiritual  consciousness,  whose  root 
lies  in  eternity,  which  survives  and  hves  forever,  and  may 
therefore  be  regarded  as  immortal.  Everything  else  be- 
longs to  passing  illusions.

Inq. —  What  do  you  really  understand  by  illusion  i?i  this 
case  ?

Theo. — It  is  very  well  described  in  the  above-mentioned 
essay  on  the  *'  Higher  Self,'*  in  which  the  author  says :Theo. — It  is  very  well  described  in  the  above-mentioned 
essay  on  the  *'  Higher  Self,'*  in  which  the  author  says :

The  theory  we  are  considering  (the  interchange  of  ideas  between  the 
Higher  Ego  and  the  lower  self)  harmonizes  very  well  with  the  treat- 
ment of  this  world  in  which  we  live  as  a  phenomenal  world  of  illusion, 
the  spiritual  planes  of  Nature  being,  on  the  other  hand,  the  noumenal 
world  or  plane  of  reality.  That  region  of  Nature  in  which,  so  to  speak, 
the  permanent  soul  is  rooted  is  more  real  than  that  in  which  its  tran- 
sitory blossoms  appear  for  a  brief  space  to  wither  and  fall  to  pieces, 
while  the  plant  recovers  energy  for  sending  forth  a  fresh  flower.  Sup- 
posing flowers  only  were  perceptible  to  ordinary  senses,  and  their  roots 
existed  in  a  state  of  Nature  intangible  and  invisible  to  us,  philosophers 
in  such  a  world  who  divined  that  there  were  such  things  as  roots  in 
another  plane  of  existence  would  be  apt  to  say  of  the  flowers,  *'  These 
are  not  the  real  plants  ;  they  are  of  no  relative  importance,  merely  illu- 
sive phenomena  of  the  moment."

This  is  what  I  mean.  It  is  not  the  world  in  which  blos- 
som the  transitory  and  evanescent  flowers  of  personal  lives 
which  is  the  real  permanent  world,  but  that  one  in  which 
we  find  the  root  of  consciousness,  the  root  which  is  beyond 
illusion  and  dwells  in  the  eternity.

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  by  the  root  dwelling  in  eter- 
nity ?

160  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  by  the  root  dwelling  in  eter- 
nity ?

160  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

Theo. — I  mean  by  this  root  the  thinking  entity,  the  Ego 
which  incarnates,  whether  we  regard  it  as  an  angel,  a  spirit, 
or  a  force.  Of  that  which  falls  under  our  sensuous  per- 
ceptions only  what  grows  directly  from,  or  is  attached  to, 
this  invisible  root  above  can  partake  of  its  immortal  life. 
Hence  every  noble  thought,  idea,  and  aspiration  of  the  per- 
sonahty  it  informs,  proceeding  from  and  fed  by  this  root, 
must  become  permanent.  As  to  the  physical  conscious- 
ness, as  it  is  a  quahty  of  the  sentient  but  lower  ''principle" 
— Kama  Rupa,  or  animal  instinct,  illuminated  by  the  lower 
manasic  reflection,  or  the  human  soul — it  must  disappear. 
It  is  the  higher  consciousness  which  displays  activity  while 
the  body  is  asleep  or  paralyzed,  our  memory  registering 
but  feebly  and  inaccurately — because  automatically — such 
experiences,  and  often  failing  to  be  even  slightly  impressed 
by  them.

Inq. — But  how  is  it  that  Manas,  although  you  call  it  nous, 
a  ''God,''^  is  so  weak  during  its  incarnations  as  to  be  actually 
co7iquered  and  fettered  by  its  body  ?Inq. — But  how  is  it  that  Manas,  although  you  call  it  nous, 
a  ''God,''^  is  so  weak  during  its  incarnations  as  to  be  actually 
co7iquered  and  fettered  by  its  body  ?

Theo. — I  might  retort  with  a  similar  question,  and  ask, 
How  is  it  that  he  whom  you  regard  as  ''  God  of  gods " 
and  the  One  Living  God  is  so  weak  as  to  allow  evil  (or 
the  devil)  to  have  the  best  of  him  as  much  as  of  all  his 
creatures,  both  while  in  heaven,  and  also  during  the  time 
he  was  incarnated  on  this  earth  ?  You  are  sure  to  reply 
again.  This  is  a  mystery,  and  we  are  forbidden  to  pry  into 
the  mysteries  of  God.  But  as  we  are  not  forbidden  to  do 
so  by  our  rehgious  philosophy,  I  answer  that,  unless  a  God 
descends  as  an  avatdra,  no  divine  principle  can  be  other- 
wise than  cramped  and  paralyzed  by  turbulent  animal  mat- 
ter. Heterogeneity  will  always  have  the  upper  hand  over 
homogeneity  on  this  plane  of  illusions ;  and  the  nearer  an 
essence  is  to  its  root-principle,  primordial  homogeneity,  the 
more  difficult  it  is  for  the  latter  to  assert  itself  on  earth.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  161

Spiritual  and  divine  powers  lie  dormant  in  every  human 
being ;  and  the  wider  the  sweep  of  his  spiritual  vision  the 
mightier  will  be  the  God  within  him.  But  few  men  can 
feel  that  God.  As  an  average  rule,  deity  is  always  bound 
and  limited  in  our  thought  by  earlier  conceptions,  ideas  in- 
culcated in  us  from  childhood ;  therefore  it  is  so  difficult 
for  you  to  understand  our  philosophy.

Inq. — A7td  is  it  this  Ego  of  ours  which  is  our  God?Inq. — A7td  is  it  this  Ego  of  ours  which  is  our  God?

Theo. — Not  at  all ;  ''a  God  "  is  not  the  Universal  Deity, 
but  only  a  spark  from  the  one  ocean  of  Divine  Fire.  Our 
God  within  us,  or  '^  our  Father  in  secret,"  is  what  we  call 
the  Higher  Self,  Atma.  Our  incarnating  Ego  was  a  God 
in  its  origin,  as  were  all  the  primeval  emanations  of  the  One 
Unknown  Principle.  But  since  its  '^fall  into  matter,"  hav- 
ing to  incarnate  throughout  the  cycle,  in  succession,  from 
first  to  last,  it  is  no  longer  a  free  and  happy  God,  but  a 
poor  pilgrim  on  his  way  to  regain  that  which  he  has  lost. 
I  can.  answer  you  more  fully  by  repeating  what  is  said  of 
the  Inner  Man  in  Isis  Unveiled  (ii.,  593) :From  the  remotest  antiquity  mankind  as  a  whole  have  always  been 
convinced  of  the  existence  of  a  personal  spiritual  entity  within  the  per- 
sonal physical  man.  This  inner  entity  was  more  or  less  divine,  accord- 
ing to  its  proximity  to  the  crown,  .  .  .  The  closer  the  union,  the 
more  serene  man's  destiny,  the  less  dangerous  the  external  conditions. 
This  belief  is  neither  bigotry  nor  superstition,  only  an  ever-present, 
instinctive  feeling  of  the  proximity  of  another  spiritual  and  invisible 
world,  which,  though  it  be  subjective  to  the  senses  of  the  outward 
man,  is  perfectly  objective  to  the  Inner  Ego.  Furthermore,  they  be- 
lieved that  there  are  external  and  internal  conditiofts  which  affect  the 
detennination  of  our  will  upon  our  actions.  They  rejected  fatalism, 
for  fatalism  implies  a  blind  course  of  some  still  blinder  power.  But 
they  believed  in  destiny  (or  Karma),  which  from  birth  to  death  every 
man  is  weaving  thread  by  thread  around  himself,  as  a  spider  does  his 
cobweb ;  and  this  destiny  is  guided  either  by  that  presence  termed  by 
some  the  guardian  angel,  or  by  our  more  intimate  astral  inner  man, 
who  is  but  too  often  the  evil  genius  of  the  man  of  flesh  (or  the  per- 
sonality).    Both  these  lead  on  .  .  .  man,  but  one  of  them  must  pre-

162  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.162  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

vail ;  and  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  invisible  affray  the  stern  and 
implacable  law  of  compensation  {and  retribution)  steps  in  and  takes  its 
course,  following  faithfully  the  fluctuations  (of  the  conflict).  When 
the  last  strand  is  woven,  and  man  is  seemingly  inwrapped  in  the  net- 
work of  his  own  doing,  then  he  finds  himself  completely  under  the 
empire  of  this  self-made  destiny.  It  then  either  fixes  him  like  the  inert 
shell  against  the  immovable  rock,  or  like  a  feather  carries  him  away 
in  a  whirlwind  raised  by  his  own  actions.

Such  is  the  destiny  of  the  ma7i — the  true  Ego,  not  the 
automaton,  the  shell  \\\dX  goes  by  that  name.  It  is  for  this 
man  to  become  the  conqueror  over  matter.

THE   COMPLEX  NATURE   OF  MANAS,

Inq. — But  you  wanted  to  tell  me  something  of  the  essential 
nature  of  Manas ^  and  of  the  relation  in  which  the  skandhas 
of  physical  man  stand  to  it,

Theo. — It  is  this  nature,  mysterious,  protean,  beyond 
any  grasp,  and  almost  shadowy  in  its  correlations  with  the 
other  principles,  that  is  so  difBcult  to  reahze,  and  still  more 
difficult  to  explain.  Manas  is  a  principle,  and  yet  it  is  an 
entity  and  individuality,  or  Ego.  He  is  a  God,  and  yet  he 
is  doomed  to  an  endless  cycle  of  incarnations,  for  each  of 
which  he  is  made  responsible,  and  for  each  of  which  he 
has  to  suffer.  All  this  seems  as  contradictory  as  it  is  puz- 
zling ;  nevertheless,  there  are  hundreds  of  people,  even  in 
America,  who  realize  all  this  perfectly,  for  they  comprehend 
the  Ego  not  only  in  its  integrity,  but  in  its  many  aspects. 
But  if  I  would  make  myself  comprehensible,  I  must  begin 
at  the  beginning  and  give  you  the  genealogy  of  this  Ego 
in  a  few  Hues.

Inq. — Say  on,Inq. — Say  on,

Theo. — Try  to  imagine  a  spirit,  a  celestial  being,  whether 
we  call  it  by  one  name  or  another,  divine  in  its  essential 
nature,  yet  not  pure  enough  to  be  one  with  the  All,  and

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  163THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  163

consequently  having  to  purify  its  nature  so  that  it  may 
finally  reach  that  goal.  It  can  do  so  only  by  passing  in- 
dividually diTid.  personally — i.e.,  spiritually  and  physically — 
through  every  experience  and  feehng  that  exists  in  the 
manifold  or  differentiated  universe.  It  has,  therefore,  after 
gaining  experience  in  the  lower  kingdoms,  and  having 
ascended  higher  and  still  higher  with  every  rung  on  the 
ladder  of  being,  to  pass  through  every  experience  on  the 
human  planes.  In  its  very  essence  it  is  thought^  and  is 
therefore  called  in  its  plurality  mdnasa-putras ^  or  ''sons  of 
the  (universal)  mind."  ThisindividuaHzed  thought  is  what 
we  Theosophists  call  the  real  human  Ego,  the  thinking 
entity  imprisoned  in  a  case  of  flesh  and  bones.  This  is 
surely  a  spiritual  entity,  not  matter,  and  such  entities  are 
the  incarnating  Egos,  informing  the  bundle  of  animal  mat- 
ter called  mankind,  who  are  called  mdiiasa-ptctras ^  and  are 
'*  minds."  But  once  imprisoned  or  incarnate,  their  essence 
becomes  dual ;  that  is  to  say,  the  rays  of  the  eternal  Divine 
Mind,  considered  as  individual  entities,  assume  a  twofold 
attribute :  (a)  their  essential^  inherent,  characteristic,  heaven- 
aspiring  mind  or  higher  Manas,  and  {b)  the  human  quality 
of  thinking,  or  animal  cogitation,  rationalized,  owing  to  the 
superiority  of  the  human  brain,  the  kama-tending  or  lower 
Manas.  One  gravitates  toward  Buddhi,  the  other  tends 
downward  to  the  seat  of  passions  and  animal  desires.  The 
latter  have  no  room  in  Devachan,  nor  can  they  associate 
with  the  divine  triad  which  ascends  as  one  into  mental 
bliss.  Yet  it  is  the  Ego,  the  manasic  entity,  which  is  held 
responsible  for  all  the  sins  of  the  lower  attributes,  just  as  a 
parent  is  answerable  for  the  transgressions  of  the  child  so 
long  as  the  latter  remains  irresponsible.Inq. — Is  this  ^'  child^'  the  personality  ?

Theo. — It  is.     But  when  it  is  stated  that  the  personal- 
ity dies  with  the  body,  that  is  not  all.     The  body,  which

164  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

was  only  the  objective  symbol  of  Mr.  A  or  Mrs.  B,  fades 
away  with  all  the  material  skandhas,  which  are  the  visible 
expressions  of  it.  But  all  that  which  during  life  consti- 
tuted the  spiritual  bundle  of  experiences,  the  noblest  aspira- 
tions, undying  affections,  and  unselfish  nature  of  Mr.  A  or 
Mrs.  B,  clings  for  the  time  of  the  devachanic  period  to  the 
Ego,  and  the  Ego  is  identified  with  the  spiritual  portion  of 
the  terrestrial  entity,  which  has  now  passed  away  out  of 
sight.  The  actor  is  so  imbued  with  the  role  he  has  lately 
played  that  he  dreams  of  it  during  the  whole  devachanic 
night,  and  this  visiofi  continues  till  the  hour  strikes  for  him 
to  return  to  the  stage  of  life  to  enact  another  part.

Inq. — But  how  is  it  that  this  doctri?ie^  which  you  say  is  as 
old  as  thinking  me7t,  has  found  no  room,  say,  in  Christia?t 
theology  ?Inq. — But  how  is  it  that  this  doctri?ie^  which  you  say  is  as 
old  as  thinking  me7t,  has  found  no  room,  say,  in  Christia?t 
theology  ?

Theo. — You  are  mistaken — it  has ;  only  theology  has  dis- 
figured it  out  of  all  recognition,  as  it  has  many  other  doc- 
trines. Theology  calls  the  Ego  the  angel  that  God  gives 
us,  at  the-'  moment  of  our  birth,  to  take  care  of  our  soul. 
Theological  logic,  instead  of  holding  that  '* angel"  re- 
sponsible for  the  transgressions  of  the  poor  helpless  '^soul,'* 
makes  the  latter  punishable  for  all  the  sins  of  both  flesh  and 
mind  !  It  is  the  soul,  the  immaterial  ''breath"  of  God 
and  his  alleged  "  creation,"  which,  by  some  most  amazing 
intellectual  jugglery,  is  doomed  to  burn  in  a  material  hell 
without  ever  being  consumed,*  while  the  ''  angel "  escapes 
scot-free,  after  folding  his  white  pinions  and  wetting  them 
with  a  few  tears.  Aye,  these  are  our  '*  ministering  spirits," 
the  ''messengers  of  mercy"  who  are  sent.  Bishop  Mant 
tells  us —

...   to  fulfil 
Good  for  salvation's  heirs ;  for  us  they  still 
Grieve  when  we  sin,  rejoice  when  we  repent.

*  Being  of  "  an  asbestos-like  nature,"  according  to  the  eloquent  and  fiery  expression 
of  a  modern  English  Tertullian.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  165

Yet  it  becomes  evident  that  if  all  the  bishops  the  world 
over  were  asked  to  define  once  for  all  what  they  mean  by 
soid2j\di  its  functions,  they  would  be  as  unable  to  do  so  as 
to  show  us  any  shadow  of  logic  in  the  orthodox  belief  !

THE  DOCTRINE  IS  TAUGHT  IN  ST  JOHN'S  GOSPELTHE  DOCTRINE  IS  TAUGHT  IN  ST  JOHN'S  GOSPEL

Inq. — To  this  the  adherents  of  this  belief  might  answer 
that,  if  eve7i  the  orthodox  dog?na  does  promise  the  i^npenitent 
sinner  and  materialist  a  bad  time  of  it  in  a  rather  too  realistic 
ififerno,  it  gives  thetn,  on  the  other  hand,  a  cha7ice  for  repen- 
tance to  the  last  minute.  Moreover,  they  do  not  teach  annihi- 
lation, or  loss  of  personality ,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing,

Theo. — If  the  church  teaches  nothing  of  the  kind,  on 
the  other  hand,  Jesus  does ;  and  that  is  something  to  those, 
at  least,  who  place  Christ  higher  than  Christianity.

Inq. — Does  Christ  teach  anything  of  the  sort  ?

Theo. — He  does  ;  and  every  well-informed  Occultist  and 
even  Kabalist  will  tell  you  so.  Christ,  or  the  Fourth  Gos- 
pel at  any  rate,  teaches  reincarnation  and  also  the  annihi- 
lation of  the  personahty,  if  you  will  only  forget  the  dead 
letter  and  hold  to  the  esoteric  spirit.  Remember  verses  i 
and  2  in  chapter  xv.  of  St.  John.  What  does  the  parable 
speak  about  if  not  of  the  upper  triad  in  man  ?  Atma  is 
the  "husbandman,"  the  spiritual  Ego,  or  Buddhi  (Christos), 
the  ''  vine,"  while  the  animal  and  vital  soul,  the  personal- 
ity, is  the  ''branch."  ''  I  am  the  true  vine,  and  my  Father 
is  the  husbandman.  Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not 
fruit  he  taketh  away.  ...  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit 
of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine ;  no  more  can  ye,  except 
ye  abide  in  me.  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches.  .  .  . 
If  a  man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and 
is  withered  ^^ — and  cast  into  the  fire  and  burned.

Now  we  explain  it  in  this  way  :  disbelieving  in  the  hell-

166  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.Now  we  explain  it  in  this  way  :  disbelieving  in  the  hell-

166  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

fires  which  theology  discovers  as  underlying  the  threat  to 
the  '' branches,"  we  say  that  the  *' husbandman "  means 
Atma,  the  symbol  for  the  infinite,  impersonal  principle,* 
while  the  ''vine"  stands  for  the  spiritual  soul,  Christos, 
and  each  ''branch"  represents  a  new  incarnation.

Inq. — But  what  proofs  have  you  to  support  such  an  arbi- 
trary interpretatio7i  ?Inq. — But  what  proofs  have  you  to  support  such  an  arbi- 
trary interpretatio7i  ?

Theo. — Universal  symbology  is  a  warrant  for  its  correct- 
ness and  that  it  is  not  arbitrary.  Hermas  says  of  "  God  " 
that  he  "  planted  the  vineyard  " — i.e.,  he  created  mankind. 
In  the  Kabalah  it  is  shown  that  the  Aged  of  the  Aged,  or 
the  "  Long  Face,"  plants  a  "  vineyard,"  typifying  mankind, 
and  a  "  vine,"  meaning  life.  The  Spirit  of  "  King  Messiah  " 
is  therefore  shown  as  washing  his  garments  in  the  wine  from 
above,  from  the  creation  of  the  world.t  And  King  Mes- 
siah is  the  Ego  purified  by  "  washing  his  garments  " — i.e., 
his  personalities  in  rebirth — in  the  "  wine  from  above,"  or 
Buddhi.  Adam,  or  A-dam,  is  "  blood."  The  life  of  the 
flesh  is  in  the  blood — nephesh^  soul  (Lev.  xvii.).  And 
Adam  Kadmon  is  the  Only-Begotten.  Noah  also  plants  a 
vineyard — the  allegorical  hotbed  of  future  humanity.  As 
a  consequence  of  the  adoption  of  the  same  allegory,  we  find 
it  reproduced  in  the  Codex  Nazarceus,  Seven  vines — our 
seven  races  with  their  seven  saviors  or  Buddhas — are  pro- 
created. These  seven  vines  spring  from  Jukabar  Zivo,  and 
Aebel  Zivo  waters  them.f  When  the  blessed  will  ascend 
among  the  creatures  of  Light,  they  shall  see  Javar  Zivo, 
Lord  of  Life,  and  the  First  Vine.§  These  kabalistic  meta- 
phors are  thus  naturally  repeated  in  the  Gospel  according 
to  St.  John.

*  During  the  Mysteries  it  is  the  hierophant,  the  **  Father,"  who  planted  the 
"vine."  Every  symbol  has  seven  keys  to  it.  The  discloser  of  the  pleroma  was 
always  called  **  Father."  t  Zohar,  xl.,  lo.

%  Codex  NazarceuSy  Liber  Adami  Appellatt^ — a  Matth.  Norberg,  iii.,  60,  61.

§  Ibid.f  ii.,  281.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  167%  Codex  NazarceuSy  Liber  Adami  Appellatt^ — a  Matth.  Norberg,  iii.,  60,  61.

§  Ibid.f  ii.,  281.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  167

Let  us  not  forget  that — even  according  to  those  philoso- 
phies which  ignore  our  septenary  division — in  the  human 
system  the  Ego,  or  thinking  man^  is  called  the  Logos,  or 
the  "  Son "  of  soul  and  spirit.  ''  Manas  is  the  adopted 
son  of  King and  Queen "  (the  esoteric  equiva- 
lents for  Atma  and  Buddhi),  says  an  occult  work.  He  is 
the  '^  man-god  "  of  Plato,  who  crucifies  himself  in  ''  space," 
or  the  duration  of  the  life-cycle,  for  the  redemption  of 
matter.  This  he  does  by  incarnating  over  and  over  again, 
thus  leading  mankind  onward  to  perfection,  and  making 
thereby  room  for  lower  forms  to  develop  into  higher.  Not 
for  even  one  life  does  he  cease  progressing  himself  and  also 
helping  all  physical  Nature  to  progress  ;  even  the  occasional, 
very  rare  event  of  his  losing  one  of  his  personalities — in  the 
case  of  the  latter  being  entirely  devoid  of  even  a  spark  of 
spirituality — helps  toward  his  individual  progress.

Inq. — But  surely y  if  the  Ego  is  held  responsible  for  the 
transgressions  of  its  personalities^  it  has  to  answer  also  for  the 
loss,  or  rather  the  complete  annihilatioii^  of  07ie  of  such.

Theo. — Not  at  all,  unless  it  has  done  nothing  to  avert 
this  dire  fate.  But  if,  notwithstanding  all  its  efforts,  its 
voice,  the  voice  of  conscience,  has  been  unable  to  penetrate 
through  the  wall  of  matter,  then  the  obtuseness  of  the  latter, 
which  proceeds  from  the  imperfect  nature  of  the  material, 
is  classed  with  other  failures  of  nature.  The  Ego  is  suffi- 
ciently punished  by  the  loss  of  Devachan,  and  especially 
by  having  to  incarnate  almost  immediately.Inq. — This  doctrine  of  the  possibility  of  losi?ig  07ie's  soul — 
or  persofiality ,  do  you  call  it  ? — viilitates  against  the  ideal 
theories  of  both  Christians  and  Spiritualists,  though  Sweden- 
borg  adopts  it  to  a  certaiji  exteiit  in  what  he  calls  '^  spiritual 
death, ^"^     Christians  and  Spiritualists  will  never  accept  it,

Theo. — This  can  in  no  way  alter  a  fact  in  Nature,  if  it 
be  a  fact,  or  prevent  such  a  thing  occasionally  taking  place.

168  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,Theo. — This  can  in  no  way  alter  a  fact  in  Nature,  if  it 
be  a  fact,  or  prevent  such  a  thing  occasionally  taking  place.

168  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

The  universe  and  everything  in  it,  moral,  mental,  physical, 
psychic,  or  spiritual,  is  built  on  a  perfect  law  of  equilibrium 
and  harmony.  As  said  before  in  Isis  Unveiled^  the  centrip- 
etal force  could  not  manifest  itself  without  the  centrifugal 
in  the  harmonious  revolutions  of  the  spheres,  and  all  forms 
and  the  progress  of  such  forms  are  products  of  this  dual 
force  in  Nature.  Now  the  spirit,  or  Buddhi,  is  the  centrif- 
ugal, and  the  soul,  or  Manas,  the  centripetal  spiritual 
energy ;  and  to  produce  one  result  they  have  to  be  in  per- 
fect union  and  harmony.  Break  or  damage  the  centripetal 
motion  of  the  earthly  soul  tending  toward  the  center  which 
attracts  it ;  arrest  its  progress  by  clogging  it  with  a  heavier 
weight  of  matter  than  it  can  bear,  or  than  is  fit  for  the 
devachanic  state,  and  the  harmony  of  the  whole  will  be  de- 
stroyed. Personal  Kfe,  or  perhaps  rather  its  ideal  reflection, 
can  only  be  continued  if  sustained  by  the  twofold  force ; 
that  is,  by  the  close  union  of  Buddhi  and  Manas  in  every 
rebirth  or  personal  Hfe.  The  least  deviation  from  harmony 
damages  it ;  and  when  it  is  destroyed  beyond  redemption 
the  two  forces  separate  at  the  moment  of  death.  During 
a  brief  interval  the  persoiial  form — called  indifferently  kdma 
rupa  and  ?ndydvi  rupa — the  spiritual  efflorescence  of  which, 
attaching  itself  to  the  Ego,  follows  it  into  Devachan  and 
gives  to  the  permanent  individuality  its  personal  coloring, 
for  the  time,  so  to  speak,  is  carried  off  to  remain  in  Kama- 
loka  and  to  be  gradually  annihilated.  For  it  is  after  the 
death  of  the  utterly  depraved,  the  unspiritual,  and  the 
wicked  beyond  redemption  that  the  critical  and  supreme 
moment  arrives.  If  during  life  the  ultimate  and  desperate 
effort  of  the  Inner  Self  (Manas)  to  unite  something  of  the 
personality  with  itself  and  the  high  glimmering  ray  of  the 
divine  Buddhi  is  thwarted ;  if  this  ray  is  allowed  to  be 
more  and  more  shut  out  from  the  ever-thickening  crust  of 
the  physical  brain,  the  spiritual  Ego  or  Manas,  once  freed 
from  the  body,  remains  severed  entirely  from  the  etherealTHE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  169

relic  of  the  personality ;  and  the  latter,  or  Kama  Rupa,  fol- 
lowing its  earthly  attractions,  is  drawn  into  and  remains  in 
Hades,  which  we  call  Kamaloka.  These  are  ''the  with- 
ered  branches  "  mentioned  by  Jesus  as  being  cut  off  from 
the  ''vine."  Annihilation,  however,  is  never  instantaneous, 
and  may  require  centuries  sometimes  for  its  accomplishment. 
But  there  the  personahty  remains  along  with  the  remnants 
of  other  more  fortunate  personal  Egos,  and  becomes  with 
them  a  shell  and  an  elefuentary.  As  said  in  Isis  Unveiled^ 
it  is  these  two  classes  of  "spirits,'*  the  shells  and  the  ele- 
mentaries,  which  are  the  leading  "  stars  "  on  the  great  spirit- 
ual stage  of  "  materializations."  And,  you  may  be  sure  of 
it,  it  is  not  they  who  incarnate ;  and  therefore  it  is  that  so 
few  of  these  "  dear  departed  ones  "  know  anything  of  rein- 
carnation, and  thereby  mislead  the  Spiritualists.

Inq. — Bui  does  not  the  author  of  Isis  U?iveiled  stand  ac- 
cused of  having  preached  against  reincarnation  ?Inq. — Bui  does  not  the  author  of  Isis  U?iveiled  stand  ac- 
cused of  having  preached  against  reincarnation  ?

Theo. — By  those  who  have  misunderstood  what  was 
said,  yes.  At  the  time  that  work  was  written  reincarna- 
tion was  not  believed  in  by  any  Spirituahsts,  either  EngUsh 
or  American,  and  what  is  said  there  of  reincarnation  was 
directed  against  the  French  Spiritists,  whose  theory  is  as 
unphilosophical  and  absurd  as  the  Eastern  teaching  is  log- 
ical and  self-evident  in  its  truth.  The  reincarnationists  of 
the  Allan  Kardec  school  believe  in  an  arbitrary  and  imme- 
diate reincarnation.  With  them,  the  dead  father  can  incar- 
nate in  his  own  unborn  daughter,  and  so  on.  They  have 
neither  Devachan,  Karma,  nor  any  philosophical  theory 
that  would  warrant  or  prove  the  necessity  of  consecu- 
tive rebirths.  But  how  can  the  author  of  Isis  Unveiled 
argue  against  karmic  reincarnation,  at  long  intervals  vary- 
ing between  one  thousand  and  fifteen  hundred  years, 
when  it  is  the  fundamental  belief  of  both  Buddhists  and 
Hindus  ?

170  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

Inq. — Then  you  reject  the  theories  of  both  the  Spiritists  and 
the  Spiritualists  in  their  entirety  ?170  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

Inq. — Then  you  reject  the  theories  of  both  the  Spiritists  and 
the  Spiritualists  in  their  entirety  ?

Theo. — Not  in  their  entirety,  but  only  with  regard  to 
their  respective  fundamental  beliefs.  Both  rely  on  what 
their  ''spirits"  tell  them,  and  both  disagree  as  much  from 
each  other  as  we  Theosophists  disagree  from  both.  Truth 
is  one ;  and  when  we  hear  the  French  spooks  preaching 
reincarnation,  and  the  English  spooks  denying  and  de- 
nouncing the  doctrine,  we  say  that  either  the  French  or 
the  English  *'  spirits  "  do  not  know  what  they  are  talking 
about.  We  believe,  with  the  Spiritualists  and  the  Spiritists, 
in  the  existence  of  ''  spirits,"  or  invisible  beings  endowed 
with  more  or  less  intelhgence.  But  while  in  our  teachings 
their  kinds  and  genera  are  legion,  our  opponents  admit  of 
no  other  than  human  disembodied  ''  spirits,"  which,  to  our 
knowledge,  are  mostly  kamalokic  shells.

Inq. —  You  seem  very  bitter  against ''  spirits^  As  you  have 
given  me  your  views  aiid  your  reasons  for  disbelieving  in  the 
materialization  of  and  direct  comfuunication  in  seances  with, 
the  disembodied  spirits^  or  the  ''  spirits  of  the  dead^^  would 
you  mind  enlightening  7ne  as  to  07ie  more  fact  ?  Why  are 
some  Theosophists  never  tired  of  saying  how  dangerous  is  in- 
tercourse with  spirits^  and  mediums  hip  ?  Have  they  any  par- 
ticular reason  for  this  ?

Theo. — We  must  suppose  so.  I  know /have.  Owing 
to  my  familiarity  for  over  half  a  century  with  these  invisible 
but  only  too  tangible  and  undeniable  "influences,"  from 
the  conscious  elementals  and  semi-conscious  shells  down  to 
the  utterly  senseless  and  nondescript  spooks  of  all  kinds,  I 
claim  a  certain  right  to  my  views.Inq. — Can  you  give  a?i  instance  or  instances  to  show  why 
these  practices  should  be  regarded  as  dangerous  ?

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  171

Theo. — This  would  require  more  time  than  I  can  give 
you.  Every  cause  must  be  judged  by  the  effects  it  pro- 
duces. Go  over  the  history  of  Spirituahsm  for  the  last  fifty 
years,  ever  since  its  reappearance  in  this  century  in  Amer- 
ica, and  judge  for  yourself  whether  it  has  done  its  votaries 
more  good  or  harm.  Pray  understand  me.  I  do  not  speak 
against  real  spiritualism,  but  against  the  modern  movement 
which  goes  under  that  name,  and  the  so-called  philosophy 
invented  to  explain  its  phenomena.

Inq. — Do  you  not  believe  in  their  phenomena  at  all?Inq. — Do  you  not  believe  in  their  phenomena  at  all?

Theo. — It  is  because  I  believe  in  them  with  too  good 
reason,  and — save  some  cases  of  dehberate  fraud — know 
them  to  be  as  true  as  that  you  and  I  live,  that  all  my  being 
revolts  against  them.  Once  more  I  speak  only  of  physical, 
not  mental  or  even  psychic  phenomena.  Like  attracts 
like.  There  are  several  high-minded,  pure,  good  men  and 
women,  known  to  me  personally,  who  have  passed  years  of 
their  lives  under  the  direct  guidance  and  even  protection 
of  high  "  spirits,'*  whether  disembodied  or  planetary.  But 
/y^^j-i? intelhgences  are  not  of  the  type  of  the  ''John  Kings" 
and  the  ''  Ernests  "  who  figure  in  seance-rooms.  These  in- 
telligences guide  and  control  mortals  only  in  rare  and  ex- 
ceptional cases  to  which  they  are  attracted  and  magneti- 
cally drawn  by  the  karmic  past  of  the  individual.  It  is  not 
enough  to  sit  ''  for  development "  in  order  to  attract  them. 
That  only  opens  the  door  to  a  swarm  of  spooks,  good,  bad, 
and  indifferent,  to  which  the  medium  becomes  a  slave  for 
life.  It  is  against  such  promiscuous  mediumship  and  inter- 
course with  goblins  that  I  raise  my  voice,  not  against  spirit- 
ual Mysticism.  The  latter  is  ennobling  and  holy ;  the 
former  is  of  just  the  same  nature  as  the  phenomena  of  two 
centuries  ago,  for  which  so  many  witches  and  wizards  have 
been  made  to  suffer.     Read  Glanvil  and  other  authors  on

172  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

the  subject  of  witchcraft,  and  you  will  find  recorded  there 
the  parallels  of  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  physical  phenomena 
of  nineteenth- century  ''Spiritualism."

Inq. — Do  you  mean  to  suggest  that  it  is  all  witchcraft  and 
7iothing  more  ?Inq. — Do  you  mean  to  suggest  that  it  is  all  witchcraft  and 
7iothing  more  ?

Theo. — I  mean  that,  whether  conscious  or  unconscious, 
all  this  dealing  with  the  dead  is  necromancy,  and  a  most 
dangerous  practice.  For  ages  before  Moses  such  raising  of 
the  dead  was  regarded  by  all  the  intelligent  nations  as  sin- 
ful and  cruel,  inasmuch  as  it  disturbs  the  rest  of  the  souls 
and  interferes  with  their  evolutionary  development  into 
higher  states.  The  collective  wisdom  of  all  past  centuries 
has  ever  been  loud  m  denouncing  such  practices.  Finally, 
I  say,  what  I  have  never  ceased  repeating  orally  and^in  print 
for  fifteen  years :  While  some  of  the  so-called  ''  spirits " 
do  not  know  what  they  are  talking  about,  repeating  merely, 
like  poll-parrots,  what  they  find  in  the  mediums'  and  other 
people's  brains,  others  are  most  dangerous  and  can  only 
lead  one  to  evil.  These  are  two  self-evident  facts.  Go 
into  spiritualistic  circles  of  the  Allan  Kardec  school,  and 
you  find  ''  spirits "  asserting  reincarnation  and  speaking 
like  Roman  Catholics  born.  Turn  to  the  *'  dear  departed 
ones  "  in  England  and  America,  and  you  will  hear  them 
denying  reincarnation  through  thick  and  thin,  denouncing 
those  who  teach  it,  and  holding  to  Protestant  views.  Your 
best,  your  most  powerful  mediums  have  all  suffered  in  health 
of  body  and  mind.  Think  of  the  sad  end  of  Charles  Fos- 
ter, who  died  in  an  asylum,  a  raving  lunatic ;  of  Slade,  an 
epileptic ;  of  Eghnton — the  best  medium  now  in  England 
— subject  to  the  same  disease.  Look  back  over  the  life  of 
D.  D.  Home,  a  man  whose  mind  was  steeped  in  gall  and 
bitterness,  who  never  had  a  good  word  to  say  of  any  one 
whom  he  suspected  of  possessing  psychic  powers,  and  who 
slandered  every  other  medium  to  the  bitter  end.    This  Cal-THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  173

vin  of  Spiritualism  suffered  for  years  from  a  terrible  spinal 
disease,  brought  on  by  his  intercourse  with  the  ''spirits," 
and  died  a  perfect  wreck.  Think  again  of  the  sad  fate  of 
poor  Washington  Irving  Bishop.  I  knew  him  in  New  York 
when  he  was  fourteen,  and  he  was  undeniably  a  medium. 
It  is  true  that  the  poor  man  stole  a  march  on  his  "  spirits  " 
and  baptized  them  ''  unconscious  muscular  action,"  to  the 
great  gaudium  of  all  the  corporations  of  highly  learned 
and  scientific  fools,  and  to  the  replenishment  of  his  own 
pocket.  But  de  morticis  nil  nisi  bo7ium;  his  end  was  a  sad 
one.  He  had  strenuously  concealed  his  epileptic  fits — the 
first  and  strongest  symptom  of  genuine  mediumship — and 
who  knows  whether  he  was  dead  or  in  a  trance  when  the 
post-mortem  examination  was  performed?  His  relatives 
insist  that  he  was  alive,  if  we  are  to  believe  Renter's  tele- 
grams. Finally,  behold  the  veteran  mediums,  the  founders 
and  prime  movers  of  modern  Spiritualism — the  Fox  sisters. 
After  more  than  forty  years  of  intercourse,  the  ''angels" 
have  led  them  to  become  incurable  sots,  who  are  now  de- 
nouncing, in  pubhc  lectures,  their  own  lifelong  work  and 
philosophy  as  a  fraud.  What  kind  of  "spirits"  must  they 
be  who  prompted  them,  I  ask  you  ?

Inq. — But  is  your  inference  a  correct  one  ?Inq. — But  is  your  inference  a  correct  one  ?

Theo. — What  would  you  infer  if  the  best  pupils  of  a  par- 
ticular school  of  singing  broke  down  from  overstrained  sore 
throats  ?  That  the  method  followed  was  a  bad  one  ?  So 
I  think  the  inference  is  equally  fair  with  regard  to  Spiritual- 
ism when  we  see  their  best  mediums  fall  a  prey  to  such  a 
fate.  We  can  only  say :  Let  those  who  are  interested  in 
the  question  judge  the  tree  of  Spiritualism  by  its  fruits,  and 
ponder  over  the  lesson.  We  Theosophists  have  always  re- 
garded the  Spiritualists  as  brothers  having  the  same  mystic 
tendency  as  ourselves ;  but  they  have  always  regarded  us  as 
enemies.     We,  being  in  possession  of  an  older  philosophy,

174  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

have  tried  to  help  and  warn  them ;  but  they  have  repaid  us 
by  revihng  and  traducing  us  and  our  motives  in  every  pos- 
sible way.  Nevertheless  the  best  English  SpirituaKsts  say 
just  as  we  do,  wherever  they  treat  of  their  belief  seriously. 
Hear  '' M.A.  Oxon."  confessing  this  truth:

Spiritualists  are  too  much  inclined  to  dwell  exclusively  on  the  inter- 
vention of  external  spirits  in  this  world  of  ours,  and  to  ignore  the  powers 
of  the  incarnate  Spirit.*

Why  vilify  and  abuse  us,  then,  for  saying  precisely  the 
same  ?  Henceforward  we  will  have  nothing  more  to  do 
with  Spiritualism.    And  now  let  us  return  to  reincarnation.

*  Second  Sights  Introduction.

XI. 
ON  THE  MYSTERIES  OF  REINCARNATION.

PERIODICAL  REBIRTHS,

Inq. —  You  7nean^  then,  that  we  have  all  lived  on  earth  be- 
fore in  many  past  incarnations,  and  shall  go  on  so  living  ?PERIODICAL  REBIRTHS,

Inq. —  You  7nean^  then,  that  we  have  all  lived  on  earth  be- 
fore in  many  past  incarnations,  and  shall  go  on  so  living  ?

Theo. — I  do.  The  life-cycle,  or  rather  the  cycle  of  con- 
scious life,  begins  with  the  separation  of  the  mortal  animal 
man  into  sexes,  and  will  end  with  the  close  of  the  last  gen- 
eration of  men  in  the  seventh  round  and  seventh  race  of 
mankind.  Considering  we  are  only  in  the  fourth  round 
and  fifth  race,  its  duration  is  more  easily  imagined  than  ex- 
pressed.

Inq. — And  we  keep  on  tncar7iating  in  new  perso?ialities  all 
the  time  ?

Theo. — Most  assuredly  so ;  because  this  life-cycle  or 
period  of  incarnation  may  be  best  compared  to  human  life. 
As  each  such  life  is  composed  of  days  of  activity  separated 
by  nights  of  sleep  or  of  inaction,  so  in  the  incarnation-cycle 
an  active  life  is  followed  by  a  devachanic  rest.

Inq. — And  it  is  this  succession  of  births  that  is  generally 
defined  as  reincarnatio7i  ?

Theo. — Just  so.  It  is  only  through  these  births  that  the 
perpetual  progress  of  the  countless  miUions  of  Egos  toward

175

176  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

final  perfection,  and  a  final  rest  as  long  as  was  the  period 
of  activity,  can  be  achieved.

Inq. — A7id  what  is  it  that  regulates  the  duration  or  special 
qualities  of  these  incar7iations  ?

Theo. — Karma,  the  universal  law  of  retributive  justice.

Inq. — Is  it  an  ifitelligent  law  ?Theo. — Karma,  the  universal  law  of  retributive  justice.

Inq. — Is  it  an  ifitelligent  law  ?

Theo. — For  the  materialist,  who  calls  the  law  of  perio- 
dicity which  regulates  the  marshaling  of  bodies,  and  all  the 
other  laws  in  Nature,  blind  forces  and  mechanical  laws,  no 
doubt  Karma  would  be  a  law  of  chance  and  no  more.  For 
us  no  adjective  or  qualification  could  describe  that  which 
is  impersonal  and  not  an  entity,  but  a  universal  operative 
law.  If  you  question  me  about  the  causative  intelhgence 
in  it,  I  must  answ^er  you,  I  do  not  know.  But  if  you  ask 
me  to  define  its  effects  and  tell  you  what  these  are  in  our 
belief,  I  may  say  that  the  experience  of  thousands  of  ages 
has  shown  us  that  they  are  absolute  and  unerring  equity, 
wisdom,  and  intelligence.  For  Karma  in  its  effects  is  an 
unfailing  redresser  of  human  injustice,  and  of  all  the  fail- 
ures of  Nature  ;  a  stern  adjuster  of  wrongs  ;  a  retributive  law 
which  rewards  and  punishes  with  equal  impartiality.  It  is, 
in  the  strictest  sense,  ''no  respecter  of  persons,"  though, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  can  neither  be  propitiated  nor  turned 
aside  by  prayer.  This  is  a  belief  common  to  Hindus  and 
Buddhists,  who  believe  in  Karma.

Inq. — In  this  Christia?i  dogmas  contradict  both  ^  and  I  doubt 
whether  any  Christian  will  accept  the  teaching.

Theo. — No ;  and  Inman  gave  the  reason  for  it  many 
years  ago.     As  he  puts  it :

The  Christians  will  accept  any  nonsense,  if  promulgated  by  the 
church  as  a  matter  of  faith :  .  .  .  the  Buddhists  hold  that  nothing 
which  is  contradicted  by  sound  reason  can  be  a  true  doctrine  of 
Buddha.

I

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  177I

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  177

The  Buddhists  do  not  beheve  in  any  pardon  for  their  sins, 
except  after  an  adequate  and  just  punishment  for  each  evil 
deed  or  thought  in  a  future  incarnation,  and  a  proportion- 
ate compensation  to  the  parties  injured.

Inq. —  Where  is  it  so  stated?

Theo. — In  most  of  their  sacred  works.  In  the  Wheel  of 
the  Law  (p.  57)  you  may  find  the  following  Theosophical 
tenet :

Buddhists  believe  that  every  act,  word,  or  thought  has  its  conse- 
quence, which  will  appear  sooner  or  later  in  the  present  or  in  the 
future  state.  Evil  acts  will  produce  evil  consequences,  good  acts  will 
produce  good  consequences  :  prosperity  in  this  world  or  birth  in  heaven 
[Devachan]  ...  in  the  future  state.

Inq. — Christians  believe  the  same  thi?ig,  do  they  not?Inq. — Christians  believe  the  same  thi?ig,  do  they  not?

Theo. — Oh  no ;  they  believe  in  the  pardon  and  the  re- 
mission of  ail  sins.  They  are  promised  that  if  they  only 
believe  in  the  blood  of  Christ — an  in7iocent  victim!  — in  the 
blood  offered  by  him  for  the  expiation  of  the  sins  of  the 
whole  of  mankind,  it  will  atone  for  every  mortal  sin.  And 
we  believe  neither  in  vicarious  atonement,  nor  in  the  pos- 
sibility of  the  remission  of  the  smallest  sin  by  any  God — not 
even  by  a/<?rj*^;/<2/ Absolute  or  Infinite,  if  such  a  thing  could 
have  any  existence.  What  we  believe  in  is  strict  and  im- 
partial justice.  Our  idea  of  the  unknown  Universal  Deity, 
represented  by  Karma,  is  that  it  is  a  power  which  cannot 
fail,  and  can  therefore  have  neither  wrath  nor  mercy,  but 
only  absolute  equity,  which  leaves  every  cause,  great  or 
small,  to  work  out  its  inevitable  effects.  The  saying  of 
Jesus,  ''  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured 
to  you  again  "  (Matt.  vii.  2),  neither  by  expression  nor  im- 
plication points  to  any  hope  of  future  mercy  or  salvation 
by  proxy.  This  is  why,  recognizing  as  we  do  in  our  phi- 
losophy the  justice  of  this  statement,  we  cannot  recommend 
too  strongly  mercy,   charity,   and  forgiveness  of  mutual

178  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.178  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

offenses.  "  Resist  not  evil "  and  ''  render  good  for  evil " 
are  Buddhist  precepts,  and  were  first  preached  in  view  of 
the  implacabihty  of  karmic  law.  For  man  to  take  the  law 
into  his  own  hands  is  in  any  case  a  sacrilegious  presumption. 
Human  law  may  use  restrictive,  not  punitive  measures ;  but 
a  man  who,  believing  in  Karma,  still  revenges  himself,  still 
refuses  to  forgive  every  injury,  whereby  he  would  render 
good  for  evil,  is  a  criminal,  and  only  hurts  himself.  As 
Karma  is  sure  to  punish  the  man  who  has  wronged  another, 
by  seeking  to  inflict  an  additional  punishment  on  one's 
enemy,  and,  instead  of  leaving  that  punishment  to  the  great 
Law,  adding  to  it  one's  own  mite,  we  only  beget  thereby  a 
cause  for  the  future  reward  of  our  enemy  and  a  future  pun- 
ishment for  ourself.  The  unfailing  *' regulator"  in  each  in- 
carnation affects  the  quahty  of  its  successor,  and  the  sum 
of  the  merit  or  demerit  in  preceding  incarnations  determines 
the  following  rebirth.

Inq. — Are  we,  then,  to  infer  a  man^s  past  from  his  present?

Theo. — Only  so  far  as  to  believe  that  his  present  life  is 
what  it  justly  should  be,  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  the  past 
life.  Of  course — seers  and  great  Adepts  excepted — we  can- 
not, as  average  mortals,  know  what  those  sins  were.  From 
our  paucity  of  data  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  determine  even 
what  an  old  man's  youth  must  have  been ;  neither  can  we, 
for  like  reasons,  draw  final  conclusions,  merely  from  what 
we  see  in  the  life  of  some  man,  as  to  what  his  past  life  may 
have  been.

WHA  T  IS  KARMA  ? 
Inq. — But  what  is  Karma  ?WHA  T  IS  KARMA  ? 
Inq. — But  what  is  Karma  ?

Theo. — As  I  have  said,  we  consider  it  as  the  ultimate 
law  of  the  universe,  the  source,  origin,  and  fount  of  all 
other  laws  which  exist  throughout  Nature.  Karma  is  the 
unerring  law  which  adjusts  effect  to  cause,  on  the  physical,

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  179

mental,  and  spiritual  planes  of  being.  As  no  cause  remains 
without  its  due  effect  from  greatest  to  least,  from  a  cosmic 
disturbance  down  to  the  movement  of  yoiu:  hand,  and  as 
like  produces  like,  Karma  is  that  unseen  and  unknown  law 
which  adjusts  wisely^  intelligently^  and  equitably  each  effect 
to  its  cause,  tracing  the  latter  back  to  its  producer.  Though 
itself  unknowable,  its  action  is  perceivable.

Inq. — Then  it  is  the  ^^  absolute^''  the  "  unknowable ^^^  again, 
and  is  not  of  much  value  as  an  explanation  of  the  problems  of 
life.

Theo. — On  the  contrary.  For  though  we  do  not  know 
what  Karma  is  per  se  and  in  its  essence,  we  do  know  how  it 
works,  and  we  can  define  and  describe  its  mode  of  action 
with  accuracy.  We  only  do  7iot  know  its  ultimate  cause^ 
just  as  modem  philosophy  universally  admits  that  the  ulti- 
mate  cause  of  a  thing  is  ''  unknowable."

Inq. — A7id  what  has  Tlieosophy  to  say  in  regard  to  the  so- 
lution of  the  more  practical  needs  of  humanity  ?  What  is  the 
explanation  which  it  offers  of  the  awful  suffering  and  dire 
necessity  prevalent  among  the  so-called  ''  lower  classes  "  ?

Theo. — To  be  pointed:  according  to  our  teaching,  all 
these  great  social  evils — the  distinction  of  classes  in  society, 
and  of  the  sexes  in  the  affairs  of  Ufe,  the  unequal  distribu- 
tion of  capital  and  of  labor — all  are  due  to  what  we  tersely 
but  truly  denominate  Karma.Inq. — But  surely  all  these  evils  which  seem  to  fall  upon 
the  masses  somewhat  indiscriminately  are  not  actual  merited 
and  individual  Karma  ?

Theo. — No,  they  cannot  be  so  strictly  defined  in  their 
effects  as  to  show  that  each  individual  environment,  and 
the  particular  conditions  of  life  in  which  each  person  finds 
himself,  are  nothing  more  than  the  retributive  Karma  which 
the  individual  has  generated  in  a  previous  life.     We  must

180  THE   KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  every  atom  is  subject  to  the 
general  law  governing  the  whole  body  to  which  it  belongs, 
and  here  we  come  upon  the  wider  track  of  the  karmic  law. 
Do  you  not  perceive  that  the  aggregate  of  individual  Karma 
becomes  that  of  the  nation  to  which  those  individuals  be- 
long, and,  further,  that  the  sum  total  of  national  Karma  is 
that  of  the  world  ?  The  evils  that  you  speak  of  are  not 
pecuUar  to  the  individual  or  even  to  the  nation ;  they  are 
more  or  less  universal ;  and  it  is  upon  this  broad  line  of 
human  interdependence  that  the  law  of  Karma  finds  its  legit- 
imate and  equable  issue.

Inq. — Do  /,  then^  understafid  that  the  law  of  Karma  is  not 
necessarily  an  individual  law  ?Inq. — Do  /,  then^  understafid  that  the  law  of  Karma  is  not 
necessarily  an  individual  law  ?

Theo. — That  is  just  what  I  mean.  It  is  impossible  that 
Karma  could  readjust  the  balance  of  power  in  the  world's 
life  and  progress  unless  it  had  a  broad  and  general  line  of 
action.  It  is  held  as  a  truth  among  Theosophists  that  the 
interdependence  of  humanity  is  the  cause  of  what  is  called 
distributive  Karma,  and  it  is  this  law  which  affords  the  solu- 
tion to  the  great  question  of  collective  suffering  and  its  re- 
lief. It  is  an  occult  law,  moreover,  that  no  man  can  rise 
superior  to  his  individual  failings  without  lifting,  be  it  ever 
so  little,  the  whole  body  of  which  he  is  an  integral  part. 
In  the  same  way  no  one  can  sin,  nor  suffer  the  effects  of 
sin,  alone.  In  reality  there  is  no  such  thing  as  "  separate- 
ness  "  ;  and  the  nearest  approach  to  that  selfish  state  which 
the  laws  of  life  permit  is  in  the  intent  or  motive.

Inq. — Aiid  are  there  no  means  by  which  the  distributive 
or  national  Karma  7?iight  be  co?tcentrated  or  collected,  so  to 
speak,  and  brought  to  its  natural  and  legitimate  fulfilment  with- 
out  all  this  protracted  suffering  ?

Theo. — As  a  general  rule,  and  within  certain  limits  which 
define  the  age  to  which  we  belong,  the  law  of  Karma  can-

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  181Theo. — As  a  general  rule,  and  within  certain  limits  which 
define  the  age  to  which  we  belong,  the  law  of  Karma  can-

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  181

not  be  hastened  or  retarded  in  its  fulfilment.  But  of  this  I 
am  certain  :  the  point  of  possibility  in  either  of  these  direc- 
tions has  never  yet  been  touched.  Listen  to  the  following 
recital  of  one  phase  of  national  suffering,  and  then  ask 
yourself  whether,  admitting  the  working  power  of  individ- 
ual, relative,  and  distributive  Karma,  these  evils  are  not 
capable  of  extensive  modification  and  general  relief.  What 
I  am  about  to  read  to  you  is  from  the  pen  of  a  national 
savior — one  who,  having  overcome  self^  and  being  free  to 
choose,  has  elected  to  serve  humanity,  in  bearing  at  least  as 
much  as  a  woman's  shoulders  can  possibly  bear  of  national 
Karma.     This  is  what  she  says :Yes.  Nature  ahvays  does  speak,  don't  you  think?  Only  sometimes 
we  make  so  much  noise  that  we  drown  her  voice.  That  is  why  it  is  so 
restful  to  go  out  of  the  town  and  nestle  awhile  in  the  Mother's  arms. 
I  am  thinking  of  the  evening  on  Hampstead  Heath  when  we  watched 
the  sun  go  down ;  but  oh,  upon  what  suffering  and  misery  that  sun 
had  set!  A  lady  brought  me  yesterday  a  big  hamper  of  wild-flowers. 
I  thought  some  of  my  East  End  family  had  a  better  right  to  it  than  I, 
and  so  I  took  it  down  to  a  very  poor  school  in  Whitechapel  this  morn- 
ing. You  should  have  seen  t]ie  pallid  little  faces  brighten!  Thence 
I  went  to  pay  for  some  dinners  at  a  little  cook-shop  for  some  children. 
It  was  in  a  back  street,  narrow,  full  of  jostling  people ;  stench  inde- 
scribable, from  fish,  meat,  and  other  comestibles,  all  reeking  in  a  sun 
that,  in  Whitechapel,  festers  instead  of  purifying.  The  cook-shop 
was  the  quintessence  of  all  the  smells.  Indescribable  meat-pies  at 
i^.,  loathsome  lumps  of  **  food,"  and  swarms  of  flies — a  very  altar  of 
Beelzebub !  All  about,  babies  on  the  prowl  for  scraps,  one,  with  the 
face  of  an  angel,  gathering  up  cherry-stones  as  a  light  and  nutritious 
form  of  diet.  I  came  westward  with  every  nerve  shuddering  and 
jarred,  wondering  whether  anything  can  be  done  with  some  parts  of 
London  save  swallowing  them  up  in  an  earthquake  and  starting  their 
inhabitants  afresh,  after  a  plunge  into  some  purifying  Lethe,  out  of 
which  not  a  memory  might  emerge!  And  then  I  thought  of  Hamp- 
stead Heath,  and — pondered.  If  by  any  sacrifice  one  could  win  the 
power  to  save  these  people,  the  cost  would  not  be  worth  counting; 
but,  you  see,  they  must  be  changed — and  how  can  that  be  wrought? 
In  the  condition  they  now  are,  they  would  not  profit  by  any  environ- 
ment in  which  they  might  be  placed ;  and  yet  in  their  present  sur-182  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

roundings  they  must  continue  to  putrefy.  It  breaks  my  heart,  this 
endless,  hopeless  misery,  and  the  brutish  degradation  that  is  at  once 
its  outgrowth  and  its  root.  It  is  like  the  banian-tree ;  every  branch 
roots  itself  and  sends  out  new  shoots.  What  a  difference  between 
these  feelings  and  the  peaceful  scene  at  Hampstead!  And  yet  we 
who  are  the  brothers  and  sisters  of  these  poor  creatures  have  only  a 
right  to  use  Hampstead  Heaths  to  gain  strength  to  save  Whitechapels. 
\_Signed  by  a  fiame  too  respected  and  too  well  known  to  be  given  to  scoffers.  ]

Inq. — That  is  a  sad  but  beautifullettei'^  a?id  I  think  it  pre- 
sents with  painful  conspiaiity  the  terrible  workings  of  what 
you  have  called  '^  7'elative  "  and  "  distributive  "  Karma,  But 
alas  !  there  seems  no  i7n7nediate  hope  of  any  relief  short  of  an 
earthquake^  or  sorne  such  general  engulfntent.Theo. — What  right  have  we  to  think  so  while  one  half 
of  humanity  is  in  a  position  to  effect  an  immediate  relief  of 
the  privations  which  are  suffered  by  their  fellows  ?  When 
every  individual  has  contributed  to  the  general  good  what 
he  can  of  money,  of  labor,  and  of  ennobling  thought,  then, 
and  only  then,  will  the  balance  of  national  Karma  be  struck, 
and  until  then  we  have  no  right,  nor  any  reasons,  for  say- 
ing that  there  is  more  life  on  the  earth  than  Nature  can  sup- 
port. It  is  reserved  for  the  heroic  souls,  the  saviors  of  our 
race  and  nation,  to  find  out  the  cause  of  this  unequal  pres- 
sure of  retributive  Karma,  and  by  a  supreme  effort  to  re- 
adjust the  balance  of  power,  and  save  the  people  from  a 
moral  engulfment  a  thousand  times  more  disastrous  and 
more  permanently  evil  than  the  like  physical  catastrophe, 
in  which  you  seem  to  see  the  only  possible  outlet  for  this 
accumulated  misery.

Inq. —  Welly  theft ^  tell  me  generally  how  you  describe  this 
law  of  Karma,

Theo. — We  describe  Karma  as  that  law  of  readjust- 
ment which  ever  tends  to  restore  disturbed  equilibrium  in 
the  physical,  and  broken  harmony  in  the  moral  world.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  183

We  say  that  Karma  does  not  act  in  this  or  that  particular 
way  always,  but  that  it  always  does  act  so  as  to  restore  har- 
mony and  preserve  the  balance  of  equilibrium,  in  virtue  of 
which  the  universe  exists.

Inq. — Give  77ie  an  illustration,Inq. — Give  77ie  an  illustration,

Theo. — Later  on  I  will  give  you  a  full  illustration. 
Think  now  of  a  pond.  A  stone  falls  into  the  water  and 
creates  disturbing  waves.  These  waves  oscillate  backward 
and  forward  till  at  last,  owing  to  the  operation  of  what 
physicists  call  the  law  of  the  dissipation  of  energy,  they  are 
brought  to  rest,  and  the  water  returns  to  its  condition  of 
calm  tranquillity.  Similarly  all  action,  on  every  plane,  pro- 
duces disturbance  in  the  balanced  harmony  of  the  universe, 
and  the  vibrations  so  produced  will  continue  to  roll  back- 
ward and  forward,  if  the  area  is  limited,  till  equilibrium  is 
restored.  But  since  each  such  disturbance  starts  from  some 
particular  point,  it  is  clear  that  equilibrium  and  harmony 
can  only  be  restored  by  the  recon verging  to  that  same  point 
of  all  the  forces  which  were  set  in  motion  from  it.  And 
here  you  have  proof  that  the  consequences  of  a  man's 
deeds,  thoughts,  etc.,  must  all  react  upon  himself  w\\h  the 
same  force  with  which  they  were  set  in  motion.

Inq. — But  I  see  nothing  of  a  moral  character  about  this 
law.  It  looks  to  me  like  the  simple  physical  laiv  that  action 
and  reactio?i  are  equal  and  opposite,

Theo. — I  am  not  surprised  to  hear  you  say  that.  Ameri- 
cans have  got  so  much  into  the  ingrained  habit  of  con- 
sidering right  and  wrong,  good  and  evil,  as  matters  of  an 
arbitrary  code  of  law  laid  down  either  by  men  or  imposed 
upon  them  by  a  personal  God.  We  Theosophists,  however, 
say  that  *'  good  "  and  ''  harmony,"  and  ''  evil "  and  ''  dis- 
harmony,*' are  synonymous.  Further,  we  maintain  that  all 
pain  and  suffering  are  results  of  want  of  harmony,  and  that

184  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,184  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

the  one  temble  and  only  cause  of  the  disturbance  of  har- 
mony is  selfishness  in  some  form  or  other.  Hence  Karma 
gives  back  to  every  man  the  actual  consequences  of  his  own 
actions,  without  any  regard  to  their  moral  character;  but 
since  he  receives  his  due  for  all^  it  is  obvious  that  he  will 
be  made  to  atone  for  all  sufferings  which  he  has  caused, 
just  as  he  will  reap  in  joy  and  gladness  the  fruits  of  all  the 
happiness  and  harmony  he  had  helped  to  produce.  I  can 
do  no  better  than  quote  for  your  benefit  certain  passages 
from  books  and  articles  written  by  those  of  our  Theoso- 
phists  who  have  a  correct  idea  of  Karma.

Inq. — /  wish  you  would^  as  your  literature  seems  to  be  very 
sparing  on  this  subject.

Theo. — Because  it  is  the  most  difficult  of  all  our  tenets. 
Some  short  time  ago  there  appeared  the  following  objection 
from  a  Christian  pen :

Granting  that  the  teaching  in  regard  to  Theosophy  is  correct,  and 
that  '*  man  must  be  his  own  savior,  must  overcome  self  and  conquer 
the  evil  that  is  in  his  dual  nature,  to  obtain  the  emancipation  of  his 
soul " — what  is  man  to  do  after  he  has  been  awakened  and  converted 
to  a  certain  extent  from  evil  or  wickedness?  How  is  he  to  get  eman- 
cipation, or  pardon,  or  the  blotting  out  of  the  evil  or  wickedness  he 
has  already  done?

To  this  Mr.  J.  H.  Connelly  replies  very  pertinently  that 
no  one  can  hope  to  '*  make  the  Theosophical  engine  run  on 
the  theological  track."     As  he  has  it :To  this  Mr.  J.  H.  Connelly  replies  very  pertinently  that 
no  one  can  hope  to  '*  make  the  Theosophical  engine  run  on 
the  theological  track."     As  he  has  it :

The  possibility  of  shirking  individual  responsibility  is  not  among  the 
concepts  of  Theosophy.  In  this  faith  there  is  no  such  thing  as  pardon- 
ing, or  *'  blotting  out  of  evil  or  wickedness  already  done,"  otherwise 
than  by  the  adequate  punishment  therefor  of  the  wrong-doer  and  the 
restoration  of  the  harmony  in  the  universe  that  had  been  disturbed  by 
his  wrongful  act.  The  evil  has  been  his  own,  and  while  others  must 
suffer  its  consequences,  atonement  can  be  made  by  nobody  but  himself.

The  condition  contemplated,  ...  in  which  a  man  shall  have  been 
'*  awakened  and  converted  to  a  certain  extent  from  evil  or  wicked- 
ness," is  that  in  which  a  man  shall  have  realized  that  his  deeds  are

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  185

evil  and  deserving  of  punishment.  In  that  realization  a  sense  of  per- 
sonal responsibility  is  inevitable,  and  just  in  proportion  to  the  extent 
of  his  awakening  or  '*  converting"  must  be  the  sense  of  that  awful 
responsibility.  While  it  is  strong  upon  him  is  the  time  when  he  is 
urged  to  accept  the  doctrine  of  vicarious  atonement.

He  is  told  that  he  must  also  repent ;  but  nothing  is  easier  than  that. 
It  is  an  amiable  weakness  of  human  nature  that  we  are  quite  prone 
to  regret  the  evil  we  have  done  when  our  attention  is  called  and  we 
have  either  suffered  from  it  ourselves  or  enjoyed  its  fruits.  Possibly 
close  analysis  of  the  feeling  would  show  us  that  that  w^hich  we  regret 
is  rather  the  necessity  that  seemed  to  require  the  evil  as  a  means  of 
attainment  of  our  selfish  ends  than  the  evil  itself.Attractive  as  this  prospect  of  casting  our  burden  of  sins  **  at  the 
foot  of  the  cross  "  may  be  to  the  ordinary  mind,  it  does  not  commend 
itself  to  the  Theosophic  student.  He  does  not  apprehend  why  the 
sinner  by  attaining  knowledge  of  his  evil  can  thereby  merit  any  par- 
don for,  or  the  blotting  out  of,  his  past  wickedness ;  or  why  repen- 
tance and  future  right  living  entitle  him  to  a  suspension  in  his  favor  of 
the  universal  law  of  relation  between  cause  and  effect.  The  results  of 
his  evil  de^ds  continue  to  exist ;  the  suffering  caused  to  others  by  his 
wickedness  is  not  blotted  out.  The  Theosophical  student  takes  the  re- 
sult of  wickedness  upon  the  innocent  into  his  problem.  He  considers 
not  only  the  guilty  person,  but  his  victims.

Evil  is  an  infraction  of  the  laws  of  harmony  governing  the  universe, 
and  the  penalty  thereof  must  fall  upon  the  violator  of  that  law  himself. 
Christ  uttered  the  warning,  ^*  Sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come 
unto  thee,"  and  St.  Paul  said,  **  Work  out  your  own  salvation;" 
"  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  That,  by  the 
way,  is  a  fine  metaphoric  rendering  of  the  sentence  of  the  Puranas,  far 
antedating  him — that  '^  every  man  reaps  the  consequences  of  his  own 
acts."

This  is  the  principle  of  the  law  of  Karma  which  is  taught  by  The- 
osophy.  Sinnett,  in  his  Esoteric  Buddhism,  rendered  Karma  as  *'  the 
law  of  ethical  causation."  '*  The  law  of  retribution,"  as  Madame 
Blavatsky  translates  its  meaning,  is  better.     It  is  the  power  which,

Just,  though  mysterious,  leads  us  on  unerring. 
Through  ways  unmarked,  from  guilt  to  punishment.Just,  though  mysterious,  leads  us  on  unerring. 
Through  ways  unmarked,  from  guilt  to  punishment.

But  it  is  more.  It  rewards  merit  as  unerringly  and  amply  as  it 
punishes  demerit.  It  is  the  outcome  of  every  act,  of  thought,  word, 
and  deed,  and  by  it  men  mold  themselves,  their  lives  and  happenings.

186  THE  KEY  TO    TIIEOSOPHY.

Eastern  philosophy  rejects  the  idea  of  a  newly  created  soul  for  every 
baby  born.  It  believes  in  a  limited  number  of  monads,  evolving  and 
growing  more  and  more  perfect  through  their  assimilation  of  many  suc- 
cessive personalities.  Those  personalities  are  the  product  of  Karma, 
and  it  is  by  Karma  and  reincarnation  that  the  human  monad  in  time 
returns  to  its  source — absolute  deity.

E.  D.  Walker,  in  his  Reincar?iation^  offers  the  following- 
explanation  :E.  D.  Walker,  in  his  Reincar?iation^  offers  the  following- 
explanation  :

Briefly,  the  doctrine  of  Karma  is  that  we  have  made  ourselves  what 
we  are  by  former  actions,  and  are  building  our  future  eternity  by  pres- 
ent actions.  There  is  no  destiny  but  what  we  ourselves  determine. 
There  is  no  salvation  or  condemnation  except  what  we  ourselves  bring 
about.  .  .  .  Because  it  offers  no  shelter  for  culpable  actions  and  neces- 
sitates a  sterling  manliness,  it  is  less  welcome  to  weak  natures  than 
the  easy  religious  tenets  of  vicarious  atonement,  intercession,  forgive- 
ness, and  death-bed  conversions.  ...  In  the  domain  of  eternal  justice 
the  offense  and  the  punishment  are  inseparably  connected  as  the  same 
event,  because  there  is  no  real  distinction  between  the  action  and  its 
outcome.  .  .  .  It  is  Karma,  or  our  old  acts,  that  draws  us  back  into 
earthly  life.  The  spirit's  abode  changes  according  to  its  Karma,  and 
this  Karma  forbids  any  long  continuance  in  one  condition,  because  it 
is  always  changing.  So  long  as  action  is  governed  by  material  and 
selfish  motives,  just  so  long  must  the  effect  of  that  action  be  mani- 
fested in  physical  rebirths.  Only  the  perfectly  selfless  man  can  elude 
the  gravitation  of  material  life.  Few  have  attained  this,  but  it  is  the 
goal  of  mankind.

And  then  the  writer  quotes  from  The  Secret  Doctrine :And  then  the  writer  quotes  from  The  Secret  Doctrine :

Those  who  believe  in  Karma  have  to  believe  in  destiny,  which,  from 
birth  to  death,  every  man  is  weaving,  thread  by  thread,  around  him- 
self, as  a  spider  does  his  cobweb ;  and  this  destiny  is  guided  either  by 
the  heavenly  voice  of  the  invisible  prototype  outside  of  us,  or  by  our 
more  intimate  astral  or  inner  man,  who  is  but  too  often  the  evil  genius 
of  the  embodied  entity  called  man.  Both  these  lead  on  the  outward 
man,  but  one  of  them  must  prevail ;  and  from  the  very  beginning  of 
the  invisible  affray  the  stern  and  implacable  law  of  compensation  steps 
in  and  takes  its  course,  faithfully  following  the  fluctuations.  When 
the  last  strand  is  woven,  and  man  is  seemingly  inwrapped  in  the  net- 
work of  his  own  doing,  then  he  finds  himself  completely  under  the 
empire  of  this  self-made  destiny.  .   .   .

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  187THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  187

An  Occultist  or  a  philosopher  will  not  speak  of  the  goodness  or 
cruelty  of  Providence  ;  but,  identifying  it  with  Karma-Nemesis,  he  will 
teach  that,  nevertheless,  it  guai'ds  the  good  and  watches  over  them  in 
this  as  in  future  lives ;  and  that  it  punishes  the  e\il-doer — aye,  even 
to  his  seventh  rebirth — so  long,  in  short,  as  the  effect  of  his  having 
thrown  into  perturbation  even  the  smallest  atom  in  the  infinite  world 
of  harmonv  has  not  been  finally  readjusted.  For  the  only  decree  of 
Karma — an  eternal  and  immutable  decree — is  absolute  harmony  in  the 
world  of  matter  as  it  is  in  the  world  of  spirit.  It  is  not,  therefore, 
Karma  that  rewards  or  punishes,  but  it  is  we  who  rew^ard  or  punish 
ourselves  according  to  whether  we  work  with,  through,  and  along 
with  Nature,  abiding  by  the  laws  on  which  that  harmony  depends,  or 
— break  them.

Nor  would  the  w^ays  of  Karma  be  inscrutable  were  men  to  work  in 
union  and  harmony,  instead  of  disunion  and  strife.  For  our  igno- 
rance of  those  ways — which  one  portion  of  mankind  calls  the  ways  of 
Providence,  dark  and  intricate ;  while  another  sees  in  them  the  action 
of  blind  fatalism ;  and  a  third,  simple  chance,  with  neither  gods  nor 
devils  to  guide  them — would  surely  disappear  if  we  would  but  attribute 
all  these  to  their  correct  cause.   .   .   .

We  stand  bewildered  before  the  mystery  of  our  own  making  and  the 
riddles  of  life  that  we  will  not  solve,  and  then  accuse  the  great  Sphinx 
of  devouring  us.  But  verily  there  is  not  an  accident  of  our  lives,  not 
a  misshapen  day  or  a  misfortune,  that  could  not  be  traced  back  to  our 
own  doings  in  this  or  in  another  life.   .   .   .The  law  of  Karma  is  inextricably  interwoven  with  that  of  reincarna- 
tion. ...  It  is  only  this  doctrine  that  can  explain  to  us  the  mysteri- 
ous problem  of  good  and  e\-il,  and  reconcile  man  to  the  terrible  and 
apparent  injustice  of  life.  Nothing  but  such  certainty  can  quiet  our 
revolted  sense  of  justice.  For,  when  one  unacquainted  with  the  noble 
doctrine  looks  around  him  and  observes  the  inequalities  of  birth  and 
fortune,  of  intellect  and  capacities  ;  when  one  sees  honor  paid  to  fools 
and  profligates  on  whom  fortune  has  heaped  her  favors  by  mere  privi- 
lege of  birth,  and  their  nearest  neighbor,  w^ith  all  his  intellect  and  noble 
\artues — far  more  deserving  in  every  way — perishing  for  want  and  for 
lack  of  sympathy ;  when  one  sees  all  this  and  has  to  turn  away,  help- 
less to  relieve  the  undeserved  suffering,  one's  ears  ringing  and  heart 
aching  with  the  cries  of  pain  around  him,  that  blessed  knowledge  of 
Karma  alone  prevents  him  from  cursing  life  and  men  as  well  as  their 
supposed  creator.   .   .   .

This  law,  whether  conscious  or  unconscious,  predestines  nothing 
and  no  one.     It  exists  from  and  in  eternity  truly,  for  it  is  eternity

188  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,This  law,  whether  conscious  or  unconscious,  predestines  nothing 
and  no  one.     It  exists  from  and  in  eternity  truly,  for  it  is  eternity

188  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

itself;  and  as  such,  since  no  act  can  be  coequal  with  eternity,  it  cannot 
be  said  to  act,  for  it  is  action  itself.  It  is  not  the  wave  which  drowns 
the  man,  but  the  personal  action  of  the  wretch  who  goes  deliberately 
and  places  himself  under  the  impersonal  action  of  the  laws  that  gov- 
ern the  ocean's  motion.  Karma  creates  nothing,  nor  does  it  design. 
It  is  man  who  plants  and  creates  causes,  and  karmic  law  adjusts  the 
effects,  which  adjustment  is  not  an  act,  but  universal  harmony,  tending 
ever  to  resume  its  original  position,  like  a  bough,  which,  bent  down 
too  forcibly,  rebounds  with  corresponding  vigor.  If  it  happen  to 
dislocate  the  arm  that  tried  to  bend  it  out  of  its  natural  position,  shall 
we  say  it  is  the  bough  which  broke  our  arm,  or  that  our  own  folly  has 
brought  us  to  grief?  Karma  has  never  sought  to  destroy  intellectual 
and  individual  liberty,  like  the  God  invented  by  the  monotheists.  It 
has  not  involved  its  decrees  in  darkness  purposely  to  perplex  man,  nor 
shall  it  punish  him  who  dares  to  scrutinize  its  mysteries.  On  the  con- 
trary, he  who  through  study  and  meditation  unveils  its  intricate  paths, 
and  throws  light  on  those  dark  ways,  in  the  windings  of  which  so 
many  men  perish,  owing  to  their  ignorance  of  the  labyrinth  of  life,  is 
working  for  the  good  of  his  fellow-men.  Karma  is  an  absolute  and 
eternal  law  in  the  world  of  manifestation ;  and  as  there  can  be  only 
one  Absolute,  as  one  eternal,  ever-present  Cause,  believers  in  Karma 
cannot  be  regarded  as  atheists  or  materialists,  still  less  as  fatalists ; 
for  Karma  is  one  with  the  Unknowable,  of  which  it  is  an  aspect,  in 
its  effects  in  the  phenomenal  world.Another  able  Theosophic  writer,  Mrs.  P.  Sinnett,  in  her 
Purpose  of  Theosophy^  says  :

Every  individual  is  making  Karma  either  good  or  bad  in  each  action 
and  thought  of  his  daily  round,  and  is  at  the  same  time  working  out  in 
this  life  the  Karma  brought  about  by  the  acts  and  desires  of  the  last. 
When  we  see  people  afflicted  by  congenital  ailments  it  may  be  safely 
assumed  that  these  ailments  are  the  inevitable  results  of  causes  started 
by  themselves  in  a  previous  birth.  It  may  be  argued  that,  as  these 
afflictions  are  hereditary,  they  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  a  past  in- 
carnation ;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  Ego,  the  real  man,  the 
individuality,  has  no  spiritual  origin  in  the  parentage  by  which  it  is 
reembodied,  but  it  is  drawn,  by  the  affinities  which  its  previous  mode 
of  life  attracted  round  it,  into  the  current  that  carries  it,  when  the  time 
comes  for  rebirth,  to  the  home  best  fitted  for  the  development  of  those 
tendencies.  .  .  .  This  doctrine  of  Karma,  when  properly  understood, 
is  well  calculated  to  guide  and  assist  those  who  realize  its  truth  to  a

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  189THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  189

higher  and  better  mode  of  life ;  for  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  not 
only  our  actions,  but  our  thoughts  also,  are  most  assuredly  followed 
by  a  crowd  of  circumstances  that  will  influence  for  good  or  for  evil 
our  own  future,  and,  what  is  still  more  important,  the  future  of  many 
of  our  fellow-creatures.  If  sins  of  omission  and  commission  could  in 
any  case  be  only  self -regarding,  the  effect  on  the  sinner's  Karma  would 
be  a  matter  of  minor  consequence.  The  effect  that  every  thought  and 
act  through  life  carries  with  it  for  good  or  evil  a  corresponding  influ- 
ence on  other  members  of  the  human  family  renders  a  strict  sense  of 
justice,  morality,  and  unselfishness  so  necessary  to  future  happiness 
or  progress.  A  crime  once  committed,  an  evil  thought  sent  out  from 
the  mind,  are  past  recall — no  amount  of  repentance  can  wipe  out  their 
results  in  the  future.  Repentance,  if  sincere,  will  deter  a  man  from 
repeating  errors  ;  it  cannot  save  him  or  others  from  the  effects  of  those 
already  produced,  which  will  most  unerringly  overtake  him  either  in 
this  life  or  in  the  next  rebirth.

Mr.  J.  H.  Connelly  proceeds :

The  believers  in  a  religion  based  upon  such  doctrine  are  willing  it 
should  be  compared  with  one  in  which  man's  destiny  for  eternity  is 
determined  by  the  accidents  of  a  single,  brief,  earthly  existence,  during 
which  he  is  cheered  by  the  promise  that  '*  as  the  tree  falls,  so  shall  it 
lie  "  ;  in  which  his  brightest  hope,  when  he  wakes  up  to  a  knowledge 
of  his  wickedness,  is  the  doctrine  of  vicarious  atonement ;  and  in  which 
even  that  is  handicapped,  according  to  the  Presbyterian  Confession  of 
Faith :**  By  the  decree  of  God,  for  the  manifestation  of  his  glory,  some 
men  and  angels  are  predestinated  unto  everlasting  life  and  others  fore- 
ordained to  everlasting  death.

**  These  angels  and  men  thus  predestinated  and  foreordained  are  par- 
ticularly and  unchangeably  designed;  and  their  number  is  so  certain 
and  definite  that  it  cannot  be  either  increased  or  diminished.  ...  As 
God  hath  appointed  the  elect  unto  glory,  .  .  .  neither  are  any  other 
redeemed  by  Christ  effectually  called,  justified,  adopted,  sanctified, 
and  saved,  but  the  elect  only.

*'  The  rest  of  mankind  God  was  pleased,  according  to  the  unsearch- 
able counsel  of  his  own  will,  whereby  he  extendeth  or  withholdeth 
mercy  as  he  pleaseth,  for  the  glory  of  his  sovereign  power  over  his 
creatures,  to  pass  by  and  to  ordain  them  to  dishonor  and  wrath  for 
their  sin,  to  the  praise  of  his  glorious  justice."

190  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

This  is  what  the  able  defender  says.  Nor  can  we  do  any 
better  than  wind  up  the  subject  as  he  does,  by  a  quotation 
from  a  magnificent  poem.     As  he  says :

The  exquisite  beauty  of  Edwin  Arnold's  exposition  of  Karma  in 
The  Light  of  Asia  tempts  to  its  reproduction  here,  but  it  is  too  long 
for  quotation  in  full.      Here  is  a  portion  of  it :

Karma — all  that  total  of  a  soul

Which  is  the  things  it  did,  the  thoughts  it  had, 
The  **  self  "  it  wove  with  woof  of  viewless  time

Crossed  on  the  warp  invisible  of  acts.

****** 
Before  beginning  and  without  an  end,

As  space  eternal  and  as  surety  sure. 
Is  fixed  a  Power  divine  which  moves  to  good,

Only  its  laws  endure.

It  will  not  be  contemned  of  any  one ;

Who  thwarts  it  loses,  and  who  serves  it  gains ; 
The  hidden  good  it  pays  with  peace  and  bliss.Only  its  laws  endure.

It  will  not  be  contemned  of  any  one ;

Who  thwarts  it  loses,  and  who  serves  it  gains ; 
The  hidden  good  it  pays  with  peace  and  bliss.

The  hidden  ill  with  pains.

It  seeth  everywhere  and  marketh  all ;

Do  right — it  recompenseth!     Do  one  wrong — 
The  equal  retribution  must  be  made,

Though  Dharma  tarry  long.

It  knows  not  wrath  nor  pardon ;  utter-true.

Its  measures  mete,  its  faultless  balance  weighs ; 
Times  are  as  naught — to-morrow  it  will  judge —

Or  after  many  days.

****** 
Such  is  the  law  which  moves  to  righteousness,

Which  none  at  last  can  turn  aside  or  stay ; 
The  heart  of  it  is  love,  the  end  of  it

Is  peace  and  consummation  sweet.     Obey.

And  now  I  advise  you  to  compare  our  Theosophic  views 
upon  Karma,  the  law  of  retribution,  and  say  whether  they 
are  not  both  more  philosophical  and  just  than  this  cruel  and 
idiotic  dogma  which  makes  of  ''  God  "  a  senseless  fiend—

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  191

the  tenet,  namely,  that  the  ''elect  only"  will  be  saved,  and 
the  rest  doomed  to  eternal  perdition  !

Inq. —  Yes^  I  see  what  you  inean  genei'ally  ;  but  I  wish  you 
could  give  some  co7icrete  exa)?iple  of  the  action  of  Karma.

Theo. — That  I  cannot  do.  We  can  only  feel  sure,  as 
I  said  before,  that  our  present  lives  and  circumstances  are 
the  direct  results  of  our  own  deeds  and  thoughts  in  lives 
that  are  past.  But  we,  who  are  not  seers  or  Initiates,  can- 
not know  anything  about  the  details  of  the  working  of  the 
law  of  Karma.

Inq. — Ca7t  any  one^  eve7i  a7i  Adept  or  seer,  follow  out  this 
karmic  process  of  readjicstment  in  detail  ?

Theo. — Certainly  ;  ''those  who  know"  can  do  so  by  the 
exercise  of  powers  which  are  latent  even  in  all  men.

WHO  ARE    THOSE    WHO  KNOW?Theo. — Certainly  ;  ''those  who  know"  can  do  so  by  the 
exercise  of  powers  which  are  latent  even  in  all  men.

WHO  ARE    THOSE    WHO  KNOW?

Inq. — Does  this  hold  equally  of  ourselves  as  of  others  ?

Theo. — Equally.  As  just  said,  the  same  hmited  vision 
exists  for  all,  save  for  those  who  have  reached,  in  the 
present  incarnation,  the  acme  of  spiritual  vision  and  clair- 
voyance. We  can  only  perceive  that,  if  things  ought  to 
have  been  different  with  us,  they  would  have  been  differ- 
ent ;  that  we  are  what  we  have  made  ourselves,  and  have 
only  what  we  have  earned  for  ourselves.

Inq. — lam  afraid  such  a  conception  would  oftly  e^nbitterus.

Theo. — I  believe  it  is  precisely  the  reverse.  It  is  dis- 
belief in  the  just  law  of  retribution  that  is  more  likely  to 
awaken  every  combative  feeling  in  man.  A  child,  as 
much  as  a  man,  resents  a  punishment,  or  even  a  reproof,  he 
beheves  to  be  unmerited,  far  more  than  he  does  a  severer 
punishment,  if  he  feels  that  it  is  merited.    Belief  in  Karma

192  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

is  the  highest  motive  for  reconcilement  to  one's  lot  in  this 
hfe,  and  the  very  strongest  incentive  toward  effort  to  better 
the  succeeding  rebirth.  Both  of  these,  indeed,  would  be 
destroyed  if  we  supposed  that  our  lot  was  the  result  of  any- 
thing but  strict  law^  or  that  destiny  was  in  any  other  hands 
than  our  own.

Inq. —  You  have  just  asserted  that  this  syste7?i  of  reincarna- 
tio7i  under  karmic  law  commended  itself  to  reason^  justice^  and 
the  moral  sense.  But,  if  so,  is  it  ?iot  at  some  sacrifice  of  the 
gentler  qualities  of  sympathy  and  pity,  and  thus  a  hardening 
of  the  finer  instincts  of  human  nature  ?Theo. — Only  apparently,  not  really.  No  man  can  re- 
ceive more  or  less  than  his  deserts  without  a  correspond- 
ing injustice  or  partiaHty  to  others ;  and  a  law  which  could 
be  averted  through  compassion  would  bring  about  more 
misery  than  it  saved,  more  irritation  and  curses  than  thanks. 
Remember,  also,  that  we  do  not  administer  the  law,  if  we 
do  create  causes  for  its  effects ;  it  administers  itself ;  and 
again,  that  the  most  copious  provision  for  the  manifesta- 
tion oijust  compassion  and  mercy  is  shown  in  the  state  of 
Devachan.

Inq. —  You  speak  of  Adepts  as  being  an  exception  to  the  rule 
of  our  general  ignorance.  Do  they  really  know  more  than  we 
do  of  rei?icar?iatio7t  and  after-states  ?

Theo. — They  do  indeed.  By  the  training  of  faculties 
we  all  possess,  but  which  they  alone  have  developed  to  per- 
fection, they  have  entered  in  spirit  these  various  planes  and 
states  we  have  been  discussing.  For  long  ages  one  gen- 
eration of  Adepts  after  another  has  studied  the  mysteries 
of  being,  of  life,  death,  and  rebirth,  and  all  have  taught  in 
their  turn  some  of  the  facts  so  learned.

Inq. — And  is  the  production  of  Adepts  the  aim  of  Theos- 
ophy?

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  193Inq. — And  is  the  production  of  Adepts  the  aim  of  Theos- 
ophy?

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  193

Theo. — Theosophy  considers  humanity  as  an  emanation 
from  divinity  on  its  retnrn-path  thereto.  At  an  advanced 
point  upon  the  path  adeptship  is  reached  by  those  who 
have  devoted  several  incarnations  to  its  achievement.  For, 
remember  well,  no  man  has  ever  reached  adeptship  in  the 
secret  sciences  in  one  life ;  but  many  incarnations  are 
necessary  for  it  after  the  formation  of  a  conscious  purpose 
and  the  beginning  of  the  needful  training.  Many  may  be 
the  men  and  women  in  the  very  midst  of  our  Society  who 
have  begun  this  uphill  work  toward  illumination  several  in- 
carnations ago,  and  who  yet,  owing  to  the  personal  illusions 
of  the  present  life,  are  either  ignorant  of  the  fact,  or  on  the 
road  to  losing  every  chance,  in  this  existence,  of  progress- 
ing any  farther.  They  feel  an  irresistible  attraction  toward 
Occultism  and  the  ''  higher  Hfe,"  and  yet  are  too  personal 
and  self-opinionated,  too  much  in  love  with  the  deceptive 
allurements  of  mundane  life  and  the  world's  ephemeral 
pleasures,  to  give  them  up,  and  so  lose  their  chance  in  their 
present  birth.  But,  for  ordinary  men,  for  the  practical 
duties  of  daily  life,  such  a  far-off  result  is  inappropriate  as 
an  aim  and  quite  ineffective  as  a  motive.

Inq. —  What,  then,  may  be  their  object  or  distinct  purpose 
in  joining  the  Theosophical  Society  ?

Theo. — Many  are  interested  in  our  doctrines,  and  feel 
instinctively  that  they  are  truer  than  those  of  any  dogmatic 
rehgion.  Others  have  formed  a  fixed  resolve  to  attain  the 
highest  ideal  of  man's  duty.

THE  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  FAITH  AND  KNOW-- 
LEDGE,   OR  BLIND  AND  REASONED  FAITH,THE  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  FAITH  AND  KNOW-- 
LEDGE,   OR  BLIND  AND  REASONED  FAITH,

Inq. —  You  say  that  they  accept  and  believe  in  the  doctrines 
of  Theosophy.  But  as  they  do  not  belong  to  those  Adepts  you 
have  just  mentioned^  then  they  must  accept  your  teachings  on

194  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

**  blind  faith, ^^     In  what  does  this  differ  from  that  of  coiive?i- 
tionai  religions  ?

Theo. — As  it  differs  on  almost  all  the  other  points,  so  it 
differs  on  this  one.  What  you  call  ''faith/'  and  that  which 
is  "blind  faith,"  in  reality,  with  regard  to  the  dogmas  of  the 
Christian  religions,  becomes  with  us  knowledge^  the  logical 
sequence  of  things  we  kiiow^  dHooMX.  facts  in  Nature.  Your 
doctrines  are  based  upon  interpretation,  therefore  upon  the 
second-hand  testimony  of  seers ;  ours  upon  the  unvarying 
and  invariable  testimony  of  seers.  The  ordinary  Christian 
theology,  for  instance,  holds  that  man  is  a  creature  of 
God,  of  three  component  parts — body,  soul,  and  spirit — 
all  essential  to  his  integrity,  and  all,  either  in  the  gross  form 
of  physical  earthly  existence  or  in  the  etherealized  form  of 
post-resurrection  experience,  needed  to  so  constitute  him 
forever,  each  man  having  thus  a  permanent  existence  sep- 
arate from  other  men  and  from  the  divine.  Theosophy, 
on  the  other  hand,  holds  that,  man  being  an  emanation  from 
the  unknown  yet  ever-present  and  infinite  Divine  Essence, 
his  body  and  everything  else  is  impermanent,  hence  an 
illusion;  spirit  alone  in  him  being  the  one  enduring  sub- 
stance, and  even  that  losing  its  separated  individuality  at 
the  moment  of  its  complete  reunion  with  the  Universal 
Spirit.

Inq. — If  we  lose  even  our  individuality^  then  it  becomes 
simply  a7inihilatio7i.Inq. — If  we  lose  even  our  individuality^  then  it  becomes 
simply  a7inihilatio7i.

Theo. — I  say  it  does  not,  since  I  speak  of  separate^  not 
of  universal  individuality.  This  individuahty  becomes  as 
a  part  transformed  into  the  whole ;  the  ''  dewdrop  **  is  not 
evaporated,  but  becomes  the  sea.  Is  physical  man  annihi- 
lated when  from  a  fetus  he  becomes  an  old  man  ?  What 
kind  of  Satanic  pride  must  be  ours  if  we  place  our  infini- 
tesimally  small  consciousness  and  individuality  higher  than 
the  universal  and  infinite  consciousness  !

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  195

Inq, — It  follows^  thetiy  that  there  is,  de  facto,  ?io  man,  but 
all  is  spirit  ?

Theo. — You  are  mistaken.  It  follows  that  the  union 
of  spirit  with  matter  is  but  temporary;  or,  to  put  it  more 
clearly,  since  spirit  and  matter  are  one,  being  the  two  oppo- 
site poles  of  the  universal  manifested  substance,  spirit  loses 
its  right  to  the  name  so  long  as  the  smallest  particle  and 
atom  of  its  manifesting  substance  still  clings  to  any  form,  the 
result  of  differentiation.    To  believe  otherwise  is  ''blind  faith."

Inq. — Thus  it  is  on  knowledge,  not  on  faith,  that  you  as- 
sert that  the  pennanent  principle,  the  spirit,  simply  makes  a 
transit  through  matter  ?

Theo. — I  would  put  it  otherwise  and  say :  We  assert  that 
the  appearance  of  the  permanent  and  one  principle — spirit 
— as  matter  is  transient,  and  therefore  no  better  than  an 
illusion.

Inq. —  Very  well ;  and  this  given  out  on  knoivledge,  not 
faith  ?Inq. —  Very  well ;  and  this  given  out  on  knoivledge,  not 
faith  ?

Theo. — ^Just  so.  But  as  I  see  very  well  what  you  are 
driving  at,  I  may  just  as  well  tell  you  that  we  hold  faith 
such  as  you  advocate  to  be  a  mental  disease,  and  real 
faith — i.e.,  the  pistis  of  the  Greeks — as  ''belief  based  on 
knowledge,"  whether  supplied  by  the  evidence  of  physical 
or  spiritual  senses.

Inq. —  What  do  you  mean  ?

Theo. — If  it  is  the  difference  between  the  two  that  you 
want  to  know,  I  mean  that  between  yb///?  07i  authority  and 
faith  on  one's  spiritual  intuition  there  is  a  very  great  differ- 
ence.

Inq. —  What  is  it?

Theo. — One  is  human  credulity  and  superstition,  the 
other  human  belief  and  intuition.     As  Professor  Alexan-

196  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

der  Wilder  says  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Eleusmian 
Mysteries  :

It  is  ignorance  which  leads  to  profanation.  Men  ridicule  what  they 
do  not  properly  understand.  .  .  .  The  undercurrent  of  this  world  is 
set  toward  one  g(3al ;  and  inside  of  human  credulity  ...  is  a  power 
ahnost  infinite,  a  holy  faith  capable  of  apprehending  the  supremest 
truths  of  all  existence.

Those  who  limit  that  ''  creduhty  *^  to  human  authoritative 
dogmas  alone  will  never  fathom  that  power,  nor  even  per- 
ceive it  in  their  natures.  It  is  stuck  fast  to  the  external 
plane,  and  is  unable  to  bring  forth  into  play  the  essence 
that  rules  it ;  for  to  do  this  they  have  to  claim  their  right 
of  private  judgment,  and  this  they  never  dare  to  do.

Inq. — A7id  is  it  this  ''  intuition  "  which  forces  you  to  reject 
God  as  aperso?ial  Father,  ruler,  and  governor  of  the  universe  ?Inq. — A7id  is  it  this  ''  intuition  "  which  forces  you  to  reject 
God  as  aperso?ial  Father,  ruler,  and  governor  of  the  universe  ?

Theo. — Precisely.  We  believe  in  an  ever-unknowable 
Principle ;  for  only  blind  aberration  can  make  one  main- 
tain that  the  universe,  thinking  man,  and  all  the  marvels 
contained  even  in  the  world  of  matter,  could  have  grown 
without  some  intelligent  powers  to  bring  about  the  extraor- 
dinarily wise  arrangement  of  all  its  parts.  Nature  may 
err,  and  often  does,  in  its  details  and  the  external  manifesta- 
tions of  its  materials,  never  in  its  inner  causes  and  results. 
Ancient  pagans  held  far  more  philosophical  views  on  this 
question  than  modem  philosophers,  whether  agnostics,  mate- 
riaHsts,  or  Christians;  and  no  pagan  writer  has  ever  yet 
advanced  the  proposition  that  cruelty  and  mercy  are  not 
finite  feelings,  and  can  therefore  be  made  the  attributes 
of  an  infinite  God.  Their  gods,  therefore,  were  all  finite. 
The  Siamese  author  of  the  Wheel  of  the  Law  expresses  the 
same  idea  about  your  personal  God  as  ourselves ;  he  says 
(p.  25):

A  Buddhist  might  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  God  sublime  above 
^U  human  qualities  and  attributes — a  perfect  God,   above  love  s^nd

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  197

hatred  and  jealousy,  calmly  resting  in  a  quietude  that  nothing  could 
disturb ;  and  of  such  a  God  he  would  speak  no  disparagement,  not 
from  a  desire  to  please  him  or  fear  to  offend  him,  but  from  natural 
veneration.  But  he  cannot  understand  a  God  with  the  attributes  and 
qualities  of  men ;  a  God  who  loves  and  hates  and  shows  anger ;  a 
Deity  who,  whether  described  as  by  Christian  missionaries  or  by 
Mahometans  or  Brahmins  *  or  Jews,  falls  below  his  standard  of  even 
an  ordinary  good  man.Inq. — Faith  for  faith  ^  is  not  the  faith  of  the  Christian  who 
believes^  in  his  human  helplessness  and  humility^  that  there  is 
a  me^xiful  Father  i?i  heaven  who  will  protect  him  from  temp- 
tation^ help  him  in  life,  a?id  forgive  him  his  transgressiofis, 
better  than  the  cold  aftd proud,  ahnost  fatalistic,  faith  of  the 
Buddhists,  Vedantins,  and  Theosophists  ?

Theo. — Persist  in  calling  our  belief  ''  faith  "  if  you  will. 
But  once  we  are  again  on  this  ever-recurring  question,  I  ask 
in  my  turn :  Faith  for  faith,  is  not  the  one  based  on  strict 
logic  and  reason  better  than  the  one  w^hich  is  based  simply 
on  human  authority  or — hero-worship  ?  Our  ''  faith  "  has 
all  the  logical  force  of  the  arithmetical  truism  that  two  and 
two  will  produce  four.  Your  faith  is  like  the  logic  of  some 
emotional  women,  of  whom  Tourgenyeff  said  that  for  them 
two  and  two  were  generally  five,  and  a  tallow  candle  into 
the  bargain.  Yours  is  a  faith,  moreover,  which  clashes 
not  only  with  every  conceivable  view  of  justice  and  logic, 
but  which,  if  analyzed,  leads  man  to  his  moral  perdition, 
checks  the  progress  of  mankind,  and  positively  making  of 
might  right,  transforms  every  second  man  into  a  Cain  to 
his  brother  Abel.

HAS   GOD    THE  RIGHT  TO  FORGIVE?

Inq. — To  what  do  you  allude?

Theo. — To  the  doctrine  of  "  atonement.''  I  allude  to  that 
dangerous  dogma  in  which  you  beHeve,  and  which  teaches

"  Sectarian  Brahmans  ar    here  meant.     The  Parabrahman  of  the  Vedantins  is  the 
Deity  we  accept  and  believe  in.

198  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,"  Sectarian  Brahmans  ar    here  meant.     The  Parabrahman  of  the  Vedantins  is  the 
Deity  we  accept  and  believe  in.

198  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

US  that  no  matter  how  enormous  our  crimes  against  the 
laws  of  God  and  of  man,  we  have  but  to  believe  in  the 
self-sacrifice  of  Jesus  for  the  salvation  of  mankind,  and  his 
blood  will  wash  out  every  stain.  It  is  now  twenty  years 
that  I  have  preached  against  it,  and  I  may  now  draw  your 
attention  to  a  paragraph  from/^/V  Unveiled^  written  in  1875. 
This  is  what  Christianity  teaches,  and  what  we  combat :

God's  mercy  is  boundless  and  unfathomable.  It  is  impossible  to 
conceive  of  a  human  sin  so  damnable  that  the  price  paid  in  advance  for 
the  redemption  of  the  sinner  would  not  wipe  it  out  if  a  thousandfold 
worse.  And,  furthermore,  it  is  never  too  late  to  repent.  Though  the 
offender  wait  until  the  last  minute  of  the  last  hour  of  the  last  day  of 
his  mortal  life  before  his  blanched  lips  utter  the  confession  of  faith, 
he  may  go  to  Paradise ;  the  dying  thief  did  so,  and  so  may  all  others 
as  vile.  These  are  the  assumptions  of  the  church  and  of  the  clergy ; 
assumptions  banged  at  the  heads  of  your  countrymen  by  England's 
favorite  preachers,  right  in  the  'Might  of  the  nineteenth  century" — 
this  most  paradoxical  age  of  all!

Now,  to  what  does  it  lead?

Inq. — Does  it  not  make  the  Christian  happier  than  the 
Buddhist  or  Brdhmaii  ?Now,  to  what  does  it  lead?

Inq. — Does  it  not  make  the  Christian  happier  than  the 
Buddhist  or  Brdhmaii  ?

Theo. — No ;  not  the  educated  man,  at  any  rate,  since 
the  majority  of  these  have  long  since  virtually  lost  all  belief 
in  this  cruel  dogma.  But  it  leads  those  who  still  believe  in 
it  more  easily  to  the  threshold  of  every  conceivable  crime  than 
any  other  I  know  of.  Let  me  quote  to  you  from  Isis  Un- 
veiled once  more  (ii.,  542,  543) :

If  we  step  outside  the  little  circle  of  creed  and  consider  the  uni- 
verse as  a  whole  balanced  by  the  exquisite  adjustment  of  parts,  how 
all  sound  logic,  how  the  faintest  glimmering  sense  of  justice,  revolts 
against  this  vicarious  atonement!  If  the  criminal  sinned  only  against 
himself,  and  wronged  no  one  but  himself ;  if  by  sincere  repentance  he 
could  cause  the  obliteration  of  past  events,  not  only  from  the  memory 
of  man,  but  also  from  that  imperishable  record  which  no  deity — not 
even  the  Supremest  of  the  Supreme — can  cause  to  disappear,  then  this 
dogma  might  not  be  incomprehensible.     But  to  maintain  that  one  may

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  199THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  199

wrong  his  fellow-man,  kill,  disturb  the  equilibrium  of  society  and  the 
natural  order  of  things,  and  then — through  cowardice,  hope,  or  com- 
pulsion matters  not — be  forgiven  by  believing  that  the  spilling  of  one 
blood  washes  out  the  other  blood  spilled — this  is  preposterous !  Can  the 
results  of  a  crime  be  obliterated  even  though  the  crime  itself  should  be 
pardoned?  The  effects  of  a  cause  are  never  limited  to  the  boundaries 
of  the  cause,  nor  can  the  results  of  crime  be  confined  to  the  offender 
and  his  victim.  Every  good  as  well  as  evil  action  has  its  effects,  as 
palpably  as  the  stone  flung  into  calm  water.  The  simile  is  trite,  but 
it  is  the  best  ever  conceived,  so  let  us  use  it.  The  eddying  circles  are 
greater  and  swifter  as  the  disturbing  object  is  greater  or  smaller ;  but 
the  smallest  pebble — nay,  the  tiniest  speck — makes  its  ripples.  And 
this  disturbance  is  not  alone  visible  and  on  the  surface.  Below%  un- 
seen, in  every  direction — outward  and  downward — drop  pushes  drop 
until  the  sides  and  bottom  are  touched  by  the  force.  More,  the  air 
above  the  water  is  agitated,  and  this  disturbance  passes,  as  the  physi- 
cists tell  us,  from  stratum  to  stratum  out  into  space  for  ever  and  ever  ; 
an  impulse  has  been  given  to  matter,  and  that  is  never  lost,  can  never 
be  recalled!   .   .   .So  with  crime  and  so  with  its  opposite.  The  action  may  be  instan- 
taneous, the  effects  are  eternal.  When,  after  the  stone  is  once  flung 
into  the  pond,  we  can  recall  it  to  the  hand,  roll  back  the  ripples,  oblit- 
erate the  force  expended,  restore  the*etheric  waves  to  their  previous 
state  of  non-being,  and  wipe  out  every  trace  of  the  act  of  throwing  the 
missile,  so  that  Time's  record  shall  not  show  that  it  ever  happened, 
then,  then  we  may  patiently  hear  Christians  argue  for  the  efficacy  of 
this  atonement

and — cease  to  believe  in  karmic  law.  As  it  now  stands, 
we  call  upon  the  whole  world  to  decide  which  of  our  two 
doctrines  is  the  most  appreciative  of  deific  justice,  and 
which  is  more  reasonable,  even  on  simple  human  evidence 
and  logic.

Inq. —  Yet  7nil lions  believe  in  the  Christimi  dogma  and  are 
happy,

Theo. — Pure  sentimentalism  overpowering  their  thinking 
faculties,  which  no  true  philanthropist  or  altruist  will  ever 
accept.  It  is  not  even  a  dream  of  selfishness,  but  a  night- 
mare of  the  human  intellect.     Look  where  it  leads  to,  and

200  THE  KEY  TO   THEOSOPHY,

tell  me  the  name  of  that  pagan  country  where  crimes  are 
more  easily  committed  or  more  numerous  than  in  Christian 
lands.  Look  at  the  long  and  ghastly  annual  records  of 
crimes  committed  in  European  countries ;  and  behold  Prot- 
estant and  biblical  America.  There  conversioiis  effected  in 
prisons  are  more  numerous  than  those  made  by  public  re- 
vivals and  preaching.See  how  the  ledger -balance  of  Christian  justice  ( ! )  stands.  Red- 
handed  murderers,  urged  on  by  the  demons  of  lust,  revenge,  cupidity, 
fanaticism,  or  mere  brutal  thirst  for  blood,  who  kill  their  victims,  in 
most  cases,  without  giving  them  time  to  repent  or  call  on  Jesus. 
These,  perhaps,  died  sinful,  and,  of  course — consistently  with  theo- 
logical logic — met  the  reward  of  their  greater  or  lesser  offenses.  But 
the  murderer,  overtaken  by  human  justice,  is  imprisoned,  wept  over  by 
sentimentalists,  prayed  with  and  at,  pronounces  the  charmed  words  of 
conversion,  and  goes  to  the  scaffold  a  redeemed  child  of  Jesus !  Except 
for  the  murder  he  would  not  have  been  prayed  with,  redeemed,  par- 
doned. Clearly  this  man  did  well  to  murder,  for  thus  he  gained  eter- 
nal happiness !  And  how  about  the  victim,  and  his  or  her  family,  rela- 
tives, dependents,  social  relations  ;  has  justice  no  recompense  for  them? 
Must  they  suffer  in  this  world  and  the  next,  while  he  who  wronged 
them  sits  beside  the  '*  holy  thief"  of  Calvary  and  is  forever  blessed? 
On  this  question  the  clergy  keep  a  prudent  silence.*

And  now  you  know  why  Theosophists — whose  funda- 
mental behef  and  hope  is  justice  for  all,  in  heaven  as  on 
earth,  and  in  Karma — reject  this  dogma.

Inq. —  The  tilti?nate  desti?ty  of  man ^  then^  is  not  a  heaven 
presided  over  by  God,  but  the  gradual  transformatio7i  of  mat- 
ter into  its  primordial  element,  spirit  ?

Theo. — It  is  to  that  final  goal  to  which  all  tends  in 
Nature.

Inq. — Do  7iot  some  of  you  regard  this  association  or  ^^fall 
of  spirit  into  inatter^^  as  evil,  and  rebirth  as  a  sorrow  ?

*  /sis  Unveiled,  ibid.

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  201*  /sis  Unveiled,  ibid.

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  201

Theo. — Some  do,  and  therefore  strive  to  shorten  their 
period  of  probation  on  earth.  It  is  not,  however,  an  un- 
mixed evil,  since  it  insures  the  experience  upon  which  we 
mount  to  knowledge  and  wisdom.  I  mean  that  experience 
which  teaches  that  the  needs  of  our  spiritual  nature  can 
never  be  met  by  other  than  spiritual  happiness.  As  long 
as  we  are  in  the  body  we  are  subjected  to  pain,  suffering, 
and  all  the  disappointing  incidents  occurring  during  life. 
Therefore,  and  to  palliate  this,  we  finally  acquire  know- 
ledge which  alone  can  afford  us  relief  and  hope  of  a  better 
future.

XII. 
WHAT  IS  PRACTICAL  THEOSOPHY?

DUTY.

Inq. —  Whyy  then,  the  need  for  rebirths,  since  all  alike  fail 
to  secure  a  permanent  peace  ?

Theo. — Because  the  final  goal  cannot  be  reached  in  any 
way  but  through  life-experiences,  and  because  the  bujk  of 
these  consists  in  pain  and  suffering.  It  is  only  through  the 
latter  that  we  can  learn.  Joys  and  pleasures  teach  us 
nothing ;  they  are  evanescent,  and  can  only  in  the  long  run 
bring  satiety.  Moreover,  our  constant  failure  to  find  any 
permanent  satisfaction  in  life  which  would  meet  the  wants 
of  our  higher  nature  shows  us  plainly  that  those  wants  can 
be  met  only  on  their  own  plane — to  wit,  the  spiritual.

Inq. — Is  the  natural  result  of  this  a  desire  to  quit  life  by 
one  means  or  another  ?Inq. — Is  the  natural  result  of  this  a  desire  to  quit  life  by 
one  means  or  another  ?

Theo. — If  you  mean  by  such  desire  ''suicide,"  then  I 
say,  most  decidedly  not.  Such  a  result  can  never  be  a 
"  natural "  one,  but  is  ever  due  to  a  morbid  brain-disease, 
or  to  most  decided  and  strong  materialistic  views.  It  is 
the  worst  of  crimes,  and  dire  in  its  results.  But  if  by  de- 
sire you  mean  simply  aspiration  to  reach  spiritual  existence, 
and  not  a  wish  to  quit  the  earth,  then  I  would  call  it  a  very

202

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  203

natural  desire  indeed.  Otherwise  voluntary  death  would 
be  an  abandonment  of  our  present  post  and  of  the  duties 
incumbent  on  us,  as  well  as  an  attempt  to  shirk  karmic  re- 
sponsibilities, and  thus  involve  the  creation  of  new  Karma.

Inq. — But  if  actions  on  the  inaterial  plarte  are  unsatisfying^ 
why  should  duties,  which  are  such  actions,  be  imperative  ?

Theo. — First  of  all,  because  our  philosophy  teaches  us 
that  the  object  of  doing  our  duties  to  all  men  first  and  to 
ourselves  last  is  not  the  attainment  of  personal  happiness, 
but  of  the  happiness  of  others  ;  the  fulfilment  of  right  for  the 
sake  of  right,  not  for  what  it  may  bring  us.  Happiness,  or 
rather  contentment,  may  indeed  follow  the  performance  of 
duty,  but  is  not  and  must  not  be  the  motive  for  it.

Inq. —  What  do  you  imderstand  precisely  by  ^'  duty  "  i7i 
Theosophy  ?  It  cannot  be  the  Christian  duties  preached  by 
Jesus  a?td  his  apostles,  since  you  recognize  neither,Inq. —  What  do  you  imderstand  precisely  by  ^'  duty  "  i7i 
Theosophy  ?  It  cannot  be  the  Christian  duties  preached  by 
Jesus  a?td  his  apostles,  since  you  recognize  neither,

Theo. — You  are  once  more  mistaken.  What  you  call 
'*  Christian  "  duties  were  inculcated  by  every  great  moral 
and  religious  reformer  ages  before  the  Christian  era.  All 
that  was  great,  generous,  heroic,  was,  in  days  of  old,  not 
only  talked  about  and  preached  from  pulpits  as  in  our  own 
time,  but  acted  upo7i,  sometimes  by  whole  nations.  The  his- 
tory of  the  Buddhist  reform  is  full  of  the  most  noble  and 
most  heroically  unselfish  acts.  ''  Be  ye  all  of  one  mind, 
having  compassion  one  of  another;  love  as  brethren,  be 
pitiful,  be  courteous :  not  rendering  evil  for  evil,  or  railing 
for  railing :  but  contrariwise  blessing,''  was  practically  car- 
ried out  by  the  followers  of  Buddha  several  centuries  be- 
fore Peter.  The  ethics  of  Christianity  are  grand,  no  doubt ; 
but,  as  undoubtedly,  they  are  not  new,  and  have  originated 
as  "  pagan  "  duties.

Inq. — And  how  would  you  define  these  duties,  or  *^  duty^^ 
in  general,  as  you  understand  the  term  ?

204  THE  KEY   TO    TIIEOSOPHV.

Theo. — Duty  is  that  which  is  due  to  humanity — to  our 
fellow-men,  neighbors,  family — and  especially  that  which 
we  owe  to  all  those  who  are  poorer  and  more  helpless  than 
we  are  ourselves.  This  is  a  debt  which,  if  left  unpaid  dur- 
ing life,  leaves  us  spiritually  insolvent  and  moral  bankrupts 
in  our  next  incarnation.  Theosophy  is  the  quintessence  of 
duty.

Inq. — So  is  Christianity  when  rightly  understood  and  car- 
ried out.Inq. — So  is  Christianity  when  rightly  understood  and  car- 
ried out.

Theo. — No  doubt  it  is ;  but  then,  were  it  not  a  lip-re- 
ligion  in  practice,  Theosophy  would  have  little  to  do  amid 
Christians.  Unfortunately  it  is  but  such  lip-ethics.  Those 
who  practise  their  duty  toward  all,  and  for  duty's  own 
sake,  are  few ;  and  fewer  still  are  those  who  perform  that 
duty,  remaining  content  with  the  satisfaction  of  their  own 
secret  consciousness.     It  is

The  public  voice 
Of  praise,  that  honors  virtue  and  rewards  it,

which  is  ever  uppermost  in  the  minds  of  the  "world-re- 
nowned "  philanthropists.  Modem  ethics  are  beautiful  to 
read  about  and  hear  discussed ;  but  what  are  words  unless 
converted  into  actions  ?  Finally,  ;f  you  ask  me  how  we 
understand  Theosophical  duty  practically  and  in  view  of 
Karma,  I  may  answer  you  that  our  duty  is  to  drink  to  the 
last  drop,  without  a  murmur,  whatever  contents  the  cup  of 
life  may  have  in  store  for  us,  to  pluck  the  roses  of  Ufe  only 
for  the  fragrance  they  may  shed  on  others,  and  to  be  our- 
selves content  but  with  the  thorns,  if  that  fragrance  cannot 
be  enjoyed  without  depriving  some  one  else  of  it.

Inq. — All  this  is  very  vague.      What  do  you  do  more  than

Christians  do  ?

Theo. — It  is  not  what  we  members  of  the  Theosophical 
Society  do — though  some  of  us  try  our  best — but  how

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  i>05Christians  do  ?

Theo. — It  is  not  what  we  members  of  the  Theosophical 
Society  do — though  some  of  us  try  our  best — but  how

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  i>05

much  farther  Theosophy  leads  to  good  than  modern 
Christianity  does.  I  say  action — enforced  action — instead 
of  mere  intention  and  talk.  A  man  may  be  what  he  likes 
— the  most  worldly,  selfish,  and  hard-hearted  of  men,  even 
a  deep-dyed  rascal — and  it  will  not  prevent  him  from  call- 
ing himself  a  Christian,  or  others  from  so  regarding  him. 
But  no  Theosophist  has  the  right  to  this  name  unless  he  is 
thoroughly  imbued  with  the  correctness  of  Carlyle's  truism, 
''  The  end  of  man  is  an  action  and  not  a  thotight,  though  it 
were  the  noblest,"  and  unless  he  sets  and  models  his  daily 
life  upon  this  truth.  The  profession  of  a  truth  is  not  yet 
the  enactment  of  it ;  and  the  more  beautiful  and  grand  it 
sounds,  the  more  loudly  virtue  or  duty  is  talked  about  in- 
stead of  being  acted  upon,  the  niore  forcibly  it  will  always 
remind  one  of  the  Dead  Sea  fruit.  Ca?it  is  the  most  loath- 
some of  all  vices,  and  cant  is  the  most  prominent  feature  of 
the  greatest  Protestant  country  of  this  century — England.

Inq. —  What  do  you  consider  as  due  to  humanity  at  large?

Theo. — Full  recognition  of  equal  rights  and  privileges 
for  all,  without  distinction  of  race,  color,  social  position,  or 
birth.

Inq. —  When  would  you  co?isider  such  due  not  given  ?Inq. —  When  would  you  co?isider  such  due  not  given  ?

Theo. — When  there  is  the  slightest  invasion  of  another's 
right,  be  that  other  a  man  or  a  nation ;  when  there  is  any 
failure  to  show  him  the  same  justice,  kindness,  considera- 
tion, or  mercy  which  we  desire  for  ourselves.  The  whole 
present  system  of  pohtics  is  built  on  the  oblivion  of  such 
rights  and  the  most  fierce  assertion  of  national  selfishness. 
The  French  say,  ''Like  master,  like  man;"  they  ought  to 
add,  '*  Like  national  pohcy,  like  citizen."

Inq. — Do  you  take  any  part  in  politics  ?

Theo. — As  a  society  we  carefully  avoid  them,  for  the  rea- 
r^ons  given  below.    To  seek  to  achieve  political  reforms  be-

206  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

fore  we  have  effected  a  reform  in  human  nature  is  like  putting 
new  wine  into  old  bottles.  Make  men  feel  and  recognize 
in  their  innermost  hearts  what  is  their  real,  true  duty  to  all 
men,  and  every  old  abuse  of  power,  every  iniquitous  law 
in  the  national  policy  based  on  human,  social,  or  political 
selfishness,  will  disappear  of  itself.  Foolish  is  the  gardener 
who  tries  to  weed  his  flower-bed  of  poisonous  plants  by 
cutting  them  off  from  the  surface  of  the  soil,  instead  of 
tearing  them  out  by  the  roots.  No  lasting  political  reform 
can  be  ever  achieved  with  the  same  selfish  men  at  the  head 
of  affairs  as  of  old.

THE  RELATIONS   OF   THE    THEOSOPHICAL   SOCIETY 
TO  POLITICAL   REFORMS.

Inq. — The  Theosophical  Society  is  ?tot,  then,  a  political  or- 
ganization ?THE  RELATIONS   OF   THE    THEOSOPHICAL   SOCIETY 
TO  POLITICAL   REFORMS.

Inq. — The  Theosophical  Society  is  ?tot,  then,  a  political  or- 
ganization ?

Theo. — Certainly  not.  It  is  international  in  the  highest 
sense,  in  that  its  members  comprise  men  and  women  of  all 
races,  creeds,  and  forms  of  thought,  who  work  together  for 
one  object — the  improvement  of  humanity ;  but  as  a  society 
it  takes  absolutely  no  part  in  any  national  or  party  politics.

Inq. —  Why  is  this  ?

Theo. — For  the  very  reasons  I  have  mentioned.  More- 
over, political  action  must  necessarily  vary  with  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  time  and  with  the  idiosyncrasies  of  in- 
dividuals. While,  from  the  very  nature  of  their  position 
as  Theosophists,  the  members  of  the  Theosophical  Society 
are  agreed  on  the  principles  of  Theosophy,  or  they  would 
not  belong  to  the  Society  at  all,  it  does  not  thereby  follow 
that  they  agree  on  every  other  subject.  As  a  society  they 
can  only  act  together  in  matters  which  are  common  to  all 
— that  is,  in  Theosophy  itself ;  as  individuals,  each  is  left 
perfectly  free  to  follow  out  his  or  her  particular  line  of

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  207

political  thought  and  action,  so  long  as  this  does  not  con- 
flict with  Theosophical  principles  or  hurt  the  Theosophical 
Society.

Inq. — But  surely  the  Theosophical  Society  does  not  stand 
altogether  aloof  from  the  social  questiofis  which  are  now  so  fast 
coming  to  the  front  ?Inq. — But  surely  the  Theosophical  Society  does  not  stand 
altogether  aloof  from  the  social  questiofis  which  are  now  so  fast 
coming  to  the  front  ?

Theo. — The  very  principles  of  the  Theosophical  Society 
are  a  proof  that  it  does  not — or,  rather,  that  most  of  its 
members  do  not — so  stand  aloof.  If  humanity  can  only 
be  developed  mentally  and  spiritually  by  the  enforcement, 
first  of  all,  of  the  soundest  and  most  scientific  physiological 
laws,  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  all  who  strive  for  this  de- 
velopment to  do  their  utmost  to  see  that  those  laws  shall  be 
generally  carried  out.  All  Theosophists  are  only  too  sadly 
aware  that,  in  Occidental  countries  especially,  the  social 
condition  of  large  masses  of  the  people  renders  it  impos- 
sible for  either  their  bodies  or  their  spirits  to  be  properly 
trained,  so  that  the  development  of  both  is  thereby  arrested. 
As  this  training  and  development  is  one  of  the  express  ob- 
jects of  Theosophy,  the  Theosophical  Society  is  in  thor- 
ough sympathy  and  harmony  with  all  true  efforts  in  this 
direction.

Inq. — But  what  do  you  mean  by  ''  true  efforts  "  /  Each 
social  refor^ner  has  his  ow7i  panacea^  and  each  believes  his  to 
be  the  07ie  and  only  thing  which  caii  improve  and  save  hu- 
manity,

Theo. — Perfectly  true ;  and  this  is  the  real  reason  why 
so  little  satisfactory  social  work  is  accomplished.  In  most 
of  these  panaceas  there  is  no  really  guiding  principle,  and 
there  is  certainly  no  one  principle  which  connects  them  all. 
Valuable  time  and  energy  are  thus  wasted  ;  for  men,  instead 
of  cooperating,  strive  one  against  the  other,  often,  it  is  to 
be  feared,  for  the  sake  of  fame  and  reward  rather  than  for

208  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,208  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

the  great  cause  which  they  profess  to  have  at  heart,  and 
which  should  be  supreme  in  their  lives.

Inq. — Hoii^^  the?i,  should  TJieosophical prviciples  be  applied 
so  that  social  cooperation  may  be  promoted  and  true  efforts  for 
social  amelioration  be  carried  on  ?

Theo. — Let  me  briefly  remind  you  what  these  principles 
are :  Universal  Unity  and  Causation ;  Human  Solidarity ; 
the  Law  of  Karma ;  Reincarnation.  These  are  the  four 
links  of  the  golden  chain  which  should  bind  humanity  into 
one  family,  one  Universal  Brotherhood.

Inq. — How  ?Inq. — How  ?

Theo. — In  the  present  state  of  society,  especially  in  so- 
called  civilized  countries,  we  are  continually  brought  face 
to  face  with  the  fact  that  large  numbers  of  people  are 
suffering  from  misery,  poverty,  and  disease.  Their  physi- 
cal condition  is  wretched,  and  their  mental  and  spiritual 
faculties  are  often  almost  dormant.  On  the  other  hand, 
many  persons  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  social  scale  are 
leading  lives  of  careless  indifference,  material  luxury,  and 
selfish  indulgence.  Neither  of  these  forms  of  existence  is 
mere  chance.  Both  are  the  effects  of  the  conditions  which 
surround  those  who  are  subject  to  them,  and  the  neglect  of 
social  duty  on  the  one  side  is  most  closely  connected  with 
the  stunted  and  arrested  development  on  the  other.  In 
sociology,  as  in  all  branches  of  true  science,  the  law  of  uni- 
versal causation  holds  good.  But  this  causation  necessarily 
implies,  as  its  logical  outcome,  that  human  solidarity  on 
which  Theosophy  so  strongly  insists.  If  the  action  of  one 
reacts  on  the  lives  of  all — and  this  is  the  true  scientific  idea — 
then  it  is  only  by  all  men  becoming  brothers  and  all  women 
sisters,  and  by  all  practising  in  their  daily  lives  true  brother- 
hood and  true  sisterhood,  that  the  real  human  solidarity 
which  lies  at  the  root  of  the  elevation  of  the  race  can  ever

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  209

be  attained.  It  is  this  action  and  interaction,  this  true 
brotherhood  and  sisterhood,  in  which  each  shall  live  for  all 
and  all  for  each,  which  is  one  of  the  fundamental  Theosoph- 
ical  principles  that  every  Theosophist  should  be  bound  not 
only  to  teach,  but  to  carry  out  \\\  his  or  her  individual  life.Inq. — All  this  is  very  ivell  as  a  ge7ieral principle^  but  how 
would  you  apply  it  in  a  concrete  way  ?

Theo. — Look  for  a  moment  at  what  you  would  call  the 
concrete  facts  of  human  society.  Contrast  the  lives  not 
only  of  the  masses  of  the  people,  but  of  many  of  those  who 
are  called  the  middle  and  upper  classes,  with  what  they 
might  be  under  healthier  and  nobler  conditions,  where  jus- 
tice, kindness,  and  love  were  paramount,  instead  of  the 
selfishness,  indifference,  and  brutality  which  now  too  often 
seem  to  reign  supreme.  All  good  and  evil  things  in 
humanity  have  their  roots  in  human  character,  and  this 
character  is,  and  has  been,  conditioned  by  the  endless  chain 
of  cause  and  effect.  But  this  conditioning  applies  to  the 
future  as  well  as  to  the  present  and  the  past.  Selfishness, 
indifference,  and  brutality  can  never  be  the  normal  state  of 
the  race ;  to  believe  so  would  be  to  despair  of  humanity, 
and  that  no  Theosophist  can  do.  Progress  can  be  attained, 
and  only  attained,  by  the  development  of  the  nobler 
qualities.  Now,  true  evolution  teaches  us  that  by  altering 
the  surroundings  of  the  organism  we  can  alter  and  improve 
the  organism ;  and  in  the  strictest  sense  this  is  true  with  re- 
gard to  man.  Every  Theosophist,  therefore,  is  bound  to  do 
his  utmost  to  help  on,  by  all  the  means  in  his  power,  every 
wise  and  well-considered  social  effort  which  has  for  its  ob- 
ject the  amelioration  of  the  condition  of  the  poor.  Such 
efforts  should  be  made  with  a  view  to  their  ultimate  social 
emancipation,  or  the  development  of  the  sense  of  duty  in 
those  who  now  so  often  neglect  it  in  nearly  every  relation 
of  life,

210  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.210  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

Inq. — Agreed.  But  who  is  to  decide  whether  social  efforts 
are  wise  or  unwise  ?

Theo. — No  one  person  and  no  society  can  lay  down  a 
hard-and-fast  rule  in  this  respect.  Much  must  necessarily 
be  left  to  the  individual  judgment.  One  general  test  may, 
however,  be  given :  Will  the  proposed  action  tend  to  pro- 
mote that  true  brotherhood  which  it  is  the  aim  of  Theoso- 
phy  to  bring  about  ?  No  real  Theosophist  will  have  much 
difficulty  in  applying  such  a  test ;  once  he  is  satisfied  of  this, 
his  duty  will  lie  in  the  direction  of  forming  pubhc  opinion. 
And  this  can  be  attained  only  by  inculcating  those  higher 
and  nobler  conceptions  of  pubhc  and  private  duties  which 
lie  at  the  root  of  all  spiritual  and  material  improvement. 
In  every  conceivable  case  he  himself  must  be  a  center  of 
spiritual  action,  and  from  him  and  his  own  daily  individual 
life  must  radiate  those  higher  spiritual  forces  which  alone 
can  regenerate  his  fellow-men.

Inq. — But  ivhy  should  he  do  this  ?  Air  not  he  and  all^ 
as  you  teach ^  co?tditioned  by  their  Karma ^  and  must  not  Karma 
necessarily  work  itself  out  on  certain  lilies  ?Inq. — But  ivhy  should  he  do  this  ?  Air  not  he  and  all^ 
as  you  teach ^  co?tditioned  by  their  Karma ^  and  must  not  Karma 
necessarily  work  itself  out  on  certain  lilies  ?

Theo. — It  is  this  very  law  of  Karma  which  gives  strength 
to  all  that  I  have  said.  The  individual  cannot  separate  him- 
self from  the  race,  nor  the  race  from  the  individual.  The 
law  of  Karma  applies  equally  to  all,  although  all  are  not 
equally  developed.  In  helping  on  the  development  of 
others  the  Theosophist  beheves  that  he  is  not  only  helping 
them  to  fulfil  their  Karma,  but  that  he  is  also,  in  the  strict- 
est sense,  fulfilling  his  own.  It  is  the  development  of 
humanity,  of  which  both  he  and  they  are  integral  parts, 
that  he  has  always  in  view,  and  he  knows  that  any  failure 
on  his  part  to  respond  to  the  highest  within  him  retards  not 
only  himself,  but  all,  in  their  progressive  march.  By  his 
actions  he  can  make  it  either  more  difficult  or  more  easy 
for  humanity  to  attain  the  next  higher  plane  of  being.

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  211

Inq. — How  does  this  bear  on  the  fourth  of  the  principles 
you  mentioned^  viz.,  reincarnatiofi  ?THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  211

Inq. — How  does  this  bear  on  the  fourth  of  the  principles 
you  mentioned^  viz.,  reincarnatiofi  ?

Theo. — The  connection  is  most  intimate.  If  our  pres- 
ent lives  depend  upon  the  development  of  certain  principles 
which  are  a  growth  from  the  germs  left  by  a  previous  exis- 
tence, the  law  holds  good  as  regards  the  future.  Once  grasp 
the  idea  that  universal  causation  is  not  merely  present,  but 
past,  present,  and  future,  and  every  action  on  our  present 
plane  falls  naturally  and  easily  into  its  true  place,  and  is 
seen  in  its  true  relation  to  ourselves  and  to  others.  Every 
mean  and  selfish  action  sends  us  backward  and  not  for- 
ward, while  every  noble  thought  and  every  unselfish  deed 
are  stepping-stones  to  the  higher  and  more  glorious  planes 
of  being.  If  this  life  were  all,  then  in  many  respects  it 
would  indeed  be  poor  and  mean ;  but  regarded  as  a  prep- 
aration for  the  next  sphere  of  existence,  it  may  be  used  as 
the  golden  gate  through  which  we  may  pass — not  selfishly 
and  alone,  but  in  company  with  our  fellows — to  the  palaces 
which  lie  beyond.

ON  SELF-SACRIFICE.

Inq. — Is  equal  justice  to  all  and  love  to  every  creature  the 
highest  standard  of  Theosophy  ?

Theo. — No  ;  there  is  an  even  far  higher  one.

Inq. —  What  caii  it  be  ?Inq. — Is  equal  justice  to  all  and  love  to  every  creature  the 
highest  standard  of  Theosophy  ?

Theo. — No  ;  there  is  an  even  far  higher  one.

Inq. —  What  caii  it  be  ?

Theo. — The  giving  to  others  more  than  to  one's  self — 
self  sacrifice.  Such  was  the  standard  and  abounding  mea- 
sure which  marked  so  preeminently  the  greatest  teachers  and 
masters  of  humanity — such  as  Gautama  Buddha  in  history, 
and  Jesus  of  Nazareth  in  the  Gospels.  This  trait  alone  was 
enough  to  secure  them  the  perpetual  reverence  and  grati- 
tude of  the  generations  of  men  that  came  after  them.  We 
say,  however,  that  self-sacrifice  has  to  be  performed  with

212  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

discrimination ;  and  such  a  self-abandonment,  if  made  with- 
out justice,  or  bHndly,  regardless  of  subsequent  results,  may 
often  prove  not  only  to  have  been  made  in  vain,  but  even 
to  be  harmful.  One  of  the  fundamental  rules  of  Theosophy 
is  justice  to  one's  self — viewed  as  a  unit  of  collective  human- 
ity, not  as  a  personal  self — justice,  not  more,  but  not  less, 
than  to  others ;  unless,  indeed,  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  one 
Self  we  can  benefit  the  many.

Inq. — Could  y oil  make  your  idea  clearer  by  giving  an  ifi- 
stance  ?Inq. — Could  y oil  make  your  idea  clearer  by  giving  an  ifi- 
stance  ?

Theo. — There  are  many  instances  to  illustrate  it  in  his- 
tory. Self-sacrifice  for  the  practical  good  of  many  or  sev- 
eral people  Theosophy  holds  far  higher  than  self-abnegation 
for  a  sectarian  idea,  such  as  that  of  **  saving  the  heathen 
,  from  damnation,"  for  instance.  In  our  opinion.  Father 
Damien,  the  young  man  of  thirty  who  offered  his  whole  life 
in  sacrifice  for  the  benefit  and  alleviation  of  the  sufferings 
of  the  lepers  at  Molokai;  who,  after  living  for  eighteen 
years  alone  with  them,  finally  caught  the  loathsome  disease 
and  died,  has  not  died  in  vain.  He  has  given  rehef  and  rel- 
ative happiness  to  thousands  of  miserable  wretches.  He 
has  brought  to  them  consolation,  mental  and  physical.  He 
threw  a  streak  of  light  into  the  black  and  dreary  night  of 
an  existence  the  hopelessness  of  which  is  unparalleled  in  the 
records  of  human  suffering.  He  was  a  true  Theosophist, 
and  his  memory  will  live  forever  in  our  annals.  In  our 
sight  this  poor  Belgian  priest  stands  immeasurably  higher 
than,  for  instance,  all  those  sincere  but  vainglorious  fools, 
the  missionaries  who  have  sacrificed  their  lives  in  the  South 
Sea  Islands  or  China.  What  good  have  they  done  ?  They 
went  in  one  case  to  those  who  were  not  yet  ripe  for  any 
truth ;  and  in  the  other  to  a  nation  whose  systems  of  reH- 
gious  philosophy  are  as  grand  as  any,  if  only  the  men  who 
have  them  would  live  up  to  the  standard  of  their  Confucius

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  213THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  213

and  Other  sages.  They  died  victims  of  irresponsible  canni- 
bals and  savages,  and  of  popular  fanaticism  and  hatred; 
whereas,  by  going  to  the  slums  of  Whitechapel,  or  some 
other  such  locality  of  those  that  stagnate  right  under  the 
blazing  sun  of  our  civilization,  full  of  Christian  savages  and 
mental  leprosy,  they  might  have  done  real  good,  and  pre- 
served their  Hves  for  a  better  and  worthier  cause.

Inq. — But  the  Christians  do  not  think  so.

Theo. — Of  course  not,  for  they  act  on  an  erroneous  be- 
lief. They  think  that  by  baptizing  the  body  of  an  irrespon- 
sible savage  they  save  his  soul  from  damnation.  One  church 
forgets  her  martyrs,  the  other  beatifies  and  raises  statues  to 
such  men  as  Labre,  who  sacrificed  his  body  for  forty  years 
only  to  benefit  the  vermin  which  it  bred.  Had  we  the 
means  to  do  so,  we  would  raise  a  statue  to  Father  Damien, 
the  true,  practical  saint,  and  perpetuate  his  memory  forever 
as  a  living  exemplar  of  Theosophical  heroism  and  of  Buddha- 
and  Christ-hke  mercy  and  self-sacrifice.

Inq. —  Then  you  regard  self-sacrifice  as  a  duty  ?Inq. —  Then  you  regard  self-sacrifice  as  a  duty  ?

Theo. — We  do  ;  and  explain  it  by  showing  that  altruism 
is  an  integral  part  of  self-development.  But  we  have  to  dis- 
criminate. A  man  has  no  right  to  starve  himself  to  death 
that  another  man  may  have  food,  unless  the  life  of  that 
man  is  obviously  more  useful  to  the  many  than  is  his  own 
life.  But  it  is  his  duty  to  sacrifice  his  own  comfort,  and  to 
work  for  others,  if  they  are  unable  to  work  for  themselves. 
It  is  his  duty  to  give  all  that  is  wholly  his  own  and  can 
benefit  no  one  but  himself  if  he  selfishly  keeps  it  from  others. 
Theosophy  teaches  self-abnegation,  but  does  not  teach  rash 
and  useless  self-sacrifice,  nor  does  it  justify  fanaticism.

Inq. — But  how  are  we  to  reach  such  an  elevated  status  ?

Theo. — By  the  enhghtened  appHcation  of  our  precepts 
to  practice ;  by  the  use  of  oux  higher  reason,  spiritual  intui-

214  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

tion,  and  moral  sense  ;  and  by  following  the  dictates  of  what 
we  call ''  the  still  small  voice  "  of  our  conscience,  which  is  that 
of  our  Ego,  and  speaks  louder  in  us  than  the  earthquakes 
and  the  thunders  of  Jehovah,  wherein  ''the  Lord  is  not."

Inq. — If  such  are  our  duties  to  humanity  at  large  ^  what  do 
you  understand  by  our  duties  to  our  immediate  surroundings  ?

Theo. — Just  the  same,  plus  those  that  arise  from  special

obligations  with  regard  to  family  ties.

Inq. — Then  it  is  not  true^  as  it  is  said,  that  no  sooner  does 
a  man  enter  into  the  Theosophical  Society  than  he  begins  to  be 
gradually  severed  from  his  wife,  children,  and  family  duties  ?Theo. — It  is  a  groundless  calumny,  like  so  many  others. 
The  first  of  the  Theosophical  duties  is  to  do  one's  duty  by 
all  men,  and  especially  by  those  to  whom  one's  specific  re- 
sponsibilities are  due,  because  one  has  either  voluntarily 
undertaken  them — such  as  marriage  ties — or  because  one's 
destiny  has  alhed  one  to  them — such  as  those  we  owe  to 
parents  or  next  of  kin.

Inq. — And  what  may  be  the  duty  of  a  Theosophist  to  him- 
self?

Theo. — To  control  and  conquer,  through  the  Higher 
Self,  the  lower  self ;  to  purify  himself  inwardly  and  morally ; 
to  fear  no  one,  and  naught,  save  the  tribunal  of  his  own 
conscience ;  never  to  do  a  thing  by  halves — i.e.,  if  he  thinks 
it  the  right  thing  to  do,  let  him  do  it  openly  and  boldly ; 
and  if  wrong,  never  touch  it  at  all.  It  is  the  duty  of  a 
Theosophist  to  lighten  his  burden  by  thinking  of  the  wise 
aphorism  of  Epictetus,  who  says :

Be  not  diverted  from  your  duty  by  any  idle  reflection  the  silly  world 
may  make  upon  you,  for  their  censures  are  not  in  your  power,  and 
consequently  should  not  be  any  part  of  your  concern.

Inq. — But  suppose  a  member  of  your  Society  should  plead 
inability  to  practise  altruism  to  other  people  on  the  ground  that

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  215

''  charity  begins  at  home  "y  urging  that  he  is  too  busy^  or  too 
poor^  to  benefit  mankind  or  even  any  of  its  units  ;  what  are 
your  rules  in  such  a  case  ?''  charity  begins  at  home  "y  urging  that  he  is  too  busy^  or  too 
poor^  to  benefit  mankind  or  even  any  of  its  units  ;  what  are 
your  rules  in  such  a  case  ?

Theo. — No  man,  on  any  pretext  whatever,  has  a  right 
to  say  that  he  can  do  nothing  for  others.  ''  By  doing  the 
proper  duty  in  the  proper  place,  a  man  may  make  the 
world  his  debtor,"  says  an  English  writer.  A  cup  of  cold 
water  given  in  time  to  a  thirsty  wayfarer  is  a  nobler  duty, 
and  of  more  worth,  than  a  dozen  dinners  given  away,  out 
of  season,  to  men  who  can  afford  to  pay  for  them.  No  man 
who  has  not  got  it  in  him  will  ever  become  a  Theosophist ; 
but  he  may  remain  a  member  of  our  Society  all  the  same. 
We  have  no  rules  by  which  we  can  force  any  man  to  become 
a  practical  Theosophist  if  he  does  not  desire  to  be  one.

Inq. — Theii  why  does  he  enter  the  Society  at  all?

Theo. — That  is  best  known  to  him  who  does  so.  For, 
here  again,  we  have  no  right  to  prejudge  a  person,  not  even 
if  the  voice  of  a  whole  community  should  be  against  him, 
and  I  may  tell  you  why.  In  our  day  vox  populi — so  far  as 
regards  the  voice  of  the  educated,  at  any  rate — is  no  longer 
vox  Dei^  but  ever  that  of  prejudice,  of  selfish  motives,  and 
often  simply  of  unpopularity.  Our  duty  is  to  sow  seeds 
broadcast  for  the  future,  and  see  they  are  good  ;  not  to  stop 
to  inquire  why  we  should  do  so,  and  how  and  wherefore  we 
are  obliged  to  lose  our  time,  since  those  who  will  reap  the 
harvest  in  days  to  come  will  never  be  ourselves.

ON  CHARITY,

Inq. — How  do  you  Theosophists  regard  the  Christian  duty 
of  charity  ?

Theo. — What  charity  do  you  mean — charity  of  mind,  or 
practical  charity  on  the  physical  plane  ?

216  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,Theo. — What  charity  do  you  mean — charity  of  mind,  or 
practical  charity  on  the  physical  plane  ?

216  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

Inq. — /  mean  practical  charity^  as  your  idea  of  universal 
brotherhood  would  include^  of  course^  charity  of  mind,

Theo. — Then  you  have  in  your  mind  the  practical  carry- 
ing out  of  the  commandments  given  by  Jesus  in  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  ?

Inq. — Precisely  so.

Theo. — Then  why  call  them  ''Christian"?  For,  al- 
though their  Saviour  preached  and  practised  them,  the  last 
thing  the  Christians  of  to-day  think  of  is  to  carry  them  out 
in  their  lives.

Inq. — And  yet  many  are  those  who  pass  their  lives  in  dis- 
pensing charity,

Theo. — Yes,  out  of  the  surplus  of  their  great  fortunes. 
But  point  out  to  me  that  Christian,  among  the  most  phil- 
anthropic, v^ho  would  give  the  shivering  and  starving  thief 
who  steals  his  coat  his  cloak  also,  or  offer  his  right 
cheek  to  him  who  smites  him  on  the  left,  and  never  think 
of  resenting  it.

Inq. — Ah  I  but  yotc  must  re7nember  that  these  precepts  have 
not  to  be  takefi  literally.  Times  and  circumstances  have 
changed  since  Chris fs  day.     Moreover^  he  spoke  in  parables,Theo. — Then  why  do  not  your  churches  teach  that  the 
doctrine  of  damnation  and  hell-fire  is  to  be  understood 
as  a  parable  too  ?  Why  do  some  of  your  most  popular 
preachers,  while  virtually  allowing  these  parables  to  be 
understood  as  you  take  them,  insist  on  the  literal  meaning 
of  the  fires  of  hell  and  the  physical  tortures  of  an  ''  asbes- 
tos-like "  soul  ?  If  one  is  a  parable,  then  the  other  is.  If  hell- 
fire  is  a  literal  truth,  then  Christ's  commandments  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  have  to  be  obeyed  to  the  very  letter. 
And  I  tell  you  that  many  who  do  not  believe  in  the  divinity 
of  Christ — Hke   Count   Leo  Tolstoi   and  more  than  one

THE   KEY  TO    THEdSOPHY.  217

Theosophist — do  carry  out  these  noble  and  universal  pre- 
cepts literally ;  and  many  more  good  men  and  women 
would  do  so  were  they  not  more  than  certain  that  such  a 
walk  in  life  would  very  probably  land  them  in  a  lunatic 
asylum — so  Christian  are  your  laws  !

Inq. — But  surely  every  one  knows  that  millions  and  mil- 
lio7is  are  spent  annually  on  private  and  public  charities  ?

Theo. — Oh  yes ;  and  half  of  it  sticks  to  the  hands  it 
passes  through  before  getting  to  the  needy,  while  a  good 
portion  of  the  remainder  gets  into  the  hands  of  professional 
beggars,  who  are  too  lazy  to  work,  thus  doing  no  good 
whatever  to  those  who  are  really  in  misery  and  suffering. 
Have  you  not  heard  that  the  first  result  of  the  great  outflow 
of  charity  toward  the  East  End  of  London  was  to  raise  the 
rents  in  Whitechapel  some  twenty  percent.  ?

Inq. —  What  would  you  do,  then  ?

Theo. — Act  individually  and  not  collectively ;  follow  the 
Northern  Buddhist  precepts  :

Never  put  food  into  the  mouth  of  the  hungry  by  the  hand  of  another.Theo. — Act  individually  and  not  collectively ;  follow  the 
Northern  Buddhist  precepts  :

Never  put  food  into  the  mouth  of  the  hungry  by  the  hand  of  another.

Never  let  the  shadow  of  thy  neighbor  [a  third  person]  come  be- 
tween thyself  and  the  object  of  thy  bounty.

Never  give  to  the  sun  time  to  dry  a  tear  before  thou  hast  wiped  it.

Never  give  money  to  the  needy,  or  food  to  the  priest,  who  begs  at 
thy  door,  through  thy  servants^  lest  thy  money  should  diminish  grati- 
tude, and  thy  food  turn  to  gall.

Inq. — But  how  cafi  this  be  applied  practically  ?

Theo. — The  Theosophical  idea  of  charity  means  per- 
sonal exertion  for  others ;  persofial  mercy  and  kindness ; 
personal  interest  in  the  welfare  of  those  who  suffer ;  personal 
sympathy,  forethought,  and  assistance  in  their  troubles  or 
needs.  Theosophists  do  not  believe  in  giving  money 
through  other  people's  hands  or  organizations.  We  believe 
in  giving  to  the  money  a  thousandfold  greater  power  and

218  THE  "KEY  TO    THRO  SOPHY,218  THE  "KEY  TO    THRO  SOPHY,

effectiveness  by  our  personal  contact  and  sympathy  with 
those  who  need  it.  We  believe  in  relieving  the  starvation 
of  the  soul,  as  much,  if  not  more  than,  the  emptiness  of  the 
stomach ;  for  gratitude  does  more  good  to  the  man  who 
feels  it  than  to  him  for  whom  it  is  felt.  Where  is  the 
gratitude  which  your  ^'  millions  of  pounds "  should  have 
called  forth,  or  the  good  feeHngs  provoked  by  them  ?  Is 
it  shown  in  the  hatred  of  the  East  End  poor  for  the  rich, 
in  the  growth  of  the  party  of  anarchy  and  disorder,  or  by 
those  thousands  of  unfortunate  working-girls,  victims  to  the 
"  sweating  '^  system,  driven  daily  to  eke  out  a  living  by  go- 
ing on  the  streets  ?  Do  your  helpless  old  men  and  women 
thank  you  for  the  workhouses ;  or  your  poor  for  the  poison- 
ously  unhealthy  dwellings  in  which  they  are  allowed  to 
breed  new  generations  of  diseased,  scrofulous,  and  rickety 
children,  only  to  put  money  into  the  pockets  of  the  insati- 
able Shylocks  who  own  houses  ?  Therefore  it  is  that  every 
sovereign  of  all  those  ''  milHons  "  contributed  by  good  and 
would-be  charitable  people  falls  like  a  burning  curse  instead 
of  a  blessing  on  the  poor  whom  it  should  relieve.  We  call 
this  generating  national  Karma^  and  terrible  will  be  its  re- 
sults on  the  day  of  reckoning.

THEOSOPHY  FOR    THE  MASSES.

Inq. — And  you  think  that  Theosophy  would,  by  stepping  in, 
help  to  remove  these  evils,  U7ider  the  practical  and  adverse  con- 
ditions of  our  modern  life  ?

Theo. — Had  we  more  money,  and  had  not  most  of  the 
Theosophists  to  work  for  their  daily  bread,  I  firmly  believe 
we  could.Theo. — Had  we  more  money,  and  had  not  most  of  the 
Theosophists  to  work  for  their  daily  bread,  I  firmly  believe 
we  could.

Inq. — How  ?  Do  you  expect  that  your  doctrines  could  ever 
take  hold  of  the  uneducated  masses,  when  they  are  so  abstruse

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  219

and  difficult  that  well-educated  people  can  hardly  understand 
them  ?

Theo. — You  forget  one  thing :  that  your  much-boasted 
modem  education  is  precisely  that  which  makes  it  difficult 
for  you  to  understand  Theosophy.  Your  mind  is  so  full  of 
intellectual  subtleties  and  preconceptions  that  your  natural 
intuition  and  perception  of  truth  cannot  act.  It  does  not 
require  metaphysics  or  education  to  make  a  man  understand 
the  broad  truths  of  Karma  and  reincarnation.  Look  at  the 
milHons  of  poor  and  uneducated  Buddhists  and  Hindus,  to 
whom  Karma  and  reincarnation  are  solid  realities,  simply 
because  their  minds  have  never  been  cramped  and  distorted 
by  being  forced  into  an  unnatural  groove.  They  have 
never  had  the  innate  human  sense  of  justice  perverted  in 
them  by  being  told  to  believe  that  their  sins  would  be  for- 
given because  another  man  had  been  put  to  death  for  their 
sakes.  And  the  Buddhists,  note  well,  live  up  to  their  beliefs 
without  a  murmur  against  Karma  or  what  they  regard  as 
a  just  punishment ;  whereas  the  Christian  populace  neither 
lives  up  to  its  moral  ideal,  nor  accepts  its  lot  contentedly. 
Hence  murmuring  and  dissatisfaction,  and  the  intensity  of 
the  struggle  for  existence  in  Western  lands.

Inq. — But  this  conte7ited7iess,  which  you  praise  so  mtich, 
would  do  away  with  all  motive  for  exertion  arid  bring  progress 
to  a  standstill.Inq. — But  this  conte7ited7iess,  which  you  praise  so  mtich, 
would  do  away  with  all  motive  for  exertion  arid  bring  progress 
to  a  standstill.

Theo. — And  we  Theosophists  say  that  your  vaunted 
progress  and  civilization  are  no  better  than  a  host  of 
will-o'-the-wisps  flickering  over  a  marsh  which  exhales  a 
poisonous  and  deadly  miasma.  This  because  we  see  selfish- 
ness, crime,  immorality,  and  all  the  evils  imaginable,  pounc- 
ing upon  unfortunate  mankind  from  this  Pandora's  box 
which  you  call  an  age  of  progress,  and  mcresismg pari  pass?/ 
with  the  growth  of  your  material  civilization.  At  such  a 
price,  better  the  inertia  and  inactivity  of  Buddhist  countries,

220  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHW

which  have  resulted  only  as  a  consequence  of  ages  of  politi- 
cal slavery.

Inq. — Then  are  all  these  metaphysics  and  mysticism  with 
which  you  occupy  yourself  so  much  of  no  importance  ?Inq. — Then  are  all  these  metaphysics  and  mysticism  with 
which  you  occupy  yourself  so  much  of  no  importance  ?

Theo. — To  the  masses,  who  need  only  practical  gui- 
dance and  support,  they  are  not  of  much  consequence ;  but 
for  the  educated,  the  natural  leaders  of  the  masses,  those 
whose  modes  of  thought  and  action  will  sooner  or  later  be 
adopted  by  these  masses,  they  are  of  the  greatest  importance. 
It  is  only  by  means  of  the  philosophy  that  an  intelligent  and 
educated  man  can  avoid  the  intellectual  suicide  of  believing 
on  blind  faith  ;  and  it  is  only  by  assimilating  the  strict  con- 
tinuity and  logical  coherence  of  the  Eastern,  if  not  esoteric, 
doctrines  that  he  can  realize  their  truth.  Conviction  breeds 
enthusiasm,  and  *'  enthusiasm,"  says  Bulwer  Lytton,  ''  is  the 
genius  of  sincerity,  and  truth  accomplishes  no  victories 
without  it ;"  while  Emerson  most  truly  remarks  that  "  every 
great  and  commanding  movement  in  the  annals  of  the 
world  is  the  triumph  of  enthusiasm."  And  what  is  more 
calculated  to  produce  such  a  feeling  than  a  philosophy  so 
grand,  so  consistent,  so  logical,  and  so  all-embracing  as  our 
Eastern  doctrines  ?

Inq. — Aiid  yet  its  enemies  are  very  nmnerous,  and  every 
day  Theo  sop  hy  acquires  new  oppone7its.

Theo. — And  this  is  precisely  what  proves  its  intrinsic  ex- 
cellence and  value.  People  hate  only  the  things  they  fear, 
and  no  one  goes  out  of  his  way  to  overthrow  that  which 
neither  threatens  nor  rises  beyond  mediocrity.

Inq. — Do  you  hope  to  i?7tpart  this  €7ithusiasm  07ie  day  to 
the  masses  ?

Theo. — Why  not? — since  history  tells  us  that  the  masses 
adopted  Buddhism  with  enthusiasm,  while,  as  said  before, 
the  practical  effect  upon  them  of  this  philosophy  of  ethicsTheo. — Why  not? — since  history  tells  us  that  the  masses 
adopted  Buddhism  with  enthusiasm,  while,  as  said  before, 
the  practical  effect  upon  them  of  this  philosophy  of  ethics

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,  221

is  still  shown  by  the  smallness  of  the  percentage  of  crime 
among  Buddhist  populations  as  compared  with  every  other 
religion.  The  chief  point  is  to  uproot  that  most  fertile 
source  of  all  crime  and  immorality — the  belief  that  it  is 
possible  for  men  to  escape  the  consequences  of  their  own 
actions.  Once  teach  them  that  greatest  of  all  laws,  Karma 
and  reincarnation,  and  besides  feehng  in  themselves  the  true 
dignity  of  human  nature,  they  will  turn  from  evil  and  eschew 
it  as  they  would  a  physical  danger.

HOW  MEMBERS   CAN  HELP   THE   SOCIETY,

Inq. — How  do  you  expect  the  Fellows  of  your  Society  to 
help  ill  the  work  ?

Theo. — First,  by  studying  and  comprehending  the  Theo- 
sophical  doctrines,  so  that  they  may  teach  others,  especially 
the  young  people.  Secondly,  by  taking  every  opportunity 
of  talking  to  others  and  explaining  to  them  what  Theosophy 
is  and  what  it  is  not;  by  removing  misconceptions  and 
spreading  an  interest  in  the  subject.  Thirdly,  by  assisting 
in  circulating  our  hterature  by  buying  books  when  they 
have  the  means,  by  lending  and  giving  them,  and  by  in- 
ducing their  friends  to  do  so.  Fourthly,  by  defending  the 
Society  from  the  unjust  aspersions  cast  upon  it  by  every 
legitimate  device  in  their  power.  Fifthly,  and  most  impor- 
tant of  all,  by  the  example  of  their  own  lives.

Inq. — But  all  this  literature^  to  the  spread  of  which  you 
attach  so  much  importance^  does  not  see?n  to  me  of  miich  prac- 
tical use  in  helping  mankind.      This  is  not  practical  charity.Theo. — We  think  otherwise.  We  hold  that  a  good  book 
which  gives  people  food  for  thought,  which  strengthens  and 
clears  their  minds,  and  enables  them  to  grasp  truths  which 
they  have  dimly  felt,  but  could  not  formulate — we  hold  that 
such  a  book  does  a  real,  substantial  good.    As  to  what  you

222  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

call  practical  deeds  of  charity,  to  benefit  the  bodies  of  our 
fellow-men,  we  do  what  little  we  can  ;  but,  as  I  have  already 
told  you,  most  of  us  are  poor,  while  the  Society  itself  has 
not  even  the  money  to  pay  a  staff  of  workers.  All  of  us 
who  toil  for  it  give  our  labor  gratis,  and  in  most  cases 
money  as  well.  The  few  who  have  the  means  of  doing 
what  are  usually  called  charitable  actions  follow  the  Bud- 
dhist precepts  and  do  their  work  themselves — not  by  proxy 
or  by  subscribing  publicly  to  charitable  funds.  What  the 
Theosophist  has  to  do  above  all  is  to  forget  his  personality.

WHAT  A    THEOSOPHIST  OUGHT  NOT   TO  DO,

Inq. — Have  you  a?iy  prohibitory  laws  or  clauses  for  TTie- 
osophists  in  your  Society  ?

Theo. — Many;  but  alas!  none  of  them  are  enforced. 
They  express  the  ideal  of  our  organization ;  but  the  practi- 
cal application  of  such  things  we  are  compelled  to  leave  to 
the  discretion  of  the  Fellows  themselves.  Unfortunately, 
the  state  of  men's  minds  in  the  present  century  is  such  that, 
unless  we  allow  these  clauses  to  remain,  so  to  speak,  ob- 
solete, no  man  or  woman  would  dare  to  risk  joining  the 
Theosophical  Society.  This  is  precisely  why  I  feel  forced 
to  lay  such  a  stress  on  the  difference  between  true  Theoso- 
phy  and  its  hard-struggling  and  well-intentioned  but  still 
unworthy  vehicle,  the  Theosophical  Society.Inq. — May  I  be  told  what  are  these  perilous  reefs  in  the 
open  sea  of  Theosophy  ?

Theo. — Well  may  you  call  them  reefs,  as  more  than  one 
otherwise  sincere  and  well-meaning  Fellow  of  the  Theosoph- 
ical Society  has  had  his  Theosophical  canoe  shattered  into 
splinters  on  them!  And  yet  to  avoid  certain  things  seems 
the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  do.     For  instance,  here  is

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  223

a  series  of  such  negatives,  screening  positive  Theosophical 
duties :

No  Theosophist  should  be  silent  when  he  hears  evil  re- 
ports or  slanders  spread  about  the  Society  or  innocent  per- 
sons, whether  they  be  his  colleagues  or  outsiders.

Inq. — But  suppose  what  one  hears  is  the  truth,  or  7nay  be 
true  without  one  hiowing  it  ?

Theo. — Then  you  must  demand  good  proofs  of  the  as- 
sertion, and  hear  both  sides  impartially,  before  you  permit 
the  accusation  to  go  uncontradicted.  You  have  no  right  to 
beheve  in  evil  until  you  get  undeniable  proof  of  the  correct- 
ness of  the  statement.

Inq. — And  what  should  you  do  then  ?

Theo. — Pity  and  forbearance,  charity  and  long-suffering, 
ought  to  be  always  there  to  prompt  us  to  excuse  our  sinning 
brethren,  and  to  pass  the  gentlest  sentence  possible  upon 
those  who  err.  A  Theosophist  ought  never  to  forget  what 
is  due  to  the  shortcomings  and  infirmities  of  human  nature.

Inq. — Ought  he  to  forgive  entirely  in  such  cases  ?

Theo. — In  every  case,  especially  he  who  is  sinned 
against.

Inq. — But  if  by  so  doing  he  risks  injuring  or  allows  others 
to  be  injured,  what  ought  he  to  do  then  ?Theo. — In  every  case,  especially  he  who  is  sinned 
against.

Inq. — But  if  by  so  doing  he  risks  injuring  or  allows  others 
to  be  injured,  what  ought  he  to  do  then  ?

Theo. — His  duty — that  which  his  conscience  and  higher 
nature  suggest  to  him ;  but  only  after  mature  deliberation. 
Justice  consists  in  doing  no  injiuy  to  any  living  being ;  but 
justice  commands  us  also  never  to  allow  injury  to  be  done 
to  the  many,  or  even  to  one  innocent  person,  by  allowing 
the  guilty  one  to  go  unchecked.

Inq. —  What  are  the  other  negative  clauses  ?

Theo. — No  Theosophist  ought  to  be  contented  with  an 
idle  or  frivolous  life,  doing  no  real  good  to  himself  and  still

224  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

less  to  others.  He  should  work  for  the  benefit  of  the  few 
who  need  his  help,  if  he  is  unable  to  toil  for  humanity,  and 
thus  work  for  the  advancement  of  the  Theosophical  cause.

Inq. — This  demands  an  exceptional  natu7r^  and  would  come 
rather  hard  up07i  soine  persons,

Theo. — Then  they  had  better  remain  outside  of  the 
Theosophical  Society,  instead  of  sailing  under  false  colors. 
No  one  is  asked  to  give  more  than  he  can  afford,  whether 
in  devotion,  time,  work,  or  money.

Inq. —  What  comes  next  ?

Theo. — No  working  member  should  set  too  great  value 
on  his  personal  progress  or  proficiency  in  Theosophic  stud- 
ies ;  but  must  be  prepared,  rather,  to  do  as  much  altruistic 
work  as  hes  in  his  power.  He  should  not  leave  the  whole 
of  the  heavy  burden  and  responsibility  of  the  Theosophical 
movement  on  the  shoulders  of  the  few  devoted  workers. 
Each  member  ought  to  feel  it  his  duty  to  take  what  share  he 
can  in  the  common  work,  and  help  it  by  every  means  in  his 
power.

Inq. — This  is  but  just.      What  comes  next?Inq. — This  is  but  just.      What  comes  next?

Theo. — No  Theosophist  should  place  his  personal  vanity 
or  feelings  above  those  of  his  Society  as  a  body.  He  who 
sacrifices  the  latter,  or  other  people's  reputations,  on  the 
altar  of  his  personal  vanity,  worldly  benefit,  or  pride,  ought 
not  to  be  allowed  to  remain  a  member.  One  cancerous 
limb  diseases  the  whole  body.

Inq. — Is  it  the  duty  of  every  member  to  teach  others  and 
preach  Theosophy  ?

Theo. — It  is  indeed.  No  Fellow  has  a  right  to  remain 
idle  on  the  excuse  that  he  knows  too  httle  to  teach.  For 
he  may  always  be  sure  that  he  will  find  others  who  know 
still  less  than  himself.     And  also  it  is  not  until  a  man  be-

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  225

gins  to  try  to  teach  others  that  he  discovers  his  own  igno- 
rance and  tries  to  remove  it.     But  this  is  a  minor  clause.

Inq. —  What  do  you  consider^  then,  to  be  the  chief  of  these 
negative  Theosophical  duties  ?

Theo. — To  be  ever  prepared  to  recognize  and  confess 
one's  faults ;  to  rather  sin  through  exaggerated  praise  than 
through  too  Uttle  appreciation  of  one's  neighbor's  efforts; 
never  to  backbite  or  slander  another  person ;  always  to  say 
openly  and  direct  to  his  face  anything  you  have  against  him  ; 
never  to  make  yourself  the  echo  of  anything  you  may  hear 
against  another,  nor  harbor  revenge  against  those  who 
happen  to  injiu"e  you.

Inq. — But  it  is  often  dangerous  to  tell  people  the  truth  to 
their  faces.  Do  you  not  think  so  ?  I  know  of  one  of  your 
members  who  was  bitterly  offe7ided,  left  the  Society,  and  be- 
ca7ne  its  greatest  enemy,  only  because  he  was  told  some  un- 
pleasant truths  to  his  face,  and  was  blamed  for  them,Theo. — Of  such  we  have  had  many.  No  member, 
whether  prominent  or  insignificant,  has  ever  left  us  without 
becoming  our  bitter  enemy.

Inq. — How  do  you  account  for  it?

Theo. — It  is  simply  this:  having  been,  in  most  cases, 
intensely  devoted  to  the  Society  at  first,  and  having  lavished 
upon  it  the  most  exaggerated  praises,  the  only  possible  ex- 
cuse such  a  backslider  can  make  for  his  subsequent  be- 
havior and  past  short-sightedness  is  to  pose  as  an  innocent 
and  deceived  victim,  thus  casting  the  blame  from  his  own 
shoulders  on  to  those  of  the  Society  in  general,  and  its 
leaders  especially.  Such  persons  remind  one  of  the  old 
fable  about  the  man  with  a  distorted  face,  who  broke  his 
looking-glass  in  the  belief  that  it  reflected  his  countenance 
crookedly.

226  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Inq. — But  what  makes  these  people  turii  against  the 
Society  ?226  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Inq. — But  what  makes  these  people  turii  against  the 
Society  ?

Theo. — Wounded  vanity  in  some  form  or  other,  almost 
in  every  case.  Generally  because  their  dicta  and  advice  are 
not  taken  as  final  and  authoritative,  or  else  because  they  are 
of  those  who  would  rather  reign  in  hell  than  serve  in  heaven. 
Because,  in  short,  they  cannot  bear  to  stand  second  to  any- 
body in  anything.  So,  for  instance,  one  member — a  true 
"  Sir  Oracle  '' — criticized  and  almost  defamed  every  mem- 
ber in  the  Theosophical  Society  to  outsiders  as  much  as 
to  Theosophists,  under  the  pretext  that  they  were  all ''  un- 
theosophical,"  blaming  them  precisely  for  what  he  was 
himself  doing  all  the  time.  Finally  he  left  the  Society, 
giving  as  his  reason  a  profound  conviction  that  we  were 
all  (the  founders  especially)  frauds  !  Another  one,  after 
intriguing  in  every  possible  way  to  be  placed  at  the  head 
of  a  large  section  of  the  Society,  finding  that  the  members 
would  not  have  him,  turned  against  the  founders  of  the 
Theosophical  Society  and  became  their  bitterest  enemy,  de- 
nouncing one  of  them  whenever  he  could,  simply  because 
the  latter  could  not,  and  would  not,  force  him  upon  the 
members.  This  was  simply  a  case  of  an  outrageous 
wounded  vanity.  Still  another  wanted  to,  and  virtually 
did,  practise  black  magic — i.e.,  undue  personal  psychologi- 
cal influence — on  certain  Fellows,  while  pretending  devotion 
and  every  Theosophical  virtue.  When  this  was  put  a  stop 
to,  the  member  broke  with  Theosophy,  and  now  slanders 
and  lies  against  the  same  hapless  leaders  in  the  most 
virulent  manner,  endeavoring  to  break  up  the  Society  by 
blackening  the  reputation  of  those  whom  that  worthy 
person  was  unable  to  deceive.Inq. —  What  would  you  do  with  such  characters  ?

Theo. — Leave  them  to  their  Karma.  Because  one 
person  does  evil  that  is  no  reason  for  others  to  do  so.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  227

Inq. — But^  to  retiirfi  to  slander,  where  is  the  line  of  demar- 
cation between  backbitiyig  and  just  criticism  to  be  drawn  ?  Is 
it  not  one's  duty  to  war?i  one's  friends  and  neighbors  against 
those  whom  one  knows  to  be  dangerous  associates  ?

Theo. — If  by  allowing  them  to  go  on  unchecked  other 
persons  may  be  thereby  injured,  it  is  certainly  our  duty  to 
obviate  the  danger  by  warning  them  privately.  But,  true 
or  false,  no  accusation  against  another  person  should  ever 
be  spread  abroad.  If  true,  and  the  fault  hurts  no  one  but 
the  sinner,  then  leave  him  to  his  Karma.  If  false,  then 
you  will  have  avoided  adding  to  the  injustice  in  the  world. 
Therefore  keep  silent  about  such  things  with  every  one  not 
directly  concerned.  But  if  your  discretion  and  silence  are 
likely  to  hurt  or  endanger  others,  then  I  add.  Speak  the 
truth  at  all  costs,  and  say  with  Annesley,  ''  Consult  duty, 
not  events."  There  are  cases  when  one  is  forced  to  ex- 
claim, ''  Perish  discretion  rather  than  allow  it  to  interfere 
with  duty ! "

Inq. — Methi7iks,  if  you  carry  out  these  maxims^  you  are 
likely  to  reap  a  nice  crop  of  troubles  /

Theo. — And  so  we  do.  We  have  to  admit  that  we  are 
now  open  to  the  same  taunt  as  the  early  Christians  were. 
**  See  how  these  Theosophists  love  one  another  ! "  may  now 
be  said  of  us  without  a  shadow  of  injustice.Inq. — Admitting  yourself  that  there  is  at  least  as  much,  if 
not  more,  backbiting,  slandering,  a7id  quarreling  in  the  Theo- 
sophical  Society  as  i7i  the  Christian  churches,  let  alone  scien- 
tific societies,  what  kind  of  brotherhood  is  this,  may  I  ask  ?

Theo. — A  very  poor  specimen  indeed  as  at  present,  and, 
until  carefully  sifted  and  reorganized,  no  better  than  all 
others.  Remember,  however,  that  human  nature  is  the 
same  in  the  Theosophical  Society  as  out  of  it.  Its  mem- 
bers are  no  saints ;  they  are  at  best  sinners  trying  to  do

228  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.228  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

better,  and  liable  to  fall  back  owing  to  personal  weakness. 
Add  to  this  that  our  '^  brotherhood  "  is  no  recognized  or 
established  body,  and  stands,  so  to  speak,  outside  of  the 
pale  of  jurisdiction.  Besides  which,  it  is  in  a  chaotic  con- 
dition, and  more  unjustly  unpopular  than  any  other  body. 
What  wonder,  then,  that  those  members  who  fail  to  carry 
out  its  ideal  should,  after  leaving  the  Society,  turn  for 
sympathetic  protection  to  our  enemies,  and  pour  all  their 
gall  and  bitterness  into  their  too  wiUing  ears  !  Knowing 
that  they  will  find  support,  sympathy,  and  ready  credence 
for  every  accusation,  however  absiu-d,  that  it  may  please 
them  to  launch  against  the  Theosophical  Society,  they 
hasten  to  do  so,  and  vent  their  wrath  on  the  innocent 
looking-glass  which  reflected  too  faithfully  their  faces. 
People  never  forgive  those  whom  they  have  wronged. 
The  sense  of  kindness  received,  and  repaid  by  them  with 
ingratitude,  drives  them  into  a  madness  of  self -justification 
before  the  world  and  their  own  consciences.  The  former 
is  but  too  ready  to  believe  in  anything  said  against  a 
society  it  hates.  The  latter — but  I  will  say  no  more, 
fearing  I  have  already  said  too  much.

Inq. —  Your  position  does  not  seem  to  me  a  very  enviable 
one,Inq. —  Your  position  does  not  seem  to  me  a  very  enviable 
one,

Theo. — It  is  not.  But  do  you  not  think  that  there 
must  be  something  very  noble,  very  exalted,  very  true, 
behind  the  Society  and  its  philosophy,  when  the  leaders  and 
the  founders  of  the  movement  still  continue  to  work  for  it 
with  all  their  strength  ?  They  sacrifice  to  it  all  comfort,  all 
worldly  prosperity  and  success,  even  to  their  good  name 
and  reputation- — aye,  even  to  their  honor — to  receive  in 
return  incessant  and  ceaseless  obloquy,  relentless  persecu- 
tion, untiring  slander^  constant  ingratitude,  and  misunder- 
standing of  their  best  efforts — blows  and  buffets  from  all 
sides — when  by  simply  dropping  their  work  they  would  find

THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  229

themselves  immediately  released  from  every  responsibility, 
shielded  from  every  further  attack.

Inq. — /  confess  such  a  perseveraiice  seems  to  me  very  as- 
toimding^  and  I  wondered  why  you  did  all  this.

Theo. — Believe  me,  for  no  self-gratification  ;  only  in  the 
hope  of  training  a  few  individuals  to  carry  on  our  work  for 
humanity  with  its  original  program  when  the  founders  are 
dead  and  gone.  They  have  already  found  a  few  such 
noble  and  devoted  souls  to  replace  them.  The  coming 
generations,  thanks  to  these  few,  will  find  the  path  to 
peace  a  little  less  thorny,  and  the  way  a  little  widened,  and 
thus  all  this  suffering  will  have  produced  good  results,  and 
their  self-sacrifice  will  not  have  been  in  vain.  At  present 
the  main,  fundamental  object  of  the  Society  is  to  sow 
germs  in  the  hearts  of  men  which  may  in  time  sprout,  and, 
under  more  propitious  circumstances,  lead  to  a  healthy  re- 
form conducive  of  more  happiness  to  the  masses  than  they 
have  hitherto  enjoyed.

XIII.XIII.

ON    THE  MISCONCEPTIONS    ABOUT  THE  THEO- 
SOPHICAL  SOCIETY.

THEOSOPHY  AND  ASCETICISM,

Inq. — I  have  heard  people  say  that  your  rules  required  all 
members  to  be  vegetarians^  celibates^  and  rigid  ascetics ;  but 
you  have  not  told  me  anything  of  the  sort  yet.  Can  you  tell 
me  the  truth  once  for  all  about  this  ?

Theo. — The  truth  is  that  our  rules  require  nothing  of  the 
kind.  The  Theosophical  Society  does  not  even  expect,  far 
less  require,  of  any  of  its  members  that  they  should  be 
ascetics  in  any  way,  except — if  you  call  that  asceticism — 
that  they  should  try  and  benefit  other  people  and  be 
unselfish  in  their  own  lives.

Inq. — But  still  many  of  your  members  are  strict  vegeta- 
rians^ and  openly  avow  their  intention  of  remaining  unmarried. 
This,  too,  is  most  often  the  case  with  those  who  take  a  promi- 
nent part  in  connection  with  the  work  of  your  Society,

Theo. — That  is  only  natiu-al,  because  most  of  our  really 
earnest  workers  are  members  of  the  inner  section  of  the 
Society,  about  which  I  told  you  before.

Inq. — Oh,  then  you  do  require  ascetic  practices  i7i  that 
inner  sectio7i  ?

230

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  231

Theo. — No,  we  do  not  require  or  enjoin  them  even 
there.  But  I  see  that  I  had  better  give  you  an  explanation 
of  our  views  on  the  subject  of  asceticism  in  general,  and 
then  you  will  understand  about  vegetarianism  and  so  on.

Inq. — Please  proceed,Inq. — Please  proceed,

Theo. — As  I  have  already  told  you,  most  people  who 
become  really  earnest  students  of  Theosophy  and  active 
workers  in  our  Society  wish  to  do  more  than  study  theo- 
retically the  truths  we  teach.  They  wish  to  kfiow  the  truth 
by  their  own  direct  personal  experience,  and  to  study  Oc- 
cultism with  the  object  of  acquiring  the  wdsdom  and  power 
which  they  feel  they  need  in  order  to  help  others  effectu- 
ally and  judiciously,  instead  of  blindly  and  at  haphazard. 
Therefore,  sooner  or  later,  they  join  the  inner  section.

Inq. — But  you  said  that  ^^  ascetic  practice s^^  are  not  obliga- 
tory even  in  that  iiiner  section.

Theo. — No  more  they  are ;  but  the  first  thing  which  the 
members  learn  there  is  a  true  conception  of  the  relation  of 
the  body,  or  physical  sheath,  to  the  inner,  the  true  man. 
The  relation  and  mutual  interaction  between  these  two 
aspects  of  human  nature  are  explained  and  demonstrated 
to  them,  so  that  they  soon  become  imbued  with  the  supreme 
importance  of  the  inner  man  over  the  outer  case  or  body. 
They  are  taught  that  bhnd,  unintelligent  asceticism  is  mere 
folly ;  that  such  conduct  as  that  of  St.  Labre,  of  which  I 
spoke  before,  or  that  of  the  Indian  fakirs  and  jungle  ascet- 
ics, who  cut,  bum,  and  macerate  their  bodies  in  the  most 
cruel  and  horrible  manner,  is  simply  self-torture  for  selfish 
ends — i.e.,  to  develop  will-power — but  is  perfectly  useless 
for  the  purpose  of  assisting  true  spiritual  or  Theosophic  de- 
velopment.

Inq. — I  see  you  regard  only  moral  asceticism  as  necessary. 
It  is  as  a  means  to  an  end,  that  end  being  the  perfect  equilib-

232  THE  KEY  TO   THRO  SOPHY,Inq. — I  see  you  regard  only  moral  asceticism  as  necessary. 
It  is  as  a  means  to  an  end,  that  end  being  the  perfect  equilib-

232  THE  KEY  TO   THRO  SOPHY,

rium  of  the  inner  nature  of  man,  and  the  attainment  of  com- 
plete mastery  over  the  body,  with  all  its  passions  and  desires,

Theo. — Just  so.  But  these  means  must  be  used  intelli- 
gently and  wisely,  not  blindly  and  foolishly ;  like  an  athlete 
who  is  training  and  preparing  for  a  great  contest,  not  like 
the  miser  who  starves  himself  into  illness  that  he  may  grat- 
ify his  passion  for  gold.

Inq. — /  understand  now  ymcr  general  idea  ;  but  let  us  see 
how  you  apply  it  iii  practice.  How  about  vegetarianism,  for 
instance  ?

Theo. — One  of  the  great  German  scientists  has  shown 
that  every  kind  of  animal  tissue,  however  you  may  cook  it, 
still  retains  certain  marked  characteristics  of  the  animal  to 
which  it  belonged,  and  these  characteristics  can  be  recog- 
nized. Apart  from  that,  also,  every  one  knows  by  the  taste 
what  meat  he  is  eating.  We  go  a  step  farther,  and  prove 
that  when  the  flesh  of  animals  is  assimilated  by  man  as 
food,  it  imparts  to  him,  physiologically,  some  of  the  char- 
acteristics of  the  animal  it  came  from.  Moreover,  occult 
science  teaches  and  proves  this  to  its  students  by  ocular 
demonstration,  showing  also  that  this  ''  coarsening "  or 
''  animalizing  "  effect  on  man  is  greatest  from  the  flesh  of 
the  larger  animals,  less  for  birds,  still  less  for  fish  and  other 
cold-blooded  animals,  and  least  of  all  when  he  eats  only 
vegetables.

Inq. — Then  would  it  be  better  not  to  eat  at  all?Inq. — Then  would  it  be  better  not  to  eat  at  all?

Theo. — If  he  could  live  without  eating,  of  course  it 
would.  But  as  the  matter  stands,  he  must  eat  to  live,  and 
so  we  advise  really  earnest  students  to  eat  such  food  as 
will  least  clog  and  weight  their  brains  and  bodies,  and  will 
have  the  smallest  effect  in  hampering  and  retarding  the 
development  of  their  intuition,  their  inner  faculties  and 
powers.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  233

Inq.— 7%^;^  you  do  not  adopt  all  the  arguments  which  vege* 
tarians  in  general  are  in  the  habit  of  using  ?

Theo. — -Certainly  not.  Some  of  their  arguments  are 
very  weak,  and  often  based  on  assumptions  which  are  quite 
false.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  many  of  the  things  they  say 
are  quite  true.  For  instance,  we  beheve  that  much  disease, 
and  especially  the  great  predisposition  to  disease  which  is 
becoming  so  marked  a  feature  in  our  time,  is  very  largely 
due  to  the  eating  of  meat,  and  especially  of  tinned  meats. 
But  it  would  take  too  long  to  go  thoroughly  into  this 
question  of  vegetarianism  on  its  merits ;  so  please  pass  on 
to  something  else.

Inq. — 07ie  question  more  :  What  are  your  members  of  the 
inner  section  to  do  with  regard  to  their  food  when  they  are  ill?Inq. — 07ie  question  more  :  What  are  your  members  of  the 
inner  section  to  do  with  regard  to  their  food  when  they  are  ill?

Theo. — Follow  the  best  practical  advice  they  can  get, 
of  course.  Do  you  not  grasp  yet  that  we  never  impose 
any  hard-and-fast  obligations  in  this  respect  ?  Remember 
once  for  all  that  in  all  such  questions  we  take  a  rational, 
and  never  a  fanatical,  view  of  things.  If  from  illness  or 
long  habit  a  man  cannot  go  without  meat,  why,  by  all 
means,  let  him  eat  it.  It  is  no  crime ;  it  will  only  retard 
his  progress  a  little ;  for  after  all  is  said  and  done,  the  purely 
bodily  actions  and  functions  are  of  far  less  importance  than 
what  a  man  thinks  and  feels;  what  desires  he  encourages 
in  his  mind,  and  allows  to  take  root  and  grow  there.

Inq. — Then  with  regard  to  the  use  of  wine  and  spirits:  I 
suppose  you  do  not  advise  people  to  drink  them  ?

Theo. — They  are  worse  for  a  man's  moral  and  spiritual 
growth  than  meat,  for  alcohol  in  all  its  forms  has  a  direct, 
marked,  and  very  deleterious  influence  on  his  psychic  con- 
dition. Wine  and  spirit  drinking  is  only  less  destructive  to 
the  development  of  the  inner  powers  than  the  habitual  use 
of  hashish,  opium,  and  similar  drugs.

234  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

THEOSOPHY  AND  MARRIAGE,

Inq. — Now  to  another  question  :  Must  a  7nan  marry  or 
re?nain  a  celibate  ?234  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

THEOSOPHY  AND  MARRIAGE,

Inq. — Now  to  another  question  :  Must  a  7nan  marry  or 
re?nain  a  celibate  ?

Theo. — It  depends  on  the  kind  of  man  you  mean.  If 
you  refer  to  one  who  intends  to  Hve  in  the  world ;  one  who, 
even  though  a  good,  earnest  Theosophist,  and  an  ardent 
worker  for  our  cause,  still  has  ties  and  wishes  which  bind 
him  to  the  world ;  who,  in  short,  does  not  feel  that  he  has 
done  forever  with  what  men  call  life,  and  that  he  desires 
one  thing  and  one  thing  only — to  know  the  truth  and  to 
be  able  to  help  others — then  for  such  a  one  I  say  there  is 
no  reason  why  he  should  not  marry,  if  he  likes  to  take  the 
risks  of  that  lottery  where  there  are  so  many  more  blanks 
than  prizes.  Surely  you  cannot  believe  us  so  absurd  and 
fanatical  as  to  preach  against  marriage  altogether  ?  On 
the  contrary,  save  in  a  few  exceptional  cases  of  practical 
Occultism,  marriage  is  the  only  remedy  against  immorality.

Inq. — But  why  cannot  one  acquire  this  knowledge  and 
power  when  living  a  married  life  ?Inq. — But  why  cannot  one  acquire  this  knowledge  and 
power  when  living  a  married  life  ?

Theo. — My  dear  sir,  I  cannot  go  into  physiological 
questions  with  you ;  but  I  can  give  you  an  obvious  and,  I 
think,  a  sufficient  answer,  which  will  explain  to  you  the 
moral  reasons  we  give  for  it.  Can  a  man  serve  two  mas- 
ters ?  No  !  Then  it  is  equally  impossible  for  him  to 
divide  his  attention  between  the  pursuit  of  Occultism  and 
a  wife.  If  he  tries  to,  he  will  assuredly  fail  in  doing  either 
properly ;  and,  let  me  remind  you,  practical  Occultism  is  far 
too  serious  and  dangerous  a  study  for  a  man  to  take  up 
unless  he  is  in  the  most  deadly  earnest,  and  ready  to  sacri- 
fice all — himself  first  of  all — to  gain  his  end.  But  this  does 
not  apply  to  the  members  of  our  inner  section.  I  am  only 
referring  to  those  who  are  determined  to  tread  that  path  of

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  235

discipleship  which  leads  to  the  highest  goal.  Most,  if  not 
all,  of  those  who  join  our  inner  section  are  only  beginners, 
preparing  themselves  in  this  hf e  to  enter  in  reahty  upon  that 
path  in  lives  to  come.

THE  OS  O  PHY  AND  EDUCATION.

Inq. — One  of  your  strongest  arguments  for  the  inadequacy 
of  the  existing  forms  of  religio?i  i?i  the  West,  as  also  to  some 
extent  the  materialistic  philosophy  which  is  now  so  popular^ 
but  which  you  seem  to  consider  as  an  abomi?tation  of  desola- 
tion^ is  the  large  amount  of  misery  and  wretched7iess  which 
undeniably  exists,  especially  in  our  great  cities.  But  surely 
you  must  recognize  hoiv  much  has  been  and  is  being  done  to 
remedy  this  state  of  things  by  the  spread  of  education  and  the 
diff^usion  of  intelligence.Theo. — The  future  generations  will  hardly  thank  you 
for  such  a  "  diffusion  of  intelHgence,"  nor  will  your  present 
education  do  much  good  to  the  poor  starving  masses.

Inq. — Ah  I  but  you  7nust  give  us  time.  It  is  only  a  few 
years  since  we  began  to  educate  the  people.

Theo. — And  what,  pray,  has  your  Christian  religion  been 
doing  ever  since  the  fifteenth  centur}^,  once  you  acknowledge 
that  the  education  of  the  masses  has  not  been  attempted 
till  now — the  very  work,  if  ever  there  could  be  one,  which 
a  Christian — ^i.e.,  a  Christ-following — church  and  people 
ought  to  perform  ?

Inq. —  Well,  you  may  be  right;  but  7iow —

Theo. — Just  let  us  consider  this  question  of  education 
from  a  broad  standpoint,  and  I  will  prove  to  you  that  you 
are  doing  harm,  not  good,  with  many  of  your  boasted  im- 
provements. The  schools  for  the  poorer  children,  though 
far  less  useful  than  they  ought  to  be,  are  good  in  contrast

236  THE  KEY  TO   THE 0 SOPHY.

with  the  vile  surroundings  to  which  they  axe  doomed  by 
your  modem  society.  The  infusion  of  a  little  practical 
Theosophy  would  help  a  hundred  times  more  in  life  the 
poor  suffering  masses  than  all  this  diffusion  of  useless  intel- 
ligence.

Inq. — But  really —Inq. — But  really —

Theo. — Let  me  finish,  please.  You  have  opened  a  sub- 
ject on  which  we  Theosophists  feel  deeply,  and  I  must  have 
my  say.  I  quite  agree  that  there  is  a  great  advantage  to 
a  small  child  bred  in  the  slums,  having  the  gutter  for  play- 
ground, and  living  amid  continued  coarseness  of  gesture  and 
word,  in  being  placed  daily  in  a  bright,  clean  school-room 
hung  with  pictures,  and  often  gay  with  flowers.  There  it 
is  taught  to  be  clean,  gentle,  orderly ;  there  it  learns  to  sing 
and  to  play ;  has  toys  that  awaken  its  intelligence ;  learns 
to  use  its  fingers  deftly ;  is  spoken  to  with  a  smile  instead 
of  a  frown ;  is  gently  rebuked  or  coaxed  instead  of  cursed. 
All  this  humanizes  the  children,  arouses  their  brains,  and 
renders  them  susceptible  to  intellectual  and  moral  influ- 
ences. The  schools  are  not  all  they  might  be  and  ought 
to  be;  but  compared  with  the  homes  they  are  paradises; 
and  they  are  slowly  reacting  on  the  homes.  But  while  this 
is  true  of  many  of  the  board-schools,  your  system  deserves 
the  worst  one  can  say  of  it.

Inq. — So  be  it;  go  on,

Theo. — What  is  the  real  object  of  modem  education  ? 
Is  it  to  cultivate  and  develop  the  mind  in  the  right  direc- 
tion ;  to  teach  the  disinherited  and  hapless  people  to  carry 
with  fortitude  the  burden  of  life  allotted  them  by  Karma ; 
to  strengthen  their  will ;  to  inculcate  in  them  the  love  of 
one's  neighbor  and  the  feeling  of  mutual  interdependence 
and  brotherhood ;  and  thus  to  train  and  form  the  character 
for  practical  life  ?    Not  a  bit  of  it    And  yet  these  are  un-

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  237THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  237

deniably  the  objects  of  all  true  education.  No  one  denies 
it ;  all  your  educationalists  admit  it,  and  talk  very  big  indeed 
on  the  subject.  But  what  is  the  practical  result  of  their 
action  ?  Every  young  man  and  boy — nay,  every  one  of 
the  younger  generation  of  schoolmasters — will  answer, ''  The 
object  of  modern  education  is  to  pass  examinations  " — a 
system  not  to  develop  right  emulation,  but  to  generate 
and  breed  jealousy,  envy,  hatred  almost,  in  young  people 
for  one  another,  and  thus  train  them  for  a  life  of  ferocious 
selfishness  and  struggle  for  honors  and  emoluments  instead 
of  kindly  feehng.

Inq. — I  must  admit  you  a7'e  right  there.Inq. — I  must  admit  you  a7'e  right  there.

Theo. — And  what  are  these  examinations — the  terror  of 
modem  boyhood  and  youth  ?  They  are  simply  a  method 
of  classification  by  which  the  results  of  your  school-teach- 
ing are  tabulated.  In  other  words,  they  form  the  practical 
application  of  the  modern  science  method  to  the  genus 
ho??w,  qua  intellection.  Now  science  teaches  that  intellect 
is  a  result  of  the  mechanical  interaction  of  the  brain-stuff; 
therefore  it  is  only  logical  that  modem  education  should 
be  almost  entirely  mechanical — a  sort  of  automatic  machine 
for  the  fabrication  of  intellect  by  the  ton.  Very  little  ex- 
perience of  examinations  is  enough  to  show  that  the  edu- 
cation they  produce  is  simply  a  training  of  the  physical 
memory,  and,  sooner  or  later,  all  your  schools  will  sink  to 
this  level.  As  to  any  real,  sound  cultivation  of  the  thinking 
and  reasoning  power,  it  is  simply  impossible  while  every- 
thing has  to  be  judged  by  the  results  as  tested  by  competi- 
tive examinations.  Again,  school  training  is  of  the  very 
greatest  importance  in  forming  character,  especially  in  its 
moral  bearing.  Now,  from  first  to  last,  your  modern  sys- 
tem is  based  on  the  so-called  scientific  revelations — the 
*'  struggle  for  existence  "  and  the  *'  survival  of  the  fittest." 
All  through  his  early  life  every  man  has  these  driven  inta

238  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,238  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

him  by  practical  example  and  experience,  as  well  as  by 
direct  teaching,  till  it  is  impossible  to  eradicate  from  his 
mind  the  idea  that  ''self" — the  lower,  personal,  animal  self 
— is  the  end-all  and  be-all  of  life.  Here  you  get  the  great 
source  of  all  the  after-misery,  crime,  and  heartless  selfish- 
ness, which  you  admit  as  much  as  I  do.  Selfishness,  as 
said  over  and  over  again,  is  the  curse  of  humanity,  and 
the  prolific  parent  of  all  the  evils  and  crimes  in  this  life ; 
and  it  is  your  schools  which  are  the  hotbeds  of  such  self- 
ishness.

Inq. —  That  is  all  very  fine  as  generalities^  but  I  should  like 
a  few  facts ^  and  to  learfi  also  how  this  can  be  remedied,Inq. —  That  is  all  very  fine  as  generalities^  but  I  should  like 
a  few  facts ^  and  to  learfi  also  how  this  can  be  remedied,

Theo. — Very  well,  I  will  try  and  satisfy  you.  There  are 
three  great  divisions  of  scholastic  establishments — board, 
middle-class,  and  public  schools,  running  up  the  scale  from 
the  most  grossly  commercial  to  the  idealistic  classical,  with 
many  permutations  and  combinations.  The  practical  com- 
mercial begets  the  modern  side,  and  the  ancient  and  ortho- 
dox classical  reflects  its  heavy  respectability  even  as  far  as 
the  school-board  pupil-teacher's  estabhshments.  Here  we 
plainly  see  the  scientific  and  material  commercial  supplant- 
ing the  effete  orthodox  and  classical.  Neither  is  the  reason 
very  far  to  seek.  The  objects  of  this  branch  of  education 
are,  then,  pounds,  shillings,  and  pence,  the  summum  bonum 
of  the  nineteenth  century.  Thus  the  energies  generated  by 
the  brain-molecules  of  its  adherents  are  all  concentrated  on 
one  point,  and  are  therefore,  to  some  extent,  an  organized 
army  of  educated  and  speculative  intellects  of  the  minority 
of  men,  trained  against  the  hosts  of  the  ignorant,  simple- 
minded  masses  doomed  to  be  vampirized,  lived  and  sat 
upon  by  their  intellectually  stronger  brethren.  Such  train- 
ing is  not  only  untheosophical ;  it  is  simply  unchristian. 
Result :  the  direct  outcome  of  this  branch  of  education  is  an 
overflooding  of  the  market  with  money-making  machines,

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  239

with  heartless,  selfish  men — animals — who  have  been  most 
carefully  trained  to  prey  on  their  fellows  and  take  advan- 
tage of  the  ignorance  of  their  weaker  brethren  !

Inq. —  Well^  but  you  cannot  assert  that  of  our  great  public 
schools^  at  any  rate,Inq. —  Well^  but  you  cannot  assert  that  of  our  great  public 
schools^  at  any  rate,

Theo. — Not  exactly,  it  is  true.  But  though  the  form  is 
different,  the  animating  spirit  is  the  same — untheosophical 
and  unchristian,  whether  Eton  and  Harrow  turn  out  scien- 
tists or  divines  and  theologians.  ^

Inq. — Surely  you  do  not  niea^i  to  call  Eton  and  Harrow 
^^  commerciar'?

Theo. — No.  Of  course  the  classical  system  is  above  all 
things  respectable^  and  in  the  present  day  is  productive  of 
some  good.  It  still  remains  the  favorite  at  our  great  pub- 
lic schools,  where  not  only  an  intellectual,  but  also  a  social 
education  is  obtainable.  It  is  therefore  of  prime  impor- 
tance that  the  dull  boys  of  aristocratic  and  w^ealthy  parents 
should  go  to  such  schools  to  meet  the  rest  of  the  young 
life  of  the  "blood"  and  money  classes.  But,  unfortu- 
nately, there  is  a  huge  competition  even  for  entrance ;  for 
the  moneyed  classes  are  increasing,  and  poor  but  clever 
boys  seek  to  enter  the  pubHc  schools  by  the  rich  scholar- 
ships, both  at  the  schools  themselves  and  from  them  to  the 
universities.

Inq. — According  to  this  view,  the  wealthier  ''  dullards  ^^ 
have  to  work  even  harder  than  their  poorer  fellows.

Theo. — It  is  so.  But,  strange  to  say,  the  faithful  of  the 
cult  of  the  "'  survival  of  the  fittest "  do  not  practise  their 
creed ;  for  their  whole  exertion  is  to  make  the  naturally 
unfit  supplant  the  fit.  Thus,  by  bribes  of  large  sums  of 
money,  they  allure  the  best  teachers  from  their  natural 
pupils  to  niechanicalize  their  naturally  unfit  progeny  into 
professions  which  they  uselessly  overcrowd.

240  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Inq. — And  you  attribute  all  this  to  what  ?240  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

Inq. — And  you  attribute  all  this  to  what  ?

Theo. — All  this  is  owing  to  the  perniciousness  of  a  system 
which  turns  out  goods  to  order,  irrespective  of  the  natural 
proclivities  and  talents  of  the  youth.  The  poor  little  candi- 
date for  this  progressive  paradise  of  learning  comes  almost 
straight  from  the  nursery  to  the  treadmill  of  a  preparatory 
school  for  sons  of  gentlemen.  Here  he  is  immediately  seized 
upon  by  the  workmen  of  the  materio-intellectual  factory, 
and  crammed  with  Latin,  French,  and  Greek  accidence, 
dates  and  tables,  so  that  if  he  have  any  natural  genius  it  is 
rapidly  squeezed  out  of  him  by  the  rollers  of  what  Carlyle 
has  so  well  called  ''  dead  vocables."

Inq. — But  surely  he  is  taught  so??iething  besides  ^^  dead  vo- 
cables^'* a7id  much  of  that  which  may  lead  hi7n  direct  to  The- 
osophy^  if  not  entirely  i7ito  the  Theosophical  Society  ?

Theo. — Not  much.  For  of  history  he  will  attain  only 
sufficient  knowledge  of  his  own  particular  nation  to  fit  him 
with  a  steel  armor  of  prejudice  against  all  other  peoples, 
and  be  steeped  in  the  foul  cesspools  of  chronicled  national 
hate  and  bloodthirstiness ;  and  surely  you  would  not  call 
that — Theosophy  ?

Inq. —  What  are  your  further  objections  ?

Theo. — Added  to  this  is  a  smattering  of  selected,  so 
called,  bibUcal  facts,  from  the  study  of  which  all  intellect  is 
eliminated.  It  is  simply  a  memory  lesson,  the  why  of  the 
teacher  being  a  ivhy  of  circumstances  and  not  of  reason.Inq. —  Yes;  but  I  have  heard  you  congratulate  yourself  at 
the  ever-increasifig  number  of  agnostics  a7td  atheists  i?i  our  day^ 
so  that  it  appears  that  even  people  trained  in  the  syste7n  you 
abuse  so  hea7^tily  do  lea7m  to  think  and  reason  for  themselves.

Theo. — Yes  ;  but  it  is  rather  owing  to  a  healthy  reaction 
from  that  system  than  due  to  it.  We  immeasurably  prefer 
agnostics,  and  even  rank  atheists,  in  our  Society  to  bigots

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  241

of  whatever  religion.  An  agnostic's  mind  is  ever  opened 
to  the  truth;  whereas  the  latter  blinds  the  bigot  like  the 
sun  does  an  owl.  The  best — i.e.,  the  most  truth-loving, 
philanthropic,  and  honest — of  our  Fellows  were,  and  are, 
agnostics  and  atheists,  in  the  sense  of  disbehevers  in  2,  per- 
sonal God.  But  there  are  no  free-thinking  boys  and  girls, 
and  generally  early  training  will  leave  its  mark  behind  in 
the  shape  of  a  cramped  and  distorted  mind.  A  proper  and 
sane  system  of  education  should  produce  the  most  vigor- 
ous and  liberal  mind,  strictly  trained  in  logical  and  accu- 
rate thought,  and  not  in  bhnd  faith.  How  can  you  ever 
expect  good  results  while  you  pervert  the  reasoning  faculty 
of  your  children  by  bidding  them  believe  in  the  miracles 
of  the  Bible  on  Sunday,  while  for  the  six  other  days  of  the 
week  you  teach  them  that  such  things  are  scientifically  im- 
possible ?

Inq. —  What  ivould yoii  have^  then  ?Inq. —  What  ivould yoii  have^  then  ?

Theo. — If  we  had  money  we  would  found  schools  which 
would  turn  out  something  else  than  reading  and  writing 
candidates  for  starvation.  Children  should  above  all  be 
taught  self-reliance,  love  for  all  men,  altruism,  mutual  char- 
ity, and,  more  than  anything  else,  to  think  and  reason  for 
themselves.  We  would  reduce  the  purely  mechanical  work 
of  the  memory  to  an  absolute  minimum,  and  devote  the 
time  to  the  development  and  training  of  the  inner  senses, 
faculties,  and  latent  capacities.  We  would  endeavor  to 
deal  with  each  child  as  a  unit,  and  to  educate  it  so  as  to 
produce  the  most  harmonious  and  equal  unfoldment  of  its 
powers,  in  order  that  its  special  aptitudes  should  find  their 
full  natiu"al  development.  We  would  aim  at  crea,ting  free 
men  and  women — free  intellectually,  free  morally ;  unpreju- 
diced in  all  respects,  and,  above  all  things,  unselfish.  And 
we  beHeve  that  much,  if  not  all,  of  this  could  be  obtained 
by  proper  and  truly  Theosophical  education.

242  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

WHY,    THEN,  IS   THERE   SO  MUCH  PREJUDICE 
AGAINST  THE   THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY?

Inq. — If  Theosophy  is  even  half  of  what  you  say,  why 
should  there  exist  such  a  terrible  ill  feeli^ig  against  it  ?  This 
is  even  more  of  a  problem  tha7i  anything  else,Inq. — If  Theosophy  is  even  half  of  what  you  say,  why 
should  there  exist  such  a  terrible  ill  feeli^ig  against  it  ?  This 
is  even  more  of  a  problem  tha7i  anything  else,

Theo. — It  is ;  but  you  must  bear  in  mind  how  many 
powerful  adversaries  we  have  aroused  ever  since  the  for- 
mation of  our  Society.  As  I  just  said,  if  the  Theosophical 
movement  were  one  of  those  numerous  modem  crazes,  as 
harmless  at  the  end  as  they  are  evanescent,  it  would  be 
simply  laughed  at— as  it  is  now  by  those  who  still  do  not 
understand  its  real  purport — and  left  severely  alone.  But 
it  is  nothing  of  the  kind.  Intrinsically,  Theosophy  is  the 
most  serious  movement  of  this  age,  and  one,  moreover, 
which  threatens  the  very  life  of  most  of  the  time-honored 
humbugs,  prejudices,  and  social  evils  of  the  day — those  evils 
which  fatten  and  make  happy  the  upper  ten  and  their  imi- 
tators and  sycophants,  the  wealthy  dozens  of  the  middle 
classes,  while  they  positively  crush  and  starve  out  of  exis- 
tence the  millions  of  the  poor.  Think  of  this,  and  you  will 
easily  understand  the  reason  of  such  a  relentless  persecution 
by  those  others  who,  more  observing  and  perspicacious,  do 
see  the  true  nature  of  Theosophy,  and  therefore  dread  it.

Inq. — Do  you  mean  to  tell  me  that  it  is  because  a  few  have 
understood  what  Theosophy  leads  to,  that  they  try  to  crush  the 
movement  ?  But  if  Theosophy  leads  only  to  good,  surely  you 
cannot  be  prepared  to  utter  such  a  terrible  accusation  of  perfid- 
ious heartlessness  and  treachery  even  against  those  few  ?Theo. — I  am  so  prepared,  on  the  contrary.  I  do  not 
call  the  enemies  we  have  had  to  battle  with  during  the  first 
nine  or  ten  years  of  the  Society's  existence  either  powerful 
or  dangerous,  but  only  those  who  have  arisen  against  us

THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.  243

in  the  last  three  or  four  years.  And  these  neither  speak, 
write,  nor  preach  against  Theosophy,  but  work  in  silence 
and  behind  the  backs  of  the  fooHsh  puppets  who  act  as 
their  visible  marionettes.  Yet,  if  invisible  to  most  of  the 
members  of  our  Society,  they  are  well  known  to  the  true 
founders  and  the  protectors  of  our  Society.  But  they 
must  remain,  for  certain  reasons,  unnamed  at  present.

Inq. — And  are  they  known  to  many  of  you,  or  to  yourself 
alone  ?

Theo. — I  never  said  that  /  knew  them ;  I  may  or  may 
not  know  them ;  but  I  know  of  them,  and  this  is  sufficient ; 
and  I  defy  them  to  do  their  worst.  They  may  achieve 
great  mischief  and  throw  confusion  into  our  ranks,  espe- 
cially among  the  faint-hearted  and  those  who  can  judge 
only  by  appearances.  They  will  not  crush  the  Society,  do 
what  they  may.  Apart  from  these  truly  dangerous  enemies 
— dangerous,  however,  only  to  those  Theosophists  who  are 
unworthy  of  the  name,  and  whose  place  is  rather  outside 
than  within  the  Theosophical  Society — the  number  of  our 
opponents  is  more  than  considerable.

Inq. — I  have  heard  many  Theosophists  speak  of  a  ^^ power 
behind  the  Society'''  and  of  certain  *'  Mahdtmds^^  mentioned 
also  in  Mr.  Sinnetfs  works,  that  are  said  to  have  founded  the 
Society,  to  watch  over  and  protect  it,

Theo. — You  may  laugh,  but  it  is  so.

XIV.

THE  THEOSOPHICAL   -  MAhAtmAs."

ARE    THEY  ''SPIRITS   OF  LIGHT''  OR   ''GOBLINS 
DAMN'D  "  ;Theo. — You  may  laugh,  but  it  is  so.

XIV.

THE  THEOSOPHICAL   -  MAhAtmAs."

ARE    THEY  ''SPIRITS   OF  LIGHT''  OR   ''GOBLINS 
DAMN'D  "  ;

Inq. —  Who  are^  then,  those  whom  you  call  your  '^Mas- 
ters "  /  Some  say  they  are  ''  spirits^'  or  some  other  kind  of 
supernatural  beings,  while  others  call  the7n  "  myths ^

Theo. — They  are  neither.  I  once  heard  one  outsider 
say  to  another  that  they  were  a  sort  of  *'  male  mermaids," 
whatever  such  a  creature  may  be.  But  if  you  hsten  to  what 
people  say  you  will  never  have  a  true  conception  of  them. 
In  the  first  place,  they  are  living  7nen,  born  as  we  are  born, 
and  doomed  to  die  like  every  other  mortal.

Inq. —  Yes,  but  it  is  rumored  that  some  of  them  are  a  thou- 
sand  years  old.     Is  this  true  ?

Theo. — As  true  as  the  miraculous  growth  of  hair  on  the 
head  of  Meredith's  Shagpat.  Truly,  like  the  "  Identical," 
no  Theosophical  Shaving  has  hitherto  been  able  to  crop  it. 
The  more  we  deny  them,  the  more  we  try  to  set  people 
right,  the  more  absurd  do  the  inventions  become.  I  have 
heard  of  Methuselah  being  nine  hundred  and  sixty-nine 
years  old;  but,  not  being  forced  to  believe  in  it,  have 
laughed  at  the  statement,  for  which  I  was  forthwith  re- 
garded by  many  as  a  blasphemous  heretic.

244

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  245

Inq. — Seriously^  though^  do  they  outlive  the  ordinary  age 
of  men  ?244

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  245

Inq. — Seriously^  though^  do  they  outlive  the  ordinary  age 
of  men  ?

Theo. — What  do  you  call  the  ordinary  age  ?  I  remem- 
ber reading  in  the  Laficet  of  a  Mexican  who  was  almost  one 
hundred  and  ninety  years  old ;  but  I  have  never  heard  of 
mortal  man,  layman  or  Adept,  who  could  live  even  half  the 
years  allotted  to  Methuselah.  Some  Adepts  do  exceed,  by 
a  good  deal,  what  you  would  call  the  ordinary  age ;  yet 
there  is  nothing  miraculous  in  it,  and  very  few  of  them  care 
to  live  very  long.

Inq. — But  what  does  the  word  '^ Mahdtmd''  really  mean?

Theo. — Simply  ''  great  soul " — great  through  moral  ele- 
vation and  intellectual  attainment.  If  the  title  of  "great" 
is  given  to  a  drunken  soldier  like  Alexander,  why  should 
we  not  call  those  ''  great "  who  have  achieved  far  greater 
conquests  in  Nature's  secrets  than  Alexander  ever  did  on 
the  field  of  battle  ?  Besides,  the  term  is  an  Indian  and  a 
very  old  word.

Inq. — And  why  do  you  call  the77i  '* Masters'' ?

Theo. — We  call  them  *'  Masters  "  because  they  are  our 
teachers,  and  because  from  them  we  have  derived  all  the 
Theosophical  truths,  however  inadequately  some  of  us 
may  have  expressed,  and  others  understood,  them.  They 
are  men  of  great  learning  and  still  greater  holiness  of  life, 
whom  we  term  Initiates.  They  are  not  ascetics  in  the 
ordinary  sense,  though  they  certainly  remain  apart  from 
the  turmoil  and  strife  of  your  Western  world.

Inq. — But  is  it  not  selfish  thus  to  isolate  themselves  ?Inq. — But  is  it  not  selfish  thus  to  isolate  themselves  ?

Theo. — Where  is  the  selfishness  ?  Does  not  the  fate  of 
the  Theosophical  Society  sufficiently  prove  that  the  world 
is  neither  ready  to  recognize  them  nor  to  profit  by  their 
teaching  ?  Of  what  use  would  Professor  Clerk  Maxwell 
have  been  to  instruct  a  class  of  little  boys  in  their  multipli-

246  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

cation  table  ?  Besides,  they  isolate  themselves  only  from 
the  West.  In  their  own  country  they  go  about  as  publicly 
as  other  people  do.

Inq. — Do  you  7iot  ascribe  to  them  supernatural  powers  ?

Theo. — We  believe  in  nothing  supernatural,  as  I  have 
told  you  already.  Had  Edison  lived  and  invented  his 
phonograph  two  hundred  years  ago  he  would  most  prob- 
ably have  been  burned  along  with  it,  and  the  whole  attrib- 
uted to  the  devil.  The  powers  which  they  exercise  are 
simply  the  development  of  potencies  lying  latent  in  every 
man  and  woman,  and  the  existence  of  which  even  official 
science  begins  to  recognize.

Inq. — Is  it  true  that  these  7ne7i  inspire  some  of  your  writers^ 
and  that  many,  if  not  all,  of  your  Theosophical  works  were 
writtefi  under  their  dictation  ?

Theo. — Some  of  them  have  done  so.  There  are  pas- 
sages entirely  dictated  by  them  verbatim  ;  but  in  most  cases 
they  only  inspire  the  ideas,  and  leave  the  literary  form  to 
the  writers.

Inq. — But  this  in  itself  is  miraculous  ;  is,  in  fact,  a  miracle. 
How  can  they  do  it  ?Inq. — But  this  in  itself  is  miraculous  ;  is,  in  fact,  a  miracle. 
How  can  they  do  it  ?

Theo. — My  dear  sir,  you  are  laboring  under  a  great  mis- 
take, and  it  is  science  itself  that  will  refute  yoiu"  arguments 
at  no  distant  day.  Why  should  it  be  a  "miracle,"  as  you 
call  it  ?  A  miracle  is  supposed  to  mean  some  operation 
which  is  supernatural,  whereas  there  is  really  nothing  above 
or  beyond  Nature  and  Nature's  laws.  Among  the  many 
forms  of  the  ''  miracle  "  which  have  come  under  modem 
scientific  recognition  there  is  hypnotism ;  and  one  phase  of 
its  power  is  known  as  ''  suggestion,"  a  form  of  thought- 
transference,  which  has  been  successfully  used  in  combating 
particular  physical  diseases,  etc.  The  time  is  not  far  dis- 
tant when  the  world  of  science  will  be  forced  to  acknow-

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.  247

ledge  that  there  exists  as  much  interaction  between  one 
mind  and  another,  no  matter  at  what  distance,  as  between 
one  body  and  another  in  closest  contact.  When  two  minds 
are  sympathetically  related,  and  the  instruments  through 
which  they  function  are  tuned  to  respond  magnetically 
and  electrically  to  one  another,  there  is  nothing  which  will 
prevent  the  transmission  of  thoughts  from  one  to  the  other 
at  will ;  for  since  the  mind  is  not  of  such  a  tangible  nature 
that  distance  can  divide  it  from  the  subject  of  its  contem- 
plation, it  follows  that  the  only  difference  that  can  exist  be- 
tween two  minds  is  a  difference  of  state.  So  if  this  latter 
hindrance  is  overcome,  w^here  is  the  *' miracle"  of  thought- 
transference,  at  whatever  distance  ?

Inq. — But  you  will  admit  that  hypnotism  does  ?wthing  so 
miraculous  or  wonderful  as  that  ?Inq. — But  you  will  admit  that  hypnotism  does  ?wthing  so 
miraculous  or  wonderful  as  that  ?

Theo. — On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  well-established  fact 
that  a  hypnotist  can  affect  the  brain  of  his  subject  so  far 
as  to  produce  an  expression  of  his  own  thoughts,  and  even 
his  words,  through  the  organism  of  his  subject ;  and  al- 
though the  phenomena  attaching  to  this  method  of  actual 
thought-transference  are  as  yet  few  in  number,  no  one,  I 
presume,  will  undertake  to  say  how  far  their  action  may 
extend  in  the  future,  when  the  laws  that  govern  their  pro- 
duction are  more  scientifically  established.  And  so,  if  such 
results  can  be  produced  by  the  knowledge  of  the  mere 
rudiments  of  hypnotism,  what  can  prevent  the  Adept  in 
psychic  and  spiritual  powers  from  producing  results  w^hich, 
with  your  present  limited  knowledge  of  these  laws,  you  are 
inclined  to  call  "  miraculous  "  ?

Inq. — Then  why  do  not  our  physicians  experiment  and  try 
if  they  could  not  do  as  much  ?  *

*  Such,  for  instance,  as  Professor  Bemheim  and  Dr.  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  of  England ; 
Professors  Beaunis  and  Li^geois,  of  Nancy ;  Delboeuf,  of  Liege  ;  Burot  and  Bourru, 
of  Rochefort ;  Fontain  and  Sigard,  of  Bordeaux  ;  Forel,  of  Ziirich ;  and  Drs.  Despine,

248  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

Theo. — Because,  first  of  all,  they  are  not  Adepts,  with  a 
thorough  understanding  of  the  secrets  and  laws  of  psychic 
and  spiritual  realms,  but  materialists,  afraid  to  step  outside 
the  narrow  groove  of  matter ;  and  secondly,  because  they 
7niist  fail  at  present,  and,  indeed,  until  they  are  brought  to 
acknowledge  that  such  powers  are  attainable.

Inq. — And  could  they  be  taught  ?Inq. — And  could  they  be  taught  ?

Theo. — Not  unless  they  were  first  of  all  prepared,  by 
having  the  materialistic  dross  they  have  accumulated  in 
their  brains  swept  away  to  the  very  last  atom.

Inq. — This  is  very  interesting.  Tell  me^  have  the  Adepts 
thus  inspired  or  dictated  to  many  of  your  Theosophists  ?

Theo. — No ;  on  the  contrary,  to  very  few.  Such  opera- 
tions require  special  conditions.  An  unscrupulous  but 
skilled  Adept  of  the  "  Black  Brotherhood  " — '''  Brothers  of 
the  Shadow,"  and  Dugpas,  we  call  them — has  far  less  diffi- 
culties to  labor  under.  For,  having  no  laws  of  a  spiritual 
nature  to  trammel  his  actions,  such  a  Dugpa  sorcerer  will 
most  unceremoniously  obtain  control  over  any  mind,  and 
subject  it  entirely  to  his  evil  powers.  But  our  Masters  will 
never  do  that.  They  have  no  right — if  they  would  escape 
falling  into  ''  black  magic  " — to  obtain  entire  mastery  over 
any  one's  immortal  Ego,  and  can  therefore  act  only  on  the 
physical  and  psychic  nature  of  the  subject,  leaving  thereby 
the  free  will  of  the  latter  wholly  undisturbed.  Hence,  un- 
less a  person  has  been  brought  into  psychic  relationship 
with  the  Masters,  and  is  assisted  by  virtue  of  his  full  faith 
in  and  devotion  to  his  teachers,  the  latter,  whenever  trans- 
mitting their  thoughts  to  one  with  whom  these  conditions 
are  not  fulfilled,  experience  great  difficulties  in  penetrating 
into  the  cloudy  chaos  of  that  person's  sphere.     But  this  is

of  Marseilles;  Van  Renterghem  and  Van  Eeden,  of  Amsterdam;  Wetterstrand,  of 
Stockholm ;  Schrenck-Notzing,  of  Leipzig ;  and  many  other  physicians  and  writers 
of  eminence.

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  249THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  249

no  place  to  treat  of  a  subject  of  this  nature.  Suffice  it  to 
say  that  if  the  power  exists,  then  there  are  Intelligences 
(embodied  or  disembodied)  which  guide  this  power,  and  liv- 
ing, conscious  instruments  through  whom  it  is  transmitted 
and  by  whom  it  is  received.  We  have  only  to  beware  of 
''  black  magic."

Inq. — But  what  do  you  really  mean  by  "  black  magic  "/

Theo. — Simply  abuse  of  psychic  powers,  or  of  any 
secret  of  Nature ;  the  fact  of  applying  to  selfish  and  sinful 
ends  the  powers  of  Occultism.  A  hypnotizer  who,  taking 
advantage  of  his  powers  of  "  suggestion,"  forced  a  subject 
to  steal  or  murder  would  be  called  by  us  a  ''black  magi- 
cian." The  famous  ''rejuvenating  system"  of  Dr.  Brown- 
S6quard,  of  Paris,  through  a  loathsome  animal  injection 
into  human  blood — a  discovery  all  the  medical  papers  of 
Europe  are  now  discussing — if  true,  is  unconscious  black 
magic.

Inq. — But  this  is  medieval  belief  in  witchcraft  and  sorcery  / 
Even  the  law  itself  has  ceased  to  believe  in  such  things,Inq. — But  this  is  medieval  belief  in  witchcraft  and  sorcery  / 
Even  the  law  itself  has  ceased  to  believe  in  such  things,

Theo. — So  much  the  worse  for  the  law,  as  it  has  been 
led,  through  such  lack  of  discrimination,  into  committing 
more  than  one  judiciary  mistake  and  crime.  It  is  the  term 
alone  that  frightens  you  with  its  "superstitious"  ring  in  it. 
Would  not  law  punish  an  abuse  of  hypnotic  powers,  as  I 
just  mentioned  ?  Nay,  it  has  so  punished  it  already  in 
France  and  Germany ;  yet  it  would  indignantly  deny  that 
it  applied  punishment  to  a  crime  of  evident  "sorcery.*' 
You  cannot  believe  in  the  efficacy  and  reality  of  the 
powers  of  suggestion  by  physicians  and  mesmerizers  or 
hypnotizers,  and  then  refuse  to  beHeve  in  the  same  powers 
when  used  for  evil  motives.  And  if  you  do,  then  you  be- 
lieve in  "  sorcery  " !  You  cannot  believe  in  good  and  dis- 
believe in  evil,  accept  genuine  money  and  refuse  to  credit

250  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

such  a  thing  as  false  coin.  Nothing  can  exist  without  its 
contrast ;  and  no  day,  no  light,  no  good,  could  have  any 
representation  as  such  in  your  consciousness  were  there  no 
night,  no  darkness,  no  evil,  to  ojffset  and  contrast  them.

Inq. — Indeed  J  I  have  known  men  who,  while  thoroughly 
believing  in  that  which  you  call  great  psychic  or  magic  powers^ 
laughed  at  the  very  mention  of  witchcraft  and  sorcery.

Theo.— What   does  it  prove  ?     Simply  that  they  are

illogical.     So  much  the  worse  for  them,  again.     And  we,

knowing  as  we  do  of  the  existence  of  good  and  holy  Adepts,

believe  as  thoroughly  in  the  existence  of  bad  and  unholy

fj^  ^       Adepts,  or — Dugpas.knowing  as  we  do  of  the  existence  of  good  and  holy  Adepts,

believe  as  thoroughly  in  the  existence  of  bad  and  unholy

fj^  ^       Adepts,  or — Dugpas.

Inq. — But  if  the  Masters  exist ^  why  do  they  not  come  out 
before  all  men  and  refute  once  for  all  the  many  charges  which 
are  made  against  Madame  Blavatsky  and  the  Society  ?

Theo. — What  charges  ?

Inq. — That  they  do  not  exist ^  and  that  she  has  invented 
them.     Does  not  all  this  injure  her  reputatio7i  ?

Theo. — In  what  way  can  such  an  accusation  injure  her 
in  reality  ?  Did  she  ever  make  money  on  their  presumed 
existence,  or  derive  benefit  or  fame  therefrom  ?  I  answer 
that  she  has  gained  only  insults,  abuse,  and  calumnies, 
which  would  have  been  very  painful  had  she  not  learned 
long  ago  to  remain  perfectly  indifferent  to  such  false 
charges.  For  what  does  it  amount  to  after  all  ?  Why, 
to  an  implied  compliment,  which,  if  the  fools,  her  accusers, 
were  not  carried  away  by  their  blind  hatred,  they  would 
have  thought  twice  before  uttering.  To  say  that  she  has 
invented  the  Masters  comes  to  this:  that  she  must  have 
invented  every  bit  of  philosophy  that  has  ever  been  given 
out  in  Theosophical  literature.  She  must  be  the  author  of 
the  letters  from  which  Esoteric  Buddhism  was  written ;  the 
sole  inventor  of  every  tenet  found  in  TJie  Secret  Doctrine^

THE  KEY   TO    TIIEOSOPHY.  251THE  KEY   TO    TIIEOSOPHY.  251

which,  if  the  world  were  just,  would  be  recognized  as  sup- 
plying many  of  the  missing  links  of  science,  as  will  be  dis- 
covered a  hundred  years  hence.  By  saying  what  they  do 
they  are  also  giving  her  the  credit  of  being  far  cleverer  than 
the  hundreds  of  men  (many  very  clever  and  not  a  few  sci- 
entific men)  who  believe  in  what  she  says — inasmuch  as 
she  must  have  fooled  them  all  !  If  they  speak  the  truth, 
then  she  must  be  several  Mahatmas  rolled  into  one,  hke  a 
nest  of  Chinese  boxes.

Inq. — They  say  that  from  beginning  to  end  they  were  a  ro- 
mance which  Madame  Blavatsky  has  woven  frofn  her  own 
brain,

Theo. — Well,  she  might  have  done  many  things  less 
clever  than  this.  At  any  rate,  we  have  not  the  slightest 
objection  to  this  theory.  As  she  always  says  now,  she  al- 
most prefers  that  people  should  not  believe  in  the  Masters. 
She  declares  openly  that  she  would  rather  people  should 
seriously  think  that  the  only  "  Mahatma-land  "  is  the  gray 
matter  of  her  brain,  and  that,  in  short,  she  has  evolved  them 
out  of  the  depths  of  her  own  inner  consciousness,  than  that 
their  names  and  grand  ideal  should  be  so  infamously  dese- 
crated as  they  are  at  present.  At  first  she  used  to  protest 
indignantly  against  any  doubts  as  to  their  existence.  Now 
she  never  goes  out  of  her  way  to  prove  or  disprove  it.  Let 
people  think  what  they  like.

Inq. — But  if  you  have  such  wise  and  good  men  to  guide 
the  Society^  how  is  it  that  so  many  mistakes  have  been  made  ?Inq. — But  if  you  have  such  wise  and  good  men  to  guide 
the  Society^  how  is  it  that  so  many  mistakes  have  been  made  ?

Theo. — The  Masters  do  not  guide  the  Society — not  even 
the  founders — and  no  one  has  ever  asserted  that  they  did ; 
they  only  watch  over  and  protect  it.  This  is  amply  proved 
by  the  fact  that  no  mistakes  have  been  able  to  cripple  it, 
and  no  scandals  from  within,  nor  the  most  damaging  at- 
tacks from  without,  have  been  able  to  overthrow  it.     The

252  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

Masters  look  at  tlie  future,  not  at  the  present,  and  every 
mistake  is  so  much  more  accumulated  wisdom  for  days  to 
come.  That  other  *'  Master  "  who  sent  out  the  man  with 
the  five  talents  did  not  tell  him  how  to  double  them,  nor 
did  he  prevent  the  foolish  servant  from  burying  his  one  tal- 
ent in  the  earth.  Each  must  acquire  wisdom  by  his  own 
experience  and  merits.  The  Christian  churches,  who  claim 
a  far  higher  Master,  the  very  Holy  Ghost  itself,  have  ever 
been,  and  are  still,  guilty  not  only  of  ''  mistakes,"  but  of  a 
series  of  bloody  crimes  throughout  the  ages.  Yet  no  Chris- 
tian would  deny,  for  all  that,  his  belief  in  that  Master,  I 
suppose,  although  his  existence  is  far  more  hypothetical 
than  that  of  the  Mahatmas,  as  no  one  has  ever  seen  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  his  guidance  of  the  church  ;  moreover,  their 
own  ecclesiastical  history  distinctly  contradicts.  Errare 
humanum  est.     Let  us  return  to  our  subject.

THE  ABUSE    OF  SACRED  NAMES  AND    TERMS,

Inq. — Then  what  I  have  heard,  namely,  that  many  of 
your  Theosophical  writers  claim  to  have  been  inspired  by  these 
Masters,  or  to  have  seen  and  conversed  with  them,  is  not  true  ?Theo. — It  may  or  it  may  not  be  true.  How  can  I  tell  ? 
The  burden  of  proof  rests  with  them.  Some  of  them — a 
few,  very  few  indeed — have  either  distinctly  hed  or  were 
hallucinated  when  boasting  of  such  inspiration;  others 
were  truly  inspired  by  great  Adepts.  The  tree  is  known 
by  its  fruits ;  and  as  all  Theosophists  have  to  be  judged 
by  their  deeds  and  not  by  what  they  write  or  say,  so  all 
Theosophical  books  must  be  accepted  on  their  merits,  and 
not  according  to  any  claim  to  authority  which  they  may 
put  forward.

Inq. — But  would  Madame  Blavatsky  apply  this  to  her  own 
works — The  Secret  Doctrine,  for  instance  ?

THE  KEY  TO    THEO SOPHY,  253Inq. — But  would  Madame  Blavatsky  apply  this  to  her  own 
works — The  Secret  Doctrine,  for  instance  ?

THE  KEY  TO    THEO SOPHY,  253

Theo. — Certainly ;  she  says  expressly  in  the  preface  that 
she  gives  out  the  doctrines  that  she  has  learned  from  the 
Masters,  but  claims  no  inspiration  whatever  for  what  she 
has  lately  written.  As  for  our  best  Theosophists,  they 
would  also,  in  this  case,  far  rather  that  the  names  of  the 
Masters  had  never  been  mixed  up  with  our  books  in  any 
way.  With  few  exceptions,  most  of  such  works  are  not 
only  imperfect,  but  positively  erroneous  and  misleading. 
Great  are  the  desecrations  to  which  the  names  of  two  of 
the  Masters  have  been  subjected.  There  is  hardly  a 
medium  who  has  not  claimed  to  have  seen  them.  Every 
bogus  swindling  society,  for  commercial  purposes,  now 
claims  to  be  guided  and  directed  by  '*  Masters,"  often  sup- 
posed to  be  far  higher  than  ours  !  Many  and  heavy  are 
the  sins  of  those  who  have  advanced  these  claims,  prompted 
either  by  desire  for  lucre,  vanity,  or  irresponsible  medium- 
ship.  Many  persons  have  been  plundered  of  their  money 
by  such  societies,  which  offer  to  sell  the  secrets  of  power, 
knowledge,  and  spiritual  truth  for  worthless  gold.  Worst 
of  all,  the  sacred  names  of  Occultism  and  the  holy  keepers 
thereof  have  been  dragged  in  this  filthy  mire,  polluted  by 
being  associated  with  sordid  motives  and  immoral  practices, 
while  thousands  of  men  have  been  held  back  from  the  path 
of  truth  and  light  through  the  discredit  and  evil  report 
which  such  shams,  swindles,  and  frauds  have  brought  upon 
the  whole  subject.  I  say  again,  every  earnest  Theosophist 
regrets  to-day,  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart,  that  these 
sacred  names  and  things  have  ever  been  mentioned  before 
the  pubUc,  and  fervently  wishes  that  they  had  been  kept 
secret  within  a  small  circle  of  trusted  and  devoted  friends.CONCLUSION.

THE  FUTURE   OF   THE    THEOSOPHICAL   SOCIETY,

Inq. —  Tell  me^  what  do  you  expect  for  Theosophy  i?i  the 
future  ?

Theo. — If  you  speak  of  Theosophy,  I  answer  that,  as 
it  has  existed  eternally  throughout  the  endless  cycles  upon 
cycles  of  the  past,  so  it  will  ever  exist  throughout  the  in- 
finitudes of  the  futiure,  because  Theosophy  is  synonymous 
with  Everlasting  Truth.

Inq. — Pardon  me  ;  I  mea7it  to  ask  you  rather  about  the 
prospects  of  the  Theosophical  Society,

Theo. — Its  future  will  depend  almost  entirely  upon  the 
degree  of  selflessness,  earnestness,  devotion,  and,  last  but 
not  least,  on  the  amount  of  knowledge  and  wisdom  pos- 
sessed by  those  members  on  whom  it  will  fall  to  carry  on 
the  work  and  to  direct  the  Society  after  the  death  of  the 
founders.

Inq. — I  quite  see  the  importance  of  their  being  selfless  and 
devoted^  but  I  do  not  quite  grasp  how  their  knowledge  can  be 
as  vital  a  factor  in  the  question  as  these  other  qualities.  Surely 
the  literature  which  already  exists^  and  to  which  constant  ad- 
ditions  are  still  being  made,  ought  to  be  sufficient,

Theo. — I  do  not  refer  to  technical  knowledge  of  the 
esoteric  doctrine,  though  that  is  most  important;  I  spoke

254

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  255Theo. — I  do  not  refer  to  technical  knowledge  of  the 
esoteric  doctrine,  though  that  is  most  important;  I  spoke

254

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,  255

rather  of  the  great  need  which  our  successors  in  the  gui- 
dance of  the  Society  will  have  of  unbiased  and  clear  judg- 
ment. Every  such  attempt  as  the  Theosophical  Society 
has  hitherto  ended  in  failure,  because,  sooner  or  later,  it 
has  degenerated  into  a  sect,  set  up  hard-and-fast  dogmas 
of  its  own,  and  so  lost  by  imperceptible  degrees  that  vital- 
ity which  hving  truth  alone  can  impart.  You  must  remem- 
ber that  all  our  members  have  been  bred  and  born  in  some 
creed  or  religion ;  that  all  are  more  or  less  of  their  genera- 
tion, both  physically  and  mentally ;  and  consequently  that 
their  judgment  is  but  too  likely  to  be  warped  and  uncon- 
sciously biased  by  some  or  all  of  these  influences.  If,  then, 
they  cannot  be  freed  from  such  inherent  bias,  or  at  least 
taught  to  recognize  it  instantly  and  so  avoid  being  led 
away  by  it,  the  result  can  only  be  that  the  Society  will 
drift  off  on  to  some  sand-bank  of  thought  or  another,  and 
there  remain,  a  stranded  carcass,  to  molder  and  die.

Inq. — But  if  this  danger  be  averted?Inq. — But  if  this  danger  be  averted?

Theo. — Then  the  Society  will  Hve  on  into  and  through 
the  twentieth  cen^tury.  It  will  gradually  leaven  and  perme- 
ate the  great  mass  of  thinking  and  intelligent  people  with 
its  large-minded  and  noble  ideas  of  religion,  duty,  and  phi- 
lanthropy. Slowly  but  surely  it  will  burst  asunder  the  iron 
fetters  of  creeds  and  dogmas,  of  social  and  caste  preju- 
dices; it  will  break  down  racial  and  national  antipathies 
and  barriers,  and  will  open  the  way  to  the  practical  realiza- 
tion of  the  Brotherhood  of  all  men.  Through  its  teaching, 
through  the  philosophy  which  it  has  rendered  accessible 
and  intelligible  to  the  modem  mind,  the  West  will  learn 
to  imderstand  and  appreciate  the  East  at  its  true  value. 
Further,  the  development  of  the  psychic  powers  and  facul- 
ties, the  premonitory  symptoms  of  which  are  already  visible 
in  America,  will  proceed  healthily  and  normally.  Mankind 
will  be  saved  from  the  terrible  dangers,  both  mental  and

236  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

bodily,  which  are  inevitable  when  that  unfolding  takes 
place,  as  it  threatens  to  do,  in  a  hotbed  of  selfishness  and 
all  evil  passions.  Man's  mental  and  psychic  growth  will 
proceed  in  harmony  with  his  moral  improvement,  while  his 
material  surroundings  will  reflect  the  peace  and  fraternal 
good  will  which  will  reign  in  his  mind,  instead  of  the  dis- 
cord and  strife  which  are  everywhere  apparent  around  us 
to-day.

Inq. — A  truly  delightful  picture  I  But  tell  me^  do  you 
really  expect  all  this  to  be  accomplished  in  one  shof^t  century  ?Inq. — A  truly  delightful  picture  I  But  tell  me^  do  you 
really  expect  all  this  to  be  accomplished  in  one  shof^t  century  ?

Theo. — Scarcely.  But  I  must  tell  you  that  during  the 
last  quarter  of  every  hundred  years  an  attempt  is  made  by 
those  Masters  of  whom  I  have  spoken  to  help  on  the 
spiritual  progress  of  humanity  in  a  marked  and  definite 
way.  Toward  the  close  of  each  century  you  will  invari- 
ably find  that  an  outpouring  or  upheaval  of  spirituality — 
or  call  it  Mysticism,  if  you  prefer — has  taken  place.  Some 
one  or  more  persons  have  appeared  in  the  world  as  their 
agents,  and  a  greater  or  less  amount  of  occult  knowledge 
and  teaching  has  been  given  out.  If  you  care  to  do  so, 
you  can  trace  these  movements  back,  century  by  century, 
as  far  as  our  detailed  historical  records  extend.

Inq. — But  how  does  this  bear  o?t  the  future  of  the  Theo- 
sophical  Society  ?

Theo. — If  the  present  attempt,  in  the  form  of  our  Society, 
succeeds  better  than  its  predecessors  have  done,  then  it  will 
be  in  existence  as  an  organized,  living,  and  healthy  body 
when  the  time  comes  for  the  effort  of  the  twentieth  century. 
The  general  condition  of  men's  minds  and  hearts  will  have 
been  improved  and  purified  by  the  spread  of  its  teachings, 
and,  as  I  have  said,  their  prejudices  and  dogmatic  illusions 
will  have  been,  to  some  extent  at  least,  removed.  Not 
only  so,  but  besides  a  large  and  accessible  hterature  ready

THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOFHY,  257THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOFHY,  257

to  men's  hands,  the  next  impulse  will  find  a  numerous  and 
united  body  of  people  ready  to  welcome  the  new  torch- 
bearer  of  Truth.  He  will  find  the  minds  of  men  prepared 
for  his  message,  a  language  ready  for  him  in  which  to 
clothe  the  new  truths  he  brings,  an  organization  awaiting 
his  arrival,  which  will  remove  the  merely  mechanical,  mate- 
rial obstacles  and  difficulties  from  his  path.  Think  how 
much  one  to  whom  such  an  opportunity  is  given  could  ac- 
complish. Measure  it  by  comparison  with  what  the  Theo- 
sophical  Society  actually  has  achieved  in  the  last  fourteen 
years,  without  any  of  these  advantages,  and  surrounded 
by  hosts  of  hindrances  which  would  not  hamper  the  new 
leader.  Consider  all  this,  and  then  tell  me  whether  I  am 
too  sanguine  when  I  say  that  if  the  Theosophical  Society 
survives  and  lives  true  to  its  mission,  to  its  original  impulses, 
through  the  next  hundred  years — tell  me,  I  say,  if  I  go  too 
far  in  asserting  that  earth  will  be  a  heaven  in  the  twenty- 
first  century  in  comparison  with  what  it  is  now  !

GLOSSARY.

259

GLOSSARY.

Absoluteness.  When  predicated  of  the  Universal  Prin- 
ciple, it  denotes  an  abstraction,  which  is  more  correct  and 
logical  than  to  apply  the  adjective  ''absolute"  to  that 
which  can  have  neither  attributes  nor  limitations.Adam  Kadmon  {Ueb.).  Archetypal  Man,  humanity. 
The  ''  heavenly  Man  "  not  fallen  into  sin.  Kabalists  refer 
it  to  the  ten  Sephiroth  on  the  plane  of  human  perception. 
In  the  Kabalah  Adam  Kadmon  is  the  manifested  logos  cor- 
responding to  our  third  logos,  the  unmanifested  being  the 
first  paradigmic,  ideal  Man,  and  symbolizing  the  universe  /// 
abscondito,  or  in  its  ''  privation  "  in  the  Aristotelian  sense. 
The  first  logos  is  the  **  light  of  the  world,"  the  second  and 
the  third  its  gradually  deepening  shadows.

Adept  [Lat.  adepttis).  In  Occultism,  one  who  has  reached 
the  stage  of  initiation  and  become  a  Master  in  the  science 
of  Esoteric  Philosophy.

i^Ether  {Gr.).  With  the  ancients,  the  divine  luminifer- 
ous  substance  which  pervades  the  whole  universe ;  the 
"  garment "  of  the  supreme  deity,  Zeus  or  Jupiter.  With 
the  moderns,  ether,  for  the  meaning  of  which,  in  physics 
and  chemistry,  see  Webster's  or  some  other  dictionary. 
In  esotericism  aether  is  the  third  principle  of  the  cosmic

261

262  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

septenary,  matter  (earth)  being  the  lowest,  and  dkdsha  the 
highest.

Agathon  [Gr,),  Plato's  supreme  deity — lit.,  the  *'  Good." 
Our  dlaya  or  the  "  soul  of  the  world."

Agnostic.  A  word  first  used  by  Professor  Huxley  to  in- 
dicate one  who  believes  nothing  which  cannot  be  demon- 
strated by  the  senses.

Ahankara  (&//^.).  The  conception  of  *'I,"  self-con- 
sciousness or  self-identity ;  the  ''I,"  or  egoistical  and  maya- 
vic  principle  in  man,  due  to  our  ignorance,  which  separates 
our  ''  I  "  from  the  Universal  One  Self,  Personality ;  ego- 
ism also.Ain  Suph  {Heb.),  The  ^'boundless''  or  "limitless" 
Deity  emanating  and  extending.  Ain  Suph  is  also  written 
En  Soph  and  Ain  Soph ;  for  no  one,  not  even  the  rabbis, 
is  quite  sure  of  their  vowxls.  In  the  religious  metaphysics 
of  the  old  Hebrew  philosophers  the  One  Principle  was  an 
abstraction  like  Farabrahman,  though  modern  Kabalists 
have  succeeded  by  mere  dint  of  sophistry  and  paradoxes 
in  making  a  ''  Supreme  God  "  of  it,  and  nothing  higher. 
But  with  the  early  Chaldean  Kabalists  Ain  Suph  was 
"  without  form  or  being,"  with  ''  no  hkeness  with  anything 
else."  (Franck's  Die  Kabbala^  p.  126.)  That  Ain  Suph 
has  never  been  considered  as  the  "creator"  is  proved  con- 
clusively by  the  fact  that  such  an  orthodox  Jew  as  Philo 
gives  the  name  of  "  creator  "  to  the  logos ^  who  stands  next 
the  "  Limitless  One  "  and  is  the  ''second  God."  "The  sec- 
ond God  is  in  its  [Ain  Suph's]  wisdom,"  says  Philo.  Deity 
is  No-T/img ;  it  is  nameless,  and  therefore  called  Ain  Suph 
— the  word  ain  meaning  nothing,     (See  also  Franck,  ibid,,

V-  I53-)

Alchemy  (in  Arabic  Ul-Khemi)  is,  as  the  name  sug- 
gests, the  chemistry  of  nature.  Ul-Khemi  or  Al-Kimia, 
however,  is  really  an  Arabianized  word,  taken  from  the 
Greek  X'^/^^^^^?  ^^om  X"f^^^»  ''  juice,"  extracted  from  a  plant.

GLOSSARY.  263GLOSSARY.  263

Alchemy  deals  with  the  finer  forces  of  Nature  and  the 
various  conditions  of  matter  in  which  they  are  found  to 
operate.  Seeking  under  the  veil  of  language  more  or  less 
artificial  to  convey  to  the  uninitiated  so  much  of  the  inys- 
terium  magnwn  as  is  safe  in  the  hands  of  a  selfish  world, 
the  Alchemist  postulates  as  his  first  principle  the  existence 
of  a  certain  universal  solve7it  in  the  homogeneous  substance 
from  which  the  elements  were  evolved,  which  substance 
he  calls  pure  gold,  or  siimrman  materice.  This  solvent,  also 
called  me7istruum  universale^  possesses  the  power  of  remov- 
ing all  the  seeds  of  disease  from  the  human  body,  of  re- 
newing youth  and  prolonging  life.  Such  is  the  lapis  phi- 
losophorum  (philosopher's  stone).  Alchemy  first  penetrated 
into  Europe  through  Geber,  the  great  Arabian  sage  and 
philosopher,  in  the  eighth  century  of  our  era;  but  it  was 
known  and  practised  long  ages  ago  in  China  and  Egypt. 
Numerous  papyri  on  Alchemy,  and  other  proofs  that  it 
was  the  favorite  study  of  kings  and  priests,  have  been  ex- 
humed, and  preserved  under  the  generic  name  of  Hermetic 
treatises.  Alchemy  is  studied  under  three  distinct  aspects, 
which  admit  of  many  different  interpretations,  viz.,  the  cos- 
mic, the  human,  and  the  terrestrial.These  three  methods  were  typified  under  the  three  al- 
chemical properties — sulphur,  mercury,  and  salt.  Differ- 
ent writers  have  stated  that  there  are  three,  seven,  ten,  and 
twelve  processes,  respectively ;  but  they  are  all  agreed  there 
is  but  one  object  in  Alchemy,  which  is  to  transmute  gross 
metals  into  pure  gold.  But  what  that  gold  really  is  very 
few  people  understand  correctly.  No  doubt  there  is  such 
a  thing  in  Nature  as  transmutation  of  the  baser  metal  into 
the  nobler;  but  this  is  only  one  aspect  of  Alchemy — the 
terrestrial  or  purely  material,  for  we  see  the  same  process 
taking  place  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth.  Yet,  besides  and 
beyond  this  interpretation,  there  is  in  Alchemy  a  symbol- 
ical  meaning,  purely   psychic  and   spiritual.     While  the

264  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.264  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

Kabalist-Alchemist  seeks  for  the  realization  of  the  former, 
the  Occultist- Alchemist,  spurm'ng  the  gold  of  the  earth,  gives 
all  his  attention  to,  and  directs  his  efforts  only  toward,  the 
transmutation  of  the  baser  quaternary  into  the  divine  upper 
trinity  of  man,  which,  when  finally  blended,  are  one.  The 
spiritual,  mental,  psychic,  and  physical  planes  of  human 
existence  are  in  Alchemy  compared  to  the  four  elements, 
fire,  air,  water,  and  earth,  and  are  each  capable  of  a  three- 
fold constitution,  i.e.,  fixed,  unstable,  and  volatile.  Little 
or  nothing  is  known  by  the  world  concerning  the  origin  of 
this  archaic  branch  of  philosophy ;  but  it  is  certain  that  it 
antedates  the  construction  of  any  known  zodiac,  and,  as 
dealing  with  the  personified  forces  of  Nature,  probably  also 
any  of  the  mythologies  of  the  world.  Nor  is  there  any 
doubt  that  the  true  secrets  of  transmutation  (on  the  physical 
plane)  were  known  in  days  of  old,  and  lost  before  the  dawn 
of  the  so-called  historical  period.  Modern  chemistry  owes 
its  best  fundamental  discoveries  to  Alchemy ;  but  regard- 
less of  the  undeniable  truism  of  the  latter  that  there  is  but 
one  element  in  the  universe,  chemistry^  placed  metals  in  the 
class  of  elements,  and  is  only  now  beginning  to  find  out 
its  gross  mistake.  Even  some  encyclopedists  are  forced  to 
confess  that  if  most  of  the  accounts  of  transmutation  are 
fraud  or  delusion,  ''  yet  some  of  them  are  accompanied  by 
testimony  which  reorders  them  probable.  By  means  of  the 
galvanic  battery  even  the  alkalis  have  been  discovered  to 
have  a  metallic  basis.  The  possibility  of  obtaining  metal 
from  other  substances  which  contain  the  ingredients  com- 
posing it,  of  changing  one  metal  i?ito  another,  ,  .  .  must 
therefore  be  left  undecided.  Nor  are  all  Alchemists  to  be 
considered  impostors.  Many  have  labored  under  the  con- 
viction of  obtaining  their  object  with  indefatigable  patience 
and  purity  of  heart,  which  is  soundly  recommended  by 
Alchemists  as  the  principal  requisite  for  the  success  of 
their  labors."GLOSSARY,  265

Alexandrian  Philosophers  (or  School).  This  famous 
school  arose  in  Alexandria  (Egypt),  which  was  for  long 
ages  a  seat  of  learning  and  philosophy.  It  was  famous  for 
its  library,  founded  by  Ptolemy  Soter  at  the  very  beginning 
of  his  reign  (Ptolemy  died  in  283  B.C.) — a  library  which 
once  boasted  seven  hundred  thousand  rolls  or  volumes 
(Aulus  Gellius) ;  for  its  museum,  the  first  real  academy  of 
sciences  and  arts ;  for  its  world-renowned  scholars,  such 
as  Euclid,  the  father  of  scientific  geometry,  Apollonius  of 
Perga,  the  author  of  the  still  extant  work  on  Conic  Sections, 
Nicomachus,  the  arithmetician ;  for  astronomers,  natiu-al 
philosophers,  anatomists  such  as  Herophilus  and  Erasis- 
tratus,  physicians,  musicians,  artists,  etc.  But  it  became 
still  more  famous  for  its  Eclectic  or  New-Platonic  school, 
founded  by  Ammonius  Saccas  in  173  a.d.,  whose  disciples 
were  Origen,  Plotinus,  and  many  other  men  now  famous 
in  history.  The  most  celebrated  schools  of  the  Gnostics 
had  their  origin  in  Alexandria.  Philo  Judaeus,  Josephus, 
lambhchus,  Porphyry,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Eratosthenes 
the  astronomer,  Hypatia  the  virgin  philosopher,  and  num- 
berless other  stars  of  second  magnitude,  all  belonged  at 
various  times  to  these  great  schools,  and  helped  to  make 
of  Alexandria  one  of  the  most  justly  renowned  seats  of 
learning  that  the  world  has  ever  produced.

Altruism.  From  alter ^  other.  A  quality  opposed  to 
egoism.  Actions  tending  to  do  good  to  others,  regardless 
of  self.Altruism.  From  alter ^  other.  A  quality  opposed  to 
egoism.  Actions  tending  to  do  good  to  others,  regardless 
of  self.

Ammonius  Saccas.  A  great  and  good  philosopher 
who  lived  in  Alexandria  between  the  second  and  third  cen- 
turies of  our  era,  the  founder  of  the  Neoplatonic  school  of 
the  Philaletheians  or  ''lovers  of  truth."  He  was  of  poor 
birth  and  bom  of  Christian  parents,  but  endowed  with  such 
prominent,  almost  divine  goodness  as  to  be  called  Theodi- 
daktos,  the  "  God-taught."  He  honored  that  which  was 
good  in  Christianity,  but  broke  with  it  and  the  churches  at

266  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

an  early  age,  being  unable  to  find  in  it  any  superiority  over 
the  old  religions.

Analogeticists.  The  disciples  of  Ammonius  Saccas, 
so  called  because  of  their  practice  of  interpreting  all  sacred 
legends,  myths,  and  mysteries  by  a  principle  of  analogy 
and  correspondence,  which  rule  is  now  found  in  the  Kaba- 
listic  system,  and  preeminently  so  in  the  schools  of  Esoteric 
Philosophy  in  the  East.  (See  ''The  Twelve  Signs  of  the 
Zodiac,'*  by  T.  Subba  Row,  in  Five  Years  of  Theosophy,)

Ananda  {Sans!).  Bliss,  joy,  felicity,  happiness.  The 
name  of  a  favorite  disciple  of  Gautama,  the  Lord  Buddha.Ananda  {Sans!).  Bliss,  joy,  felicity,  happiness.  The 
name  of  a  favorite  disciple  of  Gautama,  the  Lord  Buddha.

Anaxagoras.  A  famous  Ionian  philosopher  who  lived 
500  B.C.,  studied  philosophy  under  Anaximenes  of  Miletus, 
and  settled,  in  the  days  of  Pericles,  at  Athens.  Socrates, 
Euripides,  Archelaus,  and  other  distinguished  men  and 
philosophers  were  among  his  disciples  and  pupils.  He  was 
a  most  learned  astronomer,  and  was  one  of  the  first  to  ex- 
plain openly  that  which  was  taught  secretly  by  Pythagoras, 
viz.,  the  movements  of  the  planets,  the  eclipses  of  the  sun 
and  moon,  etc.  It  was  he  who  taught  the  theory  of  chaos, 
on  the  principle  that  ''nothing  comes  from  nothing"  (ex 
nihilo  nihil  fit)  \  and  of  atoms  as  the  underlying  essence 
and  substance  of  all  bodies,  "  of  the  same  nature  as  the 
bodies  which  they  formed."  These  atoms,  he  taught,  were 
primarily  put  in  motion  by  nous  (universal  intelligence,  the 
mahat  of  the  Hindus),  which  nous  is  an  immaterial,  eternal, 
spiritual  entity ;  by  this  combination  the  world  was  formed, 
the  material  gross  bodies  sinking  down,  and  the  ethereal 
atoms  (or  fiery  ether)  rising  and  spreading  in  the  upper 
celestial  regions.  Antedating  modern  science  by  over  two 
thousand  years,  he  taught  that  the  stars  were  of  the  same 
material  as  our  earth,  and  the  sun  a  glowing  mass;  that 
the  moon  was  a  dark,  uninhabitable  body,  receiving  its  hght 
from  the  sun;  and  beyond  the  aforesaid  science  he  con- 
fessed himself  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  real  existence

GLOSSARY.  267

of  things  perceived  by  our  senses  could  not  be  demonstrably 
proved.  He  died  in  exile  at  Lampsacus,  at  the  age  of 
seventy-two.GLOSSARY.  267

of  things  perceived  by  our  senses  could  not  be  demonstrably 
proved.  He  died  in  exile  at  Lampsacus,  at  the  age  of 
seventy-two.

Anima  Mundi  {Lat).  The  ''soul  of  the  world,"  the 
same  as  the  dlaya  of  the  Northern  Buddhists ;  the  divine 
essence  which  pervades,  permeates,  animates,  and  informs 
all  things,  from  the  smallest  atom  of  matter  to  man  and 
god.  It  is  in  a  sense  "  the  seven-skinned  Mother  "  of  the 
stanzas  in  The  Secret  Doctrine ;  the  essence  of  seven  planes 
of  sentiency,  consciousness,  and  differentiation,  both  moral 
and  physical.  In  its  highest  aspect  it  is  nirvana ;  in  its 
lowest,  the  astral  light.  It  was  feminine  with  the  Gnos- 
tics, the  early  Christians,  and  the  Nazarenes ;  bisexual  with 
other  sects,  who  considered  it  only  in  its  four  lower  planes, 
of  igneous  and  ethereal  nature  in  the  objective  world  of 
forms,  and  divine  and  spiritual  in  its  three  higher  planes. 
When  it  is  said  that  every  human  soul  was  born  by  detach- 
ing itself  from  the  a7ii??ia  mundi,  it  is  meant,  esoterically, 
that  our  higher  Egos  are  of  an  essence  identical  with  //, 
and  that  mahat  is  a  radiation  of  the  ever  unknown  universal 
Absolute.

Anoia  {Gr.\  *' Want  of  understanding,'*  ''folly.''  The 
term  applied  by  Plato  and  others  to  the  lower  Manas 
when  too  closely  allied  with  Kama,  which  is  characterized 
by  irrationality  {anoia).  The  Greek  anoia  or  ag?ioia  is  evi- 
dently a  derivative  of  the  Sanskrit  ajiidna  (phonetically, 
agnydna),  or  ignorance,  irrationality,  and  absence  of  know- 
ledge.

Anthropomorphism.  From  the  Greek  anthropos^ 
man.  The  act  of  endowing  God  or  the  gods  with  a  human 
form  and  human  attributes  or  quaHties.Anthropomorphism.  From  the  Greek  anthropos^ 
man.  The  act  of  endowing  God  or  the  gods  with  a  human 
form  and  human  attributes  or  quaHties.

Anugita  i^Sans,),  A  Upanishad,  using  the  term  in  a 
general  sense.  One  of  the  philosophical  treatises  in  the 
Mahdbhdrata,  the  great  Indian  epic.  A  very  occult  treatise. 
It  is  translated  in  "  The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East "  series.

268  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

Apollo  Belvedere.  Of  all  the  ancient  statues  of  Apollo 
— the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Latona,  called  Phoebus,  Helios, 
the  Radiant,  and  the  Sun — the  best  and  most  perfect  is  that 
of  this  name,  which  is  in  the  Belvedere  Gallery  in  the  Vati- 
can at  Rome.  It  is  called  the  Pythian  Apollo,  as  the  god 
is  represented  in  the  moment  of  his  victory  over  the  serpent 
Python.     The  statue  was  found  in  the  ruins  of  Antium  in

1503-1503-

Apollonius  of  Tyana.  A  wonderful  philosopher  bom 
in  Cappadocia  about  the  beginning  of  the  first  century ;  an 
ardent  Pythagorean,  who  studied  the  Phenician  sciences 
under  Euthydemus,  and  Pythagorean  philosophy  and  other 
subjects  under  Euxenus  of  Heraclea.  According  to  the 
tenets  of  the  Pythagorean  school,  he  remained  a  vegetarian 
the  whole  of  his  long  life,  ate  only  fruit  and  herbs,  drank 
no  wine,  wore  vestments  made  only  of  plant-fibers,  walked 
barefooted,  and  let  his  hair  grow  to  the  full  length,  as  all 
the  Initiates  have  done  before  and  after  him.  He  was  initi- 
ated by  the  priests  of  the  temple  of  ^sculapius  (Asklepios) 
at  ^gae,  and  learned  many  of  the  '^  miracles  "  for  healing 
the  sick  wrought  by  the  god  of  medicine.  Having  prepared 
himself  for  a  higher  initiation  by  a  silence  of  five  years,  and 
by  travel — visiting  Antioch,  Ephesus,  and  Pamphylia,  and 
other  parts — he  repaired  via  Babylon  to  India,  alone,  all 
his  disciples  having  abandoned  him,  as  they  feared  to  go 
to  the  ''land  of  enchantments."  A  casual  disciple,  Damis, 
whom  he  met  on  the  way,  accompanied  him,  however,  on 
his  travels.  At  Babylon  he  was  initiated  by  the  Chaldees 
and  Magi,  according  to  Damis,  whose  narrative  was  copied 
by  one  named  Philostratus  one  hundred  years  later.*  After 
his  return  from  India  he  showed  himself  a  true  Initiate  in 
that  the  pestilence,  earthquakes,  deaths  of  kings,  and  other 
events  which  he  prophesied,  duly  happened.

At  Lesbos  the  priests  of  Orpheus  became  jealous  of  him 
and  refused  to  initiate  him  into  their  peculiar  mysteries,

GLOSSARY.  269At  Lesbos  the  priests  of  Orpheus  became  jealous  of  him 
and  refused  to  initiate  him  into  their  peculiar  mysteries,

GLOSSARY.  269

though  they  did  so  several  years  later.  He  preached  to  the 
people  of  Athens  and  other  states  the  purest  and  noblest 
ethics,  and  the  phenomena  he  produced  were  as  wonderful 
as  they  were  numerous  and  well  authenticated.  "  How  is 
it,"  inquires  Justin  Martyr,  in  dismay — "  how  is  it  that  the 
talismans  {telesmata)  of  Apollonius  have  power? — for  they 
prevent,  as  we  see,  the  fury  of  the  waves,  and  the  violence 
of  the  winds,  and  the  attacks  of  wild  beasts;  and  while 
our  Lord's  miracles  are  preserved  by  tradition  alone,  those  of 
Apollonius  are  most  numerous,  and  actually  maytifested  in 
present  facts  ?  ^'  [Quest.,  xxiv.)  But  an  answer  is  easily 
found  to  this  in  the  fact  that,  after  crossing  the  Hindu- 
Koosh,  Apollonius  had  been  directed  by  a  king  to  the 
abode  of  the  sages,  whose  abode  it  may  be  to  this  day,  and 
who  taught  him  their  unsurpassed  knowledge.  His  dia- 
logues with  the  Corinthian  Menippus  give  us  truly  the  eso- 
teric catechism,  and  disclose  (when  understood)  many  an 
important  mystery  of  Nature.  Apollonius  was  the  friend, 
correspondent,  and  guest  of  kings  and  queens,  and  no 
wonderful  or  '* magic"  powers  are  better  attested  than  his. 
Toward  the  close  of  his  long  and  wonderful  Hfe  he  opened 
an  esoteric  school  at  Ephesus,  and  died  at  the  ripe  old  age 
of  one  hundred  years.

Archangel.  Highest,  supreme  angel.  From  the  two 
Greek  words,  arch,  first,  and  angelos,  messenger.Archangel.  Highest,  supreme  angel.  From  the  two 
Greek  words,  arch,  first,  and  angelos,  messenger.

Arhat  {Sans.).  Also  pronounced  and  written  ardhat, 
arhan,  rahat,  etc.  The  '^  worthy  one  "  ;  a  perfected  drya; 
one  exempt  from  reincarnation,  ''deserving  divine  honors." 
This  was  the  name  first  given  to  the  Jain,  and  subsequently 
to  the  Buddhist  holy  men  initiated  into  the  esoteric  mys- 
teries. The  Arhat  is  one  who  has  entered  the  last  and  high- 
est path,  and  is  thus  emancipated  from  rebirth.

Arians.  The  followers  of  Arius,  a  presbyter  of  the 
church  in  Alexandria  in  the  fourth  century.  One  who 
holds  that  Christ  is  a  created  and  human  being,  inferior  to

270  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

God  the  Father,  though  a  grand  and  noble  man,  a  true 
Adept,  versed  in  all  the  divine  mysteries.

Aristobulus.  An  Alexandrian  writer  and  an  obscure 
philosopher.  A  Jew  who  tried  to  prove  that  Aristotle  ex- 
plained the  esoteric  thoughts  of  Moses.

Aryan.  Lit.,  ''  the  holy."  Those  who  had  mastered 
the  *' noble  truths"  [drya-satydni)  and  entered  the  "noble 
path**  \arya-7ndrga)  to  nirvd7ta  or  moksha,  the  great  "four- 
fold "  path.  They  were  originally  known  as  Rishis ;  but 
now  the  name  has  become  the  epithet  of  a  race,  and  our 
Orientahsts,  depriving  the  Hindu  Brahmans  of  their  birth- 
right, have  made  Aryans  of  all  Europeans.  Since,  in  eso- 
tericism,  the  four  paths  or  stages  can  only  be  entered  through 
great  spiritual  development  and  "  growth  in  hoUness,"  they 
are  called  the  drya-77idrga.  The  degrees  of  arhatship,  called 
respectively  srotdpatti,  sakriddgdmin^  andgdmin^  and  arhat, 
or  the  four  classes  of  Aryas,  correspond  to  the  four  paths 
and  truths.Aspect.  The  form  (rupd)  under  which  any  principle  in 
septenary  man  or  Nature  manifests  is  called  an  aspect  of 
that  principle  in  Theosophy.

Astral  Body.  The  ethereal  counterpart  or  double  of 
any  physical  body — doppelgdnger.

Astrology.  The  science  which  defines  the  action  of 
celestial  bodies  upon  mundane  affairs,  and  claims  to  fore- 
tell futiure  events  from  the  positions  of  the  stars.  Its  antiq- 
uity is  such  as  to  place  it  among  the  very  earliest  records 
of  human  learning.  It  remained  for  long  ages  a  secret  sci- 
ence in  the  East,  and  its  final  expression  remains  so  to  this 
day,  its  exoteric  appHcation  only  having  been  brought  to 
any  degree  of  perfection  in  the  West  during  the  lapse  of 
time  since  Varaha  Mihira  wrote  his  book  on  Astrology, 
some  fourteen  hundred  years  ago.  Claudius  Ptolemy,  the 
famous  geographer  and  mathematician  who  founded  the 
system  of  astronomy  known  under  his  name,  wrote  his

GLOSSARY.  271GLOSSARY.  271

Tetrabiblos,  which  is  still  the  basis  of  modern  Astrology, 
A.D.  135.  The  science  of  horoscopy  is  studied  now  chiefly 
under  four  heads,  viz. :  ( i )  Mtmdane,  in  its  application  to 
meteorology,  seismology,  husbandry.  (2)  State  or  Civic,  in 
regard  to  the  future  of  nations,  kings,  and  rulers.  (3)  Ho- 
rary, in  reference  to  the  solving  of  doubts  arising  in  the 
mind  upon  any  subject.  (4)  Geiiethliacal,  in  connection 
with  the  future  of  individuals  from  birth  unto  death.  The 
Egyptians  and  the  Chaldees  were  among  the  most  ancient 
votaries  of  Astrology,  though  their  modes  of  reading  the 
stars  and  the  modern  methods  differ  considerably.  The 
former  claimed  that  Belus,  the  Bel  or  Elu  of  the  Chaldees, 
a  scion  of  the  Divine  Dynasty,  or  the  dynasty  of  the  King- 
gods,  had  belonged  to  the  land  of  Chemi,  and  had  left  it  to 
found  a  colony  from  Egypt  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates, 
where  a  temple,  ministered  by  priests  in  the  service  of  the 
''  lords  of  the  stars,"  was  built.  As  to  the  origin  of  the  sci- 
ence, it  is  known,  on  the  one  hand,  that  Thebes  claimed  the 
honor  of  the  invention  of  Astrology,  whereas,  on  the  other 
hand,  all  are  agreed  that  it  was  the  Chaldees  who  taught 
that  science  to  the  other  nations.  Now  Thebes  antedated 
considerably  not  only  '*  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,"  but  also 
Nipur,  where  Bel  was  first  worshiped — Sin,  his  son  (the 
moon),  being  the  presiding  deity  of  Ur,  the  land  of  the 
nativity  of  Terah,  the  Sabean  and  astrolater,  and  of  Abram, 
his  son,  the  great  astrologer  of  bibhcal  tradition.  All  tends, 
therefore,  to  corroborate  the  Egyptian  claim.  If  later  on 
the  name  of  astrologer  fell  into  disrepute  in  Rome  and  else- 
where, it  was  owing  to  the  frauds  of  those  who  wanted  to 
make  money  of  that  which  was  part  and  parcel  of  the  sacred 
science  of  the  Mysteries,  and  who,  ignorant  of  the  latter, 
evolved  a  system  based  entirely  on  mathematics,  instead  of 
on  transcendental  metaphysics  with  the  physical  celestial 
bodies  as  its  upadhi  or  material  basis.  Yet,  all  persecutions 
notwithstanding,  the   number  of   adherents    to  Astrology272  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

among  the  most  intellectual  and  scientific  minds  was  al- 
ways very  great.  If  Cardan  and  Kepler  were  among  its 
ardent  supporters,  then  later  votaries  have  nothing  to  blush 
for,  even  in  its  now  imperfect  and  distorted  form.  As  said 
in  Isis  Ufiveiled  (i.,  259) :  ''  Astrology  is  to  exact  astronomy 
what  psychology  is  to  exact  physiology.  In  astrology  and 
psychology  one  has  to  step  beyond  the  visible  world  of 
matter  and  enter  into  the  domain  of  transcendent  spirit."

Athenagoras.  A  Platonic  philosopher  of  Athens  who 
wrote  An  Apology  for  the  Christia?is^  in  a.d.  177,  addressed 
to  Marcus  Aurelius,  to  prove  that  the  accusations  brought 
against  them — viz.,  that  they  were  incestuous  and  ate  mur- 
dered children — were  untrue.

-A.  ^

Atman,  or  Atma  [Sans,),  The  universal  spirit,  the  divme 
monad,  the  seventh  ''principle,"  so  called,  in  the  exoteric 
septenary  classification  of  man.     The  supreme  soul.

Aura  {Gr,  and  Lat),  A  subtle,  invisible  essence  or  fluid 
that  emanates  from  human,  animal,  and  other  bodies.  It 
is  a  psychic  effluvium  partaking  of  both  the  mind  and  the 
body,  as  there  is  both  an  electrovital  and  at  the  same  time 
an  electromental  aura ;  called  in  Theosophy  the  akashic  or 
magnetic  aura.     In  Roman  Catholic  martyrology,  a  saint.

Avatara(*S^;^i'.).  Divine  incarnation.  The  descent  of 
a  god,  or  some  exalted  being  who  has  progressed  beyond 
the  necessity  for  rebirth,  into  the  body  of  a  simple  mortal. 
Krishna  was  an  avatdra  of  Vishnu.  The  Dalai- Lama  is 
regarded  as  an  avatdra  of  Avalokiteshvara,  and  the  Teschu- 
Lama  as  one  of  Tson-kha-pa,  or  Amitabha.  There  are  two 
kinds  of  avatdras,  one  born  from  woman  and  the  other 
"  parentless  " — a?iupddaka.Be-ness.     A  term  coined  by  Theosophists  to  render 
more  accurately  the  essential  meaning  of  the  untranslatable

GLOSSARY,  273

word  sat.  The  latter  word  does  not  mean  "  being,"  for  the 
term  "being"  presupposes  a  sentient  consciousness  of  exis- 
tence. But  as  the  term  sat  is  applied  solely  to  the  absolute 
principle,  that  universal,  unknown,  and  ever  unknowable 
principle  which  philosophical  pantheism  postulates,  caUing 
it  the  basic  root  of  cosmos  and  cosmos  itself,  it  could  not 
be  translated  by  the  simple  term  ''being."  Sat^  indeed,  is 
not  even,  as  translated  by  some  Orientalists,  the  ''incom- 
prehensible entity " ;  for  it  is  no  more  an  entity  than  a 
non-entity,  but  both.  It  is,  as  said,  absolute  be-ness,  not 
"being";  the  one  secondless,  undivided,  and  indivisible 
all ;  the  root  of  Nature  both  visible  and  invisible,  objective 
and  subjective,  comprehensible  and  never  to  be  fully  com- 
prehended.

Bhagavad^Qita  [Sans.).  Lit.,  the  "  Lord's  Song."  A 
portion  of  the  Mahabhdrata^  the  great  epic  poem  of  India. 
It  contains  a  dialogue  wherein  Krishna — the  "  charioteer  " 
— and  Arjuna,  his  cheld^  have  a  discussion  upon  the  high- 
est spiritual  philosophy.  The  work  is  preeminently  occult 
or  esoteric.

Black  Magic.  Sorcery,  necromancy,  or  the  raising  of 
the  dead  and  other  selfish  abuses  of  abnormal  powers.  This 
abuse  may  be  unintentional;  still  it  has  to  remain  "black" 
magic  whenever  anything  is  produced  phenomenally  simply 
for  one's  own  gratification.Bohme,  Jakob.  A  mystic  and  great  philosopher,  one 
of  the  most  prominent  Theosophists  of  the  medieval  ages. 
He  was  born  about  1575  at  Old  Diedenberg,  some  two 
miles  from  Gorlitz  (Silesia),  and  died  in  1624,  at  the  age  of 
nearly  fifty.  When  a  boy  he  was  a  common  shepherd,  and, 
after  learning  to  read  and  write  in  a  village  school,  became 
an  apprentice  to  a  poor  shoemaker  at  Gorlitz.  He  was  a 
natural  clairvoyant  of  the  most  wonderful  power.  With 
no  education  or  acquaintance  with  science  he  wrote  works 
which  are  now  proved  to  be  full  of  scientific  truths;  but

274  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,274  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

these,  as  he  himself  says  of  what  he  wrote,  he  '^  saw  as  in 
a  great  deep  in  the  eternal."  He  had  ''a  thorough  view  of 
the  universe,  as  in  chaos,"  which  yet  opened  itself  in  him, 
from  time  to  time,  "as  in  a  young  planet,"  he  says.  He 
was  a  thorough-born  mystic,  and  evidently  of  a  constitution 
which  is  most  rare ;  one  of  those  fine  natures  whose  mate- 
rial envelope  impedes  in  no  way  the  direct,  even  if  only 
occasional,  intercommunication  between  the  intellectual  and 
spiritual  Ego.  It  is  this  Ego  which  Jakob  Bohme,  as  so 
many  other  untrained  mystics,  mistook  for  God.  "  Man 
must  acknowledge,"  he  writes,  ''  that  his  knowledge  is  not 
his  own,  but  from  God,  who  manifests  the  ideas  of  wisdom 
to  the  soul  of  man  in  what  measure  he  pleases T  Had  this 
great  Theosophist  been  bom  three  hundred  years  later  he 
might  have  expressed  it  otherwise.  He  would  have  known 
that  the  "  God  "  who  spoke  through  his  poor  uncultured 
and  untrained  brain  was  his  own  divine  Ego,  the  omniscient 
deity  within  himself,  and  that  what  that  deity  gave  out 
was  not  ''  what  measure  he  pleased,"  but  in  the  measure 
of  the  capacities  of  the  mortal  and  temporary  dwelling  It 
informed.

Book  of  the  Keys.  An  ancient  Kabalistic  work.  The 
original  is  no  longer  extant,  though  there  may  be  spurious 
or  disfigured  copies  or  forgeries  of  it.Book  of  the  Keys.  An  ancient  Kabalistic  work.  The 
original  is  no  longer  extant,  though  there  may  be  spurious 
or  disfigured  copies  or  forgeries  of  it.

Brahma  i^Sans.).  The  student  must  distinguish  between 
the  neuter  Brahma  and  the  male  "creator'*  of  the  Indian 
Pantheon,  Brahma.  The  former  Brahma  or  Brahman  is 
the  impersonal,  supreme,  and  uncognizable  soul  of  the  uni- 
verse, from  the  essence  of  which  all  emanates,  and  into 
which  all  returns  ;  which  is  incorporeal,  immaterial,  unborn, 
eternal,  beginningless,  and  endless.  It  is  all-pervading, 
animating  the  highest  god  as  well  as  the  smallest  mineral 
atom.  Brahma,  on  the  other  hand,  the  male  and  the 
alleged  "creator,"  exists  in  his  manifestation  periodically 
only,  and  passes  vi\\o  pralaya — i.e.,  disappears  and  is  anni- 
hilated— as  periodically.

GLOSSARY.  275

Brahma's  Day.  A  period  of  4,320,000,000  years,  dur- 
ing which  Brahma,  having  emerged  out  of  his  Golden  Egg 
{hiranya-garbha),  creates  and  fashions  the  material  world 
(for  he  is  simply  the  fertilizing  and  creative  force  in  Nature). 
After  this  period,  the  worlds  being  destroyed  in  turn  by  fire  and 
water,  he  vanishes  with  objective  Nature  ;  and  then  comes

Brahma's  Night.  A  period  of  equal  duration,  in  which 
Brahma  is  said  to  be  asleep.  Upon  awakening  he  recom- 
mences the  process,  and  this  goes  on  for  an  Age  of  Brahma, 
composed  of  alternate  ''  Days  "  and  "  Nights,"  and  lasting 
for  100  years  of  3,110,400,000,000  solar  years  each.  It 
requires  fifteen  figures  to  express  the  duration  of  such  an 
age,  after  the  expiration  of  which  the  mahdpralaya  or  Great 
Dissolution  sets  in,  and  lasts  in  its  turn  for  the  same  space  of 
fifteen  figures.Brahma=Vidya  [Sa7is.).  The  knowledge  or  esoteric 
science  about  the  true  nature  of  the  two  Brahmas  (Brahma 
and  Brahma).

Buddha  {Sans).  ''The  Enlightened."  Generally  known 
as  the  title  of  Gautama  Buddha,  the  Prince  of  Kapilavastu, 
the  founder  of  modern  Buddhism.  The  highest  degree  of 
knowledge  and  holiness.  To  become  a  Buddha  one  has 
to  break  through  the  bondage  of  sense  and  personaKty ;  to 
acquire  a  complete  perception  of  the  real  Self^  and  learn 
not  to  separate  it  from  all  the  other  selves ;  to  learn  by  ex- 
perience the  utter  unreality  of  all  phenomena,  foremost  of 
all  the  visible  cosmos ;  to  attain  a  complete  detachment 
from  all  that  is  evanescent  and  finite,  and  to  live  while  yet 
on  earth  only  in  the  immortal  and  everlasting.

Buddhi  [Sans.).  Universal  soul  or  mind.  Mahdbuddhi 
is  a  name  of  mahat ;  also  the  spiritual  soul  in  man  (the  sixth 
principle,  exoterically),  the  vehicle  of  Atma  (the  seventh, 
according  to  the  exoteric  enumeration).

Buddhism  is  the  religious  philosophy  taught  by  Gautama 
Buddha.  It  is  now  split  into  two  distinct  churches,  the 
Southern  and  Northern.    The  former  is  said  to  be  the  purer,

276  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.276  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

as  having  preserved  more  religiously  the  original  teachings 
of  the  Lord  Buddha.  The  Northern  Buddhism  is  confined 
to  Tibet,  China,  and  Nepaul.  But  this  distinction  is  incor- 
rect. If  the  Southern  Chiu-ch  is  nearer,  and  has  not,  in 
fact,  departed — except,  perhaps,  in  trifling  dogmas,  due  to 
the  many  councils  held  after  the  death  of  the  Master — from 
the  public  or  exoteric  teachings  of  Shaky amuni,  the  North- 
ern Church  is  the  outcome  of  Siddhartha  Buddha's  esoteric 
teachings,  which  he  confined  to  his  elect  Bhikshus  and 
Arhats.  Buddhism,  in  fact,  cannot  be  justly  judged  in  our 
age  either  by  one  or  the  other  of  its  exoteric  popular  forms. 
Real  Buddhism  can  be  appreciated  only  by  blending  the 
philosophy  of  the  Southern  Church  and  the  metaphysics  of 
the  Northern  schools.  If  one  seems  too  iconoclastic  and 
stern,  and  the  other  too  metaphysical  and  transcendental, 
even  to  being  overcharged  with  the  weeds  of  Indian  exoteri- 
cism — many  of  the  gods  of  its  Pantheon  having  been  trans- 
planted under  new  names  into  Tibetan  soil — it  is  due  to  the 
popular  expression  of  Buddhism  in  both  churches.  Corre- 
spondentially  they  stand  in  their  relation  to  each  other  as 
Protestantism  to  Roman  Catholicism.  Both  err  by  an  ex- 
cess of  zeal  and  erroneous  interpretations,  though  neither 
the  Southern  nor  the  Northern  Buddhist  clergy  have  ever 
departed  from  truth  consciously ;  still  less  have  they  acted 
under  the  dictates  oi  priestocracy ^  ambition,  or  an  eye  to  per- 
sonal gain  and  power,  as  the  later  churches  have.BuddhuTaijasa  [Sans,).  A  very  mystic  term,  capable 
of  several  interpretations.  In  Occultism,  however,  and  in 
relation  to  the  human  ''principles"  (exoterically),  it  is  a  term 
to  express  the  state  of  our  dual  Manas,  when,  reunited  during 
a  man's  life,  it  bathes  in  the  radiance  of  Buddhi,  the  spir- 
itual soul.  For  Taijasa  means  ''  the  radiant "  ;  and  Manas, 
becoming  radiant  in  consequence  of  its  union  with  Buddhi, 
and  being,  so  to  speak,  merged  into  it,  is  identified  with 
the  latter ;  the  trinity  has  become  one  ;  and,  as  the  element

GLOSSARY.  277

of  Buddhi  is  the  highest,  it  becomes  Buddhi-Taijasa.  In 
short,  it  is  the  human  soul  illuminated  by  the  radiance  of 
the  divine  soul,  the  human  reason  lit  by  the  Ught  of  the 
spirit  or  divine  SELF-consciousness.

Caste.  Originally  the  system  of  the  four  hereditary 
classes  into  which  the  Indian  population  was  divided: 
Brahman,  Kshatriya,  Vaishya,  and  Shudra — [a)  descen- 
dants of  Brahma;  (p)  warrior;  (c)  mercantile;  and  {d)  the 
lowest  or  agricultural  class.  From  these  four  hundreds  of 
divisions  and  minor  castes  have  sprung.

Causal  Body.  This  ''body,"  which  is  in  reahty  no 
body  at  all,  either  objective  or  subjective,  but  Buddhi,  the 
spiritual  soul,  is  so  called  because  it  is  the  direct  cause  of 
the  sushupti  state,  leading  to  the  turiya  state,  the  highest 
state  of  samddhi.  It  is  called  kdranopddhi,  "the  basis  of 
the  cause,"  by  the  Taraka  Raja  Yogis,  which  in  the  Vedanta 
system  corresponds  to  both  the  vijndna7naya  and  dnanda- 
maya  kasha  (the  latter  coming  next  to  Atma,  and  therefore 
being  the  vehicle  of  the  universal  spirit).  Buddhi  alone 
could  not  be  called  a  "causal  body,"  but  becomes  one  in 
conjunction  with  Manas,  the  incarnating  entity  or  Ego.Chela  {Hindi).  A  disciple.  The  pupil  of  a  Guru  or 
sage ;  the  follower  of  some  Adept  or  school  of  philosophy.

Chrestos  (Gr.).  The  early  Gnostic  term  for  Christ. 
This  technical  term  was  used  in  the  fifth  century  b>c.  by 
^schylus,  Herodotus,  and  others.  The  77ianteumata  pytho- 
cresfa,  or  the  "oracles  delivered  by  a  Pythian  god"  through 
a  pythoness,  are  mentioned  by  the  former  [Choeph.,  9oi)> 
and  pythocrestos  is  derived  from  chrao.  Chr'esteiion  is  not 
only  the  "  test  of  an  oracle,"  but  an  offering  to,  or  for,  the 
oracle.  Chrestes  is  one  who  explains  oracles,  a  "prophet 
and  soothsayer,"  and  Chresterios^  one  who  serves  an  oracle

278  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,278  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

or  a  god.  The  earliest  Christian  writer,  Justin  Martyr,  in 
his  first  Apology^  calls  his  coreligionists  Chrestians.  "It  is 
only  through  ignorance  that  men  call  themselves  Christians, 
instead  of  Chrestians,"  says  Lactantius  (hb.  iv.,  cap.  vii.). 
The  terms  Christ  and  Christians,  spelled  originally  Chrest 
and  Chrestians,  were  borrowed  from  the  temple  vocabulary 
of  the  pagans.  Chrestos  meant,  in  that  vocabulary,  "a  dis- 
ciple on  probation,"  a  candidate  for  hierophantship ;  who, 
when  he  had  attained  it,  through  initiation,  long  trials,  and 
suffering,  and  had  been  anointed  (i.e.,  ''rubbed  with  oil,'*  as 
Initiates  and  even  idols  of  the  gods  were,  as  the  last  touch 
of  ritualistic  observance),  was  changed  into  Christos — the 
'*  purified"  in  esoteric  or  mystery  language.  In  mystic  sym- 
bology,  indeed,  Christes  or  Christos  meant  that  the  *'  way," 
the  ''path,"  was  already  trodden  and  the  goal  reached; 
when  the  fruits  of  this  arduous  labor — uniting  Ha^  person- 
ality of  evanescent  clay  with  the  indestructible  individuality 
— transformed  it  thereby  into  the  immortal  Ego.  "At  the 
end  of  the  way  stands  the  Christes,"  the  Purifier ;  and,  the 
union  once  accomplished,  the  Chrestos,  the  "  man  of  sor- 
row," became  Christos  himself.  Paul,  the  Initiate,  knew 
this,  and  meant  this  precisely  when  he  is  made  to  say  in  bad 
translation,  "I  travail  in  birth  again  until  Christ  be  formed 
in  you"  (Gal.  iv.  19),  the  true  rendering  of  which  is,  "until 
you  form  the  Christos  within  yourselves."  But  the  profane, 
who  knew  only  that  Chrestos  was  in  some  way  connected 
with  priest  and  prophet,  and  knew  nothing  about  the  hid- 
den meaning  of  Christos,  insisted,  as  did  Lactantius  and 
Justin  Martyr,  on  being  called  Chrestians  instead  of  Chris- 
tians. Every  good  individual,  therefore,  may  find  Christ 
in  his  "inner  man,"  as  Paul  expresses  it  (Eph.  iii.  16,  17), 
whether  he  be  Jew,  Mussulman,  Hindu,  or  Christian.Christ.     See  "  Chrestos."

Christian  Scientist.  A  newly  coined  term  for  denot- 
ing the  practitioners  of  a  healing  art  by  will.    The  name  is

GLOSSARV,  279

a  misnomer,  since  Buddhist  or  Jew,  Hindu  or  materialist, 
can  practise  this  new  form  of  ''Western  Yoga"  with  equal 
success  if  he  can  only  guide  and  control  his  will  with  suffi- 
cient firmness.  The  ''Mental  Scientists"  are  another  rival 
school.  These  work  by  a  universal  denial  of  every  disease 
and  evil  imaginable,  and  claim,  syllogistically,  that  since 
universal  spirit  cannot  be  subject  to  the  ailings  of  flesh,  and 
since  every  atom  is  spirit  and  in  spirit,  and  since,  finally, 
they — the  healers  and  the  healed — are  all  absorbed  in  this 
spirit  or  deity,  there  is  not,  nor  can  there  be,  such  a  thing 
as  disease.  This  prevents  in  no  wise  both  Christian  and 
Mental  Scientists  from  succumbing  to  disease  and  nursing 
clironic  ailments  for  years  in  their  own  bodies  just  hke 
other  ordinary  mortals.

Clairaudience.  The  faculty — whether  innate  or  ac- 
quired by  occult  training — of  hearing  things  at  whatever 
distance.

Clairvoyance.  The  faculty  of  seeing  with  the  inner  eye, 
or  spiritual  sight.  As  now  used,  it  is  a  loose  and  flippant 
term,  embracing  under  its  meaning  both  a  happy  guess  due 
to  natural  shrewdness  or  intuition,  and  also  that  faculty 
which  was  so  remarkably  exercised  by  Jakob  Bohme  and 
Swedenborg.  Yet  even  these  two  great  seers,  since  they 
could  never  rise  superior  to  the  general  spirit  of  the  Jew- 
ish Bible  and  sectarian  teachings,  have  sadly  confused  what 
they  saw,  and  fallen  far  short  of  true  clairvoyance.Clemens  Alexandrinus.  A  church  father  and  volu- 
minous writer,  who  had  been  a  Neoplatonist  and  a  disciple 
of  Ammonius  Saccas.  He  was  one  of  the  few  Christian 
philosophers  between  the  second  and  third  centuries  of  our 
era  at  Alexandria.

College  of  Rabbis.  A  college  at  Babylon,  most  famous 
during  the  early  centuries  of  Christianity ;  but  its  glory  was 
greatly  darkened  by  the  appearance  in  Alexandria  of  Hel- 
lenic teachers,  such  as  Philo  Judaeus,  Josephus,  Aristobulus,

280  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

and  others.  The  former  avenged  themselves  on  their  suc- 
cessful rivals  by  speaking  of  the  Alexandrians  as  Theurgists 
and  unclean  prophets.  But  the  Alexandrian  believers  in 
thaumaturgy  were  not  regarded  as  sinners  and  impostors 
when  orthodox  Jews  were  at  the  head  of  such  schools  of 
'*  Hazim."  These  were  colleges  for  teaching  prophecy  and 
occult  sciences.  Samuel  was  the  chief  of  such  a  college  at 
Ramah ;  EHsha  at  Jericho.  Hillel  had  a  regular  academy 
for  prophets  and  seers;  and  it  is  Hillel,  a  pupil  of  the 
Babylonian  college,  who  was  the  founder  of  the  sect  of 
the  Pharisees  and  the  great  orthodox  rabbis.Cycle  {Gr.).  From  kuklos.  The  ancients  divided  time 
into  endless  cycles,  wheels  within  wheels,  all  such  periods 
being  of  various  duration,  and  each  marking  the  beginning 
or  end  of  some  event,  either  cosmic,  mundane,  physical,  or 
metaphysical.  There  were  cycles  of  only  a  few  years,  and 
cycles  of  immense  duration.  The  great  Orphic  cycle,  re- 
ferring to  the  ethnological  change  of  races,  lasted  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  thousand  years,  and  that  of  Cassandrus 
one  hundred  and  thirty-six  thousand.  The  latter  brought 
about  a  complete  change  in  planetary  influences  and  their 
correlations  between  men  and  gods — a  fact  entirely  lost  sight 
of  by  modern  astrologers.

D.

Deist.  One  who  admits  the  possibility  of  the  existence 
of  a  God  or  gods,  but  claims  to  know  nothing  of  either, 
and  denies  revelation.     An  agnostic  of  olden  times.

Deva  {Sa7is.).  A  god,  a  "resplendent"  deity — deva 
(deus),  from  the  root  dw,  to  shine.  A  Deva  is  a  celestial 
being — whether  good,  bad,  or  indifferent — which  inhabits 
the  three  ''  worlds  "  or  the  three  planes  above  us.  There 
are  thirty-three  groups  or  three  hundred  and  thirty  millions 
of  them.

GLOSSARY,  281

Devachan.  The  ''dwelling  of  the  gods."  A  state  in- 
termediate between  two  earth-lives,  into  which  the  Ego 
(Atma-Buddhi-Manas,  or  the  Trinity  made  one)  enters  after 
its  separation  from  Kama  Rupa  and  the  disintegration  of 
the  lower  principles,  on  the  death  of  the  body  on  earth.

Dhammapada  {Pali).  A  work  containing  various  apho- 
risms from  the  Buddhist  Scriptures.

Dhyan  Chohans.  Lit.,  the  ''lords  of  contemplation." 
The  highest  gods,  answering  to  the  Roman  Cathohc  arch- 
angels. The  divine  intelligences  charged  with  the  supervi- 
sion of  cosmos.Dhyana  (&;^^.).  One  of  the  six  pdramitds  or  perfec- 
tions. A  state  of  abstraction  which  carries  the  ascetic  prac- 
tising it  far  above  the  region  of  sensuous  perception  and 
out  of  the  world  of  matter.  Lit.,  "contemplation."  The 
six  stages  of  d/iydna  differ  only  in  the  degrees  of  abstrac- 
tion of  the  personal  Ego  from  sensuous  life.

Double.     The  same  as  the  astral  body  or  doppelgdnger.

Ecstasis  {Gr),  A  psychospiritual  state;  a  physical 
trance  which  induces  clairvoyance,  and  a  beatific  state 
which  brings  on  visions.

Ego  [Lat.).  "  I  " ;  the  consciousness  in  man  of  the  "  I 
am  I,"  or  the  feeling  of  "  I-am-ship."  Esoteric  Philosophy 
teaches  the  existence  of  two  Egos  in  man,  the  mortal  or 
personal,  and  the  higher,  the  divine  or  impersonal ;  calling 
the  former  "  personality,"  and  the  latter  "  individuality."

Egoity.  Egoity  means  "individuality" — never  "per- 
sonality," as  it  is  the  opposite  of  egoism  or  "  selfishness," 
the  characteristic  par  excellence  of  the  latter.

Eidolon  {Gr).  The  same  as  that  which  we  term  the 
human  phantom,  the  astral  form.

Elementals.     Spirits  of  the  elements.     The  creatures

282  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.Eidolon  {Gr).  The  same  as  that  which  we  term  the 
human  phantom,  the  astral  form.

Elementals.     Spirits  of  the  elements.     The  creatures

282  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

evolved  in  the  four  kingdoms  or  elements — earth,  air,  fire, 
and  water.  They  are  called  by  the  Kabalists  gnomes  (of 
the  earth),  sylphs  (of  the  air),  salamanders  (of  the  fire),  and 
undines  (of  the  water).  Except  a  few  of  the  higher  kinds 
and  their  rulers,  they  are  rather  the  forces  of  Nature  than 
ethereal  men  and  women.  These  forces,  as  the  servile 
agents  of  the  occultist,  may  produce  various  effects ;  but 
if  employed  by  ^' elementaries "  (Kama  Rupas) — in  which 
case  they  enslave  the  mediums — they  will  deceive.  All  the 
lower  invisible  beings  generated  on  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  sev- 
enth planes  of  our  terrestrial  atmosphere  are  called  elemen- 
tal— peris,  devs,  jinns,  sylvans,  satyrs,  fauns,  elves,  dwarfs, 
trolls,  norns,  kobolds,  brownies,  nixies,  goblins,  pinkies, 
banshees,  moss-people,  white  ladies,  spooks,  fairies,  etc.Bleusinia  {Gr,).  The  Eleusinian  Mysteries  were  the 
most  famous  and  the  most  ancient  of  all  the  Greek  Mys- 
teries (with  the  exception  of  the  Samothracian),  and  were 
performed  near  the  hamlet  of  Eleusis,  not  far  from  Athens. 
Epiphanius  traces  them  to  the  days  of  lacchos  (1800  B.C.). 
They  were  held  in  honor  of  Demeter,  the  great  Ceres,  and 
the  Egyptian  Isis ;  and  the  last  act  of  the  performance  re- 
ferred to  a  sacrificial  victim  of  atonement  and  a  resurrec- 
tion, when  the  Initiate  was  admitted  to  the  highest  degree 
of  Epopt.  The  festival  of  the  Mysteries  began  in  the  month 
of  Boedromion  (September),  the  time  of  grape-gathering, 
and  lasted  from  the  15th  to  the  22d — seven  days.  The 
Hebrew  Feast  of  Tabernacles — the  feast  of  ingatherings — 
in  the  month  of  Ethanim  (the  seventh),  also  began  on  the 
15th  and  ended  on  the  2 2d  of  that  month.  The  name  of 
the  month  (Ethanim)  is  derived,  according  to  some,  from 
adonim^  adonia^  atteiiim^  ethanim^  and  was  in  honor  of  Adonai, 
or  Adonis  (Tham),  whose  death  was  lamented  by  the  He- 
brews in  the  groves  of  Bethlehem.  The  sacrifice  of  ''bread 
and  wine  "  was  performed  both  in  the  Eleusinia  and  dur- 
ing the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.

GLOSSARY.  283GLOSSARY.  283

Emanation.  This  doctrine,  in  its  metaphysical  meaning, 
is  opposed  to  evolution,  yet  one  with  it.  Science  teaches 
that,  physiologically,  evolution  is  a  mode  of  generation  in 
which  the  germ  that  develops  the  fetus  preexists  already  in 
the  parent,  the  development  and  final  form  and  character- 
istics of  that  germ  being  accomphshed  by  Nature ;  and  that 
(as  in  its  cosmology)  the  process  takes  place  blindly^  through 
the  correlation  of  the  elements  and  their  various  compounds. 
Occultism  teaches  that  this  is  only  the  apparent  mode,  the 
real  process  being  emajiation^  guided  by  intelligent  forces 
under  an  immutable  law.  Therefore,  while  the  occultists 
and  Theosophists  believe  thoroughly  in  the  doctrine  of  evo- 
lution as  given  out  by  Kapila  and  Manu,  they  are  ''  ema- 
nationists  "  rather  than  ''  evolutionists."  The  doctrine  of 
emanation  was  at  one  time  universal.  It  was  taught  by  the 
Alexandrian  as  well  as  by  the  Indian  philosophers,  by  the 
Egyptian,  the  Chaldsean  and  Hellenic  hierophants,  and  also 
by  the  Hebrews  (in  their  Kabalah,  and  even  in  Genesis). 
For  it  is  only  owang  to  deliberate  mistranslation  that  the 
Hebrew  word  asdt  was  translated  ^'  angels  "  from  the  Sep- 
tuagint,  while  it  means  ''emanations,"  ''eons,"  just  as  with 
the  Gnostics.  Indeed,  in  Deuteronomy  (xxxiii.  2)  the  word 
asdt  or  ashdt  is  translated  as  "  fiery  law,"  while  the  correct 
rendering  of  the  passage  should  be,  "from  his  right  went 
[not  a  fiery  law^  but]  a  fi.re  according  to  law,'^  viz.,  that  the 
fire  of  one  flame  is  imparted  to  and  caught  up  by  another 
— like  as  in  a  trail  of  inflammable  substance.  This  is  pre- 
cisely emanation,  as  shown  in  Isis  Uiiveiled.  "In  evolution, 
as  it  is  now  beginning  to  be  understood,  there  is  supposed 
to  be  in  all  matter  an  impulse  to  take  on  a  higher  form — a 
supposition  clearly  expressed  by  Manu  and  other  Hindu 
philosophers  of  the  highest  antiquity.  The  philosopher's 
tree  illustrates  it  in  the  case  of  the  zinc  solution.  The  con- 
troversy between  the  followers  of  this  school  and  the  ema- 
nationists  may  be  briefly  stated  thus :  the  evolutionist  stops284  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

all  inquiry  at  the  borders  of  '  the  unknowable ' ;  the  ema- 
nationist  believes  that  nothing  can  be  evolved — or,  as  the 
word  means,  unwombed  or  born — except  it  has  first  been  in- 
volved, thus  indicating  that  life  is  from  a  spiritual  potency 
above  the  whole."

Esoteric.  Hidden,  secret.  From  the  Greek  esotericos^ 
inner,  concealed.

Esoteric  Bodhism.  Secret  wisdom  or  intelHgence; 
from  the  Greek  esotericos,  inner,  and  the  Sanskrit  bodhi, 
knowledge,  in  contradistinction  to  buddhi^  the  faculty  of 
knowledge  or  intelligence,  and  buddhism^  the  philosophy 
or  law  of  buddha,  the  ''Enlightened."  Also  written  "Bud- 
hism,"  from  budha  (intelligence,  wisdom),  the  son  of  Soma.

Eurasians.  An  abbreviation  of  ''  European- Asians." 
The  mixed  colored  races,  the  children  of  the  white  fathers 
and  the  dark  mothers  of  India,  and  vice  versa.

Exoteric.  Outward,  public ;  the  opposite  of  esoteric  or 
hidden.

Extracosmic.  Outside  of  cosmos  or  Nature.  A  non- 
sensical word  invented  to  assert  the  existence  of  di  personal 
god  independent  of  or  outside  Nature  per  se;  for  as  Nature, 
or  the  universe,  is  infinite  and  limitless,  there  can  be  nothing 
outside  it.  The  term  is  coined  in  opposition  to  the  panthe- 
istic idea  that  the  whole  cosmos  is  animated  or  informed 
with  the  spirit  of  deity.  Nature  being  but  the  garment,  and 
matter  the  illusive  shadows,  of  the  real  unseen  Presence.

R

Ferho  [Syriac  ?).  The  highest  and  greatest  creative 
power  with  the  Nazarene  Gnostics.

Fire-Philosophers.  The  name  given  to  the  Hermetists 
and  alchemists  of  the  middle  ages,  and  also  to  the  Rosicru- 
cians.  The  latter,  the  successors  of  Theurgists,  regarded 
fire  as  the  symbol  of  deity.     It  was  the  source  not  only

GLOSSARY.  285GLOSSARY.  285

of  material  atoms,  but  the  container  of  the  spiritual  and 
psychic  forces  energizing  them.  Broadly  analyzed,  fire  is  a 
triple  principle  ;  esoterically,  a  septenary,  as  are  all  the  rest 
of  the  elements.  As  man  is  composed  of  spirit,  soul,  and 
body,  plus  a  fourfold  aspect,  so  is  fire.  As  in  the  works 
of  Robert  Flood  (Robertus  de  Fluctibus),  one  of  the  famous 
Rosicrucians,  fire  contains,  firstly,  a  visible  flame  (body) ; 
secondly,  an  invisible,  astral  fire  (soul) ;  and  thirdly,  spirit. 
The  four  aspects  are  [a)  heat  (hfe),  {b)  light  (mind),  {c)  elec- 
tricity (kamic  or  molecular  powers),  and  [d)  the  synthetic 
essences  beyond  spirit^  or  the  radical  cause  of  its  existence 
and  manifestation.  For  the  Hermetist  or  Rosicrucian,  when 
a  flame  is  extinct  on  the  objective  plane,  it  has  only  passed 
from  the  seen  world  into  the  unseen,  from  the  knowable 
into  the  unknowable.

Gautama  [Sans.).  A  proper  name  in  India.  It  is 
that  of  the  Prince  of  Kapilavastu,  son  of  Suddhodana,  the 
Shakhya  king  of  a  small  territory  on  the  borders  of  Nepaul, 
bom  in  the  seventh  century  B.C.,  now  called  the  "savior 
of  the  world."  Gautama,  or  Gotama,  was  the  sacerdotal 
name  of  the  Shakhya  family.  Born  a  simple  mortal,  he 
rose  to  Buddhahood  through  his  own  personal  and  unaided 
merit ;  a  man — verily  greater  than  any  god  !Qebirol.  Solomon  ben-Yehudah,  called  in  literature 
Avicebron.  An  Israelite  by  birth  ;  a  philosopher,  poet,  and 
Kabalist ;  a  voluminous  writer  and  a  mystic.  He  was  bom 
in  the  eleventh  century  at  Malaga  (102 1),  educated  at  Sara- 
gossa,  and  died  at  Valencia  in  1070,  murdered  by  a  Moham- 
medan. His  fellow-religionists  called  him  Salomon  the  Sep- 
hardi,  or  the  Spaniard,  and  the  Arabs,  Abu  Ayyub  Suleiman 
ben-Ya'hya  Ibn  Djebirol,  while  the  Scholastics  named  him 
Avicebron  (see  Myer's  Qabbalah).  Ibn  Gebirol  was  cer- 
tainly one  of  the  greatest  philosophers  and  scholars  of  his

286  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

age.  He  wrote  much  in  Arabic,  and  most  of  his  manu- 
scripts have  been  preserved.  His  greatest  work  appears  to 
be  the  Me'qor'  Hayyim — i.e.,  Fountain  of  Life — ''one  of  the 
earliest  exposures  of  the  secrets  of  the  speculative  Kabalah," 
as  his  biographer  informs  us.

Gnosis  {Gr.),  Lit.,  ''knowledge.*'  The  technical  term 
used  by  the  schools  of  rehgious  philosophy,  both  before 
and  during  the  first  centuries  of  so-called  Christianity,  to 
denote  the  object  of  their  inquiry.  This  spiritual  and  sacred 
knowledge,  the  gupta-vidyd  of  the  Hindus,  could  only  be 
obtained  by  initiation  into  spiritual  mysteries  of  which  the 
ceremonial  "  Mysteries  "  were  a  type.

Gnostics  {Gr.),  The  philosophers  who  formulated  and 
taught  the  Gnosis  or  knowledge.  They  flourished  in  the 
first  three  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  The  following 
were  eminent:  Simon  Magus,  Valentinus,  Basilides,  Mar- 
cion,  etc.

Golden  Age.  The  ancients  divided  the  life-cycle  into 
the  Golden,  Silver,  Bronze,  and  Iron  Ages.  The  Golden 
was  an  age  of  primeval  purity,  simplicity,  and  general  hap- 
piness.Great  Age.  There  are  several  "  Great  Ages "  men- 
tioned by  the  ancients.  In  India  the  Great  Age  embraced 
the  whole  mahdmanvantara^  the  "Age  of  Brahma,"  each 
"  Day "  of  which  represents  the  life-cycle  of  a  "  chain/' 
i.e.,  it  embraces  a  period  of  seven  "  rounds  "  (see  Esoteric 
Buddhism,  by  A.  P.  Sinnett).  Thus,  while  a  "Day"  and 
a  "  Night "  represent,  as  manvantara  and  pralaya,  8,640,- 
000,000  years,  an  "Age"  lasts  through  a  period  of  311,- 
040,000,000,000  ;  after  which  \}ciiQ  pralaya  or  dissolution  of 
the  universe  becomes  universal.  With  the  Egyptians  and 
Greeks  the  Great  Age  referred  only  to  the  Tropical  or 
Sidereal  Year,  the  duration  of  which  is  25,868  solar  years. 
Of  the  complete  age — that  of  the  gods — they  said  nothing, 
as  it  was  a  matter  to  be  discussed  and  divulged  only  at  the

GLOSSARY,  287

Mysteries,  and  during  the  initiation  ceremonies.  The  Great 
Age  of  the  Chaldees  was  the  same  in  figures  as  that  of  the 
Hindus.

Quhya-Vidya  [Sans.).  The  secret  knowledge  of  mys- 
tic mantras.

Gupta- Vidya  (&?2^.).  The  sa,me  sls  gu/iya-vidy a.  Eso- 
teric or  secret  science,  knowledge.

Qyges.  ''  The  ring  of  Gyges  "  has  become  a  familiar 
metaphor  in  European  literature.  Gyges  was  a  Lydian,  who, 
after  murdering  the  King  Candaules,  married  his  widow. 
Plato  tells  us  that  Gyges,  descending  once  into  a  chasm  of 
the  earth,  discovered  a  brazen  horse,  within  whose  opened 
side  was  the  skeleton  of  a  man  of  gigantic  stature,  who  had 
a  brazen  ring  on  his  finger.  This  ring,  when  placed  on  his 
own  finger,  made  him  invisible.

H.H.

Hades  (Gr.).  Aides  is  the  ''invisible,"  the  land  of 
shadows;  one  of  whose  regions  was  Tartarus,  a  place  of 
complete  darkness,  as  was  also  the  region  of  profound 
dreamless  sleep  in  Amenti.  Judging  by  the  allegorical  de- 
scription of  the  punishments  inflicted  therein,  the  place 
was  purely  karmic.  Neither  Hades  nor  Amenti  was  the 
hell  still  preached  by  some  retrograde  priests  and  clergy- 
men ;  and  whether  represented  by  the  Elysian  Fields  or  by 
Tartarus,  it  could  only  be  reached  by  crossing  the  river  to 
the  "  other  shore."  As  well  expressed  in  Egyptian  Belief 
(Bonwick),  the  story  of  Charon,  the  ferryman  of  the  Styx, 
is  to  be  found  not  only  in  Homer,  but  in  the  poetry  of 
many  lands.  The  River  must  be  crossed  before  gaining  the 
Isles  of  the  Blest.  The  Ritual  of  Egypt  described  a  Charon 
and  his  boat  long  ages  before  Homer.  He  is  Khu-en-ra, 
"  the  hawk-headed  steersman."

Hallucinations.    A  state  produced  sometimes  by  physi-

288  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.Hallucinations.    A  state  produced  sometimes  by  physi-

288  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

ological  disorders,  sometimes  by  mediumship,  and  at  others 
by  drunkenness.  But  the  cause  that  produces  the  visions 
has  to  be  sought  deeper  than  physiology.  All  such,  par- 
ticularly when  produced  through  mediumship,  are  preceded 
by  a  relaxation  of  the  nervous  system,  invariably  generat- 
ing an  abnormal  magnetic  condition  which  attracts  to  the 
sufferer  waves  of  astral  light.  It  is  these  latter  that  furnish 
the  various  hallucinations,  which,  however,  are  not  always, 
as  physicians  would  explain  them,  mere  empty  and  unreal 
dreams.  No  one  can  see  that  which  does  not  exist — i.e., 
which  is  not  impressed — in  or  on  the  astral  waves.  But  a 
seer  may  perceive  objects  and  scenes,  whether  past,  present, 
or  future,  which  have  no  relation  whatever  to  himself ;  and 
perceive,  moreover,  several  things  entirely  disconnected  from 
each  other  at  one  and  the  same  time,  so  as  to  produce  the 
most  grotesque  and  absurd  combinations.  Both  drunkard 
and  seer,  medium  and  Adept,  see  their  respective  visions  in  • 
the  astral  light ;  only  while  the  drunkard,  the  madman,  and 
the  untrained  medium,  or  one  in  a  brain-fever,  see  because 
they  cannot  help  it,  and  evoke  jumbled  visions  uncon- 
sciously to  themselves  without  being  able  to  control  them, 
the  Adept  and  the  trained  seer  have  the  choice  and  the  con- 
trol of  such  visions.  They  know  where  to  fix  their  gaze, 
how  to  steady  the  scenes  they  wish  to  observe,  and  how 
to  see  beyond  the  upper  outward  layers  of  the  astral  light. 
With  the  former  such  glimpses  into  the  waves  are  halluci- 
nations ;  with  the  latter  they  become  the  faithful  reproduc- 
tion of  what  actually  has  been,  is,  or  will  be  taking  place. 
The  glimpses  at  random  caught  by  the  medium,  and  his 
flickering  visions  in  the  deceptive  light,  are  transformed 
under  the  guiding  will  of  the  Adept  and  seer  into  steady 
pictures,  the  truthful  representation  of  that  which  he  wills 
to  come  within  the  focus  of  his  perception.Hell.     A  term  which  the  Anglo-Saxon  race  has  evidently 
derived  from  the  name  of  the  Scandinavian  goddess  Hela^

GLOSSARY,  289

just  as  the  word  Ad^  in  Russian  and  other  Slavonian  tongues, 
expressing  the  same  conception,  is  derived  from  the  Greek 
Hades ;  the  only  difference  between  the  Scandinavian  cold 
hell  and  the  hot  hell  of  the  Christians  being  found  in  their 
respective  temperatures.  But  the  idea  of  these  overheated 
regions  is  not  original  with  the  Europeans,  many  people  hav- 
ing entertained  the  conception  of  an  under- world  climate ; 
as  well  we  may,  if  we  localize  our  hell  in  the  center  of  the 
earth.  All  exoteric  religions — the  creeds  of  the  Brahmans, 
Buddhists,  Zoroastrians,  Mohammedans,  Jews,  and  the  rest — 
make  their  hells  hot  and  dark,  though  many  are  more  attrac- 
tive than  frightful.  The  idea  of  a  hot  hell  is  an  afterthought, 
the  distortion  of  an  astronomical  allegory.  With  the  Egyp- 
tians hell  became  a  place  of  punishment  by  fire  not  earlier 
than  the  Seventeenth  or  Eighteenth  Dynasty,  when  Typhon 
was  transformed  from  a  god  into  a  devil.  But  at  whatever 
time  they  implanted  this  dread  superstition  in  the  minds  of 
the  poor  ignorant  masses,  the  scheme  of  a  burning  hell  and 
souls  tormented  therein  is  purely  Egyptian.  Ra  (the  Sun) 
became  the  Lord  of  the  Furnace,  in  Karr^  the  hell  of  the 
Pharaohs,  and  the  sinner  was  threatened  with  misery  ''  in 
the  heat  of  infernal  fires."  "A  lion  was  there,"  says  Dr. 
Birch,  ''and  was  called  the  roaring  monster."  Another 
describes  the  place  as  ''the  bottomless  pit  and  lake  of  fire, 
into  which  the  victims  are  thrown  "  (compare  Revelation). 
The  Hebrew  word  gdihinnom  (gehenna)  had  never  really 
the  significance  given  to  it  in  Christian  orthodoxy.Hernias.  An  ancient  Greek  writer,  of  whose  works  only 
a  few  fragments  now  remain  extant.

Hierogrammatists.  The  title  given  to  those  Egyptian 
priests  who  were  intrusted  with  the  writing  and  reading  of 
the  sacred  and  secret  records.  The  "scribes  of  the  secret 
records,"  literally.  They  were  the  instructors  of  the  neo- 
phytes preparing  for  initiation.

Hierophant.    From  the  Greek  hierophantes^  literally  '*  he

290  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

who  explains  sacred  things  "  ;  a  title  belonging  to  the  high- 
est Adepts  in  the  temples  of  antiquity,  who  were  the  teach- 
ers and  expounders  of  the  Mysteries,  and  the  initiators  into 
the  final  great  Mysteries.  The  Hierophant  stood  for  the 
demiurge,  and  explained  to  the  postulants  for  initiation  the 
various  phenomena  of  creation  that  were  produced  for  their 
tuition.  ''  He  was  the  sole  expounder  of  the  exoteric  secrets 
and  doctrines.  It  was  forbidden  even  to  pronounce  his 
name  before  an  uninitiated  person.  He  sat  in  the  East, 
and  wore  as  symbol  of  authority  a  golden  globe  suspended 
from  the  neck.  He  was  also  called  mystagogus.'"  (Mac- 
kenzie, The  Royal  Masonic  Cyclopedia.)

Hillel.  A  great  Babylonian  rabbi  of  the  century  pre- 
ceding the  Christian  era.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  sect 
of  the  Pharisees,  a  learned  and  a  saintly  man.

Hinayana  [Sayts.).  The  ''small  vehicle  "  ;  a  scripture  and 
a  school  of  the  Buddhists,  contrasted  with  the  mahdydna, 
the  ''great  vehicle."  Both  schools  are  mystical.  Also,  in 
exoteric  superstition,  the  lowest  form  of  transmigration.

Homogeneity.  From  the  Greek  words  homos,  the  same, 
and  genos,  kind.  That  which  is  of  the  same  nature  through- 
out, undifferentiated,  non-compound,  as  gold  is  supposed  to 
be.Homogeneity.  From  the  Greek  words  homos,  the  same, 
and  genos,  kind.  That  which  is  of  the  same  nature  through- 
out, undifferentiated,  non-compound,  as  gold  is  supposed  to 
be.

Hypnotism.  A  name  given  by  Dr.  Braid  to  the  process 
by  which  one  man  of  strong  will-power  plunges  another  of 
weaker  mind  into  a  kind  of  trance ;  once  in  such  a  state, 
the  latter  will  do  anything  suggested  to  him  by  the  hypno- 
tizer.  Unless  produced  for  beneficial  purposes,  the  Occul- 
tists would  call  it  black  magic  or  sorcery.  It  is  the  most 
dangerous  of  practices,  morally  and  physically,  as  it  interferes 
with  the  nerve-fluids.

I.

lamblichus.  A  great  Theosophist  and  an  Initiate  of  the 
third  century.     He  wrote  a  great  deal  about  the  various

GLOSSARY.  291

kinds  of  demons  who  appear  through  evocation,  but  spoke

severely  against  such  phenomena.  His  austerities,  purity 
of  Hfe,  and  earnestness  were  great.  He  is  credited  with 
having  been  levitated  ten  cubits  high  from  the  ground,  as 
are  some  modern  Yogis  and  mediums.

Illusion.  In  Occultism  everything  finite  (such  as  the 
universe  and  all  in  it)  is  called  "  illusion  "  or  mdyd.

Individuality.  One  of  the  names  given  in  Theosophy 
and  Occultism  to  the  human  higher  Ego.  We  make  a  dis- 
tinction between  the  immortal  and  divine  and  the  mortal 
human  Ego  which  perishes.  The  latter,  or  *^  personality  " 
(personal  Ego),  survives  the  dead  body  only  for  a  time  in 
Kamaloka ;  the  *'  individuality  "  prevails  forever.Initiate.  From  the  Latin  initiatiis.  The  designation 
of  any  one  who  was  received  into  and  had  revealed  to  him 
the  mysteries  and  secrets  of  either  Masonry  or  Occultism. 
In  times  of  antiquity  they  were  those  who  had  been  initi- 
ated into  the  arcane  knowledge  taught  by  the  Hierophants 
of  the  Mysteries ;  and  in  our  modern  days  those  who  have 
been  initiated  by  the  Adepts  of  mystic  lore  into  the  mysteri- 
ous knowledge,  which,  notwithstanding  the  lapse  of  ages, 
has  yet  a  few  real  votaries  on  earth.

Ishvara  {Sans,),  The  "Lord,"  or  the  personal  god, 
divine  spirit  in  man.  Literally,  "  sovereign  "  (independent) 
existence.  A  title  given  to  Shiva  and  other  gods  in  India. 
Shiva  is  also  called  Ishvaradeva,  or  Sovereign  Deva.

Javidan  Khirad  [Pers,).     A  work  on  moral  precepts.

Jhana  (Pali).  The  Sanskrit  Jndna,  knowledge,  occult 
wisdom.

Josephus,  Flavius.  A  historian  of  the  first  centmy ;  a 
Hellenized  Jew  who  hved  in  Alexandria  and  died  at  Rome. 
Fie  was  credited  by  Eusebius  wath  having  wTitten  the  sixteen

292  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

famous  lines  relating  to  Christ,  which  were  most  probably 
interpolated  by  Eusebius  himself,  the  greatest  forger  among 
the  church  fathers.  This  passage,  in  which  Josephus,  al- 
though he  was  an  ardent  Jew  and  died  in  Judaism,  is  never- 
theless made  to  acknowledge  the  Messiahship  and  divine 
origin  of  Jesus,  is  now  declared  spurious  both  by  most  of 
the  Christian  bishops  (Lardner  among  others)  and  even  by 
Paley.  (See  his  Evidences  of  Christianity.)  It  was  for 
centuries  one  of  the  weightiest  proofs  of  the  real  existence 
of  Jesus,  the  Christ.Jukabar  Zivo.  A  Gnostic  term.  The  ''  Lord  of  the 
Eons"  in  the  Nazarene  system.  He  is  the  procreator 
(emanator)  of  the  seven  ''  Holy  Lives  "  (the  seven  primal 
Dhyan  Chohans  or  archangels,  each  representing  one  of 
the  cardinal  virtues),  and  is  himself  called  the  third  Life 
(third  Logos).  In  the  Codex  Nazarceus  he  is  addressed  as 
the  ''  Helm  "  and  ''  Vine  ''  of  the  food  of  life.  Thus  he  is 
identical  with  Christ  ( Christ os),  who  says,  ''  I  am  the  true 
vine^  and  my  Father  is  the  husbandman."  (John  xv.  i.) 
It  is  well  known  that  Christ  is  regarded  in  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church  as  the  ''  Chief  of  the  Eons,"  as  also  is 
Michael,  ''who  is  as  God."  Such  also  was  the  belief  of 
the  Gnostics.

K.

Kabalah  {Heb,),  ''The  hidden  wisdom  of  the  Hebrew 
rabbis  of  the  middle  ages,  derived  from  the  older  secret 
doctrines  concerning  divine  things  and  cosmogony,  which 
were  combined  into  a  theology  after  the  time  of  the  captiv- 
ity of  the  Jews  in  Babylon."  All  the  works  that  fall  under 
the  esoteric  category  are  termed  Kabalistic.

Kamaloka  {Sa7is.),  The  j'<f;^^/-material  plane,  to  us  sub- 
jective and  invisible,  where  the  disembodied  "  personalities," 
the  astral  forms  called  Kama  Rupa,  remain  until  they  fade

GLOSSARY.  293

out  from  it  by  the  complete  exhaustion  of  the  effects  of  the 
mental  impulses  that  created  these  eidolons  of  the  lower  ani- 
mal passions  and  desires.  It  is  the  Hades  of  the  ancient 
Greeks  and  the  Amenti  of  the  Egyptians — the  Land  of 
Silent  Shadows.Kama  Rupa  [Sa^is.).  Metaphysically  and  in  our  Eso- 
teric Philosophy  it  is  the  subjective  form  created,  through 
the  mental  and  physical  desires  and  thoughts  in  connection 
with  things  of  matter,  by  all  sentient  beings ;  a  form  which 
survives  the  death  of  its  body.  After  that  death,  three  of 
the  seven  ''principles"  (or,  let  us  say,  planes  of  the  senses 
and  consciousness  on  which  the  human  instincts  and  idea- 
tion act  in  turn),  viz.,  the  body,  its  astral  prototype,  and 
physical  vitality,  being  of  no  further  use,  remain  on  earth ; 
the  three  higher  principles,  grouped  into  one,  merge  into  a 
state  of  Devachan,  in  which  state  the  higher  Ego  will  re- 
main until  the  hour  for  a  new  reincarnation  arrives,  and  the 
eidolon  of  the  ex-personality  is  left  alone  in  its  new  abode. 
Here  the  pale  copy  of  the  man  that  was  vegetates  for  a 
period  of  time,  the  duration  of  which  is  variable  according 
to  the  element  of  materiality  which  is  left  in  it,  and  which 
is  determined  by  the  past  life  of  the  d-efunct.  Bereft  as  it 
is  of  its  higher  mind,  spirit,  and  physical  senses,  if  left  alone 
to  its  own  senseless  devices  it  will  gradually  fade  out  and 
disintegrate.  But  if  forcibly  drawn  back  into  the  terrestrial 
sphere,  whether  by  the  passionate  desires  and  appeals  of 
the  surviving  friends  or  by  regular  necromantic  practices — 
one  of  the  most  pernicious  of  which  is  mediumship — the 
''  spook  "  may  prevail  for  a  period  greatly  exceeding  the 
span  of  the  natural  life  of  its  body.  Once  the  Kama  Rupa 
has  learned  the  way  back  to  living  human  bodies,  it  be- 
comes a  vampire  feeding  on  the  vitahty  of  those  who  are 
so  anxious  for  its  company.  In  India  these  eidolons  are 
Q.2i}\^^  pisdchas ^  and  are  much  dreaded.Kapilavastu  {Sans).    The  birthplace  of  the  Lord  Bud-

294  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

dha,  called  the  "  yellow  dwelling/'  the  capital  of  the  mon- 
arch who  was  the  father  of  Gautama  Buddha.

Kardec,  Allan.  The  adopted  name  of  the  founder  of 
the  French  Spiritists,  whose  real  name  was  Rivaille.  It 
was  he  who  gathered  and  published  the  trance  utterances 
of  certain  mediums,  and  afterward  made  a  "philosophy" 
of  them,  between  the  years  1855  and  1870.Karma  {Saiis,).  Physically,  Action;  metaphysically, 
the  Law  of  Retribution ;  the  Law  of  Cause  and  Effect,  or 
Ethical  Causation.  It  is  Nemesis  only  in  the  sense  of  bad 
Karma.  It  is  the  eleventh  niddna  in  the  concatenation  of 
causes  and  effects  in  orthodox  Buddhism;  yet  it  is  the 
power  that  controls  all  things,  the  resultant  of  moral  action, 
the  metaphysical  samskdra^  or  the  moral  effect  of  an  act 
committed  for  the  attainment  of  something  which  gratifies 
a  personal  desire.  There  is  the  Karma  of  merit  and  the 
Karma  of  demerit.  Karma  neither  punishes  nor  rewards ; 
it  is  simply  the  one  universal  law  which  guides  unerringly, 
and,  so  to  say,  blindly,  all  other  laws  productive  of  certain 
effects  along  the  grooves  of  their  respective  causations. 
When  Buddhism  teaches  that  ''  Karma  is  that  moral  kernel 
(of  any  being)  which  alone  sm*vives  death  and  continues  in 
transmigration  "  or  reincarnation,  it  simply  means  that  there 
remains  naught  after  each  personality  but  the  causes  pro- 
duced by  it,  causes  which  are  undying,  i.e.,  which  cannot 
be  eliminated  from  the  universe  until  replaced  by  their  legit- 
imate effects,  and,  so  to  speak,  wiped  out  by  them.  And 
such  causes,  unless  compensated  with  adequate  effects  dur- 
ing the  Hfe  of  the  person  who  produced  them,  will  follow 
the  reincarnated  Ego  and  reach  it  in  its  subsequent  incar- 
nations, until  a  full  harmony  between  effects  and  causes  is 
fully  reestablished.  No  ''  personality  " — a  mere  bundle  of 
material  atoms  and  instinctual  and  mental  characteristics — 
can,  of  course,  continue  as  such  in  the  world  of  pure  spirit. 
Only  that  which  is  immortal  in  its  very  nature  and  divine

I

GLOSSARY.  295I

GLOSSARY.  295

in  its  essence — namely,  the  Ego — can  exist  forever.  And 
as  it  is  that  Ego  which  chooses  the  personahty  it  will  inform 
after  each  Devachan,  and  which  receives  through  these  per- 
sonalities the  effects  of  the  karmic  causes  produced,  it  is 
therefore  the  Ego,  that  6^^^ which  is  the  '^  moral  kernel  " 
referred  to,  and  in  fact  embodied  Karma  itself — "which 
alone  survives  death."

Kether  {Hel?.).  ''The  Crown,  the  highest  of  the  ten 
Sephiroth ;  the  first  of  the  supernal  triad.  It  corresponds 
to  the  Macroprosopos,  Vast  Countenance,  or  Arikh  Anpin, 
which  differentiates  into  Chokmah  and  Binah."

Krishna  [SaJts.).  The  most  celebrated  avatdra  of  Vishnu, 
the  ''savior"  of  the  Hindus,  and  the  most  popular  god. 
He  is  the  eighth  avatdra^  the  son  of  Devaki  and  nephew 
of  Kansha,  the  Indian  Herod,  who,  while  seeking  for  him 
among  the  shepherds  and  cowherds  who  concealed  him, 
slew  thousands  of  their  newly  born  babes.  The  story  of 
Krishna's  conception,  birth,  and  childhood  is  the  exact  pro- 
totype of  the  New  Testament  story.  The  missionaries,  of 
course,  try  to  show  that  the  Hindus  stole  the  story  of  the 
nativity  from  the  early  Christians  who  came  to  India.

Kshetrajna,  or  Kshetrajneshvara  {Sans.).  Embodied 
spirit  in  Occultism,  the  conscious  Ego  in  its  highest  mani- 
festations ;  the  reincarnating  principle,  or  the  "  Lord  "  in  us.

Kumara  [Sans.).  A  virgin  boy  or  young  celibate.  The 
first  kumdras  are  the  seven  sons  of  Brahma,  born  out  of 
the  limbs  of  the  god  in  the  so-called  7iinth  "  creation."  It 
is  stated  that  the  name  was  given  to  them  owing  to  their 
formal  refusal  to  "  procreate  "  their  species,  and  thus  they 
"  remained  Yogis  "  according  to  the  legend.

L.L.

Labre,  St.  A  Roman  saint  solemnly  beatified  a  few 
years  ago.     His  great  holiness  consisted  in  sitting  at  one

296  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

of  the  gates  of  Rome  night  and  day  for  forty  years,  and  re- 
maining unwashed  through  the  whole  of  that  time,  the  result 
of  which  was  that  he  was  eaten  by  vermin  to  his  bones.

Lao=Tze  [Chm.).  A  great  sage,  saint,  and  philosopher, 
who  was  the  contemporary  of  Confucius.

Law  of  Retribution.     See  "  Karma."

Linga  Sharira  {Sans.).  ''Astral  body,"  i.e.,  the  aerial 
symbol  of  the  body.  This  term  designates  the  doppelgdnger^ 
or  the  ''  astral  body  "  of  man  or  animal.  It  is  the  eidolofi 
of  the  Greeks,  the  vital  and  prototypal  body,  the  reflection 
of  the  man  of  flesh.  It  is  born  before  man,  and  dies  or 
fades  out  wuth  the  disappearance  of  the  last  atom  of  the 
body.

Logos  {Gr.).  The  manifested  deity  with  every  nation 
and  people;  the  outward  expression  or  the  effect  of  the 
cause  which  is  ever  concealed.  Thus  speech  is  the  logos  of 
thought ;  hence,  in  its  metaphysical  sense,  it  is  aptly  trans- 
lated by  the  terms  ''  Verbum  "  and  "Word."

Long  Face.  A  Kabalistic  term ;  Arikh  Anpin  in  Hebrew, 
or  ''  Long  Face  "  ;  in  Greek,  Macroprosopos,  as  contrasted 
with  "  Short  Face,"  or  Zeir  Anpin,  the  Microprosopos.  One 
relates  to  deity,  the  other  to  man,  the  ''  little  image  of  the 
great  form."Longinus,  Dionysius  Cassius.  A  famous  critic  and 
philosopher,  born  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  third  century 
(about  A.D.  213).  He  was  a  great  traveler,  and  attended 
at  Alexandria  the  lectures  of  Ammonius  Saccas,  the  founder 
of  Neoplatonism,  but  was  rather  a  critic  than  a  follower. 
Porphyry  (the  Jew  Malek  or  Malchus)  was  his  pupil  before 
he  became  the  disciple  of  Plotinus.  It  is  said  of  him  that 
he  was  a  living  library  and  a  walking  museum.  Toward 
the  end  of  his  life  he  became  the  instructor  in  Greek  litera- 
ture of  Zenobia,  queen  of  Palmyra.  She  repaid  his  services 
by  accusing  him  before  the  Emperor  Aurelian  of  having 
advised  her  to  rebel  against  the  latter,  a  crime  for  which

GLOSSARY.  297

Longinus,  with  several  others,  was  put  to  death  by  the 
emperor  in  273.

M.

Macrocosm.     The  ''  great  universe  "  or  cosmos.GLOSSARY.  297

Longinus,  with  several  others,  was  put  to  death  by  the 
emperor  in  273.

M.

Macrocosm.     The  ''  great  universe  "  or  cosmos.

Magic.  The  ''  great  "  science.  According  to  Deveria 
and  other  Orientahsts,  ''magic  was  considered  as  a  sacred 
science  inseparable  from  religion ''  by  the  oldest  and  most 
civilized  and  learned  nations.  The  Egyptians,  for  instance, 
were  a  most  sincerely  religious  nation,  as  were,  and  are  still, 
the  Hindus.  ''  Magic  consists  of,  and  is  acquired  by,  the 
worship  of  the  gods,"  says  Plato.  Could,  then,  a  nation 
which,  owing  to  the  irrefragable  evidence  of  inscriptions 
and  papyri,  is  proved  to  have  firmly  beheved  in  magic  for 
thousands  of  years  have  been  deceived  tor  so  long  a  time  ? 
And  is  it  likely  that  generations  upon  generations  of  a 
learned  and  pious  hierarchy,  many  among  whom  led  lives 
of  self-martyrdom,  holiness,  and  asceticism,  would  have 
gone  on  deceiving  themselves  and  the  people  (or  even  only 
the  latter)  for  the  pleasure  of  perpetuating  belief  in  ''  mira- 
cles"? Fanatics,  we  are  told,  will  do  anything  to  enforce 
belief  in  their  gods  or  idols.  To  this  we  reply:  In  such 
cases  Brahmans  and  Egyptian  rekhget-amens  or  Hierophants 
would  not  have  popularized  the  behef  i7i  the  power  of  man 
to  command  the  services  of  the  gods  by  magic  practices  ;  which 
gods  are  in  truth  but  the  occult  powers  or  potencies  of 
Nature,  personified  by  the  learned  priests  themselves,  who 
reverenced  in  them  only  the  attributes  of  the  one  unknown 
and  nameless  principle.  As  Proclus,  the  Platonist,  ably 
puts  it :  "  Ancient  priests,  when  they  considered  that  there 
is  a  certain  alliance  and  sympathy  in  natural  things  to  each 
other,  and  in  things  manifest  to  occult  powers,  and  discovered 
that  all  things  subsist  in  ^^^  fabricated  a  sacred  science  from 
this  mutual  sympathy  and  similarity^  .  .  .  and  applied  for 
occult  purposes  both  celestial  and  terrene  natures,  by  means298  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,298  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

of  which,  through  a  certain  similitude,  they  deduced  divine 
natures  into  this  inferior  abode."  Magic  is  the  science  of 
communicating  with  and  directing  supernal  supramundane 
potencies,  as  well  as  commanding  those  of  lower  spheres  ;  a 
practical  knowledge  of  the  hidden  mysteries  of  Nature,  which 
are  known  only  to  the  few,  because  they  are  so  difficult  to 
acquire  without  falling  into  sin  against  the  law.  Ancient 
and  medieval  mystics  divided  magic  into  three  classes — 
Theurgia,  Goetia,  and  Natural  Magic.  "  Theurgia  has  long 
since  been  appropriated  as  the  peculiar  sphere  of  the  The- 
osophists  and  metaphysicians,"  says  Kenneth  Mackenzie. 
'*  Goetia  is  black  magic,  and  '  natural '  or  white  magic  has 
risen  with  healing  in  its  wings  to  the  proud  position  of  an 
exact  and  progressive  study."  The  remarks  added  by  our 
late  learned  brother  are  remarkable :  ''  The  realistic  desires 
of  modem  times  have  contributed  to  bring  magic  into  dis- 
repute and  ridicule.  .  .  .  Faith  (in  one's  own  self)  is  an 
essential  element  in  magic,  and  existed  long  before  other 
ideas  which  presume  its  preexistence.  It  is  said  that  it 
takes  a  wise  man  to  make  a  fool ;  and  a  man's  idea  must 
be  exalted  almost  to  madness — i.e.,  his  brain  susceptibilities 
must  be  increased  far  beyond  the  low,  miserable  status  of 
modern  civilization — before  he  can  become  a  true  magician, 
for  a  pursuit  of  this  science  implies  a  certain  amount  of  iso- 
lation and  an  abnegation  of  self."  A  very  great  isolation, 
certainly,  the  achievement  of  which  constitutes  a  wonderful 
phenomenon,  a  miracle  in  itself.  Withal,  magic  is  not  some- 
thing supernatural.  As  explained  by  lamblichus :  *'  They, 
through  the  sacerdotal  theurgy,  announce  that  they  are 
able  to  ascend  to  more  elevated  and  universal  essences^  and 
to  those  that  are  established  above  fate,  viz.,  to  god  and 
the  demiurgus ;  neither  employing  matter,  nor  assuming  any 
other  things  besides,  except  the  observation  of  a  sensible 
time."  Already  some  are  beginning  to  recognize  the  exis- 
tence of  subtle  powers  and  influences  in  Nature,  in  whichGLOSSARY,  299

they  have  hitherto  known  naught.  But,  as  Dr.  Carter  Blake 
truly  remarks,  ''the  nineteenth  century  is  not  that  which 
has  observed  the  genesis  of  new,  nor  the  completion  of  old, 
methods  of  thought;"  to  which  Mr.  Bon  wick  adds  that  ''if 
the  ancients  knew  but  little  of  our  mode  of  investigation 
into  the  secrets  of  Nature,  we  know  still  less  of  their  mode 
of  research."

Magic,  Black.     Sorcery,  abuse  of  powers.

Magic,  Ceremonial.  Magic,  according  to  Kabalistic 
rites,  worked  out,  as  alleged  by  the  Rosicrucians  and  other 
mystics,  by  invoking  powers  spiritually  higher  than  man, 
and  commanding  elementals  who  are  far  lower  than  him- 
self on  the  scale  of  being.

Magic,  White.  "  Beneficent  magic,"  so  called,  is  divine 
magic,  devoid  of  selfishness,  love  of  power,  of  ambition  or 
lucre,  and  bent  only  on  doing  good  to  the  world  in  general 
and  one's  neighbor  in  particular.  The  smallest  attempt  to 
use  one's  abnormal  powers  for  the  gratification  of  self  makes 
of  these  powers  sorcery  or  black  magic.

Mahamanvantara  {Sans).  The  great  interludes  be- 
tween the  Mantis,  the  period  of  universal  activity.  Man- 
vantara  here  implies  simply  a  period  of  activity,  as  opposed 
to  pralaya  or  rest,  without  reference  to  the  length  of  the 
cycle.

Mahat  {Sans.),  Lit.,  the  "great"  one.  The  first  prin- 
ciple of  universal  intelHgence  and  consciousness.  In  the 
Pauranic  philosophy,  the  first  product  of  root-nature  oxprad- 
hdna  (the  same  as  mulaprakriti) ;  the  producer  of  mafias, 
the  thinking  principle,  and  of  ahankdra,  egotism,  or  the 
feeling  of  "  I  am  I  "  in  the  lower  Manas.Mahatma  {Sa7is.).  Lit.,  "great  soul."  An  Adept  of 
the  highest  order.  An  exalted  being,  who,  having  attained 
to  the  mastery  over  his  lower  principles,  is  therefore  living 
unimpeded  by  the  "man  of  flesh."  Mahatmas  are  in  pos- 
session of  knowledge  and  power  commensurate  with  the

300  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY,

stage  they  have  reached  in  their  spiritual  evolution.  Called 
in  Pali  Arahats  or  Rahats.

Mahay  ana  [Sans.).  A  school  of  Buddhistic  philosophy ; 
ht.,  the  ^'  great  vehicle."  A  mystical  system  founded  by 
Nagarjuna.  Its  books  were  written  in  the  second  cen- 
tury B.C.

Manas  [Sans,).  Lit.,  ''mind."  The  mental  faculty  which 
makes  of  a  man  an  inteUigent  and  moral  being,  and  distin- 
guishes him  from  the  mere  animal ;  a  synonym  of  mahat. 
Esoterically,  however,  it  means,  when  unqualified,  the 
higher  Ego,  or  the  sentient  reincarnating  principle  in  man. 
When  qualified,  it  is  called  by  Theosophists  Buddhi-Manas, 
or  the  spiritual  soul,  in  contradistinction  to  its  human  re- 
flection, Kama- Manas.

Manasa=putra  {Sans,).  Lit.,  ''the  sons  of  mind"  or 
mind-born  sons ;  a  name  given  to  our  higher  Egos  before 
they  incarnated  in  mankind.  In  the  exoteric,  though  alle- 
gorical and  symbolical  Puranas  (the  ancient  mythological 
writings  of  Hindus),  it  is  the  title  given  to  the  mind-bom 
sons  of  Brahma,  the  kumdras.

Manas=sutratniS  (&:;^i'.).  Two  words  meaning  "mind" 
(manas)  and  "  thread-soul  "  [siitrdimd).  It  is,  as  said,  the 
synonym  of  our  Ego,  or  that  which  reincarnates.  It  is  a 
technical  term  of  Vedantic  philosophy.

Manas-Taijasa  [Sans.).  Lit.,  the  "radiant"  Manas; 
a  state  of  the  higher  Ego  which  only  high  metaphysicians 
are  able  to  realize  and  comprehend.  The  same  as  "  Bud- 
dhi-Taijasa,"  which  see.Mantras  [Sans.).  Verses  from  the  Vedic  works,  used  as 
incantations  and  charms.  By  ??iantras  are  meant  all  those 
portions  of  the  Vedas  which  are  distinct  from  the  Brahmanas, 
or  their  interpretation.

Manu  [Sans.).  The  great  Indian  legislator.  The  name 
comes  from  the  Sanskrit  root  man,  to  think,  Man  really 
standing  only  for  Svayambhuva,  the  first  of  the  Manus,

GLOSSARY.  301

who  started  from  Svayambhu,  the  Self-existent,  who  is  henee 
the  Logos  and  the  progenitor  of  mankind.  Manu  is  the 
first  legislator — almost  a  divine  being.

Manvantara  [Saiis.).  A  period  of  manifestation,  as 
opposed  to pralaya^  dissolution  or  rest;  the  term  is  applied 
to  various  cycles,  especially  to  a  Day  of  Brahma,  4,320,- 
000,000  solar  years,  and  to  the  reign  of  one  Manu,  306,- 
720,000.  Lit.,  Manu-anfara,  between  Manus.  (See  Secret 
Doctrine,  ii.,  68  et  seq,)

Master.  A  translation  from  the  Sanskrit  guru,  "  spirit- 
ual teacher,"  and  adopted  by  the  Theosophists  to  designate 
the  Adepts,  from  whom  they  hold  their  teachings.

Materialist.  Not  necessarily  only  one  who  believes  in 
neither  God  nor  soul,  but  also  any  person  who  materiahzes 
the  purely  spiritual ;  such  as  believers  in  an  anthropomorphic 
deity,  in  a  soul  capable  of  burning  in  hell-fire,  and  a  hell 
and  paradise  as  locaHties  instead  of  states  of  consciousness. 
American  ''  Substantialists,"  a  Christian  sect,  are  material- 
ists, as  also  the  so-called  Spiritualists.Materializations.  In  Spiritualism  the  word  signifies  the 
objective  appearance  of  the  so-called  ''  spirits  of  the  dead," 
who  reclothe  themselves  occasionally  in  matter;  i.e.,  they 
form  for  themselves,  out  of  the  materials  at  hand,  found  in 
the  atmosphere  and  the  emanations  of  those  present,  a  tem- 
porary body  bearing  the  human  likeness  of  the  defunct,  as 
he  appeared  when  alive.  Theosophists  accept  the  phe- 
nomena of  ''materialization,"  but  they  reject  the  theory 
that  it  is  produced  by  ''spirits,"  i.e.,  the  immortal  princi- 
ples of  disembodied  persons.  Theosophists  hold  that  when 
the  phenomena  are  genuine — which  is  a  fact  of  rarer  occur- 
rence than  is  generally  believed — they  are  produced  by  the 
larvcB,  the  eidolons,  or  kamalokic  *'  ghosts  "  of  the  dead  per- 
sonahties.  (See  "  Kamaloka  "  and  "  Kama  Rupa.")  As 
Kamaloka  is  on  the  earth-plane  and  differs  from  its  degree 
of  materiality  only  in  the  degree  of  its  plane  of  conscious-

302  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.302  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

ness,  for  which  reason  it  is  concealed  from  our  normal  sight, 
the  occasional  apparition  of  such  shells  is  as  natural  as  that 
of  electric  balls  and  other  atmospheric  phenomena.  Elec- 
tricity as  a  fluid,  or  atomic  matter  (for  Occultists  hold  with 
Maxwell  that  it  is  atomic),  is  ever,  though  invisibly,  present 
in  the  air.  This  fluid  can  also  manifest  under  various  shapes, 
but  only  when  certain  conditions  are  present  to  ''  material- 
ize "  it,  when  it  passes  from  its  own  on  to  our  plane  and 
makes  itself  objective.  Similarly  with  the  eidolons  of  the 
dead.  They  are  present  around  us,  but,  being  on  another 
plane,  do  not  see  us  any  more  than  we  see  them.  But  when- 
ever the  strong  desires  of  living  men  and  the  conditions 
furnished  by  the  abnormal  constitutions  of  mediums  are 
combined  together,  these  eidolons  are  drawn — nay,  pulled 
— down  from  their  plane  on  to  ours  and  made  objective. 
This  is  necromancy ;  it  does  no  good  to  the  dead,  and  great 
harm  to  the  living,  in  addition  to  the  fact  that  it  interferes 
with  a  law  of  Nature.  The  occasional  materiahzation  of 
the  ''  astral  bodies  "  or  doubles  of  living  persons  is  quite 
another  matter.  These  ''  astrals  "  are  often  mistaken  for 
the  apparitions  of  the  dead,  since,  chameleon-like,  our  own 
"  elementaries,"  along  with  those  of  the  disembodied  and 
cosmic  elementals,  will  often  assume  the  appearance  of 
those  images  which  are  strongest  in  our  thoughts.  In  short, 
at  the  so-called  *' materialization  seances"  it  is  those  pres- 
ent and  the  medium  who  create  the  pecuhar  *'  apparition." 
Independent  apparitions  belong  to  another  kind  of  psychic 
phenomena.Maya  {Sans.^,  Illusion ;  the  cosmic  power  which  ren- 
ders phenomenal  existence  and  the  perceptions  thereof  pos- 
sible. In  Hindu  philosophy  that  alone  which  is  change- 
less and  eternal  is  called  reality;  all  that  which  is  subject  to 
change  through  decay  and  differentiation,  and  which  has, 
therefore,  a  beginning  and  an  end,  is  regarded  as  mdydy 
illusion.

GLOSSARY.  303

Mediumship.  A  word  now  accepted  to  indicate  that 
abnormal  psychophysiological  state  which  leads  a  person 
to  take  the  fancies  of  his  imagination,  his  hallucinations, 
real  or  artificial,  for  reahties.  No  entirely  healthy  person 
on  the  physiological  and  psychic  planes  can  ever  be  a 
medium.  That  which  mediums  see,  hear,  and  sense  is 
*'real,"  but  untrue;  it  is  either  gathered  from  the  astral 
plane,  so  deceptive  in  its  vibrations  and  suggestions,  or  from 
pure  hallucinations,  which  have  no  actual  existence  but  for 
him  who  perceives  them.  ''Mediumship  "  is  a  kind  of  vul- 
garized mediatorship^  in  which  one  afflicted  with  this  faculty 
is  supposed  to  become  an  agent  of  communication  between 
a  living  man  and  a  departed  "'  spirit."  There  exist  regular 
methods  of  training  for  the  development  of  this  undesirable 
acquirement.

Mercavah  [Heb,),  *'  A  chariot.  The  Kabalists  say  that 
the  Supreme,  after  he  had  estabhshed  the  ten  Sephiroth — 
which,  in  their  totality,  are  Adam  Kadmon,  the  Archetypal 
Man — used  them  as  a  chariot  or  throne  of  glory  in  which 
to  descend  upon  the  souls  of  men."Mesmerism.  The  term  comes  from  Mesmer,  who  re- 
discovered this  magnetic  force  and  its  practical  appHcation 
toward  the  year  1775,  at  Vienna.  It  is  a  vital  current  that 
one  person  may  transfer  to  another,  and  through  which  he 
induces  an  abnormal  state  of  the  nervous  system  that  per- 
mits him  to  have  a  direct  influence  upon  the  mind  and  will 
of  the  subject  or  mesmerized  person.

Metaphysics.  From  the  Greek  fueta^  beyond,  and 
physica^  the  things  of  the  external  material  world.  It  is  to 
forget  the  spirit  and  hold  to  the  dead  letter,  to  translate  it 
**  beyond  nature  "  or  supernatural^  as  it  is  rather  beyond 
the  natural,  visible,  or  concrete.  Metaphysics,  in  ontology 
and  philosophy,  is  the  term  to  designate  that  science  which 
treats  of  the  real  and  permanent  being  as  contrasted  with 
the  unreal,  illusionary,  or  phenomenal  being.

304  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOFHY,

Microcosm.  The  ''  little  universe,"  meaning  man,  made 
in  the  image  of  his  creator,  the  Macrocosm,  or  ''  great  uni- 
verse," and  containing  all  that  the  latter  contains.  These 
terms  are  used  in  Occultism  and  Theosophy.

Mishnah  (Heb.).  Lit.,  a  ''repetition,"  from  the  word 
shdndh,  ''  to  repeat "  something  said  orally.  A  summary 
of  written  explanations  from  the  oral  traditions  of  the  Jews, 
and  a  digest  of  the  Scriptures  on  which  the  later  Talmud 
was  based.

Moksha  [Sans,),  The  same  as  nirvana;  a  post-mortem 
state  of  rest  and  bliss  of  the  ''  soul-pilgrim."

Monad.  It  is  the  ''unity,"  the  "one";  but  in  Occul- 
tism it  often  means  the  unified  duad,  Atma-Buddhi,  or  that 
immortal  part  of  man  which,  incarnating  in  the  lower  king- 
doms and  gradually  progressing  through  them  to  man,  finds 
thence  way  to  the  final  goal,  nirvana.Monas  (Gr,).  In  the  Pythagorean  system  the  Duas 
emanates  from  the  higher  and  solitary  Monas,  which  is 
thus  the  First  Cause.

Monogenes  {Gr^,  Lit.,  the  "  only  begotten  "  ;  a  name 
of  Proserpina  and  other  goddesses  and  gods,  as  also  of 
Jesus.

Mundaka  Upanishad  {Sans.).  Lit.,  the  "Mundaka 
Esoteric  Doctrine."     A  work  of  high  antiquity.

Mysteries.  The  Sacred  Mysteries  were  enacted  in  the 
ancient  temples  by  the  initiated  Hierophants  for  the  bene- 
fit and  instruction  of  candidates.  The  most  solemn  and 
occult  were  certainly  those  which  were  performed  in  Egypt 
by  "  the  band  of  secret-keepers,"  as  Mr.  Bonwick  calls  the 
Hierophants.  Maurice  describes  their  nature  very  graphi- 
cally in  a  few  lines.  Speaking  of  the  Mysteries  performed 
in  Philse  (the  Nile-island),  he  says  :  "  It  was  in  these  gloomy 
caverns  that  the  grand  mystic  arcana  of  the  goddess  (Isis) 
were  unfolded  to  the  adoring  aspirant,  while  the  solemn 
hymn  of  initiation  resounded  through  the  long  extent  of

GLOSSARY.  305

these  stony  recesses."  The  word  ''  mystery "  is  derived 
from  the  Greek  muo,  to  close  the  mouth,  and  every  sym- 
bol connected  with  them  had  a  hidden  meaning.  As  Plato 
and  many  of  the  other  sages  of  antiquity  affirm,  these  Mys- 
teries were  highly  religious,  moral,  and  beneficent  as  a 
school  of  ethics.  The  Grecian  Mysteries — those  of  Ceres 
and  Bacchus — were  only  imitations  of  the  Egyptian;  and 
the  author  of  Egyptian  Belief  and  Moder?t  Thought  informs 
us  that  our  own  word  "  chapel  or  capella  is  said  to  be  the 
caph-el  or  college  of  el,  the  solar  divinity.'*  The  well-known 
Kabiri  are  associated  with  the  Mysteries.In  short,  the  Mysteries  were  in  every  country  a  series  of 
dramatic  performances,  in  which  the  mysteries  of  cosmogony 
and  Nature  in  general  were  personified  by  the  priests  and 
neophytes,  who  enacted  the  parts  of  various  gods  and  god- 
desses, repeating  supposed  scenes  (allegories)  from  their  re- 
spective lives.  These  were  explained  in  their  hidden  mean- 
ing to  the  candidates  for  initiation,  and  incorporated  into 
philosophical  doctrines.

Mystery  Language.  The  sacerdotal  secret  ''jargon" 
used  by  the  initiated  priests,  and  employed  only  when  dis- 
cussing sacred  things.  Every  nation  had  its  own  ''  mystery  " 
tongue,  unknown  to  all  save  those  admitted  to  the  Mysteries.

Mystic.  From  the  Greek  word  mysticos.  In  antiquity, 
one  belonging  to  those  admitted  to  the  ancient  Mysteries ; 
in  our  own  times,  one  who  practises  Mysticism,  holds  mys- 
tic, transcendental  views,  etc.

Mysticism.  Any  doctrine  involved  in  mystery  and 
metaphysics,  and  dealing  more  with  the  ideal  worlds  than 
with  our  actual,  matter-of-fact  universe.

N.

Nazarene  Codex.  The  Scriptures  of  the  Nazarenes  and 
of  the  Nabatheans  also.    According  to  sundry  church  fathers

306  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY,

— Jerome  and  Epiphanius  especially — they  were  heretical 
teachings,  but  are  in  fact  one  of  the  numerous  Gnostic  read- 
ings of  cosmogony  and  theogony,  which  produced  a  distinct 
sect.

Necromancy.  The  raising  of  the  images  of  the  dead, 
considered  in  antiquity  and  by  modern  Occultists  as  a  prac- 
tice of  black  magic.  lamblichus,  Porphyry,  and  other  the- 
urgists  deprecated  the  practice  no  less  than  Moses,  who  con- 
demned the  "  witches  "  of  his  day  to  death,  the  said  witches 
being  often  only  mediums — e.g.,  the  case  of  the  witch  of 
Endor  and  Samuel.Neoplatonists.  A  school  of  philosophy  which  arose 
between  the  second  and  third  centuries  of  our  era,  and  was 
founded  by  Ammonius  Saccas  of  Alexandria.  The  same 
as  the  Philaletheians  and  the  Analogeticists  ;  they  were  also 
called  Theurgists  and  by  various  other  names.  They  were 
the  Theosophists  of  the  early  centuries.  Neoplatonism  is 
Platonic  philosophy  plus  ecstasy^  divine  Raja  Yoga.

Nephesh  [Jleb.),  ''Breath  of  life,"  anima,  mens  vitce, 
appetites.  The  term  is  used  very  loosely  in  the  Bible.  It 
generally  means  Prana,  ''  life " ;  in  the  Kabalah  it  is  the 
animal  passions  and  the  animal  soul.  Therefore,  as  main- 
tained in  Theosophical  teachings,  nephesh  is  the  prana-kamic 
principle,  or  the  vital  animal  soul  in  man.

Nirmanakaya  i^Sans,),  Something  entirely  different  in 
Esoteric  Philosophy  from  the  popular  meaning  attached  to 
it,  and  from  the  fancies  of  the  Orientalists.  Some  call  the 
nirmanakaya^  or  body,  "  7iirvdna  with  remains "  (Schlag- 
intweit),  on  the  supposition,  probably,  that  it  is  a  kind  of 
nirvanic  condition  during  which  consciousness  and  form 
are  retained.  Others  say  that  it  is  one  of  the  trikaya  (three 
bodies),  with  "  the  power  of  assuming  any  form  of  appear- 
ance in  order  to  propagate  Buddhism"  (Eitel's  idea) ;  again, 
that  '*it  is  the  incarnate  avdtara  of  a  deity"  [ibid,).  Occul- 
tism, on  the  other  hand,  says  ( Voice  of  the  Sile?ice)  that  nir-

GLOSSARY,  307GLOSSARY,  307

mdnakdya,  although  meaning  Hterally  a  transformed  "body," 
is  a  state.  The  form  is  that  of  the  Adept  or  yogi  who  enters, 
or  chooses,  that  post-mortem  condition  in  preference  to  the 
dharmakdya  or  absolute  nirvanic  state.  He  does  this  be- 
cause the  latter  kdya  separates  him  forever  from  the  world 
of  form,  conferring  upon  him  a  state  of  selfish  bliss,  in  which 
no  other  living  being  can  participate,  the  Adept  being  thus 
precluded  from  the  possibility  of  helping  hmnanity,  or  even 
devas.  As  a  nmnd^iakdya^  however,  the  Adept  leaves  behind 
him  only  his  physical  body,  and  retains  every  other  "  prin- 
ciple," save  the  kamic,  for  he  has  crushed  this  out  forever 
from  his  nature  during  life,  and  it  can  never  resurrect  in  his 
post-mortem  state.  Thus,  instead  of  going  into  selfish  bliss, 
he  chooses  a  life  of  self-sacrifice,  an  existence  which  ends 
only  with  the  life-cycle,  in  order  to  be  enabled  to  help  man- 
kind in  an  invisible,  yet  most  effective,  manner.  (See  Voice 
of  the  Silefice,  Third  Treatise,  ''The  Seven  Portals.")  Thus 
a  nirmdnakdya  is  not,  as  popularly  believed,  the  body  "  in 
which  a  Buddha  or  a  Bodhisattva  appears  on  earth,"  but 
verily  one  who,  whether  a  chutiiktii  or  a  khubilkhan,  an 
Adept  or  a  yogi,  during  life,  has  since  become  a  member  of 
that  invisible  Host  which  ever  protects  and  watches  over 
humanity  within  karmic  limits.  Mistaken  often  for  a 
''spirit,"  a  deva,  God  himself,  etc.,  a  nirmdnakdya  is  ever 
a  protecting,  compassionate,  verily  a  guardian  angel  to  him 
who  is  worthy  of  his  help.  Whatever  objection  may  be 
brought  forward  against  this  doctrine,  however  much  it  is 
denied — because,  forsooth,  it  has  never  hitherto  been  made 
public  in  Europe,  and  therefore,  since  it  is  unknown  to 
Orientalists,  it  must  needs  be  a  "myth  of  modern  inven- 
tion"— no  one  will  be  bold  enough  to  say  that  this  idea 
of  helping  suffering  mankind  at  the  price  of  one's  own 
almost  interminable  self-sacrifice  is  not  one  of  the  grand- 
est and  noblest  that  was  ever  evolved  from  the  human 
brain.308  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

Nirvana  {Sans,).  According  to  the  Orientalists,  the 
entire  ''  blowing  out,"  like  the  flame  of  a  candle ;  the  utter 
extinction  of  existence.  But  in  the  esoteric  explanations  it 
is  the  state  of  absolute  existence  and  absolute  consciousness, 
into  which  the  Ego  of  a  man  who  had  reached  the  highest 
degree  of  perfection  and  holiness  during  life  goes  after  the 
body  dies,  and  occasionally,  as  in  the  case  of  Gautama 
Buddha  and  others,  during  hfe.Nirvani  [Sans.),  One  who  has  attained  nirvana — an 
emancipated  Soul.  That  nirvana  means  something  quite 
different  from  the  puerile  assertions  of  Orientalists,  every 
scholar  who  has  visited  India,  China,  or  Japan  is  well  aware. 
It  is  *'  escape  from  misery,"  but  only  from  that  of  matter ; 
freedom  from  kleshd  or  kdma,  and  the  complete  extinction 
of  animal  desires.  If  we  are  told  that  the  Abhidhamma 
defines  nirvd7ia  as  *'a  state  of  absolute  annihilation,"  we 
concur,  adding  to  the  last  word  the  qualification  "  of  every- 
thing connected  with  matter  or  the  physical  world,"  and 
this  simply  because  the  latter  (as  also  all  in  it)  is  illusion  or 
mdyd,  Shakyamuni  Buddha  said  in  the  last  moments  of 
his  life,  ''  The  spiritual  body  is  immortal."  As  Mr.  Eitel, 
the  scholarly  Sinologist,  explains  it :  "  The  popular  exoteric 
systems  agree  in  defining  nirvdna  negatively  as  a  state  of 
absolute  exemption  from  the  circle  of  transmigration ;  as  a 
state  of  entire  freedom  from  all  forms  of  existence — to  begin 
with,  freedom  from  all  passion  and  exertion ;  a  state  of 
indifference  to  all  sensibility;"  and  he  might  have  added 
''death  of  all  compassioit  for  the  world  of  suffering.*'  And 
this  is  why  the  Bodhisattvas  who  prefer  the  nir?ndnakdya  to 
the  dharmakdya  vesture  stand  higher  in  the  popular  estima- 
tion than  the  nirvdnis.  But  the  same  scholar  adds  that 
''positively  [and  esoterically]  they  define  nirvdna  as  the 
highest  state  of  spiritual  bliss,  as  absolute  immortality 
through  absorption  of  the  soul  [spirit,  rather]  into  itself,  but 
preserving  individuality^  so  that,  e.g.,  Buddhas,  after  enter-

GLOSSARY.  309

ing  ?iirvdna,  may  reappear  on  earth  [i.e.,  in  the  future 
vianvafttaraY'GLOSSARY.  309

ing  ?iirvdna,  may  reappear  on  earth  [i.e.,  in  the  future 
vianvafttaraY'

Noumenon  {G?-.).  The  true  essential  nature  of  Being 
as  distinguished  from  the  illusive  objects  of  sense.

Nous  {Gr,).  A  Platonic  term  for  the  higher  mind  or 
soul.  It  means  spirit  as  distinct  from  animal  ^ov\y  psyche; 
divine  consciousness  or  mind  in  man.  The  name  was 
adopted  by  the  Gnostics  for  their  first  conscious  eo?i,  which, 
with  the  Occultists,  is  the  third  logos,  cosmically,  and  the 
third  "principle"  (from  above),  or  Manas,  in  man.

Nout  {Eg.).  In  the  Egyptian  Pantheon  it  meant  the 
*' One-Only-One,"  because  it  does  not  proceed  in  the  popu- 
lar or  exoteric  religion  higher  than  the  third  manifestation 
which  radiates  from  the  Unknowable  and  the  Unknown 
in  the  Esoteric  Philosophy  of  every  nation.  The  7ious  of 
Anaxagoras  was  the  7?iahat  of  the  Hindus — Brahma,  the 
first  77ia?iifesfed  deity — ''the  mind  or  spirit  self -potent." 
This  creative  principle  is  the  prifnimi  7nohile  of  everything 
to  be  found  in  the  universe — its  soul  or  ideation.

Occultism.     See  "  Occult  Sciences."

Occultist.  One  who  practises  Occultism,  an  Adept  in 
the  secret  sciences,  but  very  often  applied  to  a  mere  student.Occultism.     See  "  Occult  Sciences."

Occultist.  One  who  practises  Occultism,  an  Adept  in 
the  secret  sciences,  but  very  often  applied  to  a  mere  student.

Occult  Sciences.  The  science  of  the  secrets  of  Nature 
— physical  and  psychic,  mental  and  spiritual ;  called  Her- 
metic and  esoteric  sciences.  In  the  West  the  Kabalah 
may  be  named ;  in  the  East,  Mysticism,  magic,  and  Yoga- 
philosophy.  The  latter  is  often  referred  to  by  the  chelds  in 
India  as  the  seve7ith  darsha7ia  or  school  of  philosophy,  there 
being  only  six  darsha7ias  in  India  known  to  the  world  of 
the  profane.  These  sciences  are,  and  have  been  for  ages, 
hidden  from  the  vulgar,  for  the  very  good  reason  that  they 
would  never  be  appreciated  by  the  selfish  educated  classes,

310  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.310  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

who  would  misuse  them  for  their  own  profit,  and  thus  turn 
the  divine  science  into  black  magic  ;  nor  by  the  uneducated, 
who  would  not  understand  them.  It  is  often  brought  for- 
ward as  an  accusation  against  the  Esoteric  Philosophy  of 
the  Kabalah  that  its  literature  is  full  of  ''  a  barbarous  and 
meaningless  jargon,"  unintelligible  to  the  ordinary  mind. 
But  do  not  exact  sciences — medicine,  physiology,  chemistry, 
and  the  rest — plead  guilty  to  the  same  impeachment  ?  Do 
not  official  scientists  veil  their  facts  and  discoveries  with  a 
newly  coined  and  most  barbarous  Greco-Latin  terminol- 
ogy ?  As  justly  remarked  by  our  late  brother,  Kenneth 
Mackenzie,  '^  to  juggle  thus  with  words,  when  the  facts  are 
so  simple,  is  the  art  of  the  scientists  of  the  present  time,  in 
striking  contrast  to  those  of  the  seventeenth  century,  who 
called  spades  spades,  and  not  '  agricultural  implements.* " 
Moreover,  while  their  ''  facts  "  would  be  as  simple  and  as 
comprehensible  if  rendered  in  ordinary  language,  the  facts 
of  occult  science  are  of  so  abstruse  a  nature  that  in  most 
cases  no  words  exist  in  European  languages  to  express  them. 
Finally,  our  "jargon"  is  a  double  necessity,  {a)  for  de- 
scribing clearly  these  j^^/^*  to  one  who  is  versed  in  the  oc- 
cult terminology;  and  (U)  for  concealing  them  from  the 
profane.

Occult  World.  The  name  of  the  first  book  treating  of 
"Theosophy,"  its  history,  and  certain  of  its  tenets,  written 
by  A.  P.  Sinnett,  then  editor  of  the  leading  Indian  paper, 
the  Pioneer^  of  Allahabad.Olympiodorus.  The  last  Neoplatonist  of  fame  and 
celebrity  in  the  school  of  Alexandria.  He  lived  in  the 
sixth  century  under  the  Emperor  Justinian.  There  were 
several  writers  and  philosophers  of  this  name  in  pre-Chris- 
tian as  in  post-Christian  periods.  One  of  these  was  the 
teacher  of  Proclus,  another  a  historian  in  the  eighth  century, 
and  so  on.

Origen.     A  Christian  churchman,  born  at  the  end  of

GLOSSARY,  311

the  second  century,  probably  in  Africa,  of  whom  Httle,  if 
anything,  is  known,  since  his  biographical  fragments  have 
passed  to  posterity  on  the  authority  of  Eusebius,  the  most 
unmitigated  falsifier  that  has  ever  existed  in  any  age.  The 
latter  is  credited  with  having  collected  upward  of  one  hun- 
dred letters  of  Origen  (Origenes  Adamantius),  which  are 
now  said  to  have  been  lost.  To  Theosophists  the  most  in- 
teresting of  all  the  works  of  Origen  is  his  ''  Doctrine  of  the 
Preexistence  of  Souls."  He  was  a  pupil  of  Ammonius 
Saccas,  and  for  a  long  time  attended  the  lectures  of  this 
great  teacher  of  philosophy.

P.

Pantaenus.  A  Platonic  philosopher  in  the  Alexandrian 
school  of  the  Philaletheians.

Pandora.  In  Greek  mythology,  the  first  woman  on 
earth,  created  by  Vulcan  out  of  clay  to  deceive  Prometheus 
and  counteract  his  gift  to  mortals.  Each  god  having  made 
her  a  present  of  some  quality,  she  was  made  to  carry  them 
in  a  box  to  Prometheus,  who,  however,  being  endowed  with 
foresight,  sent  her  away,  changing  the  gifts  into  evils.  Thus, 
when  his  brother  Epimetheus  afterward  mamed  her,  on 
opening  the  box  all  the  evils  now  afflicting  humanity  issued 
from  it,  and  have  remained  since  then  in  the  world.Pantheist.  One  who  identifies  God  with  Nature  and 
vice  versa.  If  we  have  to  regard  deity  as  an  infinite  and 
omnipresent  principle,  this  can  hardly  be  otherwise,  Nature 
being  thus  simply  the  physical  aspect  of  deity,  or  its  body.

Parabrahman  i^Sa7is!),  A  Vedantin  term  meaning 
"beyond  Brahma."  The  supreme  and  the  absolute  prin- 
ciple, impersonal  and  nameless.  In  the  Veda  it  is  referred 
to  as ''That."

Paranirv^na.  In  the  Buddhistic  philosophy,  the  high- 
est form  of  fiirvdna — beyond  the  latter.

312  THE  KEY  TO   TMEOSOPHV.

Parsis.  The  present  Persian  followers  of  Zoroaster, 
now  settled  in  India,  especially  in  Bombay  and  Gujerat; 
sun  and  fire  worshipers.  One  of  the  most  intelhgent  and 
esteemed  communities  in  the  country,  generally  occupied 
with  commercial  pursuits.  There  are  between  fifty  and 
sixty  thousand  now  left  in  India,  where  they  settled  some 
one  thousand  years  ago.

Personality.  The  teachings  of  Occultism  divide  man 
into  three  aspects — the  divine,  the  thinki?ig  or  rational,  and 
the  i7'ratio7ial  or  animal  man.  For  metaphysical  piurposes, 
also,  he  is  considered  under  a  septenary  division,  or,  as  it  is 
agreed  to  express  it  in  Theosophy,  he  is  composed  of  seven 
'^principles,"  three  of  which  constitute  the  higher  triad,  and 
the  remaining  four  the  lower  quaternary.  It  is  in  the  latter 
that  dwells  ih^ personality ,  which  embraces  all  the  character- 
istics, including  memory  and  consciousness,  of  each  physical 
life  in  turn.  The  individicality  is  the  higher  Ego  (Manas) 
of  the  triad  considered  as  a  unity.  In  other  words,  the  in- 
dividuality is  our  imperishable  Ego  which  reincarnates  and 
clothes  itself  in  a  new  personality  at  every  new  birth.Phallic  Worship.  Sex-worship ;  reverence  and  ado- 
ration shown  to  those  gods  and  goddesses  which,  like 
Shiva  and  Durga  in  India,  symbolize  respectively  the  two 
sexes.

Philadelphians.  Lit.,  ''those  who  love  their  brother- 
men."  A  sect  in  the  seventeenth  century,  founded  by  one 
Jane  Lead.  They  objected  to  all  rites,  forms,  or  cere- 
monies of  the  church,  and  even  to  the  church  itself,  but 
professed  to  be  guided  in  soul  and  spirit  by  an  internal 
deity,  their  own  Ego,  or  God  within  them.

Philaletheians.     See  "  Neoplatonists."

Philo  Judseus.  A  Hellenized  Jew  of  Alexandria,  a 
famous  historian  and  philosopher  of  the  first  century ;  born 
about  the  year  30  b.c,  and  died  between  the  years  45  and 
50  A.D.    Philo's  symbolism  of  the  Bible  is  very  remarkable.

GLOSSARY.  313

The  animals,  birds,  reptiles,  trees,  and  places  mentioned  in 
it  are  all,  it  is  said,  ''  allegories  of  conditions  of  the  soul,  of 
faculties,  dispositions,  or  passions;  the  useful  plants  were 
allegories  of  virtues,  the  noxious  of  the  affections  of  the 
unwise,  and  so  on  through  the  mineral  kingdom ;  through 
heaven,  earth,  and  stars  ;  through  fountains  and  rivers,  fields 
and  dwellings;  through  metals,  substances,  arms,  clothes, 
ornaments,  furniture,  the  body  and  its  parts,  the  sexes, 
and  our  outward  condition."  [Diet  Christ.  Biog.)  All  of 
which  would  strongly  corroborate  the  idea  that  Philo  was 
acquainted  with  the  ancient  Kabalah.

Philosopher's  Stone.  A  term  in  Alchemy ;  called  also 
the  powder  of  projection^  a  mysterious  ''principle"  having 
the  power  of  transmuting  the  base  metals  into  pure  gold. 
In  Theosophy  it  symbolizes  the  transmutation  of  the  lower 
animal  nature  of  man  into  the  highest  divine.Phren.  A  Pythagorean  term  denoting  what  we  call  the 
Kama-Manas,  still  overshadowed  by  Buddhi-Manas.

Plane.  From  the  Latin  planus^  level,  flat.  An  exten- 
sion of  space,  whether  in  the  physical  or  metaphysical  sense. 
In  Occultism,  the  range  or  extent  of  some  state  of  conscious- 
ness, or  the  state  of  matter  corresponding  to  the  perceptive 
powers  of  a  particular  set  of  senses  or  the  action  of  a  par- 
ticular force.

Planetary  Spirits.  Rulers  and  governors  of  the  planets. 
Planetary  gods.

Plastic.  Used  in  Occultism  in  reference  to  the  nature 
and  essence  of  the  astral  body,  or  the  ''  protean  soul."

Plerdma.  ''Fullness";  a  Gnostic  term  used  also  by 
St.  Paul.  Divine  world  or  the  abode  of  gods.  Universal 
space  divided  into  metaphysical  eo7is.

Plotinus.  A  distinguished  Neoplatonic  philosopher  of 
the  third  century,  a  great  practical  mystic,  renowned  for  his 
virtues  and  learning.  He  taught  a  doctrine  identical  with 
that  of  the  Vedantins,  namely,  that  the  spirit-soiil  emanated

314  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHV,

from  the  one  deific  principle,  and  after  its  pilgrimage  on 
earth  was  reunited  to  it.314  THE   KEY   TO    THEOSOPHV,

from  the  one  deific  principle,  and  after  its  pilgrimage  on 
earth  was  reunited  to  it.

Porphyry  (Porphyrius).  His  real  name  was  Melech, 
which  led  to  his  being  regarded  as  a  Jew.  He  came  from 
Tyre,  and  having  first  studied  under  Longinus,  the  eminent 
philosopher-critic,  became  the  disciple  of  Plotinus  at  Rome. 
He  was  a  Neoplatonist  and  a  distinguished  writer,  specially 
famous  for  his  controversy  with  lambHchus  regarding  the 
evils  attending  the  practice  of  Theurgy,  but  was,  however, 
finally  converted  to  the  views  of  his  opponent.  A  natural- 
born  mystic,  he  followed,  like  his  master  Plotinus,  the  pure 
Indian  Raja  Yoga  system,  which,  by  training,  leads  to  the 
union  of  the  soul  with  the  over-soul  of  the  universe,  and  of 
the  human  with  its  divine  soul,  Buddhi- Manas.  He  com- 
plains, however,  that  in  spite  of  all  his  efforts  he  reached 
the  highest  state  of  ecstasy  only  once,  and  that  when  he 
was  sixty-eight  years  of  age,  while  his  teacher  Plotinus  had 
experienced  the  supreme  bliss  six  times  during  his  life.

Pot  Amun.  A  Coptic  term  meaning  "  one  consecrated 
to  the  god  Amun,'*  the  Wisdom-god.  The  name  of  an 
Egyptian  priest  and  Occultist  under  the  Ptolemies.

Prajna  i^Sans!),  A  term  used  to  designate  the  ''univer- 
sal mind."     A  synonym  of  mahat.

Pralaya  [Sans.),  Dissolution,  the  opposite  of  manvan- 
tara,  one  being  the  period  of  rest  and  the  other  of  full  activ- 
ity (death  and  life)  of  a  planet,  or  of  the  whole  universe.

Prana  (^S'^;^^'.).  Life-principle,  the  breath  of  life,  ne- 
phesh.

Protean  Soul.  A  name  for  the  mdydvi  rupa  or  thought- 
body,  the  higher  astral  form  which  assumes  all  forms  and 
every  form  at  the  will  of  an  Adept's  thought.Protean  Soul.  A  name  for  the  mdydvi  rupa  or  thought- 
body,  the  higher  astral  form  which  assumes  all  forms  and 
every  form  at  the  will  of  an  Adept's  thought.

Psychism.  The  word  is  used  now  to  denote  every 
kind  of  mental  phenomena,  e.g.,  mediumship  as  well  as  the 
higher  form  of  sensitiveness.     A  newly  coined  word.

Puranas  (Sa^is.),    Lit., ''  the  ancient,"  referring  to  Hindu

GLOSSARY.  315

mythological  writings  or  scriptures,  of  which  there  is  a  con- 
siderable number.

Pythagoras.  The  most  famous  Greek  mystic  philos- 
opher, born  at  Samos  about  586  B.C.,  who  taught  the  helio- 
centric system  and  reincarnation,  the  highest  mathematics 
and  the  highest  metaphysics,  and  who  had  a  school  famous 
throughout  the  world.

Q.

Quaternary.  The  four  lower ''  principles  "  in  man,  those 
which  constitute  his  personality  (i.e.,  body,  astral  double, 
Prana  or  life,  organs  of  desire,  and  lower  Manas  or  brain- 
mind),  as  distinguished  from  the  higher  ternary  or  triad, 
composed  of  the  higher  spiritual  soul,  mind,  and  Atman 
(Higher  Self).

R.

Recollection,  Remembrance,  Reminiscence.  Occul- 
tists make  a  difference  betw^een  these  three  functions.  As, 
however,  a  glossary  cannot  contain  the  full  explanation  of 
every  term  in  all  its  metaphysical  and  subtle  differences,  we 
can  only  state  here  that  these  terms  vary  in  their  applica- 
tions, according  to  whether  they  relate  to  the  past  or  the 
present  birth,  and  whether  one  or  the  other  of  these  phases 
of  memory  emanates  from  the  spiritual  or  the  material  brain, 
or,  again,  from  the  '' individuahty  "  or  the  '*  personality."Reincarnation,  or  Rebirth.  The  once  universal  doctrjne 
which  taught  that  the  Ego  is  born  on  this  earth  an  innu- 
merable number  of  times.  Nowadays  it  is  denied  by  Chris- 
tians, who  seem  to  misunderstand  the  teachings  of  their  own 
Gospels.  Nevertheless  the  putting  on  of  flesh  periodically 
and  throughout  long  cycles  by  the  higher  human  soul  (Bud- 
dhi- Manas)  or  Ego  is  taught  in  the  Bible,  as  it  is  in  all  other 
ancient  scriptures,  and  ''  resiurection  "  means  only  the  re- 
birth of  the  Ego  in  another  form.

316  THE  KEY  TO    THE O SOPHY.

Reuchlin,  John.  A  great  German  philosopher  and  phi- 
lologist, Kabalist  and  scholar.  He  was  bom  at  Pforzheim, 
in  Germany,  in  1455,  and  early  in  youth  was  a  diplomat. 
At  one  period  of  his  life  he  held  the  high  office  of  judge 
of  the  tribunal  at  Tubingen,  where  he  remained  for  eleven 
years.  He  was  also  the  preceptor  of  Melanchthon,  and 
was  greatly  persecuted  by  the  clergy  for  his  glorification  of 
the  Hebrew  Kabalah,  though  at  the  same  time  called  the 
"  Father  of  the  Reformation."  He  died  in  1522,  in  great 
poverty,  the  common  fate  of  all  who  in  those  days  went 
against  the  dead  letter  of  the  church.

S.

Sacred  Science.  The  epithet  given  to  the  occult  sci- 
ences in  general,  and  by  the  Rosicrucians  to  the  Kabalah, 
and  especially  to  the  Hermetic  philosophy.

Samadhi  {Sans,),  The  name  in  India  for  spiritual 
ecstasy.  It  is  a  state  of  complete  trance,  induced  by 
means  of  mystic  concentration.

Samkhara  {Fall),  One  of  the  five  Buddhist  skandhas 
or  attributes.     ''  Tendencies  of  mind."

Samma  Sambuddha  [Fdli),  The  sudden  remembrance 
of  all  one's  past  incarnations,  a  phenomenon  of  memory 
obtained  through  Yoga.     A  Buddhist  mystic  term.Samma  Sambuddha  [Fdli),  The  sudden  remembrance 
of  all  one's  past  incarnations,  a  phenomenon  of  memory 
obtained  through  Yoga.     A  Buddhist  mystic  term.

Samothrace.  An  island  in  the  Grecian  Archipelago, 
famous  in  days  of  old  for  the  Mysteries  celebrated  in  its 
temples.     These  Mysteries  were  world-renowned.

Samyuttaka  Nikaya  [Fdli).  One  of  the  Buddhist 
sUfras,

Sann^  [Fdli).  One  of  the  five  skaiidhas  or  attributes, 
meaning  "abstract  ideas."

S6ance.  A  term  now  used  to  denote  a  sitting  with  a 
medium  for  sundry  phenomena.  Used  chiefly  among  the 
Spiritualists.

GLOSSARY.     .  317

Self.  There  are  two  Selves  in  men — the  higher  and  the 
lower,  the  impersonal  and  the  personal  Self.  One  is  divine, 
the  other  semi-animal.  A  great  distinction  should  be  made 
between  the  two.

Sephiroth.  A  Hebrew  Kabalistic  word  for  the  ten 
divine  emanations  from  Ain  Suph,  the  impersonal,  universal 
principle,  or  deity.

Skandhas.  The  attributes  of  every  personality,  which 
after  death  form  the  basis,  so  to  say,  for  a  new  karmic  re- 
incarnation. They  are  five  in  the  popular  or  exoteric  sys- 
tem of  the  Buddhists :  i.e.,  rupa^  form  or  body,  which  leaves 
behind  it  its  magnetic  atoms  and  occult  affinities ;  vedand, 
sensations,  which  do  likewise  ;  sannd,  or  abstract  ideas,  which 
are  the  creative  powers  at  work  from  one  incarnation  to 
another ;  samkhdra^  tendencies  of  mind ;  and  viniidna,  men- 
tal powers.

Somnambulism.  *' Sleep-walking."  A  psychophysio- 
logical state,  too  well  known  to  need  explanation.Somnambulism.  *' Sleep-walking."  A  psychophysio- 
logical state,  too  well  known  to  need  explanation.

Spiritism.  The  same  as  the  following,  with  the  differ- 
ence that  the  Spiritualists  almost  unanimously  reject  the 
doctrine  of  reincarnation,  while  the  Spiritists  make  of  it  the 
fundamental  principle  in  their  belief.  There  is,  however, 
a  vast  difference  between  the  views  of  the  latter  and  the 
philosophical  teachings  of  Eastern  Occultists.  Spiritists  be- 
long to  the  French  school  founded  by  Allan  Kardec,  and 
the  Spirituahsts  of  America  and  England  to  that  of  the  "  Fox 
girls,"  who  inaugurated  their  theories  at  Rochester,  N.  Y. 
Theosophists,  while  believing  in  the  mediumistic  phenom- 
ena of  both  Spirituahsts  and  Spiritists,  reject  the  idea  of 
*' spirits."

Spiritualism.  The  modern  behef  that  the  spirits  of  the 
dead  return  on  earth  to  commune  with  the  living.

St.  Germain,  Count.  A  mysterious  personage,  who 
appeared  in  the  last  century  and  early  in  the  present  one 
in  France,  England,  and  elsewhere.

318  THE  KEY  TO    THEOSOPHY.

Sthiila  Sharira  {Sans.).  The  human  physical  body  in 
Occultism  and  Vedantic  philosophy.

Sthulopadhi  {Sans.).  The  physical  body  in  its  waking, 
conscious  state  {jagrat).

Sukshmopadhi  {Sans).  The  physical  body  in  the 
dreaming  state  {svapfia),  and  kdranopddhi^  the  "causal 
body."  These  terms  belong  to  the  teachings  of  the  Taraka 
Raja  Yoga  school.

Summer=Iand.  The  fancy  name  given  by  the  Spiritual- 
ists to  the  abode  of  their  disembodied  ''  spirits/'  which  they 
locate  somewhere  in  the  Milky  Way.  It  is  described,  on 
the  authority  of  returfiing  "spirits,"  as  a  lovely  land,  hav- 
ing beautiful  cities  and  buildings,  a  congress  hall,  museums, 
etc.,  etc.     (See  the  works  of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis.)Swedenborg,  Emanuel.  A  famous  scholar  and  clair- 
voyant of  the  past  century,  a  man  of  great  learning,  who 
had  vastly  contributed  to  science,  but  whose  Mysticism 
and  transcendental  philosophy  placed  him  in  the  ranks  of 
hallucinated  visionaries.  He  is  now  universally  known  as 
the  founder  of  the  Swedenborgian  sect,  or  the  New  Jeru- 
salem Church.  He  was  born  at  Stockholm  (Sweden)  in 
1688,  from  Lutheran  parents,  his  father  being  the  Bishop 
of  West  Gothland.  His  original  name  was  Swedberg,  but 
on  his  being  ennobled  and  knighted  in  17 19  it  was  changed 
to  Swedenborg.  He  became  a  mystic  in  1743,  and  four 
years  later  (in  1747)  resigned  his  office  (of  Assessor  Ex- 
traordinary to  the  College  of  Mines)  and  gave  himself  up 
entirely  to  Mysticism.     He  died  in  1772.

Taijasa  (fe^^i".).  From  tejas^  fire;  meaning  the  "radi- 
ant," the  "  luminous  "  ;  referring  to  the  mdnasa-rupa,  "  the 
body  of  manas,^^  also  to  the  stars  and  the  starlike  shining 
envelopes.  A  term  in  Vedantic  philosophy,  having  other 
meanings  besides  the  occult  signification  just  given.

GLOSSARY.  319

Taraka  R^ja  Yoga  {Sans.).     One  of  the  Brahmanical

Yoga  systems,  the  most  philosophical,  and,  in  fact,  the  most 
secret  of  all,  as  its  real  tenets  are  never  given  out  publicly. 
It  is  a  purely  intellectual  and  spiritual  school  of  training.

Tetragrammaton  (Gr,).  The  deity-name  in  four  let- 
ters, which  are  in  their  English  form  IHVH.  It  is  a  Kaba- 
listical  term,  and  corresponds  on  a  more  material  plane  to 
the  sacred  Pythagorean  tetraktys.

Theodidaktos  (6^r.).  The  "  God-taught,"  a  title  applied 
to  Ammonius  Saccas.

Theogony.  From  the  Greek  theogo?iia,  ht.,  the  ''genesis 
of  the  gods."

Theosophia  {Gr.).  Lit.,  "divine  wisdom  or  thewnsdom 
of  the  gods."Theogony.  From  the  Greek  theogo?iia,  ht.,  the  ''genesis 
of  the  gods."

Theosophia  {Gr.).  Lit.,  "divine  wisdom  or  thewnsdom 
of  the  gods."

Therapeutse,  or  Therapeuts  {Gr.).  A  school  of  Jewish 
mystic  healers,  or  esotericists,  wrongly  referred'  to  by  some 
as  a  sect.  They  resided  in  and  near  Alexandria,  and  their 
doings  and  beliefs  are  to  this  day  a  mystery  to  the  critics, 
as  their  philosophy  seems  a  combination  of  Orphic,  Pythag- 
orean, Essenian,  and  purely  Kabalistic  practices.

Theurgy.  From  the  Greek  theioiirgia.  Rites  for  bring- 
ing down  to  earth  planetary  and  other  spirits  or  gods.  To 
arrive  at  the  realization  of  such  an  object  the  Theurgist  had 
to  be  absolutely  pure  and  unselfish  in  his  motives.  The 
practice  of  Theurgy  is  very  undesirable  and  even  dangerous 
in  the  present  day.  The  world  has  become  too  corrupt 
and  wicked  for  the  practice  of  that  which  such  holy  and 
learned  men  as  Ammonius,  Plotinus,  Porphyry,  and  lambli- 
chus  (the  most  learned  Theurgist  of  all)  could  alone  attempt 
with  impunity.  In  our  day  Theurgy,  or  divine,  beneficent 
magic,  is  but  too  apt  to  become  goetic,  or,  in  other  words, 
sorcery.  Theurgy  is  the  first  of  the  three  subdivisions  of 
magic,  which  are  theurgic,  goetic,  and  natural  magic.

Thread  Soul.  The  same  as  stitrdtmd,  which  see  under 
"  Manas-sutratma."

320  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

Thumos  {Gr.),  A  Pythagorean  and  Platonic  term; 
applied  to  an  aspect  of  the  human  soul,  to  denote  its  pas- 
sionate kama-rupic  condition  ;  almost  equivalent  to  the  San- 
skrit word  tamas,  the  quality  of  darkness,  and  probably  de- 
rived from  the  latter.TiiTifieus  of  Locris.  A  Pythagorean  philosopher,  born 
at  Locris.  He  differed  somewhat  from  his  teacher  in  the 
doctrine  of  metempsychosis.  He  wrote  a  treatise  on  the 
soul  of  the  world  and  its  nature  and  essence,  which  is  in 
the  Doric  dialect  and  still  extant.

Triad,  or  Trinity.  In  every  religion  and  philosophy,  the 
three  in  one.

U.

Universal  Brotherhood.  The  subtitle  of  the  Theo- 
sophical  Society,  and  the  first  of  the  three  objects  professed 
by  it.

Upadhi  {Sa?ts.),  Basis  of  something,  substructure ;  as 
in  Occultism  substance  is  the  upadhi  of  spirit.

Upanishad  {Sans).  Lit.,  ''esoteric  doctrine."  The 
third  division  of  the  Vedas,  and  classed  with  revelation 
{shrtUi  or  ''revealed  word  ").  Some  one  hundred  and  fifty 
or  even  two  hundred  of  the  Upanishads  still  remain  ex- 
tant, though  no  more  than  about  twelve  can  be  fully  relied 
upon  as  free  from  falsification.  These  twelve  are  all  earlier 
than  the  sixth  century  B.C.  Like  the  Kabalah,  which  in- 
terprets the  esoteric  sense  of  the  Bible,  so  the  Upanishads 
explain  the  mystic  sense  of  the  Vedas.  Professor  Cowell 
has  two  statements  regarding  the  Upanishads,  as  interesting 
as  they  are  correct.  Thus  he  says :  ( i )  These  works  have 
"one  remarkable  peculiarity,  the  total  absence  of  any 
Brahmanical  exclusiveness  in  their  doctrine.  .  .  .  They 
breathe  an  entirely  different  spirit,  a  freedom  of  thought 
unknown  in  any  earlier  work  except  the  Rig  Veda  hymns 
themselves";  and  (2)  "the  great  teachers  of  the  higher

GLOSSARY.  321GLOSSARY.  321

knowledge  \gupta-vidya\^  and  Brahmans,  are  continually 
represented  as  going  to  Kshatriya  kings  to  become  their 
pupils  \chelds\'''  This  shows  conclusively  that  (a)  the 
Upanishads  were  written  before  the  enforceme7it  of  caste 
and  Brahmanical  power,  and  are  thus  only  second  in  an- 
tiquity to  the  Vedas ;  and  (b)  that  the  occult  sciences,  or 
the  ''higher  knowledge,"  as  Cowell  puts  it,  are  far  older 
than  the  Brahmans  in  India,  or,  at  any  rate,  than  the  caste 
system.  The  Upanishads  are,  however,  far  later  than 
gupta-vidyd^  or  the  ''secret  science,"  which  is  as  old  as 
human  philosophical  thought  itself.

V.

V^han  {Sans),     "Vehicle."     A  synonym  of  upddhi.

Vallabacharyas  (&?;2^.)-  The  "sect  of  the  Mahara- 
jas*'; a  licentious  phallic- worshiping  community,  whose 
main  branch  is  at  Bombay.  The  object  of  the  worship  is 
the  infant  Krishna.  The  Anglo-Indian  government  has 
been  compelled  several  times  to  interfere  in  order  to  put  a 
stop  to  its  rites  and  vile  practices,  and  its  governing 
Maharaja,  a  kind  of  high  priest,  was  more  than  once  im- 
prisoned, and  very  justly  so.  It  is  one  of  the  blackest 
spots  of  India.

Vedanta  {Sans>i,  Meaning,  literally,  the  "end  of  [all] 
knowledge."  Among  the  six  darsha?ias  or  schools  of  phi- 
losophy it  is  also  called  Uttaramimansa,  or  the  "later'' 
Mimansa.  There  are  those  who,  unable  to  understand  its 
esotericism,  consider  it  atheistical ;  but  this  is  not  so,  as 
Shankaracharya,  the  great  apostle  of  this  school,  and  its  pop- 
ularizer,  was  one  of  the  greatest  mystics  and  Adepts  of  India.

Vidya  {Sans),  Knowledge,  or  rather  "  wisdom-know- 
ledge."

Vinnana  (Pd/i).  One  of  the  five  skandhas;  meaning, 
exoterically,  "  mental  powers."

322  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

w.Vidya  {Sans),  Knowledge,  or  rather  "  wisdom-know- 
ledge."

Vinnana  (Pd/i).  One  of  the  five  skandhas;  meaning, 
exoterically,  "  mental  powers."

322  THE  KEY   TO    THEOSOPHY.

w.

Wisdom-Religion.  The  same  as  Theosophy.  The 
name  given  to  the  secret  doctrine  which  underlies  every 
exoteric  scripture  and  religion.

Yoga  {Sa7is,).  A  school  of  philosophy  founded  by 
PatanjaH,  but  which  existed  as  a  distinct  teaching  and 
system  of  life  long  before  that  sage.  It  is  Yajnavalkya,  a 
famous  and  very  ancient  sage,  to  whom  the  White  Yajw 
Veda^  the  Shatapatha  Brahmaiia^  and  the  Brihad  Aranyaka 
are  attributed,  and  who  lived  in  pre-Mahabharatean  times, 
who  is  credited  with  inculcating  the  necessity  and  positive 
duty  of  rehgious  meditation  and  retirement  into  the  forests, 
and  who,  therefore,  is  believed  to  have  originated  the  Yoga 
doctrine.  Professor  Max  Mliller  states  that  it  is  Yajna- 
valkya who  prepared  the  world  for  the  preaching  of  Bud- 
dha. Patanjali's  Yoga,  however,  is  more  definite  and 
precise  as  a  philosophy,  and  embodies  more  of  the  occult 
sciences  than  any  of  the  works  attributed  to  Yajnavalkya.

Yogi,  or  Yogin  {Sans.).  A  devotee,  one  who  practises 
the  Yoga  system.  There  are  various  grades  and  kinds  of 
Yogis,  and  the  term  has  now  become  in  India  a  generic 
name  to  designate  every  kind  of  ascetic.

Yuga  {Sans^.  An  age  of  the  world,  of  which  there  are 
four,  which  follow  each  other  in  a  series,  namely,  krita  (or 
satyd)  yuga^  the  golden  age;  trefd  yuga,  dvdpara  yuga,  and 
finally  kali  yuga ^  the  black  age — in  which  we  now  are.

Zenobia.  The  queen  of  Palmyra,  defeated  by  the  Em- 
peror Aurehanus.  She  had  for  her  instructor  Longinus, 
the  famous  critic  and  logician  in  the  third  century  a.d.

GLOSSARY.  323GLOSSARY.  323

Zivo,  Kabar  or  Jukabar.  The  name  of  one  of  the  cre- 
ative deities  in  the  Nazarene  Codex.

Zohar  {Heb,\  The  Book  of  "  Splendor,"  a  Kabalistic 
work  attributed  to  Simeon  ben-Iochai,  in  the  first  century 
of  our  era.

Zoroastrian.  One  who  follows  the  religion  of  the 
Parsis,  sun  or  fire  worshipers.

[Readers  requiring  fuller  information  about  any  particular 
term  should  consult  The  Theosophical  Glossary. \

INDEX.

Abammon,  3.

Absolute,  2,  40,  55,  58,  59,  63, 
75»  77>  82,  95,  106,  154,  179, 
188.

Absolute  consciousness,  58,  89.

Absolute  harmony,  99.

Absolute  impartiality,  99.

Absolute  justice,  97,  124.

Absolute  law,  59.

Absolute  logic,  99.

Absolute  nothing,  103.

Absolute  oblivion,  131.

Absolute  Spirit,  61,  102.

Absolute  unity,  137.

Absolute  wisdom,  97.

Absoluteness,  55,  58,  81.

Absorption,  10 1,  102.

Abstract,  38,  138.

Abstractions,  114.

Accident,   108.

Accumulated  misery,  182.

Action,  42,  63,  64,  126,  177,  183,

191,  205. 
Acts^  loi. 
Adam,  166.

Adam  Kadmon,  166.

Adepts,  19,  20,  131,  134,  178,  189,

192,  244,  247,  248,  250. 
Adjustment,  188. 
Adultery,  68.

Aebel  Zivo,  166. 
^ther,  94.

Affection,  spiritual,  133. 
Affinities,  karmic,  153. 
After-life,  142. 
Age,  golden,  53, 
Age,  unspiritual,  34.

Aged  of  the  Aged,  166.

Agnoia,  85.

Agnostic  Journal,  39.

Agnostics,  85,  196,  241^

Ahamkara,  120.

Ain  Suph,  56.

Alchemists,  2.

Alchemy,  19,  34.

Alexandria,  5.

Alexandrian  philosophers,  I,  94.

All,  30,  75,  76,  102,  106,  108, 162.

Allegory,  70.

Altruism,  48,  213,  223,  224.

Amelioration,  209.

American  Spiritualists,  131.

Americans,  12.

Ammonius,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,Allegory,  70.

Altruism,  48,  213,  223,  224.

Amelioration,  209.

American  Spiritualists,  131.

Americans,  12.

Ammonius,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,

21,  112. 
Amun,  2. 
Analogeticists,  2, 
Analogy,  2. 
Ananda,  13,  72,  73. 
Anaxagoras,  85. 
Angels,  92,  164. 
Anima  bruta,  94. 
Anima  divina,  94. 
Anima  mundi,  94. 
Animal  characteristics,  232. 
Animal  desires,  107,  156,  163. 
Animal  flesh,  232. 
Animal  food,  232. 
Animal  instincts,  %T,y  105,  156. 
Animal  intelligence,  128. 
Animal-minded  man,  107. 
Animal  passions,  65,  86,  87,  107,

113,  156,  163. 
Animal  plane,  I28»

325

326

INDEX,

Animal  soul,  67,  82,  %Ty^  85,  91,

94,  102,  105,  108,  127,  136. 
Animal  tissue,  232. 
Animalizing  effect,  232. 
Animals,  92,  93,  loi,  no,  127. 
Annihilation,  71,  %t,^  92,  100,  loi,

102,    138,   145,   146,   150,    165,

169,  194. 
Anoia,  ^t^,  103. 
Anthropomorphic  God,  56,  98. 
Anthropomorphism,  60,  61. 
Apollonius  of  Tyana,  22. 
Arabia,  Hierophants  of,  t^Z' 
Arcane  Section  of  T.  S.,  35. 
Archaic  Doctrine,  54,  81,  102. 
Archaic  knowledge,  2>Z' 
Archaic  philosophy,  84. 
Arhats,  13,  14,  71. 
Aristobulus,  5. 
Aristotle,  5,  94. 
Arnold,  Edwin,  190. 
Aryan  philosophy,  40. 
Asceticism,  230,  231. 
Ascetics,  231,  245. 
Aspects  (see  Principles). 
Aspiration,  61,  202. 
Association  of  ideas,  no,  112. 
Astral  body,  26,  82,  84,  85,  127,

135  (see  Double). 
Astral  capsule,  92. 
Astral  eidolons,  127. 
Astral  entity,  128. 
Astral  inner  man,  161,  186. 
Astral  principles,  91,  127, 
Astral  remains,  26. 
Astral  shadow,  87. 
Astral  soul,  93. 
Astrology,  20. 
Atheism,  72.

Atheists,  56,  66,  188,  240. 
Athenagoras,  7. 
Athenians,  87. 
Atma,  62,  %2)i  86,  91,  94,  96,  102,

104,    105,   108,    119,    120,  140, 
^  154,  155,  156,  161,  166,  167. 
Atma-Buddhi,   ^^^  85,    100,    102, 
^  108.104,    105,   108,    119,    120,  140, 
^  154,  155,  156,  161,  166,  167. 
Atma-Buddhi,   ^^^  85,    100,    102, 
^  108.

Atma-Buddhi-Manas,  127. 
Atma-Buddhic  light,  61. 
Atma-Buddhic  monad,  114. 
Atman,  61,  90,  100. 
Atmic  elements,  87.

Atmic  vehicle,  156.

Atom,  58,  76.

Atonement,  94,  177,  189,  197,  198.

Attributes,  114,  115,  142.

Aura,  128.

Authority,  195.

Avatara,  160.

Bactria,  Sages  of,  4.

Balance  of  national  Karma,  182.

Banner  of  Lights  130.

Becoming,  Ever-,  59.

Being,  57,  58,  149,  151.

Belief,  147,  151,  195.

Belief  and  unbelief,  effect  of,  151.

Bellamy,  Edward,  40.

Be-ness,  58,  102.

Bhagavad  Gttd,  44,  61.

Bible,  7,  2>1,  62,  96,  99,  loi,  241.

Bigandet,  Bishop,  66.

Bigotry,  43.

Birth  (see  Rebirth).

Bishop,  Washington  Irving,  173.

Black  Brotherhood,  248.

Black  magic,  20,  61,  249.

Blind  faith  (see  Faith).

Bliss,  63,  88,  89,   129,   131,  134,

143-

Blood,  166,  199.

Blood  of  Christ,  177,  198.

Board  schools,  236.

Body  (see  Physical  body).

Body,  celestial,  121.

Body,  terrestrial,  121.

B6hme,  Jakob,  3,  20.

Book  of  Keys,  96.

Brahma,  154.

Brahma,  76,  141.

Brahma- Vidya,  2.

Brahman  as,  72.

Brahmans,  8,  12,  63,  72,  197,  198.

Brain,  60,  82,  no,  113,  128,  135, 
168.

Brain  intellect,  87.

Brain-stuff,  237.

Breath,  87,  102,  164.

Brotherhood  (see  Universal  Bro- 
therhood).

Brothers  of  the  Shadow,  248.

Brown-S^quard,  Dr.,  249.

Brutality,  209.

Brutes  (see  Animals).

INDEX.

327

Buck,  Dr.  J.  D.,  15.

Buddha,  7,  12,  13,  43,  44,  64,  70,

7i»  72,   73>  74,  loi,   115,  119,

176,  203,  211. 
Buddhas,  135,  166. 
Buddhi,  61,  82,  %Zy  86,  87,  90,

94,    102,    108,    120,    138,    140,

148,   154,   156,   158,   163,    165,

166,  168. 
Buddhi-Manas,  96,  108,  117,  141,94,    102,    108,    120,    138,    140,

148,   154,   156,   158,   163,    165,

166,  168. 
Buddhi-Manas,  96,  108,  117,  141,

142,  155- 
Buddhi-Taijasa,  146. 
Buddhic  radiance,  154. 
Buddhism,  9,    12,  14,  66,  69,  70,

74,  220. 
Buddhist  Birth  Stories,  119. 
Buddhist  Catechism,  69,  115,  118. 
Buddhist  texts,  103. 
Buddhists,    12,  66,   70,  90,   100,

169,  176,  177,  197,  198,  219. 
Budhism,  13,  70. 
Butler,  112.

Cadaver,  104.

Cant,  205.

Caste,  255.

Causal  body,  104,  108,  120,  153,

154. 
Causation,  208,  211. 
Cause,  178,  199,  208. 
Celestial  body,  124. 
Celibacy,  230.

Centrifugal  spiritual  energy,  168. 
Centripetal  spiritual  energy,  168. 
Ceremonial  magic,  3. 
Ceylon,  66,  71. 
Chain,  79.

Chaldsea,  Hierophants  of,  ^tZ- 
Chaldees,  22. 
Change,  69,  105,  141. 
Character,  119,  209. 
Charges  against  Madame  Blavat-

sky,  250. 
Charity,  40,    71,   215,   217,   222,

223. 
Charity  of  mind,  215. 
Chelas,  106. 
Children,  235. 
Chinese  Buddhism,  13. 
Christ  (see  Jesus  Christ). 
Christendom,  66. 
Christian  Church,  74,  235,  252.

Christian  duties,  203,  215. 
Christian  fathers,  10 1. 
Christian  savages,  213. 
Christian  scientists,  65. 
Christian  theology,  84,  138,  164,

194. 
Christianity,    3,   49,    50,   66,    71,

loi,  137,  165,  198,  203,  204. 
Christians,  49,   62,  63,   66,   152,

167,  176,  196,  198,  204,  216. 
Christos,  61,  64,  138,  165,  166. 
Civilization,  219. 
Clairvoyance,  191. 
Classes  in  society,  179. 
Clemens  Alexandrinus,  4,  34. 
Clement,  5,  7. 
Coarsening  effect  of  flesh-eating,

232. 
Codex  NazarcBus,  166. 
Coleridge,  121. 
Collective  suffering,  180. 
Commandments,  68. 
Communications  with  spirits,  25,

26,    129,    134,    136,    170,    172,

173.

Compassion,  192.

Compensation,  162.

Concrete,  50.

Confucius,  7,  44,  212.

Connelly,  J.  H.,  184,  189.26,    129,    134,    136,    170,    172,

173.

Compassion,  192.

Compensation,  162.

Concrete,  50.

Confucius,  7,  44,  212.

Connelly,  J.  H.,  184,  189.

Conscience,  121,  167,  214,  223.

Conscious  immortality,  147.

Conscious  life,  146,  147.

Conscious  soul,  133.

Consciousness,  27,  31,  58,  60,  77, 
80,  83,  84,  %'^,  89,  95,  96,  105, 
107,  117,  120,  121,  130,  134, 
139,  140,  141,  142,  143,  144, 
145,  150,  153,  154,  155,  158, 
159,   160,    193,   194.

Contemplation  (see  Meditation).

Continuity,  140.

Cooperation,  207.

Correlation  of  forces,  91.

Correspondences,  2,  87.

Cosmic  progress,  153.

Cosmical  ocean,  93.

Cosmos,  58,  77,  85.

Creation,  56,  57,  75,  98,  164,  166.

Creator,  55,  57.

Credulity,  195.

Creed,  T.  S.,  has  no,  17,  51,  54.

32d

INDEX.

Creeds,  255.

Crime,   66,    199,    200,   219,   221,

238,  252. 
Cup  of  life,  204. 
Cycle  of  being,  57. 
Cycle   of   incarnations,    31,    132,

142,  148,  161,  162. 
Cycle  of  life,  57,  76,  89,  95,  98,

102,  167,  175. 
Cycle  of  necessity,  149. 
Cyclic  rest,  134. 
Cyclic  transmigrations,  100.

Daily  life  (see  Life). 
Damien,  Father,  212,  213. 
Damnation,  131,  213,  216. 
Dangers     of     intercourse     with

spirits,  170,  172. 
Darkness,  99. 
David,  62.

Days  and  Nights  of  Brahma,  76. 
Dead,  131.

Dear  departed  ones,  131. 
Death,    11,  31,   71,   84,  87,   108,

113,   130,    134,    140,   142,   143,

144,    146,   148,   151,   168,    169,

196. 
Deed,  125,  177,  183,  191. 
Defence  of  T.  S.,  221. 
Deific  Principle,  56. 
Deists,  57. 
Deity,  14,  58,  59,  60,  85,  87,  89,

99,    loi,    102,    138,    161,    177,

186,  197,  198. 
Delusion,  132. 
Demerit,  128,  178. 
Demeter,  88. 
Demoniacal  wisdom,  82. 
Deniers,  65. 
Descent   of    spiritual  Ego,    137,

144. 
Destiny,  137,  161,  186,  192,  214. 
Devachan,  88,  89,  96,   114,  117,144. 
Destiny,  137,  161,  186,  192,  214. 
Devachan,  88,  89,  96,   114,  117,

118,   125,   127,   129,   131,   134,

136,   138,   144,   151,  153,   157,

163,   167,   168,  169,   177,   192. 
Devachani,   130,  131,  133. 
Devas,  63. 
Development,  48,  138,  207,  208,

209,  210,  213,  231,   232,  241,

246,  255. 
Dhamma,  73.

Dharma,  190. 
Dhyan  Chohans,  141,  I49. 
Dhyana,  loi.

Difference  between  men  and  ani- 
mals, 93. 
Diogenes  Laertius,  2. 
Discord,  256. 
Discretion,  227. 
Discrimination,  212. 
Disease,  172,  233. 
Disembodied  Ego,  153. 
Disembodied  soul,  152. 
Disembodied  spirits,  170. 
Disharmony,  183. 
Disintegration  of  principles,    88,

.113- 
Distributive  Karma,  180,  182. 
Divine  aspect  of  man,  115. 
Divine  being,  149. 
Divine  consciousness,  107. 
Divine  Ego,  70,  %2>,  93,  149,  156. 
Divine  essence,    10,  39,  90,  108,

194. 
Divine  excellence,  102. 
Divine  fire,  161. 
Divine  justice,  108. 
Divine  knowledge,  i,  2,  12. 
Divine  light,  48. 
Divine  love,  133. 
Divine  man,  108,  157. 
Divine  mind,  163. 
Divine  nature,  51. 
Divine  powers,  161. 
Divine  principle,  56,  98,  105,  120,

I37»  I5S>   i^o- 
Divine  science,  i,  "^^i' 
Divine  secrets,  12. 
Divine  self,  47.

Divine  soul,  106,  137,  141,  142. 
Divine  spirit,  66,  %:i,y  90. 
Divine  substance,  83. 
Divine  transfiguration,  84. 
Divine  triad,  163. 
Divine  Wisdom,  i,  3,  50. 
Divinity,   193,  216. 
Doctrines  of  Theosophy,  16,  55,

109,  III,  193,  208,  209,  221. 
Dogma,  12,  52,  68,  190,  193,  196,

255- 
Double,    26,    86,    105,    106,   107,

127,  156. 
Dreaming  state,  104.

INDEX.

329

Dreamless  sleep,  143,  146,  147. 
Dreams,   28,   80,   133,    145,    T46,

147,  150,  152. 
Drugs,  233. 
Duad,  120. 
Dual    Manas,   82,   Z^iy    120,    140,

156,  158. 
Dual  monad,  108. 
Duality,  96. 
Dugpas,  248,  250. 
Duty,  40,  44,  193,  203,  204,  205,147,  150,  152. 
Drugs,  233. 
Duad,  120. 
Dual    Manas,   82,   Z^iy    120,    140,

156,  158. 
Dual  monad,  108. 
Duality,  96. 
Dugpas,  248,  250. 
Duty,  40,  44,  193,  203,  204,  205,

207,  209,   213,  214,  215,   223,

224,  227,   255.

Earlier  Theosophical  movements,

16,  256. 
Earth,  77,  87,  125. 
Earth  chain,  79. 
Earth   life,    108,    117,    132,    138,

146,  147,  148,  150,  152,  157, 
192.

Eastern  philosophy,  30,  95,  103.

Eastern  school,  141.

Eastern  teachings,  91.

Eastern  terms,  English  equiva- 
lents for,  155.

Eastern  wisdom,  81.

Eclectic  Theosophical  system, 
2,  4.

Ecstasy,  4,  10,  63,  112.

Edinburgh  Encyclopedia^  7.

Edkins,  Rev.  J.,  13.

Education,  219,  235,  236,  237, 
238,  241,

Effect,  137,  199.

Efficacy  of  Theosophy,  37.

Efflorescence,  spiritual,  168.

Eglinton,  172.

Ego,  26,  28,  30,  31,  61,  70,  72, 
73,  82,  %z,  84,  85,  86,  88,  92, 
93»  94,  95,  98,  100,  102,  104, 
105,  106,  107,  III,  113,  114, 
115,  116,  117,  118,  119,  120, 
121,   122,  124,    125,   129,   130,

131,  133,  134,  136,  138,  139, 
141,   142,   143,   144,  145,   146,

147,  148,  149,  153,  i54»  155, 
156,  157,  158,  I59>  160,  161, 
162,  163,  164,  165,  166,  167, 
168,  169,  175,  214,  248.

Egoship,  120. 
Egotism,  63.

Egypt,  Hierophants  of,  8,  2>Z* 
Egyptian  doctrines,  6. 
Egyptian  system,  84. 
Egyptians,  zz,  86. 
Eidolon,  86,  89,  113,  127. 
Element,  87,  105. 
Elementals,  26. 
Elementaries,  163. 
Eleusinian  Mysteries,  8,  34. 
Eleiisinian  Mysteries,  196. 
Elevation  of  the  race,  208. 
Emanation,   56,   76,  83,  98,  103,

193,  194-

Emerson,  220.

Empedocles,  94.

Energy,  spiritual,  168.

English  equivalents  for  Eastern 
terms,  155.

Enthusiasm,  220.

Entities,  89,  122.

Entity,  82,  95,  loi,  128,  154,  157, 
160,  162,  164,  176.

Environment,  116,  123,  179,  181.

Epictetus,  214.Enthusiasm,  220.

Entities,  89,  122.

Entity,  82,  95,  loi,  128,  154,  157, 
160,  162,  164,  176.

Environment,  116,  123,  179,  181.

Epictetus,  214.

Epilepsy,  a  symptom  of  medium- 
ship,  173.

Epistles,  10 1.

Equilibrium,  182.

Equity,  68,   137,  176.

Errors  of  nature,  196.

Esoteric  Biiddhis7n,  13,  53,  54,  62, 
79,  83,  185,  250.

Esoteric  doctrine,  140,  220.

Esoteric  instructions,  19.

Esoteric  philosophy,  19,  86,  118.

Esoteric  section  of  T.  S.,  17,  19,

35,  45,  54. 
Essence,   10,   39,  60,  63,  90,  92,

98,    102,    108,    147,    153,    154,

163,  194. 
Essenes  of  Carmel,  5,  9. 
Essential  being,  103. 
Eternal  Ego,  125. 
Eternal  life,  151. 
Eternal  light,  100. 
Eternal  punishment,  98,  191. 
Eternal  reward,  98. 
Eternity,  102,  142,  148,  151,  159. 
Ether,  114.

Ethics,  14,  22,  35,  44,  203. 
Eurasians,  66. 
Europeans,  12.

330

INDEX.

Ever-Becoming,  59.

Everlasting  Truth,  254.

Evil,  99,  160,  177,  179,  180,  183, 
187,  200,  203,  209,  218,  219, 
221,   226,  242.

Evil  powers,  248.

Evolution,  56,  58,  76,  108,  209.

Example,  221.

Existence  after  death  (see  Post- 
mortem life).

Existence,  spiritual,  202.

Experience,  79,  163,  201,  202.

Ex-personality,  127.

External  plane,  196.

Extra-cosmic  God,  98.

Eyes,  spiritual,  146.

Faculties,  inner,  153,  232,  255.

Faculties,  rational,  10 1.

Failure    of   earlier   Theosophical

movements,  255. 
Failures  of  nature,  151,  167,  176. 
Faith,  176,  194,  195,  241. 
Fakirs,  231.

Fall  of  spirit  into  matter,  200. 
Family  duties,  214. 
Family  group,  133. 
Fanaticism,  213. 
Fancy,  ill,  112,  133. 
Fatal  necessity,  99. 
Fate  of  lower  principles,  127. 
Father  in  heaven,  60. 
Father  in  secret,  63,  64,  73,  90,161. 
Fear,  214. 
Felicity,  132. 
Fetish- worship,  57,  72. 
Fever,  ravings  of,  ill. 
Fifth  race,  175. 
Final  goal,  200,  203. 
Final  perfection,  176. 
Final  rest,  176. 
Finite,  100. 
Fire,  161.

Fire-philosophers,  '^'^^  94. 
Flesh  of  animals,  232,  233. 
Folk-lore,  44. 
Forbearance,  223. 
Force,  80,  114,  210. 
Forces,  man  a  correlation  of,  91. 
Foreknowledge,  iii. 
Forgetfulness  of  self,  71.

Forgiveness,  71,  199,  219,  223. 
Form,  55,  loi,  102,  168. 
Forster,  Charles,  172. 
Foundation   of   the    kingdo7n   of

righteousness  y  10 1. 
Founders  of  the  T.  S.,  228,  243. 
Four  principles,  81,  127. 
Fourth  plane,  81. 
Fourth  round,  175. 
Fox  sisters,  173. 
Fundamental  principles,  139. 
Future,  iii.

Future  lives,  144,  187,  235. 
Future  of  T.  S.,  254,  255,  257. 
Future,  seeing  the,  11,  112. 
Future  state,  82,  122,  142.

Genealogy  of  the  Ego,  162.

Gejtesis,  i^S,  96.

Germain,  St.,  21.

Glanvil,  171.

Globes,  79.

Gnosis,  9.

Gnostics,  84,  100.

Goal,  200,  203,  235.

Goblins,  171.

God,  52,  55,  56,  57,  60,  61,  62, 
63,  64,  65,  66,  67,  68,  73,  75, 
85»  95»  97,  98,  99,  129,  160, 
164,  177,  183,  189,  190,  194, 
197,   198,  241.

God  above  us,  155.

God  in  man,  66,  116,  144,  181.

God,  Manas  is  a,  162.

Gods,  63,  81.

Golden  thread,  144.

Good,  99,  135,  177,  183,  187, 
208.

Gordian,  Emperor,  4.

Gospels,  49,  70.

Gratitude,  218.

Gravity,  114.

Greek  system,  84.

Greeks,  2,2,-

Gross  matter,  95.

Group,  family,  133.

Gupta- Vidya,  13.

Hades,  2>^,  127,  169. 
Hallucinated  hysteriacs,  Il6. 
Hallucinations,  ill,  132. 
Happiness,  132,  133,  200,  203.

INDEX.

331

Harmony,  99,  168,  182,  183,  187,Gupta- Vidya,  13.

Hades,  2>^,  127,  169. 
Hallucinated  hysteriacs,  Il6. 
Hallucinations,  ill,  132. 
Happiness,  132,  133,  200,  203.

INDEX.

331

Harmony,  99,  168,  182,  183,  187,

188. 
Hashish,  233. 
Headquarters  of  T.  S.,  43. 
Heart,  60,  73,  132. 
Heathen,  66,  68. 
Heaven,  72,  100. 
Heavenly  wisdom,  82. 
Hell,  50,  122,  125,  164,  216. 
Hellenic  teachers,  5. 
Hereafter,  122. 
Herennius,  8. 
Hermas,  166. 
Hermes,  7,  88. 
Heterogeneity,  160. 
Hierogrammatists,  9. 
Hierophants,  8,  Ty2>' 
Higher  consciousness,  134. 
Higher  Ego,  61,  154,  155,  159. 
Higher  life,  193. 
Higher  Manas,  107,  108,  128,  163. 
Higher  mind,  105,  128. 
Higher  nature,  223. 
Higher  planes,  210. 
Higher  self,  10,  46,  47,66,  73,  108,

116,    117,  119,   153,    154,    155,

159,    161,   214. 
Higher  spiritual  Ego,  61. 
Higher  states  of  mind,  109. 
Higher  triad,  127,  165. 
Hillel,  44. 
Hinayana,  9. 
Hinduism,  123. 
Hindus,  12,  63,  66,  76,  169,  176,

219. 
History,  240. 
Holy  Ghost,  252. 
Holy  kiss,  96. 
Holy  One,  100. 
Home,  D.  D.,  172. 
Homogeneity,  160. 
Homogeneous  essence,  61,  77. 
Horace,  98. 
Hue,  Abbe,  66. 
Humanity,  52,  159,  193,  205,  206,

224. 
Human  character,  209. 
Human  consciousness,  121. 
Human  Ego,  163. 
Human  eidolon,  127. 
Human      interdependence,     180,

236.

Human  law,  178.

Human  monad,  106.

Human  nature,  51,  206,  223,  227.

Human  solidarity,  208.

Human  soul,  2,  67,   82,  94,  95,

102,    106,   108,    140,   141,   142,

153,    160. 
Hunter,  Sir  William,  66. 
Huxley,  Mr.,  28,  85. 
Hypnotism,  24,  25,  65,  246,  249. 
Hypocrites,  73. 
Hypotheses,  79,  114.

I  (see  Ego).

lamblichus,  3,  21.

Ideals,  44,  50,  138,  158,  193,  222,

228,  251. 
Ideas,  association  of,  no,  112. 
Identity,  115. 
Identity  of  origin  of  religions,  3,I  (see  Ego).

lamblichus,  3,  21.

Ideals,  44,  50,  138,  158,  193,  222,

228,  251. 
Ideas,  association  of,  no,  112. 
Identity,  115. 
Identity  of  origin  of  religions,  3,

53- 
Idleness,  223,  224. 
Idolatry,  12,  63,  72. 
Ignorance,  71,  %^,  134,  196,  225,

238. 
Illness,  233. 
Illusion,  57,  76,  79,  loi,  104,  106,

131,    133,   146,   148,   150,   158,

159,    160,   193,   195.^ 
Immediate     reincarnation,     151,

167. 
Immorality,  219,  221,  234. 
Immortal  Ego,  %2>i  248. 
Immortal  element,  105. 
Immortal  essence,  92. 
Immortal  life,  160. 
Immortal  man,  138. 
Immortal  self,  45. 
Immortal  spirit,  67. 
Immortal  spiritual  consciousness,

159. 
Immortality,    92,    96,    100,    103,

108,  146,  147,  148,  149. 
Immutable  law,  67,  77,  99,  122. 
Impartiality,  99. 
Imperishable  Ego,  73,  Zt^,  119. 
Imperishable  record,  198. 
Impersonal  Divine  Principle,  105,

166. 
Implacability  of  karmic  law,  177. 
Incantation,  63.

INDEX.

Incarnating  (see  Reincarnation).

Incarnating  Ego  (see  Reincarnat- 
ing Ego).

Incarnating  permanent  self,  Ii6.

Incarnation-cycle  (see  Cycle).

Indestructibility  of  spirit,  135.

India,  66,  72,  74,  loi.

India,  sages  of,  4,  2>Z'

Indian  doctrines,  6.

Indifference,  208,  209.

Individual  consciousness,  96.

Individual  Ego,  70,  1 14,  144.

Individual  immortality,  103.

Individual  judgment,  209.

Individual  Karma,  179.

Individuality,  14,  26,  30,  31,  70, 
7i»  83,  93,  94,  103,  108,  117, 
118,  125,  130,  134,  136,  149, 
150,    153,   162,   168,    194.

Inequalities  of  life,  126.

Infinite,  10,  55,  60,  63,  76,  177, 
194,  196.

Influences,  170.

Initiates,  8,  21,  51,  70,  loi,  131, 
145,  154,  191,  245.

Initiation,  74.

Injury,  225.

Injustice,  125,  176,  192.

Inner  Ego,  155.

Inner  faculties  and  powers,  232.

Inner  group,  18,  21.  34.

Inner  man,    104,    158,   161,    186,Initiation,  74.

Injury,  225.

Injustice,  125,  176,  192.

Inner  Ego,  155.

Inner  faculties  and  powers,  232.

Inner  group,  18,  21.  34.

Inner  man,    104,    158,   161,    186,

237- 
Inner  perception,  146. 
Inner  section,  230,  231,  233,  234,

235- 
Inner  self,  27,  93. 
Inner  selves,  126. 
Inspiration,  246,  252. 
Inspiration  of  men  by  Nirmana-

kayas,  135. 
Instinct,  84,  86,  105. 
Instinctual  soul,  87. 
Instructions,  19,  21. 
Instruments  of  research,  78. 
Intellect,  87,  237. 
Intellectual  capacities,  156. 
Intellectual  conscious  soul,  133. 
Intelligence,  83,  128,  135,  176. 
Intelligences,  171,  249. 
Intelligent  powers,  196. 
Intent,  180.

Intercourse  with  goblins,  171. 
Intercourse  with  spirits,  170,  172,

173. 
Interdependence     of     humanity,

180,  236. 
Introduction  to  Theosophy,  15. 
Intuition,  43,  121,  195,  196,  214,

219,  232. 
Intuitional  perception,  ill. 
Invocation,  63. 
Involution,  58.

Irrational  animal  soul,  83,  85. 
Irrational  spiritual  soul,  91. 
ishvara,  141. 
I  sis  Unveiled,  92,  161,  169,   198,

200. 
IT,  58,  76,  108.

Javar  Zivo,  166.

Javidan  Khirady  53.

Jehovah,  56,  87,  214.

Jesuits,  56.

Jesus  Christ,  6,  7,  9,   13,  37,  38,

39,  43,  44,  49,  62,  64,  65,  66,

70,  72,  74,  165,  169,  177,  198,

200,  211,  216. 
Jesus,  teachings  of,  9,  13,  37,  38,

39,  43,  44,  49,  62,  65,  70,  165,

169,  177,  216. 
Jews,  37,  60,  62,  73,  97. 
Jhana,  115.

John,  Gospel  of,  7,  165,  166. 
Josephus,  5. 
Judaism,  5. 
Judgment,  196,  210. 
Jukabar  Zivo,  166. 
Justice,  65,  68,  97,  108,  122,  124,

132,    144,   176,  177,    189,  200,

205,   209,   211,  219,  223.

Kabalah,  20,  41,  56,  100,  166. 
Kabalists,  3,  85,  ^J,  91,  165. 
Kama,  107.

Kamaloka,  88,  127,  153,  169. 
Kamalokic  shells,  26,  1 70. 
Kama  Rupa,  82,  2>2,y  85,  86,  105,Kabalah,  20,  41,  56,  100,  166. 
Kabalists,  3,  85,  ^J,  91,  165. 
Kama,  107.

Kamaloka,  88,  127,  153,  169. 
Kamalokic  shells,  26,  1 70. 
Kama  Rupa,  82,  2>2,y  85,  86,  105,

113,  127,  156,  160,  169. 
Kama-rupic  phantom,  128. 
Kama-tending  Manas,  163. 
Karanopadhi,  104. 
Kardec,  Allan,  169. 
Karma,  42,  46,  66,  Z^,  97,   118,

INDEX,

333

119,  120,  122,  125,  133,  135, 
136,  142,  143,  144,  149,  153, 
155,  161,  169,  J  72,  176,  177, 
178,  179,  180,  182,  183,  184, 
185,  186,  187,  188,  190,  191, 
199,  200,  203,  204,  208,  210, 
218,  219,  226,  236.

Karma-Nemesis,  187.

Karmic  affinities,  153.

Karmic  complication,  108.

Karmic  effects,  115,  137.

Karmic  law,  144,  178,  192.

Karmic  past,  171.

Karmic  punishment,  124,  142.

Karmic  reincarnation,  169.

Karmic  responsibility,  203.

Karmic  transgression,  122.

Kether  Malchuth,  58.

Key  to  religions,  4.

Kindness,  205,  209.

King,  John,  171.

Kingdom  of  heaven,  10 1.

Knight,  Prof.  W,,  iii.

Knowledge,   i,  2,  8,  12,  32,  50,

53,  78,  79,  193,  194,  195- 
Krishna,  61. 
Kshetrajiia,  61,  120. 
Kumaras,  123.

Labre,  St.,  213,  231.

Lancet,  245.

Laotze,  44,  104.

Law,  42,  59,  98,   131,  132,   140,

144, 176, 177, 178, 179, 192, 199- 
Law,  immutable,  67,  77,  99,  121. 
Law  of  compensation,  162. 
Law  of  retribution,  46,  97,   124,

162,  190. 
Law,  spiritual,  42. 
Law,  unerring,  124,  125. 
Law,  William,  16. 
Lectures  on  Platonic  Philosophy^

112. 
Lethe,  124. 
Leviticus  y  166. 
Liberated  spirits,  93. 
Libraries  of  T.  S.,  43. 
Life,  14,  53,  76,  82,  84,  95,  98,

lOI,    102,    105,    106,    108,     III,

113,   117,   123,  124,   126,   127,

m-,  136,  139,  140,  143,  144, 
146,  147,  148,  151,  153,  156,

i57»  i59»  160,  166,  175,  192,lOI,    102,    105,    106,    108,     III,

113,   117,   123,  124,   126,   127,

m-,  136,  139,  140,  143,  144, 
146,  147,  148,  151,  153,  156,

i57»  i59»  160,  166,  175,  192,

193,  202. 
Life  cycle  (see  Cycle  of  life). 
Life  principle,  107,  113,  156, 
Life  soul,  70. 
Light,  48,  94,  99,  loi. 
Light,  28,  108. 
Light  of  Asia,  190. 
Light  of  Buddhi,  141,  158. 
Limbus,  127. 
Linga  Sharira  (see  Astral  body),

82,  113. 
Literature,     Theoscphical,     221,

246,  250,  252. 
Locke,  80,  no. 
Logic,  99,  137,  199. 
Logos,  56,  85,  98,  167. 
Long  Face,  166. 
Longinus,  4. 
Looking  Backward,  40. 
Loss  of  memory,  109. 
Loss  of  personal  Ego,  147,  168,

169. 
Loss  of  self-consciousness,  140. 
Loss  of  soul  (see  Annihilation). 
Love,  71,  98,  100,  122,  131,  132,

133,  209,  236. 
Lower  Manas,  82,  84,  102,   107,

127,    128,    140,   141,   156,   159,

160,    163. 
Lower  mind,  105. 
Lower  personal  Ego,  61. 
Lower  principles,  127. 
Lower  self,  138,  159,  238. 
Lucifer,  66,  139,  143. 
Luther,  16. 
Luxury,  208. 
Lytton,  Bulwer,  220.

Mackenzie,  K.  R.  H.,  100.

Macrocosm,  81.

Madness,  in.

Magic,  3,  20,  24,  61,  248,  249.

Magic  powers,  250.

Maha-manvantara,  56,  93,  95.

Mahat,  120.

Mahatmas,  243,  244,  251,  252.

Malek,  4.

Man,  75,  81,  84,  87,  90,  91,  94, 
104,  105,  106,  107,  115,  125, 
138,  156,  157,  158*  I^I»  167, 
186,  231,  232.

334

INDEX.

Man  and  animals,  diflference  be- 
tween, 93.

Man,  common  origin  of,  38,  39, 
40.

Man  conqueror  over  matter,  161.

Man,  unity  of,  42,  43,  75.

Manas,  61,  85,  89,  91,  102,  106, 
107,    120,    127,    128,  140,    141,

145,  146,   155,   156,   157,   160, 
162,   167,   168.Man,  unity  of,  42,  43,  75.

Manas,  61,  85,  89,  91,  102,  106, 
107,    120,    127,    128,  140,    141,

145,  146,   155,   156,   157,   160, 
162,   167,   168.

Manas,  dual,  82,  84,  140,  159. 
Manas,  reflection  of,  85,  86,  160. 
Manas-Sutratma,  148. 
Manas-Taijasa,  141. 
Manasa-putras,  120,  122,  163. 
Manasic  consciousness,  144. 
Manasic  Ego,  121. 
Manasic  elements,  87. 
Manasic  entity,  163. 
Manasic  mind,  158. 
Manasic  recollections,  145. 
Manifestations,  spiritualistic,   25,

26,  27,  128,  169,  170. 
Manifested  Deity,  141. 
Mant,  Bishop,  164. 
Mantra,  63. 
Manu,  120,  123. 
Manvantara,  76,  122. 
*<M.A.  Oxon.,"  135,  174. 
Marriage,  214,  234. 
Masonic  Cyclopedia,  100. 
Masses,  218,  220. 
Masters,  21,    183,  244,   245,  248,

250,  251,  252,  256. 
Material  improvement,  210. 
Material  life,  151. 
Material  principles,  1 19. 
Materialism,  39,  105,  112,  151. 
Materialists,  112,    115,    139,  142,

146,  150,    151,    156,  176,    188, 
196,   248.

Materialization,  26,  84,  128,  169,

170. 
Matter,  30,  39,  57,  89,  95,  96,  100,

106,  122,  149,  162,  195,  201. 
Matter-spirit,  89. 
Maya,  106,  131. 
Mayavi  Rupa,  168. 
Meadows  of  Hades,  88. 
Meat-eating,  232. 
Medieval  Theosophists,  94. 
Medieval  Theosophy,  19.

Meditation,  4,  6,  10. 
Mediums,  28,  128,  172,  173. 
Mediumship,    20,   65,    171,    173,

253. 
Megittawatte,  68- 
Members  of  T.  S.,  lay,  22. 
Members  of  T.  S.,  pledged,  19. 
Memory,  31,  95,   loi,  109,  no,

III,   113,   115,  116,    117,   121,

124,   139,    157,   160,  237,  240. 
Memory,  physical,  no,  in,  113,

1X6,  237. 
Memory  of  the  soul.  III. 
Mens,  106. 
Mental  aspects,  104. 
Mental  development,  207,  256. 
Mental  phenomena,   171. 
Mental  plane,  1 79. 
Mental  scientists,  65. 
Mercavah,  9. 
Merciful  law,  132. 
Mercy,  68,  98,  122,  131,  137,  177,192,  205. 
Merit,  65,  128,  178. 
Mesmerism  (see  Hypnotism), 
Messiah,  166. 
Metaphysical  plane,  41. 
Metaphysical  terms,  1 5 5. 
Metaphysicians,  93. 
Metaphysics,  70,  80,  87,  219,  220, 
Michael,  123. 
Microcosm,  81. 
Mind,  67,  82,  84,  85,  86,  89,  91,

98,    105,    107,    109,    112,    117,

120,   128,  141,    156,   158,    163,

215,  247. 
Ministering  spirits,  164. 
Miracles,  24,  246. 
Misery,  32,  182,  238. 
Mishna,  99. 
Mistakes  concerning  the  T.    S.,

17,  230. 
Mistakes  concerning  Theosophy,

221. 
Mnemonics,  ill. 
Moksha,  loo. 
Molecule,  58. 
Moment  of  birth,  I44. 
Moment  of  death,  144. 
Monad,  83,  106,  108,  II4,  147. 
Monas,  85,  94. 
Moon,  87.

INDEX.

335

Moral  elevation,  47,  245.

Moral  engulf ment,  182.

Moral  improvement,  256.

Mortal  man,  82.

Moses,  5,  39,  62,  68,  172.

Mosheim,  5.

Motion,  10 1,  102.

Motive,  180,  193.

Motto  of  T.  S.,  2.

Movements,    earlier    Theosophi-

cal,  256. 
Mimdaka  Upanishad,  140. 
Mundane  life  (see  Earth  life). 
Muscular  action,  173. 
Mussulmans,  66. 
Mysteries,  3,   8,  ZZ^  34,  86,  Z^j,

88,  122,  166,  196. 
Mysteries  of  God,  68,  160. 
Mysteries  of  heaven,  72. 
Mysteriis,  De,  3. 
Mystery  language,  21. 
Mysticism,  20,  -^^^  171,  220,  256.

Names  and  principles,  152. 
Names,  sacred,  251,  252,  253. 
National   Karma,  180,    181,   182,

218. 
Nationalists,  40. 
Nature,   2,  51,  56,   57,  67,    196,

200,  206,  221,  223,  224,  227,218. 
Nationalists,  40. 
Nature,   2,  51,  56,   57,  67,    196,

200,  206,  221,  223,  224,  227,

245,  248. 
Nature,  errors  of,  196. 
Nature,  failures  of,  151,  167,  1 76. 
Nature,  laws  of,  44. 
Nature  of  Manas,  162. 
Nature  of  mind,  109. 
Nature,  secrets  of,  21,  44. 
Necessity,  cycle  of,  149. 
Necessity,  fatal,  99. 
Necromancy,  3,  172. 
Nemesis,  125,  187. 
Neoplatonic  Theosophy,  15. 
Neoplatonists,  2,  5,  91. 
Nephesh,  67,  70,  85,  %%,  96,  166. 
New  body,  113,  120. 
New  brain,  113. 
New  incarnation,  125,  141,  166. 
New  Jerusalem,  132. 
New  man,  125. 
New  memory,  113. 
New  personality,   125,  137,    147,

175-

New  Platonism  and  Alchemy^  2,

5,  9.  II.

New  soul,  98.

NrdJ  Testameiity  loi.

Night,  75,  164.

Night  of  Brahma,  76.

Nirmanakayas,  134,  135.

Nirvana,  63,  70,  71,  89,  100,  102,

103,  118,  119,  134,  149. 
Noah,  166. 
Nonentity,  128. 
Nothing,  102,  103. 
No-thing,  103. 
Noumena,  85,  142,  159. 
Nous,  81,  ^i,  85,  87,  102,  108. 
Nout,  84. 
Numbers  and  principles,  82,  104.

Objections  to  reincarnation,  108,

109. 
Objective,   Atma   can   never    be,

154. 
Objectivity,  75,  80,  122. 
Objects  of  the  T.  S.,  18,  35,  36,

43,  229. 
Oblivion,  131,  132. 
Occultism,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24,

42,  105,  106,  III,  193,  231,  234,

249,  253. 
Occultist,  19,  22,  23,  24,  60,  62,

165.

Occultists,  61,  loi.

Occult  powers,  24,  191,  231,  232,

246,  248,  249. 
Occult  sciences,  23,  24,  44,  232. 
Occult  truths,  135. 
Ocean  of  light,  94. 
Olcott,  Col.  H.  S.,  115,  118. 
Oldenburg,  72. 
Old  Testameyit^  39. 
Olympiodorus,  112. 
Omnipresent  Principle,  59. 
Omniscience,  68. 
Omniscience  of  spiritual  Ego,  1 16,

117,  131,  139. 
One  essence,  154. 
One  law,  59. 
One-Only-One,  84. 
One  Reality,  138. 
One  Self,  156.

One  Universal  Self,  154,  155. 
One  Unknown  Principle,  161.

336

INDEX,117,  131,  139. 
One  essence,  154. 
One  law,  59. 
One-Only-One,  84. 
One  Reality,  138. 
One  Self,  156.

One  Universal  Self,  154,  155. 
One  Unknown  Principle,  161.

336

INDEX,

Only-Begotten,  i66.

Opinion,  45,  210.

Opium,  233.

Orientalism,  13.

Origen,  4,  8.

Original  program  of  T.  S.,  229.

Orpheus,  7.

Orthodoxy,  16.

Pagan  duties,  203.

Pagans,  I96.

Pain  (see  Suffering).

Palace  of  Love,  1 00.

Palestine,  73.

Pan,  57.

Pantsenus,  5.

Pantheism,  57.

Pantheists,  57.

Parable  of  the  vineyard,  1 65.

Parables,  72,  216.

Parabrahman,  56,  197.

Paradise,  89,  97,    loo,   122,   129,

147. 
Paralyzing  the  personal  Ego,  116,

118. 
Paranirvana,  I49. 
Parsis,  37. 
Passions,  65,  86,  107,  113,  156,

163.

Past   incarnations  (see    Previous

incarnations). 
Path,  149. 
Path,  35,  46. 
Paul,  12,  81,  ^T^, 
Peace,  256. 
Pentateuch,  5,  96. 
Perception,  inner,  146. 
Perfection,  176. 
Permanent  Ego,  114. 
Permanent  principle,  107,  195. 
Permanent  self,  116. 
Perpetual  progress,  137,  175. 
Persecution,  228,  242. 
Persephone,  88. 
Personal  consciousness,  84,  96. 
Personal  Ego,  61,  70,  73,  Z^,  93,

106,    116,   119,   147,   156,   167,

168. 
Personal  exertion,  217. 
Personal  form,  168. 
Personal  God,  76,  98,  183,  241. 
personal  happiness,  203.

Personal  self,  116.

Personal  soul,  92,  95,  loi.

Personality,  12,  30,  31,  69,  70, 
71,  76,  83,  92,  93,  96,  100,  108, 
113,  115,  117,  118,  120,  121, 
125,  127,  129,  130,  136,  140, 
143,  148,  149,  150,  151,  155, 
156,  158,  163,  165,  167,  168, 
169,    175,   222.

Peter,  203.

Fhcedo,  112.

Phantasy,  112.

Pharisees,  60.

Phenomena,  24,   26,  27,  85,  142,

159.  171- 
Philadelphus,  5. 
Philaletheians,  i,  4. 
Philaletheian  system,  8. 
Philanthropy,  255. 
Philo  Judaeus,  5,  99. 
Philosophers,  fire-,  2>3>i  94- 
Philosopher's  stone,  61. 
Philosophy,  54.Philosophy,  Eastern,  30,  95,  103. 
Philosophy,  Esoteric,  19,  84,  86,

118. 
Philosophy,  Platonic,  5. 
Philosophy,  Pythagorean,  5. 
Philosophy  of  Spiritualism,  28. 
Photography,  spiritual,  II. 
Phren,  85,  86,  102. 
Physical  body,  27,  48,  64,  81,  82,

85,  86,  87,  91,  93,  96,  104,  107,

113,    120,   121,    124,   127,    135,

137,   146,  156,    164,   168,   194,

231. 
Physical  brain,  60,  82,  no,  113,

128,  135,  168. 
Physical  consciousness,  1 1 7,  160. 
Physical  frame,  87. 
Physical  life,  84,  123,  136,  153. 
Physical  man,  81,  84,  88,  156. 
Physical  memory,  no,   ill,  113

116,  117,  237. 
Physical  mind,  86. 
Physical  nature,  248. 
Physical  phenomena,  27,  171. 
Physical  plane,  41,  I16,  154,  155,

179. 
Physical  principles,  113. 
Physical  processes,  113. 
Physical  science,  78,  79,

INDEX.

337

Physiologists,  iii. 
Pilgrim,  spiritual,  148. 
Pineal  body,  107. 
Pistis,  195. 
Pity,  71,  223. 
Planes,  seven,  77,  80. 
Planes  of  being,  211. 
Planes  of  consciousness,  81,  105, 
106,   116,    128,    136,   153,    154,

i55»   158,   I59>   I79»   192,   194,

196,  202,  211. 
Planes  of  space,  8. 
Planet,  septenary  constitution  of,

79. 
Planetary  chain,  79. 
Planetary  spirits,  92,  171. 
Planetary  system,  77. 
Planets,  77.

Planets  and  principles,  87. 
Plastic  soul,  107. 
Plato,  7,   10,  34,  44,   81,   82,  83,

84,  86,  94,  98,  102,  112,  167. 
Platonic  philosophy,  5. 
Pleasure,  87,  193,  202. 
Pledge,  9,  19,  35,  44,  45,  47,  86. 
Pledged  chelas,  106. 
Pledged  members  of  T.  S.,  19. 
Pleroma,  1 66.

Pleroma  of  Eternal  Light,  lOO. 
Plotinus,  3,  4,  8,  10,  21,  loi,  124. 
Plutarch,  85,  86,  87. 
Point,  106. 
Policy  of  T.  S.,  5. 
Political  reforms,  206. 
Political,  T.  S.  is  not,  206. 
Politics,  205. 
Porphyry,  3. 
Post-mortem  consciousness,  116,139,  146. 
Post-mortem  dreams,  146. 
Post-mortem  Karma,  88. 
Post-mortem  life,   14,    138,    139,

140,  143,  148,  151.

Post-mortem  punishment,  122.

Post-mortem  spiritual  conscious- 
ness, 130.

Post-mortem  states,  90. 
Postnatal  consciousness,  139. 
Pot  Amun,  2. 
Potentialities  of  mind,  109. 
Powers,  divine,  ibi. 
Powers,  evil,  248.

Powers,  intelligent,  196. 
Powers,  occult,  24,  191,  231,  232,

246,  248,  249. 
Powers    of   the  incarnate   Spirit,

.  174. 
Powers,  psychic,   172,   247,  249,

255. 
Powers,  spiritual,  91,  161. 
Practical,  179,  193. 
Practical  charity,  215,  221. 
Practical  study,  130. 
Practical   Theosophy,    202,    213,

236. 
Prajiia,  141. 
Pralaya,  93.

Prana,  105,  107,  113,  156. 
Prayer,    10,   55,    59,   60,   61,   63,

64,  176. 
Prayer  kills  self-reliance,  63,  64. 
Predestination,  189. 
Predevachanic     unconsciousness,

134- 
Preexistence,  94,  100,  112. 
Prejudice,  241,  242,  255. 
Premature    return    to    earth-life,

108. 
Premonitions,  121. 
Presbyterian  Confession  of  Faith,

189. 
Previous    incarnations,   109,   113,

114,  121,  124,  131,  143,  144, 
145,    147,   178,   191.

Primeval  emanations,  98.

Primordial  elements,  102.

Primordial  matter,  95.

Principles,  56,  59,  81,  82,  %t^,  85, 
86,  87,  88,  89,  91,  93,  94,  98, 
104,   105,    106,   107,   113,   114,

115,  119,  127,  134,  137,  152, 
154,  156,  159,  160,  161,  162, 
166,    195,  211.

Private  judgment,  196.

Prognostication,  112.

Progress,  137,  153,  175,  193,  209,

219. 
Prohibitory  rules,  222. 
Projection  of  double,  106. 
Propaganda,  43. 
Proserpina,  88. 
Prospective  vision  of  future  life,

144. 
Protean  soul,  107,

338

INDEX,

Prototype,  i86.

Providence,  1 8  7.

Providential  protections,  133.

Psuche,  81,  83,  86.

Psuchikos,  loi.

Psychic  faculties,  153,  255.

Psychic  growth,  256.

Psychic  nature,  248.Prototype,  i86.

Providence,  1 8  7.

Providential  protections,  133.

Psuche,  81,  83,  86.

Psuchikos,  loi.

Psychic  faculties,  153,  255.

Psychic  growth,  256.

Psychic  nature,  248.

Psychic  phenomena,  27,  171.

Psychic  powers,    172,    247,    248,

255- 
Psychic  realms,  248. 
Psychic  senses,  78,  112. 
Psychical  body,  82. 
Psychical  wisdom,  82. 
Psychism,  20,  25. 
Psychologists,  30,  109,  no,  116,

121. 
Psychology,  65,  135. 
Psychospiritual  sciences,  78. 
Public  opinion,  210. 
Publicans,  2^%^  49. 
Punishment,  97,    121,    122,   123,

124,    142,   143,   176,   178,   187,

191,  219. 
Purity,  214.

Purpose  of  Theosopky,  188. 
Pythagoras,  7,  9,  44,  82,  85,  86,

94,  102. 
Pythagorean  philosophy,  5. 
Pythagoreans,  loi.

Quakers,  49.

Quaternary,  81,  82,  84,  87.

Quintile,  88.

Rabbis  of  Babylon,  5. 
Race,  elevation  of  the,  208. 
Race,  fifth,  175. 
Races,  seven,  166. 
Radiant  mind,  141. 
Radiation,  77,  98. 
Rational  entities,  122. 
Rational  faculties,  loi. 
Rational  soul,  85,  91,  100,  102. 
Ravings  of  fever,  in. 
Ray,  116,  168. 
Reabsorption,  96. 
Reaction,  183. 
Readjustment,  180,  182. 
Real  Ego,  104. 
Real  man,  89,  125.

Real  spiritualism,  171.

Real  world,  159.

Reality,   76,   106,  140,   147,    I48,

158,  159.

Reason,  87,  176,  197,  199,  213, 
240,  241.

Reasoned  faith,  193.

Reasoning  soul,  94,  105.

Rebirth,  69,  70,  93,  109,  117,  120, 
125,  144,  148,  151,  166,  175, 
178,  187,  189,  192,  200,  202 
(see  Reincarnation).

Recollection,  95,  no,  113,  117, 
121,  143,  145,  150.

Record,  199.

Reflection,  76.

Reformation,  16.

Reincarnating  Ego,  26,  61,  85,  90, 
92,  94,  100,  102,  113,  114,  n5, 
n7,  120,  124,  128,  137,  145, 
147,  153,  157,  160,  161,  162.Reflection,  76.

Reformation,  16.

Reincarnating  Ego,  26,  61,  85,  90, 
92,  94,  100,  102,  113,  114,  n5, 
n7,  120,  124,  128,  137,  145, 
147,  153,  157,  160,  161,  162.

Reincarnation,  31,  92,  95,  98,  100, 
107,  109,  113,  114,  116,  125, 
128,  132,  133,  137,  141,  143, 
151,  153,  154,  161,  163,  165, 
169,  172,  175,  186,  187,  192, 
208,   211,   219,   221.

Reincarnation,  186.

Reincarnation  :  A  Study  of  For- 
gotten Truth,  116.

Relative  Karma,  182.

Relief  of  suffering,  182.

Religion,  I,  14,  41,  52,  255.

Religions,  4,  5,  14,  41,  54.

Remembrance,  109,  no,  113,  117 
(see  Recollection).

Reminiscence,  no,  121,  124  (see 
Remembrance).

Remission  of  sin,  1 77.

Renunciation,  134.

Research,  23.

Resignation,  45.

Responsibility,  1 63,  203,  214.

Rest,  134,  175.

Rest  of  the  soul,  139,  143,  172.

Resurrection,  84,  138.

Retardation  of  Karma,  18 1.

Retribution,  46,  97,  I24,  162,  190.

Retributive  adjustment,  117.

Retributive  justice,  1 76.

Retributive  Karma,  179.

Retrospection,  144.

INDEX.

Return  of  spirits  (see  Spirits).

Reuchlin,  John,  1 6.

Reunion  with  Spirit,  194.

Revelation  of  the  divine,  141.

Revelation,  Theosophy  not  a,  1^7^.

Revenge,  225.

Reward,  97,  178.

Reward  of  Ego,  122.

Rhys-Davids,  Prof.,  II9.

Ritualism,  12.

Romans,  T^^t-

Root  of  consciousness,  159.

Root  of  principle,  160.

Rosicrucians,  t^t,.

Round,  175.

Royal  College  of  Physicians,  22.

Rupa,  82,  114.

Sacred  names,  251,  252,  253.

Sacred  science,  21.

Sacrifice  of  founders  and  leaders

of  T.  S.,  228. 
Sadducees,  73,  97. 
Sages,  II.

Samadhi,  10,  63,  154. 
Samanas,  72. 
Samkara,  114. 
Samma-sambuddha,  I45. 
Samothrace,  Hierophants  of,  8. 
Samyuttaka  Nikdya^  72. 
Saiina,  1 14. 
Sat,  149.

Saviors,  seven,  166. 
Saviour,  73. 
School,  Eastern,  141. 
Schools,  235.Saviors,  seven,  166. 
Saviour,  73. 
School,  Eastern,  141. 
Schools,  235.

Science,  22,  78,  79,  114,  237,  246. 
Science,  Divine,  I,  2>2>' 
Science,  occult,  23,  24,  44,  231. 
Science,  psychospiritual,  78. 
Science,  sacred,  21. 
Science,  true,  21. 
Scientific  Theosophy,  24. 
Scientists,  iii. 
Scientists,  Mental,  65. 
Stances,  171.

Seat  of  animal  desires,  I07. 
Second  death,  127. 
Second  Sights  1 74. 
Secrecy,  9,  12,  45. 
Secret  Doctrine^  54,  93,  105,  122,

141,  186,  250,  252.

Secret  science,  146,  193.

Secret  wisdom,  10,  70.

Secrets,  divine,  12.

Secrets  of  initiation,  74.

Secrets  of  Nature,  21,  44.

Sectarianism,  43.

Section,  Esoteric,  18,  19,  21,  34, 
45,  230,  231,  233,  234,  235.

Seeming  injustice,  125.

Seers,  78,  178,  191,  194.

Self,  10,  27,  45,  46,  47,  61,  64,  66, 
7i»  73»  93»  108,  116,  117,  119, 
122,  138,  153,  154,  155,  156, 
159,  161,  214,  238.

Self-abandonment,  212.

Self-abnegation,  2 1 3.

Self-consciousness  (see  Conscious- 
ness).

Self-development,  48,  213.

Self -hypnotism,  65.

Self-improvement,  47.

Self-made  destiny,  162.

Self-reliance,  63,  64,  241.

Self-sacrifice,  71,  211,  213.

Selfish  indulgence,  208.

Selfishness,  34,  37,  40,  61,  63,  65, 
184,  205,  206,  209,  219,  237, 
238,   245.

Selflessness,  254.

Selves,  47,  126,  154.

Senses,  78,  80,  154,  195,  241.

Sentimentalism,  1 99.

Separateness,  180,  210.

Separation  into  sexes,  175.

Sephiroth,  56.

Septenary  nature  of  man,  8t,  167.

Septenary  nature  of  planet,  79.

Sermon  on  the  Mount,  49,  52, 
216.

Servant  playing  violin,  118.

Servant  speaking  Hebrew,  1 18.

Seven  Buddhas,  166.

Seven  fundamental  forces,  80.

Seven  planes  of  being,  77,  80.

Seven  principles,  81,  86,  107.

Seven  races,  166.

Seven  saviors,  166.

Seven  states  of  consciousness,  80, 
81.

Seven  vines,  166.

Seventh  principle,  lo6«Seven  principles,  81,  86,  107.

Seven  races,  166.

Seven  saviors,  166.

Seven  states  of  consciousness,  80, 
81.

Seven  vines,  166.

Seventh  principle,  lo6«

Seventh  race,  175.

340

INDEX.

Seventh  round,  175.

Sexes,  175,  179.

Shadow,  85,  87.

Shadow,  Brothers  of  the,  248.

Shakespeare,  123,  126.

Shelley,  126.

Shells,  ib9,  170.

Siddhartha,  Prince,  115.

Sin,  66,  124,.  180,  225.

Sinnett,  A.  P..  I2,  82,  108,  153, 
154,  185.

Sinnett,  Mrs.  P.,  188.

Sisterhood,  208.

Six  principles,  104.

Skandhas,  69,  70,  114,  116,  118, 
125,  137,  158,  164.

Slade,  172.

Slanders,  223,  225,  226,  228.

Slate-writing,  26.

Slavery,  39.

Sleep,  28,  145,  150,  153.

Social  efforts,  209.

Social  evils,  179,  208,  242.

Social  prejudices,  255.

Social  questions,  206.

Society,  classes  in,  179.

Socrates,  7,  34,  86.

Solar  system,  77.

Solidarity,  208.

Solomon  ben  Yehudah  Ibn  Ge- 
birol,  58.

Somnambulism,  153.

Sons  of  God,  52.

Sons  of  universal  mind,  163.

Sorcery,  24,  62,  73,  249.

Sorrow,  123,  129.

Soul,  2,  39,  67,  70,  73,  75,  81,  82, 
%Z.  85,  86,  %^,  91,  92,  93,  94, 
95»  97»  98,  99»  ioi»  102,  103, 
105,  106,  107,  III,  112,  115, 
118,  120,  132,  137,  139,  140, 
141,  146,  151,  152,  153,  160, 
164,   165,   166,   172,   194.

Soul  and  spirit,  ^-^^  loi,  136,  167, 
194.

Soul-memory,  1 24.

Soul-yearnings,  132.

Space,  layers  of,  79,  80,

Space,  planes  of,  80.

Spark,  divine,  27.

Sphere,  59.

Spirit,  26,  30,  40,  61,  66,  67,  81,

83,  85,  86,  90,  91,  94,  96,  loi,

102,   103,   105,   116,   140,   194,

195,  200. 
Spirit  identity,  135. 
Spirit-matter,  89. 
Spirit-soul,  88. 
Spiritists,  83,  169,  170. 
Spirits,  93,  129,  169,  170. 
Spirits,  communication  with,   25,

26,  27,  31,  128,   129,  133,  134,26,  27,  31,  128,   129,  133,  134,

136,  169,  170,  171,  173. 
Spirits,  effect  of  drinking,  233. 
Spirits,  intelligence  of,  26. 
Spirits,  planetary,  92,  171. 
Spiritual  affection,  133. 
Spiritual  breath,  102. 
Spiritual   consciousness,    60,   83,

121,  130,  154,  158,  159. 
Spiritual  death,  1 67. 
Spiritual  development,  207,  209,

231,  232,  233,  255. 
Spiritual  efflorescence,  168. 
Spiritual  Ego,  28,  61,  82,  95,  107,

III,    116,   117,    120,   131,   138,

148,   155,    165,    168. 
Spiritual  energy,  168. 
Spiritual  entity,  95,  loi,  123,  162. 
Spiritual  essence,  147. 
Spiritual  existence,  202. 
Spiritual  eyes,  146. 
Spiritual  forces,  210. 
Spiritual  happiness,  20I. 
Spiritual  holy  love,  133. 
Spiritual  **  I,"  1 16,  143,  148. 
Spiritual   individuality,   26,    149,

Spiritual  intuition,  195,  213. 
Spiritual  law,  42. 
Spiritual  law  of  continuity,  1 40. 
Spiritual  life,  147,  148,  153. 
Spiritual  man,  81,  90. 
Spiritual  mind,  107. 
Spiritual-minded,  107. 
Spiritual  mysticism,  171. 
Spiritual  nature,  201,  248. 
Spiritual  photography,  II. 
Spiritual  pilgrim,  1 48. 
Spiritual  plane,  1 54,  159,  1 79. 
Spiritual  powers,  91,  161,  249. 
Spiritual  principles,  88,  106,  113,

119. 
Spiritual  ray,  116,  168.

INDEX.

341

Spiritual  realm,  1 54.

Spiritual  science,  78.

Spiritual  self,  26,  116,  122.

Spiritual  senses,  78,  195.

Spiritual  soul,  82,  86,  87,  94,  102, 
106,  108,  120,  142,  166.

Spiritual  Spiritualism,  25,  17!.

Spiritual  spiritualistic  phenom- 
ena, 27.

Spiritual  transmutation,  61.

Spiritual  vision,  161.

Spiritual  visions,  78,  191.

Spiritual  world,  139,  161.

Spiritualism,  3,  20,  25,  28,  30,  32, 
108,   126,   129,   135,    170,    172,

173-

Spiritualists,  25,  26,  27,  29,  30, 
83,  108,  129,  130,  132,  135, 
136,  167,  170,  173-

Spirituality,  1 28,  256.

Spleen,  107.173-

Spiritualists,  25,  26,  27,  29,  30, 
83,  108,  129,  130,  132,  135, 
136,  167,  170,  173-

Spirituality,  1 28,  256.

Spleen,  107.

Spooks,  128,  170,  171.

States  of  consciousness  (see  Con- 
sciousness).

States  of  matter,  8*9.

States  of  mind  (see  Mind).

Sthula  Sharira,  82,  1 13  (see  Phys- 
ical body).

Sthulopadhi,  104.

Study,  224.

Study,  theoretical  and  practical, 
231.

Subjective,  75,  77,  138.

Subjective  being,  103,  151.

Subjectivity,  80,  122.

Substance,  83,  95,  96,  102,  103, 
194.

Succession  of  births,  175.

Suffering,  99,  125,  130,  142,  144, 
150,  179,  180,  182,  202,  208.

Suggestion,  65.

Suicide,  202.

Sukshmopadhi,  104.

Sumangala,  Rev.  H.,  115.

Summer-land,  133,  151.

Supernatural,  246.

Super-physical         consciousness,

153.

Super-spirit,  30,  95,  120. 
Superstition,  44,  195. 
Sutratma,  145,  148,  149,  1 5 1. 
Slitratma-Buddhi,  148.

Svapna,  104. 
Sweating  system,  218. 
Swedenborg,  20,  167. 
Symbolism,  59,  61,  166. 
Symbols  of  Wisdom-Religion,  61. 
Sympathy,  151,  218.

Taijasa,  120,  141,  142,  146.

Tanha,  119.

TaO'te-King,  104.

Taraka  Raja  Yoga  school,  104.

Temptation,  99.

Term  between  rebirths,  117.

Terrestrial    body,    93,    124,    1 38

(see  Physical  body). 
Terrestrial  conceptions,  150. 
Terrestrial  Ego,  143. 
Terrestrial  entity,  164. 
Terrestrial  life  (see  Earth-life). 
Terrestrial  mind,  141. 
Terrestrial  personality,  142,  I49,

ISO- 
Terrestrial  plane,  137.

Terrestrial  soul,  108.

Terrestrial  suffering,  150.

Terrestrial  wisdom,  82.

Testimony  of  seers,  78.

Tetragrammaton,  56.

That,  118.

Theodidaktos,  3,  6.

Theogania,  I.

Theology  (see  Christian  The- 
ology). ^

Theosophia,  i,  53.

Theosophic  development,  231.

Theosophical  literature,  246,  250, 
252.

Theosophical  Miscellanies^  16.

Theosophical  Sif tings,  143.

Theosophical  Society,  Arcane  Sec- 
tion of,  35.Theosophic  development,  231.

Theosophical  literature,  246,  250, 
252.

Theosophical  Miscellanies^  16.

Theosophical  Sif tings,  143.

Theosophical  Society,  Arcane  Sec- 
tion of,  35.

Theosophical  Society,  conduct  of 
members  of,  47,  204,  220,  223, 
227.

Theosophical  Society  has  no 
creed,  17,  51,  54.

Theosophical  Society  cannot  be 
crushed,  243.

Theosophical  Society,  defense  of, 
221.

Theosophical  Society,  earlier 
movements,  16,  256.

342

INDEX.

Theosophical     Society,     enemies

of,  242. 
Theosophical     Society,     Esoteric

Section  of,  17,  18,  35,  45,  46,  54. 
Theosophical     Society,     Fellows

of,  18. 
Theosophical    Society,   formation

of,  IZ,  51- 
Theosophical     Society,    founders

of,  228,  242. 
Theosophical  Society,  future  of,

254,  255,  256. 
Theosophical  Society,  Headquar- 
ters of,  43. 
Theosophical     Society,      helping

the,  221. 
Theosophical    Society,    incentive

for  joining  the,  19,  193. 
Theosophical     Society,     libraries

of,  43-  . 
Theosophical    Society,    members

of,    not     necessarily     Theoso-

phists,  19. 
Theosophical    Society,     mistakes

concerning  the,  16,  230. 
Theosophical    Society,   motto   of

the,  2. 
Theosophical  Society,  objects  of,

19.  35»  36,  43»  229. 
Theosophical      Society,     original

program  of,  229. 
Theosophical      Society,    pledged

members  of,  19. 
Theosophical  Society,  policy  of,  5. 
Theosophical    Society  not  politi- 
cal, 206. 
Theosophical    Society,    prejudice

against  the,  241. 
Theosophical   Society  and   social

questions,  206. 
Theosophical    Society   the  store- 
house of  truths,  51. 
Theosophical  Society  and  Theoso-

phy,  47,  48,  50,  51,  215,  222. 
Theosophical  Society,  what   it  is

not,  15. 
Theosophical    Society,   work    of,

36,  224. 
Theosophical     Society,     workingphy,  47,  48,  50,  51,  215,  222. 
Theosophical  Society,  what   it  is

not,  15. 
Theosophical    Society,   work    of,

36,  224. 
Theosophical     Society,     working

members  of,  44,  51,  224,  230. 
Theosophical   Transactions  of  the

Philadelphian  Society^  15.

Theosophist^  48,  54.

Theosophists,  6,  18,  19,  23,  4r, 
47,  60,  65,  94,  197,  205,  209.

Theosophy,  2,  52.

Theosophy,  acceptance  of,  32.

Theosophy,  age  of,  11,  33.

Theosophy,  aim  of,  5,  22,  192.

Theosophy  and  Buddhism,  13,  14,

Theosophy  and  Christian  theol- 
ogy, 138-

Theosophy,  definition  of,  10,  1 1.

Theosophy,  division  of  princi- 
ples in,  82.

Theosophy,  doctrines  of,  16,  55, 
109,  no,  194,  208,  221.

Theosophy,  eclectic,  2,  3,  4.

Theosophy,  efficacy  of,  37.

Theosophy,  ethics  of,  14,  35.

Theosophy,    Everlasting    Truth,

254-

Theosophy  for  the  masses,  218.

Theosophy,  medieval,  19.

Theosophy,  meaning  of  name,  I.

Theosophy,  misconceptions  con- 
cerning, 221.

Theosophy,  Nature  and  man  ac- 
cording to,  75.

Theosophy  and  Occultism,  23.

Theosophy,    practical,   202,    213,

235- 
Theosophy,  propaganda,  43,  44. 
Theosophy   the    quintessence   of

duty,  204. 
Theosophy,  rejection  of,  34. 
Theosophy  and  religions,  52. 
Theosophy  not  a  revelation,  t^t^. 
Theosophy,  scientific,  24. 
Theosophy,  secret,  12. 
Theosophy,  seriousness  of,  242. 
Theosophy  and  Spiritualism,  25,

30-

Theosophy  unfamiliar  and  ab- 
struse, 34.

Theosophy,  why  unknown  to  the 
West,  12.

Theosophy,  1 4.

Therapeutse,  5.

Theurgy,  2,  3,  19.

Thinking  beings,  no.

Thinking,  conscious  Ego,  107.

Thinking  Ego,  123.

Thinking  entity,  157,  j6o,  163.

INDEX,

343

Thinking  man,  8i,  167,  233. 
Thinking  principle,  105,  128,  155,

157. 
Thinking  soul,  67. 
Thought,  58,  112,  124,  125,  163,

I77»  183,  191,  205. 
Thought-transference,    246,    247,157. 
Thinking  soul,  67. 
Thought,  58,  112,  124,  125,  163,

I77»  183,  191,  205. 
Thought-transference,    246,    247,

248. 
Thread,  golden,  1 44. 
Thread  soul,  145. 
Three  accepted  forms  of  memory,

no. 
Three  aspects  of  soul,  108. 
Three  chief  aspects  in  man,  105. 
Three  kinds  of  sleep,  I46,  150. 
Three  lower  principles,  127. 
Three  principles,  81,  104. 
Three    propositions     of    **  M.A.

Oxon.,"  135. 
Threshold  of  Devachan,  125. 
Thumos,  85,  86,  102. 
Timseus  of  Locris,  94. 
Time,  80.

To  Agathon,  86,  87. 
Tolstoi,  Count  Leo,  216. 
Tradition,  44.

Training,  192,  207,  229,  232,  241. 
Trance,  26. 
Transactions  of  the  London  Lodge,

153.

Transfiguration,  84.

Transmigration,  loo.

Transmutation,  spiritual,  61.

Tree  of  Knowledge,  53.

Tree  of  Life,  53.

Triad,  82,  87,  88,  127,  163,  165.

Trinity,  61,  96,  loo.

Triple  unity,  149.

True  science,  21.

Truth,  41,  51,  52,   53,  131,   135,

205,254,  257. 
Twentieth  century,  256. 
Twenty-first  century,  257. 
Two  kinds  of  conscious  existence,

147. 
Two  principles  in  man,  107.

Ultimate  cause,  179. 
Ultimate  law,  178. 
Unbelief,  effect  of,  150,  151. 
Unconditioned  reality,  147. 
Unconscious  muscular  action,  173.

Unconsciousness,  58,  77. 
Understanding,  87,  88. 
Unerring  law,  124,  1 78. 
Union,  92,  102,  187. 
Union  of  spirit  and  matter,  195. 
Unity,  41,  43,   56,   75,   137,  149,

208,  257. 
Universal  All,  108. 
Universal    Brotherhood,    17,   36,

37,  40,  41,  43,  208,  210,  215,

228,  255. 
Universal  causation,  208,  21 1. 
Universal  consciousness,  194. 
Universal  Deity,  161,  177. 
Universal  Divine    Principle,   56,

155- 
Universal  essence,  63,  102. 
Universal  harmony,  183,  188. 
Universal  individuality,  194. 
Universal  infinite  Ego,  98. 
Universal  law,  98,  176. 
Universal  life,  156. 
Universal  Mind,  91,  98,  117,  120,

163.163.

Universal  Mind-Soul,  118. 
Universal  night,  76. 
Universal  self,  61,     54,  155. 
Universal  Soul,  2,  67,  94,  98,  loi,

117. 
Universal  Spirit,  27,  82,  91,  95,

105,  199.

Universal  unityand  causation,  208. 
Universal  World-Soul,  94. 
Universally  diffused  Divine  Prin- 
ciple, 120. 
Universe,  57,  59,  75,  77,  81,  85,

106,  168,  178. 
Universities,  239. 
Unknowable,    59,    77,    89,    179,

188,  196. 
Unknown  Principle,  161. 
Unmerited  misery,  32. 
Unmerited  suffering,  142. 
Unspiritual  age,  our,  34. 
Upanishads,  145. 
Upper  triad  (see  Triad).

Vacchagotta,  72. 
Vanity,  224,  226. 
Vedana,  1 1 4. 
Vedanta,  40,  104. 
Vedanta  Sara,  140.

344

INDEX.

Vedantins,  56,  104,  108,  153,  197. 
Vegetarianism,  230,  232,  233. 
Veil  of  Maya,  131. 
Vicarious    atonement,     94,     1 77,

189,  198. 
Vice,  87,  205. 
Vidya,  13.

Vine,  parable  of,  165,  169. 
Vines,  seven,  166. 
Viiinana,  114. 
Virtue,  87,  99,  205. 
Visions,   78,   iii,    146,   161,  1 64,

191. 
Vital  double,  105. 
Vital  principle,  82. 
Vital  soul,  67. 
Voice  of  conscience,  121,  167,  214,

223.

Wagner,  12. 
Waking  state,  104,  150. 
Walker,  E.  D.,  117,  186. 
Wheel  of  the  Latv,  177,  196. 
Whitechapel,  181,  213. 
Wilder,  Prof.  Alex.,  2,  4,  7,  lo, 
196.

Will,  60,  61,  161,  231,  236. 
Will-power,  61,  231. 
Will-prayer,  60,  61. 
Wine,  effect  of,  233. 
Wisdom,  I,   2,  3,  2>i,  50,  61,  70,

82,  91,  97,  99,  176,  231. 
Wisdom,  Amun,  the  God  of,  2. 
Wisdom,  Eastern,  81. 
Wisdom- Religion,  4,  5,  8,  54,  61. 
Witchcraft,  172. 
Wordsworth,  iii. 
Work  of  members  of  T.  S.,  36,

223. 
Working  hypotheses,  79,  114. 
Working  of  Karma,  191. 
World -Karma,  180. 
World,  real,  159. 
World-Soul,  94. 
World,  spiritual,  139,  161.

Yoga,  4.

Yogis,  10,  22,  145.

Zohar,  20,  96,  99,  1 66c 
Zoroaster,  44.Yoga,  4.

Yogis,  10,  22,  145.

Zohar,  20,  96,  99,  1 66c 
Zoroaster,  44.

Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Feb.  2005

PreservationTechnologies

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066 
(724)779-2111