# Proofs of a Conspiracy Against Christianity

*Text extracted from: EPUB (archive.org proofsofconspira00robi)*

Notice

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive. The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match;  page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers.  The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you. The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.Created with hocr-to-epub (v.1.0.0)

Page 0

Page 1

The text on this page is estimated to be only 0.00% accurate
    i^'.-^S^^ m

Page 2

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.83% accurate
    w IN TME CUSTODY OV ThE BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY. SMELF N° ibO.a/

Page 3Page 2

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.83% accurate
    w IN TME CUSTODY OV ThE BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY. SMELF N° ibO.a/

Page 3

The text on this page is estimated to be only 0.00% accurate
    y

Page 6

The text on this page is estimated to be only 0.00% accurate
    ¥

Page 7

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.85% accurate
    P R OOFS OF A CONSPIR AGY AGAINST ALL THE RELIGIONS AND GOVERNMENTS OF EUROPE, CARRIED ON IN THE SECRET MEETINGS OF FREE MASONS, ILLUMINATI, AND REABING SOCIETIES, COLLECTED FROM GOOD AUTHORITIES, By J O H N R O B I S O N, A. M. PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPRY, AND SECRETARY TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH. Nam tua res agitur paries cu?n proximus ardet. The THIRD EDITION. To which is added a Postscript. PHILADELPHIA: printed FOR T. DOBSON, N°. 4I, SOUTH SECOND STREET, AND W. COBBET, N°. 25, NORTH SECOND STREET. 1798. J

Page 8

The text on this page is estimated to be only 0.00% accurate
    > A0AM8

Page 9Page 8

The text on this page is estimated to be only 0.00% accurate
    > A0AM8

Page 9

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.64% accurate
    TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE WILLIAM W Y N D H A M, SECRETARY AT WAR, Sec &c. &c. S IRy It was with great fat is fa^ Ion that I learned from a Friend that you coincided with me in the opinion ^ that the information contained in this F^ erf or man ce would make a ufeful imprejfiun on the minds of my Countrymen. I have prefumed to infcribe it with your Name^ that I may publicly exprefs the pleafure which I felt ^ when I found that neither a feparation for thirty years , nor the prejjure of the moft important hufinefs^ had effaced your kind remembrance of a College Acquaintance^ or abated that obliging and polite attention with which you favoured me in thcfe early days of life. The friendjhip of the accomplifjed and the worthy is the highefi honour ; and to him who is cut cff^ by want of healthy from almcfi every other enjoyment ^ it is an ineftimable bltfftng. Accept^ therefore^ I pray^ of ?ny grateful acknowledgments, and of my earnefi wifhes for your Healthy Profperity^ and increafing Honour, IVithfentimcnts of the greatefl Efteem and Refpe^l^ I am, SIR^ Tour mcfl obedient^ and mcfl humble Servant, JOHN ROBISOX. Edinburgh, Septemlier 5, 1797.

Page 10Page 10

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.48% accurate
    ^UOD fi quis vera vilam ratione guhernet, Diviti^ grandes hominijunt^ vivere pdirce j^quo a'dimo : neque enim eft unquam penuria parvi. At dares Je hor.mies voluerimt atque potentes^ Ut fundament 0 ft ahili for tuna maneret^ Et placidam pcjjent opiilenti degere vitam : Nequicquamy — quoniam ad Jummum Juccedere hojiorem Certantes^ iter inf eft urn fe cere vidi, Et tamen efummo quafi fulmen dejicit i^os Invidia inter dum conte?nptm in Tartar a tetra, Ergo^ Regihus cccifis, Juhverja jacehat Priftina majeftas Juliorum, etjceptrajuperha ; Et capitis Jummi prtsclar urn in figne, cruentumy Sub pedibus volgi magnum lugebat honor um : Nam cupide conculcatur nimis ante metutum. Res itaqueadjummamfa:cem^ turbajqiie redibat, Mperiumftbi cum ac Jummatum qui/que petebat, Lucretius, V. 1116.

Page 11Page 11

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.37% accurate
    INTRODUCTION. Being at a friend's houfc in the country during Ibmc part of the fummer 1795, I there faw a volume of a Gernian periodical work, c^Wcdi Religions Bcgehenheiten, i. e. Religious Occurrences : in which there was an account of the various fchifms in the Fraternity of Free Mafons, with frequent allufions to the origin and hiftory of that celebrated affociation. This account   interefted me a good deal, becaufe, in my early life, I had taken fome part in the occupations (jQiall I call them) of Free Mafonry; and, having chiefly frequented the Lodges on the Continent, I had learned many doctrines, and ittn many ceremonials which have no place in the nmple f/frem of Free Mafonry which obtains in this^ country. I had alfo remarked, that the whole was much more the obje6l of reflediion and thou2;ht than I could remember it to have been among my acquaintances at home. Ther*^, I had feen a Mafon Lodge confidered merely as a pretext for paffing an hour or two in a fort of decent conviviality, not altogether void of fome rational occupation.    I had fometimes heard of difierences of doctrines or of ceremonies, but in terms which miarked them as mere frivolities. Bur, on the Continent, I found them matters of ferious concern and debate. Such

Page 12Page 12

6 INTRODUCTION. * Such too is the contagion of example, that I could not hinder myfclf from thinking one opinion better founded, or one Ritual more appofice and Hgnificant than another J and I even feltromething like an anxiety for its being adopted, and a zeal for making it a general pradice. I had been initiated in a very fplendid Lodge at Liege, of which the Prince BiHiop, his Trefonciers, and the chief NoblefTe of the State were members. I vifited the French Lodges at Valenciennes, at BrufTcls, at Aix-la-Chapelle, at Berlin, and Koningiberg ; and I picked up fome printed difcourfes delivered by the Brother-orators of the Lodges. At St. Peterlburgh I connedled myfeif with the Englifli Lodge, and occafionally vifited the Germ.an and Ruffian Lodges held there. I found myfeif received with particular refpe6t as a Scotch Mafon, and as an Eleve of ihtLodge de la Parfait Intelligence at Liege. I was importuned by perfons of the firlt rank to purfue my mafonic career through many degrees unknown in this country. But all the fplendor and elegance that 1 faw could not conceal a frivolity in every part. It appeared a bafelefs fabric, and I could not think of engaging in an occupation which would confume much time, coft me a good deal of money, and might perhaps excite in me fome of that fanaticifm, or at leaP-, enthufiafm, that! faw in others, and perceived to be void of any rational fupport. I therefore remained in the Englilh Lodge, contented with the rank of Scotch Mailer, Vv'hich was in a manner forced on me in a private Lodge of French Mafons, but is not given in the Englifli Lodge. My jnafonic rank admitted me to a very elegant entertainment in the female hogedela Fidelite, where every ceremonial was compofcd in the higheft degree of elegance, and every thing conduced with the moft delicate refpe6l for our fair fillers, and the old fong of brotherly love was chanted in the moft refined ftrain of fentimcnt.

Page 13Page 13

INTRODUCTION. 7 t fentiment. I do not fuppofe that the Parifian Free Mafonry of forty- five degrees could give me more entertainment. I had profited fo much by it, that I had the honour of being appointed the Brother-orator. In this office I gave fuch fatisfi\6i:ion, that a worthy Brother fent me at midnight a box, which he committed to my care, as a perfon far advanced in mafonic fcience, zealoufly attached to the order, and therefore a fit depofuory of important writings. I learned next day that this gentleman had found it convenient to leave the empire in a hurry, but taking with him the funds ofan eftablifhment of which her Imperial Majefty had made him the manager. I wasdefiredto keep thefe writings till he fhould fee me again. I obeyed. About ten years afterward I law the gentleman on the ftreet in Edinburgh, converfmg v/ith a foreigner. As I paffcd by him, I faluted him foftly in the Ruffian language ; but without flopping, or looking him diredlly in the face. He coloured, but made no return. I endeavoured, in vain, to m.eet with him, wiffiing to make a proper return for much civility and kindncfs which I had received from him in his own country. I now confidered the box as acceffible to myfelf, and opened it. I found it to contain all the degrees of the Parfait Macron Ecvjjois^ with the Rituals, Catechifms, and InftruAions, and alfo four other degrees of Free Mafonry, as cultivated in the Parifian Lodges. I have kept them with all care, and mean to give them tofome refpedlable Lodge. But asl am bound by no engagement of any kind, I hold myfelf at liberty to make fuch ufe of them as may be ferviceable to the public, without enabling any uninitiated perfon to enter the Lodges of thefe degrees. This acquifition might have roufed my former reliffi for mafonry, had it been merely dormant; but, after fo long feparation from the Lodge de la Fidelite, the mafonic

Page 14Page 14

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.46% accurate
    8 INTRODUCTION. nic rpirit had evaporated. Some curiofity however remained, and Ibme v/ilh to trace this plailic my fiery to the pit from which the clay had been dug, which has been moulded into fo rhany different Ihapes, ^^ fom.e to *' honour, and fome to diflionour.'' But my opportunities were now gone. 1 have given away (when in Rufiia) my volumes of dirccurfes, and fome far-fetched and gratuitous hiilories, and nothing remained but the pitiful work of Andcrfon, and the Magonnerie Adonhiramique devoilee^ which are in every one's hands. My curiofity was ftrongly roufed by the accounts given in the Religions Begehenheiten. There I faw quotadons v.nthout number, fyftems and fchifms of which I had never heard ; but what particularly flruck me wa- a zeal and a fanaticifm about what I thought trifles, which aftoniflied me. Men of rank and fortune, and engaged in fericus and honourable public employments, not only frequennng the Lodges of the cities where they refided, but journeying from one end of Germany or France to the other, to- vifit new Lodges, or to learn new fecrets or new do6lrines. I faw conventions held at WiQrnar, at WiPoad, at Kohlo, at Brunfvvick, and at Wilk-mibad, confifting of fome hundreds of perfons of refpe^table fcations. 1 faw adventurers coming to a city, profefTing fome new fecret, and in a few days forming new Lodges, and inifruding in a troublelbme and expenfive manner hundreds of brethren. German Mafonry appeared a very ferious concern, and to be implicated with other fubje6ls with which I had never fufpe6led it to have any connedlion. I faw it much connected with many occurrences and fchifms in the Chriftian church ; I faw that the Jefuits had fcveral times interfered in it ; and that moft of the exceptionable innovations and difTcntions had arifen about the time that the order of Loyola was fupprefTed j fo that it fliould feem, that thefe intriguing brethren had attemptedPage 15

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.32% accurate
    INTRODUCTION. 9 attempted to maintain their influence by the help of Free Maibnry. I favv it much difturbed by the myftical whims of J. Behmcn and Svvedenborg — by the fanatical and knavifh do6lrines of the modern Rofycrucians^ — byMagicians — Magnet! fers — Exorcifts, &c. And I obferved that thele different ictls reprobated each other, as notonlymaintainingerroneous opinions, but even inculcating opinions which were contrary to the cftablillied religions of Germany, and contrary to the principles of the civil cftablifriments. At the lame time they charged each other vvirh miltakes and corruptions, both in dodlrine and in practice ; and particularly Vv^ith falfification of the firft principles of Free Mafonry, and with ignorance of its origin and its hiRory ; and they fupported thele charges by aiuhoritles from many different books v;hich were unknown to me. My curicfity was now greatly excited. I got from a much rclpcd:ed friend many of the preceding volumes of the Religiofis BegebenheiteYiy in hopes of much information from the patient induilry of German erudition. This opened a new and very interefting fcenc ; I was frequently fent back to England, from whence all agreed that Free Mafonry had been imported into Germany. I was frequently led into France and into Italy. There, and more remarkably in France, I found that the Lodges had become the haunts of many projeftors and fanatics, both in fcience, in religion, and in politic?, who had availed themfclves of the fccrecy and the freedom ot fpeech maintained in thefe meetings, to broach tlieir particular whims or fufpicicus doc'frines, which, if publiilied to the world in the iifual manner, v/oiild have expofed Xa\^ authors to ridicule or to cenfure. Thefe projeftors liad contrived to tag their peculiar no(Irums to the mummery of Mafonry, and were even allowed to twin the mafcnic emblenis and ceremonies B to

Page 16Page 16

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.87% accurate
    lO INTRODUCTION. to their purpofe ; fo that in their hands Free MaHjnrf became a thing totally unlike, and ahnoft in direft oppolition to the iyftem (if it may get fuch a name) imported from England j and forae Lodges had become fchools of irreligion and licentioulhefs. No nation in modern times has lo particularlyturned its attention to the cultivation of every thing that is retined or ornamental as France, and it has long been the refort of all who hunt after entertainment in its moil refined form ; the French have come to confider themfclves as the inftru6lors of the world in every thing that ornaments life, and feeling themfclves received as fuch, they have formed their manners accordingly — full of the moft condefcending complaifance to rdl who acknowledge their fuperiority. Delighted, in a high degree, vviih this office, they have become ze:dous millionarics of refinement in every department of human purfuit, and have reduced their apoflolic employm.ent to a lyUem, which they profecute with ardour and deiip-ht. This is not eroundlefs CD vj declamation, but fober hiftorical truth. It was the profelled aim (and it was a magnificent and wife aim) of the great Colbert, to make the court of Louis XIV. the fountain of human refinement, and Paris the Athens of Europe. We need only look, in the prefent day, at the plunder of Italy by the French army, to be convinced that their low-born generals and ftatefmen have in this refpe(!:l: the fame notions with the Colberts and the Richlicus. I know no lubie61: in which this aim at univerfal influence on tfie opinions of men, by holding themfelves forth as the models of excellence and elegance, is more clearly fecn than in the care that they have been pleafed to take of Free Mafonry. It feems indeed peculiarly fuited to the talents and tafte of that vain and ardent people. Bafclcfs and frivolous, it admits of every form

Page 17Page 17

INTRODUCTION. II form that Gallic refinement can invent, to recommend it to the young, the gay, the luxurious ; that clafs of fociety which alone defcrves theii; care, becaufe, in one way or another, it leads all other dalles of fociety. It has accordingly happened, that the homely Free Mafonry imported from England has been totally changed in every country of Europe either by the impoling afcendency of Frcn&h bretfiren, who are to be found every where, ready to in(lru6l the world ; or by the importation of the do6i:rines, and ceremonies, and ornaments of the Parifian Lodges. Even England, the birth-place of Mafonry, has exj-)erienced the French innovations; and all the repeated injunctions, admonitions, and reproofs of the old Lodges, cannot prevent thofe in different parts of the kingdom from admitting the French novelties, full of tinfcl and glitter, and high -founding titles. Were this all, the harm would not be great. But long before good opportunities had occurred for fpreading the refinements on the fimple Free Mafonry of England, the Lodges in France had become places of very ferious difcufTion, where opinions in morals, in religion, and in politics, had been promulgated and maintained with a freedom and a keennefs, of which we in this favoured land have no adequate notion, becaufe we are unacquainted with the reftraints which, in other countries, are laid on ordinary converfation. In confequence of this, the French innovations in Free Mafonry were quickly follovv'ed in all parts of Europe, by the admiffion of fimilar difcuffions, although in diredt oppoficion to a (landing rule, and a declaration made to every newly received Brother, " that nothing touching the religion or government '' fliall ever be fpoken of in the Lodge." But the Lodges in other countries followed the example of France, and have frequentlv become the rendezvo :s of

Page 18Page 18

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.30% accurate
    12 INTRODUCTION. of innovators in religion and politics, and otj;4er difturbers of the public peace, in fhort, I have found that the covert of a Mafon Lodge had been employed in every country for venting and propagating fentiments in religion and politics, that could not have circulated in public v^^ithout expofing the author to great danger. I found, that this impunity had gradually encouraged men of licentious principles to become more bold, and to teach do6lr;nes fubverfive of all our notions of mordity — of all our confidence in the moral government of the univerfe— of all our hopes of improvement in a future ftate of exiflience — and of all fatisfadlion and contentment v/\th our prefent life, fo long as we live in a Hate of civil fubordination. I have been able to trace thefe attempts, made, through a courfe of fifty years, under the fpecious pretext of enlightening the world by the torch of philofophy, and of difpelling the clouds of civil and religious fuperftition which keep the nations of Europe in darknefs and fiavery. I have obferved thefe do6lrines gradually diffufmg and mixing with all the different fyllems of Free Mafonry ; till, at lafV, an Association has BEEN FORMED for the cxprcfs purpofe of rooting out ALL the religious ESTABLISHMENTS, AND OVERTURNING    ALL THE EXISTING GOVERNMENTS OF Europe. I have (cen this Afibciation exerting itfelf ^ealoufly and fyftematically, till it has become almoft irrefiftible : And I have fcen that the moft adive leaders in the French Revclurion v/ere members of this Afibciation, and conduded their iiril" movements according to its principles, and by means of its inftructions and alilitance, formally requefted and obtained: And, laitly, I have (ten that this Affociation ilill exifls, fiill works in fecret, and that not only feveral appearances among ourfclves fhow that its emifiaries are endeavouring to propagate their drteilable doctrinesPage 19

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.14% accurate
    INTRODUCTION. IJ trines among us, but that the Afibciation has Lodges in Britain correfponding wich the mother Lodge at Munich ever fmce 1784. If all this were a matter of mere curiofity, and fufceptible of no good ufe, it would have been better to have kept it to myfeif, than to difturb my neighbours with the knowledge of a (late of things which they cannot amend. But if it ihall appear that the minds of my countrymen are mifltd in the very fame manner as were thofe of our continental neighbours — if I can fhow that the reafonings which make a very ftrong imprefTion on fome perfons in this country are the fame which adtually produced the dangerous alTociation in Germany i and that they had this unhappy influence folely becaufe they were thought to be fmcere, and the expreiTions of the fentiments of the fpeakers — if I can fhow that this was all a cheat, and that the Leaders of this AiTociation difoclieved every word th^t they uttered, and every doclrine that they taught; and that their real intention was to abolifb ^//religion, overturn every government, and make the world a general plunder and a wreck — if I can Hiow, that the principles which the Founder and Leaders of this AlTociation held forth as the perfedion of human virtue, and the moft powerful and efficacious for forming the minds of men, and making th.em. good and happy, had no influence on the Founder and Leaders themfelves, and that they were, almofl: without exception, the moft infigniiicant, worthiefs, and profligate of men; I cannot but think, that fuch information will make my countrymen hefitate a little, and receive with caution, and even diflrufl:, addreiles and infcruftions which flatter our felf-conceit, and which, by buoying us up with the gay profpec^l of what feems attainable by a change, may make us difcontented with our prefent condition, and forget that there never was a government on earth Vv'hcre

Page 20Page 20

14 INTRODUCTION. where the people of a great and luxurious nation enjoyed ,fo much freedom and fecurity in the polTciTion of every thing that is dear and valuable. When we fee that thefe boafted principles had not that efFcdt on the Leaders which they aficrt to be their native, certain, and inevitable confcquences, we fhall diftruft the fine defcriptions of the happincfs chat ihould refult fpom fuch a change. And when we fee that the methods which were pradifed by this AfTociation for the exprefs purpofe of breaking all the bands of fociety, were employed folely in order that the Leaders might rule the world with uncontroulable power, while all the reft, even of the aflbciated, fnould be degraded in their own eflimation, corrupted in their principles, and employed as mere tools of the ambition of their imknoivn Jwperiors ; lurely a free-born Briton will not hefitate to reject at once, and without any farther examination, a plan fo big with mifchief, fo difgraceful to its underling adherents, and fo uncertain in its ifiue. Thefe hopes have induced m.e to lay before the public a fhort abftraft of the information which I think' I have received. It will be fhort, but I hope fufficient for eftablifhing the fa6l, that this deteficihle AJfociation exifts, and its emijfaries are hujy among ourjelves, 1 was not contented with the quotations which I found in the Religions Begebenheiten, but procured from abroad fome of the chief writings from which they are taken. This both gave me confidence in the quotations from books which I could not procure, and furnidied me with more materials. Much, however, remains untold, richly deferving the attention of all thofe who/^^/ themfelves difpofed to liilen to the tales of a pofTible happinefs that may be enjoyed in a ibciety where all the magiflrates are wife and juft, and all the people are honeft and kind. I hope

Page 21Page 21

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.94% accurate
    INTRODUCTION. I5 I hope that I am honefl; and candid. I have been at all pains to give the true fenle of the authors. My knowledge of the German language is but fcanty, but I have had the affiftance of friends whenever I was in doubt. In comprefTing into one paragraph what I have colleded from many, I have, as much as I was able, fluck to the words of the author, and have been anxious to give his precife meaning. I doubt not but that I have fometimes failed, and will receive correction with deference. I entreat the reader not to exped: a piece of good literary compofition. I am very fenfible that it is far from it — it is written during bad health, when I am not at eafe — and I v;ifh to conceal my name — but my motive is, without the fmalieft mixture of another, to do fome good in the only way I am able, and I think that what I fay will come with better grace, and be received with more confidence, than any anonymous publication. Of thefc I am now moil heartily fick. I throw myfeif on my country with a free heart, and I bow with deference to its decifion. The alTociation of v;/hich Ihave been fpeaking is the Order of Illuminati, founded, in 1775, by Dr. Adam Weifhaupt, profe (Tor of Canon law in the univcrfity of Ingolftadt, and abolifned in 1786 by the Eleftor of Bavaria, but revived immediately after, under another name, and in a different form, all over Germany. It was again detected, and feemingly broken up j but it had by this time taken fo deep root that it ilill fubfifts without being dctedied, and has fpread into ail the countries of Europe. It took its firll rife among the Free Maibns, but is totally different from Free Mafonry. It was not, however, the mere protection gained by the fecrecy of the Lodges that gave occafion to it, but it arofe naturally from the corruptions that had gradually crept into that fraternity, the violence of the parry fpirit which pervaded iti

Page 22Page 22

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.81% accurate
    l6 , INTRODUCTION. it, and from the total uncertainty and darknefs that hangs over the whole of that myilerious Alfociation. It is neceflary, therefore, to give fome account of the innovations that have been introduced into Free Mafonry from the time that it made its appearance on the continent of Europe as a myftical fociety, polTcffing fecrets different from thofe of the mechanical employment whofe name ic afiiimed, and thus affording entertainment and occupation to perfons of all ranks and profcffions. It is by no means intended to give a hiftory of Free Mafonry. This would lead to a very long difculTion. The patient induilry of German eruiition has been very ferioufly employed on this fubjed, and many perform.ances have been publiihed, of which fome account is given in the di(Terent volumes of the Religions Begebenheiten, particularly in thofe for 1779, 1785, and 1786. It is evident, from the nature of che thing, that they cannot be very inilruclive to the public -y becaufe the obligation of fecrecy refpeding the important matters which are the very fubje61:s of debate, prevents the author from giving that full information that is required from an hiftorian ; and the writers have not, in general, been perfons qualitied for the taflc. Scanty erudition, credulity, and enthufiafm, appear in almofl all their writings ; and they have neither attem.pted to remove the heap of rubbifh with wliich Anderfon has difgraced his Confiitutions of Free Mafonry^ (the bafis of mafonic hiftory,) nor to avail themfelves of informations which hiftory really affords to a fjber enquirer. Their Royal art mufl: never forfooth appear in ailate of infancy or childhood, like all other human acquirements ; and therefore, when they cannot give proofs of itsexiftencein a (late of manhood, pofielTed of all its m.yiferious treafures, they fuppofe Vv^hat they do not fee, and fay that they are concealed by the oath of fecrecy. Oi fuch inUruction 1 czn make noPage 23

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.52% accurate
    INTRODUCTION". ly noufe, even if I were difpofed to write ahiftory of the Fraternity. I (hall content myielfwith an account of fuch particulars as are admitted by all the maibnic parties, and which illufirate or confirm my general propofition, making fuch ufeof the accounts of the higjier degrees in my polTeffion as I can without admitting the profane into their Lodges. Being under no tie offecrecy with regard to thefe, I am with-held by difcretion alone from putting the public in pofTefTion of all their jmyfteries. PROOFS

Page 24

The text on this page is estimated to be only 5.00% accurate
    V

Page 25

PROOFS O F A CONSPIRACY, Sec. CHAP, L Schifms in Free Majonry. X HERE is undoubtedly a dignity in the art of building, or in architedture, which no other art pofTefles, and this, whether we confider it in its rudeft (late, occupied in raifing a hut, or as pradifed in a cultivated nation, in the erection of a magnificent and ornamented temple. As the arts in general improve in any nation, this mufl always maintain its pre-eminence; for it employs them all, and no man can be eminent as an archited who docs not pofTefs a confiderable knowledge of almoft every fcience and art already cultivated in his nation. His great works are undertakings of the moft ferious concern, connect him with the public, or with the rulers of the ftate, and attach to him the pra6titioners of other arts, who are occupied in executing his orders : His works are the obje6ls of public attention, and are not the tranfient fpectaclcs of the day, but hand down to pofterity his invention.

Page 26Page 26

•20 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP, t, vention, his knowledge, and his tafte. No wonder then that he thinks highly of his profefTion, and that the public fhould acquiefce in his pretenfions, even when in fome degree extravagant. It is not at all furprifing, therefore, that the incorporated architedls in all cultivated nations ihould arrogate to themfelves a pre-eminence over the fimilar affociations of other tradefmen. We find traces of this in the remotcft antiquity. The Dionyfiacs of Afia Minor were undoubtedly an aflbciation of archite6ts and engineers, who had the exclufive privilege of building temples, Itadia, and theatres, under the myfterious tutelage of Bacchus, and diftinguiihed from the uninitiated or profane inhabitants by the fcicnce which they pofTefled, and by many private figns and tokens, by which they recognifed each other. This aflbciation came into Ionia from Syria, into which country it had come from Perfia, along with that ftyle of architedlurc that we call Grecian. We are alfo certain that there was a fimilar trading aflbciation, during the dark ages, in Chriftian Europe, which monopolized the building of great churches and cafl:les, working under the patronage and prote<5tion of the Sovereigns and Princes of Europe, and poflefling many privileges. Circumfliances, which it would be tedious to enumerate and difcufs, continued this aflbciation later in Britain than on the Continent. But it is quite uncertain when and why perfons who were not builders by profcflion firft fought admiflion into this Fraternity. The firfl: diftincl and unequivocal infl:ance that we have of this is the admiflion of Mr. Aflimole, the famous antiquary, in 1648, into a Lodge at Warrington, along with his father-in law Colonel Mainwaring. It is not improbable that the covert of fecrecy in thofc aflemblies had made them courted hj the Royalifls, as occaflons of meeting. Nay, the Ritual

Page 27Page 27

eHAl*. I, FRIE MASONRY. 21 tual of the Mailer's degree feems to have been formed, or perhaps twifted from its original inftitution, fo as to give an opportunity of founding the political princi* ple^ of the candidate, and of the whole Brethren prefe4t. For it bears fo cafy an adaption to the death of ^e King, to the overturning of the venerable conflitution of the Englifh government of three orders by a mean democracy, and its re-eftablilhment by the efforts of the loyalifts, that this would flart into every perfon's mind during the ceremonial, and could hardly fail to fhow, by the countenances and behaviour of the Brethren, how they were affedled. I recommend this hint to the confideration of the Brethren. I have met with many particular fadls, which convince me that this ufe had been made of the meetings of Mafons, and that at this time the Jefuits interfered confiderably, infinuating themfelves into the Lodges, and contributing to encreafe that religious myfticifm that is to be obfcrved in all the ceremonies of the order. This fociety is well known to have put on every ihape, and to have made ufe of every mean that could promote the power and influence of the order. And we know that at this time they were by no means without hopes of re-eftablifliing the dominion of the Church of Rome in England. Their fervices were not fcrupled at by the diftreifed royalifts, even fuch as were Proteftants, while they were iiighly prized by the Sovereign. Wc alio know that Charles II. was made a Mafon, and frequented the Lodges. It is not 'vinlikely, that belides the amufemicnt of a vacant hour, which was always agreeable to him, he had pleaftire in the meeting with his loyal friends, and in the occupations of the Lodge, which recalled to his mind their attachment and fervices. His brother and fucceflbr James II. was of a more lerious and manly caft of mind, and had little pleafure in the frivolous ceremonies

Page 28Page 28

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.91% accurate
    22 THE SCHISMS IN" CHAP. I, monies of Mjiionry. He did not frequent the Lodges. But, by this time, they were the refort of many perfons who were not of the profelTion, or members of the trading corporation. This circumftance, in all probability, produced the denominations of Free and Ac* CEPTED. A perfcn who has the privilege of working at any incorporated trade, is faid to be a freeman of that trade. Others were accepted as Brethren, and admitted to a kind of honorary freedom, as is the cafe in many other trades and incorporations, without having (as far as we can learn for certain) a legal title to earn a livelihood by the exercife of it. The Lodges being in this manner frequented by perfons of various profeffions, and in various ranks of civil fociety, it cannot be fuppofed that the employment in thofe meetings related entirely to the oftenfible profeffion of Mafonry. We have no authentic information by which the public can form any opinion about it. k v;as not till fome years after this period that the Lodges made open profefiion of the cultivation of general benevolence, and that the grand aim of the Fraternity was to enforce the exercife of all the focial virtues. It is not unlikely that this was an after-thought. The political purpofes of the afTociation being once obtained, the converfation and occupations of the members mull take fome particular turn, in order to be generally acceptal)le. The ellablifliment of a fund for- the relief of unfortunate Brethren did not take place till the very end of lall century ; and we may prefume that it was brought about by the warm recommendations of fome benevolent members, who would na* rurally enforce it by addrrfles to their afiembled Brethren. This is the probable origin of thofe philanthropic difcourfes which were delivered in the Lodges by one of the Brethren as an official tafl^. Brotherly love was the general topic, and this, with great propriety,Page 29

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.18% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MA'SONRY. 23 priery, when we confider the obje6l aimed at in thofe addrelTes. Nor was this objedt altogether a novelty. For while the manners of fociety were yet but rude. Brother Mafons, who were frequently led by their employment far from home and from their friends, flood in need of fuch helps, and might be greatly benefited by fuch an inftituiion, which gave them introdudtion and citizenfliip wherever they went, and a' right to fharc in the charitable contributions of Brethren w^ho were ftrangers to them. Other incorporated trades had fimilar provifions for their poor. But their poor were townfmen and neighbours, v/ell known to them. There was more perfuafion necefiarv in this Fraternity, where the objects of our immediate beneficence were not of our acquaintance. But when the Lodges confifled of many who were not Mafons, and who had no particular claim to good ofhces from a ftranger, and their number might be great, it is evident that ftronger perfuafions were now neceiTary, and that every topic of philanthropy muft now be emplo)cd. When the funds became confiderable^ the etFccts naturally took the public eye, and recommended the Society to notice andrefpedl. And now the Brethren were induced to dwell on the fame topic, to join in the commendations beftowed on the Society, and to fay that univerfal beneficence v/as the great aim of the Order. And this is all that could be faid in public, without infringing the obligation to fecrecy. The inquifitive are always prying and teazing, and this is the only point on which a Brother is at liberty to fpeak. He will therefore do it with affedionate zeal, till peihaps he has heated his own fancy a little, and overlooks the inconfiftency of this univerfal beneficence and philanthropy with the exclufive and monopolizing fpirit of an AlTociation, which not only confines its benevolence to its own Members, (like any other charitablePage 30

^4 'iHE SCHISMS IN CHAP, 1. ritable afibciation,) but hoards up in its bofom ineftiniable fecrets, whofe natural tendency, they fay, is to form the heart to this generous and kind condudl, ancj infpirc us with love to all mankind. The profane world cannot fee the beneficence of concealing from public view a principle or a motive which fo powerfully induces a Mafon to be good and kind. The Brother fays that publicity would rob it of its force, and we mud take him at his vi^ord -, and our curiofity is fo much the more excited to learn what are the fc^ crets which have fo fingular a quality. Thus did the Fraternity condu(5l themfelves, and thus were they confidercd by the public, when it was carried over from England to the continent ; and here it is to be particularly remarked that all our Brethren abroad profefs to have received the Myftery of Free Mafonry from Britain. This is furely a puzzle in the hiftoryj and we mufl: leave it to others to reconcile this with the repeated affertions in Anderfon's book of Conftitutions, " That the Fraternity exifled all over the World," and the numberlcfs examples which he adduces of its exertions in other countries ; nay, with his repeated ailertions, '^ that it frequently was near periiliing in *' Britain, and that our Princes were obliged to fend ^' to France and other countries, for leading men, to '^ reftorc it to its former energy among us." We fhall find by and by that it is not a point of mere hiftorical curiofity, but that much hinges on it. In the mean time, let us juft remember, that the plain tale of Brotherly love had been polilhed up to protetlatlons of univerfal benevolence, and had taken place of loyalty and attachment to the unfortunate Family of Stuart, which was now totally forgotten in the Englifh Lodges. The Revolution had taken place, and King James, with many of his moft zealous adherents, had taken refuge in France. But

Page 31Page 31

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.52% accurate
    CHAP. I, FREE MASONRY. 2^ But they took Free Mafonry with them to the continent, where it was immediately received by the French, and v/as cultivated with great zeal in a manner iuited to the tafte and habits oTth.at highly poiillied people. The Lodges in France naturally became the rendezvous of the adherents to the exiled Kinir, and the means of carrying on a correfpondence v.'ith their friends in England. At this time alfo zhe Jefuits took. a more a6live hand in Free Mafonry than ever. They infmuated themfelves into the Encrlifh Lod£;es, where they were careffed by the CathoHcs, who panted after the re-eflablifnment of their faith, and tolerated by the Proteilant royalifts, v/ho thought no concefTion too great a compenfation for their fervices. At this time changes were made in fome of the Mafonic fymbols, particularly in the tracing of the Lodge, which bear evident marks of Jefuitical interference. It was in the Lodo-e held at St. Germain's that the degree of Chevalier Mapn Ecoffcis was added to the three SYMBOLICAL degrees of Engliih Mafonry. The conftitution, as imported, appeared too coarfe for the refined tafle of our neighbowrs, and they mull make Mafonry miore like the occupation of a gentleman. Therefore, the Englifn degrees of Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Mafler, were called ^7;2^c?//c^/, and the whole contrivance was confidered either as typical of fomething more elegant, or as a preparation for it. The degrees afterwards fuperadded to this leave us in doubt which of thcfe views the French entertained of our Mafonrv. But at all events, this rank of Scotch Knio-ht was called i\\t: frjl degree of the Macon Parfait. There is a device belon2;ine to this Lodixc which deferves notice. A lion, Vvounded by an arrow, and clcaped from the flake to which he had been bound, with the broken rope ftill about his neck, is reprefented lying at the mouth of a cave, and occuoied vvidi marheniaI) ticaiPage 32Page 32

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.66% accurate
    26 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I tlcal inflrumcnts which are lying near him. A broken crown lies at the foot of the (lake. There can be little doubt but that this emblem alludes to the dethronement,   the captivity, the efcape, and the afylum of James 11. and his hopes of re-eltablillimcntby the help of the loyal Brethren. This emblem is worn as the gorget of the Scotch Knight. It is not very certain, however, when this degree was added, Vv'hether immediately after king James's Abdication, or about the time of tne attempt to fet his fon on the Briciih Throne. But it is certain, that in 17:6, this and ftill higher degrees of Mafonry were much in vogue in the Court of France. The refining genius of the French, and their love of {how, made the humble denominations of the Engiifh Brethren difgufting; and their pafTion for military rank, the only character that conne6i:ed them with the court of an abfolute monarch, m.ade them adapt Free Mafonry to the fame fcale of public eftimation, and invent ranks o{ Melons Chevaliers ^ ornam;entcd with titles, and ribands, and ftars. Thefe were highly relifned by that vain people ; and the price of reception, which was very high, became a rich fund, that was generally applied to relieve the wants of the baniilied Britifh and Irifh adherents of the unfortunate Family who had taken refuge among them. Three new degrees, of Novice, ElevCy and Chevalier, were foon added, and the Parfait iVk.gon had now feven receptions to go through, for each of which a handfome contribution Vv'as made. Afterv/ards, when the firft beneficent purpofe of this contribution ceafed to exift, the finery that nov; glittered in all the Lodges made a Itill more craving demand for reception-money, and ii^ePAiitv v/as fet to work to invent new baits fur the Parfait Mcgyn. More degrees of chivalry were added, interfperfed with degrees q^ Phikjcphe, PeUeriny Clairvoyant^ &:c. &c. till fonic Parifian Lodges had forryiivePage 33

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.34% accurate
    ei-IAf*. I. FREE MASONRY. 27 five ranks of Mafonry, having fifteen orders of chivalry. For a Knighthood, mzh a Riband and a Star, was a hnne hcuche, given at every third flep. For a long while thefe degrees of chivalry proceeded on fome faint analogies with feveral orders of chivalry which had been erected in Europe. All of thefe had fome reference to foaie myiiical dodlrines of the Chriftian church, and were, in fadt, contrivances of the Church of Rome for fecuring and extending her influence on the laymen of rank and fortune, whom fhe retained in her fervice by thefe play-things. The Knights Templars of Jerufalem, and the Knights of the Deferr, whofe ofHce it v/as to piotedi: pilgrims, and to defend the holy city, aftorded very apt models for Mafonic inimicry, becaufe the Temple of Solomon, and the Holy Sepulchre, always fhared the fame fate. Many contefted dcdrines of the theologians had alfo their Chevaliers to defend them. In all this progrefuve mummery we fee much of the hand of the jefuits, and it would fcem that it was encouraged by the church. But a thing happened which might eafily have been forefcen. The Lodges had become familiar with this kind of invention ; the profefTed obje6t of many real Orders of Knighthood was often very whimfical, or very refined and far-fetched, and it required all the finelTe of the clergy to give to it fome flight connedlion with religion or morality. The Mafons, protefted by their fecrecy, ventured to go farther. The declamations in the lodges by the Brother orator, miift naturally refemible the compofitions of the ancient fophifts, and confilT: of wire -drawn dillertations on the focral duties, where every thing is amjplificd and flrained to hyperbole, in their far-fetched and fanciful explanations ofthefymbols of Mafonry. Thuii accuftomiCd to allegory, to fidion, to finefle, and to a fort of innocent hypocrify by v/hich tbty cajoled themfclves int«Page 34Page 34

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.49% accurate
    28 THE SCHISMS IX CHAP. I. into a notion that this child's-play had at bottom a ferious and important meaning, the zealous champions of Free Mafonry found no inclination to check this inventive fpirit or circumfcribe its flights. Under the prote(5cion of Mafonic fccrecy, they planned fchemes of a different kind, and inftead of more Orders of Chivah-y direfted againft the enemies of their faith, they formed aiTociations in oppofition to the ridiculous and opprefiive ceremonies and fuperftitions of the church. There can be no doubt, that in thofe hidden afiemblies, a free communication of fentiment was highly relifhed and much indulsred. It was foon fufpedied that fuch ufe was made of the covert of a Mafon Lodge ; and the church dreaded the confequenccs, and endeavoured to fupprefs the Lodges. But in vain. And when it was found, that even auricular confellion, and the fpiritual threatenings of the church, could not make the Brethren break their oath of fecrecy ; a full contidence in their fccurity made thefe free-thinking Brethren bring forward, v.'ith all the eagernefs of a miffionary, fuch fentiments as they were afraid to hazard in ordinary fociety. This was long fufpedled ; but the rigours of the church only ferved to knit the Brethren more firmly together, and provoked them to a more eager exercile of their bold criticifms. The Lodges became fchools of fcepticifm and infidelity, and the fpirit of converfion or profclytifm grev/ every day flronger. Cardinal Dubois had before 'this time laboured with all his might to corrupt the minds of the courtiers, by patronifing, direftiy and indiredlly, all fcepcics who were otherwife men of talents. He gave tlie young courtiers to underftand, that if he fnould obtain the reins of government, they Ihould be entirelv freed from the bis-otry of Louis XIV. and the oppreilion of the church, and fhould have the free mdujgence of their inclinations. His own plans were difap Page 35Page 35

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.46% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. fi^ dlfappointed by his deaths but the Regent Orleans wjas equally indulgent, and in a few years there was hardly a man in France who pretended knowledge and reflc(5lion, who did not laugh at all religion. Amidft the almofl: infinite number of publications from the French prefTes, there is hardly a dozen to be found where the author attempts to vindicate religion from the charges of univerfal fuperftition and faifehood. And it muft be acknowledged that little tlfc was to be feen in the ellabliflied religion of the kingdom. The people found nothing in Chrillianity bvt a nevcr-ceafing round of infignificant and troublefome ceremonies, which confumed their time, and fiirnilhed a fund for fupporting a fet of lordly and opprelTive dignitaries, who declaired in the plained mann-rr their own dilbelief of their religion, by their total difregard of common decency, by their continual reiidence at court, and by abfolute neglecft, and even the mod haughty and opprefTive treatment of the only part of their order that took anv concern about the reiiiiious lentiments of the nation, namely the Cures or parifhpriefts. The monks appeared only as lazy drones ; but the parifli-priefbs inflrufted the people, vifited the fick, reconciled the ofFefider and the offended, and were the great mediators between the landlords and their vaffais, an office which endeared them m.ore to the people than all the other circumftances of their profefllon. And it is remarkable, that in all the licentious writings and biti'er fatirical tales of the philofophic freethinkers, fuch as Voltaire, who never fails to have a taunting hit at the clergy, the Cure is generally an amiable perfonage, a charitable man, a friend to the poor andunfortunate, a peace-maker, and a man of piety and worth. Yet thele men were kept in a ilate of the mod flavifn •and cruel fubjection by the higher orders of the clergy, and all hopes of advancement cut off. Rarely, hardlyPage 36Page 36

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.84% accurate
    30 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. hardly ever, does it happen, that a Cure becomes a Bifhop. The Abbes Itep into every ]Inc of preferment.    When fuch procedure is obferved by a v/hcle nation, what opinion can be formed but- that the whole is a vile cheat ? This however was the cafe in France, and therefore infidelity was almolt univerfal. Nor was this overtrained freedom or iicentioufnefs confiaed to religious opinions. It was perhaps more naturally direded to the refiraints arifing from civil fubordination. The familiar name of Brother could not but tickle the fancy of thofe of inferior rank, when they found themfeives fide by fide with perfons whom they cannot approach out of doors but with cautious refpe6l; and while thefe men of rank have their pride lulled a little, and perhaps their hearts a little foftened by the hackneyed cant of fentimental declamation on the topic of Brotherly love and Utopian felicity, the others begin to fancy the happy days arrived, and the light of philanthropy beaming from the eafl and illuminating the Lodge. The Garret Pamphleteer enjoys his fancied authoriry as Senior Warden, and conducts with affedlionate folemmity the young nobleman, who pants for the honour of Mailerfhip, and he praifes the trufty Brother who has guarded him in his perilous journies round the room. What topic of declamation can be more agreeable than the equality of the worthy Brethren ? and how naturally will the Brother Orator in fupport of this favourite topic, Aide into all the common-place pi6tures of human fociety, freed from ail the anxieties attending civil diftintlion, and pnfiing their days in happy fimplicity and equality. From this (late of the fancy, it is hardly a ftep to defcant on the propriety, the expediency, and at laft, the juftice of fuch an arrangement of civil fociety \ and in doing this, one cannot avoid taking notice of the great obflruclions to human felicity which we fee in every quarter.Page 37Page 37

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.00% accurate
    CE'AP. I. TREE MASONRY. ^I quarter, proceeding from the abufes of thofe diftinctions of rank and fortune which have arifen in the world : and as the mifchiefs and horrors of fuperflition are topics of continual declamation to thofe who wifh to throw off the redraints of religion ; fo the opprcflion of the rulers of this world, and the fufferings of talents and worth in inferior [tations, will be no lefs greedily liftened to by all whofe notions of morality are not very pure, and who would be glad to have the enjoyments of the wealthy without the trouble of labouring for them. Free Mafonry may be affirmed to have a natural tendency to fofter fuch levelling wifhes; and wc cannot doubt but that o:reat liberties are takcQ with thvofe fubje6ls in the Lodges, efpeciaily in countries where the dillin6tions of rank and fortune are ftrongly exprcfied and noticed. But iris not a matter of m.ere probability that the Mafon Lodv^^-es were the feminaries of thefe libertine infcruclions. We have diltind; proof of it, even in fome of the French degrees. In the degree called the Chevalier aeSclcil, the v/hoie inftruclion is aimed againil: the ellablilhcd religion of the kingdom. The profeiled object is the emancipation from error and the difcovery of truth. The infcription in the eail is Sagcjfe^ that in the north is Ltherte^ that in the fouth is Fermete, and in the weft it ii. Caution; terms which are very fignificant. The Tres Venerable is Adam; the Senior Warden is Truth, and all the Brethren are Chikiren of Truth. The proccfj of reception is very well contrived : the whole ritual is decent and circumifpe61:, and nothing occurs which can alarm the moP: timiid. Brother Truth is afivcd. What is the hour ? He informs Father Adam, that among men it is the hour of darknefs, but th.at; it is mid-day in the Lodge. The candidate is allied. Why he has knocked at the door, and v/h^t is become of his eight companions fhe is one of thePage 38Page 38

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.95% accurate
    32 . THE SCHISMS I >: CHAP. t. the Elus)? He fays, that the world is In darknefs, and his companions and he have loft each other ; th!at Hejperus^ the ftar of Europe, is obfcured by clouds^ of incenfe, offered up by fuperftition to defpots. Who have made themfelves f?;ods, and have rctu'ed into /the inmoft receffes of their palaces, that they may not be recognifed to be men, while their prielts are deceiving the people, and caufmg them to worlliip thefe divinities. This and many fimilar fentim.ents are evident allufions to the pernicious dodrine of the book called Origine du Defpotifme Oriental, where the religion of all countries is conlidered as a mere engine of ftate^ where it is declared that reafon is the only light which nature has given to man : that our anxiety about futurity has made us imagine endlefs torments in z. future world ; and that princes, taking advantage of our weaknefs, have taken the management of oiir hopes and fears, and direded them fo as to fuit their own purpofes i and emancipation from the fear of death is declared to be the greateft of all deliverances. Queftions are put to the candidate, tending to difc/over whether and how far he may be trulled, and what facrilices he is willing to m.ake in fearch after truth. This fhape givea to the plaftic m.yfteries of Mafonry was much reliflied, and in a very fhort time this new path was completely explored, and a new fcries of decrees was added to the lift, viz. the Nov^ice, and the Elil de la Verite, and the Suliime Fhtlcjophe. In the progrefs through thefe degrees, the Brethren muft forget that they have formerly been Chevaliers de rOrient, Chevaliers de VAigle^ when the fymbols were all explained as typical of the life and immortality brought to light by the gofpel. Indeed they are taught to clafs this among the other clouds which havepcen difpelled by the fun of reafon. Even in the Chezplerie de VAigle there is a twofold explanation given of die fymbols, by ' whichPage 39Page 39

The text on this page is estimated to be only 15.02% accurate
    CHAP. r. FREE MASONRY. Jj which a lively imagination may conceive the whole hiltory and peculiar doftrincs of the New Teilamenr, as being typical of the final triumph of reafon and philofophy over error. And perhaps this degree is the very firft ilep in the plan of Illumination. We are not to fuppofe that this v/as carried to extremity at once. But it is certain, that before 1743, it had become univtrfal, and thac the Lodges of Free Mafons had become the places for m.aking profclyces to every flranse and obnoxious doclrine. Theurgy. Cofincgcny, Cabala^ and many whimificai and myftical doctrines which have been grafted on the difliinguifliing tenets and tlie pure morality of the Jews and Chriftians, were fubjedis of frequent difcuffion in the Lodges. The celebrated Chevalier Ram^fay had a great fliare in all this bufincfs. Affectionately attached to the family of Suuartj and to his native country, he had co-operated heartily with thofe v/ho endeavoured to employ Mafonry in the fervice of the Pretender, and, availing himfcif of the pre-eminence given (at liril perhaps as a courtly com*piiment) to Scotch Mafonry, he laboured to iliew that it exided, and indeed arofe, during the Crufades, and that there really v/as either an order of chivalry whofe bufinefs it was to rebuild the Chriftian churclics dcilroyed by the Saracens, or that a fraternity of Scotch Mafons v^^ere thus employed in the eaR, under the ])rote£tlon of the Knights of St. John of Jerufalen^. He found fome fads v.'hich were thought fufBcient grounds for fuch an opinion, fuch as the biiilding of the college of thefe Knights in London, called the Temple, v/nich v^as aflually done by the public Fraternity of Mafons who had been in the holy wars. It is chiefly to him that we are indebted for that rage of Mafonic chivalry v/hich difLine^uifhes the French Free Mafonry. Rainfiy v;as as eiriincnt for his piety as he v/ac for his entliufiafm, but his cpinion.s E werePage 40

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.82% accurate
    J4 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP.i^ were fingular. His eminent learning, his elegant talents, his amiable charader, and particularly his eftimation at court, gave great influence to every thing he faid on a lubje6t: which was merely a matter of fafnion and amufement. Whoever has attended much to human affairs, knows the eagernefs with which men propagate all fingular opinions, and the delight which attends their favourable reception. None are more zealous than the apoftles of infidelity and atheifm. It is in hum.an nature to catch with greedinefs any opportunity of doing v/hat lies under general reftraint. And if our apprehcnfions are not completely quieted, in a cafe v/here our wifnes lead us ftrongly to fome fa> vourite but hazardous obie6t, we are confcious of a kind of felf bullying. This naturally gets into our difcourfe, and in our eagernefs to get the encouragement of joint adventurers, v/e enforce our tenets wiih an energy, and even a violence, that is very inconfiftent with the fubjedt in hand. If I am an Atheiil, and my neighbour a Theift, there is furely nothing thac ihould make me violent in m.v endeavours to rid him of his error. Yet how violent were the people of this party in Fiance. Thefc facts and obfervations fully account for the zeal with which all this patch-work addition to the fimple Free Mafonry of England was profecuted in France. It furprifes us Britons, who are accuilomed to confider the whole as a matter of amufement for young men, who are glad ef any pretext for indulging in conviviality. We generally confider a man advanced in life with hfs refpecl, if he fliows any ferious attachment to fuch things. But in France, the civil and religious reftraints in converfation made thefe fecret aiTemblies very precious ; and they were much frequented by men of letters, v/ho there found an opportunity  of exprefTing in fakty their diffatisfadlion with

Page 41Page 41

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.43% accurate
    CAAP. I. FREE MASONRY with chofe reflraints, and with that inferiority of rank and condition to which they v/cre fubje6tedj and which appeared to themfelves fo inadequate to their own talents and merits. The Avcccts au Parlement^ the unbenehced Abbes, the vounj^" men of no fortune, and the Joidijant philofophers, formed a numerous band^ frequented the Lodges, and there difcufTcd every topic of religion and policies. Specimens of this occupation appeared from tim.e to time in Colledlions of Difcourfes delivered by the Fr ere Or at ear. I once had in my poffelTion two volumes of thefe difcourfes, v/hich I now regret that I left in a Lodge on the continent, when my reliih for Free Mafonry had forfaken me. One of thefe is a difcourfe by Brother Robinet, delivered in the 'hcge des Chevaliers Bienfalfants de la Saint e Cite at Lyons, at a vifitation by the Grand Mailer the Due de Chartres, afterwards Orleans and Egalite. In this difccourfe we have the germ and fubftance of his noted work. La Nature, ou I' Homme VAoral et -phyfique* In another difcourfe, delivered by Brother Condorcec in the Loge des Philakthes at Straibourg, we have the outlines of his poft humous work, Le Pr ogres de FEfprit humain ; and in another, delivered by Mirabeau in the Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaijants at Paris, we have a great deal of the levelling principles, and cofmopolitifm,-jwhich he thundered from the tribunes of the National Afiembly. But the moll remarkable performances of this kind are, the Archives Myftico-Hermetiques^ and i\\q Des Erreurs^ et de la Verite. The firfl: is con fide red as an account, hiflorical and dogmiaticai, of the procedure and fyflem of the Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaijants ac * And I may add the Syfleme de la Nature of Diderot, who corredled the crude whims of Robinet by the more refined rnechanifm of Hartley. f Citizendiip of the World, from the Greek words Cofmos, world, and Poll St a ciiy.Page 42

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.55% accurate
    36 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. T. at Lyons. This was the mofl: zealous and fyftcmatical of all the cofmopolitical Lodges in France. It worked long under the patronage of its Grand iVLfter the Due des Chartres^ afterwards Orleans^ and at laft Fh. Egalite. It fent out many affiiiared Lodo-es, which v/ere eredledin various pares of the French dominions. The daughter Lodges at Paris, Srrafbourg, Lille, Thouloufe, took the additional title of Philaletbes. There arofe fome fchifms, as may be expedled, in an Affociation where every man is encouraged to broach and to propagate any the moil fingular opinion. Thefe fchifms were continued with fome heat, but v/ere in a great meafure repaired in Lodges which took the name of ylmis reunis de la Veritk One of this denomination at Paris became very eminent. The mother Lodge at Lyons extended its correfpondence into Germany, and other foreign countries, and fent conftiturions or fyftems, by which the Lodges conducled their operations. I have not been able to trace the fbeps by which this Lodge acquired fuch an afcendancy ; but I fee, that in 1769 and 1770, all the refined or philofophicai Lodges in Alface and Lorraine united, and in a convention at Lyons, formally put themftlves under the patronage of this Lodge, cultivated a continual correfpondence, and confidcrcd themfeives as profeffino; one Ivlafonic Faith, fufficiently diftingu'.fhable from that of other Lodges. What this v/as v/e do not very diftincily know. We can only infer it from fome hiftorical circumflances. One of its flivourite daucyhters, the Lod^e Theodor vcn dcr guten Ratby at Munich, became fo remarkable for difcourfes dano-erous to church and fhate, that the Ele6bor of Bavaria, after repeared admonitions during a courfe of five or fix years, v/as obliged to iuppi^efs it in 1786. Another of its fufFrrgan Lodges at Regeniburgh became exceedingly obnoxious to the llaccj

Page 43Page 43

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.64% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. ^1 dare, and occafioned feveral commotions and infurrections. Another, at Paris, gradually refined into the Jacobin club — And in the year 1791, the Lodges in Alface and Lorraine, with thofe of Spire and Worms, invited Cuftine into Germany, and delivered Mentz into his hands. When we refle6l on thefe hiilorlcal fa^ls, we get fome key to the better underftanding of the two performances which Imentiunedas defcriptive of the opinions and occupations of this Sed; of Free-Mafons. The Archives Myfrico-Hermetiques exhibit a vei-y (Irange mixture of Myfticifm, Theofophy, Cabaliftic whim, real Science, Fanaticifm, and Freethinking, both in religion and politics. They mud not be confidered as an account of any fettled fyftem, but rather as annals of the proceedings of the Lodge, and abftra6ls of the llrange doctrines whichmade their fucefiive appearance in it. But if an intelligent and cautious reader examine them, attentively, he will fee, that the book is the work of one hand, and that all the wonders and oddities are caricatured, 'lo as to engrofs the general attention, while they aifo are twiftcd a little, fo that in one way or another they accord with a general fpirit of licentioufnefs in morals, religion, and politics. Although every thing is exprelTed decently, and with fome caution and moderation, atheifm, materialifm, and difcontent vv^ith civil fubordination, pervade the whole. It is a work of great art. By keeping the ridicule and the danger of fuperftition and ignorance continually in view, the mind is captivated by the relief which free enquiry and communication of fentiment feems to fecure, and we are put off our guard againft the rifle of delufion, to which we are expofed when our judgment is warped by our pafTions. The other book, '' Des Erreurs et de la Verire," came tl-om the lame fchool, and is a fort of holy fcripture,

Page 44Page 44

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.34% accurate
    3$ THE SCHISMS IN GHAP. I. tnre, or at lead a Talmud among the Free Mafons of France. It is intended only for the initiated^ and is indeed a myftery to any other reader. But as the object of it was to fpread the favourite opinions of fome enthufiaftic Brethren, every thing is laid that does not diredtly betray the fccretsofthe Order. It contains a fyftefn of Theofophy that has often appeared in the writings of philofophers, both in ancienc and modern times. *' All the intelligence and moral fentiment *' that appears in the univerfe, either dire6lly, as in ''^ the minds of men, or indiredly, as an inference ^^ from the marks of defisn that we fee around us, fome " of which Ihow us that men have adted, and many " more that fome other intelligence has a61:ed, are con*' fidered as parts or portions of a general mafs of in*' teliigence which exifts in the univerfe, in the fame *' manner as matter exifts in it. This intelligence has *^ an infcrutable connexion with the material part of

Page 45Page 45

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.75% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MASONHy. J^ *' of an animal^ &c. is at lafl reunited, in its original " form, to the great mafs of waters, ready to run over '' the fame circle again ; fo the Soul of Man, after " performing its office, and exhibiting all that train " of intelleftual phenomena that we call human life, *^ is at laft fwallowed up in the great ocean of intelli^' gence." The author then may fmg •* Felix qui potuit rerum cognofcere caufas, " Ataue metus omnes et inexorabile fatum ** Subjecit pedibus, ftrepitumque Acheronds avari." For he has now got to his afylum. This deity of his may be the obje6t of wonder, like every thing great and incomprehenfible, but not of woriLip, as the moral Governor of the univerfe. The hopes are at end, which reft on our notions of the immortality and individualitv of the human foul, and on the encouragement which religion holds forth to believe, that improvement of the mind in the courfe of this life, by the exercife of wifdom and of virtuous difpofiticns, is but the beginning of an endlefs progrefs in all that can give delight to the rational and v\;eil-difpo fed mind. No relation now fubfifts between man and Deity that can Vi^irm the heart. But, as this is contrary to fome natural propenlity in the human mind, which in all ages and nations has panted after fome connedtion with Deitv, the author ftrives to avail hlmfclf of fome cold principles of fymmetry in the works of nature, fome ill-fupported notions of propriety, and other fuch confiderations, to make this anma mundi an obje6l of love and refpe6l. This is done in greater detail in another work, Tableau^ des rapports entre VRcnime^ Dieu, et VUnherSf which is undoubtedly by the fame hand. But the intelligent reader will readily fee, that fuch incongruous things cannot be reconciled, and that we can expect nothing here but fophiftry. The author proceeds.

Page 46Page 46

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.05% accurate
    40 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I, proceeds, in the next place^ to confider man as related to man^ and to trace out the path to happinels in this life. Here we have the fame overftrained morality as in the other work, the fame univerfai Benevolence, the fame lamentations over the miferable finite of mankind, refuking from the opprefiion of the powerful, the great ones of the earth, who have combined againil the happinefs of mankind, and have iucceeded, by debafing their minds, fo that they have become wiilinor Haves. This could not have been brou2"ht about v/ithouc the affiftance of fuperftition. But the princes of tliis world eniiiled into their fervice the priefts, who exerted them.felves in darkening the underflandings of men, and tilled their minds with religious terrors. The altar became the chief pillar of the throne, and m.en were held in complete fubjeclion. Nothing can recover them from this abje6l ftate but knowledge. While this difpels their fears, it will alio ihow them their rights, and the way to attain them. It deferves particularly to be remarked, that this fyftem of opinions (if fuch an inconfiftent mafs of affcrtions can be called a fyftem) bears a great refembiance to a performance of Toland's, publiil:ed in 1720, called Panibeijliccni fell Celelratio Scdalitii Sccratid. It is an account of the principles of a Fraternity which he calls Socratica, and the Brothers Fantheiftaf. They are fuppofed to hold a Lodge, and the author gives a ritual of the procedure in this Lodge -, the cerem.onics of opening and fjiutting of the Lodge, the admiifiion of Members into its different degrees, &c. Realbn is the Sun that illuminates the v^hole, and Liberty and Equality are the objects ol their occupations. We fhall fee afterwards that this book v/as fondly pufhed into Grrmany, tranflated, commAcnted upon, and fo mifrepreicnted, as to call oif the atttntion from the

Page 47Page 47

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.78% accurate
    CHAP. I. f^REE MASONRt. 4I the real fpiric of the book, which is Intentionally wrapped up in cabala and enigma. Mirabeau was at much pains to procure it notice ; and it mud therefore be confidered as a treafui-e of the cofmo-political opinions of the AlTociation of Chevaliers Bienfaijants^ Philalethes^ and Amis Reunisy who were called the improved Lodges, working under the D. de Chartres — of thefe there were 266 in 1784. This will be found a very important remark. Let it alfo be recollcded afterwards, that this Lodge of Lyons fenc a deputy to a grand Convention in Germany in 1772, viz. Mr. Willermooz, and that the bunnefs was thought of fuch importance, that he remained there two years. The book Des Erreiirs et de la Verite^ niuft therefore be confidered as a claflical book of thefe opinions. We know that it originated in the Lege des Chcv, BienfaiJa7its at Lyons. We know that this Lodge ftood as it were at the head of French Free Mafonry, and that the fictitious Order of Mafonic Knights Templars was formed in this Lodge, and was confidered as the model of all the red of this mimic chivalry. They proceeded fo-far in this mummery, as even to have the clerical tonfure. The Duke of Orleans, his fon, the Ele6lor of Bavaria, and fome other German Princes^ did not fcruple at this mummiery in their own perfons. In all the Lodges of reception, the Brother Orator never failed to exclaim on the topics of funerftition, blind to the exhibition he was then making", or indifferent as to the vile hypocrify of it. We have, in the lifts of Orators and Office-bearers, many n'>imes of perfons, who have had an opportunity at iaft of proclaiming their fentiments in public. The Abbe Sieyes was of the Lodo;e of Philalcthes at Paris, and alfo at Lyons. Lequinio, author of the moft profligate book that ever dil'graced a prefs, the Prejiiges vaincus par la Rai/hi, was Warden in the Lodffe CcmPrJJe Sociale, F Defprcmenil^Page 48

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.52% accurate
    42 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I, Dcfpremenil, Baiily, Fauchcr, Maury, Mounier, were of the fame lyftem, though in cii(^ercnt Lodges. They were called Martinifts, from a St. Martin, who formed a fchifm in the fyftem of the Chevaliers Bienfaijants, of which we have not any very precile account. Mercier gives fome account of it in his Tableau de PariSy and in his Anne 2440. The breach alarmed the Brethren, and occafioned great heats. But it was healed, and the Fraternity took the name of Mija du Re7ns, which is an anagram oi' d:s Amis Reimis. The_Bifhop of Aiitun, the man fo bepraifed as the benevolent Citizen of the World, the friend of mankind and of o^ood order, was Senior Warden of another Lodo-e at Paris, efiablifiied in 1786, (I think chieiiy by Orleans and himfclf,) which afterv/ards became the Jacobin Club. In fhort, we may aflert with confidence, that the Mafon Lodges in France were the hot-beds, where the feeds were fown, and tenderly reared, of all the pernicious dodrines which foon after choaked every moral or religious cultivation, and have made the Society worie than a waile, have made it a noifome marfn of human corruption, filled with every rank and poilbnous weed. Thefe Lodges were frequented by perfons of all ranks, and of every profefTion. The idle and the frivolous found amufement, and glittering things to tickle their fatiated fancies. There they becamic the dupes of the declamations of the crafty and licentious Abbes, and writers of every denomination. Mutual encouraoement in the induioence of hazardous thoughts and opinions which flatter our wifl-ies or propenfities is a lure which few minds can refill. 1 believe that moft men have felt this in fome period of their lives. I can find no other way of accounting for the company j that I havelbmetimes feen in a Mafon Lodge. The ' Lodge de la Farfaite Intelligcme at Liege, contained, in Decem.ber

Page 49Page 49

CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. 43 December 1770, the Prince Bifnop, and the greateft part of his Chapter, and all the Ofiice- bearers were dignitaries of the church j yet a dircourfe given by the Brother Orator was as poignant a fatire on fuperftition and credulity, as if it had been written by Voltaire. It was under the aufpices of this Lodge that the collection of difcourfes, which I mentioned above, v/as publifhed, and there is no fault found with Brother Robiner, nor Brother Condorcet. Indeed the Trefonciers of Liege were proverbial, even in Brabant, for their Epicurifm in the moft extenfive fenfe of the word. Thus was corruption fpread over the kingdom under the rnafk of moral in(tru6tion. For thefe difcourfes were full of the mod refined and drained morality, and florid paintings of Utopian felicity, in a ilate where all are Brothers and citizens of the world. But alas 1 thefe wire- drawn principles feem to have had little influence on the hearts, even of thofe who could befl: difplay their beauties. Read the tragedies of Voltaire^ and fome of his grave performances in profe — What man is there who feems better to know his Mailer's will ? No man cxprelles with more propriety, with more exa6tnefs, the feelings of a good mind. No man feems more fenfible of the immutable obligation of juftice and of truth. Yet this man, in his tranfactions with his bookfellers, with the very men to whom he was immediately indebted for his affluence and his fame, was repeatedly, nay inceiTantly, guilty of the meanefl:, the vileft tricks. When he fold a work for an enormous price to one bookfeiler, (even to Cramer, whom he really refpe6led,) he took care that a furreptitious edition fhoukl appear in Holland, almoft at the fame moment. Proof-ilieets have been traced from Ferney to Amflerdam. When a friend of Cramer's expoflulated with Vokaire on the injuflice of this condud, he fiid;, grinning, Oh le ton Crame'r — ch Men — //

Page 50Page 50

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.53% accurate
    44 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. n'a que d' etre du parti — he may take a fliare — he vvill not give me a liv^re the lefs for the firft piece I offer him. Where iliall we fee more tendernefs, more honour^ more love of every thing that is good and fair, than in Diderot's Pere de Fa?nille? — Yet this man did not fcruple to fell to the Emprefs of Ruffia an immenfe library^ which he did not poiTefs, for an enormious price, having got her promifc that it fliould remain in his poiTefTion in Paris during his life. When her ambaffador wanted to fee it, after a year or tvv^o's payments, and the vifitation could be no longer ftaved off^ Diderot was obliged to fet o^ in a hurry, and run through all the bookfellers fliops in Germany, to help him to fill his empty Iheives. He had the good fortune to fave appearances-— but the trick took air, becaufe he had been niggardly in his attention to the ambafTador's fecretary. This, however, did not hinder him from honouring his Imperi?.! pupil with a vifit. He expected adoration, as the light of the world, and was indeed received by the Ruffian courtiers with all the childifh fondnefs that they feel for every Parifian mode. But they did not urderftand him, and as he did not like to lofe money at play, they did not long court his company. He found his pupil too clear fig h ted. Ces philofophes, fa id fhe, font beaux y vus de loin ; mais de plus preSj h diamcnt parait cryjlal. He had contrived a poor fcory, by vvhich he hoped to get his daughter married in parade, and portioned by her Majefty— but it was fecn through, and he was difappointed. When v/e fee the inefHcacy of this refined humanity on thefe two apoflles of philofophical virtue, we fee ground for doubting of the propriety and expediency of trufling entirely to it for the peace and happinefs of a (late, and we fhould be on our guard when we liflen to the florid fpeeches of the Brother Orator, and his congra Page 51Page 51

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.68% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. 45 congratulations on the emancipation from fuperftition and opprefiion, which will in a fliorc time be efFedtuated by the Chevaliers Bienfaijants^ the Philalethes, or any other fed: of cofmo-political Brethren. I do not mean by all this to maintain, that the Mafon Lodges were the fole corrupters of the public mind in France.--^No. — In all nations that have made much progrefs in cultivation^ there is a great tendency to corruption, and it requires all the vigilance and exertions of magiflirates, and of moral inftrudtors, to prevent the fpreading of licentious principles and maxims of conduct. They arife naturally of them.feives, as weeds in a rich foil ; and, like weeds, they are pernicious, only becaufe they are, w^here they fhould not be, in a cultivated fit\d. Virtue is the cultivation of the human foul, and not the miCre pofieflion of good difpofitions j all men have thefe in fome degree, and occafionally exhibit them. But virtue fuppofes exertion ; and, as the hufbandman muft be incited to his laborious talk by fome cogent motive, fo muft man be prompted to that exertion which is necefTary on the part of every individual for the very exiftence of a great fociety : For man is indolent, and he is luxurious 5 he v/ifnes for enjoym.ent, and this with Tittle trouble. The lefs fortunate envy the enjoyments of others, and repine at their ov^n inability to obtain the like. They fee the idle in affluence. Few, even of good men, have the candour, nay, I may call it the v/ifdom, to think on the adivity and the labour which had procured thofe comforts to the rich or to their anceftors ; and to believe that they are idle only becaufe they are wealthy, but would be adive if they were needy. — Such fpontaneous reflexions cannot be expe61;ed in perfons who are engaged in unceafmg labour, to procure a very moderate fnare (in their eilimacion at leaft) of the comforts of life. Yet fuch ^eilexions would, in tliePage 52Page 52

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.14% accurate
    ■^ 46 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. the main, be jud, and furely they would greatly tend to quiet the minds of the unfuccefsful. This excellent purpofe may be greatly forwarded by a national eftablilTiment for moral inftrudion and admonition ; and if the public inftrudors fhould add all the motives to virtuous moderation which are fugr. . . *-* gelled by the coniiderations of genuine religion, every advice would have a tenfold influence. Religious and moral inftrudions are therefore, in their own nature, unequivocal fupports to that moderate exertion of the authority arifmg from civil fubordination, which the moft refined philanthropift or cofmo- polite acknowledges to be necellary for the very exiftence of a great and cultivated fociery. I have never Ictn a fcheme of Utopian happinefs that did not contain fome fyfiiem of education, and I cannot conceive any fydem of education of which moral inftrudion is not a principal part. Such eiiablifhments are didates of nature, and obtrude themfelves on the mind of every perfon who begins to form plans of civil union. And in all exifting focieties they have indeed been formed, and are confidered as the greateft corredor and foother of thofe difcontents that are unavoidable in the minds of the unfuccefsful and the unfortunate. The ma^ifcrate, therefore, whofe profciTional habits lead him frequently to exert himfelf for the maintenance of public peace, cannot but fee the advantages of fuch ftated remembrancers of our duty. He will therefore fupport and cherifh this public eRabiifhment, which fo evidently affifbs him in his beneficent and important labours. But all the evils of fociety do not fpring from the difcontents and the vices of the poor. The rich come in for a large and a confpicuous Hiare. They frequently abufe their advantages. Pride and haughty behaviour on their part rankle in the breafrs, and affed the tempers of their inferiors, already fretted by thePage 53Page 53

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.38% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. ^J the hardfhips of their own condition. The rich alfo are luxurious ; and are often needy. Grafping at every mean of gratification, they are inattentive to the rights of inferiors whom they defpife, and, defpifmg, opprefs. Perhaps their own fuperiority has: been acquired by injutlice. Perhaps moft fovcreignries have been acquired by cpprcfTion. Princes and Rulers are but men -, as fuch, they abufe many of their greated blefiings. Obferving that religious hopes make the good refigned under the hardfhips of the prefcnt fcene, and that its terrors frequently reftrain the bad -, they avail themfelves of thefe obfervations, and fupport religion as an engine of fiate, and a mean of their own fecurity. But they are not contented with its real advantages ; and they are much more afraid of tbe refentment and the crimes of the offended profligate, than of the murmurs of the fuiTering worthy. Therefore they encourage fuperfiition, and call to their aid the vices of the priefthood. The priefts are men of like pafiions as other men, and it is no ground of peculiar blame that they alfo frequently yield to the temptations of their fituation. They are encouraged to the indulgence of the love of influence natural to all men, and they heap terror upon terror, to lubdue the minds of men, and darken their underilandings. Thus the moft honourable of all employments, the moral infiruclion of thefcate, is degraded to a vile trade, and is pradifed v^ith ail the deceit and rapacity of any other trade ; and religion, from being the honour and the fafeguard of nation, becomes its greatefl: difgrace and curfe. Wiien a nation has fallen into this lamientable fdate, it is extremely diflicuk to reform. Although nothing would fo immediately and fo completely remove all ground of complaint, as the re-eilablifhing private virtue, this is of all others the leafb likely to be adopted.    The really worthy, who fee the miifchief where ic ad: u allyPage 54Page 54

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.95% accurate
    THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. a6lually Is, but who view this life as the fchool of improvement, and know that man is to be made pcrfed: through fufFering, are the laft perfons to complain. The worthlefs are the mofl difcontented, the moil noify in their complaints, and the lead fcrupulousabouD the means of redrefs. Not to improve the nation, but to advance themfelves, they turn the attention to the abufes of power and influence. And they begin their attack where they think the place moil defencelefs, and where perhaps they expedl affiftance from a difcontented garrifon. They attack fuperftition, and are not at all folicitous that true religion (hall not fufFer along with it. It is not perhaps, v^^ith any direct intention to ruin the ftate, but merely to obtain indulgence for themfelves and the co-operation of the wealthy. They expedt to be jiflened to by many who wifh for the fame indulgence ; and thus it is that religious free-thinking is generally the firil: tlep of anarchy and revolution. For in a corrupted ftate, perfons of all ranks have the fame licentious wifhes, and if fu» perftitious fear be really an ingredient of the human mind, it requires {omc Jlriiggle to fhake it off. Nothing is fo effeftual as mutual encouragement, and therefore all join againft prieft-craft ; even the rulers forget their intereft, which fliould lead them to fupport it. In fuch a ftate, the pure morality of true religion vanlihes from the fight. There is commonly no remains of it in the religion of the nation, and therefore all g;ocs together. Perhaps there never was a nation wnere ail tnefe cooperadng caufes had acquired greater ftrengdi than in France. OppreiTions of all kinds were at a height. The luxuries of life were enjoyed exclufively by the upper clafies, and this in the higheft degree of rennement j fo that the deftrcs of the reft were whetted to the utmoft. Religion appeared in its worft form, and feemed calculatedPage 55Page 55

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.17% accurate
    CHAP. r. FREE MASONRY. 49 Ciliated folcly for procuring eilablifhments for the yoiinorer fons of the infolcnc and ufciefs noblelfe. The morals of the higher orders of the clergy and of the laity were equally corrnpted. Thoufands of literary men were excluded by their ilation from all hopes of advancement ro the more ref]::)e6]:able offices in the church. Thefe vented their difconrents as far as there was fafety, and were encouraged by many of the upper clalTes, who joined them in their fatires on the prieflhood. The clergy oppofed them, it is true, but feebly, becaufe they could not fupport their oppofition by examples of their ovvn virtuous behaviour, but were always obliged to have recourfe to the power of the church, the very objecl of hatred and difguil. The whole nation becam.e inficiel ; and when in a few inftances a worthy Cure uttered the fmall dill voice of true religion, it was not heard amidft the general noife of fatire and reproach. The mdfconducl of adminiftration, and the abufe of the public treafures, were every day growing mxore impudent and glaring, and expofed the ofovernmient to continual criticifm. But it was ilill too powerful to fuller this to proceed to extremities ; while therefore infidelity and loofe fcntimients of morality paiTed unpuniihed, it was flill very hazardous to publifh any thing againft the fLare. It vv'as in this refpeft, chiefly, that the Mafon Lodges contributed to the difTemination of dangerous opinions, and they were employed for this purpofe all over the kingdom. This is not an affertion hazarded merely on account of its probability. Abundant proof will appear by and by, that the mod turbulent char:ici:ers in the nrition f^'cquented the Lodges. We cannot doubt, but that under'this covert they indulged their fadious difpoiitions ; ray, we fhall find the greateft part of the Lodges of France, converted, in the courfe of a vcrf few weeks, into correfpondino: political focieries..Page 56

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.98% accurate
    50 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. U But it is now time to turn our eyes to the progrefs of Free Malbnry in Germany and the north of Europe ; there it took a more ferious turn. Free Mafonry was imported into Germany fomewhat later than into France. The firft German Lodge that wc have any account of is that at Cologne, erected in 17 16, but very foon fuppreifed. Before the year 17C15 there were many, both in Proteiiant and CathoUc Germany.    Thofe of Wetziar, Frankfort on the Mayne, Brunfwick, and Hamburg, are the oldell, and their priority is doubtful All of them received their inftitution from England, and had patents from a mother Lodge in London. All feem to have got the myftery through the fame channel, the banifned friends of the Stuart family. Many of thcfe were Catholics, and entered into the fervice of Auftria and the Catholic princes. The true hofpitality, that is no where more confpicuous than in the charadter of the Germans, made this inilitution a mod agreeable and ufeful palTport to thefe gentlemen; and as m.any of them were in military ftations, and in gar.rifon, they found it a very eafy matter to fet up Lodges in all parts of Germany. Thefe afforded a very agreeable paflime to the officers, Vv'ho had little to occupy them, and were already accuftomed to a fubordinacion which did not affe6l their vanity on account of family didinclions. As the Enfign and the General were equally gentlemen, the allegory or play of univerfal Brotherhood was neither novel nor difo-udino-. Free Mafonry was then of the fimpleil form, confiding of the three degrees of Apprentice, Fellow-craft, and Madcr. it is remarkable, that the Germans had been longaccudomcd to the word, the do-n, and the ,qriue of the Mafons, and fome other handicraft trades. In many parts of Germany there was a didindion of operative Mafons into WortMaurers

Page 57Page 57

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.33% accurate
    GHAP. 1. FREE MASONPs^Y. , 5 1 Maiirers and Schrifc-Maurers. The Wort-Maurers had no other oroof to s^ive of their having been rej^ularly brought np to the trade of builders, but the word and figns -, the Schrift-Maurers had written indentures to fhew. There are extant and in force, boroughlaws, enjoining the Mafters of Mafons to give employment to journeymen who had the proper words and fign. In particular it appears, that fome cities had more extenfive privileges in this refpe6l than others. The word given at Wetzlar, the feat of the great council of revifion for the empire, entitled the pofTeffor to work over the whole empire. We may infer from the procelTcs and decifions in fome of thofe municipal courts, that a mafter gave a word and token for each year's progrefs of his apprentice. He gave the word of the incorporated Imperial city or borough on which he depended, and alfo a word peculiar to himfelf, by which all his own pupils could recognife each other. This mode of recognifance was probably the only document of education in old times, while writing was confined to a very fmall part of the com^ munity. When we refled: on the nature of the German empire, a confederation of fmall independent dates, we fee that this profeffion cannot keep pace with the other mechanic arts, unlefs its practitioners are invefted with greater privileges than others. Their great works exceed the flrengch of the immediate neighbourhood, and the workmen muft be brought together from a diflance. Their aiTociation muft therefore be more cared for by the public* When Englifn Free Mafonry was carried into Germany, it was hofpitably received. It required little elTort * Note. The Wort or Grufs-Maurer were abolifhed by an Im > perial eJifl: in 1731, and no.ie were intitle4 to the privileges of the cprporation but luch as could Ihcw written indentures.

Page 58Page 58

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.89% accurate
    5'2 ^ THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. effort to give it refpedlability, and to make it the occupation of a gentleman, and its fecrets and myfteries were not inch novelties as in France. It ipread rapidly, and the limple topic of Brotherly love was fufficient for recommending it to the honed and hofpitable Germans. But it foon took a very different turn. The German character is the very opponte of frivolity.    It tends to ferioufnefs, and requires ferious occupatiouc The Germans are eminent for their turn for inveiligation ; and perhaps they indulge this to excels. We call them plodding and dull, bccaufe we have little reiitli for enquiry for its own fake. But this is furely the occupation of a rational nature, and deferves any name but Itupidity. At the fame time it muft be acknowledge:], that the fpirit of enquiry requires regulation as much as any propenfity of the hu-^ man mind. But it appears that the Germans are not nice in their choice of their objcclsj it appears that fingularity, and Vv'onder, and difficulty of refearch, are to them irrefifdble recommendations and incitements. They have always exhibited a (Irong prediieclion for every thing that is wonderful, or folemn, or terrible j and in fpite of the greac progreis which men have made in the courfe of thefe two laft centuries, in the knowledge of nature, a progrefs too in which we fhould be very unjuft if we did not acknowledge that the Germans have been generally in thaeforemoll ranks, the grofs abfurdities of magic, exorcifm, wirchcrafr, fortune-tellino;. tranfmutation of metals, and univerfal medicine, have always had their zealous partisans, who have liftened with greedy ears to the nonfenfe and jargon of fanatics and cheats ; and though they every day faw examples of many v;ho had been ruined or rendered ridiculous by their credulity, every new pretender to fecrets found numbers ready to liilen to him, and to run over the fam.e courfe. FreePage 59Page 59

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.54% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. 5 o Free Mafonry, profefTing myfteries, inftantly roufed all thefc people, and the Lodges appeared to the adventurers who wanted to profit by the enthufiafm or the avarice of their dupes, the litceft places in the world for the fcene of their operations. The Rofycrucians were the firfl: who availed themfelves of the opportunity. This was not the Society which had appeared formerly under that name, and was now extindl, but a fet of Alchymifts, pretenders to the tranfmutation of metals and the univerfai medicine, who, the better to inveigle their votaries, had mixed with their own tricks a good deal of the abfurd fuperfticions of that fe6l, in order to give a greater air of myllery to the whole, to protraft the time of infl:ru6lion, and to afiord more room for evafions, by m.aking fo many difFiCult conditions neceffary for perfe6ling the grand work, that the unfortunate gull, who had thrown away his time and his money, might believe that the failure was owing to his own incapacity or unfitnefs for being the polTeffor of the grand fecret. Thefe cheats found it convenient to m^ake Mafonry one of their conditions, and by a fmall degree of art, perfuaded their pupils that they were the only true Mafons. Thefe Rofycrucian Lodges were foon eilabiiilied, and became numerous, becaufe their m-yderies v/ere addrefTed, both to the curiofity, the knfuality, and the avarice of men. They becamjc a very formidable band, adopting the conilitution of the Jefuits, dividing the Fraternity into circles, each under the management of its own fuperior, knovv^n to the prcfident, but unknown to the individuals of the Lodges. Thefe fuperiors were conne6ted with each other in a way known only to themfelves, and the v^/hole was under one General. At lead this is the account v/hich they willi to be believed.    Ifitbejuft, nothing but the abfurdity of the oftenfible m.otives of their occupations could have preventedPage 60

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.62% accurate
    54 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. vented this combinati'on from carrvino; on Ichemes h'vr with hazard to the peace of the world. But the Rofycrucian Lodges have always been coniidered by other Free Mafons as bad Societies, and as grofs ichilmatics. This did not hinder, however, their alchymical and medical fecrets from being frequently introduced into the Lodges of fimple Free Mafonry -, and in like manner, exorcifm, or ghoH-raifing, magic, and other grofs fuperilitions, were often held out in their meetings as attainable myflieries, vvhich v»?ould be immenfe acquifitions to the Fraternity, without any necefiity of admitting along with them the religious deliriums of the .Rofycrucians. In 1743, Baron Hunde, a gentleman of honourable charadler and independent forcune, was in Paris, where he faid he had o-ot acquainted with the Earl of Kilmarnock and fon:ie other o-entlemen who were about the o Pretender, and learned from them that they had fome wonderful fecrets in their Lodges. He vvas admitted, through the medium of that nobleman, and of a Lord Clifford, and his Mafonic patent was figned George (faid to be the fignature of Kilmarnock). Hunde had attached himfelf to the fortunes of the Pretender, in hopes (as he fays himfelf) of rifing in the world under his protedlion. The mighty fecret was this. '^ When the Order of Knights Templars was abolifli'^ ed by Philip the Fair, and cruelly perfecuted, fome worthy perfons efcaped, and took refuge in the Flighlands of Scotland, where they concealed themfeives in caves. Thefe perfons polfeired the true fecrets of Mafonry, which had always been in that Order, having been acquired by the Knights, du^^ ring their ftrvices in the Eaft, from the pilgrims whom they occafionally prOte(5led or delivered. The Chevaliers de la Rofe-Crcix continued to have the ^^ fame duties as formerly, though robbed of their ^^ emolucc

Page 61Page 61

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.95% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. ^j ^^ emoluments. In fine, every true Mafon is a Knight " Temiplar.*' It is very true that a clever fancy can accommodate the ritual of reception of the Chevalier de rEfee, &c. to fomething like the inftitution of the Knights Templars, and perhaps this explanation of young Zerobabel's pilgrimage, and of the rebuilding of the Temple by Ezra, is the mofh (igr.ificant explanation that has been given of the meagre fymbols of Free Mafonry. ' AVhen Baron Hunde returned to Germany, he exhibited to feme friends his extenfive powers for propagating this fyftem of Mafonry, and made a few Knights. But he was not very a(flive. Probably the failure of the Pretender's attempt to recover the throne of his anceilors had put an end to Hunde's hopes of making a figure. In the mean time Free Mafonry was cultivated with zeal in Germany, and many adventurers found their advantage in fupporting particular fchifms. But in 1756, or 1757, a complete revolution took place. The French officers v/ho were prifoners at large in Berlin, undertook, with the aflurance peculiar to their nation, to inftrudl the fimple Germans in every thing that embcllifhes fociety. They faid, that the honiefpun Free Mafonry, which had been imported from England, was fit only for the unpolifned minds of the Britiih ; but that in France it had grown into an elegant fyftem, fit for the profcfiion of Gentlemen. Nay, they (aid, that the Englilh v/ere ignorant of true Mafonry, and pofTeiTed nothing but the introduction to it; and even this was not underilood by them. When the ribbands and ftars, with which the French had ornamented the Order, were fhown to the Germans, they could not refill the enchantment. A Mr. Rofa, a French commifiary, brought fiom Paris a com[Jcte v/aggon load of Mafonic Qrnaments, which were

Page 62Page 62

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.73% accurate
    §6 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. were all dliliibuted before It had reached Berlin, and he was obliged to order another, to furnlfli the Lodges of that city. It became for a while a moft profitable bufinefs to many French ofncers and commiflarles difperfed over Germany, having little elfe to do. Every body gaped for inftru'flion, and thcfe kind teachers were alv/ays ready to befrow it. Iti half a year Free Mafonry underwent a complete revolution all over Germany, and Chevaliers multiplied without number. The Rofaic fyftern was a gofpel to the Mafons, and the poor Britifh fyftem was defpifed. But the new Lodges of Berlin, as they had been the teachers of the W'hole empire, wanted aifo to be the governors, and infifled on complete fubje6lion from all the others. This ftartled the Free Malbns at a diflance, and awakened them from their golden dreams. Now began a flrugglc for dominion and for independency. This made the old Lodges think a little about the whole affair. The refuk of this was a counter revolution. Though no man could pretend that he underfbood the true meaning of Free Mafonry, its origin, its hiftory, or its real aim, all faw that the interpretations of their hieroglyphics, and the rituals of the new degrees imported from France, were quite gratuitous. It appeared, therefore, that the fafefc thing for them was an appeal to the birth-place of Mafonry. They fent to London for Infiruclions. There they learned, that nothing was acknowledged for genuine unfophillicated Mafonry but the three degrees -, and that the mother Lodge of London alone could, by her inflruftions, prevent the m.ofl dangerous fchifms and innovations. Many Lodges, therefore, applied for patents and inftruc^ticns. Patents were cafily made out, and moil willingly fent to the zealous Brethren -, and thefe were thankfully received and paid for. But inftruclion v/as not fo cafy a matter. At that time we had nothing butPage 63

CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. ^y but the book of conftitutionSj drawn up about 1720, by Anderfon and Defaguilliers, two perfons of little education, and of low manners, who had aimed at little more than making a pretext, not altogether contemptible, for a convivial meeting. This, however, was received with refpe6l. We are apt to fmile at grave men's being fatistied with fuch coarfe and fcanty fare. But it was of ufe, merely becaufe it gave an oftenfible reafon for refitting thedefpotifm of the Lodges of Berlin. Several refpedlable Lodges, particularly that of Frankfort on the Mayne, that of Brunfwick, that of Wetzlar, and the Royal York of Berlin, refolutely adhered to the Englilh fyilem, and denied themfelves all the enjoyment of the French degrees, rather than acknowledge the fupremacy of the Rofaic Lodges of Berlin. About the year 1764 a new revolution took place. An adventurer, who called himfclf Johnfon, and pafled himfelf for an Englifhman, but who v^as really a German or Bohemian named Leucht, faid that he was ambaifadorfrom the Chapter of Knights Templars at Old Aberdeen in Scotland, fent to teach the Germans what was true Mafonry. He pretended to tranfmute metals, and fome of the Brethren declared that they had fccn him do it repeatedly. This reached Baron Hunde, and brought back all his former enthufiafm. There is fomething very dark in this part of the hidory ; for in a little Johnfon told his partifans that the only point he had to inform them of was, that Baron Hunde was the Grand Mafter of the 7th province of Mafonry, which included the whole of Germany, and the royal dominions of Pruffia. He fnowed them a map of the Mafonic Empire arranged into provinces, each of which had diftinguifhing emblems. Thefe are all taken from an old forgotten and infignificant book, Typotii Symbohz Divina et Humana, publifned in 1601. There is not the Icaft trace in this book either of Mafonry of Tempi plars.

Page 64Page 64

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.41% accurate
    58 THE SCHISMS IK CHAP. i. piarSj and the emblems are taken out without the imallcil ground of feiedion. Some inconfiftency with the former magnificent promifes of Johnfon ftartled them at firil, but they acquiefced and fubmitted to Baron Hunde as Grand Mafrer of Germany. Soon after johnfon turned out to be a cheat, efcaped, was taken, and put in prifon, where he died. Yet this feems not to have ruined the credit of Baron Hunde. He ere6led Lodges, gave a few fimple inflirucSlions, all in the fyftem of Englifli Mafonry, and promifed, that when they had approved themfelves as good Mafons, he would then impart the mighty fecret. After two or three years of noviciate, a convention was held at Altenberg ; and he told them that his whole fecret was, ibat every true Majon was a Knight Templar, They Were aftonifhed, and difappointed ; for they expedted in general that he would teach theai tne philofopher^s fbone, or ghofl-raifmg, or m.agic. After much difcontent, falling out, and difpute, many Lodges united in this fyftem, made fomewhat moderate and palatable, under the nzrat of the Strict Disciplinarians, Strickten Obfervanz. It v/as acceptable to many, becaufc they infilled that they were really Knights, properly confecrated, though without temporalities J and they krioufly {<:i themfelves="" about="" forming="" afund="" which="" fnould="" fecure="" the="" order="" in="" a="" landed="" property="" and="" revenue="" would="" give="" them="" refpe6uable="" civil="" exiftence.="" hunde="" declared="" that="" his="" whole="" eftate="" fhould="" devolve="" on="" order.="" but="" vexations="" he="" afterv="" met="" with="" failing="" love="" lady="" who="" prevailed="" him="" to="" become="" roman="" catholic="" made="" aker="" intention.="" went="" however="" acquired="" confiderable="" credit="" by="" ferious="" regularity="" of="" their="" proceedings="" although="" mean="" time="" new="" apoftk="" myfceries="" dr.="" zinzendorff="" one="" stri="" olfirvanz="" introduced="" fvftem.=""/>Page 65

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.36% accurate
    eHAF. I. FREE MASONP-Y. C •/ fyftem, which he faici was from Sweden, dldinguifhefl by fome of the myftical doclrines of the Swtrdcnborgh fed:, and though the fy (tern obtained the Royal patronao-e, and a National Lodfre was cilabiiriied at Berlin by patent, ftili the Tempciorden, or Orden des Striken Ohfervanz, continued to be very refprftable. The German gentry were better pleafed with a Grand Mafter of their own choofing, than with any impofed on them by authority. During; this (late of thino-s, one Stark, a Proteftanc divine, well knov/n in Germany by his writings, made another trial of public faith. One Gug®mos, (a private gentleman, but who would pais for fon to a King of Cyprus), and one Schropfer, keeper of a coiteehoufe at Nuremberg, drew crowds of Free Mafons around them, to learn ghoft-raifing, exorcifm, and alchymy. Numbers came from a great difrance to Weifbad to^tt and learn thefe myfteries, and Free Mafonry was on the point of another revolution. Dr. Stark was an adept in all thefe things, and had contended with Caglioilro in Courland for the palmof Ibpcriority. He faw that this deception could not long iland its ground. He therefore came forward, at a convcmtion at Braunfchweig in 1772, and faid to the Su'xdt Difciplinarians or Templars, That he was of their Order, but of the fpiritual department, and was deputed by the Chapter of K — m — d — t in Scotland, where he was Chancellor of the Consrreo\uion, and had the name of Archidemides, Eqties ab Aquila fuha : That this Chapter had the fuperintendance ot the Order: That they alone could confecrate the Knights, or tl^e unknown fuperiors ; and that he was deputed to inn:ru6t them in the real principles of the Order, and impart iis ineftimable fecrets, which could ik)l be known to Baron Hunde, as he would readily acknowledge vvr.cn i^e fhould convcrfe with him. Johnfon, he faid^ \\ id been a z\\ V Li w )

Page 66Page 66

60 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. a cheat, and probably a murderer. He had got fome knowledge from papers which he muft have ftolen from a mifnonary, who had difappeared, and was probably killed. Gugomos and Schropfer muft have had fome fimilar information j and Schropfer had even deceived him for a time. He was ready to execute his commifTion, upon their coming under the necellary obligations of fecrecy and of fubmiflion. Hunde (whofc name in the Order was the Eqiies ah Enje) acquiefced at once, and propofed a convention, with full powers to decide and accept. But a Schubart, a gentleman of chara6i:er, who was treafurer to the Templar Mafons, and had an employment which gave him confiderable influence in the Order, ftrongly dilTuaded them from fuch a mealure. The moft unqualified fubmiffion to unknown ^ij| fuperiors, and to conditions equally unknown, was required previous to the fmallett communication, or any knowledge of the powers which Archidemides had to treat v/ith them. Many meetings were held, and many attempts were made to learn fomething of this fpiritual court, and of v/hat they might expe6l from them. Dr. Stark, Baron Weggenfak, Baron von Raven, and fome others of his coadjutors in the Lodges at Koningfberg in PrufTia, and at Wifmiar, were received into the Order. But in vain — nothing was obtained from thefe ghoftly Knights but fome infignificant ceremonials of receptions and confecrations. Of this kind of novelties they were already heartily Tick; and . though they all panted after the expedled wonders, " they were fo mucli frightened by the unconditional fubmiflion, that tliey could come to no agreemient, and the fccrets of the Scotch Cono-regation of K — m — d — t ftill remain with Dr. Stark. They did, however, a fenfible thing, theyfenta deputation to Old Aberdeen, to enquire after the caves where their venerable myftcric'S were known, and their treafures were hid. They had

Page 67Page 67

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.91% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. 6l had, as they thought, merited fome more confidence; for they had remitted annual contributions to thefe unknown fuperiors, to the amount of fome thoufands of rix dollars. But alas ! their ambaffadors found the Free Mafons of Old Aberdeen ignorant of all this, and as eager to learn from the ambalfadors what was the true origin and meaning of Free Mafonry, of which they knew nothing but the fnnple tale of Old Hiram. This broke Stark's credit ; but he flill infifted on the reality of his commiffion, and laid that the Brethren at Aberdeen were indeed ignorant, but that he had never faid otherwife^ their expectations from that quarter had refted on the fcraps purloined by Johnlon. He reminded them of a thing well known to themfelves ; that one of them had been fent for by a dying nobleman to receive papers on this fubjeCt, and that his vifit having been delayed a few hours by an unavoidable accident, he found all burnt but a fragment of a capitulary, and a thing in cypher, part of which he (Dr. Stark) had explained to them. They had employed another gentleman, a H. Wachter, to make fimiiar enquiries in Italy, vy/here Schropfer and others (even Hunde) had told them great lecrets were to be obtained from the Pretender's fecretary Approfi, and others. VVachter told them, thdZ all this was a h6lion, but that he had ften at Florence fome Brethren from the Holy Land, who really poffelTed wonderful fecrets, which he was willing to impart, on proper conditions. Thelc, however, they could not accede to -, but they were cruelly tortured by feeing Wachter, who had left Germany in Ibber circumftances, now a man of great wealth and expence. He would not acknowledge that he had got the fecret of gold-making from the Afiatic Brethren; but faid that no man had any ris?ht to afk him how^ he had come by his fortune. It v/as enough that he behaved honorably.

Page 68Page 68

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.33% accurate
    Si THE SCHISMS I iV CHAP. I. rably, and owed no man any thing. He broke off all connexions with them, and left them in great diftrefs about their Order, and panting after his fecrcts. Rifum taieatis amici] Stark, in revenge for the oppofition he had met with from Schubart, left no (lone unturned to hurt him with his Brethren, and fucceeded, fo that he left them in difguft. Hunde died about this time. A book appeared, called. The Stumblmg Block and Rock cf Offence^ which betrayed (by their own confeffion) the whole fecrets of the Order of Templars, and foon made an end of it, as far as it went beyond the fimple Englifh Mafonry. Thus was the faith of Free Mafons quite unhinged in Germany. But the rage for myileries and wonder was not in the leaft abated ; and the habits of thefe fecret AfTemblies were becoming every day more craving. DiiTenfion and fchifm was multiplying in every quarter; and the Infcitution, inftead of being an incitement to mutual complaifance and Brotherly love, had become a fource of contention, and of bitter enmity. Not fatisfied Vv^ith defending the propriety of its own Infututions, each Syftem cf Free Mafonry was bufy in enticing away the partifans of other Syitems, fnut their Lodges againfl each other, and proceeded even to vilify and perfccute the adherents of every Syftem but their own. Thefe animofities arofc chiefly from the quarrels about precedency, and the arrogance (as it was thought) of the patent Lodge of Berlin, in pretending to have any authority in the other parts of the empire. But thefe pretenfions were not the refult of mere vanity. The French importers of the new degrees, always true to the glory of their nation, hoped by this means to fecure the dependence even of this frivolous fociety ; perhaps they might forefee political ufes and benefits which

Page 69Page 69

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.12% accurate
    .CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. 63 which might arife from it. One thing is worth notice : The French Lodges had all emanated from the great Confederation under the Duke de Chartrcs ; and, even if we had no other proof, we might prefume that they would cultivate the fame principles that chara6lerifed that Se6t. But we are ceitain that infidelity and laxity of moral principles were prevalent in the Rofaic Lodges, and that the obfervation of this corruption had offended many of the fober old-fafliioned Lodges, and was one great caufe of any check that was given to the brilliant Mafonry of France. It is the obfervation of this circumftance, in which they all refembled, and which foon ceafcd to be a diflindtion, becaufe it pervaded the other Lodges, that has induced me to expatiate more on this hifcory of Free Mafonry in Germany, than may appear to my readers to be adequate to the importance of Free Mafonry in the general fub~ jedl-matter of thefe pages. But I hope that it will appear in the courfe of my narration that I have not given it a greater value than it dcferves. About this very time there was a great revolution> of the public mind in Germany, and fcepticifm, infidelity, and irreligion, not only were prevalent in the minds and manners of the wealthy and luxurioits, and of the profligate of lower ranks, but began to appear in the produ6Lions of the preis. Some circumftances, peculiar to Germany, occaiioned thefe declenfions from the former acquiclcencc in the faith of their forefathers to become more uniform and rem.arkahlc than they would otherwifc have been. The confeffions of Germany are the Roman Catholic, the Lutheran^, (which they call Proteflanr,) and the Calvinift, (which they call Reformed). Thefe are profcffed in many fmali contiguous principalities, and there is hardly one of them in which all the three have not free exercile. The defire of making profelyies is natural to all fsriou.s prefcilbrsPage 70Page 70

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.07% accurate
    64 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. fefTors of a rational faith, and was frequently exercifed. The Roman Catholics are fuppofed by us to be particularly zealous, and theProteftants (Lutherans andCalvinids) were careful to oppofe them by every kind of argument, among which thofe of ridicule and reproach were not fpared. The Catholics accufcd them of infidelity refpedling the fundamental dc(51:rines of Chriftianity which tliey profellcd to believe, and even with rcfpe61; to the docfirines of natural religion. This accufation was long very Hightly fupported -, but, of late, by better proofs. The Ipirit of free enquiry was the great boaft of the Proteftants, and the only fupport againd the Catholics, fecuringthem both in their religious and civil rights. It was therefore encouraged by their governments. It is not to be wondered at that it fhould be indulged to excefs, or improperly, even by ferious men, liable to error, in their difputes with the Catholics. In the progrefs of this contell, even their own Confeflions did not efcape criticifm, and it was aficrted that the Reformation which thofe Confefiions exprefs was not complete. Further Reformations were propofed. The Scriptures, the foundation of our faith, were examined by clergymen of very different capacities, difpofitions, and views, till by explaining, correcting, allegorifrng, and otherwife twiiling the Bible, men's minds had hardly any thing left to reft on as a dodirinc of revealed religion. This encouraged others to go farther, and to fay that revelation was a folecifm, as plainly appeared by the irreconciicable differences among thofe Enlighteners (fo they were called) of the public, and that man had no-' thing to truft to but the dictates of natural reafon. Another let of writers, proceeding from this as a point already fettled, profcribed all religion whatever, and openly taught t\\^ doctrines of materialifm and atheifm. Mofc of thefc innovations were the work of Proteftant divinesPage 71

CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. 6^ divines, from the caufes that I have mentioned. Teller, Semlcr, Eberhardt, Lefling, Bahrdt, Riem, and Shultz, had the chief hand in all thcfe innovations. But no man contributed more than Nicholai, an eminent and learned bookfeller in Berlin. He has been for many years the publifher of a periodical work, called the General German Library, (Algt;mein deutfche Bibliothek,) confifting of original difiertations, and reviews of the writings of others. The great merit of this work, on account of many learned diiTertations which appear in it, has procured it much influence on that clafs of readers whofe leifure or capacity did not allow them a more profound kind of reading. This is the bulk of readers in every country. Nicholai gives a decided preference to the writings of the Enlighteners, and in his reviews treats them with particular notice, makes the public fully acquainted with their works, and makes the mod favourable comments ; whereas the performances of their opponents, or more properly fpeaking, the defenders of the National Creeds, are negledled, omitted, or barely m.entioncd, or they are criticifed with every feverity of ridicule and reproach. Fie fell upon a very fure method of rendering the orthodox writers difagreeable to the public, by reprefenting them as the abetters of fuperftition, and as fecret Jefuits. He alTerted, that the abolition of the Order of Loyola is only apparent. The Brethren ftill retained their connexion, and moft part oi' their property, under the fecret patronage of Catholic Princes. They are, therefore, in every corner, in every habit and character, working with unwearied zeal tor the reiloration of their empire. He raifed a general alarm, and made a journey through Germany, hunting for Jefuits, and for this purpofe, became Free Mafon and Rofycrucian, being introduced by his. friends Gedicke and Bjcfler, 1 clergymen.

Page 72Page 72

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.49% accurate
    €S THE SCHISMS IN * CHAP. I. clergymen, publilhers of the Berlin Monatjchrift^ and moll zealous promoters of the new do6lriiies. This favour he has repaid at his return, by betraying the myfteries of the Lodges, and by much bitter fatire. His journey was publiihed in fevcral volumes, and is full of frightful Jefuitilms. This man, as I have faid, found the greateft fuccefs in his method of flandering the defenders of Bible-Chriltianicy, by reprefenting them as concealed Jefuits. But, not contented v;ith open difcufiion, he long ago publiflied a fort of romance, called Sehaldus 'Nothanker^ in which thef^ divines are introduced under feigned names, and made as ridiculous and deteftable as pofTibie. All this was a good trading job 3 for fceptical and free-thinking writings have every where a good market; and Nicholai was not only reviewer, but publilher, having prefles in different cities of the Empire. The immenfe literary manufa6lure of Germany, far exceeding that of any nation of Europe, is carried on in a very particular v/ay. The books go in flieets to the great fairs of Leipfic and Frankfort, twice a-year. The bookfellers meet there, and fee at one glance the ftate of literature j and having fpeculated and made their bargains, the books are inlfantly difperfed through every part of the Empire, and appear at once in all quarters. Although every Principality has an officer for licenfmg, it is impolTible to prevent the currency of a performance, although it may be prohibited] for it is to be had by the carrier at three or four miles diftance in another ftate. By this mode of traffic, a plot m.ay be formed, and adtually has been formed, for giving any particular turn to the literature of the country. There is an excellent work printed at Bern by the author Heinzmann, a bookfrller, called. Appeal to my Country y concerning a Combinaticn cf JVriterSy and Bookfellers i to rule the Literature of Germany ^ and form thePage 73Page 73

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.39% accurate
    CHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. 67 the Puhlk Mind into a Cent empt for the Religicn and Civil EftabliJJjments of the Empire. It contains a hiilorical account of the publications in every branch of literature for about thirty years. The author fliows, in the mod convincing naanner, that the prodigious change from the former fatisfadion of the Germans on thofe fubjeds to their prefent difcontcnt and attacks from every quarter, is neither a fair pi^Uire of the prevailing fentmients, nor has been the iimple operation of things, but the rcfiih of a combination of trading Infidels. 1 have here fomewhat anticipated, (for I hope to point out the fources of this combination,) becaufe it helps to explain or illuflrare the progrefs of infidelity and irrelio-ion that I was fpeaking; of It was much accelerated by another circumftance. One BaJedoWy a min of talents and learning, fet up, in the Principality of Anhalt-DefTau, a Philantkropine, or academy of general education, on a plan extremely different from thofe of the Univerfities and Academies. By this appellation, the founder hoped to make parents expedt that much attention v/ould be paid to the morals of the pupils ', and indeed the programs or advertifements by which Bafedovv announced his inftitution to the public, defcribed it as the profeiTed feminary of pra6lical Ethics. Languages, fciences, and the ornamental exercifes, were here confidered as mere acceflbries, and the great aim was to form the young mind to the love of mankind and of virtue, by a plan of moral education which was very fpecious and unexceptionable. But there vv^as a circumftance which greatly obftrufted the wide profpeds of the founder. How v/ere the religious opinions of the youth to be cared for ? Catholic:., Lutherans, and Calvinifts, were almoil- equally numerous in the adjoining Principalities; and the exclufion cA any two of thefe communions would prodigioiifly limit the propoR-d ufefulnefs cfPage 74

6% THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. of the inflitution. Bafedow v^^as a man of talents, a good fcholar, and a perfuafive writer. He framed a fet of rules, by which the education fliould be condudled, and which, he thought, lliould make every parent eafy -, and the plan is very judicious and manly. But none came but Lutherans. His zeal and intereft in the thing made him endeavour to interefb others; and he found this no hard matter. The people of condition, and all fenfible men, faw that it would be a very great advantage to the place, could they induce men to fend their children from all the neighbouring ftates. What we wifh, we readily believe to be the truth ; and Bafcdow's plan and reafonings appeared complete, and had the fupport of all claffes of men. The moderate Calvinifts, after fome time, were not averfe from them, and the literary manufadlure of Germany was foon very bufy in making pamphlets, defending, improving, attacking, and reprobating the plans. Innumerable were the prcje6ts for moderating the differences between the three Chriftian communions of Germany, and making it poffible for the members of them all, not only to live amicably among each other, and to worfliip God in the fame church, but even to communicate together. This attempt naturally gave rife to much fpeculation and refinement j and the propofals for am.endment of the formulas and the inflrudions from the pulpit were profecuted with fo much keennefs, that the ground-work, Chriftianity, was refined and refined, till it vanifhed altogether, leaving Deifm, or Natural, or, as it was called, Philofophical Religion, in its place. I am not much miftaken as to hiflorical facSb, when I fay, that the aflonifhing change in religious dodrine which has taken place in Froteflant Germ.any within thefe laft thirty years was chiefly occafioned by this fcheme of Bafedow*s. The predifpofing caufes exiflcd, indeed, and were

Page 75Page 75

gHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. 69 were general and powerful, and the diforder had already broken out. But this fpecious and enticing objedt firft gave a title to Proteftant clergymen to put to their hand without rifk of being cenfured. Bafedow corredled, and corrc6led again, but not one Catholic came to the Philanthropine. He feems to have thought that the beil plan would be, to banifh all pofitive religion whatever, and that he would then be fure of Catholic fcholars. Cardinal Dubois was fo far right with refped to the firft Catholic pupil of the church. He had recommended ^a man of his own ftamp to Louis XIV. to fill fome important office. The monarch was aftoniflied, and told the Cardinal, that " that would never do, for the man was a Janfe" nift; Eh! que nsn. Sire/' faid the Cardinal, '' il *^ n'eft qu' Athee ;'' all was fafe, and the man got the priory. But though all was in vain, Bafedow's Philanthropine at Dcflau got a high charader. He publifhed many volumes on education that have much merit. It were well had this been all. But moft unfortunately, though moft naturally, writers of loofe moral principles and of wicked hearts were encouraged by the impunity which the fceptical writers experienced, and ventured to publifti things of the vileft tendency, inflaming the paflions and juftifying licentious m.anners. Thefe maxims are congenial with irreligion and Atheifm, and the books found a quick market. It v^as chiefly in the Pruffian States that this went on. The late King was, to fay the beft- of him, a naturalift, and, holding this life for his all, gave full liberty to his fubjeds to write what they pleafed, provided they did not touch on ftate matters. He declared, however, to a minifter of his court, long before his death, that "he " was extremely forry that his indifi^erence had pro" duced fuch effeds i that he was fcnfible it had greatlv '^ contri 

Page 76Page 76

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.96% accurate
    70 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. cc " contributed to hurt the peace and mutual good treatment of his fubjedis;'' and he faitl, '' that he would willingly give up the glory of his bed- fought battle, to have the fatisfadion of leaving his people in the fame ftate of peace and fatisfadlion with their reli*^ gious eftablilliments, that he found them in at his " acceflion to the throne." His fucceribr Frederick William found that things had gone much too far, and determined to fupport the church-efcablifliment in the mofl peremptory manner; but at the lame time to allow perfect freedom of thinking and convcrfing to the profelTors of every Chriflian faith, provided it was enjoyed without difturbing the general peace, or any encroachment on the rights of thofe already fupported by law. He publiflied an edi(5l to this effedl, which is really a model worthy of imitation in every country. This was the epoch of a ilrange revolution. It was attacked from all hands, and criticifms, fatires, flanders, threatenings, poured in from every quarter. The independency of the neighbouring ftates, and the monarch's not beino; a ereat favourite amono; feveral of his neighbours, permitted the publication of thofe pieces in the adjoining principalities, and it was im.poffible to prevent their circulation even in the Pruffian States. His edict was called an unjuftifiable tyranny over the confciences of men -, the dogmas fupported by it were termed abfurd fuperftitions ; the King's private chara6ler, and his opinions in religious matters, were treated with little reverence, nay, were ridiculed and fcandaloufly abufed. This field of difcuflion being thus thrown open, the writers did not confine themfelves to religious matters. After flatly denying that the prince of any country had the fmalleft right to prefcribe, or even diredl the faith of his fubjed:s, they extended their difcuflions to the rights of princes in general; and now they fairly opened their' trenches^jPage 77

CHAP. I. TREE MASONRY. yi trenches, and made an attack in form on the conftitutions of the German confederacy, and, after the ufual aoproaches, they fet up the ftandard of univerfal citizenfhip on the very ridge of the glacis, and fummoned the fort to furrender. The moil darins; of thefe attacks was a colle6lion of anonymous letters on the conftitutution of the PrufTian States. It was printed (or faid to be fo) at Utrecht; but by comparing the faults of fome types with fomc books printed in Berlin, it was fuppofcd by all to be the produftion of one of Nicholai's prefTes. It v/as thought to be the compofition of Mirabeau. It is certain that he wrote a French tranflation, with a preface and notes, more impudent than the work itfelf The monarch is declared to be a tyrant; the people are addrelTed as a parcel of tame wretches crouching under oppreffion. The people of Siieiia are reprefented as ftill in a worfe condition, and are repeatedly called to roufe themfelves, and to rife up and alTert their rights. The King is told, that there is a combination of philofophers (^conjuration) who are leagued together in defence of truth and reafon, and which no power can v/ithftand; that they are to be found in every country, and are connedted by mutual and folemn engagement, and will put in practice every mean of attack. Enlightening, inftru61:ion, was the general cry am^ong the writers. The triumph of realbn over error, the overthrow of fuperilition and flaviOi fear, freedom from religious and political prejudices, and the eftabiifhment of liberty and equality, the natural and unalienable rights of m,an, were the topics of general declamation ; and it was openly maintain-jd, that fecret focieties, v^here the communication of fcntiment (liould be free from every reftraint, was the mcll effc6lual means for indruclin^ and enliehtening the world » And

Page 78Page 78

72 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. And thus it appears, that Germany has experienced the fame gradual progrefs, from Religion to Atheifm, from decency to dilTolutenefs, and -from loyalty to rebellion, which has had its courfe in France. And I muft now add, that this progrefs has been effe6ted in the fame manner, and by the fame means 3 and that one of the chief means of fedu6lion has been the Lodges of the Free Mafons. The French, along with their numerous chevaleries, and ftars, and ribands, had brought in the cuftom of haranguing in the Lodges, and as human nature has a confiderable uniformity every where, the fame topics became favourite fubjedls of declamation that had tickled the ear in France; there were the fame corruptions of fentiments and manners among the luxurious or profligate, and the fame incitements to the utterance of thefe fentiments, wherever it could be done with fafety ; and I may fay, that the zealots in all thefe trails of freethinking were more ferious, more grave, and fanatical. Thefe are not alTertions a priori, I can produce proofs. There was a Baron Knigge refiding at that time in the neighbourhood of Frankfort, of whom I fliall afterwards have occafion frequently to fpeak. This man was an enthufiafl in Mafonry from his youth, and had run through every pofTible degree of it. He was diffatisfled with them all, and particularly with the frivolity of the French chivalry; but he fail believed that Mafonry contained invaluable fecrets. He imagined that he faw agiimfe of them in the cofmo-political and fceptical difcourfes in their Lodges 3 he fat down to meditate on thefe, and foon colledled his thoughts, and found that thofe French orators were right without knowing it ; and that Mafonry was pure natural religion and univerfal citizenfliip, and that this was alfc> true Chriftianicy. In this faith he immediately began his career of Brotherly love, and publifhcd three volumes of fermons ; the

Page 79Page 79

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.94% accurate
    CHAP. I. fREE MASONRY. 7J the firfl: and third publifned at Frankfort, and the fecond at Heidelberg, but without his name. He publiihed alio a popular fyftern of religion. In all thefe publications, of which there are extradls in the Religions Begebenheiten^ Chriftianity is confidered as a mere allegory, or a Mafonic type of natural religion j the moral duties are fpun into the common-place declam.ations of univerfal benevolence; and the attention is continually diredted to the abfurdities and horrors of fuperPcition, the fuffcrings of the poor, the tyranny and opprefiion of the great, the tricks of the priefts, and the indolent fimplicity and patience of the laity and of the common people. The happinefs of the patriarchal life, and fweets of univerfal equality and freedom, are the burden of every paragraph ; and the general tenor of the whole is to make men difcontented with their condition of civil iubordinanon, and the repLraints of revealed religion. All the proceedings of Knigge in the Mafonic fchifms Ihow that he was a zealous apoftle of cofmo-politifm, and that he was continually dealing wich people in the Lodges who were affoclated with him in propagating thofe notions among the Brethren; fo that we are certain that fuch converfations were common in the German Lodges. When the reader confiders all thefe circumilances, he will abate of that fiirprife which naturally afFedls a Briton, when he reads accounts of conventions for difcuffing and fixing the dogmatic tenets of Free Mafonry. The perfe6l freedom, civil and religious, which we enjoy in this happy country, being familiar to every man, we indulo;e it v/ith calrnnefs and moderation, and fecret aikmblics hardly diiler from the common meetings of (i iends and neighbours. We do not forget the expediency of civil fubordination, and of thofe diftinflions Vv'hich arife from fccure poileilion FC of

Page 80Page 80

74 THE schism:; in chap. r. of our rights, and the gradual accumulation of the comforts of life in the famili-^s of the fober and indudrious. Thefc have, by prudence and a refpedla- ^ ble ceconomy, preferved the acquifitions of their an- ^ cellors. Every man feels in his own bread the firong call of nature to procure for himfelf and his children, by every honeft and commendable exertion, the means of public confideration and refpedl. No man is fo totally without fpirit, as not to think the better of his condition when he is come of creditable parents, and has creditable connedions ; and without thinking that he is in any refpe6l generous, he prefumes that others have the fame fentiments, and therefore aliov^s the moderate expreffion of them, without thinking it infolence or haughtinefs. All thefe things are familiar, are not thought of, and we enjoy them as we enjoy ordinary health, without perceiving it. But in the fame manner as a young man Vv'ho has been long confined by ficknefs, exults in returning health, and is apt to riot in the enjoyment of what he fo diftinctly feels ; fo thofe who are under continual check in open fociety, feel this emancipation in thofe hidden affemblies, and indulge with eagernefs in the expreffion of fentiments which in public they muil fmother within their own breaft. Such meetings, therefore, have a zeft that is very alluring, and they are frequented with avidity. There is no country in Europe wiicrc this kind of enjoyment is fo poig-nant as in Germany. Very infignificant principalities have the fame rank in the General Federation with very excenfive dominions. The internal conftitucion of each petty (late being modelled in nearly the lame manner, the official honours of their little courts become ludicrous and even farcical. The Geheim I-Iofrath, the liofmarefchal, and all the Kammerhers tof a Prince, whofe dominions do not equal the eftates of

Page 81Page 81

CHAP. 1. FREE MASOl^RY. 75 of many Engliili Squires, caufe the whole to appear like the play of children, and muft give frequent occafion for difcontent and ridicule, Mafon Lodges even keep this alive. The fraternal equality profefTed in them is very flattering to thofe who have not fucceeded in the fcramble for civil diftindlions. Such perfons become the mofb zealous Maions, and generally obtain the adlive offices in the' Lodges, and have an opportunity of treating w^ith authority perfons whom in public fociety they muft look up to with fome refped:. Thefe confiderations account, in fome meafure, for the importance which Free Mafonry has acquired in Germany. For a long while the hopes of learning fome wonderful fecret made a German Baron think nothing of long and expendve journies in queft of fome new degree. Of late, the cofmo-political dodlrines encouraged and propagated in the Lodges, and fome hopes of producing a Revolution in fociety, by which men of talents lliould obtain the management of public affairs, feem to be the caufe of all the zeal with which the order is ftill cheriflied and promoted. In a periodical work, publifhed at Neuwied, called Algemein Zeitung der Freymaurerey ^\wt have the lift of the Lodges in 1782, with the names of the Office-bearers. Fourfifths of thefe are clergymen, profeiTors, perfons having offices in the common law-courts, men of letters by trade, fuch as reviewers and journalifts, and other pamphleteers ; a clafs of m.en, who generally think that they have not attained that rank in fociety to which their talents entitle them, and imagine that they could difcharge the imiportant offixes of the ftate witli reputation to themfclves and advantage to the public. The miferable uncertainty and inftability of the Mafonic faith, which 1 defcribed above, was not altogether the elfeft of mere chance, but had been greatly accelerated bv the machinations of Baron Kni^o-e, and fome

Page 82Page 82

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.52% accurate
    76 THE SCHISMS IN CHAP. I. fome other cofmo-political Brethren whom he had called to his affiRance. Knicro-e had now formed a fcheme for uniting the whole Fraternity, for the purpofe of promoting his Utopian plan of univerfal benevolence in a ftate of liberty and equality. He hoped to do this more readily by completing their embarrafTment, and (howing each fyitem hovv^ infirm its foundation was, and how little chance it had of obtaining a general adherence. The Striken Obfervanz had now completely loft its credit, by which it had hoped to get the better of all the rell. Knigge therefore propofed a plan to the Lodges of Frankfort and Wetzlar, by which all the fyftems might, in fome meafufe, be united, or at lead be brought to a ftate of mutual forbearance and intercourfe. He propofed that the Englifh fyftem fhould be taken for the ground -work, and to receive all and only thofe who had taken the three fymbolical degrees, as they were now generally called. After thus guarding this general point of faith, he propofed to allow the validity of every degree or rank which lliould be received in any Lodge, or be made the charadler of any particular fyftem. Thefe Lodges having fecured the adherence of feveral others, brought about a general convention at Willcmlbad in Hainault, where every different fyftem fhould communicate its peculiar tenets. It was then hoped, that after an examination of them all, a conftitution might be formed, which fhould comprehend every thing that was moft worthy of feledion, and therefore be far better than the accommodating fyftem already defcribed. By this he hoped to get his favourite fcheme introduced into the whole Order, and Free Mafons made zealous Citizens of the World. I believe he was fincerc in thefe intentions, and did not vvifh to diilurb the public peace. The convention was accordingly held, and iafted a long

Page 83Page 83

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.88% accurate
    GHAP. I. FREE MASONRY. 77 long while, the deputies confulting about the frivolities of Mafonry, with all the ferioufnefs of ftate ambafladors. But there was great iliynefs in their communications i and Knigge was making but fmall progrefs in his plan, when he met with another Mafon, the Marquis of Conftanza, who in an infbant converted him, and changed all his meafures, by fliowing him that he (Knigge) V7as only doing by halves what was already accompliilied by another Society, which had carried it to its full extent. They immediately fee about undoing what he had been occupied with, and heightened as much as they could the dilfentions already fufficiently great, and, in the mean time, got the Lodges of Frankfort and Wetzlar, and feveral others, to unite, and pick out the bed of the things they had obtained by the communications from the other fyftems, and they formed a plan of what they called, the Edecfic or i>y?! critic Mafonry of the United Ledges o( GtrrViZny. They compofed a coniiitution, ritual, and catechifm, which has merit, and is indeed the completed body of Free Mafonry that wc have. Such was the flate of this celebrated and myfterious Fraternity in Germ.any in 1776. The fpiric of innovation had fcrized ail the Brethren. No man could give a tolerable account of the origin, hidory, or objedl of the Order, and it appeared to all as a led or forgotten mydery. The fymbols feemed to be equally fufccptible of every interpretation, and none of thefe feemed entitled to any decided preference. CHAP.

Page 84Page 84

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.28% accurate
    [ 78 J G H A P. II. The lUuminati, 1 HAVE now arrived at what I fhould call the great epoch of Cofmo-politifm, the fcheme communicated to Baron Knigge by the Marcheje di Conftanza. This obliges me to mention a rcm.arkablc Lodge of the Eclectic Mafonry, ered^d at Munich in Bavaria in 1775, under the woriliipful Mafter, ProfeiTor Baader. It was called The Lodge Theodore of Good Ccunjel. It had its conftitutional patent from the Royal York at Berlin, but had formed a particular fyftem of its own, by in{lru6lions from the Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaijants at Lyons, vv^ith which it kept up a correfpondence. This refpedt to the Lodge at Lyons had arifen from the preponderance acquired in general by the French party in the convention at Willemfbad. The deputies of the Rofaic Lodges, as well as the remains of the Templars, and Stril^en Ohjervanz^ all looking up to this as the mother Lodge of what they called the Grand Orient de la France J confiding in (in 1782) of iG(y improved Lodges united under the D. de Chartres, Accordingly the Lodge at Lyons fent Mr. Wiiermooz as deputy to this convention at Wiiiemfoad. Refining gradually on the fmiple Britifh Mafonry, the Lodge had formed a fyflem of pra6l"ical moralicy, which it alicrted to be the aim of genuine Mafonry, faying,

Page 85Page 85

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.07% accurate
    CHAF. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 79 faying, that a true mafon, and a man of upright heart and a6live virtue, are fynonimous chara6lers, and that the great aim of Free Mafonry is to promote the happincfs of mankind by every mean in our power, in purfuance of thefe principles, the Lodge Theodore profefledly occupied itfelf with oeconomical, flatiflical, and political matters, and not only publifhed from time to time difcourfes on fuch fubjecfts by the Brother Orator, bun the Members confidered themfelves as in duty bound to propagate and inculcate the fame doftrines out of doors. Of the zealous members of the Lodge Theodore the moil confpicuous was Dr. Adam Weifhaupt, Profeifor of Canon Lav/ in the Univerfuy of Ingolftadt. This pcrfon had been educated among the Jefuits ; but the abolition of their order made him change his views, and from being their pupil, he became their moft bitter enemy. He had acquired a high reputation in his profefTion, and was attended not only by thofe intended for the practice in the law-courts, but aifo by young gentlemen at large in their courfe of general education ] and he brought numbers from the neighbouring Hates to this univerfity, and gave a ten to the ftudies of the place. He embraced v;ith great keennefs this opportunity of fpreading the favorite do6lrines of the Lodge, and his auditory became the fcminary of Cofmo-politifm. The engaging pictures of the pofTible felicity of a fociety where every o£Bce is held by a man of talents and virtue, and where every talent is fet in a place fitted for its exertion, forcibly catches the generous and unfufpe(51:ing minds of youth, and in a Roman Catholic (late, far advanced in the habits of grofs fuperilition (a character given to Bavaria by its neighbours) and abounding in monks and idle dignitaries, the opportunities muft be frequent for obferving the inconfiderate dominion of the clergy, and

Page 86Page 86

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.46% accurate
    So THE ILLUMINaTI. CHAP.. II. and the abje6i: and indolent fubmifTion of the laity. Accordingly ProfeiTor Weiiliaupt lays, in his Apology for liJLiminatifm, that Dciim, Infidelity, and Atheifm are more prevalent in Bavaria than in any country he was acquainted with. Difcourfes, therefore, in which the abfurdity and horrors of fuperflition and fpiritual tyranny were flrongly painted, could not fail of making a deep impreffion. And during this Rate of the minds of the auditory the tranfition to general infidelity and irreligion is fo eafy, and fo inviting to fanguine youth, prompted perhaps by a latent v^iih that the reflraints Vv'hich religion impofes on the expectants of a future flate might be found, on enquii-y, to be nothing but groundlefs terrors, that I imagine it requires the mofb anxious care of the public teacher to keep the minds of his audience imprefTed with the reality and importance of the great truths of religion, while he frees them from the ihackles of blind and abfurd fuperftition. I fear that this celebrated inftruclor had none of this anxiety, but was fatisfied with his great fuccefs in the lafl part of this tafli:, the emancipation of his young hearers from the terrors of fuperftition, I fuppofe alfo that this was the more agreeable to him, as it procured him the triumph over the Jefuits, with whom he had long ftruggled for the direction of the univerfity. This v/as in 1777. Vv'eifhaiipt had long been fcheming the eftabliiflbmcnt of an Aifociation or Order, which, in time, fliould govern the v/orld. In his firfl; fervour and high expectations, he hinted to ftveral Ex- Jefuits the probability cf their recovering, under anew name, the iniluence which they formerly poffefiTed, and of being again of great fervice to fociety, by directing the education of youth of diftin^lion, now emancipated from all civil and religious prejudices. He prevailed on fome to join him^ but they all retractedPage 87

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.23% accurate
    CHAP. 11. THE ILLUMINATI, 8l ted but two. After this dlfappointment WelfhaupC became the implacable enemy of the Jcfuits -, and his fanguine temper made him frequently lay himfelf open to their piercing eye, and drew on him their keeneft refentment, and ac lail made him the vidlim of their enmity. The Lodge Theodore was the place where the above-mentioned doctrines were moft zealouOy propagated. But Weiiliaupt's emiifarics had already procured the adherence of many other Lodges ^ and the Eclectic Mafonry had been brought into vogue chiefly by their exertions at the Willemibad convention. The Lodge Theodore was perhaps lefs guarded in its proceedings, for it became remarkable for the very bold fentiments in politics and religion vyhich were frecjuently uttered in their harangues ^ and its members were noted for their zeal in making profelytes. Many bitter pafquinades, fatires, and other oflenfive pamphlets were in ferret circulation, and even Larger works of very dangerous tendency, and feveral of them v/ere traced to that Lodge. The Eledor often exprefTcd his difapprobation of fuch proceedings, and fent them kind mclfaoes, defirinp: them to be careful not to difturb the peace of the country, and particularly to recollect the folemn declaratiox*i made to every entrant into the Fraternity of Free Mafons, ^^ That no fubject " of religion or policies iliall ever be touched on in '/ the Lodge ;" a declaration which alone could have procured his permiifnon of any fccret aflembly whatever, and on the fmcerity and honour of which he had reckoned when he gave his fanclion to their eitablifnm^ent. But repeated accounts of the iame kind increafcd the alarms, and the Eleclor ordered a judicial enquiry into the procecdinp;s of the Lodge Theodore. Ic Vv^as then difcovered that this and feveral afiociated Lod.ies were the nurlVry or preiiaration fchool for anL other

Page 88Page 88

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.24% accurate
    S2 THEILLUMINATI. CHAP. If. Other Order of Mafons, who called thcmfelves the Illuminated, and that the cxprefs aim of this Order was to abolifh Chriflianity, and overturn all civil government. But the refuk of the enquiry was very imperfe6t and unfatisfadlory. No illuminati were to be found. They were unknown in the Lodge. Some of the members occafionally heard of certain candidates for illumination called Minep.vals, who were fometimes feen among them. But whether thefe had been admitted, or who received them, was known only to themfelves. Some of thefe were examined in private by the Eledlor himfelf. They faid that they %vere bound by honour to fecrecy : But they allured the EIe61:or, on their honour, that the aim of the Order was in the higheft degree praife-worthy, and ufeful both to church and ftate. But this could not allay the anxiety of the profane public j and it was repeatedly ftated to the Eledlor, that members of the Lodge Theodore had unguardedly fpoken of this Order as one that in time mufb rule the world. He therefore iffued an order forbidding, during his pleafure, all fecret aflemblies, and fhucting up the Mafon Lodges. It v/as not meant to be rigoroufiy enforced, but was intended as a trial of the deference of thefe Aflbciations for civil authority. The Lodge Theodore diflinguifned itfeif by pointed oppoficion, continuing its meetings; and the members, out of doors, openly reprobated the prohibition as an abfurd and unjuftifiable tyranny. In the beginning of 17 83, four profeiTors of the Marianen Academy, founded by the widow^ of the late Ele6lor, viz. Utfchneider, ColTandey, Renner, and Grunberger, with two others, were fummoned before the Court of Enquiry, and quedioned, on their allegiance, refpedting the Order of the Illuminati. They acknowledged that they belonged to it, and when more

Page 89Page 89

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.87% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATi. Sg more clofely examined, they related fcveral circumilances of its conlticution and principles. Their declarations were immediately publiihed, and were very iinfav^ourable. The Order was faid to abjure Chrifrianity, and to refuie admilTion into the higher degrees to all who adheied to any o( the three confefiions. Seniual pleafures were reftored to the rank they held in the Epicurean philofophy. Self-murder was juftified on Stoical principles. In the Lodges death was declared an eternal fleep j patriorifm and loyalty were called narrow-minded prejudices, and incompatible with univerfal benevolence ; continual declamations were made on liberty and equality as the unalienable rights of man. The baneful infi'jence of accumulated property was declared an infurmountable obftacle to the happinefs of any nation whofe chief laws were framed for its protection and increafe. Nothing was fo frequently difcourfed of as the propriety of employing, for a good purpofe, the means which the wicked employed for evil purpofes ; and it was taught, that the preponderancy of good in the ultimate refult confecrated every mean employed; and that vvifdom and virtue confided in properly determining this balance. This appeared big with danger, becaufe it feemed evident that nothing would be fcrupled at, if it could be made appear that the Order would derive advantage from it, becaufe the great objed of the Order was held as fuperior to every confidcration. They concluded by faying that the method of education made them all fpies on each other and on all around them. But all this was denied by the Iliuminati. Some of thefe tenets were faid to be abfolutely falfe ; and the reft were faid to be miftakes. The apoftate profefibrs had acknov.'lcdged their ignorance of many things. Two of them were only Minervals, another was an Illuminatus of the loweft clafs, and the fourth was but one ften fiirr^erPage 90

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.95% accurate
    §4 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. farther advanced. Pamphlets appeared on both fides, with very little eftedl. The Elc(flor called before him one of the fuperiors, a yoiing nobleman, Vv'ho denied thofe injurious charges, and laid that they were readyto lay before his Highncfs their whole archives and all conftitutional papers. Notwitliflanding all this, the government had received fuch an imprellion of the dangerous tendency of the Order, that the Elector iffued another edift, forbidding all hidden affemblies ; and a third, exprefsly aboliHiing the Order of liluminati. It was followed by a fearch after their papers. The Lodge Theodore was immediately fearched, but none were to be found. They faid now that they burnt them ail, as of no ufe, fince that Order was at an end. It was now difcovered, that Weifliaupt was the head and founder of the Order. He was deprived of his ProfefTor's chair, and baniihed from the Bavarian States ; but with a penfion of 800 florins, which he refufed. He went to Regenfburgh, on the confines of Switzerland. Two Italians, the Marquis Conflanza and Marquis Savioli, were alfo banifhed, with equal penfions, (about L. 40,) which they accepted. Oi.e Zwack, a counfelior, holding fome law-office, was alfo baniflied. Others were imprifoned for Ibme time. Weifhaupt went afterwards into the fervice of the D. of Saxe Gotha, a perfon of a romantic turn of mind, and whom we lliall ap-ain meet with. Zwack went into the fervice of the Pr. dc Salms, who foon after had fo orreat a hand in the difturfbances in Holland. By deftroying the papers, all opportunity was loft for authenticating the innocence and ufefulnefs of the Order. After much altercation and paper war, Weifhaupt, now fafe in Regenfburg, publifiied an account of the Order, namely, the account which was given t® every Novice in a difcourfe read at his reception. To

Page 91Page 91

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.36% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 85 To this were added the fcatutes and the rules of proceeding, as flir as the degree o^ Illuminaliis Minor, included. This account he affirmed to be conformable to the real pra6lice of the Order. But this publication did by no means fatisfy the public mind. It differed exceedingly from the accounts given by the four profefibrs. It made no mention of the higher degrees, which had been moft blamed by them. Befides, it was alleged, that it was all a fi6lion, written in order to lull the fufpicions which had been raifed (and this was found to be the cafe, except in refped: of the very lowefl degree).- The real conllitution was brought to light by degrees, and fliali be laid before the reader, in the order in which it was gradually difcovered, that we may the better judge of things not fully known by the condu6lofthe leaders during the dete'd:ion. The firft account given by Wcifhaupc is corredl, as far as I ihall make ufe of it, and fliows clearly the methods that were taken to recommend the Order to ftrangers. The Order of Illuminati appears as an acceflbry to Free Mafonry. Ic is in the Lodges of Free Mafons that the Minervals are lound, and there they are prepared for Illumination. They m.uil have previoufiy obtained the three Engliili degrees. The founderfays more. He fays that his do6trines are the only true Free Mafonry. He was the chief promoter of the EcleElic Syftem. This h(^ urged as the bell method for 9;ettino- information of all *w/ *— ' viz? the explanations which have been given of the Mafonic Myfteries. He was alfo a Stri5f Obfervanz, and an adept Rofycrucian. The refult of all his knowledge is worthy of particular remark, and fnali therefore be ffiven at large. ^^ I declare," fays he, " and I challenge all man*' kind to contradict my declaration, that no man can '^ give

Page 92Page 92

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.98% accurate
    86 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. n. yivc any account of the Order of Free Mafonry, of ics origin, of its hi (lory, of its obje6l, nor any explanation of its myderies and fymbols, which does not leave the mind in total uncertainty on all thtfc points. Every man is entitled, therefore, to give any expUnation of the fymbols, and any fvileni of the dodlrlnes, that he can render palatable. Hence have iprung up chat variety of fyftems which for twenty years have divided the Order. The fimpie tale of the Englilli, and the fifty degrees of the French, and the Knights of Baron Hunde, are equally authentic, and have equally had the fupporc of intelligent and zealous Brethren. Thefe fyllems are in facl but one. They have all fprung from the Blue Lodg-e of Three decrees j take thefe for their ftandard, and found on thefe all the improvements by which each iyftem is afterwards fuited to the particular obje6t which it keeps in view. There is no man, nor fyflem, in thev/orld, which can fnovv by undounred fucceirion that it fiiould (land at the head of the Order. Our ignorance in this particular frets me. Do but coafider our fnort hiilory of 1 20 years. —Who will fnow me the Mother Lodge ? Thofe of London we have difcovered to be feif-ere6i:ed in 17 1 6. Afls: for their archives. They tell you they were burnt. They have nothing but the wretched fophiilications of the Englifliman Anderfon, and the Frenchman Defaguilliers. Vv^here is the Lodge of York, which pretends to the priority, with their King Bouden, and the archives that he brought from the Eaft ? Thefe too are all burnt. What is the Chapter of Old Aberdeen, and its Holy Clericatc ? t)id we not find it unknown, and the Mafon Lodges there the moil ignorant of all the ignorant, gaping for inftrudtion from our deputies ? Did we not find the fame; thing at London I and have not their " millionarie^

Page 93Page 93

The text on this page is estimated to be only 15.95% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE TLLUMIXATI. 8? (C '^ mifTionaries been among ns, prying into our myftc'' rics, and eager to learn from us what is true Free *' Mafonry ? It is in vain, therefore, to appeal to judges; they are no where to be found; all claim for thcmfelves the fceptre of the Order i all indeed are on an equal footing. They obtained followers, '^ not from their authenticity, but from their condu*^ civencfs to the end which they propofcd, and from '' the importance of that end. It is by this fcale that '' we mufc mcafure the mad and wicked explanations *^ of the Rofycrucians, the Exorcifts, and Cabalifts. ^^ Thefe are reje6led by all good Mafons, becaufe in" compatible with ibcial happinefs. Only fuch fy fee ms " as promote this are retained. But alas, they are all fadly deficient, becaufe they leave us under the dominion of political and religious prejudices ; and they are as inefficient as the^deepy dofc of an ordi*^ nary fermon, '* But I have contrived an explanation which has every advantage -, is inviting to Chriilians of every communion -, gradually frees them from all religious prejudices ; cultivates the focial virtues ; and ani^ mates them by a great, ateailble, andy^^.f^y profpec^ of univerfal happinefs, in a ilate of liberty and moral equality, freed from the obflacles which fubordination, rank, and riches, continually throw in our way. My explanation is accurate, and complete, . '^ my means are cife61:ual5 and irrefifrible. Our iccret " i^iTociation works in a way that nothing can withfcand, (ind man JIj all Jo en he free and haffy, '^ This is i?he great obiedt held out by this AITociation, and the ineans of attaining it is Illumination, enlightening the undcriianding by the fun of reafon, which v^^ill difpel the clouds of fuperftition and ofprejudice. The proficients in this Order are therefore juPtiy named the Illuminated, And of all Illumina*' tion f c cc cc cc (C (C cc

Page 94Page 94

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.77% accurate
    8S  grand in its views, and delightful in its exercife. *' And v/hatis this general obie6L ? the happiness OF THE HUMAN RACE. Is it uot ditlrcffing to a generous mind, afcer comtemplating what human nature is capable of, to fee how little we enjoy ? When we look at tliis goodly v/orld, and fee that every man 'may be happy, but that the happinefs of one depends on the conduct of another \ when we fee the wicked fo pov/erful and the good {o v/eak ; and that it is in vain x.o drive fin,o;]y and alone, ao-ainft the general current of vice and opprelTion : the wilh naturally ariles in the mind, thai" it werepoffible to form a durable combinati(5n of the moil worthv perfons, who lliould work together in removing the obllacies to human happinefs, beccine terrible to the wicked, and give their aid to all the good without diftindlion, and fliould, by tlie moil pov^'crful means, firil fetter, and by fettering, leffen vice \ means which at the fam.e time ihouki promote virtue, by rendering the inclination to redtitude hitherto lb feeble,

Page 95Page 95

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.47% accurate
    cc cc cc cc CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 8^ " feeble, more powerful and engaging. Would not *^ fuch an alTociation be a bleffing to the world ? " But where are the proper perfons, the good, the ^^ generous, and the accomplifned, to be found -, and *^ how, and by what flrong motives, are they to be «^ induced to engage in a tafk fo vaft, fo inceffant, fo ^^ difficult, and fo laborious ? This AiTociation muft *^ be gradual. There are fome fuch perfons to be *^ found in every fociety. Such noble minds will be ^^ engaged by the heart-warming obje6t. The firfl taflc *^ of the AiTociation mull therefore be to form the young members. As thefe mxultiply and advance, they become the apoflks of beneficence, and the work is now on foot, and advances with a fpecd encrealing every day. The flighteft obfervation fhows ^' that nothing will fo much contribute to increafe the '^ zeal cf the members as fecret union. We fee with *^ what keennefs and zeal the frivolous bufinefs cf *' Free Mafonry is condudled, by perfons knit toge*' ther by the fecrecy of their union. It is needlefs to ** enquire into the caufes of this zeal which fecrecy " produces. It is an univerfal (dd:, confirm.ed by the " hiftory of every age. Let this circumftance of our ^^ conftitution therefore be dire6Led to this noble purpofe, and then all the objedions urged againft it by jealous tyranny and affrighted fupcrftition wilivanifn. The order will thus work filently, and fecurely ^ and though the generous benefaclors of the human race are thus deprived of the applaufe of the world, they have the noble pleafurc of feeing their work profperin their hands." Such is the aim, and fuch are the hopes of the Order of the Illuminated. Let us now fee howthefe were to be accomplifhed. We cannot judge with perfeft certainty of this, becaufe the account given of the conftitution of the Order by its founder includes only the M iowcH cc cc cc cc cc cc ccPage 96

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.46% accurate
    90 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. loweit degree, and even this is liable to great fufpicion. The accounts given by the four ProfcfTors, even of this part of the Order, make a very different imprefTion on the mindj although they differ only in a few particulars. The only oRenfiblc members of the Order were the Minervais. They v/ere to be found only in the Lodges of Free Mafons. A candidate for admiffion muff make his wifn known to fome Minerval -, he reports it to a Superior, v/ho, by a channel to be explained prefently, intimates it to the Council. No notice is farther taken of it for fome time. The candidate is carefully obferved in filence, and if thought unfit for the Order, no notice is taken of his folicitation. But ifotherv>^ife, the candidate receives privately an invitation to a conference. Here he meets with a perfon unknown to him, and, previous to all further conference, he is required to perufe and to fign the following oath : '* I, N. N. hereby bind myfelf, by mine honour '* and good name, forfwearing all mental refervation, never to reveal, by hint, Vv'ord, writing, or in any manner v^hatever, even to my moft trufted friend, any thing that fhall now be faid or done to me refpe6ling my wifhed-for reception, and this whether my reception fliall follow or not, I being previoufly " aiTured that it lliail contain nothing contrary to religion, the irate, nor good manners. I promife, that I ihail make no intelligible extract from any papers " which fhall be Iliewn me nov/ or during my novi^•^ ciate. All this I fwear, as I am, and as I hope to ^'^ continue, a Man of Honour." The urbanity of this protedation mud agreeably imprefs the mind of a perfon who recolle(5cs the dreadful imprecations which he made at his reception into the different ranks of Free Mafonry. The candidate is then introduced to an Illummatus DirigenSy whom perhaps cc cc cc (C cc cc cc

Page 97Page 97

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.60% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 9I perhaps he knows, and is told that this ptribn is to be his future inlLru61:or. There is now prefented to the candidate, what they call a table, in which he writes his name, place of birth, age, rank, place ofrefidence, profeflion, and favourite iludies. He is then made to read feveral articles of this table. It contains, ijly a very concife account of the Order, its connec^tion with Free Mafonry, and its great obje6l, the promoting the happinefs of m.ankind by means of inflruclion and confirmation in virtuous principles. 2^/, Several queftions relative to the Order. Among thefe are, *^ What advantages he hopes to derive from being a " memiber ? What he moft particularly wnlhes to *^ learn ? What delicate quefbions relative to the life, '^ the profpe6ts, the duties of man, as an individual, ^^ and as a citizen, he wifhes to have particularly dif** cuffed to him ? In what refpefts he thinks he can " be of ufe to the Order? Who are his ancellors, re'^ lations, friends, correipondents, or enemies ? Whom '^ he thinks proper perfons to be received into the " Order, or whom lie thinks unfit for it, and the rea*^ fons for both opinions ?" To each of thefe queftions he muft Q^ive fome anrvvcr in writing;. The Novice an^-l his Mentor are known only to each other; perhaps nothing more follov/s upon this; if otherv/ife, the Mentor appoints another conference, and begins his inftrudions, by giving him in detail certain portions of the conilitution, and of the fundamental rules of the Order, Of thefe the Novice muil give a weekly account in writing. He muft alfo read, in the Mentor's houfe, a book containing more of the inftru(5tions of the Order; but he muft make no extracts. Yet from this reading he muft derive all his knowledge ; and he muft give an account in writing of his progrefs. All writings received from his Superiors muft be returned with a ftated puncbualiry. — ThefePage 98

§2 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. Thefe writings confift chiefly of important and delicate queftions, fuited, either to the particular inclination, or to the peculiar tafle which the candidate had difcovered in his fubfcriptions of the articles of the table, and in his former refcripts/ or to the dire6tion which the Mentor wilhes to eive to his thouo-hts. Enlightening the underftanding, and the rooting out of prejudices^ are pointed out to him as the principal taflis of his noviciate. The knowledge of himfelf is confidered as preparatory to all other knowledge. To difclofe to him, by means of the calm and unbiafTed obfervation of his inilruclor, what is his own charadter, his mod vulnerable fide, cither in refpedt of temper, paflions, or prepoiTefrions, is therefore the mod efTential fervice that can be done him. For this purpofe there is required of him fome account of his own condu6l on occafions where he doubted of its propriety; fome account of his friendfhips, of his differences of opinion, and of his condufl on fuch occafions. From fuch relations the Superior learns his manner of thinking and judging, and thofe propenfities which require his chief attention. Having made the candidate acquainted with himfelf, he is apprifed that the Order is not a fpeculative, but an a6i:ive aiTociation, engaged in doing good to others. The knowledge of human chara6ler is therefore of all others the moil important. This is acquired only by obfervation, affiflied by the inilrudtions of his teacher. Chara6Lers in hiftory are propofed to him for obfervation, and his opinion is required. After this he is directed to look around him, and to notice the conduct of other nr.en ; and part of his weekly refcripts mufl confift of accounts of all interefting occurrences in his neighbourhood, whether of a public or private nature. Cofiandey, one of the four ProfelTars, gives a particular account of the indrufliions relating to this kind ■ of

Page 99Page 99

€HAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. pj of fcience. " The Novice muil be attentive to tri5^ fles : For in frivolous occurrences a man is indolent, '^ and makes no effort to act a part, fo that his real ^^ character is then ading alone. Nothing will have *^ fuch influence with the Superiors in promoting the ^^ advancement of a candidate as very copious narra^' tions of this kind, becaufc the candidate, if pri>mo^' tedj is to be employed in an adlive ftation, and it ^' is from this kind of information only that the Supe^^ riors can judge of his fitnefs. Thele charafterillic ^^ anecdotes are not for the inftru6lion of the Superi" ors, who are men of long experience, and familiar *^ with fuch occupation. But they inform the Order ^' concerning the talents and proficiency of the young '^ member. Scientific inflru6lion, being conneded '^ by fyftem, is foon communicated, and may in ge'^ neral be very completely obtained from the books ^^ which are recommended to the Novice, and acqui^^ red in the public fcminaries of in(lru(5lion. But ^^ knowledge of chara6ter is more multifarious and '^ more delicate. For this there is no college, and it *^ muft therefore require longer time for its attainment. '^ Befides, this affiduous and long continued ftudy of '^ men, enables the poffeflbr of fuch knowledge to a61: *^ with men, and by his knowledge of their character, *^ to influence their condud. For fuch reafons this *^ fliudy is continued, ^nd thefe refcripts are required, ^^ during the whole progrefs through the Order, and " attention to them is recomm.ended as the only meaa ^^ of advancement. Remarks on Phyfiognomy in ^^ thefe narrations are accounted of confiderable va'' lue." So far Mr. Coffandey. During all this trial, which may lafl: one, two, or three years, the Novice knows no perfon of the Order but his own inftruclor, with whom he has frequent meetings, along with other Minervals. In thefe converfations

Page 100Page 100

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.54% accurate
    94 I^HE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II, verfatlons he learns the importance of tiiQ Order, and the opportunities he v»?ill afterwards have of acquiring much hidden fcience. The employment of his unknown Superiors naturally caufes him to entertain very high notions of their abilities and worth. He is counfellcd to aim at a refemblance to them by getting rid by degrees of all thofe prejudices or prepolTefiions which checked his own former progrefs , and he is affifted in this endeavour by an invitation to a correfpondence with them. He may addrefs his Provincial Superior, by dire6ling his letter Soli, or the General by PrimOj or the Superiors in general by ^ibus licet. In thefe letters he may mention whatever he thinks conducive to the advancement of the Order; he may Inform the Superiors how his indrudor behaves to him ; if alTiduous or rem/ifs, indulgent or fevere. The Superiors are enjoined by the ftrongefl m>otives to convey thefe letters wherever addrelTed. None but the General and Council know the refuk of all this; and all are enjoined to keep themfelves and their proceedings unknown to all the world. If three years of this Noviciate have elapfed without further notice, the Minerval mull: look for no further advancement; he is found unfit, and remains a Free Mafon of the higheil clafs. This is called a Sta bene. But fhould his Superiors judge more favourably of him, he is drawn out of the general mafs of Free M^fons, and becomics Illuminatu^ Minor. When called to a conference for this purpofe, he is told in iV.t mod ferious manner, that '' it is vain for him to hope '^ to acquire wifdom by mere fyPiemutic infl:ru6lion j ^^ for fuch in{lru6]:ion the Superiors have no leifure. " Their duty is not to form fpeculators, but a6live ^' men, whom they muft immediately employ in the '^ fervice of the Order. He mud therefore, grow v>^ife . '' and

Page 101Page 101

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.96% accurate
    «HAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 95 *^ and able entirely by the unfolding and exertion of *' his own talents. His Superiors have already difco^^ vered what thefe are, and know what fervice he may ^^ be capable of rendering the Order, provided he " now heartily acquiefces in being thus honourably " employed. They vvili affiil him in bringing his ta'' lents into aftion, and will place him in the fitua^^ tions moft favourable for their exertion, fo that he *^ may be affured of fuccefs. Hitherto he has been a ^^ mere fcholar, but his firft ilep farther carries him '^ into a6lion \ he muft therefore now confider himfelf ^^ as an inftrument in the hands of his Superiors, to " be ufed for the noblefl purpofes." The aim of the order is now more fully told him. It is, in one fentence, " to make of the human race, without any diilinftion of nation, condition, or profcflion, one good and happy family." To this aim, demonftrably attainable, every fmaller confideration mult give way. This may fometimes require facrifices which no man {landing alone has fortitude to make ; but which become light, and a fource of the pured enjoyment, when fupported and encouraged by the countenance and co-operation of the united wife and and good, fuch as are the Superiors of the Order. If the candi> date, warmed by the alluring pidure of the pollibie happinefs of a virtuous Society, fays that he is fenfible of the propriety of this procedure, and fiill wifhes to be of the Order, he is required to fign the following obligation. " I, N. N. proted before you, the v/orthy Pleni*^ potentiary of the venerable Order into which I wifh " to be admitted, that 1 acknowledge my natural «' weaknefs and inability, and that I, with all my pof'^ feillons, rank, honours, and titles V\/hich I hold in '^ political fociety, am, at bottom., only a man \ I *^ can enioy thefc chines only through mv fellow-men, '' and

Page 102Page 102

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.90% accurate
    ^$ THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. li" *^' and through them alfo I may lofe them. The ap*' probation and confideration of my fellow-men are «^' indifpenfably neceffary, and I mult try to maintain *^ them by all my talents. Thefe I will never ufe to " the prejudice of univerfal good, but will oppofe, " with ail my might, the enemies of the human race, *^ and of political fociety. I will embrace every op'^ portuniuy of faving mankind, by improving my un" derflanding and my affedions, and by imparting all ^^ important knowledge, as the good and ftatutes of «*^ this Order require of me. I bind myfelf to perpe'^ tual fiience and unihaken loyalty and fubmilTion to *' the Order, in the perfons of my Superiors ^ here '^ making a faithful and complete furrender of mypri'^ vate judgment, my own will, and every narrow" minded employment of my power and influence. I " pledse mvfelf to account the good of the Order as " my ow.n, and am ready to fcrve it with my fortune, " my honour, and my blood. Should I, through «' omifnon, negk6l, palTion, or wicknednefs, behave «^ contrary to this good of the Order, I 'fubjedt my

Page 103

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.78% accurate
    CHAP. 11. THE ILLUMINATI. 97 if he fhould ever betray the Order. He Is then a9.

Page 104Page 103

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.78% accurate
    CHAP. 11. THE ILLUMINATI. 97 if he fhould ever betray the Order. He Is then a9.

Page 104

C,S THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. ll. the favourite topic of the cnthufiaftical crconomifls, was now become a general theme of difcuflion in all focieties that had any pretenfions to cultivation. It was a fubje6t of ealy and agreeable declamation; and the Literati found in it a fubjedl admirably fitted for fhewing their talents, and ingratiating themfelves with the young men of fortune, whole minds, unfufpicious as yet and generous, were lired with the fair profpedls fet before them of univerfal and attainable happinefs. And the pupils of the lUuminati were fliili more warmed by the thought that they vv^erc to be the happy inftruments of accomplifliing all this. And though the dodlrines of univerfal liberty and equality, as imprefcriptible rights of man, might fometimes ftartle thofe v/ho poffefied the advantage of fortune, there were thoufands of younger fons, and of m.en of talents without fortune, to whom thefe were agreeable founds. And v/e mufl: particularly obferve, that thofe who were now the pupils were a fet of picked fubje6ls, whofe characters and peculiar biafes were well known by their conduct during their noviciate as Minervals. They were therefore fuch as, in all probability, would not boggle at very free fenciments. We might rather expecfl a partiality to doctrines which removed fome restraints which formerly checked them in the indulgence of youthful paffions. Their infcrudlors, who have thus relieved their minds from feveral anxious thoughts, mud appear men of fuperior minds. This was a notion mofh carefully inculcated ; and they could fee nothing to contradidl it ; for, except their own Mentor, they knew none ; they heard of Superiors of different ranks, but never faw them; and the fame mode of inftrudiion that was praclifed during their noviciate was Hill retained. More particulars of the Order were flowly unfolded to them, and they were taught that their Superiors were men of diftinguiflied talents,Page 105

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.50% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. ^^ talents, and were Superiors for this reafon alone. They were taught, that the g;eac opportunities which the Superiors had for oblervacion, and their habits of continually occupying their thoughts wich the great ob~ jecls of this Order, had enlarged their views, even far beyond the narrow limits of nations and kingdoms, which they hoped would one day coale fee into one great Society, where confideracion would attach to talents and worth alone, and that pre-eminence in thefe would be invariably attended wirh all the enjoyments of influence and pov/er. And they were told that they would gradually become acquainted vvith theih great and venerable Chara6lers, as ihey advanced in the Order. In earneft of this, they were made acquainted  with one or two Superiors, and with feveral Illuminati of their own rank. Alio, to whet their zeal, they are now made infcrudtors of one or two Minervals, and report their progrefs to their Superiors.    They are given to underiland that nothing can fo much recommend them as the fuccefs with which they perform this tafk. It is declared to be the beft evidence of their ufefulnefs in the great defigns of the Ordrr. The baleful effects of general fuperdicion, and even of any peculiar religious prepoifellion, are now ftrongly inculcated, and the difcernrnttnt of the pupils in thefe matters is learned by queilions which are given them from time to time to difcufs. Theic are managed with delicacy and circumfpcclion, that the cim.id may not be alarmed. In like manner, the political doctrines of the Order are inculcated with the utmod caution. After the mind of the pupil has been warmed by the pictures of univerfai happinefs, and convinced that it is a polTible thing to unite all the inhabitants of the earth in one great focirty ; and ni'zcr it has been made out, in fome meafure to the iatii, faction of

Page 106Page 106

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.07% accurate
    lOO THE ILLUMINATI. C'HAP. II. of the pupil, that a great addition of happinefs would be trained by the abolition of national diftindiions and animofitics ; it may frequently be no hard tafl^ to make him think that patriotifm is a narrow-minded monopoiifing fentiment, and even incompatible with the more enlarged views of the Order j namely, the uniting the vvhole human race into one great and happy fociety. Princes are a chief feature of national diftindlion. Princes, therefore, may now be fafely reprefented as iinnecefiTary. If fo, loyalty to Princes lofes much of its facred chara6ler ; and the fo frequent enforcing of it in our comm.on political difcuffions m.ay now be eafjiy made to appear a felfifn maxim of rulers, by which they may more eafily enflave the people ^ and thus, it may at laft appear, that religion, the love of our particular country, and loyalty to our Prince, fhould be refilled, if, by thefc partial or narrow viev^s, we prevent the accomplif]:iment of that Cofmo-political happinefs v;hich is continually held forth as the great object of the Order. It is in this point of view that the terms of devotion to the Order, which are inferted in the oath of adrniilion, are now explained. The authority of the ruling powers is therefore reprefented as of inferior moral Vv^eight to that of the Order. '^ Thefe powers are defpots, when they do not conduft themlelves by its principles ; and it is therefore our duty " to furround them with its members, fo that the profane may have no accefs to them. Thus we are able mofl: powerfully to promote its interefts. If *^ any perfon is more difpofed to liflen to Princes " than to the Order, he is not fit for it, and muft rife *^ no higher. We muft do our utmofl to procure the " advancement of liluminati into all important civil '' offices." Accordingly the Order laboured in this with great zeal ^nd fuccefs. A correfpondence was difcovered, in (C C( iCPage 107Page 107

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.83% accurate
    cc cc ec cc CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. lOI in which it is plain, that by their influence, one of the greateft ecclefiaftical dignities was filled up in oppofition to the right and authority of the Archbiilaop of Spire, who is there reprefented as a tyrannical and bigoted pried. They contrived to place their Members as tutors to the youth of diftijidlion. One of them. Baron Leuchtfenring, took the charge of a young prince without any lalary. They infinuated themfclves into all public offices, and particularly into courts of juftice. In like manner, the chairs in the Univerfity of Ino-olftadt were (with only two exceptions) occupied by Illuminati. *^ Rulers who are members mufl be " promoted through the ranks of the Order only in proportion as they acknowledge the goodnefs of its e;reat object, and manner of procedure. Its objedt may be faid to be the checking the tyranny of princes, nobles, and pritfts, and eftabiiiliing an *^ univerfal equality of condition and of religion." The pupil is now informed, ** that fuch a religion is '^ contained in the Order, is the perfection of Chrif" tianity, and v/ili be imparted to him in due time." Thefe and other principles and maxims of the Order are partly comm.unicated by the verbal inilrudion of the Mentor, partly by writings, which mull be punctually returned, and partly read by the pupil at the Mentor's houfe, (but without taking extradts,) in fuch portions as he fhall direCt. The refcripts by the pupil mult contain difcuffions on thefe fubjecis, and anecdotes and defcriptions of living charadlers; and thefe muft be zealoufiy continued, as the chief mean of advancement. All this while the pupil knows only his Mentor, the Minervals, and a few others of his own rank. All mention of degrees, or other bufinefs of the Order, mud be carefully avoided, even in the meetings with other members: '' For the Or*^ der wifhes to be fecret, and to work in filence ; for " thusPage 108

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.29% accurate
    102 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. U. " thus it is better fccured from the opprelTion of the *^ ruling powers, and becaufc this fccrecy gives a '' greater zed to the whole." This fhort account of the Noviciate, and of the lowed clafs of illuminati, is all we can get from the authority of Mr. Weifhaupt. The higher degrees were not pubiillied by him. Many circumftances appear fufpicious, are certainly fufceptible of different turns, and may eafily be pufhed to very dangerous extremes. The accounts given by the four prorcffors ^ confirm thefe lufpicions. They declare upon oath, that they make all thefe accufations in confequence of what they heard in the meetings, and of what they knew of the Higher Orders. But fmce the time of the fuppreflion by the Eledlor, difcoveries have been made which throw great light on the fubje(5l. A coile6lion of original papers and correfpondence was found by learching the houfe of one Zwack (a Member) in 1786. The following year a much larger colle6tion v/as found at the houfe of Baron BaiRis ; and fmce that time Baron Knigge, the mod active Member next to Weifliaupt, pubiillied an account of fome of the higher degrees, which had been formed by himfelf A long while ader this were publifhed, Neuefte Arheitung des Spcirtacus und Philo in der Illuminaten Orderly and Hchere Grciden das Ilium. Ordens. Thefe two works give an account of the whole fccret conditution of the Order, its various degrees, the manner of conferring them., the indrudtions to the intrants, and an explanation of the connc6i:ion of the Order with Free Mafonry, and a critical hidory. We fhall give fome extracts from fuch of thefe as have been publidied. Weifhaupt was the founder in 1776. In 1778 the number of Members was confiderably increafed, and the O.'-der was fully edablifhed. The Members took antique

Page 109Page 109

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.97% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. lOJ antique names. Thus Weidiaupt took the name of Spartacus, the man Vv^ho headed the infurredlion of flaves, which in Pompey's time kept Rome in terror and uproar for three years. Zvvack was called Cato. Knio-cxe was Philo. Baifus was Hannibal. Hertel DO was Marius. Marquis Conftanza was Diomedes. — Nicolai, an eminent and learned bookfellcr in Berlin, and author of feveral works of reputation, took the name of Lucian, the great icoffer at all religion. Another was Mahomet, &c. It is remarkable, that except Cato and Socrates, we have not a name of anyancient who was eminent as a teacher and pra6cifer of virtue. On the contrary, they feem to have afreclcd the charafters of the free-thinkers and turbulent fpirits of antiquity. In the fame manner they gave ancient names to the cities and countries of Europe. Munich was Athens, Vienna was Rome, &c. Sparta CMS to CatOy Feb, 6, 1778. *^ Men hut eft defaire valoir la raijon. As a fubor*^ dinate obje6t I fhall endeavour to gain fecurity to " ourfclves, a backing in cafe of misfortunes, and af*' fiitance from v^ithout. I fhall therefore prefs the *^ cultivation of fcience, efpecially fuch fciences as *^ may have an influence on our reception in the world,

Page 110

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.09% accurate

Page 111

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.21% accurate
    (C cc

Page 112Page 110

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.09% accurate

Page 111

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.21% accurate
    (C cc

Page 112

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.38% accurate
     it is meritorious virtue. It v/ill do more '' good in our hands than by remaining for icoo years '' on the dufty fhelf." There was found in the hand- writing of Zwack a prujed: for a Sifterhood, in fubferviency to the defigns of the likjminati. In it are the following pailages : '' It will be of great fervice, and procure us both *' much information and mo.xey^ and will fuit charm" ingly the tafte of many of our trueft members, who *5 arc lovers of the fex. It fhould confift of two clalfes, the virtuous and the freer hearted (i. e. thofe who fly out of the common track of prudifn manners) ; they raufi; not know of each other, and mull be iin" der the dirediion of men, but without knowing ir. '•'' Proper books mufl: be put into their hands, and fuch " (but fecretly) as are flattering to their pafilons.'* There are, in the fame hand-writing, Defcription of a flrong box, which, if forced open, Ihall blow up and deilroy its contents — Several receipts for procuring abortion — A compofition which blinds or kills when fpurted in the face — A fliect, containing a receipt for fympathetic ink — Tea for procuring abortion — Herb^ quae haheyit qualitate?n deleieream — A method for filling a bed-chamber withpeftilential vapours — How to take cfr impreilions of feals, fo as to ufe them afterwards as feals — -A collection of fome hundreds of luch imprelfions, with a lift of their owners, princes, nobles, clergymen, merchants, &c. — K receipt ad excitandum fiircr'eryi uterinum^ — Amanufcript intitled, '' Better than Horus." It was afterwards printed and diftributed at Leipzig fair, and is an attack and bitter fatire on all religion. This is in the hand-writing of Ajax. As alfo a difiertation onfuicicie. — N. B. His filter-in-law threw herfelffrom the top of a tower. There was alfo a fc t of portraits.Page 113

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.91% accurate
    GHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. IC7 portraits, or chara6lers of eighty-five ladles in Munich ; with recommendations of fome of them for members of a Lodge of Sifter Iliuminatss ; alfo injunclions to all the Superiors to learn to Vv^rite with both hands ; and that they (hould ufe more than one cypher. Immediately after the publication of thefe writings, many defences appeared. It was faid that the dreadful medical apparatus were with propriety in the hands of Counfellor Zwack, who was a judge of a criminal court, and whofe duty it was therefore to know fuch things. The fame cxcufe was offered for the collection of feals ; but how came thele things to be put up . with papers of the liluminati, and to be in the handv/ritingof one of that Order? Weilhaupt fays, *' Thefe '' things were not carried into efFe<51: — only fpoken of, ^^ and are juflifiable when taken in proper connec*^ tion/' This however he has not pointed outi but he appeals to the account of the Order, which he had publifhed at Regenfourg, and in which neither thefe things are to be found, nor any poiTibility of a connexion by which they may be juftified. *' All men," fays he, '^ are fubjecb to errors, and the be ft man is he " v/ho beft conceals them. I have never been guilty '^ of any fuch vices or follies : for proof, I appeal to " the whole tenor of my life, which my reputation, *' and my ftruggles with hoftile cab^ils, had brought " completely into public viev/long before the inftitu*' tion of this Order, wirhout abating any thing ofthat '^ flattering regard which wa

Page 114Page 114

The text on this page is estimated to be only 15.57% accurate
    lOS THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. ^ occupied in the iiniverfity of Ingoldadt, the reforr ^ of the firft clafs of the German youths whereas for' merly it had only brought round it the low-born ^ pradiitioners in the courts ot law. I have gone ^ throuphthe whole circle of human enquiry. I have ^ exorcifcd fpirits — raifed ghofts — difcovered trea^ fures — -interrogated the Cabala — batte Lcto gejpielt — I ' have never tranfmuted metals." — (A very pretty and refpedlable circle indeed, and what , vulgar fpirits would fcarcely have included within the pale of their curiofity.) — "^ The Tenor of my life has been the op' pofitc of every thing that is vile; and no man can ^ lay any fuch thing to my charge. I have reafon to ^ rejoice that thefe writings have appeared ; they are a ' vindication of the Order and of iPiy conduct. lean ^ and muil declare to God, and I do it now in the ^ mofl folemn manner, that in my whole life I never ^ faw or heard of the fo much condemned fecrtt wri' tings; and in particular, reipecling thefe abomina^ ble means, fuch as poiloning, abortion, &c. was it *" ever known to me in any cafe, that any of my friends ^ or acquaintances ever even thought of them, advif^ ed them, or made any ufe of them. I was indeed ^ always a fchemer and projector, but never could en' gage much in detail. My general plan is good, ^ though in the ttetail there may be faults. I had mv^ felf to form. In another fituation, and in an a6"tive *^ fbation in life, I lliouid liave been keenly occupied, ^ and the founding an Order would never have com.e - into my head. But I would have executed much - greater things, had not government ahvays oppofed *'' my exertion^, and placed others in the fituations *♦ whic)i fuited my talents. It was the full convi6lion *^' of tins and of what could be done, if every mian v/ere '-' placed in ih(^ ofrice for wr.ich he was fitted by nature ^^ and a proper education, v^hich iiril fuggcfted to me. '' thePage 115

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.85% accurate
    / CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. IO9 '^ the plan of Illnmination." Surely Mr. Welfnaupt had a very ferious charge, the education of youth ; and his encouragement in that charge was the mod flattering that an liluminatus could wifn for 3 becaufc he had brought round him the youth whofe influence in fociety was the greatefc, and who v/ould moflrof all contribute to the difl^ufmg good principles, and exciting to sood conduft through the whole ftate. " I did not," fays he, " bring deifm into Bavaria more than into *' Rome. I found it here, in great vigour, more a" bounding than in any of the neighbouring Protefl:ant *^ ftates. I am proud to be known to the world as *^ the founder of the Order of Illuminatii and I repeat '^ my v^ifh to have for my epitaph. cc Hicfitus eft Ph.€thcn, currus auriga-paterm^ *' !^iiem fi ncn tennit, wagriis tamen excidit aiifisy The fccond difcovery of fecret correfpondence at Sanderfdorit, the feat of Baron Batz, (Hannibal,) contains Hill more intereflins; fad:s. Spartacus to Cato. ^^ What fliall I do ? I am deprived of all help. Socrates, who would infift on being a man of confe*^ quence among us, and is really a man of talents, '• and of a right zvay cf thinkings is eternally befatted. *^ Aup-ufius is in the worll eiliination imaorinable. Al'^ cibiades fits the day long widi the vintner's pretty " wife, and there he fghs and pines. A few days " ago, at Corinrh, Tioerius attempted to ravilh the '^ wire or Dcmocides, and her hulhand came in upon " therh. Good heavens ! vvhat Areopagit^ I have got. ^^ When the worthy man Marcus Aurelius comes to ^' Athens, (Munich/) what will he think ? What a cc

Page 116Page 116

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.60% accurate
    (C cc no THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. *' meeting of diiTolutej immoral wretches, whoremaf*^ ters, iiars, bankrupts, braggarts, and vain fools ! ^' When he fees all this, what will he think ? He will *' be alliamed to enter into an Afibciation," (obferve Reader, that Spartacus writes this in Augufl 1783, in the very time that he would have murdered Cato's iifter, as we fliall fee,) '^ where the chiefs raife the *' highefi expectations, and exhibit fuch wretched ex'^ amples ; and all this from felf-will, from fenfuality. *' Am I not in the right — that this man — that any fuch worthy man — whofe name alone would give us the feledion of all Gerrnany, will declare that the whole province of Grecia, (Bavaria,) innocent and guilty, mud be excluded. I tell you, we may ftu^^ dy, and write, and toil till death. We may facri*^ hce to the Order, our health, our fortune, and our " reputation, (alas, the lofs !) and thefe Lords, fol'^ lowing their own pleafures, will vv^hore, cheat, fteal, '^ and drive on like fhamelefs ralcals j and yet muft

Page 117Page 117

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.89% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. Hi doubted not would continue them, yet he fek a difguft at the hypocnfyy which would certainly diminifh the imprclTion of the mod faiutary truths, (Is it not diitreffing to think, that this promifing youth will by and by laugh at his former fimplicity, and follow the fleps and not the inftru6lions of his phyfician.) la another place, Spartacus vvrites to Marius, (in confidence,) that another v/orthy Brother, an Jrecpcigiti^.^ had ilolen a gold and a filvcr watch, and a ring, from Brutus, (SavioliyJ and begs Marius, in anuthcr letter, to try, while it was yet poffibie, to get the things reftored, becaufe the culprit was a mofl excellent rnan^ (Vortreffiich^) and of vail ufe to the Order, havinoc the direction of an eminent feminary of youno ?entlemen-, and becaufe SavioH was much in good company, and did not much care for the Order, except in fo far as it gave him an opportunity of knowing and leading fome of them, and of fceering his v/ay at court. I cannot help inferting here, though not the mod proper place, a part of a provincial report from Knigo-e, the man of the whole Aeropagit^ who lliows any rhinolike urbanity or gentlenefs ot mind. *' Of my whole colony, (Wefcphalia,) the moft bril" liant isClaudiopolis (Iseuwled), There they work, " and direct, and do wonders." If there ever was a fpot upon earth where men may be happy in a frate of cultivated fociety, it was the little principality of Ncuwied. I faw it in* 1770. The town was neat, and the palace handfome and in pood tafte. But the country was beyond conception delightful j not a cottage that was out of repair, not a hedge out of order j it had been the hobby (pardon me the word) of the Prince, who made it his ^W/)'emipioymenc to go through his principality regularly, and aiTiit every houfholder, of whatever condition, with his advice, and

Page 118Page 118

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.05% accurate
    112 THE ILLUMINATl. CHAP. II. and with his purfe j and, when a freeholder could not of himfelf put things into a thriving condition, the Prince fent his workmen and did it for him. He endowed fchools for the comimon people, and two academies for the gentry and the people of bufinefs. He gave little portions to the daughters, and prizes to the well-behaving fons of t!ie labouring people. His own houfhold was a pattern of elegance and economy 3 his fons were fent to Paris to learn elegance, and to England to learn fcience and agriculture. In fhort, the whole was like a romance (and was indeed romantic). I heard it fpoken of with a fmiie at the table of the Biihop of Treves, at Ehrenbretilein, and was induced to fee it next day as a curiofity : And yet even here, the fanaticifm of Knigge would diilribure his poifon, and tell the blinded people, that tlicy were in a ftate of fm and mifery, that their Prince was a defpot, and that they v/ould never be hapov till he was miade to fjy, and till they were all made equal. They got their wiili ; the fwarm of French locufis fat down on Neuwied's beautiful Melds in 1793, and entrenched themfelvcs ; and in three months, Prince and farmers houfes, and cottages, and fchools, and academies — all had vanillied 3 and all the fubje6ls were made equal. But when they complained co the French General (Rene le Grand) of being plundered by his folditrs, he anfwercd, with a contemptuous and cutting; Ij.ug-h, '* All is ours — we have left vou your eves " to cryc" — {Report to the Convention^ vi^thjune 17 95. J Difcite juftitiam mcniti^ et ncn temnere divos !

Page 119Page 119

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.96% accurate
    (C CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. Ilj To proceed : Spartccus to Cato. '* By this plan we fnali dired all mankind. \x\ this *' manner, and by the fimpkfl: means, we fhall {tt all *' in motion and in flames. The occupations mufi: be '^ fo allotted and contrived, that v/c may, in fecretj " influence all political tranfadions." N. B. This alludes to a part that is with-held from the public, becaufc it contained the allotment of the mofl: rebellious and profligate occupations to feveral perfons whofe common names couid not be traced. " I have confi* dered," lays Spartacus, '' evci-y thing, and fo prepared it, that if the Order lliould this day go to ruin, ' I fliall in a year re-eftablifh it more brilliant than ever." Accordingly it got up again in about tfiis fpace of time, under the name of the German Union, appearing in the form of Reading Societies. One of rhefe was fet up in Zwack's houfe j and this raifing a fufpicion, a vifltation was m.ade at Landfl-iut, and the firft fct of the private papers were found. The fcheme was, however, zealoufly profecuted in other parts of Germany, as we fliall fee by and by. " Nor," continues Spartacus, " will it flgnify though all fliould be *^ betrayed and printed. I am fo certain of fuccefs, in *' fpite of all obftacles, (for the fprings are in every *' heart,) that I am indifl^erent, though it fhould involve my life and my liberty. What ! have thoufands throvv'n away their lives about ho?ncios and hcmoioufics *' and (liail not this caufe warm even the heart of a '' coward ? But I have the art to draw advantage even ^- from misfortune -, and when you v/ould think me funk to the bottom, I fliall rife with new vigour. ' Who v/ould have thought, that a profcfTor at Ingol> '' iladc

Page 120Page 120

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.88% accurate
    114 rH£ ILLUMINATI, CHAP. 11. *' ftadt was to become the teacher of the profefibrs of *' Gottingen, and of the greatefl men in Germany?" Spartacus to Catc, '^ Send me back my degree of Illuminatus Miner ; " it is the wonder of all men here (I may perhaps find *' time to give a trandation of the difcourfe of rccep" tion, which contains all that can be faid of this Af" fociation to the public) ; as alfo the two lad flieets *' of my degree, which is in the keeping of Marius, *' and Celfus, under loo locks, which contains my ^^ hiftory of the lives of the Patriarchs." N. B. Nothing very particular has been difcovered of thefe lives of the Patriarchs. He fays, that there were above fixty flieets of it. To judge by the care taken of it, it muft be a favourite work, very hazardous, and very catching. In another letter to Cato, we have fome hints of the higher degrees, and concerning a peculiar morality, and a popular religion, which the Order was one day to give the world. He fiys, ^' There muft (a la Je*^ Jiiite) not a fmgle purpofe ever come in fight that is ^^ ambiguous, and that m.ay betray our aims againfl ^^ religion and the ftate. One miUil fpeak fbmctimes " one way and fometimes another, but fo as never to " contradi6l ourfelves, and {o that, with refped to *' our true way of thinking, we may be impenetrable. " When our firongeil thino-s chance to o-ive offence, " they mufb be explained as attempts to draw anfwers ^* which difcover to us the fentiments of the perfon " we converfe with." N. B. This did not always fucceed with him. Spartacus fays, fpeakingof the priefls degree, ^^ One '' would almoft imagine, that this degree, as I have ma*^ nageo

Page 121Page 121

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.63% accurate
    CC cc cc CHAP. If. THE ILLUMINATI. II5 " nacred ir, is genuine Chriftianity, and that its end *' was to free the Jews from flavery. I fay, that Free Mafonry is concealed Chrifiianity. My explanation of the hieroglyphics, at leafc, proceeds on this fuppofition ; and as I explain things, no man need be ^^ afhamed of being a Chriftian. Indeed 1 afterwards " throw away this name, and fubftitute Reafon. But " I alTure you this is no fmali affair; a new religion, " and a new (late-government, which fo happily ex" plain one and all of thefe fymbols, and combine them in one degree. You may think that this is my chief work ; but I have three other degrees, ^^ all different, for my clafs of higher myderies, in " comparifon with which this is but child's play; bur '^ thefe I keep for myielf as General, to be bellowed '- by me only on the BenemeritlJJimiy' (furely fuch as Cato, his deareft friend, and the poffeffor of fuch pretty fecrets, as abortives, poifons, pcdilcnrial vapours> &c.). " The promoted may be Areopagices or not, " Were you here I fliould give you this degree with'' out hefitation. But it is too important to be intrufted to paper, or to be bellowed otherwife than from my own hand. It is the key to hiftory, to religion, and to every ftate-government in the world."* " Spartacus proceeds, " There fhall be but three *' copies for all Germany. You can't imagine what I *^ refpedt and curiofity my priefi- degree has raifed ; " and, which is wonderful, a famous Proteflant di'^ vine, who is now of the Order, is perfuaded that '' the * I obferve, in other parts of his correfpondence where he fpeaks of this, feveral fmgular phrafes, which are to be found in two books ; Anliquete clevoilee par fes Ufages, and Origine du Defpotifme Oriental. Thefe contain indeed much of the maxims inculcated in the reception difcourfe of the degree llhananitus Minor. Indeed 1 have found, that Weifhaupt is much lefs an inventor than he is generally thought. cc cc ccPage 122

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.07% accurate
    Il6 •» THE ILLUMINATI. CHi^P. II. '' the religion contained in it is the true fenfe of Chrif'' tianity. O man, man ! to what may'st thou '^ NOT BE PERSUADED. Who woiild imagine thai; I " was to be the founder of a new religion ?'' In this fcheme of Mafonic Chriftianity, SparCacus and Philo laboured ferioufly together. Spartacus fent him the materials, and Philo worked them up. Ic will therefore illuftrate this capital point of the conftitution of the Order, if we take Philo's account of it. Philo to Cato, ^^ We muil: confider the ruling propenfities of every ^f age of the world. At prefent the cheats and tricks " of the priefts have roufed all men againlt them, and ^' againft Chriftianity. But, at the fame time, fuper*-^ ftition and fanaticifm rule with unlimited dom.inion, ^^ and the underftanding of man really feems to be *^ going backwards. Our taflc, therefore, is doubled. «f We muft give fuch an account of things, that fana*' tics fhouid not be alarmed, and that fhall, notwith^^ (landing, excite a fpirit of free enquiry. We mufl " not throw avv'ay the good with the bad, the child ^^ with the dirty water; but we mud make the fecret *^ do6lrines of Chriftianity be received as the fecrcts ^^ of genuine Free Mafonry. But farther, we have to ^^ deal with the defpotifm of Princes. This increafes ^^ every day. But then, the fpirit of freedom breathes

Page 123Page 123

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.66% accurate
    cc cc cc CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. II7. *^ rif^hts. For this piirpofe he would uniLe men in a " common bond. He would fie them for this by «f fpreading a juft morality, by enlightening the unay there find a reafonable application to his peculiar do6lrines. Let this be true or fldfe, it " does not fignify. This was a fimple Religion, and *^ it w^as fo fcW infpired ; but the minds of his hearers '' were not fitted for receiving thefe doctrines. 1 told ^' you, fays he, but you could not bear it. Many '^ therefore Vv'ere called, but few were chofen. To ^^ this eie6l were entruRed the mofl important fecrets; " and even among them there were degrees of infbr" mation. There v.'as a feventy, and a twelve. All '^ this was in the natural order of things, and acccrd'^ ino: to the habits of the Tews, and indeed of all antiquicy. The Jewifh Theofophy was a myftery; like the Eleufinian, or the Pythagorean, unfit for ^ the vulgar. And thus the doctrines of Chrifbianity were committed to the Adept i, in a BijcipUna Arcani, By thefe they were maintained like the Veflal Fire. — They were kept up only in hidden focieties, v^ho handed them dovv/n to pofterity ; and they are nov/ pofil-jred by the genuine Free Maioris." N. B. This explains the origin of many anonymous pamphlets which appeared about this time in Germany,- fliov/ing that Free Mafonry was Chridianity. — Thev have doubtlefs been the works of Spartacus and his o cc cc ( cc cc cc cc cc

Page 124Page 124

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.16% accurate
    Il8 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. his partifans among the Ecledic Mafons. Nicholaj, the great apodle of" infidelity, had given very favourable reviews of thefe performances, and having always ll:ievvn himfelf an advocate of fuch writers as depreciated Chrittianity, it was natural for him to take this opportunity of bringing it flill lov>^er in the opinion of the people. Spartacus therefore conceived a high opinion of the importance of gaining Nicholai to the Order. He had before this gained Leuchtfenring, a hotheaded fanatic, who had fpied Jefuits in every corner, and fet Nicholai on his journey through Germany, to hunt them out. This m^an finding them equally hated by the Iliuminati, was eafily gained, and was moil zealous in their caufe. He engaged Nicholai, and Spartacus exults exceedingly in the acquifition, faying, '' that he was an unwearied champion, et quidem contentijfimusy Of this man Philo fays, -^ that he had fpread this Chriftianity into every corner of Germany. I have put meaning," fays Philo, " to all thefe dark i'ymbols, and have prepared b0th de*' grecs, introducing beautiful ceremonies, which I *' have felc6led from among thofe of the ancient com'^ m.unions, combined with thofe of the Rofaic Ma*' fonry; and now," fays he, " it will appear that we ^' are the only true Chriftians. We fliail now be in a '^ condition to fay a few words to Priefls and Princes. ^' I have fo contrived things, that I would admit even *^ Popes and Kings, after the trials which I have pre'' fixed , and they would be glad to be of the Order." But how is all this to be reconciled with the plan of Illumination, which is to banifh Chriflianity altogether ? Philo himfeif in many places fays, *^ that it is '' only a cloak, to prevent fqueamiili people from '^ ftarting back." This is done pretty much in the fame way that was prad:ifcd in the French Mafonry. In one of their Rituals the Mafler's degree is made typical cc (C (C ccPage 125

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.94% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATK 119 typical of the death of Jefiis Chrift, the preacher of Brotherly love. But, in the next ttep, the Chevalier du SoleiL it is Reafon that has been dellroved and entombed, and the Mafter in this deo-ree, the Sublime Philcfcphe^ occafions the difcovery of the place where the body is hid -, Reafon rifes again, and fupcrftition and tyranny difappear, and all becomes clear y man becomes free and happy. Let us hear Spartacus again. SpartacuSy in miother place, " We muft, i/?, gradually explain away all our pre" paratory pious frauds. And when perfons of difcern*^ ment find fault, we muft defire them to confidcr the '^ end of all our labour. This fandHfies our means, '^ v/hich at any rate are harmleA, and have been ufc'' fuJ, even in this cafe, becauie they procured us a *^ patient hearing, when otherwife men would have " turned away from us like petted children. 1 his '* will convince them of our fcntiments in all the intervening  points i and our ambiguous exprelTions will then be interpreted into an endeavour to draw anfwers of any kind, which may Inow us the mincis of our pupils, idj We muft unfold, from hiftory and other writingrs, the orio-in and fabrication of all religious lies whatever; and then, yl, We give a critical hiflory of the Order. But I cannot bcit laugh, when i think of the ready reception which " all this has met with from the e;rave and learned di-» '^ vines of Germany and of England ; and I wonder '^ how their William failed w^hen he attempted to eltabiifh a Deiftical Worfhip in London, (what can this mean ?) for, I am certain, that it muft have been moil; acceptable to that learned and free people. But

Page 126Page 126

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.24% accurate
    I20 THE ILLUMINATI. CKAP. II. *' they had not the enlightening of our days." I may here remark, that Weilhaupt is prefuming too much on the jofnorance of his friend, for there was a orreat deal of this enlightening in England at the time he fpeaks of, and if 1 am not miftaken, even this celebrated Profellor of Irreligion has borrowed mod of his fchtme from this kingdom. This to be fure is nothing in our praife. But the Pantheisticon of Toland refembles Weifliaupt's Illumination in every thing but its rebellion and its villainy. Toland's Socratic Lodge is an elegant pattern for Weifliaupt, and his Triumph of Reafon, his Philofophic Happinefs, his God, or Anhna Mundi^ are all lb like the harili fydem of Spartacus, that I am convinced that he has copied them, {lamping them vvith the roughnefs of his own character. But to go on j Spartacus fays of the Englifli : '' Their poet Pope made his ElTay on Man a fyftem '^ of pure naturalifm, without knowino- it, as Brother " Chryfippus did with my PrieiVs Degree, and was equally aftonidied when this was pointed out to him. Cliryfippus is religious, but not fupcrftitious. Brother Lucian (Nicolai, of whom I have already faid *' fo much) fays, that the grave Zolikofer now allows '' that it v/ould be a very proper thing to eflabliili a *' Deiflical Worfhip at Berlin. I am nor afraid but '' things will go on very well. But Philo, who was *• entrufccd with framing tlie Prieft's Degree, has de^' fcroyed it witliout any necelTity j it would, forfooth, *' ftartie thofe who have a hankering for Religion. But *' I always told you that Philo is fanatical and prudifli. '' I gave him fine materials, and he has fcufFed it full *^ of ceremonies and child's play, and as Minos fays, **^ c'cft jciier la religion. But all th.is may be corrc6led ^' in the revifion by the Areopagita:.'" N. B. I have already mentioned Baron Knigge's Gonverfion to Illuminatifm by the M. de Co ifcanza, whof: cc (CPage 127

CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 121 whofe name in the Order was Diomedes. Knigge (henceforth Philo) was, next to Spartacus, the moil: ferviceable man in the Order, and procured the greateft number of members. It was chiefly by his exertions among the Mafons in the Proteilant countries, that the EcleElic Syfteni was introduced, and afterwards brought under the dircd^tion of the Iliuminati. This conqueft was owing entirely to his very extenfive connections among the Mafons. He travelled like a philofopher from city to city, from Lodge to Lodge, and even from houfe to houfe, before his Illumination, trying to unite the Mafons, and he now went over the fame ground to extend the Ecle5lic Syftem^ and to get the Lodges put under the direction of the Iliuminati, by their choice of the Mafter and Wardens. By this the Order had an opportunity of noticing the conduct of individuals 3 and when they had found cut their ' manner of thinking, and that they Vv^ere fit for their purpofe, they never quitted them till they had gained them over to their party. We have feen, that he was by no means void of religious imprefiions, and we often find him offended wnth the acheiiln of Spartacus. Knigge was at the fame time a man of the world, and had kept good company. Weifhaupt had paiTcd his life in the habits of a college : therefore he knew Knigge's value, and communicated to him all his projeds, to be dreffed up by him for the tafte of Ibciety. Philo was of a much more affedionatc difpofition, with fomething of a devotional turn, and v/as fhocked at the hard indifference of Spartacus. After labouring four years with great zeal, he v^as provoked with the difingenuous tricks of Spartacus, and he broke off all connexion v/ith the Society in 1784, and fome rime, after publifhed a declaration of all that he had done in it. This is a moft excellent account of the plan and principles of the Order, (at leaft as he conceived it, Q^ > for

Page 128Page 128

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.98% accurate
    122 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. H. for Spartacus liaci much deeper views,) and fhows that the aim of ic was to abolilh Chriftianity, and ail the fiatc-governmerus in Europe, and to eftablifh a great repubiic. Bur it is full of romantic notions and cnthufiafiic declamation, on the hackneyed topics of univerfal citizenlliip, and liberty and equah'ty. Spartacus p,ave him line, and allowed him to work on, knowing that he could difcard him when he chofe. I fnall after tliis give fome exiracls from Philo's letters, from w^hich the reader vj'xW fee the vile behaviour of Spartacus, and the nature of his ultimate views. In the mean time we may proceed with the account of the princiules of the fyitem. Spm'taais to Cato, ^' Nothing would be more profitable to us than a rigi)t hiilory of mankind. Defpoiifm has robbed them of their liberty. How can the weak obtain proteciion ? Only by union; but this is rare. No'' thing can bring this about but hidden focieties. *' Hidden fchools of wifdom are the means which will '* one day free men from their bonds. Thefe have in all ages been the archives of nature, and of the rights of men ; and by them fhall human nature be " raifed from her fallen fiate. Princes and nations '' lliali vanifb from the earth. The human race will '' then become one family, and the world will be che '^ dwelling of rational men. *' Morality alone can do this. The Flead of every family Vvili be what Abraham was, the patriarch, the priefc, and the unlettered lord of his family, and '' Reafon will be the code of lavv^s to all mankind. " This," fays Spartacus, *' is our great secret. True, there may be fome diiuirbance , but by and '' by cc Cc (C cc cc cc

Page 129Page 129

The text on this page is estimated to be only 11.28% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMIXATI. I2J ^^ by the Aineqiial will become equal ; and after z\e '^ ftorm all wlil be calm. Can the unhappy confe^* quenccs remain w'len the grounds of dilicnfion are *^ removed ? Roufe yourfelves therefore, O men ! af'^ fert your rights, and then will Reafon rule with un" perceived fway j and all shall be happy.* " Morality will perform all this; and morality is ^^ the fruit of lilumiiiation ; duties and rights are rcci" procal. V/here Odavius has no right, Caco owes ^^ him no duty. lilumdnadon fhews us our rights, and " Morality follows ; that Morality which teaches us '^ to be cfdge, to be out of vmrdrnfrnf^ loh^ full grown ^ *' and to walk without the leading ftrhigs of pr lefts and '^ princes.'' '' Jcfus of Nazareth, the Grand Mafter of our Or«^ der, appeared at a time when the world was in the '^ utmofc diforder, and among a people who f^or ages '^ had groaned under the yoke of bondage. He taught ^^ them the lefjbns of Reafon. To be n^ore eitective, «^ he took in the aid of Religion — of opinions which '^ were current — -and, in a very clever mannerist com

Page 130Page 130

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.90% accurate
    cc cc cc cc Cf cc Ci 124 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. " of his dodlrines^ and Morality as the way to attain it, " and everv thino; in the New Teftament will be com'^ prehenfible ; and Jefus will appear as the Redeemer '^ offlaves. Man is fallen from the condition of Liberty and Equality, the state of pure nature. He is under fubordination and civil bondage, arifing from the vices of man. This is the fall, and " ORIGINAL SIN. The KINGDOM OF GRACE is that reftoration which may be brought about by Illumination and a juft Morality. This is the new birth. When man lives under government, he is fallen, his worth is gone, and his nature tarniflied. By (libduing our paffions, or limiting their cravings, we may recover a great deal of our original worth, and live ** in a ftate of grace. This is the redemption of men '^ — this is accomplillied by Morality ; and when this '■^ is fpread over the world, we have the kingdom '^ CF THE JUST. ^' But, alas ! t\At tafk of felf- formation was too hard for the fubjedls of the Roman empire, corrupted by every fpecies of profligacy. A chofcn few received the doctrines in fecret, and they have been handed down to us (but frequently almofi; buried under rubbifh of man's invention) by the Free Mafons. Thefe three conditions of human fociety are exprelTed by the rough, the fplit, and the polifhed ftone. The rough lione, and the one that is fplit, exprefs our condition under civil government \ rough by twtxy fretting inequality of condition ; and fplit, fince we *^ are no longer one family ; and are farther divided by differences of government, rank property, and religion ; but when reunited in one family, we are reprefented by the polifhed flone. G. is Grace -, ^' the Flaming Star is the Torch of Reafon. Thofe '^ who pofTefs this knowledge are indeed illuminati. '* Hiram is our ficliticus Grand Mailer, flain for the *' redemfcc cc c: cc cc ce cc cc cc cc cc

Page 131Page 131

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.57% accurate
    CHAP. II. thI: illuminati. 125 ^' PvEDEMPTiON OF SLAVES ; the Nine Mafcers are " the Founders of the Order. Free Mafonry is a '^ Royal Arc, inafmuch as it teaches us to walk with'^ out trammels, and to govern ouriclves." Reader, are you not curious to karn fomethingof this all-powerful morality, fo operative on the heart of the truly illuminated — 0^ i\\\s> dijciplina ^rc^;/?", entrufted only to the chofen few, and handed down to Profeffor Weifhaupt, to Spartacus, and his aflbciates, who have cleared it of the rubbifh heaped on it by the dim-fighted Mafons, and now beaming- in its native luPtre on the minds of the /Ireopagit^ ? The teacliers of ordinary Chriftianity have been labouring for almcft 2000 years, with the New Teftament in their hands ; many of them with great addrefs, and many, I believe, with honeft zeal. But alas ! they cannot produce fuch won^ derful and certain effedls, (for obferve, that Weifliaupt repeatedly aiTures us that his means are certain,) probably for want of ih'is difdplma m^canij of whofe efficacy fo much is faid. Moil fortunately, Spartacus has given us a brilliant fpecimen of the ethics which illuminated himfelf on a trying occafion, v/here an ordinary Chriftian would have been much perplexed, or would have taken a road widely dilrerent from that of this illuftrious apoltle of light. And feeing that fc^veral of the Areopagitae CO -o^)tx2iitd in the tranfadlion, and that it was carefully concealed from the profane and dim-fighted world, we can have no doubt but that it was conduced according to the difciplina arcani of Illumination.    I fnall give it in his own words. Spartacus to Marias^ September 1783. " I am now in the mofr embarraOlne: ficuation ; it '*' robs me of all red, and makes nie unfit for every

Page 132Page 132

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.37% accurate
    120 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. " thing. I am in danger of lofing at once my honour '* and my reputation, by which I Iiave long had fuch '' influence. What think you r — my fiiltr- in-law is *^ wich child. I have fent her to Euriphon, and am *' endeavouring to procure a marriage-licence from " Rome. How much depends on this uncertainty — '^ and there is not a moment to lofe. Should I fail, *' what is to be done ? Vv^hat a return do I make by *^ this to a perfon to whom 1 am fo mjjch obliged!'* (We fnall fee the probable m.eaning of this exclamation by and by). '^ We have tried eveiy method in *' our power to deflroy the child ; and I hope (he is " determiined on every thing — even d — ," (Can this mean death ?) **^ But aias ! Euriphon is, I fear, too ti*' mid," (alas ! poor woman, thou art now under the difci^lina arcaniy) '^ and I fee no other expedient, " Couki I be but allured of the filence of Celfus, (a ** phyfician at Ingoiltadt,) he can relieve me, and he " promt fed me as much three years ago. Do fpeak to *^ him, if you tiiink he will be fiaunch. I would not Jet *' Cuto" (his dearell friend, and his chief or only confident in the fcheme of Illum.ination) '^ know it yet, becaufe the affair in otherrcfpeds requires his whole friendihip." (Cato had all the pretty receipts.) Could you but help me our of this diftrefs, you would give me life, honour, and peace, and ftrength to work again in the great cauje. It you cannot, be affured I will venture on the moil defperate llroke,'* (poor filler !) '^ for it is fixed. — I will not lofc my ho*^ nor.r. I cannot conceive what devil has made me go " aft ray — nie who have always been Jg careful on fuch oc'^ caficns. As yet all is quiet, and none know of it but " you and Euriphon. WVre it but time to undertake " any thing — but alas ! it is the fourth month. Thofe *' damned pritfts too — for the adlion is fo criminally " accounted bv them, and fcandaiifes the blood. This *^ makes (CPage 133

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.11% accurate
    c CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 1 2^ *^' makes the utmofl efforts and the inoR" defperatc '' nieafures abfoluteiy neceflai-y/' It will throw {bme light on this tranfadtion if we read a letter from Spartacus to Cato about this time. " One thing more, my deareft friend — \¥ould it be «' agreeable to you to have me for a l>rother-in-law ? " If this fhould be ao:reeabie, and if it can be brouofhc ^« about without prejudice to my honour, as I hope it ^^ may, I am not without hopes that the connection " may take place. But in the mean time keep it a '* fecret, and only give me permiflion to enter into '^ correfpondence on the fubjed vv^ith the good lady, *^ to whom I beg you will offer my refpedlful compli^^ ments, and I will explain myfeif more fully to you " by word of mouth, and tell you my whole (ituation. '^ But I repeat it — the thing mud be gone about with '' addrefs and caution. 1 would not for all the world '^ deceive a perfon who certainly has not deferved fo

Page 134Page 134

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.53% accurate
    128 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. that it was an only fider; if it was, the probability is, that Spartacus had paid his addrelTes to her, and llicceedcd, and that the fcbfequent affair of his marriage with his fifier-in-law, or fomething worfe, broke her heart. This feenis the bell account of the matter. For Hertel (Marius) writes to Zwack in November 1782 : ^^ Spartacus is this day gone home, but has left *' his fifter-in-law pregnant behind (this is from BaiTus *^ HofF). About the new year he hopes to be made ^^ merry by a — — , who will be before all kings and " princes~a young Spartacus. The Pope alfo will '^ refpe6l him, and legitimate him before the time.'* Now, vulgar Chriitian, compare this with the former declaration of Weifhaupt, where he appeals to the tenor of his former life, which had been ib feverely fcrucinifcd, without dimiiniihing his high reputation and great influence, and his i^^^norance and abhorrence of all thofe things found in Cato's repofitories. You fee this was a furprife — he had formerly proceeded cautioufiy — ^^ He is the brft man," fays Spartacus, *^ who befh conceals his fault?." — He was difappointed by Celfus, who had p'om'ifed him his ajjijtance en Juch occaftcns three years ago, during all which time he had been buf)/ in '^ forming himfelf." How far he has advanced, the reader may judge. One is curious to know what became of the poor woman : fhe was afterwards taken to the houfe of Baron Baifus 3 but here the foolifn v/oman, for want of that courage which Illumination and the bright profpe6t of eternal fleep fiiould have produced, took fright at the dijciplini arcani, left the houfe, and in the hidden fociety of a midwife and nurfe brought forth a young Spartacus, who now lives to thank his father for his endeavours to mjjrder him. A '^ damned pr left y'' the good Bifhop of Freyfingen, knowing the cogent reafons, procured the difpenfation, and Spartacus was obliged,Page 135

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.53% accurate
    GMAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. I29 obliged, like another dim-fighted mortal, to marry her.*^ The fcandal was hufhed, and would not have been difcovered had it not been for thefe private writings. But Spartacus fays " that when you think " him funk to the bottom, he will fpring up with " double vigour." In a fubfequent work, called Short Amendment of my Plan, he fays, '^ If men were " not habituated to wicked manners, his letters would " be their own juftification/' He does not fay that he is without fault; '' but they are faults of the under'' (landing — not of the heart. He had, firftof all, to *' form himfelf; and this is a work of time.'' In the affair of his fifter-in-law he admits the fads, and the attempts to deftroy the child; " but this is far from ^^ proving any depravity of heart. In his condition, " his honour at flake, what elfe was left him to do ? *^ His greateft enemies, the Jefuits, have taught that *^ in fuch a cafe it is lawful to miake away with the *^ child," and he quotes authorities from their books.* " In the introdu6lory fault he has the example of the *^ bed of men. The fecond was its natural confe'' quence, it was altogether involuntary, and, in the " eye of a philofophical judge" (I prefumeofthe Gallic School) " who does not fquarc himfelf by the harfh *' letters of ^ blood-thirfty lawgiver,, he has but a very trifling account to fettle. He had become a public teacher, and was greatly followed ; this example might have ruined many young ?nen. The eyes of the '^ Order alfo were fixed on him. The edifice refted " on his credit ; had he fallen, hs could no longer have R ^^ been * This is flatly contradi6led in a pamphlet by F. Stattler, a Catholic clergyman of moft rerpe6lable charai^ler, who here expofes, in the moft incontrovertible manner, the impious plots of Weiihaupt, his total difregard to truth, his counterfeit antiques, and all his lies againll the Jefuits. (CPage 136

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.26% accurate
    130 THE ILLUMINATl. CHAP. U. €C

Page 137Page 136

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.26% accurate
    130 THE ILLUMINATl. CHAP. U. €C

Page 137

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.15% accurate
    CHAP. 11. THE JLLUMINATI. I3I alifm, and about the inexpediency of Princes. But this is falfe : Philo fays exprefslyj that every thing remained on its original footing in the whole pradicc and dogmas of the Order when he quitted it in July 1784. Ail this was concealed, and even the abominable Mafonry, in the account of the Order which Weifliaupt pubiiihed at Regenfburg ; and it required the conftant efforts of Philo to prevent bare or flat Atheifm from being uniformly taught in their degrees. He had told the council that Zeno w^ould not be under a roof with a man who denied the immortality of the foul. He complains of Minus's cramming irreligion down their throats in every meeting, and fays, that he frightened many from entering the Order. '^ Truth," fays Philo, " is a clever, but a modeft girl, who muft '' be led by the hand like a gentlewoman, but not " kicked about like a whore.'* Spartacus complain^ much of the fqueamifhnefs of Philo 3 yet Philo is not a great deal behind him in irreligion. When defcribing to Cato the Chriftianity of the Priefli-degree, as he had manufa(5lured it, he fays, '' It is all one whc" ther it be true or falfe, we mud have it, that we " may tickle thole who have a hankering for religion/* All the odds fecms to be, that he was of a gentler difpofition, and had more deference even for the abfurd prejudices of others. In one of his angry letters to Cato he fays : '^ The vanity and felf- conceit of Spar*' tacus would have got the better of all prudence, had I not checked him, and prevailed on the Areopagitte but to defer the developement of the bold principles till we had firmly fccured the man. I even wilhed to entice the candidate the more by giving him back *^ ail his former bonds of fecrecv, and leaving him at *^ liberty to walk out without fear; and I am certain " that they were, by this time, fo engaged that we " lliould not have loft one man. Br.t Spartacus had *' compofed an exhibition of his laft principles, for a *^ difcourfePage 138

IJi THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. 11. cc cc

Page 139Page 138

IJi THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. 11. cc cc

Page 139

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.20% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI, IJJ " them ? How will their rciationsj particulariy their '' mothers, immerfed in prejudices, confcnc that others *' lliall influence their education ? ¥/e muil begin with *^ grown girls. Hercules propofes the wife of Ptoie*^ my Magus. I have no ohjedion ; and I have four *' ftep-daughters, fine girls. The oldeft in particular '^ is excellent. She is twenty-four, has read much, is above all prejudices, and in religion fhe thinks asldo. They have much acquaintance among the young la" dies their relations. (N. B. We don't know the rank **^ of Minos, but as he does not iifc the word Damen, ^' but Frauenzlmmerj it is probable that it is not high.) '^ It may immediately be a very pretty Society, under *^ the managemicnt of Ptolemy's wife, but really un'^ der bis management. You muft contrive pretty de" grees, and drefles, and ornaments, and elegant and " decent rituals. No man mud be admitted. This '^ Vv'ill make them become more keen, and they will '^ go much farther than if we were prefcnt, or than if *^ they thought that we knew of their proceedings. *^ Leave them to the fcope of their ov/n fancies, and '^ they Vv'ill foon invent myfteries which will put us to " the blufh, and create an enthufiafm which we can never equal. They will be our great apoftles. Refle6l on the refpect, nay the awe and terror infpired by the female miydics of antiquity. (Think of the '^ Daniads — ^think of the Thcban Bacchantes.^ Ptole'^ my's wife mutt diredl: them, and fhe will be inilrudb'^ ed by Ptomlemy, and mjy dep daughters will con*' fult with me. We muft aiv/ays be at hand to pre*' vent the introdudtion of any improper quedion. Vv'c " mud prepare themes for their difcufTion — thus we '^ fhall confefs them, and infpire them with our ftnti^^ ments. No m^an however mud come near them. " This will fire their roving fancies, and we may ex" pe(5t: rare myderies. But I am doubtful whether " this cc ccPage 140

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.91% accurate
    134 "^^'^ ILLUMiNATI. CHAP. II. *^ this AiTociatlr.n will be durable. Yv'omen are fickle

Page 141

The text on this page is estimated to be only 10.25% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. I35 The feries of ranks and progrcfs of the pupil were arranged as follows :  Prcparacion,  NovicCj _^_  iviiijcrvdi,  „__ I Hum in. Minor. fSym- C  Apprentice, I iclic <  Fciiow Crafty Masonry,-^ C-  Maftcr, \ n , 7 ^ Ilhim, Mr jar, Scotch Novice L (^ iUum. cttngenSj bcoccnKnighr. C Leffcr SP;^%^^-r Pricfr, Mysteries, < > ,^ o ^ i Greater ^ - '^ V. (_ Kex. The reader mufi: be almofl fick of fo much villany, and would be difgufted with the minute detail, in which the cane of the Order is ringing continually in his ears. I fhall therefore only give I'uch a fnorc extraiSb as may fix our notions of the obje6i: of the Order, and the m.orality of the means employed for attaining it. We need not go back to the lower degrees, and ihall begin with the Illuminatus dir lgens, or Scotc?i Knight. After a fhort introduc^cion, teaching: us how the holy ferret Chapter of Scotch Knights is alTembled, we have, J. Fuller accounts and inlirucfiions relating to ihc Vv'i.ole. II. Infcruclions for the lower cianes of Mafonry. III. Inftrudlions relating to Mafjn Lodo:es in c^eneral. IV. Account of a reception into this de?:>ree, wiih the bond wlncli each fubfcribes before he caii be admitted. V. Concernincr die Solemn Chai^ter for reception. VI. Openinp; of tiie Chapter. Vlh R ieual ot Reception, and the Oath. VIII. Shutting of the Chapter. IX. / -'

Page 142

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.57% accurate

Page 143

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.63% accurate
    cc cc (C C(  When ^v*W

Page 144Page 142

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.57% accurate

Page 143

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.63% accurate
    cc cc (C C(  When ^v*W

Page 144

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.96% accurate
    IjS THE ILLUMlNATIv GHAP. H. 3^, When the Table Lodgre is ended, and the Prc^ fed fees no obitacle, he ftrikes on this bye-table the flrokc of Scotch Mafier, and his fignal is repT^ated by the Senior Warden. All are frill and filent. The Prefed lifts off the cloth. 4/Z?, The Prefcd alks, whether the Knights are in the difpofition to partake of the Love-Feaft in earneft, peace, and contentment. If none hefitates or offers to retire, he takes the plate with the bread and fays, J. of N. our Grand-Mafter, in the night in which he was betrayed by his friends, perfccuted for his love for truth, imprifoncd, and condemned to die, afTembled his trufty Brethren, to celebrate his lall: Love-Feaft — which is fignified to us in many ways. He took bread (taking it) and broke it (breaking it) and bleifed it, and gave it to his difciples, &c. — This ihall be the mark of our Holy Union, &c. Let each of you examine his heart, whether love *' reigns in it, and whether he, in full imitation of our *^ Grand-Mafter, is ready to lay down his life for his *' Brethren. Thanks be to our Grand-Mafter, who has appointed this feaft as a memorial of his kindnefs, for the uniting of the hearts of thofe who love him. — Go in peace, and blefled be this new Aftbciation which we have formed. — Blefted be ye who remain loyal and ft rive for the good caufe." ^thy The Prefed immediately clofes the Chapter -with the ufual ceremonies of the Lege de Table. 6th, It is to be obferved, that no prieft of the Order muft be prefent at this Love-Feaft, and that even the Brother Servitor quits the Lodge. I muft obferve here, that Philo, the manufadlurer of this ritual, has done it very injudicioufly ; it has no refemblance whatever to the Love-Feaft of the primitive Chriftians, and is merely a copy of a fmiilar thing m it f cPage 145Page 145

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.61% accurate
    ?;IIAP. II. THE ILLTJMINATI. I39 in one of the fleps of French Miifoniy, Philo's reading in church-hiftory was probably very fcanty, or he trulled that the candidates would not be very nice in their examination of it, and he imagined chat it would do well enoughj and '' tickle fuch as had a religious " hankering." Spartacus dilliked it exceedingly — it did not accord with his ferious conceptions, and he juilly call.'^. it J oner la Religion, The difcourfe of reception is to be found alfo in the fecret correfpondence ( NachtraglL Abtheilung, p. 44.)But it is needlefs to infcrt it here. I have given the fubfbance of this and of all the Cofmo-political declamations already in the panegeric introdudlion to the account of the procefs of education- And in Spartacus's letter, and in Philo's, I have given an abftraft of the introdudion to the explanation given in this degree of the fymbols of Free Mafonry. With refped to the explanation itfelf, it is as flovenly and wretched as can be imagined, and Ihews that Spartacus trufted to much more operative principles in the human heart for the reception of his nonfenfe than the didtates of unbialTed reafon. None but promifing fubjccls were admitted thus fat' — fuch as would not boggle ; and their principles were already fufficicntly apparent to afTure him that they would be contented with any thing that made o^ame of religion, and w^ould be diverted by the ferioufnefs which a chance devotee might exhibit during thefe filly caricatures of Chriftianity and Free Mafonry. But there is confidcrable addrefs in the way that Spartacus prepares his pupils for having all this mummery fhewn in its true colours, and oveicur ned. '* Examine, read, think on thtfe fymbols. There " are many things which one cannot find out without ** a oruide, nor even learn without infl;ru(Stion. They '* require ftudy and zeal. Should you in any future •*' period think that you have conceived a clearer no'^ tionPage 146

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.98% accurate
    CC cc << it, e( €C a 140 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. 11. ^' tion of them, that you have found a paved road, ** declare your difcoveries to your Superiors -, it is *^ thus that you improve your mind ; they expert this of you ; they know the true path — but will not point it out — enough if thty affift you in every approach to it, and warn you Vv'hen you recede from it. They have even put things in your way to try your powers of leading yourfelf through the difficult track of difcovery. In this proccfs the weak head finds only child's play— the initiated finds objects of thought *^ which language cannot exprefs, and the thinking '^ mind finds food for his faculties." By fuch forev/arnings as thefe Weifhaupt leaves room for any deviation, for any fentiment or opinion of the individual that he m.ay afterwards choofe to encourage, and '^ to *' whifper in their ear (as he expreffes it) many things ^•^ which he did not find it prudent to infert in a print'^ ed compend." But all the principles and aim of Spartacus and of his Order are mod diilindlly feen in the third or Myftery Clafs. I proceed therefore to give Ibme account of it. By the Table it appears to have two degrees, the Leffer and the Greater Mylleries, each of which have two departments, one relating chiefly to Religion and the other to Politics. The Frieft's degree contains, i. an Introdu6tion. 2. Further Accounts of the Reception into this degree. 3. What is called Inilrudtion in the Third Chamber, v^'hich the candidate muft read over. 4. The Ritual of Reception. 5. Initruftion for the Firft Degree of the Pr left's Clafs, called InftrMtllo in Scientijuis. 6. Account of the Confccration of a Dean, the Superior of this Tower Oider of Priefts. The Regent degree contains, 1. Dire6tions to the Provincial concernin;^ the difpenfation of this degree. 2. Ritual of Reception. 3. Syilem of Diredion h;r the

Page 147Page 147

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.42% accurate
    CHAP. 11. 'THE ILLUMINATI. I4I the whole Order. 4. InRru6lion for the whole Regent degree. 5. In(tru6tion for the Prefedls or Local Superiors.    6. InilrucStion for the Provincials. The moll remarkable thing in the Priell's degree is the I:iftru(Stion in the Third Chamber. It is to be found in the private correfpondence (Nachtrage Original Schrif ten 1787, 20. Abtheilnngy page 44.,). There it has the title Bijcotirje to the Illiiminati DirigenteSy or Scotch Knights. In the critical hiftory, which is annexed to the Neuejie Arbeitimg, there is an account mvtn of the reafon for this denomination; and notice is taken of fomc differences between the inftrudlions here contained and that difcourfe. This inftrui5lion begins with fore complaints of the low condition ol the human race ; and the caufes are deduced from religion and ftate-government. '^ Men "'^ originally led a patriarchal life, in which every fa^' thcr of a family was the fole lord of his houfe and his property, while he himfelf poUeiTed general freedom and equality. But they fuitered themfeives to be opprelfed — gave themfeives up to civil foeieties, and formed ilaccs. Kven by this they fell; and this '^ is the fall of man, by which they were thruft into ^'^ unfpea'kable mifery. To get out of this Hate, to *' be freed and born again, there is no other mean than the ufe of pure Reafon, by v/hich a general morality may be eitablifiied, which will put man in ^^ a condition to ofovern himfelf, reo:ain his orig-inal *' worth, and difpcnfe with ail political fupports, and ^^ and particularly Vv^ith rulers. This can be done in ** no 'Other Vv'ay but by fecret affbciations, which will ^' by degrees, and in filence, poiTrfs themifelves of the t' government of the States, and make ufe of thofe means for this purpoitr^which the wicked ufe for atattaining their bafe cnd?>. Princes and Priefts are '* in particular, an i kiT exochen the wicked, whofe " hands f cPage 148

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.20% accurate
    142 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. JI. cc cc cc cc cc cc cc cc hands we mud tie up by means of thefc aiTociacions, if wc cannot root them out altogether. Kings are parents. The paternal power ceales with the incapacity of the child ^ and the father injures his child, if he pretends to retain his right beyond this period. When a nation comes of ao-e, ^^ their flate of wardlliip is at an end.^' Here follows a long declamation againfl: patriotifm, as a narrow-minded principle when compared with true Cofrao-polirifm. Nobles are reprefcnted as '^ a race of men that ferve not the nation but the Prince, v/hom a hint from the Sovereign ilirs up againft the '^ nation, who are retained fcrvants and minifters of defpotifm, and the mean for opprefTmg national liberty. Kings are accufed of a tacit convention, under the flattering appellation of the balance of pov/er, to keep nations in fubjedion. '^ The means to regain Reafon her rights- — to raife ^^ liberty from its adies— to reftore to man his original ** rights — to produce the previous revolution in the *^ mind of man — to obtain an eternal victory over oppreflbrs — and to work the redemption of mankind, are fccret fchools of vv'ifdom. When the worthy have ilrengthcned their affociation by numbers, they are fccure, and ^hen they begin to become powerful, and terrible to the wicked, of whom many will, for fafety, amend themfelves — many will come over to our party, and we fhall bind the hands of the red, and finally conquer them. Whoever fprcads gene^ ral Illumination, augments mutual fecurity^ Illumination and fecurity make princes unneceffary; Illuminatian performs this by creating an eftedcive '^ Morahty, and Morality makes a nation of full age ^' fit to govern itfclf; and fince it is not impofTible to *^ produce a jull Morality, ip is pofTible to regain free-r >^ dom for the world. *' « Wc cc cc cc cc a C( cc cc cc cc (C

Page 149Page 149

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.08% accurate
    (C (C << cc ii ©HAP. II. THE ILLUMINATl. J4^ " VVc mufl therefore flrengtben our band, and efba*' blifh a legion, which Ihall reftore the rights of man, *^ original liberty and independence. *' Jcfus Chrift'^— but I am fick of all this. The following quedions are put to the candidate : I. " Arc our civil conditions in the world the defti" nations that feem to be the end of our nature, or the *^ purpofes for which man was placed on this earth, *^ or are they not ? Do ftates, civil obligations, popu'^ lar religion, fulfil the intentions of men who eflablifhed them ? Do fecret afTociations promote inflruction and true human happinefs, or are they the children of neceffity, of the multifarious wants, of unnatural conditions, or the inventions of vain and *^ cunnincT men r" 1. ^' What civil alTociation, what fcience do you think to the purpofe, and what are not V 3. " Has there ever been any other in the world, is there no other more fimple condition, and what do you think of it ?" 4. " Does it appear poffible, after having gone " through all the nonentities of our civil confticutions, ^' to recover for once our firft fimplicity, and get ^ back to this honourable uniformity ?*' 5. '' Hov/ can one begin this noble attempt 3 by means of open fupport, by forcible revolution, or by what other way ?" 6. "Does Chriftianity give us any hint to this pur*' pofe ? Does it notrecos^nife fuch a blcffed condition ** as once the lot of m^an, and as ftill recoverable ?*' 7. *' But is this holy religion the religion that is '' now proftiTcd by any feet on earth, or is it a bet*' ter ?" 8. " Can we learn this religion — -can the world, as it is, bear the hght ? Do you chink that it would be of fervice, before numerous obflaclts are removed, f 1

Page 150

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.76% accurate
    144 "^^E ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II;

Page 151Page 150

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.76% accurate
    144 "^^E ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II;

Page 151

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.68% accurate

Page 152Page 150

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.76% accurate
    144 "^^E ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II;

Page 151

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.68% accurate

Page 152

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.58% accurate
    14^ THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II , *' its members, and thus not only prevent their doing " milchiefj but even make them do good ?" 1. '^ Is not the objection unjuft. That fuch a Soci^^ ciety may abufe its power ? Do not our rulers fre^^ quently abufe their power, though we are filent ? " This power is not fo fecurc as in the hands of our *^ Members, whom we train up with fo much care, *' and place about princes after mature deliberation " and choice. If any government can be harmlefs '' which is erecSted by man, furely it mufl be ours^ '' which is founded on morality, forefight, talents, li^^ berty, and virtue," &c. The candidate is prefented for reception in the chara6ter of a fiave ; and it is demanded of him what has brought him into this mofl: milerable of all conditions. He anhvers — Society — the State- — Submifiivenefs — Falfe Religion. A fkeleton is pointed out to him, at the feet of which are laid a Crov/n and a Sword. He is afked, whether that is the fl<:eleton of="" a="" king="" nobleman="" or="" beggar="" as="" he="" cannot="" decide="" the="" prefident="" meeiing="" fays="" to="" him="" character="" being="" man="" is="" only="" one="" that="" importance.="" in="" long="" declamation="" on="" hackneyed="" topics="" we="" have="" here="" and="" there="" fome="" thoughts="" which="" not="" yet="" come="" before="" us.="" mufl="" allow="" underlings="" imagine="" without="" telling="" them="" truth="" thsc="" v="" dirc6c="" ail="" free="" maibn="" lodges="" even="" other="" orders="" greateft="" monarchs="" are="" under="" our="" guid="" ance="" indeed="" cafe.="" no="" way="" influencing="" men="" fo="" powerfully="" by="" m.eans="" women.="" thefe="" fhould="" fore="" be="" chief="" ftudy="" infinuate="" felves="" into="" their="" good="" opinion="" give="" hints="" emancipation="" from="" tyranny="" public="" itanding="" up="" for="" thcmfelvesi="" it="" will="" an="" im="" mcnfe=""/>Page 153

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.89% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 14? *^ mcnfe relief to their enflaved minds to be freed from ^^ any one bond of reftraint, and it will fire them the " more, and caufe them to work for us with zeal> *^ without knowing that they do fo ; for they will only *^ be indulging their own defire of perfonal admira" tion. cc cc *^ We mud win the common people in every cor^^ ner. This will be obtained chiefly by means of the " fchools, and by open, hearty behaviour, mow, con'* defcenfion, popularity, and toleration of their prejudices, which we fhall at leifure root out and difpel. If a writer publiflies any thing that attracts notice,\ " and is in itfelf juft, but does not accord with our " plan, we mufl endeavour to win him over, or decry

Page 154

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.41% accurate
    I4B THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. Il, '' The great flrength of our Order lies in its concealment j let it never appear in anyplace in its own ** name, but always covered by another name, and cc  .u^. ^.„  .:::^-^-^— ■ -- - - - another occupationv At;; is fitter than the three lower dcgi^ecs cf Free Majlnry ; the fuhlic is accuftomed to it ; '^ exfe^s little f rem it, and therefore take^ little notice of it, '* Next to this the form of a learned or literary fociety *' is bell fuited to our purpofe, and had FrecMafonry ^' not exifced^ this cover would have been employed i *' and it may be much more than a cover, it may be a " powerful engine in our hands. By efiahlifding reading '' Jbcieties, and Jidfcrlpticn libraries:, and taking theje under " cur direrticn, andfupplying them through our labours, wt

Page 155Page 155

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.11% accurate
    CHAP. 11. THE ILLUMINATI. J^g " The power of the Order muft furely be turned to " the advantage of its Members. All muft be affifted. " They mud be preferred to all perfons otherwife of ^^' equal merit. Money, fervices, nonour, goods, and ^' blood, mud be expended for the fully proved Bre*^ thren, and the unfortunate muft be relieved by the " funds of the Society." As evidence that this was not only their inftrudlionSg but ahb their affiduous pra6lice, take the following report from the overfeer of Greece (Bavaria), In Cato's hand-writing, ^* The number (about 600) of Members relates to ^f Bavaria alone. " In Munich there is a well-conftituted meeting of " Illuminati MajoreSj a meeting of excellent /////;;2//?^/i Minores, a refpe6table Grand Lodge, and two Minerval AlTemblies. There is a Minerval AiTembly at Frcyfling, at Landfberg, at Burghaufen, at Strafburg, at Ingollladt, and at laft at Regenfburg*. *^ At Munich we have bought a houfe, and by clever meafures have brought things fo far, that the citizens take no notice of it, and even fpeak of us with eilcem. We can openly go to the houfe every day, and carry on the bufmels of the Lodge. This is a great deal for this city. In the houfe is a good mufeum of natural hiftory, and apparatus for experiments: alfoa library which daily inereafes. The garden is well occupied by botanic fpecimens, and the Vv'hole has the appearance of a focicty of zealous *^ naturalifts. " We get all the literary journals. We take care, " by well-timed pieces, to make the citizens and the Princes * In this fmall turhulejit city there were eleven fccret fucieties of Mafons, Kofvcrucians^ Clair- vovants, &c. cc cc (C cc (C

Page 156Page 156

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.98% accurate
    I^O tHE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. .*^ Princes a little more noticed for certain little flips. " We oppofe the monks with all our might, and with *' great iliccefs. " The Lodge is conftituted entirely according to our *^ fyftem, and has broken oft entirely from Berlin, and *^ we have nearly finifhed our tranfadions with the *^ Lodges of Poland, and fliali have them under our* " direction. *f By the adtivity of our Brethren, the Jefuits have *^ been kept out of all the profeiTorial chairs at Ingol*^ ftadt, and our friends prevail.'* " The widow Duchefs has fet up her academy en** tirely according to our plan, and we have all the '^ ProfclTors in the Order. Five of them are excellent, " and the pupils will be prepared for us. " We have got Pylades put at the head of the Fife, «* and he has the church-money at his difpofal. By «' properly ufing this money, we have been enabled " to put our brother  's houfehold in good order ; " which he had deftroyed by going to the Jews. We " have fupported more Brethren under fimilar misfor*^ tunes. *' Our Ghoflly Brethren have been very fortunate «^ this lail year, for we have procured for them feveral " good benefices, parifhes, tutorlhips, &c. " Through our means Arminius and Cortes have " gotten Profeflbrfhips, and many of our younger

Page 157Page 157

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.01% accurate
    cc cc CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. ' I^t '^ in the Court. This has coft our fenate fome nights want of Deep. m '^ Two of our befl youths have got journies from the Courts and they will go to Vienna, where they will do us great fervice. " All the German Schools, and the Benevolent So^^ ciety, are at laft under our direction. '' We have e:ot feveral zealous members in the courts " of juftice, and we arc able to afford them pay, and '■^ other good additions. '^ Lately, we have got pofTefTionof the Bartholomew " Inftitution for young clergymen, having fecured ali *^ its fupporters. Through this we fh ail be able to " fupply Bavaria with fit priefts. " By a letter from Phiio we learn, that one of the *^ highefl dignities in the church was obtained for a " zealous lUuminatus, m oppofition even to the au" thority and right of the Bilhop of Spire, who is re^' prefented as a bigoted and tyrannical prieft." Such were the leffer myileries of the Iliuminati. But there remain the higher myileries. The fyfrem of thefe has not been printed, and the degrees were conferred only by Spartacus himfelf, from papers which he never entrufted to any peribn. They were only read to the candidate, but no copy was taken. The publiflier of the Neuefte Arheltung fays that he has read them (lb fays Grollman). He fays, *' that in the firil degree of *^ Magus or Philosophus, the doctrines are the fam.e with thofe of Spinoza, where all is material, God and the world are the fame thing, and all religion whatever is v/ithout foundation, and, the con*'■ trivance of ambitious micn." The fecond degree/ or Rex, teaches, '^ that every peafant, citizen, and *^ houfeholder is a fovereign, as in the Patriarchal ^^ Hate, and that nations muii be brought back to that *^ ftate, by v/hatever means are conducible — peaceably. cc

Page 158Page 158

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.27% accurate
    152 TH£ ILLUMINATT. CHAP. JI. €6 ably, if It can be done; but, if not, then by force " — for all fubordination mult vanilh from the face of " the earth." The author fays further, that the German Union was, to his certain knowledge, the work of the iUuminati. The private correfpondence that has been publifhed is by no means the whole of what was difcovered at Landfhut and BafTus HofF, and government got a great deal of ufeful information, which was concealed, both out of regard to the families of the perfons concerned, and alfo that the reft miojht not know the utmoft extent of the difcovery, and be lefs on their guard. A third collc6lion was found under the foundation of the houfe in which the Lodge Tbeodor vom guteyi Rath had been held. But none of this has appeared. Enough furely has been difcovered to give the public a very juft idea of the dcfigns of the Society and its connect tions. Lodges were difcovered, and are mentioned in the private papers already publifhed, in the following places. Munich Ing'olftadt Frankfort Echftadt Hanover Brunfwick Calbe Magde burgh CaiTel Ofnabruck Weimar Upper Saxony (feveral) Auftria (14) Weftphalia (feveral) Heidelbero: Manheim Strafourgh (5) Spire Worms Dufleldorff Cologne Bonn (4) Livonia (many) Courland (many) Frankendahl Alface (many) Vienna

Page 159Page 159

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.56% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. IS3 Vienna (4) HciTe (many) Buchenwerter Mompcliard Stutgard (3) Carifruhc Anfpach Neuwied (2) Mentz (2) Poland (many) Turin England (8) Scotland (2) WaiTaw (2) America (fcveral.) Deiixponts Coufel Treves (2) Aix-la-Chapelle (2) Bartfchicd Hah re n berg Switzerland (many) Rome Naples Ancona Florence France Holland (many) Drefden (4) N. B. This was before 1786. j|». I have picked up the names of the following memben Spartacus^ Philo, Araelius, Bayard, Diomedes, ' Gato, U Weiiliaupt, Profeflbr. Knigge, Freyherr, i. e. Gentleman. Bode, F. H. Bufche, F. H. Conflanza, Mara. Zwack, Lawyer. Torrin^, Count. Khreitmaier, Prince. Utfchneider, ProfeiTor. ColTandey, ProfeiTor. Renner, Profeilbr. Grunberger, ProfefTor. Balderbufch, F. FI. Lippert, Counfelior. Kundl, ditto. Bart, ditto. Leiberhauer,

Page 160

^54 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. 11^ Pythagoras, Hannibal, Brutus, Lucian, Zoroafler, Confucius, Hermes Trifmegiftus, Sulla, Pythagoras, (2cl,) Marius, Saladin, Leiberhauer, Prieft. Kundler, ProfeiTor. Lowling, ProfeiTor. Vachency, Counfellor. Moraufl^y, Count. Hoffftetter, Surveyor of Roads. Strobl, Bookfeller. Weflenrieder, Profefibr, Babo, ProfeiTor. Baader, ProfeiTor. Burzes, Prieft. Pfruntz, Prieft. BafTus, Baron. Savioli, Count. Nicholai, Bookfeller. Bahrdt, Clergyman. Baierhamer. Socher, School Infpe6lor. Dillis, Abbe. MeggenhofT, Paymafter. Danzer, Canon. Braun, ditto. Fifcher, Magiftrate. Frauenberger, Baron. Kaltner, Lieutenant. Drexl, Librarian. Hertel, Canon. Dachfel. Billing, Counfellor. Seefeld, Count. Gunflieim, ditto. Morgellan, ditto. Ecker, ditto. Ow, Major. Werner, Counfellor. Cornelius,

Page 161Page 161

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.67% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. J 55 Cornelius Scipio, Tycho Brahe, Thales, Actila, Ludovicus BavarnSj Shafteibury, Coriolaniis^ Timon, Tamerlane, Liviiis, Cicero, Ajax, Berser, Coimfellor. Worcz, Apothecary. Mauvillon, Colonel, Mirabeau, Count. Orleans, Duke. Hochinaer. Gafpar, Merchant. Kapfinger. Sauer. Lofi. Steger. Tropponera, Zufchvvartz, Michel. Lange. BadorfFer. Pfefr. MafTenhaufen, Count. I have not been able to find who perfonatcd Minos, Euriphon, Celfius, Mahomet, Hercules, Socrates, Philippo Strozzi, Euclides, and fome others who have been uncommonly adive in carrying forward the great eaufe. The chief publications for giving us regular accounts of the whole, (befides the original writings,) are, 1. Groffe Alyficht des Illuminaten Or dens. 2.  Nachtrages (3.) an denfelben. 3. IVeiJhaupfs improved Syft em. 4. Syftem des Ilium. Or dens aus dem Original-fchriften gezcgen. I may now be permitted to make a few reflections on the accounts already given of this Order, which has fo diftindly concentrated the cafual and fcattered efforts of its prompters, the Chevaliers Bienfaijants^ the Philalethes^ and Amis Reunis of France, and carried on the fyflem of enlightening and reforming the world. The ,'*

Page 162Page 162

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.44% accurate
    1^6 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. The great aim profelTed by the Order is to make men happy ; and the means profeiled to be employed, as ' the only and furely effective, is making them good ; and this is to be brought about by enlightening the mind, and freeing it from the dominicn of fuperjiition and prejudices. This purpofe is eite61:ed by its producing ajuft andfteady TiiGrality. This done, and becoming univerlal, there can be little doubt but that the peace of fociety will be the confcquence, — that government, fubordination, and all the difagreeable coercions of civil governments will be unneceffary^ — and that fociety may go on peaceably in a ftate of perfe6l liberty and equality. But furely it requires no angel from heaven to tell us that if every man is virtuous, there will be no vice; and that there wifi be peace on earth, and good-v/ill between man and man, whatever be the differences of rank and fortune \ fo that Liberty and Equality feem not to be the neceffary confequences of this juft MoralitVi nor neceffary requifites for this national happinefs. We may quedion, therefore, whether the Illumination which makes this a neceffary condition is a clear and a pure light. It miay be a falfe glare Hiowing the obje6b only on one fide, tinged with partial colours thrown on it by neighbouring objedts. We fee fo much wifdom in the general plans of nature, that we are apt to think that there is the fame in what relates to the human mind, and that the God of nature accompliihes his plans in this as well as in other inftances. We are even difpofed to think that human nature v^/ould fuffer by it. The racional nature of man is not contented with meat and drink, and raiment, and lliclter, but is alfo pleafed \\»ih exerting many powers and faculties, mid vvith gratifying many talles, which could hardly have exificnce in a fociety where all are equal. We fay that there can be no doubt but that the pleafure arifing from the contemplation of tlie works of ait — thePage 163Page 163

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.69% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. ' I57 the pleafure of intelieclual cultivation, the pleafiire of mere ornament^ are rational, diitinguifh man from a brute, and are fo general, that there is hardly a mind fo rude as not to feel them. Oi all thefe, and of all the difficult fciences, all mofl rational, and in themfelves miOfc innocent, and mod delightful to a cultivated mind, we fiiouid be deprived in a focicty where all are equal. No individual could give employment to the talents necefTary for creating and improving thefe ornamental comforts of life. We are abfolutely certain diat, even in the m.oft favourable fuuations on the face of the earth, the mofh untainted virtue in every bread could not raife man to that degree of cultivation that is polfeiled by citizens very low in any of the Hates of Europe i and in the fituation o[ moft countries we are acquainted v/ith, the itate of man w^ould be much lower: for, at our very fetting out, we muft grant that the liDerty and equality here fpoken of mult be com.plete j for there mufb not be fuch a thing as a farmer and his cottager. This would be as unjufl:, as much the caufe of difcontcnt, as the gentleman and the farmer. This fcheme therefore fcems contrary to the deligns of our Creator, who has every where placed us in thofe fituations of inequality that are here fo much reprobated, and has given us ftrong uropenfities by which we reiiih thofe enjoyments. We alfo find that they may be enjoyed in peace and innocence. And laflly, we imagine that the villain, who, in the fcation of a profeiTor, would plunder a prince, would alfo plunder the farmer if he were his cottaoer„ The Illumination therefore that appears to have the bed chance of making mankind happy is that which will teach us the Morality which will refpe6l the comforts of cultivated Society, and teach us to protedlthe poirciforsin theinnocent enjoyment of them ; that will enable us to perceive and admire the tafle and elegancePage 164Page 164

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.65% accurate
    158 THE ILLUMINATI. CHA?. If. elegance of Architefbure and Gardening, without any wilh to fwcep the palaces, the gardens, and their owner, from off the earth, merely becaufe he is their owner. We are therefore fufpicious of this Illumination, and apt to afcribe this violent antipathy to Princes and fubordination to the very caufe that makes true Illumination, and juft Morality proceeding from it, fo neceffary to public happinefs, namely, the vice and injuftice of thofe wh^o cannot innocently have the command of thofe offenfive elegancies of human life. Lux^ urious tafte, keen defires, and unbridled pafTions, would prompt to all thisj and this Illumination is, as we fee, equivalent to them in eife^t. The aim of the Order is not to enlighten the mind of man, and (hew him his moral obligations, and by the pradice of his duties to make fociety peaceable^ poiTeifion fccurcj and coercion iinneceffary, fo that all may be at refl: and happy, even though all were equal; but to get rid of the coercion which muft be employed in the place of Morality, that the innocent rich may be robbed with impunity by the idle and profligate poor. But to do this, an unjuil cafuiftry muft' be employed inilead of a juft Morality; and this muft be defended or fuggefted, by mifreprefenting the true ftate of man, and of his relation to the univerfe, and by removing the reftridlions of religion, and giving a fuperlative value to all thofe conftituents of human enjoyment, which true Iliumioation fiiews us to be but very fmall concerns of a rational and virtuous mind. The more clofely we examine the principles and practice of the Illuminati, the more clearly do we perceive that this is the cafe. Their iirft and immediate aim is to get the pofTefTion of riches, power, and inPiuence, without induftry ; and to accompliPa this, they want to abolifn Chriftianity; and then diffolute manners and univcrfal profligacy will procure them the adherence of ajj the wicked, and enable them toPage 165

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.23% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMlNATI. i ^^ to overturn all the civil governments of Europe ; after which they will think of farther conquefts, and extend their operations to the other quarters of the globe, till they have reduced mankind to the ilatc of one undiftinguifhable chaotic mafs. But this is too chimerical to be thought their real aim. Their Founder, I dare fay, never entertained fuch hopes, nor troubled himfelf with the fate ofdiftans lands. But it comes in his way when he puts on the mafk of humanity and benevolence: it mutl embrace all mankind, only becaufe it muft be llronger than patriotifm and loyalty, which (land in his way. Obferve that Weifhaupt took a name exprefiive of his principles. Spartacus was a gladiator, who headed an infurredlion of Roman flaves, and for three years kept the city in terror. Weifhaupt fays in one of his letters, " I never was fond of empty titles ; but furely " that man has a childifh foul who would not as rea" dily chufe the name of Spartacus as that of 0(Sta'* vius Au2;u{lus.'' The names which he o-ives to feveral of his gang exprefs their differences of fentiments. Philo, Lucian, and others, are very fignificantly given to Knigge, Nicholai, &c. He was vain of the name Spartacus, becaufe he confidered himfelf as employed fomewhat in the fame way, leading flaves to freedom. Princes and Priefts are mentioned by him on all occafions in terms of abhorrence. Spartacus employs powerful means. The (lyle of the Jefuits, (as he fays,) he confiders every m.ean as confecrated by the end for which it is employed^ and he fays with great truth, " Fk^ireftneqiiecJuperoSy Acheronta movelo,^^ To fave his reputation, he fcruplcs not to murder his innocent child, and the woman whom he had held in his arms with emotions of fondnefs and affedion. But

Page 166

•»•

Page 167Page 166

•»•

Page 167

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.45% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLtTMINATI. l6l doubt that makes him defperatc, fit for the full operation of fanaticifm, and he may be engaged, in the cauje of God y '' to commit all kind of wickednefs and greedi" nefs." In this (late of mind, a man ihuts his eyes, andrufhes on. Had Spartacus fuppofcd that he was dealing wirh good men, his conduit would have been the reverfe of all this. There is no occafion for this bond from a perfon convinced of the excellency of the Order. But he knew them to be unprincipled, and that the higher myfteries were fo daring, that even fome of fuch men would ftart at them. But they mud not blab. Having thus got rid of Religion, Spartacus could with more fafety bring into viev/the great aim of all his efforts — to rule the world by means of his Order. As the immediate mean for attainine this, he holds out the pro fpe6t of freedom from civil fubordination. Perfed Liberty and Equality are interwoven with every thing ; and the flattering thought is continually kept up, that " by the wife contrivance of this Order, the '' mofl comolete knowledo-e is obtained of the real "^ worth of every perfon ; the Order will, for its own ^^ Jake, and therefore certainly, place every man in *' that fituation in which he can be mofl effective. The ''^ pupils are convinced that the Order will rule the ** world. Every member therefore becomes a ruler." We all think ourfelves qualified to rule. The difiicult tafk is to obey with propriety i but we are honcftly generous in our profpeds of future comm^and. It is therefore an alluring thought, both to good and bad men. By this lure the Order v;illfprcad. If they are a6live in infmuating their members into offices, and in keeping out others, (which the private correfpondence fnews to have been the cafe,) they may have had frequent experience of their fuccefs in gaining an influence on the world. This mud whet their 2eal. If X WcilliaupcPage 168

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.58% accurate
    It2 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II, Weirnaupc was a Hncere Cofrno-polit?, he had the pleaiure of Teeing " his work, prolpering in his hands." It furely needs little argument now to prove, that the Order of Illimiinaii had for its immediate objedl the aboliQiing of Chrifcianity, (at leaft this was the intention of the Founder,) with the f)le view of overturning the civil government, by introducing univerfal dilTolutends andprofiig^^cyof mannejs, and then getting tlie affidance of the corrupted lubjedLS to overi'et the throne. The whole condu(ft in the preparation and inftrudlion of the Prefoyter and Regens is diredted to this point. Philo lays, " I have been at unwearied *^ pains to remove the fears of fome who imagine that '' our Superiors want to abolifh Chrifcianity j but by ** and by their prejudices will wear off, and they will *' be more at their eafe. Were I to let them know '^ that our General holds all Religion to be a lie, and '^ ufes even Deifm, only to lead m.en by the nofe — «f Were I to connedl myfclf again with the Free Ma*^ ions, and tell them our defigns to ruin their F'ra^^ ternity by this circular letter (a letter to the Lodge " in Courland) — Were I but to give the leaft hint to " any of the Princes of Greece (Bavaria) — No, my ^^ anger fl:all not carry me lo far. — An Order, forfooth, *^ which in this manner abufes human nature — which ^^ will fubjedt men to a bondage more intolerable than '^ Jrfuirifm — I could put it on a refpe(5table footing, '^ and the world would be ours. Should I mention *^ our fundamental principles, (even after all the pains *^ I have been at to mitigate them,) lo unqueftionably *' dangerous to the world, who would remain ? What '^ fignifies the innccf^nt ceremonies of the Prieft's degree, r-s I have compofed it, in comparifon with your m.5xim., that we m<3y ufe for agood end thofe .means winch t-ie wicked employ for a bafe purpofe ?'• BrutusPage 169

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.51% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 163 Brutus writes, *' Numenius now acquiefces in the " mortality of* the foul; but, I fear wc fhall lofe Lu*^ dovicus Bavarus. He told Spartacus, that he was *^ miftaken when he thougiu that he had fwallowcd ** his ftupid Mafonry. No, he law the trick, and did *' not admire the end that required it. 1 don't know " what to do ; a Sta bem would make him mad, and ^^ he will blow us all up. " The Order muft pollefs the power of life and " death in confequcnce of our Oarh ; and with pro^^ priety, for the fame reafon, and by the fame right, *' that any government in the world poffcfTes it : for " the Order comes in their place, making them un" necelTary. When things cannot be otherwifc, and ^^ ruin would enfue if the x^fTjciation did not emiploy *^ this mean, the Order rnuft, as well as public rulers, '^ employ it for the good of miankind ; therefore fjr *^ its own prefervati.on." (N. B. Obfcrve here vcit cafuiftry.) " Nor will the political conftitutions fuf'^ fer by this, for there are always thoufands equally " ready and able to fupply the place." We need not wcnder that Diomedes told the Profeflbrs, ^^ that death, inevitable death, from which no *' potentate couid prote6l them, awaited every traitor " of the Order;" nor that the French Convention propofcd to take off the German Princes and Generals by fword or poifon, &c. Spartacus might tickle the fancy of his Order with the notion of ruling the world ; but I imagine that his own imimcdiate objed v/as ruling the Order. The happinefs of mankind was, like Weifhaupt's Chriflianity, a mere tool, a tool which the Regentes made a joke of. But Sparcacus v/ould rule the Regentes ; this he could not fo eafily accomplifli. His defpotifm v^^as infupportable to moft of them, and finally broug.ht all to light. When he could not perfuade them by his own

Page 170Page 170

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.43% accurate
    t64 the illuminati. chap. ii. own firmnefsj and indeed by his fuperior talents and difintereiledneis in other refpedlsj and his unwearied activity, he employed jcfuitical tricks, caufing them to fall out with each other, fetting them as fpies on each other, and Icparating any tv^o that he faw attached to each oiher, by making the one a Mafler of the other; and, in iliort, he left nothing undone that could fecure his uncontrolled command. This caufed Philo to quit the Order, and niade Bajfus^ Ton Torring^ Kreitmaier^ and feveral other gentlemen, ceale attending the meetin2;s; and it was their mutual diffenfions which made them fpeak too freely in public, and call on themfeives lb much notice. At the time of the difcovery, the party of Weifhaupt confided chiefly of very mean people, devoted to him, and willing to execute his orders, that by being his fervants, they might have the pleafure of commanding others. The objecls, the undoubted objects of this AfTociation, are furely dangerous and deteilable ; namely, to overturn the prefent conllitucions of the European States, in order to introduce a chimera Vv^hich the hiftory of mankind fhevvs to be contrary to the nature of man. ' Naturayn expellas furcd, tamen ufque recurret. Suppofe it poilible, and done in peace, the new fyftem could not ftand unlefs every principle of a(2:ivity in the human mind be enthralled, all incitement to exertion and indufiry removed, and man brought into a condition incapable of improvement; and this at the expence of every thing that is valued by the beft of men . — by mifery and devaftation — by loofening all the bands of fociety. To talk of morality and virtue in coniun6lion with fuch fchemes is an infult to common fenfe ; dilTolutenefs of manners alone can bring men to think of it. Is

Page 171Page 171

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.06% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 165 Is ic not aflonillilng, therefore, to hear people in this country exprefs any regard for this inftitution ? Is it not mod mortifying to think that there are Lodges of Illuminated among us ? I think that nothing bids fairer for weaning our inconfiderate countrymen from having any conneflio'n with them, than the faithful account here given. I hope that there are few, very few of our countrymen, and none v,/hom we call friend, who can think that an Order which held fuch doctrines, and which praftifed fuch things, can be any thing elfe than a ruinous AlTociacion, a gang of profligates. All their profelTions of the love of mankind are vain i their Illumination mud be a bewildering blaze, and totally 'incfFedlual for its purpofe, for it has had no fuch influence on the leaders of the band ; yet it feems quite adequate to the edecls it has produced -, for fuch arc the charafters of thofe who forget God. If we in the next place attend to their mode of education, and examine it by thofe rules of common fenfe that we apply in other cafes of conduct, we iLali find it equally unpromifmg. The fyftem of lliuminatifni is one of the explanations of Free Mafonry 3 and it has gained many partifans. Thefe explanations reft their credit and their preference on their own merits. There is fomething in themfelvcs, or in one of them as diftinguifhed from another, which procures it the preference for its own fake. Therefore, to give this Order any dependence on Free Mafonry is to degrade the^ Order. To introduce a Mafonic Ritual into a manly inftitution, is to degrade it to a frivolous amufcment for great children. Men rcail)^ exerting rhemfelves to reform the world, and qualified for the taflc, muft hai^e been difgufted with fuch occupations. They betray a frivolous conception of the tafl: in which they are really engaged. To im,agine that men engaged in the ftruggle and rivalftiip of life, under the influence of feififh,Page 172Page 172

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.99% accurate
    j66 the illuminati. chap, ir, felfifli, or mean, or impetuous palTionSj are to be wheedled into candid fentiments, or a generous condud, as a froward child may fometimes be made gentle and tradable by a rattle or humming-top, betrays a great ignorance of human nature, and an arrogant Iclf-conccit in thofe who can imagine that all but themfelves are babies. The further we proceed, the more do we fee of this want of wijdom. The whole procedure of their inRru6tion fuppofes fuch a complete furrender of freedom of thought, of common fenfe, and of common caution, that it feems impoiTible that it fliould not have alarmed every fenfiblc mind. This indeed happened before the Order was feven years old. It was wife indeed to keep their AreopagitcC out of fight; but who can be lb filly as to believe that their unknown Superiors were all and always faultlefs men ? But had they been the men they were reprefented to be,— If I have any knowledge of my own heart, or any capacity of drawing juft inferences from the condud of others, I am perfuaded that the knowing his Superiors would have animated the pupil to exertion, that he might exhibit a pleafmg fpedacle to fuch intelligent and worthy judges. Did not the Stoics profefs themfelves to be encouraged in the fcheme of life, by the thought that the immortal Gods were looking on and pafiing their judgments on their manner of ading the part afTigned them ? But what abjed fpirit will be contented with working, zealouHy working, for years> after a plan of which he is never to learn the full meaning ? In fhort, the only knowledge that he can perceive is knowledge in its wonl form. Cunning. This mud appear in the contrivances by which he will foon find that he is kept in complete fubjedion. If he is a true and zealous Brother, he has put himfelf in the power of his Superiors by his refcripts, which they required of him on pretence of their learning his own charader,Page 173

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.41% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATl. 1 67 chara6ler, and of his learning how to know the charadlers of other men. In thele rtfcripts they have got his thoughts on many delicate points, and on the condu(St of others. His Direflors may ruin him by betraying him ; and this without being feen in it. I IJiould think that wife men would know that none buc weak or bad men would fubjedt rhemfelves to fuch a tafk. They exclude the good, the manly, the only fit perfons for affifting them in their endeavours to inform and to rule the world. Indeed I may fay that this exclufion is almoft made already by connecting the Order with Free Mafonry. Lodges are not the reforts of fuch men. They may fometimes be found there for an hour's relaxation. But thefe places arc the haunts of the young, the thoughtlefs, the idle, the weak, the vain, or of defigning Literati i and accordingly this is the condition of three-fourths of the Iliuminati whofe names are known to the public. I own that the reafons given to the pupil for prefcribing thefe tafks are artful, and Nvell adapted to produce their effcd:. During the flurry of reception, and the glow of expectation, the danger may not be fufpedled ; but I hardly imagine that it will remain unperceivcd when the pupil firs down to write his firft lelTon. Mafon Lodges, however, were the mod likely places for finding and enliftino; members. Youno- men, warmed by declamations teeming with the fiimfy moral cant of Cofmo-poiitirm, are in the proper frame of mind for this Illumination. It now appears alfo, that the.diffenfions in Free Mafonry mull have had o^reat influence in promoting this fchemc of Weifnaupt's, which was, in many particulars, io unpromifing, bccaufe it prefuppofes fuch a degradation of the mind. But when the fchifmatics in Mafonry difputed with warmth, trifles came to acquire unfpeakable importance. The hardccring after wonder was not in the lead abated by ixk »!Page 174

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.92% accurate
    i68 THE ILLUMINATI. , CHAP. II. all the tricks which had been detefted, and the impoffibility of the vvilhed-for difcovery had never been demonftrated to perfons prepoflefTed in its favour. They iliil chcje to believe that tht fymbois contained fome important fecret ; and happy will be the man who finds it out. The more frivolous the fymbois, the more docs the heart cling to the myftery j and, to a mind in this anxious ilate, Weifhaupt's proiTer was enticing. He laid before them a fcheme which was foiPiewhat feafible, was magnificeni:, furpalTmg our conceptions, but at the fame time fuch as permitted us to expatiate on the fubjeci:, and even to amplify it at pleafure in our imaginations without abfurdity. Ic does not appear to 'me wonderful, therefore, that fo many were fafcinated till they became at lafl: regardiefs of the abfurdicy and inconfifcency of the means by which this fplendid objecl was to be attained. Hear what Spartacus himfelf fays of hidden myileries. " Of '^ all the means I know to lead men, the moil effec*^ tuai is a concealed myftery. The hankering of the ^' mind is irrefiftibie ; and if once a man has taken it *' into his head that there is a myftery in a thing, it **' is impofiible to get it out, either by argument or *' experience. And then, we can fo change notions " by merely changing a word. What m^ore contempti" bie ih^n fanatiajm ; but call it enthnfiafm ; then add '^ the little word nohle^ and you may lead him over '' the world. Nor are we, in thefe bright days, a bit *^ better than our fathers, who found the pardon of " their fins myfterioufiy contained in a much greater " fin, viz. leaving their family, and going barefooted " to Rome.'' Such being the employment, and fuch the difciples, fiiould we expe6t the fruits to be very precious ? No. The do6lrines which were gradually unfolded were fuch as fjited thofe xvho continued in the Curjus Academicus.

Page 175Page 175

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.92% accurate
    CHAF*. ir. THE ILLUMINATi. 169 demicus. Thofe who did not^ becaufe they did not like them, ^oK. a Sta bene; they were not fit for advancement. The numbers however were great i Spartacus boafted of 600 in Bavaria alone in 1783. We don't know many of them ; few of thofe we know were in the upper ranks of life ; and I can fee that it required much wheedling, and many letters of long worded German compliments from the proud Spartacus, to win even a young Baron or a Graf juPc come' of age. Men in an eafy fituation in life could not brook the employment of a fpy, which is bafc, cowardly, and corrupting, and has in all ages and countries degraded the perfon who engages in it. Can the perfon be called wife v/ho thus enflaves himfelf ? Such perfons give up the right of private judgment, and rely on their unknown Superiors with the blindeft and moft abje61: confidence. For their fakes, and to rivet ftill faflier their own fetters, they engage in the moft corrupting of all em.ployments — and for what ? — To learn fomething more of an Order, of which every degree explodes the doctrine of a former one. Would it have hurt the young Illuminatiis to have it explained to him all at once ? Would not this fire his miind — when he fees with the fame glance the great object, and the firnefs of the means for attaining it ? Would not ^{\^ exalted characters of the Superiors, fo much excelling himfelf in talents, and virtue, and happinefs, (otherwife the Order is good for nothing,) warm his heart, and fijl him with emulation, fince he fees in them, that what is {o ftrongly preached to him is an attainable thing ? No^ no — it is all a trick j he miuft be kept like a child, amufed with rattles;, and ftars, and ribands — and all the fatisfa-flion he obtains is, like the Mafons, the div^x{\on of feeing others running the fame gauntlet. Weiiliaupt acknowledges than the Q;reat influence of the Order mav be abufed. Surelv, in no v/av fo eafily Y 'orPage 176

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.64% accurate
    lyO THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. U. or fo fatally as by corrupting or fediKftive kflbns in the beginning. The miltake or error of the pupil is undifcoverable by himfelf, (according to the genuine principles of Illumination,) for the pupil n-,ull believe his Mentor to be infallible — with him alone he is conne6Led — his leffons only muil he learn. Who can teli him that he has p-one wrong — or who can fct him right ? HerCj therefore, there is confufion and deficiency. There muft be fome ftandard to which appeal can be made ; but this is inacceflible to all within the pale of the Order; it is therefore without this pale, and independent of the Order — ^and it is attainable only by abandoning the Order. The Qui bus Licet, the Primo, the Soli, can procure no light to the perfon M'ho does not know that he has been led out of the right road to virtue and happinels. The Superiors indeed draw much ufeful infoimation from thefe reports, though they affed to ftand in no need of it, and they make a cruel return. All this is fo much out of the natural road of infcruction, that, on this account alone, we may prefume that it is wrong. We are generally fafe when we follow nature's plans. A child learns in his father's houfe, by feeing, and by imitating, and in common domeftic education, he gets much ufeful knowledge, and the chief habits which are afterwards to regulate his conduft. Example does almofl every things and, with refpe^l to what may be called living, as diftinguifhable from profefTion, fpeculation and argumentative inftrudion are fcldom employed, or of any ufe. The indifpenfablenefs of mutual forbearance and obedience, for domeftic peace and happinefs, forms mod of thefe habits -, and the child, under good parents, is kept in a fituation that makes virtue eafier than vice, and

Page 177Page 177

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.87% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. IJ I and he becomes wife and good without any exprefs iludy about the matter. But this Illumination plan is darknefs over all — it is too artificial — -and the topics, t1rom which counfel is to be drawn, cannot be taken from the peculiar views of the Qrder — for thefe are yet a fecret for the pupil — and muft ever be a fecret for hirn while under tuition. They muft therefore be drawn from common fources, and the Order is of no ufe ; all that can naturally be effectuated by this AlTociation is the forming, and afliduoully foftcring a narrov/, Jevv^ifn, corporation fpirit, totally oppofite to the benevolent pretenfions of the Order. The pupil can fee nothing but this, that there is a fet of men, whom he does not know, who may acquire incpntroulable power, and may perhaps make lift of him, but for what purpofe, and in what way, he does not know ; how can he know that his endeavours are to make man happier, any other way than as he might have known it without having put this collar round his own neck ? Thefe refle6tions addrefs themfelves to ail men who profefs to comiiudf: themfelves by the principles and dictates of common fenfe and prudence, and who have the ordinary fl:iare of candour and good-will to others. It requires no fmgular fenfibility of heart, nor great ge- . nerofity, to make fuch people think the do6trines and views of the Iliuminati falfe, abfurd, foolifli, and ruinous.    But I hope that I addrefs them to thoufands of my countrymen and friends, who have much higher notions of human nature, and who cherifh with care the affe6lions and the hopes that are fuited to a rational, a benevolent, and a high-minded being, capable of cndlefs improvement. To thofe who enjoy the cheering confidence in the fuperintendance and providence of God, who confider themfelves as creatures whom he has made, and whom he

Page 178Page 178

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.76% accurate
    1/2 TX-IE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II, he cares for, as the fubjecLS of his moral government, this. Order muft appear with every charadler of falfehood and abfurdity on its countenance. What can BE MORE IMPROBABLE than this, that He, whom we look up to as the contriver, the maker, anddiredtor of this goodly frame of things, fliould have fo far miirakcn his own plans, that this world of rational creatures fliould have fubfifted for thoufands of years, before a way could be found out, by which his intention of making men good and happy could be accomplifhed 3 and that this method did not occur to the great Arcift himfeir, nor even to the wifeft, and happieft, and beil men upon earth ; but to a few infignificant perfons at Munich in Bavaria, who had been trying to raife ghofls, to change lead into gold, to tell fortunes, or difcover treafures, but had failed in all their attempts ^ men who hd-d been engaged for years in every whim which characle'rifes a weak, a greedy, or a gloomy mind ? Finding all thefe beyond their reach, they combined their powers, and, at once, foand out this infinitely more important secret — for fecret it muft ftill be, otherwile not only the Deity, but even thefe philofophers, will ftill be difappointed. Yet this is the do6lrine that mufc be fwallowed by the Mi nervals and the Illuminati Minor es^ to whom it is not yet fafc to difclofe the grand fecret, that there is no Juch Juperintendance of Deity. At lafl:, however, when the pupil has conceived fuch exL?Jted notions of the knowledge of his teachers, and fuch low notions of the blundering projector of this world, it may be no difficult r^iatter to perfuade him that all his former notions were only old wives tales. By this time he muft have heard much about fuperftition, and how men's minds have been dazzled by this fplendid pidlure of a Providence and a moral government of the univerfe. it now appears incompatible with the great object of thePage 179

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.53% accurate
    CHAP.. II, THE ILLUIvIINATI. I73 the Order, the principles of univerfal liberty and equality— it is therefore rcje6ted without farther examinatien, for this reafon alone. This was precifely the argument ufed in France for rejedling revealed religion. It was incompatible with their Rights of Man. It is richly worth obferving how this principle can warp the judgment, and give quite another appearance to the fame objed. The reader will not be difpleafed with a moil remarkable inflance of it, which 1 beg leave to give at length. Our immortal Newton, whom the philofophers of Europe look up to as the honour of our fpecies, whom even Mr. Bailly, the Prefident of the National AiTembly of France, and Mayor of Paris, cannot find words fufiiciently energetic to praife j this patient, fagacious/ and fuccefsfui obferver of nature, after having exhibited to the wondering world the chara6leriflic property of that principle of material nature by which all the bodies of the folar fyftem are made to form a connedted and permanent univerle -, and after having fliown that this law of action alone was adapted to this end, and that if gravity had deviated but one thoufandch part from the inverfe duplicate ratio of the diftances, the fyftem mufl, in the courfe of a very few revolutions, have gone into confufion and ruin — -he fits down, and viewstiie goodly fcene, — and then clofcs his Principles of Natural Fhilofophy with this refledion {h\s Schclium generate) : , ^^ This moft elegant frame of things could not have arifcn, unlcfs by the contrivance and the direction of a wife and powerful Being; and if the fixed fears are the centres of fyftems, thefe fyfbems muft befimilar; " and all thefe, conftrudled according: to the fame plan, are fubjcct to the government of one Being. All thefe he governs, not as the foul of the v/orld, '* but as the Lord of all ; therefore, on account of his government. cc cc

Page 180Page 180

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.10% accurate
    174 THE ILLUMINATI. chap. li.

Page 181Page 180

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.10% accurate
    174 THE ILLUMINATI. chap. li.

Page 181

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.38% accurate
    CMAP, II. THE ILLUMINATI. I75 aflronomy and of the Newtonian philofophy. Having finilhed his work with the fame obfervation, '^ That a *^ gravitation invcrfely proportional to the fquares of '' the diftances was the ofily principle which could ^' unite material Nature into a permanent fyftem ,** he alfo fits down — furveys the fcene — points out the parts which he had brought within our ken — and then makes this rcfledion : *' Beheld in its totality, aftro'' nomy is the nobleft monument of the human mind, " its chief title to intelligence. But, feduced by the '' illufions of fenfe, and by felf-conceit, we have long '^ confidered ourfelves as the centre of thefe motions -, '' and our pride has been punifhed by the groundlefs «^ fears which we have created to ourfelves. We *' imagine, forfooih, that all this is for us, and that «^ the ftars influence our dedinies 1 But the labours of *^ ages have convinced us of our error, and we find '' ourfelves on an infignificant planet, almoft imper^' cepcible in the immenfity of fpace. Bun the fub-, *^'lime difcoveries we have made richly repay this *^ humble fituation. Let us cherifn thefe with care, as *^ the delight of thinking beings — they have deftroyed '^ our millakes as to our relation to the refc of the uni^' verfe ; errors which were the more fatal, becaufe ««^ the focial Order depends on juilice and truth alone. *f Far be from us the dangerous maxim, that it is fometimes ufeful to depart from thefe, and to deceive men, in order to infure their happinefs ; but cruel experience has fhewn us that thefe laws are never to*' rally exnin(^t.'' There can be no doubt as to the meanins: of thefe laft words — they cannot relate to ailrology— this was entirely out of date. The '-'attempts to deceive men, '' in order to infure their happinefs,*' can only be thofe bv v/hich we are made to tiiink too hio;hlv of ourfclves. '* Inhabitants of this pepper-corn, v/e think '-^ ourfelves ccPage 182

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.34% accurate
    a (C cc 176 tHE ILLUMINATI. CHAF. 11/ " OLirfeives the peculiar favourites of Heaven, nay the chief objects of care to a Being, the Maker of all ; and then we imagine that, after this life, we are to be happy or miferable, according as we accede or not to this fubjugation to opinions which enfiave us. But truth and juilice have broken thefe bonds/' — ' But where is the force of the argument which entitles this perfe6ler of the Newtonian philofophy to exult fo much ? It all refls on this. That this earth is but as a grain of muilard-feed. Man would be more worth attention had he inhabited Jupiter or the Sun. Thus may a Frenchman look down on the noble creatures who inhabit Orolong or Pelew. But whence arifes the abfurdity of the inteliedlual inhabitants of this peppercorn being a proper object of attention ? it is becaufe our fhallow comprehenfions cannot, at the fame glance, fee an extenfive fcene, and perceive its mofl: minute detail. David, a King, and a foldier, had fome notions of this *kind. The heavens, it is true, pointed out to him a Maker and Ruler, which is more than they feem to have done to the Gallic philofopher^ but David was afraid that he would be forgotten in the crowd, and cries out, " Lord what is man that thou art mindful of " him?'' But David gets rid of his fears, not by becoming a philofopher^ and difcoverino; all this to be abfurd,— he would dill be forgotten,-— he at once thinks of what he is — a noble creature — high in the fcale of nature. " But," fays he, ''^ I had forgotten myfeif. " Thou haft made man but a little lower than the an*' gels — thou haft crowned him v/ith glory and honour " — thou haft put all things under his (cci.'' Here are exalted fentiments, fit for the creature whofe ken pierces through the immenfity of the vifible univerfe, and who fees his relation to the univerfe, being nearly allied to its Sovereign, and capable of riling continuallyPage 183Page 183

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.68% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 1/7 tiniially in his rank, by cultivating thofe talents which ciiftinguifh and adorn it. Thoiifands, I truil, there are^, who think that this life is but a preparation for another, in which the rnind of man will have the whole wonders of creation and of providence laid open to its enraptured view — v/here it will fee and comprehend with one glance what Newton, the moft patient and fuccefsful of all the obfervers of nature, took years of meditation to find out — where it will attain that pitch of wiiliom, goodnefs^ and enjoyment, of which our confciences tell us we are capable, though it far fr.rpaffes that of the wifeft, the bell, and the happieil of men. Such perfons will confider this Order as degrading and de tellable, and as in diredl oppoficion to their moil confident expe6lations : For it pretends to what is impofiibie, to perfect peace and happinefs in this life. They believe, and they feel, that man mud be made perfect through fufferings, which fliali call into adliion powers of mind thatotherv^ife would never have unfolded themfeives — powers which are frequently fources of the pureil and moft foothing pleafures, and naturally make us refb our eyes and hopes on that ftate where every tear fhall be wiped away, and where tlie kind aife6Lions fhall become the never-faiiinof fouixes of pure and unfadins; delio-ht. Such perfons fee the palpable abfurdity of a preparation which is equally necefiary for ail, and yet muft be confined to the minds of a few, who have the low and indelicate apoetite for frivolous play -things, and for grofs fenfual pleafures. Such minds will turn away from this boaded treat with loathing and abhorrence. I am well aware that fome of my readers may Imile at this, and think it an cnchufiaMical working up of the imagination, fimilar to what I reprobate in the cafe of Utopian happinefs in a ftare of univerfal Liberty and Equality. It is like, they will fay, to the declaZ mationPage 184

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.59% accurate
    i7S ^ THE ILLUMINATI. , CHAP. II. matlon in a rermon I y perlons of the trade, who are trained up to fineffe, by which tliey allure and tickle weak minds. . 1 acknowledge that in the preient cafe I do not addrefs myfelt to the cokl hearts, who contentedly " Sink andjlumher in their cells cf ch-y ;  Peace to all fuch ; — — but to the ^'^ f dices anim^y " qiiihlis hcec cogmjcere cura ;''' — to thole who have enjoyed the pieafurcs of fcience, who have been fuccefsful — who have made difcoveries — who have really illuminated the v/orld — lo the Bacons, the Newtons, the Lockes. — Allow me to mention one, Daniel Bernoulli, the moil elegant mathematician, t\\t only philofopher, and the m.oft worthy man, of that celebrated family. Fie faid to a gentlem.an, (JJr. Staehling,) v/ho repeated it to m,e, that '' Vs^hen reading fome of " thofe wonderful gijelles of Sir Ifaac Newton, the " fubfequent demonfiration of which has been the ** chief fource of fame to his mod celebrated comimen^^ tators — his mind has fometimes been fo overpower*' ed by thrilling emotions, that he has wifhed that ^^ moment to be his laft; and that it v/as this which *^ gave him the clearefl: conception of the happinefs *^ of heaven." l( fuch delightful emotions could be excited by tlie perception of m^ere truth, what muft they be when each of thefe truths is an inftance of wifdorn, and when v/e recollect, that what we call wifdom in the works of nature, is always the nice adaptation of means for producing /^^^/^^t'd';z/ ends i and that each of thefe affcdting qualities is fufceptible of degrees which are boundlefs, and exceed our higheft conceptions ? What can this complex emotion or feeling be but raptrire ? But Bernoulli is a Do61or of Theology — and therefore a fufpicious pcrfon, perhaps one of the combination

Page 185Page 185

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.91% accurate
    CHAP. ir. THE ILLUMINAII. I^C^ cofPibination hired by defpots to enilave us. I will take another nran, a gentleman of rank and family, a foldier, who often fignalifrd himJelf as a naval commander— who at one time forced his way through a powerful fleet of the Venetians with a fmall fquadron, and brou2;ht relief to a diilrefTed p-arrifon. I would defire the reader to oerufe the conclufion of Sir Kenhelm Digby's ire^lifes on Body cnni Mrnd ; and after having refiected on the fiate of fcience at the time this author v/rote^ let him coolly v^eigh the incitements to iiianly condu6l v>'hich this foldier Bnds in the difrerences obferved betv/een body and mind \ and then let him fay, on his confcience, whether they arc more feeble than thcfe which he can draw from the eternal Oeep of death. \i\\t thinks that they are — he is in the proper frame for initiation into Spartacus's higher, myfieries. He may be either jVIagus or Rex. Were this a proper place for confidering the queftion as a queii:ion of fcience or truth, I would fay, that every man who has been 2l Juccefsful {Indent of nature, and who will reft his conclufions on the fam.e maxims of probable reafoning that have procured him fuccefs in his pair refearches, ¥/ill confider it as next to certain that there is another ftate of exiftence for rational man. For he mull own, that if this be not the cafe, there is a moil: fingula'r exception to a propofition which the whole courfe of his experience has made him confider as a truth founded on univerfal indu6lion, viz. that noAure ace omfl'ifhes all her flans ^ and that every clafs of beings attains all the improvement of which it is capable. Let him but turn his thoughts inward, he will feel that his intellecl: is ciipable of improvement, in comparifon with which Newton is but a child. I could purfue this argument very far, and (I th.ink) warm the heart of every m..m vviiom I fnould wifh to call n)y friend. What:Page 186Page 186

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.80% accurate
    l80 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II, What Opinion will be formed of this i^ffociation by the mode't, the iowly- minded, thc^ candid^ who acknowledge that they too often feel the fuperior force of prefent and fcnfible pleafures, by which their minds are drav/n off from the contemplation of what their confciences tell them to be right, — to be their dutiful and filial kntiments and emotions refpecling their great and Rood Parent— -to be their dutiful and neip-hbourly affections, and their proper condudl to all around them ' — and which diminiih their veneration for that purity of thought and moderation of appetite which becomes their noble natures ? What rnuft ^bey think of this Order f Confcious of frequent faults, v/hich would offend themfelves if committed by their deareft children, they look up to tlieir Maker with anxiety — are grieved to have fo far forgotten their duty, and fearful that they may again forget it. Their painful experience tells them that their reafon is often too weak, their information too fcanty, or its light is obfcrudtcd by pafiion and prejudices, which diilort and difcolour every thing i or it is unheeded during their attention to prefent objects. Happy fnoukl they be, if it iliould pleafe ' their kind Parent to remind them of their duty from time to time, or to influence their mind in any way that v/ould compenfate for their own ignorance, their own weaknefs, or even tiieir indolence and negle6l. They dare not exped: fuch a favour, wliich their modci^iy tells them they do not deferve, and Vvhich they fear may be unfit to be granted ; but when fuch a comfort is held out to them, with eager hearts they receive it — they blefs the kindnefs that granted it, and the hand that brings it.  Such amiable ciiaradcrs have appeared in ail ages, and in ail fituations of mankind. They have not in all infcances been v/ife — often have they been precipitate, and have too readily caught at any thing which pretended to give rhem the fo much wilhcd Page 187

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.56% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. iSj widied-for affiances ; and, unfortunately, there have been enthufiafts, or villains, who have taken advantage of this, univerfal wiili of anxious man: and the world has been darkened by cheats, who have mifreprefented God to mankind, have filled us with vain terrors, and have then quieted our fears by fines, and facritices, and mortifications, and fervices, which they faid were more than fufficienu to expiate all our faults. Thus was our duty to our neighbour, to our own dio-nity, and to our Maker and Parent, kept out of fight, and religion no longer caine in aid to our fenfe of right and wrong; but, on the contrary, by thefe fuperftitions it opened the dooi's of heaven to the worthlefs JL and the wicked. — But I wifn not to fpeak of thefe men, but of the good, the candid, the modest, the HUMBLE, who know their failings^ who love their duties, but wiih to know, to perceive, and to love them uill more. Thefe are they who think and believe that " the Gofpel has brought life and immortality to *' light," that is, within their reach. They think it v/orthy of the Father of mankind, and they receive it with thankful hearts, adiTiirins: above all thinf?s the fimplicity of its morality, comprehended in one fentence, '^ Do to another what you can reafonably wifh " that another ihould do to you," and that purity OF THOUGHT AND MANNERS WHICH DISTINGUISHES IT FROM ALL THE SYSTEMS OF MORAL INSTRUCTION THAT HAVE EVER BEEN OFFERED TO MEN. HcFC they find a ground of refignation under the troubles of life, and a fupport in the hour of death, quite fuited to the diffidence or their own character. Such men are ready to grant that the Stoics were perfons of no~ bie and exalted minds, and that i\\^y had worthy conceptions of the rank or man in the fcale of God's works; but they confcfs that they themfeives do not feel all that; iupport from Stoical principles which man tooPage 188Page 188

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.56% accurate
    lS2 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. too frequently needs ; and they fay that they are not fingular in their opinions, but that the bulk of mankind are prevented, by their want of heroic fortitude, by their iituation. or their want of the opportunities of cultivating their native ilrength of mind, from ever attaining this hearty fubmilTion to the v^ill of the Deity. They maintain, that the Stoics were but a few, a very few, from among many miliions— and therefore their being fatisfied was but a trifle amidft the general difcontent, and anxiety, and defpair.~Such men will mofc certainly ftart back from this Illumination with horror and fright— from a Society which gives the lie to their fondett expedlations, makes a fport of their grounds of hope, and of their deliverer; and which, after laughing at their credulity, bids them fhake off all religion whatever, and denies the exiftence of that Supreme Mind, tlie pattern of all excellence, who till now had iilled their thoughts with admiration and love — from an Order which pretends to U't^ them from fpiritual bondage, and then lays on their necks a load ten times more oppreflive and intolerable, from v/hich they have no power of ever efcaping. Men of fenfe and virtue will fpurn at fuch a propofal ; and even the profligate, vvho trade with Deity, muft be fcnfible that they will be better off v/ith their priefts, whom they know, and among whom they may make a feltcStion of fuch as will with patience and gentlenefs clear up their doubts, calm their fears, and encourage their hopes. And all good men, ail lovers of peace and of jufcice, will abhor and reject the thought of overturning the prefcnt conftitution of things, faulty as it may be> merely in the endeavour to eilablifli another, which the vices of mankind may fubvert again in a twelvemonth. They muft fee, that in order to gain their point, the propofers have found it neceffary to dellroy the grounds of morality, by permitting the moil wick-. ^ edPage 189

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.50% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. • i Sj cd means for accomplifhing any end that our fancy, warped by paffion or intereft, may reprefent to us as of great Imporrance. They fee, th^t inftead of morality, vice mull prevail, and that therefore there is no fecurity for the continuance of this Utopian felicity ; and, in the mean time, defolation and mifery muil lay the v;orld wafte during the fcruggle, and half of thofe for whom we are ftriving will be fwept from the face of the earth. We have but to look to France, where, in eight years there have been more executions and fpoliations and difireffcs of every kind by th^ pouvoir revGluticnnairey than can be found in the long records of that dcfpotic monarchy. There is nothing in the whole conllitution of the Illuminati that ilrikes m.e with more horror -than the propofals of Kcrcules and Minos to cnlift the v/omen in this fiiocking warfare v/ith all that '' is good, and ^^ pure, and lovely, and of good report." They could not have fallen on any expedient that will be more effectual and fatal. If any of m.y countrywomen fhall honour thefe pages with a reading, I w^ould call on them, in the moft earneft manner, to confider this as an affair of the utmoft importance to themfeives. I would conjure them by the regard they have for their own dignity, and for their rank in fociety, to join againft thefe enemies of human nature and profligate degradcrs of the fex ; and I would alTure them that the prefent fiate of things alm.oil puts it in their power to be the faviours of the world. But if they are remifs, and yield to the fedudlion, they Vvill fall from that high (late to which they have arifen in Chriitian Europe, and again fink into that infignificancy or Oavery in which the fex is found in ail ages and countries out of the hcarino; of Chriftianitv. I hope that my countrywomen v^ill confider this folemn addrefs to them as a proof of the high eileem in whichPage 190Page 190

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.30% accurate
    ^4 THL ILLUMrNATI. CHAI>. 11. which I hold them. They will not be offended then if, in this fcafon of alarm and anxiety, when 1 wifh to impreis their minds with a ferious truth, I ihali v/ave ceremony, which is always defi gning, and fpeak of them in honefl: but decent plainnefs. Man is immerfed in luxury. Our accommodations are now fo numerous that every thing is pleafure. Even in very fober ficuations in this highly-cultivated Sociec)% there is hardly a thing that remains in the form oi a necelfary of lite, or even of a mere conveniency — every thing is ornamented— it mud not appear of ufc — it muft appear as giving (ome fcnfible pieafure. I do not fay this by way of blaming — it is nature — man is a refining creature, and our moll: boalled acquirements are but refinements on our necelTary v/ants. Our hut becomes a palace, our blanket a fine drefs, and our arts become fciences. This difcontent with the natural condition of things, and this difpofition to refinement, is a chara6Leri(tic of our fpecies, and is the great employment of our lives. The direftion Vv'hich this propenfity chances to take in any age or nation, marks its characfler in the m.oft: confpicuous and interefting manner. AlJ have it in fome degree, and it is very conceivable that, in fome, it may confticute the chief obje6l of attention. It this be the cafe in any nations, it is furely moil likely to be io in thofe where the accommodations of life are the moii numerous — therefore in a rich and luxurious nation. I may furely, without exaggeration or reproach, g've that appellation to our own n tion at this moment. If you do not go to the very iov/eii clafs of people, who muil; labour all day, is it not the chief obje6l of all to procure jD^";'ceptible pleafure in one v/ay or another ? The fober and bufy ftruggle in the thoughts and hopes of gf*tting the means of enjoying the fo?/;'7/V/ J- of life without fartlier labour — and many have no other objecl than pleafure. ThenPage 191Page 191

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.17% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. l8jfe~ Then let us reflect that it is woman that is to grace the whole — It is in nature, it is the very conftitution of man, that woman, and every thing conneded with woman, mull appear as the ornament of life. That this mixes with every other focial fentiment, appears from the condu6t of our fpecies in all ages and in eveiy fituation. This I prefume would be the caic even though there w^erc no qualities in the fex to judify it. This fentiment refpedling the fex is neceflary, in order to rear fo helplefs, fo nice, and fo improveable a creature as man ; without it, the long abiding talk could not be performied :— and I think that I may venture to fay that it is performed in the dif7erent Paces of fociety nearly in proportion as this preparatory and indilpenfable fentiment is in force. On the other hand, I think it no h^s. evident that it is the defire of the women to be agreeable to the men, and that they will model themfelves according to what they think will pleafe. Without this adjuftment of fentiments by nature, nothing would go on. We never obferve any fuch want of fymmetry in the works of Godc If, therefore, thofe who take the lead, and give the fafhion in fociety, were wife and virtuous, I have no doubt but that the women would let the brighteft pattern of every thing that is excellent. But if the men are nice and fafcidious fenfualiiLS, the women will be refined and elegant voluptuaries. There is no deficiency in the female mind, either in talents or in difpofitions ^ nor can we fay with certainty that there is any fubjedl of intelledcual or moral difcufflon in which women have not excelled. It the delicacy of their confticution, and other phyiical caufes, allow the female fex a fmaller fliare of fome mental powers, they poflefs others in a fuperior degree, which are no lefs refpe6lable in their own nature, an.l ot as great importance to fociety. Inftead of dcfcanting at 2 A lar-cPage 192

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.82% accurate
    l86 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. large on their powers of mind, and fupporting my affertions by the indances of a Hypatia, a Schurman, a Zenobia, an Elizabeth, &c. I may repeat the account given of the fex by a perfon of uncommon experience, who faw them without difguife, or any motive that could lead them to play a feigned part — Mr. Ledyard, who traverfed the grcatefi: part of the world, for the mere indulgence of his tafte for obfervation of human nature ; generally in want, and often in extreme mifery. *^ I have (fays he) alv/ays remarked that women, '^ in all countries, are civil, obliging, tender, and humane : that they are ever inclined to be gay and cheerful, timorous and modeil; and that they do ^^ not hefitate, like men, to perform a kind or generous adion. — Not hau^rhtv, not arroo-ant, not fupercilious, they are full of courtefy, and fond of fo^^ ciety — more liable in general to err than man, but " in general, alfo, more virtuous, and performing miore good a6lions than he. To a woman, whether civilized or favage, I never addrelTed myfelf in ehe language of decency and friendfhip — without receiv'^^ ing a decent and friendly anfwer-— with man it has " often been otherwife. In v;andering over the barren plains of inhofpitable Denmark, through honefl Sweden, and frozen Lapland, rude and churlifh Finland, unprincipled Rufija, and the wide fpread regions of the wan*' dering Tartar,— if hungry, dry, cold, wet, or fick, '^ the women have ever been friendly to me, and uniformly fo ; and to add to this virtue, (fo worthy of the appellation of benevolence,) thefe adlions have ' been performed in fo free and fo kind a manner, that " if I was thirlly, I drank the fweeteft draught, and if hungry, I ate the coarfe meal with a double CC CC cc cc cc cc cc cc cc cc cc relilli." " And

Page 193Page 193

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.80% accurate
    CHAP. II- THE ILLUMINATI. iSj And thefc are they whom Weilhanj3t would corrupt ! One of thefe, whom he had embraced with fondnefs, would he have murdered^ to fave his honour, and qualify himfeif to preach virtue ! But let us not be toofcvere on Weifhaupt — let us wafh curfelves clear of allftain before we think of reprobating him. Are wc not guilty in fome degree, when v/e do not cultivate in the women thofe powers of mind, and thofe difpofitions of heart, which would equally dignify them in every ilation as in thofe humble ranks in which Mn Lcdyard mod frequently faw them ? I cannot think that we do this. They are not only to grace the whole of cultivated fociety, but it is in their faithful and affedionate perfonal attachment that we are to find the fweeteft pleafures that life can give. Yet in all thefc fituations where the manner in which they are treated is not di6lated by the ftcrn laws of necefiity, are they not trained up for mere amufement — are not ferious occupations confidered as a taflc which hurts their lovelinefs ? What is this but felfiilinefs, or as if they had no virtues'worth cultivating? Their h{/ine/s is fuppofed' to be the ornamiennng themfelves, as if nature did noc didlate this to them already, with at lead as much force as is neceflary. Every thing is prefcribed to them hecauje it makes them more lovely — even their moral leifons are enforced by this argument, and Mifs Wooliloncraft is perfe6lly right when (lie lays that the fine lelTons given to young women by Fordyceor RouiTeau are nothing but feififh and refined voluptuoufnels. This advocate of her fex purs her fifcers in the proper point of view, when fhe tells them that they are, like man, the fubje6ls of God's moral governm.ent,— like man, preparing themfelves for boundlefs improvement in a better ftate of exillence. Had fhe adhered to this view of the matter,* and kept it conflantly in fight, her book (which doubtlefs contains many excellent things, highly defervingPage 194Page 194

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.26% accurate
    l88 THE ILLUMINATI. ^HilP.IU deferving of their ferious confideration) would have been a nioft valuable work. She juftly obferves, that the virtues of the fex are great and refpe6t:able, but that in our mad chace of piealure, only pleafure, they are little thou^i^ht of or attended to. Man trufts to his own uncontroulable power, or to the general goodnefs of the fex, that their virtues will appear when we have occafion for them ;— '' but we will fend for thefe fome " otiier time •/' — Many noble difplays do they make of the molt difficult attainments. Such is the patient bearing up under misfortunes, which has no brilliancy to fupport it in the effort. This is more difficult thaa braving danger in an adive and confpicuous fituation. How often is a woman left with a family, and the fliattered rem.ains of a fortune, loft perhaps by diffipation or by indolence — and how feldom, how very feldom, do we fee woman fhrink from the tafk, or difchargc it with negligence ? Is it not therefore folly next to madnefs, not to be careful of this our greateft bleffmg — of things which fo^ nearly concern our peace — nor guard ourfeives, and thefe our beft companions and friends, from the effcds of this fatal Illumination? It has indeed brought to light what dreadful lengths men will, go, when under the fanatical and dazzling glare of happinefs in a ftate of liberty and equality, and fpurred on by infatiable luxury, and not held in check by moral feelings and the reftraints of religion — and mark, reader, that the women have here alfo taken the complexion of the men, and have even gone beyond them. If wehavefcena fon prefent himfelf to the National Affembly of France, profcffing his fatisfadion with the execution of his father three days before, and declaring himfelf a true citizen, who prefers the nation to all other confiderations i we have alfo fcen, on the fame day, wives denouncing their hufbands, and (O fhocking to human nature !) miOthers denouncing their fons, as bad citizensPage 195Page 195

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.59% accurate
    CHAP. 11. THE ILLUMINATI. 189 tizens and traitors. Mark too what return the women have met with for all their horrid fcrvices, where, to cxprefs their fentiments of civiim and abhorrence of royalty, they threw away the chara(f(;er of their fex, and bit the amputated limbs of the'.r murdered countrymen*. Surely thefe patriotic women merited that the rights of their fex fiioukl be confidered in full council, and they were well entitled to a feat -, but there is not a finglc a6l of their government in which the fex is confidered as having any rights whatever, or that they are things to be cared for. Are not the accurfed fruits of Illumination to be (c^n in the prefenthumiliating condition of woman in France? pampered in every thing that can reduce them to the mere inftruments of animal pleafure. In their prefent ftate of national moderation (as they call it) and fecurity, fee Madame Tailien come into the public theatre, accompanied by other beautiful women, (I was about to have mifnamed them Ladies,) laying afide all modefty, and prefcnting themfclves to the public view, with bared limb?, a la Sauvage^ as the alluring ohjedls of defire. I make no doubt but that this is a ferious matter, encouraged, nay, prompted by government. To keep the minds of the Parifians in the prefent fever of difiblute gaiety, they are at more expence from the national treafury for the fupportof the fixty theatres, than all the penfions and honorary offices in Britain, three times cold, amount to. Was not their abominable farce in the church of Notre Dame a bate of the fame kind in the true fpirit oC^^tVArxw^i's E'roterion? ** We * I fay this on the authority ofa young gentleman, an emigrant, ^ho faw it, and who laid, that they were women, not of the dregs of the Palais Royal, nor of infamous charader, but well drelTed. — t am forry to add, that the relation, accompanied with looksof horror and dif;i^uft, only provoked a contemptuous fmile froju an illuminated Britifh Fair-one. x'Page 196

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.33% accurate
    igO THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. **■ We do not," fald the high priefb, '^ call you to the n ' c ' ■' fc'Ji 'Oil'' fi. ' (C worfliip of inanimate idols. Behold a mafter-piece of nature, (lifting up the veil which concealed the " naked charms oi the beautiful Madmf. Barbier) : " This Tacred image fnould inflame all hearts." And it did fo ; the people fliouted out, '' No more altars, *■' no more prieds, no God but the God of Nature." Orleans, the firfl; prince of the blood, did not fcruple to proilitute his daughter, if not to the embraces, yen to the wanton view of the public, with the precife intention of inflaming their defires. (See the account given of the dinners at Sillcry's, by Camille Defmoulines, in his fpeech againft the Briilotins.) But what will be the end of all this ? Tht fondlings of the w^ealthy will be pampered in all the indulgences which fafl:idious volupcuoufnefs finds neceffary for varying or enhancing its pleafures , but they will either be flighted as toys, or they will be immured ; and the companions of the poor will be drudges and flavcs. I am fully perfuaded that it was the enthufiafbic admiration of Grecian democracy that recommended to the French nation the drefs a la Grecque, which exhibits not the elegant, ornamented beauty, but the alluring female, fully as well as Madame Tallien*s drefs ^ /

Page 197Page 197

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.94% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATJ. I^I almoft always in the (lyle of the highefl: ornament, and they triift^d, for the reil of tlie imprelTion which they willifd ro make, to the fafcinaringcxp^'cflion of elegant movements. This indeed was wonderful, and hardly conceivable by any who have not fcen a grand ballet performed by good a6lors. I have fhed tears of the mod fincere and tender forrow during the exhibition of Antigone, fet to mufic by Traecta, and performed by Madame Mcilcour and S^^ Toreili, and Zantini. 1 can cafily conceive the impreiTion to be dill (Irongcr, though perhaps of another kind, when the former fuperb dreffes are changed for the expreffive fim.plicity of the Grecian. I cannot help thinking that the female ornaments in the reft of Europe, and even among ourfelves, have k'fs elegance fmce we loft the fancStion of the French court. But fee how all this will terminate, when we fliall have brought the fex fo lov/, and will not even wait for a Mahometan paradife. What caa we expe6t but fuch adiflblutenefs of manners, that the endearing ties of relation and family, and mutual confidence within doors, will be flighted, and willceafe ; and every man muft ftand up for himfclf, fingle and alone ? Fcecunda culfd: Jacula nuptias Primum inqidnavere, et genusy et dc?nos^ Hccfcnte derivata clades In patriampo'pulumque fluxit , Hor. iii. 6. 17. This is not the fuegeftion of prudifh fear, I think it is the natural courfe of things, and that France is at this moment giving to the world the fulleft proof of Weifhaupt's fagacity, and the judgment with which he has formed his plans. Can it tend to the improvement of our morals or nianners to have our ladies frequent the gymnaftic theatres, and fee them decide, like the • Roman

Page 198Page 198

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.80% accurate
    l^t THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. Roman matrons, on the merits of a naked gladiator or wredler ? Kave we not enough of this already with our vaulters and pr^fture-maftcrs, and fhould we admire any lady who had a rage for fuch fpedtacles ? Will it improve our taflc to have our rooms ornamented with fuch paintings and fculpturcs as filled the ccnaculum, and the ftudy of the refined and elegant moralift Horace, who had the arc — ridendo dtce.e verum ? Shall we be improved when fuch indulgences are thought compatible with fuch leiTons as he generally gives for the condudl of life ? The pure Morality of Illuminatifm is nov/ employed in ftripping Italy of all tbofe precious remains of ancient art and voluptuoufnefs; and Paris will ere long be the depofit and the refort of artills from all nations, there to ffudy the works of ancient mafters, and to return from thence panders of public corruption. The plan is maflerly, and the lowborn Scatefmen and Generals of France may in this refpe6t be fet on a level wich a Colbert or a Conde. But the confcquences of this Gallic dominion over the minds of fallen man will be as dreadful as their dominion over their lives and fortunes. Recol]e6L in what manner Spartacus propofed to corrupt his fillers (for we need not fpeak of the manner in which he expe6led that this would promote his plan — this is abundantly plain). It was by deftrcying their moral fentiments, and their fentiments of religion. Recoiled what is the recommendation that the Atheifl Minos gives of his ilep-daughters, when he fpeaks of them, as proper perfons for the Lodge of Sillers, *' They have got over all prejudices, and, in matters ^' of religion they think as I do." Thefe profligates judged rightly that this affair required much caution, and that the utmod attention to decency, and even delicacy, mufl be obferved in their rituals and ceremonies, otherv^ife the \Tomen would be difgujled. This wasPage 199

CHAP. ir. THE ILLUMINATI. I9J was judging fairly of the feelings of a female mind^ But they judged falfely, and only according to theirs own coarfe experience, when they attributed their difguft and their fears to coynefs. Coyncfs is indeed the inftindlive attribute of the female. In woman it is very great, and it is perhaps the genuine fource of the dijgufl of which the Illuminati were fufpicious. But they have been dim-fighted indeed, or very unfortunate in their acquaintance, if they never obferved any other fource of repugnance in the mind of woman to what is immoral|or immodeil — if they did not fee diflike — moral difapprobation. Do they mean to infmuate, that in that regard which modeil women exprefs in all their words and a6lions, for what every one underftands by the terms decency, modefty, and the difapprobation of every thing that violates thofc feelings, the women only fliow female coynefs ? Then arc they very blind inftruQors. But they are not fo blind. The account given of the initiation of a young Sifler at Frankfort, under the feigned name FJychariGn^ fhows the mofl fcrupulous attention to the moral feelings of the fex; and the confufion and diilurbance which, after all their care, it occafioned among the ladies, fliows, that when they thought all right and delicate, they had been bun coarfe judges. Minos damns the ladies there, becaufe they are too free, too rich, too republican, and too wife, for being led about by the nofe (this is his own expreffion). But Philo certainly thought more corredlly of the fex in general, when he fays. Truth is a modeft girl : She may be handed about like a lady, by good fenfe and good manners, but mud not be bullied and driven about like a ftrumpet. I would here infert the difcourfes or addrefles which were made on thac occafion to the different clafTes of the affembly, girls, young ladies, wives, young men, and fbrangers, which * 2 B are

Page 200Page 200

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.88% accurate
    194- THE ILLUMINATJ. GHAP. If. a^e really ingenious and well ccmpofed, were they not fuch as would offend my fair countrywomen. The religious fentiments by which mortals are to be affifted, even in rhe difcharge of their moral duties, and frill more, the fentiments \\!/hich are purely religious, and have no reference to any thing here, are precifely thcfc which are moil eadly excited in the mind of woman. Affedion, admiration, filial reverence, are, if I m.iilake not exceedingly, thofe in which the v.omen fir furpafs the .men ; and it is on this account that we generally find them fo much difpofed to devotion, which is nothing but a fort of fond indulgence of thofe affedions without limit to the imagination. The enraptured devotee pours out her foul in expreffions of thefe feelings, juft as a fond mother mixes the careiTes given to her child v/ith the m.oft extravagant exprefficns of love. The devotee even endeavours to excite higher degrees of thefe affections, by expatiating on fuch circumHances in the divine condudl with refpeci: to man as naturally awaken them; and he does this without any fear of exceedino:: becaufe Infinite Wiidom and Goodnefs will always juftify the fentiment, and free the expreffion of it from all charge of hyperbole or extravagance. I am convinced, therefore, that the female mind is well adapted to cultivation by means of religion, and that their native foftnefs and kindnefs of heart will always be fufficient for procuring it a favourable reception from them. It is therefore with double regret that I fee any of them join in the arrogant pretenfions of our Illuminated philofophers, who fee no need of iuch aiTiilances for the knowledo-e and difcharore of ... "-^ their duties. There is nothincr fo unlike that general modefty of thought, and that diiiidence, which wc are difi}ofcd to think the charader of the female mind. I am

Page 201Page 201

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.12% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. IQ «. am inclined to think, that fuch deviations from the general condudl of the fcx are marks of a harfner chara6ler, of a heart that has lefs fenfibility, and is on the whole lefs amiable than that ot others. Yet it muit be owned that iherc are fome luch among us. Much, if not the whole of this pcrverfion, has, 1 am perfiiad-^ ed, been owing to the contagion of bad example in the men. They are made familiar with fuch exprefiions — their firft horror is gone, and (would to heaven that I were miitaken !) fome of them, have already wounded their confciences to fuch a degree, that they have fome reafon to wiili that religion may be without foundation. But I would call upon all, and theje v/om.en in particular, to confider this matter in a.'iother iisrht — as it may afl'cdl themfeives in this life ; as it may afteft their rank and treatment in ordinary fociety. I would fay to them, that if the world fliallonce adopt the bellc-f that this life is our all, then the true maxim of rational condudl will be, to ^"' eat and to drink, fmce to-mor** row v/e are to die 3'* and that when they have nothing to truft to but the fondnefs of the men, they will foon find themfeives reduced to flavery. The crown which they now wear will fall tl-om their heads, and they will no longer be the arbiters ot what is lovely in human life. I'he empire of beauty is but fhort; and even in republican France, it will not be many years that Madame Tallien can fafcinate the Parifian Theatie by the exhibition of her charm.s. Man is faftidious and chaneeable, he is the ihonercr animal, and can always take his own will with refped: to w( man. At prefent he is vvith-heid by refped for her moral worth — and many are with -held by religion — and m^any more are with-held by public laws, which laws were fram.ed at a time when religious truths iniiuenced the

Page 202Page 202

196 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. the minds and the condu6t of men. When the fentiments of men change, they will not be fo foolifh as to keep in force laws which cramp their flrongeft defires. Then will the rich have their Harems, and the poor their drudges. Nay, it is not merely the circnmilance of woman's being confidered as the moral companion of man that gives the fex its empire among us. There is fomething of this to be obferved in all nations. Of all the diftinftions which fet our fpecies above the other fentient inhabitants of this globe, making us as unlike to the beft of them as they are to a piece of inanimate matter, there is none more remarkable than the differences obfervable in the appearances of thofe defires by which the race is continued. As I obferved already, fuch a diilindion is indifpenfably neceflary. There muft be a moral conne6lion, in order that the human fpecies may be a race of rational creatures, improveable, not only by the increafing experience of the individual, but alfo by the heritable experience of the fuccefTive generations. It may be obferved between the foiitary pairs in Labrador, where hum:in nature ftarves, like the ftunted oak in the crevice of a baron rock j and it is feen in the cultivated focieties of Europe, where our nature in a feries of ages becomes a majeftic tree. Whatever may be the native powers of mind in the poor but gentle Efquim.aux, fhe can do nothing for the fpecies but nurfe a young one, who cannot run his race of life without inceflant and hard labour to keep foul and body together — here therefore her ftation in fociety can hardly have a name, becaufe there can hardly be faid to be any aflbciation, except what is neceflary for repelling the hoilile attacks of Indians, who feem to hunt them without provocation as the dog does the hare. In other parts of the world, ■ we

Page 203Page 203

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.74% accurate
    CHAP. 11. THE ILLUMINATI. 1^7 we fee that the confideration in which the fex is held, nearly follows the proportions of that aggregate of many different particulars, which we confider as conftituting the cultivation of a ibciety. We may perhai s err, and we probably do err, in our efliim.ation of tho'e degrees, becaufe we are not perfe6lly acquainted with what is the real excellence of man. But as far as wc can yad&Q of it, I believe that my affcrtion is acknowledged. On this authority, I might prefume to lay, that it is in Chridian Europe that man bas attained his A. highelf degree of cultivation — and it is undoubtedly here that the women have attained the highefl rank. I may even add, that it is in that part of Europe wliere the elTential and diftinguifhing dodtrines of Chriftian morality are moft generally acknowledged and attended to by tne laws of the country, that woman acls the highefl part in general fociety. But here we muft be very careful how we form our notion, cither of the fociety, or of the female rank — it is furely not from the two or three dozens who fill the highefl ranks in the flate. Their number is too fmail, and their fituation is too particular, to afford the proper average. Befides, the fituation of the individuals of this clafs in all countries is very much the fame — and in all it is very artificial — accordingly their character is fantailical. Nor are v/e to take it from that clafs that is the moft numerous of all, the lowefl clafs of fociety, for thefc are the labouring poor, whofe conduct and oc^ cupations are fo much dictated to them by the hard circumflances of their fituation, that fcarcely any thing is left to their choice. The fituation of women of this clafs muft be nearly the fame in all' nations. But this clafs is flill fufceptible of fome variety — and we fee it — and I think that even here there is a perceptible fuperiority of the female rank in thole countries wliere thePage 204

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.53% accurate
    198 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. the pureft Chriilianity prevails. We mufl however take our meafures or proportions from a numerous clafs, buc ah'b a ciafb in Ibmewhat of ealy circumilances, where meral fentiments call fome attention, ^nd pcrfons have fome choice in their condud:. And here, although I cannot pretend to have had many opportunities of obfervation, yet I have had fome. I can venture to fay that it is not in Ruifia, nor in Spain, that woman is, on the whole, the mod important as a member of the community. I would fay, that in Britain her important rights are more generally refpe6led than any where elfe. No where is a man's character fo much hurt by conjugal infidelity— no where is it fo difHcult to rub off the fligma of bailardy, or to procure a decent reception or fociciety for an improper conne6tion ^ and I believe it will readily be granted, that the fhare of the women in fucceifions, their authority in all matters of domeftic trufr, and even their opinions in what concerns life and manners, are fully more rcfpected here than in any country* I have long been of the opinion, (and every obfervation that 1 have been able to make fince I firfl formed it confirms me in it,) that v^oman is indebted to Chriftianity alone for the high rank fne holds in fociety. Look into the writings of antiquity — into, the works of the Greek and Latin poets — into the num.berlefs panegyrics of the fex, to be found both in profe and verfe — I can find little, very little indeed, where woman is treated with refped: — there is no want of love, that is, of fondnefs, of beauty, of charms, of graces. But of woman as the equal of man, as a moral companion, travelling with him the road to felicity — as his advifcr — his folace in misfortune— as a pattern froin which he may fometim.es copy

Page 205Page 205

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.81% accurate
    CHAP. H. THE ILLUMINATI. 9f copy with advantage ; — of ail this there is hardly a trace. Woman is always mentioned as an objedt of padion. Chaftity, modeily, fbber-mindcdnefs, are all confidered in relation to this finglc point; or fometimes as of importance in refpe^t of economy or domeflic quiet. RecolleCl the famous fpeech of Meteltellus Numidicus to the Roman people, when^, as, Cenfor, he was recommendinp- marriao;e. '^ Si fine uxore poiTemus Quirites tiTc, omncs ea moleftia careremus. Sed quoniam ita nacura tradidit, ut nee cum illis commode, nee fine ilHs ullo modo vivi polfet, faluti perpetuse potius quam brevi voluptati confuiendum." Jd. Cell, No^. Att. I, 6. What does Ovid, the great panegyrifl of the fex, fay for his beloved daughter, whom he had praifed for her attra6Lions in various places of his Triftia and other compofirions ? He is writing her Epitaph — and the only thing he can fay of her as a rational creature is, that (lie was — Domifida — not a Gadabout. — Search Aouleius, where you will find manv female charactersin ahftrdofc — You will find that his little Photis (a cook- maid and firumpet) was neareil to his heart, after all his philofophy. Nay, in his pretty (lory of Cupid and Pfyche, which the very wife will tell you is a fine lefibn of moral philofophy, and a reprefentation of the operations of the intclleftual and moral faculties of the human foul, a fbory which gave him the fined opportunity, nay, almofc made it necefiTary for him to infert whatever can ornam.ent the female character i what is his Pfyche but a beautiful, fond, and filly girl ; and what are the v/hole fruits of any acquaintance with the fex ?— Pleafure. Bat why take more pains in the fcarcli ? — Look at their ini mortal goddcfics —

Page 206Page 206

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.59% accurate
    200 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. croddeiTes — is there one amonff them v/hom a wife man would ielccl for a wire or a friend ? — I grant that a Lucretia is praifcd — a Portia, an Arria, a Zenobia— but thefe are individual charadlers — not reprefentatives of the fex. The only Grecian ladies who made a figure by intelleftual talents, were your Afpafias, Sapphos, Phrynes, and other nymphs of this caft, who had emerged from the general infignificance of the fex, by throwing away what we are accuRomed to call its greatefc ornament. I thini<..that the="" firft="" piece="" in="" which="" woman="" is="" pictured="" as="" a="" refpeftable="" chara6ter="" oldeft="" novel="" that="" am="" acquainted="" with="" written="" by="" chriftian="" bihiop="" heliodorus="" i="" mean="" adventures="" of="" theacrenes="" and="" chariclea.="" think="" heroine="" greater="" chara6ler="" than="" you="" will="" meet="" all="" annals="" antiquity.="" it="" worth="" while="" to="" obferve="" what="" was="" effi:="" this="" painting.="" poor="" bijqiop="" had="" been="" depofed="" even="" excommunicated="" for="" dodrinal="" errors="" drawing="" fuch="" pi6lure="" heathen.="" magiflrates="" antioch="" mod="" voluptuous="" arxd="" corrupted="" city="" eaft="" wrote="" emperor="" telling="" him="" book="" reformed="" ladies="" their="" where="" julian="" his="" sophifts="" formerly="" preached="" vain="" they="" therefore="" prayed="" good="" bifhop="" might="" not="" be="" deprived="" mitre.="" true="" we="" read="" hypatia="" daughter="" theon="" mathematician="" at="" alexandria="" who="" prodigy="" excellence="" taught="" philofophy="" i.="" e.="" art="" leading="" happy="" life="" great="" applaufe="" famous="" alexandrian="" fchool.="" but="" alio="" times="" chriftianity="" intimate="" friend="" syncellus="" other="" bifhops.=""/>

Page 207Page 207

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.01% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINATI. 201 It is undoubtedly Chriflianity that has fet woman on her throne^, making her in every refped the equal of man^ bound to the fame duties, and candidate for the fame happinefs. Mark how woman is defcribed by a Chriftian poet, •" Yet when I approach Her lovelinefs, fo abfoiute Ihe feems, And in herfelf complete, fo well to know Her own, that what fhe wills to do or fay Seems "u;//^, virtnoufijl^ difcrectefl^ be/}. Neither her uutfide, form'd fo fair,So much delights me, as thofe graceful a£}sj Thofe thoufand decencies that daily flow From all her words and actions, mix'd with love And fweet compliance, which declare unfeign'd Union of mind ^ or in us both one foul, -And, to confummate all, Greatnefs ofmind^ and noblenefs^ their feat Build in her lovelieft, and create an aws About her J as a guard angelic ■plac'dr Milton. This IS really moral painting, v/ithout any abatement of female charms. This is the natural confequence of that purity of heart, which is fo much infifted on in the Chriitian mo-rality. In the inftru6tions of the heathen philofophers, it is either not mentioned at all, or at mod, it is recommended coldly, as a thing proper^ and worthy of a mind attentive to great things. — But, in Chriitianity, it is infilled on as an indifpenfable duty, and enforced by many arguments peculiar to itfelf It is worthy of obfervation, that the moft prominent fuperftitions which have difnonoured the Chriftian churches, have been the exceffive retinements which * 2 C ' the

Page 208Page 208

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.84% accurate
    202 THE ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II, the enthufiaflic admiration of heroic purity has allowed the holy trade to introduce into the manufa61:ure of our Ipirituai fetters. Without this enthufiafm, cold expediency v/ould not have been able to make the Monadic vow fo general, nor have given us fuch numbers of convents. Thefe were generally founded by fuch enthufiafls- — the rulers indeed of the church encouraged this to the utniofc, as the befl: levy for the fpiritual power — but they could not enjrAn fuch foundations. From the fame fource we may derive the chief influence of auricular confefTion. When thefe were firmly eftablifnedj and were venerated, almoll all the other corruptions of Chriflianity followed of courfe. I may almcft add, that though it is here that Chriflianity has fuffered the iBofl violent attacks, it is htre that the place is mofl tenable. — Nothing tends fo much to knit all the ties of fociety as the endearing connediions of family, and whatever tends to lefTen our veneration for the marriage-contrad:, weakens them in the moil effcctual manner. Purity of manners is the mod effedual iupport, and pure thoughts are the only fources from which pure manners can flow, I readily grant that in former times this veneration for perfonal purity was carried to an extravagant height, and that feveral very ridiculous fancies and cuftoms arofe from this. Romantic love and chivalry are flrong inftances of the ftrange vagaries of our imagination, when carried along by this enthufiaflic admiration of female purity ; and fo unnatural and forced, that they could only be temporary failiions. But I believe that, with all their ridicule, it would be a happy nation vs^here this was the general creed and pradlice. Nor can I help thinking a nation on its decline, when the domeftic connc6tions ceafe to be venerated, and the illegitimate offspring of a nabob or a nobleman are received with eafe into good company. NothingPage 209

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.76% accurate
    CHAP. II. THE ILLUMINaTI. 20J Nothing is more clear than that the defign of the IIluminati was to abolifii Chriftianity'— and we now fee how effe6lual this would be for the corruption of the fair fex, a purpofe which they eagerly v/iihed to gain^ that they might corrupt the men. But if the women would retain the rank they now hold, they will be careful to preferve in full force on their minds this religion^ fo congenial to their difpofitions, which nature has m.ade affectionate and kind. And with refpeCl to the men^ is it not egregious folly to encourage any thing that can tend to blafl our fweetefl enjoyments ? Shall we not do this moft effectually if we attempt to corrupt what nature will always make us confider as the higheft elegance of life ? The divinity of the Stoics was^, '^ Mensjana in cor "pore Jam y^ < — but it is equally true. " Gratior eft pidchro veniens e corpore virtus. it If, therefore, inftead of profclTedly tainting w^hat is of itfelf beautiful, we could really work it up to ^' That fair form, which, wove in fancy's loom, '' Floats in light vifions round the poet's head," and make woman a patrern of perfection, we fnould undoubtedly add more to the heartfelt happinefs of life than by all the difcoveries of the Illuminati. See wkat was the effect of Theagenes and Chariclea. And vv'e fhould remember that with the fate of woman that of man is indiffolubly knit. The voice of nature fpoke through our immortal bard, when he mads Adam fay, -" From thy flate ," Mine never fhall be parted, blifs or woe." Shoi Id

Page 210Page 210

The text on this page is estimated to be only 12.48% accurate
    ^04 TffiC ILLUMINATI. CHAP. II. Should we fufFer the contagion to touch our fair partner^ ail is gone, and too late ihall we fay, '' O faireft of creation 1 laft and beO: " Of ail God's works, creature in whom excell'd ^^ Whatever can to fight or thought be form'd, ^' J^oiy^ divine J good^ amiable^ orjhveet ! ^ Hov/ art thou loft, — and now to death devote? ' ' And me with thee haft ruin'd ; for with thee '^ Certain my refoiution is to die.''

Page 211Page 211

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.97% accurate
    I ^97 ] CHAP. Ilii Th^ German Union. W HEN fuch a fermentation had been excited in the public mind, it cannot be fuppofed that the formal fuppreffion of the Order of the lilumi^ nati in Bavaria, and in the Duchy of Wirtemberg, by the reigning princes, would bring all to refl again. By no means. The minds of men were predifpofed for a change by the reftlefs fpirit of fpeculation in every kind of enquiry, and the leaven had been carefully and fkilfuily diffeminated in every quarter of the empire, and even in foreign countries. Weifhaupt faid, on good grounds, that " if the Orders fhould be difcovered and fuppreffed, he would reftore it with tenfold energy in a twelvemonth." Even in thofe ftates where it was formally abolifhed, nothing could hinder the enlifting new members, and carrying on all the purpofes of the Order. The Areopagitae might indeed be changed, and the feat of the direclion transferred to fome other place, but the Minerval and his Mentor could meet as formerly, and a ride of a few miles into another State, would bring him to a Lodge, where the young would be amufed, and the more advanced would be engage ed in ferious mifchief. \¥ei{haupt never liked children's play. He indulged Philo in it, becaufe he faw him taken with fuch rattles : but his own projeds were dark and folemn, and it was a relief to him now to be freed from that m^ummery. He foon found the bent of the perfon's liiind on whom he had fet his talons, and, he fays, that ** no man ever efcaped him whom he thought it worth v^hile to fecure." He had already filled the Ijfls wkh enough <2B of

Page 212Page 212

IgS THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. lii. of the young and gay, and when the prefent condition of the Order required fly and experienced heads, he no longer couried them by play-things. He communicated the ranks and the inflrudions by a letter, without any ceremony. The correfpondence with Phiio at the time of the breach with him, thews the fuperiority of Spartacus. Philo is in a rage, provoked to find a pitiful profeflbr difcontented with the immenfe fervices which he had received from a gentleman of his rank, and treating him with authority, and with difingenuity. — He tells Spartacus v/hat fliil greater fervices he can do the Order, and that he can alfo ruin it with a breath. — But in the midft of this rage, he propofes a thoufand modes of reconcilement. The fmallefl: concelTion would make him hug Spartacus in his arms. But Spartacus is deaf to ail his threats, and firm as a rock. Though he is confcious of his own vile condud, he abates not in the fmailefi: point, his abfolute authority — requires the mod implicit fubmifiion, which he fays '' is due not to him, but to the Order, and without which the Order mull: immediately goto ruin." — He does not even deign to ch?.llenge Philo to do his word, but allows him to go out of the Order without one angry word. This (hows his confidence in the energy of that fpirit of reliefs difcontent, and that hankering after reform which he had fo fuccefsfully fpread abroad. This had indeed arifen to an unparalleled height^ unexpeded even by the feditious themfelves. This Appeared in a remarkable manner by the reception given to the infamous letters on the conflitution 6f the PrufTian States* The general opinion was, that Mirabeau was the author oFthe letters themfelves, and it was perfedly underllood by every perfon, that the tranflation into French was a joint contrivance of Mirabeau and Nicholai.

Page 213Page 213

€HAP. 111. THE GERMAN UNION. igg cholai. I vvas affuredof this by the Brltifli MInifter at that Court. There, are fome blunders in refped of names, which an inhabitant of the country could hardly be guilty of, but are very confiftent with the felf-conceit and precipitancy of this Frenchman — There are feveral inftances of the fame kind in two pieces, which are known for certain to be his, viz. the Chronique fcandaleiife and the Hifloire Jecrette de la Cour de Berlin, Thefe letters were in every h^nd, and were mentioned in every converfation, even in the Pruflian dominions — and in other places of the empire thev were quoted, and praifed, and commented on, although fome of their contents were nothing Ihort of rebellion. Mirabeau had a large portion of that felf-conceit which diftinguifhes his countrymen. He thought himfelf qualified not only for any high office in adminiflration, but even for managing the whole affairs of the new King. He therefore endeavoured to obtain fome poft of honour. But he was difappointed, and, in revenge, did every thing in his power to make thofe in adminiflration the objeds of public ridicule and reproach. His licentious and profligate manners were fuch as excluded him from the fociety of the people of the firft claffes, whom it behoved to pay fome attention to perfonal dignity. His opinions were in the highefl: degree corrupted, and he openly profeffed Atheifm. This made him peculiarly obnoxious to the King, who was determined to corred the difturbances and difquiets which had arifen in the Pruffian ftates from the indifference of his predeceflbr in thofe matters. Mirabeau therefore attached himfelf to a junto of writers and fcribblers, who had united in order to diffeminate licentious principles, both in refped of religion and of government. His wit and fancy were great, and he had not perhaps his equal for eloquent and

Page 214Page 214

20Q THE GERMAN UNION, CHAP, ill, and biting fatire. He was therefore careffed by thofe writers as a moft valuable acquifition to their Society. He took all this deference as his jafl due ; and was fo confident in his powers, and fo foolifh^ as to advife, and even to admonifh, the King. Highly obnoxious by fuch condud, he was excluded from any chance of prefernient, and was exceedingly out of humour. In this flate of mind he was in a fit frame for Illumination. Spartacus had been eyeing him for fome time, and at lafl: communicated this honour to him through the intermedium cf Mauvillon, another Frenchman^ Lieutenant-Colonel in the fervice of the Duke of Brupfwick. This perfon had been niofl adive during the formal exi Hence of the Order, and had contributed much to its reception in the Proteflant ftates — he remained long concealed. Indeed his Illumination was not known till the invafion of Holland by the French. Mauvillon then ftepped forth, avowed his principles, and recommended the example of the French to the Germans. This encouragement brought even Philo again on the flage, notwithflanding his refentment againfi Spartacus, and his folemn declaration of having abjured all fuch focieties. — Thefe, and a thoufand fuch fads, fhow that the feeds of licentious Cofmopolitifm had taken deep root, and that cutting down the crop had by no means deflroyed the baneful plant.-— But this is not all — a new method of cultivation had been invented, and immediately adopted, and it was now growing over all Europe in another form. I have already taken notice of the general perverfion of the public mind which co-operated with the fchifms of Free Mafonry in procuring a liflening ear to Spartacus and his affociates. It will not be doubted but that the machinations of the Illuminati iricreafed this, even among thofe who did not enter inJo

Page 215Page 215

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.29% accurate
    CHAP, iili THE GERxMAN UNION. ^Ol into the Order. It was eafier to diminni the refped for civil ellablifliments in Germany than in almoil any other country. The frivolity of the ranks and court-offices in the different confederated petty llares made it impoffible to combine dignity with the habits of a fcanty income. — It was ftill eaher to expofe to ridicule and reproach thofe numberlefs abufes which the foily and the vices of men had introduced into religion. The influence on ihe public mind which natural! V attaches to the venerable office of a moral infirucior, was prodigioufly diminiihed by the continual difputes of the Catholics and Proteilanis, which were carried on with great heat in every little principality. The freedom of enquiry, vn'hich was lupported by the ftate in Proteflant Germany, was terribly abufed, (for what will the folly of man not abufe?) and degenerated into a wanton licentioufnefs of thought, and a rage for {peculation and fcepticifm on every fubjedt whatever. The ftruggle, which was originally between the Catholics and the Proteflanls, had changed, during the gradual progrefs of luxury and immorality, into a contefi: between reafon and fuperftition. And in this conteft the denomination of fuperftition had been gradually extended to every doi^rine which profefied to be of divine revelation, and reafon was declared to be, for certain, the only way in which the Deity can inform the human mind, Some refpectable Catholics had publifhed v.orks filled with liberal fentiments. Thefe weie reprefented as villainous machinations to inveide Proteftants. On the other hand, fome Proteftant divines had propofed to imitate this liberality by making concefhons which might enable a good Catholic to live more at eafe among the Proteftants, and might even accelerate an union of faiths. This was hooced beyond meafure, as Jefuitical, and big with danger. "While

Page 216Page 216

202 THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. ill. While the fceptical junto, headed by the editors of the Deutfchc Bibliothek and the Berlin Monatjchrift^ were recommending e'^ery performance thatwaslioftileto the eftabliflied faith of the country, Leuchtfenring was equally bufy, finding Jefuits in every corner, and went about with all the inquietude of a madman, picking up anecdotes. Zimmerman, the refpe(5\abie phyiician of Frederick King of Pruflia, gives a diverting account of a vifit which he had from Leuchtfenring at Hanover, all trembling with fears of Jefuits, and wifhing to perfuade him «that his life was in danger from them. Nicholai was now on the hunt, and during this crufade Philo laid hands on him, being introduced to his acquaintance by Leuchtfenring, who was, by this time, cured of his zeal for Protedanifm, and had become a difciple of Illuminatifm. Philo had gained his good opinion by the violent attack which he had publifhed on the Jefuits and RofjTrucians by the orders of Spartacus. — He had not far to go in gaining over Nicholai, who was at this time making a tour through the Lodges. The fparks of Illumination which he perceived in many of them pleafed him exceedingly, and he very cheerfully received the precious fecret from Philo. This acquifition to the Order was made in January 1782. Spartacus was delighted with it, confidered Nicholai as a mofi: excellent champion, and gave him the name of Lucian^ the great fcoffer at all religion, as aptly exprelling his character. Nicholai, on his return to Berlin, publidied many volumes of Ijis difcoveries. One would imagine that not a Jefuit had efcaped him. He mentions many flrange fchifmatics, both in religion and in Mafonrv — -But he never once mentions an Illumina' tus. — When they were fiifl: checked, and before the difcovery of the fecret correfpondence, he defended them, and ifrongly reprobated the proceedings of the Eiedor

Page 217Page 217

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.99% accurate
    Chap, iii* the German union. 203 Elc'ilor of Bavaria, calling it vile perfecution. — » Nav, after the difcovery of the letters found in Zwack's houfe, he perfiRed in his defence, vindicated the poiTefiion of the abominable receipts, and highly extolled the character of Weifhaupt. — But when the difcovery of papers in the houfe of Batz informed the public that he himfelf had long been an Illuminatus^ he was fadly put to it to reconcile his defence with any pretenfions to religion*.  Weifhaupt faved him from difgrace, as he thought, by his publication of the fyftem of liluminarifm' — Nicholai then boldly faid that he knew no more of the Order than was contained in that book, tliat is, only the two firft degrees. But before this, Nicholai had made to himfelf a mod formidable enemy. The hiftory of this conteft is curious in itfelf, and gives us a very inQrudive pidure of the machinations of that conjuration des philofopbes^ or gang of fcribblers who were leagued againfl the peace of the v/orld. The reader will therefore find it to our purpofe. On the autl:ority »f a lady in Courland, a Countefs von der Recke, Nicholai had accufed Dr. Stark of Darmiladt (who made fuch a figure in Free Mafonry) of Jeiuitifm, and of having even fubmitted to the ionfure. Stark was a moft reftlefs fpirir — had gone through every myflery in Germany, liluminatifm excepted, and had ferreted out many of Nicholai's hidden tranfac* He impudently pretended that the papers contaluing the fyftem and doftrines of Ilkinfiinatifm, came to him at Berlin, from an unknown hand. But no one beheved him — it was inconfiltent with what is faid of him in the fccret correfpondence. He had faid the fame thing concerning the French tranilation of the Letters on the Conftitution of the PrulTian States. Fifty copies were found in his ware-houfe. He faid that they had been fent from Strafburg, and that he had never fold one of them. — Suppofing both thefe afTertlons to be true, it appears that Nicholai was cdniidered as a very proper hand for difperfmg Xuch poifon. tions.Page 218

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.93% accurate
    204 THfe GERMAN UNIOW. CHAP, ili^ tions. Be was alfo an unwearied book-maker, and dealt ouc thefe dircovevies by degrees, keeping the eye of the public continually upon Nichoiai. He I'iad ftifpeded his Illumination for fome time pall, and when the fecret came our, by Spartacus' letter, where he boalls of his acquiii.ion, calling Nichoiai a moll: ifurdv combatant, and laying that he was conteniij]hnus^ Stark left no ftone unturned till he difcjvered that Nichoiai had been initiated in all the horrid and moll profligate mvfteries of Iliuminatifm, and that Spartacus had at the very fiiTc entrufted him Vvith his moil darling fecrets, and advifed with him on raanv occafions*. \ his complete blading of his moral charadet could not be paiientiy borne, and Nichoiai was in his turn the bitter enemy of Stark, and, in the pa-^ * Cf this we have complete proof In the private correfpond* ence. Philo, fpeaklng in one of his letters of the gradual change which was to be produced in the minds of their pupils from Chriftianity to Deifm, fays, *' Nichoiai informs me, that even the pious ** Zollikofer has nov^ been convinced that it would be proper to fet " up a deidical church in Berlin." It is in vain that Nichoiai fays that his knowledge of the Order was only of what Weiihaupt had piibliihed ; for Philo fays that that corre

Page 219Page 219

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.24% accurate
    CUA?. 111» THS GERMAN UNlOiV. 305 roxyfms of his anger, pub! iuied every idle tale, although he Vv^i-^s often obliged to contradict them in the next Review. In the coiirfe of this attack and defence, Dr. Stark di-covered the revival of the lihiminati, or ac leail a iocie^v which carried on the fanie great work in a fomtrwhat different way. Dr. Stark had written a defence againd one of Nichoiai'saccufations, and wifbed to have it printed at Leipzig. He therefore fent the manufcript to a friend, who relided there. This friend immediately propofed it to a moil improper perfon, Mr. Pott, who had written an anonymous commentary on the King of PrulTia's edid for the uniformity of religious worlhip in his dominions. This is one of the moft ihamelefs attacks on the efiabiiihed faith of the nation, and the authority and ccnducl of the Prince, that can be imagined. Stark's friend was ignorant of this, and fpoke to Polt, as the partner of the grea.t piiblifher Walther. They, without hehtation, undertook the publiihing ; but when fix weeks had paffed over, Stark's friend found that it was not begun. Some exceptionable parages, which treated with difrefpect the religion of Reafon, were given as the cauie of delay ; and he was told that ths author had been written to about them, but had not yet returned an anfvv^er. This was afterwards found to be falfe. Then a pr.dlige in the preface was objeded to, as treating roughly a lady inCourland, v.^hich Walther could not print, becaufe he hadconnedlions with that court. The author muft be entreated to change his expreffions. /Vfter another delay, paper was wanting. The MS. was withdrawn. Walther now faid that he v/ould print it immediately, and again got it into his hands, promiling to fend the fheets as they came from the prefs. Thefe not appearing for a long time, the agent made enquiry, and found that it was fent to Michaelisat H^lie, lo 2C ' be

Page 220Page 220

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.17% accurate
    2o6 THE GERMAN UNIONi CHAP. ilL" be printed there. The agent immediately went thither, and found that it was printing with great alterations, another title, and a guide or key, in which the work was perverted and turned into ridicule by a Dr. Bahrdt, who refided in that neighbourhood. An adion of recovery and damages was immediately commenced at Leipzig, and after much conteft, an interdid was put on Michaeiis's edition, and a proper edition was ordered immediately from Walther, with fecuritty that it fhould appear before Eahrdi's key. Yet when it VJ3S produced at the next fair, the bookfellers had been alieady fupplied with the fpurious edition ; and as this was accompanied by the key, it was much more faleabie ware, and completely fupplanted the other. This is lurely a ftrong inllance of the machinations by which the Illuminati have attempted to deftroy the Liberty of the Prefs, and the power they have to difcourage or fupprefs any thing that is not agreeable to the taPce of the literary junto. It was in the courfe of this tranra£lion that Dr^ Stark's agent found people talking in the cofFeehoufes of Leipzig and Halle of the advantages of public libraries, and of libraries by fubfcription^ in every town, where perfons could, at a fmall expence, lee what was palling in the learned w^orld^ As he could not but acquieice in thefe points, they who held this language began to talk of a general Aflociation, which flioulcl aft in concert ovel' all Germany, and make a full communication of its numerous literary producftions by forming Ibcietic^ for reading and infbrudiion, which diou'Id .be regularly fupplied with every publication. Flying Qieets and pamphlets were afterwards put into his hands, dating the great ufe of fucli an Alfociation, and the efftft which it would fpeedily produce by enliphtenirig the nation. By and by he learned

Page 221Page 221

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.91% accurate
    €HAP. ill. THE GERMAN UNION. ^.Q-J learned that fuch an Aflociation did really exift, and that it was called the German union, for ROOTING OUT SUPERSTITION AnD PREJUDICES, AND ADVANCING TRUE CHRISTIANITY. On enquiry, however, he found that this was to be a Secret Society, becaufe it had to combat pi*ejudices which were fupported by the great of this world, and becaufe its aim was to promote that general information wdiich priefts and defpots dreaded above ail things. This Alfociation was acceffible only through the reading focieties, and oaths of lecrecy and fidelity were required. In (hort, it apppeared to be the old fong of the Illuminati. This dlfcovery was immediately announced to the public, in an anonymous publication in defence of Dr. Stark. It is fuppofed to be his own performance. It difclofes a fcene of complicated villiany and folly, in w^hich the Lady in Courland makes a very llrange figure. She appears to bs a wild fanatic, deeply engaged in magic ana ghoflraifmg, and leagued with Nicholai, Gedicke, and Biefter, againft Dr. Stark. He is very conipletely cleared of the fa£ls ailedged againft him ; and his three male opponents appear void of all principle ^nd enemies of all religion. Stark however would, in Britain, be a very fingular character, confidered as a clergyman. The frivolous fecrets of Mafonry have either engroffed his whole mind, or he has laboured in them as a lucrative trade, by which he took advantage of the folly of others. The conteft between Stark and the Triumvirate at Berlin engaged the public attention much more than we Ihould imagine that a thing of fo private a nature would do. But the chara£lers were very notorious ; and it turned the attention of the public to thofe clandefline attacks which were made in

Page 222Page 222

The text on this page is estimated to be only 11.19% accurate
    Qo8 The GERMAN UNION* CHAP, u'l, ill every quarter on the civil ar.d religious eftablifliments. It was obvious to every perjon^ that theie reading I'ccleties had all on a iuddeii become very numerous; and the charadlers of thoie who patroniled them only increalcd the iufpicions which were nov/ railed. l-'hefiriL v/ork that ipeaivs exprefsly of the German Union, h a very lenlible performance "" On *' i'/ie Right of Princes to dirtCi the Rtligion of thtir *' ZuhjcChr The ne:h;t is a curious Vv'ork, a fort of narrative Dialogue on the Charaiiers cf Nicholai^ Gtdicke^ and Biejlcr, it is chiefiy occupied with the conteft v/ith Dr. Stark, but in the 5th part, it treats particularly of the German Union, About the fame time appeared fome farther account, in a book called Archives of Faiiaiicifmand Illirminatijm, But all thefe accounts are very vague and unfatisfadory. The fullefl account is to be had in a Vv'ork pubiifhed at I^ipzig- by Goichen the bookfeller. It is entitled, ^'' Merc Notes " than Text^or the GtrmanUnion of XX 1 1 ^ a new ^' Secret Society for the Good of Mankind^' Ltip^ zig 1789. The publiilicr fays that it v/as fent him by an unknown hand, and that he publilhcd it v/ith all fpeed, on account of the many mifchiefs which this Societv, ioi which he had before heard feverai reports,) might do to the world ^ and to tlie trade, if allowed to go on working in fecret. L'r;.m this work, therefore, we may form a notion of this redoubtable Society, and judge how far it is pra£ticable to prevent fuch ibcret machinations againil tlie peace and happinefs of mankind. Tbeie is another work, " Further information *' concerning the German Union , (Nahere Beleuch'• tung der Beutfche Union,) alfo JhovAng .hou\ " for a moderate price ^ one viay become a Scotch '* Free

Page 223Page 223

The text on this page is estimated to be only 11.45% accurate
    GKAP. iii* T>KE GERMAM UNION. 9,09 " Free Mfffon^ Frank ford and Lehzi^. \ 780, The author fays th::* he had all the papers in his hands : whsfeas the a'Jthcr of More Notes titan Text acknowledges the want of fonie. But ven/ little additional light is thrown on the fiibjetl by this work, and the firil is fciii the inoft iniliudtlve, and will chiefly be followed in the account which is now^ to be laid before the reader. The book More Notes than Text contains plans and letters, which the Twenty-two United Brethren iiave allowed to be given oiit, and of which the greateft part v/ere printed, bnt were entruiled •oniv' to ail u red members. No, I. is the firR plan, printed on a fmgle quaro page, and is addreifed, To all the Friends cfF^eafon^ of Truths and of Virtue, It is pretty v/ell written, and Hates among other things, that " be' caufe a great number of perfons are labouring, ' with united elfort, to bring Reafon under the ' yoke, and to prevent all infrru^lion, it is there' fore neceiTary that there be a comb!*iation which ' (hall work in oonofition to them fo that man' kind may not fmk anew into irrecoverable bar' barifm, when Reafon and Virtue fiiall have been ' completely fubdued, overpovrered by the re' fliaints v^^hich are put on oar opinions.'*'  ' For this noble purpofe a company of tv.'enty• two perfons, public inftrucStors, and men in pii' vate ftations, have uhited themlelves, according ' to a plan v/hich they have had under confidera' tion for more than a year and a half, and which, ' in their opinion, contains a method that is fair ' and irrcfiriible bv any human power, for pro' motinjy the enlip-htening- and forming- of m.an' kind, and that will gradually remove all the ob' (lades which fuperilition fupported by force ' has hitherto put in the v>^ay." This

Page 224Page 224

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.08% accurate
    21 & THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. iii. This addrefs is intended for an enlifling adver-^ tifemenL, and, after a few infignificant remarks on the AlTociation, a rix-dahler is required along with the fubfcription of acquiefcence in the plan, as a compenfation for the expences attending this mode of intimation and confent. Whoever pays the rix-dahler, and declares his "wiili to join the AfTociation, receives in a few days, No. II. which is a form of the Oath of fecrecy, alfo printed on a fingle Ato page. Having fubfcribed this, and given a full defignation of himfelf, he returns it agreeably to a certain addrefs ; and foon after, he gets No. III. printed on a 4to flieet. This number contains what is called the Second Plan, to which all the fubfequent plans and circular letters refer. A copy therefore of this will give us a pretty full and juft notion of the Order, and its mode of declaration. It is intitled, \^/ie Plan of the Twenty-Two^ and bep^ins with this declaration : " We have united, in order to accomplidi the aim of the exalted Founder of Chriftianity, viz. the enlightening of mankind, and the dethronement of fuperdition and fanaticifm, by means of a fecret fraternization of all who love the work of God, " Our liril: exertion, which h^s already been very extenfive, confifts in this, that, by means of cociidentiai perfons, we allow ourfeives to be announced every where as a Society united for the above-mentioned purpofe; and we invite and admit into brotherhood with ourfeives every perfon who has a fenfe of the importance of this matter, and wiflies to apply to us and fee our plans.

Page 225Page 225

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.32% accurate
    ilHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. 21^ " We labour fird: of all to draw into our Aflbciation all good and learned writers. This we imagine will be the eafier obtained, as they mud derive an evident advantage from it. Next to fuch men, we feek to gain the mailers and fecretaries of the Poll-offices, in order to facilitate our corr.eipondence. *' Befides thefe, we rece-ive perfons of every condition and ftation, excepting princes and their minillers. Their favourites, however, may be admitted, and may be ufeful by their influence in behalf of Truth and Virtue. '* When any perfon writes to us, we fend him an oath, by which he mufl abjure all treachery or difcovery of tlie AiTociation, till circum{lances fliall make it proper for us to come forward and diow ourielves to the world. Vv"hen he fubfcribes the oath, he receives the plan, and if he finds this to be what fatisfies his mind as a thing good and honourable, he becomes our friend only in fo far as he endeavours to gain over his friends and acquaintances. Thus we learn who are really our zealous friends, and our numbers increafe in a double proportion. " This procedure is to continue till Providence iliall fo far blefs our endeavours, that we acquire an active Brother and coadjutor in every place of note, v\^here there is any literary profeffion ; and for this purpofe we have a fecretary and proper office in the center of the AiTociation, where every thing is expedited, and all reports received. When this happy epoch arrives, we begin our fecond operation.*' That is to fay. We intimate to all the Brotherhood in every quarter, on a certain day, that the GsKMAif " Union

Page 226Page 226

The text on this page is estimated to be only 10.63% accurate
    212 THE GKRIviAN UNION. €HAP llli ' Union has now acquired a conjiflcnce^ and we ' now divide the fraternifed part of the nation ' into ten or twelve Provinces or Diccefcs^ each ' direcled by its Diocefan at his ofuce ; and thefe ' are io arranged In due fubordinaiion, that all ' biilincls comes into the Union-eouse as irito ' the center of the whiole. *'• Agreeably to this manner of proceeding there ' are twn clalTes of the Brotherhood, the Grdi' ?!a?y and the Managing Brethren, The latter ' alone know the aim of the affociation, and all ' the means for attaining it; and they alone • conilitate the UNi07>r, the name, and the con' neclion of vv'hich is not intended to be at all • conlpicuous in the world. '• To this end the bufinefs takes a new external form. The Brethren, to wit, fpeak not of the Union in the places where thev refide, nor .- r^C or a bocicty, nor ot enlightening the people ; but they ailcmble, and act together in every quarter, merely as a Literary Society, bring into it all the lovers of reading and of ufefiu knowledge; and fuch in fa6£ are the Ordinary Bretlireii, who only know that an AiTociation exifcs in their place of refidence for the encouragement of literary men, but bv no means that it has any connexion witii ciny other limilar Society, and that they all conPtitute one vvliole. But thefe Societies will naturally point out to tlie intelligent Brethren fuch perfons as are proper to be felected for carrying forward the great work. For perfons of a fcrious turn of mind are not mere loungers in fuch company, but fnow in their converfatioa the intcred tiiey take in real in(Iruaion. And the call of t]:eir reading, v/hich mud not be checked in the beginning in the *' fmalled

Page 227Page 227

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.21% accurate
    CHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. 2l3 f nailed degree, although it may be gradually directed to proper fubjects of information, will point out in the moH: unequivocal manner their peculiar ways of thinking on the important iiibjccfts conne

Page 228Page 228

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.04% accurate
    214 THE GERMAN UNION. CHAT. IIU *' comes a habit, what is really a thought ftartles, '* however fimple, and, if really uncommon, it " aftonidies and confounds. Nothing, therefore, " can fo powerfully tend to the improvement of '' the human character, as well-managed Read'* ing Societies. '' When thefe have been eftablilhed in different *' places, we mud endeavour to accomplifh the " following intermediate plans; i. To introduce " a general literary Gazette or Review, which, " by uniting all the learned Brethren, and com*' bining with judgment and addrefs all their " talents, and ileadily proceeding according to " a diftind and precife plan, may in time fup*' plant every other Gazette, a thing which its " intrinfic merit and comprehenfive plan will «' eafily accomplifh. 2. To felecl a fecretary for " our Society, who fliall have it in charge to '' commiilion the books which they (hall feie6t ^* in conformity to the great aim of the Affocia" tion, and who (hall undertake to commiilion *' all other books for the curious in his neigh" bourhood. If there be a bookfeller in the place, " who can be gained over and fworn into the *« Society, it will be proper to choofe him for *' this ofRce, fmce, as will be made more ^' plain afterwards, the trade will gradually " come into the plan, and fall into the hands ** of the Union. *' And now, every eye can perceive the pro" greffive moral influence which the Union will " acquire on the nation. Let us only conceive *' w^hat fupcrllition will loie, and what inftruc" tion muft gain by this; when, i. In every " Reading Society the books are (elected by our '- Fraternity. 2. When we have confidential ^^ perfons in every quarter, v/ho v/ill make it ^* their

Page 229Page 229

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.96% accurate
    CHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION* 2I5 *^ their ferioiis concern to fpread fuch perform** ances as promote the enlightening of mankind, *' and to introduce them even into every cot" tage. 3. When we have the loud voice of the " public on our fide, and fince we are able, *' either to banifn into the fhade ali the fanatical *' writings which appear in the reviews that are ** commonly read, or to warn the public againfl *' them ; and, on the other hand, to bring into *' notice and recomm.end thofe performances " alone v/hich give light to the human mind. " 4. When we by degrees bring the whole trade *' of bookfelling into our hands, (as the good '^ writers will fend all their performances into *' the market through our means) we (hall bring " it about, that at lail: the writers who labour in *' the caufe of fuperfiition and redraint, will " have neither a publiflier nor readers. 5. When, ' laftly, by the fpreading of our Fraternity, ali *' good hearts and fenfible men will adhere to '' us, and by our means will be put in a con*' dition that enables them to work in filence ' upon ail courts, families, and individuals in *' every quarter, and acquire an influence in the '* appointment of court-ofRcers, (lewards, fecre'* taries, parifli-priefts, public teachers, and pri*' vate tutors. " Remark, That we fnall fpeedily get the trade *' into our hands, (which was formerly the aim " of the Affcciation called the Gelth'ttrihuch" hand lung ) is conceivable by this, that every writer who unites with us immediately acquires a triple number of readers, and finds friends in every place who promote the fale of his perform.ance; fo that his gain is increafed ma'' nifold, and confequently all will quit the book" fellers, aiid accede to us by degrees. Had the " above < (

Page 230Page 230

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.36% accurate
    ^l6 TUE GERMAN UNIONT. CHAP, lil* *' above named Alfociation been confl:ru£led in ** this manner, it would, long ere now, have *' been the only fhop in Germany," The book called Fuller Information^ &c. gives a more particular account of the advantages held forth to the literary manufa(£iurers of Germany by this Union for God's incrk. The clafs of literary Brothers, cr writers by trade, was divided into Mejopolites^ Aldermen^ Men, and Cadets, The Mesopolites, or Metropolitans, are to be attached to the archive-office, and to be taken care of in the Union-houfe, when in flraits through age or riiisfortune. They will be occupied in the department of the fciences or arts, which this AlTociation profefs principally to cherifh. They are alfo Brethren of the third degree of Scotch Free Mafonfy, a qualification to be explaineil afterwards. The Union-houfe is a building which the oftenfible Founder 6f the Union profeffed to have acquired, or fpeedily to acquire at  ^  , through the favour and protection of a German Prince, who is not named. Aldermen are perfons who hold public offices, and are engaged to exercife their genius and talents in the fciences, Thefe alfo are Brothers of the third rank of Scotch Free Mafonry, and out of their number are the Diocefans and the Directors of the Reading Societies feleCled, The members who are defigned fimply Men, are Brothers of the feCond rank of Mafonry, and have alfo a definite fcientific occupation alTigned them. The Cadets are writers who have not yet merited any particular honours, but have exhi* bited funic lent difpcfitions and talents for different kinds of literary manufadure. Every

Page 231Page 231

The text on this page is estimated to be only 14.51% accurate
    CHA?. Ill* THE GERMAN UNION. ^I'J Every member is bonnd to bring the productions of his genius to maiket through the Union, An Alderrriai! receives for an original work do per cent, of the returns, and 70 for a tranfiatioii. \hc member of the next clals receives 60, and tiie Cadet ^o. As to tiie expence of printing, the Alderman pays nothing, even thou^^h the woik (hould he on hand unfold ; but the Man and the Cadet muil pay one-half. ^1 hree months after pubHcation at the fairs an account is brouglit in, and after this, yearly, when and in what manner the author Ihfill deiire. In every Diocefe wiJl be eflabhihed at leaPc one Reading Society, of which near 800 arc propofed. To each of thefe will a copy of an sliderman s work be fcnt. The fanie iavour will be fhown to a dilTcrtation by a Man, or by a Cadet, provided that the manincript is documented bv an Alderman, or formally approved by him upon ferious perufal. This i?nprh}iatu7\ which mud be confidered as a powerful recommendation of the work, is to be pnbliOied in the General P^tviexv or Gazette, This is 10 be a vehicle of political as well as of literary news ; and it is hoped that, by its intrinfic worth, and the recommendation of the members, it will foon fiipplant all others, (With refped: to afiairs of the Union, a fort of cypher was to be employed in it. Each Dlocefan was there defigned by a letter, of a (ize that marked his rank, and each member by a number. It was to appear weekly, at the very fmaii price of five-and-twenty fniUings.)---But let us return to the plan. When every thing has been eftablidied in the manner fet forth above, the Union will aifume the following republican form, (the reader always recoUedling that this is not to appear to the

Page 232Page 232

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.61% accurate
    2l8 THE GERxMAN UNION. CHAP. ill. the world, and to be knovvn only to the managing Brethren, Here, however, there is a great blank. The above-named fl^etch of this Conuitution did mot come to the hands of the perfon who furnilhed the bookfeller with the reft of the information. But v/e have other documents which give fufficient information for our pnrpofe. In the mean time, let usjiift take the papers as they ftand. No. IV. Contains a lift of the German Union^ v/hich the fender received in manufcript. Here wc find many names which we (hould not have expected, and mifs many that were much more likely to have been partners in this patriotic fcheme. There are feveral hundred names, but very few defignations ; fo that it is diificult to point out the individuals to the public. Some however are defigned, and the writer obfervcs that names are found, which, when applied to fome individuals whom he knows, accord furprifingly with the anecdotes that are to be feen in the private correfpondence of the llluminati, and in the romance called Materials for the Hiftory of Socratifm (Illuminatifm)*. It is but a difagreeable remark, that the lift of the Union contains * This, by the by, is a very Cdiious and entertaining work, and, had the whole affair been better known in this country, would have been a much better antidote againft the baneful efFeds of that Affociation than any thing that I can give to the pubh'e, being written with much accutenefs and knowledge of the human mind, and agreeably diverfified with anecdote and ironical exhibition of the affeded wifdom and philanthropy of the knavilli Foimder and his coadjutors. If the prefent imperfed and defultory account fhall be found to intereft the public, I doubt not but that a transition of this novel, and fome other fanciful performances on the fubjcft, will be read with entertainment and prcfiu the

Page 233Page 233

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.19% accurate
    CHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. *2 1 ^ the names of many public teachers, both from the pulpit, and from the accademic chair in all its degrees; and among thefe are feveral whofe cyphers fnow that they have been active hands. Some of thefe have in their writings given evident proofs of their mifconception of the fimple truths, whether dogmatical or hifiorical, of revealed religion, or of their inclination to twift and manufafture them fo as to chime in with, the religion and morality of the Sages of France. But it is m^ore diltrefiing to meet with unequivocal names of fome who profefs in their writings to confider thele fubje(fts as an honeil man (hould confider them, that is, according to the plain and common fenfe of the words; whereas we have demonflrative proofs that the German Union had the diametrically oppofite purpofe in view. The" only female in the lift is the Crafin von dcr Rccke^ the Lady who gave Dr. Stark of Darmftadt fo much trouble about his Tonfure, This Lady, as we have already feen, could not occupy herfelf with the frivolity of drefs, flirtation, or domcitic cares. " F'emina f ante pat tt, vir pecforej^ She was not pleafed however at finding her name in fuch a Plebeian lift, and gave oath, along with Biefter at the centre, that (he was not of the h.iibciation. I fee that the public was not fatisfied with this denial. The Lady has pubiifhed fome more fcandal againft Stark fince that time, and takes no notice of it; and there have appeared many accounts of very ferious literary connections between thefe two perfons and the man wiio was afterwards difcovered to be the chief agent of the Union. No. V. is an important document. It is a letter addreUed to the fworn members of the Union, reminding the beloved feiiovv-workers that " the by" gone

Page 234Page 234

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.81% accurate
    it 22,0 THE GERMAN UNION. CMAP. ill. *' pone manaeement of the bufmefs has been expeniive, and that the XXII. do not mean to make any particular charge for their own compenfation. *' But that it was neceiTary that ail and each of the '' members ihould know precifely the objedt of the *•' Aflbciation, and the way which mature confideration had pointed out as the mofl effectual method of attaining thisobjed. Then, and not till then, could the worthy members acl by one plan, and confequentiy with united force. To accomplifh this purpofe, one of their number had compofed a Treatil'e on Inftrutlion^ and the means of promoting if^'' This work has been revifed by the whole number, and may be conlidered as the refult of their deepefl: refieclion. They fay, that it would be a fignal misfortune fhould this AlTociation, this undertaking, fo important for the happinefs of mankind, be cramped in the very beginning of its brilliant progrefs. They therefore propofe to print this work, this Holy Scripture of their faith and pradice, by fubfcription, (They here give a fliort account of the work.) And they requell the members to encourage the work by fubicribing, and by exerting more than their ufual aclivity in procuring fubfcriptions, and in recommending the performance in the newfpapers. Four perfons are named as Dioceians, who are to receive the money, which they beg may be fpetdhy advanced in order to purchafe paper, thit the work may be ready for the firlt fair (Eaiter J788.), \  iNo. VI. is a printed paper (as is No. V.) without date, farther recommending the Eifay on Iniirudion. No. VII. is in manufcript, Vv'ithout date. It is ad* Ueler ausfklarung unJ Jeren BefordeningS']\IitteI. The only proptr tra'iil'Htion of this word would be, clearing up or enlighten' in*. Injiruction feems the fn:gle word that comes ncared to the Drtz\{< meaning of Aiiffklarimg^ but is not fynonymous. drcficd /

Page 235Page 235

CHAP. 111. THE GERMAN UNION. 221dreffed to "" a worthy man," intimating that the like are fent to others, to whom will alfo fpeedily be forwarded an icnproved plan, with a requeil to cancel or deflroy the former contained in No. III. It is added, that the Union now contains, among many others, more than two hundred of the moft refpectable perfons in Germany, of every rank and condition, and that in the coarfe of the year, (1788,) a general lift will be fent, with a requefl that the receiver will point cut luch as he does not think worthy of perfect confidence. It concludes with another recommendation of the book on In/lru^ion. on the returns from which firfl work of the German Union the fupport of the fecretary's office is to depend. Accordingly No. VIIL contains this plan, but it is not entitled The Improved Plan. Such a denomination would have called in doubt the infallibility of the XXII. It is therefore called the Progrefftve (vorlaufig) plan, a title which leaves room for every fubfequent change. It ditfers from the former only in fome unimportant circumftances. Some expreffions; which had given offence or raifed fufpicions, are foftened or cancelled. Two copies of this, which we may call A and B, are given, differing alfo in fome circumflances. " The great aim of the German Union is the good ** of mankind, which is to be attained only by means " of mental illumination (^Auffklarung) and the de*' throning of fanaticifm and moral defpotifm." Neither paper has the expreffion which immediately followed in the former plan, '' that this had been *' the aim of the exalted founder of Chriflianity." The paper A refers, on the prefent fubjed, to a differtation printed in 17B7, without a name. On the freedom of the Prefs and its Liynitation, This is one of the moft licentious pieces that has been publifhed 1^ on

Page 236Page 236

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.73% accurate
    %22 tHE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. lUs on the fubjecl, not only enforcing the inoft unqualified liberty of publifliing every thing a man pleafes, but exemplifying it in the n)ofl fcanclaloas manner ; libelling charaders of every fort, and perfons of every condition, and this frequently in the nioft abufive language, and exprelTions ih coarfe, as fhewed t\v^ author to be either habituated to the coarfeft corapat\iy, or determined to try boldly once for all, what the public eye can bear. The piece goes on : ''The Union conliders it as a chief part of its feci et plan of operation, to include the trade of bookfelling in their circle. By getting hold of this, they have it in their power to increafe the number of writings which prom.ote inibuclion, and to lefTen that of thofe which mar it, fmce the authors of the latter will by degrees lofe both their publifhers and their readers. That the prefent bookfellers may do them no harm, they will by degrees draw in the greater part of them to unite with them." — The literary newfpaper is here llrongly infifled on, and, in addition to what was faid in the former plan, it is faid, '' that they will include po*' litical news, as of mighty influence on the public '^ mind, and as a fubjed that merits the clofeft at'* tention of the moral inftruclor. For what illumination is that mind fulceptible of, that is fo blinded  by the prejudice created and nurfed by the habits of civil fubordination, that it worlhips flupidity or wickednefs under a coroilet, and neglecls talents and virtue under the bearfkin cap of the boor ? We muft therefore reprefent political tranfadions, and public occurrences, not as they *' affed that artificial and fantaflical creature of ima*' gination that we fee every where around us wheel" ed about in a chariot, but as it aflfeds a man, ra*' tional, adive, free born man. By thus Gripping " the tranfadion of all foreign circumlbnces, we '' lee 41 IS (C ItPage 237

it. (I il CHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. QQj fee it as it affeds, or ought to affed, ourfelves. Be allured that this new form of political intelligence will be highly interefling, and that the Gazette of the Union will foonfuperfedeall others, and, of itfelf, will defray all our necefl'ary ex*' pences." This is followed by fome alluficns to a fecret correfpondence that is quick, unfufceptible of all difcovery or treachery, and attended with no expence, by which the bulinefs of the fecret plan (^different from either of thoje comjnumcated\ to the fworn Brethren at large) is carried on, and which puts the members in a condition to learn every thing that goes on in the world, for or againft their caufe, and alfo teaches them to know mankind, to gain an influence over all, and enables them effecTlually to promote their beft fubjedls into all offices, &:c. and finally, from which every member, whether ftatefman, merchant, or writer, can draw his own advantages. Some pafTages here and in another place make me imagine that the Union hoped to get the command of the poft-oifices, by having their Brethren in the diredion. It is then faid, that '' it is fuppofed that the levy will be fufnciently numerous in the fpring of the enfuing year. When this takes place, a general fynod will be held, in which the plan of fecret operations will be finally adjufled, and accommodated to local circumflances, fo as to be digefled into a law that wdll need no farther alteration. A proper perfon will fet off from this fynod, with full powers to vifit every quarter where there are fworn Brethren, and he will there eftablifh a Lodge after the ancient iimple ritual, and will communicate verbally the plan of fecret opera^ ration^ and certain inflru(flions. Thefe Lodges will then efiablifh a managing fund or box. Each *' Lodge (I (I It (I

Page 238Page 238

224 "^"^ GERMAN UNION. CHAP, ill. (I It 11 Lodge will alfo eflablifh a Reading Society, under the management of a bookfeller refiding in the place, or of fome perfon acquainted with the mechanical condud of things of this nature. There mud alfo be a colledor and agent, (Expediteur^) *' fo that in a moment the Union will have its of'' fices or comptoirs in every quarter, through which it carries on the trade of bookfelling, and guides the ebb and flow of its correfpondence. And thus '' the whole machine will be fet in motion, and its '^ adivity is all directed from the centre." I remark, that here we have not that excluiion of Princes and miniflers that was in the former plan ; they are not even mentioned. The exclufion in exprefs terms could not but furprife people, and appear fomewhat fufpicious. No. IX. is a printed circular letter to the fworn Brethren, and is fubfcribed *' by their truly afibciat'' ed Brother Barthels, Oheramtfman (firfl bailiff) " for the King of Pruflia, at Halle on the Saal." In this letter the Brethren are informed that '' the *' XXII. were wont to meet fometimes at Halle, and *' fometimes at Berlin. But unavoidable circumflances oblige them not only to remain concealed for fometime, but even to give up their relation " to the Union, and withdraw themfelves from anv fliare in its proceedings. Thefe circumflances are but temporary, and will be completely explained in due time. They trull, however, that *' this necelfary Hep on their part will not abate the " zeal and adivity of men of noble minds, engag" ed in the caufe by the convidion of their own *' hearts. They liave therefore communicated to *' their worthy Brother Barthels all necelfary in" formations, and have unanimoufly conferred on *' him the diredion of the feci etary's office, and " have provided him with every document and *' mean IC

Page 239Page 239

44 41 44 44 44 fcHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. 225 " mean of carrying on the correfpondence. Ke has *' devoted himfelf to the honourable office, giving " up all other employments. They obfeive that by " this change in the manner of proceeding, the Af*' fociation is freed from an objedion made with " juftice to all other fecret focieties, namely, that " the members fubjedl themfelves to blind and unqualified fubmifiion to unknown fuperiors." — 1 he Society is now in the hands of its own avowed members. Every thing will ioon be arranged according to a confliiution purelv republican ; a Diocefan will be chofen, and will direct in every province, and report to the centre every fecond month, and inflrudions and other informations " will ilTue in like manner from the centre. " If this plan fhall be approved of by the Affociated, H. Earthels will tranfmit to all the Diocefes general lifts of the Union, and the Plan of Secret Operation, the refult of deep medita*' tion of the XXII. and admirably calculated for carrying on with irrefiftable efied their noble and patriotic plan. To (lop all cabal, and put an end to all flander and fufpicion, H. Barthels thinks it proper that the Union fhall flep forward, and declare itfelf to the world, and openly name fome of its moft refpedabie members. The public muft however be informed only with refpect to the exterior of the Society, for which purpofe he had written a fheet to be annexed as an appendix to the work. On InflruSIion^ declaring that to be the work of the Societv, and a fufficient indica■J ' ' tion of its moil honourable aim. He dtfires " fuch members as choofe to fliare the honour *' with him, to {^cud him their names and proper dcfignations, that they may appear in that Appendix. Andj laUiy, he requefts them to inftrudt him, and co-operate with him, according *' to 44 44 (4 <4 41 C4 44 44 b4 44 44 44 44 14

Page 240Page 240

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.52% accurate
    • • • 226 THE GERMAN UNION. ^ CHAP. Ill, " to the concerted nilesof the Union, in promot** ing the caiifc of God and the happineis of man*« kind.'' The appendix now alluded to makes No. X. of the packet fent to the Bookfeller Gofciien of Leipzig, and is dated December 1788. It is alfo found in the book On Inpru^ion^ Sec, printed at Leipzig in 1789, by Waither* Here, however, the Appendix is dated January 1789. This edition agrees in the main with that in the book from which I have made fuch copious extracts, but differs in fome particulars that are not unworthy of remark, " In the packet it is written, " The Under" 7%^^^ ^-^ il^

Page 241Page 241

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.24% accurate
    CHAP. ill. THE GERMAN UNION. 227 There has already been fo much faid about Enlightening^ that the reader mufi: be almoii tired of ic. He is allured in this performance that the Illumination propofed by the Union is not that of the fVoIfenbuttle Fragments^ nor that of Horus, nor that of Bahrdt. The Fragments and Horus tuq books wliich aim direcflly, and without any concealment, to deliroy the authority of our Scriptures, either as hiflorical narrations or as revelations of the intentions of providence and of the future profpeds of man. The Theological writings of Bahrdi are grofs perverfions, both of the fenfe of the text, and of the moral inflruclions contained in it, and are perhaps the moil exceptionable pertormances on the fubjcd. They are iligmatifed as abfurd, and coarfe, and indecent, even by the writers on the fame fide ; yet the work recommended fo often as containing the elem.ents of that liiamination which the world has to expeci from the Union, not onlv coincides in its general principles with thefe performances, but is almofl an abflrad of fome of them, particularly of his Popular Religion^ his Parapbrafe on the Sermon on the Mounts and his Morality of Religion. We have alfo {tQ,T\. that the book on the Liberty of the Prefs is quoted and recommended as an elementary book. Nay both the work on Infft uction and that on the Liberty of the Prefe^ are now known to be Bahrdt's. But thefe principles, exceptionable as they may be, are probaoly not the worit of the inftitution. We fee thac the outfide alone of the Union is to be fhewn to the r)ublic. Barthels felicitates the public that there is no fubordmation and blind obedience to unknown Superiors; yet, in the fame paragraph, he tells us that there is a fecret plan of operations, that is known only to the Centre and the Confidential Brethren. The author of Fuller Information fays that he has this plan, and would print il, were hePage 242

225 ^ THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. iil. he not re{lralned by a promife*. He gives us enough however to (how us that the higher myfteries of the Union are precifeiy the fame with thofe of the Illuminati. Chriftianity is exprefsiy faid to have been a Myliical AiTociation, and its founder the Grand Maifer of a Lodge. The Apodles, Peter, James, John, and Andrew, were the Ele^^ and Brethren of the Third Degree, and initiated into all the myfteries. The remaining Apoftles were only of the Second Degree ; and the Seventy-two were of the Firfl degree. Into this degree ordinary Chriflians may be admitted, and prepared for further advancement.    The great miftery is, that J  C  was a Naturalift, and taught the dodlrine of a Supreme Mind, the Spedator, but not the Governer of the World, pretty nearly in the fenfe of the Stoics. The Initiated Brethren were to be inflruded by reading proper books. Thofe particularly recommended are Baf dozvs P radical Knowledge^ Eherhard's Apology for Socrates^ Bahrdfs Apology for Reafon^ Steinbardf 5 Syftem of Moral Education^ Meiners Ancient Myfteries, Bahrdfs Letters on the Bible ^ and Bahrdfs Completion of the Plan and Aim of J  C  . Thefe books are of the moft Antichriftian charader, and fome of them aim at fhaking off all moral obligation whatever. Along with thefe religious dodrines, are inculcated the moft dangerous maxims of civil condudi. The defpotifm that is aimed at over the minds of men, and the machinations andantrigues for obtaining poffeftion of places of truft and influence, are equally alarming; but being perfedly fimilar to thofe of the Illuminati, it is needlefs to mention them. The chief intelligence that we ' get from this author is that the Centre of the Union is at a * This I find to be falfe, and the book a common job. houfe

Page 243Page 243

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.88% accurate
    # GHAF. ill. THE GERMAN UNION; 22g houfe in the neighbonrliood of Halle. It is a fort of tavern, in a vineyard immediately without the city. This was bought by Doctor Karl FrieDERICH Bahrdt, and fitted up for the amufement of the Univerfity Students. He calls it Bahrdt's RUHE (Bahrdt's Ptepofe). The author thinks that this muit have been the work of the AiTociation, becaufe Bahrdt had not a farthing, and was totally unable for iuch an undertaking. He may however have been the contriver of the inftitution. "tie has never affirmed or denied this in explicit terms ; nor has he ever faid who are the XXH coadjutors. Wucherer, an eminent bookfeller at Vienna, feems to have been one of the mofl active hands, and in one year admitted near two hundred members, among whom is his own fhoemaker^ He has publiQied fome of the mofl profligate pamphlets which have yet appeared in Germany, The publication of the lift of members alarmed the nation ; perfons were aftonifhed to find themfelves in every quarter in the midft of villains who were plotting againft the peace and happinefs of the country, and deflroying every fentiment of religion, morality, or loyalty. Many peribns publiihed in the newfpapers and literary journals affirmations and proofs of the falfe iniertion of their names. Some acknowledged that curiofity had made them enter the AfTociation, and even continue their correfpondence with the Centre, in order to learn fomething of what the Fraternity had in view, but declared that they had never taken any part in its proceedings. But, at the fametime^ it is certain that many Heading Societies had been fet up during thefe tranfadions, in every quarter of Germany, and that the oftenfible managers were in^'general of very fufpiciouscharadters, both 2 F as

Page 244Page 244

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.64% accurate
    23® f"HE GERMAN' 'JMION. CHAF. Illas to morals and loyalty. The Union had actually fet up a prets of their own at Calbe, in the neighbourhood of Halberdadt, Every day there appeared ilroriger proofs of a combination of the lournalifts, Reviewers, and even of the publidiers knd bookfellers, i^ fupprefs tlie w^ritings which appeared in defence of the civil and ecclefiallical conftitutions of the States of Germany. The extenfive literary manufa£lure of Germany is carried on in hich a manner that it is impodibh for any thing Icls than the joint operation of the whole federated powers to prevent this. The fpirit of freethinking and innovating in religious matters had been remarkably prevalent in the dominions of the King of Prudia, having been much encouraged by the indifference of the late King. One of the vileft things publifhed on this occaiion was an abominable farce, called the Religion Edid. This was traced to Bahrdt's Rube, and the Doclor was arreted, and all his papers feized and ranfacked. The civil Magidrate was glad of an opportunity of expifcating the German Union, which common fame had alfo traced hither. The correfpondence was accordingly examined, and many difcoveries were made, which there was no occafion to communicate to the public, and the profecution of the bufinefs of the Union was by this means Hopped. But the perfons in high office at Berlin agree in faying that the AfTociation of writers and other turbulent perfons in Germany has been but very faintly hit by this blow, and is almoft as active as ever. The German Union appears a mean and precipitate Affociation. The Centre, the Archives, and the Secretary are contemptible. All the Archives; that were found were the plans and lifts of the members and a parcel of letters of correfpondence. The correfpondence and other bufinefs Vv^as managed by an

Page 245Page 245

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.89% accurate
    CHAP. ill. THE GERMAN UNION. ^3! an old man in feme very inferior office or judicatory,, who lived at bed and 'Doard in Bahidt's houfe for about fix (hillings a week, having a cheit of papers and a vvriting-defi<: in="" the="" corner="" of="" common="" room="" houfe.="" bahrdt="" gives="" a="" long="" narration="" his="" concern="" jhe="" affair="" but="" we="" can="" put="" little="" confidence="" what="" he="" fays="" :="" yet="" as="" v="" have="" no="" better="" authority="" i="" fhall="" give="" very="" ihort="" abftra="" it="" follows="" faid="" that="" learned="" cofmo-political="" free="" mafonry="" england="" when="" was="" there="" getting="" pupils="" for="" academy="" negleded="" on="" return="" to="" germany.="" some="" time="" after="" fettlement="" roufed="" by="" vifit="" from="" firanger="" who="" paffed="" an="" engliftiman="" whom="" afterwards="" found="" be="" dutch="" officer="" defcription="" which="" bears="" confiderable="" refemblance="" prince="" or="" general="" salms="" gave="" fo="" much="" difturbance="" states="" hill="" more="" excited="" anonymous="" letter="" giving="" him="" account="" society="" employed="" infirudion="" mankind="" and="" plan="" their="" mode="" operations="" nearly="" fame="" with="" no.="" hi.="" then="" fet="" up="" lodge="" principles="" preparation="" engaging="" this="" great="" llopped="" national="" becaufe="" had="" patent="" it.="" obliged="" vjork="" fecret.="" met="" gentleman="" coffee="" houfe="" entreated="" go="" promifed="" gieat="" afiiiiance="" got="" hood="" moft="" need="" now="" working="" concert="" many="" powerful="" though="" unknown="" friends="" each="" own="" circle.="" operation="" xxn.="" gradually="" unfolded="" folemn="" promiies="" being="" made="" acquainted="" colleagues.="" touiid="" effentially="" fcrved="" noole="" cauie=""/>

Page 246Page 246

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.65% accurate
    " • ♦ «3'2 THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. 111. caufe, he was dropped by them in the hour of danger, and thus was made the facrifice for the public good. The lad packet which he received was a requefl; from a Friend to the Union to print two performances fent hjm, with a promife of loo dahlers for his trouble. Thefe were the abominable farce called the Religion Edid, and fome Diflertations on that Royal Proclamation. He then gives an account of his fyflem of Free Mafonry, not very different from Weifliaupt's Mafonic Cbriftianity— and concludes with the following abftrad of the advantages of the Union — Advancement of Science— A general intereft and concern for Arts and Learning— Excitement of TalentsCheck of Scribbling- — Good Education — Liberty — -. Equality — Hofpitaiity — Deli very of many from Misfortunes— Union of the Learned—- and at lafl-— perhaps—Amen. What the meaning of this enigmatical conclufion is we can only guefs— and our conjedures cannot be very favourable. The narration, of which this is a very fhort index, is abundantly entertaining; but the opinion of the mod intelligent is, that it is in a great meafure fiditious, and that the contrivance of the Union is moftly his own. Although it could not be legally proved that he was the author of the farce, every perfon in court was convinced that he was, and indeed it is perfedly in Bahrdt's very lingular manner. This invalidates the whole of his ilory — and he afterwards acknowledges the farce (at lead by implication) in feveral writings, and boafts of it. For thefe reafons I have omitted the narration in detail. Some information, however, which I have received hnce, feems to confirm his account, w-hilc it diminiihes its importance. I now find that the book called Fuller Information is the performance of a clergyman

Page 247Page 247

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.14% accurate
    ■A-', CHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. ^3^ a ciergvir.an cnlled ^chutz, of the lowed clafs, and bv no means of an eminent charadler. — Another performance in the form of a dialogue between X, y, and Z, giving nearly the fame account, is by Potr, the dear friend of Bradht and of his Union, and author of the Commentary on the Edi

Page 248Page 248

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.16% accurate
    234 THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. iii. minati working In another form. There Is no denying that the principles, and even the manner of proceeding, are the fame in every effential circu alliance. Many paragraphs of the declamations circulated through Germany with the plans, are tranicribed verbatim from Weifhaupt's Corrected Jyftem of Illuminatifm. Much of the work On Injlruction^ and the Means for promoting it^ is very nearly a copy of the fame work, blended with floveniv extracls '  1/ from fom.e of his own writings — There is the fame feries of deluhons from the beginning, as in Illuminatilm — Free Mafonry and Chriflianity are compounded— lirfl: v/ith marks of refpecl — then Chriftianity is twifted to a purpofe foreign from it, but the fame with that aimed at by Weifhaupt — then it is thrown away altogether, and Natural Religion and Atheifm fubllituted for it— For no perfon will have a moment's hefitation in faying, that this is the creed of the author of the books On Inftruclion and On the Liberty of the Prefs, Nor can he doubt that the political principles are equally anarchical with thole of the iiluminati. — The endeavours aifb to get pofreiiion of public ofBccs — of places of education— of the public mind, by the Reading Societies, and by publications — are {.o many tranicripts from the liluminati. Add to this, that Dr. Bahrdt was an Illiimlnatus — and wrote the Better than Horus^ at the command of Weidiaupt, Nay, it is well known that Weidiaupt was twice or thrice at Bahrdt's R.uhe duriug thofe tranf^.c^lions^ and that he zcaloudy promoted the formation of Ftcadiug Societies in feveral places. — But 1 am rather of the opinion that Weidiaupt made thofc vifits in order to keep Dr. Bahrdt within tome bounds of decency, and to hinder him from hurting the caiife by his precipitancy, when fpurrcd on by the want of money. WelHiaupt could not work in

Page 249Page 249

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.85% accurate
    €HAP. Hi. THE GERMAN UNION. t^S in fach an unfldlful manner. But he would be very glad of fuch help as this coarfe tool could give iiim — and Bahrdt gave great help; for, when lie was imprifoned and his papers (eized, his Archives,, as he called them, fiiewed that there v*7ere many Reading Sccicties which his proje£t had drawn together. The Prullian States had above thirty, and the number of readers was aftonifningly great — and it was found, that the pernicious books had really found their way into every hut. Bahrdt, by defcending a ftory lower than Weidiaupt, has greatly increafcd the number of his pupils. But, although I cannot confider the German Union as a formal revival of the Order under another name, I mud hold thofe United^ and the members of thoie Heading Societies, as Illuminati 2iX\(l ,Mhierva!s, I muib even confider the Union as a part of Spartacus' work. The plans of Wei(haupt were partly carried into eifedt in their different branches — they were pointed out, and the way to carry them on are diflinctiy defcribed in the private coriefpondence of the Order — It required little genius to attempt them in imitation, Bahrdt made the attempt, and in part ILcceedcd. Weiiliaupt's hopes were well founded — The leaven was not only diflributed, but the management of the fermentation was now underftocd, and it went on apace* It is to be remarked, that nothing was found among Bahrdt's papers to fupport the (lory he writes in his diary — no fuch correfpondenccs — but enough for detcdting many of thefe Societies. Many others however were found unconncdled with Eahrdt'sRuhe, not of better character, either as to Morality or Loyalty, and fome of them conliderable and cxpenfive; and many proofs were found

Page 250Page 250

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.91% accurate
    2^6 THE GERxMAN UNION i 6HAP. ilh found of a combination to force the public to a certain way of thinking, by the management of the Reviews and Journals. The extenfive dealings of Nicholai of Berlin gave him great weight in the book-making trade, which in Germany furpaiFes all our conceptions. The catalogues of jiew writings in ilieets, which are printed twice a-year for each of the fairs at Leipzig and Frankfort, would allonifh a Britiili reader by the numbereThe bookfellers meet there, and at one glance fee the whole republic of literature, and, like Roman fenators, decide the fentiments of diflant provinces. By thus feeing the whole togethery their fpeculations are national, and they really have it in their power to give what turn they pleafe to the literature and to the fentiments of Germany. Still however they mud be induced by motives. The motive of a merchant is gain, and every object appears in his eye fomething by which money may be made. Therefore in a luxurious and voluptuous nation, licentious and freethinking books will abound. The writers fuggelf^ and the bookfellers think how the thing w^ill tickle* Yet it mufl not be inferred, from the prevalenceof fuch books, that fuch is the common fenfe of mankind, and that the writings are not the corrupters, but the corrupted, or that they arc what they ought to be, becaufe they pleafe the publicoWe need only pulh the matter to an extremity^ and its caufe appears plain. Filthy prints will always create a greater crowd before the (hop window than the fineft performances of Wollett. Licentious books will be read w^ith a fluttering eagernefs, as long as they are not univerfally permitted ^ and pitiable will be the ftate of the nation when their number makes them familiar and no longer captivating. But

Page 251Page 251

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.13% accurate
    CHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. 237 Bat although it mull be confeiTed that great encouragement was given to the fceptical, infidel, and licentious writings in Germany, we fee that it was flill necefTary to pratitifc feduftion. The Religionifl was made to expe(^ Ibme engaging exhibition of his faith. The Citizen mult be told that his civil connexions are refpe£ted, and will be improved ; and all are told that good manners or virtue is to be fupported. Man is fuppofed to be, in very eflential circumftances, what he wifhes to be, and feels he ought to be : and he is corrupted by means of falfefhood and trick. The principles by which he is wheedled into wickednefs in the lirll inflance, are therefore fuch as are really addreffed to the general fentim^ents of mankind : thele therefore lliould be confidered as more expredive of the public mind than thofe which he afterwards adopts, after this artificial education. Therefore Virtue, Patriotifm, Loyalty, Veneration for true and undefiled Religion, are really acknowledged by thofe corrupters to be the -prevailing fentiments ; and they are good if this prevalence is to be the teft of worth. The mind that is otherwife aifedted by them, and hypocritically ufes them in order to get hold of the uninitiated, that he may in time be made lo cherifti the contrary fentiments, cannot be a good mind, notwithitanding any pretenfions it may make to the love of mankind. No man, not Weiftiaupt himfelf, has made flronger profeiTions of benevolence, of regard for thehappinefs of mankind, and of every thing that is amiable, than Dr. Bahrdt. It may not be ufelefs to enquire what effect fuch principles have had on his own mind, and thofe of his chief coadjutors. Deceit of every kind is diflionourable ; and the deceit that is profelfedly employed in the pro2 G ceedingi

Page 252Page 252

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.65% accurate
    238 THE GERMAN UNION. CHAPUU ccedings of the Union is no exception. No pious fraud ^whatever mud be ufed, and pure religion mud be prefented to the view without all difguife. ** The more fair Virtue's feen, the more '^\t charms. ** Safe, plain, and eafy, are her artlefs ways. ** With face ereft, her eyes look ftrait before ; ** For dauntlefs is her march, her Hep fecure. ** Not fo, pale Fraud — now here fhe turns, now there, ** Still feeking darker fhades, fecure in none, ** Looks often back, and wheeling round and round, ** Sinks headlong in the danger (he would ftiun.'* The mean motive of the Protellant Sceptic is as inconfiftent with our notions of honefty as with our notions of honour ; and our fufpicions are juftly raifed of the character of Dr. Bahrdt and his afrociates,even although we do not fuppofe that their aim is the total aboliihing of religion. With propriety therefore may we make fome enquiry about their lives and conduct. Fortunately this is eafy in the prefent inftance. A man that has turned every eye upon himfelf can hardly efcape obfervation. But it isnotfo eafy to get fair information.    The peculiar fituation of Dr. Bahrdt, and the caufe between him and the public, are of all others the moft productive of millake, mifreprefentation, obloquy, and injuftice. But even here we are fortunate. Many remarkable parts of his life are eftablifhed by the mod refped:able teftimony, or by judicial evidences; and, to make all fure, he has written his own life. I Ihall infert nothing here that is not made out by the two laft modes of proof, reding nothing on the fird, however refpeftable the evidence may be. But I mud obferve, that his life was alfo written, by his dear friend Pott, the partner of Walther the bookfeller.

Page 253Page 253

CHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. 239 ler. The flory of this publication is curious, and it is inftrudtive. Bahrdt was in prifon, and in great poverty. He intended to write his own life, to be printed by Wakher, under a iidlitious name, and in this work he intended to indulge his fpleen and his diflikc of all thofe who liad offended him, and in particular all priefls, and rulers, and judges, who had given him fo much trouble. He knew that the (Irange, and many af them fcandalous anecdotes, with which he had fo liberally interlarded many of his former publications, would let curiofity on tiptoe, and would procure a rapid fale as foon as the public ftiould guefs that it was his own performance, by the lingular but lignificant name which the pretended author would aiTume. He had almofl agreed with Walther for a thoufand dahlers, (about L. 200), when he wasimprifoned for being the author of the farce fo often named, and of the commentary on the Religion Edidl^ written by Pott, and for the proceedings of the German Union. He was refufed the ufe of pen and ink. H# then applied to Pott, and found means to correfpond with him, and to give him part of his life already v/ritten, and materials for the reft, confifting of flories, and anecdotes, and correfpondence. Pott fent him fcveral Iheets, with which he was fo pleaied, that they concluded a bargain. Bahrdt fays, that Pott was to have 400 copies, and that the reft was to go to the maintenance of Bahrdt and his family, confifting of his wife, daughter, a Chriftina and her children who lived with them, Sec, Pott gives a different account, and the truth was different from both, but of little confequence to us. Bahrdt's papers had been feized, and fearched for evidence of his tranfaclions, but the ftri

Page 254Page 254

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.81% accurate
    2^0 THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. ii'l. charge, and do paper was abdradled which did not relate to thele. All others were kept in a Tealed room. Pott procured the removal of thefcals and got poiFellion of them. Bahrdt lays, that Ivis wife and daughter came to him in prifon, ahnoft flarving, and told him that now that the room was opened, Pott had made an offer to write for their fupport, if he had the ufe of thcfe papers — that this was the conclufion of the bargain, and that Pott took away all the papers. N. B. Pott was the alTociate of Walther, who had great confidence in him ( Anecdotenhnch fur meinen kihen Ajiitjbr'uder^ p, 400) and had conducted the bufmefs of Stark's booii, as has been already mentioned. No man was better knov/n to Bahrdt, for they had long a£ted together as chief hands in the Union. He would therefore write the life of its founder cort amore^ and it might be expected to be a rare and tickling performance. And indeed it was. The firfl part of it only was publifhed at this time ; and the narration reaches from the birth of the hero till his leaving Leipzig in 1768' The attention is kept fully awake, but the emotions which fucceiRvcly occupy the mind of the reader are nothing but llrong degrees of averfion, diigulf, and horror. The figure fet up to view is a monfter, a man of talents indeed, and capable of great things; but loft to truth, to virtue, and even to the atlectation of common decency — In fliort, a (hamelefs profligate. — Poor Bahrdt was alioniflied, — (tared - — but, having his wits about him, faw that this life would {^\\^ and would alfo fell another. — Without lofs of time, he faid that he would hold Pott to his bargain — but he reckoned without his hod. " No, no,'' faid Potr, *' your are not the " man I took you for — your correipondence was *' put into my bands— 1 law that you had de'' ceived

Page 255Page 255

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.55% accurate
    CHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. 24I u (( it, " ceived me, and it was my duty, as a man -wko loves truth above all things ^ to hinder you from deceiving tlie world. 1 have not written the book you deiired me. i did not worii for you, but for myieif — therefore you get not a grofchen.'* " Why, Sir," faid Bahrdt, we>" both imow that this won't do. You and i have *' ah'cadv tried it. You received Stark's manu" fcript, to be printed by Walther — Walther and " you Tent it hither to Michaelis, that I might fee it during the printings 1 wrote an illuitratino and a key, which made the fellow very ridiculous, and they were printed together, with one title page. — -You know that we were caft in court. — Waither was obliged to print the work " as Stark firil ordered, and we loft all our la" hour. — So ftiall you now% for I will commence " an adlion this inilant, and let me fee with what *' face you will defend yourfeif, w^ithin a few " weeks of your lail appearance in court." Pctl faid, " You may try this. My w^ork is already fold, " and difperfed over all Germany — and I have " no objection to begin yours to-morrow — believe " me, it will fell.'' Bahrdt pondered — and refolved to write one himfelf. This is another fpecimen of the Union, Dr. Carl Frederick Bahrdt was born in 1 741. His father was then a parifn minifter, and afterwards Profeifor of Theology at Leipzig, where he died^ in 1775* The youth, when at College, enlifted in the PruiTian fervice as a huffar, but was bought off by his father. He was M. A. in 1 76 1. Ke became caret hift in his father's church, was a popular preacher, and pubiidied fermons in 1765, and fome controverfial writings, which did him honour — But he then began to indulge  in conviviality, and in anonymous pafquinades,

Page 256Page 256

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.12% accurate
    242 THE GERMAN UNION, CHAP, ill, iiades, uncommonly bitter and offenfive. No perfon was lafe — ProfefTors — Magiftrates — Clergymen, had his chief notice — alio ftudents — and even comrades and friends. (Bahrdt lays, that thefe things might cut to the quick but they were all juft. j Unluckily his temperament was what the atomical philofophers (who can explain every thing by asthers and vibrations) call fanguine. He therefore (his own word) was apaffionate admirer of the ladies. Coming home from fupper he frequently met a young Mifs in the way to his lodgings, neatly drelTed in a rofe-coloured filk jacket and train, and a fable bonnet, coftly, and like a lady. One evening (after fome old Kenifh, as he fays,) he faw the lady home. Some time after, the miftrefs of the houfe, Madam Godfchuflcy, came into his room, and faid that the poor maiden was pregnant. He could not help that — but it was very unfortunate, and would ruin him if known. — He therefore gave the old lady a bond for 200 dahlers, to be paid by inftalments of twenty-five.  *' The girl was fenfible, and good, and as he had ** already paid for it, and her converfation was " agreeable, he did not dilcontinae hisacquaint" ance." A comrade one day told him, that one Bel, a magiftrate, whom he had lampooned, knew the affair, and would bring it into court, unlefs he immediately retrieved the bond. This bond was the only evidence, but it was enough. Neither Bahrdt nor his friend could raife the money. But they fell on another contrivance. They got Madam Godfchufl<:y to="" meet="" them="" at="" another="" houfe="" in="" order="" receive="" the="" money.="" bahrdt="" was="" a="" clofet="" and="" his="" comrade="" wore="" fword.="" woman="" could="" not="" be="" prevailed="" on="" produce="" bond="" till="" balirdt="" arrive="" money="" put="" into="" her="" hands="" with="" aprefcnt="" herfelf.=""/>

Page 257Page 257

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.98% accurate
    •HAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. 24J comrade tvied to flutter her, and, drawing his Iword, (hewed her how men fenced — made pafies at the wall — and then at her — but (he was too firm — he then threw away his fword, and began to ti y to force the paper from her. She defended herfelf a good while, but at length he got the paper out of her pocket, tore it in pieces, opened the clofet door, and laid, " There you b  , there " is the honourable fellow whom you and your *' wh — have bullied — but it is with me you have " to do now, and you know that I can bring you '' to the gallows.*' There was a great ftquabble to be fure, fays Bahrdt, but it ended, and I thought all was now over. — But Mr. Bel had got word of it, and brought It into court the very day. that Bahrdt was to have made fome very reverend appearance at church. In (liort, after many attempts of his poor father to fave him, he was obliged to fend in his gown and band, and to quit the place. It was fome comfort, how^ever, that Madam Godichuiky and the young Mifs did not fare much better. They were both imprifoned. Madam G. died lometime after of Ibme (liocking difeafe. The court records give a very different account of the v/hole, and particularly of the fciffle; bfeit Bahrdt's ftory is enough. Bahrdt fays, that his father was fevere— but acknovviedges that his own temperament was hafty, (why does not his father's temperament excufe fomething? Vibratiuncula will explain everything or nothing. '' therefore (again) I fometimes forgot myfelf. One day I laid a loaded piftol on the table, and toid him that he (hould meet with that if he went on fo. But I was only feventeen." Dr. Bahrdt was, of courfe, obliged to leave the place. His friends, and Semler in particular, 2iVi eminent theological writer, who had formed a very favourable

Page 258Page 258

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.21% accurate
    ^44 "^^E GERMAN UNION. CHAP. HI, favourable opinion of his uncommon talents, were aiTidiious in their endeavours to get an edabiifhnient for him. But his high opinion of himfeif, his temper, impetuous, precipiianf.and overbearing, and a bitter fatirical habit which he had freelv induked in his oulfet of life, m.ade their endeavours very inetfedual. x^t lad he got a profefforfhip at Erlangen, then at Erfurth, and in 1771, at Gieffen. But in all thefe places he was no fooner fettled than he got into difputes v;nth his colleagues and with the eflablifhed church, being a llrenuous partizan of the innovations which were attempted to be made in the doctrines of chriftianity. In his anonymous publications, he did not trufl to rational difcuiTion alone, but had recourfe to ridicule and perfonal anecdotes, and indulged in the mod cutting farcafms and grofs fcurrility. Being fond of convivial company, his income was infuSicient for the craving demand, and as foon as he found that anecdote and flander always procured readers, he never ceafed writing. He had wonderful readinefs and adivity, and fpared neither friends nor foes in his anonymous performances. But this could not lad, and his avowed theological writings were fuch as could not be fuffered in a Profelfor of Divinity. The very dudents at Gieden were (hocked with fome of his liberties. After much wrangihig in the church judicatories he was jud going to be difmided, when he got an invitation to Marfchlins in Switzerland to fuperintend an academy. He went thither about the year 1 776, and formed the feminary after the model of Bafedow's Philanthropine, or academy, at Dedau, of which I have already given fome account. It had acquired fome celebrity, and the plan was peculiarly fuiied to Bahrdt's tade, becaufe it left him at liberty to introduce any fydeai of religious or irreligious opinions

Page 259Page 259

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.88% accurate
    «c ^HAP, ill; THE GERMAN UNION. 245 opinions that he pleafed. He refolved to avail himfelf of this libert}^ and though a clergyman and Dodor of Theolog}', he would outftrip even Bafedovv, who had no ecclefiaftical orders to reftrain him. But he wanted the moderation, the prudence and the principle of Bafedow. He had, by this time, formed his opinion of mankind, by meditating on the feelings of his own mind. His theory of human nature was fimpie — '' The leading propeniities, fays he, of the human mind are three — Inftinc^ive liberty  (Freyheitftriebe) — inftindlive adivity (Triebe fur Thatigkeit)  and inftindive love (Liebes triebe)." I do not wifli to mifunderftand him, but I can give no other tranilation.— ^' If a man is obftruded in the exercife of any of thefe propenii-^ ties he fuffers an injury. — The bufmefsof a good education therefore is to teach us how they are to be enjoyed in the highefl degree." We need not be furprifed although the Dodor fliould find it difficult to manage the Cyclopedia in his Philanthropine in fuch a manner as to give fatisfaclion to the neighbourhood, which was habituated to very different fentiments, — Accordingly he found his fituation as uncomfortable as at Gieflen. He fays, in one of his latefl performances, that the Grifons were a ilrong inftance of the immenfe importance of education. They knew: nothing but their handicrafts, and their minds were as coarfc as their perfons.'' He quarrelled with them all, and was obliged to abfcond after lying fometime in arreft. He came to Durkheim or Turkheim, where his father w^as or had been miniller. His literary talents were well known» — After fo me little time he got an afibciation formed for ere£ling and fupporting a Philanthropine or houfe of education. A large fund was coile£led, and he was enabled to 2 H travel

Page 260Page 260

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.76% accurate
    246 THE GEPvMAN UNlON.f CHAP^ llL travel into Holland and England, to engage pupil?^ and was furnillied with proper recommendations.— On Ills return the plan was carried into execution. The caflle or refidence of Count Leining Hartzburgh, at lieidelhcim, having gardens, park, and every handfome accommodation, had been fitted up for it, and it w^as coniecrated by a folemn religious fellival in 1778. But his old misfortunes purfued him. He had indeed no colleagues to quarrel with, but his avowed publications became every day more obnoxious— and when any of his anonymous pieces had a great run, he could not itifie his vanity and conceal the author's name. Of thefe pieces, fome were even (liocking to decency. It was indifferent to him whether it was friend or foe that he abuled ; and fome of them were fo horribly injurious to the characters of the mofi: refpeciable men in the (late, that he was continually under the correction of the courts of jufHce. There was hardly a man of letters that had ever been in his company who did not fuffer by it. For his conftant practice was to father every nev^ flcp that he took towards Atheiim on fome other perfon ; and, whenever the reader fees, in the beginning of a book, any perfon celebrated by the author for found fenfe, profound judgment, accurate reafoning, or praiied for a£ts of friendfliip and kindnefs to himfelf, he may be allured that, before tliC clofe of the book, this man will convince Dr, Bahrdt in fome private converfation, that fome doctrine, cheriihed and venerated by all Chriitians, is a piece of knavilh fuperftition. So lofl was Dr. Bahrdt to all fenfe of ftiame. He faid that he held his own opinions independent of all mankind, and was indifferent about their praile or their reproach. Bahrdt's

Page 261Page 261

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.63% accurate
    CHAP. ill. THE GERMAN UNION. 24^ Bahrdt's licentious, very licentions life, was the "caufe of moft of thefe enormities. No income could fuifice and he wrote for bread. "The artful manner in whicii the literary manufadlure of Germany was conducted, made it im.poilible to hinder the rapid difperfion of his writings over all Germany ; and the indelicate and coarfe maw of the public was as ravenous as the fenfuality of Ur, Br^.hrdt, who really battened in the Epicurean fly. The coniequence of all this was that he was obliged to {]y from Reidefneim, leaving his furetics in \\\^ Pkilanthropine to pay about 14,000 dahlers, befides debts without number to his friends. He was impriibned at Dienheim., but was releafed I know not bow, and fettled at Halle. There he funk to be a keeper of a tavern and billiard-table, and his houfe became the relort and the bane of the (Indents in the Univerfity, — He was obliged therefore to leave the city. He had fomehow got funds which enabled him to buy a little vineyard, prettily fituated in the neighbourhood. This he fitted up with every accommodatioti that could invite the fludents, and called it Bahrdfs Ruke, We have already feen the occupations of Dr. B. in this Buen Retiro — Can we call it otium cum dignitafe ? Alas, no ! He had not lived two years here, buftling and toiling for the German Union, fometimes without a bit of bread — when he was fent to prifon at Halle, and then to Magdeburg, where he was more than a year in jail. He was fct at liberty, and returned to Bakrdfs Ruhe^ not, alas, to live at eafe, but to lie down on afick-bed, where, after more than a year's fuifering increaiing pain, he died on the 23d of April 1793, the mod wretched and loathfome victim of unbridled fenfuality. The account of his cafe is written by a friend, a Dr. Jung, v;ho profefFes to defend his memory

Page 262Page 262

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.22% accurate
    248 THE GERxMAN UNION, CHAP, iHj memory and his principles. The medical defcripr tion melted my heart, and I am certain would make his bitterell enemy weep. Jung repeatedly fays, tl-at the cafe was not venereal — calls it the vineyard difeafe — the quickhlver dileafe, (he was dying of an unconquerable falivation,) and yet, through the whole of his narration, relates fymptoms and futferings, which, as a medical man, he could not poiRbly mean to be taken in any other fenfe than as effects of pox. He meant to pleafe the enemies of poor Bahrdt, knowing that fuch a man could have no friends, and being himfelf ignorant of what friendfhip or goodnefs is. The fate of this poor creature affected me more than any thing I have read of a great while. Ail his open enemies put together have not faid fo much ill of him as his trulted friend Pott, and another confident, whofe name I cannot recolle^l, who publiihed in his lifetime an anonymous book called Bahrdt with the Iron Brow—^ind this fellov/ Jung, under the abfurd majfk of friendfiiip, exhibited the loathfome car cafe for a florin, like a malefactor's at Surgeon's Hall, Such were the fruits of the German Union, of that Illumination that was to refine the heart of man, and bring to maturitv the feeds of native virtue, which are choaked in the hearts of other men by fuperfrition and defpotifm. We fee nothing but mutual treachery and bafe defertion, I do not concern myfelf with the gradual perverlion of Dr. Bahrdt's moral and religious opinions. But he affe£ted to be the enlightener and reformer of mankind; and ailirmed tliat all the mifchiefs in life originated from defpotifm fupported by fuperllition. " In vain," fays he, *' do " we complain of the ineiiicacy of religion. All " pofitive religion is founded en injuPiice. No " Prince

Page 263Page 263

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.40% accurate
    CHAF. ill. THE GERMAN UNION, 249 *' Prince has a right to prefcribc or faiKftion zuy " fuch iyftem. Nor would he do it, were not ** the prieils the firmell pillars of his tyranny, '' and liiperilition the ilrongeft fetters for hisfub*' jeds. He dares not fnow Religion as (he is — *' pure and undefiled — She would charai the eyes *' and the hearts of mankind, would immediately ^' produce true morality, would open the eyes *' of freeborn man, would teach him what are ^'' his rights, and who are his opprtiTors, and " Princes would vanifh from the face of the ** earth." Therefore, without troubling ourfelves with. the truth or fallehood of his religion of Nature, and afTuming it as an indifputable point, that Dr. Bahrdt has feen it in this natural and fo efreclive purity, it is furely a very pertinent queftion, *' Whether has the fight produced on his mind *' an effe£t fo far fuperior to the acknow^ledged " faintnels of the impreilion of Chriitianity on " the bulk of mankind, that it will be prudent to " adopt the plan of the German Union, and at •*' once put an end to the divifions which fo un" fortunately alienate the minds of profelRng " Chriftians from each other ?" The account here given of Dr. Bahrdt's life feems to decide the quellion. But it wall be faid, that I have only related fo many inllances of the quarrels of Prieiis and their flavilh adherents, with Dr. Bahrdt. Let us view him in his ordinary conduct, not as the champion and martyr of Illumination, but as an ordinary citizen, a hufband, a father, a friend, a teacher of youth, a clergyman. When Dr. Bahrdt was a parifh-minifler, and prefident of fome inferior ecclefiailicai diflrid, he u as empovv-ered to take off the cenfures of the church from

Page 264Page 264

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.15% accurate
    250 THE GERMAN UNION?. 6HAP. ill, from a yoving woman who had born a baflard child. By violence he again reduced her to the fame condition, and efcaped cenfure, by the poor girl's dyini^ of a fever before her pregnancy was far advanced, or even legally documented. Aifo, on the night of the folemn farce of confecrating his Philanthropine, he debauched the maid-fervant, who bore twins, and gave him up for the father. The thing, I prefume, was not judicially proved, otherwi'e he would have furely been difgraced ; but it was afterwards made evident, by the letters which were found by Pott, when he undertook to write his life. A fsries of thefe letters had paiTed between him and one Graf, a fleward, who was employed by him to give the woman the fmall pittance by which {he and the infants were maintained. Remonftrances were made when the money v;as not advanced ; and there are particularly letters about the end of I779, which fhow that Bahrdc had ceafed giving any thing. On the of February 1780, the infants (three years old) were taken away in the night, and were found expofed, the one at Uffiein, and the other at Worms, many miles difiant from each other, and almoft frozen to death. The firil was difcovered by its moans, by a ftioemaker in a field by the road-fide, about fix in the morning; the other was found by two girls between the hedges in a lane, fet be'cween two great ftones, pall all crying. The poor mother travelled up and dovv/n the country in quell of her infants, and hearing thefe accounts, found rhem both, and took one of them hom.e ; but not being able to maintain both, when Bahrdt's commilTioner refufed contributing any more, it remained with the good woman who had taken it in'''^'. * This is worfe than RouiTeau's conduct, who only fent hfs children to the Foundh'ng hafpit 1, that he might never know them again. (See his ConfefTicns,) Bahrdt

Page 265Page 265

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.63% accurate
    6HAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. ^^l' Bahrdtivas married in 1772, while atGieffen; but after vvaliing the greareli part of his wife's little fortune left her by a former hiifband, he was provoked by loiing 1000 ilor ins (about lio/. ) in the hands of her brother who would not pay it up. After this he ufed her very ill, andfpeaks very contemptuouih/-' of her in his O'vvn account of his life, callins; her a dowdv, jealous, and every thing contemptible. In two infamous novels, he exhibits characters, in which {he is reprefented in a ir.ofi cruel manner; yet this woman (perhaps daring the honey-moon) vvas enticed by him one day into the bath, in the pond of the garden of the Piiilanthrcpineat Hsideilieinj, and there, in the fight of all the pupils did he (alio undreffed) toy vvith his naked wife in the water. When at Haile, he ufed the poor woman extremely ill, keeping a miflrefs in the houfe, and giving her the whole command of the family, while the wiie and daughter were confined to a feparate part of it. When in prifon at Magdeburgh, the ilrumpet lived with him, and bore him two children. -He brought them all to his houfe when he was at liberty.' buch barbarous ufage made the poor woman at iall leave him and live with her brother, llie daughter died about a year before him, of an overdofe of laudanum given by her father, to procure fletp, when ill of a fever. He ended his own v;retched life in the ii^.me manner, unable, poor man, lo bear his diilrefs, Vv'ithout the fmailell compuncfiion or forroyv for his conducl; and the laft thing he did was to fend for a bookfeller, (Vipink' of Halle, who had publifhed fome of his vile pieces,) and recommend his ilrumpet and her children to his protection, without one thought of his injured wife. I (hall end my account of this profligate. monfier with a fpecimen of his way of uhng his friends. '' Of

Page 266Page 266

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.53% accurate
    25^ THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. iiL^ " Of all the acquiiitions which I made in England, Mr. — —-(the name appears at full length) was the mofl: important. This perfon was accompliihed in the highed degree. With foundjudgment, great genius, and correct taile, he was pei fedly a man of the world. He was my friend, and the only perfon who warmly interefled himfelf for my inflitution. To his warm and repeated lecommendations I owe all the pupils I got in England, and many mou refpedable connedions; for he was univerfaliy elieemed as a man of learning and of the moil unblemifhed worth. He wa'^ my friend, my conductor, and I may fay my preferver ; for when I had not bread for two days, he took me to his houfe, and fupplied all my wants. This gentleman was a clergyman, and had a fmall but genteel and feleded congregation, a flock which required ftrong food. My friend preached to them pure natural religion, and was beloved by them. His fermons were excellent, and delivered with native energy and grace, becaufe they came from the heart. I had once the honour of preaching for him. But what a difference—I found myfelf afraid — I feared to fpeak too boldly, becaufe I did not know where I was,and thought myfelf fpeaking lo my crouching countrymen. But the liberty of England opens every heart, and makes it acceihble to morality. i can give a very remarkable inil:ance. *' The women of the town in London do not, to befure, meet with my unqualified approbation in all refpeds. But it is impoffible not to be flruck with the propriety and decency of their manners, fo unlike the clovvnifh impudence of our German V'h — . I could not diffinguiih them from modeft women, otherwife than by their greater attention and eagernefs to (lievv me civility. My friend '' ufed

Page 267

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.64% accurate
    e.HAP. iii; the German union. 253 41 II (C (I iC (I (I ifc ic 41 «l (I &( (IPage 267

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.64% accurate
    e.HAP. iii; the German union. 253 41 II (C (I iC (I (I ifc ic 41 «l (I &( (I

Page 268Page 267

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.64% accurate
    e.HAP. iii; the German union. 253 41 II (C (I iC (I (I ifc ic 41 «l (I &( (I

Page 268

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.67% accurate
    2^^ THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. UI. " my friend ran not the fmalleD: riHc of fuffering ei" tber in his honour or ufefuinefs. — Such is the ef'' fed of freedom." We may be fure, the poor man was afionifhed when he favv his name before the public as one of the enlighteners of Chriftian Europe. He is really a man of worth, and of the moli irreproachable chat rader, and knew that whatever might be the protection of BritiOi liberty, fuch condudl would ruin him with his own hearers, and in the minds of all his refpedabie country mm. He therefore fent a vindication of his charader from this flanderous abufe to the publifhers of the principal newfpapers and literary journals in Germany. The vindication is complete, and B. is convided of having related what he could 7iot pojjlbly have feen, Ic is worthy of remark, that the vindication did not appear in the Berlin MonatIchfift^ nor- in any of the journals which made favorable mention of the performances of the Enlighteners. ** Think not, indignant reader,^' fays Arbuthnot, '' that this man's life is uieleis to mortals." It fliews in a ftrong light the faliity of all his declamations in favour of his fo much praifed natural religion and univerfal kindnefs and humanity. No man of the party writes with more perfuafive energy, and, though his petulance and precipitant felf-conceit lead him frequently aflray, no man has occafionally put all the arguments of thefe philofophers in a clearer light ; yet we fee that all is falie and hollow. He is a vile hypocrite, and the real aim of all his writings is to m/ake money, by foitering the fenfual propenhties of human nature, although he fees and feels that the completion of the plan of the German Union would be an event more dcftrudtive and lamentable than any that can be pointed out in the annals of 111 per Hit ion. I will not favthat all partifans ofPage 269

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.53% accurate
    CUAF. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. 255 of Illiunination are hogs of the fty of Epicurus like this wretch. But the reader muO acknowledge that, in the inllitution of Weifhaupt, there is the fame train of fenfual indulgence laid afong the whole, and that purity of heart and life is no part of the morality that is held forth as the perfedion of human nature. The final abolition of Chrlllianity is undoubtedly one of its objecls— whether as an end of their efforts, or as a mean for the attamment of fome end Hill more important. Parity of heart is perhaps the moft diftindive feature of Chriilian morality. Of this Dr. Bahrdt feems to have had no conception; and his inliitution, as well as his writings, fhew hira to have been a very cuarfe fenfualift. But his tafie, though coai'fe, accorded with wh^t Weifhaupt confidered as a ruling propenfity, by which he had the beft chance of fecuring the fidelity of his fubjeds. — Craving deiires, beyond the bonds of our means, were the natural confequences of indulgence ; and fince the purity of Chriilian morality ftood in his way, his firft care was to clear the road by rooting it out altogether— What can follow but general difTolutenefs of manners ? Nothing can more diftindly prove the crooked politics of the Reformers than this. It may be confidered as the main-{|3ring of tlieir whole machine. Tbsir pupils were to be led by means of their fenfual appetites, and the aim of their condudors was not to inform them, but merely to lead them ; not to reform, but to rule the world, —They \vould reign, though in hell, rather than ferve in heaven. — Dr. Bahrdt was a true Apoflle of llluminatifm ; and though his torch was m.adc of the grofTeft materials, and " lerved only to dif*' cover fights of woe," the horrid glare darted into every corner, roufmg hundreds of filthy vermin, and direding their flight to the rotten carrion

Page 270Page 270

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.73% accurate
    256 THE GERMAN UNION, CHAP, ill, rion where they could beft depofit their poiion and their eggs ; in the breafts, to wit, of the ienfual and profligate, there to feOer and burit forth in a new and filthy progeny ; and it is afLonin-'ing what numbers were thus roufed into adlion. Tne fcheme of Reading Societies had taken prodigioufly, and became a very profitable part of the literary trade of Germany. The bookfellers and writers foon perceived its importance, and afted in concert. I might iill a volume with extrads from the criticifms which were publiihed on the Religion Edidl fo often mentioned already. The Leipzig catalogue for one year contained 173. Although it concerned the Prullian States alone, thefe appeared in every corner of Germany; nay, alfo in Holland, in Flanders, in Hungary, in Switzerland, in Courland. and in Livonia. This fliows it to have been the operation of an Aflbciated Band, as was intim.ated to the King, with fo much petulance by Mirabeau. There was (pail all doubt) fuch a combination among the innumerable fcribblers w^ho fupplied the fairs of Leipzig and Frankfort.    Mirabeau calls it a Conjuration des Philojopkes^ an expreffion very clear to himlclf, for the myriads of gareteeis who have long fed the craving mouth of Paris ('' always thirfting after fome ^' new thing'') called themfelves philofophers, and, like the gangs of St, Giles's, converfed with each other in a cant of their own, full pf morale^ of energie^ of bienvillance^ &c. &c. c^c, unintelligible or mifunderftood by other men, and ufed for the purpofe of deceit. While Mirabeau lived too, they formed a Ccnjuration, The J4th of July 1790, the moil folemn invocation of the Divine pretence ever made on the face of this earth, put gn end to the propriety of this appellation; for it became

Page 271Page 271

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.72% accurate
    eHAP. ill. THE GERMAN UNION. *X^'J became neceiTary (in the progrefs of political Illumination) to declare that oaths were nonfenfe, becaiife the invoked wss a creature of the imai^i■•--3 nation, and the grand federation, like VVieiliaiipt and Bahrdt's Mafonic Chriftianity, is declared, to thofe initiated into the higher myfteries, to be a lie. But if we liave no longer a Conjiircition des Philofopkes^ we have a gang of fcribblers that has got poiTeilion of the public rnind by their management of the literary Journals of Germany, and have made licentious fcntiments in politics, jn morals, and in religion, as familiar as were formerly the articles of ordinary news. All the fceptical writings of England put together will not make half the number that have appeared in Proteftant Germany during tlie laft twelve or fifteen years. And, in the Criticifms on the Edid, it is hard to fay whether infidelity or difloyalty fills the mod pages. To fuch a degree had the Illuminati carried this favourite and important point that they obtained the direction even of thole whofe office it vv^as to prevent it. There is at Vienna, as at Berlin, an otiice for examining and licenfing writings before they can have their courfe in the market. This ofdce pcbliihes annually an index of forbidden books. In this index are included the accouut of the laft Operations of Spartacus and Philo in the Order of Illuminati^ and a difTertation on The Final OverthroTu of Free Majonry^ a moil excellent performance, fliowing the gradual corruption and final pefverfion of that fociety to a ieminary of fedition. Alfo the Vienna Magazine of Literature and Arts^ which contains many accounts of the interferences of the Illuminati in the difturbances of Europe. The Cenfor who occaiioned this prohibition was an Illuminatus named Retzer. He

Page 272Page 272

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.02% accurate
    25^ THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP, lli, He makes a mod pitiful and jefr.itical defence, fliowing bimfelf completely veriant in ^11 the chicane of the Ilhimhiati^ and devoted to their Infidel   principles. (See Rel, Begebtnh, 1795, p. 493') There are two performances which give us much information refpecling the ilate of moral and political opinions in Germany about this time. One of them is called, Proofs of a hidden Ccmbination to deflroy the Freedom of Thought and PFriting in Germany, Thefe proofs are general, taken from many concurring circumftances in the condition of German literature. They are convincing to a thinking mind, but arc too abftracled to be very impreilive on ordinary readers. The other is the Appeal to my Country^ which I mentioned in page 84. This is much more driking, and in each branch of literature, gives a progrellive account of the changes of fentiment, ail flipported by the evidence of the books themfelves. The author puts it pad contradiftion, that in every fpccies of literary compofition into which it was polSble, without palpable abiurdity, to introduce licentious and feditious principles, it was done. Many romances, novels, journeys through Germany and other countries*, are written i^vxx purpofe to attach praife or reproach to certain ientiments, charafters, and pieces of conduft. The Prince, the nobleman, is made deipotic, opprcifive, unfeeling or ridiculous— the poor, and the man of talents, are unfortunate iind. negletled— and here and there a fidlitious Gralf>

Page 273

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.85% accurate
    CHAP. iii. THE GERMAN UNION. 2^g made a divinity, by philanthropy cxprefTed in romantic charity and kindnefs, or olleritatious indifference for the Jittle honours w hich are fo precious in the eyes of a German. — In iliort, the fyftem of Wei(haupt and Knigge is carried into vigorous efFc

Page 274Page 274

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.58% accurate
    26o THE GERiMAN UNION. CHAP ill* < were going on, there did not fail to appear fome individuals of more than common zeal and aftivity, who took the lead, each in his own circle. This gave a confiftency and unity to the operations of the reft, and they, encouraged by this cooperation, couid now attempt things whicli they would not other wife have ventured on. It is not till this ftate of things obtains, that this influence becomes fenfible to the public. Philo, in his public declaration, unwarily lets this appear. Speakin

Page 275Page 275

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.06% accurate
    CHAP. ilL TH£ GURMAN U^ION. tQl lands. He had, before this time, taken into his fervice Zwack, the Gato of the Illuminati. The projed had gone fome length when it was difcovered and fuppreded by the States. Zimmerman, who had been Prefident of the Illuminati in Manheim, was alfo a mofl: active perfon in propagating their dodrines in other countries. He was employed as a miffionary, and ere^ed fome Lodges even in Rome — alfo at Neufchatel — and in Hungary. He was frequently feen in the latter place by a gentleman of my acquaintance, and preached up all the oftenfible dodrines of IHuminatifm in the moft public manner, and made many profelytes. But when it v/as difcovered that the r real and fundamental dodrines were different from thofe which he profeffed in order to draw in profelytes, Zimmerman left the country in hafte. — Some time after this he was arreted in Pruffia forfeditious harangues— but he efcaped, and has not been heard of fince. — When he was in Hungary he boaffed of having ereded above an hundred Lodges *n different parts of Europe, fome of which were in England, That the Illumhiati and other hidden Cofmo-political focieties had fome influence in bringing about the French Revolution, or at leall in accelerating it, can hardly be doubted, Iti reading the fecret correfpondence, I was always furprifed at not finding any reports from France, and fomething like a hefitation about eftablifhing a milTion there ; nor am I yet able thoroughly to account for it. But there is abundant evidence-that they interfered, both in preparing for it in the fame manner as in Germany, and in accelerating its progre/fs. Some letters in the % K Brunfwick

Page 276Page 276

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.81% accurate
    262 THE GERMAN UNION. CHAP. iiL Brunfvvick Journal from one Campe^ who was an infpedor of the feminaries of education, a man of talents, and an Illuminatus^ put it beyond doubt. He was refiding in Paris during its firfi: movements, and gives a minute account of them, lamenting their exceffes, on account of their imprudence, and the rifk of {hocking the nation, and thus deftroying the projed, but juftifying the motives, on the true principles of Cofmo-politifm. The Vienna Zeitichrift and the Magazine of Literature and Fine Arts for 1790, and other pamphlets of that date, fay the fame thing in a clearer manner. I fhall lay together fome paiTages from fuch as I have met with, w^hich I think will fhew beyond all poflibility of doubt that the IJluminati took an adive part in the whole tranfadion, and may be fald to have been its chief contrivers. I fhall premife a few obfervations, which will give a clearer view of the matter.

Page 277Page 277

f 263 ] CHAP. IV. The French Revolutiofj, D URING thefe diflenfions and dlfcontents, 3nd this general fermentation of the public mind in Germany, political occurrences in France gave exercife and full fcope for the operation of that fpirit of revolt which had long growled in fecret in the different corners of that great empire. The Cofmo-political and fceptical opinions and fentiments fo much cultivated in all the Lodges of the Phila' lethes had by this time been openly profefled by many of the fages of France, and artfully interwoven with their flatiftical economics* The many contelts between the King and the Parliament of Paris about the regiftration of his edids, had given occaiion to much difcufFion, and had made the public familiarly acquainted with topics altogether unfuitable to the abfojute monarchy of France. This acquaintance with the natural expedations of the fubjecfl, and the expediency of a candid attention on the part of Government to thefe expectations, and a view of Legiflation and Government founded on a very liberal interpretation of all thefe things, was prodigioufly promoted by the raCh interference of France in the difpute between Great Britain and her colonies. In this attempt to ruin Britain, even the court of France was obliged to preach the dodrines of Liberty, and to take its chance that Frenchman would confent to be the only flaves. But their officers and foldiers, who returned from America, imported the z\merican principles, and in every company found hearers who liftened with delight and regret to their fafcinating tale of American independence*

Page 278Page 278

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.30% accurate
    *S54 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. GHAP. IV^ independence. During the war, the Minifter, who had too confidently pledged himfelf for the deilruction of Britain, was obliged to allow the Parifians to amufe themfelves with theatrical entertainments, where Englifh law was reprefented as oppreirion,and every fretful extravagance of the Americans was applauded as a noble flruggle for native freedom.-^. All wiil:ied for a tafte of that liberty and equality which they were allowed to applaud on the ftage ; but as foon as they came from the theatre into the ftreet, they found themfelves under all their former reftraints. The fweet charm had found its way into their hearts, and all the luxuries of France became as dull as common life does to a fond girl wheq fhe lays down her novel. in this irritable fla*-e of mind a fpark was fufficlent for kindling a flame. To import this dangerous delicacy of American growth, France had expended many millions, and was drowned in debts. The mad prodigality of the Royal Family and the Court had drained the treafury, and foreflalled every livreof the revenue. The edids for new taxes and forced loans were mofi: unwelcome and opprefQve. The Avocats au parlemenf had nothing to do with flate-affairs, being very little more than barriflers in the highefl court of jullice ; and the highef}" claim of the Prelidents of this court was to be a fort of humble counfcllors to the King in common matters. Jt Vi^as a very flrange inconfiflency in that ingenious nation to permit fuch people to touch on thole flatefubjeds ; for, in f^^, tht King of Fi ance v/as an abfolute Monarch, ghd the fubjeds were flaves. This is the refuit of all their painful refearch, notwithflanding that glimmerings of natural juflice and of freedom are to be met with in their records. There could not be found in their hifiory io much as a tolerable account of the manner of calling

Page 279Page 279

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.77% accurate
    ^HAP. iV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. t6j calling the nation together, to learn from the people how their chains would bell: pleafe their fancy. Bat jail this was againil nature, and it was neceffary that it fhould come to an end, the firft time that the monarch confeiTed that he could not do every thing unlefs they put the tools into his hands. As things were approaching gradually but rapidly to this condition, the impertinent interference (for fo a Frenchman, fubjed of the Grand Monarch, miijl think it) of the advocates of the Parliament of Paris was popular in the higheft degree ; and it m.uft be confelled, that in general it v/as patriotic, however inconfiftent with the conflitution. They fek themfelves pleading the caufe of humanity and natural juflice. This would embolden honefi: and worthy men to fpeak truth, however unwelcome to the court. In general, it mud alfo be granted that they fpoke with caution and with refped to the fovereign powers ; and they had frequently the pleafure of being the means of mitigating the burdens of the people. The Parliament of Paris, by this condud, came to be, looked up to as a fort of mediator between the King and his fubjeds ; and as the avocats faw this, they naturally rofe in their own eflimation far above the rank in which the conftitution of their government had placed them. For it mull: always be kept in mind, that the robe v/as never coniidered as the drefs of a Nobleman, although the cafTock was. An advocate was merely not a rotourier ; and though we can hardly conceive a profeflion more truly honourable than the difpenfmg of diflributive juftice, nor any Ikili more congenial to a rational mind than that of the praclical morality which v/e, in theory, confider as the light by which they are always conducted ; and although even the artificial conititution of France had long been obliged to bow to the didates of nature and humanity, and confer nobility, and even title.Page 280

tSG THE FRENCH REVOLUTIONT. GHA?. ItT. title, on fuch of the profeflTors of the municipal law as had, by their (kill and their honourable charader, rifen to the firil: offices of their profefTion, yet the Nobleile de la Robe never could incorporate with the NobleiTe du Sang, nor even with the Noblefle de I'Epee. The defcendants of a Marquis de la Robe never could rife to certain dignities in the church and at court. The avocats de la parlement felt this, and fmarted under the exclulion from courthonours ; and though they eagerly courted fuch nobility as they could attain, they feldom omitted any opportunity that occurred during their junior practice, of expofing the arrogance of the NoblefTe, and the dominion of the court. This increafed their popularity, and in the prefent fituation of things, being certain of fupport, they went beyond their former cautious bounds, and introduced in their pleadings, and particularly in their joint remonFrances againft the regiftration of edids, ail the wiredrawn morality, and cofmo-political jurifprudencc, w4iich they had fo often rehearfed in the Lodges, and which had of late been openly preached by the economifls and philofophers. A fignal was given to the nation for engaging " eH maffe" in political difculTion. The Notables were called upon to come and advife the King ; and the points were laid before them, in which his Majefty, (infallible till now)acknowledgedhis ignoranceorhis doubts. Biitwhovvere the Notables? Were they more knowing than the King, or lefs in need of inflrudion? The nation thought otherwife; nay, the court thought otherv^ife; for in fome of the royal proclamations on this occaiion, men of letters were invited to affifl; with theircounfels, and togive what information their reading and experience fhould fuggeft as to the befl method of convoking the States General, and of condueling their deliberations. When a Minifler thus folic^ts

Page 281Page 281

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.37% accurate
    ^HAP. IV. THE FRENCH KEVOLUtlONi ^gy. folicits advice from all the world how to govern, he moil: aflTuredly declares his own incapacity, and tells the people that now they muft govern themfelves. This however was done, and the Minifler, IN'eckar the Philofopher and Philanthropifl: of Geneva, fet the example, by fending in his opinion, to be laid on the council-table with the reft. On this fignal, counfel poured in from every garret, and the prefs groaned with advice in every ftiape. Ponderous volumes were written for the Bifhop or the Duke ; a handfome 8vo for the Notable Officer of eighteen ; pamphlets and fingle (lieets for the loungers in the Palais' Royal, The fermentation was aftonifliing ; but it was no rnorc than fliould have been expected from the moll cultivated, the moft ingeliious, and the lead baQiful nation on earth. All wrote, and all read. Not contented with bringing forth all the fruits which the Illumination of theic bright days of reafon had raifed in fuch abund^ ance in the coniervatories of the Pliilahthes^ and which had been gathered from the writings of Voltaire, Diderot, Koulieau, Tlajnah &c. the patriotic counfellors of the Notables had ranfacked all the writings of former ages. They difcovered THAT France had alv/ays been free ! One would have thought, that they had travelled with Sir John Mandeviile in that country v^^here even the fpeechesof former times had been frozen, and were now thawing apace under the beams of the fun of Reafon. For maiiv of thefe eilavs v/ere as incongruous and mai a-propos as the broken fen* tences recorded by Mr. Addifon in the Spectator. A gentleman who was in Paris at this time, a perfon of great judgment, and well informed in every thing reipedting the conftitutlon and prefent condition of his country, aiTured me that this in vitationj followed by the memorial of Mr. Neckar, operated

Page 282Page 282

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.81% accurate
    268 THE FRENCH REVOLUTIO?:. CHAP. W. operated like an electrical (liock. In the courfe of four or five days, the appearance of Paris was completely changed. Every where one faw crowds ftaring at papers palled on the walls — breaking into little parties — walking up and down the flreets in eager converiation — adjourning to cofFee-houfes -—and the converfation in all companies turned to politics alone ; and in all thele converfations a new vocabulary, where every fecond word was Moral ity, Philanthropy, Toleration, Freedom^ and Equalifation of property. Even at this early period perfons were liftened to without cenfure, or even furprife, who faid that it v/as nonfenfe to think of reforming their government, and that it mufl be completely changed. In ihort, in the courfe of a month, a fpirit of licentioufnefs and a rage for innovation had completely pervaded the minds of the Pariflans. The moil confpicuous proof of this was the unexpected fate of the Parliament. It met earlier than ufual, and to give greater eclat to its patriotic efforts, and completely to fecure the gratitude of the people, it itTued an arret on the prefent ft ate of the nation, containing a number of refolutions on the different leading points of na= tional liberty. A few months ago thefe would have been joyfully received as the Magna Charts of Freedom, and really contained all that a wife people Pnould defire; but becaufe the Parliament had fometime before given it as their opinion as the conftitutional counfel of the Crown, that the States fnouldbe convoked on the principles of their iaft meeting in 1614, which preferved the diftinctionsof rank, all their pad fervices were forgotten • — all tlieir hard ilruggle with the former adrainiftration, and their unconquerable courage and perfeverance, which ended only with their downfal, all were forgotten ; and thofe diftinguifhed members

Page 283Page 283

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.30% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, t6g members whofe zeal and fufFerings ranked them with the mod renewed heroes and martyrs of patriotiiiii, were now regarded as the contemptible tools of Ariilocracy. The Parliament now let, in a fiery troubled (ley — to rile no more. Of all the barrillers in the Parliament of Paris, the mod confpicuous for the difplay of the enchanting doctrines of Liberty and Equality was Mr. Duval, fon of aft Avocat in the faixie court, and ennobled about this time under the name of Defpt-ernienil. He was member of a Lodge of the ^w/V Reunis at Paris, called the Contract Social ^ and of the Lodge of Chevaliers Bienfaifants at Lyons. His reputation as a barrifter had been prodigioufly increafed about this time by his management of a caufe, where the defceitdant of the unfortunate General Laily, after having obtained the reftoration of the family honours, was flriving to get back fome of the eftates. Mr. Lally Tollendahl had even trained himfeir to the profeffion, and pleaded his own caufe with aftonifli* ing abilities. But Defprefmenil had near connections with the family which was in pofleffion of the ePjates, and oppofed him with equal powers, and more addrefs. He was on the fide whicii was moft agreeable to his favourite topics of declamation, and his pleadings attracted much notice both in Paris and in fome of the provincial Parliaments, I mention thefe things with fome intereil, becaufe this was the beginning of that marked rivalfaip betv/een Lally Tollendahl and Defprefmenil, which made fuch a {ignre in the Journals of ihe National Affembly. It ended fatally for both. Lally Tollendahl was obliged to quit the Affembly, when he faw it determined on the deitru(fdon of the monarchy and of all civil order, and at lail to emigrate from his country with the lofs of all his 1 L property,

Page 284Page 284

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.30% accurate
    27b THE FRENCH t^EVOLUTIOM. CHAP. IT* property, and to fablift on the kindnefs of England. Dfeprefmenil attained his meridian of popularity by his difcovery of the fecret plan of the Court to eftabliih the Cour p/em'ere, and ever after this took the lead in all the (Irong meafures of the Parliament of Paris, which was now ovcrftepping all bounds of moderation or propriety, in hopes of preferving its influence after it had rendered itfelf impotent by an unguarded ilroke. Dcfprefmenil was the lirll martyr of that Liberty and Equality w^iich it was now boldly preaching,, having voluntarily furrendered himfelf a prifoncr to the officer fent to demand him from the Parliament. He was alfo a martyr to any thing that remained of the very (liadow of liberty after the Revolution, being guillotined by Robefpierre, I have already mentioned the intrigues of Count Mirabeau at the Court of Berlin, and his feditious preface and notes on the anonymous letters on the Fvights of the Pruffian States. He alfo, while at Berlin, publiflied an EJjai fur la SeCie des Illumines^ one of the ftrangelt and moft impudent performances that ever appeared. He there defcribes a feft exifting in Germany, called the Illuminated^ and fays, that they are the mod abfurd and grofs fanatics imaginable, waging war with every appearance of Reafon, and maintain^ ing the moft ridiculous fuperftitions. He gives fome account of thefe, and of their rituals, ceremonies, Scz, as if he had feen them all. His fedl is a Gonfufed mixture of Chriftian fnperflitions, Rofycrucian nonfenfe, and every thing that can raile contempt and hatred. But no ibch Society ever exifted, and Mirabeau confided in his own powers of deception, in order to icreen from oblervation thofe who were known to be Uluminati, and to hinder the rulers from attending to their real

Page 285Page 285

CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. ^^1 real machinations, by means of this Ignis fatuus of his own brain. He knew perfecliy that the IIluminati were of a ftamp diametrically oppofite ; for he was ilkuninated by Mauvillon long before. He gained his point in fome meafare, for NichoJai and others of the junto immediately adopted the whim, and called them Ohjcurantem^ and joined with Mirabeau in placing on the lift oiOhfcuraiiiem feveral perfons whom they wilhed to make ridiculous. Mirabeau was not more difcontentcd with the Court of Berlin for the fmail regard it had teftified for his eminent talents, than he was with his own Court, or rather with the minifter Calonne, who had fent him thither, Calonne had been greatly diffatisfied with his condudt at Berlin, where his felf-conceit, and his private proje(Sts, had made him adl in a way almoft contrary to the purpofes of his miffion. Mirabeau was therefore in a rage at the minifter, and publilbed a pamphlet, in which his celebrated memorial on the ftate of the nation, and the means of relieving it, was treated with the utmoft leverity of reproach; and in this conteft his mind was wrought up to that violent pitch of oppofition which he ever after maintained. To be noticed, and to lead, were hisfole objcfts — and he found, that taking the fide of the difcontentcd was the beft field for his elo« quencc and reftlefs ambition. — Yet there was no man that was more devoted to the principles of a court than count Mirabeau, provided he had a fhare in the adminiftration ; and he would have obtained it, if any thing moderate would have fatisfied him — but he thought nothing worthy of him but a place of aftive truft, and a high department. For fuch offices all knew him to be totally unfit. He wanted knowledge of great things, and »;, %■

Page 286Page 286

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.26% accurate
    ^72 THE FRENCH KEVOEUTION; . CHAP. Ivv and v/as learned only in the buflling detail of intrigue, and at any time would facrifice every thing to have an opportunity of exercifmg his brilliant eloquence, and indulging his pallion for fatire and reproach,— The greateit obftacle to his advancement was the abject worthleiTnefs of his character. What we uiually call profligacy, viz. debauchery, gaming, impiety, and every kind of fenluality, were not enough— he was deftitute of decency in his vices- — tricks which would difgrace a thief-catcher, were never boggled at in order to fupply his expences. For inftance, — His father and mother had a procefs of feparation— Mirabeau had juft been liberated from prifon for a grofs mifdemeanour, and was in want of money— He went to his father, fidcd with him in invectives againll his mother, and, for loo guineas, wrote his father's memorial for the court. — He then went to his mother, and by a fimilar conduCI got the ftm.e fum from her — and both memorials were prefented. Drinking was the only vice in which he did not indulge — his exhaufted conititution did not permit it. His brother, the Vifcount, on the contrary, was apt to exceed in jollity. One day the Count fald to him, " How can you, Brother, fo " expofe yourfelf ?''  *« What !'* lays the Vifcount,   '' ho\v inlatiable you are  Nature has " given you every vice, and having left me only *' this one, you grudge it me." — When the elections were making for the States-General, he offered himieit a candidate in his own order at Aix — But he was fo abhorred by the Nobleflb, that they not only rejected him but even drove him from their meetings. This affront fettled his meafures, and he detrrmined on their ruin. He went to the Commons, diiclaimed his being a gentleman, fat up a little fliop in the market place of Aix

Page 287Page 287

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.79% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 273 Aix, and fold trifles — and now, fully refolved what line he (hould purfue, he courted the Commons, by joining in all their cxccfTes againfh the Noblefle, and was at laft returned a member of tke Ail'embiy. From this account of Mirabeau we can eafily forctel the ufe he v/ould make of the Illumination which he had received in Germanv. Its p-rand truths and jull morality feem to have had the fame effe6ls on his mind as on that of Weifnaupt or Bahrdt. In the year 1*^68, Mirabeau, in conjunction with the duke de Lauzun and the Abbe Perigord^ afterwards Bifhop of Autun (the man ib puffed in the National AiTemblies as the brighteft pattern of humanity) reformed a Lodge of Philalethes in Paris, which met in the Jacobin College or Convent. It was one of the Amis Reunis^ which had now rid itfelf of all the inlignilicant myiHcifm of the fedt. This was now become troublefome, and took up the time which would be much better employed by the Chevaliers du Soliel^ and other flill more refined champions of reafon and univerfal citizenfliip, Mirabeau had imparted to it fbme of that Illumination which had beamed upon him when he was in Berlin. In 1788, he and the Abbe were wardens of the lodge. 1 hey found that they had not acquired all the dexterity of management that he underftood was pradtifed by his Brethren in Germany, for keeping up their connedtion, and conducing their corefpondence. A letter was therefore fent from this Lodge, ligned by thefe two gentlemen, to the Brethren in Germany, requefting their ailiilance and infcruction. In the courfe of this year, and during the fitting of the Notables, a deputation was sent from the German Illuminati to catch this gloria ous

Page 288Page 288

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.98% accurate
    274 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, iv^ ous opportunity of carrying their plan into fall execution with the greatefl eclat. Nothing can more convincingly demonftratc the early intentions of a party, and this a great party, in France to overturn the conftitution completely, and plant a democracy or oligarchy on its ruins. The Illuminati had no other objed:. — They accounted all Princes ufurpers and tyrants, and all privileged orders their abettors. They intended to ellabliih a government of Morality, as they called it, ( Sitte?iregiment ) where talents and character (to be eflimated by their own fcalc, and by themfeives) fliould alone lead to preferment. They meant to abolidi the laws which protected property accumulated by long continued and fuccefsful induftry, and to prevent for the future any fuch accumulation. They intended to eftabliOi univerfal Liberty and Equality, the imprefcriptible Rights of Man, (at lead they pretended all this to thofe who were neither Magi or Kegentes.) And, as neceifary preparations for all this, they intended to root out all religion and ordinary morality, and even to break the bonds of domeftic life, by deftroying the veneration for marriagevows, and by taking the education of children out of the hands of the parents. Tkis was all that the Illuminati could teach^ and this was precisely WHAT FRANCE HAS DONE. I cannot proceed in the narration without defiling the page with the detelled name of Orleans^ ftained with every thing that can degrade or difgrace human nature. He only wanted Illumination, to (hew him in a fyliem all the opinions, difpofitions, and principles which filled his own wicked heart. This contemptible being was ilhiminated by Mirabeau, and has (hown himfelt" the mod zealous difciple of the Order. In his oath of allegiance he declares

Page 289Page 289

CiiAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, 275 declares, " That the interefls and the objed of the " Order (hall be rated bv him above all other reia*' tions, and that he will ferve it with his hoiiour, '* his fortune, and his blood. "< — He has kept his word, and has facrificed them all — And he has been treated in the true ipirit of the Order — uled as a mere tool, cheated and ruined. — For I mult now add, that the French borrowed from the Illuminati a maxim, unheard of in any other alTociation of banditti, viz. that of cheating each other. As the managers had the foie poiTeiTion of the higher myfteries, and led the reil by principles which they held to be falfe, and which they employed only for the purpofe of fecuring the co-operation of the inferior Brethren, fo Mirabeau, Sieyes, Pethicn, and others, led the Duke of Orleans at firft by his wicked ambition, and the expectation of obtaining that crown which they intended to break in pieces, that they might get the ufe of his immenfe fortune, and of his influence on the thoufands of his depending fycophants, who ate his bread and pandered to his grofs appetites. Although we very foon find him ading as an Illuminatus^ we cannot fuppofe him fo loll to common fenfe as to contribute his fortune, and rifk his life, merely in order that the one fhouid be afterwards taken from him by law, and the other put on a level with that of his groom or his pimp. He furely hoped to obtain the crown of his indolent relation. And indeed Mirabeau faid to BergalTe, that '*" when the projed was mentioned to the Duke ** of Orleans, he received it with all poffible gra*' cioufnefs," {^avec toute la grace imaginable,^ During the conteds between the Court and the Parliament of Paris, he courted popularity with an indecency and folly that nothing can explain but a mad and fiery ambition which blinded his eyes to all consequences. This is put out of doubt by his behaviour

Page 290Page 290

276 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, Wt our at Verfailles on the dreadful ^th and 6th of October, 1789. The depoiiiions at the Chatelet prove in the moit inconteilible manner^ that during the horrojs of thofe two days he was repeatedly feen, and that whenever he was recognized bv the crowd, he was huzzaed with Five Orleans^ Five notre Rot Orleans^ ^^c, — 'He then withdrew, and was feen in other places. While all about the unfortunate Royal Family were in the utmofl concern for their fate, he was in gay humour, chatting on indifferent fubjeds. His lafl appearance in the evening of the 5th was about nine o'clock, converfing in a corner with ' men difguifed in mean drefs, and fome in women's clothes ; among whom were Mirabeau, Barnave, Duport, and other deputies of the Republican party — and thefe men were feen immediately after, concealed among the lines of the regiment de Flandre, the corruption of which they had that day compleated. He was feen again next morning, converfing with the fame perfons in women's drefs. And when the infulted Sovereign was dragged in triumph to Paris, Orleans was again feen (kuiking in a balcony behind his children, to view the pi-ocelTion of devils and furies ; anxioufly hoping all the while that fome difturbance would arife in which the King might perifh. — I fhould have added that he was feen in the morning at the top of the flairs, pointing the way with his hand to the mob, where they fhould go, while he went by another road to the King. In fhort, he went about trembling like a coward, waiting for the explofion which might render it fafe for him to fliew himfelf. Mirabeau faid of him, '' The fellow carries a loaded pillol in his bofom, but will never dare to pull the trigger." He was faved, notwithllanding his own folly, " by being joined in the ^xuiation with Mirabeau, who could not refcue himfelf without (driving alfo for Orleans, whom he defpifed,

Page 291Page 291

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.90% accurate
    CHAPi IVo THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 277. pifed, while he made ufe of his fortune. — In fhort, Orleans was but half iliuininaied at this time, and hoped to be King or Regent, Yet he was deeply verfed in the preparatory leffon- of Iliurniiiatiim, and well convinced of its fundamental truths. He was well allured of the great influence of the women in ibciety, and he enjployed this influence like a true difciple of Weifhaupt. — Above three hundred nyuiphs from the purlieus of the Palais Royal were provided vv'ith ecus and Louis d'ors, by his grand procureur the Abbe Sieves, and w^ere fent to meet and to illuminate tlie two battalions of the Regiment de Fiandre, vv^ho were coming to Verfailles for the protedion of the Royal Family. The privates of one of thefe regiments cam.e and informed their officers of this attempt made on their loyalty, — -45,000!, livres were given them at St. Denys, to make them difband themfelves— and the poor lads were at firll dazzled by the name of a fum that was not familiar to tbem~but Vv^hen fome thinking head among them told them that it only amounted to two Louis d'ors a piece, they difclofed the bribery.    They were then offered 90,000, but never faw it. (Depolitions at, the Chatelet No. 317.) Mademoifelle Therouane, the favonla of the day, at the Palais Royal, was the rnofl: adiveperfonof the armed mob from Paris, dreffed en Ama%onne^ with all the elegance of the opera, and turned many young heads that day which were afterwards taken off by the guillotine. The Duke of Orleans acknowledged, before his death, that he had expended above 50,0001. fterling in corrupting the Gardes Francoifes. The armed mob which came from Paris to Verfailles on the 5th of OvTtober, importuning the King for bread, had their pockets filled with crown pieces — and Orleans was leen on that day by two gentlemen, with a bag of money fo h.eavy that it was faftened to ^2 M ' his

Page 292Page 292

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.37% accurate
    ^yS THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. iv. his clothes with a (Irap, to hinder it from being oppreflive, and to keep it in fuch a pofition that it Ihould be acceffible in an inilant. (See the Depoii*tionsat the Chatelet, No. 177-) But fuch was the contempt into which his grofs profligacy, his cowardice, and his niggardly difpofition, had brought him with all parties, that, if he had not been quite bHnded by his wicked ambition, and by his implacable refentment of fome bitter taunts he had gotten from the King and Qiieen, he mud have feen very early that he was to be facrificed as foon as he bad ferved the purpofes of the fadion. At prefent, his alTiftance was of the utmoft confequence. His immenfe fortune, much above three millions fterling, was almoil exhaufted during the three firft years of the Revolution. But (what was of more confequence) he had almoft unbounded authority among the Free Mafons. In this country we have no conception of the authority of a National Grand Mailer. When Prince Ferdinand of Brunfwick, by great exertions among the jarring feels in Germany, had got hirafeif eleded Grand Mailer of the Siri5i Obfervanz^ it gave ferious alarm to the Emperor, and to all the Princes of Germany, and contributed greatly to their connivance at the attempts of the Illuminati to difcredit that party. In the great cities of Germany, the inhabitants paid more refpe£i to the Grand Mafter of the Mafoj s than to their refpective Princes. The authority of the D. of Orleans in France w^as ftill greater, in confequence of his employing his fortune to fupport it. About eight years before the Revolution he had (not vrithout much intrigue and many bribes and promifes) been elected Grand Mafter of France, having under hisdiredlions all the //;;/'roi;f^ Lodges. The whole AfFociation was called the Gra?id Oris?it de la

Page 293Page 293

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.08% accurate
    «HAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. fj^ la France^ and in 1785 contained 266 of thefe Lodges ; (ice Freymaurerifche Zeitung^ Netiwied 1787.) Thus he had the management of all thofe Secret Societies ; and the licentious and. irreligious fentiments which were currently preached there, were fure of his hearty concurrence. The fame intrigue which procured him the fupreme chair, muft have filled the Lodges with his dependents and emiifaries, and thefe men could not bettei earn their pay, than by doing their utmofl to propagate inlidclicy, immorality, and impurity of manners. But Ibmething more was wanted ; Difrefpecfb for the higher Orders of the State, and difloyalty to the Sovereign. — -it is not fo eafy to conceive how thefe fentiments, and particularly the latter, could meet with toleration, and even encouragement, in a nation noted for its profcilions of veneration for its Monarch, and for the pride of its NoblefTe. Yet I am certain that fuch doftrines were habitually preached in the Lodges of Philalethes^ and jimis Reunis de la Verite, That they iliouid be very current in Lodges of low-born Literati, and other Brethren in inferior flations, is natural, and I have already faid enough on this head. Bat the French Lodges contained many gentlemen in eafy, and affl lent circumftances, I do not expedl fuch confideiice in my affertions, that even in thefe ^he fame opinions were very prevalent. I was therefore much pleafed with a piece of information which I got while thefe fheets were printing otf, which corroborates my affertions. This is a performance called La voile retiree^ ou le Secret de la Revolution expHqtie par la Franc Macon^ nerie. It was written bv a Mr. Lefranc, Prefident of the Seminary of the Eudijis at Caen in Normandy, and a fecond edition was publilhed at Paris in 1792.

Page 294Page 294

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.40% accurate
    aSo THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAF. iv. 1 yg2. The author was butchered in the maiTacre of September. He fays, that on the death of a friend, who had been a very zealous Mafon, and many years Mafter of a refpedable Lodge, he found among his papers a colle6iion of Maionic writings, containing the rituals, catechifms, and fymbols of every kind, belonging to a long train of degrees of Free Mafonry, together with many difcourfes delivered in different  Ledges, and minutes of their proceedings. The perufai filled himvyith ailoniihment and anxiety. For he found that doctrines were taughc, and maxims of conduct were inculcated, which were fubverlive , of religion and of all good order in the Hate ; and whfch not only countenanced difloyaky and fedition, but even invited to it. Lie thoueht them fo daneerous to the Hate, that he lent an account of them to the Archbifhop of Paris long before the Revolution, and ahvays hoped that that Reverend Prelate Vv^ould reprefent the matter to his Majefly's Minjfters, and that they would put an end to the meetings of this dangerous Societ}^ or would at leail reilrain them from fuch excefles. But he v^as difappointed, and therefore thought it his duty to lay them before the public*. Mr, Lefranc fays ervpreisly, that this fnocking perverfion of Free Mafonry to fed itious purpoles * Had the good man been fpared but a few montlis, his furprife at this negle6l would have ceafed. For, on the igtU of November i 793, the Archbifhop of Paris came to the Bar of the Alfembly, accomipanied by his Vicar and eleven other Clergymen, who there renounced their Chriltianlty and their clerical vows ; acknowledging that they had played the villain for many years againft their confclences, teaching what they knew to be a lie, and were now refolved to be honeft men. The Vicar indeed had behaved like a true Illuminatus feme time before, by runninof off with another man's wife and his ftrong box. — None of them, however, feem to have attained the higher myileries, for they were all guillotined not long after. was.Page 295

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.21% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. ^8l was, in a great meafure, but a late thing, and was chiefly brought about by the agents of the Grand Mailer, the Duke of Orleans. He was, however, of opinion that the v/hole Mafonic Fraternity was hoftile to Chriftianity and to good morals, and that it was the contrivance of the great ichifmatic Fauftus Socinus, w^ho being terrified by the fate of Servetus, at Geneva, fell on this method of promulgating his doctrines among the great in fecret. This opinion is but ill fupported, and is incompatible vv ith itiany circumliances in Free Mafonry — But it is out of our way at prefent. Mr. Lefranc then takes particular notice of the many degrees of Chivalry cultivated in the Lodges, and iliows how, by artful changes in tlie fucceflive explanations of the fame fymbols, the doctrines of Chriftianity,  and of all revealed religion, are completely exploded, and the Philofophe Inconnu becomes at lad a profcfTed Atheiil» — He then takes notice of the political doctrines which are in like manner gradually unfolded, by which " patriot^' ifm and loyalty to the prince are declared to be " narrow principles, inconfiftcnt with univerfal *' benevolence, and with the native and imprefcriptible I'ights of man ; civil fubordination is a£tuai oppreilion, and Princes are ex officio ufurpers and tyrants.'' Thefe principles he fairly deduces from the Catechifms of the Chevalitr du Soliel^ and of the Philofophe Inconnu, He then proceeds to notice m^ore particularly the intrigues of the Duke of Orleans. From thefe it appears evident that his ambitious views and hopes had been of long Handing, and that it v.^as entirely by his fupport and encouragement that feditious doctrines were permitted in the Lodges. Many noblemen  and gentlemen were difgupLcd and left theie Lodges, and advantage was taken of their ablencG it,

Page 296Page 296

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.70% accurate
    282 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, iv.^ abfence to improve the Lodges flill more, that is to make them ftili more anarchical and feditious. Numbers of paltry fcribblers who haunted the Palace Royal, were admitted into the Lodges, and there vented their poiibnous doctrines. The Duke turned his chief attention to the Frencli guards, introducing many of the privates and inferior officers into the obfcure and even the more refpectable Lodges, fo that the officers were frequently difgufted in the Lodges by the infolent behaviour of their own foldicrs under the maik'of Mafonic Brotherhood and Equality — and this behaviour became not unfrequenteven out of doors. He afferts with great confidence that the troops were much corrupted by thefe intrigues — and that when they fometimes declared, on fervice, that they would not fire on their Brethren^ the phrafe had a particular reference to their Mafonic Fraternitv, becaufe they recognifed many of their Brother Mafons in every crov/d. — And the corruption was by BO means confined to Paris and its neighbourhood, but extended to every place in the kingdom where there was a Municipality and a Mafoa Lodge. Mr. Lefranc then turns our attention to many peculiarities in the Revolution, which have a refemblance to the practices in Free Maionry, Not only w^as the arch rebel the Duke of Orleans, the Grand Mafter, but the chief actors in the Revolution, Mirabean, Condorcct, Rochefoucauit, and others, were diftinguilhed office-bearers in the great Lodges. He fays that the diilribution of France into departments, difl:ri£ls, circles, cantons, &c. is perfectly fimilar, with the fame denominations, to a diftribution which he had remarked in the correfpondencc of the Grand Orient*.

Page 297Page 297

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.26% accurate
    CHAF. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION* tSj cnt*. The Prefident's hat in the National AlTembiy is copied from that of a Trcs Venerable Grand Maitre. — The fcarf of a Municipal Officer is the fame with that of a Brother Apprentice. — When the Alfembly celebrated the Hevohition in the Cathedral, they accepted of the highefl honours of Mafonry by pafling under the Arch of Steely formed by the drawn fwords of two ranks of Brethren,— Alfo it is worthy of remark, that the Na* tionai AiTcmbly protected the meetings of Free Mafons, while it preremptorily prohibited every other private meeting. The obligation of laying afide all (lars, ribbands, crofTes, and other honourable diiUndlions, under Xhc pretext of Fraternal Equality, was not merely a prelude, but was intended as a preparation for the deltrudlion of all civil difiin^tions, w'hich took place aimoil at the beginning of the Revolution, — and the fir Jl propofal of a furrender^ fays Mr. Lcfranc, was made by a zealous Majon, — Re farther obferves, that the horrible and fanguinary oaths, the daggers, death-heads, crofs-bones, the imaginary combats with the murderers of Hiram, and many other gloomy ceremonies, have a natural tendency to harden the heart, to remove its natural

Page 298Page 298

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.76% accurate
    284 THE FRENCFi REVOLUTION* CHAP. Iv. tieman (Mr. Latocnayc). He confirms my repeat-* ed afTertions, that all the irreligious and feditious dodrines were the fubjedts of repeated harangues in the Mafon Lodges, and that all the principles of the Revolution, by vvhich the public mind was as it were fet on fire, were nothing but enthufiaftic amplifications of the common-place cant of Free Mafonry, and arofe naturally out of it. He even thinks " that this mujl cfnecejfity be the cafe " in every country where the minds of the lower *' clafTesof the State are in any way coniiderably *' fretted or irritated ; it is almolt impoilable to " avoid being drawn into this vortex, whenever *' a difcontented mind enters into a Mafon Lodge. *' The fcale (lory of brotherly love, which at an^' other time would only lull the hearer afleep, *' now makes him prick up his ears, and iiflen " with avidity to the filly tale, and he cannot *' hinder fretting thoughts from continually rank" ling in his mind." Mr. Latocnaye fays exprefsly, *• That notwith'^ (landing the general contempt of the public for " the Duke of Orleans, his authority as Grand " Mailer of the Mafoiis gave him the greateil " opportunity that a feditious m.ind could defire " for helping forward the Revolution. He had " ready to his hand a connected fyftem of hidden Societies, protedled by the State, habituated to fecrecy and artifice, and already tinged with the very enthufiafm he w^iflied to infpire. in " thefe he formed political committees, into which " only his agents were admitted. He filled the Lodges with the French guards, whom he corrupted with money and hopes of preferment; and by means of the Abbe Sieyes, and other emilfaries, they were harangued with all the fophiflical declamation, or cant of Mafonry.'* Mr.

Page 299Page 299

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.68% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 285 Mr. Latocnaye fays, that all this was peculiar to the Lodges of the Grand Orient ; bat that there were m?My (not very many, if we judge by the Ncuwied almansc, which reckons only 289 in all France in 1784, of which 266 were of the Grand Orient) Lodges vv ho continued on the old plan of anufing themielves with a little foleran trifling. He coincides wiih Mr* Lefranc in the opinion that the awful and gloomy rituals of Mafonry, and particularly the ievere trials of confidence and fubmiilion, mull have a great tendency to harden the heart, an

Page 300Page 300

The text on this page is estimated to be only 15.88% accurate
    Kfe 286 THE FRENCH HfiVOLUflON. CHAP. iV« *' he faw that it was a lamb that he had {tabbed. *' Surely fiicli trials and fiich wanton cruelty are '' fit only for training conipirators." Mr. Latocnaye adds, that '' when he had been *' initiated, an old gentleman aiked him what lie '' thought of the whole ?" He anfwered, *' A great '* deal of noife, and much nonfenfe." '' Nonfenfe." faid the other, *' don't judge foraflily, young man ; '' I have worked theie twenty-five years, and the '^ farther I advanced, it intereRed me the more ; " but I ilopped fliort, and nothing (hall prevail on " m.e to advance a ftep farther." In another converfation the gentleman faid, *' I imagine that my '' (loppage was owing to my refufai about nine years ago, to lift en to fome perfons who made to me, out of the Lodge, propofals which were feditious " and horrible; for ever fmce that time I have remarked, that my higher Brethren treat me vvi h a much greater referve than they had done before, and that, under the pretext of further inflruction; '' thev have laboured to confute the notions which I had already acquired, by giving fome of the mod delicate fubjeds a different turn. I faw that they v^-anted to remove fome fufpicions which I was beginning to form concerning the ultimate fcope of the whole." I iaiagine that thefe obfervaticns will leave no doubt in the mind of the reader vi'ith refpecl to the iniiuenceof the fecret Fraternity of Free Mafonry in the French Revolution, and that he will allov.7 it to be highly probable that the infamous Duke of Orleans had, from the beginning, entertained hopes of mounting the throne of France. It is not my province to prove or difprove this point, only I think it no \eis evident, from n^any circumftances in the tranfadions of thole tumultuous days, that the adive leaders liad quite different views, and were impelled CI il (I

Page 301Page 301

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.69% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 287 impelled by fanatical notions of democratic felicity^ or, more probabiv, by their own ambition to be the movers of this vail: machine, to overturn the ancient government, and ered a republic, of v/hich they hoped to be the manageris*. Mirabeau had learned when in Germany that the principles of anarchy had been well digeiled into a fyllem, and therefore wifhed for fome inftruclionas to the fubordinate detail of the buhnefs, and for this purpofe requeded a deputation fvoixn the lHnmiNalL In fuch a caufe as this, we m.ay be certain that no ordinary perfon would be fent. One of I he deputies was Amelius, the next perfon in the order to Spartacus and Ph lo. His worldly nan:e was johann. J. C. Bode, at Weimar, privy-counfellor to the Prince of Heire-Darmfiadt. (See Fra^mente der Biographie des verftorbenes Firyherr Bode in Weimar^ mit ziLverlaJJigen Urkunder, ?>vo. Riom. 1795. See 2.\{o Endliche Shickfall der Freymaiirer€\\ 1794 ; alfo IViener Zeitfchrift fur 1793-) — This perfon has played a principal part in the whole fcheme of Illumination. He vw'as a perfon of confiderable and ihowy talents as a Vv'riier. He had great talents for converfation, and had kept good company. With * The depofitlons at the Chatelet, which I have ah*eady quoted, give repeated and unequivocal proofs, that he, with a confiderable number of the deputies of the National Afiembly, had formed this plot before the 5th of Odlober 1789. That trial was condutled in a ftrange manner, partly out of refpedl for the Royal Family, which ftill had fome hearts affedlonately attached to it, and to the monarchy, and partly by reafon of the fears of the members of this court. There was now no fafety for any pei'fon WHO differed from the opinion of the frantic populace of Pans. The chief points of accufat.'on were written In a fchedule which is not publlOKd, and the witnefles were ordered to depofe on thefe in one general Yes or No ; fo that It Is only the leafl important part of the evidence that has been printed. I am well Informed that the whole of It Is carefully preferved, and will one day appear. refpedPage 302

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.46% accurate
    288 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. IV. refpefi: to his myilical cbarader, his experience was gr^at. He was one of the Templar Mafons, and among them was E^ws a Ltliis ConvaUiiim. He had fpeculaiedmuch about tlie origin and hillory of Mafonry, and when at the Wiliemfbad convention, was converted to liluminatirm. He was the great inftigator of Nicholai, Gedicke, and Bieller, to the hunt after Jefuits which fo much occupied them, and fuggeiied to Nicholai his journey through Germany. Leuchtfenring whom I mentioned before, was only the letter-carrier between Bode and thefe three authors. He was juR fuch a man as Weifhaupt wifhed for ; his head filled with Mafonic fanaticifm, attaching infinite importance to the frivolities of MaIbnry, and engaged in an enthufiaiiic and fiuitlefs refearch after its origin and hiiiory. He had colleded, however, fuch a number of archives (as tliey were called) of Free Mafonry, that he fold his manufcripr to the Duke of Saxe Gotha, (into whofe fervice Weifhaupt engaged himfelf when he was driven from Bavaria), for 150 dahleis. This little anecdote fhows the high importance attributed to thofe matters by perfons of whom we fliould exped better things. Bode was alfo a moil determined and violent materialift. Belidesali thefe qualities, foacceptable to the liluminati, he was a diicontenred Tera.plar Mafon, having been repeatedly difappointed of the preferment which he thought hiraieif entitled to. When he learned that the hrfl operations of the liluminati were to be the obtaining the fole direction of the Mafon Lodges, and of the whole Fraternity, his hopes revived of riling to ibme of the Coriimanderies, vvhich his e'nthufiafm, or rather fanaticifm, had made him hope to fee one day regained by the Order : — but when he found that the next and favourite objed was to root out the Siri^ Qbfervan% altogether, he ilarted back. But Philo favv^ that the underflandingPage 303

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.04% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. '28q underflaiiding (HvAl we call it ?) that can be dazzled vvitli one whini, may be dazzled wiih another, and he now attached him to Iliuminatifm, by a magnificent difpiay of a world ruled by the Order, and conduced to happinefs by means of Liberty and Equality. This did the bufinefs, as we iee by the private correfpondence, where Philo informs Spartacus of his lirli diiiiculties with Amelius. Amelius was gained over in AuguH: 1782, and we fee by the fame correfpondence, that the greateit affairs were foon entruiled to him — he was generally employed to deal with the great. When a Graf or a Baron was to be wheedled into tlie Order, Amelius was the agent. — He was alfo the chief operator in all their contefts with the Jeluits and the Kofycrucians. It was alfo Bode that procured the important acceuion of Nicholai to the Order. This he brought about through Leuchtfenring ; and laftiy, his numerous connexions among the Free Mafons, together with Knigge's influence among them, enabled the Ilium inati to worm themfelves into every Lodge, and at lail gave them almofl: the entire command of the Fraternity. Such was the firft of the deputies to France. The other was a Mr. BuiTche, called in the Order Bayard ; therefore probably a man of refpedabie charader ; for molt of Spartacus's names were fignificant like his own. He was a military man, Lieutenant-Colonel in the fervice of tielTe Darmlladt. — This man alfo was a difcontented Templar Mafon, and his name in that Fraternity had been Eques a Fontihiis Eremi. He was illuminated by Knigge. He had alfo been unfuccefsful both at court and in the field, in both of which ficnations he had been attempting to make a difiinguifhed figure. He, as well ^ as Bode, were immerfed in deDts. They were therefore

Page 304Page 304

The text on this page is estimated to be only 12.28% accurate
    -2gO THt filENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. IW fore juQ: in the proper temper for Cofmo-politicai enterprife. They went to Paris in the end of 1788, while the Notables were futing, and all Paris was giving advice.    The alarm that was raifed about Animal Magnerifm, which W'as indeed making much noife at that time, and panicnlarly at Paris, was alTigned by them as the great motive of the journey. Bode alfo faid that he was anxious to learn what were the corrections made on the fyftem of the Chevaliers Bienfaifants. They had taken that name at fird, to icreen themfelves from the charges againil them under the name of Templars. They had correded fomething in their fyftem when they took the name Philalethes, And now when the Schifms of the Philaleihcs were healed, and the Brethren again united under the name of Amis Reunis, be fufpeded that Jefuits had interfered ; and becaufe he had heard that the principles of the Amis Reunis were very noble, he wifhed to be more certain that they were purged of every thing Jefuitical. The deputies accordingly arrived at Paris, and immediately obtained admifiion into thefe two Fraternities*. " ITiey found both of them in the ripell * To prevent interruptions, I mayjuft mention here the authorities for this journey and co-operation of the two deputies. 1. Eln iv'ic h tiger Aujfchhifs uht^r en noch nvenig Lekannte Veran'lajfung der Franzofchen Revolution, iii the Vienna Zeitfchrift for 2. Endliche Shickfall des Freymaurer Ordens, 1794, p- 19. 3. Neuejh Arheitimg des Sbaitacus and Philo, Munich, 1793* P' 151—54. 4. Hyionfche Nachrichten uher die Franc Revolution 1792, von Girtanrifr, var. loc. 5. Re'vnlulions Almanach fur 1792 — 4, Gottingen, var. loc. 6. Beytrage x.nr Biograpble des verjlorhenes Frey-Herr v. Bodcy -.1794. 7. Magaz'm des Ltteratur et Kunjl, {or 1792, 3, 4? Iffc- tfc. flate

Page 305Page 305

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.35% accurate
    CHAP. IV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTICN. 2gl flate for Illumination, having fhaken ofFallthe caba-^ liflical, chemical, and myilicai whims that had formerly dillurbed them, and Vvouid now take up too much of their time. 1 hey were now cultivating with great zeal the philofophico poiiiical do6irines of univerfai citizenihip. Their leaders, to the number of tu'enty, are mentioned by name in the Berlin Monatfchrift for 1785, and among them are feveral of the firfl: adois m the French Revolution. But this is nothing diilinciive, becaufe peifons of all opinions were Mafons. 7"he Amis Reunis were liftle behind the liluminati in every thin? that was irreiieious and anarchica], and had no inclination for any of the formalities of ritual, &c. They were ailready fit for the higher myfieries, and only vvanted ro learn the rr.ethods of bulinefs which had fucceeded fo well in fpreading their dodrines and maxims over Germany. Belides, their doctrines had not been digefted into a fyllem, nor had the artful methods of leading on the pupils from bad to Vw'orle been praclifed. For hitherto, each individual had vented in the Lodges his own opinions, to unburden his own mind, and the Brethren liftened for inRruction andm.utual encouragement. Therefore, when Spartacus's plan was communicated to them, they flnvat once its importance, in all its branches, fuch as the ule of the Mafon Lodges, to fifh forMinervals — ^the rituals and ranks to entice the ycune, and to lead them by degrees to opinions and meafures vv^hich, at firft (ight, would have (hocked them. The firm hold which is gotten of the pupils, and indeed of all the inferior clalTes, bv their reports in the courfe of their pretended training in the knowledge of themfelves and ofothermen — and, above all, the provincial arrangement of the order, and the clever fubordi nation and entire dependence on a felecl band orPandaemcnium at Paris,

Page 306Page 306

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.94% accurate
    292 THE fUlnch revolution. chAp. iv. Paris, which fhould infpire and direct the whole. — I . think (aitho' I have not exprefs afi'ertions of the fad) from the fubfequent condud of the French revoiters, that even at this early period, there were raany in thofe Ibcieties who were ready to go every length propofed to them b; the Ilium inati, fuch as the abolition of royalty, and of all privileged orders, as tyrants by nature, the annihilation and robbery of the priefihood, the rooting out of Chriflianity, and the introdudion of Atheiim, or a phiiofuphical chimera which they were to call Religion. Mirabeau had often fpoken of the iail: branch of the Illuminated principles, and the converfations held al Verfailles during the awful paufes of the 5th of Odober, (which are to be feen in the evidence before the Chatelet in the Orleans procefs,) can hardly be fuppofed to be the fancies of an accidental mob. Mirabeau was, as I have faid, at the head of this democratic party, and had repeatedly faid, that the only ufe of a King was to ferve as a pageant, in order to give weight to public meafures in the opinion of- the populace. — And Mr. Latocnaye fays, that this party was very numerous^ and that immediately after the imprudent or madlike invitation of every fcribbler in a garret to give his advice, the party did not fcruple to fpeak their fentiments in public, and that they were encouraged in their encomiums on the advantages of a virtuous republican government by Mr. Neckar, who had a moft extravagant and childifli prediledion for the conflitutioii of Geneva, the place of his nativity, and was alfo much tinged with the Cofmo'political philofophv of the times. The King's brothers, and the Piinccs of the blood, prefented a memorial to his Majeily, which concluded by laying, that *' the eii'ervefence of the *' public opinions had come to fuch a height that ** the

Page 307Page 307

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.84% accurate
    CHAP.lv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. SQg " the mod dangerous principles, imported from *' foreign parts, were avowed in print witli per' fed impunity — that his majefly had unwarily " encouraged every fanatic to di£late to him, " and to fpread his poifonous fentiments, in v^hich " the rights of the throne were not only difre*' fpecled, but were even difputed — that the rights *' of the higher ciaiTes in the Hate ran a great rifk " of being fpeedily fupprelTed, and that nothing " would hinder the facred right of property from ^' being ere long invaded, and the unequal diftri*'^bution of v/ealth from being thought a proper "*^fubje£l of reform.'* When fuch was the (late of things in Paris; it is plain that the buiinefs of the German deputies would be eafily tranfadled. They were received with open arms by the Philalethes^ the Amis de la Verite^ the Social Contrad^ Sec. and in the courfc of a very few weeks in the end of 1788, and the beginning of 1789, (that is, before the end of March) the whole of the Grand Orient, including the Philalethes^ Amis Reuiiis^ Martiniftes^ &c. had the fecrets of Illumination communicated to them. The operation naturally began with the Great National Lodge of Paris, and thoie in immediate dependence on it. It would alio {Qtxx\^ from many circumftances that occurred to my ol;)fervation, that the Lodges in Alface and Lorraine were Illuminated at this time, and not long before as I had imagined. Strafburg I know had been Illuminated long ago, while Philo v/as in the Order. A circunidance (Irikes me here as of fonie moment. The fe6ts of Philaletkes^ and Amis Reunis were refinemxcnts engrafted on the fyflem of the Ckevaliers Beinfaiiants at Lyons. Such refinements never fail to be conlidercd as a fort of herefy, and the profelTors will be held with a jea2 O lous

Page 308Page 308

294 "^^^^ FRENCH Revolution. chap. iv. lous and unfriendly eye by feme, who will pride th^^^mfelves on adhering to the old faith. And the greater the luccefs of the herefy, the greater will be the animofity between the parties. — May not this help to explain the mutual hatred of the Parifians and the Lyonnois, which produced the moil dreadful attrocitics ever perpetrated on the face of the earth, and made a (hambles and a de•fert of the fineft city of France ? The firfl proceeding by the advice of the deputies was the formation of a political committee in every Lodge. This committee correfponded with the diftant Lodges, and in it were difcuf^d and fettled all the political principles which were to be inculcated on the members. The author of the Neuefte Arheitiing fays exprelsly, that "he was thoroughly inllru£ted in this; that it was given in charge to thefe committees to frame general rules, and to carry through the great plan (grand auvre ) of a general overturning of religion and government." The principal leaders of the fubfequent Revolution were members of thefe committees. Here were the plans laid, and they were tranilnitted through the kingdom b}/ the Correfponding Committees. Thus were the ftupid Bavarians (as the French were once pleafed to call them) their inftruclors in the art of overturning the world. The French were indeed the firfl who put it in pra£lice. Thefe committees arofe from the Illuminati in Bavaria, wdio had by no means given over working ; and thefe committees produced the Jacobin Club. It is not a frivolous remark, that the Mafonic phrale of the peribns who Vv^ifh to addrefs the Brethren, ( F, S, je demande la parole^ which the F. S. reports to the V. G. M. and which he announces to the Brethren thus, " Mes freres^ frere tel " demande

Page 309Page 309

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.20% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 2Q5 '* demande la parole^ la parole lui ejl accordee^^ ) is exadly copied by the jacobin Club. Tliere is fiirely no natural connection between Free Mafonry and Jacobinifm — but we feek the link — 11luminatifm. — The office-bearers of one of the Lodges of Philalethes in Paris were Martin^ JVillermooz ^ (who had been deputy from Xht Chevaliers Beinfaifants to the Willcmfbad Convention) Chappe^ Mlnet^^ de la Henriere^ and Savatkr de VAnge, In another (the Coyitra5l Social) the Political Gommittee confiiled of La Fayette, Condorcet, PethioUy d'Orleans, Abbe Bartbolis, d'Aigiiillon, Bailly^ Marq. de la Salle, DejpreJmeniL This particular Lodjre had been founded and coudu£i;ed by one De Leutre, ^n adventurer and cheat of the firfl magnitude, who fometimes made a figure, and at other times was without a Ihilling. At this very time he was a fpy attached to the office of the police of Parisf. The Duke of Orleans v/as Warden * Minet was, I think, at this time a player. He was fon of a furgeon at Nantes — rob ed his father and fled- — enlifted in Holland — deferted and became fmucrecler — was taken and burnt in the hand — became player and married an aclrefs — then became prieft — a d was made Bifhop of Nantes by Couftard in difcharge of a debt of 500I. Mr. Latocnaye often faw Couflard kneel to him for benediction. It cannot be fuppo'ed that he was much venerated in his pontificals in his native city. — It feems Minet, Minet, is the call of the children to a kitten — This was prohibited at Nantes, and many perfons whipped for the freedom ufed with his name. f I am told that he now (or very lately) keeps the beft company, and lives in elegance and affluence in London. jiugur, fcbanobates,, msdiciis^ magus omnia novii Graculus ejiirlens ; in cccium jujfot'is^ ibit\, Ingenium volex audacia perdita, fermo Promptus.  :}: All fciences a hungry Frenchman knows. And bid him go to hell — to hell he goes. Johnjon^s Tranjlation,Page 310

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.41% accurate
    29^ THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, iv, of the Lodge. The Abhe Sieyes was a Brother Orator, but not of this Lodge, nor, I think, of the former. It was probably of the one conduclted by Mirabeau and the Abbe Perigord. But it appearsfrom the piece from which I am at prefent borrowing, that Sieyes was prefent in the meetings of both Lodges, probably as vifiting Brother, employed in bringing them to common m.eafiires. I mufl obferve, that the fubfcqaent condiift of fome of thefe men does not juil accord with my conjecture, that the principles of the Illuminati vvcre adopted in their full extent. But we know that all the Bavarian Brethren were not equally Illuminated, and it would be only copying their teachej-s if the clevereil of theic their ichoiai s fhould hold a JanCiiun Jandorum among tliemfeivcs, without inviting all to the conference. Obferve too that the chief lefion which they were now taking from the Germans was tlie method of doing bujintfs^ of managing their correfpondence, and of procuring and training pupils. A Frenchman does not think that he needs inftrudion in any thing like principle or fcience. He is ready ^on all occaiions to be the inilructor. Thus were the Lodges of France converted in a very fiiort time into a fet of fecret afiiiiatf d {ocieties, correfponding with the mother Lodges of Paris, receiving from thence their principles and inftruclions, and ready to rife up at once when called upon to carry on the great work of overturning the (late. Hence it has arifen that the French aimed, in the very beginning, at overturning the wliole woild. In all the revolutions of other countries, the fchemes and plots have extended no farther than the nation where they took their riie. liut here we have feen that they take in the whole world

Page 311Page 311

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.10% accurate
    GHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 2Q7 world. They have repeatedly declared this in their manifeiros, and they have declared it by their conduct — This is the very aim of the IIluminati. Hence too may be explained how the revolution took place in a moment in every part of France. The revolutionary focieties were early formed, and were v/oriiing in fecret before the opening of the National AiTembly, and the whole nation changed, and changed again, and again, as if by beat of , drum. Thofe duly initiated in this myilery of iniquity were ready every where at a call. And we fee Weifnaupt's wiili accomplillied ^ in an unexpected degree, and the debates in a club giving laws to folemn airembiies of the nation, and all France bending the neck to the city of Paris, The members of the club are llluminati, and fo are a great part of their correfpondents. — Each operates in the (late as a Minerval would do in the Order^ and the whole goes on with fyllematic regularity. The famous Jacobin Club was jud one of thofe Lodges, as has been already obferved ; and as, among individuals one commonly takes the lead, and contrives for the refb, fo it has happened on the prefent occafion, that this Lodge, fupported by Orleans and Mirabeau, was the one that (lepped forth and diewed itfelf to the world and thus became the oracle of the party ; and all the reft only echoed its dlicourfcs, and at iail allowed it to give law to the whole, and even to rule the kingdom. It is to be remarked too that the founders of the club at Mentz wert lliuminati, ( Relig, BegeLenh, 1703. p. 448.) before the Revolution, and correfponded with another Lodge at Strafburg ; and thefe two produced mighty effedls during the year 1790. In a performance call€»] Memoires Pojlhiimes de Ciifline it is faid, that when that general v/as bending his courfe to Holland,

Page 312Page 312

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.65% accurate
    '^gS THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, i\% land, the Illuminati at Straiburg, Worms, and Spire, immediately formed clubs, and invited him into that quarter, and, by going to Mentz and encouraging their brethren in that city, they railed a party againft the garrifon, and actually delivered up the place to the French army. A little book, juil now printed with the title Paragraphan^ ^'^ys, that Zimmerman, of whom I have fpoken more than once, went to France to • preach liberty. He was employed as a miffionary of Revolution in Alface, where he had formerly been a mod fuccefsfui miilionary of llluminatifm. Of his former proceedings the following is a curious anecdote. He connected himfelf with a highly accompliflied and beautiful woman, whofe converfation had fuch charms, that he fays (he gained him near a hundred converts in Spire alone. Some perfons of high rank, and great exterior dignity of charadler, had felt more tender impreffions — and when the lady informed them of certain confequences to their reputation, they were glad to compound matters with her friend Mr. Zimmerman, who either paffed for her hufoand or took the fcandal on himfeif. He made above 1500 Louis d'ors in this way. When he returned, as a preacher of Revolution, he u(cd to mount the pulpit with a fabre in his hand, and bawl out, '^ Behold, Frenchmen, this is your God. This '^ alone can fave you.'* The author adds, that when Cuiiine broke into Germany, Zimmerman got adm!iiion to him, and engaged to deliver Manheim into his hands. To gain this purpofe, he oiVered to fet ibme corners of the city on fire, and affurcd him of fupport. Guiline declined the offer. — Zimmerman appeared againft him before the F^evolutionary Tribunal, and accuicd him of treachery to his caufe. — Cuilinc's anfv^er is rare mark able.

Page 313

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.99% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. ^p

Page 314Page 313

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.99% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. ^p

Page 314

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.19% accurate
    30O -THE FRENCH REVOLUTION^ CHAP. 1V» " ways fiipport itfelf by the too great inflaence " which it had in every corrupted (late. The " Jaws (hoLild prevent the too great accumulation " of it in Particular families.''  In fnort, the counfcl was almoft verbatim what the Abbe Coffandey declared to have been preached in the meetiffgs of the Illuminali, which terrified him and his colleagues, and made them quit the aifociation. Anarcharfis Cloots, born in Prufiian Weftphaiia, a keen llluminatus, carne to Paris for the cxprefs purpofe of forwarding the great work, and by intriguing in the (lyie of the Order, he got himfelf made one of the Reprefentatives of the Nation. He feems to have been one of the completed fanatics in Cofmo-politifm, and jull fuch a tool as Weifnaupt would choofe to employ for a coarie and arduous job. He broke out at once into all the filly extravagance of the unthinking herd, and his whole language is juft the jargon of Illumination. Citizen of the world — Liberty and Equality, the imprefcripitible Rights of Man  Morality, dear Morality — Kings and Priefls are ufelefs things — they are Defpots and Corrupters, Sec. — ^He declared himfelf an ath^ilf , and zealoufly laboured to have atheifm eflablifhed by law. He condu£lcd that farcical procedion in the true ftyle of the moil childifh ritual of Philo, where counterfeited deputies from all quarters of the world, in the dreiTcs of their countries, came to congratulate the nation for its vi£lory over Kings and Priefls. It is alfo worthy of remark, that by this time Leuchtfenring, whom we have feen (b zealous an llluminatus, after having been as zea'lous a Protedant, tutor of Princes, Hofrath and Hofmeiilcr, was p,ow a fecretarv or clerk in one of the Bureaus of the National Aflembly of France. I may

Page 315Page 315

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.50% accurate
    CHAP. iV. THE FRENCH REVm-UTIO^^ 301 I may add as a finifliing touch, that the National Aflembly of France was the only body of men that I have ever heard of u'ho openly and fyftematically propofed to employ affaiTination, and to inftitute a band of patriots, who fliould exercife this profeflion either l)y fword, piilol, or poifon ; — and though the propofal was not carried into execution, it might be conlidered as 'he fentiments of the m.eeting ; for it was only delayed till it fhouid be conndered how far it might not be imprudent, becaufe they might exped reprifals. The Abbe Dubois engaged to poifon the Comte d'Artois ; but was himfelf robbed and poifoned by his accomplices. — There v;ere flrong reafons for thinking that the Emperor of Germany was poifoned- — and that Mirabeau was thus treated by his pupil Orleans, — alfo Madame de Favras and her fon. — This was copying the Illuminati very carefully. After all thefe particulars, can any perfon have a doubt that the Order of Illuminati formally interfered in the French Revolution, and contributed greatly to its progrefs? There is no denying the infolence and opprefTion of the Crown and the Nobles, nor the mifery and flavery of the people, nor that there were fufficient provocation and caufe for a total change of meafures and of principles. But the rapidity with which one opinion was declared in every corner, and that opinion as quickly changed, and the change announced every where, and the perfed conformity of the principles, and famenefs of the language, even in arbitrary trifles, can hardly be explained in any other v/ay. It may indeed be faid ^' que les beaux genies fe rencontrent^ — that ** wits jump. The principles are the fame, and *' the condud of the French has been fuch as the *' Illuminati would have exhibited ; but this is all *' «— the Illuminati no longer e.xiiled," En®ugh has 2 P been

Page 316Page 316

The text on this page is estimated to be only 15.58% accurate
    302 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. IV. been faid on this point already. — The fads are as have been narrated. The Ilkiminati continued as an Order, and even held aflemblies, though not fo frequently nor fo formally as before, and though their Areopagus was no longer at Munich. But lei us hearwhat the French themfeivesthoughtof the matter. In 1789, or the beginning of 1790, a manifejl^ was fejit from the G^AND National Lodge of Free Mafons (fo it is entitled) at Paris, figned by the Dtike of Orleans as Grand Majfer, addreffedand fent to the Lodges in all the refpe£lable cities of Europe, exhorting them to unite for the fupport of the French Revolution, to gain it friends, defenders, and dependents and according to their opportunities, and the pra6iicahiiity of the thing, to kindle and propagate the fpirit of revolution through all lands. This is a moft important article, and deferves a very ferious attention. I got it firil of all in a work called, Hochjle wichtige Erinnerungen "zur rechten Zeit uber einige der allerernfihafteften Angelegenheiten diefes Zeitalters^ vqu L, A. Hoffmann, Vienna, 1795*The author of this work fays, " That every thing *' he advances in thefe memorandums is conliflent with his own perfonal knowledge, and that he is ready to give convincing proofs of them to an)? refpedabie perfon who will apply to him perfonally. He has already given fuch convincing documents to the Emperor, and to feveral Princes, that many of the machinations occafioned by this manifeiio have been deteded and (lopped ; and be would hzv^ no fcruple at laying the whole before the public, did. it not unavoidably involve feverai worthy perfon s who had fuifered themfeives to be milled, and heartily repented of their 41 «* 41 * M-aH important Memoraadumss i» proptr Se?ifon, eonccrniag SfU€, of the islo^ fenoys Occurreaces of tlic prefent Age, by L, iL. HoSTasaaa, Yieaaa, 1795. / *•' errors/'

Page 317Page 317

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.78% accurate
    CHAP. IV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 009 *' errors." He^s naturally (being a Catholic) very fevere on the Froteftants, (and indeed he has much reafon,) and by this has drawn on himfelf many bitter retorts. He has however defended himfelf againil all that are of anv confequence to his good name and veracity, in a manner that fully convinces any impartial reader, and turns to the confufion of tjie flanderers. Hoffmann fays, that *' he faw fome of thofe mani" feflos ; that they were not all of one tenor, fome ''• being addrelTed to friends, of whofe fuppcrt they *' were already aflured." One very important article of their contents is Earnejl exhortations to eflahlijh in every quarter ft'cret Jchools of political education^ and fchools for the public education of the children cf the people^ under the direction of well-principled inafters ; and offers of pecuniary affiftance for this purpofe^ and for the encouragement of writers in favour cf the Revolution^ and for indemnifying the patriotic hookfel lers who Juffer by their endeavours to fupprefs publications which have an eppofite tendency. We know very well that the iramenfe revenue ot the Duke of Orleans was fcattered among ail the rabble of the Palais Royal, Can we doubt of its being employed in this manner? Our doubts muft vanifh, when we fee that not long after this was publicly faid in the National AfTembly, '' that this method was the moft effedual for accomplilhing their purpofe of fetting Europe in a flame." *' But much expence," iays the fpeaker, '' will attend it, and much has al'' ready been employed, which cannot be named " becaufe it is given in fecret." The Affembly' had given the Illumination war-hoop — '' Peace with '' cottages^ but war voith palaces' — A pouvoir revoluiionnaire is mentioned, which fuperfedes all narrow thoughts, all ties of morality. Lequinio publifiies the moll dete liable book that ever itlued from g printip^Page 318

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.17% accurate
    ^04 T"^2 FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. IV. •printing prefs, Les Prejuges vaincus^ comaining ail the principles, and expveded in the very words of liluroinatifni. iloiTmann lays, that the French Ptvpaganda had many erniliarics in Vienna, and many friends whom he could point oat. Mirabeau in particular had many connc^lions in Vienna, and to the certain knowledge of Hoffmann, carried on a great correfpondence in cyphers. The progrei? of Illumination had been very great in the Aullrian States, and a llatefman gave him an account of their proceedings, ( qui font redrcfjer Its cheveux ) which makes one's hair ftand on end. *' I no lon'• ger wonder," fays he, " that the Neuefts Arhei*' tung des Spartacus und Philo was forbidden. '' O ye almighty Illumiuati^ what can you net " accomplifn by your ferpent like infinnation and «' cunning !" Your leaders fay, " This book is " dangerous, becaufe it will teach wicked men " the mofl: refined methods of rebellion, and it " mud never get into the hands of the common " people. They have faid v/ith the moil impu

Page 319Page 319

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.53% accurate
    CHAf. IV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 305 ** meriting rebellion by this book. The aims are " too apparent, and even in the neighbourhood of *' Regeniburg, where the ilrength of the Illumi' *' nati lay, every pcrfon faid aloud, that the IHu*' minatifni difcovered by this book was High Treafon, and the mod unheard of attempt to annihilate every religion and every civil government.'' He goes on: '' In 1790 I was as '* well acquainted with the fpiritof the IHumina*' tion-fNilem as at prefent, but only not fo docu" mented by their conflitutional acts, as it is now '' by tlic Neiiejle Arheitiing des Spartacus iind " Philo^ My Mafonic connections were formerly *' extenfive, and my publication entitled Eighteen " Paragraphs Concerning Free Mafonry^ procured *' me more acquaintance with Free Mafons of *' the greatefl v/orth, and of Illuminati equally '• upright, perfons of refpeclability and knovv'' ledge, who had difcovered and repented the " trick and inveigling condu£l of the Order. All " of us jointly fwore oppofition to the Illuminati^ *' and my friends conhdered me as a proper in*' ftrument for this purpofe. To whet my zeal, " they put papers into my hands which made me *' fhudder, and raifed my difiike to the higheft " pitch. I received from them lifts of the mem" berSj and among them faw names which I la'' mented exceedingly. Thus ftood matters in ^* 1790, when the French Revolution began to *' take a ferious turn» The intelligent faw in the '' open fyflem of the Jacobins the complete hidden fyftcm of the illuminati. Wc knew that this fyftem included the whole world in its alms, and France was only the place of its firll explofion. The Propaganda works in every corner to this hour, and its emiffaries run about in all the four quarters of the world, and are to *' be u

Page 320Page 320

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.32% accurate
    305 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. iVi be found in numbers in every city that is a feat of government. '^ " He farther relates how they in Vienna wanted to enhfl; him, and, as this failed, how they have abufed him even in the foreign nevvfpapcrs. " 1 have perfonal knowledge (continues he) that in Germany a {Ixond Mirabcau, MauvilIon, had propofed in detail a planof revohition, entirely and precifely fuited to the prefent n:at(!j of Germany. This he circulated among feveral Free Mafon Lodges, among all the Illuminated Lodges which flill remained in Germany, and through the hands of all the emifTaries of the Propaganda, who had been already difpatched to the frontiers (vorpojlen) of evt-ry didridt of the empire, with means for ftirring up the people.'* (N. B. In 1792, Mauvillon, finding abundant fnpport and encouragement in the appearance of things round him, when the French arms had penetrated every where, and their invitations to revolt had met with fo hearty a reception from the difcontented in every flate, came boldly forward, and, in the Brunfwick Journal for March 1792, declared that *' he heartily *' rejoiced in the French Fvevolution, widied it all " fuccefs, and thought himfelf liable to no re*' proach when he declared his hopes that a fimi*' lar Revolution would fpeedily take place in " Germany.") In the Hamburgh Political Journal, Auguft, September, and Os^ober 1790, there are many proofs of the machinations of emifTaries from the Mafon LGdocs of Paris among the German Free MaTons — Sec pages 836, 963, 1087, c-'C. It appears that a cud:) luis taken the name of Propaganda* and meets once a week at Icaft, in the form of a Mafon

Page 321Page 321

The text on this page is estimated to be only 9.53% accurate
    GHAP. IV. THE FRENCH KlVOLUTlON. 307 Mafon Lodge. It confiflsof perfons of all nations, and is under the diredlion of the Grand Mafter, the Duke of Orleans. De Lcii re is one of the Wardens, They have divided iiiirope into colonies, to which they give revoliiiionary names, llich as the Cap, the Pike^ the Lantern, Sec, They have minifters in thcfe colonies. (One is pointed out in Saxony, by marks which I prelume are well underftood.) A fecret preis was found in Saxe Gotha, furnidied with German types, which priored a feditious work called the J our 7ml of Humanity, This journai w^as found in the mornings lying in the llreets and highways. The houfe belonged to an Illimiinatus of the name of Duport, a poor fchoolmafter — -he w^as alTociated with another in Straibiiro-, who was alfo an lUuminatus. — tj J His name was Meyer, the winter of the Strafom-^^ Newfpaper. He had been fomc time a teacher in Salzmann's accademy, who we fee was aifo an IIluminattis ^ but difpieafed with their proceedings almoil at fArft, (Private Correfpondence.) I have perfonal knowledge (continues Profeflbr Hoffman) that in 1791, during the tem^' porary dearth at Vienna, ieveral of thefe emilfaries wxrc bufy in corrupting the minds of the *' poor, by telling them that in like manner the court had produced a famine in Paris in i^Sp, I dete£i:ed fome of them, and expofed them in my Patriotic R€77iarhs on the Prtfent Dearth^ ** and had the fatisfadion of feeing my cndea*' voors of confiderable efle

Page 322Page 322

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.71% accurate
    3o8 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP* iv« of the niuminati, and the unhoped for opportunity that the Revolution had given them of ailing v^ith immediate effed: in carrying on their great and darling work? Can vv^e doubt that they would eagerly put their hand to the Plough ? And, to complete the proof, do we not know from the lifts found in the fecret correfpondence of the Order, that they already had Lodges in France, and that in 1790 and 1791 many Illuminated Lodges in Germany, viz. Mentz, Worms, Spire, Frankfort, actually interfered, and produced great effe£ls. In Switzerland too they were no Icfs adlive. They had Lodges at Geneva and at Bern, At Bern two Jacobins were fentenced to feveral years imprifonment, and among their papers were found their patents of Illumination. I alio fee the fate of Geneva afcribed to the operations of Illuminati refiding there, by feveral writers — particularly by Girtanner, and by the Gottingen editor of the Revolution Almanac. I conclude this article with an extra£t or two from the proceedings of the National AfTembly and Convention, which make it evident that their principles and their pra£lice are precifely thofe of the Illuminati, on a great fcale. When the afTumption of the Duchy of Savoy as an 84th Department was debated, Danton faid to the Convention. " In the mom.ent that we fend freedom to a " nation on our frontier, we muft fay to them you " muft have no more Kings — for if we are furrounded by tyrants, their coalition puts our own freedom in danger. — When the French nation fent us hither, it created a great com" mittce for the general infurrection of the peo*' pie." On

Page 323Page 323

CHAP. IV. THE FRENCH lEVOLUTION, 309 On the 19th of November 1792 it was decreed, " That the Convention, in the name of *' the French nation, tenders help and fraternity '* to all people who would recover their liberty.'* On the 21(1 of November, the Prefident of the Convention faid to the pretended deputies of the Duchy of Savoy, " Reprefentatives of an hidependent people, important to mankind was the day when the National Convention of France pronounced its fentence. Royal dignity is abo^ lifJied,  From that day many nations will, in future, reckon the era of their political exiftence. — From the beginning of civil eftablifhments Kings have been in oppofition to their nations — but now they rife up to annihilate Kings. — Reafon, when (lie darts her rays into every corner, lays open eternal truths  She alone enables us to pafs fentence on defpors, hithert© the fcare-crow of other nations." But the mod diftindl exhibition of principle is to be feen in a report from the diplomatic committee, who were commiflioncd to deliberate on the condudt which France was to hold with other nations. On this report w&s founded the decree of the 15th of December 1793. The Reporter addreffes the Convention as follows; *' The Committees of Finance and War aflc in the beginning — What is the obje£l: of the war which we have taken in hand ? Without all doubt the objed: is the annihilation of ALL PRIVILEGES, WAR WITH THE PALACES, PEACE WITH THE COTTAGES. Thcfc are the principles on which your declaration of war is founded. All tyranny, all privilege, muft be treated as an enemy in the countries where we fet our foot. This is the genuine refult of our " principles. — But it is not with Kings alone that 2 Q^ '' we

Page 324Page 324

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.33% accurate
    31 0 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, CHAP. iv< " we are to wage war — were thefe our fole ene** mies, we (hould only have to bring down ten '' or twelve heads. We have to light with all '' their accomplices, with the privileged orders, " who devour and have oppreiTed the people dur" ing many centuries. " We rniifl therefore declare ourfelves for a " revolutionary power in all the countries into ^' which we enter— r(Loud applaufes from the Af*' (embly)— Nor need we put on the cloak of hu" manity — we difdaln fuch little arts. — We muit *' clothe ourfelves with all the brilliancy of rea*' fon, and all the force of the nation. We need '* not mafk our principles- — -the defpots know ^' them already. The lirft thing we mull: do is to ^* ring the alarum bell, for infurredion and up*' roar.-^ — "We mufl, in a folemu manner, let the ^* people fee the banilhment of their tyrants and *■ privileged cafts  otherwife, the people, ac> ^* cuflomed to their fetters, will not be able to " break their bonds. — -It will effect nothing, mere-? " ly to excite a rifmg of the people — this would '• only be giving them words inftead of (landing " by them, " And fince, in this manner, we ourfelves are ^' the Revolutionary Adminillration, all that is " againfl: the rights of the people muil be over*' thrown at our entry-r-We mult difplay our prln" ciples by actually deftroying all tyranny ; and " our generals after having chafed away the ty*' rants and their fatellites, mud proclaim to the ^' people that they have brought them happinefs; ^' and then, on the fpot, they mufi fupprefs tithes, ^^ feudal rights, and every fpecies of fervitude," *' But we fhall have done nothing if we llop " here. Ariftocracy ftill domineers — we mufl ^' therefore fupprefs all authorities exifting in the * ' hands

Page 325Page 325

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.70% accurate
    CpUP. iV; THE FRENCH REVGLUTlOr^; 3II " hands of the upper clafTes^ — When the Revc** lutionary Authority appears, there niafl: nothing '' of the old ertabli(lin:ient rc:main. — A popular '^' fyflem mull be iiitroclaced — every office mu(t ^' be occupied by new functionaries-— and the " Sans Guliottes inuil every v^here have a iliare '' in the AdminiftraTion. " Still nothing is dont^, till we declare aloud " the prtcifion of our principles to luch as want " only half freedom,^ — We mufl: fay to them— If you think of compromihng with the privileged cads, wc cannot fuller fuch dealing with tyrants—They are our enemies, and we mud treat " them as enemies, becaufe they are neither for *' Liberty nor Equality. — Show yourfclves difpofcd to receive a Ix^q conftitution— and the Convention will not only (land by you, but will give you permanent fupport; we will defend you againil the vengeance of your tyrants—* againfl their attacks, and againil their return. —Therefore aboliOi from among you the Nobles, and every ecclefialtical and military incorporation. They arc incompatable with Equality.— Henceforward you are citizens, all equal in rights — equally called upon to rule^ to defend, and to ferve your country.— The agents

Page 326Page 326

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.49% accurate
    3l2 THE FBENGH KS volution. CHAP. iV. or worthlefs perfons in any country as fufliced for fetting up a tree of liberty. This they held as a fufficient call for their interference. — Sometimes they performed this ceremony themfelves — a re« prefentation was eafily made up in the fame way — and then, under the name of a free' conflitution, the nation was forced to acquiefce in a form dictated at the point of the bayonet, in which they had not the fmallefl liberty to choofc — and they were phindered of all they had, by way of compenfating to France for the trouble (lie had taken.  And this they call Liberty, — It needs no comment. — Thus have I attempted to prove that the prelent awful iituation of Europe, and the general fermentation of the public mind in ail nations, have not been altogether the natural operations of difcontent, opprellion, and moral corruption, although thefe have been great, and have operated with fatal energy; but that this political fever has been carefully and fyflematically heightened by bodies of men, who profeiled to be the phyficians of the State, and, while their open practice employed cooling medicines, and a treatment which ail approved, adminifiered in fecret the mofl inflammatory poifons, which they made up fo as to flatter the difeafed fancy of the patient. Although this was not a plan begun, carried on^ and completed by the fame perfons, it was undoubtedly an uniform and confident fchemc, proceeding on the fame unvaried principle, and France undoubtedly now fmarts under all the woes of German Illumination. I beg leave to fuggefl a few thoughts, which may enable us to draw fome advantage from this fhocking mafs of information. General

Page 327Page 327

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.84% accurate
    GHAP. IV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTIO.V. OJ^^ General Reficdlions. I. I may obferve, in ihtfirji place, and I beg ic may be particularly attended to, that in all thole villainous machinations againR the peace of the world, the attack has been firfl made on the principles of Morality and Religion. The confpirators faw that till thefe are extirpated, they have no chance of fuccefs ; and their manner of proceeding (hews that they confider Religion and Morality as infeparably conneded together. We learn much from this — Fas eft et ab hojie doceri. — They endeavour to deflroy our religious fentiments, by firil corrupting our morals. They try to inflame our pafiions, that when the demands from this quarter become urgent, the reftraints of Religion may immediately come in fight, and ftand in the way. They are careful, on this occalion, to give fuch a view of thofe reftraints, tliat the real origin of them does not appear. — We are made to believe that they have been altogether the contrivance of Priefls and defpots, in ord^^r to get the command of us. They take care, to fupport thefe aflertions by fads, which, to our great (hame, and greater misfortune, are but too nunjerous. Having now the paffions on their fide, they find no difficuky in perfuading the voiuptuarv, or the diicontented, that tyranny, acluaily exerted, or refolved on in future, is the fole origin of religious reHraint. He feeks no further ars^ument, and e;ives liimfelf no trouble to find any. Had he examined the matter with any care, he would find himfeif juft brought back to thofe very feelings of moral excellence and moral depravity that he wifhes to get rid of altogether; and thefe would tell him tljat pure Religion does

Page 328Page 328

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.66% accurate
    •3 14 THE FREN'CFikEVOLUfrON, CtiAP. IV/' does not hy a fingle reflralnt on us that a noble na-ture would not have laid on itfelf— -nor enjoins a iingle duty which an ingenuous 2nd warm heart would not be aChamed to find itfeif deficient in. He' would then lee that all the fandlions of Religion are fitted to his high rank in the fcale of exiflcnce.- And the more he contemplates his future profpecfls, the more they brighten upon his view, the more attainable they appear, and the more he is able to know what they may probably be. Having attained this happy fiate of mind, (an attainment in the power of any kind heart that is in earned in the enquiry) he will think that no punifhment is too great for the unthankful and groveling foul which can forego fuch hopes, and rejed thefe noble proffers, for the com«^ paratively frivolous and tranfitory gratifications of life. He is not frightened into worthy and virtuous condud by fears of fuch merited punifliment ; but^ if not enticed into it by his high expedations, he is^ at leafl^i retained in the paths of virtue by a kind of manly fliame. But all this is overlooked, or is kept out of lights in the inflrudions of Illuminatifm. In thefe (heeyd mufl be kept always direded to the Defpot. This is the bugbear, and every thing is made to conned with pre fen t ©r future tyranny and oppreinon  Therefore Religion is held out as a combination of terrors— the invention of the itate-tools, the prieils. But it is not eafy to ftifie the fuggeftions of Nature — • therefore no pains are fpared to keep them down^ by encreahng the uncertainty and doubts which arife in the courfe of all fpeculations on fuch fubjects* Such difficulties occur in all fcientific difcufTions.— ^ Heie they muit be numerous and embarraffing— for in this enquiry we come near the firfl: principles of things, and the firft prnicipies of human knowledge.    The geometer does not wonder at miftakcsPage 329

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.86% accurate
    (jUAF, iV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION.^ Jiff takes even in his fcience, the mofl: fiinple of all others.  Nor does the mechanic or the cheiuifl; rejed all his fcience, becaufe he cannot attain clear conceptions of iome of the natural reiations which operate in the phenomena under his confideration.^—Nor do any of thefe lludents of nature brand wirh the name of fool, or knave, or bigot, another perfon who has drawn a difi'erent concLufion from the phenomenon.  In one point they all agree— they find themfelves poffeffed of faculties which enable them to fpeculate, and to difcover ; and they find, that the operation of thofe faculties is tjuite unlike the things which they contemplate by their means — and they feel a Jatisja&ion in the pqfJeffion of them^ and in this diftindion.^  But this feems a misfortune to our Illuminators. I have long been ftruck v^ith this. If by deep meditation I have folved a problem which has baffled the endeavours of ethers, I (hould hardly thank the perfon .who convinced me that my fuccefs was entirely owning to the particular fiate of my health, by which my brain was kept free from many irritations to which other perfons are cxpofed. Yet this is the condud of the Illuminated — They are abundantly felf-conceited ; and yet they continually endeavour to defiroy all grounds of felf-eflimaticn. — They rejoice in every difcovery that is reported to them of fome refembiance, unnoticed before, between mankind and the inferior creation, and would be happy to find that the refembiance is complete. It is very true, Mr. Pope's '' Poor Indian, with untutor'd *' mind," had no objedion to his dog's going to heaven with him : " And thinks, admitted to that equal flcy, " His faithful dog fhali bear him eompany.'' Thi.

Page 330Page 330

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.29% accurate
    31 6 TME fRengh Revolution. chap. iv. This is Kot an abjed, but it is a modeft fentiment. But our high-minded philofophers, who, with Beatrice in the play, '' cannot brook obedience to a *' wayward piece of marl," if it be in the fhape of a Prince, have far other notions of the matter. Indeed they are not yet agreed about it. Mr. de la Meiherie hopes, that before the enlightened Republic of France has got into its teens, he fhall be able to tell his fellow-citizens, in his Journal de Phyfique^ that particular form of cryflallization which men have been accufremed to call God. — Dr. Prieftley again deduces all inteiligenee from eladic undulations, and will probably think, that his own great difcoveries have been the quiverings of fome fiery marfli miafma. While Pope's poor Indian hopes to take his dog to heaven with him, thefe Illuminators hope to die like dogs, and that both foul and body fliall be as if they never had been. Is not this a melancholy refult of ail our Illumination? It is of a piece with the termination of the ideal Phiiofophy, viz. profelTed and total ignorance. Should not this make us ftart back and helitate, before we pout like wayward children at the hardlhips of civil fubordination, and before we make a facrifice to our ill humour of all that we value ourfelves for ? Does it not carry ridicule and abfurdity in its forehead ?-— Such alTertions of perfonal worth and dignity, (always excepting Princes and Prieds,) and fuch abjed acknowledgments of worthleiTnefs. — Does not this, of itfelf, ftiow that there is fome radical fault in the whole ? It has all arifen from what they have called Illumination^ and this turns out to be worfe than darknefs— But we alfo know that it has all arifen from felf-conceited difcontent, and that it has been brought to its prefent ilate by the rage of ipeculation. We may venture to put the queliion to any man's confcience — -whether difcon- tentPage 331

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.68% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 317 tent did not precede his doubts about his own nature and whether he has not encouraged the train of argument that tended to degrade him ? '' Thy wifb '* was father, Harry, to that thought."— -Should not this make us diftruft, at leafl:, the operations of this faculty of our mind, and try to moderate and check this darling propeniity. — It feems a misfortune of the age — for we fee that it is a natural fource of difturbance and revolution. But here it will be immediately faid, '' What, ** mufl: we give over thinking— -be no longer ration'' ai creatures, and believe every lie that is told us?" By no means.— Let us be really rational creatures — and, taught by experience, let us, in all our fpeculations on fubjeds which engage the paffions, guard ourfeives with the mod anxious care againfl the rifk of having our judgments warped by our dehres. — There is no pvcpenfity of our nature of which the proper and modv-sft indulgence is not beneficial to man, and which is not huitful, when this indulgence is carried too far. — And if we candidly perufe the page of hiftory, we Tnaii be convinced that the abufe is great in proportion as the fubjecft is important. What has been fo ruinoufly perverted as the religious principle ? — What horrid fuperflition has it nC' produced? The Reader will not, I hope, take it am lis that I prefume to diredl his attention to fome maxims which ought to condu(5t a prudent man in his indulgence of a fpeculative difpofition, and apply them to the cafe in hand. Whoever will for a while call off his attention from the common affairs of life, the Curce hominum^ €t rerinn pondus inane^ and will but reflecl a little on that wonderful principle within him, which carries him over the whole univerfe, and (hows him its various relations — Whoever alfo remarks how very fraall a proportion his own individual exillence bears 2 R to

Page 332Page 332

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.56% accurate
    ^iS THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, iv, O to this immeafurable fcene, cannot bat feel an inexpreflible pleafure in the contemplation of his own powers— He mult rife in his own eflimation, and be difpofed to cheriOi withfondnefs this principle which fo emniently raifes him above all around him. Of ail the fources of human vanity this is fureiy the mod maniv, the moft excufable, and the moii likely to be extravagantly indulged. ^ — Vv^e may be certain that it will be ip indulged, and that men will frequently fpecula^e for the fake of fpeculation alone, and that they will have too much confidence in the refults of this favourite occupation. — As there have been ages of indolent and abjed credulity and fuperitition, it is next to certain that there are aifo times of wild and extravagant fpeculation— -and when we fee it becoming a fort of general paffion, we may be certain that this is a cafe in point. This can hardly be denied to be the characler of the prefent day. It is not denied. On the contrary it is gloried in as the prerogative of the eighteenth century. All the fpecuiations of antiquity are conlidered as glimmerings (with the exceptions of a few brighter fiafhes) vvhen compared with our prefent meridian fplendor. We (liould therefore liften with caution to the inferences from this boafted 11-^ lumination. Alio when we reflect on what palfes in our own minds, and on what we obfeive in the world, of the mighty influence of our defires and pafTions on our judgments, we fhould carefully notice whether any fuch warping of the belief is probable in the prefent cafe. That it is fo is almoil certain—for the general and immediate effed of this Illumination is to lellen or remove many rellraints which the .^andions of religion lay on the indulgence of very flrong paflions, and to diminifh our regard for a certain purity or corrc6lnefs of manners, which religion recommends as the only conduaPage 333

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.29% accurate
    CHAF. iv« THE FRENCH REVOLUTION^ 3X9 du£l fuitecl to our noble natures, and as abfolutely neeeffary for attaining that perfection and happinefs of which we are capable.  For furely if we take away rehgion, it will be wifdom *' to eat and '* to drink, fmce to-morrow we die.'* If, moreover, we fee tliis Illumination extolled above all fciencc, as friendly to virtue, as improving the heart, and as producing a juit morality, which will lead to happinefs both for ourfelves and others^ but perceive at the fame time that thefe affertions are made at the expence of principles, which our natural feelings force us to venerate as fbpreme and paramount to all others, we may then be certain that our informer is trying to midead and deceive us.-  For all virtue and goodnefs both of heart and conduct, Js in perf^ft harmony, and there is no jarring or inconfiftency. But we mud pafs this fentence on the doftrincs of this llluminatiorii For it is a melancholy truth that they have been preached and recommended, for the moft part^ by clergymen, pariih-miniflers, who, in the prefence of invoked Deity, and in the face of the world, have fet their folemn ieal to a fyftem of doctrines dire£tly oppofite to thofe recommended in their writings ; which doctrines they folemnly profefs to believe, and folemnly fwear to inculcate. Surely the informations and indructionsof fuch men lliould be rejedled. Where (hall wc find their real opinions ? In their folemn oaths? ^-^or in thefe infidel differtations? — In either cafe, they are deceivers, whether mifled by vanity or by the mean defirc of church-emoluments ; or they are prcftitutes, courting the fociety of the wealthy and fenfual. Honedy, like juftice, admits of no degrees. A man is honed, or he is a knave, and who would trufb a knave ? But fuch men are unfuitable inftru6tors for another reai'on — they are unwife ;

Page 334Page 334

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.79% accurate
    ':>20 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, IV. unwife ; for, whatever they may think, they are not refpedled as men of worth, but are inwardly defpifed as parafites, by the rich, who admit them into their company, and treat them with civility, for their own realbns. We take inftrudlions not merely from the knowing, the learned, but from the wife — not therefore from men who give fuch evidences of wtaknefs. Such would be the condudl of a prudent man^ who lifcens to the inilru£tions of another with the ferious intention of profiting by them. In the prefent cafe he fees plain proofs of degraded ftlf eftimation, of diflionefty, and of mean motives. But the prudent man will go further — he will remark that diifolute manners, and actions which are inevitably fubverfive of the peace and order, nay, of the very exiflence of fociety, are the natural and neceffary confequences of irreligion. Should any doubt of this remain in his mind ; (hould he fomctimcs think of an Epicftetus, or one or two individuals of antiquity, who were eminently virtuous, without the influence of religious fan£tions, he fhould recollect, that the Stoics were animated by the thought, that while the wife man was playing the game of life, the gods were looking on, and pieafed with his fkiil. Let him read the beautiful account given by Dr. Smith of the rife of the Stoic philofcphy, and he will fee that it was an artificial but noble attempt of a few exalted minds, cnthufiafls in virtue, aiming to fteel their fouls againft the dreadful but unavoidable misfortunes to which they were continually expofed by the daily recurring revolutions in the turbulent democracies of ancient Greece, There, a philofopher was this day a magiflrate, and the next day a captive and a flave. He would fee that this fair picture of mental happinefs and independence was fitted

Page 335Page 335

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.74% accurate
    CHAP. IV, THE FRENCH B EVOLUTION. q:2I O fitte«l for the contemplation of only a few choice fphits, but had no influence on the bulk of mankind. He muil admire the noble charaders who were animated by this manly enthLifiairij. and who have really exhibited fome wonderful pictures of virtuous heroifm ; but he will regret, that the influence of thefe manly, thcfe natural principles, was not more extenfive. lie will fayto himfelf, " How will a whole nation adt when re*' ligious fanctions are removed, and men are ac*' tuated by reafon alone?" — He is not without inflruction on this important fubjcdl. France has given an awful leiTon to furrounding nations, by lliewing them what is the natural erTect of fliaking; off the religious principle, and the veneration for that pure morality which characterifcs Chrii'ftianity. By a decree of the Convention, (June 6, 1794) it is declared, that there is nothing criminal in the promifcuous commerce of the fexes, and therefore nothing that derogates from the female character, when woman forgets that (he is the depofitary of all domeftic fatisfaclion  that her honour is the facred bond of Cocial life  that on her modefty and delicacy depend all the refpetft and confidence that will make a man attach himfelf to her fociety, free her from labour, fliare with her the fruits of aii his own exertions, and work with willingnefs and delight, that (lie may appear en all occahons his equal, and the ornament of all his acquifirions. In the very argument which this feleded body of fenators has given for the propriety of this decree, it has degraded woman below all eftiniation. '' It is to prevent her '* from i^iurdering the fruit of unlawful love, by re*' moving her (hame, and by relieving her from the '' fear of want." The fenators fay, '' the Republic *' wantsxitizens, and therefore mufl not only re" move

Page 336Page 336

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.33% accurate
    322 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. IV^' *' move this temptation of Ihame^ but miifl: take care *' of the mother while ihe nurfes the child.- It is *' the property of the nation, and muft not be loft." The woman all the while is confidered only as the fhe-aniraal, the breeder of Sans Culottes. This is ihejujl morality of Ilkmiiination. It is really amufing (for things revolting to nature now amufe) to obferve with what fidelity the principles of the Illuminati have expreffed the fentiments which take poffeiTion of a people who have fliaken off the fan(fiions of Religion and morality. The following is part of the addrefs to Pfycharion and the company mentioned in page 257 : '■' Once more, Pfycharion, I indulge you with a look behind you to the flowery days of childhood. Now look forwards, young woynan / the holy circle of the marriageable^ {ynannbaren) welcome you. Young men, honour the young woman^ the future breeder {gebaererin) !'^ Then, to all. — '' Rejoice in the dawn of" Illumination and of Freedom. Nature at laft enjoys her facred never-fading rights. Long was her voice kept dov/n by civil fubordination,^ but the days of your majority now draw nigh, and you v;ill no longer, under the authority of guardians, account it a reproach to conhder with enlightened eyes the fecret workfhops of nature, and to en^ joy your work and duty." Minos thought thig very fine, but it raifed a terrible difturbance and broke up the aflembly. Such are the effecis of this boafted enlightening oi the human mind with refpecl. to religion and morality. Let us next confider what is the refuit of the mighty informations which we have got in refpecl of our focial or political connexions. II. We have learned the fum total of this political Illumination, and fee that, if true, it is melancholy, deftruclivc of our prefent comforts, numerous as they

Page 337Page 337

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.29% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 323 they are, and affords no profped of redrefs from which we can profit, but, on the contrary, plunges mankind into diffention, mutual injury, and univerfal mifery, and all this for the chance only of prevailing in the contefi, and giving our pofterity a chance of going on in peace, if no change ihaii be produced, as in former times, by the efforts of ambitious men. But the Illumination appears to be partial, nay falfe. What is it ? It holds out to the prince nothing but the relignation of all hispofleffions, rights and claims, fandioned by the quiet poffeffion of ages, and by all the feelings of the human heart which give any notion of right to his lowed fubjed. All thefe poffeflions and claims are difcovered to have arifen from ufurpations, and are therefore tyranny. It has been difcovered, that all fubordinate fubjedions were enforced, therefore their continuance is Jlavery, But both of thefe hiflorical aflertions are in a great degree falfe, and the inferences from them are unreafonable. The world has gone on as we fee it go on at prefent. Moft principalities or fovereignties have ariien as we fee perfonal authorities and influence arife every day among ourfelves. Bufinefs for the whole muff be done. Moil men are fufiiciently occupied by their private affairs, and they are indolent even in thefe — they are contented when another does the thing (or them. There is not a little village, nor a fjciety of men, where this is not feen every day. Some men have an enjoyment in this kind of vicarious employment. Other men like influence and power, and thus are compenfated for their trouble. Thus many petty managers of public affairs arife in every country. The mutual animofities or individuals, and ffiil more, the animohties of tribes, clans, and different affociations, give rife to another kind of fuperiors — io leaders, who dired the ffruggles of the reft, whetherPage 338

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.76% accurate
    324 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAF. iv. whether for offence or defence. The defcendants of Ifrael faid, *' they wanted a man to go out before '' the people, like other nations." As the fmall buiinefs of a few individuals requires a manager or a leader, fo do fome more general affairs of thefe petty fuperiors.-— Many of thefe alfo are indolent enough to wiih this trouble taken off their hands ; and thus another rank of fupericrs aiifes, and a third, and fo on, till a great State may be formed ; and in this gradation each clafs is a competent judge of the condud of that ciafs only which is immediately above it. All this may arife, and has often arifen, from voluntary conceflion alone. This concellion may proceed from various caufes, — from confidence in fuperior talents — from confidence in great worth, — mofi: generally from the refped or deference which all men feel for great poffeffions. This is frequently founded in felf-intereff and expedations of advantage ; but it is natural to man, and perhaps fprings rom our inflindive fympathy with the fatisfadions of others— we are unwilling to dillurb them, and even wi(h to promote them. But this fubordination may arife, and has often arifen, from other caufes — from the love of power and influence, which makes fome men eager to lead others, or even to manage their concerns. We fee this every day, and it may be perfedly innocent. It often arifes from the defire of gain of one kind or another. ---This alfo may frequently be indulged with perfed innocence, and even with general advantage. Frequently, however, this fubordination J,s produced by the love of power or of gain pufhed loan immoderate degree of ambition, and rendered unjufl:. Now there arife oppreffion, tyranny, fufJenngs, ^nd fiavrry. Now appears an oppofftion between the rights or claims of the ruler and of the people.

Page 339Page 339

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.68% accurate
    CfiAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 3^^ fjeople. Now the rulers come i6 confider themielves as a d ifferentclafs, and theirtranfadionsai enowonly with each other.— Prince becomes the rival or the enemy of Prince; and in their Cornells one prevails, and the dominion is enlarged. This rivalfhip may have began in any rank of fuperiors ; even between the firli managers of the affairs of the fmalleft communities ; and it muft be remarked that thev only are the immediate gainers or lofers in the conteli, while thofe below them live at eafe, enjoying many advantages of the delegation of their own concerns. No human fociety has ever proceeded purely in either of thefe two ways, but there has alwavs been a mixture of both. — But this procefs is indifpenfably neceffary for the formation of a great nation, and for all the confequences that refult only from fuch a coalition.— Therefore it is neceffary forgiving rife to all thofe comforts, and luxuries, and elegances, which are to be fotind only in great and Cultivated ftates. It is neceffary for producing fuch enjoyments as we fee around us in Europe, which we prize f© highly, and for which we are making ali this ftir and diftarbance, I believe that no man who expeds to be believed will pofitively affert that human nature and human enjoyments are not meliorated by this cultivation.— It feems to be the intention of nature, and, notwithftanding the follies and vices of many, we can have little hefitation va faying that there are in the mod cultivated nations of Europe, and even in the higheft ranks of thofe nations, men of great virtue and worth, and of high ^ccomplifhment- — Nor can we deny that fuch men are the finefl: fpecimens of human nature. Roffeau indeed wrote a whiraiical pamphlet, in which he had the vanity to think that he had proved that all thefe fruits of cultivation were ioffes to humanity and virtue—Yet Rouffeau could not be contented with the 2 S focietyPage 340Page 340

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.18% accurate
    3^6 TftE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. iVfocicty of the rude and unpoliflied, although he pretended that he was aKiioft the fole vvorfiiipper of pure virtue. — He fupported himfeh', not by alFifting the iimple peafant,. but by wriung inufic and lufcious novels for the pampered rich. This is the circumftance entirely overlooked, or anfully kept out of fight, in the boafted Illumination of thefe days. No attention is paid to the important changes which have happened in national greatnefs, in national connedion, in national improvement— -yet we never think of parting with any of the advantages, real or imaginary, which thefe changes have produced — nor do we refled that in order to keep a great nation together — to make it ad with equality, or with preponderancy, among other nations, the individual exertions muft be concentrated, mull be direded — and that this requires a ruler vefted with fupreme power, and interefied by fome great and endearing motive^ liich as hereditary pofleilion of this power and influence, to maintaiii and defend this coalition of men. — All this is overlooked, and we attend onlv to the fubordination which is indifpenfably neceffary. Its grievances are immediately felt, and they are heightened tenfold by a delicacy or fenfibility which fprings from the great improvements in the accommodations and enjoyments of life, which the gradual ufurpation and fubiequent fubordination have produced, and continue to fupport. But we are determined to have the elegance and grandeur of a palace withoi;t the prince. — We will not give up any of our luxuries and refinements, yet will not fupport thofe high ranks and thofe nice minds which puoduced them, and which mull continue to keep them from degenerating into barbarous hm.plicity and coarfe fenfuality. We would keep the philofophers, the poets, the artiiis, but not the Maeccnafes. It is very true that in fuch a ilate there would be no Conjiiraiion des Philofopkes ;Page 341

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.02% accurate
    onAP. ir. THE FRENCH IMtVOLUTlO:^. 327 Philofophes ; for in fuch a fiate this vermin oi pbilofophes and fcribblers would not have exifled. In (hort, we would have what is impoflTible. I have no hehtation in faying, that the Britidi Conflitution is the form of government for a ^reat and refined nation^ in which the ruling fentiments and propenhties of human nature feem moil happily blended and balanced. There is no occaiion to vaunt it as the ancient rights of Britons, the wifdom of ages, &c. It has attained its prefent pitch of perfedion by degrees, and this not by the efforts of wifdom, but by the flruggles of vice and folly, working on a rich fund of good nature, and of manly fpirit, that are confpicuous in the Britifh charadler. I do not hefitate to faythat it is the only form of government which will admit and give full excrcife to all the refpedlable propenfities of our nature, with the leail chance of difturbance and the greateft probability of man's arriving at the highefl: pitch of improvement in every thing that raifes him above the beads of the iield. Yet there is no part of it that may not, that is not, abufed, by pufhing it to an improper length, and the fame w^atchful care is neceifary for preferving our ineftimable bleilings that was employed in acquiring them. This is to be done, not by flying at once to an abfcradt theory of the rights of man. There is an evident folly in this procedure. What is this theory ? It is the beft general flietch that we can draw of focial life, deduced from our knowledge of human nature. And what is this knowledge? It is a well digefled abflra6t, or rather a declaration of uohat we have obfervedo^ human adlions. What is the uie tiierefore of this intermediate pi£lure, this theory of the rights of man ?—It has a chance of being unlike the original  it muft certainly have imperfe(ftions, *

Page 342Page 342

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.31% accurate
    358 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, CHAP. iv. feclions, therefore it can be of no ufe to us. We iliould go at once to the original — we {honld con-' fider how men have adted-. — what have been their mutual expedlations — their fond propenfities — ^ what of theie are inconfiftent with each other — what are the degrees of indulgence which have been admitted in them all without difturbance. — I will venture to fay that whoever does this, will find himfeif imperceptibly led to contemplate a mixed hereditary monarchy, and will figure to himfeif a parliament of King, Lords, and Commons, all looking at each othe^' with fomewhatof a cautious or jealous eye, while the reft of the nation are fitting, '' each under his ovvm vine and *' under his own fig-tree, and there is none to " make him afraid ;"— in one word, the Conllitution of Great Britain. A mod valuable r'fult of fuch contemplation will be a thorough convidlion that the grievance which is moft clamoroufly infilled on is the inevitable confequence of the liberty and fecurity which we enjoy. I mean minifterial corruption, with all the dilmal tale of placemen, and penfioners, and rotten boroughs, &c. &c. Thefe are never fcen in a defpotic government  there they are not Wanted — nor can they be very apparent in an uncultivated and poor date — but in a luxurious nation, where pleafures abound, whete the returns of induftry are fecure; here an individual looks on every thing as his own acquifition- — he does not feel his relation to the flate — has no patriotifm— thinks that he would be much happier if the ftate would let him alone. He is fretted by the reftraints which the public weal lays on him — therefore government and governors appear as checks and hindrances to his exertions— hence a general inclination to refill adminillration. Yet public bufmefs

Page 343Page 343

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.05% accurate
    CHAP. IV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 32^ bufinefs muft be done, that we may He down and rife again in fafety and peace. Admiifiilration mud: be fupported — there are always perions who wifii to poffefs the power that is exercifed by the prelent minifters, and would turn them out. How is all this to be remedied ? I ice no way but by applying to the felfiQi views of individuals— by rewarding the friends of adminifbration — This may be done with perfect virtue— and from this the felfifli will conceive hopes, and will fupport a virtuous minidry— but they are as ready to help a wicked one. This becomes the greatefl misfortune of a free nation. Miniflers are tempted to bribe — and, if a fyilematic oppofition be coniidered as a neceffary part of a practical conftitution, it is almoft indifpenfable — and it is no where lb prevalent as in a pore democracy. Lav/s may be contrived to make it very troublefome, but can never extirpate it nor greatly diminifn it : this can be done only by defpotifm, or by national virtue. It is a (hameful complaint  we (hould not reprobate a few miniflers, but the thoufands who take the bribes. Nothing tends fo much to diminifli it in a corrupted nation as great limitations to the eligibility of reprefentatives — and this is the beauty of our conftitution. JVe have not difcovered^ therefore, by this boafled Illumination, that Princes and fuperiors are nieiefs, and mud vanifh from the earth ; nor that the people have now attained full age, ?-nd are fit to govern themfelves. We want only to revel a little on the laft fruits of national cultivation, which we would quickly confume, and never allow to be railed again. No matter how this progrefs began, whether from conceflion or ufurpation — We pofTefs it, and, if wife, we will preferve it, by preferving its indifpenfable fupports. They have

Page 344Page 344

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.11% accurate
    ti 330 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. IV. have indeed been frequently employed very improperly, but their mo(l pernicious abufe has been this breed of fcribbling vermin, which have made the body politic fmart in every limb. Hear what opinion was entertained of the fages of France by their Prince, the father of Louis XVL the unfortunate martyr of Monarchy. *' By " the principles of our new Philofophers, the " Throne no longer wears the fplendour^t^f divi* nity. They maintain that it arofe from violence, and that by the fame juitice that force erected it, force may again (hake it, and over" turn it. The people can never give up their " power. They only let it out for their own ad*' vantage, and always retain the right to refcind " the contract, and rcfume it whenever their per^' fonal advantage, their only rule of condu£t, " requires it. Our philofophers teach in public *' what our pailions fuggefl only in fecret. They ** fay to the Prince that all is permitted only " when all is in his power, and that his duty is " fulfilled when he has pleafed his fancy. Then, *' furely, if the laws of felf-interelt, that is, the '' felf-will of human paHions, (liall be fo generally " admitted, that we thereupon forget the eternal '' laws of God and of Nature, ?dl conceptions of '^ right and wrong, of virtue and vice, of good " and evil, mud be extirpated from the human *' heart. The throne mud totter, the fubjefts *' mud become unmanageable and mutinous, and '' their ruler hard-hearted and inhuman. The " people will be inceifantly oppreffed or in an " uproar."—" What fervice will it be if I order " fuch a book to be burnt, ^ — the author can Vv^rite *' another to-morrow,'' This opinion of a Prince is unpoHQicd indetd, and homely, hut itJs juft. Weiihaupt

Page 345Page 345

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.03% accurate
    CHAP. iv. T«E FRENCH REVOLUTION, 33I Wciftiaupt grants, that " there will be a terri" ble convulfion, and a ftorm — but this Vvill be " fucceeded by a calm— -the unequal will now be " equal — and when the caufe of difienlion is thus *' removed, the world will be in peace."-— True, when the caufesof diiFenfion are removed. Thus, the deflrudtion of our crop by vermin is at an end when a flood has fwcpt every thing away — but as new plants will fpring up in the wade, and, if not indantly devoured, will again cover the ground with verdure, fo the induftry of man, and his delire of comfort and confideration, will again accumulate  in the hands of the diligent a greater proportion of the good things of life. In this infant (late of the emerging remains of former cultivation, comforts, which the prefent inhabitants of Europe would look on with contempt, will be great, improper, and hazardous acquifitions. The principles which authorife the propofed dreadful equalifation will as judly entitle the idleorunfuccefsful of future days to ilrip the pofleiTor of his advantages, and things mud ever remain on their favage level. III. I think that the impreffion which the iniincerity of condud: of thole inftructors will leave on the mind, mud be highly ufeful. They are evidently teaching vv'hat they do not believe themfelves — and here I do not confine my remark to their preparatory doctrines, which they afterwards explode. I make it chiciiy with refpect to their grand odenfible principle, which pervades the whole, a principle whicii they arc obliged to adopt againd their will, -They knovy that the principles of virtue are rooted in the heart, and that they can only be fmothered  but did they pretend to eradicate them and proclaiai bominem homini lupura. all would fourn at their irircruidion #

Page 346Page 346

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.62% accurate
    33'2 TME FRENCH REVOLL'TION. CHAP. iVi inflrudion. We are wheedled, by tickling our fancy with a notion that facred virtue is not onjy fecure, but that it is only in fuch hearts that it exerts its native energy. Senfible that the levelling maxims now fpoken of are revolting to the mind, the Illuminators are under the neceffity of keeping us from looking at the fhocking pidure, by difplaying a beautiful fcene of Utopian happinefs — and they rock us afleep by the eternal lullaby of morality and univerfal phitanthropyi Therefore the foregoing narration of the perfonal condud of thefe inftrudorsand reformers of the worlds is highly ufeful. All this is to be brought about by the native lovelinefs of pure virtue, purged of the corruptions which fuperflitious fears have introduced, and alfo purged of the leififh thoughts which are avowed by the advocates of what their opponents call true religion. This is faid to hold forth eternal rewards to the good, and to threaten the wicked with dreadful punifhment. Experience has fhovvn how inefficient fuch motives are. Can they be otherwife? lay our Illuminators. Are they not addrelTed to s principle that is ungenerous and felfilh ? But our dodrines, fay they, touch the hearts of the worthy. Virtue is beloved for her own fake, and all will yield to her gentle fway. Bu6 look, Reader, look at Spartacus the murderer, at Cato the keeper of poifons and the thief— Look at Tiberius^ at Alcibiades, and the relief the Bavarian Pandemonium. Look at poor Bahrdt. Go to France — look at Lequinio, at Condorcet*. Look * De la Metherie fays, (Journ. de Phyf. Nov. 1792,) thaE CondQrcet was brought up in the houfe of the old Duke of Rothefoucault, who treated him as his fon — -got Turgot to create a hicrative office for him, and raifed him to all his eminence — yet he purfued him with malicious reports — and adlually employed ruffians to afTaffinate him Yet is Condorcet's writing a model of Aimianity and tcndernefs. atPage 347

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.51% accurate
    kllAP. iVi THE FRENCH REVOLUTIONTw 333 at the Monfter Orleans,  'All were liars. Their Hivinity had no influence on tht^ir profligate minds. They only wanted to wheedle yon, by touching the? firings of huraanity and goodnefs which are yet braced up in your heart, and which ftill yield fweet harmony if you wil! accompany their notes with thofe of religion, and neither clog them vvith the groveling pleafures of fenfe, nor damp the whole with the thouscht of eternal lilence. A moil worthy and accomplifhed gentleman, who took refuge in this country, leaving behind him his property, and friends to whom he was moft tenderly attached, often faid to nie that no'hirig fo much affecled him as the revolution in the hearts of men. ^M^haraders which were unfpotted, hearts thoroughly known to himfelf, having been tried by many things which fearch the inmoll folds of felfifhnefs or malevolence — in (hcrt, perfens whofe judgments were excellent, and on whofe worth he could have relied his honour and his life, fo fafcinated by the contagion, that they came at lall: to behold, and even to commit the moft atrocious crimes with delight. — He ufed foraetimes to utter a figh which pierced my heart, and would fay, that it was caufed by fome of thofe things that had come acrofs his thoughts. He breathed his laft among us, declaring that it was impoflible to recover peace of mind, without a total oblivion of the wickednefs and miferies he had beheld. —What a valuable advice, '* Let him that thinketh he ftandeth, take heed left he fall."— When the prophet told Hazael that he would betray his Prince, he exclaimed, '' Is thy fervant a dog, that he fhould do fuch a thing ?" Yet next day he murdered him. Never lince the beginning of the world, has true religion received fo complete an acknowledgment of her excellence, as has been extorted from the fanatics who have attempted to deflroy her. Religion 2 T ftood

Page 348Page 348

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.68% accurate
    ;^54 TfiE FRENCH REVOLUTION, CHAI*. 11% ftood in their way, and the wretch Marat, as well as the fteady villain Weifliaupt, faw that they could nor. proceed till they had eradicated all fentiments of of the moral government of the univerfe. Human nature, improved as it has been by religion, flirunk from the tafks that were impofed, and it mufl: therefore be brutalized — The grand conlederation was folemniy fworn to by millions in every corner of France— -but, as Mirabeau faid of the declaration of the Rights of Man, it mult be made only the '* Almanack of the bygone year"— Therefore Lequinio muft write a book, declaring oaths to be nonfenfe, unworthy of San Culottes, and all religion to be a farce. Not long after, they found that they had fome ufe for a God — but he was gone-— and they could not nnd another. Their conflitution was gone— and they have not yet found another. What is now left them on which they can depend for awing a man into a refpecl for truth in his judicial declarations ? what but the honour of a Citizen of France, who laughs at all engagements, which he has broken again and again ? Religion has taken off with her every fenfe of human duty. What can we expecl: but villainy from an ArchbiQiop of Paris and his chapter, who made a public profefTion that they had been playing the villains for many ^ears, teaching wdiat they thought to be a bundle of lies ? What but the very thing which they have done, cutting each other's throats ? — Have not the enlightened citizens of France applauded the execution of their fathers ? Have not the furies of Paris denounced their own children ? But turn your eyes from the horrifying fpeciacle, and think on your own noble defcent and alliance. You are not the accidental productions of a fatal chaos, but the w'ork of a Great Artift, creatures that are cared for, born to noble profpeds, and conduded to them by the plaineil and

Page 349Page 349

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.13% accurate
    CHAP. IV. THE FRSNSH REVOLUTION. 33^ and moil fimple precepts, " to do juftly, to love " mercy, and to walk humbly before God," not beivlldered by the falfe and fluttering glare of French Philofophy, but conduced by this clear, tingle light, perceivable by all, "Do to others what you (hould " reafonably expedl them to do to you." Think not the Mufe whofe fober voice you hear, , Contra(?ts with bigot fr©\vn her fullen brow, Cafts round Religion's orb the mills of Fear, Or (hades with horror what with fmiles fhould jHow. No — (he would warn you with feraphic fire, Heirs as ye are of Heaven's eternal day. Would bid you boldly to that Heaven afplre, Not link and fiumber in your cells of clay. Is this the bigot's rant ? Away, ye vain, Your doubts, your fears, in gloomy dulnefs fteep ; Go — foothe yeur fouls in ficknefs, death, or pain, With the fad folace of eternal fleep. Yet know, vain fceptics, know, th' Almighty Mind, Who breath'd on man a portion of his fire, Bade his free foul, by earth nor time confin'd. To Heaven, to immortality afpire. Nor ihall this pile of hope his bounty rear'd, . By vain philofophy be e'er deftroy'd ; Eternity, by all or hop'd or fear'd, Shall be by all or fuffer'd or enjoy'd^ Mason. The unfortunate Prince who has taken refuse iri this kingdom, and whofe fituation among us is an iiiuflrious mark of the generofity of the nation, and of the fovereignty of its laws, faid to one of the Gentleman about him, that '' if this country was to *' efcape the general wreck of nations, it would " owe its prefervation to Religion." — -When this was doubted, and it was obferved, that there had not been wanting many Religionifls in Fnuice : - Tiue,^-''

Page 350Page 350

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.25% accurate
    336 THE FRENCH REVOLUTJON. €HAP, iVc *' True," faid the Prince, " but they were not in *' earned.— I fee here a ferious intereft in the thing, *' The people know what they aie doing when they *' go to church — they underilaod fomething of ir, " and take an intereil in it." May his obfervation be jutt, and his expedations be fulfilled ! IV. I would again call upon my coLintrywomen with the moil earnefl concern^ and befcech them to iconiider this fubjecl as of more particular imporiance 10 themfelves than even to the men.— While woman is confidered as a refpeflable nioral agent, training along with ourfelves for endiefs improvement j then, and only then, will (he be confidered by lordly man as his equal ;-— then, and only then, will fhe be allowed to have any rights, and thofe rights be refpeded. Strip women of this prerogative, and they become the drudges of man's indolence, or the pampered playthings of liis idle hours, fubjeci to his caprices, and flaves to his mean paflions. Soon will their prefent empire of gallantry be over. It is a refinement of manners v;hich fprang from Chriflianity ; and when Chriftianity is forgotten, this artificial diadem will be taken from their heads, and unlels they adopc the ferocious fentim.ents of their Gallic neighbour;;, and join in the general uproar, they will link into the ififignincance of the women in the turbulent republics of Greece, wheie they are never feen in the bufy haunts of *Tnen, if we except four or five, w-ho, during the pourfe of as many centuries, emerged from the general obfcurity, and appear in the hilioric page, by their uncoramon talents, and by the facrifice of Vvhat my fair country v^omen ftill hold to be the ornament of their fex. I would remind them, that they have it in thtir power to retain their prelent honourable llation in fociety. They are our early inftru(itors 5 and while mothers in the refpettable

Page 351Page 351

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.27% accurate
    iJHAP, IV* THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 33^ refpe^lable ftations of life continued to inculcate on the tender minds of their Tons a veneration for the precepts of R.cIigion, their pliant children, receiving their initrudions along with the affectionate careiles of their mothers, got impreifions which long retained their force, and which protected them from the impulfes of youthful paffions, till ripening years fitted their minds for liftening to fcrious inllru£lion from their public teachers. Sobriety and decency of manners were then no liar on the character of a youth, and he was thought capable of flruggling for independence, or pre-eminence, fit either for fupporting or defending the iiiate, although he was neither a toper nor a rake. 1 believe that no man who has feen thirty or forty yearg of life will deny that the manners of youth are fadly changed in this refpeft. And, without prefuiTiing to fay that this has proceeded from the negle6t, and almoll total ceifation of the moral education of the nurfery, I think myfelf well warranted, from my own obiervation, to fay that this education and the fober manners of young men have quitted us together. Some will call this prudery, and croaking. But I am almod tranfcribing from Cicero, and from Quintilian. Cornelia, Aurelia, Attia, and other ladies of the firft rank, are praifed by Cicero only for their eminence in this refpecl ; but not becaufe they vv^ere (ingular, Ouintilian fays, that in the time immediately prior to his own, it had been the general pra£lice of the ladies of rank to fuperintend the moral education both of fons and daughters. But of late, fays he, they are fo engaged in continual and corrupting amufements, fuch as the fhows of gladiators, horfe-racing, and deep play, that they have no time, and have yielded their places to Greek governeires and tutors, out call" s

Page 352Page 352

The text on this page is estimated to be only 25.02% accurate
    33^ THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. FV, caftsof a nation more fubdued by their own vices than by the Roman arms  1 dare fay this was laughed at, as croaking about the corruption of the age. But what was the confequence of all this? — The Romans became the mofl abandoned vokiptuaiies, and, to preferve their mean pleafures, they crouched as willing Haves to a fucceflion of the vilefl tyrants that ever difgraced humanity. What a noble fund of felf-eftimation would our fair partners acquire to themfeives, if, by reforming the manners of the young generation, tiiey (hould be the means of reftoring peace to the world ! They have it in their pouuer, by the renewal of the good old cuftom of early inilruction, and perhaps dill more, by impreiling on the minds of their daughters the fame fentiments, and obliging them to refpe£t fobriety and decency in the youth, and pointedly to withhold their fmiles and civilities from all who tranlgrefs thefe in the fmaileil degree. This is a method of proceeding that will mo ft certainly be vidorious. Then indeed will the women be the faviours of their country. While therefore the German fair have been repeatedly branded with having welcomed the French invaders*, let our ladies ftand up for the honour of free-born Britons, by turning agaiuR the pretended ealighteners of the world, the arms which nature has put into their hands, and which thofe proiiigates have prefumptuouily expeded to * I have met with this charge in many places ; and one book in particular, written by a Pruflian General Officer, who was m the country over-run by tne French troop7, gives a detail of the coudud of the women that Is very remarkable. He idfo fays, that infidelity has become very prevalent among the ladles in the higher circles. Indeed this melancholy account is to be found in many paiTages of the private correfpondence of the Illaminatl. employ

Page 353Page 353

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.50% accurate
    CHAP. IV, THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 33^ employ in extending their influence over mankind. The empire of beaut}^ is but fhort, but the empire of virtue is durable ; nor is there an indance to be met with of its decline. If it be yet podible to reform the world, it is poilible for the fair. By the conditution of human nature, they muft always appear as the ornament of human life, and be the objects of fondnefs and affe£lion ; fo that if any thing can make head againft the felfifh and overbearing difpofitions of man, it is his refpedful regard for the fex. But mere fondnefs has but little of the rational creature in it, and we fee it harbour every day in the bread that is filled with the meanefl and mofl turbulent pallions. No where is it fo llrong as in the harems of the eaft; and as long as the women afl^ nothing of the men but fondnefs and admiration, they will get nothing clfe — they will never be refpedled. But let them roufe themfelves, afTert their dignity, by fliewing their own elevated fentiments of human nature, and by afting up to this claim, and they may then command the world. V. Another good confequencc that (liould refblt from the account that has been given of tlie proceedings of this confpiracy is, that lince the fafcinatiug picture of human life, by which men have been wheedled into immediate anarchy and rebellion, is infmcere, and a mere artificial creature of the imagination, it can have no (leadinefs, but muft be changed by every freak of fancy, or by every ingenious fophifl, who can give an equal plaufibility to whatever fuits his prefcnt views. It is as much an airy phantom as any other whim of Free Mafonry, and has no prototype, no original pattern in human nature, to which recourfe may always be had, to correal mifcakes, and keep things in a conllant tenor. Has not France given the moft

Page 354Page 354

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.65% accurate
    340 THE FREKCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, Ws moil unequivocal proofs of this? Was not the decJaration of the Rights of Man, the produ£tion of their mod brilliant Iliuminators, a picture, in abflraCio^ where man was placed at a diftance from the eye, that no faHc light of local fituation might pervert the judgment or engage the paflions? Wa5 it not declared to be the mafter-piece of human wifdom? Did not the nation confider it at leifure? and, having it continually before their eyes, did they not, flep by flep, give their affent to the different articles of their Conftitution, derived from it, and fabricated by their moH choice Illuminators? And did not this Conftitution draw the applaufes of tlie bright geniufes of other nations^ who by this time were bufy in perfuading^ each his countrymen, that they were ignoramufes in ftatiftics, and patient flaves of opprcllion or of an-* cient prejudices? Did not panegyrics on it ifTue from every garret in London ? Where is it now ? where is its (uccefTor ? Has any one plan of government fubfiiled, except v/hile it was fupported by the incontroulable and inexorable power of the guillotine? Is not the prefent adminiftration of France as much as ever the object of difcontent and of terror, and its coercions as like aS ever to the fummary jullice of the Paridan mob? Is there any probability of its permanency in a flate of peace, w hen the fears of a foreign enemy no lon-^ ger give a confoiidation to their meafures, and oblige them either to agree among themfelvcs, or immediately to perifh? VI. The above accounts evince in the mofL uncontrovertible manner the dangerous tendency of all myftical focieties, and of all aflbciations who hold iccret meetings We fee that their uniform progrefs has been from frivolity and nonfenfe to wickcdneis and fedition. Wciftiaupt has been at

Page 355Page 355

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.70% accurate
    CHAP, iv, tHE FRENCH REYOLUTION. 34! at great pains to fliew the good effe^i-s of fecrecy iii the Aflbciation, and the arguments are valid for this purpofe. But all his arguments are fo many dilTuafive advices to every thinking and fober mind. The man who really wi{hes to dilcover ail abftrnfe truth will place himfclf, if poflible in a valin fituation, and will by no means cxpofe himfelf to the impatient hankering for fecrets and wonders-— and he will always fear that a thing which refolutely conceals itfelf cannot bear the light. All wilo have ferioufly employed themfelves in the difcovery of truth have found the great advantages of open communication of fentiment. And it is againfl common fenfe to imagine that there is any thing of vafl importance td mankind which is yet a fecret, and which mufh be kept a fecret in order to be ufeful. This is againft the whole experience of mankind- — And furcly to hug in one's breall: a fecret of fuch mighty importance, is to give the lie to ail our profeflions of brotherly love. What a folecifm ! a fecret to fenlighten and reform the whole world. We render all our endeavours impotent when we grafp at a tiling beyond our power. Let an aflbciation be formed with a ferious plan for reforming its own members, and let them extend in numbers in proportion as they fucceed — this miglit do fome good; But mud the way of doing this be a fecret? — It Inay be to many— who will not look for it where it is to be found— It is this:

Page 356Page 356

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.62% accurate
    343 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. C}iAf, lY^ Now, in either cafe, the danger of fuch fecrefe afiemblies is manifefl. Mere frivolity can never ferioufly occupy men come to age. And accordingly we fee that in every quarter of Europe where Free Mafonry has been eilabliQied, the Lodges have become feed-beds of public mifchief. I believe that no ordinary brother will fay that the occupations in the Lodges are any thing better than frivolous, very frivolous indeed. The diflribution of charity needs be no.fecret, and it is but a very fmall part of the employment of the meeting. This being the cafe it is in human nature that the greater we fuppofe the frivolity of fuch an affociation to be, the greater is the chance of its ceafing to give fufficient occupation to the mind, and the greater is the riilc that the m.eetings may be employed to other purpofes which require concealment. When this happens, felfinterefl alone mufc prompt and rule, and now there is no length that fome men will not go, when they think themfelves in no danger of detedtion and punifhment. The whole proceedings of the fecret focieties of Free Mafons on the Continent (and J am authorifed to fay, of fome Lodges in Britain) have taken one turn, and this turn is «erfe6liy natural. In all countries there are men of licentious morals. Such men wifh to have a iafe opportunity of indulging their wits in fatire and farcafm ; and they are pleafed with the fupport of others. The defne of making profelytes is in every breaft — andit is whetted by the reftraints of fociety. And all countries have difcontented men, whofe grumblings will raife difcontent in otliers, v/ho might not have attended to fome of the trifling hardfhips and injuries they met with,. had they not been reminded of them. To be difcontented, and not to think of fchcmes of redrefs^ is

Page 357Page 357

CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 343 is what we cannot think natural or manly — and where can fuch fentiments and fchemes find fuch fafe utterance and fuch probable fupport as in a fecret fociety? Free Malbnry is innocent of all thefe things; but Free Mafonry has been abufed, and at lafl totally perverted — and fo will and muft any fuch lecret affociation, as long as men are licentious in their opinions or wicked in their difpofitions. It were devoutly to be wifhed therefore that the whole fraternity would imitate the truly benevolent conduft of thofe German Lodges who have formally broken up, and made a patriotic facrifice of their amufement to the fafety of the flate. I cannot think the facrifice great or coftly. It can be no difRcult matter to find as pleafing a way of palling a vacant hour  and the charitable deeds of the members need not diminilli in the fmallefl degree. Every perfon's little circle of acquaintance will give him opportunities of gratifying his kind difpofitions, without the chance of being miftaken in the worth of the perfon on whom he bellows his favours. There is no occafion to go to St. Peterfburg for a poor Brother, nor to India for a convert to Chriftianity, as long as we fee fo many futferers and infidels among ourfelves. But not only are fecret focieties dangerous, but all focieties whofe objedl is myClerious. The whole hiftory of man is a proof of this pofition. In no age or country has there ever appeared a myfterious affociation which did not in time become a public nuifance. Ingenious or defigning men of letters have attempted to (how that fome of the ancient myfteries were ufeful to mankind, containing rational dodrines of natural religion. This was the ilrong hold of Wcilhaupt, and he quotes the Eleufmian, the Pythagorean, and other myfteries.

Page 358Page 358

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.80% accurate
    344 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, iv, teries. Biitfiirely their external fignsand tokens were every thing that is (liocking to decency and civil order. It is uncommon preturaption for the learned of the eighteenth century to pretend to knowmore about them than their contemporaries, the philofophers, the lawgivers of antiquity. Thefe give no fuch account of them. I would defire any perfon who admires the ingenious diifertations of Dr. Warburton to read a dull German book, calU Caraderjftik der Myjitrien der Altern^ publiilied at Frankfort in 1787. The author conteiits him fclf with a patient colledion of every fcrap of every ancient author who h^s faid any thing about ^hem. If the reader can fee anything in them hut the moil abfurd and immoral polytheifm and fable, he muil take words in a ien{e that is ufelefs ia reading any other piece of ancient compofition, I haye a notion that the Dionyfiacs of lona had ibme fcientific fecrets, vi^. all the knowledo-e of practical mechanics which was employed by their architects and engineers, and that they were re • ally a Mafonic Fraternity. But, like the Illuminati^ they tagged to the fecrets of Mafonry the fecret of drunkennefs and debauchery ; they had their Sifter Lodges, and at laft became rebels, fubvertcrs of the ftates where they were protected, till aiming at the dominion of all Ionia, they were attacked by the neighbouring dates and difperfed. They v^ere Illuminators too, and wanted to introduce the worfhip of Bacchus over the whole country, as appears in the account of them given by Strabo. Perhaps the Pythagoreans had alio fome icientific (ecrets ; but they too were Illuminators, and thought it their duty to overfet the State, and were themfelves overiet. Nothing is fo dangerous as a myilic AiTnciation. The objc£t remaining a fecret ii) the hands of the managers

Page 359Page 359

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.16% accurate
    I3HAP, iv, THE FRENCH P.EVOi.UTlOM. 54* managers, the reft fimply put a ring in their own nofes, by whicli they may be led about at pieafure j and flill panting after the fecret, thej are the better pleafed the lefs they fee of their way. A myftical object enables the leader to (luft his ground as he pleafes, and to ^accommodate himfelf to every current fafhion or prejudice. This again gives him almoll unhniited power ; for he can make ufe of thefe prejudices to lead men by troops. He finds them already alTociated by their prejudices, and waiting for a leader to concentrate their ilrengtii and i'et them in motion. And wheti once great bodies of men are fet in motion, with a creature of their fancy for a guide, even the engineer himfelf can^iot fay, " Thus far (halt thou *' go, and no farther.'* VII. We may alfo gather from what we have feeii that all declamations on univerfal philanthropy are dansrerous. Their natural and immediate eifed on the mind is to increafe the difcontents of the un~ fortunate, and of thofe in the laborious ranks of life. No one, even of the Illuminators, will deny that thofe ranks muft be filled, if fociety exills in any degree of cultivation whatever, and that there will always be a greater number of men who have no farther profpecft. Surely it is unkind to put fuch men continually in mind of a ftate in which they might be at their eafe 5 and it is unkindnefs unmixed, becaufeall the change that they will produce will be, that James will ferve John, who formerly was the fervant of James. Such declamations naturally tend to caufe men to make light of the obligations and duties of common patriotifm, becaufe thefe are reprefented as llibordinate and inferior to the greater and more noble affection of univerfal benevolence. I do not pretend to fay that patriotifm is founded in a rationally perceived pre-eminence or excellence of the

Page 360Page 360

g^6 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. iv. the foclety with which we are conneded. But if it be a fad that fociety will not advance unlefs its members take an intereft in it, and that human nature improves only in fociety, furely this interefl (fiould be cherifhed in every bread. Perhaps national union arifes from national animofity ; — but they are plainly diftinguiftiable, and union is not neceflarily produdive of injullice. The fame arguments that have any force again il patriotifm are equally good againfl: the preference which natural inllind gives parents for their children, and furely no one can doubt of the propriety of maintaining this in its full force, fubjed however to the precife laws of jullice. But I am in the wroiig to adduce paternal or filial affedion in defence of patriotifm and loyalty, fince even thofe natural inftinds are reprobated by the llluminati, as hoilile to the all-comprehending philanthropy. Mr. de laMetherie fays, that among the memorials fent from the clubs in England to the National Affembly, he read two, (printed,) in which the Affembly was requeued to eftabiifli a community of wives, and to take children from their parents and educate them for the nation. In full compliance v^ith this didate of univerfal philanthropy, Weifhaupt would have murdered his own child and his concubine,— and Orleans voted the death of his near relation. Indeed, of all the confequences of Illumination, the mofi melancholy is this revolution which it feems to operate in the heart of man, — this forcible facrifice of every affedion of the heart to an ideal divinity, a mere creature of the imagination. — It feems a prodigy, yet it is a matter of experience, that the farther we advance, or vainly fuppofe that we do advance, in the knowledge of our mental po^vers, the more are our moral feelings fiatteiied and done away. I remember

Page 361Page 361

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.36% accurate
    CMaP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 3^^ I remember reading, long ago, a differtation on the nurfing of infants by a French academician, Le Cointre of Verfailles. He indelicately fupports his theories by the cafe of his own fon, a weak puny infant, whom his mother was obliged to keep continually applied to her bofom, fo that fiie rarely could get two hours of fleep during the time of fuckling him. Mr. Le Cointre fays, that Ihe contraded for this infant *' tine partialite toutf^-a-fait deraifonahle,'' — Plato, or Socrates, or Cicero, would probably have explained this by the habitual exercife of pity, a very endearing emotion. ---But our Academician, better illuminated, folves it by ilimuli on th^ papillte and on the nerves of the fkin, and by the meeting of the humifying aura^ &:c. and does not feem to think that young Le Cointre was much indebted to his mother. It would amufe me to learn that this was the wretch Le Cointre, Major of the National Guards of Verfailles, who countenanced and encouraged the fliocking treafon and barbarity of thofe ruffians on the 5th and 6th of Odober 1789. Complete freezing of the heart would (I think) be the Gonfequence of a theory which could perfectly explain the affedions by vibrations or cryflallizations, — Nay, any very perfed theory of moral fentiments mull; have fomething of this tendency. — Perhaps the ancient fyftems of moral philoiophy, which were chiefly fearches after \.hQ fuvimum Lonura, and fyftems of moral duties, tended more to form and flrengthen the heart, and produce a worthy man, than the mofi: perfed theory of modern times, which explains every phenomenon by means of a nice anatomy of our affedions. So far therefore as we are really more illuminated, it may chance to give us an ealier vidory over the natural or inftindive attachments of mankind, and make the facrifice to univerfal philanthropy lets eofiiy

Page 362Page 362

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.82% accurate
    g^8 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. iVs coftly to the heart. I do not however pretend to faythat this is really the cafe : but I think myfelf fully warranted to fay^ that increafe of virtuous affecflions in general has not been the fruit of modern Illumination. I will not again ficken the reader, by calling his attention to Weilhaupt and his affociates or fucceffors. But let us candidly contemplate the world around us, and particularly the perpetual advocates of univerfal philanthropy. What have been the general effeds of their continual declamations? Surely very melancholy; nor can it eafily be otherwlfe.^ — An ideal Ibndard is continually referred to. This is made gigantic, by being always feen indiftindly, as through a mift^ or rather a fluttering air. in compariion with this, every feeling that we have been accuftomed to refped vanifties as iniignificant ; and, adopting the Jefuitical maxim^ that '' the great end fanclifies every mean," this fum of Cofmo-political good is made to eclipfe or cover all the prefent evils which mufi: be endured for it. The fad now is, that we are become fo familiarifed with enormities^ fuch as brutality to the weaker fex^ cruelty to t^ld age, wanton refinement on barbarit}^, that we now hear unmoved accounts of fcenes, from which, a few years ago, we wolild have fhrunk back with horror. With cold hearts, and a metaphyfical fcale, we meafure the prefent rniferies of our fellow creatures, and compare them with the accurnulated rniferies of former times, occalioned through a courfei of ages, and afcribed to the ambition of Princes. In this artificial manner are the atrocities of France extenuated; and we ftruggle, and partly fucceed, in reafoning ourfelves out of all the feelings which link men together in fociety. — The ties of father, hufband, brother, friend—- all are abandoned for an emotion which we mud even ilrive to excite, — univerfal philanthropy. But this is fad petverlion of nature.Page 363

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.40% accurate
    C^AP. IV. ti-iE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 3 \j 49 iiature. *' He that loveth not his brother whom he hath feen, how can he love God whom he hath rcl feen r" Still lefs can he love this ideal being, of which he labours to conjure up fome indifiind and fleeting notion. It is aifo highly abfurd ; for, in trying to coliedl the circumflances which conditute the enjoyments of this Citizen of the World, we find ourfelves jufi brought back to the very moral feelings v/hich we are wantonly throwing away. Weif* haupt allures us by the happinefs of the patriarchal life as \.hQ/ummum bonum of man. But xi it is any thing more than eating andfleeping, and fquabbling with the neighbouring patriarchs, it mufl confill: in the domeflic and neighbourly affections, and every other agreeable moral feeling, all which are to be had in our prefent fiate, in greater abundance. But this is all a pretence ; — the wicked corrupters of mankind have no fuch views of human felicity, nor would they be contented with it ; they want to intrigue and to lead ; and their patriarchal life anfwers the fame purpofe of tickling the fancy as the Arcadia of the poets. Horace (hows the frivolity of thefe declamations, without formally enouncing the moral, in his pretty Ode, Beatus ille qui procul negotils* The ufurer, after expatiating on this Arcadian fellcity, hurries awav to change, and puts his whole cafli again out to ufury. Equally ineffective are the declamations of CofjTio-politifm on a mind filled with felfiili paffions ; — • they jufl ferve it for a fubterfuge. — The ties of ordinary life aTe broken in the firit place, and the Citizen of the World is a wolf of the defart. ^ The unhappy conlequence is, that the natural progrefs of liberty is retarded. Had this ignis fa2 V tuus

Page 364Page 364

35^ THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. 1^% iuus not appeared and milled us, the improvements v;hich true Illumination has really produced, the increafe in fciences and* arts, and the improvement in our eftimate of life and happinefs, would hsvc continued to work fiiently and gradually in all nations ; and thofe which are lefs fortunate in point of government would alfo have improved, by little and little, without lofing any fenfible portion of their prefent enjoyments in the poffefTion of riches, or honours, or power. Thofe pretenfions would gradually have come to balance each other, and true liberty, fuch as Britons enjoy, might have taken place over all. Inflead of this, the inhabitants of every flate are put into a iituation where every individual is alarm-* ed and injured by the fuccefs of another, becaufe all pre-eminence is criminal. Therefore there muft be perpetual jealoufy and flruggle. Princes are now alarmed, fince they fee the aim of the lower clafles, and they repent of their former liberal conceflions. All parties maintain a fullen diflance and referve ; —the people become unruly, and the fovereign hard-hearted ; fo that liberty, fuch as can be enjoyed in peace, is banifhed from the country. VIII. When we fee how eagerly the Illuminati endeavoured to inlinuate their Brethren into all offices which gave them influence on the public mind, and particularly into feminaries of education, we fhould be particularly careful to prevent them, and ought to examine with anxious attention the manner of thinking of all who offer themfelves for teachers of youth. There is no part of the fecret correfpondence of Spartacus and his Affociates, in v^hich we fee moie varied and artful methods for fecuring pnpils, than in his own condud refpecfting the ffudents in the Univerfity, and the injundions he gives to others. There are two men, Socher and Drexl, who

Page 365Page 365

CHAP. IV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 3^1 who had the general infpedion of the fchools in the Eledorate. They are treated by Spartacus as perfons of the greatetl: confequence, and the inilruvftions given them (lick at no kind of corruption. Weiftiaupt is at pains, circuitous and mean arts, to induce young gentlemen to come under his care, and, to one whom he defcribes in another letter as a little mafter who muft have much indulgence, he caufes it to be intimated, that in the quarters where he is to be lodged, he will get the key of the ftreet-door, fo that be can admit whom he will. In all this canvafling he never quits the great objed, the forming the mind of the young man according to the principles of univerfal Liberty and Equality, and to gain this point, fcruples not to flatter, aud even to excite his dangerous paflfions. We may be certain, that the zeal of Cofmo-politifm will operate in the fame way in other men, and we ought therefore to be folicitous to have all that are the inftru6lors of youth, perfons of the mofi: decent manners. No queflion but fobriety and hypocrify may inhabit the fame brealL But its immediate effedl on the pupil is at leaft fafe, and it is always eafy for a fenfible parent to reprefent the reftridions laid on the pupil by fuch a man as the effeds of uncommon anxiety for his fafety. Whereas there is no cure for the lax principles that may ileal upon the tender mind that is not early put on its guard. Weifhaupt undoubtedly thought that the principles of civil anarchy would be eafiefl: inculcated on minds, that had already fhaken off the reftraints of Religion, and entered into habits of fenfual indulgence. We fhall be fafe if we irufl: his judguient in this matter. — We ftiould be particularly obfervant of the character and principles of Men of Talents^ who offer themfelves for thefe offices, becaufe their influence muft be very great. Indeed this anxiety (liould extend

Page 366Page 366

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.37% accurate
    35^2 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, iv, tend to all offices which in any way give holders any remarkable influence on the minds of conhderable numbers. Such (hould always be filled by men of immaculate characters and approved principles; and, in times like the prefent, where the moil: eflential queftions are the fubjeds of frequent difcuiTion, we ihould always confider with fome diflruil: the men who are very cautious in declaring their opinions on thefe quefiions. It is a great misfortune undoubtedly to feel ourielves in a lituaLion which makes us damp the enjoyments of life with fo much fufpicicn. But the hiflory of mankind (hows us that many great revolutionsi have been produced by remote and apparently frivolous caufes. When things come to a height, it is frequently impoilible to tind a cure — at any rate rnedicinafero paratur^ and it is much better to prevent the dAitdS^^—principiis ohjia — venienti occurriie morbo, IX. Nor can it be faid that thefe are vain fears. We know that the enemy is working among us, and that there are many appearances in thefe kingdoms which ftrongly refemble the contrivance of this daiieerous affociation. We know that before the Order of Ilium inati was broken up by the Eledor of Bavalia, there were feveral Lodges in Britain, and we may be certain that they are not all broken up. I know that they are not, and that within thefe tvro years fome Lodges were ignorant or affeded to be fo, of the corrupted principles and dangerous deligns of the liluminati. The conflitution of the Order fhcws that this mav be, for the L

Page 367Page 367

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.84% accurate
    CHAP. iv. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 353 rank of Scotch Knight of the Order, and be a fafc man either for our Church or State. I am very well informed, that there arefeveral thoufands of fubfcribing Brethren in London alone, and we can hardly doubt, but that many of that number are vs^ell advanced. The vocabularv alfo of the Illuminati is current in certain focieties among us. Thefe focieties have taken the very name and conftitution of the French and German focieties. Correfponding — Affiliated— Provincial — Refcript — Convention  Reading Societies— Citizen of the World — Liberty and Equality, the Imprefciiptible Rights of Man, ^c. &c. And mull: it not be acknowledged that our public arbiters of literary merit have greatly changed their manner of treatment of Theological and political writings of late years ? I'ill Paine's Age of Reafon appeared, the mofl: fceptical writings of England kept within the bounds of decency and of argument, and we have not, in the courfe of two centuries, one piece that (hould be compared with many of the blackguard produdions of the German prefTes. Vet even thofe performances generally met with fharp reproof as well as judicious refutation. This is a tribute of coramendacion to Vvhich mv countrv is moll juilly entitled. In a former part of my life I was pretty converlant in writings oi this kind, and have feen aimoll every Engiifli performance of note. I cannot exprefs the furpriie and difgufl which I felt atthe number and the grofs indecency of the German dilTertations which have come in mv way fince I began this little hiftory,— and many of the titles which I obferve in the Leipzig catalogues are fuch as I think no Britifh writer would make ufe of. I am told that the iicentioufnefs of the prefs has been equally remarkable in France, even before the Revolution.— May this fenfe of propriety and decency long continue to protcd us, and fupport the nationalPage 368

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.46% accurate
    354 "^"^ FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, JV, tional character for real good breeding, as our aN tainmerjts in manly fcience have hitherto gained us the reipeft of the furrounding nations ! I cannot help thinking that BritiHi fentiment, or Britifti delicacy, is changed ; for Paine's book is treated by moil of our Reviewers with an affected liberality and candour, and is laid before the public as quite new matter, and a fair field for difculiion-rr—and it ftrikes me as if our critics were more careful to let no fault of his ppponents pafs unnoticed than to expofe the futility and rudenefs of this indelicate writer. In the review^ of poli^ tical w^ritings we fee fgw of thole kind endeavours, which real love for our conftitutional government would induce a writer to employ in order to le{^ fen the fretful difcontents of the people ; and there is frequently betrayed a fatisfadljon at finding adminiftration in flraits, either through mifconducit or misfortune. Real love for our country and its government would (I think) induce a perfon to mix with his criticifms fome fentiments of fympathy with the embarraiTirtent of a minifter loaded with the builncfs of a great nation, in a lituation never before experienced by any minifler. The critic would recollect that the minifter was a man, fubjeift to error, but not necefTarily nor altogether bale. But it ieems to be an afiumed principle with fome of our political writers and reviewers that government mud always be in fault, and that every thing needs a reform. Such w^ere the beginnings on the continent, and we cannot doubt but that attempts are made to influence the public mind in this country, in the very way that has been pra(^ifed abro^id. — Nay, X, The detcftable dodlrines of Illuminatifm have been openly preached among us. Has not Dr. Frieftley faid, (1 think in one of his letters on the

Page 369Page 369

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.61% accurate
    4( CHAP* IV. tHE FR£NCH REVOLUTIOxN. 3^ | the Birmingham riots,) " That if the condition of other nations be as much improved as that ©f France will be by the change in her fyftcm of government, tlie great crifis, dreadful as it may appear, will be a confummation devoutly to be wifhcd for ;i-^and though calamitous to many^ perhaps to many innocent perfons, v^ili be eventually glorious and happy ?" — Is not this equivalent to Spartacus faying, *' True— there will be *' a ftorm, a convulfion — but all v/ill be calm " again ?".^~Does Dr. Prieflley think that the Britifli will part more eafiily than their neighbours in France with their property and honours, fecured by ages of peaceable poiTellaon, protedled by law, and acquiefced in by all who wifli and hope that their own defcendants may reap the fruits of their honeft induftry ?— Will they make a lefs manly ftruggle ? — Are they lefs numerous ? — Mufl his friends, his patrons, whom he has thanked, and praifed, and flattered^ yield up all peaceably, or fall in the general ftruggle ? This writer has already given the moft promifing fpecimens of his own docility in the principles of Illuminatifm, and has already paffed through feveral degrees of initiation. He has refined and refined on Chriftianity, and boafts, like another Spartacus, that he has, at laft, hit on the true fecret. — Has he not been preparing the minds of his rea

Page 370Page 370

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.94% accurate
    35^ '^HE FRENCH REVOLUTION. GHAP. IV i ing with all others ? Indeed it is in this very manner that the univerfal operation of intelligence is pretended to be explained* As any new or partial undulation may be fuperinduced on any otlieialready exiftinpf, and this without the leaft diflurbance or confuiion, fo may the inferior intelligences in the univerfe be only fuperinduftions on the operations of this fupreme intelligence which pervades them all, — -And thus an undulation (of w^hat? furely of fomething prior to and independent of this modification) is the caufe of all the beings in the univerfe, and of all the harmony and beauty that we obferve, — And this undulation is the ob- \ jedl of love, and gratitude, and confidence (that is, of other kinds of undulations.) — Fortunately ail this has no meaning. — ^But furely, if any thing can tend to diminilh the force of our religious fentiments, and make all Dr. Prieftley's difcoveries in Chriftianity infignificant, this will do it. Were it poflible for the departed foul of New^ton to feel pain, he would furely recolleft with regret that unhappy hour, when provoked by Dr. Hooke's charge of plagiarifm, be firft threw out his ivhim of a vibrating ether, to fliew what might be made of an hypothehs. — For Sir Ifaac Newton mud be allowed to have paved the way for much of the atomical philofophy of the moderns. Newton's aether is aifumed as a fac totum by every precipitate fciolifl, who, in defpite of logic, and in contradiction to all the principles of mechanics,, gives us theories of mufcular motion, of animal fen-^ation, and even of intelligence and volition, by the undulations of setherial fluids. Not one of a hundred of thefe theories can go through the fundamental theorem of all this dodrine, the 47th prop, of the 'Sd . book of the Principia, and not one in a thouiand know that Newton's inveftigation is inconcluiive. — Yet

Page 371Page 371

The text on this page is estimated to be only 13.23% accurate
    CHAP. IV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 2>S1 Yet they talk ofthe effects and modificatioriS of chofe undulations as familiariy andconndentjyasif they could dernonllrate the propolitions in Euclid's Elements. Yet fuch is the reaion that fatisfies Dr. Prieftly. — But I do not fappoie that he has yet attained his acme of likimination. His genius has been cramped by Britifh prejudices. — -Theie need not fway his mind any longer. lie is now in that " rard temporis {^ct *' loci) feiici tut e^ ubi /entire qu^e veils ^ etquajentias ^' dic^te licet ^' — in the country which was honoured by giving the world the firil: avowed edition of the Age of Reajon^ with the name of the (hop and publiiher. I make no doubt but that his mind will now take a higher i^ight, — and we may expect to fee him fire " that train by which he boalled that he would *' blow up the religious eftablifhrnent of his ftupid , *- and enflaved native country."— Peace be with him. — But I grieve that he has left any of his friends and abettors among us, who declaim, in the moil violent and unqualified terms, againit all national EflabliQiments of Religion, and in no friendly terms of any ellablifliments which maintain or allow any privileged Orders. Difcanting much on fuch topics increafes the difiatisfaclion of the lefs fortuliate part of mankind, who naturally repine at advantivges which do not arlfe from the peribnal merit of th.^ pcfTeiTor, akhoui>h thev are the natural and necellary fruits of m€rit in their anceflors, and of the JLifiice and fecurity of our happy Conilitution. No well informed and feniible man will deny that the greateft injury was done to pure Religion v/hen Coniiantine deciaied Chriftianity to beihe Religion of the Empire, and vefced the Church with all the riches and power of the Heathen Prieflhood. Butit is falfe that this wasthe fourceof ail orof the woril corruptions of Chrillianity. The mereii novice in Church Hiftory knows that the errors of the GncHics, of the Cerin2 X thians.Page 372

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.75% accurate
    ^5^ THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP, iv^ thians, and others, long preceded this event, and that thoufands lofl their lives in thofe naetaphyfical dil'putes. But I cannot help thinking that, in the prefent condition of Europe, religion would defert the world, if the opinions of men were not direded, in fome proper degree, by National Eliabiifliments. Teachers among the Independents will court popuh^rity, as they have always courted it ; by foflering fome favourite and difcriininating opinion Qt their hearers. The old fubjevfts of debate have now loil their zeit, and I iliouid fear that tlie teachers would find it a fuccelsful, as it is an eafy road to popularity, to lead their hearers through a feries of refinements, till they are landed, much to their fatisfaclion, in the Materialifm of Dr. Prieftley, from which it is but a Rep to the Atheifm of Diderot and Condorcet. Seeing that there are fuch grounds of apprehenfion, I tliink that we have caufe to be upon our guard, and that every man who has enjoyed the fw^eets of Britifli liberty fliould be ver^ anxious indeed to preferve it. We fhould difcourage all fecret alTemblies, which afford opportunities to the difaffecled, and all converfations which fofter any notions of political perfection, and create hankerings after unattainable happinefs. Thefe only increafe the difcontents of the unfortunate, the idle, and the worthlefs.— Above all, we fliould be careful to difcourage and check immorality and licentioufnefs in every (liape. For this will of itfelf fubvert every government, and will fubjecl us to the vile tyranny of a profligate mob. XI. If there has ever been a feafon in which it was proper to call upon the public inflruclors of the nation to exert themielves in the caufe of Religion and Virtue, it is furely the prefent. It appears, from the tenor of the whole narration before the reader,  

Page 373Page 373

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.08% accurate
    CHAP. IV. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 3^^ reader, that Religion and Virtue are confidcred as the great obllacles to the completion of this plan for overturning the governments of Europe— and I hope that I have made it evident thatthofe confpirators have prefuppofed that there is deeply rooted in the heart of man a fincere veneration for unfophirticated virtue, and an affeCiionate propeniity toR.eligion ; that is, to confider this beautiful world as the produd:ion of wifdom and power, refiding in a Being different from the world itfelf, and the natural obj eel of admiration and of love — I do not fpeak of the truth of this principle at prefent, but only of its reality, as an imprelTion on the heart of man, Thefe principles mull therefore be worked on, — and they are acknowledged to be ilrong, becaufs much art is employed to eradicate them, or to overwhelm them by other powerful agents. — We alfo fee that Religion and Virtue are confidered by tliofe corrupters as clofely united, and as mutually fupporting each other. This they admit as a facl, and labour to prove it to be a millake. — And lallly, they entertain no hopes of complete fuccefs till they have exploded both. This being the cafe, I hope that I (liali be clear of all charge of impropriety, when I addrefsour national inllrudlors, and earneltly defn^e them to confider this caufe as peculiarly theirs. The world has been corrupted under pretence of moral inftrutiion.  Backwardnefs, therefore, on their part, may do inconceivable harm, becaufe it will mofc certainly be interpreted as an acknov/ledgment of defeat, and they will be accufed of indifference and inftiicerity. I know that a modefl man reluftantly comes forward with any thing that has the appearance of thinking himfelf wifer or better than his neighbours. But if all are fo bafliful

Page 374Page 374

The text on this page is estimated to be only 19.52% accurate
    3^0 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CilAP. iv, balliful, where will it end ? Muft we allow a parcel of worthleis profligates, whom no man would trull with the management of the mofi: trifling concern, to pafs with the ignorant and indolent for teachers of true wifdom, and thus entice the whole world into a trap ? They have lucceeded with our unfortunate neighbours on the continent, and, in Germany, (to their fhame be it fpoken) they have been alTilled even by fome faithlefs clergymen. But I will hope better of my countrymen, and I think that our clergy have encouragement even from the native character of Britons. National compari-^ fons are indeed ungraceful, and are rarely candid — * but I think they may be indulged in this inilance. It is of his own countrymen that Voltaire fpeaks, when he fays, that '' they refemble a mixed breed *' of the monkey and the tiger," animals that mix fun with mifchief, and that fport wkh the torments of their prey. — They have indeed given the moft 1] locking proofs of the juiinefs of his portrait. It is with a conhderable degree of national pride, therefore, that I compare the behaviour of the French with that of the Britifli in a very fimiiar fituation^ during the civil wars and the uiurpation of Cromwell. There have been more numerous, and iniinitely more atrocious, crimes commiitted in France during any one half year fince the beginning of the Revolution, than during the whole of that tumultuous period. And it fliould be remembered, that in Britain, at that period, to all other grounds of difcontent v^7^^s added no fmall fl^are of religious fanaticifm, a pafTion (may I call it) which feldom fails to roufe every angry thought of the heart. — Much may be hoped for from an earnefi and judicious addrefs to that rich fund of manly kindnefs that isconfpicuous in the BviliQi charaifler, — -3 fund to which I am perfuaded we owe the excellence of ourconflitutionalPage 375

The text on this page is estimated to be only 22.53% accurate
    eHAP. iv, THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. C>6l O' al governiiient — No where elfe in Europe are the claims of the different ranks in fociety fo generally and fo candidly admitted. All feel their force, and all allow them to others. Hence it happens that they are enjoyed in fo much peace  hence it happens that the gentry live among the yeomen and farmers with fo eafy and familiar a fuperiority : -Extrema per lllos jftt/tltia excedens terns vejligia fecii. Our clergy are alfo well prepared for the tafk. For our anceilors differed exceedingly from the prefent Illuminators in their notions, and have enacled that the clergy fhall be well indrudted in natural philofophy, judging that a knowledge of the fym.metry of nature, and the beautiful adjuftment of all her operations, would produce a firm belief of a wifdom and power which is the fource of all this fair order, the Author and Condu^or of all, and therefore the natural objed of admiration and of love. A good heart is open to this impreiTion, and feels no reludance, but on the contrary a pleafure, in thinking man the fubjecl of his government, and the objev^ of his care. This point being once gained, I fliould think that the falutarv truths of Religion will be hie>hlv welcome. I fhould think that it will be eafy to convince fuch minds, that in the midft of the immenfe variety of the works of God there is one great plan to Vv'hich every thing feems to refer, namely, the crowding this world, to the utmofl degree of poiTibilitv, with life, with beings that enjoy the things around them, each in its own degree and manner. Among thefe, man makes a moli conspicuous figure, and the maximum of his enjoyments feems a capital article in the u'ays of Providence. It will, I think, require little trouble tofhew that the natural didaces of Religion, or the immediate refults of the belief of God's moral

Page 376Page 376

The text on this page is estimated to be only 26.10% accurate
    302 THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. CHAP. IV, ral government of the univerfe, coincide in every circumftance of fentiment, difpofition, and condad!, with thofe that are moR: produdive of enjoy ment (on the whole) in focial life. The fame train of thought will fhew, that the real improvements in the pleafures of fociety, are, in fa(fl, improvements of man's rational nature, and fo many fteps toward that perfection which our own confciences tell us we are capable of, and which Religion encourages us to hope for in another flate of being. — -And thus will '' the ways of V/ifdom appear to be ways of plea*' fantnefs, and all her paths to be peace." Dwelling on fuch topics, there is no occafion for any political difculTion. This would be equally improper and hurtful. Such difcuffions never fail to produce ill-humour^ — But furcly the highefl: complacence muPt refdk from the thought that we are co-operating with the Author of all v/ifdom and goodnefs, and helping forward the favourite plans of his providence. Such a thought muft elevate the mind which thus recognifes a fort of alliance with , the Author of nature. — Our brethren in fociety appear brethren indeed, heirs of the fame hopes, and travelling to the fame country. This will be a fort of moral patriotifm, and fhould, I think, produce mutual forbearance, fince we difcover im per fe(fi ions in all creatures, and are confcious of them in ourlelves — notwithrianding v/hich, we hope to be all equal at la ft in worth and in happinefs. I Ihould gladly hope that I Ihall not be accufed of prefumption in this addrefs. There is no profeihon that I more fincerely refped than that of the religious and moral inllruclor of my country. I am faying nothing here that I am not accuffomed to urge at much greater length in the courfe of my profchional duty. And I do not think that I am'juflly ch.^rgeablc with vanity, when 1 fuppofe that many years of delightful ftudy of the works of God have givenPage 377

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.10% accurate
    Chap. Iv. the fRench Revolution, 303 given me fomewhat more acquaintance with tbem than is probably attained by thofe who never think of the matter, being continually engaged in the buftle of life. Should one of this defcriptiorj fay that all is fate or chance, and that " the fame thing *' happens to all," kc. as is but too common, I fhould think that a prudent man will give fo much preference to my airertion, as at iealt to think feri^ oufly about the thing, before he allow himfelf any indulgence in things which I affirm to bs highly dangerous to his future peace and happinefs.  For this reaion 1 hope not to be accufed of going out of my line, nor hear any one fay '* hs Jutor ultra ere*'• pidavi,'" The prefent is a feafcn of anxiety, and it is the duty of evicry man to contribute his mite to the general good. It is in fome fuch hopes that I have written thefe pages ; and if they have any fuch effed, I Ihali think myfelf fortunate in having by chance hit on foraething ufeful, when I was only trying to amufe myfelf durine the tedious hours of bad health and confinement. No perfon is more fenfible of the many imperfeflions of this performance than myfelf. But, as I have no motive for the publication but the hopes of doing fome good, I trud that I fhall obtain a favourable acceptance of my endeavours from an intelligent, a candid, and a good-natured public. I mult entreat that it be remembered that thefe iheets are not the work of an author determined to write a book. They were for the moft part notes, which I took from books I had borrowed, that I might occaiionally have recourfe to them when occupied with Free Mafonry, the hrft cbjevft of my curiofity. My curiofity was diverted to many other things as I went along,, and when the IIluminati came in my way, I regretted the time 1 had thrown away on Free Mafonry,-— But, obferving their \

Page 378Page 378

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.10% accurate
    3^4 THE FIIENCH REVOLUTION. CKAP. iv^ their conneclion, I thoueht that I Derceived the progrefs of one and the iair-e deiign. This made me eager to find out any renaains cf Weifhaiipt's AiTociation. I was not iurprized when I faw marks of its inteiference in the French Revolution. — In hunting for clearer proofs I found out the German Union — and^ in fine, the whole appeared to be one great and wicked projecl,- fermenting and w^orking over ail Europe.— -Some highly relpected friends encouraged me in the hope of doing fome fervice by laying my informations before the public, and faid that no time fiiculd be loll:.-—! therefore fet about colleclingmy fcattered favf^s.— I undertook this tafk at a time when my official duty prefled hard on me, and bad health made me very unfit for ifudy,— -The effects of this mull: appear in many faults, which 1 fee, without being able at prefect to am^end them. I owe this apology to the public, and I truft that my good inlentions will procure it acceptance*. Nothing * While the (heet commencing p. 341 was printing off, I got a fiirht of a v/ork pubhilied in Paris lalt year entitled La Conjura^ tlon d' Orleans* It conHrms all that I have faid refpedHng the life made of the Free Mafon Lodges. — It gives a particular account of the fGrmatirn of the Jacobin Club, by the Club Breton. This iafl appears to have been the x'Mfociation formed with the affiilancc of the German deputies. The Jacobin Club had feveral committees, fimilar to thofe of the National Affembly. Amoi g others, it had a Committee of Enquiry and Correfpondence, whofe hufinefs it was to gain partizans, to difcover enemies, to decide on the merits of tlie Brethren, and to form fimilar Clubs in other places. The author of the above-mentioned work writes as follows, (vol. iii. p, 19.) We may judge of what the D. of Orleans could do in other places, by what he did during his flay in England. During his flay in London, he gained over to his intereft Lord Stanhope and Dr. Price, two 01 the mofl refpePage 379Page 379

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.74% accurate
    CM A p. iy, THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. 365 Nothing would give me more iincere pleafure than to fee the whole proved to be a mifiake ; — to be convinced that there is no fuch plot, and that we run no rifk of tlje coniagion ; but that Britain will continue, by the abiding prevalence of honour, of virtue, and of true religion, to exhibit the fairell fpecimen of civil government that ever was feen on earth, and a national character and conduct not unvv^orthy of the ineinmable bleilings that we enjoy. Our excellent Sovereign, at his acceffion to the throne, declared to his Parliament that he gloried IN HAVING BEEN BORN A BriTON. --Wouid tO God th^t obje£l (it faid) but to fupport the Revolution, which had driven James II. from the throne of his anceftors. Orleans made of this affociation a true Jacobin Club. — It entered into correfpondence with the Committee of Enquiry of our Commune, with the fame Committee of our Jacobin Ckib, and at laft; with our National AlTembly. It even fent to the AfTembly an oftenfible letter, in which wc may fee the following pafFages : " The Society congratulate the National Aflembly of France *■* on the Revolution which has taken place in that country. It. ** cannot but earneftly wilh for the happy conciufion of io irrs** portant a Revolution, and, at the fame time, exprefs the ex** trem.e fatisfaclion whiih it feels in refledting on the glorious ** example v/hich France has given to the world." (The Reader will remark, that in this example are contained all the horrors which had been exhibited in France before the month of March 1790; and that before this time, the condudx of the Duke of Orleans on the 5th and 6th of October 1789, with all the fhockfrig atrocities of thofe days, were fully known in England.) *' The Society refolves unanimoufly to invite all the people of ** England to eftablifli Societies through the kingdom, to fupport *' the principles of the Revolution, to form correfpondence be" tween themfelves, and by thefe means to ellablifii a great con** certed Union of all the trueFriends of Liberty.*' Accordingly (fays the French author) this wis executed, and Jacobin Clubs were ellablifhed in fevcral cities of England, Scotland, and Ireland, 2 YPage 380

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.40% accurate
    2,66 THE FRENCH KEVOLUTION. CHAP. iv. that all and each of his fubieds had entertained the fame lefty notions of this good fortune ! Then woviid they have laboured, as he has done for near forty years, to fupport the honour of the Britilh name by fetting as bright an example of domeftic and of public virtue. — Then would Britons have been indeed the boaft of humanity — then we fhould have viewed thefe wicked plots of our neighbours with a fmile of contempt, and of lincere pity — and there would have been no need of this impeifed but well-meant performance.

Page 381Page 381

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.21% accurate
    f 367 J Pojlfcrlpt, A LTHOUGH I faw noreafon to doubt of the validity of the proofs which I have offered in the preceding pages, of a confpiracy againll the deareft interefts of every nation of Europe, nor of the importance of the information to my own countrymen, it gives me great fatisfa6tion to learn that it has been received with favour and indulgence. This I may conclude from the impreifion's being exhaufted in a few days, and becaufe the pubiiilier informs me that another edition is wanted immediately, I could have wi{hed that this were deferred for fome time, that I might have availed myfelf of the obfervationsof others, and be enabled to correct the miftakes into which I have been led by my fcanty knowledge of the German language, and the miftakes of the writers from whom I derived all my informations.    I fhould, in that cafe, have attempted to make the work more worthy of the public eye, by corre£ling many imperfedtions, which the continual diftradlion of bad health, and my hafte to bring it before the public, have occafioned. I fliould have made the difpofition more natural and perfpicuoiis, and have lopped off fome redundances and repetitions. But the printer tells me, that this would greatly retard the publication, by changing the feries of the pages. At any rate, I am not at prefent in a condition to engage in any work that requires difpatch, I mult yield therefore to thofe reafons, and content myfelf with fuch corrections as can be made immediately. I have found, after minute enquiry, that I was miflaken as to the exprefRon of an eminent follower

Page 382Page 382

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.26% accurate
    ^6S ' FOSTCRIPT. follower of Dr. PriefLley, mentioned before, The peifbn alluded to difclaims all fanguinary proceedings, and my information arofe from a vei'y erroneous account which w^as circulated of the converfation. But I ftiii think the caution equally neceifary, which I recommended to tlie hearers of the frequent and violent decltimations made by thofe alluded to, againlf all religious eilabliilunents.^ Except the anecdote of Diderot's library, I do not recoiled another alTertion in the book, for which I have not the authority of printed evidence. Thisilory was told me by fo many perfons of credit, v\ho were on the fpot at the time, that I have no doubt of its truth. I alfo find that I was miilaken in my conjecture that Mr. Zf F;7z;7(: communicated his fuipicions of the horrid defigns of the Free Mafons to Archbuliop Gobet. It nuift have been to Mr, Lc Clerc de Jiugne^ a mofi: worthy prelate, whom the hatred of the Jacobins obliged to fly into Switzerland. The Catholic clergy were butchered or banidied, and the Jacobins fubftituted in vheir places fuch as would iecond their views, Gobet was worthy of their confidence, and the Archbifnop of ThGuloiife ( Brkmie )\\\m.^^\x could not have ferved the caufe of the philofophiits more effeftuaily, had they fucceeded in their attempts to get him continued Archbifliop of Paris. As the poetical pichire of unqualified Liberty and Equality, and the indolent pleafures of the patriarchal life, are the charm by which thellluminators hope to fafcinate ail hearts, and as they reprobate every conilrudlion of fociety which tolerates any permanent fubordination, and particularly   fuch as found this fubordination or^ diftindlions

Page 383Page 383

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.18% accurate
    POSTSCRIPT. 369tindlions of ranks, and fcoiit all privileges allowed to particular orders of men, I hope that it will not be thought foreign to the general purpofe of the foregoing Work, if, I with great deference, lay before the Rxader fome of my reafons for afferting, without hefitation, in a former part, that the Britifriconftitution is the only one that will give permanent happinefs to a great and luxurious nation, and is peculiarly calculated to give full exercife to the bed propenfities of cultivated minds, i am the more defirous of doing this, becaufe it feems to me that moft of the political v/riters on the Continent, and many of my coun- . trymen, have not attended to important circumllances which diftinguifti our conititution from the States General of France and other countries. The republicans in France have, fmce the Revolution, employed the pains in fearching their records, which ought to have been taken before the convocation of the States, and which would probably have prevented that iiep altogether. They have (liewn that the meetings of the States, if we except that in 1614 and 1483, were uniformly occafions of mutual contefts between the different Orders, in which the interefts of the nation and the authority of the Crown were equally forgotten, and the kingdom was plunged into ail the horrors of a rancorous civil war. Of this they give us a remarkable inftance during the captivity of King John in 1355 and 1356, the horrors of which were l>ardly exceeded by any thing that has happened in our days. They have fhewn the fame difmal confequcnces of the affenibly of the different Orders in Brabant ; and Hill more remarkably in Sweden and Denmark, where they have frequently produced a revolution and change of government, all of which have terminated

Page 384Page 384

The text on this page is estimated to be only 21.64% accurate
    37<3 POSTCRIPT, nated in the abfolnte government, cither of the Crown, or of one of the contending Orders. They laugh at the fimplicity of the Britifh for expe«Sling that the permanent fruits of our conftitution, which is founded on the fame jarring principles, fhall be any better ; and affert, that the peaceable exercife of its feveral powers for fomewhat more than a century, (a thing never experienced by us in former times,) has proceeded from circumflances merely accidental. With much addrefs they have rele(Si:ed the former diiturbances, and have conne£ted them by a fort of principle, fo as to Iwpport their fyftemi, " that a States General " or Parliament, confilling of a reprefentation of the different clafTes of citizens, can never deliberate for the general good, but muft always occupy their time in contentions about their '* mutual invafions of privilege, and will faddle '' every aid to the executive power, with fomc " unjuil and ruinous aggrandifement of the vifto" rious Order." They have the effrontery to give the Magna Chart a as an inftance of an ufurpation of the great feudatories, and have reprefented it in fuch a light as to make it the game of their writers and of the tribunes.— All this they have done in order to reconcile the minds of the few thinking men of the nation to the abolition of the different Orders of the State, and to their National Convention in the form of a chaotic mafs of Frenchmen, one and indivifible : Non bene junclarum d'tfcordia femma rerum, Uh'i frigida puegnahant cal'idis^ humentia Jiccls, Moll'ia cum duris J Jlne pondere habentia pondus. Their reafonings would be jufl, Lind their proofs from hiflory v. ould be convincing, if their preoiifes

Page 385Page 385

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.54% accurate
    POSTSCKIPT. 371 mi ies were true ; if the Britifh Parliament were really an aflembly of three Orders, either perfonaily, or by repreieiitation, deliberating apart, each having a veto on the deciiions of the other twij. And I apprehend that moil: of my countrymen, who have not had occahon to canvas the fiibjedt with nuich attention, fuppofe this to be really the Britifti Conilitution : for, in the ordinary table converfations on the fubjedt, they feldom go far* ther, and talk with great complacence of the balance of hoftile powers, of the King as the umpire of differences, and of the peace and profperity that refults from the whole. But I cannot help thinking that this is a mifconception, almofl in every circumltance. I do not know any oppofite interefts in the State, except the general one of the governor and the governed, the king and the fubjedt. — -If there is an umpire in our conilitution, it is the houfe of Lords — but this is not as a reprefentation of the perlbns of birth, but as a court of hereditary magiftrates : the Peers do not meet to defend their own privileges as citizens, but either as the counfeliors of the King, or as judges in the lad refort. The privileges for which we fee them (bmetimes contend, are not the privileges of the high-born, of the great vaifals of the Crown, but the privileges of the Houfe of Lords, of the fupreme Court of Judicature, or of the King's Council. In all the nations on the Continent, the different Orders, as they are called, of the State, are corporations, bodies politic, which have jurifdidlion within themfelves, and rights w^hich they can maintain at their own hand, and privileges which mark them mod diftindtly, and produce fuch a complete fcparation between the different Orders, that they can no more mix than oil and v/ater. Yet the 2;reat *!.:

Page 386Page 386

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.25% accurate
    372 FOSTSCRIPfi great prefidcnt Montclquieu fays, that the Pccragi^ of England is a body of Nobility ; and he ufes the term body in the itri£t ienfc now mentioned, asfy* nonymous to corporation. He has repeatedly uled this term to denote the fecond order of Frenchmen, perfons of noble birth, or ennobled, (that Js, veiled in the privileges and dillin£lions of the Jiobly born,) united bylaw, and having authority to rnaintani their privileges. The hiilory of France, nay of our ovv^n country, fliows us that this body may enjoy all its diftindions of nobility, and that the Great Barons may enjoy the prerogatives of their baronies, although the authority of the Crown is almofc annihilated. — We have no cogent reafon, therefore, for thinking that they will be conilantly careful to fupport the authority of the Crown ; and much lefs to believe that they will, at the fame time, watch over the liberties of the people. In the elevSiiion of their reprefentatives, (for the whole body of the gentlemen muft appear hy reprefentation,) we muft not expedl that they will fele(Sl; fuch of their own number as will take care of thofe two eiiential objects of our conilitntion. — -Equally jealous of the authority of the Crown and of the encroachments of all thofe who are not gentlemen, and even fearful of the afllimptions of the Great Barons, the powerful inclividuals of their own order, they will always ehooie fuch reprefentatives as will defend their own rights in the firil: place. Such perfons are by no means lit for maintaining the proper authority of the Crown, and keeping the rcprcfentativesof the lower clafTes within proper bounds. Bat this is not the nature of our Houie of Lords )n the prefentday. It was fo formerly in a great mcafure, and had the fame eiie£ts as in other countries. But ('iv.Qfi the Revolution, the Peers of

Page 387Page 387

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.39% accurate
    V POSTSCPvIPt. J7J of Great-Britain have no imporrant privileges which relate merely or chiefly to birth. Thefe -all refer to their fijn61:ions as Magiflrates of the Supreme Courc. The King can, at any time, place in this Houfe any eminent perfon whom, he thinks worthy of the office of hereditary mao-ifrrate. The Peers are noble — that is, remiarkable, illuftrious ; but are not neceiliirily, nor in every inftance, perfons of' hiffh birth. This Houfe therefore is nor, in any fort, the reprefentarive of what is called in France the Nobjeffe — a particular cad of the nation ;— -nor is it a jun6i:ion of th(: proprietors of the great fees of the Crown, as fuchi — for many, very many, of the greateil baronies arc in the hands of thofe we call Comimnners.— Thcv fit as the King's Counfeilors, or as Judges. — Therefore the members of our Upper Houfe are not fwayed by the prejudices of any clafs of the citizens. Thev are hereditary ma■J J J giflrates, created by the Sovereign, for his counfei, to defend his prerogatives, to hold the balance between the throne and the people. The greatefl; pare of the Nobility (in the continental fenfe of the word) are not called into this Houfe, but they may be members of the Lower Houfe, which we call ths Commons; nay the fons and the brothers of the Peers arc in the fame iituation. The Peers therefore cannot be hofiile or indilferent to the liberrv, the rights, or the happinefs of the Commons, without being the enemies of their own famdlies. Nor is our Houfe of Commons at all rimilar to the Third E/lale of ^ny of the neiehbourin.o- kino-doms. They are not the reprefenratives of the ignobly born, or of any clafs of citizens. The members are the proper reprefentatives of the zubok natioUy and confifr of perfons of every clafs, perfons of the highefi: birth, perfons of great fortune, perfons of education, of knowledge, of raients. 2 Z Thus

Page 388Page 388

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.41% accurate
    374 POSTSCRIPT. Thus the caiifes of diiTtrriiion which refer to the diftinc^live rights or prerogatives of the different clalfts of citizens are removed, becaufe in each Hoiife there are many individuals feiedted from all the clafles. A Peer, havino^ attained the his-heft honours of the ftate, muft be an enemy to every revolution. Revolution m.ull certainly degrade him, whether ic places an abfolute monarch> or. a democratic junto, on the throne. The Sovereign naturally looks for the fuppoi t of the Upper Houfe, and in every m.eafure agreeable to the conftitution, and to the public v/eal, exerts his influence on the Houfe of Commons. Kere the character of the monarch and his choice of minifters muil appear, as in any other coj>fl"itution ; but with much lefs chance of danger to political liberty.— The great engine of m.onarchy in Europe, has been the jarring privileges of the different Orders ; and the Sovereign, by fiding with one of them, obtained acceflions of prerogative and power.— It v/as thus that, under the Houfe of Tudor, our confticution advanced with hafty ftrides to abiblute monarchy ; and would have attained it, had James the Firft been as able as he was willing to fecure what he firmly believed to be the divine rights of his Crown. I do not recollect hearing the lower ranks of the State ventino; much of their difcontents acrainfl: the Peers, and they feem to perceive pretty clearly the advantages arifing from their prerogatives. They feem to look up to them as the firft who will prote61: them againil the agents of fovercignty. They know that a man may rife from the loweft llaticn to the peerage, and that in that exaltation he remains conneded with thcmlclves by the deareft

Page 389Page 389

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.13% accurate
    POSTSCRIPT. 37 r efl ties ; and the Houfe of Commons take no offence at the creation of new Peers, becaufe their privileges as a Court, and their private rights, arc not atftcled by it. Accordingly, the Houfe has always oppofcd every projecl of limiting the King's prerogative in this refpecl. How unlike is ail this to the conllitution ccnfifting of the pure reprefentatives of the Privileged Orders of the Continental States. The felf-conceited confticutionalifts of France faw fomething in the Britifh Parliament which did not fall in v/ith their own hafty notions, and prided themfelves in not copying from us. This would have indicated great poverty of invention in a nation accuftcmcd to confider itfelf as the teacher of m.ankind. The moll fcnlible, of them, however, v/iilied to have a conllitution which they called 2iX\mprovcment of ours: and this was the fimple plan of a rep^ejentation of the two or three Orders of the State. Their Upper Houfe fiiould contain the reprefentatives of lOO, coo noblcfle. The Princes of the Blood and Great Barons fliould fit in it of their own right, and the reft by deputies. The Lower Houfe, or 'riers Etat, fhould confift of deputies from thcfe ignobly born ; fuch as merchants, perfons in the lov^/er offices of the law, artifans, peafants, and a fmall number of freeholders. Surely it needs no deep reflection to teach us what fort of deliberations would occupy fuch a houfe. It would be a moft ufeful occupation however, to perufc the hiftory of France, and ofother nations, and fee v^lvix. really did occupy the Tiers Etat thus conftru6led, and what were their proceedings, their decifions, and the fteps which they took to make them effedtual. I have no doubt but that this ftudy would cure moft of our advocates for general eligibility, and for general fuffrage. I have lately read

Page 390Page 390

The text on this page is estimated to be only 16.02% accurate
    376 POSTSCRIPT. read Velley and Viilarec's Hiflory of France^, (by the bye, the Abbe Barruel has ihewn that the Chib d'Holbach managed the publication or this Hiftory after tiie firll: eight or ten volumes, and flipped into it many things fuited to their impious project,) and the accounts of the troublefome reigns of John, and Charles his fucceilbr, by authors who wrote long befoie the Revoiucion; and they filled me with horror, I'he only inftance that I met with of any thing like moderation in the claims and difputes of the different Orders of their States General, and of patriotifm, or regard for the general interefrs of the State, is in their meetings during the minority of Charles \ ill. With refpecl to the limitations of the eligibility into the Houfe of Commons, I think that there can be no doubt that thole fhouid be excluded whole habits of needy and laborious liie have precluded them from all opportunities of acquiring fome gene* ral views of political^ relations. Such perfons are totally unfit for deliberations, where general or comprehenfive views only are to be the fubjedts of difcuiTion ; they can have no conceptions of the fubjecc, and therefore no ileady notions or opinions, but mud change them after every fpeaker^ and muit becomxe the dupes of every demagogue. But there are other circumiitances which maice me think that^ of all the clafies of citizens, the land proprietors are the fitteft~for holding this important oiHce. I do not infer this from, their having a more real connection with the nation, and a ftronger inrereil in its fate-^I prefer them on account of their general habits of thouQ-ht. Almoft all their ordinary tranfadions are fuch as make them acquainted vAth the interefts of others, caufe them to confider thole in 9;eneral points of view 3 and, in fliorc, moft or

Page 391Page 391

The text on this page is estimated to be only 13.87% accurate
    POSTSCRIPT. 211 of their occupations are, in feme degree, national. They are accuilomed to fettle differences between thofe of lower ftations — they are frequently in the * King's commiffion as Juftices of the Peace. All thefe circurr.fcances make them much aoter fchciars in that political knowledge, which is abfolutely neceiTary for a member of the Floufe of Commons. But, befides this, I have no hefiration in faying that their turn of mind, their principles of condud:, are more generally fuch as become a Senator, than thofe oi a'ny ether clafs of men. This clafs includes aimofb all men of family. I cannot help thinking that even what is called family pride is a fentiment in their favour. I am convinced that all our propenficies are ufeful in fociety, and that their bad eiteds arife wholly from want of moderation in the indul^-ence of them, or fometimes from the imrropriery of the occafion on which they arc exerted. What p;ropenf]ty is miOre general than the deiire of acquiring permanent confideration for ourfelves and our fanYilies ? Where is the man to be found fomtanfpirired as not to value him.felf {(^.r being born of creditable paients, and for creditable domeftic conne6lions ? Is this wrong becaufe it has been abufed ? So then is every pre-eminence of office j and the directors of republican France are as criminal as her former Nobles. This propeniity of the human heart fliould no m.ore be rejected than the defire of power. It fhould be regulated — but it iliould certainly  be made ufe of as one of the m.eans of carrying on the national bufmefs. I thiiik that w^e know fomje of its good tffccls — It incites to a certain propriety of condud that, is generally agreeable^ — its honefiv is embellifhed by a manner that makes it more pleafing. There is fomething that we call the behaviour cf a Genilcman th?.t is imm.cdiatly and uni-t formly underftood. The plainell peafant or labourerPage 392

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.16% accurate
    2J% * POSTSCP.IPT. er will fay of a man whom he efleems in a certain way, " He is a Gentleman, every bit of him," — .and he is perfedtiy iinderiiood by all who hear Him to mean, not a rank in life, but a turn of mind, a tenor of condu6b that is amiable and worthy, and the ground of confidence. — I /remark, with fome feeling of patriotic pride, that thefe are phrafes almoft peculiar to our language — in Ruilia the words v/ould have no meaning. But there, the Sovereign is a defpot, and all but the Gentry are ilavcs ; and the Gentry are at no pains to recommend their clafs by fuch a diftindlion, nor to give currency to fuch a phrafe. — -1 would infer from this peculiarity, that Britain is the happy land, where the wifeft ufe has been made of this propenfity of the human heart. If therefore there be a foundation for this peculiarity, the Gentry are proper objects of our choice for filling the Houfe of Commons. If theoretical confiderations are of any value in queftions of political difculTion, I would fay, that we have ^ood reafons for giving this clafs of citizens a great Ihare in the public deliberations. Befides what I have already noticed of their habits of coniidering things in general points of view, and their feeling a clofer conncdion with the nation than any other clafs, I v/ould fay that the power and influence which naturally attach to their being called to oftjces of public truft, will probably be better lodged in .rheir hands. If they are generally feleded for thefe offices, they come to confider them as parts of their civil condition, as fuuations natural to them. They will therefore exercife this power and influence with the moderation and calmnefs of habit, — they are no novelties tothem~they are notafraid of lofmgthem; — therefore, when in olEce, they do not catch at the opportunities of exercifing them.. This is the ordinary

Page 393Page 393

The text on this page is estimated to be only 23.52% accurate
    POSTSCRIPT. 279 nary conciuft of men, and therefore Is a ground of probable-reafoning. — In fhort, 1 f}iouldexpe6l from our Gentry fomewhat of gcnerofiry and candour, which would temper the commercial principle, which feems to reG;ulate the national tranfaclions of modern Europe, and whofc eifedts feem Icfs friendly to the beft intercils of humanity, than even the Roman principle of glory. The Reader will now believe that I would not recommend the filling the Houle of Commons with merchants, although they feem to be the natural Reprefentatives of the monied intereft of the nation. But I do not wiih to confiderthat Houfe as the Reprefentative of any Orders whatever, or to dilturb its deliberations with any debates on their jarring interefts. The man of purely commercial notions difclaims all generofity — recommends honefty becaufe it is the befb policy — in Hiort, *• places the " value of a thing in as much money as 'twill bring.'* I fhould watch the conduct of fuch men more narrowly than that of the Nobles. Indeed, the hiftory of Parliament will fhow that the Gentry have not been the moil venal part of the Houfe. The Illumination which now dazzles the world aims diredly at multiplying the number of venal members, by filling the fenates of Europe with m.en who may be bought aD a low price. Ivlinifterial corruption is the fruit of Liberty, and freedom dawned in this nation in Queen Elizabeth's time, wdien her minifter bribed Wentworth. — A wife and free. Legiflation will endeavour to make this as expenfive and troublefome as poffible, and therefore will neither admit univerfal fuffrao;e nor a vervextenfiveelig-lbility. Thefe two circumftances, befid&s opening a Vv'ider door to corruption, tend to defiroy the very intention of all civil confcitctions. The e;rcar obiedl in them

Page 394Page 394

The text on this page is estimated to be only 17.37% accurate
    380 POSTSCRIPT. y 1 them is, to make a great number of people haoD^ Some men place their chief enjoyment in meafunnrr their flrength with others, and love to be continuaiiy employed in canvaiilng, intriguing, and carrying on ibme little pieces of a fort of public bufinefs -, to fuch men univerfal fuftrage and eligibility would be paradife — but it is to be hoped that the number of fuch is not very great : for this occupation muit be accompanied by much difquitt among their neighbours, much diffenfion, and mutual ofrencc and ill\yili~Yand the peaceable, the indolent, the fcudious, and cne half of the nation, the women, will be great fulFerers by all this. In a nation "^Oklf^^ing many of the comforts and pleafurcs of life, the hapoiell government is thiit which will leave the greateil number poiTible totally unoccupied with national alfairs, and at full liberty to enjoy all their domeftic and focial pieaiures, and to do this with fecurity and permanency. Great limitations in the ri^jit of elecling feems therefore a circumfcance neceifary for this purpofe -, and limitations are equally neceifary  on the eligibility^ When the ofnces of power and emolument are open to all, the fcramible becomes univerfal, and the nation is never at peace. The road to a feat in Parliament iliould be acceflible to all; but it fnoulJ be long, lb that many rhings, which all may in time obtain, fhall be requifite for qualifying the candidate. The road fhouid alio be fuch that all iliould be induced to walk in it, in the profecution of their ordinary bufinefs; and their admiiTion into public ofiices (liould depend on the prcgrefs which they have made in the advancement of their own fortunes. Such regulations would, I think, give the grrateft chance of filling the ofnces with perfons hctefb for them, by their

Page 395Page 395

POSTSCRIPT, 381 their talents^ their experience, and their habits of thinking. Thefe habits, and the views of life which a man forms in confequence of his fituation, are of the utmoft importance. After all thefe obfervations, I miin; dill recur to a pofuion which I have repeated more than once^ namely, that our conftitution, which nearly emfe'races all thefe circumftances, has attained its prefent excellence chiefiy in confequence of the innate worth of the Britifh charafler. About the time of the Conqueft, our conftitution hardly differed from that of France. But the clafliing of interefis between the different Orders. of the fubjeds was not fo rancorous and obftinate—thefe Orders melted more eafily together — -the purity cf the principle of Reprefentation in the States was lefs attended to ; and while the French Peers gradually left off minding any buhnefs but their own, and left the High Court of Judicature to the lawyers, and the King to his Cabinet Council, the Peers of Greac Britain, overlooking their own lefs important diftinctions, attended more to the State, became a permanent Council to the Sovereign in the adminiftration and legiHation; and, with a patriotifm and a patience that are unknown to the Oiher Grandees of Europe, continued to hear and to judge in all queftions of juftice and property between the inferior citizens of the State. NBritifh Liberty is the highlyprized fruit of all this worthy conduft, and moft people afcribe it to the fuperior fpirit and independence of the national charader. It ftrikes me, however, as more furely indicating fuperior virtue, and more judicious patriotifm; and our happy conftitution is not more iuftly entitled to the admiration and refpecft that is paid to it by all Europe, 3 A than

Page 396Page 396

3S2 rOSTSCRlPT. than to the affedllonatc and grateful attachment of every true-hearted Briton. Since the publication of this volume I have {ecn a very remarkable v^^ork indeed, on the fame fubje6l. Memoir es pour fervir a VHiftoire du Jacohinijmey par M. l^ Ahhe Barruel. This author confirms all that I have faid of the Enlighteners , whom he very aptly calls Philojophifts ; and of the abiifes of Free Mafonry in France. He fhows, unequeftionably, that a formal and fyftematic confpiracy againft Religion was formed and zealoufly profecuted by Voltaire, d'Alembert, and Diderot, alTifted by Frederic II. King of PrulTia; and 1 fee that their principles and their manner of procedure have been the fame with thofe of the German atheifts and anarchifts. Like them they hired an Army of Writers ; they induftrioufly puflied their writings into every houfe and every cottage. Thofe writings were equally calculated for inflaming the fenfual appetites of men, and for perverting their judgments. They endeavoured to get the command of the Schools, particularly thofe for the lower clafTes ; and they ere6led and managed a prodigious number of Circulating Libraries and RcadinQ- Societies. M. Barruel lays, that this gang of public corruptors have held their meetings for many years in the Hotel dc Holbach at Paris, and that Voltaire was their honorary Prefident. The mofl eminent members were d' Alemherty Diderot, Ccndorcety La Harpe, Turgot^ hamoignon. They took the name of (^Economists, and affc6i:ed to be continually occupied with plans 'for improving Commerce, Manufactures, Agriculture, Finance, &c. and publifhed from time to time refpeclable performances on thofe fubje(51:s. — But their darling projedt was to deflroy Chriftianity and all Religion, and to brines about a total change I

Page 397Page 397

The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.99% accurate
    1»0STSCRIPT. 383 of Government. They employed writers to compofe corrupting and impious books — ihefe were revifed by the Society, and corrected till they fuited their purpofe. A number were printed in a handfome manner, to defray the expence ; and then a much greater number were printed in the cheapefl form poflible, and given for nothing, or at very low prices, to hawkers and pedlars, with injunctions to diftribute them fecretly through the cities and villages. They even hired perfons to read them to conventicles of thofe who had not learned to read.* (See vol. i. 343—3550 I am particularly (truck by a pofition of Abbe Barruel, " That Irreligion and unqualified Liberty and *^ Equality are the genuine and original Secrets of Free ^^ Mafonry, and the ultimatum of a regular progrefs ^^ through all its degrees,'' He fupports this remarkable pofition with great ingenuity, and many very pertinent fa6ls. I confcfs that now, when I have got this impreffion, I iliall find it very difficult to efface it. But I muft alfo fay, that this thought never ftruck me, during all the time that I have been * The author makes an obfervation which is as juft as it is agreeable. This atrocious gang folicited, with the moil anxious affiduity, the participation and patronage of the great ones of the world, and boaft of feveral very exalted names ; Frederic II. of Prufiia, whom they call the Solomon of the North, Catharine II. Guftavus King of Sweden, the King of Denmark, &c. &c. But in the whole feries of their correfpondence there is not the leaft trace of any encouragement or any hopes from our excellent Sovereign George III. Defpifing the incenfe of fuch wretches, and detefting their fcience, he has truly merited the title of Philofopher, by having done more for the real Illumination of the World, by the promotion of true Science, tliati Louis XIV. with his penfioned Academicians, or than all th« prefent Sovereigns of Europe united ; and has uniformly diftinguilhed himfelf by his regard for true Religion, and every thing that is venerable and facred. This omillion is above all praife*Page 398

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.80% accurate
    3^4 POSTSCRIPT. been occupied with its nor have I ever heard it exprefled by any Brother, except fuch as had been illuminated -, and fuch Brethren always confidered | this as an innovation or improvement on genuine Britilli Free Malbnry. I recoileci;, indeed, that Nicholai, in his account of the German Rofycrucians, fays, that the object of l^ree Mafonry in England^ fince the time of James II. \i Toleration in Religious Gpnions^ as RoyaUjm had been the obje6b before that time. The account which the Abbe gives of the CheValerie du Soleil is very conformable to one of the three rituals in my polTefiion. His account of the Chevalerie de Rcfe Croix, and fome others, differs confiderably from thofe in my box. I have reafon to think that my materials are tranfcripts from the rituals;"^ &c. which Rofa introduced into the Gernian Lodges, becaufe the writer of the greatcil part of them is an inhabitant of that city. I think that the Abbe Barruel's account of this matter fuggeils a pleafmg reflection. All the Brethren on the Continent agree in faying, that Free Mafonry was imported from Great Britain about the beginning of this century, and this in the form of a Myflical Society. It has been affiduoufiy cultivated in Britain ever fmce that time, and I believe that the Fraternity is more numerous here, in proportion to the population of the country, than in any other kingdom ; yet in Britain the Brethren have never fufpedied that its principles were feditious or atheiftical. While the Free Mafonry of the Continent was tricked up with all the frippery of ftars and ribands, or was perverted to the molt profligate and impious purpofes, and the Lodges became fcminaries of Foppery, of Sedition, and Lmpiety, it has retained in Britain its original form, fimple

Page 399Page 399

The text on this page is estimated to be only 24.53% accurate
    POSTSCRIPT. 385 fimple and unadorned, and the Lodges have remained the fcenes of innocent merriment, or meetings of Charity and Beneficence. As the good fcnfe and found judgments of Britons Iiave preferved them from the abfurd follies of Tranfmucacion, of Ghoft-raifing, and of Magic, fo their honed hearts and their innate good difpofitions have made them dcteft and reject the mad proje6ls and impious doctrines of Colmopolites, Epicurifts, and Atheifts. O fortiinatos nimium, Jiiafi bona nor rat Anglkolas I I have miOre confidence than ever in the fentiraent which I exprelled as an encouragement for our moral inii:ru6tors ; and with greater earneR:nefs do I call on them to refcue from corruption and impending ruin a nation fo highly deferving of their care. Mr. Barruel, in the eighteenth chapter of his work, has fup-s;e{led fome reflections, which hiehlv merit attention, and greatly tend to efface the miprelTion which is naturally made on the minds of the unthinking and precipitant, when they oblerve fuch a lift of authors, whom they have been accuftomed to admire, ail leagued againft Religion. 1 think, however, that nothing can more effectually remove it, than what I have already fhown of the vile and difgraceful tricks which thefe fophifts have been guilty of to fupport their caufe. The caufe -of this numerous affociation is diitin£l;Jy feen in their very procedure. The very firil ftep in their pro grefs is depravation of manners. In this they have laboured with as much earneftnefs as either Spartac\is, or Minos, or Bahrdt. It was a treat to me 10 learn that La Clofe's abominable book Les Liaifuns Dan^ereijcs,

Page 400Page 400

j86 POSTSCRIPT. Dangereufes, was not merely pandering for his patron Orleans, but alfo working for his maftcrs at the Hotel d'Holbach. Nothing gives fuch certain bread to thofe authors, in the beginning of their career, as immoral and impure writings j — and with fuch did even their chief fet out, and fill his pockets; witnefs his Pucelle d' Orleans ; and even after they became the Jages of France^ they continued, cither from coarfe taile or from fcrious principle, for the diabolical purpofc of inflaming the palTions of others, to interlard their graveft performances with impure thoughts and fentiments. Nay, the fecret of the Hotel d'Holbach fliews us that, for any thing we know to the contrary, the vileft produclions of their prefs may have been the compofitions of the o6togenary Voltaire, of the fly d'Alembert, or of the author of the Fere de Famille. What a pity it is that the Decline of the Roman Empire was not all written in England, and that its learned and elegant author, by going into their fociety, has allowed himfelf to be drawn into this muddy and degrading vortex ! I fnould fcarceiy aflc for more to difgufl: me with the philofophy of thefe fages, and to make me diltruil all their pretenfions to knowledge. The mcannefs of the conduct fuited the original poverty of the whole of them -, but its continuance ftrips them of all claims to the name of philofophers. Their pretended wifdom is only cunning, — and we mud acknowledge that their condud was clever : for this mean of corruption, concealed or embellilhed by their talents for frntimental flang, (I can give it no better name,) made their converfation and their writings moll acceptable to their noble patrons. — Now it is that Religion, of necelTity, comes on the iieldi for Religion tells us, that thefe are

Page 401Page 401

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.99% accurate
    POSTSCRIPT. 387 are mean pleafures for creatures born to our profpe6bs ; and Chriftianity tells us, chat they are grofs tranfgreflions o^ the only jujt morality. The progrefs of the pupil will now be rapid ; for he will liften with willing ears to lefTons which flatter his paffions. Yet Voltaire thinks it neceflary to enliven the lefTons by a little of the Jalaijon, quelques hons mots a-p'O'pos aupres des femmes^ which he recommends to d'Alembert, who, it feems, was deficient in this kind of fmall talk. Surely all this is very unlike to wifdom ; and when we fee that it is part of a plan, and this an obvious one, it fliould greatly lelfen our wonder at the number of thefe admired infidels. If we would now proceed to examine their pretenfions to fcience, on which they found their claim to the name of philofophers, we muft be careful to take the word in a fenfe that is unequivocal. Its true meaning is by no means what is commonly afTigned to it, a lover of knowledo-c. It is a lover of wifdom ^ and philofophy profcffes to teach us what are the conftituents of human felicity, and what are the means of attaining it; what are our duties, and the general rules for our conduct. The floics were philo-» fophers. The Chriflians arc alfo philofophers. The Epicureans and the Sophifls of France would alfo be called philofophers. I have put in my obje6tion to this claim already, and need not repeat my reafons for faying that their do6lrines are not diftates of wifdom. I fhall only add, that their own conduct fhows plainly that their principles had no effect on themlelves, becaufe we fee, from the feries of correfpondence which Mr. Barruel has laid before us, that they do not fcruple to pradlife villanous and hypocritical tricks, which never fail to difgrace a man, and are totally irreconcilable with our

Page 402Page 402

The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.68% accurate
    jSo POSTSCRIPT. our notions of human dignity. Voltaire patiently took a caning from an officer at Frankfort, for having wittily told lies of his fcholar Frederic, and his wifdom told him that his honour was cleared by offering to meet the Major, each of them provided with an injection f]/ringe. This was thought fublime wit at Ferney. I do not fuppofe that the flave Epi6letus, or the foldier Digby, would have ended the affair in this manner. Many of the deeds of wifdom of the club d'Holbach were more degrading than even this ; and I am confident that the whole of this phalanx of fages were confcious that they were treated by their patrons and pupils as Voltaire was treated by the Solomon of the North, and that their notions of the vraie /(^-gejls v/erc alfo the fame with his. He gives this account of it in his letter to his niece : ^' Le Roi iui avoit repondu ; ' j'aurai *' >befoin de Voltaire un an tout au plus — On prefTe *^ Torange, et on jette I'ecorce.* Je me fuis fait ^^ repeter ces douces paroles" — (How poor Voltaire would grin !) — ^^ Je vois bien qu'on a preiTe " I'orange — il faut penfer a fauver Tecorce.'* But, as things fland at prefent, philofopher means a man of fcience, and in this fenfe of the word our fages claim great refpeft. No claim can be worfe founded. It is amufing to obferve the earnetlnefs with which they recommend the (ludy of natural hiftory. One does not readily fee the conne6i:ion of this with their oftenfible objeft, the happinefs of man. A perufal of Voltaire's letters betrays the fecret. Many years ago he heard that fome obfervations on the formation of ftrata, and the folTils found in them, were incompatible with the age which the Mofaic hiftory feems to affign to this globe. He mentions this with great exultation in fome of his early letters ; and, from that time forward.

Page 403Page 403

The text on this page is estimated to be only 18.38% accurate
    POSTSCRIPT. 3S9 forward, never ceafes to enjoin his colleagues to prefs the fludy of natural hiilory and cofmogony, and carefully to bring forward every fa6l: v/hich was hoftile to the Mofaic accounts. It became a ferious part of the exercifes of their wealthy pupils, and their perplexing difcoveries were niofr oilentatioufly difpiayed. M. de Luc, a very eminent naturaiiit, has Ihewn, in a letter to the Chevalier Dr. ZimiTiermann, (pubiifhed, I think, about the year 1790,) how very icanty the knowledge of rhefe obfervers has been, and hov/ precipitate have been their conclufions. For my own part, I think the affair is of little confequence. Mofes writes the hiftory, not of this globe, but of the race of Adam. The fcience of thefe philofophers is not remarkable in other branches, if we except M. d'Alembert's mathematics"'. Yet the irnpofing confidence of Voltaire was fuch, that he pailes for a perfon fully informed, and he pronounces on every fubjed: v/ich fo much authority, with fuch a force of expreffion, and generally with fo much wit or pleafanrry, that his hearers and readers are fafcinated, and foon convinced of what they v^ifh to be true. It is not by the ' wifdom nor by tht profound knowledge which thefe waiters difplay, that they 3 B have * Never Vv^as there any thing more contemptible than the phylical and mechanical pofitions in Diderot's great work, th» Syjleme de la NaturCy (Barruel ailirrns, ihat he was the author, and got 100 piftoles for the copy, from the perfon who related the ftory to him,) that long ago found that Diderot had alTifled Robinet to make a book out of his Mafonic Oration, which I mentioned in page 41. Robinet tru lied to Diderot's knowledges in natural philofophy. But the Junto were afhamed of the book De la Nature, Diderot feems to have, afcer this, read T>r. Hartley's book, and has greatly refined on the crude fyilem of Robinet. But after all, the Syfteme de la Nattire is contemptible, if it be confidered as pretending to what is received as fcience by a mechanical phiiofopher.Page 404

The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.80% accurate
    ^QO POSTSCRIPT. have acquired celebrity, a fame which has been fo pernicious. It is by fine writing, by works addrelFed to the imagination and to the affeclions, by excellent dramas, by affedting moral efiays, full of exprefiions of the greatell refpc6l for virtue, the mofl tender benevolence, and the higheft fentiments of honour and dignity. — By thefe means they fafcinate all readers ; they gain the efteem of the worthv, who imasrine them fincere, and their pernicious dodrines are thus fpread abroad, and fceal into the minds of the diiToluce, the licentious, and the unwary. But I am writing to Britons, who are confidercd by our neighbours on the Continent as a nation of philofophers — to the country lO en of Bacon, of Locke, of Newton — v/ho arc not to be wheedled like children, but muft be reafoned with as men. — Voltaire, who decides vvithout hefitation on the chara6!:er of the moftdiftant nations in the moft remote antiquity, did not know us : he came among us, in the beginning of his career, with the higheft expe61ations of our fupport, and hoped to make his fortune by his Pucelle d'Orleans. It was rejected with difdain — but we publifned his Henriade for hj.'Ti : and, notwithftanding his repeated difappointiti^Dts of the fame kind, he durft not ofi'end his countrymen by flandering us, but joined in the profound refpcci: paid by all to Britifh fcience. — Our writers, whether on natural or moral fcience, are ftill regarded as ftandard clafTics, and are ftudied with care. Lord Verulam is acknowledged by every man of fcience to have given the tirfl; juft defcription of true philofophy, pointed out its objects, and afcertained its mode of procedure — And Newton is equally allowed to have evinced the propriety of the Baconian precepus by his unequalled fuccefs, fud

Page 405Page 405

The text on this page is estimated to be only 20.92% accurate
    POSTSCRIPT. 391 Jud Mathefi facem freferente. — The moft celebrated philofophers on the Continent are thofe who have completed by demonftration the wonderful guefles of his penetrating genius. Bailli, or Condorcet, (I forget which,) ftruck with the inconceivable reaches of Newton's thoughts, breaks out, in the words of Lucretius, Tefeqmr^ 0 magn£ gentls deciis^ inque tuls nunc Fix a -pedum pom prejjis vefiigia figms, Tu pater et rerum invent or ^ tu p atria nobis Suppeditas precepta^ tuifque ex inclute chartls^ Floriferis ut apes in fait i bus omnia libant^ Omnia nos iiidem depafcimur aurea di6ia\ Aurea^ perpetud femper digniffima vita. After fuch avowals of our capacity to inflru6t ourfelves, fliall we ftiil fly to thofe difturbers of the world for our lefTons ? No — Let us rally round our own flandards — let us take the path pointed out by Bacon — let us follow the fteps of Newton — and, to conclude, let us ferioufly confider a moft excellent advice by the higheft authority : " Beware of falfe prophets, who come to you " in fheep's cloathing, but inwardly they are r:^ " vening wolves — by their fruits ye sua ;. " KNOW THEM — Do mtn gather grapes of thoidS, '' or figs of thifiles?" THE END. To the Binder. * 2 B, and * 2 C, are to be placed before 2 B, thcfe pages being repeated.

Page 411

The text on this page is estimated to be only 0.00% accurate
    py 

Page 412

The text on this page is estimated to be only 0.00% accurate
    ^4

Page 413

Page 414

Page 415

Page 417

'