The CIA's Black Ops: Covert Action,  Foreign Policy, and  
  2000 by John 
Jacob Nutter. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior written permission of the publisher, 
except in the case of brief quotations embodied  in critical articles and reviews

Democracy.  Copyright 

Inquiries should be addressed to
Prometheus Books, 59 John Glenn Drive, 
VOICE: 716-691-0153. ext. 207.
FAX: 716-564-2711. 
WWW.PROMETHEUSBOOKS.COM

Amherst, New York  14228-2197. 

04  03  02  01  00 

5 4 3 2 1

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Nutter, John Jacob.

p. 

cm.

The CIA's black ops: covert action, foreign policy, and democracy / John Jacob Nutter, 

ISBN  1-57392-742-2 (cloth)
1.  United States. Central Intelligence Agency.  2.  United States Foreign relations.

1.  Title.  II.  Title: Central Intelligence Agency's black ops.
JK468. I6N88 
327. 1273'009'045—dc21 

1999

99-10404
CIP

Contents

Acknowledgments 

Introduction: A Tale of Two Operations: SUCCESS and Failure 

PART  I:  THE  THIRD  OPTION

1.   Like Moths to Light: The Attraction of Covert Action 

2.   The Wars That Came in from the Cold 

3.   Covert Action: The Black Ops Menu 

4.   Making New Friends: The Coup d'Etat 

9

11

25

47

73

94

PART  II:  COVERT  OPERATIONS:  RED,  W HITE,  AND  BLACK

5.   Exploding Cigars, Poisoned Wet Suits, and the Body in the Buick:

Assassination as Foreign Policy 

6.   They Were Expendable: Covert Armies 

7.   An Offer You Can't Refuse: Organized Crime and the CIA 

8.   Just Say Yes: Covert Action and Drug Empires 

9.   My Heroes Have Always Been Cowboys 

111

154

170

178

193

10.   If You're Nor lor Us, You're Against Us: Covert Actions at Home 

207

11.   The Political Economy of Covert Action 1:

The National Interest and the Corporate Interest 

221

12.   The Political Economy of Covert Action II:  It's the Economy, Stupid!  231

PART  H I:  OFF-THE-SHELF

13-  Private Armies: We Shoot for Loot 

14.   The Political Economy of Covert Action III: "Off-the-Books" 

PART  IV :  DEMOCRACY,  FOREIGN  POLICY,
AND  COVERT ACTION

15.   "Hell. Mr.  President, We Are Involved! ":

Covert Action, Operational Limits, and Prestige Investment 

16.   Innocents Abroad: Covert Action and the Advising  Process 

17.   Covert Action and Democracy 

PART V:  CONCLUSIONS:  DEJA Vu ALL  OVER  AGAIN
18.   A Circle in a Spiral: What Covert Action Accomplished 

19  Meet the New Boss: Covert Action and Foreign Policy

in the Twenty-First Century 

20.  Same as the Old Boss: The Power of Covert Institutions

and the End of the Cold War 

Spookspeak:  A Glossary of Fun and  Useful Terms 

Bibliography 

Index 

247

257

275

287

298

315

330

336

339

349

355

Acknowledgments

I  learned a great deal from my students at Michigan State University, and am 
especially indebted to those who contributed to my senior seminar, Democ­
racy, Foreign Policy, and Covert Action. There is probably a piece of each of you 
somewhere in this book. I have also benefited from some wonderful and perspi­
cacious  academic  colleagues,  including  Colleen  Tremonte,  Robert  Aponte, 
Donald  Lloyd,  Linda  Racciopi,  Norman  Graham,  Peter  Dorman,  Kenneth 
Walzer, Jessica  DeForest,  and  Dixie  Platt.  I  am  also  grateful  to  a  number  of 
friends who have helped maintain sanity (I think) through some difficult times, 
including  Steve  DeVore,  Brian  Rowe,  Mark  Bellaire,  Matt  Thompson,  Alec 
Lloyd, and Randy Cowell.

In the course of producing  this work,  I have learned a great deal from  the 
current and former intelligence officers and operators who have spared the time 
to educate me in some of the nuance and nitty-gritty of black ops. You will not 
agree with all of my analyses or conclusions, but I hope you  think your contri­
butions improved them nevertheless.  You know who you are, and you have my 
gratitude.  This  research  has  also  been  deliberately  obstructed  by  a  number  of 
people  and  organizations,  and  is  produced  here  in  spite  of  their  malignant 
efforts. You are who you are, and nothing I can say can be worse than that.

I am particularly grateful to my agent, Sheree Bykofsky, and to Janet Rosen. 
Your encouragement and belief in this work, as well as your efforts in teaching 
a novice author some of the trade, have helped make The CIA's Black Ops a reality 
I have also enjoyed the editorial skill of Meghann French, who has made this a 
much better work, and a much better experience.

Most importantly, my family has been my reason for writing as well as the 
rock upon which I have stood during some trying times. My wife, Susan, has put 
up with so many evenings and weekends while I pounded  the keyboard, and  is 
still here. My mother's faith in her son never wavered, and that is worth a lot. It 
has  been  most  difficult  for  my  son,  who  nonetheless  has  been  understanding

beyond  his years  for  the  times  his dad  has  had  to forego playing  pirates  while 
writing about spooks. Well, from now on,  "Yo ho ho. "

ih&*oducfior:

A Tale of Two Operations: 
SUCCESS  and Failure

LOOKING  GLASS  WAR

TH  he rebel DC-3 came in low and fast, ' a gray-green shadow thundering out 
A   of the  jungle  and  across  the  rooftops  of the  Guatemalan  town,  its  twin 
Pratt and Whitney engines shaking loose the red roof tiles as the campesinos in 
the marketplace scattered for cover. Wind buffeted the face of the  "bombardier" 
through  the  open  cargo door as  he  took  aim,  then  released  his  "payload"—an 
empty  Coca-Cola  bottle.  It  exploded  on  the  worn  cobblestones  of the  market 
square  with  a  startling  "boom"  that  quite  resembled  a  bomb  burst.  "Mission 
accomplished, " the pilot might have thought to himself in Chinese (for he was 
a  Taiwanese  soldier  of fortune)  as  he  turned  the  cumbersome  aircraft  toward 
home.  He  planned  to  enjoy  the  sunshine  on  the  way  back,  for  there  were  no 
enemy fighters in the sky; the Guatemalan air force was grounded by the most 
dangerous weapon of all: propaganda. It was just another day for the secret army 
of OPERATION  PB/SUCCESS, a United  States covert  action  that proved  you 
could overthrow governments with smoke and mirrors—and a few Coke bottles.
This is the story of the secret operations of the cold war. It was a war fought 
with exploding seashells, fake sex films, Frank Sinatra letters, and yes, Coke bot­
tles.  It was a war fought with student front groups and with the world's largest 
airline. It was a heartless war, with guns supplied by Americans and Soviets and 
blood  supplied  by  Kurds,  Cubans,  Hmong,  Montangards,  Afghans,  and 
Miskitos, who would each in their turn be cast aside. It was a war for the highest 
ideals;  it was a war for the lesser evil.  It was war through  the looking glass;  it 
was the war of

OPERATION PB/SUCCESS'
In November  1950,  the people of Guatemala freely and  fairly elected  as presi­
dent Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, a populist with genuine concern for the lives of the 
impoverished Guatemalans. By August  1954, Arbenz had fled the country, both 
his  regime  and  the  democratic  institutions  of Guatemala destroyed  by  a coup 
d'etat,  largely psychological  in  nature, which  was created and  implemented  by 
the Central Intelligence Agency. In fact, the operation was so effective that casu­
alties  were  virtually  nil,  except  for  the  accidental  sinking  of the  British  ship 
Springfield whose owners were compensated by Lloyds of London. OPERATION 
PB/SUCCESS,  as  it  was  code-named  by  the  CIA,  became  a  model  for  future 
covert actions against uncooperative foreign regimes. 3

Jacobo  Arbenz  assumed  office  aiming  to  improve  the  lot  of his  people,  a 
desire that crashed head-on into a brick wall of interests called the United Fruit 
Company  (UFCO).  UFCO  was  Guatemala's  largest  landowner,  and  also  con­
trolled the nation's railroads, ports, and telephone facilities. La Frutera, as UFCO 
was known  locally, followed a traditional practice of U S. corporations in Latin 
America;  it bought  land  not only  to grow crops,  but also to keep it out of the 
hands of other fruit companies. More than half a million acres of the finest agri­
cultural land  in Guatemala lay uncultivated while native Guatemalans starved. 
To remedy this, Arbenz nationalized some 400, 000 acres out of the 550, 000 held 
by 
La Frutera. 4 Yet this was no gunpoint expropriation, for Arbenz paid for the 
land.  United Fruit, however, was not amused by the compensation, which was 
the taxable value that UFCO had assigned to the land.

It was at this point in  1953 that Thomas Corcoran (aka  "Tommy the Cork") 
chief counsel  to UFCO (and  to Civil  Air Transport, a CIA proprietary airline), 
discovered the  "Communist threat"  in Guatemala,  bringing  it  to the attention 
of Undersecretary of State Waiter Bedell Smith (who was the former director of 
Central  Intelligence and future director of the United Fruit Company). As  Arbenz
had recently legalized the small Guatemalan Communist Party in addition to his 
expropriation of land, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and President Eisen­
hower were easily convinced that immediate action had to be taken to stamp out 
the  "Soviet beachhead" in our hemisphere.

The  action  was  OPERATION  PB/SUCCESS.  The  CIA  moved  rapidly  to 
assemble a group of legendary covert operators,  including  Allen  Dulles,  "Rip" 
Robertson,  Al  Haney,  Richard  Bissell,  David  Atlee  Phillips,  and  E.  Howard 
Hunt (yes, 
E. Howard Hunt). The operation relied mainly on psychological 
operations  (psyops)  to  strip  Arbenz's  regime  of  support,  especially  from  the 
middle  class  and  the  army.  Operational  assets  consisted  of a  radio  station,  a 
couple dozen  aircraft,  a  replacement  president  (Carlos  Castillo  Armas),  and  an 
"army of liberation" that "overran" the border in six trucks and a station wagon. 
It was a  "smoke-and-mirrors" affair, and it worked.

The crux of the operation was Dave Phillips's propaganda shop, which ran a

multifaceted psychological campaign aimed at the military, the general popula­
tion,  and  Arbenz's  fear.  Posters  and  leaflets  were  posted  all  over  the  country 
which simply said "Is this Your Wall? "; the message was that this was where dis­
sidents would be stood up when Arbenz unleashed his Stalin-like reign of terror. 
The radio station broadcast popular music mixed with propaganda aimed at cre­
ating distrust of Arbenz's regime and fear of the invading forces, boasting of the 
size, quality, and success of the "forces of liberation. " One particularly clever ruse 
was to announce that all those who supported the rebels should leave their lights 
on ail night. When Arbenz responded by prohibiting this, the rebels announced 
that  night  bombing  would  only  hit  the  dark  areas  of the  towns.  The  lights 
burned all  night. The station also employed  black propaganda (fake announce­
ments  that  seemed  to  be  from  Arbenz's  government)  by  "snuggling"  (broad­
casting on a frequency very close to the official government frequency), and clev­
erly using denials to start rumors, e g., "It is not true that the waters of Lake Ati
tlan have been poisoned. "

The second key to the operation was an aerial  blitz by a small, ragtag, yet 
by  Latin  American  standards,  powerful  air  force,  including  roughly  six  P-47 
Thunderbolts, three P-51  Mustangs, a dozen C-47 transports, a Cessna 180, and 
a PBY-5  naval patrol bomber. These were supplied by the United States, flown 
by CIA contract pilots (mostly Americans but also several Taiwanese soldiers of 
fortune  who  spoke  only  Chinese)  secretly  based  in  Honduras  and  Nicaragua. 
Ordnance  (i. e. „  bombs)  was  limited,  but  then  the  primary  purpose  of the  air 
force wasn't to actually fight, but to create the illusion of a powerful rebel force. 
To this  end,  the  bombers  resorted  to dropping  hand  grenades,  sticks  of dyna­
mite,  and  empty  Coca-Cola  bottles.  During  "bombing  runs"  over  Guatemala 
City, a tape of bombing sounds was blasted over loudspeakers hidden on the roof 
of the American embassy.

At a critical moment, the rebel air force lost three aircraft, almost crippling 
the air offensive. Without constant bombing to show the populace that a rebellion 
was underway, the operation would collapse. While CIA Deputy Director Charles 
Cabell pressed for deployment of U S. aircraft, CIA Director Allen Dulles believed 
that this would expose the United States as the true "rebel, " and he had promised 
President Eisenhower that the role of the United States would be invisible. "Tacho" 
Somoza,  "president "  of  Nicaragua,  came  to  the  rescue  by  supplying  two 
Nicaraguan  P-5 Is  on  the condition  the  U S.  would  replace  them.  When  Allen 
Dulles reported to Eisenhower that the chances of the operation succeeding were 
zero without the additional aircraft, Ike approved and the air offensive continued.
Once  Arbenz  believed  that  an  actual  force  was  attacking  his  regime,  he 
made  a  fatal  error.  He  had  purchased  a  shipload  of generally  useless  weapons 
from  Czechoslovakia,  including  railroad  guns,  antitank  guns,  and  some  small 
arms, and on 25 June 1954, he announced that he would arm the peasants to aid 
in the fight against the invaders. This infuriated the officers of the Guatemalan 
army, who saw this as an insult to their manhood as well as a threat to their social 
status.  Amazingly,  the  Guatemalan  army  chose  to  remain  neutral  during  an

Original  from

invasion of their own country; the army remained in  its barracks, to all intents 
and purposes handing the CIA the keys to the presidential palace. Without army 
support, who would stand against the rebels?

As  things  turned  out,  the  key  to  the  whole  operation  was  that  the 
Guatemalan air force  remained grounded.  On  18 June  1954,  rebel commander 
Castillo Armas  led his  intrepid  band of 150  "liberators"  across  the border from 
Honduras into Guatemala, moved about six miles into Guatemala, and stopped 
to  see  what  would  happen.  Meanwhile,  Dave  Phillip's  "rebel"  radio  fabricated 
breathless  reports  of fierce  combat  ending  in  rebel  victories;  simulated  radio 
transmissions  between  dozens  of nonexistent  rebel  units  filled  the  airwaves.  If 
Arbenz had gotten a single aircraft in the air, he might have discovered the trivial 
size of the rebel "army" and the true outcome of the "battles. " Yet his aircraft, like 
his army, remained at home. How had the CIA achieved this coup de main?

Realizing  early on  that  the  linchpin  of the operation  would  be  control  of 
Arbenz's  information, CIA propaganda broadcasts continuously reported defec­
tions of pilots from Communist Bloc nations, thereby planting the seeds of mis­
trust  in  Arbenz's  mind  and  ideas  in  the  minds of Guatemalan  air force  pilots. 
Eventually, one Guatemalan pilot 
did defect. When asked by the CIA to appeal 
to his fellow pilots via the rebel radio, he refused, fearing for his family, who had 
remained  in Guatemala.  Not  to be put off, CIA operatives got  the man drunk 
one  evening  and  asked  him  "hypothetically"  what  he  would  say  to encourage 
more defections. They secretly taped this conversation, then sent it out over the 
rebel  radio. 5  Fearing  that  all  his  pilots  would  fly  off  to  Honduras,  Arbenz 
grounded his entire air force. Thus blind, when rebel radio reported columns of 
well-armed  insurgents  converging  on  the  capital,  the  beleaguered  president 
believed them. On 27 June 1954, as the army demanded his resignation, Arbenz 
turned  the  government  over  to  Colonel  Carlos  Diaz  and  fled  to  refuge  in  the 
Mexican  embassy.  Shortly  after  that,  Diaz  relinquished  authority  to  Castillo 
Armas.  PB/SUCCESS had  lived up to its name. Soon after, when  Dave Phillips 
stopped  in  Guatemala  City,  he  borrowed  a pair of especially  comfortable  golf 
shoes during a round at the country club. The shoes that fit so well had belonged 
to a former member: Jacobo Arbenz.

NOTHING  SUCCEEDS  LIKE  SUCCESS:
OPERATION ZAPATA6
PB/SUCCESS,  along  with OPERATION  AJAX (the  1953  overthrow of Prime 
Minister Mohammad Mosaddeq  in Iran), convinced the CIA that a little force, a 
few million dollars, and plenty of American  "can-do" could shape world events. 
Even  a  "covert "  fiasco  in  Indonesia (1957,  see chapter  3)  failed  to  dampen  the 
enthusiasm  with  which  such  actions  were  advocated,  and  when  doubts  about 
Fidel  Castro's  political  leanings  arose, 7  the  first  impulse  was  to dispose  of him 
with "the Guatemala scenario. " Thus was born OPERATION ZAPATA.

The  regime of Fulguencio Batista imploded on New Year's Day  1959, and 
Fidel Castro, guerrilla prince, marched triumphantly into Havana to assume the 
mantle of power. A former lawyer and baseball pitcher (a lefty, naturally), Castro 
espoused Fidelismo ostensibly a form of nationalism that was not Marxism, but he
quickly aroused the wrath of American economic concerns (both legitimate and 
Mafia)  by  confiscating  hotels,  casinos,  sugar  mills,  and  plantations.  By  March 
I960, President Eisenhower's National Security Council and the  "54/12 Group " 
(a group  of advisors  that  supervised  covert  actions)  considered  Castro  a  Soviet 
puppet in the Western Hemisphere, and began a program of guerrilla infiltration 
and  support  of indigenous  insurgents  against  him.  This  program  was  run  by 
many of the guiding lights of PB/SUCCESS, including Director of Central Intel­
ligence (DCI) Allen Dulles, Deputy Director for Plans, (DDP) or head of covert 
operations,  Richard  Bissell,  Assistant  Deputy  Director for Plans (ADDP) Tracy 
Barnes, David Phillips, J. C.  King, and E.  Howard Hunt (yes, 
again). In an 
overzealous and perhaps fatal effort at secrecy, the CIA's own intelligence analysts 
were excluded from the operation. 8

By  November  I960,  the  CIA  realized  that  its  halfhearted  guerrilla  cam­
paign was failing, due to the continuing popularity of Castro, his repression of 
those dissenters who remained in Cuba, and problems in keeping the guerrillas 
supplied  (in  particular,  efforts  to  parachute-drop  supplies  consistently  failed). 
Therefore, the guerrilla program metamorphosed into an invasion /? /<%%, in which 
the CIA would secretly train a "brigade" of several  hundred  troops who would 
enter Cuba by amphibious assault near Trinidad, a town of about eighteen thou­
sand on  the southeastern coast.  The  brigade  would  be supported  with  its own 
tanks and, most importantly, an air force of B-26 bombers. While these aircraft 
were World War II surplus, they were common throughout the world, and had 
been modified by the addition of a "pack" of six. 50 caliber machine guns in the 
nose. This weaponry provided devastating firepower against troops and tanks on 
the ground. The cumbersome aircraft were not designed for aerial combat, how­
ever,  so  these  planes  were  intended  to  knock  out  Castro's  small  air  force  by 
strafing Cuban airfields before the landing, and  thereafter be free to annihilate 
Castro's ground troops.

The  biggest problem  seemed  to  lay  in  the size of the  landing  force.  How 
could fourteen hundred men, even well supported by air power, stand up for any 
length of time to Castro's forces, which numbered over two hundred thousand? 
While denied by operators  in  the CIA, there is substantial evidence today that 
shows  Dulles  and  Bissell  counted  on  the  landings  to  ignite  popular  rebellion 
against Castro, which would sweep him from power. Even though analysts from 
the CIA's analysis branch assessed the chances of this as very small, the prospects 
for an uprising were prominently featured in briefings to President Kennedy and 
his advisers. Indeed, provisions were made for landing arms for thirty thousand 
additional  men.  What if the uprisings did  not occur?  In that case, the brigade 
was expected to "melt into the hills" near Trinidad and "go guerrilla. " Moreover, 
CIA documents consistently spoke of the necessity of United States armed forces

support  should  the  rebel  Cubans  get  in  trouble,  and  on  Inauguration  Day  in 
1961, Ike had told JFK,  "This must not fail. " Kennedy, however, explicitly ruled 
out any U. S. military engagement, because he didn't want to commit American 
lives to a bloody invasion; "It would be a lucking slaughter, " he told his brother 
Bobby. Despite what their written plans said, no one from the CIA ever told the 
president that the plans virtually required U. S. military intervention.

Another difficulty with the plan as inherited by President Kennedy was the 
"noise" it was expected to create. JFK came to office hoping  to erase the  "bully 
of the N orth"  image the United States  had  in Latin America (in  no small  part 
precisely  because  of operations  like  SUCCESS  and  ZAPATA).  Therefore,  he 
wanted any intervention in Cuba to appear to be a completely Cuban operation. 
TRINIDAD (the name of the landing plan at the town of Trinidad) smacked too 
much of The Longest Day; 
(the movie about D day, World War II). The town was 
sizable, which would inevitably draw media attention, and it had no airfield that 
B-26s  could  fly  from,  thus  exposing  the  fiction  that  the  operation  was  solely 
Cuban and revealing the substantial U. S. role in the invasion.

The CIA agreed that, in the interests of a "quiet" operation, a new landing 
site  would  be  found.  The change  in site  took  place on  16  March  1961  (about 
thirty  days  before  the  assault),  and  the  selected  alternative  was  the  Bahia  de 
Cochinos, or Bay of Pigs. This bay, near the tiny seaside hamlet of Giron, had a 
runway  that  could  accommodate  B-26s.  It  was  also surrounded  by  the Zapata 
Swamp, through which passed only three narrow causeways, and the beachhead 
could  therefore,  theoretically,  be  defended  by  merely  sealing  off  the  three 
approaches through the swamp. Whereas Trinidad was only three miles from the 
escape hatch of the Escambray Mountains, however, the Bay of Pigs was eighty 
miles  away  on  the  other  side  of a  swamp.  Turning  into  guerrillas  would  be 
impossible, but no one told Kennedy. Finally, President Kennedy asked that the 
amphibious assault take place at night so as to produce a less spectacular event. 
No one told him that the United States had never, even in World War II, carried 
out  a  nighttime  amphibious  assault.  In  the  end,  the  CIA  presented  Kennedy 
with a plan that was developed in two days.

The initial air strikes began on D-2 (two days before the  Brigade  landing, 
15  April  1961),  hitting Castro's  three  main airbases and destroying  about  five 
aircraft. However, the bulk of Castro's air force remained undamaged, including 
a  couple  of prop-driven  Sea  Furies.  More  critically,  several  T-33  jets,  which, 
unbeknownst to the CIA, had been armed with rockets and machine guns, sur­
vived.  A  B-26  painted  by  the  CIA  to  resemble  a  Cuban  plane  landed  that 
morning  in  Miami  with  the cover story  that  defecting  pilots  had  attacked  the 
Cuban airfields and  then  fled  to Miami.  However, discrepancies  in  the aircraft 
(wrong nose cone, gun barrels taped over and not fired through) and cover story 
(how did  two defecting pilots simultaneously attack three airfields? ) were soon 
discovered by the press, and the web of deception began to unravel.

Since  making  an  amphibious  assault  and  holding  a  beachhead  would  be 
almost impossible without command of the air, a second air strike was necessary

to complete  the destruction of Castro's air force.  Yet no second strike was ever 
carried  out.  Why  not?  The  orthodox  explanation  is  that  President  Kennedy 
"chickened out" and canceled the second air strike due to the ruckus  raised by 
Cuba  in  the  United  Nations.  However,  accounts  by  both  David  Phillips  and 
Howard  Hunt,  who  were hardly  Kennedy  apologists,  suggest  that  the  second 
strike  was  spiked  by  Deputy  Director of Central  Intelligence  (DDCI)  Charles 
Cabell, who was unsure that a follow-up strike was authorized. When CIA exec­
utives finally acted to request a second strike, Cabell and Bissell approached Sec­
retary of State Dean  Rusk,  not JFK.  Unwitting  to  make  the decision  himself, 
Rusk asked if they wanted to press their case to the president, but they refused. 
Thus, Castro's aircraft survived to play a key role in the debacle to follow.

Concurrent  with  the  first  air  strike  on  the  night  of D-2,  a  diversionary 
landing was scheduled for the Oriente Province on the southeast coast of Cuba, 
about  thirty miles from  the U S.  naval  base at Guantanamo Bay.  This group of 
about  160 recruits was  to draw Castro's  "reaction  forces"  farther away from the 
true landing site. A series of snafus resulted in the failure of this operation, and 
no diversion took place. Besides, the CIA and independent exile groups had been 
constantly  raiding  Cuba for  months,  and Castro's  forces  had  become quite effi­
cient at responding to reported landings.

On the morning of the landing, 17 April  1961, Brigade 2506 frogmen tried 
to go ashore to mark channels for the landing craft. Although DDP Bissell had 
promised President Kennedy that there "wouldn't be a white face on the beach, " 
the two Underwater Demolition Team (UDT) groups were personally led, in the 
finest tradition of U S. Special Forces, by CIA contract agents Rip Robertson and 
Grayston "Gray" Lynch. Before it touched land, Lynch's team was spotlighted by 
a Cuban patrol. Lynch opened fire with a Browning Automatic Rifle (BAR), and 
a  fierce  night  flreflght  took  place.  Robertson's  team  was  also  discovered,  and 
what little surprise that remained in the operation slipped away.

As  dawn  broke,  the  rebel  Cubans  launched  from  their  "mother  ships, " 
heading toward three separate beaches in and around the Bay of Pigs in landing 
craft and aluminum and fiberglass pleasure boats hastily purchased days before. 
The CIA had discounted evidence of offshore reefs, but they were real, and  the 
boats frequently hung  up on coral  one hundred or more yards from  the beach, 
forcing  the  commandos  to  wade  the  rest  of the  way  in.  Critically,  almost  all 
Brigade radios were ruined by seawater, depriving the commanders of the ability 
to control their forces, to obtain timely resupply, and to keep the CIA and Pres­
ident Kennedy informed of events.

Even  though  they  were  discovered  earlier  than  planned,  the  initial  troop 
deployments  went  well,  with  paratroop  detachments  seizing  key  points along 
the narrow Zapata Swamp causeways and successfully ambushing small groups 
of Castro troops who were already heading for the landing site. Three problems 
quickly  became apparent.  First, Castro, who had been aware of the  impending 
invasion  for weeks,  responded  much  more  rapidly  than  the CIA  had planned. ^
The Brigade had  been  told  not  to expect any  serious  resistance until  two days

Original  from

after  they  had  landed  (D+2),  yet  Castro's  alert  forces  assaulted  the  beachhead 
almost  immediately.  Second,  due  to poor  training  in  transportation  and  cargo 
handling, the rebels could not land their complete force and supplies before day­
break so that their ships could escape out to sea;  they would be caught in day­
light. Third, with Castro's air force still flying, both the rebel ships and ground 
troops became easy targets, as the Brigade B-26s were no match for Castro's T- 
33 jets in air-to-air combat. Several rebel aircraft were shot down, and where the 
exile  forces  had  expected  aerial  gunfire  to  devastate  their  enemy,  they  were 
instead on the receiving end.

The CIA had decided not to arm the rebel ships, since the plan assumed that 
all of Castro's aircraft  would  be preemptively destroyed.  However, Gray Lynch 
had,  on  his  own,  provided  some  light  machine  guns  and  BARs  to  the  crews. 
Although suddenly exposed and vulnerable, the rebels on the ships succeeded in 
shooting  down  one  or  two  of the  attacking  Castro  planes,  but  then  disaster 
struck. An FAR Sea Fury braved the withering small-arms fire to bury a single, 
catastrophic bomb in the Rio Escondido. The Rio's deck was loaded with aviation
fuel,  and  the  ship  ignited  quickly,  taking  with  it  most  of the  Brigade's  spare 
ammo.  There  would  be  no  resupply.  Photographs  of the  burning  Rio  would 
become symbolic of the disaster.  A second ship, the Houston, was hit and forced 
to beach inside the bay, and the rest of the fleet fled over the horizon.

To  make  matters  worse,  the  rapid  response  of Castro's  forces  required  the 
invaders to fire off ammunition at a much higher rate than anticipated, and  by 
the morning of D+2 (19 April), the rebel Cubans had  been forced  back almost 
to the sea into a few isolated pockets of resistance. With no food, water, ammu­
nition,  or  air  cover,  Commander  Pepe  San  Roman  gave  the  order  to  disperse. 
There  was  no contingency  plan  for  "going  guerrilla"  or  for evacuating  by  sea. 
Indeed, there was no contingency plan at all. Ultimately, about twenty-six rebels 
were picked  up  by  U S.  destroyers  that  cruised  close  to  shore  looking  for sur­
vivors.  In doing so, they risked a provocation that could have led to something 
far more serious. As it was, the American ships were shelled by Cuban tanks, but 
did  not  return  fire,  and  there  was  no Cuban  equivalent  to  the Gulf of Tonkin 
incident. About twenty other survivors set off on an epic sailing voyage, landing 
in Mexico weeks later.  More than eleven hundred rebels were captured.

A stunned America watched as President Kennedy, barely three months  in 
office, shouldered the responsibility for the fiasco, and the CIA swiftly spread the 
"explanation"  that  the  president  had  "chickened  out"  on  the  air  strikes;  the 
agency  never acknowledged  the folly of sending  fourteen hundred  men against 
twenty  thousand.  Kennedy  himself  established  a  study  group,  headed  by 
Maxwell Taylor,  to perform  the official  "eyes only"  postmortem.  The  resulting 
report merely reinforced the cold war mindset that had produced the Bay of Pigs 
operation, focusing on the question of "how to do it better next time. " Despite 
this  fiasco, covert operations  had  become such an  integral  part of U S. govern­
ment policy that their raison d'etre remained unquestioned.

COVERT ACTION:  WHAT  THIS  B O O K ! s   ABOUT

In July  1947, Congress created the Central Intelligence Agency, granting it the 
authority  "to  perform  other  such  functions  and  duties  related  to  intelligence 
affecting  the national security as the National Security Council may from  time 
to  time  direct. "  Within  six  months,  the  CIA  was  airdropping  guns  to  rebels 
0357?  (one  can  imagine  our  reaction  if,  say,  Libya  was  supplying 
machine  guns  and  missiles  to,  say,  the  Michigan  Militia).  The  agency  would 
eventually plot assassinations of foreign heads of state; recruit, train, supply, and 
deploy  private  armies;  conduct  foreign  wars  by  proxy;  instigate  and  sponsor 
coups d'etat; wreck the economies of foreign countries; manipulate the political 
processes of allied countries such as England, Italy, and Australia; and disinform 
political)  purposes.
the  American  people  for  political  (and  sometimes 
Moreover,  "retired"  agency  officers  would  in  time  establish  shadowy,  parallel 
intelligence operations and conduct their own private foreign policies. President 
Truman, who signed the CIA into being, would later protest that "it [the CIA] 
has become an operational and at times a policy-making arm of the government. 
. . .  I  never  thought. . .  that  it  would  be  injected  into  peacetime  cloak-and- 
dagger operations. "

It is not much of an exaggeration, if any, to suggest that for much of the cold 
war,  in  much  of the  world,  covert  action  Mur  American  foreign  policy.  Major 
covert actions were conducted in Albania, East Germany, France, Great Britain, 
Greece,  Italy,  the  USSR,  West  Germany,  Angola,  the  Congo,  Egypt,  Ghana, 
Libya, Afghanistan, Australia, Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, 
Morocco, Laos,  North  Korea,  Pakistan,  the  Philippines, South  Korea, Vietnam 
(North, South, and united), British Guiana (now Guyana), Costa Rica, Cuba, the 
Dominican  Republic,  El  Salvador,  Grenada,  Guatemala,  Haiti,  Nicaragua, 
Dutch  Guiana  (now  Suriname),  Bolivia,  Brazil,  Chile,  Ecuador,  Peru,  and 
Uruguay. '" In some of these countries,  a few actions were carried out, while  in 
others covert action was nearly constant throughout the cold war (and continues 
to this day).

Many  of these  covert  actions  were,  speaking  legally  or  practically,  acts  of 
war. Yet they were generally undertaken with the purpose of avoiding war. They 
were  part  of "the  secret  war"  that  was  never  to  be  acknowledged;  that's  what 
made  them  "covert"  actions.  More  formally,  a  covert action is  an  operation
intended  to  change  the  political  policies,  actors,  or  institutions  of  another 
country, performed so that the covert actor's role is not apparent, and if that role 
is discovered, the actor can claim he was not involved (this is called

This  includes  paramilitary  actions,  terrorism,  assassinations,  manipu­
lating  or  "fixing"  election,  arms  supplying,  and propaganda campaigns.  (For a 
more  thorough  discussion,  see  chapter  4. )  "Insiders"  refer  to  such  actions  as 
"black operations, " or black ops, for they are conducted outside the light of day, 
away from and deniable by the more "civilized" bureaucracies.

The CIA's Black Ops is about the issues raised by the concept and conduct of 
covert action. In the chapters that follow, I explore the questions raised by covert 
action in principle, by the conduct of covert operatives, and by the assumptions 
of the  institutions that operated  in secret  throughout  this era.  These questions 
and issues include:

*  Why  did  covert  action  become  so  prevalent  after  World  War  II?  Did 
covert action become a substitute for a coherent foreign policy?  Are the 
same motivations still present after the cold war?
*  What is covert action, and what forms does it take?
*  What are the implications of covertly creating or supporting private for­
eign armies?  By encouraging and supporting oppressed peoples like the 
Kurds,  Montagnards,  and  Hmong  in  rebellion,  does  the  United  States 
create political and moral commitments that it sometimes fails to honor?
*  Why  did  the  United  States  resort  to  assassination  attempts  on  foreign 
leaders such as Patrice Lumumba, Fidel Castro, and Rafael Trujillo? Why 
assassination be an 
did these succeed or fail? Under what conditions 
effective foreign policy tool?  What are  the practical  and  moral  implica­
tions of such acts?

*  Why did the United States turn to the Mafia and drug lords, and what were 
the repercussions of this?  How does organized crime manipulate and  "set 
up" intelligence agencies to evade prosecution? Under what conditions can 
one use criminal organizations in a covert action without getting "tainted, " 
manipulated, or blackmailed?

*  How do covert operators turn into "cowboys" who run their own private 
foreign  policies?  What  made  it  possible  for  Edwin  Wilson  to  use  U S. 
Green Berets to train Gadhafi's terrorists? How did a Marine Corps lieu­
tenant colonel ignore U S. law and the Constitution to fund and fight his 
own private war? What can be done about these activities?

*  Why do secret  institutions so  frequently  resort  to covert  action against 
their own  people and  government?  FBI  operations  like COINTELPRO 
and CIA's CHAOS have shown that even innocent Americans can be the 
subject of American covert operations. How can the American people and 
American institutions be protected from this?

*  What is the connection between covert operations and U S. multinational 
corporations?  Are covert  actions sometimes  undertaken  to preserve cor­
porate power and wealth, rather than the U S. national interest? What is 
the  influence  of corporate  power  on  American  intelligence  activities? 
What  was  the  role  of the  United  Fruit  Company  in  the  "Guatemalan" 
insurrection of 1954, or of the International Telephone and Telegraph Co. 
(ITT) in the overthrow of Chilean President Salvador Allende in  1973?
*  Are covert actions as successful as we have been led to believe, or can suc­
cessful operations be attributed  to U S.  economic power?  How  much of 
the  overthrow  of Allende  can  be  attributed  to  successful  covert  action,

and how much to U. S. government economic warfare? Was it the contras 
or the cutoff of foreign credits that defeated Nicaragua's Sandinistas?
*  What are the ramifications of creating private armies in the United States 
for foreign adventures? How does one draw the line between private and 
governmental power?. %<? #/</ private "volunteers" be permitted to under­
take such ventures?

*  Why  and  how  do  covert  operators  create  "off^the-books"  funding  for 
covert operations and organizations? Did the creation of Richard Secord's 
"Enterprise"  or  the  army's  YELLOW  FRUIT  operation  damage  the 
American  democracy?  What  is  the  connection  of the  infamous  Nugan 
Hand  Bank  to  American  covert  operations  and  intelligence?  What  do 
these activities mean for democracy in the United States, and can they be 
controlled?

*  Why do covert actions so often escalate into overt operations that ignore 
limitations imposed by legitimate authority?  Did  CIA executives try  to 
force President  Kennedy to invade Cuba in  1961  by sending out a pur­
posely  weak  covert  army?  How  did  U. S.  covert  operations  in  Laos  and 
Vietnam  snowball  into a  major American  war?  If the purpose of covert 
action is to avoid open war, what can we learn from these experiences?
*  How does the control of intelligence information  by covert action insti­

tutions influence the political decision-making process?

*  Will the end of the cold war reduce the United States s reliance on covert 

*  Is it even 

to control covert action institutions? Does secret power

action? Why or why not?

corrupt secretly?

Much  of the  history  in  this  book  will  be  little  known  to  most  readers, 
because our educational system doesn't teach it. Thanks to a dedicated group of 
researchers as  well  as  the  efforts of many professional  intelligence officers  who 
remember their oath  to the U. S.  Constitution,  the true stories of covert opera­
tions have been revealed. The following pages, I hope, shed some light on what 
it all means. The cold war is over, and those peoples who win wars tend not to 
be self-reflective.  It  is enough  to win;  why dwell on  things  better left  unsaid? 
This book is my response, for it is about you and me.

NOTES

1.  Technically, the aircraft was the military version of the DC-3, designated  the C- 

47. I've called it the civilian name here to help readers visualize the craft.

2.   This  account  is  drawn  from  Stephen  Schlesinger  and  Stephen  Kinzer,  Bitter
Fruit: The Untold Story of the American Coup in Guatemala (New  York:  Anchor  Books,
1982); John  Prados, President's Secret Wars: CIA and Pentagon Covert Operations Since World War II 
77  (New  York:  William  Morrow  and  Co.,  1986),  chap.  6;  David  Atlee

Phillips, The Night Watch: Twenty-Five Years of Peculiar Service (New York:  Atheneum,
1977),  chap.  2;  Gregory  Treverton,  Covert Action  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1987), 
chap.  2.

3.  "Uncooperative" covered a wide range of cases during the cold war: Soviet client 
states (Iraq), Third World  "neutralists" (Indonesia), anyone who nationalized U S.  hold­
ings (Guatemala, Chile— it was often okay to nationalize one s own holdings, however), 
allies with strong Communist parties (Italy), and allies who didn't like what the CIA was 
doing (Australia).

4.   Importantly,  Arbenz also nationalized  most of his own  family's  landholdings  to 

redistribute to peasants.

Night Watch, chap. 6.

5.  We have no record of what happened to the defecting pilot's family. See Phillips,

6.   This  account  is  drawn  from  Peter  Wyden,  Bay of Pigs: The Untold Story (New
York: Simon and Schuster,  1979); Prados, President's Secret Wars; Taylor Report, Paramil­
itary Study, John  F.  Kennedy Library,  Boston,  Mass.; John J.  Nutter,  "To Trap a Presi­
dent: JFK, CIA, and the Bay of Pigs" (The Conflict Analysis Group, photocopy), avail­
able from author; Philips, The Nigh Watch, chap.  5; E.  Howard Hunt, 
Give Us This Day
(New York: Arlington House,  1973.

7.   Although it should  be noted  that plans to oust Castro were well underway  long 
before  he  turned  to  the USSR  for aid, and  the CIA's  own directorate of intelligence, as 
late as early  I960, described him as a nationalist.

8.   Also  strangely  cut  out  of ZAPATA,  perhaps  by  his  own  choice,  was  Richard 
Helms, who was the chief of operations in the directorate of plans, i. e., the executive nor­
mally in charge of these affairs.  It  is also possible that  the DCI and  DDP cut out  their 
own intelligence analysts because the analysts were telling them things they wanted nei­
ther to hear nor to have passed on  to President  Kennedy,  such  as  the unlikelihood  of a 
revolt against Castro.

9.  There's nothing sinister here. Reports of the impending invasion had been in the 
Latin  American  and  U S.  media  for  weeks;  rebel  troops  had  been  openly  recruited  in 
Florida;  the  town  near  the  the  brigade  training  site  in  Honduras  had  numerous  well- 
known Communists; the sudden disappearance of the brigade and closing of Nicaraguan 
docks  to load ships  with secret cargo must  have been a  tip-off to Castro; and  it's  likely 
that Castro had agents among the brigade anyway.

10.  For the history of these actions, see Prados, President's Secret Wars; 

William Blum,
Killing Hope: U. S. Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II  (Monroe,  Maine:
Common  Courage  Press,  1993);  Jonathan  Kwitny, Endless Enemies: The Making of an Unfriendly World 

(New York: Viking Penguin,  1984).

Part I
The Third Option

Chapter I

Like Moths to Light:
The Attraction  of Covert Action

T he  bumper stickers  were everywhere  during  the  cold  war:  "Better Dead 
Than Red. " For true believers, and there were many, the choices were that 
simple— nuclear war or Communist slavery—and  they'd  made their pick.  The 
more clever policy  makers expanded  the options  to 
nuclear war,  for
which they coined the mildly comforting euphemism

Into  a  world  of such  bleak  choices  rode  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency, 
charter  in  hand  and  ready  to  perform  "other  such  actions"  authorized  by  the 
National Security Council. Presidents latched onto the promise of covert action 
like a drowning man  to driftwood, and every president since Franklin D.  Roo­
sevelt has engaged in significant and numerous black operations.

Why did covert action become so important that in many times and places it 
became a substitute for a coherent foreign policy? Why, even when it failed, did it 
retain a privileged position in the foreign-policy menu? Debacles in the Ukraine, 
Albania,  Indonesia,  and  Cuba  never  dampened  the  enthusiasm  for  covert  ops. 
Sometimes covert operations led down the slippery slope of disastrous escalation. 
United  States  involvement  in  Indochina  began  in  the  1950s  with  "advisers, " 
White  Star Teams, and  Civil  Air  Transport  supply  drops  to  Dien  Bien  Phu:  it 
ended  in  Arc  Lights,  free-fire  zones,  and  the  Killing  Fields. '  Even  when  covert 
actions became highly public "proxy wars, " as in Afghanistan, the very openness 
of the warfare was viewed as a benefit—"At least we re doing something. "

To understand  the possible future of black ops in American foreign policy, 
we must understand how they became the method of choice in the foreign-policy 
menu of the United States. There is no single reason why covert action became 
the "American way, " raising up the CIA to a (or perhaps 
major foreign policy 
maker  for  the  cold  war.  As  conditions  changed  throughout  the  cold  war,  the 
motivations  for covert  action  changed  as  well,  but  whatever  the  situation,  the 
government and agents of the United States always found adequate justification 
for operating in the blacks These reasons include:

*  a "bipolar" (two-superpower) international system, which created the per­

ceived need to resist the Soviets

*  decolonization  of  European  empires  in  Asia  and  Africa,  creating  the 

potential for dozens of "brushfire" (local) wars all over the world;

*  the  potential  for  nuclear  war  that  required  the  United  States  to  avoid 

overtly confronting the Soviets;

*  a desire  to  avoid  direct  U S.  military  intervention  in  the  Third  World 
after World War II, in order to maintain U S. self-image, to buff up the 
American image abroad, to ease American "war weariness, " and to limit 
the potential financial costs of confrontation at a hundred points around 
the globe;

*  the Office of Strategic Studies (OSS) experience of the American "intelli­
gence elite, "  and  the  importance  they  placed  on  World  War II  "special 
operations";

*  the success of early covert actions  in overthrowing  "unfriendly"  regimes 

(AJAX, SUCCESS);

*  the fact that little domestic political cost occurred when some early covert 

actions misfired or were exposed;

*  the  prevailing  view  among  American  political  elites  that  "the  world  is 

malleable" and Americans could do anything;

*  the "Imperial Presidency " and the breakdown of bipartisanship in foreign 
policy,  which  exposed  conflict  between  the  president  and  Congress, 
leading  presidents  to  try  to  circumvent  controls  and  unilaterally  make 
foreign policy;

*  the  belief that  covert  actions  could  circumvent  domestic  political  con­
straints and  that  the administration could  "get away with" actions  that 
the American people and Congress would not support;

*  covert  action  permitted  decision  makers  to  do 

in  difficult  or
ambiguous circumstances,  and  it  allowed  them  to create  the  illusion  of 
having done something where they didn't want to act;

*  belief that "subversion" worked for the Commies, and that it could work 

for us, too;

*  the rejection of "idealism" and morality, and the perceived need for a new 
approach, exemplified in NSC-68, the Doolittle Commission Report, and 
the Hoover Report; and

*  the structure of the U S. intelligence community, in which the agencies them­
selves largely controlled the government's problem definition, and  therefore 
often "found" threats to the national interest that "required" covert action.

A   NEW WORLD  AND  A  NEW  ENEMY

"These proceedings are closed, "  said General  Douglas  MacArthur when  the final 
page of the armistice with Japan was signed, ending the terrible agony of World

War II and ushering in, it was thought and hoped and prayed lor, a new era of peace. 
Evil  had  been vanquished,  and on  26 June  1945,  the Allies  had  established  the 
United Nations as guarantor against a third world war.

Yet wartime alliances were already crumbling. The deep and inherent antag­
onism  between  the  capitalist  and  communist  worlds  was  reemerging.  Within 
the West, conflicts between the United States and the European colonial powers 
(Britain  and  especially  France)  over decolonization  in  areas  like  India,  central 
Africa, Indochina, and Algeria, threatened to break apart the Atlantic fraternity. 
A  new  international  system  had  emerged  with  two  superpowers  and  unpre­
dictable conflict dynamics.  President  Harry Truman was  fearful of the costs of 
sustaining a cold war economy, yet faced global military necessities. In this con­
text, a new American approach to foreign policy developed.

BIPOLARITY AND  THE  GLOBALIZATION 
OF AMERICAN  INTERESTS

Even before the end of World War II, the United States government and Amer­
ican elites had realized that the Soviet Union would emerge as the only rival to the 
United  States  in  the  postwar  world. 3  With  the  prewar  major  powers  England, 
France, Japan, Germany, and Italy in ruins, only the USSR remained to challenge 
the  hegemony of the  United States.  Even  though  the Soviets  had experienced a 
human  and  economic  catastrophe,  two  things  suggested  that  the  Soviet  Union 
would rise to confront America. First, the immense but largely untapped economic 
potential  of the  USSR  remained  largely  intact,  and  in  fact  the war had  enabled 
Josef Stalin  to mobilize  the country's  bountiful resources and  labor on a historic 
scale.  Moreover,  by  pillaging  Eastern  Europe,  the  Soviet  Union  extracted  the 
resources, physical plant, skilled labor, and technological and scientific know-how 
that enabled it to recoup the losses of the war with startling speed. Second, Soviet 
ideology was by definition the antithesis of American ideology, and thus conflict 
was inherent in the belief systems of the two goliaths.  Even before the war's end, 
both allies were regarding each other with a considerable degree of hostility. 4

This suspicion  and  animosity  was aggravated  by events  that  took  place as 
the war neared its final act. Various German leaders had tried to arrange a sepa­
rate peace with  the Anglo-American allies, dangling  the  bait of Germany as a 
bulwark  against  Communism.  Even  though  the  Western  powers  ultimately 
declined  such  offers  from  Reichsfuhrer  Heinrich  Himmler  and  Admiral  Wil­
helm  Canaris,  the  mere  offer,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  some  in  the  West  were 
willing to listen, ratcheted up Stalin's paranoia. Matters were not helped by the 
fact  that the  "separate-peace"  offers had  been sought out  by Allen Dulles, who 
would become America's spymaster as director of Central Intelligence during the 
1950s.  Moreover,  the  United  States 
eventually  protect  and  employ  a  sub­
stantial number of Germans, many of whom were known Nazis. Under the aegis 
of operations like PAPERCLIP, the United States eagerly sought the services not

Origins! from

only of rocket scientists, but also the likes of barbarous "medical" experimenters 
and mass murderers.  Neither was the atmosphere improved by the recruitment 
of Germany's  expert  on  the  USSR,  master spy  Reinhard  Gehlen,  who  worked 
first for the CIA, then became head of West German Intelligence. ' Certainly the 
Soviets also grabbed as many German experts as possible, and  they had signed 
the nonaggression pact before the war, but to Stalin this was beside the point— 
Western employment of former Nazis  merely  reinforced  his paranoia, and  also 
supported  Soviet  ideological  perceptions  about  the  unity  of capitalist  states, 
whether authoritarian or democratic.

Feeding  this fear, too, was the fact that there were many  in the West who 
openly viewed the rise of Soviet power with dread and hostility. Truman himself 
had suggested that the Western allies should side with whoever was losing in the 
East, to prolong the war and bleed the two totalitarian states dry, and Churchill's 
unconcealed  enmity  toward  the  Bolshevik  regime  dated  back  to  the  days  of 
Lenin.  American  intelligence  was  already  planning  for  U S. -Soviet  conflict  in 
any event:  Even before the end of the war, the OSS was stashing radios in the Soviet Union for postwar operations in Russia.

Against  this  background,  the  United  States  emerged  from  the  war  in  an 
unfamiliar position.  It  had suffered  far less from  the war than  any other major 
power.  It had the world's only functioning  industrial economy.  And  it  had  the 
bomb. In short, the United States towered over the world like a titan.

The emergence of the United States as a global power, and the survival of the 
Soviet  Union  as  the only  logical  and  capable  challenger,  produced  a structural 
change in the world system. Where the prewar world had contained several major 
powers, the new international system was dominated by only two, and the change 
from  a  multipolar structure (many powers)  to a  bipolar structure (two  powers) 
created  new  conflict dynamics.  Among  the most  important  of these  forces  was 
that  the  United  States  and  Soviet  Union  came  to  view  the  world  in  zero-sum 
terms. This meant that any gain for oneself was perceived as an automatic loss for 
the other side, and any loss for oneself an automatic gain for the enemy. By defi­
nition, then, the way to help oneself was to hurt the other side. Even if one might 
not capture new countries for one's own side, simply having small groups of guer­
rillas or terrorists  raise  hell  in an enemy country  forced  the opponent  to divert 
valuable  resources  and  attention  from  core  areas  of the  struggle,  thereby  auto­
matically weakening the foe. Thus, the entire globe was "in play. "

Another important idea arose to reinforce the zero-sum tenet of bipolarity: the 
Domino Theory.  This  was  the  simple concept  that  even  though  many  countries 
might be inconsequential in and of themselves, each might nevertheless be a crit­
ical stepping stone toward subverting the vital countries. As Truman pointed out:

If Greece should  fall under the control of an armed  minority,  the effect on  its 
neighbor,  Turkey,  would  be  immediate  and  serious.  Confusion  and  disorder 
might well spread throughout the entire Middle East. 6

On Laos, President Dwight D. Eisenhower explained that

you  have  the  broader  considerations  that  follow  what  you  might  call  the 
"failing  domino"  principle. . .  you  knock  over  the  first  one,  and  what  will 
happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go over very quickly. . .  the 
geographical position achieved thereby does many things. It turns the so-called 
island defensive chain of Japan, Formosa, of the Philippines, and to the south­
ward; it moves in to threaten Australia and New Zealand. 7

The implication of this shift in worldview was that there were no longer any 
inconsequential countries.  Any gain for the Soviets was a potential crack in the 
dike through which would flood unstoppable Red hordes, and no backwater was 
too remote to leave uncontested.

The possibility of falling  dominos and  U. S. -Soviet  confrontation was  dra­
matically increased by global decolonization and the wars of liberation that often 
accompanied it. For roughly three hundred years, Africa, south Asia, Indochina, 
and the southwestern Pacific archipelagoes had been ruled by European powers. 
By the end of World War II, Great Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, 
and Portugal were hanging on to these colonies by their fingernails, if they had 
not already lost them. The colonial powers were too weak from the war to hold 
on  long,  and  besides,  hadn't  the  war  been  fought  for  "freedom"?  In  such  cir­
cumstances, decolonization was going to happen, peacefully or otherwise.

Where there had been a few dozen colonies, each strictly controlled by a major 
power and generally left alone by the others, recognizing one another's "spheres of 
influence, "  decolonization  produced  one  hundred  or  more  sovereign  states,  the 
majority  of them  small,  poor,  and  weak,  each  with  its  own  foreign  policy,  and 
many of them charter members of the "revolution-of^the-month club. " All these 
countries  represented  new  opportunities  for  the  ruthless  contest  between  the 
United  States  and  the Soviet  Union.  The  new countries  were  now outside  their 
former colonial rulers' spheres of influence, and as such, were up for grabs.

Virtually  none  of these  new  entities  were,  in  any  sense,  "nation-states  ' 
While they had the trappings of sovereignty, many of the newly formed "coun­
tries" were  loose conglomerations of disparate and often hostile peoples, tribes, 
and  nations,  who  had  been  thrown  together  by  European  statesmen  drawing 
lines on maps without regard to local history, politics, or custom. Such "states" 
were  highly  prone  to civil  wars,  coups,  assassinations,  terrorism,  and  guerrilla 
warfare— in other words, each was a perfect opening for one superpower to chal­
lenge the other.  As soon as one faction in a country called on the United States 
for aid, the Soviets would immediately discover that the opposing side were pro­
letarian heroes worthy of brotherly socialist support, and vice versa. Ideology was 
a secondary consideration, since Third World rebels generally lived by the motto 
"Any Port in a Storm. "

Coupled with the explosion in opportunity was a new internationalism in Soviet 
politics. With the destruction of Germany and the establishment of an Eastern Euro­

pean buffer zone, the Soviet Union (and Russia, historically) was secure at last from 
European invasion (or capitalist counterrevolution, depending on your point of view). 
The Soviet Union now had both the inclination and the ability to look outward, with 
an eye toward imposing Soviet control where it could or simply raising a little hell 
where it couldn't/ By the early  1950s, the Soviet government decided to support 
"wars of national liberation, " and it went about this task with vigor.

Confronting  the vast assortment  of nationalist,  irredentist,  and  subversive 
movements  that  ignited  across  the  postwar globe  would  have  been  financially 
ruinous for America.  One solution  the  United States  hit  upon  was  the  nuclear 
doctrine9  of massive  retaliation,  according  to  which  John  Foster  Dulles  pro­
claimed that the American government would not fight brushfire wars all over 
the  world,  but  would  instead  "go  to  the  source "  of  subversion,  the  Soviet 
Union. '"  Thus,  subversion  in,  say,  Laos,  would  presumably  be  answered  by 
nuclear airbursts over Moscow. However, the threat of nuclear retaliation in these 
circumstances rang hollow. Once the Soviet Union developed the bomb in  1949, 
there  was  little  chance  that  the  United  States  would  nuke  Moscow  over,  say, 
Laos, knowing that the Soviets could destroy Washington in return. The "Wash­
ington for Vientiane, followed by global annihilation" strategy was a loser.

Having  defined  the choices as  nuclear war or surrender,  the  United States 
arrived at a third option:  covert action employing coups and  indigenous forces 
to  resist  the  onslaught  of  subversion  and  insurgency.  Covert  action  offered 
numerous  advantages  over the  more conventional  or  nuclear approaches.  First, 
there was (presumably) little risk of dragging the United States into a shooting 
war with the Soviets. U. S. and Soviet troops would not be directly engaged, and 
therefore the prestige of the two superpowers would not be put on the line. If a 
covert action didn't work out, one could simply withdraw with no loss of credi­
bility,  as one had  "never been  there"  in  the  first  place.  The  superpowers could 
compete in the Third  World with comparatively  little cost  to themselves.  It  is 
always far better to make war with someone else's blood.

NUCLEAR  WEAPONS  AND  COVERT  ACTION

While the bipolar worldview required confrontation practically everywhere, the 
development of the Soviet  bomb  precluded  confrontation  anywhere.  Although 
many  contemporary  strategists  suggested  that  a  nuclear weapon  was  simply  a 
"big bomb" and would  not change the face of warfare, political  leaders seemed 
to  intuitively  sense  that a nuclear war might  well  destroy  ail  human  life.  The 
tension thus created between bipolarity and the potential for nuclear escalation 
required a careful balancing act  between the two great and opposing American 
foreign-policy  analogies  of the  twentieth  century:  Munich  and  Sarajevo.  First, 
failure to respond to an opponent's encroachments, however modest and far away, 
smacked  of Munich (1938), Chamberlain, and appeasement, and could  lead  an 
aggressor to believe that one did not have the will to actually fight. It would be

even worse to attempt to defend insignificant areas with threats, but then back 
down. The consequent loss of credibility would only stimulate the adversary to 
ever greater demands and aggressions, in the belief that you were weak and vac­
illating. " On the other hand, military responses that engaged the armed forces 
of the  superpowers  against  one  another,  or  even  staked  the  credibility  of one 
against another, evoked images of 1914 and the "Guns of August. " "Some damn 
thing in the Balkans"—Sarajevo and the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdi­
nand—had precipitated  the Great  War, as  Bismarck  had  prophesied,  and  cold 
war leaders were painfully aware that small sparks could ignite the final global 
conflagration. Thus, one had to stand up to the foe 
standing up to them.
Covert action was the only policy that seemed to satisfy both conditions.

OSS BUCCANEERS  AND  THE  INTELLIGENCE  ELITE
The Central Intelligence Agency was created, as an agency and an ethos, by the 
men who had planned and executed the secret war against Germany and Japan. 
These operators, virtually all veterans of the OSS,  had  seen  the effects of resis­
tance, sabotage, guerrilla war, propaganda, and the rest of the covert menu first­
hand, and they had been impressed.

Even  before  the  United  States  was  impelled  into  World  War  II,  Franklin 
Roosevelt  had  recognized  that  American  involvement  was  merely  a matter of 
when, not if, and had asked his friend William "Wild Bill" Donovan to assemble 
the nucleus of an intelligence service. Donovan, a freewheeling Medal of Honor 
recipient from World War I, lived up to his nickname, establishing  the proto­
type for the covert operator: audacious in action, heedless of authority, ceaselessly 
active, careless of administrative detail, loyal, and fiercely protective of his field 
operatives. " For Wild Bill, no plan was too outrageous to consider. On one occa­
sion,  OSS  psychologists  diagnosed  that  Adolf Hitler  might  be driven  mad  by 
massive exposure to pornography. To that end, the OSS accumulated an immense 
store of German pornography, with the intent of airdropping it around Hitler's 
headquarters, in the belief that he might stumble across some and go insane. In 
the end, the only thing that was dropped was the plan itself, when an American 
air commander refused to risk pilot's lives on such a scheme. "

When  the  CIA  was  established  by  the  National  Security  Act  of  1947, 
Donovan  was  the  logical  choice  for  director.  He  had  argued  for  a  centralized 
intelligence  function  since  the  1930s.  Wild  Bill,  however,  faced  two  political 
enemies that cared little for his experience and acumen. Harry Truman disliked 
Donovan's postwar enthusiasm for continuing covert and special operations. Per­
haps more importantly, J. Edgar Hoover opposed him because: (1) Donovan had 
scrapped for every advantage he could during the war, including using known or 
alleged  socialists  and  Communists  in  the  OSS;  (2)  Donovan  had  made  some 
accommodations during the war with leftist guerrillas (Tito, Ho Chi Minh, and 
some Italians); and (3) Hoover wanted the job for himself. Nonetheless, the CIA

and its operating ethos was invented by the alumni of the OSS. Foremost among 
these was the "great white case officer, " Allen Dulles, who served as director of 
Central Intelligence from  1933 through  1961. Dulles was legendary even before 
World War II. He had, as a fledgling foreign service officer during World War I, 
opted  to  keep  a  tennis  date  and  skipped  a  meeting  with  a  Russian  expatriate 
seeking  his  help.  The  man  turned  out  to  be  Vladimir  Illyich  Lenin.  During 
World War II, Dulles not only ran espionage networks into the Third Reich, but 
also  conducted  clandestine  political  actions,  including  negotiations  with 
German  leaders  (e g.,  Canaris,  Himmler)  for  the  removal  of  Hitler,  and  at­
tempted to aid German groups who were trying to assassinate Der Fuhrer. Other
key CIA figures with OSS experience included:

*  William Colby, director of Central Intelligence (DCI). Colby parachuted
into occupied  France as a member of Jedburgh  team  BRUCE  and  blew 
bridges  and  railways on  the  right  flank  of General  Patton's  epic  sweep 
across  France  to  prevent  a  German  counteroffensive.  Later,  Colby  para­
chuted  into  Norway,  leading  sabotage  operations  against  the  Germans 
(mainly blowing up bridges) to pin down German troops who could have 
participated  in  the  last-ditch  defense  of  the  Fatherland. "  During 
Vietnam, Colby for a time ran the PHOENIX program, and later, as DCI, 
became the  "Man Who 
Keep Secrets, "  revealing  to Congress and
the world evidence of assassination plots, mind-control experiments, and 
domestic surveillance operations.

*  William Casey, who was responsible for ail OSS activity in Germany from 
1944 on, organizing the Jedburgh operations that delayed German reac­
tion to the Normandy landings, and guarding Patton's southern flank by 
destroying  bridges  and  railways.  He  would  write  " ... it  is  important 
today  to  understand  how  clandestine  intelligence,  covert  action,  and 
organized  resistance saved blood and  treasure in defeating  Hitler.  These 
capabilities  may  be  more  important  than  missiles  and  satellites  in 
meeting crises yet to come, and point to the potential for dissident action 
against  the  control  centers  and  lines  of communication  of totalitarian 
power. ""  Casey  would  later act  on  his  belief and  experience;  as  Ronald 
Reagan's DCI, he was a key figure in the Iran-Contra affair.

*  Ray Cline, deputy director for intelligence (DDI), a staunch CIA defender 

who would go on to found "Agents for Bush. "

*  Frank  Wisner,  first  chief  of  CIA  special  operations,  who  penetrated 
Rumania  during  World  War  II,  served  as  a  major  allied  intermediary 
with both King Michael and the head of the Soviet security service, and 
whose detailed reporting of the Soviet takeover convinced many in gov­
ernment that World War II would soon be followed by another. "

*  Tracy Barnes, an Allen Dulles protege and former Jedburgh who rose to as­
sistant deputy director for plans (ADDP)—"plans" was the early euphemism 
for covert operations. Barnes oversaw such operations as the Bay of Pigs.

*  Lyman Kirkpatrick, inspector general of the CIA, vilified within the CIA 
for his still-classified Bay of Pigs postmortem, who would be offered the 
job of DCI by President Jimmy Carter.

*  Thomas  Karamessines,  DDP  during  the  operations  against  Salvador 

Allende in Chile.

*  Lucien  Conein  (aka  "Black  Luigi"),  legendary  operator  and  key  CIA 
player in Vietnam and later in the CIA's drug war in Southeast Asia.
*  Kermit  "Kim"  Roosevelt, OSS analyst  to Supreme  Allied  Headquarters 
and  official  historian of the OSS. "  He planned  and  organized  the over­
throw of the Mosaddeq  regime in  Iran  in  1953, and  refused  the Guate­
mala operation.

*  E.  Howard Hunt, who served with  OSS Detachment  101  in Indochina, 
and would play major roles in the Guatemala coup, the Bay of Pigs, and 
Watergate.

*  Sherman Kent, deputy director of Central Intelligence (DDCI) and influ­
ential  chairman  of the  Board  of National  Estimates,  whose  memoranda 
were ignored by the Bay of Pigs planners.

*  James Jesus Angleton, famous (or infamous) CIA chief of counterintelli­
gence.  In the OSS, Angleton served as the chief of the Italian Desk, and 
his  agents (named,  among  other  things,  ROSE,  PANSY,  and  BLOOM, 
after Angleton s  love  of flowers)  sought  out  Nazi  "stay-behind"  agents 
and burgled suspected enemy agents. '* As the CIA's chief of counterintel­
ligence, his "molehunt" (investigation for Soviet spies within the agency) 
nearly destroyed the CIA, and never revealed a single enemy agent. '" Iron­
ically, Angleton was a close friend of Kim Philby, who 
turn out to be 
a Soviet spy.

The exception to this list is former DCI Richard Helms.  He served in OSS, 
but  came  away  with  a different  conclusion:  The gains  from  special  operations 
weren't worth the cost. ** To Helms, penetration of enemy military and political 
secrets cost  less and paid off far better.  This  natural caution played out during 
the Bay of Pigs,  when  Helms,  nominally  in charge of operations,  was omitted 
from the planning and execution of ZAPATA.  It was during Helms's tenure as 
DCI  that  the CIA  began to turn more toward  intelligence gathering and away 
from covert action, a trend that would  not be reversed until the directorship of 
William Casey, some seventeen years later.

With  the  exception  of Helms,  special  operations  left  a  highly  favorable 
impression on OSS veterans because the actions were so successful and apparently 
consequential  to  the  outcome  of the  war.  Some  operations  involved  starting 
small armies, such as OSS Detachment  101, which organized the Kachin tribes 
in  northern  Burma  against  the  Japanese.  By  the  war's  end,  the  group  had 
inflicted over ten thousand casualties on the invaders at a cost of about two hun­
dred of their own. ^'

Perhaps the most famous European operator exemplifies the spirit of bucca-

Original  from

neering audacity that permeated the OSS. Raised in France, Marine Corps Major 
Peter Ortiz spoke  the  language like a native and was a five-year veteran of the 
Foreign  Legion.  Parachuting  into  France  in  1943,  Ortiz  operated  by day  as  a 
fashion  designer,  well  liked  by German officers.  By  night  he  led Maquis  raids 
wearing his U S.  Marine Corps uniform.  His audacity  is best illustrated by the 
act  of walking  into  a German-filled  cabaret  wearing  his  full  uniform  under a 
raincoat. Casually drawing a pair o f. 38s from his belt, Ortiz dropped the rain­
coat, and "encouraged" the Germans, many of whom had been his drinking com­
panions, to raise a toast to Franklin Roosevelt and Allied victory. He then casu­
ally disappeared into the night. "

Former OSS men drew their conclusions about the efficacy of covert action 
not only from their own experience, but also from that of others in the war, espe­
cially  the  "cousins"  (British).  During  the  darkest  hours  of the  war,  Winston 
Churchill had chartered the Special Operations Executive (SOE) with the admo­
nition to "set Europe ablaze. " Two operations in particular illustrated the poten­
tially decisive effects of small, strategic operations.

One of the these was the theft of a German Enigma cipher machine. Enigma 
was a typewriter-like machine that encrypted  messages with  nearly an  infinite 
number  of possible  combinations,  and  was  therefore  considered  unbreakable. 
However,  in  1939, the  Polish Secret Service had ambushed a German SS truck 
in  the  Danzig Corridor and  stolen  an  Enigma  machine.  The  Poles  burned  the 
truck  and  left  a  pile  of mechanical  parts  that  the  Germans  mistook  for  the 
remains  of the  cipher  machine.  With  this  machine  in  hand,  brilliant  Allied 
cryptanalysts  sometimes  presented  Churchill  with  German  intelligence  before 
Hitler received it. "

The other  key commando operation  of the war was  the destruction  of the 
Norwegian heavy-water plant, the Norsk-Hydro, along with Germany's supply 
of heavy  water—the  crucial  ingredient  in  Hitler's  effort  to  build  an  atomic 
bomb—at Vemork, Norway,  in  1943.  Unwilling to risk the numerous Norwe­
gian civilian casualties that might be inflicted by a bombing raid, Churchill and 
SOE  sent  in  a group  of thirty-four commandos  to destroy  the plant.  Unfortu­
nately,  their  gliders  crashed,  and  the  commandos  were  all  either  killed  on 
landing or captured and summarily executed.  Next, SOE sent in a small group 
of saboteurs, who penetrated the plant, destroyed all of the electrolysis tubes and 
half a  ton  of heavy  water.  However,  this  attack  only  delayed  production,  and 
within  six  months  the  plant  was  restored  to  full  production.  Worse,  German 
security was increased to the point that no further commando or sabotage raids 
were  possible.  The  Allied  Combined  Chiefs  of Staff concluded  that  the  only 
alternative was a bomber raid, but although seven hundred bombs were dropped, 
only  two  hit  the  plant.  Norwegian  casualties  numbered  twenty-two,  and 
Norway's government-in-exile strongly protested.

Fortunately for the Allies, although the physical effect of the bombing was 
almost  nil,  the psychological effect was  impressive.  The Germans  became con­
vinced  that  Vemork  was  too  exposed  to  both  sabotage  and  bomber  raids,  and

Original  from

decided to move the whole plant and the entire stock of heavy water to Germany 
for greater security. The first part of the transport required crossing a deep Nor­
wegian  lake  by  ferry.  A  Norwegian  SOE  agent  penetrated  German  security, 
planted a bomb aboard the boat and sunk it, along with Germany's atomic bomb 
project, in a thousand feet of water. **

Additionally, the potential for small Special Forces units was amply demon­
strated  during  the  war.  While  the  United  States  regular  military  remained 
highly resistant to such "behind the lines nonsense, " the forerunners of the CIA 
watched and learned. In North Africa, David Stirling's Special Air Service (SAS) 
was spectacular in penetrating through German lines across hundreds of miles of 
trackless desert,  to cripple Erwin Rommel's supply  lines and  air force.  On one 
raid, SAS drove a convoy of land rovers down the runway at a German airbase, 
shooting up dozens of aircraft. In Asia, Orde Wingate's Chindits and Frank Mer­
rill's Marauders operated solely on airborne resupply and what  they could cap­
ture  to  range  far  into  the  interior  of Burma,  capturing  or  destroying  crucial 
Japanese installations and rail facilities.

Finally, the operators in the OSS emerged from the war with a grasp of the 
possibilities of revolutionary  warfare. "  OSS  men  had  worked  with  highly  suc­
cessful  resistance  movements  in  France,  Yugoslavia,  Greece,  Indochina,  and 
China, among  many others,  fighting  side  by side with  Mao Tse-tung,  Ho Chi 
Minh, and Tito. In some areas, insurgent forces practically liberated themselves. 
By  June  1945,  six  entire  provinces  in  Tonkin  had  been  liberated  from  the 
Japanese by Vo Nguyen Giap's Viet Minh. " Tito's Partisans freed islands, towns, 
and large tracts of land from  the occupying  German 
operated  their
own  railroad and  mail system, and  tied down  more than  300, 000 German and 
Axis troops. " These lessons were not lost on the OSS veterans who invented the 
CIA. Even if indigenous forces behind the Iron Curtain could not liberate them­
selves from Soviet occupation, experience showed that they could tie down large 
numbers of troops, who would then be unavailable to threaten Western interests. 
The  OSS  also  created  an  intellectual  underpinning  to  their  brand  of revolu­
tionary liberation. As part of their wartime study, the analysts for the OSS had 
come to know theorists of revolution such as Harvard historian Crane Brinton, 
whose Anatomy of a Revolution would be consulted by the CIA in the  1950s as a 
"how-to" book. "

In  summary,  the  men  of the  early  CIA  were  inspired  by  the  courage  and 
audacity of the OSS and SOE, and emerged from that experience convinced that 
decisive outcomes could sometimes be effected by small, cleverly directed groups 
of specialists.

THE  BREAKDOWN  OF  BIPARTISANSHIP  AND  COVERT ACTION

For much of American history, foreign policy was conducted in a spirit of bipar­
tisanship, perhaps best exemplified in the words of Senator Arthur Vandenberg,

Origins!  from

who said that  "politics stops at the water's edge. " This expressed the sentiment 
that the United States needed to present the world with a single, unified voice, 
and that this unity was so important that mere partisan political disagreements 
should be put aside. We are, after all, all Americans. Bipartisanship was also fos­
tered by the substantial foreign-policy consensus that emerged in the aftermath 
of World War II. Gone were the vituperative debates between the intervention­
ists and the isolationists. Having been  "dragged" into two European conflicts in 
twenty  years,  the  people  and  leaders  of the  United  States  concluded  that  the 
country 
could not stand  outside  these  wars,  and  that  it  was  better  to  become  a 
global  leader  to  deter  World  War  III  than  to  be  inevitably  sucked  into  yet 
another European inferno. Thus, a consensus of anti-Communism and globalism 
(active  involvement  in  world  affairs)  arose,  cutting  across  political  boundaries 
and essentially defining attempts  to use foreign policy  issues for partisan point 
scoring as "un-American. "

Two  related  issues  began  to  break  down  this  consensus  in  the  1960s:  the 
Vietnam  War  and  the  "Imperial  Presidency. "  Opinion  about  Vietnam  was 
divided  early  on,  not  only  between  doves  and  hawks,  but  also  between  those 
whose hawks who felt Vietnam was a test of America's credibility and willing­
ness  to  fight  Communism,  and  those  who  felt  it  was  a  diversionary  attack  to 
"bleed" America before the real attack in Europe. Later, when Congress became 
aware  of  the  complete  history  of  U S.  involvement  in  Indochina,  it  deeply 
resented  having  been  manipulated.  This  feeling  ran  deep  against  Lyndon  B. 
Johnson  for  the  Gulf of Tonkin  incident  and  resolution,  and  against  Richard 
Nixon, who in  1968 had promised a  "secret plan " to end the war, which he then 
allowed to drag on for five more years.

These two administrations came to be called the "Imperial Presidency. " The 
term connoted the belief that the presidents had vastly overstepped their consti­
tutional  and  traditional  powers;  that  they  had  less  in  common  with  "We  the 
people" and more in common with 
l'etat c'est moi ("I am the state").  While most 
Americans  continued  to accept  the  idea of presidential  preeminence  in  foreign 
policy, these presidents came to treat their domestic opposition contemptuously, 
often  viewing  political  disagreement  as  akin  to  treason.  The  cond