Text extracted from: PDF (PyMuFax)

--- Page 2 ---
INDEX
Alchemical Manuscript Series


Volume One:
Triumphal Chariot of Antimony, by Basil Valentine
Triumphal Chariot of Antimony by Basil Valentine is considered to be a masterpiece of chemical
literature. The treatise provides important advances in the manufacture and medical action of
chemical preparations, such as, metallic antimony, solutions of caustic alkali, the acetates of lead and
copper, gold fulminate and other salts. Accounts of practical laboratory operations are clearly
presented. Instructions in this book are noteworthy, as they provide weights and proportions, a rarity
in alchemical literature.


Volume Two:
Golden Chain of Homer, by Anton Kirchweger, Part 1
Frater Albertus was once asked if he could only have one book on alchemy, which would it be? He
answered that it would be the Golden Chain of Homer. This collection of books written by several
authors and printed in various editions, was first printed in 1723. Concepts of Platonic, Mosaic, and
Pythagorean philosophy provide extensive instruction in Cosmic, Cabbalistic, and laboratory
Alchemical Philosophy.


Volume Three:
Golden Chain of Homer, by Anton Kirchweger, Part 2
Frater Albertus was once asked if he could only have one book on alchemy, which would it be? He
answered that it would be the Golden Chain of Homer. This collection of books written by several
authors and printed in various editions, was first printed in 1723. Concepts of Platonic, Mosaic, and
Pythagorean philosophy provide extensive instruction in Cosmic, Cabbalistic, and laboratory
Alchemical Philosophy.


Volume Four:
Complete Alchemical Writings, by Isaac Hollandus, Part 1
Complete Alchemical Writings was written by father and son Dutch adepts, both named Isaac
Hollandus. The details of their operations on metals are said to be the most explicit that have ever
been presented. Extensive and lucid descriptions of preparations of tinctures, elixirs, vegetable stones,
mineral work, and the Philosopher's Stone provide a rich treasure in Alchemical work and medicinal
recipes.


Volume Five:
Complete Alchemical Writings, by Isaac Hollandus, Part 2
Complete Alchemical Writings was written by father and son Dutch adepts, both named Isaac
Hollandus. The details of their operations on metals are said to be the most explicit that have ever
been presented. Extensive and lucid descriptions of preparations of tinctures, elixirs, vegetable stones,
mineral work, and the Philosopher's Stone provide a rich treasure in Alchemical work and medicinal
recipes.


--- Page 3 ---
Volume Six:
Compound of Alchemy, by George Ripley
George Ripley was born in England and studied science, alchemy, and religion. He spent part of his
life in Rome, and returned to England with the secret of transmutation. This work was one of the most
popular books on Alchemy during the middle ages. It was first printed in London in 1591, having
circulated widely in manuscript form for many years. It is said to contain the best on how to make the
Philosopher's Stone, the "potable" Gold.


Liber Secretissimus, by George Ripley
The treatise, Liber Secretissimus, provides a philosophical description of the Composition of the
Philosophical Stone and the Great Elixir. Explanation of the White and Red Work is described in
archaic English. A good knowledge of Alchemy is recommended in order to follow the Alchemical
Process described in the work.


The Marrow of Alchemy, by George Ripley
The Marrow of Alchemy is translated from Latin by William Salmon (1644-1713), a professor and
medical doctor living in London. This treatise by George Ripley sets out to make plain the Secrets of
Alchemy and to reveal the Hidden Mysteries of Nature. This discourse on the Philosopher's Mercury
provides an important and clear description of tinctures and the process of making vegetable, mineral,
and animal stones.


Volume Seven:
Correct Usage, by Anonymous
Correct Usage is a "how to" book of Alchemy. It contains 73 recipes on how to artificially clear and
polish stones such as agate and lapis lazuli; how to make beautiful pearls; and how to make pleasantly
scented, glowing candles. The recipes come from an old German Alchemical manuscript which is
translated into very readable English. Recipes include how to separate gold or silver from steel or
iron; how to make copper like gold; how to make tin which will not crush; how to prepare Sal
Ammoniac; how to make oil of Tartar; and purify and refine sulphur.


Volume Eight:
Compendium, S. Bacstrom, M.D., (Editor), Part 1
Bacstrom's Compendium, Part 1, is a collection of extracts of alchemical books that are interpreted
by Bacstrom and include notes that provide the alchemical theory and explanation of symbols used
in the manuscripts. Bacstrom's comments provide a clear interpretation of the alchemical recipes and
processes. He discusses the occult relationship to metal such as gold and antimony and provides
procedures to produce tinctures and medical products.

Extracts include:
 The Work with the Butter of Antimony
 Chemical Moonshine
 Alchemical Aphorisms
 Instructions Respecting the Antimonial Labors for the Sophie Mercury
 Aphorisms Concerning the Universal Salt of Nature
 The Tincture of Antimony


--- Page 4 ---
 Sir Kenelm Digby's Sal Enixum and Abbe Rousseau's Primum Ens Salis
 Neuman on Nitre: The Nature and Difference of Salt Petre
 Process for the Lapis with Nitre and Salt
 Conserva Fontinalis
 Letter by Joel Langlottus, M.D.
 Myriam The Prophetess
 The Epistle of Arnoldus de Villa Nova to the King of Naples
 An Anonymous Letter to Mr. Ford on the Lapis Philosophorum
 The Process of the American Adept - Obtaining the Tincture from Urine
 The Work with Wolfram
 Some thoughts on the Hint Given by Basil Valetine of a Via Sicca Regenerationus
Principiorum
 The Work of the Jewish Rabbi
 Three Processes for Obtaining the Tincture from Nitre and Sulphur
 A Thought of Dr. Bacstrom, Saturday Night, 1/2 Past 8, 6th of April 1805
 The Mineral Gluten or The Philosophical Double Mercury


Volume Nine:
Compendium, S. Bacstrom, M.D. (Editor), Part 2

Extracts include:
 The Short Processes Indicated
 Le Febre's Philosophical Lamp Furnace
 Secret of Secrets, or, Magistery of Philosophy
 On Short Processes
 A Second Experiment on the Same Principal
 Baron von Reusenstein's Chemical Processes
 Baron von Reusenstein's Universal and Particular Processes
 Annotations on the Hermetical Triumph
 Mineral and Metallic Processes
 The Process of Alexis Piemontese
 Lapis de Tribus
 A Thought of Sig. Bacstrom concerning Platina
 Extract from Joh. Becher Explaining the Process of Paracelsus Explaining The Mercury of
Venus
 Extract from Isaac Hollandus
 Rhenaus' True Preparation of Philosophical Mercury
 Becher: Animated Mercury of Claveus
 79 Wonders of a Certain Subject (Bismuth)
 Discourses on the Philsopher's Stone-John Clerke
 Extract from Henricus Madasthanus
 Extract from Rhenanus
 Preparation of the Alkahest
 Thoughts upon Jugel's Particular Process


--- Page 5 ---
 Extracts from Wilson's Complete Chemistry Course
 Extract from Fachsens' Art of Assaying
 Extract from Digby's Chemical Secrets
 The Science of Alchemy (from an old manuscript)
 The Practice of the Philosophers
 Extract from Solis e Puleo Emergentis J. Rhenan
 Extract from Practice & Work of Brothers of R.C.
 Conversation with Mr. B. and Mr. Ford April 1805
 Further Notes to Mr. Ford
 Recapitulation of the Whole Process
 Universal Process of the Abbott Clairai
 Various Notes
 Excerpts from Baron von Reusenstein's Processes
 A Process Upon Common Lead


Volume Ten:
Of Antimony Vulgar, by Alexander Van Suchten
Alexander van Suchten was a chemist who lived in Dantzig from 1546 - 1560 where he wrote
extensively on antimony. Of Antimony Vulgar provides the alchemical recipe for working with and
deriving sulphur, salt, and mercury. This work includes a useful addition from Basil Valentine on
how to make and use the salt of antimony for alchemical and medical purposes.


Volume Eleven:
Coelum Philosophorum, Translated by S. Bacstrom, M.D.
Coelum Philosophorum is an excellent treatise thought to have been written in the 14th century by
John Cremer who devoted over 30 years to the study of alchemy. It was translated by Dr. S. Bacstrom,
M.D. in 1787 from a German alchemical book published in 1739. Elaborate directions are provided
to obtain powerful and safe medicines from each of the seven metals and various minerals. The
treatise gives the procedures to obtain tinctures, oils, and elixirs using both the dry and humid way to
obtain the Hermetical Treasure.


Volume Twelve:
Theoricus Degree, by Anonymous R+C
Theoricus Degree, was translated from German and contains a section on the Rosicrucians, their
teachings, oaths, laws, customs, prayers, along with philosophical instruction to the Brothers on
creation and the four elements. A discussion on metals, plants, man, and medical cures are described.
Instructions regarding the operation of the Third Degree (Practicus) on the mineral work are included.
The preparation of the mineral stone in the dry way is presented using laboratory techniques.


Volume Thirteen:
Aphorismi Urbigerus, by Baron Urbigerus
Aphorismi Urbigerus is a recapitulation of the whole alchemical process, written by combining many
philosophical works. The first edition appeared in London in 1690. The second edition was published
in 1671 in German and then translated into English. The work contains the alchemical rules
demonstrating three ways of preparing the Grand Vegetable Elixir of the Philosophers. Urbigerus'


--- Page 6 ---
work is considered to be a clear and complete explanation of the Opus Minus and provides the process
of the vegetable circulatum.


Volume Fourteen:
Last Will and Testament, by Basil Valentine
Last Will and Testament is a compilation of five books and became a "best seller" among the
alchemical fraternity in the seventeenth century. Sound chemical information is expressed in clear
terms and provides directions for the preparation of oil of vitriol. The description is written in such a
way that only one who had actually carried out the practical operations could have written it. A table
of Alchemical symbols is provided for the convenience of the reader. In addition, a gematria
dictionary provides a convenient reference for those interested in pursuing the possibility of numerical
codes in alchemical writings. A practical treatise together with the XII keys of alchemy is included
to derive the Great Stone of the Ancient Philosophers.


Volume Fifteen:
Acetone, by Johann Becker
Johann Becker (1635-1682) is not only famous in the history of chemistry for his theory of
combustion, but also as a technologist, miner and metallurgist. Acetone provides an explanation of
chemical laboratory practice, including descriptions of the properties of substances used in alchemical
work for chemical experiments.


Volume Sixteen:
Secret Book (Liber Secretus), by Artephius
Secret Book (Liber Secretus) was written in the Twelfth Century by Artephius, translated into English
in 1624 and printed in Amsterdam in 1578. The book provides an explanation of alchemical
laboratory processes, including antimony and the process to make a great arcanum.


--- Page 7 ---
-
the
eomPOUilD
0 f
a&esemv
<!9. l\ i p I r p


--- Page 8 ---
-
TH E
COMPOUND
0 F
ALCHEMY
0 R
The Ancient Hidden Art of Alchemie ;
Containing the right and perfect means
To make the Philosophers Stone
Aurum Potabile , with other
Excellent Experiments.
Divided into Twelve Gates
First written by the learned and rare Philosopher
of our Nation GEORGE RIPLEY, sometimes
Chanon of Bridlington in Yorkeshire and
Dedicated to K. Edward the 4th. whereunto
is adjoined his Epistle to the King,
his Vision, his Wheel , and other his works
never before published:
Set forth by Raph Rabbards , gentleman,
Studious and expert in Alchemical Arts
Pulchrum pro Patria pati.
Imprinted by Thomas Orwin.
LONDON
1591.
1 .


--- Page 9 ---
CONTENTS
2 .


--- Page 10 ---
-
To t h e Right Honourable, Worshipful, and Worthy Gent l emen of
England , and other Learned and Industri ous Students in t h e Secr ets of Phi l osophy.
Having r eserved the copy hereof (Right Hon our able and gentle
Readers) these forty years for many secret uses, corrected by t he
most learned of our time, and f eeling. myself , n ow t hrough age declining , and otherwise hindered with troublesome suites in law,
which constrained me to discontinue t hese and such other commendable practises, for the benefit and defenceof my Prin ce and Country, I have thought good to publish the same, the rather for that
there are but a few copies left, and those for the most part corrupted by negligence, or mistaking of ignorant writers thereof ;
being partly incouraged hereunto by the learned Phi.losopher SENECA,
who accompleth it an Act Meritorious to preserve or revive Science
from the Cinders, and to eternize vertuous acts with perpetual
memory.
Finding it strange, that so excellent a Monument as this most
rare and learned work of GEORGE RIPLEY , should so long lie
hidden in obscurity, and pass from hand to hand a hundred and fifty
years without utter defacing; seeing that many notable works published have , in far shorter time perished.
He lived in the time of King Edward the 4th., and Richard the
Usurper, in great fame and estimatiom, for his rare knowledge
in these secrets : And to utter his further commendati on in a word ,
if this his work be pursued with the eye of judgement , and practised by those that are experienced, I shall not need
to fear the loss of my labour, when some of my countrymen which
cannot attain into the highest hidden mysteries, shall yet find
many things both pleasant and profitable, divers ways serviceable
to kingdoms, states, and common weales ; And if one among ten thousand can hit the mark , (whereas the whole world hath aimed) we shall
3.


--- Page 11 ---
not hereafter need to seek out the Sands of the Ganges , for that
which lieth hid in the secrets of Ripley; which I offer here to
the view of the learned , and have presumed the publishing hereof,
chiefly for the benefit of my countrymen; and especially to satisfy the often and importunate request of many my learned good
friends, not doubting but that the skillful will yield me my due,
howsoever the i gnorant shall esteem thereof; which if I shall
thereby be further encouraged to impart some other rare experiments
of Distillations and Fire- works of great service , not hitherto
committed in writing or put in practice by any of our nation ,
although of late some mear toys have been highl y admired , and
extraordinarily rewarded ; The charge whereof will be found utterly
lost , when perfect trial shall be made of their slender use and
force.
To conclude , if this my good intent shall be answerable
to your expectations, I have obtained the fulness of my desires .
Yours in the futherance of Science,
Raph Rabbards .
4.


--- Page 12 ---
-
To the Most High and Mighty Princess Elizabeth by the Grace of
God Queen of England , France and Ireland .
Defender of the faith
and etc .
Excellent, most gracious, and sacred soveraigne , calling often
to remembrance, how miraculously it pleased the Almighty , many
ways to preserve and defend your Majesty , in the time of late
domestical prosecution , from the merciless hands of trecherous
murderers who not only sought all occasions by spilling your Highness ' innocent blood , to bereave this Kingdom , and us all, (that
since have lived under your royal, prosperous , and happy Government) of so rare and precious a Jewel , as Nature hath n0t at any
time to any Nation elsewhere, afforded the like ; but also prosecuted with sword , fire , bansihment, or (at the least) straight imprisonment , all such as were in any respect favoured by your Highness , or in any sort cast their eyes once toward the Orient , where
the bright splendid beams of your incomparable Majesty , lighteneth
our Horizon , to the comfort and conservation of many thousands
afflicted and the singular joy of the whole Realme , very few persons excepted, whose bleared eyes being dazzled therewith.' sought
palbable darkness , to avoid the clear light then arising with the
rare Comet or incomparable day star of your most excellent majestie
unto us: Whose piercing rays hath since like the Sun beams hath
dispersed all gross mists and fogs of ingnorance, error and blind
superstition , and withal so comforted and nourished the plant of
infalleabl e truth of the Gospel (first taking root in this Land
in the short Reign of the peerless Prince Edward the Sixth, your
Majesties Brother, of most rare expectation and famous memorie)
as the same now sprung up to a perfect tree of such full growth ,
that the brambles thereof have spread themselves long and wide
many ways over other Empires, Kingdoms and States, to anger the
Devil, the Pope , and the King of Spain , with all their fraternitie ,
5.


--- Page 13 ---
consorts, leaguers, and adherents, or other their Ministers, spreaders and maintainers of lies; under the shelter and covert of which
flourishing Palme, all true christians have been, and (I hope)
long shall be (by the Continuance of your Majesties most bountiful
and gracious especial favour) protected and shrowded, from the
burning heat of the sharp persecutions of all malicous Enemies
thereof the which God of his great mercie Grant .
Pondering I say (most high and mighty Princess) the manifold
imminent dangers , your sacred Majesty by the Omnipotence wonderful
providence of Almighty God, with more than human Virtue , and feminine patience sustained ; and in the end (contrarie to all expectation) escapeing the rage, furie, Tryannical attempts, and secret
devilish practices of your Highnesses ' mortal Enemies (utter professed unreconcileable adversaries) to the eternal truth ; Whereof
myself was an eye witness, and so far privie of some of the most
mischi evous intended conspiracies , as for my faithfull endeavours
of such rare secret services as were by me effected to prevent
the same; I tasted (amongst the rest of such as then honoured ,
reverenced, and by bounded duty loved your Majesties rare Virtues)
So great extremitie of imprisonment, and other hard usage many
ways, as escaping with life, (by timely and happy alteration of the
State) I felt long after the pains of those torments , whereby my
health in 20 years after was extremely impared: But when I consider
on the other side withall , the strange and miraculous Heroical
Actions both martial and politick which have been (si nce in the time
past of your Highness most prosperous reign) beyond all expectations
performed with singular government and incomparable magnamimite,
far surpassing all human Wisdom and mans force (whereof posteritie
shall want no due records of worthy Registers) I cannot but forget
all sorrow, and exceedingly rejoice, assuring and perswading myself
God hath ordained your Majestie to accomplish yet far greater matters
for his Glory and your own eternal memory , than time hath yet
revealed.
For the better accomplishment whereof, every dutiful
6 .


--- Page 14 ---
-
_,
-
subject and good Patriots ought in time of tranquilitie prepare
and furnish themselves according to their sevBral gifts , abilities,
and different faculties ; to further and set forth a work so great
as is likely to fall out by all consequence by reason of this
your Majesties most happy reign: Viz. the Nobilitie with learning,
Judgement, and experience , for council and advice, as well for
warlike discipline as for evfl Governament: For that the one cannot
long continue without the other and Gentlemen with ingeneous devices and stratagies of war both for sea, and land, and the whole
soldierie of all sorts such activities, and the practise of such
sorts of weapons as they shall addict themselves unto , or be found
fit to serve withall, whereby every man of what degree or quality
soever professing the wars , may in time of cessation of Arms , some
in one sort, some in another, enable themselves for the defence
of their Country, against they shall be employed ; for without
appointment and calling, no man ought to intrude or offer himself,
in such sort as is now too commonly used ; which is the cause that
so many andatious insufficient blind bastards are set a work :
Whilst the modest, skillfull , and experienced live retired , attending their vocation.
Note .
Here this Preface ends ; whether it is complete or not, I
have no way of knowing.
I presume it is by George Ripley, but
again this is not certain, at best it is not important, and pertains not to the Twelve Gates .
D • . H.
7.


--- Page 15 ---
The Vision of Sir George Ripley .
Chanon of Bridlington.
When busie at my book upon a certain night,
This Vision here exprest appeared unto my dimmed sight,*
A Toad full rudde I saw did drink the juice of grapes so fast*
Till overchar~ed with breath , his bowels all to brast ,
And after that from poisened bulke , he cast his venome fell , ~1-*
For grief and pain whereof his members all began to swell,.;~~·
With drops of poisoned sweat approaching thus his secret den
And from which in space a golden humour did ensue ,"''
Whose falling drops from high did stain the s oil with ruddy hue
And when his corps , the force of vital breath began to lack , ~'"*
This dying toad became forth with like coal for colour black ; ~'"
Thus drowned in his proper veins of poisoned flood ,*
For term of eightie days and four he rotting stood:*
By tryal t hen this venome to expell I did desire,*
For which I did commit his carkase to a gentle fire;
Which done, a wonder to the sight , but more to be rehearst,*
The Toad with colours rare through every sid e was pearced;
And white appeared when all the sundry hues were past,
Whi ch after being tincted, rudde for evermore did last; *
When of the venome handled thus a medicine I did make ,
Which venom kills, and saveth such as venome chance to take ,
Glory be to him the granter of such secret ways*
Dominion, and Honour, both with worship and with praise.
AMEN.
8.


--- Page 16 ---
--
-
The Preface.
O High, incomprehensible and glorious majesty,
Whose luminous beams obtaineth our speculation
O Trinehood in persons , O Onehood in diety ,
Of Hierarchical Jubilists gratutant glorification
O Petious Purifier of Souls and pure perpetuation,
0 deniant from danger, O drawer most debonaire,
From this troublesome vale of vanity , 0 our Exalter.
O Power, 0 Wisdom , 0 Goodness inexplicable ,
Support me, teach me, and be my Governor,
That never my living to thee be displicable ,
But that I acquit me to thee as true professor.
At this beginning Good Lord hear my prayer.
Be nigh with grace for to inforce my will,
Grant wit that I may mine intent fulfill.
Most curious cofer and copious of all treasures,
Thou art he from whom all goodness doth descend ,
To man and also to every creature
Thine handy-work therefore vouchsafe to defend,
That we no time in living here misspend ,
With troth here grant us our living so to win,
That into no danger of sinfullness we rin.
And f orasmuch as we have for thy sake
Renounced our wills , the world and fleshly lust ,
As thine own professors us to thee take,
Sith in t hee only dependeth all our trust ,
We can no further , to thee incline we must;
Thy secret treasure vouchsafe unto us ,
Show us thy secrets and to us be bounteous .
9.


--- Page 17 ---
And amongst others which be profest to thee
I me present as one with humble submission,
Thy servant beseeching that I may be
And true :n living according to my profession,
In order Chanon Regular of Bridlington
Beseeching thee Lord thou wilt me spare
To thy true servants thy secrets to declare .
In the beginning when thou mad ' st all of naught,
A globous matter and dark under confusion,
By him the beginning marvelously was wrought,
Containing naturally all things without division;
Of which in six days he made clear distinction
As Genesis apertly doth record
Then Heaven and Earth were perfect by his word.
So througt his will and power, out of one mass,
Confused ; was made each thing , that being is ,
But afore in Glory as maker he was,
Now is and shall be without end I wis,
And purified souls up to his bliss
Shall come a principle this may be one,
For declaring of our precious Stone.
For as of one mass was made all thing,
Right so in our practice must it be ,
All our secrets of one Image must spring ,
As in Philosophers books who list to see ,
Our stone is called the lesser wor ld, one and three,
Magnesia also of sulphur and mercurie,
Proportionate by nature most perfectly.
10.


--- Page 18 ---
..._,
....
But many one marveleth and marvel may,
And museth such a marvelous thing,
What is our stone; s i th philosophers say
To such as ever be it in seeking
Fouls and fishes to us doth it bring
Every man it hath, and it is in every place,
In thee in me, and in each thing , time and space.
To this I answer that mercury it is I wis
But not the common called Qui cksi lver by name,
But Mercury without which nothing being is,
All philosophers record and truly saine the same,
But simple searchers putteth them in blame ,
Saying they hid it but they be blame worthy ,
Which be no clearks and meddle with philosophy.
But though it mercury be , yet wisely understand ,
Where in it is , and where thou shalt it seech ,
Else I counsel thee take not this work in hand,
But listen to me , for truly I will thee teach ,
Which is this mercury most profitable,
Being to thee nothing deceiveable.
It is more near in some things than in some ;
Therefore take heed what I to thee write,
For if knowledge to thee never come ,
Therefore yet shalt thou me not twite,
For I will truly now thee excite
To understand well Mercuries three,
The keys which of this .science be.
11.


--- Page 19 ---
Raymond his menstrues doth them call,
Without which truly no truth is done ;
But two of them be superficial,
The third essential of Sun and Moon ,
Their properties I will declare right soon ,
And Mercury of metals essential ,
Is the pri ncipal of our stone material.
In Sun and Moon our menstrue is not seen ,
It appeareth not by effect to sight
That is the stone of which we mean ,
Who so our writings convieveth aright ,
It is a Soul, a substance bright,
Of Sun and Moon a subtile influence,
Whereby the earth revieveth resplendence.
For what is Sun and Moon saith Avicin ,
But earth which is pure white and red ;
Take from it the said clearness, and then
That earth will stand but a little stead;
The whole compound is called our Lead ;
The Quality of clearness from Sun and Moon doth come ,
These are our menstrues both all and some.
Bodys with the first we calcine naturally
Perfect , but none which been unclean
Except one which is usually
Named by philosophers the Lyon Green;
He is the meane Sun and Moon between
Of winning tincture with perfectness
As Geber ~hereunto beareth witness .
12 .


--- Page 20 ---
--
With the second which is an humidity
Vegetable , reviving that earst was dead ,
B0th principles materials must loosed be
And formalls, else stand they little stead ;
These menstrues therefore know I thee read
Without tie which neither true calcination
Done may be , nor true dissolution.
With the third humiditie most permanent
Incombustible .and unctious in his nature,
Hermes Tree into ashes is burnt,
It is our natural fire most sure,
Our mercury , our sulphur , our tincture , pure ,
Our soul, our stone born up with the wind
In eart h engendered , bear this in mind.
This stone also tell thee I dare ,
Is the vapour of metals potential ,
How thou shalt get it, thou must beware ,
For invisible truly is this menstrual
By separation of elements it may appear
How be it with the second water philosophical
To Sight , in form of water clear.
Of this menstru by labour exuberate
With it may be made sulphur of nature ,
If it be well and kindly acuate
An~ circulate into a. spirit pure ,
Then to dissolve thou must be sure ,
Thy base with it in divers wise
As thou shalt know by thy practise.
13.


--- Page 21 ---
That point therefore in his due place
I will
de~lare with other moe ,
If God will grant me grace and space ,
And me preserve in life from woe,
As I thee teach look thou do so;
And for first ground principal ,
Understand thy waters menstrual .
And when thou hast made true calcination,
Encreasing not wasting moisture radical,
Until thy base by oft subtilation,
Will lightly flow as wax upon metal
Then loose it with thy vegetable menstrual,
Till thou have oil thereof in colour bright
Then is that menstru visible to sight.
And oil is drawn out in colour of gold,
Or like thereto out of our fine red lead,
Which Raymond said when he was old,
Much more than gold would stand him in stead :
For when he was for age nigh dead ,
He made thereof Aurum Potabile ,
Which him revived as men might see.
For so together may they be circulate,
That is to say oil and the vegetable menstrual,
So that it be by labour exuberate ,
And made by craft a stone celestial ,
Of nature so fiery that we it call
Our Bazeliske or our Cockatrice ,
Our Great Elixir most of price.
14.
--


--- Page 22 ---
-
-·
-
-
Which as the sight of Baseliske his object
Killeth, so slayeth it crude Mercury ,
When thereupon he is project,
In twinckle of an eye most suddenly
That Mercury t hen teineth permanently
All bodies t o Sun and Moon perfect.
Thus guide thy base both red and white.
Aurum Potabile thus is made,
Of gold n~t commonly calcinate ,
But of our tincture that will not fade,
Out of our base drawn with the menstrue circulate
But natural calcination must algate
Be made , ere thy gold dissolved may be,
That principle first therefore I will teach thee.
But into chapters this treatise I will divide,
In number twelve with due recapitulation,
Superfluous rehearsals I ' ll lay aside ,
Intending only to give true information ;
That by my writing whoso guided will be
Of his intent perfectly speed shall he .
The first chapter shall be of natural calcination ,
The second of dissolution secret and philosophical
The third of our elemental seperation,
The fourth of conjunction matrimonial ,
The fifth of putrifaction follow shall,
Of congealation albificate .shall be the sixth ,
Then of cibation the seventh shall follow next .
15.


--- Page 23 ---
The secret of sublimation the eight shall show ,
The Nineth shall be of fermentation;
The tenth of our exaltation I trow ;
The eleve~th of our marvellous multipli cation;
The twelveth of projection , then recapitulation;
And so this treatise shall take end .
By the help of God as I intend .
Finis .
16.


--- Page 24 ---
--
Of
Calcination
The First Gate .
Calcination is the Purgation of our stone ,
Restoring also of his natural heat ,
Of radical humidity it looseth none,
Inducing solution into our stone most meet
After Philosophie I you behight
Do, but not after the common guise
With Sulphures and salts prepare in divers wise .
Neither with corrosives nor with fire alone.,
Neither with vinegar nor with water ardent,
Nor with vapour of lead our stone
Is calcined according to our intent :
All those to calcining which be so bent,
From this hard science withdraw their hand ,
Till they OUR calcining better understand.
For by such calcination their bodies be spent,
Which minisheth the moisture of our stone ,
Therefore when bodies to powder be brent ,
Dry as ashes of tree or bone,
Of such calxes then will we none,
For moisture we multiplie radicall
Incalcining minishing none at all .
And for a sure ground of our true calcination,
Work wittely only kind with kind ;
For kind unto kind hath appetitive inclination,
Who knoweth not this in knowledge is blind,
17.


--- Page 25 ---
He may forth wander as mist in the wind,
Wotting never with profit where to light ,
Because he conceives not our words aright .
Join kind to kind therefore as reason is ,
For every burgeon answers his own seed,
Man getteth man , a beast a beast I wis,
Further to treat of this it is no need;
But understand this point of thou wilt speed ,
Each thing is first calcined in his own kind ,
This well conceived fruit shalt thou find .
And we ma~e calx unctuous both white and red,
Of three degrees or our base be perfect ,
Fluxible as wax , else stand they no sted.
By r i ght long process as Philosophers do write,
A year we take or more to our respite ;
For in less space our calxes will not be made,
Able to teyne with .colour that will not fade.
And for thy proporti on thou must beware,
For therein maist thou be beguiled,
Therefore thy work t hat thou not mar e ,
Let thy bodie be subt i l ly filled
With mercury as much then so subtilled
One of the Sun , two of the Moon
Till altogether like pap be done .
Then make mercury four to the Sun ,
Two to the moon as it should be ,
And thus thy work must be begun ,
In figure of the trinity,
Three of the bodie and of the spirit three ,
18.


--- Page 26 ---
-
And for the unity of the substance spiritual
One more than of the substance corporal.
By Raymonds repertory this is true .
Proportion there who l ·ist to look ,
The same my Doctor to me did show
But three of the spirit Bacon took ,
To one of the bodie for whi ch I awoke ,
Many a night ere I i t wi st ,
And both be true take whi ch you list.
If the water al so be equal in proportion
To the earth , with heat in due measure ,
Of them s~all spring a new burgeon,
Both white and red in pure tincture,
Which in the fire shall ever endure,
Kill thou the Quick the dead revive,
Make trinity unite without any strife.
This is the surest and best proportion ,
For there is least of the part spiritual
The better therefore shall be solution ,
Than if thou di d wi th water swall ,
Thine earth over glut t i ng which loseth all ,
Take heed therefore to potters loam ,
And make thou never to neshe thy womb .
The loam behold how it tempered is ,
The mean also how it is calcined ,
And ever in mind look thou bear this ;
That never thine earth with water be suffocate ,
Dry up thy moistur e with heat most temperate,
Help dissoluti on wi th moisture of the Moon ,
And Congealat ion with the Sun, then hast thou done.


--- Page 27 ---
Four natures into the fifth so shalt thou turn ,
Which is a Nature most perfect and temperate ,
But hard it is with thy bare foot to spurn
Against a bar of iron , or steel new acuate,
For many do so which be infatuate,
When they such high things take in hand,
Which they in no wise do understand .
In eggs , :n vitriol, or in blood,
What riches wend they there to find,
If they Philosophy understood
They would not in working be so blind ,
Gold and Silver to seek out of kind.
For like as fire of burning the principle is,
So is the pri nciple of gilding , gold I wis .
If thou intend therefore to make,
Gold , and Silver by craft of our philosophie
Thereto neither eggs nor blood thou take
But Gold and Silver which naturally
Calcined wisely and not manually,
A new generation will forth bring ,
Encreasing their kind as doth everything.
And if it true were that profit might be,
In things which be. not metalline ,
In which be colours pl easant to see ,
As i n blood , eggs, hair, urine, or wine,
Or in mean minerals digged out of the mine ,
Yet must their elements be putrified and separate
And with elements of perfect bodies be dispousate .
20.


--- Page 28 ---
-
But first of these elements make thou rotation,
And into water thine earth turn first of all,
Then of thy water make air by levigation
And air make fire , then master will I call thee
Of all our secrets great and small :
The wheel of elements then canst thou turn about ,
Truly conceiving our writings without doubt .
This done, go backwards turning the wheel again,
And into thy water turn thy fire anon ,
Air into earth, else laboureth thou in vain
For so to temperment is brought our stone ,
And natures contrari-wise four are made one ,
After they have three times been circulate ,
And also thy base perfectly consumate.
Thus under thy moisture of the Moon ,
And under the temperate heat of the Sun,
Thine elements shall incenerate soon.
And then thou hast the maistrie won;
Thank God thy work was then so begun ,
For there thou hast one token true
Which first in blackness to thee will show.
The head of the crow that token call we ,
And some men call it the crows bill ,
Some call it the ashes of Hermes tree,
And thus they name it after their will ;
Our toad of the earth which eateth his fill,
Some name it by which it is mortificate ,
The spirit of the earth with venom intoxicate.
21.


--- Page 29 ---
But it hath names I say t o thee infi ni te
For after each thing that black is to sight,
Named it is till it waxeth white.
Then hath it names of more delight ,
After all things that been full white ,
And the red likewise after the same ,
Of all things red doth take the name .
At the first gate now art thou in ,
· Of our philosophers castle where they dwell,
Proceed wisely that thou may win ,
In at more gates of that castle
Which cas~le is round as any bell ,
And gates it hath eleven yet more ,
One i s conquered , now to the second go.
End of the First Gate .
22 .


--- Page 30 ---
-
-
-
Of Dissolution •
The . Second Gate .
Of Dissolution now will I speak a word or two
Which sheweth out what erst was hid from sight,
And maketh intenuate things that were which also ,
By virtue · of our first menstrue clear and bright ,
In which our bodies eclipsed been of light,
And of their hard and dry compaction subtilate,
Into their own first matter kindly retrogradate.
One in gender they be , and in number two,
Whose Father is the Sun, the Moon the Mother,
The Mover is Mercury, these and no more
Be our magnesia , our Adropp, and none other
Things there be , but only sister and brother ,
That is to mean agent and patient ,
Sulphur and Mercury coessential to our intent.
Betwixt these two equalitic contrarious
Ingendred is a mean most marvelously
Which is our Mercury and menstrue unctuous
Our secret sulphur working invisibly.
More fiercely than fire burning the bodie ,
Dissolving the bodie into water mineral ,
Which night for darkness in the North we do call.
But yet I trow thou understandest not utterly
The very secret of the ' Philosophers Di ssolution,
Therefore concei've me I counsel thee wittely,
For the truth I will tell thee without delusion ;
23.


--- Page 31 ---
Our solution is cause of our congel ation ,
For dissolution on the one side corporal
Causeth congelation on the other side spiritual.
And we dissolve into water which wetteth no hand ,
For when the earth is integrately incinerate,
Then is the water congealed; this understand
For the elements be so together concatenate ,
That when the bodie is from his first form alterate
A new form is induced immediately,
For nothing being without all form is utterly.
And here a secret to thee I will disclose ,
Which is the ground unto our secrets all ,
And it not known thou shalt but loose ,
Thy labour and cost both great and small ,
Take heed therefore in error that thou not fall
The more thine earth , and the less thy water be,
The rather and better solution shalt thou see.
Behold how ice to water doth relent,
And so it must for water it was before ,
Right so again to water our earth is went
And water thereby congealed for evermore ,
For after all philosophers that ever were bore ,
Each metal was once water mineral ,
Therefore with water they turn to water all .
In which water of kind occasionate,
Of Qualities been repugnant and diversitie,
Things into things must therefore be rotate ,
Until diversitie be brought to perfect uni tie;
For scripture recordeth when the earth shall be
24.


--- Page 32 ---
...
....
....
Troubled, and into the deep sea shall be cast
Mountains and bodies likewise at the last .
Our bodies be likened conveniently
To mountains, which after high planets we name,
Into the deepness therefore of Mercury
Turn them, and keep thee out of blame ,
For then shalt thou see a noble game ,
How all shall become powder as soft as silk,
So doth our rennet kindly kurd up our milk .
There hath the bodies their first form lost ,
And others been induced immediately!
Then hast thou well bestowed thy cost;
Whereas others uncunningly must go by ,
Not knowing the secrets of our philosophy.
Yet one point more I must tell thee,
How each bodie hath dimensions threeo
Altitude , Latitude, and also Profunditie ,
By which all gates turn we must our wheel ,
Knowing that thine entrance in the West shall be ,
Thy passages forth t o the North if thou do well ,
And there thy lights lose their lights each deele ;
For there thou must abide by ninetie nights
In darkness of purgatorie withouten lights .
Then take thy course up to the East anon ,
By colours passing variable in manifold wise
And then be winter and vere nigh overgone,
To the East therefore thine ascending devise ,
For there the Sun with daylight doth upri se,
In Sum.mer , and there disport thee with delight ,
For there thy work shall become perfect white.
25.


--- Page 33 ---
Forth from the East into the South ascend ,
And set thee down there in the chair of fire,
For there is harvest ; that is to say an end
Of all this work after thine own desire
There shineth the Sun up in his hemisphere,
After the eclipses, in redness with glory
As king to reign upon all metals and mercury.
And i n one glass must be done all this thing
Like to an egg in shape and closed well,
Then must thou know the measure of fireing,
The which unknown thy work is lost each deele :
Let never thy glass be hotter than thou maist feel ,
And suffer still in thy bare hand to hold,
For fear of loosing , as philos·ophers have told .
Yet my doctrine further attend
Beware thy glass thou never open nor move
From the beginning till thou have made an end ;
If thou do contrarie thy work may never cheve (acheave)
Thus in this chapter which is but brief ,
I have taught thee thy true solution;
Now to the third gate go , for this is won.
End of the Second Gate •
26.


--- Page 34 ---
-
-
Of Separation .
The Third Gate .
Separation doth each part from other divide,
The subtil e from the gross , the thick from the thin.
But ·separation manual look thou set aside,
For that pertains to fools that little good doth win ,
But in our separation Nature doth not blind
Making division of Qualities elemental,
Into fifth degree till they be turned all.
Earth is turned into water under black and blue,
And water after into air under very white ,
Then air into fire , elements there be no more,
Of these is made our stone of great delight.
But of this Separation is called by Philosophers definition
Of the said four elements tetrative dispersion.
Of this separation I find a like figure,
Thus spoken , by the prophet in the Psalmodie,
God brought out of a stone a flood of water pure,
And out of the hardest rock oil abundantly ,
So out of our stone precious if thou be witty ,
Oil incombustable, and water thou shalt draw,
And there abouts at the coal thou needst not to blow.
Do this with heat easie and nourishing ,
First with moist fire and after with dry,
The flegm with patience outdrawing,
And after that the other natures wittely.
Dry up thine earth until it be thirsty ,
27 .


--- Page 35 ---
By calcination else labourest thou in vain,
And then make it dry up the moisture again.
Separation thus must thou oftentimes make ,
Thy waters dividing into parts two,
So that the subtile from the gross thou take
Till the earth remain beneath in colours blue
That earth is fixed to abide all woe,
The other part is spiritual and flying,
But thou must turn them all into one thing.
Then oil and water with water shalt distill
And through her help receive moving
Keep well these two that thou not spill
Thy work for lack of due closing
And make thy stopple of glass , melting
The top of thy vessel together with it,
Then Philosopher- like it is up shut.
The water wherewith thou mayst revive the stone,
Look though distill before thou work with it,
Often times by itself alone ,
And by this sight thou shalt wit,
From feculent feces when it is quit ;
For some men can with saturn it multiplie
And other substance which we defie .
Distill it therefore till it be clean,
And thin like water as it should be,
As heaven in colour bright and sheen ,
Keeping both figure and ponderositee
Therewith did Hermes moisten his tree ;
Within his glass he made it grow upright
With flowers discoloured beautiful to sight.
28.


--- Page 36 ---
-
-
This water is like to the venomous tire,
Wherewith the mighty triacle is wrought
For it is Poison most strong of ire,
A stronger poison cannot be thought,
At Pothecaries often therefore it is sought,
But no man by it shall be intoxicate ,
From the time it is into medicine elixerate.
For then as is the Triacle True ,
It is of poison most expulsive,
And in his working doth marvels shew
Preserving many from death to life ,
But that thou meddle it with no corrosive,
But choose it pure and Quick ruru:iing
If thou thereby wilt have winning.
It is a marvellous thing in kind ,
And without it nothing can be done,
Therefore Hermes called it his wind,
For it is upflying from Sun and Moon ,
And maketh our stone fly with it soon,
Reviving the dead and giving life,
To Sun and Moon , husband and wife.
Which if they were not by craft made quick,
And their fatness with water drawn out ,
And so the thin diservered from the thick ,
Thou shouldst never bring this work about,
If thou wilt therefore speed without doubt
Raise up the birds out of their nest
And after again bring them to rest .
29.


--- Page 37 ---
Water with water accord will, and ascend,
And Spirit with spirit, for they be of one kind ,
Which after they be exalted make to descend
So shalt thou divide that , which Nature erst did bi nd,
Mercury essenti al turning into wind ,
Without which natural and subtile separation,
May never be complete profitable generation.
Now to help thee at this gate,
The last secret I wili declare to thee,
Thy water must be seven times sublimate ,
Else shall no kindly Dissolution be,
Nor putrifying shalt thou none see;
Like liquid pitch, nor colours appearing
For lack of fire within the glass working.
Four fires there be which thou must understand
Natu~al, unnatural, against Nature also ,
And elemental which doth burn the brand ;
These four fires use we no more,
Fire against nature must do thy bodie woe,
This is our Dragon as I thee tell ,
Fiercely burning as t he fire of Hell .
Fire of nature is the third menstrual ,
That fire is natural i n each thing;
But fire occasionate we call unnatural,
As heat of ashes , and blanes for putrifying ,
Without these f ires thou maist nought bring
To Putri faction, for t o be separate
Thy matters together proportionate.
30.


--- Page 38 ---
-
Therefore make fire thy glass within ,
Which burneth the bodie much more than fire
Elemental, if thou wilt win
Our secrets according to thy desire;
Then shall thy seeds both rot and spire
By help of fire occasionate,
That kindly after may be separate.
Of Separation the· Gate must thus be won,
Towards the Gate of secret conjunction,
That furthermore yet thou maist proceed
Into the Castle which will thee innerlead.
Do after my councel if thou wilt speed ,
With two strong locks this Gate is shut,
As consequently thou shalt well wit.
-?rid of the Third Gate.
31.


--- Page 39 ---
The Fourth Gate .
Of Conjunction •
After the chapter of natural Separation ,
By which the elements of our stone disevered, be ,
The chapter here followeth of secret conjunction,
Which natures repugnant j oineth to perfect unitie,
And so them knitteth that none from others may fly
When they be fire shall be examinate,
They be tJ ~eth er so surely conjungate.
And therefore Philosophers gave this difinition,
Saying this conjunction is nothing else
But of principles a co- equation as others tells;
But some men with mercury that Pothecaries sells
Medleth bJdies, which cannot divide,
Their matter, and therefore they slip aside .
For until the time the soul be separate
And cleansed from his original sin
With the water, and throughly spiritualizate
The true conjunction maist thou never begin;
Therefore the soul first from the bodie twyne
Then of t he corporall part and of the spiritual
The soul shall cause c·onjunction perpetual.
Of two Co~junctions Philosophers mention make,
Grosse when the body with mercury is reincrudate,
But let t his pass, and so the second heed take .
Which as I said· is after Seperation celebrate
In which the parties be left with least to colligate,
32.


--- Page 40 ---
-
-
And so promoted into most perfect temperance,
That never after amongst them may be repugnance .
Thus causeth Separation true conjunction to be had ,
Of water and air, with earth and fire ,
But that each element into other may be led,
And so abide forever to thy desire,
Do as do dawbers with clay or mire,
Temper them thick and make them not to thin,
So do updrying , thou shalt the rather win.
But manners there be of our conjunction three,
The first is called by Philosophers diptative ,
The which betwixt the agent and patient must be,
Male and female , mercury , and sulphur vive
Matter and form, thin and thick to thrive ,
This lesson will help thee without any doubt ,
And our conjunction truly to bring about .
The second manner is called Triptative ,
Which is conjunction, made of things three,
Of body , soul , and spirit, that they may not strive ,
Which trinitie thou must bring to unite,
For as the soul to the spirit the bond must be,
Right so the -bodie the s oul to him must knit ,
Out of thy mind let not this lesson flit.
The third manner and also the last of all,
Four elements together which join to abide ,
Tetraptative certainly Philosophers do it call ,
And specially Guido de Montanio whose same goeth wide ,
And therefore in most laudable manner this tide ,
In our conjunction four elements must aggregate
In due proportion , which first asunder were separate.
33 .


--- Page 41 ---
Therefore like as the woman hath veins fifteen,
And the man but five to the act of their secunditie ,
Reouired in our conjunction first I mean ,
So must tne man our Sun have of his water three
And nine ~is wife , which three to him must be ;
Then like with like will joy have for to dwell ,
More of cJnjunction we needeth not to tell.
This chapter I will conclude right soon therefore ,
Gross conjunction charging thee to make but one ,
For seldom have strumpets children of them bore,
And so thJu shalt never come out by our stone ,
Without thou let the woman lie alone ,
That after the once have conveived of the man ,
Her matrix be shut up from all other than .
For such as add ever more crude to crude
Opening their vessel letting their matters keele
The sperme conceived they nourish not but delude
Themselves , and spill their work each deele,
If thou therefore have list to do well
Close up thy matrix and nourish the seed
With heat continual and temperate if thou wilt speed.
And when thy vessel hath stood by months five ,
And clouds and eclipses be passed each one ,
The light appearing , increase thy heat then below,
Until maist thou open thy glass anone ,
And seed thy child which is now bore ,
With milk and meat aye more and more .
34.


--- Page 42 ---
For now bath moist and dry is so contemperate ,
That of the water earth hath received impression
Which never (after that) asunder may be seperate
And right so water to earth hath given ingression
That both together to dwell have made profession
And water of earth hath purchased a retentive ,
They four make one never more to strive. ·
Thus in two things all our intent doth hing,
In dry and moist, which be contraries two ,
In dry, that it the moist to fixing bring ,
In moist , that it give liquefaction to the earth also,
Then of them thus a temperment may forth go
A temperment not so thick as the body is ,
Neither so thin as water withouren miss .
Loosing and knitting thereof be principles two
Of this hard science, and poles most principal,
Howbeit that other principles be many more,
As shining fanes, which show I shall;
Proceed therefore unto another wall
Of this strong castle of our wisdom,
That in at the fourth Gate thou maist come.
End of the Fourth Gate •
J5.


--- Page 43 ---
Of Putrefaction.
The Fifth Gate.
Now we begin the chapter of Putrefaction,
Without which pole no seed may multiply;
Which must be done only by continual action
Of heat i~ the bodie , moist not manually;
For bodies else may not be altered naturally,
Sith Christ doth witness, without the grain of wheat
Die in the ground, encrease maist thou none get .
And in likewise without the matter putrifie,
It may in no wise truly alterate,
Nei ther t~y elements may be divided kindly
Nor the conjunction of them perfectly celebrate;
That thy labour therefore be not frustrate,
The privitie of our putrifying well understand
Or ever thou take this wor k in hand.
And Putrifaction may thus defined be ,
After philosophers sayings , to be of bodies the slaying;
And i n our compound a division of things three
The killed bodies into corruption forth leading,
And after into regeneration them abling,
For things being in the earth , without doubt
Be engendered of rotation of the heavens about.
And therefore like as I have said before
Thine elements commixt and wisely cocquate
Thou keep in temperate heat eschewing evermore ,
That they by violent heat be not incinerate,
36.


--- Page 44 ---
...
....
To powder dry improfitably rubificate,
But into powder black as a crows bill,
With heat of balne or else of our dunghill .
Until the time that nights be passed ninety,
In moist heat keep them for anything,
Soon after by blackness thou shalt espie
That they draw fast to putrifying,
Which .thou shalt after many colours bring
To perfect whiteness by patience easily,
And so thy seed in his nature shall multiplie.
Make each the other then to halse and kiss,
And like as children to play them up and down,
And when their shirts are filled with piss ,
Then let the woman to wash be bowne,
Which oft for faintness will in a swoon,
And die at the last with her children all,
And go to purgatorie to purge their filth original.
When they be there , by little and little increase
Their pains, by heat , aye more and more,
The fir~ from. them let never increase,
And so that thy furnace be surely apt therefore,
Which wise men call an Athenore,
Conserving heat required most temperatelie,
By which thy matter doth kindly putrifie.
Of this principle speaketh Sapient Guido ,
And saith by rotting dyeth the compound corporal
And then after Morien and other more,
Upriseth again regenerate simple and spiritual ,
And were not heat and moisture continual,
37 .


--- Page 45 ---
Sperm in the womb might have more abiding
And so there should no fruit thereof upspring .
Therefore at the beginning our stone thou take,
And bury each one in other within their grave .
Then equally betwixt them a marriage make
To ligge toghether six weeks let them have ,
Their seed conceived, kindly to nourish and save,
From the ground of their grave not rising that while ,
Which secret point doth many a one beguile .
This time of conception with easy heat abide ,
The blackness shewing shall tell thee when they dye,
For they together like liquid pitch that tide ,
Shall swell and burble, settle and putrifie,
Shining colours therein thou shalt espie ,
Like to tne rainbow marveilous to sight,
The water then beginneth to dry upright.
For moist bodies heat working temperate ,
Ingendreth blackness , first of all which is
Of kindly conjunction the token assignate .
And of true putrifyi ng; remember thi s
For then perfectly to alter thou canst not miss
For thus be the gate thou must come i n
The light of Paradise in whiteness if thou wilt win.
For first the Sun in his uprising obscurate
Shall be, and pass the waters of Noah ' s flood
On earth which was an hundred days continuate
And fifty away ere all these waters yood ;
Right so our waters (as wise men understood)
Shall pass, that thou with David may say
Albierunt in sicco flumina ; bear this away.
38.


--- Page 46 ---
-
-
-
Soon after that Noah planted his vineyard ,
Which royally flourished, and brought forth grapes anon
After which space thou shalt not be afeared ,
For in likewise shall follow the flourishing of our stone,
And soon after that days be gone
Thou shalt have grapes ripe as Rubie red
Which is our Adrop , our Vcifer (Lucifer?) , and our red lead .
For like as Souls after pains transitorie
Be brought to Paradise where ever is joyfull life,
So shall our stone (after his darkness in Purgatorie)
Be pur~ed , and ·joined in Elements with out strife ,
Rejoice the whiteness and beautie of his .wife ,
And pass from darkness of ·Purgatorie to light
Of Paradise, in whiteness Elixer of great might .
And that thou maist the rather to Putrefaction win ,
This example thou take to thee for a true conclusion ,
For all the secret of Putrifacti on resteth therein;
The heart of Oak that hath of water continual infusion
Will not soon putrifie , I tell thee without delusion ;
For though it in water lay 100 years and more ,
Yet shouldst thou find it sound as ere it was before.
But and thou keep it s ometime wet and sometime dry
As thou maist see in timber by usual experiment
By process of time that oak shall putrifie ;
And so even likewise according to our intent,
Sometimes our tree must with the sun be brent,
And then with water we must it keele ,
That by this means of rotting we may bring it weele .
39.


--- Page 47 ---
For now in wet, and now again in dry
And now in heat , and now again in cold
To be, shall cause it soon to putrifie,
And so shalt thou bring rotting thy gold;
Intreat thy bodies as I have thee told,
And in thy putrifying, with heat be not too swift ,
Least in the Ashes thou seek after thy thrift .
Therefore thy water out of the earth thou draw,
And make the soul therewith for to ascend ,
Then down again into the earth it throw,
That they oft times so ascend and descend,
From violent heat and sudden cold defend
Thy glass, and make thy fire so temperate
That by the sides the matter be not vitrificate.
And be thou wise in choosing of the matter ,
Meddle with no salts, sulphurs, nor mean minerals;
For whatsoever any worker to thee doth clatter,
Our Sulphur and our Mercury been only in metals
Which oils and waters some men them calls ,
Fowls and birds, with other names many one
Because that fools should never know our stone.
For of this world our stone is called the ferment
W~ich moved by craft as nature doth require
In his increase shall be full opulent,
And multiply his kind after thine own desire
Therefore if God vouchsafe thee to inspire ,
To know the truth, and fancies to eschew
Like unto thee in riches shall be but few.
40.


--- Page 48 ---
....
But many men be moved to work after their fantasie
In many subjects in which be tinctures gay ;
Both white and red divided manually
To sight , but in the fire they fly away ;
Such break pots and glasses day by day ,
Enpoisoning themselves and loosing their sights
With odours , smokes , and watching up by nights .
Their clothes be baudy and worn thread bare ,
Men may them smell for multipliers where they go
To fill their fingers with corrosives they do not spare
Their eyes be bleared , their cheeks lean and blow
And thus for had I wist they suffer loss and woe ;
And such when they have lost that was in thei.r .purse ,
Then do t~ey chide, and Philosophers sore do curse.
To see their houses it is a noble sport ,
What furnaces , what glasses there be of divers shapes
What salts , what powders, what oils , water sort.
How eloquently de materia prima their tongues do clap
And yet to find the truth they have no hap;
Of our mercury they meddle and of our sulphur vive
Where they dote , and more and 'more untrue .
For all the while they have Philosophers been ,
Yet could they never know what was our stone.
Some sought it in dung, in urine , some in wine ,
Some in star": sl~me (for thing it is but one) ,
In blood , in eggs ; some till their thrift was gone,
Dividing elements , and breaking many a pot ,
Sheards multiplying, but yet they hit it not .
41.


--- Page 49 ---
They talk of the Red man and his white wife ,
That is a special t hing and of the Elixirs two ,
Of the Quintessence , and of the Elixir of life ,
Of honey , celidonie, and of secondines also ,
These they divide into elements , with others more ,
No multi pliers, but philosophers called will they be ,
Which nat~ral philosophers did never read nor see .
This fellowshi p knoweth our stone right well
They think them richer than i s the King,
They will him help , he shall not fail
France for to win a wondrous thing ,
Thy holy Cross home they will bring,
And if the King were prisoner I take ,
Right soon his ransom would they make.
A mervaile it is that Westminster Kerke ,
To the which these Philosophers do much haunt ,
Since they can so much riches werke
As they make boast of an avaunt ,
Drinking dayly the wine a due taunt,
Is not made up perfectly at once,
For truly it lacketh yet many stones.
Fools do follow them at the tail,
Promoted to riches weening to be ;
But will you hear , what worship and avail
They win in London that noble city?
With silver maces (as you may see)
Sergeants awaiteth on them each hourly,
So been they men of great honour .
42.


--- Page 50 ---
....
Sergeants seek them from street to street ,
Merchants and goldsmiths lay after them watch ,
That well is him that with them may meet ,
For great advantage that they do catch ,
They hunt about as doth .a bratch,
Weening to win so great treasure
That ever in riches they shall endure!
Some would catch their goods again ,
And some more good would adventure,
Some for to have would be full fain
Of ten pounds one , I you ensure .
Some which have lent without measure
Their goods , and be with povertie clad,
To catch a noble, would be full glad .
But when seargents do them arrest ,
Their partners be stuffed with Paris balls,
Or with signets of Saint Martins at the least;
But as for money it is pist against the walls ;
Then be they led (as well them befalls)
To Newgate or Ludgate as I you tell ,
Because they shall in safeguard dwell .
Where is my money become, saith one?
And where is mine saith he and he .
But wiil you hear how subtile they be anon
In answering , that they be excused be?
Saying , of our Elixers robbed be we ,
Else might we have paid you all your gold,
Though it had been more by ten fold .
4J .
•


--- Page 51 ---
And then their creditors they flatter so ,
Promising to work for them again
In right short space the Elixirs two .
Doting the merchants that they be fain
To let them go , but ever in vain ;
They work so long , till at the last
They be again in prison cast.
If any of them ask , why they be not rich?
They say they can make fine gold of tin
But he , (say they) may surely swim the ditch
Which is ~pholden by the chin;
We have no stock, therefore may we not win
Which if we had, we would soon work
Enough to finish up Westminster Kerk.
And some of them be so devout ,
They will not swell out of that place;
For there they may withouten doubt
Do what them list to their solace ,
The Archdeacon is so full of grace ,
That if they bless him with their cross
He forceth little of other mens loss .
And when they then sit at the wine ,
These monks they say have many a pound ,
Would God (saith one) that some were mine ,
Yet care away , let t he cup go round ;
Drink on saith another , the mean is found ,
I am a master of that Art
I warrant us we shall have part .
44.


--- Page 52 ---
-
...
Such causeth Monks evil to doone,
To waste their wages through their dotage,
Some bringeth a mazer , some a spoon.
Their Philosophers giveth them such comage,
Behighting them winning with domage
A pound for a pennie at the least again ;
And so fair promises make fools faine .
A royal medicine one upon twelve,
They promise them thereof to have
Which they could never for themselves
Yet bring about , so God me save ;
Beware such phi losophers no man deprave
Which help these monks to riches so
In thread bare coats that they must go .
The Abbot ought well to cherish this companie ,
For they can teach his monks to live in povertie,
And to go cloathed in moneyed religioustie ,
As did Saint Bennet , eschuing superfluities,
Easing them also of the pondersoitie
Of their purses , wi th pounds so aggravate
Which by philosophi e be now alleviate .
Lo who so medleth with this rich companie ,
Great boast of their wi nning they may make ;
For they shall reap as much by their philosophy
As they of the tail of an ape , can take ;
Beware therefore for Jesus sake
A meddle with no thing of great cost
For if thou do , it is bust lost.


--- Page 53 ---
These Philosophers (of which I spake before)
Meddle anc blunder with many a thing ,
Running in errors ever more and more
For lack of true understanding;
But like must like always forth bring
So hath God ordained in every kind ,
Would Jesus they would bear this in mind .
Weene they of a nettle to have a rose,
Or of an elder to have an apple sweet ;
Alsa , that wise men their goods should loose ,
Trusting such laurels when they them meet
Which say our stone is trodden under feet ,
And maketh them vile things to distill ,
Till all their gouses with stench they fill .
Some of them never learned a word at schools,
Should such by reason understand Philosophers?
Be they Philosophers? Nay , they be fools ;
For their works prove them unwittie ,
Meddle not with them, if thou be happie ,
Least with their flatterie they do thee till
That thou agree unto their will .
Spend not thy money away in waste,
Give not to every spirit credence,
But first examine, grope and taste ;
And as thou proovest , so put thy confidence,
But ever beware of great expence;
And if the philosopher do live vertuously ,
The bette~ thou maist trust his philosophy.
46.


--- Page 54 ---
-
Prove him first, and him appose
Of all the secrets of our stone;
Which if he know not, thou need not to lose,
Meddle thou no further, but let him gone,
Make he never so perious a move ;
For then the Fox can fag and fain ,
When he would to his prey attain.
If he can answer as a clark ,
How be it he hath nor proved indeed,
And thou then help him to his work;
If he be virtuous I hold it meed,
For he will thee quit if ever he .speed
And thou shalt know by a little anon,
If he have knowledge of our stone .
One thing, one glass, one furnace, and no more .
Behold this principle if he do take,
And if he do not then let him go ,
For he shall thee no rich man make
Timely it is better thou him forsake
Than after with loss and variance
And 0th.er manner of displeasance .
But if God fortune thee to have
This science by doctrine which I have told,
Discover it not whosoever it crave
For favour, fear, silver, or gold ,
Be no oppressor , lecher nor boaster bold;
Serve thy God, and help the poor among,
If thou this life list to continue long.
47 .


--- Page 55 ---
Unto thyself thy secrets ever keep
From sinners, which have not God in dread
But will thee cast in prison deep,
Till thou them teach to do it indeed,
Then slander on thee shall spring and spread ,
That thou doest coin then will they say,
And so undo thee for ever and aye.
And i f thou teach them this cunning,
Then sinfull loving for to maintain,
In Hell therefore shall be thy wooning,
For God of thee and them will take disdaine ,
As thou nought couldst therefore thee faine,
That bodie and soul thou maist both save,
And here in peace thy living to have.
Now in this chapter I have thee taught,
How thou thy bodies must putrifie,
And so to guide thee that thou be not caught
And put to durance loss or villaine,
My doctrine therefore remember wittely ,
And pass forth towards the sixth Gate,
For this the fifth is triumphate.
The End of the Fifth Gate .
48.


--- Page 56 ---
....
Of Congelation .
The Sixth Gate .
Of congelation I need not much to write,
But what it is, I will to thee declare ;
It is of soft things induration of colour white,
And confixation of spirits which flying are ;
How to congeal, he needth not much to care,
For Elements will knit together soon
So that Putrifaction be kindly done .
But Congelations be made in divers wise
Of spirit s and bodies dissolved into water clear
Of salts also dissolved twice or thrice
And then congealed in~o a fluxible matter;
Of such congealing fools fast do clatter;
And some dissolveth dividing manually
Elements, them after congealing to powder drie.
But such congealing is not to our desire,
For unto ours it is contrarious .
Our congelation dreadeth not the fire ;
For it must ever stand in it unctuous ,
And it is also a tincture so bounteous,
Which in the air congealed will not relent
To water, for then our work were spent.
Moreover congeale not into ao hard a .stone
As glass or crystal, which melteth by fusion
But so that it like wax will melt alone
Withouten blast; and beware of delusion ,


--- Page 57 ---
For such congealing accordeth not to our conclusion
As will not flow , but run to water again
Like salt congealed , then laboureth thou in vain.
Which congelation availeth us not a deale ,
It longeth to multipliers; congealing vulgarly ,
If thou therefore list to do well
(Sith the medicine shall never flow kindly ,
Neither congeal, without thou first it putrifie)
First purge , and then fix the elements of our stone
Till they together congeale and flow anon.
For when thy matter i s made perfectly white ,
Then will the spirit with the bodie congealed be:
But of that time thou maist have long respite
Or it congeale like pearls in sight of thee,
Such congealation be thou glad to see
And after like grains red as blood,
Richer than any worldly good.
The earthly grossness therefore first mortified,
In moisture blackness ingendered is;
This principle may not be denied,
For natural Philosophers so sayne the wis ,
Which had, of whiteness thou maist not miss
And ~nto whiteness if thou congeale at once,
Then hast thou a stone most precious of all stones.
And by the dry like as the moist did putrifie ,
Which caused in colour blackness to appear ,
Right so the moist congealed by the dry ,
Ingendreth wh1teness shinning by night full clear,
And driness proceedet h as whiteth the matter ,
50.


--- Page 58 ---
-
Like as i~ blackness moisture doth him show
By colours variant always new and new.
The cause of all this is heat most temperate,
Working and moving the matter continually ,
And thereby also the matter is alterate,
Both inward and outward substancially,
Not as do fools to fight sophistically;
But in every part all fire to indure
Fluxible, fixt, stable in tincture .
As physick determineth of each digestion ,
First done in the stomach in which is driness,
Causing whiteness without question ,
Like as the second digestion causeth redness
Complete in the liver by heat in temperateness,
Right so our stone by driness and by heat
Digested is to white and red compleate.
But here thou must another secret know,
How the Philosophers child in the air is borne,
Busie thee not too fast at the coal to blow,
And·take this neither for mock nor scorn ,
But trust me truly, else is all thy work for lorn,
Without thine earth with water reunited be
Our true congealing shalt thou never see.
A soul it is betw~xt heaven and earth being,
Arising from earth as air with water pure ,
And causing life in every lively thing
Incessable running upon our fourfold n~ture
Enforcing to better him with all his cure,
Which air is the fire of our Philosophie ;
Named now oil, now water mysticallie .
51.


--- Page 59 ---
And this neans air which oil or water we call
Our fire, our ointment , our spirit, and our stone,
In which one thing we ground our wisedomes all ,
Goeth neither in nor out alone,
Nor the fire but the water alone ;
First it out leadeth, and after it bringeth it in,
As water with water which will not lightly twin.
And so may water only our water meene,
Which moving causeth both death and life
And water to water doth kindly cleeve
Without repugnance or any strife,
Which water to fools is nothing rife ,
Being of the kind withouten doubt
Of the spirit, called water and leader out .
And water is the secret and life of every thing,
That is of substance in this world I found ,
For of water each thing hath his beginning ,
As showeth in women when they shall be unbound
By water, which passeth before it all be found
Called Alvien , first from them running,
With greivous throwes before their childing.
And truly that is the cause most principal
Why Philosophers charge us to be patient,
Till time the water be dried to powder all
With nourishing heat , continual , not violent ;
For qualities be contratious of every element ,
Till after black in white be made an union
Of them for ever, congealed without division.
52.


--- Page 60 ---

And furthermore , the preparation of this conversion;
From thing to thing , from one state to another ,
Is done only by kindly and discreet operation
Of nature , as is of sperm within the mother
For sperm and heat, are as sister and brother ,
Which be converted in themselves as nature can,
By action and passion at last to perfect man.
For as the bodily part by nature was combined
Into man , is such as the beginner was ,
Which though it thus fro thing to thing was alterate
Not out of kind to mix with other kind did pass
And so our matter spermatical within our glass,
Within it self must turn from thing to thing ,
By heat most temperate only it nourishing.
Another example natural I may tell thee,
How the substance of an egg by nature is wrought
Into a chicken not passing out of the shell,
A plainer example could I not have thought,
And their conversions be made till forth be brought
From state to state, the like by like in kind,
With nourishing heat only bear this in mind .
Another example here also thou maist read
Of vegetable things, taking consideration ,
How everything groweth of his own seed
Through heat and moisture, by natural operation,
And therefore minerals be nouri shed by ministration
Of moisture radical, which there beginning was ,
Not passing their kind within one glass .
53 .


--- Page 61 ---
There we them turn f r om thing to thing again ,
Into their mother the water when they go ;
Which principle unknown, thou l abourest in vain,
Then all is sperm ; and things there be no more
But kind with kind in number two ,
Male and female, agent and patient ,
Within the matrix of the Earth most orient.
And these be turned by heat from thing to thing
Within one glass, and so from state to state ,
Until the time that nature doth them bring
Into one substance of the water regenerate;
And so the sperm with his kind is alterate,
Able in likeness his kind to multiply,
As doth in kind all other things naturally.
In the time of this said process natural,
While that the sperm conceived is growing ,
The substance is nourished with his own menstruale ,
Which water only but out of the earth did spring,
Whose colour is green in the first showing ;
And from that time the sun hideth his light,
Taking his course throughout the North by night .
The said menstruall is (I say to thee in councel)
The blood of our Green Lyon and not of vitriol ,
Dame Venus can the truth of this thee tell
At the beginning, to councel if thou her call ,
This secret is hid by Philosophers great and small,
Which blood drawn out of the Green Lyon,
For lack of heat had not perfect digestion.
54.


--- Page 62 ---
-
-
-
But this blood called our secret menstraull ,
Wherewith our sperm is nourished temperately
When it is turned into the feces corporal ,
And so become white perfectly and very dry,
Congealed and fixed into his own bodie ,
Then decoct blood to sight it may well seem,
Of this work named the milk white Dyademe .
Understand now that our firie water thus acuate,
Is called our menstruall water, wherein ,
Our earth is loosed and naturallly calcinate,
By Congelation that they may never twinne,
But yet to congeal more water thou may not linne ;
Into three parts of the acuate water sayed afore
With the fourth part of the earth congealed no more .
Unto that substance therefore congelate ,
The fourth part put of water christalline ,
And make them then together to be dispousate ,
By Congelation into a miner metalline ,
Which like a sword new slipped will ·shine ,
After the blackness which first will shew,
The fourth part then give it of water new.
Imbibitions many it must yet have,
Give it the second , and after the third also ,
The said proportion keeping in thy witt ,
Then to another the . fourth time look thou go ,
The fifth time and the sixth pass not therefore ,
But put t~o parts at each time of them three ,
And at the seventh time five parts must there be.
55.


--- Page 63 ---
When thou hast made seven times Imbibition ,
Again then must thou turn about thy wheel ,
And putri f i e all that matter without additi on .
First blackness abi ding i f thou wi lt do well,
Then into whiteness congeal it up each deele ,
And after by redness into the South ascend ,
Then hast thou brought thy base unto an end .
Thus is thy water then divi ded into parts two ,
With the first part the bodies be putrificate,
And to thine Imbibitions the second part must go ,
With which thy matter is after war d demigrate
And soon upon easie decoction albificate,
Then is it named by Philosophers our starry stone ,
Bring that to redness then is the sixth gate won .
End of Sixth Gate .
56.


--- Page 64 ---
-
-
Of Cibation.
The Seventh Gate .
Now of Cibation I turn my pen to write ,
Sith it must here the Seventh place occupie ,
But in few words it will be expedite ,
Take heed therefore, and understand me wittelie,
Cibation is called a fe·eding of our matter dri e ,
With milk and meat, which moderately thou do ,
Until it be brought the third order unto.
But give i t never so much , that thou it glut ,
Beware of dripsie, and also of Noahs flood :
By little and little therefore thou to it put
Of meat and drink , as seems to do it good ,
That watery humours not overgrow the blood ,
To drink therefore let it be measured so,
That kindl y appetite thou never quench it fro .
For if it drink too much, then must it have
A vomit or else it will be sick too long,
From the dropsie therefore thy womb thou save ,
And from t he flux, or else it will be wrong ,
But rather let it thirst for drink among,
Than thou shouldst give i t over much at once ,
Which must in youth be dieted for the nonce.
And if thou diet it (as ·nature doth require)
Moderately , till time that it be grown to age,
From cold it keeping , and nourishing with moist fire ,
Then shall it grow , and wax full of courage,
57.


--- Page 65 ---
And do to thee both pleasure and advantage ;
For he shall make dark bodies whole and bright ,
Cleansing their leprosy through his might.
Three times must thou turn about thy wheel,
Still keeping the rule of the said Cibation ,
And then as soon as it the fire doth feel ,
Like wax it will be readie unto liquation ;
For I have told thee the dietorie most convenient ,
After thine Elements be made equipolent .
And also how to whiteness thou shalt bring thy gold,
Most like in figure to leaves of hawthorne t ree
Called Magnesia , afore as I have tol d ,
And our white sulphur without combustibilitie ,
Which from the fire away will never f l ie ,
And thus the seventh Gate (as you desired )
In the uprising of the Sun is conquered.
End of Seventh Gate •
58 .


--- Page 66 ---

Of Sublimation.
The Eighth Gate .
Here of our Sublimation a word of two
I have to speak, which the eighth gate is,
Fools do sublime, but sublime thou not so ,
For we sublime not as they do y wis .
To sublime truly therefore thou shalt not miss,
If thou canst make thy bodies first spiritual ,
And then thy spirits (as I have taught thee ) corporall .
Some do mercurie from vitriol and salt sublime ,
And other spirits from scales of iron and steel,
From egg- shells calcined , and from quick lime .
And in their manner yet sublime they right well;
But such subliming accordeth never a deele
To our intents , for we sublime not so ,
To true subliming therefore , now will I go .
In Sublirration first beware of one thing ,
That thou sublime to the top of the vessel not ;
For without violence thou shalt it not down bring
Again, but there it will abide and dwell .
So it re joiceth with refrigeration I thee tell ,
Keep it therefore with temper ature heat down
Full forty days , till it wax black and brown .
For then the soul beginneth to come out
From his own veyness , for all that subtil is
Will with the spirit ascend withouten doubt ,
Bear in thy mind therefore , and think on this ,
59 .


--- Page 67 ---
How here eclipsed· been thy bodies ,
As thou do putrifie sublimi ng more and more
Into water , until they be all up above .
And thus their venome when they have spued out
Into the water t hen black it doeth appear ,
Becoming spiritual each deale without doubt ,
Subliming easily in our manner,
Into the water, which doth him bear ;
For in the air our child must thus be bore
Of the water again , as I have said before.
But when these two by sublimation continual
Be laboured so with heat both moist and temperate ,
That all is white and purely made spiritual ,
Then heaven upon earth must be reiterate ,
Until the soul with the bodie be incorporate
That earth become all that before was heaven
Which will be done in sublimations seven.
And Sublimations we make for causes three ,
The f irst cause is , to make the bodie spiritual;
The second is , that the spirit may coropral be ,
And become fixt with it, and consubstantial ;
The third cause is , that from his filthy original
He may be cleansed, and his saltness sulphurious
May be mingled in him , which is infectious .
Then when they thus together depured be ,
They will sublime up whiter than snow.
That sight will greatly comfort thee;
For then anon perfectly thou shalt know
The spirits shall so adowne y throwe ,
That this eighth gate shall be to thee unlocked
Out of the which many be shut and mocked .
End of Eighth Gate
60.


--- Page 68 ---

-
Of Fermentation.
The Ninth Gate •
True Fermentation few workers understand,
That secret therefore I will expound to thee,
I travelled through truly many a land ,
Ere ever I might find any that would tell it me ,
Yet as God would , evermore blessed be he ,
At the last I came to the knowledge thereof,
Take heed therefore what I thereof do write.
Fermentation in divers manners be done
By which our medicine must be perpetuate
Into clear water ; Some looseth Sun and Moon ,
And with their medicines make them to be congelate ,
Which in the fire when they be examinate
May not abide, nor alter with complement;
For such Fermenting is not to our intent.
But yet more kindly so me other men doone ,
Fermenting their medicines in this wise,
In mercurie dissolving both Sun and Moon ,
Till time with spiri~ they will arise,
Subliming them together twice or thrice ,
Then Fermentation therewith they make ,
That is away, but yet we it forsake.
Some othe~ there be which have more hap,
To touch the truth in part of fermenting ,
They amalgame their bodies with mercurie like pap ,
Then thereupon their medicines relenting
61.


--- Page 69 ---
These of cur secrets have some hinting .
But not the truth with perfect compliment,
Because they neither putrifie , nor alter their ferment.
That point therefore I will disclose unto thee,
Look how thou didst with thine imperfect bodie,
Do so with thy perfect bodies in each degree,
That is to say , first thou them putrifie ,
Their former qualities destroying utterly,
For this is wholly to our intent ,
That first thou alter before ferment .
To thy compound make ferment the fourth part
Which ferments being only of Sun and Moon;
If thou therefore be master of this Art ,
Thy Fermentation let thus be done,
Fix water and earth together soon,
And when thy medicine as wax doth flow,
Then upon malgames look thou it throwe .
And when all that together is mixed ,
Above the glass well closed make thy fire
And so continue it till all be fixed
And well ~ermented to thy desire ,
Then make projection after thy pleasure ,
For that is medicine each deale perfite,
Thus must thou ferment both red and white .
For like as flour of wheat made into paste
Requireth ferment, which leaven we call
Of bread , that it may have the kindly taste
And become food to man and woman cordial
Right so thy medi cine ferment thou shall
That it may taste of the ferment pure
At all assays for ever to endure .
62 .


--- Page 70 ---
-
And understand that there be ferments three,
Two be of bodies of nature clean,
Which must be altered as I have told thee;
The third most secret of which I mean ,
Is the first earth of his water Green;
And therefore when the Lion doth thirst,
Make him drink till his belly burst .
Of this a question if I should mouve ,
And ask of workers, what is this thing?
Anon thereby I should them prove ,
If they had knowledge of our fermenting ;
For many a man speaketh with wondering;
Of Robinhood and of his bow ,
Which never shot therein I trowe .
For fermentation true as I thee tell ,
Is of the soul with bodies incorporation,
Restoring to it the kindly smell,
With taste and colour by natural conspissation,
Of things dissevered , a due reintegration,
Whereby the body of the spirit taketh impression ,
That either the other may help to have ingression .
For like as bodies in their compaction corporall,
May not show out their qualities effectually,
Until the time that they become spiritual ,
No more may spirits abide with bodies stedfa·stly ,
Till they with them be confixate proportionally
For then the body teacheth the spirit to suffer fire ,
And the spirit the body to enter to thy desire .
63 .


--- Page 71 ---
Therefore thy gold with gold thou must ferment ,
With his own water thy earth cleansed I mean ,
Nought else to say but element with wlement ,
The spirit of life only going between ,
For like as an adamant as thou hast seen
Draweth iron to him, so doth our earth by kind
Draw down to him his soul born up with wind.
With wind therefore the soul lead out and in ,
Mingle gold with gold , that is for to say,
Make element with element together rin
Till time all fire they suffer may ,
For earth is ferment , withouten nay ,
To water , and water the earth unto,
Our Fermentation in this wise must be do.
Earth is gold , and so is the soul also
Not common , but ours thus Elementate ,
And yet thereto the sun must go ,
That by our wheel it may be alterate;
For so to ferment it must be preparate,
That it profoundly may joined be ,
With other natures as I said to thee .
And whatsoever I have here said of gold ,
The same of silver I will thou understand ,
That thou them putrifie and alter (as I have told)
Ere thou thy medicine to ferment take in hand ;
Forsooth I could never find him in England
Which in this wise to ferment could we teach
Without error , by practice only speech.
64 .


--- Page 72 ---
Now of this chapter needeth to treat no more ,
Sith I intend prolixitie to eschew ;
Remember well my words therefore,
Which thou shalt prove by practice true ,
And sun and moon look thou renew,
That they may hold of the first nature ,
Then shall their tincture evermore endure .
And yet a way there is most excellent,
Belonging unto another working,
A water we make most redolent,
All bodies to oil wherewith we bring ,
With which our medicine we make flowing ,
A quintessence this water we call ,
In man which healeth diseases all .
But with thy base , after my doctrine prepare ,
Which is our calx this must be done ,
For when our bodies de so calcinate ,
That water will to oil dissolve them soon ,
Make thou therefore oil both of sun and moon ,
Which is ferment most fragrant for to smell
And s9 t he ninth Gate is conquered of this castle.
End of Ninth Gate .


--- Page 73 ---
Of Exaltation.
The Tenth Gate •
Proceed we now to the chapter of Exaltation ,
Of which truly thou must have knowledge pure ,
But little it is different from Sublimation ,
If thou conceive it right I you ensure ,
Hereto accordeth the holy Scripture ,
Christ saying thus , it I exalted be ,
Then shall I draw all things unto me.
Our medicine if we exalt right so ,
It shall thereby nobilitate ,
That must be done in manners two,
From time the parties be dispousate ,
Which must be crucified and exarninate ,
And then contumulate both man and wife ,
And after reunited by the spirit of life.
Then up to heaven they must exalted be,
There to be in bodie and soul glorified (glorificate)
For thou must bring them to such subtiltie,
That the ascend together to be intronizate ,
In clouds of clearness to Angels consociate,
Then shall they draw as thou shalt see ,
All other bodies to their own dignitee .
If thou therefore the bodies wilt exalt ,
First with the spirit of life thou them augment ,
Till time the earth be well subtilizate ,
By natural rectifying of every element ,
66 .


--- Page 74 ---
...
Them up exalting into the firmament ,
Then much more precious shall they be than gold ,
Because of the quintessence which they do hold .
For when the cold hath overcome the heat ,
Then into water the air shall turned be ,
And so two contraries together shall meet
Till either with other right well agree ,
So into air the water as I tell thee ,
When heat , of cold hath got domination ,
Shall be converted cast of our circulation.
And of the air.then fire have thou shall
By loosing , putrefying and subliming ,
And fire thou hast of the earth material ,
Thine elements thus by craft dissevering ,
Most especially thine earth well calcining.
And when they be each one made pure
Then do they hold all of the first nature.
On this wise therefore make them be circulate ,
Each into other exalting by and by,
And all in this one glass surely sigillate ,
Not with thine hands , but as I teach thee naturally ,
Fire into water then turn first hardly ,
For fire is in air, which is in water existent
And this conversion accordeth to our intent .
Then f'urther more tur n on thy wheel ,
That into earth the air converted be ,
Which will be done also right well
For air is in water being in earth trust me ,
The water into fire contrarious in her qualitie ,
67.


--- Page 75 ---
Soon turn thou mayst for water in earth is,
Which is in fire, conversion true is this.
The wheel is now near turned about
Into air turn earth which is the proper nest ,
Of other elements there is no doubt,
For earth is fire is, which in air taketh rest,
This circulation begin thou in the West,
Then into the fourth, till they exalted be,
Proceed duely, as in thy figure I have taught thee .
In which process clearly thou mayst see
From one extreme how to another thou mayst not go
But by a mean, since they in qualities contrarious be,
And reason will forsooth, that it be so,
As heat into cold, with other contraries mo,
Without their means as moist to heat and cold
Examples sufficient before this I have told .
Thus have I taught thee how to make
Of all thine elements a perfect circulation,
And at thy figure example to take,
How thou shalt make this foresaid Exaltation,
And of thy medicine in the Elements true graduation
Till it be brought to a gueneritie temperate,
And then thou hast conquered the tenth Gate .
The End of the Tenth Gate •
68.


--- Page 76 ---
The Eleventh Gate .
Of Multiplication .
Multiplication now to declare I proceed
Which is by Philosophers in this wise defined
Augmentation it is of the Elixer indeed ,
In goodness and quantitie both for white and red ,
Multiplication is therefore as they do write ,
That thing that doth augment medicines in each degree ,
In colour , in odour , in virtue and also in quantitie .
And why thou mayst this medicine multiplie
Infinetely forsooth the cause is this ,
For it is fire , which kindled will never die ,
Dwelling with thee , as fir$ doth in houses ,
Of which one spark may make more fire I wis ,
As musk in pigments and other spices mo
In virtue multiplied , and our medicine right so.
So he is rich which fire hath less or more ,
Because he may so hugely it multiply ,
And right so rich is he which any part hath in store ,
Of our Elixers which be augmentable infinitely ,
One way if thou dissolve our powders dry ,
And make often time of them congelation ,
There of in goodness then makest thou augmentation .
The second way both in goodness and quantitie
It multiplyeth by iterate Fermentation,
As in that chapter I showed plainly to thee ,
By divers manners of natural operation ,


--- Page 77 ---
And also in the chapter of our Cibation ,
Where thou mayst know how thou shalt multiplie ,
Thy medicine with mercurie infinetely.
But thou wilt both loose and eke ferment ,
Both more in quantitie and better will it be ,
And in such wise thou mayst it soon augment,
That in thy glass it will grow like a tree ,
The tree of Hermes named seemly to see
Of which one pippin a thousand will multiplie ,
If thou canst make thy projection wittely,
And like as saffron when it is pulverized
By little and little if it with liquor be
Tempered , and then with much m·ore liquor dilate ,
Teyneth much more of liquor in quantitie ,
This being whole in his grosse nature ; so shalt thou see
That our Elixir , the more it is made thinne
The further in tincture it fastly will rinne .
Keep in thy fire therefore both even and morrow
From house to house that thou had not to rinne
Among thy neighbours thy fire to seek or borrow
The more thou keepest , the more shalt thou win
Multiplying it always more and more thy glass within,
By feeding with mercurie unto thy lives end,
So shalt thou have more than thou needest to spend.
This matter is plain I will no more
Write thereof , let reason thee guide ,
Be never the bolder to sin therefore,
But serve thy good the better in each tide ;
And while that thou shalt in this life abide ,
70.


--- Page 78 ---
Bear this in mind , forget not I thee pray
As thou shalt appear before God at dooms day ,
His own great gifts therefore and his treasure ,
Dispose thou virtuously , helping the poor at need,
That in this world thou mayst to thee procure ,
Mercy and Grace with heavenly bliss to to meede,
And pray to God devoutly that he thee lead ,
In at the twelfth Gate, as he can best ,
Soon after then thou shalt end thy conquest .
End of the Eleventh Gate.
71 .


--- Page 79 ---
Of Projection .
The Twelfth Gate .
In projec~ion it shall be proved if our practice be profitable,
Of which it behoveth me the secrets here to move ,
Therefore if thy tincture be sure and not variable,
By a litt~e of thy medicine thus mayst thou prove,
With mettl e, or with Mercury as pitch it will cleave,
And teyne in projection all fires to abide,
As soon it will enter and spread him full wide.
But many by ignorance do marr that they make,
When on metals uncleansed Projection they make ,
For because of corruption their tinctures must fade,
Which they would not away first from the body take,
Which after projection be brittle blue and black,
That thy tincture may ever more last,
First upon ferment thy medicine see thou cast.
Then brittle as glass will thy ferment be ,
Upon bodies cleansed and made pure,
Cast that brittle substance and soon shalt thou see
That they shall be curiously coloured with tincture,
With all assayes for ever shall endure
But profitable projection perfectly to make ,
At the Psalms of the Psalter example thou take .
On Fundamenta cast first this psalm-Nunc dimitis,
Upon Verba Mea, then cast Fundamenta beline,
Then Verba upon diligam, conceive me with thy wits,
And diligam upon attendite, if thou list to thrive ,
Thus make t hou projections, three, four and five,
72.


--- Page 80 ---
-
--
Till the tincture of thy medicine begin to decrease ,
And then it is time of Projection to cease .
By this mistie talking I mean nothing else
But that thou must cast first the less on the more,
Encreasing aye the number as wise men thee tells
And keep thou this secret unto thy self in store ,
Be covetous of cunning it is no burden sore ,
For he that joyneth not the Elixer with bodies made clean
He wott eth not surely what projection doth mean.
Ten if thou multiply first into ten ,
One hundred that number make sickerly ,
If one hundred into ·an hundred be multiplied then ,
Ten thousand is that number if thou count it wittely ,
Then into as much more ten thousand to multiplie ,
It is a thousand thousand , which multiplied Y wis,
Into as much more a hundreth millions is .
That hundreth millions being multiplied likewise ,
Into ten thousand millions , as I to thee do say ,
Maketh so great a number I wot not what it is,
Thy number in projection thus multiply alway .
Now Child of thy courtesie for me that thou pray ,
Sith I have told thee our secrets all and some ,
To the which I beseech God by grace thou mayst me .
Now hast thou conquered these Gates twelve ,
And all the castle thou holdest at thy will ;
Keep thy secrets in _store to thyself ,
And the commandments of God Look thou fulfill ,
In fire see thou continue thy glass still
And multiply thy medicines aye more and more ,
For wise men do say that store is no sore.
End of the Twelve Gates •
73 .


--- Page 81 ---
Ricapitulatio Totius Operi s Proedicti •
For to bring this treatise to a final end ,
And briefly here to conclude these secrets all ,
Diligently look thou , and to thy figure attend ,
Which doth in it contain these secrets great and small ,
And if thou it conceive , both theoritical and practical ,
By figures and colours , by scripture 'plain ,
It wittily conceived , thou may •st not work in vain .
Consider first the latitude of this precious stone ,
Beginning in the first side noted in the West,
Where the red man and the white woman be made one ,
Spoused with the spirit of life to live in r est ,
Earth and water equally proportionate, that is best ,
And one of the earth is good , and of the spirit three ,
Which twelve to four also of the earth may be .
Three of the wife , and one of the man thou take ,
And the less of the spirit in this dispousation ,
The rather thy Calcination for certain shalt thou make ,
Then .forth into the North proceed by obscuration
Of the red man and hi s white wife , called Eclipsation ,
Loosing them and alter ing them betwixt winter and vere ,
Into water turning earth , dark and nothing clear.
From thence by colours many one into the East ascend,
Then shall the Moon be full appearing by day- light ,
Then is she passed purgatorie , and her course at an end ,
There is the uprising of the Sun appearing bright ,
There is summer after vere , and day after night ;
Then earth and water which were black, be turned to air ,
And clouds of darkness overblown , and all appeareth fair .
74.


--- Page 82 ---
-
-
And as in the West was the beginning of thy practice ,
And the North the perfect mean of profound alteration ;
So in the East after them the beginning of speculation is;
But of this c~urse up in the South the Sun maketh consumation ,
Their bin the elements turned into fire by circulation;
Then to win to thy desire thou needst not be in doubt,
For the wheel of our philosophie thou hast turned about.
But yet about again two times turn thy wheel,
In which bin comprehended all the secrets of our philosophy
In Chapters 12 , made plain to thee , if thou conceive them well ,
And all the secrets by and by of our lower Astronomy
How thou shalt calcine bodies , dissolve divide and putrify ,
With perfect knowledge of all the poles which in our Heaven been ,
Shining with colours inexplicable , never were gayer seen.
And thus our secret conclusion know withouten fails ,
Our red man teineth not, nor his wife , till they teined be,
Therefore if thou list thy self by this craft to avail ,
The altitude of the bodies hide , and show out their profunditie
In every of thy materials destroying the first qualitie ,
And secondary qualities more glorious in them repair anon,
And in one glass , and without rule , four natures turn to one .
Pale and black with false citrine, imperfect white and red ,
The Peacocks feathers in colours gay, the Rainbow which shall overgo ,
The spotted panther, the Lion Green, the Crows bill blue as lead ,
These shall appear before thee perfect white and many other more ,
And after the perfect white , gray , false citrine also,
And after these , then shall appear the body red invariable ,
Then hast thou a medicine of the third order of his own kind
multiplicable.
75.


--- Page 83 ---
Thou must divide t hy white Elixir into parts two ,
Before thou rubifie , and into glasses two let them be done ,
If thou have for Sun and Moon thy elixir both do so ;
And into Mercury then multiply to great quantity soon ,
And if thou had not at the beginning to fill a spoon ,
Yet maist thou them so multiply both white and red
That if thou live a 1000 years , they shall stand thee in
Have thou recourse to thy wheel therefore I counsel thee ,
And studie him well to know in each chapter truly,
Meddle with no phantastical multipliers , but let them be ,
Which will thee flatter feinning cunning in philosophy ,
stead .
Do as I bid thee , then dissolve these foresaid bases wittilie ,
And turn them into perfect oils with our true water ardent ,
By circulation that must be done according to our intent.
These oils will fix crude Mercury and convert bodies all
Into perfect Sun and Moon , when thou shalt make projection ;
That oilie substance pure and fixt Raymond Lully did call
His Basiliske, of which he never made so plain detection ;
Pray for me to God , that I may be one of his election ,
And that he will for one of his, at doomsday me ken ,
And grant me his bliss to reign with him for ever.
Amen •
Finis Recapitulationis •
76 .


--- Page 84 ---
-
-
The Epistle to King Edward t he Fourth .
By the same Author .
1.
0 Honourable Lord , and most victorious Knight ,
With grace and virtue abundantly endued,
The safeguard of England , and maintainer of right;
That God you loveth, indeed he hath well shewed;
Wherefore I .trust this land shall be renewed
With joy and riches, with charitie and peace,
So that old ranckors new understrewed,
Tempestuous troubles, and wretchedness shall cease .
2 .
And therefore sith I see by tokens right evident ,
That God you guideth, and how that you be vertuous ,
Hating sin, and all such as be insolent,
How that also manslaughter to you is odious,
Upon the indgement also that you be piteous ;
Me seemeth ruth it were but that you should live long ;
For of your great fortune you are not presumptuous ,
Nor vengeable of spirit to revenge you of each wrong.
3.
These considered with others in your most noble state,
Like as God knoweth, ~d people do witness bear,
So entirely me mooveth, that I must algate
Record the same , and therein be no flatterer;
And not that only, but also to write here
Unto your Highness , humbly to present
Great Secrets , which in far countries I did learn,
And which by grace to me most unworthy are lent.
77.


--- Page 85 ---
4 .
Once ~o your Lordship such things I did promise,
What time you did command to send unto me ,
And sith that I wrote it in secret wise ,
Unto your Grace from the Universitie,
Of Louaine, when God fortuned me by grace to see
Greater secrets and much more perfect,
Which only to you I will disclosed to be ,
That is the Great Elixir both red and white .
5.
For like it you to trust that truly I have found ,
The most perfect way and most secret Alchymie,
Which I will never truly for marke nor for pound
Make common but to you, and that conditionally.
That to yourself you shall keep it full secr etly,
And use it as may be to Gods pleasure ,
Else in time coming to God I should obey
For my discoursing of his secret treasure.
6 .
Therefore be you well advised and with good deliberation ,
For of this secret shall know no other creature ,
But only you as I make faithfull protestation ,
For all the time that here in life I shall endure ,
Whereto I will your Lordship me ensure,
To my desire in this my oath for to agree,
Least I to me the wrath of God procure ,
For such revealing of his great gift and privitie .
7.
If God fortune you by me to win this treasure,
Serve him devoutly with more lawde and thanking ,
Praying his Godhead , in life that you may so endure ,
His Gifts of grace , and fortune to use to his pleasing,
Most especially intending over all thing ,
To your power and cunning his precepts ten
So to observe, that into no danger yourself you bring ,
But that you in glory may see him hereafter , Amen.
78.


--- Page 86 ---
...
-
8 .
And yet moreover I will your Lordship to pardon ~e
,
?or openly with pen I will it never it write,
But whensoever you list by practice you shall see ,
By mouth also this precious secret, most of delight ,
How may be made perfect Elixirs both red and white,
Plain unto your Lordship it shal l declared be ,
And if it please you , with easie expences and respite ,
I will them work by grace of the Trinitie.
9.
But notwithstanding for peril that may befall,
If I dare not here plainly the knot unbind ,
Yet in my writing I will not be so mistical ,
But that to studie the true knowledge you may find ,
How each thing is multiplied in its· kind ,
And how the likeness of bodies metalline be transmutable
I will declare , that if you feel me in your mind
My writing you shall find true and no fained fable.
10.
As philosophers in metheors do write ,
The likeness of bodies metalline be not transmutable ,
But after be added these words of more delight ,
Without they be reduced to their beginning materiable ,
Wherefore such bodies within nature be liquiable ,
Mineral and metalline may be mercurizate,
Conceive you may this science is not opinionable ,
But very true, by Raymond and others determinate .
11.
In the said book the Philosophers speak also ,
Therein if it please you Highness for to read,
Of divers sulphurs , and especially of two ,
And of two mercuries joined to them indeed ,
Whereby he doth true understanders lead
To knowledge of the principle which is only true ,
Both red , most pure , and white , as I have espied,
Which be nevertheless found but of very few .
79 .


--- Page 87 ---
12 .
And these two things be best, be added anon ,
For him that work the Alchymie to take
Our Gold and our Silver therewith to make all one ,
Wherefore I say who will our pearl and Ruby make ,
The said principles look he not forsake ;
For at the beginning , if his principles be true,
And if so be by craft he can them also bake ,
In th • end truly his work he shall not rue .
13 .
But one great secret right needfull to be known ,
That though the Philosophers speak plurally,
All is but one thing you may me well trowe ,
In kind which is our base principally ,
Whereof doth spring both white and red naturallly ,
And yet the white must come first out of the red
Which thing is not wrought manually ,
But naturally , craft helping out of our lead.
14.
For all the parts of our most precious stone,
As I can prove, be co- essential and concrete,
Moreover there is no true principle but one ,
Full long it was ere I therewith could meet ,
Who can reduce him and knoweth his heat,
And only kind with kind can well redress
Till filthie original he cleansed from· his seat ,
He likely is to find our secrets more and less.
15.
Therefore work kind only with his own kind,
And so your elements join that they not strive .
This point also for any bear in mind,
That passive natures you turn into active
Of water , fire , and wind of earth make bline* (* quickly or gladly )
And of the quadrangle make a figure round,
Then have thou the honey of thy bee- hive ,
One ounce well worth one thousand pound.
80.


--- Page 88 ---
16.
The pri ncipal secret of secrets all,
Is true proportion which may not be behind ,
Wherein I counsel thee be not superficial,
The true conclusion if thou thick to find,
Turn earth into water and water into wind ,
Thereof make fire and beware of the flood
Of Noah , wherein many men are so blind
That by this science th.ey get little good.
17.
I counsel you eat and drink temperately ,
And beware well that Iposarcha come not in place ,
Neshe not your womb by drinking immoderately ,
Lest you quench natural heat in little space ,
The colour will tell appearing in your face ,
Drink no more therefore then you may eat,
Walk up and down after an easie pace ,
Cause not your bodie too sore tp sweat .
18 .
With easie fire after moving when you sweat ,
Warm your bodie and make it dry again,
By rivers and fountains walk after meat ,
At morning time visit the high mountain,
That Phisick so bodden I reach certain ,
So high the mountains yet do you not ascend
But that you may downwards your way have plain
And with your mantle from gold ye you defend .
19.
Such labour is wholsome yor sweat for dry
With napkin , and after it see you take no cold,
For gross humours be purged by sweat kindly.
Use Diacameron then confect with perfect gold
Hermidocles for ·watery humours good I hold ,
Use Ipericon perforat with milk of tinctural,
And Spermacete with red wine, when you wax old
And goats milk sod with wine nourisheth moisture radical .
81 • .


--- Page 89 ---
20 .
But a good Physican who so intendeth to be ,
Our lower Astronomie needth well to know
And after it need to learn well urine in a glass to
And if it need to be hansed the fire for to blow ,
Then wittely it by divers ways for to throw
After the cause to make a medicine blive (quickly)
Truly telling the infirmities all on a row,
Who this can do by his Phisick is like to thrive.
see ,
21.
We have our heaven incorruptible of the quintessence ,
Ornate with signs, elements, and stars bright ,
Which moistenth our earth by subtile influence;
And of it a secret sulphur hid from sight.
It fetcheth by virtue of his active mi ght,
Like a bee fetcheth honey out of the flowers ,
Which thing could do no other worldly wight .
Therefore to God be all glory and nonour.
22 .
And like as ice to water doth relent,
When it was congealed by violence of cold ,
When Phoebus yet shineth with his heat influent,
Even so to water mineral reduced is our gold ,
As witnesseth plainly , Albert , Raymond, and Arnold ,
By heat and moisture and by craft occasi onate,
Whcih congelation of the spirits , loe now I have told,
How our materials together must be proportionate.
23 .
At the dyers craft you may learn this science ,
Beholding with with water how decoction they make
Upon a wode or madder easily and with patience ,
Till tinctures do appear which when the cloth doth take ,
Therein so fixed that they will never forsake
The cloth , for washing after they joined be,
Even so our tinctures with water of our lake ,
We draw by boiling wi th the Ashes of Hermes tree .
82.


--- Page 90 ---
....
-.
24.
Which tinctures when they by craft are made perfect,
So dyeth metals with colours aye permanent,
After the qualities of medicine , red or white ,
That never away by any fire will be brent:
To this example if you take good tent ,
Unto your purpose the rather you shall win,
And let your fire be easie, and not too fervent ,
Where nature did leave off what time look you begin ,
25.
First calcine , and after that putrifie ,
Dissolve , distill , sublime, discend , and fix,
With Aqua vitae oftentimes both wash and dry ,
And make a marriage the body and spirit betw~xt ,
Which thus together naturellie if you can mix ,
In loosing of the bodie the water congealed shall be ,
Then shall the bodie die utterly of the flixe ,
Bleeding and changing his colours , as you shall see .
26 .
The third day again to life he shall arise ,
And devour birds , and beasts of the wilderness ,
Cr ows , popinjaies, pies , peacocks , and mavies
The phoenix , with the eagle , and the griffon of fearfulness
The green lion with t he red dr agon , he shall distress ,
With the white dragon, and the antelope, unicorn and panther ,
With other beasts and birds both more and less
The Basiliske also , which almost each one doth fear .
27 .
In bus and nubibus he shall arise and descend ,
Up to the moon , and sith up to the sun
Through the Ocean Sea , which round is withouten end ,
Only shippen within a little glass tunne,
When he is there come , then is the masterie won ,
About which journey , great goods you shall not spend ,
83 .


--- Page 91 ---
And yet you shall be glad that ever it was begun,
Patiently if you list to your work attend .
28.
For then both bodie and spirit , also both oil and water
Soul, and tincture, one thing both white and red,
After colours variable it containeth , whatsoever men clatter,
Which also is called after he hath once been dead,
And is revived , our markasite, our magnet and our lead,
Our Sulphur, our arsenick , and our true calx vive,
Our sun our moon , our ferment and our bread ,
Our toad, our Basiliske our unknown bodie our man our wife,
29 .
Our bodie thus naturally by craft when he is renovate
Of the first order , is medicine called in our philosophy
Which oftentimes again must be Spiritualizate;
The round wheel turning of our Astronomie ;
And so to the Elixir of spirits you must come; for why
Till the son of the fixed by the son of the fixer be overgone,
Elixir of bodies, nemed it is only,
And this sound secret point , deceaveth many an one .
JO .
This natural process by help of craft thus consummate ,
Dissolveth Elixir spiritual in our unctious humtditie ,
Then in Balneo Mariae together let them be circulate
Like new honey or oil, till perfectly they be thickened,
Then will that medicine heal all infirmitie,
And turn all metals to sun and moon perfectly
Thus you shall make the great Elixir and Aurum Potabile,
By the Grace and Will of God , to whom be all honour and Glory.
Amen Quod George Ripley •
Finis •
84 .


--- Page 92 ---
1 l
S ecreti s i m us s
arr GEORGE RlPLEY


--- Page 93 ---
LIBER ·sECRETISSIMUS
GEORGE
RIPLEY
Aul hie aut nusq1am.
Lib er Lib.rum aper i I.
The Whole Work of the Compos ition
o f th e .Ph i I o s o p h i c a I St o n e an d
Grand El i xir, and of the
First Solution of the
Grosse Bodies:
Take our Arti ficial Antimony, but not the Natural Antimony as
it comes out of the Earth, for that is too dry for our work, and
hath little or no humidity , or fatness in it, but take I say , our
Artificial Antimonial Compound , which is abundantly replinished
with the Dew of Heaven and the fatness and unctuosity of the earth,
wherein precious Oils and rich Mercuries ar'e by Nature closely
sealed up, and hidden from the eyes of all ignorant deriders of
the great and wonderful mysteries of Almighty God , to the end
that seeing they should not see, nor understand, what he hath inclosed in the most obvious, common , and contemptible beginnings
~
.
'Of all Things in the whole World.
This our Antimonial Compound is only to be revealed to ·the Children of Art, who firmly believe the constant truth thereof , and
whom in all fraternal love and charity we say, that it is made of
one Sulphur, and of two Mercuries, which other wise by the wi se
Philosophers are called, the Sun, Moon, and Mercury , or as some
of them will more plainly have it, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury ,
which are the three several and distinct substances and bodies,
I.


--- Page 94 ---
although for the most part we term them but one Thing , because
in the conclusi on of our work they make but one Thing , that is
our admirable Elixir, and they have all one original , and tend
altogethe~ but to one end.
For if we had not in our Work a triune
aspect of these Planets , and did not begin it with a Trinity , all
would be lost labour and inutilous profile .
Wherefore if thou wilt thrive in our Art, we wish thee to begin
with our Illineral Trinity, whereof this our Artificial Antimonial
compound is made .
Take then first in the prime beginning of thy
Work , these three noble Kinsmen , who are immediately indued with
all the s~rong and subtile qualities of the four Elements , and in
their due and most natural proportions, (in which proportions
see thou do not erre , for if thou do , thou shalt never reduce those
bodies in~o our true Chaos, and so thou wilt be constrained to
begin again , which will be a most tedious discouragement unto thee).
Put them into a good and strong cucurbit, or glass body, and close
it well on the Top , that none of the spirits exhale, for if they
find a Vent to evaporate, thou art undone, because thereby thou
loosest and wasteth the flowers of our Gold.
When thy Vessel is
well closed , put it i nto the Philosophers Oven, and set it in
Ashes or sand, with a temperate fire under it , for the space of a
Philosophers Month , which is six whole weeks, and in that time
our grosse bodies will be dissolved and mortifi ed and made fit to
begin a more royal generation.
In this time of dissolution and putrefaction our three noble
Kinsmen , most unnaturally become the immane homicides of each
other , for they spare not with all cruelty to extract each others
vital blood , and are stewed in their own proper gores, and become
soft and tender , like unto butter, and are made all one thing
without ar.y difference, or distinction.
When thou hast brought
thy work to this pass , thank God, and be glad that through his
Grace and mercy thou hast obtained our Chaos dark and mistie,
which is the true one Thing written of by all the Philosophers ,
2.


--- Page 95 ---
-
our confused mass , and the prime ground of all our Secrets , for
therein lieth invisible couched , our Gold and Silver , our Sulphur
and Mercuries, our Christalline Water, our Oils and Ti nctures, and
our four Elements which thou must make visible and apparant to
all seeing eyes , else can nothing be effected, neither shalt thou
ever obtain thy wished for silvery and golden desire.
These Mercuries , Waters, Oils , Tinctures , and Elements , make
visible then and conspicuous thus .
After the aforesaid months
end, thy vessel being cold , open the mouth thereof, and set on the
top thereof a head of glass well fastened thereunto, and place
it in our Bath, and close well a receiver to the mouth of the helment, and draw out all the insipid and faint water, which take
away and reserve it close by itself, then fix your receiver on
again, and with a stronger fire in ashes , and draw out all the
White fume, which is called our Air, silverie Tincture and Virgins
Milk , which also remove ~nd keep it likewise most close stopped
by itself,
Then last of all put to another receiver, and in sand ,
with the strongest fire thou canst make, separate the red fume ,
which is called our natural fire , our golden Tincture , and radical
humidity of our Elemental bodies, and continue thy fire so long
until it leave bleeding, then asswage the fire by degrees , and
suddenly close it well with wax, that the spirits vanish not away ,
for this is called our blessed Liquor, and trust me there is not
a stronger poison in all the World than it , therefore keep it close
and meddle not with it till hereafter.
Thus now the work of Art , for Division and Separation, is the sole
work of Art and of the Artist , and not of Nature; for here Nature
i s forced by the Skill of the Workman, to forgo and part with her
beloved Elements, which she so straightly kept chained and inclosed
in her bosome, and which by violence by external fire, are even
as it were forcibly rent and torn from her.
Indeed , the first Work of Solution and Mortification is the
Sole operation of Natur e , for the Materials bei ng inclosed in their
J .


--- Page 96 ---
dungeon t here Nature attenuates them, there she dissol ves and
putrefies t h em , and causeth them to run a retrograde course into
thei r own first ma t ter again , that is, i nto a slimie and viscous
mass and substance , whereof at first out of the four Elements
they were formed and begotten.
And in that first work, the Artist
is but onl y a fire maker , which only giveth Nature strengt h and
power to work in and upon the materials, for without an exciting
fire Natur e were not able to effect anything, but she would wholly
remain idle and void of course , and that i n regard of the extreme
coldne·ss of the Mercury, for wher e cold predominates, heat must
needs l ie fettered and immoveable , but when the external fire stirreth up and provoketh the f i erce indignation of the Salt Menstrue,
she presently seizeth upon the fat unctuous body o_f the Sulphur ,
and extracts his natural heat and fiery element , and then both
of them together do so ardently incircle and work upon the cold
Mercury , that they dissever and scatter all his members into smaller
atomes than fly in the beams of the Sun , and then heat beginneth
to get the supereminence.
Ther efore in this FIRST WORK the Operator is but the Trustie
administrator of Nature, which in this case, the most i lleterate
and simple man in the World may be .
But in t he Secret Work of the conjunction of our Elements , both
Nature and Art, hand in hand accompaning each ot her, for there
the Artist findeth and imbibeth , and Nature fixeth and congealeth ,
which we will show hereafter , when we handle that work .
The FIRST WORK OF SOLUTION reduceth our Trinity and Antimonial
Compound into a green gum , called the Green Lyon , which gum dry
moderately well , but beware thou burn not his flowers, nor destroy
greenness, for therein lieth his Soul , which is our main Secret.
And our SECOND WORK manifests those things which were before
hid from sight , namely , i t makes our four Elements to appear visibly , and to be .had generally and distinctly.
But in this Second
Work if thou extract our Air and our Fire with the phl egm water ,
4.


--- Page 97 ---
...
they will the more naturally and easi ly be drawn out of their
infernal prison , and with less losse of their Spirits, than by the
former way before described.
After division is perfectly celebrated , thou shalt find in the
sides of ~he Cucurbit, and also in the head of the Alembick a
white hard Ryme much like the Congelation of a frosty vapour, or
like unto Mercury sublimate, which keep charily by itself in a
clean glass well closed, for therein lieth hid a great secret, for
therewith thou mayest abbreviate the work , in half the time, and
with half the labour that else it would be done in, which will
prove a greater ease and benefit , and shorten expenses .
The Cleansing of our Base.
It is most certain , that the external fire is a great friend
to us, and his nature is such , that he can indure no impurity in
anything , therefore at the day of Judgement, the Elemental fire
shall purifie, cleanse, and burn up all the impure earth that we
tread on, and purge it from all dross and filth.
So likewise must it do in our work .
Wherefore after the separation of our Water , Air and Fire out of our Earth ; Take out the
black feces which remain in the bottom of our Vessel, called our
Dragon , and grind it into small powder , and calcine it in two
crucibles luted together , in a potters furnace, or in a glass, or
wind furnace , until it look whitish or something grey , which Calx
keep by itself , for it is called the Base and Foundation of our
Work, and it is now called MARS, and our White Fixed Earth .
The Purification of our Faint Waters .
But that thou mayest loose no time nor be idle, while the Earth
is calcining, distil the Water that was first drawn out of the
Compound , seven times , until it be clear as Crystal, but do it
5.


--- Page 98 ---
by itself alone , not intermixing any other thing therewith, and
then hast thou our pure river of Water of Life, which hath power
and virtue to revive the dead body from whence it sprung, and to
make it white and Shini ng like a pure Alabaster .
As for our other
Arie and fiery Waters, they are so fixed and permanent, that no
fire will again elevate their substances, but they would stand
in the fire, until Doomsday without any wasting or exhalation.
All things being now purified without and within, now beginneth
the Work of Art and Nature, wherein, the one must inseparably aid
the other , for if either refuses to help each other, all the former
sweats and Toiles are to no purpose, for Nature can not bring
our disserved elements together without the assistance of the
expert Artist; neither can the Artist coagulate the elements put
together without Nature, wherefore Nature implores the aid of the
Artist with an Adjuna me, & ego adjunabose .
And the Artist finding
before , what good Nature had done him, in dissolving and putrefying the bodies , is as ready to help her, thus.
The Work of Conjunction of our Elements.
Take the abovesaid calcined faeces called MARS, or Our Dragon
which devoureth his own Tail , and put thereof so much into a glass
body , as scarcely fill half of it, and pour thereon so much of
our rectified water of Life, as well may but cover the Calx made
into powder, which done, incontinently stop the glass with a blind
head well luted to the body , and set it in hot ashes, until the
Cabe have drunk up and congealed all the Liquor, which it will
do in eight days, and so from eight days to eight days imbibe the
said Calx with his own water, and that he will drink no more, but
is very white and shineth as the Eyes of Fishes, and be full of
Chrystalline Plates, then, the said Calx being very dry, take it
out of the glass, and separate from it, all the Chrystalline Plates,
and make ~hem only into Powder, put that powder, which we call
6.


--- Page 99 ---
-
SULPHUR OF NATURE, or FOLIATED EARTH into another glass, and pour
thereon some of our Whi.te Arie fume called Virgins Milk, upon a
lent fire congeal them together, and continue this Work until
it have drunk almost all his Air, and is become fixt and permanent.
Then take it out , make it into powder and incerate it.with
part of his reserved Air by drops , until it become like liquid
honey, and that it will melt and flow like Wax, on a coal fire,
and not evaporate, thus hast thou the perfect White Stone, and
Silverie Medicine, which transmuteth all imperfect metalli ne bodies
into true , solid and perfect Luna.
The Red Work.
When thou hast once obtained our White Stone in manner and form
aforesaid, divide it into two equal parts, and to the one of them
put the 4th. part of Mercury sublimate both of them pulverized,
mix them well together , and put them into a glass which stop close,
and set it into your furnace, and there let it stand for _the space
of a month, in a temperate fire, until it be one body, then take
part of it to project for your necessitie , and the other part you
may still multiply with sublimate, or Quicksilver purified with
Salt and Vinegar, unto your lifes end , and so substract and multiply at your pleasure.
But for the Red , take the other half of your reserved White
Stone, and pulverize it, and put it into a glass , and pour thereon
a little of our fiery water , or Gol den Tincture , and congeal them
together upon a slender fire lest your glass break , by force of
the venome and insuperable power of our Red and fiery Mercury,
do so once or twice , until it be perfectly fixed , then take it out
make it into red powder_, and incerate it in a crucible with his
said red Oil , or fiery Water , until it flow like Wax , as you did
the White Medicine, then have you OUR DARK RED STONE somewhat like
the powder of an Hoematite, which is able to do miracles upon


--- Page 100 ---
earth, but we intend not to reveal them at this time, leaving it
to be experienced by those , whom Almighty God shall think worthy
to teach, by this our little and brief , but pithie and true book ,
unto whom we perpetually owe all thinks and praise , for endowing
us with the Knowledge thereof.
The Accurtation of the Great Work, which saveth half the Time
and Labour .
The White Rogue, or powder, whereof we spake before , and willed
thee carefully to reserve it, which is perfect Sulphur of Nature,
and foliated Earth , which needs neither imbibing, nor digesting
unto the white.
Take it therefore , and being ground fine and small , imbibe it
with a fourth part of our before said Air, or Virgins Milk.
But observe by the Way, that thou must have great store of our
Water, Air and Fire , and those extracted out of five or six several Compcunds, or Chaos, so that after you have driven one Chaos
out of the Oven, you must presently set in a new one, and so successively one after another, and then separate their elements, for
else you will want waters and oils for imbibition , inceration, and
multiplication, and if thy work be discontinued for want of such
materials, all is spoiled and wi ll come to nothing , for if thou
once begin , thou must proceed without stay or interruption unto
the full end.
But to the matter, having imbibed the said Ryme, congeal the
whole on a soft fire, until it be drunk up , then imbibe and congeal it twice more until it be fixed, after that powder it, and
incerate it, with some of our Air by drops, as thou didst thy
white medicine before, until it flow like wax upon a red hot iron,
and fly not away, thus shalt thou have the White Stone perfectly
made in half the time , and with half the labour which is a precious Jewel , and a great Secret .
8 .


--- Page 101 ---
The Accurtation of the Red Work .
Take the whole , or the half , of this our White Stone , made of
the said rtyme , and being pulverized, put i~ into a strong egg
glass , and imbibe it with a little of our Red fiery Mercury , and
set it on a weak fire for fear of breaking the glass , congeal it
into a dry powder , then imbibe it and congeal it so twice more
until it be strongly fixed , then take it out , pulverize it, and
incerate it with our said fiery Oil by drops in a strong crucible,
on a gentle fire until it flow like wax as is before said.
Then
hast thou the Red Stone perfect with less labour , expence of time
and costs, for the which ever thank God .
This Secret was never before discovered by any of the Ancient
Philosophers, for they were ever envious of their rare Mysteries ,
which we have now fully disclosed , for the honour of God , and for
thy good, that thereby thou mayst perform holy Works of Charity
and Mercy, plentifully supplying and relieving the fatherless and
widdowers, redeeming prisoners and captives , especially such as
suffer for our Blessed Lord and Saviour, Christ Jesus sake.
Our Whit e Stone is Multiplied by reiterate imbibition , congealation, and incerati on , with our Airie Virgins Milk, for the more and
oftner you put that to it, the more it i~creaseth in quantity ,
and it is thereby made th~ more subtile and penetrating , and converteth the more metal, with the lesser of its quantity.
In li~e manner our Red ·stone is also multiplied by reiterate
imbibition, congealation , and Inceration with our fiery Oil , or
Red Mercury , and therewith thou mayst so acuate it, that it shall
be able, not· only to penetrate metals , but also the hardest Stones,
and whatsoever other said Things in the Whole World .
Whosoever then shall obtain these Medicines , he shall have incomparable Treasures, above all the Treasures of this World.
FINIS.
9.


--- Page 102 ---
Of this Salt, Helbigius Saith:
British Museum MSS. Sloane #630
The above is the only title given this small tract
The Philosophers speak of MERCURY, SULPHUR and SALT, this third
principle viz. the Salt while I breathe I will extoll with most
ample prayers as most true principle.
In this is whatever the
Wise Men seek.
Its all in all.
It opens and shuts .
This reigns
in the Air.
It rules both earth and water , which equal Sulphur
and utmost force .
Its the third and last of most natural things
in Nature.
Water is the Mother of it; This is the MERCURY sought
after by Chemists, and their Sulphur; its neither Kitchen Salt,
nor Sea Salt nor calcined Salt, nor volatilized Salt.
Nor any other
thing produced by the help of fire .
But the most noble grain of
the maturity and excellency of everything.
Added out of the subtility of the superior Waters, to the Inferiour , for a soul and
for the beginning added to them .
We name i t in emminent manner
the Salt of Nature .
This primogenius Salt is not corrosive; not acrid, scarce sensibly astringent , most penetrative and opening , Dissolving and
when you follow the Natural Process or motion, it is Coagulating
and Maturating. Its part of the certain body obtained out of the
fire , and through continued motion , so nobilitated , and maturated
that it deservedly meri ts the Title of the Soul Essence and Salt
of Nature.
It rests upon the whole Universe , but in one place i n greater
quanti ty than another, one part whereof is easier to obtain than
another.
Whether is the MERCURIAL Viscous liquor or t he SULPHUREOUS Salt
easier obtained?
There are thr ee Kingdomes : The Inferiour that lies under mens
IO .


--- Page 103 ---
-
feet, the Middle Kingdom, the Animal, and the Superiour Kingdom ,
that, which is above us and in which we live ; It is in all three
as vide the Author .
But the middle Kingdom possesseth the most excellent SALT of
Nature and the greatest part thereof & etc . , which is as well drawn
thereout as out of the Superiour and Inferiour Kingdoms .
The Seat hereof therefore is the Middle Kindom, whose seat I call
SPELUNCA, a cave and Den, the house and habitation of sadness and
gladness.
The Inhabitant whereof or Indweller is called the Magnet,
Chaos .
Improperly Sendivogius stiles , the Hyle , the first matter.
And
it enjoys so great (an) abundance of the Salt of Nature , as no
body in the world hath so much.
It is beheld by many , but by reason of its viscid slimy cloathing, and the darkness of its leaden
colour, it seems vile , and being dug up is sometimes cast back
again (rejected) with nausia and loathing.
It is purchased with
labour but never with money.
And being once obtained it is always
sufficient (the reason thereof is that it is so easily augmented) .
The first begotten Salt of Nature being drawn down to the custody
of the Magnet, and being purified and applied to another subject,
by the heat of motion is stirred up and is made as it were an
Agent, which dissolves the Metals and Minerals which are transformed by the motion of the Water, and it opens , enters , the more
ignoble , crude, gross part of the transmuted Water ; and it doth
open that which incloses the Salt which is like itself and doth
enter into it, and helps it then that perfect grave of essence
may have greater power over the rest .
E. Q. Gold .
Gold being dissolved radically (through the operation of this
Salt as a Menstruum) by the virtue of which , and also of his own
essence (which is the same salt) which virtue is stirred up by
the motion of external heat , thus the Gold is en- nobled , and is
exalted to such a degree far exceeding the common and crude maturation it receives in the earth, so that it yields seed which inserted
II.


--- Page 104 ---
into the lesser and more unripe metals, by that Illumination doth
advance them far above the excellency of common Gold .
This Salt is that Universal Menstruum, the Coaerulated Water of
Nature .
The Vitriol of the Little World (that is the Philosophical
Egg) .
The Philosophical sublimate Mercury & etc.
This i s the
field to which Gold serves for seed.
For the separation of this Treasure, First the unprofitable part
must be cast away from the useful part , the useful part must be
purified , and separated into two parts (viz . into Mercurial Water
and Sulphurical Earth) .
The greater part flys away and ascends ,
the lesser part remai ns below as dead, until the rest of the filth
being abstracted , the upper part doth exalt the lower ; both which
being united they ripen the Gold that is added to them, and effect
it with infinite fertility.
This agrees with the other particular process which appoints
to take crude Solar and lunar or Mercurial Minerals, wherein Mercury is as yet crude and unripe , wherein the sulphurial heat hath
not yet so far coagulated the Mercurial Water ; as to bring it to
the body ~f Mercury , much less to the dryness of Antimony; (so
that certainly its in neither of these, they are past it) purifie
the matter by washing and removing the stony or too gross part ,
then putrify it 90 days, and then distil it in Balneo gently.
The which all is rising with the heat , then you may see what more
of the Mercurial Liquor rose, you may by greater heat of Sand come
the Sulphureous Earth to arise in flowers . *
* Note .
The Flowers that lie in the middle in the sublimation
that are the reddest and shining are the best , not the lightest
they are not fixed enough , and the lowest are too dropsycal, but
experience will show this .
Or the Flowers* may be got of another Solar Root .
* Note .
(or SULPHUR) some say by digestion of them together
a due time .
Then by often Cohobation of this Mercurial Water upon this
12.


--- Page 105 ---
-
~ulphurial earth, vi z. the flowers ; the liquor is so i mpregnated
with Solar SULPHUR~ that it is the true Menstruum for pure Sol
which will dissolve it and r i pen it as above said, viz . Two parts
of this Mercurial SULPHURATED liquor, and one part of purified
Sol , or Solution of Sol, put into a Philosophical Egg , not a third
full, hermetically sealed; placed in a nest in an Athanor in such
a gentle heat as only keeps a continual vapour and. moisture in the
glass with a constant ki nd of motion, therein also; through all
the colours, till it come to white and red & etc.
Too much heat
will too soon dry up the vapour and moisture, and fix the motion
(and burn Icarus his wings) too litt le heat will not raise such
natural Dewy Vapours, nor cause such Veget able and Animal motions ,
and as of the outward, the like may be said of the Inward heat
and moisture; the Philosophical Sulphur and t h e true Mercury of
the Philosophers are the Inward fire and Water of the Philosophers,
whi ch for the same reasons must be exactly ordered in the due .
quantity aforesaid ; And ~hen the Red and White, one or both , as
you please , may be again dissolved in the aforesaid Menstruum ,
and coagulated till they at tain the desired strength.
FINIS .
IJ.


--- Page 106 ---
A Short Process Following This Treatise
The way to change MERCURY as red as blood which being converted
into powder transmuteth LUNA into SOL; first make an AQUA-FORTIS
of VITRIOL and NITRE and distill it 3 times from its own CAPUT
MORTUUM.
Rx .
of this AQUA- FORTIS 3 ii j g MERCURY V iij in a retort,
let them distill then & cohobate so often until the MERCURY bears
red as blood , which will be in 5 or 6 times , then bring it to a
red powder by imbibing it with the red oil of VITRIOL 3 times,
then dry it and bring it into a red powder and divide it into 8
parts.
Then take
LUNA & t J
remain t J
t j g SATURN upon a test, when it dri veth put 3 i g
of SOL & i g the 8 parts of powder, and there will
of SOL.
I4.


--- Page 107 ---
MEDULLA ALCHYMltE
THE MARROW OF ALCHEMY
Written in Latin by George Ripley, Canon
of Bridlington, which he sent out of Italy
anno 1476. To the Arch-Bishop of York.
Translated into E?glish and now revised and claused by:
WILLIAM SALMON
prof f essor of physick


--- Page 108 ---
-
--
C H A P T E R L X I
THE PREFACE TO THE ARCH-BISHOP OF YORK.
I.
I Shall endeavour Sir , to explicate, open , and make
plain to you , the Secrets of Alchymie , which I have
attained to , by my Travels through Italy; and other
Countries and Kingdoms for the SP.ace of-Nine Years, drawing Forth , and Selec ting the true Root, and Marrow of
Nature (by a series of Experiences) from its most inward
Recesses, and secret Habitations.
II .
The which I am moved and compelled to from the
singular Good-will , entire Affections, and
Sincere Love,
whi ch as well as in times past , I now at present bear
unto you: And therefore shall faithfully (tho' briefly)
declare the. Secret s of this Art to you; plainly and openl y , not Darkly and Aenigmatically, as if it was done under
a Shadow or Vail .
III .
Such indeed is your Life (Your Works witnessi ng
the same) that you a r e as a healing Balm, a Refuge of
of Defence , and Shel ter to t he Church of God, a Pi llar
of his Holy Temple , for which Reasons , I am obliged to
reveal these hidden Mysteries , and make known to you
t he abscondite Paths of Nature , not to rejoyce your
outward Man only, by adding Health and long Life,
leaping up Treasures , and external Honours and Applause,
- 1-


--- Page 109 ---
in the World, but to excite in you the highest Devotion
to God Almighty, that you might become good to all Men,
profitable to the Church, a Father to the Fatherless ,
and a Sanctuary to the Needy and Distressed .
IV.
And in these things, I am confident of you , in whom
is found such a Portion and Treasure of Vertue, Prudence ,
Piety, and true Wisdom, but most chiefly, for that I
know you to be such a one, who has God always before your
Eyes .
V.
And therefore I speak truly and fervently , and I will
declare the Truth to you , with all faithfulness according
to the reality of my Soul; I shall Elucidate the undoubted
Verity, and declare such things, as with much Labour ,
Care, and Diligence I have sought out , and obtained the
knowledge of; which I have seen with my Eyes, and have
handled with my Hands, and which my own self has done :
And in this matter I will neither be tedious nor obscure, lest that love which I profess to you, should
seem to be deficient or imperfect.
VI .
Whatever I write , I shall open the same briefly and
plainly beseeching God, that the matter whereof I shall
entreat , may become profitable unto you; and that if you
shall please to put t h e same into practice you may find
the faithful experience thereof , and not be deceived , or
spend your time in vain: For we know certainly, that of all
-2-


--- Page 110 ---
t r ansitory things, Time is truly the most pretious .
VII.
Wherefore I write unto you (honourable and dearly
beloved Friend) such things only as may be profitable;
making this hurnbi,e suit unto your Excellency, that the
Revealed Secrets and Experiments which I send you in
this little Book , may not be prostituted, or bestowed
upon unworthy Men, who are naughty, or swoln up with
Pride, or whose Souls are bound up in their Covetousness.
VIII.
I require not of you for this Secret, a great
Sunun of Gold or Silver; nor do I put this Secret in
writing, for you to bestow much Cost and Expences upon
it; nor do I for my self desire any reward, these things
agree not with the Philosophick Verity, which professes,
that its Works are not chargeable and Expensive. Morienus
saith, beware that you spend nothing in this Magistery of
Gold.
And Das~ine, saith with the Value of one Noble
is the whole Magistery performed.
IX·.
Since then it' is so, in what thing is our Gold to
be found?
Is it not in Mercury, which is called Quick or
living Gold?
Raymandus saith, He that will reduce Quick
Gold into thin water, must make it, doe it, and Work it
by its contrary.
For saith he, Quick or living Gold,
has in its self, four Natures, and four humours or
Elements .
And therefore saith he, if you putrefie its
Cold with its Hot, and its Dry with its Moist, you shall
-3-


--- Page 111 ---
not only have the Humidity of all Bodies, but you shall
have a Menstruum, which will dissolve Argent Vive for ever.
For the least part of Mercury being once dissolved, the
dissolved Mercury will always dissolve Mercury ad Infinitum.
x.
(Mercury may as well be called Quick- Gold, as QuickSilver, for it contains them both.
If Air will make this
Separation, we must put thereto divers contrary things , as
Roger Bacon saith in Speculo.
But this putrefaction cannot be done , till it is dissolved in Water white as Milk,
putrifie that Milk 15 days in B.M. then separate its
Element, and cleanse its Earth, and after that joyn it
again in equal weight , then is the Elixir made compleate
for Saturn and Jupiter.
Quick- Gold is Crude, Imperfect ,
and unfixt in every degree, and yet it is accounted a
Body, altho ' there be no fixation in it , and therefore it
may be much sooner brought to its first matter , than any
other o= the Bodies, that have any part of fixation in
them, for they must have much Labour and long time to
separate them, and bring them back i hto their fixt mat ter.)
XI.
For saith Lully, The Elements of Mercury may be dissolved , and being so dissolved , they may be separated .
There be some that think our Resoluble Seed , or dissolved
Menstrum, is the water of Argent Vive , made only by i t
self , because it does dissolve both Metals, and pretious
Stones which we call Pearls; and so it is .
Now how this
- 4-


--- Page 112 ---
dissolving Menstrurn is made, not only Raymund seems to
shew, but Roger Bacon in like manner in his Speculum
Alchymia , where he saith, put the Body which is most
weighty, into a Distillatory, and draw forth thereof , its
Sweet Ros, or Dew, with a little Wind, or Breath : (for
betwixt every drop of Water , comes forth a Breath, as it
were of a Man, which is the substance of Argent Vive , and
which the Philosophers call our Mercury; which if it be
well putrefied before hand, will then yield the more, and
issue out forcibly , as if it were Wild- Fire out of a
Trunk, especially when the Red Furne comes.)
Thus have
you one of our Argent Vives .
XII.
To the same thing Rayrnundus assents, where he
saith, then have you that Argent Vive, which is called
Ours; and so it is indeed one of Our Argent vive; altho'
the intent of the same Philosopher in . Libro Animae Artis
Transmutatoriae, Cap. 2 was touching another more noble
and more excellent Water (supposed by some, to be Our
Burning- Water , drawn out of the Gum of Vitriol ,) by the
Virtue of which most Noble and Excellent, attractive
Water, he did not only often dissolve the Body of Sol
(not as he doth it with the a foresaid Argent vive commonly dissolved) bu~ also the same solar Body , by force
of that attractive Virtue, is disposed in a more noble
manner; as I my self have seen done, not only in the
Metalline Elixir, but also in the Elixir of Life, as here -
after shall be declared, Chap. 71, 72 . Sect.
. -5-


--- Page 113 ---
XIII .
It is fancied by an Experienced Philosopher, that
Mercury did speak, and said, I
am the Father of Enchantments, Brother to the Sun, and Sister to the Moon, I am
the Water of Life drawn out of Wine , (i.e. out of the
Wine of Mercury ) I kill that which was alive , and make
alive that which was dead; I make Black, and I make White,
and I carry in my Belly the Sol of Philosophers; and therefore he that can joyn me after that I am dissolved , and
made the pure clear and Silver like Water, called Lac
Virginis, with my Brother the Sun , he shall tinge him
with my Soul , not only much more than he was before by
an hundred fold, but also if he be joyned with my Sister
Luna, he shall make all things fair and bright . (this
Lac virginis is a Silver-like Water somewhat thick . )
-6-


--- Page 114 ---
....
-
C H A P T E R L X I I
A FARTHER DISCOURSE OF THE PHILOSOPHERS MERCURY .
I .
Of this Mercury, speaks another Philosopher thus, when
its Elements are separated, and again joyned and mixed
together by equal weight , then is it made a compleat
Elixir upon ·Saturn and Jupiter; but its Elements cannot
be separated, until such time as it is dissolved: and
of this Metalline Water , ought the Artist to draw the
Tinctur e .
II .
(The Elements of Mercury being separated , and again
commixed by equal weight · or proportion, make the Elixir
compleat with often dissolvi ng and congeal ing of the
Spirit, which must be done upon a Marble Stone , weighing the Body, and t hen taking its weight of the Secrets
Salt, grinding them together very subtil, then putting
them into Balneo , that they may be dissolved ; which done,
take it out , and make your congelation a dry Fire , do so
oftentimes , and then, etc.)
III .
And therefore to confi rm this , Raymundus saith, 0
my Son, Our Tincture is drawn out of one Vile thing, and
i s decked , finished , and ended with another thing whi ch
is more Nob le; for we do Ferment it with Vulgar Gold :
He calls i t Vile, because he saith it is sometimes found
- 7-


--- Page 115 ---
in Vile Places, as in Old draughts : also it is Vile,
because (as Raymundus saith) it is found not only in a
filthy form, and ugly shape, but because it is in every
thing, of the which (saith Albertus) is made a Permenent
or fixt Water.
IV.
(Here is to be Noted , that Raymundus commands this
Tincture to be drawn out of the Body of Venus , which
Tincture he does Ferment with the prepared Calx of common
or Vulgar Gold.)
V.
And therefore saith Avicen, it behoves you to have a
great quantity of our Gold , and of our Silver , to the end ,
that thereby the humours may be drawn forth: viz . to have
at the least sixty pounds weight , which will be a sufficient quantity for your whole life .
He also saith, the
best Mercury is brought in skins, from Mount Pasullane.
Of this Mercury, Geber saith , you must labour in all your
work to separate Mercury
or as others read it, to convince or over- come Mercury, in cornrnixing and conjoyning;
for he that cannot destroy Mercury, or undoe it in its
composure, cannot repair or restore it: nor may you work
with it as Raymund saith , till it is dissolved.
VI .
And therefore it is said , joyn not that which is
Crude , wi th that which is Decocted; for of that only with
the Ferment , is made the Elixir, which does congeal all
manner of Argent Vive.
Wherefore as Raymund saith , it is
- 8-


--- Page 116 ---
never congealed without a congealing -Sulphur ; and being
congealed, you have a great secret : for in the dissolved,
Decocted Mercury , is a great and hidden Mystery.
VII.
Another Philosopher also saith, that there is a
certain subtil Furne , which does spring forth from its
proper Veins , dispersing and spreading its self abroad
the which thin Fume if it be wisely gathered together
again, and sprinkled upon its proper Veins or Matrix , it
will make not only a certain fixation (of which thin Fume ,
in short space is made the true Elixir) but also cleans.es
the Impure Metals or Alchymick Body.
VIII.
(as to the Tincture mentioned at Sect. 4 above, it
rather seems by other works of the said Raymundus, that he
drew it out of Quick-Silver, and no other vile thing, of
which Mercury is made.
What is meant at Sect . 6 . by
not joyning the Crude with the Decocted,is to be understood of not joyning Crude Mercur~ to the Decocted Bodies
or Metals , but to put to them Decocted , i.e . dissolved
Mercury.
And herein is hidden a great secret , for Mercury being dissolved, is an hot and moist Sperm; but
Crude , it is cold and dry Saturn.
So that if you putrifie
its hot and moist Sperm with i fs cold and dry Earth, you
will have Quick- Silver dissolved, which is not Crude , but
Decocted Mercury .
So that in Crude Mercury dissolved is
hidden a great Mystery.
And however it is dissolved by a
-9-


--- Page 117 ---
Fire not natural or against Nature , yet it must be mixed,
conjoyned, fixed.)
IX.
This Alchymick Body is called Leprous Gold, wherein
Gold and Silver , are in Essence and Power, but not in fight
or appearance; in its Profundity or Depth , it is Airous
or Spiritual Gold , which none can obtain , unless the same
Body be first made clean and pure.
The which impure Body
after mundification, is a thousand times better than are
the Bodies of conunon Sol and Luna , Decocted by natural
heat.
X.
(This Leprous Gold the Philosophers call , Adrop, or
Adrup , which Gold is the Philosophers Lead.
This Alchymick Body (in his Concord) he calls Venus in the lesser
Work , both for Goid and Silver , because it is a Neutral
Body, and very easie to be changed to either : and by this
the sense of Sect. 4 and 8 . aforegoing may be more easily
understood.
The Earth , the uncleansed Body , is to be
putrified with its own Water , and afterwards nourished
with its Mothers Milk , which is called the Sulphur of
Nature.)
XI .
The fir s t Matter of this unclean Alchymical Body is
a Viscous · Water , which is thickened in the Bowels of the
Earth.
And therefore of this Impure Body (as Vincent
- 10-


--- Page 118 ---
-
-
saith) is made the great Elixir of the Red and White, whose
name is Adrop, or Adrup, viz. the Philosophers -Lead.
From
the which Rayrnundus commands an Oyl to be drawn: from the
Lead of the Philosophers (saith he) let there be an Oyl
drawn of a Golden Colour; if you can separate this Oyl
(wherein is Our second Tincture and Fire of Nature) from
its Flegm, which is it watrishness , and wisely search out
the Secret thereof , you may in the space of thirty days
perform the Work of the Philosophers Stone .
XII.
This Oyl does not only make the Medicine penetrable, being amicable and conjoynable to all Bodies or
Corporeal things, but it is also the hidden or Secret fire
of Nature; whi ch does so augment the Excellenci es of
thos e Bodies to whom it is so joyned , that it makes them
to exceed in infinite proportions of goodness and purity.
So much as does appertain to the Work of Alchymiae, which
is only for the Elixir of Metals is now sufficiently
opened , which if you right ly understand , you will find
that no great cost is required to the performance of this
Philosophick Operation.
XIII .
( The Innatural Fire is Our Aqua Foetens , or Seawater, sharp, peircing , and burning all Bodies more
f i ercely than El emental Fire , making of t he Body of Sol ,
a meer Spirit , whic h common Elemental Fire has not
power to do.)
-11-


--- Page 119 ---
XIV.
But this Elixir of Metals is not all that I intend
to shew you; the Elixir of Life is that which I chiefly
designed, infinitely exceeding all the Riches of this
World, and to which the most excellent of all the Earthly
things cannot be compared.
And therefore , I shall 1. Shew
in the Mineral Kingdom, the Elixir of Metals , and that
after divers manners.
2 . In the Vegetable Kingdom, the
Elixir both of Metals, and of Life.
3. In the Animal
Kingdom, the Elixir of Life only; albeit the same Elixir
of Lite is most excellent for the transmutation of Metalls.
XV.
There are three things necessary to this Art, of which
you ought not to ignorant, viz.
1 . The Fire wherewith :
( The fire of Nature , Innatural, Elemental , and which is
against Nature , destroying the special form of all that
is dissolved therein . )
2 . The Water whereby : (as in the
.Compound Water . )
3. And the thing whereof : (is made the
congealed Earth , as White as Snow*)
Of all which in their
proper order .
*(compare with Golden Chain of Homer- HWN)
-12-


--- Page 120 ---
C H A P T E R
L X I I I
OF THE MINERAL STONE~ AND PHILOSOPHICK FIRES.
I.
On a time as I have learned, there was an Assembly of
Philosophers, where the Matter of the Secret Stone, and
the Manner of working it, was propounded.
Several spoke
their Opinions, but at length , one younger in Years, and
(as was thought) Inferiour in Learning, declared his
thoughts and knowledge concerning that Secret.
I know
saith he, the Regiments of the Fires.
When they had
heard what he could say, they all as a mazed held their
peace for a while .
II.
At length, one of the Company made answer; If this
be true which thou hast said, thou art Master of us all,
and thereupon with one consent, they gave him the Right
Hand of Fellowship.
Whereupon they gathered, that the
Secret of this wonderful Tincture lay chiefly in the Fire.
III.
But the Fire differs after several manners; one
Natural, another innatural or preternatural, another
Elemental, another against Nature.
The Natural Fire
does come from the Influence of Sol, and Luna, and the
Asterisms, or the Sun, Moon and Stars, of the which are
Ingendred, not only the burning Waters, and potential
Vapours of Minerals, but also the Natural Virtues of
living things.
-13-


--- Page 121 ---
IV.
The Innatural or Preternatural Fire, is a thing
accidental, as Heat in an Ague, being made Artifically , and
called by the Philosophers a moist Fire , Our generating
Water, the fire of the first Degree; and for the temperature of its Heat is called a Bath, a Stew, a Dunghil, in
which Dunghil is made the putrefaction of our Stone.
See
Sect. 13 of the former Chapter, where it is more amply
defined.
v.
The Elemental fire, is that which does Fix, Calcine
and Burn, and is nourished by Combustible things.
VI.
The fire against Nature (which is a violent strong,
Corrosive, destroying the special form of that which is
dissolved therein,) is that which in Power Dissolves,
Frets , Infects, and destroys the generative Power of the
form of the Stone: it does Dissolve the Stone into Water
of the Cloud, with the loss of its Natural, Attractive,
and special Form, and is called Fire against Nature (as
Raymundus saith) from its Operation: for that which
Nature does make, this fire against Nature destroys and
brings to Corruption, unless there be fire of Nature
put to i t.
VII.
Here as Raymundus saith, lies contrary Operations,
(as in the Compounded Water) for as the fire against
Nature, does Dissolve the Spirit of the fixed Body~ the
Volatile Spirit is thereby constrained to retire into a
-14-


--- Page 122 ---
fixed Earth, (a Congealed Earth as White as Snow .)
VIII.
For the fire of Nature does Congeal the Dissolved
Spirit of tne fixed Body into a glorious Earth: and the
Body of the Volatile being fixed , by the same fire against
Nature , is here again by the fire of Nature resolved into
the Water of Philosophers, but not into the Water of the
Cloud: and so by this means the fixed is returned back
again into its wonted Nature of Flying, and the moist is
made dry , and the ponderous is made light.
IX.
But yet he saith, this fire which is against Nature
is .not the Work of Our Magistery, but it is xhe fire
which is purely Natural.
This he saith, because he would
shew us thereby the difference between t he Mineral Elixir,
and the Vegetable, and the Animal.
For that these three
several Elixirs are made of three several Waters, viz.
Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal , which serve for the Work
divers ways.
X.
And First we will Treat of the Mineral Elixir, then
of the other in order .
The Fire against Nature is a
Mineral Water, (viz. the Humour or Tincture drawn out
of Body of Venus Dissolved in its Mineral Spirit) very
strong and Mortal, serving only to the Mineral Elixir.
XI .
. Thi s Mineral Water, or Fire against Nature, is
drawn with fire Elemental, from a certain stinking Menstruum, as Rayrnundas saith, and is made of four things.
-15-


--- Page 123 ---
It is the strongest Water in the World, whose only Spirit,
(saith he) does wonderfully increase and multiply the
Tincture of the Ferment : for here Sol or Gold is Tinged
with the Mineral Spirit, the which Mineral Spirit is the
strength of the most simple Sulphur without much Earthiness.
XII.
(Thin Mineral Water is the dropping of Adrop or
Adrup, Venus , which is the noble Tincture called the
natural Roman Vitriol, and which for the abundance of
its noble Tincture, is called Roman Gold.)
XIII .
This some do call the Spirit of the Green Lyon,
others the blood of the Green Lyon: wherein almost all
Err , and are deceived: for the Green Lyon of the Phi1 -
osophers, is that Lyon, by whose Virtue attractive, all
things are lifted up from the Bowels of the Earth, and
the Winter- like Caverns, making them to Wax green and
flourish: whose Child (for all the Elixirs are to be
had from it) is to us most acceptable and sufficient.
XIV.
(The Child of Philosophers is generated of their
Green Lyon , of which Child is had the strength of Sulphur, both White and Red; Our two Sulphurs of Nature are
the Gold and Silver of the Philosophers , and their
hidden Treasure.)
-16-


--- Page 124 ---
XV.
Of this Child of the Green Lyon of the Philosophers
is drawn the strength of Sulphur White and Red , but not
Burning as Avicen saith, which are the two best things
the Alchymist can take to make his Gold and Silver of:
and this is sufficient to be said, · for the attaining the
knowledge of the Green Lyon: which is so called, because,
that when he is dissolved, he is streight ways adorned
with a green Vesture.
(i.e. When our Sulphur of Nature
is disso l ved in its own Menstruum , which is the Virgins
Milk , it is clothed with this greenness, and therefore
called the Green Lyon.)
XVI.
But of the :Green Lyon of Fools, ~his we say, that
from it with a str ong , fire is drawn Aquafortis, i n the
whi ch, the aforesaid Philosophers Lyon of the Miner al
Stone , ought to be Elixirated, and assumes its Name .
Raymundus sai th, i t were better, or safer, to eat , the
Eyes of a Basalisk, than that Gold, which is made with
the Fi re agains t Nature.
XVII .
And I say also , that the things from whence the
same Aquafortis i s drawn is green Vitriol and Azoth: i . e .
Vitriol Natural, not Ar tifici al, v i z. the droppings of
Copper , called also Roman Vitriol~ Roman Gold, by many of
the Philosophers , from the abundance of its noble Tincture,
the whi ch Tinctur e mus t be Fermented with common Gold.
-17-


--- Page 125 ---
XVIII .
How great and Secret a Virtue, then, and of what
strength, the Fire against Nature is, evidently appears
in the construction of the Body of the Volatile Spirit ,
being by its vulgarly sublimed in the form of Snowy Whiteness .
Raymundus in the end of the Epistle of his Abridgment saith, feed Argent Vive with this Oyl, viz . with
the Oyl, wherewith the Spirit of the Quintessence is
thickened, etc.
XIX .
For want of such, Natural Virtiol, the true and
natural Principle , not Artificial , (as Vincent saith)
made of Salts , Sulphurs , and Alums , which cut and gnaw
Metals, is to be chosen, lest in the end of your work
you fail of your desire.
(The Philosophers will you to
Calcine Sol with Mercury Crude, till it be brought into
a Calx Red as Blood: Here comes in the work of Sol and
Mercury together , brought into a dry Red Pouder and
fixed, but whether it is to be done with Mercury or
Sulphur, the Water of him, is doubtful .)
-18-


--- Page 126 ---
C H A P T E R L X I V
THE MANNER OF ELIXIRATION WITH THE FIRE AGAINST NATURE.
I.
Take the first Sol, Calcined with the first Water,
viz. the Mercurial Spirit, very clean, and brought into
the Color of Blood, in the space of 20 days, (in lesser
time it is not to be done.)
This Calcination cannot be
so profitable, as it would be, unless Sol be first Mercurializ'd into such a thinness, as it may cleave together to that to which it must be joyned in a 24 fold
proportion, (viz. as 1. to 24.) strained through a
clean Linnen Cloth, without any remaining substance of
the Gold .
II.
I my self have seen it so ordered and done; and then
it may certainly, in a strong BoltHe~d, well Luted on
every side, except on the Top, boyling in a strong Fire
for the space of 20 days, be precipitated into a Red
Pouder, like Cinnaber, (all which I have seen performed.)
Every particle of this Pbuder you shall so fix, as that
if it be put upon a Red-Hot Iron Plate, its Spirit shall
not fume or fly away.
III.
This Pouder Dissolve with, or in our Fire against
Nature; being Dissolved, abstract the Water of the Fire
against Nature from it, so long till the substance of the
Pouder so Dissolved, do remain in the Vessel, as thick as
an Oyl; which Oyl, first , with a soft fire, and after with
- 19-


--- Page 127 ---
a stronger, fix into dry Pouder .
IV.
(This Work is not to be done all at once, but by
little and little at a time, till it goes through with
it in the Color of Blood; then will it precipitate into
a Red Pouder, called by the Philosophers Sericon: Dissolve it with as much of Our Vegetable Sal Anatron, the
space of an hour, then set it in balneo , in a long
Receptory, till it be cleanly dissolved, and becomes as
it were a fine Wine, which with the very softest heat,
make it to Evaporate, and Congeal, so will you have a
pure Stone, and of subtil parts.
v.
Also if you dissolve this same Red Pouder of Mercury
in Water or Spirit of Common Salt, prepared as Bachon
and Albertus have taught , you shall have an Oyl or Salt of
Gold, which no Fire can destroy, which will melt and tinge
with a solar Color upon a Plate of Venus.
This Treasure
carry always with you , wheresoever you go: Who knows
not the Secret of this prepared Salt in Our lesser Works,
knows little of the hidden things of Alchymie.)
VI .
Try this fixt Pouder (at Sect. 3. above) for the
fixation, reiterate still the Work with the same Fire
against Nature upon the same Pouder Ten times , and it
will be dryed up no more into Pouder , but remain in a
thick Oyl, the which will turn Argent Vive , and all Bodies
into pure Alchymick Gold , sufficiently good for all works
- 20-


--- Page 128 ---
....
of the Goldsmith , but not for Medicine for Man's Body.
VII.
A Second way , Gold is much more wonderfully Elixirated by the said Fire against Nature, compounded with
the Fire Natural , after this manner .
Let Vitriol of the
Fire of Nature , made of the most sharp Humidity, or
moisture of Grapes, and Sericon, joyned together in a
Mass , with the Natural Mineral Vitriol (called the Gum
of Adrop, or Vitriol Azoth , ) made somewhat dry , and with
Sal Nitre, be dissolved .
VIII .
First Ascends a Fair , Weak , Fl egmatick Water , which
cast away.
Then a White Fume , making t he Vessel appear
White l i ke Mi lk , which Fume must be gathered into the
receiver, so long till it ceases, and the Vessel becomes
clear , of its own Color .
This water of the White Fume
is the stinking Mens truum, which i s called Our Dragon
against Nature.
Thi s Menstruum , if the sai d Dragon
against Nature was absent , would be our Fire Natural, of
which we shal l her eafter speak in its proper pl ace . .
IX.
(Rayrnundus saith, this Water is made of four things:
1 . The Composition of Sal Amarum.
2 . Mens truum Foetens.
3. Argent Vive , which is a common substance in every
combustible body.
4 . Mineral Vitriol .
X.
This compounded Water Mineral, and Water Vegetable,
being mixed together , and made one Water as aforesaid ,
- 21-


--- Page 129 ---
doth work contrary Operation, which is wonderful, it
Dissolves and Congeals, it makes moist and dry, it putrifies and purifies; it divides asunder and joyns together;
it destroys and restores; it kills and makes alive; it
wounds and heals again; it makes soft and hardens; it
makes thin and thick; it resolves Compounds, and Compounds again:
It begins the Work and makes an end of
the same.
XI.
These two Mineral Waters Compounded together in one,
are the two Dragons Fighting and striving to gather one
against the other in the Flood of Satalia: viz.
The
White Fume and the Red; and one of them shall devour the
other.
And here the Solutory Vessels ought to be Luted
but gently, or closed with Linnen Cloth, or with Mastick,
or common Wax, or Cerecloth.
XII.
These two Dragons are Fire and Water, within the
Vessel and not without; and therefore if they feel any
exteriour Fire, they will rise up to the top of the
Vessel, and if they be yet forced by the violence or
strength of the Fire, they will break the Vessel, and so
you will lose all your Work.
XIII.
This Compounded Water aforesaid, does Congeal as
much as it does Dissolve, and lifts it up into a glorious
Crystalline Earth.
This is our Secret dissolution of the
Stone, which is always done with the Congelatio~ of its
-22-
- .


--- Page 130 ---
Water.
The Fire of Nature is here put to the Fire against
Nature; therefore as much as the Stone has lost of its
form by the power and strength of the Water , or Fire against
Nature; so much has it gotten and recovered again of its
form , by the Virtue of the Water, or Fire of Nature .
But
the Fire against Nature , by the means of the Fire of Nature ,
cannot be destroyed .
-23-


--- Page 131 ---
C H A P T E R L X V
THE PRACTI CE WITH THE SAID COMPOUNDED WATERJ UPON THE
CALX OF THE BODY DISSOLVED.
I.
The Practice with the said Compounded Water, upon the
Calx of the Body duly dissolved and prepared: Take the
prepared Body (made with a thick Oyl,) put to it so much
of the Compounded Water as may cover the same Calx (i.e.
Our prepared Calx with Our Vegetable Menstruurn) by the
depth of half an Inch.
The Water will presently boil over
the Calx without external dissolving the Stone, and lifting it up into the form of Ice, with the drying up also
of the said Water .
II.
The said Calx being so dissolved and sublimed into
the form of Ice , you must take away; after this is done,
the residue of the Calx remaining in the Vessel, undissolved, shall again be well dryed by the Fire, upon which
put so much of the said Compounded Water as you did before, dissolving, subliming and drying, till the Calx
is wh~lly dissolved.
III.
The substance thus dissolved, subtily separated
and brought into a Pouder , must be put (as thereafter
shall be shewed) into a good quantity of the Fire of
Nature (which .is a Quintessence) the same being first well
rectified, and the Vessel well stopp ' d, to the end , that
-24-


--- Page 132 ---
.....
the means of the heat outwardly administred unto it, procuring the inward heat to work, it may be dissolved into
an Oyl; the which will soon be done, by reason of the
simplicity of the Water, or simple Fire of Nature.
IV.
And therefore when you have brought the said Pouder
so dissolved, sublimed, and prepared with the said Compounded Water into an Oyl (then is our Menstruum Visible
unto sight) by putting thereto a good quantity of the
aforesaid rectified simple Fire of Nature, as before declared; then abstract or draw away the said Water again
from the same Oyl, by Distilling the same in a moist,
Temperate heat, so long till there remains in the bottom
of the Glass a thin Oyl.
V.
This Oyl, the oftner it is dissolved with the said
simple rectified Fire of Nature, and the said Water
Abstracted or Distilled by a Temperate heat, so much the
more will the said Oyl be made subtil and thin.
VI.
With the said Oyl (provided the Calx be the Calx of
Sol or Luna) you may incere the substances or Calces of
other Bodies, the said Bodies being first dissolved, exalted, sublimed, and prepared with the said Compounded
Water, in manner and form of Ice aforesaid, till that by
the Inceration of the said .subtil and thin Oyl of Sol and
Luna, the said substances of other Bodies be made fixed,
and to flow like Wax.
- 25-


--- Page 133 ---
VII.
With which flowing substance, you shall not only congeal Argent Vive into perfect Sol and Luna , according as
you have prepared your Medicine, but you shall also with
the same fluxible and flowing substance , transmute and
change all such other imperfect Bodies, (as they were,
whose Calces were so sublimed, and from whom, at their
first sublimating or lifting up, they took their beginning)
into Sol and Luna aforesaid .
VIII .
And this thin and subtil Oyl, being put into Kemia
its .proper Vessel , first sealed up, to putrifie in the
Fire of the first degree , being moist: it becomes as
black as liquid Pitch.
The fire may then have its
Action in the Body , to corrupt it, (the same Body as before so opened.)
IX.
Therefore it grows first black, like melted Pitch,
because the heat working in this moist Body , does first
beget a blackness, which blackness is the first sign of
Corruption: and since the Corruption of one thing is the
generation of another; therefore of the Body corrupted,
is generated a Body Neutral, which is certainly apt ,
declinable, and applicable unto every Ferment whatsoever you please to apply it to.
X.
But the Ferment must be altered together with the
Alchymick Body; and the whole substance of our Stone or
-26-


--- Page 134 ---
Elixir must partake of the Nature of the Quintescence,
otherwise it will be of no effect.
XI.
And between the said sign of blackness and perfect=
whiteness, which will follow the said blackness, there
will appear a green Color, and as many variable Colors
afterwards as the mind of Man is able to conceive.
XII.
When the present White Color shall begin to appear
like the eyes of fishe~,then may you know that Summer is
near at hand, after which Autumn or Harvest will happily
follow with ripe fruit, which in the long looked for
Redness: This is after the Pale, Ashy, and Citrine Color.
XIII.
First the Sun does perfectly Descend by its due
Course, from its Meridional height and Glory, through
its gross and natural solution into an imperfect Pale,
and Ashy Color, shining in the Occidental parts of the
West, which is somewhat of a yellowish or Brick dust
Color: from thence it goes to the Septentrional parts
of the Earth, being of a Variable watrish blackness, of·
a dark, .cloudy, alterable, putrefaction watrishness.
XIV.
Then it Ascends up to the Oriental parts, shining
with a more perfect Crystalline, Surnrnerlike, and Paradisical White: ..
Lastly, he Ascends his Fiery Chariot,
directing his Course up again to his Meridional Life,
-27-


--- Page 135 ---
Perfection and Glory, there to Rule and Shine , in fire,
brightness, splendor, and the highest perfection, even
in the highest , most pure, and Imperial Redness.
XV.
When this aforesaid simple Oyl of the altered Body,
being in its Vessel duly sealed, is by the Fire thus disposed, what is there more than one simple thing , which
nature has made to be generated of Sulphur and Mercury
in the Bowels of the Earth?
XVI.
Thus it is evident , that our Stone is nothing else
but Sol and Luna, Sulphur and Mercury:
Male and Female;
Heat and Cold .
And therefore (to be more short) when all
the parts of our Stone , are thus gathered together, it
appears plainly enough, what is our Mercury , Our Sulphur ,
Our Alchemick Body, Our Ferment, Our Menstruum, Our Green
Lyon: And what Our ·white Fume, .Our two Dragons, Our Fire ,
and Our Egg, in which is both the Whiteness and the Redness .
XVII.
As also what is Man ' s Blood, Our Aquae Vitae , Our
Burning Water , and what are many other things , which in
this Our Ar t are Metaphoricall y, or figurat i vely named to
deceive the Foolish and unwary .
XVIII .
Also there is a simi litude of a Tri-Une , shining ,
in the Body , Soul and Spirit.
The Body is the substance
of the Stone.
The Soul is the Ferment which cannot be
- 28-


--- Page 136 ---
-
had, but from the most perfect Body; and the Spirit is
that which raiseth up the Natures from Death and Corruption to Life, Perfection and Glory.
xix.
In Sulphur, there is an Earthiness for the Body : In
Mercury, there is an Aerealness for the Spirit , and in
them both a Natural Unctuosity for the Soul or Ferment;
all which are inseparably United in their least parts for
ever: From this Fermental Body the Stone is formed , and
without it, it cannot be made.
XX.
It is the peculiar property of Sol and Luna , (the
which property appertains to the Stone it self) to give
the form of Gold and Silver.
And therefore the Elixir,
whether it be White or Red , may he Infinitely augmented
with the Fermental Oyl: if you do cast the same upon
Mercury, it shall transmute it into the Elixir , which
Elixir must be cast afterwards upon the Imperfect Bodies.
XXI.
Moreover the saiq White Elixir is augmented with
Mercurial Water, and the Red Elixir with the Mercurial
Oyl ; the which two, viz. the Mercurial Water and Mercurial Oyl , can only be had of Mercury dissolved of it
self .
XXII.
See what the Scripture saith, He stroke the Stone
and Water flowed out, and he brought forth Oyl out of the
- 29-


--- Page 137 ---
Flinty Rock.
We may Note the whole composition of the
Elixir in these four Verses following .
XXIII.
He stretched forth the Heavens as a Curtain . The
Waters stood above the Mountain:
This is the Water which
does cover Our Matter , and performs the dissolution
thereof , causing a cloudy Ascension. That does walk
upon the Wings of the Wind.
This figures forth the
sublimation of our Stone .
XXIV.
Who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers
a flame of Fire .
By this is shadowed forth the rectification, separation , and disposition of the Elements. Who
has founded the Earth upon its Basis; so fixt, that it
shall not be moved for ever.
Under which is described
the fixation of the Elements , and the perfection of the
Philosophick Stone.
- 30-
........


--- Page 138 ---
-
C H A P T E R L X V I
ANOTHER WAY OF ELIXIRAT ING GOLD BY THE FIRE AGAINST NATURE.
I.
Another way, by which the Body of Gold is Elixirated
by the power of the Fire against Nature , through the
help of the Operation of the Fire of Nature ; which is thus.
Dissolve the Body of pure Gold in the Fire against Nature;
the same fire being well rectified Arsenick (Mercury
sublimate) as the manner is; from which Gold being so
dissolved into a Citrine, clear and shining Water, without any Heterogenity or Sand remaining, let the water
be abstracted, till the .Body does remain in the bottom of
the Glass , like a fixt Oyl.
II.
Upon this Oyl, affuse the said Water, or Fire against
Nature again , and abstract again, and this work so often
repeat till the Water or fire against Nature , have no
more sharpness upon the Tongue than common Well-Water.
III.
This done, draw such another new Water or fire
against Nature, which Affuse upon the former Oyl, and
abstract in all respects as before is taught: then Affuse
upon this Oyl the Water or fire of Nature well rectified ,
and let it be double in quantity or proportion of the said
Oyl of the Body so dissolved, and put it into a Vessel,
which st~p well , and set it in Balneo for seven days ; so
will the Water or fire of Nature become a Citrine Color .
- ~1 -


--- Page 139 ---
IV .
This Water or fire of Nature by its attractive Virtue, will draw away the Tincture from the fire against
Nature, as Raymundus saith in his practical Alphabet .
And
altho ' it is somewhat opposite to Nature , to dissolve the
Bodies with the fire against Nature ; yet i! you know how
to comfort the matter with the fire of Nature, and by
Balneation in 15 days, to draw it from the blackness of
the water, or fire against Nature , (the which may be done ,
as I have proved, in 6 days) you shall perfect the work,
and attain the desired end.
V.
Let the aforesaid Natural Water or fire of Nature , so
tinged with a Yellow Color , be always warily emptied,
and poured off from the aforesaid dissolved Bodies, into
another Vessel, with a narrow Mouth , that may be firmly
stopped: and then with more of the said fire, let there
be made in Balneo , in the space of time aforesaid, another
quantity of the said Oyl.
VI.
And so the same water being tinged with Sol or Gold ,
let it be warily emptied, and poured off as before: and
when the water of Nature will be tinged no more, then it
is a sign, that the Tincture is all drawn forth from the
dissolved Body by the Fire against Nature.
VII.
Put the Tinctures thus decanted off into a Glass
Stillatory , and with a soft or easie Fire abstract the
_ 32-


--- Page 140 ---
Water or Fire of Nature from the same , so long till you
see in the bottom an Oyl; to which you must put New Fire
of Nature again, well rectified: and after the Matter has
stood in Balneo for the space of 6 days, then abstract the
said water or fire of Nature by distillation .
VIII.
And let the work with the same water be repeated
upon and from the said Oyl, after the same manner so long
till you have brought your Oyl of Gold to be most subtil
and pure, without any Foeculent grossness, wherein let
nothing of the water or fire of Nature be left behind,
but the substance of Gold only, turned to Oyl.
IX.
This subtil and pure Oyl of Gold, being put in Kemia,
or its proper Vessel, and firmly sealed up, may be the
aforesaid Regiments be changed into the great Elixir, as
it is shewed before with the other simple Oyl, made
with the Compounded Water, in the former practice, at
Sect . 8. Chapter 65. aforegoing.
X.
But to proceed: sublime Quick-Silver with Roman
Vitriol and prepared or Calcined Salt; and after that sublime it by it self alone three times from its Foeculent
substance.
This done, and the same made into Pouder,
put this sublimate Pouder into a fixatory Vessel, and put
thereto a certain quantity of your aforesaid Oyl of Gold,
but so much only, as may scarcely cover the sublimate:
firmly close the Vessel , and set it in a soft Fire, till
the Natures are perfectly joyned together.
- 33-


--- Page 141 ---
XI. This done, grind it upon a Marble, and Incinerate it
again with your said Oyl of Gold, and after put it again
into its Fixatory Vessel, under a fire of the first Degree
as before, and let the same Vessel stand twice as long as
it did before, to the Intent that the Natures may be
firmly Compact and United together .
XII. Now this Rule is generally to be Observed: that the
Vessel with the Matter in it to be fixed, ought always to
be set over the fire from time to time to be augmented ,
and this Incineration to be continued still upon the
Argent Vive sublimed , until the same is perfectly fixed
with the said Oyl or substance of Gold.
XIII. The which must be proved upon a Plate of Silver
Red Hot: And if it be found fixed, let it have for the
greater certainty, one Incineration more of the said Oyl,
which set under a strong fire for the space of three days:
then grind it with your Oyl upon the same Stone , till it
be as thick as an Oyntment; which make perfectly dry with
an easie fire , and then let it be Calcined with a strong
fire for the space of eight hours.
XIV.
Which done, then Incinerate it , and dry it again with
a soft or gentle fire oftentimes , till it stands in the
fire like melted Wax. This medicine will transmute Silver
substantially and perfectly into fine and pure Alchymick
Gold perfect to all the works of Goldsmiths but not to
Medicine for Men.
- 34-


--- Page 142 ---
C H A P T E R L X V I I
TWO OTHER MlNERAL ELIXIRS, OR TWO OTHER PROCESSES OF
MERCURY.
I.
There be many other Noble and Profitable Secrets in
this Art, or Mystery of our Mineral Stone; viz. good
Elixirs to be made out of Metalline Bodies; of which
Mineral Elixirs, two are more excellent than the rest, the
first of which we shall handle in this Chapter.
(Here comes the Process or Practical Operation of
Hercu~y m~ntioned Chap. 61. Sect. 13.aforegoing.)
II .
The first of these Elixirs is on£y in Mercury: The
second, in Mercury and the White Body for the White
Elixir; and with the same to t he Red too, if you so
please , being prudently pursued and sought a~ter.
III.
The first manner to Elixirate only with 'Mercury is
thus.
Dissolve Mercury only, by it self into a Milky
water, with the which Mercury so dissolved, you may dissolve so much more Mercury, and so continually, as long
as you please.
IV.
Put this into a gentle Fire to be Distilled, so
shall you have Our Virgins Milk White and Crystalline ,
wherewith a ll Bodies may be dissolved into their first
Manner, Washed and Purged.
- 35-


--- Page 143 ---
V.
This water is of a Silver Colour, which if you fix
with its Earthy Faeces Calcin'd, and after that dissolved
again in the quantity of its remaining water , and then
again Coagulated and Congealed, (which work is to be done
upon a Stone) you will have at length the Elixir of
Argent Vive., which will transmute all Imperfect Bodies
to a perfect Whiteness.
VI.
And so of this Mercurial substance is made a water
permanent or fixt , wherewith the Calces of all Bodies
may be so depurated and Whitened, as thereby to become
the most pure and fine Silver.
VII.
And therefore as I have said before in the beginning
of this work, when Mercury is dissolved , then are its
Elements separable; and after the separation of its
Mercurial Liquor , and that a competent putrefaction is
performed; after the same White Liquor, there will Distill a Golden moisture or humour, to which if you add a
small quantity of the Ferment of the Gum of the aforesaid Elixirated White Stone , that then the same White
Stone, with the said Golden humour, shall be made the
Red Stone, which shall transmute Argent Vive, and all
Metalline Bodies into the finest and most pure Gold.
VIII.
Again, if you take the aforesaid Red humour of
Mercury and Dissolve in it a little of the aforesaid Red
Ferment, being made as aforesaid of the White Stone, and
- 36-


--- Page 144 ---
...
then with the same Red humour of Mercury , so Fermented
with it self, the Calces of all Bodies, may be so depurated and Citrinated, that thereby they may become most
pure Gold.
IX .
When also Argent vive is dissolved, then dissolve
in it a little of the aforesaid Red Ferment, and so put
all into Kemia , or a proper Vessel, which firmly close up
with a Philosophick Seal.
Then with a continual and
easie or gentle Fire, draw out the Chariot of the four
Elements through the Depth of the ·sea, until (the Floods
being dryed up) there appears in the Matter a bright shining substance, like to the Eyes of the Fishes.
X.
For by this Operation, if you keep your Temperate
Fire continually alive , the Fl oods shall dry up, with an
exceeding drought , and the dry Land or Earth shall appear,
as in the days of Noah, the waters were dryed up from .off
the Earth , and behold the Face of the Ground was dry .
And by l ifting up the Rod of Moses , and stretching out his
hand, the waters were dryed up, and the dry Ground
appeared in the midst of the Sea: for so says David, He
Rebuked the Red Sea , and it was dryed up : he led them
through the Depths as through the Wilderness.
XI .
And then ·by the Space of Forty days following , it
shall be .Rubified, (as the Philosophers Demonstrate) by
the help of a Vehement Fire , as the Nature of it requires ,
-37-


--- Page 145 ---
continuing and remaining in the same strong Fire till
it melt and flow like Wax, whereby it will be able to
transmute all Bodies into pure fine Gold.
XII .
And thus the White and Red Medicines are multiplied
with their own proper humidities: viz. only by the solution of the White Medicines in their own proper White
and Red humours , and by their Coagulation again of the
same , as necessity requires .
Thus have we explicated
with singular plainess of Speech, the Elixiration of
Mercury per se, or Argent Vive alone.
- 38-


--- Page 146 ---
-

C H A P T E R L X V I I I
THE SECOND OF THE FORMER ELIXIRS) WITH MERCURY AND THE
BODY ALCHYMICK.
I . To Elixirate with Mercury and the Body Alchymick.
Take
One part of the most pure Kibrick (quod est pater Mercurii & omnium Liquabiliurn,) Sea water twelve parts , in
which dissolve the Kibrick: being dissolved, st.rain the
water through a Linnen Cloth; and what remains undissolved, which will not go through, put into the Vessel
called Kemia , set it over a gentle fire , as it were the
heat of the Sun, untill there appears on the Top a Red
Color.
II .
Then put to it a quarter more of the Sea- water aforesaid , being kept in a very clean Vessel, set it on a
very gent~e fire , and dry it up again, as you did before,
by little and little at a time.
III.
For in t his Work, by so much less there is put of
the Spirit, and more of the Body; for so much the sooner
and better shall the Solution be made; the which Solution is made by the Congelation of its water.
IV.
And therefore as the Rosary saith, you must beware
that the Belly be not made over moist , for if it be , the
water shall not receive or attain to its dryness.
- 39-


--- Page 147 ---
V.
This manner of Imbibition must be Observed and ·continued so long, till the whole water by several Irnbibitions
shall be dryed up into a Body.
VI.
This done, let the Vessel be firmly and Philosophically Sealed up, and placed in its proper Fornace,
with a mean or gentle fire, which must not wax cold, from
the first hour you begin to set the same into the Fornace,
till you have made an end of the whole work.
VII.
And when the matter is sublimed, then let it be
made to Descend by little and little without Violence ,
the fire being Artificially made or set over it; which
done, let it be again sublimed as before.
VIII.
And so let the Soul of the Sun of· the Vulgar (the
which Soul is Our unclean Oyntment, the Spirit not yet
conjoyned with the Body) Ascend from the Earth to the
Heaven; and again make it to Descend from Heaven to the
Earth , till all becomes Earth , which before was Heaven.
IX.
To the end there may be made a substance, not so
hard as the Body , nor yet so soft as the Spirit; but
holding a mean disposition , standing fixed and Permanent
in the fire, like a White peice of melted Wax, flowing
in the bottom of the Vessel.
- 40-
. ~


--- Page 148 ---
-
x.
The which White substance, of a mean or middle consistency, must be fed and nourished with Milk and Meat,
till the quantity thereof be increased according to your
desire.
XI.
This Medicine being Fermented to the Red, with a
portion of Sol Dissolved in the water of the Sea, by
reason of separating the first; the form from the Matter ,
to the end, that it may be in a more noble form than it
was before, when the first qualities did remain undivided;
and that it may be brought into a Purple Colour by the
help of a strong and continual fire: whereby is made
the true Elixir, both for the White and Red Work.
XII.
Now this Elixir, be it White or Red, shall be
increased an hundred fold more, both in Virtue , and
Goodness, if its Quintessence be fixed with it, and that
then afterwards it be brought and reduced by the Fire of
Nature into a thin Oyl, the which must be done in a
Circulatory Vessel: for truly, then the least drop thereof
does Congeal a thousand drops of Mercury into the very
greatest Medicine.
-41-


--- Page 149 ---
C H A P T E R
L X I X
OF THE VEGETABLE STONE.
I.
The Vegetable Stone is gotten by Virtue of . the Fire of
Nature, of the Composition of which fire we now intend
plainly to treat and of the way how to work with it, in
every respect .
II.
(Its Composition is of four things, as Raymundus
saith, in his ·Book of Quintessences:
It is a Composition of Sal Amarum, which is Ignis adeptus, a fire that
is gotten without Wood or Coal, and by an easie working ,
does work against all manner of sharpness of Action of
the Visible Fire, like as if it were the fire of Hell;
and therefore, altho ' Wine be hot , yet this water of
Mercury is hotter: for it is able to dissolve all Bodies,
to putrefie, and also to divide the Elements , whi ch
neither common Fire nor Wine can do.
III.
Some think that this Fire of Nature is extr acted or
drawn from Wine, according to the common way, and that it
must be rectified by often Distillations , until its Flegm
is wholly abstracted , which hinders its Heat, Virtue,
Strength and Burning.
But this, when it is done to all
advantages , and its highest perfection (which Fools call
the pur.e Spirit) and then put to the Calx of the Body
- 42-


--- Page 150 ---
-
-
never so well prepared, yet will it be weak and ineffectual
to Our purpose, for Dissolution, Conservation, etc.
IV.
(The true and Pure Spirit is Our· Silverish Spirit
of Wine, which is our Vegetable Mercury, and the true
water of the Philosophers.
Concerning which, see in
Ripley's secret Concord.)
V.
Wherefore since the vulgar Spirit or Wine is such, it
is evident that there is an Error in choosing of this
Principle: for the true Principle, (which is the beginning)
is the RESOLUTIVE MENSTRUUM (which is the soul of Mercury ,
and this Tincture is a very Oyl, separate from its foul
Earth and faint Wat .er ) which, as we know, and according
to the traditions of the Wise Philosophers, is an
Unctuous moisture, which is the nearest Matter of Our
Vegetable and Philosophick Mercury.
VI.
The which Principle , Resolutive Menstruum, Near
Matter, or Unctuous Moisture, Raymundus (in Cap. 6 and
Cap. 8. of his Clavis) does call Black, Blacker than
Black: The which Black thing or Matter I certainly know.
VII.
But since Raymundus saith, that 'this Resolutive
Menstruum, does come from Wine, or the Lees, or Tartar
thereof, how is he to be understood?
Truly, he himself
unfolds the Mystery: Our Water or Menstruum, is a Metal -
line Water, generated of a Metaltine Matter only: So that
-43-


--- Page 151 ---
Raymundus speaks, either of the Resolutive Menstruum or
of the Resoluble Menstruum.
VIII.
(This Menstruum springs from a Silver Wine, which
does Naturally make a dissolution of its own Sulphur .
It
is apparent in the 11. Cap. of Raymundus, that Our Mercurial and Radical moisture is not only Congealed into
perfect Metal, by Vapour of its hot and dry Sulphur, but
that also the same Metalline Water, being so terminated
in the form of a Metal, after its Resolution in Ashes has
power naturally of a Menstruum to dissolve Our Stone or
Sulphur, and change it to its Vegetable Nature, without
prejudice or hurt to its own Nature.
IX.
(Wherefore he says, that from whatsoever any thing
does spring or grow by Nature, that into the same it
may again be resolved.)
X.
If he (viz. Raymundus) speaks of the first water or
Resoluti ve Menstruum; you are to understand that it is
(so as he speaks) not a Metalline Water, but ·after a
certain manner: for this water of the Resolutive Menstruum, is both a Sulphurous and a Mercurial Vapour
(Ignis and Azoth) and by reason of its Sulphurity, it
burns with the fire.
XI.
(This Resolutive Menstruum is our Vegetable Mercury,
which is our Vapourous Menstruum, and every burning water
- 44-


--- Page 152 ---
of Life, Aqua Vitae ardens, by whose attractive Virtue,
the Body of the Volatile Spirit, being fixed by the fire
against Nature, is dissolved naturally into the water of
Philosophers, and exalted and lifted up from its Salt and
Combustible Dregs into a clear Mercurial and Natural substance, which must be Fermented with the Oyl of Sol and
Luna, and then is made thereof the great Elixir; with
which Mercurial substance we also counterfeit Pearls and
Pretious Stones.)
XII.
We see also, that in Tartar dryed only in the Sun,
there are certain Mercurial Qualities shining and giving
of light to the Eye, but the kind of Metals is a Composition of Sulphur and Argent Vive.
And therefore, if
he means after this sort, then the Resolutive Menstruurn,
may be taken for a Metalline water; for otherwise it is
not Answered.
XIII.
Again, Raymundus proves clearly to the contrary,
where he answers him who demanded of him; in what is the
Vegetable Mercury, in Gold or in Silver? It Ls, (saith
he) a simple Coessential substance, the which is brought
from its own Concrete parts and proper Veins, to such a
pass or point by the Di~solutive Menstruum, that by
Virtue of the simple and Co-essential substance, they are
able to multiply their similitudes in Mercuries, which
have none in themselves, and are also apt Medicines for
-45-


--- Page 153 ---
Mens Bodies, and to expel and put away from them many
Diseases, & to restore to the Old and Aged, their former
Youth, and preserve them in Health so long a time as God
has designed them to Live.
XIV.
(This Coessential substance is Our White and Red
Tincture by whom these Earths that are wanting, are multiplyed in Tincture, whereby they are made Elixirs, to
purge Metals, and a Medicine for Man's Body.)
XV.
Therefore, Our true Metalline Water is an Unctuous
humidity of the Body dissolved to the similitude of Black
Pitch, · Liquid and Melted; and this Unctuous and Black
humidity is called the true Resoluble Menstruum.
And
because we shall afterwards demonstrate the true Resolutive Menstruum, required in this Work, we will here
only declare from what principles, and how the said
Resolutive Menstruum is drawn.
XVI. (Our Metalline Water is separated from the Body of
LUNARIA, which is its terminated and Radical humidity in
the kind and Color of White shining Silver, and its Body,
is Our black Sulphur:
Therefore see Chap. 63. in the
Lunary Branch, and in his Clavis where you will find the
Radical humidity to be the true Menstruum wherewith the
solemn dissolution of its own black Body is made.)
XVII.
Rayrnundus doth say, that an Unctuous Humidity is
the last comfort and support to the Humane Body, which
-46-


--- Page 154 ---
-
--
what it is, is manifest to the Philosophers; it makes a
noise or sound in the Vessel, and is Distilled with a
great deal of Art.
He. also saith, that Our Stone is
made of the hottest Matter or substance in Nature:
And
I say that Wine .is hot; but there is another thing which
is much hotter than Wine, whose substance, by reason of
its exceeding Airyness or Spirituosity is most quickly
inflamed by the Fore.
XVIII.
And the Lees, or TARTAR, and Dregs of this
Unctuous humidity, is gross, like the Rinde or Bark of a
Tree: and the same Tartar is blacker than the Tartar of
the black Grape of Catalonia, for which cause it is
called by Raymundus, a Black, more Black than Black.
(By these L~es, or
. Ta~tar and Dregs, is meant the Lees
of our S~lver Wine, separated from the Lunary. B6dy).
XIX.
And because that this humidity is Unctuous, therefore it better agrees with the Unctuosity of Metals, than
the Spirit drawn from Common Wine; for through its
Liquefactive Virtue, Metals do Melt, and are made flowing and moist in the Fire; the which Operation truly the
Spirit of Common Wine cannot do.
XX.
For the Spirit of Wine, how strong soever it be, is
(comparatively) but clean Flegm or Water: whereas contrariwise, in Our Unctuous Distilled Spirit, there is no
watrishness at all.
But this thing being rare in our
-47-


--- Page 155 ---
parts, as well as other Countries, Guido Montanor found out
another Unctuous humidity, which swims upon other Liquors,
which humidity proceeds from Wine, which Raymundus , and
Arnoldus knew, with some others, but they taught not how
it should be obtained.
XXI.
(Our Tincture in Distilling, is separated both from
the Flegm and its gross Foeces, till it be like an Oyl ,
and that is the Soul of Mercury, which is Air and Fire ,
separate from its two extreams; and so it being an
Unctuous moisture, is the mean .
See the first and last
chapter of Raymund's Codicil.)
XXII.
Notwithstanding, Raymundus saith, it must be drawn
from Death , and from the Faeces of Wine by rectification,
that it may be acuated in Distillation by hot Vegetable
substances , thereunto appertaining, as Pepper , Euphorbium1 etc. for without these things he saith , the Virtue
thereof is not sufficient, but by long time to dissolve
Metals.
XXIII.
(Raymundus saith in the end of his natural
Magick, that there is a Salt made of the Lees or Tartar
of Wine, or Aquae Vitae, called the Salt of Art and Mercury , without which Salt (saith he) there is nothing can
be done: Also he begins his Practice with this Salt in
the first and last Chapter of his Codicil.)
-48-


--- Page 156 ---
-
XXIV.
Wherefore as the same Philosopher affirms, among
these things is this Menstruurn one of the Secrets of this
Art, whose Virtue must be increased by a wise management
of the Matter: you must circulate this Menstruum in the
Unctuous humidity in a Vessel of Circulation, by rotation
continually, an hundred and twenty days, in the hottest
Fornace.
- 49-


--- Page 157 ---
C H A P T E R L X X
THE REMAINING PROCESS OF THE VEGETABLE STONE.
I.
Hitherto the Process of the Vegetable Stone has been
long and Obscure; but that nothing may be doubtful to the
prejudice of my professed Love to your Lordship , I say
that all these things spoken by Raymundus are covered
with the Mantle of Philosophy.
Truly his intention is,
that there should be made a dissolution with the Spirit
of Wine , but that this Spirit of Wine should be joyned
with another Menstruum resoluble, without which Resolution can never be attained.
II .
(Here the two spirits are jegned together, the Vege -
table M-ens truum or White Oyl of· x.artar'% and our Me ti al 1 ine
Oyl).
*(is this alcohol? HWN)
III.
And that Menstruum Resoluble is ge nerated only of a
Metalline kind: for it is a potential or mighty Vapour ,
being in every Metalline Body , joyning together two extreams , Sulphur and .Argent Vive .
IV.
And so indeed after this sort ,· Our wa_ter is a
Metalline water, which because it does favour of the
Nature of eitner extream , it therefore bri ngs our Resolutive Menstruum into Act .
- so-


--- Page 158 ---
-
V .
. Now how this Menstruum, which is Unctuous, Moist,
Sulphurous, and Mercurial, agreeing with the Nature of
Metals, and wherewith Bodies must be Artifically dissolved,
may be had, we will here shew by clear practice .
VI .
Take the sharpest humidity of Grapes, and in it
being Distilled , dissolve the Body, well Calcin ' d into a
Redness, into a Chyrstalline clear and Ponderous water,
the which Body Calcin ' d into Redness, is of the Masters
of this Science called Sericon.
VII.
(Now comes in the Practice of PupiJ~a , of the dissolution of the Red Lyon·, f,or the fire of .n.~ture, called
also ReJ Lead, Red Coral, Sericon is of the Nature of
Black Pepper, Euphorbium, etc. of a hot biting and fiery
Nature, all which things are spoken only by way of
Comparison. )
VIII.
Then of this Crystalline water, let there be made
a Gum, the which in Taste will be like to ''.Al Ultl.
This
Gum by Raymundus is called Vitr i ol Azoth, from which let
there be drawn with a gentle Fire, first a weak water,
with no more Taste or sharpness than simple Well water.
(Fresher water there is none in Taste, yet will it never
Consume or waste, tho' it be used neger so often; nor
will it be ever less in ' quantity) .
-51-


--- Page 159 ---
IX.
And when the White Fume shall begin to appear,
change your Receiver , and Lute it strongly, that it
breath not forth; so shall you have our burning water,
Our Aquae Vitae, and Resolutive Menstruum, (the which
before was Resoluble) a Vapour potential, a mighty Vapour,
able to dissolve Bodies, to Putrifie, and to Purifie, to
divide the Elements, and also to exalt the Earth into a
wonderful Salt, by the force of its attractive Virtue.
This is our Fire of Nature.
X.
This water has a bitter sharp Taste upon the Tongue,
and also a kind of stinking Menstruum: and because it is
a water which is very Spirituous and Volatile, therefore
within a Month after it is Distilled, it ought to be put
upon its Calx.
When it is Affused upon the Calx, it will
without any external Fire, boil if the Vessel be closely
shut; and it will not cease to Ferment or work, till it
be all dryed up into the Calx.
XI.
Therefore you must put no greater a quantity of it to
the Calx, but what may just cover it as it were and so
proceed, (When the Fornace is dryed up) to the whole Complement thereof, (as in the Operation of the Compound
water,) and as the work requires.
XII.
And when the Elixir shall be brought into a Purple
Color, then let it be dissolved with the aforesaid Vege-
-52-


--- Page 160 ---
table Menstruum into a thin Oyl, the same Menstruum being
first rectified, and let the same by the Circulation of
the Spirit of our water be fixed; so will it have Power to
transmute or change all Bodies into pure Gold, and to. Heal
and Cure all Infirmities and Diseases in Man's Body, ten
thousand times better than all the Potions and Prescriptions of Galen or Hippocrates.
XIII.
This Elixir is the true AURUM POTABILE, and no
other; for it is made of Gold Elementated and Circulated
by the spirituous wheel of Philosophy; and it is so
wrought with the Air , Gass , potency , or spirit of Mercury
dis~olved by its self, sublimed and rectified , as that the
body of Gold by it may not only be curiously and exquisitely
El ix~rated; but also that it may then afterwards be
brought to such a perfection by this our Art , as to be
applied profitably to the most desirable work.
XIV.
Thus you may see, we have hid nothing concerning
this our desired Elixir of the Vegetable Stone : I shall
now proceed to that of the Animal Stone , which is but a
work of three days; and in three days will be compleatly
ended.
My advice to you is, not to gather the Leaves of
Words; but the Fruits of Works, the profit of the things
fought after .
- 53-


--- Page 161 ---
XV.
And know that in this Work, I have not so much affected
the Curio~ity of Language, or Elegancies of Stile , as the
denudating the Essential Verity, and exposing the very
Power o: Truth to your View, which by reason of my haste
I have now concisely done in few words .
- 54-


--- Page 162 ---
C H A P T E R L X X I
OF THE ANIMAL STONE.
I .
We now come to reveal the most noble and High Secret
of Secrets, viz. the Mystery of our Animal Stone desired
of all Mankind, and the way and manner of its Elixiration.
But this Animal Elixir is neither from Wine, as it is
Wine, nor from Eggs, Hair or Blood, as they are such
things, but only from the Elements: And these Elements we
ought to search out , in the Excellency of their exceeding
Simplicity and Rectification.
II.
The Elements as Roger Bachon saith, are the Roots
of all things, the Mothers of every thing: yet the
Elements of the said things do not enter into the Work of
this Our Elixir; but only by the Virtue and Conunixtion of
those Elements, with the Elements of Spirits, and Bodies
of Metals.
III.
Yet so indeed as Roger Bachan saith, the Elements of
those things aforesaid do so enter in as to pierce through
(tho' not to dwell ther) and to Accomplish this Our great
Elixir.
IV.
Notwithstanding among all those things which be
Natural, (as all the rest be, which Philosophers have
taken,) there is one thing yet, which is found more
-55-


--- Page 163 ---
pretious, more excellent, more proper, and more Natural
than all the rest, for this our purpose.
V.
The which one thing, because it is more excellent than
all the rest, the Philosophers have taken for the nearest;
because of the singular perfection which God has given to
the Microcosim or lesser World, in whom are not only the
Idea's of the Courses and effects of the Planets, Stars,
and Asterisms, but also the Complexions, humours, Spirits,
and Natural Virtues of the Elements.
VI.
And therefore consider the most noble Bird of Hermes,
which when the Sun is in Aries, begins to fly; and as it
is advised, so let it be brought forth and sought for.
Seek out the true Sulphur · from his Mine or Minor'1., not
being corrupted, for the whole perfection lies in the
uncorrupt Sulphur.
VII.
This is our Stone, the which as Aristotle saith , in
his Secret of Secrets, is generated in the Dunghil , Highways , and must be divided into four parts: because saith
he, each part has one Nature , the which parts must be
joyned together again, till they resist or strive no
more; when they are joyned unto it, it shall be White;
if Fire, Red; as you please.
- 56-


--- Page 164 ---
VIII.
But understand, that this Division , must not be a
Manual Division, (but in Power and Effect,) wherefore, let
this one thing which all Men have (its over-flowing Flegmatick property being somewhat Evacuated) be put into
Kernia or proper Vessels, which Seal up Philosophically;
let it putrifie in a moist Fire a long Season, into a
black thickness.
IX.
Then by the second Degree of Fire , let it be Coagulated into a dryness, after many Bublings which it will
make, wherein shall shine innumerable Colors : and when
all that which is fine and subtil, shall Ascend upwards
(or Sublime) in the Vessel most White, like as the Eyes
of Fishes , the work is compleat in the first part.
x.
This truly is a marvelous thing , more to be wondred at ,
than any Miracle of Nature, for then the self same White,
has fully the Nature of White Sulphur, not Burning (or
Silver,) and is the very Sulp~ur of Nature and Argen~
Vive.
XI.
Let some quantity of Luna be added to it in the
manner of an Amalgama; then it brings forth , by Operation,
or generation of White into White; and the same thing
worketh it into Red , and is made compleat into Red , by a
greater Digestion in the Fire .
- 57-


--- Page 165 ---
XII.
Then , as the Philosophers advise , let the two Sulphurs , viz . the White and the Red be mingled with the
Oyl of the White Elixir , that they may work the more
strongly; upon which, if the Quintescence of the Vegetable St one shall be fixed , you shall have the highest
Medicine in the World, both to Heal and Cure Humane
Bodies , and to transmute the Bodies of Metals in to t he
most pure a nd fine Go.ld and Silver .
- 58-


--- Page 166 ---
C H A P T E R L X X I I
THE RESERVED SECRET EXPLICATED.
I.
And now we are drawing near to the end of this work,
we shall hereunto add and Explicate one Secret, even our
reserved Secret, hitherto Buried in the Abyss of Aenigma ' s
and deep Silence.
II .
We say that the Body of the Volatile Spirit, fixed,
by Fire against Nature , ought to be dissolved in the
Vegetabl e Water, that is to say, in our Vaporous Menstruum; not in water of the Cloud, but in water of the
Philosophers.
III.
In which Dissolution, the Body is made light , for
its more pure and subtil part is lifted up (or Sublimed°)
from Salt and Combustible Faeces, by Virtue of the
water attractive: which is more clear than the water of
the Margarite, as I have seen.
IV.
And of this substance Fermented with the Oyl of
Luna or Sol, is made the great Elixir, for the transmutation of imperfect Bodies.
v. It must oftentimes be dissolved and Coagulated with
its Ferment, that it may work the better; and with this
said Mercurial substance ,
thu~ Elevated (or sublimed)
- 59-


--- Page 167 ---
we Counterfeit the most pretious Margarites or Pearls ,
not inferior to the sight , to the very best that ever
Nature produced.
VI .
And with these Artifical pretious Stones, we shall
finish the discourse of Our pretious Stones, (Mineral ,
Vegetable , and Animal) the abscondite Mysteries of which ,
being by the Wise and upright Sons of Art prudently kept
Secret.
V·II. Pray the most Good and Gracious God , to open and
reveal the same, at one time or another, even as it
shall please him, to his despised Servants and little
ones.
VIII.
0 most incomprehensible light , most Glorious in
Majesty , who with the Charity of thy Heavenly Rays dost
Darken our Dirruner Light; 0 Substantial Unity, the Divine
three, the joy and Rejoycing of the Heavenly Host , the
Glory of Our Redemption.
IX .
Thou most Merciful , the Purifier of Souls, and the
perpetual subsistance; 0 most Gratious , through daily
Dangers and Perils which thou suffers us to undergo, and
through this Vexatious vail of Vanity , bring us to thy
heavenly Kingdom.
- 60-


--- Page 168 ---
..
X.
0 Power and Wisdom, thou goodness inexplicable, uphold us daily, and be Our Guide and Director, that we may
never displease thee all the days of our Lives, but obey
thee, as Faithful Processors of thy Holy Name .
XI.
Early, even betimes 0 Lord, hear thou my Prayers ,
by the Virtue of thy Grace, help forward my desires,
and enable me I beseech thee to perform they Holy Will.
XII.
0 most excellent Fountain, boundless in Treasures,
thou scatterest thy good things without measure amongst
the Sons of Men, and thou makest every other Creature to
partake of thine especial kindness.
XIII .
Thou are worthy O Lord, to behold the Works of
thy Hand and to defend what thy Right Hand has planted,
that we may not live unprofitably, nor spend the course
of our Years in Vanities.
XIV.
Grant therefore we. beseech thee, that we may live
without falshood and deceit, that avoiding the Great
danger of a sinful course of Life , we may escape the
Snares of Sin .
XV.
And as I Renounce the Loves ~f the things of this
Life and the eoncupiscences or Lusts thereof, so accept of
me thy Servant , as a true and Spontaneous Votary, who
-61-


--- Page 169 ---
wholly depends on thy goodness, with all Confidence ,
possessing nothing more.
XVI.
We submit our selves to thee , for so it is fit;
vouchsafe thy Light to discover to us the Immortal
Treasures of Life; shew us thy hidden things , and be merciful and good unto us .
XVII.
Among the rest of thy Servants who profess thy
Name, I offer my self with all humble Submission; And I
beseech thee 0 Lord , to forgive me , if I open and reveal
thy Secrets to thy Faithful Servants.
Amen.
-62-


--- Page 170 ---
-
C H A P T E R L X X I I I
RIPLEY'S PHILOSOPHICAL AXIOMS OUT OF THE THEATRUM
CHYMICUM.
I.
Our Stone is called the Microcosm; One and Three;
Magnesia and Sulphur and Mercury, all proportioned by
Nature her self.
Now understand that there are three
MERCURI ES, which being· the Key of the whole Science,
Raymundus calls his Menstruums, without which, nothing is
to be done in this Art :
but the Essential Mercury of the
Bodies is the chief material of our Stone.
II.
Our Stone is a Soul and a substance, by which the
Earth does receive its splendor : what other thing is
Sol or .Luna · than a Terra Munda ·, a pure Earth, Red and
White?
The whole Composition we cali Our Plumbum or
Lead, the Quality of whose splendor proceeds from Sol
and Luna.
III.
No impure Body , one excepted , which the Philosophers
vulgarly call the Green Ly0n , (which is the Mediu,m which
Conjoyns the Tinctures between Sol· and Luna. with perfection) does Enter into our ~agistry.
IV.
These Menstruums you ought to know, without which no
true Calcination, or natural dissolution can possibly be
done.
But our principal Menstruum may be said indeed to
- 63-


--- Page 171 ---
be Invisible or Spiritual; yet by the help of our AQUA
PHILOSOPHICA SffCUNDA, through a separation of the Elements ,
in form of clear water, it is brought to light, and made
to appear.
V.
And by this Menstruum with great Labour is made the
Sulphur of Nature, by Circulation in a pure Spirit; and
with the same you may dissolve your Body after divers
manners: and an Oyl may be extracted therefrom, of a
Golden Color, like as from Our Red Le~d.
VI. l.ne· CALCINAT}QNE:
Calcination is the Purgation of
our Stone, restoring it to its own Natural Color, inducing
first a necessary dissolution thereof, but neither with
corrosives, nor fire alone, nor A. F. now with other
Burning waters, or the Vapour of Lead, is our Stone
Calcined; for by such Calcinations, Bodies are destroyed,
for that they diminish their humidities.
VII.
Whereas in our Calcination the Radical humidity is
Augmented or multiplied, for like increases like, he
which knows not this knows nothing in this Art.
Joyn
like with like, and kind with kind, as you ought; every
seed answers and rejoyces in seed of its own kind: and
every Spirit is fixed with a Calx of its own kind or
Nature.
-64-


--- Page 172 ---
VIII.
The Philosophers make an Unctuous Calx , both White
and Red, of three Degrees, before it can be perfected,
that shall melt as Wax, till which it is of no use.
If
your water shall be in a right or just proportion with
your Earth, and in a fit Heat, your Matter will Germinate, the White together with the Red, which will endure
in a perpetual Fire.
IX.
Make a Trinity of Unity , without dissention: this
is the most certain and best proportion : and by how much
the lesser part is the more spiritual, by so much the
more easily will the dissolution be performed:drown not
the Earth with too much water, lest you destroy the
whole Work.
x. 2 . DE DISSOLUTIONE:
Seek not that in a thing which is
not in it , as in Eggs , Blood, Wine ,
Vitriol~ and the
other middle Minerals; there is no pr ofit to be had in
things not Metallick: In Metal s , from Metals , and by or
through Metals , Metals are made perfect.
XI .
First make a Rotation of all the Elements; and before al l things , convert the Earth into water by dissolution: Then Dissolve that Water into Air , and then make
that Air into Fire: this done, reduce it again into
Earth , for otherwise you labour in vain.
- 65-


--- Page 173 ---
XII.
Here is nothing besides the Sister and the Brother;
that is, the Agent and the Patient, Sulphur and Mercury,
which are generated Co-essential substances.
The dissolution of one part of the Corporeal Substance , causeth
a Congelation of another part of the spiritual.
XIII .
Every Metal was once a Mineral Water, wherefore
they may all be dissolved into Water again; in which Water
are the four repugnant Qualities with diversity .
In one
Glass all things ought to be done, made in the form of an
Egg, and well closed.
XIV.
Let not your Glass be hotter than you can endure
your naked Hand upon, so long as your matter is in dissolution: When the Body is altered from its first form,
it immediately puts on· a new form.
XV.
3 . DE DISPOSITIONE:
Beware that you open not your
Glass , nor ever move it, from the beginning of the work
to the end thereof; for then you will never bring your
work to perfection .
Dry the Earth till it becomes
thirsty in Calcination, otherwise you Act in vain.
Divide the matter into two parts , that you may separate
the subtil from the gross , or thin from the thick , till
the Earth remains in the bottom of a Livid Color .
-66-


--- Page 174 ---
XVI.
One part is Spiritual and Volatile; but they ought
all to be converted to one matter or substance.
And distill the Water, with which you would Vivifie ~he Stone.
till it be pure and thin as water, shinning with a Blew
Livid Colour, retaining its Figure and Ponderosity: with
this Water #ermes moistens or waters his Tree, whilst in
his Glass, and makes the Flowers to increase on high.
XVII.
First divide that, which Nature first tyed together,
converting the Essential Mercury into Air, or a Vapour,
without which natural and subtil separation, no future
Generation can be compleated.
XVIII .
Your Water ought to be seven times sublimed, otherwise there can never be any natural Dissolution made; nor
shall you see any Putrefaction like Liquid Pitch; nor
will the Colors appear, because of the defect of the
Fire Operating in your Glass.
XIX.
4. DE IGNIBUS:.
There are four kinds of Fires which
you ought to know; the Natural , the Innatural, that contrary to Nature, and the Elemental, which burns Wood:
These are the fires we use, and no others.
XX .
The Fire of Nature is in every thing , and is the
third Menstruurn.
The Innatural Fire is occasionally so
called, and it is the Fire of Ashes, of Sand, and Baths
for putrefying: and without this no Putrefaction can be
done.
- 67-


--- Page 175 ---
XXI.
The Fire against Nature, is that which tears Bodies
to pieces or Atoms; which is the fiery Dragon, violently
burning like the fire of Hell.
Make therefore that your
fire within, in your Glass, which will burn the Bodies
much more powerfully than the vulgar Elemental fire can do .
XXII .
5. DE CONJUNCT IONE:
Conjunction is the joyning
together of things separated, and of differing Qualities;
or the Adequation or bringing to an equality of principles : he which knows not how to separate the Elements, and
to divide them, and then to conjoyn them again, errs , not
knowing the true way.
XXIII.
Divide the Soul from the Body, and get that , for
it is the Soul which causes the perpetual Conjunction :
the Male, which is our Sol, requires three parts; and
the Female which is his Sister, nine parts; then like
rejoyces with like for ever.
XXIV.
Certainly Dissolution and Conjunction , are two
strong principles of this Science , tho ' there may be many
other principles besides.
xxv.
6. DE PUTREFACTIONE:
The Destruction of the Bodies
is such, that you are diligently to Conserve them in a
Bath , or our Horse-Dung, viz. in a moist heat for ninty
days Natural: but the Putrefaction is not compleatly
Absolved, and brought to whiteness, like the Eyes of
- 68-


--- Page 176 ---
Fishes, in less than 150 days; the blackness first
appearing, is the Index or Sign, that the matter draws on
to Putrefaction .
XXVI.
Being together Black like Liquid Pitch, in the same
time, they swell and cause an Ebulition, with Colors like
those of the Rainbow, of a most beautiful aspect; and then
the water begins to whiten the whole Mass.
XXVII.
A temperate heat working in moist Bodies, brings
forth blackness, which having obtained , there is nothing
that you need fear, for in the same way, the Germination
of our Stone does follow, and forthwith, to wit, in the
space of thirty (or Forty) days, you have Gas, or Adrop,
which is our U.zi.fer or Cinnabar, and our Red Le-ad.
XXVIII.
Take heed to defend your Glass from a Violent
Heat, and a sudden Cold; make use of a mod~rate Fire,
and beware of Vitrification.
Beware how you bind up your
matter; mix it not with Salts, Sulphurs, nor the middle
Minerals; let Sophisters prate what they will, Our Sulphur and our Mercury are found in Metals only.
XXIX.
7. DE COAGULATIONE~ Coagulation or Congelation
is the induration or hardning of things, in Calore· Candido, and the ·fixing of the Volatile Spirit.
The Elements
are forthwith converted, but the Congelation is no way
impeded, for those things which are Congealed in the Air,
-69-


--- Page 177 ---
melt or soften not in the Water; for if so, Our work would
be destroyed, and come to nothing.
XXX.
When the Compositum is brought to Whiteness , then
the Spirit is United and Congealed with the Body; but it
will be a good length of time before such a Congelation
will appear in the likeness or Beauty of Pearls.
The
cause of all these things is the most temperate heat,
continually working and moving the Matter .
Believe me
also, that your whole Labour is lost , except you revivifie
your Earth with the Water, without that you shall never
see a true Congelation .
XXXI.
This Water is a Secret drawn from the Life of all
things existing in Nature; for from Water all things in
the World have their first beginning, as you may easily
perceive in many things.
The substance or Matter is
nourished with its proper Menstruurn , which the Water and
the Earth only produce, whose proper Color is Greenness.
XXXII .
Understand also that our fiery Water thus acuated
is called the Menstrual Water, in which Our Earth is dissolved, and naturally Calcined by Congelation; when you
have made seven Imbibitions, then by a Circumvolution ,
putrifie again all the Matter without addition, beholding
in the first place the blackness, then the Whiteness of
the Congealed Matters.
- 70-


--- Page 178 ---
XXXIII.
Thus your Water is divided into two parts: with
the first part, the Bodies are purified: the second part
is reserved for Imbibitions; with which afterwards the
Matter is made black, and .presently after with a gentle
fire, made Wh.ite, then reduce to Redness.
XXXIV.
8. DE CIBATIONE:
Cibation, is the Feeding or
Nourishing of our dry Matter with Milk and Meat, being
both administred moderately, till it is reduced ·to the
third Order: you must never give so much as to cause a
suffocation, or that the Aqueous humour should exceed
the Bloo€l: if it drinks too much, the work will be hurt.
xxxv.
Three times must you turn about the Philosophick
Wheel, observing the Rule of the said Cibation, and then
in a little time it will feel the Fire, so as to melt
presently like Wax.
XXXVI.
9. DE ·SUBLIMATIONE :
Sublime not the matter to
the top of the Vessel, for without Violence, you cannot
bring it down to the bottom again; by a temperate heat
below, in the space of 40 days , it will become black and
obscure.
When the Bodies are purified , let them be sublimed by degrees more and more, till they shall be all
elevated or converted into Water.
XXXVII .
We use Sublimation for three Causes .
First,
that the Body may be made SP.iritual.
Secondl y , that the
- 71-


--- Page 179 ---
Spirit may be made Corporeal and fixed with it, and become
Consubstantial with it.
Thirdly , that it may be purified
from its Original Impurities; and its Sulphurous Salt may
be diminished, with which it is infected; subliming it to
the Top, as White as Snow.
XXXVIII.
10
DE FERMENTATIONE: Fermentations are made
after divers manners, by which our Medicine is perpectuated.
Some dissolve Sol and Luna into a certain clear
Water; and with the Medicine of them, they make the same
to Coagulate , or be Coagulated, but such a Fermentation
we propose not.
XXXIX.
This only is our Intention, that first you must
Break, or Tear, or Grind the matter to Atoms , before you
Ferment it: Mix then presently your Water and Earth together; and when the Medicine shall flow like Wax, then
see the above mentioned Amalgamation and put forth the
same; and when all that is mixed together, above or on
the top of the Glass, (being well closed,) make a Fire ,
till the whole be Fluxed; then make projection as you
shall think fit , because it is a Medicine wholly perfect : Thus have you made the Ferment both for the Red
and the White.
XL.
The true Fermentation is the Incorporation of the
Soul with the Body, restoring to the same the Natural
Odour, Consistency , and Colour, by a Natural Inspissation
- 72-


--- Page 180 ---
-
of the separated things .
And as the Magnet draws Iron to
it self, so our Earth by Nature draws down its Soul to it
self, Elevated with Wind: For without doubt , the Earth is
the Ferment of the Water, and by Course or Turns , the
Water is t he Ferment of the Earth .
XLI.
We make the Water most Odoriferous, with which we
reduce all the Bodies into Oyl, with which Oyl we make our
Medicine flow .
We call this Water a Quintessence, or the
Powers, and it Heals or Cures all humane Diseases .
Make
therefore this Oyl of Sol and Luna, which is a Ferment
most fragrant in smell.
XLII .
11. DE EXALTATIONE.
Exaltation differs a little
from Sublimation, if you understand aright the words of the
Philosophers.
If therefore you would Exalt your Bodies,
sublime them first with Spiritus Vitae ; then let the
Earth by subtiliated by a Natural rectification of all
the Elements; so shall it be more pretious than Gold, because of the Quintessence or Powers which they contain .
XLIII.
When the Cold does overcome the Heat, then the
Air is converted into water, and so two contraries are
made by the way, till they kindly conjoyn and rest together: after this manner you must work them, that they
may be Circulated, that they (one with another) may
speedily be Exalted together in one Glass well Sealed , all
this Operation is to be done, and not with hands .
-73-


--- Page 181 ---
XLIV .
Convert the Water into Earth , which will quickly
be the Nest of the other Elements; for the Earth is in the
Fire, which rests in the Air.
Begin this Circulation in
the West, then continue it till past the Meridan, so will
they be exalted .
XLV.
12 . DE MULTIPLICATIONE ,
Multiplication is the
thing which makes the augmentation of the Medicine in Color,
Smell , Vertue, and Quantity; for it is a Fire, which being
Excited, never dies , but always dwells with you , one spark
of which is able to make more Fire by the Virtue of Multiplication .
XLVI.
He is rich which has but one Particle or Grain of
this our Elixir, because that Grain is possible to be
augmented (by one way) to Infinity : If you dissolve this
our dry Pouder, and make a frequent Coagulation thereof,
you will augment it , and so you may Multiply it , till it
increases in your Glass, into the form of a Tree , and
which Hermes calls a Tree, most Beautiful in Aspect.
Of
which one Grain may be Multiplied to an hundred , if you
know how wisely to make your Projection.
XLVII.
Our Elixir , the more fine and subtle it is made ,
so much the more compleatly it tinges, and disperses
its Tincture.
Let your Fire be kept equally close ,
Evening and Morning; so much the longer you keep the Fire,
so much the more profitable it will be; and Multiply
-74-


--- Page 182 ---
more and more in your Glass, nourishing your Mercury i n
its encl osure , whereby you will have a greater Treasure
than you could desire .
XLVIII.
13 . DE PROJECTIONE ,
If your Tincture be true
and, not Variable , you may prove it in a small quantity
thereof, either in Metal or Mercury : It cleaves thereto
as Pitch, and so Tinges in Projection, that it i s able to
endure the strongest Fire: But many through Ignorance
destroy t heir work, by making Projection upon an impure
Metal .
XLIX.
See that you Project your Medicine upon your
Ferment, so will that Ferment be Brittle as Glass: Project that Brittle Medicine upon pure Bodies, so have
you Silver or Gold, enduring the severest Test.
L.
Give not liberty to the Reins lest you sin, but
Religiously Fear and serve the Lord your God; think your
self always before the Tribunal of the most high, the
great Judge and Rewarder of Mankind, who will return to
every Man according to his works.
LI.
14 .
RECAPITULATIO,
Take heed diligently to the Latitude of our Stone , and begih in the Occident , where the
Sun sets, where tbe· Red Man and Wbite Wife are made one ,
conjoyned and Married by the Spirit of Life, that they
may live in Love and Quietness .
- 75-


--- Page 183 ---
LII.
The Earth and Water, are joyned in a fit proportion;
one part of Earth or Body to three of Spirit , which is 4
to 12 . and is a good proportion: you must take three parts
of the Female to one of the Male: by how much less there
shall be of the Spirit in this Dispensation , Conjunction,
or Marriage, by so much the sooner will the Calcination
be Absolved.
LIII. The Calcination performed , then you must dissolve
the Bodies, divide , and Putrefie them; and all the Sec-
.rets of our other lower Stars will have a perfect Coherence and understandirig with the Poles of our Heaven,
and will appear with inexplicable Colors of Light and
Glory, Transcending in Lusture and Beauty, all other
things in the World , and all this before the perfect
Whiteness.
LIV.
And after the perfect Whiteness, you will have a
Yellow, the false Citrion Colour: afterwards the Blood
Red, unchangable for ever, will be manifest; so have you
a Medicine of the third Order in its kind, which may continually be Multiplied.
But this you must not in the
least be Ignorant of, that the RED MAN does not Tinge,
nor yet his WHITE WIFE, till they themselves are first
Tinged with our Tincture or Stone.
LV.
When therefore you prepare your Matter by this our
Art; hide your Bodies all over, and lay open their
-76-


--- Page 184 ---
Profundities or In-sides, destroy the first quality of all
your Materials, and the more excellent second qualities,
which in these you must separate; and in one Glass , and
by one Government and Order, convert the four Natures
into one.
LVI.
The Red Elixir must be divided into two parts, before it be Rubified , which put into two Glasses; and i f
you would have a double Elixir, one of Sol and another of
Luna , do thus:
LVII.
With Mercury multiply presently the Medicine into
a great quantity, if you have at first only so small a
quantity as a Spoonful : then may you multiply them together into a White and Red Medicine , which by Circulation you must convert into a perfect Oyl according to
our directi ons; and this Multiplication from your first
small quantity may be continued, should you live a thousand Years .
These Oyls will fix Crude Mercury into perfect Sol and Luna .
LVIII .
This pure and fixed Oleaginous substance, Raymundus
calls his Ba.sillisk ,whose Explication is so easie to be
understood, that it needs no more Words.
LIX.
For our Metals are nothing else, than our two
Minerae, viz. those of Sol and Luna , as Raymundus wisely
Notes; The Splendor of Luna , and the Light of shining Sol .
- 77-


--- Page 185 ---
In these two Minerae, the Secret dwells; tho ' the Splendor
may for a while be hid from your Eyes, which by the help
of Art, you may easily bring to light.
XL.
This hidden Stone, this one thing, purifie it, wash
it in its own Liquor, Water or Blood, till it grows
White; then prudently Ferment it, so have you the Summ
and Perfection of the whole Work .
-
F I N I S -
- 78-
