LIBRARY

Connecticut  Agricultural  College

y.?b__ISL3_13

CkASS_Nq^ 5-7-l-C..^^_

COST \Jrr.

DATE S<^^JJ l^2J.


J  sa^3


9^^  9^^  «^*  #^^  V^*

PLEASE  HANDLE
WITH  CARE

University  of
Connecticut  Libraries

•^»  «^»  «^*  «^^  9^*


BOOK     153.7.C22    c.  1
CARPENTER    #    ART    OF    CREATION


3  T153  0D0DMM3D  7


CoiJ  -^"^


THE  ART   OF   CREATION


i  ^'geoRG g-'^-g  t»i»,g|V*3fc:dS

IS^^

^

f

a»^^&-^^,cjaggrf>gB

The  Art  of
Creation

Essays  on  the  Self
and  Its  Powers  ^
'By  Edward   Carpenter

ft-uthor  of  "Towards  Democracy,"  "Civilisation,'*


etc.  etc.


LONDON :  GEORGE  ALLEN  k  UNWIN  LTD.
KUSKIN  HOUSE    40  MUSEUM  STREET,  W.C


•  c


First  published  .  .  .  1904
Second  Edition,  enlarged,  IQ07
Third  Edition  ....  igi6
Four  tit  Edition  ,  .  ,  igig
Fifth  Edition  ....     ig2i


I9ff3.


{All  rights  reserved)


"  These  two  thingSy  the  spiritual  and  the
material^  though  we  call  them  by  different  r.ames^
in  their  Origin  are  one  and  the  sameT

— Lao-tzu.

**  When  a  new  desire  has  declared  itself  in
the  human  hearty  when  a  new  plexus  is  forming
among  the  nerves,  then  the  revolutions  of  nations
are  already  decided,  and  histories  unwritten  are

— Towards  Democracy.


PREFACE

We  seem  to  be  arriving  at  a  time  when,  with
the  circling  of  our  knowledge  of  the  globe,  a
great  synthesis  of  all  human  thought  on  the
ancient  and  ever-engrossing  problem  of  Creation
is  quite  naturally  and  inevitably  taking  shape.
The  world-old  wisdom  of  the  Upanishads,  with
their  profound  and  impregnable  doctrine  of  the
universal  Self,  the  teachings  of  Buddha  or  of
Lao-tzu,  the  poetic  insight  of  Plato,  the  inspired
sayings  of  Jesus  and  Paul,  the  speculations  of
Plotinus,  or  of  the  Gnostics,  and  the  wonderful
contributions  of  later  European  thought,  from
the  fourteenth  century  mystics  down  through
Spinoza,  Berkeley,  Kant,  Hegel,  Schopenhauer,
Ferrier  and  others ;  all  these,  combining  with  the
immense  mass  of  material  furnished  by  modern
physical  and  biological  Science,  and  Psychology,
are  preparing  a  great  birth,  as  it  were ;  and  out  of


Preface

this  meeting  of  elements  is  already  arising  the
dim  outline  of  a  philosophy  which  must  surely
dominate  human  thought  for  a  long  period.

A  new  philosophy  we  can  hardly  expect,  or
wish  for  ;  since  indeed  the  same  germinal  thoughts
of  the  Vedic  authors  come  all  the  way  down
history  even  to  Schopenhauer  and  Whitman,
inspiring  philosophy  after  philosophy  and  religion
after  religion.  But  it  is  only  to-day  that  our
knowledge  of  the  world  enables  us  to  recognise
this  immense  consensus ;  and  it  is  only  to-day  that
Science,  with  its  huge  conquests  in  the  material
plane,  is  able  to  provide — for  these  world-old
principles  —  somewhat  of  a  new  form,  and  so
wonderful  a  garment  of  illustration  and  expres-
sion as  it  docs.

The  philosophy  of  the  Upanishads  was  nothing
if  not  practical ;  and  the  same  has  been  said  by
every  great  religion  of  its  own  teaching.  ("  Do
the  will  and  ye  shall  know  of  the  doctrine.*')  It
is  not  sufficient  to  study  and  investigate  the  art
of  Creation  as  an  external  problem ;  we  have  to
learn  and  to  practise  the  art  in  ourselves.  So  alone
will  it  become  vital  and  really  intelligible  to  us
The   object   of  the   present   volume  is  to  show

viii


4

Preface

something  of  both  these    sides,  the    speculative
and  the  practical.

Chapter  II.,  from  which  the  book  takes  its
name,  was  originally  given  as  an  address.  The
remainder  of  the  body  of  the  book  appears  now
for  the  first  time — with  the  exception  of  Chapters
VIII.  and  IX.,  on  "The  Gods."  These  in  an
altered  form  were  published  as  an  article  in  the
Hibhert  Jouj'nal  for  Jan.  1904,  and  for  leave  to
reprint  them  I  am  much  indebted  to  the  Editor
of  that  Journal.  In  the  Appendix  I  have  in-
cluded three  articles  of  a  considerably  earlier
date,  as  possibly  in  their  way  contributing  some
light  to  the  main  questions  of  the  book.

E.  C.

A  new  Edition  having  been  called  for,  I  take
this  opportunity,  not  only  to  make  a  few  verbal
alterations,  but  to  insert  at  the  end  of  Chapter
III.  a  Note  on  the  vexed  question  of  the  nature
of  Matter,  and  at  the  end  of  Chapter  VI.  a  Note
on  the  Great  Sympathetic  nerve-system.

KC

May^  1907.


CONTENTS


Preface  ,         .         •

I.  Preliminary  .  .

II.  The  Art  of  Creation  .

III.  Matter  and  Consciousness

Note  on  Matter

IV.  The  Three  Stages  of  Consciousness
V.  The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

VI.  The  Self  and  its  Affiliations  {continued)

Note  on  the  Great  Sympathetic

VII.   Platonic  Ideas  and  Heredity

VIII.  The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the   Race-Life

IX.  The  Gods  as  Dwelling  in  the  Physiological

Centres     .
X.  The  Devils  and  the  Idols
XI.  Beauty  and  Duty
XII.  Creation
XIII.  Transformation     .


PACK

vii

I

10

35
45
54

71

92

118
'35

^54

174
192

2C8

223


APPENDIX

1.  The   May-Fly:    a  Study   in   Transformation      237

2.  Health  a  Conquest      .  .  .  .  -255

3.  Evening  in  Spring  :    a  Meditation  ,  .     263

xi


THE    ART   OF    CREATION


PRELIMINARY

Related  Motion  seems  to  be,  as  suggested  by
the  words  Attraction  and  Repulsion,  Gravitation,
Chemical  Affinity,  and  so  forth,  the  ground-fact
of  inorganic  Nature.  And  it  seems  also  to  be
the  ground  and  foundation  of  Life.  The  proto-
plasmic jelly  moves  towards  or  away  from  sub-
stances in  its  neighborhood,  and  this  appears  to
be  its  fundamental  property.  The  most  primitive
cellular  organisms  act  in  the  same  way.  Some
seek  light,  others  flee  from  it.  Paramecium  is
drawn  towards  slightly  acid  substances,  and  flies
from  alkalies.  Actynophrys  is  attracted  by  starch;
and  so  on.^  There  appears  to  be  a  kind  of
'  choice '  or  elective  affinity  ;  and  the  learned  are
divided  on  the  subject  into  two  schools — those
who,  like  Binet,  see  in  these  movements  of  pro-
tozoa the  germinal  characteristics  of  human  intel-
ligence, and  those  who  class  them  as  "merely
chemical "  and  automatic  reactions,

1  See  Th.  Ribot,  "  Psychology  of  the  Emotions,"  Contem-
porary Science  Series,  p.  4.  Also  H.  S.  Jennings,  "  Psychology
of  a  Protozoan,"  American  Journal  oj  P^chology,  voL  x.

2  A


The  Art  of  Creation

It  is  not  our  business  here  to  draw  the  line  of
division.  It  is  sufficient  to  see  that  on  the  very
lowest  rung  of  the  ladder  of  life,  and  at  a  point
where  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  its  laws  from
those  of  chemistry,  such  words  as  we  are  forced
to  use — words  like  Attraction,  Repulsion,  Affinity
— have  a  double  meaning,  covering  both  material
and  mental,  external  and  internal,  afF-^-ions.
Even  the  word  Motion  itself  passes  easily  into
E-motion.  And  modern  psychology  an:'  physi-
ology have  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  every
feeling  or  emotion  in  the  mind  means  w  tion  of
some  kind  in  the  tissues  or  fluids  of  the  body.
Some  of  our  highest  and  most  complex  c-motions
take  the  form  of  attraction  or  repulsion,  and  in
our  dimmest  sensations,  almost  below  the  level  of
consciousness,  we  still  can  detect  the  same.

All  Nature  is  motion.  In  the  most  primitive
Life  there  is  a  tendency  to  motion  provoked  by  a
neighboring  object.  This  capacity  to  be  pro-
voked into  motion  is  called  irritability,  and  in  a
higher  degree  sensibility.  All  these  words —
'  tendency,'  *  irritability,'  '  sensibility  ' — have  a
mental  as  well  as  physical  import,  which  it  is
difficult  to  escape  from.  If  a  protozoic  cell  does
not  feel  *  desire '  for  food  such  as  we  feel,  it
exhibits  a  '  tendency '  towards  it,  which  we  can
hardly  refuse  to  regard  as  the  germ  of  '  desire.'

Over  the  question  of  the  priority  of  the  mental
or  the  material  aspects  of  cells  and  other  things
there  has  been  much  discussion — some  maintain-
ing that  chemical  and  automatic  reactions  come


Preliminary

first,  and  that  later,  out  of  these,  mental  pheno-
mena are  evolved  ;  while  others  insist  that  con-
sciousness in  some  form  is  prior,  and  the  material
world  only  its  expression.  I  think  it  best  and
simplest  to  suppose  the  two  simultaneous  and
coextensive — and  I  shall  (provisionally)  assume
this  position,  leaving  the  question  to  clear  itself
up  later  in  the  book/  I  may,  however,  here
quote  two  passages  from  Lloyd-Morgan's  "  Intro-
duction to  Comparative  Psychology."  ^  Speaking
of  consciousness  in  some  form  as  accompanying
all  vital  organisation,  he  says :  "  Does  it  not
seem  reasonable  to  suppose  that  no  matter  what
stage  we  select,  analysis  would  still  disclose  the
two  aspects  ^  That  with  the  simpler  modes  of
nerve-energy  there  would  go  simpler  modes  of
consciousness,  and  that  with  infra-neural  modes
of  energy  there  would  be  infra-consciousness,  or
that  from  which  Consciousness  as  we  know  it
has  arisen  in  process  of  Evolution  ?  "  And  again,
speaking  of  a  dog  as  having  grown  from  a  single
fertilised  egg-cell :  "  From  what  then  have  its
states  of  consciousness  been  evolved  ?  Do  we  not
seem  forced  by  parity  of  reasoning  to  answer :
From  something  more  simple  than  consciousness,
but  of  the  same  order  of  existence,  which  answers
subjectively  to  the  simpler  organic  energy  of  the
fertilised  ovum  " — that  is,  he  supposes  that  asso-
ciated with  the  egg- cell  is  a  subconsciousness
of   some    kind,   which    expands    into    the    fuller

*  See  chapters  iii.  and  iv.

*  Contemporary  Science  Series,  pp.  8  and  328.

3


The  Art  of  Creation

consciousness  pari  passu  with  the  evolution  of  the
egg-cell  into  the  dog.

Let  us  assume  for  the  present  that  Mind  and
Matter  are  simultaneous  and  coextensive.  Then
on  the  latter  side  we  have  in  ascending  scale,  first,
purely  inorganic  substances  (if  there  are  such),
then  crystals,  protoplasmic  cells,  vegetation,  the
animal  world,  man,  and  whatever  beings  are
superior  to  man  ;  while  on  the  mental  side  cor-
responding we  have  simple  attraction  and  re-
pulsion, selective  affinity,  irritability,  sensibility,
simple  consciousness,  self-consciousness,  and  such
higher  stages  of  consciousness  as  are  beyond.
Taking  this  view,  we  are  enabled  to  abandon  the
somewhat  futile  attempts  which  have  been  made
in  all  ages  to  separate  Mind  and  Matter,  and  to
glorify  one  over  the  other  (sometimes  mind
over  matter,  and  sometimes  matter  over  mind).
These  attempts  have  led  mankind  into  all  sorts
of  bogs,  which  we  may  hope  now  simply  to  pass
by  and  leave  behind.  There  is  ^  distinction  be-
tween Mind  and  Matter  (as  of  two  aspects  of  the
same  thing),  but  no  real  separation.

This  subject  is  dealt  with  at  more  length  in
the  chapter  on  Matter  and  Consciousness  (chap,
iii.).  We  may  say  here,  however,  that  the
distinction  between  Mind  and  Matter  forces  us
to  conceive,  or  try  to  conceive,  of  a  '  stuff'
prior  to  both — a  something  of  which  they  are
the  two  aspects ;  and  thus  we  come  to  the  world-
old  idea  of  primitive  Being  (before  all  differentia-
tion, emanation,  or  expression),  or  the  *  Will  *  of

4


Preliminary

the  later  philosophers  (Schopenhauer,  Hartmann,
Roycc,  and  others).  This  Will  or  Being  is  abso-
lutely not  thinkable  by  the  ordinary  consciousness
(except  as  a  necessary  ground  for  other  thoughts),
for  obviously  it  lies  beyond  the  region  of  thought.
I  shall,  however,  endeavour  to  show  that  it  is
known  in  the  stage  of  (cosmic)  consciousness
transcending  our  ordinary  consciousness.  The
perception  of  matter  and  mind  as  distinct  things
belongs  only  to  our  ordinary  (self)  consciousness.
This  distinction  is  not  known  in  the  earlier  stage
of  simple  consciousness,  and  it  passes  away  again
in  the  higher  and  more  perfect  stage  of  the  cosmic
consciousness.  (See  chap.  iv.  on  "  The  Three
Stages  of  Consciousness.")

Nevertheless,  though  Matter  and  Mind  are
not  separable,  and  may  be  regarded  as  two
aspects  of  one  reality,  there  are  advantages  in
cases  in  treating  one  as  prior  to  the  other.  As  a
rule,  since  our  mental  states  are  the  things  that
are  nearest  to  us  and  that  we  know  best,  it  seems
wisest  to  begin  from  the  mental  side.  Then  if
we  explain  material  things  in  terms  of  mind,  we
explain  things  little  known  in  terms  of  things
better  known  ;  whereas  if  we  explain  mental
things  in  terms  of  matter,  we  are  elucidating
things  inadequately  known  by  means  of  things
less  known.  Nevertheless  the  superior  definite-
ness  of  the  material  world  over  the  mental  is  a
great  advantage  in  favour  of  the  former.  There
are  many  things  which  can  be  clearly  seen  from
the  objective  side,  which  would  escape  us  from

5


The  Art  of  Creation

the  subjective  ;  and  a  healthy  Materialism  (side
by  side  with  the  other  view)  has  its  proper
and  important  use,  and  is  by  no  means  to  be
neglected.

In  addition  to  the  debate  as  to  which  is  prior
Mind  or  Matter,  there  is  the  further  controversy
as  to  which,  in  the  constitution  of  the  Mind
itself,  comes  first  and  is  most  fundamental  —
Feeling  or  Intellect.  This  question,  however,  is
not  quite  on  all  fours  with  the  other.  For  the
question  of  Mind  and  Matter  is  mainly  a  meta-
physical one,  as  of  two  possible  aspects  of
Being ;  whereas  the  other  is  rather  a  question  of
observation,  and  of  the  order  of  evolution.  I
think  it  will  become  clear  to  any  one  who  thinks
carefully  about  the  question,  that  notwithstand-
ing a  vast  amount  of  interaction  between  the
two.  Feeling  is  more  fundamental  than  Intellect,
and  prior  to  it  in  the  order  of  expression  and
evolution.  Vague  desire  arises  in  the  mind
before  ever  it  takes  any  form  sufficiently  definite
to  be  characterised  as  Thought.  This  subject,
however,  I  deal  with  in  chap.  ii.  ("  The  Art  of
Creation")  more  in  detail,  and  I  will  not  dwell
upon  it  here.

What  we  have  just  said  about  the  necessity  of
positing  a  state  of  '  Being '  prior  to  Mind  (as
we  use  that  term)  and  Matter,  mdicates  to  us —
and  it  is  necessary  to  dwell  upon  this  for  a
moment — that  the  problem  of  the  Universe  is
essentially  insoluble  to  our  ordinary  thought.  It
is  necessary  to  face  this  fact  fairly  and  squarely,

6


Preliminary

because  by  blinking  it  and  deceiving  ourselves  we
get  landed  in  hopeless  morasses  and  vain  quests
The  problem  of  the  Universe  is  essentially  in-
soluble without  the  introduction  of  some  trans-
cendent factor — Will,  Being,  the  Ego,  a  Fourth
dimension,  or  whatever  we  may  term  it.  The
ordinary  consciousness,  forced  to  see  everything
under  the  double  form  of  subject  and  object,
mind  and  matter,  cannot  escape  this  dual  com-
pulsion ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time  its  own  con-
stitution compels  it  to  realise  and  to  assume  that
there  is  another  order  of  being  (unrepresentable
in  thought)  in  which  the  duality  is  merged  in
unity.  It  is  thus,  as  it  were  by  its  own  action,
driven  against  a  wall  which  it  cannot  overpass,
and  forced  to  set  a  barrier  to  its  own  further
progress !

Immensely  valuable  as  is  the  work  which
physical  Science  has  done,  it  suffers  from  this
disability  which  must  be  fairly  faced,  namely,
that  it  never  can  by  any  possibility  explain  the
situation,  since  it  moves  always  on  one  side  of  a
fixed  wall  or  fence.  To  pass  the  fence  trans-
cendental things  have  to  be  assumed,  and  that
means  that  at  a  certain  point  the  ordinary  mind
must  throw  up  the  sponge  !  The  situation  would
be  desperate,  were  it  not  that  perfectly  naturally
and  inevitably  in  its  due  time  another  order  of
consciousness  opens  out,  which  reconciles  subject
and  object,  mind  and  matter,  and  having  one  leg
firmly  planted  on  the  other  side,  lifts  us  gently
over  the  stile !

7


The  Art  of  Creation

In  the  two  chapters  on  "  The  Self  and  its  Affili-
ations," I  have  assumed  that  the  Ego,  a  trans-
cendental being,  descends  into  and  manifests  itself
in  our  ordinary  world  of  Time  and  Space ;  and
that  even  as  the  ego  of  the  tiniest  cell  it  has  a
potential  existence  far  transcending  the  minute
speck  of  protoplasm  which  we  can  actually  sec
or  analyse.  This  may  be  thought  to  be  an
enormous  and  unwarrantable  assumption,  but  I
have  given  the  reason  why  assumptions  of  some
such  kind  are  unavoidable.  And  it  may  be
pointed  out  that  if,  endeavoring  to  keep  to  the
lines  of  pure  physical  science,  we  barred  out  such
assumptions,  we  should  only  be  landed  in  an
infinity  and  an  unthinkability  of  another  kind.
For  to  understand  and  define  a  single  tiniest  cell,
it  is  a  mere  truism  of  science  to  say,  we  should
have  to  understand  and  define  all  its  environ-
ment in  space  and  time,  or  in  other  words  the
whole  universe.  If  therefore  we  find  the  subject
becomes  more  thinkable  by  assuming  say  a  fourth
dimensional  being  than  by  following  the  ramifica-
tions of  **  matter  and  force  "  into  infinite  space
and  time,  we  are  quite  justified  in  adopting  the
former  method.

For  while  we  have  to  admit  on  the  one  hand
that  these  problems  cannot  be  fully  worked  out
by  ordinary  thought,  wc  are  bound  on  the  other
hand  (and  we  necessarily  desire)  to  make  their
solutions  as  thinkable  as  possible.  Thinkable  in
some  degree  our  views  of  the  world  must  be  (even
if  not  absolutely  true),  or  else  we  cannot  use  them

8


Preliminary

in  our  ordinary  lives ;  and  however,  in  course
of  time,  our  ordinary  modes  of  thought  may  be
illuminated  by  a  superior  order  of  consciousness,
they  will  still  retain  their  importance  and  their
value  in  their  own  sphere.

To  show  the  limits  of  ordinary  thought  and
the  points  where  the  various  problems  hand  them-
selves over  to  other  stages  of  consciousness,  is
part  of  the  object  of  this  series  of  papers.  It  is
in  these  stages  of  consciousness  and  their  succes-
sion (which  is  a  practical  matter)  that  the  solu-
tion of  the  great  world-problems  will,  I  think,
be  found.  And  many  of  the  present  riddles  of
existence,  which  vex  us  so,  will  when  we  compass
the  *  cosmic '  stage  simply  be  left  lying  as
matters  of  no  importance  —  not  to  say  left
*  lying,*  as  seen  to  be  the  delusive  things  they
are.


II

THE   ART   OF   CREATION »

In  speaking  of  "  The  Art  of  Creation  " — as  there
may  be  some  ambiguity  about  the  expression — I
wish  to  say  that  my  object  is  to  consider  by  what
process  or  method  things  are  made  to  appear  and
exist  in  the  world.  This  may  seem  a  bold  matter
to  discuss ;  but  it  has,  of  course,  been  the  subject
of  philosophy  time  out  of  mind.

Forty  or  fifty  years  ago  the  materialistic  view
of  the  world  was  much  in  evidence.  We  all  at
that  time  were  automatons ;  and  it  was  the
fashion  to  regard  human  beings  as  composed  of
enormous  crowds  of  material  atoms,  by  whose
mechanical  impacts  all  human  actions  were  pro-
duced, and  even  certain  mental  phenomena  in  the
shape  of  consciousness  were  evolved  as  a  sort  of
by-product.  Since  then,  however,  partly  through
a  natural  reaction  and  partly  through  the  influx
of  Eastern  ideas,  there  has  been  a  great  swing  of
the  pendulum,  and  a  disposition  to  posit  the
Mental  world  as  nearer  the  basis  of  existence
and  to  look  upon  material  phenomena  rather  as
the  outcome  and  expression  of  the  mental.  In
the  later  part  of  last  century  we  looked  upon
^  Given  originally  as  an  address.

10


The  Art  of  Creation

Creation  as  a  process  of  Machinery;  to-day  wc
look  upon  it  as  an  Art.

But  as  no  theory  or  view  of  things  in  general  is
of  much  value  unless  founded  on  actual  observa-
tion in  detail,  I  should  like  the  reader  to  consider
how  things  we  know  about  actually  do  come  into
existence.  And  since  it  is  best  in  such  cases  to
observe  things  that  are  near  us  and  that  we  know
most  about,  I  propose  that  we  should  first  con-
sider how  our  own  Thoughts  and  Actions  and
Bodily  Forms  come  into  existence.

Let  us  take  our  Thoughts  first.  We  have  only
to  indulge  in  a  few  moments'  rest,  and  immedi-
ately we  become  aware  that  our  mind  is  peopled
by  a  motley  crowd  of  phantoms.  We  seem  to  see
them  springing  up  of  themselves,  and  almost  at
random,  from  the  background  of  consciousness —
images  of  scenes,  the  countenances  of  friends,
concatenations  of  arguments  and  of  events — an
innumerable  procession.  Where  does  it  all  come
from  ?  Yet  a  moment  more  and  we  see  that  the
crowd  is  not  a  random  one,  but  that  it  is  inspired
and  given  its  form  by  the  emotions,  the  feelings,
the  desires,  lying  deep  and  half-hidden  within.
Wc  are  depressed,  and  the  forms  and  images  that
pass  before  us  are  those  of  disaster  and  fear  ;  or
we  are  in  high  spirits  and  the  scenes  are  scenes
of  joy  and  gladness.  This  is  familiar  ground,  of
course,  but  it  may  be  worth  while  considering  it
more  in  detail.

Feeling  (or  desire)  lies  beneath.  Thought  is
the  form  which  it  takes  as  it  comes  into  the  outer

II


The  Art  of  Creation

world.^  Let  us  take  a  definite  instance.  We
desire  to  travel.  The  desire  begins  first  as  a
mere  vague  sense  of  discomfort  or  restlessness ;
presently  it  takes  shape  as  a  wish  to  leave  home
or  to  visit  other  regions  It  may  remain  at  that
for  some  time ;  then  it  takes  somewhat  more
definite  shape — as  to  go  to  the  seaside.  Then  we
consult  our  wife,  we  consider  ways  and  means,
we  fumble  through  Bradshaw,  the  thought  of
Margate  comes  as  a  kind  of  inspiration,  and  a
quite  distinct  and  clearly  formed  plan  emerges.

Or  we  wish  to  build  ourselves  a  house  of  our
own.  For  a  long  time  this  may  only  be  a  kind
of  cloudy  pious  aspiration.  But  at  last  and
almost  inevitably,  the  dream  of  the  house  takes
shape  within  our  minds.  We  get  so  far  as  to
make  a  pencil  sketch  of  what  we  want.     Wc  go

1  Though  there  are  some  who  dispute  the  priority  of  Feeling,
and  though  undoubtedly  there  is  a  great  interaction  between
Feeling  and  Intellect,  so  that  intellectual  states  sometimes  pro-
duce emotional  states,  and  the  two  are  often  or  even  generally
intertangled — yet  on  the  whole  it  is  clear,  I  think,  that  Feeling
is  the  more  fundamental  of  the  two,  and  prior  to  Intellect.  Ribot
("  Psychology  of  the  Emotions  ")  mentions  various  cases  in  which
emotion  appears  unaccompanied  by  any  intellection — as  in
earliest  infancy  before  perceptions  are  awakened,  or  in  some
cases  of  disease  where  vague  sadness  or  dread  makes  its  first
appearance  without  taking  any  form  or  having  any  apparent
reason.  He  thinks  there  is  an  "autonomous  life  of  feeling,
independent  of  the  intellectual  life,  and  having  its  cause  below"
(p.  9).  Paul  Deussen  points  out  ("  Elements  of  Metaphysics,"
p.  113)  that  desire  precedes  intellect  in  infancy  and  survives  it
in  old  age  ;  and  Herbert  Spencer,  in  his  "  Facts  and  Frag-
ments," p.  27,  says  "  the  emotions  are  the  masters,  the  intellect
is  the  servant."  We  may  also  notice  that  in  the  order  of
evolution  sensation  precedes  perception,  and  that  a  vegetative
nervous  system  appears  in  the  lower  animals  long  before  any-
thing resembling  a  brain  is  developed.

12


The  Art  of  Creation

and  prospect  a  site.  We  consult  an  architect,
and  presently  there  emerges  a  much  more  definite
and  detailed  plan  than  before.  Then  steps  are
actually  taken  towards  building.  Heaps  of  bricks
and  stone  and  other  materials  begin  to  appear  on
the  scene  ;  and  at  last  there  is  the  house  standing,
which  once  only  existed  in  the  dream-world  of
our  minds.  Always  the  movement  is  outwards,
from  the  indefinite  vague  Feeling  or  desire  to  the
definite  clearly  formed  Thought,  and  thence  to
Action  and  the  External  world.

Whatever  feeling  it  is,  the  result  is  the  same.
We  harbour  within  us  the  desire  to  injure  any
one,  or  the  desire  to  benefit  any  one.  The  desire
cannot  remain  at  that  stage.  It  must  either
perish  away,  or  else  if  it  is  harboured  it  will
grow.  It  will  grow  into  definite  thoughts  and
plans  of  benefit  or  of  injury.  And  these  thoughts
and  plans  will  grow  into  Actions.  True,  the
actions  may  not  be  seen  immediately ;  the
thoughts  and  plans  may  work  unseen  for  a  long
time.  Still,  there  they  are,  working ;  there  they
are  making  ready  the  channels  for  action.  And
this  it  is,  I  suppose,  which  explains  the  fact  that
we  all  of  us  at  times  act  so  much  more  heroically
than  either  our  neighbours,  or  even  ourselves,
expect ;  and  also,  I  am  afraid,  that  at  times  we
act  so  much  more  meanly.  All  the  time,  in
silence,  thought  has  been  busy  within,  making
ready  the  channels ;  and  so  one  day  when  a  great
rush  of  feeling  comes  it  flows  down,  and  in  an
instant,  as  it  were,  before  we  have  time  to  say

13


The  Art  of  Creation

Yea  or  Nay,  has  flung  itself  forth  into  our
actions,  and  taken  form  and  standing  in  the
visible  world.

And  not  only  is  this  true  of  violent  feeling,
that  it  finds  expression  in  the  visible  world ;  but
even  of  very  quiet  feeling  the  same,  if  it  is  also
Persistent.  If  so  small  a  creature  as  man  presses
with  his  hand  against  the  side  of  a  great  ship
floating  in  dock,  it  seems  that  no  result  is  pro-
duced ;  yet  we  know  that  if  he  should  continue
persistently  so  to  press,  in  time  a  measurable
effect  would  ensue.  And  so  it  is  with  those
smaller  calmer  currents  of  desire  and  feeling
within  us.  If  they  are  always  there,  always
flowing,  they  will  inevitably  show  themselves
in  time.  Gradually,  insensibly,  they  modify  our
thoughts,  our  actions,  our  habits  of  action,  the
movements  of  our  muscles  and  limbs,  the  ex-
pressions of  our  faces,  the  forms  of  our  bodies.
Yes,  even  the  forms  of  our  bodies,  the  forms  and
outlines  of  our  faces,  our  expressions  and  man-
ners, and  the  tones  of  our  voices — all  the  things
that  go  to  make  up  our  appearance  in  the  world
— are,  I  will  not  say  entirely  the  result  (since
Heredity  and  other  things  have  to  be  considered),
but  plainly  to  a  very  great  extent  the  result  and
expression  of  those  dim  feelings  and  emotions,
which,  welling  up  in  the  hidden  caverns  of  the
mind,  gradually  press  forward  and  outward  into
the  light  of  day.

So  far,  then,  we  seem  to  come  upon  something
which  we  may  call  a  Law  of  Nature,  just  as  much

14


The  Art  of  Creation

as  gravitation  or  any  other  law — the  law,  namely,
that  within  ourselves  there  is  a  continual  move-
ment outwards  from  Feeling  towards  Thought,
and  then  to  Action ;  from  the  inner  to  the
outer ;  from  the  vague  to  the  definite ;  from
the  emotional  to  the  practical ;  from  the  world
of  dreams  to  the  world  of  actual  things  and  what
we  call  rtality.

It  will  be  said,  however,  that  though  this
general  movement  of  feeling  and  thought  towards
the  outer  and  'real'  world  may  truly  be  noticed,
yet  there  is  an  immense  and  everlasting  difference
between  thoughts  and  actual  things — between  the
sketch  of  the  house  in  my  mind,  and  the  actual
house  of  stone  and  mortar.  The  one  is  a  mere
dream,  an  insubstantial  phantom  inside  my  brain,
which  no  one  but  myself  can  see  or  feel ;  the
other  is  a  solid  and  undeniable  fact  which  would
crack  my  skull  and  my  brain  both,  if  they  came
into  too  sudden  contact  with  it.  Nevertheless,
as  I  have  shown  that  between  a  man's  thoughts
and  his  actions  there  is  no  positive  line  of  sepa-
ration that  can  be  drawn ;  so  I  want  it  to  be
reahsed,  as  we  go  on,  that  the  house  as  it  exists
in  the  man's  brain,  and  the  house  as  it  stands  on
the  hillside,  are  not  two  entirely  separate  things ;
that  an  essential  unity  enfolds  them  ;  and  that
the  same  Art  of  Creation  which  is  concerned  in
the  production  of  one  is  also  concerned  in  the
production  of  the  other.

But  first  I  would  say  a  word  about  dreams.
I   have  pointed  out  that  in  our  waking  hours

IS


The  Art  of  Creation

continual  processions  of  Thoughts  are  passing
through  the  mind,  stimulated  by  underlying
feeling.  In  the  dreams  of  sleep  we  notice  the
same  ebullition  of  images,  only  we  say,  and
rightly,  that  they  are  more  scrappy,  more  in-
coherent, more  grotesque.  The  truth  is,  doubt-
less, that  in  sleep  the  higher  reasoning  centres  of
the  brain  are  quiescent,  and  consequently  the
growth  of  images  takes  place  more  at  random
and  less  harmoniously.  But  what  I  want  you  to
notice  is  that  the  same  rule  as  before  governs,
and  that  the  dream-images  are,  for  the  most  part,
inspired  or  evoked  by  dim  underlying  feelings.
We  go  to  sleep  with  insufficient  covering  on,  and
immediately  dream  of  plunging  through  snow-
drifts, or  falling  into  a  crevasse ;  or  we  have
eaten  a  heavy  supper,  and  are  haunted  by  most
discomfortable  apparitions,  which  image  and
represent  to  us  in  outward  form  the  discomfort
we  feel  within.  That  hunger  or  any  other  need
or  desire  of  the  body  evokes  illustrative  dreams
is  a  commonplace  remark.  A  friend  of  mine  in
the  interior  of  Africa  years  ago,  with  an  exploring
party,  was  for  eight  days  without  food — nothing
but  a  parrot  and  a  mud-fish  having  been  obtained
during  that  time !  He  said  that  one  of  the  worst
trials  of  the  starvation  was  the  impossibility  of
sleep  which  it  brought  with  it.  And  when,  worn
out  with  fatigue,  he  did  relapse  into  slumber  for
a  minute  or  two,  it  was  only  to  be  visited  by  a
most  tantalising  dream.  For  at  once  he  beheld
what  he  described  as  "a  most  delicious  dish  of

i6


The  Art  of  Creation

mutton-cutlets "  floating  towards  him.  Of
course,  no  sooner  did  he  stretch  his  hand  to
seize  the  prize,  than  he  woke,  and  the  vision
departed ;  but  he  said  that  if  during  those
fateful  days  he  dreamed  of  that  blessed  dish
cnce,  he  dreamed  of  it  a  hundred  times  1

Here  we  see  an  almost  poetic  and  artistic  effort
of  the  slumbering  mind  to  express  the  underlying
desire  for  food  in  the  most  lovely  and  attrac-
tive form  which  it  could  devise.  And  some  folk,
who  are  of  a  literary  turn,  are  not  unaccustomed
to  find  themselves  composing  dream-verses,  which
are  expressive  in  their  way — even  if  not  perfect
models  of  composition.  An  acquaintance  of  mine,
who  was  accustomed  to  keep  a  pencil  and  paper
by  his  bedside  for  such  occasions,  told  me  that
he  once  woke  in  the  night  feeling  himself  drenched
with  a  sense  of  seraphic  joy  and  satisfaction,  while
at  the  same  time  a  lovely  stanza  which  he  had
just  dreamed  lingered  in  his  mind.  Quickly  he
wrote  it  down,  and  immediately  fell  asleep  again.
In  the  morning  waking,  after  a  while  he  bethought
himself  of  the  precious  experience,  and  turning  to
look  at  the  words,  which  he  doubted  not  would
make  his  name  immortal,  he  read : —

Walker  with  one  eye.

Walker  with  two.
Something  to  live  for,

And  nothing  to  do.

Here  again  we  find  that  the  deep  feeling  in
which  the  sleeper's  mind  was  drenched  had  got
so  far  as  to  instinctively  clothe  itself  in  rhyme

!7  B


The  Art  of  Creation

and  rhythm.  This  at  any  rate  was  an  important
move  in  the  direction  of  expression,  even  though
the  poetry  produced  was  not  of  a  very  high  order  !
Still,  one  must  feel  that  the  ideal  of  "  something
to  live  for,  and  nothing  to  do  "  was  a  very  blessed
and  beautiful  one  in  its  way !

There  is  a  class  of  dreams  which  occur  not  un-
frequently  under  anaesthetics,  which  are  interesting
because  they  illustrate  this  expressive  symbolic
quality.  There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that
under  anaesthetics  there  is  a  separation  effected
between  the  grosser  material  body  and  the  more
subtle  and  highly  conscious  part — a  separation
from  the  connection  of  pain,  and  a  liberation,  so
to  speak,  of  the  inner  being.  And  it  is  curious
that  under  anaesthetics  dreams  so  frequently  occur
in  which  one  seems  to  be  flying  or  soaring  through
space  with  a  great  sense  of  joy  and  liberation.  I
have  heard  of  many  instances.  The  following
rather  poetic  dream  was  told  me  by  a  friend  as
consequent  on  the  somewhat  prosaic  operation  of
having  a  tooth  removed  under  gas.  He  dreamed
immediately  that  he  was  soaring  through  space
with  an  intense  feeling  of  freedom  and  ecstasy.
Up  and  up  through  the  ethereal  regions  he  went
— till  suddenly  he  popped  out  on  the  floor  of
heaven  !  And  there  (I  suppose  he  had  been  read-
ing Plato)  he  beheld  the  twelve  gods  seated  in  a
semicircle,  and  filled  (as  the  gods  should  be)
with  inextinguishable  joy  and  laughter.  And
well  might  they  laugh ;  for  now  he  became  con-
scious of  himself,  there  on  the  floor  of  heaven,

i8


The  Art  of  Creation

as  a  small  transparent  ball  of  jelly,  in  the  centre
of  which  was  a  speck,  which  he  knew  to  be  his
very  self  or  ego.  He  also  was  greatly  amused,
and  was  just  about  to  join  in  the  laughter,  when
he  heard  behind  him  a  horrible  sound,  as  of  the
belling  of  a  gigantic  bloodhound ;  and  a  sense  of
awful  despair  seized  him  as  he  realised  that  his
body,  with  its  mouth  wide  open,  was  in  pur-
suit of  him.  Escape  was  hopeless ;  there  was  a
moment  of  agony  as  he  was  swallowed  down ;
and  then  he  woke  up  to  find  his  tooth  out !  In
a  dream  like  this,  though  one  cannot  suppose  it
to  be  an  accurate  description  or  vision  of  what
actually  took  place,  yet  one  may  well  suppose  it
to  be  an  artistic  representation  of  real  facts  and
feelings,  and  an  endeavour  to  portray  them  in  the
symbols  and  images  of  the  world  we  know.

Thus  what  I  want  the  reader  to  notice  is  that
the  operation  of  the  mind  in  dreams  is  along
similar  lines  to  that  of  our  waking  hours —
though  naturally  not  quite  so  perfect — that  is,
it  proceeds  from  underlying  feeling  to  images  and
thoughts  which  represent  the  feeling,  and  which
continually  become  more  distinct  and  *  real.'  [I
need  hardly  say  that  I  am  not  here  giving  a
complete  theory  of  dreams,  for  there  may  be
some  dreams  that  fall  under  other  heads ;  but  I
am  simply  citing  them  in  illustration  of  my
principle.]

The  tendency  is,  I  say,  for  all  these  images
evoked  in  our  minds  by  feeling  to  grow  on  us
and  become  more  and  more  distinct  and  real;

19


The  Art  of  Creation

and  indeed  in  dreams  we  wonder  sometimes  at
the  intense  reality  of  the  images  we  see.  But
it  is  really  quite  the  same  in  waking  life.  We
are  walking  down  the  street  on  some  errand ;
but  presently  forgetting  about  our  proper  business,
the  mind  wanders  away  just  as  in  dreamland,
and  we  imagine  ourselves  talking  to  some  friend
in  Australia,  or  at  the  club  arguing  violently  some
question  with  an  opponent.  The  scene  grows
more  and  more  distinct,  more  real  to  us,  we
become  quite  lost  in  it — till  suddenly — we  run
against  the  lamp-post !  then  of  course  the  dream
is  dissipated.  Something  more  real  than  it  has
arrived.  But  in  the  dreams  of  sleep  there  is  no
lamp-post ;  and  so  they  go  on  gathering  reality,
till  they  seem  as  actual  to  us  as  the  events  of
the  outer  world.  The  chief  difference  between
the  thoughts  of  our  waking  hours  and  those  of
sleep  is  that  the  former  are  constantly  corrected
and  set  in  order  by  the  presence  of  the  actual
world  around  us,  whereas  the  visions  of  sleep
grow  undisturbed  like  plants  in  a  hothouse  de-
fended from  the  winds,  or  like  weeds  in  a
sheltered  and  neglected  corner  of  the  garden.

That  this  is  so,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  our
waking  thoughts  too  can  gain  the  same  reality
as  our  dreams  if  they  are  only  encouraged  and
defended  from  outer  disturbance.  When  you  sit
by  the  fire  in  the  twilight  there  is  little  to  dis-
tract your  attention,  and  your  thoughts  in  such
reveries   seem  strangely  real.      I   have  heard  of

people  who  indulged  in  such  day-dreams,  carrying

30


The  Art  of  Creation

them  on  from  day  to  day,  retiring  to  their  rooms
always  at  a  certain  hour,  and  taking  them  up
where  left  the  day  before,  till  their  life  spent
in  this  way  seemed  as  real  as  their  ordinary  life.
And  there  are  other  people,  Authors  of  novels,
or  Dramatists,  who  deliberately  do  this — who  de-
liberately isolate  themselves  and  concentrate  their
minds  till  the  figures  and  characters  so  created
become  like  living  men  and  women.  And  not
only  to  themselves ;  but  to  the  world  at  large.
So  that  to-day,  to  every  one  of  us,  there  are
scores  of  characters  created  by  the  great  drama-
tists and  authors,  of  which  it  is  hard  for  us  at
the  moment  to  say  whether  they  are  men  and
women  whom  we  actually  remember,  or  whether
they  are  such  creations  from  books.  The  truth
being  that  the  author  with  immense  labour  has
projected  his  own  feeling,  his  own  vitality,  into
figures  and  forms  with  such  force,  that  they  begin
to  compete  in  reality  with  the  figures  and  forms
of  the  actual  world.

We  may  then,  I  think,  fairly  conclude  from
what  has  been  said  that  the  same  process  may  be
witnessed  both  in  our  waking  thoughts  and  in
our  dreams — namely,  a  continual  ebullition  and
birth  going  on  within  us,  and  an  evolution  out  of
the  Mind-stufF  of  forms  which  are  the  expression
and  images  of  underlying  feeling ;  that  these
forms,  at  first  vague  and  undetermined  in  out-
line, rapidly  gather  definition  and  clearness  and
materiality,  and  press  forward  towards  expression
m   the    outer   world.     And    we    may  fairly   ask

21


The  Art  of  Creation

whether  we  are  not  here  within  our  own  minds
witnessing  what  is  really  the  essential  process  of
Creatioft^  taking  place  everywhere  and  at  all
times — in  other  persons  as  well  as  ourselves,  and
in  the  great  Life  which  underlies  and  is  the  visible
universe.

But  it  will  be  said,  We  can  see  that  the  feel-
ings in  Man  clothe  themselves  in  mental  images,
which  he,  by  throwing  his  vitality  more  and
more  into  them,  can  make  practically  real  to
himself;  and  which  by  roundabout  processes  like
writing  books  or  setting  workmen  to  build  houses
he  can  in  time  body  forth  and  make  real  to
other  folk.  But  ought  he  not,  if  your  theory  be
correct,  to  be  able  to  throw  those  mental  images
direct  into  the  outer  world  so  as  to  become  visible
and  tangible  to  others,  at  once,  and  without  inter-
mediate operations }  To  which  I  answer,  Dont  he
in  too  great  a  hurry.  I  believe  man  has  the  germ
of  such  power,  and  will  have  it  in  greater  degree.
But  because  he  can  travel  so  far  along  the  route
at  present  it  does  not  follow  that  with  his  yet
undeveloped  powers  he  can  at  once  reach  the
point  of  being  able  to  project  his  thoughts  in-
stantly into  the  world  around  him.

Yet  1  would  like  you  in  this  connection  to
consider  a  few  facts.  In  the  first  place,  is  it  not
true  that  in  moments  of  great  feeling  there
flashes  something  out  of  people's  faces  and  figures
which  is  visible  at  once  to  those  around,  and
which  is  intensely  real,  quite  as  real  as  a  light-
ning flash,  or  immovable  as  a  mass  of  rock  ?     In

22


The  Art  of  Creation

the  second  place,  has  not  the  modern  study  of
telepathy,  by  careful  and  scientific  methods,
shown  pretty  conclusively  that  images  can  be
projected  by  one  mind  and  be  seen  or  felt  by
others  at  a  distance  ?  Thirdly,  do  not  the  well-
established  phenomena  of  Wraiths,  or  the  Ghosts
of  those  in  the  act  of  dying,  point  in  the  same
direction — namely,  that  in  such  moments  the
whole  vitality  of  a  person  may  pour  itself  out
towards  a  loved  one  and  impress  itself  power-
fully as  a  real  presence  on  the  latter's  mind.

There  are  other  considerations  connected  with
what  is  called  Spiritualism,  which  are  very  in-
teresting, but  which  I  have  not  time  to  dwell
on  at  any  length.  There  seems  a  mass  of  evi-
dence to  show  that  in  connection  with  so-called
mediums  in  a  state  of  Trance  images  are  evolved
which  become  visible  and  even  tangible  to  a
small  circle  of  people.  Now  as  we  have  seen
that  in  Reverie,  when  one's  body  is  at  rest  and
the  world  around  one  is  still,  one's  vitality  may
go  into  one's  thoughts  to  such  a  degree  as  to
render  them  strangely  real ;  and  as  in  Dreams,
when  one's  body  is  asleep^  the  images  become
more  real  still ;  so  in  Trance,  which  is  a  still
deeper  sleep,  does  it  seem  quite  possible  that  the
inner  vitality  of  the  Medium  may  shape  itself
into  images  so  far  material  as  to  be  visible  even
to  other  folk.  At  any  rate  evidence  points  in
this  direction  ;  and  the  well-known  fact  that  the
Medium  is  often  greatly  exhausted  after  these
manifestations,  corroborates  the  idea.     For  since

23


The  Art  of  Creation

an  author  who  spends  three  or  four  hours  in  writing
a  novel  or  a  play — thus  doing  some  of  the  hardest
work  to  which  a  mortal  can  devote  himself — is
all  the  time  throwing  out  his  mental  vitality  to
inspire,  embody,  and  create  those  images  which
he  gives  to  the  world,  and  in  the  process
naturally  is  intensely  exhausted  ;  so  by  a  parity
of  reasoning  we  should  expect  that  the  medium
out  of  whose  mind-stuff  such  imaores  were
directly  created  would  be  exhausted  in  even  worse
fashion.^  [I  may  also  remind  the  reader  how
tiring  it  is  to  any  one  in  ordinary  sleep  to  dream
excessively.]

However,  leaving  these  passing  illustrations,  I
will  now  proceed  along  the  main  line  of  argu-
ment. Whatever  we  may  think  about  the  last
few  remarks,  we  do  see  within  ourselves  a  very
distinct  process  in  operation.  There  is  the  first
birth  of  dim  vague  Feeling  or  Desire ;  then  the
growth  in  clearness  and  intensity  of  that  Feel-
ing ;  then  its  shaping  into  distinct  Thoughts  or
Images  ;  till  these  latter  become  mtensely  real  to
ourselves  ;  then  the  descent  of  Thought  and  Feel-
ing into  our  Nerves  and  Muscles,  our  Habits  and
Manners,  the  expression  of  our  Faces,  the  very
forms  of  our  Bodies ;  and  their  ultimate  trans-
lation into  Action,  and  the  results  of  our  actions
in  the  Outer  World.  Of  this  process  there  is  no
doubt.     And  thus  we  see  that  there  is  m  Man  a

1  Here  again  I  am  not  attempting  to  give  a  complete  theory
of  Spiritualism,  but  only  to  show  how  some  of  its  phenomena
illustrate  the  main  contention  of  my  lecture.

24


The  Art  of  Creatiori

Creative  Thought-source  continually  in  opera-
tion, which  is  shaping  and  giving  form  not  only
to  his  body,  but  largely  to  the  world  in  which
he  lives.  In  fact,  the  houses,  the  gardens,  the
streets  among  which  we  live,  the  clothes  we
wear,  the  books  we  read,  have  been  produced
from  this  source.  And  there  is  not  one  of  these
things — the  building  in  which  we  are  at  this
moment,  the  conveyance  in  which  we  may  ride
home — which  has  not  in  its  first  birth  been  a
mere  phantom  Thought  in  some  man's  mind,
and  owes  its  existence  to  that  fact.  Some  of  us
who  live  in  the  midst  of  what  we  call  Civilisation
simply  live  embedded  among  the  thoughts  of
other  people.  We  see,  hear,  and  touch  those
thoughts,  and  they  are,  for  us,  our  World.

But  no  sooner  do  we  arrive  at  this  point,  and
see  the  position  clearly,  than  another  question
inevitably  rises  upon  us.  If,  namely,  this  world
of  civilised  life,  with  its  great  buildings  and
bridges  and  wonderful  works  of  art,  is  the  em-
bodiment and  materialisation  of  the  Thoughts
of  Man,  how  about  that  other  world  of  the
mountains  and  the  trees  and  the  mighty  ocean
and  the  sunset  sky — the  world  of  Nature — is
that  also  the  embodiment  and  materialisation  of
the  Thoughts  of  other  Beings,  or  of  one  other
Being  ?  And  when  we  touch  these  things  are
we  also  coming  into  touch  with  the  thoughts  of
ihese  beings  ?

It  may  seem  rather  absurd  to  some  folk  to
suppose   that   rocks   and   stones   and   trees  and

25


The  Art  of  Creation

waterspouts  can  be  the  expression  of  any  one's
thoughts.  But  that  does  not  prove  the  thing  to
be  impossible.  We  know  that  to  primitive
savages  writing  (so  famihar  to  us)  appears  just
such  an  impossible  thing.  Some  time  ago  I
heard  a  well-authenticated  story  of  a  trader
up-country  in  a  distant  land,  and  among  a
people  utterly  unused  to  civilisation,  who  had
each  week  to  send  a  basket  of  provisions  to
another  European  who  lived  some  miles  away.
The  native  who  carried  the  basket  was  naturally
much  tempted  by  the  fowls,  bread,  eggs,  or  what
other  things  it  contained ;  and  on  one  occasion,
being  overcome,  took  some  of  the  food,  then
covered  up  the  basket  and  delivered  it  as  usual.
But  the  man  who  received  it  took  up  a  little
piece  of  paper  (which  of  course  contained  a  list
of  the  articles)  from  the  basket,  looked  at  it,  and
then  said.  You  have  taken  a  loaf  and  so  many
eggs.  The  native,  horror-struck,  confessed  his
sin,  and  was  punished.  After  which  he  refrained
for  some  time ;  but  at  last  gave  way  again — and
of  course  with  the  same  result.  He  had  a  great
fear  of  that  little  bit  of  paper.  He  thought  it
Vf2is  fetish^  tabu.  Not  for  one  instant  did  it  occur
to  him  that  those  little  scratches  and  dots  on  it
could  mean  anything,  could  have  any  sense.  No,
he  thought  the  paper  was  alive^  and  that  it  saw
what  he  did,  and  told  the  man.  So  he  deter-
mined what  to  do.  The  next  time  he  felt
hungry,  he  waited  till  he  came  to  a  lonely  spot.
Then  he  put  the  basket  down,  took  out  the  bit

26


The  Art  of  Creation

of  paper,  not  without  fear  and  trembling,  carried
it  off  a  little  distance,  and  hid  it  behind  a  rock,
where  it  could  not  see  him  or  the  basket.  Then
he  helped  himself  freely,  and  having  done  so,
smoothed  the  napkin  nicely  over  the  top,  put  the
paper  back,  and  delivered  the  basket  as  usual.
Alas !  it  was  no  use.  The  paper  told  all.  He
was  punished  again,  and  from  that  time  he  aban-
doned the  affair  as  hopeless.

But  if  the  savage  takes  a  long  time  to  learn
that  these  lines  and  marks  on  paper  have  mean-
ing, may  it  not  also  take  us  a  long  time  to  learn
that  these  lines  of  the  sea  and  sunset  sky,  these
forms  and  colours  of  the  trees  and  the  flowers,
are  the  expression  of  ideas  waiting  perhaps
through  the  ages  for  their  interpreters.

It  is  curious  that  we  admit  intelligence  in  Man,
though  we  cannot  prove  it.  1  am  hopeful  that
you  perceive  some  intelligence  in  me.  But  you
cannot  absolutely  prove  that  I  feel  and  think :  for
all  you  know  I  may  be  merely  a  cleverly-made
automaton.  You  only  infer  that  I  feel  and  think
from  a  comparison  of  my  actions  and  movements
with  your  own.  And  so,  on  the  same  grounds,
we  infer  intelligence  in  dogs  and  monkeys,  be-
cause their  movements  still  resemble  ours  in  some
degree.  [But  we  must  remember  that  Descartes
and  other  philosophers  have  contended  that
animals  were  merely  machines  or  automata
without  feeling ;  and  certainly  one  is  almost
obliged  to  think  that  some  of  our  vivisecting  Pro-
fessors adopt  the  same  view.]     When,  however

27


The  Art  of  Creation

we  come  to  creatures  whose  movements  do
not  much  resemble  ours,  like  worms  and  oysters
and  trees,  it  is  noticeable  that  we  become  very
doubtful  as  to  whether  they  feel  or  are  conscious,
and  even  disinclined  to  admit  that  they  are.  Yet
it  is  obviously  only  a  question  of  degree ;  and  if
we  allow  intelligence  in  our  fellow  men  and
women,  and  then  in  dogs,  horses,  and  so  forth,
where  and  at  what  particular  point  are  we  to  draw
the  line?  In  fact,  it  is  obvious  that  the  main
reason  why  we  do  not  allow  intelligence  in  an
oyster  is  because  we  do  not  understand  and
interpret  its  movements  as  well  as  we  do  those
of  a  dog.  But  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  to  one
of  its  own  kind  another  oyster  may  appear  the
most  lovely  and  intelligent  being  in  creation.

Certainly  it  is  quite  probable  that  the  feeling
and  consciousness  in  an  oyster  or  a  tree  is  different
and  less  extended  than  in  a  man  or  a  dog ;  but
that  in  its  order  and  degree  it  is  quite  as  intense
and  definite  I  hardly  doubt.

What  is  it  that  before  all  convinces  us  that
there  is  an  intelligent  Self  in  our  fellow-man }  It
is  that  he  has  a  Will  and  Purpose,  a  Character^
which,  do  what  you  will,  tends  to  push  outwards
towards  Expression.  You  put  George  Fox  in
prison,  you  flog  and  persecute  him,  but  the
moment  he  has  a  chance  he  goes  and  preaches
just  as  before.  And  so  with  all  of  us.  Our  lives,
despite  all  the  blows  of  fortune  and  misfortune,
spring  again  and  again  from  a  mental  root  which
we  recognise  as  our  real  selves :  which  we  want

28


The  Art  of  Creation

to  express,  which  we  must  express,  and  to  express
which  is  our  very  life.  But  take  a  Tree,  and  you
notice  exactly  the  same  thing.  A  dominant  Idea
informs  the  life  of  the  Tree  ;  persisting,  it  forms
the  tree.  You  may  snip  the  leaves  as  much  as
you  like  to  a  certain  pattern,  but  they  will  only
grow  in  their  own  shape.  You  may  cut  off  a
branch,  and  another  will  take  its  place.  You
may  remove  a  small  twig,  and  even  that  twig
will  have  within  it  the  pervading  character  or
purpose,  for  if  you  plant  it  in  the  ground,  an-
other tree  of  the  same  shape  will  spring  from  it.
Finally,  you  may  cut  the  tree  down  root  and
branch,  and  burn  it,  but  if  there  is  left  a  single
seed,  within  that  seed  in  an  almost  invisible
point  lurks  the  formative  ideal,  which  under
proper  conditions  will  again  spring  into  life
and  expression.

I  need  hardly  remind  you  here  how  exactly
similar  to  that  seed,  is  the  little  compressed
Desire  or  Need  which  at  the  very  beginning  of
this  argument  we  saw,  as  it  were,  lurking  in  the
human  breast,  and  which  afterwards,  under  the
proper  conditions,  grew  out  into  a  House  or
some  other  great  objective  result  in  the  external
world.  Look  at  the  huge  network  of  Railways,
now  like  an  immense  Tree,  with  endless  branches
encircling  the  globe.  Once  that  Tree  slept  in
the  form  of  a  little  compressed  Thought  or
feeling  in  the  breast  of  George  Stephenson,  the
collier-lad,  and  unbeknown  and  invisible  to  any
but  himself.


The  Art  of  Creation

And  now,  at  this  time  of  year,  there  are  lying
and  being  buried  in  the  great  Earth  thousands
and  thousands  of  millions  of  seeds  of  all  kinds  of
plants  and  trees,  which  during  the  long  winter
will  slumber  there  like  little  dream-images  in  the
brain  of  the  great  globe,  waiting  for  their  awaken-
ing.^ And  when  the  Spring  comes  with  the
needful  conditions,  they  will  push  forward  to-
wards their  expression  and  materialisation  in
the  outer  world,  even  as  every  thought  presses
towards  its  manifestation  in  us.

Thus,  as  we  think  about  it,  it  becomes  more
and  more  possible  to  see  that  this  solid  earth,
and  the  great  liquid  sea,  and  even  the  midnight
sky  with  its  wonderful  starry  systems  which  from
dream-like  nebulae  have  gradually  through  the
ages  cohered  into  definite  and  one  may  say  living
organisms — that  this  great  world  of  Nature,  just
as  much  as  the  world  of  Man,  is  the  panorama  of
a  conscious  life  ever  pressing  forward  towards
Expression  and  Manifestation ;  and  that  these
dots  and  scratches  in  the  writing,  these  stones  and
stars  and  storms,  are  words  appealing  to  us  con-
tinually for  our  loving  understanding  and  inter-
pretation. We  conclude  the  intelligence  of  our
friends  because  we  should  find  it  absurd  and  im-
possible to  place  ourselves  on  a  lonely  pinnacle
and    look    upon    those    we    love   as  automatons.


*  Who  knows  but  what  our  brains  in  the  same  way  are  full
of  tiny  atoms — seed-atoms  of  desire  and  purpose — which  lie
there  silent  and  compressed,  till  conditions  liberate  them  to
long  trains  of  action  in  the  drama  of  humanity  ?

30


The  Art  of  Creation

And  in  the  same  way,  in  proportion  as  we  come
to  love  and  understand  the  animals  and  the  trees
and  the  face  of  Nature  shall  we  find  it  impossible
to  deny  intelligence  to  these.  Certainly  there  are
times,  as  for  instance  in  looking  at  some  beautiful
landscape  or  sunset  sky,  when  not  only  we  seem
to  perceive,  as  the  Greeks  did,  separate  presences
or  spirits  in  the  trees  and  the  plants  and  the
streams,  but  we  seem  to  feel  the  overshadowing
of  a  universal  Mind — "  A  sense  sublime,'*  as
Wordsworth  has  it,

"Of  something  far  more  deeply  interfused,
Whose  dwelHng  is  the  light  of  setiing  suns,
And  the  round  ocean,  and  the  linng  air,
And  the  blue  sky^  and  in  the  mind  of  man—
A  motion  and  a  spirit  that  impels
All  thinking  things?,  all  objects  of  all  thought.
And  rolls  thro'  all  things."

Creation,  then,  is  not  an  almighty^^/,  by  which
things  are  suddenly  out  of  nothing  given  form
and  solidity — or  if  it  is,  it  is  a  process  of  which
we  have  no  experience,  and  which  is  unintelligible
to  us.  On  the  other  hand  we  cannot  regard  it  as
a  fortuitous  concourse  of  material  atoms,  because
we  have  no  experience  of  such  atoms  or  of  their
existence  ;  and  if  Creation  were  such  a  concourse
of  senseless  things,  it  would  be  itself  senseless  and
mere  nonsense  (which  it  certainly  is  not).  But  it
is  a  process,  I  take  it,  which  we  can  see  at  any
time  going  on  within  our  own  minds  and  bodies,
by  which  forms  are  continually  being  generated
from  feeling  and  desire  ;  and,  gradually  acquiring

31


The  Art  of  Creation

more  and  more  definition,  pass  outward  from  the
subtle  and  invisible  into  the  concrete  and  tangible.
This  process,  I  say, we  can  observe  within  ourselves
in  the  passage  from  Emotion  to  Thought,  and
from  these  again  to  Action  and  the  External
world.  It  is  the  foundation  of  all  human  Art.
The  painter,  the  sculptor,  the  musician  are  for
ever  bringing  their  dreams  of  Beauty  and  Perfec-
tion forward  from  the  most  intimate  recesses  and
treasure-houses  of  their  hearts  and  giving  them  a
place  in  the  world.  And  not  only  the  Artist
and  Musician,  but  every  workman  who  makes
things  does  the  same.  The  world  of  Man  is
created  by  this  process ;  and  I  have  given  reasons
for  supposing  that  the  world  of  Nature  is  con-
tinuous with  that  of  man,  and  that  there  too
innumerable  Beings  are  for  ever  labouring  to
express  themselves,  and  so  to  enter  into  touch
and  communication  with  each  other.

[The  reader  may  say  there  is  no  evidence  that
man  ever  produces  a  particle  of  matter  directly
out  of  himself;  and  I  will  admit  that  is  so.  But
there  is  plenty  of  evidence  that  he  produces
shapes  and  forms,  and  if  he  produces  shapes  and
forms  that  is  all  we  need ;  for  what  matter  is  in
the  abstract  no  one  has  the  least  experience  or
knowledge.  All  we  know  is  that  the  things  we
see  are  shapes  and  forms  of  what  we  call  matter.
And  if  (as  is  possible  and  indeed  probable)  Matter
is  of  the  same  stuff  as  Mind — only  seen  and
envisaged  from  the  opposite  side — then  the  shapes
and  forms  of  the  actual  world  are  the  shapes  and

32


The  Art  of  Creation

forms  of  innumerable  Minds,  our  own  and  others,
thus  projected  for  us  mutually  to  witness  and  to
understand.  However,  there  I  leave  the  argu-
ment.]

I  will  only,  in  conclusion,  say  that  in  this  view
Creation  is  a  stupendous  and  perpetually  renewed
work  of  Art,  an  everlasting  evolution  and  ex-
pression of  inner  meanings  into  outer  form,^  not
only  in  the  great  whole,  but  in  every  tiniest  part ;
Nature  is  a  great  vehicle,  an  innumerable  network
and  channel  of  intelligence  and  emotion ;  and
this  whole  domain  of  the  universe  the  theatre
of  an  immense  interchange  of  conscious  life.
Countless  hosts  of  living  beings,  of  every  grade
of  organisation  and  consciousness,  are  giving
utterance  to  themselves,  expressing  and  unfolding
that  which  is  within  them — even  as  every  child  of
man  from  birth  to  death  is  constantly  endeavour-
ing to  express  and  unfold  and  give  utterance  to
what  lies  within  him.  With  incredible  speed  the
messages  of  these  intelligences  flash  through  space  ;
**  the  Morning  Stars  sing  together  "  ;  the  messages
of  light  and  sound  and  electricity  and  attraction
penetrate  everywhere ;  and  as  modern  science
shows  us  that  the  air,  the  sea,  and  the  solid  frame
of  the  earth  itself  may  be  the  vehicle  of  waves
which  without  wire  or  definite  channel  may  yet
convey    our    thoughts    safely    to    one    another

^  I  have  in  this  paper  dwelt  only  on  this  one  aspect  of  the
World  and  Existence — that  of  its  movement  outwards  —  its
generation  and  birth.  There  is  of  course  and  necessarily,  an
opposite  aspect  of  equal  importance — that  of  its  absorption  and
involution  from  the  outer  to  the  inner.

33  C


The  Art  of  Creation

through  intervening  leagues  of  distance,  so  surely
we  must  believe  that  the  countless  vibrations  ever
going  on  around,  and  ever  radiating  from  and
impinging  on  every  known  object,  are  messengers
too  of  endless  meaning  and  feeling.

The  intelligences  which  constitute  the  universe
arc  doubtless  of  infinite  variety  and  of  infinite
gradation  in  development.  Some  may  find
expression  in  a  mere  point  of  space,  others  may
enclose  a  planet  or  a  solar  system.  Some  are
harmonious  and  accordant  together ;  others  may
be — as  we  well  know — in  violent  mutual  hostility
or  warfare.  Yet  in  the  end  they  are  included.
To  regard  the  world  as  simply  an  arena  of
separate  warring  beings  and  personalities  is  im-
possible, because  (as  all  Science,  Philosophy,  and
Experience  convince  us)  there  is  inevitably  a  vast
unity  underlying  all ;  and  all  these  beings  and
personalities  must  root  down  in  one  ultimate
Life  and  Intelligence  ;  all  of  them  in  the  end
and  deep  down  must  have  a  common  purpose
ana  'object  of  existence — and  in  that  thought
there  is  liberation,  in  that  thought  there  is  rest.


Ill

MATTER   AND   CONSCIOUSNESS

The  world  consists  of  what  is  (or  can  be)
known  or  perceived.  There  is  no  other  world
obviously  that  we  know  or  can  know  anything
about.

But  what  is  this  act  of  knowing,  which  is  so
important  ?

Every  act  of  knowing  involves  three  aspects,
which  we  cannot  avoid,  and  under  which  (by  the
present  nature  of  our  minds)  we  are  forced  to  re-
gard it.  There  is  (i)  the  knower  or  perceiver,
(2)  the  knowledge  or  perception,  (3)  the  thing
to  be  known  or  perceived.  I  say  we  cannot
imagine  the  act  of  khowledge  or  perception  ex-
cept in  this  triple  form.

For  the  first  analysis  of  the  conception  of
knowledge  implies  and  compels  the  thought  of
a  knower — either  oneself  or  some  one  else.  If
it  is  our  own  knowledge,  then  we  cannot  avoid
the  thought  of  self  as  the  knower ;  if  it  is
knowledge  in  some  far  planet,  totally  beyond
our  sphere,  still  we  are  forced  to  think  of  it
as  entertained  by  some  being,  be  it  beetle  or
%ngv  \  who  is  thus  the  knower.     And  without

35


The  Art  of  Creation

some  knower  the  conception  of  knowledge  is  (to
us)  meaningless.^

Similarly  the  act  of  knowledge  at  first  analysis
yields  a  *'  thing  to  be  known  "  ; — we  cannot  avoid
thinking  there  is  something  of  which  we  have
the  knowledge  or  perception.  If  an  impression
is  made  on  our  mind  the  very  word  connotes,
as  Herbert  Spencer  says,  *'  something  that  im-
presses as  well  as  something  that  is  impressed,"
or,  in  other  words,  the  "  modification  of  our
mind'*  which  we  call  knowledge  compels  us  to
look  for  something  which  causes  the  modification.
We  are  startled  by  a  thunder-clap ;  instantly  we
ask,  What  is  the  thunder,  what  is  behind  it  ?
We  are  told  that  it  is  Zeus,  or  God,  or  Elec-
tricity. The  answers  do  not  bring  us  much
further,  but  they  indicate  the  conviction  that
there  is  **  something."  This  habit  of  the  mind
of  positing  a  something  behind  and  different  from
the  knowledge  itself  may  be  foolish,  but  it
is  apparently  quite  inveterate  and  unavoidable.
Though  we  do  not  seem  able  to  say  what  the
"  thing  known  "  is,  we  seem  to  see  quite  clearly
that  is  not   the  knowledge.     Here    is   a  violet.

*  Thus  J.  F.  Ferrier  in  his  "  Institutes  of  Metaphysics"  gives
it  as  his  first  and  foundation  proposition  that  "  Along  with  what-
ever any  intelligence  knows  it  must,  as  the  ground  or  condition
of  its  knowledge,  have  some  cognisance  oi  itself";  and  later,
"  The  objective  and  the  subjective  part  do  together  constitute
the  unit  or  minimum  of  knowledge."  Sir  William  Hamilton  also
says,  "  In  the  act  of  perception  Consciousness  gives  us  a  con-
joint fact,  an  Ego  or  mind,  and  a  Non-Ego  or  matter,  known
together  and  contradistinguished  from  each  other."  Some
modern  psychologists  have  endeavoured  to  impugn  this  view,
but  not  very  successfully.     (See  note,  p.  70,  chap,  v.)

%6


Matter  and  Consciousness

The  least  thought  shows  us  that  the  colour  of
the  flower  is  largely  in  our  own  sensations.  The
same  of  its  odour.  We  know  that  such  colours
and  smells  appeal  differently  to  different  eyes  and
noses.  What  then  is  the  violet  '*  in  itself"  ^  We
do  not  know;  we  are  tempted  to  say  that  it  cer-
tainly is  nof  the  violet  that  we  see  and  smell.  Yet
we  are  compelled  to  believe  that  there  is  an  entity
there.  And  in  all  our  knowledge  and  perception,
whatever  it  may  be,  we  cannot  get  over  this  ascrip-
tion of  an  Objective  side  to  it,  as  well  as  of  a  Sub-
jective. Even  in  our  dreams,  those  most  tenuous
phantoms,  we  are  oppressed  with  a  sense  of  their
"  reality."

The  distinction  of  Subject  and  Object  is  funda-
mental in  our  minds  (as  at  present  constituted).
Practically  all  the  philosophers  agree  in  this —
and  there  are  not  many  things  that  they  do
agree  about.  All  our  knowledge  implies  and
involves  these  two  aspects.  There  is  always  an
Ego  side  to  it,  and  always  a  Non-Ego  side.
Consciousness — to  use  the  simile  of  Ferrier — is
like  a  stick.  It  has  two  ends,  and  without  the
two  ends  we  cannot  imagine  it.  All  knowledge,
be  it  great  or  small,  simple  or  complex,  has  two
poles,  the  subject  and  the  object.  The  least  atom
of  the  knowledge  (as  in  a  magnet)  has  the  same  con-
stitution. All  our  knowledge  is  saturated  and  inter-
penetrated by  the  union  and  distinction  of  subject
and  object.    And  we  are  compelled  to  think  it  so.^

1  Kant's  doctrine  of  Causality  as  a  necessary  form  of  the
understanding   comes   to  the   same  thing.     The   experience,


The  Art  of  Creation

Nevertheless,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  this  an-
alysis, in  young  children,  animals,  and  very  primi-
tive folk,  scarcely  takes  place.  The  knower,  the
knowledge,  and  the  thing  known  are  in  experi-
ence undistinguished,  darkly  confused  together,
as  it  were  one ;  the  Ego  quite  dim,  only  now
and  then,  so  to  speak,  suspected ;  the  thing  to  be
known  and  the  knowledge  frankly  unseparated.
This  may  be  called  the  state  of  simple  conscious-
ness. Yet  again  we^  considering  it,  are  com-
pelled, if  we  believe  there  is  knowledge,  to  believe
also  there  is  a  Knower  and  a  Known,  an  ego
side  and  an  object  side  —  even  though  these
sides,  in  the  simple  consciousness,  have  not  yet
become  separated.

Once  then  the  Nature  of  knowledge,  as  above
indicated,  is  seized,  many  things  easily  follow.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  obvious  that  Matter,  per
se^  as  an  independent  entity  supposed  apart  from
some  act  of  knowledge,  is  absolutely  ui.Known  to
us.  Matter,  of  course,  is  a  general  and  in  its
way  useful  term  for  the  supposed  objective  entity
underlying  phenomena  and  our  sensations.  I  say
that  to  figure  this  entity  as  independent  and  apart
from  mind  is  impossible.  For  knowledge  is  the
subject  phis  the  object,  the  object  plus  the  subject.
It  is,  and  always  must  be,  relative  in  some  degree
to  the  Subject  or  Ego.  Something  therefore
not  relative  to  any  ego  or  subject,  but  having  an

whatever  it  is,  is  at  once  conceived  as  having  a  cause  ;  and
this  cause  is  projected  into  space,  as  the  object.  Thus  subject
plus  object  is  the  necessary  form  of  Thought.

38


Matter  and  Consciousness

independent  non-mental  existence  of  its  own,  can-
not be  known.  It  cannot  even  be  imagined.  The
instrument  or  act  of  knowledge  being  itself  partly
subjective  can  only  at  best  give  us  information
of  some  joint  relation  between  self  and  the  sup-
posed external  entity  ;  and  if  the  *'  thing  outside  "
can  exist  without  relation  to  any  self  or  ego,  all
knowledge  is  absolutely  silent  about  it.  If  there
is  an  objective  and  material  **  violet ''  existing  inde-
pendent of  any  conscious  mind  (either  its  own  or
any  other),  we  know  and  can  know  nothing  what-
ever about  it.^

It  follows,  therefore,  that  all  the  talk  about  a
mechanical  structure  of  the  universe — as  of  dead
*  matter,'  which,  apart  from  any  kind  of  con-
sciousness, moves  in  obedience  to  laws  of  its  own;
and  all  the  talk  about  senseless  atoms  which  fly
and  spin  and  collide  and  rebound,  and  so  by
unwitting  mechanical  or  chemical  processes  build
up  the  world  we  see,  is  itself  senseless,  and  may
be  at  once  dismissed,  not  only  as  having  no  mean-
ing, but  as  being  incapable  of  meaning  to  us.  We
cannot  think  such  matter  or  such  atoms,  and  the


*  "Some  truths  there  are,"  says  Berkeley,  "so  near  and
obvious  to  the  mind,  that  a  man  need  only  open  his  eyes
to  see  them.  Such  I  take  this  important  one  to  be,  to  wit,
that  all  the  choir  of  heaven  and  furniture  of  the  earth,  in
a  word,  all  those  bodies  which  compose  the  mighty  frame  of
the  world,  have  not  any  subsistence  without  mind  ;  that  their
being  is,  to  be  perceived  or  known  ;  that  consequently  so  long
as  they  are  not  actually  perceived  by  me,  or  do  not  exist  in  my
mind,  or  that  of  any  other  created  spirit,  they  must  either  have
no  existence  at  all,  or  else  subsist  in  the  mind  of  some  eternal
spirit."

39


The  Art  of  Creation

more   we   try   the   more   we   see    our    inability.
Atoms  there  may  be ;    but  if  we  are  to  think
them,  we  must  think  them  as  related  to  Mind
— either  as  being  centres  of  consciousness  them-
selves, or  as  being  outlying  elements  (thoughts)
in  wider  systems  of  consciousness.     We  may,  of
course,  think  them  as  being  our  own  thoughts
about    an    unknown   objective  world — which   no
doubt  they  to  a  large  extent  are  ;  or  again,  we
may  think  them  as  tlioughts  conveyed  to  us  by
another  mind  or  minds — in  which  case  the  objec-
tive world  is  conceived  of  as  mental  in  character.
But  as  *  matter '  which  might  conceivably  remain
and  pursue  its  course  even  in  a  world  from  which
intelligence  had  departed,  we  cannot  think  them.
Again,  as  "dead  Matter"  is  nonsense,  so  is
another   term,  lately  much   used,  namely,  "  un-
conscious Thought."     The  very  expression  is  of
course  self-contradictory.      If  there   is  thought,
there  is  consciousness — of  some  kind  ;  we  cannot
imagine    it    otherwise.       In    strict    language    the
expression    is   nonsense.      But   loosely  we   know
that   it  is  used  to  indicate  that  in  sleep  and  at
other  times   processes  resembling   thought  seem
to  go  on — either  in   portions   of  our   minds  or
bodies  or  elsewhere — of  which  v/e  have  no  con-
sciousness   or    memory,    but    of  which    we    use
the  results.      Now,   of  this  there    may  be   two
interpretations:  either  we  may  suppose  conscious
thought  (in  a  strict  sense — i.e.  conscious  to  our
own  or  to  some  other  self)  to  be  really  going  on
in  the  region  indicated ;  or  we  may  suppose  (and


Matter  and  Consciousness

this  is  the  view  I  think  most  generally  enter-
tained) that  non-conscious  cerebral,  mechanical,
and  chemical  changes  are  taking  place  which
simply  turn  out  at  last  a  result  translatable,  and
so  made  use  of,  as  conscious  thought.

Now  the  latter  supposition  we  must  dismiss ;
for  we  have  already  seen  that  non-conscious
mechanical  and  chemical  actions  convey  no
meaning  to  our  minds  and  are  really  inconceiv-
able. We  are  therefore  compelled  to  adopt  the
former  supposition,  namely,  that  "  unconscious
Thought*'  is  really  conscious  thought  of  some
kind,  but  inherent  in  or  related  to  another  self
than  our  own.  And  anyhow  it  is  far  simpler,
and  more  natural  and  intelligent,  to  suppose
this  than  to  call  in  by  way  of  explanation  a
mechanical  non-conscious  process  which,  when
we  come  to  look  into  it,  proves  meaningless
and  unimaginable  to  us,  and  therefore  to  be  no
explanation  at  all.

In  the  third  place,  from  the  Nature  of  know-
ledge it  follows  that,  like  Matter,  the  Ego,  per
se^  as  an  independent  entity  supposed  apart  from
some  act  or  possible  act  of  knowledge,  cannot
be  even  conceived  to  exist.  For  the  knower,
the  knowledge,  and  the  known  are  one  from
the  beginning ;  and  though  the  one  differentiates
into  three  aspects,  we  cannot  separate  these
aspects.  The  stick  has  two  ends,  but  we
cannot  separate  the  end  from  the  stick.  And
if  we  could,  what  satisfaction  were  it  to  have  an
end  without  a  stick  ?

41


The  Art  of  Creation

Of  the  Ego  we  have  a  consciousness,  but  only
in  the  act  of  perception  or  knowledge — which  at
the  same  moment  involves  the  consciousness  of
the  Non-Ego.  When  there  is  no  act  of  know-
ledge, there  is  no  consciousness  of  the  Ego.
[But,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  when  the  know-
ledge becomes  perfect  knowledge,  then  the  con-
sciousness of  the  Self  also  becomes  complete.]
We  cannot  be  conscious  of  our  ego  as  unrelated
and  independent ;  for  consciousness — in  the  ordi-
nary sense — of  course  means  relation.

This  consciousness  of  the  ego,  present  in  the
act  of  knowledge,  gradually  evolves,  as  we  have
seen,  and  becomes  distinct ;  indeed,  it  becomes  to
us  the  most  real  thing  in  the  world.  It  pursues
us  everywhere  ;  we  refer  everything  to  it.  Yet  it
remains  curiously  simple  and  unanalysable.  We
cannot  avoid  it ;  but  we  cannot  analyse  it,  for  the
simple  reason  that  as  soon  as  it  is  envisaged  //
becomes  the  Object,  and  the  real  Ego  is  found
to  be  again  at  the  hither  end  of  the  stick.  This
action  is  very  curious.  However  intimate  the
Thought  one  may  entertain,  the  Ego  is  instantly
beneath  it,  and  more  intimate  —  suggesting  the
idea  that  it  (the  ego)  is  a  kind  of  widely-dif-
fused substance  of  Mind,  of  which  thoughts  are
modifications.  Indeed,  the  idea  is  suggested  that
possibly  all  egos  are  in  essence  the  same — that
they  are  portions  or  branches  of  one  universal
mind-stuff,  of  which  all  thoughts  and  existences
nre  modifications.

However,  leaving  these  last  considerations  aside
42


Matter  and  Consciousness

for  the  moment,  we  see  this  curious  fact,  that
while  we  feel  the  ego  as  a  simple  unity,  we  are
compelled  to  think  it  (if  wc  think  of  it  at  all)  as
enormously  complex,  or,  at  least,  as  having  the
potentiality  of  enormous  complexity.  For  obvi-
ously the  self  which  entertains  or  is  related  to
all  our  knowledge  and  experience  cannot  be  less
complex,  or  have  less  potentiality  of  complexity,
than  the  knowledge  and  experience  to  which  it
is  related.  Consequently,  the  self  appears  at  once
as  a  simple  monad,  and  an  infinite  complexity  of
possible  relations.

In  the  fourth  place,  having  cleared  the  ground
somewhat,  the  question  arises.  Are  we  now  in  a
position  to  get  a  clearer  idea  of  the  Non-Ego  or
of  *  Matter  *  }  If  we  have  some  conception  of
the  nature  of  the  ego — as  we  are  compelled  to
conceive  it — does  that  throw  any  light  on  the
nature  of  the  non-ego }

If  the  ego  is  impressed,  what  is  that  unknown
thing  which  impresses  it }  or.  If  the  ego  enters
into  relation,  what  is  that  correlative  unknown
thing  which  enters  into  relation  with  it }  or,  to
put  it  in  the  plural,  In  a  world  of  egos  capable
of  entering  into  relation,  what  are  the  correlative
Objects  ?  But  since  there  is  no  such  thing  as
dead  Matter,  the  only  answer  wc  can  think  is :
the  objects  arc  other  egos.  The  egos  enter  into
relation  with  each  other.

I  say  we  cannot  think  otherwise,  for  we  have
nothing  to  place  at  the  other  end  of  the  stick,
except  something  similar  to  what  we  have  at  the

43


The  Art  of  Creation

hither  end.  We  know  of  nothing  else.  In  all
our  experience  the  self  and  its  knowledge  are  the
only  things  we  know  of.  We  may  not  be  right
in  our  surmise,  but  if  we  think  at  all,  we  are
compelled  to  think  thus.  There  is  a  certain
probability,  besides,  that  one  end  of  the  stick  is
similar  to  the  other.  If  Subject  and  Object  are
correlative,  as  we  are  forced  to  think  them,  then
it  is  hard  not  to  suppose  the  object  similar  in
nature  to  the  subject.  We  conceive  the  subject
as  a  self  or  intelligence  which  is  one  and  yet  in-
finitely complex — and  it  is  difficult  not  to  con-
ceive of  the  correlated  object  or  objects  as  one
or  many  similar  selves — one  and  yet  infinitely
complex — the  kind  of  thmg  which  physical
science,  along  its  own  ways,  is  constantly  search-
ing for  and  assuming  to  exist.

Thus,  as  in  the  last  chapter,  we  arrive  at  the
conclusion  that  Knowledge,  Perception,  Con-
sciousness^ are  messages  or  modes  of  communi-
cation between  various  selves — words  as  it  were
by  which  intelligences  come  to  expression,  and
become  known  to  each  other  and  themselves.
All  Nature — all  the  actual  world,  as  known  to
us  or  any  being — we  have  to  conceive  as  the
countless  interchange  of  communication  between
countless  selves ;  or,  if  these  selves  are  really
identical,  and  the  one  Ego  underlies  all  thought
and  knowledge,  then  the  Subject  and  Object  are
the  same,  and  the  World,  the  whole  Creation,
is  Self-revealment.

^  In  its  ordinary  form.
44


Matter  and  Consciousness

In  these  few  remarks  on  Matter  and  Con-
sciousness generally  I  have  endeavoured  to  set
out  not  so  much  what  /V,  as  what  we  are  com-
pelled to  think,  as  this  indeed  seems  the  safer
thing  to  do.  How  far  what  we  arc  compelled
to  think  may  be  taken  as  evidence  q£  what  is,  is
another  question,  which  I  will  not  tackle,  but
which  the  philosophers  deal  with.  I  will  only
quote  the  following  remark  of  J.  F.  Ferrier's,
from  the  Ontology  section  of  his  "  Institutes  of
Metaphysics  "  :  "  No  Existence  at  all  can  be  con-
ceived by  any  intelligence  anterior  to,  and  aloof
from,  knowledge.  Knowledge  of  existence — the
apprehension  of  oneself  and  other  things — is
alone  true  existence.  This  is  itself  the  First,
the  Bottom,  the  Origin — and  this  is  what  all
intelligence  is  prevented  by  the  laws  of  reason
from  ever  getting  beyond  or  below."


NOTE  ON    MATTER

As  the  foregoing  chapter  is  somewhat  brief  in  expression,
and  has  presented  difficulties  to  some  readers,  it  may  be
useful  to  add  a  few  words,  especially  in  elucidation  of
the  position  taken  with  regard  to  Matter,

A  difficulty  felt  by  more  than  one  person  relates  to  my
denial  that  we  can  really  know  or  imagine  such  a  thing
as  "  dead  matter "  ;  and  one  critic  ^  quotes  my  words  :
"  Something  therefore  not  relative  to  any  ego  or  subject,
but  having  an  independent  non-mental  existence  of  itf

^         *  In  the  Independent  Review,  Jan.  1905.
45


The  Art  of  Creation

own,  cannot  be  known.  It  cannot  even  be  imagined  "
— and  criticises  the  statement,  saying :  "  When  the
object  is  known,  there  is  of  course  a  subject  knowing
it ;  but  that  is  no  reason  why  the  object  should  not
exist,  whether  or  not  there  is  any  one  to  know  it.  As
a  matter  of  fact,  we  do,  most  of  us,  habitually  con-
ceive a  world  of  matter  existing  before  there  was  any
consciousness."

Here  the  difficulty  has  arisen  I  think  from  a  mis-
reading of  my  statement.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  deny
that  "  matter,"  or  the  objective  basis  of  external  pheno-
mena, has  an  independent  existence  (and  I  do  not  think
Berkeley  denies  this)  ;  but  I  deny  that  it  has  an  inde-
pendent non-mental  existence,  and  I  say  that,  if  it  has,
then  such  existence  cannot  be  known,  or  even  imagined.
I  must  say  that  this  last  position  (which  Herbert  Spencer
has  so  strongly  fortified)  appears  to  me  impregnable.
If  there  is,  beneath  or  behind  phenomena,  an  under-
lying "matter,"  and  it  is  not  related  to  any  ego  or
subject,  either  to  the  observer  or  to  itself  as  subject —
if  it  has  an  independent  non-mental  existence — then  it
is  clear  we  cannot  know  that  existence  ;  we  cannot
form  any  image  of  it.  That  we  conceive  of  icebergs
existing  at  the  South  Pole  when  for  years  perhaps  there
is  no  one  to  look  upon  them,  is  perfectly  true  ;  but  of
course  we  know  quite  well  that  what  we  are  thinking  of
in  such  case  are  the  outward  phenomena  of  light-sparkles
on  the  ice  or  the  cold  touch  of  it  to  our  hands,  which
are  merely  our  sensations ;  and  it  is  only  by  confusion
that  we  think  of  these  as  the  underlying  "  object."  To
suppose  that  those  sensations  of  light  and  cold  exist  when
there  is  absolutely  no  creature  present  that  can  see  or
feel,  would  be  absurd.  Nevertheless  that  there  is  some-
how "  a  permanent  possibility  of  sensation "  there,  as
J.  S.  Mill  says,  we  do  believe — and  quite  rightly  ;  but
the  question  before  us  is  whether  we  are  to  conceive
that  "possibility"  as  having  subjectivity,  or  as  entirely

46


Note  on   Matter

non-subjective,  and  unrelated  to  Mind — as  "dead  matter"
in  fact.  It  may  be  of  the  latter  character.  We  cannot
venture  to  say  that  that  is  impossible.  All  v/c  can  say-
is  that,  if  so,  we  cannot  imagine  it — we  cannot  form
any  figure  or  image  of  it  at  all.

But  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  conceive  that  ^*  possibility
of  sensation,"  that  underlying  existence,  that  substance^
as  having  subjectivity,  and  a  self  of  some  kind,  then  I
say  we  can  figure  it,  we  can  imagine  it.  For  since  we
are  accustomed  to  think  of  sensations  and  phenomena
as  having  relation  to  our  selves  as  subjects — at  this,  the
hither  end  of  our  experience — so  it  is  possible  for  us  to
think  of  those  sensations  and  phenomena  as  having
relation  to  a  subject  at  the  other  end.  We  can  figure
this  in  thought.  And,  if  there  is  a  self  or  subject  at
the  opposite  end,  we  can  see  that  it  is  possible  to  know
something  of  that  self  or  subject — ^just  as  we  find  it  is
possible  to  know  something  of  our  invisible  friends  who
lie  behind  the  voices  and  faces  of  daily  life.

It  does  not,  of  course,  follow  from  this,  as  a  matter
of  logic,  that  the  "  substance "  of  the  material  world
has  subjectivity.  All  we  can  certainly  say  is,  that  such
supposition  is  thinkable  ;  there  is  no  obvious  bar  to  it.
The  opposite  supposition  we  cannot  think.  In  any  case,
logic  (which  has  to  do  with  the  operations  of  the  mind)
obviously  cannot  prove  the  existence  of  Mind,  which  is
its  own  axiom.  It  cannot  prove  our  own  existence  as
selves,  nor  the  existence  of  other  selves.  Logic  does
and  must  clear  the  ground  in  every  way,  and  show  what
is  thinkable  and  what  is  unthinkable  ;  but  the  final  step
to  that  which  is  beyond  or  behind  thought  m.ust  be
taken  by  something  different  from  thought.

The  following  quotations  from  Berkeley's  "  Principles
of  Human  Knowledge  "  may  throw  light  on  the  general
position.  "  But,  say  you,  surely  there  is  nothing  easier
jhan  for  me  to  imagine  trees,  for  instance,  in  a  park,  or
iook^  existing  in  a  closet,  and  nobody  by  to  perceive

47


The  Art  of  Creation

them.  I  answer,  you  may  so,  there  is  no  difficulty  in
it ;  but  what  is  all  this,  I  beseech  you,  more  than
framing  in  your  mind  certain  ideas  which  you  call  books
and  trees,  and  the  same  time  omitting  to  frame  the  idea
of  any  one  that  may  perceive  them."  ..."  Now  for
an  idea  to  exist  in  an  unperceiving  thing  is  a  manifest
contradiction,  for  to  have  an  idea  is  all  one  as  to  per-
ceive ;  that  therefore  wherein  colour,  figure,  and  the  like
qualities  exist  must  perceive  them. ;  hence  it  is  clear
there  can  be  no  unthinking  substance  or  substratum  of
those  ideas."  ..."  The  ideas  of  Sense  are  allowed  to
have  more  reality  in  them,  that  is  to  be  more  strong,
orderly,  and  coherent  than  the  creatures  of  the  mind
[imaginations]  ;  but  this  is  no  argument  that  they  exist
without  the  mind.  They  are  less  dependent  on  the
spirit,  or  thinking  substance  which  perceives  them,  in
that  they  are  excited  by  the  will  of  another  and  more
powerful  spirit ;  yet  still  they  are  ideas^  and  certainly
no  idea,  whether  faint  or  strong,  can  exist  otherwise
than  in  a  mind  perceiving  it."

The  whole  subject  may  be  attacked  (as  has  often
been  done^)  in  another  way.  We  may  take  any  object,
and  peel  off  from  it,  in  thought,  all  those  qualities  or
attributes  which  are  clearly  due  to  our  own  sensations
or  modes  of  perception.  What  then  remains  ?  Let  us
suppose  an  Orange.  An  Orange  is  a  bit  of  Matter.  It
has  many  attributes.  It  has  colour,  smell,  taste,  a  certain
feel  in  the  hand,  softness,  weight,  stickiness,  &c.  Let  us
.  examine,  then,  these  attributes.  Let  us  take  Colour
first.  We  are  accustomed  nowadays  to  think  of  colour
as  mental.  We  are  told  of  vibrations  which  excite  the
sensation  of  colour  in  the  eye.  In  that  sense  the  Orange
has  not  colour  ;    it  only  is  something  which   produces

^  See  T.  H.  Huxley,  "Lay  Sermons,  Addresses,  and  Reviews,"
chap,  xiv.,  on  Descartes.  Josiah  Royce,  "  The  Spirit  of  Modern
Philosophy,"  Lecture  VL,  &c.

48


Note  on  Matter

that  sensation  in  us.  Similarly  of  its  fragrance  and
flavour ;  they  are  clearly  our  own  sensations.  We
cannot  say  for  certain  that  they  belong  to  the  Orange
in  itself.  Thus  Sight,  Smell,  and  Taste  tell  us  little  or
nothing  about  the  latter.  What  then  of  Touch  ?  Here
surely  we  are  near  the  real  thing.  Touch  surely  tells
us  what  Matter  is.  It  is  the  most  primitive  of  the
senses,  and  the  other  senses  are  evolved,  as  we  now
know,  out  of  it.  Here  we  are  getting  close  to  our
subject ;  and  when  like  Dr.  Johnson  we  kick  the
doorstep,  we  surely  may  not  deny  that  we  are  getting
some  solid  information  !

What  then  does  Touch  tell  us  ?  In  order  to  be  quite
clear  about  this,  and  not  to  confuse  the  issue,  let  us
imagine  ourselves  to  be  quite  blind  and  sensationless
except  for  Touch.  Press  your  thumb  against  the  Wall,
or  grasp  an  Orange  in  your  hand  ;  close  your  eyes,
remove  all  thought  of  smell  or  taste,  heat  or  cold.
What  do  you  then  experience  ?  Your  experience  is
that  Something  resists  your  thumb ;  something  prevents
your  hand  closing.  You  must  not  say  :  the  Wall  resists
my  thumb.  You  must  not  say  :  the  Orange  prevents
my  hand  closing.  For  the  "Wall"  and  the  "Orange"
are  only  images  which  your  senses  of  sight,  &c.,  have
made — images  in  your  brain,  or  in  your  mind.  It  is
not  these  images  which  are  exercising  that  resistance
which  you  feel.  Besides  in  examining  this  sense  of
Touch  we  agreed  to  bar  out  the  evidence  of  the  other
senses  ;  and  without  the  other  senses  you  would  never
have  used  the  words  Wall  or  Orange.  No,  all  you  can
say  is  that  Something,  in  each  case,  is  resisting.

Thus,  analyse  it  as  you  will,  the  sense  of  Touch  only
delivers  to  you  similar  evidence  to  that  the  other  senses
deliver — namely,  that  something  is  acting  upon  them  ;
something  invades  or  modifies  our  senses ;  something
resists  our  movements.  And  the  forms  of  Matter —
all  the  various  aspects  and  shapes  that  it  takfs — are  the

49  ^


The  Art  of  Creation

play  of  that  Something  on  our  minds ;  but  that  those
forms  are  matter  itself  we  cannot  say.  We  cannot
say  that  the  Orange  is  soft,  for  to  a  fly  it  might  appear
as  hard  as  a  lump  of  gold.  We  cannot  say  that  a  lump
of  gold  /';  hard,  for  to  a  powerful  giant  it  might  seem
soft  as  putty.  If  an  orange  thrown  in  the  dark  should
hit  you  in  the  eye,  you  would  certainly  say  something
had  hit  you,  though  you  knew  not  what ;  but  because
in  hitting  your  eye  it  produced  the  sensation  of  a  shower
of  sparks  you  would  not  be  entitled  to  say  that  a  shower
of  sparks  had  hit  you  !  that  is,  the  sensation  produced
is  not  necessarily  of  the  same  nature  as  the  thing  that
produces  the  sensation.

Let  us  call  this  unknown  Thing  or  Being  which
produces  sensations,  or  a  sensation,  in  our  minds,  X.
Then  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  X  there  are,  it
seems  to  me,  only  three  suppositions  possible  :  (i)  It
may  be  a  living  and  conscious  being,  i.e.  conscious  in
some  degree  or  other,  and  having  subjectivity — in  which
case,  for  brevity,  we  might  call  it  a  Self.  (2)  It  may
be  a  wholly  dead  and  unconscious  substance — something
like  the  "dead  matter"  of  the  last-century  science — a  sub-
stratum for  phenomena,  but  not  in  itself  a  phenomenon,
or  intelligent,  or  intelligible — in  which  case  it  is  difficult
to  find  a  word  for  it ;  but  Ave  might  call  it  a  Phantom
Lump  :  a  Lump  because  of  its  dead  unintelligent  nature,
a  Phantom  because  so  utterly  beyond  grasp  or  concep-
tion. Or  (3)  we  may  suppose  it  to  be  Nothing  at  all.
I  think  these  three  suppositions  fairly  cover  the  possible
ground.     Let  us  take  the  last  first.

The  unknown  existence  behind  phenomena  may  be
nothing  at  all.  As  far  as  pure  logic  goes  that  is  perfectly
feasible.  The  play  of  the  senses  which  we  call  the
outer  world  may  be  merely  a  dream-play  of  the  receiving
mind  itself,  self-caused  by  the  mind.  That  any  thing
or  being  is  acting  on  the  mind  from  without  may  be
pure  illusion.     Many  philosophers  have  held  this  view ;

so


Note  on  Matter

and  for  the  armchair  logician  it  may  be  tenable  and
acceptable.  Nevertheless  there  is  one  serious  and  fatal
objection  to  it — namely,  that  it  will  not  work.  Practi-
cally the  conviction  that  something  is  acting  from  out-
side upon  us  is  so  fundamental  in  our  experience,  so
ingrained,  so  universal,  that  do  what  we  may  we  cannot
escape  *t.  For  a  moment,  in  the  armchair,  we  may
deliver  ourselves  up  to  dreams  ;  but  as  soon  as  we  wake
up  again  to  practical  life  this  conviction  reasserts  itself;
the  outer  world  assumes  a  reality^  which  neither  in
thought,  speech,  nor  act,  can  we  avoid  admitting.  I
propose  therefore  to  dismiss  this  supposition  that  X
is  nothing  at  all,  as  practically  untenable  and  of  no  use
to  us,  and  as  contrary  to  pragmatical  philosophy.

The  second  supposition — ue.  that  X  is  a  Phantom
Lump — a  thing  insentient,  lifeless,  and  inscrutable,
behind  phenomena — is  also  in  a  sense  feasible.  As
far  as  pure  logic  goes  there  is  no  bar  to  it.  But  here
again  it  is  of  no  use.  It  is  like  saying  X  is  Y  ;  where
Y  is  a  thing  which  is  not  only  unknown  to  us,  but  of
which,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  we  cannot  possibly
form  any  image.  X  may  be  Y  ;  but  if  it  is  we  are  no
wiser.  Therefore  though  the  second  supposition  may
be  correct,  it  is  of  no  value  or  help  to  us  in  any  way.

There  remains  the  first  supposition — 'i,e.  that  X  is  a
self  or  selves.  Here,  though  as  far  as  strict  logic  is
concerned,  there  is  no  more  proof  than  in  the  other
cases,  there  is  this  difference,  that,  immediately,  the
situation  becomes  intelligible  and  full  of  light  and  sugges-
tion. It  is  a  supposition  that  we  can  th'ink^  that  we  can
form  an  image  of,  and  that  is  corroborated  by  analogy
in  such  a  way  as  almost  to  amount  to  proof.  In  the
first  place,  if  X,  the  thing  behind  phenomena,  is  a  self  or
selves,  that  is  an  idea  that  is  already  in  part  familiar  to
us.  We  have  some  knowledge  of  what  we  mean  by
our  own  selves,  and  though  that  knowledge  is  not  by
any  means  complete,  yet  the  word  "  self"  conveys  to  us  a

SI


The  Art  of  Creation

distinct  meaning.  We  habitually  posit  a  self  as  sub-
sisting behind  our  own  bodies  and  actions,  and  we
posit  selves  as  subsisting  behind  the  outer  forms  of  our
friends.  It  is  only  therefore  an  extension  of  this  idea
to  suppose  selves  or  a  self  as  existing  behind  or  within
the  form  of  the  smallest  microbe  or  cell,  or  within  or
behind  the  least  atom  of  Matter.  To  attribute  in  fact
to  Matter  some  degree  of  Subjectivity  and  conscious
Life — though  it  may  not  be  correct — is  at  any  rate  not
a  difficult  thing  to  do,  and  it  falls  into  line  with  so  much
of  our  experience  generally  that  it  commends  itself  to
us  as  a  likely  supposition.  In  the  second  place,  as  already
pointed  out,  this  supposition  brings  X,  the  unknown
thing,  into  relation  with  phenomena.  For  as  a  self  per-
ceives sensations  and  phenomena,  so  it  is  not  difficult
to  think  of  it  as  a  ground  or  origin  of  sensations  or
phenomena.  It  is  not  the  same  as  these,  but  it  is  the
Thing  or  Being  in  which  these  inhere.  Phenomena —
as  Berkeley  says,  and  as  we  have  just  pointed  out — ^are
ideas  excited  in  us  from  without.  The  X  which  excites
those  ideas  is  as  likely  to  be  a  self,  as  is  that  which
receives  them  ;  whereas  if  X  is  a  phantom  lump  we
can  see  no  connection  between  it  and  the  ideas  which
it  excites  ;  since  "  for  an  idea  to  exist  in  an  unperceiving
thing  is  a  manifest  contradiction."  Thus  by  positing  a
self  or  selves  behind  phenomena  we  make  a  supposition
which  is  not  only  intelligible  to  us,  but  which  falls
into  line  with  much  of  our  daily  assumption  and  ex-
perience, and  which  enables  us  to  see  a  real  connection
and  relation  between  the  phenomenal  world  and  that
which  underlies  it.

I  think  therefore  that  we  are  practically  compelled
to  take  up  this  position  :  namely,  that  phenomena  are
ideas  conveyed  to  our  minds  by  a  self  or  selves  outside
of  us.

A  word  of  warning  here  is,  however,  necessary.  The
ideas  thus  conveyed  must  not  be  confused  with  the  self

52


Note  on  Matter

from  which  they  originate  ;  and  we  must  guard  against
the  error  of  supposing  that  such  self  is  h"mited  or  described
by  the  ideas  we  obtain  about  it.  It  is  evident,  in  fact,  that
the  ideas  which  come  to  us  are  modified  by  the  action
of  our  own  minds,  and  as  in  conversation  between  two
people  the  ideas  interchanged  are  always  a  sort  of  joint
product  of  the  two  individualities,  so  it  may  be  in  our
converse  or  intercourse  with  the  material  world.  A
bee  does  not  probably  see  such  and  such  a  plant  or
flower  exactly  the  same  as  we  see  it,  because  its  mind
being  different  from  ours  is  differently  affected  by  the
mind  of  the  plant  or  flower.  But,  again,  it  is  evident
that  it  does  distinguish  the  form,  colour,  fragrance,
honey-sweetness,  &c.,  to  a  great  extent  the  same  as  we
do — and  this  remarkable  fact,  namely,  that  two  creatures
so  greatly  different  as  man  and  a  little  insect  should
envisage  the  same  object  so  much  alike,  does  greatly
strengthen  the  supposition  that  in  the  flower  or  plant
there  is  a  distinct  objective  Self  seeking  for  expression.
And  this  may  lead  us  finally  to  suppose  that,  notwith-
standing the  various  and  differing  impressions  received
from  the  same  object  by  different  creatures  or  at  different
times,  there  /;  a  real  utterance  going  on  in  creation  ;  and
that  perfected  man  (perhaps  as  far  beyond  the  present-
day  man  as  the  latter  is  beyond  the  bee)  may  be  able
to  read  that  utterance  perfectly,  and  to  see  all  creatures
in  their  real  selves  and  true  being,  as  they  are.


S3


IV

THE   THREE   STAGES   OF   CONSCIOUSNESS

Observation  of  the  actual  facts  of  life  seems
to  show  us  pretty  distinctly  that  there  are  three
stages  or  degrees  of  Consciousness  ;  and  a  con-
sideration of  the  nature  of  knowledge,  as  set  out
in  the  foregoing  paper,  would  tend  to  make  us
expect  such  three  stages.

There  is  first  the  stage  of  Simple  Conscious-
ness, in  which  the  knower,  the  knowledge,  and
the  thing  known  are  still  undifferentiated.

Though  we  cannot  observe  this  directly,  nor
draw  the  exact  line  at  which  it  begins  or  ceases,
we  seem  to  be  able  to  discern  its  existence  clearly
enough  in  the  animals.  The  thought  of  self  as
the  knower  has  not  arisen  upon  them,  except  in
low  degree  and  in  a  few  cases ;  and  certainly  the
thought  of  the  object  as  distinguishable  from  the
knowledge  or  perception  of  it  has  not  arisen.  It
is  the  same  with  very  young  children  and  some
primitive  men.  And  this  non-differentiation  of
the  self  in  consciousness  explains  in  these  cases
various  facts  which  are  puzzling  to  us  The
horse  in  the  field  stands  out,  patient  and  placid,
through  hours  or  days  of  cold  and  rain,  simply
because    not    having   a   distinct   consciousness   of

54


The  Three  Stages  of  Consciousness

self,  it  cannot  pity  itself.  It  feels  discomfort  no
doubt ;  it  may  feel  pain  ;  but  it  does  not  project
itself  and  think  with  dismay  that  itself  will  be
feeling  this  discomfort,  this  pain,  to-morrow.
Small  babies  have  little  fear,  for  the  same  reason.
[Nevertheless,  Fear  in  the  higher  animals  and
young  children — apart  from  a  mere  instinct  of
escape — is  there,  and  often  very  strongly  ;  and
this  shows  us  that  the  consciousness  of  self  is
dimly  beginning.  Fear,  in  fact,  is  an  inevitable
accompaniment  and  means  of  the  evolution  of
that  consciousness  ;  it  is  the  midwife  of  a  birth
which  in  the  far  past  of  the  human  race  has  ac-
complished itself  with  much  suffering.]

The  knowledge  and  perception  of  animals,
therefore,  owing  to  this  non-differentiation,  and
owing  to  the  absence  of  certain  causes  of  disloca-
tion and  trouble,  is  extraordinarily  perfect  and
untampered.  It  is  from  the  first  a  part  of
Nature,  and  has  a  cosmic  universal  quality  about
it.  Their  knowledge  is,  as  it  were,  embedded  in
the  great  living  intelligent  whole  (of  the  world),
and  therefore  each  special  act  of  knowledge  or
perception  carries  with  it  a  kind  of  aura  or
diffused  consciousness  extending  far,  far  around
it.  We  are  aware  of  this  aura  or  ''fringe"  of
consciousness  in  ourselves,  and  the  modern
psychologists  have  dwelt  much  on  it.  Seton
Thompson,  in  his  ''  Wild  Animals  I  have  Known,"
speaks  of  them  as  being  '*  guided  by  a  knowledge
that  is  beyond  us  "  ;  and  in  his  description  of  the
wild  horse  which  "  in  spite  of  all  reasons  to  take

S5


The  Art  of  Creation

its  usual  path "  came  along  another  and  so
avoided  the  pitfall  set  for  it,  he  says,  "What
sleepless  angel  is  it  watches  over  and  cares  for  the
wild  animals  ? "  and  again,  "  But  the  Angel  of
the  wild  things  was  with  him,  and  that  incom-
prehensible warning  came."  This  daemonic  or
quasi-divine  knowledge  is — as  we  shall  see —
largely  lost  in  the  second  stage  of  consciousness,
but  restored  again  in  the  third.

The  second  stage  is  that  in  which  the  great
mass  of  humanity  at  present  is ;  it  is  that  in
which  the  differentiation  of  knower,  knowledge,
and  thing  known  has  fairly  set  in.

The  consciousness  of  Self  becomes  more  and
more  distinct,  and  with  it  the  consciousness  of  an
object  antagonising  the  Self.  Some  folk  say  they
remember  the  moment  when,  as  quite  young
children,  to  them  with  a  sense  of  alarm  self-
consciousness  suddenly  came.  They  were  sud-
denly terrified  at  the  thought  of  self,  as  of  a
separate  item  or  atom  in  this  vast  world.
Whether  suddenly  or  gradually,  this  feeling  of
course  has  come  to  every  one.  Its  arrival  can
generally  be  noticed  without  difficulty  in  any
young  child.  It  is  the  beginning  of  a  new  era
in  its  development,  and  from  that  moment  life
begins  to  shape  round  the  self.

But  at  the  same  moment,  or  very  shortly  after,
the  child  begins  to  recognise  the  self  in  others —
in  its  mother  and  those  around.  And — what
is  curious  and  interesting  —  the  child  ascribes
'selves'  also  to   toys,  stones,  and  what  we  call

56


The  Three  Stages  of  Consciousness

inanimate  things.  In  fact,  simultaneously  with  the
appearance  of  the  subject  in  consciousness  comes
the  appearance  of  the  object  in  consciousness.  It
is  curious  that  at  these  early  stages  the  object  of
knowledge  and  the  knowledge  should  be  differen-
tiated from  each  other,  or  begin  to  be  differen-
tiated ;  but  it  is  so.  The  child  feels  not  only  (as
we  do)  that  there  is  a  personality  behind  the
appearance  of  its  mother,  but  that  there  is  some-
thing behind  these  stocks  and  stones,  and  personi-
fies them  also.  So  does  the  savage.  It  is  the
period  of  fetishism,  which  correlates  with  and
accompanies  the  first  evolution  of  the  idea  of
self.^  And  in  very  truth,  feeble  and  inadequate  as
this  '  anthropomorphism  *  may  be,  it  will  be  seen
(from  what  has  already  been  said)  that  the  child,
in  this  respect,  is  wiser  than  the  man,  that  its
view  is  really  more  logical  and  rational  than  that
of  the  '  practical '  person  who  contends  that  the
stocks  and  stones  are  the  real  objects,  or  who
posits,  in  order  to  explain  them,  an  ultimate
*  matter '  devoid  of  intelligence.  Anthropo-
morphism is  inevitable  to  us  (in  this  second  stage),
and  much  the  best  we  can  do  is  frankly  to
accept  it.

Such  then  is  the  first  birth  of  self-conscioui-
ness.  But  as  the  evolution  of  the  idea  of  self
goes  on,    there   comes   at   last   a   kind  of  fatal

*  Later,  as  the  consciousness  of  the  ego  evolves,  and  deepens
and  lifts,  so  does  the  form  in  consciousness  of  the  object  ;  and
the  fetish-beings  become  gods ;  and  the  gods  rise  to  greater
nobility  and  majesty.

57


The  Art  of  Creation

split  between  it  and  the  objective  side  of  things.
The  kindly  beliefs  of  early  peoples  in  beings
similar  to  themselves  moving  behind  and  inspir-
ing natural  phenomena,  and  the  consequent  sense
of  community  of  life  with  Nature,  fade  away.
The  subject  and  object  of  knowledge  drift
farther  and  farther  apart.  The  self  is  left  face
to  face  with  a  dead  and  senseless  world.  Its  own
importance  seems  to  increase  out  of  all  reason ;
and  with  the  growth  of  this  illusion  (for  it  is  an
illusion)  the  knowledge  itself  becomes  dislocated
from  its  proper  bearings,  becomes  cracked  and
impotent,  and  loses  its  former  unity  with  Nature.
Objects  are  soon  looked  upon  as  important  only
in  so  far  as  they  minister  to  the  (illusive)  self;
and  there  sets  in  the  stage  of  Civilisation,  when
self-consciousness  becomes  almost  a  disease  ;  when
the  desire  of  acquiring  and  grasping  objects,  or  of
enslaving  men  and  animals,  in  order  to  minister
to  the  self,  becomes  one  of  the  main  motives  of
life ;  and  when,  owing  to  this  deep  fundamental
division  in  human  nature  and  consciousness,
men's  minds  are  tormented  with  the  sense  of  sin,
and  their  bodies  with  a  myriad  forms  of  disease.

Physiologically,  this  period  is  marked  by  the
growth  of  the  Brain.  In  animals  the  cerebrum  is
small ;  the  great  sympathetic  system  of  nerves
and  the  cerebro-spinal  system  are  relatively  large.
The  cerebrum  is  only,  as  it  were,  a  small  organ
attached  to  these  systems  to  subserve  their  needs.
But  the  growth  of  the  intellect  is  at  first  stimu-
lated by  the  growth  of  the  *self'  and  its  needs.

58


The  Three  Stages  oT  Consciousness

And  in  man  the  cerebral  portion  of  the  brain,  as
specially  the  seat  of  self-regarding  relations,  rises
into  immense  importance  ;  and  over  a  long  period
lapses  into  a  kind  of  conflict  with  the  great
sympathetic  system — which,  without  doubt,  is
the  great  organ  of  the  emotions.  The  emotions
and  the  intellect  of  man  for*  a  long  period  are  at
variance,  and  distress  and  grief  ensue  in  the  mind,
as  (owing  to  the  organic  disharmony)  pain  and
disease  prevail  in  the  body.

Finally,  with  the  complete  antagonism  of  sub-
ject and  object,  of  *self'  and  *  matter,*  and  all
the  antagonisms  which  follow  in  its  wake — of
intellect  and  emotion,  the  individual  and  society,
and  so  forth — and  the  terrible  disruptions  of  life
and  society  which  ensue — comes  the  third  stage.

When  the  illusion  of  separation  is  complete
and  the  man  has  sounded  the  depths  of  grief  and
pain  which  accompany  this  illusion,  then,  one  day,
often  suddenly,  the  third  form  of  Consciousness
dawns,  or  flashes,  upon  him — that  which  has  been
called  the  Cosmic,  or  universal.  Consciousness.
The  object  suddenly  is  seen,  is/^//,  to  be  one  with
the  self.  The  reconciliation  is  effected.  The  long
process  of  differentiation  comes  to  an  end,  and
reintegration  takes  its  place.  The  knower,  the
knowledge,  and  the  thing  known  are  once  more
one — "  Objects  turn  round  upon  themselves  with
an  exceedingly  innocent  air,  but  are  visibly  not
the  same."

This  form  of  Consciousness  is  the  only  true
knowledge — it  is  the  only  true  existence.     And

59


The  Art  of  Creation

it  is  a  matter  of  experience ;  it  has  been  testified
to  in  all  parts  of  the  world  and  in  all  ages  of
history.  There  is  a  consciousness  in  which  the
subject  and  the  object  arc  felt,  are  known,  to  be
united  and  one — in  which  the  Self  is  felt  to  be  the
object  perceived  ("I  am  the  hounded  slave"),  or
at  least  in  which  the  subject  and  the  object  are
felt  to  be  parts  of  the  same  being,  of  the  same
including  Self  of  all.  And  it  is  the  only  true
knowledge ;  for  we  saw  at  the  beginning  that  the
knower  and  the  thing  known  are  aspects  of  the
act  of  knowledge,  implicit  in  it,  and  not  to  be
separated  from  it — the  knower  without  the  know-
ledge, or  the  thing  known  without  the  knowledge,
being  both  unthinkable.  Therefore  they  are
really  one  in  the  knowledge ;  and  though  a  dif-
ferentiation takes  place  in  consciousness — thus
immensely  enriching  the  knowledge — yet  as  soon,
as  ever  it  becomes  a  separation,  and  the  subject
and  object  are  thought  of  as  isolated  things,
(separate  *  selves '  and  '  atoms,'  for  example),  it
has  already  passed  over  into  a  sphere  of  illusion
and  folly,  and  has  become  nonsense.  The  true
knowledge,  therefore,  is  that  in  which  the  subject
and  object  are  known  as  one ;  and  is  of  course  a
much  higher  and  more  perfect  form  of  know-
ledge than  that  first — as  in  the  animals — when
subject  and  object  are  one,  but  never  having  been
distinguished  are  not  known  as  one.

When  this  consciousness  comes  it  brings  with
it  a  strange  illumination.  For  the  object  and  the
ego  arc  felt  to  be  one,  not  only  through   the

60


The  Three  Stages  of  Consciousness

special  act  of  knowledge  which  unites  them,  but
deep  down  in  their  very  essence.  A  circle  is,  as
it  were,  completed  ;  and  the  external  act  of  know-
ledge is  no  longer  merely  external,  but  is  trans-
formed into  a  symbol  of  a  vast  underlying  life.
The  aura^  in  fact,  of  the  animals  returns  with
greatly  increased  intensity :  to  such  a  degree,  we
may  perhaps  say,  that  //  becomes  the  main  thing,
and  the  object  or  external  experience  is  only  of
importance  as  waking  it.  It  is  not  merely  that
the  object  is  seen  by  the  eye  or  touched  by  the
hand,  but  it  is  felt  at  the  same  instant  from  within
as  a  part  of  the  ego  ;  and  this  seeing  and  touching
wake  an  infinite  response — a  reverberation  through
all  the  chambers  of  being — such  as  was  impossible
before.  The  knowledge,  in  fact,  loses  its  tenta-
tive illusive  form  of  thought^  and  acquires  a  cosmic
universal  character.  It  becomes  luminous  with
far-reaching  interpretations.

How  shall  we  denote  or  explain  these  things  ?
It  is  obvious  that  mere  thought  (belonging  to  the
second  stage  of  consciousness)  does  not  and  can-
not possibly  cover  them — any  more  than  a  man
can  walk  a  square  mile.  Thought  can  and  docs
bring  us  to  the  edge  of  the  third  stage,  and
within  sight,  as  it  were,  of  the  essential  facts
of  the  universe ;  and  its  value,  in  that  respect
alone,  is  immense ;  but,  like  the  mule  at  the
edge  of  the  glacier,  there  is  a  point  where,  from
the  nature  of  the  case,  it  has  to  be  left  behind.
We  cannot  obviously /r^t'^  the  ultimate  constitu-
tion of  things.     But  that  which  the  third  order

6i


The  Art  of  Creation

of  consciousness   conveys,  we   can  illustrate  and
symbolise  in  thought.

To  illustrate  the  two  orders  of  consciousness
we  may,  for  instance,  figure  a  tree — in  which  two
leaves  observe  each  other  externally  for  a  long
enough  time,  mutually  exclusive,  and  without
any  suspicion  that  they  have  a  life  in  common.
Then  the  *  self  consciousness  of  one  of  the
leaves  deepening  inwardly  (down  the  twig  or
branch),  at  last  reaches  the  point  whence  the
*self*  of  the  other  leaf  also  branches  off — and
becomes  aware  of  its  unity  with  the  other.  In-
stantly its  external  observation  of  its  fellow-leaf
is  transformed  ;  it  sees  a  thousand  meanings  in
it  which  it  never  saw  before.  Its  fellow-leaf  is
almost  as  much  an  expression  of  self  as  itself
is ;  for  both  now  belong  to  a  larger  self — that
of  the  spray  or  branch  from  which  they  depend.

Or  when  two  strangers,  of  different  race  and
tongue  perhaps,  meet,  they  eye  each  other  with
suspicion  and  misunderstanding,  and  seem  to
catch  only  at  the  most  external  knowledge  of
each  other — to  notice  the  slant  of  the  brow  or
the  cut  of  the  clothes.  But  when  two  folk  know
each  other  in  the  sense  of  love  (love  being  a
consciousness  of  the  third  kind),  instantly  a  word
or  a  glance  of  the  eyes,  in  the  external  world,
reveal  abysmal  depths  in  the  two  selves,  and  a
sense  of  age-long  union.  Without  the  external
knowledge  the  two  could  not  know  either  them-
selves or  the  other  person — since,  as  we  have  seen,
the  self  without  the  knowledge  is  unthinkable;


The  Three  Stages  of  Consciousness

but  in  the  second  case  the  knowledge  is  trans-
formed, and  reveals  meanings  and  depths  of  the
self  unimagined  before.

In  the  case  of  two  persons  the  transformation
of  knowledge  in  the  third  stage  of  consciousness
is  easy  to  understand,  since  here  the  so-called
subject  and  object  are  commonly  recognised  to
be  of  the  same  nature,  and  to  have  some  degree
of  identity.  But  in  the  case  of  a  man  observing,
say,  a  tree,  we  find  it  more  difficult.  Yet  in  truth
the  process  appears  to  be  quite  similar.  Some
people,  like  Jacob  Boehme,  the  mystic,  have  been
conscious  of  the  hidden  qualities  of  plants  and
trees  they  looked  on  ;  ^  and  innumerable  instances
of  *  second-sight,*  v/ell  authenticated,  must  con-
vince us  that,  in  cases,  the  direct  external  act  of
perception  brings  with  it  far  outlying  and  under-
lying tracts  of  knowledge  and  illumination.  The
external  knowledge  is  transformed  by  being
brought  into  relation  with  the  original  source
of  knowledge,  i.e.  the  unity  of  all  beings.  It  is,
in  fact,  that  hidden  knowledge  realised  and  made
external.  To  borrow  a  simile  from  electricity,
the  luminous  arc  springs  into  being  when  the
circuit  is  complete,  and  is  the  evidence  and  mani-
festation of  that  completeness.

This  third  mode  of  consciousness  is,  I  say,
the  only  perfect  knowledge ;  for  the  first  mode
(though  nearer  to  the  third  than  the  second  is)  is
merely  inchoate ;  while  the  second  mode  is  sheer

^  And  it  is  probable  that  many  primitive  folk,  as  well  as
animals,  have,  on  an  inferior  plane,  intuitions  of  the  same  kind.

63


The  Art  of  Creation

illusion.  It,  the  second  mode,  is  all  built  upon
the  separation  of  the  self  from  the  knowledge
and  from  the  object  (/.^.  from  other  selves).  It
is  therefore  built  upon  an  illusion,  and  is  itself
illusion.  Its  form  is  not  true  knowledge,  but
Thought.  Thought  is  an  aspect ;  it  is  the  last
disintegration  of  knowledge.  It  is  the  fact  seen
from  just  one  most  particular  and  separate  point
of  view.  The  (hidden)  fact  being  the  unity  of
my  *self'  with  that  of  the  tree,  all  my  thought
about  the  tree  is  an  attempt  to  get  at  that  fact
from  ever -shifting,  ever  -  countless  sides;  but
remains  profitless,  barren,  productive  of  little
but  unrest  and  disappointment — till  the  moment
when  the  reintegration  takes  place,  subject  and
object  close  in  one,  and  the  innumerable  thoughts
fusing  in  the  intense  heat  of  union  lose  their
separateness,  and  merge  in  perfect  light.

Herbert  Spencer  touches  this  point  with  a  kind
of  unwilling  illumination  when,  speaking  of  the
impossibility  of  knowing  the  **  substance  of  Mind,"
he  says,^  "  A  thing  cannot  at  the  same  instant  be
both  subject  and  object  of  Thought ;  and  yet  the
substance  of  Mind  must  be  this  before  it  can  be
known."  Certainly,  a  thing  cannot  at  once  be
subject  and  object  of  thought^  i.e.  of  the  second
stage  of  consciousness ;  because  this  stage  is  built
on  the  separation  and  antagonism  of  subject  and
object.  But  that  a  thing  may  be  subject  and
object  of  the  third  stage  experience  shows ;  and
the  'thing'  that  thus  becomes  both  subject  and

1  "  Psychology,"  i.  p.  148.
64


The  Three  Stages  of  Consciousness

object  is  the  *  self '  (which  corresponds  to  Spen-
cer's ** substance  of  Mind'').  Thus  we  conclude
that  the  self  or  substance  of  Mind  (though  it
cannot  be  known  in  the  second  stage)  may  or
must  be  known  in  the  third  stage  of  conscious-
ness ;  and  indeed  that  this  is  the  only  way  in
which  it  can  be  known.

Of  the  existence  of  this  third  form  of  con-
sciousness there  is  evidence  all  down  History ;
and  witnesses,  far  removed  from  each  other  in
time  and  space  and  race  and  language,  and  per-
fectly unaware  of  each  other's  utterances,  agree  so
remarkably  in  their  testimony,  that  there  is  left
no  doubt  that  the  experience  is  as  much  a  matter
of  fact  as  any  other  human  experience — though
the  capacity  for  it  is  of  course  not  universal.
The  authors  of  that  extraordinary  series  of  writ-
ings, the  Upanishads,  founded  evidently  the  whole
of  their  teaching  on  this  experience.  Their  object
in  the  teaching  was  to  introduce  others  to  the
same  knowledge : —

**  He  who  beholds  all  beings  in  the  Self,  and  the
Self  in  all  beings,  he  never  turns  away  from  it."

*'  When  to  a  man  who  understands,  the  Self
has  become  all  things,  what  sorrow,  what  trouble,
can  there  be  to  him  who  once  beheld  that
unity  ? "

"  Tat  tvam  asi^  Thou  art  that.  Thou  art  that,"
says  his  father  to  Svetaketu,  pointing  to  object
after  object,  and  trying  to  make  him  feel  that
the  subtle  essence  of  all  these  things  is  his  true
Self.

6s  B


The  Art  of  Creation

"Knowledge  has  three  degrees,"  says  Plotinus
— "  opinion,  science,  illumination.  ...  It  [the
last]  is  absolute  knowledge  founded  on  the  iden-
tity of  the  mind  knowing  with  the  object  knownT

*'God  is  the  soul  of  all  things,*'  says  Eckhardt,
"  He  is  the  light  that  shines  in  us  when  the  veil
[of  division]  is  rent."

Whitman  speaks  of  the  light  that  came  to
him: —

**  Light  rare,  untellable,  lighting  the  very  light,
Beyond  all  signs,  descriptions,  languages,"

and  says —

"  Strange  and  true,  that  paradox  hard  I  give,
Objects  gross  and  the  unseen  soul  are  one."

And  Tennyson,  in  a  well-known  passage,  dis-
tinguishing the  ordinary  knowledge  from  the
other,  says : —

<*  For  Knowledge  is  the  swallow  on  the  lake
That  sees  and  stirs  the  surface- shadow  there
But  never  yet  hath  dipt  into  the  abysm,
The  Abysm  of  all  Abysms,  beneath,  within
The  blue  of  sky  and  sea,  the  green  of  earth,
And  in  the  million-millionth  of  a  grain
Which  cleft  and  cleft  again  for  evermore,
And  ever  vanishing,  never  vanishes.  .  .  .

And  more,  my  son  !   for  more  than  once  when  I
Sat  all  alone,  revolving  in  myself
That  word  which  is  the  symbol  of  myself.
The  mortal  limit  of  the  Self  was  loosed.
And  past  into  the  Nameless,  as  a  cloud
Melts  into  Heaven.      I  touched  my  limbs,  the  limbs
Were  strange  not  mine — and  yet  no  shadoiu  of  doubt,
66


The  Three  Stages  of  Consciousness

But  utter  clearness,  and  through  loss  of  Self
The  gain  of  such  large  life  as  matched  with  ours
Were  Sun  to  spark,  unshadowable  in  words,
Themselves  but  shadows  of  a  shadow-world."

And  so  on.^  But  it  is  not  only  the  great  pro-
phets and  seers  who  prove  to  us  the  existence  of
another  stage  of  consciousness.  For  to  almost
all  mankind  flashes  (or  glimmers)  of  the  same
thinor  come  in  those  moments  of  exaltation  or
intuition  which  form  the  basis  of  religion,  art,
literature,  and  much  even  of  practical  life.
Schopenhauer,  who  has  written  well  on  Art  and
Music,  says  that  Art  and  the  sense  of  Beauty
give  us  the  most  real  knowledge  of  things,
because  then  we  see  the  object  as  the  **  realisa-
tion of  an  Idea  '*  [i.e.  as  a  form,  according  to
him,  of  the  world-soul)  ;  and  the  beholder
(who  has  the  same  world-soul  within  himself)
*'  becomes  the  clear  mirror  of  the  object,"  and
"  the  distinction  of  the  subject  and  object
vanishes."  And  every  one,  whether  he  agrees
with  Schopenhauer  or  not,  must  have  felt  in
poetry,  music,  and  art  generally,  and  in  all  cases
where  the  sense  of  Beauty  is  deeply  roused,  that
strange  impression  of  passing  into  another  world
of  consciousness,  where  meanings  pour  in  and
illuminate  the  soul,  and  the  "  distinction  between
subject  and  object "  vanishes.

*  Dr.  R.  M.  Bucke  in  his  great  work  on  "  Cosmic  Conscious-
ness" (Philadelphia,  1901)  has  gathered  together  the  utterances
of  a  vast  number  of  witnesses,  and  shown  very  convincingly
their  remarkable  agreement  as  to  the  nature  of  this  conscious-
ness.   His  prefatory  essay  on  its  evolution  is  also  instructive.

67


The  Art  of  Creation

The  evidence,  I  say,  for  the  existence  of  this
third  stage  of  consciousness  is  ample  and  con-
vincing ;  and  though  to  do  the  subject  justice
would  require  a  volume,  yet  we  can  see  even
from  what  has  already  been  said  that  this  cosmic
sense  is  perfectly  normal  and  in  the  line  of  human
progress,  and  that  it  surpasses  the  ordinary  con-
sciousness of  the  second  stage  as  far  indeed  as  that
surpasses  the  first.

It  is  indeed,  from  its  very  nature,  as  already
explained  (i.e.  union  of  subject  and  object),  the
only  true  and  absolute  knowledge,  and  this  view
of  it  is  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  those
who  have  experienced  it.  It  is  also  the  only  true
existence  (at  least  that  we  can  imagine),  for,  as  we
have  seen,  the  world  consists  of  what  is  known,
i.e.  of  what  enters  into  consciousness.  Con-
sciousness is  existence  ;  and  the  perfect  conscious-
ness is  the  perfect  and  true  existence.  That
universal  consciousness  by  and  in  which  the
subject  knows  itself  absolutely  united  to  the
object  is  absolute  existence,  i.e.  Being.

All  things,  and  the  whole  universe  of  space
and  time,  really  exist  and  are  in  this  third  state  ;
a  state  where  every  object  (or  portion  of  the
whole)  is  united  to  every  other  object  (or
portion)  by  infinite  threads  of  relation^ — such
infinitude  of  relations  constituting  the  universal
consciousness  as  embodied  in  that  object.     This

*  Such  a  state  is,  of  course,  assumed  by  all  physical  science
as  the  ground  of  its  operations  ;  and  it  is  the  (illusive)  dream
of  science  to  be  able  to  completely  analyse  it.

63


The  Three  Stages  of  Consciousness

IS  the  state  of  absolute  Being  in  which  all  things
are^  and  from  which  the  things  which  we  ordi-
narily see  and  know  proceed  by  disintegration  or
ignorance.  It  is  the  state /row  which  they  lapse
or  fall  by  disintegration  into  ordinary  conscious-
ness or  thought.  That  is  to  say,  the  real  tree
exists  and  can  be  seen  in  the  resplendent  light  of
the  universal  consciousness ;  but  the  tree  which
we  ordinarily  look  upon  is  only  the  merest  aspect
of  its  infinitude,  a  few  isolated  thoughts  or  rela-
tions which  the  botanist  or  the  woodman  may
happen  to  separate  off  and  call  the  tree  (the
method  of  Ignorance).

All  the  universe  exists,  and  is  in  this  third  state
of  consciousness ;  but  we  in  the  strange  condition
of  illusion  which  belongs  to  the  second  stage —
exiles  from  the  Eden-garden,  persuaded  of  the
separateness  of  our  individual  selves,  and  unable
to  enter  into  true  knowledge — are  content  to
gnaw  off  tiny  particles,  which  we  call  thoughts^
from  the  great  Reality.  Assimilating  and  digest-
ing these  as  best  we  can,  we  are  persuaded  that
some  day,  putting  all  the  results  together,  we
shall  arrive  at  the  Reality.  But  the  quest  by  this
method  is  obviously  hopeless.  Infinities  of  in-
finity stretch  before  us,  and  vistas  of  brain-
gnawing  misery.  Arrive  doubtless  we  shall,  but
it  will  be  by  another  route.  One  day  when  man
has  passed  the  '  rodent '  stage  he  will  enter  quite
naturally  and  normally  into  another  world  of  being,
surpassing  that  in  which  he  now  lives,  as  much
as    the    present    surpasses    the   world   of   simple

69


The  Art  of  Creation

consciousness  belonging  to  the  snail  or  the  fish.
Then,  though  he  will  perceive  that  his  illusions
of  *  thought'  and  *  self  *  have  not  directly
opened  the  door  for  him,  he  will  find  that  they
have  fitted  him  for  a  realisation  of  the  Truth,
such  as  perhaps  he  could  have  obtained  in  no
other  way.


T9


V

THE    SELF   AND   ITS   AFFILIATIONS

We  have  seen  three  things  in  the  two  preceding
papers — (i)  that  we  first  become  conscious  of  the
ego  as  part  of  the  act  of  knowledge,  and  appar-
ently inseparable  from  it;  (2)  that  there  is  a
stage  of  meagre  false  knowledge  connected  with
the  illusion  of  a  separate  self;  and  (3)  a  stage  of
full,  vastly-extended  knowledge  connected  with
the  (restored)  sense  of  union  between  the  ego  and
the  object.

We  have  now  to  see  how  far  we  can  get  a
clearer  idea  of  what  we  mean  by  the  ego  or  self.

But  as  a  preliminary  we  may  lay  down  two  pro-
positions, which  will  be  useful  later  on.  Firstly,
though  we  are  not  conscious  of  the  self  except  in
some  act  of  knowledge  or  consciousness  of  an
object,  and  though  consequently  we  cannot  think
of  the  self  as  existing  altogether  apart  from
knowledge,  we  can  think  of  it  as  going  to  know,
or  having  known  (/.f.  as  potential  of  knowledge).
Thus  I  think  of  myself  as  existing  in  sleep,  as  an
ego  that  did  know  yesterday,  or  will  know  to-
morrow, or  I  think  of  myself  as  perduring  from
one  act  of  knowledge  to  the  next,  and  so  as  it

71


The  Art  of  Creation

were  forming  a  link  between  the  two  acts.  This
does  not  of  course  prove  that  I  do  so  exist ;  and
many  psychologists  argue  that  this  idea  is  an
illusion,  and  that  the  ego  simply  perishes  in  sleep,
or  with  each  act  of  knowledge — the  reappearing
ego  in  each  case  being  an  entirely  new  one.  But
practically  we  think  as  I  have  indicated ;  and  in
fact  life  being  founded  on  this  assumption  (of  the
possibility  of  the  duration  of  the  ego  in  an  un-
manifested  condition)  we  accept  it — until  such
time  as  we  find  some  explanation  more  adequate
and  satisfying.^

Secondly,  this  thought  of  the  self  as  ante-
cedently capable  or  potential  of  knowledge  com-
pels us  to  think  of  the  knowledge  as  in  some
degree  dependent  on  the  self.  In  other  words,
since  knowledge  is  always  relative  to  the  subject,
the  subject  in  every  case  contributes  something
without  which  the  knowledge  (at  any  rate  in  that
form)  would  not  exist.  This  flows  obviously
from  things  that  have  already  been  said,  and  it
might  seem  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  it ;  but  it
has  important  bearings.

Practically  the  matter  is  very  evident.  Not
only  awaking  from  sleep  do  we  immediately
recognise  v/hat  the  objects  around  us  are,  because,
in  fact,  we  have  the  memories  or  images  of  them
already  in  our  minds;  but  the  simplest  observa-
tion of  things  involves  a  similar  antecedent
condition — the   knowing  what  to  look  for.     How

*  We  shall  see  later  that  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  ego
in  sleep  passes  into  the  third  stage  of  consciousness.

72


The  Self  and  its  AfRliations

hard  to  **find  the  cat"  in  the  picture,  or  the
wood-cock  in  the  autumn  leaves,  till  the  precise
image  of  what  one  wants  to  see  is  already  in  the
mind,  and  then,  how  easy !  The  townsman
walking  along  the  high-road  perceives  not  the
hare  that  is  quietly  watching  him  from  the
farther  field.  Even  when  the  countryman  points
it  out  with  all  circumstance,  he  fails ;  because  the
kind  of  thing  he  is  to  see  is  not  already  in  his
mind.  Why  is  it  so  difficult  to  point  the  con-
stellations to  one  who  has  never  considered  them
before  ?  The  sky  is  simply  a  mass  of  stars,  it  is
the  mind  that  breaks  it  into  forms.  Or  why,  look-
ing down  from  a  cliff  upon  the  sea,  do  we  isolate
a  wave  and  call  it  one  ?  It  is  not  isolated ;  no
mortal  could  tell  where  it  begins  or  leaves  off;  it
is  just  a  part  of  the  sea.  It  is  not  one  ;  it  is  millions
and  millions  of  drops ;  and  even  these  millions
are  from  moment  to  moment  changing,  moving.
Why  do  we  isolate  it  and  call  it  one  ?  There  is
some  way  of  looking  at  things^  some  preconception,
already  at  work,  in  all  cases,  which  determines  or
helps  to  determine,  what  we  see,  and  how  we  see
it.  All  nature  thus  is  broken  and  sorted  by  the
mind ;  and  as  far  as  we  can  see  this  is  true  of  the
simplest  act  of  discrimination  or  sensation — the
knower  selects,  supplies,  ignores,  compares,  con-
tributes something  without  which  the  discrimina-
tion or  sensation  would  not  be.

Every  one  has  experienced  the  magic  of  the
musician,  "  that  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,
not  a  fourth  sound,  but  a  star."     The  three  first

n


The  Art  of  Creation

notes  are  mere  sounds,  noises ;  but  with  the
fourth,  the  phrase,  the  melody,  the  meanings
suddenly  descends  upon  us  from  within ;  an
answer  comes  from  the  background  of  our  minds
which  transforms  mere  noise  into  music.  Brown-
ing suggests  that  this  magic  is  exceptional ;  but  it
is  universal.  All  life  is  made  of  it.  When  the
phrase  or  the  melody  have  come  to  vibrate  with
meaning,  then  concatenations  of  phrases  and
melodies  roll  up  into  the  huge  symphony,  which
now  we  call  an  inspiration — though  once  it  too  was
only  noise.  So  too  the  incidents,  the  events,  the
meanings  of  life  roll  up.  The  trees,  the  moun-
tains, people's  forms  and  features,  become  lumin-
ous. Why  do  you  see  expressions,  motives,
emotions,  in  folk's  faces,  broad  as  day,  which
others  never  even  suspect  or  imagine  }  The  lines,
the  movements,  are  the  same  for  everybody ;  but
it  is  your  mind  that  interprets.  Always  these
knockings  going  on  at  the  outer  door  of  ourselves,
and  always  something  from  within  descending  to
answer — and  ever  new  and  newer  answers  as  the
years  go  on.

Nor  does  it  seem  by  any  means  sufficient  to
explain  these  answers  in  each  case  as  merely  the
result  of  summations  or  associations  of  previous
experiences — partly  because  of  the  very  newness
of  the  answer  (as  of  the  *  star '  in  the  music,  or
the  expression  on  a  loved  one's  face — things  which
though  they  may  be  called  forth  by  experience
are  like  no  other  experience)  ;  and  partly  because,
as  I  have  hinted,  when  we  go  back  to  the  most

74,


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

primitive  sensations  we  seem  to  find  the  same
thing.  Buried  in  the  Self  from  the  beginning  are
these  affections.  Browning  indeed  does  not  men-
tion that  exactly  as  the  melody  though  made  of
or  provoked  by  four  sounds  was  utterly  different
from  the  four  sounds  or  their  summation,  so
each  musical  sound  itself  was  a  *  star  *  in  com-
parison to  the  air-pulses  that  provoked  //.  Why
should  270  taps  in  a  second  on  the  drum  of  the
ear  call  forth  the  fairy  CJf  from  the  hidden
chambers  within .?  or  so  many  billions  on  the
retina  the  magical  and  beautiful  colour  of  blue  ?
We  cannot  resist  the  conclusion  that  the  qualities
of  things,  the  bitter,  the  sweet,  the  rough,  the
smooth,  the  lovable,  the  hateful,  the  musical,  the
brilliant  are  given  already  in  the  mind,  though
elicited  by  the  outward  phenomena,  whatever
they  are ;  and  that,  allowing  all  we  may  for  the
gradual  building  up  of  knowledge  from  outside
and  its  gradual  transformation,  there  remain
nevertheless  the  forms  under  which  we  receive
this  knowledge — from  the  mere  sensations  of
touch  or  taste  or  colour  or  sound,  up  through  the
moral  and  mental  qualities,  to  such  things  as  the
sense  of  self  or  of  duty,  and  far  beyond — which
in  a  vast  and  ascending  scale  the  ego,  or
hidden  knower,  contributes  as  its  share  to  the  solu-
tion of  the  marvellous  problem  1

Having  then  cleared  the  ground  somewhat  by
means  of  these  two  preliminary  propositions — (i)
that  the  self  or  ego  may  (provisionally)  be  thought
of  as  existent  in  sleep   or  in    an    unmanifested

75


The  Art  of  Creation

condition ;  and  (2)  that  it  must  be  thought  of  as
contributing  the  (or  a)  formative  element  in  the
knowledge  which  comes  to  it — we  may  proceed
farther  on  the  way.

And  first  let  us  take,  with  respect  to  the  nature
of  the  self,  the  evidence  of  the  third  stage  of
Consciousness,  such  as  we  have  it.  We  saw  that
in  this  third  stage  the  subject  and  object  are  seen,
are  known,  to  be  united,  to  be  essentially  one.
This  is  the  unanimous  declaration  of  the  witnesses,
and  we  know  also  that  the  witnesses  are  by  no
means  few  or  insignificant  in  the  history  of  the
world.  If  then  we  accept  their  evidence  we  must
believe  the  final  and  real  Self  to  be  one  and
universal.  For  if  A  knows  his  essential  identity
with  all  the  objects  a,  h^  c^  &c.;  and  B  also  knows
the  same ;  then  A  and  B  know  their  essential
identity  with  each  other,  even  though  they  may
never  have  seen  each  other.  And  so  on.  All
our  *  selves  *  consequently  must  be  one,  or  at  least
united  so  as  to  be  branches  of  the  One — even
though  for  a  time  deluded  by  the  idea  of  separa-
tion. The  ground  of  the  universe  must  be  one
universal  Self  or  one  Eternal  City  of  selves,  ever
united  and  ever  arriving  at  the  knowledge  of
their  union  with  each  other.

But  since  the  evidence  of  the  so-called  Cosmic
Consciousness  is  yet  scattered  and  unauthoritative,
and  by  no  means  universally  accepted,  we  may,  in
the  second  place,  consider  what  proof  we  may  be
able  to  get  from  the  ordinary  processes  of  thought
and  consciousness.     And  even  by  these  we  seem

76


The  Self  and  its  AfEHatlons

to  be  led  towards  the  same,  conclusion,  and  to
have  the  way  up  the  higher  slopes  indicated —
though  of  course  the  mule  stops  short  at  the
edge  !

In  fact,  analysing  one's  own  mind,  one  of  the
first  things  that  appears  is  that  the  ego  underlies
or  accompanies  every  thought.  It  is  always  I
know,  I  think,  I  feel,  I  remember,  I  desire,  I  act.
Though  some  thoughts  are  moderately  simple,
and  some  exceedingly  complex,  though  some
take  their  colour  from  others  or  derive  a  halo
from  the  *  fringe  *  of  unobserved  thoughts
round  them,i  still  inevitably  whether  in  the
wholes  or  whether  in  the  components  the  ego
is  there  ;  and  we  become  convinced  at  last  that
if  we  could  reach  even  the  simplest  and  most
elementary  sensation  of  which  we  are  capable,
the  ego  would  underlie — would  be  a  part  of  the
knowledge,  even  though  not  distinctly  differ-
entiated in  consciousness.

The  ego,  therefore,  underlying  my  every
possible  thought — and  even  if  I  lived  a  thousand
years  and  shared  the  thoughts  of  all  folk  on  the
globe,  it  would  still  underlie  them — and  under-
lyipg  too   the  most  elementary  sensation  I  can


^  By  some  it  is  supposed  that  it  is  by  the  action  of  this
*  fringe'  that  the  fourth  note  becomes  a  'star' — by,  in  fact,
waking  myriads  of  unobserved  associations.  But  again —
though  there  is  some  truth  in  this  view — we  must  note  that
the  mere  summation  of  associations,  however  numerous,  will
not  create  a  new  feeling.  And  we  may  also  point  out  that  the
'  fringe '  taken  in  an  extended  sense  brings  us  back  again  to
the  unconscious,  immanifested  ego,

77


The  Art  of  Creation

possibly  conceive  myself  having — cannot  be  a
thought  itself.^  And  so  we  are  forced  to
think  of  the  ego  either  as  a  kind  of  unitary
being  separate  from  all  thought  (which  of
course  won't  do) ;  or  else  as  an  infinitely
complex  unity  capable  of  every  conceivable
thought — in  fact  a  universal  Being.  But  here,
alas  !  we  come  to  a  fatal  crevasse  beyond
which  the  four-footed  creature  cannot  go.  For
as  soon  as  we  think  of  the  ego,  the  ego  has
already  become  a  thought  and  ceases  to  be  the
ego  we  are  in  search  of.  Obviously,  therefore,
thought  can  be  no  more  made  use  of  in  the
matter,  and  the  only  course  that  remains  seems
to  be  to  feel  ['SiS  we  instinctively  do)  that  the  ego
is  a  unitary  Being  ;  and  to  see  that  directly  we
try  to  think  it,  its  first  form  is  that  of  an  infinite
complex  capable  of  every  conceivable  thought —

^  Professor  W.  James  suggests  in  speaking  of  the  "  stream  of
consciousness  "  that "  the  thoughts  themselves  are  the  thinkers ! "
("  Textbook  of  Psychology,"  p.  2 1 6.)  But  we  really  cannot  accept
this  conundrum.  I  am  not  the  knife  which  I  handle  or  the
ideal  which  I  imagine.  Practically  the  mind  is  compelled  to
believe  in  a  self  distinguishable  from  its  own  thoughts,  some-
thing underlying  and  unitary  which  gives  the  sense  and
measure  of  sameness  and  continuity;  and  whatever  subtleties
may  lead  it  away,  the  human  mind  will  inevitably  return  to  this
view — the  old  antithesis  of  Being  and  Existence,  of  '  substance'
and  'accident,'  which  cannot  be  avoided  if  we  are  to  think  at
all.  See  also  W.  Wundt's  "  Human  and  Animal  Psychology"
(Sonnenschein,  1894),  p.  250,  where  we  read,  "  Self  is  not  an
idea — it  is  simply  the  perception  of  intercommunication  of
internal  experience,  which  accompanies  that  experience  itself."
That  is,  the  Self  is  the  perception  ;  the  thoughts  are  the
thinkers.  But  it  is  evident  that  this  view  creates  more  confusion
than  it  dispels.

78


The  Self  and  Its  Affiliations

at  the  same  moment  acknowledging  that  in  the
act  of  thinking  it  we  have  already  departed  from
its  essence.

I  shall  now  therefore  assume,  both  on  account
of  the  direct  evidence  of  the  Cosmic  Conscious-
ness, and  because  the  indirect  evidence  of  the
ordinary  thought  and  consciousness  points  in  the
same  direction,  that  there  is  a  real  universal  self^
a  one  absolute  Ego  and  knower,  underlying  all
existences — the  Tat  tvam  asi  of  the  Upanishads,
the  essence  and  life  of  the  whole  universe,  and
true  self  of  every  creature.  And  I  think  we
are  justified  in  assuming  this,  because  clearly  the
evidence  of  the  ordinary  consciousness,  however
long  we  work  at  the  problem,  can  never  carry  us
a  step  farther  than  it  does  now;  while  on  the
other  hand  the  direct  evidence  of  the  Cosmic
Consciousness  is  added  to  by  fresh  witnesses
every  day,  and  daily  becomes  more  conclusive.

There  is  therefore,  I  say,  a  real  universal  Self,
but  there  is  also  an  illusive  self.  There  are
millions  of  selves  which  are  or  thmk  themselves
separate.  And  over  these  we  must  delay.  For
to  see  the  connection  between  them  and  the  one
Self  is  greatly  important ;  and  we  may  be  sure
that  the  illusive  self  is  not  for  nothing  ;  indeed
the  term  *  illusive '  may  not  after  all  be  quite
the  right  one  to  apply  to  it.

Let  us  ask  two  questions  : —

1.  How  can  the  great  Self  also  be  millions  of
selves  ?

2.  If  the  great  Self  is  within  each  of  us,  and

79


The  Art  of  Creation

the  ego  of  every  thought,  why  do  we  not  know
it  so  ?

(i)  How  can  the  great  Self  also  be  millions
of  selves?  Well,  we  may  ask,  How  can  the  self
of  the  human  body  also  be  millions  of  selves  in
the  component  cells  of  the  body  ?  For  modern
science  more  and  more  attributes  selfness  and
intelligence  to  cells,^  and  more  and  more  tends  to
establish  the  intimate  relation  between  the  self  of
the  body  and  the  selves  of  the  cells.  How  can  a
man  be  one  self  in  his  office,  and  another  at  his
club,  and  another  in  his  domestic  circle  ?  How
is  it  that  plants  and  low  animals  multiply  by
fission  ?  Do  the  selves  multiply  ?  Or,  since  a
self  is  not  necessarily  to  be  thought  of  in  space
and  time,  can  one  self  have  many  expressions  in
space  and  time,  i.e.  many  bodies  ?  or  is  it  possible
even  that  one  self  may  require  many  bodies  ?
Such  are  a  few  out  of  many  questions  that  arise
on  the  subject.

The  fact  remains  apparently  (though  we  are
not  in  a  position  yet  to  see  all  round  it)  that  a
self  may  become  many  selves,  or  that  it  may  have


1  See  Binet  on  the  "Psychic  Life  of  Micro-Organisms,"
where  he  maintains  that  infusoria  exhibit  memory,  volition,
surprise,  fear,  and  the  germinal  properties  of  human  intelli-
gence. (Though  such  words  as  memory,  volition,  surprise,  and
fear  must  certainly  be  used  with  the  greatest  caution  in  this
connection,  yet  the  facts  seem  to  show  that  there  is  a  "  sensi-
bility "  in  these  little  creatures  corresponding  to  the  germ  of
these  human  faculties  ;  and  none  the  less  real  because  it
relates  itself  to  chemical  affinities.  See  H.  S.  Jennings  on
"The  Psychology  of  a  Protozoan,"  American  Journal  of  Psy*
chology^  vol.  X.)

80


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

many  selves  affiliated  to  it.  In  the  human  body
the  cells  are  differentiated  in  a  vast  number  of
ways,  according  to  their  service  and  function  in
the  body.  The  intelligence  of  each  cell  is  an
aspect  or  a  differentiation  of  the  intelligence  of
the  body.  The  great  Self  of  the  universe  may  dif-
ferentiate itself  into  countless  selves  or  *  aspects  *
— and  this  may  be  a  condition  of  more  perfect  self-
knowledge — yet  each  self  or  aspect  may  still  be
the  whole  and  commensurate  with  the  whole.
"One  eyesight  does  not  countervail  another,"
says  Whitman.  Ten  thousand  people  gathered
round  an  arena  may  see  one  another  and  the
whole  show,  each  from  his  own  -point  of  view.
Each  onlooker  sums  up  the  Whole,  represents
the  Whole  ;  but  each  from  a  different  side.  Each
eyesight  is  individual  and  complete ;  yet  it  doeg
not  interfere  with  any  other.

The  fact  is  conceivable  that  the  Self  may  be-
come countless  selves.  The  great  Self  is  omni-
present in  Space  and  Time ;  but  if  it  appear
or  express  itself  at  any  one  point  of  space  and
time  (say  as  the  ego  of  a  single  cell),  then  at
once  and  in  that  moment  it  has  determined  an
aspect  of  itself;  and  the  ego  in  that  cell  is
already  an  individual  having  within  itself  the
potentiality  of  the  whole,  yet  different^  from
every  other  possible  individual  of  the  universe.
The  fact  of  such  multiplex  appearance  in  Space

*  Theoretically  this  would  appear  so — though  the  extreme
conclusion  (that  every  cell  represents  a  separate  and  eternal
Individuality)  need  hardly  be  pressed.    (See  next  chapter.)

8i  F


The  Art  of  Creation

and  Time  is  conceivable ;  the  reason  for  it  may
be  that  of  self-knowledge;  but  the  *'how"  of
the  operation  must  necessarily  remain  inscrutable
to  our  ordinary  thought.

Leaving  the  matter  thus,  we  may  now  then
pass  to  the  further  question,  (2)  If  the  great
Self  is  in  each  of  us,  and  is  the  ego  of  every
thought,  why  do  we  not  know  it  so?  And  the
answer  is  not  difficult  to  frame.  It  is  a  ques-
tion of  degree  of  expression.  We  only  know  that
of  which  we  perceive  the  reflection.

Suppose  the  great  Self,  now  incarnate  as  the
ego  of  a  single  cell,  to  receive  some  simple  sensa-
tion, to  exercise  some  most  primitive  and  elemen-
tary act  of  knowledge.  Then,  from  what  has  been
said  a  few  pages  back,  it  cannot  do  that  except
because  the  knowledge  is  in  some  sense  implicit
in  itself,  and  called  forth  by  the  outer  phenome-
non (whatever  that  may  be).  There  is  a  meet-
ing of  subject  and  object,  a  reflection  of  one  in
the  other,  a  consciousness — but  of  very  low  degree.
In  the  ego  all  knowledge  (so  we  are  at  liberty  to
suppose)  is  implicit — yes,  in  the  ego  of  that  single
cell — universal  knowledge,  as  from  that  particular
individual  point  of  view.  But  that  knowledge
though  implicit  is  not  expressed  ;  only  the  lowest
degree  of  it  has  come  into  consciousness.  The
ego,  therefore,  has  only  to  that  degree  become
conscious  of  itself.  Perhaps  the  sense  of  touch
has  wakened  within  it,  but  no  more.  Certainly
the  consciousness  of  its  own  universal  being,  of
its  true  self,  has  not  been  excited  or  called  forth.

82


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

As  much  of  itself  as  has  been  reflected  in  the
phenomenal  world,  it  is  conscious  of  with  the
order  of  consciousness  that  belongs  to  the  phe-
nomenal world,  but  no  more."^

But  presently  another  sensation  comes  along,
or  rather  another  happening  which  calls  forth  a
sensation,  say  again  of  touch.  Many  such  touches
may  come,  and  still  there  is  no  particular  growth
of  consciousness.  But  one  day  the  sense  of  like-
ness between  them  arrives.  And  it  arrives  from
within.  Doubtless  there  may  be  a  real  outer
relation  of  likeness  between  the  touches,  or  the
objects  that  cause  them ;  but  until  the  ego  sees
and  seizes  that  relation,  contributes  it  from  within
itself,  there  is  no  sense  or  perception  of  likeness
for  it.  Thus  now  the  ego  of  that  cell  has  arrived
at  the  degree  of  consciousness  represented  by  the
sensation  or  perception  ('recept')  of  likeness —

'  Though  our  thought  of  course  cannot  compass  this  whole
matter,  we  may  help  it  out  by  the  analogy  of  a  fourth  dimen-
sion. If  this  being  which  descends  and  manifests  itself  in
tridimensional  space  is  in  fact  a  being  of  four-dimensional
order,  then  that  conception  helps  us  to  understand  both  its
'thereness'  prior  to  manifestation,  and  the  possibility  of  its
manifestation  being  multiplex,  though  itself  one.  For  if  we
suppose  a  three-dimensional  object — say  the  hand  with  fingers
downward — coming  down  into  two-dimensional  space — say  the
surface  of  still  water,  then  we  have  a  similar  case.  The  hand
is  one,  and  it  is  'there'  prior  to  touching  the  water.  Its  first
(multiplex)  appearance  on  the  surface  is  in  four  separate  points,
the  finger-tips.  Let  us  suppose  now  the  under  surface  of  the
water  to  be  a  mirror,  and  suppose  too  the  finger-tips  to  be  pro-
vided with  eyes  ;  then  as  the  fingers  descend  below  the  sur-
face they  will  see  themselves  by  reflection — first  as  mere  nails,
then  as  first  joints,  and  so  on  ;  but  always  as  entirely  separate
objects,  till  the  moment  when  the  body  of  the  hand  passing
below  the  surface,  reveals  their  union.

83


The  Art  of  Creation

and  it  has  arrived  there  by  the  way  of  reflection
in  the  objective  world.

It  is  clear  that  that  ego  being  already  a  more
or  less  individualised  aspect  of  the  universal  Self,
will  see  and  seize  and  group  the  happenings  of
the  external  v/orld  in  some  degree  differently  from
any  other  individual^ — that  is,  its  sensations  and
perceptions  and  inner  qualities  will  develop  and
become  manifest  in  consciousness  according  to  its
own  law  and  order  of  exfoliation.  The  happen-
ings of  the  external  world  will  have  their  say
certainly,  and  must  not  be  minimised.  They
may  retard  or  hasten  the  process ;  they  may
modify  the  outer  embodiment ;  but  it  hardly
appears  that  they  can  alter  the  general  order  of
inner  evolution.

As  experiences  multiply  for  our  imagined  ego
at  last  a  cluster  of  sensations,  perceptions,  latent
associations,  instincts,  memories,  thoughts,  and
feelings — fears,  desires,  wonderments — is  formed
about  it,  and  float  around.  These  are  all  qualities
of  the  ego  —  active  as  well  as  passive — called
forth  doubtless  by  the  outer  world,  and  used  to
give  form  and  outline  to  its  dealings  with  the
outer  world,  but  coming  down  from  within.
They  are  exfoliations  or  expressions  of  the  ego ;  ^

1  Though  the  differences,  at  any  rate  in  the  early  stages,  may
be  very  slight.

2  Thus  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  and  that  of  race-
propagation  appear  in  the  very  earliest  creatures,  long  before
actual  self-consciousness  has  arisen — because,  in  fact,  these
instincts  embody  the  primary  need  of  the  ego,  i.e.  that  of
expression  —  race-propagation  being  a  device  for  securing
expression  in  another  oro^anism  when  the  first  has  perished.

84


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

they  are  the  ego  coming  to  consciousness  of  itself
— but  within  every  one  of  them  lurks  still  the
fathomless  Being,  and  that  which  is  unexpressed.
This  is  the  stage  of  Animal  Consciousness,  full  of
keen  perceptions,  sensations,  instincts,  and  dis-
closing even  higher  powers  of  the  mind ;  but
still  the  thought  of  Self  is  not  there  ;  it  has  not  yet
come  to  reflection,  to  consciousness ;  the  cluster
of  thoughts  around  the  ego  has  not  yet  been
distinctly  conceived  as  a  separate  cluster — separate
from  the  rest  of  the  world  ;  there  is  no  know-
ledge of  the  real  self,  none  of  the  illusive  self
even.  Yet  the  thought  of  self  must  arrive  some
time,  to  give  a  further  unity  to  all  experience.
It  must  arrive,  and  from  within,  because  the  self
is  a  reality — in  a  sense  the  only  reality^ — and
selfness  must  necessarily  be  one  of  the  forms  of
its  expression.  But  the  mark  of  the  individual
Self  is  its  differentiation,  its  distinctness,  even  in
some  degree  its  separation  from  the  others.  And
so  we  find  the  first  form  in  which  the  self  fairly
comes  to  consciousness  is  that  of  separation.

One  day  (and  this  happens  probably  in  the
higher  animals,  certainly  in  the  human  child)  the
thought  of  *  Me '  arises  ;  and  from  that  moment
a  great  new  stage  of  evolution,  of  exfoliation,  has
begun — the  stage  especially  of  Humanity.

Now  what  is  this  thought  of  Me .?  It  is  evi-
dently another  generalisation,  another  form,
which  the  ego  at  a  certain   stage    projects,  and

^  Even  as  an  individual  the   self  is  a   reality  through  its
affiliation  to  the  great  whole.     It  is  a  "son  of  God,'

8S


The  Art  of  Creation

classifies  and  colours  the  world  therewith.  Just
as  at  one  stage  in  human  evolution  the  sense
of  melody  came  with  the  power  of  giving  new
meaning  to  an  otherwise  disconnected  series  of
sounds,  so  at  another  stage  the  sense  of  me-ness
comes  and  throws  a  colour  and  an  associative
bond  over  all  the  experiences  of  the  ego.  "  It  is
me,'*  "  It  is  mine."  All  this  manifold  cluster  of
thoughts  and  feelings  is  now  grouped  and  con-
ceived of  as  Myself,  as  Me.

And  this  is  all  right  in  a  sense ;  for  they  are
the  expression  (so  far)  of  the  great  individual
Ego.  But  it  is  clear  that  here  two  mistakes  are
inevitable  to  occur.  In  the  first  place,  the  little
cluster  is  almost  certain  to  be  mistaken  for  a  kind
of  fixed  and  final  Me.  It  is  looked  upon  as  the
real  self,  whereas  at  best  it  only  represents  the
tiniest  portion  of  the  real  self:  it  is,  by  the  very
act  of  being  conceived,  only  an  objectivation  of
the  reality ;  while  the  ego  itself  sinks  fathomless
behind.  And  in  the  second  place  it  (the  Me)
does  not  only  appear  as  a  complex  of  thoughts
and  feelings  (representative  of  the  ego),  but  is
inevitably  confused  with  the  objects  which  excite
those  thoughts  and  feelings,  which  are  the  occa-
sion of  them,  and  in  which  they  are  reflected.
Thus  the  body,  the  clothes,  the  goods,  the  pos-
sessions, are  at  first  conceived  as  the  Me.  **  They
are  me,"  "  they  are  mine."  It  is  as  a  child  who,
first  seeing  his  reflection  in  a  glass,  thinks  the
reflection  is  the  real  thing,  and  something  inherent
in  the  glass,  and  in  that  special  bit  of  glass.     So

86


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

the  vast  immortal  Ego  finds  itself  reflected,  and
first  becomes  conscious  of  itself  (on  this  plane)  as
the  local  and  limited  Me,  tangled  apparently  and
bound  in  what  are  called  material  things.

From  all  this  arise  two  illusions,  inevitable
to  this  stage  of  self-consciousness,  and  full  of
sorrow  and  suffering  to  mankind.  The  *  I '
is  thought  of  as  perishable ;  and  it  is  thought  of
as  separate.  It  is  thought  of  as  separate,  because
the  Me  and  the  Mine  (that  is,  the  conditions  and
surroundings  which  reflect  the  I)  are  in  these
early  stages  quite  local  and  limited,  and  therefore
as  long  as  the  I  is  confused  with  the  Me  the  self
must  be  thought  of  not  only  as  different,  but  as
isolated,  separate,  enclosed,  and  apart  from  others.^
And  it  is  thought  of  as  perishable,  because  it  is
confused  with  the  things  of  the  outer  world  and
the  perishing  flux  of  phenomena.

But  because,  sitting  on  the  bank  of  a  stream,
my  reflection  in  the  water  wavers  and  shifts,  that
does  not  show  that  I  am  moving.  Through  a
glass  darkly  we  come  at  first  to  the  knowledge  of
ourselves.  For  ages  and  ages  the  primitive  Man
peered  in  ponds  and  streams,  in  bits  of  shining
flint  or  metal  or  shell,  and  saw  strange  obscure
visions,  which  he  credited  to  these  objects,  nor
knew  or  perceived  that  they  were  dim  images  of
his  own  person.  Or  if  he  did  guess  that  they
were  images,  he  thought  that  he  himself  by  some

*  Hence,  too,  of  course,  the  mind  in  this  stage  only  functions
in  the  second  degree  of  consciousness,  already  described,  in
which  subject  and  object  are  conceived  of  as  separate.

87


The  Art  of  Creation

magic  was  tangled  in  them.^  Only  at  last,  and
with  greater  experience,  did  it  one  day  flash  upon
him  that  He  was  different,  and  by  no  means  to
be  confused  with  streams  and  shells.  Only  at  last
did  his  true  identity  come  to  him.

And  only  after  long  experience  does  the  sense
of  our  true  Identity  come  to  us.  And  as  the
civilised  man  who  has  learned  what  reflection  is
can  now  see  his  own  face  almost  where  he  will
— in  pools  and  rivers  and  polished  surfaces — nor
thinks  it  only  confined  to  some  mystic  shell  or
other  object,  so  our  true  Identity  once  having
been  learned,  our  relation  to  our  body  having
been  completed,  we  shall  find  that  the  magic  of
one  particular  body  is  no  longer  necessary,  since
out  of  the  great  ocean  of  Nature  we  can  now  pick
up  our  own  reflection  (or  make  to  ourselves  a
body  of  some  kind)  practically  anywhere.

So  for  a  long  time  the  '  Me '  goes  on  growing.
Every  new  thought  or  experience  that  is  added
sinks  into  the  Me ;  and  as  long  as  the  ruling  idea
— of  the  Me  as  a  separate  perishable  entity —
governs  the  cluster  or  organism,  so  long  do  greed
and  fear,  hatred  and  jealousy,  sorrow  and  grief,
increase  and  multiply  and  hover  round,  till  their
presence  grows  wellnigh  insupportable.  Yet  all
the  time  the  ego,  the  real  self,  is  behind,  waiting
for  its  next  development,  its  next  expression —
which  must  inevitably  come.

^  Hence  the  universal  dread  among  primitive  folk  of  having
likenesses  or  images  of  themselves  made,  and  their  fear  of  the
enchantment  of  mirrors.

88


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

We  have  dealt  much  in  similes.  Let  us  return
once  more  to  the  child  regarding  its  own  reflection
— say  in  the  tiniest  of  tiny  pools.  So  small  is  the
little  mirror  that  it  only  reflects  the  smallest  part
of  the  child — a  lock  of  hair,  a  portion  of  its  dress.
The  child  does  not  in  the  least  recognise  what  the
reflection  is.  But  it  has  a  water-can  and  pours
water  into  the  pool,  and  the  pool  grows.  Now
the  child  can  see  its  own  entire  hand  in  the  water.
It  is  fascinated,  and  tires  not  to  pose  its  fingers  in
every  way  for  reflection.  But  again  the  pool  goes
on  growing,  and  more  of  its  body  becomes  visible,
till  at  last,  lo  !  the  child  can  see  itself  complete.

So  to  us.  Each  new  thought,  each  new  expe-
rience that  is  added  to  the  Me,  is  like  a  drop  of
water  that  is  added  to  the  pool,^  till  it  becomes
large  enough — the  Me  becomes  sufficiently  uni-
versal— to  reflect  the  universality  of  the  I.  The
vision  of  the  true  Self  at  last  arises,  with  wonder
and  revelation  and  joy  indescribable :  the  vision
of  a  self  that  is  united  to  others,  that  is  eternal.
The  thoughts  connected  with  separation  and
mortality — the  greeds,  the  fears,  the  hatreds,  the
griefs  fall  off^ — and  a  new  world,  or  conception  of
the  world,  opens — life  is  animated  with  a  new
spirit.  The  Me-conception  (as  far  as  that  means
isolation,  mortality,  *  self-seeking ')  disappears,  is
broken  up,  is  transformed ;  and  the  life  is  trans-
formed accordingly.^

1  Added  really  in  the  last  resort  by  ourselves.

2  Always  the  life,  the  vitality,  of  an  organism  is  a  reflection
of  its  overmastering  thought  or  conception,  and  in  the  main  is
determined  thereby.

89


The  Art  of  Creation

When  I  say  the  idea  of  the  true  Self  arises,  I
do  not  say  that  at  once  the  complete  and  final
Individual  is  realised.  Nature  does  not  proceed
per  saltum.  On  the  side  of  the  past,  there  may
yet  be  much  "clinging  to  the  old  self";  and
again,  on  the  side  of  the  future,  there  may  be
many  new  disclosures  and  revelations  still  to  be
made.  But  this  stage — in  which  the  human
being  begins  at  least  to  realise  his  universal  life
and  identity;  in  which  he,  as  it  were,  comes
within  sight  of  the  end — forms  such  an  epoch,
that  it  may  be  taken  as  one  of  the  great  land-
marks on  his  immense  journey — a  landmark  more
important  even  than  that  which  signalled  the
birth  of  Self-consciousness.

It  marks  the  entrance  to  an  emancipated,  glori-
fied, transformed  Humanity,  of  whose  further
course  and  transformation  we  need  not  too  curi-
ously inquire,  though  we  seem  to  discern  dimly  its
grander  lines.^  It  marks  the  arrival  of  the  third
stage  of  Consciousness,  at  first  only  occasionally
and  spasmodically  realised,  but  even  so  guiding
and  pointing  the  way ;  and  finally  becoming  per-
manent— not  necessarily  to  obliterate  and  negate
the  earlier  faculties,  but  rather  to  interpret  and
render  them  for  the  first  time  really  rational  and
meaningful  It  marks  the  realisation  at  last  of
the  whole  meaning  of  the  Universe,  even  though
the  detail  thereof  may  be  for  ever  inexhaustible.

With  a  kind  of  inexorable  logic,  from  infinitely
various  beginnings,  from  infinitely  various  sides,

*  See  chap,  xiii.,  "  Transformation.**
90


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

the  Great  Self  sums  itself  up  to  form  a  vast
affiliation  of  selves — a  Celestial  City  of  equals
and  lovers.^  "It  is  by  love  only  that  we  can
fully  enter  into  that  harmony  with  others  which
alone  constitutes  our  own  reality  and  the  reality
of  the  universe.  We  conceive  the  universe  as  a
spiritual  whole,  made  up  of  individuals,  who  have
no  existence  except  as  manifestations  of  the  whole  ;
as  the  whole,  on  the  other  hand,  has  no  existence
except  as  manifested  in  them."  ^

*  Love,  as  we  have  already  indicated,  whether  taken  in  its
most  ideal  or  its  most  sensuous  signification,  is  a  form  of  the
Cosmic  Consciousness.

2  M'Taggart,  "The  Further  Determination  of  the  Absolute,"
p.  56.


91


VI

THE    SELF   AND    ITS   AFFILIATIONS

(  Continued)

Having  in  the  last  paper  considered  the  Self  and
its  affiliations  from  the  within  point  of  view,  we
may  now  with  advantage  study  the  same  subject
on  its  more  external  side.

A  certain  school  of  psychologists,  in  trying  to
explain  the  total  consciousness  of  an  organism  as
the  sum  (in  some  sense)  of  the  consciousnesses  of
its  separate  cells,  are  met  with  serious  criticism,
and  themselves  find  a  difficulty,  in  the  question
of  how  the  separate  cell-consciousnesses  can  pos-
sibly be  fused  in  one  consciousness,  or  how  even
we  can  conceive  such  a  thing.  How  can  one  cell
know,  it  is  said,  what  its  neighbour  feels,  or  fuse
its  neighbour's  experience  with  its  own .?  What
kind  of  total  ego  is  it  that  can  possibly  gather  up
the  experiences  of  millions  of  lesser  egos,  and
render  them  one  ?  And  the  difficulty  is  perfectly
natural,  and  indeed  insuperable,  as  long  as  the
egos  of  the  cells  are  held  to  be  distinct  and
separate.  But  as  soon  as  we  see  that  (as  sug-
gested in  the  last  chapter)  they  may  be  the  same^
that   they    may   be   already    one,    the    difficulty

92


The  Self  and  Its  Affiliations

disappears.  We  have,  indeed,  arrived  at  the
conclusion  that  all  egos  are  finally  the  same,
though  differing  little  or  much  in  aspect,  in
affiliation,  in  ramification — even  as  every  twig  on
a  tree  dates  back  to  the  trunk,  and  has  a  common
life  with  the  others,  however  different  from  them
in  aspect  to  the  outer  world,  or  in  affiliation  to
its  main  stem,  it  may  be.  And  so  it  is  not  diffi-
cult to  conceive  of  them  as  fusing  their  know-
ledge. Indeed  it  is  inevitable  that  they  should
do  so.

Let  us  consider  for  a  moment  the  genesis  of
the  body,  human  or  other.  The  body  grows
from  one  cell,  sperm  and  germ  united.  The  cell
obtains  nourishment  (from  the  organism  of  the
mother,  in  the  higher  creatures),  and  grows,  and
splits  into  two,  four,  many,  and  then  multitudes
of  cells,  which  dispose  themselves  into  certain
forms — the  outlines  of  the  growing  creature.  At
the  same  time,  the  dividing  and  multiplying  cells
become  differentiated  from  each  other,  and  finally
(in  the  human  being)  break  up  into  some  thirty
well-marked  varieties,  according  to  their  uses  and
functions  in  the  complete  organism.

[To  make  the  meaning  of  this  process  clear,
we  must  remember  that  we  were  compelled  to
think  of  the  ego  of  that  primitive  cell  as  itself  a
unitary  but  enormously  complex  being,  manifested
at  first  in  the  lowest  degree.  Then  we  see  the
multiplication  and  differentiation  of  that  cell
simply  as  the  process  by  which  the  various  com-
plexities of  its  inner  Being  are  further  manifested

93


The  Art  of  Creation

— their  manifestations,  no  doubt,  being  sundered
in  the  world  of  space,  but  their  inner  nature
losing  nothing  of  its  original  unity.]

To  proceed.  The  growing,  multiplying,  differ-
entiating cells  are  all  in  touch  and  in  relation
with  each  other ;  but  in  time  by  special  nerve-
channels  (themselves  composed  of  cells)  more
special  and  closer  relations  are  established,  groups
are  formed,  which  tend  to  act  and  to  feel  together;
and  again  in  time  some  of  these  groups  unite  and
form  larger  groups,  and  so  on  up  to  the  whole
organism.  As  to  the  nerve-channels,  which  re-
present at  any  rate  the  subtler  and  swifter  and
more  specialised  relations  (though  not  by  any
means  all  the  relations),  they  are  of  various  kinds
and  structure,  and  are  minutely  distributed  over
the  whole  body ;  and  the  nerve-centres  and
plexuses,  which  bring  these  relations  to  definite
focus  in  a  vast  variety  of  ways,  are  also  widely
distributed,  not  only  in  the  brain  and  encephalon,
but  all  down  the  spinal  cord,  and  in  the  trunk  of
the  body,  where  they  lie  embedded  among  the
organs.

Such  is  the  process  of  the  growth  of  the  body ;
and  such — as  we  have  seen — or  very  similar,  is
the  growth  of  the  mind.  In  fact  in  the  case  of
the  latter  (using  the  word  *  thought '  to  cover
all  affections  of  the  mind)  we  have  seen  that  a
very  primitive  or  elementary  thought  must  first
appear,  that  this  being  fed  and  added  to  by  the
happenings  of  the  outer  world,  repeats  itself  and
multiplies,  and  becomes  differentiated  into  other

94


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

nearly-resembling  thoughts,  and  that  by  degrees
the  ego  groups  these  elementary  thoughts  into
more  inclusive  thoughts  (as  when  it  groups  a
number  of  separate  pulses  into  a  musical  sound),
and  then  these  group-thoughts  again  into  higher
group-thoughts  (as  when  it  groups  musical  sounds
into  melodies  or  harmonies).  And  as  in  this
mental  process  we  are  compelled  to  think  of  the
same  ego  which  underlies  the  total  mind,  or  one
of  the  higher  group-thoughts,  as  underlying  also
the  more  elementary  thoughts  (the  same  '  I '
that  perceives  the  melody  perceiving  also  the
separate  notes)  ;  so  we  may  seem  justified  in  sup-
posing in  the  case  of  the  bodily  cells  that  their
myriad  egos  form  what  may  be  called  a  group-
soul — that  they  are  in  fact  one  and  the  same  with
the  soul  of  the  whole  body.

The  difference  is,  of  course,  that  in  the  simple
cell,  though  the  total  ego  is  *  there,'  it  is  neces-
sarily expressed  only  to  a  very  simple  and  primitive
degree,  whereas  in  the  groups  of  cells,  especially
when  the  latter  have  reached  some  degree  of
differentiation,  it  may  be  much  more  fully  ex-
pressed. We  can  hardly  refuse  too  to  think  that
not  only  complexity  but  volume  of  feeling  depends
to  some  extent  on  the  largeness  of  the  group  of
cells  concerned.  Thus  in  the  great  emotions —
fear,  anger,  &c. — it  is  obvious  that  vast  multitudes
of  cells  are  agitated,  whole  organs  affected,  secre-
tions changed,  and  so  forth.  But  in  pure  thought
or  representation  where  no  emotion  is  concerned
(as,  for  instance,  in  simply  using  the  word  '  fear  *)

9S


The  Art  of  Creation

there  is  no  sense  of  volume,  and  probably  quite  a
few  little  cells  in  the  brain,  specially  differentiated
to  express  that  simple  concept,  are  all  that  is
required.  There  is  no  feeling  probably  which
carries  with  it  more  permanent  volume,  as
well  as  a  great  degree  of  complexity,  than  that
of  selfness ;  and  we  may  associate  that  with
the  supposition  that  roughly  speaking  all  the
cells  of  the  body  (through  their  instinct  of  self-
preservation,  if  through  nothing  more  complex)
are  concerned  in  it.

I  think  myself  (subject  of  course  to  correction)
that  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  consciousness
is  limited  to  the  cells  in  a  certain  portion  of  the
brain.  The  hypothesis  does  at  its  best  sound
very  improbable.  Certainly  it  is  likely  that  the
cells  of  the  cortex  are  specialised  in  that  direction
(and  particularly  as  representatives  of  the  second
stage  of  consciousness)  ;  but  this  would  not  imply
that  other  cells — from  which  the  cerebral  cells
have  been  differentiated  —  have  not  the  same
faculty  in  less  degree.  To  even  the  simplest
tissue-cell  one  must  credit  sensibility,  to  the  nerve-
cells  higher  sensibility ;  to  others  perhaps,  as
those  of  the  Sympathetic  system,  simple  conscious-
ness ;  to  the  brain-cells  or  groups  self-conscious-
ness ;  and  there  must  be  many  cells  or  groups
which  represent  those  higher  orders  of  conscious-
ness of  which  we  are  occasionally  aware.

That  there  is  a  diffused  consciousness  all
through  the  body,  I  think  any  one  who  attends
to  the  subject  will  feel  persuaded — and  that,  in

96


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

some  sense,  independent  of  the  braln.^  It  is,  in
fact,  the  primitive  consciousness  out  of  which
the  more  complex  brain-consciousness  has  been
evolved ;  and  it  Hnks  on  to  that  *  subliminal  *
region  of  the  mind  of  which  we  have  heard  so
much  lately — the  vast  *  fringe '  of  thought  and
feeling  which  surrounds  our  ordinary  conscious-
ness, which  never  comes  quite  into  the  full  light
of  observation,  and  yet  is  always  obscurely
present.

In  these  lights  it  does  not  seem  difficult  to
think  of  the  egos  of  the  body-cells  as  one  with
the  total  Ego  which  represents  the  fusion  of  their
separate  consciousnesses — one  with  it,  though  each
less  adequately  manifested  than  the  whole.  And
indeed  I  believe  they  love  to  feel  this  affiliation ;
dimly  they  are  conscious  of  it,  and  it  vitalises
them,  presiding  over  and  directing  their  activities.

Now  here  we  have  to  pause ;  for  indeed  if  my
conscious  Ego  and  the  egos  of  all  my  body-cells

^  Stanley  in  his  "Evolutionary  Psychology  of  Feeling"
(p.  32)  says:  "In  man,  physiologically  speaking,  it  is  the
brain-consciousness  that  is  general.  But  we  need  not  suppose
this  to  extinguish  all  the  lower  ganglionic  consciousness  from
which  it  arose."  And  Ribot  in  his  "  Psychology  of  the  Emo-
tions "  (p.  200),  speaking  of  the  nutritive  functions,  says  :
"  Though  in  the  adult  they  play  only  a  latent  and  intermittent
part  [in  consciousness]  by  reason  of  the  preponderance  of
external  sensations,  images,  and  ideas,  yet  it  is  probable  that
in  animals,  particularly  in  voracious  ones,  the  functions  are
inverted,  and  that  coenassthesia  passes  to  the  front  rank." _  In
fact  since  the  brain-cells  are  only  differentiations  of  the  primitive
body-cells,  we  are  compelled  to  think  of  the  general  cells  as
having  a  germinal  consciousness  ;  and  though  they  may  convey
their  coenaesthesia  or  common  sentiment  to  the  brain,  it  no  less
originates,  and  has  its  first  birth  in  them.

97  G


The  Art  of  Creation

were  in  the  condition  of  harmony  suggested,  all
would  be  *' pancakes  and  cream'*:  the  state  of
affairs  indicated  in  the  former  chapter,  **  The  Art
of  Creation,"  would  be  reaUsed  ;  these  bodies  of
ours,  and  the  bodies  of  other  creatures,  trees,
plants,  &c.,  would  be  the  adequate  manifestations
(so  far)  of  their  respective  egos,  and  would  be
the  forms  under  which  we  should  apprehend  the
expression  of  our  own  and  other  minds.

Yet  clearly  this  is  not  so.  I  and  my  cells  fall
out  to  some  extent.  They  do  not  always  do  or
say  what  I  want.  There  are  contusions  as  well  as
fusions,  alterations  and  alternations  of  personality.
My  body  is  not  altogether  an  embodiment  of  my
mind — -at  any  rate  of  that  mind  of  which  I  am
preponderantly  conscious.

What  is  the  cause  of  this  discrepancy — or  of
these  discrepancies .?

This  leads  us  on  to  further  considerations.

Exactly  as  a  (human)  body  is  a  com.plex  of
cells  descended  and  differentiated  from  a  single
pair,  so  is  a  (human)  Race  a  complex  of  bodies,
which  for  our  present  purpose  we  may  suppose  as
descended  and  differentiated  from  a  single  pair.
I  am  not  alluding  to  Adam  and  Eve  especially
as  progenitors  of  the  whole  human  race,  but
rather  (in  order  to  gain  clearness)  to  smaller
tribes  and  peoples — such  as  the  Maoris,  or  the
Apache  Indians,  or  the  old  Israelites — much  in-
terrelated, and  in  many  cases  descended  from  a
very  few  progenitors,  if  not  actually  (as  their
traditions  often  relate)  a  single  pair.     Such  a  race

9S


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

has  all  the  characteristics  of  an  organic  being :  it
has  its  well-marked  customs,  instincts,  religion,
ideals,  external  habits  of  life,  grade  of  mental
development,  and  so  forth.  It  has  its  individual
members,  its  groups,  and  larger  groups,  culmi-
nating in  the  whole  tribe  or  race  as  an  entity,  just
the  same  as  the  ceils  with  regard  to  the  human
body.  And  it  has  its  phases  of  emotion  and  belief
and  action — its  patriotisms,  religions,  and  warlike
and  other  enthusiasm.s — belonging  to  it  only  as  a
whole,  and  called  forth  somehow  by  the  sentiment
of  the  whole.  '*  Crowds  are  sometimes  accessible
to  a  very  lofty  morality,"  says  a  French  writer  ^ —
"  a  much  loftier  one,  indeed,  than  that  of  which
the  isolated  individual  is  capable."  And  anyhow
we  see  that  societies,  not  only  of  bees  (as  Maeter-
linck has  shown),  but  of  all  creatures,  up  to  man,
have,  qua  societies,  a  life  of  their  own  inclusive
of  and  superadded  to  that  of  their  individual
members.

It  is  difficult  therefore,  in  view  of  all  this,  to
refuse  to  credit  an  Ego  and  a  consciousness  to  a
well-mxarked  race  or  people  or  tribe  ;  and  of  course
this  has  often  been  done ;  while  the  cognate  idea
of  the  *'  social  organism  "  has  become  a  thing  of
common  acceptance.  Now  if  this  ascription  of
an  organic  and  conscious  life  to  huge  collections
of  human  beings  were  merely  an  abstract  affair,
like  Auguste  Comte's  "Humanity"  or  the  Spen-
cerian  "  social  organism,"  it  would  be,  to  say  the
least,  a  trifle  dull  and   uninteresting.      But  the

1  G.  Le  Bon,  "  Psychologic  des  foules,"  p.  46.
99


The  Art  of  Creation

moment  we  realise  that  it  means  just  the  opposite
— something  very  much  alive  indeed,  and  en-
tangled in  the  very  heart  of  our  own  natures — then
it  becomes  absorbingly  important.  Not  only  do
we  recognise,  when  these  huge  crowd  -  emotions
come  along,  that  immense  unsuspected  forces  are
working  within  us ;  but  we  see  that  at  all  times,
in  some  mysterious  way,  the  capacity  of  entering
into  the  Race-consciousness  is  in  us,  and  that  daily
and  hourly  this  fact  is  moulding  and  modifying
our  lives :  just  the  same  as  in  every  limb  of  my
body  there  lurks  the  capacity  of  being  thrilled
by  the  great  emotions  of  my  total  ego,  and  this
fact  in  its  turn  guides  and  moulds  the  destinies
and  activities  of  my  tiniest  cells.

To  the  more  detailed  consideration  of  this
subject,  and  of  the  way  in  which  the  gods,  the
devils,  and  the  great  emotions  represent  our  past
in  the  Race-consciousness,  I  have  given  the  next
four  chapters,  so  I  will  not  dwell  upon  it  here.
We  may  here  consider  more  in  detail  the  mode
of  arrival  of  the  individual  ego  on  the  scene,  and
his  relation  to  the  race-life.

How  did  I  arrive  as  regards  the  race  to  which
I  belong  ?  Why,  the  same  protozoic  cells  (same  in
fundamental  nature,  or  ego,  and  same  by  sheer
continuity  of  life)  which  were  in  Adam  and  Eve
have  also  produced  me.^     Or,  to  bring  the  matter

*  The  immortality  of  the  protozoic  cells  is  now  widely  ac-
cepted. That  is  to  say,  since  these  cells  multiply  by  fission  or
gemmation,  they  do  not  die.  If  a  parent  cell  divides  into  two
(or  four)  descendant  cells,  the  descendant  cells  are  simply  a  pro-
longation and  multiplication  of  the  parent  life,  .and  continuous

loo


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

within  more  definite  compass,  the  same  cells  from
which  Abraham  and  his  wife  Sarah  sprung,  pro-
duced also  Solomon  and  St.  Paul.  [I  select  the
Jews  as  an  illustration,  because  they  afford  an  in-
stance of  a  very  well-defined  race  which,  not-
withstanding occasional  lapses,  kept  itself  very
pure  and  unmixed,  and,  as  a  consequence,  had
the  strictest  customs  and  religious  ideals,  and  the
strongest  national  consciousness.]  That  is  to
say,  to  put  the  matter  more  definitely  still,  the
sex-cells  of  Abraham  and  Sarah  united  to  form
a  single  cell,  from  which  Isaac  sprang.  Every  cell
in  Isaac's  body  was  therefore  a  prolongation  and
fission-growth  from  that  single  cell.  Isaac  in  his
turn  uniting  with  Rebekah  (his  cousin)  similarly
produced  Jacob,  who  again  uniting  with  Leah  (his
cousin),  produced  Reuben,  Simeon,  and  Judah  ;
and  so  on.    After  endless  ramifications  in  this  tree


with  it,  and  so  on  to  any  number  or  degree  of  descendants.
Any  one  of  these  descendant  cells  of  course  may  perish  by
accident,  but  the  point  is  that  the  descendant  or  descendants  in
the  hundredth  generation  still  will  be  the  sa^ne^  in  being  and  life,
with  the  parent  cell.  That  it  or  they  will  have  learned  much
on  the  way  can  hardly  be  doubted.  Whether  they  will  have
been  modified  by  the  outer  world  is  a  point  which,  with  regard
to  the  sex-cells,  Weismann  has  challenged.  That  the  sex-cells
learn,  by  long  practice,  skill  in  the  art  of  self-expression  is
obvious  from  the  facts  of  embryology  and  "recapitulation";
and  this  in  itself  is  a  kind  of  use-inheritance.  Herbert  Spencer
in  his  "  Facts  and  Fragments  "  has  given  reasons  for  supposing
that  even  with  the  acceptance  of  Weismann's  general  views,
use-inheritance  is  quite  possible  ;  and  the  most  reasonable
theory  of  the  whole  subject  seems  to  be  that  a  great  inner  law
of  growth  presides  in  the  evolution  of  races  and  species,  but
always  subject  to  a  slow  m.odification  by  the  outer  world  in  the
fprms  of  Use-inheritance  and  Natural  Selection.


The  Art  of  Creation

of  life,  Solomon  appeared,  and  again  after  more^
St.  Paul  or  Jesus.  The  conclusion  is  clear.  Re-
membering the  immortality  of  the  cells  and  their
continuity  of  life,  with  of  course  great  differenti-
ations and  ramifications  all  down  the  centuries,
we  see  that  a  tiny  group  of  cells  in  Abraham's
time,  themselves  related  to  each  other,  and  pro-
bably differentiations  of  some  one  cell  further
back,  lay  beneath  the  whole  development  of  the
Jewish  race  through  the  centuries  ;  and  that  this
latter  indeed  might  reasonably  be  looked  upon  as
the  exfoliation  of  a  single  Ego  which  through
this  long  chain,  in  hundreds  of  thousands  of  lives
affiliated  to  it,  sought  expression,  and  so  far  suc-
ceeded in  finding  it.

Well  might  Jesus  of  Nazareth  exclaim,  ^*  Before
Abraham  was,  1  am."  His  consciousness,  the
consciousness  of  his  own  being,  had  reached  that
depth  at  which  it  had  become  united  with  the
consciousness  of  the  race ;  and  in  using  those
words  he  merely  stated  a  fact  which  he  felt
within  himself,  and  knew  to  be  true.

In  this  view  we  see  and  understand  the  enor-
mous import  and  sacredness  of  sex,  and  its  deep
association  with  the  religious  and  communal  life
of  the  race — a  thing  which  the  earlier  and  less
mixed  races  understood  instinctively  and  appre-
ciated much  better  than  v/e  do,  but  which  (for
reasons  which  may  later  appear)  has  been  to  a
great  degree  lost  in  the  modern  societies  and
nations.  The  sex-cells,  conserved  and  perpetuated
by  each  organism,  and  passed  on  with  fervent  care

10?


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

from  generation  to  generation,  are  the  most
central  and  potent,  and  least  differentiated  of  all
the  cells  of  the  body — the  other  cells  losing  their
reproductiveness  in  proportion  as  they  are  more
and  more  differentiated.  They  are  the  most  re-
presentative of  the  body  and  all  its  faculties,  and
within  them  lies  the  secret  and  heart  of  the  race/
The  same  ever-descendant  cells,  I  say,  which
produce  the  first  man  of  a  race,  produce  the  last
man.  But  the  last  man  is  not  therefore  the  same
as  the  first  man.  The  first  man  may  be  merely  a
living  soul  (or  psyche),  the  last  may  be  a  quicken-
ing Spirit.  The  little  primitive  cell  may  grow  and
differentiate  and  grow,  till  that  which  was  in  it
attains  at  last  to  Manhood  and  Deliverance.  The
descendant  cells  by  ever-renewed  practice,  gene-
ration after  generation,  in  the  expression  of  the
Ego  within  them,  may  attain  more  and  more
facility ;  the  art  of  building  up  the  body,  tenta-
tive at  first,  by  repetition  becomes  easy  ;  and  if
the  potency  of  the  cells  continues  (which  without
a  crossing  of  the  strain  with  another  race,  or
branch  of  the  great  Ego,  does  not  always  take

^  Ray  Lankester  (quoted  by  Geddes  and  Thomson,  "Evolu-
tion of  Sex,"  p.  277)  says,  "  The  bodies  of  the  higher  animals
which  die,  may  from  this  point  of  view  be  regarded  as  some-
thing temporary  and  non-essential,  destined  merely  to  carry  for
a  time,  to  nurse,  and  to  nourish  the  more  important  and  death-
less fission-products  of  the  unicellular  egg."  And  Metch-
nikofF  ("  The  Nature  of  Man,"  p.  268)  remarks  :  "  Scientific
proof  exists  therefore  that  our  bodies  contain  immortal  elements,
eggs,  or  spermatozoa.  .  .  .  These  cells  not  only  are  truly  alive,
but  exhibit  properties  that  are  within  the  category  of  psychical
phenomena."  He  also  says,  "It  is  possible  to  speak  of  the
soul  of  protozoa."

103


The  Art  of  Creation

place)  the  race  in  question  may  reach  a  high  level
of  development.

Thus  when  a  man  to-day,  born  of  such  and
such  parents,  appears,  his  body  in  its  early  stages
is  rapidly  and  instinctively  built  up ;  these  stages
summing  up  and  embodying  the  evolution  of  the
race  behind  it.  His  ego  is  already  affiliated  to
that  of  the  race ;  and  his  unfoldment  (so  far)
already  prepared.  His  body,  so  far,  represents  a
summation  of  an  endless  series  of  mental  actions
preceding  his  actual  nativity,  a  ramifying  thread
of  race-life,  here  condensed.  All  the  instincts,  all
the  devices,  all  the  mental  and  physical  adjust-
ments by  which  during  the  centuries  the  Ego
obtained  expression  for  its  own  nature  and  quali-
ties amid  the  outer  conditions  in  which  the  race
existed,  are  (together  with  that  nature  and  those
qualities)  summed  up  and  represented  in  his  cor-
poral organism  ;  and  within  it  the  immense
heritage  of  race-memory  is  stored.  The  'I,*
the  Ego,  of  his  race  is  not  only  present,  mani-
festing itself  in  Time  and  History — but  an  aspect,
an  affiliation,  of  it  is  now,  to-day,  present  and
existent  in  that  man,  in  his  Body.

And   this  brings  us    back    to   that  discord  or

discrepancy  between  the  body  and  the  conscious

self,   which   started   the  subject  of  the   last  few

pages.       Is    there    reason    for    supposing    a    real

discord  between    the    Ego    of  the   race,  and  the

self-conscious  individual  who  is  affiliated  to  it  ?

and  is  there  in  the  body  of  the  individual  man

really  in  some  sense  a  seat  of  race-consciousness^

104


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

separate  from  his  brain,  or  that  part  of  it,  which
is  the  seat  of  his  ordinary  mind  ?

To  take  the  last  question  first.  We  have
already  suggested  that  there  is  a  consciousness
belonging  peculiarly  to  the  body  and  its  *  auto-
matic' nerve-centres  and  ganglia,  with  all  their
instincts,  habits,  and  organic  functioning.  Though
these  (partly  from  our  inattention  to  them)  ap-
pear as  a  rule  dark  and  silent,  and  beyond  the
region  of  our  voluntary  observation  or  control,
yet  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  admitted  that
there  is  a  sort  of  *  awareness  '  of  them.  Science
is  less  and  less  able  to  proceed  without  the  con-
ception of  the  *  subliminal '  mind,  or  the  *  sub-
jective,* or  the  '  subconscious,*  or  the  '  fringe  *
which  surrounds  the  ordinary  consciousness  ;  it
is  more  and  more  seen  that  the  emotions  are
forms  of  consciousness  accompanying  the  organic
functions  and  secretions,  and  that  all  the  processes
of  the  body  contribute  their  flow  great  or  small
to  the  life  of  the  feelings,  which  again  expresses
itself  in  the  life  of  the  intellect ;  there  are  facts
such  as  second-sight,  telepathy,  and  luminous
sleep,  which  indicate  states  of  consciousness  exist-
ing when  the  ordinary  brain  is  at  rest ;  there  are
the  facts  of  cosmic  consciousness  already  alluded
to ;  and  lastly,  there  is  a  whole  series  of  facts
with  which  I  shall  deal  in  the  next  chapters,
which  seem  to  show  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as
a  race-consciousness  associated  with  our  bodily
organisation  and  accessible  on  occasions  to  our
conscious  minds.

105


The  Art  of  Creation

I  do  not  doubt  that  the  body  and  its  organisa-
tion are  the  scene  and  the  seat  of  an  extensive
consciousness — of  other  orders  of  consciousness —
which,  though  usually  hidden  from,  or  unrecog-
nised by,  us  are  still  really  operating  within  and
around  our  minds,  and  are  directly  accessible  to
them.^

But  whatever  consciousness  may  have  its  seat
in  the  body,  or  the  cerebellum,  or  the  automatic
portions  of  the  brain,  and  however  vast  the  sum-
mation and  expression  of  experience  and  instinct
these  may  represent,  they  still  do  not  represent
the  total  possible  expression  of  the  Ego  within.
The  body  (at  any  rate  in  childhood)  represents
only  the  expression  to  which  the  race  has  attained
so  far.  There  are  vast  deeps  of  the  unexpressed
yet  behind  it.  And  a  progressive  power  is  needed
to  seek  and  search  and  devise  and  effect  ever  new
advances  of  expression — however  slight.  This
power  is  the  conscious  Brain.  It  is  the  function
of  the  Brain  to  be  continually  making  new  com-
binations in  which  the  whole  Feeling-mtuvt  can
find  satisfactions — in  other  words,  to  be  con-
tinually extending  the  area  of  expression  of  that
nature.  Ever  new  thoughts,  ever  new  adjust-
ments,   ever     new    combinations,    it    consciously

1  There  is  much  to  show  that  animals  have  some  kind  of
direct  consciousness  of  their  internal  functions  ;  and  the  Hindu
yogis,  who  have  given  much  attention  to  this  subject,  not  only
obtain  a  marked  consciousness  of  their  own  internal  organs,
but  an  extraordinary  power  of  voluntarily  controlling  them —
suspending  at  will  the  action  of  the  heart,  for  instance,  or
reversing  the  peristaltic  movements  of  the  alimentary  canal,

lo6


The   Self  and  its  Affiliations

forms — which,  as  they  are  finally  accepted  and
grow  habitual,  fall  back  into  the  so-called  un-
conscious mind  of  the  organism,  and  are  replaced
by  new  purposive  endeavours.

The  Conscious  Mind  (of  the  second  stage)  is
the  pioneer  of  progress.  If  we  take  it  as  repre-
sented by  the  Brain,  and  if  we  take  the  sub-
conscious hereditary  Mind  to  be  in  the  main
represented  by  the  Great  Sympathetic  Nerve-
system,  then  the  discord  or  discrepancy  to  which
we  have  alluded  is  that  between  the  conscious
and  the  subconscious  Minds,  between  the  Brain
and  the  Great  Sympathetic.^  The  discord  is  to  a
certain  extent  the  progress ;  and  therefore  we
need  not  look  upon  it  as  bad.  It  is  easy  to
imagine,  and  comm.on  to  observe,  that  a  consider-
able and  rapid  mental  advance  may  bring  us  into
conflict  with  our  hereditary  thought  and  habits.*
Nevertheless  such  conflict  is  uncomfortable  and
must  not  be  allowed  to  continue  long,  at  risk  of
mental  or  bodily  disease.  It  may  indicate  either
that  the  hereditary  attitude  has  to  be  modified,
or  possibly  on  the  other  hand  that  a  mental  posi-
tion has  been  rashly  taken  up  which  may  have
to  be  abandoned  or  altered.  The  Brain  may  be
at  fault,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Great  Sympa-
thetic may    be.      Diseases   arc   not  unfrequently

1  More  strictly  speaking,  between  the  fore-brain  or  Cerebrum
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Great  Sympathetic  j^/us  the  hind-
brain  and  the  spinal  system  on  the  other.

*  Metchnikoff  suggests  that  some  "disharmonies"  in  Man
are  caused  by  his  highly  developed  Brain  bringing  him  into  "a
oew  path  of  evolution,"


The  Art  of  Creation

the  clearing  and  expiation  of  this  conflict,  and
in  that  sense  they  too  are  not  always  to  be
regretted,  nor  necessarily  to  be  looked  on  as
retrogressions.  But  this  subject,  which  is  a  large
one,  cannot  be  fully  considered  here.

The  Conscious  Mind  we  may  then  regard  as
the  latest  outgrowth  and  expression  of  the  un-
folding Ego  ;  and  in  that  sense  it  is  very  im-
portant. But  to  expect  our  bodies  at  every
moment  to  transform  themselves  into  expressions
of  its  passing  moods  would  be  an  absurd  thing  to
do.  It  is  only  the  advance  guard,  as  it  were,  of  a
moving  column ;  the  bud  on  the  branch ;  the
crest  on  the  wave.  And  it  is  easy  to  see  that
without  the  other  —  without  the  subconscious
Mind  and  the  life  of  the  Body,  without  the  great
race-Mind  behind  it  (and  those  other  orders  of
consciousness)  to  which  it  is  affiliated,  it  is  but  a
very  poor  thing,  and  of  comparatively  little  scope
and  value.

It  is  perhaps  the  fault  of  the  modern  Brain  or
conscious  Mind  that  it  has  not  perceived  this.
From  the  moment  when  the  sense  of  Self  (as  a
separate  being)  evolved  within  primitive  man,  and
entered  into  distinct  consciousness,  from  that
moment  an  immense  stimulus  was  given  to  the
Brain  or  the  conscious  Mind  (to  devise  satis-
factions and  expressions  for  the  individual  self  as
apart  from  the  race)  ;  and  the  enormous  develop-
ment of  brain-power  and  thought  (all  in  the
second  stage  of  consciousness)  during  the  period
of  Civilisation  goes  with  this   fact.     On   which

io8


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

indeed  we  may  congratulate  ourselves ;  but  it  has
led  to  a  fearful,  and  for  the  time  being  most
sinister,  divorce  between  the  two  parts  of  man's
nature.  Amid  the  clatter  of  self-interests  and
self-conscious  brain  activities,  the  presence  and
the  functioning  of  other  orders  of  mind  within
us  have  been  discounted  and  disregarded  ;  and,
cut  off  from  the  mass  and  communal  life  around
him,  from  the  race-life  behind,  and  the  heaven-
life  within,  the  little  self-conscious  man  has  be-
come a  puny  creature  indeed.

We  must  in  the  future  look  to  a  restoration  of
the  harmony  between  (roughly  speaking)  the  Mind
and  the  Body,  the  Brain  and  the  great  Sympathetic,
the  conscious  and  the  subconscious  Man.  "Why,"
asks  Mr.  W.  H.  Hudson  in  his  last  nature-story,^
"  why  does  the  brightness  of  the  mind  [so  often]
dim  that  beautiful  physical  brightness  which  the
wild  animals  have  .?  "  The  recovery  of  the  organic
consciousness,  the  realisation  of  the  transparency
of  the  body  and  the  splendour  of  its  intuitions,  is
not  an  impossible  feat.  The  Hindus  and  other
Orientals  have  in  these  directions,  partly  by
deliberate  practice,  come  into  touch  with  and
command  of  regions  whose  existence  the  Western
peoples  hardly  suspect.  In  the  West,  the  modern
upgrowth  of  Woman  and  her  influence  will  ere
long  make  possible  a  Humanity  which  shall
harmonise  even  in  each  individual  the  mascu-
line and  the  feminine  elements,  and  bring  back  at
last  the  Brain  and  the  self-conscious  mind  into

*  "Green  Mansions."
109


The  Art  of  Creation

relation  with  that  immense  storehouse  of  agelong
knowledge  and  power  which  is  represented  by  the
physical  body  in  the  individual,  as  it  is  repre-
sented by  the  communal  life  and  instinct  in  the
mass-people.

Thus  finally,  looking  back  on  what  has  been
said,  we  see  that  the  whole  of  Creation  falls
together  into  expressions  of  the  One  endless,
boundless,  fathomless  Self  and  its  myriad  affiUa-
tions — expressions  reached  by  infinite  divisions
into,  and  differentiations,  fusions,  and  concatena-
tions of  the  primitive  elements  of  consciousness.
Cells,  plants,  lichens,  molluscs,  fish,  quadrupeds,
bee  and  insect  swarms,  birds,  planets,  solar
systems,  races  of  men  and  animals,  societies —
organisms  far-stretching  in  time  as  well  as  in
space — all  illustrate  this  conception.  The  v/hole
of  Creation  is  alive.  But  we  now  understand,
when  we  look  at  a  man  or  a  bee,  that  we  are  not
looking  at  a  little  separate  being  that  has  sprung
as  it  were  full-armed  out  of  the  ground  in  the
course  of  a  few  days  or  years,  and  whose  actions
and  perceptions  are  rounded  by  that  scope;  but
that  we  arc  looking  at  a  being  who  stretches
(through  affiliation  after  affiliation)  into  the  far
**  backward  and  abysm  of  Time,'*  who  through
endless  centuries  has  been  seeking  to  express
itself;  nevertheless  whose  consciousness  is  here
and  now  in  its  visible  body,  as  well  as  in  that
agelong  world-life.  The  ego  of  the  Bee,  we
understand,  is  not  a  perishable  thing  of  six  or

no


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

seven  weeks'  duration,  but  is  in  its  essence  one
with  the  **  Spirit  of  the  Hive"  (whence  comes
the  utter  readiness  of  the  Bee  to  give  its  little
body  for  the  safety  of  the  Hive)  ;  the  particular
hive  or  colony  of  bees  again  is  affiliated  to  the
whole  race  of  domestic  bees,  and  this  again  to  the
further  back  race  of  wild  bees ;  and  when  our
little  friend  comes  humming  along  the  southern
wall  among  the  early  blooms  in  the  February
morning  she  brings  (as  we  feel)  a  message  not
of  the  moment,  but  of  things  aeonian  slumbering
deep  in  our  hearts  as  well  as  in  hers.

This  aliveness  of  all  Nature,  and  its  derivation
from  one  absolute  and  eternal  Self,  must  be
realised.  And  if  at  times  the  multiplexity  of
egos,  as  of  gnats  in  the  summer  sunshine,  in
myriad  procession  and  endless  turmoil,  seems
appalling  and  fatiguing ;  then  at  other  times
their  fusion  and  affiliation  with  each  other  into
larger  and  grander  beings  of  comparative  fewness
seems  consoling ;  and  even  the  conclusion  of  their
ultimate  Oneness  may  bring  a  sense  of  immense
majesty  and  calm — which,  if  it  should  be  touched
with  melancholy,  would  lead  us  back  quite  natur-
ally to  the  multiplexity  again  !

We  may  envisage  the  matter  as  we  like,  and
according  to  our  mood.  Sufficient  that  it  is  a
facile  which  we  have  to  realise :  we  may  say,  the
fact  of  the  universe.

Let  us  return  for  a  moment  to  the  elementary
act  of  knowledge  or  perception,  from  which  we
started  four  chapters  back.     I  come  to  the  gate

III


The  Art  of  Creation

of  a  wood  and  see,  before  me,  the  massed  foliage
and  congregated  stems.  It  seems  a  little  matter,
but  within  that  simple  act  sleep  the  immensities.
I  am  an  artist,  and  the  light  and  shade  and  colour
attract  me,  rousing  emotions  which  I  do  not
analyse ;  the  whisper  of  the  leaves  and  the  songs
of  the  birds  wake  far-back  feelings  dating  from
ancestral  ages.  I  am  a  woodman,  and  I  see  the
size  and  quality  of  the  timber  ;  all  the  adjuncts
of  wood-craft — the  brushing,  the  peeling,  the
felling,  and  the  hauling  with  horses — rustle  around
me ;  and  dim  visions  rise  of  the  log-cabins  or
wattled  huts  in  which  my  forefathers  lived.  The
mystery,  in  either  case,  and  the  wild  life  of  the
woods  are  there,  though  unseen ;  and  the  instincts
which  led  the  Britons  to  seek  them  for  a  cover
and  a  refuge,  or  the  Druids  to  hold  their  worship
among  them.  All  these  things  are  present  some-
how in  that  act  of  perception.  And  so  are  the
far  remembrance  of  fear  and  primitive  terror,  the
vision  of  nymphs  and  wood-gods,  and  things
deep  down  in  the  life  of  the  animals,  and  of  the
trees  themselves,  or  even  in  the  life  of  the  planet.
A  wonderful  aura  and  halo  surrounds  that  little
scene  from  the  gate,  and  is  latent  in  its  every
detail.  The  young  moon  sails  above  in  the  pure
sky  of  evening,  and  an  immense  peace,  as  of  some
eternal  being,  descends,  folding  in  silence  the  soul
of  the  onlooker.

The  knowledge  of  our  unfathomable  life  is
implicit  in  every  least  act  of  perception.  Nor
does  it  bar  the  expression  of  our  most  determined

112


The  Self  and  its  Affiliations

individuality.  Nay,  it  needs  this  forks  expression.
It  stands  revealed  and  manifest  in  the  words  and
actions  o^  V>umanity's  best-loved  children.

**  Afar  down  I  see  the  huge  first  Nothing,  I  know  I  was  eren
there,

I  waited  unseen  and  always,  and  slept  thro'  the  lethargic  mist,

And  took  my  time,  and  took  no  hurt  from  the  fetid  carbon.

Long  I  was  hugg'd  close — long  and  long.

Immense  have  been  the  preparations  for  me,

Faithful  and  friendly  the  arms  that  have  help'd  me.

Cycles  ferri«»H  my  cradle,  rowing  and  rowing  like  cheerful  boat-
men,

For  room  to  me  stars  kept  aside  in  their  own  rings."

So  says  Whitman  of  the  past — and  we  need  not
doubt  his  word.     And  again  of  the  future  : —

**  It  avails  not,  time  nor  place — distance  avails  not,
I  am  with  you  men  and  women  of  a  generation,  or  ever  so  many
generations  hence."

And  again  Jesus  of  Nazareth  says  : —
*'  Lo  !  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end
of  the  world."


NOTE   ON   THE   GREAT   SYMPATHETIC

J.  G.  Davey,  following  in  some  degree  the  ideas  of
Bichat,  published  in  1858  a  book  on  "The  Ganglionic
Nervous  System,"  which  has  been  of  importance.  He
considered  that  the  Solar  Plexus  was  the  first  part  of
the  nervous  system  formed  in  the  embryo,  and  that  it
and  the  Great  Sympathetic  generally  exercised  an  archi-
tectural power,  presiding  over  the  formation  and  life  of

113  H


The  Art  of  Creation

the  body  and  the  organs — a  power  to  which  even  the
brain  and  the  spinal  cord  were  subordinate.  Though
his  views  are  by  no  means  universally  accepted,  yet  many
of  the  later  physiologists  and  psychologists  have  advanced
along  the  line  he  indicated,  and  have  connected  the
Great  Sympathetic  system  not  only  with  the  regula-
tion of  the  bodily  organs,  but  with  the  generation  of
the  Emotions.  The  connection  between  emotion  and
physiological  change  in  the  body  is  of  course  well  known.
Every  emotion  is  accompanied  by  organic  disturbances —
of  the  respiration,  of  the  heart,  of  the  vaso-motor  system
(as  in  blushing),  or  of  the  secretions  (as  of  tears,  saliva,
bile),  and  so  forth.  And  the  nerve-centres  which  mainly
dominate  these  movements  and  disturbances  arc  known
to  be  situated  in  the  Great  Sympathetic.  This  system,
therefore,  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  organ  of
the  Emotions,  in  something  the  same  way  as  the  Brain
is  regarded  as  the  organ  of  Thought.  William  James,
Lange,  Ribot,  Hack  Tuke,  Fer6  take  this  view  more
or  less  decisively,  though  others  still  oppose  it.

William  James  says :  "  The  general  causes  of  the
emotions  are  indubitably  physiological.  Bodily  changes
follow  directly  the  perception  of  the  exciting  fact,  and
.  .  .  our  feeling  of  the  same  changes  as  they  occur  is
the  emotions"  ("Principles  of  Psychology,"  vol.  ii.  ch.
XXV.).  Fere  says  :  "The  Great  Sympathetic  seems  to  be
the  peripheral  organ  of  the  emotions  "  ("  Pathology  of  the
Emotions  ").  Hack  Tuke  says  :  "  The  emotions  are  pro-
bably much  more  nearly  associated,  than  the  intellectual
faculties,  with  the  nervous  centres  [i.e.  Great  Sympa-
thetic], which  influence  the  vascularity  of  the  secreting

114


Note  on  the  Great  Sympathetic

glands"  ("Influence  of  Mind  upon  Body,"  2nd  edition,
p.  146).  And  so  on.  This  docs  not,  of  course,  mean  that
emotion  can  be  generated  in  the  gangh'onic  centres  with-
out the  co-operation  of  the  brain.  While  disturbances  of
these  centres  are  the  ground  and  foundation  of  emotion,  the
very  clear  consciousness  of  it  no  doubt  means  a  functioning
of  the  brain.  That  is  to  say,  the  agitation  of  the  Great
Sympathetic  reports  itself  in  the  brain  as  distinct  con-
sciousness, just  as  it  reports  itself  in  the  spinal  cord  and
medulla  as  the  cause  of  gesticulatory  expressions  and
movements.  And  the  fact  that  nerves  direct  from  the
brain-system,  and  others  from  the  medullary  and  spinal
system,  interlace  in  the  Sympathetic  plexuses  shows  this
intimate  connection,  and  suggests  the  idea  that  complete
emotional  sensibility  probably  means  an  interaction  of
the  three  systems — the  Conscious,  the  Reflex,  and  the
Organic.

Some  of  the  modern  authorities  arc  also  inclined  to
follow  the  line  of  Davey  in  regarding  the  Great  Sym-
pathetic as  the  most  primary  and,  in  a  sense,  the  most
independent  of  the  three  systems,  and  as  the  seat  of  a
primitive  sensibility  or  consciousness,  which  later  became
more  definite  and  distinct  through  the  intermediation  of
the  other  systems.  H.  H.  Goddard  [Ajnerican  Journal
of  Psychology)  allows  that  in  Man  brain-consciousness  is
general ;  but  says  that  this  need  not  extinguish  all  the
lower  ganglionic  consciousness  which  is  the  evolutionary
basis  of  brain-consciousness.  And  Th.  Ribot,  in  the  first
few  pages  of  his  "  Psychology  of  the  Emotions  "  contends
that  beneath  the  conscious  life  of  feeling  there  is  a  very
low  and  obscure  region  of  vital  or  organic  sensibility —

"5


The  Art  of  Creation

the  embryonic  form  of  conscious  sensibility  ;  and  that
the  organic  or  vegetative  life  is  everyw^here  the  founda-
tion for  the  animal  life — in  other  words,  that  emotion
and  the  affective  life  underlies  the  intellectual.

With  regard  to  the  Ganglionic  System  being  that
part  of  the  nervous  system  first  formed  in  the  embryo,
the  matter  does  not  yet  seem  to  have  been  decisively
settled ;  and  some  physiologists  look  upon  the  Great
Sympathetic  as  the  primitive  and  original  nerve  system,
while  others  regard  it  as  an  outgrowth  from  the  cerebro-
spinal system.  The  probability  seems  to  be  that  the
Great  Sympathetic,  as  far  as  it  presides  over  the  mere
existence  and  vegetative  life  of  the  organs,  is  the  most
primitive,  and  corresponds  most  closely  to  the  ganglia  and
undifferentiated  nerve-fibre  which  preside  over  very  lowly
organisms  like  the  hydra  ;  that  later  on,  and  with  the
evolution  of  motor  capacities  in  the  animal  world,  the
spinal  and  reflex  system  comes  into  prominence  side
by  side  with  the  Sympathetic ;  and  that,  later  again,
the  brain,  as  an  outgrowth  of  the  spinal  system,  marks
— in  man  and  the  higher  animals — the  evolution  of  dis-
tinct processes  of  Thought,  apart  from  or  only  loosely
connected  with  movement  and  feeling.  At  every  period
in  this  world-process  there  is  sensibility  or  consciousness
of  some  kind,  even  if  at  first  of  a  very  lowly  or  indefinite
kind  ;  but  at  each  period  the  new  developments  of  con-
sciousness added  or  evoked  by  experience  tend  to  overlay
or  drown  the  earlier  developments,  which  thus  pass  into
the  region  of  subconsciousness.

Thus  the  second  stage  of  consciousness,  going  especi-
ally with  the  evolution  of  the  brain,  has  in  the  case  of

Ii6


Note  on  the  Great  Sympathetic

Man  largely  drowned  or  disguised  his  earlier  sensibilities
and  intuitions.  Is  it  feasible  to  suppose  that  the  third
stage  will  correspond  with  a  recovery  of  these  more
diffused  and  general  sensibilities,  and  a  much  closer
intimacy  and  alliance  between  the  three  great  Nerve
systems,  which  will  make  the  undue  preponderance
of  any  one  of  them  impossible,  and  consciousness  a
simultaneous  act  of  them  all,  pervasive  throughout
the  body  ?


VII

PLATONIC   IDEAS   AND   HEREDITY

Though  experience  coming  from  the  outer  world
affects  the  Mind  (through  the  senses),  yet  the  way
this  experience  is  seized  and  combined  is  largely
given  by  the  Mind  itself.  There  is,  as  we  have
already  said,  a  subjective  element  in  all  knowledge
— and  without  it  there  can  be  no  knowledge.

This  subjective  element  may  arise  from  previous
experience,  as  when  we  recognise  the  hare  sitting
in  its  '  form  *  in  a  distant  field  because  we  have
already  seen  other  hares  so  sitting,  perhaps  much
nearer.  The  mind  is  ready,  as  it  were,  to  take
the  required  shape  and  attitude,  and  may  do  so
even  under  doubtful  or  misleading  circumstances,
because  it  has  taken  the  same  shape  and  attitude
so  often  before.  And  we  can  hardly  doubt  that
through  heredity  also,  in  som.e  way,  as  well  as
through  our  own  individual  experience,  the  mind
acquires  the  habit  of  making  certain  combinations
and  interpretations  of  the  outer  world.

But  it  is  also  obvious  that  there  is  a  great  deal
on  the  subjective  side  of  knowledge  which  is  given
antecedently  to  all  experience,  hereditary  or  in-
dividual— as  when  the  sense  of  likeness  or  difference

arises,  or  of  size^  or  of  number  ;  or  when  so  many

ii8


Platonic  Ideas  and  Heredity

taps  on  the  ear  combine  to  a  musical  sound^  or  so
many  vibrations  in  the  optic  nerve  to  the  im-
pression of  blue  or  red ;  or  when  sounds  combine
to  a  sense  of  harmony  or  of  melody ;  or  when  cer-
tain vibrations  and  agitations  of  the  body  coalesce
to  the  emotion  of  fear,  or  other  vibrations  and
agitations  to  love;  or  v/hcn  certain  perceptions
grouped  together  give  rise  to  the  sense  of  justice^
or  of  truth,  or  of  beauty.

In  all  these  cases,  though  the  mental  state  thus
produced  may  grow  from  small  beginnings  and  by
means  of  experience,  yet  it  is  in  a  sense  prior  to
experience — that  is  to  say,  it  is  inconceivable  that
a  succession  of  taps  on  the  drum  of  the  ear  should
be  combined  into  one  and  heard  as  a  single
musical  sound,  unless  the  power  of  so  combining
taps  was  in  the  mind  prior  to  experience.  Or  it  is
clear  that  two  sounds  might  go  on  side  by  side  in
the  ear  for  ever,  and  not  be  heard  as  harmony, unless
the  mind  added  to  the  two  that  third  and  separate
thing  v/hich  is  the  sense  of  their  harmony.  Cer-
tainly the  sense  of  harmony  mjght  at  first  be  felt
in  some  very  simple  relation  of  two  notes,  and
afterv/ards  might  grow  and  be  extended  to  much
more  remote  and  multiplex  relations ;  but  all  the
same  it  would  from  the  first  be  an  original
synthesis  contributed  from  within.  So  of  the
sense  of  likeness  or  difference.  In  whatever  un-
developed mind  of  infant  or  animal  it  first  occurs
to  feel  that  two  experiences,  not  only  arc  each
what  they  are,  but  that  they  are  like  or  unlike

each   other,  the  new  experience  (of   likeness   or

1/9


The  Art  of  Creation

unlikeness)  is  something  added  by  the  mind.  It
represents  a  new  power  or  faculty  developedj  and
totally  unlike  all  its  former  powers  and  faculties.

So  again  when  a  great  number  of  inchoate
movements  in  the  tissues  and  nerves  of  the  body,
and  agitations  of  the  muscles,  organs  and  secre-
tions, with  the  internal  sensations  they  convey,
are  all  combined  in  one  emotion  of  fear,  or
another  set  of  movements  and  sensations  in  one
emotion  of  love,  these  emotions  are  totally  different
from  the  sensations  and  movements  so  combined.
They  are  something  added  by  the  mind  to  the
group  of  sensations ;  they  are  its  way  of  seizing
and  combining  the  group.  Lastly,  certain  groups
of  experiences  excite  in  our  minds  the  sense  of
Justice  or  of  Truth  or  of  Beauty;  but  we  are
utterly  unable  to  conceive  that  these  great  ideas
are  in  the  separate  experiences  or  events  them-
selves, but  they  are  our  way  of  looking  at  them,
our  feeling  with  regard  to  them.

I  have  insisted  on  the  aspect  of  all  these  things

as  feelings.     They  are  sensations,  emotions,  states

or  affections  of  the  Mind.     They  are  the  qualities

given   by  the  mind  to   its  various  combinations

of  experience.     Time,  Space,  and  Causality,  said

Kant,   are    universal    forms    or   qualities    of  the

understanding — conditions  of  our  perception  of

outer    experience.      But   (we    may  say)   redness,

blueness,  sound,  heat,  similarity,  order,  harmony,

love,  justice,  beauty,  &c.,  are  qualities  given  by  the

mind  still  deeper  down,  and  projected  by  it  into

the  world  of  space,  time,  and  causality.     They

1 20


Platonic  Ideas  and  Heredity

are  the  names  for  feelings,  states,  or  ideas^  if  we
like  to  call  them  so,  aboriginal  and  primitive  in
the  mind  itself.

And  here  comes  in  a  most  important  point —
the  distinction,  namely,  between  the  two  aspects
of  each  of  these  things — the  inner  or  the  outer,
the  emotional  or  the  intellectual,  the  synthetic  or
the  analytic  :  the  neglect  of  which  distinction  has
been  the  cause  of  endless  confusion.

In  fact,  we  see  that  each  of  these  affections  (the
experience  of  a  musical  sound,  for  example,  or  of
similarity,  or  of  justice)  is  on  one  side  a  perfectly
simple  and  undecomposable  feeling  ;  while  on  the
other  side  it  resolves  itself  into  a  relation,  possibly
quite  complex,  between  objects.  Thus  the  sound
of  a  violin  string  is  on  its  inner  and  deeper  side  a
simple  and  unique  sensation,  but  in  its  more
external  and  analytic  aspect  it  appears  as  a  series
of  vibrations  of  very  complex  form  falling  in  a
particular  way  on  the  ear.  Similarity  is  from  one
point  of  view  a  simple  state  or  affection  of  the
mind,  from  the  other  it  figures  out  in  the  form
of  multiplex  relations  between  objects.  So  of
Justice  ;  on  the  one  side  all  the  labyrinthine  detail
of  statutes  and  courts  of  law ;  on  the  other  a
severe  unique  sentiment.  Herbert  Spencer  has
a  long  and  eloquent  passage  in  which  he  shows
analytically  and  from  the  intellectual  side  the
vast  complexity  of  love.  Dr.  Bucke  says  that
love  is  a  perfectly  simple  moral  state  defying
analysis !

It    is   obvious   that   unless   we   recognise    the

121


The  Art  of  Creation

two-sided n ess  of  these  mental  states,  we  are  liable
to  be  landed  in  the  utmost  confusion.  Let  us  call
such  a  mental  state  (following  the  nomenclature
of  Plato,  but  perhaps  somewhat  extending  it),
which  on  its  inner  side  appears  as  a  simple  quality
or  feeling,  but  on  its  outer  side  is  a  structure  more
or  less  complex,  an  "  idea."  Then  the  units  of
the  mind's  operations  arc  such  ideas,  which  on
one  side  arc  relations,  and  on  the  other  side  are
simple  structureless  feelings.^  But  it  is  to  be
noted  that  the  latter  side  seems  to  be  the  more
intimate  and  essential,  because  the  same  feeling
may  be  associated  with  more  than  one  set  of  rela-
tions— as  when  the  sense  of  harmony  in  music  is
provoked  by  more  than  one  chord,  or  the  sense
of  injustice  by  various  possible  relations  between
folk.

There  is  another  point  which  must  be  noted,  Le,
the  structure  of  ideas  with  regard  to  one  another.
Thus,  to  take  the  case  of  music,  to  which  we  have
so  often  referred  :  taps  on  the  ear  combine  to  the
sensation  or  idea  of  sound ;  but  the  sensations
of  sound  combine  to  the  idea  of  harmony  or  of
melody.  Harmonies  and  melodies  again  combine
to  a  much  more  complex  structure — a  musical
phrase.  This  structure  in  its  turn  wakes  an
emotion^  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  other  side  of  it.
Whenever  we  hear  the  phrase  the  same  emotion

^  The  distinction  between  "ideas"  and  concepts  must  be
clearly  held  in  mind.  The  concept  of  a  dog  is  a  purely  intel-
lectual abstraction — a  symbol,  so  to  speak,  of  dogs  in  general —
with  no  feeling  necessarily  attached  to  it.  An  idea  is  not  an
idea  unless  it  carries  with  it  feeling  and  power.

122


Platonic  Ideas  and  Heredity

recurs.  Finally,  a  whole  series  of  phrases,  with
their  accompanying  emotions,  make  up  a  musical
piece,  which  excites  in  us  some  still  grander  syn-
thesis and  sense  of  Beauty  or  Truth  or  Freedom.

Let  us  suppose  the  composer's  mind  filled  with
the  sense  of  Beauty  taking  some  definite  form.
Then  that  single  idea  in  his  mind  generates  the
whole  musical  piece.  For  it  first  of  all  regulates
the  balance  and  structure  of  the  component  emo-
tions of  the  piece.  Each  of  these  emotions  in  its
turn  determines  the  musical  phrase  which  expresses
it.  The  harmonies  and  melodies  again  needful
for  the  musical  phrase  determine  the  various  rela-
tions to  each  other  of  the  single  notes  ;  and  lastly,
the  single  notes  determine  the  number  of  air-vibra-
tions necessary  for  their  production.  Thus  the
whole  complex  of  mechanical  air- vibration  is  gener-
ated and  determined  by  the  single  idea  or  feeling
of  Beauty  in  the  composer's  mind,  acting  through
lesser  and  subordinate  ideas.  And,  vice  versd,  the
public  listening  to  the  complex  of  air-vibrations
is  led  up  again  step  by  step  to  the  realisation  of
and  participation  in  that  same  root-idea  which  from
the  beginning  was  responsible  for  its  generation.

Whoever  clearly  follows  ikis  concatenation  and  sub-
ordination of  Ideas  and  their  creative  power^  has
already  come  a  long  way  towards  understanding,
not  only  the  generation  of  a  musical  piece,  but
the  generation  and  creation  of  all  nature  and
human  life.

For  the  instant  a  new  Idea  or  synthesis  is  mani-
fested, say  in  the  mind  of  a  child  (and  <-he  instant

123


The  Art  of  Creation

can  often  be  observed),  or  in  an  adult  mind —
whether  it  be  the  simple  idea  of  number,  or  of
harmony,  or  of  truth,  or  what  not — it  determines
both  observation  and  action :  it  guides  as  to  what
we  shall  perceive  and  as  to  how  we  shall  act.
Take  the  sense  of  Order  coming  to  a  child.  The
moment  of  this  happening  may  often  be  noticed
— the  new  perception  of  what  order  means,  and
the  new  feeling  of  pleasure  in  it.  The  two  to-
gether constitute  the  idea  of  order.  And  at  once
the  child  sees  new  facts  in  the  world  around  it,
and  arranges  its  life  and  belongings  anew.

I'hus  again  if  the  idea  of  Justice  is  present
among  a  people — though  it  may  be  but  a  senti-
ment at  first  and  on  its  inner  side,  yet  quickly  on
its  outer  side  it  gives  itself  structure,  and  regulates
the  conflicting  desires  and  emotions  and  needs  of
the  people ;  and  these  emotions  and  desires  so
regulated  from  above  do  each  of  them  in  their
turn  generate  and  regulate  groups  of  habits  and
customs ;  and  these  again  each  in  their  turn
innumerable  individual  acts.  And  so  the  idea  of
Justice  becomes  creative  and  alive  throughout  the
whole  State.

Plato,  as  is  well  known,  gave  to  Ideas  in  some

such    sense    as    this  the  greatest  import.     They

existed    before    the    world,   and    the    world    was

created  after  their  pattern  (see  the  "Timaeus").

And  we  can  see,  from  what  has  already  been  said,

that  they  are  somehow  implicit  in  the  Ego  before

all  experience.     As  they  descend  into  operation

and  consciousness  within  the  Man,  they  shape  his

124


Platonic  Ideas  and  Heredity-
life  and  form,  and  through  him  again  the  outer
world.  Thus  there  is  a  point  in  evolution  un-
doubtedly when  the  thought  and  feeling  of  self-
ness  emerges  in  the  child  or  the  monkey,  or
another  point  when  the  idea  of  courage  dawns  on
the  early  man  or  the  growing  boy ;  and  instantly
in  each  case  we  see  what  immense  vistas  of  life,
and  forms  of  life  and  action,  what  different
ramifications  and  institutions  of  society,  proceed
from  one  such  inner  birth.

With  Plato  the  great  ruling  Ideas  were  Justice,
Temperance,  Beauty,  and  the  like.  But  he  also
considered  that  there  were  ideas  or  patterns,  eter-
nal in  the  heavens,  of  all  tribes  and  creatures  in
the  world,  as  of  trees,  animals,  men,  and  the  lesser
gods  ;  and  he  even  went  so  far  as  to  suppose  ideas
of  things  made  by  man*s  artifice,  such  as  beds  and
tables  (see  "Republic,"  Book  X.).  Certainly  it
sounds  a  little  comic  at  first  to  hear  the  "  absolute
essential  Bed "  spoken  of,  and  Plato  has  been
considerably  berated  by  many  folk  for  his  daring
in  this  matter.  He  has  been  accused  of  con-
founding the  idea  of  a  bed  with  the  concept  of  a
bed ;  it  has  been  said  too  that  if  there  are  ideas
of  beds  and  tables,  trees  and  animals,  there  must
also  be  archetypes  in  heaven  of  pots  and  pans —
absolutely  essential  worms,  beetles  and  toadstools,
and  so  forth.  Plato,  however,  had  no  doubt  con-
sidered these  difficulties,  and  it  may  be  worth
while  for  our  purpose  to  pause  a  moment  over
them.

If  it  were  the  mere  concept  of  a  bed,  it  would
125


The  Art  of  Creation

of  course  be  absurd  to  give  it  any  essential  reality.
For  the  concept  is  a  mere  intellectual  abstraction
derived  from  the  perception  of  a  great  number  of
actual  beds,  and  is  certainly  less  real  than  the
things  of  which  it  is,  so  to  speak,  a  rough  sketch.
But  the  Idea,  as  we  have  said,  though  it  may  have
intellectual  structure  on  its  outer  side,  is  on  its
inner  side  essentially  a  feeling.  It  is  the  feeling
of  Bed  which  constitutes  the  Idea,  and  is  creative.
Now  in  Man  there  is  essentially  such  a  feeling —
a  need  and  desire  of  sleep  and  the  horizontal
position.  How  deep  this  feeling  may  root  in
the  nature  of  Man  it  might  be  hard  to  say,  but
we  can  see  that  it  is  very,  very  profound.  And
from  it  spring  all  imaginable  actual  beds,  of
most  various  shape  and  construction,  yet  all  in
their  ways  adapted  and  giving  form  to  that
feeling.

I  say  the  idea  of  Bed  in  this  sense  is  rooted
most  deep  and  far  back  in  the  nature  of  Man.
But  Man  himself  and  his  nature  is  rooted  deep  in
the  nature  of  God,  from  whom  he  springs — and
so  may  we  not  say  that  in  some  sense  the  idea  of
Bed  is  rooted  in  the  ultimate  reality  and  nature
of  things  ?

When  we  see  how  things  like  beds  and  tables
and  houses  may  thus  spring  from  needs  or  ideas,
like  Rest  and  Slielter,  lying  deep  in  the  very  con-
stitution of  man,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  further
how  the  forms  of  man's  body,  and  of  the  animals
and  trees  and  worms  and  beetles  and  toadstools,
may  have  been  (to  a  large  extent)  determined  and

126


Platonic  Ideas  and  Heredity-
created  by  the  feelings  or  ideas  slumbering  within
these  beings.  At  some  point  the  feeling  of
pleasure  and  safety  in  arboreal  life  lent  form  and
outline  to  the  whole  race  of  prehensile  monkeys ;
at  some  other  point  the  sweet  sensation  of  con-
trast between  the  moist  darkness  of  the  earth  and
the  sunlit  air  of  heaven  gave  birth  to  the  vast
tribe  of  vegetable  beings,  for  ever  seeking  by
upward  and  downward  ramifications  to  extend
the  glad  interchange  between  the  two  worlds.
That  these  creative  feelings  did  not  appear  to  the
individual  animals  and  vegetables  concerned  as
vast  and  luminous  "  Ideas,"  but  only  as  dim
semi-conscious  desires,  does  not  affect  the  argu-
ment that  in  this  way  creation  has  been  effected.
Nor  do  I  wish  to  say  that  this  is  quite  the  way  in
which  Plato  conceives  the  subject.  It  is  more
like  the  conception  of  Schopenhauer.  But  any-
how it  is  an  attempt  to  show  how  the  Platonic
ideas  may  be  brought  into  some  sort  of  line  and
harmony  with  modern  science  and  philosophy.
And  it  enables  us  dimly  to  see  how  the  great
panorama  of  creation  has  come  forth,  ever  deter-
mining and  manifesting  itself  from  within  through
the  disclosure  from  point  to  point  and  from  time
to  time  of  ever-new  creative  feelings  or  ideas —
the  whole  forming  an  immense  hierarchy,  cul-
minating in  the  grandest,  most  universal,  Being
and  Life.

Here,  in  the  contemplation  of  this  universal
Being,  this  primal  Self  of  all,  we  are  at  the  source
of  Creation.     In  this   primal  Self,  and  its  first

127


The  Art  of  Creation

differentiation,  we  may  suppose  to  exist  great
primitive  Ideas,  attitudes,  aspects — things  below
or  more  fundamental  than  Feeling,  which  yet
work  out  into  Feeling,  Thought,  and  Action.
These  ideas  are  working  everywhere  —  in  the
great  Self,  and  in  every  lesser  self  that  springs
therefrom ;  and  our  lives  are  their  expression
(differently  mingled  though  they  be  in  each
person,  and  always,  owing  to  the  conflict  of  exist-
ence, inadequately  expressed).  In  quite  inorganic
Nature,  we  still  perceive  ideas  of  a  certain  class
pervading  matter,  like  Attraction  or  Repulsion,
Rigidity  or  Fluidity,  Rest  or  Motion,  which  (as
we  have  noticed  before)  answer  to  feelings  which
we  have  within  ourselves.  In  more  organic
Nature  we  recognise  Life,  Sensitiveness,  Selfness
Affection  ;  and  in  our  fellow-man  ideas  of  Cour-
age, Justice,  Beauty,  and  so  forth.  Everywhere
in  Creation  we  see  ideas  working  which  answer
more  or  less  to  those  within  ourselves ;  and  it  is
this  answering  of  one  to  the  other,  of  the  outer
to  the  inner,  which  forms  the  very  ground  of  all
Science  and  Art,  and  the  joy  that  we  feel  in
Truth  and  Beauty.

But  in  the  Race  too,  as  well  as  in  the  indi-
vidual, these  ideas  are  working  ;  and,  in  fact,  it
is  through  the  Race  largely  that  they  gradually
gain  their  form  and  expression.  This  considera-
tion must  detain  us  a  moment,  as  it  is  important.

The  feelings  which  are  an  essential  part  of  Ideas
may  be  innate  in  the  human  mind,  and  the  capa-
city for  them   may  be  universal,  but   the  forms

128


Platonic  Ideas  and  Heredity

corresponding  may  vary  greatly  from  race  to
race.  The  feeling  of  number,  or  of  melody,  or
of  justice,  may  be  universal  in  mankind ;  but  the
arithmetical  systems,  or  the  diatonic-  scales,  or
the  social  institutions  of  the  various  races  may
be  very  various.  The  abstract  feeling  of  number
then,  or  of  melody,  or  of  justice,  may  correspond
to  the  Idea  of  Plato,  formless  in  the  heavens,  or
in  the  bosom  of  God  ;  but  when  it  comes  to  take
form  in  the  various  races  of  mankind  it  does  so
with  variety,  according  to  the  necessity  of  out-
ward circumstances,  and  the  genius  and  tradition
of  each  race.  Thus  Plato  feigns  in  the  *'Timasus"
that  the  universal  spirit  of  God  handed  over  the
seeds  of  the  immortal,  imperishable  Ideas  to  the
lesser  gods,  who,  each  according  to  the  race  of
men  or  animals  over  which  he  presided,  was  to
embody  these  seeds  in  external  forms.  Thus  the
various  races  of  living  creatures  arose — all  vivified
from  within  by  the  eternal  Ideas,  yet  all  having
their  various  structures  according  to  their  races,
and  the  genius  of  the  particular  god  presiding
over  the  race.

In  the  language  of  modern  Science,  using  the
term  "  Heredity  "  to  cover  much  the  same  ground
as  "  the  genius  of  the  race-god/'  we  should  say
that  while  the  ideas  (say  of  melody  and  of  flight
in  the  case  of  birds)  are  the  vivifying  impulses
of  any  class  of  creatures,  the  particular  forms
(as  of  songs  and  of  wings)  are  a  matter  of  slowly
growing  heredity  and  the  tradition  of  the  race.

Let  us  take  the  example  of  Courage  in  man.
129  I


The  Art  of  Creation

At  a  certain  stage  in  evolution,  doubtless,  the
idea  of  Courage  dawned  on  primitive  Man.  He
may  have  fought  in  a  scrambling,  spasmodic  way
before  that,  but  without  any  nucleus  to  his  ardour.
Now  round  this  new  idea,  this  new  sense,  a  dis-
tinct life  grew.  He  admired  courage  in  others,
he  strove  for  it  in  himself.  And  it  took  form.
The  idea  (which  in  the  abstract,  or  in  heaven,
may  be  formless  enough)  took  form — and  became
embodied  in  a  certain  type  of  man,  according  to
the  race,  according  to  its  tradition,  according  to
its  needs  and  environment.  The  physical  and
moral  type  of  courage  in  the  mind  of  a  Greek
(the  dress,  the  figure,  the  temperament,  the
character)  would  be  very  different  from  that  in
the  mind  of  a  North  American  Indian ;  and
that  again  from  the  type  in  the  mind  of  a
modern  soldier :  the  form  depending  on  more
or  less  traceable  external  conditions,  but  the  feel-
ing being  one  which  comes  to  all  races  and  men
at  a  certain  stage  of  growth.

Thus  Heredity  comes  in.  The  ancestors  having
all  been  accustomed  to  associate  Courage  with  a
certain  type  of  man  and  action,  we  can  hardly
doubt  that  in  some  way  {^pace  Weismann)  the
repeated  impressions  cohere  in  the  descendant,  or
at  least  leave  the  descendant  mind  the  more
ready  to  respond  to  that  particular  type ;  till
in  the  course  of  centuries  and  thousands  of  years,
a  particular  form  rouses  a  particular  feeling  with
the  greatest  intensity,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  a
feeling  calls  up  a  particular  form.     The  modern


Platonic  Ideas  and  Heredity

boy  sees  in  a  red-coat  soldier  an  emblem  of  super-
human valour,  when  a  befeathered  Apache  brave
would  only  fill  him  with  contempt  and  ridicule.
Thus  the  creative  Idea,  through  heredity  and
individual  experience  combined,  works  in  this
or  that  form  in  this  or  that  race — though  in
the  course  of  centuries,  with  changing  circum-
stances or  development,  the  form  too  may  slowly
change.

Or  we  may  take  the  example  of  Love — how  of
this  inner  feeling  a  certain  external  type  of  Woman
(owing  to  the  genius  and  heredity  and  circum-
stances of  the  race)  may  become  the  emblem  and
ideal,  how^  this  type  may  figure  as  the  goddess  of
Love  for  the  race,  and  become  a  great  power  in
the  midst  of  it.  Or  again  Justice — how  certain
institutions  getting  ingrained  by  heredity  in  race-
habit,  as  associated  with  this  sentiment,  acquire
a  great  sacredness  and  authority,  and  are  most
difficult  to  alter — though  to  other  races  or  folk
they  may  seem  quite  horrible.  Or  even  of  beds
and  tables — how  the  idea  of  a  bed  in  one  race
may  work  itself  out  in  a  ponderous  four-poster,
and  in  another  in  a  simple  mat  on  the  ground,
and  in  a  third  in  the  form  of  a  hammock.
Though  the  feeling  and  the  need  of  Sleep  may
be  practically  the  same  in  all  races,  yet  the  forms
and  structures  in  which  it  finds  expression  may
be  so  different  as  to  be  almost  meaningless  and
useless  to  those  unaccustomed  to  them.

Thus  we  get  a  glimpse  of  great  formative
ideas  lying  even  behind  the  evolution  of  races,

131


The  Art  of  Creation

and  largely  guiding  these  evolutions  (subject  of
course  to  external  influences,  and  such  things  as
the  clashing  of  the  ideas  of  one  race  with  those
of  another)  ;  and  we  see  how  the  expression  of
ideas,  through  the  long  race-life  and  the  repe-
tition of  them  in  the  same  form,  may  gain  an
extraordinary  intensity — a  subject  to  which  we
shall  return  in  the  next  chapter.  We  see  too
in  what  way  Plato  was  justified  in  saying  that
the  Ideas  were  the  real  things  and  the  mundane
objects  only  illusive  forms.  For  clearly  the  ham-
mock and  the  mat  and  the  four-poster,  and  all
the  countless  variations  of  these  are,  none  of  them,
the  absolute  essential  Bed  or  Bedness — but  rather
this  term  must  be  applied  to  that  profound
quality  of  man's  nature  from  which  all  mortal
beds  proceed.  And  clearly  all  the  horribly  dis-
cordant law-books  and  laws  and  lav/-courts  and
prisons  are  none  of  them  Justice ;  but  this  term
must  be  applied  to  that  deep  sentiment  of  which
all  these  are  the  lame  expression.  "  For  nothing
can  have  any  sense  except  by  reason  of  that  of
which  it  is  the  shadow."  And  finally,  we  may
ask  whether  for  a  true  understanding  of  the
trees  and  the  plants  and  the  animals  we  must
.not  refer  them  in  a  similar  way  to  the  root-
ideas  and  feelings  from  which  they  spring,  and
of  which  they  strive  to  be  the  expression.

To  recapitulate.  The  creative  source  is  in  the
transcendent  Self  of  all  things.  This  Self  at  its
first  differentiation  into  multiplex  '  aspects '    (or

132


Platonic  Ideas  and  Heredity

individualities)  manifests  at  the  same  time  the
Ideas  which  are  inherent  in  its  being  ;  ^  and  these
again  descend  into  Feeling,  Thought,  and  Action,
and  finally  into  external  structure  and  life — which
latter  may  be  looked  upon  as  largely  due  to  the
conditioning  or  limitation  of  the  ideas  manifested
in  one  individuality  by  those  manifested  in  an-
other. Anyhow,  we  can  see  that  the  manifesta-
tion takes  place  under  certain  external  conditions,
and  that  by  the  time  it  descends  into  actual  struc-
ture it  has  been  largely  swayed  by  those  condi-
tions. These  external  forms  built  up  in  any  race
for  the  manifestation  or  expression  of  Ideas  are
riveted  and  emiphasised  by  Heredity  (or  by  the
hammering  of  the  race-god  through  the  cen-
turies), and  acquire  an  extraordinary  sanctity  and
transcendent  glamour  through  this  process,  so
that  the  mere  appearance  of  the  form  instantly
wakes  the  Idea  or  deep  transcendent  feeling  which
belongs  to  it.  Thus  we  come  near  to  Plato's
avdjuivrja-i^^  and  see  how  a  kind  of  memory  of
celestial  visions  and  powers  may  be  roused  by
the  sight  of  mortal  things.

We  see  too  that  the  self  of  one  race,  having
branched    off  somewhere  from  the    primal  Self,

^  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  the  very  first  differentiation  of
the  One  into  the  Multiple  must  necessarily  mean  the  manifes-
tation of  certain  great  primal  Ideas — such  as  Union  (or  love),
Individuality  (or  pride),  Equality,  justice,  Power  the  life  of  the
Many  in  the  One),  Beauty  (the  beholding  of  the  One  in  the
Many),  Trurh,  and  so  forth.  The  Ideas  have  no  force  or
validity  of  their  own  except  as  inherent  in  the  primal  Being  or
in  those  beings  affiliated  to  it  ;  and  Being  has  no  differentiatior.
except  through  the  Ideas  which  it  manifests.

133


The  Art  of  Creation

may  embody  or  manifest  the  Ideas  in  somewhat
different  degree  or  different  order,  say  from  the
self  of  another  race  ;  and  again  that  the  indi-
vidual Ego  branching  from  the  race-Ego —
though  it  carries  on  the  general  forms  and  ideas
of  the  race — may  manifest  them  in  different
degree  or  combination  from  another  individual.
Yet  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  the  absolute
self  of  the  individual  is  still  ultimately  the
transcendent  World-self  (coming  down  in  time
through  the  Race-self,  but  by  no  means  neces-
sarily tied  to  the  race-forms),  and  that  the  indi-
vidual, notwithstanding  his  heredity,  has  still  an
access  and  appeal  to  a  region  and  powers  beyond
and  prior  to  all  heredity.


'34


VIII

THE    GODS   AS   APPARITIONS   OF   THE
RACE-LIFE

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  in  some
degree  the  mysterious  figures  of  the  gods — those
figures  which,  clothed  with  dominion  and  terror,
or  with  grace  and  beauty,  have  hovered  like
phantoms  for  thousands  and  scores  of  thousands
of  years  over  the  earlier  races  of  the  Earth.

When  we  look  back  at  the  wonderful  pano-
rama of  them — at  the  timeless  gods  of  Egypt,
the  strange  mesmeric  gods  of  India,  the  just  yet
merciful  Judges  of  Assyria,  the  gracious  deities
of  Greece,  the  v/ariike,  restless  powers  of  Scandi-
navia, the  fateful,  terrible  gods  of  Mexico,  and
all  the  grotesque,  half-brute,  half-human  idols  of
countless  savage  races ;  or  even  at  the  deities  and
saints  of  the  Christian  Church,  the  Virgin  Mary,
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  infant  or  the  crucified
Christ,  and  the  lesser  figures  grouped  round
them  in  the  Catholic  Heaven — the  question  can-
not but  force  itself  on  us :  What  is  the  meaning
of  it  all  ?  What  gave  to  these  figures  their
intense  reality  and  significance  for  the  people
over  whom  they  presided  ?

For  although  modern  Science  has  tackled  this
135


The  Art  of  Creation

question,  and  although  we  feel  that  the  current
explanations  which  it  gives  are  suggestive — as  of
generalisations  of  Nature-phenomena,  anthropo-
morphic superstitions,  idealisations  of  heroic  men
and  women,  and  so  forth,  modified  by  traditions
and  memories  and  dreams,  and  complicated  by
mistakes  in  the  meanings  of  words  and  names —
we  feel  also  that  these  explanations  fail  almost
entirely  to  account  for  the  astounding  power  and
influence  of  the  figures  concerned,  or  to  reveal
why  to  the  savage  and  untutored  mind  mere
traditions  and  generalisations  and  abstractions
should  have  acquired  such  intense  reality.

For  no  one  can  consider  the  subject  for  a
moment  without  seeing  that  for  each  race  its
gods  were  (at  any  rate  in  the  earlier  period  of
their  apparition)  actually  existent  beings.  When
we  read  that  Pheidippides,  having  been  sent  by
the  Athenians  to  Sparta  to  ask  for  aid  against
the  Persians,  was  exhausted  by  the  way  (for  he
covered,  it  was  said,  the  one  hundred  and  fifty
miles  in  less  than  two  days),  and  that  as  he  rested
for  a  moment  in  some  quiet  valley  beside  a
spring,  lo !  the  great  god  Pan  appeared  to  him,
and  his  voice  was  heard  promising  victory  to  the
Athenians ;  and  further,  that  the  latter  in  con-
sequence dedicated  a  temple  to  Pan  after  the
battle  of  Marathon,  and  honoured  him  thence-
forth with  annual  sacrifices  and  a  torch-race — we
cannot  but  feel  that  whatever  was  the  actual
occurrence,  the  popular  belief  in  the  reality  of
the  apparition  and  the  voice  was  irresistible.     Or

136


The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the  Race-Life

when  in  the  Homeric  epos  Athene  comes  from
the  sky  and  takes  Achilles  by  his  yellow  hair,
and  the  wrathful  hero,  at  the  behest  of  her  ter-
ribly brilliant  eyes,  sheathes  his  sword  ;  or  when
in  the  Mahabharata  the  supreme  god  Krishna,
in  the  form  of  the  charioteer,  holds  long  dis-
course with  Arjuna  on  the  field  of  battle,  speak-
ing words  of  eternal  and  divine  wisdom, — we  see
that  though  these  incidents  may  be  literary  in-
ventions, they  derive  all  their  force  from  the
fact  that  they  would  appeal  to  an  immense  and
v/ide-spread  conviction  that  such  incidents  could
and  did  occur.  Or  when  we  come  to  compara-
tively modern  w^itnesses,  like  Saint  Francis,  who
btheld  the  Madonna  descend  from  the  sky  and
place  in  his  arms  her  Divine  Son,  or  Catherine  of
Siena,  for  whom  Heaven  opened  and  showed  her
the  Christ  sitting  upon  the  Throne  ;  or  consider
hundreds  and  hundreds  of  similar  stories,  and
how  the  presence  and  activity  and  profound
influence  of  such  figures  and  beings  have  been
admitted  and  accepted  and  insisted  on  by  millions
and  millions  of  human  kind  in  all  races  and  in  all
ages  ;  and  the  belief  in  them  has  compelled  men
to  every  conceivable  heroism  and  devotion,  and
terror  of  death  and  sacrifice — it  is  impossible,  I
say,  not  to  see  how  intense  w^as  the  reality  with
which  they  were  credited,  and  difficult  not  to
suppose  that  (whatever  these  apparitions  actually
were)  they  represented  some  real  force  or  forces
influencing  mankind.

After  what  has  been  said  in  preceding  chapters
^37


The  Art  of  Creation

it  may  be  guessed  what  my  answer  would  be  to
these  questions.  It  is  that  these  figures  derive
their  profound  influence  from  the  fact  that  they
represent  the  life  of  the  race  itself;  that  they  are
the  manifestation  and  expression  of  that  life,  of
which  (as  far  as  our  bodies  are  concerned)  we  are
offshoots  and  affiliations — so  that  through  them
we  reach  to  another  and  more  extended  order
of  consciousness^  we  partake  of  a  vaster  life,  and
are  correspondingly  deeply  moved.  If  we  look
upon  the  vast  race-life  as  the  manifestation  of
one  great  aspect  of  the  World-Self  or  Ego,  and
on  the  great  formative  Ideas  of  the  race  as  its
gods,  whose  essence  is  eternal  but  whose  form
(as  v/e  saw  in  the  last  chapter)  is  apparitional  and
dependent  in  some  degree  on  outer  circumstances  ;
then  we  can  understand  how  through  these  forms
we  may  enter  into  the  race-life  and  the  great
Ideas  that  inspire  it,  and  come  one  step  nearer  to
the  world-self.  We  may  be  lifted  for  a  moment
out  of  our  work-a-day  existence  and  touch  upon
that  which  is  eternal.

For  the  moment  I  only  wish  to  suggest  this
general  answer — and  even  so  I  do  not  wish  to
limit  the  answer  too  much,  or  say  that  it  is  only
through  the  race-life  that  we  reach  a  higher  order
of  consciousness.  But  certainly  through  the  race-
consciousness  much  may  come ;  and  it  may  be
worth  while  to  consider  it  more  in  detail.

In  studying  any  phenomenon  of  the  past  it  is
always  advisable  to  try  and  detect  it  in  the  life  of
to-day.     And  the  moment  we  do  so  in  this  case

138


The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the  Race-Life

we  see  that  the  gods  are  still  Hving  and  real  all
around  us.  Allowing  all  one  may  for  mere  cant
or  custom,  yet  there  are  thousands  and  thousands
round  us  to  whom  the  figure  of  Christ,  say,  is  an
intense,  a  living,  and  an  actually  present  reality.
It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  all  these  people  are
merely  deceiving  themselves.  One  must  see  that
whatever  this  figure  is,  or  proceeds  from,  it  is
much  more  than  the  imagination  of  a  fairy  tale,
and  represents  a  real  power  there  present  and
acting  within  the  man.  It  is  a  thing  of  the  same
character  as  the  deities  of  olden  time.

Or  again,  who  is  there  so  unfortunate  as  not
to  have  had  the  experience,  in  ordinary  daily  life,
of  seeing  some  features,  perhaps  those  of  a  well-
known  person,  suddenly  transformed  into  the
lineaments  of  a  god — with  the  strangest  possible
sense  of  a  transcendent  Presence,  only  to  be
described  by  some  such  word  ^  Or  why,  on
occasions,  walking  along  the  crowded  streets
amid  all  the  rubbish  and  riff-raff  of  humanity,
does  a  face  suddenly  appear,  all  glorified  and
shining,  removed  by  a  measureless  gulf  from
those  around — and  disappear  again  in  the  stream?
What  is  the  meaning  of  these  sudden  halos  and
glamours  ^

Dr.  Bucke,  in  his  "  Memories  of  Walt  Whit-
man," describes  the  profound  impression  pro-
duced upon  him  by  his  first  interview  with  the
poet.  "  I  remember  well  how,  like  so  many
others,  I  was  struck,  almost  amazed,  by  the
beauty  and  majesty  of  his  person  and  the  gracious

139

/


The  Art  of  Creation

air  of  purity  that  surrounded  and  permeated  him.
We  did  not  talk  much,  nor  do  I  remember  any-
thing that  was  said,  but  it  would  be  impossible
for  me  to  fully  convey  by  words  or  in  any  way
to  describe  the  influence  upon  me  of  that  short
and  simple  interview.  A  sort  of  spiritual  intoxi-
cation set  in,  which  did  not  reach  its  culmination
for  several  weeks,  and  which,  after  continuing  for
some  months,  very  gradually,  in  the  course  of  the
next  few  years,  faded  out.  While  this  state  of
exaltation  remained  at  its  height  the  mental
image  of  the  man  Walt  Whitman  underwent
within  me  a  sort  of  glorification  (or  else  a  veil
was  withdrawn  and  I  saw  him  as  he  was  and  is),
insomuch  that  it  became  impossible  for  me  (I
am  describing  the  event  just  as  it  occurred,  and
as  accurately  as  possible)  to  believe  that  Whitman
was  a  mere  man.  It  seemed  to  me  at  that  time
certain  that  he  was  cither  actually  a  god  or  in  some
sense  clearly  and  entirely  preterhuman.  Be  all  this  as
it  may,  it  is  certain  that  the  hour  spent  that  day
with  the  poet  was  the  turning-point  of  my  life."
These  words  of  Dr.  Bucke  are  specially  interest-
ing as  coming  from  no  sentimental  youth,  but
from  a  man  of  scientific  and  practical  attainment
who  at  the  time  of  the  recorded  experience  was
fully  forty  years  old,  and  superintendent  of  a
large  insane  asylum  ;  and  they  show  clearly
enough  his  deliberate  conviction  that  he  beheld  in
Whitman  the  presence  of  a  being  divine  and
beyond  the  range  of  mortality.

Or  again,  we  ask,  why  do  the  mountain-peaks
140


The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the  Race-Life

and  the  thunder-clouds  sometimes  take  on  a
mystic  light,  and  stir  us  with  a  sense  of  some-
thing unearthly  ?  Why  in  the  sylvan  glades  do
we  become  aware,  perhaps  quite  unexpectedly,  of
a  breathless  stillness  and  magic,  and  the  trees
stand  as  though  the  Wood-god  himself  were
there,  and  the  air  exhales  a  mystery  ?  What  is
this  light  which  never  was  on  sea  or  land  ?  We
see  that  these  things  are  realities  in  the  sense  that
they  so  deeply  influence  us.  We  surmise  that
they  are  something  more  than  phantoms  or
fictions  of  our  own  individual  brains.

I  have  already  touched  upon  the  efl^ort  of
Plato  to  explain  these  mysteries.,  Plato  believed
in  a  world  of  Absolute  Forms  and  Essences
remaining  beyond  the  reach  of  Time.  There,  in
company  with  the  gods,  dwelt — and  for  ever
dwell — Justice  and  Temperance  and  Beauty  and
many  other  Ideas.  The  soul  of  every  man  in
some  earlier  state  of  being,  carried  round  in  the
retinue  of  that  special  god  to  whom  he  may
belong,  has  beheld  in  that  heavenly  world  these
divine  Essences.  But  fallen  now  to  Earth  it  has
wellnigh  forgotten  them.  Only  now  and  then,
when  the  man  sees  seme  fair  face  or  figure,  wit-
nesses some  heroic  deed  or  well-balanced  action,
or  even  perceives  some  well-formed  object,  is  he
reminded  of  that  which  is  Eternal.  For  Plato  the
explanation  of  the  Divine  was  easy  enough.  It
was  an  ava^vr^di^ — a  recollection,  faint  or  power-
ful, of  things  once  known  and  seen.  When  you
set  eyes — might  Plato  say — upon  that  face  in  the


The  Art  of  Creation

crowd  it  was  not  so  much  the  face  itself  that  was
divine  (though  it  was  certainly  privileged  so  far
to  resemble  divinity),  but  that  it  instantly  recalled
to  your  memory  the  form  of  some  god  seen  long
ago,  or  far  down  in  the  mirror  of  the  mind — to
which  god  indeed  your  adoration  and  worship
were  due,  and  not  to  the  mortal ;  or  if  to  the
mortal,  only  so  far  as  in  him  (or  her)  the  image
of  the  god  were  faintly  visible.  Of  these  celestial
forms  (and  these  are  Plato's  actual  words  in  the
''Phasdrus*')  *'  few  only  retain  an  adequate  remem-
brance ;  and  they,  when  they  behold  any  image
of  that  other  world,  are  rapt  in  amazement ;  but
they  are  ignorant  of  what  this  rapture  means,
because  they  do  not  clearly  perceive-  For  there  is
no  light  in  the  earthly  copies  of  justice  or  temper-
ance or  any  of  the  higher  qualities  which  are
precious  to  souls  :  they  are  seen  through  a  glass
dimly;  and  there  are  few  who,  going  to  the
images,  behold  in  them  the  realities,  and  they  only
with  difficulty.'*  Thus  for  Plato  the  explanation
of  *'  the  light  which  never  was  on  sea  or  land  "
was  easy  enough.  It  was  a  memory  of  that
celestial  light  in  which  the  divine  Ideas  and
heavenly  beings  themselves  were  once  seen  by  the
soul ;  and  indeed  are  (according  to  him)  ever
seen,  whenso  it  may  succeed  in  penetrating  into
that  region  where  they  dwell  eternal.

We  have  seen  (in  the  last  chapter)  how  it  may

be  possible  to  look  upon  this  theory  of  Plato's  in

the  light  of  modern  science  and  philosophy.     The

Ideas,  we  saw,  on  their  inner  and  essential  side

143


The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the  Race-Life

are  states  of  being,  states  of  feeling.  It  is  on
their  outer  side  that  they  take  form  and  structure.
So  that  ultimately  the  mundane  forms  in  which
they  express  themselves  may  not  only  be  very
various  (several  or  many  forms  being  capable  of
expressing  one  idea),  but  the  mundane  forms  are
also  necessarily  imperfect  expressions,  and  largely
determined  by  external  accident  and  circumstance.
We  sav/  also  how  Heredity  in  the  race  comes  in
to  stamp  and  accentuate  the  connection  between  a
comparatively  imperfect  and  accidental  form,  and
the  Idea  which  it  represents — and  to  such  a  degree
that  at  last  the  mxere  momentary  sight  of  the  said
imperfect  form  may  wake  the  Idea,  or  state  of
being  and  feeling,  with  the  greatest  intensity.
Thus  a  real  avaixvrja-i^  takes  place — that  is,  a  re-
membrance or  revivifying  of  divine  things  in  the
mind  through  a  mere  external  phenomenon.  The
countless  memories  of  the  race,  all  associated  for
generations  with  the  particular  object — or  the
sum  and  result  of  these  memories — wake  the  Idea
in  the  mind  of  the  present  individual  with  a
seemingly  supernatural  force.  Let  us  go  into
this  subject  yet  more  closely.

We  all  know  that  the  young  of  animals  act  in
a  way  which  suggests  that  their  psychical  selves,
their  memory  and  experience,  are  in  some  way
continuous  with  those  of  their  ancestors.  Young
partridges,  or  the  chicks  of  the  barndoor  fowl,
only  a  day  old,' at  s'ght  of  any  large  bird  in  the
air,  will  instantly  xid  instinctively  crouch  and
flatten  themselves  -n  the  ground.     Their  alarm,

'43


The  Art  of  Creation

increased  by  the  warning  call  of  the  mother,  causes
them  to  seek  refuge  under  her  wings.  What
definite  form  the  sense  of  danger  takes  in  the
young -chick's  mind  it  is  of  course  hard  to  say.
But  there  it  seems  to  be — the  memory  of  a  thou-
sand and  a  hundred  thousand  occasions  in  the
history  of  the  chick's  ancestors,  when  the  dreaded
claws  and  beak  came  from  the  sky  and  snatched
or  nearly  snatched  the  cowering  prey.  So  clear
and  oft-repeated  has  the  association  become,  that
now  the  Vision  of  a  bird  above  governs,  so  to
speak,  a  whole  plexus  of  nerves,  not  only  in  the
chick,  but  even  in  the  adult  partridge  or  fowl,
and  sets  in  movement,  almost  automatically,  a
whole  apparatus  of  muscles  of  defence  or  flight.
The  certainty  and  instantaneousness  with  which
this  happens  is  something  astonishing.  Personally
I  am  never  tired  of  watching  my  barndoor  fowls
on  the  occasions  when  the  sweep  comes  to  clean
the  chimney.  On  the  moment  when  the  brush
emerges  from  the  top  of  the  chimney — whatever
the  fowls  are  doing,  whether  they  are  feeding  or
basking,  or  foraging  in  far  grounds — in  that
instant  with  shrieks  and  screams  they  rush  in
every  direction  seeking  for  cover :  convinced  that
an  awful  enemy  has  appeared  on  the  roof.  A
cap  thrown  high  in  the  air  has  the  same  effect.
It  is  not  that  a  cap  in  form  or  movement  is  so
very  like  a  bird  (in  fact,  some  of  my  fowls
must  know  well  enough  in  their  hearts  exactly
what  my  cap  really  is),  but    that  it  wakes    the

latent  remembrance  of  the  bird   of  prey.     The

144


The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the  Race-Life

fowls  do  not  really  see  the  cap  or  the  chimney
sweep*s  brush,  but  they  see  what  may  be  called
the  Vision  of  the  Ideal  Hawk  —  which  is  far
stronger  and  more  deeply  embedded  in  their  very
physiology  than  any  momentary  image  can  be,
and  has  a  far  more  powerful  influence  on
them.

All  this  is  quite  like  the  Platonic  reminiscence.
We  do  not  really  see  the  rather  commonplace
features  which  pass  in  the  street,  but  some  celestial
vision  (in  the  race-consciousness)  of  which  they
remind  us  ;  and  it  is  this  latter  which  agitates
and  transports  us.  At  the  back  of  our  eyes,  so
to  speak,  and  in  the  profound  depths  of  the  race-
life  (of  which  each  individual  is  but  a  momentary
point)  is  stored  the  remote  past  of  the  world  ;
and  through  our  eyes  look  the  eyes  of  dead
ancestors.  Thus  we  see  not  merely  the  bare
object,  but  rather  it  is  surrounded  by  a  strange
halo  and  glamour,  which  is  the  presence  of  all
this  past.

Let  us  take  an  important  and  definite  instance
from  human  life.  In  the  last  chapter  we  spoke
of  Courage.  In  the  history  of  nations  War  is  of
supreme  importance ;  and  we  can  see  how  the
Idea  of  the  hero,  or  courageous  warrior,  has  helped
to  build  up  every  race.  Working  in  the  race
through  the  centuries,  and  under  certain  external
conditions,  it  has  produced  a  certain  type  of
warriors.  Of  these  warriors  some  naturally  would
be  more  representative  and  efficient  than  others,
and  these  would  be  the  mighty  men  of  valour  to

145  K


The  Art  of  Creation

whom  every  one  would  look  up.  Among  early
and  warlike  races,  probably  far  the  greater  part
of  the  activity  of  the  male  portion  of  the  race,
and  of  the  love-longing  of  the  female  portion,
has  thus  clustered  round  the  figure  of  the  mighty
warrior.  The  man  who  towers  head  and  shoulders
above  his  fellows,  who  is  a  terror  to  his  enemies
and  a  fortress  of  strength  to  his  friends,  necessarily
occupies  a  commanding  position  in  the  minds
of  those  around  him,  be  they  friends  or  foes —
especially  in  the  minds  of  the  youth.  His  image
is  the  object  of  their  admiration  and  emulation,
it  is  associated  with  the  most  thrilling  exploits,  it
is  the  symbol  of  all  they  would  desire  to  be,  in
themselves  or  their  children.  Every  young  man
has  had  two  or  three  such  figures  stamped  on  his
brain ;  between  which  figures  there  will  doubtless
be  some  degree  of  similarity,  and  some  degree  of
blending  into  a  joint  ideal.

But  (and  this  is  the  important  point)  the  same
process  has  been  taking  place  through  the  genera-
tions; and  going  back  through  the  long  succes-
sion of  any  one  line  of  ancestry  we  seem  to  see
that  countless  images  have  been  imprinted  (each
with  great  intensity  in  its  time)  and  superimposed
on  one  another — the  result  being  the  formation
of  a  great  composite  form  or  symbol,  which,
slowly  altering,  will  be  inherited  by  each  descend-
ant, and  will  lie  there,  perhaps  for  a  long  time
slumbering  and  unbeknown  to  the  individual,  at
the  centre  of  all  the  emotions  and  activities  con-
cerned in  warfare  and  patriotism,  and  associated

146


The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the  Race-Life

with  some  nerve-plexus  which  governs  these
activities  and  affections  in  the  human  body/

This  composite  then,  like  a  composite  photo-
graph of  many  faces  upon  the  same  plate,  will
not  show  individual  details  and  variations  except
by  implication,  but  rather  the  large  outlines  of
the  group  which  it  represents — in  this  case  the
warrior-hero.  In  the  hundreds  and  thousands  of
images  which  go  to  form  it,  defects,  dispropor-
tions, inharmonious  details,  will  cancel  each  other
out,  and  there  will  emerge  a  Form,  harmonious,
grand,  and  not  far  from  perfect — the  warrior-god,
in  fact,  of  the  race — the  result,  so  to  speak,  of
the  selection  and  chiselling  of  thousands  of  minds
through  the  centuries.

But  if  in  one  sense  this  God-form  is  the  result
of  the  chiselling  of  thousands  of  minds,  in
another  it  is  the  Form  which  the  Heroic  Idea
working  through  the  centuries  has  fashioned  for
itself  and  has  inspired  the  multitudinous  minds
to  adore.  It  is  the  god  himself,  as  one  aspect  of
the  race-life,  whom  we  here  see  in  his  double
activity — both  as  producing  certain  types  of  man-
hood, and  as  inspiring  others  to  reverence  and
store    in    memory    these    types,    so   that  at   last

^  If  it  sounds  too  crude  and  materialistic  to  speak  of  an
inherited  composite  image  as  dwelling  in  or  associated  with  a
nerve-plexus,  yet  we  must  allow  that  by  heredity  the  nerves
become  adjusted  so  as  to  respond  to  images  of  a  certain  class
or  composite  type.  And  if  again  our  knowledge  of  nerve-
plexuses  is  too  uncertain  yet  to  show  exactly  how  ideas  and
emotions  are  associated  with  them,  yet  that  there  is  some  such
general  association  is  for  the  most  part  admitted  by  the  modern
psychologists  and  physiologists.

147


The  Art  of  Creation

through  the  mortal  types  the  god  himself  may  be
beheld,  and  the  race-life  and  race-consciousness
entered  into.  There  in  its  appropriate  centre  or
nerve-structure  of  the  human  body  the  heroic
Idea  dwells,  inspiring  the  blended  memory  of
countless  heroic  actions,  feats  of  bravery,  struggles,
defeats,  triumphs,  and  so  forth,  and  governing  in
the  individual  man  the  vast  congregation  of  powers
and  activities  with  which  it  is  concerned.  No
wonder  that  when  the  sight  of  a  living  warrior
wakes  this  slumbering  centre  within  the  youth,
devotion  and  emulation,  excitement  and  the  ardour
of  heroic  deeds,  for  him  can  know  no  bounds.

Let  us  take  another  instance.  There  is  no
class  of  mental  impressions  much  more  powerful
and  persistent  through  all  time  than  those  con-
nected with  the  relation  of  the  sexes.  For  ages,
thousands  of  centuries,  the  Male  has  sought  the
Female,  the  Female  has  sought  the  Male.  Here
we  are  at  the  very  centre  and  focus  of  race-life.
Love,  in  this  sense,  means  union  of  differentiated
and  opposing  elements,  by  which  the  balance  of
race-life  is  restored,  and  the  self  or  Being  who  is
at  the  root  of  this  life  comes  one  step  farther  to
manifestation.  This  Titanic  being,  who  through
the  ages  (and  always  v/orking  subject  to  some
external  conditions)  has  thrown  out  multitudinous
types,  always  more  or  less  imperfect,  of  itself,
dwells  also  hidden  within  each  individual.  Not
only  metaphysically  speaking  does  it  dwell  in
each  individual,  but  through  the  long  process  of
Heredity,  its  Form  or  Forms  (the  race-ideals  or

148


The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the  Race-Life

race-gods)  lie  slumbering  there  ^ — and  in  closest
touch  with  all  the  nerve-structures  and  potencies
which  have  to  do  v/ith  the  generation  of  the
race.  Then  come  together  two  individuals  whose
opposite  polarities  and  differentiations  will  to-
gether build  an  adequate  expression,  and  instantly
in  each  other  they  wake  this  Titanic  life,  and  the
god-figures  belonging  to  it.  The  youth  sees  the
girl ;  it  may  be  a  chance  face,  a  chance  outline,
amid  the  most  banal  surroundings.  But  it  gives
the  cue.  There  is  a  memory,  a  confused  reminis-
cence. The  mortal  figure  without  penetrates  to
the  immortal  figure  within  ;  and  there  rises  into
consciousness  a  shining  Form,  glorious,  not  belong-
ing to  this  world,  but  vibrating  with  the  agelong
life  of  humanity,  and  the  memory  of  a  thousand
love-dramas.  The  waking  of  this  vision  intoxicates
the  man ;  it  glows  and  burns  within  him  ;  a
goddess  (it  may  be  Venus  herself)  stands  in  the
sacred  place  of  his  Temple  ;  a  sense  of  awe-struck
splendour  fills  him  ;  and  the  world  is  changed.*
**  He  whose  initiation   is  recent,"  says   Plato,

1  As  in  the  case  of  the  Warrior-god,  we  may  imagine  that
every  man  inherits  from  his  countless  male  ancestors  a  sus-
ceptibility to  a  certain  type  of  feminine  beauty  ;  and  every
woman  from  her  female  ancestors  a  susceptibility  to  a  certain
ideal  of  manhood.

2  The  degree  in  which  this  Porm  comes  into  clear  Vision  may
vary  much  with  different  races  or  individuals.  In  many  cases
a  distinct  vision  is  never  realised,  though  it  may  be  indicated
by  the  agitation  and  excitement  felt,  and  by  the  halo  thrown
round  the  mortal  creature.  Anyhow,  it  must  be  remembered
(what  we  have  already  said)  that  the  Idea  on  its  inner  side  is  a
state  of  being  or  feeling,  and  only  on  its  outer  and  less  essential
side  a  form.    Aristotle  calls  the  Platonic  Ideas  aio-^T^ra  di3ta.

149


The  Art  of  Creation

"  and  who  has  been  spectator  of  many  glories  in
the  other  world,  is  amazed  when  he  sees  any  one
having  a  god-like  face  or  form,  which  is  the
expression  of  Divine  Beauty ;  and  at  first  a
shudder  runs  through  him,  and  again  the  old
awe  steals  over  him ;  then  looking  upon  the  face
of  his  beloved  as  of  a  god  he  reverences  him,  and
if  he  were  not  afraid  of  being  thought  a  down-
right madman,  he  would  sacrifice  to  his  beloved
as  to  the  image  of  a  god."  And  Lafcadio  Hearn,
who  in  his  "  Out  of  the  East "  and  in  his  "Exotics
and  Retrospectives "  has  written  much  that  is
suggestive  on  this  point,  says  this  visionary  figure
is  "  a  composite  of  numberless  race-memories  .  .  .
a  beautiful  luminous  ghost  made  of  centillions  of
memories  "  ;  but  he  adds,  somewhat  in  the  spirit
of  Thomas  Hardy,  "  you  will  now  remember
the  beloved  seemed  lovelier  than  mortal  woman
could  be."

In  truth,  as  we  have  said  before,  the  mortal
object  which  wakes  the  ideal  in  our  minds,  and
the  Ideal  itself,  though  occasionally  confused,  are
on  the  whole  clearly  distinct  and  separable  in
thought  from  each  other.  They  are  perceived  by
separate  faculties.  The  object,  so  far  as  it  is  a
mortal  object,  is  perceived  by  the  senses,  by  surface
sight  and  touch  and  hearing  ;  but  not  so  the  inner
Vision.  Plato  says  that  this  state  of  mind,  in
which  Divine  Beauty  is  seen  (and  which  is  asso-
ciated with  all  real  love),  is  a  "  Mania,"  and  that
only  in  this  condition  of  "  Mania "  can  the
heavenly    facts    be    perceived    or    remembered.

150


The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the  Race-Life

What  he  seems  to  indicate  by  this — and  what
we,  in  modern  speech,  should  probably  say — is
that  it  is  another  state  of  consciousness  which  is
concerned  :  that  is,  that  while  the  objects  of  the
outer  world  are  perceived  by  us  through  the
senses,  co-ordinated  under  the  conditions  of
the  ordinary  consciousness,  these  ancient  (race)
memories,  and  the  feelings  and  visions  which
come  with  them,  belong  to  another  order  of
consciousness.  Indeed,  it  almost  seems  obvious
that  it  must  be  so.  If  the  existence  of  race-
memories,  and  of  feelings  and  visions  accompany-
ing them,  is  allowed  at  all,  it  would  seem  that
these  things  must  belong  in  some  degree  to  the
consciousness  of  the  race,  to  a  less  individual  and
local  consciousness  than  the  ordinary  one.  The
terms  *  mania,'  then,  or  *  ecstasy,'  which  would
indicate  the  passing  out  from  the  ordinary  con-
sciousness (into  the  racial  or  celestial,  according
as  we  adopt  the  modern  or  Platonic  view),  would
seem  quite  appropriate.

There  is  one  other  point  just  here.  I  say  the
outer  object  and  the  Ideal  Memory  which  it
wakes  in  the  mind,  though  separable  in  thought,
are  for  a  time  confused  with  one  another.  The
splendours  of  the  Ideal  are  showered  upon  and
invest  the  object.  Yet  dimly  the  mind  feels  that
it  is  remembering  something,  and  wonders  to
what  previous  experience  the  object  is  akin.  Is
this  the  explanation  of  that  curious  sense  of
Familiarity,  at  first  sight,  which  is  so  often
excited  by   the   idealisation    of  another  person  ?

151


The  Art  of  Creation

A  memory  is  indeed  awakened,  and  of  a  figure
most  intimate  to  oneself,  but  slumbering  deep  in
the  recesses  of  one's  own  mind.

Going  back  to  the  subject  of  the  Warrior,  we
see  that  Hero-worship  is  not  confined  to  that
form.  Worship  of  the  Athlete,  the  Saint,  the
King,  come  under  the  same  head.  In  modern
Europe  as  in  ancient  Greece,  the  Athlete  excites
the  mad  enthusiasm  of  crowds.  In  India,  as  in
mediaeval  Europe,  romance  and  idealism  gather
at  least  as  strongly  round  the  Saint.  These  are
matters  of  race  and  temperament.  Everywhere,
with  the  exception  of  a  few  peoples  who  have
advanced  beyond  this  stage,  the  King  is  granted
divine  honours.  No  one  can  witness  the  excite-
ment produced  by  Royalty  without  perceiving
that  it  is  an  instinct,  like  that  of  bees  for  their
Queen — that  is,  a  r^r^-consciousness  or  sentiment.
The  glamour  is  that  of  an  Idea,  an  Ideal  King,  a
figure  composite  in  the  memory  of  the  race,  and
the  centre  of  its  agelong  hopes  and  fears  and
growth  and  struggle  and  conquest,  and  the
glamour  is  readily  and  easily  transferred  to  the
living  and  actual  representative,  however  un-
worthy he  may  be.  Almost  every  one  recognises
that  it  is  so.  The  word  "King"  spoken  to  an
Enorlishman  wakens  in  his  conscious  mind  a  con-
joint  image  of  a  succession  of  sovereigns  from
Alfred  say  to  Edward  VII. ;  but  to  his  sub-
conscious self  it  means  far  far  more  than  that.
It  means  an  epitome  of  the  devotion,  the  fear,

the  awe,  the  confidence  which  every  one  of  his

152


The  Gods  as  Apparitions  of  the  Race-Life

ancestors  felt  towards  the  ruler  of  his  day,  and
that  not  only  as  far  back  as  Alfred,  but  into  the
almost  unending  past,  when  the  relation  of  every
man  to  his  chieftain  was  far  closer  than  now — all
this  mighty  mass  of  feeling  concentrated  in  one
great  Vision  of  Kinghood,  one  instinct  of  devoted
Service.  It  is  obvious  that  this  mass  of  feeling
being  still  there,  and  still  centred  and  co-
ordinated in  that  particular  way,  it  must  pour
itself  out  at  some  time,  and  the  particular
Royalty  of  the  day  is  only  the  excuse,  as  it
were,  for  such  outpouring.

But  from  this  perception  of  a  glow  or  halo
round  the  figure  of  a  king  to  his  transformation
into  a  god  is  but  a  short  step.  The  actual
mortal  sovereign  is  identified  with  the  immortal,
ever-abiding  race-memory  and  the  idealised  figure
of  Kinghood  which  dwells  there.  Everywhere
we  see  this  taking  place.  The  Egyptian  Pharaohs
were  exalted  into  gods.  To  the  Roman  Caesars
temples  were  built  and  divine  honours  paid.  The
Aztec  and  Peruvian  emperors  the  same.  Even
to-day,  for  the  Russian  peasant  or  the  tribesman
of  Morocco,  the  glamour  of  absolute  deity
surrounds  the  Tsar  or  the  Sultan.


153


IX

THE   GODS   AS   DWELLING   IN  THE
PHYSIOLOGICAL   CENTRES

I  INDICATED  in  the  last  chapter  how  the  form
and  figure  of  the  actual  king  may  rise  into  that
of  a  god  through  its  blending  with  the  immense
subconscious  emotion  of  the  race.  So  of  other
gods  and  divinities.  The  idealisation  of  the
Warrior  growing  through  successive  generations
obscurely  but  powerfully  in  the  primitive  Latin
folk,  suddenly — perhaps  through  the  appearance
of  an  actual  man  who  fulfilled  the  ideal  to  an
extraordinary  degree — may  have  taken  definite
shape  and  name  in  the  figure  of  Mars ;  who
thenceforth,  identified  with  the  ideal,  stood  as
the  God  of  War  for  succeeding  time.  Or  the
enthusiasm  for  the  Athlete  or  strong  man,  so
deeply  rooted  in  primitive  peoples,  may  have
been  brought  to  a  focus  by  the  appearance  of
a  real  Heracles  or  Hercules.  The  names  and
figures,  then,  of  these  men,  became  for  after
generations  the  centre  of  this  enthusiasm  and
deep  racial  instinct  of  admiration,  and  to  these
names  were  ascribed  many  exploits,  not  only  of
these,  but  of  other  heroes  before  and  after.  And
since  in  any  such  cases  of  mighty  men  appearing

IS4


The  (Jods  in  the  Physiological  Centres

among  !»>  people,  the  exploits  which  would  pro-
duce the  most  profound  impression  would  be
those  which  were  most  beneficial  to  the  folk —
the  slaying  of  monsters  and  wild  beasts,  the
cleansing  of  pestilent  swamps,  the  taming  of
oxen,  the  wrestling  with  death,  and  so  forth — so
it  would  be  these  which  would  be  enshrined  in
the  public  memory,  and  v/hich  (from  various
sources)  would  cluster  round  the  ideal  figure
of  the  Hero  or  Saviour.

This  myth-making  tendency  of  races,  and  the
unconscious  clustering  of  incidents  and  anecdotes
from  various  sources  round  one  or  more  definite
figures,  is  of  course  well  recognised,  and  explains
how  it  is  these  legends  often  seem  to  contain  so
deep  a  sentiment  and  meaning.  It  is  that  they
are  the  selection  and  affectionate  preservation
from  the  memorial  life  of  the  race  of  events
and  stories  which  illustrate  and  symbolise  some
deep  instinct  and  enthusiasm  of  the  race ;  such
stories  being  gradually  and  unconsciously  modified
into  more  and  more  of  expressiveness  as  time  goes
on.  In  this  way  many  great  epic  poems,  legends,
myths,  and  traditions  of  the  gods  have  been  built
up.  And  such  things  have  inevitably  a  profound
sentiment  in  them.  They  are  wiser  than  any  one
man  could  make  them — for  they  represent  the
feehngs,  the  enthusiasms,  the  wonderments,  ^he
humour,  the  wit,  the  activities  to  which  the  race
has  responded  for  generations.  If  such  legends
and  stories  were  merely  mental  ideals,  if  they  were
such  handy  little  allegories  and  generalisations  as

155


The  Art  of  Creation

any  philosopher  or  literary  person  might  make  in
his  study,  they  would  be  very  cheap  and  paltry
affairs.  The  whole  point  of  the  argument  will
be  missed  unless  it  is  seen  that  the  Ideas  and
enthusiasms  which  produce  myths  and  legends  lie
deep  down  in  the  very  structure  and  physical
organisation  of  humanity,  and  in  its  very  physi-
ology— that  they  are  things  of  agelong  life  and
importance,  principalities  and  powers  (if  we  may
so  call  them)  which  in  the  form  of  these  legends
and  figures  are  slowly  rising  into  recognition,  but
which  belong  to  another  order  of  existence,  so
to  speak,  than  that  with  which  we  are  usually
concerned.

Here  is  another  god.  Mercury — to  whom
among  the  Greeks  Hermes  corresponds,  and
who  is  represented  also  among  other  nations —
the  Swift  runner,  the  Messenger-god  It  seems
a  little  curious  at  first  that  a  mere  messenger-
ideal  should  be  deified.  Where  did  the  glow
or  glam.our  which  transformed  him  come  from  .?
But  when  you  consider  what  the  swift  runner
really  represented  in  those  days — when  you  think
for  a  moment  what  the  postal  service,  the  tele-
graph, the  locomotive,  and  all  the  other  means  of
intercommunication  are  to  us — when  you  think
of  the  story  of  Pheidippides  mentioned  above,  a
people  in  its  agony  sending  their  fleetest  foot-
racer  to  the  neighboring  state  for  help,  and  of
the  profound  sensation,  the  tears  of  joy,  the
enthusiasm,  the  worship,  with  which  he  would
be  greeted  on  his  return ;  then  it  is  easy  to  see

156


The  Gods  in  the  Physiological  Centres

that  round  the  figure  of  the  Messenger  generally
in  the  national  consciousness  a  glamour  would
grow  which  would  easily  transform  such  figure
into  a  god.  And  as  swift  communication  means
many  things  beside  the  delivery  of  messages — as
it  means  the  growth  of  commerce,  the  coming
into  contact  with  strange  peoples  and  languages
and  so  forth — so  the  Messenger  god,  Hermes,  or
Mercury,  or  Thoth,  or  v/hoever  he  might  be,
would  not  only  be  the  deliverer  of  divine  mes-
sages, but  would  stand  for  the  patron  of  all
interpretations,  mysteries,  travel,  and  commerce
(and  so  even  of  thieving) !

The  goddess  of  Love  and  of  feminine  grace  and
beauty.  Aphrodite,  Venus,  Freia,  Astarte,  is  one
to  whom  we  have  already  referred.  Her  temples
and  worship  have  been  honoured  among  almost
all  races.  We  need  not  go  again  over  ground
which  we  have  already  partly  covered.  That
there  is  among  the  nerves  of  the  human  body,
of  the  brain  and  of  the  great  sympathetic  sys-
tem, some  kind  of  centre  or  plexus,  or  group
of  plexuses,  which  co-ordinates  and  dominates
the  love-instinct,  and  that  this  is  one  of  the
most  powerful  and  important  centres  in  the
body;  that  connected  and  associated  with  this
centre  and  its  ramifications  is  a  whole  world  of
emotions,  desires,  mental  images,  thoughts,  acti-
vities ;  and  that  this  centre,  in  both  its  physi-
cal and  mental  aspects,  is  the  result  and  growth
and  embodiment  of  centuries  and  ages  of  race-
experience — these  are  things  that  few  will  deny.

157


The  Art  of  Creation

And  that  the  successive  images  of  femitxiiic  form
and  feature  acting  on  this  centre  in  long  h*.redi-
tary  line  may  have  combined  to  one  powerful  joint
Impression — v^hich,  even  though  latent  in  con-
sciousness, dominates  and  moves  all  the  race-
memories  of  love — is  something  which  seems  at
least  very  probable.^

The  raising  of  this  Composite,  this  luminous
ghost,  into  consciousness,  in  the  history  of  a
race,  is  in  this  view  the  creation  or  birth  of  the
Goddess  of  Love,  for  that  race.  Love  itself  existed
from  immemorial  time  ;  but  when  into  it  a  deeper
consciousness  began  to  come,  it  was  filled  with
strange  force  and  fire,  an  extraordinary  glow  and
glamour,  and  a  vague  sense  of  divinity  and  of  a
life  beyond  the  moment ;  and  when,  beyond  that,
the  race-consciousness  itself  in  some  moment  of
inspiration  awoke,  bringing  the  astounding  reve-
lation of  its  own  memory,  like  a  fairy  mountain
peak  rising  over  the  world,  then  the  individual
beheld  the  veritable  Goddess,  and  divined  that
Love  was  immortal.

It  will,  perhaps,  be  said  that  though  this  way
of  looking  at  the  matter  may  account  for  those

1  It  is  important  to  remember,  in  this  connection,  that  in
all  the  great  plexuses  of  the  Sympathetic  Nerve-system  there
ramify  not  only  the  nerve-fibres  of  the  Sympathetic  itself,  but
also  nerve-fibres  from  the  cerebro-spinal  system  and  nerve-fibres
from  the  cerebrum.  We  thus  have  in  the  case  of  each  plexus,
and  brought  together  into  one  focus,  capacities  of  immense
emotional  agitation  (the  Sympathetic),  capacities  of  swift  reflex
action  and  response  (the  cerebro-spinal),  and  the  formation  of
powerful  mental  images  (the  cerebrum).  These  three  elements
cannot  well  be  separated  from  each  other,  and  working  together
in  any  centre  they  represent  a  kind  of  daemonic  presence.

158


The  Gods  in  the   Physiological  Centres

gods  which  are  idealisations  of  human  types,  it
does  not  explain  why  the  mere  things  of  Nature,
like  the  Moon  and  the  Sun,  or  the  Darkness  and
the  Dav/n,  should  be  personified.  But  the  least
thought  shows  that  the  anthropomorphic  ten-
dency is  in  some  degree  inevitable  in  us.  The
Moon  and  the  Sun  are  to  us  what  they  are,  only
because  they  have  appeared  in  human  conscious-
ness. Consider  for  a  moment  the  latter.  How
many  millions  of  times  has  the  great  Sun  risen  on
our  primitive  ancestors  after  the  dark  and  peril-
ous night,  with  unspeakable  sense  of  joy,  relief,
comfort }  How  continually  has  this  sense  grown,
with  reverberant  intensity  in  the  successive  gene-
rations ? — till  at  last  in  some  more  than  usually
subtle  or  sensitive  soul  it  has  broken  into  a
strange  consciousness  of  a  Presence — ^he  presence,
in  fact,  within  that  soul,  of  the  myriad  life  and
emotion  of  those  that  have  gone  before.  The  rising
orb,  the  growing  glory  of  the  sky,  have  wakened
a  multitudinous  memory — the  memory  and  con-
sciousness of  mankind  itself  in  its  most  adventur-
ous and  buoyant  mood ;  and  to  this  child  of
Man,  this  primitive  poet,  the  Sun  has  indeed
appeared  as  not  only  a  circle  of  light  in  the
sky,  but  as  the  symbol  and  reminiscent  vision  of
a  majestic  and  celestial  being,  going  forth  to  his
daily  conquest  of  the  world,  hero  of  a  thousand
battles,  and  with  the  magic  upon  him  of  a  life
immortal.

Or,  similarly,  how  often  has  Night  descended,
with  a  mystic  sense  of  human  terror,  doubt,  and

^59


The  Art  of  Creation

awe,  a  million  times  distilled  and  concentrated  ?
Or  seriously,  can  even  we  moderns,  in  tall  hat
and  patent  leather  boots,  regard  the  young  Moon
in  the  clear  sky  of  evening  without  a  most  foolish
yet  poignant  tenderness  and  romance,  and  a  sense
as  if  within  us  and  through  our  eyes  sheer  myriads
of  other  eyes  were  watching  her  ?

In  all  these  cases  there  is  a  personification  truly  ;
but  it  is  because  what  we  are  really  coming  into
touch  with  is  not  the  so-called  Moon  or  Sun,  or
Darkness  or  Dawn,  so  much  as  the  great  sub-
conscious mind  of  the  race  under  its  different
aspects.  It  is  in  this  immense  world  which
comes  down  to  us  from  the  far  past- — that  city
of  a  thousand  gates  of  which  we  in  our  indi-
vidual bodies  are  but  the  portals,  and  yet  into
which  through  our  bodies  we  have  entrance —
that  we  must  look  for  the  Gods,  and  for  all  the
evidences  of  a  life  which,  though  greater  than
that  we  commonly  call  our  own,  belongs  to  us
and  is  indeed  ours.

And  here  we  come  again  to  the  point  which  is
the  main  subject  of  this  chapter,  the  connection
of  it  all  with  Physiology.  All  those  deities  I
have  mentioned — the  gods  and  goddesses  of  Day
and  Night,  the  Gods  of  War  and  of  Love,  the
Hero-god  or  Saviour,  the  King-god  or  Lord  of
heaven,  and  many  more,  represent  very  distinct
centres  and  co-ordinations  of  feelings  and  activi-
ties in  the  race ;  but  they  also,  as  we  have  hinted,
represent  very  distinct  centres  of  organic  life  in
each  human  body,  which  is  indeed  an  epitome  of

i6q


The  Gods  in  the  Physiological  Centres

the  race  :  they  represent  such  physiological  centres
as  Love,  Pugnacity,  Sympathy,  Sleep,  and  so  forth.
The  gods,  in  fact,  may  be  said  not  only  to  be
aspects  of  the  life  of  the  race,  but  to  dwell  in
some  sense  in  the  organic  nuclei  and  plexuses
of  the  body,  and  to  be  the  centres  of  command
and  service  there.

Strange  as  this  may  sound,  it  is  yet  most  im-
portant ;  and  the  appreciation  of  this  point  gives
perhaps  more  than  anything  else  the  key  to  the
understanding  of  the  religions  of  paganism  and
the  past,  and  to  the  progress  of  humanity  in  the
future.  The  body  is  not  vile.  It  is  not  only
a  Temple  of  God,  but  it  is  a  collection  of  temples ;
and  just  as  the  images  of  the  gods  dwell  in  the
temples  of  a  land,  and  are  the  objects  of  service
and  the  centres  of  command  there,  so,  we  may
say,  the  gods  themselves  dwell  in  the  centres  and
sacred  places  of  the  body.  The  one  thing  is  an
allegory  or  symbol  of  the  other,  and  it  has  been
the  instinct  of  primitive  humanity  to  express  itself
in  this  way.  Every  organ  and  centre  of  the  body
is  the  seat  of  some  great  emotion,  which  in  its
proper  activity  and  due  proportion  is  truly  divine.
It  is  through  this  bodily  and  physiological  centre
that  the  emotion,  the  enthusiasm,  that  portion  of
the  divine  Being,  expresses  itself;  and  in  the  pure
and  perfect  body  that  expression,  that  activity,  is
itself  a  revelation.  The  total  physiology  of  Man
is,  or  should  be,  the  nearest  expression  of  divinity
complete,  and  the  replica  or  image  of  the  physi-
ology of  the  Cosmos  itself,

i6i  L


The  Art  of  Creation

Once  this  conception  of  the  relation  of  the
human  body,  not  only  to  the  life  of  the  race,  but
to  the  whole  world  of  the  emotions  and  inner
life  of  Man,  and  to  the  panorama  of  his  gods,  is
fairly  seized  and  appropriated,  many  things  become
clear.  And  as  wc  go  on  doubtless  the  whole
subject  will  become  clearer.  At  present,  how-
ever, we  must  pass  to  two  other  points  which
need  consideration.

In  the  first  place,  these  great  formative  forces,
Ideas,  Enthusiasms,  which  manifest  themselves  in
the  race-life,  and,  clothed  with  emotion,  dwell  in
the  hidden  centres  of  the  actual  body,  are,  from
the  nature  of  the  case,  things  which  we  only
become  directly  conscious  of  in  those  moments
of  excitement  or  exaltation  which  take  us  into
the  deeper  regions  of  our  being.  Though  they
may  be  vaguely  felt  by  the  ordinary  conscious-
ness, they  cannot  very  well  be  described  in  its
terms.  They  are  therefore  only  seen  and  seized
in  their  fulness  by  the  few — by  the  few  whose
more  harmonious  natures  fit  them  for  the  vision ;
or  if  by  the  many,  only  in  rare  moments.  And
so  it  becomes  the  function  of  the  inspired  pro-
phets, poets,  artists,  to  give  these  a  definite  form
and  name — as  Moses  did,  who  bodied  forth  Jehovah
for  the  Jews,  or  as  Pheidias  the  sculptor  is  said
to  have  finally  fixed  and  shapen  the  ideal  of  Athen6
for  the  Athenians.  The  many,  when  they  see  these
forms  bodied  forth  by  the  great  Seers,  leap  to  them
and  accept  them,  feeling  distinctly  enough  that
they  answer   to  something  which  is  slumbering

162


The  Gods  in  the  Physiological  Centres

within  them,  though  they  cannot  quite  seize  the
latter  directly.  The  actual  figures  of  the  Gods,
in  fact,  accepted  and  adopted  by  the  various  races,
cannot  be  said  to  be  realities,  but  are  rather  sym-
bols or  representations,  adapted  to  the  ordinary
consciousness,  of  real  powers  working  in  the  race
and  profoundly  moving  and  inspiring  it.

In  the  second  place,  these  real  Powers  (ruling
in  our  nerve-centres  as  the  image-gods  rule  in  the
Temples)  are  themselves,  of  course,  always  grow-
ing— that  is  to  say,  that  as  the  race  grows  and
branches,  their  forms  also  modify  and  change —
slowly,  indeed,  through  centuries,  but  steadily.
But  as  the  images — the  once-inspired  forms  which
were  embodied  in  stone  or  paintings,  or  in  holy
books  and  ceremonials — as  these  do  not  change,
so  in  time  they  cease  to  correspond  to  the  realities,
they  cease  to  be  inspired  or  to  awaken  inspiration,
and  become  dry  and  dead  conventions.  On  this
subject,  however,  of  Conventions  as  affecting  the
Gods  I  will  say  no  more  here.  It  leads  to  the  con-
sideration of  the  change  in  religious  forms  and  di-
vinities which  takes  place  as  time  and  history  go  on,
and  the  eternal  conflict  between  letter  and  spirit.^

Returning  now  to  the  general  line  of  thought,
I  would  say  a  few  words  on  the  subject  of  Christi-
anity. In  speaking  of  the  genesis  of  the  deities
hitherto,  I  have  dwelt  more  especially  on  the
pagan  gods  of  Greece  and  Rome.  The  appear-
ance of  Christianity  on  the  scene  marked  a  new

^  See  "  Angels'  Wings,"  by  E.  Carpenter,  chap.  v.  (SonncD'
schein).

'63


The  Art  of  Creation

growth — not  exactly  a  new  growth  in  the  history
of  the  world,  because  something  much  (though
not  quite)  the  same  had  appeared  long  before  in
India  and  Egypt — but  new  in  the  West.  There
was  growing,  in  the  races  which  gathered  round
Imperial  Rome,  a  sense — partly  due,  perhaps,  to
reaction  from  the  life  of  the  day — a  sense  of  the
presence  of  death,  a  longing  for  some  other  life,
a  belief  in  the  power  of  gentleness,  meekness,
chastity — things  which  had  been  comparatively
little  considered  by  the  preceding  Nature-religions.
It  surely  might  almost  be  said  that  a  new  centre
of  organic  life  was  forming — a  new  plexus  among
the  nerves  of  Humanity.  No  one  can  visit
India  without  being  struck  by  what  seems  quite
a  physiological  difference  between  the  average
Hindu  and  the  average  Westerner  —  the  pas-
sivity of  the  former,  the  mildness,  the  meekness,
the  meditative  transcendental  temper,  the  sense
of  another  world,  the  little  fear  of  death.  His
organism  seems  to  be  differently  keyed  from
ours ;  so  that  while  the  Anglo-Saxon  masses  are
shouting  themselves  hoarse  over  a  football  hero
or  other  Athlete,  the  Hindu  peasant  is  paying  his
profoundest  adoration  to  an  emaciate  Saint.  That
is  to  say,  there  seems  to  be  some  organic  centre
in  each  race  so  much  more  developed  than  in  the
other  that  it  may  be  woken  to  delirium  or  frenzy
or  ecstasy  by  a  spectacle  which  leaves  the  other
unmoved.

I  say  some  such  changes  in  the  organic  consti-
tution   of  humanity  were  taking    place    in    the

164


The  Gods  in  the  Physiological  Centres

Roman  Empire,  and  that  quite  independently  of
the  little  band  of  propagandists  who  called  them-
selves Christians  (see  Walter  Pater*s  "  Marius  ").
Under  Marcus  Aurelius  a  wider  sense  of  humanity
was  growing  up.  Hospitals,  orphan  schools,  hos-
pitals for  animals  even,  began  to  be  founded.
Oriental  ideas  and  religions  and — perhaps  more
important  still — Oriental  blood  and  heredity  began
to  circulate.  A  new  type  of  human  being  de-
manded new  gods ;  and  men  and  women  whose
hearts  began  to  respond  to  the  power  of  gentle-
ness, the  pity  of  Life,  the  presence  of  Death,  who,
as  slaves  or  the  descendants  of  slaves,  knew  v/ell
what  it  was  to  be  despised  and  rejected,  began  to
see  a  glam.our  in  figures  of  a  different  complexion
from  those  which  had  dominated  their  prede-
cessors. Thus  at  length  the  personality  and  life
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  or  at  least  the  picture  of  it
drawn  by  Paul  and  the  Evangelists,  gave  form
and  outline  to  this  new  creative  Idea,  and  it  took
the  shape  of  the  gentle,  loving,  and  crucified
Christ,  the  God  that  above  all  has  dominated  the
Christian  centuries.  Not  that  this  ideal  was,  as  I
have  said,  absolutely  new  ;  for  the  glamour  of  it,
or  of  something  very  similar — allowing  for  differ-
ence of  race  and  longitude — had  been  embodied
six  centuries  before  in  the  figure  of  the  divine
Buddha,  and  doubtless  for  centuries  in  the  human
race  these  feelings  had  been  registered  in  race-
memory  and  had  struggled  for  expression ;  but
new  as  a  recognised  ideal  this  undoubtedly  was  in
the  history  of  the  Western  world.

^65


The  Art  of  Creation

And  (what  I  wish  to  enforce)  this  figure  of
Christ — written  about,  pictured  in  canvas  or  in
stone,  or  in  words  of  living  eloquence,  through
all  these  later  centuries- — has  served  to  waken  in
the  human  mind  the  consciousness  of  a  very  real
Presence :  a  Presence  at  least  as  real  as  that  indi-
cated by  Apollo  or  Athene  to  a  Homeric  Greek :
a  definite  individualised  Power  which  has  estab-
lished itself  living  and  moving  in  the  Western  races,
and  therefore  also  in  each  man  or  woman  of  these
races.  In  this  particular  case  we  have  the  advan-
tage of  being  able  to  analyse  an  actual  and  still
operative  conception  of  a  god ;  and  I  take  it  that
the  intense  reality  which  this  figure  carries  with  it
to  many  people  means  a  great  deal.  It  means
that  the  figure  not  merely  represents  a  mental
ideal  of  desirable  qualities,  or  the  remembrance
of  a  certain  beneficent  man  who  once  lived,  but
that  it  represents  a  living  focus  of  life  in  the
European  peoples  of  the  last  two  thousand
years,  which  has  slowly  emerged  to  conscious-
ness through  the  accumulated  race-memories  of
a  far  longer  period  than  that.  And  I  take  it
that  the  inward  Vision  of  this  living  power  and
presence  has  in  some  degree  come  to  most  people
who  have  been  Christians  in  anything  more  than
name ;  while  to  some  people  it  has  come  with
such  force  and  intensity  that  they  have  been  per-
suaded that  they  beheld  the  veritable  Christ
himself  surrounded  with  glory  (i.e.  seen  in  the
luminous  field  of  a  superior  consciousness).  At
any   rate   to   deny   or   utterly  discredit   all   the

J66


The  Gods  in  the  Physiological  Centres

stones  of  the  Saints,  from  St.  Paul  who  saw  a
great  light  and  heard  a  voice,  onward  through
endless  cases  to  modern  times,  would  be,  as  I
have  already  suggested,  a  parochial  and  purblind
view  to  take.

In  the  same  way  I  think  it  seems  very  un-
scientific to  regard  the  common  stories  of  '  con-
version '  as  mere  fancies  or  fabrications.  It  is
pretty  clear  that  they  represent  a  reality,  a  very
real  experience,  to  those  concerned ;  and  though
the  'conversions*  may  not  be  as  luminous  or
profound  as  that  of  St.  Paul,  it  seems  to  me
that  they  are  things  of  the  same  kind — cases,
namely,  in  which  after  long  and  silent  prepara-
tion, new  centres  of  life  are  suddenly  disclosed
within  folk,  accompanied  by  more  or  less  of
excitement,  vision,  and  a  complete  change  of
outlook  on  the  world.  And  the  stories,  often
fantastical  enough,  which  accompany  such  con-
versions, must  be  looked  on  simply  as  the  lame
effort  of  uncultured  minds  to  picture  and  inter-
pret the  cosmic  facts  experienced.  (See  two
interesting  chapters  on  *' Conversion "  in  Pro-
fessor William  James'  book  on  *'  The  Varieties
of  Religious  Experience,"  in  which  he  views
conversion  as  a  possible  shifting  of  centres  of
consciousness,  or  as  possibly  comparable  to  the
changes  of  equilibrium  in  a  polyhedron,  resting
on  one  facet  after  another.)

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  regard  the  Vision  of
Christ — as  it  comes  to  many  people  even  nowa-
days— as  indicating    a   real  power  and  presence

167


The  Art  of  Creation

living  and  working  within  them,  so  we  must  of
course  regard  the  Vision  of  Athene,  or  Apollo,
or  of  any  other  god  that  came  to  men  and  women
of  old,  as  indicating  a  very  real  and  living  power
within  them.  These  are  names  which  Humanity
through  the  ages  has  given  to  its  own  powers
and  faculties  ;  and  every  individual,  as  far  as  he
has  truly  revered  and  identified  himself  with  the
God  that  moved  within  him,  has  so  far  identified
himself  with  the  life  of  Humanity.

If  we  were  to  go  to  India,  we  should  find  this
appearance  and  presence  of  the  gods  everywhere
acknowledged  and  believed  in.  The  vision  of
Siva,  or  Vishnu,  or  Brahma,  or  of  Kali,  or
Krishna,  or  any  one  of  the  many  popular  saints
who,  having  once  been  men,  are  now  become
divinities,  is  common  enough.  I  may  give  one
instance,  which  will  help  to  remove  the  matter
from  the  region  of  mere  vulgar  fantasy  and
superstition.  Among  the  Gnanis  and  Teachers
(gurus)  who  carry  on  the  tradition  of  the  ancient
Wisdom-religion  from  very  remote  times,  and
some  of  whom  are  among  the  most  emancipated,
keen-minded,  and  inspired  of  human  beings,  it  is
said  that  a  pupil  (chela),  after  all  instruction  by
the  Guru,  may  spend  a  long  time  before  his
initiation  is  quite  complete ;  then,  in  the  ripe-
ness of  time  and  of  his  growth,  one  day  (or
night)  the  God  (Siva),  awful  and  glorious  in
light,  will  appear  to  him  clothed  in  the  form  of  his
Guru ;  and  the  chela,  overcome  with  amazement
and  emotion,  will  leap  up,  and  seeking  out  his

j68


The  Gods  in  the  Physiological  Centres

Teacher  will  throw  himself,  in  a  flood  of  tears
and  of  gratitude,  at  his  feet.  After  which  his
initiation  is  fulfilled,  and  he  is  received  into  the
long  line  of  those  who  are  followers  of  the  god.

Cases  of  this  kind  I  have  personally  heard
of.  (The  reader  also  will  remember  the  quo-
tation from  Dr.  Bucke  in  chapter  viii.)  And
there  is  no  reason,  I  think,  to  doubt  that  the
above  is  at  least  a  fair  account  of  what  usually
happens  in  the  Indian  initiations.  If  so,  it
illustrates  remarkably  what  has  been  said  all
through — namely,  that  when  the  Vision  in  the
supernal  consciousness,  with  its  accompanying
blaze  of  splendour,  takes  place,  it  clothes  itself
generally  in  the  shape  of  some  figure  which
is  known  to  the  ordinary  consciousness,  and
which  is,  as  it  were,  the  best  representation
it  can  get  for  the  purposes  of  the  latter  con-
sciousness.

There  are  other  figures  connected  with  Chris-
tianity on  which  I  can  only  dwell  briefly.  The
rise  of  the  Virgin  Mary  or  Madonna  into  a
goddess  (with  her  special  services  and  Temples),
is  a  mark  of  change  similar  to  the  rise  of  Christ
himself — though  perhaps  not  so  pronounced.
The  Madonna  links  on  very  closely  to  Isis,  Deme-
ter,  Ceres — the  ever-virgin,  yet  ever-fertile  god-
desses of  the  elder  world  ;  yet  her  motherhood
has  more  of  human  feeling  in  it  and  less  of
Nature-symbolism  than  theirs ;  and  her  worship
marks  perhaps  a  jgrowth  in  Humanity  of  filial
worship  and   respect  for  Woman.      When    one

X69


The  Art  of  Creation

thinks  for  a  moment  of  what  the  Mother  is  to
every  human  being,  of  the  profound  impression
her  figure  makes  upon  the  child,  and  then  con-
siders how  long,  what  numberless  times,  in  the
history  of  mankind  and  in  the  heredity  of  every
individual,  that  impression  has  been  repeated  on
the  sensitive  film  of  consciousness ;  then  one  sees
it  as  inevitable  that  there  must  come  a  time  when
the  Mother-figure  should  be  deified,  and  become
surrounded  with  this  halo  of  race-memory — that
a  Mother-god  should  arise,  corresponding  to  the
Father-god  of  patriarchal  times.  (Indeed  there
is  much  evidence  to  show  that  the  Mother-god
is  the  more  primitive  of  the  two.)  As  to  the
Virgin-Mother  of  Christianity,  it  is  said  that
St.  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  (iioo)  was  much
devoted  to  her.  *'  His  health  was  extremely
feeble :  and  once  when  he  was  employed  in
writing  his  homilies,  and  was  so  ill  that  he  could
scarcely  hold  the  pen,  she  graciously  appeared  to
him,  and  comforted  and  restored  him  by  her
divine  presence"  (Mrs.  Jameson,  "Legends  of
the  Monastic  Orders,"  p.  144).  And  the  num-
ber of  similar  records  of  Visions  of  the  Madonna
must  run  into  hundreds,  if  not  thousands.
Whatever  we  think  about  these  records,  their
mere  existence  convinces  us  how  deep,  how
much  deeper  than  just  one  individual  life,  the
figure  of  the  pure,  long-suffering,  tender,  divine
Mother  has  etched  itself  into  the  heart  of  the
race.

But    the   rise   of  Woman,   and  her  influence,
170


The  Gods  in  the  Physiological  Centres

brought  another  result  with  it — the  deification  of
the  Babe.  It  is  not  likely  that  Man — the  human
male  —  left  to  himself  would  have  done  this
(though  it  appears  that  the  Fanti  on  the  West
Coast  of  Africa  have  a  curious  worship  of  an
Immortal  Child).  But  to  woman  it  was  natural.
What  woman  to-day  bending  over  her  sleeping
infant  has  not  at  some  time  been  aware  of  a  Divine
Child  which  seemed  to  come  and  blend  its  features
with  those  she  gazed  on  ?  The  long  heredity  of
Mother-love  and  memory  is  there,  and  it  is  not
only  the  little  thing  before  her,  which  she  sees,
but  the  long  and  wondrous  dream  of  the  past
which  its  image  awakens.  This  glamour  of  the
Child  arising  primarily  in  the  woman,  transmitted
itself,  of  course,  to  the  man,  transmitted  itself  to
the  race  generally,  and  becomes  symbolised  in
such-  figures  as  the  infant  Jesus,  the  child
Horus,  the  holy  Bambino  at  Rome.,  and  so
forth — giving  perhaps  a  tenderness  and  humanity
to  Christianity  which  we  miss  in  the  earlier
religions.

Thus  the  Holy  Family — Father,  Mother,  and
Child  —  consolidated  itself.  For  indeed  the
Family  (in  this  close  and  limited  form)  was  a
peculiar  characteristic  of  the  Egyptian  and  of  the
Christian  centuries ;  and  human  life,  the  human
organism,  was  establishing  itself  round  this  as
one  of  its  important  centres.  In  the  earlier  and
more  primitive  and  communistic  phases  of  society,
the  tribe,  the  gens^  the  clan,  the  demos^  were  the
important  groups — the    family   (in  the   modern

171


The  Art  of  Creation

sense)  was  weak.  But  with  the  rise  of  the  Pro-
perty-civilisation and  the  breakdown  of  the  older
Societies,  the  individual  ceased  to  find  his  life  and
well-being  in  the  tribe  or  community,  and  took
refuge  as  it  were  in  the  lesser  Family,  which  be-
came sacred  and  all-important  to  him  as  the  Ark
of  his  better  self  and  affections  amid  the  troubled
waters  of  external  strife  and  competition.  Thus
the  Family  gathered  sacredness  through  the  cen-
turies till  it  became  deified  in  the  mediaeval  eye.

Looking  back  then  at  what  has  been  said,  we
seem  to  see  the  gods  arising  as  Humanity's  con-
sciousness through  the  ages  of  its  own  life  and
faculties  (called  into  play,  no  doubt,  through
contact  with  Nature).  Each  race,  representing
some  aspect  of  the  great  World-self,  and  inspired
and  moulded  from  within  by  the  formative  Ideas
belonging  to  it,  becomes  conscious  of  these  creative
powers  as  the  Gods.  The  gods  are  in  that  sense
real  emanations  and  expressions  of  the  World-
self.  And  again  each  individual  of  the  race,
affiliated  to  the  race  and  the  gods  from  whence  he
springs — or  at  least  to  whom  he  owes  his  body
and  his  heredity — does  through  that  body  and
that  heredity  at  times  enter  into  the  race-con-
sciousness, and  become  aware  of  these  powers
working  within  him  and  the  race.  Each  unit-
mind  is  an  offshoot  of  the  racial  mind ;  each
unit-body  an  offshoot  of  the  racial  body ;  and
as  far  as,  for  each  individual,  his  mind  and  body
register   the  Life  and  Memory  of  the  Race  do

17?


The  Gods  in  the  Physiological  Centres

they    form    a    gate   of   access   to    its   particular
Olympus  and  group  of  divinities.^

In  this  view,  Plato's  heaven  of  eternal  change-
less Forms  and  Essences  might  be  compared  to
the  great  uplifted  Consciousness  of  the  Human
Race.  In  the  latter,  Forms  are  seen  in  the  inner
Light,  V7hich  certainly  to  the  momentary  indi-
vidual apprehension  seem  eternal,  unchangeable —
centres  of  immense  life  and  activity,  mountainous
in  grandeur,  though  possibly,  like  the  mountains,
really  in  slow  flux  and  change:  great  gods,  who
on  their  inner  side  are  Wisdom  and  Justice  and
Beauty  and  Courage  and  Mother-Love,  and  so  forth
— in  essence  the  same  in  all  races  and  peoples  ;  but
on  their  outer  side,  and  with  respect  to  the  circum-
stances and  conditions  of  their  activity,  are  very
various  from  race  to  race.  And  the  mortal  figures
that  we  see,  and  the  images  and  idols  of  the
Temples,  acquire  much  of  their  sanctity  from  the
fact  that  they  are  expressions  or  manifestations  or
reminiscences  of  these.  But  of  idols  I  shall  speak
in  the  next  chapter.

1  But  we  must  not  forget  here,  what  I  have  hinted  more  than
once  before,  that  race-life  is  not  by  any  means  the  only  higher
order  of  life  to  which  we  have  access  ;  and  that  in  every  indi-
vidual slumbers  even  the  absolute  World-self.  But  the  race-
life  and  consciousness  is  interesting  to  us  here  as  forming  the
key  to  what  we  call  the  Gods  and  Religion.


.173


THE   DEVILS   AND   THE   IDOLS

But  some  one  will  say — If  the  Gods  are  thus
real  powers  and  centres  of  vitality  in  the  human
body  and  in  humanity  at  large,  what  about  the
Devils  ?  What  are  they  ? — The  reply  of  course
is,  They  are  the  same.  The  devils  are  very  real
powers  and  centres  of  human  energy  and  vitality.
But  yet  there  is  a  difference ;  and  the  difference
may  perhaps  be  broadly  defined  thus — that  the
Gods  arc  powers  making  for  Life  and  Harmony,
and  the  Devils  are  powers  making  for  Discord
and  Death.

There  are  centres  in  the  human  body  and  mind
which  make  for  Corruption :  we  know  that.
There  are  centres  of  Disease  in  the  body,  alien
growths  which  .consume  and  waste  its  substance ;
centres  of  Disease  in  the  mind,  alien  and  con-
suming passions,  ungoverned  greeds  and  desires,
hatreds,  vanities.  There  are  such  things  as  Lust
without  love.  Desire  of  food  and  drink  without
reverence  for  Health,  love  of  Power  without
Pity,  love  of  Gain  without  Charity.  Every  one
sees  that  here  are  centres  of  activity  in  the  human
being  which  in  the  long-run  must  lead  to  Cor-
ruption and   Disintegration.     There  are  similar

174


The  Devils  and  the  Idols

centres  in  society  at  large  and  the  life  of  the  race.
If  the  higher  centres  and  those  which  lead  to
beneficial  and  harmonious  and  permanent  activi-
ties are  the  foci  where  the  Gods  dwell,  then  these
others  are  the  seats  of  what  we  call  diabolic  and
demonic  agencies.

The  personification,  the  glamour,  the  domina-
tion of  the  latter  are  as  easy  to  explain  as  of  the
former.  Take  any  one  of  the  instances  above —
say  the  Love  of  Power.  Far  back  in  the  history
of  the  race,  did  the  domination  of  one  individual
by  another  (little  known  among  the  animals)
begin.  How  many  thousands  and  thousands  of
times  to  the  ancestors  of  each  of  us  has  the  face
of  some  petty  tyrant  made  itself  hateful  ?  how
deeply  have  his  cruelties,  his  meannesses,  seared
the  memory  of  his  features  in  the  heart  of  his
victim  ?  how  intensely  may  this  long  line  of
memories  have  come  down  surrounded  by  a
glamour  of  fear  and  hatred  ^  how  easy  to  see
that  a  certain  similarity  of  features  and  expression
in  this  long  line  may  have  given  rise  to  the  joint
picture  of  a  diabolic  figure  delighting  in  cruelty
and  tyranny — a  veritable  Satan,  composite  indeed
of  race-memories,  yet  lurking  terrible  in  the
subconsciousness  of  every  child,  and  even  of  the
adult  man  or  woman !  Or,  to  take  another
example,  how  many  thousands  of  times  to  our
feminine  ancestors  may  the  features  of  Lust
without  Love  have  made  themselves  fearful  and
terrible .?  and  how  easily  out  of  the  combined
memory  of  these  may  the  likeness  arise  of  a  devil

175


The  Art  of  Creation

of  Lust  and  Sensuality,  haunting  certain  centres
of  imagination  and  association  in  the  brain !  And
so  on.

But  there  is  another  side  too  to  the  question.
Not  only  do  we  all  bear  in  our  heredity  the
remembrance  of  countless  tyranny  suffered,  and
the  vague  image  of  a  devil  corresponding,  whom
we  hate ;  but  we  also  and  similarly  bear  the
remembrance  of  tyranny  inflicted  on  others^  and  the
pleasure  accompanying  (from  immemorial  time)
such  exercise  of  power.  Over  and  over  again  the
lower  human  and  animal  nature  within  our
countless  ancestors  has  rejoiced  in  its  sense  of
power  accompanying  some  cruel  and  tyrannous
action,  till  at  last  such  actions  have  been  invested
with  a  sort  of  glamour,  and  the  temptation  to
tyrannise  (actually  to  inflict  pain)  may  come  down
to  us  with  an  attraction  otherwise  hard  to  explain.
Or  change  the  wording  of  the  above,  and  for
Tyranny  read  Selfishness,  Greed,  Lust,  and  so
forth,  and  we  see  that  the  argument  is  the  same.
The  Greed  that  we  hate  in  others  with  a  com-
posite hatred  has  a  fatal  and  complex  hold  on
ourselves ;  and  the  devil-figure  whom  at  one
moment  we  detest,  at  another  moment  exercises
over  us  a  strange  and  lurid  fascination,  pushing
us  on  to  the  very  deeds  we  abhor.

The  strange  psychology  of  passion  is  difficult
to  understand  in  any  other  way — the  inordinate
enchantment  which  surrounds  the  pleasures  of
the  Senses,  so  disproportionate  to  the  actual  en-
joyment experienced ;  the  mania  to  which  it  may

176


The  Devils  and  the  Idols

rise — of  Drink,  or  Greed,  or  whatever  it  may
be ;  the  sense  (so  frequent)  of  a  diabolic  power
impelling  one ;  the  abhorrence,  even  while  they
are  being  perpetrated,  of  the  actions  which  we
call  our  own.  All  this  seems  only  explicable  by
the  fact  that  we  bear  in  our  bodies  the  experience
and  memory  of  countless  beings,  who,  having
witnessed  or  embodied  the  same  action  from  opposite
sides,  transmit  to  us  on  one  side  an  intense  and
reduplicated  magnetism  in  its  favour,  and  on  the
other  side  a  multiplied  hatred  of  it ;  and  from
both  sides  the  sense  of  a  sinister  Agency  at  work
within.  The  strife  between  human  beings  in  the
past,  and  arising  out  of  the  life  of  the  senses,  is
re-enacted,  in  miniature  and  in  memory,  within
our  own  breasts ;  there  the  reconciliation  waits
to  be  worked  out,  and  the  strange  Justice  of
Nature  to  be  fulfilled  !  But  it  is  obvious  that
where  such  conditions  exist,  and  the  sense  of  the
diabolic  is  present,  we  are  dealing  with  centres
which  contain  the  elements  of  strife  and  dis-
integration within  themselves,  and  which  are
therefore  leading  towards  Corruption,  Insanity,
and  Death.

But  it  will  be  asked,  If  the  devils  represent
centres  of  corruption,  how  can  they  be  related  or
assimilated  to  the  gods,  who  are  the  expression
and  embodiment  of  great  formative  Ideas  ^  The
answer  is,  Simply  enough,  because  the  devils  also
represent  formative  ideas,  but  ideas  of  a  lower
grade,  which  necessarily  in  time  have  to  be  super-
seded.   These  particular  centres  of  activity,  in  fact,

'77  M


The  Art  of  Creation

in  the  human  race,  and  human  body,  have  not
always  been  centres  of  corruption  or  degeneration
— quite  the  reverse — though  there  are  various
ways  in  which  they  may  have  become  so.  Origi-
nally perfectly  natural  and  healthy  (like  all  the
animal  instincts,  say),  and  therefore  carrying  the
sense  of  pleasure  and  goodness  with  them,  yet
any  one  of  them  may  in  course  of  time  become
disproportionately  developed,  and  lapse  into  con-
flict therefore  with  the  rest  of  the  nature ;  or  it
may,  as  it  grows,  develop  seeds  of  strife  within
itself;  or,  as  Humanity  grows  and  changes  and
adjusts  itself  round  other  centres,  the  centre  in
question  may  have  to  be  readjusted  or  broken  up.
In  any  of  these  cases  the  sense  of  evil  will  be
developed  in  connection  with  it ;  and  the  con-
tinuance of  the  centre  in  its  particular  course  will
involve  the  threat  of  corruption  and  death  to  the
race  or  the  individual.  Thus  the  Agencies  or
Personalities  which  are  associated  with  these
centres  take  on  a  maleficent  aspect.  They  may
not  have  worn  this  always.  They  may  have  been
Angels  and  Gods  (and  the  power  and  fascination
that  they  exercise  is  mainly  due  to  the  long  far-
back  and  beneficent  root-activity  of  the  ideas
which  they  represent  in  the  human  race) ;  but
now  they  are  become  falling  Angels,  dethroned
Gods,  Lucifers  with  a  lurid  light  upon  them ;
and  the  pleasures  and  activities  associated  with
them  have  become  delusive  pleasures,  insane  and
fruitless  activities,  stricken  and  made  barren  by
the  pain  and  suffering  of  others  who  are  involved;

178


The  Devils  and  the  Idols

they  stand  for  Motives  which  are  being  ejected
from  the  bosom  of  Humanity.

To  this  class  belong  a  vast  number  of  material
and  animal  pleasures  and  satisfactions.  What  joy
remains  in  the  mere  acquisition  or  spending  of
Wealth  when  the  inevitable  suffering  of  those
from  whom  it  is  wrung  begins  to  be  realised  ?  or
what  in  ambition  or  domination  or  selfish  grati-
fication when  the  others  who  represent  the  reverse
of  the  shield  are  considered  and  cared  for  ?  Not
that  the  ideas  of  Wealth,  or  Praise,  or  Power,  or
Passion,  may  not  in  essence  be  perfectly  good
and  useful,  but  the  special  forms  which  they  have
hitherto  worn  have  proved  unworthy,  and  are
being  superseded  or  modified.  The  root-ideas
are  changing  their  aspect.

It  is  needless  to  recall  in  detail  the  fact  that
the  gods  of  one  age  or  race  become  the  devils  of
another.     It  falls  naturally  into  place  here.

With  Christianity,  as  we  have  seen,  the  human
mind  grouped  itself  round  other  centres  of  inte-
rest and  activity  than  in  the  old  paganism.  A
tremendous  revolution,  in  fact,  in  humanity  was
taking  place,  and  the  physiological  equipoise  was
tending  towards  a  denial  of  the  more  animal  and
natural  centres  in  favour  of  the  more  spiritual
and  ascetic.  The  pagan  centres  of  life  became
decadent,  the  pagan  gods  were  changed  into
devils.  Apollo  became  Apollyon ;  Aphrodite
(or  Venus),  the  stately  goddess  of  Love,  Queen
of  the  world  and  rewarder  of  heroes  and  warriors,
became  a  mere  demon  and  enchantress ;  and  Pan,

179


The  Art  of  Creation

that  wonderful  impersonation  of  animal  Nature,
wore  his  horns  and  goat's-hooves  now  in  the
character  of  Satan  !  But  similar  revolutions  had
taken  place  before ;  and  as  the  gods  of  Chris-
tianity were  now  driving  out  the  gods  of
Olympus,  so  had  these  in  their  time  driven
out  Cronos  and  Rhea  and  their  crew ;  and  these
again  had  disenthroned  the  primitive  deities
Uranus  and  Gaea — strange  far-back  records  of
the  growing  life  of  the  races  within  whose
bosoms  these  gods  dwelt !

The  hatred  felt  by  one  race  for  the  gods  of
another  and  neighboring  race  is  a  thing  of  the
same  kind.  It  is  almost  a  physiological  hatred ;
and  it  indicates  the  great  constitutional  gulfs  and
differences  of  habit  and  life  which  separate  the
races.  Baal  and  Ashtoreth  were  very  respectable
deities  among  the  Phoenicians,  and  no  doubt  were
at  one  period  the  emblems  and  expressions  of
their  best  life ;  but  for  the  Israelites  they  were
simply  devils.  I  am  not  sure  that  the  Saints  of
the  Catholic  Church  are  not  by  some  Noncon-
formist sects  looked  at  in  the  same  light ;  and
it  is  obvious  that  the  great  division  of  Europe
into  Catholic  and  Protestant  and  Greek  Church
is  not  so  much  a  matter  of  intellectual  rightness
or  wrongness  of  view,  as  of  a  difference  of  in-
stinctive heredity,  and  a  distinction  of  race-feeling
between  Latin  and  Teuton  and  Slav.  From  the
same  point  of  view,  the  way  in  which  the  race-
gods  figure  in  all  race-conflicts,  and  the  im-
mense   importance  ascribed    to   them    and    their

1 80


The  Devils  and  the  Idols

prevailment  over  the  enemy,  is  a  matter  very
easily  intelligible.

But  to  return  to  our  devils.  As  I  have  said,
the  devils  are  gods  which  have  gone  astray —
Powers  or  Forms  which,  once  helpful  and  con-
structive in  the  human  organism,  have  now  be-
come maleficent  and  destructive.  Perhaps  in  the
most  primitive  races  it  is  not  always  easy  to  dis-
tinguish gods  from  devils.  The  instinct  of  self-
preservation,  for  instance,  is  one  of  the  earliest
and  most  powerful  instincts  in  animal  and  human
life.  It  is  largely  represented  in  the  lowest  savages
by  Fear.  Fear  rules  in  this  centre  of  self-preserva-
tion. Everything  that  can  possibly  harm  the  man
is  dreaded  and  avoided  ;  mental  ingenuity  is  taxed
to  discover  what  may  be  possibly  harmful.  Fear
is  thus  good,  and  a  necessary  condition  of  animal
life  and  primitive  human  preservation.  But  it  is
also  bad  and  destructive,  and  the  more  advanced
the  creature  becomes,  the  more  so.  For  as  soon
as  the  hum^an  brain  becomes  sufficiently  developed
to  be  capable  of  consciously  entertaining  within
itself  the  images  of  Fear — /.<?.,  the  images  of  harm-
ful and  horrible  things — it  is  already  harming  and
injuring  itself.  Fear  has  already  become  destruc-
tive within  it.  The  images  of  fearful  things  within
the  brain  are  already  beginning  the  work  of  de-
struction which  the  real  things  in  the  outer  world
are  accused  of.

Thus  Fear  is  one  of  the  most  primitive,  power-
ful, and  widespread  of  the  emotions;  for  a  long
timie  it  rules  in  the  centre  of  animal  and  human

i8i


The  Art  of  Creation

life ;  and  it  has  a  beneficent  as  well  as  a  malefi-
cent aspect.  From  ail  this  it  can  easily  be  under-
stood how  prolific  a  source  it  has  been  of  deities,
good  and  bad ;  and  how  among  primitive  races
certain  images  invested  with  an  agelong  glamour
of  ancestral  terror  become  transformed  at  last
into  veritable  gods  or  devils.  It  does  not  matter
whether  they  are  wooden  idols  of  a  certain  form
and  feature,  or  whether  they  are  snakes*  skins,  or
leopards'  claws,  or  whether  they  are  images  of
lions  or  crocodiles,  or  whether  they  are  real  lions
or  crocodiles,  or  whether  they  are  black  stones  or
hideous  personifications  of  the  powers  of  the  air
with  a  hundred  eyes  and  a  hundred  arms — it  does
not  matter  whether  it  is  the  most  innocent  and
harmless  object,  or  the  most  really  dangerous,  as
long  as  it  is  thought  terrible,  as  long  as  the  trans-
formation of  the  race-memory  invests  it.  It  is
sufficient  to  remember  the  fowls.  When  the
sweep's  brush  leaps  out  of  the  chimney-top,  when
the  cap  flies  up  in  the  air,  or  even  when  the
harmless  solitary  rook  wings  across  the  sky.
Dame  Partlet  does  not  stop  to  scrutinise  the
object  in  the  dry  light  of  her  own  reason,  but
in  the  glamour  of  her  race-memory  instantly
^ees  the  Hawk-devil  impending  overhead,  and
flies  for  her  life.

Even  among  ourselves — civilised  though  we  be
— why  do  certain  faces,  certain  expressions,  cer-
tain grimaces,  especially  in  childhood  (and  even  if
only  portrayed  on  paper)  afflict  with  such  a  painful
and  unreasoning  sense  of  horror  ?     Why  is  the

182


The  Devils  and  the  Idols

dark  so  much  more  alarming  to  children  (not
to  mention  adults)  than  circumstances  seem  to
justify  ?  Why  does  such  a  simple  thing  as
having  some  one  walk  continuously  behind  one
in  the  street  cause  fidgets  and  creeps  intoler-
able ? — except  that  these  things  wake  memories
in  us — memories  innumerable  of  being  pursued
by  man  or  animal,  memories  of  time  when  the
dark  was  full  of  danger,  far  more  than  now ;
and  so  forth.  Lafcadio  Hearn  indeed,  in  his
"Exotics  and  Retrospectives,"  suggests  that  the
common  nightmare  in  which  one  seems  to  lie
powerless  in  the  grasp  of  some  terrible  creature
of  uncertain  outline  arises  in  this  kind  of  way.
How  often,  he  asks,  going  back  through  one's
countless  primitive-human  and  animal  ancestry,
has  it  not  really  happened  that  a  fore-father  or
fore-mother  has  so  lain,  and  been  overpowered,
by  the  foe ;  and  this  terrible  moment  and  others
in  like  succession,  burning  themselves  in  the
brain,  and  transmitted  to  descendants,  have  fused
into  the  awful  imagery  of  the  dream,  in  which
the  very  confusedness  of  the  obsessing  Figure  is
suggestive  of  its  multiplex  origin  ^

Thus  Fear  in  the  human  race  has  been  the
source  of  countless  deities,  idols,  fetishes,  which
have  been  invested  in  their  various  degrees  with
supernatural  awe,  or  fascinating  dread,  or  the
most  unreasoning  terror,  and  which  in  propor-
tion as  Fear  itself,  with  the  growth  of  humanity,
has  tended  to  be  cast  out,  have  tended  also  to
lapse  into  devils,  charms,  and  playthings,  and  to

-.183


The  Art  of  Creation

lose  their  ancient  authority.  While  again  in  the
form  of  Awe,  and  especially  associated  with  the
marvellous  and  impressive  moments  and  aspects
of  the  planets  and  heavenly  bodies,  the  same  feel-
ing has  been  the  origin  and  inspiration  of  many  of
the  grander  and  more  enduring  gods.

But  Fear  of  course  is  by  no  means  the  only
primitive  emotion  which  has  cast  its  glamour  over
objects  and  builded  up  deities.  Sex,  Hunger,  the
Mother-instinct,  and  many  other  passions,  have
thus  projected  themselves.  The  pagan  gods  of
the  Senses  and  Passions — the  fact  that  these  deities
were  honoured  as  gods  and  not  feared  as  devils
— shows  that  these  instincts  were  on  the  whole
healthy  and  in  place.  In  fact  one  sees  with  the
passions  generally  that  they  are  healthy  as  long
as  '  in  place '  ;  and  that  their  unhealthiness  and
devilry  comes  in  when  they  usurp  power  and
cease  to  be  properly  subordinate.  With  the  in-
coming of  Christianity,  as  I  have  already  said,
many  of  these  deities  became  distinctly  devils —
partly  perhaps  because  the  passions  corresponding
were  losing  their  natural  place  and  balance  at  that
time,  and  partly  because  by  the  strong  Christian
reaction  towards  asceticism  a  kind  of  artificial
overturn  was  being  given  to  human  nature.
One  feels  that  as  long  as  Aphrodite  occupied
an  honoured  and  gracious  position  in  the  Greek
Olympus,  the  passion  which  she  represented  must
have  been  mainly  honourable  and  gracious  among
those  who  worshipped  her.  When  she  fell,  it
became    possible    for    the    monkish    writers    to

184


The   Devils  and  the   Idols

regard  woman  as  the  incarnation  of  all  filth  and
wickedness.  No  Goddess  of  Love  exists  in
modern  times,  alas !  for  indeed  Love  seems  to
have  fled  from  public  life  into  the  utmost  privacy
and  concealment,  leaving  only  Prostitution  and
the  Divorce  Court  as  its  visible  reminder  in  the
world.

The  distinction  between  gods,  devils,  idols,
fetishes,  magical  forms,  &c.,  seems  to  be  only
one  of  degree.  They  are  all  cases  in  which  an
image,  by  virtue  of  association  or  memory,
excites  in  the  mind  of  the  individual  beholder
a  state  of  consciousness  belonging  to  another
order  than  that  of  his  ordinary  life ;  and  it  is
this  extended  consciousness  which  fills  him  with
amazement  and  impresses  him  so  profoundly.

Fetish-worship  is  common  enough,  not  only
among  savage  peoples,  but  among  modern  nations.
One  of  the  most  striking  instances  is  that  of  a
child  with  its  doll.  Think  of  the  passionate  love
and  admiration,  the  veritable  ecstasy,  which  the
little  girl  feels  at  the  sight  of  its  friz-haired,  blue-
eyed  babe.  The  latter's  waxen  nose  has  long  ago
been  melted  away  by  the  fire,  and  the  sawdust
has  run  out  of  its  legs ;  but  that  makes  no  differ-
ence. It  is  still  the  doll.  The  child  knows
perfectly  well  that  the  thing  is  not  a  baby,  and
has  no  sense  or  feeling,  but  it  makes  no  difference
(any  more  than  it  makes  a  difference  to  the  fowls
that  they  know  quite  well  my  cap  is  not  an
eagle).  It  is  stiU  the  doll — the  symbol,  the
hieroglyph,  which  wakes  in  the  child's  mind  the

185


The  Art  of  Creation

immense  ancestral  emotion  of  countless  mother-
love  and  passion  flowing  down  like  a  stream  into
its  young  life,  and  filling  it  with  amazement.

A  great  deal  of  ignorant  contempt  has  been
showered  upon  the  worship  of  idols.  But  this
is  because  the  civilised  man  does  not  for  a
moment  see  or  imagine  what  the  idol  means  to
the  savage — any  more  than  as  a  rule  he  under-
stands what  the  doll  means  to  his  own  little
daughter.  The  savage  knows  as  well  as  the
civilised  child  (if  either  of  them  go  so  far  as  to
analyse  their  consciousness)  that  the  object  of  his
devotion  is  a  mere  stock  or  stone.  Yet  what  is
that  to  him.?  To  him  the  real  and  important
fact  is,  that  this  painted  monster  (this  effigy
which  for  a  hundred  generations  has  played  its
part  in  the  history  of  his  ancestors)  overwhelms
him  with  emotion — with  Wonder  and  Fear  and
the  rude  smitings  of  Conscience — and  compels
him  to  bow  to  a  Life,  a  Presence,  which  he  cannot
fathom.^

Or  (to  take  an  instance  which  appeals  to  the
civilised  man),  consider  for  a  moment  the  inor-
dinate magic  of  Gold.  For  a  vast  period  gold
has  been  the  symbol  of  power  and  well-being,
and  an  object  of  pursuit.     The  inherited  emotion

*  "  There  is  a  great,  secret,  deep,  vast  and  unspeakable  joy
in  Idol-worship.  Other  highest  experiences  also  cannot  be
comparable  to  this.  As  the  letters,  which  stand  only  in  sounds,
have  been  formed  and  are  the  cause  to  learn  the  intellectual
powers  ;  so  is  the  idol  formed  for  the  formless  god — that  we
may  know  by  experience  the  vast  intellectual  being  of  his
existence." — Extract  from  a  letter  received  from  India.

186


The  Devils  and  the  Idols

of  all  those  generations  is  in  each  of  us,  and  flows
swiftly,  almost  whether  we  will  or  no,  towards
the  symbol  when  it  appears.  This  little  old
woman,  half-starved,  and  in  clothes  rusty-green
and  ragged  with  wear,  walking  the  streets  of
London,  with  her  thousands  in  the  Bank,  and
her  beady  eyes  glittering  as  she  fingers  the  coins
in  her  purse,  is  only  an  extreme  case.  There  is
something  pathetic  surely  about  her  figure ;  for
all  these  privations  she  suffers,  all  these  sacrifices
that  she  makes,  are  not  really  for  the  little  gold
pieces.  They  are  only  because  the  gold  pieces
wake  in  her  such  wonderful  memories,  and  the
dim  consciousness  of  the  great  life  behind  her,
filling  her  with  a  strange  joy  she  cannot  explain.
This,  indeed,  is  her  religion.

Or  the  Fetishes  of  Royalty  and  Titles.  How
explain  the  glamour  which  is  upon  these  things,
and  the  anxiety  of  American  pork-dealers  to  take
part  in  them — a  glamour  which  persists  even
when  reason  exposes  the  very  prosaic  and  com-
monplace characters  of  those  concerned — unless
here  again  a  transcendent  sentiment  is  involved,
and  an  instinct  built  up  and  confirmed  during
thousands  of  years  ?

A  curious  case  of  fetish  and  magic  is  that  of
spells  and  incantations.  A  spell  is  a  spell.  That
is,  it  is  the  use  of  a  form  of  spoken  or  written
words.  To-day  the  use  of  words  has  for  the
most  part  become  commonplace ;  but  there  has
been  a  time  far  back  in  history  when  to  con-
vey meanings    in    this  way  was    little    short    of

187


The  Art  of  Creation

miraculous.  Especially  has  this  been  true  of  the
written  word.  There  existed  a  few  years  ago,
and  probably  yet  exist,  tribes  in  Central  and
South  Africa  to  whom  a  piece  of  written  paper
— a  letter  in  fact — was  taboo.  They  would  not
touch  it  or  come  near  it,  for  the  fear  and  awe
the  mystery  of  writing  inspired.^  In  all  early
peoples  writing  is  confined  to  the  few ;  and  to
the  many,  for  generation  after  generation,  it  is
surrounded  with  such  an  atmosphere  of  wonder,
that  at  last  it  comes  to  partake  of  the  super-
natural. The  Bibles  and  other  writings  of  such
peoples  largely  owe  their  sacredness  to  this  fact
— often  more  to  this  than  to  the  value  of  the
matter  which  they  contain.  And  more  than  this,
it  is  probable  that  actual  forms  of  words  used  in
such  writings — in  Bibles,  poems,  prayers,  reci-
tations, incantations — used  over  and  over  again
for  scores  of  generations — come  at  last  to  carry
with  them  a  volume  of  race-memory  and  race-
consciousness  so  great  as  to  give  them  a  quite
different  value  and  force  from  ordinary  language.
How  much  of  the  magic  which  surrounds  certain
collocations  of  words  in  poetry  is  due  to  this  fact
— that  they  recall  threads  of  ancient  experience
woven,  as  it  were,  in  our  very  blood }  As  to
spells  and  incantations,  is  it  not  really  possible
that  certain  forms  of  words,  which  have  been
used  for  immemorial  time,  have  the  power  of
waking  in  us  forms  of  the  race-consciousness  with
which  they  have  been  associated — and  so  under

1  See  chap.  ii.  p.  26.
188


The  Devils  and  the  Idols

their  influence  Satan  or  other  powers  of  light  and
darkness  may  indeed  appear !

The  same  sort  of  thing  is  true  of  the  magic  of
numbers.  If  written  words  excited  wonder  among
the  uninitiated,  much  more  would  numbers  and
their  properties  and  signification.  After  a  time
they  became  positively  sacred,  and  even  to-day
for  many  people  (theosophists  and  others)  a  3  or
a  4  or  a  5  or  a  7  bear  some  kind  of  religious
glamour  about  them,  and  mystic  mieanings
ineffable.  The  same  too  of  simple  geometrical
figures,  squares,  and  pentagons  and  hexagons  ;
and  it  is  not  difficult  to  understand  how  these
and  the  numbers  entered  into  and  became  part  of
charms  and  incantations.

My  object  throughout  is  to  make  it  clear  that
all  these  things — these  deities,  devils,  and  fetishes,
and  the  excitement  produced  by  what  appear
commonplace  and  unimportant  symbols — indicate
real  stirrings  within  us  of  another  order  of  life
and  consciousness  than  that  with  which  we  are
usually  concerned,  and  that  it  is  this  fact  which
gives  the  symbols  or  images  their  value  and
potency.  What  further  meanings  this  stirring
of  another  order  of  consciousness  within  us  may
have,  and  how  it  relates  to  our  individual  lives
and  personalities,  we  may  consider  later  on.
Here  it  is  sufficient  to  note  that  it  seems  to
be  the  explanation  of  a  vast  number  of  pheno-
mena that  otherwise  are  obscure.  Everywhere
this  glamour  is  to  be  found.     How  easy  to  see

or  feel,  as  suggested  in  an  earlier  chapter — when

189


The  Art  of  Creation

we  look,  for  instance,  at  the  young  moon  in  the
evening  sky  (in  itself,  of  course,  an  impressive
spectacle) — that  it  is  not  merely  our  individual
eyes  that  are  following  that  luminous  crescent
over  the  mountains,  but  that  within  us  millions
of  eyes  are  gazing,  with  a  thrill  of  multitudinous
emotion  far  beyond  the  experience  of  one  twilight
scene  or  one  life !  How  easy  to  see  that  the
sceptre  or  rod  which  the  King  bears  in  his  hand
(or  Whip  on  the  Egyptian  monuments)  carries  a
glamour  of  awe  with  it,  because  the  actual  rod
in  times  past  descended  on  the  backs  of  our
successive  ancestors  and  left  an  accumulated
impression  there,  still  vibrating  in  heredity !

The  various  animals  which  (naturally)  played
so  important  a  part  in  the  life  of  the  early  races,
and  entered  so  deeply  into  their  consciousness,
became  invested  with  a  corresponding  glamour;
and  there  is  hardly  a  creature — bird  or  fish  or  bull
or  cat  or  beaver  or  kangaroo — which  by  some
race,  Egyptian  or  African  or  Australian  or  Ameri-
can Indian,  has  not  been  made  fetishistic,  totem-
istic,  or  divine.  The  same  of  many  trees  and
plants.  As  to  parts  of  the  body,  it  seems  natural
enough  that  the  phallus  and  the  yoni  in  almost
every  race  of  the  world  have  been  treated  as
objects  of  worship  and  emblems  of  devilry  or
divinity ;  for  these  symbols  appeal  to  every
human  being,  and  for  good  or  bad  the  accumu-
lated ancestral  magic  surrounding  them  must
be  enormously  powerful.     But  even  other  parts

of  the  body  partake  of  the  same  enchantmentj,

190


The  Devils  and  the  Idols

and  It  is  well  known  that  the  mistress's  eyebrow,
or  the  hair,  or  the  hand,  or  even  some  article  of
clothing,  have  in  cases  a  kind  of  supernatural
attraction,  which  we  may  fairly  ascribe  to  a  more
specialised  subconscious  association  of  the  same
character.

A  curious  instance  of  the  rousing  of  the  com-
munal or  race  consciousness  is  given  by  the  word
testis^  which  signifies  both  a  witness  and  a  testicle^
the  double  signification  being  illustrated  by  the
fact  that  among  many  peoples  the  taking  of  an
oath  is  confirmed  by  the  placing  of  the  hand  on
the  part  indicated.^  More  than  any  other  fact
this  helps  us  to  understand  the  sacredness  of  sex
in  some  early  times,  and  how  the  sense  of  the
communal  life  and  divinity  in  connection  with
sex  was  so  strong,  that  an  oath  taken  thus  was  as
good  as  taken  in  the  presence  of  the  god.

*  See  Genesis  xxiv.  2,  9,  and  xlvii.  29,  &c


191


XI

BEAUTY  AND  DUTY

In  the  above  lights  it  may  be  worth  while  to  say
a  few  words  on  the  subjects  of  Art  and  Morality.
Beauty  and  Duty  are  two  of  the  great  formative
Ideas  of  which  we  have  spoken.  They  operate
especially  in  the  more  advanced  sections  of  the
human  race;  and  wherever  they  make  their
appearance  they  modify  Life  profoundly.  Like
ail  the  ideas,  they  are  on  one  side  an  incommuni-
cable, unanalysable,  innate  feeling  or  sense ;  on
the  other  side  they  are  structural,  and  built  up
of  many  and  various  elements.  The  '  sense  of
Beauty,'  the  *  sense  of  Duty,'  are  each  peculiar,
unique  feelings.  They  may  be  little  or  much
developed,  little  or  much  manifested ;  but  they
come  from  within,  and  are  as  indescribable  as  the
peculiar  smell  of  a  flower.  On  the  other  hand,
they  express  and  manifest  themselves  externally
in  endlessly  various  forms  and  structures.

If  we  remember  what  has  been  already  said
about  the  Race-life,  we  shall  see  that  the  Idea  of
Beauty,  or  the  Idea  of  Duty,  will  take  form  in
the  long  succession  of  the  generations  of  the  race
largely  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  that
life.     That  is,  the  one  Life,  or  Being,  or  Self  of

192


Beauty  and  Duty

the  race,  impelling  its  inuividual  members  to
honour  and  cherish  the  race  (in  each  other),  or
to  sacrifice  themselves  for  it,  will  stamp  upon
each  individual  mind  a  particular  form  or  type
of  Beauty  or  Duty — which  through  the  repe-
titions of  Heredity  will  be  emphasized  and  fixed
— though  such  forms  or  types  will  differ  much
from  each  other  in  different  races,  and  will
depend  along  what  particular  external  lines  the
great  formative  Ideas  are  able  to  work  in  the
given  cases.  Thus  the  ideals  of  the  various  races
are  formed.

Thomas  Hardy,  in  his  very  characteristic  poem
"  The  Well-beloved,"  figures  a  man  walking  far
one  morning  over  hill  and  dale  to  visit  his  bride,
and  dreaming,  as  he  goes,  of  her  faultless  form,
*'the  God-created  norm  of  perfect  womankind."
And  lo !  a  shape  like  that  he  dreams  glides  softly
by  his  side — so  like,  that  he  asks  it,  "Art  thou
she  ? "  And  the  Shape  with  equivocal  voice
replies : —


.  .  Thy  bride  remains  within
Her  father's  grange  and  grove.'


And  he  :-


"  Thou  speakest  rightly,"  I  broke  in,
"  Thou  art  not  she  I  love."

But  again  the  Shape  replies : —

"  Nay  ;  tho'  thy  bride  remains  inside
Her  father's  walls,"  said  she,

**  The  one  most  dear  is  with  thee  here,
For  thou  dost  love  but  me."

103  N


The  Art  of  Creation

The  man  is  puzzled ;  but  when  he  reaches  the
end  of  his  journey,  things  become  clearer;  for
he  finds  his  mortal  bride  indeed,  but

"  Her  look  wa8  pinched  and  thin,
As  if  her  soul  had  shrunk  and  died,
And  left  a  waste  within."

And  the  mystery  is  made  manifest — namely,
that  the  ideal  and  the  real  woman  are  two  very
different  apparitions  : —

"  O  fatuous  man,  this  truth  infer.
Brides  are  not  what  they  seem ;
Thou  lovest  what  thou  dreamest  her ;
I  am  thy  very  dream  !  '*

Here  the  distinction  between  the  mortal  woman
and  the  ideal  '  norm  of  womankind '  is  made
very  apparent ;  and  the  suggestion  is  of  course
made  that  the  former  derives  her  attractiveness
merely  from  the  fact  of  her  arousing  a  remi-
niscence of  the  latter.

On  the  subject  of  Beauty  an  immense  amount
has  been  written,  and  Tolstoy  in  his  "  What  is
Art .? "  though  he  only  deals  with  writers  of  the
last  two  centuries,  manages  to  quote  some  fifty
or  sixty  answers  given  to  the  question  "  What  is
Beauty  ^  "  Whether  we  agree  with  his  somewhat
contemptuous  treatment  of  the  philosophers  and
their  divergencies  or  not,  we  cannot  but  be  im-
pressed by  the  fact  that  such  an  amazing  amount
of  intellectual  activity  has  been  expended  on  this
subject  during  that  period,  as  indicating  indeed
its  importance.

194


Beauty  and   Duty

And  here  it  is  interesting  to  find  that  Tolstoy
groups  the  fifty  or  sixty  answers  of  the  philo-
sophers under  two  fundamental  conceptions.
*'  The  first  is,  that  beauty  is  something  having
an  independent  existence  (existing  in  itself),  that
it  is  one  of  the  manifestations  of  the  absolutely
Perfect,  of  the  Idea,  of  the  Spirit,  of  Will,  or  of
God ;  the  other  is,  that  beauty  is  a  kind  of
pleasure  received  by  us,  not  having  personal
advantage  for  its  object."  ^  Both  classes  of
definition  Tolstoy  considers  unsatisfactory ;  the
first,  because  it  dwells  in  a  vague  and  unknov/n
region  of  mysticism,  and  is  "a  fantastic  definition,
founded  on  nothing " ;  the  second,  because  it
descends  to  mere  physiology  and  the  senses.  But
to  us  surely  both  are  highly  interesting.  In  fact,
v/e  see  that  philosophy  only  gives  two  answers  to
the  question ;  the  one  is  practically  that  of  Plato,
the  other  is  that  of  modern  science.  The  one
places  the  sentiment  of  Beauty  in  the  perception
of  an  absolute  existence  in  the  Heavens ;  the
other,  in  the  reception  of  a  pleasure  not  having
personal  advantage  for  its  object — that  is,  in  a
pleasure  inspired  or  generated  by  something
beyond  the  personal  life.  Both  therefore  agree
in  considering  the  sentiment  of  Beauty  to  be
derived  from  our  continuity  with  an  order  of
existence  beyond  what  we  usually  call  our  own.
In  the  view  of  Plato,  the  dream-figure  which
walked  by  the  man's  side  was  a  reminiscence  of

1  Tolstoy's  "What  is  Art?"  trans,  by  Aylmer  Maude,
Chap.  iv.  jg^


The  Art  of  Creation

some  celestial  Form  seen  long  ago,  but  still
dwelling  there,  far  in  the  heavens ;  in  the  view
of  Heredity,  it  was  the  re-viviscence  within  the
mind,  of  a  luminous  form,  the  complex  product
or  manifested  presence  of  ages  of  race-conscious-
ness and  memory.  In  either  case  it  was  the
waking  of  another  order  of  consciousness  within
the  man.

I  shall  now  (even  though  the  evidence  may
not  seem  absolutely  conclusive)  assume  that  this
general  aspect  of  the  question  is  the  right  one,  and
proceed  to  inquire  what  we  may  infer  from  it.

In  the  first  place,  it  would  seem  that  if  the
dream-figure  walking  beside  the  man  is  merely
the  rehabilitation  of  some  memory  within  him,
its  connection  with  the  living  mortal  woman  to
whose  feet  he  is  making  his  pilgrimage  is  of  the
slightest ;  and  that  in  that  view  Love  is  indeed  a
sad  illusion,  as  Thomas  Hardy,  in  his  pessimistic
way,  seems  to  suggest.  The  dream-figure,  which
is  the  real  inspiration  of  the  man's  love  and
devotion,  is  a  merely  subjective  fancy ;  and  the
mortal  woman  only  the  painful  actuality  which
by  some  accident  chanced  to  recall  a  dream.

But  it  will  easily  be  seen  that  the  whole  point
of  my  endeavour  hitherto  on  this  subject  will
have  been  missed  if  the  kind  of  vision  with  which
we  are  dealing  be  thus  characterised  as  merely
subjective.  Taking  the  Heredity  view,  we  can-
not refuse  to  see  that  the  race-life  which  builds
up  and  projects  these  Visions,  dreams,  and  gla-
mours is  intensely  real,  and  that  the  visions,  &c.,

196


Beauty  and  Duty

are  quite  real  and  necessary  manifestations  of
it.  This  race-life  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  within
each  of  us,  and  forms  the  chief,  though  a  sub-
conscious, part  of  our  individual  selves  ;  we,  as
conscious  individuals,  are  simply  the  limbs  and
prolongations  of  it.  When,  therefore,  Thomas
Hardy's  pilgrim  sees  the  '*  god-created  norm  of
womankind  "  walking  beside  him  he  sees  some-
thing which,  in  a  sense,  is  more  real  than  the
figures  in  the  street,  for  he  sees  something  that
has  lived  and  moved  for  hundreds  of  years  in  the
heart  of  the  race ;  something  which  has  been  one
of  the  great  formative  influences  of  his  own  life,
and  which  has  done  as  much  to  create  those  very
figures  in  the  street  as  qualities  in  the  circulation
of  the  blood  may  do  to  form  a  finger  or  other
limb.  He  comes  into  touch  with  a  very  real
Presence  or  Power — one  of  those  organic  centres
of  growth  in  the  life  of  humanity,  of  which  we
have  spoken — and  feels  this  larger  life  within
himself,  subjective,  if  you  like,  and  yet  intensely
objective.

And  more.  For  is  it  not  also  evident  that  the
woman,  the  mortal  woman  who  excites  the  Vision,
has  some  closest  relation  to  it,  and  is  indeed  far
more  than  a  mere  mask  or  empty  formula  which
reminds  him  of  it  ?  For  she  indeed  has  within
her,  just  as  much  as  the  man  has,  deep  sub-
conscious Powers  working ;  and  the  ideal  which
has  dawned  so  entrancingly  on  the  man  is  in  all
probability  closely  related  to  that  which  has  been
working  most  powerfully  in  the  heredity  of  th?

107


The  Art  of  Creation

woman,  and  which  has  most  contributed  to  mould
her  form  and  outline.  No  wonder,  then,  that  her
form  should  remind  him  of  it.  Indeed,  when  he
looks  into  her  eyes  (for  all  that  she  be  "  pinched
and  thin"),  he  sees  through  to  a  far  deeper  life
even  than  she  herself  may  be  aware  of,  and  yet
which  is  truly  hers — a  life  perennial  and  won-
derful. The  more  than  mortal  in  him  beholds
the  more  than  mortal  in  her ;  and  the  gods
descend  to  meet.

That  there  are  many  *  norms '  and  ideals
moving  and  working  within  the  man,  within
the  woman,  and  v/ithin  the  race,  goes  without
saying ;  and  these,  as  we  have  said  farther  back,
are  continually  growing  from  age  to  age,  accreting,
advancing,  and  branching  in  the  various  sections,
branches,  families,  individuals  even,  of  the  race.
The  gods  are  no  changeless,  inviolate  beings,  but
(at  any  rate  as  far  as  their  manifestation  is  con-
cerned) may  be  thought  of  as  continually  growing,
evolving  ;  as  Robert  Buchanan  says  : —

**  Fed  with  the  blood  and  tears  of  living  things,

NourishM  and  strengthen'd  by  Creation's  woes,
The  god  unborn,  that  shall  be  King  of  Kings,

Sown  in  the  darkness,  thro'  the  darkness  grows."  ^

Furthermore,  it  is  pretty  evident  that,  as  each
individual  naturally  stands  more  under  the  influ-
ence of  one  ideal  or  organic  centre  than  another,
and  will  differ  from  other  individuals  in  the
proportion  and  arrangement  of  his  centres,  so  ail
»  "  God  Evolving."    Robert  Buchanan.

.98


Beauty  and  Duty

will  fall  into  groups,  so  to  speak,  under  their
various  gods.  Thus  Plato,  in  the  "  Phaedrus,''
explains  that  Zeus  and  the  various  gods  move
through  heaven,  each  followed  by  a  company  of
souls,  who  thus  gain  a  glimpse  of  the  things  of
the  celestial  world.  And  afterwards,  when  they
are  fallen  to  earth,  each  soul  still  implicitly
belongs  "to  that  particular  god  of  whose  choir
he  was  a  member,"  and  seeks  for  his  love  and
mate  among  such  souls.  "  They  then  that
belong  to  Zeus  seek  to  have  for  their  beloved
one  who  resembles  Zeus  in  his  soul."  Similarly
the  followers  of  Hera  or  Apollo,  or  any  other
god,  "  walking  in  the  v/ays  of  the  god,  seek  a
love  who  is  to  be  like  their  god,  and  when  they
have  found  him  they  themselves  imitate  their
god,  and  persuade  their  love  to  do  the  same,  and
bring  him  into  harmony  with  the  form  and  ways
of  the  god  as  far  as  they  can."

Thus  the  man  and  woman  drawn  together  by
great  forces  deep-lying  in  the  race,  reveal  to  each
other  their  own  deep-rooted  divinity.  And  truly
when  love  comes  between  them  there  comes  for
the  first  time  {^pace  Thomas  Hardy)  something
like  real  knov/ledge.  There  comes  also  a  trans-
formation which  may  be  seen — a  change  and
glory  which  is  as  real  and  obvious  to  the  senses
as  it  is  far-reaching  and  miraculous  in  spiritual
significance.

And  may  we  not  say  (as  Schopenhauer  says  ^)
that  it  is  in  this  *  Meeting    of   the  Ideas  '  that
^  See  above,  chap.  iv.  p.  59.
199


The  Art  of  Creation

the  sense  of  Beauty,  that  the  Art  sense  every-
where consists  ?  When  an  Idea  that  is  struggling
for  expression  within  us  meets  with  and  recog-
nises the  same  Idea  (itself  indeed)  expressed  again
in  some  outer  form — be  it  man  or  woman,  or
flower,  or  slumbering  ocean — there  is  an  infinite
sense  of  relief,  of  recognition,  of  rest,  of  unity  ;
we  are  delivered  from  our  little  selves,  our  little
desires  and  unrest ;  and  with  the  eyes  of  the  gods
we  see  the  gods.

And  1  take  it  that  it  is  much  the  same  with
the  sense  of  Duty.  Much  has  been  written  about
the  Categoric  imperative  and  the  Stern  Daughter
of  the  voice  of  God.  It  is  sufficient  to  see  that
such  expressions  point  towards  a  transcendent
consciousness,  without  feeling  it  necessary  to
accept  all  they  imply.  The  sense  of  Duty  derives
primarily  and  essentially  from  the  sense  (and  the
fact)  of  oneness  between  ourselves  and  our  fellows.
Structurally  and  through  the  centuries  it  may
grow  and  be  built  up  in  forms  of  laws  and
customs  and  out  of  lower  motives  of  Fear  and
Conformity ;  but  ultimately  and  in  all  these
forms  it  is  the  Common  Life  asserting  itself,  and
the  sense  of  the  Common  Life  and  unity.  George
Santayana  in  his  very  suggestive  book  on  ''  The
Sense  of  Beauty"  ^  points  out  that  Fear,  involving
subconsciousness  of  terrors,  death,  disease,  &c.,
lies  behind  Duty ;  while  Love,  involving  sub-
consciousness of  health,  vitality  and  all  pleasur-
able things,  lies  behind  Beauty.     And  so  we  may

*  "The  Sense  of  Beauty."    Scribner,  1901,  pp.  24,  25.
200


Beauty  and  Duty

see  that  the  earlier  consciousness  of  the  race,
wherein  Fear  and  the  unfriendly  gods  play  so
important  a  part,  gives  birth  to  the  sentiment  of
Duty  ;  while  the  later  consciousness  endues  the
Beauty  form.  In  Wordsworth  we  may  discern
the  transition  taking  place  :  "  Flowers  laugh
before  thee  on  their  beds,  and  fragrance  in
thy  footing  treads ''  ;  and  among  the  Greeks
already  moral  actions  had  become  beautiful,
and  were  accounted  desirable  because  they  were
beautiful.

In  the  end  it  is  the  sense  of  Oneness,  and  of
the  One  Life,  which  underlies  these  two,  and
perhaps  many  other  enthusiasms  ;  and  may  we
not  think  that  both  Duty  and  Beauty,  the  sense
of  Morality  and  the  sense  of  Art,  when  they  at
last  realise  their  own  meaning,  are  taken  up  and
surrender  themselves  in  an  Idea  of  an  even  higher
order,  namely  that  of  Love  ?

That  this  sense  of  the  One  Life — of  the  race,
or  of  humanity — is  not  a  mere  figment,  but  a
very  living  reality,  many  folk's  experience  v/ill
testify.  Sometimes,  under  deep  emotion  rousing
the  whole  being,  there  comes  a  glimmering  yet
distinct  consciousness  of  this  agelong  existence.
Of  such  a  mood  Walt  Whitman's  poems  show
many  examples,  but  none  perhaps  more  striking
than  those  first  lines  of  ''  Children  of  Adam  "  : —

"  To  the  garden,  the  world  anew  ascending   .   .  .
Curious  here  behold  my  resurrection  after  slumber,
The  revolving  cycles  in  their  wide  sweep  having  brought  me
again,

Zoi


The  Art  of  Creation

Amorous,  mature,  all  beautiful  to  me,  all  wondrous,

My  limbs,  and  the  quivering  fire  which  ever  plays  through

them,  for  reasons,  most  wondrous,
Existing  I  peer  and  penetrate  still,
Content  with  the  present,  content  with  the  past,
By  my  side  or  back,  of  me  Eve  following,
Or  in  front,  and  I  following  her  just  the  same."


The  existence  of  various  orders  of  conscious-
ness is  a  conception  which  is  becoming  familiar
to-day.  What  with  the  subliminal  consciousness
of  F.  W.  Myers  and  the  psychical  researchers,  the
subconscious  mind  of  the  hypnotists,  the  race-
memory  and  heredity  of  the  biologists,  the  cosmic
consciousness  of  some  late  writers,  the  ecstasy  of
the  Christian  Mystics,  and  the  samadhi  of  the
Indian  gnanis,  we  have  abundant  evidence  of  a  yet
unexplored  world  within  us.  And  some  have
sought  to  show  that  there  is  a  complete  gradation
onwards  from  the  mere  consciousness  of  the
animals  through  the  self-consciousness  of  the
human  being,  to  family,  tribal,  and  race  conscious-
ness, and  so  upward  to  the  cosmic  life  and
Nirvana.

The  important  thing,  I  think,  at  present —
without  attempting  to  go  into  any  detail  on  the
.subject  or  to  classify  what  is  yet  unknown — is  to
see  that  undoubtedly  various  orders  of  conscious-
ness do  exist,  actually  embedded  within  us-;  and
that  the  words  I  and  Thou  do  not  merely  cover
our  bodily  forms  and  the  outlines  of  our  minds
as  we  habitually  represent  them  to  ourselves,  but
cover   also    immense    tracts    of  intelligence   and

302


Beauty  and  Duty

activity  lying  behind  these  and  only  on  occasions
coming  into  consciousness.  Yet  these  tracts
belong  to  us,  and  are  ourselves  quite  as  much  as,
and  perhaps  more  intimately  than,  those  com-
monly recognised.  It  is  the  waking  of  these  tracts,
and  their  inrush  upon  the  field  of  ordinary  con-
sciousness, which  is  held  to  explain  so  many
phenomena  of  our  psychic  and  religious  experi-
ence. To  command  these  tracts  in  such  a  way
as  to  be  able  to  enter  in  and  make  use  of  them  at
will,  and  to  bring  them  into  permanent  relation
with  the  conscious  ego,  will  I  think  be  the  method
of  advance,  and  the  means  by  which  all  these
questions  of  the  perduration  and  reincarnation  of
the  ego,  and  of  its  real  relation  with  other  egos,
will  at  length  be  solved.  If  we  could  by  any
means  explore  and  realise  what  is  meant  by  that
letter  '  I ' ;  if  we  could  travel  inward  with  firm
tread  to  its  remotest  depth,  and  find  the  regions
where  it  touches  close,  so  close,  on  the  other
forms  of  the  same  letter ;  if  we  could  stand
assured,  and  look  around  us,  in  that  central  land
where  it  ceases  to  convey  the  sense  of  difference
and  only  indicates  unity  ;  and  if  then  with  light-
ning swiftness  we  could  pass  to  the  extreme  peri-
phery where  in  its  particular  and  invincible  shape
it  almost  rejoices  to  stand  alone  antagonising  the
rest  of  the  universe;  why,  then,  surely  all  would  be
clear  to  us,  and  Gladness  and  Beauty  would  be
our  perpetual  attendants.  It  is  through  the  deep-
ening of  consciousness  that  these  results  will
gradually   be   obtained ;    and   the   forms  of  the

203


The  Art  of  Creation

race-consciousness  are  perhaps  intermediary  stages
on  the  way.

For,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is  in  the  constitution
of  things  that  the  large  and  harmonious  should
prevail  over  the  petty  and  discordant,  and  there
is  a  kind  of  necessity  driving  us  in  the  happier
direction.  In  memory  and  experience  the  over-
laying of  images  tends  to  the  mutual  obliteration
of  defects  and  excrescences,  and  the  production
of  a  composite  and  ideal  finer  than  any  single
specimen.  And  just  as  in  the  case  of  musical
sounds  transmitted  a  long  distance  through  the
air,  the  discords  cancel  each  other,  leaving  harmony
in  the  end — so  in  hereditary  transmission  the
elements  which  are  mutually  harmonious  prevail.
The  organic  centres  in  the  race  (or  in  the  indi-
vidual) which  tend  to  Strength,  Peace,  Harmony,
Life,  persist  ;  those  which  tend  to  unbalance,
pettiness,  decay,  and  mutual  conflict,  dissolve  and
disappear.  The  Angels  overcome  and  eject  the
Devils.  The  root-truths,  qualities,  powers  of
the  Universe  move  ever  forwards  to  their  expres-
sion. Beauty,  amid  the  tangle  of  the  superficial
and  unfinished,  shows  itself  more  and  more.
Man  rises  from  the  life  of  his  petty  self,  to  that
of  his  family,  his  tribe,  his  race,  mankind,  find-
ing his  greater  Self  each  time  in  these ;  and  as
he  does  so  his  gods  lose  more  and  more  their
deformity  and  terror,  and  become  clothed  with
harmony  and  grace.

The  primitive  gods,  the  early  idealisations,  are

more  local,    partial ;    they  represent  the  mental

204


Beauty  and  Duty

states  of  unformed  people  living  in  tribes,  families,
localities.  They  are  grotesque,  fearsome,  foolish,
these  Typhons,  Mexitlis,  Bulls,  Grizzlies,  Dagons,
Satans,  and  other  monsters ;  yet  they  linger  in
all  of  us  still — incarnations  of  foolish  heart-
quakings  and  prejudices,  which  though  dismissed
by  our  better  reason  still  haunt  the  twilight
grounds  of  our  subconsciousness.  Farther  on
and  higher  in  development,  we  come  to  such
beautiful  impersonations  as  Apollo,  Aphrodite,
Demeter,  Isis,  Mary^ — representing  far  profounder
movements  and  intuitions  of  the  human  mind  ;
or  to  those  general  tendencies  to  deify  the  King
or  the  Warrior  or  the  Saint,  which  may  be  found
in  most  races ;  and  all  of  these  too  linger  in  us,
inspiring  the  great  mass  of  our  religion,  poetry,
ideals,  and  those  enthusiasms  which  lift  us  out
of  daily  life  into  other  spheres  of  emotion  and
experience.  But  all  these  refer  to  particular
aspects  of  humanity.  It  is  only  with  the  in-
coming of  Democracy  in  its  largest  sense  that  the
idealisation  of  the  comimon  Man  and  Woman,  of
the  human  being,  irrespective  of  all  adornments,
occurs.  The  Egyptian  could  see  plainly  that  the
mighty  Pharaoh,  as  he  drove  by  in  his  chariot,
was  a  god,  but  he  could  not  see  that  the  negro
slave,  who  flicked  the  flies  from  his  royal  master,
was  equally  divine  ;  but  Whitman  boldly  says  of
the  men  and  women  of  the  street,  '*  What  gods
can  exceed  these  that  clasp  me  by  the  hand  ?  '*
For  him  the  sight  of  a  simple  human  being  was

sufficient    to    wake    the    glow    and    the   halo  of

205


•  The  Art  of  Creation

divinity.  This  latest  and  greatest  idealisation
proceeds  clearly  from  the  fact  that  the  image  or
object  in  such  case  rouses  the  glorified  conscious-
ness— not  of  any  one  line  of  experience  and
memory,  not  of  any  particular  aspect  or  section
of  the  race,  but  of  humanity  itself.  When  the
consciousness  in  a  man  has  deepened  so  far  that
it  is  in  touch  with  that  of  humanity,  then  clearly
any  human  being  may  wake  that  deeper  con-
sciousness. And  its  awakening  is  accompanied
by  a  sense  of  glory,  wonderment,  and  peren-
nial splendour  as  great  or  perhaps  greater  than
that  which  accompanied  the  visions  of  the  elder
gods.

Here  in  this  perennial,  immeasurable  conscious-
ness sleeping  within  us  we  come  again  to  our
Celestial  City,  our  Home  from  which  as  indivi-
duals we  proceed,  but  from  v/hich  we  are  never
really  separated.  It  is  surely  some  intimation
and  sense  of  this,  some  need  of  its  revelation,
which  gives  for  us  the  charm  of  Utopias  and
dreams  of  Paradise  and  Cities  of  the  Sun.  What
exactly  our  relation  as  individuals  to  that  whole
and  to  each  other,  and  what  our  relation  to  the
past  and  future,  may  be,  are  questions  which  for
the  present  we  need  not  trouble  ourselves  with.
When  it  is  realised  that  the  central  life  /V,  and
lives  and  moves,  within  us,  that  it  is  in  some
sense  ourselves,  these  questions  will  largely  fall
away.  Every  man  feels  doubtless  that  his  little
mortal  life  is  very  inadequate,  and  that  to  express
and  give  utterance  to  all  that  is  in  him  he  would

206


Beauty  and  Duty

need  many  lives,  many  bodies.  Even  what  we
have  been  able  to  say  here  shows  that  the  deeper
self  of  him — that  which  is  the  source  of  all  his
joy  and  inspiration — has  had  the  experience  of
many  lives,  many  bodies,  and  will  have.


207


XII

CREATION

We  have  suggested  (Chapters  I.  and  II.)  evolu-
tion out  of  the  Mind-stuff,  through  Feeling  and
Thought,  as  the  essential  process  of  Creation.
The  primal  undifferentiated  Being  takes  form.
The  movement  out  of  itself  is  e-motion,  feeling ;
the  form  into  which  it  moves  is  thought.  The
material  world,  the  world  of  Creation,  is  (as
physical  science  suggests)  movement  under  various
forms.

Let  us  consider  it  more  closely.  The  pro-
tozoic  cell  moves  towards  food.  There  is  motion,
which  we  may,  if  we  like,  associate  with  chemical
action  (chemotaxis)  ;  but  we  cannot  refuse  also
to  see  that  there  is  a  simultaneous  e-motion,  or
desire  for  food,  in  the  cell-consciousness.  The
repetition  of  this  movement  towards  food  evolves
at  hst  a  dim  perception  of  relationship,  a  thought
of  the  object  as  food  ;  and  with  this  thought  of
•relation,  and  the  repeated  action  which  the  object
thus  excites,  comes  structure — as  of  the  evolution
of  tentacles,  or  swimming  apparatus,  by  which
the  food  may  be  pursued  or  seized.

Later  on  in  evolution,  objects  are  conceived  not
only  as  food,  but  as  Fear  or  Anger  or  Jealousy,

208


Creation

or  what  not.  Objects,  of  course,  are  not  fear
or  anger,  but  they  wake  these  qualities  and  feel-
ings, and  so  build  the  body  and  the  life  of  the
being  concerned.  They  call  forth  the  new  births
within  the  soul  which  determine  its  manifestation
in  the  world.  Fear  oft  repeated  calls  forth  the
long  ears  of  the  rabbit  or  the  donkey,  or  gives
to  the  monkey  its  structure  for  climbing  trees.

Later  again  the  Me-sense  is  called  forth  and
descends  into  operation  within  man.  It  too
desires  food  (the  applause  of  others),  and  so
leads  to  modifications  of  structure,  to  adaptations
of  morals  and  manners,  such  as  will  secure  the
approval  of  fellow-beings.

Looking  at  things  in  this  way  we  seem  to
see  how,  through  ages  on  the  Earth,  not  only
the  great  needs  and  emotions  have  given  rise  to
whole  races  and  tribes  of  plants  and  animals,
but  the  detailed  forms  of  these  have  been  thought
out  through  processes  most  closely  resembling
our  own  human  thinking.  If  for  a  moment
one  considers  the  working  of  the  latter — how
if  one  wishes  to  solve  any  question  the  image-
making  faculty  within  supplies  a  host  of  chance-
suggestions,  one  of  which  at  last  is  found  to
be  the  form  required  ;  or  if  we  consider  how
the  human  race  at  large  has  worked  out  any
great  problem — say  that  of  ship-building — how
through  centuries  and  thousands  of  years  tiny
suggestions  and  modifications  have  been  thrown
out  by  innumerable  thinkers — most  of  which
have  failed  and  been  discarded  in  the  struggle,

209  O


The  Art  of  Creation

but  some  of  which  have  succeeded  and  been
adopted — and  how  at  last  the  form  of  a  modern
ship  has  emerged :  we  see  at  once  that  the
process  by  which  through  the  centuries  the
forms  of  a  stag  or  a  walnut  tree  have  been  pro-
duced are  quite  similar.  They  have  been  thought
out.  The  image-making  faculty  in  each  genera-
tion of  deer  or  tree  has  thrown  out  (chiefly  in
the  seed  ^)  casual  variations,  suggestions,  most  of
which  have  failed,  but  some  have  been  adopted.
Each  individual  tree  or  animal  has  contributed
its  tiny  share  of  thought  and  ingenuity  to  the
success  or  failure  of  its  own  life,  and  so  of  the
form  which  it  represents.  In  the  vast  succession
of  individuals,  of  generations,  the  total  mass  of
accumulated  thought  and  ingenuity  has  built
itself  and  embodied  itself  in  the  marvellous  beauty,
expressiveness,  and  meaning,  of  the  stag  or  the
tree.  These  forms,  and  the  forms  of  man  him-
self, and  of  the  different  races  of  man,  are  ''  the
result  of  the  selection  and  chiselling  of  thousands
of  minds  through  the  centuries."  And,  at  once,
when  we  realise  this  view  of  Nature  and  Creation,
we  realise  our  part  in  it,  our  continuity  with  it
all,  and  xhtpower^  hitherto  undreamed  of,  which
we  may  wield,  if  we  only  seize  the  whole  process
in  ourselves,  and  at  its  very  source.

Here  then,  at  this  point,  comes  a  change   of

conception.      All   down    the   race-life   before  us

this   process   of   Creation,   through   intermediary

Feeling    and  Thought,   has  been  going  on — on

'  See  p.  30,  stipra,

2IO


Creation

a  vast  scale,  and  over  our  heads  as  it  were.  We
have  been  like  puppets  in  the  game;  and  all
these  wonderful  race-things,  these  swift  powers,
these  weaknesses  and  disabilities,  which  we  inherit
in  our  bodies,  we  have  looked  upon  as  fatal
in  their  domination  over  us — not  to  be  escaped
from,  not  to  be  resisted.

But  now  comes  a  new  conception.  This  Ego
which  all  down  the  ages  has  come  building  up
and  slowly  perfecting  the  expression  of  itself,
is  '  there '  still.  We  are  that  Ego.  It  is  not
an  alien  tyrant  dominating  us,  it  is  our  very  self.
It  is  not  somewhere  back  in  the  dark  infinite.
It  is  here.  And  with  this  recognition  all  life  is
changed.

The  whole  life  of  the  Race  from  which  we  have
come,  the  whole  route,  the  whole  series  of  thought-
processes  by  which  we  have  descended,  is  (it  cannot
be  too  often  repeated)  within  us,  in  our  bodies,  in
our  subconscious  selves.  It  is  not  that  we  have  to
go  rambling  afar  through  great  aeons  of  uncertain
history  and  biology  to  find  this  Race-life.  It —
or  that  branch  of  it  to  which  we  belong — is
here  and  now  in  our  bodies.  The  memories,
the  accumulated  experiences,  habits,  the  whole
thought-concatenation  which  has  built  them  up,
is  there — only  waiting  to  be  brought  again  into
consciousness.  Every  one  of  these  organs,  the
eye,  the  liver,  the  thyroid  gland,  or  what  not,
has  been  built  up  for  a  special  use  by  intensely
conscious  selective  thought.  It  is,  in  fact,  at  this
moment  a  habit  of  thought — having  of  course,

2H


The  Art  of  Creation

like  every  thought-structure,  a  definite  form—
and  capable  of  being  taken  up  into  consciousness
again.

The  whole  life  which  has  been  thought  out
and  expressed  in  the  Race  before  us  is  in  our
bodies ;  and  something  more^  i.e.  that  which  has
not  as  yet  got  itself  expressed.  The  primal
being,  in  which  all  thoughts  of  necessity  in-
here, which  underlies  all  thoughts,  and  contains
myriads  yet  unexpressed,  is  in  us.  It  is  there,
and  accessible  to  our  consciousness.  When  we
reach  to  it  we  reach  the  source  of  all  Power.

We  are  in  the  habit  of  regarding  our  bodies
as  material  legacies  from  the  past — that  is,  as
things  unintelligent  and  therefore  essentially
unintelligible — and  accept  them,  as  I  have  said,
as  a  kind  of  lumbering  fate  or  destiny,  which
we  may  struggle  against  indeed,  but  to  which
we  must  eventually  succumb.  But  let  us  look  at
them  as  mental  legacies — as  congeries  of  customs,
habits,  views,  prejudices,  thought-forms,  handed
down,  and  immediately  the  whole  aspect  of  the
life-problem  is  changed.  The  thought-habits
thus  crystallised  in  us  may  not  be  the  best  we
can  imagine ;  they  may  be  inchoate  forms  of  the
race-life,  destined  to  be  replaced  by  superior
forms ;  new  needs,  emotions,  surging  within  us
may  find  our  present  outlines  inadequate.  But
the  point  is  that  our  bodies  now  will  no  longer
appear  as  alien  and  separate  things  from  our
minds,  but  as  our  own  race-mind  made  visible,
and  as  essentially  continuous  with  and  undivided

212


Creation

from  that  which  we  more  specially  call  our-
selves.

And  instantly  it  becomes  clear  that  our  bodies,
instead  of  oppressing  like  a  nightmare,  may  be-
come our  most  willing  servants,  and  may  even
be  capable  of  the  most  extraordinary  and  un-
expected transformations.

For  consider  for  a  moment  the  thought-
nature  of  the  mind — that  which  we  call  specially
mental  in  ourselves.  A  man's  conscious  mind
(we  know  it  only  too  well)  is  a  mass  of  habitual
thoughts,  prejudices,  ways  of  looking  at  things.
It  has  often  a  most  rigid  outline.  He  is  a  hard-
and-fast  Tory,  or  a  Plymouth  brother,  or  a
screaming  Radical,  or  an  obdurate  Secularist.
The  form  of  the  mind  is  distinct  and  set;  one
can  almost  fed  its  shape,  as  if  it  were  a  body ;
indeed  one  can  detect  its  shape  in  the  curves  and
lines  of  the  body  itself.  And  this  mental  form
in  such  cases  is  so  set,  that  it  offers  the  greatest
resistance  to  the  entry  of  a  new  thought.  You
talk  in  vain  to  a  person  of  such  type ;  you  adduce
arguments,  instances ;  you  press  new  facts  upon
him  ;  but  these  things  roll  off  again  and  effect  no
lodgment.  Yet  at  last,  when  as  it  were  by  a
surgical  operation,  a  new  idea  is  really  introduced
into  his  mind,  how  astonishing  the  change!  How
often  a  single  suggestion  or  hint  from  nature
or  history,  finding  its  way  at  last  into  the  brain
of  some  Biblical  Calvinist,  has  brought  the
whole  structure  of  his  religion  or  superstition  to
the  ground,  and  turned  him  into  an  implacable

213


The  Art  of  Creation

*  freethinker.'  In  such  cases  the  power  of  a  single
idea  (germinal  as  every  idea  is  with  a  certain  life
of  its  own)  is  something  almost  terrible.  The
old  thought-structure  gives  way  before  it ;  de-
vastation spreads  through  the  unseen  chambers ;
the  man  thinks  he  is  going  mad,  or  really  loses
his  reason  for  a  time.  Then  he  emerges — his
faculties  and  activities  keyed  upon  a  new  con-
ception of  life,  his  mental  outlook  and  habit
altered,  his  body  even  notably  changed.     Or  the

*  freethinker '  in  his  turn,  and  by  exactly  similar
process,  is  transformed  into  a  Spiritualist — and
the  change  is  written  on  his  face !

This  power,  this  vitality,  of  a  single  thought
or  conception,  and  its  capacity  of  growth  or
multiplication  from  itself  like  a  living  organism,
are  things  which  I  think  have  not  been  sufficiently
appreciated.  It  is  not  only  that  one  hitherto
unconsidered  thought  (or  fact)  may  destroy  a
whole  system  of  philosophy  or  of  science — may
act  like  a  poison  on  such  system  unless  it  can  be
properly  assimilated  and  digested — but  that  a
similar  thought  may  multiply  in  the  brain  of  a
man  and  transform  his  whole  existence.

Here  is  a  plain  man  who  has  led  a  workaday
life  for  some  years,  honest  and  decent  and  re-
spected by  his  neighbours.  One  day  a  chance
speculation  (perhaps  in  the  markets,  perhaps
on  the  turf)  unexpectedly  successful  sets  him
thinking.  The  idea  that  he  can  make  Money^
can  get  Rich,  effects  a  lodgment  in  his  mind.
A  kind  of  fever  ensues.     The  one  idea  spawns,

214


Creation

generates,  and  multiplies  itself.  In  a  few  weeks
or  months  the  man  is  deep  in  all  manner  of
plans,  schemes,  and  speculations,  in  a  few  years
he  is  a  millionaire,  and  a  pest  to  himself  and
society.  He  is  altered  in  mind  and  deeply
altered  in  physique  and  bodily  habit.  This  one
idea  of  Money-making,  very  old  in  the  Race-
experience,  and  generating  and  propagating  itself
down  the  centuries,  has  still  enormous  vitality ;
and  fastening  itself  to-day  upon  thousands  of
brains,  and  there  spawning,  completely  mono-
polises and  subverts  them,  reducing  them  to  a
kind  of  slavery — even  as  it  might  be  some  fell
disease.

And  seriously  the  question  may  be  asked,
Whether  the  microbial  organisms  which  our
scientific  instruments  reveal  to  us  are  not  indeed
the  external  forms  of  beings  which  seen  from
within  would  appear  to  us  as  simple  or  rudi-
mentary states  of  mind  :  whether  each  microbe
which  constitutes  or  is  associated  with  a  disease
is  not  representative  of  some  attitude  of  mind
(like  Fear  or  Worry)  inimical  and  baneful  to  the
human  organism,  while  those  microbes  which  are
associated  with  health  are  representative  of  con-
structive and  harmonious  mental  attitudes.  The
planet  on  which  we  live  swarms  with  highly
complex  organisms,  which  we  call  human  bodies ;
and  we  are  so  constituted  that  we  cannot  help
crediting  each  such  body  with  an  internal  aspect,
or  mentality,  which  we  call  its  mind,  also  highly

complex.       As    we    range    down    through    the

215


The  Art  of  Creation

animal  kingdom  we  can  hardly  help  doing  the
same  thing,  and  crediting  each  simpler  organism
with  a  correspondingly  less  complex  state  of  mind.
When,  therefore,  we  reach  the  simplest  forms,  like
bacilli,  whose  whole  life-action  consists  in  one  or
two  very  simple  operations,  including  perpetual
self-propagation,  is  it  not  natural  to  suppose
that  each  such  organism  indicates  a  state  of
mind  of  a  very  simple  or  rudimentary  type — a
single  organic  thought  or  desire,  as  we  might
call  it,  incessantly  concerned  in  a  certain  form
of  action,  and  in  the  repetition  and  reproduction
of  itself?

Shall  we  actually  discover,  ere  long,  the  bacillus
of  Fear,  or  of  Money-greed,  or  of  Vanity,  or  of
Ambition.  It  does  not  seem  so  very  improbable.
Why  are  certain  bodily  diseases  associated  with
certain  mental  temperaments?  What  are  those
thoughts  that  are  in  the  air,  like  microbes —
some  beneficial,  some  baneful  ?  What  are  those
microbes  which  swarm  from  one  brain  to  another,
like  thoughts  ?  Professor  Elie  Metchnikoff  in
his  last  book,  '*  The  Nature  of  Man,"  says  that
there  is  a  class  of  tiny  organism,  he  calls  macro-
phags^  which  in  old  age  gnaw  and  eat  away  the
brain  and  other  organs.  What  does  Worry  do  ?
Is  it  a  macrophag  ?

But  leaving  this  question  of  the  special  inter-
pretation we  are  to  give  to  microbes,  let  us
return  to  the  general  fact  that  our  bodies  are
the  legacies  of  the  immemorial  thought  of  our
ancestors,    that    they    are   those    thought-forms,

2l6


Creation

habits,  prejudices,  consolidated  into  definite  shape
and  function ;  then  does  it  not  seem  clear  what  a
power  a  new  feeling  or  thought  may  have  and
may  exercise  in  disturbing  or  readjusting  the
organisation  of  the  body  ?  That  *  conversions '  and
other  such  experiences  change  folk  in  the  most
amazing  way  is  a  fact  we  have  already  alluded
to.  Such  things  not  only  shatter  and  rebuild
people's  minds,  but  also  their  bodies — simply,  it
would  appear,  because  the  body  is  also  a  system
of  habits  and  thought-forms,  like  the  mind — and
a  system  lying  in  close  relationship  (in  fact,  really
continuous)  with  what  we  call  the  mind.  And
does  it  not  seem  clear  that  in  cases  new  thoughts
may  enter  and  disturb  or  modify  the  body
directly,  without  passing  through  or  delaying  in
the  mind — or  at  any  rate  without  disturbing  it —
perhaps  because  the  mind  has  already  assimilated
or  is  familiar  with  them  ^  I  know  of  cases  in  which
the  receipt  of  so-called  bad  news,  while  leaving
the  mind  quite  untroubled  and  serene,  has  caused
a  complete  prostration  of  the  body  for  some
days ;  and  every  one  knows  of  the  wonderfully
heartening  effect  on  the  body  of  a  piece  of  good
news,  even  at  times  when  the  conscious  man
has  forgotten  the  intelligence,  or  is  not  paying
special  heed  to  it.  No  doctor  is  unaware  of  the
importance  of  instilling  courage  and  faith  into
his  patient.  This  attitude  of  mind  apparently
spreads  through  the  body,  confirming  and  strength-
ening its  organic  processes.     Doubt  and  despair  are

equally  disorganising.     A  cruel  word,  wounding

217


The  Art  of  Creation

the  heart,  may  paralyse  all  strength  in  the  limbs.
One  little  thought  or  feeling,  and  the  whole
body-structure  deranged  !

But,  naturally,  those  parts  of  the  body,  or
consolidated  racial  mind,  which  are  most  recent
and  nearest  to  the  conscious  mind,  are  most  easily
affected  by  new  thought.  The  more  complex
nerve-centres,  the  more  recently  formed  plexuses,
representing  and  embodying  more  highly  wrought
thought  and  emotion,  are  more  easily  modified,
more  easily  perhaps  upset,  than  the  more  primi-
tive and  simple.  In  insanity,  it  is  the  higher
thought-forms  and  later  developed  bodily  faculties
— the  moral  nature,  the  extended  co-ordination
of  the  limbs — which  first  give  way.  In  drunken-
ness the  same.  The  man  plumps  down  on  all
fours,  because  the  *  leg-centre '  (at  the  top  of
the  brain)  was  in  his  long  history  one  of  the
latest  formed — and  here  the  thought-habit  of
uprightness  dwells.  In  hypnotic  suggestion  a
single  notion  introduced  may  strangely  transmute
a  man's  actions,  physiognomy,  or  even  senses  of
taste  or  smell.  It  may  act  poisonously  or  cura-
tively  on  his  body.

Still,  in  all  these  cases  we  do  not  expect  to
find  the  fundamental  outlines  of  the  body  changed
— the  bones,  the  muscles,  the  forms  and  func-
tions of  the  organs — or  if  so,  we  only  expect  the
alteration  to  be  very  slow  and  gradual.  And  this
— even  though  we  admit  the  body's  close  affinity  in
itself  to  thought  and  to  the  mind — is  perfectly

natural  and  rational.     For  the  physical  structure

218


Creation

of  the  body,  muscles  and  organs,  is  immensely
old,  and  represents  thought-habits  which  have
been  allowed  and  confirmed  and  verified  by
countless  generations ;  and  it  is  not  likely  they
are  going  to  give  way  at  once  to  some  upstart
new  idea,  any  more  than  a  blooming  old  Tory  is
likely  to  have  his  political  faith  upset  by  the
first  young  Radical  shaver  who  comes  along.
Nevertheless  the  bones  and  muscles  and  solider
parts  of  the  body  are  altered  by  thought.  Sandow
has  shown  us  that.  He  has  particularly  insisted
on  the  great  influence  which  concentration  of  the
mind  exercises  on  the  growth  of  the  muscles.

Every  one  must  have  noticed  how  certain
attitudes  of  mind  are  associated  with  certain
attitudes  of  body — courage  and  faith  with  an
erect  carriage,  depression  and  doubt  with  bent
back  and  uncertain  gait,  and  so  forth.  It  is  clear
that  when  certain  attitudes  of  mind  become  per-
manent and  habitual,  they  must  permanently
alter  the  carriage  and  structure  of  the  body.
Again,  that  the  chemical  nature  of  the  secretions
from  the  various  glands  and  organs  is  altered  in
connection  with  the  various  emotions — joy,  fear,
grief,  pain,  love,  and  so  forth — is  a  well-known
fact ;  and  it  is  obvious  that  when  these  states  of
mind  persist,  permanent  alterations  of  the  func-
tions of  the  organs  must  follow.

Thus  we  arrive — and  the  human  race  is  arriv-
ing— at  the  conscious  use  of  the  formative  power.
We  are  arriving  at  one  of  the  most  fruitful  and
important   turning-points  in  the  history  of  the

219


The  Art  of  Creation

race.  The  Self  is  entering  into  relation  with  the
Body.  For,  that  the  individual  should  conceive
and  know  himself,  not  as  a  toy  and  chance-
product  of  his  own  bodily  heredity,  but  as  identi-
fied and  continuous  with  the  Eternal  Self  of
which  his  body  is  a  manifestation,  is  indeed  to
begin  a  new  life  and  to  enter  a  hitherto  un-
dreamed world  of  possibilities.

It  begins  to  dawn  on  us  that,  identifying  our-
selves with  this  immortal  self,  we  also  can  take
part  consciously  in  the  everlasting  act  of  Creation.
To  still  the  brain,  and  feel,  feel,  feel  our  identity
with  that  deepest  being  within  us  is  the  first
thing.  There  in  that  union,  in  that  identity,  all
the  sins  and  errors  of  the  actual  world  are  done
away.  We  are  most  truly  ourselves ;  we  go  back
to  the  root  from  which  all  that  may  really  express
us  must  inevitably  spring.

Remaining  there  in  silence  as  long  as  may  be,
then  out  of  that  state  will  inevitably  spring  a
wave  of  conscious  Feeling — of  joy,  courage,  love,
expansion,  or  whatever  it  may  be — a  feeling  not
foreign  or  fabricated  or  ephemeral,  but  deeply
rooted  and  expressive  of  our  real  life.  Then
holding  on  to  that  root-idea,  that  feeling,  that
emotion,  that  desire,  whatever  it  may  be,  con-
fident in  its  organic  rightness  and  constructive
power — holding  steadily  to  it  for  a  time — per-
fectly naturally  and  inevitably  out  of  it  will
flow  certain  forms  of  Thought.  The  feeling
will  take  shape,  it  will   clothe  itself  in   images

of  things  actual ;    and  already  the  process  will

220


Creation

have  begun  by  which  those  things  will  be  created
or  realised  in  the  world.  '*A11  consciousness  is
motor,"  says  William  James  ;  and  no  sooner  does
the  new  emotion  or  desire  come  within  the
border  of  consciousness  than  it  sets  the  springs
of  action  in  motion  which  inevitably  flow  down
to  Creation  and  the  outer  world.

It  is  not  that  any  violent  act  of  Will  is  re-
quired for  the  realisation  of  things  in  this  outer
world.  It  is  rather  that  by  non-acting  we  should
identify  ourselves  with  the  great  process  of
Creation  for  ever  going  on.^  There  is  Will
certainly,  there  is  control  and  power  in  holding
and  concentrating  on  any  given  feeling  or
thought ;  but  it  is  not  the  violent  will  which
would  seek  to  wrest  materials  from  their  places.
The  driver  of  a  locomotive  does  not  jump
down  and  seek  forcibly  to  turn  the  wheels  of  his
engine ;  but  moving  one  or  two  levers,  he  con-
trols the  great  driving  forces  at  their  source.
So  handling  the  levers  of  Feeling  and  Thought
we  can  already  send  the  forces  of  Nature  in
our  bodies  and  elsewhere  along  the  lines  which
we  desire.

Long  and  persevering  must  the  practice  and
exercise  be,  by  which  power  to  direct  thought
and  feeling  may  be  attained,  and  by  which  the
sense  of  identity  with   the  universal    self   may

1  "By  non-action,"  says  Lao-Tzu,  "there  is  nothing  that
may  not  be  done.  One  might  undertake  the  government  of
the  world  without  ever  taking  any  trouble — and  as  for  all  those
who  take  trouble,  they  are  not  competent  to  the  government
of  the  world."

221


The  Art  of  Creation

be  established — for  without  this  latter  all  our
work  must  inevitably  turn  out  vain  and  ephem-
eral— but  when  the  conditions  are  fulfilled,  then
strangely  obvious  is  the  result  and  simple  the
act  of  Creation.


222


XIII

TRANSFORMATION

Transformations  are  perpetually  going  on
throughout  the  animal  kingdom,  and  through-
out our  individual  lives.

New  ideals,  new  qualities,  new  feelings  and
envisagements  of  the  outer  world,  are  perpetually
descending  from  within,  both  in  man  and  the
animals ;  new  centres  and  plexuses  are  forming
among  the  nerves ;  new  gods  are  presiding  in
the  region  of  our  dreams.  Every  one  of  these
things  means  a  new  centre  of  life  and  activity,
and  a  transformation  (slow  or  swift)  in  the  type
of  the  individual  or  the  race.

The  transformations  induced  even  by  momen-
tary excitement  of  particular  feelings  or  centres
are  m.ost  extraordinary.  See  a  man  under  the
influence  of  violent  Anger  or  of  Jealousy — his
whole  mien,  face,  attitude,  exhalation  of  char-
acter changed — it  is  hardly  credible  that  he  is
the  same  person  that  we  knew  before.  Or  see
him  under  the  influence  of  some  strong  enthu-
siasm or  generous  emotion,  doing  things  he
would  have  been  physically  incapable  of  at
another  time !

Or  again,  when  the  poison  of  drink  reaches
223


The  Art  of  Creation

and  inflames  some  particular  centre  in  the  brain,
Philip  drunk  becomes  so  utterly  different  from
Philip  sober  that  we  can  only  say  he  is  not  *  him-
self; or  when  disease  or  old  age  or  madness  act
in  a  similar  way,  these  alterations  and  alternations
of  Personality  can  only  be  described  as  transforma-
tions;  taking  place,  indeed,  according  as  one
centre  or  another  in  the  brain,  one  synthesis  or
another  in  the  mind,  may  happen  to  be  m  the
ascendant.

Throughout  the  whole  animal  kingdom,  but
especially  among  insects,  transformations  of  one
kind  or  another  are  most  abundant  and  remark-
able. There  are  *  recapitulations '  by  the  em-
bryos and  young  of  mammals  of  the  life-history
of  their  race,  with  strongly  marked  breaks  and
mutations  corresponding  to  the  stages  of  evolu-
tion represented;  there  are  the  metamorphoses
of  caterpillars  and  flies,  some  including  twenty
or  thirty  changes  in  a  single  life-time ;  there
are  the  transformations  and  alternate  generations
of  annelids  and  Crustacea ;  and  there  are  strange
jumps  and  quick  disguises  in  the  lives  of  some
plants.  Even  the  human  being  passes  through
a  great  number  of  very  distinct  stages  and  phases
from  the  embryo  onwards  to  old  age.^

But  probably  the  greatest  and  most  important

of  all  transformations  in  the  human  and  animal

kingdoms,  is  that  which  takes  place  when   the

centre  of  life  in  Man  is  transferred,  as  indicated

in  the  last  chapter,  from  unconscious  activity  in

1  See  infra,  "The  Mayfly,"  p.  230  et  seq.
224


Transformation

the  body  to  the  conscious  self — that  is,  when
the  individual  self,  reaching  union  with  the
universal,  becomes  consciously  and  willingly  the
creator  and  inspirer  of  the  body.  That  is  indeed
a  Transfiguration.  The  individual  is  no  longer
under  the  domination  of  the  body  and  its  heredity,
but  rising  out  of  this  tomb  becomes  lord  and
master  of  the  body's  powers,  and  identified  with
the  immortal  Self  of  the  world.

This  transformation,  whilst  the  greatest  and
most  wonderful,  is  also  of  course  the  most  diffi-
cult in  Man's  evolution,  for  him  to  effect.  It
may  roughly  be  said  that  the  whole  of  the  civilisa-
tion-period in  Man's  history  is  the  preparation
for  it.  For  though  the  transformation  itself  (of
the  consciousness,  from  the  second  order  to  the
third  order)  may  be  practically  instantaneous,  yet
the  pupal  condition,  during  which  the  elements
of  the  change  are  being  prepared  and  set  in  order,
must  necessarily  be  immensely  protracted  ;  and  it
must  be  remembered  too,  that  when  for  any
individual  the  transformation  of  consciousness
does  occur  and  the  new  forces  begin  to  operate,
it  does  not  follow  at  once  that  the  change  is
permanent,  and  that  there  will  not  be  backsliding?
again  to  the  old  centres ;  or  that  the  change  in
the  inward  consciousness  can  be  immediately
followed  by  corresponding  change  in  the  whole
bodily  system.  Indeed  it  seems  probable  that
for  the  individual  the  permanent  change  is  hardly
possible  until  such  time  as  large  portions  of  the
race  round  him  are  sharing  in  it.

225  ^


The  Art  of  Creation

Thus,  though  this  great  Transformation  may  in-
dividually have  an  instantaneous  character,  yet  the
period  of  its  preparation  and  establishment  may
occupy  ages  of  human  history  We  may  divide
the  latter  into  three  periods :  The  first,  or  animal
period,  in  which  the  human  being  follows  his
body  and  its  instincts  unhesitatingly ;  the  second,
or  intellectual  period,  in  which  a  half-formed,
separate  and  illusive,  self  appears ;  and  the  third,
or  period  of  the  Super-man  (if  we  like  to  call  it
so)  in  which  the  self,  being  identified  with  the
universal  being,  becomes  the  centre  of  absolute
recognition  and  reliance  and  repose.  The  great
Transformation  is  that  which  takes  place  at  the
entrance  of  the  third  period ;  and  the  second
period  is  the  period  of  its  preparation.

This  transition  from  the  first  to  the  third  stage
is  obviously  a  very  difficult  and  precarious  one.
It  covers  practically  the  whole  of  what  we  call
civilisation.  During  this  period  the  sense  of
Me-ness  has  to  descend  into  consciousness,  and
to  be  evolved — the  sense  of  self,  but  of  course
at  first  in  a  very  imperfect  and  illusive  form.
The  (false)  notion  of  a  separate  and  atomic  self,
apart  and  having  interests  distinct  from  the  rest
of  the  universe,  for  a  long  time  dominates ;  and
for  a  long  time  leads  to  the  most  terrible  struggles
and  miseries.  There  is  no  real  reliance  anywhere.
The  old  animal  instincts  and  sanctions  having
been  abandoned,  there  remains  nothing  but  this
illusive  phantom  ego  which  gives  way  direfuUy
the  moment  any  pressure  is  placed  upon  it.    The

226


Transformation

fight  for  this  self  as  against  other  selves,  and  the
everlasting  doubt  as  to  where,  in  the  midst  of  the
general  chaos,  reliance  may  be  found,  lead  to  huge
and  despairing  efforts  of  the  Brain — as  it  were  to
solve  a  double  and  impossible  problem.  And  the
growth  and  ascendancy  of  the  self-conscious,
analytic,  individualising  Brain  becomes  one  of  the
great  marks  of  this  period.  The  Brain  and  Self-
consciousness  are  the  midwives,  as  it  were,  of  this
great  birth  and  transformation — the  greatest  of
all  births  and  transformations — of  the  soul.  They
are  both  of  incalculable  value  and  importance
to  humanity ;  but  in  their  present  form,  and
as  long  as  the  true  individuality  and  the  true
self  is  unrealised,  they  both  can  only  be  re-
garded as  distorted,  unbeautiful  shapes,  to  be
redeemed  in  the  future  when  the  present  work
is  done.

There  comes  a  time  however,  and  at  last,  when
— the  real  self  emerging  into  consciousness,  abys-
mal, adamantine,  founded  deep  below  and  beyond
all  worlds — the  Brain  ceases  from  its  terrified  and
insatiate  quest.  Even  the  far-inherited  and  age-
long animal  instincts,  rooted  in  the  great  immen-
sity of  material  Nature,  yield  in  respect  of
authority  or  promise  of  security  to  this  far  deeper
knowledge  of  the  Nature-self.  They  either  fail
and  shrivel  before  it,  or  becoming  identified  with
it  lose  their  separate  and  external  outline ;  and
the  first  period  joining  on  and  becoming  amalga-
mated to  the  third,  leaves  only  the  tiniest  crack

or  seam  between  to  indicate  what  was  once  a  huge

227


The  Art  of  Creation

gulf  including    thousands    of  years    of    human
history.^

The  brain  is  stilled.  It  does  not  cease  from  its
natural  and  joyful  activities.  But  it  ceases  from
that  terrified  and  joyless  quest  which  was  inevit-
able to  it  as  long  as  its  own  existence,  its  own
foundation,  its  own  affiliation  to  the  everlasting
Being  was  in  question  and  in  doubt.  The  Man
at  last  lets  Thought  go  ;  he  glides  below  it  into
the  quiet  feeling,  the  quiet  sense  of  his  own
identity  with  the  self  of  other  things — of  the
universe.  He  glides  past  the  feeling  into  the
very  identity  itself,  where  a  glorious  all-conscious-
ness leaves  no  room  for  separate  self-thoughts  or
emotions.  He  leans  back  in  silence  on  that  inner
being,  and  bars  off  for  a  time  every  thought,  every
movement  of  the  mind,  every  impulse  to  action,
or  whatever  in  the  faintest  degree  may  stand
between  him  and  That ;  and  so  there  comes  to
him  a  sense  of  absolute  repose,  a  consciousness  of
immense  and  universal  power,  such  as  completely

1  When  the  consciousness  deepens  to  that  of  the  universal
life,  and  to  the  point  whence  as  it  were  the  different  races  have
radiated,  then  the  figures  of  the  gods  grow  dim  and  lose  their
outline,  the  rivalries  and  mutual  recriminations  of  the  various
human  ideals  cease  to  have  the  old  poignancy  and  interest ;  and
their  place  is  taken  by  a  profound  sense  and  intense  realisation
of  the  unity  and  common  life  of  all  races  and  creatures ;  by  a
strange  and  novel  capacity  of  understanding  and  entering  into
the  habits  of  distant  beings  or  peoples  ;  and  by  a  mysterious
sense  of  power  to  '  flow  down '  into  these  forms  and  embody
therein  a  portion  of  the  life  universal.  And  with  all  this  come
naturally  great  changes  in  the  institutions  and  political  forms
of  peoples,  and  the  spreading  of  the  genuine  Democracy  and
Socialism  over  the  earth.

228


Transformation

transforms  the  world  for  him.  All  life  is  changed;
he  becomes  master  of  his  fate ;  he  perceives  that
all  things  are  hurrying  to  perform  his  will ;  and
whatever  in  that  region  of  inner  Life  he  may
condescend  to  desire,  that  already  is  shaping  itself
to  utterance  and  expression  in  the  outer  world
around  him.  "The  winds  are  his  messengers
over  all  the  world,  and  flames  of  fire  his  servants;
.  .  .  and  the  clouds  float  over  the  half-concealed,
dappled,  and  shaded  Earth — to  fulfil  his  will,  to
fulfil  his  eternal  joy."

For  the  ceaseless  endeavour  to  realise  this
identity  with  the  great  Self,  there  is  no  substitute.
No  teaching,  no  theorising,  no  philosophising,  no
rules  of  conduct  or  life  will  take  the  place  of
actual  experience.  This  is  the  Divine  yoga  or
union,  from  which  really  all  life,  all  Creation,
proceeds.  And  for  its  realisation  it  is  necessary
that  at  times,  as  already  said,  all  thought,  all
plans  and  purposes,  should  be  obliterated  from
the  mind,  leaving  it  free  to  fall  back  and  touch
absolutely  to  its  own  source.  What  is  learnt  by
this  actual  experience  is  so  much  more,  and  so
much  more  important,  than  anything  that  can  be
learnt  by  teaching  or  philosophy,  that  at  any  rate
without  it  the  latter  can  hardly  be  accounted  of
much  value.

It  may,  however,  be  of  some  use,  as  a  supple-
ment to  the  reader*s  personal  experience,  to  say  a
few  words  more.  This  true  Ego — this  Self  above
and   beyond    the  separate   Me — to  know   it   one

239


The  Art  of  Creation

must,  as  I  say,  become  identified  with  it ;  and
that  is  ultimately  the  only  way  of  knowing  it.
Yet  it  may  help  us,  to  be  able  to  see,  as  a  matter
of  speculation,  what  its  nature  may  and  must  be.

The  true  Self  is  universal :  that  is,  it  is  the
Self  of  all  beings.  But  that  does  not  mean  that
it  is  not  individual.  On  the  contrary,  as  far  as  it
is  the  self  of  any  one  being  it  must  be  individual.
If  it  is  remembered  what  was  said  in  the  chapter
on  Affiliation  it  will  be  seen  that  every  local  or
individual  self  exists  only  by  reason  of  its  being
an  outgrowth  or  prolongation  or  aspect  of  the
universal  Self,  and  that  conversely  the  universal
self  has  no  definite  expression  or  existence  except
in  so  far  as  it  is  individual  and  local  in  some
degree  or  other.  The  true  and  ultimate  Self
therefore  in  each  of  us  is  universal  and  common
to  all  beings,  and  yet  it  is  also  individual  and
specialised  in  a  certain  direction.  When  the
more  universal  nature  of  the  Self  descends  and
becomes  revealed,  the  consciousness  of  the
individual  necessarily  takes  certain  forms  corre-
sponding.^

One  of  these  is  Love  and  Sym.pathy.  The  self,
hitherto  deeming  itself  a  separate  atom,  suddenly
becomes  aware  of  its  inner  unity  with  these  other
human  beings,  animals,  plants  even.  It  is  as  if  a
veil  had  been  drawn  aside.  A  deep  understand-
ing, knowledge,  flows  in.  Love  takes  the  place
of  ignorance  and  blindness ;  and  to  wound  another
is  to  wound  oneself.     It  is  the  great  deliverance

*  See  note  on  the  great  primal  Ideas,  chap.  vii.  p.  121.
230


Transformation

from  the  prison-life  of  the  separate  self,  and
comes  to  the  latter  sometimes  with  the  force  and
swiftness  of  a  revelation.

Another  form  is  Faith,  Courage,  Confidence.
If  I  have  my  home  in  these  other  bodies  as  well
as  my  own,  if  my  life  is  indeed  so  wide-reaching,
so  universal,  if  I  feel  that  it  is  so — what  is  there
to  fear,  how  can  I  fear }  All  things  are  given
into  my  hands.  My  life  checked  here  may  flow
on  there ;  innumerable  are  my  weapons,  my
resources ;  and  rooted  down,  deep,  below  all
accidents,  is  my  real  being.

Or  again  a  strange  sense  of  Extension  comes  on
me — and  of  presence  in  distant  space  and  time.
Mine  is  an  endless  Life,  unconquerable,  limitless
in  subtlety  and  expanse ;  and  strange  intimations
that  it  is  so  come  to  me  even  in  my  tiny  earth-
cell —  intimations  of  power  inexhaustible,  of
knowledge  mysterious  and  unbounded,  and  of  far
presence  through  all  forms  and  ranges  of  being.

These  are  some  of  the  things — some  of  the  new
modes  of  consciousness  that  come — Love,  Faith,
endless  Life  and  Presence  in  space  and  time,  end-
less Power,  Knowledge,  *  Humanity.'  Let  them
ht  felt  first.  Do  not  think  too  much  about  them.
When  you  have  merged  your  being,  if  it  be  but
for  a  moment,  in  its  source,  then  inevitably  on
emerging  (if  union  has  really  been  effected)  will
one  or  other  of  these  feelings  that  I  have  men-
tioned be  found  occupying  your  mind.  Do  not
think — or  at  any  rate  delay  the  process  of  think-
ing as  much  as  you  can — but  retain  the  mind  in

231


The  Art  of  Creation

its  state  of  feeling.  Feel,  feel,  feel,  in  silence,
your  touch  upon  the  great  inner  Life,  in  these  its
first  Creative  forms.  Rivet  and  hold  fast  these
feelings ;  join  them  ever  on  to  your  central  and
abiding  Self;  make  them  into  the  great  main
branches  of  your  Life-tree ;  and  so  gradually  let
them  pass  outward  into  the  twigs  and  ramifica-
tions of  thought,  to  deal  with  the  actual  and  the
outer.  Thus  they  will  pass  into  structure.  These
feelings,  this  Supreme  Life  which  they  represent,
will  pass  into  expression,  and  become  realised
in  the  structure  of  the  body.  They  will  pass
into  the  life  around,  and  become  realised  in  the
structure  of  Society.

The  body  so  built — when  it  is  built — must
clearly  be  asonian,  not  mortal  in  the  ordinary
sense.  The  mortal,  local,  and  *  separate'  self,
with  its  illusive  limitations,  can  only  build  a
mortal  and  temporary  body.  The  Race-self
truly,  being  aeonian,  may  build,  in  the  institutions
and  life  of  the  race,  an  agelong-enduring  body.
And  as  far  as  this  race-self  enters  into  the  con-
sciousness of  the  individual — as  it  does  at  times
through  the  great  enthusiasms  of  the  race — so
far  does  the  individual  put  on  the  race-body,  and
share  in  its  degree  of  physical  immortality.  But
when,  further,  into  the  individual  there  descends
a  consciousness  profounder,  more  basic,  more
enduring,  even  than  that  of  the  Race-self,  then
inevitably  does  there  begin  to  be  built  even  for
the  individual,  a  body  corresponding.  This  body,
in  fact,  is  the  expression  and  grows  out  of  those


Transformation

great  creative  feelings  of  which  I  have  just
spoken.  Through  Love  it  becomes  a  body
built  into  the  lives  of  others,  and  positively
sharing  their  organic  life  and  vitality.  Since
Faith  and  Courage  inspire  it,  it  is  well  based,
firm  to  stand  the  shocks  of  Time  and  Accident ;
extending  its  domain  over  the  elements  ;  incor-
porating in  itself  the  sea  and  the  wild  creatures,
and  so  unafraid  of  them  ;  surrounding  Chance
and  taking  it  captive.  Its  consciousness  of
immense  Extension  in  time  and  space  indicates
Its  ethereal  character ;  its  consciousness  of  Power
indicates  its  strongly  material  composition ;  its
consciousness  of  Knowledge,  the  penetrating
subtle  quality  of  it.  And  so  we  forebode,  beside
and  within  the  very  local  body  which  we  know
best  (and  which  is  expressive  of  our  more  local
selves),  another  body  expressive  of  our  more
universal  nature — a  body  built  of  swift,  far-
extending  ethereal  elements,  subtle  and  penetrat-
ing, yet  powerfully  massive  and  material ;  closely
knit  in  itself,  not  easily  disturbed  or  dislocated,
enduring  for  asons ;  yet  sensitive  in  the  highest
degree,  and  twining  its  nerves  and  fibres  through
all  Creation — sharing  the  life  of  all  creatures.

Of  that  body,  woven  like  Cinderella's  robe  of
the  sun  and  moon,  who  shall  speak  ^  "  Lo  !  the
rippling  stream,  and  the  stars,  and  the  naked
tree-branches  deliver  themselves  up  to  him.
They  come  close  ;  they  are  his  body ;  and  his
spirit  is  wrapt  among  them ;  without  thought
he  hears  what  they  and  all  things  would  say."


The  Art  of  Creation

When  on  the  striving,  bewildered  consciousness,
in  the  maze  of  the  second  stage,  suddenly  the
apparition  of  that  body  dawns,  no  wonder
there  is  a  transformation  and  a  transfiguration.
"  Behold  I  show  you  a  mystery ! "  says  Paul,
**  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  we  shall  be  changed."
And  Fra  Angelico  in  his  little  cell  at  San  Marco
saw  even  the  same  mystery,  and  in  simple  vision
pictured  it  out  of  his  own  soul  upon  the  wail —
the  transfigured  Christ,  luminous,  serene,  with
arms  extending  over  the  world.

This  sublime  Consciousness  of  simple  Being
(with  which  we  began  these  chapters)  is  there — is
in  the  world  and  within  all  creatures — as  the
supreme  cosmic  Consciousness  always.  It  can
be  seen  quite  plainly  in  the  look  in  the  eyes  of
the  animals — and  in  primitive  healthy  folk  and
children — deep  down,  unsuspected  by  the  creature
itself ;  and  yet  there,  unmistakable.  It  is  seen
by  lovers  in  each  other's  eyes — the  One,  absolute
and  changeless,  yet  infinitely  individuate  and
intelligent — the  Supreme  life  and  being  ;  of  which
all  actual  existence  and  Creation  is  the  descent
and  partial  utterance  in  the  realms  of  emotion
and  thought.


334


APPENDICES


I

THE   MAY-FLY

A   STUDY   IN   TRANSFORMATION!

Every  one  knows  the  May-fly — or  at  least  some  member
of  the  tribe,  of  which  there  are  said  to  be  fifty  species  in
Great  Britain  alone.  The  most  well-known  perhaps  is
that  one  which  anglers  call  the  Green  Drake  or  the  Grey
Drake,  and  the  scientific  folk  call  Ephemera  vulgata — a
little  fairy  with  four  pearly  lace-like  wings,  and  whitey-
green  body  about  an  inch  long,  and  tail  of  three  long
hairs.  They  appear  in  numbers  on  any  hot  day  towards
the  end  of  May,  or  in  this  neighborhood  (Derbyshire)  in
June,  and  continue  to  be  seen  for  two  or  three  weeks ;
and  they  love  to  dance — scores  and  hundreds  together —
in  the  sunshine,  whizzing  vertically  upwards  for  a  few
feet,  and  then  letting  themselves  float  luxuriously  down-
ward on  poised  V-shaped  wings  ;  then  up  again  ;  and  so
on  for  the  few  short  hours  of  their  life — during  which
they  do  nothing  but  dance,  make  love,  and  lay  their  eggs.
They  cannot  eat,  for  their  mouths  do  not  admit  of  their
taking  food  !  Their  numbers  are  sometimes  so  great
that  they  look  like  snowflakes  in  the  air,  and  the  ground
and  even  the  water  are  strewn  with  their  dead  or  dying
bodies.

For  they  come  from  the  water,  from  running  water  ;

*  Reprinted  from  the  Humane  Review^  April  1903.
237


Appendix  I

there  is  no  doubt  about  that.  They  are  found  generally
near  a  stream  ;  and  if  you  go  down  to  the  stream  you
will  see  them  rising  as  if  by  magic,  from  the  weeds  by
the  brook  side,  or  even  from  the  clear  surface  of  the
water.  Look  closer,  and  you  will  see  what  appear  to  be
empty  husks  of  them  floating  in  the  water,  or  tangled
amid  the  marginal  grasses.  But  though  you  feel  sure
these  are  their  husks,  yet  it  is  most  tantalising,  for  to  put
the  two  together  and  to  see  the  fly  actually  emerging
from  its  case  is  most  diflUcult.  You  may  watch  for  an
hour  without  success — for  the  trick  is  done,  the  light-
ning change  is  made,  literally  "  in  the  twinkling  of  an
eye."

The  larva  of  the  common  may-fly  is  a  semi-transparent,
brownish,  scaly  creature,  clumsy  and  sluggish,  that  crawls
about  the  bottom  of  running  streams  or  hides  itself  in
small  semicircular  burrows  in  the  banks.  "  Bank  bait "
it  is  called  by  the  anglers,  tor  it  too,  as  well  as  the  perfect
fly,  is  much  beloved  by  the  Trout.  It  remains  in  this
condition  apparently  for  two  years  or  so,  during  this
period  casting  its  skin  several  times,  and  undergoing  on
each  occasion  slight  transformations  in  structure.  At
last  the  wings  develop  and  "  become  prominent  under
the  larval  skin,  and  the  intestine  (so  says  Swammerdam)
is  emptied,  and  the  colour  of  the  animal  changes  in
consequence."     Then  it  is  ready  for  its  transformation.

One  day,  when  the  weather  is  warm,  and  in  its
retreat  the  insect  knows  that  the  right  moment  has
arrived,  it  creeps  from  its  burrow,  swims  rapidly  up  to
the  surface  of  the  water,  and  there  performs  the  feat
which  is  so  difficult  to  witness.  Swammerdam,  in  1675,
speaking  not  of  Ephemera  vulgata^  but  of  an  allied  form,
the  Pal'tngenia  longicauda^  says  : —

"  When  the  larvae  have  left  their  burrows  they  make
their  way  with  all  speed  to  the  surface,  and  the  trans-
formation is  eflFected  with  such  rapidity  that  even  the
most  attentive  observer  can  make  out  little,  except  that

238


The  May-fly

the  winged  fly  suddenly  darts  out  from  the  midst  of
the  water."  ^

And  Reaumur,  observing  in  1738  another  aUied  form,
the  Polymitarcysy  says  : —

"  The  rapidity  with  which  they  cast  the  larval  skin  is
truly  wonderful.  We  cannot  take  our  arm  from  the  sleeve
of  a  coat  more  readily  than  the  Ephemera  extricates  its
abdomen,  wings,  legs,  and  its  long  tail-filaments  from
their  sheaths.  During  the  operation  they  rest  upon
objects  standing  out  of  the  water  or  upon  the  water
itself.  The  thorax  splits  lengthwise,  and  the  rest  of  the
business  of  extrication  is  over  in  a  moment."

And  of  their  enormous  numbers  he  says  : —

"  The  exclamations  of  my  gardener,  who  had  gone  to
the  foot  of  the  stairs  [by  the  river  Marne,  near  Paris],
attracted  my  attention.  I  then  saw  a  sight  beyond  all
expectation.  The  Ephemeras  filled  the  air  like  the
snow-flakes  in  a  dense  snow-storm.  The  steps  were
covered  to  a  depth  of  two,  three,  or  even  four  inches.
A  tract  of  water  five  or  six  feet  across  was  completely
hidden,  and  as  the  floating  insects  slowly  drifted  away,
others  took  their  place.  Several  times  I  was  obliged  to
retreat  to  the  top  of  the  stairs  from  the  annoyance  caused
by  the  Ephemeras,  which  dashed  in  my  face,  and  got  into
my  eyes,  mouth,  and  nose."

Any  observer  who  cares  to  take  the  trouble  will  be
able  to  verify  the  remarks  of  Swammerdam  and  Reaumur
as  to  the  rapidity  of  the  May-fly  metamorphosis,  and  the
difficulty  of  observing  the  actual  details.  For  some
seasons  in  succession  I  watched,  on  favorable  days,  in
a  certain  brook,  for  the  transformation  of  Ephemera
vulgata^  but  always  without  success.  At  last,  however,
I  was  rewarded.  I  saw  what  at  first  I  thought  was  a
mere  husk  floating  down  the  stream  ;  but  there  was
a  silvery  glaze  at  the  thorax  end.     Immediately  that  end

^  See  Miall's  "  Natural  History  of  Aquatic  Insects,"  chap,
viii.

239


Appendix  I

opened,  a  perfect  May-fly  glided  out,  head  first,  stood  for
a  moment  on  the  wave  beside  its  own  corpse,  stretched
its  wings,  and  flew  away.  The  whole  operation  was  so
rapid  that  it  was  completed  even  while  the  stream  moved
forward  about  three  feet,  say,  in  two  seconds.  Since
that  time  I  have  witnessed  the  change  frequently.  Some-
times the  grub  seems  to  creep  and  wriggle  up  the  bank
side  till  it  gets  onto  a  stone  or  twig  just  on  the  water
surface ;  the  glistening  air-space  appears  quite  at  the
front  end  of  the  thorax.  This  or  the  back  of  the  head
itself  opens,  the  skin  on  the  two  sides  turns  over,  leaving,
as  Sir  John  Lubbock  describes,^  only  a  small  aperture,
through  which,  as  from  a  glove,  the  insect  delivers  itself —
the  legs  from  the  legs,  the  antennae  from  the  antennas,
the  jaws  from  the  jaws,  the  eyes  from  the  eyes,  and  the
three  tail-filaments  (in  the  case  of  E,  vulgata)  from  the
three  tail-sheaths.  But  the  jaws  now,  in  the  perfect
insect,  are  rudimentary,  and  useless  for  eating  purposes  ;
and  the  eyes  are  compound  and  many-faceted,  instead  of
flat  and  smooth  as  they  were  in  the  larva.  Only  the
gills,  which  were  large  and  branched  in  the  larva,  are
completely  gone  ;  and  four  wings,  completely  absent  in
the  original  grub,  now  adorn  the  perfect  insect.

Curiously,  it  appears  that  even  now — at  any  rate  in
the  case  of  the  common  May-fly — the  transformations
are  not  finished.  For  though  it  has  its  mature  form  and
power  of  flight,  yet  presently  its  skin  splits  once  more,  a
final  veil  falls  from  its  wings  and  its  whole  body,  and  it
emerges — lighter  both  in  colour  and  in  weight  than
at  first  (the  Grey  Drake  now,  whereas  in  its  all-but-perfect
state  it  was  the  Green  Drake) — and  joins  its  companions
in  the  mazy  dance,  in  which  the  remaining  hours  of  its
existence  will  be  mostly  passed.

Mostly,  but  not  altogether.  The  one  serious  duty  of
the  Ephemera  is  egg-laying  and  fertilisation.  As  we
have  seen,  it  does  not  eat.     It  is  freed  from  the  necessity

*  "Origin  and  Metamorphoses  of  Insects,"  p.  21.
240


The  May-fly

of  collecting  and  consuming  food.  It  has  come  to  the
end  of  its  life  as  an  individual,  and  its  only  call  is  to
provide  for  the  race.  And  this  seems  to  be  a  reason  why
so  many  insects  put  on  wings  in  their  final  and  repro-
ductive stage — or  why  their  egg-laying  is  delayed  to  the
winged  stage — in  order,  namely,  that  they  may  be  able
to  spread  their  progeny  to  a  distance  from  the  original
location.  Especially  is  this  true  of  water  insects,  which,
with  the  drying  up  of  streams  and  ponds  at  certain  seasons,
might  be  in  danger  of  perishing  entirely,  if  the  perfect
creature  were  not  able,  being  winged,  to  fly  to  distant
places  where  the  conditions  were  more  favourable.

Accordingly,  our  Ephemera  takes  care  to  lay  its  eggs
in  the  water  of  some  stream — either  that  from  which  it
emerged  or  some  other — where  its  grub  will  find  itself  at
home.  Reaumur,  speaking  of  Polymitarcys,  says  that
"  they  skim  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  support  their
bodies  upon  it  by  means  of  the  tail-filaments  while
engaged  in  egg-laying.  The  eggs  fall  at  once  to  the
bottom,  and  soon  become  scattered,  for  the  jelly  in  which
they  are  embedded  is  soluble  in  water."  De  Geer,
speaking  of  E.  vulgata^  gives  much  the  same  account,
and  adds,  with  regard  to  fertilisation,  that  the  aerial
dances  of  the  Ephemerae  are  usually  composed  of  males
only,  but  that  when,  as  often  happens,  a  female  mixes  in
the  swarm,  two  or  three  males  pursue  her,  until  one  of
them  succeeds  in  flying  away  with  her — generally  to  the
top  of  a  wall  or  summit  of  a  tree.

With  fertilisation  and  egg-laying  the  duties  of  the
individual  terminate.  The  parent  insects  perish ;  and
the  life-round  begins  again.

The  metamorphoses  of  insects — of  which  that  of  the
May-fly,  with  its  very  sudden  transition  from  a  lethargic
subaqueous  existence  to  a  giddy  dance  in  the  sunshine,
is  such  a  striking  example — are  mostly  rather  dramatic
and   impressive.      But   it   is   well,   in    considering    the

241  Q


Appendix  I

subject,  to  remember  that  they  are  only  pronounced
instances  of  an  event  which  is  very  universal  in  Nature,
Slighter  transformations  are  common,  and  continually
taking  place.  The  larva  of  the  May-fly  undergoes
several  minor  changes,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,
before  its  final  liberation  into  the  air.  One  of  the
species,  Chloeon  dimidiatum^  goes  through  twenty-one
moults,  according  to  Sir  John  Lubbock,  while  it  is
preparing  for  its  imaginal  form.  Caterpillars  and  other
grubs,  as  is  well  known,  frequently  cast  their  skins  and
take  on  slight  changes  of  structure  or  colour.  In  the
case  of  worms  and  insects,  as  there  is  no  interior
skeleton,  the  skin,  horny  or  otherwise,  forms  the  attach-
ment and  support  of  the  muscles  and  internal  organs,
and  with  any  change  of  these  latter  a  new  skin  has  to
be  formed,  and  the  interval  of  forming  the  new  skin
and  casting  the  old  one  often  necessitates  a  dormant  or
pupal  stage,  which  may  be  brief  or  prolonged  according
to  circumstances.  Crabs  and  other  Crustacea  similarly
cast  their  shells  and  go  through  periods  of  seclusion,
accompanied  by  changes  of  structure.

In  the  case,  however,  of  the  vertebrate  animals  and
man  there  is  not  the  same  necessity  to  change  the  skin,
and  the  transformations  are  not  so  obvious.  Yet  they
are  taking  place  all  the  time.  The  human  being  passes
through  several  very  distinct  phases  as  an  embryo  in  the
womb  ;  besides  these  there  is  a  marked  change  at  birth  ;
then  another  at  the  coming  of  the  milk  teeth,  and  again
at  the  casting  of  the  same ;  another  at  puberty  ;  and
again  another  in  age,  with  the  lapse  of  the  sexual
functions.  Possibly  yet  others  of  a  slighter  character
might  be  distinguished.  These  that  I  have  mentioned
as  taking  place  during  the  actual  life  of  an  individual,
and  corresponding  to  the  growth  and  change  of  teeth,
to  puberty  and  to  the  meno-pause,  all  imply  considerable
changes  of  structure  and  organisation,  and  (what  is  worth
noticing)    are    generally    accompanied    by    periods     of

242


The  May-fly

lethargy,  subversion  of  the  system,  and  even  symptoms
of  disease,  which  are  suggestive,  to  say  the  least,  of  the
pupal  stages  in  insects.  So  far,  then,  v^^e  seem  to  see
that  transformations,  more  or  less  pronounced,  are  a
common,  and  one  may  perhaps  say  normal,  phenomenon
of  animate  nature.

With  regard  to  Man  and  the  Mammalia,  it  has  been,
since  the  time  of  Von  Baer,  an  accepted  doctrine  that
the  successive  changes  in  the  embryo  and  the  young
form  a  kind  of  epitome  of  the  history  of  the  race  to
which  the  individual  belongs.  It  is  pointed  out  that  the
embryo  of  man,  for  instance,  at  an  early  stage  shows
characteristics  which  assimilate  it  to  the  fishes,  and,
later,  characteristics  which  assimilate  it  in  succession  to
reptiles,  lower  Mammals,  and  higher  Mammals ;  that,
again,  the  lately  born  infant  has  some  characteristics
of  the  monkey  or  other  arboreal  animals,  and  that  the
boy  has  the  habits  and  conformation  of  the  savage  ;  and
so  on.  Some  of  these  stages  in  the  development  of  the
individual  may  be  fairly  distinct  and  well  marked;  others
may  glide  quite  imperceptibly  into  each  other.  But,
anyhow,  the  point  is  that  the  growth  of  the  individual
thus  resumes  and  rehearses  in  brief  the  agelong  previous
life  and  growth  of  the  race.  Now  the  theory  with  regard
to  insects  seems  to  be  that  here,  too,  the  life  of  the  indi-
vidual, from  the  egg  onward,  through  all  the  changes  and
transformations  of  the  grub,  the  larva,  the  pupa,  and  the
perfect  insect,  is,  in  a  similar  way,  a  recapitulation  of  the
life-history  of  its  race.  In  a  similar,  yet  not  exactly  the
same  way,  as  will  presently  be  explained.

But  first  a  word  about  what  race-history  means.

For  long  periods  in  the  life  of  a  race,  slow  growth  and
modification  of  the  organs  and  faculties  may  take  place,
and  yet  the  general  balance  of  the  organic  centres  in  the
normal  individual  may  be  little  changed  ;  the  general
type  of  the  race  may  remain  much  the  same.  But  then
again  there  will  come  a  period  or  periods  when  changes

243


Appendix  I

of  conditions  or  the  natural  course  of  evolution  will
occasion  rather  rapid  and  complete  changes  in  the
balance  of  the  functions,  possibly  even  the  growth  of
quite  new  organic  centres.  Then  the  type  of  the  race
will  alter  very  decidedly.  When,  for  instance,  the
monkey-like  animal  first  took  to  climbing  trees,  however
slow  and  continuous  its  development  had  been  before,
now  a  rapid  transformation  began  to  take  place.  A  new
centre  organising  and  controlling  the  prehensile  activity
quickly  developed,  and  soon  assumed  a  commanding
position  among  the  other  organic  centres ;  the  balance
of  functions  in  the  race  suffered  a  kind  of  revolution.
So  when  the  precursor  of  the  dog  first  came  under  the
influence  of  man,  a  new  formative  plexus  arose  which
modified  the  whole  mentality  and  activity  of  the  animal ;
or  when  certain  kinds  of  worms  or  insects  by  accident
or  by  necessity  took  to  marshy  and  watery  grounds,  and
ultimately  became  aquatic,  the  same  kind  of  thing
happened.  Thus  race-history,  from  this  point  of  view,
means  the  gradual  growth  and  redistribution  of  organic
centres  in  the  animal ;  gradual,  that  is,  as  a  general
rule,  but  varied  by  occasional  rather  rapid  changes  in
the  balance  of  these  centres  and  their  functions ;
and  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  combination  of  slow
evolution  with,  now  and  then,  what  may  be  termed
revolution.

If  we  apply  this  to  the  history  of  any  single  individual
— say,  of  an  individual  man  from  his  commencement  as
a  germ,  through  his  life  and  growth  as  an  embryo,  a
babe,  a  child,  a  boy,  and  so  on  to  maturity,  we  seem  to
see  the  same  thing — slow,  continuous  evolution,  inter-
rupted now  and  then  by  rather  rapid  and  considerable
transformations,  and  the  grouping  of  the  life  round  new
organic  centres.  Thus,  early  in  the  life  of  the  human
embryo    (between    the    fourth    and    eighth  week^)    the

1  W.  B.  Carpenter,  "Human  Physiology,"  8th  edition,
p.  loii.

244


The  May-fly

arrangement  of  its  blood-vessels,  which  hitherto  has
been  slowly  developing  on  the  type  of  the  fishes  and
cold-blooded  animals,  begins  to  transform  itself  to  the
type  of  the  Mammals,  and  at  the  moment  of  birth  the
first  use  of  the  lun^s  completely  changes  the  actual
character  of  the  circulation.  In  fishes  the  kidneys  do
not  exist,  their  function  being  partly  fulfilled  by  certain
other  bodies;  and  this  is  also  the  case  in  the  human
embryo  between  the  fourth  and  seventh  week  ;  but  at
the  latter  date  the  true  kidneys  first  begin  to  present
themselves,  and  a  readjustment  soon  takes  place  with
respect  to  these  bodies  and  their  importance  in  the
system.  Again,  with  regard  to  the  Brain,  Dr.  W.  B.
Carpenter  says  that  in  the  sixth  week  of  the  human
embryo  there  is  a  "certain  correspondence"  between  its
brain  and  that  of  a  Fish  ;  in  the  twelfth  week  there  is  a
"strong  analogy"  with  that  of  a  Bird.

"Up  to  the  end  of  the  third  month,  the  Cerebral
Hemispheres  present  only  the  rudiments  of  anterior
lobes,  and  do  not  pass  beyond  that  grade  of  development
which  is  permanently  characteristic  of  the  Marsupial
Mammalia.  .  .  .  During  the  fourth  and  part  of  the  fifth
months,  however,  the  middle  lobes  are  developed  .  .  .
and  the  posterior  lobes,  of  which  there  was  no  previous
rudiment,  subsequently  begin  to  sprout.  ...  In  these
and  other  particulars  there  is  a  very  close  correspondence
between  the  progressive  stages  of  development  of  the
Human  Cerebrum,  and  those  which  we  encounter  in
the  ascending  series  of  Mammalia."  ^

Here,  all  along,  then,  we  may  see  changes  of  struc-
ture and  function,  and  the  alteration  of  balance  in
the  organic  centres,  taking  place  gradually  or  rapidly
in  the  brief  life  of  the  individual,  just  as  on  an  in-
finitely more  extended  time-scale  they  have  taken  place
in  the  far-back  life  of  the  race  from  which  the  individual
is  descended.

*  Ibid.,  p.  1034.
^45


Appendix  I

And,  digressing  for  a  moment,  it  is  difficult  in  all  this
— however  unwilling  we  may  be  to  use  terms  which  we
cannot  fully  justify — not  to  see  something  very  like
memory.  Memory  it  may  not  be  in  exactly  the  ordinary
sense  ;  but  when  we  consider  how  like  the  process  is  to
that  which  we  use  when  recapitulating  mentally  the
events,  say,  of  our  past  years — the  rapid  summarising  in
thought  of  what  has  gone  before,  the  actual  reassuming
in  some  degree  of  the  old  attitudes  and  expressions — as
of  children  when  thinking  of  our  own  childhood,  or  of
boyhood  when  thinking  of  our  school  days — the  faint
and  more  general  delineation  of  the  distant  and  the
slower  and  more  detailed  reconstruction  of  the  nearer
past ;  when  we  think  how  near  habit  and  custom  are  to
memory,  and  how  physiological  habit  is  often  held  to
explain  our  resemblance  to  our  ancestors  :  I  say  it  is
difficult  not  to  see  in  this  recapitulation  by  the  individual
of  the  general  outlines  of  the  history  of  his  race,  some-
thing very  like  the  working  of  a  racial  memory  trans-
mitted to  the  individual.  The  expression  may  not  be
really  our  final  word  on  the  subject,  but  it  may  be
practically  the  best  that  we  at  present  have  at  command.
And  we  seem  to  see  the  individual  creature,  when  faced
with  the  problem  of  its  own  unfoldment,  leaning  back
on  its  racial  memory,  and  so  repeating  the  things  which
it  finds  there,  and  which  have  been  done  before — ^just  as
we  all,  when  faced  with  the  daily  problems  of  life,  first
of  all  in  any  case  repeat  what  our  own  memory  tells
us  we  have  done  before — and  only  when  that  process  is
finished,  or  fails  to  serve  us,  cast  about  to  try  something
else.

Now,  in  the  case  of  insects  the  theory  is,  as  I  have
said,  that  each  individual  insect  "  recapitulates "  the  life
of  the  race  from  which  it  is  descended,  in  just  the  same
way  as  does  the  young  of  man  or  the  higher  animals,
but  with  this  difference,  namely,  that  while  the  young

246


The  May-fly

of  man  and  the  higher  animals  recapitulates  all  the
earlier  portion  of  its  life-history  in  the  womb  of  its
mother  (as  an  embryo),  the  young  of  the  insect  re-
capitulates in  the  open  arena  of  the  world.  And  this  at
once  brings  in  important  considerations.

The  foetus  in  the  womb  recapitulating  the  immense
past  (dreaming  over  again,  if  you  like,  the  ancestral
memories)  can  do  so  undisturbed  (or  comparatively  so)
by  outer  events,  and  can  thus  keep  prettv  closely  along
the  line  of  its  proper  evolution.  But  the  insect,  com-
mencing first  as  a  primitive  cell-like  egg,  then  developing
to  a  mere  grub,  then  becoming  a  caterpillar  or  aquatic
larva,  with  spiracles  in  the  one  case  or  gills  in  the  other,
then  turning  to  a  butterfly  or  winged  image,  has  to  pass
throu2;h  all  these  sta2;es  in  the  face  of  the  outer  world,
and  exposed  to  its  severe  competition  and  criticism  ;  and
it  is  obvious  that  under  these  circumstances  the  line  of
its  growth  may  be  deflected,  and  may  no  longer  quite
coincide  with  the  line  of  ancestral  evolution.

Among  the  winged  or  partially  winged  insects,  the
Orthoptera  (Grasshoppers,  Cockroaches,  Earwigs,  &c.)
and  the  Hemiptera  (Bugs,  Pond-skaters,  Aphides,  &c.)
are  considered,  I  believe,  to  be  those  whose  line  of
growth  has  been  least  deflected  in  this  way,  and  whose
changes  consequently  best  represent  the  sequence  of
ancestral  evolution.  These  two  orders  are  looked  upon
as  very  primitive,  and  probably  nearer  than  any  others
to  the  wingless  ancestors  of  the  insect  tribe.^  Their
wings,  or  such  rudiments  as  they  may  possess,  grow
quite  slowly,  and  are  acquired  in  successive  moults,
without  any  distinct  pupa  stage.  We  may,  therefore,
suppose  that  there  was  a  time  when  their  ancestors  had
no   wings,   and   not   passing   beyond    the    creeping   and

1  See  F.  M.  Balfour's  "  Embryology."  Lubbock  agrees  with
Darwin  in  regarding  Campodea^  a  certain  insect  of  the  wingless
kind  which  passes  through  no  metamorphoses,  as  representin^f
the  original  stock  whence  all  insects  sprang.

247


Appendix  I

crawling  stage  of  existence,  bred  and  propagated  in  that
stage.  Subsequently,  however,  some  of  the  species
developed  membranous  appendages  which,  with  the  aid
of  the  wind,  enabled  them  to  skip  and  traverse  the
ground  quickly  ;  and,  later  still,  these  became  perfect
wings.  The  period  of  fertility  was  naturally  delayed
to  the  winged  stage,  on  account  of  the  advantages  of
widespread  propagation,  &c.,  and  each  individual  insect
now — recapitulating  the  life-history  of  the  race — begins
to  acquire  wings  as  it  approaches  maturity.

The  Orthoptera  and  Hemiptera^  however,  being  insects
which  do  not  use  their  wings  to  any  great  degree,  have
not  been  very  much  modified  by  such  use,  and  conse-
quently, as  said,  they  have  kept  very  much  along  the
ancestral  line  of  growth.  But  when  we  come  to  insects
like  Butterflies,  Bees,  Gnats,  Dragon-flies,  &c.,  which  in
their  final  stage  almost  live  on  the  wing,  it  is  obvious
that,  owing  to  this  fact,  their  structure  in  the  final  stage
has  been  greatly  altered  from  the  previous  stages,  and  a
kind  of  gap  created  between.  The  Butterfly  must  have
a  light  body  ;  it  must  have  a  suctorial  proboscis  instead
of  mandibular  jaws  ;  a  complex  eye  adapted  to  long
range,  instead  of  the  simple  eye  of  the  caterpillar,  and
so  forth.  Furthermore,  the  gap  between  it  and  the
caterpillar  may  be  widened  by  a  thousand  changes  of
condition  and  environment  acting  on  the  latter  which
were  unknown  to  its  predecessors.  Among  these  may
be  reckoned  the  fact  that  the  necessity  of  fertilisation
being  removed  from  the  caterpillar  stage  to  a  later  one,
the  caterpillar  would  no  longer  need  to  go  actively  about
in  search  of  a  mate,  thus  exposing  itself  to  dangers,  but
would  rather  adopt  a  policy  of  quiet  ease  and  conceal-
ment. Thus  it  might  easily  grow  to  a  much  greater
size  than  its  ancestral  type,  and  take  on  changes  of  form
and  habit  which  would  lead  it  away  from  the  old  line
of  evolution.  In  this  way,  for  example,  the  great  gap
swid  difference,   in  size  and   colour  and   every   respect,

248


The  May-fly

between  the  caterpillar  of  the  privet-hawk-moth  and  the
perfect  insect  itself  might  be  accounted  for.

But  the  gap  between  the  two  stages  having  once
appeared  or  begun  to  appear,  an  intermediate  or  pupal
stage  would  be  the  necessary  result.  For,  to  take  the
last-mentioned  instance,  the  caterpillar  endeavouring  to
develop  along  the  line  of  its  racial  memory,  and  yet
having  strayed  somewhat  from  the  ancestral  tradition,
would  find,  when  the  time  came  for  its  wings  to  appear,
that  it  was  off  the  track  somehow,  that  its  body  had  grown
too  big  and  lumbering  for  flight,  that  its  skin  was  too
thick  perhaps  for  wing-formation,  that  its  jaws,  with
continual  exercise,  had  become  too  horny  and  monstrous
to  be  possibly  adapted  for  sipping  honey,  and  so  forth.
What  would  it  do  ?  What  could  it  do  ?  It  could  not
go  on  indefinitely  in  its  new  line  as  a  gigantic  caterpillar,
for  experience  and  memory  would  give  it  no  clue  how
to  do  this.  On  the  other  hand,  its  whole  racial  instinct
would  be  surging  up  within  it  in  the  direction  of  flight.
What  would  it  do  ?  What  could  it  do  ?  Clearly,  it
could  only  give  up  its  errant  and  strayed  larval  life  as
a  bad  job,  coil  up,  and  try  to  dream  itself  back  again
into  its  racial  memory,  and  the  proper  line  of  its  evolu-
tion. It  could  but  refuse  to  eat,  bring  its  existing  career
to  a  close,  seek  some  retired  spot,  and  withdrawing  deep
within  itself,  allow  its  wings  to  grow  as  quickly  as  may
be,  its  overgrown  jaws  and  digestive  apparatus  to  shrivel
and  disappear,  its  old  skin  to  harden  and  fall  off,  and  the
interrupted  order  of  its  evolution  to  be  resumed.  This
then  is  what  it  does;  and  this  is  its  pupal  or  chrysalis  stage.

The  pupal  stage  is  an  exaggeration  of  the  ordinary
moult,  and  is  caused  by  a  certain  discontinuity  which
has  arisen  in  the  course  of  time  between  the  larval  and
imaginal  stages.  It  is  a  stage  of  internal  changes,  by
which  the  continuity  of  development  is  recovered,  and
it  resembles  in  some  respects  an  effort  of  memory.

The  necessity  of  quiescence  during  this  stage  is
249


Appendix  I

involved  (at  least  in  most  cases)  by  the  nature  of  the
changes  taking  place.  It  is  evident,  for  instance,  that
the  transformation  of  mouth-parts  must  mean  a  con-
siderable period  without  food.  Similarly,  the  casting  of
the  old  skin,  and  the  formation  of  a  new  one,  with  fresh
attachments  for  new  muscles  and  organs,  must  mean
temporary  retirement  and  unfitness  for  the  world.  The
pupal  stage  is  like  Memory ;  it  is  an  abandonment  of
present  complications,  in  order  to  knit  on  again  to  the
long  chain  of  the  past.  It  is  like  Sleep  ;  changes  are
going  on  in  it,  often  rapidly  enough,  but  they  are  of  an
internal  character,  and  must  not  be  interfered  with  by
the  outer  world.  It  is  like  Death  ;  for  indeed  large
tracts  of  the  old  creature  die,  and  other  tracts  take  on  a
new  life.  And  it  is  like  Disease  ;  for  revolutions  are  in
process  within,  the  balance  of  centres  is  displaced  and
re-created,  and  for  the  time  discomfort  and  uneasiness
prevail.

The  transformations  of  the  animate  world  are,  as  I
have  said,  endless.  They  are  not  confined  to  insects.
It  is  sufficient  to  mention  in  this  connection  the  extra-
ordinary facts  of  asexual  reproduction,  alternate  genera-
tion, and  pelorism,  to  show  how  widely  the  principle
ramifies.  Of  the  higher  vertebrates  and  Man,  every
individual  goes  through  transformations,  not  only  in  the
womb  before  birth,  but  afterwards  in  its  proper  and
external  life.  In  the  case  of  Man,  the  transformations
connected  with  teething,  with  puberty,  and  with  the
lapse  of  the  sexual  functions  in  age,  are  so  considerable,
and  the  disorganisation  and  readjustment  of  centres  so
great,  that  the  change  has  often  the  appearance,  and  is
accompanied  by  collateral  symptoms,  of  Disease.  And
the  query  is  suggested  to  us  whether  some  illnesses
which  occur,  and  which  leave  patients  greatly  changed  in
temperament,  and  even  improved  in  health,  should  not
be  looked  on  as  natural  and  necessary  accompaniments

2$o


The  May-fly

of  some  quite  normal  transformation  which  is  going
on  deep  below  the  surface,  and  as  steps  forward  in
the  line  of  evolution,  rather  than  as  mere  backslidings
and  signals  of  failure.  As  to  Sleep,  we  may  almost
regard  each  night*s  rest  as  a  brief  pupal  stage,  for  certain
it  is  that  every  human  being,  man  and  woman,  and
especially  boy  and  girl,  comes  again  into  the  world  each
morning  subtly  transformed  ;  something  has  passed  into
or  out  of  their  faces;  a  veil  of  thinnest  texture  has  fallen
from  their  souls.  And  when  one  thinks  of  it,  one  sees
that  Sleep  is  a  state  which  allies  itself  easily  to  the  con-
dition of  the  chrysalis.  For,  however  far  we  have
travelled  from  our  normal  line  of  growth  during  the
day,  whatever  wild  excursions  we  have  made  into  the
regions  of  care  and  folly,  the  night's  rest  restores  us,  as
we  say,  to  our  true  selves,  and  we  take  up  again  the
thread  of  our  proper  activity.  In  fact,  in  sleep  we  lapse
more  into  the  domain  of  racial  memory ;  primitive
instincts  and  thoughts  come  to  the  front  in  our  dreams,
and  we  are  refreshed  by  bathing,  as  it  were,  in  the
morning  dew  of  our  own  natures.

But  this  flooding  of  the  soul  with  its  own  primitive
life  and  instinct  is  most  marked  of  all  in  the  period
of  puberty.  Strange  that  accompanying  the  physical
changes  which  then  take  place  in  the  body  should
occur  this  drenching  of  the  mind  in  a  sea  of  emotions
and  thoughts  and  fancies  unknown  to  the  child.  It
is  as  if  a  world  of  race-memories  and  experiences
hitherto  forgotten  were  suddenly  recalled.  The  old
infantile  objects  of  pursuit  and  interest  fade  away ;  the
whole  perspective  of  the  world  is  changed.  Plato,  of
course,  insists  that  Love  is  a  reminiscence  ;  the  mania
of  Love  is  caused  by  the  vision  opening  back  in  the  soul
once  more  of  that  celestial  world,  and  of  those  divine
forms  and  beings,  which  in  ages  past  it  had  once  beheld.
We  may  or  may  not  agree  with  Plato  ;  but  in  any  case
it  is  interesting  to  find  that  he  relates  this  powerful

251


Appendix  I

force,  transforming  the  lives  and  fates  of  human  beings
to  Memory,  and  looks  upon  the  changes  so  induced  as  a
renewal  (may  we  say  a  recapitulation  ?)  of  a  long-past
existence.

Apart  from  puberty,  apart  from  illnesses,  apart  from
sleep,  there  are  other  periods,  more  obviously  mental  in
their  origin,  of  strange  transformation  in  our  lives —
periods  not  unlike  those  of  the  "conversions"  of  reli-
gious folk — when  after  weeks  or  months  of  mental
depression  and  lethargy,  or  of  inward  conflict  and  strain,
or  even  of  accompanying  physical  illness  and  incapacity,
the  whole  nature  seems  to  veer  round  and  organise  itselt
about  new  centres  of  interest  and  activity,  and  a  sudden
joy  and  outbreak  of  fresh  life  occurs.  In  these  cases,
taking  the  thing  from  the  psychological  side,  we  shall
generally  find  that  the  impression  produced  on  the  mind
is  that  it  has  found  a  long-lost  key,  that  it  has  come  back
to  something  deep  within  itself.  We  speak  of  the  return
to  Nature,  return  to  Self,  to  Truth,  to  God,  as  if  we
were  remembering  something  forgotten  and  neglected —
taking  up  a  broken  thread  ;  and  the  idea  is  suggested  to
us  (though  we  cannot  call  it  more  than  a  suggestion)
that  the  great  well-springs  of  growth  and  transformation
are  indeed  within  ;  and  that  the  successive  stages  of  our
human  life  are  but  the  falling  away  of  larval  husks,
which  in  time  must  disclose  an  universal  Form.  The
allegory  of  the  beautiful  winged  psyche — the  very  ideali-
sation of  life  and  love,  delivered  from  the  crawling  worm
and  the  cold,  unpleasant  chrysalis — has  haunted  the
imagination  of  mankind  from  earliest  times,  kindling
within  it  an  immortal  hope  ;  and  even  the  cold  light  of
Science  leaves  it  clear  that  in  every  creature  sleeps  this
impetus  of  transformation  towards  an  ever-wider  range
and  capacity  of  life.

To  come  back  to  our  particular  May-fly.  It  is  quite
probable  that  this,  and  the  other  winged  insects  which

25?


The  May-fly

emerge  from  the  waters,  were  not  originally  aquatic,  for

in  an  aquatic  life  such  insects  could  never  have  learned
to  acquire  wings.^  It  was  probably  after  the  great  body
of  Insects  had  acquired  wings  that  the  larvae  of  some  of
these  found  themselves  in  marshy  surroundings,  and
ultimately  became  adapted  to  an  aquatic  life.  Then,
though  deeply  changed  and  modified  by  their  sub-
aqueous existence,  the  memory  and  habit  of  wing-
growth  still  came  back  upon  them  at  its  appointed  time,
and  urged  them  once  more  to  a  terrestrial  and  aerial
habitat.  Thus  the  May-fly  was  able,  and  is  able  to-day,
to  effect  that  marvellous  transfiguration  from  a  watery
grub  to  an  aerial  fairy  which  so  astonishes  us,  as  with  an
exhibition  of  strange  determination  and  evolutionary
force  in  so  slight  a  creature.  It  is  not  only,  as  we  have
seen,  the  extent  of  the  transfiguration,  but  the  rapidity  of
it,  which  is  surprising,  and  the  cause  of  this  final  rapidity
is  the  fact  that  the  change  has  to  be  made  in  the  pre-
sence and  before  the  eyes,  as  it  were,  of  the  insect's
most  implacable  foe  and  pursuer — the  Trout !  Whether
as  a  larva  in  its  bank-side  burrow,  or  as  the  perfect  image
in  the  air,  the  Trout  loves  the  May-fly  ;  and  if  the  latter
delayed  for  a  moment,  even  over  the  unbuttoning  of  its
last  garment,  it  would  inevitably  be  snapped  up.  We
may  wonder  that,  under  such  circumstances,  it  did  not
give  up  the  game  long  ago  ;  but,  in  truth,  though  so
innocent  looking,  the  May-fly  is  an  old  hand,  and  this
illusive  little  thing,  that  we  call  the  creature  of  an  hour,
has  really  for  thousands  of  centuries  been  practising  her
magic  trick  ;  and  now  so  perfect  is  she  in  it  that  even

^  Other  reasons  for  believing  that  the  aquatic  Insects  were
originally  terrestrial  are  (i)  the  common  persistence  of  air-
tubes  and  spiracles  in  aquatic  insects  ;  (2)  that  the  most  primi-
tive forms  of  insects  are  terrestrial  rather  than  aquatic  ;  (3)
that  the  aquatic  species  are  more  closely  related  to  terrestrial
species  than  to  each  other.  (See  Miall's  "  Nat.  Hist.  Aquatic
Insects,"  pp.  4  and  5.)

253


Appendix  I

while  he,  her  enemy,  is  swimming  towards  her,  darting
from  the  dusky  depths  of  his  pool,  she  has  already
slipped  her  shroud,  and  is  soaring  in  the  eye  of  the
sun.

After  seeing  that,  one  can  but  conclude  that  there  is
nothing  that  Man  or  other  creature  may  not  do,
provided  he  only  chooses.


254


II

HEALTH    A    CONQUEST*

It  is  an  important  thought  that  health  cannot  be  won
without  some  amount  of  effort ;  that  conquest  and  the
putting  forth  of  power  are  intimate  conditions  of  its
acquirement  and  preservation.  Health — like  freedom —
has  to  be  won  afresh  every  morning.

And  this  in  its  way  is  true  on  all  planes.  In  physical
matters  the  effort  of  the  muscles — exercise — is  necessary
to  keep  the  body  in  good  condition.  In  the  mind,
effort,  or  the  mental  faculties  deteriorate.  In  morals
again,  effort — conscience,  duty,  sacrifice — all  necessary.

This  is  a  truth,  or  a  side  of  the  truth,  which  is  worth
dwelling  on,  especially  in  consideration  of  the  fact  that
the  easy  tendency — the  downhill  grade — is  all  the  other
way:  in  the  direction,  namely,  of  a  reliance  on  external
props  and  supports — drugs,  regulated  stimulants,  careful
avoidance  of  draughts,  plentiful  flannels,  and  all  the
other  paraphernalia  of  valetudinarianism.

**  Now  Roderick  dear,  remember,  do,
Those  breezes  from  the  Channel,
And  at  the  Volunteer  Review
Please  don^t  forget  your  flannel."

Not  that  the  wise  man  despises  flannels  and  the  para-
phernalia generally,  but  he  remembers  that  they,   poor
things,  can  only  give  a  kind  of  passive  assistance — he
1  Reprinted  from  Seedtime^  April,  1892.
2S5


Appendix  II

must  do  the  real  fighting  himself — and  salvatior  ir%  tlic
long  run  does  not  come  by  trusting  to  them.

Paradoxical  as  it  may  sound,  Health  demands  for  its
continuance  a  certain  willingness  to  run  risks — even  to
forget  itself — and  so  differs  Uto  coelo  from  valetudmarisn-
ism,  which  is  always  occupied  with  its  own  safety.
Strong  exposure — to  face  the  elements,  the  ram,  the
wind,  the  sun,  extreme  heat,  extreme  cold — to  battle
and  overcome  them,  and  take  their  strength  into  ours,
like  the  Indian  warrior  who  hangs  the  scalps  of  his  slain
to  his  girdle — that  is  good.  Not  to  be  done  all  ai  once,
certainly  ;  but  to  be  done — in  time.  I  would  not  say
"  Be  foolish  or  rash  "  ;  but  surely  it  is  itself  the  height
of  rashness  not  to  run  a  risk  now  and  then,  hiding  our-
selves as  we  do  all  day  behind  innumerable  mufflers  and
the  torn-off  skins  of  animals,  and  in  our  stuffy  dens,  till
we  turn  sickly  pale  all  over  like  unwholesome  crickets,
and  verily  fear  to  venture  out,  lest  she.  Nature,  the
argus-eyed,  see  us  and  slay  us  in  her  wrath.

Why  indeed  do  we  dread  a  cold,  a  chill,  so  much,  but
because  we  are  guilty  within,  and  we  know  it — and  the
prowling  influenza  will  find  us  out  and  expose  our
wickedness.  It  is  good  to  be  in  such  a  state  of  health
that  you  can  sit  or  lie  out,  and  turn  cold,  very  cold —
feel  like  a  stone  all  over — and  then  thaw  again  and  be
none  the  worse.  Not  much  of  a  miracle  either,  since
even  the  poor  beasts  perform  it,  lying  out  in  damp  places
or  in  frost  every  night  !  But  their  consciences  no  doubt
burn  clear  and  undimmed,  affording  a  perpetual  spring  of
inner  warmth.

I  knew  a  miner  from  Manitoba — and  a  good  whole-
some man  he  was — who  told  me  that  one  night  a
stranger  knocked  at  the  door  of  his  log-cabin  on  the
edge  of  Lake  Superior  and  begged  help,  saying  that  he
and  a  companion  had  been  crossing  the  lake  on  the  ice,
and  that  the  companion  had  given  out.  He  who
knocked  at  the  door  had  come  on  alone  for  assistance,

256


Health  a  Conquest

My  friend  picked  up  a  lantern,  and  the  two  hurried
down  across  the  ice.  The  night  was  very  cold  and
dark,  but  after  some  searching  they  found  the  man.  He
was  lying  stretched  frozen  and  insensible  and  "  stiff  as  a
log."  They  picked  him  up  and  carried  him  back  to  the
cabin,  and  sat  up  all  night  and  into  the  next  day  con-
tinually rubbing  and  chafing  his  body.  At  last  he  came
to  and  made  a  complete  recovery,  and  in  a  few  days —
except  for  some  marks  of  frost-bite  on  his  skin — showed
no  sign  of  damage.  Surely  «'hat  was  a  holy  man,  in
whom  the  frost,  though  it  went  right  through  his  body,
could  find  no  sin.

It  seems  as  if  effort,  or  vigorous  action,  has  the  effect
of  umffmg  the  body — making  it  whole  under  the  stress
of  a  single  impulse — as  if,  through  effort,  the  real  being
from  within  descended  and  made  himself  manifest.  How
often  it  happens,  when  one  feels  sick  and  out  of  sorts,
that  a  call  upon  his  energies  rouses  the  man — he  throws
himself  into  the  work,  concentrates  all  his  forces  into
one,  and  lo  !  when  the  rush  of  action  is  over  he  is  quite
well.  It  is  a  common  rem.ark  that  v/hen  people  in  old
age  give  up  their  '  business '  they  soon  die — the  concen-
tration of  will  ceasing,  the  body  begins  to  break  up.
Sometimes  when  one  sees  people  going  about  shivering
on  a  cold  day,  enveloped  in  furs,  weighed  down  with
wrappings  so  that  they  can  indeed  only  move  slowly,
one  thinks  how  good  it  would  be  for  m.ost  of  them  just
to  strip  then  and  there,  and  rww,  run  till  they  were  red
hot — mastering  the  cold  that  way.  [Not  an  altogether
gracious  sight  perhaps,  as  the  mass  of  people  are  nowa-
days, with  their  pasty  white  skins  and  ineffectual  move-
ments— but  all  that  would  soon  improve  as  they  turned
a  more  wholesome  colour  1]  How  strong  it  would  make
them  feel,  how  secure  !  What  new  waves  of  Health
never  known  before,  rushing  through  the  body  !  Then
they  might  get  clothed  and  return  to  their  right  minds
again  at  leisure.

2S7  a


Appendix  II

This  evil  (of  putting  all  one's  trust  in  external
defences)  is  an  evil  which,  like  lying,  reduplicates  and
complicates  itself.  The  more  clothes  and  w^rappings
you  wear  the  slower  and  more  feebly  you  move,  also
the  more  sensitive  and  *  nesh '  does  the  skin  become.
Hence  greater  liability  to  chill,  and  necessity  for  more
clothes,  and  so  ad  infinitum.  Some  of  our  good  *  ladies,*
under  the  enormous  weight  of  sealskins,  &c.,  which
they  feebly  animate,  seem  to  have  reached  the  infinitum
already.

The  principle  of  conquest  as  to  Health  holds  somehow
also  in  regard  to  Food.  There  seem  to  be  two  views  of
food,  more  or  less  unconsciously  entertained  of  course —
and  corresponding  to  them  I  think  perhaps  you  may  note
two  quite  different  manners  or  methods  in  eating.

The  one  view  is  that  food  is  a  mere  material  of  health
and  strength — a  material  which  has  to  be  utilised,  selected,
controlled,  and  by  some  judicious  power  built  up  into  the
structure  of  the  body  ;  the  other,  that  food  itself  contains
the  forces  which  build  up  the  body,  and  that  //  is  the
prime  agent  in  the  body's  construction  and  renovation.
The  first  gives  the  eater  an  active  relation  to  his  food,  the
second  a  passive  ;  the  first  tends  towards,  or  somewhat  in
the  direction  of  abstemiousness,  the  second  in  the  direction
of  stimulants.  I  do  not  say  that  one  is  absolutely  right
and  the  other  absolutely  wrong,  or  that  one  is  reasonable
and  the  other  quite  unreasonable  ;  but  I  think  that  now
that  we  have  attained  a  state  of  civilisation  in  which
speed  in  the  chase  is  not  for  most  of  us  an  indispensable
condition  of  getting  our  dinner,  the  first  view  is  the  one
which  we  are  most  liable  to  overlook.

The  digestive  apparatus  is  like  a  sort  of  General  Post
Office — and  a  great  deal  of  work  to  be  done  ;  the  food  to
be  dissected  and  distributed — every  atom  of  it  sorted  and
sent  to  its  different  destination.  What  an  innumerable
activity  is  here !  all  the  myriad  different  organic  of
chemic  particles  to  be  dealt  with,  each  after  its  kind  ;  all

258


Health  a  Conquest

the  countless  needs  of  the  body  to  be  provided  for  !  Yet
a  healthy  body  has  somehow,  it  would  seem,  the  power  of
carrying  on  this  complex  process  with  extraordinary  tact,
authority  and  discrimination — determining  quite  deci-
sively the  amount  and  kind  of  food  it  requires,  and  send-
ing every  particle  to  its  right  place.  This  is  indeed  a
conquest.  The  creature  advances  on  the  world,  wrests
from  the  general  currents  of  the  globe  just  those  elements
which  it  requires,  and  commands,  nay  compels  them,  to
array  themselves  around  it  in  obedience  to  some  law  or
order,  of  which  we — we  I  say  who  take  such  intimate
part  in  the  process — are  still  only  dimly  conscious.
Nevertheless  the  order  and  the  law  is  in  our  consciousness
— or  in  regions  which  in  time  if  not  now  will  be  acces-
sible to  our  consciousness.

This  apparatus  of  digestion,  as  we  well  know,  can  quite
possibly  be  broken  down  by  overloading  it  with  work.
And  there  is  no  doubt  that  all  food  beyond  what  is  really
needed  is  not  only  waste  m  itself  but  actually  wastes
energy  in  the  disposal  of  it — destroys  force  instead  of
creating  it.  That  the  assimilation  of  food  is  work  and
involves  the  exertion  of  power  is  I  think  obvious  to
every  one.  (Hence,  for  instance,  the  need  of  warmth  and
quiet  after  meals.)  Indeed  there  seems  to  be  something
necessary  and  radical  in  this  idea  :  because  the  *  I,'  the
real  person,  can  only,  one  would  suppose,  appear  and
become  manifest  through  some  authentic  action,  some
action  of  its  own  ;  and  if  the  body  were  constructed  and
built  up  by  another  force,  not  the  ego — as,  for  instance,
by  the  forces  residing  in  the  food — then  would  the  body
cease  to  be  an  expression  or  manifestation  of  such  ego,
and  become  rather  a  concealment  and  cloud  over  it.

That  the  bodies  of  many  people,  and  of  us  all  in  degree,
are  built  up  in  this  external  way  ;  and  are  more  or  less
clouded  and  spotty,  I  do  not  for  a  moment  doubt.  And
here  is  the  justification  of  the  view  that  eating  is  a  passive
process.     Shovel  the  curry  and  rice  in,  and  let  it  sort

259


Appendix  II

Itself !  Let  us  have  plenty  of  *  support  * ;  give  us  active
stimulating  viands  which  will  do  the  work  themselves
and  save  us  the  trouble  of  co-ordination,  pick-me-ups
which  will  restore  animation  at  any  hour,  and  always
everything  so  well  cooked  that  digestion  may  be  rendered
next  to  useless  !  In  these  moods  we  eat  hastily,  greedily,
with  little  discrimination — as  if  in  fear  lest  we  should
faint  before  the  precious  sustenance  were  well  down  our
throats  ;  and  like  all  that  is  done  in  haste  the  work  done
at  such  times  is  not  good  work.

For  what  if  by  rendering  digestion  passive  the  power
of  making  a  true  body  has  been  lost  ?  What  if  by
trusting  the  nourishment  to  help  us,  instead  of  in  ourselves
to  raise  the  nourishment  to  a  higher  plane  of  activity,  we
have  put  ourselves  second  and  the  lower  forces  first  ?
Doubtless  there  are  constructive  forces  resident  in  food,
but  what  if  these,  instead  of  being  dominated  and  con-
trolled by  the  consuming  organism,  have  been  left  to  their
own  sv/eet  will  ?  Then  a  body  truly  has  been  built  up,
but  not  a  human  body — only  the  body  of  the  sheep  or  the
hog  or  of  some  other  creature  according  to  the  nature  of
the  food  in  question.

Here  we  have  an  interesting  point.  There  is  warfare,
a  struggle  for  supremacy,  between  me  and  that  which  I
endeavour  to  assimilate.  I  am  a  man  and  I  try  to  assimi-
late a  sheep.  What  will  the  result  be,  man  or  sheep  ?
Will  my  food  assimilate  me,  by  any  chance  ?  Yet  this  in
plain  terms  is  the  warfare  that  is  always  going  on,  in
every  department  of  human  life — the  veritable  struggle
for  existence  ;  "  the  price  of  freedom  (from  sheephood)  is
eternal  Vigilance."

In  these  lights  the  questions  of  smmal  and  vegetable
food,  of  cooked  and  raw,  acquire  a  certain  significance.
Animal  food,  containing  as  it  does  highly  wrought  organic
forces,  may  liberate  within  our  system  powers  which  we
may  find  it  difficult  or  even  impossible  to  dominate—
lethargic  monsters,  foul  harpies,  and  sad-visaged  lemures

260


Health  a  Conquest

— which  may  insist  on  having  their  own  way,  building
up  an  animal  body  not  truly  human.  The  common-
sense  experience  of  all  advanced  races  is  against  the  use  of
raw  animal  food.  We  know  its  dangers  too  well.  "VVe
do  not  v/ant  to  make  our  bodies  nests  for  trichinae  or  any
other  insubordinate  forms.  Cooked  flesh  is  safer — a
certain  grade  of  vitality  being  destroyed  by  cookery — but
then  Oh,  dear  !  if  the  lemures  and  harpies  are  dead,  what
kind  of  cheer  is  to  be  got  out  of  their  wretched  carcases  r
The  passivity  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  lends  itself
perhaps  more  readily  to  a  true  assimilation.  But  here  on
the  other  hand  appears  an  opposite  danger.  The  man
who  feeds  on  mere  meek  pulses  and  porridges  may  domi-
nate them  almost  too  easily.  The  reins  of  his  chariot
mav  grow  slack  and  he  himself  quiescent,  like  a  carter
asleep  behind  an  aged  marc.  Fresh  fruits  have  more
vitality  in  them  ;  there  are  charming  fragrant  sylphs  and
oreads  in  these,  which  we  seem  to  absorb  into  ourselves
— and  which  it  is  a  sin  to  drive  out  by  fire.  In  a  clean
human  body  they  love  to  dwell,  making  their  homes  there
and  finding  plenty  of  occupation  under  the  eye  of  the
master.  The  slight  indigestibility  w^hich  some  people
complain  of  in  raw  fruit,  nuts,  and  so  forth,  is  a  bit  of  a
sign  which  these  dainty  little  spirits  make  to  us — a  kind
of  challenge  that  we  should  effect  that  conquest  of  them
which  is  their  beatitude  and  our  good  Health.


In  England  and  Germany  of  late  years  the  movement
towards  sun-baths  and  open-air  cures,  and  simplifications
of  dress  generally,  has  taken  great  proportions.  Sando'u/s
Magazine  not  long  ago  (Jan.  1900)  contained  an  article
on  the  importance  of  open-air  swimming-baths,  with
running  track  and  gymnastic  appliances  combined.  Such
places  (made  as  ornamental  as  may  be,  with  shrubs  and
trees)  would  afford  the  immense  advantage  of  work  \n  the

36t


Appendix  II

open,  and  of  deep  and  free  breathing—while  the  boon  to
the  gymnast  of  being  able  to  take  a  bath  before  dressing,
or  a  run  after  swimming,  would  be  obvious.  "  In  truth
there  are  few  days  in  the  year  when  such  a  place  could
not  be  used  with  advantage.  Any  runner  knows  that  he
can  run  through  wintry  weather  or  rain  and  feel  *as
warm  as  a  toast* — a  good  deal  warmer  than  when
shivering  over  the  fire  in  a  great-coat ;  and  to  conquer
cold  in  this  way,  and  get  warm  in  spite  of  it,  is  splendid
practice  ;  and  the  mere  fact  of  having  done  it  once  keeps
one  warm  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  Like  Thoreau,  who
said  that  one  sack  of  coals  served  him  all  the  winter —
because  when  cold  he  simply  carried  the  sack  up  from  the
cellar  and  took  it  down  again  ;  and  this  kept  him.  warm
without  a  fire  !  '*

Certainly  the  exposure  of  the  skin  to  sun  and  air  is  one
of  the  most  important  conditions  of  health  ;  and  I  believe
that  v/hat  we  call  *  catching  cold'  is  greatly  due  to  our
everlastingly  covering  it,  and  so  checking  the  action  of  its
innumerable  glands.


Ill

EVENING   IN   SPRING
A  MEDITATION  1

Most  lovely  is  the  evening.  The  swallows  darting  to
and  fro  in  a  clear  sky,  the  level  shafts  of  the  setting  sun
throwing  into  relief  all  the  dimples  and  contours  of  the
valley  and  its  woods,  the  trail  of  blue  smoke  from  a
cottage  floating  slowly  eastward,  the  massed  blue-bells
(like  pools  of  water)  in  all  the  shady  spots,  under  trees  or
along  the  wall  sides,  the  faint  fragrance,  the  outline  of
leaves  overhead  against  the  light,  above  all  the  wonderful
sense  of  space,  filled  as  it  seems  with  the  faintest  mist —
all  so  harmonious,  calm,  perfect.  For  a  moment  one
envies  the  swallows  their  happiness,  or  the  gnats  dancing
in  the  last  sun-rays.

But  the  swallows  are  not  happy.  Little  things  they  are
rushing  to  and  fro,  consumed  at  every  moment  by  the
desire  to  catch  a  gnat — from  one  gnat  to  another  they
rush.  If  the  swallow  is  happy  it  does  not  know  that  it  is
happy,  it  only  knows  that  it  has  caught  the  gnat  or  that
it  has  failed  to  catch  it.     One  cannot  call  this  happiness.

Or  the  gnat — whether  it  is  caught  or  whether  it
escapes — one  cannot  call  this  happiness.

Or  the  blue-bell — whether  among  the  thousands  of
other  blue-bells  down  in  that  hollow  it  has  succeeded  in
lifting  its  head  to  the  coveted  sun  and  air,  or  whether  it

*  Reprinted  from  Seedtime ^  April  1897.
263


Appendix  III

has  been  choked,  trampled  out,  by  the  huge  crowd  of  its
competitors,  and  lies  there  done  to  death  beneath  the
dead  leaves,  a  starveling  bulb  with  an  abortive  shoot — one
cannot  call  that  happiness.

Or  I — whether  I  have  caught  my  gnat  or  whether  I
have  failed  to  catch  it ;  whether  I  have  escaped  my
pursuer  or  whether  I  have  failed  to  escape  ;  whether
I  have  trampled  on  others  or  whether  I  have  myself  been
trampled  on — I  cannot  call  any  of  these  things  happiness.

And  the  scene  is  made  up  of  swallows  and  gnats  and
blue-bells  and  human  and  other  beings — thousands  and
thousands  of  them — therefore  where  among  them  all  is
happiness  ?

Yet  happiness  is  there.  When  I  look  upon  the  scene
I  feel  it  is  there  ;  I  know  it.  Indeed  I  feel  it,  unanswer-
able, incontestable,  deep  down,  far  below  failure  and
success,  in  myself.  It  is  something  that  cannot  fail.  It
is  in  the  life  of  the  scene  itself — of  which  life  the  little
motives  of  the  swallows  and  the  gnats  are  the  merest
fractions.

Sometimes  it  seems  horrible  that  Nature  should  be  "  a
world  of  plunder  and  prey" — but  then  again  it  is  not
horrible.  It  is  in  no  way  horrible  to  me  to  think  that  one
corpuscle  in  my  circulation  may  swallow  another  ;  indeed
it  may  be  absolutely  necessary  for  my  body's  existence
that  they  should  act  so.  If  the  corpuscle  that  is  swallowed
thinks  he  is  ill-treated,  and  the  corpuscle  that  swallows
thinks  that  his  merit  has  at  last  been  rewarded,  they  are
both  under  an  illusion — the  illusion  that  they  exist  in  my
circulation  as  separate  individuals,  and  that  my  body  is
their  happy  hunting  ground  ;  and  the  sooner  they  get
over  that  illusion  the  better  : —

**  If  the  red  slayer  thinks  he  slays,
And  if  the  slain  thinks  he  is  slain,
They  know  not  well  the  subtle  ways
I  keep,  and  pass,  and  turn  again,"
264


Evening  in  Spring  :    a  Meditation

In  this  scene  to-night  there  is  a  life  which  equah'ses
individual  fortune  and  misfortune.  One  blue-bell  bulb
must  fail  in  order  that  another  may  succeed,  but  to  that
life  there  is  neither  failure  nor  success.  The  individual
life  has  its  pains  and  pleasures,  which  in  the  long  run  just
about  balance  each  other.  The  universal  life  is  an  eternal
and  surpassing  joy,  of  which  the  other  is  but  the  nutriment
and  body.

The  curious  thing  is,  however,  that  one  should
be  able  to  feel  this  universal  life  in  one.  The  curious
thing  is  that  one  should  be  prompted  to  say  :  "  This,  this
surpassing  existence  is  after  all  Myself,  my  true  self."  I
wonder  if  the  swallows  and  the  gnats  and  the  corpuscles
of  the  blood  have  any  inkling  that  they  are  really  not
mutually  exclusive  individuals  ;  it  seems  as  if  there  were
two  consciousnesses,  more  or  less  distinct  and  separable,  in
each  person — one  which  occupies  itself  with  the  relation
of  things  primarily  to  oneself  as  distinct  from  other
persons  ;  the  other,  more  latent  and  less  defined,  which
occupies  itself  with  things  as  considered  rather  in  relation
to  the  common  life  of  all.  This  latter  consciousness  has
an  abode  of  course  in  the  individual,  and  perceives  and
acts  through  the  individual,  yet  it  cannot  quite  be  called
individual  in  its  aims  or  judgments.

The  curious  thing  is,  I  say,  that  this  deeper,  more
universal  consciousness  should  be  a  part  of  our  actual
selves.  Yet  that  it  is  so  there  is  no  doubt.  Hidden
or  clouded  though  it  may  be,  yet  it  is  recognisable  to  some
degree  in  all  men — nay,  I  believe  that  it  is  the  very
foundation  of  our  individual  life.

In  the  animals  the  universal  life  is  strong  (as  witness
their  instincts  often  leading  to  sacrifice  of  their  own
existence),  but  it  is  unconscious,  at  least  as  far  as  they  are
concerned — or  only  quite  subconscious.  Their  indi-
vidual consciousness  on  the  other  hand,  though  keen  and
intense  enough,  is  limited  in  area.  In  man  the  individual
consciousness  has  grown  so  vast  that  it  threatens — at  a

265  s


Appendix  III

certain  period  of  his  development — to  wrest  him  from
universal  ends  in  Titanic  revolt  against  the  Gods  (a  thing
inconceivable  in  the  case  of  the  animals) ;  but  his  salva-
tion comes  inevitably,  in  the  growth  also  within  him  of  .a
universal  consciousness — the  double  consciousness  bring-
ing terrible  discord  and  doubt  for  a  time,  till  at  last  the
fusion  of  the  two,  and  the  recognition  of  the  primacy  of
the  latter,  restores  harmony  and  makes  his  entrance  into
real  life  and  happiness  possible.

r  To  attain  this  fusion  of  the  individual  and  universal
consciousness — so  that,  still  remaining  individual,  one
should  partake  and  be  aware  of  the  universal  life — this  is
the  long  effort  and  upward  climb  of  humanity,  worth  all
the  struggles  and  disasters  and  failures  by  the  way  that
may  attend  it.  That  in  the  process  the  thwarting,  dis-
appointment, and  even  partial  destruction  of  the  individual
life  should  occasionally  be  necessary — in  order  that  the
germs  of  the  higher  consciousness  may  develop — seems  a
matter  easy  to  understand.  But  when  the  process  is
complete  the  two  sides  of  Man  do  but  feed  each  other
mutually — the  universal  nourishing  and  directing  the
individual,  and  the  individual  giving  selfness  and  defini-
tion to  the  universal.


THE   END


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by
Xnrwm  BROTHERS,  LIMITED,  THE  GRESHAM  PRESS,  WOEIXG  AND  LONDON


BOOKS    BY    EDWARD    CARPENTER

ANGELS'  WINGS :  Essays  on  Art  and  its  Relation  to  Life.  Illustrated.  Large
Cr.  8vo,  6s.  6d.  net.  [_Filth  Edition.

ART  OF  CREATION,  THE :  Essays  on  the  Self  and  its  Powen.  Cr.  8vo,  6s.
net,  [Fif^li-  Edition.

CHANTS  OF  LABOUR :  a  Songbook  for  the  People,  wkh  frontispiece  and  cover
by  Walter  Crane.     (Reprinting.)  [Fifth  Edition.

aVILlZATION:  ITS  CAUSE  AND  CURE.    Essays  on  Modern  Science.

O.  8vo.    Original  Edition.    Cloth,  3s.  6d.  net,  and  Limp  Cloth,  2s.  6d.

net.  [  Sixteen  th  Edi  Hon .

New  and  much  enlarged  Edition.    Cr.  8vo.    Cloth,  7s.  6d.  neU

DAYS  WITH  WALT  WHITMAN.    Cr.  8vo,  5s.  net.  [Second  Edition.

THE  DRAMA  OF  LOVE  AND  DEATH:  a  Study  of  Human  Evolution  and
Transfiguration.    Cr.  8vo,  6s.  net.  [Second  Edition.

ENGLAND'S  IDEAL.  Cr.  8vo.    Qoth,  3s.  6d,  net,  and  Limp  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net.

[Ninth  Edition.

FROM  ADAM'S  PEAK  TO  ELEPHANTA;  Sketches  in  Ceylon  and  India.
Large  Cr.  &vo.     [Reprinting.)  [Third  Edition.

HEALING  OF  NATIONS,  THE.  Cr.  8vo.  Cloth,  3s.  6d.  net.  Paper^  2s.  6d.  net,

[Sixth  Edition.

THE  IN  TERMED!  ATE  SEX :  a  Study  of  some  Transitional  Types  of  Men  and
Women.    Cr.  8vo,  5s.  net.  [Fourth  Edition.

INTERMEDIATE  TYPES  AMONG  PRIMITIVE  FOLK :  a  Study  in  Social
Evolution.    8vo,  5s.net.  [Second  Ediiion.

lOLAUS:  an  Anthology  of  Friendship.    Cr.  8vo,  4s.  6d.  net

[Fourth  Edition  Enlarged.

LOVE'S  COMING  OF  AGE :  on  the  Relations  of  the  Sexes.    8vo,  48.  hi,  net.

[Eleventh  Edition.

MY  DAYS  AND  DREAMS:  being  Autobiographical  Notes  with  Portraits  and
Illustrations,    Demy  8vo,  7».  6d.  net.  [Third  Edition.

PAGAN  AND  CHRISTIAN  CREEDS.    Demy  8vo,  lOs.  6d.  net.

THE  PROMI^D  LAND :  a  Drama  of  a  People's  Deliverance.    A  new  and

revised  edition  of  "  Moses."    Cr.  8vo,  3s.  6d.  net.
TOWARDS  DEMOCRACY.    Library  Edition,  6s.  net.  [Ninth  Edition.

Pocket  Edition,  5s.  net.  [Thirteenth  Edition.

TOWARDS  INDUSTRIAL  FREEDOM.  Cr.8vo.  Qoth,  3s.  6d.  net.  Paper,
2s.  6d.  net.  [Second  Impression.

A  VISIT  TO  A  GNANI.    Large  Cr.  8vo.    Half  Cloth,  3s.  6d.  net.

PHOTOGRAVURE  PORTRAIT  OF  EDWARD  CARPENTER,  with  a
facsimile  autograph.    2s.  6d.  net,

LONDON:  GEORGE  ALLEN  &  UN  WIN  LTD.
RUSKIN     HOUSE,    40    MUSEUM     STREET,     W.C.  i


>


\>


^
