PEER   GYNT


A    DRAMATIC    POEM


BY

HENRIK    IBSEN


AUTHORISED  TRANSLATION
BY

WILLIAM    AND    CHARLES    ARCHER


LONDON:

WALTER  SCOTT,    Ltd.,   24  WARWICK   LANE.

CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS,

743   &   745   BROADWAY,    NEW   YORK.

1892.


TO


HENRIK    IBSEN.

Vagliami  U  lungo  studio,  e  H  grande  amore,
Che  vC  hanfatto  cercar  lo  iuo  volume.

W.  A.
C.  A.


INTRODUCTION.


Henrik  Ibsen  was  in  his  thirty-seventh  or  thirty-eighth  year
when  he  wrote  Peer  Gynt^  piibHshed  in  Copenhagen  in  1867.
He  had  left  Norway  in  the  spring  of  1864,  having  by  that  time
produced  his  historical  and  legendary  tragedies  in  prose,  and
his  fascinating,  if  somewhat  juvenile,  Lov^s  Comedy^  written  in
rhymed  decasyllables.  Proceeding  to  Rome,  he  there  (or,
more  precisely,  at  Ariccia,  under  the  Alban  Mount)  wrote  the
satiric  tragedy.  Brandy  which  at  once  made  him  famous
throughout  Scandinavia.  B/'and  \f2i?,  published  in  1866,  while
the  poet,  who  had  now  wandered  still  further  southward,  to
Ischia  and  Sorrento,  was  writing  Peer  Gynt.  The  production
of  two  such  poems  within  the  space  of  two  consecutive  years  is
surely  unique  in  the  history  of  letters.  It  is  unique,  at  any
rate,  in  Ibsen's  record,  for  he  is,  as  a  rule,  an  extremely
deliberate  worker.

Unlike  Brandy  which  is  entirely  of  the  poet's  own  invention,
Peer  Gynt  has  its  roots  in  Norwegian  Folk-lore.  In  the  in-
valuable collections  of  popular  tales  made  by  P.  C.  Asbjornsen
and  Jorgen   Moe,^  we  find  the  germs  of  several  scenes  and

^  Norske  Folkeeventyr^  samlede  ved  P.  C.  Asbjorjisen  og  Jorgen  AJoe,
Christiania,  1842;  second  (enlarged)  ed.,  Christiania,  1852;  third  ed,,
1866;  fourth,  1868;  fifth,  1874.  Many  of  these  translated  by  Sir
George  Webbe  Dasent,  PoJ>tilar  Tales  from  the  Norse  ^  Edinburgh,  1859  ;
second  ed.  (enlarged),  same  place  and  date.  See  also  Tales  froi7i  the
FJeld,  a  second  series  of  Tales  from  the  Norse  of  P.  C.  Asbjornsen^  by
G.  W.  Dasent,  London,  1874.  Also  Norske  Huldre-Eventyr  og
Folkesagn,  by  P.  C.  Asbjornsen,  Christiania,  1848  and  1859;  third  ed.,
Christiania,  1870,  Also  Norske  Folke-og  Huldre-Eventyr,  i  Udvalgved
P.  Chr.  Asbjornsen,  Copenhagen,  1879,  translated  under  the  title  of
Pound  the  Yule  Log,  by  H.  L.  Broekstad,  London,  1881.


vi  Introduction.

incidents.  The  very  name  "Peer  Gynt"  is  suggested  by
Asbjornsen's  "Reindeer-hunting  in  the  Rondii  Hills;"^  and  in  the
same  group  of  talcs  occurs  the  adventure  of  Gudbrand  Glesne
on  the  Gendin-Edge,  which  Peer  Gynt  works  up  so  unblushingly
in  Act  I.,  Sc.  I.  The  text  of  both  these  tales  will  be  found  in
the  Appendix,  and  the  reader  will  recognise  how  very  slight  are
the  hints  which  set  the  poet's  imagination  to  work.  The
encounter  with  the  Saeter-Girls  (Act  II.,  Sc.  3),  and  the  struggle
with  the  Boyg  (Act  II.,  Sc.  7),  are  foreshadowed  in  Asbjornsen,
and  the  concluding  remark  of  Anders  Ulvsvolden  evidently
suggested  to  Ibsen  the  idea  of  incarnating  Fantasy  in  Peer
Gynt,  as  in  Brand  he  had  given  us  incarnate  Will.  But  the
Peer  Gynt  of  the  drama  has  really  nothing  in  common  with  the
Peer  Gynt  of  the  story,  and  the  rest  of  the  characters  are  not
even  remotely  suggested.  Many  scattered  traits  and  allusions,
however,  are  borrowed  from  other  legends  in  the  same  store-
house of  grotesque  and  marvellous  imaginings.  Thus  the  story
of  the  devil  in  the  nutshell  (Act  I.,  Sc.  3)  appears  in  Asbjornsen
under  the  title  of  "  The  Boy  and  the  Devil."  ^  The  appearance
of  the  Green-Clad  One  with  her  Ugly  Brat,  who  offers  Peer
Gynt  a  goblet  of  beer  (Act  III.,  Sc.  3),  is  obviously  suggested
by  an  incident  in  "  Berthe  Tuppenhaug's  Stories."'  Old
Berthe,^  too,  supplies  the  idea  of  correcting  Peer  Gynt's  eye-
sight according  to  the  standard  of  the  hill-trolls  (Act  II.,  Sc.  6),
as  well  as  the  gei-m  of  the  fantastic  yarn-ball  episode  in  the
last  Act  (Sc.  6).  The  castle,  "  East  of  the  Sun  and  West  of  the
Moon"  (Act  III.,  Sc.  4),  gives  its  title  to  one  of  Asbjornsen's
stories,^  which  may  be  read  in  English  in  Mr.  Andrew  Lang's
Blue  Fairy  Book;  and  "  Soria  Moria  Castle"  is  the  title  of
another  legend.^  Herr  Passarge  (in  his  Henrik  Ibsen,  Leipzig,
1883)  goes  so  far  as  to  trace  the  idea  of  Peer  Gynt's  shrinking

^  Norske  Huldre-Eventyr  og  Folkesagn,  Christiania,  1848,  p.  47.
See  also  Copenhagen  edition,  1879,  p.  154.

^  Norske  Folke-og  HiiJdre-Eveniyr,  Copenhagen,  1879,  p.  44.

^  Ibid,,  p.  134.

4  Ibid.,  pp.  130,  139.  5  ji^fj^^  p^  243.

^  Not  included  in  the  Copenhagen  1879  edition.  See  edition,
Christiania,  1866,  p.  115.


Introduction.  vii

from  the  casting-ladle,  even  though  hell  be  the  alternative
(Act  v.,  Sc.  7,  etc.),  to  Asbjornsen's  story  of  "  The  Smith  whom
they  dared  not  let  into  Hell;"^  but  the  circumstances  are  so
different,  and  Ibsen's  idea  is  such  an  inseparable  part  of  the
ethical  scheme  of  the  drama,  that  we  can  scarcely  take  it  to
have  been  suggested  by  this  (or  any  other)  individual  story.
At  the  same  time  there  is  no  doubt  that  "  Folk-Lore  of  Peer
Gynt"  might  form  the  subject  of  a  much  more  extended  study
than  our  space  or  our  knowledge  admits  of.  The  whole  atmo-
sphere of  the  first  three  acts  and  of  the  fifth  is  that  of  the
Norwegian  "Folk  and  Fairy  Tales."  A  careful  study  of
Asbjornsen  and  Moe  would  probably  reveal  many  direct
suggestions  besides  those  above  enumerated.  It  must  be
remembered,  too,  that  in  the  early  sixties  Ibsen  was  com-
missioned by  the  Norwegian  Government  to  visit  Romsdal
and  Sondmore  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  folk-songs  and
legends,  so  that  he  must  have  come  in  direct  personal  contact
with  the  mythopoeic  faculty  of  the  peasantry  in  its  very  strong-
hold. To  these  journeys,  no  doubt,  we  are  mainly  indebted  for
the  local  colour  of  Brand  and  Peer  Gynt.

What  are  we  to  say,  now,  of  the  drift,  the  interpretation,  of
Peer  Gyntf  The  first  thing  to  be  said  is  that  a  complete
understanding  of  its  manifold  satiric  and  symbolic  bearings  is
by  no  means  necessary  to  its  enjoyment  as  a  work  of  pure
imagination.  Rather  we  would  counsel  the  reader,  in  the  first
instance,  to  skip  the  remaining  pages  of  this  introduction,  to
ignore  the  footnotes  referring  back  to  them,  and,  heedless  of
its  ethical  and  political  intentions,  to  take  the  poem  as  it  comes,
simply  as  a  dramatic  romance  or  phantasmagoria  of  purely-
human  humour  and  pathos.  Reading  it  in  this  way,  he  will
naturally  find  a  good  deal  that  is  obscure ;  but  if  the  sheer
interest,  the  pure  poetry,  of  the  thing  does  not  carry  him  past
these  obscurities,  then  the  poem,  or  at  any  rate  this  translation,
-is  clearly  not  one  of  the  books  which  are  his  by  elective
affinity.  If  the  poem  bites  upon  his  mind  at  all,  he  will,  even
in  reading  it  merely  for  its   story,  gain   some  general  con-

^  Copenhagen  1879  edition,  p.  141.


vHi  Introduction.

ception  of  its  symbolic  scheme.  At  a  second  reading,  with
the  aid  of  such  side-lights  as  we  can  here  afford  him,  he  will
proljably  find  many  of  the  obscurities  vanish.  But  he  must
not  seek  in  Peer  Gynt  for  a  clear,  consistent,  cut-and-dried
allegory,  with  a  place  for  everything  and  everything  in  its  place.
It  is  not  an  allegory,  but  a  phantasmagory.  Its  chief  fascina-
tion, to  our  thinking  (apart  from  its  aforesaid  charm  as  a  mere
romance),  lies  in  the  multiplicity  of  meaning  which  may  be  read
into  it.  The  poet,  no  doubt,  had  his  own  more  or  less  distinct
and  definable  purpose  in  every  scene,  and  this  purpose  it  is
interesting  to  decipher.  But  Peer  Gynt  takes  its  place,  as  we
hold,  on  the  summits  of  literature,  precisely  because  it  means
so  much  more  than  the  poet  consciously  intended.  Is  not  this
one  of  the  characteristics  of  the  masterpiece,  that  every  one  can
read  in  it  his  own  secret?  In  the  material  world  (though
Nature  is  very  innocent  of  symbolic  intention)  each  of  us  finds
for  himself  the  symbols  that  have  relevance  and  value  for  him;
and  so  it  is  with  the  poems  which  are  instinct  with  true  vitality.

The  conscious  and  deliberate  meanings  of  Peer  Gynt  fall
under  three  heads.  First  we  have  "allgemein-menschlich"
satire  and  symbolism,  bearing  upon  human  nature  in  general,
irrespective  of  race  or  nationality.  Next  we  have  satire  upon
Norwegian  human  nature  in  particular,  upon  the  religious  and
political  life  of  Norway  as  a  nation.  Lastly,  we  find  a  certain
number  of  local  and  ephemeral  references — what,  in  the  slang
of  our  stage,  are  called  "  topical  allusions."  The  English  reader
would  scarcely  thank  us  if  we  attempted  to  identify  and
elucidate  all  the  sub-intentions  of  this  third  order.  It  will  be
enough  if  we  point  out  some  of  the  most  obvious  as  they  occur.

In  order  to  provide  the  reader  with  a  clue  to  the  complex
meanings  of  Peer  Gynt,  on  its  higher  lines  or  planes  of  signifi-
cance, we  cannot  do  better  than  quote  some  paragraphs  from
the  admirable  summary  of  the  drama  given  by  Mr.  P.  H.
Wicksteed  in  his  Four  Lectures  on  Henrik  Ibsen}  Mr.
Wicksteed  is  in  such  perfect  sympathy  with  Ibsen  in  the  stage
of  his  development  marked  by  Brand  and  Peer  Gynt,  that  he

^  London :  Sonnenschein,  1892.


Introduction.  ix

has  understood  these  poems,  to  our  thinking,  at  least  as  well  as
any  other  commentator,  whether  German  or  Scandinavian.  He
writes  as  follows  : —

"In  Brand  the  hero  is  an  embodied  protest  against  the  poverty  of
spirit  and  half-heartedness  that  Ibsen  rebelled  against  in  his  country-
men. In  Peer  Gynt  the  hero  is  himself  the  embodiment  of  that  spirit.
In  Brand  the  fundamental  antithesis,  upon  which,  as  its  central  theme,
the  drama  is  constructed,  is  the  contrast  between  the  spirit  of  com-
promise on  the  one  hand,  and  the  motto  '  everything  or  nothing '  on
the  other.  And  Peer  Gynt  is  the  very  incarnation  of  a  compromising
dread  of  decisive  committal  to  any  one  course.  In  Brand  the  problem
of  self-realisation  and  the  relation  of  the  individual  to  his  surroundings
is  obscurely  struggling  for  recognition,  and  in  Peer  Gynt  it  becomes  the
formal  theme  upon  which  all  the  fantastic  variations  of  the  drama  are
built  up.  In  both  plays  alike  the  problems  of  heredity  and  the  influence
of  early  surroundings  are  more  than  touched  upon;  and  both  alike
culminate  in  the  doctrine  that  the  only  redeeming  power  on  earth  or  in
heaven  is  the  power  of  love.

' '  Peer  Gynt,  as  already  stated,  stands  for  the  Norwegian  people,  much
as  they  are  sketched  in  Brandy  though  with  more  brightness  of
colouring.  Plence  his  perpetual  '  hedging '  and  determination  never
so  to  commit  himself  that  he  cannot  draw  back.  Hence  his  frag-
mentary life  of  smatterings.  Hence  his  perpetual  brooding  over  the
former  grandeur  of  his  family,  his  idle  dreams  of  the  future,  and  his
neglect  of  every  present  duty.  Hence  his  deep-rooted  selfishness  and
cynical  indifference  to  all  higher  motives;  and  hence,  above  all,  his
sordid  and  superstitious  religion ;  for  to  him  religion  is  the  apotheosis  of
the  art  of  'hedging.'

"But  Ibsen's  allegories  are  never  stiffly  or  pedantically  worked  out.
His  characters,  though  typical,  are  personal.  We  could  read  Brandy
and  could  feel  the  tragedy  and  learn  the  lessons  of  the  drama  without
any  knowledge  whatever  of  the  circumstances  or  feelings  under  which
it  was  written,  or  the  references  to  the  Norwegian  character  and
conduct  with  which  it  teems.

"  So,  too,  with  Peer  Gynt.  We  may  forget  the  national  significance  of
the  sketch,  except  where  special  allusions  recall  it  to  our  minds,  and  may
think  only  of  the  universal  problems  with  which  the  poem  deals,  and
which  will  retain  their  awful  interest  when  Ibsen's  polemic  against  his
countrymen  has  sunk  into  oblivion.  The  study  of  Peer  Gynt  as  an
occasional  poem  should  be  strictly  subsidiary  and  introductory  to  its
study  as  the  tragedy  of  a  lost  soul.

* '  What  is  it  to  be  one's  self  ?  God  nieant  something  when  he  made
each  one  of  us.  For  a  man  to  embody  that  meaning  of  God  in  his  words
and  deeds,  and  so  become  in  his  degree  a  *  word  of  God  made  flesh,'  is
to  be  himself  But  thus  to  be  himself  he  must  slay  himself  That
is  to  say,  he  must  slay  the  craving  to  make  himself  the  centre
round  which  others  revolve,  and  must  strive  to  find  his  true  orbit  and

b


X  Introduction.

swing,  sclf-poiscd,  round  the  great  central  light.  But  what  if  a  poor
devil  can  never  puzzle  out  what  on  earth  God  did  mean  when  he  made
him?  Why,  then,  he  must  feel  it.  But  how  often  your  'feeling'
misses  fire  !  Ay  !  there  you  have  it.  The  devil  has  no  stauncher  ally
than  'tvant  of  perception  !     [Act  V. ,  vSc.  9.  ]

*'  But,  after  all,  you  may  generally  find  out  what  God  meant  you  for
if  you  will  face  facts.  It  is  easy  to  find  a  refuge  from  facts  in  lies,  in
self-deception,  and  in  self-sufikiency.  It  is  easy  to  take  credit  to  your-
self for  what  circumstances  have  done  for  you,  and  lay  upon  circum-
stances what  you  owe  to  yourself.  It  is  easy  to  think  you  are  realising
yourself  by  refusing  to  become  a  *  pack-horse  for  the  weal  and  woe  of
others'  [Act  IV.,  Sc.  i],  keeping  alternatives  open  and  never  closing
a  door  behind  you,  or  burning  your  ships,  and  so  always  remaining  the
master  of  the  situation  and  self-possessed.  If  you  choose  to  do  these
easy  things  you  may  always  *get  round'  your  difficulties  [Act  II.,  Sc.
7],  but  you  will  never  get  through  them.  You  will  remain  master  of
the  situation  indeed,  but  the  situation  will  become  poorer  and  narrower
every  day.  If  you  never  commit  yourself,  you  never  express  yourself,
and  your  self  becomes  less  and  less  significant  and  decisive.  Calcu-
lating selfishness  is  the  annihilation  of  self."

The  significance  of  the  drama  in  relation  to  the  poet's
countrymen  is  well  indicated  by  Herr  Jaeger  in  his  valuable
biographical  study.^

*'  The  contest, "2  he  says,  "  did  not  end  with  Brand.  The  following
year  Ibsen  stepped  forward  once  more,  armed  with  a  new  dramatic
poem.  Peer  Gynt  stands  in  the  closest  connection  with  Brand.  If
Brand  is  the  antithesis  of  the  typical  Norwegian,  Peer  Gynt  is  the
man  himself;  the  former  represents  what  the  Norwegian  nation  lacks,
the  latter  what  it  is.  Already  in  Brand's  sketch  of  the  Norwegian
people  we  have  the  outlines  of  Peer  Gynt's  portrait.  In  the  following
verses,  for  instance,  we  find  all  the  essential  traits  : —

'  Go  but  around  in  this  our  land,
and  question  every  man  you  meet,
you'll  find  each  cue  has  learnt  to  be
a  little  bit  of  everything.

In  all  he's  but  a  little  bit ;

his  faults,  his  merits,  go  not  far  ;

a  fraction  he  in  great  and  small,

a  fraction,  both  in  ill  and  good  ;

and,  what's  the  worst,  the  fraction's  parts,

each  of  them  miurders  all  the  rest. '


1  Henrik  Ibsen,  1828- 1888.     Et  Literart  Livsbillede.     Copenhagen,
588.
^  That  is,  the  satiric  war  which  the  poet  was  waging.


Introduction.  xi

•'Peer  Gynt,  then,  is  the  nation  thrown  into  relief  as  a  single  typical
figure  ;  all  the  defects  which  Ibsen  saw  in  his  fellow-countrymen  are  to
be  found  in  him  ;  he  is  half-heartedness,  want  of  character,  egoism
personified.  ...  At  the  same  time,  Feer  Gynt  could  never  have
been  the  complete  and  living  work  it  is  had  the  poet  adhered  strictly
and  exclusively  to  the  conception  of  his  hero  as  a  national  type.  In
this  case,  too,  he  began  by  conceiving  an  abstraction,  and  ended  by
pourtraying  a  living,  individual  character.

"  Peer  Gynt  is  not  the  Norseman  in  general,  but  the  Norseman  of
a  particular  epoch,  to  wit,  the  end  of  the  romantic  period.  Attacks  on
the  outworks  of  romanticism  are  to  be  found  even  in  Brand — the
sheriff's  enthusiasm  for  the  age  of  King  Bele,  for  example.  In  Peer
Gynt  the  blow  is  aimed  at  the  very  heart  of  the  system.  Similar  types
from  the  transition  period  between  romanticism  and  our  modern  world
are  to  be  found  in  several  other  literatures.  In  Turgenieff 's  Rudin,
for  example,  and  in  Spielhagen's  Problematische  Natjiren  ...  we  find
personages  who  have  this  in  common  with  Peer  Gynt,  that  they  are
visionaries,  incapable  of  playing  their  part  in  the  life  of  reality.  Ibsen,
however,  has  gone  his  own  way  ;  while  the  others  went  to  the  cultured
classes  for  their  typical  figures,  he  has  taken  his  from  among  the  people.
Peer  Gynt  is  not,  like  the  others,  a  product  of  the  romanticism  of  culture,
but  of  the  national,  popular  romanticism,  on  which  the  cultured  variety
was  based.  Thus  not  only  the  name.  Peer  Gynt,  but  various  details  of
the  story  are  taken  partly  from  Asbjornsen  and  Moe's  Folke-eventyr,
partly  from  Asb]'6iv\sen'  s  Huldre-eventyr ;  and  the  poet  expressly  indicates
[Act  II.,  Sc.  2]  that  the  germ  of  Peer  Gynt's  fantasy-spinning  was  im-
planted by  the  fairy-tales  on  which,  so  to  speak,  his  mother  had  brought
him  up.  .  .  .  This  up-bringing  on  legends  has  borne  fruit  ;  from  the
very  beginning  of  our  acquaintance  with  him  he  is  a  visionary,  who
walks  about  in  a  day-dream  instead  of  setting  to  work  at  anything.
When  he  tells  the  story  of  Gudbrand-Glesne's  ride^  along  the  Gendin-
Edge  on  the  reindeer's  back,  he  fully  and  firmly  believes  that  it  was  he
himself  to  whom  it  happened,  though  his  ideas  of  the  Gendin-Edge  are
so  incorrect  that  it  is  plain  he  has  never  even  seen  it.  Shortly  after,  he
falls  into  a  muse  over  a  strangely-shaped  cloud,  and  forgets  both  his
neighbours'  sneers  and  the  wedding  guests  in  dreaming  that  he  is  riding
upon  it,  an  Emperor.  And  when,  for  once  in  a  way,  he  works  him-
self up  to  the  point  of  action,  the  motive  is  that  which  usually  actuates
weak  characters — namely,  pique.  His  flight  with  Ingrid  is  a  mere  piece
of  bravado,  and  is  indeed  in  itself  an  act  as  rash,  as  romantic,  as
meaningless  as  any  visionary  of  them  all  could  desire.

"There  is  a  moment  when  he  feels  that  the  life  of  deeds  is  better
than  that  of  dreams ;  the  moment,  namely,  when  he  is  being  hunted
by  the  whole  parish  like  a  wild  beast  [Act  II.,  Sc.  3].  But  this
improvement  does  not  last  long ;  he  is  soon  so  deep  again  in  his
fantastic  world  that  he  cannot  distinguish  between  his  real  experiences

1  See  Appendix.


xii  Introduction.

and  those  he  has  only  dreamt  of,  but  mixes  them  all  up  in  one  hotch-
potch.    [Act  II.,  Sc.  4.]

"Whenever  he  is  confronted  by  the  earnest  things  of  real  life  he
has  recourse  to  the  plan  his  mother  has  taught  him ;  he  takes  refuge  in
his  fantastic  world,  to

"  '  for<?et  what's  awry  and  crooked,
and  all  that  is  sharp  and  sore.'

He  invariably  'goes  roundabout' — never  straight  through.  Not  even
by  his  mother's  death-bed  [Act  III.,  Sc.  4]  will  he  look  the  truth  in  the
face,  but  spirits  her  and  himself  away  from  it  in  a  tissue  of  inventions.
What  a  difference  between  Brand's  hard  but  honest  behaviour  towards
his  dying  mother,  and  the  pitiful  fantasy-mongering  with  which  Peer
Gynt  lies  his  mother  away  from  life-  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
Ibsen  conceived  Ase's  death-scene  as  a  contrast  and  a  parallel  to  the
death  of  Brand's  mother.

"The  double  existence  which  Peer  Gynt  thus  leads  necessarily
develops  in  his  character  the  half-heartedness  of  the  true  romanticist ;
it  develops  cowardice  and  impotence,  egoism  and  bungling;  it  opens
an  impassable  gulf  between  desire  and  action,  between  willing  a  thing
and  carrying  it  out ;  its  motto  is  the  characteristic —


(( (


Ay,  think  of  it, — wish  it  done — will  it  to  boot, —

But  do  it —  I    No,  that's  past  my  understanding.' — [Act  III.,  Sc.  1.]

"All  that  Peer  Gynt  does  is  only  half  done;  he  rubs  out  with  one
hand  what  he  has  done  with  the  other,  and  accordingly  he  is  and
remains  characterless  and  effaced,  and  must  end  in  the  casting-ladle
[Act  v.,  Sc.  7]>  like  everyone  who  has  made  of  himself,  not  a  personality,
but  only  an  egoist,  the  caricature  of  a  personality — who  has  not  '  been
himself,'  but  has  only  been  'to  himself-i-enough  '  [Act  II.,  Sc.  6].
In  reading  Peer  Gynt  one  is  reminded  involuntarily  of  H.  C.  Orsted's
maxim  :  '  Forget  thyself,  but  never  lose  thy  self.'  It  is  in  Peer  Gynt's
nature  that  he  should  completely  reverse  this  maxim  in  practice ;  he
loses  his  self,  though  he  has  never  forgotten  himself.

"Thus  the  figure,  which  was  originally  conceived  as  a  national  type,
underwent  a  transformation  into  a  personage  typical  of  a  special  period,
the  latest  phase  of  which  Ibsen  himself  had  lived  through,  and  with
which,  in  producing  B?-and  and  Peer  Gynt,  he  finally  and  decisively
broke.

"Directly  satirical  sallies  are  obviously  much  rarer  in  Peer  Gynt
than  in  Brand,  The  first  three  acts  contain  only  one  instance,  a  hit  at
Norwegian  chauvinism  in  the  patriotic  maxim  of  the  Old  Man  of  the
Dovre —

"  '  The  cow  gives  cakes  and  the  bullock  mead ;
ask  not  if  its  taste  be  sour  or  sweet ;
the  main  matter  is,  and  you  mustn't  forget  it,
it's  all  of  it  home-brewed.'— [Act  II.,  Sc.  6.]


Introduction.  xiii

"A  similar  satirical  passage  addressed  specially  to  the  *  Malstrsevers'^
is  introduced  into  the  scene  in  the  mad-house  at  Cairo  [Act  IV.,  Sc.  13],
where  Huhu  deplores  the  extinction  of  the  language  of  the  orang-
outangs. The  characters  of  the  two  other  madmen,  who  are  brought
forward  in  this  scene,  are  satiric  references  to  conditions  then  existing
in  the  north.  The  Fellah  with  the  royal  mummy  on  his  back  is —
like  Trumpeterstrale — a  cut  at  the  Swedes,  the  mummy  being  Charles
the  Twelfth.  Like  the  Fellah,  it  is  implied,  the  Swedes  are  extremely
proud  of  their  'Hero-king,*  and  yet  during  the  Dano-German  war
they  showed  not  the  smallest  sign  of  having  anything  in  common  with
him,  unless  it  were  that  they,  like  him,  *  kept  still  and  completely
dead.'  In  the  delusion  of  the  minister  Hussein,  who  imagines  himself
a  pen,  there  is  a  general  reference  to  the  futile  address-  and  note-
mongering  which  went  on  in  Norwegian-Swedish  officialdom  during  the
Dano-German  war,  aiiii  a  more  special  one  to  an  eminent  Swedish
statesman,  who,  during  the  war,  had  been  extremely  proud  of  his
official  notes,  and  had  imagined  that  by  means  of  them  he  might
exercise  a  decisive  influence  on  the  course  of  events.

"General  political  and  psychological  considerations,  however,  and
not  special  and  occasional  satiric  objects,  were  those  which  mainly
influenced  the  poet  during  the  production  of  Peer  Gynt ;  and  accord-
ingly, in  drawing  in  the  hero  a  transition-figure  characteristic  of  our
century,  he  created  a  type,  which  has  relevance  far  beyond  the  limits
whether  of  Norway  or  of  Scandinavia."

Readers  who  desire  further  assistance  in  solving  the  riddles
of  Peer  Gynt  will  find  an  elaborate,  not  to  say  laborious,  com-
mentary on  the  poem  in  Passarge's  Henrik  Ibsen:  ein  Beitrag
zur  neusten  Geschichte  der  norwegischen  Naiional-literaiur
(Leipzig,  1 883).  Passarge  quotes  largely  from  Valfrid  Vasenius's
Henrik  Ibsen:  ett  Skaldep07'irdtt  (Stockholm,  1882),  which  may
also  be  consulted,  not  without  profit,  by  those  who  read  Swedish.
Both  Passarge  and  Vasenius,  however,  attempt  to  compress  the

^  *'  Malstrsever  "  may  be  translated  "language  reformer."  It  was  the
name  given  to  a  party  which  desired  to  substitute  a  language  com-
pounded from  the  various  local  dialects,  for  the  Norwegian  of  the
bourgeoisie  and  of  literature,  which  they  called  Danish,  and  declared  to
be  practically  a  foreign  tongue  to  the  peasants  and  the  lower  classes
generally.  The  peasants,  they  argued  (like  Huhu's  orang-outangs),
lived  and  died  "uninterpreted."  The  movement  attained  no  little
force  in  the  sixties  and  seventies,  and  a  considerable  literature  sprang
up  in  the  so-called  "  mal,"  the  work  of  such  men  as  Ivar  Asen,  A.  O.
Vinje,  and  Kristofer  Janson.  Some  of  the  dialect  ^poems  which  the
movement  produced,  more  especially  those  of  Ivar  Asen,  are  highly
esteemed  even  by  the  opponents  of  the  "  M^lstrsev."


xiv  Introduction.

poem  into  a  mould  of  scholastic  psychology  and  ethics  which
it  bursts  on  every  hand.  The  phrase  "  ondoyant  et  divers "
might  have  been  invented  to  characterise  Peer  Gynt.  A  more
profitable  commentary,  both  from  the  literary-historical  and  the
philosophic  point  of  view,  will  be  found  in  Auguste  Ehrhard's
Henrik  Ibsen  et  le  Theatre  Conteniporain  (Paris,  1892),  probably
the  most  thorough-going  and  competent  piece  of  Ibsen
criticism  which  has  yet  appeared.  M.  Ehrhard  (in  a  pas-
sage suggested  by  Henrik  Jaeger's  essay  on  ^^  Syn?idve
Solbakkefi  and  its  Period "  in  his  Norske  Forfattere)
tries  to  show  that  Ibsen  deliberately  intended  Peer
Gyiit  as  a  satiric  counterblast  to  Bjornson's  first  and  most
characteristic  peasant-novel.  In  this,  to  our  thinking,  he  goes
too  far.  Synnove  Solbakken  is  no  doubt  a  typical  production  of
the  period  of  national  romanticism,  against  which  (as  we  have
seen  above)  Peer  Gynt  marks  the  reaction.  But  the  ana-
logies on  which  M.  Ehrhard  founds  his  theory  that  Peer  and
Solveig  are  designed  as  counterparts  to  Thorbjorn  and  Synnove
seem  to  us  fortuitous  where  they  are  not  purely  fanciful.  Again,
the  French  critic  accepts  with  too  great  facility  Herr  Georg
Brandes's  very  inadequate  interpretation  of  the  Boyg-^  as
representing  "  Akkordens  And,"  the  spirit  of  compromise,  and
his  criticism  of  the  yarn-ball  scene  (Act  V.,  Sc.  6.)  as  an  utter-

^  Deeming  it  unnecessary  to  trouble  the  English  reader  with  niceties
of  pronunciation,  we  have  represented  the  "Boig"  of  the  original  by
the  more  easily  pronouncible  "  Boyg."  The  root-idea  seems  to  be  that
of  bending,  of  sinuousness ;  compare  Norwegian  h'die,  German  biegen,
to  bend.  The  German  translator,  both  in  the  folk-tale  and  in  the
drama,  renders  "Boigen"  by  **der  Krumme."  So  far  as  we  are
aware,  the  name  occurs  in  no  other  folk-tale  save  that  of  Peer  Gynt.
It  is  not  generic,  but  denotes  an  individual  troll-monster.  We  may
pretty  safely  conjecture  that  the  idea  of  this  vague,  shapeless,  ubiquitous,
inevitable,  invulnerable  Thing  was  what  chiefly  fascinated  the  poet's
imagination  in  the  legend  of  Peer  Gynt.  There  are  no  doubt  many
possible  sub-intentions  in  the  Boyg  as  presented  by  Ibsen,  and  we  may,
if  we  please,  understand  it  as  the  Spirit  of  Compromise  among  other
things.  But  the  key  to  its  primary  significance  is  unquestionably  to  be
found  in  Act  IV.,  Sc.  12.


Introduction.  xv

ance  of  personal  self-reproach  on  Ibsen's  part,  Peer  Gynt  being
"  too  miserable  a  creature  "  ever  to  have  experienced  such  an
emotion.  Herr  Brandes  is  justly  esteemed  one  of  the  most
competent  of  living  critics,  but  his  treatment  of  Peer  Gyfif^
is  decidedly  perfunctory.  Yet  again,  the  reader  must  judge  for
himself  how  much  weight  to  attach  to  M.  Ehrhard's  suggestion
that  Ibsen  had  Goethe's  Faust  distinctly  present  to  his  mind
in  conceiving  Peer  Gyjif.  To  our  thinking,  the  analogies  on
which  he  dwells  are,  as  in  the  case  of  Sy?i7idve  Solbakke?!^  either
fanciful  or  fortuitous.  The  redemption  of  the  hero  through  a
woman's  love  is  the  only  real  point  of  similarity;  and  this  we
take  to  be  a  mere  commonplace  of  romanticism,  which  Ibsen,
though  he  satirised  it,  had  by  no  means  finally  outgrown  when
he  wrote  Peer  Gynt.  Peer's  return  to  Solveig  is  (in  the  original)
a  passage  of  the  most  poignant  lyric  beauty,  but  it  is  surely  a
shirking,  not  a  solution,  of  the  ethical  problem.  It  would  be
impossible  to  the  Ibsen  of  to-day,  who  knows  (none  better)  that
"No  man-  can  save  his  brother's  soul,  or  pay  his  brother's
debt."  Or  are  we,  with  Mr.  George  Bernard  Shaw,^  to  read  the
situation  ironically,  and  understand  that  "  With  this  crowningly
unreal  self-reaHsation  Peer  Gynt  is  left  to  face  the  Button-
Moulder  as  best  he  can  ".^  Perhaps  ;  but  it  is  to  be  noted  that
the  poet  gives  Solveig  the  last  word.

The  principles  which  have  guided  us  in  the  following  transcript
demand  a  few  words  of  explanation,  not  to  say  apology.  Peer
Gynt  is  written  from  first  to  last  in  rhymed  verse.  Six  or  eight
different  measures  are  employed  in  the  various  scenes,  and  the
rhymes  are  exceedingly  rich  and  complex.  The  frequency  of
final  light  syllables  in  Norwegian,  resulting  from  the  number  of
inflexions  in  ^,  en^  et^  er^es^  ene^  ende,  etc.,  implies  an  exceptional
abundance  of  double  rhymes,  and  Ibsen  has  taken  full  advan-
tage of  this  peculiarity.     In  the  short  first  scene  of  the  second

^  See  his  ^sthetiske  Studier,  ed.  1888,  p.  330,  and  Det  Moderne
Gjemiembruds  Alcsud,  1883,  Essay  on  Ibsen, /a^im.

2  *'  No,  nor  woman  neither."

^  Mr.  Shaw's  Quintessence  of  Ibsenism  (London,  1891)  contains  a
suaimary  but  very  suggestive  exegesis  oi  Peer  Gynt,


xvi  Introduction.

Act,  for  example,  twenty-five  out  of  the  forty  lines  end  in  double
rhymes,  and  there  are  three  sets  of  three  lines  ending  in  the
same  double  rhyme.^  The  tintinnabulation  of  these  double
rhymes,  then,  gives  to  most  of  the  scenes  a  metrical  character
which  it  might  puzzle  Mr.  Swinburne  himself  to  reproduce  in
English.  Moreover,  the  ordinary  objections  to  rhymed  transla-
tions seemed  to  apply  with  exceptional  force  in  the  case  oi  Peer
Gynt.  The  characteristic  quality  of  its  style  is  its  vernacular
ease  and  simplicity.  It  would  have  been  heart-breaking  work
(apart  from  its  extreme  difficulty)  to  substitute  for  this  racy
terseness  the  conventional  graces  of  English  poetic  diction,
padding  here  and  perverting  there.  From  such  a  task  even  a
master  of  rhymes  and  metres  might  well  have  shrunk,  as  from  a
"  labor  improbus  "  in  a  double  sense  ;  and  we  were  the  less
tempted  to  essay  it  as  we  knew  ourselves  no  masters  either  of
metre  or  rhyme.  To  a  prose  translation,  on  the  other  hand,  the
objections  seemed  even  greater.  It  is  possible  to  give  in  prose
some  faint  adumbration  of  epic  dignity  and  even  of  lyric  loveli-
ness ;  but  we  had  here  no  epic,  no  lyric,  to  deal  with ;  not  even
a  poetic  drama,  like  Tasso  or  Heriiani^  based  on  a  single
rhetorical  convention.  We  found  (though  the  statement  may  at
first  seem  paradoxical)  that  the  same  vernacular  simplicity  of
style  which  forbade  a  translation  in  rhyme,  militated  no  less
strongly  against  a  translation  in  prose.  The  characteristic
quality  of  the  poet's  achievement  lay  precisely  in  his  having
given  to  the  most  easy  and  natural  dialogue  (natural  in  expres-
sion, however  fantastic  in  idea)  new  beauty,  aptitude,  and
elevation    by    the    aid    of   rhythm    and   rhyme.     Entirely   to

^  Brott — og  brott  igjen  os  binder ■

Djgevelen  sta  i  alt  som  minder

Djaevelen  sta  i  alle  kvinder

Uden  en.     Hvem  er  den  ene-


Fort !     Til  faer  din  !     Kjsere,  vene-
Ti  !     Du  kan  umuligt  mene

Godt  !  sa  se  da  hvem  som  vinder —

Djagvelen  sta  i  alt  som  minder ^

Djsevelen  std  i  alle  kvinder


Introduction.  xvii

eliminate  these  graces  of  form  was  to  reduce  the  poem  to  prose
indeed.  It  seemed  little  better  than  casting  a  silver  statue  into
the  crucible  and  asking  the  world  to  divine  from  the  ingot  some-
thing of  the  sculptor's  power.  A  prose  translation,  in  short,
could  not  but  strip  Fantasy  of  its  pinions,  rob  Satire  of  its
barbs.  We  put  the  matter  to  the  test ;  for  one  of  us  made  a
complete  translation  in  prose,  with  some  vague  intention  of
publishing  it  along  with  the  original  text — the  Norwegian  on  one
page,  the  English  on  the  next.  It  was  found,  however,  that  the
expense  of  such  a  publication  would  be  prohibitive ;  and  we
rejected  at  once  all  idea  of  publishing  the  English  alone,  our
own  dissatisfaction  with  it  being  reinforced  by  Henrik  Ibsen's
express  declaration  that  he  would  rather  let  Peer  Gynt  remain
untranslated  than  see  it  rendered  in  prose.  But,  as  there  is  no
copyright  between  England  and  the  Scandinavian  kingdoms,  it
was  not  in  Ibsen's  power  to  lay  upon  others  the  injunction
which  to  us  was  absolutely  binding.  We  knew  that,  in  one
form  or  another,  the  poem  was  certain  ere  long  to  be  translated ;
and,  placing  this  consideration  before  the  poet,  we  suggested  to
him  a  middle  course  between  prose  and  rhyme,  a  translation  as
nearly  as  possible  in  the  metres  of  the  original,  but  with  the
rhymes  suppressed.  To  this  compromise  he  readily  assented,
and  the  following  pages  are  the  result.

We  had  no  precedent — within  our  knowledge,  at  any  rate —
to  guide  us,  and  were  forced  to  lay  down  our  own  laws.  Even
at  the  risk^  of  falling  between  two  stools,  we  proposed  to
ourselves  a  dual  purpose.  We  sought  to  produce  a  translation
which  should  convey  to  the  general  reader  some  faint  concep-
tion of  the  movement  and  colour,  the  wit  and  pathos,  of  the
original,  and  at  the  same  time  a  transcript  which  should  serve
the  student  as  a  "  crib "  to  the  Norwegian  text.  We  knew  of
several  people  who  had  applied  themselves  to  the  study  of
Norwegian  (a  very  easy  language)  with  the  express  purpose  of
reading  Peer  Gynt  and  Bra?td  in  the  original  ;  we  held  it
certain  that,  for  some  years  at  any  rate,  an  increasing  number
would  follow  their  example ;  and  we  felt  bound  to  do  all  in  our
power  to  assist  so  excellent  a  movement.  This,  then,  the  reader
must  be  good  enough  to  bear  in   mind  :   that  the  following


xviii  Introduction.

version  is  designed  to  facilitate,  not  to  supersede,  the  study  of
the  original,  for  all  who  would  really  master  a  poem  which  we,
its  translators,  are  the  first  to  declare  essentially  untranslatable.
But,  apart  from  our  desire  to  provide  a  "  crib  "  to  Peer  Gynt^
we  felt  that,  in  taking  the  liberty  of  suppressing  the  rhymes,  we
abjured  our  right  to  any  other  liberty  whatsoever.  A  rhymed
paraphrase  of  a  great  poem  may  have  a  beauty  of  its  own  ;
an  unrhymed  version  must  be  no  paraphrase  but  a  faithful
transcript,  else  "  the  ripple  of  laughing  rhyme "  has  been
sacrificed  in  vain.  Our  fundamental  principle,  then,  has  been
to  represent  the  original  li7ie  for  line;  and  to  this  principle  we
have  adhered  with  the  utmost  fidelity.  There  are  probably  not
fifty  cases  in  the  whole  poem  in  which  a  word  has  been
transferred  from  one  line  to  another,  and  then  only  some
pronoun  or  auxiliary  verb.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  in  adhering
to  this  principle  we  have  often  had  to  resist  temptation.  Many
cases  presented  themselves  in  which  greater  clearness,  grace,
and  vigour  might  easily  have  been  attained  by  transferring  a
word  or  phrase  from  this  line  to  that,  or  even  altering  the
sequence  of  a  whole  group  of  lines.  In  no  case  have  we  yielded
to  such  temptation,  feeling  that,  our  rule  once  relaxed,  we
should  insensibly  but  inevitably  lapse  into  mere  paraphrase.
Temptation  beset  us  with  especial  force  in  the  less  vital
passages  of  the  poem.  The  first  scene  of  the  fourth  Act,  for
example,  is  written  in  a  spirit  of  reckless  whimsicality,  not  to
say  sheer  burlesque,  and  the  style  becomes  in  places  decidedly
flaccid.  In  these  places  it  would  have  been  easy  to  give  our
rendering  some  approach  to  grace  and  point  by  disregarding
inversions  and  other  defects  of  expression,  justified  in  the
original  by  the  wit  and  spirit  of  the  rhymes,  but  of  course
deprived  in  our  transcript  of  any  such  excuse.  Here,  as  else-
where, we  were  proof  against  temptation ;  it  is  for  our  readers
to  decide  whether  our  constancy  was  heroic  or  pedantic.

It  would  be  folly  to  pretend  either  that  we  have  reproduced
every  word  of  the  original,  or  that  we  have  avoided  all
necessity  for  "  padding."  The  chief  drawback  of  our  line-for-
line  principle  is  that  it  has  debarred  us  from  eking  out  the
deficiency  of  one  line  with  the  superfluity  of  the  next.    We


Introduction.  xix

trust,  however,  that  few  essential  ideas,  or  even  words,  of  the
original  will  be  found  quite  unaccounted-for  ;  while  with  regard
to  padding,  to  cheville^  we  have  tried,  where  we  found  it
absolutely  forced  upon  us,  to  use  only  such  mechanical  parts  of
speech  as  introduced  no  new  idea  into  the  context.  Only  in
the  rarest  cases  have  we  made  use  of  an  epithet  not  supplied  us
in  the  original.  For  example,  we  have  had  no  scruple  (on
occasion)  in  saying  "very  true"  or  "true  indeed"  where  Ibsen
said  only  "  true "  ;  we  may  sometimes,  but  not  often,  have
said  "  milk-white  "  or  "  sky-blue  "  where  he  said  only  "  white  "  or
"  blue  " ;  we  have  never  (to  the  best  of  our  belief)  made  a  horse
"  white  "  or  a  rose  "  red  "  when  its  colour  was  undetermined  in
the  original.  We  have  found  by  experiment  that  the  fact  of
writing  in  measure  has  frequently  enabled  us  to  keep  much
closer  to  the  original  than  would  have  been  possible  in  prose.
This  is  not  in  reality  so  strange  as  it  may  at  first  sight  appear.
A  prose  translation  of  verse  can  avoid  paraphrase  only  at  the
cost  of  grotesque  inelegance  ;  whereas  in  rendering  metre  into
metre,  we  are  working  under  the  same  laws  which  govern  the
original,  and  are  therefore  enabled  in  many  cases  to  adopt
identical  forms  of  expression  which  would  be  quite  inadmissible
in  prose.

Thirty  out  of  the  thirty-eight  scenes  into  which  the  five  acts
are  divided  are  written  almost  entirely  in  an  irregular  measure
of  four  accents,  evidently  designed  to  give  the  greatest  possible
variety  and  suppleness  to  the  dialogue.  The  four  accents  con-
stitute almost  the  only  assignable  law  of  this  measure,  the  feet
being  of  any  length,  from  two  to  four  syllables,  and  of  all  possible
denominations — iambics,  trochees,  dactyls,  anapaests,  amphi-
brachs.  The  effect  is  at  first  rather  baffling  to  the  unaccus-
tomed ear ;  but  when  one  gets  into  the  swing  of  the  rub-a-dub
rhythm,  if  we  may  venture  to  call  it  so,  the  feeling  of  ruggedness
vanishes,  and  the  verse  is  found  to  be  capable  of  poignantly
pathetic,  as  well  as  of  buoyantly  humorous,  expression.  We
pick  out  at  random  two  specimens  of  this  metre — the  first  from
Act  I.,  Sc.  3,  where  Peer  Gynt  first  sees  Solveig ;  the  second
from  Act  III.,  Sc.  3,  where  Solveig  comes  to  Peer  Gynt's  hut
in  the  forest : —


XX  Introduction.

Ilvor  l^s  !  I  Nej,  skulde  |  du  s^t  |  en  slfg  !
Sk6tted  ned  |  paa  skoen  |  og  det  hvi-  |  de  sprede  !
Og  saa  h6ldt  |  hun  i  mo-  |  derens  skjj^ir-  |  tcflig,
og  Mr  I   en  salme-  |  bog  sv^bt  i  |  et  kloede.


Nsfetterne  |  tiinge  og  |  dagene  |  tomme
bdr  mig  det  |  bud  at  |  nii  fik  jog  [  komme.
Det  bldv  som  |  Hvet  var  |  slukknet  der-  |  nede ;
jeg  kunde  ik-  |  ke  hjerte-  |  fyldt  le  el-  |  ler  grgfede ;
jeg  vldste  ik-  |  ke  tryggt  hvad  |  sfnd  du  |  aatte  ;
jeg  vidste  |  kun  tryggt  hvad  |  jeg  skulde  |  og  maatte.

We  have  not  attempted  to  reproduce  each  line  of  this  measure
accurately,  foot  for  foot,  holding  it  enough  to  observe  the  law
of  the  four  accents.  On  the  average,  probably,  our  lines  will  be
found  somewhat  longer  than  those  of  the  original,  for  we  have
throughout  been  conscious  of  a  tendency  to  increase  the
proportion  of  three-syllable  to  two-syllable  feet.  Where  the
four-accent  rule  is  obviously  departed  from,  it  will  generally  be
found  to  be  in  obedience  to  the  original ;  for  Ibsen  now  and
then  (but  very  rarely)  introduces  a  line  or  couplet  of  three  or
of  five  accents.

Of  the  eight  scenes  in  which  this  measure  is  not  employed,
three — Act  I.  Sc.  i.  Act  II.  Sc.  i,  and  Act  IV.  Sc.  7 — are  in  a
perfectly  regular  trochaic  measure  of  four  accents,  the  lines
containing  seven  or  eight  syllables,  according  as  the  rhymes
are  single  or  double.     For  example  :

FjSrst  saa  |  render  |  du  till-  [  ^elds
maaneds-  |  vis  i  |  travle  |  aannen,
for  at  I  vejde  |  ren  paa  |  faannen,
kommer  |  hjem  med  |  reven  |  pels,
uden  I  byrse,  |  iiden  |  vildt ; —
og  till-  I  skit  med  |  aabne  |  ^jne
mener  |  dii  at  |  faa  mig  |  bildt
ind  de  |  vaerste  |  skytter-  |  l^gne.

In  dealing  with  this  measure,  we  have  not  thought  it  necessary
to  follow  the  precise  arrangement  of  the  original  in  the  alterna-
tion of  seven  and  eight  syllable  lines.  In  other  words,  we
have  sometimes  represented  a  seven-syllable  line  by  one  of  eight


Introduction.  xxi

syllables,  an  eight-syllable  line  by  one  of  seven.  In  the  short
first  scene  of  the  second  act,  however,  every  line  represents
accurately  the  length  of  the  corresponding  line  in  the  original.

The  fourth  scene  of  Act  II.  is  written  in  lines  of  three
accents,  consisting  for  the  most  part  of  trochees,  dactyls,  and
amphibrachs.     For  example  :

Fiugt  over  |  Gendin  |  eggen.

Digt  og  for-  I  bandet  |  ]0gn  !

oppover  I  bratteste  |  Vceggen

med  briiden  |  — og  drukken  {  et  d^gn;

jaget  af  |  hp'g  og  [  glenter,

truet  af  ]  trold  og  |  sligt,

turet  med  |  gdlne  |  jenfer  ;  —

l^gn  og  for  I  bandet  |  digt !

The  last  scene  of  the  third  Act — Ase's  death-scene — is
written  in  lines  of  three  accents  with  alternate  double  and
single  rhymes,  the  normal  lines  consisting  of  three  amphi-
brachs, or  two  amphibrachs  and  a  trochee,  alternating  with  an
amphibrach  and  two  iambics,  thus  :

Nu,  moer,  vil  |  vi  sammen  J  snakke ;

men  bare  |  om  l^st  |  og  fast, —
og  glemme  |  det  vrange  |  og  skakke

eg  alt  som  I  er  saart  |  og  hvdsst.

In  rendering  this  scene  we  have  been  careful  to  preserve  the
alternation  of  strong  with  light  endings,  which  gives  it  its
metrical  character.

Two  scenes — Act  IV.  Sc.  i,  and  Act  V.  Sc.  2 — consist  of
four-accent  iambic  lines,  differing  from  the  octosyllabic  verse  of
Alarmion  or  The  Giaour  chiefly  in  the  greater  prevalence  of
double  and  even  treble  rhymes.     For  example  :

Det  gynt-  |  ske  selv  |  det  er  |  den  hser
af  ^n-  1  sker  lyst-  |  er  og  |  begjcer, —
det  gynt-  |  ske  selv,  |  det  er  |  det  hav
af  ind-  |  fald  for-  |  dringer  |  og  krav,
kort  alt  I  som  nett-  |  opp  mi't  |  bryst  hcever,
og  gj^r  I  at  jeg  |  som  saa-  |  dan  lever.


xxii  Introduction.

Finally,  the  sixth  scene  of  Act  V.  consists  mainly  of  eight-
line  lyrical  stanzas,  with  two  accents  in  each  line,  Peer  Gynt's
interspersed  remarks  being  in  trochaic  verses,  like  those  of
Act  I.,  Sc.  I.  In  such  intercalated  passages,  so  to  speak,  as  the
rhapsodies  of  Huhu  and  the  Fellah  in  Act  IV.,  Sc.  13,  and  the
Pastor's  speech  at  the  grave  in  Act  V.,  Sc.  3,  we  have  accurately
reproduced  the  measures  of  the  original.  The  Pastor's  speech
is  the  only  passage  in  the  whole  poem  which  is  couched  in
iambic  pentameters.

In  dealing  with  idioms  and  proverbial  expressions,  our
practice  has  not  been  very  consistent.  We  have  sometimes,
where  they  seemed  peculiarly  racy  and  expressive,  translated
them  literally  ;  in  other  cases  we  have  had  recourse  to  the
nearest  English  equivalent,  even  where  the  metaphor  employed
is  quite  different.  In  the  latter  instances  we  have  usually  given
the  literal  rendering  of  the  phrase  in  a  footnote.

W.  A.
C.  A.


PEER   GYNT.


CHARACTERS.

o

AsE,^  a  peasant's  widow.

PtiER  Gynt,2  her  son.

Two  Old  Women  with  corn-sacks.  Aslak,  a  smith.  Wedding-
Guests.     A  Master-Cook,  A  Fiddler,  etc.

A  Man  and  Wife,  newcomers  to  the  district.

SoLVEiG  and  Little  Helga,  their  daughters.

The  Farmer  at  Hegstad.

Ingrid,  his  daughter.

The  Bridegroom  and  His  Parents.

Three  S.^ter-Girls.    A  Green-clad  Woman.

The  Old  Man  of  the  Dovre.

A   Troll-Courtier.      Several    Others.      Troll-Maidens  and
-  Troll-Urchins.      A    Couple    of     Witches.      Brownies,
Nixies,  Gnomes,  etc.

An  Ugly  Brat.     A  Voice  in  the  Darkness.     Bird-Cries.

Kari,  a  cottar's  wife.

Master  Cotton,  Monsieur  Ballon,  Herren  von  Eberkopf  and
Trumpeterstrale,  gentlemen  on  their  travels.  A  Thief  and
A  Receiver.

Anitra,  daughter  of  a  Bedouin  chief.

Arabs,  Female  Slaves,  Dancing-Girls,  etc.

The  Memnon-Statue  (singing).  The  Sphinx  at  Gizeh  {mu'.a
persona).

Professor  Begriffenfeldt,  Dr.  phil.,  director  of  the  madhouse  at
Cairo.

Huhu,  a  language-reformer  from  the  coast  of  Malabar.  Hussein,
an  eastern  Minister.     A  Fellah,  with  a  royal  mummy.

Several  Madmen,  with  their  Keepers.

A  Norwegian  Skipper  and  His  Crew.    A  Strange  Passenger.

A  Pastor.  A  Funeral- Party.  A  Parish-Officer.  A  Button-
Moulder.     A  Lean  Person.

(The  action,  which  opens  in  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,
and  ends  towards  our  own  days,  takes  place  partly  in  Gudbrandsdale,
and  on  the  mountains  around  it,  partly  on  the  coast  of  Morocco,
in  the  desert  of  Sahara,  in  a  madhouse  at  Cairo,  at  sea,  etc. )

^  Pronounce  Onsc.    The  letter  a  is  pronounced  like  the  o  in  "home."
^  Pronounce  Pair  Gw»«— the  Q  hard,  the  y  like  the  German  modified  it.


PEER    GYNT.

ACT   FIRST.
SCENE  FIRST.

(A  wooded  hillside  near  Ase's  farm.  A  river  rushes  down
the  slope.  On  the  further  side  of  it  an  old  mill  shed.
It  is  a  hot  day  in  stwwter.)

(peer  GYNT,  a  strongly-built  youth  of  tzventy,  cofues  doivn
the  pathivay.  His  mother^  Ase,  a  smally  slightly-
built  IV  Oman  ^follows  him^  scolding  angrily.)

Ase.

Peer,  you're  lying !

peer
{without  stopping).

No,  I  am  not !

ase.
Well  then,  swear  that  it  is  true !

peer.
n   Swear?    Why  should  I?


Peer  Gvnt.  [Act  i.


It's  a  lie  from  first  to  last


ASE.

See,  you  dare  not !


PEER

{stopping).
It  is  true — each  blessed  word  !

ASE

{confronting  hint).

Don't  you  blush  before  your  mother  ?

First  you  skulk  among  the  mountains

monthlong  in  the  busiest  season,

stalking  reindeer  in  the  snows ;

home  you  come  then,  torn  and  tattered,

gun  amissing,  likewise  game; —

and  at  last,  witl\  open  eyes,

think  to  get  me  to  believe

all  the  wildest  hunters'-lies ! —

Well,  where  did  you  find  the  buck,  then  ?

PEER.

West  near  Gendin.i

ASE

{Imighing  scornfully).
Ah!  Indeed!

PEER.

Keen  the  blast  towards  me  swept ;
hidden  by  an  alder-clump,
he  was  scraping  in  the  snow-crust
after  lichen


1


Pronounce  Yendeen,


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.

ASE

(as  before).
Doubtless,  yes!

PEER.

Breathlessly  I  stood  and  listened,

heard  the  crunching  of  his  hoof,

saw  the  branches  of  one  antler.

Softly  then  among  the  boulders

I  crept  forward  on  my  belly.

Crouched  in  the  moraine  I  peered  up ; —

such  a  buck,  so  sleek  and  fat,

you,  I'm  sure,  have  ne'er  set  eyes  on.

ASE.

No,  of  course  not !

PEER.

Bang !  I  fired !
Clean  he  dropped  upon  the  hillside.
But  the  instant  that  he  fell
I  sat  firm  astride  his  back,
gripped  him  by  the  left  ear  tightly,
and  had  almost  sunk  my  knife-blade
in  his  neck,  behind  his  skull —
when,  behold  !  the  brute  screamed  wildly,
sprang  upon  his  feet  like  lightning,
with  a  back-cast  of  his  head
from  my  fist  made  knife  and  sheath  fly,
pinned  me  tightly  by  the  thigh,
jammed  his  horns  against  my  legs,
clenched  me  like  a  pair  of  tongs ; —
then  forthwith  away  he  flew
right  along  the  Gendin-Edge !


Jesus  save  us-


Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

ASE

{itivolujitarily).

-I

PEER.

Have  you  ever
chanced  to  see  the  Gendin-Edgc?
Nigh  on  four  miles  long  it  stretches
sharp  before  you  like  a  scythe.
Down  o'er  glaciers,  landslips,  scaurs,
down  the  toppling  grey  moraines,
you  can  see,  both  right  and  left,
straight  into  the  tarns  that  slumber,
black  and  sluggish,  more  than  seven
hundred  fathoms  deep  below  you.

Right  along  the  Edge  we  two
clove  our  passage  through  the  air.

Never  rode  I  such  a  colt !
Straight  before  us  as  we  rushed
'twas  as  though  there  glittered  suns.
Brown-backed  eagles  that  were  saihng
in  the  wide  and  dizzy  void
half-way  'twixt  us  and  the  tarns,
dropped  behind,  like  motes  in  air.

Ice-floes  on  the  shores  broke  crashing,
but  no  murmur  reached  my  ears.
Only  sprites  of  dizziness ^  sprang,
dancing,  round ;— they  sang,  they  swung,
circle-wise,  past  sight  and  hearing!

ASE

{dizzy).
Oh,  God  save  me  !

^  This  is  the  poet's  own  explanation  of  this  difficult  passage.
•'Ilvin-lens  voetter,"  he  writes,  is  equivalent  to  "  Svimmelhedens
dnder  " — ?.<?.,  spirits  of  dizziness  or  vertigo.


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  5

PEER.

All  at  once,
at  a  desperate,  break-neck  spot,
rose  a  great  cock-ptarmigan,
flapping,  cackling,  terrified,
from  the  crack  where  he  lay  hidden
at  the  buck's  feet  on  the  Edge.

Then  the  buck  shied  half  around,
leapt  sky-high,  and  down  we  plunged
both  of  us  into  the  depths  !

(AsE  totiers^  and  catches  at  the    trunk  of  a  tree.
PEER  GYNT  continties  .•)

Mountain  walls  behind  us,  black,
and  below  a  void  unfathomed !

First  we  clove  through  banks  of  mist,
then  we  clove  a  flock  of  sea-gulls,
so  that  they,  in  mid-air  startled,
flew  in  all  directions,  screaming.

Downward  rushed  we,  ever  downward.
But  beneath  us  something  shimmered,
whitish,  like  a  reindeer's  belly. —
Mother,  'twas  our  own  reflection
in  the  glass-smooth  mountain  tarn,
shooting  up  towards  the  surface
with  the  same  wfld  rush  of  speed
wherewith  we  were  shooting  downwards.

ASE

{gasping  for  breath).
Peer !     God  help  me !     Quickly,  tell !

PEER.

Buck  from  over,  buck  from  under,


C  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

in  a  moment  clashed  together,
scattering  foam-flecks  all  around.

There  we  lay  then,  floating,  plashing, —
But  at  last  we  made  our  way
somehow  to  the  northern  shore ;
buck,  he  swam,  I  clung  behind  him : —
I  ran  homewards

ASE.

But  the  buck,  dear?

PEER.

He's  there  still,  for  aught  I  know  ; —

{Snaps  his  finders,  turns  on  his  heei,  and  adds :)
catch  him,  and  you're  welcome  to  him  !

ASE.

And  your  neck  you  haven't  broken  ?
Haven't  broken  both  your  thighs  ?
and  your  backbone,  too,  is  whole?
Oh,  dear  Lord — what  thanks,  what  praise,
should  be  thine  who  helped  my  boy !
There's  a  rent,  though,  in  your  breeches ;
but  it's  scarce  worth  talking  of
when  one  thinks  what  dreadful  things

might  have  come  of  such  a  leap !

{Stops  suddenly^  looks   at  hifn  opeii-motithed  a?id

wide-eyed;  cannot  find  ivords  for  some  time^

but  at  last  bursts  out:)
Oh,  you  devil's  story-teller,
Cross  of  Christ,  how  you  can  lie !
All  this  screed  you  foist  upon  me,
I  remember  now,  I  knew  it


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.

when  I  was  a  girl  of  twenty.
Gudbrand  Glesne^  it  befell,
never  you,  you

PEER.

Me  as  well.
Such  a  thing  can  happen  twice.

ASE

{exasperated).

Yes,  a  lie,  turned  topsy-turvy,
can  be  prinked  and  tinselled  out,
decked  in  plumage  new  and  fine,
till  none  knows  its  lean  old  carcass.
That  is  just  what  you've  been  doing,
vamping  up  things,  wild  and  grand,
garnishing  with  eagles'  backs
and  with  all  the  other  horrors,
lying  right  and  lying  left,
filling  me  with  speechless  dread,
till  at  last  I  recognised  not
what  of  old  I'd  heard  and  known !

PEER.

If  another  talked  like  that
I'd  half  kill  him  for  his  pains.

ASE

{weeping).

Oh,  would  God  I  lay  a  corpse ;
would  the  black  earth  held  me  sleeping !
Prayers  and  tears  don't  bite  upon  him. —
Peer,  you're  lost,  and  ever  will  be !

^  See  Introduction,  p,  vi.,  and  Appendix.


8  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

PEER.

Darling,  pretty  little  mother,
you  arc  right  in  every  word ; —
don't  be  cross,  be  happy

ASE.

Silence  I

Could  I,  if  I  would,  be  happy,

with  a  pig  like  you  for  son  ?

Think  how  bitter  I  must  find  it,

I,  a  poor  defenceless  widow,

ever  to  be  put  to  shame !

( Weeping  again.)

How  much  have  we  now  remaining
from  your  grandsire's  days  of  glory  ?

Where  are  now  the  sacks  ^  of  coin
left  behind  by  Rasmus  Gynt?
Ah,  your  father  lent  them  wings, —
lavished  them  abroad  like  sand,
buying  land  in  every  parish,
driving  round  in  gilded  chariots.
^Vhere  is  all  the  wealth  he  wasted
at  the  famous  winter-banquet,
when  each  guest  sent  glass  and  bottle
shivering  'gainst  the  wall  behind  him  ?

PEER.

Where's  the  snow  of  yester-year  ?

ASE.

Silence,  boy,  before  your  mother !
See  the  farmhouse  !     Every  second
window-pane  is  stopped  with  clouts.

1  Literally,  "bushels."


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  S

Hedges,  fences,  all  are  down,
beasts  exposed  to  wind  and  weather,
fields  and  meadows  lying  fallow,
every  month  a  new  distraint

PEER.

Come  now,  stop  this  old-wife's  talk !
Many  a  time  has  luck  seemed  drooping,
and  sprung  up  as  high  as  ever !

ASE.

Salt-Strewn  is  the  soil  it  grew  from.
Lord,  but  you're  a  rare  one,  you, —
just  as  pert  and  jaunty  still,
just  as  bold  as  when  the  Pastor,
newly  come  from  Copenhagen,
bade  you  tell  your  Christian  name,
and  declared  that  such  a  headpiece
many  a  Prince  down  there  might  envy ;
till  the  cob  your  father  gave  him,
with  a  sledge  to  boot,  in  thanks
for  his  pleasant,  friendly  talk. —
Ah,  but  things  went  bravely  then  !
Provost,^  Captain,  all  the  rest,
dropped  in  daily,  ate  and  drank,
swilling,  till  they  well-nigh  burst.
But  'tis  need  that  tests  one's  neighbour.
Still  it  grew  and  empty  here
from  the  day  that  "  Gold-bag  Jon  "  ^
started  with  his  pack,  a  pedlar.

{Dries  her  eyes  with  her  apron ^

*  An  ecclesiastical  dignitary — something  equivalent  to  a  rural  dean.

2  *'Jon  med  Skjseppen  " — literally,  "John  with  the  Bushel" — a  nick-
name given  him  in  his  days  of  prosperity,  in  allusion  to  his  supposed
bushels  of  money.


10  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

Ah,  you're  big  and  strong  enough,
you  should  he  a  staff  and  pillar
for  your  mother's  frail  old  age, — •
you  should  keep  the  farm-work  going,
guard  the  remnants  of  your  gear  ; —

{Crying  agaht.)

oh,  God  help  me,  small's  the  profit
you  have  been  to  me,  you  scamp !
Lounging  by  the  hearth  at  home,
grubbing  in  the  charcoal  embers  ;
or,  round  all  the  country,  frightening
girls  away  from  merry-makings —
shaming  me  in  all  directions,
fighting  with  the  worst  rapscallions


Let  me  be.


PEER

{iurtiing  away  from  her).


ASE

{folloivmg  him).

Can  you  deny
that  you  were  the  foremost  brawler
in  the  mighty  battle  royal
fought  the  other  day  at  Lunde,
when  you  raged  like  mongrels  mad  ?
Who  was  it  but  you  that  broke
Blacksmith  Aslak's  arm  for  him, —
or  at  any  rate  that  wrenched  one
of  his  fingers  out  of  joint?

PEER.

Who  has  filled  you  with  such  prate?


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  ii

ASE

{hotly).
Cottar  Kari  heard  the  yells  !

PEER

{nibbing  his  elbow).
Maybe,  but  'twas  I  that  howled.

ASE.

You?

PEER.

Yes,  mother, — /got  beaten.

ASE.

What  d'you  say  ?

PEER.

He's  limber,  he  is.

ASE,

Who?

PEER.

Why  Aslak,  to  be  sure.

ASE.

Shame — and  shame ;  I  spit  upon  you  !
Such  a  worthless  sot  as  that,
such  a  brawler,  such  a  sodden
dram-sponge  to  have  beaten  you  !

( Weeping  agai?i.)
Many  a  shame  and  slight  I've  suffered  ;
but  that  this  should  come  to  pass
is  the  worst  disgrace  of  all.


12  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

What  if  he  be  ne'er  so  hmber,
need  you  therefore  be  a  weakh'ng  ?

PEER.

Though  I  hammer  or  am  hammered, —
still  we  must  have  lamentations.

{Laughing.)
Cheer  up,  mother

ASE.

What  ?     You're  lying
now  again  ?

PEER.

Yes,  just  this  once.
Come  now,  wipe  your  tears  away ; —

{Clenching  his  left  hand.)
see, — with  this  same  pair  of  tongs,
thus  I  held  the  smith  bent  double,
while  my  sledge-hammer  right  fist

Ask

ill  bring  me


Oh,  you  brawler  !     You  will  bi
with  your  doings  to  the  grave  !

PEER.

No,  you're  worth  a  better  fate ;
better  twenty  thousand  times  !
Little,  ugly,  dear  old  mother,
you  may  safely  trust  my  word, —
all  the  parish  shall  exalt  you ;
only  wait  till  I  have  done
something — something  really  grand !


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  13

ASE

{contemptuously).
You!

PEER.

Who  knows  what  may  befall  one  !

ASE.

Would  you'd  get  so  far  in  sense
one  day  as  to  do  the  darning
of  your  breeches  for  yourself !

PEER

{hotly).
I  will  be  a  king,  a  kaiser !

ASE.

Oh,  God  comfort  me,  he's  losing
all  the  wits  that  he  had  left !

PEER.

Yes,  I  will !     Just  give  me  time !

ASE.

Give  you  time,  you'll  be  a  prince,
so  the  saying  goes,  I  think !

PEER.

You  shall  see !

ASE.

Oh,  hold  your  tongue !
You're  as  mad  as  mad  can  be. —

Ah,  and  yet  it's  true  enough, —
something  might  have  come  of  you,


14  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

had  you  not  been  steeped  for  ever
in  your  lies  and  trash  and  moonshine.
Hegstad's  girl  was  fond  of  you.
Easily  you  could  have  won  her
had  you  wooed  her  with  a  will

PEER.

Could  I  ?

ASE.

The  old  man's  too  feeble
not  to  give  his  child  her  way.
He  is  stiff-necked  in  a  fashion ;
but  at  last  'tis  Ingrid  rules ;
and  where  she  leads,  step  by  step,
stumps  the  gaffer,  grumbling,  after.

{Begins  to  cry  agaiti.)
Ah,  my  Peer ! — a  golden  girl —
land  entailed  on  her !     Just  think,
had  you  set  your  mind  upon  it,
you'd  be  now  a  bridegroom  brave, —
you  that  stand  here  grimed  and  tattered  !


{briskly).

Come,  we'll

go  a-wooing,

then!

ASE.

Where?

PEER.

At

Hegstad !

ASE.

Ah,  poor  boy ;
Hegstad  way  is  barred  to  wooers !


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  .15

PEER.

How  is  that?

ASE.

Ah,  I  must  sigh  !
Lost  the  moment,  lost  the  luck


PEER.

Speak !

ASE

{sobbing).

While  in  the  Wester-hills
you  in  air  were  riding  reindeer,
here  Mads  Moen's^  won  the  girl !

PEER.

What !     That  women's-bugbear  !     He

ASE.

Ay,  she's  taking  him  for  husband.

PEER.

Wait  you  here  till  I  have  harnessed

horse  and  waggon

{Going.)

ASE.

Spare  your  pains.
They  are  to  be  wed  to-morrow

PEER.

Pooh ;  this  evening  I'll  be  there  1

^  Pronounce  Maass  Moo-en.


1 6  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

ASE.

Fie  now  !     Would  you  crown  our  miseries
with  a  load  of  all  men's  scorn  ?

PEER.

Never  fear ;  'twill  all  go  well.

{Shouting  aTid  laughi?ig  at  the  same  time.)
Mother,  jump  !  We'll  spare  the  waggon  ;
'twould  take  time  to  fetch  the  mare  up

(  Lifts  her  up  ift  his  arms).

ASE.

Put  me  down !

PEER.

No,  in  my  arms
I  will  bear  you  to  the  wedding  !

( Wades  out  into  the  streatn.)

ASE.

Help !     The  Lord  have  mercy  on  us !
Peer !     We're  drowning


PEER.

I  was  born
for  a  braver  death

ASE.

Ay,  true;
sure  enough  you'll  hang  at  last !

(Tugging  at  his  hair.)
Oh,  you  brute !


Sc.  ij  Peer  Gynt.  17

PEER.

Keep  quiet  now ;
here  the  bottom's  slippery-slimy.

ASE.

Ass!

PEER.

That's  right,  don't  spare  your  tongue ;
that  does  no  one  any  harm.
Now  it's  shelving  up  again

ASE.

Don't  you  drop  me  !

PEER.

Heisan !  Hop  !
Now  we'll  play  at  Peer  and  reindeer ; —

{Curvetting.)
I'm  the  reindeer,  you  are  Peer  !

ASE.

Oh,  I'm  going  clean  distraught !

PEER.

There  see;  now  we've  reached  the  shallows;—

( Wades  ashore,)
come,  a  kiss  now,  for  the  reindeer ;
just  to  thank  him  for  the  ride

ASE

{boxing  his  ears),
^  This  is  how  I  thank  him  !


i8


Peek  Gvnt.  [Act  i.


PEER.

Ow!
That's  a  miserable  fare  !

ASE.

Put  me  down  1

PEER.

First  to  the  wedding.
Be  my  spokesman.     You're  so  clever ;
talk  to  him,  the  old  curmudgeon ;
say  Uads  Moen's  good  for  nothing

ASE.

Put  me  down !

PEER.

And  tell  him  then
what  a  rare  lad  is  Peer  Gynt.

ASE.

Truly,  you  may  swear  to  that !
Fine's  the  character  I'll  give  you.
Through  and  through  I'll  show  you  up ;
all  about  your  devil's  pranks
I  will  tell  them  straight  and  plain

PEER.

Will  you?

ASE

{kickiiig  with  rage),
I  won't  stay  my  tongue
till  the  old  man  sets  his  dog
at  you,  as  you  were  a  tramp  !


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  tg

PEER.

Hmj  then  I  must  go  alone.

ASE.

Ay,  but  I'll  come  after  you  !

PEER.

Mother  dear,  you  haven't  strength

ASE.

Strength  ?     When  I'm  in  such  a  rage,
I  could  crush  the  rocks  to  powder !
Hu!  I'd  make  a  meal  of  flints  !
Put  me  down !

PEER.

You'll  promise  then

ASE.

Nothing  !     I'll  to  Hegstad  with  you  !
They  shall  know  you,  what  you  are !

PEER.

Then  you'll  even  have  to  stay  here.

ASE.

Never !     To  the  feast  I'm  coming !

PEER.

That  you  shan't.

ASE.

What  will  you  do?


20  Peek  Gvnt.  [Aci  i.

PEER.

Perch  you  on  the  mill-house  roof.

{He  puts  her  up  on  the  roof.     AsE  screa?ns.)

ASE.

Lift  me  down  !

PEER.

Yes,  if  you'll  listen

ASE.

Rubbish  !

PEER.

Dearest  mother,  pray

ASE

{thro7ving  a  sod  of  grass  at  him).
Lift  me  down  this  moment,  Peer  I

PEER.

If  I  dared,  be  sure  I  would.

{Coming  nearer.)
Now  remember,  sit  quite  still.
Do  not  sprawl  and  kick  about ;
do  not  tug  and  tear  the  shingles, —
else  'twill  be  the  worse  for  you ;
you  might  topple  down.

ASE.

You  beast !

PEER.

Do  not  kick !


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  21

ASE.

I'd  have  you  blown,
like  a  changeling,  into  space  l^

PEER.

Mother,  fie !

ASE.

Bah!

PEER.

Rather  give  your
blessing  on  my  undertaking.
Will  you?     Eh?

ASE.

I'll  thrash  you  soundly,
hulking  fellow  though  you  be  !

PEER.

Well,  good-bye  then,  mother  dear !
Patience ;  I'll  be  back  ere  long.

{Is  goings  hut  turns ^  holds  up  his  finger  warningl}\
and  says  ,•)
Careful  now,  don't  kick  and  sprawl !

{Goes.)

ASE.

Peer ! — God  help  me,  now  he's  off;

Reindeer-rider !     Liar  !     Hei !

Will  you  listen  ! — No,  he's  striding

o'er  the  meadow !     {Shrieks.)     Help!  I'm  dizzy!

(two  old  WOMEN,  with  sacks  on  their  backs^  come
down  the  path  to  the  77iiU.)

^  It  is  believed  in  some  parts  of  Norway  that  "changelings"  (elf-
children  left  in  the  stead  of  those  taken  away  by  the  fairies)  can,  by
certain  spells,  be  made  to  fly  away  up  the  chimney.


22  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

FIRST   WOMAN.

Christ,  who's  screaming  ?

ASE.

It  is  I  !

SECOND   WOMAN.

Ase !     A  Veil,  you  a7'c  exalted !

ASE.

This  won't  be  the  end  of  it; —

soon,  God  help  me,  I'll  be  heaven-high !

FIRST  WOMAN.

Bless  your  passing !

ASE.

Fetch  a  ladder ;
I  must  be  down  !     That  devil  Peer


SECOND   WOMAN.

Peer !    Your  son  ?

Ase.

Now  you  can  say
you  have  seen  how  he  behaves.

FIRST  WOMAN.

We'll  bear  witness.

Ase.

Only  help  me;
straight  to  Hegstad  T  will  hasten


SECOND    WOMAN.

Is  he  there  ?


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  23

FIRST   WOMAN.

You'll  be  revenged,  then ;
Aslak  Smith  will  be  there  too.

ASE

{wringing  her  hands).

Oh,  God  help  me  with  my  boy ;
they  will  kill  him  ere  they're  done  !

FIRST   WOMAN.

Oh,  that  lot  has  oft  been  talked  of;
comfort  you  :    what  must  be  must  be  !

SECOND   WOMAN.

She  is  utterly  demented.

{Calls  up  the  hill.)
Eivind,  Anders  !     Hei !     Come  here  !

A  man's  voice.
What's  amiss  ?

SECOND  WOMAN.

Peer  Gynt  has  perched  his
mother  on  the  mill-house  roof !


24  Peek  Gvnt.  [Act  i.


SCENE  SECOND.

(A  hillock^  covered  with  bushes  and  heather.  The  high-
road runs  behind  it ;  a  fence  between.)

(peer  gynt  comes  along  a  footpath^  goes  quickly  up  to  the
fence,  stops,  and  looks  out  over  the  stretch  of  country
below.)

PEER.

There  it  lies,  Hegstad.     Soon  I'll  have  reached  it.

{Puts  one  leg  over  the  fence  ;  then  hesitates.)
Wonder  if  Ingrid's  alone  in  the  house  now  ?

{Shades  his  eyes  with  his  hand,  and  looks  out.)
No ;  to  the  farm  guests  are  swarming  like  gnats. —
Hm,  to  turn  back  now  perhaps  would  be  wisest.

{Draws  back  his  leg.)
Still  they  must  titter  behind  your  back,
and  whisper  so  that  it  burns  right  through  you.

{Moves  a  few  steps  atvay  from  the  fence,  and  begins
absently  pluckifig  leaves.)
Ah,  if  I'd  only  a  good  strong  dram  now.
Or  if  I  could  pass  to  and  fro  unseen. —
Or  were  I  unknown. — Something  proper  and  strong
were  the  best  thing  of  all,  for  the  laughter  don't  bite  then.

{Looks  around  suddenly  as  though  afraid ;  then
hides  among  the  bushes.  So7?te  wedding-^
GUESTS  pass  by,  going  downwards  towards  the
farm.)

1  "  Sendingsfolk,"  literally,  "  folks  with  presents."  When  the  Nor-
wegian peasants  are  bidden  to  a  wedding-feast,  they  bring  with  them
presents  of  eatables.


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  25

A  MAN

{in  convey  sat  1071  as  ihey  pass).
His  father  was  drunken,  his  mother  is  weak.

A  WOMAN.

Ay,  then  it's  no  wonder  the  lad's  good  for  nought.

( They  pass  on.  Presently  peer  gynt  conies  forward^
his  face  flushed  with  shame.  He  peers  after
them.)

PEER

{softly).

Was  it  me  they  were  talking  of  ?

(  With  a  forced  shrug.)

Oh,  let  them  chatter  !
After  all,  they  can't  sneer  the  life  out  of  my  body.

{Casts  himself  down  upon  the  heathe?y  slope;  lies
for  some  time  flat  on  his  back  tvith  his  hands
under  his  head,  gazing  up  into  the  sky.)

What  a  strange  sort  of  cloud  !  It  is  just  like  a  horse.
There's  a  man  on  it  too — and  saddle — and  bridle. —
And  after  it  comes  an  old  crone  on  a  broomstick.

{Laughs  quietly  to  himself.)

It  is  mother.     She's  scolding  and  screaming  :  You  beast !

Hei  you,  Peer  Gynt {His  eyes  gradually  close.)     Ay,

now  she  is  frightened. —
Peer  Gynt  he  rides  first,  and  there  follow  him  many. —

His  steed  it  is  gold-shod  and  crested  with  silver.
Himself  he  has  gauntlets  and  sabre  and  scabbard.

His  cloak  it  is  long,  and  its  lining  is  silken.
Full  brave  is  the  company  riding  behind  him.

None  of  them,  though,  sits  his  charger  so  stoutly.


26  Peer  Gynt.  [Act

None  of  them  glitters  like  him  in  the  sunshine. —

Down  by  the  fence  stand  the  people  in  clusters,
lifting  their  hats,  and  agape  gazing  upwards.

Women  are  curtseying.     All  the  world  knows  him,
Kaiser  Peer  Gynt,  and  his  thousands  of  henchmen.

Sixpenny  pieces  and  glittering  shillings
over  the  roadway  he  scatters  like  pebbles.

Rich  as  a  lord  grows  each  man  in  the  parish.
High  o'er  the  ocean  Peer  Gynt  goes  a-riding.

Engelland's  Prince  on  the  seashore  awaits  him;
there  too  await  him  all  Engelland's  maidens.

Engelland's  nobles  and  Engelland's  Kaiser,
sec  him  come  riding  and  rise  from  their  banquet.

Raising  his  crown,  hear  the  Kaiser  address  him


ASLAK  THE  SMITH

{to  sofne  other  young  inen^  passing  along  the  road).
Just  look  at  Peer  Gynt  there,  the  drunken  swine !

PEER

{starting  half  up).
What,  Kaiser !

THE  SMITH

{leaning  against  the  fence  afid  orinning).
Up  with  you,  Peer,  my  lad !

PEER.

What  the  devil  ?    The  Smith !     What  do  you  want  here  ?

THE  SMITH

{to  the  others).
He  hasn't  got  over  the  Lunde-sprcc  yet.


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  27

PEER

{Jumpifig  up).
You'd  better  be  off!

THE  SMITH.

I  am  going,  yes.
But  tell  us,  where  have  you  dropped  from,  man  ?
You've  been  gone  six  weeks.     Were  you  troll-taken,  eh  ?

PEER.

I  have  been  doing  strange  deeds,  Aslak  Smith !

THE  SMITH

(winking  to  the  others).
Let  us  hear  them,  Peer  !

PEER.

They  are  nought  to  you.

THE  SMITH

{after  a  pause).
You're  going  to  Hegstad  ?

PEER.

No.

THE  SMITH.

Time  w-as
they  said  that  the  girl  there  was  fond  of  you.

PEER.

You  grimy  crow !

THE  SMITH

{falling  back  a  little).

Keep  your  temper,  Peer !


28  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

Though  Ingrid  has  jilted  you,  others  are  left ; —
think — son  of  Jon  Gynt !     Come  on  to  the  feast ;
you'll  fmd  there  both  lambkins  and  widows  well  on

PEER.

To  hell !

THE  SMITH.

You  will  surely  find  one  that  will  have  you. —
Good  evening  !     I'll  give  your  respects  to  the  bride. —

{They  go  off,  laughing  a ?id  whispering.)

PEER

{looks  after  them  a  while^  the?!  77iakes  a  defiant
motion  and  inrjis  half  round).
For  my  part,  may  Ingrid  of  Hegstad  go  marry
whoever  she  pleases.     It's  all  one  to  me.

{Looks  down  at  his  clothes.)
My  breeches  are  torn.     I  am  ragged  and  grim. —
If  only  I  had  something  new  to  put  on  now.

{Stamps  on  the  ground.)
If  only  I  could,  with  a  butcher-grip,
tear  out  the  scorn  from  their  very  vitals  !

{Looks  round  suddenly.)
What  was  thatl    Who  was  it  that  tittered  behind  there?

Hm,  I  certainly  thought No  no,  it  was  no  one. —

I'll  go  home  to  mother.

{Begins  to  go  upwards^  but  stops  again  and  listens
towards  Hegstad.)

They're  playing  a  dance  !
{Gazes  and  listens  ;  moves  doiv?iivards  step  by  step;
his  eyes  glisten ;  he  rubs  his  haiids  doivn  his
thighs.)


Sc.  iii.]  .  Peer  Gynt.  29

How  the  lasses  do  swarm  !     Six  or  eight  to  a  man  !
Oh,  galloping  death, — I  must  join  in  the  frolic ! —

But  how  about  mother,  perched  up  on  the  mill-house

{His  eyes  are  drawn  downwards  again ;  he  leaps
and  laughs^
Hei,  how  the  Hailing^  flies  over  the  green  !
Ay,  Guttorm,  he  caii  make  his  fiddle  speak  out !
It  gurgles  and  booms  like  a  foss^  o'er  a  scaur.
And  then  all  that  glittering  bevy  of  girls  ! —
Yes,  galloping  death,  I  must  join  v<\  the  frolic !

{Leaps  over  the  fence  and  goes  down  the  road.)


SCENE   THIRD.

{The  farm-place  at  Hegsiad.  In  the  dackgrotmd,  the
dwelling-house.  a  throng  of  guests.  A  lively
dance  itt  pi'ogress  on  the  green,  the  fiddler  sits  on
a  table,  the  master-cook^  is  standing  in  the  door-
way. COOKMAIDS  are  going  to  and  fro  between  the
different  buildings.  Groups  of  elderly  people  sit
here  and  there,  talking. )

A   WOMAN

{^joins  a  group  that  is  seated  on  some  logs  of  wood)
The  bride  ?     Oh  yes,  she  is  crying  a  bit  \
but  that,  you  know,  isn't  worth  heeding.

THE    master-cook

{in  a?tot her  group).

Now  then,  good  folk,  you  must  empty  the  barrel.

^  A  somewhat  violent  peasant  dance.

2  Foss  (in  the  North  of  England  "force  ") — a  waterfall.

^  A  sort  of  master  of  ceremonies.


JO  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

A    MAN.

Thanks  to  you,  friend ;  but  you  fill  up  too  quick.

A    LAD

{to  the  FIDDLER,  as  he  flies  past^  holding  a  girl  l^y
the  hand).

To  it  now,  Guttorm,  and  don't  spare  the  fiddlestrings !

THE   GIRL.

Scrape  till  it  echoes  out  over  the  meadows !

OTHER    GIRLS

{standing  in  a  ring  round  a  lad  who  is  dancing).
That's  a  rare  fling !

A   GIRL.

.   He  has  legs  that  can  lift  him !

THE    LAD

{dancing).
The  roof  here  is  high,i  ^nd  the  walls  wide  asunder!

THE   BRIDEGROOM

{comes  ivhimpering  up  to  his  father,  who  is  standing  talking
with  some  other  men^  and  twitches  his  jacket).

Father,  she  will  not ;  she  is  so  proud !

HIS    FATHER.

What  won't  she  do  ?

THE    BRIDEGROOM.

She  has  locked  herself  in.

^  To  kick  the  rafters  is  considered  a  great  feat  in  the  Halling-dance.
The  boy  means  that,  in  the  open  air,  his  leaps  are  not  limited  even  by
the  rafters.


Sc.  ill.]  Peer  Gynt.  31

HIS    FATHER.

Well,  you  must  manage  to  find  the  key.

THE    BRIDEGROOM.

I  don't  know  how.

HIS    FATHER.

You're  a  nincompoop !

{Turns  away   to   the   others.       The   bridegroom
drifts  across  the  yard.)

A    LAD

{comes  fro77i  behind  the  house").

Wait  a  bit,  girls  !     Things  '11  soon  be  lively !
Here  comes  Peer  Gynt.

THE  SMITH

{who  has  just  come  up).

Who  invited  him  ?

THE   MASTER-COOK.

No  one.
{Goes  towards  the  house.)

THE  SMITH

{to  the  girls).
If  he  should  speak  to  you,  never  take  notice !

A  GIRL

{to  the  others).
No,  we'll  pretend  that  we  don't  even  see  him.


32


Peer  Gynt.


[Act  i.


PEER  GYNT

{comes  ill  heated  atid  full  of  animation^  slops  right
in  font  of  the  group,  and  claps  his  hands).

Which  is  the  liveh'est  girl  of  the  lot  of  you  ?


A  GIRL

(as  he  approaches  her).


I  am  not


I  am  not.


ANOTHER

{similarly).


A  THIRD.

No;  nor  I  cither.


PEER

{to  a  fourth).
You  come  along,  then,  for  want  of  a  better.


Haven't  got  tiijne.


THE  GIRL.
PEER

{to  a  fifth).
Well  then,  you  !

THE  GIRL

{going).


I'm  for  home.


o-night  ?  are
T.


PEER,

you  utterly  out  of  your  senses  ?  i


the  .marriage  pz'.rty  among  the  peasants  will  often  last  several  days.


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  33

THE  SMITH

{after  a  mome?ity  in  a  low  voice).
See,  Peer,  she's  taken  a  greybeard  for  partner.

PEER

{turns  sharply  to  an  elderly  man).
Where  are  the  unbespoke  girls  ?

THE  MAN.

Find  them  out.
{Goes  away  from  him.)

(peer  gynt  has  suddenly  become  subdued.  He
glances  shyly  and  furtively  at  the  group.  All
look  at  him^  but  no  one  speaks.  He  approaches
other  groups.  Wherever  he  goes  there  is  silence;
when  he  moves  away  they  look  after  him  and
smile.)

PEER

{to  himself).

Mocking  looks;  needle-keen  whispers ^  and  smiles.
They  grate  like  a  sawblade  under  the  file !

{He  slinks  along  close  to  the  fence,  solveig,  leading
little  HELGA  by  the  hand,  comes  into  the  yard,
along  with  her  parents.)

A  man
{to  another,  close  to  peer  gynt).

Look,  here  are  the  new  folk.

THE  other.

The  ones  from  the  west  ?
1  Literally,  "thoughts."


34  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

THE  FIRST  MAN.

Ay,  the  people  from  Hedal.

THE  OTHER.

Ah  yes,  so  they  are.

PEER

{places  himself  in  the  path  of  the  new-comers^  points
to  SOLVEIG,  and  asks  the  father  :)

May  I  dance  with  your  daughter?

THE  father
{quietly).

You  may  so ;  but  first
we  must  go  to  the  farm-house  and  greet  the  good  people.

{They  go  in.)

THE  MASTER-COOK

{io  PEER  GYNT,  offering  him  drink).
Since  you  are  here,  you'd  best  take  a  pull  at  the  liquor.

PEER

{looking  fixedly  after  the  new-comers).

Thanks  j  I'm  for  dancing  ;  I  am  not  athirst.

{The  MASTER-COOK  goes  away  from  him.     peer
Q.Y'i^T  gazes  toivards  the  house  and  laughs.)
How  fair  !     Did  ever  you  see  the  like  ?
Looked  down  at  her  shoes  and  her  snow-white  apron — !
And  then  she  held  on  to  her  mother's  skirt-folds,
and  carried  a  psalm-book  wrapped  up  in  a  kerchief — !
I  must  look  at  that  girl.

{Going  into  the  house.)


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  35

A  LAD

{comt?tg  out  of  the  house,  with  several  others).

Are  you  off  so  soon,  Peer,
from  the  dance  ?

PEER.

No,  no.

THE  LAD.

Then  you're  heading  amiss !
{Takes  hold  of  his  shoulder  to  turn  him  round)

PEER.

Let  me  pass !

THE  LAD.

I  beheve  you're  afraid  of  the  Smith.

PEER.

I  afraid !

THE  LAD.

You  remember  what  happened  at  Lunde  ?
{They  go  off^  laughing^  to  the  dancing-green.)

SOLVEIG

-   (/«  the  doorway  of  the  house).
Are  you  not  the  lad  that  was  wanting  to  dance  ?

PEER.

Of  course  it  was  me  ;  don't  you  know  me  again  ?

( Takes  her  hand. )
Come,  then !


36  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

SOLVEIG.

We  mustn't  go  far,  mother  said.

PEER.

Mother  said  !     Mother  said  !     Were  you  born  yesterday  P^

SOLVEIG,

Now  you're  laughing !

PEER.

Why  sure,  you  are  almost  a  child.
Are  you  grown  up?

SOLVEIG.

I  read  with  the  pastor  last  spring.^

PEER.

Tell  me  your  name,  lass,  and  then  we'll  talk  easier.

SOLVEIG.

My  name  is  Solveig.     And  what  are  you  called  ?

PEER.

Peer  Gynt.

SOLVEIG

i^vithdrawing  her  hand).
Oh  heaven !

PEER.

Why,  what  is  it  now  ?

1  Literally,  "last  year.''

"  "  To  read  with  the  pastor,"  the  preliminary  to  confirmation,  is
currently  used  as  synonymous  with  "  to  be  confirmed."


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  37

SOLVEIG.

My  garter  is  loose ;  I  must  tie  it  up  tighter.
{Goes  away  from  him.)

THE  BRIDEGROOM

{pulling  at  his  mother's  gown).
Mother,  she  will  not !

HIS  MOTHER.

She  will  not?     What?


She  won't,  mother-


THE  BRIDEGROOM.
HIS  MOTHER.

What?

THE  BRIDEGROOM.

Unlock  the  door.

HIS  FATHER

{angrily^  below  his  breath).
Oh,  you're  only  fit  to  be  tied  in  a  stall !

HIS  MOTHER.

Don't  scold  him.     Poor  dear,  he'll  be  all  right  yet.
{They  move  away.)

A  LAD

{comitig  with  a   whole  crowd  of  others  from  the
daiicing-green) .

Peer,  have  some  brandy  ?


38  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i


Peer  Gynt.

PEER.

No.

THE  LAD.

Only  a  drain

?

PEER

{looking  darkly  at  him).

Got  any  ?

THE  LAD.

Well,  I  won't  say  but  I  have.
{Fulls  out  a  pocket-Jlask  and  drinks. )
Ah !     How  it  stings  your  throat ! — Well?

PEER.

Let  me  try  it.
{Drinks^

ANOTHER  LAD.

Now  you  must  try  mine  as  well,  you  know.

PEER.

No!

THE  LAD.

Oh,  nonsense ;  now  don't  be  a  fool.
Take  a  pull,  Peer !

PEER.

Well  then,  give  me  a  drop.
{Drifiks  again.)


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  39

A  GIRL

(half  aloud).
Come,  let's  be  going,

PEER.

Afraid  of  me,  wench  ?

A  THIRD  LAD.

Who  isn't  afraid  of  you  1

A  FOURTH.

At  Lunde
you  showed  us  clearly  what  tricks  you  could  play.

PEER.

I  can  do  more  than  that,  when  once  I  get  started !

THE  FIRST  LAD

{whispering).
Now  he's  getting  into  swing !

SEVERAL  OTHERS

(forming  a  circle  around  hint).

Tell  away !     Tell  away !
What  can  you ?

PEER.

To-morrow !

OTHERS.

No  now,  to-night !

A  GIRL.

Can  you  conjure,  Peer?


40  Peer  Gvnt.  [Act  i.

PEER.

I  can  call  up  the  devil !

A  MAN.

My  grandam  could  do  that  before  I  was  born !

PEER,

Liar  !     What  /  can  do,  that  no  one  else  can.
I  one  day  conjured  him  into  a  nut.
It  was  worm-bored,  you  see  !

SEVERAL

{laughing).

Ay,  that's  easily  guessed  !

PEER.

He  cursed,  and  he  wept,  and  he  wanted  to  bribe  me
with  all  sorts  of  things

ONE  OF  THE  CROWD.

But  he  had  to  go  in  ?

PEER.

Of  course.     I  stopped  up  the  hole  with  a  peg.

Hei !     If  you'd  heard  him  rumbling  and  grumbling  !

A  GIRL.

Only  think !

PEER.

It  was  just  like  a  humble-bee  buzzing.

THE  GIRL.

Have  you  got  him  still  in  the  nut  ?


Sc.  iii.]  Peek  Gynt.  41

PEER.

Why,  no;
by  this  time  that  devil  has  flown  on  his  way.
The  grudge  the  Smith  bears  me  is  all  his  doing.

A   LAD.

Indeed  ?

PEER.

I  went  to  the  smithy,  and  begged
that  he  would  crack  that  same  nutshell  for  me.
He  promised  he  would  ! — laid  it  down  on  his  anvil;
but  Aslak,  you  know,  is  so  heavy  of  hand ; — •
for  ever  swinging  that  great  sledge-hammer

A   VOICE   FROM   THE   CROWD.

Did  he  kill  the  foul  fiend  ?

PEER.

He  laid  on  like  a  man.
But  the  devil  showed  fight,  and  tore  off  in  a  flame
through  the  roof,  and  shattered  the  wall  asunder.

SEVERAL   VOICES.

And  the  Smith ?

PEER.

Stood  there  with  his  hands  all  scorched.
And  from  that  day  onwards,  we've  never  been  friends.

(  General  laughter. )

SOME   OF   THE   CROWD.

That  yarn  is  a  good  one.


42  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

OTHERS.

About  his  best.

PEER.

Do  you  think  I  am  making  it  up  ?

A    MAN.

Oh  no,
that  you're  certainly  not;  for  I've  heard  the  most  on't
from  my  grandfather^

PEER.

Liar  !     It  happened  to  me  !

THE    MAN.

Yes,  like  everything  else.

PEER

{with  a  fling).

I  can  ride,  I  can,
clean  through  the  air,  on  the  bravest  of  steeds  1
Oh,  many's  the  thing  I  can  do,  I  tell  you !
{Another  roar  of  laughter.)

ONE   OF   THE   GROUP.

Peer,  ride  through  the  air  a  bit !

MANY.

Do,  dear  Peer  Gynt !

PEER.

You  may  spare  you  the  trouble  of  begging  so  hard.
I  will  ride  like  a  hurricane  over  you  all !
Every  man  in  the  parish  shall  fall  at  my  feet !

^  See  Introduction,  p.  vi.


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  43

AN    ELDERLY    MAN.

Now  he  is  clean  off  his  head.

ANOTHER.

The  dolt !


Braggart !

Liar !


A   THIRD.

A   FOURTH.

PEER

{threatening  them).
Ay,  wait  till  you  see  !

A    MAN

{half  drunk).
Ay,  wait ;  you'll  soon  get  your  jacket  dusted  !

OTHERS.

Your  back  beaten  tender  !     Your  eyes  painted  blue  !

{The   crowd  disperses,    the  elder  men   angry ^    the
younger  laughing  and  jeering^

THE   BRIDEGROOM

{close  to  PEER  gynt).
Peer,  is  it  true  you  can  ride  through  the  air  ?

PEER

{shortly).
It's  all  true,  Mads  !     You  must  know  I'm  a  rare  one !

THE  BRIDEGROOM.

Then  have  you  got  the  Invisible  Cloak  too  ?


44  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

PEER.

The  Invisible  Hat,  do  you  mean  ?     Yes,  I  have.

(Turns  away  from  him.     solveig  crosses  the  yard^
leading  little  helga.)

PEER

{goes  towards  thetn  ;  his  face  lights  up).

Solveig  1     Oh,  it  is  well  you  have  come  !

{Takes  hold  of  her  wrist.)
Now  will  I  swing  you  round  fast  and  fine !

SOLVEIG.

Loose  me !

PEER.

Wherefore  ?

SOLVEIG.

You  are  so  wild.

PEER.

The  reindeer  is  wild,  too,  when  summer  is  dawning.
Come  then,  lass ;  do  not  be  wayward  now  !

SOLVEIG

{^withdrawing  her  ami).
Dare  not

PEER.

Wherefore  ?

SOLVEIG.

No,  you've  been  drinking.
{Moves  off  with  helga.)


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  45

PEER.

Oh,  if  I  had  but  my  knife-blade  driven

clean  through  the  heart  of  them, — one  and  all !

THE  BRIDEGROOM

{nudging  him  with  his  elbow).
Peer,  can't  you  help  me  to  get  at  the  bride  ?

PEER

{absently).
The  bride  ?     Where  is  she  ?

THE  BRIDEGROOM.

In  the  store-house.

PEER.

Ah.

THE  BRIDEGROOM.

Oh,  dear  Peer  Gynt,  you  must  try  at  least !

PEER.

No,  you  must  get  on  without  my  help.

{A  thought  strikes  him  ;  he  says  softly  but  sharply:)
Ingrid  !     The  store-house  !

{Goes  up  to  SOLVEIG.)

Have  you  thought  better  on't  ?
(sOLVEiG  tries  to  go  ;  he  blocks  her  path.)
You're  ashamed  to,  because  Pve  the  look  of  a  tramp.

SOLVEIG

{hastily).
No,  that  you  haven't ;  that's  not  true  at  all !


46  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

PEER.

Yes  !     And  I've  taken  a  drop  as  well ;

but  that  was  to  spite  you,  because  you  had  hurt  me.

Come  then  !

SOLVEIG.

Even  if  I  would  now,  I  daren't.

PEER.

Who  are  you  frightened  of  ?

SOLVEIG.

Father,  most.

PEER.

Father?     Ay,  ay ;  he  is  one  of  the  quiet  ones  !
One  of  the  godly,  eh  ? — Answer,  come !

SOLVEIG.

What  shall  I  say  ?

PEER.

Is  your  father  a  psalm-singer  ?  ^
And  you  and  your  mother  as  well,  no  doubt  ?
Come,  will  you  speak  ?

SOLVEIG.

Let  me  go  in  peace.

PEER.

No!

(/;/  a  low  but  sharp  and  threatening  tone.)

I  can  turn  myself  into  a  troll !
I'll  come  to  your  bedside  at  midnight  to-night.

1  Literally,  "  A  reader."


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  47

If  you  should  hear  some  one  hissing  and  spitting,

you  mustn't  imagine  it's  only  the  cat.

It's  me,  lass !     I'll  drain  out  your  blood  in  a  cup,

and  your  little  sister,  I'll  eat  her  up ;

ay,  you  must  know  I'm  a  were- wolf  at  night; —

I'll  bite  you  all  over  the  loins  and  the  back

{Suddenly  changes  his  tone^  and  entreats^  as  if  in
dread-)

Dance  with  me,  Solveig !

SOLVEIG

{looking  darkly  at  him).

Then  you  were  grim.^
{Goes  into  the  house.)

THE  BRIDEGROOM

{conies  sidling  up  again).
I'll  give  you  an  ox  if  you'll  help  me !

PEER.

Then  come !

{They  go  out  behind  tlie  house.  At  the  same
moment  a  crowd  of  men  cotne  up  from  the
dancing  green;  most  of  them  are  drunk.
Noise  and  hubbub,  solveig,  helga,  and
their  parents  appear  among  a  number  of
elderly  people  in  the  doorway.)

the  master-cook
{to  the  SMITH,  who  is  the  fore f?iost  of  the  crowd).

Keep  peace  now !

^  In  the  original  *'  Nu  var  du  styg,"  literally  "  Now  you  were  ugly."


48  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

THE  SMITH

{pulltfig  off  his  jacket).

No,  we  must  fight  it  out  here.^
Peer  Gynt  or  I  must  be  taught  a  lesson. ^

SOME  VOICES.

Ay,  let  them  fight  for  it !

OTHERS.

No,  only  wrangle !

THE  SMITH.

Fists  must  decide ;  for  the  case  is  past  words.

SOLVEIG'S  FATHER.

Control  yourself,  man !

HELGA.

Will  they  beat  him,  mother  ?

A    LAD.

Let  us  rather  tease  him  with  all  his  lies !

ANOTHER.

Kick  him  out  of  the  company !

A   THIRD.

Spit  in  his  eyes  I

A    FOURTH

{to  the  smith).

You're  not  backing  out,  Smith  ?

^  Literally,  "Here  shall  judgment  be  called  for."
2  Literally,  "  Must  be  bent  to  the  hillside,"  made  to  bite  the  dust-
but  not  in  the  sense  of  being  killed.


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  49

THE    SMITH

{flinging  away  his  Jacket).

The  jade  shall  be  slaughtered !

solveig's  mother
{to  solveig).

There,  you  can  see  how  that  windbag  is  thought  of.

.ASE

{coming  up  with  a  stick  in  her  hand).

Is  that  son  of  mine  here  ?     Now  he's  in  for  a  drubbing  !
Oh  !  how  heartily  I  will  dang  him  !

the  smith
{rolling  up  his  shirt-sleeves).

That  switch  is  too  light  for  a  carcass  like  his.

some  of  the  crowd.
The  Smith  will  dang  him  !

others.
Bang  him  !

THE   SMITH

{spits  on  his  hands  and  nods  to  Ase).

Hang  him  !

Ase.

What  ?     Hang  my  Peer  ?     Ay,  just  try  if  you  dare ; —
Ase  and  I,^  we  have  teeth  and  claws  ! —
Where  is  he?     {Calls  across  the  yard:)  Peer  !

^  A  peasant  idiom.


50  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  i.

THE    BRIDEGROOM

{comes  running  up).

Oh,  God's  death  on  the  cross !
Come  father,  come  mother,  and !

HIS    FATHER.

What  is  the  matter  ?

THE   BRIDEGROOM.

Just  fancy,  Peer  Gynt !

ASE

{screams).

Have  they  taken  his  life?

THE   BRIDEGROOM.

No,  but  Peer  Gynt !   Look,  there  on  the  hillside !

THE   CROWD.

With  the  bride !

ASE

{kts  her  stick  sink).
Oh,  the  beast !

THE    SMITH

{as  if  ihufiderstruck).

Where  the  slope  rises  sheerest
he's  clambering  upwards,  by  God,  like  a  goat !

THE    BRIDEGROOM

{crying).
He's  shouldered  her,  mother,  as  I  might  a  pig !


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  51

ASE

{shaking  her  fist  up  at  him).

Would  God  you  might  fall,  and !

{Screafns  out  in  terror.)

Take  care  of  your  footing  !

THE    HEGSTAD    FARMER

{comes  in  J  bare-headed  and  white  with  rage).
I'll  have  his  life  for  this  bride-rape  yet !

ASE.

Oh  no,  God  punish  me  if  I  let  you  !


52  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.


ACT  SECOND.
SCENE   FIRST.

(A   narrow  path,   high   up   in    the   mountains.      Early

morning. )
(peer   gynt  comes  hastily  and  sullenly  along  the  path.

INGRID,  still  wearing  some  of  her  bridal  ornaments,

is  trying  to  hold  him  back.)


PEER.


Get  you  from  me


Whither?


INGRID

{weeping).
After  this,  Peer  ?

PEER.

Where  you  will  for  me.


INGRID

{zvringiftg  her  hands).
Oh,  what  falsehood !

PEER.

Useless  railing.
Each  alone  must  go  his  way.


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.

INGRID.

Sin — and  sin  again  unites  us  !

PEER,

Devil  take  all  recollections !
Devil  take  the  tribe  of  women —
all  but  one !

INGRID.

Who  is  that  one,  pray  ?

PEER.

'Tis  not  you.

INGRID.

Who  is  it  then  ?

PEER.

Go !     Go  thither  whence  you  came  !
Off !     To  your  father  I

INGRID.

Dearest,  sweetest —

PEER.

Peace !

INGRID.

You  cannot  mean  it,  surely,
what  you're  saying  ?

PEER.

Can  and  do.

INGRID.

First  to  lure — and  then  forsake  me !


53


Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.


54

PEER.

And  what  terms  have  you  to  offer  ?

INCRID.

Hegstad  Farm,  and  more  besides.

PEER.

Is  your  psalm-book  in  your  kerchief?
Where's  the  gold-mane  on  your  shoulders  ?
Do  you  glance  adown  your  apron  ?
Do  you  hold  your  mother's  skirt-fold  ?
Speak !


No,  but-


this  last  spring-tide  ?


INGRID.
PEER.

Went  you  to  the  Pastor^

INGRID.

No,  but  Peer


PEER.

Is  there  shyness  in  your  glances  ?
When  I  beg,  can  you  deny?

INGRID.

Heaven  !  I  think  his  wits  are  going !

PEER.

Does  your  presence  sanctify  ?2
Speak !

^  See  note  on  page  36.

2  *'  Blir  der  Helg  ndr  en  dig  ser  ?"  literally,  "Does  it  become  a  holy-
day  (or  holy-tide)  when  one  sees  you  ?  "


Sc.  i.]

Peer  Gynt.

INGRID.

No,  but —

—

PEER.

What's  all  the  rest  then  ?

{Going.)

INGRID

(blocking  his  way).

Know  you  it  will  cost  your  neck

should  you  fail  me  ?

PEER.

What  do  I  care?

55


INGRID.

You  may  win  both  wealth  and  honour
if  you  take  me

PEER.

Can't  afford.

INGRID

{bursting  into  tears).
Oh,  you  lured  me !

PEER.

You  were  willing.


I  was  desperate !


INGRID.
PEER.

Frantic  I.


$6  Teek  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

INGRID

{threaiening).
Dearly  shall  you  pay  for  this !

PEER.

Dearest  payment  cheap  I'll  reckon.

INGRID.

Is  your  purpose  set  ?

PEER.

Like  flint.

INGRID.

Good  !  we'll  see,  then,  who's  the  winner  !
{Goes  downwards.)

PEER

{stands  silent  a  moment^  then  cries  .•)

Devil  take  all  recollections  !
Devil  take  the  tribe  of  women  !

INGRID

{turning  her  head^  and  calling  mockingly  upwards:)
All  but  one  !

PEER.

Yes,  all  but  one.
{They  go  their  several  ways.)


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  $7


SCENE  SECOND.

(A^ear  a  mountain  tarn;  the  ground  is  soft  and  marshy

round  about.     A  storm  is  gathering.)
(ase  enters^  calling  and  gazing  around  her  despairingly ^

in  every  direction,     solveig  has  difficulty  in  keeping

up  with  her.     solveig's  father  and  mother,  with

HELGA,  are  some  way  behind.)

Ase
{tossing  about  her  arms^  and  tearing  her  hair).

All  things  are  against  me  with  wrathful  might !
Heaven,  and  the  waters,  and  the  grisly  mountains  !
Fog-scuds  from  heaven  roll  down  to  bewilder  him !
The  treacherous  waters  are  lurking  to  murder  him  !
The  mountains  would  crush  him  with  landslip  and  rift ! —
And  the  people  too  !     They're  out  after  his  life !
God  knows  they  shan't  have  it !     I  can't  bear  to  lose  him  !
Oh,  the  oaf!  to  think  that  the  fiend  should  tempt  him !
{Turning  to  solveig.)

Now  isn't  it  clean  unbelievable  this  ?
He,  that  did  nought  but  romance  and  tell  lies ; —
he,  whose  sole  strength  was  the  strength  of  his  jaw ;
he,  that  did  never  a  stroke  of  true  work ; —
he !     Oh,  a  body  could  both  cry  and  laugh ! —

Oh,  we  clung  closely  in  sorrow  and  need.
Ay,  you  must  know  that  my  husband,  he  drank,
loafed  round  the  parish  to  roister  and  prate,
wasted  and  trampled  our  gear  under  foot.
And  meanwhile  at  home  there  sat  Peerkin  and  I —
the  best  we  could  do  was  to  try  to  forget ;
for  ever  I've  found  it  so  hard  to  bear  up.


58  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

It's  a  terrible  thing  to  look  fate  in  the  eyes ;

and  of  course  one  is  glad  to  be  quit  of  one's  cares,

and  try  all  one  can  to  keep  thought  far  away.

Some  take  to  brandy,  and  others  to  lies ;

and  we — why  we  took  to  fairy-tales

of  princes  and  trolls  and  of  all  sorts  of  beasts  ;

and  of  bride-rapes  as  well.    Ah,  but  who  could  have  dreamt

that  those  devil's  yarns  would  have  stuck  in  his  head  ?

{In  afresh  access  of  terror.^
Hu  !     What  a  scream  !     It's  the  nixie  or  droug  !  ^
Peer !  Peer ! — Up  there  on  that  hillock !

{SJie  rufis  to  the  top  of  a  lit  He  rise,  and  looks  out
over  the  tarn,  solveig's  father  and  mother
come  up.)

ASE.


Not  a  sign  to  be  seen


THE    FATHER

{quietly).
It  is  worst  for  him  !

ASE

{tueeping).
Oh,  my  Peer !     Oh,  my  own  lost  lamb !

THE    FATHER

{nods  mi'dty).
You  may  well  say  lost.

ASE.

Oh  no,  don't  talk  like  that !
He  is  so  clever.     There's  no  one  like  him.

'  A  malevolent  water-monster.


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  59

THE   FATHER.

You  foolish  woman !

ASE.

Oh  ay ;  oh  ay  ;
foolish  I  am,  but  the  boy's  all  right !

THE    FATHER

(siill  softly  and  with  viild  eyes).
His  heart  is  hardened,  his  soul  is  lost.

ASE

{in  terror).
No,  no,  he  can't  be  so  hard,  our  Lord !

THE    FATHER.

Do  you  think  he  can  sigh  for  his  debt  of  sin  ?

ASE

{eagerly).
No,  but  he  can  ride  through  the  air  on  a  buck,  though !

THE   MOTHER.

Christ,  are  you  mad  ?

THE   FATHER.

Why,  what  do  you  mean  ?

ASE.

Never  a  deed  is  too  great  for  him.

You  shall  see,  if  only  he  lives  so  long

THE    FATHER.

Best  if  you  saw  him  on  the  gallows  hanging.


6o  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

ASE

(shrieks).
Oh,  cross  of  Christ !

THE   FATHER.

In  the  hangman's  hands,
it  may  be  his  heart  would  be  turned  to  repentance.

ASE

(bewildered).
Oh,  you'll  soon  talk  me  out  of  my  senses !
We  must  find  him  !

THE    FATHER.

To  rescue  his  souL

ASE.

And  his  body !
If  he's  stuck  in  the  swamp,  we  must  drag  him  out;
if  he's  taken  by  trolls,  we  must  ring  the  bells  for  him.

THE    FATHER.

Hm  ! — Here's  a  sheep-path


your  guidance  and  help


ASE.

The  Lord  will  repay  you


THE   FATHER.

It's  a  Christian's  duty.

ASE.

Then  the  others,  fie  !  they  are  heathens  all ;
there  wasn't  one  that  would  go  with  us

THE    FATHER.

They  knew  him  too  well.


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  6i

ASE.

He  was  too  good  for  them !
(  Wrings  her  hands.)
And  to  think — and  to  think  that  his  life  is  at  stake !

THE    FATHER.

Here  are  tracks  of  a  man.

ASE.

Then  it's  here  we  must  search  !

THE   FATHER.

We'll  scatter  around  on  this  side  of  our  saeter.^

(He  and  his  wife  go  ofi  ahead.)

SOLVEIG

{to  Ase).
Say  on ;  tell  me  more.

Ase
{drying  her  eyes).

Of  my  son,  you  mean  ?

SOLVEIG.

Yes;—
Tell  everything !

Ase
{smiles  and  tosses  her  head).

Everything  ? — Soon  you'd  be  tired !

SOLVEIG.

Sooner  by  far  will  you  tire  of  the  elling
than  I  of  the  hearing.

^  ScBter — a  chalet,  or  small  mountain  farm,  where  the  cattle  are  sent
to  pasture  in  the  summer  months.


62  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.


SCENE   THIRD.

(LoWy  treeless  heights^  dose  under  the  mountain  7?ioorlands  ;

peaks  in  the  distance.     21ie  shadows  are  long ;  it  is

late  in  the  day. )
(peer  gynt  conies  running  at  full  speedy  and  stops  short

on  the  hillside. )

PEER.

The  parish  is  all  at  my  heels  in  a  pack  !

Every  man  of  them  armed  or  with  gun  or  with  club.

Foremost  I  hear  the  old  Hegstad-churl  howling. —

Now  it's  noised  far  and  wide  that  Peer  Gynt  is  abroad !

It  is  different,  this,  from  a  bout  with  a  smith  !

This  is  life  !     Every  limb  grows  as  strong  as  a  bear's.

(Strikes  out  with  his  arms  and  leaps  in  the  air.)
To  crush,  overturn,  stem  the  rush  of  the  foss !  ^
To  strike  !     Wrench  the  fir-tree  right  up  by  the  root !
This  is  life  !     This  both  hardens  and  lifts  one  high !
To  hell  then  with  all  of  the  savourless  lies !

THREE   SiETER    GIRLS ^

{rush  across  the  hillside^  screaming  and  singing),

Trond  of  the  Valfjeld  i^     Bdrd  and  K^re !
Troll-pack !     To-night  would  you  sleep  in  our  arms  ?

PEER.

To  whom  are  you  calling  ?

^  See  note,  p.  29.

2  See  Introduction,  p.  vi.,  and  Appendix.

^  Pronounce  Vaal-fyeld.


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  63


THE   GIRLS.

To  the  trolls  !  to  the  trolls !

FIRST   GIRL.

Trond,  come  with  kindness  I

SECOND   GIRL.

Bard,  come  with  force  !

THIRD   GIRL.

The  cots  in  the  sseter  are  all  standing  empty  !

FIRST   GIRL.

Force  is  kindness  !

SECOND   GIRL.

And  kindness  is  force  !

THIRD    GIRL.

If  lads  are  awanting,  one  plays  with  the  trolls  !

PEER.

Why,  where  are  the  lads,  then  ?

ALL   THREE

{^ith  a  horse-laugh).

They  cannot  come  hither !

FIRST   GIRL.

Mine  called  me  his  sweetheart  and  called  me  his  darling.
Now  he  has  married  a  grey-headed  widow.

SECOND   GIRL.

Mine  met  a  gipsy-wench  north  on  the  upland.
Now  they  are  tramping  the  country  together.


64  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

THIRD   GIRL.

Mine  put  an  end  to  our  bastard  brat.
Now  his  head's  grinning  aloft  on  a  stake.

ALL   THREE.

Trond  of  the  Valfjeld  !     Bird  and  Kdre  !
Troll-pack  !     To-night  would  you  sleep  in  our  arms  ?

PEER

{stands^  with  a  sudden  leap^  in  the  midst  of  them).
I'm  a  three-headed  troll,  and  the  boy  for  three  girls  !

THE   GIRLS.

Are  you  such  a  lad,  eh  ?

PEER.

You  shall  judge  for  yourselves  !

FIRST   GIRL.

To  the  hut !     To  the  hut !

SECOND   GIRL.

We  have  mead !

PEER.

Let  it  flow  !

THIRD   GIRL.

No  cot  shall  stand  empty  this  Saturday  night !

SECOND   GIRL

{kissing  hifn).
He  sparkles  and  glisters  like  white-heated  iron.

THIRD    GIRL

{doing  likewise).
Like  a  baby's  eyes  from  the  blackest  tarn.


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  65

PEER

{dancing  in  the  midst  of  them).

Heavy  of  heart  and  wanton  of  mind.

The  eyes  full  of  laughter,  the  throat  of  tears !

THE    GIRLS

{making  ^nocking  gestures  towards  the  mountain-tops^
screaming  and  singing).

Trond  of  the  Valfjeld  !     Bard  and  Kare  !
Troll-pack ! — To-night  will  you  sleep  in  our  arms  ?

(They  dance  away  over  the  heights^  with  peer  gynt
in  their  midst ^


SCENE  FOURTH.

{Among  the  Rond'e  mountains.     Sunset.     Shining  snow-
peaks  all  around^
(peer  gynt  enters^  dizzy  and  bewildered.)

PEER.

Tower  over  tower  arises  !

Hei,  what  a  glittering  gate  !

Stand  !     Will  you  stand  !     It's  drifting

further  and  further  away !

High  on  the  vane  the  cock  stands

lifting  his  wings  for  flight ; —

blue  spread  the  rifts  and  bluer,

locked  is  the  fell  and  barred. —

What  are  those  trunks  and  tree-roots,
that  grow  from  the  ridge's  clefts  ?
They  are  warriors  heron-footed  !
Now  they,  too,  are  fading  away.


66  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

A  shimmering  like  rainbow-streamers
goes  shooting  through  eyes  and  brain.
What  is  it,  that  far-off  chiming?
What's  weighing  my  eyebrows  down  ?
Hu,  how  my  forehead's  throbbing —

a  tightening  red-hot  ring I

I  cannot  think  who  the  devil
has  bound  it  around  my  head !

{Sinks  down.)

Flight  o'er  the  Edge  of  Gendin —
stuff  and  accursed  lies  !
Up  o'er  the  steepest  hill-wall
with  the  bride, — and  a  whole  day  drunk;
hunted  by  hawks  and  falcons,
threatened  by  trolls  and  such,
sporting  with  crazy  wenches  : —
lies  and  accursed  stuff!

{Gazes  long  upwards.)

Yonder  sail  two  brown  eagles.
Southward  the  wild  geese  fly.
And  here  I  must  splash  and  stumble
in  quagmire  and  filth  knee-deep  !

{Springs  up.)

I'll  fly  too !     I  will  wash  myself  clean  in
the  bath  of  the  keenest  winds  !
I'll  fly  high !     I  will  plunge  myself  fair  in
the  glorious  christening-font !
I  will  soar  far  over  the  saeter ;
I  will  ride  myself  pure  of  soul ;
I  will  forth  o'er  the  salt  sea  waters,
and  high  over  Engelland's  prince  !
Ay,  gaze  as  ye  may,  young  maidens ;


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  ^y

my  ride  is  for  none  of  you  ;

you're  wasting  your  time  in  waiting — !

Yet  maybe  I'll  swoop  down,  too. —

What  has  come  of  the  two  brown  eagles —  ?
They've  vanished,  the  devil  knows  where  ! —

There's  the  peak  of  a  gable  rising ;
it's  soaring  on  every  hand;
it's  growing  from  out  the  ruins ; —
see,  the  gateway  is  standing  wide !
Ha-ha,  yonder  house,  I  know  it;
it's  grandfather's  new-built  farm  !
Gone  are  the  clouts  from  the  windows ;
the  crazy  old  fence  is  gone.
The  lights  gleam  from  every  casement ;
there's  a  feast  in  the  hall  to-night.

There,  that  was  the  provost  clinking
the  back  of  his  knife  on  his  glass ; —
there's  the  captain  flinging  his  bottle,
and  shivering  the  mirror  to  bits. —
Let  them  waste ;  let  it  all  be  squandered !
Peace,  mother ;  what  need  we  care  !
'Tis  the  rich  Jon  Gynt  gives  the  banquet ;
hurrah  for  the  race  of  Gynt !
What's  all  this  bustle  and  hubbub  ?
Why  do  they  shout  and  bawl  ?
The  captain  is  calling  the  son  in ; —
oh,  the  provost  would  drink  my  health.
In  then.  Peer  Gynt,  to  the  judgment;
it  rings  forth  in  song  and  shout :
Peer  Gynt,  thou  art  come  of  great  things,
and  great  things  shall  come  of  thee !

{Leaps  forward^   but  runs  his   head  against  a  rock  ;
falls ^  a?id  remains  stretched  on  the  ground.')


68  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.


SCENE   FIFTH.

(A  hillside^  wooded  with  great  soughing  trees.  Stars  are
gleafftitig  through  the  leaves  ;  birds  are  singing  in  the
tree-tops.)

{A  GREEN-CLAD  WOMAN  ts  crossing  the  hillside;  peer
GYUT  follows  her  J  with  all  sorts  of  lover- 1  ike  antics.)

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE

(stops  afid  turns  round).
Is  it  true?

PEER

{drawing  his  finger  across  his  throat).

As  true  as  my  name  is  Peer ; —
as  true  as  that  you  are  a  lovely  woman  !
Will  you  have  me  ?     You'll  see  what  a  fine  man  Pll  be ;
you  shall  neither  tread  the  loom  nor  turn  the  spindle.
You  shall  eat  all  you  want,  till  you're  ready  to  burst.
I  never  will  drag  you  about  by  the  hair

THE   GREEN-CLAD    ONE.

Nor  beat  me  ?

PEER.

No,  can  you  think  I  would?
We  kings'  sons  never  beat  women  and  such.

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

You're  a  king's  son  ?

PEER.

Yes.


Sc.  v.]  Peer  Gynt.  69

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

I'm  the  Dovre-King's  daughter.

PEER.

Are  you  ?     See  there,  now,  how  well  that  fits  in  !

THE   GREEN-CLAD    ONE.

Deep  in  the  Ronde  has  father  his  palace.

PEER.

My  mother's  is  bigger,  or  much  I'm  mistaken.

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

Do  you  know  my  father?     His  name  is  King  Brose.^

PEER.

Do  you  know  my  mother  ?     Her  name  is  Queen  Ase.

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

When  my  father  is  angry  the  mountains  are  riven.

PEER.

They  reel  when  my  mother  by  chance  falls  a-scolding.

THE   GREEN-CLAD    ONE.

My  father  can  kick  e'en  the  loftiest  roof- tree. ^

PEER.

My  mother  can  ride  through  the  rapidest  river.

^  Pronounce  Broase.

-  Kicking  the  rafters  is  a  much-admired  exploit  in  peasant  dancing.
See  note,  page  30.


70  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

Have  you  other  garments  besides  those  rags  ?

PEER.

Ho,  you  should  just  see  my  Sunday  clothes !

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

My  week-day  gown  is  of  gold  and  silk.

PEER.

It  looks  to  me  liker  tow  and  straws.

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

Ay,  there  is  one  thing  you  must  remember : — •
this  is  the  Ronde-folk's  use  and  wont :
all  our  possessions  have  twofold  form.
When  you  shall  come  to  my  father's  hall,
it  well  may  chance  that  you're  on  the  point
of  thinking  you  stand  in  a  dismal  moraine.

PEER.

Well  now,  with  us  it's  precisely  the  same.
Our  gold  will  seem  to  you  litter  and  trash !
And  you'll  think,  mayhap,  every  glittering  pane
is  nought  but  a  bunch  of  old  stockings  and  clouts.

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

Black  it  seems  white,  and  ugly  seems  fair.

PEER.

Big  it  seems  Httle,  and  dirty  seems  clean.


Sc.  v.]  Peer  Gynt.  71

THE   GREEN-CLAD    ONE

{^falling  on  his  7ieck).
Ay,  Peer,  now  I  see  that  we  fit,  you  and  I !

PEER.

Like  the  leg  and  the  trouser,  the  hair  and  the  comb.

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE

{calls  away  over  the  hillside).
Bridal-steed  !     Bridal-steed !     Come,  bridal-steed  mine !

{A  gigantic  pig  comes  ruiining  in  with  a  rope's  end
for  a  bridle  and  an  old  sack  for  a  saddle.
PEER  GYNT  vaults  on  its  back^  and  seats  the
GREEN-CLAD  ONE  in  front  of  him.)

PEER.

Hark-away  !     Through  the  Ronde-gate  gallop  we  in  !
Gee-up,  gee-up,  my  courser  fine !

THE   GREEN-CLAD    ONE

(tenderly).

Ah,  but  lately  I  wandered  and  moped  and  pined — .
One  never  can  tell  what  may  happen  to  one !

PEER

{thrashing  the  pig  and  trotting  off).
You  may  know  the  great  by  their  riding-gear !


72  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.


SCENE  SIXTH.

{The  Royal  Hall  of  the   King  of  the  Dovr'e-Trolls.      A
great  assembly  of  troll-courtiers,   gnomes,    and

BROWNIES.         THE   OLD    MAN    OF    THE    DOVRE    sitS   On

the  throne^  crowned^  and  with  his  sceptre  in  his  hafid.
His  CHILDREN  and  nearest  relations  are  ranged
o?i  both  sides.  peer  gynt  stands  before  him.
Violent  commotion  in  the  hall.)

THE   troll-courtiers.

Slay  him  !  a  Christian-man's  son  has  deluded
the  Dovre-King's  loveliest  maid  !

A  troll-imp.
May  I  hack  him  on  the  fingers  ?

another.

May  I  tug  him  by  the  hair  ?

A  troll-maiden.
Hu,  hei,  let  me  bite  him  in  the  haunches !

A  troll-witch
{with  a  ladle).

Shall  he  be  boiled  into  broth  and  bree  ?

another  troll-witch
{with  a  chopper).

Shall  he  roast  on  a  spit  or  be  browned  in  a  stewpan  ?


Sc.  vi.]  Peer  Gynt.

THE  OLD  MAN  OF  THE  DOVRE.

Ice  to  your  blood,  friends  !

(^Beckons  his  counsellors  nearer  around  hitn.)
Don't  let  us  talk  big.
We've  been  drifting  astern  in  these  latter  years  j
we  can't  tell  what's  going  to  stand  or  to  fall,
and  there's  no  sense  in  turning  recruits  away.
Besides  the  lad's  body  has  scarce  a  blemish,
and  he's  strongly-built  too,  if  I  see  aright
'  It's  true,  he  has  only  a  single  head ;
but  my  daughter,  too,  has  no  more  than  one.
Three-headed  trolls  are  going  clean  out  of  fashion ;
one  hardly  sees  even  a  two-header  now,
and  even  those  heads  are  but  so-so  ones.

{To  PEER  GYNT.)

It's  my  daughter,  then,  you  demand  of  me  ?

PEER.

Your  daughter  and  the  realm  to  her  dowry,  yes.

THE   OLD    MAN.

You  shall  have  the  half  while  I'm  still  alive,
and  the  other  half  when  I  come  to  die.

PEER.

I'm  content  with  that.

THE   OLD    MAN.

Ay,  but  stop,  my  lad ; —
you  also  have  some  undertakings  to  give.
If  you  break  even  one,  the  whole  pact's  at  an  end,
and  you'll  never  get  away  from  here  living.
First  of  all  you  must  swear  that  you'll  never  give  heed
to  aught  that  lies  outside  the  Ronde-hills'  bounds ;
day  you  must  shun,  and  deeds,  and  each  sunlit  spot.


74  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

PEER.

Only  call  me  king,  and  that's  easy  to  keep.

THE  OLD  MAN.

And  next — now  for  putting  your  wits  to  the  test
{Draws  himself  up  in  his  seat.)

THE  OLDEST  TROLL-COURTIER
{to  PEER  gynt).

Let  us  see  if  you  have  a  wisdom-tooth

that  can  crack  the  Dovre-King's  riddle-nut !

THE  OLD  MAN.

What  difference  is  there  'twixt  trolls  and  men  ?

PEER.

No  difference  at  all,  as  it  seems  to  me.

Big  trolls  would  roast  you  and  small  trolls  would  claw  you ; —

with  us  it  were  likewise,  if  only  they  dared.

THE  OLD  MAN.

True  enough ;  in  that  and  in  more  we're  alike.
Yet  morning  is  morning,  and  even  is  even,
and  there  is  a  difference  all  the  same. —
Now  let  me  tell  you  wherein  it  lies :
Out  yonder,  under  the  shining  vault,
among  men  the  saying  goes  :  "  Man,  be  thyself!  "
At  home  here  with  us,  'mid  the  tribe  of  the  trolls,
the  saying  goes  :  "  Troll,  to  thyself  be — enough ! "

THE  TROLL-COURTIER
{to  PEER  gynt).

Can  you  fathom  the  depth  ?


Sc.  vi.]  Peer  Gynt.  75

PEER.

It  Strikes  me  as  misty.

THE  OLD  MAN.

My  son,  that  "  Enough,"  that  most  potent  and  sundering
word,  must  be  graven  upon  your  escutcheon.

PEER

{scratching  his  head).
Well,  but

THE   OLD   MAN.

It  must^  if  you  here  would  be  master !

PEER.

Oh  well,  let  it  pass ;  after  all,  it's  no  worse


THE   OLD   MAN.

And  next  you  must  learn  to  appreciate
our  homely,  everyday  way  of  life.

i^He  beckons  ;  two  trolls  with  pigs' -heads,  white  night'
caps,  and  so  forih^  bring  in  food  arid  drink.)
The  cow  gives  cakes  and  the  bullock  mead  ;
ask  not  if  its  taste  be  sour  or  sweet;
the  main  matter  is,  and  you  mustn't  forget  it,
it's  all  of  it  home-brewed.^

PEER

{pushing  the  things  away  from  him).

The  devil  fly  off  with  your  home-brewed  drinks !
I'll  never  get  used  to  the  ways  of  this  land.

^  See  Introduction,  p.  xii.


76  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

THE    OLD    MAN.

The  bowl's  given  in,  and  it's  fashioned  of  gold.

Whoso  owns  the  gold  bowl,  him  my  daughter  holds  dear.

PEER

{pondering).

It  is  written  :  Thou  shalt  bridle  the  natural  man  ; —
and  I  daresay  the  drink  may  in  time  seem  less  sour.
So  be  it !

( Co77iplies. )

THE  OLD   MAN.

Ay,  that  was  sagaciously  said.
You  spit?

PEER.

One  must  trust  to  the  force  of  habit.

THE   OLD    MAN.

And  next  you  must  throw  off  your  Christian-man's  garb ;
for  this  you  must  know  to  our  Dovre's  renown  :
here  all  things  are  mountain-made,  nought's  from  the  dale,
except  the  silk  bow  at  the  end  of  your  tail.

PEER

{indignant),
I  haven't  a  tail !

THE   OLD    MAN.

Then  of  course  you  must  get  one.
See  my  Sunday-tail,  Chamberlain,  fastened  to  him.

PEER.

I'll  be  hanged  if  you  do  !     Would  you  make  me  a  fool  ?


Sc.  vl]  Peer  Gynt.  77

THE   OLD   MAN.

None  comes  courting  my  child  with  no  tail  at  his  rear.

PEER.

Make  a  beast  of  a  man  !

THE   OLD    MAN.

Nay,  my  son^  you  mistake ;
I  make  you  a  mannerly  wooer,  no  more.
A  bright  orange  bow  we'll  allow  you  to  wear,
and  that  passes  here  for  the  highest  of  honours.

PEER

{reflectively).

It's  true,  as  the  saying  goes :  Man's  but  a  mote.
And  it's  wisest  to  follow  the  fashion  a  bit.
Tie  away !

THE   OLD   MAN.

You're  a  tractable  fellow,  I  see.

THE   COURTIER.

Just  try  with  what  grace  you  can  waggle  and  whisk  it !

PEER

{^peevishly).

Ha,  would  you  force  me  to  go  still  further  ?
Do  you  ask  me  to  give  up  my  Christian  faith  ?

THE   OLD    MAN.

No,  that  you  are  welcome  to  keep  in  peace.
Doctrine  goes  free ;  upon  that  there's  no  duty ;
it's  the  outward  cut  one  must  tell  a  troll  by.
If  we're  only  at  one  in  our  manners  and  dress,
you  may  hold  as  your  faith  what  to  us  is  a  horror.


7^  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.


PEER.

Why,  in  spite  of  your  many  conditions,  you  are

a  more  reasonable  chap  than  one  might  have  expected.

THE   OLD   MAN.

We  troll-folk,  my  son,  are  less  black  than  we're  painted;^
that's  another  distinction  between  you  and  us. —
But  the  serious  part  of  the  meeting  is  over;
now  let  us  gladden  our  ears  and  our  eyes.
Music-maid,  forth  !     Set  the  Dovre-harp  sounding !
Dancing-maid,  forth !     Tread  the  Dovre-hall's  floor  I
(Music  and  a  dance.)

THE  COURTIER.

How  like  you  it  ?

PEER.

Like  it  ?    Hm

THE   OLD   MAN.

Speak  without  fear !
What  see  you  ?

PEER.

Why,  something  unspeakably  grim  :  ^
a  bell-cow  with  her  hoof  on  a  gut-harp  strumming,
a  sow  in  socklets  a-trip  to  the  tune.

THE   COURTIERS.

Eat  him !

^  Literally,  "Better  than  our  reputation."

2  «'Ustyggelig  stygt."  "  Ustyggelig "  seems  to  be  what  Mr.
Lewis  Carroll  calls  a  portmanteau  word,  compounded  of  "usigelig"  =
unspeakable,  and  **  styg  "  =  ug]y.  The  words  might  be  rendered
"  beyond  grimness  grim."


Sc.  vi.]  Peer  Gynt.  79

THE   OLD   MAN.

His  sense  is  but  human,  remember !

TROLL-MAIDENS.

Hu,  tear  away  both  his  ears  and  his  eyes  !

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE

{weeping).

Hu-hu !     And  this  we  must  hear  and  put  up  with,
when  I  and  my  sister  make  music  and  dance.

PEER.

Oho,  was  it  you  ?     Well,  a  joke  at  the  feast,
you  must  know,  is  never  unkindly  meant.

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

Can  you  swear  it  was  so  ?

PEER.

Both  the  dance  and  the  music
were  utterly  charming,  the  cat  claw  me  else.

THE   OLD   MAN.

This  same  human  nature's  a  singular  thing ;

it  sticks  to  people  so  strangely  long.

If  it  gets  a  gash  in  the  fight  with  us,

it  heals  up  at  once,  though  a  scar  may  remain.

My  son-in-law,  now,  is  as  pliant  as  any ;

he's  willingly  thrown  off  his  Christian-man's  garb,

he's  willingly  drunk  from  our  chalice  of  mead,

he's  willingly  tied  on  the  tail  to  his  back, —

so  willing,  in  short,  did  we  find  him  in  all  things,

I  thought  to  myself  the  old  Adam,  for  certain.


8o  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

had  for  good  and  all  been  kicked  out  of  doors ;
but  lo  1  in  two  shakes  he's  atop  again  !
Ay  ay,  my  son,  we  must  treat  you,  I  see,
to  cure  this  pestilent  human  nature.

PEER.

What  will  you  do?

THE   OLD    MAN.

In  your  left  eye,^  first,
I'll  scratch  you  a  bit,  till  you  see  awry ;
but  all  that  you  see  will  seem  fine  and  brave.
And  then  I'll  just  cut  your  right  window-pane  out


PEER.

Are  you  drunk  ?

THE   OLD    MAN

{lays  a  number  of  sharp  instru7Jtents  on  the  table).

See,  here  are  the  glazier's  tools.
Blinkers  you'll  wear,  like  a  raging  bull.
Then  you'll  recognise  that  your  bride  is  lovely, —
and  ne'er  will  your  vision  be  troubled,  as  now,
with  bell-cows  harping  and  sows  that  dance.

PEER.

This  is  madman's  talk  !

THE   OLDEST   COURTIER.

It's  the  Dovre-King  speaking  \
it's  he  that  is  wise,  and  it's  you  that  are  crazy !

^  See  Introduction,  p.  vi.


Sc.  vL]  Peer  Gynt.  -  8i

THE   OLD    MAN.

Just  think  how  much  worry  and  mortification
you'll  thus  escape  from,  year  out,  year  in.
You  must  remember,  your  eyes  are  the  fountain
of  the  bitter  and  searing  lye  of  tears.

PEER.

That's  true ;  and  it  says  in  our  sermon-book  :
If  thine  eye  offend  thee,  then  pluck  it  out.
But  tell  me,  when  will  my  sight  heal  up
into  human  sight  ?

THE   OLD    MAN.

Nevermore,  my  friend.

PEER.

Indeed  !     In  that  case,  I'll  take  my  leave.

THE    OLD    MAN.

What  would  you  without  ?

PEER.

I  would  go  my  way.

THE   OLD   MAN.

No,  Stop !     It's  easy  to  slip  in  here,

but  the  Dovre-King's  gate  doesn't  open  outwards.

PEER.

You  wouldn't  detain  me  by  force,  I  hope  ?

THE   OLD    MAN.

Come  now,  just  listen  to  reason,  Prince  Peer !
You  have  gifts  for  trolldom.     He  acts,  does  he  not,
even  now  in  a  passably  troll-like  fashion  ?
And  you'd  fain  be  a  troll  ?

6


82  Peer  Gvnt.  [Act  ii.

PEER.

Yes,  I  would,  sure  enough.
For  a  bride  and  a  well-managed  kingdom  to  boot,
I  can  put  up  with  losing  a  good  many  things.
But  there  is  a  limit  to  all  things  on  earth.
The  tail  I've  accepted,  it's  perfectly  true ;
but  no  doubt  I  can  loose  what  the  Chamberlain  tied.
My  breeches  I've  dropped ;  they  were  old  and  patched ;
but  no  doubt  I  can  button  them  on  again.
And  lightly  enough  I  can  slip  my  cable
from  these  your  Dovrefied  ways  of  life.
I  am  willing  to  swear  that  a  cow  is  a  maid ;
an  oath  one  can  always  eat  up  again ; —
but  to  know  that  one  never  can  free  oneself,
that  one  can't  even  die  like  a  decent  soul ;
to  live  as  a  hill-troll  for  all  one's  days —
to  feel  that  one  never  can  beat  a  retreat, —
as  the  book  has  it,  fAai's  what  your  heart  is  set  on ;
but  that  is  a  thing  I  can  never  agree  to.

THE   OLD   MAN.

Now,  sure  as  I  live,  I  shall  soon  lose  my  temper ;
and  then  I  am  not  to  be  trifled  with.
You  pasty-faced  loon  !     Do  you  know  who  I  am  ?
First  with  my  daughter  you  make  too  free

PEER.

There  you  lie  in  your  throat !

THE   OLD   MAN.

You  must  marry  her.

PEER.

Do  you  dare  to  accuse  me ?


Sc.  vi.]  Peer  Gynt.  83

THE   OLD   MAN.

What  ?     Can  you  deny-
that  you  lusted  for  her  in  heart  and  eye  ?

PEER

{with  a  snort  of  contempt).
No  more  ?    Who  the  deuce  cares  a  straw  for  that  ?

THE    OLD    MAN.

It's  ever  the  same  with  this  humankind.

The  spirit  you're  ready  to  own  with  your  lips,

but  in  fact  nothing  counts  that  your  fists  cannot  handle.

So  you  really  think,  then,  that  lust  matters  nought  ?

Wait  j  you  shall  soon  have  ocular  proof  of  it

PEER.

You  don't  catch  me  with  a  bait  of  lies !

THE   GREEN-CLAD   ONE.

My  Peer,  ere  the  year's  out,  you'll  be  a  father.

PEER.

Open  doors  !  let  me  go  !

THE   OLD   MAN.

In  a  he-goat's  skin,
you  shall  have  the  brat  after  you.

PEER

{mopping  the  sweat  off  his  brow).

Would  I  could  waken !

THE   OLD    MAN.

Shall  we  send  him  to  the  palace  ?


84  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

PEER.

You  can  send  him  to  the  parish  !

THE  OLD    MAN.

Well  well,  Prince  Peer ;  that's  your  own  look-out.
But  one  thing's  certain,  what's  done  is  done;
and  your  offspring,  too,  will  be  sure  to  grow ;
such  mongrels  shoot  up  amazingly  fast •

PEER.

Old  man,  don't  act  like  a  headstrong  ox !
Hear  reason,  maiden  !     Let's  come  to  terms.
You  must  know  I'm  neither  a  prince  nor  rich ; —
and  whether  you  measure  or  whether  you  weigh  me,
be  sure  you  won't  gain  much  by  making  me  yours.

(the  GREEN-CLAD  ONE  IS  taken  Ul^  and  is  carried

out  by  TROLL-MAIDS. )

THE   OLD    MAN

{looks  at  him  for  a  while  in  high  disdain;  then  says:)
Dash  him  to  shards  on  the  rock-walls,  children !

THE   TROLL-IMPS.

Oh  dad,  mayn't  we  play  owl-and-eagle  first !
The  wolf-game  !     Grey-mouse  and  glow-eyed  cat !

THE    OLD    MAN.

Yes,  but  quick.     I  am  worried  and  sleepy.     Good-night !

(Ife  goes.)

PEER

(hunted  by  the  troll-imps).
Let  me  be,  devil's  imps  !

{Tries  to  escape  up  the  chimney^


Sc.  vi.]  Peer  Gynt.  85

THE   IMPS.

Come  brownies  !     Come  nixies  !
Bite  him  behind  1

PEER.

Ow!
(Tries  to  slip  down  the  cellar  trap-door.)

THE   IMPS.

Shut  up  all  the  crannies !

THE   TROLL-COURTIER.

Now  the  small-fry  are  happy  !

PEER

{struggling  with  a  little  imp  that  has  bit  himself
fast  to  his  ear).

Let  go  will  you,  beast !

THE   courtier

{hitting  him  across  the  fingers).
Gently,  you  scamp,  with  a  scion  of  royalty  !

PEER.

A  rat-hole !

{Runs  to  it.)

THE   IMPS.

Be  quick,  Brother  Nixie,  and  block  it !

PEER.

The  old  one  was  bad,  but  the  youngsters  are  worse !

THE   IMPS.

Slash  him !


S6  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

PEER.

Oh,  would  I  were  small  as  a  mouse !
{^Rushing  arou?id.)

THE   IMPS

{swarming  round  hifu).
Close  the  ring  !     Close  the  ring !

PEER

{weej}ing).

Would  that  I  were  a  louse !
{HefaHs.)

THE   IMPS*

Now  into  his  eyes !

PEER

{buried  in  a  heap  of  imps).
Mother,  help  me,  I  die !

( Church-bells  sound  far  away.)

THE  imps.
Bells  in  the  mountain  !     The  Black- Frock's  cows !

(the  trolls  take  to  flighty  amid  a  confused  uproar
of  yells  and  shrieks.  The  palace  collapses ;
everything  disappears.)


\


Sc.  vii.]  Peer  Gynt.  ^j


SCENE   SEVENTH.

{Pitch  darkness.)

(peer  gynt  is  heard  beati7ig  and  slashing  ahciit  him  wilh
a  large  bough.)

PEER.

Answer  !     Who  are  you  ?

A    VOICE    IN    THE   DARKNESS.

Myself.

PEER.

Clear  the  way !

THE    VOICE.

Go  roundabout,  Peer !     The  hill's  roomy  enough.

PEER

{tries  to  force  a  passage  at  another  place^  but  strikes
against  sotnethifig).

Who  are  you  ?

THE   VOICE.

Myself.     Can  you  say  the  same  ?

PEER.

I  can  say  what  I  will ;  and  my  sword  can  smite !
Mind  yourself!     Hu,  hei,  now  the  blow  falls  crushing!
King  Saul  slew  hundreds  ;  Peer  Gynt  slew  thousands !

{Cutting  and  slashi?tg.)
Who  are  you  ?


88  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

THE   VOICE.

Myself.

PEER.

That  stupid  reply
you  may  spare  ;  it  doesn't  clear  up  the  matter,
What  are  you  ?

THE   VOICE.

The  great  Boyg.^

PEER.

Ah,  indeed!
The  riddle  was  black ;  now  I'd  call  it  grey.
Clear  the  way  then,  Boyg  !

THE   VOICE.

Go  roundabout,  Peer !

PEER.

No,  through !

{Cuts  and  slashes.)
There  he  fell !
( Tries  to  advance^  but  strikes  against  something.)

Ho  ho,  are  there  more  here  ?

THE   VOICE.

The  Boyg,  Peer  Gynt !  the  one  only  one.

It's  the  Boyg  that's  unwounded,  and  the  Boyg  that  was  hurt,

it's  the  Boyg  that  is  dead,  and  the  Boyg  that's  alive.

^  See  Introduction,  pp.  vi.  and  xiv.,  and  Appendix.


Sc.  vii.]  Peer  Gynt.  89

PEER

{throws  away  the  branch).
The  weapon  is  troll-smeared;^  but  I  have  my  fists!
{Fights  his  way  forward.)

THE   VOICE.

Ay,  trust  to  your  fists,  lad,  trust  to  your  body.
Hee-hee,  Peer  Gynt,  so  you'll  reach  the  summit.

PEER

{falling  back  again).

Forward  or  back,  and  it's  just  as  far ; —

out  or  in,  and  it's  just  as  strait  \^

He  is  there  I     And  there  I     And  he's  round  the  bend  !

No  sooner  I'm  out  than  Pm  back  in  the  ring. —

Name  who  you  are !     Let  me  see  you  1     What  are  you  ?

THE   VOICE.

The  Boyg.

PEER

{groping  around).

Not  dead,  not  living ;  all  slimy ;  misty.

Not  so  much  as  a  shape !     It's  as  bad  as  to  battle

in  a  cluster  of  snarling,  half-wakened  bears !

{Screams.)
Strike  back  at  me,  can't  you  !

THE   VOICE.

The  Boyg  isn't  mad.

PEER.


Strike !


^  Rendered  harmless  by  magical  anointing.
^  "  Alter  og  fram,  det  er  lige  langt ; —
ud  og  inJ,  det  er  lige  trangt !  "


90  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

THE    VOICE.

The  Boyg  strikes  not.


PEER.

Fight !     You  shall !

THE   VOICE.

The  great  Boyg  conquers,  but  does  not  fight.

PEER.

Were  there  only  a  nixie  here  that  could  prick  me !

Were  there  only  as  much  as  a  year-old  troll !

Only  something  to  fight  with.     But  here  there  is  nothing. —

Now  he's  snoring !     Boyg !

THE   VOICE.

What's  your  will  ?

PEER.

Use  force !

THE   VOICE.

The  great  Boyg  conquers  in  all  things  without  it.^

PEER

{biting  his  own  arms  and  hands).

Claws  and  ravening  teeth  in  my  flesh  !

I  must  feel  the  drip  of  my  own  warm  blood.

{A  sound  is  heard  like  the  wing-strokes  of  great  birds.)

BIRD-CRIES.

Comes  he  now,  Boyg?

^  "Med  lempe,"  literally   "by  gentleness"  or    "easy-goingness."
"  Quiescence  "  ia  somewhere  near  the  idea.


Sc.  vii.]  Peer  Gynt.  91

THE   VOICE.

Ay,  step  by  step.

BIRD-CRIES.

All  our  sisters  far  off !     Gather  here  to  the  tryst !

PEER.

If  you'd  save  me  now,  lass,  you  must  do  it  quick !

Gaze  not  adown  so,  lowly  and  bending. —

Your  clasp-book !     Hurl  it  straight  into  his  eyes  !

BIRD-CRIES.

He  totters !

THE   VOICE.

We  have  him.

BIRD-CRIES.

Sisters  !     Make  haste !

PEER.

Too  dear  the  purchase  one  pays  for  life
in  such  a  heart-wasting  hour  of  strife.

{Sinks  down.)

BIRD-CRIES.

Boyg,  there  he's  fallen !     Seize  him  !     Seize  him  !
{A  sound  of  bells  and  of  psalm-singing  is  heard  far  away.)

THE   BOYG

{shrinks  up  to  nothings  and  says  in  a  gasp  .•)
He  was  too  strong.     There  were  women  behind  him.


92  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.


SCENE   EIGHTH.

{Sunrise.      The   ?fiountain-side   in  front  of  Ase's   sceter.

The  door  is  shut ;  all  is  silent  and  deserted.^
(peer  gynt  is  lyi?ig  asleep  by  t/ie  wall  of  the  scBter.)

PEER

{wakens^  a?id  looks  about  him  with  dull  and  heavy  eyes.

He  spits).

What  wouldn't  I  give  for  a  pickled  herring !

{Spits  again^  and  at  the  same  moment  catches  sight
of  HELGA,  who  appears  carrying  a  basket  of
food.)

Ha,  child,  are  you  there  ?     What  is  it  you  want  ?


HELGA.


It  is  Solveig-


PEER

{Jumping  upy
Where  is  she  ?

HELGA.

Behind  the  sseter.

SOLVEIG

{unseen).
If  you  come  nearer,  I'll  run  away!

PEER

{stopping  short).
Perhaps  you're  afraid  I  might  take  you  in  my  arms  ?


Sc.  viii.]  Peer  Gynt.  93

SOLVEIG.

For  shame !

PEER.

Do  you  know  where  I  was  last  night  ? —
Like  a  horse-fly  the  Dovre-King's  daughter  is  after  me.

SOLVEIG.

Then  it  was  well  that  the  bells  were  set  ringing.

PEER.

Peer  Gynt's  not  the  lad  they  can  lure  astray. —
What  do  you  say?

HELGA

{crying).

Oh,  she's  running  away  !
(^Running  after  her.)
Wait !

PEER

{catches  her  by  the  ami).

Look  here,  what  I  have  in  my  pocket !
A  silver  button,  child !     You  shall  have  it, —
only  speak  for  me  !

HELGA.

Let  me  be ;  let  me  go !

PEER.

There  you  have  it.

HELGA.

Let  go ;  there's  the  basket  of  food.


94  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  ii.

PEER.

God  pity  you  if  you  don't !

HELGA.

Uf,  how  you  scare  me !

PEER

{gently  ;  letiing  her  go).
No,  I  only  meant :  beg  her  not  to  forget  me !
(helga  runs  off.)


Act  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  95


ACT  THIRD.

SCENE  FIRST.

{Deep  in  the  pine-woods.     Grey  autumn  weather.     Snow

is  falling.^
(peer  gynt  stands  in  his  shirt-sleeves^  felling  timber.)

PEER

{hewing  at  a  large  fir-tree  with  twisted  branches).

Oh  ay,  you  are  tough,  you  ancient  churl ;
but  it's  all  in  vain,  for  you'll  soon  be  down.

{Hews  at  it  again.)

I  see  well  enough  you've  a  chain-mail  shirt,
but  I'll  hew  it  through,  were  it  never  so  stout. —
Ay,  ay,  you're  shaking  your  twisted  arms ;
you've  reason  enough  for  your  spite  and  rage  ;
but  none  the  less  you  must  bend  the  knee !

{Breaks  off  suddenly. )

Lies !    'Tis  an  old  tree,  and  nothing  more.

Lies  !     It  was  never  a  steel-clad  churl ;

it's  only  a  fir-tree  with  fissured  bark. —

It  is  heavy  labour  this  hewing  timber;

but  the  devil  and  all  when  you  hew  and  drcnm  too. —

I'll  have  done  with  it  all — with  this  dwelling  in  mist,

and,  broad-awake,  dreaming  your  senses  away. —


96  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.

You're  an  outlaw,  lad !     You  are  banned  to  the  woods.

{Hews  for  a  while  rapidly.)

Ay,  an  outlaw,  ay.     You've  no  mother  now

to  spread  your  table  and  bring  your  food.

If  you'd  eat,  my  lad,  you  must  help  yourself,

fetch  your  rations  raw  from  the  wood  and  stream,

split  your  own  fir-roots^  and  light  your  own  fire,

bustle  around,  and  arrange  and  prepare  things.

Would  you  clothe  yourself  warmly,  you  must  stalk  your  deer;

would  you  found  you  a  house,  you  must  quarry  the  stones ;

would  you  build  up  its  walls,  you  must  fell  the  logs,

and  shoulder  them  all  to  the  building-place. —

{His  axe  sinks  down  ;  he  gazes  straight  in  front  of
him.)

Brave  shall  the  building  be.     Tower  and  vane
shall  rise  from  the  roof-tree,  high  and  fair.
And  then  I  will  carve,  for  the  knob  on  the  gable,
a  mermaid,  shaped  like  a  fish  from  the  navel.
Brass  shall  there  be  on  the  vane  and  the  door-locks.
Glass  I  must  see  and  get  hold  of  too.
Strangers,  passing,  shall  ask  amazed
what  that  is  glittering  far  on  the  hillside.

{Laughs  angrily.)

Devil's  own  lies  !    There  they  come  again.
You're  an  outlaw,  lad  !

{Hewing  vigorously^

A  bark-thatched  hovel
is  shelter  enough  both  in  rain  and  frost.

{Looks  up  at  the  tree.)

Now  he  stands  wavering.     There ;  only  a  kick,

^  *'Tyri,"  resinous  pine-wood  which  burns  with  a  bright  blaze.


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  ^y

and  he  topples  and  measures  his  length  on  the  ground  ;—
the  thick-swarming  undergrowth  shudders  around  him  \

{Begins    lopping- the    branches  from    the   trunk;
suddenly  he  listens,  a?id  stands  motionless  with
his  axe  in  the  air.)
There's  some  one  after  me  !— Ay,  are  you  that  sort,
old  Hegstad-churlj— would  you  play  me  false?

{Crouches  behind  the  tree,  and  peeps  over  it)
A  lad  !     One  only.     He  seems  afraid.
He  peers  all  round  him.     What's  that  he  hides
'neath  his  jacket  ?     A  sickle.     He  stops  and  looks  round  -
now  he  lays  his  hand  on  a  fence-rail  flat.  *

What's  this  now?     Why  does  he  lean  like  that ?

Ugh,  ugh  !    Why,  he's  chopped  his  finger  off!

A  whole  finger  off !— He  bleeds  like  an  ox.—

Now  he  takes  to  his  heels  with  his  fist  in  a  clout.

{Rises.)

What  a  devil  of  a  lad  !     An  unmendablei  finger  !

Right  off!    And  with  no  one  compelling  him  to  it !

Ho,  now  I  remember !     It's  only  thus

you  can  'scape  from  having  to  serve  the  King.

That's  it.     They  wanted  to  send  him  soldiering,

and  of  course  the  lad  didn't  want  to  go.—

But  to  chop  off ?     To  sever  for  good  and  all ?

Ay,  thmk  of  it— wish  it  done— ze;/// it  to  boot,—

but  do  it !     No,  that's  past  my  understanding  !

{Shakes  his  head  a  little;   then  goes  on  with  his
work.)


1


"Umistelig"-unIosable,  indispensable,  irreplaceable.


98  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.


SCENE   SECOND.

(A  room  in  Ase's  house.  Every thifig  in  disorder;  boxes
standi?ig  opeft;  wearing  apparel  strewn  around.  A
cat  is  lying  on  the  ded.)

(ASE  a  fid  the  cottar's  wife  are  hard  at  work  packing
things  together  and  putting  them  straight.)

ASE
{running  to  one  side),
Kari,  come  here !

KARI.

What  now  ?

ASE

{on  the  other  side).

Come  here !


Where    is ?      Where    shall    I    find ?      Tell    me

where ?

What  am  I  seeking?     I'm  out  of  my  wits !
Where  is  the  key  of  the  chest  ?

KARL

In  the  key-hole.

ASE.

What  is  that  rumbling?

KARI.

The  last  cart-load
they're  driving  to  Hegstad.


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  99

ASE

{peeping).

How  glad  I'd  ba
in  the  black  chest  myself  to  be  driven  away !
Oh,  what  must  a  mortal  abide  and  live  through !
God  help  me  in  mercy !     The  whole  house  is  bare  !
What  the  Hegstad-churl  left  now  the  Bailiff  ^  has  taken.
Not  even  the  clothes  on  my  back  have  they  spared.
Fie  !     Shame  on  them  all  that  have  judged  so  hardly !

{Seats  herself  on  the  edge  of  the  bed.)
Both  the  land  and  the  farm-place  are  lost  to  our  line;
the  old  man  was  hard,  but  the  law  was  still  harder ; —
there  was  no  one  to  help  me,  and  none  would  show  mercy;
Peer  was  away;  not  a  soul  to  give  counsel.

KARI.

But  here,  in  this  house,  you  may  dwell  till  you  die.

ASE.

Ay,  the  cat  and  I  live  on  charity.

KARL

God  help  you,  mother ;  your  Peer's  cost  you  dear.

ASE.

Peer?     Why,  you're  out  of  your  senses,  sure!

Ingrid  came  home  none  the  worse  in  the  end.

The  right  thing  had  been  to  hold  Satan  to  reckoning ; —

he  was  the  sinner,  ay,  he  and  none  other;

the  ugly  beast  tempted  my  poor  boy  astray !

1  "Lensmand,"  the  lowest  functionary  in  the  Norwegian   official
scale — a  sort  of  parish  officer.


100


Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.


KARI.


Had  I  not  better  send  word  to  the  parson?
Mayhap  you're  worse  than  you  think  you  are.

ASE.

To  the  parson?     Truly  I  ahnost  think  so.

(Starts  uj>.)
But,  oh  God,  I  can't!     I'm  the  boy's  own  mother;
and  help  him  I  must;  it's  no  more  than  my  duty;
I  must  do  what  I  can  when  the  rest  forsake  him.
They've  left  him  this  coat ;  I  must  patch  it  up.
I  wish  I  dared  snap  up  the  fur-rug  as  well !
What's  come  of  the  hose  ?

KARL

They  are  there,  'mid  that  rubbish.

ASE

{rummaging  about).

Why,  what  have  we  here  ?     1  declare  it's  an  old
casting-ladle,  Kari!     With  this  he  would  play
button-moulder,   would  melt,   and   then   shape,    and   then

stamp  them.
One  day — there  was  company — in  the  boy  came,
and  begged  of  his  father  a  lump  of  tin.
"Not  tin,"  says  Jon,  "but  King  Christian's  coin  ;
silver;  to  show  you're  the  son  of  Jon  Gynt."
God  pardon  him,  Jon;  he  was  drunk,  you  see,
and  then  he  cared  neither  for  tin  nor  for  gold.
Here  are  the  hose.     Oh,  they're  nothing  but  holes ;
they  want  darning,  Kari !

KARI.

Indeed  but  they  do.


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  ioi

ASE.

When  that  is  done,  I  must  get  to  bed;

I  feel  so  broken,  and  frail,  and  ill

{Joyfully.)
Two  woollen-shirts,  Kari ; — they've  passed  them  by  !

KARL

So  they  have  indeed.

ASE.

It's  a  bit  of  luck.
One  of  the  two  you  may  put  aside  ;
or  rather,  I  think  we'll  e'en  take  them  both  \ —
the  one  he  has  on  is  so  worn  and  thin.

KARI.

But  oh,  Mother  Ase,  I  fear  it's  a  sin !

ASE.

Maybe ;  but  remember,  the  priest  holds  out
pardon  for  this  and  our  other  sinnings.


SCENE   THIRD.

(/«  front  of  a  settler's  newly-built  hut  in  the  forest.  A
reindeer's  horns  over  the  door.  The  snozv  is  lying
deep  around.     It  is  dusk.)

(peer  gynt  is  standifig  outside  the  door,  fastening  a  large
wooden  bar  to  it.)

PEER

{laughing  betweenwhiles).

Bars  I  must  fix  me ;  bars  that  can  fasten

the  door  against  troll-folk,  and  men,  and  women.


102  Peer  Gvnt.  [Act  iii.

Bars  I  must  fix  me ;  bars  that  can  shut  out
all  the  cantankerous  Httle  hobgobUns. — ■

They  come  with  the  darkness,  they  knock  and  they  rattle  :
Open,  Peer  Gynt,  we're  as  nimble  as  thoughts  are !

'Neath  the  bedstead  we  bustle,  we  rake  in  the  ashes,
down  the  chimney  we  hustle  like  fiery-eyed  dragons.

Hee-hee !  Peer  Gynt ;  think  you  staples  and  planks
can  shut  out  cantankerous  hobgoblin-thoughts  ?

(SOLVEIG  co?7ies  OH  suow-skoes  over  the  heath;  she
has  a  shawl  over  her  head,  and  a  bundle  in
her  hand.)

SOLVEIG.

God  prosper  your  labour.     You  must  not  reject  me.
You  sent  for  me  hither,  and  so  you  must  take  me.

PEER.

Solveig  !     It  cannot  be !     Ay,  but  it  is  ! —

And  you're  not  afi*aid  to  come  near  to  me  !

SOLVEIG.

One  message  you  sent  me  by  little  Helga ;

others  came  after  in  storm  and  in  stillness.

All  that  your  mother  told  bore  me  a  message,

that  brought  forth  others  when  dreams  sank  upon  me.

Nights  full  of  heaviness,  blank,  empty  days,

brought  me  the  message  that  now  I  must  come.

It  seemed  as  though  life  had  been  quenched  down  there ;

I  could  nor  laugh  nor  weep  from  the  depths  of  my  heart.

I  knew  not  for  sure  how  you  might  be  minded ;

I  knew  but  for  sure  what  I  should  do  and  must  do.

PEER.

But  your  father?


Sc.  Hi]  Peer  Gynt.  103

SOLVEIG.

In  all  of  God's  wide  earth
I  have  none  I  can  call  either  father  or  mother.
I  have  loosed  me  from  all  of  them.

PEER.

Solveig,  you  fair  one —
and  to  come  to  me?

SOLVEIG.

Ay,  to  you  alone  ;
you  must  be  all  to  me,  friend  and  consoler.

{/n  fears.)
The  worst  was  leaving  my  little  sister ; —
but  parting  from  father  was  worse,  still  worse ;
and  worst  to  leave  her  at  whose  breast  I  was  borne ; —
oh  no,  God  forgive  me,  the  worst  I  must  call
the  sorrow  of  leaving  them  all,  ay  all !

PEER.

And  you  know  the  doom  that  was  passed  in  spring?
It  forfeits  my  farm  and  my  heritage.

SOLVEIG.

Think  you  for  heritage,  goods,  and  gear,
I  forsook  the  paths  all  my  dear  ones  tread  ?

PEER.

And  know  you  the  compact  ?     Outside  the  forest
whoever  may  meet  me  may  seize  me  at  will.

SOLVEIG.

I  ran  upon  snow-shoes ;  I  asked  my  way  on ;

they  said  '*  Whither  go  you  ?  "  I  answered,  "  I  go  home."


104  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.

PEER.

Away,  away  then  with  nails  and  planks !

No  need  now  for  bars  against  hobgoblin-thoughts.

If  you  dare  dwell  with  the  hunter  here,

I  know  the  hut  will  be  blessed  from  ill.

Solveig  !     Let  me  look  at  you  !     Not  too  near  !

Only  look  at  you  !     Oh,  but  you  are  bright  and  pure !

Let  me  lift  you  !     Oh,  but  you  are  fine  and  light !

Let  me  carry  you,  Solveig,  and  I'll  never  be  tired  !

I  will  not  soil  you.     With  outstretched  arms

I  will  hold  you  far  out  from  me,  lovely  and  warm  one  !

Oh,  who  would  have  thought  I  could  draw  you  to  me, —

ah,  but  I  have  longed  for  you,  daylong  and  nightlong.

Here  you  may  see  I've  been  hewing  and  building ; —

it  must  down  again,  dear;  it  is  ugly  and  mean

SOLVEIG.

Be  it  mean  or  brave, — here  is  all  to  my  mind.
One  so  lightly  draws  breath  in  the  teeth  of  the  wind.
Down  below  it  was  airless  ;  one  felt  as  though  choked  ;
that  was  partly  what  drove  me  in  fear  from  the  dale.
But  here,  with  the  fir-branches  soughing  o'erhead, —
what  a  stillness  and  song  ! — I  am  here  in  my  home.

PEER,

And  know  you  that  surely  ?     For  all  your  days  ?

SOLVEIG.

The  path  I  have  trodden  leads  back  nevermore.

PEER.

You  are  mine  then  !     In  !     In  the  room  let  me  see  you  !
Go  in  !     I  must  go  to  fetch  fir-roots  ^  for  fuel.

^  See  note,  p.  96.


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  105

Warm  shall  the  fire  be  and  bright  shall  it  shine,
you  shall  sit  softly  and  never  be  a-cold.

(He  opens  the  door ;  solveig  goes  in.     He  stands

still  for  a  while,  then  laughs  aloud  with  Joy

and  leaps  into  the  air.)

PEER.

My  king's  daughter !     Now  I  have  found  her  and  won  her  !

Hei !     Now  the  palace  shall  rise,  deeply  founded  !

{He  seizes  his  axe  and  moves  away ;  at  the  same
moment  an  old-looking  woman,  iti  a  tattered
green  gown^  comes  out  from  the  wood ;  an
UGLY  BRAT,  with  an  aleflagon  in  his  hand^
lifjips  after  J  holding  on  to  her  skirt.)

THE  WOMAN.

Good  evening,  Peer  Lightfoot !

PEER.

What  is  it  ?     Who's  there  ?

THE  WOMAN.

Old  friends  of  yours,  Peer  Gynt  !     My  home  is  near  by.
We  are  neighbours.

PEER.

Indeed  ?     That  is  more  than  I  know.

THE  WOMAN.

Even  as  your  hut  was  builded,  mine  built  itself  too.

PEER

{going).
I'm  in  haste


io6  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.

THE  WOMAN.

Yes,  that  you  are  always,  my  lad ;
but  I'll  trudge  behind  you  and  catch  you  at  last.

PEER.

You're  mistaken,  good  woman  !

THE  WOMAN.

I  was  so  before ;
I  was  when  you  promised  such  mighty  fine  things.

PEER.

I  promised ?     What  devil's  own  nonsense  is  this  ?

THE  WOMAN.

You've  forgotten  the  night  when  you  drank  with  my  sire  ?
You've  forgot ?

PEER.

I've  forgot  what  I  never  have  known.
What's  this  that  you  prate  of?     When  last  did  we  meet?

THE   WOMAN.

When  last  we  met  was  when  first  we  met.

{To  THE  BRAT.)

Give  your  father  a  drink ;  he  is  thirsty,  I'm  sure.

PEER.

Father?     You're  drunk,  woman  !     Do  you  call  him ?

THE   WOMAN.

I  should  think  you  might  well  know  the  pig  by  its  skin !
Why,  where  are  your  eyes  ?     Can't  you  see  that  he's  lame
in  his  shank,  just  as  you  too  are  lame  in  your  soul  ?


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  107

PEER.

Would  you  have  me  believe ?

THE  WOMAN.

Would  you  wriggle  away ?

PEER.

This  long-legged  urchin !

THE   WOMAN.

He's  shot  up  apace.

PEER.

Dare  you,  you  troll-snout,  father  on  me ?

THE   WOMAN.

Come  now,  Peer  Gynt,  you're  as  rude  as  an  ox !

( Weeping.)

Is  it  my  fault  if  no  longer  I'm  fair,
as  I  was  when  you  lured  me  on  hillside  and  lea  ?
Last  fall,  in  my  labour,  the  Fiend  held  my  back,
and  so  'twas  no  wonder  I  came  out  a  fright.
But  if  you  would  see  me  as  fair  as  before,
you  have  only  to  turn  yonder  girl  out  of  doors,
drive  her  clean  out  of  your  sight  and  your  mind; —
do  but  this,  dear  my  love,  and  I'll  soon  lose  my  snout !

PEER.

Begone  from  me,  troll-witch !

THE   WOMAN.

Ay,  see  if  I  do  !


io8  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.

PEER.

I'll  split  your  skull  open !

THE   WOMAN.

Just  try  if  you  dare  !
Ho-ho,  Peer  Gynt,  I've  no  fear  of  blows !
Be  sure  I'll  return  every  day  of  the  year.
I'll  set  the  door  ajar  and  peep  in  at  you  both.
When  you're  sitting  with  your  girl  on  the  fireside  bench, —
when  you're  tender.  Peer  Gynt, — when  you'd  pet  and  caress

her, —
I'll  seat  myself  by  you,  and  ask  for  my  share.
She  there  and  I — we  will  take  you  by  turns.
Farewell,  dear  my  lad,  you  can  marry  to-morrow !

PEER.

You  nightmare  of  hell !

THE   WOMAN.

Bythe-bye,  I  forgot !
You  must  rear  your  own  youngster,  you  light-footed  scamp  !
Little  imp,  will  you  go  to  your  father  ?

THE    BRAT

{spits  at  hint).

Faugh !
I'll  chop  you  with  my  hatchet ;  only  wait,  only  wait !

THE   WOMAN

{kisses  THE  brat).

What  a  head  he  has  got  on  his  shoulders,  the  dear !
You'll  be  father's  living  image  when  once  you're  a  man !


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt  109


PEER


(stamping).
Oh,  would  you  were  as  far !

THE    WOMAN.

As  we  now  are  near  ?

PEER

{clenching  his  hands).
And  all  this !

THE   WOMAN.

For  nothing  but  thoughts  and  desires  !
It  is  hard  on  you,  Peer  !

PEER.

It  is  worst  for  another  ! —
Solveig,  my  fairest,  my  purest  gold  !

THE    WOMAN.

Oh  ay,  'tis  the  guiltless  must  smart,  said  the  devil ;
his  mother  boxed  his  ears  when  his  father  was  drunk  !

{She  trudges  off  into  the  thicket  with  the  brat,  who
throws  the  flagon  at  peer  gynt.)

peer
{after  a  long  silence).

The  Boyg  said,  "  Go  roundabout !  " — so  one  must  here. —
There  fell  my  fine  palace,  with  crash  and  clatter  !
There's  a  wall  around  her  whom  I  stood  so  near,
of  a  sudden  all's  ugly — my  joy  has  grown  old. —
Roundabout,  lad  !     There's  no  way  to  be  found
right  through  all  this  from  where  you  stand  to  her.
Right  through  ?     Hm,  surely  there  should  be  one.


1 10  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.

There's  a  text  on  repentance,  unless  I  mistake.
But  what  ?     What  is  it  ?     I  haven't  the  book,
I've  forgotten  it  mostly,  and  here  there  is  none
that  can  guide  me  aright  in  the  pathless  wood. —

Repentance  ?     And  maybe  'twould  take  whole  years,
ere  I  fought  my  way  through.     'Twere  a  meagre  life,  that.
To  shatter  what's  radiant,  and  lovely,  and  pure,
and  clinch  it  together  in  fragments  and  shards?
You  can  do  it  with  a  fiddle,  but  not  with  a  bell.
Where  you'd  have  the  sward  green,  you  must  mind  not  to
trample.

'Twas  nought  but  a  lie  though,  that  witch-snout  business  !
Now  all  that  foulness  is  well  out  of  sight. —
Ay,  out  of  sight  maybe,  not  out  of  mind.
Thoughts  will  sneak  stealthily  in  at  my  heel.
Ingrid  !     And  the  three,  they  that  danced  on  the  heights !
Will  they  too  want  to  join  us  ?     With  vixenish  spite
will  they  claim  to  be  folded,  like  her,  to  my  breast,
to  be  tenderly  lifted  on  outstretched  arms  ?
Roundabout,  lad ;  though  my  arms  were  as  long
as  the  root  of  the  fir,  or  the  pine-tree's  stem, —
I  think  even  then  I  should  hold  her  too  near,
to  set  her  down  pure  and  untarnished  again. —

I  must  roundabout  here,  then,  as  best  I  may,
and  see  that  it  bring  me  nor  gain  nor  loss.
One  must  put  such  things  from  one,  and  try  to  forget. —

{Goes  a  few  steps  towards  the  hut,  but  stops  again.)

Go  in  after  this ?     So  befouled  and  disgraced?
Go  in  with  that  troll-rabble  after  me  still  ?

Speak,  yet  be  silent;  confess,  yet  conceal ?

{Throws  away  his  axe.)

It's  a  holy-day  evening.     For  me  to  keep  tryst,
such  as  now  I  am,  would  be  sacrilege.


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  i  i  i

SOLVEEG

{in  the  doorway).
Are  you  coming  ?

PEER

{half  aloud).
Roundabout !

SOLVEIG.

What?

PEER.

You  must  wait.
It  is  dark,  and  I've  got  something  heavy  to  fetch.

SOLVEIG.

Wait ;  I  will  help  you ;  the  burden  we'll  share.

PEER.

No,  stay  where  you  are  !     I  must  bear  it  alona

SOLVEIG.

But  don't  go  too  far,  dear  !

PEER.

Be  patient,  my  girl ;
be  my  way  long  or  short — you  must  wait.

SOLVEIG

{nodding  to  him  as  he  goes).

Yes,  I'll  wait !

(peer  GYNT  goes  down  the   ivood-path,     solveig
remains  stattdiftg  in  the  open  half -door.)


112  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.


SCENE   FOURTH.

(Ase's  room.  Evening.  The  room  is  lighted  by  a  wood
fire  on  the  open  hearth.  A  cat  is  lying  on  a  chair  at
the  foot  of  the  bed.)

(AsE  lies  in  the  bed^  fumbling  about  restlessly  with  her
ha  fids  on  the  coverlet.)

ASE.

Oh,  Lord  my  God,  isn't  he  coming  ?

The  time  drags  so  drearily  on.
I  have  no  one  to  send  with  a  message ;

and  I've  much,  oh  so  much,  to  say.
I  haven't  a  moment  to  lose  now  !

So  quickly  !     Who  could  have  foreseen  !
Oh  me,  if  I  only  were  certain

I'd  not  been  too  strict  with  him  !

PEER  GYNT

(enters).
Good  evening  !

ASE.

The  Lord  give  you  gladness  !
You've  come  then,  my  boy,  my  dear  !
But  how  dare  you  show  face  in  the  valley?
You  know  your  life's  forfeit  here.

PEER.

Oh,  life  must  e'en  go  as  it  may  go ;
I  felt  that  I  must  look  in.


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  113

ASE.

Ay,  now  Kari  is  put  to  silence,
and  I  can  depart  in  peace  !

PEER.

Depart  ?     Why,  what  are  you  saying  ?
Where  is  it  you  think  to  go  ?

ASE.

Alas,  Peer,  the  end  is  nearing  ;
I  have  but  a  short  time  left.

PEER

{wn'thingy  and  walking  toiuards  the  back  of  the  room).

See  there  now  !  Fm  fleeing  from  trouble  ;

I  thought  at  least  here  Pd  be  free !

Are  your  hands  and  your  feet  a-cold,  then  ?

ASE.

Ay,  Peer ;  all  will  soon  be  o'er. —
When  you  see  that  my  eyes  are  glazing,

you  must  close  them  carefully.
And  then  you  must  see  to  my  coffin ;

and  be  sure  it's  a  fine  one,  dear.
Ah  no,  by-the-bye

PEER.

Be  quiet !
There's  time  yet  to  think  of  that.

ASE.

Ay,  ay.

{Looks  restlessly  around  the  i-oom.)

Here  you  see  the  little
they've  left  us  !     It's  like  them,  just.


114  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.

PEER

{with  a  writhe).
Again  !

{^Harshly.)

Well,  I  know  it  was  my  fault.
What's  the  use  of  reminding  me  ?

ASE.

You  !     No,  that  accursed  liquor,

from  that  all  the  mischief  came  !
Dear  my  boy,  you  know  you'd  been  drinking ;

and  then  no  one  knows  what  he  does ;
and  besides,  you'd  been  riding  the  reindeer;

no  wonder  your  head  was  turned  !

PEER.

Ay,  ay ;  of  that  yarn  enough  now.

Enough  of  the  whole  affair.
All  that's  heavy  we'll  let  stand  over

till  after — some  other  day.

i^Sits  on  the  edge  of  the  bed.)

Now,  mother,  we'll  chat  together ;

but  only  of  this  and  that, —
forget  what's  awry  and  crooked,

and  all  that  is  sharp  and  sore.—
Why  see  now,  the  same  old  pussy;

so  she  is  alive  then,  still  ?

ASE.

She  makes  such  a  noise  o'  nights  now ;
you  know  what  that  bodes,  my  boy !


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  115

PEER

{changifig  the  subject).
What  news  is  there  here  in  the  parish  ?

ASE

{smiling).

There's  somewhere  about,  they  say,
a  girl  who  would  fain  to  the  uplands


PEER

{hastily).
Mads  Moen,  is  he  content  ?

ASE.

They  say  that  she  hears  and  heeds  not
the  old  people's  prayers  and  tears.

You  ought  to  look  in  and  see  them  ; —
you,  Peer,  might  perhaps  bring  help-


PEER.

The  smith,  what's  become  of  him  now?

ASE.

Don't  talk  of  that  filthy  smith.
Her  name  I  would  rather  tell  you,
the  name  of  the  girl,  you  know


PEER.


No,  now  we  will  chat  together,
but  only  of  this  and  that, —

forget  what's  awry  and  crooked,
and  all  that  is  sharp  and  sore.


ii6  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.

Are  you  thirsty  ?     I'll  fetcli  you  water.

Can  you  stretch  you  ?     The  bed  is  short.
Let  me  see ; — if  I  don't  believe,  now,

It's  the  bed  that  I  had  when  a  boy !
Do  you  mind,  dear,  how  oft  in  the  evenings

you  sat  at  my  bedside  here,
and  spread  the  fur-coverlet  o'er  me,

and  sang  many  a  lilt  and  lay?

ASE.

Ay,  mind  you  ?     And  then  we  played  sledges

when  your  father  was  far  abroad.
The  coverlet  served  for  sledge-apron,

and  the  floor  for  an  ice-bound  fiord.

PEER.

Ah,  but  the  best  of  all,  though, —
mother,  you  mind  that  too  ? —
the  best  was  the  fleet-foot  horses


ASE.


Ay,  think  you  that  I've  forgot  ? —

It  was  Kari's  cat  that  we  borrowed  ;

it  sat  on  the  log-scooped  chair


PEER.

To  the  castle  west  of  the  moon,  and
the  castle  east  of  the  sun,

to  Soria-Moria  Castle

the  road  ran  both  high  and  low.

A  stick  that  we  found  in  the  closet,
for  a  whip-shaft  you  made  it  serve.


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  ii;

ASE.

Right  proudly  I  perked  on  the  box-seat

PEER.

Ay,  ay  ;  you  threw  loose  the  reins,
and  kept  turning  round  as  we  travelled,

and  asked  me  if  I  was  cold.
God  bless  you,  ugly  old  mother, —

you  were  ever  a  kindly  soul !

What's  hurting  you  now  ?

ASE.

My  back  aches,
because  of  the  hard,  bare  boards.

PEER.

Stretch  yourself;  I'll  support  you.
There  now,  you're  lying  soft.

ASE

{uneasily).
No,  Peer,  I'd  be  moving !

PEER.

Moving  ?

ASE.

Ay,  moving ;  'tis  ever  my  wish.

PEER.

Oh,  nonsense  !     Spread  o'er  you  the  bed-fur.

Let  me  sit  at  your  bedside  here.
There ;  now  we'll  shorten  the  evening

with  many  a  lilt  and  lay.


ii8  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.

ASE.

Best  bring  from  the  closet  the  prayer-book :
I  feel  so  uneasy  of  soul.

PEER.

In  Soria-Moria  Castle

the  King  and  the  Prince  give  a  feast.
On  the  sledge-cushions  lie  and  rest  you ;

I'll  drive  you  there  over  the  heath


ASE.

But,  Peer  dear,  am  I  invited  ?

PEER.

Ay,  that  we  are,  both  of  us.

(He  throws  a  siring  I'oimd  the  back  of  the  chair  on
which  the  cat  is  lyings  takes  up  a  sticky  and
seats  himself  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.)
Gee-up  1     Will  you  stir  yourself,  Black-boy  ?

Mother,  you're  not  a-cold  ?
Ay,  ay ;  by  the  pace  one  knows  it,
when  Grane^  begins  to  go !

ASE.

Why,  Peer,  what  is  it  that's  ringing ?

PEER.

The  glittering  sledge-bells,  dear !

^  Grane  (Grani)  was  the  name  of  Sigurd  Fafnirsbane's  horse,
descended  from  Odin's  Sleipnir.  Sigurd's  Grane  was  grey;  Peer  Gynt
calls  his  "Svarten,"  Black-boy,  or  Blackey. — See  the  "Voisunga
Saga,"  translated  by  Morris  and  Magnussen.     Camelot  edition,  p.  43.


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  119

ASE.

Oh,  mercy,  how  hollow  it's  rumbling !

PEER.

We're  just  driving  over  a  fiord.

ASE.

I'm  afraid  !     What  is  that  I  hear  rushing
and  sighing  so  strange  and  wild  ?

PEER.

It's  the  sough  of  the  pine-trees,  mother,
on  the  heath.     Do  you  but  sit  still.

ASE.

There's  a  sparkling  and  gleaming  afar  now ;
whence  comes  all  that  blaze  of  light  ?

PEER.

From  the  castle's  windows  and  doorways.
Don't  you  hear,  they  are  dancing  ?

ASE.

Yes.

PEER.

Outside  the  door  stands  Saint  Peter,
and  prays  you  to  enter  in.

ASE.

Does  he  greet  us  ?

PEER,

He  does,  with  honour,
and  pours  out  the  sweetest  wine.


^20  Veer  Gvnt.  [Act  iii.

ASE.

Wine  I     Has  he  cakes  as  well,  Peer  ?

PEER.

Cakes  ?     Ay,  a  heaped-up  dish.
And  the  dean's  wife^  is  getting  ready
your  coriee  and  your  dessert.

ASE.

Oh,  Christ ;  shall  we  two  come  together  ?

PEER.

As  freely  as  ever  you  will.

ASE.

Oh,  deary,  Peer,  what  a  frolic
you're  driving  me  to,  poor  soul !

PEER

{crackmg  his  ivhip).
Gee-up ;  will  you  stir  yourself,  Black-boy  !

ASE.

Peer,  dear,  you're  driving  right  ?

PEER

{cracking  his  whip  again).
Ay,  broad  is  the  way.

ASE.

This  journey,
it  makes  me  so  weak  and  tired.


1  <«


Salig  provstinde,"  literally  ''the  late  Mrs.  Provost."


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  121

PEER.

There's  the  castle  rising  before  us ;
the  drive  will  be  over  soon.

ASE.

I  will  lie  back  and  close  my  eyes  then,
and  trust  me  to  you,  my  boy !

PEER.

Come  up  with  you,  Grane,  my  trotter  !

In  the  castle  the  throng  is  great ;
they  bustle  and  swarm  to  the  gateway.

Peer  Gynt  and  his  mother  are  here !
What  say  you,  Master  Saint  Peter  ?

Shall  mother  not  enter  in  ?
You  may  search  a  long  time,  I  tell  you,

ere  you  find  such  an  honest  old  soul.
Myself  I  don't  want  to  speak  of;

I  can  turn  at  the  castle  gate.
If  you'll  treat  me,  I'll  take  it  kindly ;

if  not,  I'll  go  off  just  as  pleased.
I  have  made  up  as  many  flim-flams

as  the  devil  at  the  pulpit-desk,
and  called  my  old  mother  a  hen,  too,

because  she  would  cackle  and  crow.
But  her  you  shall  honour  and  reverence,

and  make  her  at  home  indeed ;
there  comes  not  a  soul  to  beat  her

from  the  parishes  nowadays. —
Ho-ho ;  here  comes  God  the  Father !

Saint  Peter  !  you're  in  for  it  now  !

(/«  a  deep  voice.)


122  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iii.

"  Have  done  with  these  jack-in-office  airs,  sir  ;
Mother  Ase  shall  enter  free  ! "

{Laughs  loudly^  and  turns  towards  his  mother.)

Ay,  didn't  I  know  what  would  happen  ?
Now  they  dance  to  another  tune  !

{^Uneasily!)

Why,  what  makes  your  eyes  so  glassy  ?

Mother  !     Have  you  gone  out  of  your  wits ?

i^Goes  to  the  head  of  the  bed.)

You  mustn't  lie  there  and  stare  so !

Speak,  mother ;  it's  I,  your  boy  !

{Feels  her  forehead  and  hands   cautiously ;    then
throws  the  string  on  the  chair ^  and  says  softly:)

Ay,  ay  ! — You  can  rest  yourself,  Grane ;
for  even  now  the  journey's  done.

{Closes  her  eyes,  and  bends  over  her.)

For  all  of  your  days  I  thank  you,

for  beatings  and  lullabys  ! —
But  see,  you  must  thank  me  back,  now —

{Presses  his  cheek  agaitist  her  mouth.)

There  ;  that  was  the  driver's  fare.^

THE   cottar's    wife

{etitering).

What  ?     Peer  !     Ah,  then  we  are  over

the  worst  of  the  sorrow  and  need  !
Dear  Lord,  but  she's  sleeping  soundly —

or  can  she  be ?

^  Takfor  skyds,  literally  '*  thanks  for  the  drive.'*


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  123

PEER.

Hush  ;  she  is  dead.
(kari  weeps  beside  the  body  ;  peer  gynt  ivalks  tip
and  down  the  room  for  some  time  ;  at  last  he
stops  beside  the  bed.)

peer.

See  mother  buried  with  honour.
I  must  try  to  fare  forth  from  here.

KARL

Are  you  faring  afar?

peer.
To  seaward.

KARI.

So  far  !

PEER.

Ay,  and  further  still.

(He  goes.)


124  i'EER   GyNT.  [Act  iv.


ACT  FOURTH.

SCENE   FIRST.

{On  the  south-west  coast  of  Morocco.  A  palm-grove.
Utider  a?t  awning,  on  ground  covered  with  mat-
ting, a  table  spread  for  dinner.  Further  back  in
the  grove  hammocks  are  slu7tg.  In  the  offijtg  lies  a
steam-yacht^  flying  the  A^orwegian  and  Afnerican
colours.  A  jolly-boat  drawn  up  on  the  beach.  It  is
towards  sunset.)

(peer  gynt,  a  handsojne  middle-aged  gentleman,  in  an
elegant  travelling-dress,  with  a  gold-rimmed  double  eye-
glass hanging  at  his  tuaistcoat,  is  doing  the  honours  at
the  head  of  the  table,    mr.  cotton,^  monsieur  ballon,

HERR  VON  EBERKOPF,  a7ld  HERR  TRUMPETERSTRALE,^

are  seated  at  the  table  finis  hi Jtg  dinner.)

PEER   GYNT.

Drink,  gentlemen  !     If  man  is  made

for  pleasure,  let  him  take  his  fill  then.

You  know  'tis  written  :  Lost  is  lost,

and  gone  is  gone .     What  may  I  hand  you  ?

TRUMPETERSTRALE.

As  host  you're  princely,  Brother  Gynt !

1  In  the  original,  "  Master  Cotton."

^  A  Swede.     The  name  means  *'  trumpet-blast."


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  125

PEER.

I  share  the  honour  with  my  cash,
with  cook  and  steward

MR.    COTTON.

Very  well  ^^
let's  pledge  a  toast  to  all  the  four !

MONSIEUR   BALLON.

Monsieur,^  you  have  a  goufy'^  a  fon^^
that  nowadays  is  seldom  met  with
among  men  living  e?i  garfo;i, — ^
a  certain — what's  the  word ?

VON   EBERKOPF.

A  dash,
a  tinge  of  free  soul-contemplation,
and  cosmopolitanisation,^
an  outlook  through  the  cloudy  rifts
by  narrow  prejudice  unhemmed,
a  stamp  of  high  illumination,
an  Ur-Natur^'^  with  lore  of  life,
to  crown  the  trilogy,  united.
Nicht  wahr^  Monsieur,  'twas  that  you  meant  ?

MONSIEUR   BALLON.

Yes,  very  possibly ;  not  quite
so  loftily  it  sounds  in  French.

^  In  the  original  (early  editions),  "  Werry  well."

2  So  in  original.

^  This  may  not  be  a  very  lucid  or  even  very  precise  rendering  of  Ver-
densborgerdomsforfagtning;  but  this  line,  and  indeed  the  whole  speech,
is  pure  burlesque  j  and  the  exact  sense  of  nonsense  is  naturally  elusive.


126  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.


VON  EBERKOPF.

Eiwas  f^     That  language  is  so  stiff. —
But  the  phenomenon's  final  cause
if  we  would  seek

PEER.

It's  found  already.
The  reason  is  that  I'm  unmarried.
Yes,  gentlemen,  completely  clear
the  matter  is.     What  should  a  man  be  ?
Hwiself^  is  my  concise  reply.
He  should  regard  htjnself  Sind  his.
But  can  he,  as  a  sumpter-mule  ^
for  others'  woe  and  others'  weal  ?

VON  EBERKOPF.

But  this  same  in-and-for-yourself-ness,
I'll  answer  for't,  has  cost  you  strife


PEER.

Ah  yes,  indeed  ;  in  former  days  ;
but  always  I  came  off  with  honour.
Yet  one  time  I  ran  very  near
to  being  trapped  against  my  will.
I  was  a  brisk  and  handsome  lad,
and  she  to  whom  my  heart  was  given,
she  was  of  royal  family


Of  royal-


MONSIEUR  BALLON.


^  So  in  original.

2  Literally,  "pack-camel."


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  127

PEER

(carelessly).

One  of  those  old  stocks,
you  know  the  kind

trumpeterstrAle
{thumping  the  table).

Those  noble-trolls !

PEER

{shruggi?ig  his  shoulders).

Old  fossil  Highnesses  who  make  it
their  pride  to  keep  plebeian  blots
excluded  from  their  line's  escutcheon.

MR.  COTTON.

Then  nothing  came  of  the  affair  ?

MONSIEUR   BALLON.

The  family  opposed  the  marriage  ?

PEER.

Far  from  it  !

MONSIEUR  BALLON.

Ah!

PEER

{with  for  bear  a  nee).

You  understand
that  certain  circumstances  made  for
their  marrying  us  without  delay.
But,  truth  to  tell,  the  whole  affair
was,  first  to  last,  distasteful  to  me.


128  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

I'm  finical  in  certain  ways,

and  like  to  stand  on  my  own  feet.

And  when  my  father-in-law  came  out

with  delicately  veiled  demands

that  I  should  change  my  name  and  station,

and  undergo  ennoblement,

with  much  else  that  was  most  distasteful,

not  to  say  quite  inacceptable, —

why  then  I  gracefully  withdrew,

point-blank  declined  his  ultimatum —

and  so  renounced  my  youthful  bride.

{Drums  on  the  table  with  a  devout  air.)
Yes,  yes ;  there  is  a  ruling  Fate  !
On  that  we  mortals  may  rely ;
and  'tis  a  comfortable  knowledge.

MONSIEUR  BALLON.

And  so  the  matter  ended,  eh  ?

PEER.

Oh  no,  far  otherwise  I  found  it ;
for  busy-bodies  mixed  themselves,
with  furious  outcries,  in  the  business.
The  juniors  of  the  clan  were  worst ;
with  seven  of  them  I  fought  a  duel.
That  time  I  never  shall  forget,
though  I  came  through  it  all  in  safety.
It  cost  me  blood  ;  but  that  same  blood
attests  the  value  of  my  person,
and  points  encouragingly  towards
the  wise  control  of  Fate  aforesaid.

VON  EBERKOPF.

Your  outlook  on  the  course  of  life
exalts  you  to  the  rank  of  thinker.


Sc  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  129

Whilst  the  mere  commonplace  empiric
sees  separately  the  scattered  scenes,
and  to  the  last  goes  groping  on,
you  in  one  glance  can  focus  all  things.
One  norm^  to  all  things  you  apply.
You  point  each  random  rule  of  life,
till  one  and  all  diverge  like  rays
from  one  full-orbed  philosophy. —
And  you  have  never  been  to  college  ?

PEER,

I  am,  as  I've  already  said,
exclusively  a  self-taught  man.
Methodically  naught  I've  learned  ;
but  I  have  thought  and  speculated,
and  done  much  desultory  reading.
I  started  somewhat  late  in  life,
and  then,  you  know,  it's  rather  hard
to  plough  ahead  through  page  on  page,
and  take  in  all  of  everything.
I've  done  my  history  piecemeal ;
I  never  have  had  time  for  more.
And,  as  one  needs  in  days  of  trial
some  certainty  to  place  one's  trust  in,
I  took  religion  intermittently.
That  way  it  goes  more  smoothly  down.
One  should  not  read  to  swallow  all,
but  rather  see  what  one  has  use  for.

MR.  COTTON.

Ay,  that  is  practical !

^  So  in  orisinal.


130  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

PEER

{lights  a  cigar).

Dear  friends,
just  think  of  my  career  in  general.
In  what  case  came  I  to  the  West  ?
A  poor  young  fellow,  empty-handed.
I  had  to  battle  sore  for  bread ;
trust  me,  I  often  found  it  hard.
But  life,  my  friends,  ah,  life  is  dear,
and,  as  the  phrase  goes,  death  is  bitter.
Well  !  Luck,  you  see,  was  kind  to  me ;
old  Fate,  too,  was  accommodating.
I  prospered  ;  and,  by  versatility,
I  prospered  better  still  and  better.
In  ten  years'  time  I  bore  the  name
of  Croesus  'mongst  the  Charleston  shippers.
My  fame  flew  wide  from  port  to  port,
and  fortune  sailed  on  board  my  vessels ■

MR.  COTTON.

What  did  you  trade  in  ?

PEER.

I  did  most
in  negro  slaves  for  Carolina,
and  idol-images  for  China.

MONSIEUR  BALLON.

M  done  !^

trumpeterstrAle.
The  devil.  Uncle  Gynt  !

^  So  in  original.


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  131

PEER.

You  think,  no  doubt,  the  business  hovered

on  the  outer  verge  of  the  allowable  ?

Myself  I  felt  the  same  thing  keenly.

It  struck  me  even  as  odious.

But,  trust  me,  when  you've  once  begun,

it's  hard  to  break  away  again.

At  any  rate  it's  no  light  thing,

in  such  a  vast  trade-enterprise,

that  keeps  whole  thousands  in  employ,

to  break  off  wholly,  once  for  alL

That  "  once  for  all "  I  can't  abide,

but  own,  upon  the  other  side,

that  I  have  always  felt  respect

for  what  are  known  as  consequences;

and  that  to  overstep  the  bounds

has  ever  somewhat  daunted  me.

Besides,  I  had  begun  to  age,

was  getting  on  towards  the  fifties ; —

my  hair  was  slowly  growing  grizzled ;

and,  though  my  health  was  excellent,

yet  painfully  the  thought  beset  me :

Who  knows  how  soon  the  hour  may  strike,

the  jury- verdict  be  delivered

that  parts  the  sheep  and  goats  asunder  ?

What  could  I  do  ?    To  stop  the  trade
with  China  was  impossible.
A  plan  I  hit  on — opened  straightway
a  new  trade  with  the  self-same  land.
I  shipped  off  idols  every  spring,
each  autumn  sent  forth  missionaries,
supplying  them  with  all  they  needed,
as  stockings,  Bibles,  rum,  and  rice


132  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

MR.    COTTON.


Yes,  at  a  profit  ?


PEER.


Why,  of  course.
It  prospered.     Dauntlcssly  they  toiled.
For  every  idol  that  was  sold
they  got  a  coolie  well  baptised,
so  that  the  effect  was  neutralised.
The  mission-field  lay  never  fallow,
for  still  the  idol-propaganda
the  missionaries  held  in  check.

MR.    COTTON.

Well,  but  the  African  commodities  ?

PEER.

There,  too,  my  ethics  won  the  day.

I  saw  the  traffic  was  a  wrong  one

for  people  of  a  certain  age.

One  may  drop  off  before  one  dreams  of  it.

And  then  there  were  the  thousand  pitfalls

laid  by  the  philanthropic  camp ;

besides,  of  course,  the  hostile  cruisers,

and  all  the  wind-and-weather  risks.

All  this  together  won  the  day.

I  thought:  Now,  Peter,  ^  reef  your  sails;

see  to  it  you  amend  your  faults  !

So  in  the  South  I  bought  some  land,

and  kept  the  last  meat-importation,

which  chanced  to  be  a  superfine  one.

They  throve  so,  grew  so  fat  and  sleek,

that  'twas  a  joy  to  me,  and  them  too.

^  So  in  original.


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  133

Yes,  without  boasting,  I  may  say

I  acted  as  a  father  to  them, —

and  found  my  profit  in  so  doing.

I  built  them  schools,  too,  so  that  virtue

might  uniformly  be  maintained  at

a  certain  general  fiiveaii^

and  kept  strict  watch  that  never  its

thermometer  should  sink  below  it.

Now,  furthermore,  from  all  this  business

I've  beat  a  definite  retreat ; —

I've  sold  the  whole  plantation,  and

its  tale  of  live-stock,  hide  and  hair.

At  parting,  too,  I  served  around,

to  big  and  little,  gratis  grog,^

so  men  and  women  all  got  drunk,

and  widows  got  their  snuff  as  well.

So  that  is  why  I  trust, — provided

the  saying  is  not  idle  breath  :

Whoso  does  not  do  ill,  does  good, —

my  former  errors  are  forgotten,

and  I,  much  more  than  most,  can  hold

my  misdeeds  balanced  by  my  virtues.

VON    EBERKOPF

{clmking  glasses  with  Mm),
Hovv  strengthening  it  is  to  hear
a  principle  thus  acted  out,
freed  from  the  night  of  theory,
unshaken  by  the  outward  ferment !

PEER

{tvho  has  been  dri7iking  freely  during  the  pxceding passages).
We  Northland  men  know  how  to  carry
our  battle  through !     The  key  to  the  art

^  So  in  original.


134  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

of  life's  affairs  is  simply  this  :

to  keep  one's  ear  close  shut  against

the  ingress  of  one  dangerous  viper.

MR.  COTTON.

What  sort  of  viper,  pray,  dear  friend  ?

PEER.

A  little  one  that  slyly  wiles  you
to  tempt  the  irretrievable.

{Drinking  again.)
The  essence  of  the  art  of  daring,
the  art  of  bravery  in  act,
is  this  :  To  stand  with  choice-free  foot
amid  the  treacherous  snares  of  life, —
to  know  for  sure  that  other  days
remain  beyond  the  day  of  battle, —
to  know  that  ever  in  the  rear
a  bridge  for  your  retreat  stands  open
This  theory  has  borne  me  on,
has  given  my  whole  career  its  colour;
and  this  same  theory  I  inherit,
a  race-gift,  from  my  childhood's  home.

MONSIEUR    BALLON.

You  are  Norwesrian  ?

o

PEER.

Yes,  by  birth ;
but  cosmopolitan  in  spirit.
For  fortune  such  as  I've  enjoyed
I  have  to  thank  America.
My  amply-furnished  library
I  owe  to  Germany's  later  schools.


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  135

From  France,  again,  I  get  my  waistcoats,
my  manners,  and  my  spice  of  wit, —
from  England  an  industrious  hand,
and  keen  sense  for  my  own  advantage.
The  Jew  has  taught  me  how  to  wait.
Some  taste  for  dolce  far  niente^
I  have  received  from  Italy, —
and  one  time,  in  a  perilous  pass,
to  eke  the  measure  of  my  days,
I  had  recourse  to  Swedish  steel.

trumpeterstrAle
{lifting  up  his  glass).


Ay,  Swedish  steel-


VON   EBERKOPF.


The  weapon's  wielder
demands  our  homage  first  of  all !

( They  clink  glasses  and  dririk  with  hifn.      The  wine
begins  to  go  to  his  head.)


MR.    COTTON.


All  this  is  very  good  indeed  ; —

but,  sir,i  I'm  curious  to  know

what  with  your  gold  you  think  of  doing.


Hm  ;  doing  ?     Eh  ?


PEER

{smiling).

ALL    FOUR

{coming  close?-).

Yes,  let  us  hear  !

^  So  in  original.


i3<3  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

PEER.

Well,  first  of  all,  I  want  to  travel.
You  see,  that's  why  I  shipped  you  four,
to  keep  me  company,  at  Gibraltar.
I  needed  such  a  dancing-choir
of  friends  around  my  gold-calf-altar

VON   EBERKOPF.

Most  witty !

MR.    COTTON.

Well,  but  no  one  hoists
his  sails  for  nothing  but  the  sailing.
Beyond  all  doubt,  you  have  a  goal ;
and  that  is ?

PEER.

To  be  Emperor.^

ALL   FOUR.


What?


Emperor !


PEER

{nodding).

THE    FOUR.

Where  ?


PEER.

O'er  all  the  world.


MONSIEUR    EALLON.

But  how,  friend ?

Mn  the  original   "kejser."     We  have  elsewhere  used  the  word
Kaiser,     but  in  this  scene,  and  in  Scenes  7  and  8  of  this  act,  the
ordinary  Enghsh  form  seemed  preferable.


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  137

PEER.

By  the  might  of  gold !
That  plan  is  not  at  all  a  new  one ;
it's  been  the  soul  of  my  career.
Even  as  a  boy,  I  swept  in  dreams
far  o'er  the  ocean  on  a  cloud.
I  soared  with  train  and  golden  scabbard, —
and  flopped  down  on  all-fours  again.
But  still  my  goal,  my  friends,  stood  fast. —
There  is  a  text,  or  else  a  saying,
somewhere,  I  don't  remember  where,
that  if  you  gained  the  whole  wide  world,
but  lost  yourse/fj  your  gain  were  but
a  garland  on  a  cloven  skull.
That  is  the  text — or  something  like  it ;
and  that  remark  is  sober  truth.

VON    EBERKOPF.

But  what  then  is  the  Gyntish  Self?

PEER.

The  world  behind  my  forehead's  arch,
in  force  of  which  I'm  no  one  else
than  I,  no  more  than  God's  the  Devil.

TRUMPETERSTRALE.

I  understand  now  where  you're  aiming  !

MONSIEUR    BALLON.

Thinker  sublime  !

VON    EBERKOPF.

Exalted  poet !


138  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

PEER

{}?iore  and  more  elevated).

The  Gyntish  Self — it  is  the  host

of  wishes,  appetites,  desires, —

the  Gyntish  Self,  it  is  the  sea

of  fancies,  exigencies,  claims,

all  that,  in  short,  makes  my  breast  heave,

and  whereby  I,  as  I,  exist.

But  as  our  Lord  requires  the  clay

to  constitute  him  God  o'  the  world,

so  T,  too,  stand  in  need  of  gold,

if  I  as  Emperor  would  figure.

MONSIEUR   BALLON.

You  have  the  gold,  though  !

PEER.

Not  enough.
Ay,  maybe  for  a  nine-days'  flourish,
as  Emperor  h  la^  Lippe-Detmold.
But  I  must  be  myself  en  bloc^
must  be  the  Gynt  of  all  the  planet.
Sir  Gynt  ^  throughout,  from  top  to  toe  !

MONSIEUR    BALLON

{enraptiwed).
Possess  the  earth's  most  exquisite  beauty  !

VON    EBERKOPF.

All  century-old  Johannisberger  !

TRUMPETERSTRALE.

And  all  the  blades  of  Charles  the  Twelfth  !

'  So  in  original.


Sc.  ].]  Peer  Gynt.  139

MR.    COTTON.

But  first  a  profitable  opening
for  business

PEER.

That's  already  found ;
our  anchoring  here  supplied  me  with  it.
To-night  we  set  off  northward  ho  !
The  papers  I  received  on  board

have  brouglit  me  tidings  of  importance !

{Rises  with  uplifted  glass.)
It  seems  that  Fortune  ceaselessly
aids  him  who  has  the  pluck  to  seize  it


Well  ?     Tell  us —


What !  Greece ?


THE   GUESTS.
PEER.

Greece  is  in  revolt.

ALL    FOUR

{springing  up).

PEER.

The  Greeks  have  risen  in  Hellas.

THE    FOUR.


Hurrah  !


PEER.

And  Turkey's  in  a  fix  !

{EfHpties  his  glass.)

^LONSIEUR    BALLON.

To  Hellas  !     Glory's  gate  stands  open  !
I'll  help  them  with  the  sword  of  France  !


I40  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

VON    EBERKOPF.

And  I  with  war-whoops — from  a  distance

MR.    COTTON.

And  I  as  well — by  taking  contracts  !

trumpeterstrAle.

Lead  on  !     I'll  find  again  in  Bender
the  world-renowned  spur-strap-buckles  !^

MONSIEUR   BALLON

{falling  on  peer  gynt's  neck).

Forgive  me,  friend,  that  I  at  first
misjudged  you  quite  !

VON   EBERKOPF

{pressing  his  hajtds).

I,  stupid  hound,
took  you  for  next  door  to  a  scoundrel !

MR.    cotton.

Too  strong  that ;  only  for  a  fool

TRUMPETERSTRALE

{tryitig  to  kiss  him),

I,  Uncle,  for  a  specimen

of  Yankee  riff-raff's  meanest  spawn !

Forgive  me !

1  An  allusion  to  the  spurs  with  which  Charles  XII.  is  said  to  have
torn  the  caftan  of  the  Turkish  Vizier  who  announced  to  him  that  the
Sultan  had  concluded  a  truce  with  Russia.  The  boots  and  spurs,  it
would  appear,  have  been  preserved,  but  with  the  buckles  missing.


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  141


VON  EBERKOPF.

We've  been  in  the  dark-


PEER.

What  stuff  is  this  ?

VON  EBERKOPF.

We  now  see  gathered
in  glory  all  the  Gyntish  host
of  wishes,  appetites,  and  desires !

MONSIEUR  BALLON

(admi?'i?igly).
So  this  is  being  Monsieur^  Gynt!

VON  EBERKOPF

{in  the  same  tone).
This  I  call  being  Gynt  with  honour!

PEER.

But  tell  me ?

MONSIEUR  BALLON.

Don't  you  understand  ?

PEER.

May  I  be  hanged  if  I  begin  to !

MONSIEUR  BALLON.

What?     Are  you  not  upon  your  way

to  join  the  Greeks,  with  ship  and  money ?

^  So  in  original.


142  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

PEER

{contanptiiously).

No,  many  thanks  !     I  side  with  strength,
and  lend  my  money  to  the  Turks.

MONSIEUR  BALLON.

Impossible !

.     VON  EBERKOPF.

Witty,  but  a  jest !

PEER

{after  a  short  silence^  leanhig  on  a  chair  and  assuming
a  dignified  mien).

Come,  gentlemen,  I  think  it  best

we  part  before  the  last  remains

of  friendship  melt  away  like  smoke.

Who  nothing  owns  will  lightly  risk  it.

When  in  the  world  one  scarce  commands

the  strip  of  earth  one's  shadow  covers,

one's  born  to  serve  as  food  for  powder.

But  when  a  man  stands  safely  landed,

as  I  do,  then  his  stake  is  greater.

Go  you  to  Hellas.     I  will  put  you

ashore,  and  arm  you  gratis  too.

The  more  you  eke  the  flames  of  strife,

the  better  will  it  serve  my  purpose.

Strike  home  for  freedom  and  for  right !

Fight !  storm  !  make  hell  hot  for  the  Turks;—

and  gloriously  end  your  days

upon  the  Janissaries  lances. —

But  I — excuse  me

{Slaps  his  pocket.)


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  143

I  have  cash,
and  am  myself,  Sir  Peter  Gynt.^

{Puts  up  his  sunshade^  and  goes  into  the  grove,  where
the  hanunocks  are  partly  visible^


The  swinish  cur!


TRUMPETERSTRALE.
MONSIEUR    BALLON.

No  taste  for  glory !

MR.  COTTON.

Oh,  glory's  neither  here  nor  there ;
but  think  of  the  enormous  profits
we'd  reap  if  Greece  should  free  herself.

MONSIEUR  BALLON.

I  saw  myself  a  conqueror,

by  lovely  Grecian  maids  encircled.

trumpeterstrAle.

Grasped  in  my  Swedish  hands,  I  saw
the  great,  heroic  spur-strap-buckles  !

VON  eberkopf.

I  my  gigantic  Fatherland's

culture  saw  spread  o'er  earth  and  sea !

MR.  cotton.

The  worst's  the  loss  in  solid  cash.

God  dam!^     I  scarce  can  keep  from  weeping!

I  saw  me  owner  of  Olympus.

^  So  in  original.


144  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

If  to  its  fame  the  mountain  answers,

there  must  be  veins  of  copper  in  it,

that  could  be  opened  up  again.

And  furthermore,  that  stream  Castalia,^

which  people  talk  so  much  about,

with  fall  on  fall,  at  lowest  reckoning,

must  mean  a  thousand  horse-power  good !

trumpeterstrAle.

Still  I  will  go!     My  Swedish  sword
is  worth  far  more  than  Yankee  gold !

MR.  COTTON.

Perhaps;  but,  jammed  into  the  ranks,
amid  the  press  we'd  all  be  drowned ;
and  then  where  would  the  profit  be  ?

MONSIEUR  BALLON.

Accurst !     So  near  to  fortune's  summit,
and  now  stopped  short  beside  its  grave!

MR.  COTTON

{shakes  his  fist  towards  the  yacht).

That  long  black  chest  holds  coffered  up
the  nabob's  golden  nigger-sweat !

VON    EBERKOPF.

A  royal  notion  !     Quick  !     Away  !
It's  all  up  with  his  empire  now  !
Hurrah  !

MONSIEUR    BALLON.

What  would  you  ?
^  Mr.  Cotton  seems  to  have  confounded  Olympus  with  Parnassus,


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  145


VON    EBERKOPF.


Seize  the  power  !
The  crew  can  easily  be  bought.
On  board  then  !     I  annex  the  yacht


You — what-


MR.    COTTON.

-?

VON   EBERKOPF.

I  grab  the  whole  concern  !
{Goes  down  to  the  jolly-boat.)

MR.    COTTON.

Why  then  self-interest  commands  me
to  grab  my  share.

{Goes  after  him.)

trumpeterstrAle.
What  scoundrelism  !

monsieur    BALLON.

A  scurvy  business — but — enfift  !  ^

{Follows  the  others. )

TRUMPETERSTRALE.

I'll  have  to  follow,  I  suppose, —
but  I  protest  to  all  the  world I'^

{Follows.)

^  So  in  original.

^  An  allusion  to  the  attitude  of  Sweden  during  the  Danish  War  of
1863-64,  with  special  reference  to  the  diplomatic  notes  of  the  Minister
for  Foreign  Affairs,  Grev  Manderbtrom.  He  is  also  aimed  at  in  the
character  of  Hussein  in  the  last  scene  of  this  act.  See  Introduction,
page  xiii.

ID


14^  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.


SCENE   SECOND.

{Another  part  of  the  coast.     Moonlight  with  dj'ifting  clouds.

The  yacht  is  seen  far  out,  underfill  steam.)
(peer  gynt  comes  running  along  the  beach  ;  now  pinching

his  armSy  now  gazing  out  to  sea.)

PEER.

A  nightmare  ! — Delusion  ! — I'll  soon  be  awake  !
She's  standing  to  sea  !     And  at  furious  speed  ! —
Mere  delusion  !     I'm  sleeping  !     I'm  dizzy  and  drunk  !

(^Clenches  his  hands.)
It's  not  possible  I  should  be  going  to  die  !

{Tearing  his  hair.)
A  dream  !     I'm  determined  it  shall  be  a  dream  !
Oh,  horror  !     It's  only  too  real,  worse  luck  !

My  brute-beasts  of  friends !     Do  but  hear  me,  oh  Lord  !

Since  thou  art  so  wise  and  so  righteous !    Oh  judge !

( With  upstr etched  ar7?is.)

It  is  I,  Peter^  Gynt !     Oh,  our  Lord,  give  but  heed  !
Hold  thy  hand  o'er  me,  Father  ;  or  else  I  must  perish  !
Make  them  back  the  machine  !     Make  them  lower  the  gig  !
Stop  the  robbers  !     Make  something  go  wrong  with  the

rigging  !
Hear  me  !     Let  other  folks'  business  lie  over  !
The  world  can  take  care  of  itself  for  the  time  ! —
I'm  blessed  if  he  hears  me  !     He's  deaf  as  his  wont  is  !
Here's  a  nice  thing  !     A  God  that  is  bankrupt  of  help  !
{Beckons  upwards.)

^  So  in  original.


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  147

Hist !    I've  abandoned  the  nigger-plantation  !
And  missionaries  I've  exported  to  Asia  !
Surely  one  good  turn  should  be  worth  another  !
Oh,  help  me  on  board !

(A  jet  of  fire  shoots  into  the  air  from  the  yacht^
follotved  by  thick  clouds  of  smoke ;  a  hollow
report  is  heard,  peer  gynt  utters  a  shriek^
and  sinks  down  on  the  sands.  Gradually  the
smoke  clears  aivay ;  the  ship  has  disappeared.")

PEER

{softly^  with  a  pale  face).

That's  the  sword  of  wrath  !
In  a  crack  to  the  bottom,  every  soul,  man  and  mouse  !
Oh,  for  ever  blest  be  the  lucky  chance

( With  emotion^

A  chance  ?     No,  no,  it  was  more  than  chance.
I  was  to  be  rescued  and  they  to  perish.
Oh,  thanks  and  praise  for  that  thou  hast  kept  me,
hast  cared  for  me,  spite  of  all  my  sins  ! —
{Draws  a  deep  breath.)
What  a  marvellous  feeling  of  safety  and  peace
it  gives  one  to  know  oneself  specially  shielded  !
But  the  desert  !     What  about  food  and  drink  ?
Oh,  something  I'm  sure  to  find.     He'll  see  to  that.
There's  no  cause  for  alarm ; —

{Loud  and  insinuatingly.)

He  would  never  allow
a  poor  little  sparrow  like  me  to  perish !
Be  but  lowly  of  spirit.     And  give  him  time.
Leave  it  all  in  the  Lord's  hands;  and  don't  be  cast  down. — •

(  With  a  start  of  terror.)


148  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

Can  that  be  a  lion  that  growled  in  the  reeds ?

{^His  teeth  chattering.^
No,  it  wasn't  a  lion.

{Mustering  up  courage.)
A  lion,  forsooth !
Those  beasts,  they'll  take  care  to  keep  out  of  the  way.
They  know  it's  no  joke  to  fall  foul  of  their  betters.
They  have  instinct  to  guide  them ; — they  feel,  what's  a  fact,
that  it's  dangerous  playing  with  elephants. —

But  all  the  same .     I  must  find  a  tree.

There's  a  grove  of  acacias  and  palms  over  there ;
if  I  once  can  climb  up,  I'll  be  sheltered  and  safe, —
most  of  all  if  I  knew  but  a  psalm  or  two.

{Clambers  up.)

Morning  and  evening  are  not  alike ;

that  text  has  been  oft  enough  weighed  and  pondered.

{Seats  himself  comfortably^

How  blissful  to  feel  so  uplifted  in  spirit.

To  think  nobly  is  more  than  to  know  oneself  rich.

Only  trust  in  Him.     He  knows  well  what  share

of  the  chalice  of  need  I  can  bear  to  drain.

He  takes  fatherly  thought  for  my  personal  weal ; —

{Casts  a  glaftce  over  the  sea^  and  whispers  with
a  sigh  :)

but  economical — no,  that  he  isn't !


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  149


SCENE   TI-IIRD.

{A'ight.  An  encampment  of  Moroccan  troops  on  the  edge
of  the  desert.  Watch-fii'es^  with  soldiers  resting  by
them.)

A    SLAVE

{enters,  tearing  his  hair).
Gone  is  the  Emperor's  milk-white  charger  !

ANOTHER    SLAVE

(enters,  re?iding  his  garments).
The  Emperor's  sacred  robes  are  stolen  !

AN    OFFICER

{enters).

A  hundred  stripes  upon  the  foot-soles
for  all  who  fail  to  catch  the  robber  !

{The  troopers  mount  their  horses,  and  gallop  away
in  every  direction.)


SCENE   FOURTH.

{Daybreak.     The  grove  of  acacias  and  palms.)
(peer  gynt  i7t  his  tree  with  a  broken  branch  in  his  ha7id,
tryitig  to  beat  off  a  swarm  of  monkeys. )

PEER.

Confound  it !     A  most  disagreeable  night.
{Laying  about  hi^n.)


1 50  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

Arc  you  there  again  ?     This  is  most  accursed  !
Now  they're  throwing  fruit.     No,  it's  something  else.
A  loathsome  beast  is  your  Barbary  ape  !
The  Scripture  says  :  Thou  shalt  watch  and  fight.
But  I'm  blest  if  I  can ;  I  am  heavy  and  tired.

(Is  again  attacked ;  impatiently :)
I  must  put  a  stopper  upon  this  nuisance  !
I  must  see  and  get  hold  of  one  of  these  scamps,
get  him  hung  and  skinned,  and  then  dress  myself  up,
as  best  I  may,  in  his  shaggy  hide,
that  the  others  may  take  me  for  one  of  themselves. —
What  are  we  mortals  ?     Motes,  no  more ;
and  it's  wisest  to  follow  the  fashion  a  bit. —
Again  a  rabble  !     They  throng  and  swarm.
Off  with  you  !     Shoo  !     They  go  on  as  though  crazy.
If  only  I  had  a  false  tail  to  put  on  now, —
only  something  to  make  me  a  bit  like  a  beast. —

What  now  ?     There's  a  pattering  over  my  head !

(Looks  up.)

It's  the  grandfather  ape, — with  his  fists  full  of  filth !

{Hud(iles  together  apprehensively^    and  keeps  still
■^"'  for  a  while.     The  ape  makes  a  motion ;  peer

GYNT  begins  coaxing  and  wheedlifig  hi^n^  as  he

might  a  dog.)
Ay, — are  you  there,  my  good  old  Bus  !
He's  a  good  beast,  he  is !     He  will  listen  to  reason  !
He  wouldn't  throw; — I  should  think  not,  indeed !
It  is  me  !  Pip-pip  !     We  are  first-rate  friends  !
Ai-ai !     Don't  you  hear,  I  can  talk  your  language  ?
Bus  and  I,  we  are  kinsfolk,  you  see; —

Bus  shall  have  sugar  to-morrow !     The  beast !

The  whole  cargo  on  top  of  me  !     Ugh,  how  disgusting  ! —
Or  perhaps  it  was  food  ?     'Twas  in  taste — indefinable ;


Sc.  v.]  Peer  Gynt.  151

and  taste's  for  the  most  part  a  matter  of  habit.
What  thinker  is  it  who  somewhere  says  :
You  must  spit  and  trust  to  the  force  of  habit  ? — ■
Now  here  come  the  small-fry  !

i^Hits  and  slashes  around  hi?n.)

It's  really  too  bad
that  man,  who  by  rights  is  the  lord  of  creation,

should  find  himself  forced  to !     O  murder  !  murder  !

the  old  one  was  bad,  but  the  youngsters  are  worse !


SCENE   FIFTH.

{Early  morning.  A  stony  region,  zvith  a  view  out  over  the
desert.     On  one  side  a  cleft  in  the  hill,  and  a  cave.)

{A  THIEF  and  a  receiver  hidden  in  the  cleft,  with  the
Emperor's  horse  and  robes.  The  horse,  richly  capar-
iso7ied,  is  tied  to  a  stone.  Horsemen  are  seen  afar
off-)

THE   THIEF.

The  tongues  of  the  lances
all  flickering  and  flashing,-—
see,  see  !

THE   RECEIVER.

Already  my  head  seems
to  roll  on  the  sand-plain !
Woe,  woe !

THE   THIEF

(folds  his  arms  over  his  breast).

My  father  he  thieved  ;

so  his  son  must  be  thieving.


152  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

THE   RECEIVER.

My  father  received ;

so  his  son  keeps  receiving.^

THE    THIEF.

Thy  lot  shalt  thou  bear  still ;
thyself  shalt  thou  be  still.

THE    RECEIVER

{listening).

Steps  in  the  brushwood  !
Flee,  flee  !     But  where  ?

THE   THIEF.

The  cavern  is  deep,
and  the  Prophet  great !

{They  make  off,  leaving  the  booty  behind  them.     The
horsemen  gradually  disappear  in  the  distance.^

PEER   GYNT

{enters,  cutting  a  reed  whistle).

What  a  delectable  morning-tide  ! —

The  dung-beetle's  rolling  his  ball  in  the  dust ;

the  snail  creeps  out  of  his  dwelling-house.

The  morning ;  ay,  it  has  gold  in  its  mouth. —

It's  a  wonderful  power,  when  you  think  of  it,

that  Nature  has  given  to  the  light  of  day.

One  feels  so  secure,  and  so  much  more  courageous, —

one  would  gladly,  at  need,  take  a  bull  by  the  horns. —

What  a  stillness  all  round  !     Ah,  the  joys  of  Nature, —

strange  enough  I  should  never  have  prized  them  before.

^  This  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  burlesque  instance  of  the  poet's
supposed  preoccupation  with  questions  of  heredity,  but  simply  as  an
allusion  to  the  fact  that,  in  the  East,  thieving  and  receiving  are  regular
and  hereditary  professions.


Sc.  v.]  Peer  Gynt.  153

Why  go  and  imprison  oneself  in  a  city,
for  no  end  but  just  to  be  bored  by  the  mob. —
Just  look  how  the  lizards  are  whisking  about,
snapping,  and  thinking  of  nothing  at  all.
What  innocence  ev'n  in  the  life  of  the  beasts  !
Each  fulfils  the  Creator's  behest  unimpeachably,
preserving  its  own  special  stamp  undefaced ;
is  itself,  is  itself,  both  in  sport  and  in  strife,
itself,  as  it  was  at  his  primal :  Be  !

{jPuts  on  his  eye-glasses.)

A  toad.     In  the  middle  of  a  sandstone  block.
Petrifaction  all  round  him.     His  head  alone  peering.
There  he's  sitting  and  gazing  as  though  through  a  window
at  the  world,  and  is — to  himself  enough. —

{Reflectively.)

Enough  ?     To  himself ?     Where  is  it  that's  written  ?

I've  read  it,  in  youth,  in  some  so-called  classic.

In  the  family  prayer-book  ?     Or  Solomon's  Proverbs  ?

Alas,  I  notice  that,  year  by  year,

my  memory  for  dates  and  for  places  is  fading.

{Seats  himself  in  the  shade.)

Here's  a  cool  spot  to  rest  and  to  stretch  out  one's  feet.
Why,  look,  here  are  ferns  growing — edible  roots.

{Eats  a  little.)
'Twould  be  fitter  food  for  an  animal ; —
but  the  text  says  :  Bridle  the  natural  man  !
Furthermore  it  is  written  :  The  proud  shall  be  humbled,
and  whoso  abaseth  himself,  exalted.

{Uneasily.)

Exalted  ?     Yes,  that's  what  will  happen  with  me ; —
no  other  result  can  so  much  as  be  thought  of.
Fate  will  assist  me  away  from  this  place.


154  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

and  arrange  matters  so  that  I  get  a  fresh  start.
This  is  only  a  trial ;  deliverance  will  follow, —
if  only  the  Lord  lets  me  keep  my  health.

{Disjuisses  his  misgivings,  lights  a  cigar,  stretches
himself,  and  gazes  out  over  the  desert.)

What  an  enormous,  limitless  waste  ! —

Far  in  the  distance  an  ostrich  is  striding. —

What  can  one  fancy  was  really  God's

meaning  in  all  of  this  voidness  and  deadness  ?

This  desert,  bereft  of  all  sources  of  life  ;

this  burnt-up  cinder,  that  profits  no  one ;

this  patch  of  the  world,  that  for  ever  lies  fallow ;

this  corpse,  that  never,  since  earth's  creation,

has  brought  its  Maker  so  much  as  thanks, —

why  was  it  created  ? — How  spendthrift  is  Nature  ! —

Is  that  sea  in  the  east  there,  that  dazzling  expanse

all  gleaming  }     It  can't  be;  'tis  but  a  mirage.

The  sea's  to  the  west ;  it  lies  piled  up  behind  me,

dammed  out  from  the  desert  by  a  sloping  ridge.

{A  thought  flashes  through  his  mind.)

Dammed  out  ?    Then  I  could ?     The  ridge  is  narrow.

Dammed  out  ?     It  wants  but  a  gap,  a  canal, —
like  a  flood  of  life  would  the  waters  rush
in  through  the  channel,  and  fill  the  desert !  ^
Soon  would  the  whole  of  yon  red-hot  grave
spread  forth,  a  breezy  and  rippling  sea.
The  oases  would  rise  in  the  midst,  like  islands ;
Atlas  would  tower  in  green  cliffs  on  the  north  \
saihng-ships  would,  like  stray  birds  on  the  wing,
skim  to  the  south,  on  the  caravans'  track.

1  This  proposal   was  seriously  mooted   about   ten   years  after   the
appearance  of  Peer  Gynit.


Sc.  v.]  Peer  Gynt.  155

Life-giving  breezes  would  scatter  the  choking

vapours,  and  dew  would  distil  from  the  clouds.

People  would  build  themselves  town  on  town,

and  grass  would  grow  green  round  the  swaying  palm-trees.

The  southland,  behind  the  Sahara's  wall,

would  make  a  new  seaboard  for  civilisation.

Steam  would  set  Timbuctoo's  factories  spinning ;

Bornu  would  be  colonised  apace  ;

the  naturalist  would  pass  safely  through  Habes

in  his  railway-car  to  the  Upper  Nile.

In  the  midst  of  my  sea,  on  a  fat  oasis,

I  will  replant  the  Norwegian  race ;

the  Dalesman's  blood  is  next  door  to  royal ;

Arabic  crossing  will  do  the  rest.

Skirting  a  bay,  on  a  shelving  strand,

I'll  build  the  chief  city,  Peeropolis.

The  world  is  decrepit !     Now  comes  the  turn

of  Gyntiana,  my  virgin  land  !

{Springs  up.)

Had  I  but  capital,  soon  'twould  be  done. —

A  gold  key  to  open  the  gate  of  the  sea !

A  crusade  against  Death  !     The  close-fisted  old  churl

shall  open  the  sack  he  lies  brooding  upon.

Men  rave  about  freedom  in  every  land  ; —

like  the  ass  in  the  ark,  I  will  send  out  a  cry

o'er  the  world,  and  will  baptise  to  liberty

the  beautiful,  thrall-bounden  coasts  that  shall  be.

I  must  on  !     To  find  capital,  eastward  or  west !

]My  kingdom — well,  half  of  it,  say — for  a  horse  !

{The  horse  in  the  cleft  neighs.)
A  horse  !     Ay,  and  robes  ! — Jewels  too, — and  a  sword !

{Goes  closer.)
It  can't  be  !     It  is  though !     But  how  ?     I  have  read,


156  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

I    don't    quite    know    where,    that    the    will    can    move
mountains ; —

but  how  about  moving  a  horse  as  well ?

Pooh  !     Here  stands  the  horse,  that's  a  matter  of  fact ; —
for  the  rest,  why,  ab  esse  ad posse^  et  cetera.

{Puts  on  the  dress  and  looks  down  at  it.)

Sir  Peter — a  Turk,  too,  from  top  to  toe !

Well,  one  never  knows  what  may  happen  to  one. —

Gee-up,  now,  Grane,  my  trusty  sleed  !

{Mounts  the  horse.)

Gold-slipper  stirrups  beneath  my  feet ! —
You  may  know  the  great  by  their  riding-gear !

{Gallops  off  into  the  desert.)


SCENE   SIXTH.

{The  tent  of  an  Arab  chief  standing  alone  on  an  oasis.)
(peer  gynt,  ill  his  eastern  dress ^  resting  on  cushions.     He
is  drinking  coffee^  and  smoking  a  long  pipe,     anitra,
and  a  bevy  of  girls,  dancing  and  singing  before  him.)

CHORUS   OF   girls.

The  Prophet  is  come  !

The  Prophet,  the  Lord,  the  All-Knowing  One,

to  us,  to  us  is  he  come,

o'er  the  sand-ocean  riding  !

The  Prophet,  the  Lord,  the  Unerring  One,

to  us,  to  us  is  he  come,

o'er  the  sand-ocean  sailing  !

Wake  the  flute  and  the  drum  !
The  Prophet,  the  Prophet  is  come !


Sc.  vi.]  Peer  Gynt.  157

ANITRA.

His  courser  is  white  as  the  milk  is

that  streams  in  the  rivers  of  Paradise.

Bend  every  knee  !     Bow  every  head  !

His  eyes  are  as  bright-gleaming,  mild-beaming  stars.

Yet  none  earth-born  endureth

the  rays  of  those  stars  in  their  blinding  splendour !

Through  the  desert  he  came.
Gold  and  pearl-drops  sprang  forth  on  his  breast.
Where  he  rode  there  was  li^rht.
Behind  him  was  darkness  ;
behind  him  raged  drought  and  the  simoom.
He,  the  glorious  one,  came !
Through  the  desert  he  came,
like  a  mortal  apparelled.
Kaaba,  Kaaba  stands  void  ; —
he  himself  hath  proclaimed  it  !

THE   CHORUS   OF   GIRLS.

Wake  the  flute  and  the  drum  !
The  Prophet,  the  Prophet  is  come  !

{They  continue  the  dance,  to  soft  music.)

PEER.

I  have  read  it  in  print — and  the  saying  is  true —

that  no  one's  a  prophet  in  his  native  land. —

This  position  is  very  much  more  to  my  mind

than  my  life  over  there  'mong  the  Charleston  merchants.

There  was  something  hollow  in  the  whole  affair,

something  foreign  at  the  bottom,  something  dubious  behind

it;—

I  was  never  at  home  in  their  company,
nor  felt  myself  really  one  of  the  guild.
What  tempted  me  into  that  galley  at  all  ?


i5<^  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

To  grub  and  grub  in  the  bins  of  trade —

as  I  think  it  all  over,  I  can't  understand  it ; —

it  happe7ied  so  ;  that's  the  whole  affair. — •

To  be  oneself  on  a  basis  of  gold
is  no  better  than  founding  one's  house  on  the  sand.
For   your   watch,    and   your   ring,   and   the   rest   of   your

trappings
the  good  people  fawn  on  you,  grovelling  to  earth ;
they  lift  their  hats  to  your  jewelled  breast-pin ;
but  your  ring  and  your  breast-pin  are  not  your  person. — ^
A  prophet ;  ay,  that  is  a  clearer  position.
At  least  one  knows  on  what  footing  one  stands.
If  you  make  a  success,  \'C^  yourself  \)ii2X  receives
the  ovation,  and  not  your  pounds-sterling  and  shillings.^
One  is  what  one  is,  and  no  nonsense  about  it ;
one  owes  nothing  to  chance  or  to  accident,
and  needs  neither  licence  nor  patent  to  lean  on. —
A  prophet ;  ay,  that  is  the  thing  for  me.
And  I  slipped  so  utterly  unawares  into  it, —
just  by  coming  galloping  over  the  desert,
and  meeting  these  children  of  nature  en  route.
The  Prophet  had  come  to  them ;  so  much  was  clear.

It  was  really  not  my  intent  to  deceive ;

there's  a  difference  'twixt  lies  and  oracular  answers ;

and  then  I  can  always  withdraw  again.

I'm  in  no  way  bound  ;  it's  a  simple  matter — ;

the  whole  thing  is  private,  so  to  speak;

I  can  go  as  I  came ;  there's  my  horse  ready  saddled ;

I  am  master,  in  short,  of  the  situation.

ANITRA

{approaching from  the  tent-door^.
Prophet  and  Master  !

1  Or  "ego."  2  In  original,  "  Pundsterling  og  shilling."


Sc.  vL]  Peer  Gynt.  i  59

PEER.

What  would  my  slave  ?

ANITRA.

The  sons  of  the  desert  await  at  thy  tent-door ;
they  pray  for  the  light  of  thy  countenance


PEER.


Stop


Say  in  the  distance  I'd  have  them  assemble ;
say  from  the  distance  I  hear  all  their  prayers.
Add  that  I  suffer  no  menfolk  in  here  !

Men,  my  child,  are  a  worthless  crew, —
inveterate  rascals  you  well  may  call  them !
Anitra,  you  can't  think  how  shamelessly

they  have  swind I  mean  they  have  sinned,  my  child  ! — ^

Well,  enough  now  of  that ;  you  may  dance  for  me,  damsels  !
The  Prophet  would  banish  the  memories  that  gall  him.

THE   GIRLS

{dancing).

The  Prophet  is  good  !     The  Prophet  is  grieving
for  the  ill  that  the  sons  of  the  dust  have  wrought !
The  Prophet  is  mild  ;  to  his  mildness  be  praises ;
he  opens  to  sinners  his  Paradise !

PEER

{his  eyes  following  anitra  during  the  dance).

Legs  as  nimble  as  drumsticks  flitting.

She's  a  dainty  morsel  indeed,  that  wench  !

It's  true  she  has  somewhat  extravagant  contours, — ■

not  quite  in  accord  with  the  norms  of  beauty.

^  In  the  original,  "  De  bar  snydt hm ;  jeg  mener  syndet,   mit

barn  I"


I  Co  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

But  what  is  beauty?     A  mere  convention, —

a  coin  made  current  by  time  and  place.

And  just  the  extravagant  seems  most  attractive

when  one  of  the  normal  has  drunk  one's  fill.

In  the  law-bound  one  misses  all  intoxication.

Either  plump  to  excess  or  excessively  lean ;

either  parlously  young  or  portentously  old  ; —

the  medium  is  mawkish. —

Her  feet — they  are  not  altogether  clean  ;

no  more  are  her  arms  ;  in  especial  one  of  them.

But  that  is  at  bottom  no  drawback  at  all.

I  should  rather  call  it  a  qualification —

Anitra,  come  listen  !

ANITRA

{approaching).
Thy  handmaiden  hears  ]

PEER.

You  are  tempting,  my  daughter  !    The  Prophet  is  touched
If  you  don't  believe  me,  then  hear  the  proof; —
I'll  make  you  a  Houri  in  Paradise  !

ANITRA.

Impossible,  Lord !

PEER.

What  ?     You  think  I  am  jesting  ?
I'm  in  sober  earnest,  as  true  as  I  live  !

ANITRA.

But  I  haven't  a  soul.

PEER.

Then  of  course  you  must  get  one  !


Sc.  vi.]  Peer  Gynt.  i6i

ANITRA.

How,  Lord  ?

PEER.

Just  leave  me  alone  for  that ; —
I  shall  look  after  your  education.
No  soul  ?     Why,  truly  you're  not  over  bright,
as  the  saying  goes.     I've  observed  it  with  pain.
But  pooh  !  for  a  soul  you  can  always  find  room.
Come  here !  let  me  measure  your  brain-pan,  child. —
There  is  room,  there  is  room,  I  was  sure  there  was.
It's  true  you  never  will  penetrate
very  deep ;  to  a  large  soul  you'll  scarcely  attain  ; —
but  never  you  mind  ;  it  won't  matter  a  bit ; —
you'll  have  plenty  to  carry  you  through  with  credit


ANITRA.


The  Prophet  is  gracious-


But  I'd  rather-


PEER.

You  hesitate  ?    Speak  !

ANITRA.
PEER.

Say  on ;  don't  waste  time  about  it !

ANITRA.

I  don't  care  so  much  about  having  a  soul ; —
give  me  rather

PEER.

What,  child  ?


i62  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

ANITRA

(potntifig  to  his  turban).
That  lovely  opal !

PEER

{enchajited,  handing  her  the  jewel).

Anitra  !  Anitra  !  true  daughter  of  Eve  !

I  feel  thee  magnetic ;  for  I  am  a  man.

And,  as  a  much-esteemed  author  has  phrased  it :

"  Das  Ewig-Weibliche  zieht  uns  hinan  !  "  ^


SCENE  SEVENTH.

{A   moonlight  night.      The  pahn-grove  outside  anitra's

tent.)
(peer  gynt  is  sitting  beneath  a  tree^  with  an  Arabian  lute

in  his  hands.     His  beard  and  hair  are  clipped ;  he

looks  considerably  younger.)

PEER   GYNT

{plays  and  sings).

I  double-locked  my  Paradise,

and  took  its  key  with  me.
The  north-wind  bore  me  seaward  ho  !
while  lovely  women  all  forlorn

wept  on  the  ocean  strand.

Still  southward,  southward  clove  my  keel
the  salt  sea-currents  through.

'  Ibsen  writes  *' Ziehet  uns  an."     We  have  ventured  to  restore  the
exact  wording  of  Goethe's  lines.


Sc.  vii.]  Peer  Gynt.  163

Where  palms  were  swaying  proud  and  fair,
a  garland  round  the  ocean-bight,
I  set  my  ship  afire.

I  climbed  aboard  the  desert  ship,

a  ship  on  four  stout  legs.
It  foamed  beneath  the  lashing  whip ; —
oh,  catch  me  ;  I'm  a  flitting  bird  ; —

I'm  twittering  on  a  bough  !

Anitra,  thou'rt  the  palm-tree's  must ;

that  know  I  now  full  well !
Ay,  even  the  Angora  goat-milk  cheese
is  scarcely  half  such  dainty  fare,

Anitra,  ah,  as  thou  !

(^He  hangs  the  lute  over  his  shoulder^  and  comes  fofivard.)
Stillness  !     Is  the  fair  one  listening?
Has  she  heard  my  little  song  ?
Peeps  she  from  behind  the  curtain,
veil  and  so  forth  cast  aside  ? —
Hush  !     A  sound  as  though  a  cork
from  a  bottle  burst  amain  !
Now  once  more  !    And  yet  again !
Love-sighs  can  it  be  ?  or  songs  ? —
No,  it  is  distinctly  snoring. —
Dulcet  strain  !     Anitra  sleepeth  !
Nightingale,  thy  warbling  stay  !
Every  sort  of  woe  betide  thee,
if  with  gurgling  trill  thou  darest —
but,  as  says  the  text :  Let  be  !
Nightingale,  thou  art  a  singer ;
ah,  even  such  an  one  am  I.
He,  like  me,  ensnares  with  music
tender,  shrinking  little  hearts.


164  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv,

Balmy  night  is  made  for  music ;
music  is  our  common  sphere ;
in  the  act  of  singing,  we  are
we,  Peer  Gynt  and  nightingale.
And  the  maiden's  very  sleeping
is  my  passion's  crowning  bliss  ; —
for  the  lips  protruded  o'er  the

beaker  yet  untasted  quite

but  she's  coming,  I  declare  !
After  all,  it's  best  she  should.

ANITRA

{from  the  tent).
Master,  call'st  thou  in  the  night  ?

PEER.

Yes  indeed,  the  Prophet  calls.

I  was  wakened  by  the  cat

with  a  furious  hunting-hubbub


ANITRA.

Ah,  not  hunting-noises.  Master ;
it  was  something  much,  much  worse.

PEER.

What,  then,  was't  ?

ANITRA.

Oh,  spare  me  !

PEER.
ANITRA.

Oh,  I  blush  to


Speak


Sc.  vii.]  Peer  Gynt.  165

PEER

{approaching).

Was  it,  mayhap,
that  which  filled  me  so  completely
when  I  let  you  have  my  opal  ?

ANITRA

[Iwrrified).

Liken  thee,  O  earth's  great  treasure,
to  a  horrible  old  cat !

PEER.

Child,  from  passion's  standpoint  viewed,
may  a  tom-cat  and  a  prophet
come  to  very  much  the  same.

ANITRA.

Master,  jest  like  honey  floweth
from  thy  lips.

PEER.

My  little  friend,
you,  like  other  maidens,  judge
great  men  by  their  outsides  only.
I  am  full  of  jest  at  bottom,
most  of  all  when  we're  alone.
I  am  forced  by  my  position
to  assume  a  solemn  mask.
Duties  of  the  day  constrain  me ;
all  the  reckonings  and  worry
that  I  have  with  one  and  all,
make  me  oft  a  cross-grained  prophet ;
but  it's  only  from  the  tongue  out. —


i66  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

Fudge,  avaunt !     E71  tetc-a-tete
I'm  Peer — well,  the  man  I  am.
Hei,  away  now  with  the  prophet ;
me,  myself,  you  have  me  here !

{Seats  himself  under  a  tree,  and  draws  her  to  him.)
Come,  Anitra,  we  will  rest  us
underneath  the  palm's  green  fan-shade !
I'll  lie  whispering,  you'll  lie  smiling;
afterwards  our  roles  exchange  we ;
then  shall  your  lips,  fresh  and  balmy,
to  my  smiling,  passion  whisper !

ANITRA

{lies  down  at  his  feet).

All  thy  words  are  sweet  as  singing,
though  I  understand  but  little.
Master,  tell  me,  can  thy  daughter
catch  a  soul  by  listening  ?

PEER.

Soul,  and  spirit's  light  and  knowledge,
all  in  good  time  you  shall  have  them.
When  in  east,  on  rosy  streamers
golden  types  print :  Here  is  day, —
then,  my  child,  I'll  give  you  lessons;
you'll  be  well  brought-up,  no  fear.
But,  'mid  night's  delicious  stillness,
it  were  stupid  if  I  should,
with  a  threadbare  wisdom's  remnants,
play  the  part  of  pedagogue. —
And  the  soul,  moreover,  is  not,
looked  at  properly,  the  main  thing.
It's  the  heart  that  really  matters.


Sc.  vii.]  Peer  Gynt.  167


ANITRA.

Speak,  O  Master !     When  thou  speakest,
I  see  gleams,  as  though  of  opals  !

PEER.

Wisdom  in  extremes  is  folly ;
coward  blossoms  into  tyrant ;
truth,  when  carried  to  excess,
ends  in  wisdom  written  backwards.
Ay,  my  daughter,  I'm  forsworn
as  a  dog  if  there  are  not
folk  with  o'erfed  souls  on  earth
who  shall  scarce  attain  to  clearness.
Once  I  met  with  such  a  fellow,
of  the  flock  the  very  flower ;
and  even  he  mistook  his  goal,
losing  sense  in  blatant  sound. —
See  the  waste  round  this  oasis.
Were  I  but  to  swing  my  turban,
I  could  force  the  ocean-flood
to  fill  up  the  whole  concern.
But  I  were  a  blockhead,  truly,
seas  and  lands  to  go  creating.
Know  you  what  it  is  to  live  ?

ANITRA.

Teach  me !

PEER.

It  is  to  be  wafted
dry-shod  down  the  stream  of  time,
wholly,  solely  as  oneself.
Only  in  full  manhood  can  I
be  the  man  I  am,  dear  child !


i<58  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

Aged  eagle  moults  his  plumage,

aged  fogey  lags  declining,

aged  dame  has  ne'er  a  tooth  left,

aged  churl  gets  withered  hands, —

one  and  all  get  withered  souls.

Youth  !     Ah,  youth  !     I  mean  to  reign,

as  a  sultan,  whole  and  fiery, —

not  on  Gyntiana's  shores,

under  trellised  vines  and  palm-leaves, —

but  enthroned^  in  the  freshness

of  a  woman's  virgin  thoughts. —

See  you  now,  my  little  maiden,
why  I've  graciously  bewitched  you, —
why  I  have  your  heart  selected,
and  established,  so  to  speak,
there  my  being's  Caliphate  ?
All  your  longings  shall  be  mine.
I'm  an  autocrat  in  passion  !
You  shall  live  for  me  alone.
I'll  be  he  who  shall  enthrall
you  like  gold  and  precious  stones.
Should  we  part,  then  life  is  over, —
that  is,  your  life,  nota  bene  !
Every  inch  and  fibre  of  you,
will-less,  without  yea  or  nay,
I  must  know  filled  full  of  me.
Midnight  beauties  of  your  tresses,
all  that's  lovely  to  be  named,
shall,  like  Babylonian  gardens,
tempt  your  Sultan  to  his  tryst.

After  all,  I  don't  complain,  then,
of  your  empty  forehead-vault.
With  a  soul,  one's  oft  absorbed  in

^  Literally,  "  on  the  basis  of."


Sc.  viii  ]  Peer  Gynt.  169

contemplation  of  oneself.

Listen,  while  we're  on  the  subject, —

if  you  like  it,  faith,  you  shall

have  a  ring  about  your  ankle  : —

'twill  be  best  for  both  of  us.

/  will  be  your  soul  by  proxy  ;

for  the  rest — why,  status  quo.

(anitra  snores.)
What !     She  sleeps  !     Then  has  it  glided
bootless  past  her,  all  I've  said  ? —
No  ;  it  marks  my  influence  o'er  her
that  she  floats  away  in  dreams
on  my  love-talk  as  it  flows.

{Rises,  a7id  lays  trinkets  in  her  laj>.)

Here  are  jewels  !     Here  are  more !

Sleep,  Anitra  !     Dream  of  Peer .

Sleep  !     In  sleeping,  you  the  crown  have
placed  upon  your  Emperor's  brow !
Victory  on  his  Person's  basis
has  Peer  Gynt  this  night  achieved.


SCENE   EIGHTH.

{A  caravan  route.  The  oasis  is  seen  far  off  in  the  hack-
ground.)

(peer  gynt  cojnes  galloping  across  the  desert  on  his  white
horse,  with  anitra  before  him  on  his  saddle-bow.)

ANITRA.

Let  be,  or  I'll  bite  you  !

PEER.

You  httle  rogue !


I/O  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

ANITRA.

What  would  you  ?

PEER.

What  would  I  ?     Play  hawk  and  dove !
Run  away  with  you  !     Frolic  and  frisk  a  bit !

ANITRA.

For  shame  !     An  old  prophet  like  you !

PEER.

Oh,  stuff !
The  prophet's  not  old  at  all,  you  goose !
Do  you  think  all  this  is  a  sign  of  age  ?.

ANITRA.

Let  me  go  !     I  want  to  go  home !

PEER.

Coquette !
What,  home  !     To  father-in-law  !     That  would  be  fine !
We  madcap  birds  that  have  flown  from  the  cage
must  never  come  into  his  sight  again.
Besides,  my  child,  in  the  self-same  place
it's  wisest  never  to  stay  too  long ;
for  familiarity  lessens  respect ; —
most  of  all  when  one  comes  as  a  prophet  or  such.
One  should   show  oneself  glimpse-wise,  and   pass   like  a

dream.
Faith,  'twas  time  that  the  visit  should  come  to  an  end.
They're  unstable  of  soul,  are  these  sons  of  the  desert; —
both  incense  and  prayers  dwindled  off  towards  the  end.

ANITRA.

Yes,  but  are  you  a  prophet  ?


Sc.  viii.]  Peer  Gynt.  171

PEER.

Your  Emperor  I  am  I
{Tries  to  kiss  her.)
Why  just  see  now  how  coy  the  wee  woodpecker  is !

ANITRA.

Give  me  that  ring  that  you  have  on  your  finger.

PEER.

Take,  sweet  Anitra,  the  whole  of  the  trash !

ANITRA.

Thy  words  are  as  songs !     Oh,  how  dulcet  their  sound !

PEER.

How  blessed  to  know  oneself  loved  to  this  pitch  !

I'll  dismount !     Like  your  slave,  I  will  lead  your  palfrey  !

(Hands  her  his  riding-whip^  and  dismounts.)

There  now,  my  rosebud,  my  exquisite  flower  !
Here  I'll  go  trudging  my  way  through  the  sand,
till  a  sunstroke  o'ertakes  me  and  finishes  me.
I'm  young,  Anitra  ;  bear  that  in  mind  !
You  mustn't  be  shocked  at  my  escapades.
Frolics  and  high-jinks  are  youth's  sole  criterion !
And  so,  if  your  intellect  weren't  so  dense,
you  would  see  at  a  glance,  oh  my  fair  oleander,—
your  lover  is  frolicsome — ergo^  he's  young !

ANITRA,

Yes,  you  are  young.     Have  you  any  more  rings  ?


172  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

PEER.

Am  I  not  ?     There,  grab  !     I  can  leap  like  a  buck  !
Were  there  vine-leaves  around,  I  would  garland  my  brow.
To  be  sure  I  am  young !     Hei,  I'm  going  to  dance  !
{Da?ices  and  sings.)

I  am  a  bHssful  game-cock  !

Peck  me,  my  little  pullet !

Hop-sa-sa  !     Let  me  trip  it ; —

I  am  a  blissful  game-cock  !

ANITRA.

You  are  sweating,  my  prophet ;  I  fear  you  will  melt ; —
hand  me  that  heavy  bag  hung  at  your  belt.

PEER.

Tender  solicitude !     Bear  the  purse  ever ; —
hearts  that  can  love  are  content  without  gold  !
{Dances  and  sings  again.)
Young  Peer  Gynt  is  the  maddest  wag ; —
he  knows  not  what  foot  he  shall  stand  upon.

Pooh,  says  Peer ; — pooh,  never  mind  !
Young  Peer  Gynt  is  the  maddest  wag !

ANITRA.

What  joy  when  the  Prophet  steps  forth  in  the  dance  !

PEER.

Oh,  bother  the  Prophet ! — Suppose  we  change  clothes  !
Heisa  !     Strip  off!

ANITRA.

Your  caftan  were  too  long,
your  girdle  too  wide,  and  your  stockings  too  tight


Sc.  viii.]  Peer  Gynt.  173

PEER.

Eh  Men  !  ^

{Kneels  down.)

But  vouchsafe  me  a  vehement  sorrow ; —
to  a  heart  full  of  love,  it  is  sweet  to  suffer  !
Listen ;  as  soon  as  we're  home  at  my  castle

ANITRA.

In  your  Paradise ; — have  we  far  to  ride  ?

PEER.

Oh,  a  thousand  miles  or

ANITRA.

Too  far !

PEER.

Oh,  listen ; —
you  shall  have  the  soul  that  I  promised  you  once


ANITRA.

Oh,  thank  you ;  I'll  get  on  without  the  soul.
But  you  asked  for  a  sorrow

PEER

{rising).

Ay,  curse  me,  I  did  !
A  keen  one,  but  short, — to  last  two  or  three  days  !

^  So  in  original.


174  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

ANITRA.

Anitra  obeyeth  the  Prophet ! — Farewell !

{Gives  him  a  smart  cut  across  the  fingers ^  and
dashes  off ^  at  a  tearing  gallops  back  across  the
desert^

PEER

(stattdsfor  a  lo7ig  time  thimderstrucJi).
Well  now,  may  I  be !


SCENE   NINTH.

{The  same place^  an  hour  later. ^

(peer  gynt  is  stripping  off  his  Turkish  costume,  soberly
and  thoughtfully,  bit  by  bit.  Last  of  all,  he  takes  his
little  travelling-cap  out  of  his  coat-pocket,  puts  it  on^
and  stands  once  more  in  European  dress.)

PEER  GYNT

{throwing  the  turban  far  away  from  him).

There  lies  the  Turk,  then,  and  here  stand  I ! —
These  heathenish  doings  are  no  sort  of  good.
It's  lucky  'twas  only  a  matter  of  clothes,
and  not,  as  the  saying  goes,  bred  in  the  bone. —
What  tempted  me  into  that  galley  at  all  ?
It's  best,  in  the  long  run,  to  live  as  a  Christian,
to  put  away  peacock-like  ostentation,
to  base  all  one's  dealings  on  law  and  morality,
to  be  erer  oneself,  and  to  earn  at  the  last  a
speech  at  one's  grave-side,  and  wreaths  on  one's  coffin.
(  Walks  a  few  steps.)


Sc.  ix.]  Peer  Gynt.  <  175

The  hussy ; — she  was  on  the  very  verge

of  turning  my  head  clean  topsy-turvy.

May  I  be  a  troll  if  I  understand

what  it  was  that  dazed  and  bemused  me  so.

Well ;  it's  well  that's  done  :  had  the  joke  been  carried

but  one  step  on,  I'd  have  looked  absurd. —

I  have  erred ; but  at  least  it's  a  consolation

that  my  error  was  due  to  the  false  situation.

It  wasn't  my  personal  self  that  fell.

'Twas  in  fact  this  prophetical  way  of  life,

so  utterly  lacking  the  salt  of  activity,

that  took  its  revenge  in  these  qualms  of  bad  taste.

It's  a  sorry  business  this  prophetising !

One's  office  compels  one  to  walk  in  a  mist ;

in  playing  the  prophet,  you  throw  up  the  game^

the  moment  you  act  like  a  rational  being.^

In  so  far  I've  done  what  the  occasion  demanded,

in  the  mere  fact  of  paying  my  court  to  that  goose.

But,  nevertheless

{Bursts  out  laughing.)

Hm,  to  think  of  it  now  i
To  try  to  make  time  stop  by  jigging  and  dancing,
and  to  cope  with  the  current  by  capering  and  prancing !
To  thrum  on  the  lute-strings,  to  fondle  and  sigh,
and  end,  like  a  rooster, — by  getting  well  plucked !
Such  conduct  is  truly  prophetic  frenzy. —
Yes,  plucked  ! — Phew  !  I'm  plucked  clean  enough  indeed.
Well,  well,  I've  a  trifle  still  left  in  reserve;
I've  a  little  in  America,  a  little  in  my  pocket;
so  I  won't  be  quite  driven  to  beg  my  bread. —
And  at  bottom  this  middle  condition  is  best.

1  Literally,  "you're  looed"  or  "euchred."

"  Literally,  '*  behave  as  though  sober  and  wakeful."


176  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

I'm  no  longer  a  slave  to  n:iy  coachman  and  horses;

I  haven't  to  fret  about  postchaise  or  baggage ;

I  am  master,  in  short,  of  the  situation. —

What  path  should  I  choose  ?     Many  paths  lie  before  me ;

and  a  wise  man  is  known  from  a  fool  by  his  choice.

My  business  life  is  a  finished  chapter ;

my  love-sports,  too,  are  a  cast-off  garment.

I  feel  no  desire  to  live  back  Hke  a  crab.

"Forward  or  back,  and  it's  just  as  far;

out  or  in,  and  it's  just  as  strait," —

so  I  seem  to  have  read  in  some  luminous^  work. —

I'll  try  something  new,  then ;  ennoble  my  course ;

find  a  goal  worth  the  labour  and  money  it  costs.

Shall  I  write  my  life  without  dissimulation, —

a  book  for  guidance  and  imitation  ?

Or  stay !     I  have  plenty  of  time  at  command  ; —

what  if,  as  a  travelling  scientist,
I  should  study  past  ages  and  time's  voracity  ?
Ay,  sure  enough ;  that  is  the  thing  for  me  !
Legends  I  read  e'en  in  childhood's  days,
and  since  then  I've  kept  up  that  branch  of  learning. —
I  will  follow  the  path  of  the  human  race  !
Like  a  feather  I'll  float  on  the  stream  of  history,
make  it  all  live  again,  as  in  a  dream, —
see  the  heroes  battling  for  truth  and  right,
as  an  onlooker  only,  in  safety  ensconced, —
see  thinkers  perish  and  martyrs  bleed,
see  empires  founded  and  vanish  away, —
see  world-epochs  grow  from  their  trifling  seeds ;
in  short,  I  will  skim  off  the  cream  of  history. —
I  must  try  to  get  hold  of  a  volume  of  Becker,
and  travel  as  far  as  I  can  by  chronology. —
It's  true— my  grounding's  by  no  means  thorough,
1  Literally,  '' spirituei:'


Sc.  ix.]  Peer  Gynt.  177

and  history's  wheels  within  wheels  are  deceptive ; —
but  pooh  ;  the  wilder  the  starting-point,
the  result  will  oft  be  the  more  original. —
How  exalting  it  is,  now,  to  choose  a  goal,
and  drive  straight  for  it,  like  flint  and  steel !

(  With  quiet  e7?iotio?i.)
To  break  off  all  round  one,  on  every  side,
the  bonds  that  bind  one  to  home  and  friends, —
to  blow  into  atoms  one's  hoarded  wealth, —
to  bid  one's  love  and  its  joys  good-night, —
all  simply  to  find  the  arcana  of  truth, —

(  Wiping  a  tear  from  his  eye.)
that  is  the  test  of  the  true  man  of  science  ! —
I  feel  myself  happy  beyond  all  measure.
Now  I  have  fathomed  my  destiny's  riddle.
Now  'tis  but  persevering  through  thick  and  thin  !
It's  excusable,  sure,  if  I  hold  up  my  head,
and  feel  my  worth,  as  the  man,  Peer  Gynt,
also  called  Human-life's  Emperor. —
I  will  own  the  sum-total  of  bygone  days  ;
I'll  nevermore  tread  in  the  paths  of  the  living.
The  present  is  not  worth  so  much  as  a  shoe-sole ;
all  faithless  and  marrowless  the  doings  of  men ;

their  soul  has  no  wings  and  their  deeds  no  weight ;

{Shrugs  his  shoulders.)
and  women, — ah,  they  are  a  worthless  crew !

{Goes  off.)


12


17S  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.


SCENE   TENTH.

(A  summer  day.  Far  up  in  the  North.  A  hut  hi  the
forest.  The  doo?',  with  a  large  wooden  bar,  stands
open.  Reifideer-horns  over  it.  A  flock  of  goats  by
the  zvall  of  the  hut. )

{A  MIDDLE-AGED  woiMAN,  fair-haired  and  comely,  sits
spinning  outside  iti  the  smishine.)

THE   WOMAN

{glances  down  the  path,  and  sings).

Maybe  both  the  winter  and  spring  will  pass  by,
and  the  next  summer  too,  and  the  whole  of  the  year ; —
but  thou  wilt  come  one  day,  that  know  I  full  well ;
and  I  will  await  thee,  as  I  promised  of  old. ^

{Calls  the  goats,  spins,  afid  sings  again.)
God  strengthen  thee,  whereso  thou  goest  in  the  world  !
God  gladden  thee,  if  at  his  footstool  thou  stand  !
Here  will  I  await  thee  till  thou  comest  again  ;
and  if  thou  wait  up  yonder,   then   there  we'll   meet,   my
friend !

SCENE   ELEVENTH.

{In   Egypt.     Daybreak,     memnon's    statue    a?nid  the

sands.)
(peer  gynt  e7iters  o?i  foot,  and  looks  around  him  for  a

while.)

PEER    GYNT.

Here  I  might  fittingly  start  on  my  wanderings. —
So  now,  for  a  change,  I've  become  an  Egyptian ;
but  Egyptian  on  the  basis  of  the  Gyntish  I.

*  Sidst — literally,  "when  last  we  met."


Sc.  xi.]  Peer  Gynt.  179

To  Assyria  next  I  will  bend  my  steps.

To  begin  right  back  at  the  world's  creation

would  lead  to  nought  but  bewilderment.

I  will  go  round  about^  all  the  Bible  history;

its  secular  traces  I'll  always  be  coming  on ;

and  to  look,  as  the  saying  goes,  into  its  seams,

lies  entirely  outside  both  my  plan  and  my  powers.  -

(Si^s  upo7i  a  stone.)
Now  I  will  rest  me,  and  patiently  wait
till  the  statue  has  sung  its  habitual  dawn-song.
When  breakfast  is  over,  I'll  climb  up  the  pyramid ;
if  I've  time,  I'll  look  through  its  interior  afterwards.
Then  I'll  go  round  the  head  of  the  Red  Sea  by  land ;
perhaps  I  may  hit  on  King  Potiphar's  grave. —
Next  I'll  turn  Asiatic.     In  Babylon  I'll  seek  for
the  far-renowned  harlots  and  hanging  gardens, —
that's  to  say,  the  chief  traces  of  civilisation.
Then  at  one  bound  to  the  ramparts  of  Troy.
From  Troy  there's  a  fareway  by  sea  direct
across  to  the  glorious  ancient  Athens ; —
there  on  the  spot  will  I,  stone  by  stone,
survey  the  Pass  that  Leonidas  guarded.
I  will  get  up  the  works  of  the  better  philosophers,

find  the  prison  where  Socrates  suffered,  a  martyr ;

oh  no,  by-the-bye — there's  a  war  there  at  present !

Well  then,  my  Hellenism  must  even  stand  over.

{Looks  at  his  tvatch.)
It's  really  too  bad,  such  an  age  as  it  takes
for  the  sun  to  rise.     I  am  pressed  for  time.
Well  then,  from  Troy — it  was  there  I  left  off

{Rises  and  listens.)

What  is  that  strange  sort  of  murmur  that's  rushing ?

{Sunrise})
^  "  Ga  udenom,"  the  phrase  used  by  the  Boyg,  Act  ii.,  Sc.  7.


i8o  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

memnon's  statue
{sings).

From  the  demigod's  ashes  there  soar,  youth-renewing,

birds  ever  singing.

Zeus  the  Omniscient

shaped  them  contending

Owls  of  wisdom,
my  birds,  where  do  they  slumber  ?
Thou  must  die  if  thou  rede  not

the  song's  enigma  !

PEER.

How  strange  now, — I  really  fancied  there  came
from  the  statue  a  sound.     Music,  this,  of  the  Past.
I  heard  the  stone-accents  now  rising,  now  sinking. —
I  will  register  it,  for  the  learned  to  ponder.

{Notes  in  his  pocket-book!)

"The  statue  did  sing.     I  heard  the  sound  plainly,
but  didn't  quite  follow  the  text  of  the  song.
The  whole  thing,  of  course,  was  hallucination. —
Nothing  else  of  importance  observed  to-day."

{Proceeds  on  his  way.)


Sc.  xii.]  Peer  Gynt.  i8i


SCENE  TWELFTH.

{Near  the  village  of  Gtzek.     The  great  sphinx  canned  out

of  the  rock.     In  the  distance  the  spires  and  minarets  of

Cairo. )
(peer  gynt  enters ;   he  examines  the  sphinx  attentively^

now  through  his  eyeglass^  ?iow  through  his  Iwllowed

hand.)

PEER    GYNT.

Now,  where  in  the  world  have  I  met  before
something  half  forgotten  that's  like  this  hobgoblin  ?
For  met  it  I  have,  in  the  north  or  the  south.
Was  it  a  person?     And,  if  so,  who?
That  Memnon,  it  afterwards  crossed  my  mind,
was  like  the  Old  Men  of  the  Dovre,  so  called,
just  as  he  sat  there,  stiff  and  stark,
planted  on  end  on  the  stumps  of  pillars. —
But  this  most  curious  mongrel  here,
this  changeling,  a  lion  and  woman  in  one, —
does  he  come  to  me,  too,  from  a  fairy-tale,
or  from  a  remembrance  of  something  real  ?
From  a  fairy-tale  ?     Ho,  I  remember  the  fellow  !
Why,  of  course  it's  the  Boyg,  that  I  smote  on  the  skull, —
that  is,  I  dreamt  it, — I  lay  in  fever. —

{Going  closer.)
The  self-same  eyes,  and  the  self-same  lips ; —
not  quite  so  lumpish  ;  a  little  more  cunning;
but  the  same,  for  the  rest,  in  all  essentials. —
Ay,  so  that's  it,  Boyg ;  so  you're  like  a  lion
when  one  sees  you  from  behind  and  meets  you  in  the  day-
time !


1 82  Peek  Gynt.  [i\ct  iv.

Are  you  still  good  at  riddling?     Come,  let  us  try.
Now  we  shall  see  if  you  answer  as  last  time  !
{Calls  out  towards  the  sphinx.)
Hei,  Boyg,  who  are  you  ?

A    VOICE

{behi7id  the  sphinx).

Ach,  Sphinx,  wer  bist  du  ?

PEER.

What !     Echo  answers  in  German  !     How  strange  !

THE   VOICE.

Wer  bist  du  ?

PEER.

It  speaks  it  quite  fluently  too  !
That  observation  is  new,  and  my  own.

i^Notes  in  his  dook.)
*'Echo  in  German.     Dialect,  Berlin."

(begriffenfeldt    co?fies    out    front     behittd    the

SPHINX.)

begriffenfeldt.
A  man !

PEER.

Oh,  then  it  was  he  that  was  chattering.
{Notes  again.)
"  Arrived  in  the  sequel  at  other  results."

begriffenfeldt
{with  all  sorts  of  restless  antics).

Excuse  me,  mein  Herr^ !     Eine  Lebensfrage !^

What  brings  you  to  this  place  precisely  to-day  ?

1  So  in  original.


Sc.  xii.]  Peer  Gynt.  183

PEER.

A  visit.     I'm  greeting  a  friend  of  my  youth.

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

What?     The  Sphinx ?

PEER

i^nods).
Yes,  I  knew  him  in  days  gone  by.

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Famos  I^ — x\nd  that  after  such  a  night !
My  temples  are  hammering  as  though  they  would  burst !
You  know  him,  man  !     Answer  !     Say  on  !     Can  you  tell
what  he  is  ?

PEER.

What  he  is  ?     Yes,  that's  easy  enough.
He's  himself.

BEGRIFFENFELDT

i^iih  a  bound).

Ha,  the  riddle  of  life  lightened  forth
in  a  flash  to  my  vision ! — It's  certain  he  is
himself?

PEER.

Yes,  he  says  so,  at  any  rate.

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Himself!     Revolution  !  thine  hour  is  at  hand  !

{Takes  off  his  hat.)
Your  name,  pray,  mein  Herr  ?  ^

PEER.

I  was  christened  Peer  Gynt.
^  So  in  original.


184  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

BEGRIFFENFELDT

{in  rapt  admiratioii).

Peer  Gynt !     Allegoric  !     I  might  have  foreseen  it. —
Peer  Gynt  ?     That  must  clearly  imply  :  The  Unknown, —
the  Comer  whose  coming  was  foretold  to  me

PEER.

What,  really?     And  now  you  are  here  to  meet ?

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Peer  Gynt !     Profound  !     Enigmatic  !     Incisive  !
Each  word,  as  it  were,  an  abysmal  lesson !
What  are  you  ?

PEER

{fnodestly).

I've  always  endeavoured  to  be
myself.     For  the  rest,  here's  my  passport,  you  see.

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Again  that  mysterious  word  at  the  bottom.
{Seizes  him  by  the  wrist.)
To  Cairo  !     The  Interpreters'  Kaiser  is  found  !

PEER.

Kaiser  ?

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Come  on !

PEER.

Am  I  really  known ?

BEGRIFFENFELDT

{dragging  him  away).
The  Interpreters'  Kaiser — on  the  basis  of  Self !


Sc.  xiii.]  Peer  Gynt.  185


SCENE  THIRTEENTH.

{In  Cairo.     A  large  courtyard^  surrounded  by  high  walls

and  buildings.     Barred  windows ;  iron  cages.)
(three  keepers  in  the  courtyard,     a  fourth  comes  in.)

THE   new-comer.

Schafmann,  say,  where's  the  director  gone  ?

A    keeper.

He  drove  out  this  morning  some  time  before  dawn.

THE    FIRST.

I  think  something  must  have  occurred  to  annoy  him ;
for  last  night

ANOTHER.

Hush,  be  quiet;  he's  there  at  the  door !
(begriffenfeldt  leads  peer  gynt  in^  locks  the
gate.,  and  puts  the  key  in  his  pocket.)

PEER

{to  himself).

Indeed  an  exceedingly  gifted  man;

almost  all  that  he  says  is  beyond  comprehension.

{Looks  around.)
So  this  is  the  Club  of  the  Savants,  eh  ?

begriffenfeldt.

Here  you  will  find  them,  every  man  jack  of  them ; —
the  group  of  Interpreters  threescore  and  ten  ;^

^  This  is  understood  to  refer  to  the  authors  of  the  Greek  version
of  the  Old  Testament,  known  as  the  Septuagint.  We  are  unable  to
account  for  the  hundred  and  sixty  recruits  to  their  company.


1 86  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

it's  been  lately  increased  by  a  hundred  and  sixty

{Shouts  to  the  keepers.)
Mikkel,  Schlingelberg,  Schafmann,  Fuchs, —
into  the  cages  with  you  at  once  !

THE    KEEPERS.

We!

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Who  else,  pray  ?     Get  in,  get  in  !
When  the  world  twirls  around,  we  must  twirl  with  it  too.

{Forces  them  i?ito  a  cage.)
He's  arrived  this  morning,  the  mighty  Peer; —
the  rest  you  can  guess, — I  need  say  no  more.

{Locks  the  cage  door^  and  throws  the  key  into  a  well.)

PEER.

But,  my  dear  Herr  Doctor  and  Director,  pray ?

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Neither  one  nor  the  other  !     I  was  before


Herr  Peer,  are  you  secret  ?     I  must  ease  my  heart-

PEER

{with  increasing  uneasiness).
What  is  it  ?

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Promise  you  will  not  tremble.

PEER.

I  will  do  my  best,  but

BEGRIFFENFELDT

{draws  him  into  a  corner,  and  whispers).

The  Absolute  Reason
departed  this  life  at  eleven  last  night.


Sc.  xiii.]  Peer  Gynt.  187

PEER.

God  help  me !


BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Why,  yes,  it's  extremely  deplorable.
And  as  /';«  placed,  you  see,  it  is  doubly  unpleasant;
for  this  institution  has  passed  up  to  now
for  what's  called  a  madhouse.

PEER.

A  madhouse,  ha !

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Not  noWf  understand  !

PEER

{softly y  pale  with  fear).

Now  I  see  what  the  place  is  !
And  the  man  is  mad ; — and  there's  none  that  knows  it
{Tries  to  steal  away.)

BEGRIFFENFELDT

{following  hifn).

However,  I  hope  you  don't  misunderstand  me?
When  I  said  he  was  dead,  I  was  talking  stuff.
He's  beside  himself.     Started  clean  out  of  his  skin, —
just  like  my  compatriot  Munchausen's  fox.

PEER.

Excuse  me  a  moment

BEGRIFFENFELDT

{holding  him  back).

I  meant  like  an  eel ; — ■
it  was  not  like  a  fox.  A  needle  through  his  eye  ;—
and  he  writhed  on  the  wall


i88  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

PEER.

Where  can  rescue  be  found !

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

A  snick  round  his  neck,  and  whip  !  out  of  his  skin  !

PEER.

He's  raving !     He's  utterly  out  of  his  wits !

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Now  it's  patent,  and  can't  be  dissimulated,
that  this  from-himself-going  must  have  for  result
a  complete  revolution  by  sea  and  land.
The  persons  one  hitherto  reckoned  as  mad,
you  see,  became  normal  last  night  at  eleven,
accordant  with  Reason  in  its  newest  phase.
And  more,  if  the  matter  be  rightly  regarded,
it's  patent  that,  at  the  aforementioned  hour,
the  sane  folks,  so  called,  began  forthwith  to  rave.

PEER.

You  mentioned  the  hour,  sir;  my  time  is  but  scant

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Your  time,  did  you  say  ?     There  you  jog  my  remembrance !

{Opens  a  door  and  calls  out.)
Come  forth  all !     The  time  that  shall  be  is  proclaimed  !
Reason  is  dead  and  gone ;  long  live  Peer  Gynt !

PEER.

Now,  my  dear  good  fellow !

{The  LUNATICS  come  one  by  one^  and  at  intervals^
into  the  courtyard.)


Sc.  xiii.]  Peer  Gynt.  189

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Good  morning  !     Come  forth,
and  hail  the  dawn  of  emancipation  !
Your  Kaiser  has  come  to  you  !

PEER.

Kaiser  ?

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Of  course !

PEER.

But  the  honour's  so  great,  so  entirely  excessive

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Oh,  do  not  let  any  false  modesty  sway  you
at  an  hour  such  as  this.

PEER.

But  at  least  give  me  time !

No,  indeed,  I'm  not  fit ;  I'm  completely  dumfounded  !

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

A  man  who  has  fathomed  the  Sphinx's  meaning !
A  man  who's  himself !

PEER.

Ay,  but  that's  just  the  rub.
It's  true  that  in  everything  I  am  myself;
but  here  the  point  is,  if  I  follow  your  meaning,
to  be,  so  to  phrase  it,  outside  oneself.

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Outside  ?     No,  there  you  are  strangely  mistaken  !
It's  here,  sir,  that  one  is  oneself  with  a  vengeance;
oneself,  and  nothing  whatever  besides.


iQO  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

We  go,  full  sail,  as  our  very  selves.

Each  one  shuts  himself  up  in  the  barrel  of  self,

in  the  self-fermentation  he  dives  to  the  bottom, —

with  the  self-bung  he  seals  it  hermetically,

and  seasons  the  staves  in  the  well  of  self.

No  one  has  tears  for  the  other's  woes ;

no  one  has  mind  for  the  other's  ideas.

We're  our  very  selves,  both  in  thought  and  tone,

ourselves  to  the  spring-board's  uttermost  verge, —

and  so,  if  a  Kaiser's  to  fill  the  throne,

it  is  clear  that  you  are  the  very  man.

PEER.

O  would  that  the  devil !

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Come,  don't  be  cast  down ;
almost  all  things  in  nature  are  new  at  the  first.
"  Oneself;" — come,  here  you  shall  see  an  example;

I'll  choose  you  at  random  the  first  man  that  comes

{To  a  gloomy  figure. )
Good-day,  Huhu  !     Well,  my  boy,  wandering  round
for  ever  with  misery's  impress  upon  you  ?

HUHU.  ^

Can  I  help  it,  when  the  people,
race 2  by  race,  dies  untranslated?^

{To  PEER  GYNT.)

You're  a  stranger  ;  will  you  listen  ?

PEER

{bowing).
Oh,  by  all  means  !

^  See  Introduction,  p.  xiii.  ^  Literally,  "generation."

^  Literally,  *' uninterpreted."


Sc.  xiii.]  Peer  Gynt.  191

HUHU.

Lend  your  ear  then. —
Eastward  far,  like  brow-borne  garlands,
lie  the  Malabarish  seaboards.
Hollanders  and  Portugueses
compass  all  the  land  with  culture.
There,  moreover,  swarms  are  dwelling
of  the  pure-bred  Malabaris.
These  have  muddled  up  the  language,
they  now  lord  it  in  the  country. —
But  in  long-departed  ages
there  the  orang-outang  was  ruler.
He,  the  forest's  lord  and  master,
freely  fought  and  snarled  in  freedom.
As  the  hand  of  nature  shaped  him,
just  so  grinned  he,  just  so  gaped  he.
He  could  shriek  unreprehended ;
he  was  ruler  in  his  kingdom. —
Ah,  but  then  the  foreign  yoke  came,
marred  the  forest-tongue  primeval.
Twice  two  hundred  years  of  darkness^
brooded  o'er  the  race  of  monkeys;
and,  you  know,  nights  so  protracted
bring  a  people  to  a  standstill. —
Mute  are  now  the  wood-notes  primal ;
grunts  and  growls  are  heard  no  longer ; —
if  we'd  utter  our  ideas,
it  must  be  by  means  of  language.
What  constraint  on  all  and  sundry !
Hollanders  and  Portugueses,
half-caste  race  and  Malabaris,
all  alike  must  suffer  by  it. —

1  An  allusion  to  the  long  period  of  stagnation   in  the  history  of
Norway  under  the  Danish  rule — say,  from  1400  to  1800.


192  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

I  have  tried  to  fight  the  battle
of  our  real,  primal  wood-speech, —
tried  to  bring  to  life  its  carcass, —
proved  the  people's  right  of  shrieking, —
shrieked  myself,  and  shown  the  need  of
shrieks  in  poems  for  the  people. —
Scantly,  though,  my  work  is  valued. —
Now  I  think  you  grasp  my  sorrow.
Thanks  for  lending  me  a  hearing ; —
have  you  counsel,  let  me  hear  it !

PEER

{softly).

It  is  written  :  Best  be  howling
with  the  wolves  that  are  about  you.

{Aloud.)

Friend,  if  I  remember  rightly,

there  are  bushes  in  Morocco,

where  orang-outangs  in  plenty

live  with  neither  bard  nor  spokesman ; —

their  speech  sounded  Malabarish ; —

it  was  classical  and  pleasing.

Why  don't  you,  like  other  worthies,

emigrate  to  serve  your  country  ?

HUHU.

Thanks  for  lending  me  a  hearing  ; —
I  will  do  as  you  advise  me.

( With  a  large  gestii7'e.)

East !  thou  hast  disowned  thy  singer  !
West !  thou  hast  orang-outangs  still  !

{Goes.)


Sc.  xiii.]  Peer  Gynt.  193

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Well,  was  he  himself?     I  should  rather  think  so.

He's  filled  with  his  own  affairs,  simply  and  solely.

He's  himself  in  all  that  comes  out  of  him, —

himself,  just  because  he's  beside  himself.

Come  here !     Now  I'll  show  you  another  one,

who's  no  less,  since  last  evening,  accordant  with  Reason.

{To  a  FELLAH,  with  a  mu7nmy  on  his  back.)
King  Apis,  how  goes  it,  my  mighty  lord  ?

THE    FELLAH

{zvildfyj  to  PEER  gynt).
Am  I  King  Apis  ?

PEER

{getting  behind  the  doctor).

I'm  sorry  to  say
I'm  not  quite  at  home  in  the  situation ;
but  I  certainly  gather,  to  judge  by  your  tone


THE   FELLAH.

Now  you  too  are  lying.

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Your  Highness  should  state
how  the  whole  matter  stands.

THE    FELLAH.

Yes,  I'll  tell  him  my  tale.
{Turns  to  peer  gynt.)
Do  you  see  whom  I  bear  on  my  shoulders  ?
His  name  was  King  Apis  of  old.
Now  he  goes  by  the  title  of  mummy,
and  withal  he's  completely  dead.


194  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

All  the  pyramids  yonder  he  builded,
and  hewed  out  the  mighty  Sphinx,
and  fought,  as  the  Doctor  puts  it,
with  the  Turks,  both  to  rechts  and  links.

And  therefore  the  whole  of  Egypt
exalted  him  as  a  god,
and  set  up  his  image  in  temples,
in  the  outward  shape  of  a  bull. —

But  /am  this  very  King  Apis,
I  see  that  as  clear  as  day ;
and  if  you  don't  understand  it,
you  shall  understand  it  soon.

King  Apis,  you  see,  was  out  hunting,
and  got  off  his  horse  awhile,
and  withdrew  himself  unattended
to  a  part  of  my  ancestor's  land.

But  the  field  that  King  Apis  manured
has  nourished  77ie  with  its  corn ;
and  if  further  proofs  are  demanded,
know,  I  have  invisible  horns.

Now,  isn't  it  most  accursed
that  no  one  will  own  my  might !
By  birth  I  am  Apis  of  Egypt,
but  a  fellah  in  other  men's  sight.

Can  you  tell  me  what  course  to  follow  ? —
then  counsel  me  honestly. —
The  problem  is  how  to  make  me
resemble  King  Apis  the  Great.

PEER.

Build  pyramids  then,  your  highness,
and  carve  out  a  greater  Sphinx,
and  fight,  as  the  Doctor  puts  it,
with  the  Turks,  both  to  rechts  and  links.


Sc.  xiii.]  Peer  Gynt.  195

THE    FELLAH.

Ay,  that  is  all  mighty  fine  talking  !
A  fellah  !     A  hungry  louse  !
I,  who  scarcely  can  keep  my  hovel
clear  even  of  rats  and  mice.

Quick,  man, — think  of  something  better,
that'll  make  me  both  great  and  safe,
and  further,  exactly  like  to
King  Apis  that's  on  my  back  !

PEER.

What  if  your  highness  hanged  you,
and  then,  in  the  lap  of  earth,
'tvvixt  the  coffin's  natural  frontiers,
kept  still  and  completely  dead.

THE    FELLAH.

I'll  do  it  !     My  life  for  a  halter  !
To  the  gallows  with  hide  and  hair  ! —
At  first  there  will  be  some  difference,
but  that  time  will  smooth  away.

{Goes  off  and  prepares  to  hang  himself .)

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

There's  a  personality  for  you,  Herr  Peer, —
a  man  of  method

PEER.

Yes,  yes ;  I  see ;


but  he'll  really  hang  himself  !     God  grant  us  grace  !
I'll  be  ill ; — I  can  scarcely  command  my  thoughts  !

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

A  state  of  transition  ;  it  won't  last  long.


196  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

PEER.

Transition  ?     To  what  ?     With  your  leave — I  must  go


BEGRIFFENFELDT

{holding  him).
Are  you  crazy  ?

PEER.

Not  yet .     Crazy  ?     Heaven  forbid  !

{A  commotion.     The  Miftister  hussein^  forces  his
way  through  the  crowd.)

HUSSEIN.

They  tell  me  a  Kaiser  has  come  to-day.

{To  PEER  GYNT.)

It  is  you  ?

PEER

{in  desperation).
Yes,  that  is  a  settled  thing  !

HUSSEIN.

Good. — Then  no  doubt  there  are  notes  to  be  answered?

PEER

{tearing  his  hair).
Come  on  !     Right  you  are,  sir ; — the  madder  the  better  !

HUSSEIN.

Will  you  do  me  the  honour  of  taking  a  dip  ?

{Bowing  deeply.)
I  am  a  pen.

PEER

{bozvifig  still  deeper).
Why  then  I  am  quite  clearly
a  rubbishy  piece  of  imperial  parchment.

^  See  note,  p.  145.


Sc.  xiii.]  Peer  Gynt.  197


HUSSEIN.


My  story,  my  lord,  is  concisely  this  :

they  take  me  for  a  sand-box,^  and  I  am  a  pen.

PEER.

My  story,  Sir  Pen,  is,  to  put  it  briefly  :

Pm  a  blank  sheet  of  paper  that  no  one  will  write  on.

HUSSEIN.

No  man  understands  in  the  least  what  I'm  good  for;
they  all  want  to  use  me  for  scattering  sand  with !

PEER.

I  was  in  a  woman's  keeping  a  silver-clasped  book ; —
it's  one  and  the  same  misprint  to  be  either  mad  or  sane !

HUSSEIN.

Just  fancy,  what  an  exhausting  life:

to  be  a  pen  and  never  taste  the  edge  of  a  knife  !

PEER

i^ith  a  high  leap).

Just  fancy,  for  a  reindeer  to  leap  from  on  high  —
to  fall  and  fall — and  never  feel  the  ground  beneath  your
hoofs  !

HUSSEIN.

A  knife !  I  am  blunt ; — quick,  mend  me  and  slit  me  !

The  world  will  go  to  ruin  if  they  don't  mend  my  point  for  me!

PEER.

A  pity  for  the  world  which,  like  other  self-made  things,
was  reckoned  by  the  Lord  to  be  so  excellently  good.

1  The  sand-box  has  not  yet  been  quite  superseded  by  blotting-paper
in  Norway.


198  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  iv.

BEGRIFFENFELDT.

Here's  a  knife !

HUSSEIN

(seizifig  it).

Ah,  how  I  shall  lick  up  the  ink  now !
Oh,  what  rapture  to  cut  oneself !

{Cuts  his  throat.)

BEGRIFFENFELDT

{stepping  aside).

Pray  do  not  sputter.

PEER

{in  increasing  terror).
Hold  him  !

HUSSEIN.

Ay,  hold  me  !     That  is  the  word  !

Hold  !     Hold  the  pen  !     On  the  desk  with  the  paper !

{Falls:)
Pm  outworn.     The  postscript — remember  it,  pray  :
He  lived  and  he  died  as  a  fate-guided  peni^

PEER

{dizzily).

What  shall  I !     What  am  I  ?     Thou  mighty ,  hold

fast  !

I  am  all  that  thou  wilt, — I'm  a  Turk,  Pm  a  sinner

a   hill-troll ;    but   help ; — there    was    something    that

burst !

{Shrieks  :)

I  cannot  just  hit  on  thy  name  at  the  moment ; —

oh,  come  to  my  aid,  thou — all  madmen's  protector  !

{Sinks  down  i?isensible.)

1  **  En  paholden  pen."     "  Underskrive  med  pah  olden  pen  " — to  sign
by  touching  a  pen  which  is  guided  by  another.


Sc.  xiii.]  Peer  Gynt.  199

BEGRIFFENFELDT

({duith  a  wreath  of  straw  in  his  hand,  gives  a  bound  and
sits  astride  of  him).

Ha  !     See  him  in  the  mire  enthroned  ; —

beside  himself !     To  crown  him  now  !

{Presses  the  wreath  on  peer  gynt's  head^  and  shouts .)
Long  life,  long  life  to  Self-hood's  Kaiser !

SCHAFMANN

{in  the  cage),
Es  lebe  hoch  der  grosse  Peer !


200  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.


ACT  FIFTH.

SCENE   FIRST.

{On  board  a  ship  on  the  North  Sea,  off  the  Norwegian
coast.     Swiset,     Stormy  weather.)

(peer  gynt,  a  vigorous  old  inan^  with  grizzled  hair  and
beard,  is  standing  aft  on  the  poop.  He  is  dressed  half
sailorfashion,  with  a  pea-jacket  and  long  boots.  His
clothing  is  rather  the  worse  for  wear;  he  himself  is
weather-beaten,  and  has  a  somewhat  harder  expression.
The  CAPTAIN  is  standing  beside  the  steersman  at  the
wheel.     The  crew  are  forward.)

PEER   GYNT

{leans  with  his  arms  on  the  bulwark,  and  gazes
towards  the  land).

Look  at  Hallingskarv  ^  in  his  winter  furs  ; —
he's  ruffling  it,  old  one,  in  the  evening  glow.
The  Jokel,^  his  brother,  stands  behind  him  askew ;
he's  got  his  green  ice-mantle  still  on  his  back.
The  Folgefann,^  now,  she  is  mighty  fine, —
lying  there  like  a  maiden  in  spotless  white.
Don't  you  be  madcaps,  old  boys  that  you  are !
Stand  where  you  stand  ;  you're  but  granite  knobs.

^  Mountains  and  glaciers.


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  201

THE   CAPTAIN

{shouts  forward).
Two  hands  to  the  wheels  and  the  lantern  aloft !

PEER.

It's  blowing  up  stiff

THE   CAPTAIN.

for  a  gale  to-night.

PEER.

Can  one  see  the  Ronde  Hills  from  the  sea?

THE   CAPTAIN.

No,  how  should  you  ?     They  lie  at  the  back  of  the  snow-
fields.

PEER.

Or  BUhoPi

THE   CAPTAIN.

No ;  but  from  up  in  the  rigging,
you've  a  glimpse,  in  clear  weather,  of  Galdhopiggen.^

PEER.

Where  does  H^rteig^  lie?

THE   CAPTAIN

{pointing).

About  over  there.


I  thought  so.


PEER.
THE    CAPTAIN.

You  know  where  you  are,  it  appears.
'  Mountains  and  glaciers.


202  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

When  I  left  the  country,  I  sailed  by  here  ;

And  the  dregs,  says  the  proverb,  hang  in  to  the  last.

(Sptys,  a7id gazes  at  the  coast.)

In  there,  where  the  scaurs  and  the  clefts  lie  blue, —
where  the  valleys,  like  trenches,  gloom  narrow  and  black, —
and  underneath,  skirling  the  open  fiords, —
it's  in  places  like  these  human  beings  abide.

{Looks  at  the  captain.)
They  build  far  apart  in  this  country.

THE   CAPTAIN.

Ay;
few  are  the  dwellings  and  far  between.

PEER.

Shall  we  get  in  by  day-break  ?

THE   CAPTAIN.

Thereabouts ;
if  we  don't  have  too  dirty  a  night  altogether.

PEER.

It  grows  thick  in  the  west.

THE   CAPTAIN.

It  does  so.

PEER.

Stop  a  bit !
You  might  put  me  in  mind  when  we  make  up  accounts —


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  203

I'm  inclined,  as  the  phrase  goes,  to  do  a  good  turn
to  the  crew

THE   CAPTAIN.

I  thank  you.

PEER.

It  won't  be  much.
I  have  dug  for  gold,  and  lost  what  I  found  ; —
we  are  quite  at  loggerheads,  Fate  and  I.
You  know  what  I've  got  in  safe  keeping  on  board —
that's  all  I  have  left ; — the  rest's  gone  to  the  devil.

THE    CAPTAIN.

It's  more  than  enough,  though,  to  make  you  of  weight
among  people  at  home  here.

PEER.

I've  no  relations.
There's  no  one  awaiting  the  rich  old  curmudgeon. —
Well;  that  saves  you,  at  least,  any  scenes  on  the  pier  !

THE   CAPTAIN.

Here  comes  the  storm.

PEER.

Well,  remember  then —
If  any  of  your  crew  are  in  real  need,
I  won't  look  too  closely  after  the  money

THE    CAPTAIN.

That's  kind.     They  are  most  of  them  ill  enough  off;
they  have  all  got  their  wives  and  their  children  at  home.
With  their  wages  alone  they  can  scarce  make  ends  meet ;
but  if  they  come  home  with  some  cash  to  the  good,
it  will  be  a  return  not  forgot  in  a  hurry.


204  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.


PEER.


What  do  you  say  ?     Have  they  wives  and  children  ?
Are  they  married  ?


THE   CAPTAIN.


Married  ?     Ay,  every  man  of  them.
But  the  one  that  is  worst  off  of  all  is  the  cook ;
black  famine  is  ever  at  home  in  his  house.

PEER.

Married  ?     They've  folks  that  await  them  at  home  ?
Folks  to  be  glad  when  they  come  ?     Eh  ?

THE   CAPTAIN.

Of  course,
in  poor  people's  fashion.

PEER.

And  come  they  one  evening,
what  then  ?

THE   CAPTAIN.

Why,  I  daresay  the  goodwife  will  fetch
something  good  for  a  treat

PEER.

And  a  light  in  the  sconce  ?

THE    CAPTAIN.

Ay,  ay,  may  be  two ;  and  a  dram  to  their  supper.

PEER.

And  there  they  sit  snug !     There's  a  fire  on  the  hearth  !
They've  their  children   about  them !     The  room's  full  of
chatter ;


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  205

not  one  hears  another  right  out  to  an  end,
for  the  joy  that  is  on  them !

THE    CAPTAIN.

It's  hkely  enough.
So  it's  really  kind,  as  you  promised  just  now,
to  help  eke  things  out.

PEER

{thumping  the  buhvark).

I'll  be  damned  if  I  do !
Do  you  think  I  am  mad  ?     Would  you  have  me  fork  out
for  the  sake  of  a  parcel  of  other  folks'  brats  ?
I've  slaved  much  too  sorely  in  earning  my  cash !
There's  nobody  waiting  for  old  Peer  Gynt.

THE    CAPTAIN.

Well  well ;  as  you  please  then ;  your  money's  your  own.

PEER.

Right !     Mine  it  is,  and  no  one  else's.
We'll  reckon  as  soon  as  your  anchor  is  down  !
Take  my  fare,  in  the  cabin,  from  Panama  here.
Then  brandy  all  round  to  the  crew.     Nothing  more.
If  I  give  a  doit  more,  slap  my  jaw  for  me,  Captain.

THE   CAPTAIN.

I  owe  you  a  quittance,  and  not  a  thrashing ; —
but  excuse  me,  the  wind's  blowing  up  to  a  gale.

(^He  goes  forward.  It  has  fallen  dark;  lights  are
lit  in  the  cabifi.  The  sea  increases.  Fog  and
thick  clouds.)


2o6  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

To  have  a  whole  bevy  of  youngsters  at  home  ; —

still  to  dwell  in  their  minds  as  a  coming  delight; —

to  have  others'  thoughts  follow  you  still  on  your  path  ! —

There's  never  a  soul  gives  a  thought  to  me. —

Lights  in  the  sconces !     I'll  put  out  those  lights.

I  will  hit  upon  something  ! — I'll  make  them  all  drunk ; —

not  one  of  the  devils  shall  go  sober  ashore.

They  shall  all  come  home  drunk  to.  their  children  and  wives  !

They  shall  curse;  bang  the  table  till  it  rings  again, —

they  shall  scare  those  that  wait  for  them  out  of  their  wits  !

The  goodwife  shall  scream  and  rush  forth  from  the  house, —

clutch  her  children  along  !     All  their  joy  gone  to  ruin  !

{The  ship  gives  a  heavy  lurch;    he  staggers  and
keeps  his  balance  with  difficulty.)

Why,  that  was  a  buffet  and  no  mistake.

The  sea's  hard  at  labour,  as  though  it  were  paid  for  it ; —

it's  still  itself  here  on  the  coasts  of  the  north; —

a  cross-sea,  as  wry  and  wrong-headed  as  ever

{Listens.)

Why,  what  can  those  screams  be  ?

THE    LOOK-OUT

{forward).

A  wreck  a-lee !

THE   CAPTAIN

{on  the  main  deck,  shouts).
Helm  hard  a-starboard  !     Bring  her  up  to  the  wind  !

THE    MATE.

Are  there  men  on  the  wreck  ?


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  207

THE   LOOK-OUT.

I  can  just  see  three  !

PEER.

Quick  !  lower  the  stern  boat

THE   CAPTAIN.

She'd  fill  ere  she  floated.
{Goes  forward.)

PEER.

Who  can  think  of  that  now  ?

{To  some  of  the  crew.)

If  you're  men,  to  the  rescue !
What  the  devil,  if  you  should  get  a  bit  of  a  ducking  !

THE   BOATSWAIN.

It's  out  of  the  question  in  such  a  sea.

PEER.

They  are  screaming  again  !     There's  a  lull  in  the  wind. —
Cook,  will  you  risk  it  ?     Quick  !     I  will  pay

THE   COOK.

No,  not  if  you  offered  me  twenty  pounds-sterling^

PEER.

You  hounds  !     You  chicken-hearts  !     Can  you  forget
these  are  men  that  have  goodwives  and  children  at  home  ?
There  they're  sitting  and  waiting

^  So  in  original.


2o8  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

THE    BOATSWAIN.

Well,  patience  is  wholesome.

THE    CAPTAIN.

Bear  away  from  that  sea  !

THE    MATE.

There  the  wreck  turned  over !

PEER.

All  is  silent  of  a  sudden !

THE   BOATSWAIN.

Were  they  married,  as  you  think,
there  are  three  new-baked  widows  even  now  in  the  world.

{The  storm  increases,     peer  gynt  moves  away  aft.)

PEER.

There  is  no  faith  left  among  men  any  more, —

no  Christianity, — well  may  they  say  it  and  write  it ; —

their  good  deeds  are  few  and  their  prayers  are  still  fewer,

and  they  pay  no  respect  to  the  Powers  above  them. —

In  a  storm  like  to-night's,  he's  a  terror,  the  Lord  is.

These  beasts  should  be  careful,  and  think,  what's  the  truth,

that  it's  dangerous  playing  with  elephants ; —

and  yet  they  must  openly  brave  his  displeasure  !

/  am  no  whit  to  blame ;  for  the  sacrifice

I  can  prove  I  stood  ready,  my  money  in  hand.

But  how  does  it  profit  me  ? — What  says  the  proverb  ?

A  conscience  at  ease  is  a  pillow  of  down.

Oh  ay,  that  is  all  very  well  on  dry  land,

but  I'm  blest  if  it  matters  a  snuff"  on  board  ship,

when  a  decent  man's  out  on  the  seas  with  such  riff-raff",


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  209

At  sea  one  never  can  be  one's  self ;

one  must  go  with  the  others  from  deck  to  keelj

if  for  boatswain  and  cook  the  hour  of  vengeance  should

strike,
I  shall  no  doubt  be  swept  to  the  deuce  with  the  rest; —
one's  personal  welfare  is  clean  set  aside ; —
one  counts  but  as  a  sausage  in  slaughtering-time. —

My  mistake  is  this  :  I  have  been  too  meek;
and  I've  had  no  thanks  for  it  after  all.
Were  I  younger,  I  think  I  would  shift  the  saddle,
and  try  how  it  answered  to  lord  it  awhile.
There  is  time  enough  yet !     They  shall  know  in  the  parish
that  Peer  has  come  sailing  aloft  o'er  the  seas  !
ril  get  back  the  farmstead  by  fair  means  or  foul; —
I  will  build  it  anew;  it  shall  shine  like  a  palace.
But  none  shall  be  suffered  to  enter  the  hall !
They  shall  stand  at  the  gateway,  all  twirling  their  caps ; — ■
they  shall  beg  and  beseech — that  they  freely  may  do;
but  none  gets  so  much  as  a  farthing  of  mine.
If  Fve  had  to  howl  'neath  the  lashes  of  fate,
trust  me  to  find  folks  I  can  lash  in  my  turn

THE    STRANGE   PASSENGER

{stands  in  the  darkness  at  peer  gynt's  side^  and  salutes
him  in  friendly  fashion).

Good  evening !

PEER.

Good  evening  !     What ?    Who  are  you  ?

THE    PASSENGER.

Your  fellow-passenger,  at  your  service.

PEER.

Indeed  ?     I  thought  I  was  the  only  one.

14


210  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

THE    PASSENGER.

A  mistaken  impression,  which  now  is  set  right.

PEER.

But  it's  singular  that,  for  the  first  time  to-night,
I  should  see  you

THE    PASSENGER.

I  never  come  out  in  the  day-time.

PEER.

Perhaps  you  are  ill  ?     You're  as  white  as  a  sheet

THE   PASSENGER.

No,  thank  you — my  health  is  uncommonly  good.

PEER.

What  a  raging  storm  !

THE    PASSENGER.

Ay,  a  blessed  one,  man !

PEER.

A  blessed  one  ?

THE   PASSENGER.

The  sea's  running  high  as  houses.
Ah,  one  can  feel  one's  mouth  watering !
Just  think  of  the  wrecks  that  to-night  will  be  shattered ; —
and  think,  too,  what  corpses  will  drive  ashore !

PEER.

Lord  save  us  !

THE   PASSENGER.

Have  ever  you  seen  a  man  strangled,
or  hanged, — or  drowned  ?


Sc.  i.]  Peer  Gynt.  211

PEER.

This  is  going  too  far !


THE    PASSENGER.

The  corpses  all  laugh.     But  their  laughter  is  forced ;
and  the  most  part  are  found  to  have  bitten  their  tongues,

PEER.

Hold  off  from  me !

THE   PASSENGER.

Only  one  question  pray  !
If  we,  for  example,  should  strike  on  a  rock,
and  sink  in  the  darkness

PEER.

You  think  there  is  danger  ?

THE    PASSENGER.

I  really  don't  know  what  I  ought  to  say.

But  suppose,  now,  I  float  and  you  go  to  the  bottom

PEER.

Oh,  rubbish

THE    PASSENGER.

It's  just  a  hypothesis.
But  when  one  is  placed  with  one  foot  in  the  grave,
one  grows  soft-hearted  and  open-handed

PEER

inputs  his  hand  in  his  pocket).
Ho,  money !

THE    PASSENGER.

No,  no ;  but  perhaps  you  would  kindly
make  me  a  gift  of  your  much-esteemed  carcass ?


212  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

This  is  too  much  !

THE   PASSENGER.

No  more  than  your  body,  you  know !
To  help  my  researches  in  science


PEER.


THE   PASSENGER.


Begone !


But  think,  my  dear  sir — the  advantage  is  yours  !
I'll  have  you  laid  open  and  brought  to  the  light.
What  I  specially  seek  is  the  centre  of  dreams, —
and  with  critical  care  I'll  look  into  your  seams—


PEER.

Away  with  you !

THE   PASSENGER.


Why,  my  dear  sir — a  drowned  corpse-


PEER.

Blasphemer  !     You're  goading  the  rage  of  the  storm  !
I  call  it  too  bad !     Here  it's  raining  and  blowing,
a  terrible  sea  on,  and  all  sorts  of  signs
of  something  that's  likely  to  shorten  our  days; —
And  you  carry  on  so  as  to  make  it  come  quicker !

THE    PASSENGER.

You're  in  no  mood,- 1  sec,  to  negotiate  further ;

but  time,  you  know,  brings  with  it  many  a  change

(^Nods  in  a  friendly  fashion.)
We'll  meet  \vhen  you're  sinking,  if  not  before ;
perhaps  I  may  then  find  you  more  in  the  humour.
{Goes  into  the  cabin.)


Sc.  i.]  .    Peer  Gynt.  213

PEER.

Unpleasant  companions  these  scientists  are  !
With  their  freethinking  ways

{To  the  BOATSWAIN,  who  is  passing.)

Hark,  a  word  with  you,  friend  !
That  passenger  ?     What  crazy  creature  is  he  ?

THE    BOATSWAIN.

I  know  of  no  passenger  here  but  yourself.

PEER.

No  others  ?     This  thing's  getting  worse  and  worse.

{To  the  ship's  boy,  who  comes  out  of  the  cabin.)
Who  went  down  the  companion  just  now  ?

THE   BOY.

The  ship's  dog,  sir  !
{Passes  on.)

THE    LOOK-OUT

{shouts).
Land  close  ahead  !

peer.

Where's  my  box  ?     Where's  my  trunk  ?
All  the  baggage  on  deck !

the    BOATSWAIN.

We  have  more  to  attend  to  !

PEER.

It  was  nonsense,  captain  !     'Twas  only  my  joke ; —
as  sure  as  I'm  here  I  will  help  the  cook


214  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

THE    CAPTAIN.

The  jib's  blown  away  !

THE    MATE.

And  there  went  the  foresail !

THE    BOATSWAIN

{shrieks  from  forward).
Breakers  under  the  bow !

THE   CAPTAIN.

She  will  go  to  shivers  I
{The  ship  strikes.     Noise  and  confusion^


SCENE   SECOND.

{Close  under  the  land,  among  sunken  rocks  and  surf.  The
ship  sinks.  The  jolly-boat,  with  two  men  in  her,  is
seen  for  a  mojnent  through  the  scud.  A  sea  strikes
her ;  she  fills  and  upsets.  A  shriek  is  heard ;  then
all  is  silent  for  a  zuhile.  Shortly  afterwards  the  boat
appears  floati7ig  bottom  upwards.)

(peer  gynt  comes  to  the  surface  near  the  boat.)

PEER.

Help  !  Help  !     A  boat !     Help  !     I'll  be  drowned  !
Save  me,  oh  Lord — as  saith  the  text !

{Clutches  hold  of  the  boafs  keel.)


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  215

THE   COOK

{comes  up  on  the  other  side).

Oh,  Lord  God — for  my  children's  sake,
have  mercy  !     Let  me  reach  the  land  !

{Seizes  hold  of  the  keel.)


Let  go !

Let  go


PEER.


THE    COOK.


PEER.

I'll  Strike !


THE   COOK.

So'll  I  !

PEER.


I'll  crush  you  down  with  kicks  and  blows  !
Let  go  your  hold  !     She  won't  float  two  !


I  know  it !     Yield


THE   COOK.
PEER.

Yield  you !

THE   COOK.

Oh  yes  !

{They  fight ;  one  of  the  cook's  hands  is  disabled;  he
clings  on  with  the  other ^

PEER.

Off  with  that  hand  !


2i6  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.


THE    COOK.


Oh,  kind  sir — spare  !
Think  of  my  little  ones  at  home  !

PEER.

I  need  my  life  far  more  than  you,
for  I  am  lone  and  childless  still.

THE    COOK.

Let  go  !     You've  lived,  and  I  am  young  !

PEER.

Quick  ;  haste  you  ;  sink  ; — you  drag  us  down.

THE   COOK.

Have  mercy  !     Yield  in  heaven's  name  !
There's  none  to  miss  and  mourn  for  you —

(Bis  hand  slips;  he  screams:)
I'm  drowning !

PEER

{seizing  hi7ii).

By  this  wisp  of  hair
I'll  hold  you  ;  say  your  Lord's  Prayer,  quick  !

THE    COOK.

I  can't  remember ;  all  turns  black

PEER.

Come,  the  essentials  in  a  word !

THE   COOK.

Give  us  this  day !


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  217

PEER.

Skip  that  part,  Cook ;
you'll  get  diW  you  need,  safe  enough.

THE   COOK.

Give  us  this  day

PEER.

The  same  old  song  !
One  sees  you  were  a  cook  in  life


{The  COOK  slips  from  his  grasp.)


THE    COOK

{sinking).


Give  us  this  day  our-


{Disappears,)

PEER.

Amen,  lad !
to  the  last  gasp  you  were  yourself. —

{Draws  himself  up  on  io  the  bottom  of  the  boat.)
So  long  as  there  is  life  there's  hope

THE    STRANGE   PASSENGER

{catches  hold  of  the  boat).
Good  morning !

PEER.

Hoy  !

THE    PASSENGER.

I  heard  you  shout. —
It's  pleasant  finding  you  again.
Well  ?     So  my  prophecy  came  true  !


2i8  Peer  Gvnt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

Let  go  !     Let  go  !     'Twill  scarce  float  one  I

THE   PASSENGER.

I'm  striking  out  with  my  left  leg.
I'll  float,  if  only  with  their  tips
my  fingers  rest  upon  this  ledge.
But  apropos  :  your  body

PEER.

Hush  !

THE    PASSENGER.

The  rest,  of  course,  is  done  for,  clean

PEER.

No  more !

THE    PASSENGER.

Exactly  as  you  please.
{Silence?)

PEER.

Well?

THE    PASSENGER.

I  am  silent.

PEER.

Satan's  tricks ! —
What  now  ?

THE    PASSENGER.

I'm  waiting.


Sc.  ii.]  Peer  Gynt.  219


What  are  you


PEER

{tearing  his  hair).

I'll  go  mad  ! —

THE   PASSENGER

{nods).
Friendly.

PEER.

What  else  ?     Speak  !

THE   PASSENGER.

What  think  you  ?     Do  you  know  none  other
that's  like  me  ?

PEER.

Do  I  know  the  devil ?

THE   PASSENGER

{in  a  low  voice).

Is  it  his  way  to  light  a  lantern

for  life's  night-pilgrimage  through  fear  ?

PEER.

Ah,  come  !     When  once  the  thingjs  cleared  up,
you'd  seem  a  messenger  of  light  ?

THE   PASSENGER.

Friend, — have  you  otice  in  each  half-year
felt  all  the  earnestness  of  dread  ?^

^  "Angst" — literally,  *' dread"  or  "terror" — probably  means  here
something  like  "conviction  of  sin."  The  influence  of  the  Danish
theologian,  Soren  Kierkegard,  may  be  traced  in  this  passage.


220  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.


PEER.


Why,  one's  afraid  when  danger  threatens ; —
but  all  your  words  have  double  meanings.^

THE   PASSENGER.

Ay,  have  you  gained  but  once  m  life
the  victory  that  is  given  in  dread  ?

PEER

{looks  at  him).

Came  you  to  ope  for  me  a  door,
'twas  stupid  not  to  come  before.
Wiiat  sort  of  sense  is  there  in  choosing
your  time  when  seas  gape  to  devour  one?

THE   PASSENGER.

Were,  then,  the  victory  more  likely
beside  your  hearth-stone,  snug  and  quiet  ?

PEER.

Perhaps  not  -,  but  your  talk  befooled  me.
How  could  you  fancy  it  awakening?

THE    PASSENGER.

Where  I  come  from,  there  smiles  are  prized
as  highly  as  pathetic  style.

PEER.

All  has  its  time ;  what  fits  the  taxman,^
so  says  the  text,  would  damn  the  bishop.

1  Literally,  "Are  set  on  screws."
-  "Tolder,"  the  biblical  "publican."


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  221

THE   PASSENGER.

The  host  whose  dust  inurned  has  slumbered
treads  not  on  week-days  the  cothurnus.

PEER.

Avaunt  thee,  bugbear  !     Man,  begone  1
I  will  not  die  !     I  must  ashore  !

THE   PASSENGER.

Oh,  as  for  that,  be  reassured ; —
one  dies  not  midmost  of  Act  Five.

{Glides  away.)

PEER.


Ah,  there  he  let  it  out  at  last ; — ■
he  was  a  sorry  moralist.


SCENE  THIRD.

(^Churchyard  in  a  high-lying  mountain  parish.)
{A  funeral  is  going  071.      By  the  grave ^  the  priest  and  a
gathering  of  people.      The  last  verse  of  the  psalm  is
being  sung,     peer  gy'^t passes  by  07i  the  road.)

PEER

{at  the  gate).

Here's  a  countryman  going  the  way  of  all  flesh.
God  be  thanked  that  it  isn't  me.

{Enters  the  churchyard.)


222  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

THE    PRIEST

{speaking  beside  the  grave).

Now,  when  the  soul  has  gone  to  meet  its  doom,
and  here  the  dust  lies,  like  an  empty  pod, —
now,  my  dear  friends,  we'll  speak  a  word  or  two
about  this  dead  man's  pilgrimage  on  earth.

He  was  not  wealthy,  neither  was  he  wise,
his  voice  was  weak,  his  bearing  was  unmanly,
he  spoke  his  mind  abashed  and  faltering,
he  scarce  was  master  at  his  own  fireside ;
he  sidled  into  church,  as  though  appealing
for  leave,  like  other  men,  to  take  his  place.

It  was  from  Gudbrandsdale,  you  know,  he  came.
When  here  he  settled  he  was  but  a  lad  ; —
and  you  remember  how,  to  the  very  last,
he  kept  his  right  hand  hidden  in  his  pocket.

That  right  hand  in  the  pocket  was  the  feature
that  chiefly  stamped  his  image  on  the  mind, — -
and  therewithal  his  writhing,  his  abashed
shrinking  from  notice  wheresoe'er  he  went.

But,  though  he  still  pursued  a  path  aloof,
and  ever  seemed  a  stranger  in  our  midst,
you  all  know  what  he  strove  so  hard  to  hide, —
the  hand  he  muffled  had  four  fingers  only. —

I  well  remember,  many  years  ago,
one  morning ;  there  were  sessions  held  at  Lunde.
'Twas  war-time,  and  the  talk  in  every  mouth
turned  on  the  country's  sufferings  and  its  fate.

I  stood  there  watching.     At  the  table  sat
the  Captain,  'twixt  the  Bailiff^  and  the  sergeants;
lad  after  lad  was  measured  up  and  down,
passed,  and  enrolled,  and  taken  for  a  soldier.

^  See  footnote,  p.  99.


Sc.  iii]  Peer  Gynt.  223

The  room  was  full,  and  from  the  green  outside,

where  thronged  the  young  folks,  loud  the  laughter  rang.

A  name  was  called,  and  forth  another  stepped,
one  pale  as  snow  upon  the  glacier's  edge.
They  bade  the  youth  advance ;  he  reached  the  table ;
we  saw  his  right  hand  swaddled  in  a  clout ; —
he  gasped,  he  swallowed,  battling  after  words, —
but,  though  the  Captain  urged  him,  found  no  voice.
Ah  yes,  at  last !     Then  with  his  cheek  aflame,
his  tongue  now  failing  him,  now  stammering  fast,
he  mumbled  something  of  a  scythe  that  slipped
by  chance,  and  shore  his  finger  to  the  skin.

Straightway  a  silence  fell  upon  the  room.
Men  bandied  meaning  glances ;  they  made  mouths ;
they  stoned  the  boy  with  looks  of  silent  scorn.
He  felt  the  hail-storm,  but  he  saw  it  not.
Then  up  the  Captain  stood,  the  grey  old  man ;
he  spat,  and  pointed  forth,  and  thundered  "Go  !"

And  the  lad  went.     On  both  sides  men  fell  back,
till  through  their  midst  he  had  to  run  the  gauntlet.
He  reached  the  door ;  from  there  he  took  to  flight ; —
up,  up  he  went, — through  wood  and  over  hillside,
up  through  the  stone-slips,  rough,  precipitous.
He  had  his  home  up  there  among  the  mountains. —

It  was  some  six  months  later  he  came  here,
with  mother,  and  betrothed,  and  little  child.
He  leased  some  ground  upon  the  high  hillside,
there  where  the  waste  lands  trend  away  towards  Lomb.
He  married  the  first  moment  that  he  could  ;
he  built  a  house ;  he  broke  the  stubborn  soil ;
he  throve,  as  many  a  cultivated  patch
bore  witness,  bravely  clad  in  waving  gold.
At  church  he  kept  his  right  hand  in  his  pocket, —
but  sure  I  am  at  home  his  fingers  nine


224  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

toiled  every  bit  as  hard  as  others'  ten. —
One  spring  the  torrent  washed  it  all  away.

Their  lives  were  spared.     Ruined  and  stripped  of  all,
he  set  to  work  to  make  another  clearing ;
and,  ere  the  autumn,  smoke  again  arose
from  a  new,  better-sheltered,  mountain  farm-house.
Sheltered  ?    From  torrent — not  from  avalanche  ;
two  years,  and  all  beneath  the  snow  lay  buried.

But  still  the  avalanche  could  not  daunt  his  spirit.
He  dug,  and  raked,  and  carted — cleared  the  ground —
and  the  next  winter,  ere  the  snow-blasts  came,
a  third  time  was  his  little  homestead  reared.

Three  sons  he  had,  three  bright  and  stirring  boys ;
they  must  to  school,  and  school  was  far  away ; —
and  they  must  clamber  where  the  hill-track  failed,
by  narrow  ledges  through  the  headlong  scaur.
What  did  he  do  ?     The  eldest  had  to  manage
as  best  he  might,  and,  where  the  path  was  worst,
his  father  cast  a  rope  round  him  to  stay  him  ; —
the  others  on  his  back  and  arms  he  bore.

Thus  he  toiled,  year  by  year,  till  they  were  men.
Now  might  he  well  have  looked  for  some  return.
In  the  New  World,  three  prosperous  gentlemen
their  school-going  and  their  father  have  forgotten.

He  was  short-sighted.     Out  beyond  the  circle
of  those  most  near  to  him  he  nothing  saw.
To  him  seemed  meaningless  as  cymbals'  tinkling
those  words  that  to  the  heart  should  ring  like  steel.
His  race,  his  fatherland,  all  things  high  and  shining,
stood  ever,  to  his  vision,  veiled  in  mist.

But  he  was  humble,  humble,  was  this  man ;
and  since  that  sessions-day  his  doom  oppressed  him,
as  surely  as  his  cheeks  were  flushed  with  shame,
and  his  four  fingers  hidden  in  his  pocket. —


Sc.  iii.]  Peer  Gynt.  225

Offender  'gainst  his  country's  laws  ?     Ay,  true  !
But  there  is  one  thing  that  the  law  outshineth
sure  as  the  snow-white  tent  of  Glittertind^
has  clouds,  like  higher  rows  of  peaks,  above  it.
No  patriot  was  he.     Both  for  church  and  state
a  fruitless  tree.     But  there,  on  the  upland  ridge,
in  the  small  circle  where  he  saw  his  calling,
there  he  was  great,  because  he  was  himself.
His  inborn  note  rang  true  unto  the  end.
His  days  were  as  a  lute  with  muted  strings.
And  therefore,  peace  be  with  thee,  silent  warrior,
that  fought  the  peasant's  httle  fight,  and  fell !

It  is  not  ours  to  search  the  heart  and  reins ; —
that  is  no  task  for  dust,  but  for  its  ruler ; —
yet  dare  I  freely,  firmly,  speak  my  hope :
he  scarce  stands  crippled  now  before  his  God  !

{The  gather  in fr  disperses.       peer   gynt  remains
behind^  alone.)

PEER.

Now  that  is  what  I  call  Christianity  !

Nothing  to  seize  on  one's  mind  unpleasantly. —

And  the  topic — immovably  being  oneself, —

that  the  pastor's  homily  turned  upon, —

is  full,  in  its  essence,  of  edification.

{Looks  down  upon  the  grave. )

Was  it  he,  I  wonder,  that  hacked  through  his  knuckle

that  day  I  was  out  hewing  logs  in  the  forest  ?

Who  knows  ?     If  I  weren't  standing  here  with  my  staff

by  the  side  of  the  grave  of  this  kinsman  in  spirit,

I  could  almost  believe  it  was  I  that  slept,

and  heard  in  a  vision  my  panegyric. —

^  A  mountain  in  the  Jotunheim.       The   name  means   **  glittering
peak."

15


226  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

It's  a  seemly  and  Christianlike  custom  indeed
this  casting  a  so-called  memorial  glance
in  charity  over  the  life  that  is  ended.
I  shouldn't  at  all  mind  accepting  my  verdict
at  the  hands  of  this  excellent  parish  priest.
Ah  well,  I  dare  say  I  have  some  time  left
ere  the  gravedigger  comes  to  invite  me  to  stay  with  him  ; —
and  as  Scripture  has  it :  What's  best  is  best, —
and  :    Enough  for  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof, — ^
and  further :  Discount  not  thy  funeral. —
Ah,  the  church,  after  all,  is  the  true  consoler.
I've  hitherto  scarcely  appreciated  it ; —
but  now  I  feel  clearly  how  blessed  it  is
to  be  well  assured  upon  sound  authority :
Even  as  thou  so  west  thou  shalt  one  day  reap. —
One  must  be  oneself;  for  oneself  and  one's  own
one  must  do  one's  best,  both  in  great  and  in  small  things.
If  the  luck  goes  against  you,  at  least  you've  the  honour
of  a  life  carried  through  in  accordance  with  principle. —
Now  homewards  !     Though  narrow  and  steep  the  path,
though  Fate  to  the  end  may  be  never  so  biting —
still  old  Peer  Gynt  will  pursue  his  own  way,
and  remain  what  he  is :  poor,  but  virtuous  ever.

(Goes  o?if.)

1  "Den  tid  den    sorg"  —  literally,    "That  time  that    sorrow,"  or
"care."


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  227


SCENE   FOURTH.

(A  hillside  sea7ned  by  the  dry  bed  of  a  torrent.  A
rui?ied  mill-house  beside  the  stream.  The  ground  is
torn  up^  and  the  whole  place  waste.  Further  up  the
hill,  a  large  farm-house.)

{An  auction  is  going  on  in  front  of  the  farm-house.  There
is  a  great  gathering  of  people^  ivho  ai'e  drinking,  with
much  ?ioise.  peer  gynt  is  sitting  on  a  rubbish-heap
beside  the  tniil.)

PEER.

Forward  and  back,  and  it's  just  as  far ;

out  and  in,  and  it's  just  as  strait. —

Time  wears  away  and  the  river  gnaws  on.

Go  roundabout,  the  Boyg  said ; — and  here  one  must.

A    MAN    DRESSED    IN    MOURNING.

Now  there  is  only  rubbish  left  over.

{Catches  sight  ^peer  gynt.)
Are  there  strangers   here   too?     God  be  with  you,  good
friend !

PEER.

Well  met !     You  have  lively  times  here  to-day.
Is't  a  christening  junket  or  a  wedding  feast  ?

THE   MAN    IN    MOURNING.

I'd  rather  call  it  a  house-warming  treat ; —
the  bride  is  laid  in  a  wormy  bed.

PEER.

And  the  worms  are  squabbling  for  rags  and  clouts.


228  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

THE   MAN    IN    MOURNING.

That's  the  end  of  the  ditty  ;  it's  over  and  done.

PEER.

All  the  ditties  end  just  alike  ;

and  they're  all  old  together  ;  I  knew  'em  as  a  boy.

A    LAD    OF   TWENTY

(with  a  casiing-ladle).

Just  look  what  a  rare  thing  I've  been  buying  !
In  this  Peer  Gynt  cast  his  silver  buttons.

ANOTHER.

Look  at  mine,  though  !     The  money-bag^  bought  for  a  half-
penny.

A   THIRD.

No  more,  eh  ?     Twopence  for  the  pedlar's  pack !

PEER.

Peer  Gynt  ?     Who  was  he  ?

THE   MAN   IN   MOURNING.

All  I  know  is  this :
he  was  kinsman  to  Death  and  to  Aslak  the  Smith.

A    MAN    IN    GREY.

You're  forgetting  me,  man  !     Are  you  mad  or  drunk  ?

THE    MAN    IN    MOURNING.

You  forget  that  at  Hegstad  was  a  storehouse  door.
^  Literally,  "  the  bushel."     See  note,  p.  9,


Sc.  iv.]  1*EER  GyNT.  ^29

THE   MAN    IN    GREY.

Ay,  true;  but  we  know  you  were  never  dainty.

THE   MAN   IN   MOURNING.

If  only  she  doesn't  give  Death  the  slip

THE   MAN    IN  GREY.

Come,  kinsman  !     A  dram,  for  our  kinship's  sake !

THE   MAN   IN   MOURNING.

To  the  deuce  with  your  kinship !     You're  maundering  in
drink

THE   MAN   IN   GREY.

Oh,  rubbish;  blood's  never  so  thin  as  all  that;
one  cannot  but  feel  one's  akin  to  Peer  Gynt.

{Goes  off  with  him.)

PEER

{to  hiffiself).
One  meets  with  acquaintances.

A   LAD

{calls  after  the  man  in  mourning).

Mother  that's  dead
will  be  after  you,  Aslak,  if  you  wet  your  whistle.

PEER

{rises).

The  agriculturists'  saying  seems  scarce  to  hold  here :
The  deeper  one  harrows  the  better  it  smells.


230  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

A    LAD

{ivith  a  beards  skin).

Look,  the  cat  of  the  Dovre  !^     Well,  only  his  fell.
It  was  he  chased  the  trolls  out  on  Christmas  Eve.

ANOTHER

{with  a  reindeer-skult).

Here  is  the  wonderful  reindeer  that  bore,
at  Gendin,  Peer  Gynt  over  edge  and  scaur.

A    THIRD

{ivith  a  hammer^  calls  out  to  the  man  in  mourning).

Hei,  Aslak,  this  sledge-hammer,  say,  do  you  know  it  ?
Was  it  this  that  you  used  when  the  devil  clove  the  wall  ?

A    FOURTH

{empty-handed).

Mads  Moen,  here's  the  invisible  cloak

Peer  Gynt  and  Ingrid  flew  off  through  the  air  with.

PEER.

Brandy  here,  boys  !     I  feel  Pm  grown  old ; —

I  must  put  up  to  auction  my  rubbish  and  lumber !

A    LAD.

What  have  you  to  sell,  then  ?

PEER.

A  palace  I  have ; —
it  lies  in  the  Ronde;  it's  solidly  built.

^  See  Appendix,  p.  286,


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  231

THE   LAD.

A  button  is  bid  !

PEER.

You  must  run  to  a  dram.
'Twere  a  sin  and  a  shame  to  bid  anything  less.

ANOTHER.

He's  a  jolly  old  boy  this  !

{The  bystanders  crowd  routtd him.)

PEER

(shouts).

Grane,^  my  steed;
who  bids  ?

ONE   OF   THE   CROWD.

Where's  he  running  ?

PEER.

Why,  far  in  the  west !
Near  the  sunset,  my  lads  !     Ah,  that  courser  can  fly
as  fast,  ay,  as  fast  as  Peer  Gynt  could  lie.

VOICES.

What  more  have  you  got  ?

PEER.

I've  both  rubbish  and  gold  !
I  bought  it  with  ruin ;  I'll  sell  it  at  a  loss.

A   LAD.

Put  it  up !

^  See  footnote,  p.  ii8.


232  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

A  dream  of  a  silver-clasped  book  !
That  you  can  have  for  an  old  hook  and  eye.

THE    LAD.

To  the  devil  with  dreams !

PEER.

Here's  my  Kaiserdom !
I  throw  it  in  the  midst  of  you;  scramble  for  it !

THE   LAD.

Is  the  crown  given  in  ?

PEER.

Of  the  loveliest  straw.
It  will  fit  whoever  first  puts  it  on.
Hei,  there  is  more  yet !     An  addled  egg  !
A  madman's  grey  hair  !     And  the  Prophet's  beard  !
All  these  shall  be  his  that  will  show  on  the  hillside
a  post  that  has  writ  on  it :  Here  hes  your  path !

THE    bailiff!

{zvho  has  coine  up).

You're  carrying  on,  my  good  man,  so  that  almost

I  think  that  your  path  will  lead  straight  to  the  lock-up.

PEER

{hat  in  hand).
Quite  likely.     But,  tell  me,  who  was  Peer  Gynt  ?

THE    BAILIFF.

Oh,  nonsense

^  See  footnote,  p.  99.


Sc.  iv.]  Peer  Gynt.  233


PEER.

Your  pardon  !     Most  humbly  I  beg —

THE   BAILIFF.

Oh,  he's  said  to  have  been  an  abominable  liar 1

PEER.

A  liar ?

THE   BAILIFF.

Yes — all  that  was  strong  and  great
he  made  believe  always  that  he  had  done  it.

But,  excuse  me,  friend — I  have  other  duties

{Goes^

PEER.

And  where  is  he  now,  this  remarkable  man  ?

AN    ELDERLY    MAN.

He  fared  over  seas  to  a  foreign  land ;

it  went  ill  with  him  there,  as  one  well  might  foresee; —

it's  many  a  year  now  since  he  was  hanged.

PEER.

Hanged  ?     Ay,  ay  !     Why,  I  thought  as  much ;
our  lamented  Peer  Gynt  was  himself  to  the  last.

{Bows^
Good-bye, — and  best  thanks  for  to-day's  merry  meeting.

iyGoes  a  few  steps  ^  but  stops  again.)
You  joyous  youngsters,  you  comely  lasses, —
shall  I  pay  my  shot  with  a  traveller's  tale  ?

1  "Digter";  means  also  **  poet."


234  Peer  Gvnt.  [Act  v.

SEVERAL   VOICES.

Yes  j  do  you  know  any  ?

PEER.

Nothing  more  easy. —
{He  comes  nearer ;  a  look  of  strangeness  comes  over
him.)
I  was  gold-digging  once  in  San  Francisco.
There  were  mountebanks  swarming  all  over  the  town.
One  with  his  toes  could  perform  on  the  fiddle ;
another  could  dance  a  Spanish  hailing ^  on  his  knees;
a  third,  I  was  told,  kept  on  making  verses
while  his  brain-pan  was  having  a  hole  bored  right  through  it.
To  the  mountebank-meeting  came  also  the  devil ; —
thought  he'd  try  his  luck  with  the  rest  of  them.
His  talent  was  this  :  in  a  manner  convincing,
he  was  able  to  grunt  like  a  flesh-and-blood  pig.
He  was  not  recognised,  yet  his  manners ^  attracted.
The  house  was  well  filled ;  expectation  ran  high.
He  stepped  forth  in  a  cloak  with  an  ample  cape  to  it ;
man  muss  sick  drappiren,  as  the  Germans  say.
But  under  the  mantle — what  none  suspected —
he'd  managed  to  smuggle  a  real  live  pig.
And  now  he  opened  the  representation ;
the  devil  he  pinched,  and  the  pig  gave  voice.
The  whole  thing  purported  to  be  a  fantasia
on  the  porcine  existence,  both  free  and  in  bonds ;
"«nd  all  ended  up  with  a  slaughter-house  squeal —
Qy;hereupon  the  performer  bowed  low  and  retired. —
\e  critics  discussed  and  appraised  the  affair ;
tone  of  the  whole  was  attacked  and  defended.

1  See  footnote,  p.  29.
In  the  original,  *'  Personlig  j^  personality.

H


Sc.  v.]  Peer  Gynt.  235

Some  fancied  the  vocal  expression  too  thin,

while  some  thought  the  death-shriek  too  carefully  studied ;

but  all  were  agreed  as  to  one  thing :  qua  grunt,

the  performance  was  grossly  exaggerated. —

Now  that^  you  see,  came  of  the  devil's  stupidity

in  not  taking  the  measure  of  his  public  first.

i^He  bows  and  goes  off.     A  puzzled  silence  comes
over  the  crowd.)


SCENE   FIFTH.

( Whitsun  Eve. — In  the  depths  of  the  forest.  To  the  backy
in  a  clearing,  is  a  hut  with  a  pair  of  reindeer  hortis
over  the  porch-gable.)

(peer  gynt  is  creeping  among  the  undergrowth,  gathering
wild  onions^

PEER.

Well,  this  is  one  standpoint.     Where  is  the  next  ?
One  should  try  all  things  and  choose  the  best.
Well,  I  have  done  so, — beginning  from  Caesar,
and  downwards  as  far  as  to  Nebuchadnezzar.
So  I  had,  after  all,  to  go  through  Bible  history; —
the  old  boy's  had  to  take  to  his  mother  again.
After  all  it  is  written  :  Of  the  earth  art  thou  come. —
The  main  thing  in  life  is  to  fill  one's  belly.
Fill  it  with  onions  ?     That's  not  much  good ; —
I  must  take  to  cunning,  and  set  out  snares.
There's  water  in  the  beck  here ;  I  shan't  suffer  thirst  j
and  I  count  as  the  first  'mong  the  beasts  after  all.
When  my  time  comes  to  die — as  most  likely  it  will, — >
I  shall  crawl  in  under  a  wind-fallen  tree ;


236  Peer  GynT.  [Act  v.

like  the  bear,  I  will  heap  up  a  leaf-mound  above  me,
and  I'll  scratch  in  big  print  on  the  bark  of  the  tree  :
Here  rests  Peer  Gynt,  that  decent  soul,
Kaiser  o'er  all  of  the  other  beasts. —
Kaiser  ?

{Laughs  tftwardly.)
Why,  you  old  soothsayer-humbug  !
no  Kaiser  are  you  ;  you  are  nought  but  an  onion.
I'm  going  to  peel  you  now,  my  good  Peer !
You  won't  escape  either  by  begging  or  howling.

{Takes  an  onion  and  pulls  off  layer  after  layer.)

There  lies  the  outermost  layer,  all  torn ;

that's  the  shipwrecked  man  on  the  jolly-boat's  keel.

Here's  the  passenger  layer,  scanty  and  thin  ; —

and  yet  in  its  taste  there's  a  tang  of  Peer  Gynt.

Next  underneath  is  the  gold-digger  ego ;

the  juice  is  all  gone — if  it  ever  had  any.

This  coarse-grained  layer  with  the  hardened  skin

is  the  peltry-hunter  by  Hudson's  Bay.

The  next  one  looks  like  a  crown  ; — oh,  thanks  !

we'll  throw  it  away  without  more  ado.

Here's  the  archaeologist,  short  but  sturdy ;

and  here  is  the  Prophet,  juicy  and  fresh.

He  stinks,  as  the  Scripture  has  it,  of  lies,

enough  to  bring  the  water  to  an  honest  man's  eyes.

This  layer  that  rolls  itself  softly  together

is  the  gentleman,  living  in  ease  and  good  cheer.

The  next  one  seems  sick.    There  are  black  streaks  upon  it  j —

black  symbolises  both  parsons  and  niggers.

{Fulls  off  several  layers  at  once.)
What  an  enormous  number  of  swathings  !
Isn't  the  kernel  soon  coming  to  light  ?

{Fulls  the  whole  onion  to  j^ieces.)


Sc.  v.]  Peer  Gynt.  237

Fm  blest  if  it  is  !    To  the  innermost  centre,

it's  nothing  but  swathings — each  smaller  and  smaller. —

Nature  is  witty  !

{Throws  the  fragments  away.)
The  devil  take  brooding !
If  one  goes  about  thinking,  one's  apt  to  stumble.
Well,  /  can  at  any  rate  laugh  at  that  danger  ; —
for  here  on  all  fours  I  am  firmly  planted.
{Scratches  his  head.)
A  queer  enough  business,  the  whole  concern  !
Life,  as  they  say,  plays  with  cards  up  its  sleeve ;  ^
but  when  one  snatches  at  them,  they've  disappeared,
and  one  grips  something  else, — or  else  nothing  at  all.

{He  has  come  7iear  to  the  hut ;  he  catches  sight  of  it
and  starts.)

This  hut  ?     On  the  heath !     Ha  !

{Rubs  his  eyes.)

It  seems  exactly
as  though  I  had  known  this  same  building  before. —
The  reindeer-horns  jutting  above  the  gable  ! —
A  mermaid,  shaped  like  a  fish  from  the  navel ! —
Lies  !  there's  no  mermaid  !     But  nails — and  planks, —
bars  too,  to  shut  out  hobgoblin  thoughts  ! —

SOLVEIG

{singing  in  the  hut).

Now  all  is  ready  for  Whitsun  Eve.
Dearest  boy  of  mine,  far  away,
comest  thou  soon  ?

^  This  and  the  following  line,  literally  translated,  run  thus:  "Life,
as  it's  called,  has  a  fox  behind  its  ear.  But  when  one  grasps  at  him,
Reynard  takes  to  his  heels."  "To  have  a  fox  behind  the  ear"  is  a
proverbial  expression  for  insincerity,  double-dealing.


238  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

Is  thy  burden  heavy,
take  time,  take  time ; —
I  will  await  thee ;
I  promised  of  old.^

PEER

(riseSy  quiet  and  deadly  pale).

One  that's  remembered, — and  one  that's  forgot.
One  that  has  squandered, — and  one  that  has  saved. —    ^
Oh,  earnest ! — and  never  can  the  game  be  played  o'er  !
Oh,  dread  1^ — here  was  my  Kaiserdom  !

{Hurries  off  along  the  wood  path.)


SCENE  SIXTH.

{Night.  A  heathy  with  fir-trees.  A  forest  fire  has  been
raging ;  charred  t7'ee-tru7iks  are  seen  stretching  for
miles.  White  mists  here  and  there  cli?iging  to  the
earth.)

(peer  gynt  co?nes  running  over  the  heath.)

PEER.

Ashes,  fog-scuds,  dust  wind-driven, —

here's  enough  for  building  with  !

Stench  and  rottenness  within  it ;

all  a  whited  sepulchre.

Figments,  dreams,  and  still-born  knowledge

lay  the  pyramid's  foundation  ;

o'er  them  shall  the  work  mount  upwards,

with  its  step  on  step  of  falsehood.

^  See  footnote,  p.  178.  ^  See  footnote,  p.  219.


Sc.  vi.]  Peer  Gynt.  239

Earnest  shunned,  repentance  dreaded,
flaunt  at  the  apex  like  a  scutcheon,
fill  the  trump  of  judgment  with  their  :
Petrus  Gyntus  Ccesar  fecit  1

{Listens.)
What  is  this,  like  children's  weeping  ?
Weeping,  but  half-way  to  song. —
Thread-balls  ^  at  my  feet  are  rolling  ! —
{Kicking  at  them.)
Off  with  you  !     You  block  my  path  !

THE   THREAD-BALLS

{on  the  gromid).
We  are  thoughts ;
thou  shouldst  have  thought  us ; —
feet  to  run  on
thou  shouldst  have  given  us  !

PEER

{going  rotmd  about).

I  have  given  life  to  one  ; —

'twas  a  bungled,  crook-legged  thing  !

THE  THREAD-BALLS.

We  should  have  soared  up
like  clangorous  voices, —
and  here  we  must  trundle
as  grey-yarn  thread-balls.

PEER

{stu7nbling).

Thread-clue  !     You  accursed  scamp  !
Would  you  trip  your  father's  heels  ?

{Flees.)
^  See  Introduction,  p.  vi.


240  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

WITHERED    LEAVES

{flyhig  before  the  wi?id).

We  are  a  watchword  ;

thou  shouldst  have  proclaimed  us  !

See  how  thy  dozing

has  wofully  riddled  us.

The  worm  has  gnawed  us

in  every  crevice ;

we  have  never  twined  us

like  wreaths  round  fruitage.

PEER.

Not  in  vain  your  birth,  however  ; —
lie  but  still  and  serve  as  manure.

A   SIGHING  IN   THE  AIR.

We  are  songs ;

thou  shouldst  have  sung  us  ! —

a  thousand  times  over

hast  thou  cowed  us  and  smothered  us.

Down  in  thy  heart's  pit

we  have  lain  and  waited  ; —

we  were  never  called  forth.

In  thy  gorge  be  poison  !

PEER.

Poison  thee,  thou  foolish  stave  !
Had  I  time  for  verse  and  stuff?

{Attempts  a  short  cut. )

^-'  DEWDROPS

' '  {dripping  from  the  branches).

Wf  a  are  tears
uri  shed  for  ever.


Sc.  vi.]  Peer  Gynt.  241

Ice-spears,  sharp-wounding,
we  could  have  melted.
Now  the  barb  rankles
in  the  shaggy  bosom  ; —
the  wound  is  closed  over ;
our  power  is  ended.

PEER.

Thanks ; — I  wept  in  Ronde-cloisters, —
none  the  less  they  tied  the  tail  on !

BROKEN   STRAWS.

We  are  deeds ;

thou  shouldst  have  achieved  us  !

Doubt,  the  throttler,

has  crippled  and  riven  us.

On  the  Day  of  Judgment

we'll  come  a-flock,

and  tell  the  story, —

then  woe  to  you  !

PEER.

Rascal-tricks  !     How  dare  you  debit
what  is  negative  against  me  ?

{^Hastens  away.)

ASE'S    VOICE

{far  away).
Fie,  what  a  post-boy  !
Hu,  you've  upset  me  !
Snow's  newly  fallen  here ; —
sadly  it's  smirched  me. —
You've  driven  me  the  wrong  way.
Peer,  where's  the  castle  ?
The  Fiend  has  misled  you
with  the  switch  from  the  cupboard !

16


242  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

Better  haste  away,  poor  fellow !
With  the  devil's  sins  upon  you,
soon  you'll  faint  upon  the  hillside ; —
hard  enough  to  bear  one's  own  sins.

(Jiuns  off.)


SCENE  SEVENTH.
(Another  part  of  the  heath,)

PEER   GYNT

{sings).

A  sexton  !  A  sexton  !  where  are  you,  hounds  ?
A  song  from  braying  precentor-mouths ;
around  your  hat-brim  a  mourning  band ; —
my  dead  are  many ;  I  must  follow  their  biers  !

(the  button-moulder,  with  a  box  of  tools ^  and  a
large  casting-ladle^  comes  from  a  side  path.)

the  button-moulder.
Well  met,  old  gaffer  !

PEER.

Good  evening,  friend.

THE   button-moulder.

The  man's  in  a  hurry.     Why,  where  is  he  going  ?

PEER.

To  a  grave-feast.


Sc.  vii.]  Peer  Gynt.  243

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Indeed  ?     My  sight's  not  very  good ; —
excuse  me, — your  name  doesn't  chance  to  be  Peer  ?

PEER.

Peer  Gynt,  as  the  saying  is.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

That  I  call  luck  !
It's  precisely  Peer  Gynt  I  am  sent  for  to-night.

PEER.

You're  sent  for  ?    What  do  you  want  ?

THE  BUTTON-MOULDER.

Why,  see  here ;
I'm  a  button-moulder.     You're  to  go  into  my  ladle.

PEER.

And  what  to  do  there  ?

THE  BUTTON-MOULDER.

To  be  melted  up.

PEER.

To  be  melted?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Here  it  is,  empty  and  scoured.
Your  grave  is  dug  ready,  your  coffin  bespoke.
The  worms  in  your  body  will  live  at  their  ease  ; —
but  I  have  orders,  without  delay,
on  Master's  behalf  to  fetch  in  your  soul.


244  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.


t


PEER.

It  can't  be  !     Like  this,  without  any  warning-

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

It's  an  old  tradition  at  burials  and  births
to  appoint  in  secret  the  day  of  the  feast,
with  no  warning  at  all  to  the  guest  of  honour.

PEER.

Ay,  ay,  that's  true.     All  my  brain's  awhirl.
You  are ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Why,  I  told  you — a  button-moulder.

PEER.

I  see !    A  pet  child  has  many  nicknames.

So  that's  it,  Peer ;  it  is  there  you're  to  harbour  !

But  these,  my  good  man,  are  most  unfair  proceedings  !

I'm  sure  I  deserve  better  treatment  than  this ; —

I'm  not  nearly  so  bad  as  perhaps  you  think, —

I've  done  a  good  deal  of  good  in  the  world ; —

at  worst  you  may  call  me  a  sort  of  a  bungler, —

but  certainly  not  an  exceptional  sinner.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Why  that  is  precisely  the  rub,  my  man  ;
you're  no  sinner  at  all  in  the  higher  sense ;
that's  why  you're  excused  all  the  torture-pangs,
and  land,  like  others,  in  the  casting-ladle.

PEER.

Give  it  what  name  you  please — call  it  ladle  or  pool  -^
spruce  ale  and  swipes,  they  are  both  of  them  beer.
Avaunt  from  me,  Satan  !

^  "  Pol,"  otherwise  "  Svovlpol " — the  sulphur  pool  of  hell.


Sc.  viL]  Peer  Gynt.  245

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

You  can't  be  so  rude
as  to  take  my  foot  for  a  horse's  hoof?

PEER.

On  horse's  hoof  or  on  fox's  claws  ^ —

be  off;  and  be  careful  what  you're  about !

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

My  friend,  you're  making  a  great  mistake.
We're  both  in  a  hurry,  and  so,  to  save  time,
I'll  explain  the  reason  of  the  whole  affair.
You  are,  with  your  own  lips  you  told  me  so,
no  sinner  on  the  so-called  heroic  scale, —
scarce  middling  even


to  talk  common  sense-


PEER.

Ah,  now  you're  beginning


THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Just  have  patience  a  bit — •
but  to  call  you  virtuous  would  be  going  too  far. —

PEER.

Well,  you  know  I  have  never  laid  claim  to  that.

THE    BUTTON-MOULDER.

You're  nor  one  thing  nor  t'other  then,  only  so-so.

A  sinner  of  really  grandiose  style

is  nowadays  not  to  be  met  on  the  highways.

It  wants  much  more  than  merely  to  wallow  in  mire;

for  both  vigour  and  earnestness  go  to  a  sin.

^  See  footnote,  p.  237.


246  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

Ay,  it's  very  true,  that  remark  of  yours;
one  has  to  lay  on,  Hke  the  old  Berserkers.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

You,  friend,  on  the  other  hand,  took  your  sin  lightly.

PEER.

Only  outwardly,  friend,  like  a  splash  of  mud.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Ah,  we'll  soon  be  at  one  now.     The  sulphur  pool
is  no  place  for  you,  who  but  plashed  in  the  mire.

PEER.

And  in  consequence,  friend,  I  can  go  as  I  came  ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

No,  in  consequence,  friend,  I  must  melt  you  up.

PEER.

What  tricks  are  these  that  you've  hit  upon

at  home  here,  while  I've  been  in  foreign  parts  ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

The  custom's  as  old  as  the  Snake's  creation;

it's  designed  to  prevent  loss  of  good  material

You've  worked  at  the  craft — you  must  know  that  often

a  casting  turns  out,  to  speak  plainly,  mere  dross ;

the  buttons,  for  instance,  have  sometimes  no  loop  to  them.

What  did  you  do,  then  ?

PEER.

Flung  the  rubbish  away.


Sc.  vii.]  Peer  Gynt.  247

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Ah,  yes ;  Jon  Gynt  was  well  known  for  a  waster,

so  long  as  he'd  aught  left  in  wallet  or  purse.

But  Master,  you  see,  he  is  thrifty,  he  isj

and  that  is  why  he's  so  well-to-do.

He  flings  nothing  away  as  entirely  worthless

that  can  be  made  use  of  as  raw  material.

Now,  you  were  designed  for  a  shining  button

on  the  vest  of  the  world ;  but  your  loop  gave  way;

so  into  the  waste-box  you  needs  must  go,

and  then,  as  they  phrase  it,  be  merged  in  the  mass.

PEER.

You're  surely  not  meaning  to  melt  me  up,

with  Dick,  Tom,  and  Harry,^  into  something  new  ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

That's  just  what  I  do  mean,  and  nothing  else.
We've  done  it  already  to  plenty  of  folks.
At  Kongsberg2  they  do  just  the  same  with  money
that's  been  current  so  long  that  its  stamp's  worn  away.

PEER.

But  this  is  the  wretchedest  miserliness  !
My  dear  good  friend,  let  me  get  off  free; —
a  loopless  button,  a  worn  out  farthing, —
what  is  that  to  a  man  in  your  Master's  position  ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Oh,  so  long,  and  inasmuch  as,  the  spirit's  in  one,
one  always  has  value  as  so  much  metal.

1  Literally,  "  With  Peter  and  Paul."

2  The  Royal  Mint  is  at  Kongsberg,  a  town  in  southern  Norway.


248  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

No,  I  say  !     No  !     With  both  teeth  and  claws
I'll  fight  against  this  !     Sooner  anything  else  !

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

But  what  else  ?     Come  now,  be  reasonable.
You  know  you're  not  airy  enough  for  heaven

PEER.

I'm  not  hard  to  content ;  I  don't  aim  so  high ; —
but  I  won't  be  deprived  of  one  doit  of  my  Self.
Have  me  judged  by  the  law  in  the  old-fashioned  way  !
For  a  certain  time  place  me  with  Him  of  the  Hoof; —
say  a  hundred  years,  come  the  worst  to  the  worst;
that,  now,  is  a  thing  that  one  surely  can  bear";
for  they  say  the  torment  is  only  moral,
so  it  can't  after  all  be  so  pyramidal.
It  is,  as  'tis  written,  a  mere  transition;
and  as  the  fox  said :  One  waits ;  there  comes
an  hour  of  deliverance ;  one  lives  in  seclusion,
and  hopes  in  the  meantime  for  happier  days. —
But  this  other  notion — to  have  to  be  merged,
like  a  mote,  in  the  carcass  of  some  outsider, —
this  casting-ladle  business,  this  Gynt-cessation, —
it  stirs  up  my  innermost  soul  in  revolt !

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Bless  me,  my  dear  Peer,  there  is  surely  no  need
to  get  so  wrought  up  about  trifles  like  this.
Yourself  you  never  have  been  at  all ; —
then  what  does  it  matter,  your  dying  right  out  ?

PEER.

Have  /  not  been ?     I  could  almost  laugh  !

Peer  Gynt,  then,  has  been  something  else,  I  suppose  !


Sc.  vii.]  Peer  Gynt.  249

No,  Button-moulder,  you  judge  in  the  dark.

If  you  could  but  look  into  my  very  reins,

you'd  find  only  Peer  there,  and  Peer  all  through, —

nothing  else  in  the  world,  no,  nor  anything  more.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

It's  impossible.     Here  I  have  got  my  orders.

Look,  here  it  is  written  :  Peer  Gynt  shalt  thou  summon.

He  has  set  at  defiance  his  life's  design ;

clap  him  into  the  ladle  with  other  spoilt  goods.

PEER.

What  nonsense  !     They  must  mean  some  other  person.
Is  it  really  Peer  ?     It's  not  Rasmus,  or  Jon  ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

It  is  many  a  day  since  I  melted  them.

So  come  quietly  now,  and  don't  waste  my  time.

PEER.

I'll  be  damned  if  I  do  !     Ay,  'twould  be  a  fine  thing
if  it  turned  out  to-morrow  some  one  else  was  meant.
You'd  better  take  care  what  you're  at,  my  good  man  !
think  of  the  onus  you're  taking  upon  you •

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

I  have  it  in  writing

PEER.

At  least  give  me  time  !

THE    BUTTON-MOULDER.

What  good  would  that  do  you  ?


250  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

I'll  use  it  to  prove
that  I've  been  myself  all  the  days  of  my  life  ;
and  that's  the  question  that's  in  dispute.

THE    BUTTON-MOULDER.

You'll  prove  it  ?     And  how  ?

PEER.

Why,  by  vouchers  and  witnesses.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

I'm  sadly  afraid  Master  will  not  accept  them.

PEER.

Impossible  !     However,  enough  for  the  day^ — !
My  dear  man,  allow  me  a  loan  of  myself;
I'll  be  back  again  shortly.     One  is  born  only  once,
and  one's  self,  as  created,  one  fain  would  stick  to.
Come,  are  we  agreed  ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Very  well  then,  so  be  it.
But  remember,  we  meet  at  the  next  cross-roads.

(peer  gynt  runs  off.)
^  See  footnote,  p.  226.


Sc.  viii.]  Peer  Gynt.  251

SCENE   EIGHTH.
{A  further  point  on  the  heath.)

PEER

{running  hard).

Time  is  money,  as  the  scripture  says.

If  I  only  knew  where  the  cross-roads  are ; — •

they  may  be  near  and  they  may  be  far.

The  earth  burns  beneath  me  Hke  red-hot  iron.

A  witness  !     A  witness  !     Oh,  where  shall  I  find  one  ?

It's  almost  unthinkable  here  in  the  forest.

The  world  is  a  bungle  !     A  wretched  arrangement,

when  a  man  must  prove  a  right  that's  as  patent  as  day  !

(An  OLD  MAN,  bent  with  age^  with  a  staff  in  his  hand
and  a  bag  on  his  back^  is  trudging  in  front  of  him.)

THE   OLD   MAN

{stops).
Dear,  kind  sir — a  trifle  to  a  houseless  soul !

PEER.

Excuse  me ;  I've  got  no  small  change  in  my  pocket

THE   OLD    MAN.


Prince  Peer !     Oh,  to  think  we  should  meet  again !

Who  are  you  ?


PEER


THE   OLD    MAN.

You  forget  the  Old  Man  in  the  Ronde?


252  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

Why,  you're  never ?

THE   OLD    MAN.

The  King  of  the  Dovre,  my  boy  !

PEER.

The  Dovre-King  ?     Really  ?     The  Dovre-King  ?     Speak  !

THE    OLD    MAN.

Oh,  I've  come  terribly  down  in  the  world !

PEER.

Ruined  ?

THE    OLD   MAN.

Ay,  plundered  of  every  stiver.
Here  am  I  tramping  it,  starved  as  a  wolf.

PEER.

Hurrah  !     Such  a  witness  doesn't  grow  on  the  trees  !

THE   OLD    MAN.

My  Lord  Prince,  too,  has  grizzled  a  bit  since  we  met.

PEER.

My  dear  father-in-law,  the  years  gnaw  and  wear  one. —
Well  well,  a  truce  to  all  private  affairs, —
and  pray,  above  all  things,  no  family  jars.
I  was  then  a  sad  madcap

THE   OLD    MAN.

Oh  yes  ;  oh  yes ; —
His  Highness  was  young;  and  what  won't  one  do  then?


Sc.  viii.]  Peer  Gynt.  253

But  his  Highness  was  wise  in  rejecting  his  bride ;
he  saved  himself  thereby  both  worry  and  shame  ;
for  since  then  she's  utterly  gone  to  the  bad

PEER.

Indeed !

THE   OLD   MAN.

She  has  led  a  deplorable  life;^
and,  just  think, — she  and  Trond  are  now  living  together.


Which  Trond  ?


PEER.
THE   OLD   MAN.

Of  the  Valfjeld.

PEER.

It's  he  ?    Aha ;
it  was  he  I  cut  out  with  the  saeter-girls.

THE  OLD   MAN.

But  my  grandson  has  flourished — grown  both  stout  and

great,
and  has  strapping  children  all  over  the  country

PEER.

Now,  my  dear  man,  spare  us  this  flow  of  words  ; —
I've  sometlung  quite  different  troubling  my  mind. —
I've  got  into  rather  a  ticklish  position,
and  am  greatly  in  need  of  a  witness  or  voucher; —
that's  how  you  could  help  me  best,  father-in-law,
and  I'll  find  you  a  trifle  to  drink  my  health  with.

^  "  Ilun  gik  nu  for  koldt  vand  og  lud  " — literally,  "  to  live  on  cold
water  and  lye  " — to  live  wretchedly  and  be  badly  treated.


254  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.


THE   OLD    MAN.


You  don't  say  so  ;  can  I  be  of  use  to  his  Highness  ?
You'll  give  me  a  character,  then,  in  return  ?

PEER.

Most  gladly.     I'm  somewhat  hard  pressed  for  cash,
and  must  cut  down  expenses  in  every  direction.
Now  hear  what's  the  matter.     No  doubt  you  remember
that  night  when  I  came  to  the  Ronde  a-wooing

THE   OLD   MAN.

Why,  of  course,  my  Lord  Prince  !

PEER.

Oh,  no  more  of  the  Prince  !
But  no  matter.    You  wanted,  by  sheer  brute  force,
to  bias  my  sight,  with  a  slit  in  the  lens,
and  to  change  me  about  from  Peer  Gynt  to  a  troll.
What  did  /do  then  ?     I  stood  out  against  it, —
swore  I  would  stand  on  no  feet  but  my  own ;
love,  power,  and  glory  at  once  I  renounced,
and  all  for  the  sake  of  remaining  myself.
Now  this  fact,  you  see,  you  must  swear  to  in  Court

THE   OLD   MAN.

No,  I'm  blest  if  I  can.

PEER.

Why,  what  nonsense  is  this  ?

THE   OLD   MAN.

You  surely  don't  want  to  compel  me  to  lie  ?

You  pulled  on  the  troll-breeches,  don't  you  remember,

and  tasted  the  mead


Sc.  viii.]  Peer  Gynt.  255

PEER.

Ay,  you  lured  me  seductively  ; —
but  I  flatly  declined  the  decisive  test,
and  that  is  the  thing  you  must  judge  your  man  by.
It's  the  end  of  the  ditty  that  all  depends  on.

THE   OLD    MAN.

But  it  ended,  Peer,  just  in  the  opposite  way.

PEER.

What  rubbish  is  this  ?

THE   OLD   MAN.

When  you  left  the  Ronde,
you  inscribed  my  motto  upon  your  'scutcheon.^

PEER.

What  motto  ?

THE   OLD    MAN.

The  potent  and  sundering  word.

PEER.

The  word  ?

THE   OLD   MAN.

That  which  severs  the  whole  race  of  men
from  the  troll-folk.     Troll!     To  thyself  be  enough!

PEER

i^falls  hack  a  step).
Enough  !

THE   OLD   MAN.

And  with  every  nerve  in  your  body,
you've  being  living  up  to  it  ever  since.

^  Literally,  **  Wrote  my  motto  behind  your  ear."


256  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

What,  I  ?     Peer  Gynt  ?

THE   OLD   MAN

i^eeps).

It's  ungrateful  of  you  !
You've  lived  as  a  troll,  but  have  still  kept  it  secret.
The  word  I  taught  you  has  shown  you  the  way
to  swing  yourself  up  as  a  man  of  substance  ; —
and  now  you  must  needs  come  and  turn  up  your  nose
at  me  and  the  word  you've  to  thank  for  it  all.

PEER.

Enough  I     A  hill-troll !     An  egoist !

This  must  be  all  rubbish ;  that's  perfectly  certain  !

THE   OLD   MAN

(j}u//s  out  a  bundle  of  old  newspapers).

I  daresay  you  think  that  we've  no  newspapers  ?

Wait ;  here  Pll  show  you  in  red  and  black, ^

how  the  Bloksberg  Post  eulogises  you ;

and  the  Heklefj eld  Journal  has  done  the  same

ever  since  the  winter  you  left  the  country. —

Do  you  care  to  read  them  ?     You're  welcome,  Peer.

Here's  an  article,  look  you,  signed  "  Stallionhoof."

And  here  too  is  one  :  "On  Troll-Nationalism."

The  writer  points  out  and  lays  stress  on  the  truth

that  horns  and  a  tail  are  of  little  importance,

so  long  as  one  has  but  a  strip  of  the  hide.

"Our  enough"  he  concludes,  "gives  the  hall-mark  of  trolldom

to  man," — and  proceeds  to  cite  you  as  an  instance.

^  Clearly  the  troll-substitute  for  "in  black  and  white."


Sc.  viii.]  Peer  Gynt.  257

PEER.

A  hill-troll?     I?

THE  OLD   MAN.

Yes,  that's  perfectly  clear.

PEER.

Might  as  well  have  stayed  quietly  where  I  was  ?
Might  have  stopped  in  the  Ronde  in  comfort  and  peace  ?
Saved  my  trouble  and  toil  and  no  end  of  shoe-leather  ?
Peer  Gynt— a  troll  ?     Why  it's  rubbish  !     It's  stuff !
Good-bye  !     There's  a  halfpenny  to  buy  you  tobacco.

THE   OLD    MAN.

Nay,  my  good  Prince  Peer  !

PEER.

Let  me  go !    You're  mad,
or  else  doting.     Off  to  the  hospital  with  you  !

THE   OLD   MAN.

Oh,  that  is  exactly  what  I'm  in  search  of.

But,  as  I  told  you,  my  grandson's  offspring

have  become  overwhelmingly  strong  in  the  land,

and  they  say  that  I  only  exist  in  books.

The  saw  says  :  One's  kin  are  unkindest  of  all ;

I've  found  to  my  cost  that  that  saying  is  true.

It's  cruel  to  count  as  mere  figment  and  fable


PEER.

My  dear  man,  there  are  others  who  share  the  same  fate.

THE   OLD   MAN.

And  ourselves  we've  no  Mutual  Aid  Society,

no  alms-box  or  Penny  Savings  Bank ; —

in  the  Ronde,  of  course,  they'd  be  out  of  place.

17


258  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

No,  that  cursed  :  To  thyself  be  enough  was  the  word  there  !

THE   OLD    MAN.

Oh,  come  now,  the  Prince  can't  complain  of  the  word.
And  if  he  could  manage  by  hook  or  by  crook

PEER.

My  man,  you  have  got  on  the  wrong  scent  entirely ;
I'm  myself,  as  the  saying  goes,  fairly  cleaned  out^


THE   OLD   MAN.

You  surely  can't  mean  it  ?     His  Highness  a  beggar  ?

PEER.

Completely.     His  Highness's  ego's  in  pawn.
And  it's  all  your  fault,  you  accursed  trolls  !
That's  what  comes  of  keeping  bad  company.

THE   OLD   MAN.

So  there  came  my  hope  toppling  down  from  its  perch  again  !
Good-bye  !     I  had  best  struggle  on  to  the  town

PEER.

What  would  you  do  there  ?

THE   OLD   MAN.

I  will  go  to  the  theatre.
The  papers  are  clamouring  for  national  talents

PEER.

Good  luck  on  your  journey ;  and  greet  them  from  me.
If  I  can  but  get  free,  I  will  go  the  same  way.

^  Literally,  "On  a  naked  hill."


Sc.  ix.]  Peer  Gynt.  259

A  farce  I  will  write  them,  a  mad  and  profound  one ;
its  name  shall  be  :  "  Sic  transit  gloria  mundi."

{He  runs  off  along  the  road;  the  old  man  shouts  after
him.)


SCENE   NINTH.
{At  a  cross-road.)

PEER   GYNT.

Now  comes  the  pinch,  Peer,  as  never  before !
This  Dovrish  Enough  has  passed  judgment  upon  you.
The  vessel's  a  wreck ;  one  must  float  with  the  spars.
All  else  j  only  not  to  the  spoilt-goods  heap !

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER

(at  the  cross-road).
Well  now,  Peer  Gynt,  have  you  found  your  voucher  ?

PEER.

Have  we  reached  the  cross-road  ?    Well,  that's  short  work  !

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

I  can  see  on  your  face,  as  it  were  on  a  signboard,
the  gist  of  the  paper  before  Pve  read  it.

PEER.

I  got  tired  of  the  hunt ; — one  might  lose  one's  way


THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Yes  ;  and  what  does  it  lead  to,  after  all  ?


26o  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

True  enough  ;  in  the  wood,  and  by  night  as  well


THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

There's  an  old  man,  though,  trudging.     Shall  we  call  him
here?

PEER.

No,  let  him  go.     He  is  drunk,  my  dear  fellow  !

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

But  perhaps  he  might

PEER.

Hush  ;  no — let  him  be  !

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER,

Well,  shall  we  turn  to  then  ?

PEER.

One  question  only :
What  is  it,  at  bottom,  this  "  being  oneself"?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

A  singular  question,  most  odd  in  the  mouth
of  a  man  who  just  now

PEER.

Come,  a  straightforward  answer.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

To  be  oneself  is  :  to  slay  oneself.

But  on  you  that  answer  is  doubtless  lost ;


Sc.  ix.]  Peer  Gynt.  261

and  therefore  we'll  say  :  to  stand  forth  everywhere
with  Master's  intention  displayed  like  a  signboard.

PEER.

But  suppose  a  man  never  has  come  to  know
what  Master  meant  with  him  ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

He  must  divine  it.

PEER.

But  how  oft  are  divinings  beside  the  mark, —
then  one's  carried  ad  undas^  in  middle  career.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

That  is  certain,  Peer  Gynt ;  in  default  of  divining
the  cloven-hoofed  gentleman  finds  his  best  hook.

PEER.

This  matter's  excessively  complicated. —

See  here  !     I  no  longer  plead  being  myself; —

it  might  not  be  easy  to  get  it  proven.

That  part  of  my  case  I  must  look  on  as  lost.

But  just  now,  as  I  wandered  alone  o'er  the  heath,

I  felt  my  conscience-shoe  pinching  me ;

I  said  to  myself :  After  all,  you're  a  sinner

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

You  seem  bent  on  beginning  all  over  again

PEER.

No,  very  far  from  it ;  a  great  one  I  mean  ;
not  only  in  deeds,  but  in  words  and  desires.
I've  lived  a  most  damnable  life  abroad

1  So  in  original.


262  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Perhaps  ;  I  must  ask  you  to  show  me  the  schedule  !

PEER.

Well  well,  give  me  time ;  I  will  find  out  a  parson,
confess  with  all  speed,  and  then  bring  you  his  voucher.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Ay,  if  you  can  bring  me  that,  then  it  is  clear
you  escape  this  business  of  the  casting-ladle.
But  Peer,  Fd  my  orders

PEER.

The  paper  is  old ;
it  dates  no  doubt  from  a  long  past  period ; —
at  one  time  I  lived  with  disgusting  slackness,
went  playing  the  prophet,  and  trusted  in  Fate.
Well,  may  I  try  ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

But !

PEER.

My  dear  fellow,
I'm  sure  you  can't  have  so  much  to  do.
Here,  in  this  district,  the  air  is  so  bracing,
it  adds  an  ell  to  the  people's  ages.
Recollect  what  the  Justedal  parson  wrote  :
"It's  seldom  that  any  one  dies  in  this  valley."

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

To  the  next  cross-roads  then ;  but  not  a  step  further.


Sc.  X.]  Peer  Gynt.  263

PEER.

A  priest  I  must  catch,  if  it  be  with  the  tongs.
{^He  starts  rufining.)


SCENE   TENTH.

{A  heather-clad  hillside  with  a  path  following  the  windings
of  the  ridge.)

PEER.

This  may  come  in  useful  in  many  ways,
said  Esben  as  he  picked  up  a  magpie's  wing.
Who  could  have  thought  one's  account  of  sins
would  come  to  one's  aid  on  the  last  night  of  all  ?
Well,  whether  or  no,  it's  a  ticklish  business  ;
a  move  from  the  frying-pan^  into  the  fire ; —
but  then  there's  a  proverb  of  well-tried  validity
which  says  that  as  long  as  there's  life  there's  hope.

(a  lean  person,  in  a  priesfs  cassock^  kilted-iip
high,  and  with  a  Mr  ding-net  over  his  shoulder^
comes  hurry i7ig  alofig  the  ridge.)

PEER.

Who  goes  there  ?     A  priest  with  a  fowling-net !
Hei,  hop  !  I'm  the  spoilt  child  of  fortune  indeed  !
Good  evening,  Herr  Pastor  !  the  path  is  bad

the  lean  one.
Ah  yes;  but  what  wouldn't  one  do  for  a  soul?
1  Literally,  *•  the  ashes."


264  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

Aha  !  then  there's  some  one  bound  heavenwards  ?


Noj


THE   LEAN   ONE.

I  hope  he  is  taking  a  different  road.

PEER.

May  I  walk  with  Herr  Pastor  a  bit  of  the  way  ?

THE   LEAN   ONE.

With  pleasure  ;  I'm  partial  to  company.

PEER.

I  should  like  to  consult  you

THE   LEAN   ONE.

Heraus  !^    Go  ahead !

PEER.

You  see  here  before  you  a  good  sort  of  man.
The  laws  of  the  state  I  have  strictly  observed,
have  made  no  acquaintance  with  fetters  or  bolts  ; —
but  it  happens  at  times  that  one  misses  one's  footing
and  stumbles

THE   LEAN    ONE.

Ah  yes ;  that  occurs  to  the  best  of  us.

PEER.

Now  these  trifles  you  see

^  So  in  original.


Sc.  X.]  Peer  Gynt.  265

THE   LEAN   ONE.

Only  trifles  ?

PEER.

Yes;
from  sinning  en  gros  1  I  have  ever  refrained.

THE    LEAN    ONE.

Oh  then,  my  dear  fellow,  pray  leave  me  in  peace ; —
I'm  not  the  person  you  seem  to  think  me. —
You  look  at  my  fingers  ?    What  see  you  in  them  ?

PEER.

A  nail-system  somewhat  extremely  developed.

THE   LEAN   ONE.

And  now  ?    You  are  casting  a  glance  at  my  feet  ?

PEER

{pointing).
That's  a  natural  hoof?

THE   LEAN    ONE.

So  I  flatter  myself.

PEER

{raises  his  hat).

I'd  have  taken  my  oath  you  were  simply  a  parson ;

and  I  find  I've  the  honour .     Well,  best  is  best ; —

when  the  hall  door  stands  wide, — shun  the  kitchen  way;
when  the  king's  to  be  met  with, — avoid  the  lackey.

1  So  in  original.


266  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

THE   LEAN   ONE.

Your  hand !    You  appear  to  be  free  from  prejudice.
Say  on  then,  my  friend ;  in  what  way  can  I  serve  you  ?
Now  you  mustn't  ask  me  for  wealth  or  power;
I  couldn't  supply  them  although  I  should  hang  for  it.
You  can't  think  how  slack  the  whole  business  is ; —
transactions  have  dwindled  most  pitiably.
Nothing  doing  in  souls ;  only  now  and  again
a  stray  one

PEER.

The  race  has  improved  so  remarkably?

THE   LEAN   ONE.

No,  just  the  reverse;  it's  sunk  shamefully  low; — •
the  majority  end  in  a  casting-ladle.

PEER.

Ah  yes — I  have  heard  that  ladle  mentioned ;
in  fact,  'twas  the  cause  of  my  coming  to  you.

THE   LEAN   ONE.

Speak  out !

PEER.

If  it  were  not  too  much  to  ask,
I  should  like

THE   LEAN    ONE.

A  harbour  of  refuge  ?  eh  ?

PEER.

You've  guessed  my  petition  before  I  have  asked.
You  tell  me  the  business  is  going  awry;
so  I  daresay  you  will  not  be  over-particular.


Sc.  X.]  Peer  Gynt.  267

THE   LEAN   ONE.

But,  my  dear


PEER.

My  demands  are  in  no  way  excessive.
I  shouldn't  insist  on  a  salary;
but  treatment  as  friendly  as  things  will  permit.

THE  LEAN   ONE.

A  fire  in  your  room  ?

PEER.

Not  too  much  fire; — and  chiefly
the  power  of  departing  in  safety  and  peace, —
the  right,  as  the  phrase  goes,  of  freely  withdrawing
should  an  opening  offer  for  happier  days.

THE   LEAN   ONE.

My  dear  friend,  I  vow  I'm  sincerely  distressed ;

but  you  cannot  imagine  how  many  petitions

of  similar  purport  good  people  send  in

when  they're  quitting  the  scene  of  their  earthly  activity.

PEER.

But  now  that  I  think  of  my  past  career,

I  feel  I've  an  absolute  claim  to  admission


THE    LEAN    ONE.

*Twas  but  trifles,  you  said

PEER.

In  a  certain  sense  ;-
but,  now  I  remember,  I've  trafficked  in  slaves —


268  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

THE    LEAN    ONE.

There  are  men  that  have  trafficked  in  wills  and  souls,
but  who  bungled  it  so  that  they  failed  to  get  in.

PEER.

I've  shipped  Bramah-figures  in  plenty  to  China.

THE   LEAN    ONE.

Mere  fustian  again  !     Why,  we  laugh  at  such  things.
There  are  people  that  ship  off  far  gruesomer  figures
in  sermons,  in  art,  and  in  literature —
yet  have  to  stay  out  in  the  cold

PEER.

Ah,  but  then,
do  you  know — I  once  went  and  set  up  as  prophet !

THE    LEAN    ONE.

In  foreign  parts  ?     Humbug  !     Why,  most  people's  sehen

ins  Blaue^  ends  in  the  casting-ladle.

If  you've  no  more  than  that  to  rely  upon,

with  the  best  of  goodwill,  I  can't  possibly  house  you.

PEER.

But  hear  this  :  In  a  shipwreck — I  clung  to  a  boat's  keel, —
and  it's  written  :  A  drowning  man  grasps  at  a  straw, —
furthermore  it  is  written :  You're  nearest  yourself, —
so  I  half-way  divested  a  cook  of  his  life.

THE   LEAN   ONE.

It  were  all  one  to  me  if  a  kitchen-maid
you  had  half-way  divested  of  something  else.

*  So  in  original.


Sc.  X.]  Peer  Gynt.  269

What  sort  of  stuff  is  this  half-way  jargon,

saving  your  presence  ?     Who,  think  you,  would  care

to  throw  away  dearly-bought  fuel  in  times

Hke  these  on  such  spiritless  rubbish  as  this  ?

There  now,   don't   be   enraged;    'twas   your   sins   that    I

scoffed  at ;
and  excuse  my  speaking  my  mind  so  bluntly. —
Come,  my  dearest  friend,  banish  this  stuff  from  your  head,^
and  get  used  to  the  thought  of  the  casting-ladle.
What  would  you  gain  if  I  lodged  you  and  boarded  you  ?
Consider ;  I  know  you're  a  sensible  man.
Well,  you'd  keep  your  memory  ;  that's  so  far  true  ; —
but  the  retrospect  o'er  recollection's  domain
would  be,  both  for  heart  and  for  intellect,
what  the  Swedes  call  "Mighty  poor  sport "^  indeed.
You  have  nothing  either  to  howl  or  to  smile  about,
no  cause  for  rejoicing  nor  yet  for  despair,
nothing  to  make  you  feel  hot  or  cold ;
only  a  sort  of  a  something  to  fret  over.

PEER.

It  is  written  :  It's  never  so  easy  to  know
where  the  shoe  is  tight  that  one  isn't  wearing.

THE   LEAN   ONE,

Very  true ;  I  have — praise  be  to  so-and-so  ! —
no  occasion  for  more  than  a  single  odd  shoe.
But  it's  lucky  we  happened  to  speak  of  shoes ;
it  reminds  me  that  I  must  be  hurrying  on ; —
I'm  after  a  roast  that  I  hope  will  prove  fat ;
so  I  really  mustn't  stand  gossiping  here. —

^  Literally,  "knock  out  that  tooth."
2  "  Bra  litet  rolig."


270  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

And  may  one  inquire,  then,  what  sort  of  sin-diet
the  man  has  been  fattened  on  ?

THE   LEAN   ONE.

I  understand
he  has  been  himself  both  by  night  and  by  day,
and  that,  after  all,  is  the  principal  point.

PEER.

Himself?    Then  do  such  folks  belong  to  your  parish  ?

THE   LEAN   ONE.

That  depends ;  the  door,  at  least,  stands  ajar  for  them.

Remember,  in  two  ways  a  man  can  be

himself — there's  a  right  and  wrong  side  to  the  jacket.

You  know  they  have  lately  discovered  in  Paris

a  way  to  take  portraits  by  help  of  the  sun.

One  can  either  produce  a  straightforward  picture,

or  else  what  is  known  as  a  negative  one.

In  the  latter  the  lights  and  the  shades  are  reversed,

and  they're  apt  to  seem  ugly  to  commonplace  eyes ;

but  for  all  that  the  likeness  is  latent  in  them,

and  all  you  require  is  to  bring  it  out.

If,  then,  a  soul  shall  have  pictured  itself

in  the  course  of  its  life  by  the  negative  method,

the  plate  is  not  therefore  entirely  cashiered, —

but  without  more  ado  they  consign  it  to  me.

I  take  it  in  hand,  then,  for  further  treatment,

and  by  suitable  methods  effect  its  development.

I  steam  it,  I  dip  it,  I  burn  it,  I  scour  it,

with  sulphur  and  other  ingredients  like  that,

till  the  image  appears  which  the  plate  was  designed  for, —


Sc.  X.]  Peer  Gynt.  271

that,  namely,  which  people  call  positive.

But  if  one,  like  you,  has  smudged  himself  out,

neither  sulphur  nor  potash  avails  in  the  least.

PEER.

I  see ;  one  must  come  to  you  black  as  a  raven

to  turn  out  a  white  ptarmigan  ?     Pray  what's  the  name

inscribed  'neath  the  negative  counterfeit

that  you're  now  to  transfer  to  the  positive  side  ?

THE   LEAN    ONE.

The  name's  Peter  ^  Gynt.

PEER.

Peter  Gynt?     Indeed?
Is  Herr  Gynt  himself?

THE   LEAN    ONE.

Yes,  he  vows  he  is.

PEER.

Well,  he's  one  to  be  trusted,  that  same  Herr  Peter.

THE   LEAN   ONE.

You  know  him,  perhaps  ?

PEER.

Oh  yes,  after  a  fashion ; —
one  knows  all  sorts  of  people.

THE   LEAN   ONE.

I'm  pressed  for  time ;
where  saw  you  him  last  ?

^  So  in  original.


'272  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

PEER.

It  was  down  at  the  Cape.


Di  Buona  Speranza  ?


THE   LEAN   ONE.


PEER.


Just  SO ;  but  he  sails
very  shortly  again,  if  I'm  not  mistaken.

THE   LEAN   ONE.

I  must  hurry  off  then  without  delay.

I  only  hope  I  may  catch  him  in  time !

That  Cape  of  Good  Hope — I  could  never  abide  it ; —

it's  ruined  by  missionaries  from  Stavanger.

{He  rushes  off  southwards.)

PEER.

The  stupid  hound  !     There  he  takes  to  his  heels

with  his  tongue  lolling  out.     He'll  be  finely  sold.

It  delights  me  to  humbug  an  ass  like  that.

He  to  give  himself  airs,  and  to  lord  it  forsooth  !

He's  a  mighty  lot,  truly,  to  swagger  about !

He'll  scarcely  grow  fat  at  his  present  trade ; —

he'll  soon  drop  from  his  perch  with  his  whole  apparatus. —

Hm,  Fm  not  over-safe  in  the  saddle  either  j

I'm  expelled,  one  may  say,  from  self-owning  nobility.^

{A  shooting  star  is  seen;  he  nods  after  it.)

^  "  .SV/z/ejer-Adlen."  "  Selvejer  "  (literally,  "  self-owner")  means  a
freeholder,  as  opposed  to  a  *'  husmand"  or  tenant.  There  is  of  course
a  play  upon  words  in  the  original.


Sc.  X.]  Peer  Gynt.  273

Bear  all  hail  from  Peer  Gynt,  Brother  Starry-Flash  !
To  flash  forth,  to  go  out,  and  be  naught  at  a  gulp —

{Pulis  himself  together  as  though  in   terror^   and
goes  deeper  in  among  the  mists ;  stillness  for
awhile;  then  he  cries -^
Is  there  no  one,  no  one  in  all  the  turmoil, —
in  the  void  no  one,  no  one  in  heaven — !

{He  C07nes  forward  again  further  down^  throws  his
hat  upon  the  ground^  and  tears  at  his  hair.
By  degrees  a  stillness  comes  over  hiin.)

So  unspeakably  poor,  then,  a  soul  can  go

back  to  nothingness,  into  the  grey  of  the  mist.

Thou  beautiful  earth,  be  not  angry  with  me

that  I  trampled  thy  grasses  to  no  avail.

Thou  beautiful  sun,  thou  hast  squandered  away

thy  glory  of  light  in  an  empty  hut.

There  was  no  one  within  it  to  hearten  and  warm ; —

the  owner,  they  tell  me,  was  never  at  home.

Beautiful  sun  and  beautiful  earth,

you  were  foolish  to  bear  and  give  light  to  my  mother.

The  spirit  is  niggard  and  nature  lavish ;

and  dearly  one  pays  for  one's  birth  with  one's  life. —

I  will  clamber  up  high,  to  the  dizziest  peak ;

I  will  look  once  more  on  the  rising  sun,

gaze  till  Pm  tired  o'er  the  promised  land ;

then  try  to  get  snowdrifts  piled  up  over  me.

They  can  write  above  them  :  "  Here  No  One  lies  buried  ;  "

and  afterwards, — then !     Let  things  go  as  they  can.

CHURCH-GOERS

{singing  on  the  forest  path).

Oh,  morning  thrice  blessed,

when  the  tongues  of  God's  kingdom

18


274  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

strack  the  earth  like  to  flaming  steel !
from  the  earth  to  His  dwelling
now  the  heirs'  song  ascendeth
in  the  tongue  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

PEER

{crouches  as  in  terror).

Never  look  there  !  there  all's  desert  and  waste. —
I  fear  I  was  dead  long  before  I  died.

( Tries  to  slink  in  among  the  bushes ^  but  comes  upon
the  cross-roads.)

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Good  morning,  Peer  Gynt !     Where's  the  list  of  your  sins  ?

PEER.

Do  you  think  that  I  haven't  been  whistling  and  shouting
as  hard  as  I  could  ?

THE    BUTTON-MOULDER.

And  met  no  one  at  all  ?

PEER.

Not  a  soul  but  a  tramping  photographer.

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Well,  the  respite  is  over.

PEER.

Ay,  everything's  over.
The  owl  smells  the  daylight.     Just  list  to  the  hooting  !

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

It's  the  matin-bell  ringing


Sc.  X.]  Peer  Gynt.  275

PEER

(^pointing).
What's  that  shining  yonder  ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Only  light  from  a  hut.

PEER.

And  that  wailing  sound ?

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

But  a  woman  singing.

PEER.

Ay,  there — there  I'll  find
the  list  of  my  sins

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER

{seizing  him).

Set  your  house  in  order  !
{They  have  come  out  of  the  underwood^  and  are  standitig
near  the  hut.     Day  is  dawning^

PEER.

Set  my  house  in  order  ?     It's  there  !  '  Away  !

Get  you  gone  !     Though  your  ladle  were  huge  as  a  coffin,

it  were  too  small,  I  tell  you,  for  me  and  my  sins !

THE   BUTTON-MOULDER.

Well,  to  the  third  cross-road.  Peer ;  but  then !

{Turns  aside  and  goes.)

PEER

{approaches  the  hut).
Forward  and  back,  and  it's  just  as  far.
Out  and  in,  and  it*s  just  as  strait.

{Stops.)


276  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

No  ! — like  a  wild,  an  unending  lament,

is  the  thought :  to  come  back,  to  go  in,  to  go  home.

{Takes  a  few  steps  on^  but  stops  again.)
Round  about,  said  the  Boyg  !

{Hears  singing  in  the  hut.)

Ah  no;  this  time  at  least
right  through,  though  the  path  may  be  never  so  strait !

[He  runs  towards  the  hut ;  at  the  same  moment
SOLVEIG  appears  in  the  doorway^  dressed  for
church,  with  a  psalm-book  wrapped  in  a  kerchief
and  a  staff  in  her  hand.  She  stands  there  erect
and  mild.)

PEER

(flings  himself  down  on  the  threshold).
Hast  thou  doom  for  a  sinner,  then  speak  it  forth  !

SOLVEIG.

He  is  here  !     He  is  here  !     Oh,  to  God  be  the  praise  !
{Stretches  out  her  arms  as  though  groping  for  hitn.)

PEER.

Cry  out  all  my  sins  and  my  trespasses  !

SOLVEIG.

In  nought  hast  thou  sinned,  oh  my  own  only  boy.
{Gropes  for  hi?7i  agaifi,  and  finds  him.)

THE   BUTTON- MOULDER

{behind  the  house).
The  sin-list,  Peer  Gynt  ?


Sc.  x.]  Peer  Gynt.  277

PEER.

Cry  aloud  my  crime  !

SOLVEIG

{sits  down  beside  him).

Thou  hast  made  all  my  life  as  a  beautiful  song.
Blessed  be  thou  that  at  last  thou  hast  come  !
Blessed,  thrice  blessed  our  Whitsun-morn  meeting !

PEER.

Then  I  am  lost !

SOLVEIG.

There  is  one  that  rules  all  things.

PEER

(laughs).
Lost  I     Unless  thou  canst  answer  riddles.

SOLVEIG.

Tell  me  them.

PEER.

Tell  them  !     Come  on  !     To  be  sure  !
Canst  thou  tell  where  Peer  Gynt  has  been  since  we  parted  ?

SOLVEIG.

Been?

PEER.

With  his  destiny's  seal  on  his  brow ;
been,  as  in  God's  thought  he  first  sprang  forth  !
Canst  thou  tell  me  ?     If  not,  I  must  get  me  home, —
go  down  to  the  mist-shrouded  regions.


278  Peer  Gynt.  [Act  v.

SOLVEIG

{s)niling).
Oh,  that  riddle  is  easy.

PEER.

Then  tell  what  thou  knowest !
Where  was  I,  as  myself,  as  the  whole  man,  the  true  man  ?
where  was  I,  with  God's  sigil  upon  my  brow  ?

SOLVEIG.

In  my  faith,  in  my  hope,  and  in  my  love.^

PEER

{starts  back).

What  sayest  thou ■?     Peace  !   These  are  juggling  words.

Thou  art  mother  thyself  to  the  man  that's  there.

SOLVEIG.

Ay,  that  I  am ;  but  who  is  his  father  ?
Surely  he  that  forgives  at  the  mother's  prayer.

PEER

{a  light  shines  in  his  face  ;  he  cries :)

My  mother  ;  my  wife ;  oh,  thou  innocent  woman  ! —
in  thy  love — oh,  there  hide  me,  hide  me !

{Clings  to  her  and  hides  his  face  in  her  lap.     A
long  silence.     The  sun  rises.)

^  *'  I  min  Tro,  i  mit  Hdb  og  i  min  Kjserlighed."

We  have  entirely  sacrificed  the  metre  of  the  line,  feeling  it  impossible
to  mar  its  simplicity  by  any  padding.  "Kjaerlighed"  also  means
"  charity,"  in  the  biblical  sense.


Sc.  x]  PEER   GYNT.  2/9

SOLVEIG
{sings  softly).

Sleep  thou,  dearest  boy  of  mine  !
I  will  cradle  thee,  I  will  watch  thee


The  boy  has  been  sitting  on  his  mother's  lap.
They  two  have  been  playing  all  the  life-day  long.

The  boy  has  been  resting  at  his  mother's  breast
all  the  life-day  long.     God's  blessing  on  my  joy  !

The  boy  has  been  lying  close  in  to  my  heart
all  the  life-day  long.     He  is  weary  now.

Sleep  thou,  dearest  boy  of  mine  !
I  will  cradle  thee,  I  will  watch  thee.

THE   button-moulder's   VOICE

{behifzd  the  house).

We'll  meet  at  the  last  cross-road  again,  Peer ;
and  then  we'll  see  whether ;  I  say  no  more.

SOLVEIG

{sings  louder  in  tliefull  daylight").

I  will  cradle  thee,  I  will  watch  thee ;
Sleep  and  dream  thou,  dear  my  boy  1


APPENDIX.


[The  stories  of  Peer  Gynt  and  Gudbrand  Glesne  both  occur
in  Asbjornsen's  "  Reindeer-hunting  in  the  Ronde  Hills  "  {A'orske
Hiildre-Eve7tiyr  og  Folkesagn^  Christiania,  1848).  They  are  told
by  the  peasant  guides  or  gillies  who  accompany  a  shooting
party  into  the  mountains — the  first  by  Peer  Fugleskjelle,  the
second  by  Thor  Ulvsvolden.  Our  translation  of  "  Peer  Gynt "
is  based  on  Mr.  H.  L.  Braekstad's  version,  published  in  Round
the  Yule  Log^  London,  1881.]

PEER   GYNT.

In  the  old  days  there  lived  in  Kvam  a  hunter,  whose  name
was  Peer  Gynt.  He  was  always  up  in  the  mountains  shooting
bears  and  elks  ;  for  in  those  days  there  were  more  forests  on  the
mountains  to  harbour  such  wild  beasts.  One  time,  late  in  the
autumn,  long  after  the  cattle  had  been  driven  home,  Peer  set
out  for  the  hills.  Every  one  had  left  the  uplands  except  three
saster-girls.  When  Peer  came  up  towards  Hovring,  where  he
was  to  pass  the  night  in  a  sseter,  it  was  so  dark  that  he  could
not  see  his  fist  before  him,  and  the  dogs  fell  to  barking  and  bay-
ing so  that  it  was  quite  uncanny.  All  of  a  sudden  he  ran  against
something,  and  when  he  put  his  hand  out  he  felt  it  was  cold
and  slippery  and  big.  Yet  he  did  not  seem  to  have  got  off  the
road,  so  he  couldn't  think  what  this  could  be  ;  but  unpleasant  it
was  at  any  rate.

"  Who  is  it  ? "  asked  Peer,  for  he  felt  it  moving.


282  Appendix.

"  Oh,  it's  the  Boyg," '  was  the  answer.

Peer  was  no  wiser  for  this,  but  skirted  along  it  for  a  bit,
thinking  that  somewhere  he  must  be  able  to  pass.  Suddenly  he
ran  against  something  again,  and  when  he  put  out  his  hand,  it
too  was  big,  and  cold,  and  slippery.

"  Who  is  it  ?"  asked  Peer  Gynt.

"  Oh,  it's  the  Boyg,"  was  the  answer  again.

"  Well,  straight  or  crooked,  you'll  have  to  let  me  pass,"  said
Peer ;  for  he  understood  that  he  was  walking  in  a  ring,  and
that  the  Boyg  had  curled  itself  round  the  saeter.  There-
upon it  shifted  a  little,  so  that  Peer  got  past.  When  he  came
inside  the  saeter,  it  was  no  lighter  there  than  outside.  He  was
feeling  along  the  wall  for  a  place  to  hang  up  his  gun  and  his
bag ;  but  as  he  was  groping  his  way  forward  he  again  felt  some-
thing cold,  and  big,  and  slippery.

"  Who  is  it  ?  "  shouted  Peer.

"  Oh,  it's  the  great  Boyg,"  was  the  answer.  Wherever  he  put
his  hands  out  or  tried  to  get  past,  he  felt  the  Boyg  encircling
him.

"It's  not  very  pleasant  to  be  here,"  thought  Peer,  "since
this  Boyg  is  both  out  and  in ;  but  I  think  I  can  make  short  work
of  the  nuisance."

So  he  took  his  gun  and  went  out  again,  groping  his  way  till
he  found  the  creature's  head.

"  What  are  you  ? "  asked  Peer.

"  Oh,  I  am  the  big  Boyg  from  Etnedale,"  said  the  Troll-
Monster.  Peer  did  not  lose  a  moment,  but  fired  three  shots
right  into  its  head.

"  Fire  another,"  said  the  Boyg.  "But  Peer  knew  better  ;  if  he
had  fired  another  shot,  the  bullet  would  have  rebounded  against
himself.

Thereupon  Peer  and  his  dogs  took  hold  of  the  Troll-Monster
and  dragged  him  out,  so  that  they  could  get  into  the  saeter.
Meanwhile  there  was  jeering  and  laughing  in  all  the  hills
around.

"  Peer  Gynt  dragged  hard,  but  the  dogs  dragged  harder,"
said  a  voice.

^  See  footnote,  p.  xiv.


Appendix.  283

Next  morning  he  went  out  stalking.  When  he  came  out  on
the  uplands  he  saw  a  girl,  Avho  was  calling  some  sheep  up  a
hillside.  But  when  he  came  to  the  place  the  girl  was  gone
and  the  sheep  too,  and  he  saw  nothing  but  a  great  flock  of
bears.

"Well,  I  never  saw  bears  in  a  flock  before,"  thought  Peer  to
himself.  When  he  came  nearer,  they  had  all  disappeared
except  one.

"  Look  after  your  pig  :
Peer  Gynt  is  out
with  his  gun  so  big,"^

shouted  a  voice  over  in  a  hillock.

"  Oh,  it'll  be  a  bad  business  for  Peer,  but  not  for  my  pig ;
for  he  hasn't  washed  himself  to-day,"  said  another  voice  in
the  hill.  Peer  washed  his  hands  with  the  water  he  had,  and
shot  the  bear.  There  was  more  laughter  and  jeering  in  the
hill.

"  You  should  have  looked  after  your  pig  !  "  cried  a  voice.

"  I  didn't  remember  he  had  a  water-jug  between  his  legs,"
answered  the  other.

Peer  skinned  the  bear  and  buried  the  carcass  among  the
stones,  but  the  head  and  the  hide  he  took  with  him.  On  his
way  home  he  met  a  fox.

"  Look  at  my  lamb,  how  fat  it  is,"  said  a  voice  in  a  hill.

"  Look  at  that  gun^  of  Peer's,  how  high  it  is,"  said  a  voice  in
another  hill,  just  as  Peer  took  aim  and  shot  the  fox.  He
skinned  the  fox  and  took  the  skin  with  him,  and  when  he  came
to  the  saeter  he  put  the  heads  on  the  wall  outside,  with  their
jaws  gaping.  Then  he  lighted  a  fire  and  put  a  pot  on  to  boil
some  soup,  but  the  chimney  smoked  so  terribly  that  he  could
scarcely  keep  his  eyes  open,  and  so  he  had  to  set  wide  a  small
window.  Suddenly  a  Troll  came  and  poked  his  nose  in  through
the  window ;  it  was  so  long  that  it  reached  across  the  room  to
the  fireplace.

^  Literally,  "with  his  tail."    A  gun  loosely  slung  over  the  shoulder
bears  a  certain  resemblance  to  a  tail  sticking  up  in  the  air.
2  Literally,  "tail."


284  Appendix.

"  Here's  a  proper  snout  for  you  to  see,"  said  the  Troll.

"  And  here's  proper  soup  for  you  to  taste,"  said  Peer  Gynt ;
and  he  poured  the  whole  potful  of  soup  over  the  Troll's  nose.
The  Troll  ran  away  howling ;  but  in  all  the  hills  around  there
was  jeering-  and  laughing  and  voices  shouting —

"  Soup-snout  Gyri !     Soup-snout  Gyri  !  "

All  was  quiet  now  for  a  while ;  but  before  long  there  was  a
great  noise  and  hubbub  outside  again.  Peer  looked  out  and
saw  that  there  was  a  cart  there,  drawn  by  bears.  They  hoisted
up  the  Troll-Monster,  and  carted  him  away  into  the  mountain.
Just  then  a  bucket  of  water  came  down  the  chimney  and  put  out
the  fire,  so  that  Peer  was  left  in  the  dark.  Then  a  jeering  and
laughing  began  in  all  the  corners  of  the  room,  and  a  voice  said —

"  It'll  go  no  better  with  Peer  now  than  with  the  saeter-girls  at
Vala."

Peer  made  up  the  fire  again,  took  his  dogs  with  him,  shut  up
the  house,  and  set  off  northward  to  the  Vala  saeter,  where  the
three  girls  were.  When  he  had  gone  some  distance  he  saw
such  a  glare  of  light  that  it  seemed  to  him  the  saeter  must  be  on
fire.  Just  then  he  came  across  a  pack  of  wolves;  some  of
them  he  shot,  and  some  he  knocked  on  the  head.  When  he
came  to  the  Vala  saster  he  found  it  pitch  dark ;  there  was  no
sign  of  any  fire ;  but  there  were  four  strangers  in  the  house
carrying  on  with  the  saster-girls.  They  were  four  Hill-Trolls,
and  their  names  were  Gust  of  Vasre,  Tron  of  the  Valfjeld,
Tjostol  Aabakken,  and  Rolf  Eldforpungen.  Gust  of  Vasre
was  standing  at  the  door  to  keep  watch,  while  the  others
were  in  with  the  girls  courting.  Peer  fired  at  Gust,  but  missed
him,  and  Gust  ran  away.  When  Peer  came  inside  he  found  the
Trolls  carrying  on  desperately  with  the  girls.  Two  of  the  girls
were  terribly  frightened  and  were  saying  their  prayers,  but  the
third,  who  was  called  Mad  Kari,  wasn't  afraid ;  she  said  they
might  come  there  for  all  she  cared ;  she  would  like  to  see  what
stuff  there  was  in  such  fellows.  But  when  the  Trolls  found
that  Peer  was  in  the  room  they  began  to  howl,  and  told  Eldfor-
pungen to  make  up  the  fire.  At  that  instant  the  dogs  set  upon
Tjostol  and  pulled  him  over  on  his  back  into  the  fireplace,  so
that  the  ashes  and  sparks  flew  up  all  round  him.


Appendix.  285

"  Did  you  see  my  snakes,  Peer  ?  "  asked  Tron  of  the  Valfjeld
— that  was  what  he  called  the  wolves.

"  You  shall  go  the  same  way  as  your  snakes,"  said  Peer,  and
shot  him  ;  and  then  he  killed  Aabakken  with  the  butt-end  of  his
rifle.  Eldforpungen  had  escaped  up  the  chimney.  After  this
Peer  took  the  girls  back  to  their  homes,  for  they  didn't  dare  to
stay  any  longer  up  at  the  saeter.

Shortly  before  Christmas-time  Peer  set  out  again.  He  had
heard  of  a  farm  on  the  Dovrefjeld  which  was  invaded  by  such  a
number  of  Trolls  every  Christmas-eve  that  the  people  of  the
fann  had  to  turn  out  and  get  shelter  with  some  of  their  neigh-
bours. He  was  anxious  to  go  there,  for  he  was  very  keen  upon
the  Trolls.  He  dressed  himself  in  some  old  ragged  clothes,
and  took  with  him  a  tame  white  bear  that  he  had,  as  well  as  an
awl,  some  pitch,  and  waxed  twine.  When  he  came  to  the  farm
he  went  in  and  begged  for  houseroom.

"  God  help  us  ! "  said  the  farmer ;  "  we  can't  put  you  up.
We  have  to  clear  out  of  the  house  ourselves,  for  every  blessed
Christmas-eve  the  whole  place  is  full  of  Trolls."

But  Peer  Gynt  said  he  thought  he  should  be  able  to  clear
the  house  of  Trolls  ;  and  then  he  got  leave  to  stay,  and  they
gave  him  a  pig's  skin  into  the  bargain.  The  bear  lay  down
behind  the  fireplace,  and  Peer  took  out  his  awl,  and  pitch,  and
twine,  and  set  to  making  a  big  shoe,  that  took  the  whole  pig's
skin.  He  put  a  strong  rope  in  for  laces,  so  that  he  could  pull
the  shoe  tight  together  at  tHe  top ;  and  he  had  a  couple  of
handspikes  ready.

All  of  a  sudden  the  Trolls  came,  with  a  fiddle  and  a  fiddler  ;
some  began  dancing,  while  others  fell  to  eating  the  Christmas
fare  on  the  table  ;  some  fried  bacon,  and  some  fried,  frogs  and
toads,  and  other  disgusting  things  :  these  were  the  Christmas
dainties  they  had  brought  with  them.  In  the  meantime  some  of
the  Trolls  found  the  shoe  Peer  had  made  ;  they  thought  it  must
be  for  a  very  big  foot.  Then  they  all  wanted  to  try  it  on ;  and
when  each  of  them  had  put  a  foot  into  it.  Peer  tightened  the
rope,  shoved  one  of  the  handspikes  into  it,  and  twisted  it  up  till
they  were  all  stuck  fast  in  the  shoe.
Just  then  the  bear  put  his  nose  out  and  smelt  the  fry.


286  Appendix.

"  Will  you  have  a  sausage,  white  pussy  ? "  said  one  of  the
Trolls,  and  threw  a  red-hot  frog  right  into  the  bear's  jaws.

"  Claw  and  smite.  Bruin  !  "  said  Peer  Gynt.

And  then  the  bear  got  into  such  a  rage  that  he  rushed  at  the
Trolls  and  smote  and  clawed  them  all,  and  Peer  Gynt  took
the  other  handspike  and  hammered  away  at  them  as  if  he
wanted  to  beat  their  brains  out.  So  the  Trolls  had  to  clear  out,
and  Peer  stayed  and  enjoyed  himself  on  the  Christmas  cheer
the  whole  feast-time.  After  that  the  Trolls  were  not  heard  of
again  for  many  years.  The  farmer  had  a  light-coloured  mare,
and  Peer  advised  him  to  breed  from  her,  and  let  her  foals  in
their  turn  run  and  breed  among  the  hills  there.

Many  years  afterwards,  about  Christmas-time,  the  farmer
was  out  in  the  forest  cutting  wood  for  the  feast-time,  when  a
Troll  came  towards  him  and  shouted —

"  Have  you  got  that  big  white  pussy  of  yours  yet  ?"

"  Yes,  she's  at  home  behind  the  stove,"  said  the  farmer  ;
"and  she's  got  seven  kittens  now,  much  bigger  and  fiercer
than  herself."

"  We'll  never  come  to  you  any  more,  then,"  shouted  the
Troll.

"  That  Peer  Gynt  was  a  strange  one,"  said  Anders.  "  He
was  such  an  out-and-out  tale-maker  and  yarn-spinner,  you
couldn't  have  helped  laughing  at  him.  He  always  made  out
that  he  himself  had  been  mixed  up  in  all  the  stories  that  people
said  had  happened  in  the  olden  times."


GUDBRAND    GLESNE.

"  There  was  a  hunter  in  the  West-Hills,"  said  Thor  Ulvs-
volden,  "called  Gudbrand  Glesne.  He  was  married  to  the
grandmother  of  the  lad  you  saw  at  the  saeter  yesterday  evening,
and  a  first-rate  hunter  they  say  he  was.  One  autumn  he  came
across  a  huge  buck.  He  shot  at  it,  and  from  the  way  it  fell  he
couldn't  tell  but  that  it  was  stone  dead.  So  he  went  up  to  it,  and,
as  one  often  does,  seated  himself  astride  on  its  back,  and  was


Appendix.  287

just  drawing  his  knife  to  cleave  the  neck-bone  from  the  skull.
But  no  sooner  had  he  sat  down  than  up  it  jumped,  threw  its
horns  back,  and  jammed  him  down  between  them,  so  that  he
was  fixed  as  in  an  arm-chair.  Then  it  rushed  away ;  for  the
bullet  had  only  grazed  the  beast's  head,  so  that  it  had  fallen  in
a  swoon.  Never  any  man  had  such  a  ride^  as  that  Gudbrand
had.  Away  they  went  in  the  teeth  of  the  wind,  over  the  ugliest
glaciers  and  moraines.  Then  the  beast  dashed  along  the
Gjende-edge  ;  and  now  Gudbrand  prayed  to  the  Lord,  for  he
thought  he  would  never  see  sun  or  moon  again.  But  at  last  the
reindeer  took  to  the  water  and  swam  straight  across  with  the
hunter  on  its  back.  By  this  time  he  had  got  his  knife  drawn,
and  the  moment  the  buck  set  foot  on  shore,  he  plunged  it  into
its  neck,  and  it  dropped  dead.  But  you  may  be  sure  Gudbrand
Glesne  wouldn't  have  taken  that  ride  again,  not  for  all  the  riches
in  the  world."

"  I  have  heard  a  story  like  that  in  England,  about  a  deer-
stalker that  became  a  deer-rider,"  said  Sir  Tottenbroom.^

"  Bliecher,  in  Jutland,  tells  a  similar  one,"  I  said.

"  But  what  sort  of  a  place  was  this  Gjender-edge  you  spoke
of,  Thor  ?  "  he  interrupted  me.

"  Gjende-edge,  you  mean  ?"  asked  Thor.  "  It's  the  ridge ^  of
a  mountain  lying  between  the  Gjende-lakes,  and  so  horribly
narrow  and  steep  that  if  you  stand  on  it  and  drop  a  stone  from
each  hand,  they  will  roll  down  into  the  lakes,  one  on  each  side.
The  reindeer-hunters  go  over  it  in  fine  weather,  otherwise  it's
impassable ;  but  there  was  a  devil  of  a  fellow  up  in  Skiager — Ole
Storebraten  was  his  name — who  went  over  it  carrying  a  full-
sized  reindeer  on  his  shoulders."

"  How  high  is  it  above  the  lakes  ?"  asked  Sir  Tottenbroom.

"  Oh,  it's  not  nearly  so  high  as  the  Ronde-hills,"  said  Thor.
"  But  it's  over  seven  hundred  ells  high."

^  **  Skyds  " — conveyance.

^  An  English  sportsman  who  accompanies  Asbjornsen  on  his  rambles.

^  "Rygge" — ba-ck-hone,  are^e.


THE  WALTER  SCOTT  PRESS,   NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE.


NEW    BOOKS

IMPORTED   BY

CHARLES   SCRIBNER'S   SONS,

NEW   YORK    CITY.


Crown  Svo,  Cloth.     Price  1.2^  per  Volume,
THE

CONTEMPORAEY  SCIENCE  SeEIES.

Edited  by  HAVELOCK  ELLIS.

Illustrated  Volumes^  containing  between  300  and  400  //.


THE  CONTEMPORARY  SCIENCE  SERIES  is  bringing  within
general  reach  of  the  English-speaking  public  the  best  that  is
known  and  thought  in  all  departments  of  modem  scientific  research.
The  influence  of  the  scientific  spirit  is  now  rapidly  spreading  in  every
field  of  human  activity.  Social  progress,  it  is  felt,  must  be  guided  and
accompanied  by  accurate  knowledge, — knowledge  which  is,  in  many
departments,  not  yet  open  to  the  English  reader.  In  the  Contemporary
Science  Series  all  the  questions  of  modern  life — the  various  social  and
politico-economical  problems  of  to-day,  the  most  recent  researches  in
the  knowledge  of  man,  the  past  and  present  experiences  of  the  race,
and  the  nature   of  its  environment — are   frankly  investigated    and

clearly  presented.

Already  Published: —

THE  EVOLUTION  OF  SEX.  By  Prof.  Patrick  Geddes
and  J.  Arthur  Thomson.     90  Illustrations,  and  322  pages.

**  A  work  which,  for  range  and  grace,  mastery  of  material,  originality,  and
incisiveness  of  style  and  treatment,  is  not  readily  to  be  matched  in  the  long
list  of  books  designed  more  or  less  to  popularise  science.  .  .  .  The  series  will
be,  if  it  goes  on  as  it  has  begun,  one  of  the  most  valuable  now  current." —
Scottish  Leader^

**  The  book  is  the  opening  volume  of  a  new  Scientific  Series,  and  the
publishers  are  to  be  congratulated  on  starting  with  such  a  model  of  scientific
exposition. " — Scotsman.

New  York :  Charles  Scribner's  Sons.


ELECTRICITY     IN    MODERN     LIFE.       By    G.    W.    de

TuNZELMANN.     With  88  Illustrations,  and  272  pages.

'*  It  is  with  much  pleasure  that  we  call  attention  to  this  volume,  for  the
author  has  very  successfully  grappled  with  the  difficulty  of  placing  so  intricate
a  subject  in  a  form  simple  and  plain  enough  to  be  understood  by  the  ordinary
reader.  .  .  .  The  volume  is  illustrated  by  numerous  carefully-drawn  pictures
and  diagrams." — Guardian.

THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  ARYANS.  By  Dr.  Isaac  Taylor.
With  30  Illustrations,  and  339  pages.

"  Canon  Taylor  is  probably  the  most  encyclopaedic  all-round  scholar  now
living.  For  wide  range  of  knowledge  and  depth  of  reading  he  could  no  doubt
give  points  even  to  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer.  .  .  .  His  new  volume  on  the  Origin
of  the  Aryans  is  a  first-rate  example  of  the  excellent  account  to  which  he  can
turn  his  exceptionally  wide  and  varied  information.  .  .  .  Masterly  and
exhaustive. " — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

PHYSIOGNOMY  AND  EXPRESSION.  (Illustrated.)  By
P.  Mantegazza.     336  pages.

"A  good,  popular  treatment  of  the  subject  of  physiognomy,  which  should
embody  the  results  of  recent  scientific  inquiry,  was  decidedly  a  desideratum,
and  in  the  volume  before  us  we  have  the  want  very  adequately  met." —
Sheffield  Independent.

EVOLUTION  AND  DISEASE.  By  J.  Bland  Sutton,  F.R.C.S.
With  137  Illustrations,  and  304  pages.

**  The  publisher  and  editor  of  the  series,  and  the  ingenious  author  certainly
deserve  congratulation,  for  the  book  opens  up  from  a  distance  what  seemed  a
very  dark  country,  and  proves  that  many  diseases  are  neither  unnatural  nor
unintelligible,  and  that  pathology  is  not  necessarily  pessimistic" — Scottish
Leader.

THE  VILLAGE  COMMUNITY.  With  special  reference  to  its
Survivals  in  Britain.  By  G.  Laurence  Gomme,  Director  of  the
Folk-Lore  Society.     With  Numerous  Maps  and  Plans.

**  Mr.  Gomme,  while  considering  generally  the  Aryan  local  institutions  as
developed  in  Europe  and  Asia,  has  devoted  special  attention  to  Village
Communities  in  England.  He  has  gone  to  the  best  sources,  and  has  told  us
practically  all  that  we  can  at  present  know  about  the  way  in  which  village  life
has  been  organised  and  developed." — London  Echo.

THE  CRIMINAL.  By  Havelock  Ellis.  With  many  Illus-
trations.

**  As  a  clever  summary  of  all  there  is  at  present  to  say  upon  a  socially  most
important  question,  the  book  should  widely  be  welcomed." — Yorkshire  Post.

"  The  author's  own  views  concerning  the  lines  of  reform  are  expressed  with
candour,  moderation,  and  an  utter  absence  of  extravagance ;  but  they  are  of
less  importance  than  the  vast  body  of  fact  which  he  has  brought  together  with
such  industry  and  enthusiasm.  The  book  may  be  described  as  a  pioneer
volume,  and  as  such  it  cannot  fail  to  be  useful." — Manchester  Examiner.


New  York  :  Charles  Scribner's  Sons.


SANITY  AND  INSANITY.     By  Dr.  C.  Mercier.

"Taken  as  a  whole,  it  is  the  brightest  Ijook  on  the  physical  side  of  mental
science  published  in  our  time." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

"  A  more  ably  written  and  vigorously  thought  book  on  the  subject  of  which
it  treats  it  would  be  difficult  to  find." — Scottish  Leader.

HYPNOTISM.     By  Dr.  Albert  Moll  (Berlin).

"Of  all  the  works  published  on  the  subject,  from  that  of  La  Fontaine,  the
French  Magnetiser,  who  made  public  experiments  in  Manchester  m  1841,
down  to  the  records  of  the  modern  school  at  Nancy,  Dr.  Moll's  work  is  the
one  most  likely  to  appeal  to  the  ordinary  lay  reader." — Galignani's  Messenger.

MANUAL  TRAINING.     By  Dr.  C   M.  Woodward,  Director

of  the  Manual  Training  School,   Washington  University,   St.    Louis,

Mo.     Illustrated.

"There  is  no  greater  authority  on  the  subject  of  manual   training   than

Professor  Woodward.  .  .  .   Professor  Woodward  is  not  less  instructive  as  a

practical  man  than  as  a  theorist,  and  his  book  may  be  confidently  recommended

to  those  who  wish  to  know  what  may  be  done  and  what  has  been  done  in

America  in  the  direction  of  systematic  instruction  of  this  V.ind.'"  —Manchester

Guardian.

THE  SCIENCE  OF  FAIRY  TALES.     By  E.  S.  Hartland.

* '  Mr.  Hartland's  book  will  win  the  sympathy  of  all  earnest  students,  both
by  the  knowledge  it  displays,  and  by  a  thorough  love  and  appreciation  of  his
subject,  which  is  evident  throughout." — The  Spectator.

PRIMITIVE  FOLK.     Studies  in  Comparative  Ethnology.     By
Elie  Reclus.
"  A  more  suggestive  book,  with  less  of  pedantry,  could  not  be  imagined. " —
Birmingham  Daily  Gazette.

BACTERIA    AND    THEIR    PRODUCTS.      By    Dr.    Sims

WOODHEAD.

**  A  singularly  able  and  informative  exposition  of  the  present  state  of  know-
ledge in  regard  to  one  of  the  youngest,  but  most  practically  important,  depart-
ments of  natural  science." — Scottish  Leader.

THE  EVOLUTION  OF  MARRIAGE.     By  Letourneau.

An  ethnographical  summary  of  the  facts  regarding  the  origin  and  growth  of
marriage  and  the  family  among  savages,  barbarians,  and  in  civilisation,  with
hints  as  to  its  probable  evolution  in  the  future.

EDUCATION  AND  HEREDITY.     By  J.  M.  Guyau.

A  sociological  study  of  the  various  modifications  in  education  which  are
involved  by  modern  scientific  conceptions  and  modern  conditions  of  civilisa-
tion. It  deals  with  the  influence  of  education  in  the  development  of  the  race,
with  the  effects  of  heredity  in  education,  with  the  place  of  physical  education,
and  with  the  objects  and  methods  of  education  generally.

New  York :  Charles  Scribner's  Sons.


THE  MAN  OF  GENIUS.     By  Prof.  Lombroso.

This  work  is  a  translation  of  Prof.  Lombroso's  V  Uomo  di  Genio  (the  largest
and  most  important  work  yet  written  on  Genius),  made  with  the  co-operation
of  another  authority,  who  has  supplied  additional  material  for  the  English
edition.  The  work  deals  with  the  causes  of  genius  ;  the  influences  of  race,  of
heredity,  of  climate,  of  great  cities ;  the  mental  and  physical  characteristics  of
men  of  genius  in  literature,  art,  politics,  and  religion ;  and  goes  fully  into  the
much-debated  question  of  the  relation  between  genius  and  insanity.  The
volume  will  be  copiously  illustrated.

PUBLIC  HEALTH.     By  Dr.  J.  F.  J.  Sykes.

THE  SPIRIT  OF  SCIENCE.     By  Prof.  Karl  Pearson.

other  volumes  to  follow  at  short  intervals,  including  "The  I^aws  of  Life  in
Language,"  "The  Development  of  Electro-Magnetic  Theory,"  "Industrial  Develop-
ment," "The  Factors  of  Evolution,"  "Wages,"  etc.,  etc

The  following  Writers  are  preparing  volumes  for  this  Series : —

Prof.  E.  D.  Cope,  Prof.  G.  F.  Fitzgerald,  Prof.  J.  Geikie,  E.  C.  K.
Conner,  Prof.  J.  Jastrow  (Wisconsin),  Prof.  C.  H.  Herford,  Prof.  Haddon,
etc     etc

IBJEN'S  FAMOUS  PROSE  DRpAS.

(COMPLETE    IN    FIVE    VOLUMES.)

Edited  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER.

i2mo,  CLOTH,  PRICE  $1.25  PER  VOLUME,
VOL,  L

With  Portrait  of  the  Author,  and  Biographical  Introduction  by
William  Archer.

This  volume  contains— "A  DOLL'S  HOUSE,"  "THE
LEAGUE  OF  YOUTH"  {never  before  translated),  and
"THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY."

VOL.  IL

"GHOSTS,"  "AN  ENEMY  OF  THE  PEOPLE,"  and  "THE
WILD  DUCK."  With  an  Introductory  Note  by  William
Archer.

VOL,  in,

"LADY  INGER  OF  OSTRAt,"  "THE  VIKINGS  AT
HELGELAND,"  "THE  PRETENDERS."  With  an
Introductory  Note   by  William  Archer,  and   Portrait   of

Ibsen.

New  York  :  Charles  Scribner's  Sons.


VOL.  IV.

"EMPEROR   AND   GALILEAN."      Translated   by  William
Archer.

VOL.  V.

"ROSMERSHOLM,"    "THE    LADY    FROM   THE    SEA/
"HEDDA  GABLER."

The  sequence  of  the  plays  in  each  volume  will  be  chronological ;
and  the  set  of  volumes  comprising  the  dramas  will  thus  present  them,
when  completed,  in  chronological  order.

'*  The  art  of  prose  translation  does  not  perhaps  enjoy  a  very  high  literary
status  in  England,  but  we  have  no  hesitation  in  numbering  the  present  version
of  Ibsen,  so  far  as  it  has  gone  (Vols.  I.  and  II.),  among  the  very  best  achieve-
ments, in  that  kind,  of  our  generation." — Academy.


GREAT  WRITERS.

A  NEW  SERIES  OF  CRITICAL  BIOGRAPHIES  OF  FAMOUS
WRITERS  OF  EUROPE  AND  AMERICA.

LIBRARY  EDITION.

Printed  on  large  paper  of  extra  quality^  in  handsome  binding^

Demy  Zvo^  price  ^i.oo  each.


ALPHABETICAL  LIST.


PRESS  NOTICES.

Life  of  Jane  Austen.     By  Goldwin  Smith.

**  Mr.  Goldwin  Smith  has  added  another  to  the  not  inconsiderable  roll
of  eminent  men  who  have  found  their  delight  in  Jane  Austen.      Certainly
a  fascinating  book." — Spectator.
Life  of  Balzac.     By  Frederick  Wedmore.

**  A  finished  study,   a  concentrated   summary,  a   succinct   analysis   of
Balzac's  successes  and   failures,  and  the  causes  of  these   successes  and
failures,  and  of  the  scope  of  his  genius. " — Scottish  Leader.
Life  of  Charlotte  Bronte.     By  A.  Birrell.

"Those  who  know  much  of  Charlotte  Bronte  will  learn  more,  and  those
who  know  nothing  about  her  will  find  all  that  is  best  worth  learning  in
Mr.  Birrell's  pleasant  book. " — St.  James'  Gazette.
Life  of  Browning.     By  William  Sharp.

"  This  little  Volume  is  a  model  of  excellent  English,  and  in  every  respect
it  seems  to  us  what  a  bic^aphy  should  be." — Public  Opinion.


New  York:  Charles  Scribner's  Sons.


6

Life  of  Byron.     By  Hon.  Roden  Noel.

**IIa  (Mr.  Noel)  has  at  any  rate  given  to  the  world  the  most  credible
and  comprehensible  portrait  of  the  poet  ever  drawn  with  pen  and  ink." —
Manchester  Exatniner.
Life  of  Bunyan.     By  Canon  Venables.

"  A  most  intelligent,  appreciative,  and  valuable  memoir." — Scotsman.
Life  of  Burns.     By  Professor  Blackie.

*'  The  editor  certainly  made  a  hit  when  he  persuaded  Blackie  to  write
about  Burns.'" — Pall  Mall  Gazette.
Life  of  Thomas  Carlyle.     By  R.  Garnett,  LL.D.

•'This  is  an  admirable  book.     Nothing  could  be  more  felicitous  and
fairer  than  the  way  in  which  he  takes  us  through  Carlyle's  life  and  works."
—Pall  Mall  Gazette.
Life  of  Coleridge.     By  Hall  Caine.

"  Brief  and  vigorous,  written  throughout  with  spirit  and  great  literary
skill. " — Scotsman.
Life  of  Congreve.     By  Edmund  Gosse.

*'  Mr.  Gosse  has  written  an  admirable  and  most  interesting  biography  of
a  man  of  letters  who  is  of  particular  interest  to  other  men  of  letters." —
The  Academy.
Life  of  Crabbe.     By  T.  E.  Kebbel.

"No  English  poet  since  Shakespeare  has  observed  certain  aspects  of
nature  and  of  human  life  more  closely;  and  in  the  qualities  of  manliness
and  of  sincerity  he  is  surpassed  by  none.  .  .  .     Mr.  Kebbel's  monograph
is  worthy  of  the  subject." — Athenaum,
Life  of  Darwin.     By  G.  T.  Bettany.

' '  Mr.   G.  T.  Bettany's  Life  of  Darwin  is  a  sound  and  conscientious
work. " — Saturday  Review.
Life  of  Dickens.     By  Frank  T.  Marzials.

"  Notwithstanding  the  mass  of  matter  that  has  been  printed  relating  to
Dickens  and  his  works  ...  we  should,  until  we  came  across  this  volume,
have  been  at  a  loss  to  recommend  any  popular  life  of  England's  most
popular  novelist  as  being  really  satisfactory.  The  difficulty  is  removed  by
Mr.  Marzials's  little  book." — Athenaum.
Life  of  George  Eliot.     By  Oscar  Browning.

* '  We  are  thankful  for  this  interesting  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  the
great  novelist." — Literary  World.
Life  of  Emerson.     By  Richard  Garnett,  LL.D.

"As  to  the  larger  section  of  the  public,  to  whom  the  series  of  Great
Writers  is  addressed,  no  record  of  Emerson's  life  and  work  could  be  more
desirable,  both  in  breadth  of  treatment  and  lucidity  of  style,  than    Dr.
Garnett's." — Saturday  Review.
Life  of  Goethe.     By  James  Sime.

"Mr.  James  Sime's  competence  as  a  biographer  of  Goethe,  both  in
respect  of  knowledge  of  his  special  subject,  and  of  German  literature
generally,  is  beyond  question." — Manchester  Guardian.
Life  of  Goldsmith.     By  Austin  Dobson.

"The  story  of  his  literary  and  social  life  in  London,  with  all  its
humorous  and  pathetic  vicissitudes,  is  here  retold,  as  none  could  tell  it
better. " — Daily  News.

New  York  :  Charles  Scribner's  Sons.


Life  of  Nathaniel  Hawthorna     By  Moncure  Conv/ay.

"  Easy  and  conversational  as  the  tone  is  throughout,  no  important  fact
is  omitted,  no  useless  fact  is  recalled." — Speaker.

Life  of  Heine.     By  William  Sharp.

**  This  is  an  admirable  monograph  .  .  .  more  fully  written  up  to  the
level  of  recent  knowledge  and  criticism  of  its  theme  than  any  other  English
work. " — Scotsman.

Life  of  Victor  Hugo.     By  Frank  T.  Marzials.

'*  Mr.  Marzials's  volume  presents  to  us,  in  a  more  handy  form  than  any
English,  or  even  French  handbook  gives,  the  summary  of  what,  up  to  the
moment  in  which  we  write,  is  known  or  conjectured  about  the  life  of  the
great  poet." — Saturday  Review.
Life  of  Samuel  Johnson.     By  Colonel  F.  Grant

'*  Colonel  Grant  has  performed  his  task  with  diligence,  sound  judgment,
good  taste,  and  accuracy." — Illustrated  London  News.

Life  of  Keats.     By  W.  M.  Rossetti.

"Valuable  for  the  ample  information  which  it  contains." — Cambridge
Independent.
Life  of  Lessing.     By  T.  W.  Rolleston.

*'  A  picture  of  Lessing  which  is  vivid  and  truthful,  and  has  enough  of
detail  for  all  ordinary  purposes." — Nation  (New  York).
Life  of  Longfellow.     By  Prof.  Eric  S.  Robertson.
**  A  most  readable  little  book." — Liverpool  Mercury.
Life  of  Marryat     By  David  Hannay.

"  What  Mr.  Hannay  had  to  do — give  a  craftsman-like  account  of  a
great   craftsman  who   has   been  almost  incomprehensibly  undervalued —
could  hardly  have  been  done  better  than  in  this  little  volume." — Man-
chester Guardian.
Life  of  Mill.     By  W.  L.  Courtney.

**  A  most  sympathetic  and  discriminating  memoir." — Glasgow  Herald.

Life  of  Milton.     By  Richard  Garnett,  LL.D.

"  Within  equal  compass  the  life-story  of  the  great  poet  of  Puritanism  has
never  been  more  charmingly  or  adequately  told." — Scottish  Leader.

Life  of  Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti.     By  J.  Knight.

**  Mr.  Knight's  picture  of  the  great  poet  and  painter  is  the  fullest  and
best  yet  presented  to  the  public." — The  Graphic.

Life  of  Scott.     By  Professor  Yonge.

**  For  readers  and  lovers  of  the  poems  and  novels  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,
this  is  a  most  enjoyable  book." — Aberdeen  Free  Press.

Life  of  Arthur  Schopenhauer.     By  William  Wallace.

*•  The  series  of  '  Great  Writers'  has  hardly  had  a  contribution  of  more
marked  and  peculiar  excellence  than  the  book  which  the  Whyte  Professor
of  Moral  Philosophy  at  Oxford  has  written  for  it  on  the  attractive  and
still  (in  England)  little  known  subject  of  Schopenhauer." — Manchester
Guardian.
Life  of  Shelley.     By  William  Sharp.

'*  The  criticisms  .  .  .  entitle  this  capital  monograph  to  be  ranked  with
the  best  biographies  of  Shelley." — Westminster  Review.

New  York  :  Charles  Scribner's  Sons.


8

Life  of  Sheridan.     By  Lloyd  Sanders.

"  To  say  that  Mr.  Lloyd  Sanders,  in  this  volume,  has  produced  the
best  existing  memoir  of  Sheridan  is  really,  to  award  much  fainter  praise
than  the  book  deserves." — Manchester  Examiner.

"  Rapid  and  workmanlike  in  style  ;  the  author  has  evidently  a  good
practical  knowledge  of  the  stage  of  Sheridan's  day. " — Saturday  Review.

Life  of  Adam  Smith.     By  R.  B.  Haldane,  M.P.

"Written  with  a  perspicuity  seldom  exemplified  when  dealing  with
economic  science. " — Scotsman.

"  Mr.  Haldane's  handling  of  his  subject  impresses  us  as  that  of  a  man
who  well  understands  his  theme,  and  who  knows  how  to  elucidate  it." —
Scottish  Leader.

"A  beginner  in  political  economy  might  easily  do  worse  than  take  Mr.
Haldane's  book  as  his  first  text-book." — Graphic.

Life  of  Smollett.     By  David  Hannay.

**A  capital  record  of  a  writer  who  still  remains  one  of  the  great  masters
of  the  English  novel." — Saturday  Review.

"Mr.  Hannay  is  excellently  equipped  for  writing  the  life  of  Smollett.
As  a  specialist  on  the  history  of  the  eighteenth  century  navy,  he  is  at  a
great  advantage  in  handling  works  so  full  of  the  sea  and  sailors  as
Smollett's  three  principal  novels.  Moreover,  he  has  a  complete  acquaint-
ance with  the  Spanish  romancers,  from  whom  Smollett  drew  so  much  of
his  inspiration.  His  criticism  is  generally  acute  and  discriminating ;  and
his  narrative  is  well  arranged,  compact,  and  accurate." — St.  James's
Gazette.

Life  of  Schiller.     By  Henry  W.  Nevinson.

"This  is  a  well- written  little  volume,  which  presents  the  leading  facts  of
the  poet's  life  in  a  neatly-rounded  picture." — Scotsman.

"  Mr.  Nevinson  has  added  much  to  the  charm  of  his  book  by  his  spirited
translations,  which  give  excellently  both  the  ring  and  sense  of  the
original." — Manchester  Guardian.

Life  of  Thackeray.    By  Herman  Merivale  and  Frank  T.  Marzials.

"The  book,  with  its  excellent  bibliography,  is  one  which  neither  the
student  nor  the  general  reader  can  well  afford  to  miss." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

"The  last  book  published  by  Messrs.  Merivale  and  Marzials  is  full  of
very  real  and  true  things." — Mrs.  Anne  Thackeray  Ritchie  on  '*  Thackeray
and  his  Biographers,"  in  Illustrated  London  News.

Life  of  Cervantes.     By  H.  E.  Watts.

Complete  Bibliography  to  each  volume,  by  J.  P.  Anderson,  British
Museum,  London.

Volumes  are  in  preparation  by  W.  E.  HENLEY,  H.  E.  WATTS,
COSMO  MONKHOUSE,  FRANK  T.  MARZIALS,  W.  H.  POLLOCK,
STEPNIAK,  etc.,  etc.

New  York  :  Charles  Scribner's  Sons.


31


PKT^Mnmnei
